

===== BOOK: gsft.txt =====



Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

  

GYPSY SORCERY and FORTUNE TELLING

  

ILLUSTRATED BY INCANTATIONS, SPECIMENS OF MEDICAL MAGIC, ANECDOTES, TALES

  

by Charles Godfrey Leland

  

Late President of the Gypsy-Lore Society

  

London: T. Fisher Unwin

  

[1891]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2002 by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

CONTENTS

           

       Page

     
      CHAPTER I

        

     
      The Origin of Witchcraft, Shamanism, and Sorcery--Vindictive and   Mischievous Magic

       <page 1>

     
      CHAPTER II

        

     
      Charms and Conjurations To Cure the Disorders of Grown People--Hungarian   Gypsy Magic

       <page 12>

     
      CHAPTER III

        

     
      Gypsy Conjurations and Exorcisms--The Cure of Children Hungarian   Gypsy Spells--A Curious Old Italian "Secret"--The Magic   Virtue of Garlic--A Florentine Incantation Learned From A   Witch--Lilith, the Child-Stealer, and Queen of the Witches

       <page 41>

     
      CHAPTER IV

        

     
      South Slavonian and Other Gypsy Witch-Lore--The Words For A   Witch--Vilas and The Spirits of Earth and Air--Witches, Egg-Shells,   and Egg-Lore--Egg Proverbs--Ova De Crucibus

       <page 65>

     
      CHAPTER V

        

     
      Charms or Conjurations to Cure or Protect Animals

       <page 79>

     
      CHAPTER VI

        

     
      Of Pregnancy and Charms or Folk-Lore Connected With it--Boar's Teeth   and Charms for Preventing The Flow of Blood

       <page 100>

     
      CHAPTER VII

        

     
      The Recovery of Stolen Property--Love-Charms--Shoes and   Love-Potions or Philtres

       <page 108>

     
      [p. iv]

        

     
      CHAPTER VIII

        

     
      Roumanian and Transylvanian Sorceries and Superstitions Connected With   Those of the Gypsies

       <page 122>

     
      CHAPTER IX

        

     
      The Rendezvous or Meetings of Witches, Sorcerers, and Vilas--A   Continuation of South Slavonian Gypsy-Lore

       <page 142>

     
      CHAPTER X

        

     
      Of the Haunts, Homes, and Habits of Witches in the South Slavic   Lands--Bogeys and Humbugs

       <page 152>

     
      CHAPTER XI

        

     
      Gypsy Witchcraft--The Magical Power Which Is Innate In All Men and   Women--How It May Be Cultivated And Developed--The Principles of   Fortune-Telling

       <page 162>

     
      CHAPTER XII

        

     
      Fortune-Telling (continued)--Romance Based on Chance, Or Hope, As   Regards the Future--Folk- and Sorcery-Lore--Authentic Instances of   Gypsy Prediction

       <page 186>

     
      CHAPTER XIII

        

     
      Proverbs Referring to Witches, Gypsies, and Fairies

       <page 194>

     
      CHAPTER XIV

        

     
      A Gypsy Magic Spell--Hokkani Baro--Lellin Dudikabin, Or the   Great Secret--Children's Rhymes and Incantations--Ten Little Indian   Boys and Ten Little Acorn Girls of Marcellus Burdigalensis

       <page 209>

     
      CHAPTER XV

        

     
      Gypsy Amulets

       <page 230>

     
      CHAPTER XVI

        

     
      Gypsies, Toads, and Toad-Lore

       <page 255>

     
    

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE

 THIS work contains a collection of the customs, usages, and ceremonies current among gypsies, as regards fortune-telling, witch-doctoring, love-philtering, and other sorcery, illustrated by many anecdotes and instances, taken either from works as yet very little known to the English reader or from personal experiences. Within a very few years, since Ethnology and Archaeology have received a great inspiration, and much enlarged their scope through Folk-lore, everything relating to such subjects is studied with far greater interest and to much greater profit than was the case when they were cultivated in a languid, half-believing, half-sceptical spirit which was in reality rather one of mere romance than reason. Now that we seek with resolution to find the whole truth, be it based on materialism, spiritualism, or their identity, we are amazed to find that the realm of marvel and mystery, of wonder and poetry, connected with what we vaguely call "magic," far from being explained away or exploded, enlarges

[p. vi]

before us as we proceed, and that not into a mere cloudland, gorgeous land, but into a country of reality in which men of science who would once have disdained the mere thought thereof are beginning to stray. Hypnotism has really revealed far greater wonders than were ever established by the fascinatores of old or by mesmerists of more modern times. Memory, the basis of thought according to PLATO, which was once held to be a determined quantity, has been proved, (the word is not too bold), by recent physiology, to be practically infinite, and its perfect development to be identical with that of intellect, so that we now see plainly before us the power to perform much which was once regarded as miraculous. Not less evident is it that men of science or practical inventors, such as DARWIN, WALLACE, HUXLEY, TYNDALE, GALTON, JOULE, LOCKYER, and EDISON, have been or are all working in common with theosophists, spiritualists, Folk-lorists, and many more, not diversely but all towards a grand solution of the Unknown.

Therefore there is nothing whatever in the past relating to the influences which have swayed man, however strange, eccentric, superstitious, or even repulsive they may seem, which is not of great and constantly increasing value. And if we of the present time begin already to see this, how much more important will these facts be to the men of the future, who, by virtue of more widely extended knowledge and comparison, will be better able than we are to draw wise conclusions undreamed of now. But the chief conclusion for us is to collect as much as we can, while it is yet extant, of all the strange lore of the olden time, instead of wasting time in forming idle theories about it.

In a paper read before the Congres des Traditions populaires in Paris, 1889, on the relations of gypsies to Folk-lore, I set forth my belief that these people have always been the humble priests of what is really the practical religion of all peasants and poor people; that is their magical ceremonies and medicine. Very few have any conception of the degree to which gypsies have been the colporteurs of what in Italy is called "the old faith," or witchcraft.

[p. vii]

As regards the illustrative matter given, I am much indebted to DR. WLISLOCKI, who has probably had far more intimate personal experience of gypsies than any other learned man who ever lived, through our mutual friend, Dr. ANTHON HERRMANN, editor of the Ethnologische Mitteilungen, Budapest, who is also himself an accomplished Romany scholar and collector, and who has kindly taken a warm interest in this book, and greatly aided it. To these I may add Dr. FRIEDRICH S. KRAUSS, of Vienna, whose various works on the superstitions and Folk-lore of the South Slavonians--kindly presented by him to me--contain a vast mine of material, nearly all that of which he treats being common property between peasants and the Romany, as other sources abundantly indicate. With this there is also much which I collected personally among gypsies and fortune-tellers, and similar characters, it being true as regards this work and its main object, that there is much cognate or allied information which is quite as valuable as gypsy-lore itself, as all such subjects mutually explain one of the others.

Gypsies, as I have said, have done more than any race or class on the face of the earth to disseminate among the multitude a belief in fortune-telling, magical or sympathetic cures, amulets and such small sorceries as now find a place in Folk-lore. Their women have all pretended to possess occult power since prehistoric times. By the exercise of their wits they have actually acquired a certain art of reading character or even thought, which, however it be allied to deceit, is in a way true in itself, and well worth careful examination. MATTHEW ARNOLD has dwelt on it with rare skill in his poem of "The Gypsy Scholar." Even deceit and imposture never held its own as a system for ages without some ground-work of truth, and that which upheld the structure of gypsy sorcery has never been very carefully examined. I trust that I have done this in a rational and philosophic spirit, and have also illustrated my remarks in a manner which will prove attractive to the general reader.

There are many good reasons for believing that the greatest portion of gypsy magic was brought by the Romany from the East or India. This is specially true as regards those now dwelling in Eastern Europe.

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] And it is certainly interesting to observe that among these people there is still extant, on a very extended scale indeed, a Shamanism which seems to have come from the same Tartar-Altaic source which was found of yore among the Accadian-Babylonians, Etruscan races, and Indian hill-tribes. This, the religion of the drum and the demon as a disease-or devil doctoring-will be found fully illustrated in many curious ways in these pages. I believe that in describing it I have also shown how many fragments of this primitive religion, or cult, still exist, under very different names, in the most enlightened centres of civilization. And I respectfully submit to my reader, or critic, that I have in no instance, either in this or any other case, wandered from my real subject, and that the entire work forms a carefully considered and consistent whole. To perfect my title, I should perhaps have added a line or two to the effect that I have illustrated many of the gypsy sorceries by instances of Folk-lore drawn from other sources; but I believe that it is nowhere inappropriate, considering the subject as a whole. For those who would lay stress on omissions in my book, I would say that I have never intended or pretended to exhaust gypsy superstitions. I have not even given all that may be found in the works Of WLISLOCKI alone. I have, according to the limits of the book, cited so much as to fully illustrate the main subject already described, and this will be of more interest to the student of history than the details of gypsy chiromancy or more spells and charms than are necessary to explain the leading ideas.

What is wanted in the present state of Folk-lore, I here repeat, is collection from original sources, and material, that is from people and not merely from books. The critics we have--like the poor--always with us, and a century hence we shall doubtless have far better ones than those in whom we now rejoice--or sorrow. But material abides no time, and an immense quantity of it which is world-old perishes every day. For with general culture and intelligence we are killing all kinds of old faiths, with wonderful celerity. The time is near at hand when it will all be incredibly valuable, and then men will wish

[p. ix]

sorrowfully enough that there had been more collectors to accumulate and fewer critics to detract from their labours and to discourage them, For the collector must form his theory, or system great or small, good or bad, such as it is, in order to gather his facts; and then the theory is shattered by the critic and the collection made to appear ridiculous. And so collection ends.

There is another very curious reflection which has been ever present to my mind while writing this work, and which the reader will do well carefully to think out for himself. It is that the very first efforts of the human mind towards the supernatural were gloomy, strange, and wild; they were of witchcraft and sorcery, dead bodies, defilement, deviltry, and dirt. Men soon came to believe in the virtue of the repetition of certain rhymes or spells in connection with dead men's bones, hands, and other horrors or "relics." To this day this old religion exists exactly as it did of yore, wherever men are ignorant, stupid, criminal, or corresponding to their prehistoric ancestors. I myself have seen a dead man's hand for sale in Venice. According to DR. BLOCK, says a writer in The St. James's Gazette, January 16, 1889, the corpse-candle superstition is still firmly enshrined among the tenets of thieves all over Europe. In reality, according to The Standard, we know little about the strange thoughts which agitate the minds of the criminal classes. Their creeds are legends. Most of them are the children and grandchildren of thieves who have been brought up from their youth in the densest ignorance, and who, constantly at war with society, seek the aid of those powers of darkness in the dread efficacy of which they have an unshaken confidence.

"Fetishism of the rudest type, or what the mythologists have learned to call 'animism' is part and parcel of the robber's creed. A 'habit and repute' thief has always in his pocket, or somewhere about his person, a bit of coal, or chalk, or a 'lucky stone,' or an amulet of some sort on which he relies for safety in his hour of peril. Omens he firmly trusts in. Divination is regularly practised by him, as the occasional quarrels over the Bible and key, and the sieve and shears, testify. The supposed power of witches and wizards make many of them live in terror, and pay blackmail, and although they will lie almost without a motive, the ingenuity with which the most depraved criminal will try to evade 'kissing the book,' performing this rite with his thumb instead, is a curious instance of what

[p. x]

may be termed perverted religious instincts. As for the fear of the evil eye, it is affirmed that most of the foreign thieves of London dread more being brought before a particular magistrate who has the reputation of being endowed with that fatal gift than of being summarily sentenced by any other whose judicial glare is less severe."

This is all true, but it tells only a small part of the truth. Not only is Fetish or Shamanism the real religion of criminals, but of vast numbers who are not suspected of it. There is not a town in England or in Europe in which witchcraft (its beginning) is not extensively practised, although this is done with a secrecy the success of which is of itself almost a miracle. We may erect churches and print books, but wherever the prehistoric man exists--and he is still to be found everywhere by millions--he will cling to the old witchcraft of his remote ancestors. Until you change his very nature, the only form in which he can realize supernaturalism will be by means of superstition, and the grossest superstion at that. Research and reflection have taught me that this sorcery is far more widely and deeply extended than any cultivated person dreams--instead of yielding to the progress of culture it seems to actually advance with it. Count ANGELO DE GUBERNATIS once remarked to one of the most distinguished English statesmen that there was in the country in Tuscany ten times as much heathenism as Christianity. The same remark was made to me by a fortune-teller in Florence. She explained what she meant. It was the vecchia religione--"the old religion"--not Christianity, but the dark and strange sorceries of the stregha, or witch, the compounding of magical medicine over which spells are muttered, the making love-philters, the cursing enemies, the removing the influence of other witches, and the manufacture of amulets in a manner prohibited by the Church.

It would seem as if, by some strange process, while advanced scientists are occupied in eliminating magic from religion, the coarser mind is actually busy in reducing it to religion alone. It has been educated sufficiently to perceive an analogy between dead man's hands and "relics" as working miracles, and as sorcery is more entertaining than religion, and has, moreover, the charm of secrecy, the prehistoric man, who is still

[p. xi]

with us, prefers the former. Because certain forms of this sorcery are no longer found among the educated classes we think that superstition no longer exists; but though we no longer burn witches or believe in fairies, it is a fact that of a kind and fashion proportionate to our advanced culture, it is, with a very few exceptions, as prevalent as ever. Very few persons indeed have ever given this subject the attention which it merits, for it is simply idle to speculate on the possibility of cultivating or sympathizing with the lowest orders without really understanding it in all its higher forms. And I venture to say that, as regards a literal and truthful knowledge of its forms and practices, this work will prove to be a contribution to the subject not without value.

I have, in fact, done my best to set forth in it a very singular truth which is of great importance to every one who takes any real interest in social science, or the advance of intelligence. It is that while almost everybody who contributes to general literature, be it books of travel or articles in journals, has ever and anon something clever to say about superstition among the lower orders at home or abroad, be it in remote country places or in the mountains of Italy, with the usual cry of "Would it be believed--in the nineteenth century?" &c.; it still remains true that the amount of belief in magic--call it by what name we will--in the world is just as great as ever it was. And here I would quote with approbation a passage from "The Conditions for the Survival of Archaic Customs," by G. L. Gomme, in The Archaeological Review of January, 1890:--

"If Folk-lore has done nothing else up to this date it has demonstrated that civilization, under many of its phases, while elevating the governing class of a nation, and thereby no doubt elevating the nation, does not always reach the lowest or even the lower strata of the population. As Sir Arthur Mitchell puts it, 'There is always a going up of some and a going down of others,' and it is more than probable that just as the going up of the few is in one certain direction, along certain well-ascertained lines of improvement or development, so the going down of the many is in an equally well-ascertained line of degradation or backwardness The upward march is always towards political improvement, carrying with it social development; the downward march is always towards social degradation, carrying with it political backwardness. It seems difficult indeed to believe that monarchs like Alfred, Eadward, William, and Edward, could have had within their Christianized kingdom

[p. xii]

groups of people whose status was still that of savagery; it seems difficult to believe that Raleigh and Spenser actually beheld specimens of the Irish savage; it seems impossible to read Kemble and Green and Freeman and yet to understand that they are speaking only of the advanced guard of the English nation, not of the backward races within the boundary of its island home. The student of archaic custom has, however, to meet these difficulties, and it seems necessary, therefore, to try and arrive at some idea as to what the period of savagery in these islands really means."

Which is a question that very few can answer. There is to be found in almost every cheap book, or "penny dreadful" and newspaper shop in Great Britain and America, for sale at a very low price a Book of Fate--or something equivalent to it, for the name of these works is legion--and one publisher advertises that he has nearly thirty of them, or at least such books with different titles. In my copy there are twenty-five pages of incantations, charms, and spells, every one of them every whit as "superstitious" as any of the gypsy ceremonies set forth in this volume. I am convinced, from much inquiry, that next to the Bible and the Almanac there is no one book which is so much disseminated among the million as the fortune-teller, in some form or other. [*1] That is to say, there are, numerically, many millions more of believers in such small sorcery now in Great Britain than there were centuries ago, for, be it remembered, the superstitions of the masses were always petty ones, like those of the fate-books; it was only the aristocracy who consulted Cornelius Agrippa, and could afford la haute magic. We may call it by other names, but fry, boil, roast, powder or perfume it as we will, the old faith in the supernatural and in occult means of getting at it still exists in one form or another--the parable or moral of most frequent occurrence in it being that of the Mote and the Beam, of the real and full meaning of which I can only reply in the ever-recurring refrain of the Edda: Understand ye this--or what?

Footnotes

^xii:1 I was once myself made to contribute, involuntarily, to this kind of literature. Forty years ago I published a Folk-lore book entitled "The Poetry and Mystery of Dreams," in which the explanations of dreams, as given by ASTRAMPSYCHIUS, ARTEMIDORUS, and other ancient oneirologists, were illustrated by passages from many poets and popular ballads, showing how widely the ancient symbolism had extended. A few years ago I found that some ingenious literary hack had taken my work (without credit), and, omitting what would not be understood by servant girls, had made of it a common sixpenny dream-book.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

[p. 1]

  

CHAPTER I

  

THE ORIGIN OF WITCHCRAFT, SHAMANISM, AND SORCERY--VINDICTIVE AND MISCHIEVOUS MAGIC

AS their peculiar perfume is the chief association with spices, so sorcery is allied in every memory to gypsies. And as it has not escaped many poets that there is something more strangely sweet and mysterious in the scent of cloves than in that of flowers, so the attribute of inherited magic power adds to the romance of these picturesque wanderers. Both the spices and the Romany come from the far East--the fatherland of divination and enchantment. The latter have been traced with tolerable accuracy, If we admit their affinity with the Indian Dom and Domar, back to the

[p. 2]

threshold of history, or well-nigh into prehistoric times, and in all ages they, or their women, have been engaged, as if by elvish instinct, in selling enchant. merits, peddling prophecies and palmistry, and dealing with the devil generally ill a small retail way. As it was of old so it is to-day--

Ki shan i Romani--
 Adoi san' i chov'hani.

Wherever gypsies go,
 There the witches are, we know.

It is no great problem ill ethnology or anthropology as to how gypsies became fortune-tellers. We may find a very curious illustration of it in the wren. This is apparently as humble, modest, prosaic little fowl as exists, and as far from mystery and wickedness as an old hen. But the ornithologists of the olden time, and the myth-makers, and the gypsies who lurked and lived in the forest, knew better. They saw how this bright-eyed, strange little creature in her elvish way slipped in and out of hollow trees and wood shade into sunlight, and anon was gone, no man knew whither, and so they knew that it was an uncanny creature, and told wonderful tales of its deeds in human form, and to-day it is called by gypsies in Germany, as in England, the witch-bird, or more briefly, chorihani, "the witch." Just so the gypsies themselves, with their glittering Indian eyes, slipping like the wren in and out of the shadow of the Unknown, and anon away and invisible, won for themselves the name which now they wear. Wherever Shamanism, or the sorcery which is based on exorcising or commanding spirits, exists, its professors from leading strange lives, or from solitude or wandering, become strange and wild-looking. When men have this appearance people associate with it mysterious power. This is the case in Tartary, Africa, among the Eskimo, Lapps, or Red Indians, with all of whom the sorcerer, voodoo or medaolin, has the eye of the "fascinator," glittering and cold as that of a serpent. So the gypsies, from the mere fact of being wanderers and out-of-doors livers in wild places, became wild-looking, and when asked if they did not associate with the devils who dwell in the desert places, admitted

[p. 3]

the soft impeachment, and being further questioned as to whether their friends the devils, fairies, elves, and goblins had not taught them how to tell the future, they pleaded guilty, and finding that it paid well, went to work in their small way to improve their "science," and particularly their pecuniary resources. It was an easy calling; it required no property or properties, neither capital nor capitol, shiners nor shrines, wherein to work the oracle. And as I believe that a company of children left entirely to themselves would form and grow up with a language which in a very few years would be spoken fluently, [*1] so I am certain that the shades of night, and fear, pain, and lightning and mystery would produce in the same time conceptions of dreaded beings, resulting first in demonology and then in the fancied art of driving devils away. For out of my own childish experiences and memories I retain with absolute accuracy material enough to declare that without any aid from other people the youthful mind forms for itself strange and seemingly supernatural phenomena. A tree or bush waving in the night breeze by moonlight is perhaps mistaken for a great man, the mere repetition of the sight or of its memory make it a personal reality. Once when I was a child powerful doses of quinine caused a peculiar throb in my ear which I for some time believed was the sound of somebody continually walking upstairs. Very young children sometimes imagine invisible playmates or companions talk with them, and actually believe that the unseen talk to them in return. I myself knew a small boy who had, as he sincerely believed, such a companion, whom he called Bill, and when he could not understand his lessons he consulted the mysterious William, who explained them to him. There are children who, by the voluntary or involuntary exercise of visual perception or volitional eye-memory, [*2] reproduce or create images which they imagine

[p. 4]

to be real, and this faculty is much commoner than is supposed. In fact I believe that where it exists in most remarkable degrees the adults to whom the children describe their visions dismiss them as "fancies" or falsehoods. Even in the very extraordinary cases recorded by Professor HALE, in which little children formed for themselves spontaneously a language in which they conversed fluently, neither their parents nor anybody else appears to have taken the least interest in the matter. However, the fact being that babes can form for themselves supernatural conceptions and embryo mythologies, and as they always do attribute to strange or terrible-looking persons power which the latter do not possess, it is easy, without going further, to understand why a wild Indian gypsy, with eyes like a demon when excited, and unearthly-looking at his calmest, should have been supposed to be a sorcerer by credulous child-like villagers. All of this I believe might have taken place, or really did take place, in the very dawn of man's existence as a rational creature--that as soon as "the frontal convolution of the brain which monkeys do not possess," had begun with the "genial tubercule," essential to language, to develop itself, then also certain other convolutions and tubercules, not as yet discovered, but which ad interim I will call "the ghost-making," began to act. "Genial," they certainly were not--little joy and much sorrow has man got out of his spectro-facient apparatus--perhaps if it and talk are correlative he might as well, many a time, have been better off if he were dumb.

So out of the earliest time, in the very two o'clock of a misty morning in history, man came forth believing in non-existent terrors and evils as soon as he could talk, and talking about them as fast as he formed them. Long before the conception of anything good or beneficent, or of a Heavenly Father or benevolent angels came to him, he was scared with nightmares and spirits of death and darkness, hell, hunger, torture, and terror. We all know how difficult it is for many people when some one dies out of a household to get over the involuntary feeling that we shall unexpectedly meet the departed in the usual haunts. In almost every family there is a record how some one has "heard a voice they cannot hear," or the dead speaking

[p. 5]

in the familiar tones. Hence the belief in ghosts, as soon as men began to care for death at all, or to miss those who had gone. So first of all came terrors and spectres, or revenants, and from setting out food for the latter. which was the most obvious and childlike manner to please them, grew sacrifices to evil spirits, and finally the whole system of sacrifice in all its elaboration.

It may therefore be concluded that as soon as man began to think and speak and fear the mysterious, he also began to appease ghosts and bugbears by sacrifices. Then there sprung up at once--quite as early--the magus, or the cleverer man, who had the wit to do the sacrificing and eat the meats sacrificed, and explain that he had arranged it all privately with the dead and the devils. He knew all about them, and he could drive them away. This was the Shaman. He seems to have had a Tartar-Mongol-mongrel-Turanian origin, somewhere in Central Asia, and to have spread with his magic drum, and songs, and stinking smoke, exorcising his fiends all over the face of the earth, even as his descendant, General Booth, with his "devil-drivers" is doing at the present day. But the earliest authentic records of Shamanism are to be found in the Accadian, proto-Chaldaean and Babylon records. According to it all diseases whatever, as well as all disasters, were directly the work of evil spirits, which were to be driven away by songs of exorcism, burning of perfumes or evil-smelling drugs, and performing ceremonies, many of which, with scraps of the exorcisms are found in familiar use here and there at the present day. Most important of all in it was the extraordinary influence of the Shaman himself on his patient, for he made the one acted on sleep or wake, freed him from many apparently dire disorders in a minute, among others of epilepsies which were believed to be caused by devils dwelling in man--the nearest and latest explanation of which magic power is given in that very remarkable book, "Psycho-Therapeutics, or Treatment by Sleep and Suggestion," by C. LLOYD TUCKEY, M.D. (London: Bailliere and Co., 1889), which I commend to all persons interested in ethnology as casting light on some of the most interesting and perplexing problems of humanity, and especially of "magic."

[p. 6]

It would seem, at least among the Laplanders, Finns, Eskimo, and Red Indians, that the first stage of Shamanism was a very horrible witchcraft, practised chiefly by women, in which attempts were made to conciliate the evil spirits; the means employed embracing everything which could revolt and startle barbarous men. Thus fragments of dead bodies and poison, and unheard-of terrors and crimes formed its basis. I think it very probable that this was the primitive religion among savages everywhere. An immense amount of it in its vilest conceivable forms still exists among negroes as Voodoo.

After a time this primitive witchcraft or voodooism had its reformers--probably brave and shrewd men, who conjectured that the powers of evil might be "exploited" to advantage. There is great confusion and little knowledge as yet as regards primitive man, but till we know better we may roughly assume that witch-voodooism was the religion of the people of the paleolithic period, if they could talk at all, since language is denied to the men of the Neanderthal, Canstadt, Egnisheim, and Podhava type. All that we can declare with some certainty is that we find the advanced Shamanism the religion of the early Turanian races, among whose descendants, and other people allied to them, it exists to this day. The grandest incident in the history of humanity is the appearance of the Man of Cromagnon. He it was who founded what M. DE QUATREFAGES calls "a magnificent race," probably one which speedily developed a high civilization, and a refined religion. But the old Shamanism with its amulets, exorcisms, and smoke, its noises, more or less musical, of drums and enchanted bells, and its main belief that all the ills of life came from the action of evil spirits, was deeply based among the inferior races and the inferior scions of the Cromagnon stock clung to it in forms more or less modified. just as the earlier witchcraft, or the worship and conciliation of evil, overlapped in many places the newer Shamanism, so the latter overlapped the beautiful Nature-worship of the early Aryans, the stately monotheism of the Shemites, and the other more advanced or ingenious developments of the idea of a creative cause. There are, in fact, even

[p. 7]

among us now, minds to whom Shamanism or even witchcraft is deeply or innately adapted by nature, and there are hundred of millions who, while professing a higher and purer doctrine, cling to its forms or essentials, believing that because the apparatus is called by a different name it is in no respect whatever the same thing. Finally there are men who, with no logical belief whatever in any kind of supernaturalism, study it, and love it, and are moved by it, owing to its endless associations, with poetry, art, and all the legends of infancy or youth. HEINE was not in his reasoning moments anything more or less than a strict Deist or Monotheist, but all the dreams and spectres, fairies and goblins, whether of the Middle Ages or the Talmud, were inexpressibly dear to him, and they move like myriad motes through the sunshine of his poetry and prose, often causing long rays when there were bars at the window--like that on which the saint hung his cloak. It is probable or certain that Shamanism (or that into which it has very naturally developed) will influence all mankind, until science, by absorbing man's love of the marvellous in stupendous discoveries shall so put to shame the old thaumaturgy, or wonder-working, that the latter will seem poor and childish. In all the "Arabian Nights" there is nothing more marvellous than the new idea that voices and sounds may be laid aside like real books, and made to speak and sing again years afterwards. And in all of that vast repertory of occult lore, "Isis Unveiled," there is nothing so wonderful as the simple truth that every child may be educated to possess an infinitely developed memory of words, sights, sounds, and ideas, allied to incredible quickness of perception and practice of the constructive faculties. These, with the vast fields of adjusting improved social relations and reforms--all of which in a certain way opens dazzling vistas of a certain kind of enchantment or brilliant hope--will go fast and far to change the old romance to a radically different state of feeling and association.

It is coming--let it come! Doubtless there was an awful romance of darkness about the old witchcraft which caused its worshippers to declare that the new lights of Shamanism could never dissipate it. just so many

[p. 8]

millions of educated people at present cannot be brought to understand that all things to which they are used are not based on immutable laws of nature, and must needs be eternal. They will find it hard to comprehend that there can ever be any kind of poetry, art, or sentiment, utterly different from that to which they and their ancestors have been accustomed. Yet it is clear and plain before them, this New Era, looking them directly in the face, about to usher in a reformation compared to which all the reformations and revolutions and new religions which the world has ever seen were as nothing; and the children are born who will see more than the beginning of it.

In the next chapter I will examine the Shamanic spells and charms still used among certain gypsies. For, be it observed, all the gypsy magic and sorcery here described is purely Shamanic--that is to say, of the most primitive Tartar type--and it is the more interesting as having preserved--from prehistoric times many of the most marked characteristics of the world's first magic or religion. It treats every disease, disorder, trouble, or affliction as the work of an evil spirit; it attempts to banish these influences by the aid of ceremonies, many of which, by the disgusting and singular nature of the ingredients employed, show the lingering influences of the black witchcraft which preceded Shamanism; and it invokes favourable supernatural agencies, such as the spirits of the air and Mashmurdalo', the giant of the forests. In addition to this there will be found to be clearly and unmistakably associated with all their usages, symbols and things nearly connected with much which is to be found in Greek, Roman, and Indian mythology or symbolism. Now whether this was drawn from "classic" sources, or whether all came from some ancient and obscure origin, cannot now be accurately determined. But it certainly cannot be denied that Folk-lore of this kind casts a great deal of light on the early history of mankind, and the gradual unfolding or evolution of religion and of mind, and that, if intelligently studied, this of the gypsies is as important as any chapter in the grand work.

The gypsies came, historically speaking, very recently from India.

[p. 9]

It has not been so carefully observed as it might that all Indians are not of the religion of Brahma, much less of Buddha or of Mahommed, and that among the lower castes, the primaeval Altaic Shamanism, with even earlier witchcraft, still holds its own. Witchcraft, or Voodoo, or Obi, relies greatly on poisoning for its magic, and the first gypsies were said to poison unscrupulously. Even to this day there is but one word with them as with many Hindoos for both medicine and poison--id est drab. How exactly this form of witchcraft and Shamanism exists today in India appears from the following extract from The St. James's Gazette, September 8, 1888:--

THE HINDOO PRIEST

In India, the jadoo-wallah, or exorcist, thrives apace; and no wonder, for is not the lower-caste Hindoo community bhut, or demon-ridden? Every village, graveyard, burning-ghat, has its special bhut or bhuts; and the jadoo-wallah is the earthly mediator between their bhutships and the common folk. The exorcist is usually the spiritual adviser to the population of a low-caste village, and is known as a gooroo, or priest: that is to say, he professes to hold commune with the spirits of defunct Hindoos which have qualified for their unique position in the other world--by their iniquity in this one, perhaps. Every Hindoo has a guardian bhut that requires propitiating, and the gooroo is the medium.

Amongst the Jaiswars and other low-caste Hindoos, caste is regulated by carnal pice, and a man is distinguished amongst them by a regulated monetary scale. One person may be a 14-anna caste man while another may only be a 12-anna caste man. Does the 12-anna caste man wish to supersede the 14-anna caste man, then he consults the gooroo, who will, in consideration of a certain contribution, promote him to a higher-caste grade. A moneyed man having qualms about his future state should join the Jaiswars, where at least he would have an opportunity of utilizing his spare cash for the good of his soul. The average gooroo will be only too glad to procure him everlasting glory for a matter of a few rupees.

The gooroo, then, serves as regulator of the lower-caste Hindoo, system. But it is our intention to exhibit him in his peculiar position of exorcist-general to the people. This will perhaps be best explained by an account of the case of one Kaloo. Kaloo was a grass-cutter, and had been offended by Kasi, a brother grass-cutter. Kasi, it appears, had stolen Kaloo's quilt one night during his temporary absence at a neighbouring liquor-shop. Kaloo, on his return, finding his quilt gone, raised the hue-and-cry; and Mooloo, the village policeman, traced the robbery to Kasi's hut. Yet, in spite of this damning proof, the village panchayet, or bench of magistrates, decided that, as Kaloo

[p. 10]

could not swear to the exact colour of his lost quilt--Kaloo was colour-blind--it could not possibly be his. Anyhow, Kaloo kept Kasi in view and hit upon a plan to do him a grievous bodily injury. Scraping together a few rupees, he went to the village gooroo and promised that worthy a reward if he would only exorcise the bhuts and get them to "make Kasi's liver bad." The gooroo, in consideration of five rupees cash, promised compliance. So that night we find the gooroo busy with sandal-wood and pig's blood propitiating the neighbouring bhuts. Needless to say that Kasi had in a very short space of time all the symptoms of liver complaint. Whether the bhuts gave Kasi a bad liver or the gooroo gave him a few doses of poison is a question. Anyhow, Kasi soon died. Another case in point is that of Akuti. Akuti was a retired courtesan who had long plied a profitable trade in the city. We find her, however, at her native village of Ramghur, the wife of one Balu. Balu soon got tired of his Akuti, and longed for the contents of her strong box wherein she kept her rupees, bracelets, nose-rings, and other valuables. This was a rather awkward matter for Balu, for Akuti was still in the prime of life. Balu accordingly  the gooroo and wants Akuti's liver made bad. "Nothing easier," says the gooroo: "five rupees." Balu has reckoned without his host, however: for the gooroo, as general spiritual adviser to the Ramghur community, visits Akuti and tells her of Balu's little scheme. Naturally Balu's liver is soon in a decline, for Akuti's ten rupees were put in the opposite side of the gooroo's scales.

Knaves of the gooroo genus flourish in India, and when their disposition is vicious the damage they can do is appalling. That these priests exist and do such things as I have illustrated is beyond question. Ask any native of India his views on the bhut question, and he will tell you that there are such things, and, further, that the gooroo is the only one able to lay them, so to speak. According to the low-caste Hindoo, the bhut is a spiteful creature which requires constant supplies of liquor and pork; otherwise it will wreak its vengeance on the forgetful votary who neglects the supply. A strange idea, too, is this of pork being pleasing to the bhuts; but when it is remembered that the Jaiswars, Chamars, and other low-caste Hindoos are inordinately fond of that meat themselves, they are right in supposing pig to be the favourite dish of the bhuts, who, after all, are but the departed spirits of their own people. Naturally bhai (brother) Kaloo, or bahin (sister, English gypsy pen) Muti, the quondam grass-cutter and courtesan of Ramghur village, who in this life liked nothing better than a piece of bacon and a dram of spirits, will, in their state of bhuthood hanker after those things still. Acting on these notions of the people, the gooroo lives and thrives exceedingly.

Yet of all this there is nothing "Hindoo," nothing of the Vedas. It is all pre-Aryan, devil-worshipping, poisoning, and Turanian; and it is exactly like voodooing in Philadelphia or any other city in America. It is the old faith which came before all, which existed through and under Brahminism, Buddhism, and Mahommedanism, and which, as is well

[p. 11]

known, has cropped out again and flourishes vigorously under British toleration. And this is the faith which forms the basis of European gypsy sorcery, as it did of yore that of the Chaldaean and Etrurian, which still survive in the witchcraft of the Tuscan Romagna. Every gypsy who came to Europe a few centuries ago set up as a gooroo, and did his sorceries after the same antique fashion. Even to-day it is much the same, but with far less crime. But the bhut or malignant spirit is, under other names, still believed, in, still doctored by gypsies with herbs and smoke, and "be rhymed like an Irish rat," and conjured into holes bored in trees, and wafted away into running streams, and naively implored to "go where he is wanted," to where he was nursed, and to no longer bother honest folk who are tired of him. And for all this the confiding villager must pay the gypsy wise-woman "so much monies"--as it was in the beginning and is now in good faith among millions in Europe who are in a much better class of society. And from this point of view I venture to say that there is not a charm or spell set down in this work or extant which will not be deeply interesting to every sincere student of the history of culture. Let me, however, say in this beginning once for all that I have only given specimens sufficient to illustrate my views, for my prescribed limits quite forbid the introduction of all the gypsy cures, spells, &c., which I have collected.

Footnotes

^3:1 Vide an extremely interesting paper on "The Origin of Languages and the Antiquity of Speaking Man," by Horatio Hale. ["Proceedings of the American Association for the Advancement of Science," vol. xxv.] As I had, owing to studies for many years of baby-talk and jargons, long ago arrived at Mr. Hale's conclusions, I was astonished to learn that they have been so recently formed by anybody.

^3:2 Vide "Practical Education," by C. G. Leland (London: Whittaker and Co., 1888), in which this faculty is fully discussed, pp. 184-213.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

CHAPTER II

  

CHARMS AND CONJURATIONS TO CURE THE DISORDERS OF GROWN PEOPLE

  

HUNGARIAN GYPSY MAGIC

THOUGH not liable to many disorders, the gypsies in Eastern Europe, from their wandering, out-of-doors life, and camping by marshes and pools where there is malaria, suffer a great deal from fevers, which in their simple system of medicine are divided into the shilale--i.e., chills or cold--and the tate shilalyi, "hot-cold," or fever and ague. For the former, the following remedy is applied: Three lungs and three livers, of frogs are dried and powdered and drunk in spirits, after which the sick man or woman says

[p. 13]

"Chuckerdya pal m're per
 Chaven save misece!
 Chuckerdya pal m're per
 Den miseceske drom odry prejial!

"Frogs in my belly
 Devour what is bad
 Frogs in my belly
 Show the evil the way out!"

By "the evil" is understood evil spirits. According to the old Shamanic belief, which was the primaeval religion of all mankind, every disease is caused by an evil spirit which enters the body and can only be driven out by magic. We have abundant traces of this left in our highest civilization and religion among people who gravely attribute every evil to the devil instead of the unavoidable antagonisms of nature. Nothing is more apparent in the New Testament than that all diseases were anciently regarded as coming from devils, or evil occult, spiritual influences, their negative or cure being holiness in some form. This the Jews, if they did not learn it from the Assyrians in the first place, had certainly studied deeply in Babylon, where it formed the great national cult. "It was the devil put it into my head," says the criminal; and there is not a point of this old sorcery which is not earnestly and seriously advocated by the Roman Catholic Church and the preachers of the Salvation Army. Among the American Red Indians the idea of evil spirits is carried to logical extremes. If a pen drops from our fingers, or a penny rolls from our grasp, the former of course falls on our new white dress, while the latter nine times out of ten goes directly to the nearest grating, or crack or rat-hole. I aver that it is literally true, if I ever search for a letter or paper it is almost always at the bottom of the rest, while ink-wipers and pens seem to be endowed with more than mere instinct or reason--they manifest genius in concealing themselves. The Indians having observed this have come to the conclusion that it is all the work of certain

[p. 14]

busy little mischievous goblins, in which I, to a certain extent, agree with them, holding, however, that the dwelling-place of these devilkins, is in our own brain. What are our dreams but the action of our other mind, or a second Me in my brain? Certainly it is with no will or effort, or act of mine, that I go through a diabolical torturing nightmare, or a dreadful dream, whose elaborate and subtle construction betrays very often more ingenuity than I in my waking hours possess. I have had philosophical and literary dreams, the outlines of which I have often remembered waking, which far transcended anything of the kind which I could ever hope to write. The maker of all this is not I or my will, and he is never about, or on hand, when I am self-conscious. But in the inadvertent moments of oblivion, while writing, or while performing any act, this other I, or I's, (for there may be a multitude of them for aught I know) step in and tease--even as they do in dreams. Now the distinction between this of subjective demons acting objectively, and objective or outside spirits, is really too fine to be seen even by a Darwinian-Carpenterian-Haeckelite, and therefore one need not be amazed that PIEL SABADIS or TOMAQUAH, of the Passamaquoddy tribe, or OBEAH GUMBO of New Orleans, should, with these experiences, jump at ghosts and "gobblers," is not to be wondered at; still less that they should do something to conciliate or compel these haunting terrors, or "buggs," as they were once called--whence bogeys. It is a fact that if one's ink-wipers get into the habit of hiding all we have to do is to deliberately destroy them and get others, or at least watch them carefully, and they will soon be cured of wandering. On the other hand, sacrifices to conciliate and please naturally occur, and the more expensive these are the better are they supposed to be. And as human beings were of old the most valuable property, they were as naturally supposed to be most acceptable to the gods, or, by the monotheists, to God. A West Indian voodoo on being reproached for human sacrifices to the serpent, and for eating the bodies slain, replied, "Do you believe that the Son of God was sacrificed to save man, and do you not

[p. 15]

eat what your priests say is His very body?" So difficult is it to draw distinctions between that which is spiritual and the mockeries which appear to be such!

The scape-goat, or sufferer, who is martyred that many may escape--or in other words, the unfortunate minority--is a natural result of sacrifice. There is a curious trace of it in Hungarian Gypsy Shamanism. On Easter Monday they make a wooden box or receptacle which is called the bicaben, pronounced like the English gypsy word bitchapen and meaning the same, that is--a sending, a thing sent or gift. In this, at the bottom, are two sticks across, "as in a cradle," and on these are laid herbs and other fetish stuff which every one touches with the finger; then the whole is enveloped in a winding of white and red wool, and carried by the oldest person of the tribe from tent to tent; after which it is borne to the next running stream and left there, after every one has spat upon it. By doing this they think that all the diseases and disorders which would have befallen them during the coming year are conjured into the box. But woe to him who shall find the box and open it, instead of throwing it at once into the stream! All the diseases exorcised by the gypsy band will fall upon him and his in full measure.

It would be an interesting question to know how many good people there are, let us say in London, who, if they had all opportunity to work off all their colds, gouts, scarlet-fevers, tooth- head- and stomach-aches, with the consequent doctors' bills, or all suffering and expenses, on some other family by means of secret sorcery, would or would not "try it on"? It is curious to observe the resemblance of the gypsy ceremony., with its box full of mischief, and the Jewish goat; not forgetting the red wool handed down from heathen sacrifice and sorcery of old. In the Bible white wool is the symbol of purification (Isaiah i. 18). The feet of the statues of the gods were enveloped in wool--Du laneos habent pedes--to signify that they are slow to avenge, if sure. It is altogether an interesting object, this gypsy casket, and one would like to know

[p. 16]

what all the channels were through which the magic ran ere it carne to them.

Another cure against the fever is to go to a running stream and cast pieces of wood nine times backwards into the running water, repeating the rhymes:--

"Shilalyi prejia,
 Panori me tut 'dav!
 Nani me tut kamav
 Andakode prejia,
 Odoy tut chuchiden,
 Odoy tut ferinen,
 Odoy tut may kamen
 Mashurdalo sastyar!"

Fever go away from me,
 I give it, water, unto thee
 Unto me thou art not dear,
 Therefore go away from here
 To where they nursed thee,
 Where they shelter thee,
 Where they love thee,
 Mashurdalo--help!"

This is a very remarkable invocation which takes us into true heathenism. Mashurdalo, or, correctly speaking, Mashmurdalo (it would be Masmerdo in English gypsy), means meat-killer. He is a sylvan giant--he has his hold by wode and wolde as outlawes wont to do, in faraway forests and lonely rocky places, where he lurks to catch beast and men in order to devour them. It is needless to say to those who are aware that the taste of white people's flesh is like that of very superior chicken, and a negro's something much better than grouse, that Mashmurdalo prefers, like a simple, unsophisticated savage as he is, men to animals. Like the German peasant who remarked, "It's all meat, anyhow," when he found a mouse in his soup, Mashmurdalo is not particular. He is the guardian of great treasures; like most men in the "advance

[p. 17]

business" he knows where the "money" is to be found--unlike them he is remarkably stupid, and can be easily cheated of his valuables. But if anybody does this Morgante a service he is very grateful, and aids his benefactor either with a loan or with his enormous strength. In many respects he bears a remarkable resemblance to two giants in the American Algonkin mythology, especially to At-was-kenni ges--the Spirit of the Forest--who is equally powerful, good-natured, and stupid, and to the Chenoo, who is a cannibal giant and yet grateful to friends, and also to several Hindoo gods. The gypsies have here evidently fused several Oriental beings into one., This is a process which occurs in the decline of mythologies as in languages. In the infancy of a speech, as in its old age, many words expressing different ideas, but which sound somewhat alike, become a single term. In English gypsy I have found as many as eight or ten Hindi words thus concentrated into one.

Another cure for a fever. The sufferer goes in the forest and finds a young tree. When the first rays of the rising sun fall on it the patient shakes it with all his might and exclaims:--

"Shilalyi, shilalyi prejia
 Kathe tu besha, kathe tu besha!

"Fever, fever, go away!
 Here shalt thou stay. Here shalt thou stay!"

It is here plain that the shaking the sapling is intended to transfer the shakes, as the chill and shuddering of the fever is called in America, to the tree.

"Then the fever passes into the tree." Perhaps it was in this way that the aspen learned to tremble. But among the gypsies in the south of Hungary, among whom the vaccination or inoculation of trees is greatly the fashion, a hole is bored into the wood, into which the patient spits thrice, repeats the spell, and then stops the hole with a plug. The boring of holes in trees or transferring illness to them is also practised without formulas of speech. Thus, if while a man is lying down or sitting

[p. 18]

in the spring he hears the song of the cuckoo he believes that he will be ill all the time for a year to come, especially with fevers, unless he goes. nine times to a tree, bores a hole in it, and spits into it three times. Then he is safe. In German mythology "the cuckoo is a bird which brings bad luck" (FRIEDRICH), and the inhabitants of Haiterbach were so persuaded of this that they introduced a prayer against it into their church service, whence they got the name of cuckoos (WOLF, "Zeitschrift fur Deutsche Myth," Vol. i. p. 440). It announces to men the infidelity of wives, and tells listeners how many years they have to live.

It is possible that this is a relic of an old form of sacrifice, or proof that the idea occurs to all men of thus making a casket of a tree. The occasional discovery of stone axe-heads in very old trees in America renders this probable. And where the wood grows up and encloses the object it would very rarely happen that it would ever be discovered. It should be added to the previous instance that when they have closed the hole, the Transylvanian gypsies eat some of the bark of the next tree.

Another cure for fever is effected by going in the morning before sunrise to the bank of a stream, and digging a hole with some object--for instance, a knife--which has never been used. Into this hole the patient makes water, then fills up the hole, saying:--

"Shilalyi ach kathe
 Na ava kiya mange!
 Sutyara andre chik!
 Ava kiya mange
 Kana kathe na hin pani!"

"Fever stay here!
 Do not come to me!
 Dry up in dust,
 Come unto me
 When no water is here."

Dr. WLISLOCKI translates this last line, "When there is no more water in the river," which is certainly what is meant. "While water

[p. 19]

runs or grass grows," &c. is a formula common to ail countries. Another cure for fever is this: the patient must take a kreutzer, an egg, and a handful of salt, and before sunrise go with them to a cross-road, throw them away backwards, and repeat:--

"Kana adala kiya mange aven
 Ava tu kiya mange shilalyi."

"When these things again I see,
 Fever then return to me."

Or literally, "When these things to me come." For the next three days the invalid must not touch money, eggs, or salt. There is an old MS. collection of English charms and ceremonies, professedly of "black witchcraft," in which we are told that if a girl will walk stark-naked by the light of the full moon round a field or a house, and cast behind her at every step a handful of salt, she will get the lover whom she desires. Salt, says MORESINUS, was sacred to the infernal deities, and it was a symbol of the soul, or of life, because it preserved the body while in it (PITISCUS, "Leg. Ant. Rom." ii. p. 675). The devil never eats salt. Once there was in Germany a peasant who had a witch for a wife, and the devil invited them to supper. But all the dishes were without any seasoning, and the peasant, despite all nudges and hints to hold his tongue kept crying for salt. And when it was brought and he said, "Thank God, here is salt at last!" the whole Spuck, or ghastly scene, vanished (HORST, "Daemonomagie," Frankfurt, 1818, vol. ii. p. 213). For a great deal of further information and symbolism on and of salt, including all the views of the ancient Rabbis and modern rationalists on the subject of Lot's wife, the reader may consult "Symbolik und Mythologie der Natur," by J. B. FRIEDRICH, Wurzburg, 1859: "Salt is put into love-philtres and charms to ensure the duration of an attachment; in some Eastern countries it is carried in a little bag as an amulet to preserve health."

Another cure for fever. The patient must drink, from a new jug, water from three brooks, and after every drink throw into the running

[p. 20]

stream a handful of salt. Then he must make water into the first and say--

"Kathe hin t'ro sherro!"

"Here is thy head!"

At the second he repeats the sacred ceremony and murmurs

"Kathe hin t'ro pera!"

"Here is thy belly!"

And again at the third he exclaims:--

"Te kathehin t're punra.
 Ja atunci andre pani!"

"And here are thy feet.
 Go now into the water!"

But while passing from one stream to another he must not look back once, for then he might behold the dread demon of the fever which follows him, neither must he open his mouth, except while uttering the charm, for then the fever would at once enter his body again through the portal thus left unclosed. This walking on in apprehension of beholding the ugly spectre will recall to the reader a passage in the "Ancient Mariner," of the man who walks in fear and dread,

"Nor turns around his head,
 For well he knows a frightful fiend
 Doth close behind him tread."

The wise wives among the gypsies in Hungary have many kinds of miraculous salves for sale to cure different disorders. These they declare are made from the fat of dogs, bears, wolves, frogs, and the like. As in all fetish remedies they are said to be of strange or revolting materials, like those used by Canidia of yore, the witches of Shakespeare and Ben Jonson, and of Burns in Tam O'Shanter.

When a man has been "struck by a spirit" there results a sore

[p. 21]

swelling or boil, which is cured by a sorceress as follows: The patient is put into a tent by himself, and is given divers drinks by his attendant then she rubs the sufferer with a salve, the secret of which is known only to her, while she chants:--

"Prejia, prejia, prejia,
 Kiya miseceske, ac odoy;
 Trianda sapa the caven tut,
 Trianda jiukla tut chingeren,
 Trianda kacna tut chunaven!"

"Begone, begone, begone
 To the Evil One; stay there.
 May thirty snakes devour thee,
 Thirty dogs tear thee,
 Thirty cocks swallow thee!"

After this she slaughters a black hen, splits it open, and lays it on the boil. Then the sufferer must drink water from three springs or rivulets, and throw wood nine times into the fire daily until he is well. But black hens cost money, according to WLISLOCKI; albeit the gypsies, like the children of the Mist in "Waverley," are believed to be acquainted with a far more economical and direct method of obtaining such commodities. Therefore this expensive and high-class cure is not often resorted to, and when it is the sorceress generally substitutes something cheaper than poultry. It may be here observed that the black hen occurs frequently in mediaeval witch-lore and legend as a demon-symbol (WOLF, "Niederlandische Sagen," pp. 647, 650). Thus the bones of sorcerors turn into black hens and chickens, and it is well if your black hen dies, for if she had not you would have perished in her place. Black hens were walled up in castles as sacrifices to the devil, that the walls might long endure; hence the same fowl occurs in the arms of the family of Henneberg (NORK, "Mythologie der Volksagen," p. 381). The lore on this subject is very extensive.

The following remedy against headache is in general use among Transylvanian gypsies. The patient's head is rubbed, and then washed, with vinegar or hot water while the following charm is repeated:

[p. 22]

"Oh duk andro m'ro shero
 The o dad misecesero,
 Ada dikhel akana,
 Man tu may dosta, mardyas,
 Miro shero tu mardyas!
 Tu na ach tu andre me.
 Ja tu, ja tu, ja kere.
 Kay tu misec chuchides,
 Odoy, odoy sikoves!
 Ko jal pro m'ro ushalyin,
 Adaleske e duk hin!"

Oh, pain in my head,
 The father of all evil,
 Look upon thee now!
 Thou hast greatly pained me,
 Thou tormentest my head,
 Remain not in me!
 Go thou, go thou, go home,
 Whence thou, Evil One, didst suck,
 Thither, thither hasten!
 Who treads upon my shadow,
 To him be the pain!"

It will be seen that the principle of treading on the tail of the coat practised in Ireland is much outdone by the gypsies who give a headache to any one who so much as treads on their shadows. And it is not difficult to understand that, as with children, the rubbing the head, the bathing it with warm water or vinegar, and, finally, the singing a soothing song, may all conduce to a cure. The readers of "Helen's Babies" will remember the cures habitually wrought on Budge by singing to him, "Charley boy one day." Gypsies are in many respects mere children, or little Budges. There can be no doubt that where faith is very strong, and imagination is lively, cures which seem to border on the miraculous are often effected--and this is, indeed, the basis of all miracle as applied to relieving bodily afflictions. All of this may be, if not as yet fully explained by physiology, at least shown to probably

[p. 23]

rest on a material basis. But no sound system of cure can be founded on it, because there is never any certainty, especially for difficult and serious disorders, that they can ever be healed twice in succession. The "faith" exacted is sometimes a purely hereditary gift, at other times merely a form of blind ignorance and credulity. It may vividly influence all the body, and it may fail to act altogether. But the "Faith Healer" and "Christian Scientist," or "Metaphysical Doctor," push boldly on, and when they here and there heal a patient once, it is published to the four winds as a proof of invariable infallibility. And as everybody believes that he has "faith," so he hopes to be cured. In popular custom for a man to say he believes in anything, and to be sure that he really has nothing against it, constitutes as much "faith" as most men understand. A man may be utterly destitute of any moral principle and yet live in a constant state of "faith" and pious conviction. Here the capacity for cure by means of charms is complete.

In connection with these charms for the head we may find not less interesting those in reference to the hair, as given by the same authority, Dr. von WLISLOCKI. The greatest pains are taken to ensure even for the new-born child what is called a full head, because every one who dies bald is turned into a fish, and must remain in this form till he has collected as many hairs as would make an ordinary wig. But this lasts a long time, since he can find but a single hair every month or moon. The moon is in many ways connected in gypsy faith with the hair. He who sleeps bare-headed in its light will lose his hair, or else it will become white. To have a heavy growth a man must scoop up with his left hand water from a running brook, against the current, and pour it on his head.

Immediately after the first bathing of a newly-born child, and its anointing, its forehead and neck are marked with a semicircle--perhaps meant to indicate the moon--made with a salve called barcali, intended to promote the growth of the hair. A brew, or mess, is made from beans and the blood of a cow. Hairs are taken from the heads of the

[p. 24]

father and mother, which hairs are burnt to a powder and mixed with the brew. It is remarkable that the beans are only used for a boy, their object being to insure for him great virile or sexual power. "The bean," says FRIEDRICH ("Sym. d. N."), "is an erotic symbol, or one signifying sexual pleasure." Hence it was forbidden to the Egyptian priests, the Pythagoreans, the priests of Jupiter in Rome, and to the Jewish high priests on certain festivals. But if the child is a girl, the seeds of the pumpkin or sunflower are substituted for beans, because the latter would make her barren.

It is an old belief, and one widely spread, that if the witches or the devil can get a lock of anybody's hair, they can work him evil. The gypsies have the following articles of faith as regards hairs:--

Should birds find any, and build them into their nests, the man who lost them will suffer from headaches until, during the wane of the moon, he rubs his head with the yolk of eggs and washes it clean in running water. It would be very curious if this method of cleaning the hair and giving it a soft gloss, so much in vogue among English ladies, should have originated in sorcery. Beyond this, the sufferer must mix some of his hairs with food and give them to a white dog to eat.

If hairs which have fallen or been cut away are found by a snake and carried into its hole, the man from whom they came will continue to lose more until those in the snake's nest are quite decayed.

If you see human hairs in the road do not tread on them, since, in that case, if they came from a lunatic, you, too, will go mad. According to MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS, if you pick up some hairs in the road just before entering a city gate, tie one to your own head, and, throwing the rest away, walk on without looking behind you, you can cure a headache. I have found nearly the same charm for the same purpose in Florence, but accompanied by the incantation which is wanting in MARCELLUS. Also his cure for headache with ivy from the head of a statue, which is still used in Tuscany with the incantation which the Roman omits.

[p. 25]

Finding a hair hanging to your coat, carefully burn it, since you may by so doing escape injury by witchcraft. And we may remark in confirmation of this, that when you see a long hair on a man's coat it is an almost certain sign that he has been among the witches, or is bewitched; as the Countess thought when she found one clinging to the button of her lover, Von Adelstein, as set forth in "Meister Karl's Sketch-book."

But to bewitch your enemy get some of his combed-out hair, steep it in your own water, and then throw it on his garments. Then he will have no rest by night or day. I have observed that in all the Tuscan charms intended to torment a foe, the objects employed are like this of a disgusting nature.

If a wife will hold her husband to her in love, she must take of her own hair and bind it to his. This must be done three times by full moonlight.

Or if a maid will win the love of a young man, she must take of her own hair, mix it with earth from his footsteps--"und mischt diese mit dem Speichel einer laufigen Hundinn auf"--burn the whole to powder, and so manage that the victim shall eat it--which, it is needless to say, it is not likely that he will do, knowing what it is. Earth from the footsteps of any one is regarded as a very powerful means of bewitching him in Italian and ancient sorcery.

If a man bind the combings of his hair to the mane of a strange horse it will be wild and shy till the hairs are removed.

For easy childbirth red hair is sewed in a small bag and carried on the belly next the skin during pregnancy. Red hair indicates good luck, and is called bala kameskro, or sun-hairs, which indicates its Indian origin.

If any one dreams much of the dead, let him sew some of his hair into an old shoe, and give it to any beggar. Thereby he will prevent evil spirits from annoying him.

If a child suffers from sleeplessness, some of its mother's hair should be sewed into its wrappings, and others pulverized, mixed with a decoction

[p. 26]

of elderberries, be given it to drink. In German Folk-lore, as I shall show more fully anon, the elder often occurs as a plant specially identified with sorcery. In gypsy it is called yakori bengeskro, or the devil's eye, from its berries.

Nails cut on Friday should be burned, and the ashes mingled with the fodder of cattle, who are thus ensured against being stolen or attacked by wild beasts. If children are dwarfish, the same ashes in their food will make them grow. If a child suffers from pains in the stomach, a bit of nail must be clipped from its every finger; this is mixed with the dried dung of a foal, and the patient exposed to the smoke while it is burned.

A child's first tooth must, when it falls out, be thrown into a hollow tree. Those which come out in the seventh year are carefully kept, and whenever the child suffers from toothache, one is thrown into a stream.

Teeth which have been buried for many years, serve to make a singular fetish. They are mingled with the bones of a tree-frog, and the whole then sewed up in a little bag. If a man has anything for sale, and will draw or rub this bag over it, he will have many offers or customers for the articles thus enchanted. The bones are prepared by putting the frog into a glass or earthen receptacle full of small holes. This is buried in an ant-hill. The ants enter the holes and eat away all the flesh, leaving the bones which after a few weeks are removed. [*1]

To bear healthy and strong children women wear a string of bears' claws and children's teeth. Dr. von WLISLOCKI cites, apropos of this, a passage from JACOBUS RUEFF, "Von Empfengnussen": "Etlich schwanger wyber pflagend einen baren klauen von einem baren tapen yngefaszet am hals zuo tragen" (Some women when with child are accustomed to

[p. 27]

wear mounted bears' claws on their necks). In like manner boars' teeth, which much resemble them, are still very commonly worn in Austria and Italy and almost over all Europe and the East. It is but a few days since I here, in Florence, met with a young English lady who had bought a very large one mounted in silver as a brooch, but who was utterly unaware that there was any meaning attached to it. [*1] I have a very ancient bear's tooth and whistle in silver, meant for a teething child. It came from Munich.

Pain in the eyes is cured with a wash made of spring or well water and saffron. During the application the following is recited

"Oh dukh andral yakha
 Ja andre pani
 Ja andral pani
 Andre safrane
 Andre pcuv.
 Ja andral pcuv
 Kiya Pcuvusheske--
 Odoy hin cerca,
 Odoy ja te ca."

Oh, pain from the eyes
 Go into the water,
 Go out of the water
 Into the saffron,
 Go out of the saffron
 Into the earth.
 To the Earth-Spirit.
 There's thy home.
 There go and eat."

This incantation casts light upon the earliest Shamanic remedies. When it was discovered that certain herbs really possessed curative qualities, this was attributed to inherent magic virtues. The increase of their power by combining them with water, or mingling them, was due to

[p. 28]

mystic affinities by which a spirit passed from one to another. The Spirit of Earth went into saffron, that of saffron into water. The magician thus, by a song sent the pain into its medical affinity, and so on back to the source whence it came. From early times saffron, as one of the earliest flowers of spring, owing to its colour, was consecrated to magic and love. Eos, the goddess of the Aurora, was called krokotieplo?s? {Greek  krokotieplos}, the one with the saffron garment. Therefore the public women wore a yellow robe. Even in Christian symbolism it meant love, as PORTALIS declares: "In the Christian religion the colours saffron and orange were the symbols of God embracing the heart and illuminating the souls of the faithful" ("Des Couleurs Symboliques," Paris, 1837, p. 240). So we can trace the chain from the prehistoric barbarous Shamanism, preserved by the gypsies, to the Greek, and from the Greek to the mediaeval form still existent.

The same sympathetic process of transmission may be traced in the remedy for the erysipelas. The blood of a bullfinch is put into a new vessel with scraped elder-bark, and then laid on a cloth with which the eyes are bound up overnight. Meanwhile the patient repeats:--

"Duy yakha hin mange
 Duy punra hin mange
 Dukh andral yakha
 Ja andre punra
 Ja andral punra,
 Ja andre pcuv,
 Ja andral pcuv
 Andro meriben!"

"I have two eyes,
 I have two feet,
 Pain from my eyes
 Go into my feet!
 Go from my feet,
 Go into the earth
 Go from the earth
 Into death!"

We have here in the elder-bark associations of magic which are

[p. 29]

ancient and widely spread, and which still exist; for at the present day country people in New England attribute to it curative virtues which it really does not possess. From the earliest times among the Northern races the Lady Elder, as we may learn from the Edda, or FIN MAGNUSEN ("Priscae veterum Borealium Mythologiae Lexicon," pp. 21, 239), and NYERUP ("Worterbuch der Scandinavischen Mythologie"), had an unearthly, ghostly reputation. Growing in lonely, gloomy places its form and the smell of its flowers seemed repulsive, so that it was associated with death, and some derived its name from Frau Holle, the sorceress and goddess of death. But SCHWENKI ("Mythologie der Slaven") with more probability traces it from hohl, i.e., hollow, and as spirits were believed to dwell in all hollow trees, they were always in its joints. The ancient Lithuanians, he informs us, worshipped their god Puschkeit, who was a form of Pluto, in fear and trembling at dusk, and left their offerings under the elder-tree. Everybody has seen the little puppets made of a piece of elder-pith with half a bullet under them, so that they always stand upright, and jump up when thrown down. Among the Slovaks these seem to have had some magical application. Perhaps their priests persuaded them that these jumping Jacks were miraculous, for they called them Pikuljk, a name derived from Peklo, the under-world. They still believe in a Pikuljk, who is a servant of the Evil One. He does all kinds of favours for men, but ends by getting their souls. The ancestors of the Poles were accustomed to bury all their sins and sorrows under elder-trees, thinking that they thereby gave to the lower world what properly belonged to it. This corresponds accurately to the gypsy incantation which passes the disease on from the elder bark into the earth, and from earth unto death. Frau Ellhorn, or Ellen, was the old German name for this plant. "Frau, perhaps, as appropriate to the female elf who dwelt in it" (FRIEDRICH, "Symbolik," p. 293). When it was necessary to cut one down, the peasant always knelt first before it and prayed: "Lady Ellhorn, give me of thy wood, and I will give thee of mine when it shall grow in the forest." GRIMM ("Deutsche Mythologie,"

[p. 30]

cxvi.) cites from a MS. Of 1727 the following: "Paga nismo ortum debet superstitio, sambucam non esse exscindendum nisi prius rogata permissione his verbis: Mater Sambuci permitte mihi tuae caedere sylvam!" On the other hand, Elder had certain protective and healing virtues. Hung before a stable door it warded off witchcraft, and he who planted it conciliated evil spirits. And if a twig of it were planted on a grave and it grew, that was a sign that the soul of the deceased was happy, which is the probable reason why the very old Jewish cemetery in Prague was planted full of elders. In a very curious and rare work, entitled "Blockesberge Berichtung (Leipzig, 1669), by JOHN PRAeTORIUS, devoted to "the Witch-ride and Sorcery-Sabbath," the author tells us that witches make great use of nine special herbs--"nam in herbis, verbis et lapidibus magna vis est." Among these is Elder, of which the peasants make wreaths, which, if they wear on Walpurgis night, they can see the sorceresses as they sweep through the air on their brooms, dragons, goats, and other strange steeds to the Infernal Dance. Or when they anderswo herumvagiren--"go vagabonding anywhere else." "Yea, and I know one fellow who sware unto men, that by means of this herb he once saw certain witches churning butter busily, and that on a roof, but I mistrust that this was a sell (Schnake), and that the true name of this knave was Butyrolambius" ("Blocksberg," p. 475). The same author informs us that Hollunder (or Elder) is so called from hohl, or hollow, or else is an anagram of Unholden, unholy spirits, and some people call it Alhuren, from its connection with witches and debauchery, even as CORDUS writes:--

"When elder blossoms bloom upon the bush,
 Then women's hearts to sensual pleasure rush."

He closes his comments on this subject with the dry remark that if the people of Leipzig wear, as is their wont, garlands of elder with the object of preventing breaches of the seventh commandment among them, it has in this instance, at least, utterly failed to produce the expected effect. "Quasi! creadt Judaeus Apella!"

[p. 31]

It should be mentioned that in the gypsy spell the next morning the cloth with the elder-bark must be thrown into the next running water. To cure toothache the Transylvanian gypsies wind a barley-straw round a stone, which is thrown into a running stream, while saying:--

"Oh dukh andre m're danda,
 Tu na bares cingera!
 Na ava kiya mange,
 Mire muy na hin kere!
 Tut nikana me kamav,
 Ach tu mange pal pacha;
 Kana e pcus yarpakri
 Avel tele panori!"

"Oh, pain in my teeth,
 Trouble me not so greatly!
 Do not come to me,
 My mouth is not thy house.
 I love thee not all,
 Stay thou away from me;
 When this straw is in the brook
 Go away into the water!"

Straw was anciently a symbol of emptiness, unfruitfulness, and death, and it is evidently used in this sense by the gypsies, or derived by them from some tradition connected with it. A feigned or fruitless marriage is indicated in Germany by the terms Strohwittwer and Strohwittwe. From the earliest times in France the breaking a straw signified that a compact was broken with a man because there was nothing in him. Thus in 922 the barons of Charles the Simple, in dethroning him, broke the straws which they held (CHARLOTTE DE LA TOUR, "Symbols of Flowers").

Still, straws have something in them. She who will lay straws on the table in the full moonlight by an open window, especially on Saturday night, and will repeat:--

"Straw, draw, crow craw,
 By my life I give thee law"

then the straws will become fairies and dance to the cawing of a crow

[p. 32]

who will come and sit on the ]edge of the window. And so witches were wont to make a man of straw, as did Mother Gookin, in Hawthorne's tale, and unto these they gave life, whence the saying of a man of straw and straw bail, albeit this latter is deemed by some to be related to the breaking of straws and of dependence, as told in the tale of Charles the Simple. Straw-lore is extensive and curious. As in elder-stalks, small fairies make their homes in its tubes. To strew chopped straw before the house of a bride was such an insult to her character, in Germany, and so common that laws were passed against it. I possess a work printed about 1650, entitled "De Injuriis quae haud raro Novis Nuptis inferri solent. I. Per sparsionem dissectorum culmorum frugum. Germ. Dusch das Werckerling Streuen," &c. An immense amount of learned quotation and reference by its author indicates that this custom which was influenced by superstition, was very extensively written on in its time. It was allied to the binding of knots and other magic ceremonies to prevent the consummation of marriages.

There is a very curious principle involved in curing certain disorders or afflictions by means of spells or verses. A certain word is repeated many times in a mysterious manner, so that it strikes the imagination of the sufferer. There is found in the Slavonian countries a woolly caterpillar called Wolos, whose bite, or rather touch, is much dreaded. I have myself, when a boy, been stung by such a creature in the United States. As I remember, it was like the sting of a bee. The following (Malo Russian) spell against it was given me by Prof. DRAGOMANOFF in Geneva. It is supposed that a certain kind of disorder, or cutaneous eruption, is caused by the Wolos:--

"Wolosni--Wolosniceh!
 Holy Wolos.
 Once a man drove over empty roads
 With empty oxen,
 To an empty field,
 To harvest empty corn,
 And gather it in empty ricks. [p. 33]
 He gathered the empty sheaves,
 Laid them in empty Wagons,
 Drove over empty roads,
 Unto an empty threshing-floor.
 The empty labourers threshed it,
 And bore it to the empty Mill.
 The empty baker (woman)
 Mixed it in an empty trough,
 And baked it in an empty oven.
 The empty people ate the empty bread.
 So may the Wolos swallow this disorder
 From the empty ----- (here the name of the patient.)

What is here understood by "empty" is that the swelling is taken away, subtracted, or emptied, by virtue of the repetition of the word, as if one should say, "Be thou void. Depart! depart! depart! Avoid me!"

There is a very curious incantation also apparently of Indian-gypsy origin, since it refers to the spirits of the water who cause diseases. In this instance they are supposed to be exorcised by Saint Paphnutius, who is a later Slavonian-Christian addition to the old Shamanic spell. In the Accadian-Chaldaean formulas these spirits are seven; here they are seventy.

The formula in question is against the fever:--

"In the name of God and his Son and the Holy Ghost. Amen!

"Seventy fair maids went up out of the ocean.

"They met the Saint Paphnutius, who asked:

"'Whence come ye, oh Maidens?'

"They answered, 'From the ocean-sea.

"'We go into the world to break the bones of men.

"'To give them the fever. (To make hot and cold).'"

Then the holy Paphnutius began to beat them, and gave them every one seventy-seven days:--

"They began to pray, 'O holy Paphnutius!

"'Forgive us, (and) whoever shall bear with him (thy) name, or write it, him we will leave in peace.

"'We will depart from him

"'Over the streams, over the seas.

[p. 34]

"'Over the reeds (canes) and marshes.

"'O holy Paphnutius, sua misericordia, of thy mercy,

"'Have pity on thy slave, even on the sick man ------ (the name is here uttered).

"'Free him from fever!'"

It is remarkable that, as a certain mysterious worm, caterpillar, or small lizard (accounts differ) among the Algonkin Indians is supposed to become at will a dragon, or sorcerer, or spirit, to be invoked or called on so the Wolos worm is also invoked, sometimes as a saint or sorcerer, and sometimes as a spirit who scatters disease. The following gypsy-Slavonian incantation over an invalid has much in common with the old Chaldaean spells

"Wolosni, Wolosniceh!
 Thou holy Wolos!
 God calls thee unto his dwelling,
 Unto his seat.
 Thou shalt not remain here,
 To break the yellow bones.
 To drink the red blood,
 To dry up the white body.
 Go forth as the bright sun
 Goes forth over the mountains,
 Out from the seventy-seven veins,
 Out from the seventy limbs (parts of the body).
 Before I shall recognize thee,
 Before I did not name thee (call on thee).
 But now I know who thou art;
 I began to pray to the mother of God,
 And the mother of God began to aid me.
 Go as the wind goes over the meadows or the shore (or banks),
 As the waves roll over the waters,
 So may the Wolos go from ------
 The man who is born,
 Who is consecrated with prayer."

The Shamanic worship of water as a spirit is extremely ancient, and is distinctly recognized as such by the formulas of the Church in which water is called "this creature." The water spirits play a leading part in the gypsy mythology. The following gypsy-Slav

[p. 35]

charm, to consecrate a swarm of bees, was also given to me by Prof. DRAGOMANOFF, who had learned it from a peasant:--

"One goes to the water and makes his prayer and greets the water thus:--

"Hail to thee, Water!
 Thou Water, Oliana!
 Created by God,
 And thou, oh Earth, Titiana!
 And ye the near springs, brooks and rivulets,
 Thou Water, Oliana,
 Thou goest over the earth,
 Over the neighbouring fountains and streams,
 Down unto the sea,
 Thou dost purify the sea,
 The sand, the rocks, and the roots--
 I pray thee grant me
 Of the water of this lake,
 To aid me,
 To sprinkle my bees.
 I will speak a word,
 And God will give me help,
 The all-holy Mother of God,
 The mother of Christ,
 Will aid me,
 And the holy Father
 The holy Zosimos, Sabbateus and the holy Friday Parascabeah!

"When this is said take the water and bear it home without looking back. Then the bees are to be sprinkled therewith."

The following Malo-Russian formula from the same authority, though repointed and gilt with Greek Christianity, is old heathen, and especially interesting since Prof. DRAGOMANOFF traces it to a Finnic Shaman source:--

"CHARM AGAINST THE BITE OF A SERPENT.

"The holy Virgin sent a man
 Unto Mount Sion,
 Upon this mountain
 Is the city of Babylon,
 And in the city of Babylon
 Lives Queen Volga.[p. 36]
 Oh Queen Volga,
 Why dost thou not teach
 This servant of God
 (Here the name of the one bitten by a serpent is mentioned)
 So that he may not be bitten
 By serpents?"

    (The reply of Queen Volga)
 "Not only will I teach my descendants
 But I also will prostrate myself
 Before the Lord God."

"Volga is the name of a legendary heathen princess of Kief, who was baptized and sainted by the Russian Church. The feminine form, Olga, or Volga, corresponds to the masculine name Oleg, or Olg, the earliest legendary character of Kief. His surname was Viechtchig--the sage or sorcerer" (i.e., wizard, and from a cognate root). "In popular songs he is called Volga, or Volkh, which is related to Volkv, a sorcerer. The Russian annals speak of the Volkv of Finland, who are represented as Shamans." Niya Predania i Raikazi ("Traditions and Popular Tales of Lesser Russia," by M. DRAGOMANOFF, Kief, 1876) in Russian.

I have in the chapter on curing the disorders of children spoken of Lilith, or Herodias, who steals the new-born infants. She and her twelve daughters are also types of the different kinds of fever for which the gypsies have so many cures of the same character, precisely as those which were used by the old Bogomiles. The characteristic point is that this female spirit is everywhere regarded as the cause of catalepsy or fits. Hence the invocation to St. Sisinie is used in driving them away. This invocation written, is carried as an amulet or fetish. I give the translation of one of these from the Roumanian, in which the Holy Virgin is taken as the healer. It is against cramp in the night:--

"SPELL AGAINST NIGHT-CRAMP.

"There is a mighty hill, and on this hill is a golden apple-tree,

"Under the golden apple-tree is a golden stool.

"On the stool--who sits there?

"There sits the Mother of God with Saint Maria; with the boxes in her right hand, with the cup in her left.

[p. 37]

"She looks up and sees naught, she looks down and sees my Lord and Lady Disease.

"Lords and Ladies Cramp, Lord and Lady Vampire--Lord Wehrwolf and his wives.

"They are going to ------ (the sufferer), to drink his blood and put in him a foul heart.

"The Mother of God, when she saw them, went down to them, spoke to them, and asked them, 'Whither go ye, Lord and Lady Disease,--Lords and Ladies Cramp, &c.?'

"'We go to ------ to drink his blood, to change his heart to a foul one.'

"'No, ye shall return; give him his blood back, restore him his own heart, and leave him immediately.'

"Cramps of the night, cramps of the midnight, cramps of the day, cramps wherever they are. From water, from the wind, go out from the brain, from the light of he face, from the hearing of the ears, from his heart, from his hands and feet, from the soles of his feet.

"Go and hide where black cocks never crow, [*1] where men never go, where no beast roars.

"Hide yourself there, stop there, and never show yourself more!

"May ------ remain pure and glad, as he was made by God, and was fated by the Mother of God!

"The spell is mine--the cure is God's."

In reference to the name Herodias (here identified with Lilith, the Hebrew mother of all devils and goblins); it was a great puzzle to the writers on witchcraft why the Italian witches always said they had two queens whom they worshipped--Diana and Herodias. The latter seems to have specially presided at the witch-dance. In this we can see an evident connection with the Herodias of the New Testament.

I add to this a few more very curious old Slavonian spells from Dr. Gaster's work, as they admirably illustrate one of the principal and most interesting subjects connected with the gypsy witchcraft; that is to say, its relation to early Shamanism and the forms in which its incantations were expressed. In all of these it may be taken for granted, from a great number of closely-allied examples, that the Christianity in them is recent and that they all go back to the earliest heathen times. The

[p. 38]

following formula, dating from 1423, against snake-bites bears the title:--

"PRAYER OF ST. PAUL AGAINST SNAKES.

"In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I once was a persecutor, but am now a true follower; and I went from my dwelling-place in Sicily, and they set light to a trunk, and a snake came therefrom and bit my right hand and hung from it. But I had in me the power of God, and I shook it off into the burning fire and it was destroyed, and I suffered no ill from the bite. I laid myself down to sleep; then the mighty angel said: 'Saul, Paul, stand up and receive this writing'; and I found in it the following words:

"'I exorcise you, sixty and a half kinds of beasts that creep on the earth, in the name of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and in the name of the immovable throne.

"'Serpent of Evil, I exorcise thee in the name of the burning river which rises under the footstool of the Saviour, and in the name of His incorporeal angels!

"'Thou snake of the tribe of basilisks, thou foul-headed snake, twelve-headed snake, variegated snake, dragon-like snake, that art on the right side of hell, whomsoever thou bitest thou shalt have no power to harm, and thou must go away with all the twenty-four kinds. If a man has this prayer and this curse of the true, holy apostle, and a snake bites him, then it will die on the spot, and the man that is bitten shall remain unharmed, to the honour of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and for all time. Amen.'"

It is not improbable that we have in PAUL and the Serpent and the formula for curing its bite (which is a common symbol for all disease) a souvenir of Esculapius, the all-healer, and his serpent. The following is "a prayer against the toothache, to be carried about with one," i.e., as an amulet prayer:--

"SPELL FOR THE TOOTHACHE

"Saint Peter sat on a stone and wept. Christ came to him and said, 'Peter, why weepest thou?' Peter answered, 'Lord, my teeth pain me.' The Lord thereupon ordered the worm in Peter's tooth to come out of it and never more go in again. Scarcely had the worm come out when the pain ceased. Then spoke Peter, 'I pray you, O Lord, that when these words be written out and a man carries them he shall have no toothache.' And the Lord answered, '"Tis well, Peter; so may it be!'"

It will hardly be urged that this Slavonian charm of Eastern origin

[p. 39]

could have been originated independently in England. The following, which is there found in the north, is, as Gaster remarks, "in the same: wording":--

"Peter was sitting on a marble stone,
 And Jesus passed by.
 Peter said, 'My Lord, my God,
 How my tooth doth ache!'
 Jesus said, Peter art whole
 And whosoever keeps these words for My sake
 Shall never have the toothache.'

The next specimen is a--

"CHARM AGAINST NOSE-BLEEDING.

"Zachariah was slain in the Lord's temple, and his blood turned into stone. Then stop, O blood, for the Lord's servant, ------. I exorcise thee, blood, that thou stoppest in the name of the Saviour, and by fear of the priests when they perform the liturgy at the altar."

Those who sell these charms are almost universally supposed to be mere quacks and humbugs. If this were the case, why do they so very carefully learn and preserve these incantations, transmitting them

        "as a rich legacy
 Unto their issue."

But they really do believe in them, and will give great prices for them. Prof. DRAGOMANOFF told me that once in Malo-Russia it became generally known that he had made a MS. collection of such spells. A peasant who was desirous of becoming a sorcerer, but who had very few incantations of his own, went whenever he could by stealth into the Professor's library and surreptitiously copied his incantations. And when Prof. DRAGOMANOFF returned the next year to that neighbourhood, he found the peasant doing a very good business as a conjuring doctor, or faith-healer. I have a lady correspondent in the United States who has been initiated into Voodoo and studied Indian-negro witchcraft under two eminent teachers,

[p. 40]

one a woman, the other a man. The latter, who was at the very head of the profession, sought the lady's acquaintance because he had heard that she possessed some very valuable spells. In the fourth or highest degree, as in Slavonian or Hungarian gypsy-magic, this Indian-Voodoo deals exclusively with the spirits of the forest and stream.

M. Kounavine, as set forth by Dr. A. Elysseeff (Gypsy-Lore Journal, July, 1890), gives a Russian gypsy incantation by which the fire is invoked to cure illness. It is as follows:--

"Great Fire, my defender and protector, son of the celestial fire, equal of the sun who cleanses the earth of foulness, deliver this man from the evil sickness that torments him night and day!"

The fire is also invoked to punish, or as an ordeal, e.g.:--

"Fire, who punishest the evil-doer, who hatest falsehood, who scorchest the impure, thou destroyest offenders; thy flame devoureth the earth. Devour ------ if he says what is not true, if he thinks a lie, and if he acts deceitfully."

These are pronounced by the gypsy sorcerer facing the burning hearth. There is another in which fire is addressed as Jandra, and also invoked to punish an offender:--

"Jandra, bearer of thunderbolts, great Periani (compare Parjana, an epithet of Indra, Slavonic Perun), bearer of lightning, slay with thy thunderbolt and burn with thy celestial fire him who dares to violate his oath."

 

 

Footnotes

^26:1 It is said that if the bones of a green frog which has been eaten by ants are taken, those on the left side will provoke hatred, and those on the right side excite love" ("Div. Cur.," c. 23). . . . "One species of frog called rubeta, because it lives among brambles, is said to have wonderful powers. Brought into an assembly of people it imposes silence. If the little bone in its right side be thrown into boiling water it chills it at once. It excites love when put into a draught" ("Castle Saint Angelo and the Evil Eye," by W. W. STORY).

^27:1 According to Pliny, the tooth of a wolf hung to the neck of an infant was believed to be an efficient amulet against disease; and a child's tooth caught before it falls to the ground and set in a bracelet was considered to be beneficial to women. Nat. Hist. lib. xxvi., cap. 10 ("Castle Saint Angelo and the Evil Eye," by W. W. STORY)

^37:1 This cannot fail to remind many readers of the land--

"Where the cock never crew,
 Where the sun never shone and the wind never blew."

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

CHAPTER III

GYPSY CONJURATIONS AND EXORCISMS--THE CURE OF CHILDREN-HUNGARIAN GYPSY SPELLS--A CURIOUS OLD ITALIAN "SECRET"--THE MAGIC VIRTUE OF GARLIC--A FLORENTINE INCANTATION LEARNED FROM A WITCH--LILITH, THE CHILD-STEALER, AND QUEEN OF THE WITCHES

IN all the schools of Shamanic sorcery, from those of the Assyrian Accadian to the widely-spread varieties of the present day, the Exorcism forms the principal element. An exorcism is a formula, the properties or power of which is that when properly pronounced, especially if this be done with certain fumigations and ceremonies, it will drive away devils, diseases, and disasters of every description; nay, according to very high, and that by no means too ancient, authority, it is efficacious in banishing bugs, mice, or locusts, and it is equal to Persian powder as a fuge for fleas, but is, unfortunately, too expensive to be used for that purpose save by the very wealthy. It has been vigorously applied against the grape disease, the Colorado beetle, the army worm, and the blizzard in

[p. 42]

the United States, but, I believe, without effect, owing possibly to differences of climate or other antagonistic influences.

Closely allied to the Exorcism is the Benediction, which soon grew out of it as a cure. The former being meant to repel and drive away evil, the latter very naturally suggested itself, by a law of moral polarity, as a means of attracting good fortune, blessings, health, and peace. As the one was violently curative, the other was preventive. The benediction would keep the devils and all their works away from a man or his home--in fact, if stables be only well blessed once a year, no mishaps can come to any of the animals who inhabit them; and I myself have known a number of donkeys to receive a benediction in Rome, the owner being assured that it would keep them safe from all the ills which donkeys inherit. And in the year 1880, in one of the principal churches of Philadelphia, blessed candles were sold to a congregation under guarantee that the purchase of one would preserve its possessor for one year against all disorders of the throat, on which occasion a sermon was preached, in the which seven instances were given in which people had thus been cured.

Between blessing and banning it soon became evident that many formulas of words could be used to bring about mysterious results. It is probable that the Exorcism in its original was simply the angry, elevated tone of voice which animals as well as men instinctively employ to repel an enemy or express a terror. For this unusual language would be chosen, remembered, and repeated. With every new utterance this outcry or curse would be more seriously pronounced or enlarged till it became an Ernulphian formula. The next step would be to give it metric form, and its probable development is very interesting. It does not seem to have occurred to many investigators that in early ages all things whatever which were remembered and repeated were droned and intoned, or sing-sung, until they fell of themselves into a kind of metre. In all schools at the present day, where boys are required to repeat aloud and all together the most prosaic lessons, they end by chanting them in rude rhythm. All monotone, be it that of a running brook, falls into cadence and metre. All of the sagas, or legends,

[p. 43]

of the Algonkin-Wabanaki were till within even fifty years chants or songs, and if they are now rapidly losing that character it is because they are no longer recited with the interest and accuracy which was once observed in the narrators. But it was simply because all things often repeated were thus intoned that the exorcisms became metrical. It is remarkable that among the Aryan races it assumed what is called the staff-rhyme, like that which SHAKESPEARE, and BEN JONSON, and BYRON, and many more employ, as it would seem, instinctively, whenever witches speak or spells or charms are uttered. It will not escape the reader that, in the Hungarian gypsy incantations in this work, the same measure is used as that which occurs in the Norse sagas, or in the scenes of Macbeth. It is also common in Italy. This is intelligible--that its short, bold, deeply-marked movement has in itself something mysterious and terrible. If that wofully-abused word "weird" has any real application to anything, it is to the staff-rhyme. I believe that when a man, and particularly a woman, does not know what else to say, he or she writes "lurid," or "weird," and I lately met with a book of travels in which I found the latter applied seventy-six times to all kinds of conundrums, until I concluded that, like the coachman's definition of an idea in HEINE'S "Reisebilder," it meant simply "any d----d nonsense that a man gets into his head." But if weird really and only means that which is connected with fate or destiny, from the Anglo-Saxon Weordan, to become, German, Werden, then it is applicable enough to rhymes setting forth the future and spoken by the "weird sisters," who are so-called not because they are awful or nightmarish, or pokerish, or mystical, or bug-a-boorish, but simply because they predict the future or destiny of men." The Athenians as well as Gentiles excelled in these songs of sorcery, hence we are told (VARRO, "Q. de Fascin") that in Achaia, when they learned that a certain woman who used them was an Athenian they stoned her to death, declaring that the immortal gods bestowed on man the power of healing with stones, herbs, and animals, not with words" ("De Rem. Superstit. Cognoscendis"). Truly, doctors never agree.

It was in 1886 that I learned from a girl in Florence two exorcisms or

[p. 44]

invocations which she was accustomed to repeat before telling fortunes by cards. This girl, who was of the Tuscan Romagna and who looked Etruscan with a touch of gypsy blood, was a repertory of popular superstitions, especially witch-lore, and a maker and wearer of fetishes, always carrying a small bag full of them. Bon sang ne peut mentir.

The two formulas were as follows. I omit a portion from each

"Venti cinque carte siete!
 Venti cinque diavoli diventerete,
 Diventerete, anderete
 Nel' corpo, nel' sangue nell' anima,
 Nell' sentimenti del corpo;
 Del mio amante non posso vivere,
 Non passa stare ne bere,
 Ne mangiare ne . . .
 Ne con uomini ne con donne non passa favellare,
 Finche a la porta di casa mia
 Non viene picchiare!"

"Ye are twenty-five cards.
 Become twenty-five devils
 Enter into the body, into the blood, into the soul .
 Into the feelings of the body
 Of my lover, from whom I cannot live.
 For I cannot stand (exist), or drink,
 Or eat . . .
 Nor can I converse with men or women
 Till at the door of my house
 He shall come to knock."

The second incantation was the same, but beginning with these words:--

"I put five fingers on the wall,
 I conjure five devils,
 Five monks and five friars,
 That they may enter the body
 Into the blood, into the soul," &c.

If the reader will take Le Normant's "Magie Chaldaienne," and

[p. 45]

carefully compare these Italian spells with those of ancient Nineveh, he will not only find a close general resemblance, but all the several details or actual identity of words. And it is not a little curious that the same formulas which were repeated--

"Once on a time when Babylon was young"--

should still be current in Italy. So it passed through the ages--races came and went--and among the people the old sorcery was handed across and adown, so that it still lives. But in a few years more the Folk-lorist will be its only repository.

This chapter is devoted to conjuring diseases of children by gypsies. It bears a great likeness to one in the very devout work of PETER PIPERNUS, "De Pueris affectis morbis magicis" ("Of Boys who have been Bewitched into Disease"), only that PIPERNUS uses Catholic incantations, which he also employs "pro ligatis in matrimonio," "pro incubo magico," "de doloribus stomachi magicis," &c., for to him, as he declares, all disease is of magic origin.

The magic of the gypsies is not all deceit, though they deceive with it. They put faith themselves in their incantations, and practise them on their own account. "And they believe that there are women, and sometimes men, who possess supernatural power, partly inherited and partly acquired." The last of seven daughters born in succession, without a boy's coming into the series, is wonderfully gifted, for she can see hidden treasure or spirits, or enjoy second sight of many things invisible to men. And the same holds good for the ninth in a series of boys, who may become a seer of the same sort. Such a girl, i.e., a seventh daughter, being a fortune in herself, never lacks lovers. In 1883 the young Vojvode, or leader, of the Kukaya gypsy tribe, named DANKU NICULAI, offered the old gypsy woman, PALE BOSHE, one hundred ducats if she would persuade her seventh daughter to marry him. In the United States of America there are many women who advertise in the newspapers that they also are seventh daughters

[p. 46]

of seventh daughters at that, and who make a good thing of it as fortunetellers; but they have a far more speedy, economical, and effective way of becoming the last note in an octave, than by awaiting the slow processes of being begotten or born, inasmuch as they boldly declare themselves to be sevenths, which I am assured answers every purpose, as nobody ever asks to see their certificates of baptism any more than of marriage. [*1]

Most of these witch-wives--also known in Hungary as cohalyi, or "wise women," or gule romni, "sweet" or "charming women"--are trained up from infancy by their mothers in medicine and magic. A great part of this education consists in getting by heart the incantations or formulas of which specimens will be given anon, and which, in common with their fairy tales, show intrinsic evidence of having been drawn at no very distant period from India, and probably in common with the lower or Shamanic religion of India from Turanian sources. But there is among the Hungarian gypsies a class of female magicians who stand far above their sisters of the hidden spell in power. These are the lace romni, or "good women," who draw their power directly from the Nivasi or Pchuvusi, the spirits of water and earth, or of flood and fell. For the Hungarian gypsies have a beautiful mythology of their own which at first sight would seem to be a composition of the Rosicrucian as set forth by Paracelsus and the Comte de GABALIS, with the exquisite Indo-Teutonic fairy tales of the Middle Ages. In fact, in some of the incantations used we find the Urme, or fairies, directly appealed to for help.

With the gypsies, as among the early Accadians, diseases are supposed to be caused by evil supernatural influences. This is more naturally the case among people who lead very simple lives, and with whom sickness is

[p. 47]

not almost a natural or normal condition, as it is with ladies and gentlemen, or the inhabitants of cities, who have "always something the matter with them." Nomadic life is conducive to longevity. "Our grandfathers died on the gallows--we die from losing our teeth," said an old gypsy to Doctor von WLISLOCKI, when asked what his age was. Therefore among all people who use charms and spells those which are devoted to cure occupy the principal position. However, the Hungarian Romany have many medicines, more or less mysterious, which they also apply in connection with the "healing rhymes." And as in the struggle for life the weakest go first to the wall, the remedies for the diseases of children are predominant.

When a mother begins to suffer the pangs of childbirth, a fire is made before her tent, which is kept up till the infant is baptized, in order to drive away evil spirits. Certain women feed this fire, and while fanning it (fans being used for bellows) murmur the following rhyme:--

"Oh yakh, oh yakh pcabuva,
                      Pcabuva,
 Te chavestar tu trada,
                       Tu trada,
 Pcavushen te Nivashen
 Tire tcuva the traden!
 Lache Urmen avena,
 Chaves bactales dena,
 Kathe hin yov bactales,
 Andre lime bactales!
 Motura te rana,
 Te atunci but' rana,
 Matura te rana,
 Te atunci, but' rana,
 Me dav' andre yakhera!
 Oh yakh, oh yakh pcabuva,
 Rovel chavo: ashuna!"

It may here be remarked that the pronunciation of all these words is the same as in German, with the following additions . Ch = teh in English, or to ch in church. C = ch in German as in Buch. J = azs, or the English

[p. 48]

j, in James; n, as in Spanish, or nj in German, while sh and y are pronounced as in English. A is like ah. The literal translation is

"Oh Fire, oh Fire, burn!
                     Burn!
 And from the child (do) thou drive away
                     Drive away!
 Pcuvuse and Nivashi
 And drive away thy smoke (pl.)
 (Let) good fairies come (and)
 Give luck to the child,
 Here it is lucky (or fortunate)
 In the world fortunate
 Brooms and twigs (fuel)
 Arid then more twigs,
 And then yet more twigs
 I put (give) to the fire.
 Oh fire, oh fire--burn!
 The child weeps: listen!"

In South Hungary the gypsy women on similar occasions sing the following charm:--

"Eitra Pcuvusha, efta Nivasha
 Andre mal avena
 Pcabuven, pcabuven, oh yakha!
 Dayakri punro dindalen,
 Te gule chaves mudaren
 Pcabuven, pcabuven, oh yakha;
 Ferinen o chaves te daya!"

"Seven Pcuvushe, seven Nivasi
 Come into the field,
 Burn, burn, oh fire
 They bite the mother's foot,
 They destroy the sweet child;
 Fire, fire, oh burn!
 Protect the child and the mother!"

When the birth is very difficult, the mother's relations come to help,

[p. 49]

and one of them lets an egg fall, zwischen den Beinen derselben. On this occasion the gypsy women in Southern Hungary sing:--

"Anro, anro in obles,
 Te e pera in obles:
 Ava chavo sastavestes!
 Devla, devla, tut akharel!"

The egg, the egg is round,
 And the belly is round,
 Come child in good health
 God, God calls thee!"

If a woman dies in child-bed two eggs are placed under her arms and the following couplet is muttered:--

"Kana anro kirnes hin,
 Kathe nani tcuda him!"

"When this egg is (shall be) decayed,
 Here (will be) is no milk!"

When the after-pains begin it is the custom with some of the gypsy tribes in the Siebenburgen to smoke the sufferer with decayed willow-wood which is burned for the purpose while the women in attendance sing:--

"Sik te sik o tcu ural,
 Te ural o chon ural!
 Kana len hadjinaven
 Saschipena tut' aven;
 Kana o tcu na ural--
 Tute nani the dukhal,
 Tute nani the dukhal."

"Fast and fast the smoke flies,
 And flies, the moon flies,
 When they find (themselves)
 Health (yet) will come to thee,
 When the smoke no (longer) flies
 Thou wilt feel pain no more!"

[p. 50]

There is a strange, mysterious affinity between gypsies and the moon. A wonderful legend, which they certainly brought from India since in it Mekran is mentioned as the place where its incident occurred, details that there, owing to the misrepresentations of a sorcerer, the gypsy leader, CHEN, was made to, marry his sister GUIN, or KAN, which brought the curse of wandering upon his people. Hence the Romany are called Chen-Guin. It is very evident that here we have CHON and KAN, or KAM, the Moon and Sun, which is confirmed by another gypsy legend which declares that the Sun, because he once violated or still seeks to seduce his sister, the Moon, continually follows her, being destined to wander for ever. And as the name Chen-Kan, or Zingan, or Zigeuner, is known all over the East, and, as this legend shows, is of Indian origin, it is hardly worth while to believe with MIKLOSICH that it is derived from an obscure Greek heretical sect of Christians--the more so as it is most difficult to believe that the Romany were originally either Greeks or Christians or Christian heretics.

When a gypsy woman is with child she will not, if she can help it, leave her tent by full moonshine. A child born at this time it I's believed will make a happy marriage. So it is said of birth in the Western World:--

"Full moon, high sea,
 Great man thou shalt be;
 Red dawning, cloudy sky,
 Bloody death shalt thou die.

"Pray to the Moon when she is round,
 Luck with you will then abound,
 What you seek for shall be found
 On the sea or solid ground."

Moon-worship is very ancient; it is alluded to as a forbidden thing in the Book of Job. From early times witches and other women worked their spells when stark-naked by the light of the full moon, which is evidently derived from the ancient worship of that planet and the

[p. 51]

shameless orgies connected with it. Dr. WLISLOCKI simply remarks on this subject that the moon has, in the gypsy incantation, "eine Phallische Bedeutung." In ancient symbolism the horns of the moon were regarded as synonymous with the horns of the ox-hence their connection with agriculture, productiveness, and fertility, or the generative principle, and from this comes the beneficent influence not only of the horns, but of horse-shoes, boars' tusks, crabs' claws, and pieces of coral resembling them.

The great love of gypsy mothers for their children, says WLISLOCKI, induces their friends to seek remedies for the most trifling disorders. At a later period, mother and child are left to Mother Nature--or the vis medicatrix Naturae. What is greatly dreaded is the Berufen, or being called on, "enchanted," in English "overlooked," or subjected to the evil eye. An universal remedy for this is the following:--

A jar is filled with water from a stream, and it must be taken with, not against, the current as it runs. In it are placed seven coals, seven handfuls of meal, and seven cloves of garlic, all of which is put on the fire. When the water begins to boil it is stirred with a three-forked twig, while the wise woman repeats:--

"Misec' yakha tut dikhen,
 Te yon kathe mudaren
 Te atunci efta coka
 Te caven misece yakha;
 Misec' yakha tut dikhen,
 Te yon kathe mudaren
 But prahestar e yakha
 Atunci kores th'avena;
 Misec' yakha tut dikhen
 Te yon kathe mudaren
 Pcabuvena pcabuvena
 Andre develeskero yakha!"

"Evil eyes look on thee,
 May they here extinguished be
 And then seven ravens
 Pluck out the evil eyes [p. 52]
 Evil eyes (now) look on thee.
 May they soon extinguished be!
 Much dust in the eyes,
 Thence may they become blind,
 Evil eyes now look on thee;
 May they soon extinguished be!
 May they burn, may they burn
 In the fire of God!"

Dr. WLISLOCKI remarks that the "seven ravens" are probably represented by the seven coals, while the three-pointed twig, the meal and the garlic, symbolize lightning. He does not observe that the stick may be the tricula or trident of Siva--whence probably the gipsy word trushul, a cross; but the connection is very obvious. It is remarkable that the gypsies assert that lightning leaves behind it a smell like that of garlic. As garlic forms an important ingredient in magic charms, the following from "The Symbolism of Nature" ("Die Symbolik und Mythologie der Natur"), by J. B. FRIEDRICH, will be found interesting:--

"We find in many forms spread far and wide the belief that garlic possesses the magic power of protection against poison and sorcery. This comes, according to Pliny, from the fact that when it is hung up in the open air for a time, it turns black, when it is supposed to attract evil into itself--and, consequently, to withdraw it from the wearer. The ancients believed that the herb which Mercury gave to Ulysses to protect him from the enchantment of Circe, and which Homer calls moly, was the alium nigrum, or garlic, the poison of the witch being a narcotic. Among the modern Greeks and Turks, garlic is regarded as the most powerful charm against evil spirits, magic, and misfortune. For this reason they carry it with them, and hang it up in their houses as a protection against storms and bad weather. So their sailors carry with them a sack of it to avert shipwreck. If any one utters a word of praise with the intention of fascinating or of doing harm, they cry aloud 'Garlic!' or utter it three times rapidly. In AULUS PERSIUS FLACCUS (Satyr. V.) to bite garlic averts magic and the evils which the gods send to those who are wanting in reverence for them. According to a popular belief the mere pronunciation of 'Garlic!' protects one from poison."

It appears to be generally held among them and the Poles that this word prevents children from "beschreien werden," that is, from being banned, or overlooked, or evil-eyed. And among the Poles garlic

[p. 53]

is laid under children's pillows to protect them from devils and witches. (BRATRANECK, "Beitrage zur Aesthetik der Pflanzenweit," p. 56). The belief in garlic as something sacred appears to have been very widely spread, since the Druids attributed magic virtues to it; hence the reverence for the nearly allied leek, which is attached to King David and so much honoured by the Welsh.

"Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate
 Upon Saint David's Day."--SHAKESPEARE.

The magic virtues of garlic were naturally enough also attributed to onions and leeks, and in a curious Italian work, entitled "Il Libro del Comando," attributed (falsely) to Cornelius Agrippa, I find the following:--

"Segreto magico d'indovinare, colle cipole, la salute d'una persona lontana. A magic secret to divine with onions the health of a person far distant. Gather onions on the Eve of Christmas and put them on an altar, and under every onion write the name of the persons as to whom one desires to be informed, ancorche non scrivano, even if they do not write.

"The onion (planted) which sprouts the first will clearly announce that the person whose name it bears is well.

"And in the same manner we can learn the name of the husband or wife whom we should choose, and this divination is in use in many cantons of Germany."

Very much allied to this is the following love charm from an English gypsy:--

"Take an onion, a tulip, or any root of the kind (i.e. a bulbous root?), and plant it in a clean pot never used before; and while you plant it repeat the name of the one whom you love, and every day, morning and evening, say over it

'As this root grows
 And as this blossom blows,
 May her heart be
 Turned unto me!'

[p. 54]

"And it will come to pass that every day the one whom you love will be more and more inclined to you, till you get your heart's desire."

A similar divination is practised by sowing cress or lettuce seed in the form of names in gardens. If it grows well the one who plants it will win the love of the person indicated.

As regards the use of coals in incantations, MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS, [*1] a Latin physician of the third century, who has left us a collection of Latin and Gaelic charms, recommends for a cure for toothache: "Salis granum, panis micam, carbonem mortuum in phoenicio alligabis," i.e., to carry a grain of salt, a crumb of bread, and a coal, in a red bag.

When the witch-brew of coals, garlic, and meal is made, and boiled down to a dry residuum, it is put into a small three-cornered bag, and hung about the child's neck, on which occasion the appropriate rhyme is repeated nine times. "And it is of special importance that the bag shall be made of a piece of linen, which must be stolen, found, or begged."

To learn whether a child has been overlooked, or evil-eyed, or enchanted, the "wise woman" takes it in her arms, and goes to the next running stream. There she holds the face of the babe as nearly as she can to the water, and repeats:--

"Pani, pani sikova,
 Dikh the upre, dikh tele!
 Buti pani sikovel
 Buti pal yakh the dikhel
 Te akana mudarel."

[p. 55]

"Water, water, hasten!
 Look up, look down
 Much water hastens
 (May) as much come into the eye
 Which looked evil on thee,
 And may it now perish."

If the running brook makes a louder sound than usual then it is supposed to say that the child is enchanted, but if it runs on as before then something else is the matter, and to ascertain what it is other charms and ceremonies are had recourse to. This incantation indicates, like many others, a constant dwelling in lonely places, by wood and stream, as gypsies wont to do, and sweet familiarity with Nature, until one hears sermons in stones, books in the running brooks, and voices in the wind. [*1] Civilized people who read about Red Indian sorcerers and gypsy witches very promptly conclude that they are mere humbugs or lunatics--they do not realize how these people, who pass half their lives in wild places watching waving grass and falling waters, and listening to the brook until its cadence speaks in real song, believe in their inspirations, and feel that there is the same mystical feeling and presence in all things that live and move and murmur as well as in themselves. Now we have against this the life of the clubs and family, of receptions and business, factories and stock-markets, newspapers and "culture." Absolutely no one who lives in "the movement" can understand this sweet old sorcery. But nature is eternal, and while grass grows and rivers run man is ever likely to fall again into the eternal enchantments. And truly until he does he will have no new poetry, no fresh

[p. 56]

art, and must go on copying old ideas and having wretchedly worn-out exhibitions in which there is not one original idea.

If it appears that the child is overlooked, or "berufen," many means are resorted to, "one good if another fails," but we have here to do only with those which are connected with incantations. A favourite one is the following: Three twigs are cut, each one from a different tree, and put into a pipkin which has been filled with water dipped or drawn with, not against, the current of a stream. Three handfuls of meal are then put in and boiled down to a Brei, or pudding. A horse hair is then wound round a needle, which is stuck not by the point but by the head into the inner bottom of a tube, which is filled with water, and placed upon this is the pipkin with the pudding. Then the "overlooked," or evil-seen child is held over the tub while the following rhyme is chanted

"Pani, pani lunjara,
 Pani, pani isbina;
 Te nashvalipen cuca
 Nashvalipen mudara,
 Mudara te akana,
 Kathe besha nikana,
 Sar praytina sutyarel,
 Kathe andre piri, andre piri,
 Nivasheshe les davas!"

"Water, water, spread
 Water, water, stretch
 And sickness disappear,
 Sickness be destroyed,
 Be destroyed now.
 Remain not here at all
 Who ever has overlooked this child
 As this leaf in the pot (maybe)
 Be given to the Nivashi!"

This is repeated nine times, when the water in the tub, with the pipkin and its contents, are all thrown into the stream from which the

[p. 57]

water was drawn. This is a widely-spread charm, and it is extremely ancient. The pipkin placed across the tub or trough--trog--here signifies a bridge, and WLISLOCKI tells us that no Transylvanian tent-gypsy will cross a bridge without first spitting thrice over the rails into the water. The bridge plays an important part in the mythology and Folk-lore of many races. The ancient Persians had their holy mountain, Albordi, or Garotman, the abode of gods and blessed souls, to which they passed by the bridge Cin-vat, or Chinevad, whence the creed: "I believe in the resurrection of the dead; that all bodies shall live renewed again, and I believe that by the bridge Cin-vat all good deeds will be rewarded, and all evil deeds punished." The punishment is apparent from the parallel of the bridge Al Sirat, borrowed by the Mahommedans from the Persians, over which the good souls passed to reward, and from which the wicked tumbled down into hell.

When I first met EMERSON in 1849 I happened to remark that a bridge in a landscape was like a vase in a room, the point on which an eye trained to the picturesque involuntarily rested. Nearly thirty years after, when we were both living at Shepherd's Hotel in Cairo, he reminded me of this one day when by the Nile we were looking at a bridge. As a bridge must cross a stream, or a torrent which is generally beautiful by itself, and as the cross or span has the effect of defining and framing the picture, as a circlet or tiara sets off a beautiful head, it is not remarkable that in all ages men have made such objects subjects of legend and song. Hence the oft-repeated Devil's Bridge, so-called because it seemed to simple peasants impossible for mere mortals to build, although bridges are habitually and more naturally connected with salvation and saints. He who in early ages built a bridge, did a great deed in times when roads were rare; hence the great priest was called the Pontifex.

Another spell for the purpose of averting the effects of the evil eye is as follows: The mother of the overlooked child fills her mouth with salt water, and lets it drop or trickle on the limbs of the infant, and when this has been done, repeats:

[p. 58]

"Misec yakha tut dikhen
 Sar panori--
 Mudaren!
 Nashvalipen prejia:
 Andral t'ro shero
 Andral t're kolyin,
 Andral t're per
 Andral t're punra
 Andral t're vasta
 Kathe prejanen,--
 Andre yakha yon janen!"

"False (evil) eyes see thee,
 Like this water
 May they perish
 Sickness depart
 From thy head,
 From thy breast,
 From thy belly,
 From thy feet
 From thy hands,
 May they go hence
 Into the evil eyes!"

It may be observed that meal forms an ingredient in several of these sorceries. It is a very ancient essential to sacrifices, and is offered to the spirits of the stream to appease them, as it was often given for the same purpose to the wind. The old Germans, says PRAeTORIUS, imagined the storm-wind as a starving, ravenous being, and sought to appease it by throwing meal to it. So it happened once even of later years near Bamberg when a mighty wind was raging one night that an old woman took her meal-bag and threw its contents out of the window, saying:--

"Lege dich, lieber Wind,
 Bringe diss deinem Kind!"

"Dear Wind, be not so wild,
 Take that unto thy child!"

[p. 59]

"In which thing," adds the highly Protestant PRAeTORIUS ("Anthropodemus Plutonicus," p. 429), "she was like the Papists who would fain appease the Donnerwetter, or thunderstorms, with the sound of baptized bells, as though they were raging round like famished lions, or grim wolves, or a soldier foraging, seeking what they may devour." The Wind here represents the Wild Hunter, or the Storm, the leader of the Wuthende Heer, or "raging army," who, under different names, is the hero of so many German legends.

That the voice of the wind should seem like that of wild beasts roaring for food would occur naturally enough to any one who was familiar with both.

When a child refuses the breast the gypsies believe that a Pcuvus-wife, or a female spirit of the earth has secretly sucked it. In such a case they place between the mother's breasts onions, and repeat these words:--

"Pcuvushi, Pcuvushi,
 Ac tu nashvalyi
 Tito tcud ach yakha,
 Andre pcuv tu pcabuva!
 Thavda, thavda miro tcud,
 Thavda, thavda, parno tcud,
 Thavda, thavda, sar kamav,--
 Mre chaveske bokhale!"

"Earth-spirit! Earth-spirit
 Be thou ill.
 Let thy milk be fire
 Burn in the earth!
 Flow, flow, my milk!
 Flow, flow, white milk!
 Flow, flow, as I desire
 To my hungry child!"

The same is applied when the milk holds back or will not flow, as it is then supposed that a Pcuvus-wife has secretly suckled her own child at the mother's breast. It is an old belief that elves put their own offspring in the place of infants, whom they sometimes steal. This subject of elf-changelings

[p. 60]

is extensively treated by all the writers on witchcraft. There is even a Latin treatise, or thesis, devoted to defining the legal and social status, rights, &c., of such beings. It is entitled, "De Infantibus Supposititiis, vulgo Wechsel-Balgen," Dresden, 1678. "Such infants," says the author (JOHN VALENTINE MERBITZ), "are called Cambiones, Vagiones (a continuo vagitu), Germanis Kullkrapfe, Wechselkinder, Wechselbalge, all of which indicates, in German belief, children which have nothing human about them except the skin."

When the child is subject to convulsive weeping or spasms, and loses its sleep, the mother takes a straw from the child's sleeping-place and puts into her mouth. Then, while she is fumigated with dried cow-dung, into, which the hair of the father and mother have been mingled, she chants:--

"Bala, bala pcubuven,
 Chik te bala pcubuven,
 Chik te bala pcubuven,
 Pcabuvel nashvalyipen!"

"Hair, hair, burn!
 Dirt and hair burn
 Dirt and hair burn
 Illness be burned!"

This bears manifest mark of Hindoo origin, and I have no doubt that the same ceremony in every detail is practised in India at the present day. In Southern Hungary convulsive weeping in children is cured as follows: In the evening, when the fire burns before the tent, the mother takes her child in her arms and carries it three times around the fire, putting on it a pipkin full of water, into which she puts three coals. With this water she washes the head of her child, and pours some of it on a black dog. Then she goes to the next stream or brook, and lets fall into it a red twist, saying:--

"Lava Nivashi ada bolditori te laha m're chaveskro rovipen! Kana sastavestes anav me tute pcabaya te yandra."

"Nivashi take this twist, and with it the weeping of my child. When it is well I will bring thee apples and eggs."

[p. 61]

When a child "bumps" its head the swelling is pressed with the blade of a knife, and the following spell is muttered thrice, seven, or nine times, according to the gravity of the injury:--

"Ach tu, ach in, ach kovles,
 The may sik tu mudares!
 Andre pcuv tu jia,
 Dikav tut me nikana!
 Shuri, shuri ana,
 De pal pcuv!"

"Be thou, be thou, be thou weak (i.e., soft)
 And very soon perish!
 Go thou into the earth,
 May I see thee never more
 Bring knives, knives,
 Give (i.e., put) into the earth."

Then the knife is stuck three, seven, or nine times into the earth. If the child or a grown person has a bleeding at the nose, some of the blood is covered with earth, and the following verse repeated

"Pcuvush, dav tute
 Pcuvush, lava mange,
 De tre caveske
 Hin may tate!
 Sik lava!"

"Pcuvus, I give to thee,
 Pcuvus, oh take from me,
 Give it to thy child,
 It is very warm,
 Take it quickly!"

If the child has pains in the stomach, the hair of a black dog is burned to powder and kneaded with the mother's milk and some of the feces of the child into a paste. This prescription occurs in the magical medical formulas Of MARCEI.LUS BURDIGALENIS, the court-physician at Rome in the fourth century: "Cape mel atticum et stercus infantis quod primum

[p. 62]

demittit, statim ex lacte mulieris quae puerum allactat permiscebis et sic inunges," &c. Most of the prescriptions of Marcellus were of ancient Etrurian origin, and I have found many of them still in use in the Romagna Toscana. This is put into a cloth and bound on the belly of the child. When it falls asleep a hole is bored in a tree and the paste put into it. The hole is then stopped up with a wooden plug, and while this is being done the following is repeated:--

"Andral por prejia,
 Andre selene besha!
 Besha besha tu kathe!
 Penav, penav me tu te!"

"Depart from the belly
 Live in the green! (tree)
 Remain, remain thou here
 I say, I say to thee!"

The black dog is in many countries associated with sorcery and diabolical influences, and "in European heathendom it was an emblem of the evil principle. The black demon Chernobog was represented by the Slavs as a black dog. Among the Wallachians there is a horrible vampire-like creature called Priccolitsh, or Priculics, who appears as a man in fine healthy condition, but by night he becomes a dog, kills people by the mere touch, and devours them." The black dogs of Faust and of Cornelius Agrippa will occur to most readers.

Gypsies have always been regarded as sorcerers and child-stealers, and it is remarkable that Lilith, the mother of all witchcraft, did the same. At the present day the Slavonian gypsies have spells against such a spirit.

In the Chaldaean magic, as set forth by Lenormant, as I have already stated, the powers of evil are incarnate diseases, they are seven in number, and they are invoked by means of verses which bear an extraordinary resemblance to those which are still current in Italy as well as in other countries. According to some writers this is all mere chance coincidence, or due to concurrent causes and similar conditions in different countries.

[p. 63]

That diseases, like hunger, or death, or the terrors of the night, may have been incarnated as evil spirits naturally by all mankind may be granted, but when we find them arranged in categories of numbers, in widely different countries, employing the same means of banishing them--that is, by short songs and drum-beating--when we find these incantations in the same general forms, often with the same words, our belief as to the identity of origin is confirmed at every step. We can admit that the Jews were in Babylon and wandered thence all over the world, but that any other religious or superstitious system should have done the same would be obstinately denied. And by an incredible inconsistency, scholars who admit the early migrations of whole races on a vast scale, from the remotest regions of the East to Western Europe, deny that legends and myths come with them or that they could have spread in like manner.

One of the attributes of the witch of the Middle Ages in which she has been confused with the Queen of the Fairies, and fairies in general, is that she steals newly-born children. This is a very ancient attribute of the female demon or sorceress or strega, and it is found among Jews at the present day who believe in the Benemmerinnen, or witches who haunt women in childbirth as well as in Lilith. "The Jews banish this first wife of Adam by writing on the walls, 'Adam chava chuz Lilith,' ('Keep away from here, Lilith!')" ("Anthropodemus Plutonicus," by JOHN PRAeTORIUS, 1666). That it is very ancient is rendered probable because the famous Bogomile formula of incantation against the twelve fever-fits (Tresevica), or kinds of fever, turns entirely on the legend of six children stolen by the demon who is compelled to restore them. Here we have the very oldest form of witchcraft known, that is incarnate disease in numbers allied to child-stealing. This spell of the Tresevica. is attributed, says Dr. GASTER, to Pope JEREMIA, the founder of Bogomilism (the great Oriental Slavonian heresy which spread over Europe in the Middle Ages and prepared the way for . "There is no doubt, therefore, that the spell is derived from the East, and I have else

[p. 64]

where proved its existence in that quarter as early as the eighth century. It may have been of Manichaean origin. It has been preserved up to the present day in all the lands of Eastern Europe and, with certain modifications, exists among Germans and Jews." Though attributed to Sisynios, the immediate follower Of MANES, as chief of the Manichaeans, it seems to have been derived from an earlier Oriental tale which became the basis of all later formulae. I give it here in the Roumanian form, which closely resembles the old one. Here, as in all the other variants, the demon is a feminine one. The following is the legend:--

"I, Sisveas, I came down from the Mount of Olives, saw the Archangel Gabriel as he met the Avestitza, wing of Satan, and seized her by the hair and asked her where she was going. And she answered that she was going to cheat the holy Virgin by her tricks, steal the new-born child, and drink its blood. The archangel asked her how she could get into houses so as to steal the children, and she answered that she changed herself into a fly or a cat or such forms. But whosoever knew her twelve and a half (nineteen) names and wrote them out she could not touch. She told him these names, and they were written down."

There is a Coptic as well as a Greek parallel to this. The fairy who steals the children is called Lilith, and is further identified with Herodias and her twelve daughters as personifications of different kinds of fever. This is extremely interesting, as it casts some light on a question which has greatly puzzled all writers on witchcraft as to how or why Herodias was so generally worshipped in company with Diana by witches as a goddess in Italy. This is mentioned by PIPERNUS, GRILLANDUS, MIRANDOLA, and HORST. The name is probably much older than that of the Herodias of the New Testament.

Footnotes

^46:1 Of the seventh son, PIPERNUS remarks in his book, "De Effectibus Magicis" (1647): "Est ne sanandi superstitiosus modus eorum, qui orti sunt die Parasceves, et quotquot nullo foemines sexu intercedente, ac ab ortu septimi masculi legitimo thoro sunt nati? memorat VAIRUS, I. de fascinatione; II. DEL RIUS, lib. i., part 21. GARZONIUS nel Serraglio. J. CAeSAR BARICELLUS secundus scriptor in hort. geniale."

^54:1 "Uber Marcellus Burdigalensis, von Jacob Grimm. Gelesen in der Academie der Wisscnschaften," 28 Juni, 1847 (Berlin. DUMMLER). In this work, as well as in the German Mythology, by the same author, and in RUDOLF ROTH'S "Litteratur und Geschichte des Veda" (Stuttgart, 1846), the reader will find, as also in the works of the elder CATO and PLINY, numbers of these incantations.

^55:1 The divination by the running brook has been known in other lands. The Highlanders when they consulted an oracle took their seer, wrapped him in the hide of a newly-killed ox or sheep, and left him in some wild ravine by a roaring torrent to pass the night. From such sights and sounds there resulted impressions which were reflected in his dreams (Vide Scott, "Lady of the Lake," and notes). The fact that running water often makes sounds like the human voice has been observed by the Algonkin Indians of Maine and Nova Scotia (Vide "The Algonkin Legends of New England," by Charles G. Leland).

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

CHAPTER IV

SOUTH SLAVONIAN AND OTHER GYPSY WITCH-LORE.--THE WORDS FOR A WITCH--VILAS AND THE SPIRITS OF EARTH AND AIR-WITCHES, EGGSHELLS, AND EGG-LORE-EGG PROVERBS--OVA DE CRUCIBUS

THERE is current in the whole of the Southern Slavonian provinces a vast mass of legends and other lore relating to witches, which, in the opinion of Dr. FRIEDRICH S. KRAUSS, may also be regarded as Romany, since it is held in common with the gypsies. There can, indeed, be very little doubt that most of it was derived from, or disseminated by, them, since they have been the principal masters in magic and doctors in medicine in the Slavonic lands for many centuries. There are others deeply learned in this subject who share the same opinion, it being certain that the gypsies could hardly have a separate lore for themselves and one for magic practices on others, and

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] I entertain no doubt that they are substantially the same; but to avoid possible error and confusion, I give what I have taken in this kind from Dr. KRAUSS [*1] and others by itself.

As the English word witch, Anglo-Saxon Wicca, comes from a root implying wisdom, [*2] so the pure Slavonian word vjestica, Bulgarian, vjescirica (masculine, viestae), meant originally the one knowing or well informed, and it has preserved the same power in allied languages, as Veaa (New Slovenish), knowledge, Vedavica, a fortune-teller by cards, Viedma (Russian), a witch, and Vedwin, fatidicus. In many places, especially in Dalmatia, witches are more gently or less plainly called Krstaca, the crossed, from Krst, a cross, i.e., xristo?s? {Greek  xristos}, or Rogulja, "horned," derived from association with the horns of devils. In Croatia the Italian Striga is used, while among the Slovenes and Kai-Kroats the term copernica (masculine, coprnjak). "But it enrages the witches so much to be called by this word that when they hear that any one has used it they come to his house by night and tear him in four pieces, which they cast afar into the four quarters of the earth, yea, and thereunto carry away all the swine, horses, and cattle, so intolerable is their wrath." Therefore men use the word hmana zena, or "common woman," hmana being the Slavonic pronunciation of the German word gemein, or common. In Dalmatia and far into Servia a witch is called macisnica, and magic, machija, which is, evidently enough, the Italian magia. But there are witches and witches, and it appears that among the

[p. 67]

learned the vjestica differs from the macionica, and this from the Zlokobnica who, as the "evil-meeter," or one whom it is unlucky to encounter in the morning, is probably only one who has the evil eye. A quotation from a Servian authority, given by Dr. KRAUSS, is as follows:--

"I have often heard from old Hodzas and Kadijas, that every female Wallach, as soon as she is forty years old, abandons the 'God be with us!' and becomes a witch (vjestica), or at least a zlokobnica or macionica. A real witch has a mark of a cross under her nose, a zlokobnica has some hairs of a beard, and a macionica may be known by a forehead full of dark folds (frowns), with blood-spots in her face" ("Niz srpskih pripoviedaka. VUK. vit. Vecevica. Pancevo," p. 93. 1880.

Of the great number of South Slavonian terms for the verb to enchant or bewitch, it may suffice to say that the commencement, carati, cari carani, carovnik, &c., appear to have much more affinity to the gypsy chor-ava, to steal or swindle, and chov-hani, a witch, than to the Italian ciarlatano, and the French and English charlatan, from which Dr. KRAUSS derives them.

THE VILAS-SYLVANA ELEMENTARY SPIRITS.

Among the Slavonic and gypsy races all witchcraft, fairy- and Folk-lore rests mainly upon a belief in certain spirits of the wood and wold, of earth and water, which has much in common with that of the Rosicrucians and PARACELSUS, but much more with the gypsy mythology (as given by Wlislocki, "Vom Wandernden Zigeunervolke," pp. 49-309), which is apparently in a great measure of directly Indian origin.

"In the Vile," says Dr. KRAUSS, "also known as Samovile, Samodivi, and Vilevrjaci, we have near relations to the forest and field spirits, or the 'wood-' and 'moss-folk' of Middle Germany, France, and Bavaria; the 'wild people' of Eifel, Hesse, Salzburg, and the Tyrol; the wood-women and wood-men of Bohemia; the Tyrolese Fanggen, Fanken, Norkel, and Happy Ladies; the Roumanish Orken, Euguane, and Dialen; the Danish Ellekoner; the Swedish Skogsnufvaz; and the Russian Ljesje; while in certain respects they have affinity with the Teutonic Valkyries." Yet they

[p. 68]

differ on the whole from all of these, as from English fairies, in being more like divinities, who exert a constant and familiar influence for good or evil on human beings, and who are prayed to or exorcised on all occasions. They have, however, their exact parallel among the Red Indians of North America as among the Eskimo, and it is evident that they are originally derived from the old or primeval Shamanic faith, which once spread all over the earth. It is very true, as Dr. KRAUSS remarks, that in the West of Europe it is becoming almost impossible to trace this true origin of spirits now regarded as merely diabolical, or otherwise put into new roles; but among the South Slavonians and gypsies we can still find them in very nearly their old form and playing the same parts. We can still find the Vila as set forth in old ballads, the incarnation of beauty and power, the benevolent friends of sufferers, the geniuses of heroes, the dwellers by rock and river and greenwood tree. But they are implacable in their wrath to all who deceive them, or who break a promise; nay, they inflict terrible punishment even on those who disturb their rings or the dances which they make by midsummer moonlight. Hence the proverb applied to any man who suddenly fell ill: "Naiso je na vilinsko kolo" ("He stepped on a fairy-ring"). From this arbitrary exercise of power we find the Vila represented at times as a spirit who punishes and torments.

Thus we are told that there was once a shepherd named STANKO, who played beautifully on the flute. One evening he was so absorbed in his own music that when the Ave Maria bell rung, instead of repeating the prayer he played it. As he ended he saw a Vila sitting on a hedge. And from that hour she never left him, By table, by his bed, at work or play, the white form and unearthly eyes of the spirit were close to him.

"By a spell to him unknown,
 He could never be alone."

Witches and wizards were summoned to aid him, but to no avail; nay, it made matters worse, for the Vila now often beat him, and when,

[p. 69]

people asked him why it was, he replied that the Vila did so because he refused to wander out into the world with her. And yet again he would be discovered in the top of a tree, bound with bast; and so it went on for years, till he was finally found one morning drowned in a ditch. So in the Wolf Dietrich legend the hero refuses the love of die rauhe Else, and is made mad by the witch and runs wild. All of which is identical with what is told in an Algonkin tale (vide "The Algonkin Legends of New England").

There are three kinds of witches or spirits among the Southern Slavonians which correspond in every respect exactly to those in which the gypsies believe. The first of these are the Zracne Vile, or aerial spirits. These, like the spirits of the air of Scripture, are evily-disposed to human beings, playing them mischievous tricks or inflicting on them fatal injuries. They lead them astray by night, like Friar Rush and Robin Goodfellow, or the English gypsy Mullo doods, or bewilder and frighten them into madness. Of the second kind are the Earth spirits, Pozemne Vile, in gypsy Pcuvushi or Puvushi. These are amiable, noble, and companionable beings, who often give sage counsel to men. Thirdly are the Water sprites, in Slavonic Povodne Vile, in gypsy Nivashi, who are to the highest degree vindictive at times, yet who behave kindly to men when they meet them on land. But woe to those who, while swimming, encounter them in streams or lakes, for then the goblins grasp and whirl them about until they perish. From this account by Dr. KRAUSS, it appears as if this Slavonic mythology were derived from the gypsy, firstly, because it is more imperfect than the latter, and secondly, because in it Vilas, or spirits, are confused with witches, while among the gypsies they are clearly separated and distinctly defined.

Dr. WLISLOCKI Says ("Vom Wand. Zigeunervolke," p. 253) that "gypsies are still a race given to Shamanism, but yet they reverence a highest being under the name of devla or del." This is, however, the case to-day with all believers in Shaman or Sorcery-religion, the difference between them and monotheists being that this highest god is little worshipped

[p. 70]

or even thought of, all practical devotion being paid to spirits who are really their saints. By close examination the Gypsy religion, like that of the country-folk in India, appears to be absolutely identical in spirit with that of American Indians. And I should say that the monk mentioned by PRAeTORIUS, who declared that though God and Christ should damn him, yet he could be saved by appealing to Saint Joseph, was not very far removed from being a Shamanist.

The Hungarian gypsies are divided into tribes, and one of these, the Kukaya, believes itself to be descended from the Pcuvushi, or earth-fairies, according to the following story, narrated by Dr. H. von WLISLOCKI in his paper on the genealogy and family relations of the Transylvanian Tent Gypsies:--

"Many thousand years ago there were as yet in the world very few Pchuvushi. These are beings of human form dwelling under the earth. There they have cities, but they very often come to the world above. They are ugly, and their men are covered with hair. (All of this indicates a prehistoric subterranean race like the Eskimo, fur-clad. [*1]) They carry off mortal girls for wives. Their life is hidden in the egg of a black hen."

This is the same as that of the Orco or Ogre in the Italian tale, "I Racconti delle Fate, Cesare da Causa," Florence, 1888. Whoever kills the hen and throws the egg into a running stream, kills the pchuvush.

"Once a young Pchuvush woman came up to the world and sat in a fair green forest. She saw a very beautiful youth sleeping in the shade, and said: 'What happiness it must be to have such a husband. Mine is so ugly!' Her husband, who had stolen silently after her, heard this, and reflected 'What a good idea it would be to lend my wife to this young man till she shall have borne a family of beautiful children! Then I could sell them to my rich Pchuvus friends.' So he said to his wife: 'You may live with this youth for ten. years if you will promise to give me either the boys or the girls which you may bear to him.' She agreed to this. Then the Pchuvus began to sing:--

[p. 71]

"'Kuku, kukaya
 Kames to adala?
 Kuku, kukaya.'

That is in English:--

"'Kuku, kukaya
 Do you want this (one) here
 Kuku, kukaya.'

Then the young man awoke, and as the goblin offered him much gold and silver with his wife, he took her and lived with her ten years, and every year she bore him a son. Then came the Pchuvush to get the children. But the wife said she had chosen to keep all the sons, and was very sorry but she had no girls to give him! So he went away sorrowfully, howling

"'Kuku, kukaya!
 Ada kin jirkla!
 Kuku, kukaya!'

"That is to say:--

"'Kuku, kukaya
 These are dogs here!
 Kuku, kukaya!'

"Then the ten boys laughed and said to their father We will call ourselves Kukaya.' And so from them came the race."

Dr. WLISLOCKI points out that there are races which declare themselves to be descended from dogs, or, like the Romans, from wolves. It is a curious coincidence that the Eskimo are among the former.

In all parts of Eastern Europe, as in the West, many people are not only careful to burn the parings of their nails [*1] and the combings of hair, for fear lest witches and imps should work sorcery with them to the injury of those from whom they came, but they also destroy the shells of eggs when they have eaten their contents. So A. WUTTKE tells us in his book,

[p. 72]

[paragraph continues] "Der Deutsche Volks Aberglaube der Gegenwart," 1869 "When one has eaten eggs the shells must be broken up or burned, or else the hens will lay no more, or evil witches will come over them." And in England, Spain, the Netherlands, or Portugal, there are many who believe or say that if the witches can get such shells from which people have eaten, unbroken, they can, by muttering spells, cause them to grow so large that they can use them as boats. Dom LEITAS GANET ("Donna Branca ou a Conquista do Algarre," Paris, 1826), however, assures us that is a very risky thing for the witches, because if they do not return home before midnight the shell-boat perishes, "whence it hath come to pass that many of these sorceresses have been miserably drowned."

However, an egg hung up in a house is a lucky amulet, hence the ostrich eggs and cocoanuts resembling them which are so common in the East. And it is to be observed that every gypsy in England declares that a pivilioi, or cocoanut, as a gift brings bak or luck, I myself having had many given to me with this assurance. This is evidently and directly derived from India, in which country there are a mass of religious traditions referring to it.

"Once there was a gypsy girl who noticed that when anybody ate eggs they broke up the shells, and asking why this was done received for answer:--

"'You must break the shell to bits for fear
 Lest the witches should make it a boat, my dear.
 For over the sea away from home,
 Far by night the witches roam.'

"Then the girl said: 'I don't see why the poor witches should not have boats as well as other people.' And saying this she threw the shell of an egg which she had been eating as far as she could, and cried, 'Chovihani, lav tro bero!' ('Witch--there is your boat!') But what was her amazement to see the shell caught up by the wind and whirled away on high till it became invisible, while a voice cried, 'Paraka!' ('I thank you!')

"Now it came to pass some time after that the gypsy girl was on an island, where she remained some days. And when she wished to return, behold a great flood was rising, and it had washed her boat away, she could see nothing of it. But the water kept getting higher and higher, and soon there was only a little bit of the island above the flood, and the girl thought she must drown. just then she saw a white boat coming; there sat in it a woman

[p. 73]

with witch eyes; she was rowing with a broom, and a black cat sat on her shoulder. 'Jump in!' she cried to the girl, and then rowed her to the firm land.

"When she was or. the shore the woman said: 'Turn round three times to the right and look every time at the boat.' She did so, and every time she looked she saw the boat grow smaller till it was like an egg. Then the woman sang:--

"'That is the shell you threw to me,
 Even a witch can grateful be.'

"Saying this she vanished, cat, broom, shell, and all.

"Now my story is fairly done,
 I beg you to tell a better one."

As regards these boats which grow large or small at will we find them in the Norse ship Skidbladner, which certain dwarfs made and gave to Frey. It is so large that all the gods and their army can embark in it. But when not in use it may be so contracted that one may hava i pungi sino--put it in his purse or pocket. The Algonkin god Glooskap has not only the counterpart of Skidbladnir, but the hammer of Thor and his belt of strength. He has also the two attendant birds which bring him news, and the two wolves which mean Day and Night.

Another legend given by Dr. KRAUSS, relative to witches and eggshells is as follows--

"By the Klek lived a rich tavern-keeper and his wife. He was thin and lean--hager und mager--while she was as fat as a well-fed pig.

"One day there came a gypsy woman by. She began to tell his fortune by his hand. And as she studied it seriously she became herself serious, and then said to him, 'Listen, you good-natured dolt (more)! Do you know why you are so slim and your wife so stout?' 'Not I.' 'My good friend (Latcho pral), your wife is a witch. Every Friday when there is a new moon (mladi petak) she rides you up along the Klek to the devil's dance' (Uraze kolo). 'How can that be?' 'Simply enough. As soon as you fall asleep, she slips a magic halter over your head. Then you become a horse, and she rides you over the hills and far away over mountains and woods, cities and seas, to the witches' gathering.

"Little you know where you have been,
 Little you think of what you have seen,

"For when you awake it is all forgotten, but the ride is hard for you, and you are

[p. 74]

wasting away, and dying. Take great care of yourself on the next Friday when there is a new moon!'

"So the gypsy went her way, and he thought it over. On the next Friday when the moon was new he went to bed early, but only pretended to sleep. Then his wife came silently as a cat to the bed-side with the magic halter in her hand. As quick as lightning he jumped up, snatched it from her, and threw it over her head. Then she became, in a second, a mare. He mounted her, and away she flew through the air-over hills and dales like the wind, till they came to the witches' meeting.

"He dismounted, bound the mare to a tree, and, unseen by the company, watched them at a little distance. All the witches carried pots or jars. First they danced in a ring, then every one put her pot on the ground and danced alone round it. And these pots were egg-shells.

"While he watched, there came flying to him a witch in whom he recognized his old godmother. 'How did you come here?' she inquired. 'Well, I came here on my mare, I know not how.' 'Woe to you--begone as soon as possible. If the witches once see you it will be all up with you. Know that we are all waiting for one' (this one was his wife), 'and till she comes we cannot begin.' Then the landlord mounted his mare, cried 'Home!' and when he was there tied her up in the stable and went to bed.

"In the morning his servant-man said to him: 'There is a mare in the stable.' 'Yes,' replied the master; 'it is mine.' So he sent for a smith, and made him shoe the mare. Now, whatever is done to a witch while she is in the form of an animal remains on or in her when she resumes her natural shape.

"Then he went out and assembled a judicial or legal commission. He led the members to his house, told them all his story, led forth the mare, and took off the halter. She became a woman as before, but horse-shoes were affixed to her feet and hands. She began to weep and wail, but the judge was pitiless. He had her thrown into a pit full of quicklime, and thus she was burnt to death. And since that time people break the shells of eggs after eating their contents, lest witches should make jars or pots of them."

The following story on the same subject is from a different source:--

"There was once a gypsy girl who was very clever, and whenever she heard people talk about witches she remembered it well. One day she took an egg-shell and made a small round hole in it very neatly, and are the yolk and white, but the shell she put on a heap of white sand by a stream, where it was very likely to be seen. Then she hid herself behind a bush. By and by, when it was night, there came a witch, who, seeing the shell, pronounced a word over it, when it changed to a beautiful boat, into which the witch got and sailed on the water, over the sea.

"The girl remembered the word, and soon ate another egg and turned it into a

[p. 75]

boat. Whenever she willed it went over the world to places where fruit and flowers abounded, or where people gave her much gold for such things as knives and scissors. So she grew rich and had a fine house. The boat she hid away carefully in a bush.

"There was a very envious, wicked woman, whom the girl had befriended many a time, and who hated her all the more for it. And this creature set to work, spying and sneaking, to find out the secret of the girl's prosperity. And at last she discovered the boat, and, suspecting something, hid herself in the bush hard by to watch.

"By and by the girl came with a basket full of wares for her trade, and, drawing out the boat, said, 'To Africa!'--when off it flew. The woman watched and waited. After a few hours the girl returned. Her boat was full of fine things, ostrich feathers and gold, fruit and strange flowers, all of which she carried into her house.

"Then the woman put the boat on the water, and said, 'To Africa!' But she did not know the word by means of which it was changed from an egg-shell, and which made it fly like thought. So as it went along the woman cried, 'Faster!', but it never heeded her. Then she cried again in a great rage, and at last exclaimed, 'In God's name get on with you!' Then the spell was broken, and the boat turned into an egg-shell, and the woman was drowned in the great rolling sea."

Egg-lore is inexhaustible. The eggs of Maundy Thursday (Witten Donnertag), says a writer in The Queen, protect a house against thunder and lightning, but, in fact, an egg hung up is a general protection, hence the ostrich eggs and cocoanuts of the East. Some other very interesting items in the communication referred to are as follows:--

"WITCHES AND EGGS.--'To hang an egg laid on Ascension Day in the roof of a house,' says Reginald Scot in 1584, 'preserveth the same from all hurts.' Probably this was written with an eye to the 'hurts' arising from witchcraft, in connection with which eggs were supposed to possess certain mysterious powers. In North Germany, if you have a desire to see the ladies of the broomstick on May Day, their festival, you must take an egg laid on Maundy Thursday, and stand where four roads meet; or else you must go into church on Good Friday, but come out before the blessing. It was formerly quite an article of domestic belief that the shells must be broken after eating eggs, lest the witches should sail out to sea in them; or, as Sir Thomas Browne declared, lest they 'should draw or prick their names therein, and veneficiously mischief' the person who had partaken of the egg. North Germans, ignoring this side of the question, say, "Break the shells or you will get the ague;" and Netherlanders advise you to secure yourself against the attacks of this disagreeable visitor by eating on Easter Day a couple of eggs which were laid on Good Friday.

"SCOTTISH SUPERSTITIONS.--Scotch fishers, who may be reckoned among the most superstitious of folks, believe that contrary winds and much consequent vexation of

[p. 76]

spirit will be the result of having eggs on board with them; while in the west of England it is considered very unlucky to bring birds' eggs into the house, although they may be hung up with impunity outside. Mr. Gregor, in his 'Folklore of the North-East of Scotland,' gives us some curious particulars concerning chickens, and the best methods of securing a satisfactory brood. The hen, it seems, should be set on an odd number of eggs, or the chances are that most, if not all, will be addled--a mournful prospect for the henwife; also they must be placed under the mother bird after sunset, or the chickens will be blind. If the woman who performs this office carries the eggs wrapped up in her chemise, the result will be hen birds; if she wears a man's hat, cocks. Furthermore, it is as well for her to repeat a sort of charm, 'A' in thegeethir, A oot thegeethir.'

"UNLUCKY EGGS.--There are many farmers' wives, even in the present day, who would never dream of allowing eggs to be brought into the house or taken out after dark--this being deemed extremely unlucky. Cuthbert Bede mentions the case of a farmer's wife in Rutland who received a setting of ducks' eggs from a neighbour at nine o'clock at night. 'I cannot imagine how she could have been so foolish,' said the good woman, much distressed, and her visitor, upon inquiry, was told that ducks' eggs brought into a house after sunset would never be hatched. A Lincolnshire superstition declares that if eggs are carried over running water they will be useless for setting purposes; while in Aberdeen there is an idea prevalent among the country folks that should it thunder a short time before chickens are hatched, they will die in the shell. The same wiseacres may be credited with the notion that the year the farmer's gudewife presents him with an addition to his family is a bad season for the poultry yard. 'Bairns an' chuckens,' say they, 'dinna thrive in ae year.' The probable explanation being that the gudewife, taken up with the care of her bairn, has less time to attend to the rearing of the 'chuckens.'

"FORTUNE-TELLING IN NORTHUMBERLAND.--Besides the divination practised with the white of an egg, which certainly appears of a vague and unsatisfactory character, another species of fortune-telling with eggs is in vogue in Northumberland on the eve of St. Agnes. A maiden desirous of knowing what her future lord is like, is enjoined to boil an egg, after having spent the whole day fasting and in silence, then to extract the yolk, fill the cavity with salt, and eat the whole, including the shell. This highly unpalatable supper finished, the heroic maid must walk backwards, uttering this invocation to the saint:--

"'Sweet St. Agnes, work thy fast,
 If ever I be to marry man,
 Or man be to marry me,
 I hope him this night to sec.'"

FRIEDRICH and others assert that the saying in Luke xi. 12--"Or if he shall ask an egg shall he give him a scorpion?"--is a direct

[p. 77]

reference to ancient belief that the egg typified the good principle, and the scorpion evil, and which is certainly supported by a cloud of witnesses in the form of classic folk-lore. The egg, as a cosmogenic symbol, and indicating the origin of all things, finds a place in the mythologies of many races. These are indicated with much erudition by FRIEDRICH, "Symbolik der Natur," p. 686.

In Lower Alsatia it is believed that if a man will take an Easter egg into the church and look about him, if there be any witches in the congregation he may know them by their having in their hands pieces of pork instead of prayer-books, and milk-pails on their heads for bonnets;(WOLF, "Deutsche Mahrchen und Sagen," p. 270). There is also an ancient belief that an egg built into a new building will protect it against evil and witchcraft. Such eggs were found in old houses in Altenhagen and Iserlohen, while in the East there is a proverb, "the egg of the chamber" ("Hamasa" of ABU TEMMAN, v. RUCKERT, Stuttgart, 1846), which seems to point to the same practice.

The Romans expressed a disaster by saying "Ovum ruptum est" ("The egg is smashed"). Among other egg-proverbs I find the following:--

His eggs are all omelettes (French); i.e., broken up.

Eggs in the pan give pancakes but nevermore chicks (Low German).

Never a chicken comes from broken eggs (Low German).

Bad eggs, bad chickens. Hence in America "a bad egg" for a man who is radically bad, and "a good egg" for the contrary.

Eggs not yet laid are uncertain chickens; i.e., "Do not count your chickens before they are hatched."

Tread carefully among eggs (German).

The egg pretends to be cleverer than the hen.

He waits for the eggs and lets the hen go.

He who wants eggs must endure the clucking of the hen (Westphalian).

He thinks his eggs are of more account than other people's hens.

One rotten egg spoils all the pudding.

Rotten eggs and bad butter always stand by one another; or "go well together."

Old eggs, old lovers, and an old horse,
 Are either rotten or for the worse.

[p. 78]

(Original:

Alte Eyer
 Alte Freier
 Alter Gaul
 Sind meistens faul.)

"All eggs are of the same size" (Eggs are all alike), he said, and grabbed the biggest.

As like as eggs (Old Roman).

As sure as eggs.

His eggs all have two yolks.

If you have many eggs you can have many cakes.

He who has many eggs scatters many shells.

To throw an egg at a sparrow.

To borrow trouble for eggs not yet hatched.

Half an egg is worth more than all the shell.

A drink after an egg, and a leap after an apple.

A rotten egg in his face.

In the early mythology, the egg, as a bird was hatched from it, and as it resembled seeds, nuts, &c., from which new plants come, was regarded as the great type of production. This survives in love-charms, as when a girl in the Tyrol believes she can secure a man's love by giving him a red Easter egg. This giving red eggs at Easter is possibly derived from the ancient Parsees, who did the same at their spring festival. Among the Christians the reproductive and sexual symbolism, when retained, was applied to the resurrection of the body and the immortality of the soul. Hence Easter eggs. And as Christ by His crucifixion caused this, or originated the faith, we have the ova de crucibus, the origin of which has puzzled so many antiquaries; for the cross itself was, like the egg, a symbol of life, in earlier times of reproduction, and in a later age of life eternal. These eggs are made of a large size of white glass by the Armenian Christians.

Footnotes

^66:1 "Sudslavische Hexensagen, Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien." xiv. Bande, 1884. "Medizinische Zauberspruche aus Slavonien, Bosnien, der Hercegovina und Dalmatien," Wien, 1887. "Srecha, Gluck und Schicksal im Volksglauben der Sudslaven." Wien, 1886. "Sudslavische Pestsagen." Wien, 1883.

^66:2 "Witch. Mediaeval English wicche, both masculine and feminine, a wizard, a witch. Anglo-Saxon wicca, masculine, wice, feminine. Wicca is a corruption of witga, commonly used as a short form of witega, a prophet, seer, magician, or sorcerer. Anglo-Saxon witan, to see, allied to witan, to know. Similarly Icelandic vitki, a wizard, is from vita, to know. Wizard, Norman-French wischard, the original Old French being guiscart, sagacious. Icelandic, vizkr, clever or knowing, . . . with French suffix ard as German hart, hard, strong" (SKEAT, "Etymol. Dictionary"). That is wiz-ard, very wife. Wit and wisdom here are near allied to witchcraft, and thin partitions do the bounds divide.

^70:1 For a very interesting account of the mysterious early dwarfs of Great Britain the reader may consult "Earth Houses and their Inhabitants," by David MacRitchie, in "The Testimony of Tradition." London: Trubner and Co., 1890.

^71:1 The many superstitions relating to cutting nails may be referred in part to the very wild legend of the ship Naglfara given in STURLESON'S "Edda."

"Then in that Twilight of the Gods (the Norse Day of judgment) will come the ship Naglfara, which is made of dead men's nails. In that sea it will go forth. Hrymer steereth it. And for this cause no man should die with his nails unshorn, for so the ship is made, and the gods would fain put that off as long as possible" ("Edda, Gylfesgynning," 26th tale).

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

 

LAPLAND MAGIC DRUM

 

  

CHAPTER V

CHARMS OR CONJURATIONS TO CURE OR PROTECT ANIMALS

FROM the earliest ages a drum or tambourine has formed such an indispensable adjunct of Shamanic sorcery among Tartars, Lapps, Samoyedes, Eskimo, and Red Indians, that, taking it with other associations, I can hardly believe that it has not been transmitted from one to the other. In Hungary the gypsies when they wish to know if an invalid will recover, have recourse to the covacanescro buclo (chovihanescro buklo) or "witch-drum." This is a kind of rude tambourine covered with the skin of an animal, and marked with stripes which have a special meaning. On this are placed from nine to twenty-one seeds of the thorn-apple (stramomium).

[p. 80]

The side of the drum is then gently struck with a little hammer, and according to the position which the seeds take on the marks, the recovery or death of the patient is predicted. The following is a picture of a gypsy drum as given by Dr. WLISLOCKI.

 

 

The wood for this is cut on Whitsunday. A is turned towards the fortuneteller; nine seeds are now thrown on the drum, and with the left hand, or with a hammer held in it, the tambourine is tapped. Should all the seeds come within the four lines all will go well, especially if three come within a, d, e, f. If two roll into the space between a, i, it is lucky for a woman, between i and f for a man. But if nearly all fall outside of b, c, g, h, all is unfavourable. The same divination is used to know whether animals will get well, and where stolen property is concealed. All of this corresponds exactly to the use of the same instrument by the Laplanders for the same purposes. The thorn-apple is a very poisonous plant, and the gypsies are said to have first brought it to England. This is not true, but it is extremely possible that they used it in stupefying, killing, and "bewitching." It is very much employed at present by the Voodoo poisoners in America.

The Turks are a Tartar race, and the drum is used among them very generally for magical purposes. I have one of these tambouri which, I was assured when I bought it, was made for incantations. It is of a diamond shape, has parchment on both sides, and is inscribed with the name Allah, in Arabic, and the well-known double triangle of Solomon, with the moon and star.

[p. 81]

To keep domestic animals from straying or being stolen, or falling ill, they are, when a gypsy first becomes their owner, driven up before a fire by his tent. Then they are struck with a switch, which is half blacked with coal, across the back, while the following is repeated:--

"Ach tu, ach kathe!
 Tu hin mange!
 Te Nivasa the jianen
 Na dikh tu adalen!
 Trin lanca bin mange,
 Me pcandav tute:
 Yeka o devla, avri
 O Kristus, trite Maria!"

"Stay thou, stay here
 Thou art mine!
 And the Nivasi when they go
 Thou shalt not see them!
 Three chains I have,
 I bind thee:
 One is God, the other (beyond)
 The Christ, the third, Maria!"

To charm a horse, they draw, with a coal, a ring on the left hoof and on the right a cross, and murmur

"Obles, obles te obles!
 Ac tu, ac tu may sastes
 Na th' avehas beng tute
 Devla, devla ach tute!
 Gule devla bishala
 E grayeskro pera
 Misecescro dad!
 Niko manushenge ach
 Kaske me dav, leske ach
 Shukares tu ach,
 Voyesa te laches ach,
 Ashunen efta Pcuvuse:
 Efta lanca hin mange,
 Ferinen adala
 Taysa, taysa e peda!"

[p. 82]

"Round, round, and round
 Be thou, be thou very sound
 The devil shall not come to thee.
 God, God shall be with thee
 Sweet God drive away
 From the horse's body
 The Father of Evil!
 Be to (go not to) any other man
 To whom I give (sell) unto him
 Be beautiful!
 Frolicsome and good,
 Seven spirits of earth hear
 I have seven chains,
 Protect this animal
 Ever, ever!"

Then a piece of salted bread is given to the horse, and the owner spits seven times into his eyes, by which he is supposed to lose all fear for supernatural beings. According to the gypsies, horses, especially black ones, can see beings which are invisible to human eyes. I have known an old English gypsy who believed that dogs could see ghosts when men could not. The mysterious manner in which dogs and horses betray fear when there is apparently nothing to dread, the howling of the former by night, and the wild rushes of the latter, doubtless led to this opinion. The bread and salt will recall to the reader the fact that the same was given at the ancient mysteries apparently for the purpose of strengthening the neophyte so that he should not fear the supernatural beings whom he was supposed to meet. It is curious to find this peculiar form of the sacrament administered to a horse. Another protective charm is common among the Southern Hungarian gypsies. The dung of a she-goat dried and powdered is sifted on a horse's back and this spell recited:--

"Miseces prejia,
 Andral t're pera!
 Trada chik buschakri
 Miseces perakri,-- [p. 83]
 Andral punra, andral dumno,
 Andral yakha, andral kanna!
 Nevkeradyi av akana,
 Ach tu, ach to cha mange:
 Ach tu, ach tu, ach kathe!"

"Evil be gone
 From thy belly!
 Drive away she-goat's dung
 Evil from the belly,
 From the feet, from the back,
 From the eyes, from the ears
 New-born be now,
 Be thou, be thou only mine
 Stay thou, stay thou, stay here!"

There is evidently a relation here between the dung of the she-goat and certain ancient symbols. Whatever was a sign of fruitfulness, generation, or productiveness, whether it was set forth by the generative organs, sexual passion, or even manure which fertilises, was connected with Life which is the good or vital principle opposed to death. As the goat was eminently a type of lechery, so the she-goat, owing to the great proportion of milk which she yielded, set forth abundance; hence the cornucopia of Amalthea, the prototype of the she-goat Heidrun of the Northern mythology, who yielded every day so much milk that all the Einheriar, or dwellers in Valhall, could satisfy themselves therewith. [*1] But the forms or deities indicating life were also those which shielded and protected from evil, therefore Here, the mother of life and of birth, had in Sparta a shrine where she-goats were sacrificed to her, while at Canuvium the statue of Juno Sospita (who was also Here), was covered with a she-goat's skin. It is in the ancient sense of fertility identified with protection, that the she-goat's dung is used to exorcise evil from the

[p. 84]

horse by the gypsies. There is, in fact, in all of these char ms and exorcisms a great deal which evidently connects them with the earliest rites and religions.

In the Hungarian gypsy-tribe of the Kukuya, the following method of protecting horses is used: The animal is placed by the tent-fire and there a little hole is dug before him into which ninefold grass and some hairs from his mane and tail are put. Then his left fore-hoof is traced on the ground, and the earth within it is carefully taken out and shaken into the hole, while these lines are repeated:--

"Yeka chunul yeka bal,
 Tute e bokh nani sal,
 Ko tut chorel, the merel
 Sar e bala, chunula,
 Pal e pcuv the yov avel!
 Pcuvus, adalen tute,
 Sastes gray ac mange!"

"A straw, a hair!
 May you never be hungry
 May he who steals you die
 Like the hair and the straw,
 May he go to the ground
 Earth, these things to thee
 May a sound horse be mine!"

If the animal be a mare and it is desired that she shall be with foal, they give her oats to eat out of an apron or a gourd, and say

"Trin kanalya, trin jiukla,
 Jianen upre playa!
 Caba, pcarcs hin pera!
 Trin kanalya, trin jiukla
 Jianen tele playa,
 E ceva andrasavaren
 Yek chumut andre casaren,
 Tre pera sik pcareven!"

"Three asses, three dogs,
 Go up the hill! [p. 85]
 Eat, fill thy belly with young!
 Three asses, three dogs,
 Go down the hill,
 They close the holes,
 They put the moon in (them)
 Thy belly be soon fruitful!"

"The moon has here," remarks WLISLOCKI, "a phallic meaning, the mention of the ass, and the use of the gourd and apron are symbols of fertility. Vide DE GUBERNATIS, 'Animals in Indian Mythology,' in the chapter on the ass."

There is another formula for protecting and aiding cattle, which is practised among other races besides that of the gypsies; as, for instance, among the Slovacks of Northern Hungary. This I shall leave in the original--

"Dieser Verwahrungsmittel besteht darin, dass dem gekauften weiblichen Thiere der Mann den blanken Hintern zeigt, einem mannlichen Thiere aber eine weibliche Person. Hiebei werden die Worte gesagt--

"Sar o kar pal e punra,
 Kiya mange ac taysa!

Wie der Schwantz am Bein,
 Sollst du stets bei mir sein!"

Or else:--

"Sar e minch pal e per,
 Kiya mange ac buter!

Wie das Loch im Leib,
 Also bei mir bleib!"

To secure swine to their owner a hole is dug in the turf which is filled with salt and charcoal dust, which is covered with earth, and these words uttered:--

"Ada hin tute
 Na ava pal menge
 Dav tute, so kamav
 Pcuvusheya, ashuna, [p. 86]
 Chores tuna muka
 Hin menge trin lanca,
 Trin may lace Urma,
 Ke ferinen men!"

"This is thine,
 Come not to us
 I give thee what I can
 Oh Spirit of earth, hear
 Let not the thief go!
 We have three chains,
 Three very good fairies
 Who protect us."

If the swine find the hole and root it up--as they will be tolerably certain to do owing to their fondness for salt and charcoal--they will not be stolen or run away.

The Urmen, or Fairies, are supposed to be very favourable to cattle, therefore children who torment cows are told "Urme tute na bica somnakune pcabay"--"The fairies will not send you any golden apples!" If the English gypsies had the word Urme (and it may be that it exists among them even yet), this would be, "I Urme na bitcher tute sonnakai pabya!"

But the mighty charm of charms to protect cattle from theft is the following: Three drops of blood are made to fall from the finger of a little child on a piece of bread which is given to the animal to eat, with these words

"Dav tute trinen rata
 Ternes te laces avna!
 Ko tut chorel, adaleske
 Hin rat te mas shutyardye!

Kana rata te rata
 Paltire per avna,
 Yakh te yakh te bare yakh
 Sikoves cal te cal
 Ko kamel tut te cal!"

[p. 87]

"I give three (drops of) blood
 To become young and good;
 Who steals thee to him
 Shall be (is) blood and flesh dried up!

When blood and blood
 Pass into thy belly,
 Fire and fire and great fire
 Shall devour and devour all
 Who will eat thee!"

This incantation takes us back to grim old heathenism with hints of human sacrifice. When the thief was suspected or privately detected it is probable that a dose of some burning poison made good the prediction. "The word young," remarks Dr. WLISLOCKI, "may be here understood to mean innocent, since, according to ancient belief, there was a powerful magic virtue in the blood of virgins and of little children. Every new tent is therefore sprinkled by the gypsies with a few drops of a child's blood to protect it from magic or any other accident." So in prehistoric times, and through the Middle Ages, a human being was often walled up alive in the foundations of a castle to insure its durability. (Vide P. CASSEL, Die Symbolik des Blutes," p. 157.)

When the wandering, or tent-gypsies, find that cattle are ill and do not know the nature of the disease, they take two birds--if possible quails, called by them berecto or furyo--one of which is killed, but the other, besprinkled with its blood, is allowed to fly away. With what remains of the blood they sprinkle some fodder, which is put before the animal, with the words:--

"So andre tu misec hin
            Avri ava!
 Kathe ker na avla,
            Miseceske!
 Kana rata na avna,
 Nasvalyipen na avna!
 Misec, tu avri ava,
 Ada ker na lace;
 Dav rata me kathe!"

[p. 88]

"What in thee is evil
           Come forth
 Here is no home
           For the evil one!
 When (drops of) blood come not,
 Sickness comes not,
 Thou evil one, come forth!'

"Trin parne, trin kale,
 Trin tcule pashlajen kathe,
 Ko len hadjinel
 Ach kiva mange!"

"Three white, three black,
 Three fat lie together here.
 Whoever disturbs them
 Remain to me! (Be mine!)"

To insure pigs thriving by a new owner, some charcoal-dust is mingled with their food and these words spoken:--

"Nivaseske na muka,
 The cal t're cabena!
 Misec yakha tut dikhen,
 The yon kathe mudaren,
 Tu atunci caba len!"

"Do not let the Nivasi
 Eat thy food,
 Evil eyes see thee,
 And they here shall perish,
 Then do thou eat them!

As a particularly powerful conjuration against thieves, the owner runs thrice, while quite naked, round the animal or object which he wishes to protect, and repeats at every turn:--

"Oh coreya na prejia.
 Dureder na ava!
 T're vasta, t're punra
 Avcna kirnodya
 Te ada peda laves!"

[p. 89]

"Oh, thief, do not go,
 Further do not come
 Thy hands, thy feet
 Shall decay
 If thou takest this animal!"

Another "thieves' benediction" is as follows: The owner goes at midnight with the animal or object to be protected to a cross-roads, and while letting fall on the ground a few hairs of the beast, or a bit of the thing whatever it be, repeats:--

"Ada hin tute,
 Na ava pal menge,
 Dav tute, so kamav;
 Pcuvuseya ashuna!

"This home is not good,
 Here I give (thee) blood!"

The gypsies call the quail the devil's bird (Ciriclo bengeskro), and ascribe diabolic properties to it. (Vide CASSEL, 6 and 162.) The daughters of the Nivasi appear as quails in the fields by day, but during the night they steal the corn. To keep them away it is held good during sowing-time to place in each of the four corners of the field, parts of a quail, or at least some of the feathers of a black hen which has never laid an egg. This superstition is also current among the Roumanian peasants of the Siebenburgen."

The primitive meaning of the myth may perhaps be found in the Greek tradition which regarded the quail, because it was a bird of passage, as a type of revival of spring or of life. Hercules awakes from his swoon when his companion Iolaus (from the Greek ioylo?s? {Greek  ioulos}, youth), holds a quail to his nose. Hercules suffered from epilepsy, for which disease the ancients thought the brain of a quail was a specific. The placing pieces of a quail, by the gypsies, in the corners of a field when corn is sown, connects the bird with spring. Artemis, a goddess of spring and life, was called by the Romans Ortygyia, from ortyx {Greek  ortuks}, a quail. Therefore, as signifying new life, the quail became itself a cure

[p. 90]

for many diseases. And it seems to be like the Wren, also a bird of witchcraft and sorcery, or a kind of witch itself. It is a protector, because, owing to its pugnacity, it was a type of pluck, battle and victory. In Phoenicia it was sacrificed to Hercules, and the Romans were so fanatical in regard to it that AUGUSTUS punished a city-father for serving upon his table a quail which had become celebrated for its prowess. And so it has become a devil's bird among the gypsies because in the old time it was regarded as a devil of a bird for fighting.

The gypsies are hardly to be regarded as Christians, but when they wish to contend against the powers of darkness they occasionally invoke Christian influences. If a cow gives bloody milk it is thought to be caused by her eating Wachtelkraut, or quail weed, which is a poison. In such a case they sprinkle the milk on a field frequented by quails and repeat:--

"Dav rata tumenge
 Ada na hin lache!
 Rayeskro Kristeskro rata
 Ada hin may lace
 Ada hin amenge!"

"I give to you blood,
 Which is not good!
 The Lord Christ's blood
 Is truly good,
 That is ours!"

If a cow makes water while being milked, she is bewitched, and it is well in such a case to catch some of the urine, mix it with onion-peelings and the egg of a black hen. This is boiled and mixed with the cow's food while these lines are repeated:--

"Ko andre hin, avriava,
 Trin Urma cingarden les,
 Trin Urma traden les
 Andre yandengre ker
 Beshel yov andre ker
 Hin leske may yakha,
 Hin leske may pana!"

[p. 91]

"Who is within, let him come out!
 Three Urme call him,
 Three Urme drive him
 Into the egg-shell house,
 There he lives in the house
 He has much fire,
 He has much water!"

Then half the shell of the egg of the black hen is thrown into a running stream and the other half into a fire.

Next to the Nivasi and Pcuvuse, or spirits of earth and air, and human sorcerers or witches, the being who is most dreaded as injuring cattle is the Chagrin or Cagrino. These demons have the form of a hedgehog, are of yellowish colour, and are half a yard in length, and a span in breadth. "I am certain," says WLISLOCKI, "that this creature is none other than the equally demoniac being called Harginn, still believed in by the inhabitants of North-western India. (Vide LIEBRECHT, p. 112, and LEITNER, 'Results of a Tour in Dardistan Kashmir,' &c., vol. i. p. 13) The exact identity of the description of the two, as well as that of the name, prove that the gypsies brought the belief from their Indian home." It may here be observed that the Indian name is Harginn, and the true gypsy word is pronounced very nearly like 'Hagrin--the o being an arbitrary addition. The transposition of letters in a word is extremely common among the Hindu gypsies. The Chagrin specially torments horses, by sitting on their backs and making water on their bodies. The next day they appear to be weary, sad, sick, and weak, bathed in sweat, with their manes tangled. When this is seen the following ceremony is resorted to: The horse is tied to a stake which has been rubbed with garlic juice, then a red thread is laid in the form of a cross on the ground, but so far from the heels of the horse that he cannot disturb it. And while laying it down the performer sings:--

"Save misec ach kathe,
 Ac andre lunge tave,
 Andre leg pashader pani. [p. 92]
 De tu tire pani
 Andre cucha Charineya,
 Andre tu sik mudara!"

"All evil stay here,
 Stay in the long thread,
 In the next brook (water).
 Give thy water,
 Jump in Chagrin!
 Therein perish quickly!"

Of the widely-spread and ancient belief in the magic virtues of garlic and red wool I have elsewhere spoken. That witches and goblins or imps ride horses by night and then restore them in the morning to their stalls in a wretched condition--trembling, enfeebled, and with tangled manes--is believed all the world over, and it would probably be found that the Chagrin also gallops them.

Another charm against this being consists of taking some of the hair of the animal, a little salt, and the blood of a bat, which is all mixed with meal and cooked to a bread. With this the foot of the horse is smeared, and then the empty pipkin is put into the trunk of a high tree while these words are uttered

"Ac tu chin kathe,
 Chin ada tcutes avla!"

"Stay so long here,
 Till it shall be full!"

The blood of the bat may be derived from an Oriental belief that the bat being the most perfect of birds, because it has breasts and suckles its young, it is specially adapted to magical uses. In the Tyrol he who bears the left eye of a bat may become invisible, and in Hesse he who wears the heart of a bat bound to his arm with red thread will always win at cards. The manes of the horses which have been tangled and twisted by the Chagrin must not be cut off or disentangled unless these words are spoken:--

[p. 93]

      "Chin tu jid', cin ada bala jiden."

"So long live thou, long as these hairs shall live."

It is an European belief that knots of hair made by witches must not be disentangled. The belief that such knots are made intentionally by some intelligence is very natural. I have often been surprised to find how frequently knots form themselves in the cord of my eye-glass, even when pains are taken at night to lay it down so as to be free of them. Apropos of which I may mention that this teasing personality of the eye-glass and cord seems to have been noted by others. I was once travelling on the Nile in company with a Persian prince, who became convinced that his eye-glass was very unlucky, and therefore threw it into the river.

The Chagrin specially torments mares which have recently foaled; therefore it is held needful, soon after the birth, to put into the water which the mother drinks glowing hot coals, which are thrice taken from the fire. With these are included pieces of iron, such as nails, knives, &c., and the following words are solemnly murmured:--

"Piya tu te na ach sovnibnastar!"

"Drink, and do not be sleepy!"

Many readers may here observe that charcoal and iron form a real tonic, or very practical strengthening dose for the enfeebled mare. But here, as in many cases medicine makes a cure and the devil or the doctor gets the credit. The Chagrin is supposed to attack horses only while they are asleep. Its urine often causes swellings or sores. These are covered by day with a patch of red cloth, which is stuck at night into a hole in a tree, which is closed with a cork, while these words are pronounced

"Ach tu kathe
 Chin aula tav peda
 Chin peda yek ruk
 Chin ruk yek manush
 Ko mudarel tut."

[p. 94]

"Remain thou here
 Till the rag become an animal,
 Till the animal, a tree,
 Till the tree, a man,
 Who will destroy thee!"

Dr. WLISLOCKI suggests that "the idea of the tree's becoming a man, is derived from the old gypsy belief that the first human beings were made from the leaves of trees, and refers to what he has elsewhere written on a tradition of the creation of the world, as held by Transylvanian gypsies. The following is a children's song, in which the belief may be traced:--

"Amaro dad jal andro bes
 Chingerel odoy chaves,
 Del dayakri andre pada
 Yek chavoro ada avla."

"Our father went into a wood,
 There he cut a boy,
 Laid it in mother's bed,
 So a boy comes."

The Greeks believed that man was made from an ash-tree, and the Norsemen probably derived it from the same source with them. In 1862 I published in The Continental Magazine (New York) a paper on the lore connected with the ash, in which effort was made to show that in early times in India the Banyan was specially worshipped, and that the descendants of men familiar with this cult had, after migrating to the Far West, transferred the worship and traditions of the banyan to the ash. It has been observed that the ash-tree sometimes--like the banyan--sends its shoots down to the ground, where they take root. The Algonkin Indians seem to have taken this belief of man's origin from the ash from the Norsemen, as a very large proportion of their myths correspond closely to those of the Edda. But, in brief, if the Greeks and Norsemen were of Aryan origin, and had ever had a language in common, they probably had common myths.

[p. 95]

The following is the remedy for the so-called Wurmer, or worms, i.e., external sores. Before sunrise wolf's milk (Wolfsmilch, rukeskro tcud) is collected, mixed with salt, garlic, and water, put into a pot, and boiled down to a brew. With a part of this the afflicted spot is rubbed, the rest is thrown into a brook, with the words:--

"Kirmora janen andre tcud
 Andral tcud, andre sir
 Andral sir, andre pani,
 Panensa kiya dadeske,
 Kiya Nivaseske
 Pcandel tumen shelcha
 Enavardesh tena!"

"Worms go in the milk,
 From the milk into the garlic,
 From the garlic into the water,
 With the water to (your) father,
 To the Nivasi,
 He shall bind you with a rope,
 Ninety-nine (yards long)."

A common cure of worms in swine among the Transylvanian tent-gypsies is to stand ere the sun rises before a cadcerli, or nettle, and while pouring on it the urine of the animal to be cured, repeat:--

"Lache, lache detehara!
 Hin mange may bute trasha
 Kirmora hin [baleceske],
 Te me penav, penav tute!
 Kales hin yon, loles, parnes,
 Deisisla hin yon mulanes!"

"Good, good morrow!
 I have much sorrow.
 Worms are in [my swine to-day]
 And I say, to you I say,
 Black are they or white or red
 By to-morrow be they dead!"

[p. 96]

The nettle has its own peculiar associations. According to the gypsies it grows chiefly in places where there is a subterranean passage to the dwellings of the Pcuvus or Earth-fairies, therefore it is consecrated to them and called Kasta Pcuvasengre, Pcuvus-wood. Hence the gypsy children while gathering nettles for pigs sing:--

"Chadcerli na pcabuva!
 Andre ker me na jiav,
 Kiya Pcuvus na jiav,
 Traden, traden kirmora!"

"Nettle, nettle do not burn,
 In your house no one shall go,
 No one to the Pcuvus goes,
 Drive, drive away the worms!"

"The nettle," says FRIEDRICH ("Symbolik der Natur," p. 324), "because it causes a burning pain is among the Hindoos a demoniac symbol, for, as they say, the great serpent poured out its poison on it. But as evil is an antidote for evil, the nettle held in the hand is q. guard against ghosts, and it is good for beer when laid upon the barrel." "From its employment as an aphrodisiac, and its use in flagellation to restore sexual power, it is regarded as sacred to Nature by the followers of a secret sect or society still existing in several countries, especially Persia" (MS. account of certain Secret Societies). The gypsies believe that. the Earth-fairies are the foes of every kind of worm and creeping insect with the exception of the snail, which they therefore call the "gray Pcuvusengre," the Pcuvus-horse. Gry-puvusengree would in English gypsy mean the earthy-horse. English gypsies, and the English peasantry, as well as gypsies, call snails "cattle, because they have horns." Snails are a type of voluptuousness, because they are hermaphrodite and exceedingly giving to sexual indulgence, so that as many as half a dozen may be found mutually giving and taking pleasure. Hence in German Schnecke, a snail, is a term applied to the pudendum muliebre. And as anything significant of fertility, generation, and sexual enjoyment was supposed to constitute a charm or amulet against witchcraft, i.e., all evil

[p. 97]

influences, which are allied to sterility, chastity, and barrenness, a snail's shell forms a powerful fetish for a true believer. The reference to white, black, or red in the foregoing charm, or rather the one before it, refers, says Dr. WLISLOCKI, to the gypsy belief that there are white, black, and red Earth-fairies. A girl can win (illicit) love from a man by inducing him to carry a snail shell which she has had for some time about her person. To present a snail shell is to make a very direct but not very delicate declaration of love to any one. I have heard of a lady who caused an intense excitement in a village by collecting about a hundred large snails, gilding their shells, and then turning them loose in several gardens, where their discovery excited, as may be supposed, great excitement among the finders.

If pigs lose their appetites a brew is made of milk, charcoal dust, and their own dung, which is put before them with the words: "Friss Hexe und verreck!"

"In this place I must remark that the Transylvanian tent-gypsies use for grumus merdae also the expression Hirte (feris)" (WLISLOCKI). To cure a cough in animals one should take from the hoofs of the first riding horse, dirt or dust, and put it into the mouth of the suffering animal with the words

"Prejial te nani yov avel!"

"May he go away and never return!"

To have a horse always in good spirits and lively during the waning moon his spine is rubbed with garlic, while these words are uttered

"Misec andre tut,
 O beng the cal but!
 Laches andre tut
 Achel andre tut!"

"(What is) evil in thee,
 May the devil eat it much!
 (What is) good in thee,
 May it remain in thee!"

[p. 98]

But it is far more effective when the garlic is put on a rag of the clothes of one who has been hanged, and the place rubbed with it: in which we have a remnant of the earliest witchcraft, before Shamanism, which had recourse to the vilest and most vulgar methods of exciting awe and belief. This is in all probability the earliest form in which magic, or the power of controlling invisible or supernatural influences manifested itself, and it is very interesting to observe that it still survives, and that the world still presents every phase of its faiths, ab initio.

There is a very curious belief or principle attached to the use of songs in conjuring witches, or in averting their own sorcery. It is that the witch is obliged, willy nilly, to listen to the end to what is in metre, an idea founded on the attraction of melody, which is much stronger among savages and children than with civilized adults. Nearly allied to this is the belief that if the witch sees interlaced or bewildering and confused patterns she must follow them out, and by means of this her thoughts are diverted or scattered. Hence the serpentine inscriptions of the Norsemen and their intertwining bands which were firmly believed to bring good luck or avert evil influence. A traveller in Persia states that the patterns of the carpets of that country are made as bewildering as possible "to avert the evil eye." And it is with this purpose that in Italian, as in all other witchcraft, so many spells and charms depend on interwoven braided cords.

"Twist ye, twine ye, even so,
 Mingle threads of joy and woe."

The basis for this belief is the fascination, or instinct, which many persons, especially children, feel to trace out patterns, to thread the mazes of labryinths or to analyze and disentangle knots and "cat's cradles." Did space permit, nor inclination fail, I could point out some curious proofs that the old belief in the power of long and curling hair to fascinate was derived not only from its beauty but also because of the magic of its curves and entanglements.

The gypsies believe that the Earth-spirits are specially interested in

[p. 99]

animals. They also teach women the secrets of medicine and sorcery. There are indications of this in the negro magic. Miss MARY OWEN, an accomplished Folk-lorist of St. Joseph, Missouri, who has been deeply instructed in Voodooism, informs me that a woman to become a witch must go by night into a field and pull up a weed by the roots. From the quantity of soil which clings to it, is inferred the degree of magic power which the pupil will attain. I am not astonished to learn that when this lady was initiated, the amount of earth collected was unusually great. In such cases the Pchuvus (or Poovus in English gypsy), indicate their good-will by bestowing "earth," which, from meaning luck or good-fortune, has passed in popular parlance to signifying money.

 

 

Footnotes

^83:1 "Geit suer Heidrun heitr stendr uppi a Valholl. . . . En or spenum hennar rennr moilk. . . thaer cro sva miklar at allir einheria verda fuldrucknir af." ("A ewe named Heidrun stands up in Valhalla. And from her udders runs milk; there is so much that all the heroes may drink their fill of it"). (SNORRO STURLESON'S "Edda," 20th tale).

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

 

 

  

CHAPTER VI

OF PREGNANCY AND CHARMS, OR FOLK-LORE CONNECTED WITH IT--BOAR'S TEETH AND CHARMS FOR PREVENTING THE FLOW OF BLOOD

LIKE all Orientals the gypsy desires intensely to have a family. Superstition comes in to increase the wish, for a barren woman in Eastern Europe is generally suspected of having had intercourse with a vampire or spirit before her marriage, and she who has done this, willingly or unconsciously, never has children. They have recourse to many magic medicines or means to promote conception; one of the most harmless it, Hungary is to eat grass from the grave in which a woman with child has been buried. While doing this the woman repeats:--

"Dui rika hin mire minch,
 Dui yara hin leskro kor,
 Avnas dui yek jelo,
 Keren akana yek jeles."

[p. 101]

Or else the woman drinks the water in which the husband has cast hot coals, or, better still, has spit, saying:--

"Kay me yakh som
 Ac tu angar,
 Kay me brishind som,
 Ac tu pani!"

"Where I am flame
 Be thou the coals
 Where 1 am rain
 Be thou the water!"

Or at times the husband takes an egg, makes a small hole at each end, and then blows the yolk and white into the mouth of his wife who swallows them.

There are innumerable ways and means to ensure pregnancy, some of which are very dangerous. Faith in the so-called "artificial propagation" is extensively spread. "Will der zigeuner einen Sohn erzielen, so gurtet er sich mit dem Halfterzaume eines mannlichen Pferdes und umgekehrt mit dem einer Stute, will er eine Tochter erzeugen." ("Gebrauche d. Trans. Zig." Dr. H. von WLISLOCKI. "Ill. Zeitschrift. Band," 51. No. 16.)

If a gypsy woman in Transylvania wishes to know whether she be with child, she must stand for nine evenings at a cross-road with an axe or hammer, which she must wet with her own water, and then bury there. Should it be dug up on the ninth morning after, and found rusty, it is a sign that she is "in blessed circumstances."

To bring on the menses a gypsy woman must, while roses are in bloom, wash herself all over with rose-water, and then pour the water over a rose-bush. Or she takes an egg, pours its contents into a jug, and makes water on it. If the egg swims the next morning on the surface she is enceinte; if the yolk is separate from the white she will bear a son, if they are mingled a daughter. In Tuscany women wishing for children go to a priest, get a blessed apple and pronounce Over it an incantation to Santa Anna, which was probably addressed in

[p. 102]

Roman days to Lucina, who was very probably, according to the Romagna dialect, lu S'anna--Santa Anna herself. I have several old Roman spell, from MARCELLUS, which still exist word for word in Italian, but fitted to modern usage in this manner like old windows to new houses.

Should a woman eat fish while pregnant the child will be slow in learning to speak, but if she feed on snails it will be slow in learning to walk. The proverbs, "Dumb as a fish," and "Slow as a snail," appear here.

To protect a child against the evil eye it is hung with amulets, generally with shells (die eine Aehnlichkeit mit der weiblichen Scham haben). And these must be observed on all occasions, and for everything, ceremonies, of which there are literally hundreds, showing that gypsies, notwithstanding their supposed freedom from conventionalisms, are, like all superstitious people, harassed and vexed to a degree which would seem incredible to educated Europeans, with observances and rites of the most ridiculous and vexatious nature. The shells alluded to are, however, of great interest, as they indicate the transmission of the old belief that symbols typical of generation, pleasure, and reproductiveness, are repugnant to witchcraft which is allied to barrenness, destruction, negation, and every kind of pain and sterility.

Hence a necklace of shells, especially cowries or snail shells, or the brilliant and pretty conchiglie found in such abundance near Venice, are regarded as protecting animals or children from the evil eye, and facilitating love, luxury, and productiveness. I have read an article in which a learned writer rejects with indignation the "prurient idea" that the cowrie, which gave its name porcellana to porcelain, derived it from porcella, in sensu obsceno; porcella being a Roman word not only for pig but for the female organ. But every donkey-boy in Cairo could have told him that the cowrie is used in strings on asses as on children because the shell has the likeness which the writer to whom I refer rejects with indignation. The pig, as is well known, is a common amulet, the origin thereof being that it is extremely prolific. It has within a few

[p. 103]

years been very much revived in silver as a charm for ladies, and may be found in most shops where ornaments for watch-chains are sold. The boar's tooth, as I have before mentioned, has been since time immemorial a charm; I have found them attached to chatelaines and bunches of keys, specially in Austria, from one to four or five centuries past. They are found in prehistoric graves. The tusk is properly a male emblem; a pig is sometimes placed on the base. These are still very commonly made and sold. I saw one worn by the son of a travelling basket-maker, who spoke Romany, and I purchased several in Vienna (1888), also in Copenhagen in 1889. In Florence very large boars' tusks are set as brooches, and may be . found generally in the smaller jewellers' shops and on the Ponte Vecchio. They are regarded as protective against malocchio--a general term for evil influences--especially for women during pregnancy, and as securing plenty, i.e., prosperity and increase, be it of worldly goods, honour, or prosperity. There is in the museum at Budapest a boar's tusk, mounted or set as an amulet, which is apparently of Celtic origin, and which certainly belongs to the migration of races, or a very early period. And it is in this eastern portion of Europe that it is still most generally worn as a charm.

 

BOAR'S TOOTH. VIENNA.

 

In connection with pregnancy and childbirth there is the profluvium excessive flow of blood, or menses or hemorrhages, for which there exist many charms, not only among gypsies but all races. This includes

[p. 104]

the stopping any bleeding--an art in which Scott's Lady of Deloraine was an expert, and which many practised within a century.

"Tom Potts was but a serving man,
     And yet he was a doctor good,
 He bound a handkerchief on the wound.
     And with some kind of words he staunched the blood."

What these same kind of words were among old Germans and Romans may be learned from the following: JACOB GRIMM had long been familiar with a German magic spell of the eleventh century--ad stringendum sanguinem, or stopping bleeding--but, as he says, "noch nicht zu deuten vermochte," could not explain them. They were as follows:--

"Tumbo saz in berke,
 Mit tumbemo kinde in arme,
 Tumb hiez der berc
 Tumb hiez daz kint,
 Der heiligo Tumbo
 Versegne disc wunta."

"Tumbo (i.e., dumm or stupid) sat in the hill
 With a stupid child in arms,
 Dumb (stupid) the hill was called
 Dumb was called the child,
 The holy Tumbo (or dumb).
 Heal (bless) this wound!"

Some years after he found the following among the magic formulas, of MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS:--

"Carmen utile profluvio mulieri:--

"Stupidus in monte ibat,
 Stupidus stupuit,
 Adjuro te matrix
 Ne hoc iracunda suscipias.

"Pari ratione scriptum ligabis."

I.e.: "A song useful for a flow of blood in woman:--

"The stupid man went into the mountain,
 The stupid man was amazed;
 I adjure thee, oh womb,
 Be not angry!

[p. 105]

"Which shall also be bound as a writing," i.e., according to a previous direction that it shall be written on virgin parchment, and bound with a linen cord about the waist of him or of her--quae patietur de qualibet parte corporis sanguinis fluxum--who suffers anywhere from flow of blood.

It is possible that the Stupidus and his blessing of women has here some remotely derived reference to the reverence amounting to worship of idiots in the East, who are described as being surrounded in some parts of India by matrons seeking for their touch and benediction, and soliciting their embraces. This is effected very often in an almost public manner; that is to say, by a crowd of women closely surrounding the couple, i.e., the idiot or lunatic and one of their number are joined, so that passers-by cannot see what is going on. The children born of these casual matches are not unusually themselves of weak mind, but are considered all the more holy. This recalls the allusion in the charm

"Stupid sat in the hill
 With a stupid child in arms."

This obscure myth of the stupid god appears to be very ancient.

"This Tritas is called intelligent. How then does he appear sometimes stupid? The language itself supplies the explanation. In Sanskrit balas means both child and stolid, and the third brother is supposed to be stolid because, at his first appearance especially, he is a child. (Tritas is one of the three brothers or gods, i.e., the trinity)." ("Zoological Mythology," by ANGELO DE GUBERNATIS, 1872).

I am indebted to the as yet unpublished collection of Gypsyana made by Prof. ANTON HERRMANN for the following:--

There is a superstition among our gypsies that if the shadow of a cross on a grave falls on a woman with child she will have a miscarriage, and this seems to be peculiarly appropriate to girls who have "anticipated the privileges of matrimony." The following rhyme seems to describe the hesitation of a girl who has gone to a cross to produce

[p. 106]

the result alluded to, but who is withheld by love for her unborn infant:--

"Cigno trushul pal handako
 Hin ada ushalinako;
 The zhiav me pro ushalin,
 Ajt' mange lashavo na kin.

Sar e praytin kad' chasarel,
 Save shilc barval marel,
 Pal basavo te prasape,
 Mre chajori mojd kamale."

"Cross upon a grave so small
 Here I see thy shadow fall,
 If it fall on me they say
 All my shame will pass away.

As the autumn leaf is blown,
 By the wind to die alone,
 Yet in shame and misery,
 My baby will be clear to me!"

There is a belief allied to this of the power of the dead in graves to work wonders, to the effect that if any one plucks a rose from a grave, he or she will soon die. In the following song a gypsy picks a rose from the grave of the one be loved, hoping that it will cause his death:--

"Cignoro hrobosa
 Hin sukares rosa
 Mange la pchagavas,
 Doi me na kamavas.

Besh'las piranake,
 Hrobas hin joy mange,
 Pchgavas, choch zhanav
 Pal lele avava
 Te me ne brinzinav.
 The me pochivinav."

"On her little tomb there grows
 By itself a lovely rose,
 All alone the rose I break,
 And I do it for her sake.

[p. 107]

I sat by her I held so dear,
 Now her grave and mine are near,
 I break the rose because I know
 That to her I soon must go,
 Grief cannot my spirit stir,
 Since I know I go to her!"

M. Kounavine (contribution by Dr. A. Elysseeff, Gypsy-Lore Journal, July, 1890), gives the following as a Russian gypsy spell against barrenness:--

"Laki, thou destroyest and dost make everything on earth; thou canst see nothing old, for death lives in thee, thou givest birth to all upon the earth for thou thyself art life. By thy might cause me ------ to bear good fruit, I who am deprived of the joy of motherhood, and barren as a rock."

According to Dr. Elysseeff, Laki is related to the Indian goddess Lakshmi, although differing from her in character. Another incantation of the same nature is as follows:--

"Thou art the mother of every living creature and the distributor of good thou doest according to thy wisdom in destroying what is useless or what has lived its destined time; by thy wisdom thou makest the earth to regenerate all that is new. . . . Thou dost not seek the death of any one, for thou art the benefactress of mankind."

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108]

  

CHAPTER VII

THE RECOVERY OF STOLEN PROPERTY--LOVE-CHARMS--SHOES AND LOVE-POTIONS, OR PHILTRES

WHEN a man has lost anything, or been robbed, he often has in his own mind, quite unconsciously, some suspicion or clue to it. A clever fortune-teller or gypsy who has made a life-long study of such clues, can often elicit from the loser, hints which

[p. 109]

enable the magician to surmise the truth. Many people place absolute confidence in their servants, and perhaps suspect nobody. The detective or gypsy has no such faith in man, and suspects everybody. Where positive knowledge cannot be established there is, however, another resource. The thief is often as superstitious as his victim. Hence he fears that some mysterious curse may be laid on him, which he cannot escape. In the Pacific Islands, as among negroes everywhere, a man will die if taboo or voodoo attaches to the taking of objects which have been consecrated by a certain formula. Therefore such formulas are commonly employed. Among the Hungarian gypsies to recover a stolen animal, some of its dung is taken and thrown to the East and the West with the words

"Kay tut o kam dikhel:
 Odoy ava kiya mange!"

"Where the sun sees thee,
 Hence return to me!"

But when a horse has been stolen, they take what is left of his harness, bury it in the earth and make a fire over it, saying

"Ko tut cordyas
 Nasvales th' avlas
 Leske sor na avlas,
 Tu na ach kiya leske
 Ava sastes kiya mange!
 Leskro sor kathe pashlyol
 Sar e tcuv avriural!"

"Who stole thee
 Sick may he be
 May his strength depart
 Do not thou remain by him,
 Come (back) sound to me,
 His strength lies here
 As the smoke goes away!"

To know in which direction the stolen thing lies, they carry a sucking babe to a stream, hold it over the water and say:--

[p. 110]

"Pen mange, oh Nivaseya
 Chaveskro vasteha
 Kay hin m'ro gray,
 Ujes hin chavo,
 Ujes sar o kam
 Ujes sar pani
 Ujes sar chumut
 Ujes sar legujes?
 Pen mange, oh Nivaseya.
 Caveskro vastcha
 Kay hin m'ro gray!"

"Tell me, oh Nivaseha,
 By the child's hand!
 Where is my horse ?
 Pure is the child
 Pure as the sun,
 Pure as water,
 Pure as the moon,
 Pure as the purest.
 Tell me, oh Nivaseha,
 By the child's hand!
 Where is my horse?"

In this we have an illustration of the widely spread belief that an innocent child is a powerful agent in prophecy and sorcery. The oath "by the hand" is still in vogue among all gypsies. "Apo miro dadeskro vast!" ("By my father's hand!") is one of their greatest oaths in Germany, ("Die Zigeuner," von RICHARD LIEBICH), and I have met with an old gypsy in England who knew it.

If a man who is seeking for stolen goods finds willow twigs grown into a knot, he ties it up and says:--

"Me avri pcandav choreskro bacht!"

"I tie up the thief's luck!"

There is also a belief among the gypsies that these knots are twined by the fairies, and that whoever undoes them undoes his own luck, or

[p. 111]

that of the person on whom he is thinking. (Vide ROCHOLZ, "Alemannisches Kinderlied und Kinderspiel aus der Schweiz," p. 146). These willow-knots are much used in love-charms. To win the love of a maid, a man cuts one of them, puts it into his mouth, and says:--

"T're bact me cav,
 T're bact me piyav,
 Dav tute m're bact,
 Kana tu mange sal."

I eat thy luck,
 I drink thy luck
 Give me that luck of thine,
 Then thou shalt be mine."

Then the lover, if he can, secretly hides this knot in the bed of the wished-for bride. It is worth noting that these lines are so much like English Gypsy as it was once spoken that there are still men who would, in England, understand every word of it. Somewhat allied to this is another charm. The lover takes a blade of grass in his mouth, and turning to the East and the West, says:--

"Kay o kam, avriavel,
 Kiya mange lele beshel!
 Kay o kam tel' avel,
 Kiya lelakri me beshav."

"Where the sun goes up
 Shall my love be by me
 Where the sun goes down
 There by her I'll be."

Then the blade of grass is cut up into pieces and mingled with some food which the girl must eat, and if she swallow the least bit of the grass, she will be gewogen und treugesinnt--moved to love, and true-hearted. On which Dr. WLISLOCKI remarks on the old custom "also known to the Hindoos," by which any one wishing to deprecate the wrath of another, or to express complete subjection, takes a blade of

[p. 112]

grass in his mouth. Of which GRIMM writes: "This custom may have sprung from the idea that the one conquered gave himself up like a domestic animal to the absolute power of another. And with this appears to be connected the ancient custom of holding out grass as a sign of surrender. The conquered man took the blade of grass in his mouth and then transferred it to his conqueror."

If a gypsy girl be in love she finds the foot-print of her "object," digs out the earth which is within its outline and buries this under a willow-tree, saying:--

"Upro pcuv hin but Pcuva;
 Kas kamav, mange th' avla!
 Barvol, barvol, salciye,
 Briga na hin mange!
 Yov tover, me pori,
 Yov kokosh, me catra,
 Ada, ada me kamav!"

"Many earths on earth there be,
 Whom I love my own shall be,
 Grow, grow willow tree!
 Sorrow none unto me!
 He the axe, I the helve,
 He the cock, I the hen,
 This, this (be as) I will!"

Another love-charm which belongs to ancient black witchcraft, and is known far and wide, is the following: When dogs are coupling (Wenn Hund und Hundin bei der Paarung zusammenhangen) the lover suddenly covers them with a cloth, if possible, one which is afterwards presented to the girl whom he seeks, while he says

"Me jiuklo, yoy jiukli,
 Yoy tover, me pori,
 Me kokosh, yoy catra,
 Ada, ada, me kamav!"

[p. 113]

"I the dog, she the bitch,
 I the helve, she the axe,
 I the cock (and) she the hen,
 That, that I desire!"

He or she who finds a red ribbon, tape, or even a piece of red stuff of any kind, especially if it be wool, will have luck in love. It must be picked up and carried as an amulet, and when raising it from the ground the finder must make a wish for the love of some person, or if he have no particular desire for any one, he may wish for luck in love, or a sweetheart. This is, I believe, pretty generally known in some form all over the world. A yellow ribbon or flower, especially if it be floating on water, presages gold; a white object, silver, or peace or reconciliation with enemies.

It is also lucky for love to find a key. In Tuscany there is a special formula which must be spoken while picking it up. Very old keys are valuable amulets. Those who carry them will learn secrets, penetrate mysteries, and succeed in what they undertake.

If you can get a shoe which a girl has worn you may make sad havoc with her heart if you carry it near your own. Also hang it up over your bed and put into it the leaves of rue.

During November, 1889, not a few newspaper commentators busied themselves with conjectures as to why a Scotch constable buried the boots of a murdered man. That it was done through some superstitious belief is conceded; but what the fashion of the superstition is seems unknown. It originated, beyond question, in the old Norse custom of always burying the dead in their shoes or with them. For they believed that the deceased would have, when he arrived in the other world, to traverse broad and burning plains before he could reach his destination, be it Valhalla or the dreary home of Hel; and to protect his feet from the fire his friends bound on them the "hell-shoon!' Other cares were also taken: and in the saga of Olof Tryggvasen we are told that one monarch was thoughtfully provided with a cow; while the Vikings were buried

[p. 114]

in their ships, so that they could keep on pirating "for ever and-ever."

The superstition of the burial of the boots probably survives in England. It is about seventeen years since the writer heard from an old gypsy that when another gypsy was "puvado," or "earthed," a very good pair of boots was placed by him in the grave. The reason was not given; perhaps it was not known. These customs often survive after the cause is forgotten, simply from some feeling that good or bad luck attends their observance or the neglect of it. Many years since a writer in an article on shoes in The English Magazine stated that, "according to an Aryan tradition, the greater part of the way from the land of the living to that of death lay through morasses and vast moors overgrown with furzes and thorns. That the dead might not pass over them barefoot, a pair of shoes was laid with them in the grave."

The shoe was of old in many countries a symbol of life, liberty, or entire personal control. In Ruth we are told that "it was the custom in Israel concerning changing, that a man plucked off his shoe and delivered it to his neighbour." So the bride, who was originally always a slave, transferred herself by the symbol of the shoe. When the Emperor Waldimir made proposals of marriage to the daughter of Ragnald, she replied scornfully that she would not take off her shoes to the son of a slave. Gregory of Tours, in speaking of wedding, says The bridegroom, having given a ring to the bride, presents her with a shoe."

As regards the Scandinavian hel-shoe, or hell-shoon, Kelley, in his "Indo-European Folk-lore," tells us that a funeral is still called a dead shoe in the Henneberg district; and the writer already cited adds that in a MS. of the Cotton Library, containing an account. of Cleveland in Yorkshire, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there is a passage which illustrates this curious custom. It was quoted by Sir Walter Scott in the notes to "Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border," and runs thus:--

"When any dieth certaine women sing a song to the dead bodie, reciting the journey that the partye deceased must goe; and they are of beliefe that once in their

[p. 115]

lives it is goode to give a pair of new shoes to a poor man; forasmuch as before this life they are to pass bare-foote through a great lande, full of thornes and furzen--excepte by the meryte of the almes aforesaid they have redeemed the forfeyte--for at the edge of the launde an oulde man shall meet them with the same shoes that were given by the partie when he was lyving, and after he hath shodde them dismisseth them to go, through thick and thin without scratch or scalle.

This must be a very agreeable reflection to all gentlemen who have bestowed their old boots on waiters, or ladies who have in like fashion gifted their maids. It is true, the legend specifies new shoes; but surely a pair of thirty-shilling boots only half worn count for as much as a new pair of half a sovereign chaussures. However, if one is to go "through thick and thin without scratch or scalle," it may be just as, well to be on the safe side, and give a good new extra stout pair to the gardener for Christmas. For truly these superstitions are strange things, and no one knows what may be in them.

There are one or two quaint shoe stories of the olden time which may be of value to the collector. It befell once in the beginnings of Bohemia, that, according to Schafarik ("Slawische Alterthumer," vol. ii. p. 422), Libussa, queen of that land, found herself compelled by her council to wed. And the wise men, being consulted, declared that he who was to marry the queen would be found by her favourite horse, who would lead the way till he found a man eating from an iron table, and kneel to him. So the horse went on, and unto a field where a man sat eating a peasant's dinner from a ploughshare. This was the farmer Prschemischl. So they covered him with the royal robes and led him to the queen expectant. But ere going he took his shoes of willow-wood and placed them in his bosom and kept them to remind him ever after of his low origin. It will, of course, at once strike the reader, as it has the learned, that this is a story which would naturally originate in any country where there are iron ploughshares, horses, queens, and wooden shoes: and, as Schafarik shrewdly suggests, that it was all "a put-up job;" since, of course, Prschemischl was already a lover of the queen,

[p. 116]

the horse was trained to find him and to kneel before him, and, finally, that the ploughshare and wooden shoes were the prepared properties of the little drama. The only little flaw in this evidence is the name Prschemischl, which, it must be admitted, is extremely difficult to get over.

The Seven League Boots and the shoes of Peter Schlemilil, which take one over the world at will, have a variation in a pair recorded in another tale. There was a beautiful and extremely proud damsel, who refused a young man with every conceivable aggravation of the offence, informing him that when she ran after him, and not before that, he might hope to marry her; and at the same time meeting a poor old gypsy woman who begged her for a pair of old shoes. To which the proud Princess replied:--

"Shoes here, shoes there;
 Give me a couple, I'll give thee a pair."

To which the old gypsy, who was a witch, grimly muttered, "I'll give thee a pair which ------" The rest of the expression was really too unamiable to repeat. Well, the youth and the witch met, and, going to the lady's shoemaker, "made him make" a superbly elegant pair of shoes, which were sent to the damsel as a gift. Such a gift! No sooner were they put on than off they started, carrying the Princess, malgre elle, over hill and dale. By and by she saw that a man--the man, of course, whom she had refused--was in advance of her. As in the song of the Cork Leg, "the shoes never stopped, but kept on the pace." And the young man led her to a lonely castle and reasoned with her. And as she had promised to marry should she ever run after him, and as she had pursued him a whole day, she kept her word. The shoes she sent to the witch filled with gold; and they were wedded, and all went as merry as a thousand grigs in a duck-pond.

The shoe, as has been shown by a Danish writer in a book chiefly devoted to the subject, is a type of life, especially as shown in productiveness

[p. 117]

and fertility. Hence old shoes and grain are thrown after a bride, as people say, for luck; but the Jews do it crying, "Peru urphu" "Increase and multiply." For this, and much more, the reader may consult that wonderful treasury of Folk-lore, "Die Symbolik und Mythologie der Natur," J. B. FRIEDRICH, Wurzburg, 1859. To which we would add our mite by remarking as a curious confirmation of this theory, that--

There was an old woman who lived in a shoe,
 Who had so many children she didn't know what to do.

This passes now for a mere nursery-rhyme; but doubtless there are those who will trace it back to the early morning of mythology, and prove that it was once a Himaritic hymn, sung to some Melitta who has long passed away down the back entry of time.

For several additional Hungarian gypsy love-charms and spells, collected by Dr. Wlislocki, published in Ethnographia, and subsequently in The Gipsy-Lore Journal for June, 1890, I am greatly indebted to the kindness of Mr. D. MacRitchie:--

"The gypsy girls of Transylvania believe that spells to 'know your future husband' can be best carried out on the eves of certain days, such as New Year, Easter, and Saint George. 'On New Year's Eve they throw shoes or boots on a willow tree, but are only allowed to throw them nine times.' Compare this with the throwing of the old shoe after the bride in many countries. 'If the shoe catches in the branches the girl who threw it will be married within a year.'

"'Per de, per de prajtina,
 Varckaj hin, hasz kamav?
 Basa, parro dzsiuklo,
 Pirano dzsal mai szigo.'

"'Scattered leaves around I see,
 Where can my true lover be?
 Ah, the white dog barks at last
 And my love comes running fast!'

"If during the singing the bark of a dog should be heard, the damsel will be 'wedded and bedded and a' 'ere New Year comes again. This is virtually the same

[p. 118]

with a charm practised in Tuscany, which from other ancient witness I believe to be of Etruscan origin. Allied to this is the following: On the night of Saint George's Day (query, Saint George's Eve?) gypsy girls blindfold a white dog, then, letting it loose, place themselves quietly in several places. She to whom the dog runs first will be the first married. Blindman's buff was anciently an amorous, semi-magical, or witches' game, only that in place of the dog a man was blindfolded.

"'Or the girl pulls a hair from her head, fastens a ring to it, and dangles it in a jug. The ring vibrates or swings, and so often as it touches the side of the jug so many years will it be before she marries.' This is an ancient spell of Eastern origin. As performed according to old works the thread must be wound around the ring-finger and touch the pulse. On the edge of a bowl the letters of the alphabet, or numerals, are marked, and the ring swinging against these spells words or denotes numbers. The touching of the latter indicates the number of lovers a girl is to have.

"Early on Whitsunday morning the girls go out, and if they see clouds in the East they throw twigs in that direction, saying:--

"'Predzsia, csirik leja,
 Te na trada m're piranes.'

'Fly my bird-fly, I say,
 Do not chase my love away.'

For they think that if on Whitsun-morn there are many clouds in the East few girls will be married during the coming year. This peculiar, seemingly incomprehensible, custom of the gypsies originated in an old belief, the germ of which we find in the Hindoo myth, according to which the spring morning which spreads brightness and blessings descends from the blue bird of heaven, who, on the other hand, also represents night or winter. Special preparations are made so that the predictions shall be fulfilled. On the days mentioned the girls are neither allowed to wash themselves, nor to kiss any one, nor go to church. At Easter, or on the Eve of Saint George, the girl must eat fish, in order to see the future in her dreams.

"On Easter morning the girls boil water, in the bubbles of which they try to make out the names of their future husbands.

"To find out whether the future husband is young or old the girl must take nine seeds of the thorn-apple, ploughed-up earth of nine different places, and water from as many more. With these she kneads a cake, which is laid on a cross-road on Easter or Saint George's morning. If a woman steps first on the cake her husband will be a widower or an old man, but if a man the husband will be single or young.

"To see the form of a future husband a girl must go on the night of Saint George to a cross-road. Her hair is combed backwards, and, pricking the little finger of the left hand, she must let three drops of blood fall on the ground while saying:--

[p. 119]

"'Mro rat dav piraneszke,
 Kasz dikhav, avava adaleske.'

"'I give my blood to my loved one,
 Whom I shall see shall be mine own!'

"Then the form of her future husband will rise slowly out of the blood and fade as slowly away. She must then gather up the dust, or mud-blood, and throw it into a river, otherwise the Nivashi, or Water-spirits, will lick up the blood, and the girl be drowned within the Year. It is said that about twenty years ago the beautiful Roszi (Rosa), the daughter of Peter Danku, the waywode, or chief of the Kukuja tribe, was drowned during the time of her betrothal because when she performed this ceremony she had neglected to gather up the sprinkled blood.

"If a girl wishes to see the form of her future husband, and also to know what luck awaits her love, she goes on any of the fore-named nights to a cross-road, and sits down on the ground, putting before her a fried fish and a glass of brandy. Then the form of her future husband will appear and stand before her for a time, silent and immovable. Should he then take the fish the marriage will be happy, but if he begin with the brandy it will be truly wretched. But if he takes neither, one of the two will die during the year.

"That the laying of cards, the interpretation of dreams, the reading of the future in the hand, and similar divinations are constantly practised is quite natural, but it would lead us too far to enlarge on all these practices. But there are charms to win or cause love which are more interesting. Among these are the love-potions or philtres, for preparing which gypsies have always been famed.

"The simplest and least hurtful beverage which they give unknown to persons to secure love is made as follows:--On any of the nights mentioned they collect in the meadows gander-goose (Romani, vast bengeszkero--devil's hand; in Latin, Orchis maculata; German, Knaberkraut), the yellow roots of which they dry and crush and mix with their menses, and this they introduce to the food of the person whose love they wish to secure"

Of the same character is a potion which they prepare as follows: On the day of Saint John they catch a green frog and put it in a closed earthen receptacle full of small holes, and this they place in an ant-hill. The ants cat the frog and leave the skeleton. This s ground to powder, mixed with the blood of a bat and dried bath-flies and shaped into small buns, which are, as the chance occurs, put secretly into the food of the person to be charmed.

[p. 120]

There is yet another charm connected with this which I leave in the original Latin in which it is modestly given by Dr. Wlislocki: "Qualibet supradictarum noctium occiduntur duo canes nigri, mas et femina, quorum genitalia exstirpata ad condensationem coquntur. Hujus materiae particula consumpta quemvis invincibili amore facit exardescare in eam eamve, qui hoc medio prodigioso usus est."

It may be remarked that these abominable charms are also not only known to the Tuscan witches of the present day, but are found in Voodoo sorcery, and are indeed all over the world. To use revolting means in black sorcery may be, or perhaps certainly is, spontaneous--sporadic, but when we find the peculiar details of the processes identical, we are so much nearer to transmission or history that the burden of disproving must fall on the doubter.

"To the less revolting philtres belongs one in which the girl puts the ashes of a burnt piece of her dress which had been wet with perspiration and has, perhaps, hair adhering to it, into a man's food or drink (also Tuscan).

"To bury the foot of a badger (also Voodoo), or the eye of a crow, under one's sleeping-place is believed to excite or awaken love.

"According to gypsy belief one can spread love by transplanting blood, perspiration, or hair into the body of a person.

"By burning the hair, blood, or saliva of any one, his or her love can be extinguished.

"The following is a charm used to punish a faithless lover. The deceived maid lights a candle at midnight and pricks it several times with a needle, saying:--

"'Pchagerav momely
 Pchagera tre vodyi!'

"'Thrice the candle's broke by me
 Thrice thy heart shall broken be!'

"If the faithless lover marries another. the girl mixes the broken shell of a crab in his food or drink, or hides one of her hairs in a bird's nest. This will make the marriage unhappy, and the husband will continually pine for his neglected sweetheart."

[p. 121]

This last charm is allied to another current among the Slavonians, and elsewhere mentioned, by which it is believed that if a bird gets any of a man's hair and works it into a nest he will suffer terribly till it is completely decayed.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

 

 

  

CHAPTER VIII

ROUMANIAN AND TRANSYLVANIAN SORCERIES AND SUPERSTITIONS, CONNECTED WITH THOSE OF THE GYPSIES

IN her very interesting account of Roumanian superstitions, Mrs. E. GERARD ("The Land Beyond the Forest"), finds three distinct sources for them firstly, the indigenous, which seems to have been formed by or adapted to the wild and picturesque scenery and character of the country; secondly, those derived from the old German customs and beliefs brought by the so-called Saxon, in reality Lower Rhenish colonists; and thirdly, the influence of the gypsies, "themselves a race of fortune-tellers and witches." All these kinds of superstition have twined and intermingled, acted and reacted upon one another so that in many cases it becomes a difficult matter to determine the exact parentage of some particular belief or custom.

[p. 123]

It may be often difficult to ascertain in what particular country or among what people a superstition was last found, but there is very little trouble when we compare the great body of all such beliefs of all races and ages and thereby find the parent sources. It is not many years since philologists, having taken up some favourite language--for instance, Irish--discovering many words in many tongues almost identical with others in "Earse," boldly claimed that this tongue was the original of all the others. Now we find the roots of them all in the Aryan. So when we examine Folk-lore, it is doubtless of great importance that we should learn where a tradition last lived; but we must not stop there-we must keep on inquiring till we reach the beginning. As a rule, with little exception, when we find anywhere the grosser forms of fetish and black witchcraft, we may conclude that we have remains of the world's oldest faith, or first beginning of supernaturalism in suffering and terror, a fear of mysterious evil influences. For with all due respect to the fact that such superstitions might have sprung up sporadically wherever similar causes existed to create them, it is, in the first place, a very rare chance that they should assume exactly like forms. Secondly, we must consider that as there are even now millions of people who receive with ready faith and carefully nurse these primaeval beliefs, so there has been from the beginning of time abundant opportunity for their transmission and growth. Thirdly, nothing is so quickly transmitted as Folk-lore, which in one sense includes myths and religion. If jade was in the prehistoric stone age carried from Iona or Tartary all over Europe, it is even more probable that myths went with it quite as far and fast.

It is not by loose, fanciful, and careless guess-work as to how the resemblance of Greek or Norse legends to those of the Red Indians is due to similar conditions of climate and life, that we shall arrive at facts; neither will the truth be ascertained by assuming that there was a certain beginning of them all in a certain country, or that they were all developed out of one mythology, be it solar or Shemitic, Hindoo or

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] Hebrew. What we want is impartial examination--comparison and analysis. On this basis we find that all the Folk-lore or magic of Europe, and especially of its Eastern portion, has a great deal which is derived from black witchcraft, or from the succeeding Shamanism. When we find that a superstition is based on fertility, the "mystery of generation," or "Phallic worship"--as, for instance, wearing boars' teeth or a little pig for a charm--we may conclude that it is very ancient, but still not older than the time when wise men had begun to reflect on the mysteries of birth and death and weave them into myths. The exorcism of diseases as devils, and the belief that they, in common with other evils, may be drummed, or smoked, or incanted away into animals, trees, and streams, belongs in most cases to Shamanism. In all probability the oldest sorcery of all was entirely concerned with driving out devils and injuring enemies--just as most of the play of small boys runs to fighting or the semblance of it, or as the mutual relations of most animals in the lower stages consist of devouring one another. This was the very beginning of the beginnings, and it would be really marvellous that so much of it has survived were it not that to the one who is not quite dazzled or blinded by modern enlightenment there is still existent a great outer circle of human darkness, and that this darkness may be found in thousands of intermittent varying shadows or marvellous chiaroscuro, even in the brightest sun-pictures of modern life. As I write I have before me a copy of the Philadelphia Press, of April 14, 1889, in which a J. C. BATFORD, M.D., advertises that if any one will send him two two-cent postage stamps--i.e., twopence--"with a lock of your hair, name, age, and sex," he will send a clairvoyant diagnosis of your disease. This divining by the lock of hair is extremely ancient, and had its origin in the belief that he who could obtain one from an enemy could reach his soul and kill him. From communicating a disease by means of such a lock, and ascertaining what was the matter with a man, in the same manner, was a very obvious step forward.

[p. 125]

Of all people living in Europe the peasantry of Italy and Sicily and the gypsies seem to have retained most of this Shamanism and witchcraft, and as the latter have been for centuries its chief priests, travelling here and there disseminating it, we may conclude that even where they did not originate it they have been active in keeping the old faith alive. In Roumania, where the gypsy is called in to conjure on all occasions, "people believe themselves to be surrounded by whole legions of devils, witches, and goblins." There is scarcely a day or hour in which these bad spirits have not power, "and a whole complicated system, about as laborious as the mastering an unknown language, is required in order to teach an unfortunate peasant to steer clear of the dangers by which he supposes himself to be beset."

On Wednesday and Friday no one should use needle or scissors, bake bread, or sow flax. No bargain should ever be concluded on a Friday, and Venus, here called Paraschiva, to whom this day is sacred, punishes all infractions of the law. There was among the Wends a flax-goddess, Pscipolnitza, and the shears as emblematic of death are naturally antipathetic to Venus, the source of life. Whether Mars has anything in common with Mors I know not, but in Roumania he is decidedly an evil spirit of death, whence Marti, or Tuesday, is one, when spinning is positively prohibited (here we have Venus again), and washing the hands and combing the hair are not unattended with danger. Whence it appears that the devil agrees with not a few saints in detesting neatness of the person. And as it is unlucky to wash anything on Saturday, or to spin on Thursday, or to work in the fields on Thursday between Easter and Pentecost, it will be seen that Laziness and Dirt have between them a fine field in Roumania. Add to this that, as in Russia, more than half the days in the year are Saints' days, or fast days or festivals on which it is "unlucky" to work at all, and (illegible) find that industry cannot be said to be much encouraged by Faith in (illegible) of its forms. This belief in holy days which bring ill-luck to those

[p. 126]

who work on them, which is still flourishing in every country in the world, goes back to time whereof the memory of man hath naught to the contrary. A distinct difference is here to be observed however between naturally resting from work--on certain days, which is of course an inherent instinct in all mankind, and the declaring such rest to be obligatory, and its infraction punishable by death, disaster, and bad luck, and still more the increasing such Sabbaths to such an extent as to interfere with industry, or the turning them into fast days or Saints' days with "observances." Here the old Shamanism comes in, if not the evil witchcraft itself which exacted penance and fasting, and ceremonies to exorcise the devils. The first belief was that evil spirits inflicted pain on man, and that man, by efforts which cost him suffering, could repel or retaliate on them. This was simple action and reaction, and the repulsion was effected with starving, enduring smoke, or using repulsive and filthy objects. Out of this in due time came penance of all kinds.

The Oriental or Greek Church is found at every turn, even more than the Catholic, interchanged, twined, and confused with ancient sorcery. THEODORE, like SAINT SIMEON and ANTHONY in Tuscany, is very much more of a goblin than a holy man. His weakness is young women, and sometimes in the shape of a beautiful youth, at others of a frightful monster, he carries off those who are found working on his day--that is the 23rd of January. THEODORE, according to the Solar mythologists personifies the sun. (DE GUBERNATIS, "Zoological Mythology," vol. ii. p. 296). In any case the saint who seizes girls is the Hindoo Krishna or his prototype, and therefore may have come through the gypsies. The overworked solar myth derives some support from the fact that among the Serbs on THEODORE'S day the Sintotere--or centaur, as the name declares-who is half horse and half man, rides over the people who fall in his power. The Centaurs were connected with the "rape of maidens," as shown in the legend of the Lapithae, and it is very probable that Theodore himself is, in the language of the Western

[p. 127]

[paragraph continues] Americans, "half a horse," which they regard as the greatest compliment which can be paid to a man. [*1]

"Wonderful potions and salves," says Mrs. GERARD, "composed of the fat of bears, dogs, snakes, and snails, with the oil of rain-worms, spiders, and midges, rubbed into a paste, are concocted by these Bohemians (i.e., gypsies). Saxon and Roumanian mothers are often in the habit of giving a child to be nursed for nine days to some Tzigane women supposed to have power to undo the spell."

These revolting ingredients are not the result of modern invention, but relics of the primitive witchcraft or Ur-religion, which was founded on pain, terror, and the repulsive. Among other Roumanian-Romany traditions are the following:--

Swallows here as elsewhere are luck-bringing birds, and termed Galiniele lui Dieu--fowls of the Lord. So in England we hear that:--

"The robin and the wren
 Are God Almighty's cock and hen."

There is always a treasure to be found where the first swallow is seen. Among the Romans when it was observed one ran to the nearest fountain and washed his eyes, and then during the whole year to come, dolorem omnem oculorum tuorum hirundines auferant--the swallows will carry away all your complaints of the eyes.

The skull of a horse over the gate of a courtyard, or the bones of fallen animals buried under the doorstep are preservatives against ghosts. In Roman architecture the skulls of oxen, rams, and horses continually occur as a decoration, and they are used as charms to-day in

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] Tuscany. Black fowls are believed to be in the service of witches The skull of a ram placed at the boundary of a parish in Roumania keeps off disease from cattle; it was evidently a fetish in all ages. In Slavonian, Esthonian, and Italian tales black poultry occur as diabolical--to appease the devil a black cock must be sacrificed. But in Roumania the (black) Brahmaputra fowl is believed, curiously enough, to be the offspring of the devil and a Jewish girl--truly an insignificant result of such clever parentage.

A cow that has wandered away will be safe from witches if the owner sticks a pair of scissors or shears in the centre crossbeam of the dwelling-room. The Folk-lore of shears is extensive; FRIEDRICH derives it from the cutting of the threads of life by the Fates. Thus Juno appears on a Roman coin (ECKHEL, "Numis. Vet." viii. p. 358) as holding the shears of death. The swallow is said in a Swedish fairy tale to have been the handmaid of the Virgin Mary, and to have stolen her scissors, for which reason she was turned into a bird--the swallow's tail being supposed to resemble that article. Gypsies in England use the shears in incantations.

A whirlwind denotes that the devil is dancing with a witch, and he who approaches too near it may be carried off bodily to hell (as has indeed happened to many a wicked Pike in a cyclone or blizzard in Western America), though he may escape by losing his cap.

It is very dangerous to point at a rainbow or an approaching thunderstorm. Probably the devil who here guides the whirlwind or directs the storm regards the act as impolite. He punishes those who thus indicate the rainbow by a gnawing disease. Lightning is averted by sticking a knife in a loaf of bread and spinning the two on the floor of the loft of the house while the storm lasts. The knife appears not only in many gypsy spells, but in the Etruscan-Florentine magic.

The legends of Donidaniel and the College of Sorcery in Salamanca appear in the gypsy Roumanian Scholomance, or school which exists somewhere far away deep in the heart of the mountains, "where the secrets

[p. 129]

of nature, the language of animals, and all magic spells are taught by the devil in person." Only ten scholars are admitted at a time, and when the course of learning has expired nine are dismissed to their homes, but the tenth is detained by the professor in payment. Henceforth, mounted on an ismeju, or dragon, he becomes the devil's aide-de-camp, and assists, him in preparing thunderbolts and managing storms and tempests. "A small lake, immeasurably deep, high up in the mountains, south of Hermanstadt, is supposed to be the caldron in which the dragon lies sleeping and where the thunder is brewed."

"Whoever turns three somersaults the first time he hears thunder will be free from pains in the back during the twelvemonth." Of this prescription--which reads as if it had originated with Timothy, in "Japhet in Search of a Father," when he practised as a mountebank--it may be said that it is most unlikely that any person who is capable of putting it in practice should suffer with such pains.

To be free from headache rub the forehead with a piece of iron or stone. This may be a presage of the electric cure or of that by "metallic tractors."

It is unfortunate in all Catholic countries to meet with a priest or nun, especially when he or she is the first person encountered in the morning. In Roumania this is limited to the Greek popa. But to be first met by a gypsy on going forth is a very fortunate omen indeed. According to a widely-spread and ancient belief it is also very lucky to meet with any woman of easy virtue--the easier the better. This is doubtless derived from the ancient worship of Venus, and the belief that any thing or person connected with celibacy and chastity, such as a nun, is unlucky. It would appear from this that the Roumanians, or their gypsy oracles, have formed an opinion that their own popas are strictly abstinent as regards love, while Protestant priests marry and are accordingly productive. Why the Catholic clergy are included with the latter is not at all clear. It is lucky also to meet a gypsy at any time, and doubtless this belief has been well encouraged by the Romany.

[p. 130]

"It's kushti bak to wellan a Rom,
 When tute's a pirryin pre the drom."

"When you are going along the street
 It's lucky a gypsy man to meet."

Likewise, it is lucky to meet with a woman carrying a jug full of water, &c., but unlucky if it be empty. So in the New Testament the virgins whose lamps were full of oil received great honour. The lamp was an ancient symbol of life; hence it is very often found covered with aphrodisiac symbols or made in Phallic forms. It is barely possible that common old popular simile of "Not by a jug-full"--meaning "not by a great deal"--is derived from this association of a full vessel with abundance.

It is a Roumanian gypsy custom to do homage to the Wodna zena, or "Water-woman" (Hungarian gypsy, Nivashi), by spilling a few drops of water on the ground after filling a jug, and it is regarded as an insult to offer drink without observing this ceremony. A Roumanian will never draw water against the current (also as in the Hungarian gypsy charms), as it would provoke the water-spirit. If water is drawn in the nighttime, whoever does so must blow three times over the brimming jug, and pour a few drops on the coals.

The mythology of the Roumanians agrees with that of the gypsies. It is sylvan, and Indian. In deep pools of water lurks the dreadful balaur or Wodna muz--i.e., the Waterman (Muz is both gypsy and Slavonian)who lies in wait for victims. In every forest lives the mama padura, or weshni dye--"the forest mother"--who is believed to be benevolent to human beings, especially towards children who have lost their way in the wood. But the Panusch is an amorous spirit who, like the wanton satyrs of old, haunts the silent woodland shades, and lies in wait for helpless maids. "Surely," observes Mrs. GERARD, "this is a corruption of 'great Pan,' who is not dead after all, but merely banished to the land beyond the forest." What a find this would have been for HEINE when writing "The Gods in Exile!"

[p. 131]

"In deep forests and lonely mountain gorges there wanders about a wild huntsman of superhuman size." He appears to be of a mysterious nature, and is very seldom seen. Once he met a peasant who had shot ninety-nine bears, and warned him never to attempt to kill another. But the peasant disregarded his advice, and, missing his aim, was torn in pieces by the bear.

Very singular is the story that this Lord of the Forest once taught a hunter--that if he loaded his gun on New Year's Night with a live adder he would never miss a shot during the ensuing year. It is not probable that he was told to put a live and "wiggling" snake into his gun. The story of itself suggests the firing out the ramrod for luck. It has been observed by C. LLOYD MORGAN that if a drop of the oil of a foul tobacco pipe be placed in the mouth of a snake the muscles instantly become set in knotted lumps and the creature becomes rigid. If much is given the snake dies, but if only a small amount is employed it may be restored. This, as Mr. OAKLEY has suggested, may explain the stories of Indian snake-charmers being able to turn a snake into a stick. It is performed by spitting into the snake's mouth and then placing the hand on its head till it becomes stiffened. "The effect maybe produced by opium or some other narcotic." And it may also occur to the reader that the jugglers who performed before PHARAOH were not unacquainted with this mystery. It is probable that the hunter in the gypsy Roumanian story first gave his adder tobacco before firing it off.

The Om ren, or wild man, is a malevolent forest spectre, the terror of hunters and shepherds. He is usually seen in winter, and when he finds an intruder on his haunts, he tears up pine trees by the roots with which he slays the victim, or throws him over a precipice, or overwhelms him with rocks. In every detail he corresponds to a being greatly feared by the Algonkin Indians of America.

The oameni micuti, or "small men," are grey-bearded dwarfs, dressed like miners. They are the kobolds or Bergmannchen of Germany. They seldom harm a miner, and when one has perished in the mine they make

[p. 132]

it known to his family by three knocks on his door. They may be heard quarrelling among themselves and hitting at one another with their axes, or blowing their horns as a signal of battle. These "horns of Elf-land blowing" connect them with the Korriagan of Brittany, who are fairies who always carry and play on the same instrument. PRAeTORIUS devotes a long chapter to all the learning extant on the subject of these Bergmannrigen, or Subterraneans.

The mountain monk is the very counterpart of Friar Rush in English fairy-lore, and is also of Indian origin. He delights in kicking over water-pails, putting out lamps, and committing mischief, merry, mad, or sad. Sometimes he has been known to strangle workmen whom he dislikes, though, on the other hand, he often helps distressed miners by filling their empty lamps or guiding those who have lost their way. But he always bids them keep it a secret, and if they tell they suffer for it.

Gana is queen of the witches, and corresponds to the Diana of the Italians. Gana is probably only a variation of the word Diana. Among the Wallachians this goddess is in fact known as Dina and Sina. She, like the wilde Juger, rushes in headlong hunt over the heavens or through the skies followed by a throng of witches and fairies. "People show the places where she has passed, and where the grass and leaves are dry" (FRIEDRICH). She is a powerful enchantress, and is strongest in her sorcery about Easter-tide. To guard against her the Wallachians at this time carry a piece of lime-tree or linden wood. She is a beautiful but terrible enchantress, who presides over the evil spirits who meet on May eve. She was the ruler of all Transylvania (a hunting country) before Christianity prevailed there. Her beauty bewitched many, but whoever let himself he lured into drinking mead from her urus (or wild ox) drinking-horn perished. She is like the Norse Freya, a cat goddess, and seems to be allied to the Chesme, or cat, or fountain-spirit of the Turks. According to ancient Indian mythology the moon is a cat who chases the mice (stars) of night, and in the fifth book of OVID'S "Metamorphoses," when the gods fled from the giants Diana took the form of a cat:--

[p. 133]

"Fele soror Phoebi, nivea Saturni a vacca
 Pisce Venus latuit."
                                  (V. 325, 332.)

"According to the Hellenic cosmogony the sun and moon created the animals-the sun creating the lion and the moon the cat" (DE GUBERNATIS, "Zoological Mythology," ii. 58). Gertrude, the chief sorceress or queen of the witches in old German lore, appears when dead as surrounded by mice; she is, in fact, a cat. The Turkish Chesme, or fountain-cat, inveigles youths to death like the Gana, Diana, or Lorelei, who does the same, and is also a water-sprite.

The Dschuma is a fierce virgin, or sometimes an old witch, who is incarnate disease, such as the cholera. She is supposed to suffer from cold and nakedness, and may be heard at night when disease is raging, wailing for want. Then the maidens make garments and hang them out; but it is a most effective charm when seven old women spin, weave, and sew for her a scarlet shirt all in one night without once speaking.

A curious book might be written on the efficacy of nakedness in witch-spells. In some places in Roumania there is a spirit always naked (at least appearing such), who requires a new suit of clothes every year. These are given by the inhabitants of the district haunted by such an elf, who on New Year's Night lay them out in some place supposed to be frequented by him or her.

In 1866, in a Wallachian village in the district of Bihar, to avert the cholera, six youths and maidens, all quite naked, traced with a ploughshare a furrow round their village to form a charmed circle over which the disease could not pass.

When the land is suffering from long droughts the Roumanians ascribe it to the gypsies, who by occult means make dry weather in order to favour their own trade of brickmaking. When the necessary rain cannot be obtained by beating the guilty Tziganes, the peasants resort to the Papaluga, or Rain-maiden. For this they strip a young gypsy girl stark-naked, and then cover her up in flowers and leaves, leaving only

[p. 134]

the head visible. Thus adorned the Papaluga, or Miss jack-in-the-Green, is conducted with music round the village, every person pouring water on her as she passes. When a gypsy girl cannot be had, or the Tziganes are supposed to be innocent, a Roumanian maiden may be taken. This custom is very widely spread.

Forty years ago there was a strange mania in the northern cities of the United States for "fast" girls of the most reckless kind to go out naked very late by night into the street to endeavour to run around a public square or block of houses and regain their homes without being caught by the police. I suspect that superstition suggested this strange risk. It is an old witch-charm that if a girl can, when the moon is full, go forth and run around a certain enclosure, group of trees, or dwelling, without being seen, she will marry the man whom she loves. There are also many magical ceremonies which, to ensure success, must be performed in full moonlight and when quite naked. "Among the Saxons in Transylvania when there is a very severe drought it is customary in some places for several girls, led by an old woman, and all of them absolutely naked, to go at midnight to the courtyard of some peasant and steal his harrow. With this they walk across fields to the nearest stream, where the harrow is put afloat with a burning light on each corner" (Mrs. GERARD, "Land Beyond," &c.). This is evidently the old Hindoo floating of lamps by maidens on the Ganges, and in all probability of gypsy importation.

She who will pronounce a certain spell, strip herself quite naked, and can steal into the room where a man is lying sound asleep and can clip from his head a lock of hair and escape without awakening him or meeting any one will obtain absolute mastery over him, or at least over his affections. The hair must be worn in a bag or ring on the person. But woe unto her who is caught, since in that case the enchantment "all goes the other way." Once a beautiful but very poor Hungarian maid gave all she had to a young gypsy girl for a charm to win the love of a certain lord, and was taught this, which proved to be a perfect success. Having clipped the lock of hair she wove it in a ring and wedded him.

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] After a time she died, and the gypsy being called in to dress the corpse found and kept the ring. Then the lord fell in love with the gypsy and married her. But ere long she too died, and was buried, and the ring with her. And from that day the lord seemed as if possessed to sit by her grave, and finally built a house there, and never seemed happy save when in it.

"If a Roumanian maid," says Mrs. GERARD, "desires to see her future husband's face in the water she has only to step naked at midnight into the nearest lake or river, or, if she shrink from this, let her take a stand on the more congenial dung-hill with a piece of Christmas cake in her mouth, and as the clock strikes twelve listen attentively for the first sound of a dog's bark. From whichever side it proceeds will also come the expected suitor."

A naked maid standing on a "congenial dung-hill" with a piece of Christmas cake in 'her mouth would be a subject for an artist which should be eagerly seized in these days when "excuses for the nude in art" are becoming so rare. It is worth observing that this conjuration is very much like one observed in Tuscany, in which Saint Anthony is invoked to manifest by a dog's barking at night, as by other sounds, whether the applicant, or invoker, shall obtain her desire.

At the birth of a child in Wallachia every one present takes a stone and throws it behind him, saying, "This into the jaws of the Streghoi" [*1]--"a custom," says Mrs. GERARD, "which would seem to suggest Saturn and the swaddled up stones." It is much more suggestive of the stones thrown by Deucalion and Pyrrha. Strigoi is translated as "evil spirits" it is evidently, originally at least, the streghe, or witches of Italy, from the Latin strix, the dreaded witch-bird of Ovid. "FESTUS derives the word a stringendo from the opinion that they strangle children." Middle Latin strega (Paulus Grillandus). For much learning on this subject of the Strix the reader may consult DE GUBERNATIS, "Myth of Animals," vol. ii. p. 202.

[p. 136]

"As long as the child is unbaptized it must be carefully watched for fear lest it be changed or stolen away." This is common to Christians, heathen, and gypsies to watch it for several days. "A piece of iron, or a broom laid beneath the pillow will keep spirits away." So in Roumania and Tuscany. QUINTUS SERENUS, however, recommends that when the striga atra presses the infant, garlic be used, the strong odour of which (to their credit be it said) is greatly detested by witches.

"The Romans used to cook their caena demonum for the house-spirits, and the Hindoos prepared food for them." From them it has passed through the gypsies to Eastern Europe, and now the Roumanian, who has by a simple ceremony made a contract with the devil, receives from him an attendant spirit called a spiridsui or spiridush which will

"Serve his master faithfully
 For seven long year,"

but in return expecting the first mouthful of every dish eaten by his master.

"So many differing fancies have mankind,
 That they the master-sprites may spell and bind."

Nearly connected with the Roumanian we have the beliefs in magic of the Transylvanian Saxons, all of them shared with the gypsies and probably partially derived from them. Many people must have wondered what could have been the origin of the saying in reference to a very small place that "there was not room to swing a cat in it." "But I don't want to swing a cat in it," was the very natural rejoinder of a well-known American litterateur to this remark applied to his house. It is possible that we may find the origin of this odd saying in a superstition current in Transylvania, whither it in all probability was carried by the gypsies, whose specialty it is to bear the seeds of superstitions about here and there as the winds do those of plants. In this country it is said that if a cat runs away, when recovered she must be swung three times round to attach her to the dwelling.

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] The same is done by a stolen cat by the thief if he would retain it. Truly this seems a strange way to induce an attachment--or pour encourager les autres. It is evident, however, that to the professional cat-stealer the size of his room must be a matter of some importance. it is a pity that this saying and faith were unknown to MONCRIEF-MARADAN, "the Historiogriffie of Cats," ("Oeuvres," Paris, 1794), who would assuredly have made the most of it.

As regards entering new houses in Transylvania the rule is not "Devil take the hindmost," but the foremost. The first person or being who enters the maiden mansion must die, therefore it is safe to throw in a preliminary dog or cat. The scape-cat is, however, to be preferred. I can remember once, when about six years of age, looking down into a well in Massachusetts and being told that the reflection which I saw was the face of a little boy who lived there. This made a deep impression on me, and I reflected that it was very remarkable that the dweller in the well could assume the appearance of every one who looked at him. In Transylvania it is, says Mrs. E. GERARD, "dangerous to stare down long into a well, for the well-dame who dwells at the bottom is easily offended. But children are often curious, and so, bending over the edge, they call out mockingly, 'Dame of the Well, pull me down into it!' and then run away rapidly."

Whoever has been robbed and wishes to find the thief should take a black hen, and for nine Fridays must with the hen fast strictly; the thief will then either bring back the plunder or die. This is called "taking up the black fast" against any one. It is said that a peasant of Petersdorf returned one day from Bistritz with 200 florins, which he had received for oxen. Being very tipsy he laid down to sleep, having first hidden his money in a hole in the kitchen wall. When he awoke he missed his coin, and having quite forgotten what he had done with it believed it had been stolen. So he went to an Old Wallachian, probably a gypsy, and induced him to take up the black fast against the thief. But as he himself had the money the spell worked

[p. 138]

against him and he grew weaker and pined away as it went on. By some chance at the last moment he found his money, but it was too late, and he died. Pages of black hen-lore may be gathered from the works of FRIEDRICH, DE GUBERNATIS and others; suffice it to say that Bubastis, the Egyptian moon-goddess, appears to have been the original mistress of the mysterious animal, if not the black hen as well as cat herself, and mother of all the witches.

Magic qualities are attached in Hungary as in Germany to the lime or linden tree; in some villages it is usual to plant one before a house to prevent witches from entering. From very early times the lime tree was sacred to Venus among the Greeks, as it was to Lada among the Slavonians. This, it is said, was due to its leaves being of the shape of a heart. In a Slavonian love-song the wooer exclaims:--

"As the bee is drawn by the lime-perfume (or linden-bloom)
 My heart is drawn by thee."

This was transmitted to Christian symbolism, whence the penance laid by CHRIST On MARY MAGDALEN was that "she should have no other food save lime-tree leaves, drink naught except the dew which hung on them, and sleep on no other bed save one made of its leaves" (MENZEL, "Christliche Symbolik," vol. ii. p. 57) "For Magdalena had loved much, therefore her penance was by means of that which is a symbol of love."

Mrs. GERARD tells us that "a particular growth of vine leaf, whose exact definition I have not succeeded in rightly ascertaining, is eagerly sought by Saxon girls in some villages. Whoever finds it, puts it in her hair, and if she then kisses the first man she meets on her way home she will soon be married. A story is related of a girl, who having found this growth, meeting a nobleman in a carriage stopped the horses and begged leave to kiss him." To which he consented. This particular growth, unknown to Mrs. GERARD, is when the leaves or tendrils or shoots form a natural knot. Among the gypsies in Hungary,

[p. 139]

as may be elsewhere read, such knots in the willow are esteemed as of great magic efficacy in love. A knot is a symbol of true love in all countries.

"This knot I tic, this knot I knit,
 For that true love whom I know not yet."

On Easter Monday in Transylvania the lads run about the towns and villages sprinkling with water all the girls or women whom they meet. This is supposed to cause the flax to grow well. On the following day the girls return the attention by watering the boys. "This custom, which appears to be a very old one," says Mrs. GERARD, "is also prevalent among various Slav races, such as Poles and Serbs. In Poland it used to be de rigeur that water be poured over a girl who was still asleep, so in every house a victim was selected who had to feign--sleep and patiently receive the cold shower-bath, which was to ensure the luck of the family during the year. The custom has now become modified to suit a more delicate age, and instead of formidable horse-buckets of water, dainty little perfume squirts have come to be used in many places." As the custom not only of sprinkling water, but also of squirting or spraying perfumes is from ancient India (as it is indeed prevalent all over the East), it is probable that the gypsies who are always foremost in all festivals may have brought this "holi" custom to Eastern Europe. Of late it has extended to London, as appears by the following extract from The St. James's Gazette, April, 1889.

"The newest weapon of terror in the West End is the 'scent revolver.' Its use is simple. You dine--not wisely but the other thing--and then you stroll into the Park, with your nickel-plated scent revolver in your pocket. Feeling disposed for a frolic, you walk up to a woman, present your weapon, pull the trigger, and in a moment she is drenched, not with gore but with scent, which is nearly as unpleasant if not quite so deadly. Mr. Andrew King, who amused himself in that way, has been fined 10s. at Marlborough Street. Let us hope that the 'revolver' was confiscated into the bargain."

One way of interrogating fate in love affairs is to slice an apple in

[p. 140]

two with a sharp knife; if this can be done without cutting a seed the wish of the heart will be fulfilled. Of yore, in many lands the apple was ever sacred to love, wisdom, and divination. Once in Germany a well-formed child became, through bewitchment, sorely crooked and cramped; by the advice of a monk the mother cut an apple in three pieces and made the child eat them, whereupon it became as before. In Illzach, in Alsace, there is a custom called "Andresle." On Saint Andrew's Eve a girl must take from a widow, and without returning thanks for it, an apple. As in Hungary she cuts it in two and must eat one half of it before midnight, and the other half after it; then in sleep she will see her future husband. And there is yet another love-spell of the split apple given by SCHEIBLE ("Die gute alte Zeit," Stuttgart, 1847, p, 297) which runs as follows:--

"On Friday early as may be,
 Take the fairest apple from a tree,
 Then in thy blood on paper white
 Thy own name and thy true love's write,
 That apple thou in two shalt cut,
 And for its cure that paper put,
 With two sharp pins of myrtle wood
 Join the halves till it seem good,
 In the oven let it dry,
 And wrapped in leaves of myrtle lie,
 Under the pillow of thy dear,
 Yet let it be unknown to her
 And if it a secret be
 She soon will show her love for thee."

Similar apple sorceries were known to the Norsemen. Because the apple was so nearly connected with love and luxury--"Geschlectsliebe und Zeugungslust"--those who were initiated in the mysteries and vowed to chastity were forbidden to eat it. And for the same reason apples, hares, and Cupids, or "Amorets," were often depicted together. In Genesis, as in the Canticles of Solomon, apples, or at least the fruit from which the

[p. 141]

modern apple inherited its traditions are a symbol of sexual love. In Florence women wishing for children go to a priest and get from him a blessed apple, over which they pronounce an incantation to Santa Anna--la San' Na--who was the Lucina of the Latins.

 

 

Footnotes

^127:1 Though not connected with this work, I cannot help observing that this extraordinary simile probably originated in a very common ornament used as a figurehead, or in decorations, on Mississippi steamboats, as well as ships. This is the seahorse (hippocampus), which may be often seen of large size, carved and gilt. Its fish tail might be easily confused with that of an alligator. PRAeTORIUS (1666) enumerates, among other monsters, the horse-crocodile.

^135:1 SCHOTT, "Wallachische Mahrchen," p. 297. Stuttgart, 1845.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

 

 

  

CHAPTER IX

THE RENDEZVOUS OR MEETINGS OF WITCHES, SORCERERS, AND VILAS--A CONTINUATION OF SOUTH SLAVONIAN GYPSY-LORE

IN Eastern Europe witches and their kin, or kind, assemble on the eve of Saint John and of Saint George, Christmas and Easter, at cross-roads on the broad pustas, or prairies, and there brew their magic potions. This, as Dr. KRAUSS observes, originated in feasts held at the same time in pre-Christian times. "So it was that a thousand years ago old and young assembled in woods or on plains to bring gifts to their gods, and celebrated with dances, games, and offerings the festival of spring, or of awaking and blooming Nature. These celebrations have taken Christian names, but innumerable old heathen rites and customs are still to be found in them." It may be here observed that mingled with these are many of a purely gypsy-Oriental origin, which came from the same source and which it remains for careful

[p. 143]

ethnologists and critical Folk-lorists to disentangle and make clear. The priestesses of prehistoric times on these occasions performed ceremonies, as was natural, to protect cattle or land from evil influences. To honour their deities the "wise women" bore certain kinds of boughs and adorned animals with flowers and wreaths. The new religion declared that this was all sorcery and devil-work, but the belief in the efficacy of the rites continued. The priestesses became witches, or Vilas, the terms being often confused, but they were still feared and revered.

In all the South Slavonian. country the peasants on Saint George's. Day adorn the horns of cattle with garlands, in gypsy Indian style, to protect them from evil influences. I have observed that even in Egypt among Mahometans Saint George is regarded with great reverence, and I knew one who on this day always sacrificed a sheep. The cow or ox which is not thus decorated becomes a prey in some way to witches. The garlands are hung up at night over the stable door, where they remain all the ensuing year. If a peasant neglects to crown his cow, he not only does not receive a certain fee from its owner, but is in danger of being beaten. On the same day the shepherdess, or cow-herd, takes in one hand salt, in the other a potsherd containing live coals. In the coals roses are burned. By this means witches lose all power over the animal. Near Karlstadt the mistress of the family merely strikes it with a cross to produce the same effect.

Among the Transylvanian Hungarian gypsies there is a magical ceremony performed on Saint George's Day, traces of which may be found in England. Then the girls bake a peculiar kind of cake, in which certain herbs are mixed, and which Dr. von WLISLOCKI declares has an agreeable taste. This is divided among friends and foes, and it is believed to have the property of reconciling the bitterest enemies and of increasing the love of friends. But it is most efficient as a love-charm, especially when given by women to men. The following gypsy song commemorates a deed of this kind by a husband, who recurred to it with joy:--

[p. 144]

"Kasave romni na jidel,
 Ke kasavo maro the del;
 Sar m're gule lele pekel
 Kana Svato Gordye avel.

"Furmuntel bute luludya
 Furmuntel yoy bute charma
 Andre petrel but kamabe
 Ko chal robo avla bake."

No one bakes such bread as my wife, such as she baked me on St. George's Day. Many flowers and dew were kneaded into the cake with love. Whoever eats of it will be her slave."

In England I was told by an old gypsy woman named LIZZIE BUCKLAND, that in the old time gypsy girls made a peculiar kind of cake, a Romany morriclo, which they baked especially for their lovers, and used to throw to them over the hedge by night. To make it more acceptable, and probably to facilitate the action of the charm, they would put money into the cake. It was observed of old among the Romans that fascinatio began with flattery, compliments, and presents!

On the night of Saint John the witch climbs to the top of the hurdle fence which surrounds the cow-yard, and sings the following spell:--

"K meni sir,
 K meni maslo,
 K meni puter,
 K meni mleko
 Avam pak kravsku kozhu!"

"To me the cheese,
 To me the tallow (or meat),
 To me the butter,
 To me the milk,
 To you only the cowhide."

Or, as it may be expressed in rhyme:--

"The cheese, meat, butter, and milk for me,
 But only the cowhide left for thee."

[p. 145]

Then the cow will die, the carcass be buried, and the skin sold. To prevent all this the owner goes early on St. John's Day to the meadow and gathers the morning dew in a cloak. This he carries home, and after binding the cow to a beam washes her with it. She is then milked, and it is believed that if all has gone right she will yield four bucketsful.

In the chapter on "Conjurations and Exorcisms among the Hungarian Gypsies," I have mentioned the importance which they attach to the being born a seventh or twelfth child. This is the same throughout South Slavonia, where the belief that such persons in a series of births are exceptionally gifted is shared by both gypsies, with whom it probably originated, and the peasants. What renders this almost certain is that Dr. KRAUSS mentions that the oldest information as to the subject among the Slavs dates only from 1854, while the faith is ancient among the gypsies. He refers here to the so-called Kerstniki, who on the eve of St. John do battle with the witches. Krstnik is a Greek word, meaning, literally, one who has been baptized. But the Krstnik proper is the youngest of twelve brothers, all sons of the same father. There appears to be some confusion and uncertainty among the Slavs as to whether all the twelve brothers or only the twelfth are "Krstnik"--according to the gypsy faith it would be the latter. These "twelvers" are the great protectors of the world from witchcraft. [*1] But they are in great danger on Saint John's Eve, for then the witches, having most power, assail them with sticks and stakes, or stumps of saplings, for which reason it is usual in the autumn to carefully remove everything of the kind from the ground.

A krstnik is described by Miklosich as "Chlovek kterega vile obijubiju"--"A man who has won the love of a Vila." The Vila ladies, or a certain

[p. 146]

class of them, are extremely desirous of contracting the closest intimacy--in short, of becoming the mistresses, of superior men. The reader may find numerous anecdotes of such amours in the "Curiosa" of Heinrich KORNMANN, 1666, and in my "Egyptian Sketch Book" (Trubner &. Co., London, 1874). In the heathen days, as at present among all gypsies and Orientals, it was believed to be a wonderfully lucky thing for a man to get the love of one of these beautiful beings. What the difficulties were which kept them from finding lovers is not very clear, unless it were that the latter must be twelfth sons, or, what is far more difficult to find, young men who would not gossip about their supernatural sweethearts to other mortals, who would remain true to them, and who finally would implicitly obey all their commands and follow their advice. There is a vast array of tales--Gypsy, Arab, Provencal, Norman, German, and Scandinavian, which show that on these points the Vila, or forest-maiden, or spirit of earth or air, or fairy, was absolutely exacting and implacable, being herself probably allowed by occult laws to contract an intimacy only with men of a high order, or such as are--

"Few in a heap and very hard to find."

On the other hand, the Vila yearns intensely for men and their near company, because there is about those who have been baptized a certain perfume or odour of sanctity, and as the unfortunate nymph is not immortal herself, she likes to get even an association or sniff of it from those who are. According to the Rosicrucian Mythology, as set forth in the "Undine" of LA MOTTE FOUQUE, she may acquire a soul by marrying a man who will be faithful to her--which accounts for the fact that so few Undines live for ever. However this may be, it appears that the Krstniki are specially favoured, and frequently invited by the Vilas to step in--generally to a hollow tree--and make a call. The hollow tree proves to be a door to Fairyland, and the call a residence of seven days, which on returning home the caller finds were seven years, for--

"When we are pleasantly employed, time flies."

[p. 147]

These spirits have one point in common with their gypsy friends--they steal children--with this difference, that the Vila only takes those which have been baptized, while the gypsy--at present, at least--is probably not particular in this respect. But I have very little doubt that originally one motive, and perhaps the only one which induced these thefts, was the desire of the gypsies, as heathens and sorcerers, to have among them, "for luck," a child which had received the initiation into that mysterious religion from which they were excluded, and which, as many of their charms and spells prove, they really regarded as a higher magic. It is on this ground only, or for this sole reason, that we can comprehend many of the child-stealings effected by gypsies; for it is absolutely true that, very often when they have large families of their own, they will, for no apparent cause whatever, neither for the sake of plunder, profit, or revenge, adopt or steal some poor child and bring it up, kindly enough after their rough fashion; and in doing this they are influenced, as I firmly believe, far more by a superstitious feeling of bak, or luck, and the desire to have a Mascot in the tent, than any other. That children have been robbed or stolen for revenge does not in the least disprove what I believe--that in most cases the motive for the deed is simply superstition.

On the eve of Saint George old women cut thistle-twigs and bring them to the door of the stall. This is only another form of the nettle which enters so largely into the Hungarian gypsy incantations, and they also make crosses with cowdung on the doors. This is directly of Indian origin, and points to gypsy tradition. Others drive large nails into the doors--also a curious relic of a widely-spread ancient custom, of which a trace may be found in the Vienna Stock im Eisen, or trunk driven full of nails by wandering apprentices, which may be seen near the church of Saint Stephen. But the thistle-twigs are still held to be by far the most efficacious. In Vinica, or near it, these twigs are cut before sunset. They are laid separately in many places, but are especially placed in garlands on the necks of cattle. If a witch, in spite of these precautions, contrives to get into the stable, all will go wrong with the beasts during the coming year.

[p. 148]

Now there was once a man who would have none of this thistle work--nay, he mocked at those who believed in it. So it came to pass that all through the year witches came every night and milked his cows. And he reflected, "I must find out who does this!" So he hid himself in the bay and kept sharp watch. All at once, about eleven o'clock, there came in a milk-pail, which moved of its own accord, and the cows began to let down their milk into it. The farmer sprang out and kicked it over. Then it changed into a tremendous toad which turned to attack him, so that in terror he took refuge in his house. That proved to be a lucky thing for him. A week after came the day of Saint George. Then he hung thistle-twigs on his stable door, and after that his cows gave milk in plenty.

Witches may be seen on Saint George's Day, and that unseen by them if a man will do as follows: He must rise before the sun, turn all his clothes inside out and then put them on. Then he must cut a green turf and place it on his head. Thus he becomes invisible, for the witches believe he is under the earth, being themselves apparently bewitched by this.

Very early on the day of Saint George, or before sunrise, the witches climb into the church belfry to get the grease from the axle on which the bell swings, and a piece of the bell-rope, for these things are essential to them. Dr. KRAUSS observes that in the MS. from which he took this, schmierfetet or axle-grease, is indicated by the word svierc, "in which one at once recognizes the German word schwartz, a black." It is remarkable that the Chippeway and other Algonkin Indians attach particular value to the black dye made from the grease of the axle of a grindstone.

The extraordinary pains which they took to obtain this had attracted the attention of a man in Minnesota, who told me of it. It required a whole day to obtain a very little of it. The Indians, when asked by curious white people what this was for, said it was for dyeing baskets, but, as my informant observed, the quantity obtained was utterly inadequate to any such purpose, and even better black dyes (e.g., hickory bark and alum) are known to, and can be very easily obtained by, them. The real object was to use the grease in "medicine," i.e., for sorcery. The eagerness of both witches in Europe

[p. 149]

and Indians in America to obtain such a singular substance is very strange. However, the idea must be a recent one among the Indians, for there were certainly no grindstones among them before the coming of the white men.

"For all that I can tell, said he,
 Is that it is a mystery,"

Heathens though they be, many gypsies have a superstitious belief in the efficacy of the sacramental bread and wine, and there are many instances of their stealing them for magical purposes. So in the Middle Ages witches and sorcerers used these objects for the most singular purposes, Paulus Grillandus, in his "Tractatus de Hereticis et Sortilegiis," &c. (Lyons, 1547), assuring his readers that he had known a witch who had two holy wafers, inscribed with magical characters which she used for debauching innocent girls and betraying them to men, and that it was a belief that if a woman had the sacred oil fresh on her lips no man could refrain from kissing her. This is the union of two kinds of magic; a view which never once occurred to theological writers. And here I may appropriately mention that while the proofs of this work were passing through my hands accident threw into my way an extremely rare work, which illustrates to perfection the identity of popular and ecclesiastical sorcery. This is entitled, "De Effectibus Magicis, ac de Nuce Maga Beneventana," "Six Books of Magic Effects and of the Witch Walnut-tree of Benevento. A work necessary, joyous, and useful to Astrologists, Philosophers, Physicians, Exorcists, and Doctors, and Students of Holy Scriptures. By the Chief Physician, PETER PIPERNO." It appears to have been privately printed at Naples in 164-7, and came from a conventual library. It bare, written on a fly-leaf, the word Proibito.

In it every kind of disorder or disease is declared to be caused by devils and witches. The author believes with DELRIO that disease entered into the world as a consequence of sin (referenda sit ad primae nostrae matris peccatum)--a view held by JOHN MILTON; hence, of course, all disease is caused solely by the devil. In his volume of two hundred

[p. 150]

large and close pages, our PETER PIPERNO displays a vast erudition on the origin of devils and diseases, is bitter on the rival school of magical practitioners who use cures and incantations unlike his own, and then gives us the name and nature of all diseases, according to the different parts of the body, &c., the medical prescriptions proper for them, and what is, in his opinion, most needful of all, the incantation or exorcism to be pronounced. Sometimes there are several of these, as one for making up a pill, another on taking it, &c. There are also general conjurations--I mean benedictions--for the medicines altogether or in particular, such as the Benedictio Syruporum, "The Blessing of the Syrups," and there is a very affecting and appropriately moving one for making or taking Castor Oil, and oils of all kinds, as follows:--

"BENEDICTIO OLEI.

"This begins with the In nomine Patris, &c., and Adjutorium nostrum, &c., and then:

"I exorcise you all aromatics, herbs, roots, seeds, stones, gums, and whatever is to be compounded with this oil, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, by the God triune yet one, by the holy and single Trinity, that the impure Spirit depart from you, and with it every incursion of Satan, every fraud of the Enemy, every evil of the Devil, and that mixed with oil you may free the subject from all infirmities, incantations, bindings, witchcrafts, from all diabolical fraud, art, and power, by the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ and the most beloved Virgin Mary, and of all the saints. Amen."

The curses for the devils of colds, fevers, rheumatisms, gouts, stomachaches, &c., are awful, both in number, length, and quality; enough to frighten a cowboy or "exhort an impenitent mule" into docility. There is the Exorcismus terribilis, or "Terrible Exorcism" of Saint Zeno, in which the disorder is addressed literally as "A dirty, false, heretical, drunken, lewd, proud, envious, deceitful, vile, swindling, stupid devil" with some twenty more epithets which, if applied in these our days to the devil himself, would ground an action for libel and bring heavy damages in any court. It is to be remarked that in many prescriptions the author adds to legitimate remedies, ingredients which are simply taken from popular necromancy, or witchcraft, as for instance, rue--fugae daemonum--verbena,

[p. 151]

and artemisia, all of which are still in use in Tuscany against sorcery and the evil eye.

The really magical character of these exorcisms is shown by the vast array of strange words used in them, many of which have a common source with those used by sorcerers of the Cabalistic or Agrippa school, such as Agla, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, Fons, Origo, Serpens, Avis, Leo, Imago, Sol, Floy, Vitis, Mons, Lapis, Angularis, Ischyros, Pantheon, all of which are old heathen terms of incantation. These are called in the exorcism "words by virtue of which"--per virtutem istorum verborum--the devils are invited to depart. The whole is as much a work of sorcery as any ever inscribed in a catalogue of occulta, and it was as a specimen of occulta that I bought it.

Footnotes

^145:1 In Northern Sagas it appeared that Berserkers, or desperate warriors, frequently bound themselves together in companies of twelve. Vide the Hervor Saga, Olaf Tryggvason's and the Gautrek Saga. So there were the twelve Norse gods and the twelve apostles.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 152]

 

 

  

CHAPTER X

OF THE HAUNTS, HOMES, AND HABITS OF WITCHES IN THE SOUTH SLAVIC LANDS--BOGEYS AND HUMBUGS

THE witches in Slavonian gypsy-lore have now and then parties which meet to spin, always by full moonlight on a cross-road. But it is not advisable, says KRAUSS, to pass by on such occasions, as the least they do to the heedless wayfarer is to bewitch and sink him into a deep

[p. 153]

sleep. But they are particularly fond of assembling socially in the tops of trees, especially of the ash, walnut, and linden or lime kinds, preferring those whose branches grow in the manner here depicted.

 

 

It is but a few days ago, as I write, that I observed all along the route from Padua to Florence thousands of trees supporting vines, which trees had been trained to take this form, the farmers being as much influenced by "luck" in so doing as utility; for it is not really essential that the tree shall so exactly receive this shape, to hold a vine, as is proved by the fact that there are plantations here and there where this method of training the trees is not observed. It is very suggestive of the tricula or trident of Siva, which originated the trushul, or cross of the gypsies. As regards the properties of the ash tree KRAUSS remarks that "roots with magic power grew under ash trees," and quotes a song of a maiden who, having learned that her lover is untrue, replies:--

"Ima trava u okolo Save,
 I korenja okolo jasenja,"

"There are herbs by the Save,
 And roots around ash trees,"

--meaning that she can prepare a love-potion from these. There is in the Edda a passage in which we are also told that there are magic powers in the roots of trees, the reference being probably to the ash, and possibly to the alraun, or images made of its roots, which are sometimes misnamed mandrakes.

[p. 154]

Other resorts of Slavonian gypsy witches are near or in deep woods and ravines, also on dung-hills, or places where ashes, lye, or rubbish is thrown, or among dense bushes. Or as soon as the sun sets they assemble in orchards of plum trees, or among ancient ruins, while on summer nights they hold their revels in barns, old hollow trees, by dark hedges or in subterranean caverns. The peasants greatly dread dung-hills after dark, for fear of cruel treatment by them. When a wild wind is blowing the witches love dearly to dance. Then they whirl about in eddying figures and capers, and when the sweat falls from them woe to the man who treads upon it!--for he will become at once dumb or lame, and may be called lucky should he escape with only an inflammation of the lungs. In fact, if a man even walks in a place where witches have been he will become bewildered or mad, and remain so till driven homeward by hunger. But such places may generally be recognized by their footprints in the sand; for witches have only four toes--the great toe being wanting. These mysterious four toe-tracks, which are indeed often seen, are supposed by unbelievers to be made by wild geese, swans, or wild ducks, but in reply to this the peasant or gypsy declares that witches often take the form of such fowl. And there is, moreover, much Rabbinical tradition which proves that the devil and his friends have feet like peacocks, which are notoriously birds of evil omen, as is set forth by a contributor to The St. James's Gazette, November 16, 1888:--

"Again, take peacocks. Nobody who has not gone exhaustively into the subject can have any adequate idea of the amount of general inconvenience diffused by a peacock. Broken hearts, broken limbs, pecuniary reverses, and various forms of infectious disease have all been traced to the presence of a peacock, or even a peacock feather, on the premises."

The evil reputation of the peacock is due to his having been the only creature who was induced to show Satan the way into Paradise. (For a poem on this subject, vide "Legends of the Birds," by C. G. LELAND, Philadelphia, 1864).

If any one should by chance pop in--like Tam O'Shanter--to an assembly of witches, he must at once quickly cover his head, make the sign of the cross, take three steps backwards and a fourth forwards. Then the witches

[p. 155]

cannot injure him. Should a gentleman in London or Brighton abruptly intrude into a five o'clock tea, while Peel or Primrose witches are discussing some specially racy scandal, he should, however, make instantly so many steps backwards as will take him to his overcoat or cane, and then, after a turn, so many down-stairs as will bring him into the street.

If any man should take in his hand from the garden fence anything which a witch has laid there, he will in the same year fall sick, and if he has played with it he must die. There be land-witches and water-witches--whoever goes to swim in a place where these latter are found will drown and his body never be recovered. Sometimes in these places the water is very deep, but perfectly clear, in others it is still and very muddy, to which no one can come within seven paces because of an abominable and stifling vapour. And, moreover, as a dead cat is generally seen swimming on the top of such pools, no one need be endangered by them.

The fact that the gypsy and South Slavonian or Hungarian Folklore is directly derived from classic or Oriental sources is evident from the fact that the Shemitic-Persian devil, who is the head and body of all witchcraft in Western Europe, very seldom appears in that of the Eastern parts. The witches there seem invariably to derive their art from one another; even in Venice they have no unusual fear of death or of a future state. A witch who has received the gift or power of sorcery cannot die till she transfers it to another, and this she often finds it difficult to do, as is illustrated by a story told me in Florence in 1886 by the same girl to whom I have already referred.

"There was a girl here in the city who became a witch against her will. And how? She was ill in a hospital, and by her in a bed was una vecchia, ammalata gravamente, e non poteva morire--an old woman seriously ill, yet who could not die. And the old woman groaned and cried continually, 'Oime! muoio! A chi lascio? non diceva che.' 'Alas! to whom shall I leave?'--but she did not say what. Then the poor girl, thinking of course she meant property, said: 'Lasciate a me--son tanto povera!' ('Leave it to me--I am so poor!) At once the old woman died, and 'La povera giovana se e trovato in eredita della streghoneria'--the poor girl found she had inherited witchcraft.

[p. 156]

"Now the girl went home, where she lived with her brother and mother. And having become a witch she began to go out often by night, which the mother observing, said to her son, 'Qualche volta tu troverai tua sorella colla pancia grossa.' ('Some day you will find your sister with child.') 'Don't think such a thing, mamma,' he replied. 'However, I will find out where it is she goes.'

"So he watched, and one night he saw his sister go out of the door, sullo punto della mezza notte--just at midnight. Then he caught her by the hair, and twisted it round his arm. She began to scream terribly, when--ecco! there came running a great number of cats--e cominciarono a miolare, e fare un gran chiasso--they began to mew and make a great row, and for an hour the sister struggled to escape--but in vain, for her hair was fast--and screamed while the cats screeched, till it struck one, when the cats vanished and the sorella was insensible. But from that time she had no witchcraft in her, and became a buona donna, or good girl, as she had been before--come era prima.'"

It is very evident that in this story there is no diabolical agency, and that the witchcraft is simply a quality which is transferred like a disease, and which may be removed. Thus in Venice--where, as is evident from the works of BERNONI, the witches are of Gypsy-Slavic-Greek origin--a witch loses all her power if made to shed even one drop of blood, or sometimes if she be defeated or found out to be a witch. In none of these countries has she received the horrible character of a mere instrument of a stupendous evil power, whose entire will and work is to damn all mankind (already full of original sin) to eternal torture. For this ne plus ultra of horror could only result from the Hebrew-Persian conception of perfect malignity, incarnate as an anti-god, and be developed by gloomy ascetics who begrudged mankind every smile and every gleam of sunlight. In India and Eastern Europe the witch and demon are simply awful powers of nature, like thunder and pestilence, darkness and malaria, they nowhere appear as aiming at destroying the soul. For such an idea as this it required a theology and mythology emanating from the basis of an absolutely perfect monotheos, which gave birth to an antithesis; infinite good, when concentrated, naturally suggesting a shadow counterpart of evil. In Eastern Europe the witch is, indeed, still confused with the Vila, who was once, and often still is, a benevolent elementary spirit, who often punishes only the bad, and gladly favours the good. It is as

[p. 157]

curious as it is interesting to see how, under the influence of the Church, everything which was not directly connected with the current theology was made to turn sour and bitter and poisonous, and how darkness and frost stole over flowery fields which once were gay in genial sunshine. It is a necessary result that in attaining higher ideals the lesser must fade or change. Devilism, or the dread of the child and savage of the powers of darkness and mysterious evil, ends by incarnating all that is painful or terrible in evil spirits, which suggest their opposites. From Devilism results Polytheism, with one leading and good spirit, who in time becomes supreme. Then we have Monotheism. But as evil still exists, it is supposed that there are innately evil powers or spirits who oppose the good. By following the same process the leader of these becomes an anti-type, Lucifer, or Satan, or arch-devil, the result being Dualism. In this we have a spirit endowed with incredible activity and power, who is only not omnipotent, and whose malignity far transcends anything attributed to the gods or devils of Polytheism. His constant aim is to damn all mankind to all eternity, and his power is so great that to save even a small portion of mankind from this fate, God himself, or His own Son, must undergo penance as a man--an idea found in the Buddhism of India. This is all the regular and logical sequence of Fetishism and Shamanism. Witchcraft, and the tales told of it, follow in the path of the religion of the age. In the earliest time women were apparently the only physicians-that is to say magicians-and as man was in his lowest stage the magic was a vile witchcraft. Then came the Shaman--a man who taught in Animism a more refined sorcery, which was, however, as yet the only religion. But the witch still existed, and so she continued to exist, pari passu, through all the developments of religion. And to this day every form and phase of the magician and witch exist somewhere, it sometimes happening that traces of the earliest and most barbarous sorcery are plain and palpable in the most advanced faith. There may be changes of name and of association, but in simple truth it is all "magic" and nothing else.

[p. 158]

Gypsy, Hungarian, Slavonian, Indian, and Italian witches, however they may differ from those of Western Europe on theological grounds, agree with them in meeting for the purposes of riotous dancing and debauchery. It has been observed that this kind of erotic dancing appears to have been cultivated in the East, and even in Europe, from the earliest times, by a class of women who, if not absolutely proved to be gypsies, had at any rate many points of resemblance with them. "The Syrian girl who haunts the taverns round," described by VIRGIL, suggests the Syrian and Egyptian dancer, who is evidently of Indo-Persian--that is to say of Nuri, or gypsy--origin. The Spanish dancing girls of remote antiquity have been conjectured to have come from this universal Hindoo Romany stock. I have seen many of the Almeh in Egypt--they all seemed to be gypsyish, and many were absolutely of the Helebi, Nauar, or Rhagarin stocks. This is indeed not proved--that all the deliberately cultivated profligate dancing of the world is of Indo-Persian, or gypsy origin, but there is a great deal, a very great deal, which renders it probable. And it is remarkable that it occurred to PIERRE DELANCRE that the Persian ballerine had much in common with witches. Now the dancers of India are said to have originated in ten thousand gypsies sent from Persia, and who were of such vagabond habits that they could not be persuaded to settle down anywhere. Of these Delancre says:--

"The Persian girls dance at their sacrifices like witches at a Sabbat--that is naked--to the sound of an instrument. And the witches in their accursed assemblies are either entirely naked or en chemise, with a great cat clinging to their back, as many have at divers times confessed. The dame called Volta is the commonest and the most indecent. It is believed that the devil taught three kinds of dances to the witches of Ginevra, and these dances were very wild and rude, since in them they employed switches and sticks, as do those who teach animals to dance.

"And there was in this country a girl to whom the devil had given a rod of iron, which had the power to make any one dance who was touched with it. She ridiculed the judges during her trial, declaring they could not make her die, but they found a way to blunt her petulance.

"The devils danced with the most beautiful witches, in the form of a he-goat, or of any other animal, and coupled with them, so that no married woman or maid ever

[p. 159]

came back from these dances chaste as they had gone. They generally dance in a round, back to back, rarely a solo, or in pairs.

"There are three kinds of witch-dances; the first is the trescone alla Boema, or the Bohemian rigadoon" (perhaps the polka), "the second is like that of some of our work-people in the country, that is to say by always jumping" (this may be like the Tyrolese dances), "the third with the back turned, as in the second rigadoon, in which all are drawn up holding one another by the hand, and in a certain cadence hustling or bumping one another, deretano contro deretano. These dances are to the sound of a tambourine, a flute, a violin, or of another instrument which is struck with a stick. Such is the only music of the Sabbat, and all witches assert that there are in the world no concerts so well executed."

"A tambourine, a violin, a flute," with perhaps a zimbel, which is struck with a stick. Does not this describe to perfection gypsy music, and is not the whole a picture of the wildest gypsy dancing wherever found? Or it would apply to the Hindoo debauches, as still celebrated in honour of Sakktya, "the female principle" in India. In any case the suggestion is a very interesting one, since it leads to the query as to whether the entire sisterhood of ancient strolling, licentious dancers, whether Syrian, Spanish, or Egyptian, were not possibly of Indian-gypsy origin, and whether, in their character as fortune-tellers and sorceresses, they did not suggest the dances said to be familiar to the witches.

Mr. DAVID RITCHIE, the editor, with Mr. FRANCIS GROOME, of the Journal of the Gypsy-Lore Society, has mentioned (vol. i. No. 2) that KLINGSOHR, a reputed author of the "Nibelungen Lied," was described as a "Zingar wizard" by DIETRICH the Thuringian. Like ODIN, this KLINGSOHR rode upon a wolf--a kind of steed much affected by witches and sorcerers. There is an old English rhyming romance in which a knight is represented as disguising himself as an Ethiopian minstrel. These and other stories--as, for instance, that of Sir Estmere--not only indicate a connection between the characters of minstrel and magician, but suggest that some kind of men from the far East first suggested the identity between them. Of course there have been wild dancers and witches, and minstrel-sorcerers, or vates, prophet-poets, in all countries, but it may also be borne in mind that nowhere in history do we find the female erotic

[p. 160]

dancer and fortune-teller, or witch, combined in such vast numbers as in India and Persia, and that these were, and are, what may be truly called gypsies. Forming from prehistoric times a caste, or distinct class, it is very probable that they roamed from India to Spain, possibly here and there all over Europe. The extraordinary diplomatic skill, energy, and geographic knowledge displayed by the first band of gypsies who, about 1417, succeeded in rapidly obtaining permits for their people to wander in every country in Europe except England, indicate great unity of plan and purpose. That these gypsies, as supposed sorcerers, appearing in every country in Europe, should not have influenced and coloured in some way the conceptions of witchcraft seems to be incredible. If a superstitious man had never before in his life thought of witches dancing to the devil's music, it might occur to him when looking on at some of the performances of Spanish and Syrian gypsy women, and if the man had previously been informed--as everybody was in the fifteenth century or later--that these women were all witches and sorceresses, it could hardly fall to occur to him that it was after this fashion that the sisters danced at the Sabbat. Of which opinion all that can be said is, that if not proved it is extremely possible, and may be at least probed and looked into by those of the learned who are desirous of clearly establishing all the grounds and origins of ancient religious beliefs and superstitions, in which pies it may be found that witches and gypsies have had fingers to a far greater extent than grave historians have ever imagined.

The English gypsies believe in witches, among their own people, and it is very remarkable that in such cases at least as I have heard of, they do not regard them as ames damnees or special limbs of Satan, but rather as some kinds of exceptionally gifted sorceresses or magicians. They are, however, feared from their supposed power to make mischief. Such a witch may be known by her hair, which is straight for three or four inches and then begins to curl--like a waterfall which comes down smoothly and then rebounds roundly on the rocks. It may be here remarked that all this gypsy conception of the witch is distinctly Hindoo and not in

[p. 161]

the least European or of Christians, with whom she is simply a human devil utterly given over to the devil's desires. And it is very remarkable that even the English gypsies do not associate such erring sisters--or any other kind--with the devil, as is done by their more cultivated associates.

The witch, in gypsy as in other lore, is a haunting terror of the night. It has not, that I am aware, ever been conjectured that the word Humbug is derived from the Norse hum, meaning night, or shadows (tenebrae) (JONAeO, "Icelandic Latin glossary in Niall's Saga"), and bog, or bogey, termed in several old editions of the Bible a bug, or "bugges." And as bogey came to mean a mere scarecrow, so the hum-bugges or nightly terrors became synonymes for feigned frights. "A humbug, a false alarm, a bug-bear" ("Dean Milles MS." HALLIWELL). The fact that bug is specialty applied to a nocturnal apparition, renders the reason for the addition of hum very evident.

There is a great deal that is curious in this word Bogey. Bug-a-boo is suggestive of the Slavonian Bog and Buh, both meaning God or a spirit. Boo or bo is a hobgoblin in Yorkshire, so called because it is said to be the first word which a ghost or one of his kind utters to a human being, to frighten him. Hence, "he cannot say bo to a goose." Hence boggart, bogle, boggle, bo-guest, i.e., bar-geist, boll, boman, and, probably allied, bock (Devon), fear. Bull-beggar is probably a form of bu and bogey or boge, allied to boll (Northern), an apparition.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 162]

 

 

  

CHAPTER XI

GYPSY WITCHCRAFT--THE MAGICAL POWER WHICH IS INNATE IN ALL MEN AND WOMEN--HOW IT MAY BE CULTIVATED AND DEVELOPED--THE PRINCIPLES OF FORTUNE-TELLING

WOMEN excel in the manifestation of certain qualities which are associated with mystery and suggestive of occult influences or power. Perhaps the reader will pardon me if I devote a few pages to what I conceive to be, to a certain degree, an explanation of this magic; though, indeed, it may be justly said that in so doing We only pass the old boundary of "spiritual" sorcery to find ourselves in the wider wonderland of Science.

Whether it be the action of a faculty, a correlative action of physical

[p. 163]

functions, or a separate soul in us, the fact is indisputable that when our ordinary waking consciousness or will goes to sleep or rest, or even dozes, that instant an entirely different power takes command of the myriad forces of memory, and proceeds to make them act, wheel, evolute, and perform dramatic tricks, such as the Common Sense of our daily life would never admit. This power we call the Dream, but it is more than that. It can do more than make Us, or Me, or the Waking Will, believe that we are passing through fantastic scenes. It can remember or revive the memory of things forgotten by us; it can, when he is making no effort, solve for the geometrician problems which are far beyond his waking capacity--it sometimes teaches the musician airs such as he could not compose. That is to say, within ourself there dwells a more mysterious Me, in some respects a more gifted Self. There is not the least reason, in the present state of Science, to assume that this is--either a "spiritual" being or an action of material forces. It puzzled WIGAN as the dual action of the brain; and a great light is thrown on it by the "Physiology" of CARPENTER and the "Memory" of DAVID KAY (one of the most remarkable works of modern times), as well as in the "Psycho Therapeutics" of Dr. TUCKEY.

This power, therefore, knows things hidden from Me, and can do what I cannot. Let no one incautiously exclaim here that what this really means is, that I possess higher accomplishments which I do not use. The power often actually acts against Me--it plays at fast and loose with me--it tries to deceive me, and when it finds that in dreams I have detected a blunder in the plot of the play which it is spinning, it brings the whole abruptly to an end with the convulsion of a nightmare, or by letting the curtain fall with a crash, and--scena est deserta! am awake! And then "how the phantoms flee--how the dreams depart" as WESTWOOD writes. With what wonderful speed all is washed away clean from the blackboard! Our waking visions do not fly like this. But--be it noted, for it is positively true--the evanescence of our dreams is, in a vast majority of instances, exactly in proportion to their folly.

[p. 164]

I am coming to my witchcraft directly, but I pray you have patience with my proeme. I wish to narrate a dream which I had a few years ago (September 5, 1887), which had an intensity of reality. Dreams, you know, reader, vary from rainbow mist to London fog, and so on to clouds, or mud. This one was hard as marble in comparison to most. A few days previously I had written a letter to a friend, in which I had discussed this subject of the dual-Me, and it seemed as if the Dream were called forth by it in answer.

I thought I was in my bed--a German one, for I was in Homburg vor der Hohe--yet I did not know exactly where I was. I at once perceived the anomaly, and was in great distress to know whether I was awake or in a dream. I seemed to be an invalid. I realized, or knew, that in another bed near mine was a nurse or attendant. I begged her to tell me if I were dreaming, and to awake me if I were. She tried to persuade me that I was in my ordinary life, awake. I was not at all satisfied. I arose and went into the street. There I met with two or three common men. I felt great hesitation in addressing them on such a singular subject, but told them that I was in distress because I feared that I was in a dream, and begged them to shake or squeeze my arm. I forget whether they complied, but I went on and met three gentlemen, to whom I made the same request. One at once promptly declared that he remembered me, saying that we had met before in Cincinnatti. He pressed my arm, but it had no effect. I began to believe that I was really awake. I returned to the room. I heard a child speaking or murmuring by the nurse. I asked her again to shake my hand. This she did so forcibly that I was now perfectly convinced that it was no dream. And the instant it came home to me that it was a reality, there seized me the thrill or feeling as of a coming nightmare--and I awoke!

Reviewing my dream when awake, I had the deepest feeling of having been joue or played with by a master-mocker. I recalled that, when I rose in my night-robe from the bed, I did not dress--and yet found

[p. 165]

myself fully dressed when in the street. Then I remembered that when I returned to America, in 1879, I was in great apprehension lest I should have trouble and delay with our sixteen trunks, because there was under my charge a lady who was dying. To my great relief and amazement, the officer whose duty it was to search claimed me as an old acquaintance, who had met me and T. BUCHANAN READ, the poet, in Cincinnatti in 1864, But what impressed me most of all, at once, was that the whole was caused by, and was a keen and subtle mockery of my comments in my letter, of the other Ego, and of its sarcastic power. For I had been led, step by step, through the extremest doubt, to a full conviction of being awake, and then dismissed, as it were, with a snap or sneer into wakefulness itself

Now this Dream Artist is, to judge by his works, a very different kind of a person from Me. We are not sympathetic, and herein lies a great and serious subject of study. "Dreams," says a writer, "are the novels which we read when we are fast asleep," and, at the risk of receiving punishment, I declare that my writer belongs to a school of novelists with which I have no feelings in common. If, as everybody assumes, it is always I who dream--only using other material--how is it that I always invariably disagree with, thwart, contradict, vex, and mock myself? I had rather be hanged and be done with it, before I would wrong my worst enemy with such pitiful, silly, degrading dreams and long-forgotten follies, as I am called on to endure. If this alter-ego were a lunatic, he could not be a more thoroughly uncongenial inmate of my brain than he often is. Our characters are radically different. Why has he a mind so utterly unlike mine? His tastes, his thoughts, dispositions, and petty peculiarities are all unlike mine. If we belonged to the same club, I should never talk with him.

Now we are coming to our Witchcraft. This alter-ego does not confine himself to dreams. A lunatic is a man who dreams wide-awake. He has lost his will or the controlling power resulting from the just co-relation of brain forces. Then the stored-up images stray out and blend. I have dreamed of telling or seeing things and of acting them at the same time. A fish and a watch and a man may seem to be the same thing at once in a dream, as

[p. 166]

they often are to a waking lunatic. A poet is a man who dreams wide-awake; but he can guide his dreams or imaginings to symmetrical form, and to a logical conclusion or coherence. With the painter and sculptor it is the same. When the alter-ego works harmoniously with the waking will, we call it Imagination.

But when the alter-ego draws decidedly on latent forces, or powers unknown to the waking Me, I am amazed, He does it often enough, that is certain. Then we have Mystery. And it is out of this that men have drawn the conclusion that they have two or three souls--an astral spirit, a power of prophecy, the art of leaving the body, and the entire machinery of occultism. Physiology is probably on the high road to explain it all, but as yet it is not explained.

Meanwhile it steals into our waking life in many ways. It comes in emotions, presentiments, harp tones, mystical conceptions, and minglings of images or ideas, and incomprehensible deductions, which are sometimes, of course, prophetic. It has nothing in common with common sense; therefore it is to some un-common sense, or to others non-sense. Sometimes it is one or the other. Agreeable sensations and their harmony become the Beautiful. These blend and produce a general aesthetic sense. It becomes mystical, and is easily worked on by the alter-ego. The most inspired passages of every poet on the beauty of Nature betray clearly the influence and hidden power of the Dream in waking life. SHELLEY, WORDSWORTH, KEATS, BYRON, were all waking dreamers de la premiere force.

He who has heard an Aeolian harp play--and I have heard the seven of JUSTINUS KERNER in the old castle of Weibertreu when I was his guest--if he be a "tone-artist," has often caught series of chords which were almost melodies. This music has the same relation to definite composition which the dream has to waking common sense. There are two things which I do not understand. One is, why composers of music make so little use of the suggestive Aeolian harp; the second is, why decorative designers never employ the folding mirror [*1] to produce designs. The one is an exact counterpart of

[p. 167]

the other, and both are capable of revealing inexhaustible harmonies, for both are deeply in accordance with the evolving processes of Nature.

The poetic or artistic faculty is, we therefore assume, the action on the myriad cells of memory by a strange--sometimes apparently involuntary--fantastic power, which is at the same time higher and lower than common sense or waking consciousness. Every image which man has received from sensation lies stored away in a cell, and is, in fact, a memory by itself. There is a faculty of association or sympathy by which groups of these images are called up, and there is perception which receives them, more or less vividly, like a photographic plate. When awake, Will, or coherent Common Sense, regulates all this machinery. When asleep, the Images seem to steal out and blend and frisk about by themselves in quaint dances, guided apparently by a kind of power whom I have conventionally called the alter-ego. This power throws open brain or memory-cells, which waking Common Sense has forgotten; in their chaotic or fantastic searches and mingling they produce poetry; they may chance on prophecy, for if our waking self had at command the immense latent knowledge in which these elves revel, it would detect sequences and know to what many things would lead, now unto us all unknown.

I once knew a nobleman who inherited in Italy a palace which he had never seen. There were in it three hundred rooms, and it had belonged to a family which had for six hundred years collected and handed down to their descendants every kind of object, as if they had been magpies or ravens. The heir, as a grave, earnest man, only concerned himself with the armoury and picture gallery and principal rooms. But his young daughter Bertha ranged all over the place and made hundreds of the most singular discoveries. One day she came to me very much delighted, She had found an obscure room or garret, in which there were ranged about on shelves, "sitting up and all. looking at her," several hundred old dolls and marionettes. For two hundred years or more the family had kept its old dolls. In this case the father was the waking reason, the rooms the brain cells, and Bertha the sprite who ranges over all and knows where to find forgotten images in,

[p. 168]

store. Many of those whom we meet in dreams are like the ghosts of dolls.

This is the only true Night side of Nature, but its shadows and dusky twilight, and strangely-hued chiaroscuros and long pauses of gloom, come constantly into the sunlight of our waking life. Some lives have too much of it, some too little. Some receive it in coarse and evil forms, as lunatics, and sufferers from mania a potu; some canny people--happy Scotchmen, for instance--succeed in banishing it from life as nearly as is possible for a human being to do. Now to speak clearly, and to recapitulate distinctly, I set forth the following propositions:--

I. We have a conscious will which, whether it be an independent incomprehensible spirit, or simply the correlative result or action of all our other brain powers, exists, and during our waking hours directs our thoughts and acts. While it is at work in the world with social influences, its general tendency is towards average common sense.

II. This conscious will sleeps when we sleep. But the collective images which form memory, each being indeed a separate memory, as an aggregate of bees' cells form a comb, are always ready to come forth, just as honey is always sweet, limpid, and fluid. There is between them all an associative faculty, or a strange and singular power, which begins to act when the will sleeps. Whether it be also an independent Self which plays capriciously while conscious will sleeps, or a result of correlated forces, it is not as yet possible to determine. What we know is, that it calls forth the images by association, and in a fantastic, capricious manner, imitates and combines what we have experienced, or read, or thought, during our waking hours.

III. Our waking will can only realize or act on such images as it has kept familiarly before it, or such as have been so often recalled that they recur spontaneously. But all the treasures of memory seem to be available to the dream ruler, and with them a loose facile power of grouping them into kaleidoscopic combinations. Thus, if one could imagine a kaleidoscope which at every turn made varied groups of human or other figures in different attitudes, with changing scenery; and then suppose this to be turned round

[p. 169]

by some simple vital or mechanical action, he would have an idea of the action of dreams. It is probable that the radical function of the dream-power is to prevent images from becoming utterly forgotten or rusty; and by exercising the faculty of facile or chance combination to keep awake in man originality and creativeness. For it is almost certain that, but for the intrusion of this faculty into our waking thoughts, man would become a mere animal, without an idea beyond the joint common appetites, instincts, and emotions of the lowest of his kind.

IV. The dream-power intrudes more or less into all waking life. Then it acts, though irregularly, yet in harmony, with conscious will. When it is powerful and has great skill in forming associations of images--and by images I mean, with Kay, "ideas"--and can also submit these to waking wisdom, the result is poetry or art. In recalling strange, beautiful images, and in imagining scenes, we partly lapse into dreaming; in fact, we do dream, though conscious will sits by us all the time and even aids our work. And most poets and artists, and many inventors, will testify that, while imagining or inventing, they abstract the "mind" from the world and common-place events, seek calm and quiet, and try to get into a "brown study," which is a waking dream. That is to say, a condition which is in some respects analogous to sleep is necessary to stimulate the flow and combination of images. This brown study is a state of mind in which images flow and blend and form new shapes far more easily than when Will and Reason have the upper hand. For they act only in a conventional beaten track, and deal only with the known and familiar.

V. Magic is the production of that which is not measured by the capacity of the conscious working will. The dream spirit, or that which knows all our memories, and which combines, blends, separates, scatters. unites, confuses, intensifies, beautifies, or makes terrible all the persons, scenes, acts, events, tragedies, or comedies known to us, can, if it pleases, by instantaneous reasoning or intuition, perceive what waking common sense does not. We visit a sick man, and the dream spirit, out of the inexhaustible hoards of memory aided by association, which results in subtle, occult

[p. 170]

reasoning, perceives that the patient will die in a certain time, and this result is served up in a dramatic dream. The amount of miracles, mysteries, apparitions, omens, and theurgia which the action of these latent faculties cause, or seem to cause, is simply illimitable, for no man knows how much he knows. Few, indeed, are the ordinary well-educated Europeans of average experience of life, whose memories are not inexhaustible encyclopaedias, and whose intellects are not infinite if all that is really in them could be wakened from slumber, "know thyself" would mean "know the universe." Now, there are people who, without being able to say why, are often inspired by this power which intuitively divines or guesses without revealing the process to common sense. They look into the eye of a person--something in glances and tones, gestures, mien, and address, suggests at once an assertion or a prediction which proves to be true. Considering that the dream-power has millions of experiences or images at its command, that it flits over them all like lightning, that it can combine, abstract, compare, and deduct, that it being, so to speak, more of a thaumaturgical artist than anything else, excels waking wisdom in subtle trickery, the wonder is, not that we so often hear of marvellous, magical, inexplicable wonders, but that they are not of daily or hourly occurrence. When we think of what we might be if we could master ourselves, and call on the vast sea of knowledge which is in the brain of every one who reads these lines, to give strict reckoning of its every wave and every drop of water, and every shell, pebble, wreck, weed, or grain of sand over which it rolls, and withal master the forces which make its tides and storms, then we may comprehend that all the wonder-working power attributed to all the sorcerers of olden time was nothing compared to what we really have within us.

It is awful, it is mysterious, it is terrible to learn this tremendous truth that we are indeed within ourselves magicians gifted with infinite intellectual power-which means the ability to know and do all things. In the past men surmised the existence of this infinite memory, this power of subtle research and combination, but between them and the truth in every land and . time interposed the idea of objective spiritual or supernatural

[p. 171]

existences whose aid or medium was necessary to attain to wisdom. Outside of us was always Somebody Else to be invoked, conciliated, met in vision or trance, united to in spiritual unity or syncope. Sometimes they hit upon some form of hypnotism or mesmerism, opiates or forced swoons and convulsions, and so extorted from the nerves and dream-power some of their secrets which were all duly attributed to the "spirits." But in the whole range of occult literature from HERMES TRISMEGISTUS down to Madame BLAVATSKY there is not a shade of a suspicion that all the absolutely authentic marvels of magic began and ended with man himself.

Least of all did any speculator yet conjecture how to set forth on the path which leads us to this wonderland. For there is a way to it, and a power to master the infinite stores of memory and render the dream-power a willing servant, if we take the pains to do it. Firstly--as may be found asserted, and I think fairly proved, in my work on "Practical Education," and in the "Memory of David Kay" (London, 1888)--every child by a very easy gradual process, simply that of learning by heart, and reviewing, can develope its memory to such a degree that all which that child reads, hears, or sees can be literally retained for life. Secondly, quickness of perception, which is allied to memory, can be taught so as to develope intuitive observation and intelligence to an equally incredible extent. Thirdly--and for this I have had abundant personal experience--every child can learn Design and the Minor Arts or develope the Constructive faculties, and by doing this alone a pupil becomes exceptionally clever in all studies. The proof of this is that the 200 pupils who attended an industrial or art school in Philadelphia took precedence in studies among 110,000 others in the public schools.

If all the stores of our memory were distinctly cognized by our waking will when they first came into our possession, we should have the first great element of power beyond all our present dreams of greatness. That this can be done has been recognized by many of the most advanced thinkers of the day. If a child be trained to exercise quickness of perception

[p. 172]

so that at last it observes and remembers everything--and experiment has proved this also--it will make the Dream Power a waking power absolutely in harmony and accordance with waking wisdom or conscious will. For the reason why the capricious, wild, strange fitful faculty has always remained foreign to us, is because in all our culture we have never sought to subdue and train the powers allied to it. Catch and tame one water-fairy, says the Red Indian legend, and you may get all her sisters. Waking quickness of perception is a wonderful ability. It can be trained to flit like lightning over illimitable fields of thought (supplied by a vast memory), and with them it spontaneously developes comparison and deduction. Now all of this is marvellously akin to the habitual action of the dream power plus that of reflection. And it is not possible to conceive that with waking quickness of perception, or voluntary subtlety of thought, cultivated in infancy to the highest power, its twin which sports in sleep should not feel its influence and act under it.

The result of this culture would inevitably be that the marvels, mysteries, and magic as they seem to us of the dream, or intuitive power, would be perfectly under our waking control, or to such an extent that we could secure all that is profitable in them. It is a very curious fact that while Reflection or Waking Wisdom slumbers, Quickness of Perception or Perception and Association seem to be always awake--in dreams or waking. A very extended series of observations has convinced me that the acquisition of a very great degree of Observation itself, or of Attention, is as possible as to learn French, and no harder; yet as a branch of study it literally does not exist. As a writer in the New York Tribune remarks: "In fact, observation is almost an atrophied faculty, and when a writer practises it for the purposes of his art, we regard the matter as in some sense wonderful." Interest, as MAUDSLEY has shown, is a natural result of Attention, and the two generate Will. Whether we can actually control the Dream-power is not as yet proved by experiment. All that we can say is that it is probable. But that this power manifests itself in

[p. 173]

waking hours when it submits to Reflection, is an established fact. It shows itself in all imagination, in all originality, brave art or "fantasy." Therefore it is no extravagant deduction to conclude that all of its action which now seems so wonderful, and which has furnished the ground-work for what we call magic, is perfectly within our grasp, and may be secured by simple methods of training which require only perseverance to perfect them.

The gypsy fortune-teller is accustomed for years to look keenly and earnestly into the eyes of those whom she dukkers or "fortune-tells." She is accustomed to make ignorant and credulous or imaginative girls feel that her mysterious insight penetrates "with a power and with a sign" to their very souls. As she looks into their palms, and still more keenly into their eyes, while conversing volubly with perfect self-possession, ere long she observes that she has made a hit--has chanced upon some true passage or relation to the girl's life. This emboldens her. Unconsciously the Dream Spirit, or the Alter-Ego, is awakened. It calls forth from the hidden stores of Memory strange facts and associations, and with it arises the latent and often unconscious quickness of Perception, and the gypsy actually apprehends and utters things which are "wonderful." There is no clairvoyance, illumination or witchcraft in such cases. If such powers existed as they are generally understood to do, we should for one case of curious prediction hear of twenty thousand. But the Dream-power is at best fitful, irregular and fantastic in its action; it is at all times untrustworthy, for it has never been trained unless of yore by Chaldaean priests and magi. In some wonderful way facts do, however, manifest themselves, evoked out of the unknown by "occult," though purely material, mental faculties; and the result is that wonder at the inexplicable--which makes miracles--until we are accustomed to them.

That gypsy women often do surmise or arrive at very curious and startling truths I know by my own experience, and also know that I myself when reading character in people's hands according to the laws

[p. 174]

laid down in books on chiromancy, when I have felt deeply interested, or as one may say excited or inspired, and have gone a little beyond mere description into conjecture and deduction, have been amazed at my own successes. It happened once that when in company with several ladies it was proposed after lunch to go to a gypsy camp on the Thames, and have fortunes told. Among these ladies was one of a very imaginative temperament, who had not only lived many years in the East, but had resided several winters as a guest in Arab families. As she was very much disappointed at not finding the gypsies, I offered to tell her fortune by onomancy, i.e., by taking the letters of her name according to numbers, and deducing from them her past and future. This I did in a most reckless manner, freely setting down whatever came into my mind. It seems to me now that a kind of inspiration suggested what I wrote and predicted. What was my amazement to hear the lady declare that all which had been written as to her past life was literally true, and I saw that she was simply awed at my supposed power of prediction, and had the fullest faith in what I had declared as regarded the future. What I had intended for a jest or mere entertainment turned out to be serious enough. And reflecting on the evil consequences of such belief on a person who naturally attributed it all to magic, I deeply regretted what I had done, and have not since attempted any renewal of such oracle-work. It had previously occurred that I wrote out such a prediction for another lady which I did not clearly explain to her, but in which there was a regular recurrence and repetition of something unfortunate. This was shown in after years, and the troubles all came to pass as I had written. Now the more I studied this case the more I was convinced that it was based on unconscious observation, comparison, and deduction. FICHTE has said that no bird can fly beyond itself, but the mind sometimes does actually precede its own conscious reasoning and throw back facts to it.

It may be urged by those who still cling to the old-fashioned fetish of a distinction between Spirit and Matter, that this explanation of predictions,

[p. 175]

oracles, and insight, is simply materialistic and utterly destructive of all the poetry, grandeur, and beauty which is associated with mysterious divination. But for those who believe with MAUDSLEY, et sui generis, that all such distinctions are not seriously worth considering, and to him who can rise to the great philosophy now dawning on the world, there is perceptible in it something far more wonderful and poetical, beautiful and even awful, than ever was known to any occultist of old--for it is scientific and true. It is also true that man can now talk across the world and hear all sounds conveyed to him through the depths of ocean. He can catch these sounds and keep them for centuries. How long will it be before sights, scents, and tastes will be thus transferred, and the man sitting in London will see all things passing in Asia, or wherever it pleases him or an agent to turn a mirror on a view? It will be. [*1] Or how long before the discovery of cheap and perfect aerial navigation will change all society and annihilate national distinctions? That, too, will be. These and a thousand stranger discoveries will during the ensuing century burst upon the world, changing it utterly. We go on as of old in our little petty narrow grooves, declaring that this will be, and that will never come to pass, and that this or that kind of hop-scotch lines, and tip-cat and marbles rules, are the eternal laws of humanity, and lo! all the while in his study some man whom you regard as a dreamer or dolt is preparing that which will be felt forever.

One of these great discoveries, and that not the least, will be the development and mastery of memory and perception, attention, interest, and will in children, with the constructive faculty which stimulates the whole by means of easy gradual series of instructions. When this system shall be perfected, we shall advance to understanding, controlling, and disciplining the subtler and stranger powers of the brain, which now puzzle us as dreams, intuitions, poetic inspiration, and prophecy. But this prophecy comes not from it, nor from any vague guessing or hoping. It is based on facts and on years of careful study of a thousand children's minds, and from a conviction derived

[p. 176]

from calm observation, that the powers of the human mind are infinite and capable of being developed by science. And they will be!

There is very little knowledge among gypsies of real chiromancy, such as is set forth in the literature of occult or semi-occult science. Two centuries ago, when chiromancy was studied seriously and thoroughly by learned and wise men, the latter compared thousands of hands, and naturally enough evolved certain truths, such as you, reader, would probably evolve for yourself if you would do the same. Firstly they observed, as you may do, that the hand of a boor is not marked like that of a gentleman, nor that of an ignoramus like the palm of an artist or scholar. The line which indicates brain is on an average shorter in women than in men; in almost every instance certain signs infallibly indicate great sensuality. Others show a disposition to dreaminess, sentimentalism, the occult. Now as Love, Wisdom, Strength of Will, or Inertness, are associable with Venus, Apollo, Jupiter, or Saturn, and as astrology was then seriously believed in, it came to pass that the signs of chiromancy were distributed to the seven planets, and supposed to be under their dominion. It was an error, but after all it amounts to a mere classification. Properly considered, the names Jupiter, Saturn, Apollo, Mercury, Venus, and Mars are only synonymes of qualities, meaning masculine virtue and character, aptitude, art, cleverness, sexual passion, and .combativeness. He who would, without a trace of superstition, analyze and describe many hands compared with the characters of their owners, would adopt effectively the same arrangement.

When we remember the age in which they lived and the popular yearning for wonders and marvels which then characterized even the wisest men, the old chiromancers were singularly free from superstition. There were many among them who would have regarded with supreme contempt a DESBAROLLES, with his fortune-telling for twenty francs.

To these truly honest men, the gypsies, with their pretended chiromancy, were at first a great puzzle. The learned PRAeTORIUS, in his vast work on Chiromancy and Physiognomy, devotes seventy-five pages to this "foreign element in our midst," and comes to the conclusion that they are humbugs.

[p. 177]

[paragraph continues] They do not know the lines--they know nothing. The intrusion of the latent powers of the mind had no place in the philosophy of PRAeTORIUS, therefore he did not perceive the back door by which the Romany slipped into the oracle. Yet there is abundant evidence even in his own valuable collection of the works of his predecessors, that many of them when tempted from merely describing character to straying into prophecy, were guided by something more mysterious than the laws of the lines of life, of the head, heart, the circle of Venus, the "hepatic," and via lactea. The Hungarian gypsies have a system of chiromancy of their own which the reader may find in the book "Vom Wandernden Zigeunervolke," by Dr. von WLISLOCKI, Hamburg, 1890, I had translated this and more of the kind for this chapter, but omitted it, thinking, firstly, that its place is supplied by more important matter; and, secondly, because it is, save as perhaps indicative of Indian origin, quite valueless, being merely of the prophetic kind.

I have more than once known gypsies to tell me things of my past life which were certainly remarkable, bewildering, or inexplicable. And for the ordinary seeker of "voonders oopon voonders" it is all-sufficient that a thing shall be beyond clear intelligence. "How do you explain that?" is their crucial question, and their cry of triumph when relating some case of an authentic apparition, a spiritual feat of thaumaturgy, or a dream fulfilled. In fact they would rather not have it explained. I well remember how Professor JOSEPH HENRY, when lecturing on natural science, narrated to us, his hearers, how when he told certain people how certain tricks of a common conjuror Were executed, they all protested that it could not be the way it was done. They did not wish to be disillusioned. Raise a man from the dead, make him fly through the air, and it is for everybody a miracle. Give them the power to do the same, and in a month's time it will be no longer miraculous, but something "in the due course of nature." And what single fact is there in the due course of nature which is not as inexplicable if we seek for a full explanation of it? Consider this thing every day till you ate penetrated with it, bear it in mind constantly, and in due time all, phenomena will be miracles. We can apparently get a little

[p. 178]

nearer to the causes and give our discoveries names, but the primal causes as constantly recede and are continually buried in deeper mystery. But with most people names pass for explanations.

"Can you tell me what a hypothesis is?" asked a young gentleman at a dinner party of a friend who passed for being well-informed. "Hush," was the reply. "Not now--ladies present."

"Mon caporal," asked a French soldier, "can you tell me what is meant by an equilateral?" "Certainly--mais d'abord--do you know Hebrew?" "No." "Ah, then it would be impossible to explain it to you."

"What is it that makes people's heads ache?" inquired an old lady of a youth who had just begun his medical studies. "Oh, it is only the convolution of the anomalies of the ellipsoid," replied the student. "just see now what it is to git larnin!" commented the dame. "He knows it all in a straight line?"

The one is satisfied that a hypothesis is something improper, the other that an equilateral is a matter which he might understand if he were as learned as his corporal, and the third is pleased to find that the mystery has at least a name. And human beings are satisfied in the same way as to the mysteries of Nature. Give them a name and assure them that the learned understand it, and they are satisfied.

It is a fundamental principle of human folly to assume that any alleged marvel is a "violation of the laws of Nature," or the work of supernatural influences, until it is proved not to be such. Nature cannot be violated. She is ever virgin. And "how do you account for that?" is always assumed to be a test question. It cannot be denied that in almost every case, the narrator assumes the absolute truth of all which he states, when, as is well known, even in the most commonplace incidents of ordinary life, such truth can very rarely be obtained. Secondly, he assumes that all the persons who were cognizant of the miracle, or were concerned in it, were not only perfectly truthful, but endowed with perfect perfections, and absolutely sound judgments. If

[p. 179]

there is the least shadow of a possibility that one of them could have erred in the least particular, the whole must fall to the ground as a proof or test--for we must have irrefragible and complete evidence before we adopt a faith on which all our life may depend. But, thirdly, by asking any one to account for a marvel, he assumes that the one thus called on knows everything short of the supernatural or Infinite, which is simply silly.

But there is a higher source of admiration and wonder than could ever be established by vulgar fetish, Animism, or supernaturalism, and this is to be found in the mysteries of Nature which man has never penetrated, and which, as soon as they are overcome, reveal others far grander or deeper. Thus as Alps rise beyond Alps, and seas of stars and solar systems spread in proportions of compound multiplication, our powers of vision increase. And it often happens to him who looks deeply into causes, that one of the myriad test cases of so-called "supernaturalism," when it has ignominiously broken down--as all do sooner or later--often reveals a deeper marvel or mystery than it was intended to support. Thus some Red Indians in North America, on being told how certain juggling tricks which they had accepted for magic were performed, calmly replied that it did not make the least difference--that a man must have been a magician (or divinely inspired) to be able to find out such tricks. And I myself knew an Indian trader named Ross, who, being once among a wild tribe, put on a mask of papier mache, which caused tremendous excitement and awe, which was not in the least diminished when he took it off and put it into their hands and explained its nature, for they maintained that the thing which could cause such terror indicated the existence of superior mental power, or magic, in the maker. In which there is, as it seems to me, indications of a much higher wisdom or sagacity than is to be found in the vulgar spiritualist who takes the event or thing itself for the miracle, and who, when found out in his tricks, ignominiously collapses.

The conclusion from all this is, that I have seen and heard of much

[p. 180]

in gypsy witchcraft and fortune-telling which, while it was directly allied to humbug of the shallowest kind, also rested on, or was inspired by, mental action or power which, in our present state of knowledge, must be regarded as strangely mysterious and of the deepest interest. And this is indeed weird, in the fullest and truest sense, since it is used for prophecy. I will now endeavour to illustrate this.

It is but natural that there should be "something in" gypsy fortune-telling. If the reader were to tell ten fortunes a day for twenty years it would be very remarkable indeed if in that time he had not learned some things which would seem wonderful to the world. He would detect at a glance the credulous, timid, hold, doubtful, refined or vulgar nature, just as a lawyer learns to detect character by cross-examination. Many experiments of late years have gone very far to establish the existence of a power of divining or reading thought; how this is really done I know not; perhaps the experts in it are as ignorant as I am, but it is very certain that certain minds, in some (as yet) marvellous way, betray their secrets to the master. That there are really gypsies who have a very highly cultivated faculty of reading the mind by the eye is certainly true. Sometimes they seem to be themselves uncertain, and see as through a glass darkly, and will reveal remarkable facts doubtfully. I remember a curious illustration of this. Once I was walking near Bath, and meeting a tinker asked him if there were any gypsies in the vicinity. He gave me the address of a woman who lived in a cottage at no great distance. I found it with some trouble, and was astonished on entering at the abominably miserable, reckless, squalid appearance of everything. There was a half or quarter-bred gypsy woman, ragged, dirty, and drunk, a swarm of miserable children, and a few articles of furniture misplaced or upset as if the inmates had really. no idea of how a room should be lived in. I addressed the woman civilly, but she was too vulgar and degraded to be capable of sensible or civil conversation with a superior. Such people actually exist among the worst class of vagabonds. But as I, disgusted, was about to leave, and gave her a small gratuity, she offered

[p. 181]

to tell my fortune, which I declined, whereupon she cried, "You shall see that I know something;" and certainly told me something which astonished me, of an event which had taken place two years before at a great distance. To test her I coolly denied it all, at which she seemed astonished and bewildered, saying, "Can I have made a mistake? You are certainly the person." All of this may be explained by causes which I shall set forth. But it cannot be too earnestly insisted on to people who habitually doubt, that because a thing can be explained in a certain way (i.e., by humbug) that it necessarily follows that that is the only explanation of it. Yet this is at the present day actually and positively the popular method, and it obtains very largely indeed with the small critics of the "safe school." Mrs. Million has diamonds; she may have stolen them--a great many people have stolen diamonds--therefore she is probably a thief. The Icelandic sagas describe journies to America; but the writers of the sagas were often mythical, exaggerative, and inaccurate--therefore all they narrate as regards America must be, of course, untrue.

Jack Stripe
 Eats tripe,
 It is therefore credible
 That tripe is edible ;
 And it follows perforce,
 As a matter of course,
 That the devil will gripe
 All who do not eat tripe.

But I do not insist that there is anything "miraculous" in gypsy fortune-telling. It may be merely the result of great practical experience and of a developed intuition, it may be mind or "thought-reading"--whatever that really is--or it may result from following certain regular rules. This latter method will be pronounced pure humbug, but of that I will speak anon. These rules followed by anybody, even the feeblest dilettante who has only read DESBAROLLES for drawing-room entertainment,

[p. 182]

will often astonish the dupe. They are, "in few," as follows:--

1. It is safe in most cases with middle-aged men to declare that they have had a law-suit, or a great dispute as to property, which has given them a great deal of trouble. This must be impressively uttered. Emphasis and sinking the voice are of great assistance in fortune-telling. If the subject betray the least emotion, or admit it, promptly improve the occasion, express sympathy, and "work it up."

2. Declare that a great fortune, or something greatly to the advantage of the subject, or something which will gratify him, will soon come in his way, but that he must be keen to watch his opportunity and be bold and energetic.

3. He will have three great chances, or fortunes, in his life. If you know that he has inherited or made a fortune, or had a good appointment, you may say that he has already realized one of them. This seldom fails.

4. A lady of great wealth and beauty, who is of singularly sympathetic disposition, is in love with him, or ready to be, and it will depend on himself to secure his happiness. Or he will soon meet such a person when he shall least expect it.

5. "You had at one time great trouble with your relations (or friends). They treated you very unkindly." Or, "They were prepared to do so, but your resolute conduct daunted them."

6. "You have been three times in great danger of death." Pronounce this very impressively. Everybody, though it be a schoolboy believes, or likes to believe, that he has encountered perils. This is infallible, or at least it takes in most people. If the subject can be induced to relate his hairbreadth escapes, you may foretell future perils.

7. "You have had an enemy who has caused you great trouble. But he--or she--it is well not to specify which till you find out the sex--will ere long go too far, and his or her effort to injure you will recoil on him or her." Or, briefly, "It is written that some one, by trying to wrong you, will incur terrible retribution." Or, "You have had enemies, but they are all destined to come to grief." Or, "You had an enemy but you outlived him."

8. "You got yourself once into great trouble by doing a good act."

9. "Your passions have thrice got you into great trouble. Once your inconsiderate anger (or pursuit of pleasure) involved you in great suffering which, in the end, was to your advantage." Or else, "This will come to pass; therefore be on your guard."

10. "You will soon meet with a person who will have a great influence on your future life if you cultivate his friendship. You will ere long meet some one who will fall in love with you, if encouraged."

11. "You will find something very valuable if you keep your eyes open and watch closely. You have twice passed over a treasure and missed it, but you will have a third opportunity."

12. "You have done a great deal of good, or made the fortune or prosperity of persons who have been very ungrateful."

[p. 183]

13. "You have been involved in several love affairs, but your conduct in all was really perfectly blameless."

14. "You have great capacity for something, and before long an occasion will present itself for you to exert it to your advantage."

By putting these points adroitly, and varying or combining them, startling cases of conviction may be made. Yet even into this deception will glide intuition, or the inexplicable insight to character, and the deceiver himself be led to marvel, so true is it that he who flies from Brama goes towards him, let him do what he will, for Truth is everywhere, and even lies lead to it.

The reader has often seen in London Italian women who have small birds, generally parrakeets, or paraquitos, which will for a penny pick out for her or for him slips of paper on which is printed a "fortune." If he will invest his pence in these he will in most instances find that they "fit his case" exactly, because they are framed on these or other rules, which are of very general application. There was, in 1882, an Italian named TORICELLI. Whether he was a descendant of the great natural philosopher of the same name who discovered the law of the vacuum I do not know, but he certainly exhibited--generally in Piccadilly--an ingenious application of it. He had a long glass cylinder, filled with water, in which there was a blown glass image of an imp. By pressing his hand on the top of the cover of the tube the folletto or diavoletto was made to rise or fall--from which the prediction was drawn. It will hardly be believed, but the unfortunate TORICELLI was actually arrested by the police and punished for "fortune-telling." [*1] After this he took to trained canaries or parrakeets, which picked out printed fortunes, for a living. Whether the stern arm of British justice descended on him for this latter form of sorcery and crime I do not know.

"Forse fu dal demonio trasportato,
 Fiancheggiandosi del' autorita
 Di Origene o di San Girolamo."

[p. 184]

Now it may be admitted that to form such rules (and there are many more far more ingenious and generally applicable) and to put them into practice with tact, adapting them to intuitions of character, not only as seen in the face but as heard in the voice or betrayed by gestures and dress and manner, must in the end develop a power. And, further still, this power by frequent practice enables its possessor to perform feats which are really marvellous and perhaps inexplicable, as yet, to men of science. I have, I think, indicated the road by which they travel to produce this result, but to what they arrived I do not know.

Nor do they all get there. What genius is, physiology, with all the vast flood of light spread by FRANCIS GALTON on hereditary gifts, cannot as yet explain. It is an absolute thing of itself, and a "miracle." Sometimes this wonderful power of prediction and of reading thought and quickly finding and applying rules falls into the hands of a genius. Then all our explanations of "humbug" and "trickery" and juggling fall to the ground, because he or she works what are absolutely as much miracles as if the artist had raised the dead. Such geniuses are the prophets of old; sometimes they are poets. There are as many clearly-defined and admirable predictions as to events in art and politics in the works of HEINE, which were fulfilled, as can be found anywhere.

By the constant application of such rules, promptly and aptly, or boldly, the fortune-teller acquires a very singular quickness of perception. There are very few persons living who really know what this means and to what apparently marvellous results constant practice in it may lead. Beginning with very simple and merely mechanical exercises ("Practical Education," p. 151. London: Whittaker & Co.), perception may be gradually developed until not only the eye and ear observe a thousand things which escape ordinary observation, and also many "images" at once, but finally the mind notes innumerable traits of character which would have once escaped it, combines these, and in a second draws conclusions which would amuse those who are ignorant--as indeed all men are as yet-of the extraordinary faculties latent in every man.

[p. 185]

I beg the reader to pay special attention to this fact. There is nothing in all the annals of prophecy, divination, fortune-telling, or prediction, which is nearly so wonderful as what we may all do if we would by practice and exercise bring out of ourselves our own innate power of perception. This is not an assertion based on metaphysical theory; it is founded on fact, and is in strict accordance with the soundest conclusions of modern physiology. By means of it, joined to exercises in memorizing, all that there is in a child of ordinary intellect may be unerringly drawn out; and when in due time knowledge or information is gradually adduced, there is perhaps no limit to what that intellect may become. The study, therefore, of quickness of perception, as set forth or exercised in gypsy fortune-telling, is indeed curious; but to the far-reaching observer who is interested in education it is infinitely more useful, for it furnishes proof of the ability latent in every mind to perform what appear to be more than feats of intelligence or miracles, yet which often are all mere trifles compared to what man could effect if he were properly trained to it.

Sorcery! We are all sorcerers, and live in a wonderland of marvel and beauty if we did but know it. For the seed sprouting from the ground is as strange a truth as though we saw the hosts of heaven sweeping onward in glory, or could commune with fairies, or raise from his grave the master magician of song who laid a curse on all who should dig his dust. But like children who go to sleep in the grand opera, and are wild with delight at Punch, we turn aside from the endless miracle of nature to be charmed and bewildered with the petty thaumaturgy of guitars in the dark, cigarettes, and rope-tying, because it corresponds to and is miracle enough for us. And perhaps it is as well; for much thought on the Infinites made JEAN PAUL RICHTER and THOMAS CARLYLE half mad and almost unfit for common life. Seek truth in Science and we shall be well balanced in the little as well as the great.

Footnotes

^166:1 Vide "Drawing and Designing." London: Whittaker & Co., 1888.

^175:1 This was written long before I heard that the same idea had occurred to others.

^183:1 Another Italian was fined or imprisoned for the same thing in London in July, 1890--i.e., for telling penny fortunes by the same machine.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

 

 

  

CHAPTER XII

FORTUNE-TELLING (continued)--ROMANCE BASED ON CHANCE, OR HOPE, AS REGARDS THE FUTURE-FOLK--AND SORCERY-LORE--AUTHENTIC INSTANCES OF GYPSY PREDICTION

IT would seem to all who now live that life would be really intolerably dry were it utterly deprived of mystery, marvel, or romance. This latter is the sentiment of hopeful chance allied to the beautiful. Youth is willing or eager to run great risks if the road to or through them passes by dark ravines, under castled rocks--

"o'er dewy grass
 And waters wild and fleet"

--and ever has been from the beginning. Now, it is a matter of serious importance to know whether this romance is so deeply inherent in man that it can never be removed. For, rightly viewed, it means current religion, poetry, and almost all art--as art at least was once understood--and it would seem as if we had come, or are coming, to a time when science threatens to deprive

[p. 187]

us of it all. Such is the hidden fear of many a priest and poet--it may be worth while to consider whether it is all to pass away into earnest prose or assume new conditions. Has the world been hitherto a child, or a youth, were poetry and supernaturalism its toys, and has the time come when it is to put away childish things?

We can only argue from what we are, and what we clearly know or understand. And we know that there are in Nature, though measured by the senses alone, phenomena which awake delightful or terrible, sublime or beautiful, grave or gay feelings, or emotions, which inspire corresponding thoughts. There is for us "an elf-home glory-land," far over setting suns, mysterious beauty in night and stars in their eternal course, grandeur of God in the ocean, loveliness in woman, chiaroscuro in vapoury valleys and the spray of waterfalls by moonlight, exciting emotions which are certainly not within the domain of science--as yet--and which it is impossible for us, as we are at present constituted, to imagine as regarded entirely from the standpoint of chemical and physical analysis. To see in all this--as we are--only hydro-carbons, oxygen, silex and aluminium, atoms, molecules, and "laws"--that is to say, always the parts and combinations and no sense as regards man that he is, with his emotional sense of beauty, anywhere in the game or of any account--is going far too far. Setting teleology and theology entirely aside, Man, as the highest organism, has a right to claim that, as the highest faculties which have been as yet developed in him were caused by natural phenomena, therefore there is in the phenomena a certain beauty which is far more likely to lead to more advanced enjoyment of form, colour, or what we call the aesthetic sense, than to shrink away and disappear. And it seems to me that the most extended consideration of science leads to the result or conclusion that under its influence we shall find that the chemical and physical analyses of which I have spoken are only the dry A B C of a marvellously grand literature, or of a Romance and Poetry and Beauty--perhaps even of a wondrous "occult" philosophy, of whose beginning even we have, as yet, no idea.

[p. 188]

But, great as it may be, those who will make it must derive their summary of facts or bases of observation from the past, and therefore I urge the importance of every man who can write doing what he can to collect all that illustrates Humanity as it is and as it was in by-gone ages. It hath not entered into the heart of man to conceive what a Folk-lore or ethnological society in ancient Greece, Rome, or Egypt might not have collected and preserved for the delight of every civilized human being of the present day. It is very true that the number of persons, as yet, who understand this--still less of those who take a real interest in it--is extremely limited, and they do not extend in England, America, or any other country, to more than a few hundreds. To the vast multitude, even of learned men, Folk-lore is only a "craze" for small literary bric-a-brac, a "fancy" which will have its run, and nothing more. To its earnest devotees it is the last great development of the art of learning and writing history, and a timely provision for future social science. It sets forth the most intimate inner life of people as they were, and the origins of our life as it is. In Folk-lore, Philology, Ethnology, and the study of Mythology or Religion find their greatest aid.

The amount of Red Indian Folk-lore which has been suffered to perish in the United States without exciting the least interest is beyond all belief. THOREAU could find in the Algonkin legends of New England nothing but matter for feeble-minded ridicule. But there are men coming, or a generation rising, to whom every record of the past will be of value, for they are beginning to perceive that while the collector is doing work of value the mere theorist, who generally undervalues if he does not actually oppose the collector, will with his rubbish be swept away "down the back-entry of time," to be utterly forgotten.

Gypsy sorcery-lore is of great value because all over the Aryan world gypsies have in ancient or modern times been, so to speak, the wandering priests of that form of popular religion which consists of a faith in fortune-telling. This is really a very important part in every cult; the most remarkable thing connected with it; as with charms, fetishes, incantations

[p. 189]

and protective spells, being the extraordinary success with which the more respectable magi have succeeded in convincing their followers that their own sorcery was not "magic" at all, and that the world-old heathen rites, which are substantially the same, are mere modern thieveries from the "established religion." Prediction and prophecy were the cornerstones of the classic mythology and of the Jewish law; they were equally dear to the Celtic races, and all men seem from the earliest times to have believed that coming events cast their shadows before. How this began and grew requires no deep study. Many disorders are prefaced by uneasy dreams or unaccountable melancholy, even as the greatest disaster which befel the gods of Valhalla was preceded by the troubled dreams of Balder. Sometimes the first symptom of gout is a previous irritability. But if diseases are believed to be caused by the literal occupation of the body by evil spirits these presages will be ascribed to occult spiritual influences. A man in excellent health feels gay--he goes hunting and has luck--of course his guardian spirit is believed to have inspired him to go. Then comes the priest or the gypsy to predict, and the hits are recorded and the misses are promptly forgotten.

The following instance has been related to me in good faith by a learned friend, whose books are well known to all Folk-lorists:--

"I can quote from my own experience a strange event founded on a prediction made to me by a gypsy in 1863. This was before I had learned the language of the Romany or had begun to take any interest in them. At the time of which I speak, I met one day here, in T------, one or two gypsy women bearing as usual babies on their shoulders, when the oldest as I was passing by pointed me out to the bystanders, saying in German, 'Der Herr hat viel Kummer gehabt' ('That gentleman has had much trouble '-or sorrow).

"This was true enough, as I was suffering greatly at the time from a previous bereavement, though I was no longer in mourning, nor was there at the instant any indication of gloom in my looks, for I was in a cheerful humour. So I stopped to ask her why she had made her remark. She replied, 'Ja, geben Sie mir die linke Hand und legen Sie drei Silbermunze darauf, wenn Sie weiteres horen wollen' ('Yes, give me your hand, and put three silver coins on it, if you would hear more'). I did so, when she repeated her assertion as to my sorrow, and added, 'Aber eine Grafinn steht fur Ihnen' ('But there is a countess awaiting you').

[p. 190]

"I laughed at myself for listening to this, and for the strange feeling of interest or faith which I felt in it, and which my common sense told me was ridiculous. And yet the prediction, strangely enough, was fulfilled, though not in the sense in which I suppose most people would have taken it. Soon after I lost another relative, and was overwhelmed with that and other troubles when providence gent me a friend in that most amiable and remarkable woman the Countess B------, who, with that noble and gracious affability which distinguishes her, as well as her husband, Sir ------, relieved my mind and cheered my depressed spirits.

"I add to this a marvellous story of a gypsy prediction which was uttered here in T------ and published last year in a small biography, but which is worth consideration because I have heard it apparently well authenticated by trustworthy people. A very great disgrace to our town--I am happy to say he was the only one--was a Mr. M------, of very good family. This man kept a mistress named R. M-------, who became acquainted with a young man who was employed as a clerk at the Credit Anstalt, and who always at night carried on his person its keys. This M------learned, and formed the following plot: The victim was to be enticed by the woman to her room, where she proposed to cut his throat, take the keys, and with the aid of M------ to rob the bank and escape. It succeeded so far as that the young man was brought to her room, but when she began to attempt to kill him he struggled, and was overpowering her when M------ entered the room and shot him dead.

"The precious pair were subsequently arrested and tried, and in the report of the proceedings there appears the following curious statement:--

"'It is a singular thing (cosa piu singolare) that to this woman (M------'s mistress, Miss R------), a gypsy woman who pretended to palmistry predicted that she would come to a bad end (ch'essa finirebbe assai male.),' Which she effectually did, being condemned to fourteen years' hard labour, and would have been hung had not her "interesting state" inclined the judge to mercy.

"There is the following addition in the pamphlet to what has been quoted: "Being begged by the said Maria R------ to look more closely into the hand, the Zingara refused to do so, and went away muttering strange or foreign words.' (Borbottanda strane parole)."

To this my informant adds:--

"I know of a more cheerful case of gypsy prediction, and of quite another kind, and which happened to a friend's friend of mine, also here in T-------. The 'subject' was a young lady, who was 'intended' or betrothed, to an Italian actor, who had gone to play at Madrid; but for two months she heard nothing from him, and, believing that he had neglected her, was in despair.

"One morning she was passing through one of the main streets, and was talking with my friend, when a dark gypsy girl going by, whispered to her in a hurried manner: 'Domani avrai una lettera e sarai felice' ('To-morrow you will receive a letter and be

[p. 191]

happy'). Having said this and nothing more, without asking for money, she went away. The promised letter was in fact received, all went well, and the lady is now married to the gentleman. This is all simply, true. I leave the comments on the case to investigators. Can it be that gypsies are sometimes clairvoyant?"

My own comment on the case is that, admitting that the gypsy knew beforehand all the circumstances or even the "parties" in the affair, she had divined or "intuited" a result, and risked, as some might call it, or else tittered from a real conviction, her prophecy. How the mind, without any miracle--as miracles are commonly regarded--often arrives quite unconsciously to such conclusions, I have already considered in another chapter. Making every allowance for unconscious exaggeration and the accretive power of transmission, I am willing to believe that the story is actually true.

The following is also perfectly authentic: An English lady of excellent family, meeting a gypsy, was told by the latter that in six months the most important event of her life would come to pass. At the end of the time she died. On her death-bed she said, "I thought the gypsy meant a marriage, but I feel that something far more important is coming, for death is the great end of life."

The following was told me by a Hungarian gentleman of Szegedin:--

"There was in Arad a lady who went to a ball. She had a necklace to which were attached four rings. During the evening she took this from her neck, and doubling it, wore it on her arm as a bracelet. In the house where she lived was a young gentleman who came to accompany her home from the ball. All at once, late at night, she missed her necklace and the rings, which were of great value.

"The next day she sent for a gypsy woman, who, being consulted, declared that the collar had been stolen by some one who was very intimate in her house. Her suspicions rested on the young man who had accompanied her home. He was arrested, but discharged far want of evidence.

"Three months after there came a kellner, a waiter, from some other city, to Arad. The lady, being in a cafe or some such place of resort, was waited on by this man, and saw one of her rings on his hand. He was arrested, and before the police declared that he held the ring in pledge, having advanced money upon it to a certain gentleman. This gentleman was the lady's betrothed, and he had stolen her necklace and rings. The gypsy had truly enough said that the articles had been taken by some one who was intimate in her house."

[p. 192]

The gentleman who told me this story also said that the death of his father had been foretold by a gypsy--that is, by a lady who was of half-gypsy blood.

It should be borne in mind, though few realize its truth, that in stages of society where people believe earnestly in anything--for example, in witchcraft or the evil eye--there results in time a state of mind or body in which they are actually capable of being killed with a curse, or a fear of seeing what is not before them in the body, and of many nervous conditions which are absolutely impossible and incomprehensible to the world of culture at the present day. But there are still places where witchcraft may be said to exist literally, for there the professors of the art to all intents work miracles, because they are believed in. There is abundance of such faith extant, even in England. I have heard the names of three "white" witch doctors in as many towns in the West of England, who are paid a guinea a visit, their specialty being to "unlock," or neutralize, or defeat the evil efforts of black witches. This, as is indeed true, indicates that a rather high class of patients put faith in them. In Hungary, in the country, the majority, even of the better class, are very much influenced by gypsy-witches. Witness the following, which is interesting simply because, while there is very little indeed in it, it was related to me as a most conclusive proof of magic power:--

"In a suburb of Szegedin, inhabited only by peasants, there is a school with a farm attached to it. The pay of the teacher is trifling, but he can make a comfortable living from the land. This was held by an old man, who had a young assistant. The old man died; the youth succeeded him, and as he found himself doing well, in due time he took a wife. They lived happily together for a year and had a daughter. In the spring the teacher had to work very hard, not only in school but on his farm, and so for the first time contracted the habit of going to the tavern to refresh himself, and what was worst, of concealing it from his wife under plausible tales, to which she gave no trust. She began to be very unhappy, and, naturally enough, suspected a rival.

"Of course she took advice from a gypsy woman, who heard all the story and consulted her cards. 'There is,' she said, 'no woman whatever in the way. There is no sign of one for good or evil, na latchi na misec, in the cards. But beware! for

[p. 193]

there is a great and unexpected misfortune coming, and more than this I cannot see.' So she took her pay and departed. Suddenly her child fell ill and died after eight days. Then the husband reformed his ways, and all went well with them. So, you see, the gypsy foretold it all, wonderfully and accurately."

It requires no sorcery to conjecture that the gypsy already knew the habits of the schoolmaster, as the Romany is generally familiar with the tavern of every town. To predict a misfortune at large is a sure card for every prophetess. What is remarkable is that a man of the world and one widely travelled, as was my informant, attached great importance to the story. It is evident that where so much of the sherris sack of faith accompanies such a small crust of miracle there must be a state of society in which miracles in their real sense are perfectly capable of being worked.

 

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 194]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

PROVERBS REFERRING TO WITCHES, GYPSIES, AND FAIRIES

Of Fairies, Witches, Gypsies,
 My nourrice sang to me ,
 Sua Gypsies, Fairies, Witches,
 I alsua synge to thee."
          ("Denham Tract.")

DR. KRAUSS has in his work, "Sreca, Gluck und Schicksal im Volksglauben der Sudslaven," collected a number of sayings in reference to his subject, from which I have taken some, and added more from other sources.

[p. 195]

Of an evil woman one says, as in all languages, "To ie vila"--that is, "a witch"; or it is uttered or muttered as, "To je vila ljutica"--that is, "a biting (or bitter) witch"; or to a woman whom one dislikes, "Idi vilo!"--"Begone, witch!" as in gypsy, "Jasa tu chovihani!"

Also, as in German, "Ako i je baba, nje vjestica"--"Though she is an old woman she is no witch"; while, on the other hand, we have, "Svake baba viestica, a djed vjestac"--"Every old woman is a witch, and every old man a wizard."

The proverb, "Bizi ko vistica od biloga luka"--"she runs from it like a witch from white garlic"--will be found fully explained in the chapter on "The Cure of Children," in which it is shown that from early times garlic has been a well-known witch-antidote.

Another saying is, "Uzkostrsila se ko vistica"--"Her hair is as tangled, or twisted, as that of a witch"; English gypsy, "Lakis balia shan risserdi sar i chovihanis." But this has a slightly different meaning, since in the Slavonian it refers to matted, wild-looking locks, while the Romany is according to a belief that the hair of a witch is curled at the ends only.

Allied to this is the proverb, "Izgleda kao aa su ga coprnice doniele sa Ivanjscica"--"He looks as if the witches had done for him (or brought him away, 'fetched' him) on Saint John's Eve"; English Romany, "Yuv dikela sa soved a lay sar a chovihani"--"He looks as if he had lain with a witch."

"Svaka vracara s vrazje strane"--"Every witch belongs to the devil's gang"--that is, she has, sold her soul to him and is in his interests. This is allied to the saying, "Kud ce vjestica do u svoj rod?"--"Where should a witch go if not to her kin or, "Birds of a feather flock together."

"Jasa ga vjestice"--"The witches ride him"--refers to the ancient and world-wide belief that witches turn men into animals and ride them in sleep.

The hazel tree and nut are allied to the supernatural or witchly in

[p. 196]

many lands. For the divining rod, which--is, according to "La Grande Bacchetta Divinatoria O Verga rivelatrice" of the Abbate Valmont, the great instrument for all magic and marvels, must be made of "un ramo forcuto di nocciuolo"--a forked branch of hazel-nut"--whence a proverb, "Vracarice, coprnjice, kuko ljeskova!"--"Sorceress, witch, hazel-stick." This is a reproach or taunt to a woman who pays great attention to magic and witchcraft. "This reveals a very ancient belief of the witch as a wood-spirit or fairy who dwells in the nut itself." More generally it is the bush which, in old German ballads, is often addressed as Lady Hazel. In this, as in Lady Nightingale, we have a relic of addressing certain animals or plants as if they were intelligences or spirits. In one very old song in "Des Knaben Wunderhorn," a girl, angry at the hazel, who has reproached her for having loved too lightly or been too frail, says that her brother will come and cut the bush down. To which Lady Hazel replies:--

"Although he comes and cuts me down,
     I'll grow next spring, 'tis plain,
 But if a virgin wreath should fade,
     'Twill never bloom again."

To keep children from picking unripe hazel-nuts in the Canton of Saint Gall they cry to them, "S' Haselnussfrauli chumt"--"The hazel-nut lady is coming!" Hence a rosary of hazel-nuts or a hazel rod brings luck, and they may be safely hung up in a house. The hazel-nut necklaces found in prehistoric tombs were probably amulets as well as ornaments.

Among popular sayings we may include the following from the Gorski Vijenac:--

"A eto si udrijo vladiko,
 U nekakve smuc'ene vjetrove,
 Ko u marchu shto udre yjeshtice."

But behold, O Vladika,
 Thou hast thrown thyself into every storm,
 As witches throw or change themselves to cattle."

[p. 197]

And with these we may include the curse, "Izjele te viestice"--"May the witches eat you!" which has its exact parallel in Romany. Also the Scottish saying, "Witches, warlocks, and gypsies soon ken ae the ither":--

"Witches and warlocks without any bother,
 Like gypsies on meeting well know one another."

I may appropriately add to these certain proverbs which are given in an extremely rare "Denham Tract," of which only fifty copies were printed by JOHN BELL RICHMOND, "in. Com. Ebor." This quaint little work of only six pages is entitled, "A Few Popular Rhymes, Proverbs, and Sayings relating to Fairies, Witches, and Gypsies," and bears the dedication, "To every individual Fairy, Witch, and Gypsy from the day of the Witch of Endor down to that of Billy Dawson, the Wise Man of Stokesley, lately defunct, this tract is inscribed."

WITCHES.

Vervain and Dill
 Hinder witches from their will.

The following refers to rowan or mountain-ash wood, which is supposed to be a charm against witchcraft:--

If your whipstick's made of rowan
 You can ride your nag thro' any town.

Much about a pitch,
 Quoth the devil to the witch.

A hairy man's a geary man,
 But a hairy wife's a witch.

Woe to the lad
 Without a rowan-tree god.

A witch-wife and an evil
 Is three-halfpence worse than the devil.

[p. 198]

Hey-how for Hallow-e'en!
 When all the witches are to be seen,
 Some in black and some in green,
 Hey-how for Hallow-e'en!
 Thout! tout! a tout, tout!
 Throughout and about.

Cummer goe ye before, cummer goe ye,
 Gif ye will not goe before, cummer let me!

"These lines are said to have been sung by witches at North Berwick in Lothian, accompanied by the music of a Jew's harp or trump, which was played by Geilles Duncan, a servant girl, before two hundred witches, who joined hands in a short daunce or reel, singing (also) these lines with one voice:--

"'Witchy, witchy, I defy thee,
 Four fingers round my thumb,
 Let me go quietly by thee.'

"It will be seen that this is a phallic sign, and as such dreaded by witches. It is difficult to understand why these verses with the sign should have been given by witches."

The anti-witch rhyme used in Tweedesdale some sixty or seventy years ago was:--

"'Black-luggie, lammer bead,
 Rowan-tree and reed thread,
 Put the witches to their speed.'

The meaning of 'black-luggie' I know not. 'Lammer bead' is a corruption of 'amber-bead.' They are still worn by a few old people in Scotland as a preservative against a variety of diseases, especially asthma, dropsy, and toothache. They also preserve the wearer from, the effects of witchcraft, as stated in the text. I have seen a twig of rowan-tree, witch-wood, quick-bane, wild ash, wicken-tree, wicky, wiggy, witchen, witch-bane, royne-tree, mountain-ash, whitty, wiggin, witch-hazel, roden-quicken, roden-quicken-royan, roun, or ran-tree, which had been gathered

[p. 199]

on the second of May (observe this), wound round with some dozens of yards of red thread, placed visible in the window to act as a charm in keeping witches and Boggle-boes from the house. So also we have--

"'Rowan-ash and reed thread
 Keep the devils from their speed,"'

Ye brade o' witches, ye can do no good to yourself.

Fair they came,
 Fair they go,
 And always their heels behind them.

Neither so sinful as to sink, nor so godly as to swim.

Falser than Waghorn, and he was nineteen times falser than the devil.

Ingratitude is worse than witchcraft.

Ye're as mitch
 As half a witch.

To milk the tether (i.e., the cow-tie).

This refers to a belief that witches can carry off the milk from any one's cow by milking at the end of the tether.

Go in God's name--so you ride no witches.

"Rynt, you witch" quoth Bess Lockit to her mother.

Rynt, according to Skeat, is the original Cumberland word for aroint," i.e., "aroint thee, get thee gone." Icelandic ryma--"to make room, to clear the way"--given, however, only as a guess. It seems to have been specially applied to witches.

"'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cried."
                                                  ("Macbeth")

Halliwell gives the word as rynt, and devotes a column to it, without coming to any satisfactory conclusion. I think it is simply the old word rynt or wrynt, another form of writhe, meaning to twist or strangle, as if one should say, "Be thou strangled!" which was indeed a frequent malediction. Halliwell himself gives "wreint" as meaning "awry," and

[p. 200]

"wreith destordre"--"to wring or wreith" ("Hollyband's Dictionarie," 1593). The commonest curse of English gypsies at the present day is, "Beng tasser tute!" "May the devil strangle you"--literally twist, which is an exact translation of wrinthe or rynt.

"The gode man to hys cage can goo
 And wrythed the pye's neck yn to."
                         ("MS. Cantab." ap. H.)

Rynt may mean twist away, i.e., begone, as they say in America, "he wriggled away."

They that burn you for a witch lose all their coals.

Never talk of witches on a Friday.

Ye're ower aude ffarand to be fraid o' witches.

Witches are most apt to confess on a Friday.

Friday is the witches' Sabbath.

To hug one as the devil hugs a witch.

          As black

       }

       as a witch.

     
      As cross

     
      As ugly

     
      As sinful

     
   Four fingers and a thumb--witch, I defy thee.

In Italy the signs are made differently. In Naples the gettatura consists of throwing out the fore and middle fingers, so as to imitate horns, with the thumb and fingers closed. Some say the thumb should be within the middle and third fingers. In Florence the anti-witch gesture is to fare la fica, or stick the thumb out between the fore and middle fingers.

You're like a witch, you say your prayers backward.

Witch-wood (ie., the mountain ash).

You're half a witch-i.e., very cunning.

Buzz! buzz! buzz!

In the middle of the sixteenth century if a person waved his hat or

[p. 201]

bonnet in the air and cried 'Buzz!' three times, under the belief that by this act he could take the life of another, the old law and law-makers considered the person so saying and acting to be worthy of death, he being a murderer in intent, and having dealings with witches" ("Denham Tract"). Very doubtful, and probably founded on a well known old story.

"I wish I was as far from God as my nails are free from dirt!"

Said to have been a witch's prayer whilst she was in the act of cleaning her nails. In logical accuracy this recalls the black boy in America, who on being asked if he knew the way to a certain place, replied, "I only wish I had as many dollars as I know my way there."

A witch is afraid of her own blood.

A Pendle forest witch.

A Lancashire witch.

A witch cannot greet (ie., weep).

To be hog, or witch-ridden.

 

GYPSIES.

So many gypsies, so many smiths.

The gypsies are all akin.

One of the Faw gang,
 Worse than the Faw gang.

The Faws or Faas are a gypsy family whose head-quarters are at Yetholme. I have been among them and knew the queen of the gypsies and her son Robert, who were of this clan or name.

"It is supposed the Faws acquired this appellation from Johnnie Faw, lord and earl of Little Egypt; with whom James the Fourth and Queen Mary, sovereigns of Scotland, saw not only the propriety, but also the necessity of entering into special treaty" ("Denham Tract")

"Francis Heron, king of the Faws, bur. (Yarrow) xiii. Jan., 1756 (SHARP'S "Chron. Mir").

[p. 202]

FAIRIES

Where the scythe cuts and the sock rives,
 No more fairies and bee-hives.

Laugh like a pixy (i.e., fairy).

Waters locked! waters locked! (A favourite cry of fairies.)

Borram! borram! borram! (The cry of the Irish fairies after mounting their steeds.
 Equivalent to the Scottish cry, "Horse! horse and hattock!")

To live in the land of the Fair family. (A Welsh fairy saying.)

God grant that the fairies may put money in your shoes and keep your house clean.
 (One of the good wishes of the old time.)

Fairies comb goats' beards every Friday.

He who finds a piece of money will always find another in the same place, so long as he keeps it a secret.
 (In reference to fairy gifts.)

It's going on, like Stokepitch's can.

A pixey or fairy saying, used in Devonshire. The family of Stokespitch or Sukespic resided near Topsham, and a barrel of ale in their cellars had for many years run freely without being exhausted. It was considered a valuable heirloom, and was esteemed accordingly, till an inquisitive maidservant took out the bung to ascertain the cause why it never run dry. On looking into the cask she found it full of cobwebs, but the fairies, it would seem, were offended, for on turning the cock, as usual, the ale had ceased to flow.

It was a common reply at Topsham to the inquiry how any affair went on "It's going on like Stokepitch's can," or proceeding prosperously.

To laugh like Robin Goodfellow.

To laugh like old Bogie;
 He caps Bogie.
 (Amplified to "He caps Bogie, and Bogie capped old Nick.")

To play the Puck. (An Irish saying, equivalent to the English one, "To play the deuce or devil." KEIGHTLEY'S "Fairy Mythology.")

He has got into Lob's pound or pond. (That is, into the fairies' pinfold. KEIGHTLEY'S "Fairy Mythology.")

[p. 203]

Pinch like a fairy. ("Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins." "Merry Wives of Windsor.")

To be fairy-struck. (The paralysis is, or rather perhaps was, so called. KEIGHTLEY'S "Fairy Mythology.")

There has never been a merry world since the Phynoderee lost his ground. [A Manx fairy saying. See Train's "Isle of Man," ii. p. 14.8. "Popular Rhymes of the Isle of Man," pp. 16, 17.]

To be pixey-led.

Led astray by fairies or goblins. "When a man has got a wee drap ower muckle whuskey, misses his way home, and gets miles out of his direct course, he tells a tale of excuse and whiles lays the blame on the innocent pixies" (see KEIGHTLEY'S "Fairy Mythology"). Also recalling Feufollet, or the Will o' the Wisp, and the traveller who

         "thro' bog and bush
 Was lantern-led by Friar Rush."

Gypsies have from their out of doors life much familiarity with these "spirits" whom they call mullo dudia, or mullo doods, i.e., dead or ghost lights. For an account of the adventure of a gypsy with them, see "The English Gypsies and their Language," by C. G. LELAND. London: Trubner & Co. "Pyxie-led is to be in a maze, to be bewildered as if led out of the way by hobgoblins or puck, or one of the fairies. The cure is to turn one of your garments the inside outward; some say that is for a woman to turn her cap inside outward, and for a man to do the same with some of his clothes" (MS. "Devon Glimpses"--Halliwell). "Thee pixie-led in Popish piety" (CLOBERY'S "Divine Glimpses," 1659).

The fairies' lanthorn.

That is the glow-worm. In America a popular story represents an Irishman as believing that a fire-fly was a mosquito "sakin' his prey wid a lanthorn."

God speed you, gentlemen!

When an Irish peasant sees a cloud of dust sweeping along the road,

[p. 204]

he raises his hat and utters this blessing in behoof of ye company of invisible fairies who, as he believes, caused it." ("Fairy Mythology").

The Phooka have dirtied the blackberries.

Said when the fruit of the blackberry is spoiled through age or covered with dust at the end of the season. In the North of England we say "the devil has set his foot on the Bumble-Kites" ("Denham Tract").

Fairy, fairy, bake me a bannock and roast me a collop,
 And I'll give ye a spintle off my god end.

This is spoken three times by the Clydesdale peasant when ploughing, because he believes that on getting to the end of the fourth furrow those good things will be found spread out on the grass "(CHAMBERS' "Popular Rhymes, Scotland," 3rd ed. p. 106).

Turn your clokes (i.e., coats),
 For fairy folkes
 Are in old oakes.

"I well remember that on more occasions than one, when a schoolboy, I have turned and worn my coat inside out in passing through a wood in order to avoid the 'good people.' On nutting days, those glorious red-letter festivals in the schoolboy's calendar, the use pretty generally prevailed. The rhymes in the text are the English formula" ("Denham Tract").

He's got Pigwiggan

Vulgarly called Peggy Wiggan. A severe fall or Somerset is so termed in the B'prick. The fairy Pigwiggan is celebrated by Drayton in his Nymphidia" ("Denham Tract"). To which may be added a few more from other sources.

Do what you may, say what you can,
 No washing e'er whitens the black Zingan.
                                 ("Firdusi.")

For every gypsy that comes to toon,
 A hen will be a-missing soon,
 And for every gypsy woman old,
 A maiden's fortune will be told. [p. 205]
 Gypsy hair and devil's eyes,
 Ever stealing, full of lies,
 Yet always poor and never wise.

He who has never lived like a gypsy does not know how to enjoy life as a gentleman.

I never enjoyed the mere living as regards all that constitutes ordinary respectable life so keenly as I did after some weeks of great hunger, exposure, and misery, in an artillery company in 1863, at the time of the battle of Gettysburg.

Zigeuner Leben Greiner Leben. (Gipsy life a groaning life. KORTE'S "Sprichworter d. D.")

Er taugt nicht zum Zigeuner. Spottisch vom Lugner gesagt weil er nicht wahr-sagt. (KORTE, "Sprichworter.")

"He would not do for a gypsy." Said of a liar because he cannot tell the truth. In German to predict or tell fortunes also means to speak truly, i.e., wahr = true, and sprechen = to speak.

Gypsy repentance for stolen hens is not worth much. (Old German Saying.)

The Romany chi
 And the Romany chal
 Love luripen
 And lutchipen
 And dukkeripen
 And huknipen
 And every pen
 But latchipen
 And tatchipen.

The gypsy woman
 And gypsy man
 Love stealing
 And lewdness
 And fortune telling
 And lying
 And every pen
 But shame
 And truth.

Pen is the termination of all verbal nouns.

                         (GEORGE BORROW, Quoted from memory.)

[p. 206]

It's a winter morning.

Meaning a bad day, or that matters look badly. In allusion to the Winters, a gypsy clan with a bad name.

As wild as a gypsy.

Puro romaneskoes. (In the old gypsy fashion.)

Sie hat 'nen Kobold. ("She has a brownie, or house-fairy.")

"Said of a girl who does everything deftly and readily. In some places the peasants believe that a fairy lives in the house, who does the work, brings water or wood, or curries the horses. Where such a fairy dwells, all succeeds if he or she is kindly treated" (KORTE'S "German Proverbs").

"Man siehet wohl wess Geisters Kind Sie (Er.) ist."

"One can well see what spirit was his sire." In allusion to men of singular or eccentric habits, who are believed to have been begotten by the incubus, or goblins, or fairies. There are ceremonies by which spirits may be attracted to come to people in dreams.

"There was a young man who lived near Monte Lupo, and one day he found in a place among some old ruins a statue of a fate (fairy or goddess) all naked. He set it up in its shrine, and admiring it greatly embraced it with love (ut semen ejus profluit super statuam). And that night and ever after the fate came to him in his dreams and lay with him, and told him where to find treasures, so that he became a rich man. But he lived no more among men, nor did he after that ever enter a church. And I have heard that any one who will do as he did can draw the fate to come to him, for they are greatly desirous to be loved and worshipped by men as they were in the Roman times."

The following are Hungarian or Transylvanian proverbs:--

False as a Tzigane, ie., gypsy.

Dirty as a gypsy.

They live like gypsies (said of a quarrelsome couple).

[p. 207]

He moans like a guilty Tzigane (said of a man given to useless lamenting).

He knows how to plow with the gypsies (said of a liar). Also: "He knows how to ride the gypsies' horse."

He knows the gypsy trade (i.e., he is a thief).

Tzigane weather (i.e., a showery day).

It is gypsy honey (i.e., adulterated).

A gypsy duck i.e., a poor sort of wild duck.

"The gypsy said his favourite bird would be the pig if it had only wings" (in allusion to the gypsy fondness for pork).

Mrs. GERARD gives a number of proverbs as current among Hungarian gypsies which appear to be borrowed by them from those of other races. Among them are:--

Who would steal potatoes must not forget the sack.

The best smith cannot make more than one ring at a time.

Nothing is so bad but it is good enough for somebody.

Bacon makes bold.

"He eats his faith as the gypsies ate their church."

A Wallach proverb founded on another to the effect that the gypsy church was made of pork and the dogs ate it. I shall never forget how an old gypsy in Brighton laughed when I told her this, and how she repeated: "O Romani kangri sos kerdo ballovas te i juckli hawde lis."

"No entertainment without gypsies."

In reference to gypsy musicians who are always on hand at every festivity.

The Hungarian wants only a glass of water and a gypsy fiddler to make him drunk.

In reference to the excitement which Hungarians experience in listening to gypsy music.

With a wet rag you can put to flight a whole village of gypsies (Hungarian).

It would not be advisable to attempt this with any gypsies in Great

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Britain, where they are almost, without exception, only too ready to fight with anybody.

Every gypsy woman is a witch.

"Every woman is at heart a witch."

In the "Materials for the Study of the Gypsies," by M. I. KOUNAVINE, which I have not yet seen, there are, according to A. B. Elysseeff (Gypsy-Lore Journal, July, 1890), three or four score of gypsy proverbial sayings and maxims. These refer to Slavonian or far Eastern Russian Romanis. I may here state in this connection that all who are interested in this subject, or aught relating to it, will find much to interest them in this journal of the Gypsy-Lore Society, printed by T. & A. Constable, Edinburgh. The price of subscription, including membership of the society, is L1 a year--Address: David Mac Ritchie, 4, Archibald Place, Edinburgh.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

 

 

[p. 209]

CHAPTER XIV [*1]

A GYPSY MAGIC SPELL--HOKKANI BASO--LELLIN DUDIKABIN, OR THE GREAT SECRET--CHILDREN'S RHYMES AND INCANTATIONS--TEN LITTLE INDIAN BOYS AND TEN LITTLE ACORN GIRLS OF MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS

THERE is a meaningless rhyme very common among children. It is repeated while "counting off "--or "out"--those who are taking part in a game, and allotting to each a place. There are many versions of it, but the following is exactly word for word what I learned when a boy in Philadelphia:--

Ekkeri (or ickery), akkery, u-kery an,
 Fillisi', follasy, Nicholas John,
 Queebee--quabee--Irishman (or, Irish Mary),
 Stingle 'em--stangle 'em--buck!

With a very little alteration

[p. 210]

in sounds, and not more than children make of these verses in different places, this may be read as follows:--

Ek-keri (yekori) akairi, you kair an,
 Fillissin, follasy, Nakelas jan
 Kivi, kavi--Irishman,
 Stini, stani--buck!

This is, of course, nonsense, but it is Romany or gypsy nonsense, and it may be thus translated very accurately

First--here--you begin!
 Castle, gloves. You don't play!
           Go on !
 Kivi--a kettle. How are you?
 Stani, buck.

The common version of the rhyme begins with:--

"One--ery--two--ery, ickery an."

But one-ery is an exact translation of ek-keri; ek, or yek, meaning one in gypsy. (Ek-orus, or yek-korus, means once). And it is remarkable that in-

"Hickory dickory dock,
 The rat ran up the clock,
 The clock struck one,
 And down he run,
 Hickory dickory dock."

We have hickory, or ek-keri, again followed by a significant one. It may be observed that while my first quotation abounds in what are unmistakably Romany words, I can find no trace of any in any other child-rhymes of the kind. I lay stress on this, for if I were a great Celtic scholar I should not have the least difficulty in proving that every word in every rhyme, down to "Tommy, make room for your uncle," was all old Irish or Gaelic.

[p. 211]

Word for word every person who understands Romany will admit the following:--

Ek, or yek, means one. Yekorus, ekorus, or yeckori, or ekkeri, once.

U-kair-an. You kair an, or begin. Kair is to make or do, ankair to begin. "Do you begin?"

Fillissin is a castle, or gentleman's country scat (H. SMITH).

Follasi, or follasy, is a lady's glove.

Nakelas. I learned this word from an old gypsy. It is used as equivalent to don't, but also means na (kelas), you don't play. From kel-ava, I play,

Jan, Ja-an, Go on. From java, I go. Hindu, jana, and jao.

Kivi, or keevy. No meaning.

Kavi, a kettle, from kekavi, commonly given as kavi. Greek, kekkabos {Greek  kekkabos}. Hindu, kal, a box.

Stini. No meaning that I know.

Stani. A buck.

Of the last line it may be remarked that if we take from ingle 'em (angle 'em), which is probably added for mere jingle, there remains stan, or stani, "a buck," followed by the very same word in English.

With the mournful examples of Mr. BELLENDEN KERR'S efforts to show that all our old proverbs, saws, sayings, and tavern signs are Dutch, and Sir WILLIAM BETHAM's Etruscan-Irish, and the works of an army of "philologists," who consider mere chance resemblance to be a proof of identical origin, I should be justly regarded as one of the seekers for mystery in moonshine if I declared that I positively believed this to be Romany. But it certainly contains words which, without any stretching or fitting, are simply gypsy, and I think it not improbable that it was some sham charm used by some Romany fortune-teller to bewilder Gorgios. Let the reader imagine the burnt-sienna, wild-cat-eyed old sorceress performing before a credulous farm-wife and her children, the great ceremony of hakkni panki--which Mr. BORROW calls hokkani baro, but for which there is a far deeper name--that of the great secret"--which even my best Romany friends tried to conceal from me. This is to lel dudikabin--to "take lightment." In the oldest English canting, lightment occurs as an equivalent for theft--whether it came from Romany, or Romany from it, I cannot tell.

[p. 212]

This feat-which is described by almost every writer on Gypsies--is performed by inducing some woman of largely magnified faith to believe that there is hidden in her house a magic treasure, which can only be made "to come to hand" by depositing in the cellar another treasure, to which it will come by natural affinity and attraction. "For gold, as you sees, draws gold, my deari, and so if you ties up all your money in a pocket-handkercher, an' leaves it, you'll find it doubled. An' wasn't there the Squire's lady--you know Mrs. Trefarlo, of course--and didn't she draw two hundred old gold guineas out of the ground where they'd laid in an old grave-and only one guinea she gave me for all my trouble; an' I hope you'll do better than that for the poor old gypsy, my deari--."

The gold and the spoons are all tied up-for, as the enchantress sagely observes, "there may be silver too"--and she solemnly repeats over it magical rhymes, while the children, standing around in awe, listen to every word. It is a good subject for a picture. Sometimes the windows are closed, and candles lighted--to add to the effect. The bundle is left or buried in a certain place. The next day the gypsy comes and sees how the charm is working. Could any one look under her cloak, he might find another bundle precisely resembling the one containing the treasure. She looks at the precious deposit, repeats her rhyme again solemnly and departs, after carefully charging the house-wife that the bundle must not be touched, looked at, or spoken of for three weeks. "Every word you tell about it, my deari, will be a guinea gone away." Sometimes she exacts an oath on the Bible, when she chivs o manzin apre latti--that nothing shall be said.

Back to the farmer's house never again. After three weeks another Extraordinary Instance of Gross Credulity appears in the country paper, and is perhaps repeated in a colossal London daily, with a reference to the absence of the schoolmaster. There is wailing and shame in the house--perhaps great suffering--for it may be that the savings of years, and bequeathed tankards, and marriage rings, and inherited jewellery, and mother's souvenirs have been swept away. The charm has worked.

[p. 213]

"How can people be such fools!" Yea--how can they? How can fully ninety-nine out of one hundred, and I fear me nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand, be capable of what amounts to precisely the same thing--paying out their cash in the hopes that the Invisible Influences in the Inscrutable Cellar or Celestial Garret will pay it back to them, cent. per cent.? Oh, reader, if you be of middle age (for there are perhaps some young agnostics beginning to appear to whom the cap does not fit), and can swear on your hat that you never in your life have been taken in by a dudikabin in any form--send me your name and I will award you for an epitaph that glorious one given in the Nugae Venales:

"Hic jacet ille qui unus fuit inter mille!"

The charm has worked. But the little sharp-eared children remember it, and sing it over, and the more meaningless it sounds in their ears, the more mysterious does it become. And they never talk about the bundle--which when opened was found to contain only stones, sticks, and rags--without repeating it. So it goes from mouth to mouth, until, all mutilated, it passes current for even worse nonsense than it was at first. It may be observed, however--and the remark will be fully substantiated by any one who knows the gypsy language--that there is a Romany turn to even the roughest corners of these rhymes. Kivi, stingli, stangli, are all gypsyish. But, as I have already intimated, this does not appear in any other nonsense verses of the kind. There is nothing of it in--

"Intery, mintery, cutery corn,"

or in anything else in "Mother Goose." It is alone in its sounds and sense--or nonsense. But there is not a wanderer on the roads in England who on hearing it would not exclaim, "There's a great deal of Romanes in that ere!" And if any one doubts it let him try it on any gypsy who has an average knowledge of Romany.

I should say that the word Na-Kelas, which means literally "Do not play," or, "You do not play," was explained to me by a gypsy

[p. 214]

as signifying not speaking, or keeping quiet. Nicholas John has really no meaning, but "You don't play--go on," fits exactly into a counting-out game.

The mystery of mysteries in the Romany tongue--of which I have spoken--is this: The hokkani baro, or huckeny boro, or great trick, consists of three parts. Firstly, the getting into a house or into the confidence of its owner, which is effected in England by offering small wares for sale, or by begging for food, but chiefly by fortune-telling, the latter being the usual pretence in America. If the gypsy woman be at all prepared, she will have learned enough to amaze "the lady of the house," who is thereby made ready to believe anything. The second part of the trick is the conveying away the property, which is, as I have said, to lel dudikabin, or "take lightning," possibly connected with the old canting term for conveyance of bien lightment. There is evidently a confusion of words here. And third is to "chiv o manzin apre lati" to put the oath upon her--the victim--by which she binds herself not to speak of the affair for some weeks. When the deceived are all under oath not to utter a word about the trick, the gypsy mother has a safe thing of it.

The hakkani boro, or great trick, or dudikabin, was brought by the gypsies from the East. It has been practised by them all over the world, and is still played every day somewhere. And I have read in the Press of Philadelphia that a Mrs. BROWN--whom I sadly and reluctantly believe is the wife of an acquaintance of mine who walks before the world in other names--was arrested for the same old game of fortune-telling, and persuading a simple dame that there was treasure in the house, and all the rest of the "grand deception." And Mrs. BROWN--"good old Mrs. Brown"--went to prison, where she doubtless lingered until a bribed alderman, or a purchased pardon, or some one of the numerous devices by which justice is easily evaded in Pennsylvania, delivered her.

Yet it is not a good country on the whole for hakkani boro, since

[p. 215]

the people, especially in the rural districts, have a rough and ready way of inflicting justice, which sadly interferes with the profits of aldermen and other politicians. Some years ago, in Tennessee, a gypsy woman robbed a farmer of all he was worth. Now it is no slander to say that the rural folk of Tennessee resemble Indians in several respects, and when 1 saw thousands of them during the Civil War, mustered out in Nashville, I often thought, as I studied these dark brown faces, high cheek-bones, and long, straight, wiry hair, that the American is indeed reverting to the aboriginal type. The Tennessee farmer and his friends reverted to it at any rate with a vengeance, for they turned out altogether, hunted the gypsies down, and having secured the sorceress, burned her alive at the stake. Which has been, as I believe, "an almighty warning" to the Romany in that sad section of the world. And thus in a single crime, and its consequence, we have curiously combined a world-old Oriental offence, an European Middle Age penalty for witchcraft, and the fierce torture of the Red Indian.

In the United States there is often to be found in a gypsy camp a negro or two  a few years ago a coloured sorcerer appeared in Philadelphia, who, as I was assured, "persuaded half the  in Lombard Street to dig up their cellars to find treasure--and carried off all the treasures they had." He had been, like MATTHEW ARNOLD'S scholar, among the tents of the Romany, and had learned their peculiar wisdom, and turned it to profit.

In Germany the Great Sorcery is practised with variations, and indeed in England or America or anywhere it is modified in many ways to suit the victims. The following methods are described by Dr. RICHARD LIEBICH, in "Die Zigeuner in ihrem Wesen und in ihrer Sprache" (Leipzig, 1863):--

"When a gypsy has found some old peasant who has the reputation of being rich or very well-to-do he sets himself to work with utmost care to learn the disposition

[p. 216]

of the man with every possible detail as to his house and habits." (It is easy and congenial work to people who pass their lives in learning all they can of other folks' affairs to aid in fortune-telling, to find out the soft spots, as Sam Slick calls the peculiarities by which a man may be influenced.) "And so some day, when all the rest of the family are in the fields, the gypsy--man or woman--comes, and entering into a conversation, leads it to the subject of the house, remarking that it is a belief among his people that in it a treasure lies buried. He offers, if he may have permission to take it away, to give one-fourth, a third, or a half its value. This all seems fair enough, but the peasant is greedy and wants more. The gypsy, on his side, also assumes suspicion and distrust. He proves that he is a conjuror by performing some strange tricks--thus he takes an egg from under a hen, breaks it, and apparently brings out a small human skull or some strange object, and finally persuades the peasant to collect all his coin and other valuables in notes, gold, or silver, into a bundle, cautioning him to hold them fast. He must go to bed and put the packet under his pillow, while he, the conjuror, finds the treasure. This done--probably in a darkened room--he takes a bundle of similar appearance which he has quickly prepared, and under pretence of facilitating the operation and putting the man into a proper position, takes the original package and substitutes another. Then the victim is cautioned that it is of the utmost importance for him to lie perfectly still;"

Nor move his hand nor blink his 'ee
 If ever he hoped the goud to see
 For aye aboot on ilka limb,
 The fairies had their 'een on him."

The gypsy is over the hills and far far away ere the shades of evening fall, and the family returning from their fields find the father in bed refusing to speak a word; for he has been urgently impressed with the assertion that the longer he holds his tongue and keeps the affair a secret the more money he will make. And the extreme superstition of the German peasant is such that when obliged to tell the truth he often believes that all his loss is due to a premature forced revelation of what he has done--for the gypsy in many cases has the cheek to caution the victim that if he speaks too soon the contents of the package will be turned to sand or rags--accordingly as he has prepared it.

Another and more impudent manner of playing this pretended sorcery, is to persuade the peasant that he must have a thick cloth tied

[p. 217]

around his head, and if any one addresses him to reply only by what in German is called brummen--uttering a kind of growl. This he does, when the. entire party proceed to carry off everything portable--

"Chairs and tables knives and forks,
 Tankards and bottles and cups and corks,
 Beds and dishes and boots and kegs,
 Bacon and puddings and milk and eggs,
 The carpet lying on the floor,
 And the hams hung up for the winter store,
 Every pillow and sheet and bed,
 The dough in the trough and the baken bread,
 Every bit of provant or pelf;
 All that they left was the house itself."

One may imagine what the scene is like when the rest return and find the house plundered, the paterfamilias sitting in the ruins with his head tied up, answering all frantic queries with brum--brum--brum! It may recall the well-known poem--I think it is by PETER PINDAR WOLCOTT--Of the man who was persuaded by a bet to make the motion of a pendulum, saying, "Here she goes--there she goes!" while the instigator "cleared out the house and then cleared out himself." I have little doubt that this poem was drawn from a Romany original.

Or yet, again, the gypsy having obtained the plunder and substituted the dummy packet, persuades the true believer to bury it in the barn, garden, field, or a forest, performs magic ceremonies and repeats incantations over it, and cautions him to dig it up again, perhaps six months later on a certain day, it may be his saint's or birth day, and to keep silence till then. The gypsy makes it an absolute condition--nay, he insists very earnestly on it--that the treasure shall not be dug up unless he himself is on the spot to share the spoil. But as he may possibly be prevented from coming, he tells the peasant how to proceed: he leaves with him several pieces of paper inscribed with cabalistic characters which are to be burnt when the money is removed, and teaches him what he is to repeat while doing it. With sequence as before.

[p. 218]

It might be urged by the gypsy that the taking a man's money from him under the conditions that he shall get it all back with immense interest six months after, does not differ materially from persuading him to give his property to Brahmins, or even priests, with the understanding that he is to be amply rewarded for it in a future state. I n both cases the temptation to take the money down is indeed great--as befel a certain very excellently honest but extremely cautious Scotch clergyman, to whom there once came a very wicked and wealthy old reprobate who asked him "If I gie a thousand puns till the kirk d'ye think it wad save my soul?" "I'm na preparit to preceesely answer that question," said the shrewd dominie, "but I would vara urgently advise ye to try it."

Oh thou who persuadest man that for money down great good shall result to him from any kind of spiritual incantation--twist and turn it as ye will--mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur:

"With but a single change of name,
 The story fits thee quite the same."

And few and far between are the Romanys--or even the Romans--who would not "vara earnestly advise ye to try it."

Since I wrote that last line I have met, in the Journal of American Folk-Lore, with a very interesting article on the Counting-out Rhymes of Children, in which the writer, H. CARRINGTON BOLTON, avows his belief that these doggerel verses or rhymes are the survivals of sortileges or divination by lot, and that it was practised among the ancient heathen nations as well as the Israelites:--

"The use of the lot at first received divine sanction, as in the story of Achan related by Joshua, but after this was withheld the practice fell into the hands of sorcerers--which very name signifies lot-taker. The doggerels themselves I regard as a survival of the spoken charms used by sorcerers in ancient times in conjunction with their mystic incantations. There are numerous examples of these charms, such as-

"'Huat Hanat Huat ista pista sista domiabo damnaustra.'
                  (CATO, 235 B.C.)

"And--

"'Irriori, ririori essere rhuder fere.'

[p. 219]

"And--

"'Meu, treu, mor, phor
 Teux, za, zor
 Phe, lou, chri,
 Ge, ze, on.'
 (ALEXANDER OF TRALLES.)

 

"TYLOR in his 'Primitive Culture' holds that things which occupy an important place in the life-history of grown men in a savage state become the playthings of children in a period of civilization; thus the sling and the bow and arrow, which formed the weapons of mankind in an early stage of its existence, and ate still the reliance of savage tribes, have become toys in the hands of all civilized children at the present day. Many games current in Europe and America are known to be sportive imitations of customs which formerly had a significant and serious aspect.

"Adopting this theory, I hold that counting-out is a survival of the practice of the sorcerer, using this word in its restricted and etymological meaning, and that the spoken and written charms originally used to enforce priestly power have become adjuncts to these puerile games, and the basis of the counting-out doggrels under consideration.

"The idea that European and American children engaged in 'counting-out' for games, are repeating in innocent ignorance the practices and language of a sorcerer of a dark age, is perhaps startling, but can be shown to have a high degree of probability. The leader in 'counting out' performs an incantation, but the children grouped round him are free from that awe and superstitious reverence which characterized the procedure in its earlier state. Many circumstances make this view plausible, and clothe the doggrels with a new and fascinating interest."

Mr. BOLTON remarks, however, that "in only one instance have I been able to directly connect a child's counting-out rhyme with a magic spell. According to LELAND the rhyme beginning with

'One-cry, two-ery, ickery, Ann,'

is a gypsy magic spell in the Romany language."

It occurred to me long, long ago, or before ever the name "Folk-lore" existed, that children's rhymes were a survival of incantations, and that those which are the same backward and forward were specially adapted to produce marvellous effects in lots. But there was one form of counting-out which was common as it was terrible. This was used when after a victory it was usual to put every tenth captive to death--whence the greatly abused word to "decimate"--or any other number

[p. 220]

selected. When there was a firm belief in the virtues of numbers as set forth by PYTHAGORAS, and PLATO in the Timaeus, and of cabalistic names inspired by the "Intelligences," it is not remarkable that the diviners or priests or sorcerers or distributors of sortes and sortileges should endeavour to prove that life and death lay bound up in mystic syllables. That there were curious and occult arithmetical means of counting-out and saving elected persons is shown in certain mystic problems still existent in Boys Own Books, and other handbooks of juvenile sports. It was the one on whom the fatal word of life or death fell who was saved or condemned, so that it was no wonder that the word was believed to be a subtle, mysterious existence: an essence or principle, yea, a spirit or all in one--diversi aspetti in un, confuse e misti. He who knew the name of Names which, as the Chaldaean oracles of old declared, "rushes into the infinite worlds," knew all things and had all power; even in lesser words there lingered the fragrance of God and some re-echo of the Bath Kol--the Daughter of the Voice who was herself the last echo of the divine utterance. So it went down through the ages-coming, like Caesar's clay, to base uses--till we now find the sacred divination by words a child's play: only that and nothing more.

Truly Mr. BOLTON spoke well when he said that such reflection clothes these doggerels with a new and fascinating interest. Now and then some little thing awakens us to the days of old, the rosy, early morning of mankind, when the stars of magic were still twinkling in the sky, and the dreamer, hardly awake, still thought himself communing with God. So I was struck the other day when a gypsy, a deep and firm believer in the power of the amulet, and who had long sought, yet never found, his ideal, was deeply moved when I showed him the shell on which NAV, or the Name, was mystically inscribed by Nature. Through the occult and broken traditions of his tribe there had come to him also, perhaps from Indian or Chaldaean sources, some knowledge of the ancient faith in its power.

I think that I can add to the instance of a child's counting-out

[p. 221]

game based on a magic spell, yet another. Everybody knows the song of John Brown who had

Ten little, nine little, eight little, seven little,
 Six little Indian boys;
 Five little, four little, three little, two little,
 One little Indian boy, [*1]

And of the fate which overtook them all, one by one, inevitable as the decrees of Nemesis. This song is in action a game. I have heard it in Romany from a gypsy, and have received from a gypsy scholar another version of it, though I am sure that both were versions from the English. But in Romany, as in all languages, there have existed what may be called additional and subtractive magic songs, based on some primaeval Pythagorean principle of the virtues of numbers, and, as regards form, quite like that of the ten little Indians. In the charms of MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS (third century), it appears as a cure for pains or disorders in the jaws (remedium valde certum et utile faucium doloribus), in the Song of the Seven Acorn Sisters, which the Latin-Gaul doctor describes as carmen mirum, in which opinion the lover of Folk-lore will heartily concur.

"CARMEN MIRUM AD GLANDULAS.

Glandulas mane carminabis, si dies minuetur, si nox ad vesperam, et digito medicinali ac pollice continens eas dices--

Novem glandulae sorores,
 Octo glandulae sorores,
 Septem glandulae sorores,
 Sex glandulae sorores,
 Quinque glandulae sorores,
 Quatuor glandulae sorores,
 Tres glandulae sorores,
 Duae glandulae sorores,
 Una glandula soror!

[p. 222]

Novem fiunt glandulae,
 Octo fiunt glandulae,
 Septem fiunt glandulae,
 Sex fiunt glandulae,
 Quinque fiunt glandulae,
 Quattuor fiunt glandulae,
 Tres fiunt glandulae,
 Duae fiunt glandulae,
 Una fit glandula,
 Nulla fit glandula!"

(I.e., "Nine little acorn sisters (or girls),
 Eight little acorn sisters," &c.)

This is simply the same count, forwards and backwards.

It rises before us as we read--a chorus of rosy little Auluses and Marcellas, Clodias, and Manliuses, screaming in chorus--

"Ten little, nine little, eight little, seven little,
 Six little acorn girls!"

Until it was reduced to una glandula et nulla fit--then there was none., They too had heard their elders repeat it as a c arm against the Jaw-ache--and can any man in his senses doubt that they applied it in turn to the divine witchcraft of fun and the sublime sorcery of sport, which are just as magical and wonderful in their way as anything in all theurgia or occultism, especially when the latter is used only to excite marvels and the amazement which is only a synonym for amusement. But it is not credible that such a palpable "leaving out" song as that of the Ten Little Acorn Girls should not having been utilized by such intelligent children as grew up into being the conquerors of the world--"knowing Latin at that."

There is yet another old Roman "wonderful song to the Acorns," apparently for the same disorder, given by the same author.

[p. 223]

"Albula glandula,
 Nec doleas nec noceas,
 Nec paniculas facias,
 Sed liquescas tanquam salis (mica) in aqua!

"Hoc ter novies dicens spues ad terram et glandulas ipsas pollice et digito medicinali perduces, dum carmen dices, sedante solis ortum et post occasum facies id, prout dies aut nox minuetur."

There appears in these formulas to be either a confusion or affinity as regards glandulas, the tonsils, and the same word signifying small acorns. As is very often the case, the similarity of name caused an opinion that there must be sympathetic curative qualities. Perhaps acorns were also used in this ceremony. In a comment on this GRIMM remarks: "Die Glandula wird angeredet, die Glandulae gelten fur Schwestern, wie wenn das alt hoch-deutsch druos glandula (GRAFF 5, 263) personification aukundigte? Alt Nordisch ist dros, femina."

There is another child's rhyme which is self-evidently drawn from an exorcism, that is to say an incantation. All my readers know the nursery song:--

"Snail, snail, come out of your hole,
 Or else I'll beat you as black as a coal
 Snail, snail, put out your head,
 Or else I'll beat you till you are dead!"

It is very remarkable that in Folk-lore the mole and the snail are identified, and, as DE GUBERNATIS states, both are the same with the grey mouse, or, as he might more accurately have declared with the mouse in general. A critic objects to this simply because it occurs in the work of DIE GUBERNATIS, among his "fanciful theories," but it need not follow that every citation or opinion in his book is false. FRIEDRICH, who certainly is not a fanciful theorist, asserted nearly thirty years ago that the mouse, owing to its living underground and in dark places as well as to its gnawing and destroying everything, is a chthonisches Thier, one of the animals of darkness and evil. Also "the mole, because it is of subterranean life, has received a chthonic, demoniac, misanthropic reputation."

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] In support of these statements he cites a great array of authorities. The connection between the mole and mouse is evident enough, that between both and the snail is also clear: firstly, from the fact that "the snail of popular superstition is demoniacal," or evil; and secondly, from the rhyme which I now quote, which is applied to both moles and snails. According to DU CANGE it was usual in the Middle Ages for children to go about carrying poles, on the ends of which was straw, which they lighted, and going round the gardens and under the trees shouted:--

"Taupes et mulots,
 Sortez de vas clos,
 Sinon je vous brulerai la bathe et les os!"

But in Germany there are two and in Italy five versions of the same song addressed to snails. It is evidently a Roman Catholic formula, based on some early heathen incantation. Thus in Tuscany they sing

"Chiocciola marinella
 Tira fuori le tue cornelle,
 E se tu non le tirerai
 Calcie pugni tu buscherai."

Both the snail and mole and mouse were, as I have said, chthonic, that is diabolical or of darkness. The horns of the former were supposed to connect it with the devil. "In Tuscany it is believed that in the month of April the snail makes love with serpents."

There is another nursery counting-out rhyme whose antiquity and connection with sorcery is very evident. It is as follows:--

"One, two, three, four, five,
 I caught a hare all alive.
 Six, seven, eight, nine ten,
 I let her go again."

The following from the medical spells and charms Of MARCELLUS BURDIGALENSIS manifestly explains it:--

"Lepori vivo alum abstrahes, pilosque ejus de subventre tolles atque ipsum vivum dimittes. De illis pilis, vel lana filum validum facies et ex eo talum leporis

[p. 225]

conligabis corpusque laborantis praecinges; miro remedio subvenies. Efficacius tamen erit remedium, ita ut incredibile sit, si casu os ipsum, id est talum leporis in stercore lupi inveneris, quod ita custodire debes, ne aut terram tangat aut a muliere contingatur, sed nec filum illud de lana leporis debet mulier ulla contigere. Hoc autem remedium cum uni profuerit ad alias translatum cum volueris, et quotiens volueris proderit. Filum quoque, quod ex lana vel pilis, quos de ventre leporis tuleris, solus purus et nitidus facies, quod si ita ventri laborantis subligaveris plurimum proderit, ut sublata lana leporem vivum dimmittas, et dicas ei dum dimittis eum:

"'Fuge, fuge, lepuscule, et tecum auter coli dolorem!'"

That is to say, you must "first catch your hare," then pluck from it the fur needed ad dolorem coli, then "let it go again," bidding it carry the disorder with it. In which the hare appears as a scapegoat. It may be observed that all this ceremony of catching the hare, letting it go and bidding it run and carry away the disorder, is still in familiar use in Tuscany.

It has been observed to me that "any nursery rhyme may be used as a charm." To this we may reply that any conceivable human utterance may be taken for the same purpose, but this is an unfair special pleading not connected with the main issue. Mr. CARRINGTON BOLTON admits that he has only found one instance of coincidence between nursery rhymes and spells, and I have compared hundreds of both with not much more result than what I have here given. But those who are practically familiar with such formulas recognize this affinity. On asking the Florentine fortune-teller if she knew any children's counting-out rhymes which deemed to her to be the same with incantations, she at once replied

"In witchcraft you sometimes call on people one by one by name to bewitch them. And the little girls have a song which seems to be like it." Then she sang to a very pretty tune

"Ecco l'imbasciatore,
 Col tra le vi la lera,
 Ecco l'imbasciatrice,
 Col tra la li ra la! [p. 226]
 Cosa volete col tua la li la,
 Col tra le li va la,
 Voglio Giuseppina,
 Col tra le li va le va.
 Voglio la Cesarina,
 Col tra le li ra le ra.
 Voglio la Armida, &c,
 Voglio la Gesualda,
 Voglio la Barbera,
 Voglio la Bianca,
 Voglio la Fortunata,
 Voglio la Uliva,
 Voglio la Filomena,
 Voglio la Maddalena,
 Voglio la Pia,
 Voglio la Gemma,
 Voglio la Ida,
 Voglio la Lorenzina,
 Voglio la Carolina,
 Voglio la Annunciatina,
 Voglio la Margo," &c.

There is one thing of which those who deny the identity of any counting-out rhymes with spells are not aware. These incantations are very much in vogue with the Italian peasantry, as with the gypsies. They are repeated on all occasions for every disorder, for every trifle lost, for every want. Every child has heard them, and their jingle and even their obscurity make them attractive. They are just what children would be likely to remember and to sing over, and the applying them to games and to "counting-out" would follow as a matter of course. In a country where every peasant, servant-girl and child knows at least a few spells, the wonder would be if some of these were not thus popularized or perverted. It is one thing to sit in one's library and demonstrate that this or that ought not to be, because it is founded on a "theory" or "idea," and quite another to live among people where these ideas are in active operation. WASHINGTON IRVING has recorded that one of the Dutch governors of New York achieved a vast reputation for wisdom by

[p. 227]

shrugging his shoulders, at everything and saying, "I have my doubts as to that." And truly the race Of WOUTER VAN TWILLER is not extinct as yet by any means among modern critics.

It is worth noting in this connection that in Mrs. VALENTINE'S Nursery Rhymes (Camden edition) there are fifteen charms given which are all of a magical nature.

Since the foregoing chapter was written I have obtained in Florence several additional instances of children's rhymes which were spells. Nearly allied to this subject of sorcery in the nursery is The Game of the Child-stealing Witch, which, as W. Wells Newell has shown in a very interesting and valuable contribution to the American Folk-Lore Journal, vol. iii., April, 1890, is found in many languages and lands.

In connection with divination, deceit, and robbery, it may be observed that gypsies in Eastern Europe, as in India, often tell fortunes or answer questions by taking a goblet or glass, tapping it, and pretending to hear a voice in the ring which speaks to them. This method of divination is one of the few which may have occurred sporadically, or independently in different places, as there is so much in a ringing, vibrating sound which resembles a voice. The custom is very ancient and almost universal; so Joseph (Genesis xliv. 5) says ("Vulgate"), "Scyphus quam furati estis, ipse est, in quo bibit Dominus meus, et in quo augurari solet." "The goblet which ye have stolen, is it not this wherein my lord drinketh and in which he is wont to divine?" Joseph says again (ver. 15), "Know ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine." A great number of very orthodox scholars have endeavoured to show that "divine" here means merely "to conjecture wisely," or "to see into," in order to clear Joseph from the accusation of fortune-telling: but the cup and his interpretation of dreams tell another story. In those days in the East, as now, clever men made their way very often by fortune-telling and theurgia in different forms in great families, just as ladies and gentlemen are "invited out" in London and Paris to please the company with palmistry.

[p. 228]

This divining by goblets is still common in the East. In NORDEN'S "Reise nach Egypten," &c., we are told that a native said to the travellers that he had interrogated his coffee-cup, and it had replied that the travellers were those of whom the Prophet had predicted they would come as spies and lead the way for a great immigration of Franks. In an Arabic commentary of the twelfth century the replies which the goblet gave to Joseph when it tapped on it are given in full. As coffee-drinking is very ancient it is probable that divination by means of the grounds grew out of foretelling with the cup.

Horst ("Daemonomagie," vol. ii.) remarks that "prediction by means of drinking or coffee-cups," &c., is called in magic, Scyphomancy, and that the reader may judge how common it was in Germany in the first half of the eighteenth century by consulting the famous humorous poem of the "Renomist," Song iii. ver. 47. Certain goblets of thin glass will give out quite a loud ring if only blown upon, and by blowing or breathing in a peculiar way the sound may be greatly increased or modified, so as to sound like the human voice. This was shown me by an old custode in the museum at the Hague. It is a curious trick worth trying--especially by those who would pass for magicians!

There is yet another kind of magic cup known only by tradition, the secret of which, I believe, I was the first to re-discover. It is said that the Chinese knew of old how to make bottles, &c., which appeared to be perfectly plain, but on which, when filled with wine, inscriptions or figures appeared, and which were used in divination as to answer questions. In the winter of 1886-87, Sir HENRY AUSTIN LAYARD went with me through his glass factory at Venice. [*1] As we were standing by the furnace watching the workmen it flashed upon me quite in a second how the mysterious old goblets of the Chinese could be made. This would be by blowing a bottle, &c., of thin white glass and putting on the interior in all parts except the pattern, a coating of glass half an inch in thickness. The outside should then be lightly ground, to conceal the

[p. 229]

heavy portion. If red wine or any dark fluid should then be poured into the bottle the pattern would appear of the same colour. Sir Austin Layard at once sent for his very intelligent foreman, Signor CASTELLANI, who said that he had indeed read of such goblets, but that he regarded it as a fable. But when I explained to him what had occurred to me, he said that it was perfectly possible, but that the great expense of making such objects would probably make the manufacture practically impossible. Apropos of which I may mention that those who would investigate the curiosities of glass, especially the art of making it malleable, may find a great deal in A. Nevi, "De Arte Vitraria" (Amsterdam), and its German translation of 1678 (which contains a chapter, "Wie die Malleabilitat dem Glase beygebracht werden konne").

It is probable that the celebrated cup of Djemschid, in Persian story, which showed on its surface all that passed in the world, owed its origin to these Chinese bottles.

 

 

Footnotes

^209:1 This chapter is reproduced, but with much addition, from one in my work entitled "The Gypsies," published in Boston, 1881, by HOUGHTON and MIFFLIN. London: TRUBNER & Co. The addition will be the most interesting portion to the folk-lorist.

^221:1 This song which, with its air, is very old in the United States, has been vulgarizcd by being turned into a ballad of ten little nigger boys. It is given in Mrs. VALENTINE'S Nursery Rhymes as "Indian boys."

^228:1 It is not generally known that Sir H. A. Layard and Sir William Drake were the true revivers of the glass manufacture of Venice.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 230]

 

 

  

CHAPTER XV

  

GYPSY AMULETS

"Knew many an amulet and charm
 Which would do neither good nor harm,
 In Rosicrucian lore as learned
 As he that vere adeptus earned."--HUDIBRAS.

WITH pleasant plausibility HEINE has traced the origin of one kind of fairy-lore to the associations and feelings which we form for familiar objects. A coin, a penknife, a pebble, which has long been carried in the pocket or worn by any one, seems to become imbued with his or her personality. If it could speak, we should expect to hear from it an

[p. 231]

echo of the familiar voice of the wearer; as happened, indeed, in Thuringia in the year 1562, when a fair maid, Adelhait von Helbach, was carried into captivity by certain ill-mannered persons. "Now her friends, pursuing, knew not whither to go, when they heard her voice, albeit very small and feeble, calling to them; and, seeking, they found in the bush by the road a silver image of the Virgin, which she had worn: and this image told them which road to take. Following the direction, they recovered her; the Raubritter who bore her away being broken on the wheel, and the image hung up for the glory of the Virgin, who had spoken by it, in the Church of our Lady of Kalbrunn." Again, these objects have such strange ways of remaining with one that we end by suspecting that they have a will of their own. With certain persons these small familiar friends become at last fetishes, which bring luck, giving to those who firmly believe in them great comfort and endurance in adversity.

Who has not been amazed at the persistency with which some button or pebble picked up, or placed perchance in the pocket, remains in all the migrations of keys and pencils and coins, faithful to the charge? How some card or counter will lurk in our pocket-book (misnamed "purse") or porte-monnaie, until it becomes clear as daylight that it has a reasonable intelligence, and stays with us because it wants to. As soon as this is recognized--especially by some person who is accustomed to feel mystery in everything, and who doubts nothing--the object becomes something which knows, possibly, a great deal which we do not. Therefore it is to be treated with care and respect, and in due time it becomes a kind of god, or at least the shrine of a small respectable genius, or fairy. I have heard of a gentleman in the Western United States who had a cane in which, as he seriously believed, a spirit had taken up its abode, and he reverenced it accordingly. The very ancient and widely-spread belief in the efficiency of magic wands probably came from an early faith in such implements as had been warranted to have magic virtues as weapons, or to aid a pedestrian in walking. Hence it

[p. 232]

happened that swords which had been enchanted, or which had taken lives, were supposed to have some indwelling intelligence. Hence also the names given to swords, and indeed to all weapons, by the Norsemen. It was believed that the sword of an executioner, after it had beheaded a certain number of men, pined for more victims, and manifested its desire by unearthly rattling or ringing. Apropos of which I have in my possession such a gruesome implement, which if experience in death could give it life, or make it ring in the silent watches of the night, would be a ghastly, noisy guest indeed. I once told the story in "The Gypsies" (Boston; 1881)--now I have something to add to it. I had met in London with an Indian gypsy named NANO, who informed me that in India he had belonged to a wandering tribe or race who called themselves Rom, or Romani, who spoke Romani jib, and who were the Gypsies of the Gypsies. I have in my possession a strange Hindu knife with an enormously broad blade, six inches across towards the end, with a long handle richly mounted in bronze with a little silver. I never could ascertain till I knew NANO what it had been used for. Even the old king of Oude, when he examined it, went wrong and was uncertain. Not so the gypsy. When he was in my library, and his keen black eyes rested on it, he studied it for a moment, and then said: "I know well enough that knife. I have seen it before; it is very old, and it was long in use--it was the knife used by the public executioner in Bhotan. It is Bhotani."

NANO had volunteered the explanation, and whatever his moral character might be, he was not given to romantic invention. Time passed, I went to America, stayed there four years, and returned. In 1888 I became a member of the National Association for the Advancement of Art, and was on the Central Committee. One day we had a meeting at the house of a distinguished architect. When it was over, my host showed me his many treasures of art or archaeology. While examining these, my attention was attracted by an Indian knife. It was precisely like mine, but smaller. I asked what it was, and learned that it had long been used in some place in the East for the express purpose of sacrificing

[p. 233]

young girls. And in all respects It was what we might call the feminine counterpart of my knife. And if I ever had any lingering doubt as to the accuracy of NANO's account, it disappeared when I saw the one whose history was perfectly authentic. A few years ago in Heidelburg there were sold at auction a great number of executioners' swords, some of which had been used for centuries. A gentleman who had a special fondness for this kind of bric-a-brac, had for many years collected them.

It may be here observed that the knife forms a special feature in all witch-lore, and occurs frequently among the Hungarian and Italian gypsy charms, or spells. It is sometimes stuck into a table, while a spell is muttered, protesting that it is not the wood which one wishes to hurt; but the heart of an enemy. Here the knife is supposed in reality to have an indwelling spirit which will pass to the heart or health of the one hated. In Tam O'Shanter there is a knife on the witches' table, and in Transylvania, as in Tuscany, a new knife, not an old one, is used in divers ceremonies. Sometimes an old and curious knife becomes an amulet and is supposed to bring luck, although the current belief is that any pointed gift causes a quarrel.

But to return to the fetish or pocket-deity which is worn in so many forms, be they written scrolls, crosses, medals or relics--cest tout un. Continental gypsies are notable believers in amulets. Being in a camp of very wild Cigany in Hungary a few years ago, I asked them what they wore for bakt, or luck; whereupon they all produced small seashells, which I was assured were potent against ordinary misfortunes. But for a babe which was really ill they had provided an "appreciable" dose in the form of three Maria Theresa silver dollars, which were hung round its neck, but hidden under its clothes. And I may here remark that all through many lands, even into the heart of Africa, this particular dollar is held in high esteem for magical purposes. From one to another the notion has been transferred, and travellers and traders are often puzzled to know why the savages will have no coin

[p. 234]

save this. From Russia to the Cape it is the same story, and one to be specially studied by those ethnologists who do not believe in transmission, and hold that myths and legends are of local growth and accounted for by similar local conditions.

The gypsies were very desirous to know what my charm was. Fortunately I had in my pocket a very fine fossil shark's tooth which I had purchased in Whitby, and this was greatly admired by the learned of the tribe. Mindful of good example, I obtained for myself specimens of the mystic shells, foreseeing that they would answer as passes and signs among the fraternity in Germany and elsewhere. Which, indeed, came to pass a few days ago in the town of Homburg, when looking from my window in the Schwedenpfad I saw two very honest-looking gypsies go by. Walking forth, I joined them, and led them into a garden, where over beer and cigars we discussed "the affairs of Egypt." These Romanys were from the Tyrol, and had the frank bold manner of the mountain-men blended with the natural politeness of the better class of gypsy. I had taken with me in my pocket, foreseeing its use, a small bag or purse, containing an assortment of objects such as would have puzzled anybody except a Red Indian, a negro, or any believer in medaolin or Voodoo, or my new acquaintance; and after a conversation on durkepen (in Anglo-gypsy, dukkerin) or fortune-telling, I asked the men what they wore. They wished to see my amulets first. So I produced the shells; which were at once recognized and greatly admired, especially one, which is something of a curiosity, since in its natural markings is the word NAV very plainly inscribed: Nav, in gypsy, meaning "the name." The elder gypsy said he had no charm; he had long been seeking a good one, but had not as yet met with the correct article. And then he begged me-gracious powers, how he did beg!--to bestow on him one of my shells. I resolved to do so--but at another time.

The younger gypsy, who was a pasche-paskero, a musician, and had with him a rare old violin in a wonderfully carved wooden case at least two centuries old, was "all right" on the fetish question. He had his

[p. 235]

shell, sewn up in a black leather bag, which he wore by a cord round his neck. Then I exhibited my small museum. Every object in it was carefully and seriously examined. My shark's tooth was declared to be a very good fetish, a black pebble almost equal to the shell, and an American Indian arrow-head of quartz passed muster as of possible though somewhat doubtful virtue. But an English sixpence with a hole in it was rejected as a very petty and contemptible object. I offered it in vain as a present to my friends: they would not accept it. Neither did they want money: my dross might perish with me. It was the shell--the precious beautiful little shell on which the Romany in search of a fetish had set his heart; the shell which would bring him luck, and cause him to be envied, and ensure him admiration in the tents of the wanderers from Paris to Constantinople. He admitted that it was the very shell of shells--a baro sereskeri sharkuni, or famous sea-snail. I believe the gypsies would have given me their fine old Stainer violin and the carved case for it. Failing to get the shell, he implored me to give him the black pebble. I resolved to give him both in free gift the next time we met, or as a parting souvenir. Alas for the Romany chal!--we never met again. The police allow no gypsies in Homburg, and so they had to move on. I sought them that night and I sought them next day; but they were over the hills and far away. But I have no doubt that the fame of the shell on which Nature has written the Name--the very logos of magic itself--spread ere the summer was past even to the Carpathians. Something tells me that it is not played out yet, and that I shall hear anon something regarding it.

The cult of the shell is widely spread. One day in a public-house, in the West End of London, I, while taking my glass of bitter, entered into conversation with a rather tall, decently-attired brunette Alsatian girl, who spoke French and German, and who knew a few words of Romany, which she said she had picked up by --at least she professed not to be gypsy, and to know no more. Being minded to test the truth of this, I casually exhibited one of my shells

[p. 236]

and said it was a Hungarian gypsy amulet for la bonne fortune. She began to beg earnestly for it, without getting it. On several occasions at long intervals, when I met her in the street, she again implored me for the treasure, saying that she believed "if she had it, her luck would turn to good." And, being convinced of her gypsyism, I said, "It will do you no good unless you have faith." To which she replied, in a tone which indicated truth itself: "But I have faith--absolute, entire faith in it." Which seeing, and finding that she was a true convert to the power of the holy shell, I gave it to her with my blessing, knowing that it would be a joy and comfort to her in all the trial, of life.

This reminds me that I have seen, and indeed possess, a pearl-shell bearing the image of Saint Francis of Assisi, such as is sold by thousands at his shrine, and which are supposed to possess certain miraculous innate or intrinsic virtues. Thus, if worn by children, they are a cure for croup.--Ah--but that is a very different thing, you know."

An idol is an object, generally an image, worshipped for its own sake--being supposed to not only represent a god, but to have some immanent sanctity. The Catholic priest, and for that matter all Brahmins or bonzes, assure us that their sacred images are "only symbols, not regarded as really dwelling-places of divinity." They are not, so to speak, magnified amulets. Yet how is it that, if this he true, so many images and pictures are regarded and represented by priests as being able of themselves by the touch to cure tooth-ache, and all other ills which flesh and bones are heirs to. Why is one image especially good for tooth-ache, while another of the same person cures cramp? Why, if they are all only "symbols," is one more healing or holy than another? How can our Lady of Embrun be of greater aid than our Lady of Paris? The instant we ascribe to an image or a shell real power to act, we make of it an inspired being in itself, and all the sophistry in the world as to its being a means of faith, or a symbol, or

[p. 237]

causing a higher power to act on the suppliant, is rubbish. The devotee believes tout bonnement that the image works the cure, and if he did not, any other image of the Virgin or Saint would answer the same purpose. This chaff has been thrashed out a thousand times--or many tens of thousand times in vain,--as vain so far as effects go as is the remarkably plain First Commandment. And it will last, while one fetish endures, that the hierophant will call it a mere "symbol," and the ignorant worshipper, absolutely unable to comprehend him, will worship the symbol as the thing itself--as he is really expected to do.

According to J. B. FRIEDRICH, "Symbolik der Natur," the seashell, on account of its being a product of the sea, or of the all-generating moisture; and much more probably from its shape, is an emblem of woman herself. Therefore as 'Venus, Love's goddess, was born of the sea," shells are dedicated to her. ("Museo Bourbonico," Vol. vi. p. 10. KUGLER, "Handbuch Geschichte der Malerei," Berlin, 1837, Vol. iv. p. 311. Also translated by Sir H. AUSTIN LAYARD). Being one of the great emblems of productive Nature, or of life and light, and opposed to barrenness, absence of pleasure, darkness, or negation, it was of course a charm against witchcraft or evil. That the gypsies have retained it as a powerful agent for "luck," is extremely interesting, showing to what a degree they are still influenced by the early symbolism which effectively formed not one but many mythologies. Among the Hungarian gypsies the virtue or magical power of a shell is in proportion to the degree of resemblance above mentioned, which it possesses, as Wlislocki expressly declares.

This association of shells, with the mysterious and magical, is to be found among gypsies in the East, as is shown by the following: from my work entitled "The Gypsies." It describes something which I saw many times in Cairo--

"Beyond the door which, when opened, gave this sight, was a dark, ancient archway, twenty yards long, which opened on the glaring, dusty street, where camels with their drivers, and screaming sais or carriage-runners and donkey-boys and crying

[p. 238]

venders kept up the wonted Oriental din. But in the archway, in its duskiest corner, there sat in silence and immovable, a living picture-a dark, handsome woman, of thirty years, who was unveiled. She had before her on the gateway floor, a square of cloth and a few shells. Sometimes an Egyptian of the lower class stopped, and there would be a grave consultation. She was a fortune-teller, and from the positions which the shells assumed when thrown she predicted what would come to pass. And then there would be a solemn conference and a thoughtful stroking of the beard, if the applicant was a man, and then the usual payment to the oracle, and a departure. And it was all world-old primaeval Egyptian, as it was Chaldaean, for the woman was a Rhagarin, or gypsy, and as she sat so sat the diviners of ancient days by the wayside, casting shells for auspices, even as arrows were cast of old, to be cursed by Israel.

"It is not remarkable that among the myriad manteias of olden days there should have been one by shells. The sound of the sea when heard in a nautilus or conch is marvellously--like that of ocean surges murmuring far."

"Shake me and it awakens--then apply
 Its polished lips to your attentive ear,
 And it remembers its august abodes
 And murmurs as the ocean murmurs there."

All of this is very strange to children and not less so to all unsophisticated folk, and I can remember how in boyhood I was told and listened with perfect faith to the distant roaring, and marvelled at the mystery of the ocean song being thus for ever kept alive inland. The next step to this is to hear in the sea-murmuring something like voices, and this is as curious as it is true--that if the mind be earnestly given to it, and the process be continued for a long time during several days, many persons, and probably all in time, will come to distinguish or hear human utterances and eventually words. There is no special faith required here; the mind even of the most sceptical or unimaginative will often turn back on itself, and by dint of mere perseverance produce such effects. An old pitcher or jug of a peculiar shape is also declared to be admirably adapted for this purpose, and I have one of Elizabeth's time which was trawled up from the sea near Lowestoft which would fulfil every requisition.

In 1886 I was by moonlight in a camp of gypsies in the old Roman amphitheatre near Budapest. It was a very picturesque sight, what with

[p. 239]

the blazing fire, the strangely-dressed men, the wild shrieking, singing, and dancing women. And when, as I have before mentioned, they showed me the shells which they carried for amulets, they exhibited one much larger o conch-like form, the tip of which had been removed and to which there was attached a flexible tube. This was used in a very remarkable trick. The shell, or one like it, is put into the hands of the person consulting the oracle, who is directed to listen to the voice of the Nivashi, or spirit of the air. Then he is blindfolded, the tube applied, and through it the gypsy speaks in a trained soft voice. Thus, in conchomanteia, the oracles still live and devotees still hear the fairies talk.

Now, be it observed that hearing is the most deceptive of the senses--as the reader may have seen exemplified by a lecturer, when the audience were persuaded that he was fiddling on one cane with another, or blowing a flute tune on one, when the music was made by a confederate behind a screen. I myself, a few days since, when in the Koppern Thal, verily believed I heard the murmur and music of children's voices--when lo! it proved to be the babbling brook. Some years ago--I forget where it happened in England, but I guarantee the truth of what I tell--it was found that the children in a certain village were in the habit of going to an ancient tomb in which there was a round hole, putting their ears to it, and, as they said, of listening to what the dead people were saying. It is facile enough to understand that among them there would be some whose unconscious creative faculty would lead them to literally hearing words or songs. There is another ancient and beautiful mystical association with shells. The conch when pierced formed a trumpet, whose notes seemed to be allied to the murmuring of the wind and waves heard in the shell when applied to the ear. The sea-god Triton blew upon a shell--"meaning thereby the roaring of the waves." "And in analogous wise a shell is represented on the Tower of the Winds in Athens, to represent Boreas, the north-east wind, and the roaring of the storm" (MILLIN, "Gallerie Mythologique"). The resemblance of wind to the human voice has probably occurred to every human being, and has furnished

[p. 240]

similes for every poet. That these voices should be those of spirits is a natural following. So the last Hebrew oracle, the Bath Kol, or Daughter of the Voice, survives in shells and lives in gypsy-lore. And so we find in rags and patches on the garments of Egyptian fellahin the edges of Pharaoh's garment, which in olden time it was an honour for kings to kiss.

Deception of this kind by means of voices, apparently supernatural, is of great antiquity. The high priest Savan the Asmunian, of Egypt, is said to have used acoustic tubes for this purpose, and it is very evident that the long corridors or passages in the stone temples must have suggested it as well as whispering galleries. The Hebrew Cabalists are believed to have made one form of the mysterious Teraphim by taking the head of a child and so preparing it by magic ceremonies that when interrogated it would reply. These ceremonies consisted in fact of skilfully adjusting a phonetic tube to the head. It is very probable that the widely-spread report of this oracle gave rise to the belief that the Jews slaughtered and sacrificed children. "Eliphaz Levi," or the Abbe Constant, a writer of no weight whatever as an authority, but not devoid of erudition, and with occasional shrewd insights, gives it as his belief that the terrible murders of hundreds of children by Gilles de Retz--the absurdly so-called original of Blue-beard--were suggested by a recipe for sanguinary sorcery, drawn from some Hebrew Cabalistical book. Nicephorus (Lib. 7 c. 33) and Cedrenus, as cited by Grosius in his "Magica" (1597), tell us that when Constantine was ill a number of children were collected to be slain that the emperor might bathe in their blood (in quo si se Imperator ablueret, certo recuperaret), and that because he was moved by the tears of their mothers to spare their lives, was restored to health by the saints. It seems to have escaped the attention of writers that at the very time during the Middle Ages when the Jews were being most bitterly persecuted for offering children at the Passover, it was really a common thing among Christians to sacrifice children, maids, or grown-up people, by burying them alive under the foundations of castles, &c., to insure their stability--a ghastly sacrifice, which in after-times took the form of walling-up a

[p. 241]

cock and finally an egg. But from an impartial and common-sense standpoint: there could be no difference between the sacrifice of a child by a Cabalist and the torturing and burning witches and heretics by ecclesiastics, unless, indeed, that the latter was the wickeder of the two, since the babes were simply promptly killed, while the Inquisitors put their victims to death with every refinement of mental and physical torture. Both Cabalist and priest were simply engaged in different forms of one and the same fetish-work which had been handed down from the days of witchcraft. Nor did Calvin, when he burnt Servetus, differ in anything from a Voodoo sacrificing "a goat without horns."

Punishing a heretic to please or placate the Deity differs in nothing from killing any victim to get luck. Other sentiments may be mingled with this "conjuring," but the true foundation of black witchcraft (and all witchcraft is black which calls for blood, suffering, starvation, and the sacrifice of natural instincts), is the mortar of the fear of punishment, and the stones of the hope of reward, the bulk of the latter being immeasurably greater than that of the former, which is a mere Bindemittel, or means of connection.

It is remarkable that nowhere, not even in England, do the gypsies regard the witch as utterly horrible, diabolical, and damnable. She is with them simply a woman who has gained supernatural power, which she uses for good or misuses for evil according to her disposition. The witch of the Church--Catholic or Protestant--when closely examined is a very childish conception. She sets forth personal annoyance without any regard whatever as to whether it is really good in disguise or a natural result of our own follies. Thus witches caused thunder-storms, which, because they were terrifying and more or less destructive, were seriously treated by the Church as unmitigated evils, therefore as phenomena directly due to the devil and his servants. Theology the omniscient did not know that storms cleared the air. Witches were responsible for all pestilences, and very often for all disorders of any kind--as it was very convenient for the ignorant leech to attribute to sorcery or moral delinquency

[p. 242]

or to God a disease which he could not cure. For "Theology, the science of sciences," had not as yet ascertained that plagues and black deaths, and most of the ills of man are the results of neglect of cleanliness, temperance, and other sanitary laws. It is only a few years since a very eminent clergyman and president of a college in America attributed to "Divine dispensation" the deaths of a number of students, which were directly due to palpable neglect of proper sanitary arrangements by the reverend gentleman himself, and his colleagues. But, admitting the "divine dispensation," according to the mediaeval theory, the president, as the agent, must have been a "wizard"--or conjuror--a delusion which the most superficial examination of his works would at once dissipate. But to return--there can be no denial whatever that according to what is admitted to be absolutely true to-day by everybody, be he orthodox or liberal, witches, had they existed, must have been agents of God, busied in preventing plagues instead of causing them--by raising storms which cleared the air. Even the Algonkin Indians knew more than the Church in this respect, for they have a strange old legend to the effect that when the god of Storms, Wuch-ow-sen, the giant eagle, was hindered by a magician from his accustomed work, the sea and air grew stagnant, and people died. [*1] The witch was simply another form of the Hebrew Azrael, God's Angel of Death.

Which may all lead to the question: If a belief in witches as utterly evil servants of the devil could be held as an immutable dogma of the Church and a matter of eternal truth for eternal belief-to prove which there is no end of ingenious argument and an appalling array of ecclesiastical authority cited in the black-letter "Liber de Sortilegiis" Of PAULUS GRILLANDUS, now lying before me (Lyons, 1547), as well as in the works of SPRENGER, BODINUS, DELRIO, and the Witch-bull of Pope Innocent--and if this belief be now exploded even among the priests, what proof have we that any of the dogmas which went with it are absolutely and for ever true? This is the question of dogmatik, versus development or evolution, and witchcraft

[p. 243]

is its greatest solvent. For when people believe, or make believe, in a thing so very much as to torture like devils and put to death hundreds of thousands of fellow-beings, mostly helpless and poor old women, not to mention many children, it becomes a matter of very serious import to all humanity to determine once for all whether the system or code according to which this was done was absolutely right for ever, or not. For if it was true, these executions and the old theory of witchcraft were all quite right, as the Roman Church still declares, since the Pope has sanctioned of late years several very entertaining works in which modern spiritualists, banjo-twangers, table-turners, &c., are declared to be really wizards, who perform their stupendous and appalling miracles directly by the aid of devils. And, by the way, somebody might make an interesting work not only on the works in the Index Librum Prohibitorum, which it entails seventy-six distinct kinds of damnation to read, but also on those which the Pope sanctions--I believe, blesses. Among the later of the latter is one which pretends to prove that Jews do really still continue to sacrifice Christian children at the Passover feast--and, for aught I know, to eat them, fried in oil, or "buttered with goose-grease"--apropos of which, I marvel that the Hebrews, instead of tamely denying it, do not boldly retort on the Christians the charge of torturing their own women and children to death as witches, which was a thousand times wickeder than simply bleeding them with a pen-knife, as young Hugh of Lincoln was said to have been disposed of by the Jew's daughter.

But people all say now--that was the age, and the Church was still under the influence of barbarism, and so on. Exactly; but that admission plainly knocks down and utterly destroys the whole platform of dogmatism and the immutable and eternal truth of any dogma whatever, for it admits evolution--and to seize on its temporary fleeting forms and proclaim that they are immutable, is to mistake the temporal for the eternal, the infinitesimal fraction for the whole. This is not worshipping GOD, the illimitable, unknown tremendous Source of Life, but His minor

[p. 244]

temporary forms, "essences," or "angels," as the Cabalists termed the successive off-castings of His manifestations.

In Being's flood, in action's storm,
 I work and weave--above, beneath,
 Work and weave in endless motion
 Birth and death, an infinite ocean
     A seizing and giving
     The fire of the living.
 'Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply
 And weave for God the garment thou seest Him by.

Now there are infinite numbers of these garments, but none of them are GOD, though the Church declared that what they had of them were truly Divine. So Oriental princes sent their old clothes to distant provinces to be worshipped, as GESSLER sent his hat: it is an old, old story, and one which will be long repeated in many lands.

I have, not far back, mentioned a work on witchcraft by PAULUS GRILLANDUS. Its full title is "Tractatus de Hereticis et sortilegiis, omnifariam Coitio eorumque penis. Item de Questionibus et Tortura ac de Relaxatione Carceratorum"--that is, in brief, a work on Heretics, Witches breakers of the Seventh Commandment of all kinds, Examination by Torture, and Imprisonment. It was a leading vade mecum, or standard guide, in its time for lawyers and the clergy, especially the latter, and reads as if it had come from the library of hell, and been written by a devil, though composed, according to the preface, to promote the dignity and glory of the Christian Church. I can well believe that a sensitive humane person could be really maddened by a perusal and full comprehension of all the diabolical horrors which this book reveals, and the glimpses which it gives of what must have been endured literally by millions of heretics and "witches," and all men or women merely accused by anybody of any kind of "immorality," especially of "heresy." I say suspected or accused--for either was sufficient to subject a victim to horrible agonies until he or she confessed. What is most revolting is the calm, icy-cold-blooded

[p. 245]

manner in which the most awful, infernal cruelties are carefully discussed--as, for instance, if one has already had any limbs amputated for punishment whether further tortures may then be inflicted? It is absolutely a relief to find that among the six kinds of persons legally exempted from the rack, &c.--there are only six and these do not include invalids--are pregnant women. But such touches of common humanity are rare indeed in it. I do not exaggerate in the least when I say that the whole spirit of this work--which faithfully reflects the whole spirit of the "justice" of the Middle Ages--inclines in a ferocious, wolfish manner to extend and multiply punishment of the most horrible kinds to every small offence against the Church--to manufacture and increase crime as if it were capital for business, and enlarge the sphere of torture so as to create power and awe.

Nous avons change tout cela, say the descendants of those fiends in human form. But if it was wrong then why did you do it if you were infallible inspired judges? And if you now believe that to be atrocious which was once holy, and a vast portion of your whole system, how can you say that the Church does not follow the laws of evolution and progress--and if so, where will it stop? It is a curious reflection that if the Pope and Cardinals of 1890 had lived four hundred years ago they would (with the exception, perhaps, of the Spaniards) have all been burned alive for heresy. Which is literally true.

Within a minute's walk from where I sit and indeed visible from my window in this town of Homburg vor der Hohe, are two round towers of other days--grim and picturesque relics of the early Middle Ages. One is called the Hexenthurm or Witches' Tower. In it gypsies, witches, and heretics were confined--it was the hotel specially reserved for them when they visited Homburg, and in its cells which are of the smallest between walls of the thickest, I or you, reader, Might be confined to-day, but for one MARTIN LUTHER and certain laws of evolution or progress of which Paulus Grillandus did not dream.

[p. 246]

As I was sketching the tower, an old woman told me that there were many strange tales about it. That I can well believe but I dare

say they are all summed up in the following ballad from the German of HEINE

"THE WITCH."

"FOLKS said when my granny Eliza bewitched,
     She must die for her horrid transgression;
 Much ink from his pen the old magistrate pitched,
     But he could not extort a confession.

And when in the kettle my granny was thrown
     She yelled 'Death' and 'Murder!' while dying.
 And when the black smoke all around us was blown.
     As a raven she rose and went flying.

Little black grandmother, feathered so well,
     Oh, come to the tower where I'm sitting
 Bring cakes and bring cheese to me here in the cell,
     Through the iron-barred window flitting.

Little black grandmother, feathered and wise,
     Just give my aunt a warning,
 Lest she should come flying and pick out my eyes
     When I merrily swing in the morning."

HORST in his "Daemonomagie," a History of the Belief in Magic, Demoniac marvels, Witchcraft, &c., gives the picture of a Witch-tower, at Lindheim in the Wetterau, with all its terrible history, extracted from the town archives. It is a horrible history of torturing and burning at the stake of innumerable women of all ages, the predominant feature

[p. 247]

being that any accusation by anybody whatever, or any rumour set afloat in any way, amply sufficed to bring an enemy to death, or to rob a person who had money. Hysterical women and perverse or eccentric children frequently originated these accusations merely to bring themselves into notice.

There was till within a few years a Witches' Tower in Heidelberg. It was a very picturesque structure in an out-of-the-way part of the town, in nobody's way, and was therefore of course pulled down by the good Philistine citizens, who have the same mania in Heidelberg as "their ignorant-like" in London, Philadelphia, or any other town, for removing all relics of the olden time.

In connection with sorcery and gypsies, it is worth observing that ill 1834 the latter, in Swabia, or South Germany, frequently went about among the country-people, with puppet-shows, very much of the Punch kind, and that they had a rude drama of Faust, the great wizard, which had nothing to do with that of Goethe. It was derived from the early sources, and had been little by little gypsified into a melodrama peculiar to the performers. August Zoller, in his "Bilder aus Schwaben" (Stuttgard, 1834), gives the following description of it. The book has a place in all Faust libraries, and has been kept alive by this single passage:--

"There is a blast of a trumpet, and the voice of a man proclaims behind the scenes that the play is to begin. The curtain is drawn, and Faust leaning against the background--which represents a city-soliloquizes!

"'I am the cleverest doctor in the world, but all my cleverness does not help me to make the beautiful princess love me, I will call up Saran front the under-world to aid me in my plans to win her. Devil--I call thee!'

"Meanwhile Faust's servant--the funny man--has entered and amused the public with comical gestures. The appearance of the devil is announced by a firework (Spruhteufel) fizzing and cracking. He descends from the air, there being no arrangements for his coming up. The servant bursts into a peal of laughter, and the devil asks:

"'Faust thou hast called me; now, what is thy wish?'

"'I love the lovely princess--canst thou make her love me?'

"'Nothing is easier. Cut thy finger and sign to me thy life; then all my devilish art will be at thy service till thou hast committed four murders.'

"Faust and the devil fly forth, the servant making sarcastic remarks as to the folly of his master, and the curtain falls.

[p. 248]

"In the second act the fair princess enters--she is three times as large as Faust, but bewails his absence in a plaintive voice and departs. Faust enters and calls for a Furio who shall carry him to Mantua. Enter three Furios (witches) who boast their power. 'I can carry you as swiftly as a moor-cock flies,' says one. This is not swift enough for Faust. 'I fly as fast as bullet from a gun,' says the second. The master answers:

"'A right good pace, but not enough for Faust.' To the third: 'How fast art thou?'

"'As quick as Thought.'

"'That will suffice--there's naught so swift as Thought. Bear me to Mantua, to her I love, the princess of my heart!'

"The Furio takes Faust on her back, and they fly through the air. The servant makes, as before, critical and sarcastic remarks on what has passed, and the curtain falls.

"In the third act the devil persuades Faust to murder his father, so as to inherit his treasures, 'for the old man has a tough life.' In the fourth, maddened by jealousy, he stabs the Princess and her supposed lover. The small sarcastic servant takes the murdered pair by the legs, and drags them about, cracking jokes, and giving the corpses cuff's on their ears to bring them again to life.

"In the fifth act, the clock strikes eleven. Faust has now filled to the brim the measure of his iniquity. The devil appears, proves to him that it is time to depart; it strikes twelve; the smoke of a fizzling squib and several diabolical fire-crackers fills the air, and Faust is carried away, while the small servant, as satanical and self-possessed as ever, makes his jokes on the folly of Faust--and the curtain falls."

This is the true Faust drama of the Middle Ages, with the ante-Shakespearian blending of tragedy and ribald fun. But this same mixture is found to perfection in the early Indian drama--for instance, in "Sakuntala"--and it would be indeed a very curious thing should it be discovered that the gypsies, who were in all ages small actors and showmen of small plays, had brought from the East some rude drama of a sorcerer, who is in the end cheated by his fiend. Such is, in a measure, the plot of the Baital Pachisi or Vikram and the Vampire, which is borrowed from or founded on old traditions, and the gypsies, from their familiarity with magic, and as practical actors, would, in all probability, have a Faust play of some kind, according to the laws of cause and effect. In any case the suggestion may be of value to some investigator.

Gypsies in England--that is those "of the old sort"--regard a shoestring as a kind of amulet or protection. Many think it is unlucky to

[p. 249]

have one's  taken but no harm can come of it if the one who receives the picture gives the subject a shoe-string or a pair of laces.

Dr. F. S. KRAUSS in his curious work, "Srec'a, or Fortune and Fate in the popular belief of the South Slavonians" (Vienna, 1886), draws a line of distinction between the fetish and amulet. "The fetish," he declares, "has virtue from being the dwelling of a protecting spirit. The amulet, however, is only a symbol of a higher power," that is of a power whose attention is drawn by or through it to the believer or wearer. This, however, like the distinction between idolatry and worshipping images as symbols of higher beings, becomes in the minds of the multitude (and for that matter, in all minds), a distinction without a dot of difference. The amulet may "rest upon a higher range of ideas, while the fetish stands on its own feet," but if both are regarded as bringing luck, and if, for instance, one rosary or image of the same person is believed to bring more luck than another, it is a fetish and nothing else. An amulet may pretend to be a genteeler kind of fetish, but they are all of the same family.

The gypsies prepare among the Bosniacs, "on the high plains of Malwan," a fetish in the form of a cradle made of nine kinds of wood, to bring luck to the child who sleeps in it. But Dr. KRAUSS falls, I presume, into a very great error, when he attributes to her Majesty the Queen of England a belief in fetish, on the strength of the following remarkable pas sage from the Wiener Allgemeine Zeitung:--

"By command of Queen VICTORIA, Mr. MARTIN, Director of the Institute for the Blind, has attended to the making a cradle for the newly-born child of the Princess of Battenberg. The cradle is to be made entirely by blind men and women. The Queen firmly believes that objects made by blind people bring luck."

Truly, if anything could bring luck it ought to be something ordered with a kind and charitable view from poor and suffering people, but it is rather hard to promptly conclude that her Majesty believes in fetish because she benevolently ordered a cradle from the blind, and that she had no

[p. 250]

higher motive than to get something which would bring luck to her grandchild.

It may be observed in connection with this superstition that among the Hungarian gypsies several spells depend on using different kinds of wood, and that four are said to have been taken for the true cross.

Gypsies, in common with the rest of the "fetishioners" of all the world, believe in the virtue of a child's caul. Dr. KRAUSS found in Kobash on the Save an amulet which contained such a caul with garlic and four-leaved clover. This must have been a very strong charm indeed, particularly if the garlic was fresh.

Another very great magic protector in every country among gypsies as well as Gentiles, is the thunderbolt, known in Germany as the Donneraxt, Donnerstein, Donnerkeil, Albschoss, Strahlstein, and Teufelsfinger. It was called by the Greeks Astropelakia, by the Latins Gemma cerauniae, by the Spaniards Piedras de rayo, by the dwellers in the French High Alps Peyras del tron (pierres de tonerre), by the Birmans Mogio (the child of lightning), by the Chinese Ra-fu-seki (the battle-axe of Tengu, the guardian of Heaven), by the Hindoos Swayamphu, or "the self-originated." Dr. KRAUSS, from whom I have taken these remarks, adds that in America and Australia it is also regarded as a charm protective and luck-bringing. But here there is a confusion of objects. The thunderbolt described by Dr. KRAUSS is, I believe, a petrified shell, a kind of mucro or belemnite. The thunderbolt of the Red Indians really resembles it, but is entirely different in its nature. The latter results from lightning entering the sand fusing it. It sometimes makes in this way a very long tube or rod, with a point. People, finding these, naturally believed that they were thunderbolts. I knew an old Penobscot Indian who, seeing the lightning strike the earth, searched and found such a thunderbolt, which he greatly prized. In process of time people who found mucrones in rocks believed them to be the same as the glass-like points of fused sand which they so much resembled.

The so-called thunderbolt is confused with the prehistoric stone axe,

[p. 251]

both bearing the same name in many lands. As this axe is often also a hammer it is evident that it may have been sacred to Thor. "The South Slavonian"--or gypsy--"does not distinguish," says Dr. KRAUSS, "between the thunderbolt and prehistoric axe. He calls both strelica. The possession of one brings luck and prosperity in all business, but it must be constantly carried on the person. Among the "thirties" there lived in Gaj in Slavonia a poor Jewish peddler named DAVID. Once he found a strelica. He always carried it about with him. The peasants envied him greatly its possession. They came to him in the market-place and cried, "Al si sretan, Davide!" ("Ha, how lucky thou art, David!") The Slavonian Jews called him, for a joke, "Strelica."

The prehistoric axe was probably regarded as gifted with fetish power, even in the earliest age, especially when it was made of certain rare materials. Thus among the Red Indians of Massachusetts stone "tomahawks" of veined, petrified wood were specially consecrated to burial-places, while in Europe axe-heads of jade were the most coveted of possessions. A. B. MEYER has written a large work, "Jade und Nephrit Objecte aus dem Ethriographische Museum zu Dresden, America und Europe" (Leipzig, 1882). It has always been supposed that the objects of true jade came only from Tartary, and I believe that I was the first person to discover that it existed in quantities in Western Europe. The history of this "finding" is not without interest.

It has been usual--it is said for a thousand years--for pilgrims to Iona to bring away with them as souvenirs a few green pebbles of a peculiar kind, and to this day, as every tourist will remember, the children who come to the steamboat offer handsful of them for sale. When I was there many years ago--in Iona--I also went away with perhaps twenty of them. One evening, after returning to London, there were at my home three Chinese gentlemen attached to the Legation. The conversation turned on Buddhist pilgrimages and Fusang, and the question, founded on passages in the Chinese annals, as to whether certain monks had really passed from the Celestial Kingdom to Mexico in the fifth century and returned. This

[p. 252]

reminded me of Iona, and I produced my green pebbles, and told what I knew about them.

My visitors regarded the stones with great interest and held an animated conversation over them in Chinese, which I did not understand. Observing this I made them presents of the pebbles, and was thanked with an earnestness which seemed to me to be out of all proportion to the value of the gifts. Thinking this over the next day, I wrote to the clergyman at Iona asking him to be so kind as to send me some of the pebbles, and offering to pay for them. He did so, sending me by mail a box of the stones. Two or three were very pretty, one especially. It is of a dark green colour and slightly transparent.

Two years after, when in Philadelphia, meeting with an old friend, Dr. JOSEPH LEIDY, well known as a man of science, and, inter alia, as a mineralogist. I showed him my pebble and asked him what it was. He replied, "It is jade." To my query whether it might not be nephrite he answered no, that it was true jade of fine quality.

Jade is in China a talismanic stone, many occult virtues and luck-bringing qualities being ascribed to it. It is very curious, and possibly something more than a mere chance coincidence, that the green pebbles of Iona were also carried as charms. It would be remarkable if even in prehistoric times, or in the stone age, Iona and Tartary had been connected by superstition and tradition.

Among the gypsies as well as Christians in Servia, nuts, especially those which are heart-shaped (i.e., double), are carried as fetishes or amulets. In very early times a nut, as containing like a seed the principle of germination and self-reproduction, was typical of life. Being enclosed in a shell it seemed to be in a casket or box which was of itself a mystical symbol. Hence nuts are often found in ancient graves. There are many stories accordingly in all countries in which a nut or egg is represented as being connected with the life of some particular being or person. The ogre in several tales can live until a certain egg is broken. In the Graubunden or Grisons there is the following legend:--

[p. 253]

"Once there lived near Fideriseau a rich peasant. To him came a poor beggar, who asked for alms in vain. Then the man replied, 'If thou wilt give me nothing yet will I give thee something. Thou shalt keep thy treasure and also thy daughter after thee; yea, and for years after she is dead her spirit shall know no rest for taking care of it. But I give thee this nut. Plant it by yonder great stone, thou stony-hearted fool. From the nut will grow a tree, and from the tree twigs from which a cradle will be made in which a child will be rocked who will redeem thy daughter from her penance.' And after the girl died, a spirit of a pale woman with dark hair was seen flying nightly near Fideris, and that for many years, for it takes a long time for an acorn to grow up into an oak. But as she is no longer seen it is believed that the cradle has been made and the child born who became the deliverer."

A. B. Elysseeff, in his very interesting article based on Kounavine's "Materials for the Study of the Gypsies," gives the representation of four gypsy amulets, also "a cabalistic token" that brings good luck to its wearer.

"The amulets," writes M. Elysseeff, "are made of wrought iron and belong to M. Kounavine. The cabalistic sign is designed" (copied?) "by ourselves, thanks to the amiability of a gypsy djecmas (sorcerer) of the province of Novogorod. The amulet A was found by M. Kounavine among the gypsies who roam with their camps in the Ural neighbourhood; some Bessarabian gypsies supplied B; C was obtained from a gypsy sorcerer of the Persian frontier, and D formed a part of some ornaments placed with their dead by gypsies of Southern Russia.

"The cabalistic sign" (vide illustration at head of chapter) "represents roughly a serpent, the symbol of Auromori, the evil principle in gypsy mythology. The figure of an arch surrounded with stars is, according to M. Kounavine, held by the gypsies as symbolizing the earth, the meaning of the triangle A is not known. The moon and stars which surround the earth and which are, so to speak, enclosed in the serpent's coils, symbolize the world lying in evil. This sign is engraved by gypsies upon the plates of the harness of the horses, of garments, and as designed ornaments."

It may be here remarked that the symbolism of M. Kounavine, while it may be quite accurate, must be taken with great reserve. If the "arch" he simply a horse-shoe, all these ornaments, except the serpent, may be commonly found on the trappings of London dray-horses.

"Amulet A, which also represents the sun, the moon, the stars, earth, and a serpent, can equally serve as a symbol of the universe. According to M. Kounavine, Ononi" (the Ammon of the Egyptians) "and Auromori, are symbolized upon this amulet. Amulet B represents a man surrounded by a halo, aided by the moon and the stars, and armed with a sword and

[p. 254]

arrows. Beneath is represented the horse; the serpent symbolizes Auromori. As a whole this amulet represents the conflict between the good and evil principle, Jandra (Indra) against Auromori.

"Amulet C represents a gleaming star and the serpent, and is called Baramy (Brama), symbolizing, according to M. Kounavine, the gypsy proto-divinity.

"Or amulet D, which represents a flaming pyre and some hieroglyphics, may also symbolize the prayer addressed to the divinity of the fire."

If these explanations were given by gypsy sorcerers the amulets are indeed very curious. But, abstractly, the serpent, arrows, stars, the moon, an archer, a fox, and a plant, occur, all the world over., on coins or in popular art, with or without symbolism, and I confess that I should have expected something very different as illustrating such a remarkable mythology as that given by M. Kounavine. However, the art of a nation--as, for instance, that of the Algonkin, Indians--may be very far indeed behind its myths and mental conceptions.

 

 

Footnotes

^242:1 See the "Algonkin Legends of New England," by Charles G. Leland.

Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling, by Charles Godfrey Leland, [1891], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 255]

 

 

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

GYPSIES, TOADS, AND TOAD-LORE

"I went to the toad that lies under the wall,
 I charmed him out, and he came at my call."
                          Masque, of Queens," BEN JONSON.)

THE toad plays a prominent part in gypsy (as in other) witchcraft, which it may well do, since in most Romany dialects there is the same word for a toad or frog, and the devil. PASPATI declares that the toad suggested Satan, but I incline to think that there is some as yet undiscovered Aryan word, such as beng, for the devil, and that the German Bengel, a rascal, is a descendant from it. However, gypsies and toads are "near allied and that not wide" from one another, and sometimes their children have them for pets, which recals the statements made in the celebrated witch trials in Sweden, where it was said by those who professed to have been at the Blockula, or Sabbat, that the little witch

[p. 256]

children were set to play at being shepherds, their flocks being of toads.

I have been informed by gypsies that toads do really form unaccountable predilections for persons and places. The following is accurately related as it was told me in Romany fourteen years ago, in Epping Forest, by a girl. "You know, sir, that people who live out of doors all the time, as we do, see and know a great deal about such creatures. One day we went to a farmhouse, and found the wife almost dying because she thought she was bewitched by a woman who came every day in the form of a great toad to her door and looked in. And, sure enough, while she was talking the toad came, and the woman was taken in such a way with fright that I thought she'd have died. But I had a laugh to myself; for I knew that toads have such ways, and can not only be tamed, but will almost tame themselves. So we gypsies talked together in Romany, and then said we could remove the spell if she would get us a pair of shears and a cup of salt. Then we caught the toad, and tied the shears so as to make a cross--you see!--and with it threw the toad into the fire, and poured the salt on it. So the witchcraft was ended, and the lady gave us a good meal and ten shillings." (For a Romany poem on this incident vide "English Gypsy Songs," Trubner and Co., 1875). And there is a terrible tale told by R. H. Stoddard, in a poem, that one day a gentleman accidentally trod on a toad and killed it. Hearing a scream at that instant in the woods at a little distance, followed by an outcry, he went to see what was the matter, and found a gypsy camp where they were lamenting the sudden death of a child. On looking at the corpse he was horrified to observe that it presented every appearance of having been trampled to death, its wounds being the same as those he had inflicted on the toad. This story being told by me to the gypsy girl, she in no wise doubted its truth, being in fact greatly horrified at it; but was amazed at the child chovihani, or witch, being in two places at once.

In the Spanish Association of Witches in the year 1610 (vide Lorent, "Histoire de l'Inquisition") the toad played a great part. One who had

[p. 257]

taken his degrees in this Order testified that, on admission, a mark like a toad was stamped on his eyelid, and that a real toad was given to him which had the power to make its master invisible, to transport him to distant places, and change him to the form of many kinds of animals. There is a German interjection or curse "Kroten-duvel!" or "toad-devil," which is supposed to have originated as follows: When the Emperor Charlemagne came into the country of the East Saxons and asked them whom they worshipped they replied, "Krodo is our god;" to which the Emperor replied "Krodo is all the same as Kroten-duvel!" "And he made them pay bitterly by the sword and the rope for the crime of calling God, according to their language, by a name different from that which he used; for he put many thousands of them to death, like King Olof of Norway, to show that his faith was one of meekness and mercy."

It is bad to have one's looks against one. The personal appearance of the toad is such as to have giver it a bad place in the mythology of all races. The Algonkin Indians--who, like Napoleon and Slawkenbergius, were great admirers of men with fine bold noses--after having studied the plane physiognomy of the toad, decided that it indicated all the vices, and made of the creature the mother of all the witches. Nothing could have been more condemnatory; since in their religion--as in that of the Accadians, Laps, and Eskimo--a dark and horrible sorcery, in which witches conciliated evil spirits, was believed to have preceded their own nobler Shamanism, by which these enemies of mankind were forced or conquered by magic. Once the Great Toad had, as she thought, succeeded in organizing a conspiracy by which Glooskap, the Shamanic god of Nature, was to be destroyed. Then he passed his hand over her face and that of her fellow-conspirator the Porcupine; and from that time forth their noses were flat, to the great scorn of all honest well-beaked Indians.

The old Persians made the toad the symbol and pet of Ahriman, the foe of light, and declared that his Charfester, or attendant demons, took that form when they persecuted Ormuzd. Among the Tyrolese it is a type of envy; whence the proverb, "Envious as a toad." In the Middle

[p. 258]

Ages, among artists and in many Church legends, it appears as Greed or Avarice: there is even to this day, in some mysterious place on the right bank of the Rhine between Laufenberg and Binzgau, a pile of coals on which sits a toad. That is to say, coals they seem to the world. But the pile is all pure gold, and the toad is a devil who guards it; and he who knows how can pronounce a spell which shall ban the grim guardian. And there is a story told by Menzel ("Christliche Symbolik," vol. i. p. 530), that long ago there lived in Cologne a wicked miser, who when old repented and wished to leave his money to the poor. But when he opened his great iron chest, he found that every coin in it had turned to a horrible toad with sharp teeth. This story being told to his confessor, the priest saw in it divine retribution, and told him that God would have none of his money--nay, that it would go hard with him to save his soul. And he, being willing to do anything to be free of sin, was locked up in the chest with the toads; and lo! the next day when it was opened the creatures had eaten him up. Only his clean-picked bones remained.

But in the Tyrol it is believed that the toads are themselves poor sinners, undergoing penance as Hoetschen or Hoppinen--as they are locally called--for deeds done in human form. Therefore, they are regarded with pity and sympathy by all good Christians. And it is well known that in the Church of Saint Michael in Schwatz, on the evening before the great festivals, but when no one is present, an immense toad comes crawling before the altar, where it kneels and prays, weeping bitterly. The general belief is that toads are for the most part people who made vows to go on pilgrimages, and died with the vows unfulfilled. So the poor creatures go hopping about astray, bewildered and perplexed, striving to find their way to shrines which have perchance long since ceased to exist. Once there was a toad who took seven years to go from Leifers to Weissenstein; and when the creature reached the church it suddenly changed to a resplendent white dove, which, flying up to heaven, vanished before the eyes of a large company there assembled, who bore witness to the miracle. And one day as a wagoner was going from Innsbruck to Seefeld, as he

[p. 259]

paused by the wayside a toad came hopping up and seemed to be desirous of getting into the wagon; which he, being a benevolent man, helped it to do, and gave it a place on the seat beside him. There it sat like any other respectable passenger, until they came to the side-path which leads to the church of Seefield; when, wonderful to relate! the toad suddenly turned to a maiden of angelic beauty clad in white, who, thanking the wagoner for his kindness to her when she was but a poor reptile, told him that she had once been a young lady who had vowed a pilgrimage to the church of Seefield.

In common with the frog, the toad is an emblem of productiveness, and ranks among creatures which are types of erotic passion. I have in my possession a necklace of rudely made silver toads, of Arab workmanship, intended to be worn by women who wish to become mothers. Therefore the creature, in the Old World as well as in the New, appears as a being earnestly seeking the companionship of men. Thus it happened to a youth of Aramsach, near Kattenberg, that, being one day in a lonely place by a lake, there looked up at him from the water a being somewhat like a maid but more like a hideous toad, with whom he entered into conversation; which became at last friendly and agreeable, for the strange creature talked exceeding well. Then she, thinking he might be hungry, asked him if he would fain have anything in particular to eat. He mentioned in jest a kind of cakes; whereupon, diving into the lake, she brought some up, which he ate. So he met her many times; and whenever he wished for anything, no matter what, she got it for him from the waters: the end of it all being that, despite her appalling ugliness, the youth fell in love with her and offered marriage, to which she joyfully consented. But no sooner had the ceremony been performed than she changed to a lady of wonderful beauty; and, taking him by the hand, she conducted him to the lake, into which she led him, and "in this life they were seen never more." This legend evidently belongs to frog-lore. According to one version, the toad after marriage goes to a lake, washes away her ugliness, and returns as a beauty with the bridegroom to his castle, where they live in perfect happiness.

[p. 260]

I have also a very old silver ring, in which there is set a toad rudely yet artistically carved in haematite, or blood-stone. These were famous amulets until within two or three hundred years.

If you are a gypsy and have a tame toad it is a great assistance in telling fortunes, and brings luck--that commodity which, as CALLOT observed, the gypsies are always selling to everybody while they protest they themselves have none. As I tested with the last old gypsy woman whom I met: "What bak the divvus?"--"What luck to-day?" "Kekker rya"--"None, sir," was the reply, as usual,--"I never have any luck." So like a mirror they reflect all things save themselves, and show you what they know not.

"I've seen you where you never were
     And where you never will be
 And yet within that very place
     You can be seen by me.
 For to tell what they do not know
     Is the art of the Romany."

 

    


===== BOOK: gyfb.txt =====


The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

The Grey Fairy Book

Edited by Andrew Lang

New York, London: Longmans, Green & Co.

[1900]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

Contents

[*Preface]

[*Donkey Skin]

[*The Goblin Pony]

[*An Impossible Enchantment]

[*The Story of Dschemil and Dachemila]

[*Janni and the Draken]

[*The Partnership of the Thief and the Liar]

[*Fortunatus and his Purse]

[*The Goat-faced Girl]

[*What came of picking Flowers]

[*The Story of Bensurdatu]

[*The Magician's Horse]

[*The Little Gray Man]

[*Herr Lazarus and the Draken]

[*The Story of the Queen of the Flowery Isles]

[*Udea and her Seven Brothers]

[*The White Wolf]

[*Mohammed with the Magic Finger]

[*Bobino]

[*The Dog and the Sparrow]

[*The Story of the Three Sons of Hali]

[*The Story of the Fair Circassians]

[*The Jackal and the Spring]

[*The Bear]

[*The Sunchild]

[*The Daughter of Buk Ettemsuch]

[*Laughing Eye and Weeping Eye, or the Limping Fox]

[*The Unlooked for Prince]

[*The Simpleton]

[*The Street Musicians]

[*The Twin Brothers]

[*Cannetella]

[*The Ogre]

[*A Fairy's Blunder]

[*Long, Broad, and Quickeye]

[*Prunella]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f00]

Preface

The tales in the Grey Fairy Book are derived from many countries--Lithuania, various parts of Africa, Germany, France, Greece, and other regions of the world. They have been translated and adapted by Mrs. Dent, Mrs. Lang, Miss Eleanor Sellar, Miss Blackley, and Miss hang. 'The Three Sons of Hali' is from the last century 'Cabinet des Fees,' a very large collection. The French author may have had some Oriental original before him in parts; at all events he copied the Eastern method of putting tale within tale, like the Eastern balls of carved ivory. The stories, as usual, illustrate the method of popular fiction. A certain number of incidents are shaken into many varying combinations, like the fragments of coloured glass in the kaleidoscope. Probably the possible combinations, like possible musical combinations, are not unlimited in number, but children may be less sensitive in the matter of fairies than Mr. John Stuart Mill was as regards music.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f01]

Donkey Skin

There was once upon a time a king who was so much beloved by his subjects that he thought himself the happiest monarch in the whole world, and he had everything his heart could desire. His palace was filled with the rarest of curiosities, and his gardens with the sweetest flowers, while in the marble stalls of his stables stood a row of milk-white Arabs, with big brown eyes.

Strangers who had heard of the marvels which the king had collected, and made long journeys to see them, were, however, surprised to find the most splendid stall of all occupied by a donkey, with particularly large and drooping ears. It was a very fine donkey; but still, as far as they could tell, nothing so very remarkable as to account for the care with which it was lodged; and they went away wondering, for they could not know that every night, when it was asleep, bushels of gold pieces tumbled out of its ears, which were picked up each morning by the attendants.

After many years of prosperity a sudden blow fell upon the king in the death of his wife, whom he loved dearly. But before she died, the queen, who had always thought first of his happiness, gathered all her strength, and said to him:

'Promise me one thing: you must marry again, I know, for the good of your people, as well as of yourself. But do not set about it in a hurry. Wait until you have found a woman more beautiful and better formed than myself.'

'Oh, do not speak to me of marrying,' sobbed the king; 'rather let me die with you!' But the queen only smiled faintly, and turned over on her pillow and died.

For some months the king's grief was great; then gradually he began to forget a little, and, besides, his counsellors were always urging him to seek another wife. At first he refused to listen to them, but by-and-by he allowed himself to be persuaded to think of it, only stipulating that the bride should be more beautiful and attractive than the late queen, according to the promise he had made her.

Overjoyed at having obtained what they wanted, the counsellors sent envoys far and wide to get portraits of all the most famous beauties of every country. The artists were very busy and did their best, but, alas! nobody could even pretend that any of the ladies could compare for a moment with the late queen.

At length, one day, when he had turned away discouraged from a fresh collection of pictures, the king's eyes fell on his adopted daughter, who had lived in the palace since she was a baby, and he saw that, if a woman existed on the whole earth more lovely than the queen, this was she! He at once made known what his wishes were, but the young girl, who was not at all ambitious, and had not the faintest desire to marry him, was filled with dismay, and begged for time to think about it. That night, when everyone was asleep, she started in a little car drawn by a big sheep, and went to consult her fairy godmother.

'I know what you have come to tell me,' said the fairy, when the maiden stepped out of the car; 'and if you don't wish to marry him, I will show you how to avoid it. Ask him to give you a dress that exactly matches the sky. It will be impossible for him to get one, so you will be quite safe.' The girl thanked the fairy and returned home again.

The next morning, when her father (as she had always called him) came to see her, she told him that she could give him no answer until he had presented her with a dress the colour of the sky. The king, overjoyed at this answer, sent for all the choicest weavers and dressmakers in the kingdom, and commanded them to make a robe the colour of the sky without an instant's delay, or he would cut off their heads at once. Dreadfully frightened at this threat, they all began to dye and cut and sew, and in two days they brought back the dress, which looked as if it had been cut straight out of the heavens! The poor girl was thunderstruck, and did not know what to do; so in the night she harnessed her sheep again, and went in search of her godmother.

'The king is cleverer than I thought,' said the fairy; 'but tell him you must have a dress of moonbeams.'

And the next day, when the king summoned her into his presence, the girl told him what she wanted.

'Madam, I can refuse you nothing,' said he; and he ordered the dress to be ready in twenty-four hours, or every man should be hanged.

They set to work with all their might, and by dawn next day, the dress of moonbeams was laid across her bed. The girl, though she could not help admiring its beauty, began to cry, till the fairy, who heard her, came to her help.

'Well, I could not have believed it of him!' said she; 'but ask for a dress of sunshine, and I shall be surprised indeed if he manages that! '

The goddaughter did not feel much faith in the fairy after her two previous failures; but not knowing what else to do, she told her father what she was bid.

The king made no difficulties about it, and even gave his finest rubies and diamonds to ornament the dress, which was so dazzling, when finished, that it could not be looked at save through smoked glasses!

When the princess saw it, she pretended that the sight hurt her eyes, and retired to her room, where she found the fairy awaiting her, very much ashamed of herself.

'There is only one thing to be done now,' cried she; 'you must demand the skin of the ass he sets such store by. It is from that donkey he obtains all his vast riches, and I am sure he will never give it to you.'

The princess was not so certain; however, she went to the king, and told him she could never marry him till he had given her the ass's skin.

The king was both astonished and grieved at this new request, but did not hesitate an instant. The ass was sacrificed, and the skin laid at the feet of the princess.

The poor girl, seeing no escape from the fate she dreaded, wept afresh, and tore her hair; when, suddenly, the fairy stood before her.

'Take heart,' she said, ' all will now go well! Wrap yourself in this skin, and leave the palace and go as far as you can. I will look after you. Your dresses and your jewels shall follow you underground, and if you strike the earth whenever you need anything, you will have it at once. But go quickly: you have no time to lose.'

So the princess clothed herself in the ass's skin, and slipped from the palace without being seen by anyone.

Directly she was missed there was a great hue and cry, and every corner, possible and impossible, was searched. Then the king sent out parties along all the roads, but the fairy threw her invisible mantle over the girl when they approached, and none of them could see her.

The princess walked on a long, long way, trying to find some one who would take her in, and let her work for them; but though the cottagers, whose houses she passed, gave her food from charity, the ass's skin was so dirty they would not allow her to enter their houses. For her flight had been so hurried she had had no time to clean it.

Tired and disheartened at her ill-fortune, she was wandering, one day, past the gate of a farmyard, situated just outside the walls of a large town, when she heard a voice calling to her. She turned and saw the farmer's wife standing among her turkeys, and making signs to her to come in.

'I want a girl to wash the dishes and feed the turkeys, and clean out the pig-sty,' said the w omen, 'and, to judge by your dirty clothes, you would not be too fine for the work.'

The girl accepted her offer with joy, and she was at once set to work in a corner of the kitchen, where all the farm servants came and made fun of her, and the ass's skin in which she was wrapped. But by-and-by they got so used to the sight of it that it ceased to amuse them, and she worked so hard and so well, that her mistress grew quite fond of her. And she was so clever at keeping sheep and herding turkeys that you would have thought she had done nothing else during her whole life!

One day she was sitting on the banks of a stream bewailing her wretched lot, when she suddenly caught sight of herself in the water. Her hair and part of her face was quite concealed by the ass's head, which was drawn right over like a hood, and the filthy matted skin covered her whole body. It was the first time she had seen herself as other people saw her, and she was filled with shame at the spectacle. Then she threw off her disguise and jumped into the water, plunging in again and again, till she shone like ivory. When it was time to go back to the farm, she was forced to put on the skin which disguised her, and now seemed more dirty than ever; but, as she did so, she comforted herself with the thought that to-morrow was a holiday, and that she would be able for a few hours to forget that she was a farm girl, and be a princess once more.

So, at break of day, she stamped on the ground, as the fairy had told her, and instantly the dress like the sky lay across her tiny bed. Her room was so small that there was no place for the train of her dress to spread itself out, but she pinned it up carefully when she combed her beautiful hair and piled it up on the top of her head, as she had always worn it. When she had done, she was so pleased with herself that she determined never to let a chance pass of putting on her splendid clothes, even if she had to wear them in the fields, with no one to admire her but the sheep and turkeys.

Now the farm was a royal farm, and, one holiday, when 'Donkey Skin' (as they had nicknamed the princess) had locked the door of her room and clothed herself in her dress of sunshine, the king's son rode through the gate, and asked if he might come and rest himself a little after hunting. Some food and milk were set before him in the garden, and when he felt rested he got up, and began to explore the house, which was famous throughout the whole kingdom for its age and beauty. He opened one door after the other, admiring the old rooms, when he came to a handle that would not turn. He stooped and peeped through the keyhole to see what was inside, and was greatly astonished at beholding a beautiful girl, clad in a dress so dazzling that he could hardly look at it.

The dark gallery seemed darker than ever as he turned away, but he went back to the kitchen and inquired who slept in the room at the end of the passage. The scullery maid, they told him, whom everybody laughed at, and called ' Donkey Skin;' and though he perceived there was some strange mystery about this, he saw quite clearly there was nothing to be gained by asking any more questions. So he rode back to the palace, his head filled with the vision he had seen through the keyhole.

All night long he tossed about, and awoke the next morning in a high fever. The queen, who had no other child, and lived in a state of perpetual anxiety about this one, at once gave him up for lost, and indeed his sudden illness puzzled the greatest doctors, who tried the usual remedies in vain. At last they told the queen that some secret sorrow must be at the bottom of all this, and she threw herself on her knees beside her son's bed, and implored him to confide his trouble to her. If it was ambition to be king, his father would gladly resign the cares of the crown, and suffer him to reign in his stead; or, if it was love, everything should be sacrificed to get for him the wife he desired, even if she were daughter of a king with whom the country was at war at present!

'Madam,' replied the prince, whose weakness would hardly allow him to speak, 'do not think me so unnatural as to wish to deprive my father of his crown. As long as he lives I shall remain the most faithful of his subjects! And as to the princesses you speak of, I have seen none that I should care for as a wife, though I would always obey your wishes, whatever it might cost me.'

'Ah! my son,' cried she, 'we will do anything in the world to save your life ----and ours too, for if you die, we shall die also.'

'Well, then,' replied the prince, 'I will tell you the only thing that will cure me ---a cake made by the hand of "Donkey Skin." '

'Donkey Skin?' exclaimed the queen, who thought her son had gone mad; 'and who or what is that?'

'Madam,' answered one of the attendants present, who had been with the prince at the farm, "'Donkey Skin" is, next to the wolf, the most disgusting creature on the face of the earth. She is a girl who wears a black, greasy skin, and lives at your farmer's as hen-wife.'

'Never mind,' said the queen; 'my son seems to have eaten some of her pastry. It is the whim of a sick man, no doubt; but send at once and let her bake a cake.'

The attendant bowed and ordered a page to ride with the message.

Now it is by no means certain that 'Donkey Skin' had not caught a glimpse of the prince, either when his eyes looked through the keyhole, or else from her little window, which was over the road. But whether she had actually seen him or only heard him spoken of, directly she received the queen's command, she flung off the dirty skin, washed herself from head to foot, and put on a skirt and bodice of shining silver. Then, locking herself into her room, she took the richest cream, the finest flour, and the freshest eggs on the farm, and set about making her cake.

As she was stirring the mixture in the saucepan a ring that she sometimes wore in secret slipped from her finger and fell into the dough. Perhaps 'Donkey Skin' saw it, or perhaps she did not; but, any way, she went on stirring, and soon the cake was ready to be put in the oven. When it was nice and brown she took off her dress and put on her dirty skin, and gave the cake to the page, asking at the same time for news of the prince. But the page turned his head aside, and would not even condescend to answer.

The page rode like the wind, and as soon as he arrived at the palace he snatched up a silver tray and hastened to present the cake to the prince. The sick man began to eat it so fast that the doctors thought he would choke; and, indeed, he very nearly did, for the ring was in one of the bits which he broke off, though he managed to extract it from his mouth without anyone seeing him.

The moment the prince was left alone he drew the ring from under his pillow and kissed it a thousand times. Then he set his mind to find how he was to see the owner---for even he did not dare to confess that he had only beheld 'Donkey Skin' through a keyhole, lest they should laugh at this sudden passion. All this worry brought back the fever, which the arrival of the cake had diminished for the time; and the doctors, not knowing what else to say, informed the queen that her son was simply dying of love. The queen, stricken with horror, rushed into the king's presence with the news, and together they hastened to their son's bedside.

'My boy, my dear boy!' cried the king, 'who is it you want to marry? We will give her to you for a bride; even if she is the humblest of our slaves. What is there in the whole world that we would not do for you?'

The prince, moved to tears at these words, drew the ring, which was an emerald of the purest water, from under his pillow.

'Ah, dear father and mother, let this be a proof that she whom I love is no peasant girl. The finger which that ring fits has never been thickened by hard work. But be her condition what it may, I will marry no other.'

The king and queen examined the tiny ring very closely, and agreed, with their son, that the wearer could be no mere farm girl. Then the king went out and ordered heralds and trumpeters to go through the town, summoning every maiden to the palace. And she whom the ring fitted would some day be queen.

First came all the princesses, then all the duchesses' daughters, and so on, in proper order. But not one of them could slip the ring over the tip of her finger, to the great joy of the prince, whom excitement was fast curing. At last, when the high-born damsels had failed, the shopgirls and chambermaids took their turn; but with no better fortune.

'Call in the scullions and shepherdesses,' commanded the prince; but the sight of their fat, red fingers satisfied everybody.

'There is not a woman left, your Highness,' said the chamberlain; but the prince waved him aside.

'Have you sent for "Donkey Skin," who made me the cake?' asked he, and the courtiers began to laugh, and replied that they would not have dared to introduce so dirty a creature into the palace.

'Let some one go for her at once,' ordered the king. ' I commanded the presence of every maiden, high or low, and I meant it.'

The princess had heard the trumpets and the proclamations, and knew quite well that her ring was at the bottom of it all. She, too, had fallen in love with the prince in the brief glimpse she had had of him, and trembled with fear lest someone else's finger might be as small as her own. When, therefore, the messenger from the palace rode up to the gate, she was nearly beside herself with delight. Hoping all the time for such a summons, she had dressed herself with great care, putting on the garment of moonlight, whose skirt was scattered over with emeralds. But when they began calling to her to come down, she hastily covered herself with her donkey-skin and announced she was ready to present herself before his Highness. She was taken straight into the hall, where the prince was awaiting her, but at the sight of the donkey-skin his heart sank. Had he been mistaken after all?

'Are you the girl,' he said, turning his eyes away as he spoke, 'are you the girl who has a room in the furthest corner of the inner court of the farmhouse?'

'Yes, my lord, I am,' answered she.

'Hold out your hand then,' continued the prince, feeling that he must keep his word, whatever the cost, and, to the astonishment of every one present, a little hand, white and delicate, came from beneath the black and dirty skin. The ring slipped on with the utmost ease, and, as it did so, the skin fell to the ground, disclosing a figure of such beauty that the prince, weak as he was, fell on his knees before her, while the king and queen joined their prayers to his. Indeed, their welcome was so warm, and their caresses so bewildering, that the princess hardly knew how to find words to reply, when the ceiling of the hall opened, and the fairy godmother appeared, seated in a car made entirely of white lilac. In a few words she explained the history of the princess, and how she came to be there, and, without losing a moment, preparations of the most magnificent kind were made for the wedding.

The kings of every country in the earth were invited, including, of course, the princess's adopted father (who by this time had married a widow), and not one refused.

But what a strange assembly it was! Each monarch travelled in the way he thought most impressive; and some came borne in litters, others had carriages of every shape and kind, while the rest were mounted on elephants, tigers, and even upon eagles. So splendid a wedding had never been seen before; and when it was over the king announced that it was to be followed by a coronation, for he and the queen were tired of reigning, and the young couple must take their place. The rejoicings lasted for three whole months, then the new sovereigns settled down to govern their kingdom, and made themselves so much beloved by their subjects, that when they died, a hundred years later, each man mourned them as his own father and mother.

[From le Cabinet de Fees.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f02]

The Goblin Pony

'Don't stir from the fireplace to-night,' said old Peggy, 'for the wind is blowing so violently that the house shakes; besides, this is Hallow-e'en, when the witches are abroad, and the goblins, who are their servants, are wandering about in all sorts of disguises, doing harm to the children of men.'

'Why should I stay here?' said the eldest of the young people. 'No, I must go and see what the daughter of old Jacob, the rope- maker, is doing. She wouldn't close her blue eyes all night if I didn't visit her father before the moon had gone down.'

'I must go and catch lobsters and crabs' said the second, 'and not all the witches and goblins in the world shall hinder me.'

So they all determined to go on their business or pleasure, and scorned the wise advice of old Peggy. Only the youngest child hesitated a minute, when she said to him, 'You stay here, my little Richard, and I will tell you beautiful stories.'

But he wanted to pick a bunch of wild thyme and some blackberries by moonlight, and ran out after the others. When they got outside the house they said: 'The old woman talks of wind and storm, but never was the weather finer or the sky more clear; see how majestically the moon stalks through the transparent clouds!'

Then all of a sudden they noticed a little black pony close beside them.

'Oh, ho!' they said, 'that is old Valentine's pony; it must have escaped from its stable, and is going down to drink at the horse- pond.'

'My pretty little pony,' said the eldest, patting the creature with his hand, 'you mustn't run too far; I'll take you to the pond myself.'

With these words he jumped on the pony's back and was quickly followed by his second brother, then by the third, and so on, till at last they were all astride the little beast, down to the small Richard, who didn't like to be left behind.

On the way to the pond they met several of their companions, and they invited them all to mount the pony, which they did, and the little creature did not seem to mind the extra weight, but trotted merrily along.

The quicker it trotted the more the young people enjoyed the fun; they dug their heels into the pony's sides and called out, 'Gallop, little horse, you have never had such brave riders on your back before!'

In the meantime the wind had risen again, and the waves began to howl; but the pony did not seem to mind the noise, and instead of going to the pond, cantered gaily towards the sea-shore.

Richard began to regret his thyme and blackberries, and the eldest brother seized the pony by the mane and tried to make it turn round, for he remembered the blue eyes of Jacob the rope- maker's daughter. But he tugged and pulled in vain, for the pony galloped straight on into the sea, till the waves met its forefeet. As soon as it felt the water it neighed lustily and capered about with glee, advancing quickly into the foaming billows. When the waves had covered the children's legs they repented their careless behaviour, and cried out: 'The cursed little black pony is bewitched. If we had only listened to old Peggy's advice we shouldn't have been lost.'

The further the pony advanced, the higher rose the sea; at last the waves covered the children's heads and they were all drowned.

Towards morning old Peggy went out, for she was anxious about the fate of her grandchildren. She sought them high and low, but could not find them anywhere. She asked all the neighbours if they had seen the children, but no one knew anything about them, except that the eldest had not been with the blue-eyed daughter of Jacob the rope-maker.

As she was going home, bowed with grief, she saw a little black pony coming towards her, springing and curveting in every direction. When it got quite near her it neighed loudly, and galloped past her so quickly that in a moment it was out of her sight.

[From the French, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f03]

An Impossible Enchantment

There once lived a king who was much loved by his people, and he, too, loved them warmly. He led a very happy life, but he had the greatest dislike to the idea of marrying, nor had he ever felt the slightest wish to fall in love. His subjects begged him to marry, and at last he promised to try to do so. But as, so far, he had never cared for any woman he had seen, he made up his mind to travel in hopes of meeting some lady he could love.

So he arranged all the affairs of state in an orderly manner, and set out, attended by only one equerry, who, though not very clever, had most excellent good sense. These people indeed generally make the best fellow travellers.

The king explored several countries, doing all he could to fall in love, but in vain; and at the end of two years' journeys he turned his face towards home, with as free a heart as when he set out.

As he was riding along through a forest he suddenly heard the most awful miawing and shrieking of cats you can imagine. The noise drew nearer, and nearer, and at last they saw a hundred huge Spanish cats rush through the trees close to them. They were so closely packed together that you could easily have covered them with a large cloak, and all were following the same track. They were closely pursued by two enormous apes, dressed in purple suits, with the prettiest and best made boots you ever saw.

The apes were mounted on superb mastiffs, and spurred them on in hot haste, blowing shrill blasts on little toy trumpets all the time.

The king and his equerry stood still to watch this strange hunt, which was followed by twenty or more little dwarfs, some mounted on wolves, and leading relays, and others with cats in leash. The dwarfs were all dressed in purple silk liveries like the apes.

A moment later a beautiful young woman mounted on a tiger came in sight. She passed close to the king, riding at full speed, without taking any notice of him; but he was at once enchanted by her, and his heart was gone in a moment.

To his great joy he saw that one of the dwarfs had fallen behind the rest, and at once began to question him.

The dwarf told him that the lady he had just seen was the Princess Mutinosa, the daughter of the king in whose country they were at that moment. He added that the princess was very fond of hunting, and that she was now in pursuit of rabbits.

The king then asked the way to the court, and having been told it, hurried off, and reached the capital in a couple of hours.

As soon as he arrived, he presented himself to the king and queen, and on mentioning his own name and that of his country, was received with open arms. Not long after, the princess returned, and hearing that the hunt had been very successful, the king complimented her on it, but she would not answer a word.

Her silence rather surprised him, but he was still more astonished when he found that she never spoke once all through supper-time. Sometimes she seemed about to speak, but whenever this was the case her father or mother at once took up the conversation. However, this silence did not cool the king's affection, and when he retired to his rooms at night he confided his feelings to his faithful equerry. But the equerry was by no means delighted at his king's love affair, and took no pains to hide his disappointment.

'But why are you vexed?' asked the king. 'Surely the princess is beautiful enough to please anyone?'

'She is certainly very handsome,' replied the equerry, 'but to be really happy in love something more than beauty is required. To tell the truth, sire,' he added, 'her expression seems to me hard.'

'That is pride and dignity,' said the king, 'and nothing can be more becoming.'

'Pride or hardness, as you will,' said the equerry; 'but to my mind the choice of so many fierce creatures for her amusements seems to tell of a fierce nature, and I also think there is something suspicious in the care taken to prevent her speaking.'

The equerry's remarks were full of good sense; but as opposition is only apt to increase love in the hearts of men, and especially of kings who hate being contradicted, this king begged, the very next day, for the hand of the Princess Mutinosa. It was granted him on two conditions.

The first was that the wedding should take place the very next day; and the second, that he should not speak to the princess till she was his wife; to all of which the king agreed, in spite of his equerry's objections, so that the first word he heard his bride utter was the 'Yes' she spoke at their marriage.

Once married, however, she no longer placed any check on herself, and her ladies-in-waiting came in for plenty of rude speeches---- even the king did not escape scolding; but as he was a good- tempered man, and very much in love, he bore it patiently. A few days after the wedding the newly married pair set out for their kingdom without leaving many regrets behind.

The good equerry's fears proved only too true, as the king found out to his cost. The young queen made her self most disagreeable to all her court, her spite and bad temper knew no bounds, and before the end of a month she was known far and wide as a regular vixen.

One day, when riding out, she met a poor old woman walking along the road, who made a curtsy and was going on, when the queen had her stopped, and cried: 'You are a very impertinent person; don't you know that I am the queen? And how dare you not make me a deeper curtsy?'

'Madam,' said the old woman, 'I have never learnt how to measure curtsies; but I had no wish to fail in proper respect.'

'What!' screamed the queen; 'she dares to answer! Tie her to my horse's tail and I'll just carry her at once to the best dancing- master in the town to learn how to curtsy.'

The old woman shrieked for mercy, but the queen would not listen, and only mocked when she said she was protected by the fairies. At last the poor old thing submitted to be tied up, but when the queen urged her horse on he never stirred. In vain she spurred him, he seemed turned to bronze. At the same moment the cord with which the old woman was tied changed into wreaths of flowers, and she herself into a tall and stately lady.

Looking disdainfully at the queen, she said, 'Bad woman, unworthy of your crown; I wished to judge for myself whether all I heard of you was true. I have now no doubt of it, and you shall see whether the fairies are to be laughed at.'

So saying the fairy Placida (that was her name) blew a little gold whistle, and a chariot appeared drawn by six splendid ostriches. In it was seated the fairy queen, escorted by a dozen other fairies mounted on dragons.

All having dismounted, Placida told her adventures, and the fairy queen approved all she had done, and proposed turning Mutinosa into bronze like her horse.

Placida, however, who was very kind and gentle, begged for a milder sentence, and at last it was settled that Mutinosa should become her slave for life unless she should have a child to take her place.

The king was told of his wife's fate and submitted to it, which, as he could do nothing to help it, was the only course open to him.

The fairies then all dispersed, Placida taking her slave with her, and on reaching her palace she said: 'You ought by rights to be scullion, but as you have been delicately brought up the change might be too great for you. I shall therefore only order you to sweep my rooms carefully, and to wash and comb my little dog.'

Mutinosa felt there was no use in disobeying, so she did as she was bid and said nothing.

After some time she gave birth to a most lovely little girl, and when she was well again the fairy gave her a good lecture on her past life, made her promise to behave better in future, and sent her back to the king, her husband.

Placida now gave herself up entirely to the little princess who was left in her charge. She anxiously thought over which of the fairies she would invite to be godmothers, so as to secure the best gift, for her adopted child.

At last she decided on two very kindly and cheerful fairies, and asked them to the christening feast. Directly it was over the baby was brought to them in a lovely crystal cradle hung with red silk curtains embroidered with gold.

The little thing smiled so sweetly at the fairies that they decided to do all they could for her. They began by naming her Graziella, and then Placida said: 'You know, dear sisters, that the commonest form of spite or punishment amongst us consists of changing beauty to ugliness, cleverness to stupidity, and oftener still to change a person's form altogether. Now, as we can only each bestow one gift, I think the best plan will be for one of you to give her beauty, the other good understanding, whilst I will undertake that she shall never be changed into any other form.'

The two godmothers quite agreed, and as soon as the little princess had received their gifts, they went home, and Placida gave herself up to the child's education. She succeeded so well with it, and little Graziella grew so lovely, that when she was still quite a child her fame was spread abroad only too much, and one day Placida was surprised by a visit from the Fairy Queen, who was attended by a very grave and severe- looking fairy.

The queen began at once: 'I have been much surprised by your behaviour to Mutinosa; she had insulted our whole race, and deserved punishment. You might forgive your own wrongs if you chose, but not those of others. You treated her very gently whilst she was with you, and I come now to avenge our wrongs on her daughter. You have ensured her being lovely and clever, and not subject to change of form, but I shall place her in an enchanted prison, which she shall never leave till she finds herself in the arms of a lover whom she herself loves. It will be my care to prevent anything of the kind happening.'

The enchanted prison was a large high tower in the midst of the sea, built of shells of all shapes and colours. The lower floor was like a great bathroom, where the water was let in or off at will. The first floor contained the princess's apartments, beautifully furnished. On the second was a library, a large wardrobe-room filled with beautiful clothes and every kind of linen, a music-room, a pantry with bins full of the best wines, and a store-room with all manner of preserves, bonbons, pastry and cakes, all of which remained as fresh as if just out of the oven.

The top of the tower was laid out like a garden, with beds of the loveliest flowers, fine fruit trees, and shady arbours and shrubs, where many birds sang amongst the branches.

The fairies escorted Graziella and her governess, Bonnetta, to the tower, and then mounted a dolphin which was waiting for them. At a little distance from the tower the queen waved her wand and summoned two thousand great fierce sharks, whom she ordered to keep close guard, and not to let a soul enter the tower

The good governess took such pains with Graziella's education that when she was nearly grown up she was not only most accomplished, but a very sweet, good girl.

One day, as the princess was standing on a balcony, she saw the most extraordinary figure rise out of the sea. She quickly called Bonnetta to ask her what it could be. It looked like some kind of man, with a bluish face and long sea-green hair. He was swimming towards the tower, but the sharks took no notice of him.

'It must be a merman,' said Bonnetta.

'A man, do you say?' cried Graziella; 'let us hurry down to the door and see him nearer.'

When they stood in the doorway the merman stopped to look at the princess and made many signs of admiration. His voice was very hoarse and husky, but when he found that he was not understood he took to signs. He carried a little basket made of osiers and filled with rare shells, which he presented to the princess.

She took it with signs of thanks; but as it was getting dusk she retired, and the merman plunged back into the sea.

When they were alone, Graziella said to her governess: 'What a dreadful-looking creature that was! Why do those odious sharks let him come near the tower? I suppose all men are not like him?'

'No, indeed,' replied Bonnetta. 'I suppose the sharks look on him as a sort of relation, and so did not attack him.'

A few days later the two ladies heard a strange sort of music, and looking out of the window, there was the merman, his head crowned with water plants, and blowing a great sea-shell with all his might.

They went down to the tower door, and Graziella politely accepted some coral and other marine curiosities he had brought her. After this he used to come every evening, and blow his shell, or dive and play antics under tile princess's window. She contented herself with bowing to him from the balcony, but she would not go down to the door in spite of all his signs.

Some days later he came with a person of his own kind, but of another sex. Her hair was dressed with great taste, and she had a lovely voice. This new arrival induced the ladies to go down to the door. They were surprised to find that, after trying various languages, she at last spoke to them in their own, and paid Graziella a very pretty compliment on her beauty. The mermaid noticed that the lower floor was full of water. 'Why,' cried she, ' that is just the place for us, for we can't live quite out of water.' So saying, she and her brother swam in and took up a position in the bathroom, the princess and her governess seating themselves on the steps which ran round the room.

'No doubt, madam,' said the mermaid, 'you have given up living on land so as to escape from crowds of lovers; but I fear that even here you cannot avoid them, for my brother is already dying of love for you, and I am sure that once you are seen in our city he will have many rivals.'

She then went on to explain how grieved her brother was not to be able to make himself understood, adding: 'I interpret for him, having been taught several languages by a fairy.'

'Oh, then, you have fairies, too?' asked Graziella, with a sigh.

'Yes, we have,' replied the mermaid; 'but if I am not mistaken you have suffered from the fairies on earth.'

The princess, on this, told her entire history to the mermaid, who assured her how sorry she felt for her, but begged her not to lose courage; adding, as she took her leave: Perhaps, some day, you may find a way out of your difficulties.'

The princess was delighted with this visit and with the hopes the mermaid held out. It was something to meet someone fresh to talk to.

'We will make acquaintance with several of these people,' she said to her governess, 'and I dare say they are not all as hideous as the first one we saw. Anyhow, we shan't be so dreadfully lonely.'

'Dear me,' said Bonnetta, ' how hopeful young people are to be sure! As for me I feel afraid of these folk. But what do you think of the lover you have captivated?'

'Oh, I could never love him,' cried the princess; 'I can't bear him. But, perhaps, as his sister says they are related to the fairy Marina, they may be of some use to us.'

The mermaid often returned, and each time she talked of her brother's love, and each time Graziella talked of her longing to escape from her prison, till at length the mermaid promised to bring the fairy Marina to see her, in hopes she might suggest something.

Next day the fairy came with the mermaid, and the princess received her with delight. After a little talk she begged Graziella to show her the inside of the tower and let her see the garden on the top, for with the help of crutches she could manage to move about, and being a fairy could live out of water for a long time, provided she wetted her forehead now and then.

Graziella gladly consented, and Bonnetta stayed below with the mermaid.

When they were in the garden the fairy said: 'Let us lose no time, but tell me how I can be of use to you.' Graziella then told all her story and Marina replied: 'My dear princess, I can do nothing for you as regards dry land, for my power does not reach beyond my own element. I can only say that if you will honour my cousin by accepting his hand, you could then come and live amongst us. I could teach you in a moment to swim and dive with the best of us. I can harden your skin without spoiling its colour. My cousin is one of the best matches in the sea, and I will bestow so many gifts on him that you will be quite happy.'

The fairy talked so well and so long that the princess was rather impressed, and promised to think the matter over.

Just as they were going to leave the garden they saw a ship sailing nearer the tower than any other had done before. On the deck lay a young man under a splendid awning, gazing at the tower through a spy-glass; but before they could see anything clearly the ship moved away, and the two ladies parted, the fairy promising to return shortly.

As soon as she was gone Graziella told her governess what she had said. Bonnetta was not at all pleased at the turn matters were taking, for she did not fancy being turned into a mermaid in her old age. She thought the matter well over, and this was what she did. She was a very clever artist, and next morning she began to paint a picture of a handsome young man, with beautiful curly hair, a fine complexion, and lovely blue eyes. When it was finished she showed it to Graziella, hoping it would show her the difference there was between a fine young man and her marine suitor.

The princess was much struck by the picture, and asked anxiously whether there could be any man so good looking in the world. Bonnetta assured her that there were plenty of them; indeed, many far handsomer.

'I can hardly believe that,' cried the princess; 'but, alas! If there are, I don't suppose I shall ever see them or they me, so what is the use? Oh, dear, how unhappy I am!'

She spent the rest of the day gazing at the picture, which certainly had the effect of spoiling all the merman's hopes or prospects.

After some days, the fairy Marina came back to hear what was decided; but Graziella hardly paid any attention to her, and showed such dislike to the idea of the proposed marriage that the fairy went off in a regular huff.

Without knowing it, the princess had made another conquest. On board the ship which had sailed so near was the handsomest prince in the world. He had heard of the enchanted tower, and determined to get as near it as he could. He had strong glasses on board, and whilst looking through them he saw the princess quite clearly, and fell desperately in love with her at once. He wanted to steer straight for the tower and to row off to it in a small boat, but his entire crew fell at his feet and begged him not to run such a risk. The captain, too, urged him not to attempt it. 'You will only lead us all to certain death,' he said. 'Pray anchor nearer land, and I will then seek a kind fairy I know, who has always been most obliging to me, and who will, I am sure, try to help your Highness.'

The prince rather unwillingly listened to reason. He landed at the nearest point, and sent off the captain in all haste to beg the fairy's advice and help. Meantime he had a tent pitched on the shore, and spent all his time gazing at the tower and looking for the princess through his spyglass.

After a few days the captain came back, bringing the fairy with him. The prince was delighted to see her, and paid her great attention. 'I have heard about this matter,' she said; 'and, to lose no time, I am going to send off a trusty pigeon to test the enchantment. If there is any weak spot he is sure to find it out and get in. I shall bid him bring a flower back as a sign of success; and if he does so I quite hope to get you in too.'

'But,' asked the prince, 'could I not send a line by the pigeon to tell the princess of my love?'

'Certainly,' replied the fairy, 'it would be a very good plan.'

So the prince wrote as follows:---

'Lovely Princess,---I adore you, and beg you to accept my heart, and to believe there is nothing I will not do to end your misfortunes.---BLONDEL.

This note was tied round the pigeon's neck, and he flew off with it at once. He flew fast till he got near the tower, when a fierce wind blew so hard against him that he could not get on. But he was not to be beaten, but flew carefully round the top of the tower till he came to one spot which, by some mistake, had not been enchanted like the rest. He quickly slipped into the arbour and waited for the princess.

Before long Graziella appeared alone, and the pigeon at once fluttered to meet her, and seemed so tame that she stopped to caress the pretty creature. As she did so she saw it had a pink ribbon round its neck, and tied to the ribbon was a letter. She read it over several times and then wrote this answer :---

'You say you love me; but I cannot promise to love you without seeing you. Send me your portrait by this faithful messenger. If I return it to you, you must give up hope; but if I keep it you will know that to help me will be to help yourself.---GRAZIELA.

Before flying back the pigeon remembered about the flower, so, seeing one in the princess's dress, he stole it and flew away.

The prince was wild with joy at the pigeon's return with the note. After an hour's rest the trusty little bird was sent back again, carrying a miniature of the prince, which by good luck he had with him.

On reaching the tower the pigeon found the princess in the garden. She hastened to untie the ribbon, and on opening the miniature case what was her surprise and delight to find it very like the picture her governess had painted for her. She hastened to send the pigeon back, and you can fancy the prince's joy when he found she had kept his portrait.

'Now,' said the fairy, 'let us lose no more time. I can only make you happy by changing you into a bird, but I will take care to give you back your proper shape at the right time.'

The prince was eager to start, so the fairy, touching him with her wand, turned him into the loveliest humming-bird you ever saw, at the same time letting him keep the power of speech. The pigeon was told to show him the way.

Graziella was much surprised to see a perfectly strange bird, and still more so when it flew to her saying, 'Good-morning, sweet princess.'

She was delighted with the pretty creature, and let him perch on her finger, when he said, 'Kiss, kiss, little birdie,' which she gladly did, petting and stroking him at the same time.

After a time the princess, who had been up very early, grew tired, and as the sun was hot she went to lie down on a mossy bank in the shade of the arbour. She held the pretty bird near her breast, and was just falling asleep, when the fairy contrived to restore the prince to his own shape, so that as Graziella opened her eyes she found herself in the arms of a lover whom she loved in return!

At the same moment her enchantment came to an end. The tower began to rock and to split. Bonnetta hurried up to the top so that she might at least perish with her dear princess. Just as she reached the garden, the kind fairy who had helped the prince arrived with the fairy Placida, in a car of Venetian glass drawn by six eagles.

'Come away quickly,' they cried, 'the tower is about to sink!' The prince, princess, and Bonnetta lost no time in stepping into the car, which rose in the air just as, with a terrible crash, the tower sank into the depths of the sea, for the fairy Marina and the mermen had destroyed its foundations to avenge themselves on Graziella. Luckily their wicked plans were defeated, and the good fairies took their way to the kingdom of Graziella's parents.

They found that Queen Mutinosa had died some years ago, but her kind husband lived on peaceably, ruling his country well and happily. He received his daughter with great delight, and there were universal rejoicings at the return of the lovely princess.

The wedding took place the very next day, and, for many days after, balls, dinners, tournaments, concerts and all sorts of amusements went on all day and all night.

All the fairies were carefully invited, and they came in great state, and promised the young couple their protection and all sorts of good gifts. Prince Blondel and Princess Graziella lived to a good old age, beloved by every one, and loving each other more and more as time went on.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f04]

The Story of Dschemil and Dschemila

There was once a man whose name was Dschemil, and he had a cousin who was called Dschemila. They had been betrothed by their parents when they were children, and now Dschemil thought that the time had come for them to be married, and he went two or three days' journey, to the nearest big town, to buy furniture for the new house.

While he was away, Dschemila and her friends set off to the neighbouring woods to pick up sticks, and as she gathered them she found an iron mortar lying on the ground. She placed it on her bundle of sticks, but the mortar would not stay still, and whenever she raised the bundle to put it on her shoulders it slipped off sideways. At length she saw the only way to carry the mortar was to tie it in the very middle of her bundle, and had just unfastened her sticks, when she heard her companions' voices.

'Dschemila, what are you doing? it is almost dark, and if you mean to come with us you must be quick!'

But Dschemila only replied, 'You had better go back without me, for I am not going to leave my mortar behind, if I stay here till midnight.'

'Do as you like,' said the girls, and started on their walk home.

The night soon fell, and at the last ray of light the mortar suddenly became an ogre, who threw Dschemila on his back, and carried her off into a desert place, distant a whole month's journey from her native town. Here he shut her into a castle, and told her not to fear, as her life was safe. Then he went back to his wife, leaving Dschemila weeping over the fate that she had brought upon herself.

Meanwhile the other girls had reached home, and Dschemila's mother came out to look for her daughter.

'What have you done with her?' she asked anxiously.

'We had to leave her in the wood,' they replied, 'for she had picked up an iron mortar, and could not manage to carry it.'

So the old woman set off at once for the forest, calling to her daughter as she hurried along.

'Do go home,' cried the townspeople, as they heard her; 'we will go and look for your daughter; you are only a woman, and it is a task that needs strong men.'

But she answered, 'Yes, go; but I will go with you! Perhaps it will be only her corpse that we shall find after all. She has most likely been stung by asps, or eaten by wild beasts.'

The men, seeing her heart was bent on it, said no more, but told one of the girls she must come with them, and show them the place where they had left Dschemila. They found the bundle of wood lying where she had dropped it, but the maiden was nowhere to be seen.

'Dschemila! Dschemila!' cried they; but nobody answered.

'If we make a fire, perhaps she will see it,' said one of the men. And they lit a fire, and then went, one this way, and one that, through the forest, to look for her, whispering to each other that if she had been killed by a lion they would be sure to find some trace of it; or if she had fallen asleep, the sound of their voices would wake her; or if a snake had bitten her, they would at least come on her corpse.

All night they searched, and when morning broke and they knew no more than before what had become of the maiden, they grew weary, and said to the mother: 'It is no use. Let us go home, nothing has happened to your daughter, except that she has run away with a man.'

'Yes, I will come,' answered she, 'but I must first look in the river. Perhaps some one has thrown her in there.' But the maiden was not in the river.

For four days the father and mother waited and watched for their child to come back; then they gave up hope, and said to each other: 'What is to be done? What are we to say to the man to whom Dschemila is betrothed? Let us kill a goat, and bury its head in the grave, and when the man returns we must tell him Dschemila is dead.'

Very soon the bridegroom came back, bringing with him carpets and soft cushions for the house of his bride. And as he entered the town Dschemila's father met him, saying, 'Greeting to you. She is dead.'

At these words the young man broke into loud cries, and it was some time before he could speak. Then he turned to one of the crowd who had gathered round him, and asked: 'Where have they buried her?'

'Come to the churchyard with me,' answered he; and the young man went with him, carrying with him some of the beautiful things he had brought. These he laid on the grass and then began to weep afresh. All day he stayed, and at nightfall he gathered up his stuffs and carried them to his own house. But when the day dawned he took them in his arms and returned to the grave, where he remained as long as it was light, playing softly on his flute. And this he did daily for six months.

One morning, a man who was wandering through the desert, having lost his way, came upon a lonely castle. The sun was very hot, and the man was very tired, so he said to himself, 'I will rest a little in the shadow of this castle.' He stretched himself out comfortably, and was almost asleep, when he heard a voice calling to him softly:

'Are you a ghost,' it said, 'or a man?'

He looked up, and saw a girl leaning out of a window, and he answered:

'I am a man, and a better one, too, than your father or your grandfather.'

'May all good luck be with you,' said she; 'but what has brought you into this land of ogres and horrors?'

'Does an ogre really live in this castle?' asked he.

'Certainly he does,' replied the girl, 'and as night is not far off he will be here soon. So, dear friend, depart quickly, lest he return and snap you up for supper.'

'But I am so thirsty! ' said the man. 'Be kind, and give me some drink, or else I shall die! Surely, even in this desert there must be some spring?'

'Well, I have noticed that whenever the ogre brings back water he always comes from that side; so if you follow the same direction perhaps you may find some.'

The man jumped up at once and was about to start, when the maiden spoke again: 'Tell me, where are you going?'

'Why do you want to know?'

'I have an errand for you; but tell me first whether you go east or west.'

'I travel to Damascus.'

'Then do this for me. As you pass through our village, ask for a man called Dschemil, and say to him: "Dschemila greets you, from the castle, which lies far away, and is rocked by the wind. In my grave lies only a goat. So take heart." '

And the man promised, and went his way, till he came to a spring of water. And he drank a great draught and then lay on the bank and slept quietly. When he woke he said to himself, 'The maiden did a good deed when she told me where to find water. A few hours more, and I should have been dead. So I will do her bidding, and seek out her native town and the man for whom the message was given.'

For a whole month he travelled, till at last he reached the town where Dschemil dwelt, and as luck would have it, there was the young man sitting before his door with his beard unshaven and his shaggy hair hanging over his eyes.

'Welcome, stranger,' said Dschemil, as the man stopped. 'Where have you come from?'

'I come from the west, and go towards the east,' he answered.

'Well, stop with us awhile, and rest and eat!' said Dschemil. And the man entered; and food was set before him, and he sat down with the father of the maiden and her brothers, and Dschemil. Only Dschemil himself was absent, squatting on the threshold.

'Why do you not eat too?' asked the stranger. But one of the young men whispered hastily: 'Leave him alone. Take no notice! It is only at night that he ever eats.'

So the stranger went on silently with his food. Suddenly one of Dschemil's brothers called out and said: 'Dschemil, bring us some water! ' And the stranger remembered his message and said:

'Is there a man here named "Dschemil"? I lost my way in the desert, and came to a castle, and a maiden looked out of the window and . . . '

'Be quiet,' they cried, fearing that Dschemil might hear. But Dschemil had heard, and came forward and said:

'What did you see? Tell me truly, or I will cut off your head this instant!'

'My lord,' replied the stranger, 'as I was wandering, hot and tired, through the desert, I saw near me a great castle, and I said aloud, "I will rest a little in its shadow." And a maiden looked out of a window and said, "Are you a ghost or a man? "And I answered, "I am a man, and a better one, too, than your father or your grandfather." And I was thirsty and asked for water, but she had none to give me, and I felt like to die. Then she told me that the ogre, in whose castle she dwelt, brought in water always from the same side, and that if I too went that way most likely I should come to it. But before I started she begged me to go to her native town, and if I met a man called Dschemil I was to say to him, "Dschemila greets you, from the castle which lies far away, and is rocked by the wind. In my grave lies only a goat. So take heart."'

Then Dschemil turned to his family and said: 'Is this true? and is Dschemila not dead at all, but simply stolen from her home?'

'No, no,' replied they, 'his story is a pack of lies. Dschemila is really dead. Everybody knows it.'

'That I shall see for myself,' said Dschemil, and, snatching up a spade, hastened off to the grave where the goat's head lay buried.

And they answered, 'Then hear what really happened. When you were away, she went with the other maidens to the forest to gather wood. And there she found an iron mortar, which she wished to bring home; but she could not carry it, neither would she leave it. So the maidens returned without her, and as night was come, we all set out to look for her, but found nothing. And we said, "The bridegroom will be here to- morrow, and when he learns that she is lost, he will set out to seek her, and we shall lose him too. Let us kill a goat, and bury it in her grave, and tell him she is dead." Now you know, so do as you will. Only, if you go to seek her, take with you this man with whom she has spoken that he may show you the way.' 'Yes; that is the best plan,' replied Dschemil; 'so give me food, and hand me my sword, and we will set out directly.'

But the stranger answered: 'I am not going to waste a whole month in leading you to the castle! If it were only a day or two's journey I would not mind; but a month--no!'

'Come with me then for three days,' said Dschemil, 'and put me in the right road, and I will reward you richly.'

'Very well,' replied the stranger, 'so let it be.'

For three days they travelled from sunrise to sunset, then the stranger said: 'Dschemil?'

'Yes,' replied he.

'Go straight on till you reach a spring, then go on a little farther, and soon you will see the castle standing before you.'

'So I will,' said Dschemil.

'Farewell, then,' said the stranger, and turned back the way he had come.

It was six and twenty days before Dschemil caught sight of a green spot rising out of the sandy desert, and knew that the spring was near at last. He hastened his steps, and soon was kneeling by its side, drinking thirstily of the bubbling water. Then he lay down on the cool grass, and began to think. 'If the man was right, the castle must be somewhere about. I had better sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I shall be able to see where it is.' So he slept long and peacefully. When he awoke the sun was high, and he jumped up and washed his face and hands in the spring, before going on his journey. He had not walked far, when the castle suddenly appeared before him, though a moment before not a trace of it could be seen. 'How am I to get in?' he thought. 'I dare not knock, lest the ogre should hear me. Perhaps it would be best for me to climb up the wall, and wait to see what will happen. So he did, and after sitting on the top for about an hour, a window above him opened, and a voice said: 'Dschemil!' He looked up, and at the sight of Dschemila, whom he had so long believed to be dead, he began to weep.

'Dear cousin,' she whispered, 'what has brought you here?'

'My grief at losing you.'

'Oh! go away at once. If the ogre comes back he will kill you.'

'I swear by your head, queen of my heart, that I have not found you only to lose you again! If I must die, well, I must!'

'Oh, what can I do for you?'

'Anything you like!'

'If I let you down a cord, can you make it fast under your arms, and climb up?'

'Of course I can,' said he.

So Dschemila lowered the cord, and Dschemil tied it round him, and climbed up to her window. Then they embraced each other tenderly, and burst into tears of joy.

'But what shall I do when the ogre returns?' asked she.

'Trust to me,' he said.

Now there was a chest in the room, where Dschemila kept her clothes. And she made Dschemil get into it, and lie at the bottom, and told him to keep very still.

He was only hidden just in time, for the lid was hardly closed when the ogre's heavy tread was heard on the stairs. He flung open the door, bringing men's flesh for himself and lamb's flesh for the maiden. 'I smell the smell of a man!' he thundered. 'What is he doing here?'

'How could any one have come to this desert place?' asked the girl, and burst into tears.

'Do not cry,' said the ogre; 'perhaps a raven has dropped some scraps from his claws.'

'Ah, yes, I was forgetting,' answered she. 'One did drop some bones about.'

'Well, burn them to powder,' replied the ogre, 'so that I may swallow it.'

So the maiden took some bones and burned them, and gave them to the ogre, saying, ' Here is the powder, swallow it.'

And when he had swallowed the powder the ogre stretched himself out and went to sleep.

In a little while the man's flesh, which the maiden was cooking for the ogre's supper, called out and said:

'Hist! Hist!
 A man lies in the kist! '

And the lamb's flesh answered:

'He is your brother,
 And cousin of the other.'

The ogre moved sleepily, and asked, 'What did the meat say, Dschemila?'

'Only that I must be sure to add salt.'

'Well, add salt.'

'Yes, I have done so,' said she.

The ogre was soon sound asleep again, when the man's flesh called out a second time:

'Hist! Hist!
 A man lies in the kist!'

And the lamb's flesh answered:

'He is your brother, And cousin of the other.'

'What did it say, Dschemila?' asked the ogre.

'Only that I must add pepper.'

'Well, add pepper.'

'Yes, I have done so,' said she.

The ogre had had a long day's hunting, and could not keep himself awake. In a moment his eyes were tight shut, and then the man's flesh called out for the third time:

'Hist! Hist
 A man lies in the kist,'

And the lamb's flesh answered:

'He is your brother,
 And cousin of the other.'

'What did it say, Dschemila?' asked the ogre.

'Only that it was ready, and that I had better take it off the fire.'

'Then if it is ready, bring it to me, and I will eat it.'

So she brought it to him, and while he was eating she supped off the lamb's flesh herself, and managed to put some aside for her cousin.

When the ogre had finished, and had washed his hands, he said to Dschemila: 'Make my bed, for I am tired.'

So she made his bed, and put a nice soft pillow for his head, and tucked him up.

'Father,' she said suddenly.

'Well, what is it?'

'Dear father, if you are really asleep, why are your eyes always open?'

'Why do you ask that, Dschemila? Do you want to deal treacherously with me?'

'No, of course not, father. How could I, and what would be the use of it?'

'Well, why do you want to know?'

'Because last night I woke up and saw the whole place shining in a red light, which frightened me.'

'That happens when I am fast asleep.'

'And what is the good of the pin you always keep here so carefully?'

'If I throw that pin in front of me, it turns into an iron mountain.'

'And this darning needle?'

'That becomes a sea.'

'And this hatchet?'

'That becomes a thorn hedge, which no one can pass through. But why do you ask all these questions? I am sure you have something in your head.'

'Oh, I just wanted to know; and how could anyone find me out here?' and she began to cry.

'Oh, don't cry, I was only in fun,' said the ogre.

He was soon asleep again, and a yellow light shone through the castle.

'Come quick!' called Dschemil from the chest; 'we must fly now while the ogre is asleep.'

'Not yet,' she said, 'there is a yellow light shining. I don't think he is asleep.'

So they waited for an hour. Then Dschemil whispered again: 'Wake up! There is no time to lose!'

'Let me see if he is asleep,' said she, and she peeped in, and saw a red light shining. Then she stole back to her cousin, and asked, 'But how are we to get out?'

'Get the rope, and I will let you down.'

So she fetched the rope, the hatchet, and the pin and the needles, and said, 'Take them, and put them in the pocket of your cloak, and be sure not to lose them.'

Dschemil put them carefully in his pocket, and tied the rope round her, and let her down over the wall.

'Are you safe?' he asked.

'Yes, quite.'

'Then untie the rope, so that I may draw it up.'

And Dschemila did as she was told, and in a few minutes he stood beside her.

Now all this time the ogre was asleep, and had heard nothing. Then his dog came to him and said, 'O, sleeper, are you having pleasant dreams? Dschemila has forsaken you and run away.'

The ogre got out of bed, gave the dog a kick, then went back again, and slept till morning.

When it grew light, he rose, and called, 'Dschemila! Dschemila!' but he only heard the echo of his own voice! Then he dressed himself quickly; buckled on his sword and whistled to his dog, and followed the road which he knew the fugitives must have taken. 'Cousin,' said Dschemila suddenly, and turning round as she spoke.

'What is it?' answered he.

'The ogre is coming after us. I saw him.'

'But where is he? I don't see him.'

'Over there. He only looks about as tall as a needle.'

Then they both began to run as fast as they could, while the ogre and his dog kept drawing always nearer. A few more steps, and he would have been by their side, when Dschemila threw the darning needle behind her. In a moment it became an iron mountain between them and their enemy.

'We will break it down, my dog and I,' cried the ogre in a rage, and they dashed at the mountain till they had forced a path through, and came ever nearer and nearer.

'Cousin! ' said Dschemila suddenly.

'What is it?'

'The ogre is coming after us with his dog.'

'You go on in front then,' answered he; and they both ran on as fast as they could, while the ogre and the dog drew always nearer and nearer.

'They are close upon us! ' cried the maiden, glancing behind, 'you must throw the pin.'

So Dschemil took the pin from his cloak and threw it behind him, and a dense thicket of thorns sprang up round them, which the ogre and his dog could not pass through.

'I will get through it somehow, if I burrow underground,' cried he, and very soon he and the dog were on the other side.

'Cousin,' said Dschemila, 'they are close to us now.'

'Go on in front, and fear nothing,' replied Dschemil.

So she ran on a little way, and then stopped.

'He is only a few yards away now,' she said, and Dschemil flung the hatchet on the ground, and it turned into a lake.

'I will drink, and my dog shall drink, till it is dry,' shrieked the ogre, and the dog drank so much that it burst and died. But the ogre did not stop for that, and soon the whole lake was nearly dry. Then he exclaimed, 'Dschemila, let your head become a donkey's head, and your hair fur!'

But when it was done, Dschemil looked at her in horror, and said, ' She is really a donkey, and not a woman at all! '

And he left her, and went home.

For two days poor Dschemila wandered about alone, weeping bitterly. When her cousin drew near his native town, he began to think over his conduct, and to feel ashamed of himself.

'Perhaps by this time she has changed back to her proper shape,' he said to himself, 'I will go and see!'

So he made all the haste he could, and at last he saw her seated on a rock, trying to keep off the wolves, who longed to have her for dinner. He drove them off and said, 'Get up, dear cousin, you have had a narrow escape.'

Dschemila stood up and answered, 'Bravo, my friend. You persuaded me to fly with you, and then left me helplessly to my fate.'

'Shall I tell you the truth?' asked he.

'Tell it.'

'I thought you were a witch, and I was afraid of you.'

'Did you not see me before my transformation? and did you not watch it happen under your very eyes, when the ogre bewitched me?'

'What shall I do?' said Dschemil. 'If I take you into the town, everyone will laugh, and say, "Is that a new kind of toy you have got? It has hands like a woman, feet like a woman, the body of a woman; but its head is the head of an ass, and its hair is fur." '

'Well, what do you mean to do with me?' asked Dschemila. 'Better take me home to my mother by night, and tell no one anything about it.'

'So I will,' said he.

They waited where they were till it was nearly dark, then Dschemil brought his cousin home.

'Is that Dschemil?' asked the mother when he knocked softly.

'Yes, it is.'

'And have you found her?'

'Yes, and I have brought her to you.'

'Oh, where is she? let me see her!' cried the mother.

'Here, behind me,' answered Dschemil.

But when the poor woman caught sight of her daughter, she shrieked, and exclaimed, 'Are you making fun of me? When did I ever give birth to an ass?'

'Hush!' said Dschemil, 'it is not necessary to let the whole world know! And if you look at her body, you will see two scars on it.'

'Mother,' sobbed Dschemila, 'do you really not know your own daughter?'

'Yes, of course I know her.'

'What are her two scars then?'

'On her thigh is a scar from the bite of a dog, and on her breast is the mark of a burn, where she pulled a lamp over her when she was little.'

'Then look at me, and see if I am not your daughter,' said Dschemila, throwing off her clothes and showing her two scars.

And at the sight her mother embraced her, weeping.

'Dear daughter,' she cried, 'what evil fate has befallen you?'

'It was the ogre who carried me off first, and then bewitched me,' answered Dschemila.

'But what is to be done with you?' asked her mother.

'Hide me away, and tell no one anything about me. And you, dear cousin, say nothing to the neighbours, and if they should put questions, you can make answer that I have not yet been found.'

'So I will,' replied he.

Then he and her mother took her upstairs and hid her in a cupboard, where she stayed for a whole month, only going out to walk when all the world was asleep.

Meanwhile Dschemil had returned to his own home, where his father and mother, his brothers and neighbours, greeted him joyfully.

'When did you come back?' said they, 'and have you found Dschemila?'

'No, I searched the whole world after her, and could hear nothing of her.'

'Did you part company with the man who started with you?'

'Yes; after three days he got so weak and useless he could not go on. It must be a month by now since he reached home again. I went on and visited every castle, and looked in every house. But there were no signs of her; and so I gave it up.'

And they answered him: 'We told you before that it was no good. An ogre or an ogress must have snapped her up, and how can you expect to find her?'

'I loved her too much to be still,' he said.

But his friends did not understand, and soon they spoke to him again about it.

'We will seek for a wife for you. There are plenty of girls prettier than Dschemila.'

'I dare say; but I don't want them.'

'But what will you do with all the cushions and carpets, and beautiful things you bought for your house?'

'They can stay in the chests.'

'But the moths will eat them! For a few weeks, it is of no consequence, but after a year or two they will be quite useless.'

'And if they have to lie there ten years I will have Dschemila, and her only, for my wife. For a month, or even two months, I will rest here quietly. Then I will go and seek her afresh.'

'Oh, you are quite mad! Is she the only maiden in the world? There are plenty of others better worth having than she is.'

'If there are I have not seen them! And why do you make all this fuss? Every man knows his own business best.

'Why, it is you who are making all the fuss yourself.'

But Dschemil turned and went into the house, for he did not want to quarrel.

Three months later a Jew, who was travelling across the desert, came to the castle, and laid himself down under the wall to rest.

In the evening the ogre saw him there and said to him, 'Jew, what are you doing here? Have you anything to sell?'

'I have only some clothes,' answered the Jew, who was in mortal terror of the ogre.

'Oh, don't be afraid of me,' said the ogre, laughing. 'I shall not eat you. Indeed, I mean to go a bit of the way with you myself.'

'I am ready, gracious sir,' replied the Jew, rising to his feet.

'Well, go straight on till you reach a town, and in that town you will find a maiden called Dschemila and a young man called Dschemil. Take this mirror and this comb with you, and say to Dschemila, "Your father, the ogre, greets you, and begs you to look at your face in this mirror, and it will appear as it was before, and to comb your hair with this comb, and it will be as formerly." If you do not carry out my orders, I will eat you the next time we meet.'

'Oh, I will obey you punctually,' cried the Jew.

After thirty days the Jew entered the gate of the town, and sat down in the first street he came to, hungry, thirsty, and very tired.

Quite by chance, Dschemil happened to pass by, and seeing a man sitting there, full in the glare of the sun, he stopped, and said, ' Get up at once, Jew; you will have a sunstroke if you sit in such a place.'

'Ah, good sir,' replied the Jew, 'for a whole month I have been travelling, and I am too tired to move.'

'Which way did you come?' asked Dschemil.

'From out there,' answered the Jew pointing behind him.

'And you have been travelling for a month, you say? Well, did you see anything remarkable?'

'Yes, good sir; I saw a castle, and lay down to rest under its shadow. And an ogre woke me, and told me to come to this town, where I should find a young man called Dschemil, and a girl called Dschemila.'

'My name is Dschemil. What does the ogre want with me?'

'He gave me some presents for Dschemila. How can I see her?'

'Come with me, and you shall give them into her own hands.'

So the two went together to the house of Dschemil's uncle, and Dschemil led the Jew into his aunt's room.

'Aunt!' he cried, 'this Jew who is with me has come from the ogre, and has brought with him, as presents, a mirror and a comb which the ogre has sent her.'

'But it may be only some wicked trick on the part of the ogre,' said she.

'Oh, I don't think so,' answered the young man, 'give her the things.'

Then the maiden was called, and she came out of her hiding place, and went up to the Jew, saying, 'Where have you come from, Jew?'

'From your father the ogre.'

'And what errand did he send you on?'

'He told me I was to give you this mirror and this comb, and to say "Look in this mirror, and comb your hair with this comb, and both will become as they were formerly." '

And Dschemila took the mirror and looked into it, and combed her hair with the comb, and she had no longer an ass's head, but the face of a beautiful maiden.

Great was the joy of both mother and cousin at this wonderful sight, and the news that Dschemila had returned soon spread, and the neighbours came flocking in with greetings.

'When did you come back?'

'My cousin brought me.'

'Why, he told us he could not find you! '

'Oh, I did that on purpose,' answered Dschemil. 'I did not want everyone to know.'

Then he turned to his father and his mother, his brothers and his sisters-in-law, and said, 'We must set to work at once, for the wedding will be to-day.'

A beautiful litter was prepared to carry the bride to her new home, but she shrank back, saying, 'I am afraid, lest the ogre should carry me off again.'

'How can the ogre get at you when we are all here?' they said. 'There are two thousand of us all told, and every man has his sword.' 'He will manage it somehow,' answered Dschemila, 'he is a powerful king!'

'She is right,' said an old man. 'Take away the litter, and let her go on foot if she is afraid.'

'But it is absurd!' exclaimed the rest; 'how can the ogre get hold of her?'

'I will not go,' said Dschemila again. 'You do not know that monster; I do.'

And while they were disputing the bridegroom arrived.

'Let her alone. She shall stay in her father's house. After all, I can live here, and the wedding feast shall be made ready.'

And so they were married at last, and died without having had a single quarrel.

[Marchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis,]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f05]

Janni and the Draken

Once there was a man who shunned the world, and lived in the wilderness. He owned nothing but a flock of sheep, whose milk and wool he sold, and so procured himself bread to eat; he also carried wooden spoons, and sold them. He had a wife and one little girl, and after a long time his wife had another child. The evening it was born the man went to the nearest village to fetch a nurse, and on the way he met a monk who begged him for a night's lodging. This the man willingly granted, and took him home with him. There being no one far nor near to baptize the child, the man asked the monk to do him this service, and the child was given the name of Janni.

In the course of time Janni's parents died, and he and his sister were left alone in the world; soon affairs went badly with them, so they determined to wander away to seek their fortune. In packing up, the sister found a knife which the monk had left for his godson, and this she gave to her brother.

Then they went on their way, taking with them the three sheep which were all that remained of their flocks. After wandering for three days they met a man with three dogs who proposed that they should exchange animals, he taking the sheep, and they the dogs. The brother and sister were quite pleased at this arrangement, and after the exchange was made they separated, and went their different ways.

Janni and his sister in course of time came to a great castle, in which dwelt forty Draken, who, when they heard that Janni had come, fled forty fathoms underground.

So Janni found the castle deserted, and abode there with his sister, and every day went out to hunt with the weapons the Draken had left in the castle.

One day, when he was away hunting, one of the Draken came up to get provisions, not knowing that there was anyone in the castle. When he saw Janni's sister he was terrified, but she told him not to be afraid, and by-and-by they fell in love with each other, for every time that Janni went to hunt the sister called the Drakos up. Thus they went on making love to each other till at length, unknown to Janni, they got married. Then, when it was too late, the sister repented, and was afraid of Janni's wrath when he found it out.

One day the Drakos came to her, and said: 'You must pretend to be ill, and when Janni asks what ails you, and what you want, you must answer: "Cherries," and when he inquires where these are to be found, you must say: "There are some in a garden a day's journey from here." Then your brother will go there, and will never come back, for there dwell three of my brothers who will look after him well.'

Then the sister did as the Drakos advised, and next day Janni set out to fetch the cherries, taking his three dogs with him. When he came to the garden where the cherries grew he jumped off his horse, drank some water from the spring, which rose there, and fell directly into a deep sleep. The Draken came round about to eat him, but the dogs flung themselves on them and tore them in pieces, and scratched a grave in the ground with their paws, and buried the Draken so that Janni might not see their dead bodies. When Janni awoke, and saw his dogs all covered with blood, he believed that they had caught, somewhere, a wild beast, and was angry because they had left none of it for him. But he plucked the cherries, and took them back to his sister.

When the Drakos heard that Janni had come back, he fled for fear forty fathoms underground. And the sister ate the cherries and declared herself well again.

The next day, when Janni was gone to hunt, the Drakos came out, and advised the sister that she should pretend to be ill again, and when her brother asked her what she would like, she should answer 'Quinces,' and when he inquired where these were to be found, she should say: 'In a garden distant about two days' journey.' Then would Janni certainly be destroyed, for there dwelt six brothers of the Drakos, each of whom had two heads.

The sister did as she was advised, and next day Janni again set off, taking his three dogs with him. When he came to the garden he dismounted, sat down to rest a little, and fell fast asleep. First there came three Draken round about to eat him, and when these three had been worried by the dogs, there came three others who were worried in like manner. Then the dogs again dug a grave and buried the dead Draken, that their master might not see them. When Janni awoke and beheld the dogs all covered with blood, he thought, as before, that they had killed a wild beast, and was again angry with them for leaving him nothing. But he took the quinces and brought them back to his sister, who, when she had eaten them, declared herself better. The Drakos, when he heard that Janni had come back, fled for fear forty fathoms deeper underground.

Next day, when Janni was hunting, the Drakos went to the sister and advised that she should again pretend to be ill, and should beg for some pears, which grew in a garden three days' journey from the castle. From this quest Janni would certainly never return, for there dwelt nine brothers of the Drakos, each of whom had three heads.

The sister did as she was told, and next day Janni, taking his three dogs with him, went to get the pears. When he came to the garden he laid himself down to rest, and soon fell asleep.

Then first came three Draken to eat him, and when the dogs had worried these, six others came and fought the dogs a long time. The noise of this combat awoke Janni, and he slew the Draken, and knew at last why the dogs were covered with blood.

After that he freed all whom the Draken held prisoners, amongst others, a king's daughter. Out of gratitude she would have taken him for her husband; but he put her off, saying: 'For the kindness that I have been able to do to you, you shall receive in this castle all the blind and lame who pass this way.' The princess promised him to do so, and on his departure gave him a ring.

So Janni plucked the pears and took them to his sister, who, when she had eaten them, declared she felt better. When, however, the Drakos heard that Janni had come back yet a third time safe and sound, he fled for fright forty fathoms deeper underground; and, next day, when Janni was away hunting, he crept out and said to the sister: 'Now are we indeed both lost, unless you find out from him wherein his strength lies, and then between us we will contrive to do away with him.'

When, therefore, Janni had come back from hunting, and sat at evening with his sister by the fire, she begged him to tell her wherein lay his strength, and he answered: 'It lies in my two fingers; if these are bound together then all my strength disappears.'

'That I will not believe,' said the sister, 'unless I see it for myself.'

Then he let her tie his fingers together with a thread, and immediately he became powerless. Then the sister called up the Drakos, who, when he had come forth, tore out Janni's eyes, gave them to his dogs to eat, and threw him into a dry well.

Now it happened that some travellers, going to draw water from this well, heard Janni groaning at the bottom. They came near, and asked him where he was, and he begged them to draw him up from the well, for he was a poor unfortunate man.

The travellers let a rope down and drew him up to daylight. It was not till then that he first became aware that he was blind, and he begged the travellers to lead him to the country of the king whose daughter he had freed, and they would be well repaid for their trouble.

When they had brought him there he sent to beg the princess to come to him; but she did not recognise him till he had shown her the ring she had given him.

Then she remembered him, and took him with her into the castle.

When she learnt what had befallen him she called together all the sorceresses in the country in order that they should tell her where the eyes were. At last she found one who declared that she knew where they were, and that she could restore them. This sorceress then went straight to the castle where dwelt the sister and the Drakos, and gave something to the dogs to eat which caused the eyes to reappear. She took them with her and put them back in Janni's head, so that he saw as well as before.

Then he returned to the castle of the Drakos, whom he slew as well as his sister; and, taking his dogs with him, went back to the princess and they were immediately married.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f06]

The Partnership of the Thief and the Liar

There was once upon a time a thief, who, being out of a job, was wandering by himself up and down the seashore. As he walked he passed a man who was standing still, looking at the waves.

'I wonder,' said the thief, addressing the stranger, 'if you have ever seen a stone swimming?'

'Most certainly I have,' replied the other man, 'and, what is more, I saw the same stone jump out of the water and fly through the air.'

'This is capital,' replied the thief. 'You and I must go into partnership. We shall certainly make our fortunes. Let us start together for the palace of the king of the neighbouring country. When we get there, I will go into his presence alone, and will tell him the most startling thing I can invent. Then you must follow and back up my lie.'

Having agreed to do this, they set out on their travels. After several days' journeying, they reached the town where the king's palace was, and here they parted for a few hours, while the thief sought an interview with the king, and begged his majesty to give him a glass of beer.

'That is impossible,' said the king, 'as this year there has been a failure of all the crops, and of the hops and the vines; so we have neither wine nor beer in the whole kingdom.'

'How extraordinary!' answered the thief. 'I have just come from a country where the crops were so fine that I saw twelve barrels of beer made out of one branch of hops.'

'I bet you three hundred florins that is not true,' answered the king.

'And I bet you three hundred florins it is true,' replied the thief.

Then each staked his three hundred florins, and the king said he would decide the question by sending a servant into that country to see if it was true.

So the servant set out on horseback, and on the way he met a man, and he asked him whence he came. And the man told him that he came from the self-same country to which the servant was at that moment bound.

'If that is the case,' said the servant, 'you can tell me how high the hops grow in your country, and how many barrels of beer can be brewed from one branch?'

'I can't tell you that,' answered the man, 'but I happened to be present when the hops were being gathered in, and I saw that it took three men with axes three days to cut down one branch.'

Then the servant thought that he might save himself a long journey; so he gave the man ten florins, and told him he must repeat to the king what he had just told him. And when they got back to the palace, they came together into the king's presence.

And the king asked him: 'Well, is it true about the hops?'

'Yes, sire, it is,' answered the servant; 'and here is a man I have brought with me from the country to confirm the tale.'

So the king paid the thief the three hundred florins; and the partners once more set out together in search of adventures. As they journeyed, the thief said to his comrade: 'I will now go to another king, and will tell him something still more startling; and you must follow and back up my lie, and we shall get some money out of him; just see if we don't.'

When they reached the next kingdom, the thief presented himself to the king, and requested him to give him a cauliflower. And the king answered: 'Owing to a blight among the vegetables we have no cauliflower.'

'That is strange,' answered the thief. 'I have just come from a country where it grows so well that one head of cauliflower filled twelve water-tubs.'

'I don't believe it,' answered the king.

'I bet you six hundred florins it is true,' replied the thief.

'And I bet you six hundred florins it is not true,' answered the king. And he sent for a servant, and ordered him to start at once for the country whence the thief had come, to find out if his story of the cauliflower was true. On his journey the servant met with a man. Stopping his horse he asked him where he came from, and the man replied that he came from the country to which the other was travelling.

'If that is the case,' said the servant, 'you can tell me to what size cauliflower grows in your country? Is it so large that one head fills twelve water-tubs?'

'I have not seen that,' answered the man. 'But I saw twelve waggons, drawn by twelve horses, carrying one head of cauliflower to the market.'

And the servant answered: 'Here are ten florins for you, my man, for you have saved me a long journey. Come with me now, and tell the king what you have just told me.'

'All right,' said the man, and they went together to the palace; and when the king asked the servant if he had found out the truth about the cauliflower, the servant replied: 'Sire, all that you heard was perfectly true; here is a man from the country who will tell you so.'

So the king had to pay the thief the six hundred florins. And the two partners set out once more on their travels, with their nine hundred florins. When they reached the country of the neighbouring king, the thief entered the royal presence, and began conversation by asking if his majesty knew that in an adjacent kingdom there was a town with a church steeple on which a bird had alighted, and that the steeple was so high, and the bird's beak so long, that it had pecked the stars till some of them fell out of the sky.

'I don't believe it,' said the king.

'Nevertheless I am prepared to bet twelve hundred florins that it is true,' answered the thief.

'And I bet twelve hundred florins that it is a lie,' replied the king. And he straightway sent a servant into the neighbouring country to find out the truth.

As he rode, the servant met a man coming in the opposite direction. So he hailed him and asked him where he came from. And the man replied that he came out of the very town to which the man was bound. Then the servant asked him if the story they had heard about the bird with the long beak was true.

'I don't know about that,' answered the man, 'as I have never seen the bird; but I once saw twelve men shoving all their might and main with brooms to push a monster egg into a cellar.'

'That is capital,' answered the servant, presenting the man with ten florins. 'Come and tell your tale to the king, and you will save me a long journey.'

So, when the story was repeated to the king, there was nothing for him to do but to pay the thief the twelve hundred florins.

Then the two partners set out again with their ill- gotten gains, which they proceeded to divide into two equal shares; but the thief kept back three of the florins that belonged to the liar's half of the booty. Shortly afterwards they each married, and settled down in homes of their own with their wives. One day the liar discovered that he had been done out of three florins by his partner, so he went to his house and demanded them from him.

'Come next Saturday, and I will give them to you,' answered the thief. But as he had no intention of giving the liar the money, when Saturday morning came he stretched himself out stiff and stark upon the bed, and told his wife she was to say he was dead. So the wife rubbed her eyes with an onion, and when the liar appeared at the door, she met him in tears, and told him that as her husband was dead he could not be paid the three florins.

But the liar, who knew his partner's tricks, instantly suspected the truth, and said: 'As he has not paid me, I will pay him out with three good lashes of my riding whip.'

At these words the thief sprang to his feet, and, appearing at the door, promised his partner that if he would return the following Saturday he would pay him. So the liar went away satisfied with this promise.

But when Saturday morning came the thief got up early and hid himself under a truss of hay in the hay- loft.

When the liar appeared to demand his three florins, the wife met him with tears in her eyes, and told him that her husband was dead.

'Where have you buried him?' asked the liar.

'In the hay-loft,' answered the wife.

'Then I will go there, and take away some hay in payment of his debt,' said the liar. And proceeding to the hay-loft, he began to toss about the hay with a pitchfork, prodding it into the trusses of hay, till, in terror of his life, the thief crept out and promised his partner to pay him the three florins on the following Saturday.

When the day came he got up at sunrise, and going down into the crypt of a neighbouring chapel, stretched himself out quite still and stiff in an old stone coffin. But the liar, who was quite as clever as his partner, very soon bethought him of the crypt, and set out for the chapel, confident that he would shortly discover the hiding-place of his friend. He had just entered the crypt, and his eyes were not yet accustomed to the darkness, when he heard the sound of whispering at the grated windows. Listening intently, he overheard the plotting of a band of robbers, who had brought their treasure to the crypt, meaning to hide it there, while they set out on fresh adventures. All the time they were speaking they were removing the bars from the window, and in another minute they would all have entered the crypt, and discovered the liar. Quick as thought he wound his mantle round him and placed himself, standing stiff and erect, in a niche in the wall, so that in the dim light he looked just like an old stone statue. As soon as the robbers entered the crypt, they set about the work of dividing their treasure. Now, there were twelve robbers, but by mistake the chief of the band divided the gold into thirteen heaps. When he saw his mistake he said they had not time to count it all over again, but that the thirteenth heap should belong to whoever among them could strike off the head of the old stone statue in the niche with one stroke. With these words he took up an axe, and approached the niche where the liar was standing. But, just as he had waved the axe over his head ready to strike, a voice was heard from the stone coffin saying, in sepulchral tones: 'Clear out of this, or the dead will arise from their coffins, and the statues will descend from the walls, and you will be driven out more dead than alive.' And with a bound the thief jumped out of his coffin and the liar from his niche, and the robbers were so terrified that they ran helter-skelter out of the crypt, leaving all their gold behind them, and vowing that they would never put foot inside the haunted place again. So the partners divided the gold between them, and carried it to their homes; and history tells us no more about them.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f07]

Fortunatus and His Purse

Once upon a time there lived in the city of Famagosta, in the island of Cyprus, a rich man called Theodorus. He ought to have been the happiest person in the whole world, as he had all he could wish for, and a wife and little son whom he loved dearly; but unluckily, after a short time he always grew tired of everything, and had to seek new pleasures. When people are made like this the end is generally the same, and before Fortunatus (for that was the boy's name) was ten years old, his father had spent all his money and had not a farthing left.

But though Theodorus had been so foolish he was not quite without sense, and set about getting work at once. His wife, too, instead of reproaching him sent away the servants and sold their fine horses, and did all the work of the house herself, even washing the clothes of her husband and child.

Thus time passed till Fortunatus was sixteen. One day when they were sitting at supper, the boy said to Theodorus, 'Father, why do you look so sad. Tell me what is wrong, and perhaps I can help you.'

'Ah, my son, I have reason enough to be sad; but for me you would now have been enjoying every kind of pleasure, instead of being buried in this tiny house.'

'Oh, do not let that trouble you,' replied Fortunatus, 'it is time I made some money for myself. To be sure I have never been taught any trade. Still there must be something I can do. I will go and walk on the seashore and think about it.'

Very soon--sooner than he expected--a chance came, and Fortunatus, like a wise boy, seized on it at once. The post offered him was that of page to the Earl of Flanders, and as the Earl's daughter was just going to be married, splendid festivities were held in her honour, and at some of the tilting matches Fortunatus was lucky enough to win the prize. These prizes, together with presents from the lords and ladies of the court, who liked him for his pleasant ways, made Fortunatus feel quite a rich man.

But though his head was not turned by the notice taken of him, it excited the envy of some of the other pages about the Court, and one of them, called Robert, invented a plot to move Fortunatus out of his way. So he told the young man that the Earl had taken a dislike to him and meant to kill him; Fortunatus believed the story, and packing up his fine clothes and money, slipped away before dawn.

He went to a great many big towns and lived well, and as he was generous and not wiser than most youths of his age, he very soon found himself penniless. Like his father, he then began to think of work, and tramped half over Brittany in search of it. Nobody seemed to want him, and he wandered about from one place to another, till he found himself in a dense wood, without any paths, and not much light. Here he spent two whole days, with nothing to eat and very little water to drink, going first in one direction and then in another, but never being able to find his way out. During the first night he slept soundly, and was too tired to fear either man or beast, but when darkness came on for the second time, and growls were heard in the distance, he grew frightened and looked about for a high tree out of reach of his enemies. Hardly had he settled himself comfortably in one of the forked branches, when a lion walked up to a spring that burst from a rock close to the tree, and crouching down drank greedily. This was bad enough, but after all, lions do not climb trees, and as long as Fortunatus stayed up on his perch, he was quite safe. But no sooner was the lion out of sight, than his place was taken by a bear, and bears, as Fortunatus knew very well, are tree-climbers. His heart beat fast, and not without reason, for as the bear turned away he looked up and saw Fortunatus!

Now in those days every young man carried a sword slung to his belt, and it was a fashion that came in very handily for Fortunatus. He drew his sword, and when the bear got within a yard of him he made a fierce lunge forward. The bear, wild with pain, tried to spring, but the bough he was standing on broke with his weight, and he fell heavily to the ground. Then Fortunatus descended from his tree (first taking good care to see no other wild animals were in sight) and killed him with a single blow. He was just thinking he would light a fire and make a hearty dinner off bear's flesh, which is not at all bad eating, when he beheld a beautiful lady standing by his side leaning on a wheel, and her eyes hidden by a bandage.

'I am Dame Fortune,' she said, 'and I have a gift for you. Shall it be wisdom, strength, long life, riches, health, or beauty? Think well, and tell me what you will have.'

But Fortunatus, who had proved the truth of the proverb that 'It's ill thinking on an empty stomach,' answered quickly, 'Good lady, let me have riches in such plenty that I may never again be as hungry as I am now.'

And the lady held out a purse and told him he had only to put his hand into it, and he and his children would always find ten pieces of gold. But when they were dead it would be a magic purse no longer.

At this news Fortunatus was beside himself with joy, and could hardly find words to thank the lady. But she told him that the best thing he could do was to find his way out of the wood, and before bidding him farewell pointed out which path he should take. He walked along it as fast as his weakness would let him, until a welcome light at a little distance showed him that a house was near. It turned out to be an inn, but before entering Fortunatus thought he had better make sure of the truth of what the lady had told him, and took out the purse and looked inside. Sure enough there were the ten pieces of gold, shining brightly. Then Fortunatus walked boldly up to the inn, and ordered them to get ready a good supper at once, as he was very hungry, and to bring him the best wine in the house. And he seemed to care so little what he spent that everybody thought he was a great lord, and vied with each other who should run quickest when he called.

After a night passed in a soft bed, Fortunatus felt so much better that he asked the landlord if he could find him some men-servants, and tell him where any good horses were to be got. The next thing was to provide himself with smart clothes, and then to take a big house where he could give great feasts to the nobles and beautiful ladies who lived in palaces round about.

In this manner a whole year soon slipped away, and Fortunatus was so busy amusing himself that he never once remembered his parents whom he had left behind in Cyprus. But though he was thoughtless, he was not bad-hearted. As soon as their existence crossed his mind, he set about making preparations to visit them, and as he was not fond of being alone he looked round for some one older and wiser than himself to travel with him. It was not long before he had the good luck to come across an old man who had left his wife and children in a far country many years before, when he went out into the world to seek the fortune which he never found. He agreed to accompany Fortunatus back to Cyprus, but only on condition he should first be allowed to return for a few weeks to his own home before venturing to set sail for an island so strange and distant. Fortunatus agreed to his proposal, and as he was always fond of anything new, said that he would go with him.

The journey was long, and they had to cross many large rivers, and climb over high mountains, and find their way through thick woods, before they reached at length the old man's castle. His wife and children had almost given up hopes of seeing him again, and crowded eagerly round him. Indeed, it did not take Fortunatus five minutes to fall in love with the youngest daughter, the most beautiful creature in the whole world, whose name was Cassandra.

'Give her to me for my wife,' he said to the old man, 'and let us all go together to Famagosta.'

So a ship was bought big enough to hold Fortunatus, the old man and his wife, and their ten children-- five of them sons and five daughters. And the day before they sailed the wedding was celebrated with magnificent rejoicings, and everybody thought that Fortunatus must certainly be a prince in disguise. But when they reached Cyprus, he learned to his sorrow that both his father and mother were dead, and for some time he shut himself up in his house and would see nobody, full of shame at having forgotten them all these years. Then he begged that the old man and his wife would remain with him, and take the place of his parents.

For twelve years Fortunatus and Cassandra and their two little boys lived happily in Famagosta. They had a beautiful house and everything they could possibly want, and when Cassandra's sisters married the purse provided them each with a fortune. But at last Fortunatus grew tired of staying at home, and thought he should like to go out and see the world again. Cassandra shed many tears at first when he told her of his wishes, and he had a great deal of trouble to persuade her to give her consent. But on his promising to return at the end of two years she agreed to let him go. Before he went away he showed her three chests of gold, which stood in a room with an iron door, and walls twelve feet thick. 'If anything should happen to me,' he said, 'and I should never come back, keep one of the chests for yourself, and give the others to our two sons.' Then he embraced them all and took ship for Alexandria.

The wind was fair and in a few days they entered the harbour, where Fortunatus was informed by a man whom he met on landing, that if he wished to be well received in the town, he must begin by making a handsome present to the Sultan. 'That is easily done,' said Fortunatus, and went into a goldsmith's shop, where he bought a large gold cup, which cost five thousand pounds. This gift so pleased the Sultan that he ordered a hundred casks of spices to be given to Fortunatus; Fortunatus put them on board his ship, and commanded the captain to return to Cyprus and deliver them to his wife, Cassandra. He next obtained an audience of the Sultan, and begged permission to travel through the country, which the Sultan readily gave him, adding some letters to the rulers of other lands which Fortunatus might wish to visit.

Filled with delight at feeling himself free to roam through the world once more, Fortunatus set out on his journey without losing a day. From court to court he went, astonishing everyone by the magnificence of his dress and the splendour of his presents. At length he grew as tired of wandering as he had been of staying at home, and returned to Alexandria, where he found the same ship that had brought him from Cyprus lying in the harbour. Of course the first thing he did was to pay his respects to the Sultan, who was eager to hear about his adventures.

When Fortunatus had told them all, the Sultan observed: 'Well, you have seen many wonderful things, but I have something to show you more wonderful still;' and he led him into a room where precious stones lay heaped against the walls. Fortunatus' eyes were quite dazzled, but the Sultan went on without pausing and opened a door at the farther end. As far as Fortunatus could see, the cupboard was quite bare, except for a little red cap, such as soldiers wear in Turkey.

'Look at this,' said the Sultan.

'But there is nothing very valuable about it,' answered Fortunatus. 'I've seen a dozen better caps than that, this very day.'

'Ah,' said the Sultan, 'you do not know what you are talking about. Whoever puts this cap on his head and wishes himself in any place, will find himself there in a moment.'

'But who made it?' asked Fortunatus.

'That I cannot tell you,' replied the Sultan.

'Is it very heavy to wear?' asked Fortunatus.

'No, quite light,' replied the Sultan, 'just feel it.'

Fortunatus took the cap and put it on his head, and then, without thinking, wished himself back in the ship that was starting for Famagosta. In a second he was standing at the prow, while the anchor was being weighed, and while the Sultan was repenting of his folly in allowing Fortunatus to try on the cap, the vessel was making fast for Cyprus.

When it arrived, Fortunatus found his wife and children well, but the two old people were dead and buried. His sons had grown tall and strong, but unlike their father had no wish to see the world, and found their chief pleasure in hunting and tilting. In the main, Fortunatus was content to stay quietly at home, and if a restless fit did seize upon him, he was able to go away for a few hours without being missed, thanks to the cap, which he never sent back to the Sultan.

By-and-by he grew old, and feeling that he had not many days to live, he sent for his two sons, and showing them the purse and cap, he said to them: 'Never part with these precious possessions. They are worth more than all the gold and lands I leave behind me. But never tell their secret, even to your wife or dearest friend. That purse has served me well for forty years, and no one knows whence I got my riches.' Then he died and was buried by his wife Cassandra, and he was mourned in Famagosta for many years.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f08]

The Goat-faced Girl

There was once upon a time a peasant called Masaniello who had twelve daughters. They were exactly like the steps of a staircase, for there was just a year between each sister. It was all the poor man could do to bring up such a large family, and in order to provide food for them he used to dig in the fields all day long. In spite of his hard work he only just succeeded in keeping the wolf from the door, and the poor little girls often went hungry to bed.

One day, when Masaniello was working at the foot of a high mountain, he came upon the mouth of a cave which was so dark and gloomy that even the sun seemed afraid to enter it. Suddenly a huge green lizard appeared from the inside and stood before Masaniello, who nearly went out of his mind with terror, for the beast was as big as a crocodile and quite as fierce looking.

But the lizard sat down beside him in the most friendly manner, and said: 'Don't be afraid, my good man, I am not going to hurt you; on the contrary, I am most anxious to help you.'

When the peasant heard these words he knelt before the lizard and said: 'Dear lady, for I know not what to call you, I am in your power; but I beg of you to be merciful, for I have twelve wretched little daughters at home who are dependent on me.'

'That's the very reason why I have come to you,' replied the lizard. 'Bring me your youngest daughter to-morrow morning. I promise to bring her up as if she were my own child, and to look upon her as the apple of my eye.'

When Masaniello heard her words he was very unhappy, because he felt sure, from the lizard's wanting one of his daughters, the youngest and tenderest too, that the poor little girl would only serve as dessert for the terrible creature's supper. At the same time he said to himself, 'If I refuse her request, she will certainly eat me up on the spot. If I give her what she asks she does indeed take part of myself, but if I refuse she will take the whole of me. What am I to do, and how in the world am I to get out of the difficulty?'

As he kept muttering to himself the lizard said, 'Make up your mind to do as I tell you at once. I desire to have your youngest daughter, and if you won't comply with my wish, I can only say it will be the worse for you.'

Seeing that there was nothing else to be done, Masaniello set off for his home, and arrived there looking so white and wretched that his wife asked him at once: 'What has happened to you, my dear husband? Have you quarrelled with anyone, or has the poor donkey fallen down?'

'Neither the one nor the other,' answered her husband,' but something far worse than either. A terrible lizard has nearly frightened me out of my senses, for she threatened that if I did not give her our youngest daughter, she would make me repent it. My head is going round like a mill-wheel, and I don't know what to do. I am indeed between the Devil and the Deep Sea. You know how dearly I love Renzolla, and yet, if I fail to bring her to the lizard to-morrow morning, I must say farewell to life. Do advise me what to do.'

When his wife had heard all he had to say, she said to him: 'How do you know, my dear husband, that the lizard is really our enemy? May she not be a friend in disguise? And your meeting with her may be the beginning of better things and the end of all our misery. Therefore go and take the child to her, for my heart tells me that you will never repent doing so.'

Masaniello was much comforted by her words, and next morning as soon as it was light he took his little daughter by the hand and led her to the cave.

The lizard, who was awaiting the peasant's arrival, came forward to meet him, and taking the girl by the hand, she gave the father a sack full of gold, and said: 'Go and marry your other daughters, and give them dowries with this gold, and be of good cheer, for Renzolla will have both father and mother in me; it is a great piece of luck for her that she has fallen into my hands.'

Masaniello, quite overcome with gratitude, thanked the lizard, and returned home to his wife.

As soon as it was known how rich the peasant had become, suitors for the hands of his daughters were not wanting, and very soon he married them all off; and even then there was enough gold left to keep himself and his wife in comfort and plenty all their days.

As soon as the lizard was left alone with Renzolla, she changed the cave into a beautiful palace, and led the girl inside. Here she brought her up like a little princess, and the child wanted for nothing. She gave her sumptuous food to eat, beautiful clothes to wear, and a thousand servants to wait on her.

Now, it happened, one day, that the king of the country was hunting in a wood close to the palace, and was overtaken by the dark. Seeing a light shining in the palace he sent one of his servants to ask if he could get a night's lodging there.

When the page knocked at the door the lizard changed herself into a beautiful woman, and opened it herself. When she heard the king's request she sent him a message to say that she would be delighted to see him, and give him all he wanted.

The king, on hearing this kind invitation, instantly betook himself to the palace, where he was received in the most hospitable manner. A hundred pages with torches came to meet him, a hundred more waited on him at table, and another hundred waved big fans in the air to keep the flies from him. Renzolla herself poured out the wine for him, and, so gracefully did she do it, that his Majesty could not take his eyes off her.

When the meal was finished and the table cleared, the king retired to sleep, and Renzolla drew the shoes from his feet, at the same time drawing his heart from his breast. So desperately had he fallen in love with her, that he called the fairy to him, and asked her for Renzolla's hand in marriage. As the kind fairy had only the girl's welfare at heart, she willingly gave her consent, and not her consent only, but a wedding portion of seven thousand golden guineas.

The king, full of delight over his good fortune, prepared to take his departure, accompanied by Renzolla, who never so much as thanked the fairy for all she had done for her. When the fairy saw such a base want of gratitude she determined to punish the girl, and, cursing her, she turned her face into a goat's head. In a moment Renzolla's pretty mouth stretched out into a snout, with a beard a yard long at the end of it, her cheeks sank in, and her shining plaits of hair changed into two sharp horns. When the king turned round and saw her he thought he must have taken leave of his senses. He burst into tears, and cried out: 'Where is the hair that bound me so tightly, where are the eyes that pierced through my heart, and where are the lips I kissed? Am I to be tied to a goat all my life? No, no! nothing will induce me to become the laughing-stock of my subjects for the sake of a goat-faced girl!'

When they reached his own country he shut Renzolla up in a little turret chamber of his palace, with a waiting-maid, and gave each of them ten bundles of flax to spin, telling them that their task must be finished by the end of the week.

The maid, obedient to the king's commands, set at once to work and combed out the flax, wound it round the spindle, and sat spinning at her wheel so diligently that her work was quite done by Saturday evening. But Renzolla, who had been spoilt and petted in the fairy's house, and was quite unaware of the change that had taken place in her appearance, threw the flax out of the window and said: 'What is the king thinking of that he should give me this work to do? If he wants shirts he can buy them. It isn't even as if he had picked me out of the gutter, for he ought to remember that I brought him seven thousand golden guineas as my wedding portion, and that I am his wife and not his slave. He must be mad to treat me like this.'

All the same, when Saturday evening came, and she saw that the waiting-maid had finished her task, she took fright lest she should be punished for her idleness. So she hurried off to the palace of the fairy, and confided all her woes to her. The fairy embraced her tenderly, and gave her a sack full of spun flax, in order that she might show it to the king, and let him see what a good worker she was. Renzolla took the sack without one word of thanks, and returned to the palace, leaving the kind fairy very indignant over her want of gratitude.

When the king saw the flax all spun, he gave Renzolla and the waiting-maid each a little dog, and told them to look after the animals and train them carefully.

The waiting-maid brought hers up with the greatest possible care, and treated it almost as if it were her son. But Renzolla said: 'I don't know what to think. Have I come among a lot of lunatics? Does the king imagine that I am going to comb and feed a dog with my own hands?' With these words she opened the window and threw the poor little beast out, and he fell on the ground as dead as a stone.

When a few months had passed the king sent a message to say he would like to see how the dogs were getting on. Renzolla, who felt very uncomfortable in her mind at this request, hurried off once more to the fairy. This time she found an old man at the door of the fairy's palace, who said to her: 'Who are you, and what do you want?'

When Renzolla heard his question she answered angrily: 'Don't you know me, old Goat-beard? And how dare you address me in such a way?'

'The pot can't call the kettle black,' answered the old man, 'for it is not I, but you who have a goat's head. Just wait a moment, you ungrateful wretch, and I will show you to what a pass your want of gratitude has brought you.'

With these words he hurried away, and returned with a mirror, which he held up before Renzolla. At the sight of her ugly, hairy face, the girl nearly fainted with horror, and she broke into loud sobs at seeing her countenance so changed.

Then the old man said: 'You must remember, Renzolla, that you are a peasant's daughter, and that the fairy turned you into a queen; but you were ungrateful, and never as much as thanked her for all she had done for you. Therefore she has determined to punish you. But if you wish to lose your long white beard, throw yourself at the fairy's feet and implore her to forgive you. She has a tender heart, and will, perhaps, take pity on you.'

Renzolla, who was really sorry for her conduct, took the old man's advice, and the fairy not only gave her back her former face, but she dressed her in a gold embroidered dress, presented her with a beautiful carriage, and brought her back, accompanied by a host of servants, to her husband. When the king saw her looking as beautiful as ever, he fell in love with her once more, and bitterly repented having caused her so much suffering.

So Renzolla lived happily ever afterwards, for she loved her husband, honoured the fairy, and was grateful to the old man for having told her the truth.

[From the Italian. Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f09]

What Came of Picking Flowers

There was once a woman who had three daughters whom she loved very much. One day the eldest was walking in a water-meadow, when she saw a pink growing in the stream. She stooped to pick the flower, but her hand had scarcely touched it, when she vanished altogether. The next morning the second sister went out into the meadow, to see if she could find any traces of the lost girl, and as a branch of lovely roses lay trailing across her path, she bent down to move it away, and in so doing, could not resist plucking one of the roses. In a moment she too had disappeared. Wondering what could have become of her two sisters, the youngest followed in their footsteps, and fell a victim to a branch of delicious white jessamine. So the old woman was left without any daughters at all.

She wept, and wept, and wept, all day and all night, and went on weeping so long, that her son, who had been a little boy when his sisters disappeared, grew up to be a tall youth. Then one night he asked his mother to tell him what was the matter.

When he had heard the whole story, he said, 'Give me your blessing, mother, and I will go and search the world till I find them.'

So he set forth, and after he had travelled several miles without any adventures, he came upon three big boys fighting in the road. He stopped and inquired what they were fighting about, and one of them answered:

'My lord! our father left to us, when he died, a pair of boots, a key, and a cap. Whoever puts on the boots and wishes himself in any place, will find himself there. The key will open every door in the world, and with the cap on your head no one can see you. Now our eldest brother wants to have all three things for himself, and we wish to draw lots for them.'

'Oh, that is easily settled,' said the youth. 'I will throw this stone as far as I can, and the one who picks it up first, shall have the three things.' So he took the stone and flung it, and while the three brothers were running after it, he drew hastily on the boots, and said, 'Boots, take me to the place where I shall find my eldest sister.'

The next moment the young man was standing on a steep mountain before the gates of a strong castle guarded by bolts and bars and iron chains. The key, which he had not forgotten to put in his pocket, opened the doors one by one, and he walked through a number of halls and corridors, till he met a beautiful and richly-dressed young lady who started back in surprise at the sight of him, and exclaimed, 'Oh, sir, how did you contrive *to* get in here?' The young man replied that he was her brother, and told her by what means he had been able to pass through the doors. In return, she told him how happy she was, except for one thing, and that was, her husband lay under a spell, and could never break it till there should be put to death a man who could not die.

They talked together for a long time, and then the lady said he had better leave her as she expected her husband back at any moment, and he might not like him to be there; but the young man assured her she need not be afraid, as he had with him a cap which would make him invisible. They were still deep in conversation when the door suddenly opened, and a bird flew in, but he saw nothing unusual, for, at the first noise, the youth had put on his cap. The lady jumped up and brought a large golden basin, into which the bird flew, reappearing directly after as a handsome man. Turning to his wife, he cried, 'I am sure someone is in the room!' She got frightened, and declared that she was quite alone, but her husband persisted, and in the end she had to confess the truth.

'But if he is really your brother, why did you hide him?' asked he. 'I believe you are telling me a lie, and if he comes back I shall kill him!'

At this the youth took off his cap, and came forward. Then the husband saw that he was indeed so like his wife that he doubted her word no longer, and embraced his brother-in-law with delight. Drawing a feather from his bird's skin, he said, 'If you are in danger and cry, "Come and help me, King of the Birds," everything will go well with you.'

The young man thanked him and went away, and after he had left the castle he told the boots that they must take him to the place where his second sister was living. As before, he found himself at the gates of a huge castle, and within was his second sister, very happy with her husband, who loved her dearly, but longing for the moment when he should be set free from the spell that kept him half his life a fish. When he arrived and had been introduced by his wife to her brother, he welcomed him warmly, and gave him a fish-scale, saying, 'If you are in danger, call to me, "Come and help me, King of the Fishes," and everything will go well with you.'

The young man thanked him and took his leave, and when he was outside the gates he told the boots to take him to the place where his youngest sister lived. The boots carried him to a dark cavern, with steps of iron leading up to it. Inside she sat, weeping and sobbing, and as she had done nothing else the whole time she had been there, the poor girl had grown very thin. When she saw a man standing before her, she sprang to her feet and exclaimed, 'Oh, whoever you are, save me and take me from this horrible place!' Then he told her who he was, and how he had seen her sisters, whose happiness was spoilt by the spell under which both their husbands lay, and she, in turn, related her story. She had been carried off in the water-meadow by a horrible monster, who wanted to make her marry him by force, and had kept her a prisoner all these years because she would not submit to his will. Every day he came to beg her to consent to his wishes, and to remind her that there was no hope of her being set free, as he was the most constant man in the world, and besides that he could never die. At these words the youth remembered his two enchanted brothers-in-law, and he advised his sister to promise to marry the old man, if he would tell her why he could never die. Suddenly everything began to tremble, as if it was shaken by a whirlwind, and the old man entered, and flinging himself at the feet of the girl, he said: 'Are you still determined never to marry me? If so you will have to sit there weeping till the end of the world, for I shall always be faithful to my wish to marry you!' 'Well, I will marry you,' she said, 'if you will tell me why it is that you can never die.'

Then the old man burst into peals of laughter. 'Ah, ah, ah! You are thinking how you would be able to kill me? Well, to do that, you would have to find an iron casket which lies at the bottom of the sea, and has a white dove inside, and then you would have to find the egg which the dove laid, and bring it here, and dash it against my head.' And he laughed again in his certainty that no one had ever got down to the bottom of the sea, and that if they did, they would never find the casket, or be able to open it. When he could speak once more, he said, 'Now you will be obliged to marry me, as you know my secret.' But she begged so hard that the wedding might be put off for three days, that he consented, and went away rejoicing at his victory. When he had disappeared, the brother took off the cap which had kept him invisible all this time, and told his sister not to lose heart as he hoped in three days she would be free. Then he drew on his boots, and wished himself at the seashore, and there he was directly. Drawing out the fish-scale, he cried, 'Come and help me, King of the Fishes!' and his brother-in-law swam up, and asked what he could do. The young man related the story, and when he had finished his listener summoned all the fishes to his presence. The last to arrive was a little sardine, who apologised for being so late, but said she had hurt herself by knocking her head against an iron casket that lay in the bottom of the sea. The king ordered several of the largest and strongest of his subjects to take the little sardine as a guide, and bring him the iron casket. They soon returned with the box placed across their backs and laid it down before him. Then the youth produced the key and said 'Key, open that box!' and the key opened it, and though they were all crowding round, ready to catch it, the white dove within flew away.

It was useless to go after it, and for a moment the young man's heart sank. The next minute, however, he remembered that he had still his feather, and drew it out crying, 'Come to me, King of the Birds!' and a rushing noise was heard, and the King of the Birds perched on his shoulder, and asked what he could do to help him. His brother-in-law told him the whole story, and when he had finished the King of the Birds commanded all his subjects to hasten to his presence. In an instant the air was dark with birds of all sizes, and at the very last came the white dove, apologising for being so late by saying that an old friend had arrived at his nest, and he had been obliged to give him some dinner. The King of the Birds ordered some of them to show the young man the white dove's nest, and when they reached it, there lay the egg which was to break the spell and set them all free. When it was safely in his pocket, he told the boots to carry him straight to the cavern where his youngest sister sat awaiting him.

Now it was already far on into the third day, which the old man had fixed for the wedding, and when the youth reached the cavern with his cap on his head, he found the monster there, urging the girl to keep her word and let the marriage take place at once. At a sign from her brother she sat down and invited the old monster to lay his head on her lap. He did so with delight, and her brother standing behind her back passed her the egg unseen. She took it, and dashed it straight at the horrible head, and the monster started, and with a groan that people took for the rumblings of an earthquake, he turned over and died.

As the breath went out of his body the husbands of the two eldest daughters resumed their proper shapes, and, sending for their mother-in-law, whose sorrow was so unexpectedly turned into joy, they had a great feast, and the youngest sister was rich to the end of her days with the treasures she found in the cave, collected by the monster.

[From the Portuguese.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f10]

The Story of Bensurdatu

There was once a king and a queen who had three wonderfully beautiful daughters, and their one thought, from morning till night, was how they could make the girls happy.

One day the princesses said to the king, 'Dear father, we want so much to have a picnic, and eat our dinner in the country.'

'Very well, dear children, let us have a picnic by all means,' answered he, and gave orders that everything should be got ready.

When luncheon was prepared it was put into a cart, and the royal family stepped into a carriage and drove right away into the country. After a few miles they reached a house and garden belonging to the king, and close by was their favourite place for lunch. The drive had made them very hungry, and they ate with a hearty appetite, till almost all the food had disappeared.

When they had quite done, they said to their parents: 'Now we should like to wander about the garden a little, but when you want to go home, just call to us.' And they ran off, laughing, down a green glade, which led to the garden.

But no sooner had they stepped across the fence, than a dark cloud came down and covered them, and prevented them seeing whither they were going.

Meanwhile the king and queen sat lazily among the heather, and an hour or two slipped away. The sun was dropping towards the horizon, and they began to think it was time to go home. So they called to their daughters and called again, but no one answered them.

Frightened at the silence, they searched every corner of the garden, the house, and the neighbouring wood, but no trace of the girls was to be found anywhere. The earth seemed to have swallowed them up. The poor parents were in despair. The queen wept all the way home, and for many days after, and the king issued a proclamation that whoever should bring back his lost daughters should have one of them to wife, and should, after his death, reign in his stead.

Now two young generals were at that time living at the court, and when they heard the king's declaration, they said one to the other: 'Let us go in search of them; perhaps we shall be the lucky persons.'

And they set out, each mounted on a strong horse, taking with them a change of raiment and some money.

But though they inquired at every village they rode through, they could hear nothing of the princesses, and by-and-by their money was all spent, and they were forced to sell their horses, or give up the search. Even this money only lasted a little while longer, and nothing but their clothes lay between them and starvation. They sold the spare garments that were bound on their saddles, and went in the coats they stood up in to the inn, to beg for some food, as they were really starving. When, however, they had to pay for what they had eaten and drank, they said to the host: 'We have no money, and naught but the clothes we stand up in. Take these, and give us instead some old rags, and let us stay here and serve you.' And the innkeeper was content with the bargain, and the generals remained, and were his servants.

All this time the king and queen remained in their palace hungering for their children, but not a word was heard of either of them or of the generals who had gone to seek for them.

Now there was living in the palace a faithful servant of the king's called Bensurdatu, who had served him for many years, and when Bensurdatu saw how grieved the king was, he lifted up his voice and said to him: 'Your majesty, let me go and seek your daughters.'

'No, no, Bensurdatu,' replied the king. 'Three daughters have I lost, and two generals, and shall I lose you also?'

But Bensurdatu said again: 'Let me now go, your majesty; trust me, and I will bring you back your daughters.'

Then the king gave way, and Bensurdatu set forth, and rode on till he came to the inn, where he dismounted and asked for food. It was brought by the two generals, whom he knew at once in spite of their miserable clothes, and, much astonished, asked them how in the world they came there.

They told him all their adventures, and he sent for the innkeeper, and said to him: 'Give them back their garments, and I will pay everything that they owe you.'

And the innkeeper did as he was bid, and when the two generals were dressed in their proper clothes, they declared they would join Bensurdatu, and with him seek for the king's daughters.

The three companions rode on for many miles, and at length they came to a wild place, without sign of a human being. It was getting dark, and fearing to be lost on this desolate spot they pushed on their horses, and at last saw a light in the window of a tiny hut.

'Who comes there?' asked a voice, as they knocked at the door.

'Oh! have pity on us, and give us a night's shelter,' replied Bensurdatu; 'we are three tired travellers who have lost our way.'

Then the door was opened by a very old woman who stood back, and beckoned them to enter. 'Whence do you come, and whither do you go?' said she.

'Ah, good woman, we have a heavy task before us,' answered Bensurdatu, 'we are bound to carry the king's daughters back to the palace!'

'Oh, unhappy creatures,' cried she, 'you know not what you are doing! The king's daughters were covered by a thick cloud, and no one knows where they may now be.'

'Oh, tell us, if you know, my good woman,' entreated Bensurdatu, 'for with them lies all our happiness.'

'Even if I were to tell you,' answered she, 'you could not rescue them. To do that you would have to go to the very bottom of a deep river, and though certainly you would find the king's daughters there, yet the two eldest are guarded by two giants, and the youngest is watched by a serpent with seven heads.'

The two generals, who stood by listening, were filled with terror at her words, and wished to return immediately; but Bensurdatu stood firm, and said: 'Now we have got so far we must carry the thing through. Tell us where the river is, so that we may get there as soon as possible.' And the old woman told them, and gave them some cheese, wine, and bread, so that they should not set forth starving; and when they had eaten and drunk they laid themselves down to sleep.

The sun had only just risen above the hills next morning before they all woke, and, taking leave of the wise woman who had helped them, they rode on till they came to the river.

'I am the eldest,' said one of the generals, 'and it is my right to go down first.'

So the others fastened a cord round him, and gave him a little bell, and let him down into the water. But scarcely had the river closed above his head when such dreadful rushing sounds and peals of thunder came crashing round about him that he lost all his courage, and rang his bell, if perchance it might be heard amidst all this clamour. Great was his relief when the rope began slowly to pull him upwards.

Then the other general plunged in; but he fared no better than the first, and was soon on dry ground again.

'Well, you are a brave pair!' said Bensurdatu, as he tied the rope round his own waist; 'let us see what will happen to me.' And when he heard the thunder and clamour round about him he thought to himself, 'Oh, make as much noise as you like, it won't hurt me!' When his feet touched the bottom he found himself in a large, brilliantly lighted hall, and in the middle sat the eldest princess, and in front of her lay a huge giant, fast asleep. Directly she saw Bensurdatu she nodded to him, and asked with her eyes how he had come there.

For answer he drew his sword, and was about to cut off the giant's head, when she stopped him quickly, and made signs to hide himself, as the giant was just beginning to wake. 'I smell the flesh of a man!' murmured he, stretching his great arms.

'Why, how in the world could any man get down here?' replied she; 'you had better go to sleep again.'

So he turned over and went to sleep. Then the princess signed to Bensurdatu, who drew his sword and cut off the giant's head with such a blow that it flew into the corner. And the heart of the princess leapt within her, and she placed a golden crown on the head of Bensurdatu, and called him her deliverer.

'Now show me where your sisters are,' he said, 'that I may free them also.'

So the princess opened a door, and led him into another hall, wherein sat her next sister, guarded by a giant who was fast asleep. When the second princess saw them, she made a sign to them to hide themselves, for the giant was showing symptoms of waking.

'I smell man's flesh!' murmured he, sleepily.

'Now, how could any man get down here?' asked she; 'go to sleep again.' And as soon as he closed his eyes, Bensurdatu stole out from his corner, and struck such a blow at his head that it flew far, far away. The princess could not find words to thank Bensurdatu for what he had done, and she too placed in his hand a golden crown.

'Now show me where your youngest sister is,' said he, 'that I may free her also.'

'Ah! that I fear you will never be able to do,' sighed they, 'for she is in the power of a serpent with seven heads.'

'Take me to him,' replied Bensurdatu. 'It will be a splendid fight.'

Then the princess opened a door, and Bensurdatu passed through, and found himself in a hall that was even larger than the other two. And there stood the youngest sister, chained fast to the wall, and before her was stretched a serpent with seven heads, horrible to see. As Bensurdatu came forward it twisted all its seven heads in his direction, and then made a quick dart to snatch him within its grasp. But Bensurdatu drew his sword and laid about him, till the seven heads were rolling on the floor. Flinging down his sword he rushed to the princess and broke her chains, and she wept for joy, and embraced him, and took the golden crown from off her head, and placed it in his hand.

'Now we must go back to the upper world,' said Bensurdatu, and led her to the bottom of the river. The other princesses were waiting there, and he tied the rope round the eldest, and rung his bell. And the generals above heard, and drew her gently up. They then unfastened the cord and threw it back into the river, and in a few moments the second princess stood beside her sister.

So now there were left only Bensurdatu and the youngest princess. 'Dear Bensurdatu,' said she, 'do me a kindness, and let them draw you up before me. I dread the treachery of the generals.

'No, no,' replied Bensurdatu, 'I certainly will not leave you down here. There is nothing to fear from my comrades.'

'If it is your wish I will go up then; but first I swear that if you do not follow to marry me, I shall stay single for the rest of my life.' Then he bound the rope round her, and the generals drew her up.

But instead of lowering the rope again into the river, envy at the courage and success of Bensurdatu so filled the hearts of the two generals, that they turned away and left him to perish. And, more than that, they threatened the princesses, and forced them to promise to tell their parents that it was the two generals who had set them free. 'And if they should ask you about Bensurdatu, you must say you have never seen him,' they added; and the princesses, fearing for their lives, promised everything, and they rode back to court together.

The king and queen were beside themselves with joy when they saw their dear children once more. But when the generals had told their story, and the dangers they had run, the king declared that they had gained their reward, and that the two eldest princesses should become their wives.

And now we must see what poor Bensurdatu was doing.

He waited patiently a long, long time, but when the rope never came back he knew he had been right, and that his comrades had betrayed him. 'Ah, now I shall never reach the world again,' murmured he; but being a brave man, and knowing that moaning his fate would profit him nothing, he rose and began to search through the three halls, where, perhaps, he might find something to help him. In the last one stood a dish, covered with food, which reminded him that he was hungry, and he sat down and ate and drank. Months passed away, when, one morning, as he was walking through the halls, he noticed a purse hanging on the wall, which had never been there before. He took it down to examine it, and nearly let it fall with surprise when a voice came from the purse saying: 'What commands have you?'

'Oh, take me out of this horrible place, and up into the world again; 'and in a moment he was standing by the river bank, with the purse tightly grasped in his hand.

'Now let me have the most beautiful ship that ever was built, all manned and ready for sea.' And there was the ship, with a flag floating from its mast on which were the words, 'King with the three crowns.' Then Bensurdatu climbed on board, and sailed away to the city where the three princesses dwelt; and when he reached the harbour he blew trumpets and beat drums, so that every one ran to the doors and windows. And the king heard too, and saw the beautiful vessel, and said to himself: 'That must indeed be a mighty monarch, for he has three crowns while I have only one.' So he hastened to greet the stranger, and invited him to his castle, for, thought he, 'this will be a fine husband for my youngest daughter.' Now, the youngest princess had never married, and had turned a deaf ear to all her wooers.

Such a long time had passed since Bensurdatu had left the palace, that the king never guessed for a moment that the splendidly clad stranger before him was the man whom he had so deeply mourned as dead. 'Noble lord,' said he, 'let us feast and make merry together, and then, if it seem good to you, do me the honour to take my youngest daughter to wife.'

And Bensurdatu was glad, and they all sat down to a great feast, and there were great rejoicings. But only the youngest daughter was sad, for her thoughts were with Bensurdatu. After they arose from the table the king said to her, 'Dear child, this mighty lord does you the honour to ask your hand in marriage.'

'Oh, father,' answered she, 'spare me, I pray you, for I desire to remain single.'

Then Bensurdatu turned to her, and said: 'And if I were Bensurdatu, would you give the same answer to me?'

And as she stood silently gazing at him, he added: 'Yes, I am Bensurdatu; and this is my story.'

The king and queen had their hearts stirred within them at the tale of his adventures, and when he had ended the king stretched out his hand, and said: 'Dear Bensurdatu, my youngest daughter shall indeed be your wife; and when I die my crown shall be yours. As for the men who have betrayed you, they shall leave the country and you shall see them no more.'

And the wedding feast was ordered, and rejoicings were held for three days over the marriage of Bensurdatu and the youngest princess.

[From the Sicilianische Marchen.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f11]

The Magician's Horse

Once upon a time, there was a king who had three sons. Now it happened that one day the three princes went out hunting in a large forest at some distance from their father's palace, and the youngest prince lost his way, so his brothers had to return home without him.

For four days the prince wandered through the glades of the forest, sleeping on moss beneath the stars at night, and by day living on roots and wild berries. At last, on the morning of the fifth day, he came to a large open space in the middle of the forest, and here stood a stately palace; but neither within nor without was there a trace of human life. The prince entered the open door and wandered through the deserted rooms without seeing a living soul. At last he came on a great hall, and in the centre of the hall was a table spread with dainty dishes and choice wines. The prince sat down, and satisfied his hunger and thirst, and immediately afterwards the table disappeared from his sight. This struck the prince as very strange; but though he continued his search through all the rooms, upstairs and down, he could find no one to speak to. At last, just as it was beginning to get dark, he heard steps in the distance and he saw an old man coming towards him up the stairs.

'What are you doing wandering about my castle?' asked the old man.

To whom the prince replied: 'I lost my way hunting in the forest. If you will take me into your service, I should like to stay with you, and will serve you faithfully.'

'Very well,' said the old man. 'You may enter my service. You will have to keep the stove always lit, you will have to fetch the wood for it from the forest, and you will have the charge of the black horse in the stables. I will pay you a florin a day, and at meal times you will always find the table in the hall spread with food and wine, and you can eat and drink as much as you require.'

The prince was satisfied, and he entered the old man's service, and promised to see that there was always wood on the stove, so that the fire should never die out. Now, though he did not know it, his new master was a magician, and the flame of the stove was a magic fire, and if it had gone out the magician would have lost a great part of his power.

One day the prince forgot, and let the fire burn so low that it very nearly burnt out. Just as the flame was flickering the old man stormed into the room.

'What do you mean by letting the fire burn so low?' he growled. 'I have only arrived in the nick of time.' And while the prince hastily threw a log on the stove and blew on the ashes to kindle a glow, his master gave him a severe box on the ear, and warned him that if ever it happened again it would fare badly with him.

One day the prince was sitting disconsolate in the stables when, to his surprise, the black horse spoke to him.

'Come into my stall,' it said, 'I have something to say to you. Fetch my bridle and saddle from that cupboard and put them on me. Take the bottle that is beside them; it contains an ointment which will make your hair shine like pure gold; then put all the wood you can gather together on to the stove, till it is piled quite high up.'

So the prince did what the horse told him; he saddled and bridled the horse, he put the ointment on his hair till it shone like gold, and he made such a big fire in the stove that the flames sprang up and set fire to the roof, and in a few minutes the palace was burning like a huge bonfire.

Then he hurried back to the stables, and the horse said to him: 'There is one thing more you must do. In the cupboard you will find a looking-glass, a brush and a riding-whip. Bring them with you, mount on my back, and ride as hard as you can, for now the house is burning merrily.'

The prince did as the horse bade him. Scarcely had he got into the saddle than the horse was off and away, galloping at such a pace that, in a short time, the forest and all the country belonging to the magician lay far behind them.

In the meantime the magician returned to his palace, which he found in smouldering ruins. In vain he called for his servant. At last he went to look for him in the stables, and when he discovered that the black horse had disappeared too, he at once suspected that they had gone together; so he mounted a roan horse that was in the next stall, and set out in pursuit.

As the prince rode, the quick ears of his horse heard the sound of pursuing feet.

'Look behind you,' he said, 'and see if the old man is following.' And the prince turned in his saddle and saw a cloud like smoke or dust in the distance.

'We must hurry,' said the horse.

After they had galloped for some time, the horse said again: 'Look behind, and see if he is still at some distance.'

'He is quite close,' answered the prince.

'Then throw the looking-glass on the ground,' said the horse. So the prince threw it; and when the magician came up, the roan horse stepped on the mirror, and crash! his foot went through the glass, and he stumbled and fell, cutting his feet so badly that there was nothing for the old man to do but to go slowly back with him to the stables, and put new shoes on his feet. Then they started once more in pursuit of the prince, for the magician set great value on the horse, and was determined not to lose it.

In the meanwhile the prince had gone a great distance; but the quick ears of the black horse detected the sound of following feet from afar.

'Dismount,' he said to the prince; 'put your ear to the ground, and tell me if you do not hear a sound.'

So the prince dismounted and listened. 'I seem to hear the earth tremble,' he said; 'I think he cannot be very far off.'

'Mount me at once,' answered the horse, 'and I will gallop as fast as I can.' And he set off so fast that the earth seemed to fly from under his hoofs.

'Look back once more,' he said, after a short time, 'and see if he is in sight.'

'I see a cloud and a flame,' answered the prince; 'but a long way off.'

'We must make haste,' said the horse. And shortly after he said: 'Look back again; he can't be far off now.'

The prince turned in his saddle, and exclaimed: 'He is close behind us, in a minute the flame from his horse's nostrils will reach us.'

'Then throw the brush on the ground,' said the horse.

And the prince threw it, and in an instant the brush was changed into such a thick wood that even a bird could not have got through it, and when the old man got up to it the roan horse came suddenly to a stand-still, not able to advance a step into the thick tangle. So there was nothing for the magician to do but to retrace his steps, to fetch an axe, with which he cut himself a way through the wood. But it took him some time, during which the prince and the black horse got on well ahead.

But once more they heard the sound of pursuing feet. 'Look back,' said the black horse, 'and see if he is following.'

'Yes,' answered the prince, 'this time I hear him distinctly.

'Let us hurry on,' said the horse. And a little later he said: 'Look back now, and see if he is in sight.'

'Yes,' said the prince, turning round, 'I see the flame; he is close behind us.'

'Then you must throw down the whip,' answered the horse.' And in the twinkling of an eye the whip was changed into a broad river. When the old man got up to it he urged the roan horse into the water, but as the water mounted higher and higher, the magic flame which gave the magician all his power grew smaller and smaller, till, with a fizz, it went out, and the old man and the roan horse sank in the river and disappeared. When the prince looked round they were no longer to be seen.

'Now,' said the horse, 'you may dismount; there is nothing more to fear, for the magician is dead. Beside that brook you will find a willow wand. Gather it, and strike the earth with it, and it will open and you will see a door at your feet.'

When the prince had struck the earth with the wand a door appeared, and opened into a large vaulted stone hall.

'Lead me into that hall,' said the horse, 'I will stay there; but you must go through the fields till you reach a garden, in the midst of which is a king's palace. When you get there you must ask to be taken into the king's service. Good-bye, and don't forget me.'

So they parted; but first the horse made the prince promise not to let anyone in the palace see his golden hair. So he bound a scarf round it, like a turban, and the prince set out through the fields, till he reached a beautiful garden, and beyond the garden he saw the walls and towers of a stately palace. At the garden gate he met the gardener, who asked him what he wanted.

'I want to take service with the king,' replied the prince.

'Well, you may stay and work under me in the garden,' said the man; for as the prince was dressed like a poor man, he could not tell that he was a king's son. 'I need someone to weed the ground and to sweep the dead leaves from the paths. You shall have a florin a day, a horse to help you to cart the leaves away, and food and drink.'

So the prince consented, and set about his work. But when his food was given to him he only ate half of it; the rest he carried to the vaulted hall beside the brook, and gave to the black horse. And this he did every day, and the horse thanked him for his faithful friendship.

One evening, as they were together, after his work in the garden was over, the horse said to him: 'To-morrow a large company of princes and great lords are coming to your king's palace. They are coming from far and near, as wooers for the three princesses. They will all stand in a row in the courtyard of the palace, and the three princesses will come out, and each will carry a diamond apple in her hand, which she will throw into the air. At whosesoever feet the apple falls he will be the bridegroom of that princess. You must be close by in the garden at your work. The apple of the youngest princess, who is much the most beautiful of the sisters, will roll past the wooers and stop in front of you. Pick it up at once and put it in your pocket.'

The next day, when the wooers were all assembled in the courtyard of the castle, everything happened just as the horse had said. The princesses threw the apples into the air, and the diamond apple of the youngest princess rolled past all the wooers, out on to the garden, and stopped at the feet of the young gardener, who was busy sweeping the leaves away. In a moment he had stooped down, picked up the apple and put it in his pocket. As he stooped the scarf round his head slipped a little to one side, and the princess caught sight of his golden hair, and loved him from that moment.

But the king was very sad, for his youngest daughter was the one he loved best. But there was no help for it; and the next day a threefold wedding was celebrated at the palace, and after the wedding the youngest princess returned with her husband to the small hut in the garden where he lived.

Some time after this the people of a neighbouring country went to war with the king, and he set out to battle, accompanied by the husbands of his two eldest daughters mounted on stately steeds. But the husband of the youngest daughter had nothing but the old broken-down horse which helped him in his garden work; and the king, who was ashamed of this son-in-law, refused to give him any other.

So as he was determined not to be left behind, he went into the garden, mounted the sorry nag, and set out. But scarcely had he ridden a few yards before the horse stumbled and fell. So he dismounted and went down to the brook, to where the black horse lived in the vaulted hall. And the horse said to him: 'Saddle and bridle me, and then go into the next room and you will find a suit of armour and a sword. Put them on, and we will ride forth together to battle.'

And the prince did as he was told; and when he had mounted the horse his armour glittered in the sun, and he looked so brave and handsome, that no one would have recognised him as the gardener who swept away the dead leaves from the paths. The horse bore him away at a great pace, and when they reached the battle-field they saw that the king was losing the day, so many of his warriors had been slain. But when the warrior on his black charger and in glittering armour appeared on the scene, hewing right and left with his sword, the enemy were dismayed and fled in all directions, leaving the king master of the field. Then the king and his two sons-in-law, when they saw their deliverer, shouted, and all that was left of the army joined in the cry: 'A god has come to our rescue!' And they would have surrounded him, but his black horse rose in the air and bore him out of their sight.

Soon after this, part of the country rose in rebellion against the king, and once more he and his two sons-in- law had to fare forth to battle. And the son-in-law who was disguised as a gardener wanted to fight too. So he came to the king and said: 'Dear father, let me ride with you to fight your enemies.'

'I don't want a blockhead like you to fight for me,' answered the king. 'Besides, I haven't got a horse fit for you. But see, there is a carter on the road carting hay; you may take his horse.'

So the prince took the carter's horse, but the poor beast was old and tired, and after it had gone a few yards it stumbled and fell. So the prince returned sadly to the garden and watched the king ride forth at the head of the army accompanied by his two sons-in-law. When they were out of sight the prince betook himself to the vaulted chamber by the brook-side, and having taken counsel of the faithful black horse, he put on the glittering suit of armour, and was borne on the back of the horse through the air, to where the battle was being fought. And once more he routed the king's enemies, hacking to right and left with his sword. And again they all cried: 'A god has come to our rescue!' But when they tried to detain him the black horse rose in the air and bore him out of their sight.

When the king and his sons-in-law returned home they could talk of nothing but the hero who had fought for them, and all wondered who he could be.

Shortly afterwards the king of a neighbouring country declared war, and once more the king and his sons-in-law and his subjects had to prepare themselves for battle, and once more the prince begged to ride with them, but the king said he had no horse to spare for him. 'But,' he added, 'you may take the horse of the woodman who brings the wood from the forest, it is good enough for you.'

So the prince took the woodman's horse, but it was so old and useless that it could not carry him beyond the castle gates. So he betook himself once more to the vaulted hall, where the black horse had prepared a still more magnificent suit of armour for him than the one he had worn on the previous occasions, and when he had put it on, and mounted on the back of the horse, he bore him straight to the battle-field, and once more he scattered the king's enemies, fighting single-handed in their ranks, and they fled in all directions. But it happened that one of the enemy struck with his sword and wounded the prince in the leg. And the king took his own pocket- handkerchief, with his name and crown embroidered on it, and bound it round the wounded leg. And the king would fain have compelled him to mount in a litter and be carried straight to the palace, and two of his knights were to lead the black charger to the royal stables. But the prince put his hand on the mane of his faithful horse, and managed to pull himself up into the saddle, and the horse mounted into the air with him. Then they all shouted and cried: 'The warrior who has fought for us is a god! He must be a god.'

And throughout all the kingdom nothing else was spoken about, and all the people said: 'Who can the hero be who has fought for us in so many battles? He cannot be a man, he must be a god.'

And the king said: 'If only I could see him once more, and if it turned out that after all he was a man and not a god, I would reward him with half my kingdom.'

Now when the prince reached his home--the gardener's hut where he lived with his wife--he was weary, and he lay down on his bed and slept. And his wife noticed the handkerchief bound round his wounded leg, and she wondered what it could be. Then she looked at it more closely and saw in the corner that it was embroidered with her father's name and the royal crown. So she ran straight to the palace and told her father. And he and his two sons-in-law followed her back to her house, and there the gardener lay asleep on his bed. And the scarf that he always wore bound round his head had slipped off, and his golden hair gleamed on the pillow. And they all recognised that this was the hero who had fought and won so many battles for them.

Then there was great rejoicing throughout the land, and the king rewarded his son-in-law with half of his kingdom, and he and his wife reigned happily over it.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f12]

The Little Gray Man

A nun, a countryman, and a blacksmith were once wandering through the world together. One day they lost their way in a thick, dark forest, and were thankful when they saw, in the distance, the walls of a house, where they hoped they might obtain refuge for the night. When they got close to the house they found that it was an old deserted castle, fast falling into ruins, but with some of the rooms in it still habitable. As they were homeless they determined to take up their abode in the castle, and they arranged that one of them should always stay at home and keep house, while the other two went out into the world to seek their fortunes.

The lot of remaining at home fell first to the nun, and when the countryman and the blacksmith had gone out into the wood, she set to work, tidied up the house, and prepared all the food for the day. As her companions did not come home for their mid-day meal, she ate up her own portion and put the rest in the oven to keep warm. Just as she was sitting down to sew, the door opened and a little gray man came in, and, standing before her, said: 'Oh! how cold I am!'

The nun was very sorry for him, and said at once: 'Sit down by the fire and warm yourself.'

The little man did as he was told, and soon called out: 'Oh! how hungry I am!'

The nun answered: 'There is food in the oven, help yourself.'

The little man did not need to be told twice, for he set to work and ate up everything with the greatest possible despatch. When the nun saw this she was very angry, and scolded the dwarf because he had left nothing for her companions.

The little man resented her words, and flew into such a passion that he seized the nun, beat her, and threw her first against one wall and then against the other. When he had nearly killed her he left her lying on the floor, and hastily walked out of the house.

In the evening the countryman and the blacksmith returned home, and when they found, on demanding their dinner, that there was nothing left for them, they reproached the nun bitterly, and refused to believe her when she tried to tell them what had happened.

The next day the countryman asked to be left in charge of the house, and promised that, if he remained at home, no one should go hungry to bed. So the other two went out into the forest, and the countryman having prepared the food for the day, ate up his own portion, and put the rest in the oven. Just as he had finished clearing away, the door opened and the little gray man walked in, and this time he had two heads. He shook and trembled as before, and exclaimed: 'Oh! how cold I am.'

The countryman, who was frightened out of his wits, begged him to draw near the fire and warm himself.

Soon after the dwarf looked greedily round, and said: 'Oh! how hungry I am!'

'There is food in the oven, so you can eat,' replied the countryman.

Then the little man fell to with both his heads, and soon finished the last morsel.

When the countryman scolded him for this proceeding he treated him exactly as he had done the nun, and left the poor fellow more dead than alive.

Now when the blacksmith came home with the nun in the evening, and found nothing for supper, he flew into a passion; and swore that he would stay at home the following day, and that no one should go supperless to bed.

When day dawned the countryman and the nun set out into the wood, and the blacksmith prepared all the food for the day as the others had done. Again the gray dwarf entered the house without knocking, and this time he had three heads. When he complained of cold, the blacksmith told him to sit near the fire; and when he said he was hungry, the blacksmith put some food on a plate and gave it to him. The dwarf made short work of what was provided for him, and then, looking greedily round with his six eyes, he demanded more. When the blacksmith refused to give him another morsel, he flew into a terrible rage, and proceeded to treat him in the same way as he had treated his companions.

But the blacksmith was a match for him, for he seized a huge hammer and struck off two of the dwarf's heads with it. The little man yelled with pain and rage, and hastily fled from the house. The blacksmith ran after him, and pursued him for a long way; but at last they came to an iron door, and through it the little creature vanished. The door shut behind him, and the blacksmith had to give up the pursuit and return home. He found that the nun and the countryman had come back in the meantime, and they were much delighted when he placed some food before them, and showed them the two heads he had struck off with his hammer. The three companions determined there and then to free themselves from the power of the gray dwarf, and the very next day they set to work to find him.

They had to walk a long way, and to search for many hours, before they found the iron door through which the dwarf had disappeared; and when they had found it they had the greatest difficulty in opening it. When at last they succeeded in forcing the lock, they entered a large hall, in which sat a young and lovely girl, working at a table. The moment she saw the nun, the blacksmith, and the countryman, she fell at their feet, thanking them with tears in her eyes for having set her free. She told them that she was a king's daughter, who had been shut up in the castle by a mighty magician. The day before, just about noon, she had suddenly felt the magic power over her disappear, and ever since that moment she had eagerly awaited the arrival of her deliverers. She went on to say that there was yet another princess shut up in the castle, who had also fallen under the might of the magician.

They wandered through many halls and rooms till at last they found the second princess, who was quite as grateful as the first, and thanked the three companions most warmly for having set her free.

Then the princesses told their rescuers that a great treasure lay hidden in the cellars of the castle, but that it was carefully guarded by a fierce and terrible dog.

Nothing daunted, they all went down below at once, and found the fierce animal mounting guard over the treasure as the princesses had said. But one blow from the blacksmith's hammer soon made an end of the monster, and they found themselves in a vaulted chamber full of gold and silver and precious stones. Beside the treasure stood a young and handsome man, who advanced to meet, them, and thanked the nun, the blacksmith, and the countryman, for having freed him from the magic spell he was under. He told them that he was a king's son, who had been banished to this castle by a wicked magician, and that he had been changed into the three- headed dwarf. When he had lost two of his heads the magic power over the two princesses had been removed, and when the blacksmith had killed the horrible dog, then he too had been set free.

To show his gratitude he begged the three companions to divide the treasure between them, which they did; but there was so much of it that it took a very long time.

The princesses, too, were so grateful to their rescuers, that one married the blacksmith, and the other the countryman.

Then the prince claimed the nun as his bride, and they all lived happily together till they died.

[From the German. Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f13]

Herr Lazarus and the Draken

Once upon a time there was a cobbler called Lazarus, who was very fond of honey. One day, as he ate some while he sat at work, the flies collected in such numbers that with one blow he killed forty. Then he went and ordered a sword to be made for him, on which he had written these words: 'With one blow I have slain forty.' When the sword was ready he took it and went out into the world, and when he was two days' journey from home he came to a spring, by which he laid himself down and slept.

Now in that country there dwelt Draken, one of whom came to the spring to draw water; there he found Lazarus sleeping, and read what was written on his sword. Then he went back to his people and told them what he had seen, and they all advised him to make fellowship with this powerful stranger. So the Draken returned to the spring, awoke Lazarus, and said that if it was agreeable to him they should make fellowship together.

Lazarus answered that he was willing, and after a priest had blessed the fellowship, they returned together to the other Draken, and Lazarus dwelt among them. After some days they told him that it was their custom to take it in turns to bring wood and water, and as he was now of their company, he must take his turn. They went first for water and wood, but at last it came to be Lazarus's turn to go for water. The Draken had a great leathern bag, holding two hundred measures of water. This Lazarus could only, with great difficulty, drag empty to the spring, and because he could not carry it back full, he did not fill it at all, but, instead, he dug up the ground all round the spring.

As Lazarus remained so long away, the Draken sent one of their number to see what had become of him, and when this one came to the spring, Lazarus said to him: 'We will no more plague ourselves by carrying water every day. I will bring the entire spring home at once, and so we shall be freed from this burden.'

But the Draken called out: 'On no account, Herr Lazarus, else we shall all die of thirst; rather will we carry the water ourselves in turns, and you alone shall be exempt.'

Next it comes to be Lazarus's turn to bring the wood. Now the Draken, when they fetched the wood, always took an entire tree on their shoulder, and so carried it home. Because Lazarus could not imitate them in this, he went to the forest, tied all the trees together with a thick rope, and remained in the forest till evening. Again the Draken sent one of them after him to see what had become of him, and when this one asked what he was about, Lazarus answered: 'I will bring the entire forest home at once, so that after that we may have rest.'

But the Draken called out: 'By no means, Herr Lazarus, else we shall all die of cold; rather will we go ourselves to bring wood, and let you be free.' And then the Draken tore up one tree, threw it over his shoulder, and so carried it home.

When they had lived together some time, the Draken became weary of Lazarus, and agreed among themselves to kill him; each Draken, in the night while Lazarus slept, should strike him a blow with a hatchet. But Lazarus heard of this scheme, and when the evening came, he took a log of wood, covered it with his cloak, laid it in the place where he usually slept, and then hid himself. In the night the Draken came, and each one hit the log a blow with his hatchet, till it flew in pieces.

Then they believed their object was gained, and they lay down again.

Thereupon Lazarus took the log, threw it away, and laid himself down in its stead. Towards dawn, he began to groan, and when the Draken heard that, they asked what ailed him, to which he made answer: 'The gnats have stung me horribly.' This terrified the Draken, for they believed that Lazarus took their blows for gnat-stings, and they determined at any price to get rid of him. Next morning, therefore, they asked him if he had not wife or child, and said that if he would like to go and visit them they would give him a bag of gold to take away with him. He agreed willingly to this, but asked further that one of the Draken should go with him to carry the bag of gold. They consented, and one was sent with him.

When they had come to within a short; distance of Lazarus's house, he said to the Draken: 'Stop here, in the meantime, for I must go on in front and tie up my children, lest they eat you.'

So he went and tied his children with strong ropes, and said to them: 'As soon as the Draken comes in sight, call out as loud as you can, "Drakenflesh! Drakenflesh!"'

So, when the Draken appeared, the children cried out: 'Drakenflesh! Drakenflesh!' and this so terrified the Draken that he let the bag fall and fled.

On the road he met a fox, which asked him why he seemed so frightened. He answered that he was afraid of the children of Herr Lazarus, who had been within a hair-breadth of eating him up. But the fox laughed, and said: 'What! you were afraid of the children of Herr Lazarus? He had two fowls, one of which I ate yesterday, the other I will go and fetch now--if you do not believe me, come and see for yourself; but you must first tie yourself on to my tail.'

The Draken then tied himself on to the fox's tail, and went back thus with it to Lazarus's house, in order to see what it would arrange. There stood Lazarus with his gun raised ready to fire, who, when he saw the fox coming along with the Draken, called out to the fox: 'Did I not tell you to bring me all the Draken, and you bring me only one?'

When the Draken heard that he made off to the rightabout at once, and ran so fast that the fox was dashed in pieces against the stones.

When Lazarus had got quit of the Draken he built himself, with their gold, a, magnificent house, in which he spent the rest of his days in great enjoyment.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f14]

The Story of the Queen of the Flowery Isles

There once lived a queen who ruled over the Flowery Isles, whose husband, to her extreme grief, died a few years after their marriage. On being left a widow she devoted herself almost entirely to the education of the two charming princesses, her only children. The elder of them was so lovely that as she grew up her mother greatly feared she would excite the jealousy of the Queen of all the Isles, who prided herself on being the most beautiful woman in the world, and insisted on all rivals bowing before her charms.

In order the better to gratify her vanity she had urged the king, her husband, to make war on all the surrounding islands, and as his greatest wish was to please her, the only conditions he imposed on any newly-conquered country was that each princess of every royal house should attend his court as soon as she was fifteen years old, and do homage to the transcendent beauty of his queen.

The queen of the Flowery Isles, well aware of this law, was fully determined to present her daughter to the proud queen as soon as her fifteenth birthday was past.

The queen herself had heard a rumour of the young princess's great beauty, and awaited her visit with some anxiety, which soon developed into jealousy, for when the interview took place it was impossible not to be dazzled by such radiant charms, and she was obliged to admit that she had never beheld anyone so exquisitely lovely.

Of course she thought in her own mind 'excepting myself!' for nothing could have made her believe it possible that anyone could eclipse her.

But the outspoken admiration of the entire court soon undeceived her, and made her so angry that she pretended illness and retired to her own rooms, so as to avoid witnessing the princess's triumph. She also sent word to the Queen of the Flowery Isles that she was sorry not to be well enough to see her again, and advised her to return to her own states with the princess, her daughter.

This message was entrusted to one of the great ladies of the court, who was an old friend of the Queen of the Flowery Isles, and who advised her not to wait to take a formal leave but to go home as fast as she could.

The queen was not slow to take the hint, and lost no time in obeying it. Being well aware of the magic powers of the incensed queen, she warned her daughter that she was threatened by some great danger if she left the palace for any reason whatever during the next six months.

The princess promised obedience, and no pains were spared to make the time pass pleasantly for her.

The six months were nearly at an end, and on the very last day a splendid fete was to take place in a lovely meadow quite near the palace. The princess, who had been able to watch all the preparations from her window, implored her mother to let her go as far as the meadow; and the queen, thinking all risk must be over, consented, and promised to take her there herself.

The whole court was delighted to see their much-loved princess at liberty, and everyone set off in high glee to join in the fete.

The princess, overjoyed at being once more in the open air, was walking a little in advance of her party when suddenly the earth opened under her feet and closed again after swallowing her up!

The queen fainted away with terror, and the younger princess burst into floods of tears and could hardly be dragged away from the fatal spot, whilst the court was overwhelmed with horror at so great a calamity.

Orders were given to bore the earth to a great depth, but in vain; not a trace of the vanished princess was to be found.

She sank right through the earth and found herself in a desert place with nothing but rocks and trees and no sign of any human being. The only living creature she saw was a very pretty little dog, who ran up to her and at once began to caress her. She took him in her arms, and after playing with him for a little put him down again, when he started off in front of her, looking round from time to time as though begging her to follow.

She let him lead her on, and presently reached a little hill, from which she saw a valley full of lovely fruit trees, bearing flowers and fruit together. The ground was also covered with fruit and flowers, and in the middle of the valley rose a fountain surrounded by a velvety lawn.

The princess hastened to this charming spot, and sitting down on the grass began to think over the misfortune which had befallen her, and burst into tears as she reflected on her sad condition.

The fruit and clear fresh water would, she knew, prevent her from dying of hunger or thirst, but how could she escape if any wild beast appeared and tried to devour her?

At length, having thought over every possible evil which could happen, the princess tried to distract her mind by playing with the little dog. She spent the whole day near the fountain, but as night drew on she wondered what she should do, when she noticed that the little dog was pulling at her dress.

She paid no heed to him at first, but as he continued to pull her dress and then run a few steps in one particular direction, she at last decided to follow him; he stopped before a rock with a large opening in the centre, which he evidently wished her to enter.

The princess did so and discovered a large and beautiful cave lit up by the brilliancy of the stones with which it was lined, with a little couch covered with soft moss in one corner. She lay down on it and the dog at once nestled at her feet. Tired out with all she had gone through she soon fell asleep.

Next morning she was awakened very early by the songs of many birds. The little dog woke up too, and sprang round her in his most caressing manner. She got up and went outside, the dog as before running on in front and turning back constantly to take her dress and draw her on.

She let him have his way and he soon led her back to the beautiful garden where she had spent part of the day before. Here she ate some fruit, drank some water of the fountain, and felt as if she had made an excellent meal. She walked about amongst the flowers, played with her little dog, and at night returned to sleep in the cave.

In this way the princess passed several months, and as her first terrors died away she gradually became more resigned to her fate. The little dog, too, was a great comfort, and her constant companion.

One day she noticed that he seemed very sad and did not even caress her as usual. Fearing he might be ill she carried him to a spot where she had seen him eat some particular herbs, hoping they might do him good, but he would not touch them. He spent all the night, too, sighing and groaning as if in great pain.

At last the princess fell asleep, and when she awoke her first thought was for her little pet, but not finding him at her feet as usual, she ran out of the cave to look for him. As she stepped out of the cave she caught sight of an old man, who hurried away so fast that she had barely time to see him before he disappeared.

This was a fresh surprise and almost as great a shock as the loss of her little dog, who had been so faithful to her ever since the first day she had seen him. She wondered if he had strayed away or if the old man had stolen him.

Tormented by all kinds of thoughts and fears she wandered on, when suddenly she felt herself wrapped in a thick cloud and carried through the air. She made no resistance and before very long found herself, to her great surprise, in an avenue leading to the palace in which she had been born. No sign of the cloud anywhere.

As the princess approached the palace she perceived that everyone was dressed in black, and she was filled with fear as to the cause of this mourning. She hastened on and was soon recognised and welcomed with shouts of joy. Her sister hearing the cheers ran out and embraced the wanderer, with tears of happiness, telling her that the shock of her disappearance had been so terrible that their mother had only survived it a few days. Since then the younger princess had worn the crown, which she now resigned to her sister to whom it by right belonged.

But the elder wished to refuse it, and would only accept the crown on condition that her sister should share in all the power.

The first acts of the new queen were to do honour to the memory of her dear mother and to shower every mark of generous affection on her sister. Then, being still very grieved at the loss of her little dog, she had a careful search made for him in every country, and when nothing could be heard of him she was so grieved that she offered half her kingdom to whoever should restore him to her.

Many gentlemen of the court, tempted by the thought of such a reward, set off in all directions in search of the dog; but all returned empty-handed to the queen, who, in despair announced that since life was unbearable without her little dog, she would give her hand in marriage to the man who brought him back.

The prospect of such a prize quickly turned the court into a desert, nearly every courtier starting on the quest. Whilst they were away the queen was informed one day that a very ill-looking man wished to speak with her. She desired him to be shown into a room where she was sitting with her sister.

On entering her presence he said that he was prepared to give the queen her little dog if she on her side was ready to keep her word.

The princess was the first to speak. She said that the queen had no right to marry without the consent of the nation, and that on so important an occasion the general council must be summoned. The queen could not say anything against this statement; but she ordered an apartment in the palace to be given to the man, and desired the council to meet on the following day.

Next day, accordingly, the council assembled in great state, and by the princess's advice it was decided to offer the man a large sum of money for the dog, and should he refuse it, to banish him from the kingdom without seeing the queen again. The man refused the price offered and left the hall.

The princess informed the queen of what had passed, and the queen approved of all, but added that as she was her own mistress she had made up her mind to abdicate her throne, and to wander through the world till she had found her little dog.

The princess was much alarmed by such a resolution, and implored the queen to change her mind. Whilst they were discussing the subject, one of the chamberlains appeared to inform the queen that the bay was covered with ships. The two sisters ran to the balcony, and saw a large fleet in full sail for the port. In a little time they came to the conclusion that the ships must come from a friendly nation, as every vessel was decked with gay flags, streamers, and pennons, and the way was led by a small ship flying a great white flag of peace.

The queen sent a special messenger to the harbour, and was soon informed that the fleet belonged to the Prince of the Emerald Isles, who begged leave to land in her kingdom, and to present his humble respects to her. The queen at once sent some of the court dignitaries to receive the prince and bid him welcome.

She awaited him seated on her throne, but rose on his appearance, and went a few steps to meet him; then begged him to be seated, and for about an hour kept him in close conversation.

The prince was then conducted to a splendid suite of apartments, and the next day he asked for a private audience. He was admitted to the queen's own sitting- room, where she was sitting alone with her sister.

After the first greetings the prince informed the queen that he had some very strange things to tell her, which she only would know to be true.

'Madam,' said he, 'I am a neighbour of the Queen of all the Isles; and a small isthmus connects part of my states with hers. One day, when hunting a stag, I had the misfortune to meet her, and not recognising her, I did not stop to salute her with all proper ceremony. You, Madam, know better than anyone how revengeful she is, and that she is also a mistress of magic. I learnt both facts to my cost. The ground opened under my feet, and I soon found myself in a far distant region transformed into a little dog, under which shape I had the honour to meet your Majesty. After six months, the queen's vengeance not being yet satisfied, she further changed me into a hideous old man, and in this form I was so afraid of being unpleasant in your eyes, Madam, that I hid myself in the depths of the woods, where I spent three months more. At the end of that time I was so fortunate as to meet a benevolent fairy who delivered me from the proud queen's power, and told me all your adventures and where to find you. I now come to offer you a heart which has been entirely yours, Madam, since first we met in the desert.'

A few days later a herald was sent through the kingdom to proclaim the joyful news of the marriage of the Queen of the Flowery Isles with the young prince. They lived happily for many years, and ruled their people well.

As for the bad queen, whose vanity and jealousy had caused so much mischief, the Fairies took all her power away for a punishment.

['Cabinet des Fees.']

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f15]

Udea and Her Seven Brothers

Once upon a time there was a man and his wife who had seven boys. The children lived in the open air and grew big and strong, and the six eldest spent part of every day hunting wild beasts. The youngest did not care so much about sport, and he often stayed with his mother.

One morning, however, as the whole seven were going out for a long expedition, they said to their aunt, 'Dear aunt, if a baby sister comes into the world to-day, wave a white handkerchief, and we will return immediately; but if it is only a boy, just brandish a sickle, and we will go on with what we are doing.'

Now the baby when it arrived really proved to be a girl, but as the aunt could not bear the boys, she thought it was a good opportunity to get rid of them. So she waved the sickle. And when the seven brothers saw the sign they said, 'Now we have nothing to go back for,' and plunged deeper into the desert.

The little girl soon grew to be a big girl, and she was called by all her friends (though she did not know it) 'Udea, who had driven her seven brothers into strange lands.'

One day, when she had been quarrelling with her playmates, the oldest among them said to her, 'It is a pity you were born, as ever since, your brothers have been obliged to roam about the world.'

Udea did not answer, but went home to her mother and asked her, 'Have I really got brothers?'

'Yes,' replied her mother, 'seven of them. But they went away the day you were born, and I have never heard of them since.'

Then the girl said, 'I will go and look for them till I find them.'

'My dear child,' answered her mother, 'it is fifteen years since they left, and no man has seen them. How will you know which way to go?'

'Oh, I will follow them, north and south, east and west, and though I may travel far, yet some day I will find them.'

Then her mother said no more, but gave her a camel and some food, and a negro and his wife to take care of her, and she fastened a cowrie shell round the camel's neck for a charm, and bade her daughter go in peace.

During the first day the party journeyed on without any adventures, but the second morning the negro said to the girl, 'Get down, and let the negress ride instead of you.'

'Mother,' cried Udea.

'What is it?' asked her mother.

'Barka wants me to dismount from my camel.'

'Leave her alone, Barka,' commanded the mother, and Barka did not dare to persist.

But on the following day he said again to Udea, 'Get down, and let the negress ride instead of you,' and though Udea called to her mother she was too far away, and the mother never heard her. Then the negro seized her roughly and threw her on the ground, and said to his wife, 'Climb up,' and the negress climbed up, while the girl walked by the side. She had meant to ride all the way on her camel as her feet were bare and the stones cut them till the blood came. But she had to walk on till night, when they halted, and the next morning it was the same thing again. Weary and bleeding the poor girl began to cry, and implored the negro to let her ride, if only for a little. But he took no notice, except to bid her walk a little faster.

By-and-by they passed a caravan, and the negro stopped and asked the leader if they had come across seven young men, who were thought to be hunting somewhere about. And the man answered, 'Go straight on, and by midday you will reach the castle where they live.'

When he heard this, the black melted some pitch in the sun, and smeared the girl with it, till she looked as much a negro as he did. Next he bade his wife get down from the camel, and told Udea to mount, which she was thankful to do. So they arrived at her brothers' castle.

Leaving the camel kneeling at the entrance for Udea to dismount, the negro knocked loudly at the door, which was opened by the youngest brother, all the others being away hunting. He did not of course recognise Udea, but he knew the negro and his wife, and welcomed them gladly, adding, 'But who does the other negress belong to?'

'Oh, that is your sister!' said they.

'My sister! but she is coal black!'

'That may be, but she is your sister for all that.'

The young man asked no more questions, but took them into the castle, and he himself waited outside till his brothers came home.

As soon as they were alone, the negro whispered to Udea, 'If you dare to tell your brothers that I made you walk, or that I smeared you with pitch, I will kill you.'

'Oh, I will be sure to say nothing,' replied the girl, trembling, and at that moment the six elder brothers appeared in sight.

'I have some good news for you,' said the youngest, hastening to meet them; 'our sister is here!'

'Nonsense,' they answered. 'We have no sister; you know the child that was born was a boy.'

'But that was not true,' replied he, 'and here she is with the negro and his wife. Only--she too is black,' he added softly, but his brothers did not hear him, and pushed past joyfully.

'How are you, good old Barka?' they said to the negro; 'and how comes it that we never knew that we had a sister till now?' and they greeted Udea warmly, while she shed tears of relief and gladness.

The next morning they all agreed that they would not go out hunting. And the eldest brother took Udea on his knee, and she combed his hair and talked to him of their home till the tears ran down his cheeks and dropped on her bare arm. And where the tears fell a white mark was made. Then the brother took a cloth and rubbed the place, and he saw that she was not black at all.

'Tell me, who painted you over like this?' cried he.

'I am afraid to tell you,' sobbed the girl, 'the negro will kill me.'

'Afraid! and with seven brothers!'

'Well, I will tell you then,' she answered. 'The negro forced me to dismount from the camel and let his wife ride instead. And the stones cut my feet till they bled and I had to bind them. And after that, when we heard your castle was near by, he took pitch and smeared my body with it.'

Then the brother rushed in wrath from the room, and seizing his sword, cut off first the negro's head and then his wife's. He next brought in some warm water, and washed his sister all over, till her skin was white and shining again.

'Ah, now we see that you are our sister!' they all said. 'What fools the negro must have thought us, to believe for an instant that we could have a sister who was black!' And all that day and the next they remained in the castle.

But on the third morning they said to their sister: 'Dear sister, you must lock yourself into this castle, with only the cat for company. And be very careful never to eat anything which she does not eat too. You must be sure to give her a bit of everything. In seven days we shall be back again.'

'All right,' she answered, and locked herself into the castle with the cat.

On the eighth day the brothers came home. 'How are you?' they asked. 'You have not been anxious?'

'No, why should I be anxious? The gates were fast locked, and in the castle are seven doors, and the seventh is of iron. What is there to frighten me?'

'No one will try to hurt us,' said the brothers, 'for they fear us greatly. But for yourself, we implore you to do nothing without consulting the cat, who has grown up in the house, and take care never to neglect her advice.'

'All right,' replied Udea, 'and whatever I eat she shall have half.'

'Capital! and if ever you are in danger the cat will come and tell us--only elves and pigeons, which fly round your window, know where to find us.'

'This is the first I have heard of the pigeons,' said Udea. 'Why did you not speak of them before?'

We always leave them food and water for seven days,' replied the brothers.

'Ah,' sighed the girl, 'if I had only known, I would have given them fresh food and fresh water; for after seven days anything becomes bad. Would it not be better if I fed them every day?'

'Much better,' said they, 'and we shall feel any kindnesses you do towards the cat or the pigeons exactly as if they were shown to ourselves.'

'Set your minds at ease,' answered the girl, 'I will treat them as if they were my brothers.'

That night the brothers slept in the castle, but after breakfast next morning they buckled on their weapons and mounted their horses, and rode off to their hunting grounds, calling out to their sister, 'Mind you let nobody in till we come back.'

'Very well,' cried she, and kept the doors carefully locked for seven days and on the eighth the brothers returned as before. Then, after spending one evening with her, they departed as soon as they had done breakfast.

Directly they were out of sight Udea began to clean the house, and among the dust she found a bean which she ate.

'What are you eating?' asked the cat.

'Nothing,' said she.

'Open your mouth, and let me see.' The girl did as she was told, and then the cat said 'Why did you not give me half?'

'I forgot,' answered she, 'but there are plenty of beans about, you can have as many as you like.'

'No, that won't do. I want half of that particular bean.'

'But how can I give it you? I tell you I have eaten it. I can roast you a hundred others.'

'No, I want half of that one.'

'Oh! do as you like, only go away!' cried she.

So the cat ran straight to the kitchen fire, and spit on it and put it out, and when Udea came to cook the supper she had nothing to light it with. 'Why did you put the fire out?' asked she.

'Just to show you how nicely you would be able to cook the supper. Didn't you tell me to do what I liked?'

The girl left the kitchen and climbed up on the roof of the castle and looked out. Far, far away, so far that she could hardly see it, was the glow of a fire. 'I will go and fetch a burning coal from there and light my fire,' thought she, and opened the door of the castle. When she reached the place where the fire was kindled, a hideous man-eater was crouching over it.

'Peace be with you, grandfather,' said she.

'The same to you,' replied the man-eater. 'What brings you here, Udea?'

'I came to ask for a lump of burning coal, to light my fire with.'

'Do you want a big lump or a little lump?'

'Why, what difference does it make?' said she.

'If you have a big lump you must give me a strip of your skin from your ear to your thumb, and if you have a little lump, you must give me a strip from your ear to your little finger.'

Udea, who thought that one sounded as bad as the other, said she would take the big lump, and when the man-eater had cut the skin, she went home again. And as she hastened on a raven beheld the blood on the ground, and plastered it with earth, and stayed by her till she reached the castle. And as she entered the door he flew past, and she shrieked from fright, for up to that moment she had not seen him. In her terror she called after him. 'May you get the same start as you have given me!'

'Why should you wish me harm,' asked the raven pausing in his flight, 'when I have done you a service?'

'What service have you done me?' said she.

'Oh, you shall soon see,' replied the raven, and with his bill he scraped away all the earth he had smeared over the blood and then flew away.

In the night the man-eater got up, and followed the blood till he came to Udea's castle. He entered through the gate which she had left open, and went on till he reached the inside of the house. But here he was stopped by the seven doors, six of wood and one of iron, and all fast locked. And he called through them 'Oh Udea, what did you see your grandfather doing?'

'I saw him spread silk under him, and silk over him, and lay himself down in a four-post bed.'

When he heard that, the man-eater broke in one door, and laughed and went away.

And the second night he came back, and asked her again what she had seen her grandfather doing, and she answered him as before, and he broke in another door, and laughed and went away, and so each night till he reached the seventh door. Then the maiden wrote a letter to her brothers, and bound it round the neck of a pigeon, and said to it, 'Oh, thou pigeon that served my father and my grandfather, carry this letter to my brothers, and come back at once.' And the pigeon flew away.

It flew and it flew and it flew till it found the brothers. The eldest unfastened the letter from the pigeon's neck, and read what his sister had written: 'I am in a great strait, my brothers. If you do not rescue me to-night, to-morrow I shall be no longer living, for the man-eater has broken open six doors, and only the iron door is left. So haste, haste, post haste.'

'Quick, quick! my brothers,' cried he.

'What is the matter?' asked they.

'If we cannot reach our sister to-night, to-morrow she will be the prey of the man-eater.'

And without more words they sprang on their horses, and rode like the wind.

The gate of the castle was thrown down, and they entered the court and called loudly to their sister. But the poor girl was so ill with fear and anxiety that she could not even speak. Then the brothers dismounted and passed through the six open doors, till they stood before the iron one, which was still shut. 'Udea, open!' they cried, 'it is only your brothers!' And she arose and unlocked the door, and throwing herself on the neck of the eldest burst into tears.

'Tell us what has happened,' he said, 'and how the man- eater traced you here.' 'It is all the cat's fault,' replied Udea. 'She put out my fire so that I could not cook. All about a bean! I ate one and forgot to give her any of it.'

'But we told you so particularly,' said the eldest brother, 'never to eat anything without sharing it with the cat.'

'Yes, but I tell you I forgot,' answered Udea.

'Does the man-eater come here every night?' asked the brothers.

'Every night,' said Udea, 'and he breaks one door in and then goes away.'

Then all the brothers cried together, 'We will dig a great hole, and fill it with burning wood, and spread a covering over the top; and when the man-eater arrives we will push him into it.' So they all set to work and prepared the great hole, and set fire to the wood, till it was reduced to a mass of glowing charcoal. And when the man-eater came, and called as usual, 'Udea, what did you see your grandfather doing?' she answered, 'I saw him pull off the ass' skin and devour the ass, and he fell in the fire, and the fire burned him up.'

Then the man-eater was filled with rage, and he flung himself upon the iron door and burst it in. On the other side stood Udea's seven brothers, who said, 'Come, rest yourself a little on this mat.' And the man-eater sat down, and he fell right into the burning pit which was under the mat, and they heaped on more wood, till nothing was left of him, not even a bone. Only one of his finger-nails was blown away, and fell into an upper chamber where Udea was standing, and stuck under one of the nails of her own fingers. And she sank lifeless to the earth.

Meanwhile her brothers sat below waiting for her and wondering why she did not come. 'What can have happened to her!' exclaimed the eldest brother. 'Perhaps she has fallen into the fire, too.' So one of the others ran upstairs and found his sister stretched on the floor. 'Udea! Udea!' he cried, but she did not move or reply. Then he saw that she was dead, and rushed down to his brothers in the courtyard and called out, 'Come quickly, our sister is dead!' In a moment they were all beside her and knew that it was true, and they made a bier and laid her on it, and placed her across a camel, and said to the camel, 'Take her to her mother, but be careful not to halt by the way, and let no man capture you, and see you kneel down before no man, save him who shall say "string" [Footnote: 'Riemen.'] to you. But to him who says "string," then kneel.'

So the camel started, and when it had accomplished half its journey it met three men, who ran after it in order to catch it; but they could not. Then they cried 'Stop!' but the camel only went the faster. The three men panted behind till one said to the others, 'Wait a minute! The string of my sandal is broken!' The camel caught the word 'string' and knelt down at once, and the men came up and found a dead girl lying on a bier, with a ring on her finger. And as one of the young men took hold of her hand to pull off the ring, he knocked out the man-eater's finger-nail, which had stuck there, and the maiden sat up and said, 'Let him live who gave me life, and slay him who slew me!' And when the camel heard the maiden speak, it turned and carried her back to her brothers.

Now the brothers were still seated in the court bewailing their sister, and their eyes were dim with weeping so that they could hardly see. And when the camel stood before them they said, 'Perhaps it has brought back our sister!' and rose to give it a beating. But the camel knelt down and the girl dismounted, and they flung themselves on her neck and wept more than ever for gladness.

'Tell me,' said the eldest, as soon as he could speak, 'how it all came about, and what killed you.'

'I was waiting in the upper chamber,' said she, 'and a nail of the man-eater's stuck under my nail, and I fell dead upon the ground. That is all I know.'

'But who pulled out the nail?' asked he.

'A man took hold of my hand and tried to pull off my ring, and the nail jumped out and I was alive again. And when the camel heard me say "Let him live who gave me life, slay him who slew me!" it turned and brought me back to the castle. That is my story.'

She was silent and the eldest brother spoke. 'Will you listen to what I have to say, my brothers?'

And they replied, 'How should we not hear you? Are you not our father as well as our brother?'

'Then this is my advice. Let us take our sister back to our father and mother, that we may see them once more before they die.'

And the young men agreed, and they mounted their horses and placed their sister in a litter on the camel. So they set out.

At the end of five days' journey they reached the old home where their father and mother dwelt alone. And the heart of their father rejoiced, and he said to them, 'Dear sons, why did you go away and leave your mother and me to weep for you night and day?'

'Dear father,' answered the son, 'let us rest a little now, and then I will tell you everything from the beginning.'

'All right,' replied the father, and waited patiently for three days.

And on the morning of the fourth day the eldest brother said, 'Dear father, would you like to hear our adventures?'

'Certainly I should!'

'Well, it was our aunt who was the cause of our leaving home, for we agreed that if the baby was a sister she should wave a white handkerchief, and if it was a brother, she should brandish a sickle, for then there would be nothing to come back for, and we might wander far away. Now our aunt could not bear us, and hated us to live in the same house with her, so she brandished the sickle, and we went away. That is all our story.'

And that is all this story.

[Marchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis. Von Hans Stumme.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f16]

The White Wolf

Once upon a time there was a king who had three daughters; they were all beautiful, but the youngest was the fairest of the three. Now it happened that one day their father had to set out for a tour in a distant part of his kingdom. Before he left, his youngest daughter made him promise to bring her back a wreath of wild flowers. When the king was ready to return to his palace, he bethought himself that he would like to take home presents to each of his three daughters; so he went into a jeweller's shop and bought a beautiful necklace for the eldest princess; then he went to a rich merchant's and bought a dress embroidered in gold and silver thread for the second princess, but in none of the flower shops nor in the market could he find the wreath of wild flowers that his youngest daughter had set her heart on. So he had to set out on his homeward way without it. Now his journey led him through a thick forest. While he was still about four miles distant from his palace, he noticed a white wolf squatting on the roadside, and, behold! on the head of the wolf, there was a wreath of wild flowers.

Then the king called to the coachman, and ordered him to get down from his seat and fetch him the wreath from the wolf's head. But the wolf heard the order and said: 'My lord and king, I will let you have the wreath, but I must have something in return.'

'What do you want?' answered the king. 'I will gladly give you rich treasure in exchange for it.'

'I do not want rich treasure,' replied the wolf. 'Only promise to give me the first thing that meets you on your way to your castle. In three days I shall come and fetch it.'

And the king thought to himself: 'I am still a good long way from home, I am sure to meet a wild animal or a bird on the road, it will be quite safe to promise.' So he consented, and carried the wreath away with him. But all along the road he met no living creature till he turned into the palace gates, where his youngest daughter was waiting to welcome him home.

That evening the king was very sad, remembering his promise; and when he told the queen what had happened, she too shed bitter tears. And the youngest princess asked them why they both looked so sad, and why they wept. Then her father told her what a price he would have to pay for the wreath of wild flowers he had brought home to her, for in three days a white wolf would come and claim her and carry her away, and they would never see her again. But the queen thought and thought, and at last she hit upon a plan.

There was in the palace a servant maid the same age and the same height as the princess, and the queen dressed her up in a beautiful dress belonging to her daughter, and determined to give her to the white wolf, who would never know the difference.

On the third day the wolf strode into the palace yard and up the great stairs, to the room where the king and queen were seated.

'I have come to claim your promise,' he said. 'Give me your youngest daughter.'

Then they led the servant maid up to him, and he said to her: 'You must mount on my back, and I will take you to my castle.' And with these words he swung her on to his back and left the palace.

When they reached the place where he had met the king and given him the wreath of wild flowers, he stopped, and told her to dismount that they might rest a little.

So they sat down by the roadside.

'I wonder,' said the wolf, 'what your father would do if this forest belonged to him?'

And the girl answered: 'My father is a poor man, so he would cut down the trees, and saw them into planks, and he would sell the planks, and we should never be poor again; but would always have enough to eat.'

Then the wolf knew that he had not got the real princess, and he swung the servant-maid on to his back and carried her to the castle. And he strode angrily into the king's chamber, and spoke.

'Give me the real princess at once. If you deceive me again I will cause such a storm to burst over your palace that the walls will fall in, and you will all be buried in the ruins.'

Then the king and the queen wept, but they saw there was no escape. So they sent for their youngest daughter, and the king said to her: 'Dearest child, you must go with the white wolf, for I promised you to him, and I must keep my word.'

So the princess got ready to leave her home; but first she went to her room to fetch her wreath of wild flowers, which she took with her. Then the white wolf swung her on his back and bore her away. But when they came to the place where he had rested with the servant-maid, he told her to dismount that they might rest for a little at the roadside. Then he turned to her and said: 'I wonder what your father would do if this forest belonged to him?'

And the princess answered: 'My father would cut down the trees and turn it into a beautiful park and gardens, and he and his courtiers would come and wander among the glades in the summer time.'

'This is the real princess,' said the wolf to himself. But aloud he said: 'Mount once more on my back, and I will bear you to my castle.'

And when she was seated on his back he set out through the woods, and he ran, and ran, and ran, till at last he stopped in front of a stately courtyard, with massive gates.

'This is a beautiful castle,' said the princess, as the gates swung back and she stepped inside. 'If only I were not so far away from my father and my mother!'

But the wolf answered: 'At the end of a year we will pay a visit to your father and mother.'

And at these words the white furry skin slipped from his back, and the princess saw that he was not a wolf at all, but a beautiful youth, tall and stately; and he gave her his hand, and led her up the castle stairs.

One day, at the end of half a year, he came into her room and said: 'My dear one, you must get ready for a wedding. Your eldest sister is going to be married, and I will take you to your father's palace. When the wedding is over, I shall come and fetch you home. I will whistle outside the gate, and when you hear me, pay no heed to what your father or mother say, leave your dancing and feasting, and come to me at once; for if I have to leave without you, you will never find your way back alone through the forests.'

When the princess was ready to start, she found that he had put on his white fur skin, and was changed back into the wolf; and he swung her on to his back, and set out with her to her father's palace, where he left her, while he himself returned home alone. But, in the evening, he went back to fetch her, and, standing outside the palace gate, he gave a long, loud whistle. In the midst of her dancing the princess heard the sound, and at once she went to him, and he swung her on his back and bore her away to his castle.

Again, at the end of half a year, the prince came into her room, as the white wolf, and said: 'Dear heart, you must prepare for the wedding of your second sister. I will take you to your father's palace to-day, and we will remain there together till to-morrow morning.'

So they went together to the wedding. In the evening, when the two were alone together, he dropped his fur skin, and, ceasing to be a wolf, became a prince again. Now they did not know that the princess's mother was hidden in the room. When she saw the white skin lying on the floor, she crept out of the room, and sent a servant to fetch the skin and to burn it in the kitchen fire. The moment the flames touched the skin there was a fearful clap of thunder heard, and the prince disappeared out of the palace gate in a whirlwind, and returned to his palace alone.

But the princess was heart-broken, and spent the night weeping bitterly. Next morning she set out to find her way back to the castle, but she wandered through the woods and forests, and she could find no path or track to guide her. For fourteen days she roamed in the forest, sleeping under the trees, and living upon wild berries and roots, and at last she reached a little house. She opened the door and went in, and found the wind seated in the room all by himself, and she spoke to the wind and said: 'Wind, have you seen the white wolf?'

And the wind answered: 'All day and all night I have been blowing round the world, and I have only just come home; but I have not seen him.'

But he gave her a pair of shoes, in which, he told her, she would be able to walk a hundred miles with every step. Then she walked through the air till she reached a star, and she said: 'Tell me, star, have you seen the white wolf?'

And the star answered: 'I have been shining all night, and I have not seen him.'

But the star gave her a pair of shoes, and told her that if she put them on she would be able to walk two hundred miles at a stride. So she drew them on, and she walked to the moon, and she said: 'Dear moon, have you not seen the white wolf?'

But the moon answered, 'All night long I have been sailing through the heavens, and I have only just come home; but I did not see him.'

But he gave her a pair of shoes, in which she would be able to cover four hundred miles with every stride. So she went to the sun, and said: 'Dear sun, have you seen the white wolf?'

And the sun answered, 'Yes, I have seen him, and he has chosen another bride, for he thought you had left him, and would never return, and he is preparing for the wedding. But I will help you. Here are a pair of shoes. If you put these on you will be able to walk on glass or ice, and to climb the steepest places. And here is a spinning-wheel, with which you will be able to spin moss into silk. When you leave me you will reach a glass mountain. Put on the shoes that I have given you and with them you will be able to climb it quite easily. At the summit you will find the palace of the white wolf.'

Then the princess set out, and before long she reached the glass mountain, and at the summit she found the white wolf's palace, as the sun had said.

But no one recognised her, as she had disguised herself as an old woman, and had wound a shawl round her head. Great preparations were going on in the palace for the wedding, which was to take place next day. Then the princess, still disguised as an old woman, took out her spinning-wheel, and began to spin moss into silk. And as she spun the new bride passed by, and seeing the moss turn into silk, she said to the old woman: 'Little mother, I wish you would give me that spinning-wheel.'

And the princess answered, 'I will give it to you if you will allow me to sleep to-night on the mat outside the prince's door.'

And the bride replied, 'Yes, you may sleep on the mat outside the door.'

So the princess gave her the spinning-wheel. And that night, winding the shawl all round her, so that no one could recognise her, she lay down on the mat outside the white wolf's door. And when everyone in the palace was asleep she began to tell the whole of her story. She told how she had been one of three sisters, and that she had been the youngest and the fairest of the three, and that her father had betrothed her to a white wolf. And she told how she had gone first to the wedding of one sister, and then with her husband to the wedding of the other sister, and how her mother had ordered the servant to throw the white fur skin into the kitchen fire. And then she told of her wanderings through the forest; and of how she had sought the white wolf weeping; and how the wind and star and moon and sun had befriended her, and had helped her to reach his palace. And when the white wolf heard all the story, he knew that it was his first wife, who had sought him, and had found him, after such great dangers and difficulties.

But he said nothing, for he waited till the next day, when many guests--kings and princes from far countries --were coming to his wedding. Then, when all the guests were assembled in the banqueting hall, he spoke to them and said: 'Hearken to me, ye kings and princes, for I have something to tell you. I had lost the key of my treasure casket, so I ordered a new one to be made; but I have since found the old one. Now, which of these keys is the better?'

Then all the kings and royal guests answered: 'Certainly the old key is better than the new one.'

'Then,' said the wolf, 'if that is so, my former bride is better than my new one.'

And he sent for the new bride, and he gave her in marriage to one of the princes who was present, and then he turned to his guests, and said: 'And here is my former bride'--and the beautiful princess was led into the room and seated beside him on his throne. 'I thought she had forgotten me, and that she would never return. But she has sought me everywhere, and now we are together once more we shall never part again.'

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f17]

Mohammed with the Magic Finger

Once upon a time, there lived a woman who had a son and a daughter. One morning she said to them: 'I have heard of a town where there is no such thing as death: let us go and dwell there.' So she broke up her house, and went away with her son and daughter.

When she reached the city, the first thing she did was to look about and see if there was any churchyard, and when she found none, she exclaimed, 'This is a delightful spot. We will stay here for ever.'

By-and-by, her son grew to be a man, and he took for a wife a girl who had been born in the town. But after a little while he grew restless, and went away on his travels, leaving his mother, his wife, and his sister behind him.

He had not been gone many weeks when one evening his mother said, 'I am not well, my head aches dreadfully.'

'What did you say?' inquired her daughter-in-law.

'My head feels ready to split,' replied the old woman.

The daughter-in-law asked no more questions, but left the house, and went in haste to some butchers in the next street.

'I have got a woman to sell; what will you give me for her?' said she.

The butchers answered that they must see the woman first, and they all returned together.

Then the butchers took the woman and told her they must kill her.

'But why?' she asked.

'Because,' they said, 'it is always our custom that when persons are ill and complain of their head they should be killed at once. It is a much better way than leaving them to die a natural death.'

'Very well,' replied the woman. 'But leave, I pray you, my lungs and my liver untouched, till my son comes back. Then give both to him.'

But the men took them out at once, and gave them to the daughter-in-law, saying: 'Put away these things till your husband returns.' And the daughter-in-law took them, and hid them in a secret place.

When the old woman's daughter, who had been in the woods, heard that her mother had been killed while she was out, she was filled with fright, and ran away as fast as she could. At last she reached a lonely spot far from the town, where she thought she was safe, and sat down on a stone, and wept bitterly. As she was sitting, sobbing, a man passed by.

'What is the matter, little girl? Answer me! I will be your friend.'

'Ah, sir, they have killed my mother; my brother is far away, and I have nobody.'

'Will you come with me?' asked the man.

'Thankfully,' said she, and he led her down, down, under the earth, till they reached a great city. Then he married her, and in course of time she had a son. And the baby was known throughout the city as 'Mohammed with the magic finger,' because, whenever he stuck out his little finger, he was able to see anything that was happening for as far as two days' distance.

By-and-by, as the boy was growing bigger, his uncle returned from his long journey, and went straight to his wife.

'Where are my mother and sister?' he asked; but his wife answered: 'Have something to eat first, and then I will tell you.'

But he replied: 'How can I eat till I know what has become of them?'

Then she fetched, from the upper chamber, a box full of money, which she laid before him, saying, 'That is the price of your mother. She sold well.'

'What do you mean?' he gasped.

'Oh, your mother complained one day that her head was aching, so I got in two butchers and they agreed to take her. However, I have got her lungs and liver hidden, till you came back, in a safe place.'

'And my sister?'

'Well, while the people were chopping up your mother she ran away, and I heard no more of her.'

'Give me my mother's liver and lungs,' said the young man. And she gave them to him. Then he put them in his pocket, and went away, saying: 'I can stay no longer in this horrible town. I go to seek my sister.'

Now, one day, the little boy stretched out his finger and said to his mother, 'My uncle is coming!'

'Where is he?' she asked.

'He is still two days' journey off: looking for us; but he will soon be here.' And in two days, as the boy had foretold, the uncle had found the hole in the earth, and arrived at the gate of the city. All his money was spent, and not knowing where his sister lived, he began to beg of all the people he saw.

'Here comes my uncle,' called out the little boy. 'Where?' asked his mother. 'Here at the house door;' and the woman ran out and embraced him, and wept over him. When they could both speak, he said: 'My sister, were you by when they killed my mother?'

'I was absent when they slew her,' replied she, 'and as I could do nothing, I ran away. But you, my brother, how did you get here?'

'By chance,' he said, 'after I had wandered far; but I did not know I should find you!' 'My little boy told me you were coming,' she explained, 'when you were yet two days distant; he alone of all men has that great gift.'

But she did not tell him that her husband could change himself into a serpent, a dog, or a monster, whenever he pleased. He was a very rich man, and possessed large herds of camels, goats, sheep, cattle, horses and asses; all the best of their kind. And the next morning, the sister said: 'Dear brother, go and watch our sheep, and when you are thirsty, drink their milk!'

'Very well,' answered he, and he went.

Soon after, she said again, 'Dear brother, go and watch our goats.'

'But why? I like tending sheep better!'

'Oh, it is much nicer to be a goatherd,' she said; so he took the goats out.

When he was gone, she said to her husband, 'You must kill my brother, for I cannot have him living here with me.'

'But, my dear, why should I? He has done me no harm.'

'I wish you to kill him,' she answered, 'or if not I will leave.'

'Oh, all right, then,' said he; 'to-morrow I will change myself into a serpent, and hide myself in the date barrel; and when he comes to fetch dates I will sting him in the hand.'

'That will do very well,' said she.

When the sun was up next day, she called to her brother, 'Go and mind the goats.'

'Yes, of course,' he replied; but the little boy called out: 'Uncle, I want to come with you.'

'Delighted,' said the uncle, and they started together.

After they had got out of sight of the house the boy said to him, 'Dear uncle, my father is going to kill you. He has changed himself into a serpent, and has hidden himself in the date barrel. My mother has told him to do it.'

'And what am I to do?' asked the uncle.

'I will tell you. When we bring the goats back to the house, and my mother says to you, "I am sure you must be hungry: get a few dates out of the cask," just say to me, "I am not feeling very well, Mohammed, you go and get them for me."'

So, when they reached the house the sister came out to meet them, saying, 'Dear brother, you must certainly be hungry: go and get a few dates.'

But he answered, 'I am not feeling very well. Mohammed, you go and get them for me.'

'Of course I will,' replied the little boy, and ran at once to the cask.

'No, no,' his mother called after him; 'come here directly! Let your uncle fetch them himself!'

But the boy would not listen, and crying out to her 'I would rather get them,' thrust his hand into the date cask.

Instead of the fruit, it struck against something cold and slimy, and he whispered softly, 'Keep still; it is I, your son!'

Then he picked up his dates and went away to his uncle.

'Here they are, dear uncle; eat as many as you want.'

And his uncle ate them.

When he saw that the uncle did not mean to come near the cask, the serpent crawled out and regained his proper shape.

'I am thankful I did not kill him,' he said to his wife; 'for, after all, he is my brother-in-law, and it would have been a great sin!'

'Either you kill him or I leave you,' said she.

'Well, well!' sighed the man, 'to-morrow I will do it.'

The woman let that night go by without doing anything further, but at daybreak she said to her brother, 'Get up, brother; it is time to take the goats to pasture!'

'All right,' cried he.

'I will come with you, uncle,' called out the little boy.

'Yes, come along,' replied he.

But the mother ran up, saying, 'The child must not go out in this cold or he will be ill;' to which he only answered, 'Nonsense! I am going, so it is no use your talking! I am going! I am! I am!'

'Then go!' she said.

And so they started, driving the goats in front of them.

When they reached the pasture the boy said to his uncle: 'Dear uncle, this night my father means to kill you. While we are away he will creep into your room and hide in the straw. Directly we get home my mother will say to you, "Take that straw and give it to the sheep," and, if you do, he will bite you.'

'Then what am I to do?' asked the man.

'Oh, do not be afraid, dear uncle! I will kill my father myself.'

'All right,' replied the uncle.

As they drove back the goats towards the house, the sister cried: 'Be quick, dear brother, go and get me some straw for the sheep.'

'Let me go,' said the boy.

'You are not big enough; your uncle will get it,' replied she.

'We will both get it,' answered the boy; 'come, uncle, let us go and fetch that straw!'

'All right,' replied the uncle, and they went to the door of the room.

'It seems very dark,' said the boy; 'I must go and get a light;' and when he came back with one, he set fire to the straw, and the serpent was burnt.

Then the mother broke into sobs and tears. 'Oh, you wretched boy! What have you done? Your father was in that straw, and you have killed him!'

'Now, how was I to know that my father was lying in that straw, instead of in the kitchen?' said the boy.

But his mother only wept the more, and sobbed out, 'From this day you have no father. You must do without him as best you can!'

'Why did you marry a serpent?' asked the boy. 'I thought he was a man! How did he learn those odd tricks?'

As the sun rose, she woke her brother, and said, 'Go and take the goats to pasture!'

'I will come too,' said the little boy.

'Go then!' said his mother, and they went together.

On the way the boy began: 'Dear uncle, this night my mother means to kill both of us, by poisoning us with the bones of the serpent, which she will grind to powder and sprinkle in our food.'

'And what are we to do?' asked the uncle.

'I will kill her, dear uncle. I do not want either a father or a mother like that!'

When they came home in the evening they saw the woman preparing supper, and secretly scattering the powdered bones of the serpent on one side of the dish. On the other, where she meant to eat herself, there was no poison.

And the boy whispered to his uncle, 'Dear uncle, be sure you eat from the same side of the dish as I do!'

'All right,' said the uncle.

So they all three sat down to the table, but before they helped themselves the boy said, 'I am thirsty, mother; will you get me some milk?'

'Very well,' said she, 'but you had better begin your supper.'

And when she came back with the milk they were both eating busily.

'Sit down and have something too,' said the boy, and she sat down and helped herself from the dish, but at the very first moment she sank dead upon the ground.

'She has got what she meant for us,' observed the boy; 'and now we will sell all the sheep and cattle.'

So the sheep and cattle were sold, and the uncle and nephew took the money and went to see the world.

For ten days they travelled through the desert, and then they came to a place where the road parted in two.

'Uncle!' said the boy.

'Well, what is it?' replied he.

'You see these two roads? You must take one, and I the other; for the time has come when we must part.'

But the uncle cried, 'No, no, my boy, we will keep together always.'

'Alas! that cannot be,' said the boy; 'so tell me which way you will go.'

'I will go to the west,' said the uncle.

'One word before I leave you,' continued the boy. 'Beware of any man who has red hair and blue eyes. Take no service under him.'

'All right,' replied the uncle, and they parted.

For three days the man wandered on without any food, till he was very hungry. Then, when he was almost fainting, a stranger met him and said, 'Will you work for me?'

'By contract?' asked the man.

'Yes, by contract,' replied the stranger, 'and whichever of us breaks it, shall have a strip of skin taken from his body.'

'All right,' replied the man; 'what shall I have to do?'

'Every day you must take the sheep out to pasture, and carry my old mother on your shoulders, taking great care her feet shall never touch the ground. And, besides that, you must catch, every evening, seven singing birds for my seven sons.'

'That is easily done,' said the man.

Then they went back together, and the stranger said, 'Here are your sheep; and now stoop down, and let my mother climb on your back.'

'Very good,' answered Mohammed's uncle.

The new shepherd did as he was told, and returned in the evening with the old woman on his back, and the seven singing birds in his pocket, which he gave to the seven boys, when they came to meet him. So the days passed, each one exactly like the other.

At last, one night, he began to weep, and cried: 'Oh, what have I done, that I should have to perform such hateful tasks?'

And his nephew Mohammed saw him from afar, and thought to himself, 'My uncle is in trouble--I must go and help him;' and the next morning he went to his master and said: 'Dear master, I must go to my uncle, and I wish to send him here instead of myself, while I serve under his master. And that you may know it is he and no other man, I will give him my staff, and put my mantle on him.'

'All right,' said the master.

Mohammed set out on his journey, and in two days he arrived at the place where his uncle was standing with the old woman on his back trying to catch the birds as they flew past. And Mohammed touched him on the arm, and spoke: 'Dear uncle, did I not warn you never to take service under any blue-eyed red-haired man!

'But what could I do?' asked the uncle. 'I was hungry, and he passed, and we signed a contract.'

'Give the contract to me!' said the young man.

'Here it is,' replied the uncle, holding it out.

'Now,' continued Mohammed, 'let the old woman get down from your back.'

'Oh no, I mustn't do that!' cried he.

But the nephew paid no attention, and went on talking: 'Do not worry yourself about the future. I see my way out of it all. And, first, you must take my stick and my mantle, and leave this place. After two days' journey, straight before you, you will come to some tents which are inhabited by shepherds. Go in there, and wait.'

'All right!' answered the uncle.

Then Mohammed with the Magic Finger picked up a stick and struck the old woman with it, saying, 'Get down, and look after the sheep; I want to go to sleep.'

'Oh, certainly!' replied she.

So Mohammed lay down comfortably under a tree and slept till evening. Towards sunset he woke up and said to the old woman: 'Where are the singing birds which you have got to catch?'

'You never told me anything about that,' replied she.

'Oh, didn't I?' he answered. 'Well, it is part of your business, and if you don't do it, I shall just kill you.'

'Of course I will catch them!' cried she in a hurry, and ran about the bushes after the birds, till thorns pierced her foot, and she shrieked from pain and exclaimed, 'Oh dear, how unlucky I am! and how abominably this man is treating me!' However, at last she managed to catch the seven birds, and brought them to Mohammed, saying, 'Here they are!'

'Then now we will go back to the house,' said he.

When they had gone some way he turned to her sharply:

'Be quick and drive the sheep home, for I do not know where their fold is.' And she drove them before her. By-and-by the young man spoke:

'Look here, old hag; if you say anything to your son about my having struck you, or about my not being the old shepherd, I'll kill you!'

'Oh, no, of course I won't say anything!'

When they got back, the son said to his mother: 'That is a good shepherd I've got, isn't he?'

'Oh, a splendid shepherd!' answered she. 'Why, look how fat the sheep are, and how much milk they give!'

'Yes, indeed!' replied the son, as he rose to get supper for his mother and the shepherd.

In the time of Mohammed's uncle, the shepherd had had nothing to eat but the scraps left by the old woman; but the new shepherd was not going to be content with that.

'You will not touch the food till I have had as much as I want,' whispered he.

'Very good!' replied she. And when he had had enough, he said:

'Now, eat!' But she wept, and cried: 'That was not written in your contract. You were only to have what I left!'

'If you say a word more, I will kill you!' said he.

The next day he took the old woman on his back, and drove the sheep in front of him till he was some distance from the house, when he let her fall, and said: 'Quick! go and mind the sheep!'

Then he took a ram, and killed it. He lit a fire and broiled some of its flesh, and called to the old woman:

'Come and eat with me!' and she came. But instead of letting her eat quietly, he took a large lump of the meat and rammed it down her throat with his crook, so that she died. And when he saw she was dead, he said: 'That is what you have got for tormenting my uncle!' and left her lying where she was, while he went after the singing birds. It took him a long time to catch them; but at length he had the whole seven hidden in the pockets of his tunic, and then he threw the old woman's body into some bushes, and drove the sheep before him, back to their fold. And when they drew near the house the seven boys came to meet him, and he gave a bird to each.

'Why are you weeping?' asked the boys, as they took their birds.

'Because your grandmother is dead!' And they ran and told their father. Then the man came up and said to Mohammed: 'What was the matter? How did she die?'

And Mohammed answered: 'I was tending the sheep when she said to me, "Kill me that ram; I am hungry!" So I killed it, and gave her the meat. But she had no teeth, and it choked her.'

'But why did you kill the ram, instead of one of the sheep?' asked the man.

'What was I to do?' said Mohammed. 'I had to obey orders!'

'Well, I must see to her burial!' said the man; and the next morning Mohammed drove out the sheep as usual, thinking to himself, 'Thank goodness I've got rid of the old woman! Now for the boys!'

All day long he looked after the sheep, and towards evening he began to dig some little holes in the ground, out of which he took six scorpions. These he put in his pockets, together with one bird which he caught. After this he drove his flock home.

When he approached the house the boys came out to meet him as before, saying: 'Give me my bird!' and he put a scorpion into the hand of each, and it stung him, and he died. But to the youngest only he gave a bird.

As soon as he saw the boys lying dead on the ground, Mohammed lifted up his voice and cried loudly: 'Help, help! the children are dead!'

And the people came running fast, saying: 'What has happened? How have they died?'

And Mohammed answered: 'It was your own fault! The boys had been accustomed to birds, and in this bitter cold their fingers grew stiff, and could hold nothing, so that the birds flew away, and their spirits flew with them. Only the youngest, who managed to keep tight hold of his bird, is still alive.'

And the father groaned, and said, 'I have borne enough! Bring no more birds, lest I lose the youngest also!'

'All right,' said Mohammed. As he was driving the sheep out to grass he said to his master: 'Out there is a splendid pasture, and I will keep the sheep there for two or, perhaps, three days, so do not be surprised at our absence.'

'Very good!' said the man; and Mohammed started. For two days he drove them on and on, till he reached his uncle, and said to him, 'Dear uncle, take these sheep and look after them. I have killed the old woman and the boys, and the flock I have brought to you!'

Then Mohammed returned to his master; and on the way he took a stone and beat his own head with it till it bled, and bound his hands tight, and began to scream. The master came running and asked, 'What is the matter?'

And Mohammed answered: 'While the sheep were grazing, robbers came and drove them away, and because I tried to prevent them, they struck me on the head and bound my hands. See how bloody I am!'

'What shall we do?' said the master; 'are the animals far off?'

'So far that you are not likely ever to see them again,' replied Mohammed. 'This is the fourth day since the robbers came down. How should you be able to overtake them?'

'Then go and herd the cows!' said the man.

'All right!' replied Mohammed, and for two days he went. But on the third day he drove the cows to his uncle, first cutting off their tails. Only one cow he left behind him.

'Take these cows, dear uncle,' said he. 'I am going to teach that man a lesson.'

'Well, I suppose you know your own business best,' said the uncle. 'And certainly he almost worried me to death.'

So Mohammed returned to his master, carrying the cows' tails tied up in a bundle on his back. When he came to the sea-shore, he stuck all the tails in the sand, and went and buried the one cow, whose tail he had not cut off, up to her neck, leaving the tail projecting. After he had got everything ready, he began to shriek and scream as before, till his master and all the other servants came running to see what was the matter.

'What in the world has happened?' they cried

'The sea has swallowed up the cows,' said Mohammed, 'and nothing remains but their tails. But if you are quick and pull hard, perhaps you may get them out again!'

The master ordered each man instantly to take hold of a tail, but at the first pull they nearly tumbled backwards, and the tails were left in their hands.

'Stop,' cried Mohammed, 'you are doing it all wrong. You have just pulled off their tails, and the cows have sunk to the bottom of the sea.'

'See if you can do it any better,' said they; and Mohammed ran to the cow which he had buried in the rough grass, and took hold of her tail and dragged the animal out at once.

'There! that is the way to do it!' said he, 'I told you you knew nothing about it!'

The men slunk away, much ashamed of themselves; but the master came up to Mohammed. 'Get you gone!' he said, 'there is nothing more for you to do! You have killed my mother, you have slain my children, you have stolen my sheep, you have drowned my cows; I have now no work to give you.'

'First give me the strip of your skin which belongs to me of right, as you have broken your contract!'

'That a judge shall decide,' said the master; 'we will go before him.'

'Yes, we will,' replied Mohammed. And they went before the judge.

'What is your case?' asked the judge of the master.

'My lord,' said the man, bowing low, 'my shepherd here has robbed me of everything. He has killed my children and my old mother; he has stolen my sheep, he has drowned my cows in the sea.'

The shepherd answered: 'He must pay me what he owes me, and then I will go.'

'Yes, that is the law,' said the judge.

'Very well,' returned the master, 'let him reckon up how long he has been in my service.'

'That won't do,' replied Mohammed, 'I want my strip of skin, as we agreed in the contract.'

Seeing there was no help for it, the master cut a bit of skin, and gave it to Mohammed, who went off at once to his uncle.

'Now we are rich, dear uncle,' cried he; 'we will sell our cows and sheep and go to a new country. This one is no longer the place for us.'

The sheep were soon sold, and the two comrades started on their travels. That night they reached some Bedouin tents, where they had supper with the Arabs. Before they lay down to sleep, Mohammed called the owner of the tent aside. 'Your greyhound will eat my strip of leather,' he said to the Arab.

'No; do not fear.'

'But supposing he does?'

'Well, then, I will give him to you in exchange,' replied the Arab.

Mohammed waited till everyone was fast asleep, then he rose softly, and tearing the bit of skin in pieces, threw it down before the greyhound, setting up wild shrieks as he did so.

'Oh, master, said I not well that your dog would eat my thong?'

'Be quiet, don't make such a noise, and you shall have the dog.'

So Mohammed put a leash round his neck, and led him away.

In the evening they arrived at the tents of some more Bedouin, and asked for shelter. After supper Mohammed said to the owner of the tent, 'Your ram will kill my greyhound.'

'Oh, no, he won't.'

'And supposing he does?'

'Then you can take him in exchange.'

So in the night Mohammed killed the greyhound, and laid his body across the horns of the ram. Then he set up shrieks and yells, till he roused the Arab, who said: 'Take the ram and go away.'

Mohammed did not need to be told twice, and at sunset he reached another Bedouin encampment. He was received kindly, as usual, and after supper he said to his host: 'Your daughter will kill my ram.'

'Be silent, she will do nothing of the sort; my daughter does not need to steal meat, she has some every day.'

'Very well, I will go to sleep; but if anything happens to my ram I will call out.'

'If my daughter touches anything belonging to my guest I will kill her,' said the Arab, and went to his bed.

When everybody was asleep, Mohammed got up, killed the ram, and took out his liver, which he broiled on the fire. He placed a piece of it in the girl's hands, and laid some more on her night-dress while she slept and knew nothing about it. After this he began to cry out loudly.

'What is the matter? be silent at once!' called the Arab.

'How can I be silent, when my ram, which I loved like a child, has been slain by your daughter?'

'But my daughter is asleep,' said the Arab.

'Well, go and see if she has not some of the flesh about her.'

'If she has, you may take her in exchange for the ram;' and as they found the flesh exactly as Mohammed had foretold, the Arab gave his daughter a good beating, and then told her to get out of sight, for she was now the property of this stranger.

They wandered in the desert till, at nightfall, they came to a Bedouin encampment, where they were hospitably bidden to enter. Before lying down to sleep, Mohammed said to the owner of the tent: 'Your mare will kill my wife.'

'Certainly not.'

'And if she does?'

'Then you shall take the mare in exchange.'

When everyone was asleep, Mohammed said softly to his wife: 'Maiden, I have got such a clever plan! I am going to bring in the mare and put it at your feet, and I will cut you, just a few little flesh wounds, so that you may be covered with blood, and everybody will suppose you to be dead. But remember that you must not make a sound, or we shall both be lost.'

This was done, and then Mohammed wept and wailed louder than ever.

The Arab hastened to the spot and cried, 'Oh, cease making that terrible noise! Take the mare and go; but carry off the dead girl with you. She can lie quite easily across the mare's back.'

Then Mohammed and his uncle picked up the girl, and, placing her on the mare's back, led it away, being very careful to walk one on each side, so that she might not slip down and hurt herself. After the Arab tents could be seen no longer, the girl sat up on the saddle and looked about her, and as they were all hungry they tied up the mare, and took out some dates to eat. When they had finished, Mohammed said to his uncle: 'Dear uncle, the maiden shall be your wife; I give her to you. But the money we got from the sheep and cows we will divide between us. You shall have two-thirds and I will have one. For you will have a wife, but I never mean to marry. And now, go in peace, for never more will you see me. The bond of bread and salt is at an end between us.'

So they wept, and fell on each other's necks, and asked forgiveness for any wrongs in the past. Then they parted and went their ways.

[Marchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis. Von Haus Stumme.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f18]

Bobino

Once on a time there was a rich merchant, who had an only son called Bobino. Now, as the boy was clever, and had a great desire for knowledge, his father sent him to be under a master, from whom he thought he would learn to speak all sorts of foreign languages. After some years with this master, Bobino returned to his home.

One evening, as he and his father were walking in the garden, the sparrows in the trees above their heads began such a twittering, that they found it impossible to hear each other speak. This annoyed the merchant very much, so, to soothe him, Bobino said: 'Would you like me to explain to you what the sparrows are saying to each other?'

The merchant looked at his son in astonishment, and answered: 'What can you mean? How can you explain what the sparrows say? Do you consider yourself a soothsayer or a magician?'

'I am neither a soothsayer nor a magician,' answered Bobino; 'but my master taught me the language of all the animals.'

'Alas! for my good money!' exclaimed the merchant. 'The master has certainly mistaken my intention. Of course I meant you to learn the languages that human beings talk, and not the language of animals.'

'Have patience,' answered the son. 'My master thought it best to begin with the language of animals, and later to learn the languages of human beings.'

On their way into the house the dog ran to meet them, barking furiously.

'What can be the matter with the beast?' said the merchant. 'Why should he bark at me like that, when he knows me quite well?'

'Shall I explain to you what he is saying?' said Bobino.

'Leave me in peace, and don't trouble me with your nonsense,' said the merchant quite crossly. 'How my money has been wasted!'

A little later, as they sat down to supper, some frogs in a neighbouring pond set up such a croaking as had never been heard. The noise so irritated the merchant that he quite lost his temper and exclaimed: 'This only was wanting to add the last drop to my discomfort and disappointment.'

'Shall I explain to you?' began Bobino.

'Will you hold your tongue with your explanations?' shouted the merchant. 'Go to bed, and don't let me see your face again!'

So Bobino went to bed and slept soundly. But his father, who could not get over his disappointment at the waste of his money, was so angry, that he sent for two servants, and gave them orders, which they were to carry out on the following day.

Next morning one of the servants awakened Bobino early, and made him get into a carriage that was waiting for him. The servant placed himself on the seat beside him, while the other servant rode alongside the carriage as an escort. Bobino could not understand what they were going to do with him, or where he was being taken; but he noticed that the servant beside him looked very sad, and his eyes were all swollen with crying.

Curious to know the reason he said to him: 'Why are you so sad? and where are you taking me?'

But the servant would say nothing. At last, moved by Bobino's entreaties, he said: 'My poor boy, I am taking you to your death, and, what is worse, I am doing so by the order of your father.'

'But why,' exclaimed Bobino, 'does he want me to die? What evil have I done him, or what fault have I committed that he should wish to bring about my death?'

'You have done him no evil,' answered the servant 'neither have you committed any fault; but he is half mad with anger because, in all these years of study, you have learnt nothing but the language of animals. He expected something quite different from you, that is why he is determined you shall die.'

'If that is the case, kill me at once,' said Bobino. 'What is the use of waiting, if it must be done?'

'I have not the heart to do it,' answered the servant. 'I would rather think of some way of saving your life, and at the same time of protecting ourselves from your father's anger. By good luck the dog has followed us. We will kill it, and cut out the heart and take it back to your father. He will believe it is yours, and you, in the meantime, will have made your escape.'

When they had reached the thickest part of the wood, Bobino got out of the carriage, and having said good-bye to the servants set out on his wanderings.

On and on he walked, till at last, late in the evening, he came to a house where some herdsmen lived. He knocked at the door and begged for shelter for the night. The herdsmen, seeing how gentle a youth he seemed, made him welcome, and bade him sit down and share their supper.

While they were eating it, the dog in the courtyard began to bark. Bobino walked to the window, listened attentively for a minute, and then turning to the herdsmen said: 'Send your wives and daughters at once to bed, and arm yourselves as best you can, because at midnight a band of robbers will attack this house.'

The herdsmen were quite taken aback, and thought that the youth must have taken leave of his senses.

'How can you know,' they said, 'that a band of robbers mean to attack us? Who told you so?'

'I know it from the dog's barking,' answered Bobino. 'I understand his language, and if I had not been here, the poor beast would have wasted his breath to no purpose. You had better follow my advice, if you wish to save your lives and property.'

The herdsmen were more and more astonished, but they decided to do as Bobino advised. They sent their wives and daughters upstairs, then, having armed themselves, they took up their position behind a hedge, waiting for midnight.

Just as the clock struck twelve they heard the sound of approaching footsteps, and a band of robbers cautiously advanced towards the house. But the herdsmen were on the look-out; they sprang on the robbers from behind the hedge, and with blows from their cudgels soon put them to flight.

You may believe how grateful they were to Bobino, to whose timely warning they owed their safety. They begged him to stay and make his home with them; but as he wanted to see more of the world, he thanked them warmly for their hospitality, and set out once more on his wanderings. All day he walked, and in the evening he came to a peasant's house. While he was wondering whether he should knock and demand shelter for the night, he heard a great croaking of frogs in a ditch behind the house. Stepping to the back he saw a very strange sight. Four frogs were throwing a small bottle about from one to the other, making a great croaking as they did so. Bobino listened for a few minutes, and then knocked at the door of the house. It was opened by the peasant, who asked him to come in and have some supper.

When the meal was over, his host told him that they were in great trouble, as his eldest daughter was so ill, that they feared she could not recover. A great doctor, who had been passing that way some time before, had promised to send her some medicine that would have cured her, but the servant to whom he had entrusted the medicine had let it drop on the way back, and now there seemed no hope for the girl.

Then Bobino told the father of the small bottle he had seen the frogs play with, and that he knew that was the medicine which the doctor had sent to the girl. The peasant asked him how he could be sure of this, and Bobino explained to him that he understood the language of animals, and had heard what the frogs said as they tossed the bottle about. So the peasant fetched the bottle from the ditch, and gave the medicine to his daughter. In the morning she was much better, and the grateful father did not know how to thank Bobino enough. But Bobino would accept nothing from him, and having said good-bye, set out once more on his wanderings.

One day, soon after this, he came upon two men resting under a tree in the heat of the day. Being tired he stretched himself on the ground at no great distance from them, and soon they all three began to talk to one another. In the course of conversation, Bobino asked the two men where they were going; and they replied that they were on their way to a neighbouring town, where, that day, a new ruler was to be chosen by the people.

While they were still talking, some sparrows settled on the tree under which they were lying. Bobino was silent, and appeared to be listening attentively. At the end of a few minutes he said to his companions, 'Do you know what those sparrows are saying? They are saying that to-day one of us will be chosen ruler of that town.'

The men said nothing, but looked at each other. A few minutes later, seeing that Bobino had fallen asleep, they stole away, and made with all haste for the town, where the election of a new ruler was to take place.

A great crowd was assembled in the market-place, waiting for the hour when an eagle should be let loose from a cage, for it had been settled that on whose-soever house the eagle alighted, the owner of that house should become ruler of the town. At last the hour arrived; the eagle was set free, and all eyes were strained to see where it would alight. But circling over the heads of the crowd, it flew straight in the direction of a young man, who was at that moment entering the town. This was none other than Bobino, who had awakened soon after his companions had left him, and had followed in their footsteps. All the people shouted and proclaimed that he was their future ruler, and he was conducted by a great crowd to the Governor's house, which was for the future to be his home. And here he lived happily, and ruled wisely over the people.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f19]

The Dog and the Sparrow

There was once upon a time a sheep-dog whose master was so unkind that he starved the poor beast, and ill- treated him in the cruellest manner. At last the dog determined to stand this ill-usage no longer, and, one day, he ran away from home. As he was trotting along the road he met a sparrow, who stopped him and said: 'Brother, why do you look so sad?'

The dog answered: 'I am sad because I am hungry, and have nothing to eat.'

'If that's all, dear brother,' said the sparrow, 'come to the town with me, and I'll soon get food for you.'

So they went together to the town, and when they came to a butcher's shop, the sparrow said to the dog: 'You stand still and I'll peck down a piece of meat for you.'

First she looked all round to see that no one was watching her, and then she set to work to peck at a piece of meat that lay on the edge of a shelf, till at last it fell down. The dog seized it ravenously, and ran with it to a dark corner where he gobbled it up in a very few minutes.

When he had finished it, the sparrow said: 'Now come with me to another shop, and I will get you a second piece, so that your hunger may be satisfied.' When the dog had finished the second piece of meat, the sparrow asked him: 'Brother, have you had enough now?'

'Yes,' replied the dog, 'I've had quite enough meat, but I haven't had any bread yet.'

The sparrow said: 'You shall have as much bread as you like, only come with me.' Then she led him to a baker's shop, and pecked so long at two rolls on a shelf that at last they fell down, and the dog ate them up.

But still his hunger was not appeased; so the sparrow took him to another baker's shop, and got some more rolls for him. Then she asked him: 'Well, brother, are you satisfied?'

'Yes,' he replied; 'and now let us go for a little walk outside the town.'

So the two went for a stroll into the country; but the day was very hot, and after they had gone a short distance the dog said: 'I am very tired, and would like to go to sleep.'

'Sleep, then,' said the sparrow, 'and I will keep watch meantime on the branch of a tree.'

So the dog lay down in the middle of the road, and was soon fast asleep. While he was sleeping a carter passed by, driving a waggon drawn by three horses, and laden with two barrels of wine. The sparrow noticed that the man was not going out of his way to avoid the dog, but was driving right in the middle of the road where the poor animal lay; so she called out: 'Carter, take care what you are about, or I shall make you suffer for it.'

But the carter merely laughed at her words, and, cracking his whip, he drove his waggon right over the dog, so that the heavy wheels killed him.

Then the sparrow called out: 'You have caused my brother's death, and your cruelty will cost you your waggon and horses.'

'Waggon and horses, indeed,' said the carter; 'I'd like to know how you could rob me of them!'

The sparrow said nothing, but crept under the cover of the waggon and pecked so long at the bunghole of one of the barrels that at last she got the cork away, and all the wine ran out without the carter's noticing it.

But at last he turned round and saw that the bottom of the cart was wet, and when he examined it, he found that one of the barrels was quite empty. 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!' he exclaimed.

'You'll have worse luck still,' said the sparrow, as she perched on the head of one of the horses and pecked out its eyes.

When the carter saw what had happened, he seized an axe and tried to hit the sparrow with it, but the little bird flew up into the air, and the carter only hit the blind horse on the head, so that it fell down dead. 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!' he exclaimed again.

'You'll have worse luck yet,' said the sparrow; and when the carter drove on with his two horses she crept under the covering again, and pecked away at the cork of the second barrel till she got it away, and all the wine poured out on to the road.

When the carter perceived this fresh disaster he called out once more: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

But the sparrow answered: 'Your bad luck is not over yet,' and flying on to the head of the second horse she pecked out its eyes.

The carter jumped out of the waggon and seized his axe, with which he meant to kill the sparrow; but the little bird flew high into the air, and the blow fell on the poor blind horse instead, and killed it on the spot. Then the carter exclaimed: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

'You've not got to the end of your bad luck yet,' sang the sparrow; and, perching on the head of the third horse, she pecked out its eyes.

The carter, blind with rage, let his axe fly at the bird; but once more she escaped the blow, which fell on the only remaining horse, and killed it. And again the carter called out: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

'You'll have worse luck yet,' said the sparrow, 'for now I mean to make your home desolate.'

The carter had to leave his waggon on the road, and he went home in a towering passion. As soon as he saw his wife, he called out: 'Oh! what bad luck I have had! all my wine is spilt, and my horses are all three dead.'

'My dear husband,' replied his wife, 'your bad luck pursues you, for a wicked little sparrow has assembled all the other birds in the world, and they are in our barn eating everything up.'

The carter went out to the barn where he kept his corn and found it was just as his wife had said. Thousands and thousands of birds were eating up the grain, and in the middle of them sat the little sparrow. When he saw his old enemy, the carter cried out: 'Oh! what an unlucky fellow I am!'

'Not unlucky enough yet,' answered the sparrow; 'for, mark my words, carter, your cruel conduct will cost you your life;' and with these words she flew into the air.

The carter was much depressed by the loss of all his worldly goods, and sat down at the fire plotting vengeance on the sparrow, while the little bird sat on the window ledge and sang in mocking tones: 'Yes, carter, your cruel conduct will cost you your life.'

Then the carter seized his axe and threw it at the sparrow, but he only broke the window panes, and did not do the bird a bit of harm. She hopped in through the broken window and, perching on the mantelpiece, she called out; 'Yes, carter, it will cost you your life.'

The carter, quite beside himself with rage, flew at the sparrow again with his axe, but the little creature always eluded his blows, and he only succeeded in destroying all his furniture. At last, however, he managed to catch the bird in his hands. Then his wife called out: 'Shall I wring her neck?'

'Certainly not,' replied her husband, 'that would be far too easy a death for her; she must die in a far crueller fashion than that. I will eat her alive;' and he suited the action to his words. But the sparrow fluttered and struggled inside him till she got up into the man's mouth, and then she popped out her head and said: 'Yes, carter, it will cost you your life.'

The carter handed his wife the axe, and said: 'Wife, kill the bird in my mouth dead.'

The woman struck with all her might, but she missed the bird and hit the carter right on the top of his head, so that he fell down dead. But the sparrow escaped out of his mouth and flew away into the air.

[From the German, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f20]

The Story of the Three Sons of Hali

Till his eighteenth birthday the young Neangir lived happily in a village about forty miles from Constantinople, believing that Mohammed and Zinebi his wife, who had brought him up, were his real parents.

Neangir was quite content with his lot, though he was neither rich nor great, and unlike most young men of his age had no desire to leave his home. He was therefore completely taken by surprise when one day Mohammed told him with many sighs that the time had now come for him to go to Constantinople, and fix on a profession for himself. The choice would be left to him, but he would probably prefer either to be a soldier or one of the doctors learned in the law, who explain the Koran to the ignorant people. 'You know the holy book nearly by heart,' ended the old man, 'so that in a very short time you would be fitted to teach others. But write to us and tell us how you pass your life, and we, on our side, will promise never to forget you.'

So saying, Mohammed gave Neangir four piastres to start him in the great city, and obtained leave for him to join a caravan which was about to set off for Constantinople.

The journey took some days, as caravans go very slowly, but at last the walls and towers of the capital appeared in the distance. When the caravan halted the travellers went their different ways, and Neangir was left, feeling very strange and rather lonely. He had plenty of courage and made friends very easily; still, not only was it the first time he had left the village where he had been brought up, but no one had ever spoken to him of Constantinople, and he did not so much as know the name of a single street or of a creature who lived in it.

Wondering what he was to do next, Neangir stood still for a moment to look about him, when suddenly a pleasant-looking man came up, and bowing politely, asked if the youth would do him the honour of staying in his house till he had made some plans for himself. Neangir, not seeing anything else he could do, accepted the stranger's offer and followed him home.

They entered a large room, where a girl of about twelve years old was laying three places at the table.

'Zelida,' said the stranger, 'was I not quite right when I told you that I should bring back a friend to sup with us?'

'My father,' replied the girl, 'you are always right in what you say, and what is better still, you never mislead others.' As she spoke, an old slave placed on the table a dish called pillau, made of rice and meat, which is a great favourite among people in the East, and setting down glasses of sherbet before each person, left the room quietly.

During the meal the host talked a great deal upon all sorts of subjects; but Neangir did nothing but look at Zelida, as far as he could without being positively rude.

The girl blushed and grew uncomfortable, and at last turned to her father. 'The stranger's eyes never wander from me,' she said in a low and hesitating voice. 'If Hassan should hear of it, jealousy will make him mad.'

'No, no,' replied the father, 'you are certainly not for this young man. Did I not tell you before that I intend him for your sister Argentine. I will at once take measures to fix his heart upon her,' and he rose and opened a cupboard, from which be took some fruits and a jug of wine, which he put on the table, together with a small silver and mother-of-pearl box.

'Taste this wine,' he said to the young man, pouring some into a glass.

'Give me a little, too,' cried Zelida.

'Certainly not,' answered her father, 'you and Hassan both had as much as was good for you the other day.'

'Then drink some yourself,' replied she, 'or this young man will think we mean to poison him.'

'Well, if you wish, I will do so,' said the father; 'this elixir is not dangerous at my age, as it is at yours.'

When Neangir had emptied his glass, his host opened the mother-of-pearl box and held it out to him. Neangir was beside himself with delight at the picture of a young maiden more beautiful than anything he had ever dreamed of. He stood speechless before it, while his breast swelled with a feeling quite new to him.

His two companions watched him with amusement, until at last Neangir roused himself. 'Explain to me, I pray you,' he said, 'the meaning of these mysteries. Why did you ask me here? Why did you force me to drink this dangerous liquid which has set fire to my blood? Why have you shown me this picture which has almost deprived me of reason?'

'I will answer some of your questions,' replied his host, 'but all, I may not. The picture that you hold in your hand is that of Zelida's sister. It has filled your heart with love for her; therefore, go and seek her. When you find her, you will find yourself.'

'But where shall I find her?' cried Neangir, kissing the charming miniature on which his eyes were fixed.

'I am unable to tell you more,' replied his host cautiously.

'But I can' interrupted Zelida eagerly. 'To-morrow you must go to the Jewish bazaar, and buy a watch from the second shop on the right hand. And at midnight--'

But what was to happen at midnight Neangir did not hear, for Zelida's father hastily laid his hand over her mouth, crying: 'Oh, be silent, child! Would you draw down on you by imprudence the fate of your unhappy sisters?' Hardly had he uttered the words, when a thick black vapour rose about him, proceeding from the precious bottle, which his rapid movement had overturned. The old slave rushed in and shrieked loudly, while Neangir, upset by this strange adventure, left the house.

He passed the rest of the night on the steps of a mosque, and with the first streaks of dawn he took his picture out of the folds of his turban. Then, remembering Zelida's words, he inquired the way to the bazaar, and went straight to the shop she had described.

In answer to Neangir's request to be shown some watches, the merchant produced several and pointed out the one which he considered the best. The price was three gold pieces, which Neangir readily agreed to give him; but the man made a difficulty about handing over the watch unless he knew where his customer lived.

'That is more than I know myself,' replied Neangir. 'I only arrived in the town yesterday and cannot find the way to the house where I went first.'

'Well,' said the merchant, 'come with me, and I will take you to a good Mussulman, where you will have everything you desire at a small charge.'

Neangir consented, and the two walked together through several streets till they reached the house recommended by the Jewish merchant. By his advice the young man paid in advance the last gold piece that remained to him for his food and lodging.

As soon as Neangir had dined he shut himself up in his room, and thrusting his hand into the folds of his turban, drew out his beloved portrait. As he did so, he touched a sealed letter which had apparently been hidden there without his knowledge, and seeing it was written by his foster-mother, Zinebi, he tore it eagerly open. Judge of his surprise when he read these words:

'My dearest Child,--This letter, which you will some day find in your turban, is to inform you that you are not really our son. We believe your father to have been a great lord in some distant land, and inside this packet is a letter from him, threatening to be avenged on us if you are not restored to him at once. We shall always love you, but do not seek us or even write to us. It will be useless.'

In the same wrapper was a roll of paper with a few words as follows, traced in a hand unknown to Neangir:

'Traitors, you are no doubt in league with those magicians who have stolen the two daughters of the unfortunate Siroco, and have taken from them the talisman given them by their father. You have kept my son from me, but I have found out your hiding-place and swear by the Holy Prophet to punish your crime. The stroke of my scimitar is swifter than the lightning.'

The unhappy Neangir on reading these two letters-- of which he understood absolutely nothing--felt sadder and more lonely than ever. It soon dawned on him that he must be the son of the man who had written to Mohammed and his wife, but he did not know where to look for him, and indeed thought much more about the people who had brought him up and whom he was never to see again.

To shake off these gloomy feelings, so as to be able to make some plans for the future, Neangir left the house and walked briskly about the city till darkness had fallen. He then retraced his steps and was just crossing the threshold when he saw something at his feet sparkling in the moonlight. He picked it up, and discovered it to be a gold watch shining with precious stones. He gazed up and down the street to see if there was anyone about to whom it might belong, but there was not a creature visible. So he put it in his sash, by the side of a silver watch which he had bought from the Jew that morning.

The possession of this piece of good fortune cheered Neangir up a little, 'for,' thought he, 'I can sell these jewels for at least a thousand sequins, and that will certainly last me till I have found my father.' And consoled by this reflection he laid both watches beside him and prepared to sleep.

In the middle of the night he awoke suddenly and heard a soft voice speaking, which seemed to come from one of the watches.

'Aurora, my sister,' it whispered gently. 'Did they remember to wind you up at midnight?'

'No, dear Argentine,' was the reply. 'And you?'

'They forgot me, too,' answered the first voice, 'and it is now one o'clock, so that we shall not be able to leave our prison till to-morrow--if we are not forgotten again--then.'

'We have nothing now to do here,' said Aurora. 'We must resign ourselves to our fate--let us go.'

Filled with astonishment Neangir sat up in bed, and beheld by the light of the moon the two watches slide to the ground and roll out of the room past the cats' quarters. He rushed towards the door and on to the staircase, but the watches slipped downstairs without his seeing them, and into the street. He tried to unlock the door and follow them, but the key refused to turn, so he gave up the chase and went back to bed.

The next day all his sorrows returned with tenfold force. He felt himself lonelier and poorer than ever, and in a fit of despair he thrust his turban on his head, stuck his sword in his belt, and left the house determined to seek an explanation from the merchant who had sold him the silver watch.

When Neangir reached the bazaar he found the man he sought was absent from his shop, and his place filled by another Jew.

'It is my brother you want,' said he; 'we keep the shop in turn, and in turn go into the city to do our business.'

'Ah! what business?' cried Neangir in a fury. 'You are the brother of a scoundrel who sold me yesterday a watch that ran away in the night. But I will find it somehow, or else you shall pay for it, as you are his brother!'

'What is that you say?' asked the Jew, around whom a crowd had rapidly gathered. 'A watch that ran away. If it had been a cask of wine, your story might be true, but a watch--! That is hardly possible!'

'The Cadi shall say whether it is possible or not,' replied Neangir, who at that moment perceived the other Jew enter the bazaar. Darting up, he seized him by the arm and dragged him to the Cadi's house; but not before the man whom he had found in the shop contrived to whisper to his brother, in a tone loud enough for Neangir to hear, 'Confess nothing, or we shall both be lost.'

When the Cadi was informed of what had taken place he ordered the crowd to be dispersed by blows, after the Turkish manner, and then asked Neangir to state his complaint. After hearing the young man's story, which seemed to him most extraordinary, he turned to question the Jewish merchant, who instead of answering raised his eyes to heaven and fell down in a dead faint.

The judge took no notice of the swooning man, but told Neangir that his tale was so singular he really could not believe it, and that he should have the merchant carried back to his own house. This so enraged Neangir that he forgot the respect due to the Cadi, and exclaimed at the top of his voice, 'Recover this fellow from his fainting fit, and force him to confess the truth,' giving the Jew as he spoke a blow with his sword which caused him to utter a piercing scream.

'You see for yourself,' said the Jew to the Cadi, 'that this young man is out of his mind. I forgive him his blow, but do not, I pray you, leave me in his power.'

At that moment the Bassa chanced to pass the Cadi's house, and hearing a great noise, entered to inquire the cause. When the matter was explained he looked attentively at Neangir, and asked him gently how all these marvels could possibly have happened.

'My lord,' replied Neangir, 'I swear I have spoken the truth, and perhaps you will believe me when I tell you that I myself have been the victim of spells wrought by people of this kind, who should be rooted out from the earth. For three years I was changed into a three- legged pot, and only returned to man's shape when one day a turban was laid upon my lid.'

At these words the Bassa rent his robe for joy, and embracing Neangir, he cried, 'Oh, my son, my son, have I found you at last? Do you not come from the house of Mohammed and Zinebi?'

'Yes, my lord,' replied Neangir, 'it was they who took care of me during my misfortune, and taught me by their example to be less worthy of belonging to you.'

'Blessed be the Prophet,' said the Bassa, 'who has restored one of my sons to me, at the time I least expected it! You know,' he continued, addressing the Cadi, 'that during the first years of my marriage I had three sons by the beautiful Zambac. When he was three years old a holy dervish gave the eldest a string of the finest coral, saying "Keep this treasure carefully, and be faithful to the Prophet, and you will be happy." To the second, who now stands before you, he presented a copper plate on which the name of Mahomet was engraved in seven languages, telling him never to part from his turban, which was the sign of a true believer, and he would taste the greatest of all joys; while on the right arm of the third the dervish clasped a bracelet with the prayer that his right hand should be pure and the left spotless, so that he might never know sorrow.

'My eldest son neglected the counsel of the dervish and terrible troubles fell on him, as also on the youngest. To preserve the second from similar misfortunes I brought him up in a lonely place, under the care of a faithful servant named Gouloucou, while I was fighting the enemies of our Holy Faith. On my return from the wars I hastened to embrace my son, but both he and Gouloucou had vanished, and it is only a few months since that I learned that the boy was living with a man called Mohammed, whom I suspected of having stolen him. Tell me, my son, how it came about that you fell into his hands.'

'My lord,' replied Neangir, 'I can remember little of the early years of my life, save that I dwelt in a castle by the seashore with an old servant. I must have been about twelve years old when one day as we were out walking we met a man whose face was like that of this Jew, coming dancing towards us. Suddenly I felt myself growing faint. I tried to raise my hands to my head, but they had become stiff and hard. In a word, I had been changed into a copper pot, and my arms formed the handle. What happened to my companion I know not, but I was conscious that someone had picked me up, and was carrying me quickly away.

'After some days, or so it seemed to me, I was placed on the ground near a thick hedge, and when I heard my captor snoring beside me I resolved to make my escape. So I pushed my way among the thorns as well as I could, and walked on steadily for about an hour.

'You cannot imagine, my lord, how awkward it is to walk with three legs, especially when your knees are as stiff as mine were. At length after much difficulty I reached a market-garden, and hid myself deep down among the cabbages, where I passed a quiet night.

'The next morning, at sunrise, I felt some one stooping over me and examining me closely. "What have you got there, Zinebi?" said the voice of a man a little way off.

'"The most beautiful pot in the whole world," answered the woman beside me, "and who would have dreamed of finding it among my cabbages!"

'Mohammed lifted me from the ground and looked at me with admiration. That pleased me, for everyone likes to be admired, even if he is only a pot! And I was taken into the house and filled with water, and put on the fire to boil.

'For three years I led a quiet and useful life, being scrubbed bright every day by Zinebi, then a young and beautiful woman.

'One morning Zinebi set me on the fire, with a fine fillet of beef inside me to cook for dinner. Being afraid that some of the steam would escape through the lid, and that the taste of her stew would be spoilt, she looked about for something to put over the cover, but could see nothing handy but her husband's turban. She tied it firmly round the lid, and then left the room. For the first time during three years I began to feel the fire burning the soles of my feet, and moved away a little-- doing this with a great deal more ease than I had felt when making my escape to Mohammed's garden. I was somehow aware, too, that I was growing taller; in fact in a few minutes I was a man again.

'After the third hour of prayer Mohammed and Zinebi both returned, and you can guess their surprise at finding a young man in the kitchen instead of a copper pot! I told them my story, which at first they refused to believe, but in the end I succeeded in persuading them that I was speaking the truth. For two years more I lived with them, and was treated like their own son, till the day when they sent me to this city to seek my fortune. And now, my lords, here are the two letters which I found in my turban. Perhaps they may be another proof in favour of my story.'

Whilst Neangir was speaking, the blood from the Jew's wound had gradually ceased to flow; and at this moment there appeared in the doorway a lovely Jewess, about twenty-two years old, her hair and her dress all disordered, as if she had been flying from some great danger. In one hand she held two crutches of white wood, and was followed by two men. The first man Neangir knew to be the brother of the Jew he had struck with his sword, while in the second the young man thought he recognised the person who was standing by when he was changed into a pot. Both of these men had a wide linen band round their thighs and held stout sticks.

The Jewess approached the wounded man and laid the two crutches near him; then, fixing her eyes on him, she burst into tears.

'Unhappy Izouf,' she murmured, 'why do you suffer yourself to be led into such dangerous adventures? Look at the consequences, not only to yourself, but to your two brothers,' turning as she spoke to the men who had come in with her, and who had sunk down on the mat at the feet of the Jew.

The Bassa and his companions were struck both with the beauty of the Jewess and also with her words, and begged her to give them an explanation.

'My lords,' she said, 'my name is Sumi, and I am the daughter of Moizes, one of our most famous rabbis. I am the victim of my love for Izaf,' pointing to the man who had entered last, 'and in spite of his ingratitude, I cannot tear him from my heart. Cruel enemy of my life,' she continued turning to Izaf, 'tell these gentlemen your story and that of your brothers, and try to gain your pardon by repentance.'

'We all three were born at the same time,' said the Jew, obeying the command of Sumi at a sign from the Cadi, 'and are the sons of the famous Nathan Ben-Sadi, who gave us the names of Izif, Izouf, and Izaf. From our earliest years we were taught the secrets of magic, and as we were all born under the same stars we shared the same happiness and the same troubles.

'Our mother died before I can remember, and when we were fifteen our father was seized with a dangerous illness which no spells could cure. Feeling death draw near, he called us to his bedside and took leave of us in these words:

'"My sons, I have no riches to bequeath to you; my only wealth was those secrets of magic which you know. Some stones you already have, engraved with mystic signs, and long ago I taught you how to make others. But you still lack the most precious of all talismans--the three rings belonging to the daughters of Siroco. Try to get possession of them, but take heed on beholding these young girls that you do not fall under the power of their beauty. Their religion is different from yours, and further, they are the betrothed brides of the sons of the Bassa of the Sea. And to preserve you from a love which can bring you nothing but sorrow, I counsel you in time of peril to seek out the daughter of Moizes the Rabbi, who cherishes a hidden passion for Izaf, and possesses the Book of Spells, which her father himself wrote with the sacred ink that was used for the Talmud." So saying, our father fell back on his cushions and died, leaving us burning with desire for the three rings of the daughters of Siroco.

'No sooner were our sad duties finished than we began to make inquiries where these young ladies were to be found, and we learned after much trouble that Siroco, their father, had fought in many wars, and that his daughters, whose beauty was famous throughout all the land, were named Aurora, Argentine, and Zelida.'

At the second of these names, both the Bassa and his son gave a start of surprise, but they said nothing and Izaf went on with his story.

'The first thing to be done was to put on a disguise, and it was in the dress of foreign merchants that we at length approached the young ladies, taking care to carry with us a collection of fine stones which we had hired for the occasion. But alas! it was to no purpose that Nathan Ben-Sadi had warned us to close our hearts against their charms! The peerless Aurora was clothed in a garment of golden hue, studded all over with flashing jewels; the fair-haired Argentine wore a dress of silver, and the young Zelida, loveliest of them all, the costume of a Persian lady.

'Among other curiosities that we had brought with us, was a flask containing an elixir which had the quality of exciting love in the breasts of any man or woman who drank of it. This had been given me by the fair Sumi, who had used it herself and was full of wrath because I refused to drink it likewise, and so return her passion. I showed this liquid to the three maidens who were engaged in examining the precious stones, and choosing those that pleased them best; and I was in the act of pouring some in a crystal cup, when Zelida's eyes fell on a paper wrapped round the flask containing these words. "Beware lest you drink this water with any other man than him who will one day be your husband." "Ah, traitor!" she exclaimed, "what snare have you laid for me?" and glancing where her finger pointed I recognised the writing of Sumi.

'By this time my two brothers had already got possession of the rings of Aurora and Argentine in exchange for some merchandise which they coveted, and no sooner had the magic circles left their hands than the two sisters vanished completely, and in their place nothing was to be seen but a watch of gold and one of silver. At this instant the old slave whom we had bribed to let us enter the house, rushed into the room announcing the return of Zelida's father. My brothers, trembling with fright, hid the watches in their turbans, and while the slave was attending to Zelida, who had sunk fainting to the ground, we managed to make our escape.

'Fearing to be traced by the enraged Siroco, we did not dare to go back to the house where we lodged, but took refuge with Sumi.

'"Unhappy wretches!" cried she, "is it thus that you have followed the counsels of your father? This very morning I consulted my magic books, and saw you in the act of abandoning your hearts to the fatal passion which will one day be your ruin. No, do not think I will tamely bear this insult! It was I who wrote the letter which stopped Zelida in the act of drinking the elixir of love! As for you," she went on, turning to my brothers, "you do not yet know what those two watches will cost you! But you can learn it now, and the knowledge of the truth will only serve to render your lives still more miserable."

'As she spoke she held out the sacred book written by Moizes, and pointed to the following lines:

'"If at midnight the watches are wound with the key of gold and the key of silver, they will resume their proper shapes during the first hour of the day. They will always remain under the care of a woman, and will come back to her wherever they may be. And the woman appointed to guard them is the daughter of Moizes."

'My brothers were full of rage when they saw themselves outwitted, but there was no help for it. The watches were delivered up to Sumi and they went their way, while I remained behind curious to see what would happen.

'As night wore on Sumi wound up both watches, and when midnight struck Aurora and her sister made their appearance. They knew nothing of what had occurred and supposed they had just awakened from sleep, but when Sumi's story made them understand their terrible fate, they both sobbed with despair and were only consoled when Sumi promised never to forsake them. Then one o'clock sounded, and they became watches again.

'All night long I was a prey to vague fears, and I felt as if something unseen was pushing me on--in what direction I did not know. At dawn I rose and went out, meeting Izif in the street suffering from the same dread as myself. We agreed that Constantinople was no place for us any longer, and calling to Izouf to accompany us, we left the city together, but soon determined to travel separately, so that we might not be so easily recognised by the spies of Siroco.

'A few days later I found myself at the door of an old castle near the sea, before which a tall slave was pacing to and fro. The gift of one or two worthless jewels loosened his tongue, and he informed me that he was in the service of the son of the Bassa of the Sea, at that time making war in distant countries. The youth, he told me, had been destined from his boyhood to marry the daughter of Siroco, whose sisters were to be the brides of his brothers, and went on to speak of the talisman that his charge possessed. But I could think of nothing but the beautiful Zelida, and my passion, which I thought I had conquered, awoke in full force.

'In order to remove this dangerous rival from my path, I resolved to kidnap him, and to this end I began to act a madman, and to sing and dance loudly, crying to the slave to fetch the boy and let him see my tricks. He consented, and both were so diverted with my antics that they laughed till the tears ran down their cheeks, and even tried to imitate me. Then I declared I felt thirsty and begged the slave to fetch me some water, and while he was absent I advised the youth to take off his turban, so as to cool his head. He complied gladly, and in the twinkling of an eye was changed into a pot. A cry from the slave warned me that I had no time to lose if I would save my life, so I snatched up the pot and fled with it like the wind.

'You have heard, my lords, what became of the pot, so I will only say now that when I awoke it had disappeared; but I was partly consoled for its loss by finding my two brothers fast asleep not far from me. "How did you get here?" I inquired, "and what has happened to you since we parted?"

'"Alas!" replied Izouf, "we were passing a wayside inn from which came sounds of songs and laughter, and fools that we were--we entered and sat down. Circassian girls of great beauty were dancing for the amusement of several men, who not only received us politely, but placed us near the two loveliest maidens. Our happiness was complete, and time flew unknown to us, when one of the Circassians leaned forward and said to her sister, 'Their brother danced, and they must dance too.' What they meant by these words I know not, but perhaps you can tell us?"

'"I understand quite well," I replied. "They were thinking of the day that I stole the son of the Bassa, and had danced before him."

'"Perhaps you are right," continued Izouf, "for the two ladies took our hands and danced with us till we were quite exhausted, and when at last we sat down a second time to table we drank more wine than was good for us. Indeed, our heads grew so confused, that when the men jumped up and threatened to kill us, we could make no resistance and suffered ourselves to be robbed of everything we had about us, including the most precious possession of all, the two talismans of the daughters of Siroco."

'Not knowing what else to do, we all three returned to Constantinople to ask the advice of Sumi, and found that she was already aware of our misfortunes, having read about them in the book of Moizes. The kind-hearted creature wept bitterly at our story, but, being poor herself, could give us little help. At last I proposed that every morning we should sell the silver watch into which Argentine was changed, as it would return to Sumi every evening unless it was wound up with the silver key-- which was not at all likely. Sumi consented, but only on the condition that we would never sell the watch without ascertaining the house where it was to be found, so that she might also take Aurora thither, and thus Argentine would not be alone if by any chance she was wound up at the mystic hour. For some weeks now we have lived by this means, and the two daughters of Siroco have never failed to return to Sumi each night. Yesterday Izouf sold the silver watch to this young man, and in the evening placed the gold watch on the steps by order of Sumi, just before his customer entered the house; from which both watches came back early this morning.'

'If I had only known!' cried Neangir. 'If I had had more presence of mind, I should have seen the lovely Argentine, and if her portrait is so fair, what must the original be!'

'It was not your fault,' replied the Cadi, 'you are no magician; and who could guess that the watch must be wound at such an hour? But I shall give orders that the merchant is to hand it over to you, and this evening you will certainly not forget.'

'It is impossible to let you have it to-day,' answered Izouf, 'for it is already sold.'

'If that is so,' said the Cadi, 'you must return the three gold pieces which the young man paid.'

The Jew, delighted to get off so easily, put his hand in his pocket, when Neangir stopped him.

'No, no,' he exclaimed, 'it is not money I want, but the adorable Argentine; without her everything is valueless.'

'My dear Cadi,' said the Bassa, 'he is right. The treasure that my son has lost is absolutely priceless.'

'My lord,' replied the Cadi, 'your wisdom is greater than mine. Give judgment I pray you in the matter.'

So the Bassa desired them all to accompany him to his house, and commanded his slaves not to lose sight of the three Jewish brothers.

When they arrived at the door of his dwelling, he noticed two women sitting on a bench close by, thickly veiled and beautifully dressed. Their wide satin trousers were embroidered in silver, and their muslin robes were of the finest texture. In the hand of one was a bag of pink silk tied with green ribbons, containing something that seemed to move.

At the approach of the Bassa both ladies rose, and came towards him. Then the one who held the bag addressed him saying, 'Noble lord, buy, I pray you, this bag, without asking to see what it contains.'

'How much do you want for it?' asked the Bassa.

'Three hundred sequins,' replied the unknown.

At these words the Bassa laughed contemptuously, and passed on without speaking.

'You will not repent of your bargain,' went on the woman. 'Perhaps if we come back to-morrow you will be glad to give us the four hundred sequins we shall then ask. And the next day the price will be five hundred.'

'Come away,' said her companion, taking hold of her sleeve. 'Do not let us stay here any longer. It may cry, and then our secret will be discovered.' And so saying, the two young women disappeared.

The Jews were left in the front hall under the care of the slaves, and Neangir and Sumi followed the Bassa inside the house, which was magnificently furnished. At one end of a large, brilliantly-lighted room a lady of about thirty-five years old reclined on a couch, still beautiful in spite of the sad expression of her face.

'Incomparable Zambac,' said the Bassa, going up to her, 'give me your thanks, for here is the lost son for whom you have shed so many tears,' but before his mother could clasp him in her arms Neangir had flung himself at her feet.

'Let the whole house rejoice with me,' continued the Bassa, 'and let my two sons Ibrahim and Hassan be told, that they may embrace their brother.'

'Alas! my lord!' said Zambac, 'do you forget that this is the hour when Hassan weeps on his hand, and Ibrahim gathers up his coral beads?'

'Let the command of the Prophet be obeyed,' replied the Bassa; 'then we will wait till the evening.'

'Forgive me, noble lord,' interrupted Sumi, 'but what is this mystery? With the help of the Book of Spells perhaps I may be of some use in the matter.'

'Sumi,' answered the Bassa, 'I owe you already the happiness of my life; come with me then, and the sight of my unhappy sons will tell you of our trouble better than any words of mine.'

The Bassa rose from his divan and drew aside the hangings leading to a large hall, closely followed by Neangir and Sumi. There they saw two young men, one about seventeen, and the other nineteen years of age. The younger was seated before a table, his forehead resting on his right hand, which he was watering with his tears. He raised his head for a moment when his father entered, and Neangir and Sumi both saw that this hand was of ebony.

The other young man was occupied busily in collecting coral beads which were scattered all over the floor of the room, and as he picked them up he placed them on the same table where his brother was sitting. He had already gathered together ninety-eight beads, and thought they were all there, when they suddenly rolled off the table and he had to begin his work over again.

'Do you see,' whispered the Bassa, 'for three hours daily one collects these coral beads, and for the same space of time the other laments over his hand which has become black, and I am wholly ignorant what is the cause of either misfortune.'

'Do not let us stay here,' said Sumi, 'our presence must add to their grief. But permit me to fetch the Book of Spells, which I feel sure will tell us not only the cause of their malady but also its cure.'

The Bassa readily agreed to Sumi's proposal, but Neangir objected strongly. 'If Sumi leaves us,' he said to his father, 'I shall not see my beloved Argentine when she returns to-night with the fair Aurora. And life is an eternity till I behold her.'

'Be comforted,' replied Sumi. 'I will be back before sunset; and I leave you my adored Izaf as a pledge.'

Scarcely had the Jewess left Neangir, when the old female slave entered the hall where the three Jews still remained carefully guarded, followed by a man whose splendid dress prevented Neangir from recognising at first as the person in whose house he had dined two days before. But the woman he knew at once to be the nurse of Zelida.

He started eagerly forward, but before he had time to speak the slave turned to the soldier she was conducting. 'My lord,' she said, 'those are the men; I have tracked them from the house of the Cadi to this palace. They are the same; I am not mistaken, strike and avenge yourself.'

As he listened the face of the stranger grew scarlet with anger. He drew his sword and in another moment would have rushed on the Jews, when Neangir and the slaves of the Bassa seized hold of him.

'What are you doing?' cried Neangir. 'How dare you attack those whom the Bassa has taken under his protection?'

'Ah, my son,' replied the soldier, 'the Bassa would withdraw his protection if he knew that these wretches have robbed me of all I have dearest in the world. He knows them as little as he knows you.'

'But he knows me very well,' replied Neangir, 'for he has recognised me as his son. Come with me now into his presence.'

The stranger bowed and passed through the curtain held back by Neangir, whose surprise was great at seeing his father spring forward and clasp the soldier in his arms.

'What! is it you, my dear Siroco?' cried he. 'I believed you had been slain in that awful battle when the followers of the Prophet were put to flight. But why do your eyes kindle with the flames they shot forth on that fearful day? Calm yourself and tell me what I can do to help you. See, I have found my son, let that be a good omen for your happiness also.'

'I did not guess,' answered Siroco, 'that the son you have so long mourned had come back to you. Some days since the Prophet appeared to me in a dream, floating in a circle of light, and he said to me, "Go to-morrow at sunset to the Galata Gate, and there you will find a young man whom you must bring home with you. He is the second son of your old friend the Bassa of the Sea, and that you may make no mistake, put your fingers in his turban and you will feel the plaque on which my name is engraved in seven different languages."'

'I did as I was bid,' went on Siroco, 'and so charmed was I with his face and manner that I caused him to fall in love with Argentine, whose portrait I gave him. But at the moment when I was rejoicing in the happiness before me, and looking forward to the pleasure of restoring you your son, some drops of the elixir of love were spilt on the table, and caused a thick vapour to arise, which hid everything. When it had cleared away he was gone. This morning my old slave informed me that she had discovered the traitors who had stolen my daughters from me, and I hastened hither to avenge them. But I place myself in your hands, and will follow your counsel.'

'Fate will favour us, I am sure,' said the Bassa, 'for this very night I expect to secure both the silver and the gold watch. So send at once and pray Zelida to join us.'

A rustling of silken stuffs drew their eyes to the door, and Ibrahim and Hassan, whose daily penance had by this time been performed, entered to embrace their brother. Neangir and Hassan, who had also drunk of the elixir of love, could think of nothing but the beautiful ladies who had captured their hearts, while the spirits of Ibrahim had been cheered by the news that the daughter of Moizes hoped to find in the Book of Spells some charm to deliver him from collecting the magic beads.

It was some hours later that Sumi returned, bringing with her the sacred book.

'See,' she said, beckoning to Hassan, 'your destiny is written here.' And Hassan stooped and read these words in Hebrew. 'His right hand has become black as ebony from touching the fat of an impure animal, and will remain so till the last of its race is drowned in the sea.'

'Alas!' sighed the unfortunate youth. 'It now comes back to my memory. One day the slave of Zambac was making a cake. She warned me not to touch, as the cake was mixed with lard, but I did not heed her, and in an instant my hand became the ebony that it now is.'

'Holy dervish!' exclaimed the Bassa, 'how true were your words! My son has neglected the advice you gave him on presenting him the bracelet, and he has been severely punished. But tell me, O wise Sumi, where I can find the last of the accursed race who has brought this doom on my son?'

'It is written here,' replied Sumi, turning over some leaves. 'The little black pig is in the pink bag carried by the two Circassians.'

When he read this the Bassa sank on his cushions in despair.

'Ah,' he said, 'that is the bag that was offered me this morning for three hundred sequins. Those must be the women who caused Izif and Izouf to dance, and took from them the two talismans of the daughters of Siroco. They only can break the spell that has been cast on us. Let them be found and I will gladly give them the half of my possessions. Idiot that I was to send them away!'

While the Bassa was bewailing his folly, Ibrahim in his turn had opened the book, and blushed deeply as he read the words: 'The chaplet of beads has been defiled by the game of "Odd and Even." Its owner has tried to cheat by concealing one of the numbers. Let the faithless Moslem seek for ever the missing bead.'

'O heaven,' cried Ibrahim, 'that unhappy day rises up before me. I had cut the thread of the chaplet, while playing with Aurora. Holding the ninety-nine beads in my hand she guessed "Odd," and in order that she might lose I let one bead fall from my hand. Since then I have sought it daily, but it never has been found.'

'Holy dervish!' cried the Bassa, 'how true were your words! From the time that the sacred chaplet was no longer complete, my son has borne the penalty. But may not the Book of Spells teach us how to deliver Ibrahim also?'

'Listen,' said Sumi, 'this is what I find: "The coral bead lies in the fifth fold of the dress of yellow brocade."' 'Ah, what good fortune!' exclaimed the Bassa; 'we shall shortly see the beautiful Aurora, and Ibrahim shall at once search in the fifth fold of her yellow brocade. For it is she no doubt of whom the book speaks.'

As the Jewess closed the Book of Moizes, Zelida appeared, accompanied by a whole train of slaves and her old nurse. At her entrance Hassan, beside himself with joy, flung himself on his knees and kissed her hand.

'My lord,' he said to the Bassa, 'pardon me these transports. No elixir of love was needed to inflame my heart! Let the marriage rite make us speedily one.'

'My son, are you mad?' asked the Bassa. 'As long as the misfortunes of your brothers last, shall you alone be happy? And whoever heard of a bridegroom with a black hand? Wait yet a little longer, till the black pig is drowned in the sea.'

'Yes! dear Hassan,' said Zelida, 'our happiness will be increased tenfold when my sisters have regained their proper shapes. And here is the elixir which I have brought with me, so that their joy may equal ours.' And she held out the flask to the Bassa, who had it closed in his presence.

Zambac was filled with joy at the sight of Zelida, and embraced her with delight. Then she led the way into the garden, and invited all her friends to seat themselves under the thick overhanging branches of a splendid jessamine tree. No sooner, however, were they comfortably settled, than they were astonished to hear a man's voice, speaking angrily on the other side of the wall.

'Ungrateful girls!' it said, 'is this the way you treat me? Let me hide myself for ever! This cave is no longer dark enough or deep enough for me.'

A burst of laughter was the only answer, and the voice continued, 'What have I done to earn such contempt? Was this what you promised me when I managed to get for you the talismans of beauty? Is this the reward I have a right to expect when I have bestowed on you the little black pig, who is certain to bring you good luck?'

At these words the curiosity of the listeners passed all bounds, and the Bassa commanded his slaves instantly to tear down the wall. It was done, but the man was nowhere to be seen, and there were only two girls of extraordinary beauty, who seemed quite at their ease, and came dancing gaily on to the terrace. With them was an old slave in whom the Bassa recognised Gouloucou, the former guardian of Neangir.

Gouloucou shrank with fear when he saw the Bassa, as he expected nothing less than death at his hands for allowing Neangir to be snatched away. But the Bassa made him signs of forgiveness, and asked him how he had escaped death when he had thrown himself from the cliff. Gouloucou explained that he had been picked up by a dervish who had cured his wounds, and had then given him as slave to the two young ladies now before the company, and in their service he had remained ever since.

'But,' said the Bassa, 'where is the little black pig of which the voice spoke just now?'

'My lord,' answered one of the ladies, 'when at your command the wall was thrown down, the man whom you heard speaking was so frightened at the noise that he caught up the pig and ran away.'

'Let him be pursued instantly,' cried the Bassa; but the ladies smiled.

'Do not be alarmed, my lord,' said one, 'he is sure to return. Only give orders that the entrance to the cave shall be guarded, so that when he is once in he shall not get out again.'

By this time night was falling and they all went back to the palace, where coffee and fruits were served in a splendid gallery, near the women's apartments. The Bassa then ordered the three Jews to be brought before him, so that he might see whether these were the two damsels who had forced them to dance at the inn, but to his great vexation it was found that when their guards had gone to knock down the wall the Jews had escaped.

At this news the Jewess Sumi turned pale, but glancing at the Book of Spells her face brightened, and she said half aloud, 'There is no cause for disquiet; they will capture the dervish,' while Hassan lamented loudly that as soon as fortune appeared on one side she fled on the other!

On hearing this reflection one of the Bassa's pages broke into a laugh. 'This fortune comes to us dancing my lord,' said he, 'and the other leaves us on crutches. Do not be afraid. She will not go very far.'

The Bassa, shocked at his impertinent interference, desired him to leave the room and not to come back till he was sent for.

'My lord shall be obeyed,' said the page, 'but when I return, it shall be in such good company that you will welcome me gladly.' So saying, he went out.

When they were alone, Neangir turned to the fair strangers and implored their help. 'My brothers and myself,' he cried, 'are filled with love for three peerless maidens, two of whom are under a cruel spell. If their fate happened to be in your hands, would you not do all in your power to restore them to happiness and liberty?'

But the young man's appeal only stirred the two ladies to anger. 'What,' exclaimed one, 'are the sorrows of lovers to us? Fate has deprived us of our lovers, and if it depends on us the whole world shall suffer as much as we do!'

This unexpected reply was heard with amazement by all present, and the Bassa entreated the speaker to tell them her story. Having obtained permission of her sister, she began:

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f21]

The Story of the Fair Circassians

'We were born in Circassia of poor people, and my sister's name is Tezila and mine Dely. Having nothing but our beauty to help us in life, we were carefully trained in all the accomplishments that give pleasure. We were both quick to learn, and from our childhood could play all sorts of instruments, could sing, and above all could dance. We were besides, lively and merry, as in spite of our misfortunes we are to this day.

'We were easily pleased and quite content with our lives at home, when one morning the officials who had been sent to find wives for the Sultan saw us, and were struck with our beauty. We had always expected something of the sort, and were resigned to our lot, when we chanced to see two young men enter our house. The elder, who was about twenty years of age, had black hair and very bright eyes. The other could not have been more than fifteen, and was so fair that he might easily have passed for a girl.

'They knocked at the door with a timid air and begged our parents to give them shelter, as they had lost their way. After some hesitation their request was granted, and they were invited into the room in which we were. And if our parents' hearts were touched by their beauty, our own were not any harder, so that our departure for the palace, which had been arranged for the next day, suddenly became intolerable to us.

'Night came, and I awoke from my sleep to find the younger of the two strangers sitting at my bedside and felt him take my hand.

'"Fear nothing, lovely Dely," he whispered, "from one who never knew love till he saw you. My name," he went on, "is Prince Delicate, and I am the son of the king of the Isle of Black Marble. My friend, who travels with me, is one of the richest nobles of my country, and the secrets which he knows are the envy of the Sultan himself. And we left our native country because my father wished me to marry a lady of great beauty, but with one eye a trifle smaller than the other."

'My vanity was flattered at so speedy a conquest, and I was charmed with the way the young man had declared his passion. I turned my eyes slowly on him, and the look I gave him caused him almost to lose his senses. He fell fainting forward, and I was unable to move till Tezila, who had hastily put on a dress, ran to my assistance together with Thelamis, the young noble of whom the Prince had spoken.

'As soon as we were all ourselves again we began to bewail our fate, and the journey that we were to take that very day to Constantinople. But we felt a little comforted when Thelamis assured us that he and the prince would follow in our steps, and would somehow contrive to speak to us. Then they kissed our hands, and left the house by a side-way.

'A few moments later our parents came to tell us that the escort had arrived, and having taken farewell of them we mounted the camels, and took our seats in a kind of box that was fixed to the side of the animal. These boxes were large enough for us to sleep in comfortably, and as there was a window in the upper part, we were able to see the country through which we passed.

'For several days we journeyed on, feeling sad and anxious as to what might become of us, when one day as I was looking out of the window of our room, I heard my name called, and beheld a beautifully dressed girl jumping out of the box on the other side of our camel. One glance told me that it was the prince, and my heart bounded with joy. It was, he said, Thelamis's idea to disguise him like this, and that he himself had assumed the character of a slave-dealer who was taking this peerless maiden as a present to the Sultan. Thelamis had also persuaded the officer in charge of the caravan to let him hire the vacant box, so it was easy for the prince to scramble out of his own window and approach ours.

This ingenious trick enchanted us, but our agreeable conversation was soon interrupted by the attendants, who perceived that the camel was walking in a crooked manner and came to find out what was wrong. Luckily they were slow in their movements, and the prince had just time to get back to his own box and restore the balance, before the trick was discovered.

'But neither the prince nor his friend had any intention of allowing us to enter the Sultan's palace, though it was difficult to know how we were to escape, and what was to become of us when once we had escaped. At length, one day as we were drawing near Constantinople, we learned from the prince that Thelamis had made acquaintance with a holy dervish whom he had met on the road, and had informed him that we were his sisters, who were being sold as slaves against his will. The good man was interested in the story, and readily agreed to find us shelter if we could manage to elude the watchfulness of our guards. The risk was great, but it was our only chance.

'That night, when the whole caravan was fast asleep, we raised the upper part of our boxes and by the help of Thelamis climbed silently out. We next went back some distance along the way we had come, then, striking into another road, reached at last the retreat prepared for us by the dervish. Here we found food and rest, and I need not say what happiness it was to be free once more.

'The dervish soon became a slave to our beauty, and the day after our escape he proposed that we should allow him to conduct us to an inn situated at a short distance, where we should find two Jews, owners of precious talismans which did not really belong to them. "Try," said the dervish, "by some means to get possession of them."

'The inn, though not on the direct road to Constantinople, was a favourite one with merchants, owing to the excellence of the food, and on our arrival we discovered at least six or eight other people who had stopped for refreshment. They greeted us politely, and we sat down to table together.

'In a short time the two men described by the dervish entered the room, and at a sign from him my sister made room at her side for one, while I did the same for the other.

'Now the dervish had happened to mention that "their brother had danced." At the moment we paid no attention to this remark, but it came back to our minds now, and we determined that they should dance also. To accomplish this we used all our arts and very soon bent them to our wills, so that they could refuse us nothing. At the end of the day we remained possessors of the talismans and had left them to their fate, while the prince and Thelamis fell more in love with us than ever, and declared that we were more lovely than any women in the world.

'The sun had set before we quitted the inn, and we had made no plans as to where we should go next, so we readily consented to the prince's proposal that we should embark without delay for the Isle of Black Marble. What a place it was! Rocks blacker than jet towered above its shores and shed thick darkness over the country. Our sailors had not been there before and were nearly as frightened as ourselves, but thanks to Thelamis, who undertook to be our pilot, we landed safely on the beach.

'When we had left the coast behind us, with its walls of jet, we entered a lovely country where the fields were greener, the streams clearer, and the sun brighter than anywhere else. The people crowded round to welcome their prince, whom they loved dearly, but they told him that the king was still full of rage at his son's refusal to marry his cousin the Princess Okimpare, and also at his flight. Indeed, they all begged him not to visit the capital, as his life would hardly be safe. So, much as I should have enjoyed seeing the home of my beloved prince, I implored him to listen to this wise advice and to let us all go to Thelamis's palace in the middle of a vast forest.

'To my sister and myself, who had been brought up in a cottage, this house of Thelamis's seemed like fairyland. It was built of pink marble, so highly polished that the flowers and streams surrounding it were reflected as in a mirror. One set of rooms was furnished especially for me in yellow silk and silver, to suit my black hair. Fresh dresses were provided for us every day, and we had slaves to wait on us. Ah, why could not this happiness have lasted for ever!

'The peace of our lives was troubled by Thelamis's jealousy of my sister, as he could not endure to see her on friendly terms with the prince, though knowing full well that his heart was mine. Every day we had scenes of tender reproaches and of explanations, but Tezila's tears never failed to bring Thelamis to his knees, with prayers for forgiveness.

'We had been living in this way for some months when one day the news came that the king had fallen dangerously ill. I begged the prince to hurry at once to the Court, both to see his father and also to show himself to the senators and nobles, but as his love for me was greater than his desire of a crown, he hesitated as if foreseeing all that afterwards happened. At last Tezila spoke to him so seriously in Thelamis's presence, that he determined to go, but promised that he would return before night.

'Night came but no prince, and Tezila, who had been the cause of his departure, showed such signs of uneasiness that Thelamis's jealousy was at once awakened. As for me, I cannot tell what I suffered. Not being able to sleep I rose from my bed and wandered into the forest, along the road which he had taken so many hours before. Suddenly I heard in the distance the sound of a horse's hoofs, and in a few moments the prince had flung himself down and was by my side. "Ah, how I adore you!" he exclaimed; "Thelamis's love will never equal mine." The words were hardly out of his mouth when I heard a slight noise behind, and before we could turn round both our heads were rolling in front of us, while the voice of Thelamis cried:

'"Perjured wretches, answer me; and you, faithless Tezila, tell me why you have betrayed me like this?"

'Then I understood what had happened, and that, in his rage, he had mistaken me for my sister.

'"Alas," replied my head in weak tones, "I am not Tezila, but Dely, whose life you have destroyed, as well as that of your friend." At this Thelamis paused and seemed to reflect for an instant.

'"Be not frightened," he said more quietly, "I can make you whole again," and laying a magic powder on our tongues he placed our heads on our necks. In the twinkling of an eye our heads were joined to our bodies without leaving so much as a scar; only that, blinded with rage as he still was, Thelamis had placed my head on the prince's body, and his on mine!

'I cannot describe to you how odd we both felt at this strange transformation. We both instinctively put up our hands--he to feel his hair, which was, of course, dressed like a woman's, and I to raise the turban which pressed heavily on my forehead. But we did not know what had happened to us, for the night was still dark.

'At this point Tezila appeared, followed by a troop of slaves bearing flowers. It was only by the light of their torches that we understood what had occurred. Indeed the first thought of both of us was that we must have changed clothes.

'Now in spite of what we may say, we all prefer our own bodies to those of anybody else, so notwithstanding our love for each other, at first we could not help feeling a little cross with Thelamis. However, so deep was the prince's passion for me, that very soon he began to congratulate himself on the change. " My happiness is perfect," he said; "my heart, beautiful Dely, has always been yours, and now I have your head also."

'But though the prince made the best of it, Thelamis was much ashamed of his stupidity. "I have," he said hesitatingly, "two other pastilles which have the same magic properties as those I used before. Let me cut off your heads again, and that will put matters straight." The proposal sounded tempting, but was a little risky, and after consulting together we decided to let things remain as they were. "Do not blame me then," continued Thelamis, "if you will not accept my offer. But take the two pastilles, and if it ever happens that you are decapitated a second time, make use of them in the way I have shown you, and each will get back his own head." So saying he presented us with the pastilles, and we all returned to the castle.

'However, the troubles caused by the unfortunate exchange were only just beginning. My head, without thinking what it was doing, led the prince's body to my apartments. But my women, only looking at the dress, declared I had mistaken the corridor, and called some slaves to conduct me to his highness's rooms. This was bad enough, but when--as it was still night my servants began to undress me, I nearly fainted from surprise and confusion, and no doubt the prince's head was suffering in the same manner at the other end of the castle!

'By the next morning--you will easily guess that we slept but little--we had grown partly accustomed to our strange situation, and when we looked in the mirror, the prince had become brown-skinned and black-haired, while my head was covered with his curly golden locks. And after that first day, everyone in the palace had become so accustomed to the change that they thought no more about it.

'Some weeks after this, we heard that the king of the Isle of Black Marble was dead. The prince's head, which once was mine, was full of ambitious desires, and he longed to ride straight to the capital and proclaim himself king. But then came the question as to whether the nobles would recognise the prince with a girl's body, and indeed, when we came to think of it, which was prince and which was girl?

'At last, after much argument, my head carried the day and we set out; but only to find that the king had declared the Princess Okimpare his successor. The greater part of the senators and nobles openly professed that they would much have preferred the rightful heir, but as they could not recognise him either in the prince or me, they chose to consider us as impostors and threw us into prison.

'A few days later Tezila and Thelamis, who had followed us to the capital, came to tell us that the new queen had accused us of high treason, and had herself been present at our trial--which was conducted without us. They had been in mortal terror as to what would be our sentence, but by a piece of extraordinary luck we had been condemned to be beheaded.

'I told my sister that I did not see exactly where the luck came in, but Thelamis interrupted me rudely:

'"What!" he cried, "of course I shall make use of the pastilles, and--" but here the officers arrived to lead us to the great square where the execution was to take place--for Okimpare was determined there should be no delay.

'The square was crowded with people of all ages and all ranks, and in the middle a platform had been erected on which was the scaffold, with the executioner, in a black mask, standing by. At a sign from him I mounted first, and in a moment my head was rolling at his feet. With a bound my sister and Thelamis were beside me, and like lightning Thelamis seized the sabre from the headsman, and cut off the head of the prince. And before the multitude had recovered from their astonishment at these strange proceedings, our bodies were joined to our right heads, and the pastilles placed on our tongues. Then Thelamis led the prince to the edge of the platform and presented him to the people, saying, "Behold your lawful king."

'Shouts of joy rent the air at the sound of Thelamis's words, and the noise reached Okimpare in the palace. Smitten with despair at the news, she fell down unconscious on her balcony, and was lifted up by the slaves and taken back to her own house.

'Meanwhile our happiness was all turned to sorrow. I had rushed up to the prince to embrace him fondly, when he suddenly grew pale and staggered.

'"I die faithful to you," he murmured, turning his eyes towards me, "and I die a king!" and leaning his head on my shoulder he expired quietly, for one of the arteries in his neck had been cut through.

'Not knowing what I did I staggered towards the sabre which was lying near me, with the intention of following my beloved prince as speedily as possible. And when Thelamis seized my hand (but only just in time), in my madness I turned the sabre upon him, and he fell struck through the heart at my feet.' The whole company were listening to the story with breathless attention, when it became plain that Dely could go no further, while Tezila had flung herself on a heap of cushions and hidden her face. Zambac ordered her women to give them all the attention possible, and desired they should be carried into her own rooms.

When the two sisters were in this condition, Ibrahim, who was a very prudent young man, suggested to his parents that, as the two Circassians were both unconscious, it would be an excellent opportunity to search them and see if the talismans belonging to the daughters of Siroco were concealed about their persons. But the Bassa, shocked at the notion of treating his guests in so inhospitable a manner, refused to do anything of the kind, adding that the next day he hoped to persuade them to give the talismans up of their own free will.

By this time it was nearly midnight and Neangir, who was standing near the Jewess Sumi, drew out the portrait of Argentine, and heard with delight that she was even more beautiful than her picture. Everyone was waiting on tip-toe for the appearance of the two watches, who were expected when the clock struck twelve to come in search of Sumi, and that there might be no delay the Bassa ordered all the doors to be flung wide open. It was done, and there entered not the longed-for watches, but the page who had been sent away in disgrace.

Then the Bassa arose in wrath. 'Azemi,' he said, 'did I not order you to stand no more in my presence?'

'My lord,' replied Azemi, modestly, 'I was hidden outside the door, listening to the tale of the two Circassians. And as I know you are fond of stories, give me also leave to tell you one. I promise you it shall not be long.'

'Speak on,' replied the Bassa, 'but take heed what you say.'

'My lord,' began Azemi, 'this morning I was walking in the town when I noticed a man going in the same direction followed by a slave. He entered a baker's shop, where he bought some bread which he gave to the slave to carry. I watched him and saw that he purchased many other kinds of provisions at other places, and when the slave could carry no more his master commanded him to return home and have supper ready at midnight.

'When left alone the man went up the street, and turning into a jeweller's shop, brought out a watch that as far as I could see was made of silver. He walked on a few steps, then stooped and picked up a gold watch which lay at his feet. At this point I ran up and told him that if he did not give me half its price I would report him to the Cadi; he agreed, and conducting me to his house produced four hundred sequins, which he said was my share, and having got what I wanted I went away.

'As it was the hour for attending on my lord I returned home and accompanied you to the Cadi, where I heard the story of the three Jews and learned the importance of the two watches I had left at the stranger's. I hastened to his house, but he had gone out, and I could only find the slave, whom I told that I was the bearer of important news for his master. Believing me to be one of his friends, he begged me to wait, and showed me into a room where I saw the two watches lying on the table. I put them in my pocket, leaving the four hundred sequins in place of the gold watch and three gold pieces which I knew to be the price of the other. As you know the watches never remain with the person who buys them, this man may think himself very lucky to get back his money. I have wound them both up, and at this instant Aurora and Argentine are locked safely into my own room.'

Everybody was so delighted to hear this news that Azemi was nearly stifled with their embraces, and Neangir could hardly be prevented from running to break in the door, though he did not even know where the page slept.

But the page begged to have the honour of fetching the ladies himself, and soon returned leading them by the hand.

For some minutes all was a happy confusion, and Ibrahim took advantage of it to fall on his knees before Aurora, and search in the fifth fold of her dress for the missing coral bead. The Book of Spells had told the truth; there it was, and as the chaplet was now complete the young man's days of seeking were over.

In the midst of the general rejoicing Hassan alone bore a gloomy face.

'Alas!' he said, 'everyone is happy but the miserable being you see before you. I have lost the only consolation in my grief, which was to feel that I had a brother in misfortune!'

'Be comforted,' replied the Bassa; 'sooner or later the dervish who stole the pink bag is sure to be found.'

Supper was then served, and after they had all eaten of rare fruits which seemed to them the most delicious in the whole world, the Bassa ordered the flask containing the elixir of love to be brought and the young people to drink of it. Then their eyes shone with a new fire, and they swore to be true to each other till death.

This ceremony was scarcely over when the clock struck one, and in an instant Aurora and Argentine had vanished, and in the place where they stood lay two watches. Silence fell upon all the company--they had forgotten the enchantment; then the voice of Azemi was heard asking if he might be allowed to take charge of the watches till the next day, pledging his head to end their enchantment. With the consent of Sumi, this was granted, and the Bassa gave Azemi a purse containing a thousand sequins, as a reward for the services he had already rendered to them. After this everybody went to his own apartment.

Azemi had never possessed so much money before, and never closed his eyes for joy the whole night long. Very early he got up and went into the garden, thinking how he could break the enchantment of the daughters of Siroco. Suddenly the soft tones of a woman fell on his ear, and peeping through the bushes he saw Tezila, who was arranging flowers in her sister's hair. The rustling of the leaves caused Dely to start; she jumped up as if to fly, but Azemi implored her to remain and begged her to tell him what happened to them after the death of their lovers, and how they had come to find the dervish.

'The punishment decreed to us by the Queen Okimpare,' answered Dely, 'was that we were to dance and sing in the midst of our sorrow, at a great fete which was to be held that very day for all her people. This cruel command nearly turned our brains, and we swore a solemn oath to make all lovers as wretched as we were ourselves. In this design we succeeded so well that in a short time the ladies of the capital came in a body to Okimpare, and prayed her to banish us from the kingdom, before their lives were made miserable for ever. She consented, and commanded us to be placed on board a ship, with our slave Gouloucou.

'On the shore we saw an old man who was busily engaged in drowning some little black pigs, talking to them all the while, as if they could understand him.

'"Accursed race," said he, "it is you who have caused all the misfortunes of him to whom I gave the magic bracelet. Perish all of you!"

'We drew near from curiosity, and recognised in him the dervish who had sheltered us on our first escape from the caravan.

'When the old man discovered who we were he was beside himself with pleasure, and offered us a refuge in the cave where he lived. We gladly accepted his offer, and to the cave we all went, taking with us the last little pig, which he gave us as a present.

'"The Bassa of the Sea," he added, "will pay you anything you like to ask for it."

'Without asking why it was so precious I took the pig and placed it in my work bag, where it has been ever since. Only yesterday we offered it to the Bassa, who laughed at us, and this so enraged us against the dervish that we cut off his beard when he was asleep, and now he dare not show himself.'

'Ah,' exclaimed the page, 'it is not fitting that such beauty should waste itself in making other people miserable. Forget the unhappy past and think only of the future. And accept, I pray you, this watch, to mark the brighter hours in store.' So saying he laid the watch upon her knee. Then he turned to Tezila. 'And you fair maiden, permit me to offer you this other watch. True it is only of silver, but it is all I have left to give. And I feel quite sure that you must have somewhere a silver seal, that will be exactly the thing to go with it.'

'Why, so you have,' cried Dely; 'fasten your silver seal to your watch, and I will hang my gold one on to mine.'

The seals were produced, and, as Azemi had guessed, they were the talismans which the two Circassians had taken from Izif and Izouf, mounted in gold and silver. As quick as lightning the watches slid from the hands of Tezila and her sister, and Aurora and Argentine stood before them, each with her talisman on her finger.

At first they seemed rather confused themselves at the change which had taken place, and the sunlight which they had not seen for so long, but when gradually they understood that their enchantment had come to an end, they could find no words to express their happiness.

The Circassians could with difficulty be comforted for the loss of the talismans, but Aurora and Argentine entreated them to dry their tears, as their father, Siroco, who was governor of Alexandria, would not fail to reward them in any manner they wished. This promise was soon confirmed by Siroco himself, who came into the garden with the Bassa and his two sons, and was speedily joined by the ladies of the family. Only Hassan was absent. It was the hour in which he was condemned to bewail his ebony hand.

To the surprise of all a noise was at this moment heard in a corner of the terrace, and Hassan himself appeared surrounded by slaves, clapping his hands and shouting with joy. 'I was weeping as usual,' cried he, 'when all at once the tears refused to come to my eyes, and on looking down at my hand I saw that its blackness had vanished. And now, lovely Zelida, nothing prevents me any longer from offering you the hand, when the heart has been yours always.'

But though Hassan never thought of asking or caring what had caused his cure, the others were by no means so indifferent. It was quite clear that the little black pig must be dead--but how, and when? To this the slaves answered that they had seen that morning a man pursued by three others, and that he had taken refuge in the cavern which they had been left to guard. Then, in obedience to orders, they had rolled a stone over the entrance.

Piercing shrieks interrupted their story, and a man, whom the Circassians saw to be the old dervish, rushed round the corner of the terrace with the three Jews behind him. When the fugitive beheld so many people collected together, he turned down another path, but the slaves captured all four and brought them before their master.

What was the surprise of the Bassa when he beheld in the old dervish the man who had given the chaplet, the copper plaque, and the bracelet to his three sons. 'Fear nothing, holy father,' he said, 'you are safe with me. But tell us, how came you here?'

'My lord,' explained the dervish, 'when my beard was cut off during my sleep by the two Circassians, I was ashamed to appear before the eyes of men, and fled, bearing with me the pink silk bag. In the night these three men fell in with me, and we passed some time in conversation, but at dawn, when it was light enough to see each other's faces, one of them exclaimed that I was the dervish travelling with the two Circassians who had stolen the talismans from the Jews. I jumped up and tried to fly to my cave, but they were too quick for me, and just as we reached your garden they snatched the bag which contained the little black pig and flung it into the sea. By this act, which delivers your son, I would pray you to forgive them for any wrongs they may have done you--nay more, that you will recompense them for it.' The Bassa granted the holy man's request, and seeing that the two Jews had fallen victims to the charms of the Circassian ladies, gave his consent to their union, which was fixed to take place at the same time as that of Izaf with the wise Sumi. The Cadi was sent for, and the Jews exchanged the hats of their race for the turbans of the followers of the Prophet. Then, after so many misfortunes, the Bassa's three sons entreated their father to delay their happiness no longer, and the six marriages were performed by the Cadi at the hour of noon.

[Cabinet des Fees.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f22]

The Jackal and the Spring

Once upon a time all the streams and rivers ran so dry that the animals did not know how to get water. After a very long search, which had been quite in vain, they found a tiny spring, which only wanted to be dug deeper so as to yield plenty of water. So the beasts said to each other, 'Let us dig a well, and then we shall not fear to die of thirst;' and they all consented except the jackal, who hated work of any kind, and generally got somebody to do it for him.

When they had finished their well, they held a council as to who should be made the guardian of the well, so that the jackal might not come near it, for, they said, 'he would not work, therefore he shall not drink.'

After some talk it was decided that the rabbit should be left in charge; then all the other beasts went back to their homes.

When they were out of sight the jackal arrived. 'Good morning! Good morning, rabbit!' and the rabbit politely said, 'Good morning!' Then the jackal unfastened the little bag that hung at his side, and pulled out of it a piece of honeycomb which he began to eat, and turning to the rabbit he remarked:

'As you see, rabbit, I am not thirsty in the least, and this is nicer than any water.'

'Give me a bit,' asked the rabbit. So the jackal handed him a very little morsel.

'Oh, how good it is!' cried the rabbit; 'give me a little more, dear friend!'

But the jackal answered, 'If you really want me to give you some more, you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your back, so that I can pour it into your mouth.'

The rabbit did as he was bid, and when he was tied tight and popped on his back, the jackal ran to the spring and drank as much as he wanted. When he had quite finished he returned to his den.

In the evening the animals all came back, and when they saw the rabbit lying with his paws tied, they said to him: 'Rabbit, how did you let yourself be taken in like this?'

'It was all the fault of the jackal,' replied the rabbit; 'he tied me up like this, and told me he would give me something nice to eat. It was all a trick just to get at our water.'

'Rabbit, you are no better than an idiot to have let the jackal drink our water when he would not help to find it. Who shall be our next watchman? We must have somebody a little sharper than you!' and the little hare called out, 'I will be the watchman.'

The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving the little hare to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the jackal came back. 'Good morning! good morning, little hare,' and the little hare politely said, 'Good morning.'

'Can you give me a pinch of snuff?' said the jackal.

'I am so sorry, but I have none,' answered the little hare.

The jackal then came and sat down by the little hare, and unfastened his little bag, pulling out of it a piece of honeycomb. He licked his lips and exclaimed, 'Oh, little hare, if you only knew how good it is!'

'What is it?' asked the little hare.

'It is something that moistens my throat so deliciously,' answered the jackal, 'that after I have eaten it I don't feel thirsty any more, while I am sure that all you other beasts are for ever wanting water.'

'Give me a bit, dear friend,' asked the little hare.

'Not so fast,' replied the jackal. 'If you really wish to enjoy what you are eating, you must have your paws tied behind you, and lie on your back, so that I can pour it into your mouth.'

'You can tie them, only be quick,' said the little hare, and when he was tied tight and popped on his back, the jackal went quietly down to the well, and drank as much as he wanted. When he had quite finished he returned to his den.

In the evening the animals all came back; and when they saw the little hare with his paws tied, they said to him: 'Little hare, how did you let yourself be taken in like this? Didn't you boast you were very sharp? You undertook to guard our water; now show us how much is left for us to drink!'

'It is all the fault of the jackal,' replied the little hare. 'He told me he would give me something nice to eat if I would just let him tie my hands behind my back.'

Then the animals said, 'Who can we trust to mount guard now?' And the panther answered, 'Let it be the tortoise.'

The following morning the animals all went their various ways, leaving the tortoise to guard the spring. When they were out of sight the jackal came back. 'Good morning, tortoise; good morning.'

But the tortoise took no notice.

'Good morning, tortoise; good morning.' But still the tortoise pretended not to hear.

Then the jackal said to himself, 'Well, to-day I have only got to manage a bigger idiot than before. I shall just kick him on one side, and then go and have a drink.' So he went up to the tortoise and said to him in a soft voice, 'Tortoise! tortoise!' but the tortoise took no notice. Then the jackal kicked him out of the way, and went to the well and began to drink, but scarcely had he touched the water, than the tortoise seized him by the leg. The jackal shrieked out: 'Oh, you will break my leg!' but the tortoise only held on the tighter. The jackal then took his bag and tried to make the tortoise smell the honeycomb he had inside; but the tortoise turned away his head and smelt nothing. At last the jackal said to the tortoise, 'I should like to give you my bag and everything in it,' but the only answer the tortoise made was to grasp the jackal's leg tighter still.

So matters stood when the other animals came back. The moment he saw them, the jackal gave a violent tug, and managed to free his leg, and then took to his heels as fast as he could. And the animals all said to the tortoise:

'Well done, tortoise, you have proved your courage; now we can drink from our well in peace, as you have got the better of that thieving jackal!'

[Contes Populaires des Bassoutos, recueillis et traduits par E. Jacottet. Paris: Leroux, editeur.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f23]

The Bear

Once on a time there was a king who had an only daughter. He was so proud and so fond of her, that he was in constant terror that something would happen to her if she went outside the palace, and thus, owing to his great love for her, he forced her to lead the life of a prisoner, shut up within her own rooms.

The princess did not like this at all, and one day she complained about it very bitterly to her nurse. Now, the nurse was a witch, though the king did not know it. For some time she listened and tried to soothe the princess; but when she saw that she would not be comforted, she said to her: 'Your father loves you very dearly, as you know. Whatever you were to ask from him he would give you. The one thing he will not grant you is permission to leave the palace. Now, do as I tell you. Go to your father and ask him to give you a wooden wheel-barrow, and a bear's skin. When you have got them bring them to me, and I will touch them with my magic wand. The wheel-barrow will then move of itself, and will take you at full speed wherever you want to go, and the bear's skin will make such a covering for you, that no one will recognise you.'

So the princess did as the witch advised her. The king, when he heard her strange request, was greatly astonished, and asked her what she meant to do with a wheel-barrow and a bear's skin. And the princess answered, 'You never let me leave the house--at least you might grant me this request' So the king granted it, and the princess went back to her nurse, taking the barrow and the bear's skin with her.

As soon as the witch saw them, she touched them with her magic wand, and in a moment the barrow began to move about in all directions. The princess next put on the bear's skin, which so completely changed her appearance, that no one could have known that she was a girl and not a bear. In this strange attire she seated herself on the barrow, and in a few minutes she found herself far away from the palace, and moving rapidly through a great forest. Here she stopped the barrow with a sign that the witch had shown her, and hid herself and it in a thick grove of flowering shrubs.

Now it happened that the prince of that country was hunting with his dogs in the forest. Suddenly he caught sight of the bear hiding among the shrubs, and calling his dogs, hounded them on to attack it. But the girl, seeing what peril she was in, cried, 'Call off your dogs, or they will kill me. What harm have I ever done to you?' At these words, coming from a bear, the prince was so startled that for a moment he stood stock-still, then he said quite gently, 'Will you come with me? I will take you to my home.'

'I will come gladly,' replied the bear; and seating herself on the barrow it at once began to move in the direction of the prince's palace. You may imagine the surprise of the prince's mother when she saw her son return accompanied by a bear, who at once set about doing the house-work better than any servant that the queen had ever seen.

Now it happened that there were great festivities going on in the palace of a neighbouring prince, and at dinner, one day, the prince said to his mother: 'This evening there is to be a great ball, to which I must go.'

And his mother answered, 'Go and dance, and enjoy yourself.'

Suddenly a voice came from under the table, where the bear had rolled itself, as was its wont: 'Let me come to the ball; I, too, would like to dance.'

But the only answer the prince made was to give the bear a kick, and to drive it out of the room.

In the evening the prince set off for the ball. As soon as he had started, the bear came to the queen and implored to be allowed to go to the ball, saying that she would hide herself so well that no one would know she was there. The kind-hearted queen could not refuse her.

Then the bear ran to her barrow, threw off her bear's skin, and touched it with the magic wand that the witch had given her. In a moment the skin was changed into an exquisite ball dress woven out of moon-beams, and the wheel-barrow was changed into a carriage drawn by two prancing steeds. Stepping into the carriage the princess drove to the grand entrance of the palace. When she entered the ball-room, in her wondrous dress of moon-beams, she looked so lovely, so different from all the other guests, that everyone wondered who she was, and no one could tell where she had come from.

From the moment he saw her, the prince fell desperately in love with her, and all the evening he would dance with no one else but the beautiful stranger.

When the ball was over, the princess drove away in her carriage at full speed, for she wished to get home in time to change her ball dress into the bear's skin, and the carriage into the wheel-barrow, before anyone discovered who she was.

The prince, putting spurs into his horse, rode after her, for he was determined not to let her out of his sight. But suddenly a thick mist arose and hid her from him. When he reached his home he could talk to his mother of nothing else but the beautiful stranger with whom he had danced so often, and with whom he was so much in love. And the bear beneath the table smiled to itself, and muttered: 'I am the beautiful stranger; oh, how I have taken you in!'

The next evening there was a second ball, and, as you may believe, the prince was determined not to miss it, for he thought he would once more see the lovely girl, and dance with her and talk to her, and make her talk to him, for at the first ball she had never opened her lips.

And, sure enough, as the music struck up the first dance, the beautiful stranger entered the room, looking even more radiant than the night before, for this time her dress was woven out of the rays of the sun. All evening the prince danced with her, but she never spoke a word.

When the ball was over he tried once more to follow her carriage, that he might know whence she came, but suddenly a great waterspout fell from the sky, and the blinding sheets of rain hid her from his sight.

When he reached his home he told his mother that he had again seen the lovely girl, and that this time she had been even more beautiful than the night before. And again the bear smiled beneath the table, and muttered: 'I have taken him in a second time, and he has no idea that I am the beautiful girl with whom he is so much in love.'

On the next evening, the prince returned to the palace for the third ball. And the princess went too, and this time she had changed her bear's skin into a dress woven out of the star-light, studded all over with gems, and she looked so dazzling and so beautiful, that everyone wondered at her, and said that no one so beautiful had ever been seen before. And the prince danced with her, and, though he could not induce her to speak, he succeeded in slipping a ring on her finger.

When the ball was over, he followed her carriage, and rode at such a pace that for long he kept it in sight. Then suddenly a terrible wind arose between him and the carriage, and he could not overtake it.

When he reached his home he said to his mother, 'I do not know what is to become of me; I think I shall go mad, I am so much in love with that girl, and I have no means of finding out who she is. I danced with her and I gave her a ring, and yet I do not know her name, nor where I am to find her.'

Then the bear laughed beneath the table and muttered to itself.

And the prince continued: 'I am tired to death. Order some soup to be made for me, but I don't want that bear to meddle with it. Every time I speak of my love the brute mutters and laughs, and seems to mock at me. I hate the sight of the creature!'

When the soup was ready, the bear brought it to the prince; but before handing it to him, she dropped into the plate the ring the prince had given her the night before at the ball. The prince began to eat his soup very slowly and languidly, for he was sad at heart, and all his thoughts were busy, wondering how and where he could see the lovely stranger again. Suddenly he noticed the ring at the bottom of the plate. In a moment he recognised it, and was dumb with surprise.

Then he saw the bear standing beside him, looking at him with gentle, beseeching eyes, and something in the eyes of the bear made him say: 'Take off that skin, some mystery is hidden beneath it.'

And the bear's skin dropped off, and the beautiful girl stood before him, in the dress woven out of the star-light, and he saw that she was the stranger with whom he had fallen so deeply in love. And now she appeared to him a thousand times more beautiful than ever, and he led her to his mother. And the princess told them her story, and how she had been kept shut up by her father in his palace, and how she had wearied of her imprisonment. And the prince's mother loved her, and rejoiced that her son should have so good and beautiful a wife.

So they were married, and lived happily for many years, and reigned wisely over their kingdom.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f24]

The Sunchild

Once there was a woman who had no children, and this made her very unhappy. So she spoke one day to the Sunball, saying: 'Dear Sunball, send me only a little girl now, and when she is twelve years old you may take her back again.'

So soon after this the Sunball sent her a little girl, whom the woman called Letiko, and watched over with great care till she was twelve years old. Soon after that, while Letiko was away one day gathering herbs, the Sunball came to her, and said: 'Letiko, when you go home, tell your mother that she must bethink herself of what she promised me.'

Then Letiko went straight home, and said to her mother: 'While I was gathering herbs a fine tall gentleman came to me and charged me to tell you that you should remember what you promised him.'

When the woman heard that she was sore afraid, and immediately shut all the doors and windows of the house, stopped up all the chinks and holes, and kept Letiko hidden away, that the Sunball should not come and take her away. But she forgot to close up the keyhole, and through it the Sunball sent a ray into the house, which took hold of the little girl and carried her away to him.

One day, the Sunball having sent her to the straw shed to fetch straw, the girl sat down on the piles of straw and bemoaned herself, saying: 'As sighs this straw under my feet so sighs my heart after my mother.'

And this caused her to be so long away that the Sunball asked her, when she came back: 'Eh, Letiko, where have you been so long?'

She answered: 'My slippers are too big, and I could not go faster.'

Then the Sunball made the slippers shorter.

Another time he sent her to fetch water, and when she came to the spring, she sat down and lamented, saying: 'As flows the water even so flows my heart with longing for my mother.' Thus she again remained so long away that the Sunball asked her: 'Eh, Letiko, why have you remained so long away?'

And she answered: 'My petticoat is too long and hinders me in walking.'

Then the Sunball cut her petticoat to make it shorter.

Another time the Sunball sent her to bring him a pair of sandals, and as the girl carried these in her hand she began to lament, saying: 'As creaks the leather so creaks my heart after my little mother.'

When she came home the Sunball asked her again: 'Eh, Letiko, why do you come home so late?'

'My red hood is too wide, and falls over my eyes, therefore I could not go fast.'

Then he made the hood narrower.

At last, however, the Sunball became aware how sad Letiko was. He sent her a second time to bring straw, and, slipping in after her, he heard how she lamented for her mother. Then he went home, called two foxes to him, and said: 'Will you take Letiko home?'

'Yes, why not?'

'But what will you eat and drink if you should become hungry and thirsty by the way?'

'We will eat her flesh and drink her blood.'

When the Sunball heard that, he said: 'You are not suited for this affair.'

Then he sent them away, and called two hares to him, and said: 'Will you take Letiko home to her mother?'

'Yes, why not?'

'What will you eat and drink if you should become hungry and thirsty by the way?'

'We will eat grass and drink from streamlets.'

'Then take her, and bring her home.'

Then the hares set out, taking Letiko with them, and because it was a long way to her home they became hungry by the way. Then they said to the little girl: 'Climb this tree, dear Letiko, and remain there till we have finished eating.'

So Letiko climbed the tree, and the hares went grazing.

It was not very long, however, before a lamia came under the tree and called out: 'Letiko, Letiko, come down and see what beautiful shoes I have on.'

'Oh! my shoes are much finer than yours.'

'Come down. I am in a hurry, for my house is not yet swept.'

'Go home and sweep it then, and come back when you are ready.'

Then the lamia went away and swept her house, and when she was ready she came back and called out: 'Letiko, Letiko, come down and see what a beautiful apron I have.'

'Oh! my apron is much finer than yours.'

'If you will not come down I will cut down the tree and eat you.'

'Do so, and then eat me.'

Then the lamia hewed with all her strength at the tree, but could not cut it down. And when she saw that, she called out: 'Letiko, Letiko, come down, for I must feed my children.'

'Go home then and feed them, and come back when you are ready.'

When the lamia was gone away, Letiko called out: 'Little hares! little hares!'

Then said one hare to the other: 'Listen, Letiko is calling;' and they both ran back to her as fast as they could go. Then Letiko came down from the tree, and they went on their way.

The lamia ran as fast as she could after them, to catch them up, and when she came to a field where people were working she asked them: 'Have you seen anyone pass this way?'

They answered: 'We are planting beans.'

'Oh! I did not ask about that; but if anyone had passed this way.'

But the people only answered the louder: 'Are you deaf? It is beans, beans, beans we are planting.'

When Letiko had nearly reached her home the dog knew her, and called out, 'Bow wow! see here comes Letiko!'

And the mother said, 'Hush! thou beast of ill-omen! wilt thou make me burst with misery?'

Next the cat on the roof saw her, and called out 'Miaouw! miaouw! see here comes Letiko!'

And the mother said, 'Keep silence! thou beast of ill-omen! wilt thou make me burst with misery?'

Then the cock spied, and called out: 'Cock-a-doodle-do! see here comes Letiko!'

And the mother said again: 'Be quiet! thou bird of ill-omen! wilt thou make me burst with misery?'

The nearer Letiko and the two hares came to the house the nearer also came the lamia, and when the hare was about to slip in by the house door she caught it by its little tail and tore it out.

When the hare came in the mother stood up and said to it: 'Welcome, dear little hare; because you have brought me back Letiko I will silver your little tail.'

And she did so; and lived ever after with her daughter in happiness and content.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f25]

The Daughter of Buk Ettemsuch

Once upon a time there lived a man who had seven daughters. For a long time they dwelt quite happily at home together, then one morning the father called them all before him and said:

'Your mother and I are going on a journey, and as we do not know how long we may be away, you will find enough provisions in the house to last you three years. But see you do not open the door to anyone till we come home again.'

'Very well, dear father,' replied the girls.

For two years they never left the house or unlocked the door; but one day, when they had washed their clothes, and were spreading them out on the roof to dry, the girls looked down into the street where people were walking to and fro, and across to the market, with its stalls of fresh meat, vegetables, and other nice things.

'Come here,' cried one. 'It makes me quite hungry! Why should not we have our share? Let one of us go to the market, and buy meat and vegetables.'

'Oh, we mustn't do that!' said the youngest. 'You know our father forbade us to open the door till he came home again.'

Then the eldest sister sprang at her and struck her, the second spit at her, the third abused her, the fourth pushed her, the fifth flung her to the ground, and the sixth tore her clothes. Then they left her lying on the floor, and went out with a basket.

In about an hour they came back with the basket full of meat and vegetables, which they put in a pot, and set on the fire, quite forgetting that the house door stood wide open. The youngest sister, however, took no part in all this, and when dinner was ready and the table laid, she stole softly out to the entrance hall, and hid herself behind a great cask which stood in one corner.

Now, while the other sisters were enjoying their feast, a witch passed by, and catching sight of the open door, she walked in. She went up to the eldest girl, and said: 'Where shall I begin on you, you fat bolster?'

'You must begin,' answered she, 'with the hand which struck my little sister.'

So the witch gobbled her up, and when the last scrap had disappeared, she came to the second and asked: 'Where shall I begin on you, my fat bolster?'

And the second answered, 'You must begin on my mouth, which spat on my sister.'

And so on to the rest; and very soon the whole six had disappeared. And as the witch was eating the last mouthful of the last sister, the youngest, who had been crouching, frozen with horror, behind the barrel, ran out through the open door into the street. Without looking behind her, she hastened on and on, as fast as her feet would carry her, till she saw an ogre's castle standing in front of her. In a corner near the door she spied a large pot, and she crept softly up to it and pulled the cover over it, and went to sleep.

By-and-by the ogre came home. 'Fee, Fo, Fum,' cried he, 'I smell the smell of a man. What ill fate has brought him here?' And he looked through all the rooms, and found nobody. 'Where are you?' he called. 'Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm.'

But the girl was still silent.

'Come out, I tell you,' repeated the ogre. 'Your life is quite safe. If you are an old man, you shall be my father. If you are a boy, you shall be my son. If your years are as many as mine, you shall be my brother. If you are an old woman, you shall be my mother. If you are a young one, you shall be my daughter. If you are middle-aged, you shall be my wife. So come out, and fear nothing.'

Then the maiden came out of her hiding-place, and stood before him.

'Fear nothing,' said the ogre again; and when he went away to hunt he left her to look after the house. In the evening he returned, bringing with him hares, partridges, and gazelles, for the girl's supper; for himself he only cared for the flesh of men, which she cooked for him. He also gave into her charge the keys of six rooms, but the key of the seventh he kept himself.

And time passed on, and the girl and the ogre still lived together.

She called him 'Father,' and he called her 'Daughter,' and never once did he speak roughly to her.

One day the maiden said to him, 'Father, give me the key of the upper chamber.'

'No, my daughter,' replied the ogre. 'There is nothing there that is any use to you.'

'But I want the key,' she repeated again.

However the ogre took no notice, and pretended not to hear. The girl began to cry, and said to herself: 'To-night, when he thinks I am asleep, I will watch and see where he hides it;' and after she and the ogre had supped, she bade him good-night, and left the room. In a few minutes she stole quietly back, and watched from behind a curtain. In a little while she saw the ogre take the key from his pocket, and hide it in a hole in the ground before he went to bed. And when all was still she took out the key, and went back to the house.

The next morning the ogre awoke with the first ray of light, and the first thing he did was to look for the key. It was gone, and he guessed at once what had become of it.

But instead of getting into a great rage, as most ogres would have done, he said to himself, 'If I wake the maiden up I shall only frighten her. For to-day she shall keep the key, and when I return to-night it will be time enough to take it from her.' So he went off to hunt.

The moment he was safe out of the way, the girl ran upstairs and opened the door of the room, which was quite bare. The one window was closed, and she threw back the lattice and looked out. Beneath lay a garden which belonged to the prince, and in the garden was an ox, who was drawing up water from the well all by himself --for there was nobody to be seen anywhere. The ox raised his head at the noise the girl made in opening the lattice, and said to her, 'Good morning, O daughter of Buk Ettemsuch! Your father is feeding you up till you are nice and fat, and then he will put you on a spit and cook you.'

These words so frightened the maiden that she burst into tears and ran out of the room. All day she wept, and when the ogre came home at night, no supper was ready for him.

'What are you crying for?' said he. 'Where is my supper, and is it you who have opened the upper chamber?'

'Yes, I opened it,' answered she.

'And what did the ox say to you?'

'He said, "Good morning, O daughter of Buk Ettemsuch. Your father is feeding you up till you are nice and fat, and then he will put you on a spit and cook you."'

'Well, to-morrow you can go to the window and say, "My father is feeding me up till I am nice and fat, but he does not mean to eat me. If I had one of your eyes I would use it for a mirror, and look at myself before and behind; and your girths should be loosened, and you should be blind--seven days and seven nights."'

'All right,' replied the girl, and the next morning, when the ox spoke to her, she answered him as she had been told, and he fell down straight upon the ground, and lay there seven days and seven nights. But the flowers in the garden withered, for there was no one to water them.

When the prince came into his garden he found nothing but yellow stalks; in the midst of them the ox was lying. With a blow from his sword he killed the animal, and, turning to his attendants, he said, 'Go and fetch another ox!' And they brought in a great beast, and he drew the water out of the well, and the flowers revived, and the grass grew green again. Then the prince called his attendants and went away.

The next morning the girl heard the noise of the waterwheel, and she opened the lattice and looked out of the window.

'Good morning, O daughter of Buk Ettemsuch!' said the new ox. 'Your father is feeding you up till you are nice and fat, and then he will put you on a spit and cook you.'

And the maiden answered: 'My father is feeding me up till I am nice and fat, but he does not mean to eat me. If I had one of your eyes I would use it for a mirror, and look at myself before and behind; and your girths should be loosened, and you should be blind--seven days and seven nights.'

Directly she uttered these words the ox fell to the ground and lay there, seven days and seven nights. Then he arose and began to draw the water from the well. He had only turned the wheel once or twice, when the prince took it into his head to visit his garden and see how the new ox was getting on. When he entered the ox was working busily; but in spite of that the flowers and grass were dried up. And the prince drew his sword, and rushed at the ox to slay him, as he had done the other. But the ox fell on his knees and said:

'My lord, only spare my life, and let me tell you how it happened.'

'How what happened?' asked the prince.

'My lord, a girl looked out of that window and spoke a few words to me, and I fell to the ground. For seven days and seven nights I lay there, unable to move. But, O my lord, it is not given to us twice to behold beauty such as hers.'

'It is a lie,' said the prince. 'An ogre dwells there. Is it likely that he keeps a maiden in his upper chamber?'

'Why not?' replied the ox. 'But if you come here at dawn to-morrow, and hide behind that tree, you will see for yourself.'

'So I will,' said the prince; 'and if I find that you have not spoken truth, I will kill you.'

The prince left the garden, and the ox went on with his work. Next morning the prince came early to the garden, and found the ox busy with the waterwheel.

'Has the girl appeared yet?' he asked.

'Not yet; but she will not be long. Hide yourself in the branches of that tree, and you will soon see her.'

The prince did as he was told, and scarcely was he seated when the maiden threw open the lattice.

'Good morning, O daughter of Buk Ettemsuch!' said the ox. 'Your father is feeding you up till you are nice and fat, and then he will put you on a spit and cook you.'

'My father is feeding me up till I am nice and fat, but he does not mean to eat me. If I had one of your eyes I would use it for a mirror, and look at myself before and behind; and your girths should be loosened, and you should be blind--seven days and seven nights.' And hardly had she spoken when the ox fell on the ground, and the maiden shut the lattice and went away. But the prince knew that what the ox had said was true, and that she had not her equal in the whole world. And he came down from the tree, his heart burning with love.

'Why has the ogre not eaten her?' thought he. 'This night I will invite him to supper in my palace and question him about the maiden, and find out if she is his wife.'

So the prince ordered a great ox to be slain and roasted whole, and two huge tanks to be made, one filled with water and the other with wine. And towards evening he called his attendants and went to the ogre's house to wait in the courtyard till he came back from hunting. The ogre was surprised to see so many people assembled in front of his house; but he bowed politely and said, 'Good morning, dear neighbours! To what do I owe the pleasure of this visit? I have not offended you, I hope?'

'Oh, certainly not!' answered the prince.

'Then,' continued the ogre, 'What has brought you to my house to-day for the first time?'

'We should like to have supper with you,' said the prince.

'Well, supper is ready, and you are welcome,' replied the ogre, leading the way into the house, for he had had a good day, and there was plenty of game in the bag over his shoulder.

A table was quickly prepared, and the prince had already taken his place, when he suddenly exclaimed, 'After all, Buk Ettemsuch, suppose you come to supper with me?'

'Where?' asked the ogre.

'In my house. I know it is all ready.'

'But it is so far off--why not stay here?'

'Oh, I will come another day; but this evening I must be your host.'

So the ogre accompanied the prince and his attendants back to the palace. After a while the prince turned to the ogre and said:

'It is as a wooer that I appear before you. I seek a wife from an honourable family.'

'But I have no daughter,' replied the ogre.

'Oh, yes you have, I saw her at the window.'

'Well, you can marry her if you wish,' said he.

So the prince's heart was glad as he and his attendants rode back with the ogre to his house. And as they parted, the prince said to his guest, 'You will not forget the bargain we have made?'

'I am not a young man, and never break my promises,' said the ogre, and went in and shut the door.

Upstairs he found the maiden, waiting till he returned to have her supper, for she did not like eating by herself.

'I have had my supper,' said the ogre, 'for I have been spending the evening with the prince.'

'Where did you meet him?' asked the girl.

'Oh, we are neighbours, and grew up together, and to-night I promised that you should be his wife.'

'I don't want to be any man's wife,' answered she; but this was only pretence, for her heart too was glad.

Next morning early came the prince, bringing with him bridal gifts, and splendid wedding garments, to carry the maiden back to his palace.

But before he let her go the ogre called her to him, and said, 'Be careful, girl, never to speak to the prince; and when he speaks to you, you must be dumb, unless he swears "by the head of Buk Ettemsuch." Then you may speak.'

'Very well,' answered the girl.

They set out; and when they reached the palace, the prince led his bride to the room he had prepared for her, and said 'Speak to me, my wife,' but she was silent; and by-and-by he left her, thinking that perhaps she was shy. The next day the same thing happened, and the next.

At last he said, 'Well, if you won't speak, I shall go and get another wife who will.' And he did.

Now when the new wife was brought to the palace the daughter of Buk Ettemsuch rose, and spoke to the ladies who had come to attend on the second bride. 'Go and sit down. I will make ready the feast.' And the ladies sat down as they were told, and waited.

The maiden sat down too, and called out, 'Come here, firewood,' and the firewood came. 'Come here, fire,' and the fire came and kindled the wood. 'Come here, pot.' 'Come here, oil;' and the pot and the oil came. 'Get into the pot, oil!' said she, and the oil did it. When the oil was boiling, the maiden dipped all her fingers in it, and they became ten fried fishes. 'Come here, oven,' she cried next, and the oven came. 'Fire, heat the oven.' And the fire heated it. When it was hot enough, the maiden jumped in, just as she was, with her beautiful silver and gold dress, and all her jewels. In a minute or two she had turned into a snow-white loaf, that made your mouth water.

Said the loaf to the ladies, 'You can eat now; do not stand so far off;' but they only stared at each other, speechless with surprise.

'What are you staring at?' asked the new bride.

'At all these wonders,' replied the ladies.

'Do you call these wonders?' said she scornfully; 'I can do that too,' and she jumped straight into the oven, and was burnt up in a moment.

Then they ran to the prince and said: 'Come quickly, your wife is dead!'

'Bury her, then!' returned he. 'But why did she do it? I am sure I said nothing to make her throw herself into the oven.'

Accordingly the burnt woman was buried, but the prince would not go to the funeral as all his thoughts were still with the wife who would not speak to him. The next night he said to her, 'Dear wife, are you afraid that something dreadful will happen if you speak to me? If you still persist in being dumb, I shall be forced to get another wife.' The poor girl longed to speak, but dread of the ogre kept her silent, and the prince did as he had said, and brought a fresh bride into the palace. And when she and her ladies were seated in state, the maiden planted a sharp stake in the ground, and sat herself down comfortably on it, and began to spin.

'What are you staring at so?' said the new bride to her ladies. 'Do you think that is anything wonderful? Why, I can do as much myself!'

'I am sure you can't,' said they, much too surprised to be polite.

Then the maid sprang off the stake and left the room, and instantly the new wife took her place. But the sharp stake ran through, and she was dead in a moment. So they sent to the prince and said, 'Come quickly, and bury your wife.'

'Bury her yourselves,' he answered. 'What did she do it for? It was not by my orders that she impaled herself on the stake.'

So they buried her; and in the evening the prince came to the daughter of Buk Ettemsuch, and said to her, 'Speak to me, or I shall have to take another wife.' But she was afraid to speak to him.

The following day the prince hid himself in the room and watched. And soon the maiden woke, and said to the pitcher and to the water-jug, 'Quick! go down to the spring and bring me some water; I am thirsty.'

And they went. But as they were filling themselves at the spring, the water-jug knocked against the pitcher and broke off its spout. And the pitcher burst into tears, and ran to the maiden, and said: 'Mistress, beat the water-jug, for he has broken my spout!'

'By the head of Buk Ettemsuch, I implore you not to beat me!'

'Ah,' she replied, 'if only my husband had sworn by that oath, I could have spoken to him from the beginning, and he need never have taken another wife. But now he will never say it, and he will have to go on marrying fresh ones.'

And the prince, from his hiding-place, heard her words, and he jumped up and ran to her and said, 'By the head of Buk Ettemsuch, speak to me.'

So she spoke to him, and they lived happily to the end of their days, because the girl kept the promise she had made to the ogre.

[Marchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis. Von Hans Stumme.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f26]

Laughing Eye and Weeping Eye, or the Limping Fox

(Servian Story)

Once upon a time there lived a man whose right eye always smiled, and whose left eye always cried; and this man had three sons, two of them very clever, and the third very stupid. Now these three sons were very curious about the peculiarity of their father's eyes, and as they could not puzzle out the reason for themselves, they determined to ask their father why he did not have eyes like other people.

So the eldest of the three went one day into his father's room and put the question straight out; but, instead of answering, the man flew into a fearful rage, and sprang at him with a knife. The young fellow ran away in a terrible fright, and took refuge with his brothers, who were awaiting anxiously the result of the interview.

'You had better go yourselves,' was all the reply they got, 'and see if you will fare any better.'

Upon hearing this, the second son entered his father's room, only to be treated in the same manner as his brother; and back he came telling the youngest, the fool of the family, that it was his turn to try his luck.

Then the youngest son marched boldly up to his father and said to him, 'My brothers would not let me know what answer you had given to their question. But now, do tell me why your right eye always laughs and your left eye always weeps.'

As before, the father grew purple with fury, and rushed forwards with his knife. But the simpleton did not stir a step; he knew that he had really nothing to fear from his father.

'Ah, now I see who is my true son,' exclaimed the old man; 'the others are mere cowards. And as you have shown me that you are brave, I will satisfy your curiosity. My right eye laughs because I am glad to have a son like you; my left eye weeps because a precious treasure has been stolen from me. I had in my garden a vine that yielded a tun of wine every hour--someone has managed to steal it, so I weep its loss.'

The simpleton returned to his brothers and told them of their father's loss, and they all made up their minds to set out at once in search of the vine. They travelled together till they came to some cross roads, and there they parted, the two elder ones taking one road, and the simpleton the other.

'Thank goodness we have got rid of that idiot,' exclaimed the two elder. 'Now let us have some breakfast.' And they sat down by the roadside and began to eat.

They had only half finished, when a lame fox came out of a wood and begged them to give him something to eat. But they jumped up and chased him off with their sticks, and the poor fox limped away on his three pads. As he ran he reached the spot where the youngest son was getting out the food he had brought with him, and the fox asked him for a crust of bread. The simpleton had not very much for himself, but he gladly gave half of his meal to the hungry fox.

'Where are you going, brother?' said the fox, when he had finished his share of the bread; and the young man told him the story of his father and the wonderful vine.

'Dear me, how lucky!' said the fox. 'I know what has become of it. Follow me!' So they went on till they came to the gate of a large garden.

'You will find here the vine that you are seeking, but it will not be at all easy to get it. You must listen carefully to what I am going to say. Before you reach the vine you will have to pass twelve outposts, each consisting of two guards. If you see these guards looking straight at you, go on without fear, for they are asleep. But if their eyes are shut then beware, for they are wide awake. If you once get to the vine, you will find two shovels, one of wood and the other of iron. Be sure not to take the iron one; it will make a noise and rouse the guards, and then you are lost.'

The young man got safely through the garden without any adventures till he came to the vine which yielded a tun of wine an hour. But he thought he should find it impossible to dig the hard earth with only a wooden shovel, so picked up the iron one instead. The noise it made soon awakened the guards. They seized the poor simpleton and carried him to their master.

'Why do you try to steal my vine?' demanded he; 'and how did you manage to get past the guards?'

'The vine is not yours; it belongs to my father, and if you will not give it to me now, I will return and get it somehow.'

'You shall have the vine if you will bring me in exchange an apple off the golden apple-tree that flowers every twenty-four hours, and bears fruit of gold.' So saying, he gave orders that the simpleton should be released, and this done, the youth hurried off to consult the fox.

'Now you see,' observed the fox, 'this comes of not following my advice. However, I will help you to get the golden apple. It grows in a garden that you will easily recognise from my description. Near the apple-tree are two poles, one of gold, the other of wood. Take the wooden pole, and you will be able to reach the apple.'

Master Simpleton listened carefully to all that was told him, and after crossing the garden, and escaping as before from the men who were watching it, soon arrived at the apple-tree. But he was so dazzled by the sight of the beautiful golden fruit, that he quite forgot all that the fox had said. He seized the golden pole, and struck the branch a sounding blow. The guards at once awoke, and conducted him to their master. Then the simpleton had to tell his story.

'I will give you the golden apple,' said the owner of the garden, 'if you will bring me in exchange a horse which can go round the world in four-and-twenty hours.' And the young man departed, and went to find the fox.

This time the fox was really angry, and no wonder.

'If you had listened to me, you would have been home with your father by this time. However I am willing to help you once more. Go into the forest, and you will find the horse with two halters round his neck. One is of gold, the other of hemp. Lead him by the hempen halter, or else the horse will begin to neigh, and will waken the guards. Then all is over with you.'

So Master Simpleton searched till he found the horse, and was struck dumb at its beauty.

'What!' he said to himself, 'put the hempen halter on an animal like that? Not I, indeed!' Then the horse neighed loudly; the guards seized our young friend and conducted him before their master.

'I will give you the golden horse,' said he, 'if you will bring me in exchange a golden maiden who has never yet seen either sun or moon.'

'But if I am to bring you the golden maiden you must lend me first the golden steed with which to seek for her.'

'Ah,' replied the owner of the golden horse, 'but who will undertake that you will ever come back?'

'I swear on the head of my father,' answered the young man, 'that I will bring back either the maiden or the horse.' And he went away to consult the fox.

Now, the fox who was always patient and charitable to other people's faults, led him to the entrance of a deep grotto, where stood a maiden all of gold, and beautiful as the day. He placed her on his horse and prepared to mount.

'Are you not sorry,' said the fox, 'to give such a lovely maiden in exchange for a horse? Yet you are bound to do it, for you have sworn by the head of your father. But perhaps I could manage to take her place.' So saying, the fox transformed himself into another golden maiden, so like the first that hardly anyone could tell the difference between them.

The simpleton took her straight to the owner of the horse, who was enchanted with her.

And the young man got back his father's vine and married the real golden maiden into the bargain.

[Contes Populaires Slaves. Traduits par Louis Leger. Paris: Ernest Leroux, editeur.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f27]

The Unlooked-for Prince

(Polish Story)

A long time ago there lived a king and queen who had no children, although they both wished very much for a little son. They tried not to let each other see how unhappy they were, and pretended to take pleasure in hunting and hawking and all sorts of other sports; but at length the king could bear it no longer, and declared that he must go and visit the furthest corners of his kingdom, and that it would be many months before he should return to his capital.

By that time he hoped he would have so many things to think about that he would have forgotten to trouble about the little son who never came.

The country the king reigned over was very large, and full of high, stony mountains and sandy deserts, so that it was not at all easy to go from one place to another. One day the king had wandered out alone, meaning to go only a little distance, but everything looked so alike he could not make out the path by which he had come. He walked on and on for hours, the sun beating hotly on his head, and his legs trembling under him, and he might have died of thirst if he had not suddenly stumbled on a little well, which looked as if it had been newly dug. On the surface floated a silver cup with a golden handle, but as it bobbed about whenever the king tried to seize it, he was too thirsty to wait any longer and knelt down and drank his fill.

When he had finished he began to rise from his knees, but somehow his beard seemed to have stuck fast in the water, and with all his efforts he could not pull it out. After two or three jerks to his head, which only hurt him without doing any good, he called out angrily, 'Let go at once! Who is holding me?'

'It is I, the King Kostiei,' said a voice from the well, and looking up through the water was a little man with green eyes and a big head. 'You have drunk from my spring, and I shall not let you go until you promise to give me the most precious thing your palace contains, which was not there when you left it.'

Now the only thing that the king much cared for in his palace was the queen herself, and as she was weeping bitterly on a pile of cushions in the great hall when he had ridden away, he knew that Kostiei's words could not apply to her. So he cheerfully gave the promise asked for by the ugly little man, and in the twinkling of an eye, man, spring, and cup had disappeared, and the king was left kneeling on the dry sand, wondering if it was all a dream. But as he felt much stronger and better he made up his mind that this strange adventure must really have happened, and he sprang on his horse and rode off with a light heart to look for his companions.

In a few weeks they began to set out on their return home, which they reached one hot day, eight months after they had all left. The king was greatly beloved by his people, and crowds lined the roads, shouting and waving their hats as the procession passed along. On the steps of the palace stood the queen, with a splendid golden cushion in her arms, and on the cushion the most beautiful boy that ever was seen, wrapped about in a cloud of lace. In a moment Kostiei's words rushed into the king's mind, and he began to weep bitterly, to the surprise of everybody, who had expected him nearly to die of joy at the sight of his son. But try as he would and work as hard as he might he could never forget his promise, and every time he let the baby out of his sight he thought that he had seen it for the last time.

However, years passed on and the prince grew first into a big boy, and then into a fine young man. Kostiei made no sign, and gradually even the anxious king thought less and less about him, and in the end forgot him altogether.

There was no family in the whole kingdom happier than the king and queen and prince, until one day when the youth met a little old man as he was hunting in a lonely part of the woods. 'How are you my unlooked-for Prince?' he said. 'You kept them waiting a good long time!'

'And who are you?' asked the prince.

'You will know soon enough. When you go home give my compliments to your father and tell him that I wish he would square accounts with me. If he neglects to pay his debts he will bitterly repent it.'

So saying the old man disappeared, and the prince returned to the palace and told his father what had happened.

The king turned pale and explained to his son the terrible story.

'Do not grieve over it, father,' answered the prince. 'It is nothing so dreadful after all! I will find some way to force Kostiei to give up his rights over me. But if I do not come back in a year's time, you must give up all hopes of ever seeing me.'

Then the prince began to prepare for his journey. His father gave him a complete suit of steel armour, a sword, and a horse, while his mother hung round his neck a cross of gold. So, kissing him tenderly, with many tears they let him go.

He rode steadily on for three days, and at sunset on the fourth day he found himself on the seashore. On the sand before him lay twelve white dresses, dazzling as the snow, yet as far as his eyes could reach there was no one in sight to whom they could belong. Curious to see what would happen, he took up one of the garments, and leaving his horse loose, to wander about the adjoining fields, he hid himself among some willows and waited. In a few minutes a flock of geese which had been paddling about in the sea approached the shore, and put on the dresses, struck the sand with their feet and were transformed in the twinkling of an eye into eleven beautiful young girls, who flew away as fast as they could. The twelfth and youngest remained in the water, stretching out her long white neck and looking about her anxiously. Suddenly, among the willows, she perceived the king's son, and called out to him with a human voice:

'Oh Prince, give me back my dress, and I shall be for ever grateful to you.'

The prince hastened to lay the dress on the sand, and walked away. When the maiden had thrown off the goose-skin and quickly put on her proper clothes, she came towards him and he saw that none had ever seen or told of such beauty as hers. She blushed and held out her hand, saying to him in a soft voice:

'I thank you, noble Prince, for having granted my request. I am the youngest daughter of Kostiei the immortal, who has twelve daughters and rules over the kingdoms under the earth. Long time my father has waited for you, and great is his anger. But trouble not yourself and fear nothing, only do as I bid you. When you see the King Kostiei, fall straightway upon your knees and heed neither his threats nor his cry, but draw near to him boldly. That which will happen after, you will know in time. Now let us go.'

At these words she struck the ground with her foot and a gulf opened, down which they went right into the heart of the earth. In a short time they reached Kostiei's palace, which gives light, with a light brighter than the sun, to the dark kingdoms below. And the prince, as he had been bidden, entered boldly into the hall.

Kostiei, with a shining crown upon his head, sat in the centre upon a golden throne. His green eyes glittered like glass, his hands were as the claws of a crab. When he caught sight of the prince he uttered piercing yells, which shook the walls of the palace. The prince took no notice, but continued his advance on his knees towards the throne. When he had almost reached it, the king broke out into a laugh and said:

'It has been very lucky for you that you have been able to make me laugh. Stay with us in our underground empire, only first you will have to do three things. To-night it is late. Go to sleep; to-morrow I will tell you.'

Early the following morning the prince received a message that Kostiei was ready to see him. He got up and dressed, and hastened to the presence chamber, where the little king was seated on his throne. When the prince appeared, bowing low before him, Kostiei began:

'Now, Prince, this is what you have to do. By to-night you must build me a marble palace, with windows of crystal and a roof of gold. It is to stand in the middle of a great park, full of streams and lakes. If you are able to build it you shall be my friend. If not, off with your head.'

The prince listened in silence to this startling speech, and then returning to his room set himself to think about the certain death that awaited him. He was quite absorbed in these thoughts, when suddenly a bee flew against the window and tapped, saying, 'Let me come in.' He rose and opened the window, and there stood before him the youngest princess.

'What are you dreaming about, Prince?'

'I was dreaming of your father, who has planned my death.'

'Fear nothing. You may sleep in peace, and to-morrow morning when you awake you will find the palace all ready.'

What she said, she did. The next morning when the prince left his room he saw before him a palace more beautiful than his fancy had ever pictured. Kostiei for his part could hardly believe his eyes, and pondered deeply how it had got there.

'Well, this time you have certainly won; but you are not going to be let off so easily. To-morrow all my twelve daughters shall stand in a row before you, and if you cannot tell me which of them is the youngest, off goes your head.'

'What! Not recognise the youngest princess!' said the Prince to himself, as he entered his room, 'a likely story!'

'It is such a difficult matter that you will never be able to do it without my help,' replied the bee, who was buzzing about the ceiling. 'We are all so exactly alike, that even our father scarcely knows the difference between us.'

'Then what must I do?'

'This. The youngest is she who will have a ladybird on her eyelid. Be very careful. Now good-bye.'

Next morning King Kostiei again sent for the prince. The young princesses were all drawn up in a row, dressed precisely in the same manner, and with their eyes all cast down. As the prince looked at them, he was amazed at their likeness. Twice he walked along the line, without being able to detect the sign agreed upon. The third time his heart beat fast at the sight of a tiny speck upon the eyelid of one of the girls.

'This one is the youngest,' he said.

'How in the world did you guess?' cried Kostiei in a fury. 'There is some jugglery about it! But you are not going to escape me so easily. In three hours you shall come here and give me another proof of your cleverness. I shall set alight a handful of straw, and before it is burnt up you will have turned it into a pair of boots. If not, off goes your head.'

So the prince returned sadly into his room, but the bee was there before him.

'Why do you look so melancholy, my handsome Prince?'

'How can I help looking melancholy when your father has ordered me to make him a pair of boots? Does he take me for a shoemaker?'

'What do you think of doing?'

'Not of making boots, at any rate! I am not afraid of death. One can only die once after all.' 'No, Prince, you shall not die. I will try to save you. And we will fly together or die together.'

As she spoke she spat upon the ground, and then drawing the prince after her out of the room, she locked the door behind her and threw away the key. Holding each other tight by the hand, they made their way up into the sunlight, and found themselves by the side of the same sea, while the prince's horse was still quietly feeding in the neighbouring meadow. The moment he saw his master, the horse whinnied and galloped towards him. Without losing an instant the prince sprang into the saddle, swung the princess behind him, and away they went like an arrow from a bow.

When the hour arrived which Kostiei had fixed for the prince's last trial, and there were no signs of him, the king sent to his room to ask why he delayed so long. The servants, finding the door locked, knocked loudly and received for answer, 'In one moment.' It was the spittle, which was imitating the voice of the prince.

The answer was taken back to Kostiei. He waited; still no prince. He sent the servants back again, and the same voice replied, 'Immediately.'

'He is making fun of me!' shrieked Kostiei in a rage. 'Break in the door, and bring him to me!'

The servants hurried to do his bidding. The door was broken open. Nobody inside; but just the spittle in fits of laughter! Kostiei was beside himself with rage, and commanded his guards to ride after the fugitives. If the guards returned without the fugitives, their heads should pay for it.

By this time the prince and princess had got a good start, and were feeling quite happy, when suddenly they heard the sound of a gallop far behind them. The prince sprang from the saddle, and laid his ear to the ground.

'They are pursuing us,' he said.

'Then there is no time to be lost,' answered the princess; and as she spoke she changed herself into a river, the prince into a bridge, the horse into a crow, and divided the wide road beyond the bridge into three little ones. When the soldiers came up to the bridge, they paused uncertainly. How were they to know which of the three roads the fugitives had taken? They gave it up in despair and returned in trembling to Kostiei.

'Idiots!' he exclaimed, in a passion. 'They were the bridge and the river, of course! Do you mean to say you never thought of that? Go back at once!' and off they galloped like lightning.

But time had been lost, and the prince and princess were far on their way.

'I hear a horse,' cried the princess.

The prince jumped down and laid his ear to the ground.

'Yes,' he said, 'they are not far off now.'

In an instant prince, princess, and horse had all disappeared, and instead was a dense forest, crossed and recrossed by countless paths. Kostiei's soldiers dashed hastily into the forest, believing they saw before them the flying horse with its double burden. They seemed close upon them, when suddenly horse, wood, everything disappeared, and they found themselves at the place where they started. There was nothing for it but to return to Kostiei, and tell him of this fresh disaster.

'A horse! a horse!' cried the king. 'I will go after them myself. This time they shall not escape.' And he galloped off, foaming with anger.

'I think I hear someone pursuing us,' said the princess

'Yes, so do I.'

'And this time it is Kostiei himself. But his power only reaches as far as the first church, and he can go no farther. Give me your golden cross.' So the prince unfastened the cross which was his mother's gift, and the princess hastily changed herself into a church, the prince into a priest, and the horse into a belfry.

It was hardly done when Kostiei came up.

'Greeting, monk. Have you seen some travellers on horseback pass this way?'

'Yes, the prince and Kostiei's daughter have just gone by. They have entered the church, and told me to give you their greetings if I met you.'

Then Kostiei knew that he had been hopelessly beaten, and the prince and princess continued their journey without any more adventures.

[Contes Populaires Slaves. Traduits par Louis Leger. Paris: Leroux, editeur.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f28]

The Simpleton

There lived, once upon a time, a man who was as rich as he could be; but as no happiness in this world is ever quite complete, he had an only son who was such a simpleton that he could barely add two and two together. At last his father determined to put up with his stupidity no longer, and giving him a purse full of gold, he sent him off to seek his fortune in foreign lands, mindful of the adage:

How much a fool that's sent to roam
 Excels a fool that stays at home.

Moscione, for this was the youth's name, mounted a horse, and set out for Venice, hoping to find a ship there that would take him to Cairo. After he had ridden for some time he saw a man standing at the foot of a poplar tree, and said to him: 'What's your name, my friend; where do you come from, and what can you do?'

The man replied, 'My name is Quick-as-Thought, I come from Fleet-town, and I can run like lightning.'

'I should like to see you,' returned Moscione.

'Just wait a minute, then,' said Quick-as-Thought, 'and I will soon show you that I am speaking the truth.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a young doe ran right across the field they were standing in.

Quick-as-Thought let her run on a short distance, in order to give her a start, and then pursued her so quickly and so lightly that you could not have tracked his footsteps if the field had been strewn with flour. In a very few springs he had overtaken the doe, and had so impressed Moscione with his fleetness of foot that he begged Quick-as-Thought to go with him, promising at the same time to reward him handsomely.

Quick-as-Thought agreed to his proposal, and they continued on their journey together. They had hardly gone a mile when they met a young man, and Moscione stopped and asked him: 'What's your name, my friend; where do you come from, and what can you do?'

The man thus addressed answered promptly, 'I am called Hare's-ear, I come from Curiosity Valley, and if I lay my ear on the ground, without moving from the spot, I can hear everything that goes on in the world, the plots and intrigues of court and cottage, and all the plans of mice and men.'

'If that's the case,' replied Moscione, 'just tell me what's going on in my own home at present.'

The youth laid his ear to the ground and at once reported: 'An old man is saying to his wife, "Heaven be praised that we have got rid of Moscione, for perhaps, when he has been out in the world a little, he may gain some common sense, and return home less of a fool than when he set out."'

'Enough, enough,' cried Moscione. 'You speak the truth, and I believe you. Come with us, and your fortune's made.'

The young man consented; and after they had gone about ten miles, they met a third man, to whom Moscione said: 'What's your name, my brave fellow; where were you born, and what can you do?'

The man replied, 'I am called Hit-the-Point, I come from the city of Perfect-aim, and I draw my bow so exactly that I can shoot a pea off a stone.'

'I should like to see you do it, if you've no objection,' said Moscione.

The man at once placed a pea on a stone, and, drawing his bow, he shot it in the middle with the greatest possible ease.

When Moscione saw that he had spoken the truth, he immediately asked Hit-the-Point to join his party.

After they had all travelled together for some days, they came upon a number of people who were digging a trench in the blazing sun.

Moscione felt so sorry for them, that he said: 'My dear friends, how can you endure working so hard in heat that would cook an egg in a minute?'

But one of the workmen answered: 'We are as fresh as daisies, for we have a young man among us who blows on our backs like the west wind.'

'Let me see him,' said Moscione.

The youth was called, and Moscione asked him: 'What's your name; where do you come from, and what can you do?'

He answered: 'I am called Blow-Blast, I come from Wind-town, and with my mouth I can make any winds you please. If you wish a west wind I can raise it for you in a second, but if you prefer a north wind I can blow these houses down before your eyes.'

'Seeing is believing,' returned the cautious Moscione.

Blow-Blast at once began to convince him of the truth of his assertion. First he blew so softly that it seemed like the gentle breeze at evening, and then he turned round and raised such a mighty storm, that he blew down a whole row of oak trees.

When Moscione saw this he was delighted, and begged Blow-Blast to join his company. And as they went on their way they met another man, whom Moscione addressed as usual: 'What's your name: where do you come from, and what can you do?'

'I am called Strong-Back; I come from Power-borough, and I possess such strength that I can take a mountain on my back, and it seems a feather to me.'

'If that's the case,' said Moscione, 'you are a clever fellow; but I should like some proof of your strength.'

Then Strong-Back loaded himself with great boulders of rock and trunks of trees, so that a hundred waggons could not have taken away all that he carried on his back.

When Moscione saw this he prevailed on Strong-Back to join his troop, and they all continued their journey till they came to a country called Flower Vale. Here there reigned a king whose only daughter ran as quickly as the wind, and so lightly that she could run over a field of young oats without bending a single blade. The king had given out a proclamation that anyone who could beat the princess in a race should have her for a wife, but that all who failed in the competition should lose their head.

As soon as Moscione heard of the Royal Proclamation, he hastened to the king and challenged the princess to race with him. But on the morning appointed for the trial he sent word to the king that he was not feeling well, and that as he could not run himself he would supply someone to take his place.

'It's just the same to me,' said Canetella, the princess; 'let anyone come forward that likes, I am quite prepared to meet him.'

At the time appointed for the race the whole place was crowded with people anxious to see the contest, and, punctual to the moment, Quick-as-Thought, and Canetella dressed in a short skirt and very lightly shod, appeared at the starting-point.

Then a silver trumpet sounded, and the two rivals started on their race, looking for all the world like a greyhound chasing a hare.

But Quick-as-Thought, true to his name, outran the princess, and when the goal was reached the people all clapped their hands and shouted, 'Long live the stranger!'

Canetella was much depressed by her defeat; but, as the race had to be run a second time, she determined she would not be beaten again. Accordingly she went home and sent Quick-as-Thought a magic ring, which prevented the person who wore it, not only from running, but even from walking, and begged that he would wear it for her sake.

Early next morning the crowd assembled on the race-course, and Canetella and Quick as-Thought began their trial afresh. The princess ran as quickly as ever, but poor Quick-as-Thought was like an overloaded donkey, and could not go a step.

Then Hit-the-Point, who had heard all about the princess's deception from Hare's-ear, when he saw the danger his friend was in, seized his bow and arrow and shot the stone out of the ring Quick-as-Thought was wearing. In a moment the youth's legs became free again, and in five bounds he had overtaken Canetella and won the race.

The king was much disgusted when he saw that he must acknowledge Moscione as his future son-in-law, and summoned the wise men of his court to ask if there was no way out of the difficulty. The council at once decided that Canetella was far too dainty a morsel for the mouth of such a travelling tinker, and advised the king to offer Moscione a present of gold, which no doubt a beggar like him would prefer to all the wives in the world.

The king was delighted at this suggestion, and calling Moscione before him, he asked him what sum of money he would take instead of his promised bride.

Moscione first consulted with his friends, and then answered: 'I demand as much gold and precious stones as my followers can carry away.'

The king thought he was being let off very easily, and produced coffers of gold, sacks of silver, and chests of precious stones; but the more Strong-Back was loaded with the treasure the straighter he stood.

At last the treasury was quite exhausted, and the king had to send his courtiers to his subjects to collect all the gold and silver they possessed. But nothing was of any avail, and Strong-Back only asked for more.

When the king's counsellors saw the unexpected result of their advice, they said it would be more than foolish to let some strolling thieves take so much treasure out of the country, and urged the king to send a troop of soldiers after them, to recover the gold and precious stones.

So the king sent a body of armed men on foot and horse, to take back the treasure Strong-Back was carrying away with him.

But Hare's-ear, who had heard what the counsellors had advised the king, told his companions just as the dust of their pursuers was visible on the horizon.

No sooner had Blow-Blast taken in their danger than he raised such a mighty wind that all the king's army was blown down like so many nine-pins, and as they were quite unable to get up again, Moscione and. his companions proceeded on their way without further let or hindrance.

As soon as they reached his home, Moscione divided his spoil with his companions, at which they were much delighted. He, himself, stayed with his father, who was obliged at last to acknowledge that his son was not quite such a fool as he looked.

[From the Italian, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f29]

The Street Musicians

A man once possessed a donkey which had served him faithfully for many years, but at last the poor beast grew old and feeble, and every day his work became more of a burden. As he was no longer of any use, his master made up his mind to shoot him; but when the donkey learnt the fate that was in store for him, he determined not to die, but to run away to the nearest town and there to become a street musician.

When he had trotted along for some distance he came upon a greyhound lying on the road, and panting for dear life. 'Well, brother,' said the donkey, 'what's the matter with you? You look rather tired.'

'So I am,' replied the dog, 'but because I am getting old and am growing weaker every day, and cannot go out hunting any longer, my master wanted to poison me; and, as life is still sweet, I have taken leave of him. But how I am to earn my own livelihood I haven't a notion.'

'Well,' said the donkey, 'I am on my way to the nearest big town, where I mean to become a street musician. Why don't you take up music as a profession and come along with me? I'll play the flute and you can play the kettle-drum.'

The greyhound was quite pleased at the idea, and the two set off together. When they had gone a short distance they met a cat with a face as long as three rainy days. 'Now, what has happened to upset your happiness, friend puss?' inquired the donkey.

'It's impossible to look cheerful when one feels depressed,' answered the cat. 'I am well up in years now, and have lost most of my teeth; consequently I prefer sitting in front of the fire to catching mice, and so my old mistress wanted to drown me. I have no wish to die yet, so I ran away from her; but good advice is expensive, and I don't know where I am to go to, or what I am to do.'

'Come to the nearest big town with us,' said the donkey, 'and try your fortune as a street musician. I know what sweet music you make at night, so you are sure to be a success.'

The cat was delighted with the donkey's proposal, and they all continued their journey together. In a short time they came to the courtyard of an inn, where they found a cock crowing lustily. 'What in the world is the matter with you?' asked the donkey. 'The noise you are making is enough to break the drums of our ears.'

'I am only prophesying good weather,' said the cock; 'for to-morrow is a feast day, and just because it is a holiday and a number of people are expected at the inn, the landlady has given orders for my neck to be wrung to-night, so that I may be made into soup for to-morrow's dinner.'

'I'll tell you what, redcap,' said the donkey; 'you had much better come with us to the nearest town. You have got a good voice, and could join a street band we are getting up.' The cock was much pleased with the idea, and the party proceeded on their way.

But the nearest big town was a long way off, and it took them more than a day to reach it. In the evening they came to a wood, and they made up their minds to go no further, but to spend the night there. The donkey and the greyhound lay down under a big tree, and the cat and the cock got up into the branches, the cock flying right up to the topmost twig, where he thought he would be safe from all danger. Before he went to sleep he looked round the four points of the compass, and saw a little spark burning in the distance. He called out to his companions that he was sure there must be a house not far off, for he could see a light shining.

When he heard this, the donkey said at, once: 'Then we must get up, and go and look for the house, for this is very poor shelter.' And the greyhound added: 'Yes; I feel I'd be all the better for a few bones and a scrap or two of meat.'

So they set out for the spot where the light was to be seen shining faintly in the distance, but the nearer they approached it the brighter it grew, till at last they came to a brilliantly lighted house. The donkey being the biggest of the party, went to the window and looked in.

'Well, greyhead, what do you see?' asked the cock.

'I see a well-covered table,' replied the donkey, 'with excellent food and drink, and several robbers are sitting round it, enjoying themselves highly.'

'I wish we were doing the same,' said the cock.

'So do I,' answered the donkey. 'Can't we think of some plan for turning out the robbers, and taking possession of the house ourselves?'

So they consulted together what they were to do, and at last they arranged that the donkey should stand at the window with his fore-feet on the sill, that the greyhound should get on his back, the cat on the dog's shoulder, and the cock on the cat's head. When they had grouped themselves in this way, at a given signal, they all began their different forms of music. The donkey brayed, the greyhound barked, the cat miawed, and the cock crew. Then they all scrambled through the window into the room, breaking the glass into a thousand pieces as they did so.

The robbers were all startled by the dreadful noise, and thinking that some evil spirits at the least were entering the house, they rushed out into the wood, their hair standing on end with terror. The four companions, delighted with the success of their trick, sat down at the table, and ate and drank all the food and wine that the robbers had left behind them.

When they had finished their meal they put out the lights, and each animal chose a suitable sleeping-place. The donkey lay down in the courtyard outside the house, the dog behind the door, the cat in front of the fire, and the cock flew up on to a high shelf, and, as they were all tired after their long day, they soon went to sleep.

Shortly after midnight, when the robbers saw that no light was burning in the house and that all seemed quiet, the captain of the band said: 'We were fools to let ourselves be so easily frightened away;' and, turning to one of his men, he ordered him to go and see if all was safe.

The man found everything in silence and darkness, and going into the kitchen he thought he had better strike a light. He took a match, and mistaking the fiery eyes of the cat for two glowing coals, he tried to light his match with them. But the cat didn't see the joke, and sprang at his face, spitting and scratching him in the most vigorous manner. The man was terrified out of his life, and tried to run out by the back door; but he stumbled over the greyhound, which bit him in the leg. Yelling with pain he ran across the courtyard only to receive a kick from the donkey's hind leg as he passed him. In the meantime the cock had been roused from his slumbers, and feeling very cheerful he called out, from the, shelf where he was perched, 'Kikeriki!'

Then the robber hastened back to his captain and said: 'Sir, there is a dreadful witch in the house, who spat at me and scratched my face with her long fingers; and before the door there stands a man with a long knife, who cut my leg severely. In the courtyard outside lies a black monster, who fell upon me with a huge wooden club; and that is not all, for, sitting on the roof, is a judge, who called out: "Bring the rascal to me." So I fled for dear life.'

After this the robbers dared not venture into the house again, and they abandoned it for ever. But the four street musicians were so delighted with their lodgings that they determined to take up their abode in the robbers' house, and, for all I know to the contrary, they may be living there to this day.

[From the German, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f30]

The Twin Brothers

Once there was a fisherman who had plenty of money but no children. One day an old woman came to his wife and said: 'What use is all your prosperity to you when you have no children?'

'It is God's will,' answered the fisherman's wife.

'Nay, my child, it is not God's will, but the fault of your husband; for if he would but catch the little gold-fish you would surely have children. To-night, when he comes home, tell him he must go back and catch the little fish. He must then cut it in six pieces--one of these you must eat, and your husband the second, and soon after you will have two children. The third piece you must give to the dog, and she will have two puppies. The fourth piece give to the mare, and she will have two foals. The fifth piece bury on the right of the house door, and the sixth on the left, and two cypress trees will spring up there.'

When the fisherman came home at evening his wife told him all that the old woman had advised, and he promised to bring home the little gold-fish. Next morning, therefore, he went very early to the water, and caught the little fish. Then they did as the old woman had ordered, and in due time the fisherman's wife had two sons, so like each other that no one could tell the difference. The dog had two puppies exactly alike, the mare had two foals, and on each side of the front door there sprang up two cypress trees precisely similar.

When the two boys were grown up, they were not content to remain at home, though they had wealth in plenty; but they wished to go out into the world, and make a name for themselves. Their father would not allow them both to go at once, as they were the only children he had. He said: 'First one shall travel, and when he is come back then the other may go.'

So the one took his horse and his dog, and went, saying to his brother: 'So long as the cypress trees are green, that is a sign that I am alive and well; but if one begins to wither, then make haste and come to me.' So he went forth into the world.

One day he stopped at the house of an old woman, and as at evening he sat before the door, he perceived in front of him a castle standing on a hill. He asked the old woman to whom it belonged, and her answer was: 'My son, it is the castle of the Fairest in the Land!'

'And I am come here to woo her!'

'That, my son, many have sought to do, and have lost their lives in the attempt; for she has cut off their heads and stuck them on the post you see standing there.'

'And the same will she do to me, or else I shall be victor, for to-morrow I go there to court her.'

Then he took his zither and played upon it so beautifully that no one in all that land had ever heard the like, and the princess herself came to the window to listen.

The next morning the Fairest in the Land sent for the old woman and asked her, 'Who is it that lives with you, and plays the zither so well?'

'It is a stranger, princess, who arrived yesterday evening,' answered the old woman.

And the princess then commanded that the stranger should be brought to her.

When he appeared before the princess she questioned him about his home and his family, and about this and that; and confessed at length that his zither-playing gave her great pleasure, and that she would take him for her husband. The stranger replied that it was with that intent he had come.

The princess then said: 'You must now go to my father, and tell him you desire to have me to wife, and when he has put the three problems before you, then come back and tell me.'

The stranger then went straight to the king, and told him that he wished to wed his daughter.

And the king answered: 'I shall be well pleased, provided you can do what I impose upon you; if not you will lose your head. Now, listen; out there on the ground, there lies a thick log, which measures more than two fathoms; if you can cleave it in two with one stroke of your sword, I will give you my daughter to wife. If you fail, then it will cost you your head.'

Then the stranger withdrew, and returned to the house of the old woman sore distressed, for he could believe nothing but that next day he must atone to the king with his head. And so full was he of the idea of how to set about cleaving the log that he forgot even his zither.

In the evening came the princess to the window to listen to his playing, and behold all was still. Then she called to him: 'Why are you so cast down this evening, that you do not play on your zither?'

And he told her his trouble.

But she laughed at it, and called to him: 'And you grieve over that? Bring quickly your zither, and play something for my amusement, and early to-morrow come to me.'

Then the stranger took his zither and played the whole evening for the amusement of the princess.

Next morning she took a hair from her locks and gave it to him, saying: 'Take this hair, and wind it round your sword, then you will be able to cleave the log in two.'

Then the stranger went forth, and with one blow cleft the log in two.

But the king said: 'I will impose another task upon you, before you can wed my daughter.'

'Speak on,' said the stranger.

'Listen, then,' answered the king; 'you must mount a horse and ride three miles at full gallop, holding in each hand a goblet full of water. If you spill no drop then I shall give you my daughter to wife, but should you not succeed then I will take your life.'

Then the stranger returned to the house of the old woman, and again he was so troubled as to forget his zither.

In the evening the princess came to the window as before to listen to the music, but again all was still; and she called to him: 'What is the matter that you do not play on your zither?'

Then he related all that the king had ordered him to do, and the princess answered: 'Do not let yourself be disturbed, only play now, and come to me to-morrow morning.'

Then next morning he went to her, and she gave him her ring, saying: 'Throw this ring into the water and it will immediately freeze, so that you will not spill any.'

The stranger did as the princess bade him, and carried the water all the way.

Then the king said: 'Now I will give you a third task, and this shall be the last. I have a negro who will fight with you to-morrow, and if you are the conqueror you shall wed my daughter.'

The stranger returned, full of joy, to the house of the old woman, and that evening was so merry that the princess called to him;: 'You seem very cheerful this evening; what has my father told you that makes you so glad?'

He answered: 'Your father has told me that to-morrow I must fight with his negro. He is only another man like myself, and I hope to subdue him, and to gain the contest.'

But the princess answered: 'This is the hardest of all. I myself am the black man, for I swallow a drink that changes me into a negro of unconquerable strength. Go to-morrow morning to the market, buy twelve buffalo hides and wrap them round your horse; fasten this cloth round you, and when I am let loose upon you to-morrow show it to me, that I may hold myself back and may not kill you. Then when you fight me you must try to hit my horse between the eyes, for when you have killed it you have conquered me.'

Next morning, therefore, he went to the market and bought the twelve buffalo hides which he wrapped round his horse. Then he began to fight with the black man, and when the combat had already lasted a long time, and eleven hides were torn, then the stranger hit the negro's horse between the eyes, so that it fell dead, and the black man was defeated.

Then said the king: 'Because you have solved the three problems I take you for my son-in-law.'

But the stranger answered: 'I have some business to conclude first; in fourteen days I will return and bring the bride home.'

So he arose and went into another country, where he came to a great town, and alighted at the house of an old woman. When he had had supper he begged of her some water to drink, but she answered: 'My son, I have no water; a giant has taken possession of the spring, and only lets us draw from it once a year, when we bring him a maiden. He eats her up, and then he lets us draw water; just now it is the lot of the king's daughter, and to-morrow she will be led forth.'

The next day accordingly the princess was led forth to the spring, and bound there with a golden chain. After that all the people went away and she was left alone.

When they had gone the stranger went to the maiden and asked her what ailed her that she lamented so much, and she answered that the reason was because the giant would come and eat her up. And the stranger promised that he would set her free if she would take him for her husband, and the princess joyfully consented.

When the giant appeared the stranger set his dog at him, and it took him by the throat and throttled him till he died; so the princess was set free.

Now when the king heard of it he gladly consented to the marriage, and the wedding took place with great rejoicings. The young bridegroom abode in the palace one hundred and one weeks. Then he began to find it too dull, and he desired to go out hunting. The king would fain have prevented it, but in this he could not succeed. Then he begged his son-in-law at least to take sufficient escort with him, but this, too, the young man evaded, and took only his horse and his dog.

He had ridden already a long way, when he saw in the distance a hut, and rode straight towards it in order to get some water to drink. There he found an old woman from whom he begged the water. She answered that first he should allow her to beat his dog with her little wand, that it might not bite her while she fetched the water. The hunter consented; and as soon as she had touched the dog with her wand it immediately turned to stone. Thereupon she touched the hunter and also his horse, and both turned to stone. As soon as that had happened, the cypress trees in front of his father's house began to wither. And when the other brother saw this, he immediately set out in search of his twin. He came first to the town where his brother had slain the giant, and there fate led him to the same old woman where his brother had lodged. When she saw him she took him for his twin brother, and said to him: 'Do not take it amiss of me, my son, that I did not come to wish you joy on your marriage with the king's daughter.'

The stranger perceived what mistake she had made, but only said: 'That does not matter, old woman,' and rode on, without further speech, to the king's palace, where the king and the princess both took him for his twin brother, and called out: 'Why have you tarried so long away? We thought something evil had befallen you.'

When night came and he slept with the princess, who still believed him to be her husband, he laid his sword between them, and when morning came he rose early and went out to hunt. Fate led him by the same way which his brother had taken, and from a distance he saw him and knew that he was turned to stone. Then he entered the hut and ordered the old woman to disenchant his brother. But she answered: 'Let me first touch your dog with my wand, and then I will free your brother.'

He ordered the dog, however, to take hold of her, and bite her up to the knee, till she cried out: 'Tell your dog to let me go and I will set your brother free!'

But he only answered: 'Tell me the magic words that I may disenchant him myself;' and as she would not he ordered his dog to bite her up to the hip.

Then the old woman cried out: 'I have two wands, with the green one I turn to stone, and with the red one I bring to life again.'

So the hunter took the red wand and disenchanted his brother, also his brother's horse, and his dog, and ordered his own dog to eat the old woman up altogether.

While the brothers went on their way back to the castle of the king, the one brother related to the other how the cypress tree had all at once dried up and withered, how he had immediately set out in search of his twin, and how he had come to the castle of his father-in-law, and had claimed the princess as his wife. But the other brother became furious on hearing this, and smote him over the forehead till he died, and returned alone to the house of his father-in-law.

When night came and he was in bed the princess asked him: 'What was the matter with you last night, that you never spoke a word to me?'

Then he cried out: 'That was not me, but my brother, and I have slain him, because he told me by the way that he had claimed you for his wife!'

'Do you know the place where you slew him?' asked the princess, 'and can you find the body?'

'I know the place exactly.'

'Then to-morrow we shall ride thither,' said the princess. Next morning accordingly they set out together, and when they had come to the place, the princess drew forth a small bottle that she had brought with her, and sprinkled the body with some drops of the water so that immediately he became alive again.

When he stood up, his brother said to him: 'Forgive me, dear brother, that I slew you in my anger.' Then they embraced and went together to the Fairest in the Land, whom the unmarried brother took to wife.

Then the brothers brought their parents to live with them, and all dwelt together in joy and happiness.

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f31]

Cannetella

There was once upon a time a king who reigned over a country called 'Bello Puojo.' He was very rich and powerful, and had everything in the world he could desire except a child. But at last, after he had been married for many years, and was quite an old man, his wife Renzolla presented him with a fine daughter, whom they called Cannetella.

She grew up into a beautiful girl, and was as tall and straight as a young fir-tree. When she was eighteen years old her father called her to him and said: 'You are of an age now, my daughter, to marry and settle down; but as I love you more than anything else in the world, and desire nothing but your happiness, I am determined to leave the choice of a husband to yourself. Choose a man after your own heart, and you are sure to satisfy me.' Cannetella thanked her father very much for his kindness and consideration, but told him that she had not the slightest wish to marry, and was quite determined to remain single.

The king, who felt himself growing old and feeble, and longed to see an heir to the throne before he died, was very unhappy at her words, and begged her earnestly not to disappoint him.

When Cannetella saw that the king had set his heart on her marriage, she said: 'Very well, dear father, I will marry to please you, for I do not wish to appear ungrateful for all your love and kindness; but you must find me a husband handsomer, cleverer, and more charming than anyone else in the world.'

The king was overjoyed by her words, and from early in the morning till late at night he sat at the window and looked carefully at all the passers-by, in the hopes of finding a son-in-law among them.

One day, seeing a very good-looking man crossing the street, the king called his daughter and said: 'Come quickly, dear Cannetella, and look at this man, for I think he might suit you as a husband.'

They called the young man into the palace, and set a sumptuous feast before him, with every sort of delicacy you can imagine. In the middle of the meal the youth let an almond fall out of his mouth, which, however, he picked up again very quickly and hid under the table-cloth.

When the feast was over the stranger went away, and the king asked Cannetella: 'Well, what did you think of the youth?'

'I think he was a clumsy wretch,' replied Cannetella. 'Fancy a man of his age letting an almond fall out of his mouth!'

When the king heard her answer he returned to his watch at the window, and shortly afterwards a very handsome young man passed by. The king instantly called his daughter to come and see what she thought of the new comer.

'Call him in,' said Cannetella, 'that we may see him close.'

Another splendid feast was prepared, and when the stranger had eaten and drunk as much as he was able, and had taken his departure, the king asked Cannetella how she liked him.

'Not at all,' replied his daughter; 'what could you do with a man who requires at least two servants to help him on with his cloak, because he is too awkward to put it on properly himself?'

'If that's all you have against him,' said the king, 'I see how the land lies. You are determined not to have a husband at all; but marry someone you shall, for I do not mean my name and house to die out.'

'Well, then, my dear parent,' said Cannetella, 'I must tell you at once that you had better not count upon me, for I never mean to marry unless I can find a man with a gold head and gold teeth.'

The king was very angry at finding his daughter so obstinate; but as he always gave the girl her own way in everything, he issued a proclamation to the effect that any man with a gold head and gold teeth might come forward and claim the princess as his bride, and the kingdom of Bello Puojo as a wedding gift.

Now the king had a deadly enemy called Scioravante, who was a very powerful magician. No sooner had this man heard of the proclamation than he summoned his attendant spirits and commanded them to gild his head and teeth. The spirits said, at first, that the task was beyond their powers, and suggested that a pair of golden horns attached to his forehead would both be easier to make and more comfortable to wear; but Scioravante would allow no compromise, and insisted on having a head and teeth made of the finest gold. When it was fixed on his shoulders he went for a stroll in front of the palace. And the king, seeing the very man he was in search of, called his daughter, and said: 'Just look out of the window, and you will find exactly what you want.'

Then, as Scioravante was hurrying past, the king shouted out to him: 'Just stop a minute, brother, and don't be in such desperate haste. If you will step in here you shall have my daughter for a wife, and I will send attendants with her, and as many horses and servants as you wish.'

'A thousand thanks,' returned Scioravante; 'I shall be delighted to marry your daughter, but it is quite unnecessary to send anyone to accompany her. Give me a horse and I will carry off the princess in front of my saddle, and will bring her to my own kingdom, where there is no lack of courtiers or servants, or, indeed, of anything your daughter can desire.'

At first the king was very much against Cannetella's departing in this fashion; but finally Scioravante got his way, and placing the princess before him on his horse, he set out for his own country.

Towards evening he dismounted, and entering a stable he placed Cannetella in the same stall as his horse, and said to her: 'Now listen to what I have to say. I am going to my home now, and that is a seven years' journey from here; you must wait for me in this stable, and never move from the spot, or let yourself be seen by a living soul. If you disobey my commands, it will be the worse for you.'

The princess answered meekly: 'Sir, I am your servant, and will do exactly as you bid me; but I should like to know what I am to live on till you come back?'

'You can take what the horses leave,' was Scioravante's reply.

When the magician had left her Cannetella felt very miserable, and bitterly cursed the day she was born. She spent all her time weeping and bemoaning the cruel fate that had driven her from a palace into a stable, from soft down cushions to a bed of straw, and from the dainties of her father's table to the food that the horses left.

She led this wretched life for a few months, and during that time she never saw who fed and watered the horses, for it was all done by invisible hands.

One day, when she was more than usually unhappy, she perceived a little crack in the wall, through which she could see a beautiful garden, with all manner of delicious fruits and flowers growing in it. The sight and smell of such delicacies were too much for poor Cannetella, and she said to herself, 'I will slip quietly out, and pick a few oranges and grapes, and I don't care what happens. Who is there to tell my husband what I do? and even if he should hear of my disobedience, he cannot make my life more miserable than it is already.'

So she slipped out and refreshed her poor, starved body with the fruit she plucked in the garden.

But a short time afterwards her husband returned unexpectedly, and one of the horses instantly told him that Cannetella had gone into the garden, in his absence, and had stolen some oranges and grapes.

Scioravante was furious when he heard this, and seizing a huge knife from his pocket he threatened to kill his wife for her disobedience. But Cannetella threw herself at his feet and implored him to spare her life, saying that hunger drove even the wolf from the wood. At last she succeeded in so far softening her husband's heart that he said, 'I will forgive you this time, and spare your life; but if you disobey me again, and I hear, on my return, that you have as much as moved out of the stall, I will certainly kill you. So, beware; for I am going away once more, and shall be absent for seven years.'

With these words he took his departure, and Cannetella burst into a flood of tears, and, wringing her hands, she moaned: 'Why was I ever born to such a hard fate? Oh! father, how miserable you have made your poor daughter! But, why should I blame my father? for I have only myself to thank for all my sufferings. I got the cursed head of gold, and it has brought all this misery on me. I am indeed punished for not doing as my father wished!'

When a year had gone by, it chanced, one day, that the king's cooper passed the stables where Cannetella was kept prisoner. She recognised the man, and called him to come in. At first he did not know the poor princess, and could not make out who it was that called him by name. But when he heard Cannetella's tale of woe, he hid her in a big empty barrel he had with him, partly because he was sorry for the poor girl, and, even more, because he wished to gain the king's favour. Then he slung the barrel on a mule's back, and in this way the princess was carried to her own home. They arrived at the palace about four o'clock in the morning, and the cooper knocked loudly at the door. When the servants came in haste and saw only the cooper standing at the gate, they were very indignant, and scolded him soundly for coming at such an hour and waking them all out of their sleep.

The king hearing the noise and the cause of it, sent for the cooper, for he felt certain the man must have some important business, to have come and disturbed the whole palace at such an early hour.

The cooper asked permission to unload his mule, and Cannetella crept out of the barrel. At first the king refused to believe that it was really his daughter, for she had changed so terribly in a few years, and had grown so thin and pale, that it was pitiful to see her. At last the princess showed her father a mole she had on her right arm, and then he saw that the poor girl was indeed his long-lost Cannetella. He kissed her a thousand times, and instantly had the choicest food and drink set before her.

After she had satisfied her hunger, the king said to her: 'Who would have thought, my dear daughter, to have found you in such a state? What, may I ask, has brought you to this pass?'

Cannetella replied: 'That wicked man with the gold head and teeth treated me worse than a dog, and many a time, since I left you, have I longed to die. But I couldn't tell you all that I have suffered, for you would never believe me. It is enough that I am once more with you, and I shall never leave you again, for I would rather be a slave in your house than queen in any other.'

In the meantime Scioravante had returned to the stables, and one of the horses told him that Cannetella had been taken away by a cooper in a barrel.

When the wicked magician heard this he was beside himself with rage, and, hastening to the kingdom of Bello Puojo, he went straight to an old woman who lived exactly opposite the royal palace, and said to her: 'If you will let me see the king's daughter, I will give you whatever reward you like to ask for.'

The woman demanded a hundred ducats of gold, and Scioravante counted them out of his purse and gave them to her without a murmur. Then the old woman led him to the roof of the house, where he could see Cannetella combing out her long hair in a room in the top story of the palace.

The princess happened to look out of the window, and when she saw her husband gazing at her, she got such a fright that she flew downstairs to the king, and said: 'My lord and father, unless you shut me up instantly in a room with seven iron doors, I am lost.'

'If that's all,' said the king, 'it shall be done at once.' And he gave orders for the doors to be closed on the spot.

When Scioravante saw this he returned to the old woman, and said: 'I will give you whatever you like if you will go into the palace, hide under the princess's bed, and slip this little piece of paper beneath her pillow, saying, as you do so: "May everyone in the palace, except the princess, fall into a sound sleep."'

The old woman demanded another hundred golden ducats, and then proceeded to carry out the magician's wishes. No sooner had she slipped the piece of paper under Cannetella's pillow, than all the people in the palace fell fast asleep, and only the princess remained awake.

Then Scioravante hurried to the seven doors and opened them one after the other. Cannetella screamed with terror when she saw her husband, but no one came to her help, for all in the palace lay as if they were dead. The magician seized her in the bed on which she lay, and was going to carry her off with him, when the little piece of paper which the old woman had placed under her pillow fell on the floor.

In an instant all the people in the palace woke up, and as Cannetella was still screaming for help, they rushed to her rescue. They seized Scioravante and put him to death; so he was caught in the trap which he had laid for the princess--and, as is so often the case in this world, the biter himself was bit.

[From the Italian, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f32]

The Ogre

There lived, once upon a time, in the land of Marigliano, a poor woman called Masella, who had six pretty daughters, all as upright as young fir-trees, and an only son called Antonio, who was so simple as to be almost an idiot. Hardly a day passed without his mother saying to him, 'What are you doing, you useless creature? If you weren't too stupid to look after yourself, I would order you to leave the house and never to let me see your face again.'

Every day the youth committed some fresh piece of folly, till at last Masella, losing all patience, gave him a good beating, which so startled Antonio that he took to his heels and never stopped running till it was dark and the stars were shining in the heavens. He wandered on for some time, not knowing where to go, and at last he came to a cave, at the mouth of which sat an ogre, uglier than anything you can conceive.

He had a huge head and wrinkled brow--eyebrows that met, squinting eyes, a flat broad nose, and a great gash of a mouth from which two huge tusks stuck out. His skin was hairy, his arms enormous, his legs like sword blades, and his feet as flat as ducks'. In short, he was the most hideous and laughable object in the world.

But Antonio, who, with all his faults, was no coward, and was moreover a very civil-spoken lad, took off his hat, and said: 'Good-day, sir; I hope you are pretty well. Could you kindly tell me how far it is from here to the place where I wish to go?'

When the ogre heard this extraordinary question he burst out laughing, and as he liked the youth's polite manners he said to him: 'Will you enter my service?'

'What wages do you give?' replied Antonio.

'If you serve me faithfully,' returned the ogre, 'I'll be bound you'll get enough wages to satisfy you.'

So the bargain was struck, and Antonio agreed to become the ogre's servant. He was very well treated, in every way, and he had little or no work to do, with the result that in a few days he became as fat as a quail, as round as a barrel, as red as a lobster, and as impudent as a bantam-cock.

But, after two years, the lad got weary of this idle life, and longed desperately to visit his home again. The ogre, who could see into his heart and knew how unhappy he was, said to him one day: 'My dear Antonio, I know how much you long to see your mother and sisters again, and because I love you as the apple of my eye, I am willing to allow you to go home for a visit. Therefore, take this donkey, so that you may not have to go on foot; but see that you never say "Bricklebrit" to him, for if you do you'll be sure to regret it.'

Antonio took the beast without as much as saying thank you, and jumping on its back he rode away in great haste; but he hadn't gone two hundred yards when he dismounted and called out 'Bricklebrit.'

No sooner had he pronounced the word than the donkey opened its mouth and poured forth rubies, emeralds, diamonds and pearls, as big as walnuts.

Antonio gazed in amazement at the sight of such wealth, and joyfully filling a huge sack with the precious stones, he mounted the donkey again and rode on till he came to an inn. Here he got down, and going straight to the landlord, he said to him: 'My good man, I must ask you to stable this donkey for me. Be sure you give the poor beast plenty of oats and hay, but beware of saying the word "Bricklebrit" to him, for if you do I can promise you will regret it. Take this heavy sack, too, and put it carefully away for me.'

The landlord, who was no fool, on receiving this strange warning, and seeing the precious stones sparkling through the canvas of the sack, was most anxious to see what would happen if he used the forbidden word. So he gave Antonio an excellent dinner, with a bottle of fine old wine, and prepared a comfortable bed for him. As soon as he saw the poor simpleton close his eyes and had heard his lusty snores, he hurried to the stables and said to the donkey 'Bricklebrit,' and the animal as usual poured out any number of precious stones.

When the landlord saw all these treasures he longed to get possession of so valuable an animal, and determined to steal the donkey from his foolish guest. As soon as it was light next morning Antonio awoke, and having rubbed his eyes and stretched himself about a hundred times he called the landlord and said to him: 'Come here, my friend, and produce your bill, for short reckonings make long friends.'

When Antonio had paid his account he went to the stables and took out his donkey, as he thought, and fastening a sack of gravel, which the landlord had substituted for his precious stones, on the creature's back, he set out for his home.

No sooner had he arrived there than he called out: 'Mother, come quickly, and bring table-cloths and sheets with you, and spread them out on the ground, and you will soon see what wonderful treasures I have brought you.'

His mother hurried into the house, and opening the linen-chest where she kept her daughters' wedding outfits, she took out table-cloths and sheets made of the finest linen, and spread them flat and smooth on the ground. Antonio placed the donkey on them, and called out 'Bricklebrit.' But this time he met with no success, for the donkey took no more notice of the magic word than he would have done if a lyre had been twanged in his ear. Two, three, and four times did Antonio pronounce 'Bricklebrit,' but all in vain, and he might as well have spoken to the wind.

Disgusted and furious with the poor creature, he seized a thick stick and began to beat it so hard that he nearly broke every bone in its body. The miserable donkey was so distracted at such treatment that, far from pouring out precious stones, it only tore and dirtied all the fine linen.

When poor Masella saw her table-cloths and sheets being destroyed, and that instead of becoming rich she had only been made a fool of, she seized another stick and belaboured Antonio so unmercifully with it, that he fled before her, and never stopped till he reached the ogre's cave.

When his master saw the lad returning in such a sorry plight, he understood at once what had happened to him, and making no bones about the matter, he told Antonio what a fool he had been to allow himself to be so imposed upon by the landlord, and to let a worthless animal be palmed off on him instead of his magic donkey.

Antonio listened humbly to the ogre's words, and vowed solemnly that he would never act so foolishly again. And so a year passed, and once more Antonio was overcome by a fit of home-sickness, and felt a great longing to see his own people again.

Now the ogre, although he was so hideous to look upon, had a very kind heart, and when he saw how restless and unhappy Antonio was, he at once gave him leave to go home on a visit. At parting he gave him a beautiful table-cloth, and said: 'Give this to your mother; but see that you don't lose it as you lost the donkey, and till you are safely in your own house beware of saying "Table-cloth, open," and "Table-cloth, shut." If you do, the misfortune be on your own head, for I have given you fair warning.'

Antonio set out on his journey, but hardly had he got out of sight of the cave than he laid the table-cloth on the ground and said, 'Table-cloth, open.' In an instant the table-cloth unfolded itself and disclosed a whole mass of precious stones and other treasures.

When Antonio perceived this he said, 'Table-cloth, shut,' and continued his journey. He came to the same inn again, and calling the landlord to him, he told him to put the table-cloth carefully away, and whatever he did not to say 'Table-cloth, open,' or 'Table-cloth, shut,' to it.

The landlord, who was a regular rogue, answered, 'Just leave it to me, I will look after it as if it were my own.'

After he had given Antonio plenty to eat and drink, and had provided him with a comfortable bed, he went straight to the table-cloth and said, 'Table-cloth, open.' It opened at once, and displayed such costly treasures that the landlord made up his mind on the spot to steal it.

When Antonio awoke next morning, the host handed him over a table-cloth exactly like his own, and carrying it carefully over his arm, the foolish youth went straight to his mother's house, and said: 'Now we shall be rich beyond the dreams of avarice, and need never go about in rags again, or lack the best of food.'

With these words he spread the table-cloth on the ground and said, 'Table-cloth, open.'

But he might repeat the injunction as often as he pleased, it was only waste of breath, for nothing happened. When Antonio saw this he turned to his mother and said: 'That old scoundrel of a landlord has done me once more; but he will live to repent it, for if I ever enter his inn again, I will make him suffer for the loss of my donkey and the other treasures he has robbed me of.'

Masella was in such a rage over her fresh disappointment that she could not restrain her impatience, and, turning on Antonio, she abused him soundly, and told him to get out of her sight at once, for she would never acknowledge him as a son of hers again. The poor boy was very depressed by her words, and slunk back to his master like a dog with his tail between his legs. When the ogre saw him, he guessed at once what had happened. He gave Antonio a good scolding, and said, 'I don't know what prevents me smashing your head in, you useless ne'er-do-well! You blurt everything out, and your long tongue never ceases wagging for a moment. If you had remained silent in the inn this misfortune would never have overtaken you, so you have only yourself to blame for your present suffering.'

Antonio listened to his master's words in silence, looking for all the world like a whipped dog. When he had been three more years in the ogre's service he had another bad fit of home-sickness, and longed very much to see his mother and sisters again.

So he asked for permission to go home on a visit, and it was at once granted to him. Before he set out on his journey the ogre presented him with a beautifully carved stick and said, 'Take this stick as a remembrance of me; but beware of saying, "Rise up, Stick," and "Lie down, Stick," for if you do, I can only say I wouldn't be in your shoes for something.'

Antonio took the stick and said, 'Don't be in the least alarmed, I'm not such a fool as you think, and know better than most people what two and two make.'

'I'm glad to hear it,' replied the ogre, 'but words are women, deeds are men. You have heard what I said, and forewarned is forearmed.'

This time Antonio thanked his master warmly for all his kindness, and started on his homeward journey in great spirits; but he had not gone half a mile when he said 'Rise up, Stick.'

The words were hardly out of his mouth when the stick rose and began to rain down blows on poor Antonio's back with such lightning-like rapidity that he had hardly strength to call out, 'Lie down, Stick;' but as soon as he uttered the words the stick lay down, and ceased beating his back black and blue.

Although he had learnt a lesson at some cost to himself, Antonio was full of joy, for he saw a way now of revenging himself on the wicked landlord. Once more he arrived at the inn, and was received in the most friendly and hospitable manner by his host. Antonio greeted him cordially, and said: 'My friend, will you kindly take care of this stick for me? But, whatever you do, don't say "Rise up, Stick." If you do, you will be sorry for it, and you needn't expect any sympathy from me.'

The landlord, thinking he was coming in for a third piece of good fortune, gave Antonio an excellent supper; and after he had seen him comfortably to bed, he ran to the stick, and calling to his wife to come and see the fun, he lost no time in pronouncing the words 'Rise up, Stick.'

The moment he spoke the stick jumped up and beat the landlord so unmercifully that he and his wife ran screaming to Antonio, and, waking him up, pleaded for mercy.

When Antonio saw how successful his trick had been, he said: 'I refuse to help you, unless you give me all that you have stolen from me, otherwise you will be beaten to death.'

The landlord, who felt himself at death's door already, cried out: 'Take back your property, only release me from this terrible stick;' and with these words he ordered the donkey, the table-cloth, and other treasures to be restored to their rightful owner.

As soon as Antonio had recovered his belongings he said 'Stick, lie down,' and it stopped beating the landlord at once.

Then he took his donkey and table-cloth and arrived safely at his home with them. This time the magic words had the desired effect, and the donkey and table-cloth provided the family with treasures untold. Antonio very soon married off his sister, made his mother rich for life, and they all lived happily for ever after.

[From the Italian, Kletke.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f33]

A Fairy's Blunder

Once upon a time there lived a fairy whose name was Dindonette. She was the best creature in the world, with the kindest heart; but she had not much sense, and was always doing things, to benefit people, which generally ended in causing pain and distress to everybody concerned. No one knew this better than the inhabitants of an island far off in the midst of the sea, which, according to the laws of fairyland, she had taken under her special protection, thinking day and night of what she could do to make the isle the pleasantest place in the whole world, as it was the most beautiful.

Now what happened was this:

As the fairy went about, unseen, from house to house, she heard everywhere children longing for the time when they would be 'grown-up,' and able, they thought, to do as they liked; and old people talking about the past, and sighing to be young again.

'Is there no way of satisfying these poor things?' she thought. And then one night an idea occurred to her. 'Oh, yes, of course! It has been tried before; but I will manage better than the rest, with their old Fountain of Youth, which, after all, only made people young again. I will enchant the spring that bubbles up in the middle of the orchard, and the children that drink of it shall at once become grown men and women, and the old people return to the days of their childhood.'

And without stopping to consult one single other fairy, who might have given her good advice, off rushed Dindonette, to cast her spell over the fountain.

It was the only spring of fresh water in the island, and at dawn was crowded with people of all ages, come to drink at its source. Delighted at her plan for making them all happy, the fairy hid herself behind a thicket of roses, and peeped out whenever footsteps came that way. It was not long before she had ample proof of the success of her enchantments. Almost before her eyes the children put on the size and strength of adults, while the old men and women instantly became helpless, tiny babies. Indeed, so pleased was she with the result of her work, that she could no longer remain hidden, and went about telling everybody what she had done, and enjoying their gratitude and thanks.

But after the first outburst of delight at their wishes being granted, people began to be a little frightened at the rapid effects of the magic water. It was delicious to feel yourself at the height of your power and beauty, but you would wish to keep so always! Now this was exactly what the fairy had been in too much of a hurry to arrange, and no sooner had the children become grown up, and the men and women become babies, than they all rushed on to old age at an appalling rate! The fairy only found out her mistake when it was too late to set it right.

When the inhabitants of the island saw what had befallen them, they were filled with despair, and did everything they could think of to escape from such a dreadful fate. They dug wells in their places, so that they should no longer need to drink from the magic spring; but the sandy soil yielded no water, and the rainy season was already past. They stored up the dew that fell, and the juice of fruits and of herbs, but all this was as a drop in the ocean of their wants. Some threw themselves into the sea, trusting that the current might carry them to other shores--they had no boats--and a few, still more impatient, put themselves to death on the spot. The rest submitted blindly to their destiny.

Perhaps the worst part of the enchantment was, that the change from one age to another was so rapid that the person had no time to prepare himself for it. It would not have mattered so much if the man who stood up in the assembly of the nation, to give his advice as to peace or war, had looked like a baby, as long as he spoke with the knowledge and sense of a full-grown man. But, alas! with the outward form of an infant, he had taken on its helplessness and foolishness, and there was no one who could train him to better things. The end of it all was, that before a month had passed the population had died out, and the fairy Dindonette, ashamed and grieved at the effects of her folly, had left the island for ever.

Many centuries after, the fairy Selnozoura, who had fallen into bad health, was ordered by her doctors to make the tour of the world twice a week for change of air, and in one of these journeys she found herself at Fountain Island. Selnozoura never made these trips alone, but always took with her two children, of whom she was very fond--Cornichon, a boy of fourteen, bought in his childhood at a slave-market, and Toupette, a few months younger, who had been entrusted to the care of the fairy by her guardian, the genius Kristopo. Cornichon and Toupette were intended by Selnozoura to become husband and wife, as soon as they were old enough. Meanwhile, they travelled with her in a little vessel, whose speed through the air was just a thousand nine hundred and fifty times greater than that of the swiftest of our ships.

Struck with the beauty of the island, Selnozoura ran the vessel to ground, and leaving it in the care of the dragon which lived in the hold during the voyage, stepped on shore with her two companions. Surprised at the sight of a large town whose streets and houses were absolutely desolate, the fairy resolved to put her magic arts in practice to find out the cause. While she was thus engaged, Cornichon and Toupette wandered away by themselves, and by-and-by arrived at the fountain, whose bubbling waters looked cool and delicious on such a hot day. Scarcely had they each drunk a deep draught, when the fairy, who by this time had discovered all she wished to know, hastened to the spot.

'Oh, beware! beware!' she cried, the moment she saw them. 'If you drink that deadly poison you will be ruined for ever!'

'Poison?' answered Toupette. 'It is the most refreshing water I have ever tasted, and Cornichon will say so too!'

'Unhappy children, then I am too late! Why did you leave me? Listen, and I will tell you what has befallen the wretched inhabitants of this island, and what will befall you too. The power of fairies is great,' she added, when she had finished her story, 'but they cannot destroy the work of another fairy. Very shortly you will pass into the weakness and silliness of extreme old age, and all I can do for you is to make it as easy to you as possible, and to preserve you from the death that others have suffered, from having no one to look after them. But the charm is working already! Cornichon is taller and more manly than he was an hour ago, and Toupette no longer looks like a little girl.'

It was true; but this fact did not seem to render the young people as miserable as it did Selnozoura.

'Do not pity us,' said Cornichon. 'If we are fated to grow old so soon, let us no longer delay our marriage. What matter if we anticipate our decay, if we only anticipate our happiness too?'

The fairy felt that Cornichon had reason on his side, and seeing by a glance at Toupette's face that there was no opposition to be feared from her, she answered, 'Let it be so, then. But not in this dreadful place. We will return at once to Bagota, and the festivities shall be the most brilliant ever seen.'

They all returned to the vessel, and in a few hours the four thousand five hundred miles that lay between the island and Bagota were passed. Everyone was surprised to see the change which the short absence had made in the young people, but as the fairy had promised absolute silence about the adventure, they were none the wiser, and busied themselves in preparing their dresses for the marriage, which was fixed for the next night.

Early on the following morning the genius Kristopo arrived at the Court, on one of the visits he was in the habit of paying his ward from time to time. Like the rest, he was astonished at the sudden improvement in the child. He had always been fond of her, and in a moment he fell violently in love. Hastily demanding an audience of the fairy, he laid his proposals before her, never doubting that she would give her consent to so brilliant a match. But Selnozoura refused to listen, and even hinted that in his own interest Kristopo had better turn his thoughts elsewhere. The genius pretended to agree, but, instead, he went straight to Toupette's room, and flew away with her through the window, at the very instant that the bridegroom was awaiting her below.

When the fairy discovered what had happened, she was furious, and sent messenger after messenger to the genius in his palace at Ratibouf, commanding him to restore Toupette without delay, and threatening to make war in case of refusal.

Kristopo gave no direct answer to the fairy's envoys, but kept Toupette closely guarded in a tower, where the poor girl used all her powers of persuasion to induce him to put off their marriage. All would, however, have been quite vain if, in the course of a few days, sorrow, joined to the spell of the magic water, had not altered her appearance so completely that Kristopo was quite alarmed, and declared that she needed amusement and fresh air, and that, as his presence seemed to distress her, she should be left her own mistress. But one thing he declined to do, and that was to send her back to Bagota.

In the meantime both sides had been busily collecting armies, and Kristopo had given the command of his to a famous general, while Selnozoura had placed Cornichon at the head of her forces. But before war was actually declared, Toupette's parents, who had been summoned by the genius, arrived at Ratibouf. They had never seen their daughter since they parted from her as a baby, but from time to time travellers to Bagota had brought back accounts of her beauty. What was their amazement, therefore, at finding, instead of a lovely girl, a middle-aged woman, handsome indeed, but quite faded--looking, in fact, older than themselves. Kristopo, hardly less astonished than they were at the sudden change, thought that it was a joke on the part of one of his courtiers, who had hidden Toupette away, and put this elderly lady in her place. Bursting with rage, he sent instantly for all the servants and guards of the town, and inquired who had the insolence to play him such a trick, and what had become of their prisoner. They replied that since Toupette had been in their charge she had never left her rooms unveiled, and that during her walks in the surrounding gardens, her food had been brought in and placed on her table; as she preferred to eat alone no one had ever seen her face, or knew what she was like.

The servants were clearly speaking the truth, and Kristopo was obliged to believe them. 'But,' thought he, 'if they have not had a hand in this, it must be the work of the fairy,' and in his anger he ordered the army to be ready to march.

On her side, Selnozoura of course knew what the genius had to expect, but was deeply offended when she heard of the base trick which she was believed to have invented. Her first desire was to give battle to Kristopo at once, but with great difficulty her ministers induced her to pause, and to send an ambassador to Kristopo to try to arrange matters.

So the Prince Zeprady departed for the court of Ratibouf, and on his way he met Cornichon, who was encamped with his army just outside the gates of Bagota. The prince showed him the fairy's written order that for the present peace must still be kept, and Cornichon, filled with longing to see Toupette once more, begged to be allowed to accompany Zeprady on his mission to Ratibouf.

By this time the genius's passion for Toupette, which had caused all these troubles, had died out, and he willingly accepted the terms of peace offered by Zeprady, though he informed the prince that he still believed the fairy to be guilty of the dreadful change in the girl. To this the prince only replied that on that point he had a witness who could prove, better than anyone else, if it was Toupette or not, and desired that Cornichon should be sent for.

When Toupette was told that she was to see her old lover again, her heart leapt with joy; but soon the recollection came to her of all that had happened, and she remembered that Cornichon would be changed as well as she. The moment of their meeting was not all happiness, especially on the part of Toupette, who could not forget her lost beauty, and the genius, who was present, was at last convinced that he had not been deceived, and went out to sign the treaty of peace, followed by his attendants.

'Ah, Toupette: my dear Toupette!' cried Cornichon, as soon as they were left alone; 'now that we are once more united, let our past troubles be forgotten.'

'Our past troubles!' answered she, 'and what do you call our lost beauty and the dreadful future before us? You are looking fifty years older than when I saw you last, and I know too well that fate has treated me no better!'

'Ah, do not say that,' replied Cornichon, clasping her hand. 'You are different, it is true; but every age has its graces, and surely no woman of sixty was ever handsomer than you! If your eyes had been as bright as of yore they would have matched badly with your faded skin. The wrinkles which I notice on your forehead explain the increased fulness of your cheeks, and your throat in withering is elegant in decay. Thus the harmony shown by your features, even as they grow old, is the best proof of their former beauty.'

'Oh, monster!' cried Toupette, bursting into tears, 'is that all the comfort you can give me?'

'But, Toupette,' answered Cornichon, 'you used to declare that you did not care for beauty, as long as you had my heart.'

'Yes, I know,' said she, 'but how can you go on caring for a person who is as old and plain as I?'

'Toupette, Toupette,' replied Cornichon, 'you are only talking nonsense. My heart is as much yours as ever it was, and nothing in the world can make any difference.'

At this point of the conversation the Prince Zeprady entered the room, with the news that the genius, full of regret for his behaviour, had given Cornichon full permission to depart for Bagota as soon as he liked, and to take Toupette with him; adding that, though he begged they would excuse his taking leave of them before they went, he hoped, before long, to visit them at Bagota.

Neither of the lovers slept that night--Cornichon from joy at returning home, Toupette from dread of the blow to her vanity which awaited her at Bagota. It was hopeless for Cornichon to try to console her during the journey with the reasons he had given the day before. She only grew worse and worse, and when they reached the palace went straight to her old apartments, entreating the fairy to allow both herself and Cornichon to remain concealed, and to see no one.

For some time after their arrival the fairy was taken up with the preparations for the rejoicings which were to celebrate the peace, and with the reception of the genius, who was determined to do all in his power to regain Selnozoura's lost friendship. Cornichon and Toupette were therefore left entirely to themselves, and though this was only what they wanted, still, they began to feel a little neglected.

At length, one morning, they saw from the windows that the fairy and the genius were approaching, in state, with all their courtiers in attendance. Toupette instantly hid herself in the darkest corner of the room, but Cornichon, forgetting that he was now no longer a boy of fourteen, ran to meet them. In so doing he tripped and fell, bruising one of his eyes severely. At the sight of her lover lying helpless on the floor, Toupette hastened to his side; but her feeble legs gave way under her, and she fell almost on top of him, knocking out three of her loosened teeth against his forehead. The fairy, who entered the room at this moment, burst into tears, and listened in silence to the genius, who hinted that by-and-by everything would be put right.

'At the last assembly of the fairies,' he said, 'when the doings of each fairy were examined and discussed, a proposal was made to lessen, as far as possible, the mischief caused by Dindonette by enchanting the fountain. And it was decided that, as she had meant nothing but kindness, she should have the power of undoing one half of the spell. Of course she might always have destroyed the fatal fountain, which would have been best of all; but this she never thought of. Yet, in spite of this, her heart is so good, that I am sure that the moment she hears that she is wanted she will fly to help. Only, before she comes, it is for you, Madam, to make up your mind which of the two shall regain their former strength and beauty.'

At these words the fairy's soul sank. Both Cornichon and Toupette were equally dear to her, and how could she favour one at the cost of the other? As to the courtiers, none of the men were able to understand why she hesitated a second to declare for Toupette; while the ladies were equally strong on the side of Cornichon.

But, however undecided the fairy might be, it was quite different with Cornichon and Toupette.

'Ah, my love,' exclaimed Cornichon, 'at length I shall be able to give you the best proof of my devotion by showing you how I value the beauties of your mind above those of your body! While the most charming women of the court will fall victims to my youth and strength, I shall think of nothing but how to lay them at your feet, and pay heart-felt homage to your age and wrinkles.'

'Not so fast,' interrupted Toupette, 'I don't see why you should have it all. Why do you heap such humiliations upon me? But I will trust to the justice of the fairy, who will not treat me so.'

Then she entered her own rooms, and refused to leave them, in spite of the prayers of Cornichon, who begged her to let him explain.

No one at the court thought or spoke of any other subject during the few days before the arrival of Dindonette, whom everybody expected to set things right in a moment. But, alas! she had no idea herself what was best to be done, and always adopted the opinion of the person she was talking to. At length a thought struck her, which seemed the only way of satisfying both parties, and she asked the fairy to call together all the court and the people to hear her decision.

'Happy is he,' she began, 'who can repair the evil he has caused, but happier he who has never caused any.'

As nobody contradicted this remark, she continued:

'To me it is only allowed to undo one half of the mischief I have wrought. I could restore you your youth,' she said to Cornichon, 'or your beauty,' turning to Toupette. 'I will do both; and I will do neither.'

A murmur of curiosity arose from the crowd, while Cornichon and Toupette trembled with astonishment.

'No,' went on Dindonette, 'never should I have the cruelty to leave one of you to decay, while the other enjoys the glory of youth. And as I cannot restore you both at once to what you were, one half of each of your bodies shall become young again, while the other half goes on its way to decay. I will leave it to you to choose which half it shall be--if I shall draw a line round the waist, or a line straight down the middle of the body.'

She looked about her proudly, expecting applause for her clever idea. But Cornichon and Toupette were shaking with rage and disappointment, and everyone else broke into shouts of laughter. In pity for the unhappy lovers, Selnozoura came forward.

'Do you not think,' she said, 'that instead of what you propose, it would be better to let them take it in turns to enjoy their former youth and beauty for a fixed time? I am sure you could easily manage that.'

'What an excellent notion!' cried Dindonette. 'Oh, yes, of course that is best! Which of you shall I touch first?'

'Touch her,' replied Cornichon, who was always ready to give way to Toupette. 'I know her heart too well to fear any change.'

So the fairy bent forward and touched her with her magic ring, and in one instant the old woman was a girl again. The whole court wept with joy at the sight, and Toupette ran up to Cornichon, who had fallen down in his surprise, promising to pay him long visits, and tell him of all her balls and water parties.

The two fairies went to their own apartments, where the genius followed them to take his leave.

'Oh, dear!' suddenly cried Dindonette, breaking in to the farewell speech of the genius. 'I quite forgot to fix the time when Cornichon should in his turn grow young. How stupid of me! And now I fear it is too late, for I ought to have declared it before I touched Toupette with the ring. Oh, dear! oh, dear! why did nobody warn me?'

'You were so quick,' replied Selnozoura, who had long been aware of the mischief the fairy had again done, 'and we can only wait now till Cornichon shall have reached the utmost limits of his decay, when he will drink of the water, and become a baby once more, so that Toupette will have to spend her life as a nurse, a wife, and a caretaker.'

After the anxiety of mind and the weakness of body to which for so long Toupette had been a prey, it seemed as if she could not amuse herself enough, and it was seldom indeed that she found time to visit poor Cornichon, though she did not cease to be fond of him, or to be kind to him. Still, she was perfectly happy without him, and this the poor man did not fail to see, almost blind and deaf from age though he was.

But it was left to Kristopo to undo at last the work of Dindonette, and give Cornichon back the youth he had lost, and this the genius did all the more gladly, as he discovered, quite by accident, that Cornichon was in fact his son. It was on this plea that he attended the great yearly meeting of the fairies, and prayed that, in consideration of his services to so many of the members, this one boon might be granted him. Such a request had never before been heard in fairyland, and was objected to by some of the older fairies; but both Kristopo and Selnozoura were held in such high honour that the murmurs of disgust were set aside, and the latest victim to the enchanted fountain was pronounced to be free of the spell. All that the genius asked in return was that he might accompany the fairy back to Bagota, and be present when his son assumed his proper shape.

They made up their minds they would just tell Toupette that they had found a husband for her, and give her a pleasant surprise at her wedding, which was fixed for the following night. She heard the news with astonishment, and many pangs for the grief which Cornichon would certainly feel at his place being taken by another; but she did not dream of disobeying the fairy, and spent the whole day wondering who the bridegroom could be.

At the appointed hour, a large crowd assembled at the fairy's palace, which was decorated with the sweetest flowers, known only to fairyland. Toupette had taken her place, but where was the bridegroom?

'Fetch Cornichon!' said the fairy to her chamberlain.

But Toupette interposed: 'Oh, Madam, spare him, I entreat you, this bitter pain, and let him remain hidden and in peace.'

'It is necessary that he should be here,' answered the fairy, 'and he will not regret it.'

And, as she spoke, Cornichon was led in, smiling with the foolishness of extreme old age at the sight of the gay crowd.

'Bring him here,' commanded the fairy, waving her hand towards Toupette, who started back from surprise and horror.

Selnozoura then took the hand of the poor old man, and the genius came forward and touched him three times with his ring, when Cornichon was transformed into a handsome young man.

'May you live long,' the genius said, 'to enjoy happiness with your wife, and to love your father.'

And that was the end of the mischief wrought by the fairy Dindonette!

[Cabinet des Fees.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f34]

Long, Broad, and Quickeye

(A Bohemian Story)

Once upon a time there lived a king who had an only son whom he loved dearly. Now one day the king sent for his son and said to him:

'My dearest child, my hair is grey and I am old, and soon I shall feel no more the warmth of the sun, or look upon the trees and flowers. But before I die I should like to see you with a good wife; therefore marry, my son, as speedily as possible.'

'My father,' replied the prince, 'now and always, I ask nothing better than to do your bidding, but I know of no daughter-in-law that I could give you.'

On hearing these words the old king drew from his pocket a key of gold, and gave it to his son, saying:

'Go up the staircase, right up to the top of the tower. Look carefully round you, and then come and tell me which you like best of all that you see.'

So the young man went up. He had never before been in the tower, and had no idea what it might contain.

The staircase wound round and round and round, till the prince was almost giddy, and every now and then he caught sight of a large room that opened out from the side. But he had been told to go to the top, and to the top he went. Then he found himself in a hall, which had an iron door at one end. This door he unlocked with his golden key, and he passed through into a vast chamber which had a roof of blue sprinkled with golden stars, and a carpet of green silk soft as turf. Twelve windows framed in gold let in the light of the sun, and on every window was painted the figure of a young girl, each more beautiful than the last. While the prince gazed at them in surprise, not knowing which he liked best, the girls began to lift their eyes and smile at him. He waited, expecting them to speak, but no sound came.

Suddenly he noticed that one of the windows was covered by a curtain of white silk.

He lifted it, and saw before him the image of a maiden beautiful as the day and sad as the tomb, clothed in a white robe, having a girdle of silver and a crown of pearls. The prince stood and gazed at her, as if he had been turned into stone, but as he looked the sadness which, was on her face seemed to pass into his heart, and he cried out:

'This one shall be my wife. This one and no other.'

As he said the words the young girl blushed and hung her head, and all the other figures vanished.

The young prince went quickly back to his father, and told him all he had seen and which wife he had chosen. The old man listened to him full of sorrow, and then he spoke:

'You have done ill, my son, to search out that which was hidden, and you are running to meet a great danger. This young girl has fallen into the power of a wicked sorcerer, who lives in an iron castle. Many young men have tried to deliver her, and none have ever come back. But what is done is done! You have given your word, and it cannot be broken. Go, dare your fate, and return to me safe and sound.'

So the prince embraced his father, mounted his horse, and set forth to seek his bride. He rode on gaily for several hours, till he found himself in a wood where he had never been before, and soon lost his way among its winding paths and deep valleys. He tried in vain to see where he was: the thick trees shut out the sun, and he could not tell which was north and which was south, so that he might know what direction to make for. He felt in despair, and had quite given up all hope of getting out of this horrible place, when he heard a voice calling to him.

'Hey! hey! stop a minute!'

The prince turned round and saw behind him a very tall man, running as fast as his legs would carry him.

'Wait for me,' he panted, 'and take me into your service. If you do, you will never be sorry.'

'Who are you?' asked the prince, 'and what can you do?'

'Long is my name, and I can lengthen my body at will. Do you see that nest up there on the top of that pine-tree? Well, I can get it for you without taking the trouble of climbing the tree,' and Long stretched himself up and up and up, till he was very soon as tall as the pine itself. He put the nest in his pocket, and before you could wink your eyelid he had made himself small again, and stood before the prince.

'Yes; you know your business,' said he, 'but birds' nests are no use to me. I am too old for them. Now if you were only able to get me out of this wood, you would indeed be good for something.'

'Oh, there's no difficulty about that,' replied Long, and he stretched himself up and up and up till he was three times as tall as the tallest tree in the forest. Then he looked all round and said, 'We must go in this direction in order to get out of the wood,' and shortening himself again, he took the prince's horse by the bridle, and led him along. Very soon they got clear of the forest, and saw before them a wide plain ending in a pile of high rocks, covered here and there with trees, and very much like the fortifications of a town.

As they left the wood behind, Long turned to the prince and said, 'My lord, here comes my comrade. You should take him into your service too, as you will find him a great help.'

'Well, call him then, so that I can see what sort of a man he is.'

'He is a little too far off for that,' replied Long. 'He would hardly hear my voice, and he couldn't be here for some time yet, as he has so much to carry. I think I had better go and bring him myself,' and this time he stretched himself to such a height that his head was lost in the clouds. He made two or three strides, took his friend on his back, and set him down before the prince. The new-comer was a very fat man, and as round as a barrel.

'Who are you?' asked the prince, 'and what can you do?'

'Your worship, Broad is my name, and I can make myself as wide as I please.'

'Let me see how you manage it.'

'Run, my lord, as fast as you can, and hide yourself in the wood,' cried Broad, and he began to swell himself out.

The prince did not understand why he should run to the wood, but when he saw Long flying towards it, he thought he had better follow his example. He was only just in time, for Broad had so suddenly inflated himself that he very nearly knocked over the prince and his horse too. He covered all the space for acres round. You would have thought he was a mountain!

At length Broad ceased to expand, drew a deep breath that made the whole forest tremble, and shrank into his usual size.

'You have made me run away,' said the prince. 'But it is not every day one meets with a man of your sort. I will take you into my service.'

So the three companions continued their journey, and when they were drawing near the rocks they met a man whose eyes were covered by a bandage.

'Your excellency,' said Long, 'this is our third comrade. You will do well to take him into your service, and, I assure you, you will find him worth his salt.'

'Who are you?' asked the prince. 'And why are your eyes bandaged? You can never see your way!'

'It is just the contrary, my lord! It is because I see only too well that I am forced to bandage my eyes. Even so I see as well as people who have no bandage. When I take it off my eyes pierce through everything. Everything I look at catches fire, or, if it cannot catch fire, it falls into a thousand pieces. They call me Quickeye.'

And so saying he took off his bandage and turned towards the rock. As he fixed his eyes upon it a crack was heard, and in a few moments it was nothing but a heap of sand. In the sand something might be detected glittering brightly. Quickeye picked it up and brought it to the prince. It turned out to be a lump of pure gold.

'You are a wonderful creature,' said the prince, 'and I should be a fool not to take you into my service. But since your eyes are so good, tell me if I am very far from the Iron Castle, and what is happening there just now.'

'If you were travelling alone,' replied Quickeye, 'it would take you at least a year to get to it; but as we are with you, we shall arrive there to-night. Just now they are preparing supper.'

'There is a princess in the castle. Do you see her?'

'A wizard keeps her in a high tower, guarded by iron bars.'

'Ah, help me to deliver her!' cried the prince.

And they promised they would.

Then they all set out through the grey rocks, by the breach made by the eyes of Quickeye, and passed over great mountains and through deep woods. And every time they met with any obstacle the three friends contrived somehow to put it aside. As the sun was setting, the prince beheld the towers of the Iron Castle, and before it sank beneath the horizon he was crossing the iron bridge which led to the gates. He was only just in time, for no sooner had the sun disappeared altogether, than the bridge drew itself up and the gates shut themselves.

There was no turning back now!

The prince put up his horse in the stable, where everything looked as if a guest was expected, and then the whole party marched straight up to the castle. In the court, in the stables, and all over the great halls, they saw a number of men richly dressed, but every one turned into stone. They crossed an endless set of rooms, all opening into each other, till they reached the dining-hall. It was brilliantly lighted; the table was covered with wine and fruit, and was laid for four. They waited a few minutes expecting someone to come, but as nobody did, they sat down and began to eat and drink, for they were very hungry.

When they had done their supper they looked about for some place to sleep. But suddenly the door burst open, and the wizard entered the hall. He was old and hump-backed, with a bald head and a grey beard that fell to his knees. He wore a black robe, and instead of a belt three iron circlets clasped his waist. He led by the hand a lady of wonderful beauty, dressed in white, with a girdle of silver and a crown of pearls, but her face was pale and sad as death itself.

The prince knew her in an instant, and moved eagerly forward; but the wizard gave him no time to speak, and said:

'I know why you are here. Very good; you may have her if for three nights following you can prevent her making her escape. If you fail in this, you and your servants will all be turned into stone, like those who have come before you.' And offering the princess a chair, he left the hall.

The prince could not take his eyes from the princess, she was so lovely! He began to talk to her, but she neither answered nor smiled, and sat as if she were made of marble. He seated himself by her, and determined not to close his eyes that night, for fear she should escape him. And in order that she should be doubly guarded, Long stretched himself like a strap all round the room, Broad took his stand by the door and puffed himself out, so that not even a mouse could slip by, and Quickeye leant against a pillar which stood in the middle of the floor and supported the roof. But in half a second they were all sound asleep, and they slept sound the whole night long.

In the morning, at the first peep of dawn, the prince awoke with a start. But the princess was gone. He aroused his servants and implored them to tell him what he must do.

'Calm yourself, my lord,' said Quickeye. 'I have found her already. A hundred miles from here there is a forest. In the middle of the forest, an old oak, and on the top of the oak, an acorn. This acorn is the princess. If Long will take me on his shoulders, we shall soon bring her back.' And sure enough, in less time than it takes to walk round a cottage, they had returned from the forest, and Long presented the acorn to the prince.

'Now, your excellency, throw it on the ground.'

The prince obeyed, and was enchanted to see the princess appear at his side. But when the sun peeped for the first time over the mountains, the door burst open as before, and the wizard entered with a loud laugh. Suddenly he caught sight of the princess; his face darkened, he uttered a low growl, and one of the iron circlets gave way with a crash. He seized the young girl by the hand and bore her away with him.

All that day the prince wandered about the castle, studying the curious treasures it contained, but everything looked as if life had suddenly come to a standstill. In one place he saw a prince who had been turned into stone in the act of brandishing a sword round which his two hands were clasped. In another, the same doom had fallen upon a knight in the act of running away. In a third, a serving man was standing eternally trying to convey a piece of beef to his mouth, and all around them were others, still preserving for evermore the attitudes they were in when the wizard had commanded 'From henceforth be turned into marble.' In the castle, and round the castle all was dismal and desolate. Trees there were, but without leaves; fields there were, but no grass grew on them. There was one river, but it never flowed and no fish lived in it. No flowers blossomed, and no birds sang.

Three times during the day food appeared, as if by magic, for the prince and his servants. And it was not until supper was ended that the wizard appeared, as on the previous evening, and delivered the princess into the care of the prince.

All four determined that this time they would keep awake at any cost. But it was no use. Off they went as they had done before, and when the prince awoke the next morning the room was again empty.

With a pang of shame, he rushed to find Quickeye. 'Awake! Awake! Quickeye! Do you know what has become of the princess?'

Quickeye rubbed his eyes and answered: 'Yes, I see her. Two hundred miles from here there is a mountain. In this mountain is a rock. In the rock, a precious stone. This stone is the princess. Long shall take me there, and we will be back before you can turn round.'

So Long took him on his shoulders and they set out. At every stride they covered twenty miles, and as they drew near Quickeye fixed his burning eyes on the mountain; in an instant it split into a thousand pieces, and in one of these sparkled the precious stone. They picked it up and brought it to the prince, who flung it hastily down, and as the stone touched the floor the princess stood before him. When the wizard came, his eyes shot forth flames of fury. Cric-crac was heard, and another of his iron bands broke and fell. He seized the princess by the hand and led her off, growling louder than ever.

All that day things went on exactly as they had done the day before. After supper the wizard brought back the princess, and looking him straight in the eyes he said, 'We shall see which of us two will gain the prize after all!'

That night they struggled their very hardest to keep awake, and even walked about instead of sitting down. But it was quite useless. One after another they had to give in, and for the third time the princess slipped through their fingers.

When morning came, it was as usual the prince who awoke the first, and as usual, the princess being gone, he rushed to Quickeye.

'Get up, get up, Quickeye, and tell me where is the princess?'

Quickeye looked about for some time without answering. 'Oh, my lord, she is far, very far. Three hundred miles away there lies a black sea. In the middle of this sea there is a little shell, and in the middle of the shell is fixed a gold ring. That gold ring is the princess. But do not vex your soul; we will get her. Only to-day, Long must take Broad with him. He will be wanted badly.'

So Long took Quickeye on one shoulder, and Broad on the other, and they set out. At each stride they left thirty miles behind them. When they reached the black sea, Quickeye showed them the spot where they must seek the shell. But though Long stretched down his hand as far as it would go, he could not find the shell, for it lay at the bottom of the sea.

'Wait a moment, comrades, it will be all right. I will help you,' said Broad.

Then he swelled himself out so that you would have thought the world could hardly have held him, and stooping down he drank. He drank so much at every mouthful, that only a minute or so passed before the water had sunk enough for Long to put his hand to the bottom. He soon found the shell, and pulled the ring out. But time had been lost, and Long had a double burden to carry. The dawn was breaking fast before they got back to the castle, where the prince was waiting for them in an agony of fear.

Soon the first rays of the sun were seen peeping over the tops of the mountains. The door burst open, and finding the prince standing alone the wizard broke into peals of wicked laughter. But as he laughed a loud crash was heard, the window fell into a thousand pieces, a gold ring glittered in the air, and the princess stood before the enchanter. For Quickeye, who was watching from afar, had told Long of the terrible danger now threatening the prince, and Long, summoning all his strength for one gigantic effort, had thrown the ring right through the window.

The wizard shrieked and howled with rage, till the whole castle trembled to its foundations. Then a crash was heard, the third band split in two, and a crow flew out of the window.

Then the princess at length broke the enchanted silence, and blushing like a rose, gave the prince her thanks for her unlooked-for deliverance.

But it was not only the princess who was restored to life by the flight of the wicked black crow. The marble figures became men once more, and took up their occupations just as they had left them off. The horses neighed in the stables, the flowers blossomed in the garden, the birds flew in the air, the fish darted in the water. Everywhere you looked, all was life, all was joy!

And the knights who had been turned into stone came in a body to offer their homage to the prince who had set them free.

'Do not thank me,' he said, 'for I have done nothing. Without my faithful servants, Long, Broad, and Quickeye, I should even have been as one of you.'

With these words he bade them farewell, and departed with the princess and his faithful companions for the kingdom of his father.

The old king, who had long since given up all hope, wept for joy at the sight of his son, and insisted that the wedding should take place as soon as possible.

All the knights who had been enchanted in the Iron Castle were invited to the ceremony, and after it had taken place, Long, Broad, and Quickeye took leave of the young couple, saying that they were going to look for more work.

The prince offered them all their hearts could desire if they would only remain with him, but they replied that an idle life would not please them, and that they could never be happy unless they were busy, so they went away to seek their fortunes, and for all I know are seeking still.

[Contes populaires. Traduits par Louis Leger. Paris: Leroux, editeur.]

The Grey Fairy Book, by Andrew Lang, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[f35]

Prunella

There was once upon a time a woman who had an only daughter. When the child was about seven years old she used to pass every day, on her way to school, an orchard where there was a wild plum tree, with delicious ripe plums hanging from the branches. Each morning the child would pick one, and put it into her pocket to eat at school. For this reason she was called Prunella. Now, the orchard belonged to a witch. One day the witch noticed the child gathering a plum, as she passed along the road. Prunella did it quite innocently, not knowing that she was doing wrong in taking the fruit that hung close to the roadside. But the witch was furious, and next day hid herself behind the hedge, and when Prunella came past, and put out her hand to pluck the fruit, she jumped out and seized her by the arm.

'Ah! you little thief!' she exclaimed. 'I have caught you at last. Now you will have to pay for your misdeeds.'

The poor child, half dead with fright, implored the old woman to forgive her, assuring her that she did not know she had done wrong, and promising never to do it again. But the witch had no pity, and she dragged Prunella into her house, where she kept her till the time should come when she could have her revenge. As the years passed Prunella grew up into a very beautiful girl. Now her beauty and goodness, instead of softening the witch's heart, aroused her hatred and jealousy.

One day she called Prunella to her, and said: 'Take this basket, go to the well, and bring it back to me filled with water. If you don't I will kill you.'

The girl took the basket, went and let it down into the well again and again. But her work was lost labour. Each time, as she drew up the basket, the water streamed out of it. At last, in despair, she gave it up, and leaning against the well she began to cry bitterly, when suddenly she heard a voice at her side saying 'Prunella, why are you crying?'

Turning round she beheld a handsome youth, who looked kindly at her, as if he were sorry for her trouble.

'Who are you,' she asked, 'and how do you know my name?'

'I am the son of the witch,' he replied, 'and my name is Bensiabel. I know that she is determined that you shall die, but I promise you that she shall not carry out her wicked plan. Will you give me a kiss, if I fill your basket?'

'No,' said Prunella, 'I will not give you a kiss, because you are the son of a witch.'

'Very well,' replied the youth sadly. 'Give me your basket and I will fill it for you.' And he dipped it into the well, and the water stayed in it. Then the girl returned to the house, carrying the basket filled with water. When the witch saw it, she became white with rage, and exclaimed 'Bensiabel must have helped you.' And Prunella looked down, and said nothing.

'Well, we shall see who will win in the end,' said the witch, in a great rage.

The following day she called the girl to her and said: 'Take this sack of wheat. I am going out for a little; by the time I return I shall expect you to have made it into bread. If you have not done it I will kill you.' Having said this she left the room, closing and locking the door behind her.

Poor Prunella did not know what to do. It was impossible for her to grind the wheat, prepare the dough, and bake the bread, all in the short time that the witch would be away. At first she set to work bravely, but when she saw how hopeless her task was, she threw herself on a chair, and began to weep bitterly. She was roused from her despair by hearing Bensiabel's voice at her side saying: 'Prunella, Prunella, do not weep like that. If you will give me a kiss I will make the bread, and you will be saved.'

'I will not kiss the son of a witch,' replied Prunella.

But Bensiabel took the wheat from her, and ground it, and made the dough, and when the witch returned the bread was ready baked in the oven.

Turning to the girl, with fury in her voice, she said: 'Bensiabel must have been here and helped you;' and Prunella looked down, and said nothing.

'We shall see who will win in the end,' said the witch, and her eyes blazed with anger.

Next day she called the girl to her and said: 'Go to my sister, who lives across the mountains. She will give you a casket, which you must bring back to me.' This she said knowing that her sister, who was a still more cruel and wicked witch than herself, would never allow the girl to return, but would imprison her and starve her to death. But Prunella did not suspect anything, and set out quite cheerfully. On the way she met Bensiabel.

'Where are you going, Prunella?' he asked.

'I am going to the sister of my mistress, from whom I am to fetch a casket.'

'Oh poor, poor girl!' said Bensiabel. 'You are being sent straight to your death. Give me a kiss, and I will save you.'

But again Prunella answered as before, 'I will not kiss the son of a witch.'

'Nevertheless, I will save your life,' said Bensiabel, 'for I love you better than myself. Take this flagon of oil, this loaf of bread, this piece of rope, and this broom. When you reach the witch's house, oil the hinges of the door with the contents of the flagon, and throw the loaf of bread to the great fierce mastiff, who will come to meet you. When you have passed the dog, you will see in the courtyard a miserable woman trying in vain to let down a bucket into the well with her plaited hair. You must give her the rope. In the kitchen you will find a still more miserable woman trying to clean the hearth with her tongue; to her you must give the broom. You will see the casket on the top of a cupboard, take it as quickly as you can, and leave the house without a moment's delay. If you do all this exactly as I have told you, you will not be killed.'

So Prunella, having listened carefully to his instructions, did just what he had told her. She reached the house, oiled the hinges of the door, threw the loaf to the dog, gave the poor woman at the well the rope, and the woman in the kitchen the broom, caught up the casket from the top of the cupboard, and fled with it out of the house. But the witch heard her as she ran away, and rushing to the window called out to the woman in the kitchen: 'Kill that thief, I tell you!'

But the woman replied: 'I will not kill her, for she has given me a broom, whereas you forced me to clean the hearth with my tongue.'

Then the witch called out in fury to the woman at the well: 'Take the girl, I tell you, and fling her into the water, and drown her!'

But the woman answered: 'No, I will not drown her, for she gave me this rope, whereas you forced me to use my hair to let down the bucket to draw water.'

Then the witch shouted to the dog to seize the girl and hold her fast; but the dog answered: 'No, I will not seize her, for she gave me a loaf of bread, whereas you let me starve with hunger.'

The witch was so angry that she nearly choked, as she called out: 'Door, bang upon her, and keep her a prisoner.'

But the door answered: 'I won't, for she has oiled my hinges, so that they move quite easily, whereas you left them all rough and rusty.'

And so Prunella escaped, and, with the casket under her arm, reached the house of her mistress, who, as you may believe, was as angry as she was surprised to see the girl standing before her, looking more beautiful than ever. Her eyes flashed, as in furious tones she asked her, 'Did you meet Bensiabel?'

But Prunella looked down, and said nothing.

'We shall see,' said the witch, 'who will win in the end. Listen, there are three cocks in the hen-house; one is yellow, one black, and the third is white. If one of them crows during the night you must tell me which one it is. Woe to you if you make a mistake. I will gobble you up in one mouthful.'

Now Bensiabel was in the room next to the one where Prunella slept. At midnight she awoke hearing a cock crow.

'Which one was that?' shouted the witch.

Then, trembling, Prunella knocked on the wall and whispered: 'Bensiabel, Bensiabel, tell me, which cock crowed?'

'Will you give me a kiss if I tell you?' he whispered back through the wall.

But she answered 'No.'

Then he whispered back to her: 'Nevertheless, I will tell you. It was the yellow cock that crowed.'

The witch, who had noticed the delay in Prunella's answer, approached her door calling angrily: 'Answer at once, or I will kill you.'

So Prunella answered: 'It was the yellow cock that crowed.'

And the witch stamped her foot and gnashed her teeth.

Soon after another cock crowed. 'Tell me now which one it is,' called the witch. And, prompted by Bensiabel, Prunella answered: 'That is the black cock.'

A few minutes after the crowing was heard again, and the voice of the witch demanding 'Which one was that?'

And again Prunella implored Bensiabel to help her. But this time he hesitated, for he hoped that Prunella might forget that he was a witch's son, and promise to give him a kiss. And as he hesitated he heard an agonised cry from the girl: 'Bensiabel, Bensiabel, save me! The witch is coming, she is close to me, I hear the gnashing of her teeth!'

With a bound Bensiabel opened his door and flung himself against the witch. He pulled her back with such force that she stumbled, and falling headlong, dropped down dead at the foot of the stairs.

Then, at last, Prunella was touched by Bensiabel's goodness and kindness to her, and she became his wife, and they lived happily ever after.

 

 

End of The Grey Fairy Book.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hba.txt =====


    
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

HINDU BOOK

  

----OF----

  

ASTROLOGY

 

          OR YOGIC KNOWLEDGE OF THE STARS AND PLANETARY FORCES AND HOW TO CONTROL   THEM TO OUR ADVANTAGE ...

     
    

 

  

BY

  

BHAKTI SEVA (The Blissful Prophet)

  

PUBLISHED BY

  

THE NEW YORK MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES

  

22 North William Street, New York City

  

[1902]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, March 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
Chart

 

           

       Parts of the
   Grand Man
   Relating to the

       Signs

       Domain
   of the
   Signs.

       Date of the Signs.

       Page No.

     
      Four
   Positive
   Signs

        

       Head

        

       aries
   Aries.

       Fire.

       Mch. 21 to Apr. 19.

       <page 35>

     
      Neck

       taurus
   Taurus.

       Earth.

       Apr. 19 to May 20.

       <page 42>

     
      Chest

       gemini
   Gemini.

       Air.

       May 20 to June 21.

       <page 49>

     
      Heart

       cancer
   Cancer.

       Water.

       June 21 to July 22.

       <page 55>

     
      Four
   Middle
   Signs

       Stomach

       leo
   Leo.

       Fire.

       July 22 to Aug. 22.

       <page 62>

     
      Upper Intestines

       virgo
   Virgo.

       Earth.

       Aug. 22 to Sept. 23.

       <page 69>

     
      Lower Intestines

       libra
   Libra.

       Air.

       Sept. 23 to Oct. 23.

       <page 70>

     
      Genitals

       scorpio
   Scorpio.

       Water.

       Oct. 23 to Nov. 22.

       <page 83>

     
      Four
   Negative
   Signs

       Upper Leg

       sagittarius
   Sagittarius.

       Fire.

       Nov. 23 to Dec. 21.

       <page 90>

     
      Knees

       capricorn
   Capricorn.

       Earth.

       Dec. 21 to Jan. 20.

       <page 14>

     
      Calf

       aquarius
   Aquarius.

       Air.

       Jan. 20 to Feb. 19.

       <page 21>

     
      Feet

       pisces
   Pisces.

       Water.

       Feb. 19 to Mch. 21.

       <page 78>

     
   
     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS.

           

       PAGE.

     
      THE HINDU BOOK OF ASTROLOGY--INTRODUCTION

       <page 7>

     
      CAPRICORN

       <page 14>

     
      AQUARIUS

       <page 21>

     
      PISCES

       <page 28>

     
      ARIES

       <page 35>

     
      TAURUS

       <page 42>

     
      GEMINI

       <page 49>

     
      CANCER

       <page 55>

     
      LEO

       <page 62>

     
      VIRGO

       <page 69>

     
      LIBRA

       <page 76>

     
      SCORPIO

       <page 83>

     
      SAGITTARIUS

       <page 90>

     
      THE HINDU YOGIS' RULES FOR ATTAINING HEALTH, WEALTH AND   HAPPINESS

       <page 97>

     
   
     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

THE HINDU BOOK

  

OF

  

ASTROLOGY

For thousands of years the Hindu Astrologers have by their knowledge of the solar system been enabled to formulate a system of Astrology which enables them to speak with scientific authority and certainty with respect to the planetary influences upon mankind.

Each person is born in or under one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac and is thus influenced more or less throughout life by the planetary conditions at time of birth.

In this work I propose to state the natural tendencies of each person and in a certain way indicate what they should do and what they should not do to make their life a success.

[p. 8]

By referring to your sign, which is indicated by the date and month when you were born, you will see what your natural tendencies are, and what it is best for you to do to attract and use unseen forces and powers which are your birthright, and which will aid you to make your future bright.

Each and every person is naturally endowed with peculiar and great powers which make for good, and also are born with tendencies which must be corrected in order that the higher and good powers and forces may be able to work to advantage. No matter how bad your lot may seem to you, and how difficult it is for you to get along in the world, you can readily change all darkness to the brightest sunshine if you only go about it in the right spirit.

The first step to take is to fix in your mind a strong desire for what you wish, and persistently and patiently hold this desire until you get it fulfilled. In India, men, through the advice of eminent astrologers, will have an aspiration to accomplish a certain thing, and will persistently hold and believe they will be successful in attaining what they desire until they get their aspiration satisfied.

There are three things absolutely essential to happiness and which will always bring success; viz., hope, patience and determination--persistent

[p. 9]

determination to reach success. When we learn to exercise our mind and will on hope, patience and determination, we find a wide door open to permanent health, wealth, honor and happiness. One who grumbles and complains and whines and murmurs because others are successful will never have fair Fortune's smile; the unseen powers cannot and will not help any soul who whines, complains and murmurs in a world that is filled with health, wealth and happiness. The grumbler and complainer is never loved; no one desires to help such a being. Indeed, the world leas no use for such persons, as they are repulsive. Their natures are poisoned with pessimism and they repel and drive from them constantly millions of good things.

The Devas (angels) can and do help the bright and cheerful ones who are full of hope, and aspire to great and good things; while the lazy, indolent and whining beings are surrounded by low and degrading forces, which keep them always from everything that is good in this world of good things.

There is a cause for every effect. There is a reason why some men and women are successful, and a reason why others are sick and worried and poverty-stricken, miserable and unhappy.

No one can reach success or happiness until he

[p. 10]

or she first calmly, yet with grim determination, says: I WILL BE WHAT I WILL TO BE. MY LIFE MUST BE ONE OF SUCCESS AND HAPPINESS. MY MISTAKES AND ERRORS WILL NOT DISCOURAGE ME; BUT I WILL PROFIT BY THEM AND MAKE THEM SERVE AS STEPPING STONES TO TRUTH AND SUCCESS.

It is always wise to calmly reflect upon the past; but very unwise and exceedingly foolish and weakening to brood or worry about the missteps we have taken. No matter what happens to you keep a cheerful and hopeful mind and you will eventually succeed beyond all your fondest expectations. Health, success and happiness is always abundantly measured out by the higher and unseen powers to those who are persistently patient, hopeful and courageous.

No matter what one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac you are born under, you can develop into a good and successful person if you will pay strict attention to the golden truths printed in this book. Scarcely one person of the large and growing human family pay enough attention to questions bearing upon individual happiness, prosperity, harmony and health. This book should be read many times and carefully studied because it contains vital truths respecting our well-being. It suggests

[p. 11]

to an open and aspiring mind the TREMENDOUS POWER OF THE WILL, which, if intelligently exercised, can do wonders. Anyone, with a little mental effort, can train and develop the will just as easy as we can train and develop the muscles by persistent physical exercise. "The moment we fully and vitally realize who and what we are, we then begin to build our own world even as God builds His."

As long as one thinks he is weak; that he is a poor worm of the dust; that he has no chance; that his fate is to be whirled hither and thither by forces over which he has no control, just that long he will be at the mercy of such forces. But, I tell you, everyone can control these forces and powers and can accomplish grand results the very moment he cleanses his mind of fear and doubt about his ability to succeed. AS A MAN THINKS SO HE WILL BE. Continually think disease and you will continually be weak and sick; continually think poverty and you will continually be poverty-stricken. These are truths, absolute truths.

We must strenuously strive to be SOUND, HELPFUL AND SENSIBLE; we must be strong, self-reliant, self-supporting and not dependent. Servile dependence in money matters is no longer deemed honorable. Poverty cannot bring happiness. To

[p. 12]

abolish poverty we must work with faith and hope, and banish once and for all time any and all fears of failure,--worry about the past, or apprehension about the future. We must live intensely in the present, let go the past, and the future will take care of itself. WE ARE ALL MASTERS OF OUR OWN FATE. FOOLS BELIEVE IN LUCK AND CHANCE.

Each one occupies a good place in the Universal Zodiac, and all our sufferings are due entirely to a lack of knowledge and wisdom. Now, my sole aim in writing this book, is to wake people up out of the delusions in which they live. I tell you all, you are greater beings than you imagine you are; that your dormant or latent powers and forces are great and wonderful; that YOU and YOU alone limit yourself and suffer because you will not rouse yourself to the grand truths which wise and good men have taught for thousands of years, namely, that you are all the children of ONE great loving Father, who is ever trying to point you the way to Eternal happiness through the YOGIS, ADEPTS AND MASTERS who are the mediums through whom God the Blessed Father works to help His children. There is a good time coming for all of us, and we can hasten that time by a little thought.

Blessed be all the Yogis, Sankaras, Vidyaranya,

[p. 13]

and King Sudhanva, and blessed be all the readers

of my books, and may joy, peace, health, prosperity and happiness come to all beings on this planet.

BHAKTI SEVA, MYSTIC NO. 10,         
 22 North William Street,      
 New York City.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

Capricorn.

  

capricorn

All persons born from December 21 to January 19, inclusive, were born under the sign of Capricorn.

This is the last sign of the Earth Triplicity, and is the dark or mysterious sign of the earth. It will be well for you to study, read much, and do a lot of thinking. Many professional men and women come out of this sign, especially orators, lecturers and teachers. Education and knowledge of all kinds will be very beneficial for you. Work hard at one thing at a time, and don't try to accomplish too many things in a given time. Act as you think best, and don't permit anyone to run your affairs. By attending strictly to your own business, and not meddling or interfering with the affairs of others, you will become very successful. At times you are liable to become blue and depressed. Really there is no cause for any Capricorn person to ever feel dejected or disheartened, as everything good in the Universe is attracted to this sign. By being kind, gentle, noble and generous you will

[p. 15]

become very magnetic and charming and people will love you, especially those of the opposite sex. You also have wonderful hypnotic powers which can be brought to a very high degree of development by always being patient and never allowing yourself to become angry or to feel envious or jealous of others. Both your magnetic and hypnotic powers will lead you to wealth and success. Be careful of your money, and don't try to help others too much. Always keep well informed of the progress of the world and keep your mind open, broad and tolerant, respecting the opinion of others even if you don't believe in them. Always put your whole heart, soul and energy into everything you undertake, no matter if the undertaking is a small one. I know your nature is to do large and great things, and that is all right; but ever remember if you do the smallest thing in the world successfully it will put you in a position to do something better and greater. All Capricorn people ought to have a good business education, and should ever strive to acquire and save money. I don't mean to be stingy, mean or penurious about money matters, because no one in this great and wonderful age will be much of a success who is not liberal and broad-minded with respect to money matters. The

[p. 16]

women of this sign are very sensible, practical and lovable; they make excellent wives, managers of homes and housekeepers of large institutions. Music to you is very beneficial. Some excellent singers, musicians, actors and actresses come out of this sign. Enjoy yourself all you can in a rational and sensible way, such as attending social gatherings, entertainments, concerts, lectures and public meetings. Be moderate and temperate in all you do, and your success and happiness is assured. Never doubt your ability to amass money in any line of work which you really love; it is foolish for you to engage in work that is utterly distasteful to you, and in which you cannot willingly put your whole heart, head and soul. Ever remember that while wealth is a great thing to have there are other equally as great things for you to acquire, viz., perfect health, and a thorough cultivation of your mind and higher nature. Don't be proud, arrogant or dictatorial; remember we are all of one family and that we are all God's children. It is difficult to get Capricorn people to give much time to the cultivation of the spiritual side of their natures; yet, when once aroused in this respect they often become enthusiastic and earnest workers in religious causes. Right here I desire to state that it will be well for you to remember

[p. 17]

that without any exception every great and true man and woman in all history was a lover of God and obeyed the Divine Law. You may question this, but look into the matter fairly, deeply and honestly and you will find my statement is the absolute truth. Avoid being skeptical or pessimistic; don't talk too much, but be a good listener. You can become a very good and useful citizen by holding in your mind high and noble thoughts, and keeping well balanced. When a Capricorn person can fully control their mind so that he or she will not be angry, and free from worry or anxiety, there is no telling how wonderful they will become in their achievements. By often silently thinking and meditating on life and its meaning and the beautiful and higher things in life you will draw to you the Life forces of the Universe and all the good planetary and solar forces of your sign which will bring you to the greatest success and complete and perfect happiness. A study of occult science, philosophy and metaphysical works would be of untold advantage to you. Many of the greatest men and women in the world were born in your sign. This planet's attraction for you is very strong, and you must be very careful to control all your appetites, passions and desires with an iron will, which you possess and can use,

[p. 18]

if you see fit to do so. There is scarcely any limit to your powers if you only will exercise your wonderful will intelligently. A happy marriage is essential to the success and happiness of Capricorn people of both sexes. In India the Yogic astrologers say to you people, get married and follow the Divine command by raising a family of children. We also are very strict in our advice to Capricorn people, that they must love their fellowmen and do unto all as they would be done by. The Golden Rule has been practised in India for thousands of years before the Christian Era. Your sign is governed by Saturn, and you are continually surrounded by planetary forces and solar fluids which can help you. Now, dear friend, be guided by what I say, as I love you dearly and wish to see you make your life a grand success. You can read every word in this book many times to great advantage. A Capricorn person is very foolish to ever doubt his or her ability to succeed.

This sign is governed by Saturn, and the gems are white onyx and moonstone. The astral colors are garnet, brown, silver-gray and black.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are indigestion and melancholia. You are also given to over-work, because of your determination to succeed in whatever you undertake.

[p. 19]

Your best companions are those born in Taurus, Virgo and Libra, also those born in your own sign

People born in this sign are usually short of stature, and sometimes have dark complexions and hair, with remarkably expressive eyes.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One and all the Devas (angels) and all Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Capricorn.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days; any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF SAGITTARIUS--CAPRICORN.

December 21 to 27.

These Cuspers are, as a rule, happier than those born in the sign Capricorn. The social and intellectual ambition of Capricorn is modified by the

[p. 20]

democratic attributes of Sagittarius. The natives of this cusp are among the greatest thinkers of the world. They are natural teachers of the young, and are much fonder of children than the average Capricorner. The successful training of musical talent is easily developed by the response of earth to fire, and the companionable influence of Jupiter. People born in this cusp are just and kindly, are great observers and fine critics. They do not fall in love easily, and when they marry it is because of affection. They are exact, methodical and efficient in all they undertake. They are good dancers, good linguists, and the best of traveling companions.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

Aquarius.

  

aquarius

All persons born from January 20 to February 18, inclusive, were born under the sign of Aquarius.

This is the last sign of the Air Triplicity, and people born under it will do well to give the strictest heed and attention to what I say here. Your strength and power lies wholly within your own hands, and it is very important that you so think and live as to bring out your great possibilities. You must not rely on your friends for help, but must be thoroughly self-reliant, self-supporting and independent. But you should rely on and pay great attention to the teachings and writings of good and great men and women, who are striving to help mankind. You have days of great happiness and days of great misery, and you must learn how to avoid these blue spells and have all of your days bright and happy. This can be done by your understanding once and for all time that you are possessed of unusual powers and abilities; but, if you are lazy and blue you cannot use these powers. Wake up, then, and by your will throw off all

[p. 22]

doubts of your ability to make a grand success of life. When you do this then will come to you great health and wealth, and your rare and natural talents will be amply rewarded. You have wonderful magnetic and hypnotic powers, which you can develop to a very high degree by keeping quiet and calm and free from all worry. As a matter of fact your planetary and solar forces will carry you through any and all sickness or trouble if you will only remain quiet and give them a chance to work. But the very moment you begin to doubt, fret or worry about any good thing coming to you these forces cannot work. Work, and lots of it, is what you require, and you will not amount to a great deal until you keep fully occupied in some line of work which you have a taste or inclination for. You must not be proud or vain, or think too much of yourself. If you do you will not be as charming as you could by being quiet and modest. Persons born in your sign have no reason whatever to idly sit about deploring their misfortunes or inability to succeed, for, I tell you, positively, you can succeed far beyond your fondest expectations, if you will go about it as directed here and elsewhere in this book. Read this book carefully and thoughtfully many times when, you are calm and quiet; its teachings can direct you to

[p. 23]

all you desire. People of your sign who worry and fret and become discouraged surround themselves with the repelling forces of the Universe, which will cause their friends and acquaintances to dislike them; indeed, they drive people from them who could be of great assistance, when in moody or blue fits. Don't live in the senses too much. Remember you are not here to eat, drink and be merry all the time. Realize that you have duties to perform; that God intends each one of His children to do certain work, reap the reward and be cheerful and happy. Don't be afraid or timid or halfhearted in your undertakings, whether it is in amassing money, making love or acquiring knowledge. Whatever you attempt to do or desire to become will be accomplished, providing you have full faith in your ability to succeed. You ought to read a great deal--of newspapers, magazines and books. Reading the lives of successful men and women will help you wonderfully. Don't care what people think or say about your actions. Be good and honest and do the very best you can without fear of criticism or without caring what your friends will think about it. Forge ahead, with strong will, and grim determination to succeed, and your success will be assured. Don't talk at all with your friends about the great things you intend doing;

[p. 24]

keep a closed mouth and quietly and intently go about doing your work or carrying out your plans, and then you will succeed. All this advice will apply to social achievements, business success or love affairs, and is written for both sexes. You can succeed in anything you undertake when once you understand or realize that you must have no fears or doubts about your ability to succeed. Always be careful to think alone over a project, an undertaking or selection of a calling, and after cool and careful thought, if you arrive at a conclusion just what you want to do, go about it, without consulting anyone, fully determined you will succeed. Economy and strict application to business is the foundation of all wealth. Pay as you go and keep out of debt. Debt weakens and makes an arrant coward of one born in your sign. Attention to religion and philosophy will be very beneficial to you. Try to feel and realize that there is a Great and Good God back of everything you see; that this world, this Universe, You, did not happen by chance. When aroused to Spiritual or Divine truths the Aquarius people are marvelous beings. In India, the Yogis, who are the most wonderful people in the world, give their whole lives to worship and the service of God; they are mighty workers and do a great amount of good. We say to you

[p. 25]

of the Aquarius sign have faith and hope, be cheerful and happy, and then the good forces, which are the unseen powers, will all work for your good. The Devas (angels), of which there are countless numbers, will begin to help you just as soon as you have a sincere desire to be a good or great person. Understand, your great help can come from yourself, and when you arouse your will and spirit these unseen forces and powers will be at hand to guide and help you. Either sex of this sign ought to make a happy marriage and surround their home with children.

By knowing and correcting our faults we become great. Strenuously strive to go onward, forward and upward; be progressive; don't lag at the tail end of the procession, but be at the head. Cast out of your mind forever all fear, doubt, lack of hope, and thoughts of failure, and your life will be bright and happy.

This sign is governed by Saturn and Uranus; the gems are sapphire, opal and turquoise; and the astral colors are blue, pink and Nile green.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are rheumatism, pains in the head and feet, brain difficulties, low circulation, loss of vital heat, nervous diseases and gloomy forebodings. Your best companions are those born in Aries,

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] Sagittarius and Aquarius, and sometimes you would work harmoniously with Libra people.

People born in this sign are usually tall, dignified, healthy, robust, and have clear complexions.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels), and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Aquarius.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF CAPRICORN--AQUARIUS.

This is the union of two negative signs--the last sign of the air, the last sign of the earth. From a business point this is said to be the chief cusp for both men and women. The men are cool in their performances and calculations, and are ingenious and are unusually exact. The women have

[p. 27]

a natural gift for business. They can run most any kind of an establishment with ease and success. The pronounced ideas concerning economy insure people born in this cusp plenty of this world's goods. They are original in their ideas and sometimes exceedingly stubborn. They are spasmodically generous, giving where other people do not give, and withholding where others give. They enjoy philanthropic work, but are liable to tire of it if it interferes with their business.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

Pisces

  

pisces

All persons born from February 19 to March 20, inclusive, were born under the sign of Pisces.

Pisces people are born in the last sign of the Water Triplicity, and have a deep, hidden love nature; they are naturally noble, generous and helpful. In India the Astrologers give much attention to Pisces people and I intend here to give you words of advice, which, if heeded and followed, will lead you into the very highest realms of happiness. First you must understand that your realm is the kingdom of the soul; that you must ever strive to live a clean, pure life, be kind, gentle and loving to all beings, especially animals. The world always needs loving people, and it always amply rewards them with all the good things of the world. You can help others and by doing so will help yourself. The most successful men and women in this world are those who are charming, magnetic and hypnotic, and the only way to get these wonderful

[p. 29]

powers in their highest degree is for you to always think well of everyone, to wish everyone in the world success and happiness and never in the slightest way have any feelings of anger, jealousy or envy. The very best of us at times are apt to have these bad thoughts enter our minds, but with patience and practice we can learn to throw such bad and weakening thoughts out of the mind and put in their place higher and better thoughts. Now, this is what you must ever strive to do, and then you will attract powers and forces which will make every being dearly love you, especially the opposite sex. The world will never love or serve a low-minded man or woman. You must always aspire to be great and good, and distinctly understand that if you are good, honest, just and true, you will do a great amount of good in the world and reap the richest awards. By letting your higher or best nature dominate your lower nature you will draw to you anything you desire. Great health, prosperity and happiness is yours if you will only be true to yourself. Many fine musicians, artists, art critics, poets, writers and lecturers come out of this sign. Pisces people also naturally have good judgment and discriminating powers, which place them in high positions of trust and responsibility, and we find among them, private secretaries,

[p. 30]

stenographers, bookkeepers, cashiers and treasurers. Always avoid anything that is low, vulgar, coarse or common. Spend a great deal of your time in reading poetry, history, biography and other good and elevating literature. Listening to much music will be very beneficial to your health and also in developing latent forces within you. I would also advise you to give time to outdoor exercise, especially in the fields and woods, where you can observe nature. Associate all you can with quiet, calm and thoughtful persons, and be alone with good thoughts some time each day. If you have a tendency to talk about yourself, stop it; no one loves an egotist. At times you may feel that all the world is against you, but I say positively that this is bad thinking and is not true; for, as a general thing, all the world loves a Pisces person, especially when they have cultivated the higher nature. You are really a very powerful person, and you can increase your force and powers by always being patient, calm and cheerful. God has endowed you with great natural gifts, and you must realize this fact, and then you will be very successful and very happy. Be broad, liberal and tolerant, and never think falsely, such as, for instance, that any one religion is the only true one. God, in His great wisdom, manifests Himself in

[p. 31]

many ways and through many religions and many sects. Therefore, I say, with divine knowledge and wisdom, that all religions are good for man. This is the age of tolerance and liberality. Dogmas and Creeds keep one in bondage.

Fretting, worrying, anxiety and impatience are your faults at times, and if you want health, wealth and happiness, it will be necessary for you to stop this sort of thing at once, and for all time. Morbid and gloomy feelings will only keep you down and cause untold suffering and agony of mind. If you are inclined to be blue, dejected or depressed, go off in a quiet spot all alone, and silently and earnestly pray to God for Light, Love and Direction, and your prayers will be immediately answered--immediate relief will come to you. People of your sign reach their highest achievement and greatest happiness when they learn to place all their trust and hope in the Blessed One--God--Good. He is the All in All and All Love, and is always ready to help us if we will only give Him a chance to do so.

Don't be obstinate or stubborn or unreasonable, as this attitude of mind will make you suffer from painful nervousness, melancholy and despondency. The Pisces people must be very careful to not allow their minds to dwell on one thing too much,

[p. 32]

and therefore ought to have diversified employments. Another thing, you must curb all foolish emotions and learn to attend strictly to your own affairs, and never, in any way, meddle or interfere with the business of others. Pisces people of both sexes ought to get married and have children. A pleasant, harmonious home of their own is very essential to their happiness.

In amassing wealth you can do it easily if you will be quiet, patient and calm about it; but if you hurry and worry about money, you are apt to be poor--invite poverty. You must learn to become calm, quiet, tranquil, restful and reposeful before the great and wonderful unseen planetary and solar forces can help you. I have surely pointed the way for your success, and I sincerely hope you will be guided by my words.

This sign is governed by Jupiter and Neptune. The gems are chrysolite, pink shell and moonstone. The astral colors are white, pink, emerald-green and black.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are pains in the head, feet and back, and weakness of the digestive organs, and you are liable to have periods of despondency.

Your best companions are those born in Virgo and Capricorn.

[p. 33]

People born in this sign are usually full-faced, with placid, sleepy eyes, and are inclined to be round-shouldered.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Pisces.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF AQUARIUS--PISCES.

February 19 to 25.

The natives of this cusp are honorable in their business relations, and endeavor to carry this principle of truth and justice in everything they do, but they have very little conscience about social engagements. They are liable to be peculiar. They

[p. 34]

wish to oblige everybody, and so they promise and forget, or promise and ignore. They enjoy to be tastefully dressed, and are great lovers of a combination of colors in their dress. They are fond of talking of their own achievements, but are not liable to tell of their failures, sicknesses or troubles. When happily married, they are the most joyous people on earth. There are also a few gay Lotharios and heartless coquettes in this cusp. They have the best disposition of any of the twelve cusps, and they seldom if ever lose their good temper.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

Aries

  

aries

All persons born from March 21 to April 19, inclusive, were born under the sign of Aries.

This is the head of the Fire Triplicity, and is a most favorable sign to be born under. Your success in everything depends upon tremendous push, energy and systematic effort. You must be stubbornly persistent in carrying your projects to a successful end. Men and women of the Aries sign, when they do not fear opposition and are sincerely honest and earnest, become great leaders. The planetary and solar forces which surround you can be of greater help when you are kind, gentle, noble, generous, agreeable and affable. At such times you are very fascinating, charming and exceedingly magnetic and hypnotic. Any man or woman who has magnetism is a grand success in everything. Education, culture and lots of reading will make you a brilliant and charming conversationalist. Knowledge and wisdom are of great importance to you, and you can acquire the same without

[p. 36]

much difficulty; if you will set your mind with grim determination that you must have knowledge, powers and forces which are yours by birth will help you. We Yogis positively know that the Devas (angels) will help all Aries people who have faith in themselves, and are hopeful, cheerful and courageous. There are no powers in the Universe that can help in the slightest degree anyone who whines, murmurs, complains and broods over troubles or obstacles. There is a way out of every trouble, and the calm, quiet, patient being soon discovers that way and is helped by unseen powers. When the higher or spiritual side of the Aries nature is cultivated, it makes a wonderfully strong character, with extraordinary psychic powers for banishing all ill, sorrows and troubles. You can acquire clairvoyant powers when you can learn to diligently apply yourself to trying to improve your mind and body by thought and study. It is very important that you think highly and live simply. Only do one thing at a time and learn to concentrate and apply your mind to that one thing alone and not scatter and throw away your force on a number of undertakings. Steady application is absolutely necessary in amassing wealth and having perfect health and happiness. It will be of advantage to you to study

[p. 37]

occult science and metaphysics. Many such works are published, and if you have a strong desire to know about these subjects you will find a way of laying your hands on the right works at the right time. Always remember you can make a grand success in anything you undertake if you so believe at the commencement of the undertaking and persistently hold to that thought until the end. Aries people of a true religious nature, who persistently and silently pray to God for help, light and direction, invariably have their prayers answered.

And now a few words of caution about envy and jealousy. Often Aries people have envious and jealous thoughts, which retard their progress and dwarf their nature. To counteract this bad and injurious state of mind learn to give forth thoughts of love and kindness to all your fellow beings, and especially learn to love your enemies and those who are more successful than you are. In love affairs you will be a dire failure if you are the least bit jealous. No one can really love or admire anyone tainted the least bit with jealousy. Love is always driven away by jealousy. Moreover, there can be no happiness where there is jealousy. In business matters, envy of others' success is disastrous to one's own success. It should delight you

[p. 38]

beyond all measure to see everyone succeed, and you should never gloat over the failure of anyone who is competing with you. A great man or woman is always above all envy or all jealousy. Selfishness, anger, intense greed and impatience can also block your way to success. You must always strive to be large and broadminded, liberal, tolerant and not bigoted. These are the men and women of the world who succeed--the broadminded people. Now I tell you emphatically that any Aries person who will be guided by my advice, as given here, can without a question of doubt become perfectly healthy, vigorous and powerful, lovable and charming, and wealthy and happy. Associate all you can with good, wise, educated and successful people, and in conversation do little talking yourself, but a great deal of observation and thinking. This is a rule observed by all who desire to become wise and great. Life and its proper conduct is the greatest problem man has to solve, and we must silently and alone give much thought to it. When you have a very important matter to decide, take plenty of time in arriving at a decision; you should always be in a quiet and calm state of mind in settling important matters. Anger, haste and excitement have caused much failure, much sadness and much sorrow in this world.

[p. 39]

A happy marriage is a good thing for Aries people of both sexes, and in the selection of a life partner don't be in too great a hurry. If you are married, then continually study and plan to make your home a bright and happy one. If there is not harmony, peace and happiness in your home, the chances are that it is your fault, as Aries people often cause unhappiness by their anger, selfishness and jealousy.

This sign is governed by Mars and Neptune; the gems are amethyst-Brazilian and diamond. The astral colors are white and rose pink.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are headache, affections of the eyes, stomach troubles and paralysis.

Your best companions are those born in Sagittarius and your own sign.

There are really two distinct types of Aries people; one type is tall, spare, with oval face, swarthy complexion and large shoulders; the other type is short of stature.

May the peace and blessing of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Aries.--Bhakti Seva.

[p. 40]

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF PISCES--ARIES.

March 21 to 27.

This cusp is a union of the feet--intellect--head, which insures remarkable brain power and capacity to carry business projects of all kinds to successful conclusions. They have remarkable enthusiasm and kindliness, which makes them charming friends and companions. Their loyalty is as steadfast as the day is long. They depend upon their intuition, which is remarkable, and their intuition never fails them. The women are unusually fond of men's society and enjoy having a large number of strings to their bow, and do not care to forfeit this pleasure for marriage. The men are more given to marriage than the women, but they have a way of calculating conditions and look before 

[p. 41]

they leap. The genius of this cusp is absolute cleanliness, inside and out. They have warm hearts and cool passions, and are called the consolers of the world.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

Taurus

  

taurus

All persons born from April 20 to May 19, inclusive, were born under the sign of Taurus.

This is the head sign of the Earth Triplicity, and the Taurus people naturally living in the realm of their sensations and emotions, must give great heed to doing certain things, or else they will suffer much. In the first place, you must control your appetites and passions. I know you are generous and like to entertain your friends with good dinners, but don't do too much of it, as you often place them in an embarrassing position, as they are not able to always return your kind and generous favors. Taurus people can amass great fortunes, if they are true to their higher nature, which is to be large-minded, broad and liberal in all they do. It is easier for you to make money than it is to save it. I would advise you to get into the habit of saving a little money regularly for a rainy day; although the true developed Taurus person will see few if any "Rainy Days." You are naturally

[p. 43]

strong intellectually, and ought to cultivate your mind by wide and extensive reading. Some great writers, public speakers, preachers and lecturers come out of your sign. It does not make much difference what profession or line of work you choose, you will be very successful in it, provided you will put all of your mind, heart and soul into it. In other words, your success depends upon being earnestly enthusiastic over anything you have under way. You are a natural born leader, and must not allow others to dictate to you what to do. Don't be proud, vain or arrogant, or even dictatorial, but go along quietly, carrying out whatever plans you may have in hand, and which seem right to you, without permitting anyone to influence your course of procedure. Your inner self--the true man--will decide better what to do than anyone else can. In love matters, social attainments and leadership, you will excel, providing you will be guided by what I write here. Practice silence and patience, and don't think or talk much about what a great person you are. Realize quietly that you are great, but avoid being egotistical, and then you will be very charming, fascinating, magnetic and hypnotic, drawing to yourself all the good things of the Universe. At all times you must have self-control, and understand

[p. 44]

if you cannot control yourself, you cannot help or control others, and what is best of all, control and use to your great advantage the good and wonderful planetary forces and solar fluids, which surround all Taurus people. Mildness, gentleness and consideration for others whom you feel are inferior to yourself, will make you a wonderful man or woman. Women of this sign must not be overbearing and dictatorial, but gentle, mild and calm, and then they will wield a tremendous force. Anyone who has not self-control is not reliable, and does not inspire confidence or respect.

Taurus people, as a rule, have a natural tendency to eat and drink too much, and by not curbing their appetites, bring on disease, depression, morbid and melancholy feelings--the blues. Whenever you feel blue or dejected, fast for a day or stop eating and drinking so much, keep cool and quiet, and you will soon recover your spirits and be bright and cheerful.

Always look upon the opposite sex with pure minds, for overwhelming disaster now and then comes to the Taurus person who is not pure in mind with respect to the opposite sex. Your great force and power is in making your higher nature rule and dominate your lower nature--your brutal instincts. When in a passion Taurus (the Bull)

[p. 45]

people often rip and tear about with the madness of an infuriated bull. You should always be on your guard to not let your angry passions rise and make you ridiculous to all who see you perform. Anger is very weakening, and always destroys charm of character. No one can love one who gets angry spells. One of the worst faults of the Taurus sign is anger. Many a person can trace misfortune, sickness and even failure to a spell of anger. Madness and anger are the signs of an unbalanced mind; indeed, it is often the sign or forerunner of insanity. Don't be too exacting, arbitrary or domineering, and understand others have rights which must be respected. Naturally, no matter how careful you may be to avoid it, you will have your own way, especially when your way is the right and true way.

Taurus men must not be harsh or cruel to their wives, but kind and loving. If you are a married man, and disobey this command of the Yogis, you will suffer greatly. Woman is the grandest and best being in the world; she is not the weaker vessel, but is by all odds the finest organization in the universe. In India woman stands at the head of creation. Many Hindus worship God--as Mother of mankind--not Father. Woman should command our highest love and highest respect.

[p. 46]

All Taurus people will find much happiness in marriage, especially if the marriage is blessed with children. Many a man in this sign has reached his highest success after marriage. In love affairs you can be very successful if you will exercise mildness, gentleness and patience. Now remember you can be mighty, great and good, happy and prosperous only when you conquer your lower nature. "The greatest of all conquests is the conquest of self."

This sign is governed by Venus. The gems are moss agate and emerald. The astral colors are red and lemon yellow. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are heart troubles, dropsy, tumors and sometimes apoplexy and brain disorders. Your best companions are those born under Capricorn and Libra.

People born in this sign usually have full faces, wide noses and mouths, shining flesh inclined to reddishness and are generally powerfully built.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Taurus.--Bhakti Seva.

[p. 47]

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence, you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days; any time less endows one with some * of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF ARIES--TAURUS.

April 19 to 25.

These natives have a wiry, tenacious nature, and show remarkable strength in all mental conditions. It is their nature to load their friends and neighbors with good things to wear and good things to eat. They are fond of the very best things, have good taste, and their beneficiaries are in luck. The impulse of the sex is strong, and they are apt to make unhappy marriages. Their natural tendencies are toward the very highest heights, but if the native of this sign decides to touch the bottom of dissipation and sensuality he will do so. They are called "The children of the four horns," on account of their invincible determination to win. The Ram is fearless and busy, the Bull is fearless and dominant. The natives of this cusp are liable

[p. 48]

to think they know it all, and are given to inflict their advice upon their families and associates. Their capacity is unbounded and they are born rulers.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

Gemini

  

gemini

All persons born from May 20 to June 20, inclusive, were born under the sign of Gemini.

This is the head sign of the Air Triplicity. Gemini people have a vivacious, restless and anxious nature. This is the sign of the Twins, and all born in it have two distinct and pronounced natures--one very low and one very high. As they are apt to be extremists in everything they do, they usually experience alternately the very highest success and great failure--are either very strong and healthy, or are weakly and sick. There is only one thing for a Gemini person to do, and that is to first realize his dual nature and then go to work with a grim determination to kill the lower or base nature. It can be done, and when accomplished, the Gemini man or woman rises to the very highest success and happiness. You will find you have two minds all the time in intense action; one says do this and the other says do that. You want to travel and you want to stay at home; you want to

[p. 50]

work like a demon, and you want to be as lazy and indolent as a drone. Always restless, always anxious and apprehensive, and yet at times very calm. This restless, nervous temperament is due to fear and doubt, and must be supplanted by courage and hope and faith. As a matter of fact, there is no person who can do more and achieve greater success than you can if you will only understand how favorably you are born and your great and wonderful forces of the unseen world which are always ready to help you, if you will only give these powers half a chance. You must learn to be moderate and patient, and keep in a calm, quiet, receptive condition, when great and good things will flow to you in abundance. In other words, place all of your trust and confidence in the Great and Wise God who made and rules ALL in this universe. I know you are apt to doubt this truth, but stop a moment and be reasonable--use your fine and great mind. Look about you and observe everything and soberly ask yourself could this world and all that is in it; this great universe, with its countless solar systems and countless worlds; these human beings, of which I am one, happen by chance? By cool and calm observation and reflection you will answer the question by admitting there must be an intelligent head or force back of it all. Now,

[p. 51]

this Blessed One, of which everything in the universe, especially You are a part, can help you. God is all in all, and is all love, and does not create to destroy. You have absolutely nothing to fear or doubt. All that is necessary for you to do to accomplish all your desires is to have full and unbounded faith in yourself, and then you will be successful.

You can amass great wealth, have perfect health, and permanent happiness the very moment you begin to live in your higher nature. Worry, discontent, complaining and murmuring will keep you in darkness and misery. Improve your mind, study and read much, observe more, and understand knowledge and wisdom brings to man all power and all force and all success and happiness. You must get full control of your desires, appetites and passions, and not be too anxious, too ambitious or too impatient. Learn to not worry, hurry or scurry through life. Do one thing at a time and do that one thing well. Whenever you start any undertaking don't stop until you bring it to an end. Associate with refined and educated people as much as you can, and do not place too high a value on your abilities.

Give to all beings, especially animals, great love, and try to be kind and gentle to everyone. Get a

[p. 52]

good loving partner as a husband or a wife. Marriage is very beneficial to Gemini people. If you are married, do all you possibly can to make your home a bright and happy one.

Be temperate in all things, especially in eating and drinking, and avoid all foods or drinks which excite or make you restless. Gemini people ought to eat sparingly of flesh or animal foods. Listen to music, attend lectures, churches and public meetings. Read much about successful men and women. The study of metaphysics and the occult sciences is very beneficial to Gemini people. Don't be too sensitive or timid. Remember you are a wonderful being and can accomplish much; that there is no such thing as failure to one born in your sign.

Above all things be truthful and avoid making extravagant statements or narrating exploits in which you were the central figure; in plain English, don't be an egotist. In India many of the great seers, sages, Yogis and adepts came out of this sign. The Gemini person is naturally very magnetic and has wonderful hypnotic and clairvoyant powers. Some of the greatest philosophers and prophets of the world were born in this sign. Be being calm, modest, unaffected, truthful and honest, and striving to do the exact right thing,

[p. 53]

you will be a very charming and fascinating person and all persons will dearly love and worship you. Look after your faults and correct them, and you will live a long, prosperous and exceedingly happy life.

This sign is governed by Mercury, and the gems are beryl, aquamarine and dark blue stones, and the astral colors are red, white and blue. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are throat and lung troubles and nervous diseases. Your best companions are those born in Aquarius and Virgo.

People born in this sign are usually well formed, with bright complexion and dark hair.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One; and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Gemini.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

[p. 54]

  

THE CUSP OF TAURUS--GEMINI.

May 20 to 26.

The persons born on either of these six days are remarkably gifted. Their brains and their hands work in harmony. They are thinkers, artisans, artists, orators and inventors. Without early training, they often develop abnormally and spend their time in sensuous enjoyment. Under these conditions the women are either chronically nervous or hysterical, and the men without proper development are careless of their manners and reputation and are liable to be loud-voiced. But, under wise direction, the very opposite exists for both sexes. You will find good taste displayed, and very refined people are developed in this cusp. They are busy and helpful when at their best and indolent when not in good spirits. It is all up and down with these people until they learn to govern themselves. If poor, they are tragically unhappy. They are remarkably proud, and will starve rather than to ask for succor. These people are the very salt of the earth, and when developed to their spiritual and intellectual heritage their natures are most powerful for good when they are understood and they are generous givers but poor receivers.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

Cancer

  

cancer

All persons born from June 21 to July 21, inclusive, were born under the sign of Cancer.

Cancer is the head sign of the Water Triplicity. Hindu Astrology teaches persons born in this sign much that will enable them to go through life successfully. In the first place, you are naturally restless and nervous, and have a hard time making your friends understand your true nature. It is important that you know all your faults and realize that you must overcome them before you can reach the high degree of success which you can attain, and which belongs to your sign. Really you can become very successful and reach greatness by paying strict attention to what I here tell you. Your propensity is to travel, and it would be an excellent thing if you could engage in some occupation that would require you to be on the go most of the time. But don't travel about chasing rainbows or will-o'-the-wisps. Have a steadfast and earnest purpose in everything you do, and try

[p. 56]

to acquire much knowledge of the world by reading good books of travel, history and biographical sketches. Learn at once that it is a very bad thing for you to talk about yourself--about the great things you have done or intend doing. Be silent and act, ever remembering that performance and true work speak louder than boastful talk. Don't get discouraged or make yourself miserable because you cannot do all of the great things you see others doing. If you will keep calm and patient you can attract unseen planetary and solar forces which in time will enable you to surpass in accomplishment many of your acquaintances who seem to be ahead of you. Your best plan is to be secretive and work quietly without letting anyone know your plans. "Acts speak louder than words; silence is golden." You must be at the head and not at the tail end of things, and you can accomplish this by quiet thought, careful study and much reading of the lives of successful men and women. Learn all you can and understand that knowledge and wisdom is power. Stick persistently to one kind of occupation and don't fritter and waste your energy and powers by changing from one thing to another. While you are naturally adapted to do many things well, take the advice of one who knows what he is writing about and stick faithfully and

[p. 57]

persistently to one thing at a time. If you will follow the teachings of Hindu Astrologers, you will never regret it. Under no circumstances tell a lie; be truthful and honest, and you will receive great reward. There is a Great and Loving Ruler of this universe to whom you ought to pray for Light, Love and Direction. Such prayers are always answered. He, the Blessed One, can lead you to all peace and all happiness. The Devas (angels) are ever ready to help you. Have the strongest faith in yourself, for you can succeed and progress and go onward, forward and upward, if you once realize what a great being you are. Cancer people have always furnished the world with great and grand people. Make up your mind that you will be one more of this class. It is in You to be good and great, and you certainly can become so by following Bhakti Seva's advice, as given here.

We Yogis always urge men and women to marry and have children and make happy homes. In all ages through the writings of sages, seers and prophets, God has given the command to His children to marry and perpetuate the races. Any man or woman who does not heed this Divine command is doing wrong. There is nothing that can bring so much success and true happiness into the world

[p. 58]

as a happy marriage. If you are married, then God bless you, and may you create such a happy home that it will be an example to others to do likewise. In love affairs the Cancer people are very successful when they are sincere and persistent. Laziness, selfishness, vanity, jealousy and dishonesty, are sometimes natural to the Cancer person, and must be overcome before any success or happiness can be had. You ought to dress well, but must not run in debt for fine clothes; every dollar you spend for anything ought to be a dollar that you have earned. Don't let people make you vain, silly and foolish by flattering you; flattery can work you great harm if you listen to it. Don't be fickle or inconstant, because a fickle person is soon known, and no one will place any confidence in such a person. Some women of the Cancer sign are very fickle. Cancer is governed by the Moon, and as this satellite of our planet is changing every month, it accounts for the restless and impatient nature of people born in your sign. You can easily remedy all of your bad tendencies and become very strong and great by holding in your mind all the time an earnest desire to be a better man or a better woman. The planetary forces and the solar fluids will then help you to destroy the influence of the Moon. Besides, Cancer people can get much

[p. 59]

strength and help from unseen powers if they will only feel and understand that behind all Creation is one Blessed Principle--the Ancient One--the King of all kings--the very God of the universe. Until you can realize this grand truth you will have to struggle and suffer more or less. God can only help those who sincerely desire His help. The study of philosophy, metaphysics and occult science will open your eyes to wonderful truths, and give you powers and forces that will make you successful, magnetic, charming and fascinating.

This sign is governed by the Moon, and the gems are emerald and black onyx. The astral colors are green and russet brown. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are indigestion, and gastric troubles. Your best companions are those born in Pisces and Scorpio.

People born in this sign are usually of medium stature, rather large in the upper portion of the body, with round face, soft skin, pale complexion and small features.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Cancer.--Bhakti Seva.

[p. 60]

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF GEMINI--CANCER.

June 21 to 27.

The utmost care in childhood is needed to persons born in this cusp. These persons are opinionated and self-willed, but make the best neighbors and friends when they are understood. The women born in this sign are often coquettes. Their marital engagement is treated as a passing sensation, and marriage is liable to be held quite as loosely. They are excessively fond of children, and in case of separation they fight to death for their custody. The men are extremely fond of pleasure, and liable to sacrifice business and home for this pursuit. The bon vivants of the world were born in this cusp. They are excessively fond of show, but possess a magnetic quality that draws everything to them. If they fail in business some one always

[p. 61]

comes to the rescue and helps them start again, and it is very apt to be a woman. They are remarkably brilliant, and always show to advantage on account of their wonderful magnetism. They are fluent talkers, great readers, but are apt to be superficial. The genius of this sign is kindliness.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

Leo

  

leo

All persons born from July 22 to August 21, inclusive, were born under the sign of Leo.

Leo, the Lion, is the middle of the Fire Triplicity. You are naturally of a jovial, sympathetic, free and friendly disposition. To the extent that you are kind-hearted, generous and sympathetic to that extent you are magnetic and hypnotic. Magnetic and hypnotic powers will give you force to accomplish much good, and will draw to you wealth, health and happiness. You must bend every energy to be magnetic and charming, because these qualities are yours by birth. By paying the strictest attention to what I advise in this delineation you can swing through this world as a lovable and powerful being, and can avoid all trouble and friction. Put forth of your love freely to all mankind and have only high aims, ever striving to be pure and high thinking. There is nothing that can harm you or retard your progress and growth if you will only hold steadfast

[p. 63]

to high principles. Learn that silence is great power; that cheerfulness, contentment and patience will bring you much prosperity, much health and much happiness. Never shirk a duty, and work with a high motive, and you will become invincible and can overcome with your mind and will every obstacle in your pathway. Education, culture and refinement can do great things for you. Always remember you were born under very fortunate planetary conditions; that many of the greatest people in the world are Leo people. You have the strength and courage of a lion, and if you are not successful or happy, it is due entirely to your neglect of cultivating and bringing out your wonderful powers. These powers and forces which make for success are always latent in every Leo person, and can only be developed by intelligent exercise of mind and the will. And that reminds me your will power is naturally very strong; but you can add greatly to its strength by continually and persistently holding in your mind high and strong thoughts. Any line of thinking which causes you to be morbid or blue is weakening to your will power, and all worry and apprehension about your success will drive good things away from you. In business, love and money matters you must feel that you will be successful; that there is no possible

[p. 64]

chance for you to fail, and when you can get into that state of mind your success is as certain and sure as two and two are four. Those of the Leo sign who reach the highest attainments are always of a philosophical turn of mind; they fully realize that it is of the utmost importance for them to take the ups and downs of life without a single murmur or complaint. Learn to take the bitter with the sweet, rain with the sunshine, sorrow with joy, and never whine or grumble at seeming fate or ill-luck. In other words, be grateful and thankful for the many good things in the world. By doing this you strengthen your will power and will easily batter down all obstacles in your way to success and happiness. In love affairs, by being mild, gentle and kind to the being loved, you will in return not only win all of that person's love, but will also command their highest respect and admiration. All Leo people should seek an early marriage. If you are married, your chief aim or object should be to make your home bright and happy by flooding it with all the kindness and love you can command.

In every move you make be absolutely fearless and courageous, always keeping in mind that the highest rewards are only earned by indomitable will, great courage and an entire absence of doubt

[p. 65]

and fear. The cultivated and educated Leo persons possess clairvoyant and intuitive powers which enable them to foretell and prophesy things that will happen in the future. Many great prophets, seers, sages and wise men and women come out of the sign of Leo. Listening to music, reading good books and magazines and observing and studying successful men and women is of untold advantage to you. You can learn anything that you will apply your mind to, and ought to be handy in mechanical matters. Your possibilities are so great when you correct and remedy your faults that I have taken special pains in this delineation to caution you against faults which will retard your progress and make you unhappy. In no way ever give way to an inclination to be tricky. Always stick to strict truth and don't borrow money, books or anything. Be independent and self-reliant, and you will become a giant of strength and power. If you yield to laziness, indolence, impatience, anger, worry and anxiety you will bring on yourself misery and suffering. Always control your passion for the opposite sex; by not doing this many a Leo person has brought on great misery and trouble. Always have high ideals and try to

live a pure and high life; let your higher nature have full sway. Whenever you are troubled or

[p. 66]

anxious, I would advise you to go off in a quiet spot and all alone try to calm yourself by thinking of the bright side of life. If you can believe in prayer to the Good God, offer up to Him a silent prayer for calm, peace, help and love, and your prayer will be answered. The power of an earnest, sincere prayer for relief is wonderful. By prayer, the Yogis often perform wonderful things, which, to the ignorant and unbelieving, seem like great miracles. As a matter of fact, we say that every force and power in the universe is natural, and can be controlled and directed in natural ways for good. We know there is nothing supernatural in the universe. The great Sun of this solar system governs your sign, and you can attract all of the wonderful solar fluids and currents to your aid by living the higher life. I have suggested here just what you are to do to have perfect health, amass wealth and happiness, and if you heed my teachings you cannot fail.

This sign is governed by the Sun. The gems are ruby and diamond. The astral colors are red and green. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are weak lungs, heart troubles, fevers, back and kidney troubles and despondency. Your best companions are those born in Sagittarius, Libra and Aries.

[p. 67]

People born in this sign are usually wiry, but not over tall, well proportioned, round head, light or ruddy complexion and have a strong, deep voice and large eyes.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Leo.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF CANCER--LEO.

July 22 to 28.

In these six days are found the elements of fire and water. The most daring and confident, the most unscrupulous politicians were born during this period. The natural Leo laziness is much modified by the Cancer restlessness, which keeps

[p. 68]

them looking for strange sensations and new enjoyments. They are secretive or frank, whichever best suits their purpose. The men require the utmost probity of their wives, but do not care to be called to book in return. The women of this sign are intense, and if treated harshly or indifferently will conceive a disgust for their marital companion. As mothers, they are self-denying and affectionate, and as housekeepers they are orderly; in fact, they are liable to be too orderly for their own comfort and those around them. The people born in this cusp are gifted with phenomenal memory. There are no heights that these people cannot attain if they so determine. They can always be depended upon to stand by a friend through every description of trouble. When well reared and educated these natives have beautiful characters, freely giving to the suffering both from their pocket and their heart.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

Virgo

  

virgo

All persons born from August 21 to September 22, inclusive, were born under the sign of Virgo.

Virgo is the sign of the Virgin, and is the middle sign of the Earth Triplicity, and the people of this sign are usually cool, calm and confident--great and grand qualities, which can bring one to the highest success and happiness. In India, the Yogic Astrologers tell the Virgo people their faults and bad tendencies so that they may correct them and thus reach the high position in life which is theirs by birth under this excellent sign. You can and must excel in everything you undertake; to think of failure is very, very foolish and weakening. Always have hope and courage, and you will draw and attract to yourself wonderful power and force. Fight with strong will and grim determination every obstacle that crosses your path, whether it be sickness, adversity or poverty. You can win every time. You are fully adapted to a business or a professional career, and will be a

[p. 70]

marked success in whatever calling you select, provided you will kill entirely all low, vulgar and selfish tendencies. Your sign represents the hidden fire of the earth, which means you are an all-powerful, forceful being. Learn at once that order and method in your habits are absolutely essential to your happiness, success and well-being. "Order is heaven's first law." Think and observe much, and order your life so that you will do everything in an orderly, methodical and systematic way. Strive strenuously to fully develop all the good that is in you; give much attention to your higher nature; improve yourself morally, spiritually and intellectually. The only force in this universe is the force of Good--the force of God. A beautiful and happy life can only be attained by aspiring for good--the highest. The study of philosophy, occult science and metaphysics will open your mind to a wealth of happiness you little dream of. Always be generous, kind and loyal. Many excellent scholars and musicians are found in this sign, and we always urge Virgo persons of either sex to study much, read much and give a great deal of time to hearing music. Music is very inspiring and helpful to you, and if you have any inclination to play or sing, don't hesitate in cultivating your taste in this direction.

[p. 71]

The pronounced faults of the Virgo people are: A too strong desire to rule and dominate over people, seeing the faults of others and not seeing their own weak points; false pride and false ambition; meddling with other people's business and affairs and not attending strictly to their own business; taking drugs and medicines for imaginary diseases and ailments; conceit, vanity and egotism; falsehood, misrepresentation, exaggeration and making extravagant statements about matters and things, especially with regard to their achievements; running in debt for the sake of keeping up appearances. All of these bad qualities are likely to appear in the lower, uneducated and uncultivated persons of this sign, and if you have any or all of these tendencies I advise you to root them out of your being once and for all time, as they will be the millstones around your neck, which will keep you from rising to a superior position. I do not know of a higher or grander character than the highly developed Virgo person; or of a meaner and lower being when this sign lives on the low plane --in ignorance and darkness. So you see it is of the utmost importance for you to cultivate your higher nature, which is always true and grand. With respect to health the Virgo people are naturally healthy persons, and do not need drugs or

[p. 72]

medicines. Outdoor exercise, lots of air and sunshine will keep you well, strong and vigorous.

In love you will be successful when you learn to not be too critical or exacting. If not married, you will do well to select a life partner who is cheerful and does not look on the dark side of life. If you are married, you can make your home a very happy one by not expecting too much from your wife or husband. Your weak point is seeing faults in others and often a married. Virgo person carries his criticism into his or her married life and sees too many faults in the chosen wife or husband.

Spend much time with nature--in the green fields and woods. Love animals and surround yourself with flowers and domestic pets. If you will be temperate in your eating and don't drug and dose yourself with medicines you can live many years and retain youthful spirits and vigor up to the time you pass on to the other world. The elixir of life is yours if you will only realize that everything in this world is all right and running in perfect order, directed and guided by the Wise One who rules all. You may think you could run this universe better than it is run, but don't attempt it unless you wish to make yourself miserable

[p. 73]

and destroy your great natural powers and forces. Give yourself a frequent careful examination, looking out for your own bad faults or tendencies, and don't waste any of your time and energy in picking out the flaws in others. In this world the Law is that we find exactly what we look for; if we look for bad, bad will come to us; if we think weakness, failure, poverty and that sort of thing we will certainly get our full share of weakness, failure, poverty, etc. As a man thinks so will he be. Poverty is very galling to Virgo people, and they can never amass money until they live on a high plane; that is to say, as long as they brood, whine, grumble, complain and murmur over their lot just so long they will remain poor and miserable. But, on the other hand, let the Virgo person wake up and cast out all fear and doubt--be up and doing with a cheerful spirit and a high motive, then will he or she have success beyond their fondest hopes. You have everything to live for and can have prosperity and happiness by doing as I suggest.

This sign is governed by Mercury, and the gems are pink jasper and hyacinth. The astral colors are gold and black, speckled with blue dots. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are stomach troubles and nervousness. Your best

[p. 74]

companions are those born in Libra--Sagittarius and in your own sign Virgo.

People born in this sign are usually of middle stature and well formed, with noble faces.

May the peace and blessing of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Virgo.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign constitutes six days; any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF LEO--VIRGO.

August 22 to 28.

Persons born on any of these six days make excellent and intelligent citizens. They partake of the strong combination of Fire and Earth. The Earth needs the Sun, and these natives apparently

[p. 75]

understand that need. Both the men and women are fond of everything that grows. They are also tremendous workers, and when educated are logical thinkers. They have a natural ability of taking the good things of the earth to themselves and enjoying them. They make excellent physicians and teachers, and their ability to convince is remarkably pronounced.

The heat of Leo is modified by the coolness and solidity of the Earth, so that there is not so much temptation to take offense as prevails if the two signs were taken separately. They are true children of nature and like to spend most of their time out of doors, wearing as few garments as possible; but when it is necessary to live within four walls they demand the best quality of wearing apparel combined with the latest style.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

Libra

  

libra

All persons born from September 23 to October 22, inclusive, were born under the sign of Libra.

This is the middle sign of the Air Triplicity, and persons born in it have a great variety of disposition. You are naturally persistent and competent, and can, through these qualities, win success. Your foresight and judgment are excellent, and you could become a successful merchant or business man or woman. In studies you can excel, and if you have an inclination to be a scholar, a writer, a lecturer or educator, I would advise you to follow that bent of your mind. The study of Philosophy or Occult science would interest and benefit you much. Indeed, your success, in a very great measure, depends upon acquiring knowledge of what this life is for; why we are here, where we came from and whence we go. This is a wonderful world, and a wonderful universe, controlled and directed by One wonderful Force. "What is that, knowing which, all can be known?"

[p. 77]

Your success and happiness depend upon your being energetic, ambitious and striving to know all that can be known. In all your undertakings you must be fearlessly bold and daring, and never worry over losses, troubles or obstacles. The moment you stop to waste any force or energy in fear, doubt or regrets for past actions, that moment you are in danger. Understand that you are a very fortunate person and can always win success if you feel sure you will win before making the attempt. No half-hearted or faint-hearted work will be a success in your hands. You must be enthusiastically in earnest and feel in every fibre of your being that you will succeed in whatever you attempt to do. Many daring and brilliant financiers, stockbrokers, speculators, schemers, promoters and even gamblers, come out of your sign. Gambling never brings happiness, even if success attends it, and I would caution you against this pernicious habit. There are so many good legitimate enterprises in which you could engage with success, that I would urge on you to apply yourself to a good honest calling.

Men and women of this sign can make themselves very charming, fascinating, magnetic, hypnotic and attractive by curbing their intense passions and appetites a little. Avoid being too reckless

[p. 78]

and too daring; there is a golden mean or happy medium between the two extremes of daring and boldness, and fear and timidity, which you should adopt in all of your undertakings. Libra women are more sensible and have better judgment than the men of this sign. In love affairs exercise great care, and don't place your love through low or sensual feelings. Never borrow money, but earn all you spend; be self-reliant and strong, and fight the world by your own strength and power, which, I can assure you, is very strong. The planetary forces and solar fluids will serve you well and good, when you stand out alone and rely on your own abilities.

The good that Libra people can do in the world when they are spiritually awakened, is astounding. You ought to give your time to reading philosophical works, and ever hold in your mind to be a good, true, forceful man or woman. Learn to adapt yourself to all conditions of life and not to be disturbed by either adversity or prosperity. When you can be calm and tranquil, no matter what happens, that very moment you become a very powerful being and can work wonders. All the powers and forces of the universe are then yours to use; indeed, you will be helped by unseen powers that you little dream exist. If man only

[p. 79]

knew of the countless great souls who could help him, he would have more courage than he has. What you attribute to luck is not luck, but the work of unseen intelligent powers who help those who try to help themselves.

Be kind, amiable, pleasant, gentle and generous to all mankind and all animals. The Devas (angels) are always good to those who are good to the brute creation. As long as you do not worry or fret about money you will have plenty of it, and the best plan for you to follow in amassing a fortune is not to think much about money matters, but plunge ahead in an easy, confident way, in any line that is to your fancy, and you will be successful. Always be broad-minded and liberal in your ideas.

Your great fault is impatience, and you must learn to wait. When you can overcome impatience and will let your higher and better mind guide and direct your actions, you will get along better. Persons of your nature ought to dress well, live in good houses and have all the comforts and even the luxuries of life. It hardly ever pays a Libra person to engage in hard and dirty work; because they must be neat and clean. The world always shows favors to neat, trim and clean-looking people, and has no use for a slovenly appearing person.

[p. 80]

The married people of this sign who have children, and provide good homes for their families, are always very fortunate in their financial undertakings. It is very unwise for a Libra person of either sex to remain unmarried.

One of the glaring faults of this sign is egotism; strive to be modest and quiet, not vain and proud. I would like you, dear reader, to cultivate your higher and better nature all you can. I dearly love the Libra people, because they are always so fearless, daring, dashing and bold. It is difficult for the world to love or help a timid, cowardly person; one who is weak and afraid and goes about telling tales of woe and misery. Yet the Yogis love the weak and ever strive to put hope and courage into them.

This sign is governed by Venus. The gems are diamond and opal. The astral colors are black, crimson and light blue. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are nervous prostration and stomach troubles. Your best companions are those born in your own sign and in Aquarius.

People born in this sign are usually tall and slender, well formed, with oval faces, and have beautiful eyes.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of

[p. 81]

the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Libra.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF VIRGO--LIBRA.

September 23 to 29.

There is the same fondness for out-of-doors of persons born during these six days, as that which distinguishes the Leo--Virgo people. The combination of Virgo and Libra forms a most charming and fascinating character, as the reserve of Virgo is broken up by the ease and enthusiasm of Libra.

These people are not easily taken advantage of, and at the same time have very kind natures and are extremely unselfish. They make enthusiastic

[p. 82]

lovers and devoted marital companions. If they make an unfortunate marriage they keep that to themselves and make the best of it, and turn their attention to business or intellectual pursuits or enjoyment. Their best and most practical friend is nature. They are great travelers, and a trip helps them forget their troubles and disappointments. They are at all times alive to the beauties of this world, and have the pleasant faculty of producing charming results in dress and household arrangements.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

Scorpio

  

scorpio

All persons born from October 23 to November 21, inclusive, were born under the sign of Scorpio.

The Scorpio people are allied to the great powers of the ocean of this planet. This is the middle sign of the Water Triplicity. The Scorpio people are wonderfully strong, as the planetary and solar forces which surge through them constantly, give them great magnetism and vitality. In India, the land of wonders, the Yogis, especially the Bhakti Yogis (True God Lovers), fully know that any person born in this sign has great possibilities, so we earnestly urge them to realize their greatness. Many Yogis and wise men and women are born in this sign, and they have set down many rules which, if followed, will lead the Scorpio person to the greatest success. The most helpful men and women come out of this sign; and the world can rejoice every time a Scorpio person is born. Oh, you blessed people, what strength and power for success and happiness you have! You are the salt of the earth.

[p. 84]

Many eloquent speakers come out of this sign, such as lecturers of note and preachers of prominence. Also some of our best writers are Scorpio people. When not ignorant, but educated, these people can turn their minds and hands to any line of work with success.

Therefore, it is very important that you read a great deal and acquire all the knowledge you can. It is important that you always maintain a quiet, modest and dignified bearing. It is well for you to be fond of the good things of the world, dress well, and have a comfortable home. In money matters you can amass wealth by steady and persistent endeavor in one line. Always be provident and saving, and put by money for future needs or investments. But don't be stingy, mean or penurious; you can be careful with money and yet spend considerable sums in improving your surroundings; in improving your mind. Much of your leisure time should be given to outdoor exercise, as your health and vigor depends upon lots of pure fresh air and sunshine. Traveling on water, such as an ocean or lake trip, is very beneficial to you, and if you are fond of boating give much of your leisure time to it. Strolling along a river bank, or on the shores of a lake or ocean, will do you much good. Don't get money mad, or let money getting be your

[p. 85]

only aim, as being too deeply engrossed in the acquiring of riches often with Scorpio people defeats the very end sought. Sometimes a person of this sign will get money mad and break down their health and destroy the vigor and vitality necessary to everyone who amasses money. Don't worry; don't hurry; take it easy. I mean work steadily at something which you like and give more thought to doing your work honestly and thoroughly, and in the best possible manner, than to what money it will bring you. Learn to work and be busy with the idea of the good your work will do rather than with the thought of how much money you can get out of it.

In love affairs you will be successful from the very moment that you can fully control any feelings of anger, jealousy, envy or hatred. Indeed, the worst fault of this sign, and the fault which retards progress and success, is a tendency that you are likely to have to get angry and disturbed if things don't go just as you think they ought to go. For this cause some Scorpio people are not successful in love and business. Be kind, gentle, amiable and polite to all, and all will love you, and your success is assured. By following this advice you will become magnetic, hypnotic, fascinating, charming, and draw and attract to yourself the love of

[p. 86]

everyone; people will admire you and want to associate with you, and do business with you. This means success. If you are not married, I would advise you to look about and select a good life partner, as marriage will bring you great success and happiness. This advice applies equally to both sexes. And while speaking of marriage let me say, the Hindu Yogis positively know that the man or woman who gets married, no matter what sign they are born in, makes a move which can bring more prosperity and happiness than anything else. We always advocate marriage and the rearing and raising of children. It is the divine command. God intended all of His children to marry and raise children. Countless men and women make life a failure and are very miserable and unhappy, because they have disobeyed God's command about marriage. If you are of a nagging or jealous nature don't think of marriage until you are thoroughly cured of this mean, low and bad habit; there is nothing meaner or lower in our natures than jealousy and its twin brother envy. A jealous or envious person will never be happy; is never loved; always drives people away. Now I want you to overcome all bad tendencies and become a good and true being, and then you can be anything you choose to be. Give some thought to God your Father,

[p. 87]

and understand that in all history there never was a grand or noble character who did not love God--the Good. When you love God you will not be suspicious or want to scold or find fault with people whom you associate with. The best way to love God is to love all human beings and all animals, and be kind, gentle and considerate of others.

Associate all you can with men and women of success, and carefully study and observe how they order their lives. Read the lives of great and good men and women who have achieved success. Around you all the time are great forces and powers which can help you if you will only heed what I say here. My only interest is the deep love I have for all and my desire to see you get the full benefit of the extraordinarily good planetary and solar conditions under which you were born.

This sign is governed by Mars, and the gems are topaz and malachite. The astral colors are golden brown and black. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are heart troubles, weakness of the back, lumbago and gout. Your best companions are those born in Pisces, Libra and Virgo.

People born in this sign are inclined to corpulency in middle life, have dusky complexions, broad square faces and dark hair.

[p. 88]

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Scorpio.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days, any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF LIBRA--SCORPIO.

October 23 to 29.

Persons born on any of these six days have a remarkable creative genius. They are great originators, and can carry their ideas to successful conclusion. The women are excellent cooks and housekeepers and are usually successful in anything they undertake.

The combination of the Libra--Scorpio makes a pleasing and unconventional character. The

[p. 89]

natural Libra fear and hesitation sometimes communicate their influence to this cusp and make the person stop in a crisis, but when the time actually arrives for the deed to be done, the forces from Scorpio unite with those of Libra, and success is generally accomplished. They are sometimes very jealous and untruthful. Their appearance is usually immaculate, and they have a faculty of getting out of most any scrape that they become involved in.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

Sagittarius

  

sagittarius

All persons born from November 22 to December 20, inclusive, were born under the sign of Sagittarius.

This is the last sign of the Fire Triplicity. As this is the sign of earnestness, honesty and frankness, I want to impress you with the fact that the Hindu Yogis give their whole lives to doing good; that all that I write here is for your good; I want you to be successful and happy. The text of all our sermons and writings is "Health, Wealth and Happiness." We try to love the world the same as God does. Naturally you are born for grand achievement. The only things that can retard your progress or be obstacles to your being successful would be tendencies of doubt, fear, morbidness, impatience, dishonesty, a lack of combativeness, a lack of hope and cheerfulness and a lack of generosity. You must study your weak points carefully and try to break yourself of the tendency to quickly get angered or mad with those who do not agree

[p. 91]

with you. Put your whole force and energy in whatever you undertake and know that you can succeed. You can generally accomplish what you undertake by having the fullest faith and greatest confidence in your ability to succeed. It is  necessary for people of your sign, of either sex, to have unbounded faith, hope and confidence; if you are fearful of success and have any doubts about succeeding in any undertaking you may have in mind, it would be wise for you to abandon it, as the chances are you will not meet with success. Work is essential to your happiness. All people of this sign who are idle or not continually actively engaged in some pursuit are apt to be very miserable. Rely entirely upon your own opinions and don't permit or allow anyone to switch you off or change your mind, as your own judgment about what to do and what not to do is far more valuable than that of friends or acquaintances. People of this sign, both men and women, are adapted to business, and are successful when they apply themselves to one line. Concentrate all of your energy and powers on whatever you have in hand, and do not take up a new undertaking until you carry the present one to a successful end. You will be very powerful and forceful to the extent that you combat and overcome obstacles, especially your faults.

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] You are one who does not need to be told much about your faults, as you know them yourself. Therefore, I will not say much about them, but leave you to determine your weak points, and only urge you to fight with persistency to down every low and bad tendency you may have. Your great success and happiness will depend upon how you bring out the good and high qualities which you naturally possess. When these are strong, and dominate your lower nature, you will be a very charming and fascinating person. Then in love, business, social achievements or culture, you will be successful. People will then marvel at your wonderful magnetic and hypnotic powers, which will make you all-powerful in influencing men and women; in attracting and drawing to you people who can be of service to you.

Be ever active in your own affairs, and waste no time or energy in meddling with the affairs of others. People of this sign do many of the great things in the world, and when educated, well read, well informed and cultivated invariably achieve distinction and amass great fortunes. It is well for you in your relations with men and women to be frank and open, and always bright, cheerful and jovial. If there is anything that people dislike it is a blue, grumbling, whining man or woman

[p. 93]

who, with sorrowful or sad countenance, always has a tale of woe to tell. People who succeed are those who are ever hopeful and cheerful and who are always up and doing--making things happen. And that is just what you must fix in your mind--I WILL make things happen; I WILL succeed; I WILL be happy and joyful; I WILL see only the good and bright things of this world. What this world needs is more cheerful workers, more enterprising men and women, more progressive beings, more courageous and combative people.

If not married, I would advise you to seriously consider the question. Read what I say about marriage in the closing chapter of this book.

Neatness, order, attention to details, providently laying aside money for emergencies, belong to your sign in a marked degree and are what make so many of the Sagittarius people so wonderfully successful. They generally understand the following words of wisdom uttered by a wise and good man: "The way to wealth is as plain as the way to market. It depends on two words--industry and frugality; that is, waste neither time nor money, but make the best use of both. If you would be wealthy, think of saving as well as getting." Poverty is a curse and must be abolished. The Yogis of India, in a quiet and subtle way, in all of their

[p. 94]

sermons, lectures and writings, inject suggestions against poverty. We pray constantly that the Minds of men may grasp the true and high way of acquiring money and using it wisely. We claim no great fortunes were ever amassed dishonestly; that to acquire enormous wealth one must be honest and wise--know how to use it wisely after getting it.

Fully developed, cultured, refined and educated, the Sagittarius people are very intuitive, their minds constantly running ahead, and quite accurately foretelling coming events; they become bright and brilliant conversationalists and, all in all, a much-loved people. Lots of reading, good, spirited music, outdoor sports, dancing and association with learned and brilliant people is of advantage to you.

This sign is governed by Jupiter, and the gems are carbuncle, diamond and turquoise. The astral colors are gold, red and green. The diseases which you are most likely to suffer from are rheumatism and stomach troubles. Your best companions are those born in Aries, Aquarius, Libra, Virgo and in your own sign.

People born in this sign have very expressive eyes, and are active and graceful, being swift in their movements.

[p. 95]

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister or brother of Sagittarius.--Bhakti Seva.

  

CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days; any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding sign.

  

THE CUSP OF SCORPIO--SAGITTARIUS.

November 22 to 28.

Persons born on any of these six days are agreeable in speech and graceful in manner, and are remarkable imitators. The conscience of Sagittarius has a hard struggle at times with the easy moral principles of Scorpio, but Sagittarius usually conquers.

If a native of this cusp takes up an impure or dissipated life their descent is most rapid. They

[p. 96]

make the best soldiers, surgeons and lawyers, as they are devoid of all fear. The woman is law in her own household and severely deals with any disobedience.

These persons require praise and consideration for their good deeds, and if it is not given it has a marked effect on their happiness. The people of this cusp are remarkably brilliant and capable of great learning, but they lack patience and frequently fret themselves into the grave.

Sometimes the forces from these two signs produce a most pronounced and disagreeable pessimist. As a rule, however, the people of these signs are agreeable.

     
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

THE HINDU YOGIS' RULES FOR ATTAINING HEALTH, WEALTH AND HAPPINESS;

  

OR,

  

How to Banish Disease and Abolish Poverty

The Hindu Yogi is a seer or sage who, by deep and long meditation, prayer, study of man and the universe, at last reaches illumination or wisdom, whereby he thoroughly understands the many perplexing problems of life and can solve them.

This planet leas now reached that stage of evolution where its highest order of inhabitants are beginning to awake to a realization of their wonderful greatness. The ignorance and darkness of the past ages is being dissipated by the Light of Truth --modern thought.

  

FALSE TEACHING CAUSE OF WOE AND MISERY.

For thousands of years man has been ruled and governed by much false teaching. He has been

[p. 98]

told that he is a miserable worm and been made a weakling and an arrant coward by the fear of punishment by a wrathful and angry God who ever sits in judgment on his every act. With such teachings and such a God he could make little progress, because fear is always weakening and never inspires hope or courage. The Yogis, who are the greatest lovers and worshippers of God in the world, say that the great Ruler of this universe is all mercy, all love, all helping and never punishes; that a man is all-powerful, all-forceful and not limited; that ALL are ONE. All that a man has got to do is to realize what a great and powerful being he is, and then the can accomplish anything he desires.

  

THE REAL AND THE APPARENT MAN.

"What is that, knowing which, everything else is to be known?" This is the one theme that the Yogi dwells upon, and as thought can by persistent concentration solve the deepest problems, we eventually arrive at the truth of what the real man is, and his purpose here. We find that man's goal is knowledge, wisdom and freedom from all bondage; that he is an Eternal Soul with all possibilities; that he can control all the powers and forces in the universe for his own good; for health, for

[p. 99]

wealth and happiness. To reach the highest degree of attainment or success he must stop thinking fear, doubt, disease, failure, disaster and that sort of thing. Man, therefore, according to our philosophy, is the greatest being that is in the universe, and this earth the best place, because here is the greatest chance, the only chance to become perfect. So we say always strive to improve your mind, your body, your material wealth and your environment--be cheerful and happy, and let God take care of the rest. When you can learn to think this way you will be the real God-man, and the apparent-man or shadow will vanish forever. You are then at one with the Great One, and all force and power is yours.

  

HOW THE DEVAS (ANGELS) CAN HELP US.

Countless angels, or spirits, are ever ready to help the real man--the brave, bold, true and courageous man--and do help him, in a way that it would be hard to explain in a book of this scope and to the ordinary mind. All humanity is being helped all the time by these Great Souls, who do not live in a gross body like ours. To get their best help one must be kind, gentle, calm and free from anger or hatred. That is the reason you will

[p. 100]

always see that all great men and women have full and complete control of themselves and are invariably mild, kind and gentle people. You have no idea how much good you lose when you lose control of your temper or passion.

  

MARRIAGE BRINGS SUCCESS.

Look about you and on every hand you will observe that about all the men and women who reach great success have a partner--a wife or husband. God has always commanded man to marry and bring into the world children. In selecting a wife or husband be careful to take a person on the same social plane as yourself.

  

ABOUT WOMAN.

The Yogis have the very highest respect and the purest love for women. We know that woman is a finer organization than man, and in India, you never hear the Hindus of culture or refinement ever refer to woman as the "weaker vessel." Man to reach his highest development must look up to woman, the mother of creation, and love her with the highest and purest love, and respect her with the highest respect. No man can become great until

[p. 101]

he has this respect for woman. Woman is the "finer vessel," and not the "weaker vessel."

  

OCCULT SCIENCE.

In this wonderful and progressive age men and women are discovering that the study of occult science and metaphysics is of great advantage to them. The occult or secret powers and forces can only come to us by and through certain studies of this nature. The reading of books on astrology, mental science, mind reading, telepathy, etc., opens the mind to new and fresh thought which is very helpful and inspiring.

  

POWER OF PRAYER.

Prayers when uttered in the right spirit, and which are not made with mean or selfish motives, are always answered. If at any time you are in great distress of mind, are burdened with troubles which seem too great to overcome, if you will go off to some quiet place and open your heart and mind to God, asking for light, direction or relief, He will answer your prayer surely. Or maybe some of the Devas (angels) will hear your appeal

[p. 102]

and come and soothe you and give you gentle thoughts which will help you. The prayer of the Yogi is always for Light, Direction and Love, and is answered.

  

DON'T WORRY.

The strong and great man is the calm, cool, collected man who holds his temper, who don't worry or hurry or get rattled, no matter whether things go against him or with him. He is a giant of patience, strength and force. Such a soul has strength and force to do things; to keep itself in the very middle of the current of success, health and happiness; by its magnificence and greatness it attracts all the good elements and forces of the universe to its aid; it aspires to be good and great and inspires all persons with love, admiration and confidence. And right here let me quote a great scientist who says: "If the blood is not right, the brain cannot be, for it can only be nourished by good blood. The chief enemies of the brain are WORRY, which disorganizes the human machinery; SHOCK, which paralyzes the brain. Worry or excitement causes irregular nerve action. We call it confusion of ideas or nervosity. Worry is the worst disease of the age."

[p. 103]

  

ABOUT OUR TROUBLES.

"In trouble to be troubled is to have your trouble doubled." The only way to overcome our troubles is to let them wear themselves out. If you will pay no attention to them they will soon go away. People worry and trouble much over troubles that do not come.

Of the hard and weary loads
   'Neath which we bend and fall,
 The troubles that do not come
   Are the heaviest ones of all.

Our thoughts make us. Thinking trouble brings trouble. Thinking good brings good. We can make our life just what the mind thinks. Therefore, how important it is for all of us to think rightly.

  

THE SECRET OF WEALTH.

We must first think wealth, and then use the mind to discover the true foundation of wealth. The mind in its search for the cause of wealth will soon discover that well-directed energy--work, is back of all wealth. But along with this energy we

[p. 104]

must have faith, hope and courage. This is a busy world, and we are living in a wonderful age of big undertakings and great progress. At every hand is to be seen advancement, improvement, progress, growth and expansion. We are continually going forward, onward and upward. Nothing stands still! There is no backward movement! The world is better and busier to-day than it was yesterday, and will be better and busier to-morrow than it is to-day. It is the calm, honest, thorough, thoughtful and busy workers who make this condition of growth and progress; not the worrying, hurrying, fretful, gloomy, morbid, pessimistic minds who persist in looking at things through the wrong end of the telescope. No one will be successful or feel the glorious good times which are here to stay, unless he is hopeful and cheerful, and willing to play the part God has assigned to him.

And now, dear friends, I have tried hard in this book to inspire you with hope and courage, and I sincerely hope you will feel that we Yogis dearly love you and wish you peace, joy, prosperity and happiness, and in conclusion let me quote the saying of one of our brothers, who is a great Yogi--a great soul: "You are all God, O ye men and O ye animals, and living beings, ye are the manifestation of the One living God--the Blessed One--the

[p. 105]

[paragraph continues] All in All, so how can you doubt your reaching perfection?"

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas (angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, my beloved sisters and brothers, is the prayer of

BHAKTI SEVA,
 22 North William Street, New York City.

    
The Hindu Book of Astrology, by Bhakti Seva, [1902], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

The following advertisements followed the text in the original book. They are transcribed for completeness. These pages are numbered with small roman numerals in the original.

  

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES IS THE PHENOMENAL SUCCESS OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

Read the following Testimonials, and then send your subscription for this Wonderful, Inspiring and Helpful Magazine

John Carlton Barnaby, Gig Harbor, Pierce Co., Wash., in sending his subscription for one year, says:

I think THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES is the best periodical I have ever read, and I have read a good many. It is food for the soul.

Miss E. Willie Lightfoot, Brisbane, Ark., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

This Magazine may be improved by becoming weekly, semi-weekly, then daily, as the Mystic Membership grows larger, the circulation greater, while the contributors get purer, brighter and deeper in thought. May the South get into this circle, too.

George Brand, Anaconda, Montana, in sending his subscription for one year, says:

I am very well pleased with your Magazine. I have been looking for something of the kind for some time, and it is my everyday handbook and guide.

Mrs. Wm. H. Stilwell, 1804 West Monroe St., Phoenix, A. Ty., in sending her subscription for one year, says: My trial subscription of three months has been very satisfactory, and I find much of interest and that which is helpful in your journal.

Katherine Pearce, 78 Walnut St., Newark, N. J., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

I cannot well advise any change in your Magazine. The only copy I have seen pleases me very much. I have been helped and comforted by the many beautiful thoughts printed therein, and hope and believe the future numbers will prove equally inspiring.

Anna A. Goodwin, 19 1-2 Swan St., Green Island, N. Y., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

About two months ago I was lonesome one Saturday night and entered a large book-store to see if I could find something interesting to read. While waiting for the clerk, I picked up a copy of your Mystic Magazine, came home and read and re-read the contents, receiving so much consolation from it I waited the April issue with impatience, which came and has been studied through with untold good. It is the very best paper I have ever read.

Miss E. Southergill, Farmington, Conn., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

I find your Magazine soul-inspiring and helpful.

[p. ii]

  

MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES' TESTIMONIALS--(Continued)

F. C. Kingman, 444 Mass. Ave., Boston, Mass., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

I enjoy reading the Magazine very much, and feel much better for reading it, and I will do what I can in my humble way to help it along.

Mrs. M. J. Smithey, 1446 Columbia Ave., Indianapolis, Ind., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

Your Magazine cannot be improved; it is splendid.

Margaret Aird, 47 12th St., Buffalo, N. Y., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

This is the first of your magazines that I have seen or read, and have enjoyed the reading very much. It is altogether a book that helps to lift one's mind off the petty things of this life to a higher and nobler life above. But as for the improvement of the Magazine I can't say anything until I get better acquainted with it.

Mary F. Johnson, 28 W. 13th St., Wilmington, Del., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

After reading very carefully the booklets you sent me, and the request of me becoming a subscriber to this valuable grand Magazine, I am more than glad so to do. I am more than pleased with it. I never in all my life saw anything near like it. It not only entrances, but holds you with rapport and delight, and I cannot express fully the pleasure and happiness it affords me.

Lewis H. Karn, Port Orange, Fla., in sending his subscription for one year, says:

The sample copy of THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES came to hand, and I am very much pleased with it. I enclose you $1.00 for one year's subscription.

Ellsworth E. Worden, Portland, Ore., in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

I have bought several copies of your Magazine. I think it is a wonderful Magazine, just what I have been wanting to find in the line of reading. Hold it up to its high standard and you will do a world of good. I send you one dollar for a year's subscription.

Maynard Oxley, Extension, B. C., Can., in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

I received the sample copy of the Magazine and was very much interested in it. It is the best I have ever seen. Madame Theodore Rodriguez, Port au Prince, Haiti, in sending in her subscription for one year, says:

Having been privileged (through the goodness of Dr. Tabourin Holly) to read your valuable Magazine, I feel much interested in same. Actuated by none other but a fervent desire toward the love of God and divine knowledge, I take the liberty of enclosing subscription price.

Thos. A. Clarke, 2723 Bryant Ave., San Francisco, Cal., in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

[p. iii]

  

MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES' TESTIMONIALS--(Continued)

I am so happy I have found such a comforting and helping paper as your MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES. It has done so much for me and I am sure it will do the same for others. I saw it in one of the stores one day, and something kept urging me for a week to go and buy it. Now, since I have got work, I am able to be one of your subscribers, and to continue so. I will try and interest all my friends in buying your paper also, for it is a blessing to all who will read and re-read it as I do. I even sleep with it under my pillow, and send a little prayer to God for others and myself to lead us onward with His Holy Spirit, and keep us from sin.

John Howell, 518 Grand Ave., Los Angeles. Cal., in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

Inclosed please find an order for one dollar, in return for which please send me your splendid Magazine beginning with the May number. I purchased a copy of your March number at the bookstall here, thinking that it was a fortune-telling affair, and to say I was pleasurably surprised when I began to peruse its pages is a mild way of expressing my delight at having made the acquaintance of the best publication in existence, bar the Bible. Candidly, sir, I believe that the chance purchase of your Magazine marks the great epoch and turning-point in my life, for although I have belonged to a church all my life, and have been confirmed, your Magazine was the first light that has come to me. I read your March and April numbers through, not missing a word, and although I would like to do so, I cannot find words to express to you how much good I have derived from the soul-inspiring words they contain.

Isaac M. Myers, Ligonier, Ind., in sending his subscription for one year, says:

Your welcome MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES and the postal card at hand, which I received March 13th. I am a strong advocate of what the Magazine teaches. I feel that it is the paper that will help to keep our courage and faith strong in the power of the Divine Jehovah, Father, and the Son Jesus and the Holy Spirit. I am thankful to the subscriber of your paper that suggested my name to you. I believe that the paper should be in every person's hands, that is trying to do right and live up to the first commandment, to love God, the Father, and his neighbor as himself. If you wish, send my delineation of my life. I will feel very grateful to you.

Mrs. Mary A. Smith, 131 Meadow St., Pittsburgh, Pa., in sending in her subscription for one year, says:

I have been reading your excellent paper for some time and I cannot speak too highly of it. I get more knowledge and comfort from the reading of it than any other paper or publication of the kind that I have ever read. I look upon it as a friend and adviser. Heretofore, I have got the paper at the news depot, but I have trouble sometimes to get them; therefore, I am going to subscribe for it by the year.

[p. iv]

  

MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES' TESTIMONIALS--(Continued)

Mrs. F. Lindquist, 400 Roscoe St., Chicago, Ill., in sending her subscription for one year, says:

Let me thank you for THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES. It is beautiful, sweet and true. I have read and read it over and over again and never get tired of reading, and you can be sure that I shall try my best to get you customers for it. I find every word so inspiring and elevating, and I wish you success with all my heart.

Morris Rodman, 1837 Third Ave., N. Y., in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

I have fortunately happened to come across your highly valuable Magazine, and have read it for the last few months, and derived so much pleasure by reading that I actually do not know how I could get along without it. I can gladly call it my instructive companion for my life, and would not part with it for the best thing in the world. I have long been searching for something of that character, and found it at last, which is the knowledge I so long craved for.

Lydia A. Irons, Milan, Spokane Co., Wash., in sending in her subscription for one year, says:

I can find no words strong enough to express my keen appreciation of all the articles by Mr. J. M. Peebles and C. Fannie Allyn on Spiritualism, and the articles by Hindu writers are particularly helpful to me. Such belief brings with it comfort and peace of mind and would change all this world's sadness to joy. If all issues are equal to this one it surely is valuable.

J. M. Righter, Cambria, Wyoming, in sending in his subscription for one year, says:

I received your Magazine. I was much pleased with it. I never have had any publication of such a cheerful nature. At this time I am sorely in need of encouragement, and trust it may reform my whole life.

Rev. M. M. Marshall, Montesano, Wash., in sending his subscription for one year, says:

I am pleased with THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES. You certainly deserve not only encouragement but the heartfelt gratitude of all who read it. Whenever I find opportunity to call the attention of any who would be likely to appreciate it, to its merits. I shall do so.

The Magazine of Mysteries stands unique as the only magazine of its kind. You will respect and enjoy this charming magazine, as it teaches LOVE, FREEDOM, TOLERANCE, CHARITY, GOLDEN RULE, PROSPERITY AND HEALTH. Single copies 10 cents. Subscription price only one dollar a year. Address

  

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES
 22 North William St., New York City

[p. v]

In a spiritual, dignified way, the Mystic Adepts in The Magazine of Mysteries unfold Psychic or Spiritual Powers, giving to all Vibrations of Health, Wealth and Happiness

You are interested in Progress, Prosperity, Health and Happiness, and you should read this wonderful paper. It is the Soulful Magazine of the New Century. Single copies 10 cents. Subscription price only One Dollar a Year

Address

  

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES
 22 North William St., New York City

[p. vi]

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES will give absolutely free to each person sending $1.00 for one year's subscription to the Magazine, a lengthy Graphological Delineation, prepared by a Mystic Adept Graphologer. This delineation will reveal to you your natural capabilities, and will guide you to health, wealth and happiness.

These delineations are of great value to anyone who desires to know the mystic rules for having long life, perfect health, abundance of wealth and happiness, as they are prepared by one of the greatest mystic adepts in the world.

Be sure and write your letter in ink, and have it contain at least ten lines, and write just as if you were writing to a dear friend, free from all care and in a natural state.

Graphology is a science and an art, which deals with handwriting as an index to character, exposing instantly to a Mystic Adept Graphologer a person's mental and physical peculiarities, as well as their natural abilities, by their penmanship.

This science is based on years of study and research, and there are very few well qualified graphologers in this country. The Mystic Adept Graphologer connected with THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES is undoubtedly one of the greatest and most scientific graphologers the world has ever known.

Remember, you get this Magazine one whole year for $1.00, and we send you free your delineation.

Write your letter in ink and send $1.00 for a year's subscription to

  

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES
 22 North William St., New York City

[p. vii]

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES Will give, absolutely free, to each person sending one dollar for one year's subscription to the magazine, a lengthy Astrological Delineation, prepared by a MYSTIC ADEPT ASTROLOGER. Be sure to send the month and date of your birth with your subscription.

These Delineations are of great value to any one who desires to know the Mystic Rules for having Perfect Health, Wealth and Happiness, as they are prepared by one of the greatest Mystic Adepts in the world.

With this wonderful Delineation and the magazine you can learn how to have all the Unseen Forces and Occult Powers help you. There is not a greater blessing than perfect health, prosperity, long life and general success. These Mystic Astrological Delineations show you how to get wonderful Psychic Power. They show you what to do, when to do and how to do to command all of the great planetary, solar, magnetic and psychic forces of the universe.

With your Astrological Delineation, as given by this Mystic Adept in astrological and occult science, YOU CAN AVOID DISEASE, FAILURE AND MISFORTUNE.

Astrology is an exact science, and a Delineation prepared by a true Astrological Adept, who is honest, sincere, learned and conscientious, will be of great value to you.

Remember, you get this magazine one whole year for one dollar, and we send you free your Delineation.

Send date and place of birth, giving year and hour if possible, and one dollar to

  

THE MAGAZINE OF MYSTERIES
 22 North William St., New York City

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hec.txt =====


    
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

HYMNS

  

OF

  

The Eastern Church

[p. 2]

PRINTED BY
 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
 LONDON

[p. 3]

  

HYMNS

  

OF

  

The Eastern Church.

  

TRANSLATED,

  

WITH NOTES AND AN INTRODUCTION,

  

BY

  

THE REV. J: M. Neale, D.D.,

Warden of Sackville College.

FIFTH EDITION.

  

LONDON:

  

J. T. HAYES, 17 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

  

[1884]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July 2009, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

[p. 4]

          Sion's lyre, thou best content
   That e'er Heav'n to mortals lent,
   Though they as a trifle leave thee,
   Whose dull thoughts cannot conceive thee, 
   Though to them thou be a scorn
   Who to nought but earth are born,
   May my life no longer be
   Than 1 am in love with thee!

WITHER.

     
   [p. 5]

TO

THE SUPERIOR

AND

THE OTHER SISTERS

OF

The House of Mercy at Clewer.

WITH THANKFULNESS FOR THEIR PAST, AND PRAYERS FOR THEIR FUTURE SUCCESS,

THESE HYMNS

ARE DEDICATED.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6] [p. 7]

CONTENTS.

           

       PAGE

     
      Preface to First Edition

       <page 13>

     
      Preface to Second Edition

       <page 19>

     
      Preface to Third Edition

       <page 21>

     
      Introduction

       <page 25>

     
      S. ANATOLIUS--(d.   458) 55

        

     
          Stichera for a Sunday of the First Tone

       <page 57>

     
          Evening Hymn

       <page 59>

     
          Stichera at Vespers, S. Stephen's Day

       <page 62>

     
          Stichera for Christmas-tide

       <page 64>

     
      S. ANDREW OF CRETE--(A.D. 660-732)

       <page 71>

     
          Stichera for Great Thursday

       <page 73>

     
          Troparia for Palm Sunday

       <page 76>

     
          The Great Canon

       <page 78>

     
          Stichera for the Second Week of the Great Fast

       <page 82>

     
      S. GERMANUS--(A.D. 634-734)

       <page 85>

     
          A Sunday in the Week of the First Tone

       <page 87>

     
      S. JOHN DAMASCENE--(circ. A.D. 780)

       <page 90>

     
          Canon for Easter Day, called the "Queen of   Canons"--

       <page 92>

     
              Ode   I.--"'Tis the Day of Resurrection"

       <page 95>

     
      [p. 8]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      S. JOHN DAMASCENE--Continued.

        

     
          Ode III. Come and let us drink of that New   River"

       <page 97>

     
          Ode IV.--"Stand on thy watch-tower,   Habakkuk the Seer"

       <page 98>

     
          Ode V.--"Let us rise in early   morning"

       <page 100>

     
          Ode VI.--"Into the dim earth's lowest   parts descending"

       <page 102>

     
          Ode VII.--"Who from the fiery furnace   saved the Three"

       <page 103>

     
          Ode VIII.--"Thou hallowed chosen morn of   praise"

       <page 105>

     
          Ode IX. Thou New Jerusalem, arise and shine"

       <page 107>

     
      The Stichera of the Last Kiss

       <page 108>

     
      Idiomela for All Saints

       <page 115>

     
      Canon for S. Thomas' Sunday:--

        

     
          Ode I. Come, ye faithful, raise the strain"

       <page 118>

     
          Ode III.--"On the rock of Thy   Commandments"

       <page 121>

     
          Ode IV.--"CHRIST, we turn   our eyes to Thee"

       <page 123>

     
          Ode V.--Thee, O CHRIST, we, very   early rising"

       <page 125>

     
      [p. 9]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      S. COSMAS, surnamed The   Melodist--(A.D. 760)

       <page 127>

     
          Canon for Christmas Day:

        

     
              Ode I.--"  CHRIST is born! Tell forth His fame"

       <page 130>

     
              Ode 11I.--"Him,   of the FATHER'S very Essence"

       <page 133>

     
              Ode IV.--"Rod of   the Root of Jesse"

       <page 136>

     
              Ode V.--"Father   of Peace, and GOD of Consolation"

       <page 139>

     
              Ode VI.--"As   Jonah, issuing from his three days' tomb"

       <page 141>

     
              Ode VII.--"The   Holy Children boldly stand"

       <page 143>

     
              Ode VIII.--"The   dewy freshness that the furnace flings"

       <page 145>

     
              Ode IX.--"O   wond'rous mystery, full of passing grace!"

       <page 148>

     
          Cento on the Transfiguration

       <page 150>

     
      S. TARASIUS--(A.D. 806)

       <page 154>

     
      S. THEOPHANES--(A.D. 759-818)

       <page 156>

     
          Idiomela on Friday of Tyrophagus

       <page 160>

     
          Stichera at the First Vespers of Cheese Sunday   (Quinquagesima):--"Adam's   Complaint"

       <page 164>

     
      [p. 10]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      S. THEODORE OF THE STUDIUM--(A.D. 826)

       <page 168>

     
          Canon for Apocreos (Sexagesima)

       <page 191>

     
              Ode I.--"That   fearful day, that day of speechless dread"

       <page 174>

     
              Ode   III.--"GOD comes, and who shall stand before His   fear?"

       <page 176>

     
              Ode IV.--"The   day is near, the Judgment is at hand"

       <page 178>

     
              Ode IX.--"The   LORD draws nigh, the righteous Throne's Assessor"

       <page 181>

     
          Orthodoxy Sunday (1st Sunday in Lent)

       <page 184>

     
      S. METHODIUS I.--(A.D. 836)

       <page 192>

     
          Idiomela for a Sunday of the Fourth Tone

       <page 193>

     
      S. JOSEPH OF THE STUDIUM--(A.D. 830)

       <page 195>

     
          Canon at Lauds for Sunday of the Prodigal Son   (Septuagesima)

       <page 198>

     
          Cento from the Canon of SS. Timothy and Maura:

        

     
              "Let our Choir new Anthems raise"

       <page 201>

     
      [p. 11]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      S. JOSEPH OF THE STUDIUM--continued.

        

     
          Cento from the Canon for the Monday of the First Tone;   in the Paracletice: "And wilt Thou   pardon, Lord?"

       <page 204>

     
          Cento from the Canon of the Bodiless Ones (Tuesday   in the Week of the Fourth Tone): "Stars   of the Morning"

       <page 206>

     
          Canon for Ascension Day:--

        

     
              Ode I.--"After   three days Thou didst rise"

       <page 209>

     
              Ode   III.--"Exalt, exalt, the Heavenly Gates"

       <page 212>

     
              Ode   IV.--"JESUS, LORD of Life Eternal"

       <page 214>

     
              Ode V.--"Now   that Death by death hath found its ending"

       <page 216>

     
              Ode VI.--"Rain   down, ye heav'ns, eternal bliss"

       <page 218>

     
              Ode   VII.--"Wafting Him up on high"

       <page 221>

     
              Ode VIII.--"Of   twofold natures, CHRIST, the Giver"

       <page 223>

     
              Ode IX.--"Holy gift,   surpassing comprehension"

       <page 226>

     
      S. THEOCTISTUS OF THE STUDIUM--(circ. A.D. 890)

       <page 229>

     
      Cento from the "Suppliant Canon to JESUS"

       <page 229>

     
      [p. 12]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      METROPHANES OF SMYRNA--(circ. A.D. 910)

       <page 233>

     
          From the Canon for Sunday of the Second   Tone:--

        

     
              "O Unity of Threefold Light"

       <page 234>

     
      EUTHYMIUS--(A.D. 910)

       <page 236>

     
      LEO VI.--(A.D. 917)

       <page 237>

     
      JOHN MAUROPUS--(A.D. 1060)

       <page 238>

     
      APPENDIX.

        

     
      S. STEPHEN THE SABAITE--(A.D. 725-794)

       <page 240>

     
          Idiomela in the Week of the First Oblique Tone

       <page 242>

     
      S. JOSEPH OF THE STUDIUM (A.D. 830):

        

     
          "The   Pilgrims of Jesus"

       <page 245>

     
          "The Return   Home"

       <page 248>

     
   
     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION.

THE following Translations have occupied a portion of my leisure time for me last twelve years: and some of them have already appeared in more than one ecclesiastical periodical. So has also great part of the Introduction. It is a most remarkable fact, and one which shows how very little interest has been hitherto felt in the Eastern Church, that these are literally, I believe, the only English versions of any part of the treasures of Oriental Hymnology. There is scarcely a first or second-rate hymn of the Roman Breviary which has not been translated: of many we have six or eight versions. The eighteen quarto volumes of Greek Church-poetry

[p. 14]

can only at present be known to the English reader by my little book.

Yet surely, if in the future Hymnal of the English Church we are to build an eclectic superstructure on the foundation of the Sarum Book, the East ought to yield its full share of compositions. And hence, I cannot but marvel that the compilers of eclectic Hymnals, such as the (modern) Sarum, the Hymns Ancient and Modern, and others, have never turned to this source. Here was a noble field open to them; and to me it is incomprehensible that they should have so utterly neglected it.

There are difficulties in the task to which it is as well to revert. Though the superior terseness and brevity of the Latin Hymns renders a translation which shall represent those qualities a work of great labour, yet still the versifier has the help of the same metre; his version may be line for

[p. 15]

line; and there is a great analogy between the Collects and the Hymns, most helpful to the translator. Above all, we have examples enough of former translation by which we may take pattern.

But in attempting a Greek Canon, from the fact of its being in prose,--(metrical Hymns, as the reader will learn, are unknown,)--one is all at sea. What measure shall we employ? why this more than that? Might we attempt the rhythmical prose of the original, and design it to be chanted?--Again, the great length of the Canons renders them unsuitable for our churches, as wholes. Is it better simply to form centos of the more beautiful passages? or can separate Odes, each necessarily imperfect, be employed as separate Hymns? And above all, we have no pattern or example of any kind to direct our labour.

[p. 16]

These questions, and many others, have as yet received no reply; but will, in time, no doubt, work out their answer. My own belief is, that the best way to employ Greek Hymnology for the uses of the English Church would be by centos.

The reader will find, in the following pages, examples of different methods of treatment. The following are short Idiomela, &c., which might serve as separate Hymns:--

5. The day is past and over. (Evening.)

20. O the mystery, passing wonder. (Maundy Thursday.)

28. Christian! dost thou see them? (A Sunday in Lent.)

35. By fruit the ancient foe's device. (Easter Tide.)

65. Those eternal bowers. (All Saints.)

[p. 17]

84. The choirs of ransomed Israel. (Transfiguration.)

124. Are thy toils and woes increasing? (Passion or Holy Week.)

Centos might perhaps be made from

        The Canon for

       Easter,

       p.

       95.

     
      "

       Low Sunday,

       p.

       118.

     
      "

       Christmas,

       p.

       130.

     
      "

       Lent

       p.

       78.

     
      "

       "

       p.

       176.

     
 I trust the reader will not forget the immense difficulty of an attempt so perfectly new as the present, where I have had no predecessors, and therefore could have no master. If I have opened the way for others to do better what I have done imperfectly, I shall have every reason to be thankful. I have kept most of the translations by me for at least the nine years recommended

[p. 18]

by Horace; and now offer them as a contribution to the hymnology of our own Church. And while fully sensible of their imperfections, I may yet (by way of excuse rather than of boast) say, almost in Bishop Hall's words--

"I first adventure: follow me who list,
  And be the second Eastern Melodist."

SACKVILLE COLLEGE,
      Feast of the Epiphany, 1862.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.

I had not ventured to hope that, whatever be the beauty of these Hymns in their original language, a Second Edition of the Translation should so soon have been called for. And it has been an additional pleasure to me to find that, notwithstanding the miserable inferiority of the version, the words of S. Cosmas, S. John Damascene, and S. Joseph of the Studium, have been already introduced into English congregations. One Hymnal which has been kindly sent to me, contains no less than eleven Greek Hymns. In the present Edition, all those versions which did I not rhyme,--that is, which would be of no practical use, are omitted. Of the Canon for

[p. 20]

[paragraph continues] S. Thomas's Sunday more is given: and in some cases where, of alternate rhymes, the one-half was permitted to remain without consonance, the defect has been remedied, I hope, without much injury to the sense. It would be ungrateful if I did not express my gratitude for the way in which my little book has been received, notwithstanding its manifold imperfections.

SACKVILLE COLLEGE.
    Nov. 16th, 1862.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION.

It is of course a matter of deep thankfulness to me that the Eastern Church should now be more and more widely brought before ordinary congregations by means of some of the following versions. GOD grant that this may be one little help towards the great work of Re-union.

I have been more than once asked to what tunes any of the hymns contained in this little book may be sung. The following is a list of all the settings with which I am acquainted:--

"Peace! It is I!" by the Rev. T. Helmore, M.A. Second Edition. Novello. 1863.

"The Day of Resurrection:" by the Rev. T. Helmore, M.A. Novello. 1863.

"The Day is past and over:" by the Rev. T. Helmore, M.A. Second Edition. Novello. 1865.

[p. 22]

"The Day is past and over:" by Arthur Henry Brown Organist of Brentwood. Second Edition. Masters.

"Fierce was the wild billow:" by Edith Kerr. Novello.

Fortitude: a Sacred Song. [i.e., "Christian, dost thou see them?"] Music by M. E. H. S. Novello.

Hymns of the Holy Eastern Church; set to music for four voices by Edmund Sedding. London, Masters. [This contains five.]

Hymns of the Eastern Church. In competent score for four voices. Second Edition. London: Novello. Leicester: Crossley and Clarke. [This contains six. As it has no distinguishing title, it is referred to in the following page as H.E.C.]

In the Church Hymnal of the Rev. J. F. Young, which having appeared in Philadelphia is reprinting in London, eleven of these hymns occur; the Greek being given as well as the English.

Each of the above melodies will be found noticed at the end of the Hymn which has been set to it.

And so once more I commit this attempt to

[p. 23]

further the cause of English Hymnology to GOD'S blessing: and I cannot do it better than in the quaint old words of a forgotten poet:--

"I long have long'd to do some little good,
  (According to the best I understood,)
  By Thy good grace assisting, which I do
  Most humbly beg for: O adjoin it to
  My longing ardent soul; and have respect
  To this my weak endeavour, and accept
  (In Thy great mercy) both of it and me,
  Ev'n as we dedicate ourselves to Thee."

SACKVILLE COLLEGE.
    April, 1866

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

NOTE.

###126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126######126###

  

Hymns of the Eastern Church.

  

Translated, with Notes and an Introduction, by the

  

REV. J. M. NEALE, D.D.

  

FOURTH EDITION,

With Music, from Greek and other sources, Verifications, Various Readings, and Prose Translations, by

S. G. HATHERLY, MUS.B.

*** Sixteen of the total number of Sixty-four pieces of Music are unaltered from the Greek.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

INTRODUCTION.

As a general rule, the first poetical attempts of the Eastern, like those of the Western, Church, were in classical measures. But as classical Greek died out from being a spoken language,--as new trains of thought were familiarized,--as new words were coined,--a versification became valueless, which was attached with no living bonds to the new energy, to the onward movement. Dean Trench has admirably expressed this truth in the introduction to his "Sacred Latin Poetry," and showed how the "new wine must be put into new bottles." Ecclesiastical terms must be used, which rebel against classical metre: in Greek, no less than in Latin, five words in eight would be shut out of the principal

[p. 26]

classical rhythms. Now, the Gospel was preached to the poor. Church hymns must be the life-expression of all hearts. The Church was forced to make a way for saying in poetry what her message bade her say. [**]

S. Gregory Nazianzen, the first Greek Church poet, used only the ordinary classical measures. S. Sophronius of Jerusalem employed (and in

[p. 27]

their way not unhappily), Anacreontics: and his hymns on various festivals have some elegance. But there is a certain degree of dilettante-ism, rather than of earnestness, in these compositions; and the most airy, tripping, frivolous measure that the Greek Muse possessed, never, by any possibility, could form the ordinary utterance of the Church. The Church compositions of S. Sophronius, though called poiemata, are in fact mere prose: as those grand prayers on the Epiphany.

How then was the problem to be solved as to

[p. 28]

the composition of Eastern Church Song? In Latin, somewhat before the time of S. Sophronius, A.D. 630, it was answered by the glorious introduction of rhyme. Why not in Greek also?

Now, it is no less true in Greek, than in Latin, that there was a tendency to rhyme from the very beginning. Open Homer: look for caudate rhymes:--

Nemertes te kai Apseydes kai Kallianassa.
 Enthad' een Klymene, Ianeira kai Ifianassa.
                                   Il. xviii. 46.

Asteos aithomenoio. theun de fe meinis aneiken.
 Pasi de theike ponon, polloisi de kede efeiken.
 Us Axileus Truessi ponon kai kedea theiken.
                                   Il. xxi. 523.

Oy men gar meizon kleos aneros, ofra ken Esin
 E o ti possin te rhezei kai xersi feeisin..
                                   Odyss. viii. 147.

[p. 29]

Leonines are still more common. The reader's attention is particularly requested to those that follow:--

Il. ii. 220. Exthistos d' Axileii malist' En, ed' Odyseii,

      484. Espete nun moi, Mousai, Olumpia dumat' exoysai.

      475. RHeia diakrinusin, epei ke nomu migeusin.

   iii. 84. Us efath'. oi d' esxonto maxes, aneui t' egenonto.

   v. 529. U filoi, aneres este, kai alkimon Etor elesthe.

   vi. 242. Ton d' Elene muthoisi proseuda meilixioisi.

Od. i. 40.Ek gar Orestao tisis essetai Atrefidao.

      397. Aytar egu foikoio fanax esom' emeteroio.

[p. 30]

   iv. 12 1. Ek d' Elene thalamoio thyudeos ypsorofoio.

   xiv. 371. Aspidas, ossai aristai eni stratui ede megistai.

And I might mark multitudes more: but these are enough by way of example. The question then occurs at once, Why did not the new life, instilled into the Greek as well as into the Latin language by Christianity, seize the grand capability of RHYME in the one case as well as in the other? How stately it would have been in anapaestics! how sweet in trochaics! Why was it neglected?

For this reason: the reader must remember that HARDLY ONE OF THE RHYMES I HAVE BEEN POINTING OUT IN HOMER WOULD BE RHYMES TO A GREEK EAR. Read them accentually, and you find aristai and megistai are no more double

[p. 31]

rhymes to a Greek than gloriously and ferociously are to us: mousai and exoysai, no more than glory and victory. Accent, in the decline of the language, was trampling down quantity. Now accent is not favourable to such rhymes, though many poems have been thus composed in the newer Greek:

eyron filon komatake
 kath' oper teteragunake

[paragraph continues] But it was not sufficiently removed from every-day life,--too familiar,--had too little dignity. There was an innate vulgarity about it which rendered it impossible to the Church.

Now, let it be observed, accentuation even in Latin was not without its difficulty. In the new style, dissyllables, whatever their real quantity, were always read--and so we read them now--as trochees. Ferox, velox, sceptrum.

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] Hence a verse in the early metrical hymns, such as--

"Castos fides somnos juvat,"

a dimeter iambic, would have been read in mediaeval times, Castos fides somnos juvat, and so have virtually become a dimeter trochaic. Popular poetry soon devised its own metre, political verse, as it was called, because used for every-day domestic matters. This was none other than a favourite metre of Aristophanes, iambic tetrameter catalectic,--our own ballad rhythm:--

"A Captain bold of Halifax, who lived in country quarters."

And this, sometimes with rhyme, sometimes without, is the favourite Romaic metre to the present day. For example:--

me dia thuras bainein de legu tous kleptabbadas, [p. 33]
 xustous, egkleistoys, elkontas theria, stelobatas,
 pantas osoi para ta nomima drusi ton bion,
 kai tun monutropountun de, plen en eremoy tropois.

The Church never attempted this sing-song stanza, and preferred falling back on an older form.

From the brief allusions we find to the subject in the New Testament, we should gather that "the hymns and spiritual songs" of the Apostles were written in metrical prose. Accustomed as many of the early Christians were to the Hebrew Scriptures, this is not unlikely; and proof seems strong that it was so. Compare these passages:--

Eph. v. 14. Wherefore he saith:

egeire o katheudun,
 kai anasta ek tun nekrun.
 epifausei soi o Khristos.

[p. 34]

Undoubtedly the fragment of a hymn. Again:--

Apoc. iv. 8. 

megala kai thaymasta ta erga soy,
 Kurie o Theos o pantokratur.
 dikaiai kai alethinai ai odoi soy,
 o Basileus tun ethnun.

[paragraph continues] And nearly coeval with these we have the Gloria in Excelsis, the Ter Sanctus, and the Joyful Light. Also the Eastern phase, so to speak, of the Te Deum; the kath' ekasten emeran. And to this rhythmical prose the Church now turned.

Then, not to pursue the subject with a detail of which this Introduction will not admit, we find that by the beginning of the eighth century, verse, properly speaking (and that with scarcely an exception), had been discarded for ever from the hymns of the Eastern Church; those hymns, occupying a space beyond all comparison greater

[p. 35]

than they do in the Latin, being written in measured prose. And now to explain the system.

The stanza which is to form the model of the succeeding stanzas,--the strophe, in fact,--is called the Hirmos, from its drawing others after it. The stanzas which are to follow it are called troparia, from their turning to it.

Let Ps. cxix. 13, be the Hirmos:--

"I will talk of Thy commandments
  and have respect unto Thy ways."

Then verse 15 would be a troparion to it:--

"With my lips have been I telling:
  of all the judgments of Thy mouth."

So would 17:--

"O do well unto Thy servant:
  that I may live, and keep Thy word."

[p. 36]

and Ps. cii. 16:--

"When the LORD shall build up Sion:
  and when His glory shall appear."

[paragraph continues] Let verse 44 be a Hirmos:

"So shall I always keep Thy law:
  yea, for ever and ever."

and 45 will be a troparion to it:--

"And I will walk at liberty:
  for I seek Thy commandments."

These troparia are always divided for chanting by commas,--utterly irrespective of the sense. This separation into commatisms renders it very difficult to read them without practice. Take an example, with the corresponding effect in English

Uide a. Exos d'. o eirmos.

Thalassas to erythraioy pelagos, abroxois ixnesin, o palaios pezeusas Israel, stayrotupois

[p. 37]

[paragraph continues] Museus xersi, tou Amalek ten dunamin, en tei eremui etropusato.

"Israel in ancient times passing on foot with, unbedewed steps the Red Gulf, of the sea, turned to flight by, the cross-typifying arms, of Moses the might of Amalek, in the wilderness."

The perfection of troparia is in a Canon, of which I shall say more presently. I need not trouble the reader with the minute distinction between troparia and stichera; as a troparion follows a Hirmos, so a sticheron follows an bomoion, and then becomes a prosomoion. There are also idiomela,--that is, stanzas which are their own models,--and an infinite variety of names expressive of the different kind of troparia.

A collection of any number of troparia, preceded by their Hirmos, sometimes merely quoted by its initial words, sometimes given at length, and with inverted commas, is an Ode.

[p. 38]

Let the Hirmos, be as before--

"With my lips have I," &c.

and the Ode might follow thus:--

Hirmos.

"With my lips have I been telling: of all the judgments of Thy mouth.
 "Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.
 "I am weary of my groaning: and every night I wash my bed.
 "For he lieth waiting secretly as a lion in his den.
 "I am poured out like water: and all my bones are out of joint."

Glory.

"I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect unto thy ways."

Both now.

And let this be most carefully observed: an Ode is simply a Sequence under somewhat different laws. Just when the system of Greek

[p. 39]

ecclesiastical poetry was fully developed, S. Notker and the Monks of S. Gall hit out a similar one for the Latin Church: the Sequence or the Prose. It was not copied from the East, for we have S. Notker's own account of the way in which he invented it. It prospered to a certain extent; that is, it became one, though the least important, branch of Ecclesiastical verses. Now the perfection of Greek poetry is attained by the Canons at Lauds, of which I proceed to speak.

A Canon consists of Nine Odes,--each Ode containing any number of troparia from three to beyond twenty. The reason for the number nine is this: that there are nine Scriptural canticles, employed at Lauds, (eis ton Orthron), on the model of which those in every Canon are formed. The first: that of Moses after the passage of the Red Sea--the second, that of

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Moses in Deuteronomy (chap. xxxiii.)--the third, that of Hannah--the fourth, that of Habakkuk--the fifth, that of Isaiah (xxvi. 9-20)--the sixth, that of Jonah--the seventh, that of the Three Children (verses 3-34, of our "Song" in the Bible Version)--the eighth, Benedicite--the ninth, Magnificat and Benedictus.

From this arrangement two consequences follow. The first, that, as the Second Canticle is never recited except in Lent, the Canons never have any second Ode. The second, that there is generally some reference, either direct or indirect, in each Ode, to the Canticle of the same number: in the first Ode, e.g., to the Song of Moses at the Red Sea: in the third to that of Hannah. This gives rise, on the one hand, to a marvellous amount of ingenuity, in tracing the most far-fetched connexions,--in discovering the most remote types;--it brings out into the clearest

[p. 41]

light the wonderful analogies which underlie the surface of Scripture narration; and so far imbues each Ode with a depth of Scriptural meaning which it could scarcely otherwise reach. On the other, it has a stiffening and cramping effect; and sometimes, especially to the uninitiated, has somewhat of a ludicrous tendency. It would be curious to sum up the variety of objects of which, in a thousand Sixth Odes, we find Jonah's Whale a type. On the whole, this custom has about the same disadvantages and advantages which Warton points out as resulting from the four rhymes of a Spenserian stanza;--the advantages,--picturesqueness, ingenuity, discovery of new beauties: the disadvantages,--art not concealed by art, tautology, imparity of similitudes, a caricature of typology, painful and affected elaboration.

The Hirmos, on which each Ode is based, is

[p. 42]

sometimes quoted at length at the commencement, in which case it is always distinguished by inverted commas; or the first few words are merely cited as a note to the singer, for whose benefit the Tone is also given.

The next noticeable matter is that these Odes are usually arranged after an acrostich, itself commonly in verse: sometimes alphabetical. The latter device was probably borrowed from the Psalms; as for example the 25, 112, 119.

The arrangement is not to be considered as a useless formality or pretty-ism: it was of the greatest importance, when so many Canons had to be remembered by heart. We know to what curious devices the Western Church, in matters connected with the Calendar, had recourse as a Memoria Technica; and not a few of her short hymns were alphabetical, either by verses or by lines; I know no instance of any other kind of

[p. 43]

acrostich. Besides the line which forms the initials of Greek Canons, the name of the composer, likewise finds a frequent place. And it is worth noticing that, whereas the authors of the world-famous hymns of the West, with a few exceptions (such as the Vexilla Regis, the Dies Irae, the Veni Sancte Spiritus), are unknown, the case in the East is reversed. The acrostich may, or may not, run through the Theotokia, of which I now proceed to speak.

Each Ode is ended by a troparion, dedicated to the celebration of S. Mary, and thence named Theotokion. Sometimes there is another, which commemorates her at the Cross; and then it is a Stauro-theotokion. In long Canons, a stanza, sometimes intercalated at the end of the third or sixth Odes, is called a Cathisma, because the congregation are then allowed to sit. There is also the Oicos, literally the House,--which is the

[p. 44]

exact Italian Stanza,--about the length of three ordinary troparia. The Catavasia is a troparion in which both choirs come down together, and stand in the middle of the Church, singing it in common.

The acrostichs are usually in iambics,--sometimes none of the best: e.g.--

ekplettomai soy tous logoys Zaxaria,

on the feast of S. Zacharias the Prophet:--and generally bringing in some paronomasia on the Saint's names; as--

ferunymon se tou Theou duron sebu, on that of S. Dorotheus.

[paragraph continues] Or again:--

tryfeis methexein axiuson me, Trufun.

and of S. Clement:

melpu se, kleima teis noeteis ampeloy.

[p. 45]

But there are examples of acrostichs which take the form of an hexameter, as--

eikadi oyranou eis xenien Xene Elthe tetarte.

and

Timotheon ton Apostolon, aismastitoisde gerairu.

and

ton theoremona Gregorion ton aoidimon aidu.

I shall more than once have occasion to observe that, while the earlier Odes, which treat of such subjects as the Resurrection, Ascension, Nativity, are magnificent specimens of religious poetry, the later ones, composed in commemoration of martyrs, of whom nothing but the fact of their martyrdom is known, are often grievously dull and heavy. Herein the Eastern Church would have done well; to have had, for such as these, a Canon of the Common of Martyrs, instead of

[p. 46]

celebrating each differently; if the tautology which composes such Odes can indeed be called different.

I said, some short time since, that the Greek Ode and the Latin Notkerian Sequence were essentially the same. This being so, it is to introduce confusion into the very axioms of hymnology to call that kind of Sequence, as Mone does, by the name of Troparion. The Troparion does not answer to the Sequence, but to each stanza of the Sequence. The differences between Odes and Sequences may be briefly summed up as follows:--

The Hirmos in the former has a number of Troparia following it and based on it, whereas in the latter the Troparia run in couples; that is, one Hirmos has one follower, or Troparion, and there an end; then, another follows another, and so on. There are sometimes triplets, but these are not common.

[p. 47]

2. The Hirmos in Greek Odes is always an already existing Troparion; whereas, in Latin, the writer generally composed that as much as any other part of the Sequence. But in certain Sequences this was not always the case. Godeschalkus sometimes took a verse from the Psalms.

3. Sometimes, indeed, a whole Sequence was made super some other Sequence, and then it became a vast Troparion, the different verses taking the place of the commatisms in Greek Odes. In the February number of The Ecclesiologist for 1859, is given a list of Hirmos-Sequences, from the Brander MS. of S. Gall. But even in these cases, it is better not to call them Troparia, as they have so little real resemblance to Greek stanzas of that kind: I had rather see them called Homoia.

4. The rhythm in the Greek is far more exact. Not only the syllabic arrangement, but the accentuation

[p. 48]

is the same; whereas in Latin, the accentuation is often counter; that is, an iambic dimeter in the Hirmos is answered by a trochaic dimeter in the Troparion. For example, if the Hirmos were,--

"The LORD is great in Sion:
  and high above all people,"

the requirements of a Sequence would be satisfied with the Troparion,

"Look upon my misery:
  and forgive me all my sins."

[paragraph continues] Such a licence would not for one moment be allowed in the Greek.

I next have to speak of the books in which Greek Hymnology is to be found. They consist principally of sixteen volumes.

a. Twelve of the Menaea:--which would answer, in Western Ritual, to the Breviary, minus the ferial offices. But, whereas in the

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] West, the only human compositions of the Breviary are the lections from the sermons of the Fathers, the hymns, and a few responses--the body of the Eastern Breviary is ecclesiastical poetry: poetry not, strictly speaking, written in verse, but in measured prose. This is the staple of those three thousand pages--under whatever name the stanzas may be presented--forming Canons and Odes; as, Troparia, Idiomela, Stichera, Stichoi, Contakia, Cathismata, Theotokia, Triodia, Staurotheotokia, Catavasiae,--or whatever else. Nine-tenths of the Eastern Service-book is poetry.

b. The Paracletice, or Great Octoechus: in eight parts.

This contains the Ferial Office for eight weeks.

Each week has on Sunday--

A Canon of the Trinity.

A Canon of the Resurrection.

[p. 50]

A Canon of the Cross and Resurrection.

A Canon of the Mother of GOD (one or more).

On Monday:

A Canon of Penitence.

A Canon of the Angels.

On Tuesday:

A Canon of Penitence.

A Canon of the Forerunner.

On Wednesday:

A Canon of the Cross.

A Canon of the Mother of GOD.

On Thursday:

A Canon of the Apostles.

A Canon of S. Nicolas.

On Friday:

A Canon of the Passion.

A Canon of the Mother of GOD (two).

[p. 51]

On Saturday:

A Canon of Prophets and Martyrs.

A Canon of the Dead.

In the first week, the whole of the Canons are sung to the first Tone: in the second, to the second, and so on. The Greek Tones answer to our Gregorian, thus:--

           

       Latin.

       Greek.

        

     
      Tone

       I.

       I.

        

     
       

       II.

       I.

       Plagal.

     
       

       III.

       II.

        

     
       

       IV.

       II.

       Plagal.

     
       

       V.

       III.

        

     
       

       VI.

        

       Varys (heavy.)

     
       

       VII.

       IV.

        

     
       

       VIII.

       IX.

        Plagal.

     
   The Paracletice forms a quarto volume (double columns) of 350 pages: at least half is the work of Joseph of the Studium. The

[p. 52]

[paragraph continues] Octoechus, sometimes called the Little Octoechus, contains the Sunday services from the Paracletice: they are often printed separately.

g. The Triodion: the Lent volume, which commences on the Sunday of the Pharisee and Publican (that before Septuagesima) and goes down to Easter. It is so called, because the leading Canons have, during that period, only three Odes.

d. The Pentecostarion,--more properly the Pentecostarion Charmosynon,--the Office for Easter-tide. On a moderate computation, these volumes together comprise 5000 closely printed quarto pages, in double columns, of which at least 4000 are poetry.

The thought that, in conclusion, strikes one is this: the marvellous ignorance in which English ecclesiastical scholars are content to remain of this huge treasure of divinity--the gradual completion

[p. 53]

of nine centuries at least. I may safely calculate that not one out of twenty who peruse these pages will ever have read a Greek "Canon" through; yet what a glorious mass of theology do these offices present! If the following pages tend in any degree to induce the reader to study these books for himself, my labour could hardly have been spent to a better result.

Footnotes

^26:* As an illustration of this remark, it is worth while noticing how very few examples of Hexameters occur in the New Testament. I believe that the following are all that are tolerable; that is, that can so be scanned without one or two false quantities:--

S. Luke xxi. 18. Thrix ek teis kefaleis ymun oy me apoletai

S. John xiii. 5. Ballei ydur eis ton nipteira, kai erxato niptein.

S. John xiii. 16. oyk esti [n] doulos meizun tou kyrioy aytou.

S. John xvii. 20. kai peri tun pisteysontun dia tou logoy aytun.

Titus iii. 2. medena blasfemein, amaxoys einai, epieikeis.

Heb. xii. 13. kai troxias orthas poiesate tois posin ymun.

[p. 27]

There are some which are very near a hexameter: as S. Matt. xxiii. 6--

kai tas prutokathedrias en tais synagugais.

[paragraph continues] A tolerable pentameter occurs in Rom. vi. 53--

kai ta mele ymun opla dikaiosunes.

and a remarkable iambic in the LORD'S Prayer.

ton arton emun ton epiousion didoy.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

FIRST EPOCH.

  

A.D. 360 . . . A.D. 726.

It is not my intention to dwell on the hymn writers of this period, such as S. Gregory Nazianzen and S. Sophronius, because their works have not been employed in the Divine Office, are merely an imitation of classical writers, and, however occasionally pretty, are not the stuff out of which Church-song is made. There is but one writer in this epoch who gives spring-promise of the approaching summer, and that is S. Anatolius.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

S. Anatolius.

  

+ 458.

The first poet who emancipated himself from the tyranny of the old laws--hence to be compared to Venantius Fortunatus in the West--and who boldly struck out the new path of harmonious prose, was S. Anatolius of Constantinople. His commencements were not promising. He had been apocrisiarius, or legate, from the arch-heretic Dioscorus, to the Emperor's Court: and at the death of S. Flavian, in consequence of the violence received in the "Robbers' Meeting" at Ephesus, A.D. 449, was, by the influence of his Pontiff, raised to the vacant throne of Constantinople. He soon, however, vindicated his orthodoxy: and in the Council of Chalcedon, he procured

[p. 56]

the enactment of the famous 28th Canon, by which, (in spite of all the efforts of Rome,) Constantinople was raised to the second place among Patriarchal Sees. Having governed his Church eight years in peace, he departed to his rest in A.D. 458. His compositions are not numerous, and are almost all short, but they are usually very spirited.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

STICHERA FOR A SUNDAY OF THE FIRST TONE.

by S. Anatolius.

zoferas trikymias.

Fierce was the wild billow;
   Dark was the night;
 Oars labour'd heavily;
   Foam glimmer'd white;
 Trembled the mariners;
   Peril was nigh;
 Then said the GOD of GOD,
  --"Peace! It is I!"

Ridge of the mountain-way;
   Lower thy crest!
 Wail of Euroclydon,
   Be thou at rest!

[p. 58]

Sorrow can never be,--
   Darkness must fly,--
 Where saith the Light of Light,
  --"Peace! It is I!

JESU, Deliverer!
   Come Thou to me:
 Soothe Thou my voyaging
   Over Life's sea!
 Thou, when the storm of Death
   Roars, sweeping by,
 Whisper, O Truth of Truth!
  --"Peace! It is I!"

[The above hymn has been set by my friend Mr. Helmore; also in H. E. C., of which it forms No. 1: also by Miss Kerr. The last melody is, to my mind, especially beautiful.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

EVENING HYMN.

by S. Anatolius.

ten emeran dielthun.

This little hymn, which, I believe, is not used in the public service of the Church, is a great favourite in the Greek Isles. Its peculiar style and evident antiquity may well lead to the belief that it is the work of our present author. It is, to the scattered hamlets of Chios and Mitylene, what Bishop Ken's Evening Hymn is to the villages of our own land; and its melody singularly plaintive and soothing.

The day is past and over;
   All thanks, O LORD, to Thee!
 I pray Thee, that offenceless
   The hours of dark may be.

[p. 60]

O JESU! keep me in Thy sight,
   And save me through the coming night!

The joys of day are over:
   I lift my heart to Thee;
 And call on Thee, that sinless
   The hours of sin may be.
 O JESU! make their darkness light,
   And save me through the coming night!

The toils of day are over:
   I raise the hymn to Thee;
 And ask that free from peril
   The hours of fear may be.
 O JESU! keep me in Thy sight,
   And guard me through the coming night!

Lighten mine eyes, O SAVIOUR,
   Or sleep in death shall I;
 And he, my wakeful tempter,
   Triumphantly shall cry: [p. 61]
 "He could not make their darkness light,
  Nor guard them through the hours of night!"

Be Thou my soul's preserver,
   O GOD! for Thou dost know
 How many are the perils
   Through which I have to go:
 Lover of men! O hear my call,
   And guard and save me from them all!

[Set by Mr. Helmore: also by Mr. Arthur Brown. Both settings have reached a second Edition.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

St. Stephen's Day.

  

STICHERA AT VESPERS.

by S. Anatolius.

tui Basilei kai Despotei.

The LORD and King of all things
   But yesterday was born:
 And Stephen's glorious offering
   His birthtide shall adorn.
 No pearls of orient splendour,
   No jewels can he show;
 But with his own true heart's-blood
   His shining vestments glow.

Come, ye that love the Martyrs,
   And pluck the flow'rs of song,
 And weave them in a garland
   For this our suppliant throng: [p. 63]
 And cry,--O thou that shinest
   In grace's  ray,
 CHRIST'S valiant Protomartyr,
   For peace and favour pray!

Thou first of all Confessors,
   Thou of all Deacons crown,
 Of every following athlete
   The glory and renown:
 Make supplication, standing
   Before CHRIST'S Royal Throne,
 That He would give the kingdom,
   And for our sins atone!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

STICHERA FOR CHRISTMAS-TIDE.

by S. Anatolius.

mega kai paradoxon thauma.

A great and mighty wonder!
   A full and holy cure!
 The Virgin bears the Infant,
   With Virgin-honour pure!

The Word becomes Incarnate,
   ( [**]) And yet remains on high:
 And Cherubim sing anthems
   To shepherds from the sky.

[p. 65]

And we with them triumphant
   Repeat the hymn again:
 "To GOD on high be glory,
   And peace on earth to men!"

While thus they sing your Monarch,
   Those bright angelic bands,
 Rejoice, ye vales and mountains!
   Ye oceans, clap your hands!

Since all He comes to ransom,
   By all be He adored,
 The Infant born in Bethlehem,
   The Saviour and the LORD!

And idol forms shall perish,
   And error shall decay,
 And CHRIST shall wield His sceptre,
   Our LORD and GOD for aye.

[In Mr. Young's book. Melody of Christus der ist mein Leben. Harmony by M. Vulpius, 1609.]

Footnotes

^64:* Compare S. Thomas: Verbum supernum prodiens, Nec Patris linquens dexteram.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

SECOND EPOCH.

A.D. 726 . . . A.D. 820.

The second period of Greek Hymnology is very nearly, as I said, coincident with the Iconoclastic controversy. Its first writer, indeed, died shortly after the commencement of that stormy age, and took no share in its Councils or sufferings; while the last hymnographer who bore a part in its proceedings, S. Joseph of the Studium, belongs to the decline of his art. With these two exceptions, the ecclesiastical poets of this period were  only thrown into the midst of that great struggle, but, with scarcely one exception, took an active share in it.

A few words on that conflict of one hundred

[p. 67]

and sixteen years are absolutely necessary, if we would understand the progress and full development of Greek Hymnography. No controversy has been more grossly misapprehended; none, without the key of subsequent events, could have been so difficult to appreciate. Till Calvinism, and its daughter Rationalism, showed the ultimate development of Iconoclast principles, it must have been well nigh impossible to realize the depth of feeling on the side of the Church, or the greatness of the interests attacked by her opponents. We may, perhaps, doubt whether even the Saints of that day fully understood the character of the battle; whether they did not give up ease, honour, possessions, life itself, rather from an intuitive perception that their cause was the cause of the Catholic faith, than from a logical appreciation of the results to which the Image-destroyers were

[p. 68]

tending. Just as in the early part of the Nestorian controversy, many and many a simple soul must have felt intuitively that the title of Theotocos was to be defended, without seeing the full consequences to which its denial would subsequently lead. The supporters of Icons, by universal consent, numbered amongst their ranks all that was pious and venerable in the Eastern Church. The Iconoclasts seem to have been a legitimate outbreak of that secret creeping Manichaeism, which, under the various names of Turlupins, Bogomili, or Good-men, so long devastated CHRIST'S fold.

We must keep the landmarks of the controversy in sight. Commenced by Leo the Isaurian, in A.D. 726, the persecution was carried on by his despicable son, Constantine Copronymus, who also endeavoured to destroy monasticism. The great Council of Constantinople, attended by

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] 338 prelates, in 752, which rejected the use of images, was the culminating success of the Iconoclasts. Lulling at the death of Constantine, the persecution again raged in the latter years of his successor Leo, and was only terminated by the death of that prince, and the succession of Constantine and Irene. The Second Council of Nicaea, Seventh (Ecumenical (A.D. 787), attended by 377 Bishops, seemed to end the heresy; but it again broke out under the Iconoclast Emperor, Leo the Armenian (813), and after having been carried on under the usurper Michael, and his son Theophilus, ended with the death of the latter in 842. In the Hymnographers of this epoch, it may be noticed that the Second Council of Nicaea forms the culminating point of ecclesiastical poetry. Up to that date, there is a vigour and freshness which the twenty-eight years of

[p. 70]

peace succeeding the Council corrupted, and that rapidly, with the fashionable language of an effete court, and deluged with Byzantine bombast.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

S. Andrew of Crete.

A.D. 660. . . .A.D. 732.

Andrew was born at Damascus, about the year 660, and embraced the monastic life at Jerusalem, from which city he sometimes takes his name. Hence he was sent on ecclesiastical business to Constantinople, where he became a Deacon of the Great Church, and Warden of the Orphanage. His first entrance on public life does no credit to his sanctity. During the reign of Philippicus Bardanes, (711-714) he was raised by that usurper to the Archiepiscopate of Crete; and shortly afterwards was one of the Pseudo-Synod of Constantinople, held under the Emperor's auspices in A.D. 712, which condemned the Sixth Oecumenical Council, and

[p. 72]

restored the Monothelite heresy. At a later period, however, he returned to the faith of the Church, and refuted the error into which he had fallen. Seventeen of his Homilies, rather laboured than eloquent, remain to us: that in which he rises highest is, not unnaturally, his sermon on S. Titus, Apostle of Crete. He died in the island of Hierissus, near Mitylene, about the year 732.

As a poet, his most ambitious composition is the Great Canon; which, partially used during other days of Lent, is sung right through on the Thursday of Mid-Lent week, called, indeed, from that hymn. His Triodia in Holy Week, and Canon on Mid-Pentecost, are fine; and he has a great variety of spirited Idiomela scattered through the Triodion and Pentecostarion.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

STICHERA FOR GREAT THURSDAY.

by S. Andrew of Crete.

to mega mysterion.

O the mystery, passing wonder,
   When, reclining at the board,
 "Eat," Thou saidst to Thy Disciples,
   "That True Bread with quickening stored:
 "Drink in faith the healing Chalice
   "From a dying GOD outpoured."

Then the glorious upper chamber
   A celestial tent was made,
 When the bloodless rite was offered,
   And the soul's true service paid, [p. 74]
 And the table of the feasters
   As an altar stood displayed.

CHRIST is now our mighty Pascha,
   Eaten for our mystic bread:
 Take we of His broken Body,
   Drink we of the Blood He shed,
 As a lamb led out to slaughter,
   And for this world offered.

To the Twelve spake Truth eternal,
   To the Branches spake the Vine:
 "Never more from this day forward
   Shall I taste again this wine,
 Till I drink it in the kingdom
   Of My FATHER, and with Mine."

Thou hast stretched those hands for silver
   That had held the Immortal Food; [p. 75]
 With those lips that late had tasted
   Of the Body and the Blood,
 Thou hast given the kiss, O Judas;
   Thou hast heard the woe bestowed.

CHRIST to all the world gives banquet
   On that most celestial Meat:
 Him, albeit with lips all earthly,
   Yet with holy hearts we greet:
 Him, the sacrificial Pascha,
   Priest and Victim all complete.

[In Mr. Young's book. Melody of Pange lingua, harmonised by Dr. Schroeder. I may add that I purposely chose this Stanza to suit the melody of S. Thomas's great hymn.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

TROPARIA FOR PALM SUNDAY.

by S. Andrew of Crete.

The following Stanzas are from the Triodion sung at Compline on Palm Sunday: which has the same name among the Greeks as among ourselves.

Iesous yper tou kosmoy.

JESUS, hastening for the world to suffer,
   Enters in, Jerusalem, to thee:
 With His Twelve He goeth forth to offer
   That free sacrifice He came to be.

They that follow Him with true affection
   Stand prepared to suffer for His Name:
 Be we ready then for man's rejection,
   For the mockery, the reproach, the shame.

[p. 77]

Now, in sorrow, sorrow finds its healing:
   In the form wherein our father fell,
 CHRIST appears, those quick'ning Wounds revealing,
   Which shall save from sin and death and hell.

Now, Judaea, call thy Priesthood nigh thee!
   Now for Deicide prepare thy hands!
 Lo I thy Monarch, meek and gentle by thee!!
   Lo! the Lamb and Shepherd in thee stands!

To thy Monarch, Salem, give glad greeting!
   Willingly He hastens to be slain
 For the multitude His entrance meeting
   With their false Hosanna's ceaseless strain.
        "Blest is He That comes," they cry,
        "On the Cross for man to die!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

THE GREAT CANON,
 CALLED ALSO
 THE KING OF CANONS.

by S. Andrew of Crete.

It would be unpardonable not to give a portion of that which the Greeks regard as the King of Canons--the Great Canon of the Mid-Lent week. It is a collection of Scriptural examples, turned to the purpose of penitential Confession. It is impossible to deny the beauty of many stanzas, and the ingenuity of some tropological applications. But the immense length of the Canon, for it exceeds three hundred stanzas, and its necessary tautology, must render it wearisome, unless devotionally used under the peculiar circumstances for which it is appointed. The following is a part of the earlier portion.

Pothen arxomai threnein;

    Whence shall my tears begin?
     What first-fruits shall I bear
   Of earnest sorrow for my sin?
     Or how my woes declare? [p. 79]
 O Thou! the Merciful and Gracious One
 Forgive the foul transgressions I have done.

    With Adam I have vied,
     Yea, pass'd him, in my fall;
   And I am naked now, by pride
     And lust made bare of all;
 Of Thee, O GOD, and that Celestial Band,
 And all the glory of the Promised Land.

    No earthly Eve beguil'd
     My body into sin:
   A spiritual temptress smiled,
     Concupiscence within:
 Unbridled passion grasp'd the unhallow'd sweet:
 Most bitter--ever bitter--was the meat.

    If Adam's righteous doom,
     Because he dared transgress
   Thy one decree, lost Eden's bloom
     And Eden's loveliness: [p. 80]
 What recompence, O LORD, must I expect,
 Who all my life Thy quickening laws neglect?

    By mine own act, like Cain,
     A murderer was I made:
   By mine own act my soul was slain,
     When Thou wast disobeyed:
 And lusts each day are quickened, warring still
 Against Thy grace with many a deed of ill.

    Thou formed'st me of clay,
     O Heav'nly Potter! Thou
   In fleshly vesture didst array,
     With life and breath endow.
 Thou Who didst make, didst ransom, and dost know,
 To Thy repentant creature pity show!

    My guilt for vengeance cries;
     But yet Thou pardonest all, [p. 81]
   And whom Thou lov'st Thou dost chastise,
     And mourn'st for them that fall:
 Thou, as a Father, mark'st our tears and pain,
 And welcomest the prodigal again.

    I lie before Thy door,
     O turn me not away!
   Nor in mine old age give me o'er
     To Satan for a prey!
 But ere the end of life and term of grace,
 Thou Merciful! my many sins efface!

    The Priest beheld, and pass'd
     The way he had to go:
   A careless glance the Levite cast,
     And left me to my woe:
 But Thou, O JESU, Mary's Son, console,
 Draw nigh, and succour me, and make me whole!

[p. 82]

    Thou Spotless Lamb divine,
     Who takest sins away,
   Remove, remove, the load that mine
     Upon my conscience lay:
 And, of Thy tender mercy, grant Thou me
 To find remission of iniquity!

[In Mr. Young's book: composed by Dr. Schroeder.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

  

STICHERA FOR THE SECOND WEEK OF THE GREAT FAST.

by S. Andrew of Crete.

oy gar blepeis tous tarattontas.

Christian! dost thou see them
   On the holy ground,
 How the troops of Midian
   Prowl and prowl around? [p. 83]
 Christian! up and smite them,
   Counting gain but loss:
 Smite them by the merit
   Of the Holy Cross!

Christian! dost thou feel them,
   How they work within,
 Striving, tempting, luring,
   Goading into sin?
 Christian! never tremble!
   Never be down-cast!
 Smite them by the virtue
   Of the Lenten Fast!

Christian! dost thou hear them,
   How they speak thee fair?
 "Always fast and vigil?
   Always watch and prayer?"
 Christian! say but boldly:
   "While I breathe, I pray:" [p. 84]
 Peace shall follow battle,
   Night shall end in day.

"Well I know thy trouble,
   O my servant true;
 Thou art very weary,--
   I was weary too:
 But that toil shall make thee,
   Some day, all Mine own:
 But the end of sorrow
   Shall be near My Throne."

[In H. E. C., where it is No. 2. Also, as Fortitude, a Sacred Song, by M. E. H. S. This is, of course, not intended to be used in Church; but, as a song, it is extremely pretty.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

S. Germanus

A.D. 631 . . . A D 734.

S. Germanus of Constantinople was born in that city about 634. His father, Justinian, a patrician, had the ill-fortune to excite the jealousy of the Emperor Constantine Pogonatus, who put him to death, and obliged Germanus to enrol himself among the Clergy of the Great Church. Here he became distinguished for piety and learning, and in process of time was made Bishop of Cyzicus. In this capacity he assisted, with S. Andrew of Crete, in the Synod of Constantinople of which I have just spoken: and no doubt, he might be the more favourably disposed to Monothelitism, because he had been so deeply injured by its great opponent, Pogonatus. However, he also,

[p. 86]

at a late period, expressly condemned that heresy. Translated to the throne of Constantinople in 715, he governed his Patriarchate for some time in tranquillity. At the beginning of the attack of Leo the Isaurian on Icons, his letters, in opposition to the Imperial mandate, were the first warnings which the Church received of the impending storm. Refusing to sign the decrees of the Synod which was convoked by that Emperor in A.D. 730, and stripping off his Patriarchal robes, with the words--"It is impossible for me, Sire, to innovate, without the sanction of the Oecumenical Council," he was driven from his See, not, it is said, without blows, and returned to his own house at Platanias, where he thenceforth led a quiet and private life. He died shortly afterwards, aged about one hundred years, and is regarded by the Greeks as one of their most glorious Confessors.

[p. 87]

The poetical compositions of S. Germanus are few.

He has stanzas on S. Simeon Stylites, on the Prophet Elias, and on the Decollation of S. John Baptist. His most poetical work is perhaps his Canon on the Wonder-working Image in Edessa. But probably the following simpler stanzas, for Sunday in the Week of the First Tone, will better commend themselves to the English reader.

By fruit, the ancient Foe's device
 Drave Adam forth from Paradise:
 CHRIST, by the cross of shame and pain,
 Brought back the dying Thief again:
 "When in Thy kingdom, LORD," said he,
 "Thou shalt return, remember me!"

Thy Holy Passion we adore
 And Resurrection evermore: [p. 88]
 With heart and voice to Thee on high,
 As Adam and the Thief we cry:
 "When in Thy kingdom Thou shalt be
 "Victor o'er all things, think of me!"

Thou, after three appointed days,
 Thy Body's Temple didst upraise:
 And Adam's children, one and all,
 With Adam, to New Life didst call:
 "When Thou," they cry, "shalt Victor be
 "In that Thy kingdom, think of me!"

Early, O CHRIST, to find Thy Tomb,
 The weeping Ointment-bearers come:
 The Angel, cloth'd in white, hath said,
 "Why seek the LIVING with the dead?
 "The LORD of Life hath burst death's chain,
 "Whom here ye mourn and seek in vain."

The Apostles, on Thy Vision bent,
 To that appointed mountain went: [p. 89]
 And there they worship when they see,
 And there the message comes from Thee,
 That every race beneath the skies
 They should disciple and baptize.

We praise the FATHER, GOD on High,
 The Holy SON we magnify:
 Nor less our praises shall adore
 The HOLY GHOST for evermore;
 This grace, Blest TRINITY, we crave;
 Thy suppliant servants hear and save.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

S. John Damascene.

+ circ. A.D. 780.

S. John Damascene has the double honour of being the last but one of the Fathers of the Eastern Church, and the greatest of her poets. It is surprising, however, how little is known of his life. That he was born of a good family at Damascus,--that he made great progress in philosophy,--that he administered some charge under the Caliph,--that he retired to the monastery of S. Sabas, in Palestine,--that he was the most learned and eloquent writer with whom the Iconoclasts had to contend,--that at a comparatively late period of life he was ordained Priest of the Church of Jerusalem, and that he died after

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] 754, and before 787, seems to comprise all that has reached us of his biography. His enemies, from an unknown reason, called him Mansur: [**] whether he were the same with John Arklas, also an ecclesiastical poet, is not so certain.

As a poet, he had a principal share in the Octoechus, of which I have already spoken. His three great canons are those on Easter, the Ascension, and S. Thomas's Sunday, the first and third of which I shall give either wholly or in part. Probably, however, many of the Idiomela and Stichera which are scattered about the office-books under the title of John and John the Hermit, are his. His eloquent defence of Icons has deservedly procured him the title of The Doctor of Christian Art.

Footnotes

^91:* He was called Ibn-Mansur, from the name of his father.--Assemani, Bib. Orient. ii. 97. R. F. L.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

CANON FOR EASTER DAY,

  

CALLED THE "GOLDEN CANON," OR, THE "QUEEN OF CANONS."

by S. John Damascene.

The circumstances under which the Canon is sung are thus eloquently described by a modern writer. The scene is at Athens.

"As midnight approached, the Archbishop, with his priests, accompanied by the King and Queen, left the Church, and stationed themselves on the platform, which was raised considerably from the ground, so that they were distinctly seen by the people. Every one now remained in breathless expectation, holding their unlighted tapers in readiness when the glad moment should arrive, while the priests still continued murmuring their melancholy chant in a low half-whisper. Suddenly a single report

[p. 93]

of a cannon announced that twelve o'clock had struck, and that Easter day had begun; then the old Archbishop elevating the cross, exclaimed in a loud exulting tone, 'Christos anesti!' 'CHRIST is risen!' and instantly every single individual of all that host took up the cry, and the vast multitude broke through and dispelled for ever the intense and mournful silence which they had maintained so long, with one spontaneous shout of indescribable joy and triumph, 'CHRIST is risen!' 'CHRIST is risen!' At the same moment, the oppressive darkness was succeeded by a blaze of light from thousands of tapers, which, communicating one from another, seemed to send streams of fire in all directions, rendering the minutest objects distinctly visible, and casting the most vivid glow on the expressive faces full of exultation, of the rejoicing crowd; bands of music struck up their gayest strains; the roll of

[p. 94]

the drum through the town, and further on the pealing of the cannon announced far and near these 'glad tidings of great joy;' while from hill and plain, from the sea-shore and the far olive-grove, rocket after rocket ascending to the clear sky, answered back with their mute eloquence, that CHRIST is risen indeed, and told of other tongues that were repeating those blessed words, and other hearts that leap for joy; everywhere men clasped each other's hands, and congratulated one another, and embraced with countenances beaming with delight, as though to each one separately some wonderful happiness had been proclaimed and so in truth it was and all the while, rising above the mingling of many sounds, each one of which was a sound of gladness, the aged priests were distinctly heard chanting forth a glorious old hymn of victory in tones so loud and clear, that they seemed to have regained

[p. 95]

their youth and strength to tell the world how  'CHRIST is risen from the dead, having trampled death beneath His feet, and henceforth they that are in the tombs have everlasting life.'"

That which follows is the "glorious old Hymn of Victory."

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE I.

by S. John Damascene.

anastaseus emera.

'Tis the Day of Resurrection:
   Earth! tell it out abroad!
 The Passover of gladness!
   The Passover of GOD!
 From Death to Life Eternal,
   From this world to the sky,
 Our CHRIST hath brought us over,
   With hymns of victory.

[p. 96]

Our hearts be pure from evil,
   That we may see aright
 The LORD in rays eternal
   Of Resurrection-Light:
 And, listening to His accents,
   May hear, so calm and plain,
 His own--All Hail!--and hearing,
   May raise the victor strain!

Now let the Heav'ns be joyful!
   Let earth her song begin!
 Let the round world keep triumph,
   And all that is therein:
 Invisible and visible
   Their notes let all things blend,--
 For CHRIST the LORD hath risen,--
   Our joy that hath no end.

[Set by Mr. Helmore: a very spirited melody. Also in Mr. Young's book: composed by Dr. Schroeder.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE III.

by S. John Damascene.

Deute poma piumen.

Come, and let us drink of that New River,
   Not from barren Rock divinely poured,
 But the Fount of Life that is for ever
   From the Sepulchre of CHRIST the LORD.

All the world hath bright illumination,--
   Heav'n and Earth and things beneath the earth:
 'Tis the Festival of all Creation:
   CHRIST hath ris'n, Who gave Creation birth:

Yesterday with Thee in burial lying,
   Now to-day with Thee aris'n I rise;
 Yesterday the partner of Thy dying,
   With Thyself upraise me to the skies.

[In Mr. Young's book: composed by Dr. Schroeder.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE IV.

by S. John Damascene.

epi teis theias fylakeis.

Stand on thy watch-tower, Habakkuk the Seer,
 And show the Angel, radiant in his light:
 'To-day,' saith he, 'Salvation shall appear,
 'Because the LORD hath ris'n, as GOD of Might.'

The male that opes the Virgin's womb is He;
 The Lamb of Whom His faithful people eat;
 Our truer Passover from blemish free;
 Our very GOD, Whose name is all complete.

This yearling Lamb, our Sacrifice most blest,
 Our glorious Crown, for all men freely dies:
 Behold our Pascha, beauteous from His rest,
 The healing Sun of Righteousness arise.

[p. 99]

Before the ark, a type to pass away,
 David of old time danced: we, holier race,
 Seeing the Antitype come forth to-day,
 Hail, with a shout, CHRIST'S own Almighty grace.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE V.

by S. John Damascene.

orthrisumen orthroy batheos.

Let us rise in early morning,
   And, instead of ointments, bring
 Hymns of praises to our Master,
   And His Resurrection sing:
 We shall see the Sun of Justice
   Risen with healing on His wing.

Thy unbounded loving-kindness,
   They that groaned in Hades' chain,
 Prisoners, from afar beholding,
   Hasten to the light again
 And to that eternal Pascha
   Wove the dance and raised the strain.

[p. 101]

Go ye forth, His Saints, to meet Him!
   Go with lamps in every hand!
 From the sepulchre He riseth:
   Ready for the Bridegroom stand:
 And the Pascha of salvation
   Hail, with His triumphant band.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE VI.

by S. John Damascene.

kateilthes en tois katutatois.

Into the dim earth's lowest parts descending,
   And bursting by Thy might the infernal chain
 That bound the prisoners, Thou, at three days' ending,
   As Jonah from the whale, hast risen again.

Thou brakest not the seal, Thy surety's token,
   Arising from the Tomb, Who left'st in Birth
 The portals of Virginity unbroken,
   Opening the gates of heaven to sons of earth.

Thou, Sacrifice ineffable and living,
   Didst to the FATHER by Thyself atone
 As GOD eternal: resurrection giving
   To Adam, general parent, by Thine own.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 103]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE VII.

by S. John Damascene.

O paidas ek kaminoy.

Who from the fiery furnace saved the Three,
 Suffers as mortal; that, His Passion o'er,
 This mortal, triumphing o'er death, might be
 Vested with immortality once more:
     He Whom our fathers still confest
     GOD over all, for ever blest.

The women with their ointment seek the Tomb:
 And Whom they mourned as dead, with many a tear,
 They worship now, joy dawning on their gloom,
 As Living GOD, as mystic Passover;
     Then to the LORD'S Disciples gave
     The tidings of the vanquished grave.

[p. 104]

We keep the festal of the death of death;
 Of hell o'erthrown: the first-fruits pure and bright,
 Of life eternal; and with joyous breath
 Praise Him that won the victory by His might:
     Him Whom our fathers still confest
     GOD over all, for ever blest.

All hallowed festival, in splendour born!
 Night of salvation and of glory! Night
 Fore-heralding the Resurrection morn!
 When from the tomb the everlasting Light,
     A glorious frame once more his own,
     Upon the world in splendour shone.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 105]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE VIII.

by S. John Damascene.

ayte e klete.

Thou hallowed chosen morn of praise,
   That best and greatest shinest!
 Lady and Queen and Day of days,
   Of things divine, divinest!
 On thee our praises CHRIST adore
 For ever and for evermore.

Come, let us taste the Vine's new fruit
   For heavenly joy preparing:
 To-day the branches with the Root
   In Resurrection sharing:
 Whom as True GOD our hymns adore
 For ever and for evermore.

[p. 106]

Rise, Sion, rise, and looking forth,
   Behold thy children round thee!
 From East and West, and South and North,
   Thy scatter'd sons have found thee!
 And in thy bosom CHRIST adore
 For ever and for evermore.

O FATHER! O co-equal SON!
   O co-eternal SPIRIT!
 In Persons Three, in Substance One,
   And One in power and merit;
 In Thee baptiz'd, we Thee adore
 For ever and for evermore!

[No. 1 in Mr. Sedding's book. A very appropriate melody.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

Canon for Easter Day

  

ODE IX.

by S. John Damascene.

futizoy, futizoy.

Thou New Jerusalem, arise and shine!
 The glory of the Lord on thee hath risen!
 Sion, exult! rejoice with joy divine,
 Mother of GOD! Thy Son hath burst His prison!

O heavenly Voice! O word of purest love!
 'Lo! I am with you alway to the end!'
 This is the anchor, steadfast from above,
 The golden anchor, whence our hopes depend.

O CHRIST, our Pascha! greatest, holiest, best!
 GOD'S Word and Wisdom and effectual Might!
 Thy fuller, lovelier presence manifest,
 In that eternal realm, that knows no night!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 108]

  

THE STICHERA OF THE LAST KISS.

by S. John Damascene.

Deute teleytaion aspasmon dumen.

The following Stichera, which are generally (though without any great cause) attributed to S. John Damascene, form, perhaps, one of the most striking portions of the service of the Eastern Church. They are sung towards the conclusion of the Funeral Office, while the friends and relations are, in turn, kissing the corpse; the Priest does so last of all. Immediately afterwards, it is borne to the grave; the Priest casts the first earth on the coffin, with the words, "The earth is the LORD'S and all that therein is: the compass of the world, and they that dwell therein." I have omitted four of the stanzas, as being almost a repetition of the rest.

[p. 109]

Take the last kiss,--the last for ever!
   Yet render thanks amidst your gloom:
 He, severed from his home and kindred,
   Is passing onwards to the tomb:
 For earthly labours, earthly pleasures,
   And carnal joys, he cares no more:
 Where are his kinsfolk and acquaintance?
   They stand upon another shore.
     Let us say, around him pressed,
     Grant him, LORD, eternal rest!

The hour of woe and separation,
   The hour of falling tears is this:
 Him that so lately was among us
   For the last time of all we kiss:
 Up to the grave to be surrendered,
   Sealed with the monumental stone,
 A dweller in the house of darkness,
   Amidst the dead to lie alone. [p. 110]
     Let us say, around him pressed,
     Grant him, LORD, eternal rest!

Life, and life's evil conversation,
   And all its dreams, are passed away:
 The soul hath left her tabernacle:
   Black and unsightly grows the clay.
 The golden vessel here lies broken:
   The tongue no voice of answer knows:
 Hushed is sensation, stilled is motion;
   Toward the tomb the dead man goes.
     Let us cry with heart's endeavour,
     Grant him rest that is for ever!

What is our life? A fading flower;
   A vapour, passing soon away;
 The dewdrops of the early morning:--
   Come gaze upon the tombs to-day. [p. 111]
 Where now is youth? Where now is beauty,
   And grace of form, and sparkling eye?
 All, like the summer grass, are withered;
   All are abolished utterly
     While our eyes with grief grow dim,
     Let us weep to CHRIST for him!

Woe for that bitter, bitter moment,
   The fearful start, the parting groan,
 The wrench of anguish, from the body
   When the poor soul goes forth alone!
 Hell and destruction are before her;
   Earth in its truest worth she sees;
 A flickering shade; a dream of error;
   A vanity of vanities.
     Sin in this world let us flee,
     That in heaven our place may be.

Draw nigh, ye sons of Adam; viewing
   A likeness of yourselves in clay: [p. 112]
 Its beauty gone; its grace disfigured;
   Dissolving in the tomb's decay;
 The prey of worms and of corruption,
   In silent darkness mouldering on;
 Earth gathers round the coffin, hiding
   The brother, now for ever gone.
     Yet we cry, around him pressed,
     Grant him, LORD, eternal rest!

When, hurried forth by fearful angels,
   The soul forsakes her earthly frame,
 Then friends and kindred she forgetteth,
   And this world's cares have no more claim
 Then passed are vanity and labour;
   She hears the Judge's voice alone;
 She sees the ineffable tribunal:
   Where we, too, cry with suppliant moan,
     For the sins that soul hath done,
     Grant Thy pardon, Holy One!

[p. 113]

Now all the organs of the body,
   So full of energy before,
 Have lost perception, know not motion,
   Can suffer and can act no more.
 The eyes are closed in death's dark shadow;
   The ear can never hear again;
 The feet are bound; the hands lie idle;
   The tongue is fast as with a chain.
     Great and mighty though he be,
     Every man is vanity.

Behold and weep me, friends and brethren!
   Voice, sense, and breath, and motion gone;
 But yesterday I dwelt among you;
   Then death's most fearful hour came on.
 Embrace me with the last embracement;
   Kiss me with this, the latest kiss;
 Never again shall I be with you;
   Never with you share woe or bliss.

[p. 114]

I go toward the dread tribunal
   Where no man's person is preferred;
 Where lord and slave, where chief and soldier,
   Where rich and poor alike are heard:
 One is the manner of their judgment:
   Their plea and their condition one:
 And they shall reap in woe or glory
   The earthly deeds that they have done.
 I pray you, brethren, I adjure you,
   Pour forth to CHRIST the ceaseless prayer,
 He would not doom me to Gehenna,
   But in His glory give me share

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

  

IDIOMELA FOR ALL SAINTS.

by S. John Damascene.

tas edras tas aiunias.

Those eternal bowers
   Man hath never trod,
 Those unfading flowers
   Round the Throne of GOD:
 Who may hope to gain them
   After weary fight?
 Who at length attain them
   Clad in robes of white?

He, who gladly barters
   All on earthly ground;
 He who, like the Martyrs,
   Says, 'I WILL be crown'd:' [p. 116]
 He, whose one oblation
   Is a life of love;
 Clinging to the nation
   Of the Blest above.

Shame upon you, legions
   Of the Heavenly King,
 Denizens of regions
   Past imagining!
 What! with pipe and tabor
   Fool away the light,
 When He bids you labour,
   When He tells you,--'Fight!'

While I do my duty,
   Struggling through the tide,
 Whisper Thou of beauty
   On the other side! [p. 117]
 Tell who will the story
   Of our now distress:
 Oh the future glory!
   Oh the loveliness!

[No. 3 in H. E. C. A very sweet melody.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

S. THOMAS'S SUNDAY.

by S. John Damascene.

The four following Odes are the first four of our Saint's Canon for S. Thomas's Sunday, called also Renewal Sunday: with us Low Sunday. The first Stanzas are marked with inverted commas, as being Hirmoi.

  

ODE I.

asumen pantes laoi.

"Come, ye faithful, raise the strain
   "Of triumphant gladness
 "GOD hath brought His Israel
   "Into joy from sadness:
 "Loosed from Pharaoh's bitter yoke
   "Jacob's sons and daughters;
 "Led them with unmoistened foot
   "Through the Red Sea waters."

[p. 119]

'Tis the Spring of souls to-day;
   CHRIST hath burst His prison;
 And from three days' sleep in death,
  --As a sun, hath risen.
 All the winter of our sins,
   Long and dark, is flying
 From His Light, to Whom we give
   Laud and praise undying.

Now the Queen of Seasons, bright
   With the day of Splendour,
 With the royal Feast of feasts,
   Comes its joy to render;
 Comes to glad Jerusalem,
   Who with true affection
 Welcomes, in unwearied strains,
   JESU'S Resurrection.

Neither might the gates of death,
   Nor the tomb's dark portal, [p. 120]
 Nor the watchers, nor the seal,
   Hold Thee as a mortal:
 But to-day amidst the Twelve
   Thou didst stand, bestowing
 That Thy peace, which evermore
   Passeth human knowing.

Catavasia. "'Tis the day of Resurrection." (p. 38.)

[No. 2 in Mr. Sedding's book. A genuine Easter melody.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 121]

"S. Thomas's Sunday"

  

ODE III.

by S. John Damascene.

stereuson me, Khriste.

"On the rock of Thy commandments
   "Fix me firmly, lest I slide:
 "With the glory of Thy Presence
   "Cover me on every side;
 "Seeing none save Thee is holy,
   "GOD, for ever glorified!"

New immortal out of mortal,
   New existence out of old:
 This the Cross of CHRIST accomplished,
   This the Prophets had foretold:
 So that we thus newly quickened,
   Might attain the heavenly fold.

[p. 122]

Thou Who comprehendest all things,
   Comprehended by the tomb,
 Gav'st Thy body to the graveclothes
   And the silence and the gloom:
 Till through fast-closed doors Thou camest
   Thy Disciples to illume.

Every nail-print, every buffet,
   Thou didst freely undergo,
 As Thy Resurrection's witness
   To the Twelve Thou cam'st to show:
 So that what they saw in vision,
   Future years by faith might know.

Catavasia. "Come, and let us drink of that New River." (p. 97)

[No. 3 in Mr. Sedding's book.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 123]

"S. Thomas's Sunday"

  

ODE IV.

by S. John Damascene.

mega to mysterion.

"'CHRIST, we turn our eyes to Thee,
 "'And this mighty mystery!'
 "Habakkuk exclaimed of old,
 "In the HOLY SPIRIT bold:
 "'Thou shalt come in time appointed,
 "For the help of Thine anointed!"

Taste of myrrh He deign'd to know,
 Who redeemed the source of woe:
 Now He bids all sickness cease
 Through the honey-comb of peace:
 And to this world deigns to give
 That sweet food by which we live.

[p. 124]

Patient LORD! with loving eye
 Thou invitest Thomas nigh,
 Showing Him that Wounded Side:
 While the world is certified,
 Flow the third day, from the grave,
 JESUS CHRIST arose to save.

Blest, O Didymus, the tongue
 Where that first confession hung:
 First the SAVIOUR to proclaim
 First the LORD of Life to name:
 Such the graces it supplied,
 --That dear touch of JESU'S side!

Catavasia. "Stand on thy watch-tower, Habakkuk the Seer." (p. 98.)

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 125]

"S. Thomas's Sunday"

  

ODE V.

by S. John Damascene.

ek nyktos orthrizontes.

"Reconciliation's plan devising,
   "Fellow-sharer of the FATHER'S Throne,
 "Thee, O CHRIST, we, very early rising,
   "Tender lover of our spirits, own!"

When Thy Friends, with deep dismay confounded,
   Stood amaz'd, and knew not where to fly,
 All the darkness that their souls surrounded
   Thou didst scatter with Thy drawing nigh.

Touch how awful, how consolatory!
   When, O Thomas, thou didst stretch thine hand, [p. 126]
 And that Side, resplendent in its glory,
   Didst explore, because He gave command!

Unbelief of Thomas was the Mother
   Of Thy Church's most unshaken Creed:
 Thou, O SAVIOUR, wise above all other,
 Had'st, before the world was, thus decreed.

Catavasia. "Let us rise in early morning." (p. 100.)

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 127]

  

S. Cosmas

Surnamed the Melodist.

+ A.D. 760.

S. Cosmas of Jerusalem holds the second place amidst Greek Ecclesiastical poets. Left an orphan at an early age, he was adopted by the father of S. John Damascene; and the two foster-brothers were bound together by a friendship which lasted through life. They excited each other to Hymnology, and assisted, corrected, and polished each other's compositions. Cosmas, like his friend, became a monk of S. Sabas: and against his will was consecrated Bishop of Maiuma, near Gaza, by John, Patriarch of

[p. 128]

[paragraph continues] Jerusalem; the same who ordained S. John Damascene Priest. After administering his diocese with great holiness, he departed this life in a good old age, about 760, and is commemorated by the Eastern Church on the 14th of October.

"Where perfect sweetness dwells, is Cosmas gone;
  But his sweet lays to cheer the Church live on,"

says the stichos prefixed to his life.

His compositions are tolerably numerous, and he seems to have taken a pleasure in competing with S. John Damascene, as in the Nativity, the Epiphany, the Transfiguration, where the Canons of both are given. To Cosmas, a considerable part of the Octoechus is owing. The best of his compositions, besides those already mentioned, seem to be his Canons on S. Gregory Nazianzen, and the Purification. He is the most learned of

[p. 129]

the Greek Church poets: and his fondness for types, boldness in their application, and love of aggregating them, make him the Oriental Adam of S. Victor. It is owing partly to a compressed fulness of meaning, very uncommon in the Greek poets of the Church, partly to the unusual harshness and contraction of his phrases, that he is the hardest of ecclesiastical bards to comprehend.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

CANON FOR CHRISTMAS DAY.

This is perhaps the finest, on the whole, of the Canons of Cosmas; and may fairly be preferred to the rival composition of S. John Damascene.

  

ODE I.

by S. Cosmas

Khristos gennatai. doxasate

CHRIST is born! Tell forth His fame!
 CHRIST from Heaven! His love proclaim!
 CHRIST on earth! Exalt His Name!
 Sing to the LORD, O world, with exultation!
 Break forth in glad thanksgiving, every nation!
                 For He hath triumphed gloriously!

[p. 131]

Man, in GOD'S own Image made,
 Man, by Satan's wiles betrayed,
 Man, on whom corruption preyed,
 Shut out from hope of life and of salvation,
 To-day CHRIST maketh him a new creation,
                 For He hath triumphed gloriously!

For the Maker, when His foe,
 Wrought the creature death and woe,
 Bowed the Heav'ns, and came below, [**]
 And in the Virgin's womb His dwelling making,
 Became true man, man's very nature taking;
                 For He hath triumphed gloriously!

He, the Wisdom, WORD, and Might,
 GOD, and <sc; Son, and Light of light,
 Undiscovered by the sight [p. 132]
 Of earthly monarch, or infernal spirit,
 Incarnate was, that we might Heav'n inherit;
                 For He hath triumphed gloriously!

[In Mr. Young's book. The melody by Dr. Schroeder.]

Footnotes

^131:* The reference is, of course, to Psalm xviii. 9; "He bowed the Heavens also, and came down."

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 133]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE III.

by S. Cosmas

tui pro tun aiunun.

Him, of the FATHER'S very Essence,
   Begotten, ere the world began,
 And, in the latter time, of Mary,
   Without a human sire, made Man
        Unto Him, this glorious morn,
          Be the strain outpoured!
        Thou That liftest up our horn,
          Holy art Thou, LORD!

The earthly Adam, erewhile quickened
   By the blest breath of GOD on high,
 Now made the victim of corruption,
   By woman's guile betray'd to die, [p. 134]
        He, deceived by woman's part,
          Supplication pour'd;
        Thou Who in my nature art,
          Holy art Thou, LORD!

Thou, JESUS CHRIST, wast consubstantial
   With this our perishable clay,
 And, by assuming earthly nature,
   Exaltedst it to heavenly day.
        Thou, That wast as mortal born,
          Being GOD ador'd,
        Thou That liftest up our horn,
          Holy art Thou, LORD!

Rejoice, O Bethlehem, the city
   Whence Judah's monarchs had their birth;
 Where He that sitteth on the Cherubs,
   The King of Israel, came on earth: [p. 135]
        Manifested this blest morn,
          As of old time never,
        He hath lifted up our horn,
          He shall reign for ever!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE IV.

by S. Cosmas

RHabdos ek teis pizes.

Rod of the Root of Jesse,
   Thou, Flower of Mary born,
 From that thick shady mountain [**]
   Cam'st glorious forth this morn:
 Of her, the ever Virgin,
   Incarnate east Thou made,
 The immaterial Essence,
   The GOD by all obeyed!
       Glory, LORD, Thy servants pay
       To Thy wondrous might to-day!

[p. 137]

The Gentiles' expectation,
   Whom Jacob's words foretell,
 Who Syria's pride shalt vanquish,
   Samaria's pride shalt quell;
 Thou from the Root of Judah
   Like some fair plant dost spring,
 To turn old Gentile error
   To Thee, its GOD and King!
       Glory, LORD, Thy servants pay
       To Thy wondrous might to-day!

In Balaam's ancient vision
   The Eastern seers were skilled,
 They marked the constellations,
   And joy their spirits filled:
 For Thou, bright Star of Jacob,
   Arising in Thy might,
 Didst call these Gentiles first-fruits
   To worship in Thy light. [p. 138]
       They in holy reverence bent,
       Gifts acceptable present.

As on a fleece descending
   The gentle dews distil,
 As drops the earth that water,
   The Virgin didst Thou fill.
 For Media, leagued with Sheba,
   Falls down and worships Thee:
 Tarsihish and Ethiopia,
   The Isles and Araby.
       Glory, LORD, Thy servants pay
       To Thy wondrous might to-day

[In Mr. Young's book. The melody by Dr. Schroeder.]

Footnotes

^136:* The reference is to the Song of Habakkuk; [iii. 3], where the LXX. give--"GOD shall come from Teman, and The Holy from the thick and shady mountain of Paran."

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE V.

by S. Cosmas

Theos un eirenes.

Father of Peace, and GOD of Consolation!
   The Angel of the Counsel dost Thou send
 To herald peace, to manifest Salvation,
   Thy Light to pour, Thy knowledge to extend;
 Whence, with the morning's earliest rays,
 Lover of men! Thy Name we praise.

'Midst Caesar's subjects Thou, at his decreeing,
   Obey'dst and was enrolled: our mortal race,
 To sin and Satan slave, from bondage freeing,
   Our poverty in all points didst embrace:
 And by that Union didst combine
 The earthly with the All-Divine.

[p. 140]

Lo! Mary, as the world's long day was waning,
   Incarnate Deity conceived and bore;
 Virgin in birth, and after birth, remaining;
   And man to GOD is reconciled once more
 Wherefore in faith her name we bless,
 And Mother of our GOD confess.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 141]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE VI.

by S. Cosmas

splagxnun Iunan.

As Jonah, issuing from his three days' tomb,
   At length was cast, uninjured, on the earth;
 So, from the Virgin's unpolluted womb
   The Incarnate WORD, That dwelt there, had His Birth:
 For He, Who knew no taint of mortal stain,
 Willed that His Mother spotless should remain.

CHRIST comes, Incarnate GOD, amongst us now,
   Begotten of the FATHER ere the day:
 And He, to Whom the sinless legions bow,
   Lies cradled, 'midst unconscious beasts on hay:
 And, by His homely swaddling-bands girt in,
 Looses the many fetters of our sin.

[p. 142]

Now the New Child of Adam's race draws nigh,
   To us, the faithful, given: This, this is He
 That shall the Father of Eternity,
   The Angel of the Mighty Counsel, be:
 This the eternal GOD, by Whose strong hands
 The fabric of the world supported stands.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE VII.

by S. Cosmas

oi paides eysebeiai.

The Holy Children boldly stand
 Against the tyrant's fierce command:
 The kindled furnace they defy,--
 No doom can shake their constancy
 They in the midmost flame confess'd,
 "GOD of our Fathers! Thou art bless'd!"

The Shepherds keep their flocks by night;
 The Heav'n glows out with wondrous light;
 The glory of the LORD is there,
 The Angel-bands their King declare:
 The watchers of the night confess'd,
 "GOD of our Fathers! Thou art bless'd!"

[p. 144]

The Angel ceas'd; and suddenly
 Seraphic legions fill'd the sky:
 "Glory to GOD," they cry again:
 "Peace upon earth, good will to men:
 "CHRIST comes! "--And they that heard confess'd,
 "GOD of our fathers! Thou art bless'd!"

What said the Shepherds?--"Let us turn
 This new-born miracle to learn."
 To Bethlehem's gate their footsteps drew:
 The Mother with the Child they view:
 They knelt and worshipp'd, and confess'd,
 "GOD of our Fathers! Thou art bless'd!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 145]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE VIII.

by S. Cosmas

thaumatos yperfyous e drosobolos.

The dewy freshness that the furnace flings
 Works out a wond'rous type of future things:
 Nor did the flame the Holy Three consume,
 Nor did the Godhead's fire thy frame entomb,
   Thou, on Whose bosom hung the WORD:
   Wherefore we cry with hearts endeavour,
   "Let all Creation bless the Loin,
   And magnify His Name for ever!"

Babel's proud daughter once led David's race
 From Sion, to their exile's woful place:
 Babel now bids her wise men, gifts in hand,
 Before King David's Royal Daughter stand, [p. 146]
   The Mother of the Incarnate Word:
   Wherefore we cry with heart's endeavour,
   "Let all Creation bless the LORD,
   And magnify His Name for ever!"

From music grief held back the exile's hand:
 "How sing the LORD'S song in an alien land?"
 But Babel's exile here is done away,
 And Bethlehem's harmony this glorious day
   By Thee, Incarnate GOD, restored:
   Wherefore we cry with heart's endeavour,
   "Let all Creation bless the LORD,
   And magnify His Name for ever!"

Of old victorious Babel bore away,
 The spoils of Royal Sion and her prey:
 But Babel's treasure now, and Babel's kings,
 CHRIST, by the guiding star, to Sion brings, [p. 147]
   There they knelt, and there ador'd:
   Wherefore we cry with heart's endeavour,
   Let all Creation bless the LORD,
   And magnify His Name for ever!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 148]

Canon for Christmas Day

  

ODE IX.

by S. Cosmas

mysterion xenon.

O wond'rous mystery, full of passing grace!
   The grot becometh Heav'n: the Virgin's breast
 The bright Cherubic Throne: the stall that place,
   Where He, Who fills all space, vouchsafes to rest:
   CHRIST our GOD, to Whom we raise
   Hymns of thankfulness and praise!

The course propitious of the unknown Star
   The Wise-men follow'd on its heavenly way,--
 Until it led them, beckoning from afar,
   To where the CHRIST, the King of all things, lay:
   Him in Bethlehem they find,
   Born the SAVIOUR of mankind.

[p. 149]

"Where is the Child," they ask, "the new-born King,
   Whose herald-light is glittering in the sky,--
 To Whom our offerings and our praise we bring?"
   And Herod's heart is troubled utterly.
   Armed for war with GOD, in vain
   Would he see that Infant slain.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

TRANSFIGURATION.

by S. Cosmas

I shall, perhaps, render the following Canon more acceptable to most readers if, instead of translating the Odes in detail, I make a cento from the more remarkable Troparia.

They are principally from the first four Odes.

xoros Israel.

The choirs of ransomed Israel,
   The Red Sea's passage o'er,
 Uprais'd the hymn of triumph
   Upon the further shore:
 And shouted, as the foeman
   Was whelm'd beneath the sea,--
 'Sing we to Judah's Saviour,
   For glorified is He!'

[p. 151]

Amongst His Twelve Apostles
   CHRIST spake the Words of Life,
 And show'd a realm of beauty
   Beyond a world of strife:
 'When all My FATHER'S glory
   Shall shine expressed in Me,
 Then praise Him, then exalt Him,
   For magnified is He!'

Upon the Mount of Tabor
   The promise was made good;
 When, baring all the Godhead,
   In light itself He stood:
 And they, in awe beholding,
   The Apostolic Three,
 Sang out to GOD their Saviour,
   For magnified was He!

In days of old, on Sinai,
   The LORD of Sabaoth came, [p. 152]
 In majesty of terror,
   In thunder-cloud and flame:
 On Tabor, with the glory
   Of sunniest light for vest,
 The excellence of beauty
   In JESUS was express'd.

All hours and days inclin'd there,
   And did Thee worship meet,
 The sun himself adored Thee,
   And bow'd him at Thy feet:
 White Moses and Elias,
   Upon the Holy Mount,
 The co-eternal glory
   Of CHRIST our GOD recount.

O holy, wonderous Vision!
   But what, when this life past,
 The beauty of Mount Tabor
   Shall end in Heav'n at last? [p. 153]
 But what, when all the glory
   Of uncreated light
 Shall be the promis'd guerdon
   Of them that win the fight?

[No. 5 in Mr. Sedding's book.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 154]

  

S. Tarasius.

+ A.D. 806.

Tarasius, raised by Constantine and Irene from the post of Secretary of State, at one step, though a layman, to the Patriarchate of Constantinople, (A.D. 784) was the chief mover in the restoration of Icons and the Second Council of Nicaea. Strongly opposing the divorce of Constantine from Maria, he refused to celebrate that Emperor's nuptials with Theodora. But when they had been performed, he was with some difficulty persuaded to pardon the priest who had officiated at them. On this, S. Plato, and the monks of the all-influential Studium, forsook his communion;

[p. 155]

nor was the schism composed till the Patriarch yielded and retracted his pardon. He died February 25th, A.D. 806, on which day he is commemorated both by the East and West. His hymns are unimportant. The longest is the Canon on the Invention of S. John Baptist, May 25th. It is in no wise remarkable. Nor do I know any of his compositions which would be sufficiently interesting to the English reader, to make it worth versification here.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

S. Theophanes.

A.D. 759 . . . A.D. 818.

S. Theophanes, who holds the third place among Greek Church-poets, was born in 759, his father being Governor of the Archipelago. Betrothed in childhood to a lady named Megalis, he persuaded her, on their wedding-day, to embrace the monastic life. He retired to the monastery of Syngriana, in the early part of the reign of Constantine and Irene. From the fiftieth year of his age he was nearly bedridden; but his devotion to the cause of Icons marked him out as one of the earliest victims of Leo the Armenian, who, after imprisoning him for two

[p. 157]

years, banished him to Samothrace. On the third day after his arrival in that inhospitable region, worn out with sufferings and sickness, he departed this life: A.D. 818. He is chiefly famous for his History, with which we have now nothing to do. With the one exception of S. Joseph of the Studium, Theophanes is the most prolific of Eastern Hymnographers; and in his writings we first see that which has been the bane and ruin of later Greek poetry, the composition of hymns, not from the spontaneous effusion of the heart, but because they were wanted to fill up a gap in the Office-book.

Because the great festivals and the chief Saints of the Church had their Canon and their Stichera, therefore, every martyr, every confessor, who happened to give his name to a day, must have his Canon and Stichera also, just for uniformity. How different the Latin use, where not even the

[p. 158]

Apostles have separate hymns received by the whole Church, but supply themselves from the Common! Hence the deluge of worthless compositions that occur in the Menaea: hence tautology, repeated till it becomes almost sickening; the merest commonplace, again and again decked in the tawdry shreds of tragic language, and twenty or thirty times presenting the same thought in slightly varying terms. Theophanes, indeed, must be distinguished from the host of inferior writers that about his time began to overwhelm the Church. Many of his subjects are of world-wide interest. The Eastern martyrs, whom he celebrates, are, for the most part, those who have won for themselves the greatest name in the annals of history. But still we find him thus honouring some, of whom all that can be said is, that they died for the Name of CHRIST. And though the poet brings more matter to his task

[p. 159]

than do others, many long stanzas, that keep pretty close to their subject, concerning a Saint of whom there is nothing especial to say, must become tedious.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

  

IDIOMELA

  

ON FRIDAY OF CHEESE-SUNDAY,

  

THAT IS,

  

OF QUINQUAGESIMA.

by S. Theophanes

At this period of the year the weeks are named, not from the Sundays that precede, but from those that follow them. Quinquagesima is termed Tyrophagus, because up to that time, but not beyond, cheese is allowed. The Friday previous is appropriated to the Commemoration of All Holy Ascetes; in order, as the Synaxarion says, that, by the remembrance of their conflict, we may be invigorated for the race that is set before us.

Deute apantes pistoi.

Hither, and with one accord,
 Sing the servants of the LORD:
 Sing each great ascetic sire:--
 Anthony shall lead the choir: [p. 161]
 Let Euthymius next him stand;
 Then in order all the band.
 Make we joyous celebration
 Of their heavenly conversation;
 Of their glory, how they rise,
 Like another Paradise;
 These the trees our GOD hath plac'd,
 Trees, with fruit immortal grac'd;
 Bringing forth, for CHRIST on high,
 Flowers of Life that cannot die;
 With the sweetness that they fling
 Mortal spirits nourishing.
     Filled with GOD, and ever blest,
     For our pardon make request!

Egypt, hail, thou faithful strand!
 Hail, thou holy Libyan land!
 Nurturing for the realm on high
 Such a glorious company! [p. 162]
 They by many a toil intense,
 Chastity and continence,
 Perfect men to GOD upreared,
 Stars to guide us have appeared:
 They, by many a glorious sign,
 Many a beam of Power Divine,
 To the earth's remotest shore
 Far and wide their radiance pour.
     Holy Fathers, bright and blest,
     For our pardon make request!

By what skill of mortal tongue
 Shall your wondrous acts be sung?
 All the conflicts of the soul,
 All your struggles towards the goal;
 And your virtues' prize immense,
 And your victories over sense,
 How perpetual watch ye kept
 Over passion, prayed and wept: [p. 163]
 Yea, every angels came,
 Visible in earthly frame,
 And with Satan girt for fight
 Utterly o'erthrew his might.
 Fam'd for signs and wonders rare,
 Join to ours, great Saints, your prayer:
     Ask that we, ye ever blest,
     May attain the Land of Rest!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 164]

  

STICHERA AT THE FIRST VESPERS OF CHEESE-SUNDAY.

  

(Quinquagesima.)

  

ADAM'S COMPLAINT.

by S. Theophanes

The reader can hardly fail to be struck with the beautiful idea in the third stanza, where the foliage of Paradise is asked to make intercession for Adam's recall. The last stanza, Milton, as an universal scholar, doubtless had in his eye, in Eve's lamentation.

"The LORD my Maker, forming me of clay,
 By His own Breath, the breath of life convey'd
 O'er all the bright new world He gave me sway,
 A little lower than the Angels made.
 But Satan, using for his guile
 The crafty serpent's cruel wile,
 Deceiv'd me by the Tree; [p. 165]
 And severed me from GOD and grace,
 And wrought me death, and all my race,
 As long as time shall be.
 O Lover of the sons of men!
 Forgive, and call me back again!

"In that same hour I lost the glorious stole
 Of innocence, that GOD'S own Hands had made;
 And now, the tempter poisoning all my soul,
 sit, in fig leaves and in skins arrayed:
 I sit condemn'd, distress'd, forsaken;
 Must till the ground whence I was taken
 By labour's daily sweat.
 But Thou, That shalt hereafter come,
 The Offspring of a Virgin-womb,
 Have pity on me yet!
 O turn on me those gracious eyes,
 And call me back to Paradise!

[p. 166]

"O glorious Paradise! O lovely clime!
 O God-built mansion! Joy of every Saint!
 Happy remembrance to all coming time!
 Whisper, with all thy leaves, in cadence faint,
 One prayer to Him Who made them all,
 One prayer for Adam in his fall!--
 That He, Who formed thy gates of yore,
 Would bid those gates unfold once more
 That I had closed by sin:
 And let me taste that holy Tree
 That giveth immortality
 To them that dwell therein:
 Or have I fallen so far from grace
 That mercy hath for me no place?"

Adam sat right against the Eastern gate,
 By many a storm of sad remembrance tost
 O me! so ruined by the serpent's hate!
 O me! so glorious once, and now so lost! [p. 167]
 So mad that bitter lot to choose!
 Beguil'd of all I had to lose!
 Must I then, gladness of my eyes,--
 Must I then leave thee, Paradise,
 And as an exile go?
 And must I never cease to grieve
 How once my GOD, at cool of eve,
 Came down to walk below?
 O Merciful! on Thee I call:
 O Pitiful! forgive my fall!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 168]

  

Theodore of the Studium.

+ A.D. 826.

Theodore of the Studium, by his sufferings and his influence, did more, perhaps, in the cause of Icons than any other man. His uncle, S. Plato, and himself, had been cruelly persecuted by Constantine, for refusing to communicate with him after his illicit marriage with Theodora, at a time when, as we have seen, the firmness of even the Patriarch Tarasius gave way. Raised subsequently to be Hegumen of the great abbey of the Studium, the first at Constantinople, and probably the most influential that ever existed in the world, Theodore exhibited more doubtful

[p. 169]

conduct in the schism which regarded the readmission to communion of Joseph, the priest who had give the nuptial benediction to Constantine: but he suffered imprisonment on this account with the greatest firmness. When the Iconoclastic persecution again broke out under Leo the Armenian, Theodore was one of the first sufferers: he was exiled, imprisoned, scourged, and left for dead. Under Michael Curopalata he enjoyed greater liberty; but he died in banishment, Nov. 11th, A.D. 826. His Hymns are, in my judgment, superior to those of S. Theophanes,--and nearly, if not quite, equal to the works of S. Cosmas. In those (comparatively few) which he has left for the Festivals of Saints, he does not appear to advantage: it is in 1 is Lent Canons, in the Triodion, that his great excellency lies. The contrast there presented between the rigid, unbending, unyielding character

[p. 170]

of the man in his outward history, and the fervent gush of penitence and love which his inward life, as revealed by these compositions, manifests, is very striking;--it forms a remarkable parallel to the characters of S. Gregory VII., Innocent III., and other holy men of the Western Church, whom the world, judging from a superficial view of their characters, has branded with unbending haughtiness, and the merest formality in religion, while their most secret writings show them to have been clinging to the Cross in an ecstasy of love and sorrow.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 171]

  

CANON FOR APOCREOS.

by Theodore of the Studium

Apocreos is our Sexagesima, and is so called, because meat is not eaten beyond it. The Synaxarion (which will explain the following poem) begins thus:

"ON THIS DAY, WE COMMEMORATE THE SECOND AND IMPARTIAL COMING OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Stichos. When He, the Judge of all things, sits to doom,
          Oh grant that I may hear his joyful Come!'

This commemoration the most Divine Fathers set after the two parables" (i.e., the Gospels of

[p. 172]

the two preceding Sundays, The Pharisee and Publican, and the Prodigal Son) "lest any one, learning from them the mercy of GOD, should live carelessly, and say, 'God is merciful, and whenever I wish to relinquish sin, it will be in my power to accomplish my purpose.' They therefore here commemorated that fearful day, that, by the consideration of death, and the expectation of the dreadful things that shall hereafter be, they might terrify men of negligent life, and bring them back again to virtue, and might teach them not simply to put confidence in GOD'S mercy, considered by itself, but to remember also that the Judge is just, and will render to every man according to his works."

As the Eastern Church has no such season as Advent, this commemoration becomes more peculiarly appropriate. The Canon that follows is unfortunate in provoking a comparison with the unapproachable

[p. 173]

majesty of the Dies Irae. Yet during the four hundred years by which it anticipated that Sequence, it was undoubtedly the grandest Judgment-hymn of the Church. Its faults are those of most of the class: it eddies round and round the subject, without making way,--its different portions have no very close connexion with each other,--and its length is accompanied by considerable tautology. Yet, in spite of these defects, it is impossible to deny that the great common-places of Death and Judgment are very nobly set forth in this poem. On account of its length, I give the first three and last Odes only.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 174]

Canon for Apocreos

  

ODE I.

by Theodore of the Studium

ten emeran ten frikten.

That fearful Day, that Day of speechless dread,
 When Thou shalt come to judge the quick and dead--

        I shudder to foresee,
         O GOD! what then shall be!

When Thou shalt come, angelic legions round,
 With thousand thousands, and with trumpet sound,

        CHRIST, grant me in the air
         With saints to meet Thee there!

Weep, O my soul, ere that great hour and day,
 When GOD shall shine in manifest array,

        Thy sin, that thou may'st be
         In that strict judgment free!

[p. 175]

The terror!--hell-fire fierce and unsufficed:
 The bitter worm: the gnashing teeth:--O CHRIST,

        Forgive, remit, protect;
         And set me with the elect!

That I may hear the blessed voice that calls
 The righteous to the joy of heavenly halls.

        And, King of Heaven, may reach
         The realm that passeth speech!

Enter Thou not in judgment with each deed,
 Nor each intent and thought in strictness read:

        Forgive, and save me then,
         O Thou That lovest men!

Thee, One in Three blest Persons! LORD o'er all!
 Essence of essence, Power of power. we call!

        Save us, O FATHER, SON,
         And SPIRIT, ever one!

[In Mr. Young's book. Composed by Dr. Schroeder.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

Canon for Apocreos

  

ODE III.

by Theodore of the Studium

O Kurios erxetai.

GOD comes;--and who shall stand before His fear?
 Who bide His Presence, when He draweth near?

        My soul, my soul, prepare
         To kneel before Him there!

Haste,--weep,--be reconciled to Him before
 The fearful judgment knocketh at the door

        Where, in the Judge's eyes,
         All bare and naked lies.

Have mercy, LORD, have mercy, LORD, I cry,
 When with Thine angels Thou appear'st on high:

        And each shall doom inherit,
         According to his merit.

[p. 177]

How can I bear Thy fearful anger, LORD?
 I, that have so often transgressed Thy word?

        But put my sins away,
         And spare me in that day!

O miserable soul, return, lament,
 Ere earthly converse end, and life be spent:

        Ere, time for sorrow o'er,
         The Bridegroom close the door!

Yea, I have sinned, as no man sinned beside:
 With more than human guilt my soul is dyed:

        But spare, and save me here,
         Before that day appear!

Three Persons in One Essence uncreate,
 On Whom, both Three and One, our praises wait,

        Give everlasting light,
         To them that sing Thy might!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

Canon for Apocreos

  

ODE IV.

by Theodore of the Studium

efesteken e emera.

The Day is near, the Judgment is at hand,
 Awake, my soul, awake, and ready stand!
 Where chiefs shall go with them that filled the throne,
 Where rich and poor the same tribunal own;

        And every thought and deed
         Shall find its righteous meed.

There with the sheep the shepherd of the fold
 Shall stand together; there the young and old;
 Master and slave one doom shall undergo;
 Widow and maiden one tribunal know.

        Oh woe, oh woe, to them
         Whom lawless lives condemn!

[p. 179]

That Judgment-seat, impartial in decree,
 Accepts no bribe, admits no subtilty:
 No orator persuasion may exert,
 No perjured witness wrong to right convert:

        But all things, hid in night,
         Shall then be dragged to light.

Let me not enter in the land of woe,
 Let me not realms of outer darkness know!
 Nor from the wedding-feast reject Thou me,
 For my soiled vest of immortality;

        Bound hand and foot, and cast
         In anguish that shall last!

When Thou, the nations ranged on either side,
 The righteous from the sinners shalt divide,
 Then give me to be found amongst Thy sheep,
 Then from the goats Thy trembling servant keep:

        That I may hear the voice
         That bids Thy Saints rejoice!

[p. 180]

When righteous inquisition shall be made,
 And the books opened, and the thrones arrayed,
 My soul, what plea to shield thee canst thou know,
 Who hast no fruit of righteousness to show,

        No holy deeds to bring
         To CHRIST the LORD and King?

I hear the rich man's wail and bitter cry,
 Out of the torments of eternity;
 I know, beholding that devouring flame,
 My guilt and condemnation are the same;

        And spare me, LORD, I say,
         In the great Judgment Day!

The WORD and SPIRIT, with the FATHER ONE,
 One Light and emanation of One Sun,
 The WORD by generation, we adore,
 The SPIRIT by procession, evermore;

        And with creation raise
         The thankful hymn of praise.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

Canon for Apocreos

  

ODE IX.

by Theodore of the Studium

O Kurios erxetai.

The LORD draws nigh, the righteous Throne's Assessor,
 The just to save, to punish the transgressor:
         Weep we, and mourn, and pray,
         Regardful of that day;
 When all the secrets of all hearts shall be
 Lit with the blaze of full eternity.

Clouds and thick darkness o'er the Mount assembling,
 Moses beheld the Eternal's glory, trembling:
         And yet he might but see
         GOD'S feebler Majesty. [p. 182]
 And I--I needs must view His fullest Face:
 O spare me, LORD! O take me to Thy grace!

David of old beheld, in speechless terror,
 The session of the Judge--the doom of error:
         And what have I to plead
         For mercy in my need?
 Nothing save this: O grant me yet to be,
 Ere that day come, renewed and true to Thee!

Here, fires of deep damnation roar and glitter:
 The worm is deathless, and the cup is bitter:
         There, day that hath no morrow,
         And joy that hath no sorrow:
 And who so blest that he shall fly the abyss,
 Rais'd up to GOD'S Right Hand, and speechless bliss!

My soul with many an act of sin is wounded:
 With mortal weakness is my frame surrounded: [p. 183]
         My life is well nigh o'er:
         The Judge is at the door
 How wilt thou, miserable spirit, fare,
 What time He sends His summons through the air?

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 184]

  

ORTHODOXY SUNDAY.

by Theodore of the Studium

The first Sunday in Lent is kept in memory: primarily, of the final triumph of the Church over the Iconoclasts in 842; and, incidentally, of her victory over all other heresies. It has a kind of comminution appropriate to itself alone. The fallowing Canon is ascribed to S. Theodore of the Studium, though Baronius has thought that it cannot be his, because it implies that peace was restored to the Church, whereas that hymnographer died while the persecution still continued. Very possibly, however, it was written en the temporary victory of the Church, which did occur in the time of S. Theodore; and then, in 842, may have been lengthened and adapted to

[p. 185]

the then state of things, perhaps by Naucratius, the favourite disciple of S. Theodore. It is, perhaps, the most spirited of all the Canons, though many of its expressions savour too much of bitterness and personal feeling to be well defended, and the reader must constantly bear in mind that the poet feels the cause, not so much of Icons, as of the Incarnation itself, to be at stake. I have only given about one-third of the poem. The stanzas are these: Ode I. Tropar. I, 2; III. 6; IV. 1, 2, 3; V. 1, 3, 4, 5; VI. 1; IX. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Kharisterion uiden.

A song, a song of gladness!
   A song of thanks and praise
 The horn of our salvation
 Hath GOD vouchsafed to raise! [p. 186]
 A monarch true and faithful,
 And glorious in her might,
 To champion CHRIST'S own quarrel,
   And Orthodoxy's right!

Now manifest is glory;
   Now grace and virtue shine:
 Now joys the Church regaining
   Her ornaments divine:
 And girds them on in gladness,
   As fits a festal day,
 After long months of struggle,
   Long years of disarray.

Now cries the blood for vengeance,
   By persecutors poured,
 Of them that died defending
   The likeness of the LORD: [p. 187]
 The likeness, as a mortal
   That He vouchsaf'd to take,
 Long years ago, in Bethlem,
   Incarnate for our sake.

Awake, O Church, and triumph
   Exult, each realm and land!
 And open let the houses,
   The ascetic houses stand!
 And let the holy virgins
   With joy and song take in
 Their relics and their Icons,
   Who died this day to win!

Assemble ye together
   So joyous and so bold,
 The ascetic troops, and pen them
   Once more within the fold! [p. 188]
 If strength again he gather, [**]
   Again the foe shall fall:
 If counsel he shall counsel,
   Our GOD shall scatter all.

The LORD, the LORD hath triumphed:
   Let all the world rejoice!
 Hush'd is the turmoil, silent
   His servants' tearful voice: [p. 189]
 And the One Faith, the True Faith,
   Goes forth from East to West,
 Enfolding, in its beauty,
   The earth as with a vest.

They rise, the sleepless watchmen
   Upon the Church's wall;
 With yearning supplication
   On GOD the LORD they call:
 And He, though long time silent,
   Bow'd down a gracious ear,
 His people's earnest crying
   And long complaint to hear.

Sing, sing for joy, each desert!
   Exult, each realm of earth
 Ye mountains, drop down sweetness!
   Ye hillocks, leap for mirth! [p. 190]
 For CHRIST the WORD, bestowing
   His blessed peace on men,
 In Faith's most holy union
   Hath knit His Church again.

The GOD of vengeance rises:
   And CHRIST attacks the foe,
 And makes His servants mighty
   The wicked to o'erthrow:
 And now Thy condescension
   In boldness may we hymn,
 And now in peace and safety
   Thy sacred Image limn.

O LORD of loving kindness,
   How wondrous are Thy ways!
 What tongue of man suffices
   Thy gentleness to praise? [p. 191]
 Because of Thy dear Image
   Men dared Thy Saints to kill,
 Yet didst Thou not consume them,
   But bear'st their insults still.

Thou Who has fixed unshaken
   Thy Church's mighty frame,
 So that hell-gates shall never
   Prevail against the same;--
 Bestow upon Thy people
   Thy peace, that we may bring
 One voice, one hymn, one spirit,
   To glorify our King!

Footnotes

^188:* This is from the magnificent Emmanuel Ode sung at Great Compline on high festivals.

"Having become mighty, ye have been subdued.
         "For God is with us.

"And if ye shall again become mighty, again ye shall be subdued.
         "For God is with us.

"And if ye shall devise any device, the
     LORD shall scatter it,
         "For God is with us."

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

S. Methodius I.

+- A.D. 836.

S. Methodius I., a native of Syracuse, embraced the monastic life at Constantinople. Sent as legate from Pope Paschal to Michael the Stammerer, he was imprisoned by that prince in a close cell, and there passed nine years, on account of his resolute defence of Icons. Having been scourged for the same cause, by the Emperor Theophilus, he made his  from prison; and when peace was restored to the Church was raised to the throne of Constantinople. His first care was to assemble a Synod for the restoration of Icons; and it is, properly speaking, that Synod

[p. 193]

which the Greeks celebrate on Orthodoxy Sunday. With this Council the Iconoclast troubles ceased. S. Methodius died November 4th, 846. His compositions are very few, and are chiefly confined to Idiomela.

ei kai ta paronta.

Are thy toils and woes increasing?
 Are the Foe's attacks unceasing?
     Look with Faith unclouded,
     Gaze with eyes unshrouded,
       On the Cross!

Dost thou fear that strictest trial?
 Tremblest thou at CHRIST'S denial?
     Never rest without it,
     Clasp thine hands about it,
      --That dear Cross

[p. 194]

Diabolic legions press thee?
 Thoughts and works of sin distress thee?
     It shall chase all terror,
     It shall right all error,
       That sweet Cross!

Draw'st thou nigh to Jordan's river?
 Should'st thou tremble? Need'st thou quiver?
     No! if by it lying,
     No! if on it dying,
       On the Cross!

Say then,--"Master, while I cherish
 That sweet hope, I cannot perish!
     After this life's story,
     Give Thou me the glory
       For the Cross!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 195]

  

S. Joseph of the Studium

The third period of Greek Hymnology opens with its most voluminous writer, S. Joseph of the Studium. A Sicilian by birth, he left his native country on its occupation by the Mahometans in 830, and went to Thessalonica, where he embraced the monastic life. Thence he removed to Constantinople, but, in the second Iconoclastic persecution, he seems to have felt no vocation for confessorship, and went to Rome. Taken by pirates, he was for some years a slave in Crete, where he converted many to the Faith; and having obtained his liberty, and returned to the Imperial City, he stood high in the favour, first

[p. 196]

of S. Ignatius, then of Photius, whom he accompanied into exile. On the death of that great man he was recalled, and gave himself up entirely to Hymnology. A legend, connected with his death, is related of him. A citizen of Constantinople betook himself to the church of S. Theodore in the hope of obtaining some benefit from the intercessions of that martyr. He waited three days in vain; then, just as he was about to leave the church in despair, S. Theodore appeared. "I," said the vision, "and the other Saints, whom the poet Joseph has celebrated in his Canons, have been attending his soul to Paradise: hence my absence from my church." The Eastern Communion celebrates him on the 3rd of April. But of the innumerable compositions of this most laborious writer, it would be impossible to find many which, to Western taste, give the least sanction to the position which he

[p. 197]

holds in the East. The insufferable tediousness consequent on the necessity of filling eight Odes with the praises of a Saint of whom nothing, beyond the fact of his martyrdom, is known, and doing this sixty or seventy different times,--the verbiage, the bombast, the trappings with which Scriptural simplicity is elevated to the taste of a corrupt Court, are each and all scarcely to be paralleled. He is by far the most prolific of the hymn-writers.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 198]

  

SUNDAY OF THE PRODIGAL SON.

  

(SEPTUAGESIMA.)

by S. Joseph of the Studium

The Sunday before Septuagesima, and Septuagesima itself are, respectively, in the Greek Church, the Sunday of the Pharisee and Publican,--and the Sunday of the Prodigal Son,--those parables forming the Gospel for the day, and serving for the key-note to the offices. The following Troparia are from the Canon at Lauds on Septuagesima. (Ode VI. and Ode VIII. Trop. 2, 3.)

bythos amartematun.

The abyss of many a former sin
 Encloses me, and bars me in:
 Like billows my transgressions roll:
 Be Thou the Pilot of my soul;
 And to Salvation's harbour bring,
 Thou Saviour and Thou glorious King!

[p. 199]

My Father's heritage abused,
 Wasted by lust, by sin misused;
 To shame and want and misery brought,
 The slave to many a fruitless thought,
 I cry to Thee, Who lovest men,
 O pity and receive again!

In hunger now,--no more possessed
 Of that my portion bright and blest,
 The exile and the alien see
 Who yet would fain return to Thee .
 And save me, LORD, who seek to raise
 To Thy dear love the hymn of praise!

With that blest thief my prayer I make,
 Remember for Thy mercy's sake!
 With that poor publican I cry,
 Be merciful, O GOD most High!
 With that lost Prodigal I fain
 Back to my home would turn again!

[p. 200]

Mourn, mourn, my soul, with earnest care,
 And raise to CHRIST the contrite prayer:--
 O Thou, Who freely wast made poor,
 My sorrows and my sins to cure,
 Me, poor of all good works, embrace,
 Enriching with Thy boundless grace

[In Mr. Young's book. Melody of Vater unser im Himmelreich: harmonised by Ch. H. Pink. A striking melody.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

LET OUR CHOIR NEW ANTHEMS RAISE.

A Cento from the Canon for SS. Timothy and Maura; May 3rd.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

tun ierun athloforun.

Let our Choir new anthems raise:
   Wake the morn with gladness:
 GOD Himself to joy and praise
   Turns the Martyrs' sadness:
 This the day that won their crown,
   Opened Heav'n's bright portal;
 As they laid the mortal down.
   And put on th' immortal.

[p. 202]

Never flinched they from the flame,
   From the torture, never;
 Vain the foeman's sharpest aim,
   Satan's best endeavour:
 For by faith they saw the Land
   Decked in all its glory,
 Where triumphant now they stand
   With the victor's story.

Faith they had that knew not shame,
   Love that could not languish;
 And eternal Hope o'ercame
   Momentary anguish.
 He Who trod the self-same road,
   Death and Hell defeated;
 Wherefore these their passions show'd
   Calvary repeated.

Up and follow, Christian men!
   Press through toil and sorrow! [p. 203]
 Spurn the night of fear, and then,--
   Oh the glorious morrow!
 Who will venture on the strife?
   Who will first begin it?
 Who will seize the Land of Life?
   Warriors, up and win it?

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

AND WILT THOU PARDON, LORD.

The following Stanzas are a Cento from the Canon for the Monday of the First Tone, in the Paracletice.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

tun amartiun moy ten plethun.

  And wilt Thou pardon, LORD,
   A sinner such as I?
 Although Thy book his crimes record
   Of such a crimson dye?

  So deep are they engrav'd,--
   So terrible their fear,
 The righteous scarcely shall be sav'd,
   And where shall I appear?

[p. 205]

  My soul, make all things known
   To Him Who all things sees:
 That so the LAMB may yet atone
   For thine iniquities.

  O Thou Physician blest,
 Make clean my guilty soul!
   And me, by many a sin oppress'd,
   Restore, and keep me whole!

  I know not how to praise
 Thy mercy and Thy love:
   But deign Thy servant to upraise,
   And I shall learn above!

[In Mr. Young's book. Composed by Dr. Schroeder.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 206]

  

STARS OF THE MORNING.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

A Cento from the Canon of the "Bodiless Ones;" Tuesday in the Week of the Fourth Tone.

Stars of the morning, so gloriously bright,
 Fill'd with celestial resplendence and light;
 These that, where night never followeth day,
 Raise the Trishagion ever and aye:

These are Thy counsellors: these dost Thou own,
 GOD of Sabaoth! the nearest Thy throne;
 These are Thy ministers; these dost Thou send,
 Help of the helpless ones! man to defend.

[p. 207]

These keep the guard, amidst Salem's dear bowers:
 Thrones, Principalities, Virtues, and Powers:
 Where with the Living Ones, mystical Four,
 Cherubin, Seraphin, bow and adore.

"Who like the LORD? "--thunders Michael, the Chief:
 Raphael, "the Cure of GOD," comforteth grief:
 And, as at Nazareth, prophet of peace,
 Gabriel, "the Light of GOD," bringeth release.

Then, when the earth was first pois'd in mid-space,
 Then, when the planets first sped on their race,--
 Then, when were ended the six days' employ,--
 Then all the sons of GOD shouted for joy.

[p. 208]

Still let them succour us; still let them fight,
 LORD of angelic hosts, battling for right!
 Till, where their anthems they ceaselessly pour,
 We with the Angels may bow and adore!

[No. 6 in H.E.C]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 209]

  

CANON FOR ASCENSION DAY.

This is the crowning glory of the poet Joseph; he has here with a happy boldness entered into the lists with S. John Damascene, to whom, on this one occasion, he must be pronounced superior. 1 have preserved the alphabetic arrangement, and "Joseph's Ode" at the end. All the Catavasias are in Iambics.

  

ODE. I.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

anestes triemeros.

A   fter three days Thou didst rise
     Visible to mortal eyes:
     First the Eleven worshipped Thee,--
     Then the rest in Galilee:
     Then a cloud in glory bore
     Thee to Thine own native shore.

[p. 210]

B   oldly David pour'd the strain:
     GOD ascends to Heav'n again:
     With the trumpet's pealing note
     Alleluias round Him float;
     As He now, by hard-won right,
     Seeks the Fount of purest Light!

C   rime on crime, and grief on grief,
     Left the world without relief:
     Now that aged, languid race,
     GOD hath quickened by His grace:
     As Thy going up we see,
     Glory to Thy Glory be!

Catavasia.

theiui kalyftheis.

D   arkness and awe, when Sinai's top he trod,
     Taught him of faltering tongue the Law of GOD: [p. 211]
     The mist was scattered from his spirit's eye,
     He prais'd and hymn'd the Maker of the sky,
     When He That is and was and shall be, passed by.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE III.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

eparate pylas.

"E   xalt, exalt, the Heavenly Gates,
        Ye chiefs of mighty name!
      The Lord and King of all things waits,
        Enrob'd in earthly frame."
      So to the higher seats they cry,
        The humbler legions of the sky.

F   or Adam's sake, by Serpent-guile
       Distress'd, deceiv'd, o'erthrown,
     Thou left'st Thy native Home awhile,
       Thou left'st the FATHER'S Throne:
     Now he is deck'd afresh with grace,
       Thou seek'st once more the Heavenly place.

[p. 213]

G   lad festal keeps the earth to-day,
       Glad festal Heav'n is keeping:
     The Ascension-pomp, in bright array,
       Goes proudly sky-ward sweeping:
     The LORD the mighty deed hath done,
       And join'd the severed into one.

Catavasia.

erhr'exe gastros.

H   er fetters of the barren womb it rent,
     It crush'd the malice of the insolent,
     The cry of her--the prophetess, who brought
     A contrite spirit, and a humble thought
     To Him, Who bids His Throne by earnest prayer be sought.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE IV.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

Iesous o zuodotes.

J   ESUS, LORD of Life Eternal,
       Taking those He lov'd the best,
     Stood upon the Mount of Olives,
       And His Own the last time blest:
     Then, though He had never left it,
       Sought again his FATHER'S breast.

K   nit is now our flesh to Godhead,
       Knit in everlasting bands:
     Call the world to highest festal:
       Floods and oceans, clap your hands:
     Angels, raise the song of triumph!
       Make response, ye distant lands

[p. 215]

L   oosing Death with all its terrors
       Thou ascended'st up on high;
     And to mortals, now Immortal,
       Gavest immortality:
     As Thine own Disciples saw Thee
       Mounting victor to the sky

Catavasia.

M   onarch of monarchs, Sole of Sole, to Thee,
     WORD, Glorious in Thy FATHER'S Majesty,
     And sending Thy co-equal SPIRIT bright
     To teach, to comfort, and to guide aright,
     Thine own Apostles sang: All glory to Thy might!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 216]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE V.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

nekrusas ton thanaton.

N   ow that Death by death hath found his ending,
       Thou dost call to Thee Thy loved Eleven;
     And from holy Olivet ascending
       On a cloud art carried up to Heaven.

O   that wondrous Birth! that wondrous Rising!
       That more wondrous mounting to the sky!
     So Elias, earthly things despising,
       In a fiery chariot went on high.

P   arted from Him, still they watch'd His going:
       'Why stand gazing thus?' the Angel said:
     'This same JESUS, all His glory showing,
       Shall return to judge the quick and dead.'

[p. 217]

Catavasia.

Q   uicken'd and cleans'd, receive remission new
     In the descending SPIRIT'S fiery dew,
     Sons of the Church, and light-formed generation!
     For lo! the law goes forth from Sion's nation,
     The cloven tongues of flame the PARACLETE'S salvation!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE VI.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

rhanatusan emin anuthen,

R   ain down, ye heav'ns, eternal bliss!
       The Cherub-cloud to-day
     Bears JESUS where His Father is,
       Along the starry way!

S   under'd of old were Heaven and Earth:
       But Thou, Incarnate King!
     Hast made them one by that Thy Birth,
       And this Thy triumphing.

'T   hy victor-raiment, wherefore red?
       What mean the marks of pain
     That print Thy form?'--the Angels said,
       The ascending Monarch's train.

[p. 219]

Catavasia.

V   ery Oblation, by the scourges torn!
     Nailed to the bitter Cross, O Virgin-born!
     As once the Prophet from the monster's maw,
     So now Thy love, accomplishing the Law,
     Adam from utter death to perfect Life would draw.

Oicos.

ta teis geis epi teis geis.

V   anities earthly in earth will we lay,
     Ashes with ashes, the dust with the clay:
     Lift up the heart, and the eye, and the love,
     Lift up thyself, to the regions above:
     Since the Immortal hath entered of late,
     Mortals may pass at the heavenly gate.

[p. 220]

    Stand we on Olivet: mark Him ascend,
     Whose is the glory and might without end;
     There, with His own ones, the Giver of Good
     Blessing them once more, a little while stood.
     "Nothing can part us,--nor distance, nor foes,
     Lo! I am for you, and who can oppose?"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 221]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE VII.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

futeine se, fus.

W   afting Him up on high,
       The glorious cloud receives
     The LORD of Immortality,
       And earth the Victor leaves:
     The Heavenly People raise the strain,
     The Apostles pour the hymn again;--
       GOD of our Fathers, Thou art blest!

Y   e faithful, tell your joys!
       All hearts with gladness bound!
     GOD is gone up with a merry noise,--
       The LORD with the trumpet's sound!
     To Him we cry, by woes once tried,
     Now glorious at the FATHER'S side,--
       GOD of our Fathers, Thou art blest!

[p. 222]

Z   ealous for GOD of yore,
       With zeal still Moses burns:
     "Come, Heavenly Spirits, and adore
       The Victor Who returns;
     Rise, Angel legions, rise and sing
     The ancient hymn to greet the King,--
       GOD of our Fathers, Thou art blest!"

Catavasia.

J   oin'd with the trumpet-peal, the din and shout,
     Cornet, flute, sackbut, dulcimer rang out,
     And bade adore the golden deity:
     The SPIRIT'S gentler voice gives praise to Thee,
 O   co-eternal One--O consubstantial Three!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 223]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE VIII.

  

Hirmos. "HIM OF THE FATHER." [**]

by S. Joseph of the Studium

ton en dysi tais oysiais.

O   f twofold natures, CHRIST, the Giver
       Of immortality and love,
     Ascendeth to the FATHER'S glory,
       Ascendeth to the Throne above:
         Wherefore He, this glorious morn,
           Be by all ador'd:
         Thou That liftest up our horn,
           Holy art Thou, LORD!

[p. 224]

S   laves are set free, and captives ransom'd:
       The Nature that He made at first
     He now presenteth to the FATHER,
       The chains of her damnation burst:
         This the cause that He was born,
           Adam's race restor'd:
         Thou That liftest up our horn,
           Holy art Thou, LORD!

E   mptied awhile of all His brightness,
       He enter'd thus the glorious fight;
     O'erthrew the foe, mankind exalted
       Far above every Pow'r and Might:
         Therefore bare He pains and scorn,
           Calvary's heart-blood pour'd:--
         Thou That liftest up our horn,
           Holy art Thou, LORD!

[p. 225]

Catavasia.

P   raising the LORD they stood, the Martyr Three,
     Untouch'd amidst the fire, and wholly free:
     With them associate, let the world's wide frame
     To Him Whose healing dew restrain'd the flame,
     Send up the hymn of praise, and magnify His Name!

Footnotes

^223:* I have specified this Hirmos, because the reader can see it by turning back to page <page 133>.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 226]

Canon for Ascension Day

  

ODE IX.

u tun dureun.

H   oly gift, surpassing comprehension!
     Wond'rous mystery of each fiery tongue!
     CHRIST made good His Promise in Ascension:
     O'er the Twelve the cloven flames have hung!

S   pake the LORD, or ere He left the Eleven:
     "Here in Salem wait the Gift I send:
     Till the PARACLETE come down from Heaven:
     Everlasting Guide and Guard and Friend."

[p. 227]

O   that shame, now ended in that glory!
     Pain untold, now lost in joy unknown!
     Tell it out with praise, the whole glad story,
     Human nature at the FATHER'S Throne!

Catavasia.

D   eclare, ye Angel Bands that dwell on high,
     How saw ye Him, the Victor, drawing nigh?
     What strange new visions burst upon your sight?
     One in the form of Man, That claims by right
     The very throne of GOD, the unapproached Light!

Exaposteilarion.

E   ternal! After Thine own will
       Thou born in time would'st be: [p. 228]
     After the self-same counsel still
       Was Thine Epiphany:
     Thou in our flesh didst yield Thy breath,
       Immortal GOD, for man:
     Thou by Thy death didst conquer Death,
       Through Thine Almighty plan:
     Thou, rising Victor to the sky,
       Fill'st Heav'n and earth above
     And send'st the Promise from on high,
       The SPIRIT of Thy love!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 229]

Theoctistus of the Studium.

+ circ. A.D. 890.

He is said to have been the friend of S. Joseph; but is only known-to us by the "Suppliant Canon to Jesus," to be found at the end of the Paracletice. The following is a Cento formed from it.

Iesou glykutate.

JESU, Name all names above,
   JESU, best and dearest,
 JESU, Fount of perfect love,
   Holiest, tenderest, nearest;
 JESU, source of grace completest,
 JESU purest, JESU sweetest,
   JESU, Well of power Divine,
   Make me, keep me, seal me Thine!

[p. 230]

JESU, open me the gate
   That of old he enter'd,
 Who, in that most lost estate,
   Wholly on Thee ventur'd;
 Thou, Whose Wounds are ever pleading,
 And Thy Passion interceding,
   From my misery let me rise
   To a Home in Paradise!

Thou didst call the Prodigal:
   Thou didst pardon Mary:
 Thou Whose words can never fall,
   Love can never vary:
 LORD, to heal my lost condition,
 Give--for Thou canst give--contrition;
   Thou canst pardon all mine ill
   If Thou wilt: O say, "I will!"

[p. 231]

Woe, that I have turned aside
   After fleshly pleasure!
 Woe, that I have never tried
   For the Heavenly Treasure!
 Treasure, safe in Home supernal;
 Incorruptible, eternal!
   Treasure no less price hath won
   Than the Passion of The SON!

JESU, crown'd with Thorns for me,
   Scourged for my transgression,
 Witnessing, through agony,
   That Thy good confession!
 JESU, clad in purple raiment,
 For my evils making payment;
   Let not all Thy woe and pain,
   Let not Calvary, be in vain!

[p. 232]

When I reach Death's bitter sea
   And its waves roll higher,
 Help the more forsaking me
   As the storm draws nigher:
 JESU, leave me not to languish,
 Helpless, hopeless, full of anguish!
   Tell me,--"Verily I say,
   Thou shalt be with Me to-day!"

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

  

Metrophanes of Smyrna.

+ circ. A.D. 910.

He was Bishop of that See towards the close of the ninth century, and is principally famous for his Canons in honour of the Blessed TRINITY,--eight in number, one to each Tone. They are sung at Matins on Sundays: and if the writer has not always been able to fuse his learning and orthodoxy into poetry, nor yet to escape the tautology of his brother bards, these compositions are stately and striking. Metrophanes was a vigorous supporter of S. Ignatius; and the partisan of Rome in her contest with Photius.

It would be impossible, without wearying the reader, to translate the whole of one of the Triadic Canons; but a Cento from one of them may not be unacceptable.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

  

O UNITY OF THREEFOLD LIGHT.

by Metrophanes of Smyrna

From the Canon for Sunday of the Second Tone.

trifegges Monas thearxike.

O Unity of Threefold Light,
   Send out Thy loveliest ray,
 And scatter our transgressions' night,
   And turn it into day;
 Make us those temples pure and fair,
   Thy glory loveth well,
 The spotless tabernacles, where
   Thou may'st vouchsafe to dwell!

The glorious hosts of peerless might
   That ever see Thy Face, [p. 235]
 Thou mak'st the mirrors of Thy Light,
   The vessels of Thy grace:
 Thou, when their wond'rous strain they weave,
   Hast pleasure in the lay:
 Deign thus our praises to receive,
   Albeit from lips of clay!

And yet Thyself they cannot know,
   Nor pierce the veil of light
 That hides Thee from the Thrones below,
   As in profoundest night:
 How then can mortal accents frame
   Due tribute to the King?
 Thou, only, while we praise Thy Name,
   Forgive us as we sing!

Beyond Metrophanes, it will not be necessary to carry our translations. The following names may, however, be mentioned.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 236]

  

Euthymius.

+ A.D. 910.

Euthymius, usually known as Syngelus, (the same as Syncellus, the confidential Deacon of the Patriarch of Constantinople,) who died about 916, is the author of a Penitential Canon to S Mary, which is highly esteemed in the East. It would scarcely, however, be possible to make even a Cento from it which would be acceptable to the English reader.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237]

  

Leo VI.

+ A.D. 917.

Our next name is that of a Royal Poet, Leo VI., the Philosopher, who reigned from 886 to 917, and left behind him the Idiomela, or detached stanzas, on the Resurrection, sung at Lauds. They are better than might have been expected from an imperial author, and the troubler of the Eastern Church by a fourth marriage.

The same thing may be said of the Exaposteilaria of his son, Constantine Porphyrogenitus, whose life lasted till 959.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 238]

  

John Mauropus.

+ A.D. 1060.

John Mauropus, Metropolitan of Euchaita, sometimes called the last of the Greek Fathers, left a number of hymns, printed at Eton in 1610; and if not boasting much poetical fire, at least graced with a gentle and Isocratean eloquence. As they have not been employed by the Church, they claim no further notice here.

With this Metropolitan, Greek Hymnology well-nigh ceased: at least the only other name that need be mentioned is that of Philotheus, Patriarch of Constantinople, who died in 1376. This man, the warm supporter of the dogma of the Uncreated Light, was the composer of several stanzas for Orthodoxy Sunday, and the Canon for July 16th, on the Holy Fathers: both in the very worst taste.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 239]

  

APPENDIX

[p. 240]

  

S. Stephen the Sabaite.

A.D. 725 . . . A D 799.

S. Stephen, called the Sabaite, from the monastery of S. Sabas, was the nephew of S. John Damascene, who placed him in that house. He was then ten years of age: he passed fifty-nine years in that retreat; and was the earliest of the hymnographers who lived to see the final restoration of Icons. He has left but few poetical compositions. The two best are those on the Martyrs of the monastery of S. Sabas--(March 10th)--on which a monk of that house would be likely to write con amore; and on the Circumcision. His style seems formed on that of

[p. 241]

[paragraph continues] S. Cosmas, rather than on that of his own uncle. He is not deficient in elegance and richness of typology, but exhibits something of sameness, and is occasionally guilty of very hard metaphors, as when he speaks of the circumcision of the tempest of our souls." He is commemorated on the 13th of July.

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 242]

  

IDIOMELA IN THE WEEK OF THE FIRST OBLIQUE TONE.

by S. Stephen the Sabaite

These Stanzas, which strike me as very sweet, are not in all the editions of the Octoechus.

kopon te kai kamaton.

Art thou weary, art thou languid,
   Art thou sore distrest?
 "Come to me "--saith One--"and coming,
                    Be at rest!"

Hath He marks to lead me to Him,
   If He be my Guide?
 "In Hip Feet and Hands are Wound-prints,
                    And His Side."

[p. 243]

Is there Diadem, as Monarch,
   That His Brow adorns?
 "Yea, a Crown, in very surety,
                    But of Thorns!"

If I find Him, if I follow,
   What His guerdon here?
 "Many a sorrow, many a labour,
                    Many a tear."

If I still hold closely to Him,
   What hath He at last?
 "Sorrow vanquish'd, labour ended,
                    Jordan past!"

If I ask Him to receive me,
   Will He say me nay?
 "Not till earth, and not till Heaven
                    Pass away!"

[p. 244]

Finding, following, keeping, struggling,
   Is He sure to bless?
 "Angels, Martyrs, Prophets, Virgins,
                    Answer, Yes!"

[No. 4. in Mr. Sedding's book: also No. 4 in H. E. C. Both very sweet melodies;--but that in H. E. C., which gives a different version of the 4th line throughout, is, to my mind, singularly touching.]

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 245]

  

THE PILGRIMS OF JESUS

by S. Joseph of the Studium

O happy band of pilgrims,
   If onward ye will tread
 With JESUS as your Fellow
   To JESUS as your Head!

O happy, if ye labour
   As JESUS did for men:
 O happy, if ye hunger
   As JESUS hunger'd then!

The Cross that JESUS carried
   He carried as your due:
 The Crown that JESUS weareth
   He weareth it for you.

[p. 246]

The Faith by which ye see Him,
   The Hope, in which ye yearn,
 The Love that through all troubles
   To Him alone will turn,--

What are they, but vaunt-couriers
   To lead you to His Sight?
 What are they, save the effluence
   Of Uncreated Light?

The trials that beset you,
   The sorrows ye endure,
 The manifold temptations
   That Death alone can cure,--

What are they, but His jewels
   Of right celestial worth?
 What are they but the ladder,
   Set up to Heav'n on earth?

[p. 247]

O happy band of pilgrims,
   Look upward to the skies:--
 Where such a light affliction
   Shall win you such a prize!

     
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 248]

  

THE RETURN HOME.

by S. Joseph of the Studium

  Safe home, safe home in port!
   --Rent cordage, shattered deck,
   Torn sails, provisions short,
   And only not a wreck:
 But oh! the joy upon the shore
 To tell our voyage-perils o'er!

  The prize, the prize secure!
   The athlete nearly tell;
   Bare all he could endure,
   And bare not always well:
 But he may smile at troubles gone
 Who sets the victor-garland on!

[p. 249]

  No more the foe can harm:
   No more of leaguer'd camp,
   And cry of night-alarm,
   And need of ready lamp:
 And yet how nearly he had failed,--
 How nearly had that foe prevailed!

  The lamb is in the fold
   In perfect safety penn'd:
   The lion once had hold,
   And thought to make an end:
 But One came by with Wounded Side,
 And for the sheep the Shepherd died.

  The exile is at Home
   --O nights and days of tears,
   O longings not to roam,
   O sins, and doubts, and fears,--
 What matter now (when so men say)
 The King has wip'd those tears away?

[p. 250]

  O happy, happy Bride!
   Thy widow'd hours are past,
   The Bridegroom at thy side,
   Thou all His own at last!
 The sorrows of thy former cup
 In full fruition swallow'd up!

[No. 5 in H. E. C. This, of all the melodies written for, or adapted to, these hymns, is my own especial favourite. One feels that the anonymous writer of such a plaintive, yet soothing, melody, must have been one--to quote Archbishop Trench's words with regard to the author of Veni, Sancte Spiritus,-- acquainted with great sorrows, but also with great consolations.]

 

 

 

PRINTED BY
 SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
 LONDON

 

 

 

    
Hymns of the Eastern Church, by J.M. Neale, [1884], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

The following period advertisements followed the original book. They are included for completeness.--JBH

WORKS by the late Rev. Dr. NEALE,

PUBLISHED BY

J. T. HAYES, 17 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

THE AUTHOR'S LAST TWO WORKS.

I.

Price 2s. 6d; by post, 2s. 9d.

Original Sequences,

HYMNS,

AND OTHER ECCLESIASTICAL VERSES.

BY

THE LATE REV. DR. NEALE,

SACKVILLE COLLEGE, EAST GRINSTED.

'It had long been my wish, especially when I had occasion to notice the great favour which GOD had bestowed on my translations from Mediaeval Hymnology, to collect some of my own Hymns and Sequences as a poor little offering to the Great Treasury. Laid aside in spring last from all active work by a severe and dangerous illness, the wish was more strongly impressed on my mind, and I felt that no kind of composition could be more suitable for one who might soon be called to have done with earthly composition for ever.'--Preface (1866).

[p. 2]

II.

Price 1s.; by post, 1s. 2d.

Stabat Mater Speciosa:

FULL OF BEAUTY STOOD THE MOTHER.

BY

THE LATE DR. NEALE.

'The companion Sequence to the Stabat Mater Dolorosa is now presented to the reader--Stabat Mater Speciosa; this is the hymn of the Cradle, as the other of the Cross. . . . I cannot but wonder that it has never hitherto appeared in an English translation; nor even, so far as I know, been reprinted in this country.'--Author's Preface.

*** The above Work, and the ORIGINAL SEQUENCES, were the last efforts of DR. NEALE on his Sick Bed, and were only finished two or three days before his decease.

[p. 3]

Fine Edition, on Toned Paper, price 1s. 6d. cloth; by post, 1s. 8d. The Cheap Edition, 9d.; by post, 10d.

THE

Rhythm of Bernard of Morlaix,

ON THE HEAVENLY COUNTRY.

EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY

THE LATE DR. NEALE.

'And Bernard, minstrel of the Cross;
   And Bernard, who with home-sick view,
 Counting all other joys but loss,
   JERUSALEM THE GOLDEN drew.'
                   Neale's Original Sequences.

This RHYTHM is that which will most surely enshrine JOHN MASON NEALE'S memory in the Church of England as a dear and honoured treasure. His song will long he the solace of sad hearts on earth, but he is now learning a brighter and sweeter one.' Dr. Littledales Preface to the Eighth Edition.

[p. 4]

NEW AND SECOND EDITION OF THE COMPANION VOLUME TO THE RHYTHM OF S. BERNARD.

Price 1s. 6d.; by post, 1s. 8d.

HYMNS,

CHIEFLY MEDIAeVAL,

ON THE

Joys and Glories of Paradise.

BY

THE LATE DR. NEALE.

Dr. NEALE has intended this volume as a companion to his translation of "Bernard of Morlaix," but it is much more miscellaneous in its contents, which, were it not for the gravity and unity of their subjects, would be almost grotesquely varied.'--Guardian.

'This little book contains some perfect gems.'--Ecclesiastic.

[p. 5]

Fine Edition, on Toned Paper, 1s. 6d.; by post, 1s. 8d. Cheap Edition, 1s.; by post, 1s. 1d.

Hymns, suitable for Invalids

ORIGINAL OR TRANSLATED.

BY

THE LATE DR. NEALE.

WITH PREFACE BY DR. LITTLEDALE.

'The hymns in this neat little collection are selected from various volumes of his Sacred Poetry, and are admirably suited to form a companion to his "Readings for the Aged." Almost all of them are well-known favourites with persons acquainted with Dr. NEALE'S poetry, and they are such as to lead those who are yet strangers to it to lose no time in filling up this gap in their knowledge of contemporary poetry.'--Literary Churchman.

'This beautiful collection should be in the hands of every one who visits the sick.'--Church Review.

[p. 6]

A VOLUME OF CHOICE SERMONS BY DR. NEALE.

SECOND EDITION, CONSIDERABLY ENLARGED.

6s.; by post, 6s. 5d.

The Song of Songs:

A VOLUME OF SERMONS THEREON.

BY

THE LATE DR. NEALE.

*** Many Sermons have been added which have never hitherto been published.

'Its style is that of Dr. NEALE himself--peculiar, forcible, attractive, epigrammatic, and thoroughly original; while the Biblical knowledge displayed in it, and the deep lessons brought out by a mystical treatment of words of Sacred Writ, would no doubt astonish some professing Bible Christians of another school.'--Union Review.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hft.txt =====


    
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

  

HAWAIIAN FOLK TALES

  

A COLLECTION

  

OF NATIVE LEGENDS

  

COMPILED BY

  

THOS. G. THRUM

  

Chicago: A.C. McClurg & Co.

  

[1907]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, July 2006. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE

IT is becoming more and more a matter of regret that a larger amount of systematic effort was not established in early years for the gathering and preservation of the folk-lore of the Hawaiians. The world is under lasting obligations to the late Judge Fornander, and to Dr. Rae before him, for their painstaking efforts to gather the history of this people and trace their origin and migrations; but Fornander's work only has seen the light, Dr. Rae's manuscript having been accidentally destroyed by fire.

The early attempts of Dibble and Pogue to gather history from Hawaiians themselves have preserved to native and foreign readers much that would probably otherwise have been lost. To the late Judge Andrews we are indebted for a very full grammar and dictionary of the language, as also for a valuable manuscript collection of meles and antiquarian literature that passed to the custody of the Board of Education.

There were native historians in those days; the newspaper articles of S. M. Kamakau, the earlier writings of David Malo, and the later contributions of G. W. Pilipo and others are but samples of a wealth of material, most of which has been lost forever to the world. From time to time Prof. W. D. Alexander,

[p. vi]

as also C. J. Lyons, has furnished interesting extracts from these and other hakus.

The Rev. A. O. Forbes devoted some time and thought to the collecting of island folk-lore: and King Kalakaua took some pains in this line also, as evidenced by his volume of "Legends and Myths of Hawaii," edited by R. M. Daggett, though there is much therein that is wholly foreign to ancient Hawaiian customs and thought. No one of late years had a better opportunity than Kalakaua toward collecting the meles, kaaos, and traditions of his race; and for purposes looking to this end there was established by law a Board of Genealogy, which had an existence of some four years, but nothing of permanent value resulted therefrom.

Fornander's manuscript collection of meles, legends, and genealogies in the vernacular has fortunately become, by purchase, the property of the Hon. C. R. Bishop, which insures for posterity the result of one devoted scholar's efforts to rescue the ancient traditions that are gradually slipping away; for the haku meles (bards) of Hawaii are gone. This fact, as also the Hawaiian Historical Society's desire to aid and stimulate research into the history and traditions of this people, strengthens the hope that some one may yet arise to give us further insight into the legendary folk-lore of this interesting race.

T. G. T.

HONOLULU, January 1, 1907.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

NOTE

IN response to repeated requests, the compiler now presents in book form the series of legends that have been made a feature of "The Hawaiian Annual" for a number of years past. The series has been enriched by the addition of several tales, the famous shark legend having been furnished for this purpose from the papers of the Hawaiian Historical Society.

The collection embraces contributions by the Rev. A. O. Forbes, Dr. N. B. Emerson, J. S. Emerson, Mrs. E. M. Nakuina, W. M. Gibson, Dr. C. M. Hyde, and others, all of whom are recognized authorities.

T. G. T.

HONOLULU, January 1, 1907.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

CONTENTS

           

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       Legends   Resembling Old Testament History. Rev.   C. M. Hyde, D.D.

       <page 15>

     
      II.

       Exploits of   Maui. Rev. A. O. Forbes

        

     
       

       I. Snaring the   Sun.

       <page 31>

     
       

       II. The Origin   of Fire

       <page 33>

     
      III.

       Pele and the   Deluge. Rev. A. O. Forbes

       <page 36>

     
      IV.

       Pele and   Kahawali. From Ellis's "Tour of   Hawaii"

       <page 39>

     
      V.

       Hiku and   Kawelu. J. S. Emerson

       <page 43>

     
       

       Location of the   Lua o Milu

       <page 48>

     
      VI.

       Lonopuha; or, Origin   of the Art of Healing in Hawaii. Translated   by Thos. G. Thrum

       <page 51>

     
      VII.

       A Visit to the   Spirit Land; or, The Strange Experience of a Woman in Kona, Hawaii. Mrs. E. N. Haley

       <page 58>

     
      VIII.

       Kapeepeekauila;   or, The Rocks of Kana. Rev. A. O.   Forbes

       <page 63>

     
      IX.

       Kalelealuaka. Dr. N. B. Emerson

       <page 74>

     
      X.

       Stories of the   Menehunes: Hawaii the Original Home of the Brownies. Thos. G. Thrum

       <page 107>

     
       

       Moke Manu's   Account

       <page 109>

     
       

       Pi's   Watercourse

       <page 110>

     
       

       Laka's   Adventure

       <page 111>

     
       

       Kekupua's Canoe

       <page 114>

     
       

       As Heiau   Builders

       <page 116>

     
      XI.

       Kahalaopuna,   Princess of Manoa. Mrs. E. M. Nakuina

       <page 118>

     
       

       [p. x]

        

     
      XII.

       The Punahou   Spring. Mrs. E. M. Nakuina

       <page 133>

     
      XIII.

       Oahunui. Mrs. E. M. Nakuina

       <page 139>

     
      XIV.

       Ahuula: A   Legend of Kanikaniaula and the First Feather Cloak. Mrs. E. M. Nakuina

       <page 147>

     
      XV.

       Kaala and   Kaaialii: A Legend of Lanai. W. M.   Gibson

       <page 156>

     
      XVI.

       The Tomb of   Puupehe: A Legend of Lanai. From   "The Hawaiian Gazette"

       <page 181>

     
      XVII.

       Ai Kanaka: A   Legend of Molokai. Rev. A.O. Forbes

       <page 186>

     
      XVIII.

       Kaliuwaa. Scene   of the Demigod Kamapuaa's Escape from Olopana. From "The Hawaiian   Spectator"

       <page 193>

     
      XIX.

       Battle of the   Owls. Jos. M. Poepoe

       <page 200>

     
      XX.

       This Land is   the Sea's. Traditional Account of an Ancient Hawaiian Prophecy. Translated from Moke Manu by Thos. G.   Thrum

       <page 203>

     
      XXI.

       Ku-ula, the   Fish God of Hawaii. Translated from   Moke Manu by M. K. Nakuina

       <page 215>

     
      XXII.

       Aiai, Son of   Ku-ula. Part II of the Legend of Ku-ula, the Fish God of Hawaii. Translated from Moke Manu by M. K. Nakuina

       <page 230>

     
      XXIII.

       Kaneaukai: A   Legend of Waialua. Thos. G. Thrum

       <page 250>

     
      XXIV.

       The Shark-man,   Nanaue. Mrs. E. M. Nakuina

       <page 255>

     
      XXV.

       Fish Stories   and Superstitions. Translated by M. K.   Nakuina

       <page 269>

     
       

       GLOSSARY

       <page 277>

     
    

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

HAWAIIAN FOLK TALES

  

I

  

LEGENDS RESEMBLING OLD TESTAMENT HISTORY

  

REV. C. M. HYDE, D. D.

IN the first volume of Judge Fornander's elaborate work on "The Polynesian Race" he has given some old Hawaiian legends which closely resemble the Old Testament history. How shall we account for such coincidences?

Take, for instance, the Hawaiian account of the Creation. The Kane, Ku, and Lono: or, Sunlight, Substance, and Sound,--these constituted a triad named Ku-Kaua-Kahi, or the Fundamental Supreme Unity. In worship the reverence due was expressed by such epithets as Hi-ka-po-loa, Oi-e, Most Excellent, etc. "These gods existed from eternity, from and before chaos, or, as the Hawaiian term expressed it, 'mai ka po mai' (from the time of night, darkness, chaos). By an act of their will these gods dissipated or broke into pieces the existing, surrounding, all-containing po, night, or chaos. By this act light entered into space. They then created the heavens, three in number, as a place to dwell in; and the earth to be their footstool, he keehina honua a Kane. Next they created the sun,

[p. 16]

moon, stars, and a host of angels, or spirits--i kini akua--to minister to them. Last of all they created man as the model, or in the likeness of Kane. The body of the first man was made of red earth--lepo ula, or alaea--and the spittle of the gods--wai nao. His head was made of a whitish clay--palolo--which was brought from the four ends of the world by Lono. When the earth-image of Kane was ready, the three gods breathed into its nose, and called on it to rise, and it became a living being. Afterwards the first woman was created from one of the ribs--lalo puhaka--of the man while asleep, and these two were the progenitors of all mankind. They are called in the chants and in various legends by a large number of different names; but the most common for the man was Kumuhonua, and for the woman Keolakuhonua [or Lalahonua].

"Of the creation of animals these chants are silent; but from the pure tradition it may be inferred that the earth at the time of its creation or emergence from the watery chaos was stocked with vegetable and animal. The animals specially mentioned in the tradition as having been created by Kane were hogs (puaa), dogs (ilio), lizards or reptiles (moo).

"Another legend of the series, that of Wela-ahi-lani, states that after Kane had destroyed the world by fire, on account of the wickedness of the people then living, he organized it as it now is, and created the first man and the first woman, with the assistance of Ku and Lono, nearly in the same manner as narrated in the former legend of Kumuhonua. In this legend the

[p. 17]

man is called Wela-ahi-lani, and the woman is called Owe."

Of the primeval home, the original ancestral seat of mankind, Hawaiian traditions speak in highest praise. "It had a number of names of various meanings, though the most generally occurring, and said to be the oldest, was Kalana-i-hau-ola (Kalana with the life-giving dew). It was situated in a large country, or continent, variously called in the legends Kahiki-honua-kele, Kahiki-ku, Kapa-kapa-ua-a-Kane, Molo-lani. Among other names for the primary homestead, or paradise, are Pali-uli (the blue mountain), Aina-i-ka-kaupo-o-Kane (the land in the heart of Kane), Aina-wai-akua-a-Kane (the land of the divine water of Kane). The tradition says of Pali-uli, that it was a sacred, tabooed land; that a man must be righteous to attain it; if faulty or sinful he will not get there; if he looks behind he will not get there; if he prefers his family he will not -enter Pali-uli." "Among other adornments of the Polynesian Paradise, the Kalana-i-hau-ola, there grew the Ulu kapu a Kane, the breadfruit tabooed for Kane, and the ohia hemolele, the sacred apple-tree. The priests of the olden time are said to have held that the tabooed fruits of these trees were in some manner connected with the trouble and death of Kumuhonua and Lalahonua, the first man and the first woman. Hence in the ancient chants he is called Kane-laa-uli, Kumu-uli, Kulu-ipo, the fallen chief, he who fell on account of the tree, or names of similar import."

According to those legends of Kumuhonua and

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] Wela-ahi-lani, "at the time when the gods created the stars, they also created a multitude of angels, or spirits (i kini akua), who were not created like men, but made from the spittle of the gods (i kuhaia), to be their servants or messengers. These spirits, or a number of them, disobeyed and revolted, because they were denied the awa; which means that they were not permitted to be worshipped, awa being a sacrificial offering and sign of worship. These evil spirits did not prevail, however, but were conquered by Kane, and thrust down into uttermost darkness (ilalo loa i ka po). The chief of these spirits was called by some Kanaloa, by others Milu, the ruler of Po; Akua ino; Kupu ino, the evil spirit. Other legends, however, state that the veritable and primordial lord of the Hawaiian inferno was called Manua. The inferno itself bore a number of names, such as Po-pau-ole, Po-kua-kini, Po-kini-kini, Po-papa-ia-owa, Po-ia-milu. Milu, according to those other legends, was a chief of superior wickedness on earth who was thrust down into Po, but who was really both inferior and posterior to Manua. This inferno, this Po, with many names, one of which remarkably enough was Ke-po-lua-ahi, the pit of fire, was not an entirely dark place. There was light of some kind and there was fire. The legends further tell us that when Kane, Ku, and Lono were creating the first man from the earth, Kanaloa was present, and in imitation of Kane, attempted to make another man out of the earth. When his clay model was ready, he called to it to become alive, but no life came to it. Then Kanaloa became very angry, and said to Kane,

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] 'I will take your man, and he shall die,' and so it happened. Hence the first man got his other name Kumu-uli, which means a fallen chief, he 'lii kahuli. . . . With the Hawaiians, Kanaloa is the personified spirit of evil, the origin of death, the prince of Po, or chaos, and yet a revolted, disobedient spirit, who was conquered and punished by Kane. The introduction and worship of Kanaloa, as one of the great gods in the Hawaiian group, can be traced back only to the time of the immigration from the southern groups, some eight hundred years ago. In the more ancient chants he is never mentioned in conjunction with Kane, Ku, and Lono, and even in later Hawaiian mythology he never took precedence of Kane. The Hawaiian legend states that the oldest son of Kumuhonua, the first man, was called Laka, and that the next was called Ahu, and that Laka was a bad man; he killed his brother Ahu.

"There are these different Hawaiian genealogies, going back with more or less agreement among themselves to the first created man. The genealogy of Kumuhonua gives thirteen generations inclusive to Nuu, or Kahinalii, or the line of Laka, the oldest son of Kumuhonua. (The line of Seth from Adam to Noah counts ten generations.) The second genealogy, called that of Kumu-uli, was of greatest authority among the highest chiefs down to the latest times, and it was taboo to teach it to the common people. This genealogy counts fourteen generations from Huli-houna, the first man, to Nuu, or Nana-nuu, but inclusive, on the line of Laka. The third genealogy,

[p. 20]

which, properly speaking, is that of Paao, the high priest who came with Pili from Tahiti, about twenty-five generations ago, and was a reformer of the Hawaiian priesthood, and among whose descendants it has been preserved, counts only twelve generations from Kumuhonua to Nuu, on the line of Kapili, youngest son of Kumuhonua."

"In the Hawaiian group there are several legends of the Flood. One legend relates that in the time of Nuu, or Nana-nuu (also pronounced lana, that is, floating), the flood, Kaiakahinalii, came upon the earth, and destroyed all living beings; that Nuu, by command of his god, built a large vessel with a house on top of it, which was called and is referred to in chants as 'He waa halau o ka Moku,' the royal vessel, in which he and his family, consisting of his wife, Lilinoe, his three sons and their wives, were saved. When the flood subsided, Kane, Ku, and Lono entered the waa halau of Nuu, and told him to go out. He did so, and found himself on the top of Mauna Kea (the highest mountain on the island of Hawaii). He called a cave there after the name of his wife, and the cave remains there to this day--as the legend says in testimony of the fact. Other versions of the legend say that Nuu landed and dwelt in Kahiki-honua-kele, a large and extensive country." . . . "Nuu left the vessel in the evening of the day and took with him a pig, cocoanuts, and awa as .an offering to the god Kane. As he looked up he saw the moon in the sky. He thought it was the god, saying to himself, 'You are Kane, no doubt, though

[p. 21]

you have transformed yourself to my sight.' So he worshipped the moon, and offered his offerings. Then Kane descended on the rainbow and spoke reprovingly to Nuu, but on account of the mistake Nuu escaped punishment, having asked pardon of Kane." . . . "Nuu's three sons were Nalu-akea, Nalu-hoo-hua, and Nalu-mana-mana. In the tenth generation from Nuu arose Lua-nuu, or the second Nuu, known also in the legend as Kane-hoa-lani, Kupule, and other names. The legend adds that by command of his god he was the first to introduce circumcision to be practised among his descendants. He left his native home and moved a long way off until he reached a land called Honua-ilalo, 'the southern country.' Hence he got the name Lalo-kona, and his wife was called Honua-po-ilalo. He was the father of Ku-nawao by his slave-woman Ahu (O-ahu) and of Kalani-menehune by his wife, Mee-hewa. Another says that the god Kane ordered Lua-nuu to go up on a mountain and perform a sacrifice there. Lua-nuu looked among the mountains of Kahiki-ku, but none of them appeared suitable for the purpose. Then Lua-nuu inquired of God where he might find a proper place. God replied to him: 'Go travel to the eastward, and where you find a sharp-peaked hill projecting precipitously into the ocean, that is the hill for the sacrifice.' Then Lua-nuu and his son, Kupulu-pulu-a-Nuu, and his servant, Pili-lua-nuu, started off in their boat to the eastward. In remembrance of this event the Hawaiians called the back of Kualoa Koo-lau; Oahu (after one of Lua-nuu's names), Kane-hoa-lani; 

[p. 22]

and the smaller hills in front of it were named Kupu-pulu and Pili-lua-nuu. Lua-nuu is the tenth descendant from Nuu by both the oldest and the youngest of Nuu's sons. This oldest son is represented to have been the progenitor of the Kanaka-maoli, the people living on the mainland of Kane (Aina kumupuaa a Kane): the youngest was the progenitor of the white people (ka poe keokeo maoli). This Lua-nuu (like Abraham, the tenth from Noah, also like Abraham), through his grandson, Kini-lau-a-mano, became the ancestor of the twelve children of the latter, and the original founder of the Menehune people, from whom this legend makes the Polynesian family descend."

The Rev. Sheldon Dibble, in his history of the Sandwich Islands, published at Lahainaluna, in 1843, gives a tradition which very much resembles the history of Joseph. "Waikelenuiaiku was one of ten brethren who had one sister. They were all the children of one father, whose name was Waiku. Waikelenuiaiku was much beloved by his father, but his brethren hated him. On account of their hatred they carried him and cast him into a pit belonging to Holonaeole. The oldest brother had pity on him, and gave charge to Holonaeole to take good care of him. Waikelenuiaiku escaped and fled to a country over which reigned a king whose name was Kamohoalii. There he was thrown into a dark place, a pit under ground, in which many persons were confined for various crimes. Whilst confined in this dark place he told his companions to dream dreams and tell

[p. 23]

them to him. The night following four of the prisoners had dreams. The first dreamed that he saw a ripe ohia (native apple), and his spirit ate it; the second dreamed that he saw a ripe banana, and his spirit ate it; the third dreamed that he saw a hog, and his spirit ate it; and the fourth dreamed that he saw awa, pressed out the juice, and his spirit drank it. The first three dreams, pertaining to food, Waikelenuiaiku interpreted unfavorably, and told the dreamers they must prepare to die. The fourth dream, pertaining to drink, he interpreted to signify deliverance and life. The first three dreamers were slain according to the interpretation, and the fourth was delivered and saved. Afterward this last dreamer told Kamohoalii, the king of the land, how wonderful was the skill of Waikelenuiaiku in interpreting dreams, and the king sent and delivered him from prison and made him a principal chief in his kingdom."

Judge Fornander alludes to this legend, giving the name, however, Aukelenui-a-Iku, and adding to it the account of the hero's journey to the place where the water of life was kept (ka-wai-ola-loa-a-Kane), his obtaining it and therewith resuscitating his brothers, who had been killed by drowning some years before. Another striking similarity is that furnished to Judge Fornander in the legend of Ke-alii-waha-nui: "He was king of the country called Honua-i-lalo. He oppressed the Menehune people. Their god Kane sent Kane-apua and Kaneloa, his elder brother, to bring the people away, and take them to the land which Kane had given them, and which was called

[p. 24]

[paragraph continues] Ka aina momona a Kane, or Ka one lauena a Kane, and also Ka aina i ka haupo a Kane. The people were then told to observe the four Ku days in the beginning of the month as Kapu-hoano (sacred or holy days), in remembrance of this event, because they thus arose (Ku) to depart from that land. Their offerings on the occasion were swine and goats." The narrator of the legend explains that formerly there were goats without horns, called malailua, on the slopes of Mauna Loa on Hawaii, and that they were found there up to the time of Kamehameha I. The legend further relates that after leaving the land of Honualalo, the people came to the Kai-ula-a-Kane (the Red Sea of Kane); that they were pursued by Ke-alii-waha-nui; that Kane-apua and Kanaloa prayed to Lono, and finally reached the Aina lauena a Kane.

"In the famous Hawaiian legend of Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele, it is said that when Hiiaka went to the island of Kauai to recover and restore to life the body of Lohiau, the lover of her sister, Pele, she arrived at the foot of the Kalalau Mountain shortly before sunset. Being told by her friends at Haena that there would not be daylight sufficient to climb the pali (precipice) and get the body out of the cave in which it was hidden, she prayed to her gods to keep the sun stationary (i ka muli o Hea) over the brook Hea, until she had accomplished her object. The prayer was heard, the mountain was climbed, the guardians of the cave vanquished, and the body recovered."

A story of retarding the sun and making the day

[p. 25]

longer to accomplish his purpose is told of Maui-a-kalana, according to Dibble's history.

Judge Fornander alludes to one other legend with incidents similar to the Old Testament history wherein "Na-ula-a-Maihea, an Oahu prophet, left Oahu for Kauai, was upset in his canoe, was swallowed by a whale, and thrown up alive on the beach at Wailua, Kauai."

Judge Fornander says that, when he first heard the legend of the two brother prophets delivering the Menehune people, "he was inclined to doubt its genuineness and to consider it as a paraphrase or adaptation of the Biblical account by some semi-civilized or semi-Christianized Hawaiian, after the discovery of the group by Captain Cook. But a larger and better acquaintance with Hawaiian folk-lore has shown that though the details of the legend, as interpreted by the Christian Hawaiian from whom it was received, may possibly in some degree, and unconsciously to him, perhaps, have received a Biblical coloring, yet the main facts of the legend, with the identical names of persons and places, are referred to more or less distinctly in other legends of undoubted antiquity." And the Rev. Mr. Dibble, in his history, says of these Hawaiian legends, that "they were told to the missionaries before the Bible was translated into the Hawaiian tongue, and before the people knew much of sacred history. The native who acted as assistant in translating the history of Joseph was forcibly struck with its similarity to their ancient tradition. Neither is there the least room for supposing that the songs referred to are recent inventions.

[p. 26]

[paragraph continues] They can all be traced back for generations, and are known by various persons residing on different islands who have had no communication with each other. Some of them have their date in the reign of some ancient king, and others have existed time out of mind. It may also be added, that both their narrations and songs are known the best by the very oldest of the people, and those who never learned to read; whose education and training were under the ancient system of heathenism."

"Two hypotheses," says Judge Fornander, "may with some plausibility be suggested to account for this remarkable resemblance of folk-lore. One is, that during the time of the Spanish galleon trade, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, between the Spanish Main and Manila, some shipwrecked people, Spaniards and Portuguese, had obtained sufficient influence to introduce these scraps of Bible history into the legendary lore of this people. . . . On this first hypothesis I remark that, if the shipwrecked foreigners were educated men, or only possessed of such Scriptural knowledge as was then imparted to the commonality of laymen, it is morally impossible to conceive that a Spaniard of the sixteenth century should confine his instruction to some of the leading events of the Old Testament, and be totally silent upon the Christian dispensation, and the cruciolatry, mariolatry, and hagiolatry of that day. And it is equally impossible to conceive that the Hawaiian listeners, chiefs, priests, or commoners, should have retained and incorporated so much of the former in their own folk-lore, and yet

[p. 27]

have utterly forgotten every item bearing upon the latter.

"The other hypothesis is, that at some remote period either a body of the scattered Israelites had arrived at these islands direct, or in Malaysia, before the exodus of 'the Polynesian family,' and thus imparted a knowledge of their doctrines, of the early life of their ancestors, and of some of their peculiar customs, and that having been absorbed by the people among whom they found a refuge, this is all that remains to attest their presence--intellectual tombstones over a lost and forgotten race, yet sufficient after twenty-six centuries of silence to solve in some measure the ethnic puzzle of the lost tribes of Israel. In regard to this second hypothesis, it is certainly more plausible and cannot be so curtly disposed of as the Spanish theory. . . . So far from being copied one from the other, they are in fact independent and original versions of a once common legend, or series of legends, held alike by Cushite, Semite, Turanian, and Aryan, up to a certain time, when the divergencies, of national life and other causes brought other subjects peculiar to each other prominently in the foreground; and that as these divergencies hardened into system and creed, that grand old heirloom of a common past became overlaid and colored by the peculiar social and religious atmosphere through which it has passed up to the surface of the present time. But besides this general reason for refusing to adopt the Israelitish theory, that the Polynesian legends were introduced by fugitive or emigrant Hebrews from the subverted kingdoms of

[p. 28]

[paragraph continues] Israel or Judah, there is the more special reason to be added that the organization and splendor of Solomon's empire, his temple, and his wisdom became proverbial among the nations of the East subsequent to his time; on all these, the Polynesian legends are absolutely silent."

In commenting on the legend of Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele, Judge Fornander says: "If the Hebrew legend of Joshua or a Cushite version give rise to it, it only brings down the community of legends a little later in time. And so would the legend of Naulu-a-Maihea, . . . unless the legend of Jonah, with which it corresponds in a measure, as well as the previous legend of Joshua and the sun, were Hebrew anachronisms compiled and adapted in later times from long antecedent materials, of which the Polynesian references are but broken and distorted echoes, bits of legendary mosaics, displaced from their original surroundings and made to fit with later associations."

In regard to the account of the Creation, he remarks that "the Hebrew legend infers that the god Elohim existed contemporaneously with and apart from the chaos. The Hawaiian legend makes the three great gods, Kane, Ku, and Lono, evolve themselves out of chaos. . . . The order of creation, according to Hawaiian folk-lore, was that after Heaven and earth had been separated, and the ocean had been stocked with its animals, the stars were created, then the moon, then the sun." Alluding to the fact that the account in Genesis is truer to nature, Judge Fornander nevertheless propounds the inquiry whether this fact may not

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] "indicate that the Hebrew text is a later emendation of an older but once common tradition"?

Highest antiquity is claimed for Hawaiian traditions in regard to events subsequent to the creation of man. "In one of the sacrificial hymns of the Marquesans, when human victims were offered, frequent allusions were made to 'the red apples eaten in Naoau,' . . . and to the 'tabooed apples of Atea,' as the cause of death, wars, pestilence, famine, and other calamities, only to be averted or atoned for by the sacrifice of human victims. The close connection between the Hawaiian and the Marquesan legends indicates a common origin, and that origin can be no other than that from which the Chaldean and Hebrew legends of sacred trees, disobedience, and fall also sprang." In comparison of "the Hawaiian myth of Kanaloa as a fallen angel antagonistic to the great gods, as the spirit of evil and death in the world, the Hebrew legends are more vague and indefinite as to the existence of an evil principle. The serpent of Genesis, the Satan of Job, the Hillel of Isaiah, the dragon of the Apocalypse--all point, however, to the same underlying idea that the first cause of sin, death, evil, and calamities, was to be found in disobedience and revolt from God. They appear as disconnected scenes of a once grand drama that in olden times riveted the attention of mankind, and of which, strange to say, the clearest synopsis and the most coherent recollection are, so far, to be found in Polynesian traditions. It is probably in vain to inquire with whom the legend of an evil spirit and his operations in Heaven and on

[p. 30]

earth had its origin. Notwithstanding the apparent unity of design and remarkable coincidence in many points, yet the differences in coloring, detail, and presentation are too great to suppose the legend borrowed by one from either of the others. It probably descended to the Chaldeans, Polynesians, and Hebrews alike, from a source or people anterior to themselves, of whom history now is silent."

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

II

  

EXPLOITS OF MAUI

  

REV. A. O. FORBES

  

I.--SNARING THE SUN

MAUI was the son of Hina-lau-ae and Hina, and they dwelt at a place called Makalia, above Kahakuloa, on West Maui. Now, his mother Hina made kapas. And as she spread them out to dry, the days were so short that she was put to great trouble and labor in hanging them out and taking them in day after day until they were dry. Maui, seeing this, was filled with pity for her, for the days were so short that, no sooner had she got her kapas all spread out to dry, than the Sun went down, and she had to take them in again. So he determined to make the Sun go slower. He first went to Wailohi, in Hamakua, on East Maui, to observe the motions of the Sun. There he saw that it rose toward Hana. He then went up on Haleakala, and saw that the Sun in its course came directly over that mountain. He then went home again, and after a few days went to a place called Paeloko, at Waihee. There he cut down all the cocoanut-trees, and gathered the fibre of the cocoanut husks in great quantity. This he manufactured into strong cord. One Moemoe, seeing this,

[p. 32]

said tauntingly to him: "Thou wilt never catch the Sun. Thou art an idle nobody."

Maui answered: "When I conquer my enemy, and my desire is attained, I will be your death." So he went up Haleakala again, taking his cord with him. And when the Sun arose above where he was stationed, he prepared a noose of the cord and, casting it, snared one of the Sun's larger beams and broke it off. And thus he snared and broke off, one after another, all the strong rays of the Sun.

Then shouted he exultingly: "Thou art my captive, and now I will kill thee for thy going so swiftly."

And the Sun said: "Let me live, and thou shalt see me go more slowly hereafter. Behold, hast thou not broken off all my strong legs, and left me only the weak ones?"

So the agreement was made, and Maui permitted the Sun to pursue its course, and from that time on it went more slowly; and that is the reason why the days are longer at one season of the year than at another. It was this that gave the name to that mountain, which should properly be called Alehe-ka-la (sun snarer), and not Haleakala.

When Maui returned from this exploit, he went to find Moemoe, who had reviled him. But that individual was not at home. He went on in his pursuit till he came upon him at a place called Kawaiopilopilo, on the shore to the eastward of the black rock called Kekaa, north of Lahaina. Moemoe dodged him up hill and down, until at last Maui, growing wroth, leaped upon and slew the fugitive. And the dead

[p. 33]

body was transformed into a long rock, which is there to this day, by the side of the road.

  

II.--THE ORIGIN OF FIRE

Maui and Hina dwelt together, and to them were born four sons, whose names were Maui-mua, Maui-hope, Maui-kiikii, and Maui-o-ka-lana. These four were fishermen. One morning, just as the edge of the Sun lifted itself up, Maui-mua roused his brethren to go fishing. So they launched their canoe from the beach at Kaupo, on the island of Maui, where they were dwelling, and proceeded to the fishing ground. Having arrived there, they were beginning to fish, when Maui-o-ka-lana saw the light of a fire on the shore they had left, and said to his brethren: "Behold, there is a fire burning. Whose can this fire be?"

And they answered: "Whose, indeed? Let us return to the shore, that we may get our food cooked; but first let us get some fish."

So, after they had obtained some fish, they turned toward the shore; and when the canoe touched the beach Maui-mua leaped ashore and ran toward the spot where the fire had been burning. Now, the curly-tailed alae (mud-hens) were the keepers of the fire; and when they saw him coming they scratched the fire out and flew away. Maui-mua was defeated, and returned to the house to his brethren.

Then said they to him: "How about the fire?" "How, indeed?" he answered. "When I got there, behold, there was no fire; it was out. I supposed

[p. 34]

some man had the fire, and behold, it was not so; the alae are the proprietors of the fire, and our bananas are all stolen."

When they heard that, they were filled with anger, and decided not to go fishing again, but to wait for the next appearance of the fire. But after many days had passed without their seeing the fire, they went fishing again, and behold, there was the fire! And so they were continually tantalized. Only when they were out fishing would the fire appear, and when they returned they could not find it.

This was the way of it. The curly-tailed alae knew that Maui and Hina had only these four sons, and if any of them stayed on shore to watch the fire while the others were out in the canoe the alae knew it by counting those in the canoe, and would not light the fire. Only when they could count four men in the canoe would they light the fire. So Maui-mua thought it over, and said to his brethren: "To-morrow morning do you go fishing, and I will stay ashore. But do you take the calabash and dress it in kapa, and put it in my place in the canoe, and then go out to fish."

They did so, and when they went out to fish the next morning, the alae counted and saw four figures in the canoe, and then they lit the fire and put the bananas on to roast. Before they were fully baked one of the alae cried out: "Our dish is cooked! Behold, Hina has a smart son."

And with that, Maui-mua, who had stolen close to them unperceived, leaped forward, seized the curly-tailed alae and exclaimed: "Now I will kill you, you

[p. 35]

scamp of an alae! Behold, it is. you who are keeping the fire from us. I will be the death of you for this."

Then answered the alae: "If you kill me the secret dies with me, and you won't get the fire." As Maui-mua began to wring its neck, the alae again spoke, and said: "Let me live, and you shall have the fire."

So Maui-mua said: "Tell me, where is the fire?"

The alae replied: "It is in the leaf of the a-pe plant " (Alocasia macrorrhiza).

So, by the direction of the alae, Maui-mua began to rub the leaf-stalk of the ape-plant with a piece of stick, but the fire would not come. Again he asked: "Where is this fire that you are hiding from me?"

The alae answered: "In a green stick."

And he rubbed a green stick, but got no fire. So it went on, until finally the alae told him he would find it in a dry stick; and so, indeed, he did. But Maui-mua, in revenge for the conduct of the alae, after he had got the fire from the dry stick, said: "Now, there is one thing more to try." And he rubbed the top of the alae's head till it was red with blood, and the red spot remains there to this day.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

III

  

PELE AND THE DELUGE

  

REV. A. O. FORBES

ALL volcanic phenomena are associated in Hawaiian legendary lore with the goddess Pele; and it is a somewhat curious fact that to the same celebrated personage is also attributed a great flood that occurred in ancient times. The legends of this flood are various, but mainly connected with the doings of Pele in this part of the Pacific Ocean. The story runs thus:

Kahinalii was the mother of Pele; Kanehoalani was her father; and her two brothers were Kamohoalii and Kahuilaokalani. Pele was born in the land of Hapakuela, a far-distant land at the edge of the sky, toward the southwest. There she lived with her parents until she was grown up, when she married Wahialoa; and to these were born a daughter named Laka, and a son named Menehune. But after a time Pele's husband, Wahialoa, was enticed away from her by Pelekumulani. The deserted Pele, being much displeased and troubled in mind on account of her husband, started on her travels in search of him, and came in the direction of the Hawaiian Islands. Now, at that time these islands were a vast waste. There was no sea, nor was there any fresh water. When Pele set

[p. 37]

out on her journey, her parents gave her the sea to go with her and bear her canoes onward. So she sailed forward, flood-borne by the sea, until she reached the land of Pakuela, and thence onward to the land of Kanaloa. From her head she poured forth the sea as she went, and her brothers composed the celebrated ancient mele:

O the sea, the great sea!
 Forth bursts the sea:
 Behold, it bursts on Kanaloa!

But the waters of the sea continued to rise until only the highest points of the great mountains, Haleakala, Maunakea, and Maunaloa, were visible; all else was covered. Afterward the sea receded until it reached its present level. This event is called the Kai a Kahinalii (Sea of Kahinalii), because it was from Kahinalii, her mother, that Pele received the gift of the sea, and she herself only brought it to Hawaii.

And from that time to this, Pele and all her family forsook their former land of Hapakuela and have dwelt in Hawaii-nei, Pele coming first and the rest following at a later time.

On her first arrival at Hawaii-nei, Pele dwelt on the island of Kauai. From there she went to Kalaupapa, [*1] on the island of Molokai, and dwelt in the crater of Kauhako at that place; thence she departed to Puulaina, [*2] near Lahainaluna, where she dug out that crater. Afterward she moved still further to Haleakala,

[p. 38]

where she stayed until she hollowed out that great crater; and finally she settled at Kilauea, on the island of Hawaii, where she has remained ever since. [*1]

Footnotes

^37:1 Now the Leper Settlement.

^37:2 The hill visible from the Lahaina anchorage to the north of Lahainaluna School, and near to it.

^38:1 It is not a little remarkable that the progress of Pele, as stated in this tradition, agrees with geological observation in locating the earliest volcanic action in this group, on the island of Kauai, and the latest, on the island of Hawaii.--Translator.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

IV

  

PELE AND KAHAWALI

  

FROM ELLIS'S "TOUR OF HAWAII"

IN the reign of Kealiikukii, an ancient king of. Hawaii, Kahawali, chief of Puna, and one of his favorite companions went one day to amuse themselves with the holua (sled), on the sloping side of a hill, which is still called ka holua ana o Kahawali (Kahawali's sliding-place). Vast numbers of the people gathered at the bottom of the hill to witness the game, and a company of musicians and dancers repaired thither to add to the amusement of the spectators. The performers began their dance, and amidst the sound of drums and the songs of the musicians the sledding of Kahawali and his companion commenced. The hilarity of the occasion attracted the attention of Pele, the goddess of the volcano, who came down from Kilauea to witness the sport. Standing on the summit of the hill in the form of a woman, she challenged Kahawali to slide with her. He accepted the offer, and they set off together down the hill. Pele, less acquainted with the art of balancing herself on the narrow sled than her rival, was beaten, and Kahawali was applauded by the spectators as he returned up the side of the hill.

[p. 40]

Before starting again, Pele asked him to give her his papa holua, but he, supposing from her appearance that she was no more than a native woman, said: "Aole! (no!) Are you my wife, that you should obtain my sled?" And, as if impatient at being delayed, he adjusted his papa, ran a few yards to take a spring, and then, with this momentum and all his strength he threw himself upon it and shot down the hill.

Pele, incensed at his answer, stamped her foot on the ground and an earthquake followed, which rent the hill in sunder. She called, and fire and liquid lava arose, and, assuming her supernatural form, with these irresistible ministers of vengeance, she followed down the hill. When Kahawali reached the bottom, he arose, and on looking behind saw Pele, accompanied by thunder and lightning, earthquake, and streams of burning lava, closely pursuing him. He took up his broad spear which he had stuck in the ground at the beginning of the game, and, accompanied by his friend, fled for his life. The musicians, dancers, and crowds of spectators were instantly overwhelmed by the fiery torrent, which, bearing on its foremost wave the enraged goddess, continued to pursue Kahawali and his companion. They ran till they came to an eminence called Puukea. Here Kahawali threw off his cloak of netted ki leaves and proceeded toward his house, which stood near the shore. He met his favorite pig and saluted it by touching noses, then ran to the house of his mother, who lived at Kukii, saluted her by touching noses, and said: "Aloha ino oe, eia ibonei paha oe e make ai, ke ai mainei Pele." (Compassion great to you!

[p. 41]

[paragraph continues] Close here, perhaps, is your death; Pele comes devouring.) Leaving her, he met his wife, Kanakawahine, and saluted her. The burning torrent approached, and she said: "Stay with me here, and let us die together." He said: "No; I go, I go." He then saluted his two children, Poupoulu and Kaohe, and said, "Ke ue nei au is olua." (I grieve for you two.) The lava rolled near, and he ran till a deep chasm arrested his progress. He laid down his spear and walked over on it in safety. His friend called out for his help; he held out his spear over the chasm; his companion took hold of it and he drew him securely over. By this time Pele was coming down the chasm with accelerated motion. He ran till he reached Kula. Here he met his sister, Koai, but had only time to say, "Aloha oe!" (Alas for you!) and then ran on to the shore. His younger brother had just landed from his fishing-canoe, and had hastened to his house to provide for the safety of his family, when Kahawali arrived. He and his friend leaped into the canoe, and with his broad spear paddled out to sea. Pele, perceiving his escape, ran to the shore and hurled after him, with prodigious force, great stones and fragments of rock, which fell thickly around but did not strike his canoe. When he had paddled a short distance from the shore the kumukahi (east wind) sprung up. He fixed his broad spear upright in the canoe, that it might answer the double purpose of mast and sail, and by its aid he soon reached the island of Maui, where they rested one night and then proceeded to Lanai. The day following

[p. 42]

they moved on to Molokai, thence to Oahu, the abode of Kolonohailaau, his father, and Kanewahinekeaho, his sister, to whom he related his disastrous perils, and with whom he took up his permanent abode.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

V

  

HIKU AND KAWELU

  

J. S. EMERSON

NOT far from the summit of Hualalai, on the island of Hawaii, in the cave on the southern side of the ridge, lived Hina and her son, the kupua, or demigod, Hiku. All his life long as a child and a youth, Hiku had lived alone with his mother on this mountain summit, and had never once been permitted to descend to the plains below to see the abodes of men and to learn of their ways. From time to time, his quick ear had caught the sound of the distant hula drum and the voices of the gay merrymakers. Often had he wished to see the fair forms of those who danced and sang in those far-off cocoanut groves. But his mother, more experienced in the ways of the world, had never given her consent. Now, at length, he felt that he was a man, and as the sounds of mirth arose on his ears, again he asked his mother to let him go for himself and mingle with the people on the shore. His mother, seeing that his mind was made up to go, reluctantly gave her consent and warned him not to stay too long, but to return in good time. So, taking in his hand his faithful arrow, Pua Ne, which he always carried, he started off.

[p. 44]

This arrow was a sort of talisman, possessed of marvellous powers, among which were the ability to answer his call and by its flight to direct his journey.

Thus he descended over the rough clinker lava and through the groves of koa that cover the southwestern flank of the mountain, until, nearing its base, he stood on a distant hill; and consulting his arrow, he shot it far into the air, watching its bird-like flight until it struck on a distant hill above Kailua. To this hill he rapidly directed his steps, and, picking up his arrow in due time, he again shot it into the air. The second flight landed the arrow near the coast of Holualoa, some six or eight miles south of Kailua. It struck on a barren waste of pahoehoe, or lava rock, beside the water-hole of Waikalai, known also as the Wai a Hiku (Water of Hiku), where to this day all the people of that vicinity go to get their water for man and beast.

Here he quenched his thirst, and nearing the village of Holualoa, again shot the arrow, which, instinct with life, entered the courtyard of the alii, or chief, of Kona, and from among the women who were there singled out the fair princess Kawelu, and landed at her feet. Seeing the noble bearing of Hiku as he approached to claim his arrow, she stealthily hid it and challenged him to find it. Then Hiku called to the arrow, "Pua ne! Pua ne!" and the arrow replied, "Ne!" thus revealing its hiding-place.

This exploit with the arrow and the remarkable grace and personal beauty of the young man quite won the heart of the princess, and she was soon possessed

[p. 45]

by a strong passion for him, and determined to make him her husband.

With her wily arts she detained him for several days at her home, and when at last he was about to start for the mountain, she shut him up in the house and thus detained him by force. But the words of his mother, warning him not to remain too long, came to his mind, and he determined to break away from his prison. So he climbed up to the roof, and removing a portion of the thatch, made his escape.

When his flight was discovered by Kawelu, the infatuated girl was distracted with grief. Refusing to be comforted, she tasted no food, and ere many days had passed was quite dead. Messengers were despatched who brought back the unhappy Hiku, author of all this sorrow. Bitterly he wept over the corpse of his beloved, but it was now too late; the spirit had departed to the nether world, ruled over by Milu. And now, stung by the reproaches of her kindred and friends for his desertion, and urged on by his real love for the fair one, he resolved to attempt the perilous descent into the nether world and, if possible, to bring her spirit back.

With the assistance of her friends, he collected from the mountain slope a great quantity of the kowali, or convolvulus vine. He also prepared a hollow cocoanut shell, splitting it into two closely fitting parts. Then anointing himself with a mixture of rancid cocoanut and kukui oil, which gave him a very strong corpse-like odor, he started with his companions in the well-loaded canoes for a point in the sea where the sky comes down to meet the water.

[p. 46]

Arrived at the spot, he directed his comrades to lower him into the abyss called by the Hawaiians the Lua o Milu. Taking with him his cocoanut-shell and seating himself astride of the cross-stick of the swing, or kowali, he was quickly lowered down by the long rope of kowali vines held by his friends in the canoe above.

Soon he entered the great cavern where the shades of the departed were gathered together. As he came among them, their curiosity was aroused to learn who he was. And he heard many remarks, such as "Whew! what an odor this corpse emits!" "He must have been long dead." He had rather overdone the matter of the rancid oil. Even Milu himself, as he sat on the bank watching the crowd, was completely deceived by the stratagem, for otherwise he never would have permitted this bold descent of a living man into his gloomy abode.

The Hawaiian swing, it should be remarked, unlike ours, has but one rope supporting the cross-stick on which the person is seated. Hiku and his swing attracted considerable attention from the lookers-on. One shade in particular watched him most intently; it was his sweetheart, Kawelu. A mutual recognition took place, and with the permission of Milu she darted up to him and swung with him on the kowali. But even she had to avert her face on account of his corpselike odor. As they were enjoying together this favorite Hawaiian pastime of lele kowali, by a preconcerted signal the friends above were informed of the success of his ruse and were now rapidly drawing them up.

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] At first she was too much absorbed in the sport to notice this. When at length her attention was aroused by seeing the great distance of those beneath her, like a butterfly she was about to flit away, when the crafty Hiku, who was ever on the alert, clapped the cocoanut-shells together, imprisoning her within them, and was then quickly drawn up to the canoes above.

With their precious burden, they returned to the shores of Holualoa, where Hiku landed and at once repaired to the house where still lay the body of his beloved. Kneeling by its side, he made a hole in the great toe of the left foot, into which with great difficulty he forced the reluctant spirit, and in spite of its desperate struggles he tied up the wound so that it could not escape from the cold, clammy flesh in which it was now imprisoned. Then he began to lomilomi, or rub and chafe the foot, working the spirit further and further up the limb.

Gradually, as the heart was reached, the blood began once more to flow through the body, the chest began gently to heave with the breath of life, and soon the spirit gazed out through the eyes. Kawelu was now restored to consciousness, and seeing her beloved Hiku bending tenderly over her, she opened her lips and said: "How could you be so cruel as to leave me?"

All remembrance of the Lua o Milu and of her meeting him there had disappeared, and she took up the thread of consciousness just where she had left it a few days before at death. Great joy filled the hearts of the people of Holualoa as they welcomed back to

[p. 48]

their midst the fair Kawelu and the hero, Hiku, from whom she was no more to be separated.

  

LOCATION OF THE LUA O MILU

In the myth of Hiku and Kawelu, the entrance to the Lua o Milu is placed out to sea opposite Holualoa and a few miles south of Kailua. But the more usual account of the natives is, that it was situated at the mouth of the great valley of Waipio, in a place called Keoni, where the sands have long since covered up and concealed from view this passage from the upper to the nether world.

Every year, so it is told, the procession of ghosts called by the natives Oio, marches in solemn state down the Mahiki road, and at this point enters the Lua o Milu. A man, recently living in Waimea, of the best reputation for veracity, stated that about thirty or more years ago, he actually saw this ghostly company. He was walking up this road in the evening, when he saw at a distance the Oio appear, and knowing that should they encounter him his death would be inevitable, he discreetly hid himself behind a tree and, trembling with fear, gazed in silence at the dread spectacle. There was Kamehameha, the conqueror, with all his chiefs and warriors in military array, thousands of heroes who had won renown in the olden time. Though all were silent as the grave, they kept perfect step as they marched along, and passing through the woods down to Waipio, disappeared from his view.

[p. 49]

In connection with the foregoing, Professor W. D. Alexander kindly contributes the following:

"The valley of Waipio is a place frequently celebrated in the songs and traditions of Hawaii, as having been the abode of Akea and Milu, the first kings of the island. . . .

"Some said that the souls of the departed went to the Po (place of night), and were annihilated or eaten by the gods there. Others said that some went to the regions of Akea and Milu. Akea (Wakea), they said, was the first king of Hawaii. At the expiration of his reign, which terminated with his life at Waipio, where we then were, he descended to a region far below, called Kapapahanaumoku (the island bearing rock or stratum), and founded a kingdom there. Milu, who was his successor, and reigned in Hamakua, descended, when he died, to Akea and shared the government of the place with him. Their land is a place of darkness; their food lizards and butterflies. There are several streams of water, of which they drink, and some said that there were large kahilis and wide-spreading kou trees, beneath which they reclined." [*1]

"They had some very indistinct notion of a future state of happiness and of misery. They said that, after death, the ghost went first to the region of Wakea, the name of their first reputed progenitor, and if it had observed the religious rites and ceremonies, was entertained and allowed to remain there. That was a place of houses, comforts, and pleasures.

[p. 50]

If the soul had failed to be religious, it found no one there to entertain it, and was forced to take a desperate leap into a place of misery below, called Milu.

"There were several precipices, from the verge of which the unhappy ghosts were supposed to take the a leap into the region of woe; three in particular, one at the northern extremity of Hawaii, one at the western termination of Maui, and the third at the northern point of Oahu." [*1]

Near the northwest point of Oahu is a rock called Leina Kauhane, where the souls of the dead descended into Hades. In New Zealand the same term, "Reinga" (the leaping place), is applied to the North Cape. The Marquesans have a similar belief in regard to the  island of their group, and apply the same term, "Reinga," to their Avernus.

Footnotes

^49:1 Ellis's "Polynesian Researches," pp, 365-7.

^50:1 Dibble's History, p. 99.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

VI

  

LONOPUHA; OR, ORIGIN OF THE ART OF HEALING IN HAWAII

  

TRANSLATED BY THOS. G. THRUM

DURING the time that Milu was residing at Waipio, Hawaii, the year of which is unknown, there came to these shores a number of people, with their wives, from that vague foreign land, Kahiki. But they were all of godly kind (ano akua nae), it is said, and drew attention as they journeyed from place to place. They arrived first at Niihau, and from there they travelled through all the islands. At Hawaii they landed at the south side, thence to Puna, Hilo, and settled at Kukuihaele, Hamakua, just above Waipio.

On every island they visited there appeared various diseases, and many deaths resulted, so that it was said this was their doings, among the chiefs and people. The diseases that followed in their train were chills, fevers, headache, pani, and so on.

These are the names of some of these people: Kaalaenuiahina, Kahuilaokalani, Kaneikaulanaula, besides others. They brought death, but one Kamakanuiahailono followed after them with healing powers. This was perhaps the origin of sickness and the art of healing with medicines in Hawaii.

[p. 52]

As has been said, diseases settled on the different islands like an epidemic, and the practice of medicine ensued, for Kamakanuiahailono followed them in their journeyings. He arrived at Kau, stopping at Kiolakaa, on the west side of Waiohinu, where a great multitude of people were residing, and Lono was their chief. The stranger sat on a certain hill, where many of the people visited him, for the reason that he was a newcomer, a custom that is continued to this day. While there he noticed the redness of skin of a certain one of them, and remarked, "Oh, the redness of skin of that man!"

The people replied, "Oh, that is Lono, the chief of this land, and he is a farmer."

He again spoke, asserting that his sickness was very great; for through the redness of the skin he knew him to be a sick man.

They again replied that he was a healthy man, "but you consider him very sick." He then left the residents and set out on his journey.

Some of those who heard his remarks ran and told the chief the strange words, "that he was a very sick man." On hearing this, Lono raised up his oo (digger) and said, "Here I am, without any sign of disease, and yet I am sick." And as he brought down his oo with considerable force, it struck his foot and pierced it through, causing the blood to flow freely, so that he fell and fainted away. At this, one of the men seized a pig and ran after the stranger, who, hearing the pig squealing, looked behind him and saw the man running with it; and as he neared him he dropped it

[p. 53]

before him, and told him of Lono's misfortune. Kamakanuiahailono then returned, gathering on the way the young popolo seeds and its tender leaves in his garment (kihei). When he arrived at the place where the wounded man was lying he asked for some salt, which he took and pounded together with the popolo and placed it with a cocoanut covering on the wound. From then till night the flowing of the blood ceased. After two or three weeks had elapsed he again took his departure.

While he was leisurely journeying, some one breathing heavily approached him in the rear, and, turning around, there was the chief, and he asked him: "What is it, Lono, and where are you going?"

Lono replied, "You healed me; therefore, as soon as you had departed I immediately consulted with my successors, and have resigned my offices to them, so that they will have control over all. As for myself, I followed after you, that you might teach me the art of healing."

The kahuna lapaau (medical priest) then said, "Open your mouth." When Lono opened his mouth, the kahuna spat into it, [*1] by which he would become proficient in the calling he had chosen, and in which he eventually became, in fact, very skilful.

As they travelled, he instructed Lono (on account of the accident to his foot he was called Lonopuha) in the various diseases, and the different medicines for the proper treatment of each. They journeyed through Kau, Puna, and Hilo, thence onward to Hamakua as

[p. 54]

far as Kukuihaele. Prior to their arrival there, Kamakanuiahailono said to Lonopuha, "It is better that we reside apart, lest your healing practice do not succeed; but you settle elsewhere, so as to gain recognition from your own skill."

For this reason, Lonopuha went on farther and located in Waimanu, and there practised the art of healing. On account of his labors here, he became famous as a skilful healer, which fame Kamakanuiahailono and others heard of at Kukuihaele; but he never revealed to Kaalaenuiahina ma (company) of his teaching of Lonopuha, through which he became celebrated. It so happened that Kaalaenuiahina ma were seeking an occasion to cause Milu's death, and he was becoming sickly through their evil efforts.

When Milu heard of the fame of Lonopuha as a skilful healer, because of those who were afflicted with disease and would have died but for his treatment, he sent his messenger after him. On arriving at .Milu's house, Lonopuha examined and felt of him, and then said, "You will have no sickness, provided you be obedient to my teachings." He then exercised his art, and under his medical treatment Milu recovered.

Lonopuha then said to him: "I have treated you, and you are well of the internal ailments you suffered under, and only that from without remains. Now, you must build a house of leaves and dwell therein in quietness for a few weeks, to recuperate." These houses are called pipipi, such being the place to which invalids are moved for convalescent treatment unless something unforeseen should occur.

[p. 55]

Upon Milu's removal thereto, Lonopuha advised him as follows: "O King! you are to dwell in this house according to the length of time directed, in perfect quietness; and should the excitement of sports with attendant loud cheering prevail here, I warn you against these as omens of evil for your death; and I advise you not to loosen the ti leaves of your house to peep out to see the cause, for on the very day you do so, that day you will perish."

Some two weeks had scarcely passed since the King had been confined in accordance with the kahuna's instructions, when noises from various directions in proximity to the King's dwelling were heard, but he regarded the advice of the priest all that day. The cause of the commotion was the appearance of two birds playing in the air, which so excited the people that they kept cheering them all that day.

Three weeks had almost passed when loud cheering was again heard in Waipio, caused by a large bird decorated with very beautiful feathers, which flew out from the clouds and soared proudly over the palis (precipices) of Koaekea and Kaholokuaiwa, and poised gracefully over the people; therefore, they cheered as they pursued it here and there. Milu was much worried thereby, and became so impatient that he could no longer regard the priest's caution; so he lifted some of the ti leaves of his house to look out at the bird, when instantly it made a thrust at him, striking him under the armpit, whereby his life was taken and he was dead (lilo ai kona ola a make iho la).

The priest saw the bird flying with the liver of Milu;

[p. 56]

therefore, he followed after it. When it saw that it was pursued, it immediately entered into a sunken rock just above the base of the precipice of Koaekea. As he reached the place, the blood was spattered around where the bird had entered. Taking a piece of garment (pahoola), he soaked it with the blood and returned and placed it in the opening in the body of the dead King and poured healing medicine on the wound,, whereby Milu recovered. And the place where the bird entered with Milu's liver has ever since been called Keakeomilu (the liver of Milu).

A long while afterward, when this death of the King was as nothing (i mea ole), and he recovered as formerly, the priest refrained not from warning him, saying: "You have escaped from this death; there remains for you one other."

After Milu became convalescent from his recent serious experience, a few months perhaps had elapsed, when the surf at Waipio became very high and was breaking heavily on the beach. This naturally caused much commotion and excitement among the people, as the numerous surf-riders, participating in the sport, would land upon the beach on their surf-boards. Continuous cheering prevailed, and the hilarity rendered Milu so impatient at the restraint put upon him by the priest that he forsook his wise counsel and joined in the exhilarating sport.

Seizing a surf-board he swam out some distance to the selected spot for suitable surfs. Here he let the first and second combers pass him; but watching his opportunity he started with the momentum of the

[p. 57]

heavier third comber, catching the crest just right. Quartering on the rear of his board, he rode in with majestic swiftness, and landed nicely on the beach amid the cheers and shouts of the people. He then repeated the venture and was riding in as successfully, when, in a moment of careless abandon, at the place where the surfs finish as they break on the beach, he was thrust under and suddenly disappeared, while the surf-board flew from under and was thrown violently upon the shore. The people in amazement beheld the event, and wildly exclaimed: "Alas! Milu is dead! Milu is dead!" With sad wonderment they searched and watched in vain for his body. Thus was seen the result of repeated disobedience.

Footnotes

^53:1 An initiatory act, as in the priesthood.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

VII

  

A VISIT TO THE SPIRIT LAND; OR, THE STRANGE EXPERIENCE OF A WOMAN IN KONA, HAWAII

  

MRS. E. N. HALEY

KALIMA had been sick for many weeks, and at last A Her friends gathered around her with loud cries of grief, and with many expressions of affection and sorrow at their loss they prepared her body for its burial.

The grave was dug, and when everything was ready for the last rites and sad act, husband and friends came to take a final look at the rigid form and ashen face before it was laid away forever in the ground. The old mother sat on the mat-covered ground beside her child, brushing away the intrusive flies with a piece of cocoanut-leaf, and wiping away the tears that slowly rolled down her cheeks. Now and then she would break into a low, heart-rending wail, and tell in a sob-choked, broken voice, how good this her child had always been to her, how her husband loved her, and how her children would never have any one to take her place. "Oh, why," she cried, "did the gods leave me? I am old and heavy with years; my back is bent and my eyes are getting dark. I cannot work, and am too old and weak to enjoy fishing in the sea, or dancing

[p. 59]

and feasting under the trees. But this my child loved all these things, and was so happy. Why is she taken and I, so useless, left?" And again that mournful, sob-choked wail broke on the still air, and was borne out to the friends gathered under the trees before the door, and was taken up and repeated until the hardest heart would have softened and melted at the sound. As they sat around on the mats looking at their dead and listening to the old mother, suddenly Kalima moved, took a long breath, and opened her eyes. They were frightened at the miracle, but so happy to have her back again among them.

The old mother raised her hands and eyes to heaven and, with rapt faith on her brown, wrinkled face, exclaimed: "The gods have let her come back! How they must love her!"

Mother, husband, and friends gathered around and rubbed her hands and feet, and did what they could for her comfort. In a few minutes she revived enough to say, "I have something strange to tell you."

Several days passed before she was strong enough to say more; then calling her relatives and friends about her, she told them the following weird and strange story:

"I died, as you know. I seemed to leave my body and stand beside it, looking down on what was me. The me that was standing there looked like the form I was looking at, only, I was alive and the other was dead. I gazed at my body for a few minutes, then turned and walked away. I left the house and village,

[p. 60]

and walked on and on to the next village, and there I found crowds of people,--Oh, so many people! The place which I knew as a small village of a few houses was a very large place, with hundreds of houses and thousands of men, women, and children. Some of them I knew and they spoke to me,--although that seemed strange, for I knew they were dead,--but nearly all were strangers. They were all so happy! They seemed not to have a care; nothing to trouble them. Joy was in every face, and happy laughter and bright, loving words were on every tongue.

"I left that village and walked on to the next. I was not tired, for it seemed no trouble to walk. It? was the same there; thousands of people, and every one so joyous and happy. Some of these I knew. I spoke to a few people, then went on again. I seemed to be on my way to the volcano,--to Pele's pit,--and could not stop, much as I wanted to do so.

"All along the road were houses and people, where I had never known any one to live. Every bit of good ground had many houses, and many, many happy people on it. I felt so full of joy, too, that my heart sang within me, and I was glad to be dead.

"In time I came to South Point, and there, too, was a great crowd of people. The barren point was a great village. I was greeted with happy alohas, then passed on. All through Kau it was the same, and I felt happier every minute. At last I reached the volcano. There were some people there, but not so many as at other places. They, too, were happy like

[p. 61]

the others, but they said, You must go back to your body. You are not to die yet.'

"I did not want to go back. I begged and prayed to be allowed to stay with them, but they said, 'No, you must go back; and if you do not go willingly, we will make you. go.'

"I cried and tried to stay, but they drove me back, even beating me when I stopped and would not go on. So I was driven over the road I had come, back through all those happy people. They were still joyous and happy, but when they saw that I was not allowed to stay, they turned on me and helped drive me, too.

"Over the sixty miles I went, weeping, followed by those cruel people, till I reached my home and stood by my body again. I looked at it and hated it. Was that my body? What a horrid, loathsome thing it was to me now, since I had seen so many beautiful, happy creatures! Must I go and live in that thing again? No, I would not go into it; I rebelled and cried for mercy.

"'You must go into it; we will make you!' said my tormentors. They took me and pushed me head foremost into the big toe.

"I struggled and fought, but could not help myself. They pushed and beat me again, when I tried for the last time to escape. When I passed the waist, I seemed to know it was of no use to struggle any more, so went the rest of the way myself. Then my body came to life again, and I opened my eyes.

"But I wish I could have stayed with those happy

[p. 62]

people. It was cruel to make me come back. My other body was so beautiful, and I was so happy, so happy!"

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

  

VIII

  

KAPEEPEEKAUILA; OR, THE ROCKS OF KANA

  

REV. A. O. FORBES

ON the northern side of the island of Molokai, commencing at the eastern end and stretching along a distance of about twenty miles, the coast is a sheer precipice of black rock varying in height from eight hundred to two thousand feet. The only interruptions to the continuity of this vast sea wall are formed by the four romantic valleys of Pelekunu, Puaahaunui, Wailau, and Waikolu. Between the valleys of Pelekunu and Waikolu, juts out the bold, sharp headland of Haupu, forming the dividing ridge between them, and reminding one somewhat of an axe-head turned edge upward. Directly in a line with this headland, thirty or forty rods out in the ocean, arise abruptly from the deep blue waters the rocks of Haupu, three or four sharp, needle-like points of rock varying from twenty to one hundred feet in height. This is the spot associated with the legend of Kapeepeekauila, and these rocks stand like grim sentinels on duty at the eastern limit of what is now known as the settlement of Kalawao. The legend runs as follows:

Keahole was the father, Hiiaka-noholae was the

[p. 64]

mother, and Kapeepeekauila was the son. This Kapeepeekauila was a hairy man, and dwelt on the ridge of Haupu.

Once on a time Hakalanileo and his wife Hina, the mother of Kana, came and dwelt in the valley of Pelekunu, on the eastern side of the ridge of Haupu.

Kapeepeekauila, hearing of the arrival of Hina, the beautiful daughter of Kalahiki, sent his children to fetch her. They went and said to Hina, " Our royal father desires you as his wife, and we have come for you."

"Desires me for what?" said she.

"Desires you for a wife," said they.

This announcement pleased the beautiful daughter of Kalahiki, and she replied, "Return to your royal father and tell him he shall be the husband and I will be the wife."

When this message was delivered to Kapeepeekauila, he immediately sent a messenger to the other side of the island to summon all the people from Keonekuina to Kalamaula; for we have already seen that he was a hairy man, and it was necessary that this blemish

 should be removed. Accordingly, when the people had all arrived, Kapeepeekauila laid himself down and they fell to work until the hairs were all plucked out. He then took Hina to wife, and they two dwelt together on the top of Haupu.

Poor Hakalanileo, the husband of Hina, mourned the loss of his companion of the long nights of winter and the shower-sprinkled nights of summer. Neither could he regain possession of her, for the ridge of

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Haupu grew till it reached the heavens. He mourned and rolled himself in the dust in agony, and crossed his hands behind his back. He went from place to place in search of some powerful person who should be able to restore to him his wife. In his wanderings, the first person to whom he applied was Kamalalawalu, celebrated for strength and courage. This man, seeing his doleful plight, asked, "Why these tears, O my father?"

Hakalanileo replied, "Thy mother is lost."

"Lost to whom?"

"Lost to Kapeepee."

"What Kapeepee?"

"Kapeepee-kauila."

"What Kauila?"

"Kauila, the dauntless, of Haupu."

"Then, O father, thou wilt not recover thy wife. Our stick may strike; it will but hit the dust at his feet. His stick, when it strikes back, will hit the head. Behold, measureless is the height of Haupu."

Now, this Kamalalawalu was celebrated for his strength in throwing stones. Of himself, one side was stone, and the other flesh. As a test he seized a large stone and threw it upwards. It rose till it hit the sky and then fell back to earth again. As it came down, he turned his stony side toward it, and the collision made his side rattle. Hakalanileo looked on and sadly said, "Not strong enough."

On he went, beating his breast in his grief, till he came to the celebrated Niuloihiki. Question and answer passed between them, as in the former-case, but

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] Niuloihiki replied, " It is hopeless; behold, measureless is the height of Haupu."

Again he prosecuted his search till he met the third man of fame, whose name was Kaulu. Question and  answer passed, as before, and Kaulu, to show his strength, seized a river and held it fast in its course.' But Hakalanileo mournfully said, "Not strong enough."

Pursuing his way with streaming eyes, he came to the fourth hero, Lonokaeho by name. As in the former cases, so in this, he received no satisfaction. These four were all he knew of who were foremost in prowess, and all four had failed him. It was the end, and he turned sadly toward the mountain forest, to return to his home.

Meantime, the rumor had reached the ears of Niheu, surnamed "the Rogue." Some one told him, a father had passed along searching for some one able; to recover him his wife.

"Where is this father of mine?" inquired Niheu.

"He has gone inland," was the reply.

"I'll overtake him; he won't escape me," said Niheu. So he went after the old man, kicking over the trees that came in his way. The old man had gone on till he was tired and faint, when Niheu overtook him and brought him back to his house. Then Niheu asked him, "What made you go on without coming to the house of Niheu?"

"What, indeed," answered the old man; "as though I were not seeking to recover thy mother, who is lost!"

[p. 67]

Then came question and answer, as in former cases, and Niheu said, "I fear thou wilt not recover thy wife, O my father. But let us go inland to the foster son of Uli." So they went. But Niheu ran on ahead and told Kana, the foster son of Uli: "Behold, here comes Hakalanileo, bereft of his wife. We are all beat."

"Where is he?" inquired Kana.

"Here he is, just arrived."

Kana looked forth, and Hakalanileo recoiled with fear at the blazing of his eyes.

Then spoke Niheu: "Why could you not wait before looking at our father? Behold, you have frightened him, and he has run back."

On this, Kana, remaining yet in the house, stretched forth his hand, and, grasping the old man in the distance, brought him back and sat him on his lap. Then Kana wept. And the impudent Niheu said, "Now you are crying; look out for the old man, or he will get water-soaked."

But Kana ordered Niheu to bestir himself and light a fire, for the tears of Kana were as the big dropping rains of winter, soaking the plain. And Kana said to the old man, "Now, dry yourself by the fire, and when you are warm, tell your story."

The old man obeyed, and when he was warm enough, told the story of his grief. Then said Kana, "Almost spent are my years; I am only waiting for death, and behold I have at last found a foeman worthy of my prowess."

Kana immediately espoused the cause of Hakalanileo,

[p. 68]

and ordered his younger brother, Niheu, to construct a canoe for the voyage. Poor Niheu worked and toiled without success until, in despair, he exclaimed, upbraidingly, "Thy work is not work; it is slavery. There thou dwellest at thy ease in thy retreat, while with thy foot thou destroyest my canoe."

Upon this, Kana pointed out to Niheu a bush, and'. said, "Can you pull up that bush?"

"Yes," replied Niheu, for it was but a small bush, and he doubted not his ability to root it up; so he pulled and tugged away, but could not loosen it.

Kana looking on, said, tauntingly, "Your foeman will not be overcome by you."

Then Kana stretched forth his hands, scratching among the forests, and soon had a canoe in one hand; a little more and another canoe appeared in the other hand. The twin canoes were named Kaumueli. He lifted them down to the shore, provided them with paddles, and then appointed fourteen rowers. Kana embarked with his magic rod called Waka-i-lani. Thus they set forth to wage war upon Kapeepeekauila. They went on until the canoes grounded on a hard ledge.

Niheu called out, "Behold, thou sleepest, O Kana, while we all perish."

Kana replied, " What is there to destroy us? Are not these the reefs of Haupu? Away with the ledges, the rock points, and the yawning chasms! Smite with Waka-i-lani, thy rod."

Niheu smote, the rocks crumbled to pieces, and the canoes were freed. They pursued their course again

[p. 69]

until Niheu, being on the watch, cried out, "Why sleepest thou, O Kana? Here we perish, again. Thy like for sleeping I never saw!"

"Wherefore perish?" said Kana.

"Behold," replied Niheu, "the fearful wall of water. If we attempt to pass it, it will topple over and destroy us all."

Then said Kana: "Behold, behind us the reefs of Haupu. That is the destruction passed. As for the destruction before us, smite with thy rod."

Niheu smote, the wall of water divided, and the canoes passed safely through. Then they went on their course again, as before. After a time, Niheu again called out, "Alas, again we perish. Here comes a great monster. If he falls upon us, we are all dead men."

And Kana said, "Look sharp, now, and when the pointed snout crosses our bow, smite with thy rod."

And he did so, and behold, this great thing was a monster fish, and when brought on board it became food for them all. So wonderfully great was this fish that its weight brought the rim of the canoes down to the water's edge.

They continued on their way, and next saw the open mouth of the sharp-toothed shark--another of the outer defences of Haupu--awaiting them.

"Smite with thy rod," ordered Kana.

Niheu smote, and the shark died.

Next they came upon the great turtle, another defence of Haupu. Again the sleepy Kana is aroused by the cry of the watchful Niheu, and the turtle is

[p. 70]

slain by the stroke of the magic rod. All this was during the night. At last, just as the edge of the morning lifted itself from the deep, their mast became entangled in the branches of the trees. Niheu flung upward a stone. It struck. The branches came rattling down, and the mast was free. On they went till the canoes gently stood still. On this, Niheu cried out, "Here you are, asleep again, O Kana, and the canoes are aground!"

Kana felt beneath; there was no ground. He felt above; the mast was entangled in weeds. He pulled, and the weeds and earth came down together. The smell of the fresh-torn weeds was wafted up to Halehuki, the house where Kapeepeekauila lived. His people, on the top of Haupu, looked down on the canoes floating at the foot. "Wondrous is the size of the canoes!" they cried. "Ah! it is a load of opihis (shell-fish) from Hawaii for Hina," for that was a favorite dish with her.

Meantime, Kana despatched Niheu after his mother. "Go in friendly fashion," said the former.

Niheu leaped ashore, but slipped and fell on the smooth rocks. Back he went to the canoes.

"What sort of a coming back is this?" demanded Kana.

"I slipped and fell, and just escaped with my life," answered Niheu.

"Back with you!" thundered Kana.

Again the luckless Niheu sprang ashore, but the long-eyed sand-crabs (ohiki-makaloa) made the sand fly with their scratching till his eyes were filled. Back to

[p. 71]

the canoes again he went. "Got it all in my eyes!" said he, and he washed them out with sea-water.

"You fool!" shouted Kana; "what were you looking down for? The sand-crabs are not birds. If you had been looking up, as you ought, you would not have got the sand in your eyes. Go again!"

This time he succeeded, and climbed to the top of Haupu. Arriving at the house, Hale-huki, where Hina dwelt, he entered at once. Being asked "Why enterest thou this forbidden door?" he replied:

"Because I saw thee entering by this door. Hadst thou entered some other way, I should not have come in at the door." And behold, Kapeepeekauila and Hina sat before him. Then Niheu seized the hand of Hina and said, "Let us two go." And she arose and went.

When they had gone about half-way to the brink of the precipice, Kapeepeekauila exclaimed, "What is this? Is the woman gone?"

Mo-i, the sister of Kana, answered and said, "If you wish the woman, now is the time; you and I fight."

Great was the love of Kapeepeekauila for Hina, and he said, "No war dare touch Haupu; behold, it is a hill, growing even to the heavens." And he sent the kolea (plover) squad to desecrate the sacred locks of Niheu; for the locks of Niheu were kapu, and if they should be touched, he would relinquish Hina for very shame. So the kolea company sailed along in the air till they brushed against the sacred locks of Niheu, and for very shame he let go his mother and struck at the koleas with his rod and hit their tail feathers and knocked them all out, so that they remain tailless to

[p. 72]

this day. And he returned to the edge of the shore, while the koleas bore off Hina in triumph.

When Niheu reached the shore, he beat his forehead with stones till the blood flowed; a trick which Kana perceived from on board the canoes. And when Niheu went on board he said, "See! we fought and I got my head hurt."

But Kana replied, "There was no fight; you did it yourself, out of shame at your defeat."

And Niheu replied, "What, then, shall we fight?" "Yes," said Kana, and he stood up.

Now, one of his legs was named Keauea and the other Kaipanea, and as he stood upon the canoes, he began to lengthen himself upward until the dwellers on top of Haupu exclaimed in terror, "We are all dead men! Behold, here is a great giant towering above us."

And Kapeepeekauila, seeing this, hastened to prune the branches of the kamani tree (Calophyllum inophyllum), so that the bluff should grow upward. And the bluff rose, and Kana grew. Thus they strove, the bluff rising higher and Kana growing taller, until he became as the stalk of a banana leaf, and gradually spun himself out till he was no thicker than a strand of a spider's web, and at last he yielded the victory to Kapeepeekauila.

Niheu, seeing the defeat of Kana, called out, "Lay yourself along to Kona, on Hawaii, to your grandmother, Uli."

And he laid himself along with his body in Kona, while his feet rested on Molokai. His grandmother in Kona fed him until he became plump and fat again.

[p. 73]

[paragraph continues] Meanwhile, poor Niheu, watching at his feet on Molokai, saw their sides fill out with flesh while he was almost starved with hunger. "So, then," quoth he, "you are eating and growing fat while I die with hunger." And he cut off one of Kana's feet for revenge.

The sensation crept along up to his body, which lay in Kona, and Kana. said to his grandmother, Uli, "I seem to feel a numbness creeping over me."

And she answered, and said, "Thy younger brother is hungry with watching, and seeing thy feet grow plump, he has cut off one of them; therefore this numbness."

Kana, having at last grown strong and fat, prepared to wage war again upon Kapeepeekauila. Food was collected in abundance from Waipio, and when it was prepared, they embarked again in their canoes and came back to Haupu, on Molokai. But his grandmother, Uli, had previously instructed him to first destroy all the branches of the kamani tree of Haupu. Then he showed himself, and began again to stretch upward and tower above the bluff. Kapeepeekauila hastened again to trim the branches of the kamani, that the bluff might grow as before; but behold, they were all gone! It was the end; Kapeepeekauila was at last vanquished. The victorious Kana recovered his sister, Mo-i, restored to poor Hakalanileo his wife, Hina, and then, tearing down the bluff of Haupu, kicked off large portions of it into the sea, where they stand to this day, and are called "The Rocks of Kana."

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

  

IX

  

KALELEALUAKA

  

DR. N. B. EMERSON

  

PART I

KAOPELE was born in Waipio, Hawaii. When born he did not breathe, and his parents were greatly troubled; but they washed his body clean, and having arrayed it in good clothes, they watched anxiously over the body for several days, and then, concluding it to be dead, placed it in a small cave in the face of the cliff. There the body remained from the summer month of Ikiki (July or August) to the winter month of Ikua.(December or January), a period of six months.

At this time they were startled by a violent storm of thunder and lightning, and the rumbling of an earthquake. At the same time appeared the marvellous phenomenon of eight rainbows arching over the mouth of the cave. Above the din of the storm the parents heard the voice of the awakened child calling to them:

"Let your love rest upon me,
 O my parents, who have thrust me forth,
 Who have left me in the cavernous cliff,
 Who have heartlessly placed me in the
 Cliff frequented by the tropic bird! [p. 75]
 O Waiaalaia, my mother!
 O Waimanu, my father!
 Come and take me!"

The yearning love of the mother earnestly besought the father to go in quest of the infant; but he protested that search was useless, as the child was long since dead. But, unable longer to endure a woman's teasing, which is the same in all ages, he finally set forth in high dudgeon, vowing that in case of failure he would punish her on his return.

On reaching the place where the babe had been deposited, its body was not to be found. But lifting up his eyes and looking about, he espied the child perched on a tree, braiding a wreath from the scarlet flowers of the lehua (Metrosideros polymorpha). "I have come to take you home with me," said the father. But the infant made no answer. The mother received the child to her arms with demonstrations of the liveliest affection. At her suggestion they named the boy Kaopele, from the name of their goddess, Pele.

Six months after this, on the first day (Hilo) of the new moon, in the month of Ikiki, they returned home from working in the fields and found the child lying without breath, apparently dead. After venting their grief for their darling in loud lamentations, they erected a frame to receive its dead body.

Time healed the wounds of their affection, and after the lapse of six moons they had ceased to mourn, when suddenly they were affrighted by a storm of thunder and lightning, with a quaking of the earth,

[p. 76]

in the midst of which they distinguished the cry of their child, "Oh, come; come and take me!"

They, overjoyed at this second restoration of their, child to them, and deeming it to be a miracle worked by their goddess, made up their minds that if it again fell into a trance they would not be anxious, since their goddess would awake their child and bring it to life again.

But afterward the child informed them of their mistake, saying: "This marvel that you see in me is a trance; when I pass into my deep sleep my spirit at once floats away in the upper air with the goddess, Poliahu. We are a numerous band of spirits, but I excel them in the distance of my flights. In one day I can compass this island of Hawaii, as well as Maui, Oahu, and Kauai, and return again. In my flights I have seen that Kauai is the richest of all the islands, for it is well supplied with food and fish, and it is abundantly watered. I intend to remain with you until I am grown; then I shall journey to Kauai and there spend the rest of my life." Thus Kaopele lived with his parents until he was grown, but his habit of trance still clung to him.

Then one day he filled them with grief by saying: "I am going, aloha."

They sealed their love for each other with tears and kisses, and he slept and was gone. He alighted at Kula, on Maui. There he engaged in cultivating food. When his crops were nearly ripe and ready to be eaten he again fell into his customary deep sleep, and when he awoke he found that the people of the land had eaten up all his crops.

[p. 77]

Then he flew away to a place called Kapapakolea, in Moanalua, on Oahu, where he set out a new plantation. Here the same fortune befell him, and his time for sleep came upon him before his crops were fit for eating. When he awoke, his plantation had gone to waste.

Again he moves on, and this time settles in Lihue, Oahu, where for the third time he sets out a plantation of food, but is prevented from eating it by another interval of sleep. Awakening, he finds his crops overripe and wasted by neglect and decay.

His restless ambition now carries him to Lahuimalo, still on the island of Oahu, where his industry plants another crop of food. Six months pass, and he is about to eat of the fruits of his labor, when one day, on plunging into the river to bathe, he falls into his customary trance, and his lifeless body is floated by the stream out into the ocean and finally cast up by the waters on the sands of Maeaea, a place in Waialua, Oahu.

At the same time there arrived a man from Kauai in search of a human body to offer as a sacrifice at the temple of Kahikihaunaka at Wailua, on Kauai, and having seen the corpse of Kaopele on the beach, he asks and obtains permission of the feudal lord (Konohiki) of Waialua to take it. Thus it happens that Kaopele is taken by canoe to the island of Kauai and placed, along with the corpse of another man, on the altar of the temple at Wailua.

There he lay until the bones of his fellow corpse had begun to fall apart. When six moons had

[p. 78]

been accomplished, at midnight there came a burst of thunder and an earthquake. Kaopele came to life, descended from the altar, and directed his steps toward a light which he saw shining through some chinks in a neighboring house. He was received by the occupants of the house with that instant and hearty hospitality which marks the Hawaiian race, and bidden to enter ("mai, komo mai").

Food was set before him, with which he refreshed himself. The old man who seemed to be the head of the household was so much pleased and impressed with the bearing and appearance of our hero that he forthwith sought to secure him to be the husband of his granddaughter, a beautiful girl named Makalani. Without further ado, he persuaded him to be a suitor for the hand of the girl, and while it was yet night, started off to obtain the girl's consent and to bring her back with him.

The young woman was awakened from her slumbers in the night to hear the proposition of her grandfather, who painted to her in glowing colors the manly attractions of her suitor. The suit found favor in the eyes of the girl's parents and she herself was nothing loath; but with commendable maidenly propriety she insisted that her suitor should be brought and presented to her, and that she should not first seek him.

The sun had hardly begun to lift the dew from the grass when our young hero, accompanied by the two matchmakers, was brought into the presence of his future wife. They found favor in each other's eyes,

[p. 79]

and an ardent attachment sprang up on the instant. Matters sped apace. A separate house was assigned as the residence of the young couple, and their married life began felicitously.

But the instincts of a farmer were even stronger in the breast of Kaopele than the bonds of matrimony. In the middle of the night he arose, and, leaving the sleeping form of his bride, passed out into the darkness. He went mauka until he came upon an extensive upland plain, where he set to work clearing and making ready for planting. This done, he collected from various quarters shoots and roots of potato, kalo, banana, waoke, awa, and other plants, and before day the whole plain was a plantation. After his departure his wife awoke with a start and found her husband was gone. She went into the next house, where her parents were sleeping, and, waking them, made known her loss; but they knew nothing of his whereabouts. Much perplexed, they were still debating the cause of his departure, when he suddenly returned, and to his wife's questioning, answered that he had been at work.

She gently reproved him for interrupting their bridal night with agriculture, and told him there would be time enough for that when they had lived together a while and had completed their honeymoon. "And besides," said she, "if you wish to turn your hand to agriculture, here is the plat of ground at hand in which my father works, and you need not go up to that plain where only wild hogs roam."

To this he replied: "My hand constrains me to

[p. 80]

plant; I crave work; does idleness bring in anything? There is profit only when a man turns the palm of his hand to the soil: that brings in food for family and friends. If one were indeed the son of a king he could sleep until the sun was high in the heavens, and then rise and find the bundles of cooked food ready for him. But for a plain man, the only thing to do is to cultivate the soil and plant, and when he returns from his work let him light his oven, and when the food is cooked let the husband and the wife crouch about the hearth and eat together."

Again, very early on the following morning, while his wife slept, Kaopele rose, and going to the house of a neighbor, borrowed a fishhook with its tackle. Then, supplying himself with bait, he went a-fishing in the ocean and took an enormous quantity of fish. On his way home he stopped at the house where he had borrowed the tackle and returned it, giving the man also half of the fish. Arrived at home, he threw the load of fish onto the ground with a thud which waked his wife and parents.

"So you have been a-fishing," said his wife. "Thinking you had again gone to work in the field, I went up there, but you were not there. But what an immense plantation you have set out! Why, the whole plain is covered."

His father-in-law said, "A fine lot of fish, my boy."

Thus went life with them until the crops were ripe, when one day Kaopele said to his wife, who was now evidently with child, "If the child to be born is a boy,

[p. 81]

name it Kalelealuaka; but if it be a girl, name it as you will, from your side of the family."

From his manner she felt uneasy and suspicious of him, and said, "Alas! do you intend to desert me?"

Then Kaopele explained to his wife that he was not really going to leave her, as men are wont to forsake their wives, but he foresaw that that was soon to happen which was habitual to him, and he felt that on the night of the morrow a deep sleep would fall upon him (puni ka hiamoe), which would last for six months. Therefore, she was not to fear.

"Do not cast me out nor bury me in the ground," said he. Then he explained to her how he happened to be taken from Oahu to Kauai and how he came to be her husband, and he commanded her to listen attentively to him and to obey him implicitly. Then they pledged their love to each other, talking and not sleeping all that night.

On the following day all the friends and neighbors assembled, and as they sat about, remarks were made among them in an undertone, like this, "So this is the man who was placed on the altar of the heiau at Wailua." And as evening fell he bade them all aloha, and said that he should be separated from them for six months, but that his body would remain with them if they obeyed his commands. And, having kissed his wife, he fell into the dreamful, sacred sleep of Niolokapu.

On the sixth day the father-in-law said: "Let us bury your husband, lest he stink. I thought it was to be only a natural sleep, but it is ordinary death.

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] Look, his body is rigid, his flesh is cold, and he does not breathe; these are the signs of death."

But Makalani protested, "I will not let him be buried; let him lie here, and I will watch over him as he commanded; you also heard his words." But in spite of the wife's earnest protests, the hard-hearted father-in-law gathered strong vines of the koali (convolvulus), tied them about Kaopele's feet, and attaching to them heavy stones, caused his body to be conveyed in a canoe and sunk in the dark waters of the ocean midway between Kauai and Oahu.

Makalani lived in sorrow for her husband until the birth of her child, and as it was a boy, she called his name Kalelealuaka.

  

PART II

When the child was about two months old the sky became overcast and there came up a mighty storm, with lightning and an earthquake. Kaopele awoke in his dark, watery couch, unbound the cords that held his feet, and by three powerful strokes raised himself to the surface of the water. He looked toward Kauai and Oahu, but love for his wife and child prevailed and drew him to Kauai.

In the darkness of night he stood by his wife's bed and, feeling for her, touched her forehead with his clammy hand. She awoke with a start, and on his making himself known she screamed with fright, "Ghost of Kaopele!" and ran to her parents. Not until a candle was lighted would she believe it to be her husband. The step-parents, in fear and shame at

[p. 83]

their heartless conduct, fled away, and never returned. From this time forth Kaopele was never again visited by a trance; his virtue had gone out from him to the boy Kalelealuaka.

When Kalelealuaka was ten years old Kaopele began to train the lad in athletic sports and to teach him all the arts of war and combat practised throughout the islands, until he had attained great proficiency in them. He also taught him the arts of running and jumping, so that he could jump either up or down a high Pali, or run, like a waterfowl on the surface of the water. After this, one day Kalelealuaka went over to Wailua, where he witnessed the games of the chiefs. The youth spoke contemptuously of their performances as mere child's play; and when his remark was reported to the King he challenged the young man to meet him in a boxing encounter. When Kalelealuaka came into the presence of the King his royal adversary asked him what wager he brought. As the youth had nothing with him, he seriously proposed that each one should wager his own body against that of the other one. The proposal was readily accepted. The herald sounded the signal of attack, and both contestants rushed at each other. Kalelealuaka warily avoided the attack by the King, and hastened to deliver a blow which left his opponent at his mercy; and thereupon, using his privilege, he robbed the King of his life, and to the astonishment of all, carried away the body to lay as a sacrifice on the altar of the temple, hitherto unconsecrated by human sacrifice, which he and his father Kaopele had recently built in honor of their deity.

[p. 84]

After a time there reached the ear of Kalelealuaka a report of the great strength of a certain chief who lived in Hanalei. Accordingly, without saying anything about his intention, he went over to the valley of Hanalei. He found the men engaged in the game of throwing heavy spears at the trunk of a cocoanut tree. As on the previous occasion, he invited a challenge by belittling their exploits, and when challenged by the chief, fearlessly proposed, as a wager, the life of one against the other. This was accepted, and the chief had the first trial. His spear hit the stem of the huge tree and made its lofty crest nod in response to the blow. It was now the turn of Kalelealuaka to hurl the spear. In anticipation of the failure of the youth and his own success, the chief took the precaution to station his guards about Kalelealuaka, to be ready to seize him on the instant. In a tone of command our hero bade the guards fall back, and brandishing his spear, stroked and polished it with his hands from end to end; then he poised and hurled it, and to the astonishment of all, lo! the tree was shivered to pieces. On this the people raised a shout of admiration at the prowess of the youth, and declared he must be the same hero who had slain the chief at Wailua. In this way Kalelealuaka obtained a second royal sacrifice with which to grace the altar of his temple.

One clear, calm evening, as Kalelealuaka looked out to sea, he descried the island of Oahu, which is often clearly visible from Kauai, and asked his father what land that was that stood out against them. Kaopele told the youth it was Oahu; that the cape

[p. 85]

that swam out into the ocean like a waterfowl was Kaena; that the retreating contour of the coast beyond was Waianae. Thus he described the land to his son. The result was that the adventurous spirit of Kalelealuaka was fired to explore this new island for himself, and he expressed this wish to his father. Everything that Kalelealuaka said or did was good in the eye of his father, Kaopele. Accordingly, he immediately set to work and soon had a canoe completely fitted out, in which Kalelealuaka might start on his travels. Kalelealuaka took with him, as travelling companion, a mere lad named Kaluhe, and embarked in his canoe. With two strokes of the paddle his prow grated on the sands of Waianae.

Before leaving Kauai his father had imparted to Kalelealuaka something of the topography of Oahu, and had described to him the site of his former plantation at Keahumoe. At Waianae the two travellers were treated affably by the people of the district. In reply to the questions put them, they said they were going sight-seeing. As they went along they met a party of boys amusing themselves with darting arrows; one of them asked permission to join their party. This was given, and the three turned inland and journeyed till they reached a plain of soft, whitish rock, where they all refreshed themselves with food. Then they kept on ascending, until Keahumoe lay before them, dripping with hoary moisture from the mist of the mountain, yet as if smiling through its tears. Here were standing bananas with ripened, yellow fruit, upland kalo, and sugar cane, rusty and crooked with

[p. 86]

age, while the sweet potatoes had crawled out of the earth and were cracked and dry. It was the very place where Kaopele, the father of Kalelealuaka, had years before set out the plants from which these were descended.

"This is our food, and a good place, perhaps, for us to settle down," said Kalelealuaka; "but before we make up our minds to stay here let me dart an arrow; and if it drops soon we shall stay, but if it flies afar we shall not tarry here." Kalelealuaka darted his arrow, while his companions looked on intently. The arrow flew along, passing over many a hill and valley, and finally rested beyond Kekuapoi, while they followed the direction of its wonderful flight. Kalelealuaka sent his companions on to find the arrow, telling them at the same time to go to the villages and get some awa roots for drink, while he would remain there and put up a shelter for them.

On their way the two companions of Kalelealuaka encountered a number of women washing kalo in a stream, and on asking them if they had seen their arrow flying that way they received an impertinent answer; whereupon they called out the name of the arrow, "Pua-ne, Pua-ne," and it came to their hands at once. At this the women ran away, frightened at the marvel.

The two boys then set to gathering awa roots, as they had been bidden. Seeing them picking up worthless fragments, a kind-hearted old man, who turned out to be the konohiki of the land, sent by his servants an abundance of good food to Kalelealuaka.

[p. 87]

On their return the boys found, to their astonishment, that during their absence Kalelealuaka had put up a fine, large house, which was all complete but the mats to cover the floors. The kind-hearted konohiki remarked this, and immediately sent his servants to fetch mats for the floors and sets of kapa for bedding, adding the command, "And with them bring along some malos" (girdles used by the males). Soon all their wants were supplied, and the three youths were set up in housekeeping. To these services the konohiki, through his attendants, added still others; some chewed and strained the awa, while others cooked and spread for them a bountiful repast. The three youths ate and drank, and under the drowsy influence of the awa they slept until the little birds that peopled the wilderness about them waked them with their morning songs; then they roused and found the sun already climbing the heavens.

Now, Kalelealuaka called to his comrades, and said, "Rouse up and let us go to cultivating." To this they agreed, and each one set to work in his own way, working his own piece of ground. The ground prepared by Kalelealuaka was a strip of great length, reaching from the mountain down toward the ocean. This he cleared and planted the same day. His two companions, however, spent several days in clearing their ground, and then several days more in planting it. While these youths occupied their mountain home, the people of that region were well supplied with food. The only lack of Kalelealuaka and his comrades was animal food (literally, fish), but they supplied its place as well as

[p. 88]

they could with such herbs as the tender leaves of the popolo, which they cooked like spinach, and with inamona made from the roasted nuts of the kukui tree (Aleurites molluccana).

One day, as they were eking out their frugal meal with a mess of popolo cooked by the lad from Waianae, Kalelealuaka was greatly disgusted at seeing a worm in that portion that the youth was eating, and thereupon nicknamed him Keinohoomanawanui (sloven, or more literally, the persistently unclean). The name ever after stuck to him. This same fellow had the misfortune, one evening, to injure one of his eyes by the explosion of a kukui nut which he was roasting on the fire. As a result, that member was afflicted with soreness, and finally became blinded. But their life agreed with them, and the youths throve and increased in stature, and grew to be stout and lusty young men.

Now, it happened that ever since their stay at their mountain house, Lelepua (arrow flight), they had kept a torch burning all night, which was seen by Kakuhihewa, the King of Oahu, and had caused him uneasiness.

One fine evening, when they had eaten their fill and had gone to bed, Kalelealuaka called to Keinohoomanawanui and said, "Halloo there! are you asleep?"

And he replied, "No; have I drunk awa? I am restless. My eyes will not close."

"Well," said Kalelealuaka, "when you are restless at night, what does your mind find to do?"

"Nothing," said the Sloven.

"I find something to think about," said Kalelealuaka.

[p. 89]

"What is that?" said the Sloven.

"Let us wish" (kuko, literally, to lust), said Kalelealuaka.

"What shall we wish?" said the Sloven.

"Whatever our hearts most earnestly desire;" said Kalelealuaka. Thereupon they both wished. The Sloven, in accordance with his nature, wished for things to eat,--the eels, from the fish-pond of Hanaloa (in the district of Ewa), to be cooked in an oven together with sweet potatoes, and a bowl of awa.

"Pshaw, what a beggarly wish!" said Kalelealuaka. "I thought you had a real wish. I have a genuine wish. Listen: The beautiful daughters of Kakuhihewa to be my wives; his fatted pigs and dogs to be baked for us; his choice kalo, sugar cane, and bananas to be served up for us; that Kakuhihewa himself send and get timber and build a house for us; that he pull the famous awa of Kahauone; that the King send and fetch us to him; that he chew the awa for us in his own mouth, strain and pour it for us, and give us to drink until we are happy, and then take us to our house."

Trembling with fear at the audacious ambition of his concupiscent companion, the Sloven replied, "If your wish should come to the ears of the King, we shall die; indeed, we should die."

In truth, as they were talking together and uttering their wishes, Kakuhihewa had arrived, and was all the time listening to their conversation from the outside of their house. When the King had heard their conversation he thrust his spear into the ground outside

[p. 90]

the inclosure about Kalelealuaka's house, and by the spear placed his stone weapon (pahoa), and immediately returned to his residence at Puuloa. Upon his arrival at home that night King Kakuhihewa commanded his stewards to prepare a feast, and then summoned his chiefs and table companions and said, "Let us sup." When all was ready and they had seated themselves, the King said, "Shall we eat, or shall we talk?"

One of them replied: "If it please the King, perhaps it were better for him to speak first; it may be what he has to say touches a matter of life and death; therefore, let him speak and we will listen."

Then Kakuhihewa told them the whole story of the light seen in the mountains, and of the wishes of Kalelealuaka and the Sloven.

Then up spoke the soldiers, and said: "Death! This man is worthy to be put to death; but as for the other one, let him live."

"Hold," said the King, "not so fast! Before condemning him to death, I will call together the wise men, priests, wizards, and soothsayers; perchance they will find that this is the man to overcome Kualii in battle." Thereupon all the wise men, priests, wizards, and soothsayers were immediately summoned, and after!' the King had explained the whole story to them they agreed with the opinion of the soldiers. Again the King interposed delay, and said, "Wait until my wise kahuna Napuaikamao comes; if his opinion agrees with yours, then, indeed, let the man be put to death; but if he is wiser than you, the man shall live. But you will have eaten this food in vain."

[p. 91]

So the King sent one of his fleetest runners to go and fetch Napuaikamao. To him the King said, "I have sent for you to decide what is just and right in the case of these two men who lived up in the region of Waipio." Then he went on to state the whole case to this wise man.

"In regard to Keinohoomanawanui's wish," said the wise man, "that is an innocent wish, but it is profitless and will bring no blessing." At the narration of Kalelealuaka's wish he inclined his head, as if in thought; then lifting his head, he looked at the King and said: "O King, as for this man's wish, it is an ambition which will bring victory to the government. Now, then, send all your people and fetch house-timber and awa."

As soon as the wise man had given this opinion, the King commanded his chief marshal, Maliuhaaino, to set every one to work to carry out the directions of this counsellor. This was done, and before break of day every man, woman, and child in the district of Ewa, a great multitude, was on the move.

Now, when the Sloven awoke in the morning and went out of doors, he found the stone weapon (pahoa) of the King, with his spear, standing outside of the house. On seeing this he rushed back into the house and exclaimed to his comrades, "Alas! our wishes have been overheard by the King; here are his hatchet and his spear. I said that if the King heard us we should die, and he has indeed heard us. But yours was the fatal ambition; mine was only an innocent wish."

Even while they were talking, the babble of the

[p. 92]

multitude drew near, and the Sloven exclaimed, "Our death approaches!"

Kalelealuaka replied, "That is not for our death; it is the people coming to get timber for our houses." But the fear of the Sloven would not be quieted.

The multitude pressed on, and by the time the last of them had reached the mountain the foremost had returned to the sea-coast and had begun to prepare the foundations for the houses, to dig the holes for the posts, to bind on the rafters and the small poles on which they tied the thatch, until the houses were done.

Meantime, some were busy baking the pigs and the poi-fed dogs in ovens; some in bringing the eels of Kanaloa and cooking them with potatoes in an oven by themselves.

The houses are completed, everything is ready, the grand marshal, Maliuhaaino, has just arrived in front of the house of the ambitious youth Kalelealuaka, and calls out "Keinohoomanawanui, come out!" and he comes out, trembling. "Kalelealuaka, come out!" and he first sends out the boy Kaluhe and then comes forth himself and stands outside, a splendid youth. The marshal stands gazing at him in bewilderment and admiration. When he has regained his equanimity he says to him, "Mount on my back and let us go down."

"No," said Kalelealuaka, "I will go by myself, and do you walk ahead. I will follow after; but do not look behind you, lest you die."

As soon as they had started down, Kalelealuaka was transported to Kuaikua, in Helemano. There he

[p. 93]

plunged into the water and bathed all over; this done, he called on his ancestral shades (Aumakua), who came and performed on him the rite of circumcision while lightning flashed, thunder sounded, and the earth quaked.

Kaopele, on Kauai, heard the commotion and exclaimed, "Ah! my son has received the purifying rite--the offspring of the gods goes to meet the sovereign of the land" (Alii aimoku).

Meanwhile, the party led by Maliuhaaino was moving slowly down toward the coast, because the marshal himself was lame. Returning from his purification, Kalelealuaka alighted just to the rear of the party, who had not noticed his absence, and becoming impatient at the tedious slowness of the journey,--for the day was waning, and the declining sun was already standing over a peak of the Waianae Mountains called Puukuua,--this marvellous fellow caught up the lame marshal in one hand and his two comrades in the other, and, flying with them, set them down at Puuloa. But the great marvel was, that they knew nothing about being transported, yet they had been carried and set down as from a sheet.

On their arrival at the coast all was ready, and the people were waiting for them. A voice called out, "Here is you house, Keinohoomanawanui!" and the Sloven entered with alacrity and found bundles of his wished-for eels and potatoes already cooked and awaiting his disposal.

But Kalelealuaka proudly declined to enter the house prepared for himself when the invitation came

[p. 94]

to him, "Come in! this is your house," all because his little friend Kaluhe, whose eyes had often been filled with smoke while cooking luau and roasting kukui nuts for him, had not been included in the invitation, and he saw that no provision had been made for him. When this was satisfactorily arranged Kalelealuaka and his little friend entered and sat down to eat. The King, with his own hand, poured out awa for Kalelealuaka, brought him a gourd of water to rinse his mouth, offered him food, and waited upon him till he had supplied all his wants.

Now, when Kalelealuaka had well drunken, and was beginning to feel drowsy from the awa, the lame marshal came in and led him to the two daughters of Kakuhihewa, and from that time these two lovely girls were his wives.

  

PART III

Thus they lived for perhaps thirty days (he mau anahulu), when a messenger arrived, announcing that Kualii was making war at Moanalua. The soldiers of Kakuhihewa quickly made themselves ready, and among them Keinohoomanawanui went out to battle. The lame marshal had started for the scene the night before.

On the morning of the day of battle, Kalelealuaka said to his wives that he had a great hankering for, some shrimps and moss, which must be gathered in a particular way, and that nothing else would please his appetite. Thereupon, they dutifully set out to obtain these things for him. As soon as they had gone from

[p. 95]

the house Kalelealuaka flew to Waianae and arrayed himself with wreaths of the fine-leaved maile (Maile laulii), which is peculiar to that region. Thence he flew to Napeha, where the lame marshal, Maliuhaaino, was painfully climbing the hill on his way to battle. Kalelealuaka cheerily greeted him, and the following dialogue occurred:

K. "Whither are you trudging, Maliuhaaino?"

M. "What! don't you know about the war?"

K. "Let me carry you."

M. "How fast you travel! Where are you from?"

K. "From Waianae."

M. "So I see from your wreaths. Yes, carry me, and Waianae shall be yours."

At the word Kalelealuaka picked up the cripple and set him down on an eminence mauka of the battlefield, saying, "Remain you here and watch me. If I am killed in the fight, you return by the same way we came and report to the King."

Kalelealuaka then addressed himself to the battle, but before attacking the enemy he revenged himself on those who had mocked and jeered at him for not joining the forces of Kakuhihewa. This done, he turned his hand against the enemy, who at the time were advancing and inflicting severe loss in the King's army.

To what shall we compare the prowess of our hero? A man was plucked and torn in his hand as if he were but a leaf. The commotion in the ranks of the enemy was as when a powerful waterfowl lashes the water with his wings (O haehae ka manu, Ke ale nei ka 

[p. 96]

wai). Kalelealuaka moved forward in his work of destruction until he had slain the captain who stood beside the rebel chief, Kualii. From the fallen captain he took his feather cloak and helmet and cut off his right ear and the little finger of his right hand. Thus ended the slaughter that day.

The enthusiasm of the cripple was roused to the highest pitch on witnessing the achievements of Kalelealuaka, and he determined to return and report that he had never seen his equal on the battlefield.

Kalelealuaka returned to Puuloa and hid the feather cloak and helmet under the mats of his bed, and having fastened the dead captain's ear and little finger to the side of the house, lay down and slept.

After a while, when the two women, his wives, returned with the moss and shrimps, he complained that the moss was not gathered as he had directed, and that they had been gone such a long time that his appetite had entirely left him, and he would not eat of what they had brought. At this the elder sister said nothing, but the younger one muttered a few words to herself; and as they were all very tired they soon went to sleep.

They had slept a long while when the tramp of the soldiers of Kakuhihewa was heard, returning from the battle. The King immediately asked how the battle had gone. The soldiers answered that the battle had gone well, but that Keinohoomanawanui alone had greatly distinguished himself. To this the King replied he did not believe that the Sloven was a great warrior, but when the cripple returned he would learn the truth.

[p. 97]

About midnight the footsteps of the lame marshal were heard outside of the King's house. Kakuhihewa called to him, "Come, how went the battle?"

"Can't you have patience and let me take breath?" said the marshal. Then when he had rested himself he answered, "They fought, but there was one man who excelled all the warriors in the land. He was from Waianae. I gave Waianae to him as a reward for carrying me."

"It shall be his," said the King.

"He tore a man to pieces," said the cripple, "as he would tear a banana-leaf. The champion of Kualii's army he killed, and plundered him of his feather cloak and helmet."

"The soldiers say that Keinohoomanawanui was the hero of the day," said the King.

"What!" said the cripple. "He did nothing. He merely strutted about. But this man--I never saw his equal; he had no spear, his only weapons were his hands; if a spear was hurled at him, he warded it off with his hair. His hair and features, by the way, greatly resemble those of your son-in-law."

Thus they conversed till daybreak.

After a few days, again came a messenger announcing that the rebel Kualii was making war on the plains of Kulaokahua. On hearing this Kakuhihewa immediately collected his soldiers. As usual, the lame marshal set out in advance the evening before the battle.

In the morning, after the army had gone, Kalelealuaka said to his wives, "I am thirsting for some water taken with the snout of the calabash held downward.

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] I shall not relish it if it is taken with the snout turned up." Now, Kalelealuaka knew that they could not fill the calabash if held this way, but he resorted to this artifice to prevent the two young women from knowing of his miraculous flight to the battle. As soon as the young women had got out of sight he hastened to Waialua and arrayed himself in the rough and shaggy wreaths of uki from the lagoons of Ukoa and of hinahina from Kealia. Thus arrayed, he alighted behind the lame marshal as he climbed the hill at Napeha, slapped him on the backs, exchanged greetings with him, and received a compliment on his speed; and when asked whence he came, he; answered from Waialua. The shrewd, observant cripple recognized the wreaths as being those of Waialua but he did not recognize the man, for the wreaths with which Kalelealuaka had decorated himself were of such a color--brownish gray--as to give him the appearance of a man of middle age. He lifted the cripple as before, and set him down on the brow of Puowaina (Punch Bowl Hill), and received from the grateful cripple, as a reward for his service, all the land of Waialua for his own.

This done, Kalelealuaka repeated the performances of the previous battle. The enemy melted away before him, whichever way he turned. He stayed his hand only when he had slain the captain of the host and stripped him of his feather cloak and helmet, taking also his right ear and little finger. The speed with which Kalelealuaka returned to his home at Puuloa was like the flight of a bird. Their

[p. 99]

spoils and trophies of this battle he disposed of as before.

The two young women, Kalelealuaka's wives, turned the nozzle of the water-gourd downward, as they were bidden, and continued to press it into the water, in the vain hope that it might rise and fill their container, until the noonday sun began to pour his rays directly upon their heads; but no water entered their calabash. Then the younger sister proposed to the elder to fill the calabash in the usual way, saying that Kalelealuaka would not know the difference. This they did, and returned home.

Kalelealuaka would not drink of the water, declaring that it had been dipped up. At this the younger wife laughed furtively; the elder broke forth and said: "It is due to the slowness of the way you told us to employ in getting the water. We are not accustomed to the menial office of fetching water; our father treated us delicately, and a man always fetched water for us, and we always used to see him pour the water into the gourd with the nozzle turned up, but you trickily ordered us to turn the nozzle down. Your exactions are heartless."

Thus the women kept complaining until, by and by, the tramp of the returning soldiers was heard, who were boasting of the great deeds of Keinohoomanawanui. The King, however, said: "I do not believe a word of your talk; when my cripple comes he will tell me the truth. I do not believe that Keinohoomanawanui is an athlete. Such is the opinion I have formed of him. But there is a powerful man, Kalelealuaka,--

[p. 100]

if he were to go into battle I am confident he would perform wonders. Such is the opinion I have formed of him, after careful study."

So the King waited for the return of the cripple until night, and all night until nearly dawn. When finally the lame marshal arrived, the King prudently abstained from questioning him until he had rested a while and taken breath; then he obtained from him the whole story of this new hero from Waialua, whose name he did not know, but who, he declared, resembled the King's son-in-law, Kalelealuaka.

Again, on a certain day, came the report of an attack by Kualii at Kulaokahua, and the battle was to be on the morrow. The cripple, as usual, started off the evening before. In the morning, Kalelealuaka called to his wives, and said: "Where are you? Wake up. I wish you to bake a fowl for me. Do it thus: Pluck it; do not cut it open, but remove the inwards through the opening behind; then stuff it with luau from the same end, and bake it; by no means cut it open, lest you spoil the taste of it."

As soon as they had left the house he flew to Kahuku and adorned his neck with wreaths of the pandanus fruit and his head with the flowers of the sugar cane, thus entirely changing his appearance and making him look like a gray-haired old man. As on previous days, he paused behind the cripple and greeted him with a friendly slap on the back. Then he kindly lifted the lame man and set him down at Puowaina. In return for this act of kindness the cripple gave him the district of Koolau.

[p. 101]

In this battle he first slew those soldiers in Kakuhihewa's army who had spoken ill of him. Then he turned his hand against the warriors of Kualii, smiting them as with the stroke of lightning, and displaying miraculous powers. When he had reached the captain of Kualii's force, he killed him and despoiled his body of his feather cloak and helmet, taking also a little finger and toe. With these he flew to the cripple, whom he lifted and bore in his flight as far as Waipio, and there dropped him at a point just below where the water bursts forth at Waipahu.

Arrived at his house, Kalelealuaka, after disposing of his spoils, lay down and slept. After he had slept several hours, his wives came along in none too pleased a mood and awoke him, saying his meat was cooked. Kalelealuaka merely answered that it was so late his appetite had gone, and he did not care to eat.

At this slight his wives said: "Well, now, do you think we are accustomed to work? We ought to live without work, like a king's daughters, and when the men have prepared the food then we should go and eat it."

The women were still muttering over their grievance, when along came the soldiers, boasting of the powers of Keinohoomanawanui, and as they passed Kalelealuaka's door they said it were well if the two wives of this fellow, who lounges at home in time of war, were given to such a brave and noble warrior as Keinohoomanawanui.

The sun was just sinking below the ocean when

[p. 102]

the footsteps of the cripple were heard at the King's door, which he entered, sitting down within. After a short time the King asked him about the battle. "The valor and prowess of this third man were even greater than those of the previous ones; yet all three resemble each other. This day, however, he first avenged himself by slaying those who had spoken ill of him. He killed the captain of Kualii's army and took his feather cloak and helmet. On my return he lifted me as far as Waipahu."

In a few days again came a report that Kualii had an army at a place called Kahapaakai, in Nuuanu. Maliuhaaino immediately marshalled his forces and started for the scene of battle the same evening.

Early the next morning Kalelealuaka awakened his wives, and said to them: "Let us breakfast, but do you two eat quietly in your own house, and I in my house with the dogs; and do not come until I call you." So they did, and the two women went and breakfasted by themselves. At his own house Kalelealuaka ordered Kaluhe to stir up the dogs and keep them barking until his return. Then he sprang away and lighted at Kapakakolea, where he overtook the cripple, whom, after the usual interchange of greetings," he lifted, and set down at a place called Waolani.

On this day his first action was to smite and slay' those who had reviled him at his own door. That done, he made a great slaughter among the soldiers of Kualii; then, turning, he seized Keinohoomanawanui, threw him down and asked him how he became blinded in one eye.

[p. 103]

"It was lost," said the Sloven, "from the thrust of a spear, in a combat with Olopana."

"Yes, to be sure," said Kalelealuaka, "while you and I were living together at Wailuku, you being on one side of the stream and I on the other, a kukui nut burst in the fire, and that was the spear that put out your eye."

When the Sloven heard this, he hung his head. Then Kalelealuaka seized him to put him to death, when the spear of the Sloven pierced the fleshy part of Kalelealuaka's left arm, and in plucking it out the spear-head remained in the wound.

Kalelealuaka killed Keinohoomanawanui and beheaded him, and, running to the cripple, laid the trophy at his feet with the words: "I present you, Maliuhaaino, with the head of Keinohoomanawanui." This done, he returned to the battle, and went on slaying until he had advanced to the captain of Kualii's forces, whom he killed and spoiled of his feather cloak and helmet.

When Kualii saw that his chief captain, the bulwark of his power, was slain, he retreated and fled up Nuuanu Valley, pursued by Kalelealuaka, who overtook him at the head of the valley. Here Kualii surrendered himself, saying: "Spare my life. The land shall all go to Kakuhihewa, and I will dwell on it as a loyal subject under him and create no disturbance as long as I live."

To this the hero replied: "Well said! I spare your life on these terms. But if you at any time foment a rebellion, I will take your life! So, then,

[p. 104]

return, and live quietly at home and do not stir up any war in Koolau." Thus warned,  set out to return to the "deep blue palis of Koolau."

While the lame marshal was trudging homeward, bearing the head of the Sloven, Kalelealuaka alighted from his flight at his house, and having disposed in; his usual manner of his spoils, immediately called, to his wives to rejoin him at his own house.

The next morning, after the sun was warm, the cripple arrived at the house of the King in a state of great excitement, and was immediately questioned by him as to the issue of the battle. "The battle was altogether successful," said the marshal, "but Keinohoomanawanui was killed. I brought his head along with me and placed it on the altar mauka of Kalawao. But I would advise you to send at once your fleetest runners through Kona and Koolau, commanding everybody to assemble in one place, that I may review them and pick out and vaunt as the bravest that one whom I shall recognize by certain marks--for I have noted him well: he is wounded in the left arm."

Now, Kakuhihewa's two swiftest runners (kukini) were Keakealani and Kuhelemoana. They were so fleet that they could compass Oahu six times in a forenoon, or twelve times in a whole day. These two were sent to call together all the men of the King's' domain. The men of Waianae came that same day and stood in review on the sandy plains of Puuloa. But among them all was not one who bore the marks sought for. Then came the men of Kona,

[p. 105]

of Waialua, and of Koolau, but the man was not found.

Then the lame marshal came and stood before the King and said: "Your bones shall rest in peace, Kalani. You had better send now and summon your son-in-law to come and stand before me; for he is the man." Then Kakuhihewa arose and went himself to the house of his son-in-law, and called to his daughters that he had come to get their husband to go and stand before Maliuhaaino.

Then Kalelealuaka lifted up the mats of his bed and took out the feather cloaks and the helmets and arrayed his two wives, and Kaluhe, and himself. Putting them in line, he stationed the elder of his wives first, next to her the younger, and third Kaluhe, and placing himself at the rear of the file, he gave the order to march, and thus accompanied he went forth to obey the King's command.

The lame marshal saw them coming, and in ecstasy he prostrated himself and rolled over in the dust. "The feather cloak and the helmet on your elder daughter are the ones taken from the captain of Kualii's army in the first day's fight; those on your second daughter from the captain of the second day's fight; while those on Kalelealuaka himself are from the captain killed in the battle on the fourth day. You will live, but perhaps I shall die, since he is weary of carrying me."

The lame marshal went on praising and eulogizing Kalelealuaka as he drew near. Then addressing the hero, he said: "I recognize you, having met you

[p. 106]

before. Now show your left arm to the King and to this whole assembly, that they may see where you were wounded by the spear."

Then Kalelealuaka bared his left arm and displayed his wound to the astonished multitude. Thereupon Kakuhihewa said: "Kalelealuaka and my daughters, do you take charge of the kingdom, and I will pass into the ranks of the common people under you."

After this a new arrangement of the lands was made, and the country had peace until the death of Kakuhihewa; Kalelealuaka also lived peacefully until death took him.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 107]

  

X

  

STORIES OF THE MENEHUNES

  

HAWAII THE ORIGINAL HOME OF THE BROWNIES

  

THOS. G. THRUM

STUDENTS of Hawaiian folk-lore find much of coincident interest with traditional or more historic beliefs of other and older lands. The same applies, in a measure, to some of the ancient customs of the people. This is difficult to account for, more especially since the Hawaiians possessed no written language by which such knowledge could be preserved or transmitted. Fornander and others discovered in the legends of this people traces of the story of the Flood, the standing still of the sun, and other narratives of Bible history, which some savants accept as evidence of their Aryan origin. This claim we are not disposed to dispute, but desire to present another line of tradition that has been neglected hitherto, yet has promise of much interest.

It will doubtless interest some readers to learn that Hawaii is the real home of the Brownies, or was; and that this adventurous nomadic tribe were known to the Hawaiians long before Swift's satirical mind conceived his Lilliputians.

It would be unreasonable to expect so great a range

[p. 108]

of nationalities and peculiar characteristics among the pygmies of Hawaii as among the Brownies of story. Tradition naturally represents them as of one race, and all nimble workers; not a gentleman dude, or policeman in the whole lot. Unlike the inquisitive and mischievous athletes of present fame, the original and genuine Brownies, known as the Menehunes, are referred to as an industrious race. In fact, it was their alleged power to perform a marvellous amount of labor in a short space of time that has fixed them in the minds of Hawaiians, many of whom point to certain traces of their work in various parts of the islands to substantiate the traditional claim of their existence.

Meeting thus with occasional references to this active race, but mostly in a vague way, it has been a matter of interesting inquiry among Hawaiians, some of whom were noted kaao, or legend-bearers, for further knowledge on the subject. Very naturally their ideas differ respecting the Menehunes. Some treat the subject with gravity and respect, and express the belief that they were the original inhabitants of these islands, but gradually gave way to the heavier-bodied ancestors of the present race; others consider that the history of the race has been forgotten through the lapse of ages; while the more intelligent and better educated look upon the Menehunes as a mythical class of gnomes or dwarfs, and the account of their exploits as having been handed down by tradition for social entertainment, as other peoples relate fairy stories.

In the Hawaiian legend of Kumuhonua, Fornander states that the Polynesians were designated as "the

[p. 109]

people, descendants from Menehune, son of Lua Nuu, etc. It disappeared as a national name so long ago, however, that subsequent legends have changed it to a term of reproach, representing them at times as a separate race, and sometimes as a race of dwarfs, skilful laborers, but artful and cunning."

In the following account and selection of stories gathered from various native sources, as literal a rendition as possible has been observed by the translators for the better insight it gives of Hawaiian thought and character.

  

MOKE MANU'S ACCOUNT

The Menehunes were supposed to have been a wonderful people, small of stature and of great activity. They were always united in doing any service required of them. It was their rule that any work undertaken must be completed in one night, otherwise it would be left unfinished, as they did not labor twice on the same work; hence the origin of the saying: "He po hookahi, a ao ua pau,"--in one night, and by dawn it is finished.

There is no reliable history of the Menehunes. No one knows whence they came, though tradition says they were the original people of the Hawaiian Islands. They are thought to have been supernatural beings, governed by some one higher in rank than themselves, whom they recognized as having power and authority over them, that assigned them to the mountains and hills where they lived permanently. They were said to be the only inhabitants of the islands up to the time

[p. 110]

of Papa and Wakea, and were invisible to every one but their own descendants, or those connected with them in some way. Many persons could hear the noise and hum of their voices, but the gift of seeing them with the naked eye was denied to those not akin to them. They were always willing to do the bidding of their descendants, and their supernatural powers enabled them to perform some wonderful works.

  

PI'S WATERCOURSE

Pi was an ordinary man living in Waimea, Kauai, who wanted to construct a mano, or dam, across the Waimea River and a watercourse therefrom to a point near Kikiaola. Having settled upon the best locations for his proposed work, he went up to the mountains and ordered all the Menehunes that were living near Puukapele to prepare stones for the dam and watercourse. The Menehunes were portioned off for the work; some to gather stones, and others to cut them. All the material was ready in no time (manawa ole), and Pi settled upon the night when the work was to be done. When the time came he went to the point where the dam was to be built, and waited. At the dead of night he heard the noise and hum of the voices of the Menehunes on their way to Kikiaola, each of whom was carrying a stone. The dam was duly constructed, every stone fitting in its proper place, and the stone auwai, or watercourse, also laid around the bend of Kikiaola. Before the break of day the work was completed, and the water of the

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Waimea River was turned by the dam into the watercourse on the flat lands of Waimea.

When the work was finished Pi served out food for the Menehunes, which consisted of shrimps (opae), this being the only kind to be had in sufficient quantity to supply each with a fish to himself. They were well supplied and satisfied, and at dawn returned to the mountains of Puukapele rejoicing, and the hum of their voices gave rise to the saying, "Wawa ka Menehune i Puukapele, ma Kauai, puoho ka manu o ka loko o Kawainui ma Koolaupoko, Oahu"--the hum of the voices of the Menehunes at Puukapele, Kauai, startled the birds of the pond of Kawainui, at Koolaupoko, Oahu.

The auwai, or watercourse, of Pi is still to be seen at Kikiaola.

At one time Pi also told the Menehunes to wall in a fish-pond at the bend of the Huleia River. They commenced work toward midnight, but at dawn the walls of the pond were not sufficiently finished to meet, so it was left incomplete, and has remained so to this day.

  

LAKA'S ADVENTURE

Wahieloa, a chief, lived at Kalaikoi, Kipahulu, Maui. He took to him a wife named Hinahawea. In due time a boy was born to them, whom Hinahowana, the mother of Hinahawea, brought up under her own care at Alaenui. She called him Laka-a-wahieloa. He was greatly petted by his parents. One day his father went to Hawaii in search

[p. 112]

of the Ala-Koiula a Kane for a toy for his son, landing at Punaluu, Kau, Hawaii, where he was killed in a cave called Keana-a-Kaualehu.

After a long absence Laka asked for his father, and his mother referred him to his grandmother, who, on being questioned, told him that his father went to Hawaii, and was supposed to be dead. Laka then asked for means by which he could search for his father.

His grandmother replied: "Go to the mountains and look for the tree that has leaves shaped like the moon on the night of Hilo, or Hoaka; such is the tree for a canoe."

Laka followed this advice, and went to the mountains to find the tree for his canoe. Finding a suitable one, he commenced to cut in the morning, and by sundown he had felled it to the ground. This accomplished, he went home. Returning the next day, to his surprise he could not find his fallen tree, so he cut down another, with the same result. Laka was thus tricked for several days, and in his perplexity consulted again with his grandmother, who sent him off with the same advice as before, to look for the crescent-shaped leaf.

He went to the mountains again and found the desired tree, but before cutting it he dug a big hole on the side where the Kalala-Kamahele would fall. Upon cutting the tree it fell right into the hole or trench, as designed; then he jumped into it and lay in waiting for the person or persons who were reerecting the trees he had cut down for his canoe.

[p. 113]

While thus waiting, he heard some one talking about raising the tree and returning it to its former position, followed by some one chanting as follows:

E ka mano a ke Akua,
 Ke kini o ke Akua,
 Ka lehu a ke Akua,
 Ka lalani Akua,
 Ka pukui Akua!
 E na Akua a ke kuahiwi nei,
 I ka mauna,
 I ke kualono,
 I ka manowai la-e,
 E-iho! [*1]

When this appeal ended there was a hum and noise, and in a short time (manawa ole) the place was filled with a band of people, who endeavored to lift the tree; but it would not move. Laka then jumped out from his place of hiding and caught hold of two of the men, Mokuhalii and Kapaaikee, and threatened to kill them for raising again the trees he had cut for his canoe. Mokuhalii then told Laka that if they were killed, nobody would be able to make a canoe for him, nor would anybody pull it to the beach, but if they were spared they would willingly do it for him, provided Laka would first build a big and long shed (halau) of sufficient size to hold the canoe, and prepare sufficient food for the men. Laka gladly consenting, released them and returned to his home and built a shed on

[p. 114]

the level ground of Puhikau. Then he went up to the woods and saw the canoe, ready and complete. The Menehunes told Laka that it would he brought to the halau that night. At the dead of night the hum of the voices of the Menehunes was heard; this was the commencement of the lifting of the canoe. It was not dragged, but held up by hand. The second hum of voices brought the canoe to Haloamekiei, at Pueo. And at the third hum the canoe was carefully laid down in the halau. Food and fish were there spread out for the workers, the ha of the taro for food, and the opae and oopu for fish. At dawn the Menehunes returned to their home. Kuahalau was the name of the halau, the remains of the foundation of which were to be seen a few years ago, but now it is ploughed over. The hole dug by Laka still exists.

  

KEKUPUA'S CANOE

Kakae, a chief, lived at Wahiawa, Kukaniloko, Waialua, Oahu. One day his wife told him that she desired to go in search of her brother, Kahanaiakeakua, who was supposed to be living at Tahiti. Kakae thereupon ordered his man Kekupua to go into the woods and find a suitable tree and make a canoe for his wife for this foreign voyage. Kekupua, with a number of men under him, searched in the forest belt of Wahiawa, Helemano, and Waoala, as also through the woods of Koolau, without success. From Kahana they made a search through the mountains till they came to Kilohana, in Kalihi Valley, and from there to Waolani, in Nuuanu, where they slept in a cave.

[p. 115]

[paragraph continues] In the dead of night they heard the hum as of human voices, but were unable to discern any person, though the voices sounded close to them. At dawn silence reigned again, and when the sun arose, lo, and behold! there stood a large mound of stones, the setting of which resembled that of a heiau, or temple, the remains of which are said to be noticeable to this day.

Kekupua and his men returned to their chief and reported their unsuccessful search for a suitable koa (Acacia koa) tree for the desired canoe, and related also the incident at Waolani. Kakae, being a descendant of the Menehunes, knew immediately the authors of the strange occurrence. He therefore instructed Kekupua to proceed to Makaho and Kamakela and to stay there till the night of Kane, then go up to Puunui and wait till hearing the hum and noise of the Menehunes, which would be the signal of their finishing the canoe. And thus it was; the Menehunes, having finished the canoe, were ready to pull it to the sea. He directed them to look sharp, and two men would be noticed holding the ropes at the pu (or head) of the canoe. One of them would leap from one side to the other; he was the director of the work and was called pale. There would be some men farther behind, holding the kawelewele, or guiding-ropes. They were the kahunas that superintended the construction of the canoe. He reminded them to remember these directions, and when they saw these men, to give them orders and show them the course to take in pulling the canoe to the sea.

Kekupua followed all these instructions faithfully.

[p. 116]

[paragraph continues] He waited at Puunui till dusk, when he heard a hum as of many voices, and proceeding farther up near the slope of Alewa he saw these wonderful people. They were like ordinary human beings but diminutive. He directed them to pull the canoe along the nae, or farther side of the Puunui stream. By this course the canoe was brought down as far as Kaalaa, near; Waikahalulu, where, when daylight came, they left their burden and returned to Waolani. The canoe was left in the ditch, where it remained for many generations, and was called Kawaa-a-Kekupua (Kekupua's canoe), in honor of the servant of the chief Kakae.

Thus, even with the help of the Menehunes, the wife of Kakae was not satisfied in her desire.

  

AS HEIAU BUILDERS

The Menehunes are credited with the construction of numerous heiaus (ancient temples) in various parts of the islands.

The heiau of Mookini, near Honoipu, Kohala, is I pointed out as an instance of their marvellous work. The place selected for the site of the temple was on a grassy plain. The stones in the nearest neighborhood were for some reason not deemed suitable for the work, so those of Pololu Valley, distant some twelve miles, were selected. Tradition says the Menehunes were placed in a line covering the entire distance from Pololu to Honoipu, whereby the stones were passed from hand to hand for the entire work. Work was begun at the quiet of night, and at cock-

[p. 117]

crow in the morning it was finished. Thus in one night the heiau of Mookini was built.

Another temple of their erection was at Pepeekeo, Hilo, the peculiarity of the work being that the stones had been brought together by the residents of that part of the district, by direction of the chief, but that in one night, the Menehunes gathered together and built it. The chief and his people were surprised on coming the next morning to resume their labors, to find the heiau completed.

There stands on the pali of Waikolu, near Kalaupapa, Molokai, a heiau that Hawaiians believe to have been constructed by no one else than the Menehunes. It is on the top of a ledge in the face of a perpendicular cliff, with a continuous inaccessible cliff behind it reaching hundreds of feet above. No one has ever been able to reach it either from above or from below; and the marvel is how the material, which appears to be seashore stones, was put in place.

Footnotes

^113:1

O the four thousand gods,
 The forty thousand gods,
 The four hundred thousand gods,
 The file of gods,
 The assembly of gods!

O gods of these woods,
 Of the mountain,
 And the knoll,
 At the water-dam,
 Oh, come!

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 118]

  

XI

  

KAHALAOPUNA, PRINCESS OF MANOA

  

MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

AKAAKA (laughter) is a projecting spur of the  mountain range at the head of Manoa Valley, forming the ridge running back to and above Waiakeakua, "the water of the gods." Akaaka was united in marriage to Nalehuaakaaka, still represented by some lehua (Metrosideros polymorpha) bushes on the very brow of the spur or ridge. They had two children, twins, Kahaukani, a boy, and Kauakuahine, a girl. These children were adopted at birth by a chief, Kolowahi, and chiefess, Pohakukala, who were brother and sister, and cousins of Akaaka. The brother took charge of the boy, Kahaukani, a synonym for the Manoa wind; and Pohakukala the girl, Kauakuahine, meaning the famous Manoa rain. When the children were grown up, the foster parents determined that they should be united; and the children, having been brought up separately and in ignorance of their relationship, made no objections. They were accordingly married and a girl was born to them, who was called Kahalaopuna. Thus Kolowahi and Pohakukala, by conspiring to unite the twin brother and sister, made permanent the union of rain and wind for which

[p. 119]

[paragraph continues] Manoa Valley is noted; and the fruit of such a union was the most beautiful woman of her time. So the Manoa girls, foster children of the Manoa rains and winds, have generally been supposed to have inherited the beauty of Kahalaopuna.

A house was built for Kahalaopuna at Kahaiamano on the road to Waiakekua, where she lived with a few attendants. The house was surrounded by a fence of auki (dracaena), and a puloulou (sign of kapu) was placed on each side of the gate, indicative of forbidden ground. The puloulou were short, stout poles, each surmounted by a ball of white kapa cloth, and indicated that the person or persons inhabiting the premises so defined were of the highest rank, and sacred.

Kahalaopuna was very beautiful from her earliest childhood. Her cheeks were so red and her face so bright that a glow emanated therefrom which shone through the thatch of her house when she was in; a rosy light seemed to envelop the house, and bright rays seemed to play over it constantly. When she went to bathe in the spring below her house, the rays of light surrounded her like a halo. The natives maintain that this bright light is still occasionally seen at Kahaiamano, indicating that the spirit of Kahalaopuna is revisiting her old home.

She was betrothed in childhood to Kauhi, the young chief of Kailua, in Koolau, whose parents were so sensible of the honor of the contemplated union of their son with the Princess of Manoa, who was deemed of a semi-supernatural descent, that they

[p. 120]

always sent the poi of Kailua and the fish of Kawainui for the girl's table. She was thus, as it were, brought up entirely on the food of her prospective husband.

When she was grown to young womanhood, she was so exquisitely beautiful that the people of the valley would make visits to the outer puloulou at the sacred precinct of Luaalea, the land adjoining Kahaiamano, just to get a glimpse of the beauty as she went to and from the spring. In this way the fame of her surpassing loveliness was spread all over the valley, and came to the ears of two men, Kumauna and Keawaa, both of whom were disfigured by a contraction of the lower eyelids, and were known as makahelei (drawn eyes). Neither of these men had ever seen Kahalaopuna, but they fell in love with her from hearsay, and not daring to present themselves to her as suitors on account of their disfigurement, they would weave and deck themselves leis (wreaths) of maile (Alyxia olivaeformis), ginger, and ferns and go to Waikiki for surf-bathing. While there they would indulge in boasting of their conquest of the famous beauty, representing the leis with which they were decked as love-gifts from Kahalaopuna. Now, when the surf of Kalehuawehe at Waikiki was in proper condition, it would attract people from all parts of the island to enjoy the delightful sport. Kauhi, the betrothed of Kahalaopuna, was one of these. The time set for his marriage to Kahalaopuna was drawing near, and as yet he had not seen her, when the assertions of the two makahelei men came to his ears.

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] These were repeated so frequently that Kauhi finally came to believe them, and they so filled him with jealous rage of his betrothed that he determined to kill her. He started for Manoa at dawn, and proceeded as far as Mahinauli, in mid-valley, where he rested under a hala (Pandanus odoratissimus) tree that grew in the grove of wiliwili (Erythrina monosperma). He sat there some time, brooding over the fancied injury to himself, and nursing his wrath. Upon resuming his walk he broke off and carried along with him a bunch of hala nuts. It was quite noon when he reached Kahaiamano and presented himself before the house of Kahalaopuna. The latter had just awakened from a sleep, and was lying on a pile of mats facing the door, thinking of going to the spring, her usual bathing-place, when she perceived a stranger at the door.

She looked at him some time and, recognizing him from oft repeated descriptions, asked him to enter; but Kauhi refused, and asked her to come outside. The young girl had been so accustomed from early childhood to consider herself as belonging to Kauhi, and of being indebted to him, as it were, for her daily food, that she obeyed him unhesitatingly.

He perhaps intended to kill her then, but the girl's unhesitating obedience as well as her extreme loveliness made him hesitate for a while; and after looking intently at her for some time he told her to go and bathe and then prepare herself to accompany him in a ramble about the woods.

While Kahalaopuna was bathing, Kauhi remained

[p. 122]

moodily seated where she had left him, and watched  the bright glow, like rainbow rays, playing above the spring. He was alternately filled with jealousy, regret, and longing for the great beauty of the girl; but that did not make him relent in his dreadful purpose. He seemed to resent his betrothed's supposed infidelity!' the more because she had thrown herself away on such unworthy persons, who were, besides, ugly and disfigured, while he, Kauhi, was not only a person of rank and distinction, but possessed also of considerable manly beauty.

When she was ready he motioned her to follow him, and turned to go without a word. They went across Kumakaha to Hualea, when the girl said, "Why don't you stay and have something to eat before we go?"

He answered rather surlily, "I don't care to eat; I have no appetite."

He looked so sternly at her as he said this that she cried out to him, "Are you annoyed with me? Have I displeased you in any way?"

He only said, "Why, what have you done that would displease me?"

He kept on his way, she following, till they came to a large stone in Aihualama, when he turned abruptly and, facing the young girl, looked at her with an expression of mingled longing and hate. At last, with a deep sigh, he said, "You are beautiful, my betrothed, but, as you have been false, you must die."

The young girl looked up in surprise at these strange words, but saw only hatred and a deadly purpose in Kauhi's eyes; so she said: "If I have to die,

[p. 123]

why did you not kill me at home, so that my people could have buried my bones; but you brought me to the wild woods, and who will bury me? If you think I have been false to you, why not seek proof before believing it?"

But Kauhi would not listen to her appeal. Perhaps it only served to remind him of what he considered was his great loss. He struck her across the temple with the heavy bunch of hala nuts he had broken off at Mahinauli, and which he had been holding all the time. The blow killed the girl instantly, and Kauhi hastily dug a hole under the side of the rock and buried her; then he started down the valley toward Waikiki.

As soon as he was gone, a large owl, who was a god, and a relative of Kahalaopuna, and had followed her from home, immediately set to digging the body out; which done, it brushed the dirt carefully off with its wings and, breathing into the girl's nostrils, restored her to life. It rubbed its face against the bruise on the temple, and healed it immediately. Kauhi had not advanced very far on his way when he heard the voice of Kahalaopuna singing a lament for his unkindness, and beseeching him to believe her, or, at least, prove his accusation.

Hearing her voice, Kauhi returned, and, seeing the owl flying above her, recognized the means of her resurrection; and, going up to the girl, ordered her to follow him. They went up the side of the ridge which divides Manoa Valley from Nuuanu. It was hard work for the tenderly nurtured maiden to climb

[p. 124]

the steep mountain ridge, at one time through a thorny tangle of underbrush, and at another clinging against the bare face of the rocks, holding on to swinging vines for support. Kauhi never offered to assist her, but kept on ahead, only looking back occasionally to see that she followed. When they arrived at the summit of the divide she was all scratched and bruised, and pa-u (skirt) in tatters. Seating herself on a stone to regain her breath, she asked Kauhi where they were going. He never answered, but struck her again with the hala branch, killing her instantly, as before. He then dug a hole near where she lay, and buried her, and started for Waikiki by way of the Kakea ridge. He was no sooner out of sight than the owl again scratched the dirt away and restored the girl, as before. Again she followed and sang a song of love and regret for her lover's anger, and pleaded with him to lay aside his unjust suspicions. On hearing her voice again, Kauhi returned and ordered her to follow him. They descended into Nuuanu Valley, at Kaniakapupu, and crossed over to Waolani ridge, where he again killed and buried the faithful girl, who was again restored by the owl. When he was on his way back, as before, she sang a song, describing the perils and difficulties of the way traversed by them, and ended by pleading for pardon for the unknown fault. The wretched man, on hearing her voice again, was very angry; and his repeated acts of cruelty and the suffering endured by the girl, far from softening his heart, only served. to render him more brutal, and to extinguish what little spark of kindly feeling he might

[p. 125]

have had originally. His only thought was to kill her for good, and thus obtain some satisfaction for his wasted poi and fish. He returned to her and ordered her, as before, to follow him, and started for Kilohana, at the head of Kalihi Valley, where he again killed her. She was again restored by the owl, and made her resurrection known by singing to her cruel lover. He this time took her across gulches, ravines, and plains, until they arrived at Pohakea, on the Ewa slope of the Kaala Mountains, where he killed her and buried her under a large koa (Acacia koa) tree. The faithful owl tried to scrape the dirt away, so as to get at the body of the girl, but his claws became entangled in the numerous roots and rootlets which Kauhi had been careful not to cut away. The more the owl scratched, the more deeply tangled he got, and, finally, with bruised claws and ruffled feathers, he had to give up the idea of rescuing the girl; and perhaps he thought it useless, as she would be sure to make her resurrection known to Kauhi. So the owl left, and followed Kauhi on his return to Waikiki.

There had been another witness to Kauhi's cruelties, and that was Elepaio (Chasiempis sandwichensis), a little green bird, a cousin to Kahalaopuna. As soon as this bird saw that the owl had deserted the body of Kahalaopuna, it flew straight to Kahaukani and Kauakuahine, and told them of all that had happened. The girl had been missed, but, as some of the servants had recognized Kauhi, and had seen them leave together for what they supposed was a ramble in the adjoining woods, no great anxiety had been felt, as yet. But

[p. 126]

when the little bird told his tale, there was great consternation, and even positive disbelief; for, how could any one in his senses, they argued, be guilty of such, cruelty to such a lovely, innocent being, and one, too, belonging entirely to himself.

In the meantime, the spirit of the murdered girl discovered itself to a party who were passing by; and one of them, a young man, moved with compassion, went to the tree indicated by the spirit, and, removing the dirt and roots, found the body, still warm. He wrapped it in his kihei (shoulder scarf), and then covered it entirely with maile, ferns, and ginger, and, making a haawe, or back-load, of it, carried it to his home at Kamoiliili. There, he submitted the body to his elder brother, who called upon two spirit sisters of theirs, with whose aid they finally succeeded in restoring it to life. In the course of the treatment she was frequently taken to an underground water-cave, called Mauoki, for the Kakelekele (hydropathic cure). The water-cave has ever since been known as the "Water of Kahalaopuna."

The young man who had rescued her from the grave naturally wanted her to become his bride; but the girl refused, saying that as long as Kauhi lived she was his, and none other's, as her very body was, as it were, nourished on his food, and was as much his property as the food had been.

The elder brother then counselled the younger to seek, in some way, the death of Kauhi. To this end they conspired with the parents of Kahalaopuna to keep her last resurrection secret. The young man

[p. 127]

then set to work to learn all the meles Kahalaopuna had sung to her lover during that fatal journey. When he knew these songs well, he sought the kilu (play, or game) houses of the King and high chiefs, where Kauhi was sure to be found.

One day, when Kauhi was playing, this young man placed himself on the opposite side, and as Kauhi ceased, took up the kilu and chanted the first of Kahalaopuna's meles.

Kauhi was very much surprised, and contrary to the etiquette of the game of kilu, stopped him in his play to ask him where he had learned that song. The young man answered he had learned it from Kahalaopuna, the famous Manoa beauty, who was a friend of his sister's and who was now on a visit at their house. Kauhi, knowing the owl had deserted the body of the girl, felt certain that she was really dead, and accused the other of telling a lie. This led to an angry and stormy scene, when the antagonists were parted by orders of the King.

The next night found them both at the kilu house, when the second of Kahalaopuna's songs was sung, and another angry discussion took place. Again they were separated by others. On the third night, the third song having been sung, the dispute between the young men became so violent that Kauhi told the young man that the Kahalaopuna he knew must be an impostor, as the real person of that name was dead, to his certain knowledge. He dared him to produce the young woman whom he had been representing as Kahalaopuna; and should she not prove to be the

[p. 128]

genuine one then his life should be the forfeit, and on the other hand, if it should be the real one, then he, Kauhi, should be declared the liar and pay for his insults to the other with his life.

This was just what the young man had been scheming to compass, and he quickly assented to the challenge, calling on the King and chiefs to take notice of the terms of agreement, and to see that they were enforced.

On the appointed day Kahalaopuna went to Waikiki, attended by her parents, relatives, servants, and the two spirit sisters, who had assumed human form for that day so as to accompany their friend and advise her in case of necessity. Akaaka, the grandfather, who had been residing in Waikiki some little time previous to the dispute between the young men, was appointed one of the judges at the approaching trial.

Kauhi had consulted the priests and sorcerers of his family as to the possibility of the murdered girl having assumed human shape for the purpose of working him some injury. Kaea, a famous priest and seer of his family, told him to have the large leaves of the a-pe (Calladium costatum) spread where Kahalaopuna and party were to be seated. If she was a spirit, she would not be able to tear the a-pe leaf on which she would be seated, but if human, the leaf or leaves would be torn. With the permission of the King, this was done. The latter, surrounded by the highest chiefs and a vast assemblage from all parts of the island, was there to witness the test.

[p. 129]

When Kahalaopuna and party were on the road to the scene of the test, her spirit friends informed her of the a-pe leaves, and advised her to trample on them so as to tear them as much as possible, as they, being spirits, would be unable to tear the leaves on which they should be seated, and if any one's attention were drawn to them, they would be found out and killed by the poe po-i uhane (spirit catchers).

The young girl faithfully performed what was required of her. Kaea, on seeing the torn leaves, remarked that she was evidently human, but that he felt the presence of spirits, and would watch for them, feeling sure they were in some way connected with the girl. Akaaka then told him to look in a calabash of water, when he would in all probability see the spirits. The seer, in his eagerness to unravel the mystery, forgot his usual caution and ordered a vessel of water to be brought, and, looking in, he saw only his own reflection. Akaaka at that moment caught the reflection of the seer (which was his spirit), and crushed it between his palms, and at that moment the seer dropped down dead. Akaaka now turned around and opened his arms 'and embraced Kahalaopuna, thus acknowledging her as his own beloved granddaughter.

The King now demanded of the girl and of Kauhi an account of all that had happened between them, and of the reported death of the maiden. They both told their stories, Kauhi ascribing his anger to hearing the assertions of the two disfigured men, Kumauna and Keawaa. These two, on being confronted with

[p. 130]

the girl, acknowledged never having seen her before, and that all their words had been idle boastings. The King then said: "As your fun has cost this innocent girl so much suffering, it is my will that you two and Kauhi suffer death at once, as a matter of justice; and if your gods are powerful enough to restore you, so much the better for you."

Two large imus (ground ovens) had been heated by the followers of the young men, in anticipation of the possible fate of either, and Kauhi, with the two mischief-makers and such of their respective followers and retainers as preferred to die with their chiefs, were baked therein.

The greater number of Kauhi's people were so incensed with his cruelty to the lovely young girl that they transferred their allegiance to her, offering themselves for her vassals as restitution, in a measure, for the undeserved sufferings borne by her at the hands of their cruel chief.

The King gave her for a bride to the young man who had not only saved her, but had been the means of avenging her wrongs.

The imus in which Kauhi and his companions were baked were on the side of the stream of Apuakehau, in the famous Ulukou grove, and very near the sea. The night following, a great tidal wave, sent in by a powerful old shark god, a relative of Kauhi's, swept over the site of the two ovens, and in the morning it was seen that their contents had disappeared. The bones had been taken by the old shark into the sea. The chiefs, Kumauna and Keawaa, were, through the

[p. 131]

power of their family gods, transformed into the two mountain peaks on the eastern corner of Manoa Valley, while Kauhi and his followers were turned into sharks.

Kahalaopuna lived happily with her husband for about two years. Her grandfather, knowing of Kauhi's transformation, and aware of his vindictive nature, strictly forbade her from ever going into the sea. She remembered and heeded the warning during those years, but one day, her husband and all their men having gone to Manoa to cultivate kalo (Colocasia antiquorum), she was left alone with her maid servants.

The surf on that day was in fine sporting condition, and a number of young women were surf-riding, and Kahalaopuna longed to be with them. Forgetting the warning, as soon as her mother fell asleep she slipped out with one of her maids and swam out on a surf-board. This was Kauhi's opportunity, and as soon as she was fairly outside the reef he bit her in two and held the upper half of the body up out of the water, so that all the surf-bathers would see and know that he had at last obtained his revenge.

Immediately on her death the spirit of the young woman went back and told her sleeping mother of what had befallen her. The latter woke up, and, missing her, gave the alarm. This was soon confirmed by the terrified surf-bathers, who had all fled ashore at seeing the terrible fate of Kahalaopuna. Canoes were launched and manned, and chase given to the shark and his prey, which could be easily tracked by the blood.

[p. 132]

He swam just far enough below the surface of the water to be visible, and yet too far to be reached with effect by the fishing-spears of the pursuers. He led them a long chase to Waianae; then, in a sandy opening in the bottom of the sea, where everything was visible to the pursuers, he ate up the young woman, so that she could never again be restored to this life.

Her parents, on hearing of her end, retired to Manoa Valley, and gave up their human life, resolving themselves into their supernatural elements. Kahaukani, the father, is known as the Manoa wind, but his usual and visible form is the grove of ha-u (hibiscus) trees, below Kahaiamano. Kauakuahine, the mother, assumed her rain form, and is very often to be met with about the former home of her beloved child.

The grandparents also gave up their human forms, and returned, the one to his mountain form, and the other into the lehua bushes still to be met with on the very brow of the hill, where they keep watch over the old home of their petted and adored grandchild.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 133]

  

XII

  

THE PUNAHOU SPRING

  

MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

THERE formerly lived on the Kaala Mountains a chief by the name of Kahaakea. He had two children, a boy and a girl, twins, whose mother had died at their birth. The brother was called Kauawaahila (Waahila Rain), and the girl Kauakiowao (Mountain Mist). Kahaakea was very tenderly attached to his motherless children, and after a while took to himself a wife, thinking thus to provide his children with a mother's care and love. This wife was called Hawea and had a boy by her former husband. This boy was deformed and ugly, while the twins were very beautiful. The stepmother was jealous of their beauty, and resented the universal admiration expressed for them, while no one noticed her boy except with looks of aversion. She was very considerate toward the twins when their father was present, but hated and detested them most violently. When they were about ten years old their father had occasion to go to Hawaii, and had to remain away a long time. He felt perfectly safe in leaving his children with his wife, as she had always feigned great love for them, and had successfully concealed from him her real feelings in regard to them.

[p. 134]

[paragraph continues] But as soon as he was fairly away she commenced series of petty persecutions of the poor children.

It seems the mother of the children had been "uhae ia" at her death. That is, certain prayers, invocations, fasting, and humiliation had been performed by certain relatives of the deceased, and quantities of pre pared awa, black, unblemished pig, red fish, and all the customary food of the gods, had been prepared and offered with the object of strengthening the spirit of the departed and of attracting it strongly, as well as giving it a sort of power and control over mundane affairs and events. So when Hawea began to persecute her stepchildren, the spirit of their own mother would assist and protect them.

The persecutions of the stepmother at last became unendurable to the twins. She not only deprived them of food, clothing, and water, but subjected them besides to all sorts of indignities and humiliations. Driven to desperation, they fled to Konahuanui, the mountain peak above the Pali of Nuuanu; but were soon discovered and driven away from there by the cruel Hawea. They then went to the head of Manoa Valley. The stepmother was not at all pleased at their getting out of the way of her daily persecutions, and searched for them everywhere. She finally tracked them by the constant appearance of rainbows at the head of Manoa Valley, those unfailing attendants of rain and mist. The children were again driven away and told to return to Kaala, where they would be constantly under her eye; but they ran and hid themselves in a small cave on the side of the hill of Kukaoo,

[p. 135]

whose top is crowned by the temple of the Menehunes. Here they lived some time and cultivated a patch of sweet potatoes, their food at this time being grasshoppers and greens. The greens were the leaves and the tender shoots of the popolo, aheahea, pakai, laulele and potato vines, cooked by rolling hot stones around and among them in a covered gourd. This is called the puholoholo.

When their potato tubers were fit to be eaten, the brother (Waahila Rain) made a double imu (oven), having a kapu, or sacred side, for his food and a noa, or free side, for his sister. The little cave that was their dwelling was also divided in two, a sacred and a free part, respectively, for brother and sister. The cave can still be seen, and the wall of stone dividing it in two was still intact a few years ago, as also was the double imu. In olden times it was tabooed to females to appear at any eating-place of the males.

When their crops were fairly ripe, the stepmother found them again, and drove them away from their cave, she appropriating the fruit of their labors. The children fled to the rocky hills just back of Punahou, where they found two small caves, which the brother and sister occupied, respectively, as dwellings. The rolling plains and small ravines of the surrounding country, and of what was later known as the Punahou pasture, were not then covered with manienie grass, but with the indigenous shrubs and bushes, tall ilimas, aheaheas, popolo, etc., making close thickets, with here and there open spaces covered with manienieakiaki, the valuable medicinal grass of the olden times.

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] These shrubs and bushes either bore edible fruit or flowers, or the leaves and tender shoots made nourishing and satisfying food when cooked in the way previously described. The poor children lived on these and grasshoppers, and sometimes wild fowl.

One day the sister, Kauakiowao, told her brother that she wanted to bathe, and complained of their having taken up their residence in a place where no water could be found. Her brother hushed her complaint by telling her that it was a safe place, and one where their stepmother would not be likely to look for them, but he would try to get her some water. In his trips around the neighborhood for fruit and greens he had noticed a large rain-water pond to the east of the hill on which they dwelt. This pond was called Kanawai. Here he sometimes came to snare wild ducks. He also had met and knew the Kakea water god, a moo, who had charge of and controlled all the water sources of Manoa and Makiki Valleys. This god was one of the ancestors of the children on the mother's side, and was on the best of terms with Waahila rain. The boy paid him a visit, and asked him to assist him to open a watercourse from the pond of Kanawai to a place he indicated in front of and below the caves inhabited by himself and his sister. The old water god not only consented to help his young relative, but promised to divide the water supply of the neighboring Wailele spring, and let it run into the watercourse that the boy would make, thus insuring its permanence.

Waahila Rain then went to the pond of Kanawai and

[p. 137]

dived under, the water god causing a passage to open underground to the spot indicated, and swam through the water underground till he came out at the place now known as the Punahou Spring. The force of the rushing waters as they burst through the ground soon sufficed to make a small basin, which the boy proceeded to bank and wall up, leaving a narrow outlet for the surplus waters. With the invisible help of the old water god, he immediately set to work to excavate a good-sized pond for his sister to swim in, and when she awoke from a noonday nap, she was astonished to behold a lovely sheet of water where, in the morning, was only dry land. Her brother was swimming and splashing about in it, and gayly called to his sister to come and try her bathing-place.

Kauawaahila afterward made some kalo patches, and people, attracted by the water and consequent fertility of the place, came and settled about, voluntarily offering themselves as vassals to the twins. More and more kalo patches were excavated, and the place became a thriving settlement. The spring became known as Ka Punahou (the new spring), and gave its name to the surrounding place.

About this time Kahaakea returned, and hearing of the persecutions to which his beloved children had been subjected, killed Hawea and then himself. Rocky Hill, the home of the children, was called after him, and is known by that name to the present day. Hawea has ever since then been a synonym in the Hawaiian mind for a cruel stepmother.

The Mountain Mist and Waahila Rain afterward

[p. 138]

returned to the home of their infancy, Kaala, where they,, would stay a while, occasionally visiting Konahuanui and upper Manoa Valley, and may be met with in these places at the present day.

They also occasionally visited Punahou, which was under their especial care and protection; but when the land and spring passed into the hands of foreigners, who did not pay homage to the twins, and who allowed the springs to be defiled by the washing of unclean articles and by the bathing of unclean persons, the twins indignantly left the place, and retired to the head of Manoa Valley.

They sometimes pass swiftly over their old home on their way to Kaala, or Konahuanui, and on such occasions will sometimes linger sorrowfully for a few minutes about Rocky Hill. The rain-water pond of Kanawai is now always dry, as the shrubs and bushes which supplied the food of the twins favored of the gods have disappeared. Old natives say that there is now no inducement for the gentle rain of the Uakiowao and Uawaahila to visit those bare hills and plains, as they would find no food there.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

XIII

  

OAHUNUI

  

MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

ON the plateau lying between Ewa and Waialua, on the island of Oahu, and about a mile off, and mauka of the Kaukonahua bridge, is the historical place called Kukaniloko. This was the ancient birthplace of the Oahu kings and rulers. It was incumbent on all women of the royal line to retire to this place when about to give birth to a child, on pain of forfeiting the rank, privileges, and prerogatives of her expected offspring, should that event happen in a less sacred place.

The stones were still standing some years ago, and perhaps are yet undisturbed, where the royal accouchements took place. In ancient times this locality was taboo ground, for here the high priest of the island had his headquarters. Himself descended from the chief families, and being, in many instances, an uncle or younger brother of the reigning king, or connected by marriage with those of the royal line, and being also at the head of a numerous, well organized, and powerful priesthood, his influence was hardly second to that of the king, and in some matters his authority was paramount.

[p. 140]

A few miles mauka of Kukaniloko, toward the Waimea Mountains, is Helemano, where the last of the cannibal chiefs from the South Seas finally settled when driven from the plains of Mokuleia and Waialua by the inhabitants of those districts; for the people had been exasperated by the frequent requisitions on the kamaainas (original inhabitants) by the stranger chiefs to furnish material for their cannibal feasts.

To the east of Helemano, and about the same distance from Kukaniloko, is Oahunui (Greater Oahu), another historical place. This was the residence of the kings of the island. Tradition has it that previous to the advent of the cannibal strangers the place was known by another name.

When the Lo Aikanaka, as the last of the man-eating chiefs are called, were constrained to take up their residence in upper Helemano, a district just outside of the boundaries of those reserved for the royal and priestly residences, a young man called Oahunui was king. An elder sister named Kilikiliula, who had been as a mother to him, was supposed to share equally with him the royal power and prerogative. This sister was married to a chief named Lehuanui, of the priestly line, but one not otherwise directly connected with royalty, and was the mother of three children; the two eldest being boys and the youngest a girl. They all lived together in the royal enclosure, but in separate houses, according to ancient custom.

Now, the Lo Aikanaka, on establishing themselves in upper Helemano, had at first behaved very well. They had been circumspect and prudent in their intercourse

[p. 141]

with the royal retainers, and had visited the young King to render their homage with every appearance of humility.

Oahunui was quite captivated by the plausible, suave manners of the ingratiating southern chief and those of his immediate retainers, and he invited them to a feast.

This civility was reciprocated, and the King dined with the strangers. Here it was strongly suspected that the dish of honor placed before the King was human flesh, served under the guise of pork.

The King found the dish very much to his liking, and intimated to the Lo Aikanaka chief that his aipuupuu (chief cook or steward) understood the preparation and cooking of pork better than the royal cook did.

The Lo Aikanaka took the hint, and the young King became a very frequent guest at the Southerner's board--or rather, mat table. Some excuse or other would be given to invite the royal guest, such as a challenge to the King to a game of konane (a game like checkers); or a contest of skill in the different athletic and warlike sports would be arranged, and Oahunui would be asked to be the judge, or simply invited to view them. As a matter of course, it would be expected that the King would remain after the sports and partake of food when on friendly visits of this nature. Thus with one excuse or another he spent a great deal of his time with his new subjects and friends.

To supply the particular dainty craved by the royal visitor, the Lo Aikanaka had to send out warriors to the passes leading to Waianae from Lihue and Kalena, and also to the lonely pathway leading up to Kalakini,

[p. 142]

on the Waimea side, there to lie in ambush for any lone traveller, or belated person after la-i, aaho, or ferns. Such a one would fall an easy prey to the Lo Aikanaka stalwarts, skilful in the art of the lua (to kill by breaking the bones).

This went on for some time, until the unaccountable disappearance of so many people began to be connected with the frequent entertainments by the southern chief. Oahunui's subjects began to hint that their young King had acquired the taste for human flesh at these feasts, and that it was to gratify his unnatural appetite for the horrid dish that he paid his frequent visits to those who were his inferiors, contrary to all royal precedent.

The people's disapproval of the intimacy of Oahunui with his new friends was expressed more and more openly, and the murmurs of discontent grew loud and deep. His chiefs and high priest became alarmed, and begged him to discontinue his visits, or they would not be answerable for the consequences. The King was thereby forced to heed their admonitions and promised to keep away from Lo's, and did so for quite a while.

Now, all the male members of the royal family ate their meals with the King when he was at home. This included, among others, Lehuanui, his sister's husband, and their two sons--healthy, chubby little lads of about eight and six years of age. One day after breakfast, as the roar of the surf at Waialua could be distinctly heard, the King remarked that the fish of Ukoa pond at Waialua must be pressing on to the makaha (floodgates) and he would like some aholehole.

[p. 143]

This observation really meant a command to his brother-in-law to go and get the fish, as he was the highest chief present except his two royal nephews, too small to assume such duties.

Lehuanui, Kilikiliula's husband, accordingly went to Waialua with a few of his own family retainers and a number of those belonging to the King. They found the fish packed thick at the makaha, and were soon busily engaged in scooping out, cleaning, and salting them. It was quite late at night when Lehuanui, fatigued with the labors of the day, lay down to rest. He had been asleep but a short time when he seemed to see his two sons standing by his head. The eldest spoke to him: "Why do you sleep, my father? While you are down here we are being eaten by your brother-in-law, the King. We were cooked and eaten up, and our skulls are now hanging in a net from a branch of the lehua-tree you are called after, and the rest of our bones are tied in a bundle and buried under the tree by the big root running to the setting sun."

Then they seemed to fade away, and Lehuanui started up, shivering with fear. He hardly knew whether he had been dreaming or had actually seen an apparition of his little sons. He had no doubt they were dead, and as he remembered all the talk and innuendoes about the King's supposed reasons for visiting the strangers and the enforced cessation of those visits at the urgent request of the high priest and the chiefs, he came to the conclusion that the King had expressed a desire for fish in his presence only to send him out of the way. He reasoned that

[p. 144]

no doubt the King had noticed the chubby forms and rounded limbs of the little lads, and being debarred a chance of partaking surreptitiously of human flesh, had compelled his servants to kill, cook, and serve up his own nephews. In satisfying his depraved appetite, he had also got rid of two who might become formidable rivals; for it was quite within the possibilities that the priests and chiefs in the near future, should he be suspected of a desire for a further indulgence in cannibal diet, might depose him, and proclaim either one of the young nephews his successor.

The father was so troubled that he aroused his immediate body servant, and the two left Waialua for home shortly after midnight. They arrived at the royal enclosure at dawn, and went first to the lehua-tree spoken of by the apparition of the child, and on looking up amid the branches, sure enough there dangled two little skulls in a large-meshed fishing-net. Lehuanui then stooped down and scraped away the leaves and loose dirt from the root indicated, and out rolled a bundle of tapa, which on being opened was found to contain the bones of two children. The father reached up for the net containing the skulls, and putting the bundle of tapa in it, tied the net around his neck. The servant stood by, a silent and grieved spectator of a scene whose meaning he fully understood.

The father procured a stone adze and went to the King's sleeping-house, the servant still following. Here every one but an old woman tending the kukui-nut candle was asleep. Oahunui was stretched out on

[p. 145]

a pile of soft mats covered with his paiula, the royal red kapa of old. The cruel wretch had eaten to excess of the hateful dish he craved, and having accompanied it with copious draughts of awa juice, was in a heavy, drunken sleep.

Lehuanui stood over him, adze in hand, and called, "O King, where are my children?" The stupefied King only stirred uneasily, and would not, or could not, awake. Lehuanui called him three times, and the sight of the drunken brute, gorged with his flesh and blood, so enraged the father that he struck at Oahunui's neck with his stone adze, and severed the head from the body at one blow.

The father and husband then strode to his own sleeping-house, where his wife lay asleep with their youngest child in her arms. He aroused her and asked for his boys. The mother could only weep, without answering. He upbraided her for her devotion to her brother, and for having tamely surrendered her children to satisfy the appetite of the inhuman monster. He reminded her that she had equal power with her brother, and that the latter was very unpopular, and had she chosen to resist his demands and called on the retainers to defend her children, the King would have been killed and her children saved.

He then informed her that, as she had given up his children to be killed for her brother, he had killed him in retaliation, and, saying, "You have preferred your brother to me and mine, so you will see no more of me and mine," he tore the sleeping child from her arms and turned to leave the house.

[p. 146]

The poor wife and mother followed, and, flinging herself on her husband, attempted to detain him by clinging to his knees; but the father, crazed by his loss and the thought of her greater affection for a cruel, inhuman brother than for her own children, struck at her with all his might, exclaiming, "Well, then, follow your brother," and rushed away, followed by all his retainers.

Kilikiliula fell on the side of the stream opposite to where the lehua-tree stood, and is said to have turned to stone. The stone is pointed out to this day, balanced on the hillside of the ravine formed by the stream, and is one of the objects for the Hawaiian sightseer.

The headless body of Oahunui lay where he was killed, abandoned by every one. The story runs that in process of time it also turned to stone, as a witness to the anger of the gods and their detestation of his horrible crime. All the servants who had in any way been concerned, in obedience to royal mandate, in killing and cooking the young princes were, at the death of Kilikiliula, likewise turned to stone, just as they were, in the various positions of crouching, kneeling, or sitting. All the rest of the royal retainers, with the lesser chiefs and guards, fled in fear and disgust from the place, and thus the once sacred royal home of the Oahuan chiefs was abandoned and deserted.

The great god Kane's curse, it is believed, still hangs over the desolate spot, in proof of which it is asserted that, although all this happened hundreds of years ago, no one has ever lived there since.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

XIV

  

AHUULA

  

A LEGEND OF KANIKANIAULA AND THE FIRST FEATHER CLOAK

  

MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

ELEIO was a kukini (trained runner) in the service of Kakaalaneo, King of Maui, several runners being always kept by each king or alii of consequence. These kukinis, when sent on any errand, always took a direct line for their destination, climbing hills with the agility of goats, jumping over rocks and streams, and leaping from precipices. They were so fleet of foot that the common illustration of the fact among the natives was the saying that when a kukini was sent on an errand that would ordinarily take a day and a night, fish wrapped in ki leaves (known as lawalu), if put on the fire on his starting, would not be cooked sufficiently to be turned before he would be back. Being so serviceable to the aliis, kukinis always enjoyed a high degree of consideration, freedom, and immunity from the strict etiquette and unwritten laws of a Hawaiian court. There was hardly anything so valuable in their master's possession that they could not have it if they wished.

Eleio was sent to Hana to fetch awa for the King,

[p. 148]

and was expected to be back in time for the King's supper. Kakaalaneo was then living at Lahaina. Now, Eleio was not only a kukini, but he was also a kahuna, and had been initiated in the ceremonies and observances by which he was enabled to see spirits or wraiths, and was skilled in medicines, charms, etc., and could return a wandering spirit to its body unless decomposition had set in.

Soon after leaving Olowalu, and as he commenced' the ascent of Aalaloloa, he saw a beautiful young woman ahead of him. He naturally hastened his steps, intending to overtake such a charming fellow-traveller; but, do what he would, she kept always just so far ahead of him. Being the fleetest and most renowned kukini of his time, it roused his professional pride to be outrun by a woman, even if only for a short distance; so he was determined to catch her, and he gave himself entirely to that effort. The young woman led him a weary chase over rocks, hills, mountains, deep ravines, precipices, and dark streams, till they came to the Lae (cape) of Hanamanuloa at Kahikinui, beyond Kaupo, when he caught her just at the entrance to a puoa. A puoa was a kind of tower, generally of bamboo, with a platform half-way up, on which the dead bodies of persons of distinction belonging to certain families or classes were exposed to the elements.

When Eleio caught the young woman she turned to him and cried: "Let me live! I am not human, but a spirit, and inside this inclosure is my dwelling."

He answered: "I have been aware for some time

[p. 149]

of your being a spirit. No human being could have so outrun me."

She then said: "Let us be friends. In yonder house live my parents and relatives. Go to them and ask for a hog, kapas, some fine mats, and a feather cloak. Describe me to them and tell them that I give all those things to you. The feather cloak is unfinished. It is now only a fathom and a half square, and was intended to be two fathoms. There are enough feathers and netting in the house to finish it. Tell them to finish it for you." The spirit then disappeared.

Eleio entered the puoa, climbed on to the platform, and saw the dead body of the girl. She was in every way as beautiful as the spirit had appeared to him, and apparently decomposition had not yet set in. He left the puoa and hurried to the house pointed out by the spirit as that of her friends, and saw a woman wailing, whom, from the resemblance, he at once knew to be the mother of the girl; so he saluted her with an aloha. He then said: "I am a stranger here, but I had a travelling companion who guided me to yonder puoa and then disappeared." At these strange words the woman stopped wailing and called to her husband, to whom she repeated what the stranger had said. The latter then asked: "Does this house belong to you?"

Husband and wife, wondering, answered at once: "It does."

"Then," said Eleio, "my message is to you. My travelling companion has a hog a fathom in length in

[p. 150]

your care; also a pile of fine kapas of Paiula and others of fine quality; also a pile of mats and an unfinished feather cloak, now a fathom and a half in length, which you are to finish, the materials being in the house. All these things she has given to me, and sent me to you for them." Then he began to describe the young woman. Both parents recognized the truthfulness of the description, and willingly agreed to give up the things which their beloved daughter must have herself given away. But when they spoke of killing the hog and making an ahaaina (feast) for him, whom they had immediately resolved to adopt as a son, he said: "Wait a little and let me ask: Are all these people I see around this place your friends?"

They both answered: "They are our relatives--uncles, aunts, and cousins to the spirit, who seems to have adopted you either as husband or brother."

"Will they do your bidding in everything?" he asked.

They answered that they could be relied upon. He directed them to build a large lanai, or arbor, to be entirely covered with ferns, ginger, maile, and ieie--the sweet and odorous foliage greens of the islands. An altar was to be erected at one end of the lanai and appropriately decorated. The order was willingly carried out, men, women, and children working with a I will, so that the whole structure was finished in a couple of hours.

Eleio now directed the hog to be cooked. He also ordered cooked red and white fish, red, white, and black cocks, and bananas of the lele and maoli varieties,

[p. 151]

to be placed on the altar. He ordered all women and children to enter their houses and to assist him with their prayers; all pigs, chickens, and dogs to be tied in dark huts to keep them quiet, and that the most profound silence should be kept. The men at work were asked to remember their gods, and to invoke their assistance for Eleio. He then started for Hana, pulled up a couple of bushes of awa of Kaeleku, famous for its medicinal properties, and was back again before the hog was cooked. The awa was prepared, and when the preparations for the feast were complete and set out, he offered everything to his gods and begged assistance in what he was about to perform.

It seems the spirit of the girl had been lingering near him all the time, seeming to be attached to him, but of course invisible to every one. When Eleio had finished his invocation he turned and caught the spirit, and, holding his breath and invoking the gods, he hurried to the puoa, followed by the parents, who now began to understand that he was going to try the kapuku (or restoration to life of the dead) on their daughter. Arriving at the puoa, he placed the spirit against the insteps of the girl and pressed it firmly in, meanwhile continuing his invocation. The spirit entered its former tenement kindly enough until it came to the knees, when it refused to go any further, as from there it could perceive that the stomach was beginning to decompose, and it did not want to be exposed to the pollution of decaying matter. But Eleio, by the strength of his prayers, was enabled to push the spirit up past the knees till it came to the

[p. 152]

thigh bones, when the refractory spirit again refused to proceed. He had to put additional fervor into his prayers to overcome the spirit's resistance, and it proceeded up to the throat, when there was some further check; by this time the father, mother, and male relatives were all grouped around anxiously watching the operation, and they all added the strength of their petitions to those of Eleio, which enabled him to push the spirit past the neck, when the girl gave a sort of crow. There was now every hope of success, and all the company renewed their prayers with redoubled vigor. The spirit made a last feeble resistance at the elbows and wrists, which was triumphantly overborne by the strength of the united prayers. Then it quietly submitted, took complete possession of the body, and the girl came to life. She was submitted to the usual ceremonies of purification by the local priest, after which she was led to the prepared lanai, when kahuna, maid, parents, and relatives had a joyous reunion. Then they feasted on the food prepared for the gods, who were only supposed to absorb the spiritual essence of things, leaving the grosser material parts to their devotees, who, for the time being, are considered their guests.

After the feast the feather cloak, kapas, and fine mats were brought and displayed to Eleio; and the father said to him: "Take the woman thou hast restored and have her for wife, and remain here with us; you will be our son and will share equally in the love we have for her."

But our hero, with great self-denial and fidelity,

[p. 153]

said: "No, I accept her as a charge, but for wife, she is worthy to be one for a higher than I. If you will trust her to me, I will take her to my master, for by her beauty and charms she is worthy to be the queen of our lovely island."

The father answered: "She is yours to do with as you will. It is as if you had created her, for without you, where would she be now? We only ask this, that you always remember that you have parents and relatives here, and a home whenever you choose."

Eleio then asked that the feather cloak be finished for him before he returned to his master. All who could work at feathers set about it at once, including the fair girl restored to life; and he now learned that she was called Kanikaniaula.

When it was completed he set out on his return to Lahaina accompanied by the girl, and taking the feather cloak and the remaining awa he had not used in his incantations. They travelled slowly according to the strength of Kanikaniaula, who now in the body could not equal the speed she had displayed as a spirit.

Arriving at Launiupoko, Eleio turned to her and said: "You wait and hide here in the bushes while I go on alone. If by sundown I do not return, I shall be dead. You know the road by which we came; then return to your people. But if all goes well with me I shall be back in a little while."

He then went on alone, and when he reached Makila, on the confines of Lahaina, he saw a number of people heating an imu, or underground oven. On

[p. 154]

perceiving him they started to bind and roast him alive, such being the orders of the King, but he ordered them away with the request, "Let me die at the feet of my master." And thus he passed successfully the imu heated for him.

When he finally stood before Kakaalaneo, the latter said to him: "How is this? Why are you not cooked alive, as I ordered? How came you to pass my lunas?"

The kukini answered: "It was the wish of the slave to die at the feet of his master, if die he must; but if so, it would be an irreparable loss to you, my master, for I have that with me that will cause your name to be renowned and handed down to posterity."

"And what is that?" questioned the King.

Eleio then unrolled his bundle and displayed to the astonished gaze of the King and courtiers the glories of a feather cloak, before then unheard of on the islands. Needless to say, he was immediately pardoned and restored to royal favor, and the awa he had brought from Hana was reserved for the King's special use in his offerings to the gods that evening.

When the King heard the whole story of Eleio's absence, and that the fair original owner was but a short way off, he ordered her to be immediately brought before him that he might express his gratitude for the wonderful garment. When she arrived, he was so struck with her beauty and modest deportment that he asked her to become his Queen. Thus, some of the highest chiefs of the land traced their descent from Kakaalaneo and Kanikaniaula.

[p. 155]

The original feather cloak, known as the "Ahu o Kakaalaneo," is said to be in the possession of the Pauahi Bishop Museum. At one time it was used on state occasions as a pa-u, or skirt, by Princess Nahienaena, own sister of the second and third Kamehamehas.

The ahuulas of the ancient Hawaiians were of fine netting, entirely covered with feathers, woven in. These were either of one color and kind or two or three different colors outlining patterns. The feathers were knotted by twos or threes with twisted strands of the olona, the process being called uo. They were then woven into the foundation netting previously made the exact shape and size wanted. The whole process of feather cloak making was laborious and intricate, and the making of a cloak took a great many years. And as to durability, let the cloak of , now several centuries old, attest.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

XV

  

KAALA AND KAAIALII

  

A LEGEND OF LANAI

  

W. M. GIBSON

BORDERING upon the land of Kealia, on the southwest coast of Lanai, where was a pahonua, or place of refuge, are the remains of Kaunolu, an ancient heiau, or temple. Its ruins lie within the mouth of a deep ravine, whose extending banks run out into the sea and form a bold, bluff-bound bay. On the top of the western bank there is a stone-paved platform, called the kuaha. Outside of this, and separated by a narrow alley-way, there runs a broad high wall, which quite encircles the kuaha. Other walls and structures lead down the bank, and the slope is terraced and paved down to the tide-worn stones of the shore.

At the beach there is a break; a great block of the bluff has been rent away by some convulsion of nature, and stands out like a lone tower, divided from the main by a gulf of the sea. Its high walls beetle from their tops, upon which neither man nor goat can climb. But you can behold on the flat summit of this islet bluff, portions of ancient work, of altars and walls, and no doubt part of the mainland temple, to which this fragment once was joined. But man can

[p. 157]

visit this lone tower's top no more, and his feet can never climb its overhanging walls.

Inland from the temple there are many remains of the huts of the people of the past. The stone foundations, the inclosures for swine, the round earth ovens, and other traces of a throng of people cover many acres of beach and hillside. This was a town famed as an abode of gods and a refuge for those who fled for their lives; but it drew its people mainly through the fame of its fishing-ground, which swarmed with the varied life of the Hawaiian seas.

To this famed fishing-ground came the great hero of Hawaii to tax the deep, when he had subdued this and the other isles. He came with his fleets of war canoes; with his faithful koas, or fighting men, with his chiefs, and priests, and women, and their trains. He had a house here. Upon the craggy bluff that forms the eastern bank of the bay there is a lonely pa, or wall, and stones of an ancient fort, overlooking the temple, town, and bay.

Kamehameha came to Kealia for sport rather than for worship. Who so loved to throw the maika ball, or hurl the spear, or thrust aside the many javelins flung at his naked chest, as the chief of Kohala? He rode gladly on the crest of the surf waves. He delighted to drive his canoe alone out into the storm. He fought with the monsters of the deep, as well as with men. He captured the great shark that abounds in the bay, and he would clutch in the fearful grip of his hands the deadly eel or snake of these seas, the terror of fishes and men.

[p. 158]

When this warrior king came to Kaunolu, the islanders thronged to the shore to pay homage to the great chief, and to lay at the feet of their sovereign, as was their wont, the products of the isle: the taro, the yam, the hala, the cocoanut, ohelo, banana, and sweet potato. They piled up a mound of food before the door of the King's pakui, along with a clamorous multitude of fat poi-fed dogs, and of fathom-long swine.

Besides this tribute of the men, the workers of the land, the women filled the air with the sweet odors of their floral offerings. The maidens were twined from head to waist with leis or wreaths of the na-u, which is Lanai's own lovely jessamine--a rare gardenia, whose sweet aroma loads the breeze, and leads you to the bush when seeking it afar off. These garlands were fastened to the plaited pili thatch of the King's pakui; they were placed on the necks of the young warriors, who stood around the chief; and around his royal brows they twined an odorous crown of maile.

The brightest of the girlish throng who stood before the dread Lord of the Isles was Kaala, or Sweet Scented, whose fifteen suns had just burnished her sweet brown face with a soft golden gloss; and her large, round, tender eyes knew yet no wilting fires. Her neck and arms, and all of her young body not covered by the leafy pa-u, was tinted with a soft sheen like unto a rising moon. Her skin glowed with the glory of youth, and mingled its delicate odor of health with the blooms of the groves, so that the perfume of her presence received fittingly the name of Fragrance.

[p. 159]

In those rude days the island race was sound and clean. The supple round limbs were made bright and strong by the constant bath and the temperate breeze. They were not cumbered with clothing; they wore no long, sweating gowns, but their smooth, shining skins reflected back their sun, which gave them such a rich and dusky charm.

Perhaps such a race cannot long wear all our gear and live. They are best clothed with sea foam, or with the garlands of their groves. Flow sweetly blend the brown and green; and when young, soft, amber-tinted cheeks, glowing with the crimson tide beneath, are wreathed with the odorous evergreens of the isles, you see the poesy of our kind, and the sweet, wild grace that dwelt in the Eden Paradise.

The sweet Kaala stood mindless of harm, as the playful breeze rustled the long blades of the la-i (dracaena) leaves, hanging like a bundle of green swords from her waist; and as they twirled and fluttered in the air, revealed the soft, rounded form, whose charm filled the eye and heart of one who stood among the braves of the great chief--the heart of the stout young warrior Kaaialii.

This youth had fought in the battle of Maunalei, Lanai's last bloody fight. With his long-reaching spear, wielded with sinewy arms, he urged the flying foe to the top of a fearful cliff, and mocking the cries of a huddled crowd of panic-scared men, drove them with thrusts and shouts till they leaped like frightened sheep into the jaws of the deep, dark chasm, and their torn corses strewed the jagged stones below.

[p. 160]

Kaaialii, like many a butcher of his kind, was comely to see. With the lion's heart, he had the lion's tawny hue. A swart grace beamed beneath his curling brows. He had the small, firm hand to throttle or caress, and eyes full of fire for hate or love; and love's flame now lit the face of the hero of the bloody leap, and to his great chief he said, "O King of all the isles, let this sweet flower be mine, rather than the valley thou gayest me for my domain."

Said Kamehameha: "You shall plant the Lanai jessamine in the valley I gave you in Kohala. But there is another who claims our daughter, who is the stout bone-breaker, the scarred Mailou. My spear-man of Maunalei can have no fear; and you shall wrestle with him; and let the one whose arms can clasp the girl after the fight carry her to his house, where one kapa shall cover the two."

The poor maid, the careless gift of savage power, held up her clasped hands with a frightened gesture at the dread name of the breaker of bones; for she had heard how he had sucked the breath of many a dainty bloom like her, then crunched the wilted blossom with sinews of hate, and flung it to the sharks.

And the Lanai maiden loved the young chief of Hawaii. He had indeed pierced her people, but only the tender darts of his eyes had wounded her. Turning to him, she looked her savage, quick, young love, and said, "O Kaaialii, may thy grip be as sure as thy thrust. Save me from the bloody virgin-eater, and I will catch the squid and beat the kapa for thee all my days."

[p. 161]

The time of contest approached. The King sat under the shade of a leafy kou, the royal tree of the olden time, which has faded away with the chiefs it once did shelter. On the smooth shell floor, covered with the hala mat, stood the bare-limbed braves, stripped to the malo, who with hot eyes of hate shot out their rage of lust and blood, and stretched out their strangling arms. They stood, beating with heavy fists their broad, glossy chests of bronze, and grinning face to face, they glowered their savage wish to kill. Then, with right foot advanced, and right arm uplifted, they pause to shout their gage of battle, and tell to each how they would maim and tear, and kill, and give each other's flesh for food to some beastly maw.

And now, each drawing near to each, with arms uplifted, and outspread palms with sinewy play, like nervy claws trying to clutch or grip, they seek a chance for' a deadly clinch. And swift the scarred child-strangler has sprung with his right to the young spear-man's throat, who as quickly hooks the lunging arm within the crook of his, and with quick, sledge-like blow breaks the shoulder arm-bone.

With fury the baffled bone-breaker grips with the uncrippled hand; but now two stout young arms, tense with rage, soon twist and break the one unaided limb. Then with limp arms the beaten brute turns to flee; but swift hate is upon him, and clutches him by the throat; and pressing him down, the hero of Kaala holds his knee to the hapless wretch's back, and with knee bored into the backward bended spine, he strains

[p. 162]

and jerks till the jointed bones snap and break, and the dread throttler of girls and babes lies prone on the mat, a broken and bloody corse.

"Good!" cried the King. "Our son has the strength of Kanekoa. Now let our daughter soothe the limbs of her lover. Let her stroke his skin, press his joints, and knead his back with the loving grip and touch of the lomilomi. We will have a great bake, with the hula and song; and when the feast is over, then shall they be one."

A line of women squat down. They crone their wild refrain, praising the one who wins in strife and love. They seize in their right hand the hula gourd, clattering with pebbles inside. They whirl it aloft, they shake, they swing, they strike their palms, they thump the mat; and now with supple joints they twirl their loins, and with heave and twist, and with swing and song, the savage dance goes on.

Kaala stood up with the maiden throng, the tender, guarded gifts of kings. They twined their wreaths, they swayed, and posed their shining arms; and flapping with their hands their leafy skirts, revealed their rounded limbs. This fires the gaze of men, and the hero of the day with flaming eyes, springs and clasps his love, crying as he bears her away: "Thou shalt dance in my hut in Kohala for me alone, forever!"

At this, a stout yet grizzled man of the isle lifts up his voice and wails: "Kaala, my child, is gone. Who shall soothe my limbs when I return from spearing the ohua? And who shall feed me with taro and bread-fruit like the chief of Olowalu, when I have no

[p. 163]

daughter to give away? I must hide from the chief or I die." And thus wailed out Opunui, the father of Kaala.

But a fierce hate stirred the heart of Opunui. His friend was driven over the cliff at Maunalei, and he himself had lived only by crawling at the feet of the slayer. He hid his hate, and planned to save his girl and balk the killer of his people. He said in his heart, "I will hide her in the sea, and none but the fish gods and I shall know where the ever-sounding surf surges over Kaala."

Now, in the morn, when the girl with ruddy brown cheeks, and glowing with the brightening dawn of love, stood in the doorway of the lodge of her lord, and her face was sparkling with the sheen from the sun, her sire in humble guise stood forth and said, "My child, your mother at Mahana is dying. Pray you, my lord, your love, that you may see her once more before his canoe shall bear you to his great land."

"Alas!" said the tender child, "since when is Kalani ill? I shall carry to her this large sweet fish speared by my lord; and when I have rubbed her aching limbs, she will be well again with the love touch of her child. Yes, my lord will let me go. Will you not, O Kaaialii; will you not let me go to give my mother a last embrace, and I shall be back again before the moon has twice spanned the bay?"

The hero clasped his young love with one stout twining arm, and gazing into her eyes, he with a caressing hand put back from her brow her shining hair, and thus to his heart's life he spoke: "O my

[p. 164]

sweet flower, how shall I live without thee, even for this day's march of the sun? For thou art my very breath, and I shall pant and die like a stranded fish without thee. But no, let me not say so. Kaaialii is a chief who has fought men and sharks; and he must not speak like a girl. He too loves his mother, who looks for him in the valley of Kohala; and shall he deny thy mother, to look her last upon the sweet face and the tender limbs that she fed and reared for him? Go, my Kaala. But thy chief will sit and watch with a hungering heart, till thou come back to his arms again."

And the pretty jessamine twined her arms around his neck, and laying her cheek upon his breast said, with upturned tender glances, "O my chief, who gayest me life and sweet joy; thy breath is my breath; thy eyes are my sweetest sight; thy breast is my only 'd resting-place; and when I go away, I shall all the way look back to thee, and go slowly with a backward turned heart; but when I return to thee, I shall have wings to bear me to my lord."

"Yes, my own bird," said Kaaialii, "thou must fly, but fly swiftly in thy going as well as in thy coming; for both ways thou fliest to me. When thou art gone I shall spear the tender ohua fish, I shall bake the yam and banana, and I will fill the calabash with sweet water, to feed thee, my heart, when thou shalt come; and thou shalt feed me with thy loving eyes.

"Here, Opunui! take thy child. Thou gayest life to her, but now she gives life to me. Bring her back all well, ere the sun has twice risen. If she come not

[p. 165]

soon, I shall die; but I should slay thee before I die; therefore, O Opunui, hasten thy going and thy coming, and bring back my life and love to me."

And now the stern hero unclasped the weeping girl. His eye was calm, but his shut lips showed the work within of a strong and tender heart of love. He felt the ache of a larger woe than this short parting. He pressed the little head between his palms; he kissed the sobbing lips again and again; he gave one strong clasp, heart to heart, and then quickly strode away.

As Kaala tripped along the stony up-hill path, she glanced backward on her way, to get glimpses of him she loved, and she beheld her chief standing on the topmost rock of the great bluff overhanging the sea. And still as she went and looked, still there he stood; and when on the top of the ridge and about to descend into the great valley, she turned to look her last, still she saw her loving lord looking up to her.

The silent sire and the weeping child soon trod the round, green vale of Palawai. She heeded not now to pluck, as was her wont, the flowers in her path; but thought how she should stop a while, as she came back, to twine a wreath for her dear lord's neck. And thus this sad young love tripped along with innocent hope by the moody Opunui's side.

They passed through the groves of Kalulu and Kumoku, and then the man swerved from the path leading to Mahana and turned his face again seaward. At this the sad and silent child looked up into the face of her grim and sullen sire and said: "O father,

[p. 166]

we shall not find mother on this path, but we shall lose our way and come to the sea once more."

"And thy mother is by the sea, by the bay of Kaumalapau. There she gathers limpets on the rocks. She has dried a large squid for thee. She has pounded some taro and filled her calabash with poi, and would feed thee once more. She is not sick; but had I said she was well, thy lord would not have let thee go; but now thou art on the way to sleep with thy mother by the sea."

The poor weary girl now trudged on with a doubting heart. She glanced sadly at her dread sire's moody eye. Silent and sore she trod the stony path leading down to the shore, and when she came to the beach with naught in view but the rocks and sea, she said with a bursting heart, "O my father, is the shark to be my mother, and I to never see my dear chief any more?"

"Hear the truth," cried Opunui. "Thy home for a time is indeed in the sea, and the shark shall be thy mate, but he shall not harm thee. Thou goest down where the sea god lives, and he shall tell thee that the accursed chief of the bloody leap shall not carry away any daughter of Lanai. When Kaaialii has sailed for Kohala then shall the chief of Olowalu come and bring thee to earth again."

As the fierce sire spoke, he seized the hand of Kaala, and unheeding her sobs and cries, led her along the' rugged shore to a point eastward of the bay, where the beating sea makes the rocky shore tremble beneath the feet. Here was a boiling gulf, a fret and foam of

[p. 167]

the sea, a roar of waters, and a mighty jet of brine and spray from a spouting cave whose mouth lay deep beneath the battling tide.

See yon advancing billow! The south wind sends it surging along. It rears its combing, whitening crest, and with mighty, swift-rushing volume of angry green sea, it strikes the mouth of the cave; it drives and packs the pent-up air within, and now the tightened wind rebounds, and driving back the ramming sea, bursts forth with a roar as the huge spout of sea leaps upward to the sky, and then comes curving down in gentle silver spray.

The fearful child now clasped the knees of her savage sire. "Not there, O father," she sobbed and wailed. "The sea snake (the puhi) has his home in the cave, and he will bite and tear me, and ere I die, the crawling crabs will creep over me and pick out my weeping eyes. Alas, O father, better give me to the shark, and then my cry and moan will not hurt thine ear."

Opunui clasped the slender girl with one sinewy arm, and with a bound he leaped into the frothed and fretted pool below. Downward with a dolphin's ease he moved, and with his free arm beating back the brine, moved along the ocean bed into the sea cave's jagged jaws; and then stemming with stiffened sinew the wind-driven tide, he swam onward till he struck a sunless beach and then stood inside the cave, whose mouth is beneath the sea.

Here was a broad, dry space with a lofty, salt-icicled roof. The green, translucent sea, as it rolled back and

[p. 168]

forth at their feet, gave to their brown faces a ghastly white glare. The scavenger crabs scrambled away over the dank and dripping stones, and the loathsome biting eel, slowly reached out its well-toothed, wide-gaping jaw to tear the tender feet that roused it from its horrid lair, where the dread sea god dwelt.

The poor hapless girl sank down upon this gloomy shore and cried, clinging to the kanaka's knee: "O father, beat out my brains with this jagged stone, and do not let the eel twine around my neck, and trail with a loathsome, slimy, creeping crawl over my body before I die. Oh! the crabs will pick and tear me before my breath is gone."

"Listen," said Opunui. "Thou shalt go back with me to the warm sunny air. Thou shalt tread again the sweet-smelling flowery vale of Palawai, and twine thy neck with wreaths of scented jessamine, if thou wilt go with me to the house of the chief of Olowalu and there let thy bloody lord behold thee wanton with thy love in another chief's arms."

"Never," shouted the lover of Kaaialii, "never will I meet any clasp of love but that of my own chief. If I cannot lay my head again upon his breast, I will lay it in death upon these cold stones. If his arm shall never again draw me to his heart, then let the eel twine my neck and let him tear away my cheeks rather than that another beside my dear lord shall press my face."

"Then let the eel be thy mate," cried Opunui, as he roughly unclasped the tender arms twined around his knees; "until the chief of Olowalu comes to seize

[p. 169]

thee, and carry thee to his house in the hills of Maui. Seek not to leave the cave. Thou knowest that with thy weak arms, thou wilt tear thyself against the jagged rocks in trying to swim through the swift flowing channel. Stay till I send for thee, and live." Then dashing out into the foaming gulf with mighty buffeting arms he soon reached the upper air.

And Kaaialii stood upon the bluff, looking up to the hillside path by which his love had gone, long after her form was lost to view in the interior vales. And after slight sleep upon his mat, and walking by the shore that night, he came at dawn and climbed the bluff again to watch his love come down the hill. And as he gazed he saw a leafy skirt flutter in the wind, and his heart fluttered to clasp his little girl; but as a curly brow drew near, his soul sank to see it was not his love, but her friend Ua (rain) with some sad news upon her face.

With hot haste and eager asking eyes does the love-lorn chief meet the maiden messenger, and cries, "Why does Kaala delay in the valley? Has she twined wreaths for another's neck for me to break? Has a wild hog torn her? Or has the anaana prayer of death struck her heart, and does she lie cold on the sod of Mahana? Speak quickly, for thy face kills me, O Ua!"

"Not thus, my lord," said the weeping girl, as the soft shower fell from Ua's sweet eyes. "Thy love is not in the valley; and she has not reached the hut of her mother Kalani. But kanakas saw from the hills of Kalulu her father lead her through the forest of

[p. 170]

[paragraph continues] Kumoku; since then our Kaala has not been seen, and I fear has met some fate that is to thwart thy love."

"Kaala lost? The blood of my heart is gone!" He hears no more! The fierce chief, hot with baffled passion, strikes madly at the air, and dashes away, onward up the stony hill; and upward with his stout young savage thews, he bounds along without halt or slack of speed till he reaches the valley's rim, then rushes down its slopes.

He courses over its bright green plains. He sees in the dusty path some prints that must be those of the dear feet he follows now. His heart feels a fresh bound; he feels neither strain of limb nor scantness of breath, and, searching as he runs, he descries before him in the plain the deceitful sire alone.

"Opunui," he cries, "give me Kaala, or thy life!" The stout, gray kanaka looks to see the face of flame and the outstretched arms, and stops not to try the strength of his own limbs, or to stay for any parley, but flies across the valley, along the very path by which the fierce lover came; and with fear to spur him on, he keeps well before his well blown foe.

But Kaaialii is now a god; he runs with new strung limbs, and presses hard this fresh-footed runner of many a race. They are within two spears' length of each other's grip upon the rim of the vale; and hot with haste the one, and with fear the other, they dash along the rugged path of Kealia, and rush downward to the sea. They bound o'er the fearful path of clinkers. Their torn feet heed not the pointed stones.

[p. 171]

[paragraph continues] The elder seeks the shelter of the taboo; and now, both roused by the outcries of a crowd that swarm on the bluffs around, they put forth their remaining strength and strive who shall gain first the entrance to the sacred wall of refuge.

For this the hunted sire strains his fast failing nerve; and the youth with a shout quickens his still tense limbs. He is within a spear's length; he stretches out his arms. Ha, old man! he has thy throat within his grip. But no, the greased neck slips the grasp; the wretch leaps for his dear life, he gains the sacred wall, he bounds inside, and the furious foe is stopped by the staves of priests.

The baffled chief lies prone in the dust, and curses the gods and the sacred taboo. After a time he is led away to his hut by friends; and then the soothing hands of Ua rub and knead the soreness out of his limbs. And when she has set the calabash of poi before him along with the relishing dry squid, and he has filled himself and is strong again, he will not heed any entreaty of chief or friends; not even the caressing lures of Ua, who loves him; but he says, "I will go and seek Kaala; and if I find her not, I die."

Again the love-lorn chief seeks the inland. He shouts the name of his lost love in the groves of Kumoku, and throughout the forest of Mahana. Then he roams through the cloud-canopied valley of Palawai; he searches among the wooded canyons of Kalulu, and he wakes the echoes with the name of Kaala in the gorge of the great ravine of Maunalei. He follows this high walled barranca over its richly

[p. 172]

flowered and shaded floor; and also along by the winding stream, until he reaches its source, an abrupt wall of stone, one hundred feet high, and forming the head of the ravine. From the face of this steep, towering rock, there exudes a sweet, clear rain, a thousand trickling rills of rock-filtered water leaping from points of fern and moss, and filling up an ice cold pool below, at which our weary chief gladly slaked his thirst. The hero now clambers the steep walls of the gorge, impassable to the steps of men in these days; but he climbs with toes thrust in crannies, or resting on short juts and points of rock; and he pulls himself upward by grasping at out-cropping bushes and strong tufts of fern. And thus with stout sinew and bold nerve the fearless spearman reaches the upper land from whence he had, in his day of devouring rage, hurled and driven headlong the panic-stricken foe.

And now he runs on over the lands of Paomai, through the wooded dells of the gorge of Kaiholena, and onward across Kaunolu and Kalulu, until he reaches the head spring of sacred Kealia called Waiakekua; and here he gathered bananas and ohelo berries; and as he stayed his hunger with the pleasant wild fruit, he beheld a white-haired priest of Kaunolu, bearing a calabash of water.

The aged priest feared the stalwart chief, because he was not upon his own sacred ground, under the safe wing of the taboo; and therefore he bowed low and clasped the stout knees, and offered the water to slake the thirst of the sorrowing chief. But Kaaialii cried out: "I thirst not for water, but for the sight of my

[p. 173]

love. Tell me where she is hid, and I will bring thee hogs and men for the gods." And to this the glad priest replied:

"Son of the stout spear! I know thou seekest the sweet Flower of Palawai; and no man but her sire has seen her resting-place; but I know that thou seekest in vain in the groves, and in the ravines, and in this mountain. Opunui is a great diver and has his dens in the sea. He leaves the shore when no one follows, and he sleeps with the fish gods, and thou wilt find thy love in some cave of the rock-bound southern shore."

The chief quickly turns his face again seaward. He descends the deep shaded pathway of the ravine of Kaunolu. He winds his way through shaded thickets of ohia, sandalwood, the yellow mamani, the shrub violet, and the fragrant na-u. He halted not as ht reached the plain of Palawai, though the ever overhanging canopy of cloud that shades this valley of the mountain cooled his weary feet. These upper lands were still, and no voice was heard by the pili grass huts, and the maika balls and the wickets of the bowling alley of Palawai stood untouched, because all the people were with the great chief by the shore of Kaunolu; and Kaaialii thought that he trod the flowery pathway of the still valley alone.

But there was one who, in soothing his strained limbs after he fell by the gateway of the temple, had planted strong love in her own heart; and she, Ua, with her lithe young limbs, had followed this sorrowing lord through all his weary tramp, even through

[p. 174]

the gorges, and over the ramparts of the hills, and she was near the sad, wayworn chief when he reached the southern shore.

The weary hero only stayed his steps when he reached the brow of the great bluff of Palikaholo. The sea broke many hundred feet below where he stood. The gulls and screaming boatswain birds sailed in mid-air between his perch and the green waves. He looked up the coast to his right, and saw the lofty, wondrous sea columns of Honopu. He looked to the left, and beheld the crags of Kalulu, but nowhere could he see any sign which should tell him where his love was hid away.

His strong, wild . nature was touched by the distant sob and moan of the surf. It sang a song for his sad, savage soul. It roused up before his eyes other eyes, and lips, and cheeks, and clasps of tender arms. His own sinewy ones he now stretched out wildly in the mocking air. He groaned, and sobbed, and beat his breast as he cried out, "Kaala! O Kaala! Where art thou? Dost thou sleep with the fish gods, or must I go to join thee in the great shark's maw?"

As the sad hero thought of this dread devourer of many a tender child of the isles, he hid his face with his hands,--looking with self-torture upon the image of his soft young love, crunched, bloody and shrieking, in the jaws of the horrid god of the Hawaiian seas; and as he thought and waked up in his heart the memories of his love, he felt that he must seek her even in her gory grave in the sea.

Then he looks forth again, and as he gazes down

[p. 175]

by the shore his eyes rest upon the spray of the blowing cave near Kaumalapau. It leaps high with the swell which the south wind sends. The white mist gleams in the sun. Shifting forms and shades are seen in the varied play of the up-leaping cloud. And as with fevered soul he glances, he sees a form spring up in the ever bounding spray.

He sees with his burning eyes the lines of the sweet form that twines with tender touch around his soul. He sees the waving hair, that mingles on his neck with his own swart curls. He sees,--he thinks he sees,--in the leap and play of sun-tinted spray, his love, his lost Kaala; and with hot foot he rushes downward to the shore.

He stands upon the point of rock whence Opunui sprang. He feels the throb beneath his feet of the beating, bounding tide. He sees the fret and foam of the surging gulf below the leaping spray, and is wetted by the shore-driven mist. He sees all of this wild, working water, but he does not see Kaala.

And yet he peers into this mad surf for her he seeks. The form that he has seen still leads him on. He will brave the sea god's wrath; and he fain would cool his brow of flame in the briny bath. He thinks he hears a voice sounding down within his soul; and cries, "Where art thou, O Kaala? I come, I come!" And as he cries, he springs into the white, foaming surge of this ever fretted sea.

And one was near as the hero sprang; even Ua, with the clustering curls. She loved the chief; she did hope that when his steps were stayed by the sea, and

[p. 176]

he had mingled his moan with the wild waters' wail, that he would turn once more to the inland groves, where she would twine him wreaths, and soothe his limbs, and rest his head upon her knees; but he has leaped for death, he comes up no more, And Ua wailed for Kaaialii; and as the chief rose no more from out the lashed and lathered sea, she cried out, "Auwe ka make!" (Alas, he is dead!) And thus wailing and crying out, and tearing her hair, she ran back over the bluffs, and down the shore to the tabooed ground of Kealia, and wailing ever, flung herself at the feet of Kamehameha.

The King was grieved to hear from Ua of the loss of his young chief. But the priest Papalua standing near, said: "O Chief of Heaven, and of all the isles; there where Kaaialii has leaped is the sea den of Opunui, and as thy brave spearman can follow the turtle to his deep sea nest, he will see the mouth of the cave, and in it, I think, he will find his lost love, Kaala, the flower of Palawai."

At this Ua roused up. She called to her brother Keawe, and laying hold on him, pulled him toward the shore, crying out, "To thy canoe, quick! I will help thee to paddle to Kaumalapau." For thus she could reach the cave sooner than by the way of the bluffs. And the great chief also following, sprang into his swiftest canoe, and helping as was his wont, plunged his blade deep into the swelling tide, and bounded along by the frowning shore of Kumoku.

When Kaaialii plunged beneath the surging waters, he became at once the searching diver of the Hawaiian

[p. 177]

seas; and as his keen eye peered throughout the depths, he saw the portals of the ocean cave into which poured the charging main. He then, stemming with easy play of his well-knit limbs the suck and rush of the sea, shot through the current of the gorge; and soon stood up upon the sunless strand.

At first he saw not, but his ears took in at once a sad and piteous moan,--a sweet, sad moan for his hungry ear, of the voice of her he sought. And there upon the cold, dank, dismal floor he could dimly see his bleeding, dying love. Quickly clasping and soothing her, he lifted her up to bear her to the upper air; but the moans of his poor weak Kaala told him she would be strangled in passing through the sea.

And as he sat down, and held her in his arms, she feebly spoke: "O my chief, I can die now! I feared that the fish gods would take me, and I should never see thee more. The eel bit me, and the crabs crawled over me, and when I dared the sea to go and seek thee, my weak arms could not fight the tide; I was torn against the jaws of the cave, and this and the fear of the gods have so hurt me, that I must die."

"Not so, my love," said the sad and tearful chief. "I am with thee now. I give thee the warmth of my heart. Feel my life in thine. Live, O my Kaala, for me. Come, rest and be calm, and when thou canst hold thy breath I will take thee to the sweet air again, and to thy valley, where thou shalt twine wreaths for me." And thus with fond words and caresses he sought to soothe his love.

But the poor girl still bled as she moaned; and with

[p. 178]

fainter voice she said, "No, my chief, I shall never twine a wreath, but only my arms once more around thy neck." And feebly clasping him, she said in sad, sobbing, fainting tones, "Aloha, my sweet lord! Lay me among the flowers by Waiakeakua, and do not slay my father."

Then, breathing moans and murmurs of love, she lay for a time weak and fainting upon her lover's breast, with her arms drooping by her side. But all at once she clasps his neck, and with cheek to cheek, she clings, she moans, she gasps her last throbs of love and passes away; and her poor torn corse lies limp within the arms of the love-lorn chief.

As he cries out in his woe there are other voices in the cave. First he hears the voice of Ua speaking to him in soothing tones as she stoops to the body of her friend; and then in a little while he hears the voice of his great leader calling to him and bidding him stay his grief. "O King of all the Seas," said Kaaialii, standing up and leaving Kaala to the arms of Ua, "I have lost the flower thou gayest me; it is broken and dead, and I have no more joy in life."

"What!" said Kamehameha, "art thou a chief, and wouldst cast away life for a girl? Here is Ua, who loves thee; she is young and tender like Kaala. Thou shalt have her, and more, if thou dost want. Thou shalt have, besides the land I gave thee in Kohala, all that thou shalt ask of Lanai. Its great valley of Palawai shall be thine; and thou shalt watch my fishing grounds of Kaunolu, and be the Lord of Lanai."

"Hear, O King," said Kaaialii. "I gave to Kaala

[p. 179]

more of my life in loving her, and of my strength in seeking for her than ever I gave for thee in battle. I gave to her more of love than I ever gave to my mother, and more of my thought than I ever gave to my own life. She was my very breath, and my life, and how shall I live without her? Her face, since first I saw her, has been ever before me; and her warm breasts were my joy and repose; and now that they are cold to me, I must go where her voice and love have gone. If I shut my eyes now I see her best; therefore let me shut my eyes forevermore." And as he spoke, he stooped to clasp his love, said a tender word of adieu to Ua, and then with a swift, strong blow, crushed in brow and brain with a stone.

The dead chief lay by the side of his love, and Ua wailed over both. Then the King ordered that the two lovers should lie side by side on a ledge of the cave; and that they should be wrapped in tapas which should be brought down through the sea in tight bamboos. Then there was great wailing for the chief and the maid who lay in the cave; and thus wailed Ua:

"Where art thou, O brave chief?
 Where art thou, O fond girl?
 Will ye sleep by the sound of the sea?
 And will ye dream of the gods of the deep?
 O sire, where now is thy child?
 O mother, where now is thy son?
 The lands of Kohala shall mourn,
 And valleys of Lanai shall lament.
 The spear of the chief shall rot in the cave,
 And the tapa of the maid is left undone.
 The wreaths for his neck, they shall fade, [p. 180]
 They shall fade away on the hills.
 O Kaaialii, who shall spear the uku?
 O Kaala, who shall gather the na-u?
 Have ye gone to the shores of Kahiki,
 To the land of our father, Wakea?
 Will ye feed on the moss of the cave,
 And the limpets of the surf-beaten shore?
 O chief, O friend, I would feed ye,
 O chief, O friend, I would rest ye.
 Ye loved, like the sun and the flower,
 Ye lived like the fish and the wave,
 And now like the seeds in a shell,
 Ye sleep in your cave by the sea.
 Alas! O chief, alas! O my friend,
 Will ye sleep in the cave evermore?"

And thus Ua wailed, and then was borne away by her brother to the sorrowful shore of Kaunolu, where there was loud wailing for the chief and the maid; and many were the chants of lamentation for the two lovers, who sleep side by side in the Spouting Cave of Kaala.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 181]

  

XVI

  

THE TOMB OF PUUPEHE

  

A LEGEND OF LANAI

  

FROM "THE HAWAIIAN GAZETTE"

ONE of the interesting localities of tradition, famed in Hawaiian song and story of ancient days, is situate at the southwestern point of the island of Lanai, and known as the Kupapau o Puupehe, or Tomb of Puupehe. At the point indicated, on the leeward coast of the island, may be seen a huge block of red lava about eighty feet high and some sixty feet in diameter, standing out in the sea, and detached from the mainland some fifty fathoms, around which centres the following legend.

Observed from the overhanging bluff that overlooks Puupehe, upon the summit of this block or elevated islet, would be noticed a small inclosure formed by a low stone wall. This is said to be the last resting-place of a Hawaiian girl whose body was buried there by her lover Makakehau, a warrior of Lanai.

Puupehe was the daughter of Uaua, a petty chief, one of the dependents of the king of Maui, and she was won by young Makakehau as the joint prize of love and war. These two are described in the Kanikau, or Lamentation, of Puupehe, as mutually captive,

[p. 182]

the one to the other. The maiden was a sweet flower of Hawaiian beauty. Her glossy brown, spotless body "shone like the clear sun rising out of Haleakala." Her flowing, curly hair, bound by a wreath of lehua blossoms, streamed forth as she ran "like the surf crests scudding before the wind." And the starry eyes of the beautiful daughter of Uaua blinded the young warrior, so that he was called Makakehau, or Misty Eyes.

The Hawaiian brave feared that the comeliness of his dear captive would cause her to be coveted by the chiefs of the land. His soul yearned to keep her all to himself. He said: "Let us go to the clear waters of Kalulu. There we will fish together for the kala and the aku, and there I will spear the turtle. I will hide you, my beloved, forever in the cave of Malauea. Or, we will dwell together in the great ravine of Palawai, where we will eat the young of the uwau bird, and we will bake them in ki leaf with the sweet pala fern root. The ohelo berries of the mountains will refresh my love. We will drink of the cool waters of Mauna-lei. I will thatch a hut in the thicket of Kaohai for our resting-place, and we shall love on till the stars die."

The meles tell of their love in the Pulou ravine, where they caught the bright iiwi birds, and the scarlet apapani. Ah, what sweet joys in the banana groves of Waiakeakua, where the lovers saw naught so beautiful as themselves! But the "misty eyes" were soon to be made dim by weeping, and dimmer, till the drowning brine should close them forevermore.

[p. 183]

Makakehau left his love one day in the cave of Malauea while he went to the mountain spring to fill the water-gourds with sweet water. This cavern yawns at the base of the overhanging bluff that overtops the rock of Puupehe. The sea surges far within, but there is an inner space which the expert swimmer can reach, and where Puupehe had often rested and baked the honu, or sea turtle, for her absent lover.

This was the season for the kona, the terrific storm that comes up from the equator and hurls the ocean in increased volume upon the southern shores of the Hawaiian Islands. Makakehau beheld from the rock springs of Pulou the vanguard of a great kona,--scuds of rain and thick mist, rushing with a howling wind, across the valley of Palawai. He knew the storm would fill the cave with the sea and kill his love. He flung aside his calabashes of water and ran down the steep, then across the great valley and beyond its rim he rushed, through the buffetings of the storm, with an agonized heart, down the hill slope to the shore.

The sea was up indeed. The yeasty foam of mad surging waves whitened the shore. The thundering buffet of the charging billows chorused with the howl of the tempest. Ah! where should Misty Eyes find his love in this blinding storm? A rushing mountain of sea filled the mouth of Malauea, and the pent-up air hurled back the invading torrent with bubbling roar, blowing forth great streams of spray. This was a war of matter, a battle of the elements to thrill with pleasure the hearts of strong men. But with one's

[p. 184]

love in the seething gulf of the whirlpool, what would be to him the sublime cataract? What, to see amid the boiling foam the upturned face, and the dear, tender body of one's own and only poor dear love, all mangled? You might agonize on the brink; but Makakehau sprang into the dreadful pool and snatched his murdered bride from the jaws of an ocean grave.

The next day, fishermen heard the lamentation of Makakehau, and the women of the valley came down and wailed over Puupehe. They wrapped her in bright new kapa. They placed upon her garlands of the fragrant na-u (gardenia). They prepared her for burial, and were about to place her in the burial ground of Manele, but Makakehau prayed that he might be left alone one night more with his lost love. And he was left as he desired.

The next day no corpse nor weeping lover were to be I found, till after some search Makakehau was seen at work piling up stones on the top of the lone sea tower. The wondering people of Lanai looked on from the neighboring bluff, and some sailed around the base of the columnar rock in their canoes, still wondering, because they could see no way for him to ascend, for every face of the rock is perpendicular or overhanging. The old belief was, that some akua, kanekoa, or keawemauhili (deities), came at the cry of Makakehau and helped him with the dead girl to the top.

When Makakehau had finished his labors of placing his lost love in her grave and placed the last stone upon it, he stretched out his arms and wailed for Puupehe, thus:

[p. 185]

"Where are you O Puupehe?
 Are you in the cave of Malauea?
 Shall I bring you sweet water,
 The water of the mountain?
 Shall I bring the uwau,
 The pala, and the ohelo?
 Are you baking the honu
 And the red sweet hala?
 Shall I pound the kalo of Maui?
 Shall we dip in the gourd together?
 The bird and the fish are bitter,
 And the mountain water is sour.
 I shall drink it no more;
 I shall drink with Aipuhi,
 The great shark of Manele."

Ceasing his sad wail, Makakehau leaped from the rock into the boiling surge at its base, where his body was crushed in the breakers. The people who beheld the sad scene secured the mangled corpse and buried it with respect in the kupapau of Manele.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 186]

  

XVII

  

AI KANAKA

  

A LEGEND OF MOLOKAI

  

REV. A. O. FORBES

ON the leeward side of the island of Molokai, a little to the east of Kaluaaha lies the beautiful valley of Mapulehu, at the mouth of which is located the heiau, or temple, of Iliiliopae, which was erected by direction of Ku-pa, the Moi, to look directly out upon the harbor of Ai-Kanaka, now known as Pukoo. At the time of its construction, centuries ago, Kupa was the Moi, or sovereign, of the district embracing the Ahupuaas, or land divisions, of Mapulehu and Kaluaaha, and he had his residence in this heiau which was built by him and famed as the largest throughout the whole Hawaiian group.

Kupa had a priest named Kamalo, who resided at Kaluaaha. This priest had two boys, embodiments of mischief, who one day while the King was absent on a fishing expedition, took the opportunity to visit his house at the heiau. Finding there the pahu kaeke [*1]

[p. 187]

belonging to the temple, they commenced drumming on it.

Some evil-minded persons heard Kamalo's boys drumming on the Kaeke and immediately went and told Kupa that the priest's children were reviling him in the grossest manner on his own drum. This so enraged the King that he ordered his servants to put them to death. Forthwith they were seized and murdered; whereupon Kamalo, their father, set about to secure revenge on the King.

Taking with him a black pig as a present, he started forth to enlist the sympathy and services of the celebrated seer, or wizard, Lanikaula, living some twelve miles distant at the eastern end of Molokai. On the way thither, at the village of Honouli, Kamalo met a man the lower half of whose body had been bitten off by a shark, and who promised to avenge him provided he would slay some man and bring him the lower half of his body to replace his own. But Kamalo, putting no credence in such an offer, pressed on to the sacred grove of Lanikaula. Upon arrival there Lanikaula listened to his grievances but could do nothing for him. He directed him, however, to another prophet, named Kaneakama, at the west end of the island, forty miles distant. Poor Kamalo picked up his pig and travelled back again, past his own home, down the coast to Palaau. Meeting with Kaneakama the prophet directed him to the heiau of Puukahi, at the foot of the pali, or precipice, of Kalaupapa, on the

[p. 188]

windward side of the island, where he would find the priest Kahiwakaapuu, who was a kahu, or steward, of Kauhuhu, the shark god. Once more the poor man shouldered his pig, wended his way up the long ascent of the hills of Kalae to the pali of Kalaupapa, descending which he presented himself before Kahiwakaapuu, and pleaded his cause. He was again directed to go still farther along the windward side of the island till he should come to the Ana puhi (eel's cave), a singular cavern at sea level in the bold cliffs between the valleys of Waikolu and Pelekunu, where Kauhuhu, the shark god, dwelt, and to him he must apply. Upon this away went Kamalo and his pig. Arriving at the cave, he found there Waka and Moo, two kahus of the shark god. "Keep off! Keep off!" they shouted. "This place is kapu. No man can enter here, on penalty of death."

"Death or life," answered he, "it is all the same to me if I can only gain my revenge for my poor boys who have been killed." He then related his story, and his wanderings, adding that he had come to make his appeal to Kauhuhu and cared not for his own life.

"Well," said they to him, "Kauhuhu is away now fishing, but if he finds you here when he returns, our lives as well as yours will pay the forfeit. However, we will see what we can do to help you. We must hide you hereabouts, somewhere, and when he returns trust to circumstances to accomplish your purpose."

But they could find no place to hide him where he would be secure from the search of the god, except the rubbish pile where the offal and scrapings of taro were

[p. 189]

thrown. They therefore thrust him and his pig into the rubbish heap and covered them over with the taro peelings, enjoining him to keep perfectly still, and watch till he should see eight heavy breakers roll in successively from the sea. He then would know that Kauhuhu was returning from his fishing expedition.

Accordingly, after waiting a while, the eight heavy rollers appeared, breaking successively against the rocks; and sure enough, as the eighth dissolved into foam, the great shark god came ashore. Immediately assuming human form, he began snuffing about the place, and addressing Waka and Moo, his kahus, said to them, "There is a man here." They strenuously denied the charge and protested against the possibility of their allowing such a desecration of the premises. But he was not satisfied. He insisted that there was a man somewhere about, saying, "I smell him, and if I find him you are dead men; if not, you escape." He examined the premises over and over again, never suspecting the rubbish heap, and was about giving up the search when, unfortunately, Kamalo's pig sent forth a squeal which revealed the poor fellow's hiding-place.

Now came the dread moment. The enraged Kauhuhu seized Kamalo with both hands and, lifting him up with the intention of swallowing him, according to his shark instinct, had already inserted the victim's head and shoulders into his mouth before he could speak.

"O Kauhuhu, before you eat me, hear my petition; then do as you like."

"Well for you that you spoke as you did,"

[p. 190]

answered Kauhuhu, setting him down again on the ground. "Now, what have you to say? Be quick about it."

Kamalo then rehearsed his grievances and his travels in search for revenge, and presented his pig to the god.

Compassion arose in the breast of Kauhuhu, and he said, "Had you come for any other purpose I would have eaten you, but as your cause is a sacred one I espouse it, and will revenge it on Kupa the King. You must, however, do all that I tell you. Return to the heiau of Puukahi, at the foot of the pali, and take the priest Kahiwakaapuu on your back, and carry him up the pali over to the other side of the island, all the way to your home at Kaluaaha. Erect a sacred fence all around your dwelling-place, and surround it with the sacred flags of white kapa. Collect black hogs by the lau (four hundred), red fish by the lau, white fowls by the lau, and bide my coming. Wait and watch till you see a small cloud the size of a man's hand arise, white as snow, over the island of Lanai. That cloud will enlarge as it makes its way across the channel against the wind until it rests on the mountain peaks of Molokai back of Mapulehu Valley. Then a rainbow will span the valley from side to side, whereby will know that I am there, and that your time of revenge has come. Go now, and remember that you are the only man who ever ventured into the sacred precincts of the great Kauhuhu and returned alive."

Kamalo returned with a joyful heart and performed all that had been commanded him. He built the sacred fence around his dwelling; surrounded the

[p. 191]

inclosure with sacred flags of white kapa; gathered together black hogs, red fish, and white fowls, each by the lau, as directed, with other articles sacred to the gods, such as cocoanuts and white kapas, and then sat himself down to watch for the promised signs of his revenge. Day after day passed until they multiplied into weeks, and the weeks began to run into months.

Finally, one day, the promised sign appeared. The snow white speck of cloud, no bigger than a man's hand, arose over the mountains of Lanai and made its way across the stormy channel in the face of the opposing gale, increasing as it came, until it settled in a majestic mass on the mountains at the head of Mapulehu Valley. Then appeared a splendid rainbow, proudly over-arching the valley, its ends resting on the high lands on either side. The wind began to blow; the rain began to pour, and shortly a furious storm came down the doomed valley, filling its bed from side to side with a mad rushing torrent, which, sweeping everything before it, spread out upon the belt of lowlands at the mouth of the valley, overwhelming Kupa and all his people in one common ruin, and washing them all into the sea, where they were devoured by the sharks. All were destroyed except Kamalo and his family, who were safe within their sacred inclosure, which the flood dared not touch, though it spread terror and ruin on every side of them. Wherefore the harbor of Pukoo, where this terrible event occurred, was long known as Ai Kanaka (man eater), and it has passed into a proverb among the inhabitants of

[p. 192]

that region that "when the rainbow spans Mapulehu Valley, then look out for the Waiakoloa,"--a furious storm of rain and wind which sometimes comes suddenly down that valley.

Footnotes

^186:1 A species of drum made out of a hollowed section of the trunk of a cocoanut tree and covered over one end with sharkskin. It was generally used in pairs, one larger than the other, somewhat after the idea of the bass and tenor drums of civilized nations. One of these drums was placed on either side of the performer, and the drumming was performed with both hands by tapping with the fingers. By peculiar variations of the [p. 187] drumming, known only to the initiated, the performer could drum out whatever he wished to express in such a way, it is alleged, as to be intelligible to initiated listeners without uttering a single syllable with the voice.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

XVIII

  

KALIUWAA

  

SCENE OF THE DEMIGOD KAMAPUAA'S ESCAPE FROM OLOPANA

  

FROM "THE HAWAIIAN SPECTATOR"

A FEW miles east of Laie, on the windward side of the island of Oahu, are situated the valley and falls of Kaliuwaa, noted as one of the most beautiful and romantic spots of the island, and famed in tradition as possessing more than local interest.

The valley runs back some two miles, terminating abruptly at the foot of the precipitous chain of mountains which runs nearly the whole length of the windward side of Oahu, except for a narrow gorge which affords a channel for a fine brook that descends with considerable regularity to a level with the sea. Leaving his horse at the termination of the valley and entering this narrow pass of not over fifty or sixty feet in width, the traveller winds his way along, crossing and recrossing the stream several times, till he seems to be entering into the very mountain. The walls on each side are of solid rock, from two hundred to three hundred, and in some places four hundred feet high, directly overhead, leaving but a narrow strip of sky visible.

Following up the stream for about a quarter of a

[p. 194]

mile, one's attention is directed by the guide to a curiosity called by the natives a waa (canoe). Turning to the right, one follows up a dry channel of what once must have been a considerable stream, to the distance of fifty yards from the present stream. Here one is stopped by a wall of solid rock rising perpendicularly before one to the height of some two hundred feet, and down which the whole stream must have descended in a beautiful fall. This perpendicular wall is worn in by the former action of the water in the shape of a gouge, and in the most perfect manner; and as one looks upon it in all its grandeur, but without the presence of the cause by which it was formed, he can scarcely divest his mind of the impression that he is gazing upon some stupendous work of art.

Returning to the present brook, we again pursued our way toward the fall, but had not advanced far before we arrived at another, on the left hand side of the brook, similar in many respects, but much larger and higher than the one above mentioned. The forming agent cannot be mistaken, when a careful survey is made of either of these stupendous perpendicular troughs. The span is considerably wider at the bottom than at the top, this result being produced by the spreading of the sheet of water as it was precipitated from the dizzy height above. The breadth of this one is about twenty feet at the bottom, and its depth about fourteen feet. But its depth and span gradually diminish from the bottom to the top, and the rock is worn as smooth as if chiselled by the hand of an artist. Moss and small plants have sprung out from the little

[p. 195]

soil that has accumulated in the crevices, but not enough to conceal the rock from observation. It would be an object worth the toil to discover what has turned the stream from its original channel.

Leaving this singular curiosity, we pursued our way a few yards farther, when we arrived at the fall. This is from eighty to one hundred feet high, and the water is compressed into a very narrow space just where it breaks forth from the rock above. It is quite a pretty sheet of water when the stream is high. We learned from the natives that there are two falls above this, both of which are shut out from the view from below, by a sudden turn in the course of the stream. The perpendicular height of each is said to be much greater than of the one we saw. The upper one is visible from the road on the seashore, which is more than two miles distant, and, judging from information obtained, must be between two and three hundred feet high. The impossibility of climbing the perpendicular banks from below deprived us of the pleasure of farther ascending the stream toward its source. This can be done only by commencing at the plain and following up one of the lateral ridges. This would itself be a laborious and fatiguing task, as the way would be obstructed by a thick growth of trees and tangled underbrush.

The path leading to this fall is full of interest to any one who loves to study nature. From where we leave our horses at the head of the valley and commence entering the mountain, every step presents new and peculiar beauties. The most luxuriant verdure

[p. 196]

clothes the ground, and in some places the beautifully burnished leaves of the ohia, or native apple-tree (Eugenia malaccensis), almost exclude the few rays of light that find their way down into this secluded nook. A little farther on, and the graceful bamboo sends up its slender stalk to a great height, mingling its dark, glossy foliage with the silvery leaves of the kukui, or candle-nut (Aleurites moluccana); these together form a striking contrast to the black walls which rise in such sullen grandeur on each side.

Nor is the beauty of the spot confined to the luxuriant verdure, or the stupendous walls and beetling crags. The stream itself is beautiful. From the basin at the falls to the lowest point at which we observed it, every succeeding step presents a delightful change. Here, its partially confined waters burst forth with considerable force, and struggle on among the opposing rocks for some distance; there, collected in a little basin, its limpid waves, pure as the drops of dew from the womb of the morning, circle round in ceaseless eddies, until they get within the influence of the downward current, when away they whirl, with a gurgling, happy sound, as if joyous at being released from their temporary confinement. Again, an aged kukui, whose trunk is white with the moss of accumulated years, throws his broad boughs far over the stream that nourishes his vigorous roots, casting a meridian shadow upon the surface of the water, which is reflected back with singular distinctness from its mirrored bosom.

To every other gratification must be added the incomparable fragrance of the fresh wood, in perpetual

[p. 197]

life and vigor, which presents a freshness truly grateful to the senses. But it is in vain to think of conveying an adequate idea of a scene where the sublime is mingled with the beautiful, and the bold and striking with the delicate and sensitive; where every sense is gratified, the mind calmed, and the whole soul delighted.

Famed as this spot is for its natural scenic attractions, intimated in the foregoing description, its claim of distinction with Hawaiians is indelibly fixed by the traditions of ancient times, the narration of which, at this point, will assist the reader to understand the character of the native mind and throw some light also on the history of the Hawaiians.

Tradition in this locality deals largely with Kamapuaa, the famous demigod whose exploits figure prominently in the legends of the entire group. Summarized, the story is about as follows:

Kamapuaa, the fabulous being referred to, seems, according to the tradition, to have possessed the power of transforming himself into a hog, in which capacity he committed all manner of depredations upon the possessions of his neighbors. He having stolen some fowls belonging to Olopana, who was the King of Oahu, the latter, who was then living at Kaneohe, sent some of his men to secure the thief. They succeeded in capturing him, and having tied him fast with cords, were bearing him in triumph to the King, when, thinking they had carried the joke far enough, he burst the bands with which he was bound, and killed all the men except one, whom he permitted to

[p. 198]

convey the tidings to the King. This defeat so enraged the monarch that he determined to go in person with all his force, and either destroy his enemy, or drive him from his dominions. He accordingly, despising ease inglorious,

Waked up, with sound of conch and trumpet shell,
 The well-tried warriors of his native dell,

at whose head he sought his waiting enemy. Success attending the King's attack, his foe was driven from the field with great loss, and betook himself to the gorge of Kaliuwaa, which leads to the falls. Here the King thought he had him safe; and one would think so too, to look at the immense precipices that rise on each side, and the falls in front. But the sequel will show that he had a slippery fellow to deal with, at least when he chose to assume the character of a swine; for, being pushed to the upper end of the gorge near the falls, and seeing no other way of escape, he suddenly transformed himself into a hog, and, rearing upon his hind legs and leaning his back against the perpendicular precipice, thus afforded a very comfortable ladder upon which the remnant of his army ascended and made their escape from the vengeance of the King. Possessing such powers, it is easy to see how he could follow the example of his soldiers and make his own escape. The smooth channels before described are said to have been made by him on these occasions; for he was more than once caught in the same predicament. Old natives still believe that they are the prints of his back; and they account for a very

[p. 199]

natural phenomenon, by bringing to their aid this most natural and foolish superstition.

Many objects in the neighborhood are identified with this remarkable personage, such as a large rock to which he was tied, a wide place in the brook where he used to drink, and a number of trees he is said to have planted. Many other things respecting him are current, but as they do not relate to the matter in hand, it will perhaps suffice to say, in conclusion, that tradition further asserts that Kamapuaa conquered the volcano, when Pele its goddess became his wife, and that they afterward lived together in harmony. That is the reason why there are no more islands formed, or very extensive eruptions in these later days, as boiling lava was the most potent weapon she used in fighting her enemies, throwing out such quantities as greatly to increase the size of the islands, and even to form new ones.

Visitors to the falls, even to this day, meet with evidences of the superstitious awe in which the locality is held by the natives. A party who recently visited the spot states that when they reached the falls they were instructed to make an offering to the presiding goddess. This was done in true Hawaiian style; they built a tiny pile of stones on one or two large leaves, and so made themselves safe from falling stones, which otherwise would assuredly have struck them.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 200]

  

XIX

  

BATTLE OF THE OWLS

  

JOS. M. POEPOE

THE following is a fair specimen of the animal myths current in ancient Hawaii, and illustrates the place held by the owl in Hawaiian mythology.

There lived a man named Kapoi, at Kahehuna, in Honolulu, who went one day to Kewalo to get some thatching for his house. On his way back he found some owl's eggs, which he gathered together and brought home with him. In the evening he wrapped them in ti leaves and was about to roast them in hot ashes, when an owl perched on the fence which surrounded his house and called out to him, "O Kapoi, give me my eggs!"

Kapoi asked the owl, "How many eggs had you?"

"Seven eggs," replied the owl.

Kapoi then said, "Well, I wish to roast these eggs for my supper."

The owl asked the second time for its eggs, and was answered by Kapoi in the same manner. Then said the owl, "O heartless Kapoi! why don't you take pity on me? Give me my eggs."

Kapoi then told the owl to come and take them. The owl, having got the eggs, told Kapoi to build up a heiau, or temple, and instructed him to make an

[p. 201]

altar and call the temple by the name of Manua. Kapoi built the temple as directed; set kapu days for its dedication, and placed the customary sacrifice on the altar.

News spread to the hearing of Kakuihewa, who was then King of Oahu, living at the time at Waikiki, that a certain man had kapued certain days for his heiau, and had already dedicated it. This King had made a law that whoever among his people should erect a heiau and kapu the same before the King had his temple kapued, that man should pay the penalty of death. Kapoi was thereupon seized, by the King's orders, and led to the heiau of Kupalaha, at Waikiki.

That same day, the owl that had told Kapoi to erect a temple gathered all the owls from Lanai, Maui, Molokai, and Hawaii to one place at Kalapueo. [*1] All those from the Koolau districts were assembled at Kanoniakapueo, [*2] and those from Kauai and Niihau at Pueohulunui, near Moanalua.

It was decided by the King that Kapoi should be put to death on the day of Kane. [*3] When that day came, at daybreak the owls left their places of rendezvous and covered the whole sky over Honolulu; and as the King's servants seized Kapoi to put him to death, the owls flew at them, pecking them with their beaks and scratching them with their claws. Then and there was fought the battle between Kakuihewa's people and the owls. At last the owls conquered, and

[p. 202]

[paragraph continues] Kapoi was released, the King acknowledging that his Akua (god) was a powerful one. From that time the owl has been recognized as one of the many deities venerated by the Hawaiian people.

Footnotes

^201:1 Situate beyond Diamond Head.

^201:2 In Nuuanu Valley.

^201:3 When the moon is twenty-seven days old.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 203]

  

XX

  

THIS LAND IS THE SEA'S

  

TRADITIONAL ACCOUNT OF AN ANCIENT HAWAIIAN PROPHECY

  

TRANSLATED FROM MOKE MANU BY THOS. G. THRUM

IT is stated in the history of Kaopulupulu that he was famed among the kahunas of the island of Oahu for his power and wisdom in the exercise of his profession, and was known throughout the land as a leader among the priests. His place of residence was at Waimea, between Koolauloa and Waialua, Oahu. There he married, and there was born to him a son whom he named Kahulupue, and whom he instructed during his youth in all priestly vocations.

In after years when Kumahana, brother of Kahahana of Maui, became the governing chief (alii aimoku) of Oahu, Kahulupue was chosen by him as his priest. This chief did evil unto his subjects, seizing their property and beheading and maiming many with the leiomano (shark's tooth weapon) and pahoa (dagger), without provocation, so that he became a reproach to his people. From such treatment Kahulupue endeavored to dissuade him, assuring him that such a course would fail to win their support and obedience, whereas the supplying of food and fish, with covering

[p. 204]

for the body, and malos, would insure their affectionate regard. The day of the people was near, for the time of conflict was approaching when he would meet the enemy. But these counsels of Kahulupue were disregarded, so he returned to his father at Waimea.

Not long thereafter this chief Kumahana was cast out and rejected by the lesser chiefs and people, and under cover of night he escaped by canoe to Molokai, where he was ignored and became lost to further history in consequence of his wrong-doings.

When Kahekili, King of Maui, heard of the stealthy flight of the governing chief of Oahu, he placed the young prince Kahahana, his foster-son, as ruler over Oahu in the place of his deposed relative, Kumahana. This occurred about the year 1773, and Kahahana took with him as his intimate friend and companion one Alapai. Kahahana chose as his place of residence the shade of the kou and cocoanut trees of Ulukou, Waikiki, where also gathered together the chiefs of the island to discuss and consider questions of state.

The new ruler being of fine and stalwart form and handsome appearance, the chiefs and common people maintained that his fame in this respect induced a celebrated chieftainess of Kauai, named Kekuapoi, to voyage hither. Her history, it is said, showed that she alone excelled in maiden charm and beauty; she was handsome beyond all other chiefesses from Hawaii to Kauai, as "the third brightness of the sun" (he ekolu ula o ka la). In consequence, Kahahana took her as his wife, she being own sister to Kekuamanoha.

At this time the thought occurred to the King to

[p. 205]

inquire through the chiefs of Oahu of the whereabouts of Kaopulupulu, the celebrated priest, of whom he had heard through Kahekili, King of Maui. In reply to this inquiry of Kahahana, the chiefs told him that his place of residence was at Waimea, whereupon a messenger was sent to bid him come up by order of the King. When the messenger reached Kaopulupulu he delivered the royal order. Upon the priest hearing this word of the King he assented thereto, with this reply to the messenger: "You return first and tell him that on the morning after the fourteenth night of the moon (po o akua), I will reach the place of the King."

At the end of the conference the messenger returned and stood before Kahahana and revealed the words of Kaopulupulu; and the King waited for the time of his arrival.

It is true, Kaopulupulu made careful preparation for his future. Toward the time of his departure he was engaged in considering the good or evil of his approaching journey by the casting of lots, according to the rites of his profession. He foresaw thereby the purpose of the King in summoning him to dwell at court. He therefore admonished his son to attend to all the rites and duties of the priesthood as he had been taught, and to care for his mother and relatives.

At early dawn Kaopulupulu arose and partook of food till satisfied, after which he prepared himself for the journey before him. After he had given his farewell greetings to his household he seized his bundle and, taking a cocoanut fan in his hand, set out toward Punanue, where was a temple (heiau) for priests only,

[p. 206]

called Kahokuwelowelo. This was crown land at Waialua in ancient times. Entering the temple he prayed for success in his journey, after which he proceeded along the plains of Lauhulu till reaching the Anahulu stream, thence by Kemoo to Kukaniloko, the shelter of whose prominent rock the chiefesses of Oahu were wont to choose for their place of confinement.

Leaving this place he came to Kalakoa, where Kekiopilo the prophet priest lived and died, and the scene of his vision at high noon when he prophesied of the coming of foreigners with a strange language. Here he stopped and rested with some of the people, and ate food with them, after which he journeyed on by way of Waipio by the ancient path of that time till he passed Ewa and reached Kapukaki.

The sun was well up when he reached the water of Lapakea, so he hastened his steps in ascending Kauwalua, at Moanalua, and paused not till he came to the mouth of the Apuakehau stream at Waikiki. Proceeding along the sand at this place he was discerned by the retainers of the King and greeted with the shout, "Here comes the priest Kaopulupulu."

When the King heard this he was exceedingly pleased (pihoihoi loa) at the time, and on the priest's meeting with King Kahahana he welcomed Kaopulupulu with loud rejoicing.

Without delay the King set apart a house wherein to meet and discuss with the priest those things he had in mind, and in the consideration of questions from first to last, Kaopulupulu replied with great wisdom in accordance with his knowledge of his profession.

[p. 207]

[paragraph continues] At this time of their conference he sat within the doorway of the house, and the sun was near its setting. As he turned to observe this he gazed out into the sky and noticing the gathering short clouds (ao poko) in the heavens, he exclaimed:

"O heaven, the road is broad for the King, it is full of chiefs and people; narrow is my path, that of the kahuna; you will not be able to find it, O King. Even now the short clouds reveal to me the manner of your reign; it will not be many days. Should you heed my words, O King, you will live to gray hair. But you will be the king to slay me and my child."

At these words of the priest the King meditated seriously for some time, then spoke as follows: "Why should my days be short, and why should your death be by me, the King?"

Kaopulupulu replied: "O King, let us look into the future. Should you die, O King, the lands will be desolate; but for me, the kahuna, the name will live on from one generation to another; but my death will be before thine, and when I am up on the heaven-feared altar then my words will gnaw thee, O King, and the rains and the sun will bear witness."

These courageous words of Kaopulupulu, spoken in the presence of Kahahana without fear, and regardless of the dignity and majesty of the King, were uttered because of the certainty that the time would come when his words would be carried into effect. The King remained quiet without saying a word, keeping his thoughts to himself.

After this conference the King took Kaopulupulu

[p. 208]

to be his priest, and in course of time he became also an intimate companion, in constant attendance upon the King, and counselled him in the care of his subjects, old and young, in all that pertained to their welfare. The King regarded his words, and in their I circuit of the island together they found the people contented and holding their ruler in high esteem. But at the end of three years the King attempted some wrong to certain of his subjects like unto that of his deposed predecessor. The priest remonstrated with him continually, but he would not regard his counsel; therefore, Kaopulupulu left King Kahahana and returned to his land at Waimea and at once tattooed his knees. This was done as a sign that the King had turned a deaf ear to his admonitions.

When several days had passed, rumors among certain people of Waialua reached the priest that he was to be summoned to appear before the King in consequence of this act, which had greatly angered his august lord. Kahahana had gone to reside at Waianae, and from there shortly afterward he sent messengers to fetch Kaopulupulu and his son Kahulupue from Waimea.

In the early morning of the day of the messenger's arrival, a rainbow stood directly in the doorway of Kaopulupulu's house, and he asked of his god its meaning; but his prayer was broken (ua haki ka pule). This boded him ill; therefore he called to his son to stand in prayer; but the result was the same. Then he said, "This augurs of the day of death; see! the rising up of,a man in the pass of Hapuu, putting on

[p. 209]

his kapa with its knot fastening on the left side of the neck, which means that he is bringing a death message."

Shortly after the priest had ended these words a man was indeed seen approaching along the mountain pass, with his kapa as indicated; and he came and stood before the door of their house and delivered the order of the King for them to go to Waianae, both him and his son.

The priest replied: "Return you first; we will follow later," and the messenger obeyed. When he had departed Kaopulupulu recalled to his son the words he had spoken before the advent of the messenger, and said: "Oh, where are you, my child? Go clothe the body; put on the malo; eat of the food till satisfied, and we will go as commanded by the King; but this journey will result in placing us on the altar (kau i ka lele). Fear not death. The name of an idler, if he be beaten to death, is not passed on to distinction."

At the end of these words of his father, Kahulupue wept for love of his relatives, though his father bid him to weep not for his family, because he, Kaopulupulu, saw the end that would befall the King, Kahahana, and his court of chiefs and retainers. Even at this time the voices of distress were heard among his family and their tears flowed, but Kaopulupulu looked on unmoved by their cries.

He then arose and, with his son, gave farewell greetings to their household, and set forth. In journeying they passed through Waialua, resting in the house of

[p. 210]

a kamaaina at Kawaihapai. In passing the night at this place Kahulupue slept not, but went out to examine the fishing canoes of that neighborhood. Finding a large one suitable for a voyage, he returned and awoke his father, that they might flee together that night to Kauai and dwell on the knoll of Kalalea. But Kaopulupulu declined the idea of flight. In the morning, ascending a hill, they turned and looked back over the sea-spray of Waialua to the swimming halas of Kahuku beyond. Love for the place of his birth so overcame Kaopulupulu for a time that his tears flowed for that he should see it no more.

Then they proceeded on their way till, passing Kaena Point, they reached the temple of Puaakanoe. At this sacred boundary Kaopulupulu said to his son, "Let us swim in the sea and touch along the coast of Makua." At one of their resting-places, journeying thus, he said, with direct truthfulness, as his words proved: "Where are you, my son? For this drenching of the high priests by the sea, seized will be the sacred lands (moo-kapu) from Waianae to Kualoa by the chief from the east."

As they were talking they beheld the King's men, approaching along the sand of Makua, and shortly afterward these men came before them and seized them and tied their hands behind their backs and took them to the place of King Kahahana at Puukea, Waianae, and put them, father and son, in a new grass hut unfinished of its ridge thatch, and tied them, the one to the end post (pouhana) and the other to the, corner post (poumanu) of the house.

[p. 211]

At the time of the imprisonment of the priest and his son in this new house Kaopulupulu spake aloud, without fear of dire consequences, so that the King and all his men heard him, as follows: "Here I am with my son in this new unfinished house; so will be unfinished the reign of the King that slays us." At this saying Kahahana, the King, was very angry.

Throughout that day and the night following, till the sun was high with warmth, the King was directing his soldiers to seize Kahulupue first and put him to death. Obeying the orders of the King, they took Kahulupue just outside of the house and stabbed at his eyes with laumake spears and stoned him with stones before the eyes of his father, with merciless cruelty. These things, though done by the soldiers, were dodged by Kahulupue, and the priest, seeing the King had no thought of regard for his child, spoke up with priestly authority, as follows: "Be strong of breath, my son, till the body touch the water, for the land indeed is the sea's."

When Kahulupue heard the voice of his father telling him to flee to the sea, he turned toward the shore in obedience to these last words to him, because of the attack by the soldiers of the King. As he ran, he was struck in the back by a spear, but he persevered and leaped into the sea at Malae and was drowned, his blood discoloring the water. His dead body was taken and placed up in the temple at Puehuehu. After the kapu days therefore the King, with his chiefs and soldiers, moved to Puuloa, Ewa, bringing with them the priest Kaopulupulu, and after some days

[p. 212]

he was brought before the King by the soldiers, and without groans for his injuries was slain in the King's presence. But he spoke fearlessly of the vengeance that would fall upon the King in consequence of his death, and during their murderous attack upon him proclaimed with his dying breath: "You, O King, that kill me here at Puuloa, the time is near when a direct death will be yours. Above here in this land, and the spot where my lifeless body will be borne and placed high on the altar for my flesh to decay and slip to the earth, shall be the burial place of chiefs and people hereafter, and it shall be called 'the royal sand of the mistaken'; there will you be placed in the temple." At the end of these words of Kaopulupulu his spirit took flight, and his body was left for mockery and abuse, as had been that of his son in the sea of Malae, at Waianae.

After a while the body of the priest was placed on a double canoe and brought to Waikiki and placed high in the cocoanut trees at Kukaeunahi, the place of the temple, for several ten-day periods (he mau anahulu) without decomposition and falling off of the flesh to the sands of Waikiki.

When King Kahekili of Maui heard of the death of the priest Kaopulupulu by Kahahana, he sent some of his men thither by canoe, who landed at Waimanalo, Koolau, where, as spies, they learned from the people respecting Kaopulupulu and his death, with that of his son; therefore they returned and told the King the truth of these reports, at which the affection of Kahekili welled up for the dead priest, and he condemned

[p. 213]

the King he had established. Coming with an army from Maui, he landed at Waikiki without meeting Kahahana, and took back the government of Oahu under his own kingship. The chiefs and people of Oahu all joined under Kahekili, for Kahahana had been a chief of wrong-doing. This was the first sea of Kaopulupulu in accordance with his prophetic utterance to his son, "This land is the sea's."

Upon the arrival here at Oahu of Kahekili, Kahahana fled, with his wife Kekuapoi, and friend Alapai, and hid in the shrubbery of the hills. They went to Aliomanu, Moanalua, to a place called Kinimakalehua; then moved along to Keanapuaa and Kepookala, at the lochs of Puuloa, and from there to upper Waipio; thence to Wahiawa, Helemano, and on to Lihue; thence they came to Poohilo, at Honouliuli, where they first showed themselves to the people and submitted themselves to their care.

While they were living there, report thereof was made to Kahekili, the King, who thereupon sent Kekuamanoha, elder brother of Kekuapoi, the wife of Kahahana, with men in double canoes from Waikiki, landing first at Kupahu, Hanapouli, Waipio, with instructions to capture and put to death Kahahana, as also his friend Alapai, but to save alive Kekuapoi. When the canoes touched at Hanapouli, they proceeded thence to Waikele and Hoaeae, and from there to Poohilo, Honouliuli, where they met in conference with Kahahana and his party. At the close of the day Kekuamanoha sought by enticing words to induce his brother-in-law to go up with him and see the father

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] King and be assured of no death condemnation, and by skilled flattery he induced Kahahana to consent to his proposition; whereupon preparation was made for the return. On the following morning, coming along and reaching the plains of Hoaeae, they fell upon and slew Kahahana and Alapai there, and bore their lifeless bodies to Halaulani, Waipio, where they were placed in the canoes and brought up to Waikiki and placed up in the cocoanut trees by King Kahekili and his priests from Maui, as Kaopulupulu had been. Thus was fulfilled the famous saying of the Oahu priest in all its truthfulness.

According to the writings of S. M. Kamakau and David Malo, recognized authorities, the thought of Kaopulupulu as expressed to his son Kahulupue, "This land is the sea's," was in keeping with the famous prophetic vision of Kekiopilo that "the foreigners possess the land," as the people of Hawaii now realize. The weighty thought of this narration and the application of the saying of Kaopulupulu to this time of enlightenment are frequent with certain leaders of thought among the people, as shown in their papers.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

  

XXI

  

KU-ULA, THE FISH GOD OF HAWAII

  

TRANSLATED FROM MOKE MANU BY M. K. NAKUINA

THE story of Ku-ula, considered by ancient Hawaiians as the deity presiding over and controlling the fish of the sea,--a story still believed by many of them to-day,--is translated and somewhat condensed from an account prepared by a recognized legendary bard of these islands. The name of Ku-ula is known from the ancient times on each of the islands of the Hawaiian group, and the writer gives the Maui version as transmitted through the old people of that island.

Ku-ula had a human body, and was possessed with wonderful or miraculous power (mana kupua) in directing, controlling, and influencing all fish of the sea, at will.

Leho-ula, in the land of Aleamai, Hana, Maui, is where Ku-ula and Hina-pu-ku-ia lived. Nothing is known of their parents, but tradition deals with Ku-ula, his wife, their son Ai-ai, and Ku-ula-uka, a younger brother of Ku-ula. These lived together for a time at Leho-ula, and then the brothers divided their work between them, Ku-ula-uka choosing farm work, or work pertaining to the land, from the seashore to the mountain-top, while Ku-ula--known also

[p. 216]

as Ku-ula-kai--chose to be a fisherman, with such other work as pertained to the sea, from the pebbly shore to ocean depths. After this division Ku-ula-uka went up in the mountains to live, and met a woman known as La-ea--called also Hina-ulu-ohia--a sister of Hina-pu-ku-ia, Ku-ula's wife. These sisters had three brothers, named Moku-ha-lii, Kupa-ai-kee, and Ku-pulu-pulu-i-ka-na-hele. This trio were called by the old people the gods of the canoe-making priests--"Na akua aumakua o ka poe kahuna kalai waa."

While Ku-ula and his wife were living at Leho-ula he devoted all his time to his chosen vocation, fishing. His first work was to construct a fish-pond handy to his house but near to the shore where the surf breaks, and this pond he stocked with all kinds of fish. Upon a rocky platform he also built a house to be sacred for the fishing kapu which he called by his own name, Ku-ula.

It is asserted that when Ku-ula made all these preparations he believed in the existence of a God who had supreme power over all things. That is why he prepared this place wherein to make his offerings of the first fish caught by him to the fish god. From this observance of Ku-ula all the fish were tractable (laka loa) unto him; all he had to do was to say the word, and the fish would appear. This was reported all over Hana and when Kamohoalii the King (who was then living at Wananalua, the land on which Kauiki Hill stands) heard of it, he appointed Ku-ula to be his head fisherman. Through this pond, which was well stocked with all kinds of fish, the King's

[p. 217]

table was regularly supplied with all rare varieties, whether in or out of season. Ku-ula was his mainstay for fish-food and was consequently held in high esteem by Kamohoalii, and they lived without disagreement of any kind between them for many years.

During this period the wife of Ku-ula gave birth to a son, whom they called Aiai-a-Ku-ula (Aiai of Ku-ula). The child was properly brought up according to the usage of those days, and when he was old enough to care for himself an unusual event occurred.

A large puhi (eel), called Koona, lived at Wailau, on the windward side of the island of Molokai. This eel was deified and prayed to by the people of that place, and they never tired telling of the mighty things their god did, one of which was that a big shark came to Wailau and gave it battle, and during the fight the puhi caused a part of the rocky cliff to fall upon the shark, which killed it. A cave was thus formed, with a depth of about five fathoms; and that large opening is there to this day, situate a little above the sea and close to the rocky fort where lived the well known Kapepeekauila. This puhi then left its own place and came and lived in a cave in the sea near Aleamai, called Kapukaulua, some distance out from the Alau rocks. It came to break and rob the pond that Ku-ula had built and stocked with fish of various kinds and colors, as known to-day.

Ku-ula was much surprised on discovering his pond stock disappearing, so he watched day and night, and at last, about daybreak, he saw a large eel come in through the makai (seaward) wall of the pond. When

[p. 218]

he saw this he knew that it was the cause of the loss of his fish, and was devising a way to catch and kill it; but on consulting with his wife they decided to leave the matter to their son Aiai, for him to use his own judgment as to the means by which the thief might be captured and killed. When Aiai was told of it he sent word to all the people of Aleamai and Haneoo to make ili hau ropes several lau fathoms in length; and when all was ready a number of the people went out with it in two canoes, one each from the two places, with Aiai-a-Ku-ula in one of them. He put two large stones in his canoe and held in his hands a fisherman's gourd (hokeo), in which was a large fishhook called manaiaakalani.

When the canoes had proceeded far out he located his position by landmarks; and looking down into the sea, and finding the right place, he told the paddlers to cease paddling. Standing up in the canoe and taking one of the stones in his hands he dived into the sea. Its weight took him down rapidly to the bottom, where he saw a big cave opening right before him, with a number of fishes scurrying about the entrance, such as uluas and other deep sea varieties. Feeling assured thereby that the puhi was within, he arose to the surface and got into his canoe. Resting for a moment, he then opened the gourd and took out the hook manaiaakalani and tied the hau rope to it. He also picked up a long stick and placed at the end of it the hook, baited with a preparation of cocoanut and other substances attractive to fishes. Before taking his second dive he arranged with those on the canoe as to the signs to them of his

[p. 219]

success. Saying this, he picked up the other stone and dived down again into the sea; then, proceeding to the cave, he placed the hook in it, at the same time murmuring a few incantations in the name of his parents. When he knew that the puhi was hooked he signalled, as planned, to tell those on the canoe of his success. In a short while he came to the surface, and entering the canoe they all returned to shore, trailing the rope behind. He told those in the canoe from Haneoo to paddle thither and to Hamoa, and to tell all the people to pull the puhi; like instructions were given those on the Aleamai canoe for their people. The two canoes set forth on their courses to the landings, keeping in mind Aiai's instructions, which were duly carried out by the people of the two places; and there were many for the work.

Then Aiai ascended Kaiwiopele Hill and motioned to the people of both places to pull the ropes attached to the hook on the mouth of the puhi. It was said that the Aleamai people won the victory over the much greater number from the other places, by landing the puhi on the pahoehoe stones at Lehoula. The people endeavored to kill the prize, but without success till Aiai came and threw three ala stones at it and killed it. The head was cut off and cooked in the imu (oven). The bones of its jaw, with the mouth wide open, are seen to this day at a place near the shore, washed by the waves,--the rock formation at a short distance having such a resemblance.

Residents of the place state that all ala stones near where the imu was made in which the puhi was baked

[p. 220]

do not crack when heated, as they do elsewhere, because of the imu heating of that time. It is so even to this day. The backbone (iwi kuamoo) of this puhi is still lying on the pahoehoe where Aiai killed it with the three ala stones,--the rocky formation, about thirty feet in length, exactly resembling the backbone of an eel. The killing of this puhi by Aiai gave him fame among the people of Hana. Its capture was the young lad's first attempt to follow his father's vocation, and his knowledge was a surprise to the people.

After this event a man came over from Wailau, Molokai, who was a kahu (keeper) of the puhi. He dreamed one night that he saw its spirit, which told him that his aumakua (god) had been killed at Hana, so he came to see with his own eyes where this had occurred. Arriving at Wananalua he was befriended by one of the retainers of Kamohoalii, the King of Hana, and lived there a long time serving under him, during which time he learned the story of how the puhi had been caught and killed by Aiai, the son of Ku-ula and Hinapukuia, whereupon he sought to accomplish their death.

Considering a plan of action, he went one day to Ku-ula, without orders, and told him that the King had sent him for fish for the King. Ku-ula gave him but one fish, an ulua, with a warning direction, saying, "Go back to the King and tell him to cut off the head of the fish and cook it in the imu, and the flesh of its body cut up and salt and dry in the sun, for 'this is Hana the aupehu land; Hana of the scarce fish; the fish Kama; the fish of Lanakila.' (Eia o Hana la he aina 

[p. 221]

aupehu; o Hana keia i ka ia iki; ka ia o Kama; ka ia o Lanakila)."

When the man returned to the King and gave him the fish, the King asked: "Who gave it to you?" and the man answered:

"Ku-ula."

Then it came into his head that this was his chance for revenge, so he told the King what Ku-ula had said but not in the same way, saying: "Your head fisherman told me to come back and tell you that your head should be cut from your body and cooked in the imu, and the flesh of your body should be cut up and salted and dried in the sun."

The King on hearing this message was so angered with Ku-ula, his head fisherman, that he told the man to go and tell all his konohikis (head men of lands with others under them) and people, to go up in the mountains and gather immediately plenty of firewood and place it around Ku-ula's house, for he and his wife and child should be burned up.

This order of the King was carried out by the konohikis and people of all his lands except those of Aleamai. These latter did not obey this order of the King, for Ku-ula had always lived peaceably among them. There were days when they had no fish, and he had supplied them freely.

When Ku-ula and his wife saw the people of Hana bringing firewood and placing it around the house they knew it foreboded trouble; so Ku-ula went to a place where taro, potatoes, bananas, cane, and some gourds were growing. Seeing three dry gourds on the vine,

[p. 222]

he asked the owner for them and was told to take them. These he took to his house and discussed with his wife the evil day to come, and told Aiai that their house would be burned and their bodies too, but not to fear death nor trouble himself about it when the people came to shut them in.

After some thinking Ku-ula remembered his giving the ulua to the King's retainer and felt that he was the party to blame for this action of the King's people. He had suspected it before, but now felt sure; therefore he turned to his son and said: "Our child, Aiai-a-Ku-ula, if our house is burned, and our bodies too, you must look sharp for the smoke when it goes straight up to the hill of Kaiwiopele. That will be your way out of this trouble, and you must follow it till you find a cave where you will live. You must take this hook called manaiaakalani with you; also this fish-pearl (pa hi aku), called Kahuoi; this shell called lehoula, and this small sandstone from which I got the name they call me, Ku-ula-au-a-Ku-ulakai. It is the progenitor of all the fish in the sea. You will be the one to make all the ku-ulas from this time forth, and have charge also of making all the fishing stations (ko'a lawaia) in the sea throughout the islands. Your name shall be perpetuated and those of your parents also, through all generations to come, and I hereby confer upon you all my power and knowledge. Whenever you desire anything call, or ask, in our names, and we will grant it. We will stand up and go forth from here into the sea and abide there forever; and you, our child, shall live on the land here without worrying about anything that

[p. 223]

may happen to you. You will have power to punish with death all those who have helped to burn us and our house. Whether it be king or people, they must die; therefore let us calmly await the calamity that is to befall us."

All these instructions Aiai consented to carry out from first to last, as a dutiful son.

After Ku-ula's instructions to his son, consequent upon the manifestations of coming trouble, the King's people came one day and caught them and tied their hands behind their backs, the evil-doer from Molokai being there to aid in executing the cruel orders of Kamohoalii resulting from his deceitful story. Upon being taken into their house Ku-ula was tied to the end post of the ridge pole (pouhana), the wife was tied to the middle post (kai waena) of the house, and the boy, Aiai, was tied to one of the corner posts (pou o manu). Upon fastening them in this manner the people went out of the house and barricaded the doorway with wood, which they then set on fire. Before the fire was lit, the ropes with which the victims were tied dropped off from their hands. Men, women, and children looked on at the burning house with deep pity for those within, and tears were streaming down their cheeks as they remembered the kindness of Ku-ula during all the time they had lived together. They knew not why this family and their house should be burned in this manner.

When the fire was raging all about the house and the flames were consuming everything, Ku-ula and his wife gave their last message to their son and left him.

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] They went right out of the house as quietly as the last breath leaves the body, and none of the people standing there gazing saw where, or how, Ku-ula and his wife came forth out of the house. Aiai was the only one that retained material form. Their bodies were changed by some miraculous power and entered the sea, taking with them all the fish swimming in and around Hana. They also took all sea-mosses, crabs, crawfish, and the various kinds of shellfish along the seashore, even to the opihi-koele at the rocky beach; every edible thing in the sea was taken away. This was the first stroke of Ku-ula's revenge on the King and the people of Hana who obeyed his mandate; they suffered greatly from the scarcity of fish.

When Ku-ula and his wife were out of the house they three gourds exploded from the heat, one by one, and all those who were gazing at the burning house believed the detonations indicated the bursting of the bodies of Ku-ula, his wife, and child. The flames shot up through the top of the house, and the black smoke hovered above it, then turned toward the front of Kaiwiopele Hill. The people saw Aiai ascend through the flames and walk upon the smoke toward the hill till he came to a small cave that opened to receive and rescue him.

As Aiai left the house it burned fiercely, and, carrying out the instructions of his father he called upon him to destroy by fire all those who had caught and tied them in their burning house. As he finished his appeal he saw the rippling of the wind on the sea and a misty rain coming with it, increasing as it came

[p. 225]

till it reached Lehoula, which so increased the blazing of the fire that the flames reached out into the crowd of people for those who had obeyed the King. The man from Molokai, who was the cause of the trouble, was reached also and consumed by the fire, and the charred bodies were left to show to the people the second stroke of Ku-ula's vengeance. Strange to say, all those who had nothing to do with this cruel act, though closer to the burning house, were uninjured; the tongues of fire reached out only for the guilty ones. In a little while but a few smouldering logs and ashes were all that remained of the house of Ku-ula. Owing to this strange action of the fire some of the people doubted the death of Ku-ula and his wife, and much disputation arose among them on the subject.

When Aiai walked out through the flames and smoke and reached the cave, he stayed there through that night till the next morning, then, leaving his hook, pearl shell, and stone there, he went forth till he came to the road at Puilio, where he met several children amusing themselves by shooting arrows, one of whom made friends with him and asked him to his house. Aiai accepted the invitation, and the boy and his parents treating him well, he remained with them for some days.

While Aiai was living in their house the parents of the boy heard of the King's order for all the people of Hana to go fishing for hinalea. The people obeyed the royal order, but when they went down to the shore with their fishing baskets they looked around for the usual bait (ueue), which was to be pounded up and put

[p. 226]

into the baskets, but they could not find any, nor any other material to be so used, neither could they see any fish swimming around in the sea. "Why?" was the question. Because Ku-ula and his wife had taken with them all the fish and everything pertaining to fishing. Finding no bait they pounded up limestone and placed it in the baskets and swam out and set them h in the sea. They watched and waited all day, but in vain, for not a single hinalea was seen, nor did any enter the baskets. When night came they went back empty-handed and came down again the next day only to meet the same luck. The parents of the boy who had befriended Aiai were in this fishing party, in obedience to the King's orders, but they got nothing for their trouble. Aiai, seeing them go down daily to Haneoo, asked concerning it, and was told every thing so he bade his friend come with him to the cave where' he had stayed after his father's house was burned. Arriving there he showed the stone fish god, Pohaku-muone, and said: "We can get fish up here from this stone without much work or trouble."

Then Aiai picked up the stone and they went down; to Lehoula, and setting it down at a point facing the pond which his father had made he repeated these words: "O Ku-ula, my father; O Hina, my mother, I place this stone here in your name, Ku-ula, which action will make your name famous and mine too, your son; the keeping of this ku-ula stone I give to my friend, and he and his offspring hereafter will do and act in all things pertaining to it in our names."

After saying these words he told his friend his duties

[p. 227]

and all things to be observed relative to the stone and the benefits to be derived therefrom as an influencing power over such variety of fish as he desired. This was the first establishment of the ko'a ku-ula on land,--a place where the fisherman was obliged to make his offering of the first of his catch by taking two fishes and placing them on the ku-ula stone as an offering to Ku-ula. Thus Aiai first put in practice the fishing oblations established by his father at the place of his birth, in his youth, but it was accomplished only through the mana kupua of his parents.

When Aiai had finished calling on his parents and instructing his friend, there were seen several persons walking along the Haneoo beach with their fishing baskets and setting them in the sea, but catching nothing. At Aiai's suggestion he and his friend went over to witness this fishing effort. When they reached the fishers Aiai asked them, "What are those things placed there for?"

They answered, " Those are baskets for catching hinaleas, a fish that our King, Kamohoalii, longs for, but we cannot get bait to catch the fish with."

"Why is it so? " asked Aiai.

And they answered, "Because Ku-ula and his family are dead, and all the fish along the beach of Hana are taken away."

Then Aiai asked them for two baskets. Having received them, he bade his friend take them and follow him. They went to a little pool near the beach, and setting the baskets therein, he called on his parents for hinaleas. As soon as he had finished, the fish

[p. 228]

were seen coming in such numbers as to fill the pool, and still they came. Aiai now told his friend to go and fetch his parents and relatives to get fish, and to bring baskets with which to take home a supply; they should have the first pick, and the owners of the baskets should have the next chance. The messenger went with haste and brought his relatives as directed. Aiai then took two fishes and gave them to his friend to place on the ko'a they had established at Lehoula for the ku-ula. He also told him that before the setting of the sun of that day they would hear that King Kamohoalii of Hana was dead, choked and strangled 4 to death by the fish. These prophetic words of Aiai came true.

After Aiai had made his offering, his friend's parents came to where the fish were gathering and were told to take all they desired, which they did, returning home happy for the liberal supply obtained without trouble. The owners of the baskets were then called and told to take all the fish they wished for themselves and for the King. When these people saw the great supply they were glad and much surprised at the success of these two boys. The news of the reappearing of the fish spread through the district, and the people flocked in great numbers and gathered hinaleas to their satisfaction, and returned to their homes with rejoicing. Some of those who gave Aiai the baskets returned with their bundles of fish to the King. When he saw so many of those he had longed for he became so excited that he reached out and picked one up and put it in his mouth, intending to eat it; but instead the

[p. 229]

fish slipped right into his throat and stuck there. Many tried to reach and take it out, but were unable, and before the sun set that day Kamohoalii, the King of Hana, died, being choked and strangled to death by the fish. Thus the words of Aiai, the son of Ku-ula, proved true.

By the death of the King of Hana the revenge was complete. The evil-doer from Molokai, and those who obeyed the King's orders on the day Ku-ula's house was fired, met retribution, and Aiai thus won a victory over all his father's enemies.

After living for a time at Hana Aiai left that place and went among the different islands of the group establishing fishing ko'as (ko'a aina aumakua). He was the first to measure the depth of the sea to locate these fishing ko'as for the deep sea fishermen who go out in their canoes, and the names of many of these ko'as located around the different islands are well known.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 230]

  

XXII

  

AIAI, SON OF KU-ULA

  

PART II OF THE LEGEND OF KU-ULA, THE FISH GOD OF HAWAII

  

TRANSLATED FROM MOKE MANU BY M. K. NAKUINA

AFTER the death of the King of Hana, Aiai left the people of Haneoo catching hinalea and went to Kumaka, a place where fresh water springs out from the sand and rocks near the surf of Puhele, at Hamoa, where lay a large, long stone in the sea. This stone he raised upright and also placed others about the water spring, and said to his friend: "To-day I name this stone Ku-a-lanakila, for I have triumphed over my enemies; and I hereby declare that all fishes, crabs, and sea-moss shall return again in plenty throughout the seas of Hana, as in the days when my parents were living in the flesh at Lehoula."

From the time Aiai raised this stone, up to the present generation, the story of Ku-ula and Aiai is well preserved, and people have flocked to the place where the stone stands to see it and verify the tradition. Some kahunas advise their suffering patients to pay a visit to the stone, Ku-lanakila, with some offerings for relief from their sickness and also to bathe in the spring of Kumaka and the surf of Puhele. This was a favorite

[p. 231]

spot of the kings and chiefs of the olden times for bathing and surf-riding, and is often referred to in the stories and legends of Hawaii-nei. This was the first stone raised by Aiai, and established as a ku-ula at Hamoa; and the old people of Hana attributed to its influence the return of the fish to their waters.

After Aiai's practice of his father's instructions and the return of the fishes, his fame spread throughout the district, and the people made much of him during his stay with them.

A great service wrought by Aiai during his boyhood was the teaching of his friend and his friend's parents how to make the various nets for all kinds of fishing. He also taught them to make the different kinds of fishing lines. When they were skilled in all these branches of knowledge pertaining to fishing, he called the people together, and in their presence declared his friend to be the head fisherman of Hana, with full control of all the stations (ko'a ia) he had. established. This wonder-working power second to none, possessed by Aiai, he now conferred on his friend, whereby his own name would be perpetuated and his fame established all over the land.

The first ko'a ia (fishing ground, or station) where Aiai measured the depth of the sea is near Aleamai, his birthplace, and is called Kapukaulua, where he hooked and killed the eel Koona. It is a few miles from the shore to the southeast of the rocky islet called Alau. The second station he established was at a spot about a mile from Haneoo and Hamoa which was for the kala, palani, nanue, puhi, and ula. These

[p. 232]

varieties of fish are not caught by nets, or with the hook, but in baskets which are filled with bait and let down in the deep sea.

The third station, which he named Koauli, was located out in the deep sea for the deep sea fishes, the depth ranging about two hundred fathoms. This is the ko'a that fishermen have to locate by certain shore bearings, lest a mistake be made as to the exact spot and the bottom be found rocky and the hooks entangle in the coral. In all the stations Aiai located there are no coral ledges where the fisherman's hook would catch, or the line be entangled; and old Hawaiians commended the skill of such locations, believing that the success of Aiai's work was due to his father's influence as an ocean deity.

At one time Aiai went over to the bay of Wananalua, the present port of Hana, with its noted hill of Kauiki and the sandy beach of Pueokahi. Here he made and placed a ku-ula, and also placed a fish stone in the cliff of Kauiki whereon is the ko'a known as Makakiloia. And the people of Hana give credit to this stone for the frequent appearance of the akule, oio, moi, and other fishes in their waters.

Aiai's good work did not stop at this point; proceeding to Honomaele he picked up three pebbles at the shore and, going into the sea, out beyond the breaking surf, he placed them there. In due time these three pebbles gathered others together and made a regular ridge; and when this was accomplished, the aweoweo gathered from the far ocean to this ridge of pebbles for rest; whereupon the people came with net,

[p. 233]

hook, and line, and caught them as they desired. The writer witnessed this in 1845 with his own eyes. This ko'a for aweoweo is still there, but difficult to locate, from the fact that all the old residents are gone--either dead or moved away.

He next went over to Waiohue, Koolau, where he placed a stone on a sharp rocky islet, called Paka, whereon a few puhala grow. It is claimed that during the season of the kala, they come in from the ocean, attracted to this locality by the power of this stone. They continue on to Mokumana, a cape between Keanae and Wailuanui. They come in gradually for two days, and on the third day of their reaching the coast, at the pali of Ohea, is the time and place to surround them with nets. In olden times while the fishermen were hauling in their nets full of kala into the canoes, the akule and oio also came in numbers at the same time, making it impossible to catch all in one day; and as there were so many gathered in the net it took them a day and a night before they could care for their draught, which yielded so many more than could be made use of that they were fed to the pigs and dogs. The kala of Ohea is noted for its fatness and fine flavor. Few people are now living there, and the people who knew all about this are dead; but the stone that Aiai placed on that little island at Waiohue is still there.

Aiai stayed there a few days and then returned to Hana and lived at his birthplace quite a length of time till he was a man grown. During this period he was teaching his art of fishing in all its forms; and when

[p. 234]

he was satisfied the people were proficient, he prepared to visit other places for like service. But before leaving, Aiai told his friend to go and kill the big hee kupua (wonderful octopus) in the deep sea, right out of Wailuanui, Koolau, and he consented.

When the canoes were made ready and drawn to the beach and the people came prepared to start, Aiai brought the hokeo (fishing gourd), where the leho (kauri shell) that Ku-ula his father gave him was kept, and gave it to his friend. This shell is called lehoula, and the locality at Hana of that name was called after it.

Then the canoes and people sailed away till they got out along the palis near Kopiliula, where they rested. Aiai was not with the party, but overlooked their operations from the pali of Puhiai. While they rested, preparation for the lowering of the leho was being made, and when ready, Aiai's friend called on Ku-ula and Hina for the assistance of their wonderful powers. When he was through, he took off the covering of the gourd and took out the leho, which had rich beautiful colors like the rainbow, and attaching it to the line, he lowered it into the sea, where it sent out rays of a fiery light. The hee was so attracted by its radiance that it came out of its hole and with its great arms, which were as long and large as a full-grown cocoanut tree, came up to the surface of the water and stood there like a cocoanut grove. The men were frightened, for it approached and went right into the canoes with the intention of destroying them and the men and capturing the leho; but it failed, because Aiai's friend, with his skill and power, had provided himself with a stone,

[p. 235]

which, at the proper time, he shoved into the head of the squid; and the weight of the stone drew it down to the bottom of the sea and kept it there, and being powerless to remove the stone, it died. The men seized and cut off one of the arms, which was so big that it loaded the canoes down so that they returned to Hana. When the squid died, it turned to stone. It is pointed out to-day just outside of Wailuanui, where a stone formation resembles the body of a squid and the arms, with one missing.

When Aiai saw from the pali that his friend was successful in killing the hee, he returned to Hana unseen, and in a short while the canoes arrived with its arm, which was divided among the people according to the directions of Aiai.

When Aiai saw that his friend and others of Hana were skilled in all the art of fishing, he decided to leave his birthplace and journey elsewhere. So he called a council of his friends and told them of his intended departure, to establish other fishing stations and instruct the people with all the knowledge thereof in conformity with the injunction of Ku-ula his father. They approved of the course contemplated and expressed their indebtedness to him for all the benefits he had shown them.

On leaving Aleamai he took with him the fish-hook, manaiaakalani, and the fish pearl, Kahuoi, for aku from the little cave where he had lodged on the hill of Kaiwiopele, and then disappeared in the mysterious manner of his parents. He established ku-ulas and ko'a aina, by placing three fish stones at various points

[p. 236]

as far as Kipahulu. At the streams of Kikoo and Maulili there stands a stone to-day, which was thrown by Aiai and dropped at a bend in the waters, unmoved by the many freshets that have swept the valleys since that time.

Out in the sea of Maulili is a famous station known as Koanui. It is about a mile from the shore and marks the boundary of the sea of Maulili, and the fish that appear periodically and are caught within its limits have been subject to a division between the fishermen and the landowner ever since. This is a station where the fisherman's hook shall not return without a fish except the hook be lost, or the line cut.

The first time that Aiai tested this station and caught a fish with his noted hook, he saw a fisherman in his canoe drifting idly, without success. When he saw Aiai, this fisherman, called Kanemakua, paddled till he came close to where Aiai was floating on an improvised canoe, a wiliwili log, without an outrigger,--which much surprised him. Before the fisherman reached him, Aiai felt a tug at his line and knew that he had caught a fish and began pulling it in. When Kanemakua came within speaking distance Aiai greeted him and gave him the fish, putting it into his canoe. Kanemakua was made happy and thanked Aiai for his generosity. While putting it in the canoe Aiai said:

"This is the first time I have fished in these waters to locate (or found) this station, and as you are the first man I meet I give you the first fish caught. I also give you charge of this ko'a; but take my advice. When you come here to fish and see a man meeting

[p. 237]

you in a canoe and floating alongside of you, if at that time you have caught a fish, then give it to him as I have done to you, without regret, and thus get a good name and be known as a generous man. If you observe this, great benefits will come to you and those related to you."

As Aiai finished speaking he suddenly disappeared, and Kanemakua could hardly realize that he had not been dreaming but for the assurance he had in the great fish lying in his canoe. He returned to the shore with his prize, which was so large and heavy that it required the help of two others to carry it to the house, where it was cut up and the oven made hot for its baking. When it was cooked he took the eyes of the fish and offered them up as a thanksgiving sacrifice. Then the family, friends, and neighbors around came to the feast and ate freely. During all this time Kanemakua was thinking of the words spoken by the young man, which he duly observed. The first ku-ula established in Maulili, Maui, was named after him, and from that time its fish have been given out freely without restriction or division.

After establishing the different ku-ula stations along the coast from Hana to Kipahulu, Aiai went to Kaupo and other places. A noted station and ku-ula is at Kahikinui. All the stations of this place are in the deep sea, where they use nets of three kinds; there is also fishing with poles, and ulua fishing, because this part of the island faces the wind; but the ku-ulas are located on the seashore, as is also the one at Honuaula, where it is covered over by the lava flow.

[p. 238]

Thus was performed the good work of Aiai in establishing ku-ula stations and fish stones all around the island of Maui. It is also said that he visited Kahoolawe and established a ku-ula at Hakioawa, though it differs from the others, being built on a high bluff overlooking the sea, somewhat like a temple, by placing stones in the form of a square, in the middle of which was left a space wherein the fishermen of that island laid their first fish caught, as a thank offering. Awa and kapa were also placed there as offerings to the fish deities.

An idea prevails with some people that the ko'a of Kamohoalii, the king shark of Kahoolawe, is on this island, but if all the stories told of it be examined there will be found no reference to a ko'a of his on this island.

From Kahoolawe, Aiai next went to Lanai, where he started fishing for aku (bonito) at Cape Kaunolu, using his pearl Kahuoi. This is the first case known of fishing for aku with pearl from the land, as it is a well known fact that this fish is caught only in deep sea, far from shore. In the story of Kaneapua it is shown that he is the only one who had fished for aku at the Cape of Kaunolu, where it was started by Aiai.

From Kaunolu, Aiai went to Kaena Cape, where at a place close to Paomai, was a little sandy beach now known as Polihua. Here he took a stone and carved a figure on it, then carried and placed it on the sandy beach, and called on his parents. While making his incantations the stone moved toward the sea and disappeared under the water. His incantations finished,

[p. 239]

the stone reappeared and moved toward him till it reached the place where it had been laid; whereupon it was transformed into a turtle, and gave the name of Polihua to that beach. This work of Aiai on the island of Lanai was the first introduction of the turtle in the seas of Hawaii, and also originated the habit of the turtle of going up the beach to lay its eggs, then returning to the sea.

After making the circuit of Lanai he went over to Molokai, landing at Punakou and travelled along the shore till he reached Kaunakakai. At this place he saw spawns of mullet, called Puai-i, right near the shore, which he kicked with his foot, landing them on the sand. This practice of kicking fish with the feet is carried on to this time, but only at that locality. Aiai continued on along the Kona side of Molokai, examining its fishing grounds and establishing ku-ulas till he got to Halawa. At the Koolau side of the island he stopped at Wailau and saw the cave of the eel Koona that went to Hana and stole the fish from his father's pond, and the cause of all the trouble that befell his parents and himself.

When Aiai landed at Wailau he saw that both sides of the valley were covered with men, women, and children engaged in closing up the stream and diverting its water to another course, whereby they would be enabled to catch oopu and opae. The water being low, the gourds of some of the people were full from their catch.

Aiai noticed their wanton method of fishing, whereby all oopus and opaes were caught without thought

[p. 240]

of any reservation for their propagation; therefore he called on his parents to take them all away. The prayer was granted, for suddenly they all disappeared; those in the water went up the stream to a place called Koki, while those in the gourds were turned to lizards which scampered out and ran all over the rocks. The people were much surprised at this change and felt sorely disappointed at the loss of their food supply.

On account of his regard for a certain lad of that place, named Kahiwa, he showed him the place of the opaes to be up the precipitous cliff, Koki. The youth was attentive to the direction of Aiai and going there he found the oopus and opaes as stated, as they are to this day. That is what established the noted saying of the old people of that land: "Kokio of Wailau is the ladder of the opae." It is also known as the "Pali of Kahiwa."

When Aiai left Wailau he showed this lad the ku-ula and the fish station in the sea he had located there, at the same distance as that rocky island known as Mokapu. He went also to Pelekunu, Waikolu and Kalawao, even to Kalaupapa, the present home of the lepers. At the latter place he left a certain fish stone. That is the reason fish constantly gather there even to this day. He also went to Hoolehua and so on as far as Ka lae o ka ilio (the dog's forehead) and Ka lae o ka laau. Between these two capes in the sea is a station established by Aiai, where a tree grew out from under a rock, Ekaha by name. It is a hardwood tree, but the trunk and

[p. 241]

also the branches are without leaves. This place is a great haunt for fishermen with their hooks.

Aiai then came to Oahu, first landing at Makapuu, in Koolau, where he founded a pohaku-ia (fish stone) for red fish and for speckled fish, and called it Malei. This was a female rock, and the fish of that place is the uhu. It is referred to in the mele of Hiiaka, thus:

"I will not go to the stormy capes of Koolau,
 The sea-cliffs of Moeaau.
 The woman watching uhu of Makapuu
 Dwells on the ledge of Kamakani
 At Koolau. The living
 Offers grass-twined sacrifices, O Malie!"

From the time Aiai founded that spawning-place until the present, its fish have been the uhu, extending to Hanauma. There were also several gathering-places for fish established outside of Kawaihoa. Aiai next moved to Maunalua, then to Waialae and Kahalaia. At Kaalawai he placed a white and brown rock. There in that place is a hole filled with aholehole, therefore the name of the land is Kaluahole. Right outside of Kahuahui there is a station where Aiai placed a large round sandstone that is surrounded by spawning-places for fish; Ponahakeone is its name.

In ancient times the chiefs selected a very secret place wherein to hide the dead bodies of their greatly beloved, lest some one should steal their bones to make fish-hooks, or arrows to shoot mice with. For that reason the ancients referred to Ponahakeone as "He Lualoa no Na'lii"--a deep pit for the chiefs.

[p. 242]

Aiai came to Kalia and so on to Kakaako. Here he was befriended by a man named Apua, with whom he remained several days, observing and listening to the murmurs of the chief named Kou. This chief was a skilful hiaku fisherman, his grounds being outside of Mamala until you came to Moanalua. There was none so skilled as he, and generous withal, giving akus to the people throughout the district.

As Aiai was dwelling with his friend Apua at Kakaako, he meandered off one day along the shore of Kulolia, and so on to Pakaka and Kapapoko. But he did not return to the house of his friend, for he met a young woman gathering limu (sea-moss) and fishing for crabs. This young woman, whose name was Puiwa, lived at Hanakaialama and was a virgin, never having had a husband. She herself, as the people would say, was forward to ask Aiai to be her husband; but he listened to her voice, and they went up together to her home and saw the parents and relatives, and forthwith were married. After living with this young woman some time a son was born to them, whom Aiai named Puniaiki. During those days was the distribution of aku which were sent up from Honolulu to the different dwellings; but while others were given a whole fish, they got but a portion from some neighbor. For this reason the woman was angry, and told Aiai to go to the brook and get some oopus fit to eat, as well as opae. Aiai listened to the voice of his wife. He dug a ditch and constructed a dam so as to lead the water of the brook into some pits, and thus be able to catch the oopu and opae. He

[p. 243]

labored some days at this work, and the fish and shrimps were hung up to dry.

On a certain day following, Aiai and his wife went with their child to the brook. She left her son upon the bank of the stream while she engaged herself in catching opae and oopu from the pits. But it was not long before the child began to cry; and as he cried, Aiai told his wife to leave her fishing, but she talked saucily to him. So Aiai called upon the names of his ancestors. Immediately a dark and lowering cloud drew near and poured out a flood of water upon the stream, and in a short time the dam was broken by the freshet and all the oopu and opae, together with the child, were swept toward the sea. But the woman was not taken by the flood. Aiai then rose up and departed, without thought of his wife.

He went down from the valley to Kaumakapili, and as he was standing there he saw some women fishing for oopu on the banks of the stream, the daughter of the chief Kikihale being with them. At that time, behold, there was caught by the female guardian of the daughter of Kikihale a very large oopu. This oopu she showed to her protegee, who told her to put it into a large calabash with water and feed it with limu, so that it might become a pet fish. This was done and the oopu was tended very carefully night and day.

Aiai stood by and saw the fish lifted out of the brook, and recognized it at the same time as his own child, changed from a human being into an oopu.

(At this point the story of Aiai gives place to that of his child.)

[p. 244]

When the oopu was placed in a large calabash with water, it was carefully tended and fed with sea-moss for some time, but one day in seeing to this duty the guardian of the chiefess, on reaching the calabash, was startled to behold therein a human child, looking with its eyes. And the water in the calabash had disappeared. She was greatly surprised and seized with a dark foreboding, and a trembling fear possessed her as she looked upon this miraculous child.

This woman went and told the chiefess of this child they knew to have had the form of an oopu, and as Kikihale heard the story of her guardian she went quickly, with grave doubts, however, of this her report; but there, on reaching the calabash, as she looked she saw indeed a child therein. She immediately put forth her hands toward the child and lifting it, carefully examined its form and noted its agreeable features. As the thought quickly possessed this girl, she said: "Now, my guardian, you and your husband take and rear this child till he is grown, then I will be his wife."

The guardian answered her: "When this child becomes grown you will be old; that is, your days will be in the evening of life, while his place will be in the early morn. Will you not thereby have lasting cause for dissatisfaction and contention between you in the future?"

Kikihale answering her guardian said: "You are not to blame; these things are mine to consider, for the reason that the desire is mine, not yours, my guardian."

[p. 245]

After this talking the child was quickly known of among the chiefs and attendants. He was nourished and brought up to adult age, when Kikihale took him for her husband as she had said; and for a time they dwelt together as man and wife without disagreement between them. But during these days Kikihale saw plainly that her husband was not disposed to do anything for their support; therefore she mourned over it continually and angrily reproved him, finally, saying:

"O my husband, can you not go forth also, as others, to assist our father and the attendants in the duties of fishing, instead of eating till you are satisfied, then rolling over with face upward to the ridge-pole of the house and counting the ahos? It may do while my father is alive; but if he should die, whence would come our support?" Thus she spoke reproachingly from day to day, and the words stung Puniaiki's heart with much pain.

And this is what he said to his wife one day: "It is unpleasant to hear you constantly talking thus. Not as wild animals is the catching of fish in the sea; they are obedient if called, and you may eat wastefully of my fish when procured. I have authority over fish, men, pigs, and dogs. If you are a favorite of your father then go to him for double canoes, with their fishing appurtenances, and men to paddle them."

When Kikihale heard these words of her husband she hastened to Kou, her father, and told him all that Puniaiki had said, and the request was promptly

[p. 246]

executed. Kikihale returned to her husband and told him all she had done.

On Puniaiki's going down to the canoe place he found the men were making ready the canoes with the nets, rods, lines, and the pearl fish-hooks. Here he lit a fire and burned up the pearl fish-hooks, at which his wife was much angered and cried loudly for the hiaku pearl hooks of her father. She went and told Kou of this mischievous action of her husband, but he answered her not a word at this act of his son-in-law, though he had supplied five gourds filled with them, a thousand in number, and the strangest thing was, that all were burned up save two only which Kou had reserved.

That night Puniaiki slept apart from his wife, and he told the canoe paddlers to sleep in the canoe sheds, not to go to their homes that night; and they obeyed O his voice.

It was Kou's habit to rouse his men before break of day to sail in the malaus for aku fishing at the mouth of the harbor, for that was their feeding-time, not after the sun had risen. Thus would the canoes enter the schools of aku and this chief became famous thereby as a most successful fisherman. But on this day was seen the sorcerer's work of this child of Aiai.

As Kou with his men set out always before dawn, here was this Puniaiki above at his place at sunrise. At this time on his awaking from sleep he turned his face mountainward, and looking at Kaumakapili he saw a rainbow and its reddish mist spread out at that place, wherein was standing a human form. He felt

[p. 247]

conscious that it was Aiai his father, therefore he went there and Aiai showed him the place of the pa (fishhook) called Kahuai, and he said to his son: "Here will I stay till you return; be quick."

Upon Puniaiki reaching the landing the canoes were quickly made ready to depart, and as they reached Kapapoko and Pakaka, at the sea of Kuloloia, they went on to Ulukua, now the lighthouse location of Honolulu harbor. At this place Puniaiki asked the paddlers: "What is the name of that surf cresting beneath the prow of our canoes?"

"Puuiki," replied the men.

He then said to them: "Point straight the prow of the canoes and paddle with strength." At these words of Puniaiki their minds were in doubt, because there were probably no akus at that place in the surf; but that was none of their business. As they neared the breakers of Puuiki, below the mouth of Mamala, Puniaiki said to his men: "Turn the canoes around and go shorewards." And in returning he said quickly, "Paddle strong, for here we are on the top of a school of akus." But strange to say, as the men looked in the water they saw no fish swimming about, but on reaching Ulakua Puniaiki opened up the fish-hook, Kahuai, from its wrapping in the gourd and held it in his hand.

At this the akus, unprecedented in number, fairly leaped into the canoes. They became so filled with the fish, without labor, that they sank in the water as they reached Kapuukolo, and the men jumped overboard to float them to the beach. The canoe men

[p. 248]

wondered greatly at this work of the son-in-law of Kou the chief; and the shore people shouted as the akus which filled the harbor swam toward the fishpond of Kuwili and on to the mouth of Leleo stream.

When the canoes touched shore Puniaiki seized two fishes in his hands and went to join his father where he was staying, and Aiai directed him to take them up to where his mother lived. These akus were not gifts for her, but an offering to Ku-ula at a ko'a established just above Kahuailanawai. Puniaiki obeyed the instructions of his father, and on returning to him he was sent back to his mother, Puiwa, with a supply of akus. She was greatly surprised that this handsome young man, with his gift of akus for her to eat, was her own son, and these were the first fruits of his labor.

The people marvelled at the quantity of fish throughout the harbor, so that even the stream at Kikihale was also full of akus, and Puniaiki commanded the people to take of them day and night; and the news of this visit of akus went all around Oahu. This unequalled haul of akus was a great humiliation to Kou, affecting his fame as a fisherman; but he was neither jealous of his son-in-law nor angry,--he just sat silent. He thought much on the subject but with kindly feelings, resulting in turning over this employment to him who could prosecute it without worry.

Shortly afterwards Aiai arranged with Puniaiki for the establishing of ku-ulas, ko'as, and fish stones around the island of Oahu, which were as follows:

[p. 249]

The Kou stone was for Honolulu and Kaumakapili; a ku-ula at Kupahu; a fish stone at Hanapouli, Ewa. Ahuena was the ku-ula for Waipio; two were assigned for Honouliuli. Hani-o was the name of the ko'a outside of Kalaeloa; Kua and Maunalahilahi for Waianae; Kamalino for Waimea; and Kaihukuuna for Laiemaloo, Koolau.

Aiai and his son also visited Kauai and Niihau on this work, then they turned and went together to Hawaii. The principal or most noted fishing-grounds there are: Poo-a, Kahaka, and Olelomoana at Kona; Kalae at Kau; Kupakea at Puna, and I at Hilo.

In former times at most of these fishing-grounds were seen multitudes and varieties of fish, all around the islands, and occasionally deep sea kinds came close in shore, but in this new era there are not so many. Some people say it is on account of the change of the times.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 250]

  

XXIII

  

KANEAUKAI

  

A LEGEND OF WAIALUA

  

THOS. G. THRUM

LONG ago, when the Hawaiians were in the darkness of superstition and kahunaism, with their gods and lords many, there lived at Mokuleia, Waialua, two old men whose business it was to pray to Kaneaukai for a plentiful supply of fish. These men were quite poor in worldly possessions, but given to the habit of drinking a potion of awa after their evening meal of poi and fish.

The fish that frequented the waters of Mokuleia were the aweoweo, kala, manini, and many other varieties that find their habitat inside the coral reefs. Crabs of the white variety burrowed in the sand near the seashore and were dug out by the people, young and old. The squid also were speared by the skilful fishermen, and were eaten stewed, or salted and sun-dried and roasted on the coals. The salt likely came from Kaena Point, from salt-water evaporation in the holes of rocks so plentiful on that stormy cape. Or it may have been made on the salt pans of Paukauwila, near the stream of that name, where a few years ago this industry existed on a small scale.

[p. 251]

But to return to our worshippers of Kaneaukai, One morning on going out upon the seashore they found a log of wood, somewhat resembling the human form, which they took home and set in a corner of their lowly hut, and continued their habit of praying to Kaneaukai. One evening, after having prepared a scanty supper of poi and salt, with perhaps a few roasted kukui-nuts, as a relish, and a couple of cocoanut cups of awa as their usual drink, they saw a handsome young man approaching, who entered their hut and saluted them. He introduced himself by saying, "I am Kaneaukai to whom you have been praying, and that which you have set up is my image; you have done well in caring for it."

He sat down, after the Hawaiian custom, as if to share their evening meal, which the two old men invited him to partake of with them, but regretted the scanty supply of awa. He said: "Pour the awa back into the bowl and divide into three." This they did and at once shared their meal with their guest.

After supper Kaneaukai said to the two old men, "Go to Keawanui and you will get fish enough for the present." He then disappeared, and the fishermen went as instructed and obtained three fishes; one they gave to an old sorceress who lived near by, and the other two they kept for themselves.

Soon after this there was a large school of fish secured by the fishermen of Mokuleia. So abundant were the fish that after salting all they could, there was enough to give away to the neighbors; and even the dogs had more than they desired.

[p. 252]

Leaving the Mokuleia people to the enjoyment of their unusual supply of fish, we will turn to the abode of two kahunas, who were also fishermen, living on the south side of Waimea Valley, Oahu. One morning, being out of fish, they went out into the harbor to try their luck, and casting their net they caught up a calcareous stone about as large as a man's head, and a pilot fish. They let the pilot fish go, and threw the stone back into the sea. Again they cast their net and again they caught the stone and the pilot fish; and so again at the third haul. At this they concluded that the stone was a representative of some god. The elder of the two said: "Let us take this stone ashore and set it up as an idol, but the pilot fish we will let go." So they did, setting it up on the turn of the bluff on the south side of the harbor of Waimea. They built an inclosure about it and smoothed off the rocky bluff by putting flat stones from the immediate neighborhood about the stone idol thus strangely found.

About ten days after the finding of the stone idol the two old kahunas were sitting by their grass hut in the dusk of the evening, bewailing the scarcity of fish, when Kaneaukai himself appeared before them in the guise of a young man. He told them that they had done well in setting up his stone image, and if they would follow his directions they would have a plentiful supply of fish. Said he, "Go to Mokuleia, and you will find my wooden idol; bring it here and set it up alongside of my stone idol." But they demurred, as it was a dark night and there were usually quicksands

[p. 253]

after a freshet in the Kamananui River. His answer was, 'Send your grandsons." And so the two young men were sent to get the wooden idol and were told where they could find it.

The young men started for Mokuleia by way of Kaika, near the place where salt was made a few years ago. Being strangers, they were in doubt about the true way, when a meteor (hoku kaolele) appeared and went before them, showing them how to escape the quicksands. After crossing the river they went on to Mokuleia as directed by Kaneaukai, and found the wooden idol in the hut of the two old men. They shouldered it, and taking as much dried fish as they could carry, returned by the same way that they had come, arriving at home about midnight.

The next day the two old kahunas set up the wooden idol in the same inclosure with the stone representative of Kaneaukai. The wooden image has long since disappeared, having been destroyed, probably, at the time Kaahumanu made a tour of Oahu after her conversion to Christianity, when she issued her edict to burn all the idols. But the stone idol was not destroyed. Even during the past sixty years offerings of roast pigs are known to have been placed before it. This was done secretly for fear of the chiefs, who had published laws against idolatry.

Accounts differ, various narrators giving the story some embellishments of their own. So good a man as a deacon of Waialua in telling the above seemed to believe that, instead of being a legend it was true; for an old man, to whom he referred as authority, said

[p. 254]

that one of the young men who went to Mokuleia and brought the wooden idol to Waimea was his own grandfather.

An aged resident of the locality gives this version: Following the placement of their strangely found stone these two men dreamed of Kaneaukai as a god in some far-distant land, to whom they petitioned that he would crown their labors with success by granting them a plentiful supply of fish. Dreaming thus, Kaneaukai revealed himself to them as being already at their shore; that the stone which they had been permitted to find and had honored by setting up at Kehauapuu, was himself, in response to their petitions; and since they had been faithful so far, upon continuance of the same, and offerings thereto, they should ever after be successful in their fishing. As if in confirmation of this covenant, this locality has ever since been noted for the periodical visits of schools of the anae-holo and kala, which are prevalent from April to July, coming, it is said, from Ohea, Honuaula, Maui, by way of Kahuku, and returning the same way.

So strong was the superstitious belief of the people in this deified stone that when, some twenty years ago, the road supervisor of the district threw it over and broke off a portion, it was prophesied that Kaneaukai would be avenged for the insult. And when shortly afterward the supervisor lost his position and removed from the district, returning not to the day of his death; and since several of his relatives have met untimely ends, not a few felt it was the recompense of his sacrilegious act.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 255]

  

XXIV

  

THE SHARK-MAN, NANAUE

  

MRS. E. M. NAKUINA

KAMOHOALII, the King-shark of Hawaii and Maui, has several deep sea caves that he uses in turn as his habitat. There are several of these at the bottom of the palisades, extending from Waipio toward Kohala, on the island of Hawaii. A favorite one was at Koamano, on the mainland, and another was at Maiaukiu, the small islet just abreast of the valley of Waipio. It was the belief of the ancient Hawaiians that several of these shark gods could assume any shape they chose, the human form even, when occasion demanded.

In the reign of Umi, a beautiful girl, called Kalei, living in Waipio, was very fond of shellfish, and frequently went to Kuiopihi for her favorite article of diet. She generally went in the company of other women, but if the sea was a little rough, and her usual companion was afraid to venture out on the wild and dangerous beach, she very often went alone rather than go without her favorite sea-shells.

In those days the Waipio River emptied over a low fall into a basin partly open to the sea; this basin is now completely filled up with rocks from some convulsion

[p. 256]

of nature, which has happened since then. In this was a deep pool, a favorite bathing-place for all Waipio. The King shark god, Kamohoalii, used to visit this pool very often to sport in the fresh waters of the Waipio River. Taking into account the many different tales told of the doings of this shark god, he must have had quite an eye for human physical beauty.

Kalei, as was to be expected from a strong, well-formed Hawaiian girl of those days, was an expert swimmer, a good diver, and noted for the neatness and grace with which she would lelekawa (jump from the rocks into deep water) without any splashing of water, which would happen to unskilful divers, from the awkward attitudes they would assume in the act of jumping.

It seems Kamohoalii, the King-shark, had noted the charms of the beautiful Kalei, and his heart, or whatever answers in place of it with fishes, had been captured by them. But he could not expect to make much of an impression on the maiden's susceptibilities in propria persona, even though he was perfectly able to take her bodily into his capacious maw; so he must needs go courting in a more pleasing way. Assuming the form of a very handsome man, he walked on the beach one rather rough morning, waiting for the girl's appearance.

Now the very wildness of the elements afforded him the chance he desired, as, though Kalei was counted among the most agile and quick of rock-fishers, that morning, when she did come, and alone, as her usual companions were deterred by the rough weather, she

[p. 257]

made several unsuccessful springs to escape a high threatening wave raised by the god himself; and apparently, if it had not been for the prompt and effective assistance rendered by the handsome stranger, she would have been swept out into the sea.

Thus an acquaintance was established. Kalei met the stranger from time to time, and finally became his wife.

Some little time before she expected to become a mother, her husband, who all this time would only come home at night, told her his true nature, and informing her that he would have to leave her, gave orders in regard to the bringing up of the future child. He particularly cautioned the mother never to let him be fed on animal flesh of any kind, as he would be born with a dual nature, and with a body that he could change at will.

In time Kalei was delivered of a fine healthy boy, apparently the same as any other child, but he had, besides the normal mouth of a human being, a shark's mouth on his back between the shoulder blades. Kalei had told her family of the kind of being her husband was, and they all agreed to keep the matter of the shark-mouth on the child's back a secret, as there was no knowing what fears and jealousies might be excited in the minds of the King or high chiefs by such an abnormal being, and the babe might be killed.

The old grandfather, far from heeding the warning given by Kamohoalii in the matter of animal diet, as soon as the boy, who was called Nanaue, was old enough to come under the taboo in regard to the eating

[p. 258]

of males, and had to take his meals at the mua,, house with the men of the family, took especial pains to feed him on dog meat and pork. He had a hope that his grandson would grow up to be a great, strong man, and become a famous warrior; and there was no knowing what possibilities lay before a strong, skilful warrior in those days. So he fed the boy with meat, whenever it was obtainable. The boy thrived, grew strong, big, and handsome as a young lama (Maba sandwicensis) tree.

There was another pool with a small fall of the Waipio River very near the house of Kalei, and the boy very often went into it while his mother watched on the banks. Whenever he got into the water he would take the form of a shark and would chase and eat the small fish which abounded in the pool. As he grew old enough to understand, his mother took especial pains to impress on him the necessity of concealing his shark nature from other people.

This place was also another favorite bathing-place of the people, but Nanaue, contrary to all the habits of a genuine Hawaiian, would never go in bathing with the others, but always alone; and when his mother was able, she used to go with him and sit on the banks, holding the kapa scarf, which he always wore to hide the shark-mouth on his back.

When he became a man, his appetite for animal diet, indulged in childhood, had grown so strong that a human being's ordinary allowance would not suffice for him. The old grandfather had died in the meantime, so that he was dependent on the food supplied

[p. 259]

by his stepfather and uncles, and they had to expostulate with him on what they called his shark-like voracity. This gave rise to the common native nickname of a manohae (ravenous shark) for a very gluttonous man, especially in the matter of meat.

Nanaue used to spend a good deal of his time in the two pools, the one inland and the other opening into the sea. The busy-bodies (they had some in those days as well as now) were set to wondering why he always kept a kihei, or mantle, on his shoulders; and for such a handsomely shaped, athletic young man, it was indeed a matter of wonder and speculation, considering the usual attire of the youth of those days. He also kept aloof from all the games and pastimes of the young people, for fear that the wind or some active movement might displace the kapa mantle, and the shark-mouth be exposed to view.

About this time children and eventually grown-up people began to disappear mysteriously.

Nanaue had one good quality that seemed to redeem his apparent unsociability; he was almost always to be seen working in his mother's taro or potato patch when not fishing or bathing. People going to the sea beach would have to pass these potato or taro patches, and it was Nanaue's habit to accost them with the query of where they were going. If they answered, "To bathe in the sea," or, "Fishing," he would answer, "Take care, or you may disappear head and tail." Whenever he so accosted any one it would not be long before some member of the party so addressed would be bitten by a shark.

[p. 260]

If it should be a man or woman going to the beach alone, that person would never be seen again, as the shark-man would immediately follow, and watching for a favorable opportunity, jump into the sea. Having previously marked the whereabouts of the person he was after, it was an easy thing for him to approach quite close, and changing into a shark, rush on the unsuspecting person and drag him or her down into the deep, where he would devour his victim at his leisure. This was the danger to humanity which his king-father foresaw when he cautioned the mother of' 1 the unborn child about feeding him on animal flesh, as thereby an appetite would be evoked which they had no means of satisfying, and a human being would furnish the most handy meal of the kind that he would desire.

Nanaue had been a man grown some time, when an order was promulgated by Umi, King of Hawaii, for every man dwelling in Waipio to go to koele work, tilling a large plantation for the King. There were to I be certain days in an anahulu (ten days) to be set aside for this work, when every man, woman, and child had to go and render service, excepting the very old and decrepit, and children in arms.

The first day every one went but Nanaue. He kept on working in his mother's vegetable garden to the astonishment of all who saw him. This was reported to the King, and several stalwart men were sent after him. When brought before the King he still wore his kapa kihei, or mantle.

The King asked him why he was not doing koele

[p. 261]

work with every one else. Nanaue answered he did not know it was required of him. Umi could not help admiring the bold, free bearing of the handsome man, and noting his splendid physique, thought he would make a good warrior, greatly wanted in those ages, and more especially in the reign of Umi, and simply ordered him to go to work.

Nanaue obeyed, and took his place in the field with the others, and proved himself a good worker, but still kept on his kihei, which it would be natural to suppose that he would lay aside as an incumbrance when engaged in hard labor. At last some of the more venturesome of the younger folks managed to tear his kapa off, as if accidentally, when the shark-mouth on his back was seen by all the people near.

Nanaue was so enraged at the displacement of his kapa and his consequent exposure, that he turned and bit several of the crowd, while the shark-mouth opened and shut with a snap, and a clicking sound was heard such as a shark is supposed to make when baulked by its prey.

The news of the shark-mouth and his characteristic shark-like actions were quickly reported to the King, with the fact of the disappearance of so many people in the vicinity of the pools frequented by Nanaue; and of his pretended warnings to people going to the sea, which were immediately followed by a shark bite or by their being eaten bodily, with every one's surmise and belief that this man was at the bottom of all those disappearances. The King believed it was even so,

[p. 262]

and ordered a large fire to be lighted, and Nanaue to be thrown in to be burnt alive.

When Nanaue saw what was before him, he called on the shark god, his father, to help him; then, seeming to be endowed with superhuman strength in answer to his prayer, he burst the ropes with which he had been bound in preparation for the burning, and breaking through the throng of Umi's warriors, who attempted to detain him, he ran, followed by the whole multitude, toward the pool that emptied into the sea. When he got to the edge of the rocks bordering the pool, he waited till the foremost persons were within arm's length, when he leaped into the water and immediately turned into a large shark on the surface of the water, in plain view of the people who had arrived, and whose numbers were being continually augmented by more and more arrivals.

He lay on the surface some little time, as if to recover his breath, and then turned over on his back, and raising his head partly out of the water, snapped his teeth at the crowd who, by this time, completely lined the banks, and then, as if in derision or defiance of them, turned and flirted his tail at them and swam out to sea.

The people and chiefs were for killing his mother and relatives for having brought up such a monster. Kalei and her brothers were seized, bound, and dragged before Umi, while the people clamored for their immediate execution, or as some suggested, that they be thrown into the fire lighted for Nanaue.

But Umi was a wise king and would not consent to

[p. 263]

any such summary proceedings, but questioned Kalei in regard to her fearful offspring. The grieved and frightened mother told everything in connection with the paternity and bringing up of the child, and with the warning given by the dread sea-father.

Umi considered that the great sea god Kamohoalii was on the whole a beneficent as well as a powerful one. Should the relatives and mother of that shark god's son be killed, there would then be no possible means of checking the ravages of that son, who might linger around the coast and creeks of the island, taking on human shape at will, for the purpose of travelling inland to any place he liked, and then reassume his fish form and lie in wait in the many deep pools formed by the streams and springs.

Umi, therefore, ordered Kalei and her relatives to be set at liberty, while the priests and shark kahunas were requested to make offerings and invocations to Kamohoalii that his spirit might take possession of one of his hakas (mediums devoted to his cult), and so express to humanity his desires in regard to his bad son, who had presumed to eat human beings, a practice well known to be contrary to Kamohoalii's design.

This was done, whereupon the shark god manifested himself through a haka, and expressed his grief at the action of his wayward son. He told them that the grandfather was to blame for feeding him on animal flesh contrary to his orders, and if it were not for that extenuating circumstance, he would order his son to be killed by his own shark officers; but as it was, he would require of him that he should disappear forever

[p. 264]

from the shores of Hawaii. Should Nanaue disregard that order and be seen by any of his father's shark soldiers, he was to be instantly killed.

Then the shark god, who it seems retained an affection for his human wife, exacted a promise that she and her relatives were to be forever free from any persecutions on account of her unnatural son, on pain of the return and freedom from the taboo of that son.

Accordingly Nanaue left the island of Hawaii, crossed over to Maui, and landing at Kipahulu, resumed his human shape and went inland. He was seen by the people, and when questioned, told them he was a traveller from Hawaii, who had landed at Hana and was going around sightseeing. He was so good looking, pleasant, and beguiling in his conversation that people generally liked him. He was taken as aikane by one of the petty chiefs of the place, who gave his own sister for wife to Nanaue. The latter made a stipulation that his sleeping house should be separated from that of his wife, on account of a pretended vow, but really in order that his peculiar second mouth might escape detection.

For a while the charms of the pretty girl who had become his wife seem to have been sufficient to prevent him from trying to eat human beings, but after a while, when the novelty of his position as a husband had worn off, and the desire for human flesh had again become very strong, he resumed the old practice for which he had been driven away from Hawaii.

He was eventually detected in the very act of pushing

[p. 265]

a girl into the sea, jumping in after her, then turning into a shark, and commencing to devour her, to the horror of some people who were fishing with hook and rod from some rocks where he had not observed them. These people raised the alarm, and Nanaue seeing that he was discovered, left for Molokai where he was not known.

He took up his residence on Molokai at Poniuohua, adjoining the ahupuaa of Kainalu, and it was not very long before he was at his old practice of observing and accosting people, giving them his peculiar warning, following them to the sea in his human shape, then seizing one of them as a shark and pulling the unfortunate one to the bottom, where he would devour his victim. In the excitement of such an occurrence, people would fail to notice his absence until he would reappear at some distant point far away from the throng, as if engaged in shrimping or crabbing.

This went on for some time, till the frightened and harassed people in desperation went to consult a shark kahuna, as the ravages of the man-eating shark had put a practical taboo on all kinds of fishing. It was not safe to be anywhere near the sea, even in the shallowest water.

The kahuna told them to lie in wait for Nanaue, and the next time he prophesied that a person would be eaten head and tail, to have some strong men seize him and pull off his kapa mantle, when a shark mouth would be found on his back. This was done, and the mouth seen, but the shark-man was so strong when they seized him and attempted to bind him, that he

[p. 266]

broke away from them several times. He was finally overpowered near the seashore and tightly bound. All the people then turned their attention to gathering brush and firewood to burn him, for it was well known that it is only by being totally consumed by fire that a man-shark can be thoroughly destroyed, and prevented from taking possession of the body of some harmless fish shark, who would then be incited to do all the pernicious acts of a man-shark.

While he lay there on the low sandy beach, the tide was coming in, and as most of the people were returning with fagots and brush, Nanaue made a supreme effort and rolled over so that his feet touched the water, when he was enabled at once to change into a monster shark. Those who were near him saw it, but were not disposed to let him off so easily, and they ran several rows of netting makai, the water being very shallow for quite a distance out. The shark's flippers were all bound by the ropes with which the man Nanaue had been bound, and this with the shallowness of the water prevented him from exerting his great strength to advantage. He did succeed in struggling to the breakers, though momentarily growing weaker from loss of blood, as the people were striking at him with clubs, spears, stone adzes and anything that would hurt or wound, so as to prevent his escape.

With all that, he would have got clear, if the people had not called to their aid the demigod Unauna, who lived in the mountains of upper Kainalu. It was then a case of Akua vs. Akua, but Unauna was only a young demigod, and not supposed to have acquired

[p. 267]

his full strength and supernatural powers, while Nanaue was a full-grown man and shark. If it had not been for the latter's being hampered by the cords with which he was bound, the nets in his way, as well as the loss of blood, it is fully believed that he would have got the better of the young local presiding deity; but he was finally conquered and hauled up on the hill slopes of Kainalu to be burnt.

The shallow ravine left by the passage of his immense body over the light yielding soil of the Kainalu Hill slope can be seen to this day, as also a ring or deep groove completely around the top of a tall insulated rock very near the top of Kainalu Hill, around which Unauna had thrown the rope, to assist him in hauling the big shark uphill. The place was ever afterwards called Puumano (Shark Hill), and is so known to this day.

Nanaue was so large, that in the attempt to burn him, the blood and water oozing out of his burning body put out the fire several times. Not to be outwitted in that way by the shark son of Kamohoalii, Unauna ordered the people to cut and bring for the purpose of splitting into knives, bamboos from the sacred grove of Kainalu. The shark flesh was then cut into strips, partly dried, and then burnt, but the whole bamboo grove had to be used before the big shark was all cut. The god Mohoalii (another form of the name of the god Kamohoalii), father of Unauna, was so angered by the desecration of the grove, or more likely on account of the use to which it was put, that he took away all the edge and sharpness from the

[p. 268]

bamboos of this grove forever, and to this day they are different from the bamboos of any other place or grove on the islands, in this particular, that a piece of them cannot cut any more than any piece of common wood.

     
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 269]

  

XXV

  

FISH STORIES AND SUPERSTITIONS

  

TRANSLATED BY M. K. NAKUINA

THE following narration of the different fishes here given is told and largely believed in by native fishermen. All may not agree as to particulars in this version, but the main features are well known and vary but little. Some of these stories are termed mythical, in others the truth is never questioned, and together they have a deep hold on the Hawaiian mind. Further and confirmatory information may be obtained from fishermen and others, and by visiting the market the varieties here mentioned may be seen almost daily.

In the olden time certain varieties of fish were tabooed and could not be caught at all times, being subject to the kapu of Ku-ula, the fish god, who propagated the finny tribes of Hawaiian waters. While deep sea fishing was more general, that in the shallow sea, or along shore, was subject to the restrictions of the konohiki of the land, and aliis, both as to certain kinds and periods. The sign of the shallow sea kapu was the placing of branches of the hau tree all along the shore. The people seeing this token of the kapu respected it, and any violation thereof in ancient times was said to be punishable by death.

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] While this kapu prevailed the people resorted to the deep sea stations for their food supply. With the removal of the hau branches, indicating that the kapu was lifted, the people fished as they desired, subject only to the makahiki taboo days of the priest or alii, when no canoes were allowed to go out upon the water.

The first fish caught by a fisherman, or any one else, was marked and dedicated to Ku-ula. After this offering was made, Ku-ula's right therein being thus recognized, they were free from further oblations so far as that particular variety of fish was concerned. All fishermen, from Hawaii to Niihau, observed this custom religiously. When the fishermen caught a large supply, whether by the net, hook, or shell, but one of a kind, as just stated, was reserved as an offering to Ku-ula; the remainder was then free to the people.

  

DEIFIED FISH SUPERSTITION

Some of the varieties of fish we now eat were deified and prayed to by the people of the olden time, and even some Hawaiians of to-day labor under like superstition with regard to sharks, eels, oopus, and some others. They are afraid to eat or touch these lest they suffer in consequence; and this belief has been perpetuated, handed down from parents to children, even to the present day. The writer was one of those brought up to this belief, and only lately has eaten the kapu fish of his ancestors without fearing a penalty therefor.

  

STORY OF THE ANAE-HOLO

The anae-holo is a species of mullet unlike the shallow water, or pond, variety; and the following

[p. 271]

story of its habit is well known to any kupa (native born) of Oahu.

The home of the anae-holo is at Honouliuli, Pearl Harbor, at a place called Ihuopalaai. They make periodical journeys around to the opposite side of the island, starting from Puuloa and going to windward, passing successively Kumumanu, Kalihi, Kou, Kalia, Waikiki, Kaalawai and so on, around to the Koolau side, ending at Laie, and then returning by the same course to their starting-point. This fish is not caught at Waianae, Kaena, Waialua, Waimea, or Kahuku because it does not run that way, though these places are well supplied with other kinds. The reason given for this is as follows:

Ihuopalaai had a Ku-ula, and this fish god supplied anaes. Ihuopalaai's sister took a husband and went and lived with him at Laie, Koolauloa. In course of time a day came when there was no fish to be had. In her distress and desire for some she bethought herself of her brother, so she sent her husband to Honouliuli to ask Ihuopalaai for a supply, saying: "Go to Ihuopalaai, my brother, and ask him for fish. If he offers you dried fish, refuse it by all means;--do not take it, because the distance is so long that you would not be able to carry enough to last us for any length of time."

When her husband arrived at Honouliuli he went to Ihuopalaai and asked him for fish. His brother-in-law gave him several large bundles of dried fish, one of which he could not very well lift, let alone carry a distance. This offer was refused and reply given

[p. 272]

according to instruction. Ihuopalaai sat thinking for some time and then told him to return home, saying: "You take the road on the Kona side of the island; do not sit, stay, nor sleep on the way till you reach your own house."

The man started as directed, and Ihuopalaai asked Ku-ula to send fish for his sister, and while the man was journeying homeward as directed a school of fish was following in the sea, within the breakers. He did not obey fully the words of Ihuopalaai, for he became so tired that he sat down on the way; but he noticed that whenever he did so the fish rested too. The people seeing the school of fish went and caught some of them. Of course, not knowing that this was his supply, he did not realize that the people were taking his fish. Reaching home, he met his wife and told her he had brought no fish, but had seen many all the way, and pointed out to her the school of anae-holo which was then resting abreast of their house. She told him it was their supply, sent by Ihuopalaai, his brother-in-law. They fished, and got all they desired, whereupon the remainder returned by the same way till they reached Honouliuli where Ihuopalaai was living. Ever afterward this variety of fish has come and gone the same way every year to this day, commencing some time in October and ending in March or April.

Expectant mothers are not allowed to eat of the anae-holo, nor the aholehole, fearing dire consequences to the child, hence they never touch them till after the eventful day. Nor are these fish ever given to children till they are able to pick and eat them of their own accord.

[p. 273]

  

MYTH OF THE HILU

The hilu is said to have once possessed a human form, but by some strange event its body was changed to that of a fish. No knowledge of its ancestry or place of origin is given, but the story is as follows:

Hilu-ula and Hilu-uli were born twins, one a male and the other a female. They had human form, but with power to assume that of the fish now known as hilu. The two children grew up together and in due time when Hilu-uli, the sister, was grown up, she left her brother and parents without saying a word and went into the sea, and, assuming her fish form, set out on a journey, eventually reaching Heeia, Koolaupoko. During the time of her journey she increased the numbers of the hilu so that by the time they came close to Heeia there was so large a school that the sea was red with them. When the people of Heeia and Kaneohe saw this, they paddled out in their canoes to discover that it was a fish they had never seen nor heard of before. Returning to the shore for nets, they surrounded the school and drew in so many that they were not able to care for them in their canoes. The fishes multiplied so rapidly that when the first school was surrounded and dragged ashore, another one appeared, and so on, till the people were surfeited. Yet the fish stayed in the locality, circling around. The people ate of them in all styles known to Hawaiians; raw, lawalued, salted, and broiled over a fire of coals.

While the Koolau people were thus fishing and

[p. 274]

feasting, Hilu-ula, the brother, arrived among them in his human form; and when he saw the hilu-uli broiling over the coal fire he recognized the fish form of his sister. This so angered him that he assumed the form of a whirlwind and entered every house where they had hilu and blew the fish all back into the sea. Since then the hilu-uli has dark scales, and is well known all over the islands.

  

THE HOU, OR SNORING FISH

The hou lives in shallow water. When fishing with torches on a quiet, still night, if one gets close to where it is sleeping it will be heard to snore as if it were a human being. This is a small, beautifully colored fish. Certain sharks also, sleeping in shallow water, can be heard at times indulging in the same habit.

There are many kinds of fish known to these islands, and other stories connected with them, which, if gathered together, would make an interesting collection of yarns as "fishy" as any country can produce.

 

THE END

 

 

    
Hawaiian Folk Tales, by Thomas G. Thrum, [1907], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275] [p. 276] [p. 277]

  

GLOSSARY OF HAWAIIAN WORDS

  

AAH

aaho, sticks for thatching, <page 142>.

ahaaina, feast, <page 150>.

aheahea, an edible plant, <page 135>.

aholehole, a species of fish.

ahos, small sticks used in thatching, <page 245>.

Ahu o Kakaalaneo, the name given to the original feather cloak, <page 155>.

ahupuaa, a small division of a country under the care of a head man.

ahuula, a feather cloak, <page 155>.

Ai Kanaka, man eater, <page 191>.

aikane, an intimate friend of the same sex, <page 264>.

Aina-i ka-kaupo-o-Kane (the land in the heart of Kane), the primeval home of mankind, <page 17>.

Aina kumupuaa a Kane, see Kanaka-maoli.

Aina lauena a Kane, <page 24>

Aina-wai-akua-a-Kane (the land of the divine water of Kane), the primeval home of mankind, <page 17>.

aipuupuu, chief cook or steward, <page 141>.

akaaka, laughter, <page 118>.

aku, a species of fish, the bonito.

akua, a deity, <page 184>.

  

A-PE

akule, a species of fish.

ala, a smooth, round stone.

alae, mud-hens, <page 33>.

alaea, red earth, of which the body of the first man was made, <page 16>.

Alehe-ka-la, sun snarer, <page 32>.

alii, chief.

Alii aimoku, sovereign of the land. aloha, a word betokening greeting or farewell.

Aloha ino oe, eia ihonei paha oe e make ai, ke ai mainei Pele, Compassion great to you! Close here, perhaps, is your death; Pele comes devouring, <page 40>.

Aloha oe! Alas for you! <page 45>.

anaana, prayer of a Kahuna to accomplish one's death, <page 169>.

anae-holo, a species of fish, <page 270>.

anahulu, a period of ten days.

Ana puhi, eel's cave, <page 188>.

ano akua nae, but godlike, <page 55>.

Aole! no! <page 40>.

ao poko, short cloud, <page 207>.

apapani (or apapane), a scarlet bird, <page 182>.

a-pe, a plant having broad leaves of an acrid taste, like kalo, but stronger.

[p. 278]

  

AUK

auki, the ki leaf (Dracaena terminalis), <page 119>.

Aumakua, ancestral shades, <page 93>; god, <page 220>.

aupehu, famine swollen, <page 220>.

auwai, watercourse, <page 110>.

Auwe ka make! alas, he is dead! <page 176>.

awa, the name of a plant of a bitter, acrid taste, from which an intoxicating drink is made; also the name of the liquor itself, expressed from the root of the plant. (Piper methysticum).

aweoweo, a species of reddish fish.

 

Eia o Hana la he aina aupehu; o Hana keia i ka ia iki; ka ia o Kama; ka ia o Lanakila, <page 220>.

Elepaio, a small green bird (Chasiempis sandwichensis), <page 125>.

 

ha, the lower stem of leaves when cut from the root, <page 114>.

haawe, back-load, <page 126>.

haka, a medium devoted to the cult of a god, <page 263>.

hala, tree (Pandanus odoratissimus), <page 121>.

halau, shed, <page 113>.

hau, a forest tree--a species of hibiscus.

he ekolu ula o ka la, the third brightness of the sun, <page 204>.

hee kupua, wonderful octopus, <page 234>.

heiau, temple.

  

IKI

he keehina honua a Kane, <page 15>.

he'lii kahuli, a fallen chief, <page 19>.

He Lualoa no Na'lii, a deep pit for the chiefs, <page 241>.

he mau anahulu, several ten day periods.

He po hookahi, a ao ua pau, in one night, and by dawn it is finished, <page 109>.

He waa halau Alii a ka Moku, the royal vessel, the ark, <page 20>.

hiaku, name of a place in the sea beyond the kaiuli, and inside the kohola, <page 242>.

Hi-ka-po-loa, a name for the godhead, <page 15>.

Hilo, the first day (of the new moon), <page 75>.

hilu, a species of fish, spotted with various colors, <page 273>.

hinahina, leaves of a gray or withered appearance, <page 98>.

hinalea, a species of wrasse-fish. hokeo, a fisherman's gourd.

hoku kaolele, a meteor, <page 253>.

holua, sled.

honu, sea turtle, <page 183>.

hou, a species of fish, <page 274>.

hula, a dance.

 

ieie, a decorative vine. (Freyoinetia arnotti).

iiwi, a small red bird.

i ka muli o Hea at the rear of Hea, <page 24>.

Ikiki, a summer month--July or August, <page 74>.

i kini akua, spirits, angels.

[p. 279]

  

IKU

Ikua, a winter month--December or January, <page 74>.

i kuhaia, from spittle, <page 18>.

ilalo loa i ka po, deep down into darkness, <page 18>.

hau, the bark of the hau tree from which ropes are made, <page 218>.

ilio, dog.

i mea ole, as nothing.

imu, oven.

iwi kuamoo, the backbone.

 

ka aina i ka haupo a Kane, <page 24>.

ka aina momona a Kane, the fruitful land of Kane, <page 24>.

kaao, legend, <page 108>.

ka holua ana o Kahawali, Kahawali's sliding-place, <page 39>.

kahu, keeper, <page 188>.

Kahunas, priests, <page 203>.

kahuna lapaau, medical priest, <page 53>.

Kaiakahinalii, the Flood, <page 20>.

Kai a Kahinalii, Sea of Kahinalaa, <page 37>.

kai-ula-a-Kane, the Red Sea of Kane, <page 24>.

kaiuli, the deep sea.

kai waena, middle post (of a house), <page 223>.

Kakelekele, hydropathic cure, <page 126>.

kala, a species of fish.

Ka lae o ka ilio, the dog's forehead, <page 240>.

Ka lae a ka laau, <page 240>.

Kalana-i hau-ola (Kalana with the life-giving dew), the primeval home of mankind, <page 17>.

  

KAU

kalo, the well-known vegetable of Hawaii, a species of Arum esculentum; Colocasia antiquorum, <page 131>.

kamaainas, original inhabitants, or long residents, <page 140>.

kamani tree, Calophyllum inophyllum, <page 72>.

kanaka, a man; the general name of men, women, and children of all classes, in distinction from animals.

Kanaka-maoli, the people living on the mainland of Kane (Aina kumupuaa a Kane), <page 22>.

Kane, sunlight, one of the three supreme gods, <page 15>.

kanekoa, a deity, <page 184>.

Kane-laa-uli, the fallen chief, he who fell on account of the tree, <page 17>.

Kanikau, lamentation, p.,<page 81>.

ka one lauena a Kane, <page 24>.

kapa, the cloth beaten from the bark of the paper mulberry, also from the bark of several other trees; hence, cloth of any kind; clothing generally.

Kapapahanaumoku, the island bearing rock or stratum, <page 49>.

ka poe keokeo maoli, <page 22>.

kapu, sacred.

kapu-hoano, sacred or holy days, <page 24>.

kapuku, the restoration to life of the dead, <page 151>.

Ka Punahou, the new spring, <page 37>.

Kauakiowao, Mountain Mist, <page 133>.

[p. 280]

  

KAU

Kauawaahila, Waahila Rain, <page 133>.

kau i ka lele, placed on the altar, <page 209>.

ka-wai-ola-loa-a-Kane, water of everlasting life, <page 23>.

kawelewele, guiding-ropes, <page 115>.

Keakeomilu, the liver of Milu, <page 56>.

keawemauhili, a deity, <page 184>.

Keinohoomanawanui, a sloven, one persistently unclean, <page 88>.

Ke po-lua ahi, the pit of fire, inferno, <page 18>.

Ke ue nei au ia olua, I grieve for you two, <page 45>.

ki, a plant having a saccharine root, the leaves of which are used for wrapping up bundles of food; the leaves are also used as food for cattle and for thatching.

kihei, a mantle worn over the shoulders.

kilu, play, or game, <page 127>.

koa tree, Acacia koa.

ko' a aina aumakua, fishing-station, <page 229>.

ko' a ia, fishing-station.

ko' a ku-ula, a temple to , <page 227>.

ko' a lawaia, fishing-station, <page 222>.

koali, same as kowali.

koas, fighting men, <page 157>.

koele, a small division of land; hence, a field planted by the tenants for a landlord; a garden belonging to the chief, but cultivated by his people, <page 260>.

kohola, a reef.

  

LAK

kolea, plover, <page 71>.

kona, a severe storm that comes up from the equator, <page 183>.

konane, a game like checkers.

Konohiki, feudal lord, a head man with others under him.

kou, a large shade tree growing mostly near the sea, <page 161>.

kowali, convolvulus vine, a swing made of these vines, <page 46>.

Ku, Substance; one of the three supreme gods.

ku, arise, stand, <page 24>.

kuaha, a stone-paved platform, <page 156>.

Ku-Kaua-Kaki, a triad--the Fundamental Supreme Unity, <page 15>.

kukini, trained runner.

kuko, to wish, to lust, <page 89>.

kukui tree, Aleurites molluccana, <page 88>.

Kulu-ipo, the fallen chief, he who fell on account of the tree, <page 17>.

kumukahi, east wind, <page 41>. 

Kumu-uli, the fallen tree, he who fell on account of the tree, <page 17>.

kupa, native born person, <page 271>.

Kupapau o Puupehe, Tomb of Puupehe, <page 181>.

kupua, demigod, <page 43>.

ku-ula, the fish god of Hawaiians.

 

Lae, cape (of land), <page 148>.

la-i leaves, dracaena leaves.

laka loa, very tame, <page 216>.

[p. 281]

  

LAL

lalo puhaka, <page 16>.

lama, a forest tree (Maba sandwicensis) which has very hard wood, <page 258>.

lana, floating, <page 20>.

lanai, arbor, <page 150>.

lau, four hundred, <page 190>.

, a species of turnip. (<page 135> --JBH)

lawalu, to cook meat on the coals wrapped in ki leaves, <page 147>. 

leho, cowry shell.

lehoula, a species of cowry of a red color.

lehua tree, Metrosideros polymorpha.

leiomano, shark's tooth weapon, <page 203>.

leis, wreaths.

lele, a variety of banana, <page 150>.

lelekawa, to jump from a height into deep water, <page 256>.

lele kowali, swinging, <page 46>.

Lelepua, arrow flight, <page 88>.

lepo ula, red earth, of which the body of the first man was made, <page 16>.

lilo ai kona ola a make iho la, his life was taken, so death ensued, <page 55>.

limu, sea-moss, <page 242>.

Lo Aikanaka, the last of the man-eating chiefs.

lomilomi, to rub or chafe the body.

Lono, Sound; one of the three Supreme gods.

lua, killing by breaking the bones, <page 142>.

Lua o Milu, the nether world, <page 46>.

  

MAN

luau, the kalo leaf; boiled herbs; young kalo leaves gathered and cooked for food.

ma, a syllable signifying accompanying, together, etc., p <page 54>.

maika, the name of a popular game; also, the stone used for rolling in that game, <page 157>.

mai ka po mai, from the time of night, darkness, chaos, <page 55>.

mai, komo mai, come, come in, <page 78>.

maile, Alyxia olivaeformis, <page 120>; fine-leaved variety, Maile laulii, <page 95>.

makaha, floodgates, <page 142>.

makahelei, drawn eyes, <page 120>.

makahiki, year, <page 270>.

makai, seaward, <page 217>.

Makakehau, Misty Eyes, <page 182>.

malailua, goats without horns, such as were found on Mauna Loa, <page 24>.

malau, a place in the sea where the water is still and quiet; a place where the bait for the aku or bonito is found, <page 246>.

malos, girdles worn by the males.

mamani, or mamane (Sophora chrysophylla), a hard wood tree, <page 173>.

manaiaakalani, <page 218>.

mana kupua, miraculous power, <page 215>.

manawa ole, in no time, <page 110>; in a short time, <page 113>.

manienie-akiaki, a medicinal grass of the olden time, <page 135>.

[p. 282]

  

MAN

manini, a species of fish caught by diving, <page 250>.

mane, dam, <page 110>; also the general name for shark.

manohae, a ravenous shark, <page 259>.

maoli, a species of banana; the long, dark-colored plantain, <page 150>.

mauka, inland.

Milu, inferno.

Moi, sovereign, <page 186>.

moi, a species of fish (Threadfin) of a white color.

moo, a general name for all lizards, a serpent.

Moo-kapu, sacred lands, <page 210>.

mua, front; the house of a man's outfit (of several) that was Kapu to all women, even his wife, <page 258>.

Na akua aumakua o ka poe kahuna kalai waa, ancestral gods of the canoe builders, <page 216>.

nae, the farther side, <page 116>.

na-u, jessamine, gardenia.

noa, free of, or released from Kapu, <page 135>.

 

O haehae ka manu, ke ale nei ka wai, the water is disturbed by action of the birds, <page 95>.

ohelo, a species of small reddish berry; the Hawaiian whortleberry, <page 182>.

ohia, native apple; also, a forest tree of several varieties.

ohia hemolele, the sacred apple-tree, P. <page 17>.

  

PAL

ohiki-makaloa, long-eyed sand-crabs, <page 70>.

ohua, the name given to the young of the manini fish.

Oi-e, Most Excellent, <page 15>.

Oio, procession of ghosts, <page 48>.

oio, a species of fish (Bonefish).

oo, digger, <page 52>.

oopu, a species of small fish living in fresh water rivers and ponds. opae, a small fish; a shrimp; a crab.

opihi-koele, a species of shell-fish, <page 224>.

opihis, shell-fish, <page 70>.

 

pa, wall, <page 157>.

pa, pearl shell, <page 247>.

pa hi aku, pearl fish-hook.

pahoa, stone weapon; dagger.

pahoehoe, smooth, shining lava.

pahonua, (more correctly puuhonua), place of refuge, <page 156>.

pahoola, a remnant, a healing piece, <page 56>.

pahu kaeke, a temple drum, <page 186>.

paiula, the royal red kapa of old, <page 145>.

pakai, an herb used for food in time of scarcity.

pakai, a house joined to a house above--that is, a tower, <page 158>.

pala, ripe, soft; also, as a noun, a vegetable used as food in time of scarcity.

pale, a director, <page 115>.

pali, precipice.

[p. 283]

  

PAL

Pali-uli (the blue mountain), the primeval home of mankind, <page 17>.

palolo, whitish clay, of which the head of the first man was made, <page 16>.

pani, a stoppage, a closing up, that which stops or closes.

papa, a board; a term applied to anything of flat surface.

papa holua, a flat sled, <page 40>.

pa-u, skirt.

pihoihoi lea, greatly excited, <page 206>.

pili, the long, coarse grass used in thatching houses, <page 158>.

pipipi, a temporary shelter hut, <page 54>.

po, night, chaos, p<page 15>, <page 49>.

poe poi-uhane, spirit catchers, <page 129>.

pohaku-ia, fish stone, <page 241>.

poi, the paste or pudding which was formerly the chief food of the Hawaiians, and still is so to a great extent. It is made of kalo, sweet potatoes, or breadfruit, but mostly of kalo, by baking the above articles in an underground oven, and then peeling or pounding them, adding a little water; it is then left in a mass to ferment; after fermentation, it is again worked over with more water until it has the consistency of thick paste. It is eaten cold with the fingers.

Po-ia-milu, inferno, <page 18>.

  

UHA

Po-kini-kini, inferno, <page 18>.

Po-kua-kini, inferno, <page 18>.

po o akua, a certain night of the month, <page 205>.

Po-papa-ia-owa, inferno, <page 18>.

Po-pau-ole, endless night, <page 18>.

popolo, a plant sometimes eaten in times of scarcity, also used as a medicine.

pouhana, end post (of a house).

poumanu, corner post (of a house), <page 210>.

pou o manu, corner post (of a house), <page 223>.

pu, head or end of a canoe, or log, on which to fasten the rope to draw it down out of the river, <page 115>.

puaa, a hog, <page 16>.

puhala, the hala tree, <page 233>.

puhi, eel, sea snake.

puholoholo, to cook (food) by rolling with hot stones in a covered gourd, <page 135>.

puloulou, sign of kapu, <page 119>.

puni ka hiamoe, a trance or deep sleep, <page 81>.

puoa, a burial tower, <page 148>.

 

Reinga, the leaping place, <page 50>.

 

tapa, see Kapa, <page 144>.

 

Ua, rain, <page 169>.

ua haki ka pule, <page 208>.

ueue, bait, <page 225>.

uhae ia, <page 134>.

[p. 284]

  

UHU

uhu, a species of fish about the size of the salmon, <page 241>.

uki, a plant or shrub sometimes used in thatching; a species of grass, <page 98>.

uku, a species of fish.

Ulu kapu a Kane, the breadfruit tabooed for Kane, <page 57>.

uo, a part of the process of feather cloak making, <page 155>.

uwau, a species of bird; a kind of waterfowl.

 

waa, canoe, <page 194>.

waa halau, see He waa halau Alii o ka Moku.

  

WIL

Wai a Hiku, water of Hiku, <page 44>.

Waiakoloa, <page 192>.

Wai nao, spittle, <page 16>.

waoke, or wauke, (Broussonetia papyrifera), the plant furnishing bark for the best Kapa, <page 79>.

Wawa ka Menehune i Puukapele, ma Kauai,  ka manu o ka loko o Kawainui ma Koolaupoko, Oahu, the hum of the voices of the Menehunes at Puukapele, Kauai, startled the birds of the pond of Kawainui, at Koolaupoko, Oahu, <page 111>.

wiliwili tree, Erythrina monosperma, <page 121>.

 

    


===== BOOK: hh.txt =====


    
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio

     THE HISTORY OF HERODOTUS BOOK I THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED CLIO This is the Showing forth of the Inquiry of Herodotus of Halicarnassos, to the end that neither the deeds of men may be forgotten by lapse of time, nor the works great and marvellous, which have been produced some by Hellenes and some by Barbarians, may lose their renown; and especially that the causes may be remembered for which these waged war with one another.         
Kleobis kai Bitun[Prologos]Erodotoy Alikarnesseos istories apodexis ede, us mete ta genomena ex anthrupun tui xronui exitela genetai, mete erga megala te kai thumasta, ta men Ellesi ta de barbaroisi apodexthenta, aklea genetai, ta te alla kai di' en aitien epolemesan alleloisi.    
      1. Those of the Persians who have knowledge of history declare that the Phenicians first began the quarrel. These, they say, came from that which is called the Erythraian Sea to this of ours; and having settled in the land where they continue even now to dwell, set themselves forthwith to make long voyages by sea. And conveying merchandise of Egypt and of Assyria they arrived at other places and also at Argos; now Argos was at that time in all points the first of the States within that land which is now called Hellas;--the Phenicians arrived then at this land of Argos, and began to dispose of their ship's cargo: and on the fifth or sixth day after they had arrived, when their goods had been almost all sold, there came down to the sea a great company of women, and among them the daughter of the king; and her name, as the Hellenes also agree, was Io the daughter of Inachos. These standing near to the stern of the ship were buying of the wares such as pleased them most, when of a sudden the Phenicians, passing the word from one to another, made a rush upon them; and the greater part of the women escaped by flight, but Io and certain others were carried off. So they put them on board their ship, and forthwith departed, sailing away to Egypt.         1. [1] Perseun men nyn oi logioi Foinikas aitioys fasi genesthai teis diaforeis. toutoys gar apo teis Erythreis kaleomenes thalasses apikomenoys epi tende ten thalassan, kai oikesantas touton ton xuron ton kai nun oikeoysi, aytika naytilieisi makreisi epithesthai, apagineontas de fortia Aiguptia te kai Assuria tei te allei esapikneesthai kai de kai es Argos. [2] to de Argos touton ton xronon proeixe apasi tun en tei nun Elladi kaleomenei xurei. apikomenoys de tous Foinikas es de to Argos touto diatithesthai ton forton. [3] pemptei de e ektei emerei ap' Es apikonto, exempolemenun sfi sxedon pantun, elthein epi ten thalassan gynaikas allas te pollas kai de kai tou basileos thygatera. to de oi oynoma einai, kata tuyto to kai Ellenes legoysi, Ioun ten Inaxoy. [4] tautas stasas kata prumnen teis neos uneesthai tun fortiun tun sfi En thymos malista. kai tous Foinikas diakeleysamenoys ormeisai ep' aytas. tas men de pleunas tun gynaikun apofygein, ten de Ioun sun alleisi arpastheinai. esbalomenoys de es ten nea oixesthai apopleontas ep' Aiguptoy.    
      2. In this manner the Persians report that Io came to Egypt, not agreeing therein with the Hellenes, and this they say was the first beginning of wrongs. Then after this, they say, certain Hellenes (but the name of the people they are not able to report) put in to the city of Tyre in Phenicia and carried off the king's daughter Europa;--these would doubtless be Cretans;--and so they were quits for the former injury. After this however the Hellenes, they say, were the authors of the second wrong; for they sailed in to Aia of Colchis and to the river Phasis with a ship of war, and from thence, after they had done the other business for which they came, they carried off the king's daughter Medea: and the king of Colchis sent a herald to the land of Hellas and demanded satisfaction for the rape and to have his daughter back; but they answered that, as the Barbarians had given them no satisfaction for the rape of Io the Argive, so neither would they give satisfaction to the Barbarians for this.         2. [1] oytu men Ioun es Aigypton apikesthai legoysi Persai, oyk us Ellenes, kai tun adikematun pruton touto arxai. meta de tauta Ellenun tinas (oy gar exoysi toynoma apegesasthai) fasi teis Foinikes es Turon prossxontas arpasai tou basileos ten thygatera Eyrupen. eiesan d' an oytoi Kreites. tauta men de isa pros isa sfi genesthai, meta de tauta Ellenas aitioys teis deyteres adikies genesthai. [2] kataplusantas gar makrei nei es Aian te ten Kolxida kai epi Fasin potamon, entheuten, diaprexamenoys kai talla tun eineken apikato, arpasai tou basileos ten thygatera Medeien. [3] pempsanta de ton Kolxun basilea es ten Ellada keryka aiteein te dikas teis arpageis kai apaiteein ten thygatera. tous de ypokrinasthai us oyde ekeinoi Ious teis Argeies edosan sfi dikas teis arpageis. oyde un aytoi dusein ekeinoisi.    
      3. In the next generation after this, they say, Alexander the son of Priam, having heard of these things, desired to get a wife for himself by violence from Hellas, being fully assured that he would not be compelled to give any satisfaction for this wrong, inasmuch as the Hellenes gave none for theirs. So he carried off Helen, and the Hellenes resolved to send messengers first and to demand her back with satisfaction for the rape; and when they put forth this demand, the others alleged to them the rape of Medea, saying that the Hellenes were now desiring satisfaction to be given to them by others, though they had given none themselves nor had surrendered the person when demand was made.         3. [1] deyterei de legoysi geneei meta tauta Alexandron ton Priamoy, akekoota tauta, etheleisai oi ek teis Ellados di' arpageis genesthai gynaika, epistamenon pantus oti oy dusei dikas. oyde gar ekeinoys didonai. [2] oytu de arpasantos aytou Elenen, toisi Ellesi doxai pruton pempsantas aggeloys apaiteein te Elenen kai dikas teis arpageis aiteein. tous de, proisxomenun tauta, proferein sfi Medeies ten arpagen, us oy dontes aytoi dikas oyde ekdontes apaiteontun boyloiato sfi par' allun dikas ginesthai.    
      4. Up to this point, they say, nothing more happened than the carrying away of women on both sides; but after this the Hellenes were very greatly to blame; for they set the first example of war, making an expedition into Asia before the Barbarians made any into Europe. Now they say that in their judgment, though it is an act of wrong to carry away women by force, it is a folly to set one's heart on taking vengeance for their rape, and the wise course is to pay no regard when they have been carried away; for it is evident that they would never be carried away if they were not themselves willing to go. And the Persians say that they, namely the people of Asia, when their women were carried away by force, had made it a matter of no account, but the Hellenes on account of a woman of Lacedemon gathered together a great armament, and then came to Asia and destroyed the dominion of Priam; and that from this time forward they had always considered the Hellenic race to be their enemy: for Asia and the Barbarian races which dwell there the Persians claim as belonging to them; but Europe and the Hellenic race they consider to be parted off from them.         4. [1] mexri men un toutoy arpagas mounas einai par' allelun, to de apo toutoy Ellenas de megalus aitioys genesthai. proteroys gar arxai strateuesthai es ten Asien e sfeas es ten Eyrupen. [2] to men nyn arpazein gynaikas andrun adikun nomizein ergon einai, to de arpastheiseun spoyden poiesasthai timureein anoetun, to de medemian uren exein arpastheiseun sufronun. deila gar de oti, ei me aytai eboulonto, oyk an erpazonto. [3] sfeas men de tous ek teis Asies legoysi Persai arpazomeneun tun gynaikun logon oydena poiesasthai, Ellenas de Lakedaimonies eineken gynaikos stolon megan synageirai kai epeita elthontas es ten Asien ten Priamoy dunamin katelein. [4] apo toutoy aiei egesasthai to Ellenikon sfisi einai polemion. ten gar Asien kai ta enoikeonta ethnea barbara oikeieuntai oi Persai, ten de Eyrupen kai to Ellenikon egentai kexuristhai.    
      5. The Persians for their part say that things happened thus; and they conclude that the beginning of their quarrel with the Hellenes was on account of the taking of Ilion: but as regards Io the Phenicians do not agree with the Persians in telling the tale thus; for they deny that they carried her off to Egypt by violent means, and they say on the other hand that when they were in Argos she was intimate with the master of their ship, and perceiving that she was with child, she was ashamed to confess it to her parents, and therefore sailed away with the Phenicians of her own will, for fear of being found out. These are the tales told by the Persians and the Phenicians severally: and concerning these things I am not going to say that they happened thus or thus, but when I have pointed to the man who first within my own knowledge began to commit wrong against the Hellenes, I shall go forward further with the story, giving an account of the cities of men, small as well as great: for those which in old times were great have for the most part become small, while those that were in my own time great used in former times to be small: so then, since I know that human prosperity never continues steadfast, I shall make mention of both indifferently.         5. [1] oytu men Persai legoysi genesthai, kai dia ten Ilioy alusin eyriskoysi sfisi eousan ten arxen teis exthres teis es tous Ellenas. [2] peri de teis Ious oyk omologeoysi Perseisi oytu Foinikes. oy gar arpagei sfeas xresamenoys legoysi agagein ayten es Aigypton, all' us en tui Argei emisgeto tui nayklerui teis neos. epei d' emathe egkyos eousa, aideomene tous tokeas oytu de ethelonten ayten toisi Foinixi synekplusai, us an me katadelos genetai. [3] tauta men nyn Persai te kai Foinikes legoysi. egu de peri men toutun oyk erxomai ereun us oytu e allus kus tauta egeneto, ton de oida aytos pruton yparxanta adikun ergun es tous Ellenas, touton semenas probesomai es to prosu tou logoy, omoius smikra kai megala astea anthrupun epexiun. [4] ta gar to palai megala En, ta polla smikra aytun gegone. ta de ep' emeu En megala, proteron En smikra. ten anthrupeien un epistamenos eydaimonien oydama en tuytui menoysan, epimnesomai amfoterun omoius.    
      6. Croesus was Lydian by race, the son of Alyattes and ruler of the nations which dwell on this side of the river Halys; which river, flowing from the South between the Syrians and the Paphlagonians, runs out towards the North Wind into that Sea which is called the Euxine. This Croesus, first of all the Barbarians of whom we have knowledge, subdued certain of the Hellenes and forced them to pay tribute, while others he gained over and made them his friends. Those whom he subdued were the Ionians, the Aiolians, and the Dorians who dwell in Asia; and those whom he made his friends were the Lacedemonians. But before the reign of Croesus all the Hellenes were free; for the expedition of the Kimmerians, which came upon Ionia before the time of Croesus, was not a conquest of the cities but a plundering incursion only.         6. [1] Kroisos En Lydos men genos, pais de Alyatteu, turannos de ethneun tun entos Alyos potamou, os rheun apo mesambries metaxu Syriun te kai Paflagonun exiei pros boreen anemon es ton Eyxeinon kaleomenon ponton. [2] oytos o Kroisos barbarun prutos tun emeis idmen tous men katestrepsato Ellenun es foroy apagugen, tous de filoys prosepoiesato. katestrepsato men Iunas te kai Aioleas kai Durieas tous en tei Asiei, filoys de prosepoiesato Lakedaimonioys. [3] pro de teis Kroisoy arxeis pantes Ellenes Esan eleutheroi. to gar Kimmeriun strateyma to epi ten Iunien apikomenon Kroisoy eon presbuteron oy katastrofe egeneto tun poliun all' ex epidromeis arpage.    
      7. Now the supremacy which had belonged to the Heracleidai came to the family of Croesus, called Mermnadai, in the following manner:--Candaules, whom the Hellenes call Myrsilos, was ruler of Sardis and a descendant of Alcaios, son of Heracles: for Agron, the son of Ninos, the son of Belos, the son of Alcaios, was the first of the Heracleidai who became king of Sardis, and Candaules the son of Myrsos was the last; but those who were kings over this land before Agrond, were descendants of Lydos the son of Atys, whence this whole nation was called Lydian, having been before called Meonian. From these the Heracleidai, descended from Heracles and the slave-girl of Iardanos, obtained the government, being charged with it by reason of an oracle; and they reigned for two-and-twenty generations of men, five hundred and five years, handing on the power from father to son, till the time of Clandaules the son of Myrsos.         7. [1] e de egemonie oytu perieilthe, eousa Erakleideun es to genos to Kroisoy, kaleomenoys de Mermnadas. [2] En Kandaules, ton oi Ellenes Myrsilon onomazoysi, turannos Sardiun, apogonos de Alkaioy tou Erakleos. Agrun men gar o Ninoy tou Beloy tou Alkaioy prutos Erakleideun basileus egeneto Sardiun, Kandaules de o Mursoy ystatos. [3] oi de proteron Agrunos basileusantes tautes teis xures Esan apogonoi Lydou tou Atyos, ap' otey o deimos Ludios eklethe o pas oytos, proteron Meiun kaleomenos. [4] para toutun Erakleidai epitrafthentes esxon ten arxen ek theopropioy, ek doules te teis Iardanoy gegonotes kai Erakleos, arxantes men epi duo te kai eikosi geneas andrun etea pente te kai pentakosia, pais para patros ekdekomenos ten arxen, mexri Kandauleu tou Mursoy.    
      8. This Candaules then of whom I speak had become passionately in love with his own wife; and having become so, he deemed that his wife was fairer by far than all other women; and thus deeming, to Gyges the son of Daskylos (for he of all his spearmen was the most pleasing to him), to this Gyges, I say, he used to impart as well the more weighty of his affairs as also the beauty of his wife, praising it above measure: and after no long time, since it was destined that evil should happen to Candaules, he said to Gyges as follows: "Gyges, I think that thou dost not believe me when I tell thee of the beauty of my wife, for it happens that men's ears are less apt of belief than their eyes: contrive therefore means by which thou mayest look upon her naked." But he cried aloud and said: "Master, what word of unwisdom is this which thou dost utter, bidding me look upon my mistress naked? When a woman puts off her tunic she puts off her modesty also. Moreover of old time those fair sayings have been found out by men, from which we ought to learn wisdom; and of these one is this,--that each man should look on his own: but I believe indeed that she is of all women the fairest and I entreat thee not to ask of me that which it is not lawful for me to do."         8. [1] oytos de un o Kandaules erasthe teis euytou gynaikos, erastheis de enomize oi einai gynaika pollon paseun kallisten. uste de tauta nomizun, En gar oi tun aixmoforun Guges o Daskuloy areskomenos malista, toutui tui Gugei kai ta spoydaiestera tun pregmatun yperetitheto o Kandaules kai de kai to eidos teis gynaikos yperepaineun. [2] xronoy de oy pollou dielthontos (xrein gar Kandaulei genesthai kakus) elege pros ton Gugen toiade. <<Guge, oy gar se dokeu peithesthai moi legonti peri tou eideos teis gynaikos (uta gar tygxanei anthrupoisi eonta apistotera ofthalmun), poiee okus ekeinen theeseai gymnen.>> [3] o d' ambusas eipe <<despota, tina legeis logon oyk ygiea, keleuun me despoinan ten emen theesasthai gymnen; ama de kithuni ekdyomenui synekduetai kai ten aidu gyne. [4] palai de ta kala anthrupoisi exeuretai, ek tun manthanein dei. en toisi en tode esti, skopeein tina ta euytou. egu de peithomai ekeinen einai paseun gynaikun kallisten, kai seo deomai me deesthai anomun.>>    
      9. With such words as these he resisted, fearing lest some evil might come to him from this; but the king answered him thus: "Be of good courage, Gyges, and have no fear, either of me, that I am saying these words to try thee, or of my wife, lest any harm may happen to thee from her. For I will contrive it so from the first that she shall not even perceive that she has been seen by thee. I will place thee in the room where we sleep, behind the open door; and after I have gone in, my wife also will come to lie down. Now there is a seat near the entrance of the room, and upon this she will lay her garments as she takes them off one by one; and so thou wilt be able to gaze upon her at full leisure. And when she goes from the chair to the bed and thou shalt be behind her back, then let it be thy part to take care that she sees thee not as thou goest through the door."         9. [1] o men de legun toiauta apemaxeto, arrudeun me ti oi ex aytun genetai kakon, o d' ameibeto toiside. <<tharsee, Guge, kai me fobeu mete eme, us seo peirumenos legu logon tonde, mete gynaika ten emen, me ti toi ex ayteis genetai blabos. arxen gar egu mexanesomai oytu uste mede mathein min oftheisan ypo seu. [2] egu gar se es to oikema en tui koimumetha opisthe teis anoigomenes thures stesu. meta d' eme eselthonta parestai kai e gyne e eme es koiton. keitai de agxou teis esodoy thronos. epi touton tun imatiun kata en ekaston ekdunoysa thesei, kai kat' esyxien pollen parexei toi theesasthai. [3] epean de apo tou thronoy steixei epi ten eynen kata nutoy te ayteis genei, soi meletu to entheuten okus me se opsetai ionta dia thyreun.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [10]

     10. He then, since he might not avoid it, gave consent: and Candaules, when he considered that it was time to rest, led Gyges to the chamber; and straightway after this the woman also appeared: and Gyges looked upon her after she came in and as she laid down her garments; and when she had her back turned towards him, as she went to the bed, then he slipped away from his hiding-place and was going forth. And as he went out, the woman caught sight of him, and perceiving that which had been done by her husband she did not cry out, though struck with shame, but she made as though she had not perceived the matter, meaning to avenge herself upon Candaules: for among the Lydians as also among most other Barbarians it is a shame even for a man to be seen naked.         10. [1] o men de us oyk edunato diafygein, En etoimos. o de Kandaules, epei edokee ure teis koites einai, egage ton Gugea es to oikema. kai meta tauta aytika parein kai e gyne. eselthousan de kai titheisan ta eimata etheeito o Guges. [2] us de kata nutoy egeneto iouses teis gynaikos es ten koiten, ypekdus exuree exu, kai e gyne eporai min exionta. mathousa de to poiethen ek tou andros oyte anebuse aisxyntheisa oyte edoxe mathein, en nou exoysa tisesthai ton Kandaulea. [3] para gar toisi Lydoisi, sxedon de kai para toisi alloisi barbaroisi kai andra oftheinai gymnon es aisxunen megalen ferei.    
      11. At the time then she kept silence, as I say, and made no outward sign; but as soon as day had dawned, and she made ready those of the servants whom she perceived to be the most attached to herself, and after that she sent to summon Gyges. He then, not supposing that anything of that which had been done was known to her, came upon her summons; for he had been accustomed before to go whenever the queen summoned him. And when Gyges was come, the woman said to him these words: "There are now two ways open to thee, Gyges, and I give thee the choice which of the two thou wilt prefer to take. Either thou must slay Candaules and possess both me and the kingdom of Lydia, or thou must thyself here on the spot be slain, so that thou mayest not in future, by obeying Candaules in all things, see that which thou shouldest not. Either he must die who formed this design, or thou who hast looked upon me naked and done that which is not accounted lawful." For a time then Gyges was amazed at these words, and afterwards he began to entreat her that she would not bind him by necessity to make such a choice: then however, as he could not prevail with her, but saw that necessity was in truth set before him either to slay his master or to be himself slain by others, he made the choice to live himself; and he inquired further as follows: "Since thou dost compel me to take my master's life against my own will, let me hear from thee also what is the manner in which we shall lay hands upon him." And she answering said: "From that same place shall the attempt be, where he displayed me naked; and we will lay hands upon him as he sleeps."         11. [1] tote men de oytu oyden delusasa esyxien eixe. us de emere taxista egegonee, tun oiketeun tous malista ura pistous eontas euytei, etoimoys poiesamene ekalee ton Gugea. o de oyden dokeun ayten tun prexthentun epistasthai Elthe kaleomenos. euthee gar kai prosthe, okus e basileia kaleoi, foitan. [2] us de o Guges apiketo, elege e gyne tade. <<nun toi dyun odun pareoyseun Guge didumi airesin, okoteren bouleai trapesthai. e gar Kandaulea apokteinas eme te kai ten basileien exe ten Lydun, e ayton se aytika oytu apothneskein dei, us an me panta peithomenos Kandaulei tou loipou ideis ta me se dei. [3] all' etoi keinon ge ton tauta boyleusanta dei apollysthai, e se ton eme gymnen theesamenon kai poiesanta oy nomizomena.>> o de Guges teus men apethumaze ta legomena, meta de iketeye me min anagkaiei endeein diakrinai toiauten airesin. [4] oykun de epeithe, all' ura anagkaien aletheus prokeimenen e ton despotea apollunai e ayton yp' allun apollysthai. aireetai aytos perieinai. epeiruta de legun tade. <<epei me anagkazeis despotea ton emon kteinein oyk ethelonta, fere akousu teui kai tropui epixeiresomen aytui.>> [5] e de ypolabousa efe <<ek tou aytou men xurioy e orme estai othen per kai ekeinos eme epedexato gymnen, ypnumenui de e epixeiresis estai.>>    
      12. So after they had prepared the plot, when night came on, (for Gyges was not let go nor was there any way of escape for him, but he must either be slain himself or slay Candaules), he followed the woman to the bedchamber; and she gave him a dagger and concealed him behind that very same door. Then afterwards, while Candaules was sleeping, Gyges came privily up to him and slew him, and he obtained both his wife and his kingdom: of him moreover Archilochos the Parian, who lived about that time, made mention in a trimeter iambic verse.         12. [1] us de ertysan ten epiboylen, nyktos genomenes (oy gar emetieto o Guges, oyde oi En apallage oydemia, all' edee e ayton apolulenai e Kandaulea) eipeto es ton thalamon tei gynaiki, kai min ekeine, egxeiridion dousa, katakruptei ypo ten ayten thuren. [2] kai meta tauta anapayomenoy Kandauleu ypekdus te kai apokteinas ayton esxe kai ten gynaika kai ten basileien Guges tou kai Arxiloxos o Parios kata ton ayton xronon genomenos en iambui trimetrui epemnesthe.3    
      13. He obtained the kingdom however and was strengthened in it by means of the Oracle at Delphi; for when the Lydians were angry because of the fate of Candaules, and had risen in arms, a treaty was made between the followers of Gyges and the other Lydians to this effect, that if the Oracle should give answer that he was to be king of the Lydians, he should be king, and if not, he should give back the power to the sons of Heracles. So the Oracle gave answer, and Gyges accordingly became king: yet the Pythian prophetess said this also, that vengeance for the Heracleidai should come upon the descendants of Gyges in the fifth generation. Of this oracle the Lydians and their kings made no account until it was in fact fulfilled.         13. [1] esxe de ten basileien kai ekratunthe ek tou en Delfoisi xresterioy. us gar de oi Lydoi deinon epoieunto to Kandauleu pathos kai en oploisi Esan, synebesan es tuyto oi te tou Gugeu stasiutai kai oi loipoi Lydoi, en men to xresterion anelei min basilea einai Lydun, ton de basileuein, en de me, apodounai opisu es Erakleidas ten arxen. [2] aneile te de to xresterion kai ebasileyse oytu Guges. tosonde mentoi eipe e Pythie, us Erakleideisi tisis exei es ton pempton apogonon Gugeu. toutoy tou epeos Lydoi te kai oi basilees aytun logon oydena epoieunto, prin de epetelesthe.    
      14. Thus the Mermnadai obtained the government having driven out from it the Heracleidai: and Gyges when he became ruler sent votive offerings to Delphi not a few, for of all the silver offerings at Delphi his are more in number than those of any other man; and besides the silver he offered a vast quantity of gold, and especially one offering which is more worthy of mention than the rest, namely six golden mixing-bowls, which are dedicated there as his gift: of these the weight is thirty talents, and they stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, (though in truth this treasury does not belong to the State of the Corinthians, but is that of Kypselos the son of Aetion). This Gyges was the first of the Barbarians within our knowledge who dedicated votive offerings at Delphi, except only Midas the son of Gordias king of Phrygia, who dedicated for an offering the royal throne on which he sat before all to decide causes; and this throne, a sight worth seeing, stands in the same place with the bowls of Gyges. This gold and silver which Gyges dedicated is called Gygian by the people of Delphi, after the name of him who offered it. Now Gyges also, as soon as he became king, led an army against Miletos and Smyrna, and he took the lower town of Colophon: but no other great deed did he do in his reign, which lasted eight-and-thirty years, therefore we will pass him by with no more mention than has already been made,         14. [1] ten men de tyrannida oytu esxon oi Mermnadai tous Erakleidas apelomenoi, Guges de tyranneusas apepempse anathemata es Delfous oyk oliga, all' osa men arguroy anathemata, esti oi pleista en Delfoisi, parex de tou arguroy xryson apleton anetheke allon te kai tou malista mnemen axion exein esti, kreteires oi arithmon ex xruseoi anakeatai. [2] estasi de oytoi en tui Korinthiun thesayrui, stathmon exontes triekonta talanta. alethei de logui xreumenui oy Korinthiun tou demosioy esti o thesayros, alla Kypseloy tou Eetiunos. oytos de o Guges prutos barbarun tun emeis idmen es Delfous anetheke anathemata meta Miden ton Gordieu Frygies basilea. [3] anetheke gar de kai Mides ton basileion thronon es ton prokatizun edikaze, eonta axiotheeton. keitai de o thronos oytos entha per oi tou Gugeu kreteires. o de xrysos oytos kai o argyros ton o Guges anetheke, ypo Delfun kaleetai Gygadas epi tou anathentos epunymien.  [4] esebale men nyn stratien kai oytos epeite Erxe es te Mileton kai es Smurnen, kai Kolofunos to asty eile. all' oyden gar mega ap' aytou allo ergon egeneto basileusantos dyun deonta tesserakonta etea, touton men paresomen tosauta epimnesthentes,   
      15. and I will speak now of Ardys the son of Gyges, who became king after Gyges. He took Priene and made an invasion against Miletos; and while he was ruling over Sardis, the Kimmerians driven from their abodes by the nomad Scythians came to Asia and took Sardis except the citadel.         15.[1] Ardyos de tou Gugeu meta Gugen basileusantos mnemen poiesomai. oytos de Prieneas te eile es Mileton te esebale, epi toutoy te tyranneuontos Sardiun Kimmerioi ex etheun ypo Skytheun tun nomadun exanastantes apikonto es ten Asien kai Sardis plen teis akropolios eilon.    
      16. Now when Ardys had been king for nine-and-forty years, Sadyattes his son succeeded to his kingdom, and reigned twelve years; and after him Alyattes. This last made war against Kyaxares the descendant of Deiokes and against the Medes, and he drove the Kimmerians forth out of Asia, and he took Smyrna which had been founded from Colophon, and made an invasion against Clazomenai. From this he returned not as he desired, but with great loss: during his reign however he performed other deeds very worthy of mention as follows:--        16. [1] Ardyos de basileusantos enos deonta pentekonta etea exedexato Sadyattes o Ardyos, kai ebasileyse etea dyudeka, Sadyatteu de Alyattes. [2] oytos de Kyaxarei te tui Deiokeu apogonui epolemese kai Medoisi, Kimmerioys te ek teis Asies exelase, Smurnen te ten apo Kolofunos ktistheisan eile, es Klazomenas te esebale. apo men nyn toutun oyk us ethele apellaxe, alla prosptaisas megalus.   
      17. He made war with those of Miletos, having received this war as an inheritance from his father: for he used to invade their land and besiege Miletos in the following manner:--whenever there were ripe crops upon the land, then he led an army into their confines, making his march to the sound of pipes and harps and flutes both of male and female tone: and when he came to the Milesian land, he neither pulled down the houses that were in the fields, nor set fire to them nor tore off their doors, but let them stand as they were; the trees however and the crops that were upon the land he destroyed, and then departed by the way he came: for the men of Miletos had command of the sea, so that it was of no use for his army to blockade them: and he abstained from pulling down the houses to the end that the Milesians might have places to dwell in while they sowed and tilled the land, and by the means of their labour he might have somewhat to destroy when he made his invasion.         17. [1] alla de erga apedexato eun en tei arxei axiapegetotata tade. epolemese Milesioisi, paradexamenos ton polemon para tou patros. epelaunun gar epoliorkee ten Mileton tropui toiuide. okus men eie en tei gei karpos adros, tenikauta eseballe ten stratien. estrateueto de ypo syriggun te kai pektidun kai aylou gynaikeioy te kai andreioy. [2] us de es ten Milesien apikoito, oikemata men ta epi tun agrun oyte kateballe oyte enepimpre oyte thuras apespa, ea de kata xuren estanai. o de ta te dendrea kai ton karpon ton en tei gei okus diaftheireie, apallasseto opisu. [3] teis gar thalasses oi Milesioi epekrateon, uste epedres me einai ergon tei stratiei. tas de oikias oy kateballe o Lydos tunde eineka, okus exoien entheuten ormumenoi ten gein speirein te kai ergazesthai oi Milesioi, aytos de ekeinun ergazomenun exoi ti kai sinesthai esballun.    
      18. Thus he continued to war with them for eleven years; and in the course of these years the Milesians suffered two great defeats, once when they fought a battle in the district of Limenion in their own land, and again in the plain of Maiander. Now for six of the eleven years Sadyattes the son of Ardys was still ruler of the Lydians, the same who was wont to invade the land of Miletos at the times mentioned; for this Sadyattes was he who first began the war: but for the five years which followed these first six the war was carried on by Alyattes the son of Sadyattes, who received it as an inheritance from his father (as I have already said) and applied himself to it earnestly. And none of the Ionians helped those of Miletos bear the burden of this war except only the men of Chios. These came to their aid to pay back like with like, for the Milesians had formerly assisted the Chians throughout their war with the people of Erythrai.         18. [1] tauta poieun epolemee etea endeka, en toisi trumata megala difasia Milesiun egeneto, en te Limeneiui xures teis sfeteres maxesamenun kai en Maiandroy pediui. [2] ta men nyn ex etea tun endeka Sadyattes o Ardyos eti Lydun Erxe, o kai esballun tenikauta es ten Milesien ten stratien. Sadyattes oytos gar kai o ton polemon En synapsas. ta de pente tun eteun ta epomena toisi ex Alyattes o Sadyatteu epolemee, os paradexamenos, us kai proteron moi dedelutai, para tou patros ton polemon proseixe entetamenus. [3] toisi de Milesioisi oydamoi Iunun ton polemon touton synepelafrynon oti me Khioi mounoi. oytoi de to omoion antapodidontes etimureon. kai gar de proteron oi Milesioi toisi Khioisi ton pros Erythraioys polemon syndieneikan.    
      19. Then in the twelfth year of the war, when standing corn was being burnt by the army of the Lydians, it happened as follows:--as soon as the corn was kindled, it was driven by a violent wind and set fire to the temple of Athene surnamed of Assessos; and the temple being set on fire was burnt down to the ground. Of this no account was made then; but afterwards when the army had returned to Sardis, Alyattes fell sick, and as his sickness lasted long, he sent messengers to inquire of the Oracle at Delphi, either being advised to do so by some one, or because he himself thought it best to send and inquire of the god concerning his sickness. But when these arrived at Delphi, the Pythian prophetess said that she would give them no answer, until they should have built up again the temple of Athene which they had burnt at Assessos in the land of Miletos.         19. [1] tui de dyudekatui etei leioy empipramenoy ypo teis stratieis syneneixthe ti toionde genesthai preigma. us afthe taxista to leion, anemui biumenon apsato neou Athenaies epiklesin Assesies, aftheis de o neos katekauthe. [2] kai to paraytika men logos oydeis egeneto, meta de teis stratieis apikomenes es Sardis enosese o Alyattes. makroteres de oi ginomenes teis nousoy pempei es Delfous theopropoys, eite de symboyleusantos tey, eite kai aytui edoxe pempsanta ton theon epeiresthai peri teis nousoy. [3] toisi de e Pythie apikomenoisi es Delfous oyk efe xresein prin e ton neon teis Athenaies anorthususi, ton enepresan xures teis Milesies en Assesui.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [20]

     20. Thus much I know by the report of the people of Delphi; but the Milesians add to this that Periander the son of Kypselos, being a special guest-friend of Thrasybulos the then despot of Miletos, heard of the oracle which had been given to Alyattes, and sending a messenger told Thrasybulos, in order that he might have knowledge of it beforehand and take such counsel as the case required. This is the story told by the Milesians.         20. [1] Delfun oida egu oytu akousas genesthai. Milesioi de tade prostitheisi toutoisi, Periandron ton Kypseloy eonta Thrasyboului tui tote Miletoy tyranneuonti xeinon es ta malista, pythomenon to xresterion to tui Alyattei genomenon, pempsanta aggelon kateipein, okus an ti proeidus pros to pareon boyleuetai. Milesioi men nyn oytu legoysi genesthai.   
      21. And Alyattes, when this answer was reported to him, sent a herald forthwith to Miletos, desiring to make a truce with Thrasybulos and the Milesians for so long a time as he should be building the temple. He then was being sent as envoy to Miletos; and Thrasybulos in the meantime being informed beforehand of the whole matter and knowing what Alyattes was meaning to do, contrived this device:--he gathered together in the market-place all the store of provisions which was found in the city, both his own and that which belonged to private persons; and he proclaimed to the Milesians that on a signal given by him they should all begin to drink and make merry with one another.         21. [1] Alyattes de, us oi tauta exaggelthe, aytika epempe keryka es Mileton boylomenos spondas poiesasthai Thrasyboului te kai Milesioisi xronon oson an ton neon oikodomeei. o men de apostolos es ten Mileton En, Thrasuboylos de safeus propepysmenos panta logon, kai eidus ta Alyattes melloi poiesein, mexanatai toiade. [2] osos En en tui astei sitos kai euytou kai idiutikos, touton panta sygkomisas es ten agoren proeipe Milesioisi, epean aytos semenei, tote pinein te pantas kai kumui xrasthai es alleloys.    
      22. This Thrasybulos did and thus proclaimed to the end that the herald from Sardis, seeing a vast quantity of provisions carelessly piled up, and the people feasting, might report this to Alyattes: and so on fact it happened; for when the herald returned to Sardis after seeing this and delivering to Thrasybulos the charge which was given to him by the king of Lydia, the peace which was made, came about, as I am informed, merely because of this. For Alyattes, who thought that there was a great famine in Miletos and that the people had been worn down to the extreme of misery, heard from the herald, when he returned from Miletos, the opposite to that which he himself supposed. And after this the peace was made between them on condition of being guest-friends and allies to one another, and Alyattes built two temples to Athene at Assessos in place of one, and himself recovered from his sickness. With regard then to the war waged by Alyattes with the Milesians and Thrasybulos things went thus.         22. [1] tauta de epoiee te kai proegoreye Thrasuboylos tunde eineken, okus an de o keiryx o Sardienos idun te suron megan sitoy kexymenon kai tous anthrupoys en eypatheieisi eontas aggeilei Alyattei. [2] ta de kai egeneto. us gar de idun te ekeina o keiryx kai eipas pros Thrasuboylon tou Lydou tas entolas apeilthe es tas Sardis, us egu pynthanomai, di' oyden allo egeneto e diallage. [3] elpizun gar o Alyattes sitodeien te einai isxyren en tei Miletui kai ton leun tetrusthai es to esxaton kakou, ekoye tou kerykos nostesantos ek teis Miletoy tous enantioys logoys e us aytos katedokee. [4] meta de e te diallage sfi egeneto ep' ui te xeinoys alleloisi einai kai symmaxoys, kai duo te anti enos neous tei Athenaiei oikodomese o Alyattes en tei Assesui, aytos te ek teis nousoy aneste. kata men ton pros Milesioys te kai Thrasuboylon polemon Alyattei ude esxe.    
      23. As for Periander, the man who gave information about the oracle to Thrasybulos, he was the son of Kypselos, and despot of Corinth. In his life, say the Corinthians, (and with them agree the Lesbians), there happened to him a very great marvel, namely that Arion of Methymna was carried ashore at Tainaron upon a dolphin's back. This man was a harper second to none of those who then lived, and the first, so far as we know, who composed a dithyramb, naming it so and teaching it to a chorus at Corinth.         23. [1] Periandros de En Kypseloy pais oytos o tui Thrasyboului to xresterion menusas. etyranneye de o Periandros Korinthoy. tui de legoysi Korinthioi (omologeoysi de sfi Lesbioi) en tui biui thuma megiston parasteinai, Ariona ton Methymnaion epi delfinos exeneixthenta epi Tainaron, eonta kitharuidon tun tote eontun oydenos deuteron, kai dithurambon pruton anthrupun tun emeis idmen poiesanta te kai onomasanta kai didaxanta en Korinthui.    
      24. This Arion, they say, who for the most part of his time stayed with Periander, conceived a desire to sail to Italy and Sicily; and after he had there acquired large sums of money, he wished to return again to Corinth. He set forth therefore from Taras, and as he had faith in Corinthians more than in other men, he hired a ship with a crew of Corinthians. These, the story says, when out in open sea, formed a plot to cast Arion overboard and so possess his wealth; and he having obtained knowledge of this made entreaties to them, offering them his wealth and asking them to grant him his life. With this however he did not prevail upon them, but the men who were conveying him bade him either slay himself there, that he might receive burial on the land, or leap straightway into the sea. So Arion being driven to a strait entreated them that, since they were so minded, they would allow him to take his stand in full minstrel's garb upon the deck of the ship and sing; and he promised to put himself to death after he had sung. They then, well pleased to think that they should hear the best of all minstrels upon earth, drew back from the stern towards the middle of the ship; and he put on the full minstrel's garb and took his lyre, and standing on the deck performed the Orthian measure. Then as the measure ended, he threw himself into the sea just as he was, in his full minstrel's garb; and they went on sailing away to Corinth, but him, they say, a dolphin supported on its back and brought him to shore at Tainaron: and when he had come to land he proceeded to Corinth with his minstrel's garb. Thither having arrived he related all that had been done; and Periander doubting of his story kept Arion in guard and would let him go nowhere, while he kept careful watch for those who had conveyed him. When these came, he called them and inquired of them if they had any report to make of Arion; and when they said that he was safe in Italy and that they had left him at Taras faring well, Arion suddenly appeared before them in the same guise as when he made his leap from the ship; and they being struck with amazement were no longer able to deny when they were questioned. This is the tale told by the Corinthians and Lesbians alike, and there is at Tainaron a votive offering of Arion of no great size, namely a bronze figure of a man upon a dolphin's back.         24. [1] touton ton Ariona legoysi, ton pollon tou xronoy diatribonta para Periandrui epithymeisai plusai es Italien te kai Sikelien, ergasamenon de xremata megala theleisai opisu es Korinthon apikesthai. [2] ormasthai men nyn ek Tarantos, pisteuonta de oydamoisi mallon e Korinthioisi misthusasthai ploion andrun Korinthiun. tous de en tui pelagei epiboyleuein ton Ariona ekbalontas exein ta xremata. ton de synenta touto lissesthai, xremata men sfi proienta, psyxen de paraiteomenon. [3] oykun de peithein ayton toutoisi, alla keleuein tous porthmeas e ayton diaxrasthai min, us an tafeis en gei tuxei, e ekpedan es ten thalassan ten taxisten. [4] apeilethenta de ton Ariona es aporien paraitesasthai, epeide sfi oytu dokeoi, periidein ayton en tei skeyei pasei stanta en toisi edulioisi aeisai. aeisas de ypedeketo euyton katergasasthai. [5] kai toisi eselthein gar edonen ei melloien akousesthai tou aristoy anthrupun aoidou, anaxureisai ek teis prumnes es mesen nea. ton de endunta te pasan ten skeyen kai labonta ten kitharen, stanta en toisi edulioisi diexelthein nomon ton orthion, teleytuntos de tou nomoy rhipsai min es ten thalassan euyton us eixe sun tei skeyei pasei. [6] kai tous men apopleein es Korinthon, ton de delfina legoysi ypolabonta exeneikai epi Tainaron. apobanta de ayton xureein es Korinthon sun tei skeyei, kai apikomenon apegeesthai pan to gegonos. [7] Periandron de ypo apisties Ariona men en fylakei exein oydamei metienta, anakus de exein tun porthmeun. us de ara pareinai aytous, klethentas istoreesthai ei ti legoien peri Arionos. famenun de ekeinun us eie te sus peri Italien kai min ey pressonta lipoien en Taranti, epifaneinai sfi ton Ariona usper exun exepedese. kai tous ekplagentas oyk exein eti elegxomenoys arneesthai. [8] tauta men nyn Korinthioi te kai Lesbioi legoysi, kai Arionos esti anathema xalkeon oy mega epi Tainarui, epi delfinos epeun anthrupos.    
      25. Alyattes the Lydian, when he had thus waged war against the Milesians, afterwards died, having reigned seven-and-fifty years. This king, when he recovered from his sickness, dedicated a votive offering at Delphi (being the second of his house who had so done), namely a great mixing-bowl of silver with a stand for it of iron welded together, which last is a sight worth seeing above all the offerings at Delphi and the work of Glaucos the Chian, who of all men first found out the art of welding iron.         25. [1] Alyattes de o Lydos ton pros Milesioys polemon dieneikas metepeita teleytai, basileusas etea epta kai pentekonta. [2] anetheke de ekfygun ten nouson deuteros oytos teis oikies tautes es Delfous kreteira te argureon megan kai ypokreteridion sidereon kolleton, thees axion dia pantun tun en Delfoisi anathematun, Glaukoy tou Khioy poiema, os mounos de pantun anthrupun sideroy kollesin exeure.    
      26. After Alyattes was dead Croesus the son of Alyattes received the kingdom in succession, being five-and-thirty years of age. He (as I said) fought against the Hellenes and of them he attacked the Ephesians first. The Ephesians then, being besieged by him, dedicated their city to Artemis and tied a rope from the temple to the wall of the city: now the distance between the ancient city, which was then being besieged, and the temple is seven furlongs. These, I say, where the first upon whom Croesus laid hands, but afterwards he did the same to the other Ionian and Aiolian cities one by one, alleging against them various causes of complaint, and making serious charges against those in whose cases he could find serious grounds, while against others of them he charged merely trifling offences.         26. [1] teleytesantos de Alyatteu exedexato ten basileien Kroisos o Alyatteu, eteun eun elikien pente kai triekonta. os de Ellenun prutoisi epethekato Efesioisi. [2] entha de oi Efesioi poliorkeomenoi yp' aytou anethesan ten polin tei Artemidi, exapsantes ek tou neou sxoinion es to teixos. esti de metaxu teis te palaieis polios, e tote epoliorkeeto, kai tou neou epta stadioi. [3] prutoisi men de toutoisi epexeirese o Kroisos, meta de en merei ekastoisi Iunun te kai Aioleun, alloisi allas aitias epiferun, tun men edunato mezonas pareyriskein, mezona epaitiumenos, toisi de aytun kai faula epiferun.    
      27. Then when the Hellenes in Asia had been conquered and forced to pay tribute, he designed next to build for himself ships and to lay hands upon those who dwelt in the islands; and when all was prepared for his building of ships, they say that Bias of Priene (or, according to another account, Pittacos of Mytilene) came to Sardis, and being asked by Croesus whether there was any new thing doing in Hellas, brought to an end his building of ships by this saying: "O king," said he, "the men of the islands are hiring a troop of ten thousand horse, and with this they mean to march to Sardis and fight against thee." And Croesus, supposing that what he reported was true, said: "May the gods put it into the minds of the dwellers of the islands to come with horses against the sons of the Lydians!" And he answered and said: "O king, I perceive that thou dost earnestly desire to catch the men of the islands on the mainland riding upon horses; and it is not unreasonable that thou shouldest wish for this: what else however thinkest thou the men of the islands desire and have been praying for ever since the time they heard that thou wert about to build ships against them, than that they might catch the Lydians upon the sea, so as to take vengeance upon thee for the Hellenes who dwell upon the mainland, whom thou dost hold enslaved?" Croesus, they say, was greatly pleased with this conclusion, and obeying his suggestion, for he judged him to speak suitably, he stopped his building of ships; and upon that he formed a friendship with the Ionians dwelling in the islands.         27. [1] us de ara oi en tei Asiei Ellenes katestrafato es foroy apagugen, to entheuten epenoee neas poiesamenos epixeireein toisi nesiuteisi. [2] eontun de oi pantun etoimun es ten naypegien, oi men Bianta legoysi ton Prienea apikomenon es Sardis, oi de Pittakon ton Mytilenaion, eiromenoy Kroisoy ei ti eie neuteron peri ten Ellada, eiponta tade katapausai ten naypegien. [3] <<u basileu, nesiutai ippon synuneontai myrien, es Sardis te kai epi se en noui exontes strateuesthai.>> Kroison de elpisanta legein ekeinon alethea eipein <<ai gar touto theoi poieseian epi noon nesiuteisi, elthein epi Lydun paidas sun ippoisi. [4] ton de ypolabonta fanai <<u basileu, prothumus moi faineai eyxasthai nesiutas ippeyomenoys labein en epeirui, oikota elpizun. nesiutas de ti dokeeis eyxesthai allo e, epeite taxista eputhonto se mellonta epi sfisi naypegeesthai neas, labein arumenoi Lydous en thalassei, ina yper tun en tei epeirui oikemenun Ellenun tisuntai se, tous su doylusas exeis;>> [5] karta te estheinai Kroison tui epilogui kai oi, prosfyeus gar doxai legein, peithomenon pausasthai teis naypegies. kai oytu toisi tas nesoys oikemenoisi Iusi xeinien synethekato.    
      28. As time went on, when nearly all those dwelling on this side the river Halys had been subdued, (for except the Kilikians and Lykians Croesus subdued and kept under his rule all the nations, that is to say Lydians, Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandynoi, Chalybians, Paphlagonians, Thracians both Thynian and Bithynian, Carians, Ionians, Dorians, Aiolians, and Pamphylians),         28. [1] xronoy de epiginomenoy kai katestrammenun sxedon pantun tun entos Alyos potamou oikemenun. plen gar Kilikun kai Lykiun tous alloys pantas yp' euytui eixe katastrepsamenos o Kroisos. eisi de oide, Lydoi, Fruges, Mysoi, Mariandynoi, Khalybes, Paflagones, Threikes oi Thynoi te kai Bithynoi, Kares, Iunes, Duriees, Aiolees, Pamfyloi.   
      29. when these, I say, had been subdued, and while he was still adding to his Lydian dominions, there came to Sardis, then at the height of its wealth, all the wise men of the Hellas who chanced to be alive at that time, brought thither severally by various occasions; and of them one was Solon the Athenian, who after he had made laws for the Athenians at their bidding, left his native country for ten years and sailed away saying that he desired to visit various lands, in order that he might not be compelled to repeal any of the laws which he had proposed. For of themselves the Athenians were not competent to do this, having bound themselves by solemn oaths to submit for ten years to the laws which Solon should propose for them.         29. [1] katestrammenun de toutun kai prosepiktumenoy Kroisoy Lydoisi, apikneontai es Sardis akmazousas ploutui alloi te oi pantes ek teis Ellados sofistai, oi touton ton xronon etugxanon eontes, us ekastos aytun apikneoito, kai de kai Solun aner Athenaios, os Athenaioisi nomoys keleusasi poiesas apedemese etea deka kata theuries profasin ekplusas,ina de me tina tun nomun anagkasthei, lusai tun etheto. [2] aytoi gar oyk oioi te Esan ayto poieisai Athenaioi. orkioisi gar megaloisi kateixonto deka etea xresesthai nomoisi tous an sfi Solun theitai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [30]

     30. So Solon, having left his native country for this reason and for the sake of seeing various lands, came to Amasis in Egypt, and also to Croesus at Sardis. Having there arrived he was entertained as a guest by Croesus in the king's palace; and afterwards, on the third or fourth day, at the bidding of Croesus his servants led Solon round to see his treasuries; and they showed him all things, how great and magnificent they were: and after he had looked upon them all and examined them as he had occasion, Croesus asked him as follows: "Athenian guest, much report of thee has come to us, both in regard to thy wisdom and thy wanderings, how that in thy search for wisdom thou hast traversed many lands to see them; now therefore a desire has come upon me to ask thee whether thou hast seen any whom thou deemest to be of all men the most happy." This he asked supposing that he himself was the happiest of men; but Solon, using no flattery but the truth only, said: "Yes, O king, Tellos the Athenian." And Croesus, marvelling at that which he said, asked him earnestly: "In what respect dost thou judge Tellos to be the most happy?" And he said: "Tellos, in the first place, living while his native State was prosperous, had sons fair and good and saw from all of them children begotten and living to grow up; and secondly he had what with us is accounted wealth, and after his life a most glorious end: for when a battle was fought by the Athenians at Eleusis against the neighbouring people, he brought up supports and routed the foe and there died by a most fair death; and the Athenians buried him publicly where he fell, and honoured him greatly."         30. [1] aytun de un toutun kai teis theuries ekdemesas o Solun eineken es Aigypton apiketo para Amasin kai de kai es Sardis para Kroison. apikomenos de exeinizeto en toisi basileioisi ypo tou Kroisoy. meta de emerei tritei e tetartei keleusantos Kroisoy ton Soluna therapontes perieigon kata tous thesayrous, kai epedeiknysan panta eonta megala te kai olbia. [2] theesamenon de min ta panta kai skepsamenon us oi kata kairon En, eireto o Kroisos tade. <<xeine Athenaie, par' emeas gar peri seo logos apiktai pollos kai sofies eineken teis seis kai planes, us filosofeun gein pollen theuries eineken epelelythas. nun un epeiresthai me imeros epeilthe se ei tina ede pantun eides olbiutaton.>> [3] o men elpizun einai anthrupun olbiutatos tauta epeiruta. Solun de oyden ypothupeusas alla tui eonti xresamenos legei <<u basileu, Tellon Athenaion.>> [4] apothumasas de Kroisos to lexthen eireto epistrefeus. <<koiei de krineis Tellon einai olbiutaton;>> o de eipe Tellui touto men teis polios ey ekouses paides Esan kaloi te kagathoi, kai sfi eide apasi tekna ekgenomena kai panta parameinanta. touto de tou bioy ey ekonti, us ta par' emin, teleyte tou bioy lamprotate epegeneto. [5] genomenes gar Athenaioisi maxes pros tous astygeitonas en Eleysini, boethesas kai tropen poiesas tun polemiun apethane kallista, kai min Athenaioi demosiei te ethapsan aytou tei per epese kai etimesan megalus.>>    
      31. So when Solon had moved Croesus to inquire further by the story of Tellos, recounting how many points of happiness he had, the king asked again whom he had seen proper to be placed next after this man, supposing that he himself would certainly obtain at least the second place; but he replied: "Cleobis and Biton: for these, who were of Argos by race, possessed a sufficiency of wealth and, in addition to this, strength of body such as I shall tell. Both equally had won prizes in the games, and moreover the following tale is told of them:--There was a feast of Hera among the Argives and it was by all means necessary that their mother should be borne in a car to the temple. But since their oxen were not brought up in time from the field, the young men, barred from all else by lack of time, submitted themselves to the yoke and drew the wain, their mother being borne by them upon it; and so they brought it on for five-and-forty furlongs, and came to the temple. Then after they had done this and had been seen by the assembled crowd, there came to their life a most excellent ending; and in this the deity declared that it was better for man to die than to continue to live. For the Argive men were standing round and extolling the strength of the young men, while the Argive women were extolling the mother to whose lot it had fallen to have such sons; and the mother being exceedingly rejoiced both by the deed itself and by the report made of it, took her stand in front of the image of the goddess and prayed that she would give to Cleobis and Biton her sons, who had honoured her greatly, that gift which is best for man to receive: and after this prayer, when they had sacrificed and feasted, the young men lay down to sleep within the temple itself, and never rose again, but were held bound in this last end. And the Argives made statues in the likeness of them and dedicated them as offerings at Delphi, thinking that they had proved themselves most excellent."         31. [1] us de ta kata ton Tellon proetrepsato o Solun ton Kroison eipas polla te kai olbia, epeiruta tina deuteron met' ekeinon idoi, dokeun pagxy deytereia gun oisesthai. o d' eipe <<Kleobin te kai Bituna. [2] toutoisi gar eousi genos Argeioisi bios te arkeun ypein, kai pros toutui rhume sumatos toiede. aethloforoi te amfoteroi omoius Esan, kai de kai legetai ode o logos. eouses orteis tei Erei toisi Argeioisi edee pantus ten metera aytun zeugei komistheinai es to iron, oi de sfi boes ek tou agrou oy pareginonto en urei. ekkleiomenoi de tei urei oi neeniai ypoduntes aytoi ypo ten zeuglen eilkon ten amaxan, epi teis amaxes de sfi uxeeto e meter. stadioys de pente kai tesserakonta diakomisantes apikonto es to iron. [3] tauta de sfi poiesasi kai oftheisi ypo teis panegurios teleyte tou bioy ariste epegeneto, diedexe te en toutoisi o theos us ameinon eie anthrupui tethnanai mallon e zuein. Argeioi men gar peristantes emakarizon tun neenieun ten rhumen, ai de Argeiai ten metera aytun, oiun teknun ekurese. [4] e de meter perixares eousa tui te ergui kai tei femei, stasa antion tou agalmatos eyxeto Kleobi te kai Bituni toisi euyteis teknoisi, oi min etimesan megalus, ten theon dounai to anthrupui tyxein ariston esti. [5] meta tauten de ten eyxen us ethysan te kai eyuxethesan, katakoimethentes en aytui tui irui oi neeniai oyketi anestesan all' en telei toutui esxonto. Argeioi de sfeun eikonas poiesamenoi anethesan es Delfous us aristun genomenun.>>    
      32. Thus Solon assigned the second place in respect of happiness to these: and Croesus was moved to anger and said: "Athenian guest, hast thou then so cast aside our prosperous state as worth nothing, that thou dost prefer to us even men of private station?" And he said: "Croesus, thou art inquiring about human fortunes of one who well knows that the Deity is altogether envious and apt to disturb our lot. For in the course of long time a man may see many things which he would not desire to see, and suffer also many things which he would not desire to suffer. The limit of life for a man I lay down at seventy years: and these seventy years give twenty-five thousand and two hundred days, not reckoning for any intercalated month. Then if every other one of these years shall be made longer by one month, that the seasons may be caused to come round at the due time of the year, the intercalated months will be in number five-and-thirty besides the seventy years; and of these months the days will be one thousand and fifty. Of all these days, being in number twenty-six thousand two hundred and fifty, which go to the seventy years, one day produces nothing at all which resembles what another brings with it. Thus then, O Croesus, man is altogether a creature of accident. As for thee, I perceive that thou art both great in wealth and king of many men, but that of which thou didst ask me I cannot call thee yet, until I learn that thou hast brought thy life to a fair ending: for the very rich man is not at all to be accounted more happy than he who has but his subsistence from day to day, unless also the fortune go with him of ending his life well in possession of all things fair. For many very wealthy men are not happy, while many who have but a moderate living are fortunate; and in truth the very rich man who is not happy has two advantages only as compared with the poor man who is fortunate, whereas this latter has many as compared with the rich man who is not happy. The rich man is able better to fulfil his desire, and also to endure a great calamity if it fall upon him; whereas the other has advantage over him in these things which follow:--he is not indeed able equally with the rich man to endure a calamity or to fulfil his desire, but these his good fortune keeps away from him, while he is sound of limb, free from disease, untouched by suffering, the father of fair children and himself of comely form; and if in addition to this he shall end his life well, he is worthy to be called that which thou seekest, namely a happy man; but before he comes to his end it is well to hold back and not to call him yet happy but only fortunate. Now to possess all these things together is impossible for one who is mere man, just as no single land suffices to supply all tings for itself, but one thing it has and another it lacks, and the land that has the greatest number of things is the best: so also in the case of a man, no single person is complete in himself, for one thing he has and another he lacks; but whosoever of men continues to the end in possession of the greatest number of these things and then has a gracious ending of his life, he is by me accounted worthy, O king, to receive this name. But we must of every thing examine the end and how it will turn out at the last, for to many God shows but a glimpse of happiness and then plucks them up by the roots and overturns them."         32. [1] Solun men de eydaimonies deytereia eneme toutoisi, Kroisos de sperxtheis eipe <<u xeine Athenaie, e d' emetere eydaimonie oytu toi aperriptai es to meden uste oyde idiuteun andrun axioys emeas epoiesas;>> o de eipe <<u Kroise, epistamenon me to theion pan eon fthoneron te kai taraxudes epeirutais anthrupeiun pregmatun peri. [2] en gar tui makrui xronui polla men esti idein ta me tis ethelei, polla de kai pathein. es gar ebdomekonta etea oyron teis zoes anthrupui protithemi. [3] oytoi eontes eniaytoi ebdomekonta parexontai emeras diekosias kai pentakisxilias kai dismyrias, embolimoy menos me ginomenoy. ei de de ethelesei toyteron tun eteun meni makroteron ginesthai, ina de ai urai symbainusi paraginomenai es to deon, meines men para ta ebdomekonta etea oi embolimoi ginontai triekonta pente, emerai de ek tun menun toutun xiliai pentekonta. [4] toyteun tun apaseun emereun tun es ta ebdomekonta etea, eoyseun pentekonta kai diekosieun kai exakisxilieun kai dismyrieun, e etere ayteun tei eterei emerei to parapan oyden omoion prosagei preigma. oytu un Kroise pan esti anthrupos symfore. [5] emoi de su kai ployteein mega faineai kai basileus pollun einai anthrupun. ekeino de to eireo me, oyku se egu legu, prin teleytesanta kalus ton aiuna puthumai. oy gar ti o mega plousios mallon tou ep' emeren exontos olbiuteros esti, ei me oi tuxe epispoito panta kala exonta ey teleyteisai ton bion. polloi men gar zaploytoi anthrupun anolbioi eisi, polloi de metrius exontes bioy eytyxees. [6] o men de mega plousios anolbios de dyoisi proexei tou eytyxeos mounon, oytos de tou ploysioy kai anolboy polloisi. o men epithymien ektelesai kai aten megalen prospesousan eneikai dynatuteros, o de toiside proexei ekeinoy. aten men kai epithymien oyk omoius dynatos ekeinui eneikai, tauta de e eytyxie oi aperukei, aperos de esti, anoysos, apathes kakun, eypais, eyeides. [7] ei de pros toutoisi eti teleytesei ton bion ey, oytos ekeinos ton su zeteeis, o olbios kekleisthai axios esti. prin d' an teleytesei, episxein, mede kaleein ku olbion all' eytyxea. [8] ta panta men nyn tauta syllabein anthrupon eonta adunaton esti, usper xurei oydemia katarkeei panta euytei parexoysa, alla allo men exei eteroy de epideetai. e de an ta pleista exei, ayte ariste. us de kai anthrupoy suma en oyden aytarkes esti. to men gar exei, alloy de endees esti. [9] os d' an aytun pleista exun diateleei kai epeita teleytesei eyxaristus ton bion, oytos par' emoi to oynoma touto u basileu dikaios esti feresthai. skopeein de xre pantos xrematos ten teleyten, kei apobesetai. polloisi gar de ypodexas olbon o theos prorrizoys anetrepse.>>    
      33. Thus saying he refused to gratify Croesus, who sent him away from his presence holding him in no esteem, and thinking him utterly senseless in that he passed over present good things and bade men look to the end of every matter.         33. [1] tauta legun tui Kroisui oy kus oyte exarizeto, oyte logoy min poiesamenos oydenos apopempetai, karta doxas amathea einai, os ta pareonta agatha meteis ten teleyten pantos xrematos oran ekeleye.    
      34. After Solon had departed, a great retribution from God came upon Croesus, probably because he judged himself to be the happiest of all men. First there came and stood by him a dream, which showed to him the truth of the evils that were about to come to pass in respect of his son. Now Croesus had two sons, of whom one was deficient, seeing that he was deaf and dumb, while the other far surpassed his companions of the same age in all things: and the name of this last was Atys. As regards this Atys then, the dream signified to Croesus that he should lose him by the blow of an iron spear-point: and when he rose up from sleep and considered the matter with himself, he was struck with fear on account of the dream; and first he took for his son a wife; and whereas his son had been wont to lead the armies of the Lydians, he now no longer sent him forth anywhere on any such business; and the javelins and lances and all such things which men use for fighting he conveyed out of the men's apartments and piled them up in the inner bed-chambers, for fear lest something hanging up might fall down upon his son.         34. [1] meta de Soluna oixomenon elabe ek theou nemesis megale Kroison, us eikasai, oti enomise euyton einai anthrupun apantun olbiutaton. aytika de oi eydonti epeste oneiros, os oi ten aletheien efaine tun mellontun genesthai kakun kata ton paida. [2] Esan de tui Kroisui duo paides, tun oyteros men dieftharto, En gar de kufos, o de eteros tun elikun makrui ta panta prutos. oynoma de oi En Atys. touton de un ton Atyn semainei tui Kroisui o oneiros, us apoleei min aixmei sidereei blethenta. [3] o d' epeite exegerthe kai euytui logon eduke, katarrudesas ton oneiron agetai men tui paidi gynaika, euthota de strategeein min tun Lydun oydamei eti epi toiouto preigma exepempe. akontia de kai doratia kai ta toiauta panta toisi xreuntai es polemon anthrupoi, ek tun andreunun ekkomisas es tous thalamoys synenese, me ti oi kremamenon tui paidi empesei.    
      35. Then while he was engaged about the marriage of his son, there came to Sardis a man under a misfortune and with hands not clean, a Phrygian by birth and of the royal house. This man came to the house of Croesus, and according to the customs which prevail in that land made request that he might have cleansing; and Croesus gave him cleansing: now the manner of cleansing among the Lydians is the same almost as that which the Hellenes use. So when Croesus had done that which was customary, he asked of him whence he came and who he was, saying as follows: "Man, who art thou, and from what region of Phrygia didst thou come to sit upon my hearth? And whom of men or women didst thou slay?" And he replied: "O king, I am the son of Gordias, the son of Midas, and I am called Adrastos; and I slew my own brother against my will, and therefore am I here, having been driven forth by my father and deprived of all that I had." And Croesus answered thus: "Thou art, as it chances, the offshoot of men who are our friends and thou hast come to friends, among whom thou shalt want of nothing so long as thou shalt remain in our land: and thou wilt find it most for thy profit to bear this misfortune as lightly as may be." So he had his abode with Croesus.         35. [1] exontos de oi en xersi tou paidos ton gamon, apikneetai es tas Sardis aner symforei exomenos kai oy katharos xeiras, eun Frux men geneei, geneos de tou basileioy. parelthun de oytos es ta Kroisoy oikia kata nomoys tous epixurioys katharsioy edeeto kyreisai, Kroisos de min ekathere. [2] esti de paraplesie e katharsis toisi Lydoisi kai toisi Ellesi. epeite de ta nomizomena epoiese o Kroisos, epynthaneto okothen te kai tis eie, legun tade. [3] <<unthrupe, tis te eun kai kothen teis Frygies ekun epistios moi egeneo; tina te andrun e gynaikun efoneysas;>> o de ameibeto <<u basileu, Gordieu men tou Mideu eimi pais, onomazomai de Adrestos, foneusas de adelfeon emeuytou aekun pareimi exelelamenos te ypo tou patros kai esteremenos pantun.>> [4] Kroisos de min ameibeto toiside. <<andrun te filun tygxaneis ekgonos eun kai elelythas es filoys, entha amexaneseis xrematos oydenos menun en emeteroy, symforen te tauten us koyfotata ferun kerdaneeis pleiston.>>    
      36. During this time there was produced in the Mysian Olympos a boar of monstrous size. This, coming down from the mountain aforesaid, ravaged the fields of the Mysians, and although the Mysians went out against it often, yet they could do it no hurt, but rather received hurt themselves from it; so at length messengers came from the Mysians to Croesus and said: "O king, there has appeared in our land a boar of monstrous size, which lays waste our fields; and we, desiring eagerly to take it, are not able: now therefore we ask of thee to send with us thy son and also a chosen band of young men with dogs, that we may destroy it out of our land." Thus they made request, and Croesus calling to mind the words of the dream spoke to them as follows: "As touching my son, make no further mention of him in this matter; for I will not send him with you, seeing that he is newly married and is concerned now with the affairs of his marriage: but I will send with you chosen men of the Lydians and the whole number of my hunting dogs, and I will give command to those who go, to be as zealous as may be in helping you to destroy the wild beast out of your land."         36. [1] o men de diaitan eixe en Kroisoy. en de tui aytui xronui toutui en tui Mysiui Olumpui yos xreima ginetai mega. ormumenos de oytos ek tou oreos toutoy ta tun Mysun erga diaftheireske. pollakis de oi Mysoi ep' ayton exelthontes poieeskon men kakon oyden, epasxon de pros aytou. [2] telos de apikomenoi para ton Kroison tun Mysun aggeloi elegon tade. <<u basileu, yos xreima megiston anefane emin en tei xurei, os ta erga diaftheirei. touton prothymeomenoi elein oy dynametha. nun un prosdeometha sey ton paida kai logadas neenias kai kunas sympempsai emin, us an min exelumen ek teis xures.>> [3] oi men de toutun edeonto, Kroisos de mnemoneuun tou oneiroy ta epea elege sfi tade. <<paidos men peri tou emou me mnestheite eti. oy gar an ymin sympempsaimi. neogamos te gar esti kai tauta oi nun melei. Lydun mentoi logadas kai to kynegesion pan sympempsu, kai diakeleusomai toisi iousi einai us prothymotatoisi synexelein ymin to therion ek teis xures.>> tauta ameipsato.   
      37. Thus he made reply, and while the Mysians were being contented with this answer, there came in also the son of Croesus, having heard of the request made by the Mysians: and when Croesus said that he would not send his son with them, the young man spoke as follows: "My father, in times past the fairest and most noble part was allotted to us, to go out continually to wars and to the chase and so have good repute; but now thou hast debarred me from both of these, although thou hast not observed in me any cowardly or faint-hearted spirit. And now with what face must I appear when I go to and from the market- place of the city? What kind of a man shall I be esteemed by the citizens, and what kind of a man shall I be esteemed by my newly- married wife? With what kind of a husband will she think that she is mated? Therefore either let me go to the hunt, or persuade me by reason that these things are better for me done as now they are."         37. [1] apoxreumenun de toutoisi tun Mysun, epeserxetai o tou Kroisoy pais akekous tun edeonto oi Mysoi. oy famenoy de tou Kroisoy ton ge paida sfi sympempsein, legei pros ayton o neenies tade. [2] <<u pater, ta kallista proteron kote kai gennaiotata emin En es te polemoys kai es agras foiteontas eydokimeein. nun de amfoterun me toutun apokleisas exeis, oyte tina deilien moi paridun oyte athymien nun te teoisi me xre ommasi es te agoren kai ex agoreis foiteonta fainesthai; [3] koios men tis toisi polieteisi doxu einai, koios de tis tei neogamui gynaiki; koiui de ekeine doxei andri synoikeein; eme un su e metes ienai epi ten theren, e logui anapeison okus moi ameinu esti tauta oytu poieomena.>>    
      38. And Croesus made answer thus: "My son, not because I have observed in thee any spirit of cowardice or any other ungracious thing, do I act thus; but a vision of a dream came and stood by me in my sleep and told me that thou shouldest be short-lived, and that thou shouldest perish by a spear-point of iron. With thought of this vision therefore I both urged on this marriage for thee, and I refuse now to send thee upon the matter which is being taken in hand, having a care of thee that I may steal thee from thy fate at least for the period of my own life, if by any means possible for me to do so. For thou art, as it chances, my only son: the other I do not reckon as one, seeing that he is deficient in hearing."         38. [1] ameibetai Kroisos toiside. <<u pai, oyte deilien oyte allo oyden axari paridun, toi poieu tauta, alla moi opsis oneiroy en tui ypnui epistasa efe se oligoxronion esesthai. ypo gar aixmeis siderees apoleesthai. [2] pros un ten opsin tauten ton te gamon toi touton espeysa kai epi ta paralambanomena oyk apopempu, fylaken exun, ei kus dynaimen epi teis emeis se zoes diaklepsai. eis gar moi mounos tygxaneis eun pais. ton gar de eteron dieftharmenon ten akoen oyk einai moi logizomai.>>    
      39. The young man made answer thus: "It may well be forgiven in thee, O my father, that thou shouldest have a care of me after having seen such a vision; but that which thou dost not understand, and in which the meaning of the dream has escaped thee, it is right that I should expound to thee. Thou sayest the dream declared that I should end my life by means of a spear-point of iron: but what hands has a boar, or what spear-point of iron, of which thou art afraid? If the dream had told thee that I should end my life by a tusk, or any other thing which resembles that, it would be right for thee doubtless to do as thou art doing; but it said 'by a spear- point.' Since therefore our fight will not be with men, let me now go."         39. [1] ameibetai o neenies toiside. <<syggnume men u pater toi, idonti ge opsin toiauten, peri eme fylaken exein. to de oy manthaneis alla lelethe se to oneiron, eme toi dikaion esti frazein. [2] fes toi to oneiron ypo aixmeis siderees fanai eme teleytesein. yos de koiai men eisi xeires, koie de aixme sideree ten su fobeai; ei men gar ypo odontos toi eipe teleytesein me, e alloy tey o ti toutui eoike, xrein de se poieein ta poieeis. nun de ypo aixmeis. epeite un oy pros andras emin ginetai e maxe, metes me.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [40]

     40. Croesus made answer: "My son, thou dost partly prevail with me by declaring thy judgment about the dream; therefore, having been prevailed upon by thee, I change my resolution and allow thee to go to the chase."         40. [1] ameibetai Kroisos <<u pai, esti tei me nikais gnumen apofainun peri tou enypnioy. us un nenikemenos ypo seo metaginusku, metiemi te se ienai epi ten agren.>>    
      41. Having thus said Croesus went to summon Adrastos the Phrygian; and when he came, he addressed him thus: "Adrastos, when thou wast struck with a grievous misfortune (with which I reproach thee not), I cleansed thee, and I have received thee into my house supplying all thy costs. Now therefore, since having first received kindness from me thou art bound to requite me with kindness, I ask of thee to be the protector of my son who goes forth to the chase, lest any evil robbers come upon you by the way to do you harm; and besides this thou too oughtest to go where thou mayest become famous by thy deeds, for it belongs to thee as an inheritance from thy fathers so to do, and moreover thou hast strength for it."         41. [1] eipas de tauta o Kroisos metapempetai ton Fruga Adreston, apikomenui de oi legei tade. <<Adreste, egu se symforei, peplegmenon axari, ten toi oyk oneidizu, ekathera kai oikioisi ypodexamenos exu, parexun pasan dapanen. [2] nun un (ofeileis gar emou propoiesantos xresta es se xrestoisi me ameibesthai) fulaka paidos se tou emou xreizu genesthai es agren ormumenoy, me tines kat' odon klupes kakourgoi epi delesi faneusi ymin. [3] pros de toutui kai se toi xreon esti ienai entha apolampryneai toisi xreon patruion te gar toi esti kai proseti rhume yparxei.>>    
      42. Adrastos made answer: "O king, but for this I should not have been going to any such contest of valour; for first it is not fitting that one who is suffering such a great misfortune as mine should seek the company of his fellows who are in prosperity, and secondly I have no desire for it; and for many reasons I should have kept myself away. But now, since thou art urgent with me, and I ought to gratify thee (for I am bound to requite thee with kindness), I am ready to do this: expect therefore that thy son, whom thou commandest me to protect, will return home to thee unhurt, so far as his protector may avail to keep him safe."         42. [1] ameibetai o Adrestos <<u basileu, allus men eguge an oyk eia es aethlon toionde. oyte gar symforei toieide kexremenon oikos esti es omelikas ey pressontas ienai, oyte to boulesthai para, pollaxei te an isxon emeuyton. [2] nun de, epeite su speudeis kai dei toi xarizesthai (ofeilu gar se ameibesthai xrestoisi), poieein eimi etoimos tauta, paida te son, ton diakeleueai fylassein, apemona tou fylassontos eineken prosdoka toi aponostesein.>>    
      43. When he had made answer to Croesus in words like these, they afterwards set forth provided with chosen young men and with dogs. And when they were come to Mount Olympos, they tracked the animal; and having found it and taken their stand round in a circle, they were hurling against it their spears. Then the guest, he who had been cleansed of manslaughter, whose name was Adrastos, hurling a spear at it missed the boar and struck the son of Croesus. So he being struck by the spear-point fulfilled the saying of the dream. And one ran to report to Croesus that which had come to pass, and having come to Sardis he signified to him of the combat and of the fate of his son.         43. [1] toioutoisi epeite oytos ameipsato Kroison, eisan meta tauta exertymenoi logasi te neenieisi kai kysi. apikomenoi de es ton Olympon to oros ezeteon to therion, eyrontes de kai peristantes ayto kuklui esekontizon. [2] entha de o xeinos, oytos de o kathartheis ton fonon, kaleomenos de Adrestos, akontizun ton yn tou men amartanei, tygxanei de tou Kroisoy paidos. [3] o men de bletheis tei aixmei exeplese tou oneiroy ten femen, ethee de tis aggeleun tui Kroisui to gegonos, apikomenos de es tas Sardis ten te maxen kai ton tou paidos moron esemene oi.    
      44. And Croesus was very greatly disturbed by the death of his son, and was much the more moved to complaining by this, namely that his son was slain by the man whom he had himself cleansed of manslaughter. And being grievously troubled by the misfortune he called upon Zeus the Cleanser, protesting to him that which he had suffered from his guest, and he called moreover upon the Protector of Suppliants and the Guardian of Friendship, naming still the same god, and calling upon him as the Protector of Suppliants because when he received the guest into his house he had been fostering ignorantly the slayer of his son, and as the Guardian of Friendship because having sent him as a protector he had found him the worst of foes.         44. [1] o de Kroisos tui thanatui tou paidos syntetaragmenos mallon ti edeinologeeto oti min apekteine ton aytos fonoy ekathere. [2] periemekteun de tei symforei deinus ekalee men Dia katharsion martyromenos ta ypo tou xeinoy peponthus eie ekalee de epistion te kai etaireion, ton ayton touton onomazun theon, ton men epistion kaleun, dioti de oikioisi ypodexamenos ton xeinon fonea tou paidos elanthane boskun, ton de etaireion, us fulaka sympempsas ayton eyrekoi polemiutaton.    
      45. After this the Lydians came bearing the corpse, and behind it followed the slayer: and he taking his stand before the corpse delivered himself up to Croesus, holding forth his hands and bidding the king slay him over the corpse, speaking of his former misfortune and saying that in addition to this he had now been the destroyer of the man who had cleansed him of it; and that life for him was no more worth living. But Croesus hearing this pitied Adrastos, although he was himself suffering so great an evil of his own, and said to him: "Guest, I have already received from thee all the satisfaction that is due, seeing that thou dost condemn thyself to suffer death; and not thou alone art the cause of this evil, except in so far as thou wert the instrument of it against thine own will, but some one, as I suppose, of the gods, who also long ago signified to me that which was about to be." So Croesus buried his son as was fitting: but Adrastos the son of Gordias, the son of Midas, he who had been the slayer of his own brother and the slayer also of the man who had cleansed him, when silence came of all men round about the tomb, recognising that he was more grievously burdened by misfortune than all men of whom he knew, slew himself upon the grave.         45. [1] pareisan de meta touto oi Lydoi ferontes ton nekron, opisthe de eipeto oi o foneus. stas de oytos pro tou nekrou paredidoy euyton Kroisui proteinun tas xeiras, epikatasfaxai min keleuun tui nekrui, legun ten te proteren euytou symforen, kai us ep' ekeinei ton katheranta apolulekus eie, oyde oi eie biusimon. [2] Kroisos de toutun akousas ton te Adreston katoikteirei, kaiper eun en kakui oikeiui tosoutui kai legei pros ayton <<exu u xeine para seu pasan ten diken, epeide seuytou katadikazeis thanaton. eis de oy su moi toude tou kakou aitios, ei me oson aekun exergasao, alla theun kou tis, os moi kai palai proesemaine ta mellonta esesthai.>> [3] Kroisos men nyn ethapse us oikos En ton euytou paida. Adrestos de o Gordieu tou Mideu, oytos de o foneus men tou euytou adelfeou genomenos foneus de tou katherantos, epeite esyxie tun anthrupun egeneto peri to seima, sygginuskomenos anthrupun einai tun aytos eidee barysymforutatos, epikatasfazei tui tumbui euyton.    
      46. For two years then Croesus remained quiet in his mourning, because he was deprived of his son: but after this period of time the overthrowing of the rule of Astyages the son of Kyaxares by Cyrus the son of Cambyses, and the growing greatness of the Persians caused Croesus to cease from his mourning, and led him to a care of cutting short the power of the Persians, if by any means he might, while yet it was in growth and before they should have become great. So having formed this design he began forthwith to make trial of the Oracles, both those of the Hellenes and that in Libya, sending messengers some to one place and some to another, some to go to Delphi, others to Abai of the Phokians, and others to Dodona; and some were sent to the shrine of Amphiaraos and to that of Trophonios, others to Branchidai in the land of Miletos: these are the Oracles of the Hellenes to which Croesus sent messengers to seek divination; and others he sent to the shrine of Ammon in Libya to inquire there. Now he was sending the messengers abroad to the end that he might try the Oracles and find out what knowledge they had, so that if they should be found to have knowledge of the truth, he might send and ask them secondly whether he should attempt to march against the Persians.         46. [1] Kroisos de epi duo etea en penthei megalui kateisto tou paidos esteremenos. meta de e Astyageos tou Kyaxareu egemonie katairetheisa ypo Kuroy tou Kambuseu kai ta tun Perseun pregmata ayxanomena pentheos men Kroison apepayse, enebese de es frontida, ei kus dunaito, prin megaloys genesthai tous Persas, katalabein aytun ayxanomenen ten dunamin. [2] meta un ten dianoian tauten aytika apepeirato tun manteiun tun te en Ellesi kai tou en Libuei, diapempsas alloys allei, tous men es Delfous ienai, tous de es Abas tas Fukeun, tous de es Dudunen. oi de tines epemponto para te Amfiareun kai para Trofunion, oi de teis Milesies es Bragxidas. [3] tauta men nyn ta Ellenika manteia es ta apepempse manteysomenos Kroisos. Libues de para Ammuna apestelle alloys xresomenoys. diepempe de peirumenos tun manteiun o ti froneoien, us ei froneonta ten aletheien eyretheie, epeiretai sfea deutera pempun ei epixeireoi epi Persas strateuesthai.    
      47. And to the Lydians whom he sent to make trial of the Oracles he gave charge as follows,--that from the day on which they set out from Sardis they should reckon up the number of the days following and on the hundredth day they should consult the Oracles, asking what Croesus the son of Alyattes king of the Lydians chanced then to be doing: and whatever the Oracles severally should prophesy, this they should cause to be written down and bear it back to him. Now what the other Oracles prophesied is not by any reported, but at Delphi, so soon as the Lydians entered the sanctuary of the temple to consult the god and asked that which they were commanded to ask, the Pythian prophetess spoke thus in hexameter measure: 
"But the number of sand I know, and the measure of drops in the ocean; 
 The dumb man I understand, and I hear the speech of the speechless: 
 And there hath come to my soul the smell of a strong-shelled tortoise 
 Boiling in caldron of bronze, and the flesh of a lamb mingled with it; 
 Under it bronze is laid, it hath bronze as a clothing upon it."         47. [1] enteilamenos de toisi Lydoisi tade apepempe es ten diapeiran tun xresteriun, ap' Es an emeres ormetheusi ek Sardiun, apo tautes emerologeontas ton loipon xronon ekatostei emerei xrasthai toisi xresterioisi, epeirutuntas o ti poieun tygxanoi o Lydun basileus Kroisos o Alyatteu. assa d' an ekasta tun xresteriun thespisei, syggrapsamenoys anaferein par' euyton. [2] o ti men nyn ta loipa tun xresteriun ethespise, oy legetai pros oydamun. en de Delfoisi us eseilthon taxista es to megaron oi Lydoi xresomenoi tui theui kai epeirutun to entetalmenon, e Pythie en exametrui tonui legei tade.     [3] oida d' egu psammoy t' arithmon kai metra thalasses,
      kai kufou syniemi, kai oy funeuntos akouu.
      odme m' es frenas Elthe kratairinoio xelunes
      epsomenes en xalkui am' arneioisi kreessin,
      ei xalkos men ypestrutai, xalkon d' epiestai.   
      48. When the Pythian prophetess had uttered this oracle, the Lydians caused the prophecy to be written down, and went away at once to Sardis. And when the rest also who had been sent round were there arrived with the answers of the Oracles, then Croesus unfolded the writings one by one and looked upon them: and at first none of them pleased him, but when he heard that from Delphi, forthwith he did worship to the god and accepted the answer, judging that the Oracle at Delphi was the only true one, because it had found out what he himself had done. For when he had sent to the several Oracles his messengers to consult the gods, keeping well in mind the appointed day he contrived the following device,--he thought of something which it would be impossible to discover or to conceive of, and cutting up a tortoise and a lamb he boiled them together himself in a caldron of bronze, laying a cover of bronze over them.         48. [1] tauta oi Lydoi thespisases teis Pythies syggrapsamenoi oixonto apiontes es tas Sardis. us de kai ulloi oi peripemfthentes pareisan ferontes tous xresmous, enthauta o Kroisos ekasta anaptussun epura tun syggrammatun, tun men de oyden prosieto min. o de us to ek Delfun ekoyse, aytika proseuxeto te kai prosedexato, nomisas mounon einai manteion to en Delfoisi, oti oi exeyrekee ta aytos epoiese. [2] epeite gar de diepempse para ta xresteria tous theopropoys, fylaxas ten kyrien tun emereun emexanato toiade. epinoesas ta En amexanon exeyrein te kai epifrasasthai, xelunen kai arna katakopsas omou Epse aytos en lebeti xalkeui, xalkeon epithema epitheis.    
      49. This then was the answer given to Croesus from Delphi; and as regards the answer of Amphiaraos, I cannot tell what he replied to the Lydians after they had done the things customary in his temple, for there is no record of this any more than of the others, except only that Croesus thought that he also possessed a true Oracle.         49. [1] ta men de ek Delfun oytu tui, Kroisui exresthe. kata de ten Amfiareu tou manteioy ypokrisin, oyk exu eipein o ti toisi Lydoisi exrese poiesasi peri to iron ta nomizomena (oy gar un oyde touto legetai), allo ge e oti kai touto enomise manteion apseydes ekteisthai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [50]

     50. After this with great sacrifices he endeavoured to win the favour of the god at Delphi: for of all the animals that are fit for sacrifice he offered three thousand of each kind, and he heaped up couches overlaid with gold and overlaid with silver, and cups of gold, and robes of purple, and tunics, making of them a great pyre, and this he burnt up, hoping by these means the more to win over the god to the side of the Lydians: and he proclaimed to all the Lydians that every one of them should make sacrifice with that which each man had. And when he had finished the sacrifice, he melted down a vast quantity of gold, and of it he wrought half-plinths making them six palms in length and three in breadth, and in height one palm; and their number was one hundred and seventeen. Of these four were of pure gold weighing two talents and a half each, and others of gold alloyed with silver weighing two talents. And he caused to be made also an image of a lion of pure gold weighing ten talents; which lion, when the temple of Delphi was being burnt down, fell from off the half-plinths, for upon these it was set, and is placed now in the treasury of the Corinthians, weighing six talents and a half, for three talents and a half were melted away from it.         50. [1] meta de tauta thysieisi megaleisi ton en Delfoisi theon ilasketo. ktenea te gar ta thusima panta trisxilia ethyse, klinas te epixrusoys kai eparguroys kai fialas xryseas kai eimata porfurea kai kithunas, nesas pyren megalen, katekaie, elpizun ton theon mallon ti toutoisi anaktesesthai. Lydoisi te pasi proeipe thuein panta tina aytun toutui o ti exoi ekastos. [2] us de ek teis thysies egeneto, kataxeamenos xryson apleton emiplinthia ex aytou exelayne, epi man ta makrotera poieun exapalaista, epi de ta braxutera tripalaista, ypsos de palaistiaia. arithmon de eptakaideka kai ekaton, kai toutun apefthoy xrysou tessera, triton emitalanton ekaston elkonta, ta de alla emiplinthia leykou xrysou, stathmon ditalanta. [3] epoieeto de kai leontos eikona xrysou apefthoy elkoysan stathmon talanta deka. oytos o leun, epeite katekaieto o en Delfoisi neos, katepese apo tun emiplinthiun (epi gar toutoisi idryto), kai nun keitai en tui Korinthiun thesayrui, elkun stathmon ebdomon emitalanton. apetake gar aytou tetarton emitalanton.    
      51. So Croesus having finished all these things sent them to Delphi, and with them these besides:--two mixing bowls of great size, one of gold and the other of silver, of which the golden bowl was placed on the right hand as one enters the temple, and the silver on the left, but the places of these also were changed after the temple was burnt down, and the golden bowl is now placed in the treasury of the people of Clazomenai, weighing eight and a half talents and twelve pounds over, while the silver one is placed in the corner of the vestibule and holds six hundred amphors (being filled with wine by the Delphians on the feast of the Theophania): this the people of Delphi say is the work of Theodoros the Samian, and, as I think, rightly, for it is evident to me that the workmanship is of no common kind: moreover Croesus sent four silver wine-jars, which stand in the treasury of the Corinthians, and two vessels for lustral water, one of gold and the other of silver, of which the gold one is inscribed "from the Lacedemonians," who say that it is their offering: therein however they do not speak rightly; for this also is from Croesus, but one of the Delphians wrote the inscription upon it, desiring to gratify the Lacedemonians; and his name I know but will not make mention of it. The boy through whose hand the water flows is from the Lacedemonians, but neither of the vessels for lustral water. And many other votive offerings Croesus sent with these, not specially distinguished, among which are certain castings of silver of a round shape, and also a golden figure of a woman three cubits high, which the Delphians say is a statue of the baker of Croesus. Moreover Croesus dedicated the ornaments from his wife's neck and her girdles.         51. [1] epitelesas de o Kroisos tauta apepempe es Delfous, kai tade alla ama toisi, kreteiras duo megathei megaloys, xruseon kai argureon, tun o men xruseos ekeito epi dexia esionti es ton neon, o de argureos ep' aristera. [2] metekinethesan de kai oytoi ypo ton neon katakaenta kai o men xruseos keitai en tui Klazomeniun thesayrui, elkun stathmon einaton emitalanton kai eti dyudeka mneas, o de argureos epi tou proneioy teis gunies, xureun amforeas exakosioys. epikirnatai gar ypo Delfun Theofanioisi. [3] fasi de min Delfoi Theoduroy tou Samioy ergon einai, kai egu dokeu. oy gar to syntyxon fainetai moi ergon einai. kai pithoys te argyreoys tesseras apepempse, oi en tui Korinthiun thesayrui estasi, kai perirranteria duo anetheke, xruseon te kai argureon, tun tui xryseui epigegraptai Lakedaimoniun famenun einai anathema, oyk orthus legontes. [4] esti gar kai touto Kroisoy, epegrapse de tun tis Delfun Lakedaimonioisi boylomenos xarizesthai, tou epistamenos to oynoma oyk epimnesomai. all' o men pais, di' oy teis xeiros rheei to ydur, Lakedaimoniun esti, oy mentoi tun ge perirranteriun oydeteron. [5] alla te anathemata oyk episema polla apepempse ama toutoisi o Kroisos, kai xeumata argurea kykloterea, kai de kai gynaikos eidulon xruseon tripexy, to Delfoi teis artokopoy teis Kroisoy eikona legoysi einai. pros de kai teis euytou gynaikos ta apo teis deireis anetheke o Kroisos kai tas zunas.    
      52. These are the things which he sent to Delphi; and to Amphiaraos, having heard of his valour and of his evil fate, he dedicated a shield made altogether of gold throughout, and a spear all of solid gold, the shaft being of gold also as well as the two points, which offerings were both remaining even to my time at Thebes in the temple of Ismenian Apollo.         52. [1] tauta men es Delfous apepempse, tui de Amfiareui, pythomenos aytou ten te areten kai ten pathen, anetheke sakos te xruseon pan omoius kai aixmen stereen pasan xryseen, to xyston teisi logxeisi eon omoius xruseon. ta eti kai amfotera es eme En keimena en Thebeisi kai Thebeun en tui neui tou Ismenioy Apollunos.    
      53. To the Lydians who were to carry these gifts to the temples Croesus gave charge that they should ask the Oracles this question also,-- whether Croesus should march against the Persians, and if so, whether he should join with himself any army of men as his friends. And when the Lydians had arrived at the places to which they had been sent and had dedicated the votive offerings, they inquired of the Oracles and said: "Croesus, king of the Lydians and of other nations, considering that these are the only true Oracles among men, presents to you gifts such as your revelations deserve, and asks you again now whether he shall march against the Persians, and if so, whether he shall join with himself any army of men as allies." They inquired thus, and the answers of both the Oracles agreed in one, declaring to Croesus that if he should march against the Persians he should destroy a great empire: and they counselled him to find out the most powerful of the Hellenes and join these with himself as friends.         53. [1] toisi de agein melloysi tun Lydun tauta ta dura es ta ira enetelleto o Kroisos epeirutan ta xresteria ei strateuetai epi Persas Kroisos kai ei tina straton andrun prostheoito filon, [2] us de apikomenoi es ta apepemfthesan, oi Lydoi anethesan ta anathemata, exreunto toisi xresterioisi legontes <<Kroisos o Lydun te kai allun ethneun basileus, nomisas tade manteia einai mouna en anthrupoisi, ymin te axia dura eduke tun exeyrematun, kai nun ymeas epeirutai ei strateuetai epi Persas kai ei tina straton andrun prostheoito summaxon.>> [3] oi men tauta epeirutun, tun de manteiun amfoterun es tuyto ai gnumai synedramon, prolegoysai Kroisui, en strateuetai epi Persas, megalen arxen min katalusein. tous de Ellenun dynatutatoys synebouleyon oi exeyronta filoys prosthesthai.    
      54. So when the answers were brought back and Croesus heard them, he was delighted with the oracles, and expecting that he would certainly destroy the kingdom of Cyrus, he sent again to Pytho, and presented to the men of Delphi, having ascertained the number of them, two staters of gold for each man: and in return for this the Delphians gave to Croesus and to the Lydians precedence in consulting the Oracle and freedom from all payments, and the right to front seats at the games, with this privilege also for all time, that any one of them who wished should be allowed to become a citizen of Delphi.         54. [1] epeite de aneneixthenta ta theopropia eputheto o Kroisos, yperesthe te toisi xresterioisi, pagxy te elpisas katalusein ten Kuroy basileien, pempsas aytis es Pythu Delfous dureetai, pythomenos aytun to pleithos, kat' andra duo stateirsi ekaston xrysou. [2] Delfoi de anti toutun edosan Kroisui kai Lydoisi promanteien kai ateleien kai proedrien, kai exeinai tui boylomenui aytun ginesthai Delfon es ton aiei xronon.    
      55. And having made presents to the men of Delphi, Croesus consulted the Oracle the third time; for from the time when he learnt the truth of the Oracle, he made abundant use of it. And consulting the Oracle he inquired whether his monarchy would endure for a long time. And the Pythian prophetess answered him thus: 
"But when it cometh to pass that a mule of the Medes shall be monarch 
 Then by the pebbly Hermos, O Lydian delicate-footed, 
 Flee and stay not, and be not ashamed to be called a coward."         55. [1] duresamenos de tous Delfous o Kroisos exresteriazeto to triton. epeite gar de parelabe tou manteioy aletheien, eneforeeto aytou. epeiruta de tade xresteriazomenos, ei oi polyxronios estai e moynarxie. [2] e de Pythie oi xrai tade.     all' otan emionos basileus Medoisi genetai,
      kai tote, Lyde podabre, polypsefida par' Ermon
      feugein mede menein med' aideisthai kakos einai.   
      56. By these lines when they came to him Croesus was pleased more than by all the rest, for he supposed that a mule would never be ruler of the Medes instead of a man, and accordingly that he himself and his heirs would never cease from their rule. Then after this he gave thought to inquire which people of the Hellenes he should esteem the most powerful and gain over to himself as friends. And inquiring he found that the Lacedemonians and the Athenians had the pre-eminence, the first of the Dorian and the others of the Ionian race. For these were the most eminent races in ancient time, the second being a Pelasgian and the first a Hellenic race: and the one never migrated from its place in any direction, while the other was very exceedingly given to wanderings; for in the reign of Deucalion this race dwelt in Pthiotis, and in the time of Doros the son of Hellen in the land lying below Ossa and Olympos, which is called Histiaiotis; and when it was driven from Histiaiotis by the sons of Cadmos, it dwelt in Pindos and was called Makednian; and thence it moved afterwards to Dryopis, and from Dryopis it came finally to Peloponnesus, and began to be called Dorian.         56. [1] toutoisi elthousi toisi epesi o Kroisos pollon ti malista pantun esthe, elpizun emionon oydama ant' andros basileusein Medun, oyd' un aytos oyde oi ex aytou pausesthai kote teis arxeis. meta de tauta efrontize istoreun tous an Ellenun dynatutatoys eontas prosktesaito filoys, [2] istoreun de eyriske Lakedaimonioys kai Athenaioys proexontas tous men tou Durikou geneos tous de tou Iunikou. tauta gar En ta prokekrimena, eonta to arxaion to men Pelasgikon to de Ellenikon ethnos. kai to men oydamei ku exexurese, to de polyplaneton karta. [3] epi men gar Deykaliunos basileos oikee gein ten Fthiutin, epi de Duroy tou Ellenos ten ypo ten Ossan te kai ton Olympon xuren, kaleomenen de Istiaiutin. ek de teis Istiaiutidos us exaneste ypo Kadmeiun, oikee en Pindui Makednon kaleomenon. entheuten de aytis es ten Dryopida metebe kai ek teis Dryopidos oytu es Peloponneson elthon Durikon eklethe.    
      57. What language however the Pelasgians used to speak I am not able with certainty to say. But if one must pronounce judging by those that still remain of the Pelasgians who dwelt in the city of Creston above the Tyrsenians, and who were once neighbours of the race now called Dorian, dwelling then in the land which is now called Thessaliotis, and also by those that remain of the Pelasgians who settled at Plakia and Skylake in the region of the Hellespont, who before that had been settlers with the Athenians, and of the natives of the various other towns which are really Pelasgian, though they have lost the name,--if one must pronounce judging by these, the Pelasgians used to speak a Barbarian language. If therefore all the Pelasgian race was such as these, then the Attic race, being Pelasgian, at the same time when it changed and became Hellenic, unlearnt also its language. For the people of Creston do not speak the same language with any of those who dwell about them, nor yet do the people of Phakia, but they speak the same language one as the other: and by this it is proved that they still keep unchanged the form of language which they brought with them when they migrated to these places.         57. [1] entina de glussan iesan oi Pelasgoi, oyk exu atrekeus eipein. ei de xreon esti tekmairomenon legein toisi nun eti eousi Pelasgun tun yper Tyrsenun Krestuna polin oikeontun, oi omoyroi kote Esan toisi nun Durieusi kaleomenoisi (oikeon de tenikauta gein ten nun Thessaliutin kaleomenen), [2] kai tun Plakien te kai Skylaken Pelasgun oikesantun en Ellespontui, oi sunoikoi egenonto Athenaioisi, kai osa alla Pelasgika eonta polismata to oynoma metebale. ei toutoisi tekmairomenon dei legein, Esan oi Pelasgoi barbaron glussan ientes. [3] ei toinyn En kai pan toiouto to Pelasgikon, to Attikon ethnos eon Pelasgikon ama tei metabolei tei es Ellenas kai ten glussan metemathe. kai gar de oyte oi Krestunieitai oydamoisi tun nun sfeas perioikeontun eisi omoglussoi oyte oi Plakienoi, sfisi de omoglussoi. delousi te oti ton eneikanto glusses xarakteira metabainontes es tauta ta xuria, touton exoysi en fylakei.    
      58. As for the Hellenic race, it has used ever the same language, as I clearly perceive, since it first took its rise; but since the time when it parted off feeble at first from the Pelasgian race, setting forth from a small beginning it has increased to that great number of races which we see, and chiefly because many Barbarian races have been added to it besides. Moreover it is true, as I think, of the Pelasgian race also, that so far as it remained Barbarian it never made any great increase.         58. [1] to de Ellenikon glussei men epeite egeneto aiei kote tei aytei diaxratai, us emoi katafainetai einai. aposxisthen mentoi apo tou Pelasgikou eon asthenes, apo smikrou teo ten arxen ormumenon ayxetai es pleithos tun ethneun, Pelasgun malista proskexurekotun aytui kai allun ethneun barbarun syxnun. prosthe de un emoige dokeei oyde to Pelasgikon ethnos, eon barbaron, oydama megalus ayxetheinai.    
      59. Of these races then Croesus was informed that the Athenian was held subject and torn with faction by Peisistratos the son of Hippocrates, who then was despot of the Athenians. For to Hippocrates, when as a private citizen he went to view the Olympic games, a great marvel had occurred. After he had offered the sacrifice, the caldrons which were standing upon the hearth, full of pieces of flesh and of water, boiled without fire under them and ran over. And Chilon the Lacedemonian, who chanced to have been present and to have seen the marvel, advised Hippocrates first not to bring into his house a wife to bear him children, and secondly, if he happened to have one already, to dismiss her, and if he chanced to have a son, to disown him. When Chilon had thus recommended, Hippocrates, they say, was not willing to be persuaded, and so there was born to him afterwards this Peisistratos; who, when the Athenians of the shore were at feud with those of the plain, Megacles the son of Alcmaion being leader of the first faction, and Lycurgos the son of Aristolaides of that of the plain, aimed at the despotism for himself and gathered a third party. So then, after having collected supporters and called himself leader of the men of the mountain-lands, he contrived a device as follows:--he inflicted wounds upon himself and upon his mules, and then drove his car into the market-place, as if he had just escaped from his opponents, who, as he alleged, had desired to kill him when he was driving into the country: and he asked the commons that he might obtain some protection from them, for before this he had gained reputation in his command against the Megarians, during which he took Nisaia and performed other signal service. And the commons of the Athenians being deceived gave him those men chosen from the dwellers in the city who became not indeed the spear-men of Peisistratos but his club-men; for they followed behind him bearing wooden clubs. And these made insurrection with Peisistratos and obtained possession of the Acropolis. Then Peisistratos was ruler of the Athenians, not having disturbed the existing magistrates nor changed the ancient laws; but he administered the State under that constitution of things which was already established, ordering it fairly and well.         59. [1] toutun de un tun ethneun to men Attikon katexomenon te kai diespasmenon epynthaneto o Kroisos ypo Peisistratoy tou Ippokrateos touton ton xronon tyranneuontos Athenaiun. Ippokratei gar eonti idiutei kai theureonti ta Olumpia teras egeneto mega. thusantos gar aytou ta ira oi lebetes epesteutes kai kreun te eontes empleoi kai ydatos aney pyros ezesan kai yperebalon. [2] Khilun de o Lakedaimonios paratyxun kai theesamenos to teras synebouleye Ippokratei pruta men gynaika me agesthai teknopoion es ta oikia, ei de tygxanei exun, deytera ten gynaika ekpempein, kai ei tis oi tygxanei eun pais, touton apeipasthai. [3] oykun tauta parainesantos Khilunos peithesthai thelein ton Ippokratea. genesthai oi meta tauta ton Peisistraton touton, os stasiazontun tun paralun kai tun ek tou pedioy Athenaiun, kai tun men proesteutos Megakleos tou Alkmeunos, tun de ek tou pedioy Lykourgoy Aristolaideu, katafronesas ten tyrannida egeire triten stasin. syllexas de stasiutas kai tui logui tun yperakriun prostas mexanatai toiade. [4] trumatisas euyton te kai emionoys elase es ten agoren to zeugos us ekpefeygus tous exthrous, oi min elaunonta es agron ethelesan apolesai deithen, edeeto te tou demoy fylakeis tinos pros aytou kyreisai, proteron eydokimesas en tei pros Megareas genomenei strategiei, Nisaian te elun kai alla apodexamenos megala erga. [5] o de deimos o tun Athenaiun exapatetheis eduke oi tun astun katalexas andras toutoys oi doryforoi men oyk egenonto Peisistratoy, koryneforoi de. xulun gar korunas exontes eiponto oi opisthe. [6] synepanastantes de oytoi ama Peisistratui esxon ten akropolin. entha de o Peisistratos Erxe Athenaiun, oyte timas tas eousas syntaraxas oyte thesmia metallaxas, epi te toisi katesteusi eneme ten polin kosmeun kalus te kai ey.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [60]

     60. However, no long time after this the followers of Megacles and those of Lycurgos joined together and drove him forth. Thus Peisistratos had obtained possession of Athens for the first time, and thus he lost the power before he had it firmly rooted. But those who had driven out Peisistratos became afterwards at feud with one another again. And Megacles, harassed by the party strife, sent a message to Peisistratos asking whether he was willing to have his daughter to wife on condition of becoming despot. And Peisistratos having accepted the proposal and made an agreement on these terms, they contrived with a view to his return a device the most simple by far, as I think, that ever was practised, considering at least that it was devised at a time when the Hellenic race had been long marked off from the Barbarian as more skilful and further removed from foolish simplicity, and among the Athenians who are accounted the first of the Hellenes in ability. In the deme of Paiania there was a woman whose name was Phya, in height four cubits all but three fingers, and also fair of form. This woman they dressed in full armour and caused her to ascend a chariot and showed her the bearing in which she might best beseem her part, and so they drove to the city, having sent on heralds to run before them, who, when they arrived at the city, spoke that which had been commanded them, saying as follows: "O Athenians, receive with favour Peisistratos, whom Athene herself, honouring him most of all men, brings back to her Acropolis." So the heralds went about hither and thither saying this, and straightway there came to the demes in the country round a report that Athene was bringing Peisistratos back, while at the same time the men of the city, persuaded that the woman was the very goddess herself, were paying worship to the human creature and receiving Peisistratos.         60. [1] meta de oy pollon xronon tuyto fronesantes oi te tou Megakleos stasiutai kai oi tou Lykourgoy exelaunoysi min. oytu men Peisistratos esxe to pruton Athenas, kai ten tyrannida oyku karta errizumenen exun apebale. oi de exelasantes Peisistraton aytis ek nees ep' alleloisi estasiasan. [2] perielaynomenos de tei stasi o Megaklees epekerykeueto Peisistratui, ei bouloito oi ten thygatera exein gynaika epi tei tyrannidi. [3] endexamenoy de ton logon kai omologesantos epi toutoisi Peisistratoy, mexanuntai de epi tei katodui preigma eyethestaton, us egu eyrisku, makrui, epei ge apekrithe ek palaiteroy tou barbaroy ethneos to Ellenikon eon kai dexiuteron kai eyetheies elithioy apellagmenon mallon, ei kai tote ge oytoi en Athenaioisi toisi prutoisi legomenoisi einai Ellenun sofien mexanuntai toiade. [4] en tui demui tui Paianiei En gyne tei oynoma En Fue, megathos apo tesserun pexeun apoleipoysa treis daktuloys kai allus eyeides. tauten ten gynaika skeyasantes panopliei, es arma esbibasantes kai prodexantes sxeima oion ti emelle eyprepestaton faneesthai exoysa, elaynon es to asty, prodromoys kerykas propempsantes. oi ta entetalmena egoreyon apikomenoi es to asty, legontes toiade. [5] <<u Athenaioi, dekesthe agathui noui Peisistraton, ton ayte e Aethnaie timesasa anthrupun malista katagei es ten euyteis akropolin. oi men de tauta diafoiteontes elegon. aytika de es te tous demoys fatis apiketo us Athenaie Peisistraton katagei, kai oi en tui astei peithomenoi ten gynaika einai ayten ten theon proseuxonto te ten anthrupon kai edekonto Peisistraton.    
      61. So having received back the despotism in the manner which has been said, Peisistratos according to the agreement made with Megacles married the daughter of Megacles; but as he had already sons who were young men, and as the descendants of Alcmaion were said to be under a curse, therefore not desiring that children should be born to him from his newly-married wife, he had commerce with her not in the accustomed manner. And at first the woman kept this secret, but afterwards she told her mother, whether in answer to her inquiry or not I cannot tell; and the mother told her husband Megacles. He then was very indignant that he should be dishonoured by Peisistratos; and in his anger straightway he proceeded to compose his quarrel with the men of his faction. And when Peisistratos heard of that which was being done against himself, he departed wholly from the land and came to Eretria, where he took counsel together with his sons: and the advice of Hippias having prevailed, that they should endeavour to win back the despotism, they began to gather gifts of money from those States which owed them obligations for favours received: and many contributed great sums, but the Thebans surpassed the rest in the giving of money. Then, not to make the story long, time elapsed and at last everything was prepared for their return. For certain Argives came as mercenaries from the Peloponnesus, and a man of Naxos had come to them of his own motion, whose name was Lygdamis, and showed very great zeal in providing both money and men.         61. [1] apolabun de ten tyrannida tropui tui eiremenui o Peisistratos kata ten omologien ten pros Megaklea genomenen gameei tou Megakleos ten thygatera. oia de paidun te oi yparxontun neenieun kai legomenun enageun einai tun Alkmeunideun, oy boylomenos oi genesthai ek teis neogamoy gynaikos tekna emisgeto oi oy kata nomon. [2] ta men nyn pruta ekrypte tauta e gyne, meta de eite istoreusei eite kai oy frazei tei euyteis metri, e de tui andri. orgei de us eixe katallasseto ten exthren toisi stasiuteisi. mathun de o Peisistratos ta poieumena ep' euytui apallasseto ek teis xures to parapan, apikomenos de es Eretrian eboyleueto ama toisi paisi. [3] Ippieu de gnumei nikesantos anaktasthai opisu ten tyrannida, enthauta egeiron dutinas ek tun poliun aitines sfi proaideonto kou ti. pollun de megala parasxontun xremata, Thebaioi yperebalonto tei dosi tun xrematun. [4] meta de, oy pollui logui eipein, xronos diefy kai panta sfi exertyto es ten katodon. kai gar Argeioi misthutoi apikonto ek Peloponnesoy, kai Naxios sfi aner apigmenos ethelontes, tui oynoma En Lugdamis, prothymien pleisten pareixeto, komisas kai xremata kai andras.    
      62. So starting from Eretria after the lapse of ten years they returned back; and in Attica the first place of which they took possession was Marathon. While they were encamping here, their partisans from the city came to them, and also others flowed in from the various demes, to whom despotic rule was more welcome than freedom. So these were gathering themselves together; but the Athenians in the city, so long as Peisistratos was collecting the money, and afterwards when he took possession of Marathon, made no account of it; but when they heard that he was marching from Marathon towards the city, then they went to the rescue against him. These then were going in full force to fight against the returning exiles, and the forces of Peisistratos, as they went towards the city starting from Marathon, met them just when they came to the temple of Athene Pallenis, and there encamped opposite to them. Then moved by divine guidance there came into the presence of Peisistratos Amphilytos the Arcarnanian, a soothsayer, who approaching him uttered an oracle in hexameter verse, saying thus: 
"But now the cast hath been made and the net hath been widely extended, 
 And in the night the tunnies will dart through the moon-lighted waters."         62. [1] ex Eretries de ormethentes dia endekatoy eteos apikonto opisu, kai pruton teis Attikeis isxoysi Marathuna. en de toutui tui xurui sfi stratopedeyomenoisi oi te ek tou asteos stasiutai apikonto alloi te ek tun demun proserreon, toisi e tyrannis pro eleytheries En aspastoteron. [2] oytoi men de synelizonto, Athenaiun de oi ek tou asteos, eus men Peisistratos ta xremata egeire, kai metautis us esxe Marathuna, logon oydena eixon. epeite de eputhonto ek tou Marathunos ayton poreuesthai epi to asty, oytu de boetheoysi ep' ayton. [3] kai oytoi te panstratiei eisan epi tous kationtas kai oi amfi Peisistraton, us ormethentes ek Marathunos eisan epi to asty, es tuyto syniontes apikneontai epi Pallenidos Athenaies iron, kai antia ethento ta opla. [4] enthauta theiei pompei xreumenos paristatai Peisistratui Amfilytos o Akarnan xresmologos aner, os oi prosiun xrai en exametrui tonui tade legun.      <<erriptai d' o bolos, to de diktyon ekpepetastai,
      thunnoi d' oimesoysi selenaies dia nyktos.>>   
      63. This oracle he uttered to him being divinely inspired, and Peisistratos, having understood the oracle and having said that he accepted the prophecy which was uttered, led his army against the enemy. Now the Athenians from the city were just at that time occupied with the morning meal, and some of them after their meal with games of dice or with sleep; and the forces of Peisistratos fell upon the Athenians and put them to flight. Then as they fled, Peisistratos devised a very skilful counsel, to the end that the Athenians might not gather again into one body but might remain scattered abroad. He mounted his sons on horseback and sent them before him; and overtaking the fugitives they said that which was commanded them by Peisistratos, bidding them be of good cheer and that each man should depart to his own home.         63. [1] o men de oi entheazun xrai tade, Peisistratos de syllabun to xresterion kai fas dekesthai to xresthen epeige ten stratien. Athenaioi de oi ek tou asteos pros ariston tetrammenoi Esan de tenikauta, kai meta to ariston metexeteroi aytun oi men pros kuboys oi de pros ypnon. oi de amfi Peisistraton espesontes tous Athenaioys trepoysi. [2] feygontun de toutun boylen enthauta sofutaten Peisistratos epitexnatai, okus mete alistheien eti oi Athenaioi dieskedasmenoi te eien. anabibasas tous paidas epi ippoys proepempe, oi de katalambanontes tous feugontas elegon ta entetalmena ypo Peisistratoy, tharseein te keleuontes kai apienai ekaston epi ta euytou.    
      64. Thus then the Athenians did, and so Peisistratos for the third time obtained possession of Athens, and he firmly rooted his despotism by many foreign mercenaries and by much revenue of money, coming partly from the land itself and partly from about the river Strymon, and also by taking as hostages the sons of those Athenians who had remained in the land and had not at once fled, and placing them in the hands of Naxos; for this also Peisistratos conquered by war and delivered into the charge of Lygdamis. Moreover besides this he cleansed the island of Delos in obedience to the oracles; and his cleansing was of the following kind:--so far as the view from the temple extended he dug up all the dead bodies which were buried in this part and removed them to another part of Delos. So Peisistratos was despot of the Athenians; but of the Athenians some had fallen in the battle, and others of them with the sons of Alcmaion were exiles from their native land.         64. [1] peithomenun de tun Athenaiun, oytu de Peisistratos to triton sxun Athenas errizuse ten tyrannida epikouroisi te polloisi kai xrematun synodoisi, tun men aytothen tun de apo Strymonos potamou syniontun, omeroys te tun parameinantun Athenaiun kai me aytika fygontun paidas labun kai katastesas es Naxon [2] (kai gar tauten o Peisistratos katestrepsato polemui kai epetrepse Lygdami) pros te eti toutoisi ten neison Deilon katheras ek tun logiun katheras de ude. ep' oson epopsis tou irou eixe, ek toutoy tou xuroy pantos exoruxas tous nekrous meteforee es allon xuron teis Deloy. [3] kai Peisistratos men etyranneye Atheneun, Athenaiun de oi men en tei maxe epeptukesan, oi de aytun met' Alkmeunideun efeygon ek teis oikeies.    
      65. Such was the condition of things which Croesus heard was prevailing among the Athenians during this time; but as to the Lacedemonians he heard that they had escaped from great evils and had now got the better of the Tegeans in the war. For when Leon and Hegesicles were kings of Sparta, the Lacedemonians, who had good success in all their other wars, suffered disaster in that alone which they waged against the men of Tegea. Moreover in the times before this they had the worst laws of almost all the Hellenes, both in matters which concerned themselves alone and also in that they had no dealings with strangers. And they made their change to a good constitution of laws thus:-- Lycurgos, a man of the Spartans who was held in high repute, came to the Oracle at Delphi, and as he entered the sanctuary of the temple, straightway the Pythian prophetess said as follows: 
"Lo, thou art come, O Lycurgos, to this rich shrine of my temple, 
 Loved thou by Zeus and by all who possess the abodes of Olympos. 
 Whether to call thee a god, I doubt, in my voices prophetic, 
 God or a man, but rather a god I think, O Lycurgos." Some say in addition to this that the Pythian prophetess also set forth to him the order of things which is now established for the Spartans; but the Lacedemonians themselves say that Lycurgos having become guardian of Leobotes his brother's son, who was king of the Spartans, brought in these things from Crete. For as soon as he became guardian, he changed all the prevailing laws, and took measures that they should not transgress his institutions: and after this Lycurgos established that which appertained to war, namely Enomoties and Triecads and Common Meals, and in addition to this the Ephors and the Senate.         65. [1] tous men nyn Athenaioys toiauta ton xronon touton epynthaneto o Kroisos katexonta, tous de Lakedaimonioys ek kakun te megalun pefeygotas kai eontas ede tui polemui katyperteroys Tegeeteun. epi gar Leontos basileuontos kai Egesikleos en Spartei tous alloys polemoys eytyxeontes oi Lakedaimonioi pros Tegeetas mounoys proseptaion. [2] to de eti proteron toutun kai kakonomutatoi Esan sxedon pantun Ellenun kata te sfeas aytous kai xeinoisi aprosmiktoi. metebalon de ude es eynomien. Lykourgoy tun Spartieteun dokimoy andros elthontos es Delfous epi to xresterion, us eseie es to megaron, eythus e Pythie legei tade.     [3] <<ekeis u Lykoorge emon poti piona neon
      Zeni filos kai pasin Olumpia dumat' exoysi.
      dizu e se theon manteusomai e anthrupon.
      all' eti kai mallon theon elpomai, u Lykoorge.>>[4] oi men de tines pros toutoisi legoysi kai frasai aytui ten Pythien ton nun katesteuta kosmon Spartieteisi. us d' aytoi Lakedaimonioi legoysi, Lykourgon epitropeusanta Leubuteu, adelfideoy men euytou basileuontos de Spartieteun, ek Kretes agagesthai tauta. [5] us gar epetropeyse taxista, metestese ta nomima panta, kai efulaxe tauta me parabainein. meta de ta es polemon exonta, enumotias kai triekadas kai syssitia, pros te toutoisi tous eforoys kai gerontas estese Lykourgos.    
      66. Having changed thus, the Spartans had good laws; and to Lycurgos after he was dead they erected a temple, and they pay him great worship. So then, as might be supposed, with a fertile land and with no small number of men dwelling in it, they straightway shot up and became prosperous: and it was no longer sufficient for them to keep still; but presuming that they were superior in strength to the Arcadians, they consulted the Oracle at Delphi respecting conquest of the whole of Arcadia; and the Pythian prophetess gave answer thus: 
"The land of Arcadia thou askest; thou askest me much; I refuse it; 
 Many there are in Arcadian land, stout men, eating acorns; 
 These will prevent thee from this: but I am not grudging towards thee; 
 Tegea beaten with sounding feet I will give thee to dance in, 
 And a fair plain I will give thee to measure with line and divide it." When the Lacedemonians heard report of this, they held off from the other Arcadians, and marched against the Tegeans with fetters in their hands, trusting to a deceitful oracle and expecting that they would make slaves of the men of Tegea. But having been worsted in the encounter, those of them who were taken alive worked wearing the fetters which they themselves brought with them and having "measured with line and divided" the plain of the Tegeans. And these fetters with which they had been bound were preserved even to my own time at Tegea, hanging about the temple of Athene Alea.         66. [1] oytu men metabalontes eynomethesan, tui de Lykourgui teleytesanti iron eisamenoi sebontai megalus. oia de en te xurei agathei kai plethei oyk oligun andrun, ana te edramon aytika kai eythenethesan, kai de sfi oyketi apexra esyxien agein, alla katafronesantes Arkadun kressones einai exresteriazonto en Delfoisi epi pasei tei Arkadun xurei. [2] e de Pythie sfi xrai tade.     <<Arkadien m' aiteis. mega m' aiteis. oy toi dusu.
      polloi en Arkadiei balanefagoi andres easin,
      oi s' apokulusoysin. egu de toi oyti megairu.
      dusu toi Tegeen possikroton orxesasthai
      kai kalon pedion sxoinui diametresasthai.>>[3] tauta us apeneixthenta ekoysan oi Lakedaimonioi,Arkadun men tun allun apeixonto, oi de pedas feromenoi epi Tegeetas estrateuonto, xresmui kibdelui pisynoi, us de exandrapodioumenoi tous Tegeetas. [4] essuthentes de tei symbolei, osoi aytun ezugrethesan, pedas te exontes tas eferonto aytoi kai sxoinui diametresamenoi to pedion to Tegeeteun ergazonto. ai de pedai aytai en teisi ededeato eti kai es eme Esan soai en Tegeei peri ton neon teis Alees Athenaies kremamenai.    
      67. In the former war then I say they struggled against the Tegeans continually with ill success; but in the time of Croesus and in the reign of Anaxandrides and Ariston at Lacedemon the Spartans had at length become victors in the war; and they became so in the following manner:--As they continued to be always worsted in the war by the men of Tegea, they sent messengers to consult the Oracle at Delphi and inquired what god they should propitiate in order to get the better of the men of Tegea in the war: and the Pythian prophetess made answer to them that they should bring into their land the bones of Orestes the son of Agamemnon. Then as they were not able to find the grave of Orestes, they sent men again to go to the god and to inquire about the spot where Orestes was laid: and when the messengers who were sent asked this, the prophetess said as follows: 
"Tegea there is, in Arcadian land, in a smooth place founded; 
 Where there do blow two blasts by strong compulsion together; 
 Stroke too there is and stroke in return, and trouble on trouble. 
 There Agamemnon's son in the life-giving earth is reposing; 
 Him if thou bring with thee home, of Tegea thou shalt be master." When the Lacedemonians had heard this they were none the less far from finding it out, though they searched all places; until the time that Lichas, one of those Spartans who are called "Well-doers," discovered it. Now the "Well-doers" are of the citizens the eldest who are passing from the ranks of the "Horsemen," in each year five; and these are bound during that year in which they pass out from the "Horsemen," to allow themselves to be sent without ceasing to various places by the Spartan State.         67. [1] kata men de ton proteron polemon synexeus aiei kakus aethleon pros tous Tegeetas, kata de ton kata Kroison xronon kai ten Anaxandrideu te kai Aristunos basileien en Lakedaimoni ede oi Spartieitai katyperteroi tui polemui egegonesan, tropui toiuide genomenoi. [2] epeide aiei tui polemui essounto ypo Tegeeteun, pempsantes theopropoys es Delfous epeirutun tina an theun ilasamenoi katuperthe tui polemui Tegeeteun genoiato. e de Pythie sfi exrese ta Oresteu tou Agamemnonos ostea epagagomenoys. [3] us de aneyrein oyk oioi te eginonto ten theken tou Oresteu epempon aytis ten es theon epeiresomenoys ton xuron en tui keoito Orestes. eirutusi de tauta toisi theopropoisi legei e Pythie tade.     [4] <<esti tis Arkadies Tegee leyrui eni xurui,
      enth' anemoi pneioysi duu kratereis yp' anagkes,
      kai tupos antitypos, kai peim' epi pemati keitai.
      enth' Agamemnoniden katexei fysizoos aia,
      ton su komissamenos Tegees epitarrothos essei.>>[5] us de kai tauta ekoysan oi Lakedaimonioi, apeixon teis exeyresios oyden elasson, panta dizemenoi, es oy de Lixes tun agathoergun kaleomenun Spartieteun aneure, oi de agathoergoi eisi tun astun, exiontes ek tun ippeun aiei oi presbutatoi, pente eteos ekastoy. tous dei touton ton eniayton, ton an exiusi ek tun ippeun, Spartieteun tui koinui diapempomenoys me elinuein alloys allei.    
      68. Lichas then, being one of these, discovered it in Tegea by means both of fortune and ability. For as there were at that time dealings under truce with the men of Tegea, he had come to a forge there and was looking at iron being wrought; and he was in wonder as he saw that which was being done. The smith therefore, perceiving that he marvelled at it, ceased from his work and said: "Surely, thou stranger of Lacedemon, if thou hadst seen that which I once saw, thou wouldst have marvelled much, since now it falls out that thou dost marvel so greatly at the working of this iron; for I, desiring in this enclosure to make a well, lighted in my digging upon a coffin of seven cubits in length; and not believing that ever there had been men larger than those of the present day, I opened it, and I saw that the dead body was equal in length to the coffin: then after I had measured it, I filled in the earth over it again." He then thus told him of that which he had seen; and the other, having thought upon that which was told, conjectured that this was Orestes according to the saying of the Oracle, forming his conjecture in the following manner:--whereas he saw that the smith had two pairs of bellows, he concluded that these were the winds spoken of, and that the anvil and the hammer were the stroke and the stroke in return, and that the iron which was being wrought was the trouble laid upon trouble, making comparison by the thought that iron has been discovered for the evil of mankind. Having thus conjectured he came back to Sparta and declared the whole matter to the Lacedemonians; and they brought a charge against him on a fictitious pretext and drove him out into exile. So having come to Tegea, he told the smith of his evil fortune and endeavoured to hire from him the enclosure, but at first he would not allow him to have it: at length however Lichas persuaded him and he took up his abode there; and he dug up the grave and gathered together the bones and went with them away to Sparta. From that time, whenever they made trial of one another, the Lacedemonians had much the advantage in the war; and by now they had subdued to themselves the greater part of Peloponnesus besides.         68. [1] toutun un tun andrun Lixes aneure en Tegeei kai syntyxiei xresamenos kai sofiei. eouses gar touton ton xronon epimixies pros tous Tegeetas, elthun es xalkeion etheeito sideron exelaynomenon, kai en thumati En oreun to poieomenon. [2] mathun, de min o xalkeus apothumazonta eipe paysamenos tou ergoy <<E koy an, u xeine Lakun ei per eides to per egu, karta an ethumazes, okoy nun oytu tygxaneis thuma poieumenos ten ergasien tou sideroy. [3] egu gar en teide thelun tei aylei frear poiesasthai, orussun epetyxon sorui eptapexei. ypo de apisties me men genesthai medama mezonas anthrupoys tun nun anoixa ayten kai eidon ton nekron mekei ison eonta tei sorui. metresas de synexusa opisu.>> o men de oi elege ta per opupee, o de ennusas ta legomena syneballeto ton Orestea kata to theopropion touton einai, teide symballomenos. [4] tou xalkeos duo oreun fusas tous anemoys eyriske eontas, ton de akmona kai ten sfuran ton te tupon kai ton antitypon, ton de exelaynomenon sideron to peima epi pemati keimenon, kata toionde ti eikazun, us epi kakui anthrupoy sideros aneuretai. [5] symbalomenos de tauta kai apelthun es Sparten efraze Lakedaimoniossi pan to preigma. oi de ek logoy plastou epeneikantes oi aitien ediuxan. o de apikomenos es Tegeen kai frazun ten euytou symforen pros ton xalkea emisthouto par' oyk ekdidontos ten aylen. [6] xronui de us anegnuse, enoikisthe, anoruxas de ton tafon kai ta ostea syllexas oixeto ferun es Sparten. kai apo toutoy tou xronoy, okus peiruiato allelun, pollui katyperteroi tui polemui eginonto oi Lakedaimonioi. ede de sfi kai e polle teis Peloponnesoy En katestrammene.    
      69. Croesus accordingly being informed of all these things was sending messengers to Sparta with gifts in their hands to ask for an alliance, having commanded them what they ought to say: and they when they came said: "Croesus king of the Lydians and also of other nations sent us hither and saith as follows: O Lacedemonians, whereas the god by an oracle bade me join with myself the Hellene as a friend, therefore, since I am informed that ye are the chiefs of Hellas, I invite you according to the oracle, desiring to be your friend and your ally apart from all guile and deceit." Thus did Croesus announce to the Lacedemonians through his messengers; and the Lacedemonians, who themselves also had heard of the oracle given to Croesus, were pleased at the coming of the Lydians and exchanged oaths of friendship and alliance: for they were bound to Croesus also by some services rendered to them even before this time; since the Lacedemonians had sent to Sardis and were buying gold there with purpose of using it for the image of Apollo which is now set up on Mount Thornax in the Lacedemonian land; and Croesus, when they desired to buy it, gave it them as a gift.         69. [1] tauta de un panta pynthanomenos o Kroisos epempe es Sparten aggeloys dura te ferontas kai deesomenoys symmaxies, enteilamenos te ta legein xrein. oi de elthontes elegon [2] <<epempse emeas Kroisos o Lydun te kai allun ethneun basileus, legun tade. u Lakedaimonioi, xresantos tou theou ton Ellena filon prosthesthai, ymeas gar pynthanomai proestanai teis Ellados, ymeas un kata to xresterion proskaleomai filos te thelun genesthai kai summaxos aney te doloy kai apates.>> [3] Kroisos men de tauta di' aggelun epekerykeueto, Lakedaimonioi de akekootes kai aytoi to theopropion to Kroisui genomenon esthesan te tei apixi tun Lydun kai epoiesanto orkia xeinies peri kai symmaxies. kai gar tines aytous eyergesiai eixon ek Kroisoy proteron eti gegonyiai. [4] pempsantes gar oi Lakedaimonioi es Sardis xryson uneonto, es agalma boylomenoi xresasthai touto to nun teis Lakunikeis en Thornaki idrytai Apollunos. Kroisos de sfi uneomenoisi eduke dutinen.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [70]

     70. For this reason therefore the Lacedemonians accepted the alliance, and also because he chose them as his friends, preferring them to all the other Hellenes. And not only were they ready themselves when he made his offer, but they caused a mixing-bowl to be made of bronze, covered outside with figures round the rim and of such a size as to hold three hundred amphors, and this they conveyed, desiring to give it as a gift in return to Croesus. This bowl never came to Sardis for reasons of which two accounts are given as follows:--The Lacedemonians say that when the bowl was on its way to Sardis and came opposite the land of Samos, the men of Samos having heard of it sailed out with ships of war and took it away; but the Samians themselves say that the Lacedemonians who were conveying the bowl, finding that they were too late and hearing that Sardis had been taken and Croesus was a prisoner, sold the bowl in Samos, and certain private persons bought it and dedicated it as a votive offering in the temple of Hera; and probably those who had sold it would say when they returned to Sparta that it had been taken from them by the Samians.         70. [1] toutun te un eineken oi Lakedaimonioi ten symmaxien edexanto, kai oti ek pantun sfeas prokrinas Ellenun aireeto filoys. kai touto men aytoi Esan etoimoi epaggeilanti, touto de poiesamenoi kreteira xalkeon zuidiun te exuthen plesantes peri to xeilos kai megathei triekosioys amforeas xureonta Egon, duron boylomenoi antidounai Kroisui. [2] oytos o kreter oyk apiketo es Sardis di' aitias difasias legomenas tasde. oi men Lakedaimonioi legoysi us epeite agomenos es tas Sardis o kreter egineto kata ten Samien, pythomenoi Samioi apeloiato ayton neysi makreisi epiplusantes. [3] aytoi de Samioi legoysi us epeite ysteresan oi agontes tun Lakedaimoniun ton kreteira, epynthanonto de Sardis te kai Kroison elukenai, apedonto ton kreteira en Samui, idiutas de andras priamenoys anatheinai min es to Eraion. taxa de an kai oi apodomenoi legoien apikomenoi es Sparten us apairetheiesan ypo Samiun.   
      71. Thus then it happened about the mixing-bowl: but meanwhile Croesus, mistaking the meaning of the oracle, was making a march into Cappadokia, expecting to overthrow Cyrus and the power of the Persians: and while Croesus was preparing to march against the Persians, one of the Lydians, who even before this time was thought to be a wise man but in consequence of this opinion got a very great name for wisdom among the Lydians, had advised Croesus as follows (the name of the man was Sandanis):--"O king, thou art preparing to march against men who wear breeches of leather, and the rest of their clothing is of leather also; and they eat food not such as they desire but such as they can obtain, dwelling in a land which is rugged; and moreover they make no use of wine but drink water; and no figs have they for dessert, nor any other good thing. On the one hand, if thou shalt overcome them, what wilt thou take away from them, seeing they have nothing? and on the other hand, if thou shalt be overcome, consider how many good things thou wilt lose; for once having tasted our good things, they will cling to them fast and it will not be possible to drive them away. I for my own part feel gratitude to the gods that they do not put it into the minds of the Persians to march against the Lydians." Thus he spoke not persuading Croesus: for it is true indeed that the Persians before they subdued the Lydians had no luxury nor any good thing.         71. [1] kata men nyn ton kreteira oytu esxe, Kroisos de amartun tou xresmou epoieeto strateien es Kappadokien, elpisas katairesein Kuron te kai ten Perseun dunamin. [2] paraskeyazomenoy de Kroisoy strateuesthai epi Persas, tun tis Lydun nomizomenos kai prosthe einai sofos, apo de tautes teis gnumes kai to karta oynoma en Lydoisi exun, synebouleyse Kroisui tade. oynoma oi En Sandanis. <<u basileu, ep' andras toioutoys strateuesthai paraskeyazeai, oi skytinas men anaxyridas skytinen de ten allen estheita foreoysi, siteontai de oyk osa etheloysi all' osa exoysi, xuren exontes trexean. [3] pros de oyk oinui diaxreuntai alla ydropoteoysi, oy suka de exoysi trugein, oyk allo agathon oyden. touto men de, ei nikeseis, ti sfeas apaireseai, toisi ge me esti meden; touto de, en niketheis, mathe osa agatha apobaleeis. geysamenoi gar tun emeterun agathun periexontai oyde apustoi esontai. [4] egu men nyn theoisi exu xarin, oi oyk epi noon poieoysi Perseisi strateuesthai epi Lydous.>> tauta legun oyk epeithe ton Kroison. Perseisi gar, prin Lydous katastrepsasthai, En oyte abron oyte agathon oyden.    
      72. Now the Cappadokians are called by the Hellenes Syrians; and these Syrians, before the Persians had rule, were subjects of the Medes, but at this time they were subjects of Cyrus. For the boundary between the Median empire and the Lydian was the river Halys; and this flows from the mountain-land of Armenia through the Kilikians, and afterwards, as it flows, it has the Matienians on the right hand and the Phrygians on the other side; then passing by these and flowing up towards the North Wind, it bounds on the one side the Cappadokian Syrians and on the left hand the Paphlagonians. Thus the river Halys cuts off from the rest almost all the lower parts of Asia by a line extending from the sea that is opposite Cyprus to the Euxine. And this tract is the neck of the whole peninsula, the distance of the journey being such that five days are spent on the way by a man without encumbrance.         72. [1] oi de Kappadokai ypo Ellenun Surioi onomazontai. Esan de oi Surioi oytoi to men proteron e Persas arxai Medun katekooi, tote de Kuroy. [2] o gar oyros En teis te Medikeis arxeis kai teis Lydikeis o Alys potamos, os rheei ex Armenioy oreos dia Kilikun, meta de Matienous men en dexiei exei rheun, ek de tou eteroy Frugas. parameibomenos de toutoys kai rheun anu pros boreen anemon enthen men Syrioys Kappadokas apergei, ex eyunumoy de Paflagonas. [3] oytu o Alys potamos apotamnei sxedon panta teis Asies ta katu ek thalasses teis antion Kuproy es ton Eyxeinon ponton. esti de ayxen oytos teis xures tautes apases. meikos odou eyzunui andri pente emerai anaisimountai.    
      73. Now for the following reasons Croesus was marching into Cappadokia: --first because he desired to acquire the land in addition to his own possessions, and then especially because he had confidence in the oracle and wished to take vengeance on Cyrus for Astyages. For Cyrus the son of Cambyses had conquered Astyages and was keeping him in captivity, who was brother by marriage to Croesus and king of the Medes: and he had become the brother by marriage of Croesus in this manner:--A horde of the nomad Scythians at feud with the rest withdrew and sought refuge in the land of the Medes: and at this time the ruler of the Medes was Kyaxares the son of Phraortes, the son of Deiokes, who at first dealt well with these Scythians, being suppliants for his protection; and esteeming them very highly he delivered boys to them to learn their speech and the art of shooting with the bow. Then time went by, and the Scythians used to go out continually to the chase and always brought back something; till once it happened that they took nothing, and when they returned with empty hands Kyaxares (being, as he showed on this occasion, not of an eminently good disposition) dealt with them very harshly and used insult towards them. And they, when they had received this treatment from Kyaxares, considering that they had suffered indignity, planned to kill and to cut up one of the boys who were being instructed among them, and having dressed his flesh as they had been wont to dress the wild animals, to bear it to Kyaxares and give it to him, pretending that it was game taken in hunting; and when they had given it, their design was to make their way as quickly as possible to Alyattes the son of Sadyattes at Sardis. This then was done; and Kyaxares with the guests who ate at his table tasted of that meat, and the Scythians having so done became suppliants for the protection of Alyattes.         73. [1] estrateueto de o Kroisos epi ten Kappadokien tunde eineka, kai geis imerui prosktesasthai pros ten euytou moiran boylomenos, kai malista tui xresteriui pisynos eun kai tisasthai thelun yper Astyageos Kuron. [2] Astyagea gar ton Kyaxareu, eonta Kroisoy men gambron Medun de basilea, Kuros o Kambuseu katastrepsamenos eixe, genomenon gambron Kroisui ude. [3] Skytheun tun nomadun eilei andrun stasiasasa ypexeilthe es gein ten Mediken. etyranneye de ton xronon touton Medun Kyaxares o Fraorteu tou Deiokeu, os tous Skuthas toutoys to men pruton perieipe ey us eontas iketas. uste de peri pollou poieomenos aytous, paidas sfi pareduke ten glussan te ekmathein kai ten texnen tun toxun. [4] xronoy de genomenoy, kai aiei foiteontun tun Skytheun ep' agren kai aiei ti ferontun, kai kote syneneike elein sfeas meden. nostesantas de aytous keineisi xersi o Kyaxares (En gar, us diedexe, orgen akros) trexeus karta periespe aeikeiei. [5] oi de tauta pros Kyaxareu pathontes, uste anaxia sfeun aytun peponthotes, ebouleysan tun para sfisi didaskomenun paidun ena katakopsai, skeyasantes de ayton usper euthesan kai ta theria skeyazein, Kyaxarei dounai ferontes us agren deithen, dontes de ten taxisten komizesthai para Alyattea ton Sadyatteu es Sardis. [6] tauta kai egeneto. kai gar Kyaxares kai oi pareontes daitymones tun kreun toutun epasanto, kai oi Skuthai tauta poiesantes Alyatteu iketai egenonto.    
      74. After this, seeing that Alyattes would not give up the Scythians when Kyaxares demanded them, there had arisen war between the Lydians and the Medes lasting five years; in which years the Medes often discomfited the Lydians and the Lydians often discomfited the Medes (and among others they fought also a battle by night): and as they still carried on the war with equally balanced fortune, in the sixth year a battle took place in which it happened, when the fight had begun, that suddenly the day became night. And this change of the day Thales the Milesian had foretold to the Ionians laying down as a limit this very year in which the change took place. The Lydians however and the Medes, when they saw that it had become night instead of day, ceased from their fighting and were much more eager both of them that peace should be made between them. And they who brought about the peace between them were Syennesis the Kilikian and Labynetos the Babylonian: these were they who urged also the taking of the oath by them, and they brought about an interchange of marriages; for they decided that Alyattes should give his daughter Aryenis to Astyages the son of Kyaxares, seeing that without the compulsion of a strong tie agreements are apt not to hold strongly together. Now these nations observe the same ceremonies in taking oaths as the Hellenes, and in addition to them they make incision into the skin of their arms, and then lick up the blood each of the other.         74. [1] meta de tauta, oy gar de o Alyattes exedidoy tous Skuthas exaiteonti Kyaxarei, polemos toisi Lydoisi kai toisi Medoisi egegonee ep' etea pente, en toisi pollakis men oi Meidoi tous Lydous enikesan, pollakis de oi Lydoi tous Medoys, en de kai nyktomaxien tina epoiesanto. [2] diaferoysi de sfi epi ises ton polemon tui ektui etei symboleis genomenes syneneike uste teis maxes synesteuses ten emeren exapines nukta genesthai. ten de metallagen tauten tei emeres Thaleis o Milesios toisi Iusi proegoreyse esesthai, oyron prothemenos eniayton touton en tui de kai egeneto e metabole. [3] oi de Lydoi te kai oi Meidoi epeite eidon nukta anti emeres genomenen, teis maxes te epausanto kai mallon ti espeysan kai amfoteroi eirenen euytoisi genesthai. oi de symbibasantes aytous Esan oide, Syennesis te o Kilix kai Labunetos o Babylunios. [4] oytoi sfi kai to orkion oi speusantes genesthai Esan kai gamun epallagen epoiesan. Alyattea gar egnusan dounai ten thygatera Aruenin Astyagei tui Kyaxareu paidi. aney gar anagkaies isxyreis symbasies isxyrai oyk etheloysi symmenein. [5] orkia de poieetai tauta ta ethnea ta per te Ellenes, kai pros toutoisi, epean tous braxionas epitamuntai es ten omoxroien, to aima analeixoysi allelun.    
      75. This Astyages then, being his mother's father, Cyrus had conquered and made prisoner for a reason which I shall declare in the history which comes after. This then was the complaint which Croesus had against Cyrus when he sent to the Oracles to ask if he should march against the Persians; and when a deceitful answer had come back to him, he marched into the dominion of the Persians, supposing that the answer was favourable to himself. And when Croesus came to the river Halys, then, according to my account, he passed his army across by the bridges which there were; but, according to the account which prevails among the Hellenes, Thales the Milesian enabled him to pass his army across. For, say they, when Croesus was at a loss how his army should pass over the river (since, they add, there were not yet at that time the bridges which now there are), Thales being present in the army caused the river, which flowed then on the left hand of the army, to flow partly also on the right; and he did it thus:--beginning above the camp he proceeded to dig a deep channel, directing it in the form of a crescent moon, so that the river might take the camp there pitched in the rear, being turned aside from its ancient course by this way along the channel, and afterwards passing by the camp might fall again into its ancient course; so that as soon as the river was thus parted in two it became fordable by both branches: and some say even that the ancient course of the river was altogether dried up. But this tale I do not admit as true, for how then did they pass over the river as they went back?         75. [1] touton de un ton Astyagea Kuros eonta euytou metropatora katastrepsamenos esxe di' aitien ten egu en toisi opisu logoisi semaneu. [2] ta Kroisos epimemfomenos tui Kurui es te ta xresteria epempe ei strateuetai epi Persas, kai de kai apikomenoy xresmou kibdeloy, elpisas pros euytou ton xresmon einai, estrateueto es ten Perseun moiran. [3] us de apiketo epi ton Alyn potamon o Kroisos, to entheuten, us men egu legu, kata tas eousas gefuras diebibase ton straton, us de o pollos logos Ellenun, Thaleis oi o Milesios diebibase. [4] aporeontos gar Kroisoy okus oi diabesetai ton potamon o stratos (oy gar de einai ku touton ton xronon tas gefuras tautas) legetai pareonta ton Thalein en tui stratopedui poieisai aytui ton potamon ex aristereis xeiros rheonta tou stratou kai ek dexieis rheein, poieisai de ude. [5] anuthen tou stratopedoy arxamenon diuryxa bathean orussein, agonta menoeidea, okus an to stratopedon idrymenon kata nutoy laboi, tautei kata ten diuryxa ektrapomenos ek tun arxaiun rheethrun, kai aytis parameibomenos to stratopedon es ta arxaia esballoi. uste epeite kai esxisthe taxista o potamos, amfoterei diabatos egeneto, [6] oi de kai to parapan legoysi kai to arxaion rheethron apoxerantheinai. alla touto men oy prosiemai. kus gar opisu poreyomenoi diebesan ayton;    
      76. And Croesus, when he had passed over with his army, came to that place in Cappadokia which is called Pteria (now Pteria is the strongest place in this country, and is situated somewhere about in a line with the city of Sinope on the Euxine). Here he encamped and ravaged the fields of the Syrians. Moreover he took the city of the Pterians, and sold the people into slavery, and he took also all the towns that lay about it; and the Syrians, who were not guilty of any wrong, he forced to remove from their homes. Meanwhile Cyrus, having gathered his own forces and having taken up in addition to them all who dwelt in the region between, was coming to meet Croesus. Before he began however to lead forth his army, he had sent heralds to the Ionians and tried to induce them to revolt from Croesus; but the Ionians would not do as he said. Then when Cyrus was come and had encamped over against Croesus, they made trial of one another by force of arms in the land of Pteria: and after hard fighting, when many had fallen on both sides, at length, night having come on, they parted from one the other with no victory on either side.         76. [1] Kroisos de epeite diabas sun tui stratui apiketo teis Kappadokies es ten Pterien kaleomenen (e de Pterie esti teis xures tautes to isxyrotaton, kata Sinupen polin ten en Eyxeinui pontui malista kei keimene), enthauta estratopedeueto ftheirun tun Syriun tous kleroys. [2] kai eile men tun Pteriun ten polin kai endrapodisato, eile de tas perioikidas ayteis pasas, Syrioys te oyden eontas aitioys anastatoys epoiese. Kuros de ageiras ton euytou straton kai paralabun tous metaxu oikeontas pantas entiouto Kroisui. [3] prin de exelaunein ormeisai ton straton, pempsas kerykas es tous Iunas epeirato sfeas apo Kroisoy apistanai. Iunes men nyn oyk epeithonto. Kuros de us apiketo kai antestratopedeusato Kroisui, enthauta en tei Pteriei xurei epeirunto kata to isxyron allelun. [4] maxes de kartereis genomenes kai pesontun amfoterun pollun, telos oydeteroi nikesantes diestesan nyktos epelthouses.   
      77. Thus the two armies contended with one another: and Croesus being ill satisfied with his own army in respect of number (for the army which he had when he fought was far smaller than that of Cyrus), being dissatisfied with it I say on this account, as Cyrus did not attempt to advance against him on the following day, marched back to Sardis, having it in his mind to call the Egyptians to his help according to the oath which they had taken (for he had made an alliance with Amasis king of Egypt before he made the alliance with the Lacedemonians), and to summon the Babylonians as well (for with these also an alliance had been concluded by him, Labynetos being at that time ruler of the Babylonians), and moreover to send a message to the Lacedemonians bidding them appear at a fixed time: and then after he had got all these together and had gathered his own army, his design was to let the winter go by and at the coming of spring to march against the Persians. So with these thoughts in his mind, as soon as he came to Sardis he proceeded to send heralds to his several allies to give them notice that by the fifth month from that time they should assemble at Sardis: but the army which he had with him and which had fought with the Persians, an army which consisted of mercenary troops, he let go and disbanded altogether, never expecting that Cyrus, after having contended against him with such even fortune, would after all march upon Sardis.         77. [1] kai ta men stratopeda amfotera oytu egunisato. Kroisos de memftheis kata to pleithos to euytou strateyma (En gar oi o symbalun stratos pollon elassun e o Kuroy), touto memftheis, us tei ysteraiei oyk epeirato epiun o Kuros, apelayne es tas Sardis en noui exun parakalesas men Aigyptioys kata to orkion [2] (epoiesato gar kai pros Amasin basileuonta Aiguptoy symmaxien proteron e per pros Lakedaimonioys), metapempsamenos de kai Babylunioys (kai gar pros toutoys aytui epepoieto symmaxie, etyranneye de ton xronon touton tun Babyluniun Labunetos), [3] epaggeilas de kai Lakedaimonioisi pareinai es xronon rheton alisas te de toutoys kai ten euytou syllexas stratien enenuto ton xeimuna pareis, ama tui eari strateuein epi tous Persas. [4] kai o men tauta froneun, us apiketo es tas Sardis, epempe kerykas kata tas symmaxias proereontas es pempton meina syllegesthai es Sardis. ton de pareonta kai maxesamenon straton Perseisi, os En aytou xeinikos, panta apeis dieskedase oydama elpisas me kote ara agunisamenos oytu paraplesius Kuros elasei epi Sardis.    
      78. When Croesus had these plans in his mind, the suburb of the city became of a sudden all full of serpents; and when these had appeared, the horses leaving off to feed in their pastures came constantly thither and devoured them. When Croesus saw this he deemed it to be a portent, as indeed it was: and forthwith he despatched messengers to the dwelling of the Telmessians, who interpret omens: and the messengers who were sent to consult arrived there and learnt from the Telmessians what the portent meant to signify, but they did not succeed in reporting the answer to Croesus, for before they sailed back to Sardis Croesus had been taken prisoner. The Telmessians however gave decision thus: that an army speaking a foreign tongue was to be looked for by Croesus to invade his land, and that this when it came would subdue the native inhabitants; for they said that the serpent was born of the soil, while the horse was an enemy and a stranger. The men of Telmessos thus made answer to Croesus after he was already taken prisoner, not knowing as yet anything of the things which had happened to Sardis and to Croesus himself.         78. [1] tauta epilegomenui Kroisui to proasteion pan ofiun eneplesthe. fanentun de aytun oi ippoi metientes tas nomas nemesthai foiteontes katesthion. idonti de touto Kroisui, usper kai En edoxe teras einai. [2] aytika de epempe theopropoys es tun exegeteun Telmesseun. apikomenoisi de toisi theopropoisi kai mathousi pros Telmesseun to thelei semainein to teras, oyk exegeneto Kroisui apaggeilai. prin gar e opisu sfeas anaplusai es tas Sardis elu o Kroisos. [3] Telmessees mentoi tade egnusan, straton allothroon prosdokimon einai Kroisui epi ten xuren, apikomenon de touton katastrepsesthai tous epixurioys, legontes ofin einai geis paida, ippon de polemion te kai epelyda. Telmessees men nyn tauta ypekrinanto Kroisui ede elukoti, oyden ku eidotes tun En peri Sardis te kai ayton Kroison.    
      79. Cyrus, however, so soon as Croesus marched away after the battle which had been fought in Pteria, having learnt that Croesus meant after he had marched away to disband his army, took counsel with himself and concluded that it was good for him to march as quickly as possible to Sardis, before the power of the Lydians should be again gathered together. So when he had resolved upon this, he did it without delay: for he marched his army into Lydia with such speed that he was himself the first to announce his coming to Croesus. Then Croesus, although he had come to a great strait, since his affairs had fallen out altogether contrary to his own expectation, yet proceeded to lead forth the Lydians into battle. Now there was at this time no nation in Asia more courageous or more stout in battle than the Lydian; and they fought on horseback carrying long spears, the men being excellent in horsemanship.         79. [1] Kuros de aytika apelaunontos Kroisoy meta ten maxen ten genomenen en tei Pteriei, mathun us apelasas melloi Kroisos diaskedan ton straton, boyleyomenos eyriske preigma oi einai elaunein us dunaito taxista epi tas Sardis, prin e to deuteron alistheinai tun Lydun ten dunamin. [2] us de oi tauta edoxe, kai epoiee kata taxos. elasas gar ton straton es ten Lydien aytos aggelos Kroisui eleluthee. enthauta Kroisos es aporien pollen apigmenos, us oi para doxan esxe ta pregmata e us aytos katedokee, omus tous Lydous exeige es maxen. [3] En de touton ton xronon ethnos oyden en tei Asiei oyte andreioteron oyte alkimuteron tou Lydioy. e de maxe sfeun En ap' ippun, dorata te eforeon megala, kai aytoi Esan ippeuesthai agathoi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [80]

     80. So when the armies had met in that plain which is in front of the city of Sardis,--a plain wide and open, through which flow rivers (and especially the river Hyllos) all rushing down to join the largest called Hermos, which flows from the mountain sacred to the Mother surnamed "of Dindymos" and runs out into the sea by the city of Phocaia,--then Cyrus, when he saw the Lydians being arrayed for battle, fearing their horsemen, did on the suggestion of Harpagos a Mede as follows:--all the camels which were in the train of his army carrying provisions and baggage he gathered together, and he took off their burdens and set men upon them provided with the equipment of cavalry: and having thus furnished them forth he appointed them to go in front of the rest of the army towards the horsemen of Croesus; and after the camel-troop he ordered the infantry to follow; and behind the infantry he placed his whole force of cavalry. Then when all his men had been placed in their several positions, he charged them to spare none of the other Lydians, slaying all who might come in their way, but Croesus himself they were not to slay, not even if he should make resistance when he was captured. Such was his charge: and he set the camels opposite the horsemen for this reason,--because the horse has a fear of the camel and cannot endure either to see his form or to scent his smell: for this reason then the trick had been devised, in order that the cavalry of Croesus might be useless, that very force wherewith the Lydian king was expecting most to shine. And as they were coming together to the battle, so soon as the horses scented the camels and saw them they turned away back, and the hopes of Croesus were at once brought to nought. The Lydians however for their part did not upon that act as cowards, but when they perceived what was coming to pass they leapt from their horses and fought with the Persians on foot. At length, however, when many had fallen on either side, the Lydians turned to flight; and having been driven within the wall of their fortress they were besieged by the Persians.         80. [1] es to pedion de synelthontun touto to pro tou asteos esti tou Sardienou, eon mega te kai psilon (dia de aytou potamoi rheontes kai alloi kai Yllos syrregnusi es ton megiston, kaleomenon de Ermon, os ex oreos irou metros Dindymenes rheun ekdidoi es thalassan kata Fukaien polin), [2] enthauta o Kuros us eide tous Lydous es maxen tassomenoys, katarrudesas ten ippon epoiese Arpagoy ypothemenoy andros Medoy toionde. osai tui stratui tui euytou eiponto sitoforoi te kai skeyoforoi kameloi, tautas pasas alisas kai apelun ta axthea andras ep' aytas anebese ippada stolen enestalmenoys, skeyasas de aytous prosetaxe teis alles stratieis proienai pros ten Kroisoy ippon, tei de kamelui epesthai ton pezon straton ekeleyse, opisthe de tou pezou epetaxe ten pasan ippon. [3] us de oi pantes dietetaxato, parainese tun men allun Lydun me feidomenoys kteinein panta ton empodun ginomenon, Kroison de ayton me kteinein, mede en syllambanomenos amunetai. [4] tauta men parainese, tas de kameloys etaxe antia teis ippoy tunde eineken. kamelon ippos fobeetai, kai oyk anexetai oyte ten ideen aytou oreun oyte ten odmen osfrainomenos. aytou de un toutoy eineken esesofisto, ina tui Kroisui axreston ei to ippikon, tui de ti kai epeixe ellampsesthai o Lydos. [5] us de kai syneisan es ten maxen, enthauta us usfronto taxista tun kamelun oi ippoi kai eidon aytas, opisu anestrefon, dieftharto te tui Kroisui e elpis. [6] oy mentoi oi ge Lydoi to entheuten deiloi Esan, all' us emathon to ginomenon, apothorontes apo tun ippun pezoi toisi Perseisi syneballon. xronui de pesontun amfoterun pollun etraponto oi Lydoi, kateilethentes de es to teixos epoliorkeonto ypo tun Perseun.    
      81. By these then a siege had been established: but Croesus, supposing that the siege would last a long time, proceeded to send from the fortress other messengers to his allies. For the former messengers were sent round to give notice that they should assemble at Sardis by the fifth month, but these he was sending out to ask them to come to his assistance as quickly as possible, because Croesus was being besieged.         81. [1] toisi men de katestekee poliorkie. Kroisos de dokeun oi xronon epi makron esesthai ten poliorkien epempe ek tou teixeos alloys aggeloys es tas symmaxias. oi men gar proteroi diepemponto es pempton meina proereontes syllegesthai es Sardis, toutoys de exepempe ten taxisten deesthai boetheein us poliorkeomenoy Kroisoy.    
      83. So then in sending to his other allies he sent also to Lacedemon. But these too, the Spartans I mean, had themselves at this very time (for so it had fallen out) a quarrel in hand with the Argives about the district called Thyrea. For this Thyrea, being part of the Argive possessions, the Lacedemonians had cut off and taken for themselves. Now the whole region towards the west extending as far down as Malea was then possessed by the Argives, both the parts situated on the mainland and also the island of Kythera with the other islands. And when the Argives had come to the rescue to save their territory from being cut off from them, then the two sides came to a parley together and agreed that three hundred should fight of each side, and whichever side had the better in the fight that nation should possess the disputed land: they agreed moreover that the main body of each army should withdraw to their own country, and not stand by while the contest was fought, for fear lest, if the armies were present, one side seeing their countrymen suffering defeat should come up to their support. Having made this agreement they withdrew; and chosen men of both sides were left behind and engaged in fight with one another. So they fought and proved themselves to be equally matched; and there were left at last of six hundred men three, on the side of the Argives Alkenor and Chromios, and on the side of the Lacedemonians Othryades: these were left alive when night came on. So then the two men of the Argives, supposing that they were the victors, set off to run to Argos, but the Lacedemonian Othryades, after having stripped the corpses of the Argives and carried their arms to his own camp, remained in his place. On the next day both the two sides came thither to inquire about the result; and for some time both claimed the victory for themselves, the one side saying that of them more had remained alive, and the others declaring that these had fled away, whereas their own man had stood his ground and had stripped the corpses of the other party: and at length by reason of this dispute they fell upon one another and began to fight; and after many had fallen on both sides, the Lacedemonians were the victors. The Argives then cut their hair short, whereas formerly they were compelled by law to wear it long, and they made a law with a curse attached to it, that from that time forth no man of the Argives should grow the hair long nor their women wear ornaments of gold, until they should have won back Thyrea. The Lacedemonians however laid down for themselves the opposite law to this, namely that they should wear long hair from that time forward, whereas before that time they had not their hair long. And they say that the one man who was left alive of the three hundred, namely Othryades, being ashamed to return to Sparta when all his comrades had been slain, slew himself there in Thyrea.         82. [1] es te de un tas allas epempe symmaxias kai de kai es Lakedaimona. toisi de kai aytoisi toisi Spartieteisi kat' ayton touton ton xronon synepeptukee eris eousa pros Argeioys peri xuroy kaleomenoy Thyrees. [2] tas gar Thyreas tautas eousa teis Argolidos moires apotamomenoi esxon oi Lakedaimonioi. En de kai e mexri Maleun e pros esperen Argeiun, e te en tei epeirui xurei kai e Kytherie neisos kai ai loipai tun nesun. [3] boethesantun de Argeiun tei sfeterei apotamnomenei, enthauta synebesan es logoys synelthontes uste triekosioys ekaterun maxesasthai, okoteroi d' an perigenuntai, toutun einai ton xuron. to de pleithos tou stratou apallassesthai ekateron es ten euytou mede paramenein agunizomenun, tunde eineken ina me pareontun tun stratopedun oruntes oi eteroi essoymenoys tous sfeteroys apamunoien. [4] synthemenoi tauta apallassonto, logades de ekaterun ypoleifthentes synebalon. maxomenun de sfeun kai ginomenun isopaleun ypeleiponto ex andrun exakosiun treis, Argeiun men Alkenur te kai Khromios, Lakedaimoniun de Othryades. ypeleifthesan de oytoi nyktos epelthouses. [5] oi men de duo tun Argeiun us nenikekotes etheon es to Argos, o de tun Lakedaimoniun Othryades skyleusas tous Argeiun nekrous kai prosforesas ta opla pros to euytou stratopedon en tei taxi eixe euyton. emerei de deyterei pareisan pynthanomenoi amfoteroi. [6] teus men de aytoi ekateroi efasan nikan, legontes oi men us euytun pleunes perigegonasi, oi de tous men apofainontes pefeygotas, ton de sfeteron parameinanta kai skyleusanta tous ekeinun nekrous. [7] telos de ek teis eridos sympesontes emaxonto, pesontun de kai amfoterun pollun enikun Lakedaimonioi. Argeioi men nyn apo toutoy tou xronoy katakeiramenoi tas kefalas, proteron epanagkes komuntes, epoiesanto nomon te kai kataren me proteron threpsein komen Argeiun medena, mede tas gynaikas sfi xrysoforesein, prin Thyreas anasusuntai. [8] Lakedaimonioi de ta enantia toutun ethento nomon. oy gar komuntes pro toutoy apo toutoy koman. ton de ena legoysi ton perileifthenta tun triekosiun Othryaden, aisxynomenon aponosteein es Sparten tun oi sylloxiteun dieftharmenun, aytou min en teisi Thyreeisi kataxresasthai euyton.    
      83. Such was the condition of things at Sparta when the herald from Sardis arrived asking them to come to the assistance of Croesus, who was being besieged. And they notwithstanding their own difficulties, as soon as they heard the news from the herald, were eager to go to his assistance; but when they had completed their preparations and their ships were ready, there came another message reporting that the fortress of the Lydians had been taken and that Croesus had been made prisoner. Then (and not before) they ceased from their efforts, being grieved at the event as at a great calamity.         83. [1] toioutun de toisi Spartieteisi enesteutun pregmatun Eke o Sardienos keiryx deomenos Kroisui boetheein poliorkeomenui. oi de omus, epeite eputhonto tou kerykos, ormeato boetheein. kai sfi ede pareskeyasmenoisi kai neun eoyseun etoimun Elthe alle aggelie, us elukoi to teixos tun Lydun kai exoito Kroisos zugretheis. oytu de oytoi men symforen poiesamenoi megalen epepaynto.    
      84. Now the taking of Sardis came about as follows:--When the fourteenth day came after Croesus began to be besieged, Cyrus made proclamation to his army, sending horsemen round to the several parts of it, that he would give gifts to the man who should first scale the wall. After this the army made an attempt; and when it failed, then after all the rest had ceased from the attack, a certain Mardian whose name was Hyroiades made an attempt to approach on that side of the citadel where no guard had been set; for they had no fear that it would ever be taken from that side, seeing that here the citadel is precipitous and unassailable. To this part of the wall alone Meles also, who formerly was king of Sardis, did not carry round the lion which his concubine bore to him, the Telmessians having given decision that if the lion should be carried round the wall, Sardis should be safe from capture: and Meles having carried it round the rest of the wall, that is to say those parts of the citadel where the fortress was open to attack, passed over this part as being unassailable and precipitous: now this is a part of the city which is turned towards Tmolos. So then this Mardian Hyroiades, having seen on the day before how one of the Lydians had descended on that side of the citadel to recover his helmet which had rolled down from above, and had picked it up, took thought and cast the matter about in his own mind. Then he himself ascended first, and after him came up others of the Persians, and many having thus made approach, Sardis was finally taken and the whole city was given up to plunder.         84. [1] Sardies de elusan ude. epeide tessereskaidekate egeneto emere poliorkeomenui Kroisui, Kuros tei stratiei tei euytou diapempsas ippeas proeipe tui prutui epibanti tou teixeos dura dusein. [2] meta de touto peiresamenes teis stratieis us oy proexuree, enthauta tun allun pepaymenun aner Mardos epeirato prosbainun, tui oynoma En Yroiades, kata touto teis akropolios tei oydeis etetakto fulakos. oy gar En deinon kata touto me alui kote. [3] apotomos te gar esti tautei e akropolis kai amaxos. tei oyde Meles o proteron basileus Sardiun mounei oy perieneike ton leonta ton oi e pallake eteke, Telmesseun dikasantun us perieneixthentos tou leontos to teixos esontai Sardies analutoi. o de Meles kata to allo teixos perieneikas, tei En epimaxon to xurion teis akropolios, katelogese touto us eon amaxon te kai apotomon. esti de pros tou Tmuloy tetrammenon teis polios. [4] o un de Yroiades oytos o Mardos idun tei proteraiei tun tina Lydun kata touto teis akropolios katabanta epi kyneen anuthen katakylistheisan kai anelomenon, efrasthe kai es thymon ebaleto. [5] tote de de aytos te anabebekee kai kat' ayton alloi Perseun anebainon. prosbantun de syxnun oytu de Sardies te elukesan kai pan to asty eportheeto.    
      85. Meanwhile to Croesus himself it happened thus:--He had a son, of whom I made mention before, who was of good disposition enough but deprived of speech. Now in his former time of prosperity Croesus had done everything that was possible for him, and besides other things which he devised he had also sent messengers to Delphi to inquire concerning him. And the Pythian prophetess spoke to him thus: 
"Lydian, master of many, much blind to destiny, Croesus, 
 Do not desire to hear in thy halls that voice which is prayed for, 
 Voice of thy son; much better if this from thee were removed, 
 Since he shall first utter speech in an evil day of misfortune." Now when the fortress was being taken, one of the Persians was about to slay Croesus taking him for another; and Croesus for his part, seeing him coming on, cared nothing for it because of the misfortune which was upon him, and to him it was indifferent that he should be slain by the stroke; but this voiceless son, when he saw the Persian coming on, by reason of terror and affliction burst the bonds of his utterance and said: "Man, slay not Croesus." This son, I say, uttered voice then first of all, but after this he continued to use speech for the whole time of his life.         85. [1] kat' ayton de Kroison tade egineto. En oi pais, tou kai proteron epemnesthen, ta men alla epieikes, afunos de. en tei un parelthousei eyestoi o Kroisos to pan es ayton epepoiekee, alla te epifrazomenos, kai de kai es Delfous peri aytou epepomfee xresomenoys. [2] e de Pythie oi eipe tade.     Lyde genos, pollun basileu, mega nepie Kroise,
      me bouloy polueykton ien ana dumat' akouein
      paidos ftheggomenoy. to de soi polu luion amfis
      emmenai. aydesei gar en emati pruton anolbui.[3] aliskomenoy de tou teixeos, eie gar tun tis Perseun allognusas Kroison us apokteneun, Kroisos men nyn oreun epionta ypo teis pareouses symforeis paremelekee, oyde ti oi diefere plegenti apothanein. [4] o de pais oytos o afunos us eide epionta ton Persen, ypo deoys te kai kakou errexe funen, eipe de <<unthrupe, me kteine Kroison.>> oytos men de touto pruton efthegxato, meta de touto ede efunee ton panta xronon teis zoes.    
      86. The Persians then had obtained possession of Sardis and had taken Croesus himself prisoner, after he had reigned fourteen years and had been besieged fourteen days, having fulfilled the oracle in that he had brought to an end his own great empire. So the Persians having taken him brought him into the presence of Cyrus: and he piled up a great pyre and caused Croesus to go up upon it bound in fetters, and along with him twice seven sons of Lydians, whether it was that he meant to dedicate this offering as first-fruits of his victory to some god, or whether he desired to fulfil a vow, or else had heard that Croesus was a god-fearing man and so caused him to go up on the pyre because he wished to know if any one of the divine powers would save him, so that he should not be burnt alive. He, they say, did this; but to Croesus as he stood upon the pyre there came, although he was in such evil case, a memory of the saying of Solon, how he had said with divine inspiration that no one of the living might be called happy. And when this thought came into his mind, they say that he sighed deeply and groaned aloud, having been for long silent, and three times he uttered the name of Solon. Hearing this, Cyrus bade the interpreters ask Croesus who was this person on whom he called; and they came near and asked. And Croesus for a time, it is said, kept silence when he was asked this, but afterwards being pressed he said: "One whom more than much wealth I should have desired to have speech with all monarchs." Then, since his words were of doubtful import, they asked again of that which he said; and as they were urgent with him and gave him no peace, he told how once Solon an Athenian had come, and having inspected all his wealth had made light of it, with such and such words; and how all had turned out for him according as Solon had said, not speaking at all especially with a view to Croesus himself, but with a view to the whole human race and especially those who seem to themselves to be happy men. And while Croesus related these things, already the pyre was lighted and the edges of it round about were burning. Then they say that Cyrus, hearing from the interpreters what Croesus had said, changed his purpose and considered that he himself also was but a man, and that he was delivering another man, who had been not inferior to himself in felicity, alive to the fire; and moreover he feared the requital, and reflected that there was nothing of that which men possessed which was secure; therefore, they say, he ordered them to extinguish as quickly as possible the fire that was burning, and to bring down Croesus and those who were with him from the pyre; and they using endeavours were not able now to get the mastery of the flames.         86. [1] oi de Persai tas te de Sardis esxon kai ayton Kroison ezugresan, arxanta etea tessereskaideka kai tessereskaideka emeras poliorkethenta, kata to xresterion te katapausanta ten euytou megalen arxen. labontes de ayton oi Persai egagon para Kuron. [2] o de synnesas pyren megalen anebibase ep' ayten ton Kroison te en pedeisi dedemenon kai dis epta Lydun par' ayton paidas, en noui exun eite de akrothinia tauta katagiein theun oteui de, eite kai eyxen epitelesai thelun, eite kai pythomenos ton Kroison einai theosebea toude eineken anebibase epi ten pyren, boylomenos eidenai ei tis min daimonun rhusetai tou me zunta katakaytheinai. [3] ton men de poieein tauta. tui de Kroisui esteuti epi teis pyreis eselthein, kaiper en kakui eonti tosoutui, to tou Solunos us oi eie sun theui eiremenon, to medena einai tun zuontun olbion. us de ara min prossteinai touto, aneneikamenon te kai anastenaxanta ek polleis esyxies es tris onomasai <<Solun.>> [4] kai ton Kuron akousanta keleusai tous ermeneas epeiresthai ton Kroison tina touton epikaleoito, kai tous proselthontas epeirutan. Kroison de teus men sigen exein eirutumenon, meta de us enagkazeto, eipein <<ton an egu pasi tyrannoisi proetimesa megalun xrematun es logoys elthein.>> us de sfi asema efraze, palin epeirutun ta legomena. [5] lipareontun de aytun kai oxlon parexontun, elege de us Elthe arxen o Solun eun Athenaios, kai theesamenos panta ton euytou olbon apoflayriseie oia de eipas, us te aytui panta apobebekoi tei per ekeinos eipe, oyden ti mallon es euyton legun e oyk es apan to anthrupinon kai malista tous para sfisi aytoisi olbioys dokeontas einai. ton men Kroison tauta apegeesthai, teis de pyreis ede ammenes kaiesthai ta periesxata. [6] kai ton Kuron akousanta tun ermeneun ta Kroisos eipe, metagnonta te kai ennusanta oti kai aytos anthrupos eun allon anthrupon, genomenon euytou eydaimoniei oyk elassu, zunta pyri didoie, pros te toutoisi deisanta ten tisin kai epilexamenon us oyden eie tun en anthrupoisi asfaleus exon, keleuein sbennunai ten taxisten to kaiomenon pur kai katabibazein Kroison te kai tous meta Kroisoy. kai tous peirumenoys oy dunasthai eti tou pyros epikrateisai.    
      87. Then it is related by the Lydians that Croesus, having learned how Cyrus had changed his mind, and seeing that every one was trying to put out the fire but that they were no longer able to check it, cried aloud entreating Apollo that if any gift had ever been given by him which had been acceptable to the god, he would come to his aid and rescue him from the evil which was now upon him. So he with tears entreated the god, and suddenly, they say, after clear sky and calm weather clouds gathered and a storm burst, and it rained with a very violent shower, and the pyre was extinguished. Then Cyrus, having perceived that Croesus was a lover of the gods and a good man, caused him to be brought down from the pyre and asked him as follows: "Croesus, tell me who of all men was it who persuaded thee to march upon my land and so to become an enemy to me instead of a friend?" and he said: "O king, I did this to thy felicity and to my own misfortune, and the causer of this was the god of the Hellenes, who incited me to march with my army. For no one is so senseless as to choose of his own will war rather peace, since in peace the sons bury their fathers, but in war the fathers bury their sons. But it was pleasing, I suppose, to the divine powers that these things should come to pass thus."         87. [1] enthauta legetai ypo Lydun Kroison mathonta ten Kuroy metagnusin, us ura panta men andra sbennunta to pur, dynamenoys de oyketi katalabein, epibusasthai ton Apolluna epikaleomenon, ei ti oi kexarismenon ex aytou edurethe, parasteinai kai rhusasthai ayton ek tou pareontos kakou. [2] ton men dakruonta epikaleesthai ton theon, ek de aithries te kai nenemies syndramein exapines nefea kai xeimuna te katarrageinai kai ysai ydati labrotatui, katasbestheinai te ten pyren. oytu de mathonta ton Kuron us eie o Kroisos kai theofiles kai aner agathos, katabibasanta ayton apo teis pyreis eiresthai tade. [3] <<Kroise, tis se anthrupun anegnuse epi gein ten emen strateysamenon polemion anti filoy emoi katasteinai; o de eipe <<u basileu, egu tauta eprexa tei sei men eydaimoniei, tei emeuytou de kakodaimoniei, aitios de toutun egeneto o Ellenun theos epaeiras eme strateuesthai. [4] oydeis gar oytu anoetos esti ostis polemon pro eirenes aireetai. en men gar tei oi paides tous pateras thaptoysi, en de tui oi pateres tous paidas. alla tauta daimosi koy filon En oytu genesthai.>>    
      88. So he spoke, and Cyrus loosed his bonds and caused him to sit near himself and paid to him much regard, and he marvelled both himself and all who were about him at the sight of Croesus. And Croesus wrapt in thought was silent; but after a time, turning round and seeing the Persians plundering the city of the Lydians, he said: "O king, must I say to thee that which I chance to have in my thought, or must I keep silent in this my present fortune?" Then Cyrus bade him say boldly whatsoever he desired; and he asked him saying: "What is the business that this great multitude of men is doing with so much eagerness?" and he said: "They are plundering thy city and carrying away thy wealth." And Croesus answered: "Neither is it my city that they are plundering nor my wealth which they are carrying away; for I have no longer any property in these things: but it is thy wealth that they are carrying and driving away."         88. [1] o men tauta elege, Kuros de ayton lusas kateise te eggus euytou kai karta en pollei promethiei eixe, apethumaze te oreun kai aytos kai oi peri ekeinon eontes pantes. o de synnoiei exomenos esyxos En. [2] meta de epistrafeis te kai idomenos tous Persas to tun Lydun asty keraizontas eipe <<u basileu, koteron legein pros se ta noeun tygxanu e sigan en tui pareonti xre;>> Kuros de min tharseonta ekeleye legein o ti bouloito. o de ayton eiruta legun [3] <<oytos o pollos omilos ti tauta pollei spoydei ergazetai;>> o de eipe <<polin te ten sen diarpazei kai xremata ta sa diaforeei.>> Kroisos de ameibeto <<oyte polin ten emen oyte xremata ta ema diarpazei. oyden gar emoi eti toutun meta. alla feroysi te kai agoysi ta sa.>>    
      89. And Cyrus was concerned by that which Croesus had said, and he caused all the rest to withdraw and asked Croesus what he discerned for his advantage as regards that which was being done; and he said: "Since the gods gave me to thee as a slave, I think it right if I discern anything more than others to signify it to thee. The Persians, who are by nature unruly, are without wealth: if therefore thou shalt suffer them to carry off in plunder great wealth and to take possession of it, then it is to be looked for that thou wilt experience this result, thou must expect namely that whosoever gets possession of the largest share will make insurrection against thee. Now therefore, if that which I say is pleasing to thee, do this: --set spearmen of thy guard to watch at all the gates, and let these take away the things, and say to the men who were bearing them out of the city that they must first be tithed for Zeus: and thus thou on the one hand wilt not be hated by them for taking away the things by force, and they on the other will willingly let the things go, acknowledging within themselves that thou art doing that which is just."         89. [1] Kurui de epimeles egeneto ta Kroisos eipe. metastesamenos de tous alloys, eireto Kroison o ti oi enoruie en toisi poieymenoisi. o de eipe <<epeite me theoi edukan doulon soi, dikaiu, ei ti enoreu pleon, semainein soi. [2] Persai fusin eontes ybristai eisi axrematoi. en un su toutoys periideis diarpasantas kai katasxontas xremata megala, tade toi ex aytun epidoxa genesthai. os an aytun pleista katasxei, touton prosdekesthai toi epanastesomenon. nun un poieson ude, ei toi areskei ta egu legu. [3] katison tun doryforun epi paseisi teisi puleisi fylakoys, oi legontun pros tous ekferontas ta xremata apaireomenoi us sfea anagkaius exei dekateytheinai tui Dii. kai su te sfi oyk apextheseai biei apaireomenos ta xremata, kai ekeinoi syggnontes poieein se dikaia ekontes proesoysi.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [90]

     90. Hearing this, Cyrus was above measure pleased, because he thought that Croesus advised well; and he commended him much and enjoined the spearmen of his guard to perform that which Croesus had advised: and after that he spoke to Croesus thus: "Croesus, since thou art prepared, like a king as thou art, to do good deeds and speak good words, therefore ask me for a gift, whatsoever thou desirest to be given thee forthwith." And he said: "Master, thou wilt most do me a pleasure if thou wilt permit me to send to the god of the Hellenes, whom I honoured most of all gods, these fetters, and to ask him whether it is accounted by him right to deceive those who do well to him." Then Cyrus asked him what accusation he made against the god, that he thus requested; and Croesus repeated to him all that had been in his mind, and the answers of the Oracles, and especially the votive offerings, and how he had been incited by the prophecy to march upon the Persians: and thus speaking he came back again to the request that it might be permitted to him to make this reproach against the god. And Cyrus laughed and said: "Not this only shalt thou obtain from me, Croesus, but also whatsoever thou mayst desire of me at any time." Hearing this Croesus sent certain of the Lydians to Delphi, enjoining them to lay the fetters upon the threshold of the temple and to ask the god whether he felt no shame that he had incited Croesus by his prophecies to march upon the Persians, persuading him that he should bring to an end the empire of Cyrus, seeing that these were the first- fruits of spoil which he had won from it,--at the same time displaying the fetters. This they were to ask, and moreover also whether it was thought right by the gods of the Hellenes to practice ingratitude.         90. [1] tauta akouun o Kuros yperedeto, us oi edokee ey ypotithesthai. ainesas de polla, kai enteilamenos toisi doryforoisi ta Kroisos ypethekato epiteleein, eipe pros Kroison tade. <<Kroise, anartemenoy seu andros basileos xresta erga kai epea poieein, aiteo dosin entina bouleai toi genesthai paraytika.>> [2] o de eipe <<u despota, easas me xariei malista ton theon tun Ellenun, ton egu etimesa theun malista, epeiresthai pempsanta tasde tas pedas, ei exapatan tous ey poieuntas nomos esti oi.>> Kuros de eireto o ti oi touto epegoreun paraiteoito. [3] Kroisos de oi epalillogese pasan ten euytou dianoian kai tun xresteriun tas ypokrisias kai malista ta anathemata, kai us epaertheis tui manteiui estrateusato epi Persas. legun de tauta katebaine aytis paraiteomenos epeinai oi tui theui touto oneidisai. Kuros de gelasas eipe <<kai toutoy teuxeai par' emeu, Kroise, kai alloy pantos tou an ekastote deei.>> [4] us de tauta ekoyse o Kroisos, pempun tun Lydun es Delfous enetelleto tithentas tas pedas epi tou neou ton oydon eirutan ei oy ti epaisxunetai toisi manteioisi epaeiras Kroison strateuesthai epi Persas us katapausonta ten Kuroy dunamin, ap' Es oi akrothinia toiauta genesthai, deiknuntas tas pedas. tauta te epeirutan, kai ei axaristoisi nomos einai toisi Ellenikoisi theoisi.    
      91. When the Lydians came and repeated that which they were enjoined to say, it is related that the Pythian prophetess spoke as follows: "The fated destiny it is impossible even for a god to escape. And Croesus paid the debt due for the sin of his fifth ancestor, who being one of the spearmen of the Heracleidai followed the treacherous device of a woman, and having slain his master took possession of his royal dignity, which belonged not to him of right. And although Loxias eagerly desired that the calamity of Sardis might come upon the sons of Croesus and not upon Croesus himself, it was not possible for him to draw the Destinies aside from their course; but so much as these granted he brought to pass, and gave it as a gift to Croesus: for he put off the taking of Sardis by three years; and let Croesus be assured that he was taken prisoner later by these years than the fated time: moreover secondly, he assisted him when he was about to be burnt. And as to the oracle which was given, Croesus finds fault with good ground: for Loxias told him beforehand that if he should march upon the Persians he should destroy a great empire: and he upon hearing this, if he wished to take counsel well, ought to have sent and asked further whether the god meant his own empire or that of Cyrus: but as he did not comprehend that which was uttered and did not ask again, let him pronounce himself to be the cause of that which followed. To him also when he consulted the Oracle for the last time Loxias said that which he said concerning a mule; but this also he failed to comprehend: for Cyrus was in fact this mule, seeing that he was born of parents who were of two different races, his mother being of nobler descent and his father of less noble: for she was a Median woman, daughter of Astyages and king of the Medes, but he was a Persian, one of a race subject to the Medes, and being inferior in all respects he was the husband of one who was his royal mistress." Thus the Pythian prophetess replied to the Lydians, and they brought the answer back to Sardis and repeated it to Croesus; and he, when he heard it, acknowledged that the fault was his own and not that of the god. With regard then to the empire of Croesus and the first conquest of Ionia, it happened thus.         91. [1] apikomenoisi de toisi Lydoisi kai legoysi ta entetalmena ten Pythien legetai eipein tade. <<ten peprumenen moiran adunata esti apofygein kai theui. Kroisos de pemptoy goneos amartada exeplese, os eun doryforos Erakleideun, dolui gynaikeiui epispomenos efoneyse ton despotea kai esxe ten ekeinoy timen oyden oi prosekoysan. [2] prothymeomenoy de Loxieu okus an kata tous paidas tou Kroisoy genoito to Sardiun pathos kai me kat' ayton Kroison, oyk oion te egineto paragagein moiras. [3] oson de enedukan aytai, enyse te kai exarisato oi. tria gar etea epanebaleto ten Sardiun alusin, kai touto epistasthu Kroisos us ysteron toisi etesi toutoisi alous teis peprumenes. deytera de toutun kaiomenui aytui eperkese. [4] kata de to manteion to genomenon oyk orthus Kroisos memfetai. proegoreye gar oi Loxies, en strateuetai epi Persas, megalen arxen ayton katalusein. ton de pros tauta xrein ey mellonta boyleuesthai epeiresthai pempsanta kotera ten euytou e ten Kuroy legoi arxen. oy syllabun de to rhethen oyd' epaneiromenos euyton aition apofainetu. [5] tui kai to teleytaion xresteriazomenui eipe Loxies peri emionoy, oyde touto synelabe. En gar de o Kuros oytos emionos. ek gar dyun oyk omoethneun egegonee, metros ameinonos, patros de ypodeesteroy. [6] e men gar En Medis kai Astyageos thygater tou Medun basileos, o de Perses te En kai arxomenos yp' ekeinoisi kai enerthe eun toisi apasi despoinei tei euytou synoikee.>> tauta men e Pythie ypekrinato toisi Lydoisi, oi de aneneikan es Sardis kai apeggeilan Kroisui. o de akousas synegnu euytou einai ten amartada kai oy tou theou.   
      92. Now there are in Hellas many other votive offerings made by Croesus and not only those which have been mentioned: for first at Thebes of the Boeotians there is a tripod of gold, which he dedicated to the Ismenian Apollo; then at Ephesos there are the golden cows and the greater number of the pillars of the temple; and in the temple of Athene Pronaia at Delphi a large golden shield. These were still remaining down to my own time, but others of his votive offerings have perished: and the votive offerings of Croesus at Branchidai of the Milesians were, as I am told, equal in weight and similar to those at Delphi. Now those which he sent to Delphi and to the temple of Amphiaraos he dedicated of his own goods and as first-fruits of the wealth inherited from his father; but the other offerings were made of the substance of a man who was his foe, who before Croesus became king had been factious against him and had joined in endeavouring to make Pantaleon ruler of the Lydians. Now Pantaleon was a son of Alyattes and a brother of Croesus, but not by the same mother, for Croesus was born to Alyattes of a Carian woman, but Pantaleon of an Ionian. And when Croesus had gained possession of the kingdom by the gift of his father, he put to death the man who opposed him, drawing him upon the carding-comb; and his property, which even before that time he had vowed to dedicate, he then offered in the manner mentioned to those shrines which have been named. About his votive offerings let it suffice to have said so much.         92. [1] kata men de ten Kroisoy te arxen kai Iunies ten pruten katastrofen esxe oytu. Kroisui de esti alla anathemata en tei Elladi polla kai oy ta eiremena mouna. en men gar Thebeisi teisi Boiutun tripoys xruseos, ton anetheke tui Apolluni tui Ismeniui, en de Efesui ai te boes ai xruseai kai tun kionun ai pollai, en de Proneies teis en Delfoisi aspis xrysee megale. tauta men kai eti es eme En perieonta, ta d' exapolule tun anathematun. [2] ta d' en Bragxideisi teisi Milesiun anathemata Kroisui, us egu pynthanomai, isa te stathmon kai omoia toisi en Delfoisi .... ta men nyn es te Delfous kai es tou Amfiareu anetheke oikeia te eonta kai tun patruiun xrematun aparxen. ta de alla anathemata ex andros egeneto oysies exthrou, os oi prin e basileusai antistasiutes katestekee, syspeudun Pantaleonti genesthai ten Lydun arxen. [3] o de Pantaleun En Alyatteu men pais, Kroisoy de adelfeos oyk omometrios. Kroisos men gar ek Kaeires En gynaikos Alyattei, Pantaleun de ex Iados. [4] epeite de dontos tou patros ekratese teis arxeis o Kroisos, ton anthrupon ton antipressonta epi knafoy elkun dieftheire, ten de oysien aytou eti proteron katirusas tote tropui tui eiremenui anetheke es ta eiretai. kai peri men anathematun tosauta eiresthu.    
      93. Of marvels to be recorded the land of Lydia has no great store as compared with other lands, excepting the gold-dust which is carried down from Tmolos; but one work it has to show which is larger far than any other except only those in Egypt and Babylon: for there is there the sepulchral monument of Alyattes the father of Croesus, of which the base is made of larger stones and the rest of the monument is of earth piled up. And this was built by contributions of those who practised trade and of the artisans and the girls who plied their traffic there; and still there existed to my own time boundary-stones five in number erected upon the monument above, on which were carved inscriptions telling how much of the work was done by each class; and upon measurement it was found that the work of the girls was the greatest in amount. For the daughters of the common people in Lydia practice prostitution one and all, to gather for themselves dowries, continuing this until the time when they marry; and the girls give themselves away in marriage. Now the circuit of the monument is six furlongs and two hundred feet, and the breadth is thirteen hundred feet. And adjoining the monument is a great lake, which the Lydians say has a never-failing supply of water, and it is called the lake of Gyges. Such is the nature of this monument.         93. [1] thumata de gei e Lydie es syggrafen oy mala exei, oia te kai alle xure, parex tou ek tou Tmuloy kataferomenoy psegmatos. [2] en de ergon pollon megiston parexetai xuris tun te Aigyptiun ergun kai tun Babyluniun. esti aytothi Alyatteu tou Kroisoy patros seima, tou e krepis men esti lithun megalun, to de allo seima xuma geis. exergasanto de min oi agoraioi anthrupoi kai oi xeirunaktes kai ai energazomenai paidiskai. [3] oyroi de pente eontes eti kai es eme Esan epi tou sematos anu, kai sfi grammata enekekolapto ta ekastoi exergasanto, kai efaineto metreomenon to tun paidiskeun ergon eon megiston. [4] tou gar de Lydun demoy ai thygateres porneuontai pasai, syllegoysai sfisi fernas, es o an synoikesusi touto poieoysai. ekdidousi de aytai euytas. [5] e men de periodos tou sematos eisi stadioi ex kai duo plethra, to de eyros esti plethra tria kai deka. limne de exetai tou sematos megale, ten legoysi Lydoi aeinaon einai. kaleetai de ayte Gygaie. touto men de toiouto esti.    
      94. Now the Lydians have very nearly the same customs as the Hellenes, with the exception that they prostitute their female children; and they were the first of men, so far as we know, who struck and used coin of gold or silver; and also they were the first retail-traders. And the Lydians themselves say that the games which are now in use among them and among the Hellenes were also their invention. These they say were invented among them at the same time as they colonised Tyrsenia, and this is the account they give of them:--In the reign of Atys the son of Manes their king there came to be a grievous dearth over the whole of Lydia; and the Lydians for a time continued to endure it, but afterwards, as it did not cease, they sought for remedies; and one devised one thing and another of them devised another thing. And then were discovered, they say, the ways of playing with the dice and the knucklebones and the ball, and all the other games excepting draughts (for the discovery of this last is not claimed by the Lydians). These games they invented as a resource against the famine, and thus they used to do:--on one of the days they would play games all the time in order that they might not feel the want of food, and on the next they ceased from their games and had food: and thus they went on for eighteen years. As however the evil did not slacken but pressed upon them ever more and more, therefore their king divided the whole Lydian people into two parts, and he appointed by lot one part to remain and the other to go forth from the land; and the king appointed himself to be over that one of the parts which had the lot to stay in the land, and his son to be over that which was departing; and the name of his son was Tyrsenos. So the one party of them, having obtained the lot to go forth from the land, went down to the sea at Smyrna and built ships for themselves, wherein they placed all the movable goods which they had and sailed away to seek for means of living and a land to dwell in; until after passing by many nations they came at last to the land of the Ombricans, and there they founded cities and dwell up to the present time: and changing their name they were called after the king's son who led them out from home, not Lydians but Tyrsenians, taking the name from him. The Lydians then had been made subject to the Persians as I say:         94. [1] Lydoi de nomoisi men paraplesioisi xreuntai kai Ellenes, xuris e oti ta thelea tekna kataporneuoysi, prutoi de anthrupun tun emeis idmen nomisma xrysou kai arguroy kopsamenoi exresanto, prutoi de kai kapeloi egenonto. [2] fasi de aytoi Lydoi kai tas paignias tas nun sfisi te kai Ellesi katesteusas euytun exeurema genesthai. ama de tautas te exeyretheinai para sfisi legoysi kai Tyrsenien apoikisai, ude peri aytun legontes. [3] epi Atyos tou Maneu basileos sitodeien isxyren ana ten Lydien pasan genesthai, kai tous Lydous teus men diagein lipareontas, meta de us oy pauesthai, akea dizesthai, allon de allo epimexanasthai aytun. exeyretheinai de un tote kai tun kubun kai tun astragalun kai teis sfaires kai tun alleun paseun paignieun ta eidea, plen pessun toutun gar un ten exeuresin oyk oikeiountai Lydoi. [4] poieein de ude pros ton limon exeyrontas, ten men eteren tun emereun paizein pasan, ina de me zeteoien sitia, ten de eteren siteesthai payomenoys tun paignieun. toioutui tropui diagein ep' etea dyun deonta eikosi. [5] epeite de oyk anienai to kakon all' eti epi mallon biazesthai oytu de ton basilea aytun duo moiras dielonta Lydun pantun klerusai ten men epi monei ten de epi exodui ek teis xures, kai epi men tei menein aytou lagxanousei tun moireun euyton ton basilea prostassein, epi de tei apallassomenei ton euytou paida, tui oynoma einai Tyrsenon. [6] laxontas de aytun tous eteroys exienai ek teis xures katabeinai es Smurnen kai mexanesasthai ploia, es ta esthemenoys ta panta osa sfi En xresta epiploa, apopleein kata bioy te kai geis zetesin, es o ethnea polla parameipsamenoys apikesthai es Ombrikous, entha sfeas enidrusasthai polias kai oikeein to mexri toude. [7] anti de Lydun metonomastheinai aytous epi tou basileos tou paidos, os sfeas anegage, epi toutoy ten epunymien poieymenoys onomastheinai Tyrsenous. Lydoi men de ypo Perseisi ededoulunto.    
      95. and after this our history proceeds to inquire about Cyrus, who he was that destroyed the empire of Croesus, and about the Persians, in what manner they obtained the lead of Asia. Following then the report of some of the Persians,--those I mean who do not desire to glorify the history of Cyrus but to speak that which is in fact true,--according to their report, I say, I shall write; but I could set forth also the other forms of the story in three several ways. The Assyrians ruled Upper Asia for five hundred and twenty years, and from them the Medes were the first who made revolt. These having fought for their freedom with the Assyrians proved themselves good men, and thus they pushed off the yoke of slavery from themselves and were set free; and after them the other nations also did the same as the Medes: and when all on the continent were thus independent, they returned again to despotic rule as follows:--        95. [1] epidizetai de de to entheuten emin o logos ton te Kuron ostis eun ten Kroisoy arxen kateile, kai tous Persas oteui tropui egesanto teis Asies. us un Perseun metexeteroi legoysi, oi me boylomenoi semnoun ta peri Kuron alla ton eonta legein logon, kata tauta grapsu, epistamenos peri Kuroy kai trifasias allas logun odous feinai.  [2] Assyriun arxontun teis anu Asies ep' etea eikosi kai pentakosia, prutoi ap' aytun Meidoi erxanto apistasthai, kai kus oytoi peri teis eleytheries maxesamenoi toisi Assyrioisi egenonto andres agathoi, kai apusamenoi ten doylosunen eleytheruthesan. meta de toutoys kai ta alla ethnea epoiee tuyto toisi Medoisi.    
      96. There appeared among the Medes a man of great ability whose name was Deiokes, and this man was the son of Phraortes. This Deiokes, having formed a desire for despotic power, did thus:--whereas the Medes dwelt in separate villages, he, being even before that time of great repute in his own village, set himself to practise just dealing much more and with greater zeal than before; and this he did although there was much lawlessness throughout the whole of Media, and although he knew that injustice is ever at feud with justice. And the Medes of the same village, seeing his manners, chose him for their judge. So he, since he was aiming at power, was upright and just, and doing thus he had no little praise from his fellow-citizens, insomuch that those of the other villages learning that Deiokes was a man who more than all others gave decision rightly, whereas before this they had been wont to suffer from unjust judgments, themselves also when they heard it came gladly to Deiokes to have their causes determined, and at last they trusted the business to no one else.         96. [1] eontun de aytonomun pantun ana ten epeiron, ude aytis es tyrannida perieilthon. aner en toisi Medoisi egeneto sofos tui oynoma En Deiokes, pais d' En Fraorteu. [2] oytos o Deiokes erastheis tyrannidos epoiee toiade. katoikemenun tun Medun kata kumas, en tei euytou eun kai proteron dokimos kai mallon ti kai prothymoteron dikaiosunen epithemenos eskee. kai tauta mentoi eouses anomies polleis ana pasan ten Mediken epoiee, epistamenos oti tui dikaiui to adikon polemion esti. oi d' ek teis ayteis kumes Meidoi oruntes aytou tous tropoys dikasten min euytun aireonto. o de de, oia mnumenos arxen, ithus te kai dikaios En, [3] poieun te tauta epainon eixe oyk oligon pros tun polieteun, oytu uste pynthanomenoi oi en teisi alleisi kumeisi us Deiokes eie aner mounos kata to orthon dikazun, proteron peripiptontes adikoisi gnumeisi, tote epeite ekoysan asmenoi, efoitun para ton Deiokea kai aytoi dikasomenoi, telos de oydeni allui epetraponto.    
      97. Then, as more and more continually kept coming to him, because men learnt that his decisions proved to be according to the truth, Deiokes perceiving that everything was referred to himself would no longer sit in the place where he used formerly to sit in public to determine causes, and said that he would determine causes no more, for it was not profitable for him to neglect his own affairs and to determine causes for his neighbours all through the day. So then, since robbery and lawlessness prevailed even much more in the villages than they did before, the Medes having assembled together in one place considered with one another and spoke about the state in which they were: and I suppose the friends of Deiokes spoke much to this effect: "Seeing that we are not able to dwell in the land under the present order of things, let us set up a king from among ourselves, and thus the land will be well governed and we ourselves shall turn to labour, and shall not be ruined by lawlessness." By some such words as these they persuaded themselves to have a king.         97. [1] pleunos de aiei ginomenoy tou epifoiteontos, oia pynthanomenun tas dikas apobainein kata to eon, gnous o Deiokes es euyton pan anakeimenon oyte katizein eti ethele entha per proteron prokatizun edikaze, oyt' efe dikan eti. oy gar oi lysiteleein tun euytou exemelekota toisi pelas di' emeres dikazein. [2] eouses un arpageis kai anomies eti pollui mallon ana tas kumas e proteron En, synelexthesan oi Meidoi es tuyto kai edidosan sfisi logon, legontes peri tun katekontun. us d' egu dokeu, malista elegon oi tou Deiokeu filoi [3] <<oy gar de tropui tui pareonti xreumenoi dynatoi eimen oikeein ten xuren, fere stesumen emeun aytun basilea. kai oytu e te xurei eynomesetai kai aytoi pros erga trepsometha, oyde yp' anomies anastatoi esometha.>>   
      98. And when they straightway proposed the question whom they should set up to be king, Deiokes was much put forward and commended by every one, until at last they agreed that he should be their king. And he bade them build for him a palace worthy of the royal dignity and strengthen him with a guard of spearmen. And the Medes did so: for they built him a large and strong palace in that part of the land which he told them, and they allowed him to select spearmen from all the Medes. And when he had obtained the rule over them, he compelled the Medes to make one fortified city and pay chief attention to this, having less regard to the other cities. And as the Medes obeyed him in this also, he built large and strong walls, those which are now called Agbatana, standing in circles one within the other. And this wall is so contrived that one circle is higher than the next by the height of the battlements alone. And to some extent, I suppose, the nature of the ground, seeing that it is on a hill, assists towards this end; but much more was it produced by art, since the circles are in all seven in number. And within the last circle are the royal palace and the treasure-houses. The largest of these walls is in size about equal to the circuit of the wall round Athens; and of the first circle the battlements are white, of the second black, of the third crimson, of the fourth blue, of the fifth red: thus are the battlements of all the circles coloured with various tints, and the two last have their battlements one of them overlaid with silver and the other with gold.         98. [1] tauta kei legontes peithoysi euytous basileuesthai. aytika de proballomenun ontina stesontai basilea, o Deiokes En pollos ypo pantos andros kai proballomenos kai aineomenos, es o touton kataineoysi basilea sfisi einai. [2] o d' ekeleye aytous oikia te euytui axia teis basileies oikodomeisai kai kratunai ayton doryforoisi. poieusi de tauta oi Meidoi. oikodomeoysi te gar aytui oikia megala te kai isxyra, ina aytos efrase teis xures, kai doryforoys aytui epitrepoysi ek pantun Medun katalexasthai. [3] o de us esxe ten arxen, tous Medoys enagkase en polisma poiesasthai kai touto peristellontas tun allun Esson epimelesthai. peithomenun de kai tauta tun Medun oikodomeei teixea megala te kai kartera tauta ta nun Agbatana kekletai, eteron eterui kuklui enesteuta. [4] memexanetai de oytu touto to teixos uste o eteros tou eteroy kuklos toisi promaxeusi mounoisi esti ypseloteros. to men kou ti kai to xurion symmaxeei kolunos eun uste toiouto einai, to de kai mallon ti epetedeuthe. [5] kuklun d' eontun tun synapantun epta, en de tui teleytaiui ta basileia enesti kai oi thesayroi. to d' aytun megiston esti teixos kata ton Atheneun kuklon malista kei to megathos. tou men de prutoy kukloy oi promaxeunes eisi leykoi, tou de deyteroy melanes, tritoy de kukloy foinikeoi, tetartoy de kyaneoi, pemptoy de sandarakinoi. [6] oytu tun pente kuklun oi promaxeunes enthismenoi eisi farmakoisi. duo de oi teleytaioi eisi o men katargyrumenoys o de katakexrysumenoys exun tous promaxeunas.    
      99. These walls then Deiokes built for himself and round his own palace, and the people he commanded to dwell round about the wall. And after all was built, Deiokes established the rule, which he was the first to establish, ordaining that none should enter into the presence of the king, but that they deal with him always through messengers; and that the king should be seen by no one; and moreover that to laugh or to spit in presence is unseemly, and this last for every one without exception. Now he surrounded himself with this state to the end that his fellows, who had been brought up with him and were of no meaner family nor behind him in manly virtue, might not be grieved by seeing him and make plots against him, but that being unseen by them he might be thought to be of different mould.         99. [1] tauta men de o Deiokes euytui te eteixee kai peri ta euytou oikia, ton de allon deimon perix ekeleye to teixos oikeein. oikodomethentun de pantun kosmon tonde Deiokes prutos esti o katastesamenos, mete esienai para basilea medena, di' aggelun de panta xrasthai, orasthai te basilea ypo medenos, pros te toutoisi eti gelan te kai antion ptuein kai apasi einai touto ge aisxron. [2] tauta de peri euyton esemnyne tunde eineken, okus an me oruntes oi omelikes, eontes suntrofoi te ekeinui kai oikies oy flayroteres oyde es andragathien leipomenoi, lypeoiato kai epiboyleuoien, all' eteroios sfi dokeoi einai me orusi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [100]

     100. Having set these things in order and strengthened himself in his despotism, he was severe in preserving justice; and the people used to write down their causes and send them in to his presence, and he determined the questions which were brought in to him and sent them out again. Thus he used to do about the judgment of causes; and he also took order for this, that is to say, if he heard that any one was behaving in an unruly manner, he sent for him and punished him according as each act of wrong deserved, and he had watchers and listeners about all the land over which he ruled.         100. [1] epeite de tauta diekosmese kai ekratyne euyton tei tyrannidi, En to dikaion fylassun xalepos. kai tas te dikas grafontes esu par' ekeinon espempeskon, kai ekeinos diakrinun tas esferomenas ekpempeske. [2] tauta men kata tas dikas epoiee, tade de alla ekekosmeato oi. ei tina pynthanoito ybrizonta, touton okus metapempsaito kat' axien ekastoy adikematos edikaiey, kai oi kataskopoi te kai katekooi Esan ana pasan ten xuren teis Erxe.    
      101. Deiokes then united the Median race alone, and was ruler of this: and of the Medes there are the tribes which here follow, namely, Busai, Paretakenians, Struchates, Arizantians, Budians, Magians: the tribes of the Medes are so many in number.         101. [1] Deiokes men nyn to Medikon ethnos synestrepse mounon kai touton Erxe. esti de Medun tosade genea, Bousai Paretakenoi Strouxates Arizantoi Boudioi Magoi. genea men de Medun esti tosade.    
      102. Now the son of Deiokes was Phraortes, who when Deiokes was dead, having been king for three- and-fifty years, received the power in succession; and having received it he was not satisfied to be ruler of the Medes alone, but marched upon the Persians; and attacking them first before others, he made these first subject to the Medes. After this, being ruler of these two nations and both of them strong, he proceeded to subdue Asia going from one nation to another, until at last he marched against the Assyrians, those Assyrians I mean who dwelt at Nineveh, and who formerly had been rulers of the whole, but at that time they were left without support their allies having revolted from them, though at home they were prosperous enough. Phraortes marched, I say, against these, and was both himself slain, after he had reigned two-and-twenty years, and the greater part of his army was destroyed.         102. [1] Deiokeu de pais ginetai Fraortes, os teleytesantos Deiokeu, basileusantos tria kai pentekonta etea, paredexato ten arxen, paradexamenos de oyk apexrato mounun Medun arxein, alla strateysamenos epi tous Persas prutoisi te toutoisi epethekato kai prutoys Medun ypekooys epoiese. [2] meta de exun duo tauta ethnea kai amfotera isxyra, katestrefeto ten Asien ap' alloy ep' allo iun ethnos, es o strateysamenos epi tous Assyrioys kai Assyriun, toutoys oi Ninon eixon kai Erxon proteron pantun, tote de Esan memoynumenoi men symmaxun ate apesteutun, allus mentoi euytun ey ekontes, epi toutoys de strateysamenos o Fraortes aytos te diefthare, arxas duo kai eikosi etea, kai o stratos aytou o pollos.    
      103. When Phraortes had brought his life to an end, Kyaxares the son of Phraortes, the son of Deiokes, received the power. This king is said to have been yet much more warlike than his forefathers; and he first banded the men of Asia into separate divisions, that is to say, he first arrayed apart from one another the spearmen and the archers and the horsemen, for before that time they were all mingled together without distinction. This was he who fought with the Lydians when the day became night as they fought, and who also united under his rule the whole of Asia above the river Halys. And having gathered together all his subjects he marched upon Nineveh to avenge his father, and also because he desired to conquer that city. And when he had fought a battle with the Assyrians and had defeated them, while he was sitting down before Nineveh there came upon him a great army of Scythians, and the leader of them was Madyas the son of Protohyas, king of the Scythians. These had invaded Asia after driving the Kimmerians out of Europe, and in pursuit of them as they fled they had come to the land of Media.         103. [1] Fraorteu de teleytesantos exedexato Kyaxares o Fraorteu tou Deiokeu pais. oytos legetai pollon eti genesthai alkimuteros tun progonun, kai prutos te eloxise kata telea tous en tei, Asiei kai prutos dietaxe xuris ekastoys einai, tous te aixmoforoys kai tous toxoforoys kai tous ippeas. pro tou de anamix En panta omoius anapefyrmena. [2] oytos o toisi Lydoisi esti maxesamenos ote nux e emere egeneto sfi maxomenoisi, kai o ten Alyos potamou anu Asien pasan systesas euytui. syllexas de tous yp' euytui arxomenoys pantas estrateueto epi ten Ninon, timureun te tui patri kai ten polin tauten thelun exelein. [3] kai oi, us symbalun enikese tous Assyrioys, perikatemenui ten Ninon epeilthe Skytheun stratos megas, Ege de aytous basileus o Skytheun Madues Protothueu pais. oi esebalon men es ten Asien Kimmerioys ekbalontes ek teis Eyrupes, toutoisi de epispomenoi feugoysi oytu es ten Mediken xuren apikonto.    
      104. Now from the Maiotian lake to the river Phasis and to the land of the Colchians is a journey of thirty days for one without encumbrance; and from Colchis it is not far to pass over to Media, for there is only one nation between them, the Saspeirians, and passing by this nation you are in Media. However the Scythians did not make their invasion by this way, but turned aside from it to go by the upper road which is much longer, keeping Mount Caucasus on their right hand. Then the Medes fought with the Scythians, and having been worsted in the battle they lost their power, and the Scythians obtained rule over all Asia.         104. [1] esti de apo teis limnes teis Maietidos epi Fasin potamon kai es Kolxoys triekonta emereun eyzunui odos, ek de teis Kolxidos oy pollon yperbeinai es ten Mediken, all' en to dia mesoy ethnos aytun esti, Saspeires, touto de parameibomenoisi einai en tei Medikei. [2] oy mentoi oi ge Skuthai tautei esebalon, alla ten katuperthe odon pollui makroteren ektrapomenoi, en dexiei exontes to Kaykasion oros. enthauta oi men Meidoi symbalontes toisi Skutheisi kai essuthentes tei maxei teis arxeis kateluthesan. oi de Skuthai ten Asien pasan epesxon.    
      105. Thence they went on to invade Egypt; and when they were in Syria which is called Palestine, Psammetichos king of Egypt met them; and by gifts and entreaties he turned them from their purpose, so that they should not advance any further: and as they retreated, when they came to the city of Ascalon in Syria, most of the Scythians passed through without doing any damage, but a few of them who had stayed behind plundered the temple of Aphrodite Urania. Now this temple, as I find by inquiry, is the most ancient of all the temples which belong to this goddess; for the temple in Cyprus was founded from this, as the people of Cyprus themselves report, and it was the Phenicians who founded the temple in Kythera, coming from this land of Syria. So these Scythians who had plundered the temple at Ascalon, and their descendants for ever, were smitten by the divinity with a disease which made them women instead of men: and the Scythians say that it was for this reason that they were diseased, and that for this reason travellers who visit Scythia now, see among them the affection of those who by the Scythians are called Enarees.         105. [1] entheuten de eisan ep' Aigypton. kai epeite egenonto en tei Palaistinei Syriei, Psammetixos sfeas Aiguptoy basileus antiasas duroisi te kai liteisi apotrapei to prosuteru me poreuesthai. [2] oi de epeite anaxureontes opisu egenonto teis Syries en Askaluni poli, tun pleonun Skytheun parexelthontun asineun, oligoi tines aytun ypoleifthentes esulesan teis oyranies Afrodites to iron. [3] esti de touto to iron, us egu pynthanomenos eyrisku, pantun arxaiotaton irun osa tautes teis theou. kai gar to en Kuprui iron entheuten egeneto, us aytoi Kuprioi legoysi, kai to en Kytheroisi Foinikes eisi oi idrysamenoi ek tautes teis Syries eontes. [4] toisi de tun Skytheun sylesasi to iron to en Askaluni kai toisi toutun aiei ekgonoisi eneskepse o theos thelean nouson. uste ama legoysi te oi Skuthai dia touto sfeas noseein, kai oran par' euytoisi tous apikneomenoys es ten Skythiken xuren us diakeatai tous kaleoysi Enareas oi Skuthai.    
      106. For eight-and-twenty years then the Scythians were rulers of Asia, and by their unruliness and reckless behaviour everything was ruined; for on the one hand they exacted that in tribute from each people which they laid upon them, and apart from the tribute they rode about and carried off by force the possessions of each tribe. Then Kyaxares with the Medes, having invited the greater number of them to a banquet, made them drunk and slew them; and thus the Medes recovered their power, and had rule over the same nations as before; and they also took Nineveh,--the manner how it was taken I shall set forth in another history,--and made the Assyrians subject to them excepting only the land of Babylon.         106. [1] epi men nyn oktu kai eikosi etea Erxon teis Asies oi Skuthai, kai ta panta sfi ypo te ybrios kai oliguries anastata En. xuris men gar foron epresson par' ekastun ton ekastoisi epeballon, xuris de tou foroy erpazon perielaunontes touto o ti exoien ekastoi. [2] kai toutun men tous pleunas Kyaxares te kai Meidoi xeinisantes kai katamethusantes katefoneysan, kai oytu anesusanto ten arxen Meidoi kai epekrateon tun per kai proteron, kai ten te Ninon eilon (us de eilon en eteroisi logoisi delusu) kai tous Assyrioys ypoxeirioys epoiesanto plen teis Babylunies moires. [3] meta de tauta Kyaxares men, basileusas tesserakonta etea sun toisi Skuthai Erxan, teleytai.   
      107. After this Kyaxares died, having reigned forty years including those years during which the Scythians had rule, and Astyages son of Kyaxares received from him the kingdom. To him was born a daughter whom he named Mandane; and in his sleep it seemed to him that there passed from her so much water as to fill his city and also to flood the whole of Asia. This dream he delivered over to the Magian interpreters of dreams, and when he heard from them the truth at each point he became afraid. And afterwards when this Mandane was of an age to have a husband, he did not give her in marriage to any one of the Medes who were his peers, because he feared the vision; but he gave her to a Persian named Cambyses, whom he found to be of a good descent and of a quiet disposition, counting him to be in station much below a Mede of middle rank.         107. [1] ekdeketai de Astyages Kyaxareu pais ten basileien. kai oi egeneto thygater tei oynoma etheto Mandanen. ten edokee Astyages en tui ypnui oyreisai tosouton uste pleisai men ten euytou polin, epikataklusai de kai ten Asien pasan. yperthemenos de tun Magun toisi oneiropoloisi to enupnion, efobethe par' aytun ayta ekasta mathun. [2] meta de ten Mandanen tauten eousan ede andros uraien Medun men tun euytou axiun oydeni didoi gynaika, dedoikus ten opsin. o de Persei didoi tui oynoma En Kambuses, ton eyriske oikies men eonta agatheis tropoy de esyxioy, pollui enerthe agun ayton mesoy andros Medoy.    
      108. And when Mandane was married to Cambyses, in the first year Astyages saw another vision. It seemed to him that from the womb of this daughter a vine grew, and this vine overspread the whole of Asia. Having seen this vision and delivered it to the interpreters of dreams, he sent for his daughter, being then with child, to come from the land of the Persians. And when she had come he kept watch over her, desiring to destroy that which should be born of her; for the Magian interpreters of dreams signified to him that the offspring of his daughter should be king in his room. Astyages then desiring to guard against this, when Cyrus was born, called Harpagos, a man who was of kin near him and whom he trusted above all the other Medes, and had made him manager of all his affairs; and to him he said as follows: "Neglect not by any means, Harpagos, the matter which I shall lay upon thee to do, and beware lest thou set me aside, and choosing the advantage of others instead, bring thyself afterwards to destruction. Take the child which Mandane bore, and carry it to thy house and slay it; and afterwards bury it in whatsoever manner thou thyself desirest." To this he made answer: "O king, never yet in any past time didst thou discern in me an offence against thee, and I keep watch over myself also with a view to the time that comes after, that I may not commit any error towards thee. If it is indeed thy pleasure that this should so be done, my service at least must be fitly rendered."         108. [1] synoikeouses de tui Kambusei teis Mandanes, o Astyages tui prutui etei eide allen opsin, edokee de oi ek tun aidoiun teis thygatros tautes funai ampelon, ten de ampelon episxein ten Asien pasan. [2] idun de touto kai yperthemenos toisi oneiropoloisi, metepempsato ek tun Perseun ten thygatera epiteka eousan, apikomenen de efulasse boylomenos to genomenon ex ayteis diaftheirai. ek gar oi teis opsios oi tun Magun oneiropoloi esemainon oti melloi o teis thygatros aytou gonos basileusein anti ekeinoy. [3] tauta de un fylassomenos o Astyages, us egeneto o Kuros, kalesas Arpagon andra oikeion kai pistotaton te Medun kai pantun epitropon tun euytou, elege oi toiade. [4] <<Arpage, preigma to an toi prostheu, medamus paraxresei, mede eme te parabalei kai alloys elomenos ex ysteres soi aytui peripeseis. labe ton Mandane eteke paida, ferun de es seuytou apokteinon, meta de thapson tropui oteui aytos bouleai.>> [5] o de ameibetai <<u basileu, oyte allote ku pareides andri tuide axari oyden, fylassometha de es se kai es ton metepeita xronon meden examartein. all' ei toi filon touto oytu ginesthai, xre de to ge emon ypereteesthai epitedeus.>>    
      109. Thus he made answer, and when the child had been delivered to him adorned as for death, Harpagos went weeping to his wife all the words which had been spoken by Astyages. And she said to him: "Now, therefore, what is it in thy mind to do?" and he made answer: "Not according as Astyages enjoined: for not even if he shall come to be yet more out of his senses and more mad than he now is, will I agree to his will or serve him in such a murder as this. And for many reasons I will not slay the child; first because he is a kin to me, and then because Astyages is old and without male issue, and if after he is dead the power shall come through me, does not the greatest of dangers then await me? To secure me, this child must die; but one of the servants of Astyages must be the slayer of it, and not one of mine."         109. [1] toutoisi ameipsamenos o Arpagos, us oi paredothe to paidion kekosmemenon ten epi thanatui eie klaiun es ta oikia. parelthun de efraze tei euytou gynaiki ton panta Astyageos rhethenta logon. [2] e de pros ayton legei <<nun un ti soi en noui esti poieein;>> o de ameibetai <<oy tei enetelleto Astyages, oyd' ei parafronesei te kai maneetai kakion e nun mainetai, oy oi eguge prosthesomai tei gnumei oyde es fonon toiouton yperetesu. [3] pollun de eineka oy foneusu min, kai oti aytui moi syggenes esti o pais, kai oti Astyages men esti gerun kai apais ersenos gonoy. [4] ei d' ethelesei toutoy teleytesantos es ten thygatera tauten anabeinai e tyrannis, teis nun ton yion kteinei di' emeu, allo ti e leipetai to entheuten emoi kindunun o megistos; alla tou men asfaleos eineka emoi dei touton teleytan ton paida, dei mentoi tun tina Astyageos aytou fonea genesthai kai me tun emun.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [110]

     110. Thus he spoke, and straightway sent a messenger to that one of the herdsmen of Astyages who he knew fed his herds on the pastures which were most suitable for his purpose, and on the mountains most haunted by wild beasts. The name of this man was Mitradates, and he was married to one who was his fellow-slave; and the name of the woman to whom he was married was Kyno in the tongue of the Hellenes and in the Median tongue Spaco, for what the Hellenes call kyna (bitch) the Medes call spaca. Now, it was on the skirts of the mountains that this herdsman had his cattle-pastures, from Agbatana towards the North Wind and towards the Euxine Sea. For here in the direction of the Saspeirians the Median land is very mountainous and lofty and thickly covered with forests; but the rest of the land of Media is all level plain. So when this herdsman came, being summoned with much urgency, Harpagos said these words: "Astyages bids thee take this child and place it on the most desolate part of the mountains, so that it may perish as quickly as possible. And he bade me to say that if thou do not kill it, but in any way shalt preserve it from death, he will slay thee by the most evil kind of destruction: and I have been appointed to see that the child is laid forth."         110. [1] tauta eipe kai aytika aggelon epempe epi tun boykolun tun Astyageos ton epistato nomas te epitedeotatas nemonta kai orea theriudestata. tui oynoma En Mitradates, synoikee de euytou syndoulei, oynoma de tei gynaiki En tei synoikee Kynu kata ten Ellenun glussan, kata de ten Mediken Spaku. ten gar kuna kaleoysi spaka Meidoi. [2] ai de ypureai eisi tun oreun, entha tas nomas tun boun eixe oytos de o boykolos, pros boreu te anemoy tun Agbatanun kai pros tou pontoy tou Eyxeinoy. tautei men gar e Medike xurei pros Saspeirun oreine esti karta kai ypsele te kai ideisi synerefes, e de alle Medike xurei esti pasa apedos. [3] epei un o boykolos spoydei pollei kaleomenos apiketo, elege o Arpagos tade. <<keleuei se Astyages to paidion touto labonta theinai es to eremotaton tun oreun, okus an taxista diafthareie. kai tade toi ekeleyse eipein, en me apokteineis ayto alla teui tropui peripoieseis, olethrui tui kakistui se diaxresesthai. eporan de ekkeimenon tetagmai egu.>>    
      111. Having heard this and having taken up the child, the herdsman went back by the way he came, and arrived at his dwelling. And his wife also, as it seems, having been every day on the point of bearing a child, by a providential chance brought her child to birth just at that time, when the herdsman was gone to the city. And both were in anxiety, each for the other, the man having fear about the child-bearing of his wife, and the woman about the cause why Harpagos had sent to summon her husband, not having been wont to do so aforetime. So as soon as he returned and stood before her, the woman seeing him again beyond her hopes was the first to speak, and asked him for what purpose Harpagos had sent for him so urgently. And he said: "Wife, when I came to the city I saw and heard that which I would I had not seen, and which I should wish had never chanced to those whom we serve. For the house of Harpagos was all full of mourning, and I being astonished thereat went within: and as soon as I entered I saw laid out to view an infant child gasping for breath and screaming, which was adorned with gold ornaments and embroidered clothing: and when Harpagos saw me he bade me forthwith to take up the child and carry it away and lay it on that part of the mountains which is most haunted by wild beasts, saying that it was Astyages who laid this task upon me, and using to me many threats, if I should fail to do this. And I took it up and bore it away, supposing that it was the child of some one of the servants of the house, for never could I have supposed whence it really was; but I marvelled to see it adorned with gold and raiment, and I marvelled also because mourning was made for it openly in the house of Harpagos. And straightway as we went by the road, I learnt the whole of the matter from the servant who went with me out of the city and placed in my hands the babe, namely that it was in truth the son of Mandane the daughter of Astyages, and of Cambyses the son of Cyrus, and that Astyages bade slay it. And now here it is."         111. [1] tauta akousas o boykolos kai analabun to paidion eie ten ayten opisu odon kai apikneetai es ten epaylin. tui d' ara kai aytui e gyne, epitex eousa pasan emeren, tote kus kata daimona tiktei oixomenoy tou boykoloy es polin. Esan de en frontidi amfoteroi allelun peri, o men tou tokoy teis gynaikos arrudeun, e de gyne o ti oyk euthus o Arpagos metapempsaito ayteis ton andra. [2] epeite de aponostesas epeste, oia ex aelptoy idousa e gyne eireto protere o ti min oytu prothumus Arpagos metepempsato. o de eipe <<u gunai, eidon te es polin elthun kai ekoysa to mete idein ofelon mete kote genesthai es despotas tous emeteroys. oikos men pas Arpagoy klaythmui kateixeto, egu de ekplageis eia esu. [3] us de taxista eseilthon, oreu paidion prokeimenon aspairon te kai krayganomenon, kekosmemenon xrysui te kai estheiti poikilei. Arpagos de us eide me, ekeleye ten taxisten analabonta to paidion oixesthai feronta kai theinai entha theriudestaton eie tun oreun, fas Astyagea einai ton tauta epithemenon moi, poll' apeilesas ei me sfea poiesaimi. [4] kai egu analabun eferon, dokeun tun tinos oiketeun einai. oy gar an kote katedoxa enthen ge En. ethambeon de oreun xrysui te kai eimasi kekosmemenon, pros de kai klaythmon katesteuta emfanea en Arpagoy. [5] kai prokate de kat' odon pynthanomai ton panta logon therapontos, os eme propempun exu polios enexeirise to brefos, us ara Mandanes te eie pais teis Astyageos thygatros kai Kambuseu tou Kuroy, kai min Astyages entelletai apokteinai.   
      112. And as he said this the herdsman uncovered it and showed it to her. And she, seeing that the child was large and of fair form, wept and clung to the knees of her husband, beseeching him by no means to lay it forth. But he said that he could not do otherwise than so, for watchers would come backwards and forwards sent by Harpagos to see that this was done, and he would perish by a miserable death if he should fail to do this. And as she could not after all persuade her husband, the wife next said as follows: "Since then I am unable to persuade thee not to lay it forth, do thou this which I shall tell thee, if indeed it needs must be seen laid forth. I also have borne a child, but I have borne it dead. Take this and expose it, and let us rear the child of the daughter of Astyages as if it were our own. Thus thou wilt not be found out doing a wrong to those whom we serve, nor shall we have taken ill counsel for ourselves; for the dead child will obtain a royal burial and the surviving one will not lose his life."         112. [1] nun te ode esti.>> ama de tauta elege o boykolos kai ekkalupsas apedeiknye. e de us eide to paidion mega te kai eyeides eon, dakrusasa kai labomene tun goynatun tou andros exreize medemiei texnei ektheinai min. [2] o de oyk efe oios t' einai allus ayta poieein. epifoitesein gar kataskopoys ex Arpagoy epopsomenoys, apoleesthai te kakista en me sfea poiesei. us de oyk epeithe ara ton andra, deytera legei e gyne tade. <<epei toinyn oy dunamai se peithein me ektheinai, su de ude poieson, ei de pasa anagke oftheinai ekkeimenon. tetoka gar kai egu, tetoka de tethneos. [3] touto men ferun prothes, ton de teis Astyageos thygatros paida us ex emeun eonta trefumen. kai oytu oyte su aluseai adikeun tous despotas oyte emin kakus beboyleymena estai. o te gar tethneus basileies tafeis kyresei kai o perieun oyk apoleei ten psyxen.>>    
      113. To the herdsman it seemed that, the case standing thus, his wife spoke well, and forthwith he did so. The child which he was bearing to put to death, this he delivered to his wife, and his own, which was dead, he took and placed in the chest in which he had been bearing the other; and having adorned it with all the adornment of the other child, he bore it to the most desolate part of the mountains and placed it there. And when the third day came after the child had been laid forth, the herdsman went to the city, leaving one of his under- herdsmen to watch there, and when he came to the house of Harpagos he said that he was ready to display the dead body of the child; and Harpagos sent the most trusted of his spearmen, and through them he saw and buried the herdsman's child. This then had had burial, but him who was afterwards called Cyrus the wife of the herdsman had received, and was bringing him up, giving him no doubt some other name, not Cyrus.         113. [1] karta te edoxe tui, boykolui pros ta pareonta ey legein e gyne, kai aytika epoiee tauta. ton men efere thanatusun paida, touton men paradidoi tei euytou gynaiki, ton de euytou eonta nekron labun etheke es to aggos en tui efere ton eteron. [2] kosmesas de tui kosmui panti tou eteroy paidos, ferun es to eremotaton tun oreun tithei. us de trite emere tui paidiui ekkeimenui egeneto, eie es polin o boykolos, tun tina proboskun fulakon aytou katalipun, elthun de es tou Arpagoy apodeiknunai efe etoimos einai tou paidioy ton nekyn. [3] pempsas de o Arpagos tun euytou doryforun tous pistotatoys eide te dia toutun kai ethapse tou boykoloy to paidion, kai to men etethapto, ton de ysteron toutun Kuron onomasthenta paralabousa etrefe e gyne tou boykoloy, oynoma allo kou ti kai oy Kuron themene.    
      114. And when the boy was ten years old, it happened with regard to him as follows, and this made him known. He was playing in the village in which were stalls for oxen, he was playing there, I say, with other boys of his age in the road. And the boys in their play chose as their king this one who was called the son of the herdsman: and he set some of them to build palaces and others to be spearmen of his guard, and one of them no doubt he appointed to be the eye of the king, and to one he gave the office of bearing the messages, appointing a work for each one severally. Now one of these boys who was playing with the rest, the son of Artembares a man of repute among the Medes, did not do that which Cyrus appointed him to do; therefore Cyrus bade the other boys seize him hand and foot, and when they obeyed his command he dealt with the boy very roughly, scourging him. But he, so soon as he was let go, being made much more angry because he considered that he had been treated with indignity, went down to the city and complained to his father of the treatment which he had met with from Cyrus, calling him not Cyrus, for this was not yet his name, but the son of the herdsman of Astyages. And Artembares in the anger of the moment went at once to Astyages, taking the boy with him, and he declared that he had suffered things that were unfitting and said: "O king, by thy slave, the son of a herdsman, we have been thus outraged," showing him the shoulders of his son.         114. [1] kai ote En dekaetes o pais, preigma es ayton toionde genomenon exefene min. epaize en tei kumei tautei en tei Esan kai ai boykoliai aytai, epaize de met' allun elikun en odui. kai oi paides paizontes eilonto euytun basilea einai touton de ton tou boykoloy epiklesin paida. [2] o de aytun dietaxe tous men oikias oikodomeein, tous de doryforoys einai, ton de koy tina aytun ofthalmon basileos einai, tui de tini tas aggelias ferein edidoy geras, us ekastui ergon prostassun. [3] eis de toutun tun paidun sympaizun, eun Artembareos pais andros dokimoy en Medoisi, oy gar de epoiese to prostaxthen ek tou Kuroy, ekeleye ayton tous alloys paidas dialabein, peithomenun de tun paidun o Kuros ton paida trexeus karta periespe mastigeun. [4] o de epeite meteithe taxista, us ge de anaxia euytou pathun, mallon ti periemektee, katelthun de es polin pros ton patera apoiktizeto tun ypo Kuroy entese, legun de oy Kuroy (oy gar ku En touto toynoma), alla pros tou boykoloy tou Astyageos paidos. [5] o de Artembares orgei us eixe elthun para ton Astyagea kai ama agomenos ton paida anarsia pregmata efe peponthenai, legun <<u basileu, ypo tou sou douloy, boykoloy de paidos ude periybrismetha,>> deiknus tou paidos tous umoys.    
      115. And Astyages having heard and seen this, wishing to punish the boy to avenge the honour of Artembares, sent for both the herdsman and his son. And when both were present, Astyages looked at Cyrus and said: "Didst thou dare, being the son of so mean a father as this, to treat with such unseemly insult the son of this man who is first in my favour?" And he replied thus: "Master, I did so to him with right. For the boys of the village, of whom he also was one, in their play set me up as king over them, for I appeared to them most fitted for this place. Now the other boys did what I commanded them, but this one disobeyed and paid no regard, until at last he received the punishment due. If therefore for this I am worthy to suffer any evil, here I stand before thee."         115. [1] akousas de kai idun Astyages, thelun timureisai tui paidi timeis teis Artembareos eineka, metepempeto ton te boykolon kai ton paida. epeite de pareisan amfoteroi, blepsas pros ton Kuron o Astyages efe [2] <<su de eun toude toioutoy eontos pais etolmesas ton toude paida eontos prutoy par' emoi aeikeiei toieide perispein;>> o de ameibeto ude. <<u despota, egu tauta touton epoiesa sun dikei. oi gar me ek teis kumes paides, tun kai ode En, paizontes sfeun aytun estesanto basilea. edokeon gar sfi einai es touto epitedeotatos. [3] oi men nyn alloi paides ta epitassomena epeteleon, oytos de anekoustee te kai logon eixe oydena, es o elabe ten diken. ei un de toude eineka axios tey kakou eimi, ode toi pareimi.>>    
      116. While the boy thus spoke, there came upon Astyages a sense of recognition of him and the lineaments of his face seemed to him to resemble his own, and his answer appeared to be somewhat over free for his station, while the time of the laying forth seemed to agree with the age of the boy. Being struck with amazement by these things, for a time he was speechless; and having at length with difficulty recovered himself, he said, desiring to dismiss Artembares, in order that he might get the herdsman by himself alone and examine him: "Artembares, I will so order these things that thou and thy son shall have no cause to find fault"; and so he dismissed Artembares, and the servants upon the command of Astyages led Cyrus within. And when the herdsman was left alone with the king, Astyages being alone with him asked whence he had received the boy, and who it was who had delivered the boy to him. And the herdsman said that he was his own son, and that the mother was living with him still as his wife. But Astyages said that he was not well advised in desiring to be brought to extreme necessity, and as he said this he made a sign to the spearmen of his guard to seize him. So he, as he was being led away to the torture, then declared the story as it really was; and beginning from the beginning he went through the whole, telling the truth about it, and finally ended with entreaties, asking that he would grant him pardon.         116. [1] tauta legontos tou paidos ton Astyagea eseie anagnusis aytou, kai oi o te xarakter tou prosupoy prosferesthai edokee es euyton kai e ypokrisis eleytherutere einai, o te xronos teis ekthesios tei elikiei tou paidos edokee symbainein. [2] ekplageis de toutoisi epi xronon afthoggos En. mogis de de kote aneneixtheis eipe, thelun ekpempsai ton Artembarea, ina ton boykolon mounon labun basanisei, <<Artembares, egu tauta poiesu uste se kai ton paida ton son meden epimemfesthai.>> [3] ton men de Artembarea pempei, ton de Kuron Egon esu oi therapontes keleusantos tou Astyageos, epei de ypeleleipto o boykolos mounos moynothen, tade ayton eireto o Astyageos, kothen laboi ton paida kai tis eie o paradous. [4] o de ex euytou te efe gegonenai kai ten tekousan ayton einai eti par' euytui. Astyages de min oyk ey boyleuesthai efe epithymeonta es anagkas megalas apikneesthai, ama te legun tauta esemaine toisi doryforoisi lambanein ayton. [5] o de agomenos es tas anagkas oytu de efaine ton eonta logon. arxomenos de ap' arxeis diexeie tei aletheiei xreumenos, kai katebaine es litas te kai syggnumen euytui keleuun exein ayton.    
      117. So when the herdsman had made known the truth, Astyages now cared less about him, but with Harpagos he was very greatly displeased and bade his spearmen summon him. And when Harpagos came, Astyages asked him thus: "By what death, Harpagos, didst thou destroy the child whom I delivered to thee, born of my daughter?" and Harpagos, seeing that the herdsman was in the king's palace, turned not to any false way of speech, lest he should be convicted and found out, but said as follows: "O king, so soon as I received the child, I took counsel and considered how I should do according to thy mind, and how without offence to thy command I might not be guilty of murder against thy daughter and against thyself. I did therefore thus:--I called this herdsman and delivered the child to him, saying first that thou wert he who bade him slay it--and in this at least I did not lie, for thou didst so command. I delivered it, I say, to this man commanding him to place it upon a desolate mountain, and to stay by it and watch it until it should die, threatening him with all kinds of punishment if he should fail to accomplish this. And when he had done that which was ordered and the child was dead, I sent the most trusted of my eunuchs and through them I saw and buried the child. Thus, O king, it happened about this matter, and the child had this death which I say."         117. [1] Astyages de tou men boykoloy ten aletheien ekfenantos logon ede kai elassu epoieeto, Arpagui de kai megalus memfomenos kaleein ayton tous doryforoys ekeleye. [2] us de oi parein o Arpagos, eireto min o Astyages <<Arpage, teui de morui ton paida katexresao ton toi pareduka ek thygatros gegonota teis emeis;>> o de Arpagos us eide ton boykolon endon eonta, oy trepetai epi pseydea odon, ina me elegxomenos alisketai, alla legei tade. [3] <<u basileu, epeite parelabon to paidion, ebouleyon skopeun okus soi te poiesu kata noon, kai egu pros se ginomenos anamartetos mete thygatri tei sei mete aytui soi eien aythentes. [4] poieu de ude. kalesas ton boykolon tonde paradidumi to paidion, fas se te einai ton keleuonta apokteinai ayto. kai legun touto ge oyk epseydomen. su gar enetelleo oytu. paradidumi mentoi tuide kata tade enteilamenos, theinai min es eremon oros kai paramenonta fylassein axri oy teleytesei, apeilesas pantoia tuide en me tade epitelea poiesei. [5] epeite de poiesantos toutoy ta keleyomena eteleutese to paidion, pempsas tun eynouxun tous pistotatoys kai eidon di' ekeinun kai ethapsa min. oytu esxe u basileu peri tou pregmatos toutoy, kai toioutui morui exresato o pais.>>    
      118. So Harpagos declared the truth, and Astyages concealed the anger which he kept against him for that which had come to pass, and first he related the matter over again to Harpagos according as he had been told it by the herdsman, and afterwards, when it had been thus repeated by him, he ended by saying that the child was alive and that that which had come to pass was well, "for," continued he, "I was greatly troubled by that which had been done to this child, and I thought it no light thing that I had been made at variance with my daughter. Therefore consider that this is a happy change of fortune, and first send thy son to be with the boy who is newly come, and then, seeing that I intend to make a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the preservation of the boy to those gods to whom that honour belongs, be here thyself to dine with me."         118. [1] Arpagos men de ton ithun efaine logon. Astyages de kruptun ton oi eneixe xolon dia to gegonos, pruta men, kata per ekoyse aytos pros tou boykoloy to preigma, palin apegeeto tui Arpagui, meta de us oi epalillogeto, katebaine legun us periesti te o pais kai to gegonos exei kalus. [2] <<tui te gar pepoiemenui>> efe legun <<es ton paida touton ekamnon megalus, kai thygatri tei emei diabeblemenos oyk en elafrui epoieumen. us un teis tuxes ey metesteuses, touto men ton seuytou paida apopempson para ton paida ton neelyda, touto de (sustra gar tou paidos mellu thuein toisi theun time ayte proskeetai) paristhi moi epi deipnon.>>    
      119. When Harpagos heard this, he did reverence and thought it a great matter that his offence had turned out for his profit and moreover that he had been invited to dinner with happy augury; and so he went to his house. And having entered it straightway, he sent forth his son, for he had one only son of about thirteen years old, bidding him go to the palace of Astyages and do whatsoever the king should command; and he himself being overjoyed told his wife that which had befallen him. But Astyages, when the son of Harpagos arrived, cut his throat and divided him limb from limb, and having roasted some pieces of the flesh and boiled others he caused them to be dressed for eating and kept them ready. And when the time arrived for dinner and the other guests were present and also Harpagos, then before the other guests and before Astyages himself were placed tables covered with flesh of sheep; but before Harpagos was placed the flesh of his own son, all but the head and the hands and the feet, and these were laid aside covered up in a basket. Then when it seemed that Harpagos was satisfied with food, Astyages asked him whether he had been pleased with the banquet; and when Harpagos said that he had been very greatly pleased, they who had been commanded to do this brought to him the head of his son covered up, together with the hands and the feet; and standing near they bade Harpagos uncover and take of them that which he desired. So when Harpagos obeyed and uncovered, he saw the remains of his son; and seeing them he was not overcome with amazement but contained himself: and Astyages asked him whether he perceived of what animal he had been eating the flesh: and he said that he perceived, and that whatsoever the king might do was well pleasing to him. Thus having made answer and taking up the parts of the flesh which still remained he went to his house; and after that, I suppose, he would gather all the parts together and bury them.         119. [1] Arpagos men us ekoyse tauta, proskynesas kai megala poiesamenos oti te e amartas oi es deon egegonee kai oti epi tuxeisi xresteisi epi deipnon ekekleto, eie es ta oikia. [2] eselthun de ten taxisten, En gar oi pais eis mounos etea tria kai deka koy malista gegonus, touton ekpempen ienai te keleuun es Astyageos kai poieein o ti an ekeinos keleuei, aytos de perixares eun frazei tei gynaiki ta sygkyresanta. [3] Astyages de, us oi apiketo o Arpagoy pais, sfaxas ayton kai kata melea dielun ta men uptese ta de epsese tun kreun, eytyka de poiesamenos eixe etoima. [4] epeite de teis ures ginomenes tou deipnoy pareisan oi te alloi daitymones kai o Arpagos, toisi men alloisi kai aytui Astyagei paretitheato trapezai epipleai meleun kreun, Arpagui de tou paidos tou euytou, plen kefaleis te kai akrun xeirun te kai podun, talla panta. tauta de xuris ekeito epi kaneui katakekalymmena, [5] us de tui Arpagui edokee alis exein teis boreis, Astyages eireto min ei estheie ti tei thoinei. famenoy de Arpagoy kai karta estheinai, pareferon toisi prosekeito ten kefalen tou paidos katakekalymmenen kai tas xeiras kai tous podas, Arpagon de ekeleyon prosstantes apokaluptein te kai labein to bouletai aytun. [6] peithomenos de o Arpagos kai apokaluptun orai tou paidos ta leimmata, idun de oyte exeplage entos te euytou ginetai. eireto de ayton o Astyages ei ginuskoi otey therioy krea bebrukoi. [7] o de kai ginuskein efe kai areston einai pan to an basileus erdei. toutoisi de ameipsamenos kai analabun ta loipa tun kreun eie es ta oikia, entheuten de emelle, us egu dokeu, alisas thapsein ta panta.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [120]

     120. On Harpagos Astyages laid this penalty; and about Cyrus he took thought, and summoned the same men of the Magians who had given judgment about his dream in the manner which has been said: and when they came, Astyages asked how they had given judgment about his vision; and they spoke according to the same manner, saying that the child must have become king if he had lived on and had not died before. He made answer to them thus: "The child is alive and not dead: and while he was dwelling in the country, the boys of the village appointed him king; and he performed completely all those things which they do who are really kings; for he exercised rule, appointed to their places spearmen of the guard and doorkeepers and bearers of messages and all else. Now therefore, to what does it seem to you that these things tend?" The Magians said: "If the child is still alive and became king without any arrangement, be thou confident concerning him and have good courage, for he shall not be ruler again the second time; since some even of our oracles have had but small results, and that at least which has to do with dreams comes often in the end to a feeble accomplishment." Astyages made answer in these words: "I myself also, O Magians, am most disposed to believe that this is so, namely that since the boy was named king the dream has had its fulfilment and that this boy is no longer a source of danger to me. Nevertheless give counsel to me, having well considered what is likely to be most safe both for my house and for you." Replying to this the Magians said: "To us also, O king, it is of great consequence that thy rule should stand firm; for in the other case it is transferred to strangers, coming round to this boy who is a Persian, and we being Medes are made slaves and become of no account in the eyes of the Persians, seeing that we are of different race; but while thou art established as our king, who art one of our own nation, we both have our share of rule and receive great honours from thee. Thus then we must by all means have a care of thee and of thy rule. And now, if we saw in this anything to cause fear, we would declare all to thee beforehand: but as the dream has had its issue in a trifling manner, both we ourselves are of good cheer and we exhort thee to be so likewise: and as for this boy, send him away from before thine eyes to the Persians and to his parents."         120. [1] Arpagui men Astyages diken tauten epetheke, Kupoy de peri boyleuun ekalee tous aytous tun Magun oi to enupnion oi tautei ekrinan. apikomenoys de eireto o Astyages tei ekrinan oi ten opsin. oi de kata tayta eipan legontes us basileusai xrein ton paida, ei epezuse kai me apethane proteron. [2] o de ameibetai aytous toiside. <<esti te o pais kai periesti, kai min ep' agrou diaitumenon oi ek teis kumes paides estesanto basilea. o de panta osa per oi alethei logui basilees eteleuse poiesas. kai gar doryforoys kai thyrurous kai aggelieforoys kai ta loipa panta diataxas Erxe. [3] kai nun es ti ymin tauta fainetai ferein;>> eipan oi Magoi <<ei men periesti te kai ebasileyse o pais me ek pronoies tinos, tharsee te toutoy eineka kai thymon exe agathon. oy gar eti to deuteron arxei. para smikra gar kai tun logiun emin enia kexureke, kai ta ge tun oneiratun exomena teleus es asthenes erxetai.>> [4] ameibetai o Astyages toiside. <<kai aytos u Magoi tautei pleistos gnumen eimi, basileos onomasthentos tou paidos exekein te ton oneiron kai moi ton paida touton einai deinon eti oyden. omus men ge toi symboyleusate moi ey periskepsamenoi ta mellei asfalestata einai oikui te tui emui kai ymin.>> [5] eipan pros tauta oi Magoi <<u basileu, kai aytoisi emin peri pollou esti katorthousthai arxen ten sen. keinus men gar allotrioutai es ton paida touton periiousa eonta Persen, kai emeis eontes Meidoi doyloumetha te kai logoy oydenos ginometha pros Perseun, eontes xeinoi. seo d' enesteutos basileos, eontos polieteu, kai arxomen to meros kai timas pros seo megalas exomen. [6] oytu un pantus emin seo kai teis seis arxeis proopteon esti. kai nun ei foberon ti enurumen, pan an soi proefrazomen. nun de aposkepsantos tou enypnioy es faulon, aytoi te tharseomen kai soi etera toiauta parakeleyometha. ton de paida touton ex ofthalmun apopempsai es Persas te kai tous geinamenoys.>>    
      121. When he heard this Astyages rejoiced, and calling Cyrus spoke to him thus: "My son, I did thee wrong by reason of a vision of a dream which has not come to pass, but thou art yet alive by thine own destiny; now therefore go in peace to the land of the Persians, and I will send with thee men to conduct thee: and when thou art come thither, thou shalt find a father and a mother not after the fashion of Mitradates the herdsman and his wife."         121. [1] akousas tauta o Astyages exare te kai kalesas ton Kuron elege oi tade. <<u pai, se gar egu di' opsin oneiroy oy teleen edikeon, tei seuytou de moirei perieis. nun un ithi xairun es Persas, pompous de egu ama pempsu. elthun de ekei patera te kai metera eyreseis oy kata Mitradaten te ton boykolon kai ten gynaika aytou.>>    
      122. Thus having spoken Astyages sent Cyrus away; and when he had returned and come to the house of Cambyses, his parents received him; and after that, when they learnt who he was, they welcomed him not a little, for they had supposed without doubt that their son had perished straightway after his birth; and they inquired in what manner he had survived. And he told them, saying that before this he had not known but had been utterly in error; on the way, however, he had learnt all his own fortunes: for he had supposed without doubt that he was the son of the herdsman of Astyages, but since his journey from the city began he had learnt the whole story from those who conducted him. And he said that he had been brought up by the wife of the herdsman, and continued to praise her throughout, so that Kyno was the chief person in his tale. And his parents took up this name from him, and in order that their son might be thought by the Persians to have been preserved in a more supernatural manner, they set on foot a report that Cyrus when he was exposed had been reared by a bitch: and from that source has come this report.         122. [1] tauta eipas o Astyages apopempei ton Kuron. nostesanta de min es tou Kambuseu ta oikia edexanto oi geinamenoi, kai dexamenoi us eputhonto, megalus aspazonto oia de epistamenoi aytika tote teleyteisai, istoreon te oteui tropui perigenoito. [2] o de sfi elege, fas pro tou men oyk eidenai all' emartekenai pleiston, kat' odon de pythesthai pasan ten euytou pathen. epistasthai men gar us boykoloy tou Astyageos eie pais, apo de teis keithen odou ton panta logon tun pompun pythesthai. [3] trafeinai de elege ypo teis tou boykoloy gynaikos, eie te tauten aineun dia pantos, En te oi en tui logui ta panta e Kynu. oi de tokees paralabontes to oynoma touto, ina theioterus dokeei toisi Perseisi perieinai sfi o pais, katebalon fatin us ekkeimenon Kuron kuun exethrepse. entheuten men e fatis ayte kexureke.   
      123. Then as Cyrus grew to be a man, being of all those of his age the most courageous and the best beloved, Harpagos sought to become his friend and sent him gifts, because he desired to take vengeance on Astyages. For he saw not how from himself, who was in a private station, punishment should come upon Astyages; but when he saw Cyrus growing up, he endeavoured to make him an ally, finding a likeness between the fortunes of Cyrus and his own. And even before that time he had effected something: for Astyages being harsh towards the Medes, Harpagos communicated severally with the chief men of the Medes, and persuaded them that they must make Cyrus their leader and cause Astyages to cease from being king. When he had effected this and when all was ready, then Harpagos wishing to make known his design to Cyrus, who lived among the Persians, could do it no other way, seeing that the roads were watched, but devised a scheme as follows:--he made ready a hare, and having cut open its belly but without pulling off any of the fur, he put into it, just as it was, a piece of paper, having written upon it that which he thought good; and then he sewed up again the belly of the hare, and giving nets as if he were a hunter to that one of his servants whom he trusted most, he sent him away to the land of the Persians, enjoining him by word of mouth to give the hare to Cyrus, and to tell him at the same time to open it with his own hands and let no one else be present when he did so.         123. [1] Kurui de andreymenui kai eonti tun elikun andreiotatui kai prosfilestatui prosekeito o Arpagos dura pempun, tisasthai Astyagea epithymeun. ap' euytou gar eontos idiuteu oyk enura timurien esomenen es Astyagea, Kuron de oreun epitrefomenon epoieeto summaxon, tas pathas tas Kuroy teisi euytou omoioumenos. [2] pro d' eti toutoy tade oi katergasto. eontos tou Astyageos pikrou es tous Medoys, symmisgun eni ekastui o Arpagos tun prutun Medun anepeithe us xre Kuron prostesamenoys Astyagea pausai teis basileies. [3] katergasmenoy de oi toutoy kai eontos etoimoy, oytu de tui Kurui diaitumenui en Perseisi boylomenos Arpagos delusai ten euytou gnumen allus men oydamus eixe ate tun odun fylassomeneun, o de epitexnatai toionde. [4] lagon mexanesamenos, kai anasxisas toutoy ten gastera kai oyden apotilas, us de eixe oytu esetheke byblion, grapsas ta oi edokee. aporrapsas de tou lagou ten gastera, kai diktya dous ate thereytei tun oiketeun tui pistotatui, apestelle es tous Persas, enteilamenos oi apo glusses didonta ton lagon Kurui epeipein aytoxeiriei min dielein kai medena oi tauta poieunti pareinai.    
      124. This then was accomplished, and Cyrus having received from him the hare, cut it open; and having found within it the paper he took and read it over. And the writing said this: "Son of Cambyses, over thee the gods keep guard, for otherwise thou wouldst never have come to so much good fortune. Do thou therefore take vengeance on Astyages who is thy murderer, for so far as his will is concerned thou art dead, but by the care of the gods and of me thou art still alive; and this I think thou hast long ago learnt from first to last, both how it happened about thyself, and also what things I have suffered from Astyages, because I did not slay thee but gave thee to the herdsman. If therefore thou wilt be guided by me, thou shalt be ruler of all that land over which now Astyages is ruler. Persuade the Persians to revolt, and march any army against the Medes: and whether I shall be appointed leader of the army against thee, or any other of the Medes who are in repute, thou hast what thou desirest; for these will be the first to attempt to destroy Astyages, revolting from him and coming over to thy party. Consider then that here at least all is ready, and therefore do this and do it with speed."         124. [1] tauta te de un epitelea egineto kai o Kuros paralabun ton lagon anesxise. eyrun de en aytui to byblion eneon labun epelegeto, ta de grammata elege tade. <<u pai Kambuseu, se gar theoi eporusi. oy gar an kote es tosouto tuxes apikey. su nyn Astyagea ton seuytou fonea tisai. [2] kata men gar ten toutoy prothymien tethnekas, to de kata theous te kai eme perieis. ta se kai palai dokeu panta ekmemathekenai, seo te aytou peri us eprexthe, kai oia egu ypo Astyageos pepontha, oti se oyk apekteina alla eduka tui boykolui. su nyn, en boulei emoi peithesthai, teis per Astyages arxei xures, tautes apases arxeis. Persas gar anapeisas apistasthai stratelatee epi Medoys. [3] kai en te egu ypo Astyageos apodextheu strategos antia seu, esti toi ta su bouleai, en te tun tis dokimun allos Medun. prutoi gar oytoi apostantes ap' ekeinoy kai genomenoi pros seo Astyagea kataireein peiresontai. us un etoimoy tou ge enthade eontos, poiee tauta kai poiee kata taxos.>>    
      125. Cyrus having heard this began to consider in what manner he might most skilfully persuade the Persians to revolt, and on consideration he found that this was the most convenient way, and so in fact he did:--He wrote first on a paper that which he desired to write, and he made an assembly of the Persians. Then he unfolded the paper and reading from it said that Astyages appointed him commander of the Persians; "and now, O Persians," he continued, "I give you command to come to me each one with a reaping-hook." Cyrus then proclaimed this command. (Now there are of the Persians many tribes, and some of them Cyrus gathered together and persuaded to revolt from the Medes, namely those, upon which all the other Persians depend, the Pasargadai, the Maraphians and the Maspians, and of these the Pasargadai are the most noble, of whom also the Achaimenidai are a clan, whence are sprung the Perseid kings. But other Persian tribes there are, as follows:-- the Panthaliaians, the Derusiaians and the Germanians, these are all tillers of the soil; and the rest are nomad tribes, namely the Daoi, Mardians, Dropicans and Sagartians.)         125. [1] akousas tauta o Kuros efrontize oteui tropui sofutatui Persas anapeisei apistasthai, frontizun de eyrisketai tauta kairiutata einai. epoiee de tauta. [2] grapsas es byblion ta ebouleto, alien tun Perseun epoiesato, meta de anaptuxas to byblion kai epilegomenos efe Astyagea min strategon Perseun apodeiknunai. <<nun te,>> efe legun, <<u Persai, proagoreuu ymin pareinai ekaston exonta drepanon. Kuros men tauta proegoreyse. esti de Perseun syxna genea, kai ta men aytun o Kuros synalise kai anepeise apistasthai apo Medun. [3] esti de tade, ex un ulloi pantes arteatai Persai, Pasargadai Marafioi Maspioi. toutun Pasargadai eisi aristoi, en toisi kai Axaimenidai eisi fretre, enthen oi basilees oi Perseidai gegonasi. [4] alloi de Persai eisi oide, Panthialaioi Deroysiaioi Germanioi. oytoi men pantes aroteires eisi, oi de alloi nomades, Daoi Mardoi Dropikoi Sagartioi.    
      126. Now there was a certain region of the Persian land which was overgrown with thorns, extending some eighteen or twenty furlongs in each direction; and when all had come with that which they had been before commanded to bring, Cyrus bade them clear this region for cultivation within one day: and when the Persians had achieved the task proposed, then he bade them come to him on the next day bathed and clean. Meanwhile Cyrus, having gathered together in one place all the flocks of goats and sheep and the herds of cattle belonging to his father, slaughtered them and prepared with them to entertain the host of the Persians, and moreover with wine and other provisions of the most agreeable kind. So when the Persians came on the next day, he made them recline in a meadow and feasted them. And when they had finished dinner, Cyrus asked them whether that which they had on the former day or that which they had now seemed to them preferable. They said that the difference between them was great, for the former day had for them nothing but evil, and the present day nothing but good. Taking up this saying Cyrus proceeded to lay bare his whole design, saying: "Men of the Persians, thus it is with you. If ye will do as I say, ye have these and ten thousand other good things, with no servile labour; but if ye will not do as I say, ye have labours like that of yesterday innumerable. Now therefore do as I say and make yourselves free: for I seem to myself to have been born by providential fortune to take these matters in hand; and I think that ye are not worse men than the Medes, either in other matters or in those which have to do with war. Consider then that this is so, and make revolt from Astyages forthwith."         126. [1] us de pareisan apantes exontes to proeiremenon, enthauta o Kuros, En gar tis xuros teis Persikeis akanthudes oson te epi oktukaideka stadioys e eikosi pantei, touton sfi ton xuron proeipe exemerusai en emerei. [2] epitelesantun de tun Perseun ton prokeimenon aethlon, deutera sfi proeipe es ten ysteraien pareinai leloymenoys. en de toutui ta te aipolia kai tas poimnas kai ta boykolia o Kuros panta tou patros synalisas es tuyto ethyse kai pareskeuaze us dexomenos ton Perseun straton, pros de oinui te kai sitioisi us epitedeotatoisi. [3] apikomenoys de tei ysteraiei tous Persas kataklinas es leimuna eyuxee. epeite de apo deipnoy Esan, eireto sfeas o Kuros kotera ta tei proteraiei eixon e ta pareonta sfi eie airetutera. [4] oi de efasan pollon einai aytun to meson. ten men gar proteren emeren panta sfi kaka exein, ten de tote pareousan panta agatha. paralabun de touto to epos o Kuros paregumnoy ton panta logon, legun [5] <<andres Persai, oytu ymin exei. boylomenoisi men emeo peithesthai esti tade te kai alla myria agatha, oydena ponon doyloprepea exoysi, me boylomenoisi de emeo peithesthai eisi ymin ponoi tui xthizui paraplesioi anarithmetoi. [6] nun un emeo peithomenoi ginesthe eleutheroi. aytos te gar dokeu theiei tuxei gegonus tade es xeiras agesthai, kai ymeas egemai andras Medun einai oy fayloteroys oyte talla oyte ta polemia. us un exontun ude, apistasthe ap' Astyageos ten taxisten.>>    
      127. So the Persians having obtained a leader willingly attempted to set themselves free, since they had already for a long time been indignant to be ruled by the Medes: but when Astyages heard that Cyrus was acting thus, he sent a messenger and summoned him; and Cyrus bade the messenger report to Astyages that he would be with him sooner than he would himself desire. So Astyages hearing this armed all the Medes, and blinded by divine providence he appointed Harpagos to be the leader of the army, forgetting what he had done to him. Then when the Medes had marched out and began to fight with the Persians, some of them continued the battle, namely those who had not been made partakers in the design, while others went over to the Persians; but the greater number were wilfully slack and fled.         127. [1] Persai men nyn prostateu epilabomenoi asmenoi eleytherounto, kai palai deinon poieumenoi ypo Medun arxesthai. Astyages de us eputheto Kuron tauta pressonta, pempsas aggelon ekalee ayton. [2] o de Kuros ekeleye ton aggelon apaggellein oti proteron exoi par' ekeinon e Astyages aytos boylesetai. akousas de tauta o Astyages Medoys te uplise pantas, kai strategon aytun uste theoblabes eun Arpagon apedexe, lethen poieumenos ta min eorgee. [3] us de oi Meidoi strateysamenoi toisi Perseisi synemisgon, oi men tines aytun emaxonto, osoi me tou logoy metesxon, oi de aytomoleon pros tous Persas, oi de pleistoi ethelokakeon te kai efeygon.    
      128. So when the Median army had been shamefully dispersed, so soon as Astyages heard of it he said, threatening Cyrus: "But not even so shall Cyrus at least escape punishment." Thus having spoken he first impaled the Magian interpreters of dreams who had persuaded him to let Cyrus go, and then he armed those of the Medes, youths and old men, who had been left behind in the city. These he led out and having engaged battle with the Persians he was worsted, and Astyages himself was taken alive, and he lost also those of the Medes whom he had led forth.         128. [1] dialythentos de tou Medikou. strateumatos aisxrus, us eputheto taxista o Astyages, efe apeileun tui Kurui <<all' oyd' us Kuros ge xairesei.>> [2] tosauta eipas pruton men tun Magun tous oneiropoloys, oi min anegnusan meteinai ton Kuron, toutoys aneskolopise, meta de uplise tous ypoleifthentas en tui astei tun Medun, neoys te kai presbutas andras. [3] exagagun de toutoys kai symbalun toisi Pereisi essuthe, kai aytos te Astyages ezugrethe kai tous exegage tun Medun apebale.    
      129. Then when Astyages was a prisoner, Harpagos came and stood near him and rejoiced over him and insulted him; and besides other things which he said to grieve him, he asked him especially how it pleased him to be a slave instead of a king, making reference to that dinner at which Astyages had feasted him with the flesh of his own son. He looking at him asked him in return whether he claimed the work of Cyrus as his own deed: and Harpagos said that since he had written the letter, the deed was justly his. Then Astyages declared him to be at the same time the most unskilful and the most unjust of men; the most unskilful because, when it was in his power to become king (as it was, if that which had now been done was really brought about by him), he had conferred the chief power on another, and the most unjust, because on account of that dinner he had reduced the Medes to slavery. For if he must needs confer the kingdom on some other and not keep it himself, it was more just to give this good thing to one of the Medes rather than to one of the Persians; whereas now the Medes, who were guiltless of this, had become slaves instead of masters, and the Persians who formerly were slaves of the Medes had now become their masters.         129. [1] eonti de aixmalutui tui Astyagei prosstas o Arpagos katexaire te kai katekertomee, kai alla legun es ayton thymalgea epea, kai de kai eireto min pros to euytou deipnon, to min ekeinos sarxi tou paidos ethoinese, o ti eie e ekeinoy doylosune anti teis basileies. [2] o de min prosidun anteireto ei euytou poieetai to Kuroy ergon. Arpagos de efe, aytos gar grapsai, to preigma euytou de dikaius einai. [3] Astyages de min apefaine tui logui skaiotaton te kai adikutaton eonta pantun anthrupun, skaiotaton men ge, ei pareon aytui basilea genesthai, ei de di' euytou ge eprexthe ta pareonta, allui perietheke to kratos, adikutaton de, oti tou deipnoy eineken Medoys katedouluse. [4] ei gar de dein pantus peritheinai allui teui ten basileien kai me ayton exein, dikaioteron einai Medun teui peribalein touto to agathon e Perseun. nun de Medoys men anaitioys toutoy eontas douloys anti despoteun gegonenai, Persas de douloys eontas to prin Medun nun gegonenai despotas.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [130]

     130. Astyages then, having been king for five-and-thirty years, was thus caused to cease from being king; and the Medes stooped under the yoke of the Persians because of his cruelty, after they had ruled Asia above the river Halys for one hundred and twenty-eight years, except during that period for which the Scythians had rule. Afterwards however it repented them that they had done this, and they revolved from Dareios, and having revolted they were subdued again, being conquered in a battle. At this time then, I say, in the reign of Astyages, the Persians with Cyrus rose up against the Medes and from that time forth were rulers of Asia: but as for Astyages, Cyrus did no harm to him besides, but kept him with himself until he died. Thus born and bred Cyrus became king; and after this he subdued Croesus, who was the first to begin the quarrel, as I have before said; and having subdued him he then became ruler of all Asia.         130. [1] Astyages men nyn basileusas ep' etea pente kai triekonta oytu teis basileies katepausthe, Meidoi de ypekypsan Perseisi dia ten toutoy pikroteta, arxantes teis anu Alyos potamou Asies ep' etea triekonta kai ekaton dyun deonta, parex e oson oi Skuthai Erxon. [2] ysterui mentoi xronui metemelese te sfi tauta poiesasi kai apestesan apo Dareioy, apostantes de opisu katestrafthesan maxei nikethentes. tote de epi Astyageos oi Persai te kai o Kuros epanastantes toisi Medoisi Erxon to apo toutoy teis Asies. [3] Astyagea de Kuros kakon oyden allo poiesas eixe par' euytui, es o eteleutese. oytu de Kuros genomenos te kai trafeis ebasileyse kai Kroison ysteron toutun arxanta adikies katestrepsato, us eiretai moi proteron, touton de katastrepsamenos oytu pases teis Asies Erxe.    
      131. These are the customs, so far as I know, which the Persians practise:--Images and temples and altars they do not account it lawful to erect, nay they even charge with folly those who do these things; and this, as it seems to me, because they do not account the gods to be in the likeness of men, as do the Hellenes. But it is their wont to perform sacrifices to Zeus going up to the most lofty of the mountains, and the whole circle of the heavens they call Zeus: and they sacrifice to the Sun and the Moon and the Earth, to Fire and to Water and to the Winds: these are the only gods to whom they have sacrificed ever from the first; but they have learnt also to sacrifice to Aphrodite Urania, having learnt it both from the Assyrians and the Arabians; and the Assyrians call Aphrodite Mylitta, the Arabians Alitta, and the Persians Mitra.         131. [1] Persas de oida nomoisi toioiside xreumenoys, agalmata men kai neous kai bumous oyk en nomui poieymenoys idruesthai, alla kai toisi poieusi murien epiferoysi, us men emoi dokeein, oti oyk anthrupofyeas enomisan tous theous kata per oi Ellenes einai. [2] oi de nomizoysi Dii men epi ta ypselotata tun oreun anabainontes thysias erdein, ton kuklon panta tou oyranou Dia kaleontes. thuoysi de eliui te kai selenei kai gei kai pyri kai ydati kai anemoisi. [3] toutoisi men de thuoysi mounoisi arxeithen, epimemathekasi de kai tei Oyraniei thuein, para te Assyriun mathontes kai Arabiun. kaleoysi de Assurioi ten Afroditen Mulitta, Arabioi de Alilat, Persai de Mitran.    
      132. Now this is the manner of sacrifice for the gods aforesaid which is established among the Persians:--they make no altars neither do they kindle fire; and when they mean to sacrifice they use no libation nor music of the pipe nor chaplets nor meal for sprinkling; but when a man wishes to sacrifice to any one of the gods, he leads the animal for sacrifice to an unpolluted place and calls upon the god, having his tiara wreathed round generally with a branch of myrtle. For himself alone separately the man who sacrifices may not request good things in his prayer, but he prays that it may be well with all the Persians and with the king; for he himself also is included of course in the whole body of Persians. And when he has cut up the victim into pieces and boiled the flesh, he spreads a layer of the freshest grass and especially clover, upon which he places forthwith all the pieces of flesh; and when he has placed them in order, a Magian man stands by them and chants over them a theogony (for of this nature they say that their incantation is), seeing that without a Magian it is not lawful for them to make sacrifices. Then after waiting a short time the sacrificer carries away the flesh and uses it for whatever purpose he pleases.         132. [1] thysie de toisi Perseisi peri tous eiremenoys theous ede katesteke. oyte bumous poieuntai oyte pur anakaioysi mellontes thuein, oy spondei xreuntai, oyki aylui, oy stemmasi, oyki oyleisi. tun de us ekastui thuein thelei, es xuron katharon agagun to kteinos kaleei ton theon, estefanumenos ton tiaran myrsinei malista. [2] euytui men de tui thuonti idiei mounui oy oi egginetai arasthai agatha, o de toisi pasi Perseisi kateuxetai ey ginesthai kai tui basilei. en gar de toisi apasi Perseisi kai aytos ginetai. epean de diamistulas kata melea to ireion epsesei ta krea ypopasas poien us apalutaten, malista de to trifyllon, epi tautes etheke un panta ta krea. [3] diathentos de aytou Magos aner paresteus epaeidei theogonien, oien de ekeinoi legoysi einai ten epaoiden. aney gar de Magoy oy sfi nomos esti thysias poieesthai. episxun de oligon xronon apoferetai o thusas ta krea kai xratai o ti min logos aireei.    
      133. And of all days their wont is to honour most that on which they were born, each one: on this they think it right to set out a feast more liberal than on other days; and in this feast the wealthier of them set upon the table an ox or a horse or a camel or an ass, roasted whole in an oven, and the poor among them set out small animals in the same way. They have few solid dishes, but many served up after as dessert, and these not in a single course; and for this reason the Persians say that the Hellenes leave off dinner hungry, because after dinner they have nothing worth mentioning served up as dessert, whereas if any good dessert were served up they would not stop eating so soon. To wine-drinking they are very much given, and it is not permitted for a man to vomit or to make water in presence of another. Thus do they provide against these things; and they are wont to deliberate when drinking hard about the most important of their affairs, and whatsoever conclusion has pleased them in their deliberation, this on the next day, when they are sober, the master of the house in which they happen to be when they deliberate lays before them for discussion: and if it pleases them when they are sober also, they adopt it, but if it does not please them, they let it go: and that on which they have had the first deliberation when they are sober, they consider again when they are drinking.         133. [1] emeren de apaseun malista ekeinen timan nomizoysi tei ekastos egeneto. en tautei de pleu daita tun alleun dikaieusi protithesthai. en tei oi eydaimones aytun boun kai ippon kai kamelon kai onon protitheatai oloys optous en kaminoisi, oi de penetes aytun ta lepta tun probatun protitheatai. [2] sitoisi de oligoisi xreuntai, epiforemasi de polloisi kai oyk alesi. kai dia touto fasi Persai tous Ellenas siteomenoys peinuntas pauesthai, oti sfi apo deipnoy paraforeetai oyden logoy axion. ei de ti paraferoito, esthiontas an oy pauesthai. [3] oinui de karta proskeatai, kai sfi oyk emesai exesti, oyki oyreisai antion alloy. tauta men nyn oytu fylassetai, methyskomenoi de euthasi boyleuesthai ta spoydaiestata tun pregmatun. [4] to d' an adei sfi boyleyomenoisi, touto tei ysteraiei nefoysi protithei o stegarxos, en tou an eontes boyleuuntai, kai en men adei kai nefoysi, xreuntai aytui, en deme adei, metieisi. ta d' an nefontes proboyleusuntai, methyskomenoi epidiaginuskoysi.    
      134. When they meet one another in the roads, by this you may discern whether those who meet are of equal rank,--for instead of greeting by words they kiss one another on the mouth; but if one of them is a little inferior to the other, they kiss one another on the cheeks, and if one is of much less noble rank than the other, he falls down before him and does worship to him. And they honour of all most after themselves those nations which dwell nearest to them, and next those which dwell next nearest, and so they go on giving honour in proportion to distance; and they hold least in honour those who dwell furthest off from themselves, esteeming themselves to be by far the best of all the human race on every point, and thinking that others possess merit according to the proportion which is here stated, and that those who dwell furthest from themselves are the worst. And under the supremacy of the Medes the various nations used also to govern one another according to the same rule as the Persians observe in giving honour, the Medes governing the whole and in particular those who dwelt nearest to themselves, and these having rule over those who bordered upon them, and those again over the nations that were next to them: for the race went forward thus ever from government by themselves to government through others.         134. [1] entygxanontes d' alleloisi en teisi odoisi, tuide an tis diagnoie ei omoioi eisi oi syntygxanontes. anti gar tou prosagoreuein alleloys fileoysi toisi stomasi. en de ei oyteros ypodeesteros oligui, tas pareias fileontai. en de pollui ei oyteros agennesteros, prospiptun proskyneei ton eteron. [2] timusi de ek pantun tous agxista euytun oikeontas meta ge euytous, deytera de tous deyteroys. meta de kata logon probainontes timusi. ekista de tous euytun ekastatu oikemenoys en timei agontai, nomizontes euytous einai anthrupun makrui ta panta aristoys, tous de alloys kata logon teis areteis antexesthai, tous de ekastatu oikeontas apo euytun kakistoys einai. [3] epi de Medun arxon tun kai Erxe ta ethnea allelun, synapantun men Meidoi kai tun agxista oikeontun sfisi, oytoi de kai tun omourun, oi de mala tun exomenun, kata ton ayton de logon kai oi Persai timusi. proebaine gar de to ethnos arxon te kai epitropeuon.    
      135. The Persians more than any other men admit foreign usages; for they both wear the Median dress judging it to be more comely than their own, and also for fighting the Egyptian corslet: moreover they adopt all kinds of luxuries when they hear of them, and in particular they have learnt from the Hellenes to have commerce with boys. They marry each one several lawful wives, and they get also a much larger number of concubines.         135. [1] xeinika de nomaia Persai prosientai andrun malista. kai gar de ten Mediken estheita nomisantes teis euytun einai kalliu foreoysi, kai es tous polemoys tous Aigyptioys thurekas. kai eypatheias te pantodapas pynthanomenoi epitedeuoysi, kai de kai ap' Ellenun mathontes paisi misgontai. gameoysi de ekastos aytun pollas men koyridias gynaikas, pollui d' eti pleunas pallakas ktuntai.    
      136. It is established as a sign of manly excellence next after excellence in fight, to be able to show many sons; and to those who have most the king sends gifts every year: for they consider number to be a source of strength. And they educate their children, beginning at five years old and going on till twenty, in three things only, in riding, in shooting, and in speaking the truth: but before the boy is five years old he does not come into the presence of his father, but lives with the women; and it is so done for this reason, that if the child should die while he is being bred up, he may not be the cause of any grief to his father.         136. [1] andragathie de ayte apodedektai, meta to maxesthai einai agathon, os an pollous apodexei paidas. tui de tous pleistoys apodeiknunti dura ekpempei basileus ana pan etos. to pollon d' egeatai isxyron einai. [2] paideuoysi de tous paidas apo pentaeteos arxamenoi mexri eikosaeteos tria mouna, ixneuein kai toxeuein kai alethizesthai. prin de e pentaetes genetai, oyk apikneetai es opsin tui patri, alla para teisi gynaixi diaitan exei. toude de eineka touto oytu poieetai, ina en apothanei trefomenos, medemian asen tui patri prosbalei.    
      137. I commend this custom of theirs, and also the one which is next to be mentioned, namely that neither the king himself shall put any to death for one cause alone, nor any of the other Persians for one cause alone shall do hurt that is irremediable to any of his own servants; but if after reckoning he finds that the wrongs done are more in number and greater than the services rendered, then only he gives vent to his anger. Moreover they say that no one ever killed his own father or mother, but whatever deeds have been done which seemed to be of this nature, if examined must necessarily, they say, be found to be due either to changelings or to children of adulterous birth; for, say they, it is not reasonable to suppose that the true parent would be killed by his own son.         137. [1] aineu men nyn tonde ton nomon, aineu de kai tonde, to me mieis aities eineka mete ayton ton basilea medena foneuein, mete tun allun Perseun medena tun euytou oiketeun epi miei aitiei anekeston pathos erdein. alla logisamenos en eyriskei pleu te kai mezu ta adikemata eonta tun ypoyrgematun, oytu tui thymui xratai. [2] apokteinai de oydena ku legoysi ton euytou patera oyde metera, alla okosa ede toiauta egeneto, pasan anagken fasi anazeteomena tauta aneyretheinai etoi ypobolimaia eonta e moixidia. oy gar de fasi oikos einai ton ge aletheus tokea ypo tou, euytou paidos apothneskein.    
      138. Whatever things it is not lawful for them to do, these it is not lawful for them even to speak of: and the most disgraceful thing in their estimation is to tell an lie, and next to this to owe money, this last for many other reasons, but especially because it is necessary, they say, for him who owes money, also sometimes to tell lies: and whosoever of the men of the city has leprosy or whiteness of skin, he does not come into a city nor mingle with the other Persians; and they say that he has these diseases because he has offended in some way against the Sun: but a stranger who is taken by these diseases, in many regions they drive out of the country altogether, and also white doves, alleging against them the same cause. And into a river they neither make water nor spit, neither do they wash their hands in it, nor allow any other to do these things, but they reverence rivers very greatly.         138. [1] assa de sfi poieein oyk exesti, tauta oyde legein exesti. aisxiston de aytoisi to pseudesthai nenomistai, deutera de to ofeilein xreos, pollun men kai allun eineka, malista de anagkaien fasi einai ton ofeilonta kai ti pseudos legein. os an de tun astun lepren e leuken exei, es polin oytos oy katerxetai oyde symmisgetai toisi alloisi Perseisi. fasi de min es ton elion amartonta ti tauta exein. [2] xeinon de panta ton lambanomenon ypo toyteun polloi exelaunoysi ek teis xures, kai tas leykas peristeras, ten ayten aitien epiferontes. es potamon de oyte enoyreoysi oyte emptuoysi, oy xeiras enaponizontai, oyde allon oydena periorusi, alla sebontai potamous malista.    
      139. This moreover also has chanced to them, which the Persians have themselves failed to notice but I have not failed to do so:--their names, which are formed to correspond with their bodily shapes or their magnificence of station, end all with the same letter, that letter which the Dorians call san and the Ionians sigma; with this you will find, if you examine the matter, that all the Persian names end, not some with this and others with other letters, but all alike.         139. [1] kai tode allo sfi ude sympeptuke ginesthai, to Persas men aytous lelethe, emeas mentoi oy. ta oynomata sfi eonta omoia toisi sumasi kai tei megaloprepeiei teleytusi panta es tuyto gramma, to Duriees men san kaleoysi, Iunes de sigma. es touto dizemenos eyreseis teleytunta tun Perseun ta oynomata, oy ta men ta d' oy, alla panta omoius.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [140]

     140. So much I am able to say for certain from my own knowledge about them: but what follows is reported about their dead as a secret mystery and not with clearness, namely that the body of a Persian man is not buried until it has been torn by a bird or a dog. (The Magians I know for a certainty have this practice, for they do it openly.) However that may be, the Persians cover the body with wax and then bury it in the earth. Now the Magians are distinguished in many ways from other men, as also from the priests in Egypt: for these last esteem it a matter of purity to kill no living creature except the animals which they sacrifice; but the Magians kill with their own hands all creatures except dogs and men, and they even make this a great end to aim at, killing both ants and serpents and all other creeping and flying things. About this custom then be it as it was from the first established; and I return now to the former narrative.         140. [1] tauta men atrekeus exu peri aytun eidus eipein. tade mentoi us kryptomena legetai kai oy safeneus peri tou apothanontos, us oy proteron thaptetai andros Perseu o nekys prin an yp' ornithos e kynos elkysthei. [2] Magoys men gar atrekeus oida tauta poieontas. emfaneus gar de poieusi. katakerusantes de un ton nekyn Persai gei kruptoysi. Magoi de kexuridatai pollon tun te allun anthrupun kai tun en Aiguptui ireun. [3] oi men gar agneuoysi empsyxon meden kteinein, ei me osa thuoysi. oi de de Magoi aytoxeiriei panta plen kynos kai anthrupoy kteinoysi, kai agunisma mega touto poieuntai, kteinontes omoius murmekas te kai ofis kai talla erpeta kai peteina. kai amfi men tui nomui toutui exetu us kai arxen enomisthe, aneimi de epi ton proteron logon.    
      141. The Ionians and Aiolians, as soon as the Lydians had been subdued by the Persians, sent messengers to Cyrus at Sardis, desiring to be his subjects on the same terms as they had been subjects of Croesus. And when he heard that which they proposed to him, he spoke to them a fable, saying that a certain player on the pipe saw fishes in the sea and played on his pipe, supposing that they would come out to land; but being deceived in his expectation, he took a casting-net and enclosed a great multitude of the fishes and drew them forth from the water: and when he saw them leaping about, he said to the fishes: "Stop dancing I pray you now, seeing that ye would not come out and dance before when I piped." Cyrus spoke this fable to the Ionians and Aiolians for this reason, because the Ionians had refused to comply before, when Cyrus himself by a messenger requested them to revolt from Croesus, while now when the conquest had been made they were ready to submit to Cyrus. Thus he said to them in anger, and the Ionians, when they heard this answer brought back to their cities, put walls round about them severally, and gathered together to the Panionion, all except the men of Miletos, for with these alone Cyrus had sworn an agreement on the same terms as the Lydians had granted. The rest of the Ionians resolved by common consent to send messengers to Sparta, to ask the Spartans to help the Ionians.         141. [1] Iunes de kai Aiolees, us oi Lydoi taxista katestrafato ypo Perseun, epempon aggeloys es Sardis para Kuron, ethelontes epi toisi aytoisi einai toisi kai Kroisui Esan katekooi. o de akousas aytun ta proisxonto elexe sfi logon, andra fas ayleten idonta ixthus en tei thalassei ayleein, dokeonta sfeas exeleusesthai es gein. [2] us de pseystheinai teis elpidos, labein amfiblestron kai peribalein te pleithos pollon tun ixthuun kai exeirusai, idonta de pallomenoys eipein ara ayton pros tous ixthus <<pauesthe moi orxeomenoi, epei oyd' emeo ayleontos ethelete ekbainein orxeomenoi.>> [3] Kuros men touton ton logon toisi Iusi kai toisi Aioleusi tunde eineka elexe, oti de oi Iunes proteron aytou Kuroy deethentos di' aggelun apistasthai sfeas apo Kroisoy oyk epeithonto, tote de katergasmenun tun pregmatun Esan etoimoi peithesthai Kurui. [4] o men de orgei exomenos elege sfi tade. Iunes de us ekoysan toutun aneneixthentun es tas polias, teixea te periebalonto ekastoi kai synelegonto es Paniunion oi alloi, plen Milesiun. pros mounoys gar toutoys orkion Kuros epoiesato ep' oisi per o Lydos. toisi de loipoisi Iusi edoxe koinui logui pempein aggeloys es Sparten deesomenoys Iusi timureein.    
      142. These Ionians to whom belongs the Panionion had the fortune to build their cities in the most favourable position for climate and seasons of any men whom we know: for neither the regions above Ionia nor those below, neither those towards the East nor those towards the West, produce the same results as Ionia itself, the regions in the one direction being oppressed by cold and moisture, and those in the other by heat and drought. And these do not use all the same speech, but have four different variations of language. First of their cities on the side of the South lies Miletos, and next to it Myus and Priene. These are settlements made in Caria, and speak the same language with one another; and the following are in Lydia,-- Ephesos, Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Clazomenai, Phocaia: these cities resemble not at all those mentioned before in the speech which they use, but they agree one with another. There remain besides three Ionian cities, of which two are established in the islands of Samos and Chios, and one is built upon the mainland, namely Erythrai: now the men of Chios and of Erythrai use the same form of language, but the Samians have one for themselves alone. Thus there result four separate forms of language.         142. [1] oi de Iunes oytoi, tun kai to Paniunion esti, tou men oyranou kai tun ureun en tui kallistui etugxanon idrysamenoi polias pantun anthrupun tun emeis idmen. [2] oyte gar ta anu ayteis xuria tuyto poieei tei Iuniei oyte ta katu oyte ta pros ten eu oyte ta pros ten esperen, ta men ypo tou psyxrou te kai ygrou piezomena, ta de ypo tou thermou te kai ayxmudeos. [3] glussan de oy ten ayten oytoi nenomikasi, alla tropoys tesseras paragugeun. Miletos men ayteun prute keetai polis pros mesambrien, meta de Myous te kai Priene. [4] aytai men en tei Kariei katoikentai kata tayta dialegomenai sfisi, aide de en tei Lydiei, Efesos Kolofun Lebedos Teus Klazomenai Fukaia. aytai de ai polies teisi proteron lextheiseisi omologeoysi kata glussan oyden, sfisi de omofuneoysi. eti de treis ypoloipoi Iades polies, tun ai duo men nesoys oikeatai, Samon te kai Khion, e de mia en tei epeirui idrytai, Erythrai. Khioi men nyn kai Erythraioi kata tuyto dialegontai, Samioi de ep' euytun mounoi. oytoi xarakteires glusses tesseres ginontai.    
      143. Of these Ionians then those of Miletos were sheltered from danger, since they had sworn an agreement; and those of them who lived in islands had no cause for fear, for the Phenicians were not yet subjects of the Persians and the Persians themselves were not sea-men. Now these were parted off from the other Ionians for no other reason than this:--The whole Hellenic nation was at that time weak, but of all its races the Ionian was much the weakest and of least account: except Athens, indeed, it had no considerable city. Now the other Ionians, and among them the Athenians, avoided the name, not wishing to be called Ionians, nay even now I perceive that the greater number of them are ashamed of the name: but these twelve cities not only prided themselves on the name but established a temple of their own, to which they gave the name of Panionion, and they made resolution not to grant a share in it to any other Ionians (nor indeed did any ask to share it except those of Smyrna);         143. [1] toutun de un tun Iunun oi Milesioi men Esan en skepei tou foboy, orkion poiesamenoi, toisi de aytun nesiuteisi En deinon oyden. oyte gar Foinikes Esan ku Perseun katekooi oyte aytoi oi Persai naybatai. [2] apesxisthesan de apo tun allun Iunun oytoi kat' allo men oyden, astheneos de eontos tou pantos tote Ellenikou geneos, pollui de En asthenestaton tun ethneun to Iunikon kai logoy elaxistoy. oti gar me Atheinai, En oyden allo polisma logimon. [3] oi men nyn alloi Iunes kai oi Athenaioi efygon to oynoma, oy boylomenoi Iunes kekleisthai, alla kai nun fainontai moi oi polloi aytun epaisxunesthai tui oynomati. ai de dyudeka polies aytai tui te oynomati egallonto kai iron idrusanto epi sfeun ayteun, tui oynoma ethento Paniunion, eboyleusanto de aytou metadounai medamoisi alloisi Iunun (oyd' edeethesan de oydamoi metasxein oti me Smyrnaioi).    
      144. just as the Dorians of that district which is now called the Five Cities but was formerly called the Six Cities, take care not to admit any of the neighbouring Dorians to the temple of Triopion, and even exclude from sharing in it those of their own body who commit any offence as regards the temple. For example, in the games of the Triopian Apollo they used formerly to set bronze tripods as prizes for the victors, and the rule was that those who received them should not carry them out of the temple but dedicate them then and there to the god. There was a man then of Halicarnassos, whose name was Agasicles, who being a victor paid no regard to this rule, but carried away the tripod to his own house and hung it up there upon a nail. On this ground the other five cities, Lindos, Ialysos and Cameiros, Cos and Cnidos, excluded the sixth city Halicarnassos from sharing in the temple.         144. [1] kata per oi ek teis pentapolios nun xures Duriees, proteron de exapolios teis ayteis tautes kaleomenes, fylassontai un medamous esdexasthai tun prosoikun Durieun es to Triopikon iron, alla kai sfeun aytun tous peri to iron anomesantas exekleisan teis metoxeis, [2] en gar tui aguni tou Triopioy Apollunos etithesan to palai tripodas xalkeoys toisi nikusi, kai toutoys xrein tous lambanontas ek tou irou me ekferein all' aytou anatithenai tui theui. [3] aner un Alikarnesseus, tui oynoma En Agasiklees, nikesas ton nomon katelogese, ferun de pros ta euytou oikia prosepassaleyse ton tripoda. dia tauten ten aitien ai pente polies, Lindos kai Ielysos te kai Kameiros kai Kus te kai Knidos exekleisan teis metoxeis ten ekten polin Alikarnesson. toutoisi men nyn oytoi tauten ten zemien epethekan.    
      145. Upon these they laid this penalty: but as for the Ionians, I think that the reason why they made of themselves twelve cities and would not receive any more into their body, was because when they dwelt in Peloponnesus there were of them twelve divisions, just as now there are twelve divisions of the Achaians who drove the Ionians out: for first, (beginning from the side of Sikyon) comes Pellene, then Aigeira and Aigai, in which last is the river Crathis with a perpetual flow (whence the river of the same name in Italy received its name), and Bura and Helike, to which the Ionians fled for refuge when they were worsted by the Achaians in fight, and Aigion and Rhypes and Patreis and Phareis and Olenos, where is the great river Peiros, and Dyme and Tritaieis, of which the last alone has an inland position. These form now twelve divisions of the Achaians, and in former times they were divisions of the Ionians.         145. [1] dyudeka de moi dokeoysi polias poiesasthai oi Iunes kai oyk etheleisai pleunas esdexasthai toude eineka, oti kai ote en Peloponnesui oikeon, dyudeka En aytun merea, kata per nun Axaiun tun exelasantun Iunas dyudeka esti merea, Pellene men ge prute pros Sikyunos, meta de Aigeira kai Aigai, en tei Krathis potamos aeinaos esti, ap' otey o en Italiei potamos to oynoma esxe, kai Boura kai Elike, es ten katefygon Iunes ypo Axaiun maxei essuthentes, kai Aigion kai RHupes kai Patrees kai Farees kai Ulenos, en tui Peiros potamos megas esti, kai Dume kai Tritaiees, oi mounoi toutun mesogaioi oikeoysi. tauta dyudeka merea nun Axaiun esti kai tote ge Iunun En.    
      146. For this reason then the Ionians also made for themselves twelve cities; for at any rate to say that these are any more Ionians than the other Ionians, or have at all a nobler descent, is mere folly, considering that a large part of them are Abantians from Euboea, who have no share even in the name of Ionia, and Minyai of Orchomenos have been mingled with them, and Cadmeians and Dryopians and Phokians who seceded from their native State and Molossians and Pelasgians of Arcadia and Dorians of Epidauros and many other races have been mingled with them; and those of them who set forth to their settlements from the City Hall of Athens and who esteem themselves the most noble by descent of the Ionians, these, I say, brought no women with them to their settlement, but took Carian women, whose parents they slew: and on account of this slaughter these women laid down for themselves a rule, imposing oaths on one another, and handed it on to their daughters, that they should never eat with their husbands, nor should a wife call her own husband by name, for this reason, because the Ionians had slain their fathers and husbands and children and then having done this had them to wife. This happened at Miletos.         146. [1] toutun de eineka kai oi Iunes dyudeka polias epoiesanto. epei us ge ti mallon oytoi Iunes eisi tun allun Iunun e kallion ti gegonasi, murie polle legein. tun Abantes men ex Eyboies eisi oyk elaxiste moira, toisi Iunies meta oyde tou oynomatos oyden, Minuai de Orxomenioi sfi anamemixatai kai Kadmeioi kai Druopes kai Fukees apodasmioi kai Molossoi kai Arkades Pelasgoi kai Duriees Epidaurioi, alla te ethnea polla anamemixatai. [2] oi de aytun apo tou prytaneioy tou Athenaiun ormethentes kai nomizontes gennaiotatoi einai Iunun, oytoi de oy gynaikas egagonto es ten apoikien alla Kaeiras esxon, tun efoneysan tous goneas. [3] dia touton de ton fonon ai gynaikes aytai nomon themenai sfisi ayteisi orkoys epelasan kai paredosan teisi thygatrasi, me kote omositeisai toisi andrasi mede oynomati busai ton euyteis andra, toude eineka oti efoneysan sfeun tous pateras kai andras kai paidas kai epeita tauta poiesantes ayteisi synoikeon.    
      147. Moreover some of them set Lykian kings over them, descendants of Glaucos and Hippolochos, while others were ruled by Cauconians of Pylos, descendants of Codros the son of Melanthos, and others again by princes of the two races combined. Since however these hold on to the name more than the other Ionians, let them be called, if they will, the Ionians of truly pure descent; but in fact all are Ionians who have their descent from Athens and who keep the feast of Apaturia; and this all keep except the men of Ephesos and Colophon: for these alone of all the Ionians do not keep the Apaturia, and that on the ground of some murder committed.         147. [1] tauta de En ginomena en Miletui. basileas de estesanto oi men aytun Lykioys apo Glaukoy tou Ippoloxoy gegonotas, oi de Kaukunas Pylioys apo Kodroy tou Melanthoy, oi de kai synamfoteroys. alla gar periexontai tou oynomatos mallon ti tun allun Iunun, estusan de kai oi katharus gegonotes Iunes. [2] eisi de pantes Iunes osoi ap' Atheneun gegonasi kai Apatouria agoysi orten. agoysi de pantes plen Efesiun kai Kolofuniun. oytoi gar mounoi Iunun oyk agoysi Apatouria, kai oytoi kata fonoy tina skeipsin.    
      148. Now the Panionion is a sacred place on the north side of Mycale, set apart by common agreement of the Ionians for Poseidon of Helike; and this Mycale is a promontory of the mainland running out Westwards towards Samos, where the Ionians gathering together from their cities used to hold a festival which they called the Panionia. (And not only the feasts of the Ionians but also those of all the Hellenes equally are subject to this rule, that their names all end in the same letter, just like the names of the Persians.) These then are the Ionian cities:         148. [1] to de Paniunion esti teis Mykales xuros iros pros arkton tetrammenos, koinei exarairemenos ypo Iunun Poseideuni Elikuniui. e de Mykale esti teis epeiroy akre pros zefyron anemon katekoysa Samui katantion, es ten syllegomenoi apo tun poliun Iunes ageskon orten tei ethento oynoma Paniunia. [2] [peponthasi de oyti mounai ai Iunun ortai touto, alla kai Ellenun pantun omoius pasai es tuyto gramma teleytusi, kata per tun Perseun ta oynomata.]13    
      149. and those of Aiolia are as follows:--Kyme, which is called Phriconis, Larisai, Neon-teichos, Temnos, Killa, Notion, Aigiroessa, Pitane, Aigaiai, Myrina, Gryneia; these are the ancient cities of the Aiolians, eleven in number, since one, Smyrna, was severed from them by the Ionians; for these cities, that is those on the mainland, used also formerly to be twelve in number. And these Aiolians had the fortune to settle in a land which is more fertile than that of the Ionians but in respect of climate less favoured.         149. [1] aytai men ai Iades polies eisi, aide de ai Aiolides, Kume e Frikunis kaleomene, Lerisai, Neon teixos, Teimnos, Killa, Notion, Aigiroessa, Pitane, Aigaiai, Murina, Gruneia. aytai endeka Aioleun polies ai arxaiai. mia gar sfeun pareluthe Smurne ypo Iunun. Esan gar kai aytai dyudeka ai en tei epeirui. [2] oytoi de oi Aiolees xuren men etyxon ktisantes ameinu Iunun, ureun de ekoysan oyk omoius.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [150]

     150. Now the Aiolians lost Smyrna in the following manner:--certain men of Colophon, who had been worsted in party strife and had been driven from their native city, were received there for refuge: and after this the Colophonian exiles watched for a time when the men of Smyrna were celebrating a festival to Dionysos outside the walls, and then they closed the gates against them and got possession of the city. After this, when the whole body of Aiolians came to the rescue, they made an agreement that the Ionians should give up the movable goods, and that on this condition the Aiolians should abandon Smyrna. When the men of Smyrna had done this, the remaining eleven cities divided them amongst themselves and made them their own citizens.         150. [1] Smurnen de ude apebalon Aiolees. Kolofunioys andras stasi essuthentas kai ekpesontas ek teis patridos ypedexanto. meta de oi fygades tun Kolofuniun fylaxantes tous Smyrnaioys orten exu teixeos poieymenoys Dionusui, tas pulas apokleisantes esxon ten polin. [2] boethesantun de pantun Aioleun, omologiei exresanto ta epipla apodontun tun Iunun eklipein Smurnen Aioleas. poiesantun de tauta Smyrnaiun epidieilonto sfeas ai endeka polies kai epoiesanto sfeun ayteun polietas.    
      151. These then are the Aiolian cities upon the mainland, with the exception of those situated on Mount Ida, for these are separate from the rest. And of those which are in the islands, there are five in Lesbos, for the sixth which was situated in Lesbos, namely Arisba, was enslaved by the men of Methymna, though its citizens were of the same race as they; and in Tenedos there is one city, and another in what are called the "Hundred Isles." Now the Lesbians and the men of Tenedos, like those Ionians who dwelt in the islands, had no cause for fear; but the remaining cities came to a common agreement to follow the Ionians whithersoever they should lead.         151. [1] aytai men nyn ai epeirutides Aiolides polies, exu tun en tei Idei oikemeneun. kexuridatai gar aytai. [2] ai de tas nesoys exoysai pente men polies ten Lesbon nemontai (ten gar ekten en tei Lesbui oikemenen Arisban endrapodisan Methymnaioi eontas omaimoys), en Tenedui de mia oiketai polis, kai en teisi Ekaton nesoisi kaleomeneisi alle mia. [3] Lesbioisi men nun kai Tenedioisi, kata per Iunun toisi tas nesoys exoysi, En deinon oyden. teisi de loipeisi polisi eade koinei Iusi epesthai tei an oytoi exegeuntai.    
      152. Now when the messengers from the Ionians and Aiolians came to Sparta (for this business was carried out with speed), they chose before all others to speak for them the Phocaian, whose name was Pythermos. He then put upon him a purple cloak, in order that as many as possible of the Spartans might hear of it and come together, and having been introduced before the assembly he spoke at length, asking the Spartans to help them. The Lacedemonians however would not listen to him, but resolved on the contrary not to help the Ionians. So they departed, and the Lacedemonians, having dismissed the messengers of the Ionians, sent men notwithstanding in a ship of fifty oars, to find out, as I imagine, about the affairs of Cyrus and about Ionia. These when they came to Phocaia sent to Sardis the man of most repute among them, whose name was Lacrines, to report to Cyrus the saying of the Lacedemonians, bidding him do hurt to no city of the Hellas, since they would not permit it.         152. [1] us de apikonto es ten Sparten tun Iunun kai Aioleun oi aggeloi (kata gar de taxos En tauta pressomena), eilonto pro pantun legein ton Fukaea, tui oynoma En Puthermos. o de porfureon te eima peribalomenos, us an pynthanomenoi pleistoi synelthoien Spartieteun, kai katastas elege polla timureein euytoisi xreizun. [2] Lakedaimonioi de oy kus esekoyon, all' apedoxe sfi me timureein Iusi. oi men de apallassonto, Lakedaimonioi de apusamenoi tun Iunun tous aggeloys omus apesteilan pentekonterui andras, us men emoi dokeei, kataskopoys tun te Kuroy pregmatun kai Iunies. [3] apikomenoi de oytoi es Fukaian epempon es Sardis sfeun aytun ton dokimutaton, tui oynoma En Lakrines, apereonta Kurui Lakedaimoniun rheisin, geis teis Ellados medemian polin sinamureein, us aytun oy periopsomenun.    
      153. When the herald had spoken thus, Cyrus is said to have asked those of the Hellenes whom he had with him, what men the Lacedemonians were and how many in number, that they made this proclamation to him; and hearing their answer he said to the Spartan herald: "Never yet did I fear men such as these, who have a place appointed in the midst of their city where they gather together and deceive one another by false oaths: and if I continue in good health, not the misfortunes of the Ionians will be for them a subject of talk, but rather their own." These words Cyrus threw out scornfully with reference to the Hellenes in general, because they have got for themselves markets and practise buying and selling there; for the Persians themselves are not wont to use markets nor have they any market-place at all. After this he entrusted Sardis to Tabalos a Persian, and the gold both of Croesus and of the other Lydians he gave to Pactyas a Lydian to take charge of, and himself marched away to Agbatana, taking with him Croesus and making for the present no account of the Ionians. For Babylon stood in his way still, as also the Bactrian nation and the Sacans and the Egyptians; and against these he meant to make expeditions himself, while sending some other commander about the Ionians.         153. [1] tauta eipontos tou kerykos, legetai Kuron epeiresthai tous pareontas oi Ellenun tines eontes anthrupoi Lakedaimonioi kai kosoi pleithos tauta euytui proagoreuoysi. pynthanomenon de min eipein anthrupoi Lakedaimonioi kai kosoi <<oyk edeisa ku andras toioutoys, toisi esti xuros en mese tei poli apodedegmenos es ton syllegomenoi alleloys omnuntes exapatusi. toisi, en egu ygiainu, oy ta Iunun pathea estai ellesxa alla ta oikeia.>> [2] tauta es tous pantas Ellenas aperripse o Kuros ta epea, oti agoras stesamenoi unei te kai presi xreuntai. aytoi gar oi Persai agoreisi oyden euthasi xrasthai, oyde sfi esti to parapan agore. [3] meta tauta epitrepsas tas men Sardis Tabalui andri Persei, ton de xryson ton te Kroisoy kai ton tun allun Lydun Paktuei andri Lydui komizein, apelayne aytos es Agbatana, Kroison te ama agomenos kai tous Iunas en oydeni logui poiesamenos ten pruten einai. [4] e te gar Babylun oi En empodios kai to Baktrion ethnos kai Sakai te kai Aiguptioi, ep' oys epeixe te stratelateein aytos, epi de Iunas allon pempein strategon.    
      154. But when Cyrus had marched away from Sardis, Pactyas caused the Lydians to revolt from Tabalos and from Cyrus. This man went down to the sea, and having in his possession all the gold that there had been in Sardis, he hired for himself mercenaries and persuaded the men of the sea-coast to join his expedition. So he marched on Sardis and besieged Tabalos, having shut himself up in the citadel.         154. [1] us de apelase o Kuros ek tun Sardiun, tous Lydous apestese o Paktues apo te Tabaloy kai Kuroy, katabas de epi thalassan, ate ton xryson exun panta ton ek tun Sardiun, epikouroys te emisthouto kai tous epithalassioys anthrupoys epeithe sun euytui strateuesthai. elasas de epi tas Sardis epoliorkee Tabalon apergmenon en tei akropoli.    
      155. Hearing this on his way, Cyrus said to Croesus as follows: "Croesus, what end shall I find of these things which are coming to pass? The Lydians will not cease as it seems, from giving trouble to me and from having it themselves. I doubt me if it were not best to sell them all as slaves; for as it is, I see that I have done in like manner as if one should slay the father and then spare his sons: just so I took prisoner and am carrying away thee, who wert much more than the father of the Lydians, while to the Lydians themselves I delivered up their city; and can I feel surprise after this that they have revolted from me?" Thus he said what was in his mind, but Croesus answered him as follows, fearing lest he should destroy Sardis: "O king, that which thou hast said is not without reason; but do not thou altogether give vent to thy wrath, nor destroy an ancient city which is guiltless both of the former things and also of those which have come to pass now: for as to the former things it was I who did them and I bear the consequences heaped upon my head; and as for what is now being done, since the wrongdoer is Pactyas to whom thou didst entrust the charge of Sardis, let him pay the penalty. But the Lydians I pray thee pardon, and lay upon them commands as follows, in order that they may not revolt nor be a cause of danger to thee:--send to them and forbid them to possess weapons of war, but bid them on the other hand put on tunics under their outer garments and be shod with buskins, and proclaim to them that they train their sons to play the lyre and the harp and to be retail-dealers; and soon thou shalt see, O king, that they have become women instead of men, so that there will be no fear that they will revolt from thee."         155. [1] pythomenos de kat' odon tauta o Kuros eipe pros Kroison tade. <<Kroise, ti estai telos tun ginomenun toutun emoi; oy pausontai Lydoi, us oikasi, pregmata parexontes kai aytoi exontes. frontizu me ariston ei exandrapodisasthai sfeas. omoius gar moi nun ge fainomai pepoiekenai us ei tis patera apokteinas tun paidun aytou feisato. [2] us de kai egu Lydun ton men pleon ti e patera eonta se labun agu, aytoisi de Lydoisi ten polin pareduka, kai epeita thumazu ei moi apestasi.>> o men de ta per enoee elege, o d' ameibeto toiside, deisas me anastatoys poiesei tas Sardis. [3] <<u basileu, ta men oikota eirekas, su mentoi me panta thymui xreo, mede polin arxaien exanasteseis anamarteton eousan kai tun proteron kai tun nun esteutun. ta men gar proteron egu te eprexa kai egu kefalei anamaxas feru. ta de nun pareonta Paktues gar esti o adikeun, tui su epetrepsas Sardis, oytos dotu toi diken. [4] Lydoisi de syggnumen exun tade aytoisi epitaxon, us mete aposteusi mete deinoi toi eusi. apeipe men sfi pempsas opla areia me ekteisthai, keleye de sfeas kithunas te ypodunein toisi eimasi kai kothornoys ypodeesthai, proeipe d' aytoisi kitharizein te kai psallein kai kapeleuein paideuein tous paidas. kai taxeus sfeas u basileu gynaikas ant' andrun opseai gegonotas, uste oyden deinoi toi esontai me aposteusi.>>    
      156. Croesus, I say, suggested to him this, perceiving that this was better for the Lydians than to be reduced to slavery and sold; for he knew that if he did not offer a sufficient reason, he would not persuade Cyrus to change his mind, and he feared lest at some future time, if they should escape the present danger, the Lydians might revolt from the Persians and be destroyed. And Cyrus was greatly pleased with the suggestion made and slackened from his wrath, saying that he agreed with his advice. Then he called Mazares a Mede, and laid charge upon him to proclaim to the Lydians that which Croesus suggested, and moreover to sell into slavery all the rest who had joined with the Lydians in the expedition to Sardis, and finally by all means to bring Pactyas himself alive to Cyrus.         156. [1] Kroisos men de tauta oi ypetitheto, airetutera tauta eyriskun Lydoisi e andrapodisthentas pretheinai sfeas, epistamenos oti en me axioxreon profasin proteinei, oyk anapeisei min metaboyleusasthai, arrudeun de me kai ysteron kote oi Lydoi, en to pareon ypekdramusi, apostantes apo tun Perseun apoluntai. [2] Kuros de estheis tei ypothekei kai ypeis teis orgeis efe oi peithesthai. kalesas de Mazarea andra Meidon, tauta te oi eneteilato proeipein Lydoisi ta o Kroisos ypetitheto, kai pros exandrapodisasthai tous alloys pantas oi meta Lydun epi Sardis estrateusanto, ayton de Paktuen pantus zunta agagein par' euyton.    
      157. Having given this charge upon the road, he continued his march to the native land of the Persians; but Pactyas hearing that an army was approaching to fight against him was struck with fear and fled away forthwith to Kyme. Then Mazares the Mede marched upon Sardis with a certain portion of the army of Cyrus, and as he did not find Pactyas or his followers any longer at Sardis, he first compelled the Lydians to perform the commands of Cyrus, and by his commands the Lydians changed the whole manner of their life. After this Mazares proceeded to send messengers to Kyme bidding them give up Pactyas: and the men of Kyme resolved to refer to the god at Branchidai the question what counsel they should follow. For there was there an Oracle established of old time, which all the Ionians and Aiolians were wont to consult; and this place is in the territory of Miletos above the port of Panormos.         157. [1] o men de tauta ek teis odou enteilamenos apelayne es ethea ta Perseun, Paktues de pythomenos agxou einai straton ep' euyton ionta deisas oixeto feugun es Kumen. [2] Mazares de o Meidos elasas epi tas Sardis tou Kuroy stratou moiran osen de kote exun, us oyk eyre eti eontas tous amfi Paktuen en Sardisi, pruta men tous Lydous enagkase tas Kuroy entolas epiteleein, ek toutoy de keleysmosunes Lydoi ten pasan diaitan teis zoes metebalon. [3] Mazares de meta touto epempe es ten Kumen aggeloys ekdidonai keleuun Paktuen. oi de Kymaioi egnusan symboyleis peri es theon anoisai ton en Bragxideisi. En gar aytothi manteion ek palaiou idrymenon, tui Iunes te pantes kai Aiolees euthesan xrasthai. o de xuros oytos esti teis Milesies yper Panormoy limenos.    
      158. So the men of Kyme sent messengers to the Branchidai to inquire of the god, and they asked what course they should take about Pactyas so as to do that which was pleasing to the gods. When they thus inquired, the answer was given them that they should deliver up Pactyas to the Persians: and the men of Kyme, having heard this answer reported, were disposed to give him up. Then when the mass of the people were thus disposed, Aristodicos the son of Heracleides, a man of repute among the citizens, stopped the men of Kyme from doing so, having distrust of the answer and thinking that those sent to inquire were not speaking the truth; until at last other messengers were sent to the Oracle to ask a second time about Pactyas, and of them Aristodicos was one.         158. [1] pempsantes un oi Kymaioi es tous Bragxidas theopropoys eiruteyn peri Paktuen okoion ti poieontes theoisi melloien xarieisthai. epeirutusi de sfi tauta xresterion egeneto ekdidonai Paktuen Perseisi. tauta de us apeneixthenta ekoysan oi Kymaioi, ormeato ekdidonai. [2] ormemenoy de tautei tou pletheos, Aristodikos o Erakleideu aner tun astun eun dokimos esxe me poieisai tauta Kymaioys, apisteun te tui xresmui kai dokeun tous theopropoys oy legein aletheus, es o to deuteron peri Paktueu epeiresomenoi eisan alloi theopropoi, tun kai Aristodikos En.    
      159. When these came to Branchidai, Aristodicos stood forth from the rest and consulted the Oracle, asking as follows: Lord, there came to us a suppliant for protection Pactyas the Lydian, flying from a violent death at the hands of the Persians, and they demand him from us, bidding the men of Kyme give him up. But we, though we fear the power of the Persians, yet have not ventured up to this time to deliver to them the suppliant, until thy counsel shall be clearly manifested to us, saying which of the two things we ought to do." He thus inquired, but the god again declared to them the same answer, bidding them deliver up Pactyas to the Persians. Upon this Aristodicos with deliberate purpose did as follows:--he went all round the temple destroying the nests of the sparrows and of all the other kinds of birds which had been hatched on the temple: and while he was doing this, it is said that a voice came from the inner shrine directed to Aristodicos and speaking thus: "Thou most impious of men, why dost thou dare to do this? Dost thou carry away by force from my temple the suppliants for my protection?" And Aristodicos, it is said, not being at all at a loss replied to this: "Lord, dost thou thus come to the assistance of thy suppliants, and yet biddest the men of Kyme deliver up theirs?" and the god answered him again thus: "Yea, I bid you do so, that ye may perish the more quickly for your impiety; so that ye may not at any future time come to the Oracle to ask about delivering up of suppliants."         159. [1] apikomenun de es Bragxidas exresteriazeto ek pantun Aristodikos epeirutun tade. <<unax, Elthe par' emeas iketes Paktues o Lydos, feugun thanaton biaion pros Perseun. oi de min exaiteontai, proeinai Kymaioys keleuontes. [2] emeis de deimainontes ten Perseun dunamin ton iketen es tode oy tetolmekamen ekdidonai, prin an to apo seu emin deluthei atrekeus okotera poieumen.>> o men tauta epeiruta, o d' aytis ton ayton sfi xresmon efaine, keleuun ekdidonai Paktuen Perseisi. [3] pros tauta o Aristodikos ek pronoies epoiee tade. periiun ton neon kuklui exairee tous stroythous kai alla osa En nenosseymena ornithun genea en tui neui. poieontos de aytou tauta legetai funen ek tou adutoy genesthai feroysan men pros ton Aristodikon, legoysan de tade <<anosiutate anthrupun, ti tade tolmais poieein; tous iketas moy ek tou neou keraizeis;>> [4] Aristodikon de oyk aporesanta pros tauta eipein <<unax, aytos men oytu toisi iketeisi boetheeis, Kymaioys de keleueis ton iketen ekdidonai; ton de aytis ameipsasthai toiside <<nai keleuu, ina ge asebesantes thasson apolesthe, us me to loipon peri iketeun ekdosios elthete epi to xresterion.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [160]

     160. When the men of Kyme heard this saying reported, not wishing either to be destroyed by giving him up or to be besieged by keeping him with them, they sent him away to Mytilene. Those of Mytilene however, when Mazares sent messages to them, were preparing to deliver up Pactyas for a price, but what the price was I cannot say for certain, since the bargain was never completed; for the men of Kyme, when they learnt that this was being done by the Mytilenians, sent a vessel to Lesbos and conveyed away Pactyas to Chios. After this he was dragged forcibly from the temple of Athene Poliuchos by the Chians and delivered up: and the Chians delivered him up receiving Atarneus in return, (now this Atarneus is a region of Mysia opposition Lesbos). So the Persians having received Pactyas kept him under guard, meaning to produce him before Cyrus. And a long time elapsed during which none of the Chians either used barley-meal grown in this region of Atarneus, for pouring out in sacrifice to any god, or baked cakes for offering of the corn which grew there, but all the produce of this land was excluded from every kind of sacred service.         160. [1] tauta us apeneixthenta ekoysan oi Kymaioi, oy boylomenoi oyte ekdontes apolesthai oyte par' euytoisi exontes poliorkeesthai, ekpempoysi ayton es Mytilenen. [2] oi de Mytilenaioi epipempontos tou Mazareos aggelias ekdidonai ton Paktuen pareskeyazonto epi misthui osui de. oy gar exu touto ge eipein atrekeus. oy gar eteleuthe. [3] Kymaioi gar us emathon tauta pressomena ek tun Mytilenaiun, pempsantes ploion es Lesbon ekkomizoysi Paktuen es Khion. entheuten de ex irou Athenaies poliouxoy apospastheis ypo Khiun exedothe. exedosan de oi Khioi epi tui Atarnei misthui. [4] tou de Atarneos toutoy esti xuros teis Mysies, Lesboy antios. Paktuen men nyn paradexamenoi oi Persai eixon en fylakei, thelontes Kurui apodexai. [5] En de xronos oytos oyk oligos ginomenos, ote Khiun oydeis ek tou Atarneos toutoy oyte oylas kritheun proxysin epoieeto theun oydeni oyte pemmata epesseto karpou tou entheuten, apeixeto te tun pantun irun ta panta ek teis xures tautes ginomena.    
      161. The men of Chios had then delivered up Pactyas; and after this Mazares made expedition against those who had joined in besieging Tabalos: and first he reduced to slavery those of Priene, then he overran the whole plain of the Maiander making spoil of it for his army, and Magnesia in the same manner: and straightway after this he fell sick and died.         161. [1] Khioi men nyn Paktuen exedosan. Mazares de meta tauta estrateueto epi tous sympoliorkesantas Tabalon, kai touto men Prieneas exendrapodisato, touto de Maiandroy pedion pan epedrame leien poieumenos tui stratui, Magnesien te usautus. meta de tauta aytika nousui teleytai.    
      162. After he was dead, Harpagos came down to take his place in command, being also a Mede by race (this was the man whom the king of the Medes Astyages feasted with the unlawful banquet, and who helped to give the kingdom to Cyrus). This man, being appointed commander then by Cyrus, came to Ionia and proceeded to take the cities by throwing up mounds against them: for when he had enclosed any people within their walls, then he threw up mounds against the walls and took their city by storm; and the first city of Ionia upon which he made an attempt was Phocaia.         162. [1] apothanontos de toutoy, Arpagos katebe diadoxos teis strategies, genos kai aytos eun Meidos, ton o Medun basileus Astyages anomui trapezei edaise, o tui Kurui ten basileien sygkatergasamenos. [2] oytos uner tote ypo Kuroy strategos apodextheis us apiketo es ten Iunien, airee tas polias xumasi. okus gar teixereas poieseie, to entheuten xumata xun pros ta teixea eporthee.    
      163. Now these Phocaians were the first of the Hellenes who made long voyages, and these are they who discovered the Adriatic and Tyrsenia and Iberia and Tartessos: and they made voyages not in round ships, but in vessels of fifty oars. These came to Tartessos and became friends with the king of the Tartessians whose name was Arganthonios: he was ruler of the Tartessians for eighty years and lived in all one hundred and twenty. With this man, I say, the Phocaians became so exceedingly friendly, that first he bade them leave Ionia and dwell wherever they desired in his own land; and as he did not prevail upon the Phocaians to do this, afterwards, hearing from them of the Mede how his power was increasing, he gave them money to build a wall about their city: and he did this without sparing, for the circuit of the wall is many furlongs in extent, and it is built all of large stones closely fitted together.         163. [1] prutei de Fukaiei Iunies epexeirese. oi de Fukaiees oytoi naytilieisi makreisi prutoi Ellenun exresanto, kai ton te Adrien kai ten Tyrsenien kai ten Iberien kai ton Tartesson oytoi eisi oi katadexantes. [2] enaytillonto de oy strogguleisi neysi alla pentekonteroisi. apikomenoi de es ton Tartesson prosfilees egenonto tui basilei tun Tartessiun, tui oynoma men En, Arganthunios, etyranneyse de Tartessou ogdukonta etea, ebiuse de panta eikosi kai ekaton. [3] toutui de tui andri prosfilees oi Fukaiees oytu de ti egenonto us ta men pruta sfeas eklipontas Iunien ekeleye teis euytou xures oikeisai okoy boulontai. meta de, us touto ge oyk epeithe tous Fukaieas, o de pythomenos ton Meidon par' aytun us ayxoito, edidoy sfi xremata teixos peribalesthai ten polin, [4] edidoy de afeideus. kai gar kai e periodos tou teixeos oyk oligoi stadioi eisi, touto de pan lithun megalun kai ey synarmosmenun.    
      164. The wall of the Phocaians was made in this manner: and Harpagos having marched his army against them began to besiege them, at the same time holding forth to them proposals and saying that it was enough to satisfy him if the Phocaians were willing to throw down one battlement of their wall and dedicate one single house. But the Phocaians, being very greatly grieved at the thought of subjection, said that they wished to deliberate about the matter for one day and after that they would give their answer; and they asked him to withdraw his army from the wall while they were deliberating. Harpagos said that he knew very well what they were meaning to do, nevertheless he was willing to allow them to deliberate. So in the time that followed, when Harpagos had withdrawn his army from the wall, the Phocaians drew down their fifty-oared galleys to the sea, put into them their children and women and all their movable goods, and besides them the images out of the temples and the other votive offerings except such as were made of bronze or stone or consisted of paintings, all the rest, I say, they put into the ships, and having embarked themselves they sailed towards Chios; and the Persians obtained possession of Phocaia, the city being deserted of the inhabitants.         164. [1] to men de teixos toisi Fukaieusi tropui toiude exepoiethe. o de Arpagos us epelase ten stratien, epoliorkee aytous, proisxomenos epea us oi kataxrai ei boulontai Fukaiees promaxeuna ena mounon tou teixeos ereipsai kai oikema en katirusai. [2] oi de Fukaiees periemekteontes tei doylosune efasan thelein boyleusasthai emeren mian kai epeita ypokrineesthai. [3] en ui de boyleuontai aytoi, apagagein ekeinon ekeleyon ten stratien apo tou teixeos. o d' Arpagos efe eidenai men ey ta ekeinoi melloien poieein, omus de sfi parienai boyleusasthai. en ui un o Arpagos apo tou teixeos apegage ten, stratien, oi Fukaiees en toutui kataspasantes tas pentekonteroys, esthemenoi tekna kai gynaikas kai epipla panta, pros de kai ta agalmata ta en tun irun kai ta alla anathemata, xuris o ti xalkos e lithos e grafe En, ta de alla panta esthentes kai aytoi eisbantes epleon epi Khioy. ten de Fukaien eremutheisan andrun esxon oi Persai.    
      165. But as for the Phocaians, since the men of Chios would not sell them at their request the islands called Oinussai, from the fear lest these islands might be made a seat of trade and their island might be shut out, therefore they set out for Kyrnos: for in Kyrnos twenty years before this they had established a city named Alalia, in accordance with an oracle, (now Arganthonios by that time was dead). And when they were setting out for Kyrnos they first sailed to Phocaia and slaughtered the Persian garrison, to whose charge Harpagos had delivered the city; then after they had achieved this they made solemn imprecations on any one of them who should be left behind from their voyage, and moreover they sank a mass of iron in the sea and swore that not until that mass should appear again on the surface would they return to Phocaia. However as they were setting forth to Kyrnos, more than half of the citizens were seized with yearning and regret for their city and for their native land, and they proved false to their oath and sailed back to Phocaia. But those of them who kept the oath still, weighed anchor from the islands of Oinussai and sailed.         165. [1] oi de Fukaiees, epeite sfi Khioi tas nesoys tas Oinoussas kaleomenas oyk eboulonto uneymenoisi puleein, deimainontes me ai men emporion genuntai, e de aytun neisos apokleisthei toutoy eineka, pros tauta oi Fukaies estellonto es Kurnon. en gar tei Kurnui eikosi etesi proteron toutun ek theopropioy anestesanto polin, tei oynoma En Alalie. [2] Arganthunios de tenikauta ede teteleytekee. stellomenoi de epi ten Kurnon, pruta katapleusantes es ten Fukaien katefoneysan tun Perseun ten fylaken, e efrouree paradexamene para Arpagoy ten polin. meta de, us touto sfi exergasto, epoiesanto isxyras kataras tui ypoleipomenui euytun tou stoloy, [3] pros de tauteisi kai mudron sidereon katepontusan kai umosan me prin es Fukaien exein prin e ton mudron touton anafaneinai. stellomenun de aytun epi ten Kurnon, yperemiseas tun astun elabe pothos te kai oiktos teis polios kai tun etheun teis xures, pseydorkioi de genomenoi apepleon opisu es ten Fukaien. oi de aytun to orkion efulasson, aerthentes ek tun Oinoysseun epleon.    
      166. When these came to Kyrnos, for five years they dwelt together with those who had come thither before, and they founded temples there. Then, since they plundered the property of all their neighbours, the Tyrsenians and Carthaginians made expedition against them by agreement with one another, each with sixty ships. And the Phocaians also manned their vessels, sixty in number, and came to meet the enemy in that which is called the Sardinian sea: and when they encountered one another in the sea-fight the Phocaians won a kind of Cadmean victory, for forty of their ships were destroyed and the remaining twenty were disabled, having had their prows bent aside. So they sailed in to Alalia and took up their children and their women and their other possessions as much as their ships proved capable of carrying, and then they left Kyrnos behind them and sailed to Rhegion.         166. [1] epeite de es ten Kurnon apikonto, oikeon koinei meta tun proteron apikomenun ep' etea pente, kai ira enidrusanto. kai Egon gar de kai eferon tous perioikoys apantas, strateuontai un ep' aytous koinui logu xresamenoi Tyrsenoi kai Karxedonioi, neysi ekateroi exekonta. [2] oi de Fukaiees plerusantes kai aytoi ta ploia, eonta arithmon exekonta, antiazon es to Sardonion kaleomenon pelagos. symmisgontun de tei naymaxiei Kadmeie tis nike toisi Fukaieusi egeneto. ai men gar tesserakonta sfi nees dieftharesan, ai de eikosi ai perieousai Esan axrestoi. apestrafato gar tous emboloys. [3] kataplusantes de es ten Alalien anelabon ta tekna kai tas gynaikas kai ten allen kteisin osen oiai te eginonto ai nees sfi agein, kai epeita apentes ten Kurnon epleon es RHegion.    
      167. But as for the crews of the ships that were destroyed, the Carthaginians and Tyrsenians obtained much the greater number of them, and these they brought to land and killed by stoning. After this the men of Agylla found that everything which passed by the spot where the Phocaians were laid after being stoned, became either distorted, or crippled, or paralysed, both small cattle and beasts of burden and human creatures: so the men of Agylla sent to Delphi desiring to purge themselves of the offence; and the Pythian prophetess bade them do that which the men of Agylla still continue to perform, that is to say, they make great sacrifices in honour of the dead, and hold at the place a contest of athletics and horse-racing. These then of the Phocaians had the fate which I have said; but those of them who took refuge at Rhegion started from thence and took possession of that city in the land of Oinotria which now is called Hyele. This they founded having learnt from a man of Poseidonia that the Pythian prophetess by her answer meant them to found a temple to Kyrnos, who was a hero, and not to found a settlement in the island of Kyrnos.         167. [1] tun de diafthareiseun neun tous andras oi te Karxedonioi kai oi Tyrsenoi [dielaxon, tun de Tyrsenun oi Agyllaioi] elaxon te aytun pollui pleistoys kai toutoys exagagontes kateleysan. meta de Agyllaioisi panta ta parionta ton xuron, en tu oi Fukaiees kataleysthentes ekeato, egineto diastrofa kai empera kai apoplekta, omoius probata kai ypozugia kai anthrupoi. [2] oi de Agyllaioi es Delfous epempon boylomenoi akesasthai ten amartada. e de Pythie sfeas ekeleyse poieein ta kai nun oi Agyllaioi eti epiteleoysi. kai gar enagizoysi sfi megalus kai aguna gymnikon kai ippikon epistasi. [3] kai oytoi men tun Fukaieun toioutui morui diexresanto, oi de aytun es to RHegion katafygontes entheuten ormumenoi ektesanto polin geis teis Oinutpies tauten etis nun Yele kaleetai. [4] ektisan de tauten pros andros Poseidunieteu mathontes us ton Kurnon sfi e Pythie exrese ktisai erun eonta, all' oy ten neison. Fukaies men nyn peri teis en Iuniei oytus esxe.   
      168. About Phocaia in Ionia it happened thus, and nearly the same thing also was done by the men of Teos: for as soon as Harpagos took their wall with a mound, they embarked in their ships and sailed straightway for Thrace; and there they founded the city of Abdera, which before them Timesios of Clazomenai founded and had no profit therefrom, but was driven out by the Thracians; and now he is honoured as a hero by the Teians in Abdera.         168. [1] paraplesia de toutoisi kai Teioi epoiesan. epeite gar sfeun eile xumati to teixos Arpagos, esbantes pantes es ta ploia oixonto pleontes epi teis Threikes, kai enthauta ektisan polin Abdera, ten proteros toutun Klazomenios Timesios ktisas oyk aponeto, all' ypo Threikun exelastheis timas nun ypo Teiun tun en Abderoisi us erus exei.    
      169. These alone of all the Ionians left their native cities because they would not endure subjection: but the other Ionians except the Milesians did indeed contend in arms with Harpagos like those who left their homes, and proved themselves brave men, fighting each for his own native city; but when they were defeated and captured they remained all in their own place and performed that which was laid upon them: but the Milesians, as I have also said before, had made a sworn agreement with Cyrus himself and kept still. Thus for the second time Ionia had been reduced to subjection. And when Harpagos had conquered the Ionians on the mainland, then the Ionians who dwelt in the islands, being struck with fear by these things, gave themselves over to Cyrus.         169. [1] oytoi men nyn Iunun mounoi ten doylosunen oyk anexomenoi exelipon tas patridas. oi d' alloi Iunes plen Milesiun dia maxes men apikonto Arpagui kata per oi eklipontes, kai andres egenonto agathoi peri teis euytou ekastos maxomenoi, essuthentes de kai alontes emenon kata xuren ekastoi kai ta epitassomena epeteleon. [2] Milesioi de, us kai proteron moi eretai, aytui Kurui orkion poiesamenoi esyxien Egon. oytu de to deuteron Iunie ededouluto. us de tous en tei epeirui Iunas exeirusato Arpagos, oi tas nesoys exontes Iunes katarrudesantes tauta sfeas aytous edosan Kurui.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [170]

     170. When the Ionians had been thus evilly entreated but were continuing still to hold their gatherings as before at the Panionion, Bias a man of Priene set forth to the Ionians, as I am informed, a most profitable counsel, by following which they might have been the most prosperous of all the Hellenes. He urged that the Ionians should set forth in one common expedition and sail to Sardinia, and after that found a single city for all the Ionians: and thus they would escape subjection and would be prosperous, inhabiting the largest of all islands and being rulers over others; whereas, if they remained in Ionia, he did not perceive, he said, that freedom would any longer exist for them. This was the counsel given by Bias of Priene after the Ionians had been ruined; but a good counsel too was given before the ruin of Ionia by Thales a man of Miletos, who was by descent of Phenician race. He advised the Ionians to have one single seat of government, and that this should be at Teos (for Teos, he said, was in the centre of Ionia), and that the other cities should be inhabited as before, but accounted just as if they were demes. These men set forth to them counsels of the kind which I have said:         170. [1] kekakumenun de Iunun kai syllegomenun oyden Esson es to Paniunion, pynthanomai gnumen Bianta andra Prienea apodexasthai Iusi xresimutaten, tei ei epeithonto, pareixe an sfi eydaimoneein Ellenun malista. [2] os ekeleye koinui stolui Iunas aerthentas pleein es Sardu kai epeita polin mian ktizein pantun Iunun, kai oytu apallaxthentas sfeas doylosunes eydaimonesein, nesun te apaseun megisten nemomenoys kai arxontas allun. menoysi de sfi en tei Iuniei oyk efe enoran eleytherien eti esomenen. [3] ayte men Biantos tou Prieneos gnume epi dieftharmenoisi Iusi genomene, xreste de kai prin e diafthareinai Iunien Thaleu andros Milesioy egeneto, to anekathen genos eontos Foinikos, os ekeleye en boyleyterion Iunas ekteisthai, to de einai en Teui (Teun gar meson einai Iunies), tas de allas polias oikeomenas meden Esson nomizesthai kata per es deimoi eien.   
      171. but Harpagos, after subduing Ionia, proceeded to march against the Carians and Caunians and Lykians, taking also Ionians and Aiolians to help him. Of these the Carians came to the mainland from the islands; for being of old time subjects of Minos and being called Leleges, they used to dwell in the islands, paying no tribute, so far back as I am able to arrive by hearsay, but whenever Minos required it, they used to supply his ships with seamen: and as Minos subdued much land and was fortunate in his fighting, the Carian nation was of all nations by much the most famous at that time together with him. And they produced three inventions of which the Hellenes adopted the use; that is to say, the Carians were those who first set the fashion of fastening crests on helmets, and of making the devices which are put onto shields, and these also were the first who made handles for their shields, whereas up to that time all who were wont to use shields carried them without handles and with leathern straps to guide them, having them hung about their necks and their left shoulders. Then after the lapse of a long time the Dorians and Ionians drove the Carians out of the islands, and so they came to the mainland. With respect to the Carians the Cretans relate that it happened thus; the Carians themselves however do not agree with this account, but suppose that they are dwellers on the mainland from the beginning, and that they went always by the same name which they have now: and they point as evidence of this to an ancient temple of Carian Zeus at Mylasa, in which the Mysians and Lydians share as being brother races of the Carians, for they say that Lydos and Mysos were brothers of Car; these share in it, but those who being of another race have come to speak the same language as the Carians, these have no share in it.         171. [1] oytoi men de sfi gnumas toiasde apedexanto. Arpagos de katastrepsamenos Iunien epoieeto strateien epi Karas kai Kaynioys kai Lykioys, ama agomenos kai Iunas kai Aioleas. [2] eisi de toutun Kares men apigmenoi es ten epeiron ek tun nesun. to gar palaion eontes Minu katekooi kai kaleomenoi Leleges eixon tas nesoys, foron men oydena ypoteleontes, oson kai egu dynatos eimi epi makrotaton exikesthai akoei. oi de, okus Minus deoito, epleroyn oi tas neas. [3] ate de Minu te katestrammenoy gein pollen kai eytyxeontos tui polemui, to Karikon En ethnos logimutaton tun ethneun apantun kata touton ama ton xronon makrui malista. [4] kai sfi trixa exeyremata egeneto, toisi oi Ellenes exresanto. kai gar epi ta kranea lofoys epideesthai Kares eisi oi katadexantes kai epi tas aspidas ta semeia poieesthai, kai oxana aspisi oytoi eisi oi poiesamenoi prutoi. teus de aney oxanun eforeon tas aspidas pantes oi per euthesan aspisi xrasthai, telamusi skytinoisi oiekizontes, peri toisi ayxesi te kai toisi aristeroisi umoisi perikeimenoi. [5] meta de tous Karas xronui ysteron pollui Duriees te kai Iunes exanestesan ek tun nesun, kai oytu es ten epeiron apikonto. kata men de Karas oytu Kreites legoysi genesthai. oy mentoi aytoi ge omologeoysi toutoisi oi Kares, alla nomizoysi aytoi euytous einai aytoxthonas epeirutas, kai tui oynomati tui aytui aiei diaxreumenoys tui per nun. [6] apodeiknusi de en Mylasoisi Dios Karioy iron arxaion, tou Mysoisi men kai Lydoisi metesti us kasignetoisi eousi toisi Karsi. ton gar Lydon kai ton Myson legoysi einai Karos adelfeous. toutoisi men de metesti, osoi de eontes alloy ethneos omoglussoi toisi Karsi egenonto, toutoisi de oy meta.    
      172. It seems to me however that the Caunians are dwellers there from the beginning, though they say themselves that they came from Crete: but they have been assimilated to the Carian race in language, or else the Carians to the Caunian race, I cannot with certainty determine which. They have customs however in which they differ very much from all other men as well as from the Carians; for example the fairest thing in their estimation is to meet together in numbers for drinking, according to equality of age or friendship, both men, women, and children; and again when they had founded temples for foreign deities, afterwards they changed their purpose and resolved to worship only their own native gods, and the whole body of Caunian young men put on their armour and made pursuit as far as the borders of the Calyndians, beating the air with their spears; and they said that they were casting the foreign gods out of the land. Such are the customs which these have.         172. [1] oi de Kaunioi aytoxthones dokeein emoi eisi, aytoi mentoi ek Kretes fasi einai. proskexurekasi de glussan men pros to Karikon ethnos, e oi Kares pros to Kaynikon (touto gar oyk exu atrekeus diakrinai), nomoisi de xreuntai kexurismenoisi pollon tun te allun anthrupun kai Karun. toisi gar kalliston esti kat' elikien te kai filoteta eiladon sygginesthai es posin, kai andrasi kai gynaixi kai paisi. [2] idrythentun de sfi irun xeinikun, metepeita us sfi apedoxe, edoxe de toisi patrioisi mounon, xeasthai theoisi, enduntes ta opla apantes Kaunioi ebedon, tuptontes dorasi ton eera, mexri oyrun tun Kalyndikun eiponto, kai efasan ekballein tous xeinikous theous.    
      173. The Lykians however have sprung originally from Crete (for in old time the whole of Crete was possessed by Barbarians): and when the sons of Europa, Sarpedon and Minos, came to be at variance in Crete about the kingdom, Minos having got the better in the strife of parties drove out both Sarpedon himself and those of his party: and they having been expelled came to the land of Milyas in Asia, for the land which now the Lykians inhabit was anciently called Milyas, and the Milyans were then called Solymoi. Now while Sarpedon reigned over them, they were called by the name which they had when they came thither, and by which the Lykians are even now called by the neighbouring tribes, namely Termilai; but when from Athens Lycos the son of Pandion came to the land of the Termilai and to Sarpedon, he too having been driven out by his brother namely Aigeus, then by the name taken from Lycos they were called after a time Lykians. The customs which these have are partly Cretan and partly Carian; but one custom they have which is peculiar to them, and in which they agree with no other people, that is they call themselves by their mothers and not by their fathers; and if one asks his neighbour who he is, he will state his parentage on the mother's side and enumerate his mother's female ascendants: and if a woman who is a citizen marry a slave, the children are accounted to be of gentle birth; but if a man who is a citizen, though he were the first man among them, have a slave for wife or concubine, the children are without civil rights.         173. [1] kai oytoi men tropoisi toioutoisi xreuntai, oi de Lukioi ek Kretes turxaion gegonasi (ten gar Kreten eixon to palaion pasan barbaroi). [2] dieneixthentun de en Kretei peri teis basileies tun Eyrupes paidun Sarpedonos te kai Minu, us epekratese tei stasi Minus, exelase ayton te Sarpedona kai tous stasiutas aytou, oi de apusthentes apikonto teis Asies es gein ten Milyada. ten gar nun Lukioi nemontai, ayte to palaion En Milyas, oi de Miluai tote Solymoi ekaleonto. [3] eus men de aytun Sarpedun Erxe, oi de ekaleonto to per te eneikanto oynoma kai nyn eti kaleontai ypo tun perioikun oi Lukioi Termilai. us de ex Atheneun Lukos o Pandionos, exelastheis kai oytos ypo tou adelfeou Aigeos, apiketo es tous Termilas para Sarpedona, oytu de kata tou Lukoy ten epunymien Lukioi ana xronon eklethesan. [4] nomoisi de ta men Kretikoisi ta de Karikoisi xreuntai. en de tode idion nenomikasi kai oydamoisi alloisi symferontai anthrupun. kaleoysi apo tun meterun euytous kai oyki apo tun paterun. [5] eiromenoy de eteroy ton plesion tis eie, katalexei euyton metrothen kai teis metros ananemeetai tas meteras. kai en men ge gyne aste doului synoikesei, gennaia ta tekna nenomistai. en de aner astos kai o prutos aytun gynaika xeinen e pallaken exei, atima ta tekna ginetai.    
      174. Now the Carians were reduced to subjection by Harpagos without any brilliant deed displayed either by the Carians themselves or by those of the Hellenes who dwell in this land. Of these last there are besides others the men of Cnidos, settlers from Lacedemon, whose land runs out into the sea, being in fact the region which is called Triopion, beginning from the peninsula of Bybassos: and since all the land of Cnidos except a small part is washed by the sea (for the part of it which looks towards the North is bounded by the Gulf of Keramos, and that which looks to the South by the sea off Syme and Rhodes), therefore the men of Cnidos began to dig through this small part, which is about five furlongs across, while Harpagos was subduing Ionia, desiring to make their land an island: and within the isthmus all was theirs, for where the territory of Cnidos ends in the direction of the mainland, here is the isthmus which they were digging across. And while the Cnidians were working at it with a great number of men, it was perceived that the men who worked suffered injury much more than might have been expected and in a more supernatural manner, both in other parts of their bodies and especially in their eyes, when the rock was being broken up; so they sent men to ask the Oracle at Delphi what the cause of the difficulty was. And the Pythian prophetess, as the men of Cnidos themselves report, gave them this reply in trimeter verse:-- 
"Fence not the place with towers, nor dig the isthmus through; 
 Zeus would have made your land an island, had he willed." When the Pythian prophetess had given this oracle, the men of Cnidos not only ceased from their digging but delivered themselves to Harpagos without resistance, when he came against them with his army.         174. [1] oi men nyn Kares oyden lampron ergon apodexamenoi edoyluthesan ypo Arpagoy, oyte aytoi oi Kares apodexamenoi oyden, oyte osoi Ellenun tauten ten xuren oikeoysi. [2] oikeoysi de kai alloi kai Lakedaimoniun apoikoi Knidioi. oi teis xures teis sfeteres tetrammenes es ponton, to de Triopion kaleetai, argmenes de ek teis Khersonesoy teis Bybassies, eouses te pases teis Knidies plen oliges perirrooy [3] (ta men gar ayteis pros boreen anemon o Kerameikos kolpos apergei, ta de pros noton e kata Sumen te kai RHodon thalassa), to un de oligon touto, eon oson te epi pente stadia, urysson oi Knidioi en osui Arpagos ten Iunien katestrefeto, boylomenoi neison ten xuren poieisai. entos de pasa sfi egineto. tei gar e Knidie xure es ten epeiron teleytai, tautei o isthmos esti ton urysson. [4] kai de pollei, xeiri ergazomenun tun Knidiun, mallon gar ti kai theioteron efainonto titruskesthai oi ergazomenoi tou oikotos ta te alla tou sumatos kai malista ta peri tous ofthalmous thrayomenes teis petres, epempon es Delfous theopropoys epeiresomenoys to antixoon. [5] e de Pythie sfi, us aytoi Knidioi legoysi, xrai en trimetrui tonui tade.     Isthmon de me pyrgoute med' orussete.
      Zeus gar k' etheke neison, ei k' ebouleto.[6] Knidioi men tauta teis Pythies xresases tou te orugmatos epausanto kai Arpagui epionti sun tui stratui amaxeti sfeas aytous paredosan.    
      175. There were also the Pedasians, who dwelt in the inland country above Halicarnassos; and among these, whenever anything hurtful is about to happen either to themselves or to their neighbours, the priestess of Athene has a great beard: this befell them three times. These of all about Caria were the only men who held out for any time against Harpagos, and they gave him trouble more than any other people, having fortified a mountain called Lide.         175. [1] Esan de Pedasees oikeontes yper Alikarnessou mesogaian. toisi okus ti melloi anepitedeon esesthai, aytoisi te kai toisi perioikoisi, e ireie teis Athenaies puguna megan isxe. tris sfi touto egeneto. oytoi tun peri Karien andrun mounoi te antesxon xronon Arpagui kai pregmata paresxon pleista, oros teixisantes tui oynoma esti Lide.    
      176. After a time the Pedasians were conquered; and the Lykians, when Harpagos marched his army into the plain of Xanthos, came out against him and fought, few against many, and displayed proofs of valour; but being defeated and confined within their city, they gathered together into the citadel their wives and their children, their property and their servants, and after that they set fire to this citadel, so that it was all in flames, and having done so and sworn terrible oaths with one another, they went forth against the enemy and were slain in fight, that is to say all the men of Xanthos: and of the Xanthians who now claim to be Lykians the greater number have come in from abroad, except only eighty households; but these eighty households happened at that time to be away from their native place, and so they escaped destruction. Thus Harpagos obtained possession of Caunos, for the men of Caunos imitated in most respects the behaviour of the Lykians.         176. [1] Pedasees men nyn xronui exairethesan. Lukioi de, us es to Xanthion pedion elase o Arpagos ton straton, epexiontes kai maxomenoi oligoi pros pollous aretas apedeiknynto, essuthentes de kai kateilethentes es to asty synelisan es ten akropolin tas te gynaikas kai ta tekna kai ta xremata kai tous oiketas, kai epeita ypeipsan ten akropolin pasan tauten kaiesthai. [2] tauta de poiesantes kai synomosantes orkoys deinous, epexelthontes apethanon pantes Xanthioi maxomenoi. [3] tun de nun Lykiun famenun Xanthiun einai oi polloi, plen ogdukonta istieun, eisi epelydes. ai de ogdukonta istiai aytai etyxon tenikauta ekdemeoysi kai oytu periegenonto. ten men de Xanthon oytu esxe o Arpagos, paraplesius de kai ten Kaunon esxe. kai gar oi Kaunioi tous Lykioys emimesanto ta pleu.    
      177. So Harpagos was conquering the coast regions of Asia; and Cyrus himself meanwhile was doing the same in the upper parts of it, subduing every nation and passing over none. Now most of these actions I shall pass over in silence, but the undertakings which gave him trouble more than the rest and which are the most worthy of note, of these I shall make mention.         177. [1] ta men nyn katu teis Asies Arpagos anastata epoiee, ta de anu ayteis aytos Kuros, pan ethnos katastrefomenos kai oyden parieis. ta men nyn aytun pleu paresomen. ta de oi paresxe te ponon pleiston kai axiapegetotata esti, toutun epimnesomai.    
      178. Cyrus, so soon as he had made subject to himself all other parts of the mainland, proceeded to attack the Assyrians. Now Assyria has doubtless many other great cities, but the most famous and the strongest, and the place where the seat of their monarchy had been established after Nineveh was destroyed, was Babylon; which was a city such as I shall say.--It lies in a great plain, and in size it is such that each face measures one hundred and twenty furlongs, the shape of the whole being square; thus the furlongs of the circuit of the city amount in all to four hundred and eighty. Such is the size of the city of Babylon, and it had a magnificence greater than all other cities of which we have knowledge. First there runs round it a trench deep and broad and full of water; then a wall fifty royal cubits in thickness and two hundred cubits in height: now the royal cubit is larger by three fingers than the common cubit.         178. [1] Kuros epeite ta panta teis epeiroy ypoxeiria epoiesato, Assyrioisi epetitheto. teis de Assyries esti men koy kai alla polismata megala polla, to de onomastotaton kai isxyrotaton kai entha sfi Ninoy anastatoy genomenes ta basileia katestekee, En Babylun, eousa toiaute de tis polis. [2] keetai en pediui megalui, megathos eousa metupon ekaston eikosi kai ekaton stadiun, eouses tetragunoy. oytoi stadioi teis periodoy teis polios ginontai synapantes ogdukonta kai tetrakosioi, to men nyn megathos tosouton esti tou asteos tou Babylunioy, ekekosmeto de us oyden allo polisma tun emeis idmen. [3] tafros men pruta min bathea te kai eyrea kai plee ydatos peritheei, meta de teixos pentekonta men pexeun basileiun eon to eyros, ypsos de diekosiun pexeun. o de basileios peixys tou metrioy esti pexeos mezun trisi daktuloisi.    
      179. I must also tell in addition to this for what purpose the earth was used, which was taken out of the trench, and in what manner the wall was made. As they dug the trench they made the earth which was carried out of the excavation into bricks, and having moulded enough bricks they baked them in kilns; and then afterwards, using hot asphalt for mortar and inserting reed mats at every thirty courses of brickwork, they built up first the edges of the trench and then the wall itself in the same manner: and at the top of the wall along the edges they built chambers of one story facing one another; and between the rows of chambers they left space to drive a four-horse chariot. In the circuit of the wall there are set a hundred gates made of bronze throughout, and the gate- posts and lintels likewise. Now there is another city distant from Babylon a space of eight days' journey, of which the name is Is; and there is a river there of no great size, and the name of the river is also Is, and it sends its stream into the river Euphrates. This river Is throws up together with its water lumps of asphalt in great abundance, and thence was brought the asphalt for the wall of Babylon.         179. [1] dei de me pros toutoisi eti frasai ina te ek teis tafroy e gei anaisimuthe, kai to teixos ontina tropon ergasto. orussontes ama ten tafron eplintheyon ten gein ten ek tou orugmatos ekferomenen, elkusantes de plinthoys ikanas uptesan aytas en kaminoisi. [2] meta de telmati xreumenoi asfaltui thermei kai dia triekonta domun plinthoy tarsous kalamun diastoibazontes, edeiman pruta men teis tafoy ta xeilea, deytera de ayto to teixos ton ayton tropon. [3] epanu de tou teixeos para ta esxata oikemata moynokula edeiman, tetrammena es allela. to meson de tun oikematun elipon tethrippui perielasin. pulai de enestasi perix tou teixeos ekaton, xalkeai pasai, kai stathmoi te kai yperthyra usautus. [4] esti de alle polis apexoysa oktu emereun odon apo Babylunos. Is oynoma aytei. entha esti potamos oy megas. Is kai tui potamui to oynoma. esballei de oytos es ton Eyfreten potamon to rheethron. oytos un o Is potamos ama tui, ydati thromboys asfaltoy anadidoi pollous, enthen e asfaltos es to en Babyluni teixos ekomisthe.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [180]

     180. Babylon then was walled in this manner; and there are two divisions of the city; for a river whose name is Euphrates parts it in the middle. This flows from the land of the Armenians and is large and deep and swift, and it flows out into the Erythraian sea. The wall then on each side has its bends carried down to the river, and from this point the return walls stretch along each bank of the stream in the form of a rampart of baked bricks: and the city itself is full of houses of three and four stories, and the roads by which it is cut up run in straight lines, including the cross roads which lead to the river; and opposite to each road there were set gates in the rampart which ran along the river, in many in number as the ways, and these also were of bronze and led like the ways to the river itself.         180. [1] eteteixisto men nyn e Babylun tropui toiuide, esti de duo farsea teis polios. to gar meson ayteis potamos diergei, tui oynoma esti Eyfretes. rheei de ex Armeniun, eun megas kai bathus kai taxus. exiei de oytos es ten Erythren thalassan. [2] to un de teixos ekateron tous agkunas es ton potamon elelatai. to de apo toutoy ai epikampai para xeilos ekateron tou potamou aimasie plinthun opteun parateinei. [3] to de asty ayto, eon pleires oikieun triurofun kai tetrurofun, katatetmetai tas odous itheas tas te allas kai tas epikarsias tas epi ton potamon exousas. [4] kata de un ekasten odon en tei aimasiei tei para ton potamon pylides epeisan, osai per ai laurai, tosautai arithmon. Esan de kai aytai xalkeai .... feroysai [kai aytai] es ayton ton potamon.    
      181. This wall then which I have mentioned is as it were a cuirass for the town, and another wall runs round within it, not much weaker for defence than the first but enclosing a smaller space. And in each division of the city was a building in the midst, in the one the king's palace of great extent and strongly fortified round, and in the other the temple of Zeus Belos with bronze gates, and this exists still up to my time and measures two furlongs each way, being of a square shape: and in the midst of the temple is built a solid tower measuring a furlong both in length and in breadth, and on this tower another tower has been erected, and another again upon this, and so on up to the number of eight towers. An ascent to these has been built running outside round about all the towers; and when one reaches about the middle of the ascent one finds a stopping-place and seats to rest upon, on which those who ascend sit down and rest: and on the top of the last tower there is a large cell, and in the cell a large couch is laid, well covered, and by it is placed a golden table: and there is no image there set up nor does any human being spend the night there except only one woman of the natives of the place, whomsoever the god shall choose from all the woman, as say the Chaldeans who are the priests of this god.         181. [1] touto men de to teixos thurex esti, eteron de esuthen teixos peritheei, oy pollui teui asthenesteron tou eteroy teixeos, steinoteron de. [2] en de farsei ekaterui teis polios eteteixisto en mesui en tui men ta basileia peribolui megalui te kai isxyrui, en de tui eterui Dios Beloy iron xalkopylon, kai es eme eti touto eon, duo stadiun pantei, eon tetragunon. [3] en mesui de tou irou purgos stereos oikodometai, stadioy kai to meikos kai to eyros, kai epi toutui tui purgui allos purgos epibebeke, kai eteros mala epi toutui, mexri oy oktu purgun. [4] anabasis de es aytous exuthen kuklui peri pantas tous purgoys exoysa pepoietai. mesounti de koy teis anabasios esti kataguge te kai thukoi ampaysterioi, en toisi katizontes ampauontai oi anabainontes. [5] en de tui teleytaiui purgui neos epesti megas. en de tui neui kline megale keetai ey estrumene, kai oi trapeza parakeetai xrysee. agalma de oyk eni oyden aytothi enidrymenon, oyde nukta oydeis enaylizetai anthrupun oti me gyne moune tun epixuriun, ten an o theos eletai ek paseun, us legoysi oi Khaldaioi eontes irees toutoy tou theou.    
      182. These same men say also, but I do not believe them, that the god himself comes often to the cell and rests upon the couch, as happens likewise in the Egyptian Thebes according to the report of the Egyptians, for there also a woman sleeps in the temple of the Theban Zeus (and both these women are said to abstain from commerce with men), and as happens also with the prophetess of the god in Patara of Lykia, whenever there is one, for there is not always an Oracle there, but whenever there is one, then she is shut up during the nights in the temple within the cell.         182. [1] fasi de oi aytoi oytoi, emoi men oy pista legontes, ton theon ayton foitan te es ton neon kai ampauesthai epi teis klines, kata per en Thebeisi teisi Aigyptieisi kata ton ayton tropon, us legoysi oi Aiguptioi. [2] kai gar de ekeithi koimatai en tui tou Dios tou Thebaieos gyne, amfoterai de aytai legontai andrun oydamun es omilien foitan. kai kata per en Pataroisi teis Lykies e promantis tou theou, epean genetai. oy gar un aiei esti xresterion aytothi. epean de genetai tote un sygkatakleietai tas nuktas esu en tui neui.    
      183. There is moreover in the temple at Babylon another cell below, wherein is a great image of Zeus sitting, made of gold, and by it is placed a large table of gold, and his footstool and seat are of gold also; and, as the Chaldeans reported, the weight of the gold of which these things are made is eight hundred talents. Outside this cell is an altar of gold; and there is also another altar of great size, where full-grown animals are sacrificed, whereas on the golden altar it is not lawful to sacrifice any but young sucklings only: and also on the larger altar the Chaldeans offer one thousand talents of frankincense every year at the time when they celebrate the feast in honour of this god. There was moreover in these precincts still remaining at the time of Cyrus, a statue twelve cubits high, of gold and solid. This I did not myself see, but that which is related by the Chaldeans I relate. Against this statue Dareios the son of Hystaspes formed a design, but he did not venture to take it: it was taken however by Xerxes the son of Dareios, who also killed the priest when he forbade him to meddle with the statue. This temple, then, is thus adorned with magnificence, and there are also many private votive-offerings.         183. [1] esti de tou en Babuluni irou kai allos katu neos, entha agalma mega tou Dios eni katemenon xruseon, kai oi trapeza megale parakeetai xrysee, kai to bathron oi kai o thronos xruseos esti. kai us elegon oi Khaldaioi, talantun oktakosiun xrysioy pepoietai tauta. [2] exu de tou neou bumos esti xruseos, esti de kai allos bumos megas, ep' oy thuetai ta telea tun probatun. epi gar tou xryseoy bumou oyk exesti thuein oti me galathena mounai, epi de tou mezonos bumou kai katagizoysi libanutou xilia talanta eteos ekastoy oi Khaldaioi tote epean ten orten agusi tui theui toutui. En de en tui temenei toutui eti ton xronon ekeinon kai andrias dyudeka pexeun xruseos stereos. [3] egu men min oyk eidon, ta de legetai ypo Khaldaiun, tauta legu. toutui tui andrianti Dareios men o Ystaspeos epiboyleusas oyk etolmese labein, Xerxes de o Dareioy elabe kai ton irea apekteine apagoreuonta me kineein ton andrianta. to men de iron touto oytu kekosmetai, esti de kai idia anathemata polla.    
      184. Of this Babylon, besides many other rulers, of whom I shall make mention in the Assyrian history, and who added improvement to the walls and temples, there were also two who were women. Of these, the one who ruled first, named Semiramis, who lived five generations before the other, produced banks of earth in the plain which are a sight worth seeing; and before this the river used to flood like a sea over the whole plain.         184. [1] teis de Babylunos tautes polloi men koy kai alloi egenonto basilees, tun en toisi Assyrioisi logoisi mnemen poiesomai, oi ta teixea te epekosmesan kai ta ira, en de de kai gynaikes duo. e men proteron arxasa, teis ysteron geneeisi pente proteron genomene, tei oynoma En Semiramis, ayte men apedexato xumata ana to pedion eonta axiotheeta. proteron de euthee o potamos ana to pedion pan pelagizein.    
      185. The queen who lived after her time, named Nitocris, was wiser than she who had reigned before; and in the first place she left behind her monuments which I shall tell of; then secondly, seeing that the monarchy of the Medes was great and not apt to remain still, but that besides other cities even Nineveh had been captured by it, she made provision against it in so far as she was able. First, as regards the river Euphrates which flows through the midst of their city, whereas before this it flowed straight, she by digging channels above made it so winding that it actually comes three times in its course to one of the villages in Assyria; and the name of the village to which the Euphrates comes is Ardericca; and at this day those who travel from this Sea of ours to Babylon, in their voyage down the river Euphrates arrive three times at this same village and on three separate days. This she did thus; and she also piled up a mound along each bank of the river, which is worthy to cause wonder for its size and height: and at a great distance above Babylon, she dug a basin for a lake, which she caused to extend along at a very small distance from the river, excavating it everywhere of such depth as to come to water, and making the extent such that the circuit of it measured four hundred and twenty furlongs: and the earth which was dug out of this excavation she used up by piling it in mounds along the banks of the river: and when this had been dug by her she brought stones and set them all round it as a facing wall. Both these two things she did, that is she made the river to have a winding course, and she made the place which was dug out all into a swamp, in order that the river might run more slowly, having its force broken by going round many bends, and that the voyages might be winding to Babylon, and after the voyages there might succeed a long circuit of the pool. These works she carried out in that part where the entrance to the country was, and the shortest way to it from Media, so that the Medes might not have dealings with her kingdom and learn of her affairs.         185. [1] e de de deuteron genomene tautes basileia, tei oynoma En Nitukris, ayte de synetutere genomene teis proteron arxases touto men mnemosyna elipeto ta egu apegesomai, touto de ten Medun orusa arxen megalen te kai oyk atremizoysan, all' alla te arairemena astea aytoisi, en de de kai ten Ninon, proefylaxato osa edunato malista. [2] pruta men ton Eyfreten potamon rheonta proteron ithun, os sfi dia teis polios meses rheei, touton anuthen diuryxas oruxasa oytu de ti epoiese skolion uste de tris es tun tina kumeun tun en tei Assyriei apikneetai rheun. tei de kumei oynoma esti, es ten apikneetai o Eyfretes, Arderikka. kai nun oi an komizuntai apo teisde teis thalasses es Babyluna, katapleontes ton Eyfreten potamon tris te es ten ayten tauten kumen paraginontai kai en trisi emereisi. [3] touto men de toiouton epoiese, xuma de parexuse par' ekateron tou potamou to xeilos axion thumatos megathos kai ypsos oson ti esti. [4] katuperthe de pollui Babylunos urysse elytron limnei, oligon ti parateinoysa apo tou potamou, bathos men es to ydur aiei orussoysa, eyros de to perimetron aytou poieusa eikosi te kai tetrakosiun stadiun. ton de oryssomenon xoun ek toutoy tou orugmatos anaisimoy para ta xeilea tou potamou paraxeoysa. [5] epeite de oi orurykto, lithoys agagomene krepida kuklui peri ayten elase. [6] epoiee de amfotera tauta, ton te potamon skolion kai to orygma pan elos, us o te potamos braduteros eie peri kampas pollas agnumenos, kai oi plooi eusi skolioi es ten Babyluna, ek te tun ploun ekdeketai periodos teis limnes makre. [7] kata touto de ergazeto teis xures tei ai te esbolai Esan kai ta suntoma teis ek Medun odou, ina me epimisgomenoi oi Meidoi ekmanthanoien ayteis ta pregmata.    
      186. These defences she cast round her city from the depth; and she made the following addition which was dependent upon them:--The city was in two divisions, and the river occupied the space between; and in the time of the former rulers, when any one wished to pass over from the one division to the other, he had to pass over in a boat, and that, as I imagine, was troublesome: she however made provision also for this; for when she was digging the basin for the lake she left this other monument of herself derived from the same work, that is, she caused stones to be cut of very great length, and when the stones were prepared for her and the place had been dug out, she turned aside the whole stream of the river into the place which she had been digging; and while this was being filled with water, the ancient bed of the river being dried up in the meantime, she both built up with baked bricks after the same fashion as the wall the edges of the river, where it flows through the city, and the places of descent leading from the small gateways to the river; and also about the middle of the city, as I judge, with the stones which she had caused to be dug out she proceeded to build a bridge, binding together the stones with iron and lead: and upon the top she laid squared timbers across, to remain there while it was daytime, over which the people of Babylon made the passage across; but at night they used to take away these timbers for this reason, namely that they might not go backwards and forwards by night and steal from one another: and when the place dug out had been made into a lake full of water by the river, and at the same time the bridge had been completed, then she conducted the Euphrates back into its ancient channel from the lake, and so the place dug out being made into a swamp was thought to have served a good purpose, and there had been a bridge set up for the men of the city.         186. [1] tauta men de ek batheos periebaleto, toiende de ex aytun parentheken epoiesato. teis polios eouses duo farseun, tou de potamou meson exontos, epi tun proteron basileun okus tis etheloi ek tou eteroy farseos es toyteron diabeinai, xrein ploiui diabainein, kai En, us egu dokeu, oxleron touto. ayte de kai touto proeide. epeite gar urysse to elytron tei limnei, mnemosynon tode allo apo tou aytou ergoy elipeto. [2] etamneto lithoys perimekeas, us de oi Esan oi lithoi etoimoi kai to xurion orurykto, ektrepsasa tou potamou to rheethron pan es to urysse xurion, en ui epimplato touto, en toutu apexerasmenoy tou arxaioy rheethroy touto men ta xeilea tou potamou kata ten polin kai tas katabasias tas ek tun pylidun es ton potamon ferousas anoikodomese plinthoisi opteisi kata ton ayton logon tui teixei, touto de kata mesen koy malista ten polin toisi lithoisi tous uruxato oikodomee gefyran, deoysa tous lithoys siderui te kai molubdui. [3] epiteineske de ep' ayten, okus men emere ginoito, xula tetraguna, ep' un ten diabasin epoieunto oi Babylunioi. tas de nuktas ta xula tauta apaireeskon toude eineka, ina me diafoiteontes tas nuktas kleptoien par' allelun. [4] us de to te oryxthen limne pleres egegonee ypo tou potamou kai ta peri ten gefyran ekekosmeto, ton Eyfreten potamon es ta arxaia rheethra ek teis limnes exegage, kai oytu to oryxthen elos genomenon es deon edokee gegonenai kai toisi polieteisi gefyra En kateskeyasmene.    
      187. This same queen also contrived a snare of the following kind:-- Over that gate of the city through which the greatest number of people passed she set up for herself a tomb above the very gate itself. And on the tomb she engraved writing which said thus: "If any of the kings of Babylon who come after me shall be in want of wealth, let him open my tomb and take as much as he desires; but let him not open it for any other cause, if he be not in want; for that will not be well." This tomb was undisturbed until the kingdom came to Dareios; but to Dareios it seemed that it was a monstrous thing not to make any use of this gate, and also, when there was money lying there, not to take it, considering that the money itself invited him to do so. Now the reason why he would not make any use of this gate was because the corpse would have been above his head as he drove through. He then, I say, opened the tomb and found not indeed money but the corpse, with writing which said thus: "If thou hadst not been insatiable of wealth and basely covetous, thou wouldest not have opened the resting-places of the dead."         187. [1] e d' ayte ayte basileia kai apaten toiende tina emexanesato. yper tun malista leuforun pyleun tou asteos tafon euytei kateskeyasato meteuron epipoleis ayteun tun pyleun, enekolapse de es ton tafon grammata legonta tade. [2] <<tun tis emeu ysteron ginomenun Babylunos basileun en spanisei xrematun, anoixas ton tafon labetu okosa bouletai xremata. me mentoi ge me spanisas ge allus anoixei. oy gar ameinon.>> [3] oytos o tafos En akinetos mexri oy es Dareion perieilthe e basileie. Dareiui de kai deinon edokee einai teisi puleisi tauteisi meden xrasthai, kai xrematun keimenun kai aytun tun grammatun epikaleomenun, me oy labein ayta. [4] teisi de puleisi tauteisi oyden exrato toude eineka, oti yper kefaleis oi egineto o nekros diexelaunonti. [5] anoixas de ton tafon eyre xremata men oy, ton de nekron kai grammata legonta tade. <<ei me aplestos te eas xrematun kai aisxrokerdes, oyk an nekrun thekas aneuiges.>> ayte men nyn e basileia toiaute tis legetai genesthai.    
      188. This queen then is reported to have been such as I have described: and it was the son of this woman, bearing the same name as his father, Labynetos, and being ruler over the Assyrians, against whom Cyrus was marching. Now the great king makes his marches not only well furnished from home with provisions for his table and with cattle, but also taking with him water from the river Choaspes, which flows by Susa, of which alone and of no other river the king drinks: and of this water of the Choaspes boiled, a very great number of waggons, four-wheeled and drawn by mules, carry a supply in silver vessels, and go with him wherever he may march at any time.         188. [1] o de de Kuros epi tautes teis gynaikos ton paida estrateueto, exonta te tou patros tou euytou toynoma Labynetoy kai ten Assyriun arxen. strateuetai de de basileus o megas kai sitioisi ey eskeyasmenos ex oikoy kai probatoisi, kai de kai ydur apo tou Khoaspeu potamou ama agetai tou para Sousa rheontos, tou mounoy pinei basileus kai alloy oydenos potamou. [2] toutoy de tou Khoaspeu tou ydatos apepsemenoy pollai karta amaxai tetrakykloi emioneai komizoysai en aggeioisi argyreoisi epontai, okei an elaunei ekastote.    
      189. Now when Cyrus on his way towards Babylon arrived at the river Gyndes,--of which river the springs are in the mountains of the Matienians, and it flows through the Dardanians and runs into another river, the Tigris, which flowing by the city of Opis runs out into the Erythraian Sea,-- when Cyrus, I say, was endeavouring to cross this river Gyndes, which is a navigable stream, then one of his sacred white horses in high spirit and wantonness went into the river and endeavoured to cross, but the stream swept it under water and carried it off forthwith. And Cyrus was greatly moved with anger against the river for having done thus insolently, and he threatened to make it so feeble that for the future even women could cross it easily without wetting the knee. So after this threat he ceased from his march against Babylon and divided his army into two parts; and having divided it he stretched lines and marked out straight channels, one hundred and eighty on each bank of the Gyndes, directed every way, and having disposed his army along them he commanded them to dig: so, as a great multitude was working, the work was completed indeed, but they spent the whole summer season at this spot working.         189. [1] epeite de o Kuros poreyomenos epi ten Babyluna egineto epi Gundei potamui, tou ai men pegai en Matienoisi oresi, rheei de dia Dardaneun, ekdidoi de es eteron potamon Tigren, o de para Upin polin rheun es ten Erythren thalassan ekdidoi, touton de ton Gunden potamon us diabainein epeirato o Kuros eonta neysipereton, enthauta oi tun tis irun ippun tun leykun ypo ybrios esbas es ton potamon diabainein epeirato, o de min sympsesas ypobruxion oixukee ferun. [2] karta te de exalepaine tui potamui o Kuros touto ybrisanti, kai oi epepeilese oytu de min asthenea poiesein uste tou loipou kai gynaikas min eypeteus to gony oy brexousas diabesesthai. [3] meta de ten apeilen meteis ten epi Babyluna strateysin diairee ten stratien dixa, dielun de kateteine sxoinoteneas ypodexas diuryxas ogdukonta kai ekaton par' ekateron to xeilos tou Gundeu tetrammenas panta tropon, diataxas de ton straton orussein ekeleye. [4] oia de omiloy pollou ergazomenoy eneto men to ergon, omus mentoi ten thereien pasan aytou tautei dietripsan ergazomenoi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [190]

     190. When Cyrus had taken vengeance on the river Gyndes by dividing it into three hundred and sixty channels, and when the next spring was just beginning, then at length he continued his advance upon Babylon: and the men of Babylon had marched forth out of their city and were awaiting him. So when in his advance he came near to the city, the Babylonians joined battle with him, and having been worsted in the fight they were shut up close within their city. But knowing well even before this that Cyrus was not apt to remain still, and seeing him lay hands on every nation equally, they had brought in provisions beforehand for very many years. So while these made no account of the siege, Cyrus was in straits what to do, for much time went by and his affairs made no progress onwards.         190. [1] us de ton Gunden potamon etisato Kuros es triekosias kai exekonta diuryxas min dialabun, kai to deuteron ear ypelampe, oytu de elayne epi ten Babyluna. oi de Babylunioi ekstrateysamenoi emenon ayton. epei de egeneto elaunun agxou teis polios, synebalon te oi Babylunioi kai essuthentes tei maxei kateilethesan es to asty. [2] oia de exepistamenoi eti proteron ton Kuron oyk atremizonta, all' oreontes ayton panti ethnei omoius epixeireonta, proesaxanto sitia eteun karta pollun. enthauta oytoi men logon eixon teis poliorkies oydena, Kuros de aporieisi eneixeto, ate xronoy te egginomenoy syxnou anuteru te oyden tun pregmatun prokoptomenun.    
      191. Therefore, whether it was some other man who suggested it to him when he was in a strait what to do, or whether he of himself perceived what he ought to do, he did as follows:--The main body of his army he posted at the place where the river runs into the city, and then again behind the city he set others, where the river issues forth from the city; and he proclaimed to his army that so soon as they should see that the stream had become passable, they should enter by this way into the city. Having thus set them in their places and in this manner exhorted them he marched away himself with that part of his army which was not fit for fighting: and when he came to the lake, Cyrus also did the same things which the queen of the Babylonians had done as regards the river and the lake; that is to say, he conducted the river by a channel into the lake, which was at that time a swamp, and so made the former course of the river passable by the sinking of the stream. When this had been done in such a manner, the Persians who had been posted for this very purpose entered by the bed of the river Euphrates into Babylon, the stream having sunk so far that it reached about to the middle of a man's thigh. Now if the Babylonians had had knowledge of it beforehand or had perceived that which was being done by Cyrus, they would have allowed the Persians to enter the city and then destroyed them miserably; for if they had closed all the gates that led to the river and mounted themselves upon the ramparts which were carried along the banks of the stream, they would have caught them as it were in a fish- wheal: but as it was, the Persians came upon them unexpectedly; and owing to the size of the city (so it is said by those who dwell there) after those about the extremities of the city had suffered capture, those Babylonians who dwelt in the middle did not know that they had been captured; but as they chanced to be holding a festival, they went on dancing and rejoicing during this time until they learnt the truth only too well. Babylon then had thus been taken for the first time:         191. [1] eite de un allos oi aporeonti ypethekato, eite kai aytos emathe to poieteon oi En, epoiee de toionde. [2] taxas ten stratien apasan ex emboleis tou potamou, tei es ten polin esballei, kai opisthe aytis teis polios taxas eteroys, tei exiei ek teis polios o potamos, proeipe tui stratui, otan diabaton to rheethron iduntai genomenon, esienai tautei es ten polin. oytu te de taxas kai kata tauta parainesas apelayne aytos sun tui axreiui tou stratou. [3] apikomenos de epi ten limnen, ta per e tun Babyluniun basileia epoiese kata te ton potamon kai kata ten limnen, epoiee kai o Kuros etera toiauta. ton gar potamon diuryxi esagagun es ten limnen eousan elos, to arxaion rheethron diabaton einai epoiese, yponostesantos tou potamou. [4] genomenoy de toutoy toioutoy, oi Persai oi per etetaxato ep' aytui toutui kata to rheethron tou Eyfreteu potamou yponenostekotos andri us es meson meron malista kei, kata touto eseisan es ten Babyluna. [5] ei men nyn proeputhonto e emathon oi Babylunioi to ek tou Kuroy poieumenon, oi d' an periidontes tous Persas eselthein es ten polin dieftheiran an kakista. katakleisantes gar an pasas tas es ton potamon pylidas exousas kai aytoi epi tas aimasias anabantes tas para ta xeilea tou potamou elelamenas, elabon an sfeas us en kurtei. [6] nun de ex aprosdoketoy sfi parestesan oi Persai. ypo de megatheos teis polios, us legetai ypo tun tautei oikemenun, tun peri ta esxata teis polios ealukotun tous to meson oikeontas tun Babyluniun oy manthanein ealukotas, alla tyxein gar sfi eousan orten, xoreuein te touton ton xronon kai en eypatheieisi einai, es o de kai to karta eputhonto. kai Babylun men oytu tote pruton araireto.   
      192. and as to the resources of the Babylonians how great they are, I shall show by many other proofs and among them also by this:--For the support of the great king and his army, apart from the regular tribute the whole land of which he is ruler has been distributed into portions. Now whereas twelve months go to make up the year, for four of these he has his support from the territory of Babylon, and for the remaining eight months from the whole of the rest of Asia; thus the Assyrian land is in regard to resources the third part of all Asia: and the government, or satrapy as it is called by the Persians, of this territory is of all the governments by far the best; seeing that when Tritantaichmes son of Artabazos had this province from the king, there came in to him every day an artab full of silver coin (now the artab is a Persian measure and holds more than the medimnos of Attica by three Attic choinikes); and of horses he had in this province as his private property, apart from the horses for use in war, eight hundred stallions and sixteen thousand mares, for each of these stallions served twenty mares: of Indian hounds moreover such a vast number were kept that four large villages in the plain, being free from other contributions, had been appointed to provide food for the hounds.         192. [1] ten de dunamin tun Babyluniun polloisi men kai alloisi delusu ose tis esti, en de de kai tuide. basilei tui megalui es trofen aytou te kai teis stratieis diarairetai, parex tou foroy, gei pasa oses arxei. dyudeka un menun eontun es ton eniayton tous tesseras meinas trefei min e Babylunie xurei, tous de oktu tun menun e loipe pasa Asie. [2] oytu tritemorie e Assyrie xure tei dynami teis alles Asies. kai e arxe teis xures tautes, ten oi Persai satrapeien kaleoysi, esti apaseun tun arxeun pollon ti kratiste, okoy Tritantaixmei tui Artabazoy ek basileos exonti ton nomon touton argyrioy men proseie ekastes emeres artabe meste. [3] e de artabe, metron eon Persikon, xureei medimnoy Attikou pleon xoinixi trisi Attikeisi, ippoi de oi aytou Esan idiei, parex tun polemisteriun, oi men anabainontes tas theleas oktakosioi, ai de bainomenai exakisxiliai kai myriai. anebaine gar ekastos tun ersenun toutun eikosi ippoys. [4] kynun de Indikun tosouto de ti pleithos etrefeto uste tesseres tun en tui pediui kumai megalai, tun allun eousai atelees, toisi kysi prosetetaxato sitia parexein. toiauta men tui arxonti teis Babylunos ypeirxe eonta.    
      193. Such was the wealth which belonged to the ruler of Babylon. Now the land of the Assyrians has but little rain; and this little gives nourishment to the root of the corn, but the crop is ripened and the ear comes on by the help of watering from the river, not as in Egypt by the coming up of the river itself over the fields, but the crop is watered by hand or with swing-buckets. For the whole Babylonian territory like the Egyptian is cut up into channels, and the largest of the channels is navigable for ships and runs in the direction of the sunrising in winter from the Euphrates to another river, namely the Tigris, along the bank of which lay the city of Nineveh. This territory is of all that we know the best by far for producing corn: as to trees, it does not even attempt to bear them, either fig or vine or olive, but for producing corn it is so good that it returns as much as two-hundred-fold for the average, and when it bears at its best it produces three-hundred-fold. The leaves of the wheat and barley there grow to be full four fingers broad; and from millet and sesame seed how large a tree grows, I know myself but shall not record, being well aware that even what has already been said relating to the crops produced has been enough to cause disbelief in those who have not visited the Babylonian land. They use no oil of olives, but only that which they make of sesame seed; and they have date-palms growing over all the plain, most of them fruit-bearing, of which they make both solid food and wine and honey; and to these they attend in the same manner as to fig-trees, and in particular they take the fruit of those palms which the Hellenes call male-palms, and tie them upon the date-bearing palms, so that their gall-fly may enter into the date and ripen it and that the fruit of the palm may not fall off: for the male-palm produces gall-flies in its fruit just as the wild-fig does.         193. [1] e de gei tun Assyriun yetai men oligui, kai to ektrefon ten rhizan tou sitoy esti touto. ardomenon mentoi ek tou potamou adrunetai te to leion kai paraginetai o sitos, oy kata per en Aiguptui aytou tou potamou anabainontos es tas arouras, alla xersi te kai keluneioisi ardomenos. [2] e gar Babylunie xure pasa, kata per e Aigyptie, katatetmetai es diuryxas. kai e megiste tun diuruxun esti neysiperetos, pros elion tetrammene ton xeimerinon, esexei de es allon potamon ek tou Eyfreteu, es ton Tigren, par' on Ninos polis oiketo. esti de xureun ayte paseun makrui ariste tun emeis idmen Demetros karpon ekferein ... [3] ta gar de alla dendrea oyde peiratai arxen ferein, oyte sykeen oyte ampelon oyte elaien. ton de teis Demetros karpon ude agathe ekferein esti uste epi diekosia men to parapan apodidoi, epeidan de arista ayte euyteis eneikei, epi triekosia ekferei. ta de fulla aytothi tun te pyrun kai tun kritheun to platos ginetai tesserun eypeteus daktulun. [4] ek de kegxroy kai sesamoy oson ti dendron megathos ginetai, exepistamenos mnemen oy poiesomai, ey eidus oti toisi me apigmenoisi es ten Babylunien xuren kai ta eiremena karpun exomena es apistien pollen apiktai. xreuntai de oyden elaiui all' e ek tun sesamun poieuntes. eisi de sfi foinikes pefykotes ana pan to pedion, oi pleunes aytun karpoforoi, ek tun kai sitia kai oinon kai meli poieuntai. [5] tous sykeun tropon therapeuoysi ta te alla kai foinikun tous ersenas Ellenes kaleoysi, toutun ton karpon perideoysi teisi balaneforoisi ton foinikun, ina pepainei te sfi o psen ten balanon esdunun kai me aporreei o karpos tou foinikos. pseinas gar de feroysi en tui karpui oi ersenes kata per de oi olynthoi.    
      194. But the greatest marvel of all the things in the land after the city itself, to my mind is this which I am about to tell: Their boats, those I mean which go down the river to Babylon, are round and all of leather: for they make ribs for them of willow which they cut in the land of the Armenians who dwell above the Assyrians, and round these they stretch hides which serve as a covering outside by way of hull, not making broad the stern nor gathering in the prow to a point, but making the boats round like a shield: and after that they stow the whole boat with straw and suffer it to be carried down the stream full of cargo; and for the most part these boats bring down casks of palm- wood filled with wine. The boat is kept straight by two steering- oars and two men standing upright, and the man inside pulls his oar while the man outside pushes. These vessels are made both of very large size and also smaller, the largest of them having a burden of as much as five thousand talents' weight; and in each one there is a live ass, and in those of larger size several. So when they have arrived at Babylon in their voyage and have disposed of their cargo, they sell by auction the ribs of the boat and all the straw, but they pack the hides upon their asses and drive them off to Armenia: for up the stream of the river it is not possible by any means to sail, owing to the swiftness of the current; and for this reason they make their boats not of timber but of hides. Then when they have come back to the land of the Armenians, driving their asses with them, they make other boats in the same manner.         194. [1] to de apantun thuma megiston moi esti tun tautei meta ge ayten ten polin, erxomai frasun. ta ploia aytoisi esti ta kata ton potamon poreyomena es ten Babyluna, eonta kykloterea, panta skutina. [2] epean gar en toisi Armenioisi toisi katuperthe Assyriun oikemenoisi nomeas itees tamomenoi poiesuntai, periteinoysi toutoisi diftheras stegastridas exuthen edafeos tropon, oyte prumnen apokrinontes oyte pruiren synagontes, all' aspidos tropon kykloterea poiesantes kai kalames plesantes pan to ploion touto apieisi kata ton potamon feresthai, fortiun plesantes. malista de bikoys foinikeioys katagoysi oinoy pleoys. [3] ithunetai de ypo te duo plektrun kai duo andrun orthun esteutun, kai o men esu elkei to pleiktron o de exu utheei. poieetai de kai karta megala tauta ta ploia kai elassu. ta de megista aytun kai pentakisxiliun talantun gomon exei. en ekastui de ploiui onos zuos enesti, en de toisi mezosi pleunes. [4] epean un apikuntai pleontes es ten Babyluna kai diatheuntai ton forton, nomeas men tou ploioy kai ten kalamen pasan ap' un ekeryxan, tas de diftheras episaxantes epi tous onoys apelaunoysi es tous Armenioys. [5] ana ton potamon gar de oyk oia te esti pleein oydeni tropui ypo taxeos tou potamou. dia gar tauta kai oyk ek xulun poieuntai ta ploia all' ek difthereun. epean de tous onoys elaunontes apikuntai opisu es tous Armenioys, alla tropui tui aytui poieuntai ploia.    
      195. Such are their boats; and the following is the manner of dress which they use, namely a linen tunic reaching to the feet, and over this they put on another of wool, and then a white mantle thrown round, while they have shoes of a native fashion rather like the Boeotian slippers. They wear their hair long and bind their heads round with fillets, and they are anointed over the whole of their body with perfumes. Each man has a seal and a staff carved by hand, and on each staff is carved either an apple or a rose or a lily or an eagle or some other device, for it is not their custom to have a staff without a device upon it.         195. [1] ta men de ploia aytoisi esti toiauta. estheiti de toieide xreuntai, kithuni podenekei lineui, kai epi touton allon eirineon kithuna ependunei kai xlanidion leykon periballomenos, ypodemata exun epixuria, paraplesia teisi Boiutieisi embasi. komuntes de tas kefalas mitreisi anadeontai, memyrismenoi pan to suma. sfregida de ekastos exei kai skeiptron xeiropoieton. [2] ep' ekastui de skeptrui epesti pepoiemenon e meilon e rhodon e krinon e aietos e allo ti. aney gar episemoy oy sfi nomos esti exein skeiptron. ayte men de sfi artisis peri to suma esti. nomoi de aytoisi ude katestasi.   
      196. Such is the equipment of their bodies: and the customs which are established among them are as follows, the wisest in our opinion being this, which I am informed that the Enetoi in Illyria also have. In every village once in each year it was done as follows:--When the maidens grew to the age for marriage, they gathered these all together and brought them in a body to one place, and round them stood a company of men: and the crier caused each one severally to stand up, and proceeded to sell them, first the most comely of all, and afterwards, when she had been sold and had fetched a large sum of money, he would put up another who was the most comely after her: and they were sold for marriage. Now all the wealthy men of the Babylonians who were ready to marry vied with one another in bidding for the most beautiful maidens; those however of the common sort who were ready to marry did not require a fine form, but they would accept money together with less comely maidens. For when the crier had made an end of selling the most comely of the maidens, then he would cause to stand up that one who was least shapely, or any one of them who might be crippled in any way, and he would make proclamation of her, asking who was willing for least gold to have her in marriage, until she was assigned to him who was willing to accept least: and the gold would be got from the sale of the comely maidens, and so those of beautiful form provided dowries for those which were unshapely or crippled; but to give in marriage one's own daughter to whomsoever each man would, was not allowed, nor to carry off the maiden after buying her without a surety; for it was necessary for the man to provide sureties that he would marry her, before he took her away; and if they did not agree well together, the law was laid down that he should pay back the money. It was allowed also for any one who wished it to come from another village and buy. This then was their most honourable custom; it does not however still exist at the present time, but they have found out of late another way, in order that the men may not ill-treat them or take them to another city: for since the time when being conquered they were oppressed and ruined, each one of the common people when he is in want of livelihood prostitutes his female children.         196. [1] o men sofutatos ode kata gnumen ten emeteren, tui kai Illyriun Enetous pynthanomai xrasthai. kata kumas ekastas apax tou eteos ekastoy epoieeto tade. us an ai parthenoi genoiato gamun uraiai, tautas okus synagagoien pasas, es en xurion esageskon aleas, perix de aytas istato omilos andrun, [2] anistas de kata mian ekasten keiryx puleeske, pruta men ten eyeidestaten ek paseun. meta de, okus ayte eyrousa pollon xrysion pretheie, allen an ekerysse e met' ekeinen eske eyeidestate. epuleonto de epi synoikesi. osoi men de eskon eydaimones tun Babyluniun epigamoi, yperballontes alleloys exuneonto tas kallisteyousas. osoi de tou demoy eskon epigamoi, oytoi de eideos men oyden edeonto xrestou, oi d' an xremata te kai aisxionas parthenoys elambanon. [3] us gar de diexelthoi o keiryx puleun tas eyeidestatas tun parthenun aniste an ten amorfestaten, e ei tis ayteun emperos eie, kai tauten an ekerysse, ostis theloi elaxiston xrysion labun synoikeein aytei, es o tui to elaxiston ypistamenui prosekeito. to de an xrysion egineto apo tun eyeideun parthenun kai oytu ai eymorfoi tas amorfoys kai emperoys exedidosan. ekdounai de ten euytou thygatera oteui bouloito ekastos oyk exein, oyde aney eggyeteu apagesthai ten parthenon priamenon, all' eggyetas xrein katastesanta e men synoikesein aytei, oytu apagesthai. [4] ei de me symferoiato, apoferein to xrysion ekeito nomos. exein de kai ex alles elthonta kumes ton boylomenon uneesthai. [5] o men nyn kallistos nomos oytos sfi En, oy mentoi nun ge diateleei eun, allo de ti exeyrekasi neusti genesthai [ina me adikoien aytas med' eis eteran polin aguntai]. epeite gar alontes ekakuthesan kai oikofthorethesan, pas tis tou demoy bioy spanizun kataporneuei ta thelea tekna.    
      197. Next in wisdom to that, is this other custom which was established among them:--they bear out the sick into the market- place; for of physicians they make no use. So people come up to the sick man and give advice about his disease, if any one himself has ever suffered anything like that which the sick man has, or saw any other who had suffered it; and coming near they advise and recommend those means by which they themselves got rid of a like disease or seen some other get rid of it: and to pass by the sick man in silence is not permitted to them, nor until one has asked what disease he has.         197. [1] deuteros de sofiei ode allos sfi nomos katesteke. tous kamnontas es ten agoren ekforeoysi. oy gar de xreuntai ietroisi. prosiontes un pros ton kamnonta symboyleuoysi peri teis nousoy, ei tis kai aytos toiouto epathe okoion an exei o kamnun e allon eide pathonta, tauta prosiontes symboyleuoysi kai paraineoysi assa aytos poiesas exefyge omoien nouson e allon eide ekfygonta. sigei de parexelthein ton kamnonta oy sfi exesti, prin an epeiretai entina nouson exei.    
      198. They bury their dead in honey, and their modes of lamentation are similar to those used in Egypt. And whenever a Babylonian man has intercourse with his wife, he sits by incense offered, and his wife does the same on the other side, and when it is morning they wash themselves, both of them, for they will touch no vessel until they have washed themselves: and the Arabians do likewise in this matter.         198. [1] tafai de sfi en meliti, threinoi de paraplesioi toisi en Aiguptui. osakis d' an mixthei gynaiki tei euytou aner Babylunios, peri thymiema katagizomenon izei, eteruthi de e gyne tuyto touto poieei, orthroy de genomenoy lountai kai amfoteroi. aggeos gar oydenos apsontai prin an lousuntai. tayta de tauta kai Arabioi poieusi.    
      199. Now the most shameful of the customs of the Babylonians is as follows: every woman of the country must sit down in the precincts of Aphrodite once in her life and have commerce with a man who is a stranger: and many women who do not deign to mingle with the rest, because they are made arrogant by wealth, drive to the temple with pairs of horses in covered carriages, and so take their place, and a large number of attendants follow after them; but the greater number do thus,--in the sacred enclosure of Aphrodite sit great numbers of women with a wreath of cord about their heads; some come and others go; and there are passages in straight lines going between the women in every direction, through which the strangers pass by and make their choice. Here when a woman takes her seat she does not depart again to her house until one of the strangers has thrown a silver coin into her lap and has had commerce with her outside the temple, and after throwing it he must say these words only: "I demand thee in the name of the goddess Mylitta": now Mylitta is the name given by the Assyrians to Aphrodite: and the silver coin may be of any value; whatever it is she will not refuse it, for that is not lawful for her, seeing that this coin is made sacred by the act: and she follows the man who has first thrown and does not reject any: and after that she departs to her house, having acquitted herself of her duty to the goddess, nor will you be able thenceforth to give any gift so great as to win her. So then as many as have attained to beauty and stature are speedily released, but those of them who are unshapely remain there much time, not being able to fulfil the law; for some of them remain even as much as three or four years: and in some parts of Cyprus too there is a custom similar to this.         199. [1] o de de aisxistos tun nomun esti toisi Babylunioisi ode. dei pasan gynaika epixurien izomenen es iron Afrodites apax en tei zoei mixtheinai andri xeinui. pollai de kai oyk axioumenai anamisgesthai teisi alleisi, oia ploutui yperfroneoysai, epi zeygeun en kamareisi elasasai pros to iron estasi. therapeie de sfi opisthe epetai polle. [2] ai de pleunes poieusi ude. en temenei Afrodites kateatai stefanon peri teisi kefaleisi exoysai thumiggos pollai gynaikes. ai men gar proserxontai, ai de aperxontai. sxoinotenees de diexodoi panta tropon odun exoysi dia tun gynaikun, di' un oi xeinoi diexiontes eklegontai. [3] entha epean izetai gyne, oy proteron apallassetai es ta oikia e tis oi xeinun argurion embalun es ta gounata mixthei exu tou irou. embalonta de dei eipein tosonde. <<epikaleu toi ten theon Mulitta.>> Mulitta de kaleoysi ten Afroditen Assurioi. [4] to de argurion megathos esti oson un. oy gar me apusetai. oy gar oi themis esti. ginetai gar iron touto to argurion. tui de prutui embalonti epetai oyde apodokimai oydena. epean de mixthei, aposiusamene tei theui apallassetai es ta oikia, kai tupo toutoy oyk oytu mega ti oi duseis us min lampseai. [5] ossai men nyn eideos te epammenai eisi kai megatheos, taxu apallassontai, osai de amorfoi ayteun eisi, xronon pollon prosmenoysi oy dynamenai ton nomon ekpleisai. kai gar trietea kai tetraetea metexeterai xronon menoysi. eniaxei de kai teis Kuproy esti paraplesios toutui nomos.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [200]

     200. These customs then are established among the Babylonians: and there are of them three tribes which eat nothing but fish only: and when they have caught them and dried them in the sun they do thus, --they throw them into brine, and then pound them with pestles and strain them through muslin; and they have them for food either kneaded into a soft cake, or baked like bread, according to their liking.         200. [1] nomoi men de toisi Babylunioisi oytoi katestasi. eisi de aytun patriai treis ai oyden allo siteontai ei me ixthus mounon, tous epeite an thereusantes ayenusi pros elion, poieusi tade. esballoysi es olmon kai leenantes yperoisi susi dia sindonos, kai os men an bouletai aytun ate mazan maxamenos exei, o de artoy tropon optesas.    
      201. When this nation also had been subdued by Cyrus, he had a desire to bring the Massagetai into subjection to himself. This nation is reputed to be both great and warlike, and to dwell towards the East and the sunrising, beyond the river Araxes and over against the Issedonians: and some also say that this nation is of Scythian race.         201. [1] us de tui Kurui kai touto to ethnos katergasto, epethumese Massagetas yp' euytui poiesasthai. to de ethnos touto kai mega legetai einai kai alkimon, oikemenon de pros eu te kai elioy anatolas, peren tou Araxeu potamou, antion de Issedonun andrun. eisi de oitines kai Skythikon legoysi touto to ethnos einai.    
      202. Now the Araxes is said by some to be larger and by others to be smaller than the Ister: and they say that there are many islands in it about equal in size to Lesbos, and in them people dwelling who feed in the summer upon roots of all kinds which they dig up and certain fruits from trees, which have been discovered by them for food, they store up, it is said, in the season when they are ripe and feed upon them in the winter. Moreover it is said that other trees have been discovered by them which yield fruit of such a kind that when they have assembled together in companies in the same place and lighted a fire, they sit round in a circle and throw some of it into the fire, and they smell the fruit which is thrown on, as it burns, and are intoxicated by the scent as the Hellenes are with wine, and when more of the fruit is thrown on they become more intoxicated, until at last they rise up to dance and begin to sing. This is said to be their manner of living: and as to the river Araxes, it flows from the land of the Matienians, whence flows the Gyndes which Cyrus divided into the three hundred and sixty channels, and it discharges itself by forty branches, of which all except one end in swamps and shallow pools; and among them they say that men dwell who feed on fish eaten raw, and who are wont to use as clothing the skins of seals: but the one remaining branch of the Araxes flows with unimpeded course into the Caspian Sea.         202. [1] o de Araxes legetai kai mezun kai elassun einai tou Istroy. nesoys de en aytui Lesbui megathea paraplesias syxnas fasi einai, en de ayteisi anthrupoys oi siteontai men rhizas to theros orussontes pantoias. karpous de apo dendreun exeyremenoys sfi es forben katatithesthai uraioys, kai toutoys siteesthai ten xeimerinen. [2] alla de sfi exeyreisthai dendrea karpous toiousde tinas feronta, tous epeite an es tuyto synelthusi kata eilas kai pur anakausuntai kuklui periizomenoys epiballein epi to pur, osfrainomenoys de katagizomenoy tou karpou tou epiballomenoy methuskesthai tei osmei kata per Ellenas tui oinui pleunos de epiballomenoy tou karpou mallon methuskesthai, es o es orxesin te anistasthai kai es aoiden apikneesthai. toutun men ayte legetai diaitai einai. [3] o de Araxes potamos rheei men ek Matienun, othen per o Gundes ton es tas diuryxas tas exekonta te kai triekosias dielabe o Kuros, stomasi de exereugetai tesserakonta, tun ta panta plen enos es elea te kai tenagea ekdidoi. en toisi anthrupoys katoikeisthai legoysi ixthus umous siteomenoys, estheiti de nomizontas xrasthai fukeun dermasi. [4] to de en tun stomatun tou Araxeu rheei dia katharou es ten Kaspien thalassan.   
      203. Now the Caspian Sea is apart by itself, not having connection with the other Sea: for all that Sea which the Hellenes navigate, and the Sea beyond the Pillars, which is called Atlantis, and the Erythraian Sea are in fact all one, but the Caspian is separate and lies apart by itself. In length it is a voyage of fifteen days if one uses oars, and in breadth, where it is broadest, a voyage of eight days. On the side towards the West of this Sea the Caucasus runs along by it, which is of all mountain-ranges both the greatest in extent and the loftiest: and the Caucasus has many various races of men dwelling in it, living for the most part on the wild produce of the forests; and among them there are said to be trees which produce leaves of such a kind that by pounding them and mixing water with them they paint figures upon their garments, and the figures do not wash out, but grow old with the woollen stuff as if they had been woven into it at the first: and men say that the sexual intercourse of these people is open like that of cattle.         203. [1]  e de Kaspie thalassa esti ep' euyteis, oy symmisgoysa tei eterei thalassei. ten men gar Ellenes naytillontai pasa kai e exu steleun thalassa e Atlantis kaleomene kai e Erythre mia eousa tygxanei. e de Kaspie esti etere ep' euyteis, eousa meikos men plooy eiresiei xreumenui pentekaideka emereun, eyros de, tei eyrytate esti ayte euyteis, oktu emereun. kai ta men pros ten esperen feronta teis thalasses tautes o Kaukasos parateinei, eon oreun kai plethei megiston kai megathei ypselotaton. ethnea de anthrupun polla kai pantoia en euytui exei o Kaukasos, ta polla panta ap' yles agries zuonta. [2] en toisi kai dendrea fulla toieisde idees parexomena einai legetai, ta tribontas te kai paramisgontas ydur zuia euytoisi es ten estheita eggrafein. ta de zuia oyk ekplunesthai, alla sygkatageraskein tui allui eiriui kata per enyfanthenta arxen. mixin de toutun tun anthrupun einai emfanea kata per toisi probatoisi.    
      204. On the West then of this Sea which is called Caspian the Caucasus is the boundary, while towards the East and the rising sun a plain succeeds which is of limitless extent to the view. Of this great plain then the Massagetai occupy a large part, against whom Cyrus had become eager to march; for there were many strong reasons which incited him to it and urged him onwards,--first the manner of his birth, that is to say the opinion held of him that he was more than a mere mortal man, and next the success which he had met with in his wars, for whithersoever Cyrus directed his march, it was impossible for that nation to escape.         204. [1] ta men de pros esperen teis thalasses tautes teis Kaspies kaleomenes o Kaukasos apergei, ta de pros eu te kai elion anatellonta pedion ekdeketai pleithos apeiron es apopsin. tou un de pedioy toutoy tou megaloy oyk elaxisten moiran metexoysi oi Massagetai, ep' oys o Kuros esxe prothymien strateusasthai. [2] polla te gar min kai megala ta epaeironta kai epotrunonta En, pruton men e genesis, to dokeein pleon ti einai anthrupoy, deytera de e eytyxie e kata tous polemoys genomene. okei gar ithuseie strateuesthai Kuros, amexanon En ekeino to ethnos diafygein.    
      205. Now the ruler of the Massagetai was a woman, who was queen after the death of her husband, and her name was Tomyris. To her Cyrus sent and wooed her, pretending that he desired to have her for his wife: but Tomyris understanding that he was wooing not herself but rather the kingdom of the Massagetai, rejected his approaches: and Cyrus after this, as he made no progress by craft, marched to the Araxes, and proceeded to make an expedition openly against the Massagetai, forming bridges of boats over the river for his army to cross, and building towers upon the vessels which gave them passage across the river.         205. [1] En de tou andros apothanontos gyne tun Massageteun basileia. Tomyris oi En oynoma. tauten pempun o Kuros emnato tui logui thelun gynaika en exein. e de Tomyris synieisa oyk ayten min mnumenon alla ten Masageteun basileien, apeipato ten prosodon. [2] Kuros de meta touto, us oi dolui oy proexuree, elasas epi ton Araxea epoieeto ek tou emfaneos epi tous Massagetas strateien, gefuras te zeygnuun epi tou potamou diabasin tui stratui, kai purgoys epi ploiun tun diaporthmeyontun ton potamon oikodomeomenos.    
      206. While he was busied about this labour, Tomyris sent a herald and said thus: "O king of the Medes, cease to press forward the work which thou art now pressing forward; for thou canst not tell whether these things will be in the end for thy advantage or no; cease to do so, I say, and be king over thine own people, and endure to see us ruling those whom we rule. Since however I know that thou wilt not be willing to receive this counsel, but dost choose anything rather than to be at rest, therefore if thou art greatly anxious to make trial of the Massagetai in fight, come now, leave that labour which thou hast in yoking together the banks of the river, and cross over into our land, when we have first withdrawn three days' journey from the river: or if thou desirest rather to receive us into your land, do thou this same thing thyself." Having heard this Cyrus called together the first men among the Persians, and having gathered these together he laid the matter before them for discussion, asking their advice as to which of the two things he should do: and their opinions all agreed in one, bidding him receive Tomyris and her army into his country.         206. [1] exonti de oi touton ton ponon pempsasa e Tomyris keryka elege tade. <<u basileu Medun, pausai speudun ta speudeis. oy gar an eideies ei toi es kairon estai tauta teleomena. paysamenos de basileye tun seuytou, kai emeas anexey oreun arxontas tun per arxomen. [2] oykun etheleseis ypothekeisi teiside xrasthai, alla pantus mallon e di' esyxies einai. su de ei megalus prothymeai Massageteun peiretheinai, fere moxthon men ton exeis zeygnus ton potamon apes, su de emeun anaxuresantun apo tou potamou triun emereun odon diabaine es ten emeteren. [3] ei d' emeas bouleai esdexasthai mallon es ten ymeteren, su tuyto touto poiee. tauta de akousas o Kuros synekalese Perseun tous prutoys, synageiras de toutoys es meson sfi proetithee to preigma, symboyleyomenos okotera poieei. tun de kata tuyto ai gnumai synexepipton keleyontun esdekesthai Tomyrin te kai ton straton ayteis es ten xuren.    
      207. But Croesus the Lydian, being present and finding fault with this opinion, declared an opinion opposite to that which had been set forth, saying as follows: "O king, I told thee in former time also, that since Zeus had given me over to thee, I would avert according to my power whatever occasion of falling I might see coming near thy house: and now my sufferings, which have been bitter, have proved to be lessons of wisdom to me. If thou dost suppose that thou art immortal and that thou dost command an army which is also immortal, it will be of no use for me to declare to thee my judgment; but if thou hast perceived that thou art a mortal man thyself and dost command others who are so likewise, then learn this first, that for the affairs of men there is a revolving wheel, and that this in its revolution suffers not the same persons always to have good fortune. I therefore now have an opinion about the matter laid before us, which is opposite to that of these men: for if we shall consent to receive the enemy into our land, there is for thee this danger in so doing:--if thou shalt be worsted thou wilt lose in addition all thy realm, for it is evident that if the Massagetai are victors they will not turn back and fly, but will march upon the provinces of thy realm; and on the other hand if thou shalt be the victor, thou wilt not be victor so fully as if thou shouldest overcome the Massagetai after crossing over into their land and shouldest pursue them when they fled. For against that which I said before I will set the same again here, and say that thou, when thou hast conquered, wilt march straight against the realm of Tomyris. Moreover besides that which has been said, it is a disgrace and not to be endured that Cyrus the son of Cambyses should yield to a woman and so withdraw from her land. Now therefore it seems good to me that we should cross over and go forward from the crossing as far as they go in their retreat, and endeavour to get the better of them by doing as follows:--The Massagetai, as I am informed, are without experience of Persian good things, and have never enjoyed any great luxuries. Cut up therefore cattle without stint and dress the meat and set out for these men a banquet in our camp: moreover also provide without stint bowls of unmixed wine and provisions of every kind; and having so done, leave behind the most worthless part of thy army and let the rest begin to retreat from the camp towards the river: for if I am not mistaken in my judgment, they when they see a quantity of good things will fall to the feast, and after that it remains for us to display great deeds."         207. [1] pareun de kai memfomenos ten gnumen tauten Kroisos o Lydos apedeiknyto enantien tei prokeimenei gnumei, legun tade. <<u basileu, eipon men kai proteron toi oti epei me Zeus eduke toi, to an oru sfalma eon oikui tui sui kata dunamin apotrepsein. ta de moi pathemata eonta axarita mathemata gegone. [2] ei men athanatos dokeeis einai kai stratieis toiautes arxein, oyden an eie preigma gnumas eme soi apofainesthai. ei d' egnukas oti anthrupos kai su eis kai eterun toiunde arxeis, ekeino pruton mathe, us kuklos tun anthrupeiun esti pregmatun, periferomenos de oyk eai aiei tous aytous; eytyxeein. [3] ede un exu gnumen peri tou prokeimenoy pregmatos ta empalin e oytoi. ei gar ethelesomen esdexasthai tous polemioys es ten xuren, ode toi en aytui kindynos eni. essutheis men prosapollueis pasan ten arxen. deila gar de oti nikuntes Massagetai oy to opisu feuxontai all' ep' arxas tas sas elusi. [4] nikun de oy nikais tosouton oson ei diabas es ten ekeinun, nikun Massagetas, epoio feugoysi. tuyto gar antithesu ekeinui, oti nikesas tous antioymenoys elais ithu teis arxeis teis Tomurios. [5] xuris te tou apegemenoy aisxron kai oyk anasxeton Kuron ge ton Kambuseu gynaiki eixanta ypoxureisai teis xures. nun un moi dokeei diabantas proelthein oson an ekeinoi ypexiusi, entheuten de tade poieuntas peirasthai ekeinun perigenesthai. [6] us gar egu pynthanomai, Massagetai eisi agathun te Persikun apeiroi kai kalun megalun apathees. toutoisi un toisi andrasi tun probatun afeideus polla katakopsantas kai skeyasantas protheinai en tui stratopedui tui emeterui daita, pros de kai kreteiras afeideus oinoy akretoy kai sitia pantoia. [7] poiesantas de tauta, ypolipomenoys teis stratieis to flayrotaton, tous loipous aytis exanaxureein epi ton potamon. en gar egu gnumes me amartu, keinoi idomenoi agatha polla trepsontai te pros ayta kai emin to entheuten leipetai apodexis ergun megalun.>>    
      208. These were the conflicting opinions; and Cyrus, letting go the former opinion and choosing that of Croesus, gave notice to Tomyris to retire, as he was intending to cross over to her. She then proceeded to retire, as she had at first engaged to do, but Cyrus delivered Croesus into the hands of his son Cambyses, to whom he meant to give the kingdom, and gave him charge earnestly to honour him and to treat him well, if the crossing over to go against the Massagetai should not be prosperous. Having thus charged him and sent these away to the land of the Persians, he crossed over the river both himself and his army.         208. [1] gnumai men aytai synestasan. Kuros de meteis ten proteren gnumen, ten Kroisoy de elomenos, proegoreye Tomuri exanaxureein us aytou diabesomenoy ep' ekeinen. e men de exanexuree kata ypesxeto pruta. Kuros de Kroison es tas xeiras estheis tui euytou paidi Kambusei, tui per ten basileien edidoy, kai polla enteilamenos oi timan te ayton kai ey poieein, en e diabasis e epi Massagetas me orthuthei, tauta enteilamenos kai aposteilas toutoys es Persas, aytos diebaine ton potamon kai o stratos aytou.    
      209. And when he had passed over the Araxes, night having come on he saw a vision in his sleep in the land of the Massagetai, as follows:-- in his sleep it seemed to Cyrus that he saw the eldest of the sons of Hystaspes having upon his shoulders wings, and that with the one of these he overshadowed Asia and with the other Europe. Now of Hystaspes the son of Arsames, who was a man of the Achaimenid clan, the eldest son was Dareios, who was then, I suppose, a youth of about twenty years of age, and he had been left behind in the land of the Persians, for he was not yet of full age to go out to the wars. So then when Cyrus awoke he considered with himself concerning the vision: and as the vision seemed to him to be of great import, he called Hystaspes, and having taken him apart by himself he said: "Hystaspes, thy son has been found plotting against me and against my throne: and how I know this for certain I will declare to thee:--The gods have a care of me and show me beforehand all the evils that threaten me. So in the night that is past while sleeping I saw the eldest of thy sons having upon his shoulders wings, and with the one of these he overshadowed Asia and with the other Europe. To judge by this vision then, it cannot be but that he is plotting against me. Do thou therefore go by the quickest way back to Persia and take care that, when I return thither after having subdued these regions, thou set thy son before me to be examined."         209. [1] epeite de eperaiuthe ton Araxea, nyktos epelthouses eide opsin eydun en tun Massageteun tei xurei toiende. edokee o Kuros en tui ypnui oran tun Ystaspeos paidun ton presbutaton exonta epi tun umun pterygas kai toyteun tei men ten Asien tei de ten Eyrupen episkiazein. [2] Ystaspei de tui Arsameos eonti andri Axaimenidei En tun paidun Dareios presbutatos, eun tote elikien es eikosi koy malista etea, kai oytos kateleleipto en Perseisi. oy gar eixe ku elikien strateuesthai. [3] epei un de exegerthe o Kuros, edidoy logon euytui peri teis opsios. us de oi edokee megale einai e opsis, kalesas Ystaspea kai apolabun mounon eipe <<Ystaspes, pais sos epiboyleuun emoi te kai tei emei arxei ealuke. us de tauta atrekeus oida, egu semaneu. [4] emeu theoi kedontai kai moi panta prodeiknuoysi ta epiferomena. ede un en tei paroixomenei nykti eydun eidon tun sun paidun ton presbutaton exonta epi tun umun pterygas kai toyteun tei men ten Asien tei de ten Eyrupen episkiazein. [5] oykun esti mexane apo teis opsios tautes oydemia to me ekeinon epiboyleuein emoi. su nyn ten taxisten poreueo opisu es Persas kai poiee okus, epean egu tade katastrepsamenos elthu ekei, us moi katasteseis ton paida es elegxon.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 1: Clio [210]

     210. Cyrus said thus supposing that Dareios was plotting against him; but in fact the divine powers were showing him beforehand that he was destined to find his end there and that his kingdom was coming about to Dareios. To this then Hystaspes replied as follows: "O king, heaven forbid that there should be any man of Persian race who would plot against thee, and if there be any, I pray that he perish as quickly as may be; seeing that thou didst make the Persians to be free instead of slaves, and to rule all nations instead of being ruled by others. And if any vision announces to thee that my son is planning rebellion against thee, I deliver him over to thee to do with him whatsoever thou wilt.         210. [1] Kuros men dokeun oi Dareion epiboyleuein elege tade. tui de o daimun proefaine us aytos men teleytesein aytou tautei melloi, e de basileie aytou perixureoi es Dareion. [2] ameibetai de un o Ystaspes toiside. <<u basileu, me eie aner Perses gegonus ostis toi epiboyleuseie, ei d' esti, apoloito us taxista. os anti men doulun epoiesas eleytheroys Persas einai, anti de arxesthai yp' allun arxein apantun. [3] ei de tis toi opsis apaggellei paida ton emon neutera boyleuein peri seo, egu toi paradidumi xrasthai aytui touto o ti su bouleai.>> Ystaspes men toutoisi ameipsamenos kai diabas ton Araxea eie es Persas fylaxun Kurui ton paida Dareion.   
      211. Hystaspes then, having made answer with these words and having crossed over the Araxes, was going his way to the Persian land to keep watch over his son Dareios for Cyrus; and Cyrus meanwhile went forward and made a march of one day from the Araxes according to the suggestion of Croesus. After this when Cyrus and the best part of the army of the Persians had marched back to the Araxes, and those who were unfit for fighting had been left behind, then a third part of the army of the Massagetai came to the attack and proceeded to slay, not without resistance, those who were left behind of the army of Cyrus; and seeing the feast that was set forth, when they had overcome their enemies they lay down and feasted, and being satiated with food and wine they went to sleep. Then the Persians came upon them and slew many of them, and took alive many more even than they slew, and among these the son of the queen Tomyris, who was leading the army of the Massagetai; and his name was Spargapises.         211. [1] Kuros de proelthun apo tou Araxeu emeres odon epoiee kata tas Kroisoy ypothekas. [2] meta de tauta Kuroy te kai Perseun tou katharou stratou apelasantos opisu epi ton Araxea, leifthentos de tou axreioy, epelthousa tun Massageteun tritemoris tou stratou tous te leifthentas teis Kuroy stratieis efoneye alexomenoys kai ten prokeimenen idontes daita, us exeirusanto tous enantioys, klithentes edainynto, pleruthentes de forbeis kai oinoy eydon. [3] oi de Persai epelthontes pollous men sfeun efoneysan, pollui d' eti pleunas ezugresan kai alloys kai ton teis basileies Tomurios paida strategeonta Massageteun, tui oynoma En Spargapises.    
      212. She then, when she heard that which had come to pass concerning the army and also the things concerning her son, sent a herald to Cyrus and said as follows: "Cyrus, insatiable of blood, be not elated with pride by this which has come to pass, namely because with that fruit of the vine, with which ye fill yourselves and become so mad that as the wine descends into your bodies, evil words float up upon its stream,--because setting a snare, I say, with such a drug as this thou didst overcome my son, and not by valour in fight. Now therefore receive the word which I utter, giving thee good advice:-- Restore to me my son and depart from this land without penalty, triumphant over a third part of the army of the Massagetai: but if thou shalt not do so, I swear to thee by the Sun, who is lord of the Massagetai, that surely I will give thee thy fill of blood, insatiable as thou art."         212. [1] e de pythomene ta te peri ten stratien gegonota kai ta peri ton paida, pempoysa keryka para Kuron elege tade. [2] <<apleste aimatos Kure, meden epaertheis tui gegonoti tuide pregmati, ei ampelinui karpui, tui per aytoi empiplamenoi mainesthe oytu uste kationtos tou oinoy es to suma epanapleein ymin epea kaka, toioutui farmakui dolusas ekratesas paidos tou emou, all' oy maxei kata to karteron. [3] nun un mey ey paraineouses ypolabe ton logon. apodous moi ton paida apithi ek teisde teis xures azemios, Massageteun tritemoridi tou stratou katybrisas. ei de tauta oy poieseis, elion epomnymi toi ton Massageteun despoten, E men se egu kai apleston eonta aimatos koresu.>>    
      213. When these words were reported to him Cyrus made no account of them; and the son of the queen Tomyris, Spargapises, when the wine left him and he learnt in what evil case he was, entreated Cyrus that he might be loosed from his chains and gained his request, and then so soon as he was loosed and had got power over his hands he put himself to death.         213. [1] Kuros men epeun oydena toutun aneneixthentun epoieeto logon. o de teis basileies Tomurios pais Spargapises, us min o te oinos aneike kai emathe ina En kakou, deetheis Kuroy ek tun desmun lytheinai etyxe, us de eluthe te taxista kai tun xeirun ekratese, diergazetai euyton.    
      214. He then ended his life in this manner; but Tomyris, as Cyrus did not listen to her, gathered together all her power and joined battle with Cyrus. This battle of all the battles fought by Barbarians I judge to have been the fiercest, and I am informed that it happened thus:--first, it is said, they stood apart and shot at one another, and afterwards when their arrows were all shot away, they fell upon one another and engaged in close combat with their spears and daggers; and so they continued to be in conflict with one another for a long time, and neither side would flee; but at last the Massagetai got the better in the fight: and the greater part of the Persian army was destroyed there on the spot, and Cyrus himself brought his life to an end there, after he had reigned in all thirty years wanting one. Then Tomyris filled a skin with human blood and had search made among the Persian dead for the corpse of Cyrus: and when she found it, she let his head down into the skin and doing outrage to the corpse she said at the same time this: "Though I yet live and have overcome thee in fight, nevertheless thou didst undo me by taking my son with craft: but I according to my threat will give thee thy fill of blood." Now as regards the end of the life of Cyrus there are many tales told, but this which I have related is to my mind the most worthy of belief.         214. [1] kai de oytos men tropui toioutui teleytai. Tomyris de, us oi Kuros oyk esekoyse, syllexasa pasan ten euyteis dunamin synebale Kurui. tauten ten maxen, osai de barbarun andrun maxai egenonto, krinu isxyrotaten genesthai, kai de kai pynthanomai oytu touto genomenon. [2] pruta men gar legetai aytous diastantas es alleloys toxeuein, meta de us sfi ta belea exetetoxeyto, sympesontas teisi aixmeisi te kai toisi egxeiridioisi synexesthai. xronon te de epi pollon synestanai maxomenoys kai oydeteroys ethelein feugein. telos de oi Massagetai periegenonto, [3] e te de polle teis Persikeis stratieis aytou tautei diefthare kai de kai aytos Kuros teleytai, basileusas ta panta enos deonta triekonta etea. [4] askon de plesasa aimatos anthrupeioy Tomyris edizeto en toisi tethneusi tun Perseun ton Kuroy nekyn, us de eyre, enapeike aytou ten kefalen es ton askon, lymainomene de tui nekrui epelege tade. [5] <<su men eme zusan te kai nikusan se maxei apulesas, paida ton emon elun dolui. se d' egu, kata per epeilesa, aimatos koresu.>> ta men de kata ten Kuroy teleyten tou bioy, pollun logun legomenun, ode moi o pithanutatos eiretai.    
      215. As to the Massagetai, they wear a dress which is similar to that of the Scythians, and they have a manner of life which is also like theirs; and there are of them horsemen and also men who do not ride on horses (for they have both fashions), and moreover there are both archers and spearmen, and their custom it is to carry battle- axes; and for everything they use either gold or bronze, for in all that has to do with spear-points or arrow-heads or battle-axes they use bronze, but for head-dresses and girdles and belts round the arm-pits they employ gold as ornament: and in like manner as regards their horses, they put breast-plates of bronze about their chests, but on their bridles and bits and cheek-pieces they employ gold. Iron however and silver they use not at all, for they have them not in their land, but gold and bronze in abundance.         215. [1] Massagetai de estheita te omoien tei Skythikei foreoysi kai diaitan exoysi, ippotai de eisi kai anippoi (amfoterun gar metexoysi) kai toxotai te kai aixmoforoi, sagaris nomizontes exein. xrysui de kai xalkui ta panta xreuntai. osa men gar es aixmas kai ardis kai sagaris, xalkui ta panta xreuntai, osa de peri kefalen kai zusteiras kai masxalisteiras, xrysui kosmeontai. [2] us d' aytus tun ippun ta men peri ta sterna xalkeoys thurekas periballoysi, ta de peri tous xalinous kai stomia kai falara xrysui. siderui de oyd' argurui xreuntai oyden. oyde gar oyde sfi esti en tei xurei, o de xrysos kai o xalkos apletos.    
      216. These are the customs which they have:--Each marries a wife, but they have their wives in common; for that which the Hellenes say that the Scythians do, is not in fact done by the Scythians but by the Massagetai, that is to say, whatever woman a man of the Massagetai may desire he hangs up his quiver in front of the waggon and has commerce with her freely. They have no precise limit of age laid down for their life, but when a man becomes very old, his nearest of kin come together and slaughter him solemnly and cattle also with him; and then after that they boil the flesh and banquet upon it. This is considered by them the happiest lot; but him who has ended his life by disease they do not eat, but cover him up in the earth, counting it a misfortune that he did not attain to being slaughtered. They sow no crops but live on cattle and on fish, which last they get in abundance from the river Araxes; moreover they are drinkers of milk. Of gods they reverence the Sun alone, and to him they sacrifice horses: and the rule of the sacrifice is this:--to the swiftest of the gods they assign the swiftest of all mortal things.        216. [1] nomoisi de xreuntai toioiside. gynaika men gameei ekastos, tauteisi de epikoina xreuntai. to gar Skuthas fasi Ellenes poieein, oy Skuthai eisi oi poieontes alla Massagetai. teis gar epithymesei gynaikos Massagetes aner, ton faretreuna apokremasas pro teis amaxes misgetai adeus. [2] oyros de elikies sfi prokeitai allos men oydeis. epean de gerun genetai karta, oi prosekontes oi pantes synelthontes thuoysi min kai alla probata ama aytui, epsesantes de ta krea kateyuxeontai. [3] tauta men ta olbiutata sfi nenomistai, ton de nousui teleytesanta oy katasiteontai all' gei kruptoysi, symforen poieumenoi oti oyk iketo es to tytheinai. speiroysi de oyden, all' apo kteneun zuoysi kai ixthuun. oi de afthonoi sfi ek tou Araxeu potamou paraginontai. [4] galaktopotai d' eisi. theun de mounon elion sebontai, tui thuoysi ippoys. noos de oytos teis thysies. tun theun tui taxistui pantun tun thnetun to taxiston dateontai.
  
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe

     BOOK II THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED EUTERPE         
I s t o r i u n   BE y t e r p e
 
e tarixeysis   
      1. When Cyrus had brought his life to an end, Cambyses received the royal power in succession, being the son of Cyrus and of Cassandane the daughter of Pharnaspes, for whose death, which came about before his own, Cyrus had made great mourning himself and also had proclaimed to all those over whom he bore rule that they should make mourning for her: Cambyses, I say, being the son of this woman and of Cyrus, regarded the Ionians and Aiolians as slaves inherited from his father; and he proceeded to march an army against Egypt, taking with him as helpers not only the other nations of which he was the ruler, but also those of the Hellenes over whom he had power besides.         1. [1] teleytesantos de Kuroy parelabe ten basileien Kambuses, Kuroy eun pais kai Kassandanes teis Farnaspeu thygatros, teis proapothanouses Kuros aytos te mega penthos epoiesato kai toisi alloisi proeipe pasi tun Erxe penthos poieesthai. [2] tautes de teis gynaikos eun pais kai Kuroy Kambuses Iunas men kai Aioleas us douloys patruioys eontas enomize, epi de Aigypton epoieeto stratelasien alloys te paralabun tun Erxe kai de kai Ellenun tun epekratee.    
      2. Now the Egyptians, before the time when Psammetichos became king over them, were wont to suppose that they had come into being first of all men; but since the time when Psammetichos having become king desired to know what men had come into being first, they suppose that the Phrygians came into being before themselves, but they themselves before all other men. Now Psammetichos, when he was not able by inquiry to find out any means of knowing who had come into being first of all men, contrived a device of the following kind:--Taking two new- born children belonging to persons of the common sort he gave them to a shepherd to bring up at the place where his flocks were, with a manner of bringing up such as I shall say, charging him namely that no man should utter any word in their presence, and that they should be placed by themselves in a room where none might come, and at the proper time he should bring to them she-goats, and when he had satisfied them with milk he should do for them whatever else was needed. These things Psammetichos did and gave him this charge wishing to hear what word the children would let break forth first, after they had ceased from wailings without sense. And accordingly so it came to pass; for after a space of two years had gone by, during which the shepherd went on acting so, at length, when he opened the door and entered, both the children fell before him in entreaty and uttered the word bekos, stretching forth their hands. At first when he heard this the shepherd kept silence; but since this word was often repeated, as he visited them constantly and attended to them, at last he declared the matter to his master, and at his command he brought the children before his face. Then Psammetichos having himself also heard it, began to inquire about what nation of men named anything bekos, and inquiring he found that the Phrygians had this name for bread. In this manner and guided by an indication such as this, the Egyptians were brought to allow that the Phrygians were a more ancient people than themselves.         2. [1] oi de Aiguptioi, prin men e Psammetixon sfeun basileusai, enomizon euytous prutoys genesthai pantun anthrupun. epeide de Psammetixos basileusas ethelese eidenai oitines genoiato prutoi, apo toutoy nomizoysi Frugas proteroys genesthai euytun, tun de allun euytous. [2] Psammetixos de us oyk edunato pynthanomenos poron oydena toutoy aneyrein, oi genoiato prutoi anthrupun, epitexnatai toionde. paidia duo neogna anthrupun tun epityxontun didusi poimeni trefein es ta poimnia trofen tina toiende, enteilamenos medena antion aytun medemian funen ienai, en stegei de eremei ep' euytun keesthai ayta, kai ten uren epagineein sfi aigas, plesanta de galaktos talla diapressesthai. [3] tauta de epoiee te kai enetelleto Psammetixos thelun akousai tun paidiun, apallaxthentun tun asemun knyzematun, entina funen rhexoysi pruten. ta per un kai egeneto. us gar dietes xronos egegonee tauta tui poimeni pressonti, anoigonti ten thuren kai esionti ta paidia amfotera prospiptonta bekos efuneon, oregonta tas xeiras. [4] ta men de pruta akousas esyxos En o poimen. us de pollakis foiteonti kai epimelomenui pollon En touto to epos, oytu de semenas tui despotei egage ta paidia keleusantos es opsin ten ekeinoy. akousas de kai aytos o Psammetixos epynthaneto oitines anthrupun bekos ti kaleoysi, pynthanomenos de eyriske Frugas kaleontas ton arton. [5] oytu synexuresan Aiguptioi kai toioutui stathmesamenoi pregmati tous Frugas presbyteroys einai euytun. ude men genesthai tun ireun tou Efaistoy tou en Memfi ekoyon. Ellenes de legoysi alla te mataia polla kai us gynaikun tas glussas o Psammetixos ektamun ten diaitan oytu epoiesato tun paidun para tauteisi teisi gynaixi.    
      3. That so it came to pass I heard from the priests of that Hephaistos who dwells at Memphis; but the Hellenes relate, besides many other idle tales, that Psammetichos cut out the tongues of certain women, and then caused the children to live with these women. With regard then to the rearing of the children they related so much as I have said: and I heard also other things at Memphis when I had speech with the priests of Hephaistos. Moreover I visited both Thebes and Heliopolis for this very cause, namely because I wished to know whether the priests at these places would agree in their accounts with those at Memphis; for the men of Heliopolis are said to be the most learned in records of the Egyptians. Those of their narrations which I heard with regard to the gods I am not earnest to relate in full, but I shall name them only, because I consider that all men are equally ignorant of these matters: and whatever things of them I may record, I shall record only because I am compelled by the course of the story.         3. [1] kata men de ten trofen tun paidun tosauta elegon, ekoysa de kai alla en Memfi elthun es logoys toisi ireusi tou Efaistoy. kai de kai es Thebas te kai es Elioy polin aytun toutun eineken etrapomen, ethelun eidenai ei symbesontai toisi logoisi toisi en Memfi. oi gar Eliopolitai legontai Aigyptiun einai logiutatoi. [2] ta men nyn theia tun apegematun oia ekoyon oyk eimi prothymos exegeesthai, exu e ta oynomata aytun mounon, nomizun pantas anthrupoys ison peri aytun epistasthai. ta d' an epimnestheu aytun, ypo tou logoy exanagkazomenos epimnesthesomai.    
      4. But as to those matters which concern men, the priests agreed with one another in saying that the Egyptians were the first of all men on earth to find out the course of the year, having divided the seasons into twelve parts to make up the whole; and this they said they found out from the stars: and they reckon to this extent more wisely than the Hellenes, as it seems to me, inasmuch as the Hellenes throw in an intercalated month every other year, to make the seasons right, whereas the Egyptians, reckoning the twelve months at thirty days each, bring in also every year five days beyond the number, and thus the circle of their seasons is completed and comes round to the same point whence it set out. They said moreover that the Egyptians were the first who brought into use appellations for the twelve gods and the Hellenes took up the use from them; and that they were the first who assigned altars and images and temples to the gods, and who engraved figures on stones; and with regard to the greater number of these things they showed me by actual facts that they had happened so. They said also that the first man who became king of Egypt was Min; and that in his time all Egypt except the district of Thebes was a swamp, and none of the regions were then above water which now lie below the lake of Moiris, to which lake it is a voyage of seven days up the river from the sea:         4. [1] osa de anthrupeia pregmata, ude elegon omologeontes sfisi, prutoys Aigyptioys anthrupun apantun exeyrein ton eniayton, dyudeka merea dasamenoys tun ureun es ayton. tauta de exeyrein ek tun asterun elegon. agoysi de tosuide sofuteron Ellenun, emoi dokeein, osui Ellenes men dia tritoy eteos embolimon epemballoysi tun ureun eineken, Aiguptioi de triekontemeroys agontes tous dyudeka meinas epagoysi ana pan etos pente emeras parex tou arithmou, kai sfi o kuklos tun ureun es tuyto periiun paraginetai. [2] dyudeka te theun epunymias elegon prutoys Aigyptioys nomisai kai Ellenas para sfeun analabein, bumous te kai agalmata kai neous theoisi aponeimai sfeas prutoys kai zuia en lithoisi egglupsai. kai toutun men nyn ta pleu ergui edeloyn oytu genomena. basileusai de pruton Aiguptoy anthrupon elegon Mina. [3] epi toutoy, plen tou Thebaikou nomou, pasan Aigypton einai elos, kai ayteis einai oyden yperexon tun nun enerthe limnes teis Moirios eontun, es ten anaploos apo thalasses epta emereun esti ana ton potamon.    
      5. and I thought that they said well about the land; for it is manifest in truth even to a person who has not heard it beforehand but has only seen, at least if he have understanding, that the Egypt to which the Hellenes come in ships is a land which has been won by the Egyptians as an addition, and that it is a gift of the river: moreover the regions which lie above this lake also for a distance of three days' sail, about which they did not go on to say anything of this kind, are nevertheless another instance of the same thing: for the nature of the land of Egypt is as follows:-- First when you are still approaching it in a ship and are distant a day's run from the land, if you let down a sounding-line you will bring up mud and will find yourself in eleven fathoms. This then so far shows that there is a silting forward of the land.         5. [1] kai ey moi edokeon legein peri teis xures. deila gar de kai me proakousanti idonti de, ostis ge sunesin exei, oti Aigyptos, es ten Ellenes naytillontai, esti Aigyptioisi epiktetos te gei kai duron tou potamou, kai ta katuperthe eti teis limnes tautes mexri triun emereun plooy, teis peri ekeinoi oyden eti toionde elegon, esti de eteron toionde. [2] Aiguptoy gar fusis esti teis xures toiede. pruta men prospleun eti kai emeres dromon apexun apo geis, kateis katapeireterien pelon te anoiseis kai en endeka orgyieisi eseai. touto men epi tosouto deloi proxysin teis geis eousan.    
      6. Then secondly, as to Egypt itself, the extent of it along the sea is sixty schoines, according to our definition of Egypt as extending from the Gulf of Plinthine to the Serbonian lake, along which stretches Mount Casion; from this lake then the sixty schoines are reckoned: for those of men who are poor in land have their country measured by fathoms, those who are less poor by furlongs, those who have much land by parasangs, and those who have land in very great abundance by schoines: now the parasang is equal to thirty furlongs, and each schoine, which is an Egyptian measure, is equal to sixty furlongs. So there would be an extent of three thousand six hundred furlongs for the coast-land of Egypt.         6. [1] aytis de ayteis esti Aiguptoy meikos to para thalassan exekonta sxoinoi, kata emeis diaireomen einai Aigypton apo tou Plinthineteu kolpoy mexri Serbunidos limnes, par' en to Kasion oros teinei. tautes un apo oi exekonta sxoinoi eisi. [2] osoi men gar geupeinai eisi anthrupun, orgyieisi memetrekasi ten xuren, osoi de Esson geupeinai, stadioisi, oi de pollen exoysi, parasaggeisi, oi de afthonon lien, sxoinoisi. [3] dunatai de o parasagges triekonta stadia, o de sxoinos, metron eon Aiguption, exekonta stadia. oytu an eiesan Aiguptoy stadioi exakosioi kai trisxilioi to para thalassan.   
      7. From thence and as far as Heliopolis inland Egypt is broad, and the land is all flat and without springs of water and formed of mud: and the road as one goes inland from the sea to Heliopolis is about the same in length as that which leads from the altar of the twelve gods at Athens to Pisa and the temple of Olympian Zeus: reckoning up you would find the difference very small by which these roads fail of being equal in length, not more indeed than fifteen furlongs; for the road from Athens to Pisa wants fifteen furlongs of being fifteen hundred, while the road to Heliopolis from the sea reaches that number completely.         7. [1] entheuten men kai mexri Elioy polios es ten mesogaian esti eyrea Aigyptos, eousa pasa yptie te kai enydros kai ilus. esti de odos es Elioy polin apo thalasses anu ionti paraplesie to meikos tei ex Atheneun odui tei apo tun dyudeka theun tou bumou ferousei es te Pisan kai epi ton neon tou Dios tou Olympioy. [2] smikron ti to diaforon eyroi tis an logizomenos tun odun toyteun to me isas meikos einai, oy pleon pentekaideka stadiun. e men gar es Pisan ex Atheneun katadei pentekaideka stadiun me einai pentakosiun kai xiliun, e de es Elioy polin apo thalasses pleroi es ton arithmon touton. apo de Elioy polios anu ionti steine esti Aigyptos.   
      8. From Heliopolis however, as you go up, Egypt is narrow; for on the one side a mountain-range belonging to Arabia stretches along by the side of it, going in a direction from North towards the midday and the South Wind, tending upwards without a break to that which is called the Erythraian Sea, in which range are the stone-quarries which were used in cutting stone for the pyramids at Memphis. On this side then the mountain ends where I have said, and then takes a turn back; and where it is widest, as I was informed, it is a journey of two months across from East to West; and the borders of it which turn towards the East are said to produce frankincense. Such then is the nature of this mountain-range; and on the side of Egypt towards Libya another range extends, rocky and enveloped in sand: in this are the pyramids, and it runs in the same direction as those parts of the Arabian mountains which go towards the midday. So then, I say, from Heliopolis the land has no longer a great extent so far as it belongs to Egypt, and for about four days' sail up the river Egypt properly so called is narrow: and the space between the mountain-ranges which have been mentioned is plain-land, but where it is narrowest it did not seem to me to exceed two hundred furlongs from the Arabian mountains to those which are called the Libyan. After this again Egypt is broad.         8. [1] tei men gar teis Arabies oros paratetatai, feron ap' arktoy pros mesambrien te kai noton, aiei anu teinon es ten Erythren kaleomenen thalassan. en tui ai lithotomiai eneisi ai es tas pyramidas katatmetheisai tas en Memfi. tautei men leigon anakamptei es ta eiretai to oros. tei de ayto euytou esti makrotaton, us egu epynthanomen, duo menun ayto einai teis odou apo eous pros esperen, ta de pros ten eu libanutofora aytou ta termata einai. [2] touto men nyn to oros toiouto esti, to de pros Libues teis Aiguptoy oros allo petrinon teinei, en tui ai pyramides eneisi, psammui kateilymenon, kata ton ayton tropon kai tou Arabioy ta pros mesambrien feronta. [3] to un de apo Elioy polios oyketi pollon xurion us einai Aiguptoy, all' oson te emereun tesserun kai deka anaplooy esti steine Aigyptos, eousa tun oreun tun eiremenun to metaxu pedias men gei, stadioi de malista edokeon moi einai, tei steinotaton esti, diekosiun oy pleoys ek tou Arabioy oreos es to Libykon kaleomenon. to d' entheuten aytis eyrea Aigyptos esti.   
      9. Such is the nature of this land: and from Heliopolis to Thebes is a voyage up the river of nine days, and the distance of the journey in furlongs is four thousand eight hundred and sixty, the number of the schoines being eighty-one. If these measures of Egypt in furlongs be put together the result is as follows:--I have already before this shown that the distance along the sea amounts to three thousand six hundred furlongs, and I will now declare what the distance is inland from the sea to Thebes, namely six thousand one hundred and twenty furlongs: and again the distance from Thebes to the city called Elephantine is one thousand eight hundred furlongs.         9. [1] pefyke men nyn e xure ayte oytu. apo de Elioy polios es Thebas esti anaploos ennea emereun, stadioi de teis odou exekonta kai oktakosioi kai tetrakisxilioi, sxoinun enos kai ogdukonta eontun. [2] oytoi syntithemenoi oi stadioi Aiguptoy to men para thalassan ede moi kai proteron dedelutai oti exakosiun te esti stadiun kai trisxiliun, oson de ti apo thalasses es mesogaian mexri Thebeun esti, semaneu. stadioi gar eisi eikosi kai ekaton kai exakisxilioi. to de apo Thebeun es Elefantinen kaleomenen polin stadioi xilioi kai oktakosioi eisi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [10]

     10. Of this land then, concerning which I have spoken, it seemed to myself also, according as the priests said, that the greater part had been won as an addition by the Egyptians; for it was evident to me that the space between the aforesaid mountain-ranges, which lie above the city of Memphis, once was a gulf of the sea, like the regions about Ilion and Teuthrania and Ephesos and the plain of the Maiander, if it be permitted to compare small things with great; and small these are in comparison, for of the rivers which heaped up the soil in those regions none is worthy to be compared in volume with a single one of the mouths of the Nile, which has five mouths. Moreover there are other rivers also, not in size at all equal to the Nile, which have performed great feats; of which I can mention the names of several, and especially the Acheloos, which flowing through Acarnania and so issuing out into the sea has already made half of the Echinades from islands into mainland.         10. [1] tautes un teis xures teis eiremenes e polle, kata per oi irees elegon, edokee kai aytui moi einai epiktetos Aigyptioisi. tun gar oreun tun eiremenun tun yper Memfin polin keimenun to metaxu efaineto moi einai kote kolpos thalasses, usper ge ta peri Ilion kai Teythranien kai Efeson te kai Maiandroy pedion, us ge einai smikra tauta megaloisi symbalein. [2] tun gar tauta ta xuria prosxusantun potamun eni tun stomatun tou Neiloy, eontos pentastomoy, oydeis aytun pletheos peri axios symbletheinai esti. [3] eisi de kai alloi potamoi, oy kata ton Neilon eontes megathea, oitines erga apodexamenoi megala eisi. tun egu frasai exu oynomata kai allun kai oyk ekista Axeluioy, os rheun di' Akarnanies kai exieis es thalassan tun Exinadun nesun tas emiseas ede epeiron pepoieke.    
      11. Now there is in the land of Arabia, not far from Egypt, a gulf of the sea running in from that which is called the Erythraian Sea, very long and narrow, as I am about to tell. With respect to the length of the voyage along it, one who set out from the innermost point to sail out through it into the open sea, would spend forty days upon the voyage, using oars; and with respect to breadth, where the gulf is broadest it is half a day's sail across: and there is in it an ebb and flow of tide every day. Just such another gulf I suppose that Egypt was, and that the one ran in towards Ethiopia from the Northern Sea, and the other, the Arabian, of which I am about to speak, tended from the South towards Syria, the gulfs boring in so as almost to meet at their extreme points, and passing by one another with but a small space left between. If then the stream of the Nile should turn aside into this Arabian gulf, what would hinder that gulf from being filled up with silt as the river continued to flow, at all events within a period of twenty thousand years? indeed for my part I am of opinion that it would be filled up even within ten thousand years. How, then, in all the time that has elapsed before I came into being should not a gulf be filled up even of much greater size than this by a river so great and so active?         11. [1] esti de teis Arabies xures, Aiguptoy de oy prosu, kolpos thalasses esexun ek teis Erythreis kaleomenes thalasses, makros oytu de ti kai steinos us erxomai frasun. [2] meikos men plooy arxamenui ek myxou diekplusai es ten eyrean thalassan emerai anaisimountai tesserakonta eiresiei xreumenui. eyros de, tei eyrutatos esti o kolpos, emisy emeres plooy. rhexie d' en aytui kai amputis ana pasan emeren ginetai. [3] eteron toiouton kolpon kai ten Aigypton dokeu genesthai kote, ton men ek teis boreies thalasses kolpon esexonta ep' Aithiopies, ton de Arabion, ton erxomai lexun, ek teis noties feronta epi Syries, sxedon men alleloisi syntetrainontas tous myxous, oligon de ti parallassontas teis xures. [4] ei un ethelesei ektrepsai to rheethron o Neilos es touton ton Arabion kolpon, ti min kuluei rheontos toutoy ekxustheinai entos ge dismyriun eteun; egu men gar elpomai ge kai myriun entos xustheinai an. kou ge de en tui proanaisimumenui xronui proteron e eme genesthai oyk an xustheie kolpos kai pollui mezun eti toutoy ypo tosoutoy te potamou kai oytu ergatikou;    
      12. As regards Egypt then, I both believe those who say that things are so, and for myself also I am strongly of opinion that they are so; because I have observed that Egypt runs out into the sea further than the adjoining land, and that shells are found upon the mountains of it, and an efflorescence of salt forms upon the surface, so that even the pyramids are being eaten away by it, and moreover that of all the mountains of Egypt, the range which lies above Memphis is the only one which has sand: besides which I notice that Egypt resembles neither the land of Arabia, which borders upon it, nor Libya, nor yet Syria (for they are Syrians who dwell in the parts of Arabia lying along the sea), but that it has soil which is black and easily breaks up, seeing that it is in truth mud and silt brought down from Ethiopia by the river: but the soil of Libya, we know, is reddish in colour and rather sandy, while that of Arabia and Syria is somewhat clayey and rocky.         12. [1] ta peri Aigypton un kai toisi legoysi ayta peithomai kai aytos oytu karta dokeu einai, idun te ten Aigypton prokeimenen teis exomenes geis kogxulia te fainomena epi toisi oresi kai almen epantheoysan, uste kai tas pyramidas deleesthai, kai psammon mounon Aiguptoy oros touto to yper Memfios exon, [2] pros de tei xurei oyte tei Arabiei prosourui eousei ten Aigypton proseikelen oyte tei Libuei, oy men oyde tei Syriei (teis gar Arabies ta para thalassan Suroi nemontai), alla melaggaion te kai katarregnymenen, uste eousan ilun te kai proxysin ex Aithiopies kateneneigmenen ypo tou potamou. [3] ten de Libuen idmen erythroteren te gein kai ypopsammoteren, ten de Arabien te kai Syrien argiludesteren te kai ypopetron eousan.    
      13. The priests also gave me a strong proof concerning this land as follows, namely that in the reign of king Moiris, whenever the river reached a height of at least eight cubits it watered Egypt below Memphis; and not yet nine hundred years had gone by since the death of Moiris, when I heard these things from the priests: now however, unless the river rises to sixteen cubits, or fifteen at the least, it does not go over the land. I think too that those Egyptians who dwell below the lake of Moiris and especially in that region which is called the Delta, if that land continues to grow in height according to this proportion and to increase similarly in extent, will suffer for all remaining time, from the Nile not overflowing their land, that same thing which they themselves said that the Hellenes would at some time suffer: for hearing that the whole land of the Hellenes has rain and is not watered by rivers as theirs is, they said that the Hellenes would at some time be disappointed of a great hope and would suffer the ills of famine. This saying means that if the god shall not send them rain, but shall allow drought to prevail for a long time, the Hellenes will be destroyed by hunger; for they have in fact no other supply of water to save them except from Zeus alone.         13. [1] elegon de kai tode moi mega tekmerion peri teis xures tautes oi irees, us epi Moirios basileos, okus elthoi o potamos epi oktu pexeas to elaxiston, ardeske Aigypton ten enerthe Memfios. kai Moiri oyku En etea einakosia teteleytekoti ote tun ireun tauta egu ekoyon. nun de ei me ep' ekkaideka e pentekaideka pexeas anabei to elaxiston o potamos, oyk yperbainei es ten xuren. [2] dokeoysi te moi Aigyptiun oi enerthe limnes teis Moirios oikeontes ta te alla xuria kai to kaleomenon Delta, en oytu e xure ayte kata logon epididui es ypsos kai to omoion apodidui es ayxesin, me katakluzontos ayten tou Neiloy peisesthai ton panta xronon ton epiloipon Aiguptioi to kote aytoi Ellenas efasan peisesthai. [3] pythomenoi gar us yetai pasa e xure tun Ellenun all' oy potamoisi ardetai kata per e sfetere, efasan Ellenas pseysthentas kote elpidos megales kakus peinesein. to de epos touto ethelei legein us, ei me ethelesei sfi yein o theos alla ayxmui diaxrasthai, limui oi Ellenes airethesontai. oy gar de sfi esti ydatos oydemia alle apostrofe oti me ek tou Dios mounon.    
      14. This has been rightly said by the Egyptians with reference to the Hellenes: but now let me tell how matters are with the Egyptians themselves in their turn. If, in accordance with what I before said, their land below Memphis (for this is that which is increasing) shall continue to increase in height according to the same proportion as in past time, assuredly those Egyptians who dwell here will suffer famine, if their land shall not have rain nor the river be able to go over their fields. It is certain however that now they gather in fruit from the earth with less labour than any other men and also with less than the other Egyptians; for they have no labour in breaking up furrows with a plough nor in hoeing nor in any other of those labours which other men have about a crop; but when the river has come up of itself and watered their fields and after watering has left them again, then each man sows his own field and turns into it swine, and when he has trodden the seed into the ground by means of the swine, after that he waits for the harvest; and when he has threshed the corn by means of the swine, then he gathers it in.         14. [1] kai tauta men es Ellenas Aigyptioisi orthus exonta eiretai. fere de nun kai aytoisi Aigyptioisi us exei frasu. ei sfi theloi, us kai proteron eipon, e xure e enerthe Memfios (ayte gar esti e ayxanomene) kata logon tou paroixomenoy xronoy es ypsos ayxanesthai, allo ti e oi tautei oikeontes Aigyptiun peinesoysi; ei mete ge ysetai sfi e xure mete o potamos oios t' estai es tas arouras yperbainein. [2] E gar de nun ge oytoi aponetotata karpon komizontai ek geis tun te allun anthrupun pantun kai tun loipun Aigyptiun. oi oyte arotrui anarregnuntes aylakas exoysi ponoys oyte skallontes oyte allo ergazomenoi oyden tun oi alloi anthrupoi peri leion poneoysi, all' epean sfi o potamos aytomatos epelthun arsei tas arouras, arsas de apolipei opisu, tote speiras ekastos ten euytou aroyran esballei es ayten ys, epean de katapatesei teisi ysi to sperma, ameton to apo toutoy menei, apodinesas de teisi ysi ton siton oytu komizetai.    
      15. If we desire to follow the opinions of the Ionians as regards Egypt, who say that the Delta alone is Egypt, reckoning its sea-coast to be from the watch-tower called of Perseus to the fish-curing houses of Pelusion, a distance of forty schoines, and counting it to extend inland as far as the city of Kercasoros, where the Nile divides and runs to Pelusion and Canobos, while as for the rest of Egypt, they assign it partly to Libya and partly to Arabia,--if, I say, we should follow this account, we should thereby declare that in former times the Egyptians had no land to live in; for, as we have seen, their Delta at any rate is alluvial, and has appeared (so to speak) lately, as the Egyptians themselves say and as my opinion is. If then at the first there was no land for them to live in, why did they waste their labour to prove that they had come into being before all other men? They needed not to have made trial of the children to see what language they would first utter. However I am not of opinion that the Egyptians came into being at the same time as that which is called by the Ionians the Delta, but that they existed always ever since the human race came into being, and that as their land advanced forwards, many of them were left in their first abodes and many came down gradually to the lower parts. At least it is certain that in old times Thebes had the name of Egypt, and of this the circumference measures six thousand one hundred and twenty furlongs.         15. [1] ei un boylometha gnumeisi teisi Iunun xrasthai ta peri Aigypton, oi fasi to Delta mounon einai Aigypton, apo Perseos kaleomenes skopieis legontes to para thalassan einai ayteis mexri Tarixeiun tun Peloysiakun, tei de tesserakonta eisi sxoinoi, to de apo thalasses legontun es mesogaian teinein ayten mexri Kerkasuroy polios, kat' en sxizetai o Neilos es te Pelousion rheun kai es Kanubon, ta de alla legontun teis Aiguptoy ta men Libues ta de Arabies einai, apodeiknuoimen an toutui tui logui xreumenoi Aigyptioisi oyk eousan proteron xuren. [2] ede gar sfi to ge Delta, us aytoi legoysi Aiguptioi kai emoi dokeei, esti katarryton te kai neusti us logui eipein anapefenos. ei toinyn sfi xure ge medemia ypeirxe, ti periergazonto dokeontes prutoi anthrupun gegonenai; oyde edei sfeas es diapeiran tun paidiun ienai, tina glussan pruten apesoysi. [3] all' oyte Aigyptioys dokeu ama tui Delta tui ypo Iunun kaleomenui genesthai aiei te einai ex oy anthrupun genos egeneto, proiouses de teis xures pollous men tous ypoleipomenoys aytun genesthai pollous de tous ypokatabainontas. to d' un palai ai Theibai Aigyptos ekaleeto, teis to perimetron stadioi eisi eikosi kai ekaton kai exakisxilioi.    
      16. If then we judge aright of these matters, the opinion of the Ionians about Egypt is not sound: but if the judgment of the Ionians is right, I declare that neither the Hellenes nor the Ionians themselves know how to reckon since they say that the whole earth is made up of three divisions, Europe, Asia, and Libya: for they ought to count in addition to these the Delta of Egypt, since it belongs neither to Asia nor to Libya; for at least it cannot be the river Nile by this reckoning which divides Asia from Libya, but the Nile is cleft at the point of this Delta so as to flow round it, and the result is that this land would come between Asia and Libya.         16. [1] ei un emeis orthus peri aytun ginuskomen, Iunes oyk ey froneoysi peri Aiguptoy. ei de orthe esti e gnume tun Iunun, Ellenas te kai aytous Iunas apodeiknymi oyk epistamenoys logizesthai, oi fasi tria moria einai gein pasan, Eyrupen te kai Asien kai Libuen. [2] tetarton gar de sfeas dei proslogizesthai Aiguptoy to Delta, ei mete ge esti teis Asies mete teis Libues. oy gar de o Neilos ge esti kata touton ton logon o ten Asien oyrizun tei Libuei, tou Delta de toutoy kata to oxu perirregnytai o Neilos, uste en tui metaxu Asies te kai Libues ginoit' an.    
      17. We dismiss then the opinion of the Ionians, and express a judgment of our own in this matter also, that Egypt is all that land which is inhabited by Egyptians, just as Kilikia is that which is inhabited by Kilikians and Assyria that which is inhabited by Assyrians, and we know of no boundary properly speaking between Asia and Libya except the borders of Egypt. If however we shall adopt the opinion which is commonly held by the Hellenes, we shall suppose that the whole of Egypt, beginning from the Cataract and the city of Elephantine, is divided into two parts and that it thus partakes of both the names, since one side will thus belong to Libya and the other to Asia; for the Nile from the Cataract onwards flows to the sea cutting Egypt through the midst; and as far as the city of Kercasoros the Nile flows in one single stream, but from this city onwards it is parted into three ways; and one, which is called the Pelusian mouth, turns towards the East; the second of the ways goes towards the West, and this is called the Canobic mouth; but that one of the ways which is straight runs thus,--when the river in its course downwards comes to the point of the Delta, then it cuts the Delta through the midst and so issues out to the sea. In this we have a portion of the water of the river which is not the smallest nor the least famous, and it is called the Sebennytic mouth. There are also two other mouths which part off from the Sebennytic and go to the sea, and these are called, one the Saitic, the other the Mendesian mouth. The Bolbitinitic and Bucolic mouths, on the other hand, are not natural but made by digging.         17. [1] kai ten men Iunun gnumen apiemen, emeis de ude kai peri toutun legomen, Aigypton men pasan einai tauten ten yp' Aigyptiun oikeomenen kata per Kilikien ten ypo Kilikun kai Assyrien ten ypo Assyriun, oyrisma de Asiei kai Libuei oidamen oyden eon orthui logui ei me tous Aigyptiun oyroys. [2] ei de tui yp' Ellenun nenomismenui xresometha, nomioumen Aigypton pasan arxamenen apo Katadoupun te kai Elefantines polios dixa diaireesthai kai amfotereun tun epunymieun exesthai. ta men gar ayteis einai teis Libues ta de teis Asies. [3] o gar de Neilos arxamenos ek tun Katadoupun rheei mesen Aigypton sxizun es thalassan. mexri men nyn Kerkasuroy polios rheei eis eun o Neilos, to de apo tautes teis polios sxizetai trifasias odous. [4]  kai e men pros eu trepetai, to kaleetai Pelousion stoma, e de etere tun odun pros esperen exei. touto de Kanubikon stoma kekletai. e de de ithea tun odun tui Neilui esti ede. anuthen feromenos es to oxu tou Delta apikneetai, to de apo toutoy sxizun meson to Delta es thalassan exiei, oyte elaxisten moiran tou ydatos parexomenos tauten oyte ekista onomasten. to kaleetai Sebennytikon stoma. [5] esti de kai etera difasia stomata apo tou Sebennytikou aposxisthenta, feronta es thalassan. toisi oynomata keetai tade, tui men Saitikon aytun tui de Mendesion. [6] to de Bolbitinon stoma kai to Boykolikon oyk ithagenea stomata esti all' orykta.    
      18. Moreover also the answer given by the Oracle of Ammon bears witness in support of my opinion that Egypt is of the extent which I declare it to be in my account; and of this answer I heard after I had formed my own opinion about Egypt. For those of the city of Marea and of Apis, dwelling in the parts of Egypt which border on Libya, being of opinion themselves that they were Libyans and not Egyptians, and also being burdened by the rules of religious service, because they desired not to be debarred from the use of cows' flesh, sent to Ammon saying that they had nought in common with the Egyptians, for they dwelt outside the Delta and agreed with them in nothing; and they said they desired that it might be lawful for them to eat everything without distinction. The god however did not permit them to do so, but said that that land which was Egypt which the Nile came over and watered, and that those were Egyptians who dwelling below the city of Elephantine drank of that river. Thus it was answered to them by the Oracle about this:         18. [1] martyreei de moi tei gnumei, oti tosaute esti Aigyptos osen tina egu apodeiknymi tui logui, kai to Ammunos xresterion genomenon. to egu teis emeuytou gnumes ysteron peri Aigypton epythomen. [2] oi gar de ek Marees te polios kai Apios, oikeontes Aiguptoy ta prosoyra Libuei, aytoi te dokeontes einai Libyes kai oyk Aiguptioi kai axthomenoi tei peri ta ira threskeiei, boylomenoi theleun boun me ergesthai, epempsan es Ammuna famenoi oyden sfisi te kai Aigyptioisi koinon einai. oikeein te gar exu tou Delta kai oyden omologeein aytoisi, boulesthai te pantun sfisi exeinai geuesthai. [3] o de theos sfeas oyk ea poieein tauta, fas Aigypton einai tauten ten o Neilos epiun ardei, kai Aigyptioys einai toutoys oi enerthe Elefantines polios oikeontes apo tou potamou toutoy pinoysi. oytu sfi tauta exresthe.    
      19. and the Nile, when it is in flood, goes over not only the Delta but also of the land which is called Libyan and of that which is called Arabian sometimes as much as two days' journey on each side, and at times even more than this or at times less. As regards the nature of the river, neither from the priests nor yet from any other man was I able to obtain any knowledge: and I was desirous especially to learn from them about these matters, namely why the Nile comes down increasing in volume from the summer solstice onwards for a hundred days, and then, when it has reached the number of these days, turns and goes back, failing in its stream, so that through the whole winter season it continues to be low, and until the summer solstice returns. Of none of these things was I able to receive any account from the Egyptians, when I inquired of them what power the Nile has whereby it is of a nature opposite to that of other rivers. And I made inquiry, desiring to know both this which I say and also why, unlike all other rivers, it does not give rise to any breezes blowing from it.         19. [1] eperxetai de o Neilos, epean plethuei, oy mounon to Delta alla kai tou Libykou te legomenoy xurioy einai kai tou Arabioy eniaxei kai epi duo emereun ekateruthi odon, kai pleon eti toutoy kai elasson. tou potamou de fusios peri oyte ti tun ireun oyte alloy oydenos paralabein edynasthen. [2] prothymos de ea tade par' aytun pythesthai, o ti katerxetai men o Neilos plethuun apo tropeun tun therineun arxamenos epi ekaton emeras, pelasas de es ton arithmon toyteun tun emereun opisu aperxetai apoleipun to rheethron, uste braxus ton xeimuna apanta diateleei eun mexri oy aytis tropeun tun therineun. [3] toutun un peri oydenos oyden oios te egenomen paralabein para tun Aigyptiun, istoreun aytous entina dunamin exei o Neilos ta empalin pefykenai tun allun potamun. tauta te de ta lelegmena boylomenos eidenai istoreon kai o ti ayras apopneousas mounos potamun pantun oy parexetai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [20]

     20. However some of the Hellenes who desired to gain distinction for cleverness have given an account of this water in three different ways: two of these I do not think it worth while even to speak of except only to indicate their nature; of which the one says that the Etesian Winds are the cause that makes the river rise, by preventing the Nile from flowing out into the sea. But often the Etesian Winds fail and yet the Nile does the same work as it is wont to do; and moreover, if these were the cause, all the other rivers also which flow in a direction opposed to the Etesian Winds ought to have been affected in the same way as the Nile, and even more, in as much as they are smaller and present to them a feebler flow of stream: but there are many of these rivers in Syria and many also in Libya, and they are affected in no such manner as the Nile.         20. [1] alla Elleinun men tines episemoi boylomenoi genesthai sofien elexan peri tou ydatos toutoy trifasias odous. tun tas men duo tun odun oyd' axiu mnestheinai ei me oson semeinai boylomenos mounon. [2] tun e etere men legei tous etesias anemoys einai aitioys plethuein ton potamon, kuluontas es thalassan ekreein ton Neilon. pollakis de etesiai men oykun epneysan, o de Neilos tuyto ergazetai. [3] pros de, ei etesiai aitioi Esan, xrein kai tous alloys potamous, osoi toisi etesieisi antioi rheoysi, omoius pasxein kai kata ta ayta tui Neilui, kai mallon eti tosoutui osui elassones eontes asthenestera ta rheumata parexontai. eisi de polloi men en tei Syriei potamoi polloi de en tei Libuei, oi oyden toiouto pasxoysi oion ti kai o Neilos.    
      21. The second way shows more ignorance than that which has been mentioned, and it is more marvellous to tell; for it says that the river produces these effects because it flows from the Ocean, and that the Ocean flows round the whole earth.         21. [1] e d' etere anepistemonestere men esti teis lelegmenes, logui de eipein thumasiutere. e legei apo tou Ukeanou rheonta ayton tauta mexanasthai, ton de Ukeanon gein peri pasan rheein.    
      22. The third of the ways is much the most specious, but nevertheless it is the most mistaken of all: for indeed this way has no more truth in it than the rest, alleging as it does that the Nile flows from melting snow; whereas it flows out of Libya through the midst of the Ethiopians, and so comes out into Egypt. How then should it flow from snow, when it flows from the hottest parts to those which are cooler? And indeed most of the facts are such as to convince a man (one at least who is capable of reasoning about such matters), that it is not at all likely that it flows from snow. The first and greatest evidence is afforded by the winds, which blow hot from these regions; the second is that the land is rainless always and without frost, whereas after snow has fallen rain must necessarily come within five days, so that if it snowed in those parts rain would fall there; the third evidence is afforded by the people dwelling there, who are of a black colour by reason of the burning heat. Moreover kites and swallows remain there through the year and do not leave the land; and cranes flying from the cold weather which comes on in the region of Scythia come regularly to these parts for wintering: if then it snowed ever so little in that land through which the Nile flows and in which it has its rise, none of these things would take place, as necessity compels us to admit.         22. [1] e de trite tun odun pollon epieikestate eousa malista epseystai. legei gar de oyd' ayte oyden, famene ton Neilon rheein apo tekomenes xionos. os rheei men ek Libues dia mesun Aithiopun, ekdidoi de es Aigypton. [2] kus un deita rheoi an apo xionos, apo tun thermotatun rheun es ta psyxrotera ta polla esti; andri ge logizesthai toioutun peri oiui te eonti, us oyde oikos apo xionos min rheein, pruton men kai megiston marturion oi anemoi parexontai pneontes apo tun xureun toyteun thermoi. [3] deuteron de oti anombros e xure kai akrustallos diateleei eousa, epi de xioni pesousei pasa anagke esti ysai en pente emereisi, uste, ei exionize, yeto an tauta ta xuria. trita de oi anthrupoi ypo tou kaumatos melanes eontes. [4] iktinoi de kai xelidones di' eteos eontes oyk apoleipoysi, geranoi de feugoysai ton xeimuna ton en tei Skythikei xurei ginomenon foitusi es xeimasien es tous topoys toutoys. ei toinyn exionize kai oson un tauten ten xuren di' Es te rheei kai ek teis arxetai rheun o Neilos, En an toutun oyden, us e anagke elegxei.    
      23. As for him who talked about the Ocean, he carried his tale into the region of the unknown, and so he need not be refuted; since I for my part know of no river Ocean existing, but I think that Homer or one of the poets who were before him invented the name and introduced it into his verse.         23. [1] o de peri tou Ukeanou lexas es afanes ton muthon aneneikas oyk exei elegxon. oy gar tina eguge oida potamon Ukeanon eonta, Omeron de e tina tun proteron genomenun poieteun dokeu to oynoma eyronta es poiesin eseneikasthai.    
      24. If however after I have found fault with the opinions proposed, I am bound to declare an opinion of my own about the matters which are in doubt, I will tell what to my mind is the reason why the Nile increases in the summer. In the winter season the Sun, being driven away from his former path through the heaven by the stormy winds, comes to the upper parts of Libya. If one would set forth the matter in the shortest way, all has now been said; for whatever region this god approaches most and stands directly above, this it may reasonably be supposed is most in want of water, and its native streams of rivers are dried up most.         24. [1] ei de dei mempsamenon gnumas tas prokeimenas ayton peri tun afaneun gnumen apodexasthai, frasu di' o ti moi dokeei plethunesthai o Neilos tou thereos. ten xeimerinen uren apelaynomenos o elios ek teis arxaies diexodoy ypo tun xeimunun erxetai teis Libues ta anu. [2] us men nyn en elaxistui delusai, pan eiretai. teis gar an agxotatu te ei xures oytos o theos kai kata entina, tauten oikos dipsein te ydatun malista kai ta egxuria rheumata marainesthai tun potamun.    
      25. However, to set it forth at greater length, thus it is:--the Sun passing in his course by the upper parts of Libya, does thus, that is to say, since at all times the air in those parts is clear and the country is warm, because there are no cold winds, in passing through it the Sun does just as he was wont to do in the summer, when going through the midst of the heaven, that is he draws to himself the water, and having drawn it he drives it away to the upper parts of the country, and the winds take it up and scattering it abroad melt it into rain; so it is natural that the winds which blow from this region, namely the South and South-west Winds, should be much the most rainy of all the winds. I think however that the Sun does not send away from himself all the water of the Nile of each year, but that he also lets some remain behind with himself. Then when the winter becomes milder, the Sun returns back again to the midst of the heaven, and from that time onwards he draws equally from all rivers; but in the meanwhile they flow in large volume, since water of rain mingles with them in great quantity, because their country receives rain then and is filled with torrent streams. In summer however they are weak, since not only the showers of rain fail then, but also they are drawn by the Sun. The Nile however, alone of all rivers, not having rain and being drawn by the Sun, naturally flows during this time of winter in much less than its proper volume, that is much less than in summer; for then it is drawn equally with all the other waters, but in winter it bears the burden alone. Thus I suppose the Sun to be the cause of these things.         25. [1] us de en pleoni logui delusai, ude exei. diexiun teis Libues ta anu o elios tade poieei. ate dia pantos tou xronoy aithrioy te eontos tou eeros tou kata tauta ta xuria kai aleeineis teis xures eouses kai anemun psyxrun, diexiun poieei oion per kai to theros euthe poieein iun to meson tou oyranou. [2] elkei gar ep' euyton to ydur, elkusas de aputheei es ta anu xuria, ypolambanontes de oi anemoi kai diaskidnantes tekoysi. kai eisi oikotus oi apo tautes teis xures pneontes, o te notos kai o lips, anemun pollon tun pantun yetiutatoi [3] dokeei de moi oyde pan to ydur to epeteion ekastote apopempesthai tou Neiloy o elios, alla kai ypoleipesthai peri euyton. preunomenoy de tou xeimunos aperxetai o elios es meson ton oyranon opisu, kai to entheuten ede omoius apo pantun elkei tun potamun. [4] teus de oi men ombrioy ydatos symmisgomenoy pollou aytoisi, ate yomenes te teis xures kai kexaradrumenes, rheoysi megaloi. tou de thereos tun te ombrun epileipontun aytous kai ypo tou elioy elkomenoi asthenees eisi. [5] o de Neilos eun anombros, elkomenos de ypo tou elioy mounos potamun touton ton xronon, oikotus aytos euytou rheei pollui ypodeesteros e tou thereos. tote men gar meta pantun tun ydatun ison elketai, ton de xeimuna mounos piezetai. oytu ton elion nenomika toutun aition einai.   
      26. He is also the cause in my opinion that the air in these parts is dry, since he makes it so by scorching up his path through the heaven: thus summer prevails always in the upper parts of Libya. If however the station of the seasons had been changed, and where now in the heaven are placed the North Wind and winter, there was the station of the South Wind and of the midday, and where now is placed the South Wind, there was the North, if this had been so, the Sun being driven from the midst of the heaven by the winter and the North Wind would go to the upper parts of Europe, just as now he comes to the upper parts of Libya, and passing in his course throughout the whole of Europe I suppose that he would do to the Ister that which he now works upon the Nile.         26. [1] aitios de o aytos oytos kata gnumen ten emen kai ton eera xeron ton tautei einai, diakaiun ten diexodon euytou. oytu teis Libues ta anu theros aiei katexei. [2] ei de e stasis ellakto tun ureun, kai tou oyranou tei men nun o borees te kai o xeimun estasi, tautei men tou notoy En e stasis kai teis mesambries, tei de o notos nun esteke, tautei de o borees, ei tauta oytu eixe, o elios an apelaynomenos ek mesoy tou oyranou ypo tou xeimunos kai tou boreu eie an ta anu teis Eyrupes kata per nun teis Libues erxetai, diexionta d' an min dia pases Eyrupes elpomai poieein an ton Istron ta per nun ergazetai ton Neilon.    
      27. As to the breeze, why none blows from the river, my opinion is that from very hot places it is not natural that anything should blow, and that a breeze is wont to blow from something cold.         27. [1] teis ayres de peri, oti oyk apopneei, tende exu gnumen, us karta apo thermeun xureun oyk oikos esti oyden apopneein, ayre de apo psyxrou tinos fileei pneein.    
      28. Let these matters then be as they are and as they were at the first: but as to the sources of the Nile, not one either of the Egyptians or of the Libyans or of the Hellenes, who came to speech with me, professed to know anything, except the scribe of the sacred treasury of Athene at the city of Sais in Egypt. To me however this man seemed not to be speaking seriously when he said that he had certain knowledge of it; and he said as follows, namely that there were two mountains of which the tops ran up to a sharp point, situated between the city of Syene, which is in the district of Thebes, and Elephantine, and the names of the mountains were, of the one Crophi and of the other Mophi. From the middle between these two mountains flowed (he said) the sources of the Nile, which were fathomless in depth, and half of the water flowed to Egypt and towards the North Wind, the other half to Ethiopia and the South Wind. As for the fathomless depth of the source, he said that Psammetichos king of Egypt came to a trial of this matter; for he had a rope twisted of many thousands of fathoms and let it down in this place, and it found no bottom. By this the scribe (if this which he told me was really as he said) gave me to understand that there were certain strong eddies there and a backward flow, and that since the water dashed against the mountains, therefore the sounding-line could not come to any bottom when it was let down.         28. [1] tauta men nyn estu us esti te kai us arxen egeneto. tou de Neiloy tas pegas oyte Aigyptiun oyte Libuun oyte Ellenun tun emoi apikomenun es logoys oydeis ypesxeto eidenai, ei me en Aiguptui en Sai poli o grammatistes tun irun xrematun teis Athenaies. [2] oytos d' emoige paizein edokee famenos eidenai atrekeus. elege de ude, einai duo orea es oxu tas koryfas apegmena, metaxu Syenes te polios keimena teis Thebaidos kai Elefantines, oynomata de einai toisi oresi tui men Krufi tui de Mufi. [3] tas un de pegas tou Neiloy eousas abussoys ek tou mesoy tun oreun toutun rheein, kai to men emisy tou ydatos ep' Aiguptoy rheein kai pros boreen anemon, to d' eteron emisy ep' Aithiopies te kai notoy. [4] us de abyssoi eisi ai pegai, es diapeiran efe toutoy Psammetixon Aiguptoy basilea apikesthai. polleun gar ayton xiliadun orgyieun plexamenon kalon kateinai tautei kai oyk exikesthai es bysson. [5] oytu men de o grammatistes, ei ara tauta ginomena elege, apefaine, us eme katanoeein, dinas tinas tautei eousas isxyras kai palirroien, oia de emballontos tou ydatos toisi oresi, me dunasthai katiemenen katapeireterien es bysson ienai.    
      29. From no other person was I able to learn anything about this matter; but for the rest I learnt so much as here follows by the most diligent inquiry; for I went myself as an eye-witness as far as the city of Elephantine and from that point onwards I gathered knowledge by report. From the city of Elephantine as one goes up the river there is country which slopes steeply; so that here one must attach ropes to the vessel on both sides, as one fastens an ox, and so make one's way onward; and if the rope break, the vessel is gone at once, carried away by the violence of the stream. Through this country it is a voyage of about four days in length, and in this part the Nile is winding like the river Maiander, and the distance amounts to twelve schoines, which one must traverse in this manner. Then you will come to a level plain, in which the Nile flows round an island named Tachompso. (Now in the regions above Elephantine there dwell Ethiopians at once succeeding, who also occupy half of the island, and Egyptians the other half.) Adjoining this island there is a great lake, round which dwell Ethiopian nomad tribes; and when you have sailed through this you will come to the stream of the Nile again, which flows into this lake. After this you will disembark and make a journey by land of forty days; for in the Nile sharp rocks stand forth out of the water, and there are many reefs, by which it is not possible for a vessel to pass. Then after having passed through this country in the forty days which I have said, you will embark again in another vessel and sail for twelve days; and after this you will come to a great city called Meroe. This city is said to be the mother-city of all the other Ethiopians: and they who dwell in it reverence of the gods Zeus and Dionysos alone, and these they greatly honour; and they have an Oracle of Zeus established, and make warlike marches whensoever this god commands them by prophesyings and to whatsoever place he commands.         29. [1] alloy de oydenos oyden edynamen pythesthai. alla tosonde men allo epi makrotaton epythomen, mexri men Elefantines polios aytoptes elthun, to de apo toutoy akoei ede istoreun. [2] apo Elefantines polios anu ionti anantes esti xurion. tautei un dei to ploion diadesantas amfoteruthen kata per boun poreuesthai. en de aporragei to ploion oixetai feromenon ypo isxuos tou rhooy. [3] to de xurion touto esti ep' emeras tesseras ploos, skolios de tautei kata per o Maiandros esti o Neilos. sxoinoi de dyudeka eisi oytoi tous dei toutui tui tropui diekplusai. kai epeita apixeai es pedion leion, en tui neison perirreei o Neilos. Taxompsu oynoma aytei esti. [4] oikeoysi de ta apo Elefantines anu Aithiopes ede kai teis nesoy to emisy, to de emisy Aiguptioi. exetai de teis nesoy limnen megale, ten perix nomades Aithiopes nemontai. ten diekplusas es tou Neiloy to rheethron exeis, to es ten limnen tauten ekdidoi. [5] kai epeita apobas para ton potamon odoiporien poieseai emereun tesserakonta. skopeloi te gar en tui Neilui oxees anexoysi kai xoirades pollai eisi, di' un oyk oia te esti pleein. [6] diexelthun de en teisi tesserakonta emereisi touto to xurion, aytis es eteron ploion esbas dyudeka emeras pleuseai, kai epeita exeis es polin megalen tei oynoma esti Meroe. legetai de ayte e polis einai metropolis tun allun Aithiopun. [7] oi d' en tautei Dia theun kai Dionyson mounoys sebontai, toutoys te megalus timusi, kai sfi manteion Dios katesteke. strateuontai de epean sfeas o theos oytos keleuei dia thespismatun, kai tei an keleuei, ekeise.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [30]

     30. Sailing from this city you will come to the "Deserters" in another period of time equal to that in which you came from Elephantine to the mother- city of the Ethiopians. Now the name of these "Deserters" is Asmach, and this word signifies, when translated into the tongue of the Hellenes, "those who stand on the left hand of the king." These were two hundred and forty thousand Egyptians of the warrior class, who revolted and went over to the Ethiopians for the following cause:--In the reign of Psammetichos garrisons were set, one towards the Ethiopians at the city of Elephantine, another towards the Arabians and Assyrians at Daphnai of Pelusion, and another towards Libya at Marea: and even in my own time the garrisons of the Persians too are ordered in the same manner as these were in the reign of Psammetichos, for both at Elephantine and at Daphnai the Persians have outposts. The Egyptians then of whom I speak had served as outposts for three years and no one relieved them from their guard; accordingly they took counsel together, and adopting a common plan they all in a body revolted from Psammetichos and set out for Ethiopia. Hearing this Psammetichos set forth in pursuit, and when he came up with them he entreated them much and endeavoured to persuade them not to desert the gods of their country and their children and wives: upon which it is said that one of them pointed to his privy member and said that wherever this was, there would they have both children and wives. When these came to Ethiopia they gave themselves over to the king of the Ethiopians; and he rewarded them as follows:--there were certain of the Ethiopians who had come to be at variance with him; and he bade them drive these out and dwell in their land. So since these men settled in the land of the Ethiopians, the Ethiopians have come to be of milder manners, from having learnt the customs of the Egyptians.         30. [1] apo de tautes teis polios pleun en isui xronui allui exeis es tous aytomoloys en osui per ex Elefantines Elthes es ten metropolin ten Aithiopun. toisi de aytomoloisi toutoisi oynoma esti Asmax, dunatai de touto to epos kata ten Ellenun glussan oi ex aristereis xeiros paristamenoi basilei. [2] apestesan de aytai tesseres kai eikosi myriades Aigyptiun tun maximun es tous Aithiopas toutoys di' aitien toiende. epi Psammetixoy basileos fylakai katestesan en te Elefantinei poli pros Aithiopun kai en Dafneisi teisi Peloysieisi alle pros Arabiun te kai Assyriun, kai en Mareei pros Libues alle. [3] eti de ep' emeu kai Perseun kata tayta ai fylakai exoysi us kai epi Psammetixoy Esan. kai gar en Elefantinei Persai froyreoysi kai en Dafneisi. tous un de Aigyptioys tria etea froyresantas apelye oydeis teis froyreis. oi de boyleysamenoi kai koinui logui xresamenoi pantes apo tou Psammetixoy apostantes eisan es Aithiopien. [4] Psammetixos de pythomenos ediuke. us de katelabe, edeeto polla legun kai sfeas theous patruioys apolipein oyk ea kai tekna kai gynaikas. tun de tina legetai dexanta to aidoion eipein, entha an touto ei, esesthai aytoisi enthauta kai tekna kai gynaikas. [5] oytoi epeite es Aithiopien apikonto, didousi sfeas aytous tui Aithiopun basilei, o de sfeas tuide antidureetai. Esan oi diaforoi tines gegonotes tun Aithiopun. toutoys ekeleye exelontas ten ekeinun gein oikeein. toutun de esoikisthentun es tous Aithiopas emeruteroi gegonasi Aithiopes, ethea mathontes Aiguptia.    
      31. The Nile then, besides that part of its course which is in Egypt, is known as far as a four months' journey by river and land: for that is the number of months which are found by reckoning to be spent in going from Elephantine to these "Deserters": and the river runs from the West and the setting of the sun. But what comes after that no one can clearly say; for this land is desert by reason of the burning heat.         31. [1] mexri men nyn tesserun menun plooy kai odou ginusketai o Neilos parex tou en Aiguptui rheumatos. tosoutoi gar symballomenui meines eyriskontai anaisimoumenoi ex Elefantines poreyomenui es tous aytomoloys toutoys. rheei de apo esperes te kai elioy dysmeun. to de apo toude oydeis exei safeus frasai. eremos gar esti e xure ayte ypo kaumatos.    
      32. Thus much however I heard from men of Kyrene, who told me that they had been to the Oracle of Ammon, and had come to speech with Etearchos king of the Ammonians: and it happened that after speaking of other matters they fell to discourse about the Nile and how no one knew the sources of it; and Etearchos said that once there had come to him men of the Nasamonians (this is a Libyan race which dwells in the Syrtis, and also in the land to the East of the Syrtis reaching to no great distance), and when the Nasamonians came and were asked by him whether they were able to tell him anything more than he knew about the desert parts of Libya, they said that there had been among them certain sons of chief men, who were of unruly disposition; and these when they grew up to be men had devised various other extravagant things and also they had told off by lot five of themselves to go to see the desert parts of Libya and to try whether they could discover more than those who had previously explored furthest: for in those parts of Libya which are by the Northern Sea, beginning from Egypt and going as far as the headland of Soloeis, which is the extreme point of Libya, Libyans (and of them many races) extend along the whole coast, except so much as the Hellenes and Phenicians hold; but in the upper parts, which lie above the sea-coast and above those people whose land comes down to the sea, Libya is full of wild beasts; and in the parts above the land of wild beasts it is full of sand, terribly waterless and utterly desert. These young men then (said they), being sent out by their companions well furnished with supplies of water and provisions, went first through the inhabited country, and after they had passed through this they came to the country of wild beasts, and after this they passed through the desert, making their journey towards the West Wind; and having passed through a great tract of sand in many days, they saw at last trees growing in a level place; and having come up to them, they were beginning to pluck the fruit which was upon the trees: but as they began to pluck it, there came upon them small men, of less stature than men of the common size, and these seized them and carried them away; and neither could the Nasamonians understand anything of their speech nor could those who were carrying them off understand anything of the speech of the Nasamonians: and they led them (so it was said) through very great swamps, and after passing through these they came to a city in which all the men were in size like those who carried them off and in colour of skin black; and by the city ran a great river, which ran from the West towards the sunrising, and in it were seen crocodiles.         32. [1] alla tade men ekoysa andrun Kyrenaiun famenun elthein te epi to Ammunos xresterion kai apikesthai es logoys Etearxui tui Ammuniun basilei, kai kus ek logun allun apikesthai es lesxen peri tou Neiloy, us oydeis aytou oide tas pegas, kai ton Etearxon fanai elthein kote par' ayton Nasamunas andras. [2] to de ethnos touto esti men Libykon, nemetai de ten Surtin te kai ten pros eu xuren teis Surtios oyk epi pollon. [3] apikomenoys de tous Nasamunas kai eirutumenoys ei ti exoysi pleon legein peri tun eremun teis Libues, fanai para sfisi genesthai andrun dynasteun paidas ybristas, tous alla te mexanasthai andruthentas perissa kai de kai apoklerusai pente euytun opsomenoys ta erema teis Libues, kai ei ti pleon idoien tun ta makrotata idomenun. [4] teis gar Libues ta men kata ten boreien thalassan ap' Aiguptoy arxamenoi mexri Soloentos akres, e teleytai teis Libues, parekoysi para pasan Libyes kai Libuun ethnea polla, plen oson Ellenes kai Foinikes exoysi. ta de yper thalasses te kai tun epi thalassan katekontun anthrupun, ta katuperthe theriudes esti e Libue. ta de katuperthe teis theriudeos psammos te esti kai anydros deinus kai eremos pantun. [5] eipai un tous neenias apopempomenoys ypo tun elikun, ydasi te kai sitioisi ey exertymenoys, ienai ta pruta men dia teis oikeomenes, tauten de diexelthontas es ten theriudea apikesthai, ek de tautes ten eremon diexienai, ten odon poieymenoys pros zefyron anemon, [6] diexelthontas de xuron pollon psammudea kai en polleisi emereisi idein de kote dendrea en pediui pefykota, kai sfeas proselthontas aptesthai tou epeontos epi tun dendreun karpou, aptomenoisi de sfi epelthein andras mikrous, metriun elassonas andrun, labontas de agein sfeas. funeis de oyte ti teis ekeinun tous Nasamunas ginuskein oyte tous agontas tun Nasamunun. [7] agein te de aytous di' eleun megistun, kai diexelthontas tauta apikesthai es polin en tei pantas einai toisi agoysi to megathos isoys, xruma de melanas. para de ten polin rheein potamon megan, rheein de apo esperes ayton pros elion anatellonta, fainesthai de en aytui krokodeiloys.    
      33. Of the account given by Etearchos the Ammonian let so much suffice as is here said, except that, as the men of Kyrene told me, he alleged that the Nasamonians returned safe home, and that the people to whom they had come were all wizards. Now this river which ran by the city, Etearchos conjectured to be the Nile, and moreover reason compels us to think so; for the Nile flows from Libya and cuts Libya through in the midst, and as I conjecture, judging of what is not known by that which is evident to the view, it starts at a distance from its mouth equal to that of the Ister: for the river Ister begins from the Keltoi and the city of Pyrene and so runs that it divides Europe in the midst (now the Keltoi are outside the Pillars of Heracles and border upon the Kynesians, who dwell furthest towards the sunset of all those who have their dwelling in Europe); and the Ister ends, having its course through the whole of Europe, by flowing into the Euxine Sea at the place where the Milesians have their settlement of Istria.         33. [1] o men de tou Ammunioy Etearxoy logos es touto moi dedelusthu, plen oti aponosteisai te efaske tous Nasamunas, us oi Kyrenaioi elegon, kai es tous oytoi apikonto anthrupoys, goetas einai apantas. [2] ton de de potamon touton ton pararreonta kai Etearxos syneballeto einai Neilon, kai de kai o logos oytu aireei. rheei gar ek Libues o Neilos kai mesen tamnun Libuen, kai us egu symballomai toisi emfanesi ta me ginuskomena tekmairomenos, tui Istrui ek tun isun metrun ormatai. [3] Istros te gar potamos arxamenos ek Keltun kai Pyrenes polios rheei mesen sxizun ten Eyrupen. oi de Keltoi eisi exu Erakleun steleun, omoyreoysi de Kynesioisi, oi esxatoi pros dysmeun oikeoysi tun en tei Eyrupei katoikemenun. [4] teleytai de o Istros es thalassan rheun ten tou Eyxeinoy pontoy dia pases Eyrupes, tei Istrien oi Milesiun oikeoysi apoikoi.    
      34. Now the Ister, since it flows through land which is inhabited, is known by the reports of many; but of the sources of the Nile no one can give an account, for the part of Libya through which it flows is uninhabited and desert. About its course however so much as it was possible to learn by the most diligent inquiry has been told; and it runs out into Egypt. Now Egypt lies nearly opposite to the mountain districts of Kilikia; and from thence to Sinope, which lies upon the Euxine Sea, is a journey in the same straight line of five days for a man without encumbrance; and Sinope lies opposite to the place where the Ister runs out into the sea: thus I think that the Nile passes through the whole of Libya and is of equal measure with the Ister. Of the Nile then let so much suffice as has been said.         34. [1] o men de Istros, rheei gar di' oikeomenes, pros pollun ginusketai, peri de tun tou Neiloy pegeun oydeis exei legein. aoiketos te gar kai eremos esti e Libue di' Es rheei. peri de tou rheumatos aytou, ep' oson makrotaton istoreunta En exikesthai, eiretai. ekdidoi de es Aigypton. e de Aigyptos teis oreineis Kilikies malista kei antie keetai. [2] entheuten de es Sinupen ten en tui Eyxeinui pontui pente emereun ithea odos eyzunui andri. e de Sinupe tui Istrui ekdidonti es thalassan antion keetai. oytu ton Neilon dokeu dia pases teis Libues diexionta exisousthai tui Istrui. Neiloy men nyn peri tosauta eiresthu.   
      35. Of Egypt however I shall make my report at length, because it has wonders more in number than any other land, and works too it has to show as much as any land, which are beyond expression great: for this reason then more shall be said concerning it. The Egyptians in agreement with their climate, which is unlike any other, and with the river, which shows a nature different from all other rivers, established for themselves manners and customs in a way opposite to other men in almost all matters: for among them the women frequent the market and carry on trade, while the men remain at home and weave; and whereas others weave pushing the woof upwards, the Egyptians push it downwards: the men carry their burdens upon their heads and the women upon their shoulders: the women make water standing up and the men crouching down: they ease themselves in their houses and they eat without in the streets, alleging as reason for this that it is right to do secretly the things that are unseemly though necessary, but those which are not unseemly, in public: no woman is a minister either of male or female divinity, but men of all, both male and female: to support their parents the sons are in no way compelled, if they do not desire to do so, but the daughters are forced to do so, be they never so unwilling.         35. [1] erxomai de peri Aiguptoy mekyneun ton logon, oti pleista thumasia exei e e alle pasa xure kai erga logoy mezu parexetai pros pasan xuren toutun eineka pleu peri ayteis eiresetai.  [2] Aiguptioi ama tui oyranui tui kata sfeas eonti eteroiui kai tui potamui fusin alloien parexomenui e oi alloi potamoi, ta polla panta empalin toisi alloisi anthrupoisi estesanto ethea te kai nomoys. en toisi ai men gynaikes agorazoysi kai kapeleuoysi, oi de andres kat' oikoys eontes yfainoysi. yfainoysi de oi men alloi anu ten kroken utheontes, Aiguptioi de katu. [3] ta axthea oi men andres epi tun kefaleun foreoysi, ai de gynaikes epi tun umun. oyreoysi ai men gynaikes orthai, oi de andres katemenoi. eymareiei xreuntai en toisi oikoisi, esthioysi de exu en teisi odoisi epilegontes us ta men aisxra anagkaia de en apokrufui esti poieein xreon, ta de me aisxra anafandon. [4] iratai gyne men oydemia oyte ersenos theou oyte thelees, andres de pantun te kai paseun. trefein tous tokeas toisi men paisi oydemia anagke me boylomenoisi, teisi de thygatrasi pasa anagke kai me boylomeneisi.    
      36. The priests of the gods in other lands wear long hair, but in Egypt they shave their heads: among other men the custom is that in mourning those whom the matter concerns most nearly have their hair cut short, but the Egyptians, when deaths occur, let their hair grow long, both that on the head and that on the chin, having before been close shaven: other men have their daily living separated from beasts, but the Egyptians have theirs together with beasts: other men live on wheat and barley, but to any one of the Egyptians who makes his living on these it is a great reproach; they make their bread of maize, which some call spelt; they knead dough with their feet and clay with their hands, with which also they gather up dung: and whereas other men, except such as have learnt otherwise from the Egyptians, have their members as nature made them, the Egyptians practise circumcision: as to garments, the men wear two each and the women but one: and whereas others make fast the rings and ropes of the sails outside the ship, the Egyptians do this inside: finally in the writing of characters and reckoning with pebbles, while the Hellenes carry the hand from the left to the right, the Egyptians do this from the right to the left; and doing so they say that they do it themselves rightwise and the Hellenes leftwise: and they use two kinds of characters for writing, of which the one kind is called sacred and the other common.         36. [1] oi irees tun theun tei men allei komeoysi, en Aiguptui de xyruntai. toisi alloisi anthrupoisi nomos ama kedei kekarthai tas kefalas tous malista ikneetai, Aiguptioi de ypo tous thanatoys anieisi tas trixas ayxesthai tas te en tei kefalei kai tui geneiui, teus exyremenoi. [2] toisi men alloisi anthrupoisi xuris theriun e diaita apokekritai, Aigyptioisi de omou therioisi e diaita esti. apo pyrun kai kritheun ulloi zuoysi, Aigyptiun de tui poieymenui apo toutun ten zoen oneidos megiston esti, alla apo olyreun poieuntai sitia, tas zeias metexeteroi kaleoysi. [3] fyrusi to men stais toisi posi, ton de pelon teisi xersi, kai ten kopron anaireontai. ta aidoia ulloi men eusi us egenonto, plen osoi apo toutun emathon, Aiguptioi de peritamnontai. eimata tun men andrun ekastos exei duo, tun de gynaikun en ekaste. [4] tun istiun tous krikoys kai tous kaloys oi men alloi exuthen prosdeoysi, Aiguptioi de esuthen. grammata grafoysi kai logizontai psefoisi Ellenes men apo tun aristerun epi ta dexia ferontes ten xeira, Aiguptioi de apo tun dexiun epi ta aristera. kai poieuntes tauta aytoi men fasi epi dexia poieein, Ellenas de ep' aristera. difasioisi de grammasi xreuntai, kai ta men aytun ira ta de demotika kaleetai.    
      37. They are religious excessively beyond all other men, and with regard to this they have customs as follows:--they drink from cups of bronze and rinse them out every day, and not some only do this but all: they wear garments of linen always newly washed, and this they make a special point of practice: they circumcise themselves for the sake of cleanliness, preferring to be clean rather than comely. The priests shave themselves all over their body every other day, so that no lice or any other foul thing may come to be upon them when they minister to the gods; and the priests wear garments of linen only and sandals of papyrus, and any other garment they may not take nor other sandals; these wash themselves in cold water twice in the day and twice again in the night; and other religious services they perform (one may almost say) of infinite number. They enjoy also good things not a few, for they do not consume or spend anything of their own substance, but there is sacred bread baked for them and they have each great quantity of flesh of oxen and geese coming in to them each day, and also wine of grapes is given to them; but it is not permitted to them to taste of fish: beans moreover the Egyptians do not at all sow in their land, and those which grow they neither eat raw nor boil for food; nay the priests do not endure even to look upon them, thinking this to be an unclean kind of pulse: and there is not one priest only for each of the gods but many, and of them one is chief- priest, and whenever a priest dies his son is appointed to his place.         37. [1] theosebees de perissus eontes malista pantun anthrupun nomoisi toioiside xreuntai. ek xalkeun poteriun pinoysi, diasmuntes ana pasan emeren, oyk o men o d' oy, alla pantes. [2] eimata de linea foreoysi aiei neoplyta, epitedeuontes touto malista, ta te aidoia peritamnontai kathareiotetos eineken, protimuntes katharoi einai e eyprepesteroi. oi de irees xyruntai pan to suma dia trites emeres, ina mete ftheir mete allo mysaron meden egginetai sfi therapeuoysi tous theous. [3] estheita de foreoysi oi irees lineen mounen kai ypodemata bublina. allen de sfi estheita oyk exesti labein oyde ypodemata alla. lountai de dis teis emeres ekastes psyxrui kai dis ekastes nyktos, allas te threskeias epiteleoysi myrias us eipein logui. [4] pasxoysi de kai agatha oyk oliga. oyte ti gar tun oikeiun triboysi oyte dapanuntai, alla kai sitia sfi esti ira pessomena, kai kreun boeun kai xeneun pleithos ti ekastui ginetai pollon emeres ekastes, didotai de sfi kai oinos ampelinos. ixthuun de oy sfi exesti pasasthai. [5] kyamoys de oyte ti mala speiroysi Aiguptioi en tei xurei, tous te ginomenoys oyte trugoysi oyte epsontes pateontai, oi de de irees oyde oreontes anexontai, nomizontes oy katharon einai min osprion. iratai de oyk eis ekastoy tun theun alla polloi, tun eis esti arxiereus. epean de tis apothanei, toutoy o pais antikatistatai.    
      38. The males of the ox kind they consider to belong to Epaphos, and on account of him they test them in the following manner:--If the priest sees one single black hair upon the beast he counts it not clean for sacrifice; and one of the priests who is appointed for the purpose makes investigation of these matters, both when the beast is standing upright and when it is lying on its back, drawing out its tongue moreover, to see if it is clean in respect of the appointed signs, which I shall tell of in another part of the history: he looks also at the hairs of the tail to see if it has them growing in the natural manner: and if it be clean in respect of all these things, he marks it with a piece of papyrus, rolling this round the horns, and then when he has plastered sealing-earth over it he sets upon it the seal of his signet-ring, and after that they take the animal away. But for one who sacrifices a beast not sealed the penalty appointed is death.         38. [1] tous de bous tous ersenas tou Epafoy einai nomizoysi, kai toutoy eineka dokimazoysi aytous ude. trixa en kai mian idetai epeousan melainan, oy katharon einai nomizei. [2] dizetai de tauta epi toutui tetagmenos tun tis ireun kai orthou esteutos tou kteneos kai yptioy, kai ten glussan exeirusas, ei kathare tun prokeimenun semeiun, ta egu en allui logui ereu. katorai de kai tas trixas teis oyreis ei kata fusin exei pefykyias. [3] en de toutun pantun ei katharos, semainetai bublui peri ta kerea eilissun kai epeita gein semantrida epiplasas epiballei ton daktulion, kai oytu apagoysi. asemanton de thusanti thanatos e zemie epikeetai. dokimazetai men nyn to kteinos tropui toiuide, thysie de sfi ede katesteke.    
      39. In this way then the beast is tested; and their appointed manner of sacrifice is as follows:--they lead the sealed beast to the altar where they happen to be sacrificing and then kindle a fire: after that, having poured libations of wine over the altar so that it runs down upon the victim and having called upon the god, they cut its throat, and having cut its throat they sever the head from the body. The body then of the beast they flay, but upon the head they make many imprecations first, and then they who have a market and Hellenes sojourning among them for trade, these carry it to the market-place and sell it, while they who have no Hellenes among them cast it away into the river: and this is the form of imprecation which they utter upon the heads, praying that if any evil be about to befall either themselves who are offering sacrifice or the land of Egypt in general, it may come rather upon this head. Now as regards the heads of the beasts which are sacrificed and the pouring over them of the wine, all the Egyptians have the same customs equally for all their sacrifices; and by reason of this custom none of the Egyptians eat of the head either of this or of any other kind of animal:         39. [1] agagontes to sesemasmenon kteinos pros ton bumon okoy an thuusi, pur anakaioysi, epeita de ep' aytou oinon kata tou ireioy epispeisantes kai epikalesantes ton theon sfazoysi, sfaxantes de apotamnoysi ten kefalen. [2] suma men de tou kteneos deiroysi, kefalei de keinei polla kataresamenoi feroysi, toisi men an ei agore kai Ellenes sfi eusi epidemioi emporoi, oi de ferontes es ten agoren ap' un edonto, toisi de an me pareusi Ellenes, oi d' ekballoysi es ton potamon. [3] kataruntai de tade legontes teisi kefaleisi, ei ti melloi e sfisi toisi thuoysi e Aiguptui tei synapasei kakon genesthai, es kefalen tauten trapesthai. [4] kata men nyn tas kefalas tun thyomenun kteneun kai ten epispeisin tou oinoy pantes Aiguptioi nomoisi toisi aytoisi xreuntai omoius es panta ta ira, kai apo toutoy tou nomoy oyde alloy oydenos empsuxoy kefaleis geusetai Aigyptiun oydeis.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [40]

     40. but the manner of disembowelling the victims and of burning them is appointed among them differently for different sacrifices; I shall speak however of the sacrifices to that goddess whom they regard as the greatest of all, and to whom they celebrate the greatest feast.--When they have flayed the bullock and made imprecation, they take out the whole of its lower entrails but leave in the body the upper entrails and the fat; and they sever from it the legs and the end of the loin and the shoulders and the neck: and this done, they fill the rest of the body of the animal with consecrated loaves and honey and raisins and figs and frankincense and myrrh and every other kind of spices, and having filled it with these they offer it, pouring over it great abundance of oil. They make their sacrifice after fasting, and while the offerings are being burnt, they all beat themselves for mourning, and when they have finished beating themselves they set forth as a feast that which they left unburnt of the sacrifice.         40. [1] e de de exairesis tun irun kai e kausis alle peri allo iron sfi katesteke. ten d' un megisten te daimona egentai einai kai megisten oi orten anagoysi, tauten erxomai ereun .... [2] epean apodeirusi ton boun, kateyxamenoi koilien men keinen pasan ex un eilon, splagxna de aytou leipoysi en tui sumati kai ten pimelen, skelea de apotamnoysi kai ten osfun akren kai tous umoys te kai ton traxelon. [3] tauta de poiesantes to allo suma tou boos pimplasi artun katharun kai melitos kai astafidos kai sukun kai libanutou kai smurnes kai tun allun thyumatun, plesantes de toutun katagizoysi, elaion afthonon kataxeontes. [4] pronesteusantes de thuoysi, kaiomenun de tun irun tuptontai pantes, epean de apotupsuntai, daita protithentai ta eliponto tun irun.    
      41. The clean males then of the ox kind, both full-grown animals and calves, are sacrificed by all the Egyptians; the females however they may not sacrifice, but these are sacred to Isis; for the figure of Isis is in the form of a woman with cow's horns, just as the Hellenes present Io in pictures, and all the Egyptians without distinction reverence cows far more than any other kind of cattle; for which reason neither man nor woman of Egyptian race would kiss a man who is a Hellene on the mouth, nor will they use a knife or roasting-spits or a caldron belonging to a Hellene, nor taste of the flesh even of a clean animal if it has been cut with the knife of a Hellene. And the cattle of this kind which die they bury in the following manner:--the females they cast into the river, but the males they bury, each people in the suburb of their town, with one of the horns, or sometimes both, protruding to mark the place; and when the bodies have rotted away and the appointed time comes on, then to each city comes a boat from that which is called the island of Prosopitis (this is in the Delta, and the extent of its circuit is nine schoines). In this island of Prosopitis is situated, besides many other cities, that one from which the boats come to take up the bones of the oxen, and the name of the city is Atarbechis, and in it there is set up a holy temple of Aphrodite. From this city many go abroad in various directions, some to one city and others to another, and when they have dug up the bones of the oxen they carry them off, and coming together they bury them in one single place. In the same manner as they bury the oxen they bury also their other cattle when they die; for about them also they have the same law laid down, and these also they abstain from killing.         41. [1] tous men nyn katharous bous tous ersenas kai tous mosxoys oi pantes Aiguptioi thuoysi, tas de theleas oy sfi exesti thuein, alla irai eisi teis Isios. [2] to gar teis Isios agalma eon gynaikeion boukerun esti kata per Ellenes ten Ioun grafoysi, kai tas bous tas theleas Aiguptioi pantes omoius sebontai probatun pantun malista makrui. [3] tun eineka oyte aner Aiguptios oyte gyne andra Ellena fileseie an tui stomati, oyde maxairei andros Ellenos xresetai oyde obeloisi oyde lebeti, oyde kreus katharou boos diatetmemenoy Ellenikei maxairei geusetai. [4] thaptoysi de tous apothneskontas bous tropon tonde. tas men theleas es ton potamon apieisi, tous de ersenas katorussoysi ekastoi en toisi proasteioisi, to keras to eteron e kai amfotera yperexonta semeioy eineken. epean de sapei kai prosiei o tetagmenos xronos, apikneetai es ekasten polin baris ek teis Prosupitidos kaleymenes nesoy. [5] e d' esti men en tui Delta, perimetron de ayteis eisi sxoinoi ennea. en tautei u tei Prosupitidi nesui eneisi men kai allai polies syxnai, ek teis de ai baries paraginontai anairesomenai ta ostea tun boun, oynoma tei poli Atarbexis, en d' aytei Afrodites iron agion idrytai. [6] ek tautes teis polios planuntai polloi alloi es allas polis, anoruxantes de ta ostea apagoysi kai thaptoysi es ena xuron pantes. kata tayta de toisi boysi kai talla ktenea thaptoysi apothneskonta. kai gar peri tauta oytu sfi nenomothetetai. kteinoysi gar de oyde tauta.    
      42. Now all who have a temple set up to the Theban Zeus or who are of the district of Thebes, these, I say, all sacrifice goats and abstain from sheep: for not all the Egyptians equally reverence the same gods, except only Isis and Osiris (who they say is Dionysos), these they all reverence alike: but they who have a temple of Mendes or belong to the Mendesian district, these abstain from goats and sacrifice sheep. Now the men of Thebes and those who after their example abstain from sheep, say that this custom was established among them for the cause which follows:--Heracles (they say) had an earnest desire to see Zeus, and Zeus did not desire to be seen of him; and at last when Heracles was urgent in entreaty Zeus contrived this device, that is to say, he flayed a ram and held in front of him the head of the ram which he had cut off, and he put on over him the fleece and then showed himself to him. Hence the Egyptians make the image of Zeus into the face of a ram; and the Ammonians do so also after their example, being settlers both from the Egyptians and from the Ethiopians, and using a language which is a medley of both tongues: and in my opinion it is from this god that the Ammonians took the name which they have, for the Egyptians call Zeus Amun. The Thebans then do not sacrifice rams but hold them sacred for this reason; on one day however in the year, on the feast of Zeus, they cut up in the same manner and flay one single ram and cover with its skin the image of Zeus, and then they bring up to it another image of Heracles. This done, all who are in the temple beat themselves in lamentation for the ram, and then they bury it in a sacred tomb.         42. [1] osoi men de Dios Thebaieos idryntai iron e nomou tou Thebaioy eisi, oytoi men nyn pantes oiun apexomenoi aigas thuoysi. [2] theous gar de oy tous aytous apantes omoius Aiguptioi sebontai, plen Isios te kai Osirios, ton de Dionyson einai legoysi. toutoys de omoius apantes sebontai. osoi de tou Mendetos ektentai iron e nomou tou Mendesioy eisi, oytoi de aigun apexomenoi ois thuoysi. [3] Thebaioi men nyn kai osoi dia toutoys oiun apexontai, dia tade legoysi ton nomon tonde sfisi tetheinai. Eraklea theleisai pantus idesthai ton Dia, kai ton oyk ethelein oftheinai yp' aytou. telos de, epeite lipareein ton Eraklea, tade ton Dia mexanesasthai. [4] krion ekdeiranta prosxesthai te ten kefalen apotamonta tou kriou kai endunta to nakos oytu oi euyton epidexai. apo toutoy krioprosupon tou Dios tugalma poieusi Aiguptioi, apo de Aigyptiun Ammunioi, eontes Aigyptiun te kai Aithiopun apoikoi kai funen metaxu amfoterun nomizontes. [5] dokeein de moi, kai to oynoma Ammunioi apo toude sfisi ten epunymien epoiesanto. Amoun gar Aiguptioi kaleoysi ton Dia. tous de krious oy thuoysi Thebaioi, all' eisi sfi iroi dia touto. [6] miei de emerei tou eniaytou, en ortei tou Dios, krion ena katakopsantes kai apodeirantes kata tuyto enduoysi tugalma tou Dios, kai epeita allo agalma Erakleos prosagoysi pros ayto. tauta de poiesantes tuptontai oi peri to iron apantes ton krion kai epeita en irei thekei thaptoysi ayton.    
      43. About Heracles I heard the account given that he was of the number of the twelve gods; but of the other Heracles whom the Hellenes know I was not able to hear in any part of Egypt: and moreover to prove that the Egyptians did not take the name of Heracles from the Hellenes, but rather the Hellenes from the Egyptians,--that is to say those of the Hellenes who gave the name Heracles to the son of Amphitryon,--of that, I say, besides many other evidences there is chiefly this, namely that the parents of this Heracles, Amphitryon and Alcmene, were both of Egypt by descent, and also that the Egyptians say that they do not know the names either of Poseidon or of the Dioscuroi, nor have these been accepted by them as gods among the other gods; whereas if they had received from the Hellenes the name of any divinity, they would naturally have preserved the memory of these most of all, assuming that in those times as now some of the Hellenes were wont to make voyages and were sea-faring folk, as I suppose and as my judgment compels me to think; so that the Egyptians would have learnt the names of these gods even more than that of Heracles. In fact however Heracles is a very ancient Egyptian god; and (as they say themselves) it is seventeen thousand years to the beginning of the reign of Amasis from the time when the twelve gods, of whom they count that Heracles is one, were begotten of the eight gods.         43. [1] Erakleos de peri tonde ton logon ekoysa, oti eie tun dyudeka theun. tou eteroy de peri Erakleos, ton Ellenes oidasi, oydamei Aiguptoy edynasthen akousai. [2] kai men oti ge oy par' Ellenun elabon to oynoma Aiguptioi tou Erakleos, alla Ellenes mallon par' Aigyptiun kai Ellenun oytoi oi themenoi tui Amfitruunos gonui toynoma Eraklea, polla moi kai alla tekmeria esti touto oytu exein, en de kai tode, oti te tou Erakleos toutoy oi gonees amfoteroi Esan Amfitruun kai Alkmene gegonotes to anekathen ap' Aiguptoy, kai dioti Aiguptioi oyte Poseideunos oyte Dioskourun ta oynomata fasi eidenai, oyde sfi theoi oytoi en toisi alloisi theoisi apodedexatai. [3] kai men ei ge par' Ellenun elabon oynoma tey daimonos, toutun oyk ekista alla malista emellon mnemen exein, ei per kai tote naytilieisi exreunto kai Esan Ellenun tines naytiloi, us elpomai te kai eme gnume aireei. uste toutun an kai mallon tun theun ta oynomata exepisteato Aiguptioi e tou Erakleos. [4] alla tis arxaios esti theos Aigyptioisi Eraklees. us de aytoi legoysi, etea esti eptakisxilia kai muria es Amasin basileusanta, epeite ek tun oktu theun oi dyudeka theoi egenonto tun Eraklea ena nomizoysi.    
      44. I moreover, desiring to know something certain of these matters so far as might be, made a voyage also to Tyre of Phenicia, hearing that in that place there was a holy temple of Heracles; and I saw that it was richly furnished with many votive offerings besides, and especially there were in it two pillars, the one of pure gold and the other of an emerald stone of such size as to shine by night: and having come to speech with the priests of the god, I asked them how long time it was since their temple had been set up: and these also I found to be at variance with the Hellenes, for they said that at the same time when Tyre was founded, the temple of the god also had been set up, and that it was a period of two thousand three hundred years since their people began to dwell at Tyre. I saw also at Tyre another temple of Heracles, with the surname Thasian; and I came to Thasos also and there I found a temple of Heracles set up by the Phenicians, who had sailed out to seek for Europa and had colonised Thasos; and these things happened full five generations of men before Heracles the son of Amphitryon was born in Hellas. So then my inquiries show clearly that Heracles is an ancient god, and those of the Hellenes seem to me to act most rightly who have two temples of Heracles set up, and who sacrifice to the one as an immortal god and with the title Olympian, and make offerings of the dead to the other as a hero.         44. [1] kai thelun de toutun peri safes ti eidenai ex un oion te En, epleysa kai es Turon teis Foinikes, pynthanomenos aytothi einai iron Erakleos agion. [2] kai eidon ploysius kateskeyasmenon alloisi te polloisi anathemasi, kai en aytui Esan steilai duo, e men xrysou apefthoy, e de smaragdoy lithoy lampontos tas nuktas megathos. es logoys de elthun toisi ireusi tou theou eiromen okosos xronos eie ex oy sfi to iron idrytai. [3] eyron de oyde toutoys toisi Ellesi symferomenoys. efasan gar ama Turui oikizomenei kai to iron tou theou idrytheinai, einai de etea ap' oy Turon oikeoysi triekosia kai disxilia. eidon de en tei Turui kai allo iron Erakleos epunymien exontos Thasioy einai. [4] apikomen de kai es Thason, en tei eyron iron Erakleos ypo Foinikun idrymenon, oi kat' Eyrupes zetesin ekplusantes Thason ektisan. kai tauta kai pente geneeisi andrun protera esti e ton Amfitruunos Eraklea en tei Elladi genesthai. [5] ta men nyn istoremena deloi safeus palaion theon Eraklea eonta, kai dokeoysi de moi oytoi orthotata Ellenun poieein, oi dixa Erakleia idrysamenoi ektentai, kai tui men us athanatui Olympiui de epunymien thuoysi, tui de eterui us erui enagizoysi.    
      45. Moreover, besides many other stories which the Hellenes tell without due consideration, this tale is especially foolish which they tell about Heracles, namely that when he came to Egypt, the Egyptians put on him wreaths and led him forth in procession to sacrifice him to Zeus; and he for some time kept quiet, but when they were beginning the sacrifice of him at the altar, he betook himself to prowess and slew them all. I for my part am of opinion that the Hellenes when they tell this tale are altogether without knowledge of the nature and customs of the Egyptians; for how should they for whom it is not lawful to sacrifice even beasts, except swine and the males of oxen and calves (such of them as are clean) and geese, how should these sacrifice human beings? Besides this, how is it in nature possible that Heracles, being one person only and moreover a man (as they assert), should slay many myriads? Having said so much of these matters, we pray that we may have grace from both the gods and the heroes for our speech.         45. [1] legoysi de polla kai alla anepiskeptus oi Ellenes, eyethes de aytun kai ode o muthos esti ton peri tou Erakleos legoysi, us ayton apikomenon es Aigypton stepsantes oi Aiguptioi ypo pompeis exeigon us thusontes tui Dii. ton de teus men esyxien exein, epei de aytou pros tui bumui katarxonto, es alken trapomenon pantas sfeas katafoneusai. [2] emoi men nyn dokeoysi tauta legontes teis Aigyptiun fusios kai tun nomun pampan apeirus exein oi Ellenes. toisi gar oyde ktenea osie thuein esti xuris yun kai ersenun boun kai mosxun, osoi an katharoi eusi, kai xenun, kus an oytoi anthrupoys thuoien; [3] eti de ena eonta ton Eraklea kai eti anthrupon, us de fasi, kus fusin exei pollas myriadas foneusai; kai peri men toutun tosauta emin eipousi kai para tun theun kai para tun eruun eymeneia eie.    
      46. Now the reason why those of the Egyptians whom I have mentioned do not sacrifice goats, female or male, is this:--the Mendesians count Pan to be one of the eight gods (now these eight gods they say came into being before the twelve gods), and the painters and image-makers represent in painting and in sculpture the figure of Pan, just as the Hellenes do, with goat's face and legs, not supposing him to be really like this but to resemble the other gods; the cause however why they represent him in this form I prefer not to say. The Mendesians then reverence all goats and the males more than the females (and the goatherds too have greater honour than other herdsmen), but of the goats one especially is reverenced, and when he dies there is great mourning in all the Mendesian district: and both the goat and Pan are called in the Egyptian tongue Mendes. Moreover in my lifetime there happened in that district this marvel, that is to say a he-goat had intercourse with a woman publicly, and this was so done that all men might have evidence of it.         46. [1] tas de de aigas kai tous tragoys tunde eineka oy thuoysi Aigyptiun oi eiremenoi. ton Pana tun oktu theun logizontai einai oi Mendesioi, tous de oktu theous toutoys proteroys tun dyudeka theun fasi genesthai. [2] grafoysi te de kai glufoysi oi zugrafoi kai oi agalmatopoioi tou Panos tugalma kata per Ellenes aigoprosupon kai tragoskelea, oyti toiouton nomizontes einai min alla omoion toisi alloisi theoisi. otey de eineka toiouton grafoysi ayton, oy moi edion esti legein. [3] sebontai de pantas tous aigas oi Mendesioi, kai mallon tous ersenas tun theleun, kai toutun oi aipoloi timas mezonas exoysi. ek de toutun ena malista, ostis epean apothanei, penthos mega panti tui Mendesiui nomui tithetai. [4] kaleetai de o te tragos kai o Pan Aigyptisti Mendes. egeneto de en tui nomui toutui ep' emeu touto to teras. gynaiki tragos emisgeto anafandon. touto es epidexin anthrupun apiketo.    
      47. The pig is accounted by the Egyptians an abominable animal; and first, if any of them in passing by touch a pig, he goes into the river and dips himself forthwith in the water together with his garments; and then too swineherds, though they be native Egyptians, unlike all others do not enter any of the temples in Egypt, nor is anyone willing to give his daughter in marriage to one of them or to take a wife from among them; but the swineherds both give in marriage to one another and take from one another. Now to the other gods the Egyptians do not think it right to sacrifice swine; but to the Moon and to Dionysos alone at the same time and on the same full-moon they sacrifice swine, and then eat their flesh: and as to the reason why, when they abominate swine at all their other feasts, they sacrifice them at this, there is a story told by the Egyptians; and this story I know, but it is not a seemly one for me to tell. Now the sacrifice of the swine to the Moon is performed as follows:--when the priest has slain the victim, he puts together the end of the tail and the spleen and the caul, and covers them up with the whole of the fat of the animal which is about the paunch, and then he offers them with fire; and the rest of the flesh they eat on that day of full moon upon which they have held the sacrifice, but on any day after this they will not taste of it: the poor however among them by reason of the scantiness of their means shape pigs of dough and having baked them they offer these as a sacrifice.         47. [1] yn de Aiguptioi miaron egentai therion einai, kai touto men en tis psausei aytun pariun aytoisi toisi imatioisi ap' un ebapse euyton bas es ton potamon. touto de oi sybutai eontes Aiguptioi eggenees es iron oyden tun en Aiguptui eserxontai mounoi pantun, oyde sfi ekdidosthai oydeis thygatera ethelei oyd' agesthai ex aytun, all' ekdidontai te oi sybutai kai agontai ex allelun. [2] toisi men nyn alloisi theoisi thuein ys oy dikaiousi Aiguptioi, Selenei de kai Dionusui mounoisi tou aytou xronoy, tei aytei panselenui, tous ys thusantes pateontai tun kreun. dioti de tous ys en men teisi alleisi orteisi apestygekasi en de tautei thuoysi, esti men logos peri aytou yp' Aigyptiun legomenos, emoi mentoi epistamenui oyk eyprepesteros esti legesthai. [3] thysie de ede tun yun tei Selenei poieetai. epean thusei, ten oyren akren kai ton spleina kai ton epiploon syntheis omou kat' un ekalypse pasei tou kteneos tei pimelei tei peri ten nedun ginomenei, kai epeita katagizei pyri. ta de alla krea siteontai en tei panselenui en tei an ta ira thususi, en allei de emerei oyk an eti geysaiato. oi de penetes aytun yp' astheneies bioy staitinas plasantes ys kai optesantes tautas thuoysi.    
      48. Then for Dionysos on the eve of the festival each one kills a pig by cutting its throat before his own doors, and after that he gives the pig to the swineherd who sold it to him, to carry away again; and the rest of the feast of Dionysos is celebrated by the Egyptians in the same way as by the Hellenes in almost all things except choral dances, but instead of the phallos they have invented another contrivance, namely figures of about a cubit in height worked by strings, which women carry about the villages, with the privy member made to move and not much less in size than the rest of the body: and a flute goes before and they follow singing the praises of Dionysos. As to the reason why the figure has this member larger than is natural and moves it, though it moves no other part of the body, about this there is a sacred story told.         48. [1] tui de Dionusui teis orteis tei dorpiei xoiron pro tun thyreun sfaxas ekastos didoi apoferesthai ton xoiron aytui tui apodomenui tun sybuteun. [2] ten de allen anagoysi orten tui Dionusui oi Aiguptioi plen xorun kata tayta sxedon panta Ellesi. anti de fallun alla sfi esti exeyremena, oson te pexyaia agalmata neyrospasta, ta periforeoysi kata kumas gynaikes, neuon to aidoion, oy pollui teui elasson eon tou alloy sumatos. proegeetai de aylos, ai de epontai aeidoysai ton Dionyson. [3] dioti de mezon te exei to aidoion kai kineei mounon tou sumatos, esti logos peri aytou iros legomenos.    
      49. Now I think that Melampus the son of Amytheon was not without knowledge of these rites of sacrifice, but was acquainted with them: for Melampus is he who first set forth to the Hellenes the name of Dionysos and the manner of sacrifice and the procession of the phallos. Strictly speaking indeed, he when he made it known did not take in the whole, but those wise men who came after him made it known more at large. Melampus then is he who taught of the phallos which is carried in procession for Dionysos, and from him the Hellenes learnt to do that which they do. I say then that Melampus being a man of ability contrived for himself an art of divination, and having learnt from Egypt he taught the Hellenes many things, and among them those that concern Dionysos, making changes in some few points of them: for I shall not say that that which is done in worship of the god in Egypt came accidentally to be the same with that which is done among the Hellenes, for then these rites would have been in character with the Hellenic worship and not lately brought in; nor certainly shall I say that the Egyptians took from the Hellenes either this or any other customary observance: but I think it most probable that Melampus learnt the matters concerning Dionysos from Cadmos the Tyrian and from those who came with him from Phenicia to the land which we now call Boeotia.         49. [1] ede un dokeei moi Melampoys o Amytheunos teis thysies tautes oyk einai adaes all' empeiros. Ellesi gar de Melampoys esti o exegesamenos tou Dionusoy to te oynoma kai ten thysien kai ten pompen tou fallou. atrekeus men oy panta syllabun ton logon efene, all' oi epigenomenoi toutui sofistai mezonus exefenan. ton d' un fallon ton tui Dionusui pempomenon Melampoys esti o kategesamenos, kai apo toutoy mathontes poieusi ta poieusi Ellenes. [2] egu men nyn femi Melampoda genomenon andra sofon mantiken te euytui systeisai kai pythomenon ap' Aiguptoy alla te polla esegesasthai Ellesi kai ta peri ton Dionyson, oliga aytun parallaxanta. oy gar de sympesein ge fesu ta te en Aiguptui poieumena tui theui kai ta en toisi Ellesi. omotropa gar an En toisi Ellesi kai oy neusti esegmena. [3] oy men oyde fesu okus Aiguptioi par' Ellenun elabon e touto e allo kou ti nomaion. pythesthai de moi dokeei malista Melampoys ta peri ton Dionyson para Kadmoy te tou Tyrioy kai tun sun aytui ek Foinikes apikomenun es ten nun Boiutien kaleomenen xuren.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [50]

     50. Moreover the naming of almost all the gods has come to Hellas from Egypt: for that it has come from the Barbarians I find by inquiry is true, and I am of opinion that most probably it has come from Egypt, because, except in the case of Poseidon and the Dioscuroi (in accordance with that which I have said before), and also of Hera and Hestia and Themis and the Charites and Nereids, the Egyptians have had the names of all the other gods in their country for all time. What I say here is that which the Egyptians think themselves: but as for the gods whose names they profess that they do not know, these I think received their naming from the Pelasgians, except Poseidon; but about this god the Hellenes learnt from the Libyans, for no people except the Libyans have had the name of Poseidon from the first and have paid honour to this god always. Nor, it may be added, have the Egyptians any custom of worshipping heroes.         50. [1] sxedon de kai pantun ta oynomata tun theun ex Aiguptoy elelythe es ten Ellada. dioti men gar ek tun barbarun ekei, pynthanomenos oytu eyrisku eon. dokeu d' un malista ap' Aiguptoy apixthai. [2] oti gar de me Poseideunos kai Dioskourun, us kai proteron moi tauta eiretai, kai Eres kai Isties kai Themios kai Kharitun kai Nereidun, tun allun theun Aigyptioisi aiei kote ta oynomata esti en tei xurei. legu de ta legoysi aytoi Aiguptioi. tun de oy fasi theun ginuskein ta oynomata, oytoi de moi dokeoysi ypo Pelasgun onomastheinai, plen Poseideunos. touton de ton theon para Libuun eputhonto. [3] oydamoi gar ap' arxeis Poseideunos oynoma ektentai ei me Libyes kai timusi ton theon touton aiei. nomizoysi d' un Aiguptioi oyd' erusi oyden.    
      51. These observances then, and others besides these which I shall mention, the Hellenes have adopted from the Egyptians; but to make, as they do, the images of Hermes with the phallos they have learnt not from the Egyptians but from the Pelasgians, the custom having been received by the Athenians first of all the Hellenes and from these by the rest; for just at the time when the Athenians were beginning to rank among the Hellenes, the Pelasgians became dwellers with them in their land, and from this very cause it was that they began to be counted as Hellenes. Whosoever has been initiated in the mysteries of the Cabeiroi, which the Samothrakians perform having received them from the Pelasgians, that man knows the meaning of my speech; for these very Pelasgians who became dwellers with the Athenians used to dwell before that time in Samothrake, and from them the Samothrakians received their mysteries. So then the Athenians were the first of the Hellenes who made the images of Hermes with the phallos, having learnt from the Pelasgians; and the Pelasgians told a sacred story about it, which is set forth in the mysteries in Samothrake.         51. [1] tauta men nyn kai alla pros toutoisi, ta egu frasu, Ellenes ap' Aigyptiun nenomikasi. tou de Ermeu ta agalmata ortha exein ta aidoia poieuntes oyk ap' Aigyptiun memathekasi, all' apo Pelasgun prutoi men Ellenun apantun Athenaioi paralabontes, para de toutun ulloi. [2] Athenaioisi gar ede tenikauta es Ellenas teleoysi Pelasgoi sunoikoi egenonto en tei xurei, othen per kai Ellenes erxanto nomistheinai. ostis de ta Kabeirun orgia memuetai, ta Samothreikes epiteleoysi paralabontes para Pelasgun, oytos uner oide to legu. [3] ten gar Samothreiken oikeon proteron Pelasgoi oytoi oi per Athenaioisi sunoikoi egenonto, kai para toutun Samothreikes ta orgia paralambanoysi. [4] ortha un exein ta aidoia tagalmata tou Ermeu Athenaioi prutoi Ellenun mathontes para Pelasgun epoiesanto. oi de Pelasgoi iron tina logon peri aytou elexan, ta en toisi en Samothreikei mysterioisi dedelutai.    
      52. Now the Pelasgians formerly were wont to make all their sacrifices calling upon the gods in prayer, as I know from that which I heard at Dodona, but they gave no title or name to any of them, for they had not yet heard any, but they called them gods from some such notion as this, that they had set in order all things and so had the distribution of everything. Afterwards, when much time had elapsed, they learnt from Egypt the names of the gods, all except Dionysos, for his name they learnt long afterwards; and after a time the Pelasgians consulted the Oracle at Dodona about the names, for this prophetic seat is accounted to be the most ancient of the Oracles which are among the Hellenes, and at that time it was the only one. So when the Pelasgians asked the Oracle at Dodona whether they should adopt the names which had come from the Barbarians, the Oracle in reply bade them make use of the names. From this time they sacrificed using the names of the gods, and from the Pelasgians the Hellenes afterwards received them:         52. [1] ethyon de panta proteron oi Pelasgoi theoisi epeyxomenoi, us egu en Dudunei oida akousas, epunymien de oyd' oynoma epoieunto oydeni aytun. oy gar akekoesan ku. theous de prosunomasan sfeas apo tou toioutoy, oti kosmui thentes ta panta pregmata kai pasas nomas eixon. [2] epeita de xronoy pollou diexelthontos eputhonto ek teis Aiguptoy apikomena ta oynomata tun theun tun allun, Dionusoy de ysteron pollui eputhonto. kai meta xronon exresteriazonto peri tun oynomatun en Dudunei. to gar de manteion touto nenomistai arxaiotaton tun en Ellesi xresteriun einai, kai En ton xronon touton mounon. [3] epei un exresteriazonto en tei Dudunei oi Pelasgoi ei aneluntai ta oynomata ta apo tun barbarun ekonta, aneile to manteion xrasthai. apo men de toutoy tou xronoy ethyon toisi oynomasi tun theun xreumenoi. para de Pelasgun Ellenes exedexanto ysteron.    
      53. but whence the several gods had their birth, or whether they all were from the beginning, and of what form they are, they did not learn till yesterday, as it were, or the day before: for Hesiod and Homer I suppose were four hundred years before my time and not more, and these are they who made a theogony for the Hellenes and gave the titles to the gods and distributed to them honours and arts, and set forth their forms: but the poets who are said to have been before these men were really in my opinion after them. Of these things the first are said by the priestesses of Dodona, and the latter things, those namely which have regard to Hesiod and Homer, by myself.         53. [1] enthen de egenonto ekastos tun theun, eite aiei Esan pantes, okoioi te tines ta eidea, oyk episteato mexri oy pruen te kai xthes us eipein logui. [2] Esiodon gar kai Omeron elikien tetrakosioisi etesi dokeu mey presbyteroys genesthai kai oy pleosi. oytoi de eisi oi poiesantes theogonien Ellesi kai toisi theoisi tas epunymias dontes kai timas te kai texnas dielontes kai eidea aytun semenantes. [3] oi de proteron poietai legomenoi toutun tun andrun genesthai ysteron, emoige dokeein, egenonto. toutun ta men pruta ai Dudunides ireiai legoysi, ta de ystera ta es Esiodon te kai Omeron exonta egu legu.    
      54. As regards the Oracles both that among the Hellenes and that in Libya, the Egyptians tell the following tale. The priests of the Theban Zeus told me that two women in the service of the temple had been carried away from Thebes by Phenicians, and that they had heard that one of them had been sold to go into Libya and the other to the Hellenes; and these women, they said, were they who first founded the prophetic seats among the nations which have been named: and when I inquired whence they knew so perfectly of this tale which they told, they said in reply that a great search had been made by the priests after these women, and that they had not been able to find them, but they had heard afterwards this tale about them which they were telling.         54. [1] xresteriun de peri tou te en Ellesi kai tou en Libuei tonde Aiguptioi logon legoysi. efasan oi irees tou Thebaieos Dios duo gynaikas ireias ek Thebeun exaxtheinai ypo Foinikun, kai ten men ayteun pythesthai es Libuen pretheisan ten de es tous Ellenas. tautas de tas gynaikas einai tas idrysamenas ta manteia prutas en toisi eiremenoisi ethnesi. [2] eiromenoy de mey okothen oytu atrekeus epistamenoi legoysi, efasan pros tauta zetesin megalen apo sfeun genesthai tun gynaikun toyteun, kai aneyrein men sfeas oy dynatoi genesthai, pythesthai de ysteron tauta peri ayteun ta per de elegon.    
      55. This I heard from the priests at Thebes, and what follows is said by the prophetesses of Dodona. They say that two black doves flew from Thebes to Egypt, and came one of them to Libya and the other to their land. And this latter settled upon an oak-tree and spoke with human voice, saying that it was necessary that a prophetic seat of Zeus should be established in that place; and they supposed that that was of the gods which was announced to them, and made one accordingly: and the dove which went away to the Libyans, they say, bade the Libyans to make an Oracle of Ammon; and this also is of Zeus. The priestesses of Dodona told me these things, of whom the eldest was named Promeneia, the next after her Timarete, and the youngest Nicandra; and the other people of Dodona who were engaged about the temple gave accounts agreeing with theirs.         55. [1] tauta men nyn tun en Thebeisi ireun ekoyon, tade de Dudunaiun fasi ai promanties. duo peleiadas melainas ek Thebeun tun Aigyptieun anaptamenas ten men ayteun es Libuen ten de para sfeas apikesthai, [2] izomenen de min epi fegon aydaxasthai funei anthrupeiei us xreon eie manteion aytothi Dios genesthai, kai aytous ypolabein theion einai to epaggellomenon aytoisi, kai sfeas ek toutoy poieisai. [3] ten de es tous Libyas oixomenen peleiada legoysi Ammunos xresterion keleusai tous Libyas poieein. esti de kai touto Dios. Dudunaiun de ai ireiai, tun tei presbytatei oynoma En Promeneia, tei de meta tauten Timarete, tei de neutatei Nikandre, elegon tauta. synumologeon de sfi kai oi alloi Dudunaioi oi peri to iron.    
      56. I however have an opinion about the matter as follows:--If the Phenicians did in truth carry away the consecrated women and sold one of them into Libya and the other into Hellas, I suppose that in the country now called Hellas, which was formerly called Pelasgia, this woman was sold into the land of the Thesprotians; and then being a slave there she set up a sanctuary of Zeus under a real oak-tree; as indeed it was natural that being an attendant of the sanctuary of Zeus at Thebes, she should there, in the place to which she had come, have a memory of him; and after this, when she got understanding of the Hellenic tongue, she established an Oracle, and she reported, I suppose, that her sister had been sold in Libya by the same Phenicians by whom she herself had been sold.         56. [1] egu d' exu peri aytun gnumen tende. ei aletheus oi Foinikes exegagon tas iras gynaikas kai ten men ayteun es Libuen ten de es ten Ellada apedonto, dokeei emoi e gyne ayte teis nun Ellados, proteron de Pelasgies kaleymenes teis ayteis tautes, pretheinai es Thesprutous, [2] epeita doyleuoysa aytothi idrusasthai ypo fegui pefykyiei iron Dios, usper En oikos amfipoleuoysan en Thebeisi iron Dios, entha apiketo, enthauta mnemen aytou exein. [3] ek de toutoy xresterion kategesato, epeite synelabe ten Ellada glussan. fanai de oi adelfeen en Libuei pepreisthai ypo tun aytun Foinikun yp' un kai ayte eprethe.    
      57. Moreover, I think that the women were called doves by the people of Dodona for the reason that they were Barbarians and because it seemed to them that they uttered voice like birds; but after a time (they say) the dove spoke with human voice, that is when the woman began to speak so that they could understand; but so long as she spoke a Barbarian tongue she seemed to them to be uttering voice like a bird: for had it been really a dove, how could it speak with human voice? And in saying that the dove was black, they indicate that the woman was Egyptian. The ways of delivering oracles too at Thebes in Egypt and at Dodona closely resemble one another, as it happens, and also the method of divination by victims has come from Egypt.         57. [1] peleiades de moi dokeoysi kletheinai pros Dudunaiun epi toude ai gynaikes, dioti barbaroi Esan, edokeon de sfi omoius ornisi ftheggesthai. [2] meta de xronon ten peleiada anthrupeiei funei aydaxasthai legoysi, epeite syneta sfi eyda e gyne. eus de ebarbarize, ornithos tropon edokee sfi ftheggesthai, epei teui an tropui peleias ge anthrupeiei funei fthegxaito; melainan de legontes einai ten peleiada semainoysi oti Aigyptie e gyne En. [3] e de manteie e te en Thebeisi teisi Aigyptieisi kai en Dudunei paraplesiai alleleisi tygxanoysi eousai. esti de kai tun irun e mantike ap' Aiguptoy apigmene.    
      58. Moreover, it is true also that the Egyptians were the first of men who made solemn assemblies and processions and approaches to the temples, and from them the Hellenes have learnt them, and my evidence for this is that the Egyptian celebrations of these have been held from a very ancient time, whereas the Hellenic were introduced but lately.         58. [1] paneguris de ara kai pompas kai prosagugas prutoi anthrupun Aiguptioi eisi oi poiesamenoi, kai para toutun Ellenes memathekasi. tekmerion de moi toutoy tode. ai men gar fainontai ek pollou tey xronoy poieumenai, ai de Ellenikai neusti epoiethesan.    
      59. The Egyptians hold their solemn assemblies not once in the year but often, especially and with the greatest zeal and devotion at the city of Bubastis for Artemis, and next at Busiris for Isis; for in this last-named city there is a very great temple of Isis, and this city stands in the middle of the Delta of Egypt; now Isis is in the tongue of the Hellenes Demeter: thirdly, they have a solemn assembly at the city of Sais for Athene, fourthly at Heliopolis for the Sun (Helios), fifthly at the city of Buto in honour of Leto, and sixthly at the city of Papremis for Ares.         59. [1] panegyrizoysi de Aiguptioi oyk apax tou eniaytou, paneguris de syxnas, malista men kai prothymotata es Boubastin polin tei Artemidi, deutera de es Bousirin polin tei Isi. [2] en tautei gar de tei poli esti megiston Isios iron, idrytai de e polis ayte teis Aiguptoy en mesui tui Delta. Isis de esti kata ten Ellenun glussan Demeter. [3] trita de es Sain polin tei Athenaiei panegyrizoysi, tetarta de es Elioy polin tui Eliu, pempta de es Boytoun polin tei Letoi, ekta de es Papremin polin tui Arei.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [60]

     60. Now, when they are coming to the city of Bubastis they do as follows:--they sail men and women together, and a great multitude of each sex in every boat; and some of the women have rattles and rattle with them, while some of the men play the flute during the whole time of the voyage, and the rest, both women and men, sing and clap their hands; and when as they sail they come opposite to any city on the way they bring the boat to land, and some of the women continue to do as I have said, others cry aloud and jeer at the women in that city, some dance, and some stand up and pull up their garments. This they do by every city along the river-bank; and when they come to Bubastis they hold festival celebrating great sacrifices, and more wine of grapes is consumed upon that festival than during the whole of the rest of the year. To this place (so say the natives) they come together year by year even to the number of seventy myriads of men and women, besides children.         60. [1] es men nyn Boubastin polin epean komizuntai, poieusi toiade. pleoysi te gar de ama andres gynaixi kai pollon ti pleithos ekaterun en ekastei bari. ai men tines tun gynaikun krotala exoysai krotalizoysi, oi de ayleoysi kata panta ton ploon, ai de loipai gynaikes kai andres aeidoysi kai tas xeiras kroteoysi. [2] epean de pleontes kata tina polin allen genuntai, egxrimpsantes ten barin tei gei poieusi toiade. ai men tines tun gynaikun poieusi ta per eireka, ai de tuthazoysi bousai tas en tei poli tautei gynaikas, ai de orxeontai, ai de anasurontai anistamenai. tauta para pasan polin parapotamien poieusi. [3] epean de apikuntai es ten Boubastin, ortazoysi megalas anagontes thysias, kai oinos ampelinos anaisimoutai pleun en tei ortei tautei e en tui apanti eniaytui tui epiloipui. symfoitusi de, o ti aner kai gyne esti plen paidiun, kai es ebdomekonta myriadas, us oi epixurioi legoysi.    
      61. Thus it is done here; and how they celebrate the festival in honour of Isis at the city of Busiris has been told by me before: for, as I said, they beat themselves in mourning after the sacrifice, all of them both men and women, very many myriads of people; but for whom they beat themselves it is not permitted to me by religion to say: and so many as there are of the Carians dwelling in Egypt do this even more than the Egyptians themselves, inasmuch as they cut their foreheads also with knives; and by this it is manifested that they are strangers and not Egyptians.         61. [1] tauta men de tautei poieetai, en de Boysiri poli us anagoysi tei Isi ten orten, eiretai proteron moi. tuptontai men gar de meta ten thysien pantes kai pasai, myriades karta pollai anthrupun. ton de tuptontai, oy moi osion esti legein. [2] osoi de Karun eisi en Aiguptui oikeontes, oytoi de tosoutui eti pleu poieusi toutun osui kai ta metupa koptontai maxaireisi, kai toutui eisi deiloi oti eisi xeinoi kai oyk Aiguptioi.    
      62. At the times when they gather together at the city of Sais for their sacrifices, on a certain night they all kindle lamps many in number in the open air round about the houses; now the lamps are saucers full of salt and oil mixed, and the wick floats by itself on the surface, and this burns during the whole night; and to the festival is given the name Lychnocaia (the lighting of the lamps). Moreover those of the Egyptians who have not come to this solemn assembly observe the night of the festival and themselves also light lamps all of them, and thus not in Sais alone are they lighted, but over all Egypt: and as to the reason why light and honour are allotted to this night, about this there is a sacred story told.         62. [1] es Sain de polin epean syllextheusi, teis thysies en tei nykti luxna kaioysi pantes polla ypaithria peri ta dumata kuklui. ta de luxna esti embafia emplea alos kai elaioy, epipoleis de epesti ayto to elluxnion, kai touto kaietai pannuxion, kai tei ortei oynoma keetai lyxnokaie. [2] oi d' an me elthusi tun Aigyptiun es ten panegyrin tauten, fylassontes ten nukta teis thysies kaioysi kai aytoi pantes ta luxna, kai oytu oyk en Sai mounei kaietai alla kai ana pasan Aigypton. otey de eineka fus elaxe kai timen e nux ayte, esti iros peri aytou logos legomenos.    
      63. To Heliopolis and Buto they go year by year and do sacrifice only: but at Papremis they do sacrifice and worship as elsewhere, and besides that, when the sun begins to go down, while some few of the priests are occupied with the image of the god, the greater number of them stand in the entrance of the temple with wooden clubs, and other persons to the number of more than a thousand men with purpose to perform a vow, these also having all of them staves of wood, stand in a body opposite to those: and the image, which is in a small shrine of wood covered over with gold, they take out on the day before to another sacred building. The few then who have been left about the image, draw a wain with four wheels, which bears the shrine and the image that is within the shrine, and the other priests standing in the gateway try to prevent it from entering, and the men who are under a vow come to the assistance of the god and strike them, while the others defend themselves. Then there comes to be a hard fight with staves, and they break one another's heads, and I am of opinion that many even die of the wounds they receive; the Egyptians however told me that no one died. This solemn assembly the people of the place say that they established for the following reason:--the mother of Ares, they say, used to dwell in this temple, and Ares, having been brought up away from her, when he grew up came thither desiring to visit his mother, and the attendants of his mother's temple, not having seen him before, did not permit him to pass in, but kept him away; and he brought men to help him from another city and handled roughly the attendants of the temple, and entered to visit his mother. Hence, they say, this exchange of blows has become the custom in honour of Ares upon his festival.         63. [1] es de Elioy te polin kai Boytoun thysias mounas epiteleoysi foiteontes. en de Papremi thysias men kai ira kata per kai tei allei poieusi. eyt' an de ginetai kataferes o elios, oligoi men tines tun ireun peri tugalma peponeatai, oi de polloi aytun xulun korunas exontes estasi tou irou en tei esodui, alloi te eyxulas epiteleontes pleunes xiliun andrun, ekastoi exontes xula kai oytoi, epi ta etera alees estasi. [2] to de agalma eon en neui mikrui xylinui katakexrysumenui proekkomizoysi tei proteraiei es allo oikema iron. oi men de oligoi oi peri tugalma leleimmenoi elkoysi tetrakyklon amaxan agoysan ton neon te kai to en tui neui eneon agalma, oi de oyk eusi en toisi propylaioisi esteutes esienai, oi de eyxulimaioi timureontes tui theui paioysi aytous alexomenoys. [3] enthauta maxe xuloisi kartere ginetai kefalas te synarassontai, kai us egu dokeu polloi kai apothneskoysi ek tun trumatun. oy mentoi oi ge Aiguptioi efasan apothneskein oydena. [4] ten de panegyrin tauten ek toude nomisai fasi oi epixurioi. oikeein en tui irui toutui tou Areos ten metera, kai ton Area apotrofon genomenon elthein exandrumenon ethelonta tei metri symmixai, kai tous propoloys teis metros, oia oyk opupotas ayton proteron, oy perioran parienai alla aperukein, ton de ex alles polios agagomenon anthrupoys tous te propoloys trexeus perispein kai eselthein para ten metera. apo toutoy tui Arei tauten ten plegen en tei ortei nenomikenai fasi.    
      64. The Egyptians were the first who made it a point of religion not to lie with women in temples, nor to enter into temples after going away from women without first bathing: for almost all other men except the Egyptians and the Hellenes lie with women in temples and enter into a temple after going away from women without bathing, since they hold that there is no difference in this respect between men and beasts: for they say that they see beasts and the various kinds of birds coupling together both in the temples and in the sacred enclosures of the gods; if then this were not pleasing to the god, the beasts would not do so.         64. [1] kai to me misgesthai gynaixi en iroisi mede aloutoys apo gynaikun es ira esienai oytoi eisi oi prutoi threskeusantes. oi men gar alloi sxedon pantes anthrupoi, plen Aigyptiun kai Ellenun, misgontai en iroisi kai apo gynaikun anistamenoi aloytoi eserxontai es iron, nomizontes anthrupoys einai kata per ta alla ktenea. [2] kai gar ta alla ktenea oran kai ornithun genea oxeyomena en te toisi neoisi tun theun kai en toisi temenesi. ei un einai tui theui touto me filon, oyk an oyde ta ktenea poieein. oytoi men nyn toiauta epilegontes poieusi emoige oyk aresta.   
      65. Thus do these defend that which they do, which by me is disallowed: but the Egyptians are excessively careful in their observances, both in other matters which concern the sacred rites and also in those which follow:--Egypt, though it borders upon Libya, does not very much abound in wild animals, but such as they have are one and all accounted by them sacred, some of them living with men and others not. But if I should say for what reasons the sacred animals have been thus dedicated, I should fall into discourse of matters pertaining to the gods, of which I most desire not to speak; and what I have actually said touching slightly upon them, I said because I was constrained by necessity. About these animals there is a custom of this kind:--persons have been appointed of the Egyptians, both men and women, to provide the food for each kind of beast separately, and their office goes down from father to son; and those who dwell in the various cities perform vows to them thus, that is, when they make a vow to the god to whom the animal belongs, they shave the head of their children either the whole or the half or the third part of it, and then set the hair in the balance against silver, and whatever it weighs, this the man gives to the person who provides for the animals, and she cuts up fish of equal value and gives it for food to the animals. Thus food for their support has been appointed: and if any one kill any of these animals, the penalty, if he do it with his own will, is death, and if against his will, such penalty as the priests may appoint: but whosoever shall kill an ibis or a hawk, whether it be with his will or against his will, must die.         65. [1]  Aiguptioi de threskeuoysi perissus ta te alla peri ta ira kai de kai tade. [2] eousa e Aigyptos omoyros tei Libuei oy mala theriudes esti. ta de eonta sfi apanta ira nenomistai, kai ta men suntrofa aytoisi toisi anthrupoisi, ta de oy. tun de eineken aneitai ta theria ira ei legoimi, katabaien an tui logui es ta theia pregmata, ta egu feugu malista apegeesthai. ta de kai eireka aytun epipsausas, anagkaiei katalambanomenos eipon. [3] nomos de esti peri tun theriun ude exun. meledunoi apodedexatai teis trofeis xuris ekastun kai ersenes kai theleai tun Aigyptiun, tun pais para patros ekdeketai ten timen. [4] oi de en teisi polisi ekastoi eyxas tasde sfi apoteleoysi. eyxomenoi tui theui tou an ei to therion, xyruntes tun paidiun e pasan ten kefalen e to emisy e to triton meros teis kefaleis, istasi stathmui pros argurion tas trixas. to d' an elkusei, touto tei meledunui tun theriun didoi, e de ant' aytou tamnoysa ixthus parexei boren toisi therioisi. [5] trofe men de aytoisi toiaute apodedektai. to d' an tis tun theriun toutun apokteinei, en men ekun, thanatos e zemie, en de aekun, apotinei zemien ten an oi irees taxuntai. os d' an ibin e ireka apokteinei, en te ekun en te aekun, tethnanai anagke.    
      66. Of the animals that live with men there are great numbers, and would be many more but for the accidents which befall the cats. For when the females have produced young they are no longer in the habit of going to the males, and these seeking to be united with them are not able. To this end then they contrive as follows,--they either take away by force or remove secretly the young from the females and kill them (but after killing they do not eat them), and the females being deprived of their young and desiring more, therefore come to the males, for it is a creature that is fond of its young. Moreover when a fire occurs, the cats seem to be divinely possessed; for while the Egyptians stand at intervals and look after the cats, not taking any care to extinguish the fire, the cats slipping through or leaping over the men, jump into the fire; and when this happens, great mourning comes upon the Egyptians. And in whatever houses a cat has died by a natural death, all those who dwell in this house shave their eyebrows only, but those in whose houses a dog has died shave their whole body and also their head.         66. [1] pollun de eontun omotrofun toisi anthrupoisi theriun pollui an eti pleu egineto, ei me katelambane tous aielouroys toiade. epean tekusi ai theleai, oyketi foiteoysi para tous ersenas. oi de dizemenoi misgesthai ayteisi oyk exoysi. [2] pros un tauta sofizontai tade. arpazontes apo tun theleun kai ypaireomenoi ta tekna kteinoysi, kteinantes mentoi oy pateontai. ai de steriskomenai tun teknun, allun de epithymeoysai, oytu de apikneontai para tous ersenas. filoteknon gar to therion. [3] pyrkaieis de genomenes theia pregmata katalambanei tous aielouroys. oi men gar Aiguptioi diastantes fylakas exoysi tun aielourun, amelesantes sbennunai to kaiomenon, oi de aieloyroi diadunontes kai yperthruskontes tous anthrupoys esallontai es to pur. [4] tauta de ginomena penthea megala tous Aigyptioys katalambanei. en oteoisi d' an oikioisi aieloyros apothanei apo tou aytomatoy, oi enoikeontes pantes xyruntai tas ofruas mounas, par' oteoisi d' an kuun, pan to suma kai ten kefalen.    
      67. The cats when they are dead are carried away to sacred buildings in the city of Bubastis, where after being embalmed they are buried; but the dogs they bury each people in their own city in sacred tombs; and the ichneumons are buried just in the same way as the dogs. The shrew-mice however and the hawks they carry away to the city of Buto, and the ibises to Hermopolis; the bears (which are not commonly seen) and the wolves, not much larger in size than foxes, they bury on the spot where they are found lying.         67. [1] apagontai de oi aieloyroi apofanontes es iras stegas, entha thaptontai tarixeythentes, en Boybastipoli. tas de kunas en tei euytun ekastoi poli thaptoysi en ireisi thekeisi. us de aytus teisi kysi oi ixneytai thaptontai. tas de mygalas kai tous irekas apagoysi es Boytoun polin, tas de ibis es Ermeu polin. [2] tas de arktoys eousas spanias kai tous lukoys oy pollui teui eontas alupekun mezonas aytou thaptoysi tei an eyretheusi keimenoi.    
      68. Of the crocodile the nature is as follows:--during the four most wintry months this creature eats nothing: she has four feet and is an animal belonging to the land and the water both; for she produces and hatches eggs on the land, and the most part of the day she remains upon dry land, but the whole of the night in the river, for the water in truth is warmer than the unclouded open air and the dew. Of all the mortal creatures of which we have knowledge this grows to the greatest bulk from the smallest beginning; for the eggs which she produces are not much larger than those of geese and the newly-hatched young one is in proportion to the egg, but as he grows he becomes as much as seventeen cubits long and sometimes yet larger. He has eyes like those of a pig and teeth large and tusky, in proportion to the size of his body; but unlike all other beasts he grows no tongue, neither does he move his lower jaw, but brings the upper jaw towards the lower, being in this too unlike all other beasts. He has moreover strong claws and a scaly hide upon his back which cannot be pierced; and he is blind in the water, but in the air he is of very keen sight. Since he has his living in the water he keeps his mouth all full within of leeches; and whereas all other birds and beasts fly from him, the trochilus is a creature which is at peace with him, seeing that from her he receives benefit; for the crocodile having come out of the water to the land and then having opened his mouth (this he is wont to do generally towards the West Wind), the trochilus upon that enters into his mouth and swallows down the leeches, and he being benefited is pleased and does no harm to the trochilus.         68. [1] tun de krokodeilun fusis esti toiede. tous xeimeriutatoys meinas tesseras esthiei oyden, eon de tetrapoyn xersaion kai limnaion esti. tiktei men gar uia en gei kai eklepei, kai to pollon teis emeres diatribei en tui xerui, ten de nukta pasan en tui potamui. thermoteron gar de esti to ydur teis te aithries kai teis drosoy. [2] pantun de tun emeis idmen thnetun touto ex elaxistoy megiston ginetai. ta men gar uia xeneun oy pollui mezona tiktei, kai o neossos kata logon tou uiou ginetai, ayxanomenos de ginetai kai es eptakaideka pexeas kai mezun eti. [3] exei de ofthalmous men yos, odontas de megaloys kai xayliodontas kata logon tou sumatos. glussan de mounon theriun oyk efyse, oyde kineei ten katu gnathon, alla kai touto mounon theriun ten anu gnathon prosagei tei katu. [4] exei de kai onyxas karterous kai derma lepiduton arrekton epi tou nutoy. tyflon de en ydati, en de tei aithriei oxyderkestaton. ate de un en ydati diaitan poieumenon, to stoma endothen foneei pan meston bdelleun. ta men de alla ornea kai theria feugei min, o de troxilos eirenaion oi esti ate ufeleomenui pros aytou. [5] epean gar es ten gein ekbei ek tou ydatos o krokodeilos kai epeita xanei (euthe gar touto us epipan poieein pros ton zefyron), enthauta o troxilos esdunun es to stoma aytou katapinei tas bdellas. o de ufeleumenos edetai kai oyden sinetai ton troxilon.    
      69. Now for some of the Egyptians the crocodiles are sacred animals, and for others not so, but they treat them on the contrary as enemies: those however who dwell about Thebes and about the lake of Moiris hold them to be most sacred, and each of these two peoples keeps one crocodile selected from the whole number, which has been trained to tameness, and they put hanging ornaments of molten stone and of gold into the ears of these and anklets round the front feet, and they give them food appointed and victims of sacrifices and treat them as well as possible while they live, and after they are dead they bury them in sacred tombs, embalming them: but those who dwell about the city of Elephantine even eat them, not holding them to be sacred. They are called not crocodiles but champsai, and the Ionians gave them the name of crocodile, comparing their form to that of the crocodiles (lizards) which appear in their country in the stone walls.         69. [1] toisi men de tun Aigyptiun iroi eisi oi krokodeiloi, toisi de oy, all' ate polemioys periepoysi. oi de peri te Thebas kai ten Moirios limnen oikeontes kai karta egentai aytous einai irous. [2] ek pantun de ena ekateroi trefoysi krokodeilon dedidagmenon einai xeiroethea, artemata te lithina xyta kai xrusea es ta uta enthentes kai amfideas peri tous emprosthioys podas, kai sitia apotakta didontes kai ireia, kai periepontes us kallista zuntas. apothanontas de thaptoysi tarixeusantes en ireisi thekeisi. [3] oi de peri Elefantinen polin oikeontes kai esthioysi aytous oyk egeomenoi irous einai. kaleontai de oy krokodeiloi alla xampsai. krokodeiloys de Iunes unomasan, eikazontes aytun ta eidea toisi para sfisi ginomenoisi krokodeiloisi toisi en teisi aimasieisi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [70]

     70. There are many ways in use of catching them and of various kinds: I shall describe that which to me seems the most worthy of being told. A man puts the back of a pig upon a hook as bait, and lets it go into the middle of the river, while he himself upon the bank of the river has a young live pig, which he beats; and the crocodile hearing its cries makes for the direction of the sound, and when he finds the pig's back he swallows it down: then they pull, and when he is drawn out to land, first of all the hunter forthwith plasters up his eyes with mud, and having so done he very easily gets the mastery of him, but if he does not do so he has much trouble.         70. [1] agrai de sfeun pollai katestasi kai pantoiai. e d' un emoige dokeei axiutate apegesios einai, tauten grafu. epean nuton yos deleasei peri agkistron, metiei es meson ton potamon, aytos de epi tou xeileos tou potamou exun delfaka zuen tauten tuptei. [2] epakousas de teis funeis o krokodeilos ietai kata ten funen, entyxun de tui nutui katapinei. oi de elkoysi. epean de exelkysthei es gein, pruton apantun o thereytes pelui kat' un eplase aytou tous ofthalmous. touto de poiesas karta eypeteus ta loipa xeiroutai, me poiesas de touto sun ponui.    
      71. The river-horse is sacred in the district of Papremis, but for the other Egyptians he is not sacred; and this is the appearance which he presents: he is four-footed, cloven-hoofed like an ox, flat-nosed, with a mane like a horse and showing teeth like tusks, with a tail and voice like a horse, and in size as large as the largest ox; and his hide is so exceedingly thick that when it has been dried shafts of javelins are made of it.         71. [1] oi de ippoi oi potamioi nomui men tui Papremitei iroi eisi, toisi de alloisi Aigyptioisi oyk iroi. fusin de parexontai idees toiende. tetrapoyn esti, dixelon, oplai boos, simon, lofien exon ippoy, xayliodontas fainon, oyren ippoy kai funen, megathos oson te bous o megistos. to derma d' aytou oytu de ti paxu esti uste ayoy genomenoy xysta poieesthai akontia ex aytou.    
      72. There are moreover otters in the river, which they consider to be sacred; and of fish also they esteem that which is called the lepidotos to be sacred, and also the eel; and these they say are sacred to the Nile: and of birds the fox-goose.         72. [1] ginontai de kai enudries en tui potamui, tas iras egentai einai. nomizoysi de kai tun ixthuun ton kaleumenon lepiduton iron einai kai ten egxelyn, irous de toutoys tou Neiloy fasi einai, kai tun ornithun tous xenalupekas.    
      73. There is also another sacred bird called the phoenix which I did not myself see except in painting, for in truth he comes to them very rarely, at intervals, as the people of Heliopolis say, of five hundred years; and these say that he comes regularly when his father dies; and if he be like the painting, he is of this size and nature, that is to say, some of his feathers are of gold colour and others red, and in outline and size he is as nearly as possible like an eagle. This bird they say (but I cannot believe the story) contrives as follows:-- setting forth from Arabia he conveys his father, they say, to the temple of the Sun (Helios) plastered up in myrrh, and buries him in the temple of the Sun; and he conveys him thus:--he forms first an egg of myrrh as large as he is able to carry, and then he makes trial of carrying it, and when he has made trial sufficiently, then he hollows out the egg and places his father within it and plasters over with other myrrh that part of the egg where he hollowed it out to put his father in, and when his father is laid in it, it proves (they say) to be of the same weight as it was; and after he has plastered it up, he conveys the whole to Egypt to the temple of the Sun. Thus they say that this bird does.         73. [1] esti de kai allos ornis iros, tui oynoma foinix. egu men min oyk eidon ei me oson grafei. kai gar de kai spanios epifoitai sfi, di' eteun, us Eliopolitai legoysi, pentakosiun. [2] foitan de tote fasi epean oi apothanei o pater. esti de, ei tei grafei paromoios, tososde kai toiosde. ta men aytou xrysokoma tun pterun ta de erythra es ta malista. aietui periegesin omoiotatos kai to megathos. [3] touton de legoysi mexanasthai tade, emoi men oy pista legontes. ex Arabies ormumenon es to iron tou Elioy komizein ton patera en smurnei emplassonta kai thaptein en tou Elioy tui irui, [4] komizein de oytu. pruton teis smurnes uion plassein oson te dynatos esti ferein, meta de peirasthai ayto foreonta, epean de apopeirethei, oytu de koilenanta to uion ton patera es ayto entithenai, smurnei de allei emplassein touto kat' o ti tou uiou ekkoilenas enetheke ton patera. eskeimenoy de tou patros ginesthai tuyto baros. emplasanta de komizein min ep' Aiguptoy es tou Elioy to iron. tauta men touton ton ornin legoysi poieein.    
      74. There are also about Thebes sacred serpents, not at all harmful to men, which are small in size and have two horns growing from the top of the head: these they bury when they die in the temple of Zeus, for to this god they say that they are sacred.         74. [1] eisi de peri Thebas iroi ofies, anthrupun oydamus delemones, oi megathei eontes mikroi duo kerea foreoysi pefykota ex akres teis kefaleis. tous thaptoysi apothanontas en tui irui tou Dios. toutoy gar sfeas tou theou fasi einai irous.    
      75. There is a region moreover in Arabia, situated nearly over against the city of Buto, to which place I came to inquire about the winged serpents: and when I came thither I saw bones of serpents and spines in quantity so great that it is impossible to make report of the number, and there were heaps of spines, some heaps large and others less large and others smaller still than these, and these heaps were many in number. This region in which the spines are scattered upon the ground is of the nature of an entrance from a narrow mountain pass to a great plain, which plain adjoins the plain of Egypt; and the story goes that at the beginning of spring winged serpents from Arabia fly towards Egypt, and the birds called ibises meet them at the entrance to this country and do not suffer the serpents to go by but kill them. On account of this deed it is (say the Arabians) that the ibis has come to be greatly honoured by the Egyptians, and the Egyptians also agree that it is for this reason that they honour these birds.         75. [1] esti de xuros teis Arabies kata Boytoun polin malista kei keimenos, kai es touto to xurion Elthon pynthanomenos peri tun pterutun ofiun. apikomenos de eidon ostea ofiun kai akanthas plethei men adunata apegesasthai, suroi de Esan akantheun kai megaloi kai ypodeesteroi kai elassones eti toutun, polloi de Esan oytoi. [2] esti de o xuros oytos, en tui ai akanthai katakexuatai, toiosde tis, esbole ex oreun steinun es pedion mega, to de pedion touto synaptei tui Aigyptiui pediui. [3] logos de esti ama tui eari pterutous ofis ek teis Arabies petesthai ep' Aiguptoy, tas de ibis tas ornithas apantusas es ten esbolen tautes teis xures oy parienai tous ofis alla katakteinein. [4] kai ten ibin dia touto to ergon tetimeisthai legoysi Arabioi megalus pros Aigyptiun. omologeoysi de kai Aiguptioi dia tauta timan tas ornithas tautas.   
      76. The outward form of the ibis is this:--it is a deep black all over, and has legs like those of a crane and a very curved beak, and in size it is about equal to a rail: this is the appearance of the black kind which fight with the serpents, but of those which most crowd round men's feet (for there are two several kinds of ibises) the head is bare and also the whole of the throat, and it is white in feathering except the head and neck and the extremities of the wings and the rump (in all these parts of which I have spoken it is a deep black), while in legs and in the form of the head it resembles the other. As for the serpent its form is like that of the watersnake; and it has wings not feathered but most nearly resembling the wings of the bat. Let so much suffice as has been said now concerning sacred animals.         76. [1] eidos de teis men ibios tode. melaina deinus pasa, skelea de foreei geranoy, prosupon de es ta malista epigrypon, megathos oson krex. tun men de melaineun tun maxomeneun pros tous ofis ede idee, tun d' en posi mallon eileymeneun toisi anthrupoisi (dixai gar de eisi ibies) [2] psile ten kefalen kai ten deiren pasan, leyke pteroisi plen kefaleis kai ayxenos kai akreun tun pterugun kai tou pygaioy akroy (tauta de ta eipon panta melana esti deinus), skelea de kai prosupon emferes tei eterei. tou de ofios e morfe oie per tun ydrun, [3] ptila de oy pteruta foreei alla toisi teis nykteridos pteroisi malista kei emferestata. tosauta men theriun peri irun eiresthu.    
      77. Of the Egyptians themselves, those who dwell in the part of Egypt which is sown for crops practise memory more than any other men and are the most learned in history by far of all those of whom I have had experience: and their manner of life is as follows:--For three successive days in each month they purge, hunting after health with emetics and clysters, and they think that all the diseases which exist are produced in men by the food on which they live; for the Egyptians are from other causes also the most healthy of all men next after the Libyans (in my opinion on account of the seasons, because the seasons do not change, for by the changes of things generally, and especially of the seasons, diseases are most apt to be produced in men), and as to their diet, it is as follows:--they eat bread, making loaves of maize, which they call kyllestis, and they use habitually a wine made out of barley, for vines they have not in their land. Of their fish some they dry in the sun and then eat them without cooking, others they eat cured in brine. Of birds they eat quails and ducks and small birds without cooking, after first curing them; and everything else which they have belonging to the class of birds or fishes, except such as have been set apart by them as sacred, they eat roasted or boiled.         77. [1] aytun de de Aigyptiun oi men peri ten speiromenen Aigypton oikeoysi, mnemen anthrupun pantun epaskeontes malista logiutatoi eisi makrui tun egu es diapeiran apikomen, [2] tropui de zoes toiuide diaxreuntai. syrmaizoysi treis emeras epexeis menos ekastoy, emetoisi therumenoi ten ygieien kai klusmasi, nomizontes apo tun trefontun sitiun pasas tas nousoys toisi anthrupoisi ginesthai. [3] eisi men gar kai allus Aiguptioi meta Libyas ygierestatoi pantun anthrupun tun ureun dokeein emoi eineka, oti oy metallassoysi ai urai. en gar teisi metaboleisi toisi anthrupoisi ai nousoi malista ginontai tun te allun pantun kai de kai tun ureun malista. [4] artofageoysi de ek tun olyreun poieuntes artoys, tous ekeinoi kyllestis onomazoysi. oinui de ek kritheun pepoiemenui diaxreuntai. oy gar sfi eisi en tei xurei ampeloi. ixthuun de tous men pros elion ayenantes umous siteontai, tous de ex almes tetarixeymenoys. [5] ornithun de tous te ortygas kai tas nessas kai ta mikra tun ornithun uma siteontai protarixeusantes. ta de alla osa e ornithun e ixthuun sfi esti exomena, xuris e okosoi sfi iroi apodedexatai, tous loipous optous kai efthous siteontai.    
      78. In the entertainments of the rich among them, when they have finished eating, a man bears round a wooden figure of a dead body in a coffin, made as like the reality as may be both by painting and carving, and measuring about a cubit or two cubits each way; and this he shows to each of those who are drinking together, saying: "When thou lookest upon this, drink and be merry, for thou shalt be such as this when thou art dead." Thus they do at their carousals.         78. [1] en de teisi synoysieisi toisi eydaimosi aytun, epean apo deipnoy genuntai, periferei aner nekron en sorui xulinon pepoiemenon, memimemenon es ta malista kai grafei kai ergui, megathos oson te pexyaion e dipexyn, deiknus de ekastui tun sympoteun legei <<es touton oreun pine te kai terpey. eseai gar apothanun toioutos.>> tauta men para ta symposia poieusi.    
      79. The customs which they practise are derived from their fathers and they do not acquire others in addition; but besides other customary things among them which are worthy of mention, they have one song, that of Linos, the same who is sung of both in Phenicia and in Cyprus and elsewhere, having however a name different according to the various nations. This song agrees exactly with that which the Hellenes sing calling on the name of Linos, so that besides many other things about which I wonder among those matters which concern Egypt, I wonder especially about this, namely whence they got the song of Linos. It is evident however that they have sung this song from immemorial time, and in the Egyptian tongue Linos is called Maneros. The Egyptians told me that he was the only son of him who first became king of Egypt, and that he died before his time and was honoured with these lamentations by the Egyptians, and that this was their first and only song.         79. [1] patrioisi de xreumenoi nomoisi allon oydena epiktuntai. toisi alla te epaxia esti nomima, kai de kai aeisma en esti, Linos, osper en te Foinikei aoidimos esti kai en Kuprui kai allei, kata mentoi ethnea oynoma exei, [2] symferetai de uytos einai ton oi Ellenes Linon onomazontes aeidoysi, uste polla men kai alla apothumazein me tun peri Aigypton eontun, en de de kai ton Linon okothen elabon to oynoma. fainontai de aiei kote touton aeidontes. esti de Aigyptisti o Linos kaleumenos Manerus. [3] efasan de min Aiguptioi tou prutoy basileusantos Aiguptoy paida moynogenea genesthai, apothanonta de ayton anuron threnoisi toutoisi ypo Aigyptiun timetheinai, kai aoiden te tauten pruten kai mounen sfisi genesthai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [80]

     80. In another respect the Egyptians are in agreement with some of the Hellenes, namely with the Lacedemonians, but not with the rest, that is to say, the younger of them when they meet the elder give way and move out of the path, and when their elders approach they rise out of their seat. In this which follows however they are not in agreement with any of the Hellenes,--instead of addressing one another in the roads they do reverence, lowering their hand down to their knee.         80. [1] symferontai de kai tode allo Aiguptioi Ellenun mounoisi Lakedaimonioisi. oi neuteroi aytun toisi presbyteroisi syntygxanontes eikoysi teis odou kai ektrepontai kai epiousi ex edres ypanisteatai. [2] tode mentoi alloisi Ellenun oydamoisi symferontai. anti tou prosagoreuein alleloys en teisi odoisi proskyneoysi katientes mexri tou gounatos ten xeira.    
      81. They wear tunics of linen about their legs with fringes, which they call calasiris; above these they have garments of white wool thrown over: woollen garments however are not taken into the temples, nor are they buried with them, for this is not permitted by religion. In these points they are in agreement with the observances called Orphic and Bacchic (which are really Egyptian), and also with those of the Pythagoreans, for one who takes part in these mysteries is also forbidden by religious rule to be buried in woollen garments; and about this there is a sacred story told.         81. [1] endedukasi de kithunas lineoys peri ta skelea thysanutous, tous kaleoysi kalasiris. epi toutoisi de eirinea eimata leyka epanabledon foreoysi. oy mentoi es ge ta ira esferetai eirinea oyde sygkatathaptetai sfi. oy gar osion. [2] omologeoysi de tauta toisi Orfikoisi kaleomenoisi kai Bakxikoisi, eousi de Aigyptioisi kai Pythagoreioisi. oyde gar toutun tun orgiun metexonta osion esti en eirineoisi eimasi thaftheinai. esti de peri aytun iros logos legomenos.    
      82. Besides these things the Egyptians have found out also to what god each month and each day belongs, and what fortunes a man will meet with who is born on any particular day, and how he will die, and what kind of a man he will be: and these inventions were taken up by those of the Hellenes who occupied themselves about poesy. Portents too have been found out by them more than by all other men besides; for when a portent has happened, they observe and write down the event which comes of it, and if ever afterwards anything resembling this happens, they believe that the event which comes of it will be similar.         82. [1] kai tade alla Aigyptioisi esti exeyremena, meis te kai emerei ekaste theun otey esti, kai tei ekastos emerei genomenos oteoisi egkyresei kai okus teleytesei kai okoios tis estai. kai toutoisi tun Ellenun oi en poiesi genomenoi exresanto. [2] terata te pleu sfi aneuretai e toisi alloisi apasi anthrupoisi. genomenoy gar teratos fylassoysi grafomenoi tupobainon, kai en kote ysteron paraplesion toutui genetai, kata tuyto nomizoysi apobesesthai.    
      83. Their divination is ordered thus:--the art is assigned not to any man, but to certain of the gods, for there are in their land Oracles of Heracles, of Apollo, of Athene, of Artemis, of Ares, and of Zeus, and moreover that which they hold most in honour of all, namely the Oracle of Leto which is in the city of Buto. The manner of divination however is not yet established among them according to the same fashion everywhere, but is different in different places.         83. [1] mantike de aytoisi ude diakeetai. anthrupun men oydeni proskeetai e texne, tun de theun metexeteroisi. kai gar Erakleos manteion aytothi esti kai Apollunos kai Athenaies kai Artemidos kai Areos kai Dios, kai to ge malista en timei agontai pantun tun manteiun, Letous en Boytoi poli esti. oy mentoi ai ge manteiai sfi kata tuyto estasi, alla diaforoi eisi.    
      84. The art of medicine among them is distributed thus:--each physician is a physician of one disease and of no more; and the whole country is full of physicians, for some profess themselves to be physicians of the eyes, others of the head, others of the teeth, others of the affections of the stomach, and others of the more obscure ailments.         84. [1] e de ietrike kata tade sfi dedastai. mieis nousoy ekastos ietros esti kai oy pleonun. panta d' ietrun esti plea. oi men gar ofthalmun ietroi katestasi, oi de kefaleis, oi de odontun, oi de tun kata nedun, oi de tun afaneun nousun.    
      85. Their fashions of mourning and of burial are these:--Whenever any household has lost a man who is of any regard amongst them, the whole number of women of that house forthwith plaster over their heads or even their faces with mud. Then leaving the corpse within the house they go themselves to and fro about the city and beat themselves, with their garments bound up by a girdle and their breasts exposed, and with them go all the women who are related to the dead man, and on the other side the men beat themselves, they too having their garments bound up by a girdle; and when they have done this, they then convey the body to the embalming.         85. [1] threinoi de kai tafai sfeun eisi aide. toisi an apogenetai ek tun oikiun anthrupos tou tis kai logos ei, to theily genos pan to ek tun oikiun toutun kat' un eplasato ten kefalen pelui e kai to prosupon, kapeita en toisi oikioisi lipousai ton nekron aytai ana ana ten polin strufumenai tuptontai epezusmenai kai fainoysai tous mazous, sun de sfi ai prosekoysai pasai, [2] eteruthen de oi andres, tuptontai epezumenoi kai oytoi.   
      86. In this occupation certain persons employ themselves regularly and inherit this as a craft. These, whenever a corpse is conveyed to them, show to those who brought it wooden models of corpses made like reality by painting, and the best of the ways of embalming they say is that of him whose name I think it impiety to mention when speaking of a matter of such a kind; the second which they show is less good than this and also less expensive; and the third is the least expensive of all. Having told them about this, they inquire of them in which way they desire the corpse of their friend to be prepared. Then they after they have agreed for a certain price depart out of the way, and the others being left behind in the buildings embalm according to the best of these ways thus:-- First with a crooked iron tool they draw out the brain through the nostrils, extracting it partly thus and partly by pouring in drugs; and after this with a sharp stone of Ethiopia they make a cut along the side and take out the whole contents of the belly, and when they have cleared out the cavity and cleansed it with palm-wine they cleanse it again with spices pounded up: then they fill the belly with pure myrrh pounded up and with cassia and other spices except frankincense, and sew it together again. Having so done they keep it for embalming covered up in natron for seventy days, but for a longer time than this it is not permitted to embalm it; and when the seventy days are past, they wash the corpse and roll its whole body up in fine linen cut into bands, smearing these beneath with gum, which the Egyptians use generally instead of glue. Then the kinsfolk receive it from them and have a wooden figure made in the shape of a man, and when they have had this made they enclose the corpse, and having shut it up within, they store it then in a sepulchral chamber, setting it to stand upright against the wall.         86. [1] epean de tauta poiesusi, oytu es ten tarixeysin komizoysi. eisi de oi ep' aytui toutui kateatai kai texnen exoysi tauten. [2] oytoi, epean sfi komisthei nekros, deiknuoysi toisi komisasi paradeigmata nekrun xulina, tei grafei memimemena..., kai ten men spoydaiotaten ayteun fasi einai tou oyk osion poieumai to oynoma epi toioutui pregmati onomazein, ten de deyteren deiknuoysi ypodeesteren te tautes kai eytelesteren, ten de triten eytelestaten. frasantes de pynthanontai par' aytun kata entina boulontai sfi skeyastheinai ton nekron. [3] oi men de ekpodun misthui omologesantes apallassontai, oi de ypoleipomenoi en oikemasi ude ta spoydaiotata tarixeuoysi. pruta men skoliui sideru dia tun myxuterun exagoysi ton egkefalon, ta men aytou oytu exagontes, ta de egxeontes farmaka. [4] meta de lithui Aithiopikui oxei parasxisantes para ten laparen ex un eilon ten koilien pasan, ekkatherantes de ayten kai diethesantes oinui foinikeiui aytis dietheoysi thymiemasi tetrimmenoisi. [5] epeita ten nedun smurnes akeratoy tetrimmenes kai kasies kai tun allun thymiematun, plen libanutou, plesantes syrraptoysi opisu. tauta de poiesantes tarixeuoysi litrui krupsantes emeras ebdomekonta. pleunas de toyteun oyk exesti tarixeuein. [6] epean de parelthusi ai ebdomekonta, lousantes ton nekron kateilissoysi pan aytou to suma sindonos byssines telamusi katatetmemenoisi, ypoxriontes tui kommi, tui de anti kolles ta polla xreuntai Aiguptioi. [7] entheuten de paradexamenoi min oi prosekontes poieuntai xulinon tupon anthrupoeidea, poiesamenoi de esergnusi ton nekron, kai katakleisantes oytu thesayrizoysi en oikemati thekaiui, istantes orthon pros toixon.    
      87. Thus they deal with the corpses which are prepared in the most costly way; but for those who desire the middle way and wish to avoid great cost they prepare the corpse as follows:--having filled their syringes with the oil which is got from cedar-wood, with this they forthwith fill the belly of the corpse, and this they do without having either cut it open or taken out the bowels, but they inject the oil by the breech, and having stopped the drench from returning back they keep it then the appointed number of days for embalming, and on the last of the days they let the cedar oil come out from the belly, which they before put in; and it has such power that it brings out with it the bowels and interior organs of the body dissolved; and the natron dissolves the flesh, so that there is left of the corpse only the skin and the bones. When they have done this they give back the corpse at once in that condition without working upon it any more.         87. [1] oytu men tous ta polytelestata skeyazoysi nekrous, tous de ta mesa boylomenoys ten de polyteleien feugontas skeyazoysi ude. [2] epean tous klysteiras plesuntai tou apo kedroy aleifatos ginomenoy, en un eplesan tou nekrou ten koilien, oyte anatamontes ayton oyte exelontes ten nedun, kata de ten edren esethesantes kai epilabontes to klusma teis opisu odou tarixeuoysi tas prokeimenas emeras, tei de teleytaiei exieisi ek teis koilies ten kedrien ten eseikan proteron. [3] e de exei tosauten dunamin uste ama euytei ten nedun kai ta splagxna katatetekota exagei. tas de sarkas to litron katatekei, kai de leipetai tou nekrou to derma mounon kai ta ostea. epean de tauta poiesusi, ap' un edukan oytu ton nekron, oyden eti pregmateythentes.    
      88. The third kind of embalming, by which are prepared the bodies of those who have less means, is as follows:-- they cleanse out the belly with a purge and then keep the body for embalming during the seventy days, and at once after that they give it back to the bringers to carry away.         88. [1] e de trite tarixeysis esti ede, e tous xremasi asthenesteroys skeyazei. syrmaiei diethesantes ten koilien tarixeuoysi tas ebdomekonta emeras kai epeita ap' un edukan apoferesthai.    
      89. The wives of men of rank when they die are not given at once to be embalmed, nor such women as are very beautiful or of greater regard than others, but on the third or fourth day after their death (and not before) they are delivered to the embalmers. They do so about this matter in order that the embalmers may not abuse their women, for they say that one of them was taken once doing so to the corpse of a woman lately dead, and his fellow-craftsman gave information.         89. [1] tas de gynaikas tun epifaneun andrun, epean teleytesusi, oy paraytika didousi tarixeuein, oyde osai an eusi eyeidees karta kai logoy pleunos gynaikes. all' epean tritaiai e tetartaiai genuntai, oytu paradidousi toisi tarixeuoysi. [2] touto de poieusi oytu toude eineken, ina me sfi oi tarixeytai misguntai teisi gynaixi. lamftheinai gar tina fasi misgomenon nekrui prosfatui gynaikos, kateipein de ton omotexnon.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [90]

     90. Whenever any one, either of the Egyptians themselves or of strangers, is found to have been carried off by a crocodile or brought to his death by the river itself, the people of any city by which he may have been cast up on land must embalm him and lay him out in the fairest way they can and bury him in a sacred burial-place, nor may any of his relations or friends besides touch him, but the priests of the Nile themselves handle the corpse and bury it as that of one who was something more than man.         90. [1] os d' an e aytun Aigyptiun e xeinun omoius ypo krokodeiloy arpastheis e yp' aytou tou potamou fainetai tethneus, kat' en an polin exeneixthei, toutoys pasa anagke esti tarixeusantas ayton kai peristeilantas us kallista thapsai en ireisi thekeisi. [2] oyde psausai exesti aytou allon oydena oyte tun prosekontun oyte tun filun, alla min ai irees aytoi tou Neiloy ate pleon ti e anthrupoy nekron xeiraptazontes thaptoysi.    
      91. Hellenic usages they will by no means follow, and to speak generally they follow those of no other men whatever. This rule is observed by most of the Egyptians; but there is a large city named Chemmis in the Theban district near Neapolis, and in this city there is a temple of Perseus the son of Danae which is of a square shape, and round it grow date-palms: the gateway of the temple is built of stone and of very great size, and at the entrance of it stand two great statues of stone. Within this enclosure is a temple-house and in it stands an image of Perseus. These people of Chemmis say that Perseus is wont often to appear in their land and often within the temple, and that a sandal which has been worn by him is found sometimes, being in length two cubits, and whenever this appears all Egypt prospers. This they say, and they do in honour of Perseus after Hellenic fashion thus,--they hold an athletic contest, which includes the whole list of games, and they offer in prizes cattle and cloaks and skins: and when I inquired why to them alone Perseus was wont to appear, and wherefore they were separated from all the other Egyptians in that they held an athletic contest, they said that Perseus had been born of their city, for Danaos and Lynkeus were men of Chemmis and had sailed to Hellas, and from them they traced a descent and came down to Perseus: and they told me that he had come to Egypt for the reason which the Hellenes also say, namely to bring from Libya the Gorgon's head, and had then visited them also and recognised all his kinsfolk, and they said that he had well learnt the name of Chemmis before he came to Egypt, since he had heard it from his mother, and that they celebrated an athletic contest for him by his own command.         91. [1] Ellenikoisi de nomaioisi feugoysi xrasthai, to de sumpan eipein, med' allun medama medamun anthrupun nomaioisi. oi men nyn alloi Aiguptioi oytu touto fylassoysi, esti de Khemmis polis megale nomou tou Thebaikou eggus Nees polios. [2] en tautei tei poli esti Perseos tou Danaes iron tetragunon, perix de aytou foinikes pefukasi. ta de propyla tou irou lithina esti karta megala. epi de aytoisi andriantes duo estasi lithinoi megaloi. en de tui peribeblemenui toutui neos te eni kai agalma en aytui enesteke tou Perseos. [3] oytoi oi Khemmitai legoysi ton Persea pollakis men ana ten gein fainesthai sfi pollakis de esu tou irou, sandalion te aytou peforemenon eyriskesthai eon to megathos dipexy, to epean fanei, eytheneein apasan Aigypton. [4] tauta men legoysi, poieusi de tade Ellenika tui Persei. aguna gymnikon titheisi dia pases agunies exonta, parexontes aethla ktenea kai xlainas kai dermata. [5] eiromenoy de mey o ti sfi mounoisi euthe o Perseus epifainesthai kai o ti kexuridatai Aigyptiun tun allun aguna gymnikon tithentes, efasan ton Persea ek teis euytun polios gegonenai. ton gar Danaon kai ton Lygkea eontas Khemmitas ekplusai es ten Ellada, apo de toutun geneelogeontes katebainon es ton Persea. [6] apikomenon de ayton es Aigypton kat' aitien ten kai Ellenes legoysi, oisonta ek Libues ten Gorgous kefalen, efasan elthein kai para sfeas kai anagnunai tous syggeneas pantas. ekmemathekota de min apikesthai es Aigypton to teis Khemmios oynoma, pepysmenon para teis metros. aguna de oi gymnikon aytou keleusantos epiteleein.    
      92. All these are customs practised by the Egyptians who dwell above the fens: and those who are settled in the fen-land have the same customs for the most part as the other Egyptians, both in other matters and also in that they live each with one wife only, as do the Hellenes; but for economy in respect of food they have invented these things besides:--when the river has become full and the plains have been flooded, there grow in the water great numbers of lilies, which the Egyptians call lotos; these they cut with a sickle and dry in the sun, and then they pound that which grows in the middle of the lotos and which is like the head of a poppy, and they make of it loaves baked with fire. The root also of this lotos is edible and has a rather sweet taste: it is round in shape and about the size of an apple. There are other lilies too, in flower resembling roses, which also grow in the river, and from them the fruit is produced in a separate vessel springing from the root by the side of the plant itself, and very nearly resembles a wasp's comb: in this there grow edible seeds in great numbers of the size of an olive-stone, and they are eaten either fresh or dried. Besides this they pull up from the fens the papyrus which grows every year, and the upper parts of it they cut off and turn to other uses, but that which is left below for about a cubit in length they eat or sell: and those who desire to have the papyrus at its very best bake it in an oven heated red-hot, and then eat it. Some too of these people live on fish alone, which they dry in the sun after having caught them and taken out the entrails, and then when they are dry, they use them for food.         92. [1] tauta men panta oi katuperthe tun eleun oikeontes Aiguptioi nomizoysi. oi de de en toisi elesi katoikemenoi toisi men aytoisi nomoisi xreuntai toisi kai oi alloi Aiguptioi, kai ta alla kai gynaiki miei ekastos aytun synoikeei kata per Ellenes, atar pros eyteleien tun sitiun tade sfi alla exeuretai. [2] epean pleres genetai o potamos kai ta pedia pelagisei, fuetai en tui ydati krinea polla, ta Aiguptioi kaleoysi luton. taut' epean drepsusi ayainoysi pros elion kai epeita to ek mesoy tou lutou, tei mekuni eon emferes, ptisantes poieuntai ex aytou artoys optous pyri. [3] esti de kai e rhiza tou lutou toutoy edudime kai egglussei epieikeus, eon stroggulon, megathos kata meilon. [4] esti de kai alla krinea rhodoisi emferea, en tui potamui ginomena kai tauta, ex un o karpos en allei kalyki parafyomenei ek teis rhizes ginetai, keriui sfekun ideen omoiotaton. en toutui trukta oson te pyren elaies egginetai syxna, trugetai de kai apala tauta kai aya. [5] ten de bublon ten epeteion ginomenen epean anaspasusi ek tun eleun, ta men anu ayteis apotamnontes es allo ti trepoysi, to de katu leleimmenon oson te epi peixyn trugoysi kai puleoysi. oi de an kai karta bouluntai xrestei tei bublui xrasthai, en klibanui diafanei pnixantes oytu trugoysi. oi de tines aytun zusi apo tun ixthuun mounon, tous epean labusi kai exelusi ten koilien, ayainoysi pros elion kai epeita ayoys eontas siteontai.    
      93. Fish which swim in shoals are not much produced in the rivers, but are bred in the lakes, and they do as follows:--When there comes upon them the desire to breed, they swim out in shoals towards the sea; and the males lead the way shedding forth their milt as they go, while the females, coming after and swallowing it up, from it become impregnated: and when they have become full of young in the sea they swim up back again, each shoal to its own haunts. The same however no longer lead the way as before, but the lead comes now to the females, and they leading the way in shoals do just as the males did, that is to say they shed forth their eggs by a few grains at a time, and the males coming after swallow them up. Now these grains are fish, and from the grains which survive and are not swallowed, the fish grow which afterwards are bred up. Now those of the fish which are caught as they swim out to sea are found to be rubbed on the left side of the head, but those which are caught as they swim up again are rubbed on the right side. This happens to them because as they swim down to the sea they keep close to the land on the left side of the river, and again as they swim up they keep to the same side, approaching and touching the bank as much as they can, for fear doubtless of straying from their course by reason of the stream. When the Nile begins to swell, the hollow places of the land and the depressions by the side of the river first begin to fill, as the water soaks through from the river, and so soon as they become full of water, at once they are all filled with little fishes; and whence these are in all likelihood produced, I think that I perceive. In the preceding year, when the Nile goes down, the fish first lay eggs in the mud and then retire with the last of the retreating waters; and when the time comes round again, and the water once more comes over the land, from these eggs forthwith are produced the fishes of which I speak.         93. [1] oi de ixthues oi agelaioi en men toisi potamoisi oy mala ginontai, trefomenoi de en teisi limneisi toiade poieusi. epean sfeas esiei oistros kyiskesthai, ageledon ekpleoysi es thalassan. egeontai de oi ersenes aporrainontes tou thorou, ai de epomenai anakaptoysi kai ex aytou kyiskontai. [2] epean de plerees genuntai en tei thalassei, anapluoysi opisu es ethea ta euytun ekastoi, egeontai mentoi ge oyketi oi aytoi, alla tun theleun ginetai e egemonia. egeumenai de ageledon poieusi oion per epoieyn oi ersenes. tun gar uiun aporrainoysi kat' oligoys tun kegxrun, oi de ersenes katapinoysi epomenoi. eisi de oi kegxroi oytoi ixthues. [3] ek de tun periginomenun kai me katapinomenun kegxrun oi trefomenoi ixthues ginontai. oi d' an aytun alusi ekpluontes es thalassan, fainontai tetrimmenoi ta ep' aristera tun kefaleun, oi d' an opisu anapluontes, ta epi dexia tetrifatai. [4] pasxoysi de tauta dia tode. exomenoi teis geis ep' aristera katapluoysi es thalassan, kai anapluontes opisu teis ayteis antexontai, egxrimptomenoi kai psauontes us malista, ina de me amartoien teis odou dia ton rhoon. [5] epean de plethunesthai arxetai o Neilos, ta te koila teis geis kai ta telmata ta para ton potamon pruta arxetai pimplasthai dietheontos tou ydatos ek tou potamou. kai aytika te plea ginetai tauta kai paraxreima ixthuun smikrun pimplatai panta. [6] kothen de oikos aytous ginesthai, egu moi dokeu katanoeein touto. tou proteroy eteos epean apolipei o Neilos, oi ixthues entekontes uia es ten ilun ama tui esxatui ydati apallassontai. epean de perielthontos tou xronoy palin epelthei to ydur, ek tun uiun toutun paraytika ginontai oi ixthues oytoi. kai peri men tous ixthuas oytu exei.   
      94. Thus it is as regards the fish. And for anointing those of the Egyptians who dwell in the fens use oil from the castor-berry, which oil the Egyptians call kiki, and thus they do:--they sow along the banks of the rivers and pools these plants, which in a wild form grow of themselves in the land of the Hellenes; these are sown in Egypt and produce berries in great quantity but of an evil smell; and when they have gathered these, some cut them up and press the oil from them, others again roast them first and then boil them down and collect that which runs away from them. The oil is fat and not less suitable for burning than olive-oil, but it gives forth a disagreeable smell.         94. [1]  aleifati de xreuntai Aigyptiun oi peri ta elea oikeontes apo tun sillikypriun tou karpou, to kaleusi men Aiguptioi kiki, poieusi de ude. para ta xeilea tun te potamun kai tun limneun speiroysi ta sillikupria [2] tauta, ta en Ellesi aytomata agria fuetai. tauta en tei Aiguptui speiromena karpon ferei pollon men dysudea de. touton epean syllexuntai, oi men kopsantes apipousi, oi de kai fruxantes apepsoysi, kai to aporreon ap' aytou sygkomizontai. esti de pion kai oyden Esson tou elaioy tui luxnui prosenes, odmen de barean parexetai.    
      95. Against the gnats, which are very abundant, they have contrived as follows:--those who dwell above the fen-land are helped by the towers, to which they ascend when they go to rest; for the gnats by reason of the winds are not able to fly up high: but those who dwell in the fen-land have contrived another way instead of the towers, and this is it:--every man of them has got a casting net, with which by day he catches fish, but in the night he uses it for this purpose, that is to say he puts the casting-net round about the bed in which he sleeps, and then creeps in under it and goes to sleep: and the gnats, if he sleeps rolled up in a garment or a linen sheet, bite through these, but through the net they do not even attempt to bite.         95. [1] pros de tous kunupas afthonoys eontas tade sfi esti memexanemena. tous men ta anu tun eleun oikeontas oi purgoi ufeleoysi, es tous anabainontes koimuntai. oi gar kunupes ypo tun anemun oyk oioi te eisi ypsou petesthai. [2] toisi de peri ta elea oikeoysi tade anti tun purgun alla memexanetai. pas aner aytun amfiblestron ektetai, tui teis men emeres ixthus agreuei, ten de nukta tade aytui xratai. en tei anapauetai koitei, peri tauten istesi to amfiblestron kai epeita endus yp' ayto kateudei. [3] oi de kunupes, en men en imatiui eneilixamenos eydei e sindoni, dia toutun daknoysi, dia de tou diktuoy oyde peiruntai arxen.    
      96. Their boats with which they carry cargoes are made of the thorny acacia, of which the form is very like that of the Kyrenian lotos, and that which exudes from it is gum. From this tree they cut pieces of wood about two cubits in length and arrange them like bricks, fastening the boat together by running a great number of long bolts through the two-cubit pieces; and when they have thus fastened the boat together, they lay cross-pieces over the top, using no ribs for the sides; and within they caulk the seams with papyrus. They make one steering-oar for it, which is passed through the bottom of the boat; and they have a mast of acacia and sails of papyrus. These boats cannot sail up the river unless there be a very fresh wind blowing, but are towed from the shore: down-stream however they travel as follows:--they have a door-shaped crate made of tamarisk wood and reed mats sewn together, and also a stone of about two talents weight bored with a hole; and of these the boatman lets the crate float on in front of the boat, fastened with a rope, and the stone drag behind by another rope. The crate then, as the force of the stream presses upon it, goes on swiftly and draws on the baris (for so these boats are called), while the stone dragging after it behind and sunk deep in the water keeps its course straight. These boats they have in great numbers and some of them carry many thousands of talents' burden.         96. [1] ta de de ploia sfi, toisi fortegeoysi, esti ek teis akanthes poieumena, teis e morfe men esti omoiotate tui Kyrenaiui lutui, to de dakryon kommi esti. ek tautes un teis akanthes kopsamenoi xula oson te dipexea plinthedon syntitheisi naypegeumenoi tropon toionde. [2] peri gomfoys pyknous kai makrous perieiroysi ta dipexea xula. epean de tui tropui toutui naypegesuntai, zyga epipoleis teinoysi aytun. nomeusi de oyden xreuntai. esuthen de tas armonias en un epaktusan tei bublui. [3] pedalion de en poieuntai, kai touto dia teis tropios diabunetai. istui de akanthinui xreuntai, istioisi de byblinoisi. tauta ta ploia ana men ton potamon oy dunatai pleein, en me lampros anemos epexei, ek geis de parelketai, kata rhoon de komizetai ude. [4] esti ek myrikes pepoiemene thure, katerrammene rhipi kalamun, kai lithos tetremenos ditalantos malista kei stathmon. toutun ten men thuren dedemenen kalui emprosthe tou ploioy apiei epiferesthai, ton de lithon allui kalui opisthe. [5] e men de thure tou rhooy empiptontos xureei taxeus kai elkei ten barin (touto gar de oynoma esti toisi ploioisi toutoisi), o de lithos opisthe epelkomenos kai eun en byssui katithunei ton ploon. esti de sfi ta ploia tauta plethei polla, kai agei enia pollas xiliadas talantun.    
      97. When the Nile comes over the land, the cities alone are seen rising above the water, resembling more nearly than anything else the islands in the Egean sea; for the rest of Egypt becomes a sea and the cities alone rise above water. Accordingly, whenever this happens, they pass by water not now by the channels of the river but over the midst of the plain: for example, as one sails up from Naucratis to Memphis the passage is then close by the pyramids, whereas the usual passage is not the same even here, but goes by the point of the Delta and the city of Kercasoros; while if you sail over the plain to Naucratis from the sea and from Canobos, you will go by Anthylla and the city called after Archander.         97. [1] epean de epelthei o Neilos ten xuren, ai polies mounai fainontai yperexoysai, malista kei emferees teisi en tui Aigaiui pontui nesoisi. ta men gar alla teis Aiguptoy pelagos ginetai, ai de polies mounai yperexoysi. porthmeuontai un, epean touto genetai, oyketi kata ta rheethra tou potamou alla dia mesoy tou pedioy. [2] es men ge Memfin ek Naykratios anapluonti par' aytas tas pyramidas ginetai o ploos. esti de oyd' oytos, alla para to oxu tou Delta kai para Kerkasuron polin. es de Naukratin apo thalasses kai Kanuboy dia pedioy pleun exeis kat' Anthyllan te polin kai ten Arxandroy kaleymenen.    
      98. Of these Anthylla is a city of note and is especially assigned to the wife of him who reigns over Egypt, to supply her with sandals, (this is the case since the time when Egypt came to be under the Persians): the other city seems to me to have its name from Archander the son-in-law of Danaos, who was the son of Phthios, the son of Achaios; for it is called the City of Archander. There might indeed be another Archander, but in any case the name is not Egyptian.         98. [1] toyteun de e men Anthylla eousa logime polis es ypodemata exairetos didotai tou aiei basileuontos Aiguptoy tei gynaiki (touto de ginetai ex osoy ypo Perseisi esti Aigyptos), [2] e de etere polis dokeei moi to oynoma exein apo tou Danaou gambrou Arxandroy tou Fthioy tou Axaiou. kaleetai gar de Arxandroy polis. eie d' an kai allos tis Arxandros, oy mentoi ge Aiguption to oynoma.    
      99. Hitherto my own observation and judgment and inquiry are the vouchers for that which I have said; but from this point onwards I am about to tell the history of Egypt according to that which I heard, to which will be added also something of that which I have myself seen. Of Min, who first became king of Egypt, the priests said that on the one hand he banked off the site of Memphis from the river: for the whole stream of the river used to flow along by the sandy mountain- range on the side of Libya, but Min formed by embankments that bend of the river which lies to the South about a hundred furlongs above Memphis, and thus he dried up the old stream and conducted the river so that it flowed in the middle between the mountains: and even now this bend of the Nile is by the Persians kept under very careful watch, that it may flow in the channel to which it is confined, and the bank is repaired every year; for if the river should break through and overflow in this direction, Memphis would be in danger of being overwhelmed by flood. When this Min, who first became king, had made into dry land the part which was dammed off, on the one hand, I say, he founded in it that city which is now called Memphis; for Memphis too is in the narrow part of Egypt; and outside the city he dug round it on the North and West a lake communicating with the river, for the side towards the East is barred by the Nile itself. Then secondly he established in the city the temple of Hephaistos a great work and most worthy of mention.         99. [1] mexri men toutoy opsis te eme kai gnume kai istorie tauta legoysa esti, to de apo toude Aigyptioys erxomai logoys ereun kata ta ekoyon. prosestai de aytoisi ti kai teis emeis opsios. [2] Mina ton pruton basileusanta Aiguptoy oi irees elegon touto men apogefyrusai ten Memfin. ton gar potamon panta rheein para to oros to psamminon pros Libues, ton de Mina anuthen, oson te ekaton stadioys apo Memfios, ton pros mesambries agkuna prosxusanta to men arxaion rheethron apoxereinai, ton de potamon oxeteusai to meson tun oreun rheein. [3] eti de kai nun ypo Perseun o agkun oytos tou Neiloy us apergmenos rheei en fylakeisi megaleisi exetai, frassomenos ana pan etos. ei gar ethelesei rhexas yperbeinai o potamos tautei, kindynos pasei Memfi kataklystheinai esti. [4] us de tui Mini toutui tui prutui genomenui basilei xerson gegonenai to apergmenon, touto men en aytui polin ktisai tauten etis nun Memfis kaleetai. esti gar kai e Memfis en tui steinui teis Aiguptoy. exuthen de ayteis perioruxai limnen ek tou potamou pros boreen te kai pros esperen (to gar pros ten eu aytos o Neilos apergei), touto de tou Efaistoy to iron idrusasthai en aytei, eon mega te kai axiapegetotaton.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [100]

     100. After this man the priests enumerated to me from a papyrus roll the names of other kings, three hundred and thirty in number; and in all these generations of men eighteen were Ethiopians, one was a woman, a native Egyptian, and the rest were men and of Egyptian race: and the name of the woman who reigned was the same as that of the Babylonian queen, namely Nitocris. Of her they said that desiring to take vengeance for her brother, whom the Egyptians had slain when he was their king and then, after having slain him, had given his kingdom to her,--desiring, I say, to take vengeance for him, she destroyed by craft many of the Egyptians. For she caused to be constructed a very large chamber under ground, and making as though she would handsel it but in her mind devising other things, she invited those of the Egyptians whom she knew to have had most part in the murder, and gave a great banquet. Then while they were feasting, she let in the river upon them by a secret conduit of large size. Of her they told no more than this, except that, when this had been accomplished, she threw herself into a room full of embers, in order that she might escape vengeance.         100. [1] meta de touton katelegon oi irees ek bubloy allun basileun triekosiun kai triekonta oynomata. en tosauteisi de geneeisi anthrupun oktukaideka men Aithiopes Esan, mia de gyne epixurie, oi de alloi andres Aiguptioi. [2] tei de gynaiki oynoma En, etis ebasileyse, to per tei Babyluniei, Nitukris. ten elegon timureoysan adelfeui, ton Aiguptioi basileuonta sfeun apekteinan, apokteinantes de oytu ekeinei apedosan ten basileien, toutui timureoysan pollous Aigyptiun diaftheirai dolui. [3] poiesamenen gar min oikema perimekes ypogaion kainoun tui logui, noui de alla mexanasthai. kalesasan de min Aigyptiun tous malista metaitioys tou fonoy eidee pollous istian, dainymenoisi de epeinai ton potamon di' aylunos kryptou megaloy. [4] tautes men peri tosauta elegon, plen oti ayten min, us touto exergasto, rhipsai es oikema spodou pleon, okus atimuretos genetai.    
      101. As for the other kings, they could tell me of no great works which had been produced by them, and they said that they had no renown except only the last of them, Moris: he (they said) produced as a memorial of himself the gateway of the temple of Hephaistos which is turned towards the North Wind, and dug a lake, about which I shall set forth afterwards how many furlongs of circuit it has, and in it built pyramids of the size which I shall mention at the same time when I speak of the lake itself. He, they said, produced these works, but of the rest none produced any.         101. [1] tun de allun basileun oy gar elegon oydemian ergun apodexin kai oyden einai lamprotetos, plen enos tou esxatoy aytun Moirios. [2]  touton de apodexasthai mnemosyna tou Efaistoy ta pros boreen anemon tetrammena propulaia, limnen te oruxai, teis e periodos osun esti stadiun ysteron delusu, pyramidas te en aytei oikodomeisai, tun tou megatheos peri omou aytei tei limnei epimnesomai. touton men tosauta apodexasthai, tun de allun oydena oyden.    
      102. Therefore passing these by I shall make mention of the king who came after these, whose name was Sesostris. He (the priests said) first of all set out with ships of war from the Arabian gulf and subdued those who dwelt by the shores of the Erythraian Sea, until as he sailed he came to a sea which could no further be navigated by reason of shoals: then secondly, after he had returned to Egypt, according to the report of the priests he took a great army and marched over the continent, subduing every nation which stood in his way: and those of them whom he found valiant and fighting desperately for their freedom, in their lands he set up pillars which told by inscriptions his own name and the name of his country, and how he had subdued them by his power; but as to those of whose cities he obtained possession without fighting or with ease, on their pillars he inscribed words after the same tenor as he did for the nations which had shown themselves courageous, and in addition he drew upon them the hidden parts of a woman, desiring to signify by this that the people were cowards and effeminate.         102. [1] parameipsamenos un toutoys tou epi toutoisi genomenoy basileos, tui oynoma En Sesustris, toutoy mnemen poiesomai. [2] ton elegon oi irees pruton men ploioisi makroisi ormethenta ek tou Arabioy kolpoy tous para ten Erythren thalassan katoikemenoys katastrefesthai, es o pleonta min prosu apikesthai es thalassan oyketi pluten ypo braxeun. [3] entheuten de us opisu apiketo es Aigypton, kata tun ireun ten fatin, pollen stratien tun labun elayne dia teis epeiroy, pan ethnos to empodun katastrefomenos. [4] oteoisi men nyn aytun alkimoisi enetugxane kai deinus glixomenoisi peri teis eleytheries, toutoisi men stelas eniste es tas xuras dia grammatun legousas to te euytou oynoma kai teis patres, kai us dynami tei euytou katestrepsato sfeas. [5] oteun de amaxeti kai eypeteus parelabe tas polias, toutoisi de enegrafe en teisi steleisi kata tayta kai toisi andreioisi tun ethneun genomenoisi, kai de kai aidoia gynaikos prosenegrafe, deila boylomenos poieein us eiesan analkides.    
      103. Thus doing he traversed the continent, until at last he passed over to Europe from Asia and subdued the Scythians and also the Thracians. These, I am of opinion, were the furthest people to which the Egyptian army came, for in their country the pillars are found to have been set up, but in the land beyond this they are no longer found. From this point he turned and began to go back; and when he came to the river Phasis, what happened then I cannot say for certain, whether the king Sesostris himself divided off a certain portion of his army and left the men there as settlers in the land, or whether some of his soldiers were wearied by his distant marches and remained by the river Phasis.         103. [1] tauta de poieun diexeie ten epeiron, es o ek teis Asies es ten Eyrupen diabas tous te Skuthas katestrepsato kai tous Threikas. es toutoys de moi dokeei kai prosutata apikesthai o Aiguptios stratos. en men gar tei toutun xurei fainontai statheisai ai steilai, to de prosuteru toutun oyketi. [2] entheuten de epistrepsas opisu eie, kai epeite egineto epi Fasi potamui, oyk exu to entheuten atrekeus eipein eite aytos o basileus Sesustris apodasamenos teis euytou stratieis morion oson de aytou katelipe teis xures oiketoras, eite tun tines stratiuteun tei planei aytou axthesthentes peri Fasin potamon katemeinan.    
      104. For the people of Colchis are evidently Egyptian, and this I perceived for myself before I heard it from others. So when I had come to consider the matter I asked them both; and the Colchians had remembrance of the Egyptians more than the Egyptians of the Colchians; but the Egyptians said they believed that the Colchians were a portion of the army of Sesostris. That this was so I conjectured myself not only because they are dark-skinned and have curly hair (this of itself amounts to nothing, for there are other races which are so), but also still more because the Colchians, Egyptians, and Ethiopians alone of all the races of men have practised circumcision from the first. The Phenicians and the Syrians who dwell in Palestine confess themselves that they have learnt it from the Egyptians, and the Syrians about the river Thermodon and the river Parthenios, and the Macronians, who are their neighbours, say that they have learnt it lately from the Colchians. These are the only races of men who practise circumcision, and these evidently practise it in the same manner as the Egyptians. Of the Egyptians themselves however and the Ethiopians, I am not able to say which learnt from the other, for undoubtedly it is a most ancient custom; but that the other nations learnt it by intercourse with the Egyptians, this among others is to me a strong proof, namely that those of the Phenicians who have intercourse with Hellas cease to follow the example of the Egyptians in this matter, and do not circumcise their children.         104. [1] fainontai men gar eontes oi Kolxoi Aiguptioi, noesas de proteron aytos e akousas allun legu. us de moi en frontidi egeneto, eiromen amfoteroys, kai mallon oi Kolxoi ememneato tun Aigyptiun e oi Aiguptioi tun Kolxun. [2] nomizein d' efasan oi Aiguptioi teis Sesustrios stratieis einai tous Kolxoys. aytos de eikasa teide, kai oti melagxroes eisi kai oylotrixes. kai touto men es oyden anekei. eisi gar kai eteroi toioutoi. alla toiside kai mallon, oti mounoi pantun anthrupun Kolxoi kai Aiguptioi kai Aithiopes peritamnontai ap' arxeis ta aidoia. [3] Foinikes de kai Suroi oi en tei Palaistinei kai aytoi omologeoysi par' Aigyptiun memathekenai, Surioi de oi peri Thermudonta kai Parthenion potamon kai Makrunes oi toutoisi astygeitones eontes apo Kolxun fasi neusti memathekenai. oytoi gar eisi oi peritamnomenoi anthrupun mounoi, kai oytoi Aigyptioisi fainontai poieuntes kata tayta. [4] aytun de Aigyptiun kai Aithiopun oyk exu eipein okoteroi para tun eterun exemathon. arxaion gar de ti fainetai eon. us de epimisgomenoi Aiguptui exemathon, mega moi kai tode tekmerion ginetai. Foinikun okosoi tei Elladi epimisgontai, oyketi Aigyptioys mimeontai kata ta aidoia. alla tun epiginomenun oy peritamnoysi ta aidoia.    
      105. Now let me tell another thing about the Colchians to show how they resemble the Egyptians:--they alone work flax in the same fashion as the Egyptians, and the two nations are like one another in their whole manner of living and also in their language: now the linen of Colchis is called by the Hellenes Sardonic, whereas that from Egypt is called Egyptian.         105. [1] fere nun kai allo eipu peri tun Kolxun, us Aigyptioisi prosferees eisi. linon mounoi oytoi te kai Aiguptioi ergazontai kai kata tayta, kai e zoe pasa kai e glussa emferes esti alleloisi. linon de to men Kolxikon ypo Ellenun Sardunikon kekletai, to mentoi ap' Aiguptoy apikneumenon kaleetai Aiguption.    
      106. The pillars which Sesostris of Egypt set up in the various countries are for the most part no longer to be seen extant; but in Syria Palestine I myself saw them existing with the inscription upon them which I have mentioned and the emblem. Moreover in Ionia there are two figures of this man carved upon rocks, one on the road by which one goes from the land of Ephesos to Phocaia, and the other on the road from Sardis to Smyrna. In each place there is a figure of a man cut in the rock, of four cubits and a span in height, holding in his right hand a spear and in his left a bow and arrows, and the other equipment which he has is similar to this, for it is both Egyptian and Ethiopian: and from the one shoulder to the other across the breast runs an inscription carved in sacred Egyptian characters, saying thus, "This land with my shoulders I won for myself." But who he is and from whence, he does not declare in these places, though in other places he has declared this. Some of those who have seen these carvings conjecture that the figure is that of Memnon, but herein they are very far from the truth.         106. [1] ai de steilai tas ista kata tas xuras o Aiguptoy basileus Sesustris, ai men pleunes oyketi fainontai perieousai, en de tei Palaistinei Syriei aytos urun eousas kai ta grammata ta eiremena eneonta kai gynaikos aidoia. [2] eisi de kai peri Iunien duo tupoi en petreisi egkekolammenoi toutoy tou andros, tei te ek teis Efesies es Fukaian erxontai kai tei ek Sardiun es Smurnen. [3] ekateruthi de aner eggeglyptai megathos pemptes spithameis, tei men dexiei xeiri exun aixmen tei de aristerei toxa, kai ten allen skeyen usautus. kai gar Aigyptien kai Aithiopida exei. [4] ek de tou umoy es ton eteron umon dia tun stetheun grammata ira Aiguptia diekei egkekolammena, legonta tade. <<egu tende ten xuren umoisi toisi emoisi ektesamen.>> ostis de kai okothen esti, enthauta men oy deloi, eteruthi de dedeluke. [5] ta de kai metexeteroi tun theesamenun Memnonos eikona eikazoysi min einai, pollon teis aletheies apoleleimmenoi.    
      107. As this Egyptian Sesostris was returning and bringing back many men of the nations whose lands he had subdued, when he came (said the priests) to Daphnai in the district of Pelusion on his journey home, his brother to whom Sesostris had entrusted the charge of Egypt invited him and with him his sons to a feast; and then he piled the house round with brushwood and set it on fire: and Sesostris when he discovered this forthwith took counsel with his wife, for he was bringing with him (they said) his wife also; and she counselled him to lay out upon the pyre two of his sons, which were six in number, and so to make a bridge over the burning mass, and that they passing over their bodies should thus escape. This, they said, Sesostris did, and two of his sons were burnt to death in this manner, but the rest got away safe with their father.         107. [1] touton de ton Aiguption Sesustrin anaxureonta kai anagonta pollous anthrupoys tun ethneun tun tas xuras katestrepsato, elegon oi irees, epeite egineto anakomizomenos en Dafneisi teisi Peloysieisi, ton adelfeon euytou, tui epetrepse o Sesustris ten Aigypton, touton epi xeinia ayton kalesanta kai pros aytui tous paidas perineisai exuthen ten oikien ylei, perinesanta de ypopreisai. [2] ton de us mathein touto, aytika symboyleuesthai tei gynaiki. kai gar de kai ten gynaika ayton ama agesthai. ten de oi symboyleusai tun paidun eontun ex tous duo epi ten pyren ekteinanta gefyrusai to kaiomenon, aytous de ep' ekeinun epibainontas eksuzesthai. tauta poieisai ton Sesustrin, kai duo men tun paidun katakaeinai tropui toioutui, tous de loipous aposutheinai ama tui patri.    
      108. Then Sesostris, having returned to Egypt and having taken vengeance on his brother, employed the multitude which he had brought in of those whose lands he had subdued, as follows:--these were they who drew the stones which in the reign of this king were brought to the temple of Hephaistos, being of very great size; and also these were compelled to dig all the channels which now are in Egypt; and thus (having no such purpose) they caused Egypt, which before was all fit for riding and driving, to be no longer fit for this from thenceforth: for from that time forward Egypt, though it is plain land, has become all unfit for riding and driving, and the cause has been these channels, which are many and run in all directions. But the reason why the king cut up the land was this, namely because those of the Egyptians who had their cities not on the river but in the middle of the country, being in want of water when the river went down from them, found their drink brackish because they had it from wells.         108. [1] nostesas de o Sesustris es ten Aigypton kai tisamenos ton adelfeon, tui men omilui ton epegageto tun tas xuras katestrepsato, toutui men tade exresato. [2] tous te oi lithoys tous epi toutoy tou basileos komisthentas es tou Efaistoy to iron, eontas megathei perimekeas, oytoi Esan oi elkusantes, kai tas diuryxas tas nun eousas en Aiguptui pasas oytoi anagkazomenoi urysson, epoieyn te oyk ekontes Aigypton, to prin eousan ippasimen kai amaxeyomenen pasan, endea toutun. [3] apo gar toutoy tou xronoy Aigyptos eousa pedias pasa anippos kai anamaxeytos gegone. aitiai de toutun ai diuryxes gegonasi eousai pollai kai pantoioys tropoys exoysai. [4] katetamne de toude eineka ten xuren o basileus. osoi tun Aigyptiun me epi tui potamui ektento tas polis all' anamesoys, oytoi, okus te apioi o potamos, spanizontes ydatun platyteroisi exreunto toisi pomasi, ek freatun xreumenoi. toutun men de eineka katetmethe e Aigyptos.   
      109. For this reason Egypt was cut up; and they said that this king distributed the land to all the Egyptians, giving an equal square portion to each man, and from this he made his revenue, having appointed them to pay a certain rent every year: and if the river should take away anything from any man's portion, he would come to the king and declare that which had happened, and the king used to send men to examine and to find out by measurement how much less the piece of land had become, in order that for the future the man might pay less, in proportion to the rent appointed: and I think that thus the art of geometry was found out and afterwards came into Hellas also. For as touching the sun-dial and the gnomon and the twelve divisions of the day, they were learnt by the Hellenes from the Babylonians.         109. [1] kataneimai de ten xuren Aigyptioisi apasi touton elegon ton basilea, kleiron ison ekastui tetragunon didonta, kai apo toutoy tas prosodoys poiesasthai, epitaxanta apoforen epiteleein kat' eniayton. [2] ei de tinos tou kleroy o potamos ti pareloito, elthun an pros ayton esemaine to gegenemenon. o de epempe tous episkepsomenoys kai anametresontas osui elassun o xuros gegone, okus tou loipou kata logon teis tetagmenes apoforeis teleoi. [3] dokeei de moi entheuten geumetrie eyretheisa es ten Ellada epanelthein. polon men gar kai gnumona kai ta dyudeka merea teis emeres para Babyluniun emathon oi Ellenes.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [110]

     110. He moreover alone of all the Egyptian kings had rule over Ethiopia; and he left as memorials of himself in front of the temple of Hephaistos two stone statues of thirty cubits each, representing himself and his wife, and others of twenty cubits each representing his four sons: and long afterwards the priest of Hephaistos refused to permit Dareios the Persian to set up a statue of himself in front of them, saying that deeds had not been done by him equal to those which were done by Sesostris the Egyptian; for Sesostris had subdued other nations besides, not fewer than he, and also the Scythians; but Dareios had not been able to conquer the Scythians: wherefore it was not just that he should set up a statue in front of those which Sesostris had dedicated, if he did not surpass him in his deeds. Which speech, they say, Dareios took in good part.         110. [1] basileus men de oytos mounos Aiguptios Aithiopies Erxe, mnemosyna de elipeto pro tou Efaisteioy andriantas lithinoys, duo men triekonta pexeun, euyton te kai ten gynaika, tous de paidas eontas tesseras eikosi pexeun ekaston. [2] tun de o ireus tou Efaistoy xronui metepeita pollui Dareion ton Persen oy perieide istanta emprosthe andrianta, fas oy oi pepoieisthai erga oia per Sesustri tui Aigyptiui. Sesustrin men gar alla te katastrepsasthai ethnea oyk elassu ekeinoy kai de kai Skuthas, Dareion de oy dynastheinai Skuthas elein. [3] oykun dikaion einai istanai emprosthe tun ekeinoy anathematun me oyk yperballomenon toisi ergoisi. Dareion men nyn legoysi pros tauta syggnumen poiesasthai.    
      111. Now after Sesostris had brought his life to an end, his son Pheros, they told me, received in succession the kingdom, and he made no warlike expedition, and moreover it chanced to him to become blind by reason of the following accident:--when the river had come down in flood rising to a height of eighteen cubits, higher than ever before that time, and had gone over the fields, a wind fell upon it and the river became agitated by waves: and this king (they say) moved by presumptuous folly took a spear and cast it into the midst of the eddies of the stream; and immediately upon this he had a disease of the eyes and was by it made blind. For ten years then he was blind, and in the eleventh year there came to him an oracle from the city of Buto saying that the time of his punishment had expired, and that he should see again if he washed his eyes with the water of a woman who had accompanied with her own husband only and had not knowledge of other men: and first he made trial of his own wife, and then, as he continued blind, he went on to try all the women in turn; and when he had at last regained his sight he gathered together all the women of whom he had made trial, excepting her by whose means he had regained his sight, to one city which now is named Erythrabolos, and having gathered them to this he consumed them all by fire, as well as the city itself; but as for her by whose means he had regained his sight, he had her himself to wife. Then after he had escaped the malady of his eyes he dedicated offerings at each one of the temples which were of renown, and especially (to mention only that which is most worthy of mention) he dedicated at the temple of the Sun works which are worth seeing, namely two obelisks of stone, each of a single block, measuring in length a hundred cubits each one and in breadth eight cubits.         111. [1] Sesustrios de teleytesantos ekdexasthai elegon ten basileien ton paida aytou Ferun, ton apodexasthai men oydemian strateien, syneneixtheinai de oi tyflon genesthai dia toionde preigma. tou potamou katelthontos megista de tote ep' oktukaideka pexeas, us yperebale tas arouras, pneumatos empesontos kymaties o potamos egeneto. [2] ton de basilea legoysi touton atasthaliei xresamenon, labonta aixmen balein es mesas tas dinas tou potamou, meta de aytika kamonta ayton tous ofthalmous tyflutheinai. deka men de etea einai min tyflon, endekatui de etei apikesthai oi manteion ek Boytous polios us exekei te oi o xronos teis zemies kai anablepsei gynaikos oyrui nipsamenos tous ofthalmous, etis para ton euyteis andra mounon pefoiteke, allun andrun eousa apeiros. [3] kai ton prutes teis euytou gynaikos peirasthai, meta de, us oyk anelepe, epexeis paseun peirasthai. anablepsanta de synagagein tas gynaikas tun epeirethe, plen e teis tui oyrui nipsamenos aneblepse, es mian polin, e nun kaleetai Erythre bulos. es tauten synalisanta ypopreisai pasas sun aytei tei poli. [4] teis de nipsamenos tui oyrui aneblepse, tauten de esxe aytos gynaika. anathemata de apofygun ten pathen tun ofthalmun alla te ana ta ira panta ta logima anetheke kai tou ge logon malista axion esti exein, es tou Elioy to iron axiotheeta anetheke erga, obelous duo lithinoys, ex enos eonta ekateron lithoy, meikos men ekateron pexeun ekaton, eyros de oktu pexeun.    
      112. After him, they said, there succeeded to the throne a man of Memphis, whose name in the tongue of the Hellenes was Proteus; for whom there is now a sacred enclosure at Memphis, very fair and well ordered, lying on that side of the temple of Hephaistos which faces the North Wind. Round about this enclosure dwell Phenicians of Tyre, and this whole region is called the Camp of the Tyrians. Within the enclosure of Proteus there is a temple called the temple of the "foreign Aphrodite," which temple I conjecture to be one of Helen the daughter of Tyndareus, not only because I have heard the tale how Helen dwelt with Proteus, but also especially because it is called by the name of the "foreign Aphrodite," for the other temples of Aphrodite which there are have none of them the addition of the word "foreign" to the name.         112. [1] toutoy de ekdexasthai ten basileien elegon andra Memfiten, tui kata ten Ellenun glussan oynoma Prutea einai. tou nun temenos esti en Memfi karta kalon te kai ey eskeyasmenon, tou Efaisteioy pros noton anemon keimenon. [2] perioikeoysi de to temenos touto Foinikes Turioi, kaleetai de o xuros oytos o synapas Tyriun stratopedon. esti de en tui temenei tou Pruteos iron to kaleetai xeines Afrodites. symballomai de touto to iron einai Elenes teis Tyndareu, kai ton logon akekous us diaitethe Elene para Prutei, kai de kai oti xeines Afrodites epunymon esti. osa gar alla Afrodites ira esti, oydamus xeines epikaleetai.    
      113. And the priests told me, when I inquired, that the things concerning Helen happened thus:--Alexander having carried off Helen was sailing away from Sparta to his own land, and when he had come to the Egean Sea contrary winds drove him from his course to the Sea of Egypt; and after that, since the blasts did not cease to blow, he came to Egypt itself, and in Egypt to that which is now named the Canobic mouth of the Nile and to Taricheiai. Now there was upon the shore, as still there is now, a temple of Heracles, in which if any man's slave take refuge and have the sacred marks set upon him, giving himself over to the god, it is not lawful to lay hands upon him; and this custom has continued still unchanged from the beginning down to my own time. Accordingly the attendants of Alexander, having heard of the custom which existed about the temple, ran away from him, and sitting down as suppliants of the god, accused Alexander, because they desired to do him hurt, telling the whole tale how things were about Helen and about the wrong done to Menelaos; and this accusation they made not only to the priests but also to the warden of this river-mouth, whose name was Thonis.         113. [1] elegon de moi oi irees istoreonti ta peri Elenen genesthai ude. Alexandron arpasanta Elenen ek Spartes apopleein es ten euytou. kai min, us egeneto en tui Aigaiui, exustai anemoi ekballoysi es to Aiguption pelagos, entheuten de, oy gar aniei ta pneumata, apikneetai es Aigypton kai Aiguptoy es to nun Kanubikon kaleumenon stoma tou Neiloy kai es Tarixeias. [2] En de epi teis eionos to kai nun esti Erakleos iron, es to en katafygun oiketes otey un anthrupun epibaletai stigmata ira, euyton didous tui theui, oyk exesti toutoy apsasthai. [3] o nomos oytos diateleei eun omoios mexri emeu tui ap' arxeis. tou un de Alexandroy apisteatai therapontes pythomenoi ton peri to iron exonta nomon, iketai de izomenoi tou theou kategoreon tou Alexandroy, boylomenoi blaptein ayton, panta logon exegeumenoi us eixe peri ten Elenen te kai ten es Meneleun adikien. kategoreon de tauta pros te tous ireas kai ton stomatos toutoy fulakon, tui oynoma En Thunis.    
      114. Thonis then having heard their tale sent forthwith a message to Proteus at Memphis, which said as follows: "There hath come a stranger, a Teucrian by race, who hath done in Hellas an unholy deed; for he hath deceived the wife of his own host, and is come hither bringing with him this woman herself and very much wealth, having been carried out of his way by winds to thy land. Shall we then allow him to sail out unharmed, or shall we first take away from him that which he brought with him?" In reply to this Proteus sent back a messenger who said thus: "Seize this man, whosoever he may be, who has done impiety to his own host, and bring him away into my presence, that I may know what he will find to say."         114. [1] akousas de toutun o Thunis pempei ten taxisten es Memfin para Prutea aggelien legoysan tade. [2] <<ekei xeinos genos men Teykros, ergon de anosion en tei Elladi exergasmenos. xeinoy gar tou euytou exapatesas ten gynaika ayten te tauten agun ekei kai polla karta xremata, ypo anemun es gein tauten apeneixtheis. kotera deita touton eumen asinea ekpleein e apelumetha ta exun Elthe;>> [3] antipempei pros tauta o Pruteus legonta tade.<<andra touton, ostis kote esti anosia ergasmenos xeinon ton euytou, syllabontes apagete par' eme, ina eideu o ti kote kai lexei.>>    
      115. Hearing this, Thonis seized Alexander and detained his ships, and after that he brought the man himself up to Memphis and with him Helen and the wealth he had, and also in addition to them the suppliants. So when all had been conveyed up thither, Proteus began to ask Alexander who he was and from whence he was voyaging; and he both recounted to him his descent and told him the name of his native land, and moreover related of his voyage, from whence he was sailing. After this Proteus asked him whence he had taken Helen; and when Alexander went astray in his account and did not speak the truth, those who had become suppliants convicted him of falsehood, relating in full the whole tale of the wrong done. At length Proteus declared to them this sentence, saying, "Were it not that I count it a matter of great moment not to slay any of those strangers who being driven from their course by winds have come to my land hitherto, I should have taken vengeance on thee on behalf of the man of Hellas, seeing that thou, most base of men, having received from him hospitality, didst work against him a most impious deed. For thou didst go in to the wife of thine own host; and even this was not enough for thee, but thou didst stir her up with desire and hast gone away with her like a thief. Moreover not even this by itself was enough for thee, but thou art come hither with plunder taken from the house of thy host. Now therefore depart, seeing that I have counted it of great moment not to be a slayer of strangers. This woman indeed and the wealth which thou hast I will not allow thee to carry away, but I shall keep them safe for the Hellene who was thy host, until he come himself and desire to carry them off to his home; to thyself however and thy fellow-voyagers I proclaim that ye depart from your anchoring within three days and go from my land to some other; and if not, that ye will be dealt with as enemies."         115. [1] akousas de tauta o Thunis syllambanei ton Alexandron kai tas neas aytou katisxei, meta de ayton te touton anegage es Memfin kai ten Elenen te kai ta xremata, pros de kai tous iketas. [2] anakomisthentun de pantun, eiruta ton Alexandron o Pruteus tis eie kai okothen pleoi. o de oi kai to genos katelexe kai teis patres eipe to oynoma, kai de kai ton ploon apegesato okothen pleoi. [3] meta de o Pruteus eiruta ayton okothen ten Elenen laboi. planumenoy de tou Alexandroy en tui logui kai oy legontos ten aletheien, elegxon oi genomenoi iketai, exegeumenoi panta logon tou adikematos. [4] telos de de sfi logon tonde ekfainei o Pruteus, legun oti <<egu ei me peri pollou egeumen medena xeinun kteinein, osoi yp' anemun ede apolamfthentes Elthon es xuren ten emen, egu an se yper tou Ellenos etisamen, os, u kakiste andrun, xeiniun tyxun ergon anosiutaton ergasao. para tou seuytou xeinoy ten gynaika Elthes. kai mala tauta toi oyk erkese, all' anapterusas ayten oixeai exun ekklepsas. [5] kai oyde tauta toi mouna erkese, alla kai oikia tou xeinoy keraisas ekeis. [6] nun un epeide peri pollou egemai me xeinoktoneein, gynaika men tauten kai ta xremata oy toi proesu apagesthai, all' ayta egu tui Elleni xeinui fylaxu, es o an aytos elthun ekeinos apagagesthai ethelei. ayton de se kai tous sous symplooys triun emereun proagoreuu ek teis emeis geis es allen tina metormizesthai, ei de me, ate polemioys periepsesthai.>>    
      116. This the priests said was the manner of Helen's coming to Proteus; and I suppose that Homer also had heard this story, but since it was not so suitable to the composition of his poem as the other which he followed, he dismissed it finally, making it clear at the same time that he was acquainted with that story also: and according to the manner in which he described the wanderings of Alexander in the Iliad (nor did he elsewhere retract that which he had said) it is clear that when he brought Helen he was carried out of his course, wandering to various lands, and that he came among other places to Sidon in Phenicia. Of this the poet has made mention in the "prowess of Diomede," and the verses run this: 
"There she had robes many-coloured, the works of women of Sidon, 
 Those whom her son himself the god-like of form Alexander 
 Carried from Sidon, what time the broad sea-path he sailed over 
 Bringing back Helene home, of a noble father begotten." And in the Odyssey also he has made mention of it in these verses: 
"Such had the daughter of Zeus, such drugs of exquisite cunning, 
 Good, which to her the wife of Thon, Polydamna, had given, 
 Dwelling in Egypt, the land where the bountiful meadow produces 
 Drugs more than all lands else, many good being mixed, many evil." And thus too Menelaos says to Telemachos: 
"Still the gods stayed me in Egypt, to come back hither desiring, 
 Stayed me from voyaging home, since sacrifice was due I performed not." In these lines he makes it clear that he knew of the wandering of Alexander to Egypt, for Syria borders upon Egypt and the Phenicians, of whom is Sidon, dwell in Syria.         116. [1] Elenes men tauten apixin para Prutea elegon oi irees genesthai. dokeei de moi kai Omeros ton logon touton pythesthai. all' oy gar omoius es ten epopoiien eyprepes En tui eterui tui per exresato, ekun meteike ayton, delusas us kai touton epistaito ton logon. [2] deilon de kata [gar] epoiese en Iliadi (kai oydamei allei anepodise euyton) planen ten Alexandroy, us apeneixthe agun Elenen tei te de allei plazomenos kai us es Siduna teis Foinikes apiketo. [3] epimemnetai de aytou en Diomedeos aristeiei. legei de ta epea ude.     enth' esan oi peploi pampoikiloi, erga gynaikun
      Sidoniun, tas aytos Alexandros theoeides
      egage Sidoniethen, epiplus eyrea ponton,
      ten odon en Elenen per anegagen eypatereian.
      (Hom. Il. 6, 289-292)[4]  epimemnetai de kai en Odysseiei en toiside toisi epesi.
      toia Dios thygater exe farmaka metioenta,
      esthla, ta oi Poludamna poren Thunos parakoitis
      Aigyptie, tei pleista ferei zeiduros aroyra
      farmaka, polla men esthla memigmena, polla de lygra.
      (Hom. Od. 4, 227-230)[5] kai tade etera pros Telemaxon Meneleus legei.
      Aiguptui m' eti deuro theoi memauta neesthai
      esxon, epei oy sfin erexa teleessas ekatombas.
      (Hom. Od. 4, 351-352)
 
 [6] en toutoisi toisi epesi deloi oti epistato ten es Aigypton Alexandroy planen. omoyreei gar e Syrie Aiguptu, oi de Foinikes, tun esti e Sidun, en tei Syriei oikeoysi.    
      117. By these lines and by this passage it is also most clearly shown that the "Cyprian Epic" was not written by Homer but by some other man: for in this it is said that on the third day after leaving Sparta Alexander came to Ilion bringing with him Helen, having had a "gently-blowing wind and a smooth sea," whereas in the Iliad it says that he wandered from his course when he brought her.         117. [1] kata tauta de ta epea kai tode to xurion oyk ekista alla malista deloi oti oyk Omeroy ta Kupria epea esti all' alloy tinos. en men gar toisi Kyprioisi eiretai us tritaios ek Spartes Alexandros apiketo es to Ilion agun Elenen, eyaei te pneumati xresamenos kai thalassei leiei. en de Iliadi legei us eplazeto agun ayten. Omeros men nyn kai ta Kupria epea xairetu.   
      118. Let us now leave Homer and the "Cyprian" Epic; but this I will say, namely that I asked the priests whether it is but an idle tale which the Hellenes tell of that which they say happened about Ilion; and they answered me thus, saying that they had their knowledge by inquiries from Menelaos himself. After the rape of Helen there came indeed, they said, to the Teucrian land a large army of Hellenes to help Menelaos; and when the army had come out of the ships to land and had pitched its camp there, they sent messengers to Ilion, with whom went also Menelaos himself; and when these entered within the wall they demanded back Helen and the wealth which Alexander had stolen from Menelaos and had taken away; and moreover they demanded satisfaction for the wrongs done: and the Teucrians told the same tale then and afterwards, both with oath and without oath, namely that in deed and in truth they had not Helen nor the wealth for which demand was made, but that both were in Egypt; and that they could not justly be compelled to give satisfaction for that which Proteus the king of Egypt had. The Hellenes however thought that they were being mocked by them and besieged the city, until at last they took it; and when they had taken the wall and did not find Helen, but heard the same tale as before, then they believed the former tale and sent Menelaos himself to Proteus.         118. [1] eiromenoy de mey tous ireas ei mataion logon legoysi oi Ellenes ta peri Ilion genesthai e oy, efasan pros tauta tade, istorieisi famenoi eidenai par' aytou Meneleu. [2] elthein men gar meta ten Elenes arpagen es ten Teykrida gein Ellenun stratien pollen boetheusan Meneleui, ekbasan de es gein kai idrytheisan ten stratien pempein es to Ilion aggeloys, sun de sfi ienai kai ayton Meneleun. [3] tous d' epeite eselthein es to teixos, apaiteein Elenen te kai ta xremata ta oi oixeto klepsas Alexandros, tun te adikematun dikas aiteein. tous de Teykrous ton ayton logon legein tote kai metepeita, kai omnuntas kai anumoti, me men exein Elenen mede ta epikaleumena xremata, all' einai ayta panta en Aiguptui, kai oyk an dikaius aytoi dikas ypexein tun Pruteus o Aiguptios basileus exei. [4] oi de Ellenes katagelasthai dokeontes yp' aytun oytu de epoliorkeon, es o exeilon. elousi de to teixos us oyk efaineto e Elene, alla ton ayton logoy tui proterui epynthanonto, oytu de pisteusantes tui logui tui prutui oi Ellenes ayton Meneleun apostelloysi para Prutea.    
      119. And Menelaos having come to Egypt and having sailed up to Memphis, told the truth of these matters, and not only found great entertainment, but also received Helen unhurt, and all his own wealth besides. Then however, after he had been thus dealt with, Menelaos showed himself ungrateful to the Egyptians; for when he set forth to sail away, contrary winds detained him, and as this condition of things lasted long, he devised an impious deed; for he took two children of natives and made sacrifice of them. After this, when it was known that he had done so, he became abhorred, and being pursued he escaped and got away in his ships to Libya; but whither he went besides after this, the Egyptians were not able to tell. Of these things they said that they found out part by inquiries, and the rest, namely that which happened in their own land, they related from sure and certain knowledge.         119. [1] apikomenos de o Meneleus es ten Aigypton kai anaplusas es ten Memfin, eipas ten aletheien tun pregmatun, kai xeiniun entese megalun kai Elenen apathea kakun apelabe, pros de kai ta euytou xremata panta. [2] tyxun mentoi toutun egeneto Meneleus aner adikos es Aigyptioys. apopleein gar ormemenon ayton isxon aploiai. epeide de touto epi pollon toiouton En, epitexnatai preigma oyk osion. [3] labun gar duo paidia andrun epixuriun entoma sfea epoiese. meta de us epaistos egeneto touto ergasmenos, misetheis te kai diukomenos oixeto feugun teisi neysi epi Libues. to entheuten de okoy eti etrapeto oyk eixon eipein Aiguptioi. toutun de ta men istorieisi efasan epistasthai, ta de par' euytoisi genomena atrekeus epistamenoi legein.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [120]

     120. Thus the priests of the Egyptians told me; and I myself also agree with the story which was told of Helen, adding this consideration, namely that if Helen had been in Ilion she would have been given up to the Hellenes, whether Alexander consented or no; for Priam assuredly was not so mad, nor yet the others of his house, that they were desirous to run risk of ruin for themselves and their children and their city, in order that Alexander might have Helen as his wife: and even supposing that during the first part of the time they had been so inclined, yet when many others of the Trojans besides were losing their lives as often as they fought with the Hellenes, and of the sons of Priam himself always two or three or even more were slain when a battle took place (if one may trust at all to the Epic poets),--when, I say, things were coming thus to pass, I consider that even if Priam himself had had Helen as his wife, he would have given her back to the Achaians, if at least by so doing he might be freed from the evils which oppressed him. Nor even was the kingdom coming to Alexander next, so that when Priam was old the government was in his hands; but Hector, who was both older and more of a man than he, would have received it after the death of Priam; and him it behoved not to allow his brother to go on with his wrong-doing, considering that great evils were coming to pass on his account both to himself privately and in general to the other Trojans. In truth however they lacked the power to give Helen back; and the Hellenes did not believe them, though they spoke the truth; because, as I declare my opinion, the divine power was purposing to cause them utterly to perish, and so make it evident to men that for great wrongs great also are the chastisements which come from the gods. And thus have I delivered my opinion concerning these matters.         120. [1] tauta men Aigyptiun oi irees elegon. egu de tui logui tui peri Elenes lexthenti kai aytos prostithemai, tade epilegomenos, ei En Elene en Iliui, apodotheinai an ayten toisi Ellesi etoi ekontos ge e aekontos Alexandroy. [2] oy gar de oytu ge frenoblabes En o Priamos oyde oi alloi oi prosekontes aytui, uste toisi sfeteroisi sumasi kai toisi teknoisi kai tei poli kindyneuein eboulonto, okus Alexandros Elenei synoikeei. [3] ei de toi kai en toisi prutoisi xronoisi tauta eginuskon, epei polloi men tun allun Truun, okote symmisgoien toisi Ellesi, apullynto, aytou de Priamoy oyk esti ote oy duo e treis e kai eti pleoys tun paidun maxes ginomenes apethneskon, ei xre ti toisi epopoioisi xreumenon legein, toutun de toioutun symbainontun egu men elpomai, ei kai aytos Priamos synoikee Elenei, apodounai an ayten toisi Axaioisi, mellonta ge de tun pareontun kakun apallagesesthai. [4] oy men oyde e basileie es Alexandron perieie, uste gerontos Priamoy eontos ep' ekeinui ta pregmata einai, alla Ektur kai presbuteros kai aner ekeinoy mallon eun emelle ayten Priamoy apothanontos paralampsesthai, ton oy proseike adikeonti tui adelfeui epitrepein, kai tauta megalun kakun di' ayton symbainontun idiei te aytui kai toisi alloisi pasi Trusi. [5] all' oy gar eixon Elenen apodounai, oyde legoysi aytoisi ten aletheien episteyon oi Ellenes, us men egu gnumen apofainomai, tou daimonioy paraskeyazontos, okus panulethriei apolomenoi katafanes touto toisi anthrupoisi poiesusi, us tun megalun adikematun megalai eisi kai ai timuriai para tun theun. kai tauta men tei emoi dokeei eiretai.    
      121. After Proteus, they told me, Rhampsinitos received in succession the kingdom, who left as a memorial of himself that gateway to the temple of Hephaistos which is turned towards the West, and in front of the gateway he set up two statues, in height five-and-twenty cubits, of which the one which stands on the North side is called by the Egyptians Summer and the one on the South side Winter; and to that one which they call Summer they do reverence and make offerings, while to the other which is called Winter they do the opposite of these things.         121. [1] Pruteos de ekdexasthai ten basileien RHampsiniton elegon, os mnemosyna elipeto ta propulaia ta pros esperen tetrammena tou Efaisteioy, antioys de tun propylaiun estese andriantas duo, eontas to megathos pente kai eikosi pexeun, tun Aiguptioi ton men pros boreu esteuta kaleoysi theros, ton de pros noton xeimuna. kai ton men kaleoysi theros, touton men proskyneoysi te kai ey poieoysi, ton de xeimuna kaleomenon ta empalin toutun erdoysi   
      121. (a) This king, they said, got great wealth of silver, which none of the kings born after him could surpass or even come near to; and wishing to store his wealth in safety he caused to be built a chamber of stone, one of the walls whereof was towards the outside of his palace: and the builder of this, having a design against it, contrived as follows, that is, he disposed one of the stones in such a manner that it could be taken out easily from the wall either by two men or even by one. So when the chamber was finished, the king stored his money in it, and after some time the builder, being near the end of his life, called to him his sons (for he had two) and to them he related how he had contrived in building the treasury of the king, and all in forethought for them, that they might have ample means of living. And when he had clearly set forth to them everything concerning the taking out of the stone, he gave them the measurements, saying that if they paid heed to this matter they would be stewards of the king's treasury. So he ended his life, and his sons made no long delay in setting to work, but went to the palace by night, and having found the stone in the wall of the chamber they dealt with it easily and carried forth for themselves great quantity of the wealth within.         121. a [1] plouton de toutui tui basilei genesthai arguroy megan, ton oydena tun ysteron epitrafentun basileun dunasthai yperbalesthai oyd' eggus elthein. boylomenon de ayton en asfaleiei ta xremata thesayrizein oikodomeesthai oikema lithinon, tou tun toixun ena es to exu meros teis oikies exein. ton de ergazomenon epiboyleuonta tade mexanasthai. tun lithun paraskeyasasthai ena exaireton einai ek tou toixoy rheidius kai ypo duo andrun kai ypo enos. [2] us de epetelesthe to oikema, ton men basilea thesayrisai ta xremata en aytui. xronoy de periiontos ton oikodomon peri teleyten tou bioy eonta anakalesasthai tous paidas (einai gar aytui duo), toutoisi de apegesasthai us ekeinun proorun, okus bion afthonon exusi, texnasaito oikodomeun ton thesayron tou basileos. safeus de aytoisi panta exegesamenon ta peri ten exairesin tou lithoy dounai ta metra aytou, legonta us tauta diafylassontes tamiai tun basileos xrematun esontai. [3] kai ton men teleyteisai ton bion, tous de paidas oyk es makren ergoy exesthai, epelthontas de epi ta basileia nyktos kai ton lithon epi tui oikodomemati aneyrontas rheidius metaxeirisasthai kai tun xrematun polla exeneikasthai.   
      121. (b) And the king happening to open the chamber, he marvelled when he saw the vessels falling short of the full amount, and he did not know on whom he should lay the blame, since the seals were unbroken and the chamber had been close shut; but when upon his opening the chamber a second and a third time the money was each time seen to be diminished, for the thieves did not slacken in their assaults upon it, he did as follows:--having ordered traps to be made he set these round about the vessels in which the money was; and when the thieves had come as at former times and one of them had entered, then so soon as he came near to one of the vessels he was straightway caught in the trap: and when he perceived in what evil case he was, straightway calling his brother he showed him what the matter was, and bade him enter as quickly as possible and cut off his head, for fear lest being seen and known he might bring about the destruction of his brother also. And to the other it seemed that he spoke well, and he was persuaded and did so; and fitting the stone into its place he departed home bearing with him the head of his brother.         121. b [1] us de tyxein ton basilea anoixanta to oikema, thumasai idonta tun xrematun katadea ta aggeia, oyk exein de ontina epaitiatai, tun te semantrun eontun soun kai tou oikematos kekleimenoy. us de aytui kai dis kai tris anoixanti aiei elassu fainesthai ta xremata (tous gar kleptas oyk anienai keraizontas), poieisai min tade. pagas prostaxai ergasasthai kai tautas peri ta aggeia en toisi ta xremata enein steisai. [2] tun de furun usper en tui pro tou xronui elthontun kai esduntos tou eteroy aytun, epei pros to aggos proseilthe, itheus tei pagei enexesthai. us de gnunai ayton en oiui kakui En, itheus kaleein ton adelfeon kai deloun aytui ta pareonta, kai keleuein ten taxisten esdunta apotamein aytou ten kefalen, okus me aytos oftheis kai gnuristheis os eie prosapolesei kakeinon. tui de doxai ey legein, kai poieisai min peisthenta tauta, kai katarmosanta ton lithon apienai ep' oikoy, feronta ten kefalen tou adelfeou.   
      121. (c) Now when it became day, the king entered into the chamber and was very greatly amazed, seeing the body of the thief held in the trap without his head, and the chamber unbroken, with no way to come in or go out: and being at a loss he hung up the dead body of the thief upon the wall and set guards there, with charge if they saw any one weeping or bewailing himself to seize him and bring him before the king. And when the dead body had been hung up, the mother was greatly grieved, and speaking with the son who survived she enjoined him, in whatever way he could, to contrive means by which he might take down and bring home the body of his dead brother; and if he should neglect to do this, she earnestly threatened that she would go and give information to the king that he had the money.         121. g [1] us de emere egeneto, eselthonta ton basilea es to oikema ekpepleixthai orunta to suma tou furos en tei pagei aney teis kefaleis eon, to de oikema asines kai oyte esodon oyte ekdysin oydemian exon. aporeumenon de min tade poieisai. tou furos ton nekyn kata tou teixeos katakremasai, fylakoys de aytou katastesanta enteilasthai sfi, ton an iduntai apoklausanta e katoiktisamenon, syllabontas agein pros euyton. [2] anakremamenoy de tou nekyos ten metera deinus ferein, logoys de pros ton perieonta paida poieymenen prostassein aytui oteui tropui dunatai mexanasthai okus to suma tou adelfeou katalusas komiei. ei de toutun amelesei, diapeileein ayten us elthousa pros ton basilea menusei ayton exonta ta xremata.   
      121. (d) So as the mother dealt hardly with the surviving son, and he though saying many things to her did not persuade her, he contrived for his purpose a device as follows:--Providing himself with asses he filled some skins with wine and laid them upon the asses, and after that he drove them along: and when he came opposite to those who were guarding the corpse hung up, he drew towards him two or three of the necks of the skins and loosened the cords with which they were tied. Then when the wine was running out, he began to beat his head and cry out loudly, as if he did not know to which of the asses he should first turn; and when the guards saw the wine flowing out in streams, they ran together to the road with drinking vessels in their hands and collected the wine that was poured out, counting it so much gain; and he abused them all violently, making as if he were angry, but when the guards tried to appease him, after a time he feigned to be pacified and to abate his anger, and at length he drove his asses out of the road and began to set their loads right. Then more talk arose among them, and one or two of them made jests at him and brought him to laugh with them; and in the end he made them a present of one of the skins in addition to what they had. Upon that they lay down there without more ado, being minded to drink, and they took him into their company and invited him to remain with them and join them in their drinking: so he (as may be supposed) was persuaded and stayed. Then as they in their drinking bade him welcome in a friendly manner, he made a present to them also of another of the skins; and so at length having drunk liberally the guards became completely intoxicated; and being overcome by sleep they went to bed on the spot where they had been drinking. He then, as it was now far on in the night, first took down the body of his brother, and then in mockery shaved the right cheeks of all the guards; and after that he put the dead body upon the asses and drove them away home, having accomplished that which was enjoined him by his mother.         121. d [1] us de xalepus elambaneto e meter tou perieontos paidos kai polla pros ayten legun oyk epeithe, epitexnesasthai toiade min. onoys kataskeyasamenon kai askous plesanta oinoy epitheinai epi tun onun kai epeita elaunein aytous. us de kata tous fylassontas En ton kremamenon nekyn, epispasanta tun askun duo e treis podeunas ayton luein apammenoys. [2] us de erree o oinos, ten kefalen min koptesthai megala bounta us oyk exonta pros okoion tun onun pruton trapetai. tous de fylakoys us idein pollon rheonta ton oinon, syntrexein es ten odon aggeia exontas, kai ton ekkexymenon oinon sygkomizein en kerdei poieymenoys. [3] ton de dialoidoreesthai pasi orgen prospoieumenon, paramytheymenun de ayton tun fylakun xronui preunesthai prospoieesthai kai ypiesthai teis orgeis, telos de exelasai ayton tous onoys ek teis odou kai kataskeyazein. [4] us de logoys te pleoys egginesthai kai tina kai skupsai min kai es geluta proagagesthai, epidounai aytoisi tun askun ena. tous de aytou usper eixon kataklithentas pinein dianoeesthai, kai ekeinon paralambanein kai keleuein met' euytun meinanta sympinein. ton de peistheinai te de kai katameinai. [5] us de min para ten posin filofronus espazonto, epidounai aytoisi kai allon tun askun. dapsilei de tui potui xresamenoys tous fylakoys ypermethystheinai kai kratethentas ypo tou ypnoy aytou entha per epinon katakoimetheinai. [6] ton de, us prosu En teis nyktos, to te suma tou adelfeou katalusai kai tun fylakun epi lumei pantun xyreisai tas dexias pareidas, epithenta de ton nekyn epi tous onoys apelaunein ep' oikoy, epitelesanta tei metri ta prostaxthenta.    
      121. (e) Upon this the king, when it was reported to him that the dead body of the thief had been stolen away, displayed great anger; and desiring by all means that it should be found out who it might be who devised these things, did this (so at least they said, but I do not believe the account),--he caused his own daughter to sit in the stews, and enjoined her to receive all equally, and before having commerce with any one to compel him to tell her what was the most cunning and what the most unholy deed which had been done by him in all his life-time; and whosoever should relate that which had happened about the thief, him she must seize and not let him go out. Then as she was doing that which was enjoined by her father, the thief, hearing for what purpose this was done and having a desire to get the better of the king in resource, did thus:--from the body of one lately dead he cut off the arm at the shoulder and went with it under his mantle: and having gone in to the daughter of the king, and being asked that which the others also were asked, he related that he had done the most unholy deed when he cut off the head of his brother, who had been caught in a trap in the king's treasure-chamber, and the most cunning deed in that he made drunk the guards and took down the dead body of his brother hanging up; and she when she heard it tried to take hold of him, but the thief held out to her in the darkness the arm of the corpse, which she grasped and held, thinking that she was holding the arm of the man himself; but the thief left it in her hands and departed, escaping through the door.         121. e [1] ton de basilea, us aytui apeggelthe tou furos o nekys ekkeklemmenos, deina poieein. pantus de boylomenon eyretheinai ostis kote eie o tauta mexanumenos, poieisai min tade, emoi men oy pista. [2] ten thygatera ten euytou katisai ep' oikematos, enteilamenon pantas te omoius prosdekesthai, kai prin syggenesthai, anagkazein legein aytei o ti de en tui biui ergastai aytui sofutaton kai anosiutaton. os d' an apegesetai ta peri ton fura gegenemena, touton syllambanein kai me apienai exu. [3] us de ten paida poieein ta ek tou patros prostaxthenta, ton fura pythomenon tun eineka tauta epresseto, boylethenta polytropiei tou basileos perigenesthai poieein tade. [4] nekrou prosfatoy apotamonta en tui umui ten xeira ienai ayton exonta ayten ypo tui imatiui. eselthonta de us tou basileos ten thygatera kai eirutumenon ta per kai oi alloi, apegesasthai us anosiutaton men eie ergasmenos oti tou adelfeou en tui thesayrui tou basileos ypo pages alontos apotamoi ten kefalen, sofutaton de oti tous fylakoys katamethusas kataluseie tou adelfeou kremamenon ton nekyn. [5] ten de us ekoyse aptesthai aytou. ton de fura en tui skotei proteinai aytei tou nekrou ten xeira. ten de epilabomenen exein, nomizoysan aytou ekeinoy teis xeiros antexesthai. ton de fura proemenon aytei oixesthai dia thyreun feugonta.    
      121. (f) Now when this also was reported to the king, he was at first amazed at the ready invention and daring of the fellow, and then afterwards he sent round to all the cities and made proclamation granting a free pardon to the thief, and also promising a great reward if he would come into his presence. The thief accordingly trusting to the proclamation came to the king, and Rhampsinitos greatly marvelled at him, and gave him this daughter of his to wife, counting him to be the most knowing of all men; for as the Egyptians were distinguished from all other men, so was he from the other Egyptians.         121. z [1] us de kai tauta es ton basilea aneneixthe, ekpepleixthai men epi tei polyfrosunei te kai tolmei tou anthrupoy, telos de dianemonta es pasas tas polis epaggellesthai adeien te didonta kai megala ypodekomenon elthonti es opsin ten euytou. [2] ton de fura pisteusanta elthein pros ayton, RHampsiniton de megalus thumasai, kai oi ten thygatera tauten synoikisai us pleista epistamenui anthrupun. Aigyptioys men gar tun allun prokekristhai, ekeinon de Aigyptiun.    
      122. After these things they said this king went down alive to that place which by the Hellenes is called Hades, and there played at dice with Demeter, and in some throws he overcame her and in others he was overcome by her; and he came back again having as a gift from her a handkerchief of gold: and they told me that because of the going down of Rhampsinitos the Egyptians after he came back celebrated a feast, which I know of my own knowledge also that they still observe even to my time; but whether it is for this cause that they keep the feast or for some other, I am not able to say. However, the priests weave a robe completely on the very day of the feast, and forthwith they bind up the eyes of one of them with a fillet, and having led him with the robe to the way by which one goes to the temple of Demeter, they depart back again themselves. This priest, they say, with his eyes bound up is led by two wolves to the temple of Demeter, which is distant from the city twenty furlongs, and then afterwards the wolves lead him back again from the temple to the same spot.         122. [1] meta de tauta elegon touton ton basilea zuon katabeinai katu es ton oi Ellenes Aiden nomizoysi einai, kai keithi sygkybeuein tei Demetri, kai ta men nikan ayten ta de essousthai yp' ayteis, kai min palin apikesthai duron exonta par' ayteis xeiromaktron xruseon. [2] apo de teis RHampsinitoy katabasios, us palin apiketo, orten de anagein Aigyptioys efasan. ten kai egu oida eti kai es eme epiteleontas aytous, oy mentoi ei ge dia tauta ortazoysi exu legein. [3] faros de aytemeron exyfenantes oi irees kat' un edesan enos euytun mitrei tous ofthalmous, agagontes de min exonta to faros es odon feroysan es iron Demetros aytoi apallassontai opisu. ton de irea touton katadedemenon tous ofthalmous legoysi ypo duo lukun agesthai es to iron teis Demetros apexon teis polios eikosi stadioys, kai aytis opisu ek tou irou apagein min tous lukoys es tuyto xurion.    
      123. Now as to the tales told by the Egyptians, any man may accept them to whom such things appear credible; as for me, it is to be understood throughout the whole of the history that I write by hearsay that which is reported by the people in each place. The Egyptians say that Demeter and Dionysos are rulers of the world below; and the Egyptians are also the first who reported the doctrine that the soul of man is immortal, and that when the body dies, the soul enters into another creature which chances then to be coming to the birth, and when it has gone the round of all the creatures of land and sea and of the air, it enters again into a human body as it comes to the birth; and that it makes this round in a period of three thousand years. This doctrine certain Hellenes adopted, some earlier and some later, as if it were of their own invention, and of these men I know the names but I abstain from recording them.         123. [1] toisi men nyn yp' Aigyptiun legomenoisi xrasthu oteui ta toiauta pithana esti. emoi de para panta ton logon ypokeitai oti ta legomena yp' ekastun akoei grafu. arxegeteein de tun katu Aiguptioi legoysi Demetra kai Dionyson. [2] prutoi de kai tonde ton logon Aiguptioi eisi oi eipontes, us anthrupoy psyxe athanatos esti, tou sumatos de katafthinontos es allo zuion aiei ginomenon esduetai, epean de panta perielthei ta xersaia kai ta thalassia kai ta peteina, aytis es anthrupoy suma ginomenon esdunei. ten perielysin de aytei ginesthai en trisxilioisi etesi. [3] toutui tui logui eisi oi Ellenun exresanto, oi men proteron oi de ysteron, us idiui euytun eonti. tun egu eidus ta oynomata oy grafu.    
      124. Down to the time when Rhampsinitos was king, they told me there was in Egypt nothing but orderly rule, and Egypt prospered greatly; but after him Cheops became king over them and brought them to every kind of evil: for he shut up all the temples, and having first kept them from sacrificing there, he then bade all the Egyptians work for him. So some were appointed to draw stones from the stone-quarries in the Arabian mountains to the Nile, and others he ordered to receive the stones after they had been carried over the river in boats, and to draw them to those which are called the Libyan mountains; and they worked by a hundred thousand men at a time, for each three months continually. Of this oppression there passed ten years while the causeway was made by which they drew the stones, which causeway they built, and it is a work not much less, as it appears to me, than the pyramid; for the length of it is five furlongs and the breadth ten fathoms and the height, where it is highest, eight fathoms, and it is made of stone smoothed and with figures carved upon it. For this, they said, the ten years were spent, and for the underground chambers on the hill upon which the pyramids stand, which he caused to be made as sepulchral chambers for himself in an island, having conducted thither a channel from the Nile. For the making of the pyramid itself there passed a period of twenty years; and the pyramid is square, each side measuring eight hundred feet, and the height of it is the same. It is built of stone smoothed and fitted together in the most perfect manner, not one of the stones being less than thirty feet in length.         124. [1] mexri men nyn RHampsinitoy basileos einai en Aiguptui pasan eynomien elegon kai eytheneein Aigypton megalus, meta de touton basileusanta sfeun Kheopa es pasan kakoteta elasai. katakleisanta gar min panta ta ira pruta men sfeas thysieun toyteun aperxai, meta de ergazesthai euytui keleuein pantas Aigyptioys. [2] toisi men de apodedexthai ek tun lithotomieun tun en tui Arabiui orei, ek toyteun elkein lithoys mexri tou Neiloy. diaperaiuthentas de ton potamon ploioisi tous lithoys eteroisi epetaxe ekdekesthai kai pros to Libykon kaleumenon oros, pros touto elkein. [3] ergazonto de kata deka myriadas anthrupun aiei ten trimenon ekasten. xronon de eggenesthai tribomenui tui leui deka etea men teis odou kat' en eilkon tous lithoys, ten edeiman ergon eon oy pollui teui elasson teis pyramidos. us emoi dokeein. [4] teis men gar meikos eisi pente stadioi, eyros de deka orgyiai, ypsos de, tei ypselotate esti ayte euyteis, oktu orgyiai, lithoy de xestou kai zuiun eggeglymmenun. tautes te de ta deka etea genesthai kai tun epi tou lofoy ep' oy estasi ai pyramides, tun ypo gein oikematun, tas epoieeto thekas euytui en nesui, diuryxa tou Neiloy esagagun. [5] tei de pyramidi aytei xronon genesthai eikosi etea poieymenei. teis esti pantaxei metupon ekaston oktu. plethra eouses tetragunoy kai ypsos ison, lithoy de xestou te kai armosmenoy ta malista. oydeis tun lithun triekonta podun elassun.    
      125. This pyramid was made after the manner of steps, which some call "rows" and others "bases": and when they had first made it thus, they raised the remaining stones with machines made of short pieces of timber, raising them first from the ground to the first stage of the steps, and when the stone got up to this it was placed upon another machine standing on the first stage, and so from this it was drawn to the second upon another machine; for as many as were the courses of the steps, so many machines there were also, or perhaps they transferred one and the same machine, made so as easily to be carried, to each stage successively, in order that they might take up the stones; for let it be told in both ways, according as it is reported. However that may be, the highest parts of it were finished first, and afterwards they proceeded to finish that which came next to them, and lastly they finished the parts of it near the ground and the lowest ranges. On the pyramid it is declared in Egyptian writing how much was spent on radishes and onions and leeks for the workmen, and if I rightly remember that which the interpreter said in reading to me this inscription, a sum of one thousand six hundred talents of silver was spent; and if this is so, how much besides is likely to have been expended upon the iron with which they worked, and upon bread and clothing for the workmen, seeing that they were building the works for the time which has been mentioned and were occupied for no small time besides, as I suppose, in the cutting and bringing of the stones and in working at the excavation under the ground?         125. [1] epoiethe de ude ayte e pyramis. anabathmun tropon, tas metexeteroi krossas oi de bumidas onomazoysi, [2] toiauten to pruton epeite epoiesan ayten, eeiron tous epiloipoys lithoys mexaneisi xulun braxeun pepoiemeneisi, xamathen men epi ton pruton stoixon tun anabathmun aeirontes. [3] okus de anioi o lithos ep' ayton, es eteren mexanen etitheto esteusan epi tou prutoy stoixoy, apo toutoy de epi ton deuteron eilketo stoixon ep' alles mexaneis. [4] osoi gar de stoixoi Esan tun anabathmun, tosautai kai mexanai Esan, eite kai ten ayten mexanen eousan mian te kai eybastakton meteforeon epi stoixon ekaston, okus ton lithon exeloien. lelexthu gar emin ep' amfotera, kata per legetai. [5] exepoiethe d' un ta anutata ayteis pruta, meta de ta exomena toutun exepoieyn, teleytaia de ayteis ta epigaia kai ta katutatu exepoiesan. [6] sesemantai de dia grammatun Aigyptiun en tei pyramidi osa es te syrmaien kai krommya kai skoroda anaisimuthe toisi ergazomenoisi. kai us eme ey memneisthai ta o ermeneus moi epilegomenos ta grammata efe, exakosia kai xilia talanta argyrioy tetelesthai. [7] ei d' esti oytu exonta tauta, kosa oikos alla dedapaneisthai esti es te sideron tui ergazonto kai sitia kai estheita toisi ergazomenoisi, okote xronon men oikodomeon ta erga ton eiremenon, allon de, us egu dokeu, en tui tous lithoys etamnon kai Egon kai to ypo gein orygma ergazonto, oyk oligon xronon.    
      126. Cheops moreover came, they said, to such a pitch of wickedness, that being in want of money he caused his own daughter to sit in the stews, and ordered her to obtain from those who came a certain amount of money (how much it was they did not tell me); but she not only obtained the sum appointed by her father, but also she formed a design for herself privately to leave behind her a memorial, and she requested each man who came in to her to give her one stone upon her building: and of these stones, they told me, the pyramid was built which stands in front of the great pyramid in the middle of the three, each side being one hundred and fifty feet in length.         126. [1] es touto de elthein Kheopa kakotetos uste xrematun deomenon ten thygatera ten euytou katisanta ep' oikematos prostaxai pressesthai argurion okoson de ti. oy gar de touto ge elegon. ten de ta te ypo tou patros taxthenta pressesthai, idiei de kai ayten dianoetheinai mnemeion katalipesthai, kai tou esiontos pros ayten ekastoy deesthai okus an aytei ena lithon en toisi ergoisi dureoito. [2] ek toutun de tun lithun efasan ten pyramida oikodometheinai ten en mesui tun triun estekyian, emprosthe teis megales pyramidos, teis esti to kulon ekaston oloy kai emiseos plethroy.    
      127. This Cheops, the Egyptians said, reigned fifty years; and after he was dead his brother Chephren succeeded to the kingdom. This king followed the same manner as the other, both in all the rest and also in that he made a pyramid, not indeed attaining to the measurements of that which was built by the former (this I know, having myself also measured it), and moreover there are no underground chambers beneath nor does a channel come from the Nile flowing to this one as to the other, in which the water coming through a conduit built for it flows round an island within, where they say that Cheops himself is laid: but for a basement he built the first course of Ethiopian stone of divers colours; and this pyramid he made forty feet lower than the other as regards size, building it close to the great pyramid. These stand both upon the same hill, which is about a hundred feet high. And Chephren they said reigned fifty and six years.         127. [1] basileusai de ton Kheopa touton Aiguptioi elegon pentekonta etea, teleytesantos de toutoy ekdexasthai ten basileien ton adelfeon aytou Khefreina. kai touton de tui aytui tropui diaxrasthai tui eterui ta te alla kai pyramida poieisai, es men ta ekeinoy metra oyk anekoysan. [2] tauta gar un kai emeis emetresamen. (oyte gar ypesti oikemata ypo gein, oyte ek tou Neiloy diuryx ekei es ayten usper es ten eteren rheoysa. di' oikodomemenoy de aylunos esu neison perirreei, en tei ayton legoysi keisthai Kheopa). [3] ypodeimas de ton pruton domon lithoy Aithiopikou poikiloy, tesserakonta podas ypobas teis eteres tuyto megathos, exomenen teis megales oikodomese. estasi de epi lofoy tou aytou amfoterai, malista es ekaton podas ypselou. basileusai de elegon Khefreina ex kai pentekonta etea.    
      128. Here then they reckon one hundred and six years, during which they say that there was nothing but evil for the Egyptians, and the temples were kept closed and not opened during all that time. These kings the Egyptians by reason of their hatred of them are not very willing to name; nay, they even call the pyramids after the name of Philitis the shepherd, who at that time pastured flocks in those regions.         128. [1] tauta ex te kai ekaton logizontai etea, en toisi Aigyptioisi te pasan einai kakoteta kai ta ira xronoy tosoutoy katakleisthenta oyk anoixtheinai. toutoys ypo miseos oy karta theloysi Aiguptioi onomazein, alla kai tas pyramidas kaleoysi poimenos Filitios, os touton ton xronon eneme ktenea kata tauta ta xuria.    
      129. After him, they said, Mykerinos became king over Egypt, who was the son of Cheops; and to him his father's deeds were displeasing, and he both opened the temples and gave liberty to the people, who were ground down to the last extremity of evil, to return to their own business and to their sacrifices;: also he gave decisions of their causes juster than those of all the other kings besides. In regard to this then they commend this king more than all the other kings who had arisen in Egypt before him; for he not only gave good decisions, but also when a man complained of the decision, he gave him recompense from his own goods and thus satisfied his desire. But while Mykerinos was acting mercifully to his subjects and practising this conduct which has been said, calamities befell him, of which the first was this, namely that his daughter died, the only child whom he had in his house: and being above measure grieved by that which had befallen him, and desiring to bury his daughter in a manner more remarkable than others, he made a cow of wood, which he covered over with gold, and then within it he buried this daughter who, as I said, had died.         129. [1] meta de touton basileusai Aiguptoy Mykerinon elegon Kheopos paida. tui ta men tou patros erga apadein, ton de ta te ira anoixai kai ton leun tetrymenon es to esxaton kakou aneinai pros erga te kai thysias, dikas de sfi pantun basileun dikaiotata krinein. [2] kata touto men nyn to ergon apantun osoi ede basilees egenonto Aigyptiun aineoysi malista touton. ta te alla gar min krinein ey, kai de kai tui epimemfomenui ek teis dikes par' euytou didonta alla apopimplanai aytou ton thymon. [3] eonti de epiui tui Mykerinui kata tous polietas kai tauta epitedeuonti pruton kakun arxai ten thygatera apothanousan aytou, ten mounon oi einai en toisi oikioisi teknon. ton de yperalgesanta te tui periepeptukee pregmati, kai boylomenon perissoteron ti tun allun thapsai ten thygatera, poiesasthai boun xylinen koilen, kai epeita kataxrysusanta min tauten esu en aytei thapsai tauten de ten apothanousan thygatera.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [130]

     130. This cow was not covered up in the ground, but it might be seen even down to my own time in the city of Sais, placed within the royal palace in a chamber which was greatly adorned; and they offer incense of all kinds before it every day, and each night a lamp burns beside it all through the night. Near this cow in another chamber stand images of the concubines of Mykerinos, as the priests at Sais told me; for there are in fact colossal wooden statues, in number about twenty, made with naked bodies; but who they are I am not able to say, except only that which is reported.         130. [1] ayte un e bous gei oyk ekrufthe, all' eti kai es eme En fanere, en Sai men poli eousa, keimene de en toisi basileioisi en oikemati eskemenui. thymiemata de par' aytei pantoia katagizoysi ana pasan emeren, nukta de ekasten pannyxos luxnos parakaietai. [2] agxou de teis boos tautes en allui oikemati eikones tun pallakeun tun Mykerinoy estasi, us elegon oi en Sai poli irees. estasi men gar xulinai kolossoi, eousai arithmon us eikosi malista kei, gymnai ergasmenai. aitines mentoi eisi, oyk exu eipein plen e ta legomena.    
      131. Some however tell about this cow and the colossal statues the following tale, namely that Mykerinos was enamoured of his own daughter and afterwards ravished her; and upon this they say that the girl strangled herself for grief, and he buried her in this cow; and her mother cut off the hands of the maids who had betrayed the daughter to her father; wherefore now the images of them have suffered that which the maids suffered in their life. In thus saying they speak idly, as it seems to me, especially in what they say about the hands of the statues; for as to this, even we ourselves saw that their hands had dropped off from lapse of time, and they were to be seen still lying at their feet even down to my time.         131. [1] oi de tines legoysi peri teis boos tautes kai tun kolossun tonde ton logon, us Mykerinos erasthe teis euytou thygatros kai epeita emige oi aekousei. [2] meta de legoysi us e pais apegxato ypo axeos, o de min ethapse en tei boi tautei, e de meter ayteis tun amfipolun tun prodoyseun ten thygatera tui patri apetame tas xeiras, kai nun tas eikonas ayteun einai peponthyias ta per ai zuai epathon. [3] tauta de legoysi flyereontes, us egu dokeu, ta te alla kai de kai ta peri tas xeiras tun kolossun. tautas gar un kai emeis urumen oti ypo xronoy tas xeiras apobeblekasi, ai en posi ayteun efainonto eousai eti kai es eme.    
      132. The cow is covered up with a crimson robe, except only the head and the neck, which are seen, overlaid with gold very thickly; and between the horns there is the disc of the sun figured in gold. The cow is not standing up but kneeling, and in size it is equal to a large living cow. Every year it is carried forth from the chamber, at those times, I say, the Egyptians beat themselves for that god whom I will not name upon occasion of such a matter; at these times, I say, they also carry forth the cow to the light of day, for they say that she asked of her father Mykerinos, when she was dying, that she might look upon the sun once in the year.         132. [1] e de bous ta men alla katakekryptai foinikeui eimati, ton ayxena de kai ten kefalen fainei kexrysumena paxei karta xrysui. metaxu de tun kereun o tou elioy kuklos memimemenos epesti xruseos. [2] esti de e bous oyk orthe all' en gounasi keimene, megathos de ose per megale bous zue. ekferetai de ek tou oikematos ana panta etea, epean tuptuntai Aiguptioi ton oyk onomazomenon theon yp' emeu epi toioutui pregmati. [3] tote un kai ten boun ekferoysi es to fus. fasi gar ayten deetheinai tou patros Mykerinoy apothneskoysan en tui en tui eniaytui apax min ton elion katidein.    
      133. After the misfortune of his daughter it happened, they said, secondly to this king as follows:--An oracle came to him from the city of Buto, saying that he was destined to live but six years more, in the seventh year to end his life: and he being indignant at it sent to the Oracle a reproach against the god, making complaint in reply that whereas his father and uncle, who had shut up the temples and had not only not remembered the gods, but also had been destroyers of men, had lived for a long time, he himself, who practised piety, was destined to end his life so soon: and from the Oracle there came a second message, which said that it was for this very cause that he was bringing his life to a swift close; for he had not done that which it was appointed for him to do, since it was destined that Egypt should suffer evils for a hundred and fifty years, and the two kings who had risen before him had perceived this, but he had not. Mykerinos having heard this, and considering that this sentence had been passed upon him beyond recall, procured many lamps, and whenever night came on he lighted these and began to drink and take his pleasure, ceasing neither by day nor by night; and he went about to the fen-country and to the woods and wherever he heard there were the most suitable places for enjoyment. This he devised (having a mind to prove that the Oracle spoke falsely) in order that he might have twelve years of life instead of six, the nights being turned into days.         133. [1] meta de teis thygatros to pathos deutera toutui tui basilei tade genesthai. elthein oi manteion ek Boytous polios us melloi ex etea mounon bious tui ebdomui teleytesein. [2] ton de deinon poiesamenon pempsai es to manteion tui theui oneidisma, antimemfomenon oti o men aytou pater kai patrus, apokleisantes ta ira kai theun oy memnemenoi alla kai tous anthrupoys ftheirontes, ebiusan xronon epi pollon, aytos d' eysebes eun melloi taxeus oytu teleytesein. [3] ek de tou xresterioy aytui deutera elthein legonta toutun eineka kai syntaxunein ayton ton bion. oy gar poieisai min to xreon En poieein. dein gar Aigypton kakousthai ep' etea pentekonta te kai ekaton, kai tous men duo tous pro ekeinoy genomenoys basileas mathein touto, keinon de oy. [4] tauta akousanta ton Mykerinon, us katakekrimenun ede oi toutun, luxna poiesamenon polla, okus ginoito nux, anapsanta ayta pinein te kai eypatheein, oyte emeres oyte nyktos anienta, es te ta elea kai ta alsea planumenon kai ina pynthanoito einai enebeteria epitedeotata. [5] tauta de emexanato thelun to manteion pseydomenon apodexai, ina oi dyudeka etea anti ex eteun genetai, ai nuktes emerai poieumenai.    
      134. This king also left behind him a pyramid, much smaller than that of his father, of a square shape and measuring on each side three hundred feet lacking twenty, built moreover of Ethiopian stone up to half the height. This pyramid some of the Hellenes say was built by the courtesan Rhodopis, not therein speaking rightly: and besides this it is evident to me that they who speak thus do not even know who Rhodopis was, for otherwise they would not have attributed to her the building of a pyramid like this, on which have been spent (so to speak) innumerable thousands of talents: moreover they do not know that Rhodopis flourished in the reign of Amasis, and not in this king's reign; for Rhodopis lived very many years later than the kings who left behind the pyramids. By descent she was of Thrace, and she was a slave of Iadmon the son of Hephaistopolis a Samian, and a fellow-slave of Esop the maker of fables; for he too was once the slave of Iadmon, as was proved especially in this fact, namely that when the people of Delphi repeatedly made proclamation in accordance with an oracle, to find some one who would take up the blood- money for the death of Esop, no one else appeared, but at length the grandson of Iadmon, called Iadmon also, took it up; and thus it is shown that Esop too was the slave of Iadmon.         134. [1] pyramida de oytos apelipeto pollon elassu tou patros, eikosi podun katadeoysan kulon ekaston triun plethrun, eouses tetragunoy, lithoy de es to emisy Aithiopikou. ten de metexeteroi fasi Ellenun RHodupios etaires gynaikos einai, oyk orthus legontes. [2] oyde un oyde eidotes moi fainontai legein oytoi etis En e RHodupis. oy gar an oi pyramida anethesan poiesasthai toiauten, es ten talantun xiliades anarithmetoi us logui eipein anaisimuntai. pros de oti kata Amasin basileuonta En akmazoysa RHodupis, all' oy kata touton. [3] etesi gar karta polloisi ysteron toutun tun basileun tun tas pyramidas tautas En lipomenun RHodupis, geneen men apo Threikes, doule de En Iadmonos tou Efaistopolios andros Samioy, sundoylos de Aisupoy tou logopoiou. kai gar oytos Iadmonos egeneto, us diedexe teide oyk ekista. [4] epeite gar pollakis keryssontun Delfun ek theopropioy os bouloito poinen teis Aisupoy psyxeis anelesthai, allos men oydeis efane, Iadmonos de paidos pais allos Iadmun aneileto. oytu kai Aisupos Iadmonos egeneto.    
      135. As for Rhodopis, she came to Egypt brought by Xanthes the Samian, and having come thither to exercise her calling she was redeemed from slavery for a great sum by a man of Mytilene, Charaxos son of Scamandronymos and brother of Sappho the lyric poet. Thus was Rhodopis set free, and she remained in Egypt and by her beauty won so much liking that she made great gain of money for one like Rhodopis, though not enough to suffice for the cost of such a pyramid as this. In truth there is no need to ascribe to her very great riches, considering that the tithe of her wealth may still be seen even to this time by any one who desires it: for Rhodopis wished to leave behind her a memorial of herself in Hellas, namely to cause a thing to be made such as happens not to have been thought of or dedicated in a temple by any besides, and to dedicate this at Delphi as a memorial of herself. Accordingly with the tithe of her wealth she caused to be made spits of iron of size large enough to pierce a whole ox, and many in number, going as far therein as her tithe allowed her, and she sent them to Delphi: these are even at the present time lying there, heaped all together behind the altar which the Chians dedicated, and just opposite to the cell of the temple. Now at Naucratis, as it happens, the courtesans are rather apt to win credit; for this woman first, about whom the story to which I refer is told, became so famous that all the Hellenes without exception come to know the name of Rhodopis, and then after her one whose name was Archidiche became a subject of song over all Hellas, though she was less talked of than the other. As for Charaxos, when after redeeming Rhodopis he returned back to Mytilene, Sappho in an ode violently abused him. Of Rhodopis then I shall say no more.         135. [1] RHodupis de es Aigypton apiketo Eantheu tou Samioy komisantos, apikomene de kat' ergasien eluthe xrematun megalun ypo andros Mytilenaioy Kharaxoy tou Skamandrunumoy paidos, adelfeou de Sapfous teis moysopoiou. [2] oytu de de e RHodupis eleytheruthe, kai katemeine te en Aiguptui kai karta epafroditos genomene megala ektesato xremata us an einai RHodupi, atar oyk us ge es pyramida toiauten exikesthai. [3] teis gar ten dekaten tun xrematun idesthai esti eti kai es tode panti tui boylomenui, oyden dei megala oi xremata anatheinai. epethumese gar RHodupis mnemeion euyteis en tei Elladi katalipesthai, poiema poiesamene touto to me tygxanoi allui exeyremenon kai anakeimenon en irui, touto anatheinai es Delfous mnemosynon euyteis. [4] teis un dekates tun xrematun poiesamene obelous boyporoys pollous sidereoys, oson enexuree e dekate oi, apepempe es Delfous. oi kai nun eti synneneatai opisthe men tou bumou ton Khioi anethesan, antion de aytou tou neou. [5] fileoysi de kus en tei Naykrati epafroditoi ginesthai ai etairai. touto men gar ayte, teis peri legetai ode o logos, oytu de ti kleine egeneto us kai oi pantes Ellenes RHodupios to oynoma exemathon. touto de ysteron tautes, tei oynoma En Arxidike, aoidimos ana ten Ellada egeneto, Esson de teis eteres perilesxeneytos. [6] Kharaxos de us lysamenos RHodupin apenostese es Mytilenen, en melei Sapfu polla katekertomese min. RHodupios men nyn peri pepaymai.   
      136. After Mykerinos the priests said Asychis became king of Egypt, and he made for Hephaistos the temple gateway which is towards the sunrising, by far the most beautiful and the largest of the gateways; for while they all have figures carved upon them and innumerable ornaments of building besides, this has them very much more than the rest. In this king's reign they told me that, as the circulation of money was very slow, a law was made for the Egyptians that a man might have that money lent to him which he needed, by offering as security the dead body of his father; and there was added moreover to this law another, namely that he who lent the money should have a claim also to the whole sepulchral chamber belonging to him who received it, and that the man who offered that security should be subject to this penalty, if he refused to pay back the debt, namely that neither the man himself should be allowed to have burial when he died, either in that family burial-place or in any other, nor should he be allowed to bury any one of his kinsmen whom he lost by death. This king desiring to surpass the kings of Egypt who had arisen before him left as a memorial of himself a pyramid which he made of bricks, and on it there is an inscription carved in stone and saying thus: "Despise not me in comparison with the pyramids of stone, seeing that I excel them as much as Zeus excels the other gods; for with a pole they struck into the lake, and whatever of the mud attached itself to the pole, this they gathered up and made bricks, and in such manner they finished me." Such were the deeds which this king performed;         136. [1] meta de Mykerinon genesthai Aiguptoy basilea elegon oi irees Asyxin, ton ta pros elion anisxonta poieisai tui Efaistui propulaia, eonta pollui te kallista kai pollui megista. exei men gar kai ta panta propulaia tupoys te eggeglymmenoys kai allen opsin oikodomematun myrien, ekeina de kai makrui malista. [2] epi toutoy basileuontos elegon, amixies eouses polleis xrematun, genesthai nomon Aigyptioisi, apodeiknunta enexyron tou patros ton nekyn oytu lambanein to xreos. prostetheinai de eti toutui tui nomui tonde, ton didonta to xreos kai apases krateein teis tou lambanontos thekes, tui de ypotithenti touto to enexyron tende epeinai zemien me boylomenui apodounai to xreos, mete aytui ekeinui teleytesanti einai tafeis kyreisai met' en ekeinui tui patruiui tafui met' en allui medeni, mete allon medena tun euytou apogenomenon thapsai. [3] yperbalesthai de boylomenon touton ton basilea tous proteron euytou basileas genomenoys Aiguptoy mnemosynon pyramida lipesthai ek plinthun poiesanta, en tei grammata en lithui egkekolammena tade legonta esti. [4] <<me me katonostheis pros tas lithinas pyramidas. proexu gar ayteun tosouton oson o Zeus tun allun theun. kontui gar ypotuptontes es limnen, o ti prossxoito tou pelou tui kontui, touto syllegontes plinthoys eirysan kai me tropui toioutui exepoiesan.>> touton men tosauta apodexasthai.   
      137. and after him reigned a blind man of the city of Anysis, whose name was Anysis. In his reign the Ethiopians and Sabacos the king of the Ethiopians marched upon Egypt with a great host of men; so this blind man departed, flying to the fen-country, and the Ethiopian was king over Egypt for fifty years, during which he performed deeds as follows:-- whenever any man of the Egyptians committed any transgression, he would never put him to death, but he gave sentence upon each man according to the greatness of the wrong-doing, appointing them work at throwing up an embankment before that city from whence each man came of those who committed wrong. Thus the cities were made higher still than before; for they were embanked first by those who dug the channels in the reign of Sesostris, and then secondly in the reign of the Ethiopian, and thus they were made very high: and while other cities in Egypt also stood high, I think in the town at Bubastis especially the earth was piled up. In this city there is a temple very well worthy of mention, for though there are other temples which are larger and built with more cost, none more than this is a pleasure to the eyes. Now Bubastis in the Hellenic tongue is Artemis,         137. [1] meta de touton basileusai andra tyflon ex Anusios polios, tui oynoma Anysin einai. epi toutoy basileuontos elasai ep' Aigypton xeiri pollei Aithiopas te kai Sabakun ton Aithiopun basilea. [2] ton men de tyflon touton oixesthai feugonta es ta elea, ton de Aithiopa basileuein Aiguptoy ep' etea pentekonta, en toisi ayton tade apodexasthai. [3] okus tun tis Aigyptiun amartoi ti, kteinein men aytun oydena ethelein, ton de kata megathos tou adikematos ekastui dikazein epitassonta xumata xoun pros tei euytun poli, othen ekastos En tun adikeontun. kai oytu eti ai polies egenonto ypseloterai. [4] to men gar pruton exusthesan ypo tun tas diuryxas oryxantun epi Sesustrios basileos, deutera de epi tou Aithiopos kai karta ypselai egenonto. [5] ypseleun de kai etereun genomeneun en tei Aiguptui poliun, us emoi dokeei, malista e en Boybastipolis exexusthe, en tei kai iron esti Boybastios axiapegetotaton. mezu men gar alla kai polydapanutera esti ira, edone de idesthai oyden toutoy mallon. e de Boubastis kata Ellada glussan esti Artemis.    
      138. and her temple is ordered thus:--Except the entrance it is completely surrounded by water; for channels come in from the Nile, not joining one another, but each extending as far as the entrance of the temple, one flowing round on the one side and the other on the other side, each a hundred feet broad and shaded over with trees; and the gateway has a height of ten fathoms, and it is adorned with figures six cubits high, very noteworthy. This temple is in the middle of the city and is looked down upon from all sides as one goes round, for since the city has been banked up to a height, while the temple has not been moved from the place where it was at the first built, it is possible to look down into it: and round it runs a stone wall with figures carved upon it, while within it there is a grove of very large trees planted round a large temple-house, within which is the image of the goddess: and the breadth and length of the temple is a furlong every way. Opposite the entrance there is a road paved with stone for about three furlongs, which leads through the market-place towards the East, with a breadth of about four hundred feet; and on this side and on that grow trees of height reaching to heaven: and the road leads to the temple of Hermes. This temple then is thus ordered.         138. [1] to d' iron ayteis ude exei. plen teis esodoy to allo neisos esti. ek gar tou Neiloy diuryxes esexoysi oy symmisgoysai alleleisi, all' axri teis esodoy tou irou ekatere esexei, e men tei perirreoysa e de tei, eyros eousa ekatere ekaton podun, dendresi kataskios. [2] ta de propulaia ypsos men deka orgyieun esti, tupoisi de exapexesi eskeyadatai axioisi logoy. eon d' en mesei tei poli to iron katoratai pantothen periionti. ate gar teis polios men ekkexusmenes ypsou, tou d' irou oy kekinemenoy us arxeithen epoiethe, esopton esti. [3] peritheei de ayto aimasie eggeglymmene tupoisi, esti de esuthen alsos dendreun megistun pefyteymenon peri neon megan, en tui de tugalma eni. eyros de kai meikos tou irou pantei stadioy esti. [4] kata men de ten esodon estrumene esti odos lithoy epi stadioys treis malista kei, dia teis agoreis feroysa es to pros eu, eyros de us tesserun plethrun. tei de kai tei teis odou dendrea oyranomekea pefyke. ferei de es Ermeu iron. to men de iron touto oytu exei.    
      139. The final deliverance from the Ethiopian came about (they said) as follows:--he fled away because he had seen in his sleep a vision, in which it seemed to him that a man came and stood by him and counselled him to gather together all the priests of Egypt and cut them asunder in the midst. Having seen this dream, he said that it seemed to him that the gods were foreshowing him this to furnish an occasion against him, in order that he might do an impious deed with respect to religion, and so receive some evil either from the gods or from men: he would not however do so, but in truth (he said) the time had expired, during which it had been prophesied to him that he should rule Egypt before he departed thence. For when he was in Ethiopia the Oracles which the Ethiopians consult had told him that it was fated for him to rule Egypt fifty years: since then this time was now expiring, and the vision of the dream also disturbed him, Sabacos departed out of Egypt of his own free will.         139. [1] telos de teis apallageis tou Aithiopos ude elegon genesthai. opsin en tui ypnui toiende idonta ayton oixesthai feugonta. edokee oi andra epistanta symboyleuein tous ireas tous en Aiguptui syllexanta pantas mesoys diatamein. [2] idonta de ten opsin tauten legein ayton us profasin oi dokeoi tauten tous theous prodeiknunai, ina asebesas peri ta ira kakon ti pros theun e pros anthrupun laboi. oykun poiesein tauta, alla gar oi exelelythenai ton xronon, okoson kexreisthai arxanta Aiguptoy ekxuresein. [3] en gar tei Aithiopiei eonti aytui ta manteia, toisi xreuntai Aithiopes, aneile us deoi ayton Aiguptoy basileusai etea pentekonta. us un o xronos oytos exeie kai ayton e opsis tou enypnioy epetarasse, ekun apallasseto ek teis Aiguptoy o Sabakus.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [140]

     140. Then when the Ethiopian had gone away out of Egypt, the blind man came back from the fen-country and began to rule again, having lived there during fifty years upon an island which he had made by heaping up ashes and earth: for whenever any of the Egyptians visited him bringing food, according as it had been appointed to them severally to do without the knowledge of the Ethiopian, he bade them bring also some ashes for their gift. This island none was able to find before Amyrtaios; that is, for more than seven hundred years the kings who arose before Amyrtaios were not able to find it. Now the name of this island is Elbo, and its size is ten furlongs each way.         140. [1] us d' ara oixesthai ton Aithiopa ex Aiguptoy, aytis ton tyflon arxein ek tun eleun apikomenon, entha pentekonta etea neison xusas spodui te kai gei oikee. okus gar oi foitan siton agontas Aigyptiun, us ekastoisi prostetaxthai, sigei tou Aithiopos, es ten dureen keleuein sfeas kai spodon komizein. [2] tauten ten neison oydeis proteron edynasthe Amyrtaioy exeyrein, alla etea epi pleu e eptakosia oyk oioi te Esan ayten aneyrein oi proteroi genomenoi basilees Amyrtaioy. oynoma de tautei tei nesui Elbu, megathos d' esti pantei deka stadiun.    
      141. After him there came to the throne the priest of Hephaistos, whose name was Sethos. This man, they said, neglected and held in no regard the warrior class of the Egyptians, considering that he would have no need of them; and besides other slights which he put upon them, he also took from them the yokes of corn-land which had been given to them as a special gift in the reigns of the former kings, twelve yokes to each man. After this, Sanacharib king of the Arabians and of the Assyrians marched a great host against Egypt. Then the warriors of the Egyptians refused to come to the rescue, and the priest, being driven into a strait, entered into the sanctuary of the temple and bewailed to the image of the god the danger which was impending over him; and as he was thus lamenting, sleep came upon him, and it seemed to him in his vision that the god came and stood by him and encouraged him, saying that he should suffer no evil if he went forth to meet the army of the Arabians; for he himself would send him helpers. Trusting in these things seen in sleep, he took with him, they said, those of the Egyptians who were willing to follow him, and encamped in Pelusion, for by this way the invasion came: and not one of the warrior class followed him, but shop-keepers and artisans and men of the market. Then after they came, there swarmed by night upon their enemies mice of the fields, and ate up their quivers and their bows, and moreover the handles of their shields, so that on the next day they fled, and being without defence of arms great numbers fell. And at the present time this king stands in the temple of Hephaistos in stone, holding upon his hand a mouse, and by letters inscribed he says these words: "Let him who looks upon me learn to fear the gods."         141. [1] meta de touton basileusai ton irea tou Efaistoy, tui oynoma einai Sethun. ton en alogieisi exein paraxresamenon tun maximun Aigyptiun us oyden deesomenon aytun, alla te de atima poieunta es aytous, kai sfeas apelesthai tas arouras. toisi epi tun proterun basileun dedosthai exairetoys ekastui dyudeka arouras. [2] meta de ep' Aigypton elaunein straton megan Sanaxaribon basilea Arabiun te kai Assyriun. oykun de ethelein tous maximoys tun Aigyptiun boetheein. [3] ton d' irea es aporien apeilemenon eselthonta es to megaron pros tugalma apoduresthai oia kindyneuei parthein. olofyromenon d' ara min epelthein ypnon, kai oi doxai en tei opsi epistanta ton theon tharsunein us oyden peisetai axari antiazun ton Arabiun straton. aytos gar oi pempsein timurous. [4] toutoisi de min pisynon toisi enypnioisi, paralabonta Aigyptiun tous boylomenoys oi epesthai, stratopedeusasthai en Peloysiui. tautei gar eisi ai esbolai. epesthai de oi tun maximun men oydena andrun, kapeloys de kai xeirunaktas kai agoraioys anthrupoys. [5] enthauta apikomenoisi toisi enantioisi aytoisi epixythentas nyktos mus aroyraioys kata men fagein tous faretreunas aytun kata de ta toxa, pros de tun aspidun ta oxana, uste tei ysteraiei feygontun sfeun gymnun pesein pollous. [6] kai nun oytos o basileus esteke en tui irui tou Efaistoy lithinos, exun epi teis xeiros mun, legun dia grammatun tade. <<es eme tis oreun eysebes estu.>>    
      142. So far in the story the Egyptians and the priests were they who made the report, declaring that from the first king down to this priest of Hephaistos who reigned last, there had been three hundred and forty-one generations of men, and that in them there had been the same number of chief-priests and of kings: but three hundred generations of men are equal to ten thousand years, for a hundred years is three generations of men; and in the one-and-forty generations which remain, those I mean which were added to the three hundred, there are one thousand three hundred and forty years. Thus in the period of eleven thousand three hundred and forty years they said that there had arisen no god in human form; nor even before that time or afterwards among the remaining kings who arose in Egypt, did they report that anything of that kind had come to pass. In this time they said that the sun had moved four times from his accustomed place of rising, and where he now sets he had thence twice had his rising, and in the place from whence he now rises he had twice had his setting; and in the meantime nothing in Egypt had been changed from its usual state, neither that which comes from the earth nor that which comes to them from the river nor that which concerns diseases or deaths.         142. [1] es men tosonde tou logoy Aiguptioi te kai oi irees elegon, apodeiknuntes apo tou prutoy basileos es tou Efaistoy ton irea touton ton teleytaion basileusanta mian te kai tesserakonta kai triekosias geneas anthrupun genomenas, kai en tauteisi arxiereas kai basileas ekateroys tosoutoys genomenoys. [2] kaitoi triekosiai men andrun geneai dyneatai muria etea. geneai gar treis andrun ekaton etea esti. mieis de kai tesserakonta eti tun epiloipun geneeun, ai epeisan teisi triekosieisi, esti tesserakonta kai triekosia kai xilia etea. [3] oytu en myrioisi te etesi kai xilioisi kai triekosioisi te kai tesserakonta elegon theon anthrupoeidea oydena genesthai. oy mentoi oyde proteron oyde ysteron en toisi ypoloipoisi Aiguptoy basileusi genomenoisi elegon oyden toiouto. [4] en toinyn toutui tui xronui tetrakis elegon ex etheun ton elion anateilai. entha te nun kataduetai, entheuten dis epanteilai, kai enthen nun anatellei, enthauta dis katadunai. kai oyden tun kat' Aigypton ypo tauta eteroiutheinai, oyte ta ek teis geis oyte ta ek tou potamou sfi ginomena, oyte ta amfi nousoys oyte ta kata tous thanatoys.    
      143. And formerly when Hecataios the historian was in Thebes, and had traced his descent and connected his family with a god in the sixteenth generation before, the priests of Zeus did for him much the same as they did for me (though I had not traced my descent). They led me into the sanctuary of the temple, which is of great size, and they counted up the number, showing colossal wooden statues in number the same as they said; for each chief-priest there sets up in his lifetime an image of himself: accordingly the priests, counting and showing me these, declared to me that each one of them was a son succeeding his own father, and they went up through the series of images from the image of the one who had died last, until they had declared this of the whole number. And when Hecataios had traced his descent and connected his family with a god in the sixteenth generation, they traced a descent in opposition to this, besides their numbering, not accepting it from him that a man had been born from a god; and they traced their counter-descent thus, saying that each one of the statues had been piromis son of piromis, until they had declared this of the whole three hundred and forty-five statues, each one being surnamed piromis; and neither with a god nor a hero did they connect their descent. Now piromis means in the tongue of Hellas "honourable and good man."         143. [1] proteron de Ekataiui tui logopoiui en Thebeisi geneelogesanti te euyton kai anadesanti ten patrien es ekkaidekaton theon epoiesan oi irees tou Dios oion ti kai emoi oy geneelogesanti emeuyton. [2] esagagontes es to megaron esu eon mega exerithmeon deiknuntes kolossous xylinoys tosoutoys osoys per eipon. arxiereus gar ekastos aytothi istai epi teis euytou zoes eikona euytou. [3] arithmeontes un kai deiknuntes oi irees emoi apedeiknysan paida patros euytun ekaston eonta, ek tou agxista apothanontos teis eikonos diexiontes dia paseun, eus oy apedexan apasas aytas. [4] Ekataiui de geneelogesanti euyton kai anadesanti es ekkaidekaton theon antegeneelogesan epi tei arithmesi, oy dekomenoi par' aytou apo theou genesthai anthrupon. antegeneelogesan de ude, famenoi ekaston tun kolossun pirumin ek pirumios gegonenai, es o tous pente kai tesserakonta kai triekosioys apedexan kolossous [pirumin eponomazomenon], kai oyte es theon oyte es erua anedesan aytous. pirumis de esti kata Ellada glussan kalos kagathos.    
      144. From their declaration then it followed, that they of whom the images were had been of form like this, and far removed from being gods: but in the time before these men they said that gods were the rulers in Egypt, not mingling with men, and that of these always one had power at a time; and the last of them who was king over Egypt was Oros the son of Osiris, whom the Hellenes call Apollo: he was king over Egypt last, having deposed Typhon. Now Osiris in the tongue of Hellas is Dionysos.         144. [1] ede un tun ai eikones Esan, toioutoys apedeiknysan sfeas pantas eontas, theun de pollon apallagmenoys. [2] to de proteron tun andrun toutun theous einai tous en Aiguptui arxontas, oyk eontas ama toisi anthrupoisi, kai toutun aiei ena ton krateonta einai. ystaton de ayteis basileusai uron ton Osirios paida, ton Apolluna Ellenes onomazoysi. touton katapausanta Tyfuna basileusai ystaton Aiguptoy. Osiris de esti Dionysos kata Ellada glussan.    
      145. Among the Hellenes Heracles and Dionysos and Pan are accounted the latest-born of the gods; but with the Egyptians Pan is a very ancient god, and he is one of those which are called the eight gods, while Heracles is of the second rank, who are called the twelve gods, and Dionysos is of the third rank, namely of those who were born of the twelve gods. Now as to Heracles I have shown already how many years old he is according to the Egyptians themselves, reckoning down to the reign of Amasis, and Pan is said to have existed for yet more years than these, and Dionysos for the smallest number of years as compared with the others; and even for this last they reckon down to the reign of Amasis fifteen thousand years. This the Egyptians say that they know for a certainty, since they always kept a reckoning and wrote down the years as they came. Now the Dionysos who is said to have been born of Semele the daughter of Cadmos, was born about sixteen hundred years before my time, and Heracles who was the son of Alcmene, about nine hundred years, and that Pan who was born of Penelope, for of her and of Hermes Pan is said by the Hellenes to have been born, came into being later than the wars of Troy, about eight hundred years before my time.         145. [1] en Ellesi men nyn neutatoi tun theun nomizontai einai Eraklees te kai Dionysos kai Pan, par' Aigyptioisi de Pan men arxaiotatos kai tun oktu tun prutun legomenun theun, Eraklees de tun deyterun tun dyudeka legomenun einai, Dionysos de tun tritun, oi ek tun dyudeka theun egenonto. [2] Eraklei men de osa aytoi Aiguptioi fasi einai etea es Amasin basilea, dedelutai moi prosthe. Pani de eti toutun pleona legetai einai, Dionusui d' elaxista toutun, kai toutui pentakisxilia kai muria logizontai einai es Amasin basilea. [3] kai tauta Aiguptioi atrekeus fasi. epistasthai, aiei te logizomenoi kai aiei apografomenoi ta etea. [4] Dionusui men nyn tui ek Semeles teis Kadmoy legomenui genesthai kata exakosia etea kai xilia malista esti es eme, Eraklei de tui Alkmenes kata einakosia etea. Pani de tui ek Penelopes (ek tautes gar kai Ermeu legetai genesthai ypo Ellenun o Pan) elassu etea esti tun Truikun, kata oktakosia malista es eme.    
      146. Of these two accounts every man may adopt that one which he shall find the more credible when he hears it. I however, for my part, have already declared my opinion about them. For if these also, like Heracles the son of Amphitryon, had appeared before all men's eyes and had lived their lives to old age in Hellas, I mean Dionysos the son of Semele and Pan the son of Penelope, then one would have said that these also had been born mere men, having the names of those gods who had come into being long before: but as it is, with regard to Dionysos the Hellenes say that as soon as he was born Zeus sewed him up in his thigh and carried him to Nysa, which is above Egypt in the land of Ethiopia; and as to Pan, they cannot say whither he went after he was born. Hence it has become clear to me that the Hellenes learnt the names of these gods later than those of the other gods, and trace their descent as if their birth occurred at the time when they first learnt their names. Thus far then the history is told by the Egyptians themselves;         146. [1] toutun un amfoterun paresti xrasthai toisi tis peisetai legomenoisi mallon. emoi d' un e peri aytun gnume apodedektai. ei men gar faneroi te egenonto kai kategerasan kai oytoi en tei Elladi, kata per Eraklees o ex Amfitruunos genomenos, kai de kai Dionysos o ek Semeles kai Pan o ek Penelopes genomenos, efe an tis kai toutoys alloys andras genomenoys exein ta ekeinun oynomata tun progegonotun theun. [2] nun de Dionyson te legoysi oi Ellenes us aytika genomenon es ton meron enerrapsato Zeus kai eneike es Nusan ten yper Aiguptoy eousan en tei Aithiopiei, kai Panos ge peri oyk exoysi eipein okei etrapeto genomenos. deila moi gegone oti ysteron eputhonto oi Ellenes toutun ta oynomata e ta tun allun theun. ap' oy de eputhonto xronoy, apo toutoy geneelogeoysi aytun ten genesin.    
      147. but I will now recount that which other nations also tell, and the Egyptians in agreement with the others, of that which happened in this land: and there will be added to this also something of that which I have myself seen. Being set free after the reign of the priest of Hephaistos, the Egyptians, since they could not live any time without a king, set up over them twelve kings, having divided all Egypt into twelve parts. These made intermarriages with one another and reigned, making agreement that they would not put down one another by force, nor seek to get an advantage over one another, but would live in perfect friendship: and the reason why they made these agreements, guarding them very strongly from violation, was this, namely that an oracle had been given to them at first when they began to exercise their rule, that he of them who should pour a libation with a bronze cup in the temple of Hephaistos, should be king of all Egypt (for they used to assemble together in all the temples).         147. [1] tauta men nyn aytoi Aiguptioi legoysi. osa de oi te alloi anthrupoi kai Aiguptioi legoysi omologeontes toisi alloisi kata tauten ten xuren genesthai, taut' ede frasu. prosestai de ti aytoisi kai teis emeis opsios. [2] eleytheruthentes Aiguptioi meta ton irea tou Efaistoy basileusanta, oydena gar xronon oioi te Esan aney basileos diaitasthai, estesanto dyudeka basileas, dyudeka moiras dasamenoi Aigypton pasan. [3] oytoi epigamias poiesamenoi ebasileyon nomoisi toiside xreumenoi, mete kataireein alleloys mete pleon ti dizesthai exein ton eteron tou eteroy, einai te filoys ta malista. [4] tunde de eineka tous nomoys toutoys epoieonto, isxyrus peristellontes. ekexresto sfi kat' arxas aytika enistamenoisi es tas tyrannidas ton xalkeei fialei speisanta aytun en tui irui tou Efaistoy, touton apases basileusein Aiguptoy. es gar de ta panta ira synelegonto.    
      148. Moreover they resolved to join all together and leave a memorial of themselves; and having so resolved they caused to be made a labyrinth, situated a little above the lake of Moiris and nearly opposite to that which is called the City of Crocodiles. This I saw myself, and I found it greater than words can say. For if one should put together and reckon up all the buildings and all the great works produced by the Hellenes, they would prove to be inferior in labour and expense to this labyrinth, though it is true that both the temple at Ephesos and that at Samos are works worthy of note. The pyramids also were greater than words can say, and each one of them is equal to many works of the Hellenes, great as they may be; but the labyrinth surpasses even the pyramids. It has twelve courts covered in, with gates facing one another, six upon the North side and six upon the South, joining on one to another, and the same wall surrounds them all outside; and there are in it two kinds of chambers, the one kind below the ground and the other above upon these, three thousand in number, of each kind fifteen hundred. The upper set of chambers we ourselves saw, going through them, and we tell of them having looked upon them with our own eyes; but the chambers under ground we heard about only; for the Egyptians who had charge of them were not willing on any account to show them, saying that here were the sepulchres of the kings who had first built this labyrinth and of the sacred crocodiles. Accordingly we speak of the chambers below by what we received from hearsay, while those above we saw ourselves and found them to be works of more than human greatness. For the passages through the chambers, and the goings this way and that way through the courts, which were admirably adorned, afforded endless matter for marvel, as we went through from a court to the chambers beyond it, and from the chambers to colonnades, and from the colonnades to other rooms, and then from the chambers again to other courts. Over the whole of these is a roof made of stone like the walls; and the walls are covered with figures carved upon them, each court being surrounded with pillars of white stone fitted together most perfectly; and at the end of the labyrinth, by the corner of it, there is a pyramid of forty fathoms, upon which large figures are carved, and to this there is a way made under ground.         148. [1] kai de sfi mnemosyna edoxe lipesthai koinei, doxan de sfi epoiesanto laburinthon, oligon yper teis limnes teis Moirios kata Krokodeilun kaleomenen polin malista kei keimenon. ton egu ede eidon logoy mezu. [2] ei gar tis ta ex Ellenun teixea te kai ergun apodexin syllogisaito, elassonos ponoy te an kai dapanes faneie eonta tou labyrinthoy toutoy. kaitoi axiologos ge kai o en Efesui esti neos kai o en Samui. [3] Esan men nyn kai ai pyramides logoy mezones, kai pollun ekaste ayteun Ellenikun ergun kai megalun antaxie, o de de laburinthos kai tas pyramidas yperballei. [4] tou [gar] dyudeka men eisi aylai katastegoi, antipyloi alleleisi, ex men pros boreu ex de pros noton tetrammenai, synexees. toixos de exuthen o aytos sfeas periergei. oikemata d' enesti dipla, ta men ypogaia ta de meteura ep' ekeinoisi, trisxilia arithmon, pentakosiun kai xiliun ekatera. [5] ta men nyn meteura tun oikematun aytoi te urumen diexiontes kai aytoi theesamenoi legomen, ta de aytun ypogaia logoisi epynthanometha. oi gar epesteutes tun Aigyptiun deiknunai ayta oydamus ethelon, famenoi thekas aytothi einai tun te arxen ton laburinthon touton oikodomesamenun basileun kai tun irun krokodeilun. [6] oytu tun men katu peri oikematun akoei paralabontes legomen, ta de anu mezona anthrupeiun ergun aytoi urumen. ai te gar diexodoi dia tun stegeun kai oi eligmoi dia tun ayleun eontes poikilutatoi thuma myrion pareixonto ex ayleis te es ta oikemata diexiousi kai ek tun oikematun es pastadas, es stegas te allas ek tun pastadun kai es aylas allas ek tun oikematun. [7] orofe de pantun toutun lithine kata per oi toixoi, oi de toixoi tupun eggeglymmenun pleoi, ayle de ekaste peristylos lithoy leykou armosmenoy ta malista. teis de gunies teleytuntos tou labyrinthoy exetai pyramis tesserakontorgyios, en tei zuia megala eggeglyptai. odos d' es ayten ypo gein pepoietai.    
      149. Such is this labyrinth; but a cause for marvel even greater than this is afforded by the lake, which is called the lake of Moiris, along the side of which this labyrinth is built. The measure of its circuit is three thousand six hundred furlongs (being sixty schoines), and this is the same number of furlongs as the extent of Egypt itself along the sea. The lake lies extended lengthwise from North to South, and in depth where it is deepest it is fifty fathoms. That this lake is artificial and formed by digging is self-evident, for about in the middle of the lake stand two pyramids, each rising above the water to a height of fifty fathoms, the part which is built below the water being of just the same height; and upon each is placed a colossal statue of stone sitting upon a chair. Thus the pyramids are a hundred fathoms high; and these hundred fathoms are equal to a furlong of six hundred feet, the fathom being measured as six feet or four cubits, the feet being four palms each, and the cubits six. The water in the lake does not come from the place where it is, for the country there is very deficient in water, but it has been brought thither from the Nile by a canal: and for six months the water flows into the lake, and for six months out into the Nile again; and whenever it flows out, then for the six months it brings into the royal treasury a talent of silver a day from the fish which are caught, and twenty pounds when the water comes in.         149. [1] tou de labyrinthoy toutoy eontos toioutoy thuma eti mezon parexetai e Moirios kaleomene limne, par' en o laburinthos oytos oikodometai. teis to perimetron teis periodoy eisi stadioi exakosioi kai trisxilioi, sxoinun exekonta eontun, isoi kai ayteis Aiguptoy to para thalassan. keitai de makre e limne pros boreen te kai noton, eousa bathos, tei bathytate ayte euyteis, pentekontorgyios. [2] oti de xeiropoietos esti kai orykte, ayte deloi. en gar mesei tei limnei malista kei estasi duo pyramides, tou ydatos yperexoysai pentekonta orgyias ekatere, kai to kat' ydatos oikodometai eteron tosouton, kai ep' amfotereisi epesti kolossos lithinos katemenos en thronui. [3] oytu ai men pyramides eisi ekaton orgyieun, ai d' ekaton orgyiai dikaiai eisi stadion exaplethron, exapedoy te teis orgyieis metreomenes kai tetrapexeos, tun podun men tetrapalaistun eontun, tou de pexeos exapalaistoy. [4] to de ydur to en tei limnei aythigenes men oyk estilpar; anydros gar de deinus esti e tautei), ek tou Neiloy de kata diuryxa eseiktai, kai ex men meinas esu rheei es ten limnen, ex de meinas exu es ton Neilon aytis. [5] kai epean men ekreei exu, e de tote tous ex meinas es to basileion kataballei ep' emeren ekasten talanton argyrioy ek tun ixthuun, epean de esiei to ydur es ayten, eikosi mneas.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [150]

     150. The natives of the place moreover said that this lake had an outlet under ground to the Syrtis which is in Libya, turning towards the interior of the continent upon the Western side and running along by the mountain which is above Memphis. Now since I did not see anywhere existing the earth dug out of this excavation (for that was a matter which drew my attention), I asked those who dwelt nearest to the lake where the earth was which had been dug out. These told me to what place it had been carried away; and I readily believed them, for I knew by report that a similar thing had been done at Nineveh, the city of the Assyrians. There certain thieves formed a design once to carry away the wealth of Sardanapallos son of Ninos, the king, which wealth was very great and was kept in treasure-houses under the earth. Accordingly they began from their own dwelling, and making estimate of their direction they dug under ground towards the king's palace; and the earth which was brought out of the excavation they used to carry away, when night came on, to the river Tigris which flows by the city of Nineveh, until at last they accomplished that which they desired. Similarly, as I heard, the digging of the lake in Egypt was effected, except that it was done not by night but during the day; for as they dug the Egyptians carried to the Nile the earth which was dug out; and the river, when it received it, would naturally bear it away and disperse it. Thus is this lake said to have been dug out.         150. [1] elegon de oi epixurioi kai us es ten Surtin ten es Libuen ekdidoi e limne ayte ypo gein, tetrammene to pros esperen es ten mesogaian para to oros to yper Memfios. [2] epeite de tou orugmatos toutoy oyk urun ton xoun oydamou eonta, epimeles gar de moi En, eiromen tous agxista oikeontas teis limnes okoy eie o xous o exoryxtheis. oi de efrasan moi ina exeforethe, kai eypeteus epeithon. eidea gar logui kai en Ninui tei Assyriun poli genomenon eteron toiouton. [3] ta gar Sardanapalloy tou Ninoy basileos eonta megala xremata kai fylassomena en thesayroisi katagaioisi epenoesan klupes ekforeisai. ek de un tun sfeterun oikiun arxamenoi oi klupes ypo gein stathmeomenoi es ta basileia oikia urysson, ton de xoun ton ekforeomenon ek tou orugmatos, okus genoito nux, es ton Tigren potamon pararreonta ten Ninon exeforeon, es o katergasanto o ti eboulonto. [4] toiouton eteron ekoysa kai kata to teis en Aiguptui limnes orygma genesthai, plen oy nyktos alla met' emeren poieumenon. orussontas gar ton xoun tous Aigyptioys es ton Neilon foreein. o de ypolambanun emelle diaxeein. e men nyn limne ayte oytu legetai oryxtheinai.    
      151. Now the twelve kings continued to rule justly, but in course of time it happened thus:--After sacrifice in the temple of Hephaistos they were about to make libation on the last day of the feast, and the chief-priest, in bringing out for them the golden cups with which they had been wont to pour libations, missed his reckoning and brought eleven only for the twelve kings. Then that one of them who was standing last in order, namely Psammetichos, since he had no cup took off from his head his helmet, which was of bronze, and having held it out to receive the wine he proceeded to make libation: likewise all the other kings were wont to wear helmets and they happened to have them then. Now Psammetichos held out his helmet with no treacherous meaning; but they taking note of that which had been done by Psammetichos and of the oracle, namely how it had been declared to them that whosoever of them should make libation with a bronze cup should be sole king of Egypt, recollecting, I say, the saying of the Oracle, they did not indeed deem it right to slay Psammetichos, since they found by examination that he had not done it with any forethought, but they determined to strip him of almost all his power and to drive him away into the fen-country, and that from the fen- country he should not hold any dealings with the rest of Egypt.         151. [1] tun de dyudeka basileun dikaiosunei xreumenun, ana xronon us ethysan en tui irui tou Efaistoy, tei ystatei teis orteis, mellontun kataspeisein, o arxiereus exeneike sfi fialas xryseas, teisi per euthesan spendein, amartun tou arithmou, endeka dyudeka eousi. [2] enthauta us oyk eixe fialen o esxatos esteus aytun Psammetixos, perielomenos ten kyneen eousan xalkeen ypesxe te kai espende. kyneas de kai oi alloi apantes eforeon te basilees kai etugxanon tote exontes. [3] Psammetixos men nyn oydeni dolerui noui xreumenos ypesxe ten kyneen. oi de en freni labontes to te poiethen ek Psammetixoy kai to xresterion, oti ekexresto sfi ton xalkeei speisanta aytun fialei touton basilea esesthai mounon Aiguptoy, anamnesthentes tou xresmou kteinai men oyk edikaiusan Psammetixon, us aneuriskon basanizontes ex oydemieis pronoies ayton poiesanta, es de ta elea edoxe sfi diuxai psilusantas ta pleista teis dynamios, ek de tun eleun ormumenon me epimisgesthai tei allei Aiguptui.    
      152. This Psammetichos had formerly been a fugitive from the Ethiopian Sabacos who had killed his father Necos, from him, I say, he had then been a fugitive in Syria; and when the Ethiopian had departed in consequence of the vision of the dream, the Egyptians who were of the district of Sais brought him back to his own country. Then afterwards, when he was king, it was his fate to be a fugitive a second time on account of the helmet, being driven by the eleven kings into the fen- country. So then holding that he had been grievously wronged by them, he thought how he might take vengeance on those who had driven him out: and when he had sent to the Oracle of Leto in the city of Buto, where the Egyptians have their most truthful Oracle, there was given to him the reply that vengeance would come when men of bronze appeared from the sea. And he was strongly disposed not to believe that bronze men would come to help him; but after no long time had passed, certain Ionians and Carians who had sailed forth for plunder were compelled to come to shore in Egypt, and they having landed and being clad in bronze armour, one of the Egyptians, not having before seen men clad in bronze armour, came to the fen-land and brought a report to Psammetichos that bronze men had come from the sea and were plundering the plain. So he, perceiving that the saying of the Oracle was coming to pass, dealt in a friendly manner with the Ionians and Carians, and with large promises he persuaded them to take his part. Then when he had persuaded them, with the help of those Egyptians who favoured his cause and of these foreign mercenaries he overthrew the kings.         152. [1] ton de Psammetixon touton proteron feugonta ton Aithiopa Sabakun, os oi ton patera Nekun apekteine, touton feugonta tote es Syrien, us apallaxthe ek teis opsios tou oneiroy o Aithiops, kategagon Aigyptiun oytoi oi ek nomou tou Saiteu eisi. [2] meta de basileuonta to deuteron pros tun endeka basileun katalambanei min dia ten kyneen feugein es ta elea. [3] epistamenos un us periybrismenos eie pros aytun, epenoee tisasthai tous diuxantas. pempsanti de oi es Boytoun polin es to xresterion teis Letous, entha de Aigyptioisi esti manteion apseydestaton, Elthe xresmos us tisis exei apo thalasses xalkeun andrun epifanentun. [4]  kai tui men de apistie megale ypekexyto xalkeoys oi andras exein epikouroys. xronoy de oy pollou dielthontos anagkaie katelabe Iunas te kai Karas andras kata leien ekplusantas apeneixtheinai es Aigypton, ekbantas de es gein kai oplisthentas xalkui aggellei tun tis Aigyptiun es ta elea apikomenos tui Psammetixui, us oyk idun proteron xalkui andras oplisthentas, us xalkeoi andres apigmenoi apo thalasses leelateusi to pedion. [5] o de mathun to xresterion epiteleumenon fila te toisi Iusi kai Karsi poieetai kai sfeas megala ypisxneumenos peithei met' euytou genesthai. us de epeise, oytu ama toisi ta euytou boylomenoisi Aigyptioisi kai toisi epikouroisi kataireei tous basileas.    
      153. Having thus got power over all Egypt, Psammetichos made for Hephaistos that gateway of the temple at Memphis which is turned towards the South Wind; and he built a court for Apis, in which Apis is kept when he appears, opposite to the gateway of the temple, surrounded all with pillars and covered with figures; and instead of columns there stand to support the roof of the court colossal statues twelve cubits high. Now Apis is in the tongue of the Hellenes Epaphos.         153. [1] kratesas de Aiguptoy pases o Psammetixos epoiese tui Efaistui propulaia en Memfi ta pros noton anemon tetrammena, aylen te tui Api, en tei trefetai epean fanei o Apis, oikodomese enantion tun propylaiun, pasan te peristylon eousan kai tupun pleen. anti de kionun ypestasi kolossoi dyudekapexees tei aylei. o de Apis kata ten Ellenun glussan esti Epafos.    
      154. To the Ionians and to the Carians who had helped him Psammetichos granted portions of land to dwell in, opposite to one another with the river Nile between, and these were called "Encampments": these portions of land he gave them, and he paid them besides all that he had promised: moreover he placed with them Egyptian boys to have them taught the Hellenic tongue; and from these, who learnt the language thoroughly, are descended the present class of interpreters in Egypt. Now the Ionians and Carians occupied these portions of land for a long time, and they are towards the sea a little below the city of Bubastis, on that which is called the Pelusian mouth of the Nile. These men king Amasis afterwards removed from thence and established them at Memphis, making them into a guard for himself against the Egyptians: and they being settled in Egypt, we who are Hellenes know by intercourse with them the certainty of all that which happened in Egypt beginning from king Psammetichos and afterwards; for these were the first men of foreign tongue who settled in Egypt: and in the land from which they were removed there still remained down to my time the sheds where their ships were drawn up and the ruins of their houses. Thus then Psammetichos obtained Egypt:         154. [1] toisi de Iusi kai toisi Karsi toisi sygkatergasamenoisi aytui o Psammetixos didusi xuroys enoikeisai antioys allelun, tou Neiloy to meson exontos, toisi oynomata etethe Stratopeda. toutoys te de sfi tous xuroys didusi kai ta alla ta ypesxeto panta apeduke. [2] kai de kai paidas parebale aytoisi Aigyptioys ten Ellada glussan ekdidaskesthai. apo de toutun ekmathontun ten glussan oi nun ermenees en Aiguptui gegonasi. [3] oi de Iunes te kai oi Kares toutoys tous xuroys oikesan xronon epi pollon. eisi de oytoi oi xuroi pros thalasses oligon enerthe Boybastios polios, epi tui Peloysiui kaleomenui stomati tou Neiloy. toutoys men de xronui ysteron basileus Amasis exanastesas entheuten katoikise es Memfin, fylaken euytou poieumenos pros Aigyptiun. [4] toutun de oikisthentun en Aiguptui, oi Ellenes oytu epimisgomenoi toutoisi ta peri Aigypton ginomena apo Psammetixoy basileos arxamenoi panta kai ta ysteron epistametha atrekeus. prutoi gar oytoi en Aiguptui alloglussoi katoikisthesan. [5] ex un de exanestesan xurun, en toutoisi de oi te olkoi tun neun kai ta ereipia tun oikematun to mexri emeu Esan. Psammetixos men nyn oytu esxe Aigypton.   
      155. and of the Oracle which is in Egypt I have made mention often before this, and now I will give an account of it, seeing that it is worthy to be described. This Oracle which is in Egypt is sacred to Leto, and it is established in a great city near that mouth of the Nile which is called Sebennytic, as one sails up the river from the sea; and the name of this city where the Oracle is found is Buto, as I have said before in mentioning it. In this Buto there is a temple of Apollo and Artemis; and the temple- house of Leto, in which the Oracle is, is both great in itself and has a gateway of the height of ten fathoms: but that which caused me most to marvel of the things to be seen there, I will now tell. There is in this sacred enclosure a house of Leto made of one single stone as regards both height and length, and of which all the walls are in these two directions equal, each being forty cubits; and for the covering in of the roof there lies another stone upon the top, the cornice measuring four cubits.         155. [1]  tou de xresterioy tou en Aiguptui polla epemnesthen ede, kai de logon peri aytou us axioy eontos poiesomai. to gar xresterion touto to en Aiguptui esti men Letous iron, en poli de megalei idrymenon kata to Sebennytikon kaleomenon stoma tou Neiloy, anapleonti apo thalasses anu. [2] oynoma de tei poli tautei okoy to xresterion esti Boytu, us kai proteron unomastai moi. iron de esti en tei Boytoi tautei Apollunos kai Artemidos, kai o ge neos teis Letous, en tui de to xresterion eni, aytos te tygxanei eun megas kai ta propulaia exei es ypsos deka orgyieun. [3] to de moi tun fanerun En thuma megiston parexomenon, frasu. esti en tui temenei toutui Letous neos ex enos lithoy pepoiemenos es te ypsos kai es meikos kai toixos ekastos toutoisi isos tesserakonta pexeun toutun ekaston esti, to de katastegasma teis orofeis allos epikeitai lithos, exun ten parurofida tetrapexyn.    
      156. This house then of all the things that were to be seen by me in that temple is the most marvellous, and among those which come next is the island called Chemmis. This is situated in a deep and broad lake by the side of the temple at Buto, and it is said by the Egyptians that this island is a floating island. I myself did not see it either floating about or moved from its place, and I feel surprise at hearing of it, wondering if it be indeed a floating island. In this island of which I speak there is a great temple-house of Apollo, and three several altars are set up within, and there are planted in the island many palm-trees and other trees, both bearing fruit and not bearing fruit. And the Egyptians, when they say that it is floating, add this story, namely that in this island, which formerly was not floating, Leto, being one of the eight gods who came into existence first, and dwelling in the city of Buto where she has this Oracle, received Apollo from Isis as a charge and preserved him, concealing him in the island which is said now to be a floating island, at that time when Typhon came after him seeking everywhere and desiring to find the son of Osiris. Now they say that Apollo and Artemis are children of Dionysos and of Isis, and that Leto became their nurse and preserver; and in the Egyptian tongue Apollo is Oros, Demeter is Isis, and Artemis is Bubastis. From this story and from no other Aeschylus the son of Euphorion took this which I shall say, wherein he differs from all the preceding poets; he represented namely that Artemis was the daughter of Demeter. For this reason then, they say, it became a floating island. Such is the story which they tell;         156. [1] oytu men nyn o neos tun fanerun moi tun peri touto to iron esti thumastotaton, tun de deyterun neisos e Khemmis kaleymene. [2] esti men en limnei batheei kai plateei keimene para to en Boytoi iron, legetai de yp' Aigyptiun einai ayte e neisos plute. aytos men eguge oyte pleoysan oyte kinetheisan eidon, tethepa de akouun ei neisos aletheus esti plute. [3] en de un tautei neos te Apollunos megas eni kai bumoi trifasioi enidruatai, empefukasi d' en aytei foinikes syxnoi kai alla dendrea kai karpofora kai afora polla. [4] logon de tonde epilegontes oi Aiguptioi fasi einai ayten pluten, us en tei nesui tautei oyk eousei proteron plutei Letu, eousa tun oktu theun tun prutun genomenun, oikeoysa de en Boytoi poli, ina de oi to xresterion touto esti, Apolluna par' Isios parakatatheken dexamene diesuse katakrupsasa en tei nun plutei legomenei nesui, ote to pan dizemenos o Tyfun epeilthe, thelun exeyrein tou Osirios ton paida. [5] Apolluna de kai Artemin Dionusoy kai Isios legoysi einai paidas, Letoun de trofon aytoisi kai suteiran genesthai. Aigyptisti de Apollun men Uros, Demeter de Isis, Artemis de Boubastis. [6] ek toutoy de tou logoy kai oydenos alloy Aisxulos o Eyforiunos erpase to egu frasu, mounos de poieteun tun progenomenun. epoiese gar Artemin einai thygatera Demetros. ten de neison dia touto genesthai pluten. tauta men oytu legoysi.    
      157. but as for Psammetichos, he was king over Egypt for four-and-fifty years, of which for thirty years save one he was sitting before Azotos, a great city of Syria, besieging it, until at last he took it: and this Azotos of all cities about which we have knowledge held out for the longest time under a siege.         157. [1] Psammetixos de ebasileyse Aiguptoy tessera kai pentekonta etea, tun ta enos deonta triekonta Azuton teis Syries megalen polin proskatemenos epoliorkee, es o exeile. ayte de e Azutos apaseun poliun epi pleiston xronon poliorkeomene antesxe tun emeis idmen.    
      158. The son of Psammetichos was Necos, and he became king of Egypt. This man was the first who attempted the channel leading to the Erythraian Sea, which Dareios the Persian afterwards completed: the length of this is a voyage of four days, and in breadth it was so dug that two triremes could go side by side driven by oars; and the water is brought into it from the Nile. The channel is conducted a little above the city of Bubastis by Patumos the Arabian city, and runs into the Erythraian Sea: and it is dug first along those parts of the plain of Egypt which lie towards Arabia, just above which run the mountains which extend opposite Memphis, where are the stone-quarries,--along the base of these mountains the channel is conducted from West to East for a great way; and after that it is directed towards a break in the hills and tends from these mountains towards the noon-day and the South Wind to the Arabian gulf. Now in the place where the journey is least and shortest from the Northern to the Southern Sea (which is also called Erythraian), that is from Mount Casion, which is the boundary between Egypt and Syria, the distance is exactly a thousand furlongs to the Arabian gulf; but the channel is much longer, since it is more winding; and in the reign of Necos there perished while digging it twelve myriads of the Egyptians. Now Necos ceased in the midst of his digging, because the utterance of an Oracle impeded him, which was to the effect that he was working for the Barbarian: and the Egyptians call all men Barbarians who do not agree with them in speech.         158. [1] Psammetixoy de Nekus pais egeneto kai ebasileyse Aiguptoy, os tei diuryxi epexeirese prutos tei es ten Erythren thalassan ferousei, ten Dareios o Perses deutera diuryxe. teis meikos esti ploos emerai tesseres, eyros de uruxthe uste triereas duo pleein omou elastreymenas. [2] Ektai de apo tou Neiloy to ydur es ayten. Ektai de katuperthe oligon Boybastios polios para Patoymon ten Arabien polin, esexei de es ten Erythren thalassan. oruryktai de pruton men tou pedioy tou Aigyptioy ta pros Arabien exonta. exetai de katuperthe tou pedioy to kata Memfin teinon oros, en tui ai lithotomiai eneisi. [3] tou un de oreos toutoy para ten ypurean Ektai e diuryx ap' esperes makre pros ten eu, kai epeita teinei es diasfagas, feroysa apo tou oreos pros mesambrien te kai noton anemon es ton kolpon ton Arabion. [4] tei de elaxiston esti kai syntomutaton ek teis boreies thalasses yperbeinai es ten notien kai Erythren ten ayten tauten kaleomenen, apo tou Kasioy oreos tou oyrizontos Aigypton te kai Syrien, apo toutoy eisi stadioi aparti xilioi es ton Arabion kolpon. [5] touto men to syntomutaton, e de diuryx pollui makrotere, osui skoliutere esti. ten epi Neku basileos orussontes Aigyptiun apulonto dyudeka myriades. Nekus men nyn metaxu orussun epausato manteioy empodioy genomenoy toioude, tui barbarui ayton proergazesthai. barbaroys de pantas oi Aiguptioi kaleoysi tous me sfisi omoglussoys.    
      159. Thus having ceased from the work of the channel, Necos betook himself to waging wars, and triremes were built by him, some for the Northern Sea and others in the Arabian gulf for the Erythraian Sea; and of these the sheds are still to be seen. These ships he used when he needed them; and also on land Necos engaged battle at Magdolos with the Syrians, and conquered them; and after this he took Cadytis, which is a great city of Syria: and the dress which he wore when he made these conquests he dedicated to Apollo, sending it to Branchidai of the Milesians. After this, having reigned in all sixteen years, he brought his life to an end, and handed on the kingdom to Psammis his son.         159. [1] paysamenos de teis diuryxos o Nekus etrapeto pros strateias, kai trierees ai men epi tei boreiei thalassei epoiethesan, ai d' en tui Arabiui kolpui epi tei Erythrei thalassei, tun eti oi olkoi epideloi. [2] kai tauteisi te exrato en tui deonti kai Suroisi pezei o Nekus symbalun en Magdului enikese, meta de ten maxen Kadytin polin teis Syries eousan megalen eile. [3] en tei de estheiti etyxe tauta katergasamenos, anetheke tui Apolluni pempsas es Bragxidas tas Milesiun. meta de, ekkaideka etea ta panta arxas, teleytai, tui paidi Psammi paradous ten arxen.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [160]

     160. While this Psammis was king of Egypt, there came to him men sent by the Eleians, who boasted that they ordered the contest at Olympia in the most just and honourable manner possible and thought that not even the Egyptians, the wisest of men, could find out anything besides, to be added to their rules. Now when the Eleians came to Egypt and said that for which they had come, then this king called together those of the Egyptians who were reputed the wisest, and when the Egyptians had come together they heard the Eleians tell of all that which it was their part to do in regard to the contest; and when they had related everything, they said that they had come to learn in addition anything which the Egyptians might be able to find out besides, which was juster than this. They then having consulted together asked the Eleians whether their own citizens took part in the contest; and they said that it was permitted to any one who desired it, both of their own people and of the other Hellenes equally, to take part in the contest: upon which the Egyptians said that in so ordering the games they had wholly missed the mark of justice; for it could not be but that they would take part with the man of their own State, if he was contending, and so act unfairly to the stranger: but if they really desired, as they said, to order the games justly, and if this was the cause for which they had come to Egypt, they advised them to order the contest so as to be for strangers alone to contend in, and that no Eleian should be permitted to contend. Such was the suggestion made by the Egyptians to the Eleians.         160. [1] epi touton de ton Psammin basileuonta Aiguptoy apikonto Eleiun aggeloi, ayxeontes dikaiotata kai kallista tithenai ton en Olympiei aguna pantun anthrupun, kai dokeontes para tauta oyd' an tous sofutatoys anthrupun Aigyptioys oyden epexeyrein. [2] us de apikomenoi es ten Aigypton oi Eleioi elegon tun eineka apikonto, enthauta o basileus oytos sygkaleetai Aigyptiun tous legomenoys einai sofutatoys. synelthontes de oi Aiguptioi epynthanonto tun Eleiun legontun apanta ta katekei sfeas poieein peri ton aguna. apegesamenoi de ta panta efasan ekein epimathesomenoi ei ti exoien Aiguptioi toutun dikaioteron epexeyrein. [3] oi de boyleysamenoi epeirutun tous Eleioys ei sfi oi polieitai enagunizontai. oi de efasan kai sfeun kai tun allun Ellenun omoius tui boylomenui exeinai agunizesthai. [4] oi de Aiguptioi efasan sfeas oytu tithentas pantos tou dikaioy emartekenai. oydemian gar einai mexanen okus oy tui astui agunizomenui prosthesontai, adikeontes ton xeinon. all' ei de boulontai dikaius tithenai kai toutoy eineka apikoiato es Aigypton, xeinoisi agunisteisi ekeleyon ton aguna tithenai, Eleiun de medeni einai agunizesthai. tauta men Aiguptioi Eleioisi ypethekanto.    
      161. When Psammis had been king of Egypt for only six years and had made an expedition to Ethiopia and immediately afterwards had ended his life, Apries the son of Psammis received the kingdom in succession. This man came to be the most prosperous of all the kings up to that time except only his forefather Psammetichos; and he reigned five-and-twenty years, during which he led an army against Sidon and fought a sea-fight with the king of Tyre. Since however it was fated that evil should come upon him, it came by occasion of a matter which I shall relate at greater length in the Libyan history, and at present but shortly. Apries having sent a great expedition against the Kyrenians, met with correspondingly great disaster; and the Egyptians considering him to blame for this revolted from him, supposing that Apries had with forethought sent them out to evident calamity, in order (as they said) that there might be a slaughter of them, and he might the more securely rule over the other Egyptians. Being indignant at this, both these men who had returned from the expedition and also the friends of those who had perished made revolt openly.         161. [1] Psammios de ex etea mounon basileusantos Aiguptoy kai strateysamenoy es Aithiopien kai metaytika teleytesantos exedexato Apries o Psammios. [2] os meta Psammetixon ton euytou propatora egeneto eydaimonestatos tun proteron basileun, ep' etea pente kai eikosi arxas, en toisi epi te Siduna straton elase kai enaymaxese tui Tyriui. [3] epei de oi edee kakus genesthai, egineto apo profasios ten egu mezonus men en toisi Libykoisi logoisi apegesomai, metrius d' en tui pareonti. [4] apopempsas gar strateyma o Apries epi Kyrenaioys megalusti proseptaise, Aiguptioi de tauta epimemfomenoi apestesan ap' aytou, dokeontes ton Aprien ek pronoies aytous apopempsai es fainomenon kakon, ina de sfeun fthore genetai, aytos de tun loipun Aigyptiun asfalesteron arxoi. tauta de deina poieumenoi oytoi te oi aponostesantes kai oi tun apolomenun filoi apestesan ek teis ithees.    
      162. Hearing this Apries sent to them Amasis, to cause them to cease by persuasion; and when he had come and was seeking to restrain the Egyptians, as he was speaking and telling them not to do so, one of the Egyptians stood up behind him and put a helmet upon his head, saying as he did so that he put it on to crown him king. And to him this that was done was in some degree not unwelcome, as he proved by his behaviour; for as soon as the revolted Egyptians had set him up as king, he prepared to march against Apries: and Apries hearing this sent to Amasis one of the Egyptians who were about his own person, a man of reputation, whose name was Patarbemis, enjoining him to bring Amasis alive into his presence. When this Patarbemis came and summoned Amasis, the latter, who happened to be sitting on horseback, lifted up his leg and behaved in an unseemly manner, bidding him take that back to Apries. Nevertheless, they say, Patarbemis made demand of him that he should go to the king, seeing that the king had sent to summon him; and he answered him that he had for some time past been preparing to do so, and that Apries would have no occasion to find fault with him. Then Patarbemis both perceiving his intention from that which he said, and also seeing his preparations, departed in haste, desiring to make known as quickly as possible to the king the things which were being done: and when he came back to Apries not bringing Amasis, the king paying no regard to that which he said, but being moved by violent anger, ordered his ears and his nose to be cut off. And the rest of the Egyptians who still remained on his side, when they saw the man of most repute among them thus suffering shameful outrage, waited no longer but joined the others in revolt, and delivered themselves over to Amasis.         162. [1] pythomenos de Apries tauta pempei ep' aytous Amasin katapausonta logoisi. o de epeite apikomenos katelambane tous Aigyptioys tauta me poieein, legontos aytou tun tis Aigyptiun opisthe stas perietheke oi kyneen, kai perititheis efe epi basileiei peritithenai. [2] kai tui oy kus aekousion egineto to poieumenon, us diedeiknye. epeite gar estesanto min basilea tun Aigyptiun oi apesteutes, pareskeyazeto us elun epi ton Aprien. [3] pythomenos de tauta o Apries epempe ep' Amasin andra dokimon tun peri euyton Aigyptiun, tui oynoma En Patarbemis, enteilamenos aytui zunta Amasin agagein par' euyton. us de apikomenos ton Amasin ekalee o Patarbemis, o Amasis, etyxe gar ep' ippoy katemenos, epaeiras apemataise, kai touto min ekeleye Apriei apagein. [4] omus de ayton axioun ton Patarbemin basileos metapempomenoy ienai pros ayton. ton de aytui ypokrinesthai us tauta palai pareskeyazeto poieein, kai aytui oy mempsesthai Aprien. paresesthai gar kai aytos kai alloys axein. [5] ton de Patarbemin ek te tun legomenun oyk agnoeein ten dianoian, kai paraskeyazomenon orunta spoydei apienai, boylomenon ten taxisten basilei delusai ta pressomena. us de apikesthai ayton pros ton Aprien oyk agonta ton Amasin, oydena logon aytui donta alla perithumus exonta peritamein prostaxai aytou ta te uta kai ten rhina. [6] idomenoi d' oi loipoi tun Aigyptiun, oi eti ta ekeinoy efroneon, andra ton dokimutaton euytun oytu aisxrus lumei diakeimenon, oydena de xronon episxontes apisteato pros tous eteroys kai edidosan sfeas aytous Amasi.    
      163. Then Apries having heard this also, armed his foreign mercenaries and marched against the Egyptians: now he had about him Carian and Ionian mercenaries to the number of thirty thousand; and his royal palace was in the city of Sais, of great size and worthy to be seen. So Apries and his army were going against the Egyptians, and Amasis and those with him were going against the mercenaries; and both sides came to the city of Momemphis and were about to make trial of one another in fight.         163. [1] pythomenos de kai tauta o Apries uplize tous epikouroys kai elayne epi tous Aigyptioys. eixe de peri euyton Karas te kai Iunas andras epikouroys trismyrioys. En de oi ta basileia en Sai poli, megala eonta kai axiotheeta. [2] kai oi te peri ton Aprien epi tous Aigyptioys eisan kai oi peri ton Amasin epi tous xeinoys. en te de Mumemfi poli egenonto amfoteroi kai peiresesthai emellon allelun.    
      164. Now of the Egyptians there are seven classes, and of these one class is called that of the priests, and another that of the warriors, while the others are the cowherds, swineherds, shopkeepers, interpreters, and boatmen. This is the number of the classes of the Egyptians, and their names are given them from the occupations which they follow. Of them the warriors are called Calasirians and Hermotybians, and they are of the following districts,--for all Egypt is divided into districts.         164. [1] esti de Aigyptiun epta genea, kai toutun oi men irees oi de maximoi kekleatai, oi de boykoloi oi de sybutai, oi de kapeloi, oi de ermenees, oi de kybernetai. genea men Aigyptiun tosauta esti, oynomata de sfi keetai apo tun texneun. [2] oi de maximoi aytun kaleontai men Kalasiries te kai Ermotubies, ek nomun de tunde eisi. kata gar de nomous Aigyptos apasa diarairetai.    
      165. The districts of the Hermotybians are those of Busiris, Sais, Chemmis, Papremis, the island called Prosopitis, and the half of Natho,--of these districts are the Hermotybians, who reached when most numerous the number of sixteen myriads. Of these not one has learnt anything of handicraft, but they are given up to war entirely.         165. [1] Ermotybiun men oide eisi nomoi, Boysirites, Saites, Khemmites, Papremites, neisos e Prosupitis kaleomene, Nathu to emisy. ek men toutun tun nomun Ermotubies eisi, genomenoi, ote epi pleistoys egenonto, ekkaideka myriades. kai toutun banaysies oydeis dedaeke oyden, all' aneuntai es to maximon.    
      166. Again the districts of the Calasirians are those of Thebes, Bubastis, Aphthis, Tanis, Mendes, Sebennytos, Athribis, Pharbaithos, Thmuis Onuphis, Anytis, Myecphoris, --this last is on an island opposite to the city of Bubastis. These are the districts of the Calasirians; and they reached, when most numerous, to the number of five-and-twenty myriads of men; nor is it lawful for these, any more than for the others, to practise any craft; but they practise that which has to do with war only, handing down the tradition from father to son.         166. [1] kalasiriun de oide alloi nomoi eisi, Thebaios, Boybastites, Afthites, Tanites, Mendesios, Sebennutes, Athribites, Farbaithites, Thmoyites, Onoyfites, Anutios, Myekforites. oytos o nomos en nesui oikeei antion Boybastios polios. [2] oytoi de oi nomoi Kalasiriun eisi, genomenoi, ote epi pleistoys egenonto, pente kai eikosi myriades andrun. oyde toutoisi exesti texnen epaskeisai oydemian, alla ta es polemon epaskeoysi mouna, pais para patros ekdekomenos.    
      167. Now whether the Hellenes have learnt this also from the Egyptians, I am not able to say for certain, since I see that the Thracians also and Scythians and Persians and Lydians and almost all the Barbarians esteem those of their citizens who learn the arts, and the descendants of them, as less honourable than the rest; while those who have got free from all practice of manual arts are accounted noble, and especially those who are devoted to war: however that may be, the Hellenes have all learnt this, and especially the Lacedemonians; but the Corinthians least of all cast slight upon those who practise handicrafts.         167. [1] ei men nyn kai touto par' Aigyptiun memathekasi oi Ellenes, oyk exu atrekeus krinai, oreun kai Threikas kai Skuthas kai Persas kai Lydous kai sxedon pantas tous barbaroys apotimoteroys tun allun egemenoys polieteun tous tas texnas manthanontas kai tous ekgonoys toutun, tous de apallagmenoys tun xeirunaxieun gennaioys nomizomenoys einai, kai malista tous es ton polemon aneimenoys. [2] memathekasi d' un touto pantes oi Ellenes kai malista Lakedaimonioi. ekista de Korinthioi onontai tous xeirotexnas.    
      168. The following privilege was specially granted to this class and to none others of the Egyptians except the priests, that is to say, each man had twelve yokes of land specially granted to him free from imposts: now the yoke of land measures a hundred Egyptian cubits every way, and the Egyptian cubit is, as it happens, equal to that of Samos. This, I say, was a special privilege granted to all, and they also had certain advantages in turn and not the same men twice; that is to say, a thousand of the Calasirians and a thousand of the Hermotybians acted as body-guard to the king during each year; and these had besides their yokes of land an allowance given them for each day of five pounds weight of bread to each man, and two pounds of beef, and four half-pints of wine. This was the allowance given to those who were serving as the king's bodyguard for the time being.         168. [1] gerea de sfi En tade exarairemena mounoisi Aigyptiun parex tun ireun, aroyrai exairetoi dyudeka ekastui atelees. e de aroyra ekaton pexeun esti Aigyptiun pantei, o de Aiguptios peixys tygxanei isos eun tui Samiui. [2] tauta men de toisi apasi En exarairemena, tade de en peritropei###837### ekarpounto kai oydama uytoi. Kalasiriun xilioi kai Ermotybiun edoryforeon eniayton ekastoi ton basilea. toutoisi un tade parex tun aroyreun alla edidoto ep' emerei ekastei, optou sitoy stathmos pente mneai ekastui, kreun boeun duo mneai, oinoy tesseres arysteires. tauta toisi aiei doryforeoysi edidoto.    
      169. So when Apries leading his foreign mercenaries, and Amasis at the head of the whole body of the Egyptians, in their approach to one another had come to the city of Momemphis, they engaged battle: and although the foreign troops fought well, yet being much inferior in number they were worsted by reason of this. But Apries is said to have supposed that not even a god would be able to cause him to cease from his rule, so firmly did he think that it was established. In that battle then, I say, he was worsted, and being taken alive was brought away to the city of Sais, to that which had formerly been his own dwelling but from thenceforth was the palace of Amasis. There for some time he was kept in the palace, and Amasis dealt well with him; but at last, since the Egyptians blamed him, saying that he acted not rightly in keeping alive him who was the greatest foe both to themselves and to him, therefore he delivered Apries over to the Egyptians; and they strangled him, and after that buried him in the burial-place of his fathers: this is in the temple of Athene, close to the sanctuary, on the left hand as you enter. Now the men of Sais buried all those of this district who had been kings, within the temple; for the tomb of Amasis also, though it is further from the sanctuary than that of Apries and his forefathers, yet this too is within the court of the temple, and it consists of a colonnade of stone of great size, with pillars carved to imitate date-palms, and otherwise sumptuously adorned; and within the colonnade are double-doors, and inside the doors a sepulchral chamber.         169. [1] epeite de syniontes o te Apries agun tous epikouroys kai o Amasis pantas Aigyptioys apikonto es Mumemfin polin, synebalon. kai emaxesanto men ey oi xeinoi, plethei de pollui elassones eontes kata touto essuthesan. [2] Aprieu de legetai einai ede dianoia, med' an theon min medena dunasthai pausai teis basileies. oytu asfaleus euytui idrusthai edokee. kai de tote symbalun essuthe kai zugretheis apexthe es Sain polin, es ta euytou oikia proteron eonta, tote de Amasios ede basileia. [3] enthauta de teus men etrefeto en toisi basileioisi, kai min Amasis ey perieite. telos de memfomenun Aigyptiun us oy poieoi dikaia trefun ton sfisi te kai euytui exthiston, oytu de paradidoi ton Aprien toisi Aigyptioisi. oi de min apepnixan kai epeita ethapsan en teisi patruieisi tafeisi. [4] ai de eisi en tui irui teis Athenaies, agxotatu tou megaroy, esionti aristereis xeiros. ethapsan de Sai###776###tai pantas tous ek nomou toutoy genomenoys basileas esu en tui irui. [5] kai gar to tou Amasios seima ekasteru men esti tou megaroy e to tou Aprieu kai tun toutoy propatorun, esti mentoi kai touto en tei aylei tou irou, pastas lithine megale kai eskemene stuloisi te foinikas ta dendrea memimemenoisi kai tei allei dapanei. esu de en tei pastadi dixa thyrumata esteke, en de toisi thyrumasi e theke esti.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [170]

     170. Also at Sais there is the burial- place of him whom I account it not pious to name in connexion with such a matter, which is in the temple of Athene behind the house of the goddess, stretching along the whole wall of it; and in the sacred enclosure stand great obelisks of stone, and near them is a lake adorned with an edging of stone and fairly made in a circle, being in size, as it seemed to me, equal to that which is called the "Round Pool" in Delos.         170. [1] eisi de kai ai tafai tou oyk osion poieumai epi toioutui pregmati exagoreuein to oynoma en Sai, en tui irui teis Athenaies, opisthe tou neou, pantos tou teis Athenaies exomenai toixoy. [2] kai en tui temenei obeloi estasi megaloi lithinoi, limne te esti exomene lithinei krepidi kekosmemene kai ergasmene ey kuklui kai megathos, us emoi edokee, ose per e en Delui e troxoeides kaleomene.    
      171. On this lake they perform by night the show of his sufferings, and this the Egyptians call Mysteries. Of these things I know more fully in detail how they take place, but I shall leave this unspoken; and of the mystic rites of Demeter, which the Hellenes call thesmophoria, of these also, although I know, I shall leave unspoken all except so much as piety permits me to tell. The daughters of Danaos were they who brought this rite out of Egypt and taught it to the women of the Pelasgians; then afterwards when all the inhabitants of Peloponnese were driven out by the Dorians, the rite was lost, and only those who were left behind of the Peloponnesians and not driven out, that is to say the Arcadians, preserved it.         171. [1] en de tei limnei tautei ta deikela tun patheun aytou nyktos poieusi, ta kaleoysi mysteria Aiguptioi. peri men nyn toutun eidoti moi epi pleon us ekasta aytun exei, eystoma keisthu. [2] kai teis Demetros teleteis peri, ten oi Ellenes thesmoforia kaleoysi, kai tautes moi peri eystoma keisthu, plen oson ayteis osie esti legein. [3] ai Danaou thygateres Esan ai ten teleten tauten ex Aiguptoy exagagousai kai didaxasai tas Pelasgiutidas gynaikas. meta de exanastases pases Peloponnesoy ypo Durieun exapuleto e telete, oi de ypoleifthentes Peloponnesiun kai oyk exanastantes Arkades diesuzon ayten mounoi.    
      172. Apries having thus been overthrown, Amasis became king, being of the district of Sais, and the name of the city whence he was is Siuph. Now at the first the Egyptians despised Amasis and held him in no great regard, because he had been a man of the people and was of no distinguished family; but afterwards Amasis won them over to himself by wisdom and not wilfulness. Among innumerable other things of price which he had, there was a foot-basin of gold in which both Amasis himself and all his guests were wont always to wash their feet. This he broke up, and of it he caused to be made the image of a god, and set it up in the city, where it was most convenient; and the Egyptians went continually to visit the image and did great reverence to it. Then Amasis, having learnt that which was done by the men of the city, called together the Egyptians and made known to them the matter, saying that the image had been produced from the foot-basin, into which formerly the Egyptians used to vomit and make water, and in which they washed their feet, whereas now they did to it great reverence; and just so, he continued, had he himself now fared, as the foot-basin; for though formerly he was a man of the people, yet now he was their king, and he bade them accordingly honour him and have regard for him.         172. [1] Aprieu de ude katarairemenoy ebasileyse Amasis, nomou men Saiteu eun, ek teis de En polios, oynoma oi esti Siouf. [2] ta men de pruta katunonto ton Amasin Aiguptioi kai en oydemiei moirei megalei Egon ate de demoten to prin eonta kai oikies oyk epifaneos. meta de sofiei aytous o Amasis, oyk agnumosunei prosegageto. [3] En oi alla te agatha myria, en de kai podanipter xruseos, en tui aytos te o Amasis kai oi daitymones oi pantes tous podas ekastote enapenizonto. touton kat' un kopsas agalma daimonos ex aytou epoiesato, kai idryse teis polios okoy En epitedeotaton. oi de Aiguptioi foiteontes pros tugalma esebonto megalus. [4] mathun de o Amasis to ek tun astun poieumenon, sygkalesas Aigyptioys exefene fas ek tou podanipteiros tugalma gegonenai, es ton proteron men tous Aigyptioys enemeein te kai enoyreein kai podas enaponizesthai, tote de megalus sebesthai. [5] ede un efe legun omoius aytos tui podanipteiri pepregenai. ei gar proteron einai demotes, all' en tui pareonti einai aytun basileus. kai timan te kai prometheesthai euytou ekeleye. toioutui men tropui prosegageto tous Aigyptioys uste dikaioun doyleuein.   
      173. In such manner he won the Egyptians to himself, so that they consented to be his subjects; and his ordering of affairs was thus:--In the early morning, and until the time of the filling of the market he did with a good will the business which was brought before him; but after this he passed the time in drinking and in jesting at his boon-companions, and was frivolous and playful. And his friends being troubled at it admonished him in some such words as these: "O king, thou dost not rightly govern thyself in thus letting thyself descend to behaviour so trifling; for thou oughtest rather to have been sitting throughout the day stately upon a stately throne and administering thy business; and so the Egyptians would have been assured that they were ruled by a great man, and thou wouldest have had a better report: but as it is, thou art acting by no means in a kingly fashion." And he answered them thus: "They who have bows stretch them at such time as they wish to use them, and when they have finished using them they loose them again; for if they were stretched tight always they would break, so that the men would not be able to use them when they needed them. So also is the state of man: if he should always be in earnest and not relax himself for sport at the due time, he would either go mad or be struck with stupor before he was aware; and knowing this well, I distribute a portion of the time to each of the two ways of living." Thus he replied to his friends.         173. [1] exrato de katastasi pregmatun toieide. to men orthrion mexri otey plethouses agoreis prothumus epresse ta prosferomena pregmata, to de apo toutoy epine te kai kateskupte tous sympotas kai En mataios te kai paigniemun. [2] axthesthentes de toutoisi oi filoi aytou enoytheteon ayton toiade legontes. <<u basileu, oyk orthus, seuytou proestekas, es to agan faulon proagun seuyton. se gar exrein en thronui semnui semnon thukeonta di' emeres pressein ta pregmata, kai oytu Aiguptioi t' an episteato us yp' andros megaloy arxontai, kai ameinon su an ekoyes. nun de poieeis oydamus basilika.>> [3] o d' ameibeto toiside aytous. <<ta toxa oi ektemenoi, epean men deuntai xrasthai, entanuoysi. ei gar de ton panta xronon entetamena eie, ekrageie an, uste es to deon oyk an exoien aytoisi xrasthai. [4] oytu de kai anthrupoy katastasis. ei etheloi katespoydasthai aiei mede es paignien to meros euyton anienai, lathoi an etoi maneis e o ge apoplektos genomenos. ta egu epistamenos meros ekaterui nemu.>> tauta men tous filoys ameipsato.    
      174. It is said however that Amasis, even when he was in a private station, was a lover of drinking and of jesting, and not at all seriously disposed; and whenever his means of livelihood failed him through his drinking and luxurious living, he would go about and steal; and they from whom he stole would charge him with having their property, and when he denied it would bring him before the judgment of an Oracle, whenever there was one in their place; and many times he was convicted by the Oracles and many times he was absolved: and then when finally he became king he did as follows:--as many of the gods as had absolved him and pronounced him not to be a thief, to their temples he paid no regard, nor gave anything for the further adornment of them, nor even visited them to offer sacrifice, considering them to be worth nothing and to possess lying Oracles; but as many as had convicted him of being a thief, to these he paid very great regard, considering them to be truly gods, and to present Oracles which did not lie.         174. [1] legetai de o Amasis, kai ote En idiutes, us filopotes En kai filoskummun kai oydamus katespoydasmenos aner. okus de min epileipoi pinonta te kai eypatheonta ta epitedea, klepteske an periiun. oi d' an min famenoi exein ta sfetera xremata arneumenon ageskon epi manteion, okoy ekastoisi eie. polla men de kai elisketo ypo tun manteiun, polla de kai apefeyge. [2] epeite de kai ebasileyse, epoiese toiade. osoi men ayton tun theun apelysan me fura einai, toutun men tun irun oyte epemeleto oyte es episkeyen edidoy oyden, oyde foiteun ethye us oydenos eousi axioisi pseydea te manteia ektemenoisi. osoi de min katedesan fura einai, toutun de us aletheun theun eontun kai apseydea manteia parexomenun ta malista epemeleto.    
      175. First in Sais he built and completed for Athene a temple-gateway which is a great marvel, and he far surpassed herein all who had done the like before, both in regard to height and greatness, so large are the stones and of such quality. Then secondly he dedicated great colossal statues and man-headed sphinxes very large, and for restoration he brought other stones of monstrous size. Some of these he caused to be brought from the stone-quarries which are opposite Memphis, others of very great size from the city of Elephantine, distant a voyage of not less than twenty days from Sais: and of them all I marvel most at this, namely a monolith chamber which he brought from the city of Elephantine; and they were three years engaged in bringing this, and two thousand men were appointed to convey it, who all were of the class of boatmen. Of this house the length outside is one-and-twenty cubits, the breadth is fourteen cubits, and the height eight. These are the measures of the monolith house outside; but the length inside is eighteen cubits and five- sixths of a cubit, the breadth twelve cubits, and the height five cubits. This lies by the side of the entrance to the temple; for within the temple they did not draw it, because, as it said, while the house was being drawn along, the chief artificer of it groaned aloud, seeing that much time had been spent and he was wearied by the work; and Amasis took it to heart as a warning and did not allow them to draw it further onwards. Some say on the other hand that a man was killed by it, of those who were heaving it with levers, and that it was not drawn in for that reason.         175. [1] kai touto men en Sai tei Athenaiei propulaia thumasia oia exepoiese, pollon pantas yperbalomenos tui te ypsei kai tui megathei, osun te to megathos lithun esti kai okoiun teun. touto de kolossous megaloys kai androsfiggas perimekeas anetheke, lithoys te alloys es episkeyen yperfyeas to megathos ekomise. [2] egageto de toutun tous men ek tun kata Memfin eoyseun lithotomieun, tous de ypermegatheas ex Elefantines polios ploon kai eikosi emereun apexouses apo Saios. [3] to de oyk ekista aytun alla malista thumazu, esti tode. oikema moynolithon ekomise ex Elefantines polios, kai touto ekomizon men ep' etea tria, disxilioi de oi prosetetaxato andres agugees, kai oytoi apantes Esan kyberneitai. teis de steges tautes to men meikos exuthen esti eis te kai eikosi pexees, eyros de tessereskaideka, ypsos de oktu. [4] tauta men ta metra exuthen teis steges teis moynolithoy esti, atar esuthen to meikos oktukaideka pexeun kai pygonos ..., to de ypsos pente pexeun esti. ayte tou irou keetai para ten esodon. [5] esu gar min es to iron fasi tunde eineka oyk eselkusai. ton arxitektona ayteis elkomenes teis steges anastenaxai, oia te xronoy eggegonotos pollou kai axthomenon tui ergui, ton de Amasin enthumion poiesamenon oyk ean eti prosuteru elkusai. ede de tines legoysi us anthrupos diefthare yp' ayteis tun tis ayten moxleyontun, kai apo toutoy oyk eselkystheinai.    
      176. Amasis also dedicated in all the other temples which were of repute, works which are worth seeing for their size, and among them also at Memphis the colossal statue which lies on its back in front of the temple of Hephaistos, whose length is five-and-seventy feet; and on the same base made of the same stone are set two colossal statues, each of twenty feet in length, one on this side and the other on that side of the large statue. There is also another of stone of the same size in Sais, lying in the same manner as that at Memphis. Moreover Amasis was he who built and finished for Isis her temple at Memphis, which is of great size and very worthy to be seen.         176. [1] anetheke de kai en toisi alloisi iroisi o Amasis pasi toisi ellogimoisi erga to megathos axiotheeta, en de kai en Memfi ton yption keimenon kolosson tou Efaisteioy emprosthe, tou podes pente kai ebdomekonta eisi to meikos. epi de tui aytui bathrui estasi tou aytou eontos lithoy duo kolossoi, eikosi podun to megathos eun ekateros, o men enthen o d' enthen tou megaloy. [2] esti de lithinos eteros tosoutos kai en Sai, keimenos kata ton ayton tropon tui en Memfi. tei Isi te to en Memfi iron Amasis esti o exoikodomesas, eon mega te kai axiotheetotaton.    
      177. In the reign of Amasis it is said that Egypt became more prosperous than at any other time before, both in regard to that which comes to the land from the river and in regard to that which comes from the land to its inhabitants, and that at this time the inhabited towns in it numbered in all twenty thousand. It was Amasis too who established the law that every year each one of the Egyptians should declare to the ruler of his district, from what source he got his livelihood, and if any man did not do this or did not make declaration of an honest way of living, he should be punished with death. Now Solon the Athenian received from Egypt this law and had it enacted for the Athenians, and they have continued to observe it, since it is a law with which none can find fault.         177. [1] ep' Amasios de basileos legetai Aigyptos malista de tote eydaimoneisai kai ta apo tou potamou tei xurei ginomena kai ta apo teis xures toisi anthrupoisi, kai polis en aytei genesthai tas apasas tote dismyrias tas oikeomenas. [2] nomon te Aigyptioisi tonde Amasis esti o katastesas, apodeiknunai eteos ekastoy tui nomarxei panta tina Aigyptiun othen bioutai. me de poieunta tauta mede apofainonta dikaien zoen ithunesthai thanatui. Solun de o Athenaios labun ex Aiguptoy touton ton nomon Athenaioisi etheto. tui ekeinoi es aiei xreuntai eonti amumui nomui.    
      178. Moreover Amasis became a lover of the Hellenes; and besides other proofs of friendship which he gave to several among them, he also granted the city of Naucratis for those of them who came to Egypt to dwell in; and to those who did not desire to stay, but who made voyages thither, he granted portions of land to set up altars and make sacred enclosures for their gods. Their greatest enclosure and that one which has most name and is most frequented is called the Hellenion, and this was established by the following cities in common: --of the Ionians Chios, Teos, Phocaia, Clazomenai, of the Dorians Rhodes, Cnidos, Halicarnassos, Phaselis, and of the Aiolians Mytilene alone. To these belongs this enclosure and these are the cities which appoint superintendents of the port; and all other cities which claim a share in it, are making a claim without any right. Besides this the Eginetans established on their own account a sacred enclosure dedicated to Zeus, the Samians one to Hera, and the Milesians one to Apollo.         178. [1] filellen de genomenos o Amasis alla te es Ellenun metexeteroys apedexato, kai de kai toisi apikneymenoisi es Aigypton eduke Naukratin polin enoikeisai. toisi de me boylomenoisi aytun oikeein, aytou de naytillomenoisi eduke xuroys enidrusasthai bumous kai temenea theoisi. [2] to men nyn megiston aytun temenos, kai onomastotaton eon kai xresimutaton, kaleumenon de Ellenion, aide ai polies eisi ai idrymenai koinei, Iunun men Khios kai Teus kai Fukaia kai Klazomenai, Durieun de RHodos kai Knidos kai Alikarnessos kai Faselis, Aioleun de e Mytilenaiun moune. [3] toyteun men esti touto to temenos, kai prostatas tou emporioy aytai ai polies eisi ai parexoysai. osai de allai polies metapoieuntai, oyden sfi meteon metapoieuntai. xuris de Aigineitai epi euytun idrusanto temenos Dios, kai allo Samioi Eres kai Milesioi Apollunos.    
      179. Now in old times Naucratis alone was an open trading- place, and no other place in Egypt: and if any one came to any other of the Nile mouths, he was compelled to swear that he came not thither of his own will, and when he had thus sworn his innocence he had to sail with his ship to the Canobic mouth, or if it were not possible to sail by reason of contrary winds, then he had to carry his cargo round the head of the Delta in boats to Naucratis: thus highly was Naucratis privileged.         179. [1] En de to palaion moune Naukratis emporion kai allo oyden Aiguptoy. ei de tis es tun ti allo stomatun tou Neiloy apikoito, xrein omosai me men ekonta elthein, apomosanta de tei nei aytei pleein es to Kanubikon. e ei me ge oia te eie pros anemoys antioys pleein, ta fortia edee periagein en barisi peri to Delta, mexri oy apikoito es Naukratin. oytu men de Naukratis etetimeto.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 2: Euterpe [180]

     180. Moreover when the Amphictyons had let out the contract for building the temple which now exists at Delphi, agreeing to pay a sum of three hundred talents, (for the temple which formerly stood there had been burnt down of itself), it fell to the share of the people of Delphi to provide the fourth part of the payment; and accordingly the Delphians went about to various cities and collected contributions. And when they did this they got from Egypt as much as from any place, for Amasis gave them a thousand talents' weight of alum, while the Hellenes who dwelt in Egypt gave them twenty pounds of silver.         180. [1] Amfiktyonun de misthusantun ton en Delfoisi nun eonta neon triekosiun talantun exergasasthai (o gar proteron eun aytothi aytomatos katekae), tous Delfous de epeballe tetartemorion tou misthumatos parasxein. [2] planumenoi de oi Delfoi peri tas polis edutinazon, poieuntes de touto oyk elaxiston ex Aiguptoy eneikanto. Amasis men gar sfi eduke xilia stypteries talanta, oi de en Aiguptui oikeontes Ellenes eikosi mneas.    
      181. Also with the people of Kyrene Amasis made an agreement for friendship and alliance; and he resolved too to marry a wife from thence, whether because he desired to have a wife of Hellenic race, or apart from that, on account of friendship for the people of Kyrene: however that may be, he married, some say the daughter of Battos, others of Arkesilaos, and others of Critobulos, a man of repute among the citizens; and her name was Ladike. Now whenever Amasis lay with her he found himself unable to have intercourse, but with his other wives he associated as he was wont; and as this happened repeatedly, Amasis said to his wife, whose name was Ladike: "Woman, thou hast given me drugs, and thou shalt surely perish more miserably than any other woman." Then Ladike, when by her denials Amasis was not at all appeased in his anger against her, made a vow in her soul to Aphrodite, that if Amasis on that night had intercourse with her (seeing that this was the remedy for her danger), she would send an image to be dedicated to her at Kyrene; and after the vow immediately Amasis had intercourse, and from thenceforth whenever Amasis came in to her he had intercourse with her; and after this he became very greatly attached to her. And Ladike paid the vow that she had made to the goddess; for she had an image made and sent it to Kyrene, and it was still preserved even to my own time, standing with its face turned away from the city of the Kyrenians. This Ladike Cambyses, having conquered Egypt and heard from her who she was, sent back unharmed to Kyrene.         181. [1] Kyrenaioisi de Amasis filoteta te kai symmaxien synethekato, edikaiuse de kai geimai aytothen, eit' epithymesas Ellenidos gynaikos eite kai allus filotetos Kyrenaiun eineka. [2] gameei de un oi men legoysi Battoy oi d' Arkesileu thygatera, oi de Kritobouloy andros tun astun dokimoy, tei oynoma En Ladike. tei epeite sygklinoito o Amasis, misgesthai oyk oios te egineto, teisi de alleisi gynaixi exrato. [3] epeite de pollon touto egineto, eipe o Amasis pros ten Ladiken tauten kaleomenen, <<u gunai, kata me efarmaxas, kai esti toi oydemia mexane me oyk apolulenai kakista gynaikun paseun.>> [4] e de Ladike, epeite oi arneymenei oyden egineto preuteros o Amasis, eyxetai en tui noui tei Afroditei, en oi yp' ekeinen ten nukta mixthei o Amasis, touto gar oi kakou einai meixos, agalma oi apopempsein es Kyrenen. meta de ten eyxen aytika oi emixthe o Amasis. kai to entheuten ede, okote elthoi Amasis pros ayten, emisgeto, kai karta min esterxe meta touto. [5] e de Ladike apeduke ten eyxen tei theui. poiesamene gar agalma apepempse es Kyrenen, to eti kai es eme En soon, exu tetrammenon tou Kyrenaiun asteos. tauten ten Ladiken, us epekratese Kambuses Aiguptoy kai eputheto ayteis etis eie, apepempse asinea es Kyrenen.    
      182. Amasis also dedicated offerings in Hellas, first at Kyrene an image of Athene covered over with gold and a figure of himself made like by painting; then in the temple of Athene at Lindson two images of stone and a corslet of linen worthy to be seen; and also at Samos two wooden figures of himself dedicated to Hera, which were standing even to my own time in the great temple, behind the doors. Now at Samos he dedicated offerings because of the guest-friendship between himself and Polycrates the son of Aiakes; at Lindos for no guest- friendship but because the temple of Athene at Lindos is said to have been founded by the daughters of Danaos, who had touched land there at the time when they were fleeing from the sons of Aigyptos. These offerings were dedicated by Amasis; and he was the first of men who conquered Cyprus and subdued it so that it paid him tribute.        182. [1] anetheke de kai anathemata o Amasis es ten Ellada, touto men es Kyrenen agalma epixryson Athenaies kai eikonas euytou grafei eikasmenen, touto de tei en Lindui Athenaiei duo te agalmata lithina kai thureka lineon axiotheeton, touto d' es Samon tei Erei eikonas euytou difasias xylinas, ai en tui neui tui megalui idruato eti kai to mexri emeu, opisthe tun thyreun. [2] es men nyn Samon anetheke kata xeinien ten euytou te kai Polykrateos tou Aiakeos, es de Lindon xeinies men oydemieis eineken, oti de to iron to en Lindui to teis Athenaies legetai tas Danaou thygateras idrusasthai prossxousas, ote apedidreskon tous Aiguptoy paidas. tauta men anetheke o Amasis, eile de Kupron prutos anthrupun kai katestrepsato es foroy apagugen.  
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia

     BOOK III THE THIRD BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED THALEIA         
I s t o r i u n   GTh a l e i a   
      1. Against this Amasis then Cambyses the son of Cyrus was making his march, taking with him not only other nations of which he was ruler, but also Hellenes, both Ionians and Aiolians: and the cause of the expedition was as follows:--Cambyses sent an envoy to Egypt and asked Amasis to give him his daughter; and he made the request by counsel of an Egyptian, who brought this upon Amasis having a quarrel with him for the following reason:--at the time when Cyrus sent to Amasis and asked him for a physician of the eyes, whosoever was the best of those in Egypt, Amasis had selected him from all the physicians in Egypt and had torn him away from his wife and children and delivered him up to Persia. Having, I say, this cause of quarrel, the Egyptian urged Cambyses on by his counsel bidding him ask Amasis for his daughter, in order that he might either be grieved if he gave her, or if he refused to give her, might offend Cambyses. So Amasis, who was vexed by the power of the Persians and afraid of it, knew neither how to give nor how to refuse: for he was well assured that Cambyses did not intend to have her as his wife but as a concubine. So making account of the matter thus, he did as follows:--there was a daughter of Apries the former king, very tall and comely of form and the only person left of his house, and her name was Nitetis. This girl Amasis adorned with raiment and with gold, and sent her away to Persia as his own daughter: but after a time, when Cambyses saluted her calling her by the name of her father, the girl said to him: "O king, thou dost not perceive how thou hast been deceived by Amasis; for he adorned me with ornaments and sent me away giving me to thee as his own daughter, whereas in truth I am the daughter of Apries against whom Amasis rose up with the Egyptians and murdered him, who was his lord and master." These words uttered and this occasion having arisen, led Cambyses the son of Cyrus against Egypt, moved to very great anger.         1. [1] epi touton de ton Amasin Kambuses o Kuroy estrateueto, agun kai alloys tun Erxe kai Ellenun Iunas te kai Aioleas, di' aitien toiende. pempsas Kambuses es Aigypton keryka aitee Amasin thygatera, aitee de ek boyleis andros Aigyptioy, os memfomenos Amasin eprexe tauta oti min ex apantun tun en Aiguptui ietrun apospasas apo gynaikos te kai teknun ekdoton epoiese es Persas, ote Kuros pempsas para Amasin aitee ietron ofthalmun os eie aristos tun en Aiguptui. [2] tauta de epimemfomenos o Aiguptios eneige tei symboylei keleuun aiteein ton Kambusea Amasin thygatera, ina e dous aniuito e me dous Kambusei apexthoito. o de Amasis tei dynami tun Perseun axthomenos kai arrudeun oyk eixe oyte dounai oyte arnesasthai. ey gar epistato oti oyk us gynaika min emelle Kambuses exein all' us pallaken. [3] tauta de eklogizomenos epoiese tade. En Aprieu tou proteroy basileos thygater karta megale te kai eyeides moune tou oikoy leleimmene, oynoma de oi En Nitetis. tauten de ten paida o Amasis kosmesas estheiti te kai xrysui apopempei es Persas us euytou thygatera. [4] meta de xronon us min espazeto patrothen onomazun, legei pros ayton e pais <<u basileu, diabeblemenos ypo Amasios oy manthaneis. os eme soi kosmui askesas apepempse us euytou thygatera didous, eousan tei aletheiei Aprieu, ton ekeinos eonta euytou despotea met' Aigyptiun epanastas efoneyse.>> [5] touto de to epos kai ayte e aitie eggenomene egage Kambusea ton Kuroy megalus thymuthenta ep' Aigypton. oytu men nyn legoysi Persai.   
      2. Such is the report made by the Persians; but as for the Egyptians they claim Cambyses as one of themselves, saying that he was born of this very daughter of Apries; for they say that Cyrus was he who sent to Amasis for his daughter, and not Cambyses. In saying this however they say not rightly; nor can they have failed to observe (for the Egyptians fully as well as any other people are acquainted with the laws and customs of the Persians), first that it is not customary among them for a bastard to become king, when there is a son born of a true marriage, and secondly that Cambyses was the son of Cassandane the daughter of Pharnaspes, a man of the Achaimenid family, and not the son of the Egyptian woman: but they pervert the truth of history, claiming to be kindred with the house of Cyrus. Thus it is with these matters;         2. [1] Aiguptioi de oikeiountai Kambusea, famenoi min ek tautes de teis Aprieu thygatros genesthai. Kuron gar einai ton pempsanta para Amasin epi ten thygatera, all' oy Kambusea. legontes de tauta oyk orthus legoysi. [2] oy men oyde lelethe aytous (ei gar tines kai alloi, ta Perseun nomima episteatai kai Aiguptioi) oti pruta men nothon oy sfi nomos esti basileusai gnesioy pareontos, aytis de oti Kassandanes teis Farnaspeu thygatros En pais Kambuses, andros Axaimenideu, all' oyk ek teis Aigypties. alla paratrepoysi ton logon prospoieumenoi tei Kuroy oikiei syggenees einai. kai tauta men ude exei.   
      3. and the following story is also told, which for my part I do not believe, namely that one of the Persian women came in to the wives of Cyrus, and when she saw standing by the side of Cassandane children comely of form and tall, she was loud in her praises of them, expressing great admiration; and Cassandane, who was the wife of Cyrus, spoke as follows: "Nevertheless, though I am the mother of such children of these, Cyrus treats me with dishonour and holds in honour her whom he has brought in from Egypt." Thus she spoke, they say, being vexed by Nitetis, and upon that Cambyses the elder of her sons said: "For this cause, mother, when I am grown to be a man, I will make that which is above in Egypt to be below, and that which is below above." This he is reported to have said when he was perhaps about ten years old, and the women were astonished by it: and he, they say, kept it ever in mind, and so at last when he had become a man and had obtained the royal power, he made the expedition against Egypt.         3. [1] legetai de kai ode logos, emoi men oy pithanos, us tun Persidun gynaikun eselthousa tis para tas Kuroy gynaikas, us eide tei Kassandanei paresteuta tekna eyeidea te kai megala, pollui exrato tui epainui yperthumazoysa, e de Kassandane eousa tou Kuroy gyne eipe tade. [2] <<toiunde mentoi eme paidun metera eousan Kuros en atimiei exei, ten de ap' Aiguptoy epikteton en timei tithetai.>> ten men axthomenen tei Niteti eipein tauta, tun de oi paidun ton presbuteron eipein Kambusea. [3] <<toigar toi u meiter, epean egu genumai aner, Aiguptoy ta men anu katu thesu, ta de katu anu.>> tauta eipein ayton etea us deka koy gegonota, kai tas gynaikas en thumati genesthai. ton de diamnemoneuonta oytu de, epeite andruthe kai esxe ten basileien, poiesasthai ten ep' Aigypton strateien.    
      4. Another thing also contributed to this expedition, which was as follows:--There was among the foreign mercenaries of Amasis a man who was by race of Halicarnassos, and his name was Phanes, one who was both capable in judgment and valiant in that which pertained to war. This Phanes, having (as we may suppose) some quarrel with Amasis, fled away from Egypt in a ship, desiring to come to speech with Cambyses: and as he was of no small repute among the mercenaries and was very closely acquainted with all the affairs of Egypt, Amasis pursued him and considered it a matter of some moment to capture him: and he pursued by sending after him the most trusted of his eunuchs with a trireme, who captured him in Lykia; but having captured him he did not bring him back to Egypt, since Phanes got the better of him by cunning; for he made his guards drunk and escaped to Persia. So when Cambyses had made his resolve to march upon Egypt, and was in difficulty about the march, as to how he should get safely through the waterless region, this man came to him and besides informing of the other matters of Amasis, he instructed him also as to the march, advising him to send to the king of the Arabians and ask that he would give him safety of passage through this region.         4. [1] syneneike de kai allo ti toionde preigma genesthai es ten epistrateysin tauten. En tun epikourun Amasios aner genos men Alikarnesseus, oynoma de oi Fanes, kai gnumen ikanos kai ta polemika alkimos. [2] oytos o Fanes memfomenos kou ti Amasi ekdidreskei ploiui ex Aiguptoy, boylomenos Kambusei elthein es logoys. oia de eonta ayton en toisi epikouroisi logoy oy smikrou epistamenon te ta peri Aigypton atrekestata, metadiukei o Amasis spoyden poieumenos elein, metadiukei de tun eynouxun ton pistotaton aposteilas trierei kat' ayton, os aireei min en Lykiei, elun de oyk anegage es Aigypton. sofiei gar min perieilthe o Fanes. [3] katamethusas gar tous fylakoys apallasseto es Persas. ormemenui de strateuesthai Kambusei ep' Aigypton kai aporeonti ten elasin, okus ten anydron diekperai, epelthun frazei men kai ta alla ta Amasios pregmata, exegeetai de kai ten elasin, ude paraineun, pempsanta para ton Arabiun basilea deesthai ten diexodon oi asfalea parasxein.    
      5. Now by this way only is there a known entrance to Egypt: for from Phenicia to the borders of the city of Cadytis belongs to the Syrians who are called of Palestine, and from Cadytis, which is a city I suppose not much less than Sardis, from this city the trading stations on the sea- coast as far as the city of Ienysos belong to the king of Arabia, and then from Ienysos again the country belongs to the Syrians as far as the Serbonian lake, along the side of which Mount Casion extends towards the Sea. After that, from the Serbonian lake, in which the story goes that Typhon is concealed, from this point onwards the land is Egypt. Now the region which lies between the city of Ienysos on the one hand and Mount Casion and the Serbonian lake on the other, which is of no small extent but as much as a three days' journey, is grievously destitute of water.         5. [1] mounei de tautei eisi fanerai esbolai es Aigypton. apo gar Foinikes mexri oyrun tun Kadutios polios esti Surun tun Palaistinun kaleomenun. [2] apo de Kadutios eouses polios, us emoi dokeei, Sardiun oy pollui elassonos, apo tautes ta emporia ta epi thalasses mexri Ienusoy polios esti tou Arabioy, apo de Ienusoy aytis Surun mexri Serbunidos limnes, par' en de to Kasion oros teinei es thalassan. [3] apo de Serbunidos limnes, en tei de logos ton Tyfu kekrufthai, apo tautes ede Aigyptos. to de metaxu Ienusoy polios kai Kasioy te oreos kai teis Serbunidos limnes, eon touto oyk oligon xurion alla oson te epi treis emeras odon, anydron esti deinus.    
      6. And one thing I shall tell of, which few of those who go in ships to Egypt have observed, and it is this:-- into Egypt from all parts of Hellas and also from Phenicia are brought twice every year earthenware jars full of wine, and yet it may almost be said that you cannot see there one single empty wine-jar. In what manner, then, it will be asked, are they used up? This also I will tell. The head-man of each place must collect all the earthenware jars from his own town and convey them to Memphis, and those at Memphis must fill them with water and convey them to these same waterless regions of Syria: this the jars which come regularly to Egypt and are emptied there, are carried to Syria to be added to that which has come before.         6. [1] to de oligoi tun es Aigypton naytillomenun ennenukasi, touto erxomai frasun. es Aigypton ek teis Ellados pases kai pros ek Foinikes keramos esagetai pleres oinoy dis tou eteos ekastoy, kai en keramion oineron arithmui keinon oyk esti us logui eipein idesthai. [2] kou deita, eipoi tis an, tauta anaisimoutai; egu kai touto frasu. dei ton men demarxon ekaston ek teis euytou polios syllexanta panta ton keramon agein es Memfin, tous de ek Memfios es tauta de ta anydra teis Syries komizein plesantas ydatos. oytu o epifoiteun keramos kai exaireomenos en Aiguptui epi ton palaion komizetai es Syrien.    
      7. It was the Persians who thus prepared this approach to Egypt, furnishing it with water in the manner which has been said, from the time when they first took possession of Egypt: but at the time of which I speak, seeing that water was not yet provided, Cambyses, in accordance with what he was told by his Halicarnassian guest, sent envoys to the Arabian king and from him asked and obtained the safe passage, having given him pledges of friendship and received them from him in return.         7. [1] oytu men nyn Persai eisi oi ten esbolen tauten paraskeyasantes es Aigypton, kata de ta eiremena saxantes ydati, epeite taxista parelabon Aigypton. [2] tote de oyk eontos ku ydatos etoimoy, Kambuses pythomenos tou Alikarnesseos xeinoy, pempsas para ton Arabion aggeloys kai deetheis teis asfaleies etyxe, pistis dous te kai dexamenos par' aytou.    
      8. Now the Arabians have respect for pledges of friendship as much as those men in all the world who regard them most; and they give them in the following manner:--A man different from those who desire to give the pledges to one another, standing in the midst between the two, cuts with a sharp stone the inner parts of the hands, along by the thumbs, of those who are giving the pledges to one another, and then he takes a thread from the cloak of each one and smears with the blood seven stones laid in the midst between them; and as he does this he calls upon Dionysos and Urania. When the man has completed these ceremonies, he who has given the pledges commends to the care of his friends the stranger (or the fellow-tribesman, if he is giving the pledges to one who is a member of his tribe), and the friends think it right that they also should have regard for the pledges given. Of gods they believe in Dionysos and Urania alone: moreover they say that the cutting of their hair is done after the same fashion as that of Dionysos himself; and they cut their hair in a circle round, shaving away the hair of the temples. Now they call Dionysos Orotalt and Urania they call Alilat.         8. [1] sebontai de Arabioi pistis anthrupun omoia toisi malista, poieuntai de aytas tropui toiuide. tun boylomenun ta pista poieesthai allos aner, amfoterun aytun en mesui esteus, lithui oxei to esu tun xeirun para tous daktuloys tous megaloys epitamnei tun poieymenun tas pistis, kai epeita labun ek tou imatioy ekateroy krokuda aleifei tui aimati en mesui keimenoys lithoys epta. touto de poieun epikaleei te ton Dionyson kai ten Oyranien. [2] epitelesantos de toutoy tauta, o tas pistis poiesamenos toisi filoisi pareggyai ton xeinon e kai ton aston, en pros aston poieetai. oi de filoi kai aytoi tas pistis dikaieusi sebesthai. [3] Dionyson de theun mounon kai ten Oyranien egeontai einai, kai tun trixun ten koyren keiresthai fasi kata per ayton ton Dionyson kekarthai. keirontai de peritroxala, ypoxyruntes tous krotafoys. onomazoysi de ton men Dionyson Orotalt, ten de Oyranien Alilat.    
      9. So then when the Arabian king had given the pledge of friendship to the men who had come to him from Cambyses, he contrived as follows:-- he took skins of camels and filled them with water and loaded them upon the backs of all the living camels that he had; and having so done he drove them to the waterless region and there awaited the army of Cambyses. This which has been related is the more credible of the accounts given, but the less credible must also be related, since it is a current account. There is a great river in Arabia called Corys, and this runs out into the Sea which is called Erythraian. From this river then it is said that the king of the Arabians, having got a conduit pipe made by sewing together raw ox-hides and other skins, of such a length as to reach to the waterless region, conducted the water through these forsooth, and had great cisterns dug in the waterless region, that they might receive the water and preserve it. Now it is a journey of twelve days from the river to this waterless region; and moreover the story says that he conducted the water by three conduit-pipes to three different parts of it.         9. [1] epei un ten pistin toisi aggeloisi toisi para Kambuseu apigmenoisi epoiesato o Arabios, emexanato toiade. askous kamelun plesas, ydatos epesaxe epi tas zuas tun kamelun pasas, touto de poiesas elase es ten anydron kai ypemene enthauta ton Kambuseu straton. [2] oytos men o pithanuteros tun logun eiretai, dei de kai ton Esson pithanon, epei ge de legetai, rhetheinai. potamos esti megas en tei Arabiei tui oynoma Korys, ekdidoi de oytos es ten Erythren kaleomenen thalassan. [3] apo toutoy de un tou potamou legetai ton basilea tun Arabiun, rhapsamenon tun umoboeun kai tun allun dermatun oxeton mekei exikneumenon es ten anydron, agagein dia de toutun to ydur, en de tei, anudrui megalas dexamenas oruxasthai, ina dekomenai to ydur suzusi. [4] odos d' esti dyudeka emereun apo tou potamou es tauten ten anydron. agein de min di' oxetun triun es trixa xuria.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [10]

     10. Meanwhile Psammenitos the son of Amasis was encamped at the Pelusian mouth of the Nile waiting for the coming of Cambyses: for Cambyses did not find Amasis yet living when he marched upon Egypt, but Amasis had died after having reigned forty and four years during which no great misfortune had befallen him: and when he had died and had been embalmed he was buried in the burial-place in the temple, which he had built for himself. Now when Psammenitos son of Amasis was reigning as king, there happened to the Egyptians a prodigy, the greatest that had ever happened: for rain fell at Thebes in Egypt, where never before had rain fallen nor afterwards down to my time, as the Thebans themselves say; for in the upper parts of Egypt no rain falls at all: but at the time of which I speak rain fell at Thebes in a drizzling shower.         10. [1] en de tui Peloysiui kaleomenui stomati tou Neiloy estratopedeueto Psammenitos o Amasios pais ypomenun Kambusea. [2] Amasin gar oy katelabe zunta Kambuses elasas ep' Aigypton, alla basileusas o Amasis tessera kai tesserakonta etea apethane, en toisi oyden oi mega anarsion preigma syneneixthe. apothanun de kai tarixeytheis etafe en teisi tafeisi en tui irui, tas aytos oikodomesato. [3] epi Psammenitoy de tou Amasios basileuontos Aiguptoy fasma Aigyptioisi megiston de egeneto. ysthesan gar Theibai ai Aiguptiai, oyte proteron oydama ystheisai oyte ysteron to mexri emeu, us legoysi aytoi Thebaioi. oy gar de yetai ta anu teis Aiguptoy to parapan. alla kai tote ysthesan ai Theibai psakadi.    
      11. Now when the Persians had marched quite through the waterless region and were encamped near the Egyptians with design to engage battle, then the foreign mercenaries of the Egyptian king, who were Hellenes and Carians, having a quarrel with Phanes because he had brought against Egypt an army of foreign speech, contrived against him as follows:--Phanes had children whom he had left behind in Egypt: these they brought to their camp and into the sight of their father, and they set up a mixing-bowl between the two camps, and after that they brought up the children one by one and cut their throats so that the blood ran into the bowl. Then when they had gone through the whole number of the children, they brought and poured into the bowl both wine and water, and not until the mercenaries had all drunk of the blood, did they engage battle. Then after a battle had been fought with great stubbornness, and very many had fallen of both the armies, the Egyptians at length turned to flight.         11. [1] oi de Persai epeite diexelasantes ten anydron izonto pelas tun Aigyptiun us symbaleontes, enthauta oi epikoyroi oi tou Aigyptioy, eontes andres Ellenes te kai Kares, memfomenoi tui Fanei oti straton egage ep' Aigypton allothroon, mexanuntai preigma es ayton toionde. [2] Esan tui Fanei paides en Aiguptui kataleleimmenoi. tous agagontes es to stratopedon kai es opsin tou patros kreteira en mesui estesan amfoterun tun stratopedun, meta de agineontes kata ena ekaston tun paidun esfazon es ton kreteira. [3] dia pantun de diexelthontes tun paidun oinon te kai ydur eseforeon es ayton, empiontes de tou aimatos pantes oi epikoyroi oytu de synebalon. maxes de genomenes kartereis kai pesontun ex amfoterun tun stratopedun plethei pollun etraponto oi Aiguptioi.    
      12. I was witness moreover of a great marvel, being informed of it by the natives of the place; for of the bones scattered about of those who fell in this fight, each side separately, since the bones of the Persians were lying apart on one side according as they were divided at first, and those of the Egyptians on the other, the skulls of the Persians are so weak that if you shall hit them only with a pebble you will make a hole in them, while those of the Egyptians are so exceedingly strong that you would hardly break them if you struck them with a large stone. The cause of it, they say, was this, and I for my part readily believe them, namely that the Egyptians beginning from their early childhood shave their heads, and the bone is thickened by exposure to the sun: and this is also the cause of their not becoming bald-headed; for among the Egyptians you see fewer bald-headed men than among any other race. This then is the reason why these have their skulls strong; and the reason why the Persians have theirs weak is that they keep them delicately in the shade from the first by wearing tiaras, that is felt caps. So far of this: and I saw also a similar thing to this at Papremis, in the case of those who were slain together with Achaimenes the son of Dareios, by Inaros the Libyan.         12. [1] thuma de mega eidon pythomenos para tun epixuriun. tun gar osteun perikexymenun xuris ekaterun tun en tei maxei tautei pesontun (xuris men gar tun Perseun ekeito ta ostea, us exuristhe kat' arxas, eteruthi de tun Aigyptiun), ai men tun Perseun kefalai eisi asthenees oytu uste, ei theleis psefui mounei balein, diatetraneeis, ai de tun Aigyptiun oytu de ti isxyrai, mogis an lithui paisas diarrexeias. [2] aition de toutoy tode elegon, kai eme g' eypeteus epeithon, oti Aiguptioi men aytika apo paidiun arxamenoi xyruntai tas kefalas kai pros ton elion paxunetai to osteon. [3] tuyto de touto kai tou me falakrousthai aition esti. Aigyptiun gar an tis elaxistoys idoito falakrous pantun anthrupun. [4] toutoisi men de touto esti aition isxyras foreein tas kefalas, toisi de Perseisi oti astheneas foreoysi tas kefalas aition tode. skietrofeoysi ex arxeis piloys tiaras foreontes. tauta men nyn toiauta. eidon de kai alla omoia toutoisi en Papremi tun ama Axaimenei tui Dareioy diaftharentun ypo Inaru tou Libyos.    
      13. The Egyptians when they turned to flight from the battle fled in disorder: and they being shut up in Memphis, Cambyses sent a ship of Mytilene up the river bearing a Persian herald, to summon the Egyptians to make terms of surrender; but they, when they saw the ship had entered into Memphis, pouring forth in a body from the fortress both destroyed the ship and also tore the men in it limb from limb, and so bore them into the fortress. After this the Egyptians being besieged, in course of time surrendered themselves; and the Libyans who dwell on the borders of Egypt, being struck with terror by that which had happened to Egypt, delivered themselves up without resistance, and they both laid on themselves a tribute and sent presents: likewise also those of Kyrene and Barca, being struck with terror equally with the Libyans, acted in a similar manner: and Cambyses accepted graciously the gifts which came from the Libyans, but as for those which came from the men of Kyrene, finding fault with them, as I suppose, because they were too small in amount (for the Kyrenians sent in fact five hundred pounds' weight of silver), he took the silver by handfuls and scattered it with his own hand among his soldiers.         13. [1] oi de Aiguptioi ek teis maxes us etraponto, efeygon oydeni kosmui. kateilethentun de es Memfin, epempe ana potamon Kambuses nea Mytilenaien keryka agoysan andra Persen, es omologien prokaleomenos Aigyptioys. [2] oi de epeite ten nea eidon eselthousan es ten Memfin, ekxythentes alees ek tou teixeos ten te nea dieftheiran kai tous andras kreoyrgedon diaspasantes eforeon es to teixos. [3] kai Aiguptioi men meta touto poliorkeumenoi xronui parestesan, oi de prosexees Libyes deisantes ta peri ten Aigypton gegonota paredosan sfeas aytous amaxeti kai foron te etaxanto kai dura epempon. us de Kyrenaioi kai Barkaioi, deisantes omoius kai oi Libyes, toiauta epoiesan. [4] Kambuses de ta men para Libuun elthonta dura filofronus edexato. ta de para Kyrenaiun apikomena memftheis, us emoi dokeei, oti En oliga. epempsan gar de pentakosias mneas argyrioy oi Kyrenaioi. tautas drassomenos aytoxeiriei diespeire tei stratiei.    
      14. On the tenth day after that on which he received the surrender of the fortress of Memphis, Cambyses set the king of the Egyptians Psammenitos, who had been king for six months, to sit in the suburb of the city, to do him dishonour,--him I say with other Egyptians he set there, and he proceeded to make trial of his spirit as follows:-- having arrayed his daughter in the clothing of a slave, he sent her forth with a pitcher to fetch water, and with her he sent also other maidens chosen from the daughters of the chief men, arrayed as was the daughter of the king: and as the maidens were passing by their fathers with cries and lamentation, the other men all began to cry out and lament aloud, seeing that their children had been evilly entreated, but Psammenitos when he saw it before his eyes and perceived it bent himself down to the earth. Then when the water- bearers had passed by, next Cambyses sent his son with two thousand Egyptians besides who were of the same age, with ropes bound round their necks and bits placed in their mouths; and these were being led away to execution to avenge the death of the Mytilenians who had been destroyed at Memphis with their ship: for the Royal Judges had decided that for each man ten of the noblest Egyptians should lose their lives in retaliation. He then, when he saw them passing out by him and perceived that his son was leading the way to die, did the same as he had done with respect to his daughter, while the other Egyptians who sat round him were lamenting and showing signs of grief. When these also had passed by, it chanced that a man of his table companions, advanced in years, who had been deprived of all his possessions and had nothing except such things as a beggar possesses, and was asking alms from the soldiers, passed by Psammenitos the son of Amasis and the Egyptians who were sitting in the suburb of the city: and when Psammenitos saw him he uttered a great cry of lamentation, and he called his companion by name and beat himself upon the head. Now there was, it seems, men set to watch him, who made known to Cambyses all that he did on the occasion of each going forth: and Cambyses marvelled at that which he did, and he sent a messenger and asked him thus: "Psammenitos, thy master Cambyses asks thee for what reason, when thou sawest thy daughter evilly entreated and thy son going to death, thou didst not cry aloud nor lament for them, whereas thou didst honour with these signs of grief the beggar who, as he hears from others, is not in any way related to thee?" Thus he asked, and the other answered as follows: "O son of Cyrus, my own troubles were too great for me to lament them aloud, but the trouble of my companion was such as called for tears, seeing that he has been deprived of great wealth, and has come to beggary upon the threshold of old age." When this saying was reported by the messenger, it seemed to them that it was well spoken; and, as is reported by the Egyptians, Croesus shed tears (for he also, as fortune would have it, had accompanied Cambyses to Egypt) and the Persians who were present shed tears also; and there entered some pity into Cambyses himself, and forthwith he bade them save the life of the son of Psammenitos from among those who were being put to death, and also he bade them raise Psammenitos himself from his place in the suburb of the city and bring him into his own presence.         14. [1] emerei de dekatei ap' Es parelabe to teixos to en Memfi Kambuses, katisas es to proasteion epi lumei ton basilea tun Aigyptiun Psammeniton, basileusanta meinas ex, touton katisas sun alloisi Aigyptioisi diepeirato aytou teis psyxeis poieun toiade. [2] steilas aytou ten thygatera estheiti doyleiei exepempe ep' ydur exoysan ydreion, synepempe de kai allas parthenoys apolexas andrun tun prutun, omoius estalmenas tei tou basileos. [3] us de boei te kai klaythmui pareisan ai parthenoi para tous pateras, oi men alloi pantes anteboun te kai anteklaion oruntes ta tekna kekakumena, o de Psammenitos proidun kai mathun ekypse es ten gein. [4] parelthoyseun de tun ydroforun, deutera oi ton paida epempe met' allun Aigyptiun disxiliun ten ayten elikien exontun, tous te ayxenas kalui dedemenoys kai ta stomata egkexalinumenoys. [5] egonto de poinen tisontes Mytilenaiun toisi en Memfi apolomenoisi sun tei nei. tauta gar edikasan oi basileioi dikastai, yper andros ekastoy deka Aigyptiun tun prutun antapollysthai. [6] o de idun parexiontas kai mathun ton paida egeomenon epi thanaton, tun allun Aigyptiun tun perikatemenun ayton klaiontun kai deina poieuntun, tuyto epoiese to kai epi tei thygatri. [7] parelthontun de kai toutun, syneneike uste tun sympoteun oi andra apelikesteron, ekpeptukota ek tun eontun exonta te oyden ei me osa ptuxos kai prosaiteonta ten stratien, parienai Psammeniton te ton Amasios kai tous en tui proasteiui katemenoys Aigyptiun. o de Psammenitos us eide, anaklausas mega kai kalesas onomasti ton etairon eplexato ten kefalen. [8] Esan d' ara aytou fulakoi, oi to poieumenon pan ex ekeinoy ep' ekastei exodui Kambusei esemainon. thumasas de o Kambuses ta poieumena, pempsas aggelon eiruta ayton legun tade. [9] <<despotes se Kambuses, Psammenite, eirutai di' o ti de ten men thygatera oreun kekakumenen kai ton paida epi thanaton steixonta oyte anebusas oyte apeklaysas, ton de ptuxon oyden soi prosekonta, us allun pynthanetai, etimesas. o men de tauta epeiruta, o d' ameibeto toiside. [10] <<u pai Kuroy, ta men oikeia En mezu kaka e uste anaklaiein, to de tou etairoy penthos axion En dakruun, os ek pollun te kai eydaimonun ekpesun es ptuxeien apiktai epi geraos oydui.>> kai tauta us apeneixthenta ypo toutoy ey dokeein sfi eireisthai, [11] us [de] legetai yp' Aigyptiun, dakruein men Kroison (eteteuxee gar kai oytos epispomenos Kambusei ep' Aigyptoys), dakruein de Perseun tous pareontas. aytui te Kambusei eselthein oikton tina, kai aytika keleuein ton te oi paida ek tun apollymenun suzein kai ayton ek tou proasteioy anastesantas agein par' euyton.    
      15. As for the son, those who went for him found that he was no longer alive, but had been cut down first of all, but Psammenitos himself they raised from his place and brought him into the presence of Cambyses, with whom he continued to live for the rest of his time without suffering any violence; and if he had known how to keep himself from meddling with mischief, he would have received Egypt so as to be ruler of it, since the Persians are wont to honour the sons of kings, and even if the kings have revolted from them, they give back the power into the hands of their sons. Of this, namely that it is their established rule to act so, one may judge by many instances besides and especially by the case of Thannyras the son of Inaros, who received back the power which his father had, and by that of Pausiris the son of Amyrtaios, for he too received back the power of his father: yet it is certain that no men ever up to this time did more evil to the Persians than Inaros and Amyrtaios. As it was, however, Psammenitos devised evil and received the due reward: for he was found to be inciting the Egyptians to revolt; and when this became known to Cambyses, Psammenitos drank bull's blood and died forthwith. Thus he came to his end.         15. [1] ton men de paida eyron aytou oi metiontes oyketi perieonta alla pruton katakopenta, ayton de Psammeniton anastesantes Egon para Kambusea. [2] entha tou loipou diaitato exun oyden biaion. ei de kai epistethe me polypregmoneein, apelabe an Aigypton uste epitropeuein ayteis, epei timan euthasi Persai tun basileun tous paidas. tun, ei kai sfeun aposteusi, omus toisi ge paisi aytun apodidousi ten arxen. [3] polloisi men nyn kai alloisi esti stathmusasthai oti touto oytu nenomikasi poieein, en de kai tui te Inaru paidi Thannurai, os apelabe ten oi o pater eixe arxen, kai tui Amyrtaioy Paysiri. kai gar oytos apelabe ten tou patros arxen. kaitoi Inaru ge kai Amyrtaioy oydamoi ku Persas kaka pleu ergasanto. [4]  nun de mexanumenos kaka o Psammenitos elabe ton misthon. apistas gar Aigyptioys elu. epeite de epaistos egeneto ypo Kambuseu, aima tauroy piun apethane paraxreima. oytu de oytos eteleutese.    
      16. From Memphis Cambyses came to the city of Sais with the purpose of doing that which in fact he did: for when he had entered into the palace of Amasis, he forthwith gave command to bring the corpse of Amasis forth out of his burial-place; and when this had been accomplished, he gave command to scourge it and pluck out the hair and stab it, and to do to it dishonour in every possible way besides: and when they had done this too until they were wearied out, for the corpse being embalmed held out against the violence and did not fall to pieces in any part, Cambyses gave command to consume it with fire, enjoining thereby a thing which was not permitted by religion: for the Persians hold fire to be a god. To consume corpses with fire then is by no means according to the custom of either people, of the Persians for the reason which has been mentioned, since they say that it is not right to give the dead body of a man to a god; while the Egyptians have the belief established that fire is a living wild beast, and that it devours everything which it catches, and when it is satiated with the food it dies itself together with that which it devours: but it is by no means their custom to give the corpse of a man to wild beasts, for which reason they embalm it, that it may not be eaten by worms as it lies in the tomb. Thus then Cambyses was enjoining them to do that which is not permitted by the customs of either people. However, the Egyptians say that it was not Amasis who suffered this outrage, but another of the Egyptians who was of the same stature of body as Amasis; and that to him the Persians did outrage, thinking that they were doing it to Amasis: for they say that Amasis learnt from an Oracle that which was about to happen with regard to himself after his death; and accordingly, to avert the evil which threatened to come upon him, he buried the dead body of this man who was scourged within his own sepulchral chamber near the doors, and enjoined his son to lay his own body as much as possible in the inner recess of the chamber. These injunctions, said to have been given by Amasis with regard to his burial and with regard to the man mentioned, were not in my opinion really given at all, but I think that the Egyptians make pretence of it from pride and with no good ground.         16. [1] Kambuses de ek Memfios apiketo es Sain polin, boylomenos poieisai ta de kai epoiese. epeite gar eseilthe es ta tou Amasios oikia, aytika ekeleye ek teis tafeis ton Amasios nekyn ekferein exu. us de tauta epitelea egeneto, mastigoun ekeleye kai tas trixas apotillein kai kentoun te kai talla panta lymainesthai. [2] epeite de kai tauta ekamon poieuntes (o gar de nekros ate tetarixeymenos anteixe te kai oyden diexeeto), ekeleyse min o Kambuses katakausai, entellomenos oyk osia. Persai gar theon nomizoysi einai pur. [3] to un katakaiein ge tous nekrous oydamus en nomui oydeteroisi esti, Perseisi men di' o per eiretai, theui oy dikaion einai legontes nemein nekron anthrupoy. Aigyptioisi de nenomistai pur therion einai empsyxon, panta de ayto katesthiein ta per an labei, plesthen de ayto teis boreis synapothneskein tui katesthiomenui. [4] oykun therioisi nomos oydamus sfi esti ton nekyn didonai, kai dia tauta tarixeuoysi, ina me keimenos ypo eyleun katabruthei. oytu oydeteroisi nomizomena enetelleto poieein o Kambuses. [5] us mentoi, Aiguptioi legoysi, oyk Amasis En o tauta pathun, alla allos tis tun Aigyptiun exun ten ayten elikien Amasi, tui lymainomenoi Persai edokeon Amasi lymainesthai. [6] legoysi gar us pythomenos ek manteioy o Amasis ta peri euyton apothanonta mellonta ginesthai, oytu de akeomenos ta epiferomena ton men anthrupon touton ton mastiguthenta apothanonta ethapse epi teisi thureisi entos teis euytou thekes, euyton de eneteilato tui paidi en myxui teis thekes us malista theinai. [7] ai men nyn ek tou Amasios entolai aytai ai es ten tafen te kai ton anthrupon exoysai oy moi dokeoysi arxen genesthai, allus d' ayta Aiguptioi semnoun.    
      17. After this Cambyses planned three several expeditions, one against the Carthaginians, another against the Ammonians, and a third against the "Long-lived" Ethiopians, who dwell in that part of Libya which is by the Southern Sea: and in forming these designs he resolved to send his naval force against the Carthaginians, and a body chosen from his land-army against the Ammonians; and to the Ethiopians to send spies first, both to see whether the table of the Sun existed really, which is said to exist among these Ethiopians, and in addition to this to spy out all else, but pretending to be bearers of gifts for their king.         17. [1] meta de tauta o Kambuses eboyleusato trifasias strateias, epi te Karxedonioys kai epi Ammunioys kai epi tous makrobioys Aithiopas, oikemenoys de Libues epi tei notiei thalassei. [2] boyleyomenui de oi edoxe epi men Karxedonioys ton naytikon straton apostellein, epi de Ammunioys tou pezou apokrinanta, epi de tous Aithiopas katoptas pruton, opsomenoys te ten en toutoisi toisi Aithiopsi legomenen einai elioy trapezan ei esti aletheus, kai pros tautei ta alla katopsomenoys, dura de tui logui ferontas tui basilei aytun.    
      18. Now the table of the Sun is said to be as follows:--there is a meadow in the suburb of their city full of flesh-meat boiled of all four-footed creatures; and in this, it is said, those of the citizens who are in authority at the time place the flesh by night, managing the matter carefully, and by day any man who wishes comes there and feasts himself; and the natives (it is reported) say that the earth of herself produces these things continually.         18. [1] e de trapeza tou elioy toiede tis legetai einai, leimun esti en tui proasteiui epipleos kreun efthun pantun tun tetrapodun, es ton tas men nuktas epitedeuontas tithenai ta krea tous en telei ekastote eontas tun astun, tas de emeras dainysthai prosionta ton boylomenon. fanai de tous epixurioys tauta ten gein ayten anadidonai ekastote. e men de trapeza tou elioy kaleomene legetai einai toiede.   
      19. Of such nature is the so-called table of the Sun said to be. So when Cambyses had resolved to send the spies, forthwith he sent for those men of the Ichthyophagoi who understood the Ethiopian tongue, to come from the city of Elephantine: and while they were going to fetch these men, he gave command to the fleet to sail against Carthage: but the Phenicians said that they would not do so, for they were bound not to do so by solemn vows, and they would not be acting piously if they made expedition against their own sons: and as the Phenicians were not willing, the rest were rendered unequal to the attempt. Thus then the Carthaginians escaped being enslaved by the Persians; for Cambyses did not think it right to apply force to compel the Phenicians, both because they had delivered themselves over to the Persians of their own accord and because the whole naval force was dependent upon the Phenicians. Now the men of Cyprus also had delivered themselves over to the Persians, and were joining in the expedition against Egypt.         19. [1] Kambusei de us edoxe pempein tous kataskopoys, aytika metepempeto ex Elefantines polios tun Ixthyofagun andrun tous epistamenoys ten Aithiopida glussan. [2] en ui de toutoys meteisan, en toutui ekeleye epi ten Karxedona pleein ton naytikon straton. Foinikes de oyk efasan poiesein tauta. orkioisi gar megaloisi endedesthai, kai oyk an poieein osia epi tous paidas tous euytun strateyomenoi. Foinikun de oy boylomenun oi loipoi oyk axiomaxoi eginonto. [3] Karxedonioi men nyn oytu doylosunen diefygon pros Perseun. Kambuses gar bien oyk edikaioy prosferein Foinixi, oti sfeas te aytous ededukesan Perseisi kai pas ek Foinikun erteto o naytikos stratos. dontes de kai Kuprioi sfeas aytous Perseisi estrateuonto ep' Aigypton.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [20]

     20. Then as soon as the Ichthyophagoi came to Cambyses from Elephantine, he sent them to the Ethiopians, enjoining them what they should say and giving them gifts to bear with them, that is to say a purple garment, and a collar of twisted gold with bracelets, and an alabaster box of perfumed ointment, and a jar of palm-wine. Now these Ethiopians to whom Cambyses was sending are said to be the tallest and the most beautiful of all men; and besides other customs which they are reported to have different from other men, there is especially this, it is said, with regard to their regal power,--whomsoever of the men of their nation they judge to be the tallest and to have strength in proportion to his stature, this man they appoint to reign over them.         20. [1] epeite de tui Kambusei ek teis Elefantines apikonto oi Ixthyofagoi, epempe aytous es tous Aithiopas enteilamenos ta legein xrein kai dura ferontas porfureon te eima kai xruseon strepton periayxenion kai pselia kai muroy alabastron kai foinikeioy oinoy kadon. oi de Aithiopes oytoi, es tous apepempe o Kambuses, legontai einai megistoi kai kallistoi anthrupun pantun. [2] nomoisi de kai alloisi xrasthai aytous kexurismenoisi tun allun anthrupun kai de kai kata ten basileien toiuide. ton an tun astun krinusi megiston te einai kai kata to megathos exein ten isxun, touton axiousi basileuein.    
      21. So when the Ichthyophagoi had come to this people they presented their gifts to the king who ruled over them, and at the same time they said as follows: "The king of the Persians Cambyses, desiring to become a friend and guest to thee, sent us with command to come to speech with thee, and he gives thee for gifts these things which he himself most delights to use." The Ethiopian however, perceiving that they had come as spies, spoke to them as follows: "Neither did the king of the Persians send you bearing gifts because he thought it a matter of great moment to become my guest-friend, nor do ye speak true things (for ye have come as spies of my kingdom), nor again is he a righteous man; for if he had been righteous he would not have coveted a land other than his own, nor would he be leading away into slavery men at whose hands he has received no wrong. Now however give him this bow and speak to him these words: The king of the Ethiopians gives this counsel to the king of the Persians, that when the Persians draw their bows (of equal size to mine) as easily as I do this, then he should march against the Long-lived Ethiopians, provided that he be superior in numbers; but until that time he should feel gratitude to the gods that they do not put it into the mind of the sons of the Ethiopians to acquire another land in addition to their own."         21. [1] es toutoys de un tous andras us apikonto oi Ixthyofagoi, didontes ta dura tui, basilei aytun elegon tade. <<basileus o Perseun Kambuses, boylomenos filos kai xeinos toi genesthai, emeas te apepempse es logoys toi elthein keleuun, kai dura tauta toi didoi toisi kai aytos malista edetai xreumenos.>> [2] o de Aithiops mathun oti katoptai ekoien, legei pros aytous toiade. <<oyte o Perseun basileus dura ymeas epempse ferontas protimun pollou emoi xeinos genesthai, oyte ymeis legete alethea (ekete gar katoptai teis emeis arxeis), oyte ekeinos aner dikaios. ei gar En dikaios, oyt' an epethumese xures alles e teis euytou, oyt' an es doylosunen anthrupoys Ege yp' un meden ediketai. nun de aytui toxon tode didontes tade epea legete. [3] <<basileus o Aithiopun symboyleuei tui Perseun basilei, epean oytu eypeteus elkusi ta toxa Persai eonta megathei tosauta, tote ep' Aithiopas tous makrobioys plethei yperballomenon strateuesthai. mexri de toutoy theoisi eidenai xarin, oi oyk epi noon trepoysi Aithiopun paisi gein allen prosktasthai tei euytun.>>    
      22. Having thus said and having unbent the bow, he delivered it to those who had come. Then he took the garment of purple and asked what it was and how it had been made: and when the Ichthyophagoi had told him the truth about the purple-fish and the dyeing of the tissue, he said that the men were deceitful and deceitful also were their garments. Then secondly he asked concerning the twisted gold of the collar and the bracelets; and when the Ichthyophagoi were setting forth to him the manner in which it was fashioned, the king broke into a laugh and said, supposing them to be fetters, that they had stronger fetters than those in their country. Thirdly he asked about the perfumed ointment, and when they had told him of the manner of its making and of the anointing with it, he said the same as he had said before about the garment. Then when he came to the wine, and had learned about the manner of its making, being exceedingly delighted with the taste of the drink he asked besides what food the king ate, and what was the longest time that a Persian man lived. They told him that he ate bread, explaining to him first the manner of growing the wheat, and they said that eighty years was the longest term of life appointed for a Persian man. In answer to this the Ethiopian said that he did not wonder that they lived but a few years, when they fed upon dung; for indeed they would not be able to live even so many years as this, if they did not renew their vigour with the drink, indicating to the Ichthyophagoi the wine; for in regard to this, he said, his people were much behind the Persians.         22. [1] tauta de eipas kai aneis to toxon pareduke toisi ekoysi. labun de to eima to porfureon eiruta o ti eie kai okus pepoiemenon. eipontun de tun Ixthyofagun ten aletheien peri teis porfures kai teis bafeis, dolerous men tous anthrupoys efe einai, dolera de aytun ta eimata. [2] deutera de ton xryson eiruta ton strepton ton periayxenion kai ta pselia. exegeomenun de tun Ixthyofagun ton kosmon aytou, gelasas o basileus kai nomisas einai sfea pedas eipe us par' euytoisi eisi rhumaleuterai toyteun pedai. [3] triton de eiruta to muron. eipontun de teis poiesios peri kai aleipsios, ton ayton logon ton kai peri tou eimatos eipe. us de es ton oinon apiketo kai eputheto aytou ten poiesin, yperestheis tui pomati epeireto o ti te siteetai o basileus kai xronon okoson makrotaton aner Perses zuei. [4] oi de siteesthai men ton arton eipon, exegesamenoi tun pyrun ten fusin, ogdukonta de etea zoes pleruma andri makrotaton prokeisthai. pros tauta o Aithiops efe oyden thumazein ei siteomenoi kopron etea oliga zuoysi. oyde gar an tosauta dunasthai zuein sfeas, ei me tui pomati aneferon, frazun toisi Ixthyofagoisi ton oinon. toutui gar euytous ypo Perseun essousthai.    
      23. Then when the Ichthyophagoi asked the king in return about the length of days and the manner of life of his people, he answered that the greater number of them reached the age of a hundred and twenty years, and some surpassed even this; and their food was boiled flesh and their drink was milk. And when the spies marvelled at the number of years, he conducted them to a certain spring, in the water of which they washed and became more sleek of skin, as if it were a spring of oil; and from it there came a scent as it were of violets: and the water of this spring, said the spies, was so exceedingly weak that it was not possible for anything to float upon it, either wood or any of those things which are lighter than wood, but they all went to the bottom. If this water which they have be really such as it is said to be, it would doubtless be the cause why the people are long-lived, as making use of it for all the purposes of life. Then when they departed from this spring, he led them to a prison-house for men, and there all were bound in fetters of gold. Now among these Ethiopians bronze is the rarest and most precious of all things. Then when they had seen the prison-house they saw also the so-called table of the Sun:         23. [1] anteiromenun de ton basilea tun Ixthyofagun teis zoes kai diaites peri, etea men es eikosi kai ekaton tous pollous aytun apikneesthai, yperballein de tinas kai tauta, sitesin de einai krea te eftha kai poma gala. [2] thuma de poieymenun tun kataskopun peri tun eteun, epi krenen sfi egesasthai, ap' Es loyomenoi liparuteroi eginonto, kata per ei elaioy eie. ozein de ap' ayteis us ei iun. [3] asthenes de to ydur teis krenes tautes oytu de ti elegon einai oi kataskopoi uste meden oion t' einai ep' aytou epipleein, mete xulon mete tun osa xuloy esti elafrotera, alla panta sfea xureein es bysson. to de ydur touto ei sfi esti aletheus oion ti legetai, dia touto an eien, toutui ta panta xreumenoi, makrobioi. [4] apo teis krenes de apallassomenun, agagein sfeas es desmuterion andrun, entha tous pantas en pedeisi xryseeisi dedesthai. esti de en toutoisi toisi Aithiopsi pantun o xalkos spaniutaton kai timiutaton. theesamenoi de kai to desmuterion, etheesanto kai ten tou elioy legomenen trapezan.    
      24. and after this they saw last of all their receptacles of dead bodies, which are said to be made of crystal in the following manner:--when they have dried the corpse, whether it be after the Egyptian fashion or in some other way, they cover it over completely with plaster and then adorn it with painting, making the figure as far as possible like the living man. After this they put about it a block of crystal hollowed out; for this they dig up in great quantity and it is very easy to work: and the dead body being in the middle of the block is visible through it, but produces no unpleasant smell nor any other effect which is unseemly, and it has all its parts visible like the dead body itself. For a year then they who are most nearly related to the man keep the block in their house, giving to the dead man the first share of everything and offering to him sacrifices: and after this period they carry it out and set it up round about the city.         24. [1] meta de tauten teleytaias etheesanto tas thekas aytun, ai legontai skeyazesthai ex yeloy tropui toiuide. [2] epean ton nekron isxnenusi, eite de kata per Aiguptioi eite allus kus, gypsusantes apanta ayton grafei kosmeoysi, exomoieuntes to eidos es to dynaton, epeita de oi periistasi stelen ex yeloy pepoiemenen koilen. e de sfi polle kai eyergos orussetai. [3] en mesei de tei stelei eneun diafainetai o nekys, oyte odmen oydemian axarin parexomenos oyte allo aeikes oyden, kai exei panta fanera omoius aytui tui nekyi. [4] eniayton men de exoysi ten stelen en toisi oikioisi oi malista prosekontes, pantun aparxomenoi kai thysias oi prosagontes. meta de tauta ekkomisantes istasi peri ten polin.    
      25. After they had seen all, the spies departed to go back; and when they reported these things, forthwith Cambyses was enraged and proceeded to march his army against the Ethiopians, not having ordered any provision of food nor considered with himself that he was intending to march an army to the furthest extremities of the earth; but as one who is mad and not in his right senses, when he heard the report of the Ichthyophagoi he began the march, ordering those of the Hellenes who were present to remain behind in Egypt, and taking with him his whole land force: and when in the course of his march he had arrived at Thebes, he divided off about fifty thousand of his army, and these he enjoined to make slaves of the Ammonians and to set fire to the seat of the Oracle of Zeus, but he himself with the remainder of his army went on against the Ethiopians. But before the army had passed over the fifth part of the way, all that they had of provisions came to an end completely; and then after the provisions the beasts of burden also were eaten up and came to an end. Now if Cambyses when he perceived this had changed his plan and led his army back, he would have been a wise man in spite of his first mistake; as it was, however, he paid no regard, but went on forward without stopping. The soldiers accordingly, so long as they were able to get anything from the ground, prolonged their lives by eating grass; but when they came to the sand, some did a fearful deed, that is to say, out of each company of ten they selected by lot one of themselves and devoured him: and Cambyses, when he heard it, being alarmed by this eating of one another gave up the expedition against the Ethiopians and set forth to go back again; and he arrived at Thebes having suffered loss of a great number of his army. Then from Thebes he came down to Memphis and allowed the Hellenes to sail away home.         25. [1] theesamenoi de ta panta oi kataskopoi apallassonto opisu. apaggeilantun de tauta toutun, aytika o Kambuses orgen poiesamenos estrateueto epi tous Aithiopas, oyte paraskeyen sitoy oydemian paraggeilas, oyte logon euytui dous oti es ta esxata geis emelle strateuesthai. [2] oia de emmanes te eun kai oy freneres, us ekoye tun Ixthyofagun, estrateueto, Ellenun men tous pareontas aytou taxas ypomenein, ton de pezon panta ama agomenos. [3] epeite de strateyomenos egeneto en Thebeisi, apekrine tou stratou us pente myriadas, kai toutoisi men enetelleto Ammunioys exandrapodisamenoys to xresterion to tou Dios empreisai, aytos de ton loipon agun straton eie epi tous Aithiopas. [4] prin de teis odou to pempton meros dielelythenai ten stratien, aytika panta aytous ta eixon sitiun exomena epeleloipee, meta de ta sitia kai ta ypozugia epelipe katesthiomena. [5] ei men nyn mathun tauta o Kambuses egnusimaxee kai apeige opisu ton straton, epi tei arxeithen genomenei amartadi En an aner sofos. nun de oydena logon poieumenos eie aiei es to prosu. [6] oi de stratiutai eus men ti eixon ek teis geis lambanein, poiefageontes diezuon, epei de es ten psammon apikonto, deinon ergon aytun tines ergasanto. ek dekados gar ena sfeun aytun apoklerusantes katefagon. [7] pythomenos de tauta o Kambuses, deisas ten allelofagien, apeis ton ep' Aithiopas stolon opisu eporeueto kai apikneetai es Thebas pollous apolesas tou stratou. ek Thebeun de katabas es Memfin tous Ellenas apeike apopleein.    
      26. Thus fared the expedition against the Ethiopians: and those of the Persians who had been sent to march against the Ammonians set forth from Thebes and went on their way with guides; and it is known that they arrived at the city of Oasis, which is inhabited by Samians said to be of the Aischrionian tribe, and is distant seven days' journey from Thebes over sandy desert: now this place is called in the speech of the Hellenes the "Isle of the Blessed." It is said that the army reached this place, but from that point onwards, except the Ammonians themselves and those who have heard the account from them, no man is able to say anything about them; for they neither reached the Ammonians nor returned back. This however is added to the story by the Ammonians themselves:--they say that as the army was going from this Oasis through the sandy desert to attack them, and had got to a point about mid-way between them and the Oasis, while they were taking their morning meal a violent South Wind blew upon them, and bearing with it heaps of the desert sand it buried them under it, and so they disappeared and were seen no more. Thus the Ammonians say that it came to pass with regard to this army.         26. [1] o men ep' Aithiopas stolos oytu eprexe. oi d' aytun ep' Ammunioys apostalentes strateuesthai, epeite ormethentes ek tun Thebeun eporeuonto exontes agugous, apikomenoi men faneroi eisi es Oasin polin, ten exoysi men Samioi teis Aisxriunies fyleis legomenoi einai, apexoysi de epta emereun odon apo Thebeun dia psammoy. onomazetai de o xuros oytos kata Ellenun glussan Makarun neisos. [2] es men de touton ton xuron legetai apikesthai ton straton, to entheuten de, oti me aytoi Ammunioi kai oi toutun akousantes, alloi oydenes oyden exoysi eipein peri aytun. oyte gar es tous Ammunioys apikonto oyte opisu enostesan. [3] legetai de kata tade yp' aytun Ammuniun. epeide ek teis Oasios tautes ienai dia teis psammoy epi sfeas, genesthai te aytous metaxu koy malista aytun te kai teis Oasios, ariston aireomenoisi aytoisi epipneusai noton megan te kai exaision, foreonta de thinas teis psammoy kataxusai sfeas, kai tropui toioutui afanistheinai. Ammunioi men oytu legoysi genesthai peri teis stratieis tautes.    
      27. When Cambyses arrived at Memphis, Apis appeared to the Egyptians, whom the Hellenes call Epaphos: and when he had appeared, forthwith the Egyptians began to wear their fairest garments and to have festivities. Cambyses accordingly seeing the Egyptians doing thus, and supposing that they were certainly acting so by way of rejoicing because he had fared ill, called for the officers who had charge of Memphis; and when they had come into his presence, he asked them why when he was at Memphis on the former occasion, the Egyptians were doing nothing of this kind, but only now, when he came there after losing a large part of his army. They said that a god had appeared to them, who was wont to appear at intervals of long time, and that whenever he appeared, then all the Egyptians rejoiced and kept festival. Hearing this Cambyses said that they were lying, and as liars he condemned them to death.         27. [1] apigmenoy de Kambuseu es Memfin efane Aigyptioisi o Apis, ton Ellenes Epafon kaleoysi. epifaneos de toutoy genomenoy aytika oi Aiguptioi eimata eforeon ta kallista kai Esan en thalieisi. [2] idun de tauta tous Aigyptioys poieuntas o Kambuses, pagxy sfeas katadoxas euytou kakus prexantos xarmosyna tauta poieein, ekalee tous epitropoys teis Memfios, apikomenoys de es opsin eireto o ti proteron men eontos aytou en Memfi epoieyn toiouton oyden Aiguptioi, tote de epei aytos pareie teis stratieis pleithos ti apobalun. [3] oi de efrazon us sfi theos eie faneis dia xronoy pollou euthus epifainesthai, kai us epean fanei tote pantes Aiguptioi kexarekotes ortazoien. tauta akousas o Kambuses efe pseudesthai sfeas kai us pseydomenoys thanatui ezemioy.    
      28. Having put these to death, next he called the priests into his presence; and when the priests answered him after the same manner, he said that it should not be without his knowledge if a tame god had come to the Egyptians; and having so said he bade the priests bring Apis away into his presence: so they went to bring him. Now this Apis-Epaphos is a calf born of a cow who after this is not permitted to conceive any other offspring; and the Egyptians say that a flash of light comes down from heaven upon this cow, and of this she produces Apis. This calf which is called Apis is black and has the following signs, namely a white square upon the forehead, and on the back the likeness of an eagle, and in the tail the hairs are double, and on the tongue there is a mark like a beetle.         28. [1] apokteinas de toutoys deutera tous ireas ekalee es opsin. legontun de kata tayta tun ireun, oy lesein efe ayton ei theos tis xeiroethes apigmenos eie Aigyptioisi. tosauta de eipas apagein ekeleye ton Apin tous ireas. oi men de meteisan axontes. [2] o de Apis oytos o Epafos ginetai mosxos ek boos, etis oyketi oie te ginetai es gastera allon ballesthai gonon. Aiguptioi de legoysi selas epi ten boun ek tou oyranou katisxein, kai min ek toutoy tiktein ton Apin. [3] exei de o mosxos oytos o Apis kaleomenos semeia toiade eun melas, epi men tui metupui leykon ti trigunon, epi de tou nutoy aieton eikasmenon, en de tei oyrei tas trixas diplas, ypo de tei glussei kantharon.    
      29. When the priests had brought Apis, Cambyses being somewhat affected with madness drew his dagger, and aiming at the belly of Apis, struck his thigh: then he laughed and said to the priests: "O ye wretched creatures, are gods born such as this, with blood and flesh, and sensible of the stroke of iron weapons? Worthy indeed of Egyptians is such a god as this. Ye however at least shall not escape without punishment for making a mock of me." Having thus spoken he ordered those whose duty it was to do such things, to scourge the priests without mercy, and to put to death any one of the other Egyptians whom they should find keeping the festival. Thus the festival of the Egyptians had been brought to an end, and the priests were being chastised, and Apis wounded by the stroke in his thigh lay dying in the temple.         29. [1] us de egagon ton Apin oi irees, o Kambuses, oia eun ypomargoteros, spasamenos to egxeiridion, thelun tupsai ten gastera tou Apios paiei ton meron. gelasas de eipe pros tous ireas [2] <<u kakai kefalai, toioutoi theoi ginontai, enaimoi te kai sarkudees kai epaiontes sideriun; axios men ge Aigyptiun oytos ge o theos, atar toi ymeis ge oy xairontes geluta eme thesesthe.>> tauta eipas eneteilato toisi tauta pressoysi tous men ireas apomastigusai, Aigyptiun de tun allun ton an labusi ortazonta kteinein. [3] orte men de dielelyto Aigyptioisi, oi de irees edikaieunto, o de Apis peplegmenos ton meron efthine en tui irui katakeimenos. kai ton men teleytesanta ek tou trumatos ethapsan oi irees lathrei Kambuseu.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [30]

     30. Him, when he had brought his life to an end by reason of the wound, the priests buried without the knowledge of Cambyses: but Cambyses, as the Egyptians say, immediately after this evil deed became absolutely mad, not having been really in his right senses even before that time: and the first of his evil deeds was that he put to death his brother Smerdis, who was of the same father and the same mother as himself. This brother he had sent away from Egypt to Persia in envy, because alone of all the Persians he had been able to draw the bow which the Ichthyophagoi brought from the Ethiopian king, to an extent of about two finger-breadths; while of the other Persians not one had proved able to do this. Then when Smerdis had gone away to Persia, Cambyses saw a vision in his sleep of this kind:--it seemed to him that a messenger came from Persia and reported that Smerdis sitting upon the royal throne had touched the heaven with his head. Fearing therefore with regard to this lest his brother might slay him and reign in his stead, he sent Prexaspes to Persia, the man whom of all the Persians he trusted most, with command to slay him. He accordingly went up to Susa and slew Smerdis; and some say that he took him out of the chase and so slew him, others that he brought him to the Erythraian Sea and drowned him.         30. [1] Kambuses de, us legoysi Aiguptioi, aytika dia touto to adikema emane, eun oyde proteron freneres. kai pruta men tun kakun exergasato ton adelfeon Smerdin eonta patros kai metros teis ayteis, ton apepempse es Persas fthonui ex Aiguptoy, oti to toxon mounos Perseun oson te epi duo daktuloys eiryse, to para tou Aithiopos eneikan oi Ixthyofagoi, tun de allun Perseun oydeis oios te egeneto. [2] apoixomenoy un es Persas tou Smerdios opsin eide o Kambuses en tui ypnui toiende. edoxe oi aggelon elthonta ek Perseun aggellein us en tui thronui tui basileiui izomenos Smerdis tei kefalei tou oyranou psauseie. [3] pros un tauta deisas peri euytou me min apokteinas o adelfeos arxei, pempei Prexaspea es Persas, os En oi aner Perseun pistotatos, apokteneonta min. o de anabas es Sousa apekteine Smerdin, oi men legoysi ep' agren exagagonta, oi de es ten Erythren thalassan proagagonta katapontusai.    
      31. This they say was the first beginning of the evil deeds of Cambyses; and next after this he put to death his sister, who had accompanied him to Egypt, to whom also he was married, she being his sister by both parents. Now he took her to wife in the following manner (for before this the Persians had not been wont at all to marry their sisters):--Cambyses fell in love with one of his sisters, and desired to take her to wife; so since he had it in mind to do that which was not customary, he called the Royal Judges and asked them whether there existed any law which permitted him who desired it to marry his sister. Now the Royal Judges are men chosen out from among the Persians, and hold their office until they die or until some injustice is found in them, so long and no longer. These pronounce decisions for the Persians and are the expounders of the ordinances of their fathers, and all matters are referred to them. So when Cambyses asked them, they gave him an answer which was both upright and safe, saying that they found no law which permitted a brother to marry his sister, but apart from that they had found a law to the effect that the king of the Persians might do whatsoever he desired. Thus on the one hand they did not tamper with the law for fear of Cambyses, and at the same time, that they might not perish themselves in maintaining the law, they found another law beside that which was asked for, which was in favour of him who wished to marry his sisters. So Cambyses at that time took to wife her with whom he was in love, but after no long time he took another sister. Of these it was the younger whom he put to death, she having accompanied him to Egypt.         31. [1] pruton men de legoysi Kambusei tun kakun arxai touto. deutera de exergasato ten adelfeen espomenen oi es Aigypton, tei kai synoikee kai En oi ap' amfoterun adelfee. [2] egeme de ayten ude. oydamus gar euthesan proteron teisi adelfeeisi synoikeein Persai. erasthe mieis tun adelfeun Kambuses, kai epeita boylomenos ayten geimai, oti oyk euthota epenoee poiesein, eireto kalesas tous basileioys dikastas ei tis esti keleuun nomos ton boylomenon adelfeei synoikeein. [3] oi de basileioi dikastai kekrimenoi andres ginontai Perseun, es oy apothanusi e sfi pareyrethei ti adikon, mexri toutoy. oytoi de toisi perseisi dikas dikazoysi kai exegetai tun patriun thesmun ginontai, kai panta es toutoys anakeetai. [4] eiromenoy un tou Kambuseu, ypekrinonto aytui oytoi kai dikaia kai asfalea, famenoi nomon oydena exeyriskein os keleuei adelfeei synoikeein adelfeon, allon mentoi exeyrekenai nomon, tui basileuonti Perseun exeinai poieein to an bouletai. [5] oytu oyte ton nomon elysan deisantes Kambusea, ina te me aytoi apoluntai ton nomon peristellontes, parexeuron allon nomon summaxon tui thelonti gameein adelfeas. [6] tote men de o Kambuses egeme ten erumenen, meta mentoi oy pollon xronon esxe allen adelfeen. toyteun deita ten neuteren epispomenen oi ep' Aigypton kteinei.    
      32. About her death, as about the death of Smerdis, two different stories are told. The Hellenes say that Cambyses had matched a lion's cub in fight with a dog's whelp, and this wife of his was also a spectator of it; and when the whelp was being overcome, another whelp, its brother, broke its chain and came to help it; and having become two instead of one, the whelps then got the better of the cub: and Cambyses was pleased at the sight, but she sitting by him began to weep; and Cambyses perceived it and asked wherefore she wept; and she said that she had wept when she saw that the whelp had come to the assistance of its brother, because she remembered Smerdis and perceived that there was no one who would come to his assistance. The Hellenes say that it was for this saying that she was killed by Cambyses: but the Egyptians say that as they were sitting round at table, the wife took a lettuce and pulled off the leaves all round, and then asked her husband whether the lettuce was fairer when thus plucked round or when covered with leaves, and he said "when covered with leaves": she then spoke thus: "Nevertheless thou didst once produce the likeness of this lettuce, when thou didst strip bare the house of Cyrus." And he moved to anger leapt upon her, being with child, and she miscarried and died.         32. [1] amfi de tui thanatui ayteis dixos usper peri Smerdios legetai logos. Ellenes men legoysi Kambusea symbalein skumnon leontos skulaki kynos, theureein de kai ten gynaika tauten, nikumenoy de tou skulakos adelfeon aytou allon skulaka aporrexanta ton desmon paragenesthai oi, duo de genomenoys oytu de tous skulakas epikrateisai tou skumnoy. [2] kai ton men Kambusea edesthai theumenon, ten de paremenen dakruein. Kambusea de mathonta touto epeiresthai di' o ti dakruei, ten de eipein us idousa ton skulaka tui adelfeui timuresanta dakruseie, mnestheisa te Smerdios kai mathousa us ekeinui oyk eie o timuresun. [3] Ellenes men de dia touto to epos fasi ayten apolesthai ypo Kambuseu, Aiguptioi de us trapezei parakatemenun labousan thridaka ten gynaika peritilai kai epaneiresthai ton andra koteron peritetilmene e thridax e dasea eie kalliun, kai ton fanai dasean, ten d' eipein [4] <<tauten mentoi kote su ten thridaka emimesao ton Kuroy oikon apopsilusas.>> ton de thymuthenta empedeisai aytei exousei en gastri, kai min ektrusasan apothanein.    
      33. These were the acts of madness done by Cambyses towards those of his own family, whether the madness was produced really on account of Apis or from some other cause, as many ills are wont to seize upon men; for it is said moreover that Cambyses had from his birth a certain grievous malady, that which is called by some the "sacred" disease: and it was certainly nothing strange that when the body was suffering from a grievous malady, the mind should not be sound either.         33. [1] tauta men es tous oikeioys o Kambuses exemane, eite de dia ton Apin eite kai allus, oia polla euthe anthrupoys kaka katalambanein. kai gar tina ek geneeis nouson megalen legetai exein o Kambuses, ten iren onomazoysi tines. oy nun toi aeikes oyden En tou sumatos nouson megalen noseontos mede tas frenas ygiainein.    
      34. The following also are acts of madness which he did to the other Persians:--To Prexaspes, the man whom he honoured most and who used to bear his messages (his son also was cup-bearer to Cambyses, and this too was no small honour),--to him it is said that he spoke as follows: "Prexaspes, what kind of a man do the Persians esteem me to be, and what speech do they hold concerning me?" and he said: "Master, in all other respects thou art greatly commended, but they say that thou art overmuch given to love of wine." Thus he spoke concerning the Persians; and upon that Cambyses was roused to anger, and answered thus: "It appears then that the Persians say I am given to wine, and that therefore I am beside myself and not in my right mind; and their former speech then was not sincere." For before this time, it seems, when the Persians and Croesus were sitting with him in council, Cambyses asked what kind of a man they thought he was as compared with his father Cyrus; and they answered that he was better than his father, for he not only possessed all that his father had possessed, but also in addition to this had acquired Egypt and the Sea. Thus the Persians spoke; but Croesus, who was present and was not satisfied with their judgment, spoke thus to Cambyses: "To me, O son of Cyrus, thou dost not appear to be equal to thy father, for not yet hast thou a son such as he left behind him in you." Hearing this Cambyses was pleased, and commended the judgment of Croesus.         34. [1] tade d' es tous alloys Persas exemane. legetai gar eipein ayton pros Prexaspea, ton etima te malista kai oi tas aggelias eforee oytos, toutoy te o pais oinoxoos En tui Kambusei, time de kai ayte oy smikre. eipein de legetai tade. [2] <<Prexaspes, koion me tina nomizoysi Persai einai andra tinas te logoys peri emeo poieuntai;>> ton de eipein <<u despota, ta men alla panta megalus epaineai, tei de filoiniei se fasi pleonus proskeisthai.>> [3] ton men de legein tauta peri Perseun, ton de thymuthenta toiade ameibesthai. <<nun ara me fasi Persai oinui proskeimenon parafroneein kai oyk einai noemona. oyd' ara sfeun oi proteroi logoi Esan alethees.>> [4] proteron gar de ara, Perseun oi synedrun eontun kai Kroisoy, eireto Kambuses koios tis dokeoi aner einai pros ton patera telesai Kuron, oi de ameibonto us eie ameinun tou patros. ta te gar ekeinoy panta exein ayton kai prosekteisthai Aigypton te kai ten thalassan. [5] Persai men tauta elegon, Kroisos de pareun te kai oyk areskomenos tei krisi eipe pros ton Kambusea tade. <<emoi men nyn, u pai Kuroy, oy dokeeis omoios einai tui patri. oy gar ku toi esti yios oion se ekeinos katelipeto.>> esthe te tauta akousas o Kambuses kai epainee ten Kroisoy krisin.    
      35. So calling to mind this, he said in anger to Prexaspes: "Learn then now for thyself whether the Persians speak truly, or whether when they say this they are themselves out of their senses: for if I, shooting at thy son there standing before the entrance of the chamber, hit him in the very middle of the heart, the Persians will be proved to be speaking falsely, but if I miss, then thou mayest say that the Persians are speaking the truth and that I am not in my right mind." Having thus said he drew his bow and hit the boy; and when the boy had fallen down, it is said that he ordered them to cut open his body and examine the place where he was hit; and as the arrow was found to be sticking in the heart, he laughed and was delighted, and said to the father of the boy: "Prexaspes, it has now been made evident, as thou seest, that I am not mad, but that it is the Persians who are out of their senses; and now tell me, whom of all men didst thou ever see before this time hit the mark so well in shooting?" Then Prexaspes, seeing that the man was not in his right senses and fearing for himself, said: "Master, I think that not even God himself could have hit the mark so fairly." Thus he did at that time: and at another time he condemned twelve of the Persians, men equal to the best, on a charge of no moment, and buried them alive with the head downwards.         35. [1] toutun de un epimnesthenta orgei legein pros ton Prexaspea <<su nyn mathe ei legoysi Persai alethea eite aytoi legontes tauta parafroneoysi. [2] ei men gar tou paidos tou sou toude esteutos en toisi prothuroisi balun tuxoimi meses teis kardies, Persai faneontai legontes oyden. en de amartu, fanai Persas te legein alethea kai me me sufroneein.>> [3] tauta de eiponta kai diateinanta to toxon balein ton paida, pesontos de tou paidos anasxizein ayton keleuein kai skepsasthai to bleima. us de en tei kardiei eyretheinai eneonta ton oiston, eipein pros ton patera tou paidos gelasanta kai perixarea genomenon [4] <<Prexaspes, us men egu te oy mainomai Persai te parafroneoysi, deila toi gegone. nun de moi eipe, tina eides ede pantun anthrupun oytu episkopa toxeuonta;>> Prexaspea de orunta andra oy frenerea kai peri euytui deimainonta eipein <<despota, oyd' an ayton eguge dokeu ton theon oytu an kalus balein.>> [5] tote men tauta exergasato, eteruthi de Perseun omoioys toisi prutoisi dyudeka ep' oydemiei aitiei axioxreui elun zuontas epi kefalen katuryxe.    
      36. When he was doing these things, Croesus the Lydian judged it right to admonish him in the following words: "O king, do not thou indulge the heat of thy youth and passion in all things, but retain and hold thyself back: it is a good thing to be prudent, and forethought is wise. Thou however are putting to death men who are of thine own people, condemning them on charges of no moment, and thou art putting to death men's sons also. If thou do many such things, beware lest the Persians make revolt from thee. As for me, thy father Cyrus gave me charge, earnestly bidding me to admonish thee, and suggest to thee that which I should find to be good." Thus he counselled him, manifesting goodwill towards him; but Cambyses answered: "Dost thou venture to counsel me, who excellently well didst rule thine own country, and well didst counsel my father, bidding him pass over the river Araxes and go against the Massagetai, when they were willing to pass over into our land, and so didst utterly ruin thyself by ill government of thine own land, and didst utterly ruin Cyrus, who followed thy counsel. However thou shalt not escape punishment now, for know that before this I had very long been desiring to find some occasion against thee." Thus having said he took his bow meaning to shoot him, but Croesus started up and ran out: and so since he could not shoot him, he gave orders to his attendants to take and slay him. The attendants however, knowing his moods, concealed Croesus, with the intention that if Cambyses should change his mind and seek to have Croesus again, they might produce him and receive gifts as the price of saving his life; but if he did not change his mind nor feel desire to have him back, then they might kill him. Not long afterwards Cambyses did in fact desire to have Croesus again, and the attendants perceiving this reported to him that he was still alive: and Cambyses said that he rejoiced with Croesus that he was still alive, but that they who had preserved him should not get off free, but he would put them to death: and thus he did.         36. [1] tauta de min poieunta edikaiuse Kroisos o Lydos noytheteisai toiside toisi epesi. <<u basileu, me panta elikiei kai thymui epitrape, all' isxe kai katalambane seuyton. agathon ti pronoon einai, sofon de e promethie. su de kteineis men andras seuytou polietas ep' oydemiei aitiei axioxreui elun, kteineis de paidas. [2] en de polla toiauta poieeis, ora okus me sey apostesontai Persai. emoi de pater sos Kuros enetelleto polla keleuun se noytheteein kai ypotithesthai o ti an eyrisku agathon.>> o men de eynoien fainun synebouleye oi tauta. o d' ameibeto toiside. [3] <<su kai emoi tolmais symboyleuein, os xrestus men ten seuytou patrida epetropeysas, ey de tui patri tui emui synebouleysas, keleuun ayton Araxea potamon diabanta ienai epi Massagetas, boylomenun ekeinun diabainein es ten emeteren, kai apo men seuyton ulesas teis seuytou patridos kakus prostas, apo de ulesas Kuron peithomenon soi, all' oyti xairun, epei toi kai palai es se profasios tey edeomen epilabesthai.>> [4] tauta de eipas elambane to toxon us katatoxeusun ayton, Kroisos de anadramun ethee exu. o de epeite toxeusai oyk eixe, eneteilato toisi therapoysi labontas min apokteinai. [5] oi de therapontes epistamenoi ton tropon aytou katakruptoysi ton Kroison epi tuide tui logui uste, ei men metamelesei tui Kambusei kai epizeteei ton Kroison, oi de ekfenantes ayton dura lampsontai zuagria Kroisoy, en de me metameletai mede potheei min, tote kataxrasthai. [6] epothese te de o Kambuses ton Kroison oy pollui metepeita xronui ysteron, kai oi therapontes mathontes touto epeggellonto aytui us perieie. Kambuses de Kroisui men synedesthai efe perieonti, ekeinoys mentoi tous peripoiesantas oy kataproixesthai all' apokteneein. kai epoiese tauta.    
      37. Many such acts of madness did he both to Persians and allies, remaining at Memphis and opening ancient tombs and examining the dead bodies. Likewise also he entered into the temple of Hephaistos and very much derided the image of the god: for the image of Hephaistos very nearly resembles the Phenician Pataicoi, which the Phenicians carry about on the prows of their triremes; and for him who has not seen these, I will indicate its nature,--it is the likeness of a dwarfish man. He entered also into the temple of the Cabeiroi, into which it is not lawful for any one to enter except the priest only, and the images there he even set on fire, after much mockery of them. Now these also are like the images of Hephaistos, and it is said that they are the children of that god.         37. [1] o men de toiauta polla es Persas te kai tous symmaxoys exemaineto, menun en Memfi kai thekas te palaias anoigun kai skeptomenos tous nekrous. [2] us de de kai es tou Efaistoy to iron Elthe kai polla tui agalmati kategelase. esti gar tou Efaistoy tugalma toisi Foinikeioisi Pataikoisi emferestaton, tous oi Foinikes en teisi pruireisi tun triereun periagoysi. os de toutoys me opupe, ude semaneu. pygmaioy andros mimesis esti. [3] eseilthe de kai es tun Kabeirun to iron, es to oy themiton esti esienai allon ge e ton irea. tauta de ta agalmata kai eneprese polla kataskupsas. esti de kai tauta omoia toisi tou Efaistoy. toutoy de sfeas paidas legoysi einai.    
      38. It is clear to me therefore by every kind of proof that Cambyses was mad exceedingly; for otherwise he would not have attempted to deride religious rites and customary observances. For if one should propose to all men a choice, bidding them select the best customs from all the customs that there are, each race of men, after examining them all, would select those of his own people; thus all think that their own customs are by far the best: and so it is not likely that any but a madman would make a jest of such things. Now of the fact that all men are thus wont to think about their customs, we may judge by many other proofs and more specially by this which follows:--Dareios in the course of his reign summoned those of the Hellenes who were present in his land, and asked them for what price they would consent to eat up their fathers when they died; and they answered that for no price would they do so. After this Dareios summoned those Indians who are called Callatians, who eat their parents, and asked them in presence of the Hellenes, who understood what they said by help of an interpreter, for what payment they would consent to consume with fire the bodies of their fathers when they died; and they cried out aloud and bade him keep silence from such words. Thus then these things are established by usage, and I think that Pindar spoke rightly in his verse, when he said that "of all things law is king."         38. [1] pantaxei un moi deila esti oti emane megalus o Kambuses. oy gar an iroisi te kai nomaioisi epexeirese katagelan. ei gar tis protheie pasi anthrupoisi eklexasthai keleuun nomoys tous kallistoys ek tun pantun nomun, diaskepsamenoi an eloiato ekastoi tous euytun. oytu nomizoysi pollon ti kallistoys tous euytun nomoys ekastoi einai. [2] oykun oikos esti allon ge e mainomenon andra geluta ta toiauta tithesthai. us de oytu nenomikasi ta peri tous nomoys pantes anthrupoi, polloisi te kai alloisi tekmerioisi paresti stathmusasthai, en de de kai tuide. [3] Dareios epi teis euytou arxeis kalesas Ellenun tous pareontas eireto epi kosui an xremati boyloiato tous pateras apothneskontas katasiteesthai. oi de ep' oydeni efasan erdein an touto. [4] Dareios de meta tauta kalesas Indun tous kaleomenoys Kallatias, oi tous goneas katesthioysi, eireto, pareontun tun Ellenun kai di' ermeneos manthanontun ta legomena, epi tini xremati dexaiat' an teleytuntas tous pateras katakaiein pyri. oi de ambusantes mega eyfemeein min ekeleyon. oytu men nyn tauta nenomistai, kai orthus moi dokeei Pindaros poieisai nomon pantun basilea fesas einai.    
      39. Now while Cambyses was marching upon Egypt, the Lacedemonians also had made an expedition against Samos and against Polycrates the son of Aiakes, who had risen against the government and obtained rule over Samos. At first he had divided the State into three parts and had given a share to his brothers Pantagnotos and Syloson; but afterwards he put to death one of these, and the younger, namely Syloson, he drove out, and so obtained possession of the whole of Samos. Then, being in possession, he made a guest-friendship with Amasis the king of Egypt, sending him gifts and receiving gifts in return from him. After this straightway within a short period of time the power of Polycrates increased rapidly, and there was much fame of it not only in Ionia, but also over the rest of Hellas: for to whatever part he directed his forces, everything went fortunately for him: and he had got for himself a hundred fifty-oared galleys and a thousand archers, and he plundered from all, making no distinction of any; for it was his wont to say that he would win more gratitude from his friend by giving back to him that which he had taken, than by not taking at all. So he had conquered many of the islands and also many cities of the continent, and besides other things he gained the victory in a sea-fight over the Lesbians, as they were coming to help the Milesians with their forces, and conquered them: these men dug the whole trench round the wall of the city of Samos working in chains.         39. [1] Kambuseu de ep' Aigypton strateyomenoy epoiesanto kai Lakedaimonioi strateien epi Samon te kai Polykratea ton Aiakeos. os esxe Samon epanastas, [2] kai ta men pruta trixei dasamenos ten polin.. toisi adelfeoisi Pantagnutui kai Sylosunti eneime, meta de ton men aytun apokteinas ton de neuteron Sylosunta exelasas esxe pasan Samon, sxun de xeinien Amasi tui Aiguptoy basilei synethekato, pempun te dura kai dekomenos alla par' ekeinoy. [3] en xronui de oligui aytika tou Polykrateos ta pregmata eyxeto kai En bebumena ana te ten Iunien kai ten allen Ellada. okoy gar ithuseie strateuesthai, panta oi exuree eytyxeus. ekteto de pentekonteroys te ekaton kai xilioys toxotas, efere de kai Ege pantas diakrinun oydena. [4] tui gar filui efe xarieisthai mallon apodidous ta elabe e arxen mede labun. syxnas men de tun nesun arairekee, polla de kai teis epeiroy astea. en de de kai Lesbioys panstratiei boetheontas Milesioisi naymaxiei kratesas eile, oi ten tafron peri to teixos to en Samui pasan dedemenoi uryxan.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [40]

     40. Now Amasis, as may be supposed, did not fail to perceive that Polycrates was very greatly fortunate, and it was to him an object of concern; and as much more good fortune yet continued to come to Polycrates, he wrote upon a paper these words and sent them to Samos: "Amasis to Polycrates thus saith:--It is a pleasant thing indeed to hear that one who is a friend and guest is faring well; yet to me thy great good fortune is not pleasing, since I know that the Divinity is jealous; and I think that I desire, both for myself and for those about whom I have care, that in some of our affairs we should be prosperous and in others should fail, and thus go through life alternately faring well and ill, rather than that we should be prosperous in all things: for never yet did I hear tell of any one who was prosperous in all things and did not come to an utterly evil end at the last. Now therefore do thou follow my counsel and act as I shall say with respect to thy prosperous fortunes. Take thought and consider, and that which thou findest to be the most valued by thee, and for the loss of which thou wilt most be vexed in thy soul, that take and cast away in such a manner that it shall never again come to the sight of men; and if in future from that time forward good fortune does not befall thee in alternation with calamities, apply remedies in the manner by me suggested."         40. [1] kai kus ton Amasin eytyxeun megalus o Polykrates oyk elanthane, alla oi tout' En epimeles. pollui de eti pleunos oi eytyxies ginomenes grapsas es byblion tade epesteile es Samon. <<Amasis Polykratei ude legei. [2]  edu men pynthanesthai andra filon kai xeinon ey pressonta. emoi de ai sai megalai eytyxiai oyk areskoysi, to theion epistamenui us esti fthoneron. kai kus boulomai kai aytos kai tun an kedumai to men ti eytyxeein tun pregmatun to de prosptaiein, kai oytu diaferein ton aiuna enallax pressun e eytyxeein ta panta. [3] oydena gar ku logui oida akousas ostis es telos oy kakus eteleutese prorrizos, eytyxeun ta panta. su nyn emoi peithomenos poieson pros tas eytyxias toiade. [4] frontisas to an eyreis eon toi pleistoy axion kai ep' ui su apolomenui malista ten psyxen algeseis, touto apobale oytu okus meketi exei es anthrupoys. en te me enallax ede tupo toutoy ai eytyxiai toi teisi patheisi prospiptusi, tropui tui ex emeu ypokeimenui akeo.>>    
      41. Polycrates, having read this and having perceived by reflection that Amasis suggested to him good counsel, sought to find which one of his treasures he would be most afflicted in his soul to lose; and seeking he found this which I shall say:--he had a signet which he used to wear, enchased in gold and made of an emerald stone; and it was the work of Theodoros the son of Telecles of Samos. Seeing then that he thought it good to cast this away, he did thus:-- he manned a fifty-oared galley with sailors and went on board of it himself; and then he bade them put out into the deep sea. And when he had got to a distance from the island, he took off the signet-ring, and in the sight of all who were with him in the ship he threw it into the sea. Thus having done he sailed home; and when he came to his house he mourned for his loss.         41. [1] tauta epilexamenos o Polykrates kai noui labun us oi ey ypetitheto Amasis, edizeto ep' ui an malista ten psyxen asetheie apolomenui tun keimeliun, dizemenos de eyriske tode. En oi sfregis ten eforee xrysodetos, smaragdoy men lithoy eousa, ergon de En Theoduroy tou Telekleos Samioy. [2] epei un tauten oi edokee apobalein, epoiee toiade. pentekonteron plerusas andrun esebe es ayten, meta de anagagein ekeleye es to pelagos. us de apo teis nesoy ekas egeneto, perielomenos ten sfregida pantun oruntun tun symploun rhiptei es to pelagos. touto de poiesas apeplee, apikomenos de es ta oikia symforei exrato.    
      42. But on the fifth or sixth day after these things it happened to him as follows:--a fisherman having caught a large and beautiful fish, thought it right that this should be given as a gift to Polycrates. He bore it therefore to the door of the palace and said that he desired to come into the presence of Polycrates, and when he had obtained this he gave him the fish, saying: "O king, having taken this fish I did not think fit to bear it to the market, although I am one who lives by the labour of his hands; but it seemed to me that it was worthy of thee and of thy monarchy: therefore I bring it and present it to thee." He then, being pleased at the words spoken, answered thus: "Thou didst exceedingly well, and double thanks are due to thee, for thy words and also for thy gift; and we invite thee to come to dinner." The fisherman then, thinking this a great thing, went away to this house; and the servants as they were cutting up the fish found in its belly the signet-ring of Polycrates. Then as soon as they had seen it and taken it up, they bore it rejoicing to Polycrates, and giving him the signet-ring they told him in what manner it had been found: and he perceiving that the matter was of God, wrote upon paper all that he had done and all that had happened to him, and having written he despatched it to Egypt.         42. [1] pemptei de e ektei emerei apo toutun tade oi syneneike genesthai. aner alieus labun ixthun megan te kai kalon exioy min Polykratei duron dotheinai. ferun de epi tas thuras Polykratei efe ethelein elthein es opsin, xuresantos de oi toutoy elege didous ton ixthun [2] <<u basileu, egu tonde elun oyk edikaiusa ferein es agoren, kaiper eun apoxeirobiotos, alla moi edokee seu te einai axios kai teis seis arxeis. soi de min ferun didumi.>> o de estheis toisi epesi ameibetai toiside. <<karta te ey epoiesas kai xaris diplei tun te logun kai tou duroy, kai se epi deipnon kaleomen.>> [3] o men de alieus mega poieumenos tauta eie es ta oikia, ton de ixthun tamnontes oi therapontes eyriskoysi en tei nedui aytou eneousan ten Polykrateos sfregida. [4] us de eidon te kai elabon taxista, eferon kexarekotes para ton Polykratea, didontes de oi ten sfregida elegon oteui tropui eyrethe. ton de us eseilthe theion einai to preigma, grafei es byblion panta ta poiesanta min oia katalelabeke, grapsas de es Aigypton epetheke.    
      43. Then Amasis, when he had read the paper which had come from Polycrates, perceived that it was impossible for man to rescue man from the event which was to come to pass, and that Polycrates was destined not to have a good end, being prosperous in all things, seeing that he found again even that which he cast away. Therefore he sent an envoy to him in Samos and said that he broke off the guest- friendship; and this he did lest when a fearful and great mishap befell Polycrates, he might himself be grieved in his soul as for a man who was his guest.         43. [1] epilexamenos de o Amasis to byblion to para tou Polykrateos Ekon, emathe oti ekkomisai te adunaton eie anthrupui anthrupon ek tou mellontos ginesthai pregmatos, kai oti oyk ey teleytesein melloi Polykrates eytyxeun ta panta, os kai ta apoballei eyriskei. [2] pempsas de oi keryka es Samon dialuesthai efe ten xeinien. toude de eineken tauta epoiee, ina me syntyxies deineis te kai megales Polykratea katalabouses aytos algeseie ten psyxen us peri xeinoy andros.    
      44. It was this Polycrates then, prosperous in all things, against whom the Lacedemonians were making an expedition, being invited by those Samians who afterwards settled at Kydonia in Crete, to come to their assistance. Now Polycrates had sent an envoy to Cambyses the son of Cyrus without the knowledge of the Samians, as he was gathering an army to go against Egypt, and had asked him to send to him in Samos and to ask for an armed force. So Cambyses hearing this very readily sent to Samos to ask Polycrates to send a naval force with him against Egypt: and Polycrates selected of the citizens those whom he most suspected of desiring to rise against him and sent them away in forty triremes, charging Cambyses not to send them back.         44. [1] epi touton de un ton Polykratea eytyxeonta ta panta estrateuonto Lakedaimonioi, epikalesamenun tun meta tauta Kydunien ten en Kretei ktisantun Samiun. pempsas de keryka lathrei Samiun Polykrates para Kambusea ton Kuroy syllegonta straton ep' Aigypton, edeethe okus an kai par' euyton pempsas es Samon deoito stratou. [2] Kambuses de akousas toutun prothumus epempse es Samon deomenos Polykrateos straton naytikon ama pempsai euytui ep' Aigypton. o de epilexas tun astun tous ypupteye malista es epanastasin apepempe tesserakonta trieresi, enteilamenos Kambusei opisu toutoys me apopempein.    
      45. Now some say that those of the Samians who were sent away by Polycrates never reached Egypt, but when they arrived on their voyage at Carpathos, they considered with themselves, and resolved not to sail on any further: others say that they reached Egypt and being kept under guard there, they made their escape from thence. Then, as they were sailing in to Samos, Polycrates encountered them with ships and engaged battle with them; and those who were returning home had the better and landed in the island; but having fought a land-battle in the island, they were worsted, and so sailed to Lacedemon. Some however say that those from Egypt defeated Polycrates in the battle; but this in my opinion is not correct, for there would have been no need for them to invite the assistance of the Lacedemonians if they had been able by themselves to bring Polycrates to terms. Moreover, it is not reasonable either, seeing that he had foreign mercenaries and native archers very many in number, to suppose that he was worsted by the returning Samians, who were but few. Then Polycrates gathered together the children and wives of his subjects and confined them in the ship- sheds, keeping them ready so that, if it should prove that his subjects deserted to the side of the returning exiles, he might burn them with the sheds.         45. [1] oi men de legoysi tous apopemfthentas Samiun ypo Polykrateos oyk apikesthai es Aigypton, all' epeite egenonto en Karpathui pleontes, dounai sfisi logon, kai sfi adein to prosuteru meketi pleein. oi de legoysi apikomenoys te es Aigypton kai fylassomenoys entheuten aytous apodreinai. [2] katapleoysi de es ten Samon Polykrates neysi antiasas es maxen kateste. nikesantes de oi kationtes apebesan es ten neison, pezomaxesantes de en aytei essuthesan, kai oytu de epleon es Lakedaimona. [3] eisi de oi legoysi tous ap' Aiguptoy nikeisai Polykratea, legontes emoi dokeein oyk orthus. oyden gar edei sfeas Lakedaimonioys epikaleesthai, ei per aytoi Esan ikanoi Polykratea parastesasthai. pros de toutoisi oyde logos aireei, tui epikoyroi te misthutoi kai toxotai oikeioi Esan plethei polloi, touton ypo tun kationtun Samiun eontun oligun essutheinai. [4] tun d' yp' euytui eontun polieteun ta tekna kai tas gynaikas o Polykrates es tous neusoikoys syneilesas eixe etoimoys, en ara prodidusi oytoi pros tous kationtas, ypopreisai aytoisi toisi neusoikoisi.    
      46. When those of the Samians who had been driven out by Polycrates reached Sparta, they were introduced before the magistrates and spoke at length, being urgent in their request. The magistrates however at the first introduction replied that they had forgotten the things which had been spoken at the beginning, and did not understand those which were spoken at the end. After this they were introduced a second time, and bringing with them a bag they said nothing else but this, namely that the bag was in want of meal; to which the others replied that they had overdone it with the bag. However, they resolved to help them.         46. [1] epeite de oi exelasthentes Samiun ypo Polykrateos apikonto es ten Sparten, katastantes epi tous arxontas elegon polla oia karta deomenoi. oi de sfi tei prutei katastasi ypekrinanto ta men pruta lexthenta epileleisthai, ta de ystata oy synienai. [2] meta de tauta deutera katastantes allo men eipon oyden, thulakon de ferontes efasan ton thulakon alfitun deesthai. oi de sfi ypekrinanto tui thylakui periergasthai. boetheein d' un edoxe aytoisi.    
      47. Then the Lacedemonians prepared a force and made expedition to Samos, in repayment of former services, as the Samians say, because the Samians had first helped them with ships against the Messenians; but the Lacedemonians say that they made the expedition not so much from desire to help the Samians at their request, as to take vengeance on their own behalf for the robbery of the mixing-bowl which they had been bearing as a gift to Croesus, and of the corslet which Amasis the king of Egypt had sent as a gift to them; for the Samians had carried off the corslet also in the year before they took the bowl; and it was of linen with many figures woven into it and embroidered with gold and with cotton; and each thread of this corslet is worthy of admiration, for that being itself fine it has in it three hundred and sixty fibres, all plain to view. Such another as this moreover is that which Amasis dedicated as an offering to Athene at Lindos.         47. [1] kai epeita paraskeyasamenoi estrateuonto Lakedaimonioi epi Samon, us men Samioi legoysi, eyergesias ektinontes, oti sfi proteroi aytoi neysi eboethesan epi Messenioys. us de Lakedaimonioi legoysi, oyk oytu timureisai deomenoisi Samioisi estrateuonto us tisasthai boylomenoi tou kreteiros teis arpageis, ton Egon Kroisui, kai tou thurekos, ton aytoisi Amasis o Aiguptoy basileus epempse duron. [2] kai gar thureka eleisanto tui proterui etei e ton kreteira oi Samioi, eonta men lineon kai zuiun enyfasmenun syxnun, kekosmemenon de xrysui kai eirioisi apo xuloy. [3] tun de eineka thumasai axion, arpedone ekaste tou thurekos poieei. eousa gar lepte exei arpedonas en euytei triekosias kai exekonta, pasas faneras. toioutos eteros esti kai ton en Lindui anetheke tei Athenaiei Amasis.    
      48. The Corinthians also took part with zeal in this expedition against Samos, that it might be carried out; for there had been an offence perpetrated against them also by the Samians a generation before the time of this expedition and about the same time as the robbery of the bowl. Periander the son of Kypselos had despatched three hundred sons of the chief men of Corcyra to Alyattes at Sardis to be made eunuchs; and when the Corinthians who were conducting the boys had put in to Samos, the Samians, being informed of the story and for what purpose they were being conducted to Sardis, first instructed the boys to lay hold of the temple of Artemis, and then they refused to permit the Corinthians to drag the suppliants away from the temple: and as the Corinthians cut the boys off from supplies of food, the Samians made a festival, which they celebrate even to the present time in the same manner: for when night came on, as long as the boys were suppliants they arranged dances of maidens and youths, and in arranging the dances they made it a rule of the festival that sweet cakes of sesame and honey should be carried, in order that the Corcyrean boys might snatch them and so have support; and this went on so long that at last the Corinthians who had charge of the boys departed and went away; and as for the boys, the Samians carried them back to Corcyra.         48. [1] synepelabonto de tou strateumatos tou epi Samon uste genesthai kai Korinthioi prothumus. ybrisma gar kai es toutoys eixe ek tun Samiun genomenon geneei proteron tou strateumatos toutoy, kata de ton ayton xronon tou kreteiros tei arpagei gegonos. [2] Kerkyraiun gar paidas triekosioys andrun tun prutun Periandros o Kypseloy es Sardis apepempse para Alyattea ep' ektomei. prossxontun de es ten Samon tun agontun tous paidas Korinthiun, pythomenoi oi Samioi ton logon, ep' oisi agoiato es Sardis, pruta men tous paidas edidaxan irou apsasthai Artemidos. [3] meta de oy perioruntes apelkein tous iketas ek tou irou, sitiun de tous paidas ergontun Korinthiun, epoiesanto oi Samioi orten, tei kai nun eti xreuntai kata tayta. nyktos gar epigenomenes, oson xronon iketeyon oi paides, istasan xorous parthenun te kai eitheun, istantes de tous xorous trukta sesamoy te kai melitos epoiesanto nomon feresthai, ina arpazontes oi tun Kerkyraiun paides exoien trofen. [4] es touto de tode egineto, es o oi Korinthioi tun paidun oi fulakoi oixonto apolipontes. tous de paidas apegagon es Kerkyran oi Samioi.    
      49. Now, if after the death of Periander the Corinthians had been on friendly terms with the Corcyreans, they would not have joined in the expedition against Samos for the cause which has been mentioned; but as it is, they have been ever at variance with one another since they first colonised the island. This then was the cause why the Corinthians had a grudge against the Samians.         49. [1] ei men nyn Periandroy teleytesantos toisi Korinthioisi fila En pros tous Kerkyraioys, oi de oyk an synelabonto tou strateumatos tou epi Samon tautes eineken teis aities. nun de aiei epeite ektisan ten neison eisi alleloisi diaforoi, eontes euytoisi ... [2] toutun un eineken apemnesikakeon toisi Samioisi oi Korinthioi. apepempe de es Sardis ep' ektomei Periandros tun prutun Kerkyraiun epilexas tous paidas timureumenos. proteroi gar oi Kerkyraioi Erxan es ayton preigma atasthalon poiesantes.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [50]

     50. Now Periander had chosen out the sons of the chief men of Corcyra and was sending them to Sardis to be made eunuchs, in order that he might have revenge; since the Corcyreans had first begun the offence and had done to him a deed of reckless wrong. For after Periander had killed his wife Melissa, it chanced to him to experience another misfortune in addition to that which had happened to him already, and this was as follows:--He had by Melissa two sons, the one of seventeen and the other of eighteen years. These sons their mother's father Procles, who was despot of Epidauros, sent for to himself and kindly entertained, as was to be expected seeing that they were the sons of his own daughter; and when he was sending them back, he said in taking leave of them: "Do ye know, boys, who it was that killed your mother?" Of this saying the elder of them took no account, but the younger, whose name was Lycophron, was grieved so greatly at hearing it, that when he reached Corinth again he would neither address his father, nor speak to him when his father would have conversed with him, nor give any reply when he asked questions, regarding him as the murderer of his mother. At length Periander being enraged with his son drove him forth out of his house.         50. [1] epeite gar ten euytou gynaika Melissan Periandros apekteine, symforen toiende oi allen synebe pros tei gegonyiei genesthai. Esan oi ek Melisses duo paides, elikien o men eptakaideka o de oktukaideka etea gegonus. [2] toutoys o metropatur Proklees eun Epidauroy turannos metapempsamenos par' euyton efilofroneeto, us oikos En thygatros eontas teis euytou paidas. epeite de sfeas apepempeto, eipe propempun aytous [3] <<ara iste, u paides, os ymeun ten metera apekteine;>> touto to epos o men presbuteros aytun en oydeni logui epoiesato. o de neuteros, tui oynoma En Lykofrun, elgese akousas oytu uste apikomenos es ten Korinthon ate fonea teis metros ton patera oyte proseipe, dialegomenui te oyte prosdielegeto istoreonti te logon oydena edidoy. telos de min perithumus exun o Periandros exelaunei ek tun oikiun.    
      51. And having driven him forth, he asked of the elder son what his mother's father had said to them in his conversation. He then related how Procles had received them in a kindly manner, but of the saying which he had uttered when he parted from them he had no remembrance, since he had taken no note of it. So Periander said that it could not be but that he had suggested to them something, and urged him further with questions; and he after that remembered, and told of this also. Then Periander taking note of it and not desiring to show any indulgence, sent a messenger to those with whom the son who had been driven forth was living at that time, and forbade them to receive him into their houses; and whenever having been driven away from one house he came to another, he was driven away also from this, since Periander threatened those who received him, and commanded them to exclude him; and so being driven away again he would go to another house, where persons lived who were his friends, and they perhaps received him because he was the son of Periander, notwithstanding that they feared.         51. [1] exelasas de touton istoree ton presbuteron ta sfi o metropatur dielexthe. o de oi apegeeto us sfeas filofronus edexato. ekeinoy de tou epeos to sfi o Proklees apostellun eipe, ate oy noui labun, oyk ememneto. Periandros de oydemian mexanen efe einai me oy sfi ekeinon ypothesthai ti, eliparee te istoreun. o de anamnestheis eipe kai touto. [2] Periandros de noui labun [kai touto] kai malakon endidonai boylomenos oyden, tei o exelastheis yp' aytou pais diaitan epoieeto, es toutoys pempun aggelon apegoreye me min dekesthai oikioisi. [3] o de okus apelaynomenos elthoi es allen oikien, apelaunet' an kai apo tautes, apeileontos te tou Periandroy toisi dexamenoisi kai exergein keleuontos. apelaynomenos d' an eie ep' eteren tun etairun. oi de ate Periandroy eonta paida kaiper deimainontes omus edekonto.    
      52. At last Periander made a proclamation that whosoever should either receive him into their houses or converse with him should be bound to pay a fine to Apollo, stating the amount that it should be. Accordingly, by reason of this proclamation no one was willing either to converse with him or to receive him into their house; and moreover even he himself did not think it fit to attempt it, since it had been forbidden, but he lay about in the porticoes enduring exposure: and on the fourth day after this, Periander seeing him fallen into squalid misery and starvation felt pity for him; and abating his anger he approached him and began to say: "Son, which of these two is to be preferred, the fortune which thou dost now experience and possess, or to inherit the power and wealth which I possess now, by being submissive to thy father's will? Thou however, being my son and the prince of wealthy Corinth, didst choose nevertheless the life of a vagabond by making opposition and displaying anger against him with whom it behoved thee least to deal so; for if any misfortune happened in those matters, for which cause thou hast suspicion against me, this has happened to me first, and I am sharer in the misfortune more than others, inasmuch as I did the deed myself. Do thou however, having learnt by how much to be envied is better than to be pitied, and at the same time what a grievous thing it is to be angry against thy parents and against those who are stronger than thou, come back now to the house." Periander with these words endeavoured to restrain him; but he answered nothing else to his father, but said only that he ought to pay a fine to the god for having come to speech with him. Then Periander, perceiving that the malady of his son was hopeless and could not be overcome, despatched a ship to Corcyra, and so sent him away out of his sight, for he was ruler also of that island; and having sent him away, Periander proceeded to make war against his father-in-law Procles, esteeming him most to blame for the condition in which he was; and he took Epidauros and took also Procles himself and made him a prisoner.         52. [1] telos de o Periandros kerygma epoiesato, os an e oikioisi ypodexetai min e prosdialexthei, iren zemien touton tui Apolluni ofeilein, osen de eipas. [2] pros un de touto to kerygma oyte tis oi dialegesthai oyte oikioisi dekesthai ethele. pros de oyde aytos ekeinos edikaioy peirasthai apeiremenoy, alla diakartereun en teisi stoeisi ekalindeeto. [3] tetartei de emerei idun min o Periandros aloysieisi te kai asitieisi sympeptukota oikteire. ypeis de teis orgeis eie asson kai elege <<u pai, kotera toutun airetutera esti, tauta to nun exun presseis, e ten tyrannida kai ta agatha ta nun egu exu, tauta eonta tui patri epitedeon paralambanein, [4] os eun emos te pais kai Korinthoy teis eydaimonos basileus aleten bion eiley, antistateun te kai orgei xreumenos es ton se ekista exrein. ei gar tis symfore en aytoisi gegone, ex Es ypopsien es eme exeis, emoi te ayte gegone kai egu ayteis to pleun metoxos eimi, osui aytos sfea exergasamen. [5] su de mathun osui fthoneesthai kresson esti e oikteiresthai, ama te okoion ti es tous tokeas kai es tous kressonas tethymusthai, apithi es ta oikia.>> [6] Periandros men toutoisi ayton katelambane. o de allo men oyden ameibetai ton patera, efe de min iren zemien ofeilein tui theui euytui es logoys apikomenon. mathun de o Periandros us aporon ti to kakon eie tou paidos kai aniketon, ex ofthalmun min apopempetai steilas ploion es Kerkyran. epekratee gar kai tautes. [7] aposteilas de touton o Periandros estrateueto epi ton pentheron Proklea us tun pareontun oi pregmatun eonta aitiutaton, kai eile men ten Epidayron, eile de ayton Proklea kai ezugrese.    
      53. When however, as time went on, Periander had passed his prime and perceived within himself that he was no longer able to overlook and manage the government of the State, he sent to Corcyra and summoned Lycophron to come back and take the supreme power; for in the elder of his sons he did not see the required capacity, but perceived clearly that he was of wits too dull. Lycophron however did not deign even to give an answer to the bearer of his message. Then Periander, clinging still in affection to the youth, sent to him next his own daughter, the sister of Lycophron, supposing that he would yield to her persuasion more than to that of others; and she arrived there and spoke to him thus: "Boy, dost thou desire that both the despotism should fall to others, and also the substance of thy father, carried off as plunder, rather than that thou shouldest return back and possess them? Come back to thy home: cease to torment thyself. Pride is a mischievous possession. Heal not evil with evil. Many prefer that which is reasonable to that which is strictly just; and many ere now in seeking the things of their mother have lost the things of their father. Despotism is an insecure thing, and many desire it: moreover he is now an old man and past his prime. Give not thy good things unto others." She thus said to him the most persuasive things, having been before instructed by her father: but he in answer said, that he would never come to Corinth so long as he heard that his father was yet alive. When she had reported this, Periander the third time sent an envoy, and said that he desired himself to come to Corcyra, exhorting Lycophron at the same time to come back to Corinth and to be his successor on the throne. The son having agreed to return on these terms, Periander was preparing to sail to Corcyra and his son to Corinth; but the Corcyreans, having learnt all that had taken place, put the young man to death, in order that Periander might not come to their land. For this cause it was that Periander took vengeance on those of Corcyra.         53. [1] epei de tou xronoy probainontos o te Periandros parebekee kai syneginusketo euytui oyketi einai dynatos ta pregmata eporan te kai diepein, pempsas es ten Kerkyran apekalee ton Lykofrona epi ten tyrannida. en gar de tui presbyterui tun paidun oykun enura, alla oi katefaineto einai nuthesteros. [2] o de Lykofrun oyde anakrisios exiuse ton feronta ten aggelien. Periandros de periexomenos tou neenieu deutera apesteile ep' ayton ten adelfeen, euytou de thygatera, dokeun min malista tautei an peithesthai. [3] apikomenes de tautes kai legouses, <<u pai, bouleai ten te tyrannida es alloys pesein kai ton oikon tou patros diaforethenta mallon e aytos sfea apelthun exein; apithi es ta oikia, pausai seuyton zemiun. [4] filotimie kteima skaion. me tui kakui to kakon iu. polloi tun dikaiun ta epieikestera protitheisi, polloi de ede ta metruia dizemenoi ta patruia apebalon. tyrannis xreima sfaleron, polloi de ayteis erastai eisi, o de gerun te ede kai parebekus. me duis ta seuytou agatha alloisi.>> [5] e men de ta epagugotata didaxtheisa ypo tou patros elege pros ayton. o de ypokrinamenos efe oydama exein es Korinthon, est' an pynthanetai perieonta ton patera. [6] apaggeilases de tautes tauta, to triton Periandros keryka pempei boylomenos aytos men es Kerkyran ekein, ekeinon de ekeleye es Korinthon apikomenon diadoxon ginesthai teis tyrannidos. [7] katainesantos de epi toutoisi tou paidos, o men Periandros estelleto es ten Kerkyran, o de pais oi es ten Korinthon. mathontes de oi Kerkyraioi toutun ekasta, ina me sfi Periandros es ten xuren apiketai, kteinoysi ton neeniskon. anti toutun men Periandros Kerkyraioys etimureeto.    
      54. The Lacedemonians then had come with a great armament and were besieging Samos; and having made an attack upon the wall, they occupied the tower which stands by the sea in the suburb of the city, but afterwards when Polycrates came up to the rescue with a large body they were driven away from it. Meanwhile by the upper tower which is upon the ridge of the mountain there had come out to the fight the foreign mercenaries and many of the Samians themselves, and these stood their ground against the Lacedemonians for a short while and then began to fly backwards; and the Lacedemonians followed and were slaying them.         54. [1] Lakedaimonioi de stolui megalui us apikonto, epoliorkeon Samon. prosbalontes de pros to teixos tou men pros thalassei esteutos purgoy kata to proasteion teis polios epebesan, meta de aytou boethesantos Polykrateos xeiri pollei apelasthesan. [2] kata de ton epanu purgon ton epi teis rhaxios tou oreos epeonta epexeilthon oi te epikoyroi kai aytun Samiun syxnoi, dexamenoi de tous Lakedaimonioys ep' oligon xronon efeygon opisu, oi de epispomenoi ekteinon.    
      55. Now if the Lacedemonians there present had all been equal on that day to Archias and Lycopas, Samos would have been captured; for Archias and Lycopas alone rushed within the wall together with the flying Samians, and being shut off from retreat were slain within the city of the Samians. I myself moreover had converse in Pitane (for to that deme he belonged) with the third in descent from this Archias, another Archias the son of Samios the son of Archias, who honoured the Samians of all strangers most; and not only so, but he said that his own father had been called Samios because his father Archias had died by a glorious death in Samos; and he said that he honoured Samians because his grandfather had been granted a public funeral by the Samians.         55. [1] ei men nyn oi pareontes Lakedaimoniun omoioi egenonto tauten ten emeren Arxiei te kai Lykupei, airethe an Samos. Arxies gar kai Lykupes mounoi synespesontes feugoysi es to teixos toisi Samioisi kai apokleisthentes teis opisu odou apethanon en tei poli tei Samiun. [2] tritui de ap' Arxieu toutoy gegonoti allui Arxiei tui Samioy tou Arxieu aytos en Pitanei synegenomen (demoy gar toutoy En), os xeinun pantun malista etima te Samioys kai oi tui patri efe Samion toynoma tetheinai, oti oi o pater Arxies en Samui aristeusas eteleutese. timan de Samioys efe, dioti tafeinai oi ton pappon demosiei ypo Samiun.    
      56. The Lacedemonians then, when they had been besieging Samos for forty days and their affairs made no progress, set forth to return to Peloponnesus. But according to the less credible account which has been put abroad of these matters Polycrates struck in lead a quantity of a certain native coin, and having gilded the coins over, gave them to the Lacedemonians, and they received them and upon that set forth to depart. This was the first expedition which the Lacedemonians (being Dorians) made into Asia.         56. [1] Lakedaimonioi de, us sfi tesserakonta egegonesan emerai poliorkeoysi Samon es to prosu te oyden proekopteto tun pregmatun, apallassonto es Peloponneson. [2] us de o mataioteros logos ormetai, legetai Polykratea epixurion nomisma kopsanta pollon molubdoy kataxrysusanta dounai sfi, tous de dexamenoys oytu de apallassesthai. tauten pruten strateien es ten Asien Lakedaimonioi Duriees epoiesanto.    
      57. Those of the Samians who had made the expedition against Polycrates themselves also sailed away, when the Lacedemonians were about to desert them, and came to Siphnos: for they were in want of money, and the people of Siphnos were then at their greatest height of prosperity and possessed wealth more than all the other islanders, since they had in their island mines of gold and silver, so that there is a treasury dedicated at Delphi with the tithe of the money which came in from these mines, and furnished in a manner equal to the wealthiest of these treasuries: and the people used to divide among themselves the money which came in from the mines every year. So when they were establishing the treasury, they consulted the Oracle as to whether their present prosperity was capable of remaining with them for a long time, and the Pythian prophetess gave them this reply: 
"But when with white shall be shining the hall of the city in Siphnos, 
 And when the market is white of brow, one wary is needed 
 Then, to beware of an army of wood and a red-coloured herald." Now just at that time the market-place and city hall of the Siphnians had been decorated with Parian marble.         57. [1] oi d' epi ton Polykratea strateysamenoi Samiun, epei oi Lakedaimonioi aytous apolipein emellon, kai aytoi apepleon es Sifnon, [2] xrematun gar edeonto, ta de tun Sifniun pregmata ekmaze touton ton xronon, kai nesiuteun malista eplouteon, ate eontun aytoisi en tei nesui xryseun kai argyreun metallun, oytu uste apo teis dekates tun ginomenun aytothen xrematun thesayros en Delfoisi anakeitai omoia toisi ploysiutatoisi. aytoi de ta ginomena tui eniaytui ekastui xremata dienemonto. [3] ote un epoieunto ton thesayron, exreunto tui xresteriui ei aytoisi ta pareonta agatha oia te esti pollon xronon paramenein. e de Pythie exrese sfi tade.     [4] <<all' otan en Sifnui prytaneia leyka genetai
      leukofrus t' agore, tote de dei fradmonos andros
      frassasthai xulinon te loxon keryka t' erythron.>>toisi de Sifnioisi En tote e agore kai to prytaneion Pariui lithui eskemena.    
      58. This oracle they were not able to understand either then at first or when the Samians had arrived: for as soon as the Samians were putting in to Siphnos they sent one of their ships to bear envoys to the city: now in old times all ships were painted with red, and this was that which the Pythian prophetess was declaring beforehand to the Siphnians, bidding them guard against the "army of wood" and the "red-coloured herald." The messengers accordingly came and asked the Siphnians to lend them ten talents; and as they refused to lend to them, the Samians began to lay waste their lands: so when they were informed of it, forthwith the Siphnians came to the rescue, and having engaged battle with them were defeated, and many of them were cut off by the Samians and shut out of the city; and the Samians after this imposed upon them a payment of a hundred talents.         58. [1] touton ton xresmon oyk oioi te Esan gnunai oyte tote eythus oyte tun Samiun apigmenun. epeite gar taxista pros ten Sifnon prosisxon oi Samioi, epempon tun neun mian presbeas agoysan es ten polin. [2] to de palaion apasai ai nees Esan miltelifees, kai En touto to e Pythie proegoreye toisi Sifnioisi, fylaxasthai ton xulinon loxon keleuoysa kai keryka erythron. [3] apikomenoi un oi aggeloi edeonto tun Sifniun deka talanta sfi xreisai. oy faskontun de xresein tun Sifniun aytoisi, oi Samioi tous xuroys aytun eportheon. [4] pythomenoi de eythus Ekon oi Sifnioi boetheontes kai symbalontes aytoisi essuthesan, kai aytun polloi apekleisthesan tou asteos ypo tun Samiun, kai aytous meta tauta ekaton talanta eprexan.    
      59. Then from the men of Hermion they received by payment of money the island of Hydrea, which is near the coast of Peloponnese, and they gave it in charge to the Troizenians, but they themselves settled at Kydonia which is in Crete, not sailing thither for that purpose but in order to drive the Zakynthians out of the island. Here they remained and were prosperous for five years, so much so that they were the builders of the temples which are now existing in Kydonia, and also of the house of Dictyna. In the sixth year however the Eginetans together with the Cretans conquered them in a sea-fight and brought them to slavery; and they cut off the prows of their ships, which were shaped like boars, and dedicated them in the temple of Athene in Egina. This the Eginetans did because they had a grudge against the Samians; for the Samians had first made expedition against Egina, when Amphicrates was king in Samos, and had done much hurt to the Eginetans and suffered much hurt also from them. Such was the cause of this event:         59. [1] para de Ermioneun neison anti xrematun parelabon Ydreen ten epi Peloponnesui kai ayten Troizenioisi parakatethento. aytoi de Kydunien ten en Kretei ektisan, oyk epi touto pleontes alla Zakynthioys exeluntes ek teis nesoy. [2] emeinan d' en tautei kai eydaimonesan ep' etea pente, uste ta ira ta en Kyduniei eonta nun oytoi eisi oi poiesantes [kai ton teis Diktunes neon]. [3] ektui de etei Aigineitai aytous naymaxiei nikesantes endrapodisanto meta Kretun, kai tun neun kaprioys exoyseun tas pruiras ekruteriasan kai anethesan es to iron teis Athenaies en Aiginei. [4] tauta de epoiesan egkoton exontes Samioisi Aigineitai. proteroi gar Samioi ep' Amfikrateos basileuontos en Samui strateysamenoi ep' Aiginan megala kaka epoiesan Aiginetas kai epathon yp' ekeinun. e men aitie ayte.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [60]

     60. and about the Samians I have spoken at greater length, because they have three works which are greater than any others that have been made by Hellenes: first a passage beginning from below and open at both ends, dug through a mountain not less than a hundred and fifty fathoms in height; the length of the passage is seven furlongs and the height and breadth each eight feet, and throughout the whole of it another passage has been dug twenty cubits in depth and three feet in breadth, through which the water is conducted and comes by the pipes to the city, brought from an abundant spring: and the designer of this work was a Megarian, Eupalinos the son of Naustrophos. This is one of the three; and the second is a mole in the sea about the harbour, going down to a depth of as much as twenty fathoms; and the length of the mole is more than two furlongs. The third work which they have executed is a temple larger than all the other temples of which we know. Of this the first designer was Rhoicos the son of Philes, a native of Samos. For this reason I have spoken at greater length of the Samians.         60. [1] emekyna de peri Samiun mallon, oti sfi tria esti megista apantun Ellenun exergasmena, oreos te ypselou es pentekonta kai ekaton orgyias, toutoy orygma katuthen arxamenon, amfistomon. [2] to men meikos tou orugmatos epta stadioi eisi, to de ypsos kai eyros oktu ekateron podes. dia pantos de aytou allo orygma eikosipexy bathos oruryktai, tripoyn de to eyros, di' oy to ydur oxeteyomenon dia tun sulenun paraginetai es ten polin agomenon apo megales pegeis. [3] arxitektun de tou orugmatos toutoy egeneto Megareus Eypalinos Naystrofoy. touto men de en tun triun esti, deuteron de peri limena xuma en thalassei, bathos kai eikosi orgyieun. meikos de tou xumatos mezon duo stadiun. [4] triton de sfi exergastai neos megistos pantun neun tun emeis idmen. tou arxitektun prutos egeneto RHoikos Fileu epixurios. toutun eineken mallon ti peri Samiun emekyna.    
      61. Now while Cambyses the son of Cyrus was spending a long time in Egypt and had gone out of his right mind, there rose up against him two brothers, Magians, of whom the one had been left behind by Cambyses as caretaker of his household. This man, I say, rose up against him perceiving that the occurrence of the death of Smerdis was being kept secret, and that there were but few of the Persians who were aware of it, while the greater number believed without doubt that he was still alive. Therefore he endeavoured to obtain the kingdom, and he formed his plan as follows:--he had a brother (that one who, as I said, rose up with him against Cambyses), and this man in form very closely resembled Smerdis the son of Cyrus, whom Cambyses had slain, being his own brother. He was like Smerdis, I say, in form, and not only so but he had the same name, Smerdis. Having persuaded this man that he would manage everything for him, the Magian Patizeithes brought him and seated him upon the royal throne: and having so done he sent heralds about to the various provinces, and among others one to the army in Egypt, to proclaim to them that they must obey Smerdis the son of Cyrus for the future instead of Cambyses.         61. [1] Kambusei de tui Kuroy xronizonti peri Aigypton kai parafronesanti epanisteatai andres Magoi duo adelfeoi, tun ton eteron kataleloipee tun oikiun meledunon o Kambuses. oytos de un oi epaneste mathun te ton Smerdios thanaton us kruptoito genomenos, kai us oligoi eiesan oi epistamenoi ayton Perseun, oi de polloi perieonta min eideiesan. [2] pros tauta boyleusas tade epexeirese toisi basileioisi. En oi adelfeos, ton eipa oi synepanasteinai, oikus malista to eidos Smerdi tui Kuroy, ton o Kambuses eonta euytou adelfeon apekteine. En te de omoios eidos tui Smerdi kai de kai oynoma tuyto eixe Smerdin. [3] touton ton andra anagnusas o Magos Patizeithes us oi aytos panta diaprexei, eise agun es ton basileion thronon. poiesas de touto kerykas tei te allei diepempe kai de kai es Aigypton proereonta tui stratui us Smerdios tou Kuroy akoystea eie tou loipou all' oy Kambuseu.    
      62. So then the other heralds made this proclamation, and also the one who was appointed to go to Egypt, finding Cambyses and his army at Agbatana in Syria, stood in the midst and began to proclaim that which had been commanded to him by the Magian. Hearing this from the herald, and supposing that the herald was speaking the truth and that he had himself been betrayed by Prexaspes, that is to say, that when Prexaspes was sent to kill Smerdis he had not done so, Cambyses looked upon Prexaspes and said: "Prexaspes, was it thus that thou didst perform for me the thing which I gave over to thee to do?" and he said: "Master, the saying is not true that Smerdis thy brother has risen up against thee, nor that thou wilt have any contention arising from him, either great or small: for I myself, having done that which thou didst command me to do, buried him with my own hands. If therefore the dead have risen again to life, then thou mayest expect that Astyages also the Mede will rise up against thee; but if it is as it was beforetime, there is no fear now that any trouble shall spring up for you, at least from him. Now therefore I think it well that some should pursue after the herald and examine him, asking from whom he has come to proclaim to us that we are to obey Smerdis as king."         62. [1] oi te de un alloi kerykes proegoreyon tauta kai de kai o ep' Aigypton taxtheis, eyriske gar Kambusea kai ton straton eonta teis Syries en Agbatanoisi, proegoreye stas es meson ta entetalmena ek tou Magoy. [2] Kambuses de akousas tauta ek tou kerykos kai elpisas min legein alethea aytos te prodedosthai ek Prexaspeos (pemfthenta gar ayton us apokteneonta Smerdin oy poieisai tauta), blepsas es ton Prexaspea eipe <<Prexaspes, oytu moi dieprexao to toi prosetheka preigma;>> [3] o de eipe <<u despota, oyk esti tauta alethea, okus kote soi Smerdis adelfeos sos epanesteke, oyde okus ti ex ekeinoy tou andros neikos toi estai e mega e smikron. egu gar aytos, poiesas ta su me ekeleyes, ethapsa min xersi teisi emeuytou. [4] ei men nyn oi tethneutes anestasi, prosdekeo toi kai Astyagea ton Meidon epanastesesthai. ei d' esti usper pro tou, oy me ti toi ek ge ekeinoy neuteron anablastei. nun un moi dokeei metadiuxantas ton keryka exetazein eiruteuntas par' otey ekun proagoreuei emin Smerdios basileos akouein.>>    
      63. When Prexaspes had thus spoken, Cambyses was pleased with the advice, and accordingly the herald was pursued forthwith and returned. Then when he had come back, Prexaspes asked him as follows: "Man, thou sayest that thou art come as a messenger from Smerdis the son of Cyrus: now therefore speak the truth and go away in peace. I ask thee whether Smerdis himself appeared before thine eyes and charged thee to say this, or some one of those who serve him." He said: "Smerdis the son of Cyrus I have never yet seen, since the day that king Cambyses marched to Egypt: but the Magian whom Cambyses appointed to be guardian of his household, he, I say, gave me this charge, saying that Smerdis the son of Cyrus was he who laid the command upon me to speak these things to you." Thus he spoke to them, adding no falsehoods to the first, and Cambyses said: "Prexaspes, thou hast done that which was commanded thee like an honest man, and hast escaped censure; but who of the Persians may this be who has risen up against me and usurped the name of Smerdis?" He said: "I seem to myself, O king, to have understanding of this which has come to pass: the Magians have risen against thee, Patizeithes namely, whom thou didst leave as caretaker of thy household, and his brother Smerdis."         63. [1] tauta eipantos Prexaspeos, erese gar Kambusei, aytika metadiuktos genomenos o keiryx Eke. apigmenon de min eireto o Prexaspes tade. <<unthrupe, fes gar ekein para Smerdios tou Kuroy aggelos. nun un eipas ten aletheien apithi xairun, kotera aytos toi Smerdis fainomenos es opsin enetelleto tauta e tun tis ekeinoy ypereteun.>> [2] ode eipe <<egu Smerdin men ton Kuroy, ex otey basileus Kambuses elase es Aigypton, oyku opupa. o de moi Magos ton Kambuses epitropon tun oikiun apedexe, oytos tauta eneteilato, fas Smerdin ton Kuroy einai ton tauta epithemenon eipai pros ymeas.>> [3] o men de sfi elege oyden epikatepseysmenos, Kambuses de eipe <<Prexaspes, su men oia aner agathos poiesas to keleyomenon aitien ekpefeygas. emoi de tis an eie Perseun o epanesteus epibateuun tou Smerdios oynomatos;>> o de eipe [4] <<egu moi dokeu synienai to gegonos touto, u basileu. oi Magoi eisi toi oi epanesteutes, ton te elipes meledunon tun oikiun, Patizeithes, kai o toutoy adelfeos Smerdis.>>    
      64. Then Cambyses, when he heard the name of Smerdis, perceived at once the true meaning of this report and of the dream, for he thought in his sleep that some one had reported to him that Smerdis was sitting upon the royal throne and had touched the heaven with his head: and perceiving that he had slain his brother without need, he began to lament for Smerdis; and having lamented for him and sorrowed greatly for the whole mishap, he was leaping upon his horse, meaning as quickly as possible to march his army to Susa against the Magian; and as he leapt upon his horse, the cap of his sword-sheath fell off, and the sword being left bare struck his thigh. Having been wounded then in the same part where he had formerly struck Apis the god of the Egyptians, and believing that he had been struck with a mortal blow, Cambyses asked what was the name of that town, and they said "Agbatana." Now even before this he had been informed by the Oracle at the city of Buto that in Agbatana he should bring his life to an end: and he supposed that he should die of old age in Agbatana in Media, where was his chief seat of power; but the oracle, it appeared, meant in Agbatana of Syria. So when by questioning now he learnt the name of the town, being struck with fear both by the calamity caused by the Magian and at the same time by the wound, he came to his right mind, and understanding the meaning of the oracle he said: "Here it is fated that Cambyses the son of Cyrus shall end his life."         64. [1] enthauta akousanta Kambusea to Smerdios oynoma etypse e aletheie tun te logun kai tou enypnioy. os edokee en tui ypnui apaggeilai tina oi us Smerdis izomenos es ton basileion thronon psauseie tei kefalei tou oyranou. [2] mathun de us maten apolulekus eie ton adelfeon, apeklaie Smerdin. apoklausas de kai periemektesas tei apasei symforei anathruskei epi ton ippon, en noui exun ten taxisten es Sousa strateuesthai epi ton Magon. [3] kai oi anathruskonti epi ton ippon tou koleou tou xifeos o mukes apopiptei, gymnuthen de to xifos paiei ton meron. trumatistheis de kata touto tei aytos proteron ton tun Aigyptiun theon Apin eplexe, us oi kairiei edoxe tetufthai, eireto o Kambuses o ti tei poli oynoma eie. oi de eipan oti Agbatana. [4] tui de eti proteron ekexresto ek Boytous polios en Agbatanoisi teleytesein ton bion. o men de en toisi Medikoisi Agbatanoisi edokee teleytesein geraios, en toisi oi En ta panta pregmata. to de xresterion en toisi en Syriei Agbatanoisi elege ara. [5] kai de us tote epeiromenos eputheto teis polios to oynoma, ypo teis symforeis teis te ek tou Magoy ekpeplegmenos kai tou trumatos esufronese, syllabun de to theopropion eipe <<enthauta Kambusea ton Kuroy esti peprumenon teleytan.>>    
      65. So much only he said at that time; but about twenty days afterwards he sent for the most honourable of the Persians who were with him, and said to them as follows: "Persians, it has become necessary for me to make known to you the thing which I was wont to keep concealed beyond all other things. Being in Egypt I saw a vision in my sleep, which I would I had never seen, and it seemed to me that a messenger came from home and reported to me that Smerdis was sitting upon the royal throne and had touched the heaven with his head. Fearing then lest I should be deprived of my power by my brother, I acted quickly rather than wisely; for it seems that it is not possible for man to avert that which is destined to come to pass. I therefore, fool that I was, sent away Prexaspes to Susa to kill Smerdis; and when this great evil had been done, I lived in security, never considering the danger that some other man might at some time rise up against me, now that Smerdis had been removed: and altogether missing the mark of that which was about to happen, I have both made myself the murderer of my brother, when there was no need, and I have been deprived none the less of the kingdom; for it was in fact Smerdis the Magian of whom the divine power declared to me beforehand in the vision that he should rise up against me. So then, as I say, this deed has been done by me, and ye must imagine that ye no longer have Smerdis the son of Cyrus alive: but it is in truth the Magians who are masters of your kingdom, he whom I left as guardian of my household and his brother Smerdis. The man then who ought above all others to have taken vengeance on my behalf for the dishonour which I have suffered from the Magians, has ended his life by an unholy death received from the hands of those who were his nearest of kin; and since he is no more, it becomes most needful for me, as the thing next best of those which remain, to charge you, O Persians, with that which dying I desire should be done for me. This then I lay upon you, calling upon the gods of the royal house to witness it,--upon you and most of all upon those of the Achaemenidai who are present here,--that ye do not permit the return of the chief power to the Medes, but that if they have acquired it by craft, by craft they be deprived of it by you, or if they have conquered it by any kind of force, by force and by a strong hand ye recover it. And if ye do this, may the earth bring forth her produce and may your wives and your cattle be fruitful, while ye remain free for ever; but if ye do not recover the power nor attempt to recover it, I pray that curses the contrary of these blessings may come upon you, and moreover that each man of the Persians may have an end to his life like that which has come upon me." Then as soon as he had finished speaking these things, Cambyses began to bewail and make lamentation for all his fortunes.         65. [1] tote men tosauta. emereisi de ysteron us eikosi metapempsamenos Perseun tun pareontun tous logimutatoys elege sfi tade. <<u Persai, katalelabeke me, to pantun malista ekrypton pregmatun, touto es ymeas ekfeinai. [2] egu gar eun en Aiguptui eidon opsin en tui ypnui, ten medama ofelon idein. edokeon de moi aggelon elthonta ex oikoy aggellein us Smerdis izomenos es ton basileion thronon psauseie tei kefalei tou oyranou. [3] deisas de me apairetheu ten arxen pros tou adelfeou, epoiesa taxutera e sofutera. en tei gar anthrupeiei fusi oyk enein ara to mellon ginesthai apotrepein. egu de o mataios Prexaspea apopempu es Sousa apokteneonta Smerdin. exergasthentos de kakou tosoutoy adeus diaitumen, oydama epilexamenos me kote tis moi Smerdios yparairemenoy allos epanastaie anthrupun. [4] pantos de tou mellontos esesthai amartun adelfeoktonos te oyden deon gegona kai teis basileies oyden Esson esteremai. Smerdis gar de En o Magos ton moi o daimun proefaine en tei opsi epanastesesthai. [5] to men de ergon exergastai moi, kai Smerdin ton Kuroy meketi ymin eonta logizesthe. oi de ymin Magoi krateoysi tun basileiun, ton te elipon epitropon tun oikiun kai o ekeinoy adelfeos Smerdis. ton men nyn malista xrein emeu aisxra pros tun Magun peponthotos timureein emoi, oytos men anosiui morui teteleuteke ypo tun euytou oikeiotatun. [6] toutoy de meketi eontos, deutera tun loipun ymin u Persai ginetai moi anagkaiotaton entellesthai ta thelu moi genesthai teleytun ton bion. kai de ymin tade episkeptu theous tous basileioys epikaleun kai pasi ymin kai malista Axaimenideun toisi pareousi, me periidein ten egemonien aytis es Medoys perielthousan, all' eite dolui exoysi ayten ktesamenoi, dolui apairetheinai ypo ymeun, eite kai sthenei teui katergasamenoi, sthenei kata to karteron anasusasthai. [7] kai tauta men poieusi ymin gei te karpon ekferoi kai gynaikes te kai poimnai tiktoien, eousi es ton apanta xronon eleytheroisi. me de anasusamenoisi ten arxen med' epixeiresasi anasuzein ta enantia toutoisi arumai ymin genesthai, kai pros eti toutoisi to telos Perseun ekastui epigenesthai oion emoi epigegone.>> ama te eipas tauta o Kambuses apeklaie pasan ten euytou preixin.    
      66. And the Persians, when they saw that the king had begun to bewail himself, both rent the garments which they wore and made lamentation without stint. After this, when the bone had become diseased and the thigh had mortified, Cambyses the son of Cyrus was carried off by the wound, having reigned in all seven years and five months, and being absolutely childless both of male and female offspring. The Persians meanwhile who were present there were very little disposed to believe that the power was in the hands of the Magians: on the contrary, they were surely convinced that Cambyses had said that which he said about the death of Smerdis to deceive them, in order that all the Persians might be moved to war against him. These then were surely convinced that Smerdis the son of Cyrus was established to be king; for Prexaspes also very strongly denied that he had slain Smerdis, since it was not safe, now that Cambyses was dead, for him to say that he had destroyed with his own hand the son of Cyrus.         66. [1] Persai de us ton basilea eidon anaklausanta pantes ta te estheitos exomena eixon, tauta katereikonto kai oimugei afthonui diexreunto. [2] meta de tauta us esfakelise te to osteon kai o meros taxista esape, apeneike Kambusea ton Kuroy, basileusanta men ta panta epta etea kai pente meinas, apaida de to parapan eonta ersenos kai theleos gonoy. [3] Perseun de toisi pareousi apistie polle ypekexyto tous Magoys exein ta pregmata, all' episteato epi diabolei eipein Kambusea ta eipe peri tou Smerdios thanatoy, ina oi ekpolemuthei pan to Persikon.    
      67. Thus when Cambyses had brought his life to an end, the Magian became king without disturbance, usurping the place of his namesake Smerdis the son of Cyrus; and he reigned during the seven months which were wanting yet to Cambyses for the completion of the eight years: and during them he performed acts of great benefit to all his subjects, so that after his death all those in Asia except the Persians themselves mourned for his loss: for the Magian sent messengers abroad to every nation over which he ruled, and proclaimed freedom from military service and from tribute for three years.         67. [1] oytoi men nyn episteato Smerdin ton Kuroy basilea enesteuta. deinus gar kai o Prexaspes exarnos En me men apokteinai Smerdin. oy gar En oi asfales Kambuseu teteleytekotos fanai ton Kuroy yion apolulekenai aytoxeiriei. [2] o de de Magos teleytesantos Kambuseu adeus ebasileyse, epibateuun tou omunumoy Smerdios tou Kuroy, meinas epta tous epiloipoys Kambusei es ta oktu etea teis plerusios. [3] en toisi apedexato es tous ypekooys pantas eyergesias megalas, uste apothanontos aytou pothon exein pantas tous en tei Asiei parex aytun Perseun. diapempsas gar o Magos es pan ethnos tun Erxe proeipe ateleien einai strateies kai foroy ep' etea tria.    
      68. This proclamation, I say, he made at once when he established himself upon the throne: but in the eighth month it was discovered who he was in the following manner:--There was one Otanes the son of Pharnaspes, in birth and in wealth not inferior to any of the Persians. This Otanes was the first who had had suspicion of the Magian, that he was not Smerdis the son of Cyrus but the person that he really was, drawing his inference from these facts, namely that he never went abroad out of the fortress, and that he did not summon into his presence any of the honourable men among the Persians: and having formed a suspicion of him, he proceeded to do as follows:--Cambyses had taken to wife his daughter, whose name was Phaidyme; and this same daughter the Magian at that time was keeping as his wife and living with her as with all the rest also of the wives of Cambyses. Otanes therefore sent a message to this daughter and asked her who the man was by whose side she slept, whether Smerdis the son of Cyrus or some other. She sent back word to him saying that she did not know, for she had never seen Smerdis the son of Cyrus, nor did she know otherwise who he was who lived with her. Otanes then sent a second time and said: "If thou dost not thyself know Smerdis the son of Cyrus, then do thou ask of Atossa who this man is, with whom both she and thou live as wives; for assuredly it must be that she knows her own brother."         68. [1] proeipe men de tauta aytika enistamenos es ten arxen, ogdoui de meni egeneto katadelos tropui toiuide. Otanes En Farnaspeu men pais, genei de kai xremasi omoios tui prutui Perseun. [2] oytos o Otanes prutos ypupteyse ton Magon us oyk eie o Kuroy Smerdis all' os per En, teide symbalomenos, oti te oyk exefoita ek teis akropolios kai oti oyk ekalee es opsin euytui oydena tun logimun Perseun. [3] ypopteusas de min epoiee tade. esxe aytou Kambuses thygatera, tei oynoma En Faidume. ten ayten de tauten eixe tote o Magos kai tautei te synoikee kai teisi alleisi paseisi teisi tou Kambuseu gynaixi. pempun de un o Otanes para tauten ten thygatera epynthaneto par' oteui anthrupun koimuito, eite meta Smerdios tou Kuroy eite meta alloy tey. [4] e de oi antepempe famene oy ginuskein. oyte gar ton Kuroy Smerdin idesthai oydama oyte ostis eie o synoikeun aytei eidenai. epempe deutera o Otanes legun <<ei me ayte Smerdin ton Kuroy ginuskeis, su de para Atosses puthey oteui toutui synoikeei ayte te ekeine kai su. pantus gar de koy ton ge euyteis adelfeon ginuskei.>> antipempei pros tauta e thygater [5] <<oyte Atossei dunamai es logoys elthein oyte allen oydemian idesthai tun sygkatemeneun gynaikun. epeite gar taxista oytos unthrupos, ostis kote esti, parelabe ten basileien, diespeire emeas allen allei taxas.>>    
      69. To this the daughter sent back word: "I am not able either to come to speech with Atossa or to see any other of the women who live here with me; for as soon as this man, whosoever he may be, succeeded to the kingdom, he separated us and placed us in different apartments by ourselves." When Otanes heard this, the matter became more and more clear to him, and he sent another message in to her, which said: "Daughter, it is right for thee, nobly born as thou art, to undertake any risk which thy father bids thee take upon thee: for if in truth this is not Smerdis the son of Cyrus but the man whom I suppose, he ought not to escape with impunity either for taking thee to his bed or for holding the dominion of Persians, but he must pay the penalty. Now therefore do as I say. When he sleeps by thee and thou perceivest that he is sound asleep, feel his ears; and if it prove that he has ears, then believe that thou art living with Smerdis the son of Cyrus, but if not, believe that it is with the Magian Smerdis." To this Phaidyme sent an answer saying that, if she should do so, she would run a great risk; for supposing that he should chance not to have his ears, and she were detected feeling for them, she was well assured that he would put her to death; but nevertheless she would do this. So she undertook to do this for her father: but as for this Magian Smerdis, he had had his ears cut off by Cyrus the son of Cambyses when he was king, for some grave offence. This Phaidyme then, the daughter of Otanes, proceeding to perform all that she had undertaken for her father, when her turn came to go to the Magian (for the wives of the Persians go in to them regularly each in her turn), came and lay down beside him: and when the Magian was in deep sleep, she felt his ears; and perceiving not with difficulty but easily that her husband had no ears, so soon as it became day she sent and informed her father of that which had taken place.         69. [1] akouonti de tauta tui Otanei mallon katefaineto to preigma. triten de aggelien espempei par' ayten legoysan tauta. [2] <<u thugater, dei se gegonyian ey kindynon analabesthai ton an o pater ypodunein keleuei. ei gar de me esti o Kuroy Smerdis alla ton katadokeu egu, oytoi min soi te sygkoimumenon kai to Perseun kratos exonta dei xaironta apallassein, alla dounai diken. [3] nun un poieson tade. epean soi syneudei kai matheis ayton katypnumenon, afason aytou ta uta. kai en men fainetai exun uta, nomize seuyten Smerdi tui Kuroy synoikeein, en de me exun, su de tui Magui Smerdi.>> [4] antipempei pros tauta e Faidume famene kindyneusein megalus, en poieei tauta. ei gar de me tygxanei ta uta exun, epilamptos de afassoysa estai, ey eidenai us aistusei min. omus mentoi poiesein tauta. [5] e men de ypedexato tauta tui patri katergasesthai. tou de Magoy toutoy tou Smerdios Kuros o Kambuseu arxun ta uta apetame ep' aitiei de tini oy smikrei. [6] e un de Faidume ayte, e tou Otaneu thygater, panta epiteleoysa ta ypedexato tui patri, epeite ayteis meros egineto teis apixios para ton Magon (en peritropei gar de ai gynaikes foiteoysi toisi Perseisi), elthousa par' ayton eyde, ypnumenoy de karterus tou Magoy efase ta uta. mathousa de oy xalepus all' eypeteus oyk exonta ton andra uta, us emere taxista egegonee, pempsasa esemene tui patri ta genomena.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [70]

     70. Then Otanes took to him Aspathines and Gobryas, who were leading men among the Persians and also his own most trusted friends, and related to them the whole matter: and they, as it then appeared, had suspicions also themselves that it was so; and when Otanes reported this to them, they readily accepted his proposals. Then it was resolved by them that each one should associate with himself that man of the Persians whom he trusted most; so Otanes brought in Intaphrenes, Gobryas brought in Megabyzos, and Aspathines brought in Hydarnes. When they had thus become six, Dareios the son of Hystaspes arrived at Susa, having come from the land of Persia, for of this his father was governor. Accordingly when he came, the six men of the Persians resolved to associate Dareios also with themselves.         70. [1] o de Otanes paralabun Aspathinen kai Gobruen, Perseun te prutoys eontas kai euytui epitedeotatoys es pistin, apegesato pan to preigma. oi de kai aytoi ara ypupteyon oytu touto exein, aneneikantos de tou Otaneu tous logoys edexanto, [2] kai edoxe sfi ekaston andra Perseun prosetairisasthai touton oteui pisteuei malista. Otanes men nyn esagetai Intafrenea, Gobrues de Megabyzon, Aspathines de Ydarnea. [3] gegonotun de toutun ex paraginetai es ta Sousa Dareios o Ystaspeos ek Perseun ekun. toutun gar de En oi o pater yparxos. epei un oytos apiketo, toisi ex tun Perseun edoxe kai Dareion prosetairisasthai.    
      71. These then having come together, being seven in number, gave pledges of faith to one another and deliberated together; and when it came to Dareios to declare his opinion, he spoke to them as follows: "I thought that I alone knew this, namely that it was the Magian who was reigning as king and that Smerdis the son of Cyrus had brought his life to an end; and for this very reason I am come with earnest purpose to contrive death for the Magian. Since however it has come to pass that ye also know and not I alone, I think it well to act at once and not to put the matter off, for that is not the better way." To this replied Otanes: "Son of Hystaspes, thou art the scion of a noble stock, and thou art showing thyself, as it seems, in no way inferior to thy father: do not however hasten this enterprise so much without consideration, but take it up more prudently; for we must first become more in numbers, and then undertake the matter." In answer to this Dareios said: "Men who are here present, if ye shall follow the way suggested by Otanes, know that ye will perish miserably; for some one will carry word to the Magian, getting gain thereby privately for himself. Your best way would have been to do this action upon your own risk alone; but since it seemed good to you to refer the matter to a greater number, and ye communicated it to me, either let us do the deed to-day, or be ye assured that if this present day shall pass by, none other shall prevent me as your accuser, but I will myself tell these things to the Magian."         71. [1] synelthontes de oytoi eontes epta edidosan sfisi pistis kai logoys. epeite de es Dareion apiketo gnumen apofainesthai, elege sfi tade. [2] <<egu tauta edokeon men aytos mounos epistasthai, oti te o Magos eie o basileuun kai Smerdis o Kuroy teteleuteke. kai aytou toutoy eineken eku spoydei us systesun epi tui Magui thanaton. epeite de syneneike uste kai ymeas eidenai kai me mounon eme, poieein aytika moi dokeei kai me yperballesthai. oy gar ameinon.>> [3] eipe pros tauta o Otanes <<u pai Ystaspeos, eis te patros agathou kai ekfainein eoikas seuyton eonta tou patros oyden essu. ten mentoi epixeiresin tauten me oytu syntaxyne aboulus, all' epi to sufronesteron ayten lambane. dei gar pleunas genomenoys oytu epixeireein.>> [4] legei pros tauta Dareios <<andres oi pareontes, tropui tui eiremenui ex Otaneu ei xresesthe, epistasthe oti apoleesthe kakista. exoisei gar tis pros ton Magon, idiei periballomenos euytui kerdea. [5] malista men nyn ufeilete ep' ymeun aytun ballomenoi poieein tauta. epeite de ymin anaferein es pleunas edokee kai emoi yperethesthe, e poieumen semeron e iste ymin oti en yperpesei e nun emere, us oyk allos fthas emeu kategoros estai, alla sfea aytos egu katereu pros ton Magon.>>    
      72. To this Otanes, when he saw Dareios in violent haste, replied: "Since thou dost compel us to hasten the matter and dost not permit us to delay, come expound to us thyself in what manner we shall pass into the palace and lay hands upon them: for that there are guards set in various parts, thou knowest probably thyself as well as we, if not from sight at least from hearsay; and in what manner shall we pass through these?" Dareios made reply with these words: "Otanes, there are many things in sooth which it is not possible to set forth in speech, but only in deed; and other things there are which in speech can be set forth, but from them comes no famous deed. Know ye however that the guards which are set are not difficult to pass: for in the first place, we being what we are, there is no one who will not let us go by, partly, as may be supposed, from having respect for us, and partly also perhaps from fear; and secondly I have myself a most specious pretext by means of which we may pass by; for I shall say that I am just now come from the Persian land and desire to declare to the king a certain message from my father: for where it is necessary that a lie be spoken, let it be spoken; seeing that we all aim at the same object, both they who lie and they who always speak the truth; those lie whenever they are likely to gain anything by persuading with their lies, and these tell the truth in order that they may draw to themselves gain by the truth, and that things may be entrusted to them more readily. Thus, while practising different ways, we aim all at the same thing. If however they were not likely to make any gain by it, the truth-teller would lie and the liar would speak the truth, with indifference. Whosoever then of the door-keepers shall let us pass by of his own free will, for him it shall be the better afterwards; but whosoever shall endeavour to oppose our passage, let him then and there be marked as our enemy, and after that let us push in and set about our work."         72. [1] legei pros tauta Otanes, epeide ura sperxomenon Dareion, <<epeite emeas syntaxunein anagkazeis kai yperballesthai oyk eais, ithi exegeo aytos oteui tropui parimen es ta basileia kai epixeiresomen aytoisi. fylakas gar de diesteusas oidas koy kai aytos, ei me idun, all' akousas. tas teui tropui peresomen;>> ameibetai Dareios toiside. [2] <<Otane, E polla esti ta logui men oyk oia te delusai, ergui de. alla d' esti ta logui men oia te, ergon de oyden ap' aytun lampron ginetai. ymeis de iste fylakas tas katesteusas eousas oyden xalepas parelthein. [3] touto men gar emeun eontun toiunde oydeis ostis oy paresei, ta men koy kataideomenos emeas, ta de koy kai deimainun. touto de exu aytos skeipsin eyprepestaten tei parimen, fas arti te ekein ek Perseun kai boulesthai ti epos para tou patros semeinai tui basilei. [4] entha gar ti dei pseudos legesthai, legesthu. tou gar aytou glixometha oi te pseydomenoi kai oi tei aletheiei diaxreumenoi. oi men ge pseudontai tote epean ti mellusi toisi pseudesi peisantes kerdesesthai, oi d' alethizontai ina tei aletheiei epispasuntai kerdos kai ti mallon sfi epitrapetai. oytu oy tayta askeontes tuytou periexometha. [5] ei de meden kerdesesthai melloien, omoius an o te alethizomenos pseydes eie kai o pseydomenos alethes. os an men nyn tun pyloyrun ekun pariei, aytui oi ameinon es xronon estai. os d' an antibainein peiratai, deiknusthu enthauta eun polemios, kai epeita usamenoi esu ergoy exumetha.>>    
      73. Then said Gobryas: "Friends, at what time will there be a fairer opportunity for us either to recover our rule, or, if we are not able to get it again, to die? seeing that we being Persians on the one hand lie under the rule of a Mede, a Magian, and that too a man whose ears have been cut off. Moreover all those of you who stood by the side of Cambyses when he was sick remember assuredly what he laid upon the Persians as he was bringing his life to an end, if they should not attempt to win back the power; and this we did not accept then, but supposed that Cambyses had spoken in order to deceive us. Now therefore I give my vote that we follow the opinion of Dareios, and that we do not depart from this assembly to go anywhither else but straight to attack the Magian." Thus spoke Gobryas, and they all approved of this proposal.         73. [1] legei Gobrues meta tauta <<andres filoi, emin kote kallion parexei anasusasthai ten arxen, e ei ge me oioi te esometha ayten analabein, apothanein; ote ge arxometha men eontes Persai ypo Medoy andros Magoy, kai toutoy uta oyk exontos. [2] osoi te ymeun Kambusei noseonti paregenonto, pantus koy memnesthe ta epeskepse Perseisi teleytun ton bion me peirumenoisi anaktasthai ten arxen. ta tote oyk enedekometha, all' epi diabolei edokeomen eipein Kambusea. [3] nun un tithemai pseifon peithesthai Dareiui kai me dialuesthai ek tou syllogoy toude all' e epi ton Magon itheus.>> tauta eipe Gobrues, kai pantes tautei aineon.    
      74. Now while these were thus taking counsel together, it was coming to pass by coincidence as follows:--The Magians taking counsel together had resolved to join Prexaspes with themselves as a friend, both because he had suffered grievous wrong from Cambyses, who had killed his son by shooting him, and because he alone knew for a certainty of the death of Smerdis the son of Cyrus, having killed him with his own hands, and finally because Prexaspes was in very great repute among the Persians. For these reasons they summoned him and endeavoured to win him to be their friend, engaging him by pledge and with oaths, that he would assuredly keep to himself and not reveal to any man the deception which had been practised by them upon the Persians, and promising to give him things innumerable in return. After Prexaspes had promised to do this, the Magians, having persuaded him so far, proposed to him a second thing, and said that they would call together all the Persians to come up to the wall of the palace, and bade him go up upon a tower and address them, saying that they were living under the rule of Smerdis the son of Cyrus and no other. This they so enjoined because they supposed that he had the greatest credit among the Persians, and because he had frequently declared the opinion that Smerdis the son of Cyrus was still alive, and had denied that he had slain him.         74. [1] en ui de oytoi tauta eboyleuonto, egineto kata syntyxien tade. toisi Magoisi edoxe boyleyomenoisi Prexaspea filon prosthesthai, oti te epeponthee pros Kambuseu anarsia, os oi ton paida toxeusas apolulekee, kai dioti mounos epistato ton Smerdios tou Kuroy thanaton aytoxeiriei min apolesas, pros d' eti eonta en ainei megistei ton Prexaspea en Perseisi. [2] toutun de min eineken kalesantes filon prosektunto pisti te labontes kai orkioisi, E men exein par' euytui med' exoisein medeni anthrupun ten apo sfeun apaten es Persas gegonyian, ypisxneumenoi ta panta oi myria dusein. [3] yposxomenoy de tou Prexaspeos poiesein tauta, us anepeisan min oi Magoi, deutera proseferon, aytoi men famenoi Persas pantas sygkaleein ypo to basileion teixos, keinon d' ekeleyon anabanta epi purgon agoreusai us ypo tou Kuroy Smerdios arxontai kai yp' oydenos alloy. [4] tauta de oytu enetellonto us pistotatoy deithen eontos aytou en Perseisi kai pollakis apodexamenoy gnumen us perieie o Kuroy Smerdis, kai exarnesamenoy ton fonon aytou.    
      75. When Prexaspes said that he was ready to do this also, the Magians having called together the Persians caused him to go up upon a tower and bade him address them. Then he chose to forget those things which they asked of him, and beginning with Achaimenes he traced the descent of Cyrus on the father's side, and then, when he came down to Cyrus, he related at last what great benefits he had conferred upon the Persians; and having gone through this recital he proceeded to declare the truth, saying that formerly he kept it secret, since it was not safe for him to tell of that which had been done, but at the present time he was compelled to make it known. He proceeded to say how he had himself slain Smerdis the son of Cyrus, being compelled by Cambyses, and that it was the Magians who were now ruling. Then he made imprecation of many evils on the Persians, if they did not win back again the power and take vengeance upon the Magians, and upon that he let himself fall down from the tower head foremost. Thus Prexaspes ended his life, having been throughout his time a man of repute.         75. [1] famenoy de kai tauta etoimoy einai poieein tou Prexaspeos, sygkalesantes Persas oi Magoi anebibasan ayton epi purgon kai agoreuein ekeleyon. o de tun men ekeinoi prosedeonto aytou, toutun men ekun epeletheto, arxamenos de ap' Axaimeneos egeneelogese ten patrien ten Kuroy, meta de us es touton katebe teleytun elege osa agatha Kuros Persas pepoiekoi, [2] diexelthun de tauta exefaine ten aletheien, famenos proteron men kruptein (oy gar oi einai asfales legein ta genomena), en de tui pareonti, anagkaien min katalambanein fainein. kai de elege ton men Kuroy Smerdin us aytos ypo Kambuseu anagkazomenos apokteineie, tous Magoys de basileuein. [3] Perseisi de polla eparesamenos ei me anaktesaiato opisu ten arxen kai tous Magoys tisaiato, apeike euyton epi kefalen feresthai apo tou purgoy katu. Prexaspes men nyn eun ton panta xronon aner dokimos oytu eteleutese.    
      76. Now the seven of the Persians, when they had resolved forthwith to lay hands upon the Magians and not to delay, made prayer to the gods and went, knowing nothing of that which had been done with regard to Prexaspes: and as they were going and were in the middle of their course, they heard that which had happened about Prexaspes. Upon that they retired out of the way and again considered with themselves, Otanes and his supporters strongly urging that they should delay and not set to the work when things were thus disturbed, while Dareios and those of his party urged that they should go forthwith and do that which had been resolved, and not delay. Then while they were contending, there appeared seven pairs of hawks pursuing two pairs of vultures, plucking out their feathers and tearing them. Seeing this the seven all approved the opinion of Dareios and thereupon they went to the king's palace, encouraged by the sight of the birds.         76. [1] oi de de epta tun Perseun us eboyleusanto aytika epixeireein toisi Magoisi kai me yperballesthai, eisan eyxamenoi toisi theoisi, tun peri Prexaspea prexthentun eidotes oyden. [2] en te de tei odui mesei steixontes eginonto kai ta peri Prexaspea gegonota epynthanonto. enthauta ekstantes teis odou edidosan aytis sfisi logoys, oi men amfi ton Otanen pagxy keleuontes yperbalesthai mede oideontun tun pregmatun epitithesthai, oi de amfi ton Dareion aytika te ienai kai ta dedogmena poieein mede yperballesthai. [3] uthizomenun d' aytun efane irekun epta zeugea duo aigypiun zeugea diukonta kai tillonta te kai amussonta. idontes de tauta oi epta ten te Dareioy pantes aineon gnumen kai epeita eisan epi ta basileia tetharsekotes toisi ornisi.    
      77. When they appeared at the gates, it happened nearly as Dareios supposed, for the guards, having respect for men who were chief among the Persians, and not suspecting that anything would be done by them of the kind proposed, allowed them to pass in under the guiding of heaven, and none asked them any question. Then when they had passed into the court, they met the eunuchs who bore in the messages to the king; and these inquired of them for what purpose they had come, and at the same time they threatened with punishment the keepers of the gates for having let them pass in, and tried to stop the seven when they attempted to go forward. Then they gave the word to one another and drawing their daggers stabbed these men there upon the spot, who tried to stop them, and themselves went running on towards the chamber of the men.         77. [1] epistasi de epi tas pulas egineto oion ti Dareiui e gnume efere. kataideomenoi gar oi fulakoi andras tous Perseun prutoys kai oyden toiouto ypopteuontes ex aytun esesthai, pariesan theiei pompei xreumenoys, oyd' epeiruta oydeis. [2] epeite de kai pareilthon es ten aylen, enekyrsan toisi tas aggelias esferoysi eynouxoisi. oi sfeas istoreon o ti thelontes ekoien, kai ama istoreontes toutoys toisi pyloyroisi apeileon oti sfeas pareikan, isxon te boylomenoys tous epta es to prosu parienai. [3] oi de diakeleysamenoi kai spasamenoi ta egxeiridia toutoys men tous isxontas aytou tautei sygkenteoysi, aytoi de eisan dromui es ton andreuna.    
      78. Now the Magians happened both of them to be there within, consulting about that which had been done by Prexaspes. So when they saw that the eunuchs had been attacked and were crying aloud, they ran back both of them, and perceiving that which was being done they turned to self-defence: and one of them got down his bow and arrows before he was attacked, while the other had recourse to his spear. Then they engaged in combat with one another; and that one of them who had taken up his bow and arrows found them of no use, since his enemies were close at hand and pressed hard upon him, but the other defended himself with his spear, and first he struck Aspathines in the thigh, and then Intaphrenes in the eye; and Intaphrenes lost his eye by reason of the wound, but his life he did not lose. These then were wounded by one of the Magians, but the other, when his bow and arrows proved useless to him, fled into a bedchamber which opened into the chamber of the men, intending to close the door; and with him there rushed in two of the seven, Dareios and Gobryas. And when Gobryas was locked together in combat with the Magian, Dareios stood by and was at a loss what to do, because it was dark, and he was afraid lest he should strike Gobryas. Then seeing him standing by idle, Gobryas asked why he did not use his hands, and he said: "Because I am afraid lest I may strike thee": and Gobryas answered: "Thrust with thy sword even though it stab through us both." So Dareios was persuaded, and he thrust with his danger and happened to hit the Magian.         78. [1] oi de Magoi etyxon amfoteroi tenikauta eontes te esu kai ta apo Prexaspeos genomena en boylei exontes. epei un eidon tous eynouxoys tethorybemenoys te kai bountas, ana te edramon palin amfoteroi kai us emathon to poieumenon pros alken etraponto. [2] o men de aytun fthanei ta toxa katelomenos, o de pros ten aixmen etrapeto. enthauta de synemisgon alleloisi. tui men de ta toxa analabonti aytun, eontun te agxou tun polemiun kai proskeimenun, En xresta oyden. o d' eteros tei aixmei emuneto kai touto men Aspathinen paiei es ton meron, touto de Intafrenea es ton ofthalmon. kai esterethe men tou ofthalmou ek tou trumatos o Intafrenes, oy mentoi apethane ge. [3] tun men de Magun oyteros trumatizei toutoys. o de eteros, epeite oi ta toxa oyden xresta egineto, En gar de thalamos esexun es ton andreuna, es touton katafeugei, thelun aytou prostheinai tas thuras, kai oi synespiptoysi tun epta duo, Dareios te kai Gobrues. [4] symplakentos de Gobrueu tui Magui o Dareios epesteus eporee oia en skotei, prometheomenos me plexei ton Gobruen. [5] oreun de min argon epesteuta o Gobrues eireto o ti oy xratai tei xeiri. o de eipe Prometheomenos seo, me plexu.>> Gobrues de ameibeto <<uthee to xifos kai di' amfoterun.>> Dareios de peithomenos use te to egxeiridion kai etyxe kus tou Magoy.    
      79. So when they had slain the Magians and cut off their heads, they left behind those of their number who were wounded, both because they were unable to go, and also in order that they might take charge of the fortress, and the five others taking with them the heads of the Magians ran with shouting and clashing of arms and called upon the other Persians to join them, telling them of that which had been done and showing the heads, and at the same time they proceeded to slay every one of the Magians who crossed their path. So the Persians when they heard of that which had been brought to pass by the seven and of the deceit of the Magians, thought good themselves also to do the same, and drawing their daggers they killed the Magians wherever they found one; so that if night had not come on and stopped them, they would not have left a single Magian alive. This day the Persians celebrate in common more than all other days, and upon it they keep a great festival which is called by the Persians the festival of the slaughter of the Magians, on which no Magian is permitted to appear abroad, but the Magians keep themselves within their houses throughout that day.         79. [1] apokteinantes de tous Magoys kai apotamontes aytun tas kefalas, tous men trumatias euytun aytou leipoysi kai adynasies eineken kai fylakeis teis akropolios, oi de pente aytun exontes tun Magun tas kefalas etheon boei te kai patagui xreumenoi, kai Persas tous alloys epekaleonto exegeomenoi te to preigma kai deiknuontes tas kefalas, kai ama ekteinon panta tina tun Magun ton en posi ginomenon. [2] oi de Persai mathontes to gegonos ek tun epta kai tun Magun ten apaten, edikaieyn kai aytoi etera toiauta poieein, spasamenoi de ta egxeiridia ekteinon okoy tina Magon eyriskon. ei de me nux epelthousa esxe, elipon an oydena Magon. [3] tauten ten emeren therapeuoysi Persai koinei malista tun emereun, kai en aytei orten megalen anagoysi, e kekletai ypo Perseun magofonia. en tei Magon oydena exesti faneinai es to fus, alla kat' oikoys euytous oi Magoi exoysi ten emeren tauten.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [80]

     80. When the tumult had subsided and more than five days had elapsed, those who had risen against the Magians began to take counsel about the general state, and there were spoken speeches which some of the Hellenes do not believe were really uttered, but spoken they were nevertheless. On the one hand Otanes urged that they should resign the government into the hands of the whole body of the Persians, and his words were as follows: "To me it seems best that no single one of us should henceforth be ruler, for that is neither pleasant nor profitable. Ye saw the insolent temper of Cambyses, to what lengths it went, and ye have had experience also of the insolence of the Magian: and how should the rule of one alone be a well-ordered thing, seeing that the monarch may do what he desires without rendering any account of his acts? Even the best of all men, if he were placed in this disposition, would be caused by it to change from his wonted disposition: for insolence is engendered in him by the good things which he possesses, and envy is implanted in man from the beginning; and having these two things, he has all vice: for he does many deeds of reckless wrong, partly moved by insolence proceeding from satiety, and partly by envy. And yet a despot at least ought to have been free from envy, seeing that he has all manner of good things. He is however naturally in just the opposite temper towards his subjects; for he grudges to the nobles that they should survive and live, but delights in the basest of citizens, and he is more ready than any other man to receive calumnies. Then of all things he is the most inconsistent; for if you express admiration of him moderately, he is offended that no very great court is paid to him, whereas if you pay court to him extravagantly, he is offended with you for being a flatterer. And the most important matter of all is that which I am about to say:--he disturbs the customs handed down from our fathers, he is a ravisher of women, and he puts men to death without trial. On the other hand the rule of many has first a name attaching to it which is the fairest of all names, that is to say 'Equality'; next, the multitude does none of those things which the monarch does: offices of state are exercised by lot, and the magistrates are compelled to render account of their action: and finally all matters of deliberation are referred to the public assembly. I therefore give as my opinion that we let monarchy go and increase the power of the multitude; for in the many is contained everything."         80. [1] epeite de kateste o thorybos kai ektos pente emereun egeneto, eboyleuonto oi epanastantes toisi Magoisi peri tun pantun pregmatun kai elexthesan logoi apistoi men enioisi Ellenun, elexthesan d' un. [2] Otanes men ekeleye es meson Perseisi katatheinai ta pregmata, legun tade. <<emoi dokeei ena men emeun mounarxon meketi genesthai. oyte gar edu oyte agathon. eidete men gar ten Kambuseu ybrin ep' oson epexeilthe, metesxekate de kai teis tou Magoy ybrios. [3] kus d' an eie xreima katertemenon moynarxie, tei exesti aneythunui poieein ta bouletai; kai gar an ton ariston andrun pantun stanta es tauten ektos tun euthotun noematun steseie. egginetai men gar oi ybris ypo tun pareontun agathun, fthonos de arxeithen emfuetai anthrupui. [4] duo d' exun tauta exei pasan kakoteta. ta men gar ybri kekoremenos erdei polla kai atasthala, ta de fthonui. kaitoi andra ge turannon afthonon edei einai, exonta ge panta ta agatha. to de ypenantion toutoy es tous polietas pefyke. fthoneei gar toisi aristoisi perieousi te kai zuoysi, xairei de toisi kakistoisi tun astun, diabolas de aristos endekesthai. [5] anarmostotaton de pantun. en te gar ayton metrius thumazeis, axthetai oti oy karta therapeuetai, en te therapeuei tis karta, axthetai ate thupi. ta de de megista erxomai ereun. nomaia te kineei patria kai biatai gynaikas kteinei te akritoys. [6] pleithos de arxon pruta men oynoma pantun kalliston exei, isonomien, deutera de toutun tun o mounarxos poieei oyden. palui men arxas arxei, ypeuthynon de arxen exei, boyleumata de panta es to koinon anaferei. tithemai un gnumen metentas emeas moynarxien to pleithos aexein. en gar tui pollui eni ta panta.>>    
      81. This was the opinion expressed by Otanes; but Megabyzos urged that they should entrust matters to the rule of a few, saying these words: "That which Otanes said in opposition to a tyranny, let it be counted as said for me also, but in that which he said urging that we should make over the power to the multitude, he has missed the best counsel: for nothing is more senseless or insolent than a worthless crowd; and for men flying from the insolence of a despot to fall into that of unrestrained popular power, is by no means to be endured: for he, if he does anything, does it knowing what he does, but the people cannot even know; for how can that know which has neither been taught anything noble by others nor perceived anything of itself, but pushes on matters with violent impulse and without understanding, like a torrent stream? Rule of the people then let them adopt who are foes to the Persians; but let us choose a company of the best men, and to them attach the chief power; for in the number of these we shall ourselves also be, and it is likely that the resolutions taken by the best men will be the best."         81. [1] Otanes men de tauten gnumen esefere. Megabyzos de oligarxiei ekeleye epitrepein, legun tade. <<ta men Otanes eipe tyrannida pauun, lelexthu kamoi tauta, ta d' es to pleithos anuge ferein to kratos, gnumes teis aristes emarteke. omiloy gar axreioy oyden esti axynetuteron oyde ybristoteron. [2] kaitoi tyrannoy ybrin feugontas andras es demoy akolastoy ybrin pesein esti oydamus anasxeton. o men gar ei ti poieei, ginuskun poieei, tui de oyde ginuskein eni. kus gar an ginuskoi os oyt' edidaxthe oyte eide kalon oyden oikeion, utheei te empesun ta pregmata aney nooy, xeimarrui potamui eikelos; [3] demui men nyn, oi Perseisi kakon noeoysi, oytoi xrasthun, emeis de andrun tun aristun epilexantes omilien toutoisi peritheumen to kratos. en gar de toutoisi kai aytoi enesometha. aristun de andrun oikos arista boyleumata ginesthai.>>    
      82. This was the opinion expressed by Megabyzos; and thirdly Dareios proceeded to declare his opinion, saying: "To me it seems that in those things which Megabyzos said with regard to the multitude he spoke rightly, but in those which he said with regard to the rule of a few, not rightly: for whereas there are three things set before us, and each is supposed to be the best in its own kind, that is to say a good popular government, and the rule of a few, and thirdly the rule of one, I say that this last is by far superior to the others; for nothing better can be found than the rule of an individual man of the best kind; seeing that using the best judgment he would be guardian of the multitude without reproach; and resolutions directed against enemies would so best be kept secret. In an oligarchy however it happens often that many, while practising virtue with regard to the commonwealth, have strong private enmities arising among themselves; for as each man desires to be himself the leader and to prevail in counsels, they come to great enmities with one another, whence arise factions among them, and out of the factions comes murder, and from murder results the rule of one man; and thus it is shown in this instance by how much that is the best. Again, when the people rules, it is impossible that corruption should not arise, and when corruption arises in the commonwealth, there arise among the corrupt men not enmities but strong ties of friendship: for they who are acting corruptly to the injury of the commonwealth put their heads together secretly to do so. And this continues so until at last some one takes the leadership of the people and stops the course of such men. By reason of this the man of whom I speak is admired by the people, and being so admired he suddenly appears as monarch. Thus he too furnishes herein an example to prove that the rule of one is the best thing. Finally, to sum up all in a single word, whence arose the liberty which we possess, and who gave it to us? Was it a gift of the people or of an oligarchy or of a monarch? I therefore am of opinion that we, having been set free by one man, should preserve that form of rule, and in other respects also that we should not annul the customs of our fathers which are ordered well; for that is not the better way."         82. [1] Megabyzos men de tauten gnumen esefere. tritos de Dareios apedeiknyto gnumen, legun <<emoi de ta men eipe Megabyzos es to pleithos exonta dokeei orthus lexai, ta de es oligarxien oyk orthus. triun gar prokeimenun kai pantun tui logui aristun eontun, demoy te aristoy kai oligarxies kai moynarxoy, pollui touto proexein legu. [2] andros gar enos tou aristoy oyden ameinon an faneie. gnumei gar toiautei xreumenos epitropeuoi an amumetus tou pletheos, siguito te an boyleumata epi dysmeneas andras oytu malista. [3] en de oligarxiei polloisi areten epaskeoysi es to koinon exthea idia isxyra fileei egginesthai. aytos gar ekastos boylomenos koryfaios einai gnumeisi te nikan es exthea megala alleloisi apikneontai, ex un stasies egginontai, ek de tun stasiun fonos. ek de tou fonoy apebe es moynarxien, kai en toutui diedexe osui esti touto ariston. [4] demoy te ay arxontos adunata me oy kakoteta egginesthai. kakotetos toinyn egginomenes es ta koina exthea men oyk egginetai toisi kakoisi, filiai de isxyrai. oi gar kakountes ta koina sygkupsantes poieusi. touto de toiouto ginetai es o an prostas tis tou demoy tous toioutoys pausei. ek de aytun thumazetai oytos de ypo tou demoy, thumazomenos de an' un efane mounarxos eun, kai en toutui deloi kai oytos us e moynarxie kratiston. [5] eni de epei panta syllabonta eipein, kothen emin e eleytherie egeneto kai teu dontos; kotera para tou demoy e oligarxies e moynarxoy; exu toinyn gnumen emeas eleytheruthentas dia ena andra to toiouto peristellein, xuris te toutoy patrioys nomoys me luein exontas ey. oy gar ameinon.>>    
      83. These three opinions then had been proposed, and the other four men of the seven gave their assent to the last. So when Otanes, who was desirous to give equality to the Persians, found his opinion defeated, he spoke to those assembled thus: "Partisans, it is clear that some one of us must become king, selected either by casting lots, or by entrusting the decision to the multitude of the Persians and taking him whom it shall choose, or by some other means. I therefore shall not be a competitor with you, for I do not desire either to rule or to be ruled; and on this condition I withdraw from my claim to rule, namely that I shall not be ruled by any of you, either I myself or my descendants in future time." When he had said this, the six made agreement with him on those terms, and he was no longer a competitor with them, but withdrew from the assembly; and at the present time this house remains free alone of all the Persian houses, and submits to rule only so far as it wills to do so itself, not transgressing the laws of the Persians.         83. [1] gnumai men de treis aytai proekeato, oi de tesseres tun epta andrun prosethento tautei. us de essuthe tei gnumei o Otanes Perseisi isonomien speudun poieisai, elexe es meson aytoisi tade. [2] <<andres stasiutai, deila gar de oti dei ena ge tina emeun basilea genesthai, etoi klerui ge laxonta, e epitrepsantun tui Perseun plethei ton an ekeino eletai, e allei tini mexanei. egu men nyn ymin oyk enagunieumai. oyte gar arxein oyte arxesthai ethelu. epi toutui de ypexistamai teis arxeis, ep' ui te yp' oydenos ymeun arxomai, oyte aytos egu oyte oi ap' emeu aiei ginomenoi.>> [3] toutoy eipantos tauta us synexureon oi ex epi toutoisi, oytos men de sfi oyk enegunizeto all' ek mesoy kateisto, kai nun ayte e oikie diateleei moune eleythere eousa Perseun kai arxetai tosauta osa ayte thelei, nomoys oyk yperbainoysa tous Perseun.    
      84. The rest however of the seven continued to deliberate how they should establish a king in the most just manner; and it was resolved by them that to Otanes and his descendants in succession, if the kingdom should come to any other of the seven, there should be given as special gifts a Median dress every year and all those presents which are esteemed among the Persians to be the most valuable: and the reason why they determined that these things should be given to him, was because he first suggested to them the matter and combined them together. These were special gifts for Otanes; and this they also determined for all in common, namely that any one of the seven who wished might pass in to the royal palaces without any to bear in a message, unless the king happened to be sleeping with his wife; and that it should not be lawful for the king to marry from any other family, but only from those of the men who had made insurrection with him: and about the kingdom they determined this, namely that the man whose horse should first neigh at sunrise in the suburb of the city when they were mounted upon their horses, he should have the kingdom.         84. [1] oi de loipoi tun epta eboyleuonto us basilea dikaiotata stesontai. kai sfi edoxe Otanei men kai toisi apo Otaneu aiei ginomenoisi, en es allon tina tun epta elthei e basileie, exaireta didosthai estheita te Mediken eteos ekastoy kai ten pasan dureen e ginetai en Perseisi timiutate. toude de eineken ebouleysan oi didosthai tauta, oti ebouleyse te prutos to preigma kai synestese aytous. [2] tauta men de Otanei exaireta, tade de es to koinon ebouleysan, parienai es ta basileia panta ton boylomenon tun epta aney esaggeleos, en me tygxanei eydun meta gynaikos basileus, gameein de me exeinai allothen tui basilei e ek tun synepanastantun. [3] peri de teis basileies ebouleysan toionde. otey an o ippos elioy epanatellontos prutos fthegxetai, en tui proasteiui aytun epibebekotun, touton exein ten basileien.    
      85. Now Dareios had a clever horse-keeper, whose name was Oibares. To this man, when they had left their assembly, Dareios spoke these words: "Oibares, we have resolved to do about the kingdom thus, namely that the man whose horse first neighs at sunrise, when we are mounted upon our horses he shall be king. Now therefore, if thou hast any cleverness, contrive that we may obtain this prize, and not any other man." Oibares replied thus: "If, my master, it depends in truth upon this whether thou be king or no, have confidence so far as concerns this and keep a good heart, for none other shall be king before thee; such charms have I at my command." Then Dareios said: "If then thou hast any such trick, it is time to devise it and not to put things off, for our trial is to-morrow." Oibares therefore hearing this did as follows:--when night was coming on he took one of the mares, namely that one which the horse of Dareios preferred, and this he led into the suburb of the city and tied her up: then he brought to her the horse of Dareios, and having for some time led him round her, making him go so close by so as to touch the mare, at last he let the horse mount.         85. [1] Dareiui de En ippokomos aner sofos, tui oynoma En Oibares. pros touton ton andra, epeite dieluthesan, elexe Dareios tade. << Oibares, emin dedoktai peri teis basileies poieein kata tade. otey an o ippos prutos fthegxetai ama tui eliui anionti aytun epanabebekotun, touton exein ten basileien. nun un ei tina exeis sofien, mexanu us an emeis sxumen touto to geras kai me allos tis.>> [2] ameibetai Oibares toiside. <<ei men de u despota en toutui toi esti e basilea einai e me, tharsee toutoy eineken kai thymon exe agathon, us basileus oydeis allos pro seu estai. toiauta exu farmaka.>> legei Dareios <<ei toinyn ti toiouton exeis sofisma, ure mexanasthai kai me anaballesthai, us teis epiouses emeres o agun emin esti.>> [3] akousas tauta o Oibares poieei toionde. us egineto e nux, tun theleun ippun mian, ten o Dareioy ippos esterge malista, tauten agagun es to proasteion katedese kai epegage ton Dareioy ippon, kai ta men polla perieige agxou tei ippui egxrimptun tei theleei, telos de epeike oxeusai ton ippon.    
      86. Now at dawn of day the six came to the place as they had agreed, riding upon their horses; and as they rode through by the suburb of the city, when they came near the place where the mare had been tied up on the former night, the horse of Dareios ran up to the place and neighed; and just when the horse had done this, there came lightning and thunder from a clear sky: and the happening of these things to Dareios consummated his claim, for they seemed to have come to pass by some design, and the others leapt down from their horses and did obeisance to Dareios.         86. [1] am' emerei de diafuskousei oi ex kata synethekanto pareisan epi tun ippun. diexelaynontun de kata to proasteion, us kata touto to xurion eginonto ina teis paroixomenes nyktos katededeto e thelea ippos, enthauta o Dareioy ippos prosdramun exremetise. [2] ama de tui ippui touto poiesanti astrape ex aithries kai bronte egeneto. epigenomena de tauta tui Dareiui eteleuse min usper ek synthetoy tey genomena. oi de katathorontes apo tun ippun prosekuneon ton Dareion.    
      87. Some say that the contrivance of Oibares was this, but others say as follows (for the story is told by the Persians in both ways), namely that he touched with his hands the parts of this mare and kept his hand hidden in his trousers; and when at sunrise they were about to let the horses go, this Oibares pulled out his hand and applied it to the nostrils of the horse of Dareios; and the horse, perceiving the smell, snorted and neighed.         87. [1] oi men de fasi ton Oibarea tauta mexanesasthai, oi de toiade (kai gar ep' amfotera legetai ypo Perseun), us teis ippoy tautes tun arthrun epipsausas tei xeiri exoi ayten krupsas en teisi anaxyrisi. us de ama tui eliui anionti apiesthai mellein tous ippoys, ton Oibarea touton exeiranta ten xeira pros tou Dareioy ippoy tous mykteiras proseneikai, ton de aisthomenon frimaxasthai te kai xremetisai.    
      88. So Dareios the son of Hystaspes had been declared king; and in Asia all except the Arabians were his subjects, having been subdued by Cyrus and again afterwards by Cambyses. The Arabians however were never obedient to the Persians under conditions of subjection, but had become guest-friends when they let Cambyses pass by to Egypt: for against the will of the Arabians the Persians would not be able to invade Egypt. Moreover Dareios made the most noble marriages possible in the estimation of the Persians; for he married two daughters of Cyrus, Atossa and Artystone, of whom the one, Arossa, had before been the wife of Cambyses her brother and then afterwards of the Magian, while Artystone was a virgin; and besides them he married the daughter of Smerdis the son of Cyrus, whose name was Parmys; and he also took to wife the daughter of Otanes, her who had discovered the Magian; and all things became filled with his power. And first he caused to be a carving in stone, and set it up; and in it there was the figure of a man on horseback, and he wrote upon it writing to this effect: "Dareios son of Hystaspes by the excellence of his horse," mentioning the name of it, "and of his horse-keeper Oibares obtained the kingdom of the Persians."         88. [1] Dareios te de o Ystaspeos basileus apededekto, kai oi Esan en tei Asiei pantes katekooi plen Arabiun, Kuroy te katastrepsamenoy kai ysteron aytis Kambuseu. Arabioi de oydama katekoysan epi doylosunei Perseisi, alla xeinoi egenonto parentes Kambusea ep' Aigypton. aekontun gar Arabiun oyk an esbaloien Persai es Aigypton. [2] gamoys te tous prutoys egamee Perseisi o Dareios, Kuroy men duo thygateras Atossan te kai Artystunen, ten men Atossan prosynoikesasan Kambusei te tui adelfeui kai aytis tui Magui, ten de Artystunen parthenon. [3] eteren de Smerdios tou Kuroy thygatera egeme, tei oynoma En Parmys. esxe de kai ten tou Otaneu thygatera, e ton Magon katadelon epoiese. dynamios te panta oi epimpleato. pruton men nyn tupon poiesamenos lithinon estese. zuion de oi enein aner ippeus, epegrapse de grammata legonta tade. <<Dareios o Ystaspeos sun te tou ippoy tei aretei>> to oynoma legun <<kai Oibareos tou ippokomoy ektesato ten Perseun basileien.>>    
      89. Having so done in Persia, he established twenty provinces, which the Persians themselves call satrapies; and having established the provinces and set over them rulers, he appointed tribute to come to him from them according to races, joining also to the chief races those who dwelt on their borders, or passing beyond the immediate neighbours and assigning to various races those which lay more distant. He divided the provinces and the yearly payment of tribute as follows: and those of them who brought in silver were commanded to pay by the standard of the Babylonian talent, but those who brought in gold by the Euboic talent; now the Babylonian talent is equal to eight-and-seventy Euboic pounds. For in the reign of Cyrus, and again of Cambyses, nothing was fixed about tribute, but they used to bring gifts: and on account of this appointing of tribute and other things like this, the Persians say that Dareios was a shopkeeper, Cambyses a master, and Cyrus a father; the one because he dealt with all his affairs like a shopkeeper, the second because he was harsh and had little regard for any one, and the other because he was gentle and contrived for them all things good.         89. [1] poiesas de tauta en Perseisi arxas katestesato eikosi, tas aytoi kaleoysi satrapeias. katastesas de tas arxas kai arxontas epistesas etaxato foroys oi prosienai kata ethnea te kai pros toisi ethnesi tous plesioxuroys prostassun, kai yperbainun tous prosexeas ta ekasteru alloisi alla ethnea nemun. [2] arxas de kai forun prosodon ten epeteion kata tade dieile. toisi men aytun argurion apagineoysi eireto Babylunion stathmon talanton apagineein, toisi de xrysion apagineoysi Eyboikon. to de Babylunion talanton dunatai Eyboidas oktu kai ebdomekonta mneas. [3] epi gar Kuroy arxontos kai aytis Kambuseu En katestekos oyden foroy peri, alla dura agineon. dia de tauten ten epitaxin tou foroy kai paraplesia tautei alla legoysi Persai us Dareios men En kapelos, Kambuses de despotes, Kuros de pater, o men oti ekapeleye panta ta pregmata, o de oti xalepos te En kai oliguros, o de oti epios te kai agatha sfi panta emexanesato.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [90]

     90. From the Ionians and the Magnesians who dwell in Asia and the Aiolians, Carians, Lykians, Milyans and Pamphylians (for one single sum was appointed by him as tribute for all these) there came in four hundred talents of silver. This was appointed by him to be the first division. From the Mysians and Lydians and Lasonians and Cabalians and Hytennians there came in five hundred talents: this is the second division. From the Hellespontians who dwell on the right as one sails in and the Phrygians and the Thracians who dwell in Asia and the Paphlagonians and Mariandynoi and Syrians the tribute was three hundred and sixty talents: this is the third division. From the Kilikians, besides three hundred and sixty white horses, one for every day in the year, there came also five hundred talents of silver; of these one hundred and forty talents were spent upon the horsemen which served as a guard to the Kilikian land, and the remaining three hundred and sixty came in year by year to Dareios: this is the fourth division.         90. [1] apo men de Iunun kai Magnetun tun en tei Asiei kai Aioleun kai Karun kai Lykiun kai Milyeun kai Pamfulun (eis gar En oi tetagmenos oytos foros) proseie tetrakosia talanta argyrioy. o men de prutos oytos oi nomos katestekee, apo de Mysun kai Lydun kai Lasoniun kai Kabaleun kai Ytenneun pentakosia talanta. deuteros nomos oytos. [2] apo de Ellespontiun tun epi dexia espleonti kai Frygun kai Threikun tun en tei Asiei kai Paflagonun kai Mariandynun kai Syriun exekonta kai triekosia talanta En foros. nomos tritos oytos. [3] apo de Kilikun ippoi te leykoi exekonta kai triekosioi, ekastes emeres eis ginomenos, kai talanta argyrioy pentakosia. toutun de tesserakonta kai ekaton es ten froyreoysan ippon ten Kilikien xuren anaisimouto, ta de triekosia kai exekonta Dareiui efoita. nomos tetartos oytos.    
      91. From that division which begins with the city of Posideion, founded by Amphilochos the son of Amphiaraos on the borders of the Kilikians and the Syrians, and extends as far as Egypt, not including the territory of the Arabians (for this was free from payment), the amount was three hundred and fifty talents; and in this division are the whole of Phenicia and Syria which is called Palestine and Cyprus: this is the fifth division. From Egypt and the Libyans bordering upon Egypt, and from Kyrene and Barca, for these were so ordered as to belong to the Egyptian division, there came in seven hundred talents, without reckoning the money produced by the lake of Moiris, that is to say from the fish; without reckoning this, I say, or the corn which was contributed in addition by measure, there came in seven hundred talents; for as regards the corn, they contribute by measure one hundred and twenty thousand bushels for the use of those Persians who are established in the "White Fortress" at Memphis, and for their foreign mercenaries: this is the sixth division. The Sattagydai and Gandarians and Dadicans and Aparytai, being joined together, brought in one hundred and seventy talents: this is the seventh division. From Susa and the rest of the land of the Kissians there came in three hundred: this is the eighth division.         91. [1] apo de Posideioy polios, ten Amfiloxos o Amfiareu oikise ep' oyroisi toisi Kilikun te kai Surun, arxamenos apo tautes mexri Aiguptoy, plen moires teis Arabiun (tauta gar En atelea), pentekonta kai triekosia talanta foros En. esti de en tui nomui toutui Foinike te pasa kai Syrie e Palaistine kaleomene kai Kupros. nomos pemptos oytos. [2] ap' Aiguptoy de kai Libuun tun prosexeun Aiguptui kai Kyrenes te kai Barkes (es gar ton Aiguption nomon aytai ekekosmeato) eptakosia proseie talanta, parex tou ek teis Moirios limnes ginomenoy argyrioy, to egineto ek tun ixthuun. [3] toutoy te de xuris tou argyrioy kai tou [epimetroymenoy] sitoy proseie eptakosia talanta. sitoy gar duo kai deka myriadas Perseun te toisi en tui Leykui teixei tui en Memfi katoikemenoisi katametreoysi kai toisi toutun epikouroisi. nomos ektos oytos. [4] Sattagudai de kai Gandarioi kai Dadikai te kai Aparutai es tuyto tetagmenoi ebdomekonta kai ekaton talanta proseferon. nomos de oytos ebdomos. apo Sousun de kai teis alles Kissiun xures triekosia. nomos ogdoos oytos.    
      92. From Babylon and from the rest of Assyria there came in to him a thousand talents of silver and five hundred boys for eunuchs: this is the ninth division. From Agbatana and from the rest of Media and the Paricanians and Orthocorybantians, four hundred and fifty talents: this is the tenth division. The Caspians and Pausicans and Pantimathoi and Dareitai, contributing together, brought in two hundred talents: this is the eleventh division. From the Bactrians as far as the Aigloi the tribute was three hundred and sixty talents: this is the twelfth division.         92. [1] apo Babylunos de kai teis loipeis Assyries xilia oi proseie talanta argyrioy kai paides ektomiai pentakosioi. nomos einatos oytos. apo de Agbatanun kai teis loipeis Medikeis kai Parikaniun kai Orthokorybantiun pentekonta te kai tetrakosia talanta. nomos dekatos oytos. [2] Kaspioi de kai Paysikai kai Pantimathoi te kai Dareitai es tuyto symferontes diekosia talanta apagineon. nomos endekatos oytos.    
      93. From Pactyike and the Armenians and the people bordering upon them as far as the Euxine, four hundred talents: this is the thirteenth division. From the Sagartians and Sarangians and Thamanaians and Utians and Mycans and those who dwell in the islands of the Erythraian Sea, where the king settles those who are called the "Removed," from all these together a tribute was produced of six hundred talents: this is the fourteenth division. The Sacans and the Caspians brought in two hundred and fifty talents: this is the fifteenth division. The Parthians and Chorasmians and Sogdians and Areians three hundred talents: this is the sixteenth division.         93. [1] apo Baktrianun de mexri Aiglun exekonta kai triekosia talanta foros En. nomos dyudekatos oytos. apo Paktyikeis de kai Armeniun kai tun prosexeun mexri tou pontoy tou Eyxeinoy tetrakosia talanta. nomos tritos kai dekatos oytos. [2] apo de Sagartiun kai Saraggeun kai Thamanaiun kai Oytiun kai Mukun kai tun en teisi nesoisi oikeontun tun en tei Erythrei thalassei, en teisi tous anaspastoys kaleomenoys katoikizei basileus, apo toutun pantun exakosia talanta egineto foros. nomos tetartos kai dekatos oytos. [3] Sakai de kai Kaspioi pentekonta kai diekosia apagineon talanta. nomos pemptos kai dekatos oytos. Parthoi de kai Khorasmioi kai Sogdoi te kai Areioi triekosia talanta. nomos ektos kai dekatos oytos.    
      94. The Paricanians and Ethiopians in Asia brought in four hundred talents: this is the seventeenth division. To the Matienians and Saspeirians and Alarodians was appointed a tribute of two hundred talents: this is the eighteenth division. To the Moschoi and Tibarenians and Macronians and Mossynoicoi and Mares three hundred talents were ordered: this is the nineteenth division. Of the Indians the number is far greater than that of any other race of men of whom we know; and they brought in a tribute larger than all the rest, that is to say three hundred and sixty talents of gold-dust: this is the twentieth division.         94. [1] Parikanioi de kai Aithiopes oi ek teis Asies tetrakosia talanta apagineon. nomos ebdomos kai dekatos oytos. Matienoisi de kai Saspeirsi kai Alarodioisi diekosia epetetakto talanta. nomos ogdoos kai dekatos oytos. [2] Mosxoisi de kai Tibarenoisi kai Makrusi kai Mossynoikoisi kai Marsi triekosia talanta proeireto. nomos einatos kai dekatos oytos. Indun de pleithos te pollui pleiston esti pantun tun emeis idmen anthrupun, kai foron apagineon pros pantas tous alloys exekonta kai triekosia talanta psegmatos. nomos eikostos oytos.    
      95. Now if we compare Babylonian with Euboic talents, the silver is found to amount to nine thousand eight hundred and eighty talents; and if we reckon the gold at thirteen times the value of silver, weight for weight, the gold-dust is found to amount to four thousand six hundred and eighty Euboic talents. These being all added together, the total which was collected as yearly tribute for Dareios amounts to fourteen thousand five hundred and sixty Euboic talents: the sums which are less than these I pass over and do not mention.         95. [1] to men de argurion to Babylunion pros to Eyboikon symballomenon talanton ginetai ogdukonta kai oktakosia kai einakisxilia talanta. to de xrysion triskaidekastasion logizomenon, to pseigma eyrisketai eon Eyboikun talantun ogdukonta kai exakosiun kai tetrakisxiliun. [2] toutun un pantun syntithemenun to pleithos Eyboika talanta synelegeto es ton epeteion foron Dareiui muria kai tetrakisxilia kai pentakosia kai exekonta. to d' eti toutun elasson apieis oy legu.    
      96. This was the tribute which came in to Dareios from Asia and from a small part of Libya: but as time went on, other tribute came in also from the islands and from those who dwell in Europe as far as Thessaly. This tribute the king stores up in his treasury in the following manner:--he melts it down and pours it into jars of earthenware, and when he has filled the jars he takes off the earthenware jar from the metal; and when he wants money he cuts off so much as he needs on each occasion.         96. [1] oytos Dareiui proseie foros apo teis te Asies kai teis Libues oligaxothen. proiontos mentoi tou xronoy kai apo nesun proseie allos foros kai tun en tei Eyrupei mexri Thessalies oikemenun. [2] touton ton foron thesayrizei basileus tropui toiuide. es pithoys keraminoys texas kataxeei, plesas de to aggos periaireei ton keramon. epean de deethei xrematun, katakoptei tosouto osoy an ekastote deetai.    
      97. These were the provinces and the assessments of tribute: and the Persian land alone has not been mentioned by me as paying a contribution, for the Persians have their land to dwell in free from payment. The following moreover had no tribute fixed for them to pay, but brought gifts, namely the Ethiopians who border upon Egypt, whom Cambyses subdued as he marched against the Long-lived Ethiopians, those who dwell about Nysa, which is called "sacred," and who celebrate the festivals in honour of Dionysos: these Ethiopians and those who dwell near them have the same kind of seed as the Callantian Indians, and they have underground dwellings. These both together brought every other year, and continue to bring even to my own time, two quart measures of unmelted gold and two hundred blocks of ebony and five Ethiopian boys and twenty large elephant tusks. The Colchians also had set themselves among those who brought gifts, and with them those who border upon them extending as far as the range of the Caucasus (for the Persian rule extends as far as these mountains, but those who dwell in the parts beyond Caucasus toward the North Wind regard the Persians no longer),--these, I say, continued to bring the gifts which they had fixed for themselves every four years even down to my own time, that is to say, a hundred boys and a hundred maidens. Finally, the Arabians brought a thousand talents of frankincense every year. Such were the gifts which these brought to the king apart from the tribute.         97. [1] aytai men arxai te Esan kai forun epitaxies. e Persis de xure moune moi oyk eiretai dasmoforos. atelea gar Persai nemontai xuren. [2] oide de foron men oydena etaxthesan ferein, dura de agineon. Aithiopes oi prosoyroi Aiguptui, tous Kambuses elaunun epi tous makrobioys Aithiopas katestrepsato, oi te peri te Nusen ten iren katoikentai kai tui Dionusui anagoysi tas ortas. [oytoi oi Aithiopes kai oi plesioxuroi toutoisi spermati men xreuntai tui aytui tui kai oi Kallantiai Indoi, oikemata de ektentai katagaia.] [3] oytoi synamfoteroi dia tritoy eteos agineon, agineoysi de kai to mexri emeu, duo xoinikas apuroy xrysioy kai diekosias falaggas ebenoy kai pente paidas Aithiopas kai elefantos odontas megaloys eikosi. [4] Kolxoi de ta etaxanto es ten dureen kai oi prosexees mexri Kaykasios oreos (es touto gar to oros ypo Perseisi arxetai, ta de pros boreen anemon tou Kaykasios Perseun oyden eti frontizei (, oytoi un dura ta etaxanto eti kai es eme dia penteteridos agineon, ekaton paidas kai ekaton parthenoys. [5] Arabioi de xilia talanta agineon libanutou ana pan etos. tauta men oytoi dura parex tou foroy basilei ekomizon.    
      98. Now this great quantity of gold, out of which the Indians bring in to the king the gold-dust which has been mentioned, is obtained by them in a manner which I shall tell:--That part of the Indian land which is towards the rising sun is sand; for of all the peoples in Asia of which we know or about which any certain report is given, the Indians dwell furthest away towards the East and the sunrising; seeing that the country to the East of the Indians is desert on account of the sand. Now there are many tribes of Indians, and they do not agree with one another in language; and some of them are pastoral and others not so, and some dwell in the swamps of the river and feed upon raw fish, which they catch by fishing from boats made of cane; and each boat is made of one joint of cane. These Indians of which I speak wear clothing made of rushes: they gather and cut the rushes from the river and then weave them together into a kind of mat and put it on like a corslet.         98. [1] ton de xryson touton ton pollon oi Indoi, ap' oy to pseigma tui basilei to eiremenon komizoysi, tropui toiuide ktuntai. [2] esti teis Indikeis xures to pros elion anisxonta psammos. tun gar emeis idmen, tun kai peri atrekes ti legetai, prutoi pros eu kai elioy anatolas oikeoysi anthrupun tun en tei Asiei Indoi. Indun gar to pros ten eu eremie esti dia ten psammon. [3] esti de polla ethnea Indun kai oyk omofuna sfisi, kai oi men aytun nomades eisi oi de oy, oi de en toisi elesi oikeoysi tou potamou kai ixthuas siteontai umous, tous aireoysi ek ploiun kalaminun ormumenoi. kalamoy de en gony ploion ekaston poieetai. [4] oytoi men de tun Indun foreoysi estheita floinen. epean ek tou potamou floun amesusi kai kopsusi, to entheuten formou tropon kataplexantes us thureka endunoysi.    
      99. Others of the Indians, dwelling to the East of these, are pastoral and eat raw flesh: these are called Padaians, and they practise the following customs:--whenever any of their tribe falls ill, whether it be a woman or a man, if a man then the men who are his nearest associates put him to death, saying that he is wasting away with the disease and his flesh is being spoilt for them: and meanwhile he denies stoutly and says that he is not ill, but they do not agree with him; and after they have killed him they feast upon his flesh: but if it be a woman who falls ill, the women who are her greatest intimates do to her in the same manner as the men do in the other case. For in fact even if a man has come to old age they slay him and feast upon him; but very few of them come to be reckoned as old, for they kill every one who falls into sickness, before he reaches old age.         99. [1] alloi de tun Indun pros eu oikeontes toutun nomades eisi kreun edestai umun, kaleontai de Padaioi, nomaioisi de toioiside legontai xrasthai. os an kamei tun astun, en te gyne en te aner, ton men andra andres oi malista oi omileontes kteinoysi, famenoi ayton tekomenon tei nousui ta krea sfisi diaftheiresthai. o de aparnos esti me men noseein, oi de oy sygginuskomenoi apokteinantes kateyuxeontai. [2] e de an gyne kamei, usautus ai epixreumenai malista gynaikes tayta toisi andrasi poieusi. ton gar de es geiras apikomenon thusantes kateyuxeontai. es de toutoy logon oy polloi tines aytun apikneontai. pro gar tou ton es nouson piptonta panta kteinoysi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [100]

     100. Other Indians have on the contrary a manner of life as follows:--they neither kill any living thing nor do they sow any crops nor is it their custom to possess houses; but they feed on herbs, and they have a grain of the size of millet, in a sheath, which grows of itself from the ground; this they gather and boil with the sheath, and make it their food: and whenever any of them falls into sickness, he goes to the desert country and lies there, and none of them pay any attention either to one who is dead or to one who is sick.         100. [1] eterun de esti Indun ode allos tropos. oyte kteinoysi oyden empsyxon oyte ti speiroysi oyte oikias nomizoysi ekteisthai poiefageoysi te. kai aytoisi esti oson kegxros to megathos en kalyki, aytomaton ek teis geis ginomenon, to syllegontes aytei tei kalyki epsoysi te kai siteontai. os d' an es nouson aytun pesei, elthun es ten eremon keitai. frontizei de oydeis oyte apothanontos oyte kamnontos.    
      101. The sexual intercourse of all these Indians of whom I have spoken is open like that of cattle, and they have all one colour of skin, resembling that of the Ethiopians: moreover the seed which they emit is not white like that of other races, but black like their skin; and the Ethiopians also are similar in this respect. These tribes of Indians dwell further off than the Persian power extends, and towards the South Wind, and they never became subjects of Dareios.         101. [1] mixis de toutun tun Indun tun katelexa pantun emfanes esti kata per tun probatun, kai to xruma foreoysi omoion pantes kai paraplesion Aithiopsi. [2] e gone de aytun, ten apientai es tas gynaikas, oy kata per tun allun anthrupun esti leyke, alla melaina kata per to xruma. toiauten de kai Aithiopes apientai thoren. oytoi men tun Indun ekasteru tun Perseun oikeoysi kai pros notoy anemoy, kai Dareioy basileos oydama ypekoysan.    
      102. Others however of the Indians are on the borders of the city of Caspatyros and the country of Pactyike, dwelling towards the North of the other Indians; and they have a manner of living nearly the same as that of the Bactrians: these are the most warlike of the Indians, and these are they who make expeditions for the gold. For in the parts where they live it is desert on account of the sand; and in this desert and sandy tract are produced ants, which are in size smaller than dogs but larger than foxes, for there are some of them kept at the residence of the king of Persia, which are caught here. These ants then make their dwelling under ground and carry up the sand just in the same manner as the ants found in the land of the Hellenes, which they themselves also very much resemble in form; and the sand which is brought up contains gold. To obtain this sand the Indians make expeditions into the desert, each one having yoked together three camels, placing a female in the middle and a male like a trace-horse to draw by each side. On this female he mounts himself, having arranged carefully that she shall be taken to be yoked from young ones, the more lately born the better. For their female camels are not inferior to horses in speed, and moreover they are much more capable of bearing weights.         102. [1] alloi de tun Indun Kaspaturui te poli kai tei Paktyikei xurei eisi prosoyroi, pros arktoy te kai boreu anemoy katoikemenoi tun allun Indun, oi Baktrioisi paraplesien exoysi diaitan. oytoi kai maximutatoi eisi Indun kai oi epi ton xryson stellomenoi eisi oytoi. kata gar touto esti eremie dia ten psammon. [2] en de un tei eremiei tautei kai tei psammui ginontai murmekes megathea exontes kynun men elassona alupekun de mezona. eisi gar aytun kai para basilei tui Perseun entheuten thereythentes. oytoi un oi murmekes poieumenoi oikesin ypo gein anaforeoysi ten psammon kata per oi en toisi Ellesi murmekes kata ton ayton tropon, eisi de kai aytoi to eidos omoiotatoi. e de psammos e anaferomene esti xrysitis. [3] epi de tauten ten psammon stellontai es ten eremon oi Indoi, zeyxamenos ekastos kameloys treis, seireforon men ekateruthen ersena parelkein, thelean de es meson. epi tauten de aytos anabainei, epitedeusas okus apo teknun us neutatun apospasas zeuxei. ai gar sfi kameloi ippun oyk essones es taxyteita eisi, xuris de axthea dynatuterai pollon ferein.    
      103. As to the form of the camel, I do not here describe it, since the Hellenes for whom I write are already acquainted with it, but I shall tell that which is not commonly known about it, which is this:--the camel has in the hind legs four thighs and four knees, and its organs of generation are between the hind legs, turned towards the tail.         103. [1] to men de eidos okoion ti exei e kamelos, epistamenoisi toisi Ellesi oy syggrafu. to de me episteatai ayteis, touto frasu. kamelos en toisi opisthioisi skelesi exei tesseras merous kai gounata tessera, ta te aidoia dia tun opisthiun skeleun pros ten oyren tetrammena.    
      104. The Indians, I say, ride out to get the gold in the manner and with the kind of yoking which I have described, making calculations so that they may be engaged in carrying it off at the time when the greatest heat prevails; for the heat causes the ants to disappear underground. Now among these nations the sun is hottest in the morning hours, not at midday as with others, but from sunrise to the time of closing the market: and during this time it produces much greater heat than at midday in Hellas, so that it is said that then they drench themselves with water. Midday however has about equal degree of heat with the Indians as with other men, while after midday their sun becomes like the morning sun with other men, and after this, as it goes further away, it produces still greater coolness, until at last at sunset it makes the air very cool indeed.         104. [1] oi de de Indoi tropui toioutui kai zeuxi toiautei xreumenoi elaunoysi epi ton xryson lelogismenus okus kaymatun tun thermotatun eontun esontai en tei arpagei. ypo gar tou kaumatos oi murmekes afanees ginontai ypo gein. [2] thermotatos de esti o elios toutoisi toisi anthrupoisi to euthinon, oy kata per toisi alloisi mesambries, all' yperteilas mexri oy agoreis dialusios. touton de ton xronon kaiei pollui mallon e tei mesambriei ten Ellada, oytu ust' en ydati logos aytous esti brexesthai tenikauta. [3] mesousa de e emere sxedon paraplesius kaiei tous te alloys anthrupoys kai tous Indous. apoklinomenes de teis mesambries ginetai sfi o elios kata per toisi alloisi o euthinos, kai to apo toutoy apiun epi mallon psuxei, es o epi dysmeisi eun kai to karta psuxei.    
      105. When the Indians have come to the place with bags, they fill them with the sand and ride away back as quickly as they can, for forthwith the ants, perceiving, as the Persians allege, by the smell, begin to pursue them: and this animal, they say, is superior to every other creature in swiftness, so that unless the Indians got a start in their course, while the ants were gathering together, not one of them would escape. So then the male camels, for they are inferior in speed of running to the females, if they drag behind are even let loose from the side of the female, one after the other; the females however, remembering the young which they left behind, do not show any slackness in their course. Thus it is that the Indians get most part of the gold, as the Persians say; there is however other gold also in their land obtained by digging, but in smaller quantities.         105. [1] epean de elthusi es ton xuron oi Indoi exontes thylakia, emplesantes tauta teis psammoy ten taxisten elaunoysi opisu. aytika gar oi murmekes odmei, us de legetai ypo Perseun, mathontes diukoysi. einai de taxyteita oydeni eterui omoion, oytu uste, ei me prolambanein tous Indous teis odou en ui tous murmekas syllegesthai, oydena an sfeun aposuzesthai. [2] tous men nyn ersenas tun kamelun, einai gar essonas theein tun theleun, paraluesthai epelkomenoys, oyk omou amfoteroys. tas de theleas anamimneskomenas tun elipon teknun endidonai malakon oyden. ton men de pleu tou xrysou oytu oi Indoi ktuntai, us Persai fasi. allos de spaniuteros esti en tei xurei oryssomenos.    
      106. It seems indeed that the extremities of the inhabited world had allotted to them by nature the fairest things, just as it was the lot of Hellas to have its seasons far more fairly tempered than other lands: for first, India is the most distant of inhabited lands towards the East, as I have said a little above, and in this land not only the animals, birds as well as four-footed beasts, are much larger than in other places (except the horses, which are surpassed by those of Media called Nessaian), but also there is gold in abundance there, some got by digging, some brought down by rivers, and some carried off as I explained just now: and there also the trees which grow wild produce wool which surpasses in beauty and excellence that from sheep, and the Indians wear clothing obtained from these trees.         106. [1] ai d' esxatiai kus teis oikeomenes ta kallista elaxon, kata per e Ellas tas uras pollon ti kallista kekremenas elaxe. [2] touto men gar pros ten eu esxate tun oikeomeneun e Indike esti, usper oligui proteron eireka. en tautei touto men ta empsyxa, tetrapoda te kai ta peteina, pollui mezu e en toisi alloisi xurioisi esti, parex tun ippun (oytoi de essountai ypo tun Medikun, Nesaiun de kaleymenun ippun), touto de xrysos apletos aytothi esti, o men oryssomenos, o de kataforeumenos ypo potamun, o de usper esemena arpazomenos. [3] ta de dendrea ta agria aytothi ferei karpon eiria kallonei te proferonta kai aretei tun apo tun oiun. kai estheiti Indoi apo toutun tun dendreun xreuntai.    
      107. Then again Arabia is the furthest of inhabited lands in the direction of the midday, and in it alone of all lands grow frankincense and myrrh and cassia and cinnamon and gum-mastich. All these except myrrh are got with difficulty by the Arabians. Frankincense they collect by burning the storax, which is brought thence to the Hellenes by the Phenicians, by burning this, I say, so as to produce smoke they take it; for these trees which produce frankincense are guarded by winged serpents, small in size and of various colours, which watch in great numbers about each tree, of the same kind as those which attempt to invade Egypt: and they cannot be driven away from the trees by any other thing but only the smoke of storax.         107. [1] pros d' ay mesambries esxate Arabie tun oikeomeneun xureun esti, en de tautei libanutos te esti mounei xureun paseun fyomenos kai smurne kai kasie kai kinamumon kai ledanon. tauta panta plen teis smurnes dyspeteus ktuntai oi Arabioi. [2] ton men ge libanuton syllegoysi ten sturaka thymiuntes, ten es Ellenas Foinikes exagoysi. tauten thymiuntes lambanoysi. ta gar dendrea tauta ta libanutofora ofies ypopteroi, mikroi ta megathea, poikiloi ta eidea, fylassoysi plethei polloi peri dendron ekaston, oytoi oi per ep' Aigypton epistrateuontai, oydeni de allui apelaunontai apo tun dendreun e teis sturakos tui kapnui.    
      108. The Arabians say also that all the world would have been by this time filled with these serpents, if that did not happen with regard to them which I knew happened with regard to vipers: and it seems that the Divine Providence, as indeed was to be expected, seeing that it is wise, has made all those animals prolific which are of cowardly spirit and good for food, in order that they may not be all eaten up and their race fail, whereas it has made those which are bold and noxious to have small progeny. For example, because the hare is hunted by every beast and bird as well as by man, therefore it is so very prolific as it is: and this is the only one of all beasts which becomes pregnant again before the former young are born, and has in its womb some of its young covered with fur and others bare; and while one is just being shaped in the matrix, another is being conceived. Thus it is in this case; whereas the lioness, which is the strongest and most courageous of creatures, produces one cub once only in her life; for when she produces young she casts out her womb together with her young; and the cause of it is this:--when the cub being within the mother begins to move about, then having claws by far sharper than those of any other beast he tears the womb, and as he grows larger he proceeds much further in his scratching: at last the time of birth approaches and there is now nothing at all left of it in a sound condition.         108. [1] legoysi de kai tode Arabioi, us pasa an gei epimplato tun ofiun toutun, ei me ginesthai kat' aytous oion ti kata tas exidnas epistamen ginesthai. [2] kai kus tou theioy e pronoie, usper kai oikos esti, eousa sofe, osa men psyxen te deila kai edudima, tauta men panta polugona pepoieke, ina me epilipei katesthiomena, osa de sxetlia kai aniera, oligogona. [3] touto men, oti o lagos ypo pantos thereuetai therioy kai ornithos kai anthrupoy, oytu de ti polugonon esti. epikyisketai mounon pantun theriun, kai to men dasu tun teknun en tei gastri to de psilon, to de arti en teisi metreisi plassetai, to de anaireetai. [4] touto men de toiouto esti. e de de leaina eon isxyrotaton kai thrasutaton apax en tui biui tiktei en. tiktoysa gar synekballei tui teknui tas metras. to de aition toutoy tode esti. epean o skumnos en tei metri eun arxetai diakineomenos, o de exun onyxas theriun pollon pantun oxytatoys amussei tas metras, ayxomenos te de pollui mallon esikneetai katagrafun. pelas te de o tokos esti, kai to parapan leipetai ayteun ygies oyden.    
      109. Just so also, if vipers and the winged serpents of the Arabians were produced in the ordinary course of their nature, man would not be able to live upon the earth; but as it is, when they couple with one another and the male is in the act of generation, as he lets go from him the seed, the female seizes hold of his neck, and fastening on to it does not relax her hold till she has eaten it through. The male then dies in the manner which I have said, but the female pays the penalty of retribution for the male in this manner:--the young while they are still in the womb take vengeance for their father by eating through their mother, and having eaten through her belly they thus make their way out for themselves. Other serpents however, which are not hurtful to man, produce eggs and hatch from them a very large number of offspring. Now vipers are distributed over all the earth; but the others, which are winged, are found in great numbers together in Arabia and in no other land: therefore it is that they appear to be numerous.         109. [1] us de kai oi exidnai te kai oi en Arabioisi ypopteroi ofies ei eginonto us e fusis aytoisi yparxei, oyk an En biusima anthrupoisi. nun d' epean thornuuntai kata zeugea kai en aytei ei o ersen tei ekpoiesi, apiemenoy aytou ten gonen e thelea aptetai teis deireis, kai emfusa oyk aniei prin an diafagei. [2] o men de ersen apothneskei tropui tui eiremenui, e de thelea tisin toiende apotinei tui erseni. tui gonei timureonta eti en tei gastri eonta ta tekna diesthiei ten metera, diafagonta de ten nedun ayteis oytu ten ekdysin poieetai. [3] oi de alloi ofies eontes anthrupun oy delemones tiktoysi te uia kai eklepoysi pollon ti xreima tun teknun. ai men nyn exidnai kata pasan ten gein eisi, oi de ypopteroi ofies athrooi eisi en tei Arabiei kai oydamei allei. kata touto dokeoysi polloi einai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [110]

     110. This frankincense then is obtained thus by the Arabians; and cassia is obtained as follows:-- they bind up in cows'-hide and other kinds of skins all their body and their face except only the eyes, and then go to get the cassia. This grows in a pool not very deep, and round the pool and in it lodge, it seems, winged beasts nearly resembling bats, and they squeak horribly and are courageous in fight. These they must keep off from their eyes, and so cut the cassia.         110. [1] ton men de libanuton touton oytu ktuntai Arabioi, ten de kasien ude. epean katadesuntai burseisi kai dermasi alloisi pan to suma kai to prosupon plen aytun tun ofthalmun, erxontai epi ten kasien. e de en limnei fuetai oy batheei, peri de ayten kai en aytei aylizetai koy theria pteruta, teisi nykterisi proseikela malista, kai tetrige deinon, kai es alken alkima. ta dei apamynomenoys apo tun ofthalmun oytu drepein ten kasien.    
      111. Cinnamon they collect in a yet more marvellous manner than this: for where it grows and what land produces it they are not able to tell, except only that some say (and it is a probable account) that it grows in those regions where Dionysos was brought up; and they say that large birds carry those dried sticks which we have learnt from the Phenicians to call cinnamon, carry them, I say, to nests which are made of clay and stuck on to precipitous sides of mountains, which man can find no means of scaling. With regard to this then the Arabians practise the following contrivance:-- they divide up the limbs of the oxen and asses that die and of their other beasts of burden, into pieces as large as convenient, and convey them to these places, and when they have laid them down not far from the nests, they withdraw to a distance from them: and the birds fly down and carry the limbs of the beasts of burden off to their nests; and these are not able to bear them, but break down and fall to the earth; and the men come up to them and collect the cinnamon. Thus cinnamon is collected and comes from this nation to the other countries of the world.         111. [1] to de de kinamumon eti toutun thumastoteron syllegoysi. okoy men gar ginetai kai etis min gei e trefoysa esti, oyk exoysi eipein, plen oti logui oikoti xreumenoi en toiside xurioisi fasi tines ayto fuesthai en toisi o Dionysos etrafe. [2] ornithas de legoysi megalas foreein tauta ta karfea ta emeis apo Foinikun mathontes kinamumon kaleomen, foreein de tas ornithas es neossias prospeplasmenas ek pelou pros apokremnoisi oresi, entha prosbasin anthrupui oydemian einai. [3] pros un de tauta tous Arabioys sofizesthai tade. boun te kai onun tun apoginomenun kai tun allun ypozygiun ta melea diatamontas us megista komizein es tauta ta xuria, kai sfea thentas agxou tun neossieun apallassesthai ekas ayteun. tas de ornithas katapetomenas ta melea tun ypozygiun anaforeein epi tas neossias, tas de oy dynamenas isxein katarregnysthai epi gein, tous de epiontas syllegein. oytu men to kinamumon syllegomenon ek toutun apikneesthai es tas allas xuras.    
      112. Gum-mastich however, which the Arabians call ladanon, comes in a still more extraordinary manner; for though it is the most sweet-scented of all things, it comes in the most evil- scented thing, since it is found in the beards of he-goats, produced there like resin from wood: this is of use for the making of many perfumes, and the Arabians use it more than anything else as incense.         112. [1] to de de ledanon, to kaleoysi Arabioi ladanon, eti toutoy thumasiuteron ginetai. en gar dysodmotatui ginomenon eyudestaton esti. tun gar aigun tun tragun en toisi pugusi eyrisketai egginomenon oion gloios apo teis yles. xresimon d' es polla tun murun esti, thymiusi te malista touto Arabioi.    
      113. Let what we have said suffice with regard to spices; and from the land of Arabia there blows a scent of them most marvellously sweet. They have also two kinds of sheep which are worthy of admiration and are not found in any other land: the one kind has the tail long, not less than three cubits in length; and if one should allow these to drag these after them, they would have sores from their tails being worn away against the ground; but as it is, every one of the shepherds knows enough of carpentering to make little cars, which they tie under the tails, fastening the tail of each animal to a separate little car. The other kind of sheep has the tail broad, even as much as a cubit in breadth.         113. [1] tosauta men thyumatun peri eiresthu, apozei de teis xures teis Arabies thespesion us edu. duo de genea oiun sfi esti thumatos axia, ta oydamothi eteruthi esti. to men aytun eteron exei tas oyras makras, triun pexeun oyk elassonas, tas ei tis epeie sfi epelkein, elkea an exoien anatribomeneun pros tei gei tun oyreun. [2] nun d' apas tis tun poimenun epistatai xyloyrgeein es tosouto. amaxidas gar poieuntes ypodeoysi aytas teisi oyreisi, enos ekastoy kteneos ten oyren epi amaxida ekasten katadeontes. to de eteron genos tun oiun tas oyras plateas foreoysi kai epi peixyn platos.    
      114. As one passes beyond the place of the midday, the Ethiopian land is that which extends furthest of all inhabited lands towards the sunset. This produces both gold in abundance and huge elephants and trees of all kinds growing wild and ebony, and men who are of all men the tallest, the most beautiful and the most long-lived.         114. [1] apoklinomenes de mesambries parekei pros dunonta elion e Aithiopie xure esxate tun oikeomeneun. ayte de xryson te ferei pollon kai elefantas amfilafeas kai dendrea panta agria kai ebenon kai andras megistoys kai kallistoys kai makrobiutatoys.    
      115. These are the extremities in Asia and in Libya; but as to the extremities of Europe towards the West, I am not able to speak with certainty: for neither do I accept the tale that there is a river called in Barbarian tongue Eridanos, flowing into the sea which lies towards the North Wind, whence it is said that amber comes; nor do I know of the real existence of "Tin Islands" from which tin comes to us: for first the name Eridanos itself declares that it is Hellenic and that it does not belong to a Barbarian speech, but was invented by some poet; and secondly I am not able to hear from any one who has been an eye-witness, though I took pains to discover this, that there is a sea on the other side of Europe. However that may be, tin and amber certainly come to us from the extremity of Europe.         115. [1] aytai men nyn en te tei Asiei esxatiai eisi kai en tei Libuei. peri de tun en tei Eyrupei tun pros esperen esxatieun exu men oyk atrekeus legein. oyte gar eguge endekomai Eridanon kaleesthai pros barbarun potamon ekdidonta es thalassan ten pros boreen anemon, ap' otey to elektron foitan logos esti, oyte nesoys oida Kassiteridas eousas, ek tun o kassiteros emin foitai. [2] touto men gar o Eridanos ayto kategoreei to oynoma us esti Ellenikon kai oy barbaron, ypo poieteu de tinos poiethen. touto de oydenos aytopteu genomenoy dunamai akousai, touto meletun, okus thalassa esti ta epekeina Eyrupes. ex esxates d' un o kassiteros emin foitai kai to elektron.    
      116. Then again towards the North of Europe, there is evidently a quantity of gold by far larger than in any other land: as to how it is got, here again I am not able to say for certain, but it is said to be carried off from the griffins by Arimaspians, a one-eyed race of men. But I do not believe this tale either, that nature produces one-eyed men which in all other respects are like other men. However, it would seem that the extremities which bound the rest of the world on every side and enclose it in the midst, possess the things which by us are thought to be the most beautiful and the most rare.         116. [1] pros de arktoy teis Eyrupes pollui ti pleistos xrysos fainetai eun. okus men ginomenos, oyk exu oyde touto atrekeus eipai, legetai de ypek tun grypun arpazein Arimaspous andras moynofthalmoys. [2] peithomai de oyde touto okus moynofthalmoi andres fuontai, fusin exontes ten allen omoien toisi alloisi anthrupoisi. [3] ai de un esxatiai oikasi, perikleioysai ten allen xuren kai entos apergoysai, ta kallista dokeonta emin einai kai spaniutata exein aytai.    
      117. Now there is a plain in Asia bounded by mountains on all sides, and through the mountains there are five clefts. This plain belonged once to the Chorasmians, and it lies on the borders of the Chorasmians themselves, the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Sarangians, and Thamanaians; but from the time that the Persians began to bear rule it belongs to the king. From this enclosing mountain of which I speak there flows a great river, and its name is Akes. This formerly watered the lands of these nations which have been mentioned, being divided into five streams and conducted through a separate cleft in the mountains to each separate nation; but from the time that they have come to be under the Persians they have suffered as follows:--the king built up the clefts in the mountains and set gates at each cleft; and so, since the water has been shut off from its outlet, the plain within the mountains is made into a sea, because the river runs into it and has no way out in any direction. Those therefore who in former times had been wont to make use of the water, not being able now to make use of it are in great trouble: for during the winter they have rain from heaven, as also other men have, but in the summer they desire to use the water when they sow millet and sesame seed. So then, the water not being granted to them, they come to the Persians both themselves and their wives, and standing at the gates of the king's court they cry and howl; and the king orders that for those who need it most, the gates which lead to their land shall be opened; and when their land has become satiated with drinking in the water, these gates are closed, and he orders the gates to be opened for others, that is to say those most needing it of the rest who remain: and, as I have heard, he exacts large sums of money for opening them, besides the regular tribute.         117. [1] esti de pedion en tei Asiei perikekleimenon orei pantothen, diasfages de tou oreos eisi pente. touto to pedion En men kote Khorasmiun, en oyroisi eon Khorasmiun te aytun kai Yrkaniun kai Parthun kai Saraggeun kai Thamanaiun, epeite de Persai exoysi to kratos, esti tou basileos. [2] ek de un tou perikleiontos oreos toutoy rheei potamos megas, oynoma de oi esti Akes. oytos proteron men ardeske dialelammenos pentaxou toutun tun eiremenun tas xuras, dia diasfagos agomenos ekastes ekastoisi. epeite de ypo tui Persei eisi, peponthasi toionde. [3] tas diasfagas tun oreun endeimas o basileus pulas ep' ekastei diasfagi estese. apokekleimenoy de tou ydatos teis exodoy to pedion to entos tun oreun pelagos ginetai, endidontos men tou potamou, exontos de oydamei exelysin. [4] oytoi un oi per emprosthe euthesan xrasthai tui ydati, oyk exontes aytui xrasthai symforei megalei diaxreuntai. ton men gar xeimuna yei sfi o theos usper kai toisi alloisi anthrupoisi, tou de thereos speirontes melinen kai sesamon xreiskontai tui ydati. [5] epean un meden sfi paradidutai tou ydatos, elthontes es tous Persas aytoi te kai gynaikes, stantes kata tas thuras tou basileos bousi uryomenoi, o de basileus toisi deomenoisi aytun malista entelletai anoigein tas pulas tas es touto ferousas. [6] epean de diakoros e gei sfeun genetai pinoysa to ydur, aytai men ai pulai apokleiontai, allas d' entelletai anoigein alloisi toisi deomenoisi malista tun loipun. us d' egu oida akousas, xremata megala pressomenos anoigei parex tou foroy. tauta men de exei oytu.   
      118. Thus it is with these matters: but of the seven men who had risen against the Magian, it happened to one, namely Intaphrenes, to be put to death immediately after their insurrection for an outrage which I shall relate. He desired to enter into the king's palace and confer with the king; for the law was in fact so, that those who had risen up against the Magian were permitted to go in to the king's presence without any one to announce them, unless the king happened to be lying with his wife. Accordingly Intaphrenes did not think it fit that any one should announce his coming; but as he was one of the seven, he desired to enter. The gatekeeper however and the bearer of messages endeavoured to prevent him, saying that the king was lying with his wife: but Intaphrenes believing that they were not speaking the truth, drew his sword and cut off their ears and their noses, and stringing these upon his horse's bridle he tied them round their necks and so let them go.         118. [1] tun de tui Magui epanastantun epta andrun, ena aytun Intafrenea katelabe ybrisanta tade apothanein aytika meta ten epanastasin. ethele es ta basileia eselthun xrematisasthai tui basilei. kai gar de kai o nomos oytu eixe, toisi epanastasi tui Magui esodon einai para basilea aney aggeloy, en me gynaiki tygxanei misgomenos basileus. [2] oykun de Intafrenes edikaioy oydena oi esaggeilai, all' oti En tun epta, esienai ethele. o de pyloyros kai o aggelieforos oy periurun, famenoi ton basilea gynaiki misgesthai. o de Intafrenes dokeun sfeas pseudea legein poieei toiade. spasamenos ton akinakea apotamnei aytun ta te uta kai tas rhinas, kai aneiras peri ton xalinon tou ippoy peri tous ayxenas sfeun edese, kai apeike.    
      119. Upon this they showed themselves to the king and told the cause for which they had suffered this; and Dareios, fearing that the six might have done this by common design, sent for each one separately and made trial of his inclinations, as to whether he approved of that which had been done: and when he was fully assured that Intaphrenes had not done this in combination with them, he took both Intaphrenes himself and his sons and all his kinsmen, being much disposed to believe that he was plotting insurrection against him with the help of his relations; and having seized them he put them in bonds as for execution. Then the wife of Intaphrenes, coming constantly to the doors of the king's court, wept and bewailed herself; and by doing this continually after the same manner she moved Dareios to pity her. Accordingly he sent a messenger and said to her: "Woman, king Dareios grants to thee to save from death one of thy kinsmen who are lying in bonds, whomsoever thou desirest of them all." She then, having considered with herself, answered thus: "If in truth the king grants me the life of one, I choose of them all my brother." Dareios being informed of this, and marvelling at her speech, sent and addressed her thus: "Woman, the king asks thee what was in thy mind, that thou didst leave thy husband and thy children to die, and didst choose thy brother to survive, seeing that he is surely less near to thee in blood than thy children, and less dear to thee than thy husband." She made answer: "O king, I might, if heaven willed, have another husband and other children, if I should lose these; but another brother I could by no means have, seeing that my father and my mother are no longer alive. This was in my mind when I said those words." To Dareios then it seemed that the woman had spoken well, and he let go not only him for whose life she asked, but also the eldest of her sons because he was pleased with her: but all the others he slew. One therefore of the seven had perished immediately in the manner which has been related.         119. [1] oi de tui basilei deiknuoysi euytous kai ten aitien eipon di' en peponthotes eiesan. Dareios de arrudesas me koinui logui oi ex pepoiekotes eusi tauta, metapempomenos ena ekaston apepeirato gnumes, ei synepainoi eisi tui pepoiemenui. [2] epeite de exemathe us oy sun keinoisi eie tauta pepoiekus, elabe ayton te ton Intafrenea kai tous paidas aytou kai tous oikeioys pantas, elpidas pollas exun meta tun syggeneun min epiboyleuein oi epanastasin, syllabun de sfeas edese ten epi thanatui. [3] e de gyne tou Intafreneos foitusa epi tas thuras tou basileos klaieske an kai odyresketo. poieusa de aiei tuyto touto ton Dareion epeise oikteirai min. pempsas de aggelon elege tade. <<u gunai, basileus toi Dareios didoi ena tun dedemenun oikeiun rhusasthai ton bouleai ek pantun.>> [4] e de boyleysamene ypekrineto tade. <<ei men de moi didoi basileus enos ten psyxen, aireomai ek pantun ton adelfeon.>> [5] pythomenos de Dareios tauta kai thumasas ton logon, pempsas egoreye <<u gunai, eirutai se basileus, tina exoysa gnumen, ton andra te kai ta tekna egkatalipousa, ton adelfeon eiley perieinai toi, os kai allotriuteros toi tun paidun kai Esson kexarismenos tou andros esti.>> [6] e d' ameibeto toiside. <<u basileu, aner men moi an allos genoito, ei daimun etheloi, kai tekna alla, ei tauta apobaloimi. patros de kai metros oyketi mey zuontun adelfeos an allos oydeni tropui genoito. tautei tei gnumei xreumene elexa tauta.>> [7] ey te de edoxe tui Dareiui eipein e gyne, kai oi apeike touton te ton paraiteeto kai tun paidun ton presbutaton, estheis aytei, tous de alloys apekteine pantas. tun men de epta eis aytika tropui tui eiremenui apolulee.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [120]

     120. Now about the time of the sickness of Cambyses it had come to pass as follows:--There was one Oroites, a Persian, who had been appointed by Cyrus to be governor of the province of Sardis. This man had set his desire upon an unholy thing; for though from Polycrates the Samian he had never suffered anything nor heard any offensive word nor even seen him before that time, he desired to take him and put him to death for a reason of this kind, as most who report the matter say:--while Oroites and another Persian whose name was Mitrobates, ruler of the province of Daskyleion, were sitting at the door of the king's court, they came from words to strife with one another; and as they debated their several claims to excellence, Mitrobates taunting Oroites said: "Dost thou count thyself a man, who didst never yet win for the king the island of Samos, which lies close to thy province, when it is so exceedingly easy of conquest that one of the natives of it rose up against the government with fifteen men-at-arms and got possession of the island, and is now despot of it?" Some say that because he heard this and was stung by the reproach, he formed the desire, not so much to take vengeance on him who said this, as to bring Polycrates to destruction at all costs, since by reason of him he was ill spoken of:         120. [1] kata de koy malista ten Kambuseu nouson egineto tade. ypo Kuroy katastatheis En Sardiun yparxos Oroites aner Perses. oytos epethumese pregmatos oyk osioy. oyte gar ti pathun oyte akousas mataion epos pros Polykrateos tou Samioy, oyde idun proteron, epethumee labun ayton apolesai, us men oi pleunes legoysi, dia toiende tina aitien. [2] epi tun basileos thyreun katemenon ton te Oroitea kai allon Persen tui oynoma einai Mitrobatea, nomou arxonta tou en Daskyleiui, toutoys ek logun es neikea sympesein, krinomenun de peri areteis eipein ton Mitrobatea tui Oroitei proferonta [3] <<su gar en andrun logui, os basilei neison Samon pros tui sui nomui proskeimenen oy prosektesao, ude de ti eousan eypetea xeirutheinai, ten tun tis epixuriun pentekaideka opliteisi epanastas esxe kai nun ayteis tyranneuei;>> [4] oi men de min fasi touto akousanta kai algesanta tui oneidei epithymeisai oyk oytu ton eipanta tauta tisasthai us Polykratea pantus apolesai, di' ontina kakus ekoyse.    
      121. the lesser number however of those who tell the tale say that Oroites sent a herald to Samos to ask for something or other, but what it was is not mentioned; and Polycrates happened to be lying down in the men's chamber of his palace, and Anacreon also of Teos was present with him: and somehow, whether it was by intention and because he made no account of the business of Oroites, or whether some chance occurred to bring it about, it happened that the envoy of Oroites came into his presence and spoke with him, and Polycrates, who chanced to be turned away towards the wall, neither turned round at all nor made any answer.         121. [1] oi de elassones legoysi pempsai Oroitea es Samon keryka otey de xrematos deesomenon (oy gar un de touto ge legetai), kai ton Polykratea tyxein katakeimenon en andreuni, pareinai de oi kai Anakreonta ton Teion. [2] kai kus eit' ek pronoies ayton katelogeonta ta Oroiteu pregmata, eite kai syntyxie tis toiaute epegeneto. ton te gar keryka ton Oroiteu parelthonta dialegesthai, kai ton Polykratea (tyxein gar apestrammenon pros ton toixon) oyte ti metastrafeinai oyte ypokrinasthai.    
      122. The cause then of the death of Polycrates is reported in these two different ways, and we may believe whichever of them we please. Oroites however, having his residence at that Magnesia which is situated upon the river Maiander, sent Myrsos the son of Gyges, a Lydian, to Samos bearing a message, since he had perceived the designs of Polycrates. For Polycrates was the first of the Hellenes of whom we have any knowledge, who set his mind upon having command of the sea, excepting Minos the Cnossian and any other who may have had command of the sea before his time. Of that which we call mortal race Polycrates was the first; and he had great expectation of becoming ruler of Ionia and of the islands. Oroites accordingly, having perceived that he had this design, sent a message to him and said thus: "Oroites to Polycrates saith as follows: I hear that thou art making plans to get great power, and that thou hast not wealth according to thy high thoughts. Now therefore if thou shalt do as I shall say, thou wilt do well for thyself on the one hand, and also save me from destruction: for king Cambyses is planning death for me, and this is reported to me so that I cannot doubt it. Do thou then carry away out of danger both myself and with me my wealth; and of this keep a part for thyself and a part let me keep, and then so far as wealth may bring it about, thou shalt be ruler of all Hellas. And if thou dost not believe that which I say about the money, send some one, whosoever happens to be most trusted by thee, and to him I will show it."         122. [1] aitiai men de aytai difasiai legontai tou thanatoy tou Polykrateos genesthai, paresti de peithesthai okoterei tis bouletai ayteun. o de un Oroites izomenos en Magnesiei tei yper Maiandroy potamou oikemenei epempe Murson ton Gugeu andra Lydon es Samon aggelien feronta, mathun tou Polykrateos ton noon. [2] Polykrates gar esti prutos tun emeis idmen Ellenun os thalassokrateein epenoethe, parex Minuos te tou Knussioy kai ei de tis allos proteros toutoy Erxe teis thalasses. teis de anthrupeies legomenes geneeis Polykrates prutos, elpidas pollas exun Iunies te kai nesun arxein. [3] mathun un tauta min dianoeumenon o Oroites pempsas aggelien elege tade. <<Oroites Polykratei ude legei. pynthanomai epiboyleuein se pregmasi megaloisi, kai xremata toi oyk einai kata ta fronemata. su nyn ude poiesas orthuseis men seuyton, suseis de kai eme. emoi gar basileus Kambuses epiboyleuei thanaton, kai moi touto exaggelletai safeneus. [4] su nyn eme ekkomisas ayton kai xremata, ta men aytun aytos exe, ta de eme ea exein. eineken te xrematun arxeis apases teis Ellados. ei de moi apisteeis ta peri tun xrematun, pempson ostis toi pistotatos tygxanei eun, tui egu apodexu.>>    
      123. Polycrates having heard this rejoiced, and was disposed to agree; and as he had a great desire, it seems, for wealth, he first sent Maiandrios the son of Maiandrios, a native of Samos who was his secretary, to see it: this man was the same who not long after these events dedicated all the ornaments of the men's chamber in the palace of Polycrates, ornaments well worth seeing, as an offering to the temple of Hera. Oroites accordingly, having heard that the person sent to examine might be expected soon to come, did as follows, that is to say, he filled eight chests with stones except a small depth at the very top of each, and laid gold above upon the stones; then he tied up the chests and kept them in readiness. So Maiandrios came and looked at them and brought back word to Polycrates:         123. [1] tauta akousas Polykrates esthe te kai ebouleto. kai kus imeireto gar xrematun megalus, apopempei pruta katopsomenon Maiandrion Maiandrioy andra tun astun, os oi En grammatistes. os xronui oy pollui ysteron toutun ton kosmon ton ek tou andreunos tou Polykrateos eonta axiotheeton anetheke panta es to Eraion. [2] o de Oroites mathun ton kataskopon eonta prosdokimon epoiee toiade. larnakas oktu plerusas lithun plen karta braxeos tou peri ayta ta xeilea, epipoleis tun lithun xryson epebale, katadesas de tas larnakas eixe etoimas. elthun de o Maiandrios kai theesamenos apeggelle tui Polykratei.    
      124. and he upon that prepared to set out thither, although the diviners and also his friends strongly dissuaded him from it, and in spite moreover of a vision which his daughter had seen in sleep of this kind,--it seemed to her that her father was raised up on high and was bathed by Zeus and anointed by the Sun. Having seen this vision, she used every kind of endeavour to dissuade Polycrates from leaving his land to go to Oroites, and besides that, as he was going to his fifty-oared galley she accompanied his departure with prophetic words: and he threatened her that if he should return safe, she should remain unmarried for long; but she prayed that this might come to pass, for she desired rather, she said, to be unmarried for long than to be an orphan, having lost her father.         124. [1] o de polla men tun mantiun apagoreyontun polla de tun filun estelleto aytose, pros de kai idouses teis thygatros opsin enypnioy toiende. edokee oi ton patera en tui eeri meteuron eonta lousthai men ypo tou Dios, xriesthai de ypo tou elioy. [2] tauten idousa ten opsin pantoie egineto me apodemeisai ton Polykratea para ton Oroitea, kai de kai iontos aytou epi ten pentekonteron epefemizeto. o de oi epeilese, en sus aponostesei, pollon min xronon partheneuesthai. e de eresato epitelea tauta genesthai. boulesthai gar partheneuesthai pleu xronon e tou patros estereisthai.    
      125. Polycrates however neglected every counsel and set sail to go to Oroites, taking with him, besides many others of his friends, Demokedes also the son of Calliphon, a man of Croton, who was a physician and practised his art better than any other man of is time. Then when he arrived at Magnesia, Polycrates was miserably put to death in a manner unworthy both of himself and of his high ambition: for excepting those who become despots of the Syracusans, not one besides of the Hellenic despots is worthy to be compared with Polycrates in magnificence. And when he had killed him in a manner not fit to be told, Oroites impaled his body: and of those who accompanied him, as many as were Samians he released, bidding them be grateful to him that they were free men; but all those of his company who were either allies or servants, he held in the estimation of slaves and kept them. Polycrates then being hung up accomplished wholly the vision of his daughter, for he was bathed by Zeus whenever it rained, and anointed by the Sun, giving forth moisture himself from his body.         125. [1] Polykrates de pases symboylies alogesas eplee para ton Oroitea, ama agomenos alloys te pollous tun etairun, en de de kai Demokedea ton Kallifuntos Krotunieten andra, ietron te eonta kai ten texnen askeonta arista tun kat' euyton. [2] apikomenos de es ten Magnesien o Polykrates diefthare kakus, oyte euytou axius oyte tun euytou fronematun. oti gar me oi Syrekosiun genomenoi turannoi oyde eis tun allun Ellenikun tyrannun axios esti Polykratei megaloprepeien symbletheinai. [3] apokteinas de min oyk axius apegesios Oroites anestauruse. tun de oi epomenun osoi men Esan Samioi, apeike, keleuun sfeas euytui xarin eidenai eontas eleytheroys, osoi de Esan xeinoi te kai douloi tun epomenun, en andrapodun logui poieumenos eixe. [4] Polykrates de anakremamenos epetelee pasan ten opsin teis thygatros. elouto men gar ypo tou Dios okus yoi, exrieto de ypo tou elioy, anieis aytos ek tou sumatos ikmada. Polykrateos men de ai pollai eytyxiai es touto eteleutesan tei oi Amasis o Aiguptoy basileus proemanteusato.   
      126. To this end came the great prosperity of Polycrates, as Amasis the king of Egypt had foretold to him: but not long afterwards retribution overtook Oroites in his turn for the murder of Polycrates. For after the death of Cambyses and the reign of the Magians Oroites remained at Sardis and did no service to the Persians, when they had been deprived of their empire by the Medes; moreover during this time of disturbance he slew Mitrobates the governor in Daskyleion, who had brought up against him the matter of Polycrates as a reproach; and he slew also Cranaspes the son of Mitrobates, both men of repute among the Persians: and besides other various deeds of insolence, once when a bearer of messages had come to him from Dareios, not being pleased with the message which he brought he slew him as he was returning, having set men to lie in wait for him by the way; and having slain him he made away with the bodies both of the man and of his horse.         126. [1] xronui de oy pollui ysteron kai Oroitea Polykrateos tisies meteilthon. meta gar ton Kambuseu thanaton kai tun Magun ten basileien menun en teisi Sardisi Oroites ufelee men oyden Persas ypo Medun aparairemenoys ten arxen. [2] o de en tautei tei taraxei kata men ekteine Mitrobatea ton ek Daskyleioy yparxon, os oi uneidise ta es Polykratea exonta, kata de tou Mitrobateu ton paida Kranaspen, andras en Perseisi dokimoys, alla te exubrise pantoia kai tina aggelieforon elthonta Dareioy par' ayton, us oy pros edonen oi En ta aggellomena, kteinei min opisu komizomenon, andras oi ypeisas kat' odon, apokteinas de min efanise aytui ippui.    
      127. Dareios accordingly, when he had come to the throne, was desirous of taking vengeance upon Oroites for all his wrongdoings and especially for the murder of Mitrobates and his son. However he did not think it good to act openly and to send an army against him, since his own affairs were still in a disturbed state and he had only lately come to the throne, while he heard that the strength of Oroites was great, seeing that he had a bodyguard of a thousand Persian spearmen and was in possession of the divisions of Phrygia and Lydia and Ionia. Therefore Dareios contrived as follows:--having called together those of the Persians who were of most repute, he said to them: "Persians, which of you all will undertake to perform this matter for me with wisdom, and not by force or with tumult? for where wisdom is wanted, there is no need of force. Which of you, I say, will either bring Oroites alive to me or slay him? for he never yet did any service to the Persians, and on the other hand he has done to them great evil. First he destroyed two of us, Mitrobates and his son; then he slays the men who go to summon him, sent by me, displaying insolence not to be endured. Before therefore he shall accomplish any other evil against the Persians, we must check his course by death."         127. [1] Dareios de us esxe ten arxen, epethumee ton Oroitea tisasthai pantun tun adikematun eineken kai malista Mitrobateu kai tou paidos. ek men de teis ithees straton ep' ayton oyk edokee pempein ate oideontun eti tun pregmatun, kai neusti exun ten arxen kai ton Oroitea megalen ten isxun pynthanomenos exein. ton xilioi men Perseun edoryforeon, eixe de nomon ton te Frugion kai Ludion kai Iunikon. [2] pros tauta de un o Dareios tade emexanesato. sygkalesas Perseun tous dokimutatoys elege sfi tade. <<u Persai, tis an moi touto ymeun ypostas epiteleseie sofiei kai me biei te kai omilui; entha gar sofies deei, bies ergon oyden. [3] ymeun de un tis moi Oroitea e zuonta agagoi e apokteineie; os ufelese men ku Persas oyden, kaka de megala eorge. touto men duo emeun eistuse, Mitrobatea te kai ton paida aytou, touto de tous anakaleontas ayton kai pempomenoys yp' emeu kteinei, ybrin oyk anasxeton fainun. prin ti un mezon exergasasthai min Persas kakon, katalampteos esti emin thanatui.>>    
      128. Thus Dareios asked, and thirty men undertook the matter, each one separately desiring to do it himself; and Dareios stopped their contention and bade them cast lots: so when they cast lots, Bagaios the son of Artontes obtained the lot from among them all. Bagaios accordingly, having obtained the lot, did thus:--he wrote many papers dealing with various matters and on them set the seal of Dareios, and with them he went to Sardis. When he arrived there and came into the presence of Oroites, he took the covers off the papers one after another and gave them to the Royal Secretary to read; for all the governors of provinces have Royal Secretaries. Now Bagaios thus gave the papers in order to make trial of the spearmen of the guard, whether they would accept the motion to revolt from Oroites; and seeing that they paid great reverence to the papers and still more to the words which were recited from them, he gave another paper in which were contained these words: "Persians, king Dareios forbids you to serve as guards to Oroites": and they hearing this lowered to him the points of their spears. Then Bagaios, seeing that in this they were obedient to the paper, took courage upon that and gave the last of the papers to the secretary; and in it was written: "King Dareios commands the Persians who are in Sardis to slay Oroites." So the spearmen of the guard, when they heard this, drew their swords and slew him forthwith. Thus did retribution for the murder of Polycrates the Samian overtake Oroites.         128. [1] Dareios men tauta epeiruta, tui de andres triekonta ypestesan, aytos ekastos ethelun poieein tauta. erizontas de Dareios katelambane keleuun pallesthai. pallomenun de lagxanei ek pantun Bagaios o Artonteu. [2] laxun de o Bagaios poieei tade. byblia grapsamenos polla kai peri pollun exonta pregmatun sfregida sfi epebale ten Dareioy, meta de eie exun tauta es tas Sardis. [3] apikomenos de kai Oroiteu es opsin elthun, tun bybliun en ekaston periaireomenos edidoy tui grammatistei tui basileiui epilegesthai. grammatistas de basileioys oi pantes yparxoi exoysi. apopeirumenos de tun doryforun edidoy ta byblia o Bagaios, ei endexaiato apostasin apo Oroiteu. [4] oreun de sfeas ta te byblia sebomenoys megalus kai ta legomena ek tun bybliun eti mezonus, didoi allo en tui enein epea tade. u Persai, basileus Dareios apagoreuei ymin me doryforeein Oroitea.>> oi de akousantes toutun meteikan oi tas aixmas. [5] idun de touto sfeas o Bagaios peithomenoys tui bybliui, enthauta de tharsesas to teleytaion tun bybliun didoi tui grammatistei, en tui egegrapto <<basileus Dareios Perseisi toisi en Sardisi entelletai kteinein Oroitea.>> oi de doryforoi us ekoysan tauta, spasamenoi tous akinakas kteinoysi paraytika min, oytu de Oroitea ton Persen Polykrateos tou Samioy tisies meteilthon.    
      129. When the wealth of Oroites had come or had been carried up to Susa, it happened not long after, that king Dareios while engaged in hunting wild beasts twisted his foot in leaping off his horse, and it was twisted, as it seems, rather violently, for the ball of his ankle-joint was put out of the socket. Now he had been accustomed to keep about him those of the Egyptians who were accounted the first in the art of medicine, and he made use of their assistance then: but these by wrenching and forcing the foot made the evil continually greater. For seven days then and seven nights Dareios was sleepless owing to the pain which he suffered; and at last on the eighth day, when he was in a wretched state, some one who had heard talk before while yet at Sardis of the skill of Demokedes of Croton, reported this to Dareios; and he bade them bring him forthwith into his presence. So having found him somewhere unnoticed among the slaves of Oroites, they brought him forth into the midst dragging fetters after him and clothed in rags.         129. [1] apikomenun de kai anakomisthentun tun Oroiteu xrematun es ta Sousa, syneneike xronui oy pollui ysteron basilea Dareion en agrei therun apothruskonta ap' ippoy strafeinai ton poda. [2] kai kus isxyroterus estrafe. o gar oi astragalos exexurese ek tun arthrun. nomizun de kai proteron peri euyton exein Aigyptiun tous dokeontas einai prutoys ten ietriken, toutoisi exrato. oi de streblountes kai biumenoi ton poda kakon mezon ergazonto. [3] ep' epta men de emeras kai epta nuktas ypo tou pareontos kakou o Dareios agrypnieisi eixeto. tei de de ogdoei emerei exonti oi flaurus, parakousas tis proteron eti en Sardisi tou Krotunieteu Demokedeos ten texnen aggellei tui Dareiui. o de agein min ten taxisten par' euyton ekeleyse. ton de us exeuron en toisi Oroiteu andrapodoisi okoy de apemelemenon, pareigon es meson pedas te elkonta kai rhakesi esthemenon.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [130]

     130. When he had been placed in the midst of them, Dareios asked him whether he understood the art; but he would not admit it, fearing lest, if he declared himself to be what he was, he might lose for ever the hope of returning to Hellas: and it was clear to Dareios that he understood that art but was practising another, and he commanded those who had brought him thither to produce scourges and pricks. Accordingly upon that he spoke out, saying that he did not understand it precisely, but that he had kept company with a physician and had some poor knowledge of the art. Then after this, when Dareios had committed the case to him, by using Hellenic drugs and applying mild remedies after the former violent means, he caused him to get sleep, and in a short time made him perfectly well, though he had never hoped to be sound of foot again. Upon this Dareios presented him with two pairs of golden fetters; and he asked him whether it was by design that he had given to him a double share of his suffering, because he had made him well. Being pleased by this saying, Dareios sent him to visit his wives, and the eunuchs in bringing him in said to the women that this was he who had restored to the king his life. Then each one of them plunged a cup into the gold-chest and presented Demokedes with so abundant a gift that his servant, whose name was Skiton, following and gathering up the coins which fell from the cups, collected for himself a very large sum of gold.         130. [1] stathenta de es meson eiruta o Dareios ten texnen ei epistaito. o de oyk ypedeketo, arrudeun me euyton ekfenas to parapan teis Ellados ei apesteremenos. [2] katefane te tui Dareiui texnazein epistamenos, kai tous agagontas ayton ekeleyse mastigas te kai kentra paraferein es to meson. o de enthauta de un ekfainei, fas atrekeus men oyk epistasthai, omilesas de ietrui flaurus exein ten texnen. [3] meta de, us oi epetrepse, Ellenikoisi iemasi xreumenos kai epia meta ta isxyra prosagun ypnoy te min lagxanein epoiee kai en xronui oligui ygiea min apedexe, oydama eti elpizonta artipoyn esesthai. [4] dureetai de min meta tauta o Dareios pedeun xryseun duo zeugesi. o de min epeireto ei oi diplesion to kakon epitedes nemei, oti min ygiea epoiese. estheis de tui epei o Dareios apopempei min para tas euytou gynaikas. paragontes de oi eynouxoi elegon pros tas gynaikas us basilei oytos eie os ten psyxen apeduke. [5] ypotuptoysa de ayteun ekaste fialei tou xrysou es theken edureeto Demokedea oytu de ti dapsilei dureei us tous apopiptontas apo tun fialeun stateiras epomenos o oiketes, tui oynoma En Skitun, anelegeto kai oi xreima pollon ti xrysou synelexthe.    
      131. This Demokedes came from Croton, and became the associate of Polycrates in the following manner:--at Croton he lived in strife with his father, who was of a harsh temper, and when he could no longer endure him, he departed and came to Egina. Being established there he surpassed in the first year all the other physicians, although he was without appliances and had none of the instruments which are used in the art. In the next year the Eginetan State engaged him for a payment of one talent, in the third year he was engaged by the Athenians for a hundred pounds weight of silver, and in the fourth by Polycrates for two talents. Thus he arrived in Samos; and it was by reason of this man more than anything else that the physicians of Croton got their reputation: for this event happened at the time when the physicians of Croton began to be spoken of as the first in Hellas, while the Kyrenians were reputed to have the second place. About this same time also the Argives had the reputation of being the first musicians in Hellas.         131. [1] o de Demokedes oytos ude ek Krotunos apigmenos Polykratei umilese. patri syneixeto en tei Krotuni orgen xalepui. touton epeite oyk edunato ferein, apolipun oixeto es Aiginan. katastas de es tauten prutui etei yperebaleto tous alloys ietrous, askeyes per eun kai exun oyden tun osa peri ten texnen esti ergaleia. [2] kai min deyterui etei talantoy Aigineitai demosiei misthountai, tritui de etei Athenaioi ekaton mneun, tetartui de etei Polykrates dyun talantun. oytu men apiketo es ten Samon, kai apo toutoy tou andros oyk ekista Krotunieitai ietroi eydokimesan. [3] egeneto gar un touto ote prutoi men Krotunieitai ietroi elegonto ana ten Ellada einai, deuteroi de Kyrenaioi. kata ton ayton de touton xronon kai Argeioi ekoyon moysiken einai Ellenun prutoi.    
      132. Then Demokedes having healed king Dareios had a very great house in Susa, and had been made a table-companion of the king; and except the one thing of returning to the land of the Hellenes, he had everything. And first as regards the Egyptian physicians who tried to heal the king before him, when they were about to be impaled because they had proved inferior to a physician who was a Hellene, he asked their lives of the king and rescued them from death: then secondly, he rescued an Eleian prophet, who had accompanied Polycrates and had remained unnoticed among the slaves. In short Demokedes was very great in the favour of the king.         132. [1] tote de o Demokedes en toisi Sousoisi exiesamenos Dareion oikon te megiston eixe kai omotrapezos basilei egegonee, plen te enos tou es Ellenas apienai panta talla oi parein. [2] kai touto men tous Aigyptioys ietrous, oi basilea proteron iunto, mellontas anaskolopieisthai oti ypo Ellenos ietrou essuthesan, toutoys basilea paraitesamenos errusato. touto de mantin Eleion Polykratei epispomenon kai apemelemenon en toisi andrapodoisi errusato. En de megiston preigma Demokedes para basilei.    
      133. Not long time after this another thing came to pass which was this:--Atossa the daughter of Cyrus and wife of Dareios had a tumour upon her breast, which afterwards burst and then was spreading further: and so long as it was not large, she concealed it and said nothing to anybody, because she was ashamed; but afterwards when she was in evil case, she sent for Demokedes and showed it to him: and he said that he would make her well, and caused her to swear that she would surely do for him in return that which he should ask of her; and he would ask, he said, none of such things as are shameful.         133. [1] en xronui de oligui meta tauta tade alla syneneike genesthai. Atossei tei Kuroy men thygatri Dareioy de gynaiki epi tou mastou efy fuma, meta de ekragen enemeto prosu. oson men de xronon En elasson, e de kruptoysa kai aisxynomene efraze oydeni. epeite de en kakui En, metepempsato ton Demokedea kai oi epedexe. [2] o de fas ygiea poiesein exorkoi min E men oi antypoyrgesein ekeinen touto to an ayteis deethei. deesesthai de oydenos tun osa es aisxunen esti feronta.    
      134. So when after this by his treatment he had made her well, then Atossa instructed by Demokedes uttered to Dareios in his bedchamber some such words as these: "O king, though thou hast such great power, thou dost sit still, and dost not win in addition any nation or power for the Persians: and yet it is reasonable that a man who is both young and master of much wealth should be seen to perform some great deed, in order that the Persians may know surely that he is a man by whom they are ruled. It is expedient indeed in two ways that thou shouldest do so, both in order that the Persians may know that their ruler is a man, and in order that they may be worn down by war and not have leisure to plot against thee. For now thou mightest display some great deed, while thou art still young; seeing that as the body grows the spirit grows old also with it, and is blunted for every kind of action." Thus she spoke according to instructions received, and he answered thus: "Woman, thou hast said all the things which I myself have in mind to do; for I have made the plan to yoke together a bridge from this continent to the other and to make expedition against the Scythians, and these designs will be by way of being fulfilled within a little time." Then Atossa said: "Look now,--forbear to go first against the Scythians, for these will be in thy power whenever thou desirest: but do thou, I pray thee, make an expedition against Hellas; for I am desirous to have Lacedemonian women and Argive and Athenian and Corinthian, for attendants, because I hear of them by report: and thou hast the man who of all men is most fitted to show thee all things which relate to Hellas and to be thy guide, that man, I mean, who healed thy foot." Dareios made answer: "Woman, since it seems good to thee that we should first make trial of Hellas, I think it better to send first to them men of the Persians together with him of whom thou speakest, to make investigation, that when these have learnt and seen, they may report each several thing to us; and then I shall go to attack them with full knowledge of all."         134. [1] us de ara min meta tauta iumenos ygiea apedexe, enthauta de didaxtheisa ypo tou Demokedeos e Atossa prosefere en tei koitei Dareiui logon toionde. <<u basileu, exun dunamin tosauten katesai, oyte ti ethnos prosktumenos oyte dunamin Perseisi. [2] oikos de esti andra kai neon kai xrematun megalun despoten fainesthai ti apodeiknumenon, ina kai Persai ekmathusi oti yp' andros arxontai. ep' amfotera de toi symferei tauta poieein, kai ina sfeun Persai epistuntai andra einai ton proesteuta, kai ina tribuntai polemui mede sxolen agontes epiboyleuusi toi. [3] nun gar an ti kai apodexaio ergon, eus neos eis elikien. ayxomenui gar tui sumati synauxontai kai ai frenes, geraskonti de syggeraskoysi kai es ta pregmata panta apamblunontai.>> [4] e men de tauta ek didaxeis elege, o d' ameibeto toiside. <<u gunai, panta osa per aytos epinoeu poiesein eirekas. egu gar bebouleymai zeuxas gefyran ek teisde teis epeiroy es ten eteren epeiron epi Skuthas strateuesthai. kai tauta oligoy xronoy estai teleumena.>> legei Atossa tade. [5] <<ora nyn, epi Skuthas men ten pruten ienai eason. oytoi gar, epean su boulei, esontai toi. su de moi epi ten Ellada strateuesthai. epithymeu gar logui pynthanomene Lakainas te moi genesthai therapainas kai Argeias kai Attikas kai Korinthias. exeis de andra epitedeotaton andrun pantun dexai te ekasta teis Ellados kai kategesasthai, touton os sey ton poda exiesato.>> [6] ameibetai Dareios <<u gunai, epei toinyn toi dokeei teis Ellados emeas pruta apopeirasthai, kataskopoys moi dokeei Perseun pruton ameinon einai omou toutui tui su legeis pempsai es aytous, oi mathontes kai idontes exaggeleoysi ekasta aytun emin. kai epeita exepistamenos ep' aytous trepsomai.>>    
      135. Thus he said, and he proceeded to do the deed as he spoke the word: for as soon as day dawned, he summoned fifteen Persians, men of repute, and bade them pass through the coasts of Hellas in company with Demokedes, and take care not to let Demokedes escape from them, but bring him back at all costs. Having thus commanded them, next he summoned Demokedes himself and asked him to act as a guide for the whole of Hellas and show it to the Persians, and then return back: and he bade him take all his movable goods and carry them as gifts to his father and his brothers, saying that he would give him in their place many times as much; and besides this, he said, he would contribute to the gifts a merchant ship filled with all manner of goods, which should sail with him. Dareios, as it seems to me, promised him these things with no crafty design; but Demokedes was afraid that Dareios was making trial of him, and did not make haste to accept all that was offered, but said that he would leave his own things where they were, so that he might have them when he came back; he said however that he accepted the merchant ship which Dareios promised him for the presents to his brothers. Dareios then, having thus given command to him also, sent them away to the sea.         135. [1] tauta eipe kai ama epos te kai ergon epoiee. epeite gar taxista emere epelampse, kalesas Perseun andras dokimoys pentekaideka enetelleto sfi epomenoys Demokedei diexelthein ta parathalassia teis Ellados, okus te me diadresetai sfeas o Demokedes, alla min pantus opisu apaxoysi. [2] enteilamenos de toutoisi tauta, deutera kalesas ayton Demokedea edeeto aytou okus exegesamenos pasan kai epidexas ten Ellada toisi Perseisi opisu exei. dura de min tui patri kai toisi adelfeoisi ekeleye panta ta ekeinoy epipla labonta agein, fas alla oi pollaplesia antidusein. pros de es ta dura olkada oi efe symbaleesthai plesas agathun pantoiun, ten ama oi pleusesthai. [3] Dareios men de, dokeein emoi, ap' oydenos dolerou nooy epaggelleto oi tauta. Demokedes de deisas me ey ekpeiruito Dareios, oyti epidramun panta ta didomena edeketo, alla ta men euytou kata xuren efe kataleipsein, ina opisu sfea apelthun exoi, ten mentoi olkada, ten oi Dareios epaggelleto es ten dureen toisi adelfeoisi, dekesthai efe. enteilamenos de kai toutui tayta o Dareios apostellei aytous epi thalassan.    
      136. So these, when they had gone down to Phenicia and in Phenicia to the city of Sidon, forthwith manned two triremes, and besides them they also filled a large ship of burden with all manner of goods. Then when they had made all things ready they set sail for Hellas, and touching at various places they saw the coast regions of it and wrote down a description, until at last, when they had seen the greater number of the famous places, they came to Taras in Italy. There from complaisance to Demokedes Aristophilides the king of the Tarentines unfastened and removed the steering-oars of the Median ships, and also confined the Persians in prison, because, as he alleged, they came as spies. While they were being thus dealt with, Demokedes went away and reached Croton; and when he had now reached his own native place, Aristophilides set the Persians free and gave back to them those parts of their ships which he had taken away.         136. [1] katabantes de oytoi es Foiniken kai Foinikes es Siduna polin aytika men triereas duo eplerusan, ama de ayteisi kai gaulon megan pantoiun agathun. pareskeyasmenoi de panta epleon es ten Ellada, prosisxontes de ayteis ta parathalassia etheeunto kai apegrafonto, es o ta polla ayteis kai onomasta theesamenoi apikonto teis Italies es Taranta. [2] enthauta de ek rhestunes teis Demokedeos Aristofilides tun Tarantinun o basileus touto men ta pedalia parelyse tun Medikeun neun, touto de aytous tous Persas eirxe us kataskopoys deithen eontas. en ui de oytoi tauta epasxon, o Demokedes es ten Krotuna apikneetai. apigmenoy de ede toutoy es ten euytou o Aristofilides elyse tous Persas, kai ta parelabe tun neun apeduke sfi.    
      137. The Persians then sailing thence and pursuing Demokedes reached Croton, and finding him in the market-place they laid hands upon him; and some of the men of Croton fearing the Persian power were willing to let him go, but others took hold of him and struck with their staves at the Persians, who pleaded for themselves in these words: "Men of Croton, take care what ye are about: ye are rescuing a man who was a slave of king Dareios and who ran away from him. How, think you, will king Dareios be content to receive such an insult; and how shall this which ye do be well for you, if ye take him away from us? Against what city, think you, shall we make expedition sooner than against this, and what city before this shall we endeavour to reduce to slavery?" Thus saying they did not however persuade the men of Croton, but having had Demokedes rescued from them and the ship of burden which they were bringing with them taken away, they set sail to go back to Asia, and did not endeavour to visit any more parts of Hellas or to find out about them, being now deprived of their guide. This much however Demokedes gave them as a charge when they were putting forth to sea, bidding them say to Dareios that Demokedes was betrothed to the daughter of Milon: for the wrestler Milon had a great name at the king's court; and I suppose that Demokedes was urgent for this marriage, spending much money to further it, in order that Dareios might see that he was held in honour also in his own country.         137. [1] pleontes de entheuten oi Persai kai diukontes Demokedea apikneontai es ten Krotuna, eyrontes de min agorazonta aptonto aytou. [2] tun de Krotunieteun oi men katarrudeontes ta Persika pregmata proienai etoimoi Esan, oi de antaptonto kai toisi skytaloisi epaion tous Persas proisxomenoys epea tade. <<andres Krotunieitai, orate ta poieete. andra basileos drepeten genomenon exaireesthe. [3] kus tauta basilei Dareiui ekxresei periybristhai; kus de ymin ta pieumena exei kalus, en apelesthe emeas; epi tina de teisde proteren strateysometha polin; tina de proteren andrapodizesthai periesometha;>> [4] tauta legontes tous Krotunietas oykun epeithon, all' exairethentes te ton Demokedea kai ton gaulon ton ama egonto apairethentes apepleon opisu es ten Asien, oyd' eti ezetesan to prosuteru teis Ellados apikomenoi ekmathein, esteremenoi tou egemonos. [5] tosonde mentoi eneteilato sfi Demokedes anagomenoisi, keleuun eipein sfeas Dareiui oti armostai ten Milunos thygatera Demokedes gynaika. tou gar de palaisteu Milunos En oynoma pollon para basilei. kata de touto moi dokeei speusai ton gamon touton telesas xremata megala Demokedes, ina fanei pros Dareioy eun kai en tei euytou dokimos.    
      138. The Persians however, after they had put out from Croton, were cast away with their ships in Iapygia; and as they were remaining there as slaves, Gillos a Tarentine exile rescued them and brought them back to king Dareios. In return for this Dareios offered to give him whatsoever thing he should desire; and Gillos chose that he might have the power of returning to Taras, narrating first the story of his misfortune: and in order that he might not disturb all Hellas, as would be the case if on his account a great armament should sail to invade Italy, he said it was enough for him that the men of Cnidos should be those who brought him back, without any others; because he supposed that by these, who were friends with the Tarentines, his return from exile would most easily be effected. Dareios accordingly having promised proceeded to perform; for he sent a message to Cnidos and bade them being back Gillos to Taras: and the men of Cnidos obeyed Dareios, but nevertheless they did not persuade the Tarentines, and they were not strong enough to apply force. Thus then it happened with regard to these things; and these were the first Persians who came from Asia to Hellas, and for the reason which has been mentioned these were sent as spies.         138. [1] anaxthentes de ek teis Krotunos oi Persai ekpiptoysi teisi neysi es Iepygien, kai sfeas doyleuontas enthauta Gillos aner Tarantinos fygas rhysamenos apegage para basilea Dareion. o de anti toutun etoimos En didonai touto o ti bouloito aytos. [2] Gillos de aireetai katodon oi es Taranta genesthai, proapegesamenos ten symforen. ina de me syntaraxei ten Ellada, en di' ayton stolos megas pleei epi ten Italien, Knidioys mounoys apoxran oi efe tous katagontas ginesthai, dokeun apo toutun eontun toisi Tarantinoisi filun malista ten katodon oi esesthai. [3] Dareios de ypodexamenos epetelee. pempsas gar aggelon es Knidon katagein sfeas ekeleye Gillon es Taranta. peithomenoi de Dareiui Knidioi Tarantinoys oykun epeithon, bien de adunatoi Esan prosferein. [4] tauta men nyn oytu eprexthe. oytoi de prutoi ek teis Asies es ten Ellada apikonto Persai, kai oytoi dia toionde preigma kataskopoi egenonto.    
      139. After this king Dareios took Samos before all other cities, whether of Hellenes or Barbarians, and for a cause which was as follows:--When Cambyses the son of Cyrus was marching upon Egypt, many Hellenes arrived in Egypt, some, as might be expected, joining in the campaign to make profit, and some also coming to see the land itself; and among these was Syoloson the son of Aiakes and brother of Polycrates, an exile from Samos. To this Syloson a fortunate chance occurred, which was this:--he had taken and put upon him a flame- coloured mantle, and was about the market-place in Memphis; and Dareios, who was then one of the spearmen of Cambyses and not yet held in any great estimation, seeing him had a desire for the mantle, and going up to him offered to buy it. Then Syloson, seeing that Dareios very greatly desired the mantle, by some divine inspiration said: "I will not sell this for any sum, but I will give it thee for nothing, if, as it appears, it must be thine at all costs." To this Dareios agreed and received from him the garment.         139. [1] meta de tauta Samon basileus Dareios aireei, poliun paseun pruten Ellenidun kai barbarun, dia toiende tina aitien. Kambuseu tou Kuroy strateyomenoy ep' Aigypton alloi te syxnoi es ten Aigypton apikonto Ellenun, oi men, us oikos, kat' emporien strateyomenoi, oi de tines kai ayteis teis xures theetai. tun En kai Sylosun o Aiakeos, Polykrateos te eun adelfeos kai feugun ek Samoy. [2] touton ton Sylosunta katelabe eytyxie tis toiede. labun xlanida kai peribalomenos pyrren egoraze en tei Memfi. idun de ayton Dareios, doryforos te eun Kambuseu kai logoy oydenos ku megaloy, epethumese teis xlanidos kai ayten proselthun uneeto. [3] o de Sylosun oreun ton Dareion megalus epithymeonta teis xlanidos, theiei tuxei xreumenos legei <<egu tauten puleu men oydenos xrematos, didumi de allus, ei per oytu dei genesthai pantus toi.>> ainesas tauta o Dareios paralambanei to eima. o men de Sylosun epistato touto oi apolulenai di' eyetheien.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [140]

     140. Now Syloson supposed without any doubt that he had altogether lost this by easy simplicity; but when in course of time Cambyses was dead, and the seven Persians had risen up against the Magian, and of the seven Dareios had obtained the kingdom, Syloson heard that the kingdom had come about to that man to whom once in Egypt he had given the garment at his request: accordingly he went up to Susa and sat down at the entrance of the king's palace, and said that he was a benefactor of Dareios. The keeper of the door hearing this reported it to the king; and he marvelled at it and said to him: "Who then of the Hellenes is my benefactor, to whom I am bound by gratitude? seeing that it is now but a short time that I possess the kingdom, and as yet scarcely one of them has come up to our court; and I may almost say that I have no debt owing to a Hellene. Nevertheless bring him in before me, that I may know what he means when he says these things." Then the keeper of the door brought Syloson before him, and when he had been set in the midst, the interpreters asked him who he was and what he had done, that he called himself the benefactor of the king. Syloson accordingly told all that had happened about the mantle, and how he was the man who had given it; to which Dareios made answer: "O most noble of men, thou art he who when as yet I had no power gavest me a gift, small it may be, but nevertheless the kindness is counted with me to be as great as if I should now receive some great thing from some one. Therefore I will give thee in return gold and silver in abundance, that thou mayest not ever repent that thou didst render a service to Dareios the son of Hystaspes." To this Syloson replied: "To me, O king, give neither gold nor silver, but recover and give to me my fatherland Samos, which now that my brother Polycrates has been slain by Oroites is possessed by our slave. This give to me without bloodshed or selling into slavery."         140. [1] us de tou xronoy probainontos Kambuses te apethane kai tui Magui epanestesan oi epta kai ek tun epta Dareios ten basileien esxe, pynthanetai o Sylosun us e basileie perieleluthoi es touton ton andra tui kote aytos eduke en Aiguptui deethenti to eima. anabas de es ta Sousa izeto es ta prothyra tun basileos oikiun kai efe Dareioy eyergetes einai. [2] aggellei tauta akousas o pyloyros tui basilei. o de thumasas legei pros ayton <<kai tis esti Ellenun eyergetes tui egu proaideumai, neusti men ten arxen exun; anabebeke d' e tis e oydeis ku par' emeas aytun, exu de xreos eipein oyden andros Ellenos. omus de ayton paragete esu, ina eideu ti thelun legei tauta.>> [3] pareige o pyloyros ton Sylosunta, stanta de es meson eirutun oi ermenees tis te eie kai ti poiesas eyergetes fesi einai basileos. eipe un o Sylosun panta ta peri ten xlanida genomena, kai us aytos eie keinos o dous. [4] ameibetai pros tauta Dareios <<u gennaiotate andrun, su keinos eis os emoi oydemian exonti ku dunamin edukas ei kai smikra, all' un ise ge e xaris omoius us ei nun kothen ti mega laboimi. ant' un toi xryson kai argyron apleton didumi, us me kote toi metamelesei Dareion ton Ystaspeos ey poiesanti.>> legei pros tauta o Sylosun [5] <<emoi mete xryson u basileu mete argyron didoy, all' anasusamenos moi dos ten patrida Samon, ten nun adelfeou tou emou Polykrateos apothanontos ypo Oroiteu exei doulos emeteros. tauten moi dos aney te fonoy kai exandrapodisios.>>    
      141. Dareios having heard this prepared to send an expedition with Otanes as commander of it, who had been one of the seven, charging him to accomplish for Syloson all that which he had requested. Otanes then went down to the sea-coast and was preparing the expedition.         141. [1] tauta akousas Dareios apestelle stratien te kai strategon Otanea andrun tun epta genomenon, enteilamenos, osun edeethe o Sylosun, tauta oi poieein epitelea. katabas de epi ten thalassan o Otanes estelle ten stratien.    
      142. Now Maiandrios the son of Maiandrios was holding the rule over Samos, having received the government as a trust from Polycrates; and he, though desiring to show himself the most righteous of men, did not succeed in so doing: for when the death of Polycrates was reported to him, he did as follows:--first he founded an altar to Zeus the Liberator and marked out a sacred enclosure round it, namely that which exists still in the suburb of the city: then after he had done this he gathered together an assembly of all the citizens and spoke these words: "To me, as ye know as well as I, has been entrusted the sceptre of Polycrates and all his power; and now it is open to me to be your ruler; but that for the doing of which I find fault with my neighbour, I will myself refrain from doing, so far as I may: for as I did not approve of Polycrates acting as master of men who were not inferior to himself, so neither do I approve of any other who does such things. Now Polycrates for his part fulfilled his own appointed destiny, and I now give the power into the hands of the people, and proclaim to you equality. These privileges however I think it right to have assigned to me, namely that from the wealth of Polycrates six talents should be taken out and given to me as a special gift; and in addition to this I choose for myself and for my descendants in succession the priesthood of Zeus the Liberator, to whom I myself founded a temple, while I bestow liberty upon you." He, as I say, made these offers to the Samians; but one of them rose up and said: "Nay, but unworthy too art thou to be our ruler, seeing that thou art of mean birth and a pestilent fellow besides. Rather take care that thou give an account of the money which thou hadst to deal with."         142. [1] teis de Samoy Maiandrios o Maiandrioy eixe to kratos, epitropaien para Polykrateos labun ten arxen. tui dikaiotatui andrun boylomenui genesthai oyk exegeneto. [2] epeide gar oi exaggelthe o Polykrateos thanatos, epoiee toiade. pruta men Dios eleytherioy bumon idrusato kai temenos peri ayton oyrise touto to nun en tui proasteiui esti. meta de, us oi epepoieto, ekklesien synageiras pantun tun astun elexe tade. [3] <<emoi, us iste kai ymeis, skeiptron kai dunamis pasa e Polykrateos epitetraptai, kai moi parexei nun ymeun arxein. egu de ta tui pelas epiplessu, aytos kata dunamin oy poiesu. oyte gar moi Polykrates ereske despozun andrun omoiun euytui oyte allos ostis toiauta poieei. Polykrates men nyn exeplese moiran ten euytou, egu de es meson ten arxen titheis isonomien ymin proagoreuu. [4] tosade mentoi dikaiu gerea emeuytui genesthai, ek men ge tun Polykrateos xrematun exaireta ex talanta moi genesthai, irusunen de pros toutoisi aireumai aytui te moi kai toisi ap' emeu aiei ginomenoisi tou Dios tou eleytherioy. tui aytos te iron idrysamen kai ten eleytherien ymin peritithemi.>> [5] o men de tauta toisi Samioisi epaggelleto. tun de tis exanastas eipe <<all' oyd' axios eis su ge emeun arxein, gegonus te kakus kai eun olethros. alla mallon okus logon duseis tun metexeirisas xrematun.>>    
      143. Thus said one who was a man of repute among the citizens, whose name was Telesarchos; and Maiandrios perceiving that if he resigned the power, some other would be set up as despot instead of himself, did not keep the purpose at all of resigning it; but having retired to the fortress he sent for each man separately, pretending that he was going to give an account of the money, and so seized them and put them in bonds. These then had been put in bonds; but Maiandrios after this was overtaken by sickness, and his brother, whose name was Lycaretos, expecting that he would die, put all the prisoners to death, in order that he might himself more easily get possession of the power over Samos: and all this happened because, as it appears, they did not choose to be free.         143. [1] tauta eipe eun en toisi astoisi dokimos, tui oynoma En Telesarxos. Maiandrios de noui labun us ei metesei ten arxen, allos tis ant' aytou turannos katastesetai, oyden eti en noui eixe metienai ayten, all' us anexurese es ten akropolin, metapempomenos ena ekaston us de logon tun xrematun dusun, synelabe sfeas kai katedese. [2] oi men de ededeato, Maiandrion de meta tauta katelabe nousos. elpizun de min apothaneesthai o adelfeos, tui oynoma En Lykaretos, ina eypetesterus katasxei ta en tei Samui pregmata, katakteinei tous desmutas pantas. oy gar de, us oikasi, eboulonto einai eleutheroi.    
      144. So when the Persians arrived at Samos bringing Syloson home from exile, no one raised a hand against them, and moreover the party of Maiandrios and Maiandrios himself said that they were ready to retire out of the island under a truce. Otanes therefore having agreed on these terms and having made a treaty, the most honourable of the Persians had seats placed for them in front of the fortress and were sitting there.         144. [1] epeide un apikonto es ten Samon oi Persai katagontes Sylosunta, oyte tis sfi xeiras antaeiretai, ypospondoi te efasan einai etoimoi oi tou Maiandrioy stasiutai kai aytos Maiandrios ekxureisai ek teis nesoy. katainesantos d' epi toutoisi Otaneu kai speisamenoy, tun Perseun oi pleistoy axioi thronoys themenoi katenantion teis akropolios kateato.    
      145. Now the despot Maiandrios had a brother who was somewhat mad, and his name was Charilaos. This man for some offence which he had been committed had been confined in an underground dungeon, and at this time of which I speak, having heard what was being done and having put his head through out of the dungeon, when he saw the Persians peacefully sitting there he began to cry out and said that he desired to come to speech with Maiandrios. So Maiandrios hearing his voice bade them loose him and bring him into his presence; and as soon as he was brought he began to abuse and revile him, trying to persuade him to attack the Persians, and saying thus: "Thou basest of men, didst thou put me in bonds and judge me worthy of the dungeon under ground, who am thine own brother and did no wrong worthy of bonds, and when thou seest the Persians casting thee forth from the land and making thee homeless, dost thou not dare to take any revenge, though they are so exceedingly easy to be overcome? Nay, but if in truth thou art afraid of them, give me thy mercenaries and I will take vengeance on them for their coming here; and thyself I am willing to let go out of the island."         145. [1] Maiandriui de tui tyrannui En adelfeos ypomargoteros, tui oynoma En Kharileus. oytos o ti de examartun en gorgurei ededeto, kai de tote epakousas te ta pressomena kai diakupsas dia teis gorgures, us eide tous Persas eirenaius katemenoys, eboa te kai efe legun Maiandriui thelein elthein es logoys. [2] epakousas de o Maiandrios lusantas ayton ekeleye agein par' euyton. us de axthe taxista, loidoreun te kai kakizun min anepeithe epithesthai toisi Perseisi, legun toiade. <<eme men, u kakiste andrun, eonta seuytou adelfeon kai adikesanta oyden axion desmou desas gorgures exiusas. oreun de tous Persas ekballontas te se kai anoikon poieontas oy tolmais tisasthai, oytu de ti eontas eypeteas xeirutheinai. [3] all' ei toi su sfeas katarrudekas, emoi dos tous epikouroys, kai sfeas egu timuresomai teis enthade apixios. ayton de se ekpempsai ek teis nesoy etoimos eimi.>>    
      146. Thus spoke Charilaos, and Maiandrios accepted that which he said, not, as I think, because he had reached such a height of folly as to suppose that his own power would overcome that of the king, but rather because he grudged Syloson that he should receive from him the State without trouble, and with no injury inflicted upon it. Therefore he desired to provoke the Persians to anger and make the Samian power as feeble as possible before he gave it up to him, being well assured that the Persians, when they had suffered evil, would be likely to be as bitter against the Samians as well as against those who did the wrong, and knowing also that he had a safe way of escape from the island whenever he desired: for he had had a secret passage made under ground, leading from the fortress to the sea. Maiandrios then himself sailed out from Samos; but Charilaos armed all the mercenaries, and opening wide the gates sent them out upon the Persians, who were not expecting any such thing, but supposed that all had been arranged: and the mercenaries falling upon them began to slay those of the Persians who had seats carried for them and were of most account. While these were thus engaged, the rest of the Persian force came to the rescue, and the mercenaries were hard pressed and forced to retire to the fortress.         146. [1] tauta de elexe o Kharileus. Maiandrios de ypelabe ton logon, us men egu dokeu, oyk es touto afrosunes apikomenos us doxai ten euytou dunamin periesesthai teis basileos, alla fthonesas mallon Sylosunti ei aponeti emelle apolampsesthai akeraion ten polin. [2] erethisas un tous Persas ethele us asthenestata poieisai ta Samia pregmata kai oytu paradidonai, ey exepistamenos us pathontes oi Persai kakus prosempikraneesthai emellon toisi Samioisi, eidus te euytui asfalea ekdysin eousan ek teis nesoy tote epean aytos bouletai. epepoieto gar oi krypte diuryx ek teis akropolios feroysa epi thalassan. [3] aytos men de o Maiandrios ekpleei ek teis Samoy. tous d' epikouroys pantas oplisas o Kharileus, kai anapetasas tas pulas, exeike epi tous Persas oyte prosdekomenoys toiouto oyden dokeontas te de panta symbebanai. empesontes de oi epikoyroi tun Perseun tous difroforeymenoys te kai logoy pleistoy eontas ekteinon. [4] kai oytoi men tauta epoieyn, e de alle stratie e Persike epeboethee. piezeumenoi de oi epikoyroi opisu kateilethesan es ten akropolin.    
      147. Then Otanes the Persian commander, seeing that the Persians had suffered greatly, purposely forgot the commands which Dareios gave him when he sent him forth, not to kill any one of the Samians nor to sell any into slavery, but to restore the island to Syloson free from all suffering of calamity,--these commands, I say, he purposely forgot, and gave the word to his army to slay every one whom they should take, man or boy, without distinction. So while some of the army were besieging the fortress, others were slaying every one who came in their way, in sanctuary or out of sanctuary equally.         147. [1] Otanes de o strategos idun pathos mega Persas peponthotas, entolas men tas Dareios oi apostellun enetelleto, mete kteinein medena Samiun mete andrapodizesthai apathea te kakun apodounai ten neison Sylosunti, toyteun men tun entoleun memnemenos epelanthaneto, o de pareggeile tei stratiei panta ton an labusi kai andra kai paida omoius kteinein. [2] enthauta teis stratieis oi men ten akropolin epoliorkeon, oi de ekteinon panta ton empodun ginomenon omoius en te irui kai exu irou.    
      148. Meanwhile Maiandrios had escaped from Samos and was sailing to Lacedemon; and having come thither and caused to be brought up to the city the things which he had taken with him when he departed, he did as follows:--first, he would set out his cups of silver and of gold, and then while the servants were cleaning them, he would be engaged in conversation with Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, then king of Sparta, and would bring him on to his house; and when Cleomenes saw the cups he marvelled and was astonished at them, and Maiandrios would bid him take away with him as many of them as he pleased. Maiandrios said this twice or three times, but Cleomenes herein showed himself the most upright of men; for he not only did not think fit to take that which was offered, but perceiving that Maiandrios would make presents to others of the citizens, and so obtain assistance for himself, he went to the Ephors and said that it was better for Sparta that the stranger of Samos should depart from Peloponnesus, lest he might persuade either himself or some other man of the Spartans to act basely. They accordingly accepted his counsel, and expelled Maiandrios by proclamation.         148. [1] Maiandrios de apodras ek teis Samoy ekpleei es Lakedaimona. apikomenos de es ayten kai aneneikamenos ta exun exexurese, epoiee toiade. okus poteria argurea te kai xrusea protheito, oi men therapontes aytou exesmun ayta, o d' an ton xronon touton tui Kleomenei tui Anaxandrideu en logoisi eun, basileuonti Spartes, proeige min es ta oikia. okus de idoito Kleomenes ta poteria, apethumaze te kai exeplesseto. o de an ekeleye ayton apoferesthai aytun osa bouloito. [2] touto kai dis kai tris eipantos Maiandrioy o Kleomenes dikaiotatos andrun ginetai, os labein men didomena oyk edikaioy, mathun de us alloisi didous tun astun eyresetai timurien, bas epi tous eforoys ameinon einai efe tei Spartei ton xeinon ton Samion apallassesthai ek teis Peloponnesoy, ina me anapeisei e ayton e allon tina Spartieteun kakon genesthai. oi d' ypakousantes exekeryxan Maiandrion.    
      149. As to Samos, the Persians, after sweeping the population off it, delivered it to Syloson stripped of men. Afterwards however the commander Otanes even joined in settling people there, moved by a vision of a dream and by a disease which seized him, so that he was diseased in the genital organs.         149. [1] ten de Samon [sageneusantes] oi Persai paredosan Sylosunti eremon eousan andrun. ysterui mentoi xronui kai sygkatoikise ayten o strategos Otanes ek te opsios oneiroy kai nousoy e min katelabe noseisai ta aidoia.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [150]

     150. After a naval force had thus gone against Samos, the Babylonians made revolt, being for this exceedingly well prepared; for during all the time of the reign of the Magian and of the insurrection of the seven, during all this time and the attendant confusion they were preparing themselves for the siege of their city: and it chanced by some means that they were not observed to be doing this. Then when they made open revolt, they did as follows:--after setting apart their mothers first, each man set apart also for himself one woman, whosoever he wished of his own household, and all the remainder they gathered together and killed by suffocation. Each man set apart the one who has been mentioned to serve as a maker of bread, and they suffocated the rest in order that they might not consume their provisions.         150. [1] epi de Samon strateumatos naytikou oixomenoy Babylunioi apestesan, karta ey pareskeyasmenoi. en osui gar o te Magos Erxe kai oi epta epanestesan, en toutui panti tui xronui kai tei taraxei es ten poliorkien pareskeyazonto. [2] kai kus tauta poieuntes elanthanon. epeite de ek tou emfaneos apestesan, epoiesan toionde. tas meteras exelontes, gynaika ekastos mian prosexaireeto ten ebouleto ek tun euytou oikiun, tas de loipas apasas synagagontes apepnixan. ten de mian ekastos sitopoion exaireeto. apepnixan de aytas, ina me sfeun ton siton anaisimususi.    
      151. Dareios being informed of this and having gathered together all his power, made expedition against them, and when he had marched his army up to Babylon he began to besiege them; but they cared nothing about the siege, for the Babylonians used to go up to the battlements of the wall and show contempt of Dareios and of his army by gestures and by words; and one of them uttered this saying: "Why, O Persians, do ye remain sitting here, and not depart? For then only shall ye capture us, when mules shall bring forth young." This was said by one of the Babylonians, not supposing that a mule would ever bring forth young.         151. [1] pythomenos de tauta o Dareios kai syllexas pasan ten euytou dunamin estrateueto ep' aytous, epelasas de epi ten Babyluna epoliorkee frontizontas oyden teis poliorkies. anabainontes gar epi tous promaxeunas tou teixeos oi Babylunioi katurxeonto kai kateskupton Dareion kai ten stratien aytou, kai tis aytun eipe touto to epos. [2] <<ti katesthe u Persai enthauta, all' oyk apallassesthe; tote gar airesete emeas, epean emionoi tekusi.>> touto eipe tun tis Babyluniun oydama elpizun an emionon tekein.    
      152. So when a year and seven months had now passed by, Dareios began to be vexed and his whole army with him, not being able to conquer the Babylonians. And yet Dareios had used against them every kind of device and every possible means, but not even so could he conquer them, though besides other devices he had attempted it by that also with which Cyrus conquered them; but the Babylonians were terribly on their guard and he was not able to conquer them.         152. [1] epta de menun kai eniaytou dielelythotos ede o Dareios te esxalle kai e stratie pasa oy dynate eousa elein tous Babylunioys. kaitoi panta sofismata kai pasas mexanas epepoiekee es aytous Dareios. all' oyd' us edunato elein sfeas, alloisi te sofismasi peiresamenos, kai de kai tui Kuros eile sfeas, kai toutui epeirethe. alla gar deinus Esan en fylakeisi oi Babylunioi, oyde sfeas oios te En elein.    
      153. Then in the twentieth month there happened to Zopyros the son of that Megabyzos who had been of the seven men who slew the Magian, to this Zopyros, I say, son of Megabyzos there happened a prodigy,--one of the mules which served as bearers of provisions for him produced young: and when this was reported to him, and Zopyros had himself seen the foal, because he did not believe the report, he charged those who had seen it not to tell that which had happened to any one, and he considered with himself what to do. And having regard to the words spoken by the Babylonian, who had said at first that when mules should produce young, then the wall would be taken, having regard (I say) to this ominous saying, it seemed to Zopyros that Babylon could be taken: for he thought that both the man had spoken and his mule had produced young by divine dispensation.         153. [1] enthauta eikostui meni Zupurui tui Megabuzoy, toutoy os tun epta andrun egeneto tun ton Magon katelontun, toutui tui Megabuzoy paidi Zupurui egeneto teras tode. tun oi sitoforun emionun mia eteke. us de oi exaggelthe kai ypo apisties aytos o Zupyros eide to brefos, apeipas toisi idousi medeni frazein to gegonos eboyleueto. [2] kai oi pros ta tou Babylunioy rhemata, os kat' arxas efese, epean per emionoi tekusi, tote to teixos alusesthai, pros tauten ten femen Zupurui edokee einai alusimos e Babylun. sun gar theui ekeinon te eipein kai euytui tekein ten emionon.    
      154. Since then it seemed to him that it was now fated that Babylon should be captured, he went to Dareios and inquired of him whether he thought it a matter of very great moment to conquer Babylon; and hearing in answer that he thought it of great consequence, he considered again how he might be the man to take it and how the work might be his own: for among the Persians benefits are accounted worthy of a very high degree of honour. He considered accordingly that he was not able to make conquest of it by any other means, but only if he should maltreat himself and desert to their side. So, making light esteem of himself, he maltreated his own body in a manner which could not be cured; for he cut off his nose and his ears, and shaved his hair round in an unseemly way, and scourged himself, and so went into the presence of Dareios.         154. [1] us de oi edokee morsimon einai ede tei Babyluni aliskesthai, proselthun Dareioy apepynthaneto ei peri pollou karta poieetai ten Babyluna elein. pythomenos de us pollou timuito, allo eboyleueto, okus aytos te estai o elun ayten kai euytou to ergon estai. karta gar en toisi Perseisi ai agathoergiai es to prosu megatheos timuntai. [2] allui men nyn oyk efrazeto ergui dynatos einai min ypoxeirien poieisai, ei d' euyton lubesamenos aytomoleseie es aytous. enthauta en elafrui poiesamenos euyton lubatai luben anekeston. apotamun gar euytou ten rhina kai ta uta kai ten komen kakus perikeiras kai mastigusas Elthe para Dareion.    
      155. And Dareios was exceedingly troubled when he saw the man of most repute with him thus maltreated; and leaping up from his seat he cried aloud and asked him who was the person who had maltreated him, and for what deed. He replied: "That man does not exist, excepting thee, who has so great power as to bring me into this condition; and not any stranger, O king, has done this, but I myself to myself, accounting it a very grievous thing that the Assyrians should make a mock of the Persians." He made answer: "Thou most reckless of men, thou didst set the fairest name to the foulest deed when thou saidest that on account of those who are besieged thou didst bring thyself into a condition which cannot be cured. How, O thou senseless one, will the enemy surrender to us more quickly, because thou hast maltreated thyself? Surely thou didst wander out of thy senses in thus destroying thyself." And he said, "If I had communicated to thee that which I was about to do, thou wouldst not have permitted me to do it; but as it was, I did it on my own account. Now therefore, unless something is wanting on thy part, we shall conquer Babylon: for I shall go straightway as a deserter to the wall; and I shall say to them that I suffered this treatment at thy hands: and I think that when I have convinced them that this is so, I shall obtain the command of a part of their forces. Do thou then on the tenth day from that on which I shall enter within the wall take of those troops about which thou wilt have no concern if they be destroyed,--of these, I say, get a thousand by the gate of the city which is called the gate of Semiramis; and after this again on the seventh day after the tenth set, I pray thee, two thousand by the gate which is called the gate of the Ninevites; and after this seventh day let twenty days elapse, and then lead other four thousand and place them by the gate called the gate of the Chaldeans: and let neither the former men nor these have any weapons to defend them except daggers, but this weapon let them have. Then after the twentieth day at once bid the rest of the army make an attack on the wall all round, and set the Persians, I pray thee, by those gates which are called the gate of Belos and the gate of Kissia: for, as I think, when I have displayed great deeds of prowess, the Babylonians will entrust to me, besides their other things, also the keys which draw the bolts of the gates. Then after that it shall be the care of myself and the Persians to do that which ought to be done."         155. [1] Dareios de karta bareus eneike idun andra dokimutaton lelubemenon, ek te tou thronoy anapedesas anebuse te kai eireto min ostis eie o lubesamenos kai o ti poiesanta. [2] o de eipe <<oyk esti oytos uner, oti me su, tui esti dunamis tosaute eme de ude diatheinai. oyde tis allotriun u basileu tade ergastai, all' aytos egu emeuyton, deinon ti poieumenos Assyrioys Perseisi katagelan.>> [3] o d' ameibeto <<u sxetliutate andrun, ergui tui aisxistui oynoma to kalliston ethey, fas dia tous poliorkeomenoys seuyton anekestus diatheinai. ti d', u mataie, lelubemenoy seu thasson oi polemioi parastesontai; kus oyk exeplusas tun frenun seuyton diaftheiras;>> [4] o de eipe <<ei men toi yperetithea ta emellon poiesein, oyk an me perieides. nun d' ep' emeuytou balomenos eprexa. ede un en me tun sun deesei, aireomen Babyluna. egu men gar us exu aytomolesu es to teixos kai fesu pros aytous us ypo seu tade epathon. kai dokeu, peisas sfeas tauta exein oytu, teuxesthai stratieis. [5] su de, ap' Es an emeres egu eselthu es to teixos, apo tautes es dekaten emeren teis seuytou stratieis, teis oydemia estai ure apollymenes, tautes xilioys taxon kata tas Semiramios kaleomenas pulas. meta de aytis apo teis dekates es ebdomen alloys moi taxon disxilioys kata tas Niniun kaleomenas pulas. apo de teis ebdomes dialeipein eikosi emeras, kai epeita alloys katison agagun kata tas Khaldaiun kaleomenas pulas, tetrakisxilioys. exontun de mete oi proteroi meden tun amyneuntun mete oytoi, plen egxeiridiun. touto de ean exein. [6] meta de ten eikosten emeren itheus ten men allen stratien keleuein perix prosballein pros to teixos, Persas de moi taxon kata te tas Belidas kaleomenas kai Kissias pulas. us gar egu dokeu, emeo megala erga apodexamenoy, ta te alla epitrepsontai emoi Babylunioi kai de kai tun pyleun tas balanagras. to de entheuten emoi te kai Perseisi melesei ta dei poieein.>>    
      156. Having thus enjoined he proceeded to go to the gate of the city, turning to look behind him as he went, as if he were in truth a deserter; and those who were set in that part of the wall, seeing him from the towers ran down, and slightly opening one wing of the gate asked who he was, and for what purpose he had come. And he addressed them and said that he was Zopyros, and that he came as a deserter to them. The gate-keepers accordingly when they heard this led him to the public assembly of the Babylonians; and being introduced before it he began to lament his fortunes, saying that he had in fact suffered at his own hands, and that he had suffered this because he had counselled the king to withdraw his army, since in truth there seemed to be no means of taking the town: "And now," he went on to say, "I am come for very great good to you, O Babylonians, but for very great evil to Dareios and his army, and to the Persians, for he shall surely not escape with impunity for having thus maltreated me; and I know all the courses of his counsels."         156. [1] tauta enteilamenos eie epi tas pulas, epistrefomenos us de aletheus aytomolos. oruntes de apo tun purgun oi kata touto tetagmenoi katetrexon katu kai oligon ti paraklinantes ten eteren pulen eirutun tis te eie kai otey deomenos ekoi. o de sfi egoreye us eie te Zupyros kai aytomoleoi es ekeinoys. [2] Egon de min oi pyloyroi, tauta us ekoysan, epi ta koina tun Babyluniun. katastas de ep' ayta katoiktizeto, fas ypo Dareioy peponthenai ta epeponthee yp' euytou, pathein de tauta dioti symboyleusai oi apanistanai ten stratien, epeite de oydeis poros efaineto teis alusios. [3] <<nun te>> efe legun <<egu ymin u Babylunioi eku megiston agathon, Dareiui de kai tei stratiei kai Perseisi megiston kakon. oy gar de eme ge ude lubesamenos kataproixetai. epistamai d' aytou pasas tas diexodoys tun boyleymatun.>> toiauta elege.    
      157. Thus he spoke, and the Babylonians, when they saw the man of most reputation among the Persians deprived of nose and ears and smeared over with blood from scourging, supposing assuredly that he was speaking the truth and had come to be their helper, were ready to put in his power that for which he asked them, and he asked them that he might command a certain force. Then when he had obtained this from them, he did that which he had agreed with Dareios that he would do; for he led out on the tenth day the army of the Babylonians, and having surrounded the thousand men whom he had enjoined Dareios first to set there, he slew them. The Babylonians accordingly, perceiving that the deeds which he displayed were in accordance with his words, were very greatly rejoiced and were ready to serve him in all things: and after the lapse of the days which had been agreed upon, he again chose men of the Babylonians and led them out and slew the two thousand men of the troops of Dareios. Seeing this deed also, the Babylonians all had the name of Zopyros upon their tongues, and were loud in his praise. He then again, after the lapse of the days which had been agreed upon, led them out to the place appointed, and surrounded the four thousand and slew them. When this also had been done, Zopyros was everything among the Babylonians, and he was appointed both commander of their army and guardian of their walls.         157. [1] oi de Babylunioi oruntes andra ton en Perseisi dokimutaton rhinos te kai utun esteremenon, mastixi te kai aimati anapefyrmenon, pagxy elpisantes legein min alethea kai sfi ekein summaxon, epitrepesthai etoimoi Esan tun edeeto sfeun. edeeto de stratieis. [2] o de epeite aytun touto parelabe, epoiee ta per tui Dareiui synethekato. exagagun gar tei dekatei emerei ten stratien tun Babyluniun kai kyklusamenos tous xilioys, tous prutoys eneteilato Dareiui taxai, toutoys katefoneyse. [3] mathontes de min oi Babylunioi toisi epesi ta erga parexomenon omoia, pagxy perixarees eontes pan de etoimoi Esan ypereteein. o de dialipun emeras tas sygkeimenas, aytis epilexamenos tun Babyluniun exegage kai katefoneyse tun Dareioy stratiuteun tous disxilioys. [4] idontes de kai touto to ergon oi Babylunioi pantes Zupyron eixon en stomasi aineontes. o de aytis dialipun tas sygkeimenas emeras exegage es to proeiremenon, kai kyklusamenos katefoneyse tous tetrakisxilioys. us de kai touto katergasto, panta de En en toisi Babylunioisi Zupyros, kai stratarxes te oytos sfi kai teixofulax apededekto.    
      158. But when Dareios made an attack according to the agreement on every side of the wall, then Zopyros discovered all his craft: for while the Babylonians, having gone up on the wall, were defending themselves against the attacks of the army of Dareios, Zopyros opened the gates called the gates of Kissia and of Belos, and let in the Persians within the wall. And of the Babylonians those who saw that which was done fled to the temple of Zeus Belos, but those who did not see remained each in his own appointed place, until at last they also learnt that they had been betrayed.         158. [1] prosbolen de Dareioy kata ta sygkeimena poieymenoy perix to teixos, enthauta de panta ton dolon o Zupyros exefaine. oi men gar Babylunioi anabantes epi to teixos emunonto ten Dareioy stratien prosballoysan, o de Zupyros tas te Kissias kai Belidas kaleomenas pulas anapetasas eseike tous Persas es to teixos. [2] tun de Babyluniun oi men eidon to poiethen, oytoi men efeygon es tou Dios tou Beloy to iron. oi de oyk eidon, emenon en tei euytou taxi ekastos, es o de kai oytoi emathon prodedomenoi.    
      159. Thus was Babylon conquered for the second time: and Dareios when he had overcome the Babylonians, first took away the wall from round their city and pulled down all the gates; for when Cyrus took Babylon before him, he did neither of these things: and secondly Dareios impaled the leading men to the number of about three thousand, but to the rest of the Babylonians he gave back their city to dwell in: and to provide that the Babylonians should have wives, in order that their race might be propagated, Dareios did as follows (for their own wives, as has been declared at the beginning, the Babylonians had suffocated, in provident care for their store of food):--he ordered the nations who dwelt round to bring women to Babylon, fixing a certain number for each nation, so that the sum total of fifty thousand women was brought together, and from these women the present Babylonians are descended.         159. [1] Babylun men nyn oytu to deuteron airethe. Dareios de epeite ekratese tun Babyluniun, touto men sfeun to teixos perieile kai tas pulas pasas apespase. to gar proteron elun Kuros ten Babyluna epoiese toutun oydeteron. touto de o Dareios tun andrun tous koryfaioys malista es trisxilioys aneskolopise, toisi de loipoisi Babylunioisi apeduke ten polin oikeein. [2] us d' exoysi gynaikas oi Babylunioi ina sfi genee ypoginetai, tade Dareios proidun epoiese. tas gar euytun, us kai kat' arxas dedelutai, apepnixan oi Babylunioi tou sitoy prooreontes. epetaxe toisi perioikoisi ethnesi gynaikas es Babyluna katistanai, osas de ekastoisi epitassun, uste pente myriadun to kefalaiuma tun gynaikun syneilthe. ek toyteun de tun gynaikun oi nun Babylunioi gegonasi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 3: Thaleia [160]

     160. As for Zopyros, in the judgment of Dareios no one of the Persians surpassed him in good service, either of those who came after or of those who had gone before, excepting Cyrus alone; for to Cyrus no man of the Persians ever yet ventured to compare himself: and Dareios is said to have declared often that he would rather that Zopyros were free from the injury than that he should have twenty Babylons added to his possession in addition to that one which he had. Moreover he gave him great honours; for not only did he give him every year those things which by the Persians are accounted the most honourable, but also he granted him Babylon to rule free from tribute, so long as he should live; and he added many other gifts. The son of this Zopyros was Megabyzos, who was made commander in Egypt against the Athenians and their allies; and the son of this Megabyzos was Zopyros, who went over to Athens as a deserter from the Persians.        160. [1] Zupuroy de oydeis agathoergien Perseun yperebaleto para Dareiui kritei oyte tun ysteron genomenun oyte tun proteron, oti me Kuros mounos. toutui gar oydeis Perseun exiuse ku euyton symbalein. pollakis de Dareion legetai gnumen tende apodexasthai, us bouloito an Zupyron einai apathea teis aeikeies mallon e Babylunas oi eikosi pros tei eousei prosgenesthai. [2] etimese de min megalus. kai gar dura oi ana pan etos edidoy tauta ta Perseisi esti timiutata, kai ten Babyluna oi eduke atelea nemesthai mexri teis ekeinoy zoes, kai alla polla epeduke. Zupuroy de toutoy ginetai Megabyzos, os en Aiguptui antia Athenaiun kai tun symmaxun estrategese. Megabuzoy de toutoy ginetai Zupyros, os es Athenas eytomolese ek Perseun.  
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene

     BOOK IV THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED MELPOMENE         
I s t o r i u n   DM e l p o m e n e
 
Dareios   
      1. After Babylon had been taken, the march of Dareios himself against the Scythians took place: for now that Asia was flourishing in respect of population, and large sums were being gathered in as revenue, Dareios formed the desire to take vengeance upon the Scythians, because they had first invaded the Median land and had overcome in fight those who opposed them; and thus they had been the beginners of wrong. The Scythians in truth, as I have before said, had ruled over Upper Asia for eight-and-twenty years; for they had invaded Asia in their pursuit of the Kimmerians, and they had deposed the Medes from their rule, who had rule over Asia before the Scythians came. Now when the Scythians had been absent from their own land for eight-and-twenty years, as they were returning to it after that interval of time, they were met by a contest not less severe than that which they had had with the Medes, since they found an army of no mean size opposing them. For the wives of the Scythians, because their husbands were absent from them for a long time, had associated with the slaves.         1. [1] meta de ten Babylunos airesin egeneto epi Skuras aytou Dareioy elasis. antheuses gar teis Asies andrasi kai xrematun megalun syniontun, epethumese o Dareios tisasthai Skuthas, oti ekeinoi proteroi esbalontes es ten Mediken kai nikesantes maxei tous antioymenoys ypeirxan adikies. [2] teis gar anu Asies Erxan, us kai proteron moi eiretai, Skuthai etea dyun deonta triekonta. Kimmerioys gar epidiukontes esebalon es ten Asien, katapausantes teis arxeis Medoys. oytoi gar prin e Skuthas apikesthai Erxon teis Asies. [3] tous de Skuthas apodemesantas oktu kai eikosi etea kai dia xronoy tosoutoy kationtas es ten sfeteren exedexato oyk elassun ponos tou Medikou. eyron gar antioymenen sfisi stratien oyk oligen. ai gar tun Skytheun gynaikes, us sfi oi andres apeisan xronon pollon, efoiteon para tous douloys.   
      2. Now the Scythians put out the eyes of all their slaves because of the milk which they drink; and they do as follows:--they take blow-pipes of bone just like flutes, and these they insert into the vagina of the mare and blow with their mouths, and others milk while they blow: and they say that they do this because the veins of the mare are thus filled, being blown out, and so the udder is let down. When they had drawn the milk they pour it into wooden vessels hollowed out, and they set the blind slaves in order about the vessels and agitate the milk. Then that which comes to the top they skim off, considering it the more valuable part, whereas they esteem that which settles down to be less good than the other. For this reason the Scythians put out the eyes of all whom they catch; for they are not tillers of the soil but nomads.         2. [1] tous de douloys oi Skuthai pantas tyflousi tou galaktos eineken tou pinoysi poieuntes ude. epean fyseteiras labusi osteinoys ayloisi prosemferestatoys, toutoys esthentes es tun theleun ippun ta arthra fysusi toisi stomasi, alloi de allun fysuntun amelgoysi. fasi de toude eineka touto poieein. tas flebas te pimplasthai fysumenas teis ippoy kai to oythar katiesthai. [2] epean de amelxusi to gala, esxeantes es xulina aggeia koila kai peristixantes kata ta aggeia tous tyflous doneoysi to gala, kai to men aytou epistamenon aparusantes egeuntai einai timiuteron, to d' ypistamenon Esson tou eteroy. toutun men eineka apanta ton an labusi oi Skuthai ektyflousi. oy gar arotai eisi alla nomades.   
      3. From these their slaves then, I say, and from their wives had been born and bred up a generation of young men, who having learnt the manner of their birth set themselves to oppose the Scythians as they were returning from the Medes. And first they cut off their land by digging a broad trench extending from the Tauric mountains to the Maiotian lake, at the point where this is broadest; then afterwards when the Scythians attempted to invade the land, they took up a position against them and fought; and as they fought many times, and the Scythians were not able to get any advantage in the fighting, one of them said: "What a thing is this that we are doing, Scythians! We are fighting against our own slaves, and we are not only becoming fewer in number ourselves by being slain in battle, but also we are killing them, and so we shall have fewer to rule over in future. Now therefore to me it seems good that we leave spears and bows and that each one take his horse-whip and so go up close to them: for so long as they saw us with arms in our hands, they thought themselves equal to us and of equal birth; but when they shall see that we have whips instead of arms, they will perceive that they are our slaves, and having acknowledged this they will not await our onset."         3. [1] ek toutun de un sfi tun doulun kai tun gynaikun etrafe neotes. oi epeite emathon ten sfeteren genesin, entiounto aytoisi katiousi ek tun Medun. [2] kai pruta men ten xuren apetamonto, tafron oryxamenoi eyrean katateinoysan ek tun Tayrikun oreun es ten Maieitin limnen, tei per esti megiste. meta ge peirumenoisi esballein toisi Skutheisi antikatizomenoi emaxonto. [3] ginomenes de maxes pollakis kai oy dynamenun oyden pleon exein tun Skytheun tei maxei, eis aytun elexe tade. <<oia poieumen, andres Skuthai. douloisi toisi emeteroisi maxomenoi aytoi te kteinomenoi elassones ginometha kai ekeinoys kteinontes elassonun to loipon arxomen. [4] nun un moi dokeei aixmas men kai toxa meteinai, labonta de ekaston tou ippoy ten mastiga ienai asson aytun. mexri men gar urun emeas opla exontas, oi de enomizon omoioi te kai ex omoiun emin einai. epean de iduntai mastigas anti oplun exontas, mathontes us eisi emeteroi douloi kai syggnontes touto. oyk ypomeneoysi.>>   
      4. When they heard this, the Scythians proceeded to do that which he said, and the others being panic-stricken by that which was done forgot their fighting and fled. Thus the Scythians had ruled over Asia; and in such manner, when they were driven out again by the Medes, they had returned to their own land. For this Dareios wished to take vengeance upon them, and was gathering together an army to go against them.         4. [1] tauta akousantes oi Skuthai epoieyn epitelea. oi de ekplagentes tui ginomenui teis maxes te epelathonto kai efeygon. oytu oi Skuthai teis te Asies Erxan kai exelasthentes aytis ypo Medun kateilthon tropui toioutui es ten sfeteren. tunde eineka o Dareiys tisasthai boylomenos synegeire ep' aytous strateyma.    
      5. Now the Scythians say that their nation is the youngest of all nations, and that this came to pass as follows:--The first man who ever existed in this region, which then was desert, was one named Targitaos: and of this Targitaos they say, though I do not believe it for my part, however they say the parents were Zeus and the daughter of the river Borysthenes. Targitaos, they report, was produced from some such origin as this, and of him were begotten three sons, Lipoxais and Arpoxais and the youngest Colaxais. In the reign of these there came down from heaven certain things wrought of gold, a plough, a yoke, a battle-axe, and a cup, and fell in the Scythian land: and first the eldest saw and came near them, desiring to take them, but the gold blazed with fire when he approached it: then when he had gone away from it, the second approached, and again it did the same thing. These then the gold repelled by blazing with fire; but when the third and youngest came up to it, the flame was quenched, and he carried them to his own house. The elder brothers then, acknowledging the significance of this thing, delivered the whole of the kingly power to the youngest.         5. [1] us de Skuthai legoysi, neutaton pantun ethneun einai to sfeteron, touto de genesthai ude. andra genesthai pruton en tei gei tautei eousei eremui tui oynoma einai Targitaon. tou de Targitaoy toutoy tous tokeas legoysi einai, emoi men oy pista legontes, legoysi d' un, Dia te kai Borystheneos tou potamou thygatera. [2] geneos men toioutoy de tinos genesthai ton Targitaon, toutoy de genesthai paidas treis, Lipoxain kai Arpoxain kai neutaton Kolaxain. [3] epi toutun arxontun ek tou oyranou feromena xrusea poiemata, arotron te kai zygon kai sagarin kai fialen, pesein es ten Skythiken. kai tun idonta pruton ton presbutaton asson ienai boylomenon ayta labein, ton de xryson epiontos kaiesthai. [4] apallaxthentos de toutoy prosienai ton deuteron, kai ton aytis tayta poieein. tous men de kaiomenon ton xryson apusasthai, tritui de tui neutatui epelthonti katasbeinai, kai min ekeinon komisai es euytou. kai tous presbyteroys adelfeous pros tauta syggnontas ten basileien pasan paradounai tui neutatui.   
      6. From Lixopais, they say, are descended those Scythians who are called the race of the Auchatai; from the middle brother Arpoxais those who are called Catiaroi and Traspians, and from the youngest of them the "Royal" tribe, who are called Paralatai: and the whole together are called, they say, Scolotoi, after the name of their king; but the Hellenes gave them the name of Scythians.         6. [1] apo men de Lipoxaios gegonenai toutoys tun Skytheun oi Ayxatai genos kaleontai, apo de tou mesoy Arpoxaios oi Katiaroi te kai Traspies kaleontai, apo de tou neutatoy aytun tou basileos oi kaleontai Paralatai. [2] sumpasi de einai oynoma Skolotoys, tou basileos epunymien. Skuthas de Ellenes unomasan.   
      7. Thus the Scythians say they were produced; and from the time of their origin, that is to say from the first king Targitaos, to the passing over of Dareios against them, they say that there is a period of a thousand years and no more. Now this sacred gold is guarded by the kings with the utmost care, and they visit it every year with solemn sacrifices of propitiation: moreover if any one goes to sleep while watching in the open air over this gold during the festival, the Scythians say that he does not live out the year; and there is given him for this so much land as he shall ride round himself on his horse in one day. Now as the land was large, Colaxais, they say, established three kingdoms for his sons; and of these he made one larger than the rest, and in this the gold is kept. But as to the upper parts which lie on the North side of those who dwell above this land, they say one can neither see nor pass through any further by reason of feathers which are poured down; for both the earth and the air are full of feathers, and this is that which shuts off the view.         7. [1] gegonenai men nyn sfeas ude legoysi oi Skuthai, etea de sfisi epeite gegonasi ta sumpanta legoysi einai apo tou prutoy basileos Targitaoy es ten Dareioy diabasin ten epi sfeas xiliun oy pleu alla tosauta. ton de xryson touton ton iron fylassoysi oi basilees es ta malista, kai thysieisi megaleisi ilaskomenoi meterxontai ana pan etos. [2] os d' an exun ton xryson ton iron en tei ortei ypaithrios katakoimethei, oytos legetai ypo Skytheun oy dieniaytizein. didosthai de oi dia touto osa an ippu en emerei miei perielasei aytos. teis de xures eouses megales trifasias tas basileias toisi paisi toisi euytou katastesasthai Kolaxain, kai toyteun mian poieisai megisten, en tei ton xryson fylassesthai. [3] ta de katuperthe pros boreen legoysi anemon tun yperoikun teis xures oyk oia te einai eti prosuteru oyte oran oyte diexienai ypo pterun kexymenun. pterun gar kai ten gein kai ton eera einai pleon, kai tauta einai ta apokleionta ten opsin.    
      8. Thus say the Scythians about themselves and about the region above them; but the Hellenes who dwell about the Pontus say as follows:-- Heracles driving the cattle of Geryones came to this land, then desert, which the Scythians now inhabit; and Geryones, says the tale, dwelt away from the region of the Pontus, living in the island called by the Hellenes Erytheia, near Gadeira which is outside the Pillars of Heracles by the Ocean.--As to the Ocean, they say indeed that it flows round the whole earth beginning from the place of the sunrising, but they do not prove this by facts.--From thence Heracles came to the land now called Scythia; and as a storm came upon him together with icy cold, he drew over him his lion's skin and went to sleep. Meanwhile the mares harnessed in his chariot disappeared by a miraculous chance, as they were feeding.         8. [1] Skuthai men ude yper sfeun te aytun kai teis xures teis katuperthe legoysi, <<Ellenun de oi ton Ponton oikeontes ude. Eraklea elaunonta tas Geryoneu bous apikesthai es gein tauten eousan eremen, entina nun Skuthai nemontai. [2] Geryonea de oikeein exu tou Pontoy, katoikemenon ten Ellenes legoysi Erutheian neison ten pros Gadeiroisi toisi exu Erakleun steleun epi tui Ukeanui. ton de Ukeanon logui men legoysi apo elioy anatoleun arxamenon gein peri pasan rheein, ergui de oyk apodeiknusi. [3] entheuten ton Eraklea apikesthai es ten nun Skythien xuren kaleomenen, kai katalabein gar ayton xeimuna te kai krymon, epeirysamenon ten leonteen katypnusai, tas de oi ippoys tas ypo tou armatos nemomenas en toutui tui xronui afanistheinai theie tuxei.   
      9. Then when Heracles woke he sought for them; and having gone over the whole land, at last he came to the region which is called Hylaia; and there he found in a cave a kind of twofold creature formed by the union of a maiden and a serpent, whose upper parts from the buttocks upwards were those of a woman, but her lower parts were those of a snake. Having seen her and marvelled at her, he asked her then whether she had seen any mares straying anywhere; and she said that she had them herself and would not give them up until he lay with her; and Heracles lay with her on condition of receiving them. She then tried to put off the giving back of the mares, desiring to have Heracles with her as long as possible, while he on the other hand desired to get the mares and depart; and at last she gave them back and said: "These mares when they came hither I saved for thee, and thou didst give me reward for saving them; for I have by thee three sons. Tell me then, what must I do with these when they shall be grown to manhood, whether I shall settle them here, for over this land I have power alone, or send them away to thee?" She thus asked of him, and he, they say, replied: "When thou seest that the boys are grown to men, do this and thou shalt not fail of doing right:--whichsoever of them thou seest able to stretch this bow as I do now, and to be girded with this girdle, him cause to be the settler of this land; but whosoever of them fails in the deeds which I enjoin, send him forth out of the land: and if thou shalt do thus, thou wilt both have delight thyself and perform that which has been enjoined to thee."         9. [1] us d' egertheinai ton Eraklea, dizesthai, panta de teis xures epexelthonta telos apikesthai es ten Ylaien kaleomenen gein. enthauta de ayton eyrein en antrui mixoparthenon tina, exidnan difyea, teis ta men anu apo tun gloytun einai gynaikos, ta de enerthe ofios. [2] idonta de kai thumasanta epeiresthai min ei koy idoi ippoys planumenas. ten de fanai euyten exein kai oyk apodusein ekeinui prin e oi mixthei. to de Eraklea mixtheinai epi tui misthui toutui. [3] keinen te de yperballesthai ten apodosin tun ippun, boylomenen us pleiston xronon syneinai tui Eraklei, kai ton komisamenon ethelein apallassesthai. telos de apodidousan ayten eipein Ippoys men de tautas apikomenas enthade esusa toi egu, sustra te su paresxes. egu gar ek seu treis paidas exu. [4] toutoys, epean genuntai trofies, o ti xre poieein, exegeo su, eite aytou katoikizu (xures gar teisde exu to kratos ayte) eite apopempu para se.>> ten men de tauta epeirutan, ton de legoysi pros tauta eipein [5] <<epean andruthentas idei tous paidas, tade poieusa oyk an amartanois. ton men an orais aytun tode to toxon ude diateinomenon kai tui zusteiri tuide kata tade zunnumenon, touton men teisde teis xures oiketora poieu. os d' an toutun tun ergun tun entellomai leipetai, ekpempe ek teis xures. kai tauta poieusa ayte te eyfraneai kai ta entetalmena poieseis.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [10]

     10. Upon this he drew one of his bows (for up to that time Heracles, they say, was wont to carry two) and showed her the girdle, and then he delivered to her both the bow and the girdle, which had at the end of its clasp a golden cup; and having given them he departed. She then, when her sons had been born and had grown to be men, gave them names first, calling one of them Agathyrsos and the next Gelonos and the youngest Skythes; then bearing in mind the charge given to her, she did that which was enjoined. And two of her sons, Agathyrsos and Gelonos, not having proved themselves able to attain to the task set before them, departed from the land, being cast out by her who bore them; but Skythes the youngest of them performed the task and remained in the land: and from Skythes the son of Heracles were descended, they say, the succeeding kings of the Scythians (Skythians): and they say moreover that it is by reason of the cup that the Scythians still even to this day wear cups attached to their girdles: and this alone his mother contrived for Skythes. Such is the story told by the Hellenes who dwell about the Pontus.         10. [1] ton men de eirusanta tun toxun to eteron (duo gar de foreein teus Eraklea) kai ton zusteira prodexanta, paradounai to toxon te kai ton zusteira exonta ep' akres teis symboleis fialen xryseen, donta de apallassesthai. ten d', epei oi genomenoys tous paidas andrutheinai, touto men sfi oynomata thesthai, tui men Agathyrson aytun, tui d' epomenui Gelunon, Skuthen de tui neutatui, touto de teis epistoleis memnemenen ayten poieisai ta entetalmena. [2] kai de duo men oi tun paidun, ton te Agathyrson kai ton Gelunon, oyk oioys te genomenoys exikesthai pros ton prokeimenon aethlon, oixesthai ek teis xures ekblethentas ypo teis geinamenes, ton de neutaton aytun Skuthen epitelesanta katameinai en tei xurei. [3] kai apo men Skutheu tou Erakleos genesthai tous aiei basileas ginomenoys Skytheun, apo de teis fiales eti kai es tode fialas ek tun zusterun foreein Skuthas. to de mounon mexanesasthai ten metera Skuthei. tauta de Ellenun oi ton Ponton oikeontes legoysi.    
      11. There is however also another story, which is as follows, and to this I am most inclined myself. It is to the effect that the nomad Scythians dwelling in Asia, being hard pressed in war by the Massagetai, left their abode and crossing the river Araxes came towards the Kimmerian land (for the land which now is occupied by the Scythians is said to have been in former times the land of the Kimmerians); and the Kimmerians, when the Scythians were coming against them, took counsel together, seeing that a great host was coming to fight against them; and it proved that their opinions were divided, both opinions being vehemently maintained, but the better being that of their kings: for the opinion of the people was that it was necessary to depart and that they ought not to run the risk of fighting against so many, but that of the kings was to fight for their land with those who came against them: and as neither the people were willing by means to agree to the counsel of the kings nor the kings to that of the people, the people planned to depart without fighting and to deliver up the land to the invaders, while the kings resolved to die and to be laid in their own land, and not to flee with the mass of the people, considering the many goods of fortune which they had enjoyed, and the many evils which it might be supposed would come upon them, if they fled from their native land. Having resolved upon this, they parted into two bodies, and making their numbers equal they fought with one another: and when these had all been killed by one another's hands, then the people of the Kimmerians buried them by the bank of the river Tyras (where their burial-place is still to be seen), and having buried them, then they made their way out from the land, and the Scythians when they came upon it found the land deserted of its inhabitants.         11. [1] esti de kai allos logos exun ude, tui malista legomenui aytos proskeimai, Skuthas tous nomadas oikeontas en tei Asiei, polemui piesthentas ypo Massageteun, oixesthai diabantas potamon Araxen epi gein ten Kimmerien (ten gar nun nemontai Skuthai, ayte legetai to palaion einai Kimmeriun), [2] tous de Kimmerioys epiontun Skytheun boyleuesthai us stratou epiontos megaloy, kai de tas gnumas sfeun kexurismenas, entonoys men amfoteras, ameinu de ten tun basileun. ten men gar de tou demoy ferein gnumen us apallassesthai preigma eie mede pro spodou menontas kindyneuein, ten de tun basileun diamaxesthai peri teis xures toisi epiousi. [3] oykun de ethelein peithesthai oyte toisi basileusi ton deimon oyte tui demui tous basileas. tous men de apallassesthai boyleuesthai amaxeti ten xurein paradontas toisi epiousi. toisi de basileusi doxai en tei euytun keisthai apothanontas mede symfeugein tui demui, logisamenoys osa te agatha peponthasi kai osa feugontas ek teis patridos kaka epidoxa katalambanein. [4] us de doxai sfi tauta, diastantas kai arithmon isoys genomenoys maxesthai pros alleloys. kai tous men apothanontas pantas yp' euytun thapsai ton deimon tun Kimmeriun para potamon Turen (kai sfeun eti deilos esti o tafos), thapsantas de oytu ten exodon ek teis xures poieesthai. Skuthas de epelthontas labein ten xuren eremen.   
      12. And there are at the present time in the land of Scythia Kimmerian walls, and a Kimmerian ferry; and there is also a region which is called Kimmeria, and the so-called Kimmerian Bosphorus. It is known moreover that the Kimmerians, in their flight to Asia from the Scythians, also made a settlement on that peninsula on which now stands the Hellenic city of Sinope; and it is known too that the Scythians pursued them and invaded the land of Media, having missed their way; for while the Kimmerians kept ever along by the sea in their flight, the Scythians pursued them keeping Caucasus on their right hand, until at last they invaded Media, directing their course inland. This then which has been told is another story, and it is common both to Hellenes and Barbarians.         12. [1] kai nun esti men en tei Skythikei Kimmeria teixea, esti de porthmeia Kimmeria, esti de kai xurei oynoma Kimmerie, esti de Bosporos Kimmerios kaleomenos. [2] fainontai de oi Kimmerioi feugontes es ten Asien tous Skuthas kai ten xersoneson ktisantes, en tei nun Sinupe polis Ellas oikistai. faneroi de eisi kai oi Skuthai diuxantes aytous kai esbalontes es gein ten Mediken, amartontes teis odou. [3] oi men gar Kimmerioi aiei ten para thalassan efeygon, oi de Skuthai en dexiei ton Kaukason exontes ediukon es oy esebalon es gein ten Mediken, es mesogaian teis odou trafthentes. oytos de allos xynos Ellenun te kai barbarun legomenos logos eiretai.   
      13. Aristeas however the son of Caystrobios, a man of Proconnesos, said in the verses which he composed, that he came to the land of the Issedonians being possessed by Phoebus, and that beyond the Issedonians dwelt Arimaspians, a one-eyed race, and beyond these the gold-guarding griffins, and beyond them the Hyperboreans extending as far as the sea: and all these except the Hyperboreans, beginning with the Arimaspians, were continually making war on their neighbours, and the Issedonians were gradually driven out of their country by the Arimaspians and the Scythians by the Issedonians, and so the Kimmerians, who dwelt on the Southern Sea, being pressed by the Scythians left their land. Thus neither does he agree in regard to this land with the report of the Scythians.         13. [1] efe de Aristees o Kaustrobioy aner Prokonnesios poieun epea, apikesthai es Issedonas foibolamptos genomenos, Issedonun de yperoikeein Arimaspous andras moynofthalmoys yper de toutun tous xrysofulakas grupas, toutun de tous Yperboreoys katekontas epi thalassan. [2] toutoys un pantas plen Yperboreun, arxantun Arimaspun, aiei toisi plesioxuroisi epitithesthai, kai ypo men Arimaspun exutheesthai ek teis xures Issedonas, ypo de Issedonun Skuthas, Kimmerioys de oikeontas epi tei notiei thalassei ypo Skytheun piezomenoys ekleipein ten xuren. oytu oyde oytos symferetai peri teis xures tautes Skutheisi.    
      14. As to Aristeas who composed this, I have said already whence he was; and I will tell also the tale which I heard about him in Proconnesos and Kyzicos. They say that Aristeas, who was in birth inferior to none of the citizens, entered into a fuller's shop in Proconnesos and there died; and the fuller closed his workshop and went away to report the matter to those who were related to the dead man. And when the news had been spread abroad about the city that Aristeas was dead, a man of Kyzicos who had come from the town of Artake entered into controversy with those who said so, and declared that he had met him going towards Kyzicos and had spoken with him: and while he was vehement in dispute, those who were related to the dead man came to the fuller's shop with the things proper in order to take up the corpse for burial; and when the house was opened, Aristeas was not found there either dead or alive. In the seventh year after this he appeared at Proconnesos and composed those verses which are now called by the Hellenes the Arimaspeia, and having composed them he disappeared the second time.         14. [1] kai othen men En Aristees o tauta eipas, eireka, ton de peri aytou ekoyon logon en Prokonnesui kai Kyzikui, lexu. Aristeen gar legoysi, eonta tun astun oydenos genos ypodeesteron, eselthonta es knafeion en Prokonnesui apothanein, kai ton knafea katakleisanta to ergasterion oixesthai aggeleonta toisi prosekoysi tui nekrui. [2] eskedasmenoy de ede tou logoy ana ten polin us tethneus eie o Aristees, es amfisbasias toisi legoysi apikneesthai andra Kyzikenon ekonta ex Artakes polios, fanta syntyxein te oi ionti epi Kyzikoy kai es logoys apikesthai. kai touton men entetamenus amfisbateein, tous de prosekontas tui nekrui epi to knafeion pareinai exontas ta prosfora us anairesomenoys. [3] anoixthentos de tou oikematos oyte tethneuta oyte zunta fainesthai Aristeen. meta de ebdomui etei fanenta ayton es Prokonneson poieisai ta epea tauta ta nun yp' Ellenun Arimaspea kaleetai, poiesanta de afanistheinai to deuteron.   
      15. So much is told by these cities; and what follows I know happened to the people of Metapontion in Italy two hundred and forty years after the second disappearance of Aristeas, as I found by putting together the evidence at Proconnesos and Metapontion. The people of Metapontion say that Aristeas himself appeared in their land and bade them set up an altar of Apollo and place by its side a statue bearing the name of Aristeas of Proconnesos; for he told them that to their land alone of all the Italiotes Apollo had come, and he, who now was Aristeas, was accompanying him, being then a raven when he accompanied the god. Having said this he disappeared; and the Metapontines say that they sent to Delphi and asked the god what the apparition of the man meant: and the Pythian prophetess bade them obey the command of the apparition, and told them that if they obeyed, it would be the better for them. They therefore accepted this answer and performed the commands; and there stands a statue now bearing the name of Aristeas close by the side of the altar dedicated to Apollo, and round it stand laurel trees; and the altar is set up in the market-place. Let this suffice which has been said about Aristeas.         15. [1] tauta men ai polies aytai legoysi, tade de oida Metapontinoisi toisi en Italiei sygkyresanta meta ten afanisin ten deyteren Aristeu etesi tesserakonta kai diekosioisi, us egu symballomenos en Prokonnesui te kai Metapontiui eyriskon. [2] Metapontinoi fasi ayton Aristeen fanenta sfi es ten xuren keleusai bumon Apollunos idrusasthai kai Aristeu tou Prokonnesioy epunymien exonta andrianta par' ayton istanai. fanai gar sfi ton Apolluna Italiuteun mounoisi de apikesthai es ten xuren, kai aytos oi epesthai o nun eun Aristees. tote de, ote eipeto tui theui, einai korax. [3] kai ton men eiponta tauta afanistheinai, sfeas de Metapontinoi legoysi es Delfous pempsantas ton theon epeirutan o ti to fasma tou anthrupoy eie. ten de Pythien sfeas keleuein peithesthai tui fasmati, peithomenoisi de ameinon synoisesthai. kai sfeas dexamenoys tauta poieisai epitelea. [4] kai nun esteke andrias epunymien exun Aristeu par' aytui tui agalmati tou Apollunos, perix de ayton dafnai estasi. to de agalma en tei agorei idrytai. Aristeu men nyn peri tosauta eiresthu.    
      16. Now of the land about which this account has been begun, no one knows precisely what lies beyond it: for I am not able to hear of any one who alleges that he knows as an eye-witness; and even Aristeas, the man of whom I was making mention just now, even he, I say, did not allege, although he was composing verse, that he went further than the Issedonians; but that which is beyond them he spoke of by hearsay, and reported that it was the Issedonians who said these things. So far however as we were able to arrive at certainty by hearsay, carrying inquiries as far as possible, all this shall be told.         16. [1] teis de geis, teis peri ode o logos ormetai legesthai, oydeis oide atrekeus o ti to katuperthe esti. oydenos gar de aytopteu eidenai famenoy dunamai pythesthai. oyde gar oyde Aristees, tou per oligui proteron toutun mnemen epoieumen, oyde oytos prosuteru Issedonun en aytoisi toisi epesi poieun efese apikesthai, alla ta katuperthe elege akoei, fas' Issedonas einai tous tauta legontas. [2] all' oson men emeis atrekeus epi makrotaton oioi te egenometha akoei exikesthai, pan eiresetai.   
      17. Beginning with the trading station of the Borysthenites,--for of the parts along the sea this is the central point of all Scythia,-- beginning with this, the first regions are occupied by the Callipidai, who are Hellenic Scythians; and above these is another race, who are called Alazonians. These last and the Callipidai in all other respects have the same customs as the Scythians, but they both sow corn and use it as food, and also onions, leeks, lentils and millet. Above the Alazonians dwell Scythians who till the ground, and these sow their corn not for food but to sell. Beyond them dwell the Neuroi; and beyond the Neuroi towards the North Wind is a region without inhabitants, as far as we know. These races are along the river Hypanis to the West of the Borysthenes;         17. [1] apo tou Borystheneiteun emporioy (touto gar tun parathalassiun mesaitaton esti pases teis Skythies), apo toutoy prutoi Kallippidai nemontai eontes Ellenes Skuthai, yper de toutun allo ethnos oi Alazones kaleontai. oytoi de kai oi Kallippidai ta men alla kata tayta Skutheisi epaskeoysi, siton de kai speiroysi kai siteontai, kai krommya kai skoroda kai fakous kai kegxroys. [2] yper de Alazonun oikeoysi Skuthai aroteires, oi oyk epi sitesi speiroysi ton siton all' epi presi. toutun de katuperthe oikeoysi Neyroi. Neyrun de to pros boreen anemon eremon anthrupun, oson emeis idmen. tauta men para ton Ypanin potamon esti ethnea pros esperes tou Borystheneos.   
      18. but after crossing the Borysthenes, first from the sea-coast is Hylaia, and beyond this as one goes up the river dwell agricultural Scythians, whom the Hellenes who live upon the river Hypanis call Borysthenites, calling themselves at the same time citizens of Olbia. These agricultural Scythians occupy the region which extends Eastwards for a distance of three days' journey, reaching to a river which is called Panticapes, and Northwards for a distance of eleven days' sail up the Borysthenes. Then immediately beyond these begins the desert and extends for a great distance; and on the other side of the desert dwell the Androphagoi, a race apart by themselves and having no connection with the Scythians. Beyond them begins a region which is really desert and has no race of men in it, as far as we know.         18. [1] atar diabanti ton Borysthenea apo thalasses pruton men ei Ylaie, apo de tautes anu ionti oikeoysi Skuthai geurgoi, tous Ellenes oi oikeontes epi tui Ypani potamui kaleoysi Borystheneitas, sfeas de aytous Olbiopolitas. [2] oytoi un oi geurgoi Skuthai nemontai to men pros ten eu epi treis emeras odou, katekontes epi potamon tui oynoma keitai Pantikapes, to de pros boreen anemon ploon ana ton Borysthenea emereun endeka. ede de katuperthe toutun ei eremos esti epi pollon. [3] meta de ten eremon Androfagoi oikeoysi, ethnos eon idion kai oydamus Skythikon. to de toutun katuperthe eremon ede aletheus kai ethnos anthrupun oyden, oson emeis idmen.   
      19. The region which lies to the East of these agricultural Scythians, after one has crossed the river Panticapes, is occupied by nomad Scythians, who neither sow anything nor plough the earth; and this whole region is bare of trees except Hylaia. These nomads occupy a country which extends to the river Gerros, a distance of fourteen days' journey Eastwards.         19. [1] to de pros ten eu tun geurgun toutun Skytheun, diabanti ton Pantikapen potamon, nomades ede Skuthai nemontai, oyte ti speirontes oyden oyte arountes. psile de dendreun e pasa ayte plen teis Ylaies. oi de nomades oytoi to pros ten eu emereun tesserun kai deka odon nemontai xuren katateinoysan epi potamon Gerron.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [20]

     20. Then on the other side of the Gerros we have those parts which are called the "Royal" lands and those Scythians who are the bravest and most numerous and who esteem the other Scythians their slaves. These reach Southwards to the Tauric land, and Eastwards to the trench which those who were begotten of the blind slaves dug, and to the trading station which is called Cremnoi upon the Maiotian lake; and some parts of their country reach to the river Tanais. Beyond the Royal Scythians towards the North Wind dwell the Melanchlainoi, of a different race and not Scythian. The region beyond the Melanchlainoi is marshy and not inhabited by any, so far as we know.         20. [1] peren de tou Gerroy tauta de ta kaleumena basileia esti kai Skuthai oi aristoi te kai pleistoi kai tous alloys nomizontes Skuthas douloys sfeteroys einai. katekoysi de oytoi to men pros mesambrien es ten Tayriken, to de pros eu epi te tafron, ten de oi ek tun tyflun genomenoi uryxan, kai epi teis limnes teis Maietidos to emporion to kaleetai Kremnoi. ta de aytun katekoysi epi potamon Tanain. [2] ta de katuperthe pros boreen anemon tun basileiun Skytheun oikeoysi Melagxlainoi, allo ethnos kai oy Skythikon. Melagxlainun de to katuperthe limnai kai eremos esti anthrupun, kat' oson emeis idmen.   
      21. After one has crossed the river Tanais the country is no longer Scythia, but the first of the divisions belongs to the Sauromatai, who beginning at the corner of the Maiotian lake occupy land extending towards the North Wind fifteen days' journey, and wholly bare of trees both cultivated and wild. Above these, holding the next division of land, dwell the Budinoi, who occupy a land wholly overgrown with forest consisting of all kinds of trees.         21. [1] Tanain de potamon diabanti oyketi Skythike, all' e men prute tun laxiun Sayromateun esti, oi ek tou myxou arxamenoi teis Maietidos limnes nemontai to pros boreen anemon emereun pentekaideka odon, pasan eousan psilen kai agriun kai emerun dendreun. yperoikeoysi de toutun deyteren laxin exontes Boydinoi, gein nemomenoi pasan dasean yle pantoiei.   
      22. Then beyond the Budinoi towards the North, first there is desert for seven days' journey; and after the desert turning aside somewhat more towards the East Wind we come to land occupied by the Thyssagetai, a numerous people and of separate race from the others. These live by hunting; and bordering upon them there are settled also in these same regions men who are called Irycai, who also live by hunting, which they practise in the following manner:--the hunter climbs up a tree and lies in wait there for his game (now trees are abundant in all this country), and each has a horse at hand, which has been taught to lie down upon its belly in order that it may make itself low, and also a dog: and when he sees the wild animal from the tree, he first shoots his arrow and then mounts upon his horse and pursues it, and the dog seizes hold of it. Above these in a direction towards the East dwell other Scythians, who have revolted from the Royal Scythians and so have come to this region.         22. [1] Boydinun de katuperthe pros boreen esti prute men eremos ep' emereun epta odon, meta de ten eremon apoklinonti mallon pros apeliuten anemon nemontai Thyssagetai, ethnos pollon kai idion. zusi de apo theres. [2] synexees de toutoisi en toisi aytoisi topoisi katoikemenoi eisi toisi oynoma keitai Iurkai, kai oytoi apo theres zuntes tropui toiuide. loxai epi dendreon anabas, ta de esti pykna ana pasan ten xuren. ippos de ekastui dedidagmenos epi gastera keisthai tapeinotetos eineka etoimos esti kai kuun. epean de apidei to therion apo tou dendreoy, toxeusas epibas epi ton ippon diukei, kai o kuun exetai, [3] yper de toutun to pros ten eu apoklinonti oikeoysi Skuthai alloi, apo tun basileiun Skytheun apostantes kai oytu apikomenoi es touton ton xuron.   
      23. As far as the country of these Scythians the whole land which has been described is level plain and has a deep soil; but after this point it is stony and rugged. Then when one has passed through a great extent of this rugged country, there dwell in the skirts of lofty mountains men who are said to be all bald-headed from their birth, male and female equally, and who have flat noses and large chins and speak a language of their own, using the Scythian manner of dress, and living on the produce of trees. The tree on the fruit of which they live is called the Pontic tree, and it is about the size of a fig- tree: this bears a fruit the size of a bean, containing a stone. When the fruit has ripened, they strain it through cloths and there flows from it a thick black juice, and this juice which flows from it is called as-chy. This they either lick up or drink mixed with milk, and from its lees, that is the solid part, they make cakes and use them for food; for they have not many cattle, since the pastures there are by no means good. Each man has his dwelling under a tree, in winter covering the tree all round with close white felt-cloth, and in summer without it. These are injured by no men, for they are said to be sacred, and they possess no weapon of war. These are they also who decide the disputes rising among their neighbours; and besides this, whatever fugitive takes refuge with them is injured by no one: and they are called Argippaians.         23. [1] mexri men de teis toutun tun Skytheun xures esti e katalextheisa pasa pedias te gei kai bathugaios, to d' apo toutoy lithudes t' esti kai trexea. [2] diexelthonti de kai teis trexees xures pollon oikeoysi ypurean oreun ypselun anthrupoi legomenoi einai pantes falakroi ek geneteis ginomenoi, kai ersenes kai theleai omoius, kai simoi kai geneia exontes megala, funen de idien ientes, estheiti de xreumenoi Skythikei, zuntes de apo dendreun. [3] pontikon men oynoma tui dendreui ap' oy zusi, megathos de kata sykeen malista kei. karpon de foreei kyamui ison, pyreina de exei. touto epean genetai pepon, sakkeoysi imatioisi, aporreei de ap' aytou paxu kai melan. oynoma de tui aporreonti esti asxy. touto kai leixoysi kai galakti symmisgontes pinoysi, kai apo teis paxutetos aytou teis trygos palathas syntitheisi kai tautas siteontai. [4] probata gar sfi oy polla esti. oy gar ti spoydaiai ai nomai aytothi eisi. ypo dendreui de ekastos katoiketai, ton men xeimuna epean to dendreon perikalupsei pilui stegnui leykui, to de theros aney piloy. [5] toutoys oydeis adikeei anthrupun. iroi gar legontai einai. oyde ti areion oplon ekteatai. kai touto men toisi perioikeoysi oytoi eisi oi tas diaforas diaireontes, touto de os an feugun katafugei es toutoys, yp' oydenos adikeetai. oynoma de sfi esti Argippaioi.   
      24. Now as far as these bald-headed men there is abundantly clear information about the land and about the nations on this side of them; for not only do certain of the Scythians go to them, from whom it is not difficult to get information, but also some of the Hellenes who are at the trading-station of the Borysthenes and the other trading- places of the Pontic coast: and those of the Scythians who go to them transact their business through seven interpreters and in seven different languages.         24. [1] mexri men nyn tun falakrun toutun polle perifaneie teis xures esti kai tun emprosthe ethneun. kai gar Skytheun tines apikneontai es aytous, tun oy xalepon esti pythesthai kai Ellenun tun ek Borystheneos te emporioy kai tun allun Pontikun emporiun. Skytheun de oi an elthusi es aytous, di' epta ermeneun kai di' epta glusseun diapressontai.   
      25. So far as these, I say, the land is known; but concerning the region to the North of the bald-headed men no one can speak with certainty, for lofty and impassable mountains divide it off, and no one passes over them. However these bald-headed men say (though I do not believe it) that the mountains are inhabited by men with goats' feet; and that after one has passed beyond these, others are found who sleep through six months of the year. This I do not admit at all as true. However, the country to the East of the bald-headed men is known with certainty, being inhabited by the Issedonians, but that which lies beyond both the bald-headed men and the Issedonians towards the North Wind is unknown, except so far as we know it from the accounts given by these nations which have just been mentioned.         25. [1] mexri men de toutun ginusketai, to de tun falakrun katuperthe oydeis atrekeus oide frasai. orea gar ypsela apotamnei abata kai oydeis sfea yperbainei. oi de falakroi oytoi legoysi, emoi men oy pista legontes, oikeein ta orea aigipodas andras, yperbanti de toutoys anthrupoys alloys oi ten examenon kateudoysi. touto de oyk endekomai ten arxen, [2] alla to men pros eu tun falakrun ginusketai atrekeus ypo Issedonun oikeomenon, to mentoi katuperthe pros boreen anemon oy ginusketai oyte tun falakrun oyte tun Issedonun, ei me osa aytun toutun legontun.   
      26. The Issedonians are said to have these customs:--when a man's father is dead, all the relations bring cattle to the house, and then having slain them and cut up the flesh, they cut up also the dead body of the father of their entertainer, and mixing all the flesh together they set forth a banquet. His skull however they strip of the flesh and clean it out and then gild it over, and after that they deal with it as a sacred thing and perform for the dead man great sacrifices every year. This each son does for his father, just as the Hellenes keep the day of memorial for the dead. In other respects however this race also is said to live righteously, and their women have equal rights with the men.         26. [1] nomoisi de Issedones toiside legontai xrasthai. epean andri apothanei pater, oi prosekontes pantes prosagoysi probata, kai epeita tauta thusantes kai katatamontes ta krea katatamnoysi kai ton tou dekomenoy tethneuta gonea, anamixantes de panta ta krea daita protithentai. [2] ten de kefalen aytou psilusantes kai ekkatherantes kataxrysousi kai epeita ate agalmati xreuntai, thysias megalas epeteioys epiteleontes. pais de patri touto poieei, kata per Ellenes ta genesia. allus de dikaioi kai oytoi legontai einai, isokratees de omoius ai gynaikes toisi andrasi.   
      27. These then also are known; but as to the region beyond them, it is the Issedonians who report that there are there one-eyed men and gold-guarding griffins; and the Scythians report this having received it from them, and from the Scythians we, that is the rest of mankind, have got our belief; and we call them in Scythian language Arimaspians, for the Scythians call the number one arima and the eye spu.         27. [1] ginuskontai men de kai oytoi, to de apo toutun to katuperthe Issedones eisi oi legontes moynofthalmoys anthrupoys kai xrysofulakas grupas einai. para de toutun Skuthai paralabontes legoysi, para de Skytheun emeis oi alloi nenomikamen kai onomazomen aytous skythisti Arimaspous. arima gar en kaleoysi Skuthai, spou de ofthalmon.   
      28. This whole land which has been described is so exceedingly severe in climate, that for eight months of the year there is frost so hard as to be intolerable; and during these if you pour out water you will not be able to make mud, but only if you kindle a fire can you make it; and the sea is frozen and the whole of the Kimmerian Bosphorus, so that the Scythians who are settled within the trench make expeditions and drive their waggons over into the country of the Sindians. Thus it continues to be winter for eight months, and even for the remaining four it is cold in those parts. This winter is distinguished in its character from all the winters which come in other parts of the world; for in it there is no rain to speak of at the usual season for rain, whereas in summer it rains continually; and thunder does not come at the time when it comes in other countries, but is very frequent, in the summer; and if thunder comes in winter, it is marvelled at as a prodigy: just so, if an earthquake happens, whether in summer or in winter, it is accounted a prodigy in Scythia. Horses are able to endure this winter, but neither mules nor asses can endure it at all, whereas in other countries horses if they stand in frost lose their limbs by mortification, while asses and mules endure it.         28. [1] dysxeimeros de ayte e katalextheisa pasa xure oytu de ti esti, entha tous men oktu tun menun aforetos oios ginetai krymos, en toisi ydur ekxeas pelon oy poieseis, pur de anakaiun poieseis pelon. e de thalassa pegnytai kai o Bosporos pas o Kimmerios, kai epi tou krystalloy oi entos tafroy Skuthai katoikemenoi strateuontai kai tas amaxas epelaunoysi peren es tous Sindoys. [2] oytu men de tous oktu meinas diateleei xeimun eun, tous d' epiloipoys tesseras psuxea aytothi esti. kexuristai de oytos o xeimun tous tropoys pasi toisi en alloisi xurioisi ginomenoisi xeimusi, en tui ten men uraien oyk yei logoy axion oyden, to de theros yun oyk aniei. [3] brontai te Emos tei allei ginontai, tenikauta men oy ginontai, thereos de amfilafees. en de xeimunos bronte genetai, us teras nenomistai thumazesthai. us de kai en seismos genetai en te thereos en te xeimunos en tei Skythikei, teras nenomistai. [4] ippoi de anexomenoi feroysi ton xeimuna touton, emionoi de oyde onoi oyk anexontai arxen. tei de allei ippoi men en krymui esteutes aposfakelizoysi, onoi de kai emionoi anexontai.   
      29. I think also that it is for this reason that the hornless breed of oxen in that country have no horns growing; and there is a verse of Homer in the Odyssey supporting my opinion, which runs this:-- 
"Also the Libyan land, where the sheep very quickly grow horned," for it is rightly said that in hot regions the horns come quickly, whereas in extreme cold the animals either have no horns growing at all, or hardly any.         29. [1] dokeei de moi kai to genos tun boun to kolon dia tauta oy fuein kerea aytothi. martyreei de moi tei gnumei kai Omeroy epos en Odysseiei exon ude,      kai Libuen, othi t' arnes afar keraoi telethoysi,
      (Hom. Od. 4.85)orthus eiremenon, en toisi thermoisi taxu paraginesthai ta kerea, en de toisi isxyroisi psuxesi e oy fuein kerea ta ktenea arxen e fuonta fuein mogis.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [30]

     30. In that land then this takes place on account of the cold; but (since my history proceeded from the first seeking occasions for digression) I feel wonder that in the whole land of Elis mules cannot be bred, though that region is not cold, nor is there any other evident cause. The Eleians themselves say that in consequence of some curse mules are not begotten in their land; but when the time approaches for the mares to conceive, they drive them out into the neighbouring lands and there in the land of their neighbours they admit to them the he-asses until the mares are pregnant, and then they drive them back.         30. [1] enthauta men nyn dia ta psuxea ginetai tauta. thumazu de (prosthekas gar de moi o logos ex arxeis edizeto) oti en tei Eleiei pasei xurei oy dyneatai ginesthai emionoi, oyte psyxrou tou xuroy eontos oyte alloy fanerou aitioy oydenos. fasi de aytoi Eleioi ek katares tey oy ginesthai sfisi emionoys, [2] all' epean prosiei e ure kyiskesthai tas ippoys, exelaunoysi es tous plesioxuroys aytas, kai epeita sfi en tei tun pelas epieisi tous onoys, es oy an sxusi ai ippoi en gastri. epeita de apelaunoysi.   
      31. As to the feathers of which the Scythians say that the air is full, and that by reason of them they are not able either to see or to pass through the further parts of the continent, the opinion which I have is this:--in the parts beyond this land it snows continually, though less in summer than in winter, as might be supposed. Now whomsoever has seen close at hand snow falling thickly, knows what I mean without further explanation, for the snow is like feathers: and on account of this wintry weather, being such as I have said, the Northern parts of this continent are uninhabitable. I think therefore that by the feathers the Scythians and those who dwell near them mean symbolically the snow. This then which has been said goes to the furthest extent of the accounts given.         31. [1] peri de tun pterun tun Skuthai legoysi anapleon einai ton eera, kai toutun eineka oyk oioi te einai oyte idein to prosu teis epeiroy oyte diexienai, tende exu peri aytun gnumen. ta katuperthe tautes teis xures aiei nifetai, elassoni de tou thereos e tou xeimunos, usper kai oikos. [2] ede un ostis agxothen xiona adren piptoysan eide oide to legu. eoike gar e xiun pteroisi kai dia ton xeimuna touton eonta toiouton anoiketa ta pros boreen esti teis epeiroy tautes. ta un ptera eikazontas ten xiona tous Skuthas te kai tous perioikoys dokeu legein. tauta men nyn ta legetai makrotata eiretai.    
      32. About a Hyperborean people the Scythians report nothing, nor do any of those who dwell in this region, unless it be the Issedonians: but in my opinion neither do these report anything; for if they did the Scythians also would report it, as they do about the one-eyed people. Hesiod however has spoken of Hyperboreans, and so also has Homer in the poem of the "Epigonoi," at least if Homer was really the composer of that Epic.         32. [1] Yperboreun de peri anthrupun oyte ti Skuthai legoysi oyden oyte tines alloi tun tautei oikemenun, ei me ara Issedones. us de egu dokeu, oyd' oytoi legoysi oyden. elegon gar an kai Skuthai, us peri tun moynofthalmun legoysi. all' Esiodui men esti peri Yperboreun eiremena, esti de kai Omerui en Epigonoisi, ei de tui eonti ge Omeros tauta ta epea epoiese.   
      33. But much more about them is reported by the people of Delos than by any others. For these say that sacred offerings bound up in wheat straw are carried from the land of the Hyperboreans and come to the Scythians, and then from the Scythians the neighbouring nations in succession receive them and convey them Westwards, finally as far as the Adriatic: thence they are sent forward towards the South, and the people of Dodona receive them first of all the Hellenes, and from these they come down to the Malian gulf and are passed over to Euboea, where city sends them on to city till they come to Carystos. After this Andros is left out, for the Carystians are those who bring them to Tenos, and the Tenians to Delos. Thus they say that these sacred offerings come to Delos; but at first, they say, the Hyperboreans sent two maidens bearing the sacred offerings, whose names, say the Delians, were Hyperoche and Laodike, and with them for their protection the Hyperboreans sent five men of their nation to attend them, those namely who are now called Perpherees and have great honours paid to them in Delos. Since however the Hyperboreans found that those who were sent away did not return back, they were troubled to think that it would always befall them to send out and not to receive back; and so they bore the offerings to the borders of their land bound up in wheat straw, and laid a charge upon their neighbours, bidding them send these forward from themselves to another nation. These things then, they say, come to Delos being thus sent forward; and I know of my own knowledge that a thing is done which has resemblance to these offerings, namely that the women of Thrace and Paionia, when they sacrifice to Artemis "the Queen," do not make their offerings without wheat straw.         33. [1] pollui de ti pleista peri aytun Delioi legoysi, famenoi ira endedemena en kalamei pyrun ex Yperboreun feromena apikneesthai es Skuthas, apo de Skytheun ede dekomenoys aiei tous plesioxuroys ekastoys komizein ayta to pros esperes ekastatu epi ton Adrien, [2] entheuten de pros mesambrien propempomena prutoys Dudunaioys Ellenun dekesthai, apo de toutun katabainein epi ton Meliea kolpon kai diaporeuesthai es Eyboian, polin te es polin pempein mexri Karustoy, to d' apo tautes eklipein Andron. Karystioys gar einai tous komizontas es Teinon, Tenioys de es Deilon. [3] apikneesthai men nyn oytu tauta ta ira legoysi es Deilon. pruton de tous Yperboreoys pempsai ferousas ta ira duo koras, tas onomazoysi Delioi einai Yperoxen te kai Laodiken. ama de ayteisi asfaleies eineken pempsai tous Yperboreoys tun astun andras pente pompous, toutoys oi nun Perferees kaleontai timas megalas en Delui exontes. [4] epei de toisi Yperboreoisi tous apopemfthentas opisu oyk aponosteein, deina poieymenoys ei sfeas aiei katalampsetai apostellontas me apodekesthai, oytu de ferontas es tous oyroys ta ira endedemena en pyrun kalamei tous plesioxuroys episkeptein keleuontas propempein sfea apo euytun es allo ethnos. [5] kai tauta men oytu propempomena apikneesthai legoysi es Deilon. oida de aytos toutoisi toisi iroisi tode poieumenon prosferes, tas Threikias kai tas Paionidas gynaikas, epean thuusi tei Artemidi tei basileiei, oyk aney pyrun kalames exousas ta ira.   
      34. These I know do as I have said; and for those maidens from the Hyperboreans, who died in Delos, both the girls and the boys of the Delians cut off their hair: the former before marriage cut off a lock and having wound it round a spindle lay it upon the tomb (now the tomb is on the left hand as one goes into the temple of Artemis, and over it grows an olive-tree), and all the boys of the Delians wind some of their hair about a green shoot of some tree, and they also place it upon the tomb.         34. [1] kai tauta men de tautas oida poieusas. teisi de parthenoisi tauteisi teisi ex Yperboreun teleytesaseisi en Delui keirontai kai ai korai kai oi paides oi Deliun. ai men pro gamoy plokamon apotamnomenai kai peri atrakton eilixasai epi to seima titheisi [2] (to de seima esti esu es to Artemision esionti aristereis xeiros, epipefyke de oi elaie), osoi de paides tun Deliun, peri xloen tina eilixantes tun trixun titheisi kai oytoi epi to seima.   
      35. The maidens, I say, have this honour paid them by the dwellers in Delos: and the same people say that Arge and Opis also, being maidens, came to Delos, passing from the Hyperboreans by the same nations which have been mentioned, even before Hyperoche and Laodike. These last, they say, came bearing for Eileithuia the tribute which they had laid upon themselves for the speedy birth, but Arge and Opis came with the divinities themselves, and other honours have been assigned to them by the people of Delos: for the women, they say, collect for them, naming them by their names in the hymn which Olen a man of Lykia composed in their honour; and both the natives of the other islands and the Ionians have learnt from them to sing hymns naming Opis and Arge and collecting:--now this Olen came from Lukia and composed also the other ancient hymns which are sung in Delos:-- and moreover they say that when the thighs of the victim are consumed upon the altar, the ashes of them are used to cast upon the grave of Opis and Arge. Now their grave is behind the temple of Artemis, turned towards the East, close to the banqueting hall of the Keieans.         35. [1] aytai men de tauten timen exoysi pros tun Deloy oiketorun. fasi de oi aytoi oytoi kai ten Argen te kai ten Upin eousas parthenoys ex Yperboreun kata tous aytous toutoys anthrupoys poreyomenas apikesthai es Deilon eti proteron Yperoxes te kai Laodikes. [2] tautas men nyn tei Eileithyiei apoferousas anti tou ukytokoy ton etaxanto foron apikesthai, ten de Argen te kai ten Upin ama aytoisi theoisi apikesthai legoysi kai sfi timas allas dedosthai pros sfeun. [3] kai gar ageirein sfi tas gynaikas eponomazousas ta oynomata en tui ymnui ton sfi Ulen aner Lukios epoiese, para de sfeun mathontas nesiutas te kai Iunas ymneein Upin te kai Argen onomazontas te kai ageirontas (oytos de o Ulen kai tous alloys tous palaious ymnoys epoiese ek Lykies elthun tous aeidomenoys en Delui), [4] kai tun meriun katagizomenun epi tui bumui ten spodon tauten epi ten theken teis Upios te kai Arges anaisimousthai epiballomenen. e de theke ayteun esti opisthe tou Artemisioy, pros eu tetrammene, agxotatu tou Keiun istietorioy.    
      36. Let this suffice which has been said of the Hyperboreans; for the tale of Abaris, who is reported to have been a Hyperborean, I do not tell, namely how he carried the arrow about all over the earth, eating no food. If however there are any Hyperboreans, it follows that there are also Hypernotians; and I laugh when I see that, though many before this have drawn maps of the Earth, yet no one has set the matter forth in an intelligent way; seeing that they draw Ocean flowing round the Earth, which is circular exactly as if drawn with compasses, and they make Asia equal in size to Europe. In a few words I shall declare the size of each division and of what nature it is as regards outline.         36. [1] kai tauta men Yperboreun peri eiresthu. ton gar peri Abarios logon tou legomenoy einai Yperboreoy oy legu, us ton oiston periefere kata pasan gein oyden siteomenos. ei de eisi yperboreoi tines anthrupoi, eisi kai ypernotioi alloi. [2] gelu de oreun geis periodoys grapsantas pollous ede kai oydena noonexontus exegesamenon. oi Ukeanon te rheonta grafoysi perix ten gein eousan kykloterea us apo tornoy, kai ten Asien tei Eyrupei poieuntun isen. en oligoisi gar egu delusu megathos te ekastes ayteun kai oie tis esti es grafen ekaste.    
      37. The Persians inhabit Asia extending to the Southern Sea, which is called the Erythraian; and above these towards the North Wind dwell the Medes, and above the Medes the Saspeirians, and above the Saspeirians the Colchians, extending to the Northern Sea, into which the river Phasis runs. These four nations inhabit from sea to sea.         37. [1] Persai oikeoysi katekontes epi ten notien thalassan ten, Erythren kaleomenen, toutun de yperoikeoysi pros boreen anemon Meidoi, Medun de Saspeires, Saspeirun de Kolxoi katekontes epi ten boreien thalassan, es ten Fasis potamos ekdidoi. tauta tessera ethnea oikeei ek thalasses es thalassan.   
      38. From them Westwards two peninsulas stretch out from Asia into the sea, and these I will describe. The first peninsula on the one of its sides, that is the Northern, stretches along beginning from the Phasis and extending to the sea, going along the Pontus and the Hellespont as far as Sigeion in the land of Troy; and on the Southern side the same peninsula stretches from the Myriandrian gulf, which lies near Phenicia, in the direction of the sea as far as the headland Triopion; and in this peninsula dwell thirty races of men.         38. [1] entheuten de to pros esperes aktai difasiai ap' ayteis katateinoysi es thalassan, tas egu apegesomai. [2] enthen men e akte e etere ta pros boreen apo Fasios arxamene paratetatai es thalassan para te ton Ponton kai ton Ellesponton mexri Sigeioy tou Truikou. ta de pros notoy e ayte ayte akte apo tou Myriandikou kolpoy tou pros Foinikei keimenoy teinei ta es thalassan mexri Triopioy akres. oikeei de en tei aktei tautei ethnea anthrupun triekonta.   
      39. This then is one of the peninsulas, and the other beginning from the land of the Persians stretches along to the Erythraian Sea, including Persia and next after it Assyria, and Arabia after Assyria: and this ends, or rather is commonly supposed to end, at the Arabian gulf, into which Dareios conducted a channel from the Nile. Now in the line stretching to Phenicia from the land of the Persians the land is broad and the space abundant, but after Phenicia this peninsula goes by the shore of our Sea along Palestine, Syria, and Egypt, where it ends; and in it there are three nations only.         39. [1] ayte men nyn e etere tun akteun, e de de etere apo Perseun arxamene paratetatai es ten Erythren thalassan, e te Persike kai apo tautes ekdekomene e Assyrie kai apo Assyries e Arabie. legei de ayte, oy legoysa ei me nomui, es ton kolpon ton Arabion, es ton Dareios ek tou Neiloy diuryxa esegage. [2] mexri men nyn Foinikes apo Perseun xuros platus kai pollos esti. to de apo Foinikes parekei dia teisde teis thalasses e akte ayte para te Syrien ten Palaistinen kai Aigypton, es ten teleytai. en tei ethnea esti tria mouna.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [40]

     40. These are the parts of Asia which tend towards the West from the Persian land; but as to those which lie beyond the Persians and Medes and Saspeirians and Colchians towards the East and the sunrising, on one side the Erythraian Sea runs along by them, and on the North both the Caspian Sea and the river Araxes, which flows towards the rising sun: and Asia is inhabited as far as the Indian land; but from this onwards towards the East it becomes desert, nor can any one say what manner of land it is.         40. [1] tauta men apo Perseun ta pros esperen teis Asies exonta esti. ta de katuperthe Perseun kai Medun kai Saspeirun kai Kolxun, ta pros eu te kai elion anatellonta, enthen men e Erythre parekei thalassa, pros boreu de e Kaspie te thalassa kai o Araxes potamos, rheun pros elion anisxonta. [2] mexri de teis Indikeis oikeetai Asie. to de apo tautes eremos ede to pros ten eu, oyde exei oydeis frasai oion de ti esti.   
      41. Such and so large is Asia: and Libya is included in the second peninsula; for after Egypt Libya succeeds at once. Now about Egypt this peninsula is narrow, for from our Sea to the Erythraian Sea is a distance there of ten myriads of fathoms, which would amount to a thousand furlongs; but after this narrow part, the portion of the peninsula which is called Libya is, as it chances, extremely broad.         41. [1] toiaute men kai tosaute e Asie esti, e de Libue en tei aktei tei eterei esti. apo gar Aiguptoy Libue ede ekdeketai. kata men nyn Aigypton e akte ayte steine esti. apo gar teisde teis thalasses es ten Erythren thalassan deka myriades eisi orgyieun, aytai d' an eien xilioi stadioi. to de apo tou steinou toutoy karta platea tygxanei eousa e akte etis Libue kekletai.    
      42. I wonder then at those who have parted off and divided the world into Libya, Asia, and Europe, since the difference between these is not small; for in length Europe extends along by both, while in breadth it is clear to me that it is beyond comparison larger; for Libya furnishes proofs about itself that it is surrounded by sea, except so much of it as borders upon Asia; and this fact was shown by Necos king of the Egyptians first of all those about whom we have knowledge. He when he had ceased digging the channel which goes through from the Nile to the Arabian gulf, sent Phenicians with ships, bidding them sail and come back through the Pillars of Heracles to the Northern Sea and so to Egypt. The Phenicians therefore set forth from the Erythraian Sea and sailed through the Southern Sea; and when autumn came, they would put to shore and sow the land, wherever in Libya they might happen to be as they sailed, and then they waited for the harvest: and having reaped the corn they would sail on, so that after two years had elapsed, in the third year they turned through the Pillars of Heracles and arrived again in Egypt. And they reported a thing which I cannot believe, but another man may, namely that in sailing round Libya they had the sun on their right hand.         42. [1] thumazu un tun dioyrisantun kai dielontun Libuen te kai Asien kai Eyrupen. oy gar smikra ta diaferonta ayteun esti. mekei men gar par' amfoteras parekei e Eyrupe, eyreos de peri oyde symballein axie fainetai moi einai. [2] Libue men gar deloi euyten eousa perirrytos, plen oson ayteis pros ten Asien oyrizei, Neku tou Aigyptiun basileos prutoy tun emeis idmen katadexantos. os epeite ten diuryxa epausato orussun ten ek tou Neiloy diexoysan es ton Arabion kolpon, apepempse Foinikas andras ploioisi, enteilamenos es to opisu di' Erakleun steleun ekpleein eus es ten boreien thalassan kai oytu es Aigypton apikneesthai. [3] ormethentes un oi Foinikes ek teis Erythreis thalasses epleon ten notien thalassan. okus de ginoito fthinopuron prossxontes an speireskon ten gein, ina ekastote teis Libues pleontes ginoiato, kai meneskon ton ameton. [4] therisantes d' an ton siton epleon, uste duo eteun diexelthontun tritui etei kampsantes Erakleas stelas apikonto es Aigypton. kai elegon emoi men oy pista, allui de de teui, us peripluontes ten Libuen ton elion esxon es ta dexia.   
      43. Thus was this country first known to be what it is, and after this it is the Carthaginians who make report of it; for as to Sataspes the son of Teaspis the Achaimenid, he did not sail round Libya, though he was sent for this very purpose, but was struck with fear by the length of the voyage and the desolate nature of the land, and so returned back and did not accomplish the task which his mother laid upon him. For this man had outraged a daughter of Zopyros the son of Megabyzos, a virgin; and then when he was about to be impaled by order of king Xerxes for this offence, the mother of Sataspes, who was a sister of Dareios, entreated for his life, saying that she would herself lay upon him a greater penalty than Xerxes; for he should be compelled (she said) to sail round Libya, until in sailing round it he came to the Arabian gulf. So then Xerxes having agreed upon these terms, Sataspes went to Egypt, and obtaining a ship and sailors from the Egyptians, he sailed to the Pillars of Heracles; and having sailed through them and turned the point of Libya which is called the promontory of Soloeis, he sailed on towards the South. Then after he had passed over much sea in many months, as there was needed ever more and more voyaging, he turned about and sailed back again to Egypt: and having come from thence into the presence of king Xerxes, he reported saying that at the furthest point which he reached he was sailing by dwarfish people, who used clothing made from the palm-tree, and who, whenever they came to land with their ship, left their towns and fled away to the mountains: and they, he said, did no injury when they entered into the towns, but took food from them only. And the cause, he said, why he had not completely sailed round Libya was that the ship could not advance any further but stuck fast. Xerxes however did not believe that he was speaking the truth, and since he had not performed the appointed task, he impaled him, inflicting upon him the penalty pronounced before. A eunuch belonging to this Sataspes ran away to Samos as soon as he heard that his master was dead, carrying with him large sums of money; and of this a man of Samos took possession, whose name I know, but I purposely pass it over without mention.         43. [1] oytu men ayte egnusthe to pruton, meta de Karxedonioi eisi oi legontes. epei Sataspes ge o Teaspios aner Axaimenides oy periepluse Libuen, ep' ayto touto pemftheis, alla deisas to te meikos tou plooy kai ten eremien apeilthe opisu, oyd' epetelese ton epetaxe oi e meter aethlon. [2] thygatera gar Zupuroy tou Megabuzoy ebiesato parthenon. epeita mellontos aytou dia tauten ten aitien anaskolopieisthai ypo Xerxeu basileos, e meter tou Sataspeos eousa Dareioy adelfee paraitesato, fasa oi ayte mezu zemien epithesein e per ekeinon. [3] Libuen gar oi anagken esesthai peripluein, es o an apiketai peripleun ayten es ton Arabion kolpon. sygxuresantos de Xerxeu epi toutoisi, o Sataspes apikomenos es Aigypton kai labun nea te kai nautas para toutun eplee epi Erakleas stelas. [4] diekplusas de kai kampsas to akruterion teis Libues tui oynoma Soloeis esti, eplee pros mesambrien. peresas de thalassan pollen en polloisi mesi, epeite tou pleunos aiei edee, apostrepsas opisu apeplee es Aigypton. [5] ek de tautes apikomenos para basilea Xerxea elege fas ta prosutatu anthrupoys mikrous parapleein estheiti foinikeiei diaxreumenoys, oi okus sfeis katagoiato tei nei feugeskon pros ta orea leipontes tas polias. aytoi de adikeein oyden esiontes, bruta de mouna ex ayteun lambanein. [6] tou de me periplusai Libuen panteleus aition tode elege, to ploion to prosu oy dynaton eti einai probainein all' enisxesthai. Xerxes de oy oi sygginuskun legein alethea oyk epitelesanta te ton prokeimenon aethlon aneskolopise, ten arxaien diken epitimun. [7] toutoy de tou Sataspeos eynouxos apedre es Samon, epeite eputheto taxista ton despotea teteleytekota, exun xremata megala, ta Samios aner katesxe, tou epistamenos to oynoma ekun epilethomai.    
      44. Of Asia the greater part was explored by Dareios, who desiring to know of the river Indus, which is a second river producing crocodiles of all the rivers in the world,--to know, I say, of this river where it runs out into the sea, sent with ships, besides others whom he trusted to speak the truth, Skylax also, a man of Caryanda. These starting from the city of Caspatyros and the land of Pactyike, sailed down the river towards the East and the sunrising to the sea; and then sailing over the sea Westwards they came in the thirtieth month to that place from whence the king of the Egyptians had sent out the Phenicians of whom I spoke before, to sail round Libya. After these had made their voyage round the coast, Dareios both subdued the Indians and made use of this sea. Thus Asia also, excepting the parts of it which are towards the rising sun, has been found to be similar to Libya.         44. [1] teis de Asies ta polla ypo Dareioy exeyrethe, os boylomenos Indon potamon, os krokodeiloys deuteros oytos potamun pantun parexetai, touton ton potamon eidenai tei es thalassan ekdidoi, pempei ploioisi alloys te toisi episteye ten aletheien ereein kai de kai Skulaka andra Karyandea. [2] oi de ormethentes ek Kaspaturoy te polios kai teis Paktyikeis geis epleon kata potamon pros eu te kai elioy anatolas es thalassan, dia thalasses de pros esperen pleontes triekostui meni apikneontai es touton ton xuron othen o Aigyptiun basileus tous Foinikas tous proteron eipa apesteile peripluein Libuen. [3] meta de toutoys periplusantas Indous te katestrepsato Dareios kai tei thalassei tautei exrato. oytu kai teis Asies, plen ta pros elion anisxonta, ta alla aneuretai omoia parexomene tei Libuei.    
      45. As to Europe, however, it is clearly not known by any, either as regards the parts which are towards the rising sun or those towards the North, whether it be surrounded by sea: but in length it is known to stretch along by both the other divisions. And I am not able to understand for what reason it is that to the Earth, which is one, three different names are given derived from women, and why there were set as boundaries to divide it the river Nile of Egypt and the Phasis in Colchis (or as some say the Maiotian river Tanais and the Kimmerian ferry); nor can I learn who those persons were who made the boundaries, or for what reason they gave the names. Libya indeed is said by most of the Hellenes to have its name from Libya a woman of that country, and Asia from the wife of Prometheus: but this last name is claimed by the Lydians, who say that Asia has been called after Asias the son of Cotys the son of Manes, and not from Asia the wife of Prometheus; and from him too they say the Asian tribe in Sardis has its name. As to Europe however, it is neither known by any man whether it is surrounded by sea, nor does it appear whence it got this name or who he was who gave it, unless we shall say that the land received its name from Europa the Tyrian; and if so, it would appear that before this it was nameless like the rest. She however evidently belongs to Asia and did not come to this land which is now called by the Hellenes Europe, but only from Phenicia to Crete, and from Crete to Lykia. Let this suffice now which has been said about these matters; for we will adopt those which are commonly accepted of the accounts.         45. [1] e de Eyrupe pros oydamun fanere esti ginuskomene, oyte ta pros elion anatellonta oyte ta pros boreen, ei perirrytos esti. mekei de ginusketai par' amfoteras parekoysa. [2] oyd' exu symbalesthai ep' otey miei eousei gei oynomata trifasia keetai epunymias exonta gynaikun, kai oyrismata aytei Neilos te o Aiguptios potamos etethe kai Fasis o Kolxos (oi de Tanain potamon ton Maieten kai porthmeia ta Kimmeria legoysi), oyde tun dioyrisantun ta oynomata pythesthai, kai othen ethento tas epunymias. [3] ede gar Libue men epi Libues legetai ypo tun pollun Ellenun exein to oynoma gynaikos aytoxthonos, e de Asie epi teis Prometheos gynaikos ten epunymien. kai toutoy men metalambanontai tou oynomatos Lydoi, famenoi epi Asieu tou Kotyos tou Maneu kekleisthai ten Asien, all' oyk epi teis Prometheos Asies. ap' otey kai ten en Sardisi fylen kekleisthai Asiada. [4] e de de Eyrupe oyte ei perirrytos esti ginusketai pros oydamun anthrupun, oyte okothen to oynoma elabe touto, oyte ostis oi En o themenos fainetai, ei me apo teis Tyries fesomen Eyrupes labein to oynoma ten xuren. proteron de En ara anunymos usper ai eterai. [5] all' ayte ge ek teis Asies te fainetai eousa kai oyk apikomene es ten gein tauten etis nun ypo Ellenun Eyrupe kaleetai, all' oson ek Foinikes es Kreten, ek Kretes de es Lykien. tauta men nyn epi tosouton eiresthu. toisi gar nomizomenoisi aytun xresometha.    
      46. Now the region of the Euxine upon which Dareios was preparing to march has, apart from the Scythian race, the most ignorant nations within it of all lands: for we can neither put forward any nation of those who dwell within the region of Pontus as eminent in ability, nor do we know of any man of learning having arisen there, apart from the Scythian nation and Anacharsis. By the Scythian race one thing which is the most important of all human things has been found out more cleverly than by any other men of whom we know; but in other respects I have no great admiration for them: and that most important thing which they have discovered is such that none can escape again who has come to attack them, and if they do not desire to be found, it is not possible to catch them: for they who have neither cities founded nor walls built, but all carry their houses with them and are mounted archers, living not by the plough but by cattle, and whose dwellings are upon cars, these assuredly are invincible and impossible to approach.         46. [1] o de Pontos o Eyxeinos, ep' on estrateueto o Dareios, xureun paseun parexetai exu tou Skythikou ethnea amathestata. oyte gar ethnos tun entos tou Pontoy oyden exomen probalesthai sofies peri oyte andra logion oidamen genomenon, parex tou Skythikou ethneos kai Anaxarsios. [2] tui de Skythiku genei en men to megiston tun anthrupeiun pregmatun sofutata pantun exeuretai tun emeis idmen, ta mentoi alla oyk agamai. to de megiston oytu sfi aneuretai uste apofygein te medena epelthonta epi sfeas, me boylomenoys te exeyretheinai katalabein me oion te einai. [3] toisi gar mete astea mete teixea e ektismena, alla fereoikoi eontes pantes eusi ippotoxotai, zuntes me ap' arotoy all' apo kteneun, oikemata te sfi ei epi zeygeun, kus oyk an eiesan oytoi amaxoi te kai aporoi prosmisgein;   
      47. This they have found out, seeing that their land is suitable to it and at the same time the rivers are their allies: for first this land is plain land and is grassy and well watered, and then there are rivers flowing through it not much less in number than the channels in Egypt. Of these as many as are noteworthy and also can be navigated from the sea, I will name: there is Ister with five mouths, and after this Tyras, Hypanis, Borysthenes, Panticapes, Kypakyris, Gerros and Tanais. These flow as I shall now describe.         47. [1] exeuretai de sfi tauta teis te geis eouses epitedees kai tun potamun eontun sfi symmaxun. e te gar gei eousa pedias ayte poiudes te kai eyydros esti, potamoi te di' ayteis rheoysi oy pollui teui arithmon elassones tun en Aiguptui diuruxun. [2] osoi de onomastoi te eisi aytun kai prosplutoi apo thalasses, toutoys onomaneu .... Istros men pentastomos, meta de Tures te kai Ypanis kai Borysthenes kai Pantikapes kai Ypakyris kai Gerros kai Tanais. rheoysi de oide kata tade.   
      48. The Ister, which is the greatest of all the rivers which we know, flows always with equal volume in summer and winter alike. It is the first towards the West of all the Scythian rivers, and it has become the greatest of all rivers because other rivers flow into it. And these are they which make it great:--five in number are those which flow through the Scythian land, namely that which the Scythians call Porata and the Hellenes Pyretos, and besides this, Tiarantos and Araros and Naparis and Ordessos. The first-mentioned of these is a great river lying towards the East, and there it joins waters with the Ister, the second Tiarantos is more to the West and smaller, and the Araros and Naparis and Ordessos flow into the Ister going between these two.         48. [1] Istros men, eun megistos potamun pantun tun emeis idmen, isos aiei aytos euytui rheei kai thereos kai xeimunos, prutos de to ap' esperes tun en tei Skythikei rheun kata toionde megistos gegone. potamun kai allun es ayton ekdidontun [2] eisi de oide oi megan ayton poieuntes, dia men ge teis Skythikeis xures pente men oi rheontes, ton te Skuthai Porata kaleoysi Ellenes de Pyreton, kai allos Tiarantos kai Araros te kai Naparis kai Ordessos. [3] o men prutos lextheis tun potamun megas kai pros eu rheun anakoinoutai tui Istrui to ydur, o de deuteros lextheis Tiarantos pros esperes te mallon kai elassun, o de de Araros te kai o Naparis kai o Ordessos kai mesoy toutun iontes esballoysi es ton Istron. oytoi men aythigenees Skythikoi potamoi symplethuoysi ayton, ek de Agathursun Maris potamos rheun symmisgetai tui Istrui.   
      49. These are the native Scythian rivers which join to swell its stream, while from the Agathyrsians flows the Maris and joins the Ister, and from the summits of Haimos flow three other great rivers towards the North Wind and fall into it, namely Atlas and Auras and Tibisis. Through Thrace and the Thracian Crobyzians flow the rivers Athrys and Noes and Artanes, running into the Ister; and from the Paionians and Mount Rhodope the river Kios, cutting through Haimos in the midst, runs into it also. From the Illyrians the river Angros flows Northwards and runs out into the Triballian plain and into the river Brongos, and the Brongos flows into the Ister; thus the Ister receives both these, being great rivers. From the region which is above the Ombricans, the river Carpis and another river, the Alpis, flow also towards the North Wind and run into it; for the Ister flows in fact through the whole of Europe, beginning in the land of the Keltoi, who after the Kynesians dwell furthest towards the sun- setting of all the peoples of Europe; and thus flowing through all Europe it falls into the sea by the side of Scythia.         49. [1] ek de tou Aimoy tun koryfeun treis alloi megaloi rheontes pros boreen anemon esballoysi es ayton, Atlas kai Ayras kai Tibisis. dia de Threikes kai Threikun tun Krobuzun rheontes Athrys kai Noes kai Artanes ekdidousi es ton Istron. ek de Paionun kai oreos RHodopes Kios potamos meson sxizun ton Aimon ekdidoi es ayton. [2] ex Illyriun de rheun pros boreen anemon Aggros potamos esballei es pedion to Triballikon kai es potamon Broggon, o de Broggos es ton Istron. oytu amfoteroys eontas megaloys o Istros deketai. ek de teis katuperthe xures Ombrikun Karpis potamos kai allos Alpis potamos pros boreen anemon kai oytoi rheontes ekdidousi es ayton. [3] rheei gar de dia pases teis Eyrupes o Istros, arxamenos ek Keltun, oi esxatoi pros elioy dysmeun meta Kunetas oikeoysi tun en tei Eyrupe. rheun de dia pases teis Eyrupes es ta plagia teis Skythies esballei.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [50]

     50. So then it is because these which have been named and many others join their waters together, that Ister becomes the greatest of rivers; since if we compare the single streams, the Nile is superior in volume of water; for into this no river or spring flows, to contribute to its volume. And the Ister flows at an equal level always both in summer and in winter for some such cause as this, as I suppose:--in winter it is of the natural size, or becomes only a little larger than its nature, seeing that this land receives very little rain in winter, but constantly has snow; whereas in summer the snow which fell in the winter, in quantity abundant, melts and runs from all parts into the Ister. This snow of which I speak, running into the river helps to swell its volume, and with it also many and violent showers of rain, for it rains during the summer: and thus the waters which mingle with the Ister are more copious in summer than they are in winter by about as much as the water which the Sun draws to himself in summer exceeds that which he draws in winter; and by the setting of these things against one another there is produced a balance; so that the river is seen to be of equal volume always.         50. [1] toutun un tun katalexthentun kai allun pollun symballomenun to sfeteron ydur ginetai o Istros potamun megistos, epei ydur ge en pros en symballein o Neilos plethei apokrateei. isos de gar de touton oyte potamos oyte krene oydemia esdidousa es pleithos oi symballetai. [2] isos de aiei rheei en te therei kai xeimuni o Istros kata toionde ti, us emoi dokeei. tou men xeimunos esti osos per esti, oligui te mezun teis euytou fusios ginetai. yetai gar e gei ayte tou xeimunos pampan oligui, nifetui de panta xratai. [3] tou de thereos e xiun e en tui xeimuni pesousa, eousa amfilafes, tekomene pantothen esdidoi es ton Istron. ayte te de e xiun esdidousa es ayton symplethuei kai ombroi polloi te kai labroi sun aytei. yei gar de to theros. [4] osu de pleon ep' euyton ydur o elios epelketai en tu therei e en tui xeimuni, tosoutui ta symmisgomena tui Istrui pollaplesia esti tou thereos e per tou xeimunos. antitithemena de tauta antisekusis ginetai, uste ison min aiei fainesthai eonta.    
      51. One, I say, of the rivers which the Scythians have is the Ister; and after it the Tyras, which starts from the North and begins its course from a large lake which is the boundary between the land of the Scythians and that of the Neuroi. At its mouth are settled those Hellenes who are called Tyritai.         51. [1] eis men de tun potamun toisi Skutheisi esti o Istros, meta de touton Tures, os apo boreu megales e oyrizei ten te Skythiken kai Neyrida gein. epi de tui stomati aytou katoikentai Ellenes oi Tyritai kaleontai.   
      52. The third river is the Hypanis, which starts from Scythia and flows from a great lake round which feed white wild horses; and this lake is rightly called "Mother of Hypanis." From this then the river Hypanis takes its rise and for a distance of five days' sail it flows shallow and with sweet water still; but from this point on towards the sea for four days' sail it is very bitter, for there flows into it the water of a bitter spring, which is so exceedingly bitter that, small as it is, it changes the water of the Hypanis by mingling with it, though that is a river to which few are equal in greatness. This spring is on the border between the lands of the agricultural Scythians and of the Alazonians, and the name of the spring and of the place from which it flows is in Scythian Exampaios, and in the Hellenic tongue Hierai Hodoi. Now the Tyras and the Hypanis approach one another in their windings in the land of the Alazonians, but after this each turns off and widens the space between them as they flow.         52. [1] tritos de Ypanis potamos ormatai men ek teis Skythikeis, rheei de ek limnes megales ten perix nemontai ippoi agrioi leykoi. kaleetai de e limne ayte orthus meter Ypanios. [2] ek tautes un anatellun o Ypanis potamos rheei epi men pente emereun ploon braxus kai glykus esti, apo de toutoy pros thalasses tesserun emereun ploon pikros deinus. [3] ekdidoi gar es ayton krene pikre, oytu de ti eousa pikre, e megathei smikre eousa kirnai ton Ypanin eonta potamon en oligoisi megan. esti de e krene ayte en oyroisi xures teis te aroterun Skytheun kai Alazonun. oynoma de tei krenei kai othen rheei tui xurui skythisti men Exampaios, kata de ten Ellenun glussan Irai odoi. [4] synagoysi de ta termata o te Tures kai o Ypanis kata Alazonas, to de apo toutoy apostrepsas ekateros rheei eyrunun to meson.   
      53. Fourth is the river Borysthenes, which is both the largest of these after the Ister, and also in our opinion the most serviceable not only of the Scythian rivers but also of all the rivers of the world besides, excepting only the Nile of Egypt, for to this it is not possible to compare any other river: of the rest however the Borysthenes is the most serviceable, seeing that it provides both pastures which are the fairest and the richest for cattle, and fish which are better by far and more numerous than those of any other river, and also it is the sweetest water to drink, and flows with clear stream, though others beside it are turbid, and along its banks crops are produced better than elsewhere, while in parts where it is not sown, grass grows deeper. Moreover at its mouth salt forms of itself in abundance, and it produces also huge fish without spines, which they call antacaioi, to be used for salting, and many other things also worthy of wonder. Now as far as the region of the Gerrians, to which it is a voyage of forty days, the Borysthenes is known as flowing from the North Wind; but above this none can tell through what nations it flows: it is certain however that it runs through desert to the land of the agricultural Scythians; for these Scythians dwell along its banks for a distance of ten days' sail. Of this river alone and of the Nile I cannot tell where the sources are, nor, I think, can any of the Hellenes. When the Borysthenes comes near the sea in its course, the Hypanis mingles with it, running out into the same marsh; and the space between these two rivers, which is as it were a beak of land, is called the point of Hippoles, and in it is placed a temple of the Mother, and opposite the temple upon the river Hypanis are settled the Borysthenites.         53. [1] tetartos de Borysthenes potamos, os esti te megistos meta Istron toutun kai polyarkestatos kata gnumas tas emeteras oyti mounon tun Skythikun potamun alla kai tun allun apantun, plen Neiloy tou Aigyptioy. toutui gar oyk oia te esti symbalein allon potamon. [2] tun de loipun Borysthenes esti polyarkestatos, os nomas te kallistas kai eykomidestatas ktenesi parexetai ixthuas te aristoys diakridon kai pleistoys, pinesthai te edistos esti, rheei te katharos para tholeroisi, sporos te par' ayton aristos ginetai, poie te, tei oy speiretai e xure, bathytate. [3] ales te epi tui stomati aytou aytomatoi pegnyntai apletoi. ketea te megala anakantha, ta antakaioys kaleoysi, parexetai es tarixeysin, alla te polla thumasai axia. [4] mexri men nyn Gerreun xuroy, es ton tesserakonta emereun ploos esti, ginusketai rheun apo boreu anemoy. to de katuperthe di' un rheei anthrupun oydeis exei frasai. fainetai de rheun di' eremoy es tun geurgun Skytheun ten xuren. oytoi gar oi Skuthai par' ayton epi deka emereun ploon nemontai. [5] mounoy de toutoy tou potamou kai Neiloy oyk exu frasai tas pegas, dokeu de, oyde oydeis Ellenun. agxou te de thalasses o Borysthenes rheun ginetai kai oi symmisgetai o Ypanis es tuyto elos ekdidous. [6] to de metaxu tun potamun toutun, eon embolon teis xures, Ippoleu akre kaleetai, en de aytui, iron Demetros enidrytai. peren de tou irou epi tui Ypani Borysthenei###776###tai katoikentai.   
      54. This is that which has to do with these rivers; and after these there is a fifth river besides, called Panticapes. This also flows both from the North and from a lake, and in the space between this river and the Borysthenes dwell the agricultural Scythians: it runs out into the region of Hylaia, and having passed by this it mingles with the Borysthenes.         54. [1] tauta men ta apo toutun tun potamun, meta de toutoys pemptos potamos allos, tui oynoma Pantikapes, rheei men kai oytos apo boreu te kai ek limnes, kai to metaxu toutoy te kai tou Borystheneos nemontai oi geurgoi Skuthai, ekdidoi de es ten Yblaien, parameipsamenos de tauten tui Borysthenei symmisgetai.   
      55. Sixth comes the river Hypakyris, which starts from a lake, and flowing through the midst of the nomad Scythians runs out into the sea by the city of Carkinitis, skirting on its right bank the region of Hylaia and the so-called racecourse of Achilles.         55. [1] ektos de Ypakyris potamos, os ormatai men ek limnes, dia mesun de tun nomadun Skytheun rheun ekdidoi kata Karkinitin polin, es dexien apergun ten te Ylaien kai ton Axilleion dromon kaleomenon.   
      56. Seventh is the Gerros, which parts off from the Borysthenes near about that part of the country where the Borysthenes ceases to be known,--it parts off, I say, in this region and has the same name which this region itself has, namely Gerros; and as it flows to the sea it borders the country of the nomad and that of the Royal Scythians, and runs out into the Hypakyris.         56. [1] ebdomos de Gerros potamos apesxistai men apo tou Borystheneos kata touto teis xures es o ginusketai o Borysthenes. apesxistai men nyn ek toutoy tou xuroy, oynoma de exei to per o xuros aytos, Gerros, rheun de es thalassan oyrizei ten te tun nomadun xuren kai ten tun basileiun Skytheun, ekdidoi de es ton Ypakyrin.   
      57. The eighth is the river Tanais, which starts in its flow at first from a large lake, and runs out into a still larger lake called Maiotis, which is the boundary between the Royal Scythians and the Sauromatai. Into this Tanais falls another river, whose name is Hyrgis.         57. [1] ogdoos de de Tanais potamos, os rheei tanekathen ek limnes megales ormumenos, ekdidoi de es mezu eti limnen kaleomenon Maieitin, e oyrizei Skuthas te tous basileioys kai Sayromatas. es de Tanain touton allos potamos esballei tui oynoma esti Yrgis.   
      58. So many are the rivers of note with which the Scythians are provided: and for cattle the grass which comes up in the land of Scythia is the most productive of bile of any grass which we know; and that this is so you may judge when you open the bodies of the cattle.         58. [1] toisi men de onomastoisi potamoisi oytu de ti oi Skuthai eskeyadatai, toisi de ktenesi e poie anafyomene en tei Skythikei esti epixolutate paseun poieun tun emeis idmen. anoigomenoisi de toisi ktenesi esti stathmusasthai oti touto oytu exei.    
      59. Thus abundant supply have they of that which is most important; and as for the rest their customs are as follows. The gods whom they propitiate by worship are these only:--Hestia most of all, then Zeus and the Earth, supposing that Earth is the wife of Zeus, and after these Apollo, and Aphrodite Urania, and Heracles, and Ares. Of these all the Scythians have the worship established, and the so-called Royal Scythians sacrifice also to Poseidon. Now Hestia is called in Scythian Tabiti, and Zeus, being most rightly named in my opinion, is called Papaios, and Earth Api, and Apollo Oitosyros, and Aphrodite Urania is called Argimpasa, and Poseidon Thagimasidas. It is not their custom however to make images, altars or temples to any except Ares, but to him it is their custom to make them.         59. [1] ta men de megista oytu sfi eypora esti, ta de loipa nomaia kata tade sfi diakeetai. theous men mounoys tousde ilaskontai, Istien men malista, epi de Dia kai Gein, nomizontes ten Gein tou Dios einai gynaika, meta de toutoys, Apolluna te kai oyranien Afroditen kai Eraklea kai Area. toutoys men pantes Skuthai nenomikasi, oi de kaleomenoi basileioi Skuthai kai tui Poseideuni thuoysi. [2] onomazetai de skythisti Istie men Tabiti, Zeus de orthotata kata gnumen ge ten emen kaleomenos Papaios, Gei de Api. Apollun de Goitosyros, oyranie de Afrodite Argimpasa, Poseideun de Thagimasadas. agalmata de kai bumous kai neous oy nomizoysi poieein plen Arei. toutui de nomizoysi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [60]

     60. They have all the same manner of sacrifice established for all their religious rites equally, and it is thus performed:--the victim stands with its fore-feet tied, and the sacrificing priest stands behind the victim, and by pulling the end of the cord he throws the beast down; and as the victim falls, he calls upon the god to whom he is sacrificing, and then at once throws a noose round its neck, and putting a small stick into it he turns it round and so strangles the animal, without either lighting a fire or making any first offering from the victim or pouring any libation over it: and when he has strangled it and flayed off the skin, he proceeds to boil it.         60. [1] thysie de e ayte pasi katesteke peri panta ta ira omoius, erdomene ude. to men ireion ayto empepodismenon tous emprosthioys podas esteke, o de thuun opisthe tou kteneos esteus spasas ten arxen tou strofoy kataballei min, [2] piptontos de tou ireioy epikaleei ton theon tui an thuei, kai epeita broxui peri un ebale ton ayxena, skytalida de embalun periagei kai apopnigei, oyte pur anakausas oyte katarxamenos oyt' epispeisas. apopnixas de kai apodeiras trepetai pros epsesin.   
      61. Now as the land of Scythia is exceedingly ill wooded, this contrivance has been invented for the boiling of the flesh:--having flayed the victims, they strip the flesh off the bones and then put it into caldrons, if they happen to have any, of native make, which very much resemble Lesbian mixing-bowls except that they are much larger,--into these they put the flesh and boil it by lighting under it the bones of the victim: if however thy have not at hand the caldron, they put all the flesh into the stomachs of the victims and adding water they light the bones under them; and these blaze up beautifully, and the stomachs easily hold the flesh when it has been stripped off the bones: thus an ox is made to boil itself, and the other kinds of victims each boil themselves also. Then when the flesh is boiled, the sacrificer takes a first offering of the flesh and of the vital organs and casts it in front of him. And they sacrifice various kinds of cattle, but especially horses.         61. [1] teis de geis teis Skythikeis ainus axuloy eouses ude sfi es ten epsesin tun kreun exeuretai. epeidan apodeirusi ta ireia, gymnousi ta ostea tun kreun, epeita esballoysi, en men tuxusi exontes, es lebetas epixurioys, malista Lesbioisi kreteirsi proseikeloys, xuris e oti pollui mezonas. es toutoys esballontes epsoysi ypokaiontes ta ostea tun ireiun. en de me sfi parei, o lebes, oi de es tas gasteras tun ireiun esballontes ta krea panta kai paramixantes ydur ypokaioysi ta ostea. [2] ta de aithetai kallista, ai de gasteres xureoysi eypeteus ta krea epsilumena tun osteun. kai oytu bous te euyton exepsei kai talla ireia euyto ekaston. epean de epsethei ta krea, o thusas tun kreun kai tun splagxnun aparxamenos rhiptei es to emprosthe. thuoysi de kai ta alla probata kai ippoys malista.    
      62. To the others of the gods they sacrifice thus and these kinds of beasts, but to Ares as follows:--In each district of the several governments they have a temple of Ares set up in this way:-- bundles of brushwood are heaped up for about three furlongs in length and in breadth, but less in height; and on the top of this there is a level square made, and three of the sides rise sheer but by the remaining one side the pile may be ascended. Every year they pile on a hundred and fifty waggon-loads of brushwood, for it is constantly settling down by reason of the weather. Upon this pile of which I speak each people has an ancient iron sword set up, and this is the sacred symbol of Ares. To this sword they bring yearly offerings of cattle and of horses; and they have the following sacrifice in addition, beyond what they make to the other gods, that is to say, of all the enemies whom they take captive in war they sacrifice one man in every hundred, not in the same manner as they sacrifice cattle, but in a different manner: for they first pour wine over their heads, and after that they cut the throats of the men, so that the blood runs into a bowl; and then they carry this up to the top of the pile of brushwood and pour the blood over the sword. This, I say, they carry up; and meanwhile below by the side of the temple they are doing thus:--they cut off all the right arms of the slaughtered men with the hands and throw them up into the air, and then when they have finished offering the other victims, they go away; and the arm lies wheresoever it has chanced to fall, and the corpse apart from it.         62. [1] toisi men de alloisi tun theun oytu thuoysi kai tauta tun kteneun, tui de Arei ude. kata nomous ekastoys tun arxeun esidrytai sfi Areos iron toionde fryganun fakeloi synneneatai oson t' epi stadioys treis meikos kai eyros, ypsos de elasson. anu de toutoy tetragunon apedon pepoietai, kai ta men tria tun kulun esti apotoma, kata de to en epibaton. [2] eteos de ekastoy amaxas pentekonta kai ekaton epineoysi fryganun. yponosteei gar de aiei ypo tun xeimunun. epi toutoy de tou sekou akinakes sidereos idrytai arxaios ekastoisi, kai tout' esti tou Areos to agalma. toutui de tui akinakei thysias epeteioys prosagoysi probatun kai ippun, kai de kai toisid' eti pleu thuoysi e toisi alloisi theoisi. [3] osoys an tun polemiun zugresusi, apo tun ekaton andrun andra thuoysi tropui oy tui aytui kai ta probata, all' eteroiui. epean gar oinon epispeisusi kata tun kefaleun, aposfazoysi tous anthrupoys es aggos kai epeita aneneikantes anu epi ton ogkon tun fryganun kataxeoysi to aima tou akinakeu. [4] anu men de foreoysi touto, katu de para to iron poieusi tade. tun aposfagentun andrun tous dexious umoys pantas apotamontes sun teisi xersi es ton eera ieisi, kai epeita kai ta alla aperxantes ireia apallassontai. xeir de tei an pesei keetai, kai xuris o nekros.    
      63. Such are the sacrifices which are established among them; but of swine these make no use, nor indeed are they wont to keep them at all in their land.         63. [1] thysiai men nyn aytai sfi katestasi. ysi de oytoi oyden nomizoysi, oyde trefein en tei xurei to parapan theloysi.   
      64. That which relates to war is thus ordered with them:--When a Scythian has slain his first man, he drinks some of his blood: and of all those whom he slays in the battle he bears the heads to the king; for if he has brought a head he shares in the spoil which they have taken, but otherwise not. And he takes off the skin of the head by cutting it round about the ears and then taking hold of the scalp and shaking it off; afterwards he scrapes off the flesh with the rib of an ox, and works the skin about with his hands; and when he has thus tempered it, he keeps it as a napkin to wipe the hands upon, and hangs it from the bridle of the horse on which he himself rides, and takes pride in it; for whosoever has the greatest number of skins to wipe the hands upon, he is judged to be the bravest man. Many also make cloaks to wear of the skins stripped off, sewing them together like shepherds' cloaks of skins; and many take the skin together with the finger-nails off the right hands of their enemies when they are dead, and make them into covers for their quivers: now human skin it seems is both thick and glossy in appearance, more brilliantly white than any other skin. Many also take the skins off the whole bodies of men and stretch them on pieces of wood and carry them about on their horses.         64. [1] ta d' es polemon exonta ude sfi diakeatai. epean ton pruton andra katabalei aner Skuthes, tou aimatos empinei, osoys d' an foneusei en tei maxei, toutun tas kefalas apoferei tui basilei. apeneikas men gar kefalen teis leies metalambanei ten an labusi, me eneikas de oy. [2] apodeirei de ayten tropui toiuide. peritamun kuklui peri ta uta kai labomenos teis kefaleis ekseiei, meta de sarkisas boos pleyrei depsei teisi xersi, orgasas de ayto ate xeiromaktron ektetai, ek de tun xalinun tou ippoy ton aytos elaunei, ek toutoy exaptei kai agalletai. os gar an pleista dermata xeiromaktra exei, aner aristos oytos kekritai. [3] polloi de aytun ek tun apodermatun kai xlainas epeinysthai poieusi, syrraptontes kata per baitas. polloi de andrun exthrun tas dexias xeiras nekrun eontun apodeirantes aytoisi onyxi kaluptras tun faretreun poieuntai. derma de anthrupoy kai paxu kai lampron En ara, sxedon dermatun pantun lamprotaton leykoteti. [4] polloi de kai oloys andras ekdeirantes kai diateinantes epi xulun ep' ippun periferoysi.   
      65. Such are their established customs about these things; and to the skulls themselves, not of all but of their greatest enemies, they do thus:--the man saws off all below the eyebrows and clears out the inside; and if he is a poor man he only stretches ox-hide round it and then makes use of it; but if he be rich, besides stretching the ox-hide he gilds it over within, and makes use of it as a drinking- cup. They do this also if any of their own family have been at variance with them and the man gets the better of his adversary in trial before the king; and when strangers come to him whom he highly esteems, he sets these skulls before them, and adds the comment that they being of his own family had made war against him, and that he had got the better of them; and this they hold to be a proof of manly virtue.         65. [1] tauta men de oytu sfi nenomistai, aytas de tas kefalas, oyti pantun alla tun exthistun, poieusi tade. apoprisas ekastos pan to enerthe tun ofruun ekkathairei. kai en men ei penes, o de exuthen umoboeen mounen periteinas oytu xratai, en de ei plousios, ten men umoboeen periteinei, esuthen de kataxrysusas oytu xratai poteriui. [2] poieusi de touto kai ek tun oikeiun en sfi diaforoi genuntai kai en epikratesei aytou para tui basilei, xeinun de oi elthontun tun an logon poieetai, tas kefalas tautas paraferei kai epilegei us oi eontes oikeioi polemon prosethekanto kai sfeun aytos epekratese, tauten andragathien legontes.   
      66. Once every year each ruler of a district mixes in his own district a bowl of wine, from which those of the Scythians drink by whom enemies have been slain; but those by whom this has not been done do not taste of the wine, but sit apart dishonoured; and this is the greatest of all disgraces among them: but those of them who have slain a very great number of men, drink with two cups together at the same time.         66. [1] apax de tou eniaytou ekastoy o nomarxes ekastos en tui euytou nomui kirnai kreteira oinoy, ap' oy pinoysi tun Skytheun toisi an andres polemioi arairemenoi eusi. toisi d' an me katergasmenon ei touto, oy geuontai tou oinoy toutoy, all' etimumenoi apokateatai. oneidos de sfi esti megiston touto. osoi de an aytun kai karta pollous andras arairekotes eusi, oytoi de sundyo kulikas exontes pinoysi omou.    
      67. Diviners there are many among the Scythians, and they divine with a number of willow rods in the following manner:--they bring large bundles of rods, and having laid them on the ground they unroll them, and setting each rod by itself apart they prophesy; and while speaking thus, they roll the rods together again, and after that they place them in order a second time one by one. This manner of divination they have from their fathers: but the Enarees or "man-women" say that Aphrodite gave them the gift of divination, and they divine accordingly with the bark of the linden-tree. Having divided the linden-bark into three strips, the man twists them together in his fingers and untwists them again, and as he does this he utters the oracle.         67. [1] manties de Skytheun eisi polloi, oi manteuontai rhabdoisi iteineisi polleisi ude. epean fakeloys rhabdun megaloys eneikuntai, thentes xamai diexeilissoysi aytous, kai epi mian ekasten rhabdon tithentes thespizoysi, ama te legontes tauta syneileoysi tas rhabdoys opisu kai aytis kata mian syntitheisi. [2] ayte men sfi e mantike patruie esti. oi de Enarees oi androgynoi ten Afroditen sfisi legoysi mantiken dounai. filures d' un floiui manteuontai. epean ten filuren trixa sxisei, diaplekun en toisi daktuloisi toisi euytou kai dialuun xrai.   
      68. When the king of the Scythians is sick, he sends for three of the diviners, namely those who are most in repute, who divine in the manner which has been said: and these say for the most part something like this, namely that so and so has sworn falsely by the hearth of the king, and they name one of the citizens, whosoever it may happen to be: now it is the prevailing custom of the Scythians to swear by the hearth of the king at the times when they desire to swear the most solemn oath. He then who they say has sworn falsely, is brought forthwith held fast on both sides; and when he has come the diviners charge him with this, that he is shown by their divination to have sworn falsely by the hearth of the king, and that for this reason the king is suffering pain: and he denies and says that he did not swear falsely, and complains indignantly: and when he denies it, the king sends for other diviners twice as many in number, and if these also by looking into their divination pronounce him guilty of having sworn falsely, at once they cut off the man's head, and the diviners who came first part his goods among them by lot; but if the diviners who came in afterwards acquit him, other diviners come in, and again others after them. If then the greater number acquit the man, the sentence is that the first diviners shall themselves be put to death.         68. [1] epean de basileus o Skytheun kamei, metapempetai tun mantiun andras treis tous eydokimeontas malista, oi tropui tui eiremenui manteuontai. kai legoysi oytoi us to epipan malista tade, us tas basileias istias epiurkeke os kai os, legontes tun astun ton an de legusi. [2] tas de basileias istias nomos Skutheisi ta malista esti omnunai tote epean ton megiston orkon ethelusi omnunai. aytika de dialelammenos agetai oytos ton an de fusi epiorkeisai, apigmenon de elegxoysi oi manties us epiorkesas fainetai en tei mantikei tas basileias istias kai dia tauta algeei o basileus. o de arneetai, oy famenos epiorkeisai, kai deinologeetai. [3] arneomenoy de toutoy o basileus metapempetai alloys diplesioys mantias. kai en men kai oytoi esoruntes es ten mantiken katadesusi epiorkeisai, tou de itheus ten kefalen apotamnoysi, kai ta xremata aytou dialagxanoysi oi prutoi tun mantiun. [4] en de oi epelthontes manties apolususi, alloi pareisi manties kai mala alloi. en un oi pleunes ton anthrupon apolususi, dedoktai toisi prutoisi tun mantiun aytoisi apollysthai.   
      69. They put them to death accordingly in the following manner:--first they fill a waggon with brushwood and yoke oxen to it; then having bound the feet of the diviners and tied their hands behind them and stopped their mouths with gags, they fasten them down in the middle of the brushwood, and having set fire to it they scare the oxen and let them go: and often the oxen are burnt to death together with the diviners, and often they escape after being scorched, when the pole to which they are fastened has been burnt: and they burn the diviners in the manner described for other causes also, calling them false prophets. Now when the king puts any to death, he does not leave alive their sons either, but he puts to death all the males, not doing any hurt to the females.         69. [1] apollusi deita aytous tropui toiuide. epean amaxan fryganun plesusi kai ypozeuxusi bous, empodisantes tous mantias kai xeiras opisu desantes kai stomusantes katergnusi es mesa ta frugana, ypopresantes de ayta apieisi fobesantes tous bous. [2] polloi men de sygkatakaiontai toisi mantisi boes, polloi de perikekaymenoi apofeugoysi, epean aytun o rhymos katakaythei. katakaioysi de tropui tui eiremenu kai di' allas aitias tous mantias, pseydomantias kaleontes. [3] tous d' an apokteinei basileus, toutun oyde tous paidas leipei, alla panta ta ersena kteinei, ta de thelea oyk adikeei.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [70]

     70. In the following manner the Scythians make oaths to whomsoever they make them:--they pour wine into a great earthenware cup and mingle with it blood of those who are taking the oath to one another, either making a prick with an awl or cutting with a dagger a little way into their body, and then they dip into the cup a sword and arrows and a battle-axe and a javelin; and having done this, they invoke many curses on the breaker of the oath, and afterwards they drink it off, both they who are making the oath and the most honourable of their company.         70. [1] orkia de poieuntai Skuthai ude pros tous an poieuntai. es kulika megalen keraminen oinon egxeantes aima symmisgoysi tun to orkion tamnomenun, tupsantes ypeati e epitamontes maxairei smikron tou sumatos, kai epeita apobapsantes es ten kulika akinaken kai oistous kai sagarin kai akontion. epean de tauta poiesusi, kateuxontai polla kai epeita apopinoysi aytoi te oi to orkion poieumenoi kai tun epomenun oi pleistoy axioi.    
      71. The burial-place of the kings is in the land of the Gerrians, the place up to which the Borysthenes is navigable. In this place, when their king has died, they make a large square excavation in the earth; and when they have made this ready, they take up the corpse (the body being covered over with wax and the belly ripped up and cleansed, and then sewn together again, after it has been filled with kyperos cut up and spices and parsley-seed and anise), and they convey it in a waggon to another nation. Then those who receive the corpse thus conveyed to them do the same as the Royal Scythians, that is they cut off a part of their ear and shave their hair round about and cut themselves all over the arms and tear their forehead and nose and pass arrows through their left hand. Thence they convey in the waggon the corpse of the king to another of the nations over whom they rule; and they to whom they came before accompany them: and when they have gone round to all conveying the corpse, then they are in the land of the Gerrians, who have their settlements furthest away of all the nations over whom they rule, and they have reached the spot where the burial place is. After that, having placed the corpse in the tomb upon a bed of leaves, they stick spears along on this side and that of the corpse and stretch pieces of wood over them, and then they cover the place in with matting. Then they strangle and bury in the remaining space of the tomb one of the king's mistresses, his cup-bearer, his cook, his horse-keeper, his attendant, and his bearer of messages, and also horses, and a first portion of all things else, and cups of gold; for silver they do not use at all, nor yet bronze. Having thus done they all join together to pile up a great mound, vying with one another and zealously endeavouring to make it as large as possible.         71. [1] tafai de tun basileun en Gerroisi eisi es o o Borysthenes esti prosplutos. enthauta, epean sfi apothanei o basileus, orygma geis mega orussoysi tetragunon, etoimon de touto poiesantes analambanoysi ton nekron, katakekerumenon men to suma, ten de nedun anasxistheisan kai kathartheisan, pleen kyperoy kekommenoy kai thymiematos kai selinoy spermatos kai annesoy, synerrammenen opisu, kai komizoysi en amaxei es allo ethnos. [2] oi de an paradexuntai komisthenta ton nekron, poieusi ta per oi basileioi Skuthai. tou utos apotamnontai, trixas perikeirontai, braxionas peritamnontai, metupon kai rhina katamussontai, dia teis aristereis xeiros oistous diabyneontai. [3] entheuten de komizoysi en tei amaxei tou basileos ton nekyn es allo ethnos tun arxoysi. oi de sfi epontai es tous proteron Elthon. epean de pantas perielthusi ton nekyn komizontes, en te Gerroisi esxata katoikemenoisi eisi tun ethneun tun arxoysi kai en teisi tafeisi. [4] kai epeita, epean theusi ton nekyn en teisi thekeisi epi stibados, parapexantes aixmas enthen kai enthen tou nekrou xula yperteinoysi kai epeita rhipsi katastegazoysi, en de tei loipei eyryxuriei teis thekes tun pallakeun te mian apopnixantes thaptoysi kai ton oinoxoon kai mageiron kai ippokomon kai diekonon kai aggelieforon kai ippoys kai tun allun pantun aparxas kai fialas xryseas. argurui de oyden oyde xalkui xreuntai. [5] tauta de poiesantes xousi pantes xuma mega, amillumenoi kai prothymeomenoi us megiston poieisai.   
      72. Afterwards, when the year comes round again, they do as follows:-- they take the most capable of the remaining servants,--and these are native Scythians, for those serve him whom the king himself commands to do so, and his servants are not bought for money,--of these attendants then they strangle fifty and also fifty of the finest horses; and when they have taken out their bowels and cleansed the belly, they fill it with chaff and sew it together again. Then they set the half of a wheel upon two stakes with the hollow side upwards, and the other half of the wheel upon other two stakes, and in this manner they fix a number of these; and after this they run thick stakes through the length of the horses as far as the necks, and they mount them upon the wheels; and the front pieces of wheel support the shoulders of the horses, while those behind bear up their bellies, going by the side of the thighs; and both front and hind legs hang in the air. On the horses they put bridles and bits, and stretch the bridles tight in front of them and then tie them up to pegs: and of the fifty young men who have been strangled they mount each one upon his horse, having first run a straight stake through each body along by the spine up to the neck; and a part of this stake projects below, which they fasten into a socket made in the other stake that runs through the horse. Having set horsemen such as I have described in a circle round the tomb, they then ride away.         72. [1] eniaytou de periferomenoy aytis poieusi toionde. labontes tun loipun therapontun tous epitedeotatoys (oi de eisi Skuthai eggenees. oytoi gar therapeuoysi tous an aytos o basileus keleusei argyrunetoi de oyk eisi sfi therapontes), [2] toutun un tun diekonun epean apopnixusi pentekonta kai ippoys tous kallistoys pentekonta, exelontes aytun ten koilien kai katherantes empiplasi axurun kai syrraptoysi. [3] apsidos de emisy epi duo xula stesantes yption kai to eteron emisy teis apsidos ep' etera duo, katapexantes tropui toioutui polla tauta, epeita tun ippun kata ta mekea xula paxea dielasantes mexri tun traxelun anabibazoysi aytous epi tas apsidas. [4] tun de ai men proterai apsides ypexoysi tous umoys tun ippun, ai de opisthe para tous merous tas gasteras ypolambanoysi. skelea de amfotera katakrematai meteura. xalinous de kai stomia embalontes es tous ippoys katateinoysi es to prosthe aytun kai epeita ek passalun deoysi. [5] tun de de neeniskun tun apopepnigmenun tun pentekonta ena ekaston anabibazoysi epi ton ippon, ude anabibazontes, epean nekrou ekastoy para ten akanthan xulon orthon dielasusi mexri tou traxeloy. katuthen de yperexei tou xuloy toutoy to es tormon pegnuoysi tou eteroy xuloy tou dia tou ippoy. epistesantes de kuklui to seima ippeas toioutoys apelaunoysi.   
      73. Thus they bury their kings; but as for the other Scythians, when they die their nearest relations carry them round laid in waggons to their friends in succession; and of them each one when he receives the body entertains those who accompany it, and before the corpse they serve up of all things about the same quantity as before the others. Thus private persons are carried about for forty days, and then they are buried: and after burying them the Scythians cleanse themselves in the following way:--they soap their heads and wash them well, and then, for their body, they set up three stakes leaning towards one another and about them they stretch woollen felt coverings, and when they have closed them as much as possible they throw stones heated red-hot into a basin placed in the middle of the stakes and the felt coverings.         73. [1] oytu men tous basileas thaptoysi. tous de alloys Skuthas, epean apothanusi, periagoysi oi agxotatu prosekontes kata tous filoys en amaxeisi keimenoys. tun de ekastos ypodekomenos eyuxeei tous epomenoys, kai tui nekrui apantun paraplesius paratithesi osa toisi alloisi. emeras de tesserakonta oytu oi idiutai periagontai, epeita thaptontai. [2] thapsantes de oi Skupsai kathairontai tropui toiuide. smesamenoi tas kefalas kai ekplynamenoi poieusi peri to suma tade epean xula stesusi tria es allela keklimena, peri tauta piloys eirineoys periteinoysi, symfraxantes de us malista lithoys ek pyros diafaneas esballoysi es skafen keimenen en mesui tun xulun te kai tun pilun.   
      74. Now they have hemp growing in their land, which is very like flax except in thickness and in height, for in these respects the hemp is much superior. This grows both of itself and with cultivation; and of it the Thracians even make garments, which are very like those made of flaxen thread, so that he who was not specially conversant with it would not be able to decide whether the garments were of flax or of hemp; and he who had not before seen stuff woven of hemp would suppose that the garment was made of flax.         74. [1] esti de sfi kannabis fyomene en tei xurei plen paxutetos kai megatheos tui linui emferestate. tautei de pollui yperferei e kannabis. ayte kai aytomate kai speiromene fuetai, kai ex ayteis Threikes men kai eimata poieuntai toisi lineoisi omoiotata. oyd' an, ostis me karta tribun eie ayteis, diagnoie linoy e kannabios esti. os de me eide ku ten kannabida, lineon dokesei einai to eima.   
      75. The Scythians then take the seed of this hemp and creep under the felt coverings, and then they throw the seed upon the stones which have been heated red-hot: and it burns like incense and produces a vapour so think that no vapour-bath in Hellas would surpass it: and the Scythians being delighted with the vapour-bath howl like wolves. This is to them instead of washing, for in fact they do not wash their bodies at all in water. Their women however pound with a rough stone the wood of the cypress and cedar and frankincense tree, pouring in water with it, and then with this pounded stuff, which is thick, they plaster over all their body and also their face; and not only does a sweet smell attach to them by reason of this, but also when they take off the plaster on the next day, their skin is clean and shining.         75. [1] tautes un oi Skuthai teis kannabios to sperma epean labusi, ypodunoysi ypo tous piloys, kai epeita epiballoysi to sperma epi tous diafaneas lithoys tui pyri. to de thymiatai epiballomenon kai atmida parexetai tosauten uste Ellenike oydemia an min pyrie apokrateseie. [2] oi de Skuthai agamenoi tei pyriei uruontai. touto sfi anti loytrou esti. oy gar de louontai ydati to parapan to suma. [3] ai de gynaikes aytun ydur paraxeoysai katasuxoysi peri lithon trexun teis kyparissoy kai kedroy kai libanoy xuloy, kai epeita to katasuxomenon touto paxu eon kataplassontai pan to suma kai to prosupon. kai ama men eyudie sfeas apo toutoy isxei, ama de apaireoysai tei deytere emerei ten kataplastun ginontai katharai kai lamprai.    
      76. This nation also is very averse to adopting strange customs, rejecting even those of other tribes among themselves, but especially those of the Hellenes, as the history of Anacharsis and also afterwards of Skyles proved. For as to Anacharsis first, when he was returning to the abodes of the Scythians, after having visited many lands and displayed in them much wisdom, as he sailed through the Hellespont he put in to Kyzicos: and since he found the people of Kyzicos celebrating a festival very magnificently in honour of the Mother of the gods, Anacharsis vowed to the Mother that if he should return safe and sound to his own land, he would both sacrifice to her with the same rites as he saw the men of Kyzicos do, and also hold a night festival. So when he came to Scythia he went down into the region called Hylaia (this is along by the side of the racecourse of Achilles and is quite full, as it happens, of trees of all kinds),-- into this, I say, Anacharsis went down, and proceeded to perform all the ceremonies of the festival in honour of the goddess, with a kettle-drum and with images hung about himself. And one of the Scythians perceived him doing this and declared it to Saulios the king; and the king came himself also, and when he saw Anacharsis doing this, he shot him with an arrow and killed him. Accordingly at the present time if one asks about Anacharsis, the Scythians say that they do not know him, and for this reason, because he went out of his own country to Hellas and adopted foreign customs. And as I heard from Tymnes the steward of Ariapeithes, he was the uncle on the father's side of Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians, and the son of Gnuros, the son of Lycos, the son of Spargapeithes. If then Anacharsis was of this house, let him know that he died by the hand of his brother, for Idanthyrsos was the son of Saulios, and Saulios was he who killed Anacharsis.         76. [1] xeinikoisi de nomaioisi kai oytoi feugoysi ainus xrasthai, mete teun allun, Ellenikoisi de kai ekista, us diedexan Anaxarsis te kai deutera aytis Skules. [2] touto men gar Anaxarsis epeite gein pollen theuresas kai apodexamenos kat' ayten sofien pollen ekomizeto es ethea ta Skytheun, pleun di' Ellespontoy prosisxei es Kuzikon. [3] kai eyre gar tei metri tun theun anagontas tous Kyzikenous orten megaloprepeus karta, eyxato tei metri o Anaxarsis, en sus kai ygies aponostesei es euytou, thusein te kata tayta kata ura tous Kyzikenous poieuntas kai pannyxida stesein. [4] us de apiketo es ten Skythiken katadus es ten kaleomenen Ylaien (e d' esti men para ton Axilleion dromon, tygxanei de pasa eousa dendreun pantoiun plee), es tauten de katadus o Anaxarsis ten orten epetelee pasan tei theui, tumpanon te exun kai ekdesamenos agalmata. [5] kai tun tis Skytheun katafrastheis ayton tauta poieunta esemene tui basilei Sayliu. o de kai aytos apikomenos us eide ton Anaxarsin poieunta tauta, toxeusas ayton apekteine. kai nun en tis eiretai peri Anaxarsios, oy fasi min Skuthai ginuskein, dia touto oti exedemese te es ten Ellada kai xeinikoisi ethesi diexresato. [6] us d' egu ekoysa Tumneu tou Ariapeitheos epitropoy, einai ayton Idanthursoy tou Skytheun basileos patrun, paida de einai Gnouroy tou Lukoy tou Spargapeitheos. ei un tautes En teis oikies o Anaxarsis, istu ypo tou adelfeou apothanun. Idanthyrsos gar En pais Saylioy, Saulios de En o apokteinas Anaxarsin.   
      77. However I have heard also another story, told by the Peloponnesians, that Anacharsis was sent out by the king of the Scythians, and so made himself a disciple of Hellas; and that when he returned back he said to him that had sent him forth, that the Hellenes were all busied about every kind of cleverness except the Lacedemonians; but these alone knew how to exchange speech sensibly. This story however has been invented without any ground by the Hellenes themselves; and however that may be, the man was slain in the way that was related above.         77. [1] kaitoi tina ede ekoysa logon allon ypo Peloponnesiun legomenon, us ypo tou Skytheun basileos Anaxarsis apopemftheis teis Ellados mathetes genoito, opisu te aponostesas faie pros ton apopempsanta Ellenas pantas asxoloys einai es pasan sofien plen Lakedaimoniun, toutoisi de einai mounoisi sufronus dounai te kai dexasthai logon. [2] all' oytos men o logos allus peplastai yp' aytun Ellenun, o d' un aner usper proteron eirethe diefthare. oytos men nyn oytu de eprexe dia xeinika te nomaia kai Ellenikas omilias.   
      78. This man then fared thus badly by reason of foreign customs and communication with Hellenes; and very many years afterwards Skyles the son of Ariapeithes suffered nearly the same fate as he. For Ariapeithes the king of the Scythians with other sons had Skyles born to him: and he was born of a woman who was of Istria, and certainly not a native of Scythia; and this mother taught him the language and letters of Hellas. Afterwards in course of time Ariapeithes was brought to his end by treachery at the hands of Spargapeithes the king of the Agathyrsians, and Skyles succeeded to the kingdom; and he took not only that but also the wife of his father, whose name was Opoia: this Opoia was a native Scythian and from her was born Oricos to Ariapeithes. Now when Skyles was king of the Scythians, he was by no means satisfied with the Scythian manner of life, but was much more inclined towards Hellenic ways because of the training with which he had been brought up, and he used to do somewhat as follows:--When he came with the Scythians in arms to the city of the Borysthenites (now these Borysthenites say that they are of Miletos),--when Skyles came to these, he would leave his band in the suburbs of the city and go himself within the walls and close the gates. After that he would lay aside his Scythian equipments and take Hellenic garments, and wearing them he would go about in the market-place with no guards or any other man accompanying him (and they watched the gates meanwhile, that none of the Scythians might see him wearing this dress): and while in other respects too he adopted Hellenic manners of life, he used also to perform worship to the gods according to the customs of the Hellenes. Then having stayed a month or more than that, he would put on the Scythian dress and depart. This he did many times, and he both built for himself a house in Borysthenes and also took to it a woman of the place as his wife.         78. [1] polloisi de karta etesi ysteron Skules o Ariapeitheos epathe paraplesia toutui. Ariapeithei gar tui Skytheun basilei ginetai met' allun paidun Skules. ex Istrieneis de gynaikos oytos ginetai kai oydamus egxuries. ton e meter ayte glussan te Ellada kai grammata edidaxe. [2] meta de xronui ysteron Ariapeithes men teleytai dolui ypo Spargapeitheos tou Agathursun basileos, Skules de ten te basileien parelabe kai ten gynaika tou patros, tei oynoma En Opoie. En de ayte e Opoie aste, ex Es En Orikos Ariapeithei pais. [3] basileuun de Skytheun o Skules diaitei oydamus eresketo Skypsikei, alla pollon pros ta Ellenika mallon tetrammenos En apo paideusios teis epepaideyto, epoiee te toiouto. eyte agagoi ten stratien ten Skytheun es to Borystheneiteun asty (oi de Borysthenei###776###tai oytoi legoysi sfeas aytous einai Milesioys), es toutoys okus elthoi o Skules, ten men stratien katalipeske en tui proasteiui, [4] aytos de okus elthoi es to teixos kai tas pulas egkleiseie, ten stolen apothemenos ten Skythiken labeske an Ellenida estheita, exun d' an tauten egoraze oyte doryforun epomenun oyte alloy oydenos. tas de pulas efulasson, me tis min Skytheun idoi exonta tauten ten stolen. kai ta te alla exrato diaite Ellenikei kai theoisi ira epoiee kata nomoys tous Ellenun. [5] ote de diatripseie meina e pleon toutoy, apallasseto endus ten Skythiken stolen. tauta poieeske pollakis kai oikia te edeimato en Borysthenei kai gynaika egeme es ayta epixurien.   
      79. Since however it was fated that evil should happen to him, it happened by an occasion of this kind:--he formed a desire to be initiated in the rites of Bacchus-Dionysos, and as he was just about to receive the initiation, there happened a very great portent. He had in the city of the Borysthenites a house of great size and built with large expense, of which also I made mention a little before this, and round it were placed sphinxes and griffins of white stone: on this house Zeus caused a bolt to fall; and the house was altogether burnt down, but Skyles none the less for this completed his initiation. Now the Scythians make the rites of Bacchus a reproach against the Hellenes, for they say that it is not fitting to invent a god like this, who impels men to frenzy. So when Skyles had been initiated into the rites of Bacchus, one of the Borysthenites went off to the Scythians and said: "Whereas ye laugh at us, O Scythians, because we perform the rite of Bacchus and because the god seizes us, now this divinity has seized also your king; and he is both joining in the rite of Bacchus and maddened by the influence of the god. And if ye disbelieve me, follow and I will show you." The chief men of the Scythians followed him, and the Borysthenite led them secretly into the town and set them upon a tower. So when Skyles passed by with the company of revellers, and the Scythians saw him joining in the rite of Bacchus, they were exceedingly grieved at it, and they went out and declared to the whole band that which they had seen.         79. [1] epeite de edee oi kakus genesthai, egineto apo profasios toieisde. epethumese Dionusui Bakxeiui telestheinai. mellonti de oi es xeiras agesthai ten teleten egeneto fasma megiston. [2] En oi en Borystheneiteun tei poli oikies megales kai polyteleos peribole, teis kai oligui ti proteron toutun mnemen eixon, ten perix leykou lithoy sfigges te kai grupes estasan. es tauten o theos eneskepse belos. kai e men katekae pasa, Skules de oyden toutoy eineka Esson epetelese ten teleten. [3] Skuthai de tou bakxeuein peri Ellesi oneidizoysi. oy gar fasi oikos einai theon exeyriskein touton ostis mainesthai enagei anthrupoys. [4] epeite de etelesthe tui Bakxeiui o Skules, diepresteyse tun tis Borystheneiteun pros tous Skuthas legun <<emin gar katagelate, u Skuthai, oti bakxeuomen kai emeas o theos lambanei. nun oytos o daimun kai ton ymeteron basilea lelabeke, kai bakxeuei te kai ypo tou theou mainetai. ei de moi apisteete, epesthe, kai ymin egu dexu.>> [5] eiponto tun Skutheun oi proesteutes, kai aytous anagagun o Borystheneites lathrei epi purgon kateise. epeite de pareie sun tui thiasui o Skules kai eidon min bakxeuonta oi Skuthai, karta symforen megalen epoiesanto, exelthontes de esemainon pasei tei stratiei ta idoien.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [80]

     80. After this when Skyles was riding out again to his own abode, the Scythians took his brother Octamasades for their leader, who was a son of the daughter of Teres, and made insurrection against Skyles. He then when he perceived that which was being done to his hurt and for what reason it was being done, fled for refuge to Thrace; and Octamasades being informed of this, proceeded to march upon Thrace. So when he had arrived at the river Ister, the Thracians met him; and as they were about to engage battle, Sitalkes sent a messenger to Octamasades and said: "Why must we make trial of one another in fight? Thou art my sister's son and thou hast in thy power my brother. Do thou give him back to me, and I will deliver to thee thy brother Skyles: and let us not either of us set our armies in peril, either thou or I." Thus Sitalkes proposed to him by a herald; for there was with Octamasades a brother of Sitalkes, who had gone into exile for fear of him. And Octamasades agreed to this, and by giving up his own mother's brother to Sitalkes he received his brother Skyles in exchange: and Sitalkes when he received his brother led him away as a prisoner, but Octamasades cut off the head of Skyles there upon the spot. Thus do the Scythians carefully guard their own customary observances, and such are the penalties which they inflict upon those who acquire foreign customs besides their own.         80. [1] us de meta tauta exelayne o Skules es ethea ta euytou, oi Skuthai prostesamenoi ton adelfeon aytou Oktamasaden, gegonota ek teis Tereu thygatros, epanisteato tui Skulei. [2] o de mathun to ginomenon ep' euytui kai ten aitien di' en epoieeto, katafeugei es ten Threiken. pythomenos de o Oktamasades tauta estrateueto epi ten Threiken. epeite de epi tui Istrui egeneto, entiasan min oi Threikes, mellontun de aytun synapsein epempse Sitalkes para ton Oktamasaden legun toiade. [3] <<ti dei emeas allelun peiretheinai; eis men mey teis adelfeeis pais, exeis de mey adelfeon. su de moi apodos touton, kai egu soi ton son Skulen paradidumi. stratiei de mete su kindyneuseis met' egu.>> [4] tauta oi pempsas o Sitalkes epekerykeueto. En gar para tui Oktamasade adelfeos Sitalkeu pefeygus. o de Oktamasades kataineei tauta, ekdous de ton euytou metrua Sitalke elabe ton adelfeon Skulen. [5] kai Sitalkes men paralabun ton adelfeon apegeto, Skuleu de Oktamasades aytou tautei apetame ten kefalen. oytu men peristelloysi ta sfetera nomaia Skuthai, toisi de paraktumenoisi xeinikous nomoys toiauta epitimia didousi.    
      81. How many the Scythians are I was not able to ascertain precisely, but I heard various reports of the number: for reports say both that they are very many in number and also that they are few, at least as regards the true Scythians. Thus far however they gave me evidence of my own eyesight:--there is between the river Borysthenes and the Hypanis a place called Exampaios, of which also I made mention somewhat before this, saying that there was in it a spring of bitter water, from which the water flows and makes the river Hypanis unfit to drink. In this place there is set a bronze bowl, in size at least six times as large as the mixing-bowl at the entrance of the Pontus, which Pausanias the son of Cleombrotos dedicated: and for him who has never seen that, I will make the matter clear by saying that the bowl in Scythia holds easily six hundred amphors, and the thickness of this Scythian bowl is six fingers. This then the natives of the place told me had been made of arrow-heads: for their king, they said, whose name was Ariantas, wishing to know how many the Scythians were, ordered all the Scythians to bring one arrow-head, each from his own arrow, and whosoever should not bring one, he threatened with death. So a great multitude of arrow-heads was brought, and he resolved to make of them a memorial and to leave it behind him: from these then, they said, he made this bronze bowl and dedicated it in this place Exampaios.         81. [1] pleithos de to Skytheun oyk oios te egenomen atrekeus pythesthai, alla diaforoys logoys peri tou arithmou ekoyon. kai gar karta pollous einai sfeas kai oligoys us Skuthas einai. [2] tosonde mentoi apefainon moi es opsin. esti metaxu Borystheneos te potamou kai Ypanios xuros, oynoma de oi esti Exampaios. tou kai oligui ti proteron toutun mnemen eixon, famenos en aytui krenen ydatos pikrou einai, ap' Es to ydur aporreon ton Ypanin apoton poieein. [3] en toutui tui xurui keetai xalkeion, megathei kai exaplesion tou epi stomati tou Pontoy kreteiros, ton Paysanies o Kleombrotoy anetheke. [4] os de me eide ku touton, ude delusu. exakosioys amforeas eypeteus xureei to en Skutheisi xalkeion, paxos de to Skythikon touto xalkeion esti daktulun ex. touto un elegon oi epixurioi apo ardiun genesthai. [5] boylomenon gar ton sfeteron basilea, tu oynoma einai Ariantan, touton eidenai to pleithos to Skytheun keleuein min pantas Skuthas ardin ekaston mian apo tou oistou komisai. os d' an me komisei, thanaton apeilee. [6] komistheinai te de xreima pollon ardiun kai oi doxai ex ayteun mnemosynon poiesanti lipesthai. ek toyteun de min to xalkeion poieisai touto kai anatheinai es ton Exampaion touton. tauta de peri tou pletheos tou Skytheun ekoyon.   
      82. This is what I heard about the number of the Scythians. Now this land has no marvellous things except that it has rivers which are by far larger and more numerous than those of any other land. One thing however shall be mentioned which it has to show, and which is worthy of wonder even besides the rivers and the greatness of the plain, that is to say, they point out a footprint of Heracles in the rock by the bank of the river Tyras, which in shape is like the mark of a man's foot but in size is two cubits long. This then is such as I have said; and I will go back now to the history which I was about to tell at first.         82. [1] thumasia de e xure ayte oyk exei, xuris e oti potamous te pollu megistoys kai arithmon pleistoys. to de apothumasai axion kai parex tun potamun kai tou megatheos tou pedioy parexetai, eiresetai. ixnos Erakleos fainoysi en petrei eneon, to eoike men bemati andros, esti de to megathos dipexy, para ton Turen potamon. touto men nyn toiouto esti, anabesomai de es ton kat' arxas eia lexun logon.    
      83. While Dareios was preparing to go against the Scythians and was sending messengers to appoint to some the furnishing of a land-army, to others that of ships, and to others the bridging over of the Thracian Bosphorus, Artabanos, the son of Hystaspes and brother of Dareios, urged him by no means to make the march against the Scythians, telling him how difficult the Scythians were to deal with. Since however he did not persuade him, though he gave him good counsel, he ceased to urge; and Dareios, when all his preparations had been made, began to march his army forth from Susa.         83. [1] paraskeyazomenoy Dareioy epi tous Skuthas kai epipempontos aggeloys epitaxontas toisi men pezon straton, toisi de neas parexein, toisi de zeugnysthai ton Threikion Bosporon Artabanos o Ystaspeos, adelfeos eun Dareioy, exreize medamus ayton strateien epi Skuthas poieesthai, katalegun tun Skytheun ten aporien. [2] all' oy gar epeithe symboyleuun oi xresta, o men epepayto, o de, epeide oi ta apanta pareskeuasto, exelayne ton straton ek Sousun.   
      84. Then one of the Persians, Oiobazos, made request to Dareios that as he had three sons and all were serving in the expedition, one might be left behind for him: and Dareios said that as he was a friend and made a reasonable request, he would leave behind all the sons. So Oiobazos was greatly rejoiced, supposing that his sons had been freed from service, but Dareios commanded those who had the charge of such things to put to death all the sons of Oiobazos.         84. [1] enthauta tun Perseun Oiobazos edeethe Dareioy triun eontun oi paidun kai pantun strateyomenun ena aytui kataleiftheinai. o de efe us filui eonti kai metriun deomenui pantas tous paidas kataleipsein. [2] o men de Oiobazos perixares En, elpizun tous yieas strateies apolelusthai. o de ekeleyse tous epi toutun epesteutas apokteinai pantas tous Oiobazoy paidas. kai oytoi men aposfagentes aytou tautei eleiponto.   
      85. These then were left, having been slain upon the spot where they were: and Dareios meanwhile set forth from Susa and arrived at the place on the Bosphorus where the bridge of ships had been made, in the territory of Chalcedon; and there he embarked in a ship and sailed to the so-called Kyanean rocks, which the Hellenes say formerly moved backwards and forwards; and taking his seat at the temple he gazed upon the Pontus, which is a sight well worth seeing. Of all seas indeed it is the most marvellous in its nature. The length of it is eleven thousand one hundred furlongs, and the breadth, where it is broadest, three thousand three hundred: and of this great Sea the mouth is but four furlongs broad, and the length of the mouth, that is of the neck of water which is called Bosphorus, where, as I said, the bridge of ships had been made, is not less than a hundred and twenty furlongs. This Bosphorus extends to the Propontis; and the Propontis, being in breadth five hundred furlongs and in length one thousand four hundred, has its outlet into the Hellespont, which is but seven furlongs broad at the narrowest place, though it is four hundred furlongs in length: and the Hellespont runs out into that expanse of sea which is called the Egean.         85. [1] Dareios de epeite poreyomenos ek Sousun apiketo teis Kalxedonies epi ton Bosporon ina ezeykto e gefyra, entheuten esbas es nea eplee epi tas Kyaneas kaleymenas, tas proteron plagktas Ellenes fasi einai, ezomenos de epi rhiui etheeito ton Ponton eonta axiotheeton. [2] pelageun gar apantun pefyke thumasiutatos. tou to men meikos stadioi eisi ekaton kai xilioi kai murioi, to de eyros, tei eyrutatos aytos euytou, stadioi triekosioi kai trisxilioi. [3] toutoy tou pelageos to stoma esti eyros tesseres stadioi. meikos de, tou stomatos o ayxen, to de Bosporos kekletai, kat' o de ezeykto e gefyra, epi stadioys eikosi kai ekaton esti. teinei d' es ten Propontida o Bosporos. [4] e de Propontis eousa eyros men stadiun pentakosiun, meikos de tetrakosiun kai xiliun, katadidoi es ton Ellesponton eonta steinoteta men epta stadioys, meikos de tetrakosioys. ekdidoi de o Ellespontos es xasma pelageos to de Aigaion kaleetai.   
      86. These measurements I have made as follows:--a ship completes on an average in a long day a distance of seventy thousand fathoms, and in a night sixty thousand. Now we know that to the river Phasis from the mouth of the Sea (for it is here that the Pontus is longest) is a voyage of nine days and eight nights, which amounts to one hundred and eleven myriads of fathoms; and these fathoms are eleven thousand one hundred furlongs. Then from the land of the Sindians to Themiskyra on the river Thermodon (for here is the broadest part of the Pontus) it is a voyage of three days and two nights, which amounts to thirty-three myriads of fathoms or three thousand three hundred furlongs. This Pontus then and also the Bosphorus and the Hellespont have been measured by me thus, and their nature is such as has been said: and this Pontus also has a lake which has its outlet into it, which lake is not much less in size than the Pontus itself, and it is called Maiotis and "Mother of the Pontus."         86. [1] memetretai de tauta ude. neus epipan malista kei katanuei en makremeriei orgyias eptakismyrias, nyktos de exakismyrias. [2] ede un es men Fasin apo tou stomatos (touto gar esti tou Pontoy makrotaton) emereun ennea ploos esti kai nyktun oktu. aytai endeka myriades kai ekaton orgyieun ginontai, ek de tun orgyieun toyteun stadioi ekaton kai xilioi kai murioi eisi. [3] es de Themiskuren ten epi Thermudonti potamui ek teis Sindikeis (kata touto gar esti tou Pontoy eyrutaton) triun te emereun kai duo nyktun ploos. aytai de treis myriades kai triekonta orgyieun ginontai, stadioi de triekosioi kai trisxilioi. [4] o men nyn Pontos oytos kai Bosporos te kai Ellespontos oytu te moi memetreatai kai kata ta eiremena pefukasi, parexetai de kai limnen o Pontos oytos ekdidousan es ayton oy pollui teui elassu euytou, e Maieitis te kaleetai kai meter tou Pontoy.   
      87. Dareios then having gazed upon the Pontus sailed back to the bridge, of which Mandrocles a Samian had been chief constructor; and having gazed upon the Bosphorus also, he set up two pillars by it of white stone with characters cut upon them, on the one Assyrian and on the other Hellenic, being the names of all the nations which he was leading with him: and he was leading with him all over whom he was ruler. The whole number of them without the naval force was reckoned to be seventy myriads including cavalry, and ships had been gathered together to the number of six hundred. These pillars the Byzantians conveyed to their city after the events of which I speak, and used them for the altar of Artemis Orthosia, excepting one stone, which was left standing by the side of the temple of Dionysos in Byzantion, covered over with Assyrian characters. Now the place on the Bosphorus where Dareios made his bridge is, as I conclude, midway between Byzantion and the temple at the mouth of the Pontus.         87. [1] o de Dareios us etheesato ton Ponton, eplee opisu epi ten gefyran, teis arxitektun egeneto Mandroklees Samios. theesamenos de kai ton Bosporon stelas estese duo ep' aytou lithoy leykou, entamun grammata es men ten Assuria es de ten Ellenika, ethnea panta osa per Ege. Ege de panta tun Erxe. toutun myriades exerithmethesan, xuris tou naytikou, ebdomekonta sun ippeusi, nees de exakosiai synelexthesan. [2] teisi men nyn steleisi tauteisi Byzantioi komisantes es ten polin ysteron toutun exresanto pros ton bumon teis Orthusies Artemidos, xuris enos lithoy. oytos de kateleifthe para tou Dionusoy ton neon en Byzantiui, grammatun Assyriun pleos. tou de Bosporoy o xuros ton ezeyxe basileus Dareios, us emoi dokeei symballomenui, meson esti Byzantioy te kai tou epi stomati irou.    
      88. After this Dareios being pleased with the floating bridge rewarded the chief constructor of it, Mandrocles the Samian, with gifts tenfold; and as an offering from these Mandrocles had a painting made of figures to present the whole scene of the bridge over the Bosphorus and king Dareios sitting in a prominent seat and his army crossing over; this he caused to be painted and dedicated it as an offering in the temple of Hera, with the following inscription: 
"Bosphorus having bridged over, the straits fish-abounding, to Hera 
   Mandroclees dedicates this, of his work to record; 
 A crown on himself he set, and he brought to the Samians glory, 
   And for Dareios performed everything after his mind."         88. [1] Dareios de meta tauta estheis tei sxediei ton arxitektona ayteis Mandroklea ton Samion eduresato pasi deka. ap' un de Mandroklees aparxen zuia grapsamenos pasan ten zeuxin tou Bosporoy kai basilea te Dareion en proedriei katemenon kai ton straton aytou diabainonta tauta grapsamenos anetheke es to Eraion, epigrapsas tade.     [2] Bosporon ixthyoenta gefyrusas anetheke
           Mandroklees Erei mnemosynon sxedies,
      aytui men stefanon peritheis, Samioisi de kudos,
           Dareioy basileos ektelesas kata noun.   
      89. This memorial was made of him who constructed the bridge: and Dareios, after he had rewarded Mandrocles with gifts, passed over into Europe, having first commanded the Ionians to sail into the Pontus as far as the river Ister, and when they arrived at the Ister, there to wait for him, making a bridge meanwhile over the river; for the chief of his naval force were the Ionians, the Aiolians and the Hellespontians. So the fleet sailed through between the Kyanean rocks and made straight for the Ister; and then they sailed up the river a two days' voyage from the sea and proceeded to make a bridge across the neck, as it were, of the river, where the mouths of the Ister part off. Dareios meanwhile, having crossed the Bosphorus on the floating bridge, was advancing through Thrace, and when he came to the sources of the river Tearos he encamped for three days.         89. [1] tauta men nyn tou zeuxantos ten gefyran mnemosyna egeneto. Dareios de duresamenos Mandroklea diebaine es ten Eyrupen, toisi Iusi paraggeilas pleein es ton Ponton mexri Istroy potamou, epean de apikuntai es ton Istron, enthauta ayton perimenein zeygnuntas ton potamon. to gar de naytikon Egon Iunes te kai Aiolees kai Ellespontioi. [2] o men de naytikos stratos Kyaneas diekplusas eplee ithu tou Istroy, anaplusas de ana potamon dyun emereun ploon apo thalasses, tou potamou ton ayxena, ek tou sxizetai ta stomata tou Istroy, ezeugnye. [3] Dareios de us diebe ton Bosporon kata ten sxedien, eporeueto dia teis Threikes, apikomenos de epi Tearoy potamou tas pegas estratopedeusato emeras treis.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [90]

     90. Now the Tearos is said by those who dwell near it to be the best of all rivers, both in other respects which tend to healing and especially for curing diseases of the skin both in men and in horses: and its springs are thirty-eight in number, flowing all from the same rock, of which some are cold and others warm. The way to them is of equal length from the city of Heraion near Perinthos and from Apollonia upon the Euxine Sea, that is to say two days' journey by each road. This Tearos runs into the river Contadesdos and the Contadesdos into the Agrianes and the Agrianes into the Hebros, which flows into the sea by the city of Ainos.         90. [1] o de Tearos legetai ypo tun perioikun einai potamun aristos ta te alla ta es akesin feronta kai de kai andrasi kai ippoisi psuren akesasthai. eisi de aytou ai pegai dyun deoysai tesserakonta, ek petres teis ayteis rheoysai, kai ai men ayteun eisi psyxrai ai de thermai. [2] odos d' ep' aytas esti ise ex Eraioy te polios teis para Perinthui kai ex Apollunies teis en tui Eyxeinui pontui, dyun emereun ekatere. ekdidoi de o Tearos oytos es ton Kontadesdon potamon, o de Kontadesdos es ton Agrianen, o de Agrianes es ton Ebron, o de es thalassan ten par' Ainui poli.   
      91. Dareios then, having come to this river and having encamped there, was pleased with the river and set up a pillar there also, with an inscription as follows: "The head-springs of the river Tearos give the best and fairest water of all rivers; and to them came leading an army against the Scythians the best and fairest of all men, Dareios the son of Hystaspes, of the Persians and of all the Continent king." These were the words which were there written.         91. [1] epi touton un ton potamon apikomenos o Dareios us estratopedeusato, estheis tui potamui stelen estese kai enthauta, grammata eggrapsas legonta tade. [2] <<Tearoy potamou kefalai ydur ariston te kai kalliston parexontai pantun potamun. kai ep' aytas apiketo elaunun epi Skuthas straton aner aristos te kai kallistos pantun anthrupun, Dareios o Ystaspeos, Perseun te kai pases teis epeiroy basileus.>> tauta de enthauta egrafe.   
      92. Dareios then set out from thence and came to another river whose name is Artescos, which flows through the land of the Odrysians. Having come to this river he did as follows:--he appointed a place for his army and bade every man as he passed out by it place one stone in this appointed place: and when the army had performed this, then he marched away his army leaving behind great mounds of these stones.         92. [1] Dareios de entheuten ormetheis apiketo ep' allon potamon tui oynoma Arteskos esti, os dia Odryseun rheei. epi touton de ton potamon apikomenos epoiese toionde. apodexas xurion tei stratiei ekeleye panta andra lithon ena parexionta tithenai es to apodedegmenon touto xurion. us de tauta e stratie epetelese, enthauta kolunous megaloys tun lithun katalipun apelayne ten stratien.   
      93. But before he came to the Ister he conquered first the Getai, who believe in immortality: for the Thracians who occupy Salmydessos and are settled above the cities of Apollonian and Mesambria, called the Kyrmianai and the Nipsaioi, delivered themselves over to Dareios without fighting; but the Getai, who are the bravest and the most upright in their dealings of all the Thracians, having betaken themselves to obstinacy were forthwith subdued.         93. [1] prin de apikesthai epi ton Istron, prutoys aireei Getas tous athanatizontas. oi men gar ton Salmydesson exontes Threikes kai yper Apollunies te kai Mesambries polios oikemenoi, kaleumenoi de Kyrmianai kai Nipsaioi, amaxeti sfeas aytous paredosan Dareiui. oi de Getai pros agnumosunen trapomenoi aytika edoyluthesan, Threikun eontes andreiotatoi kai dikaiotatoi.   
      94. And their belief in immortality is of this kind, that is to say, they hold that they do not die, but that he who is killed goes to Salmoxis, a divinity, whom some of them call Gebeleizis; and at intervals of four years they send one of themselves, whomsoever the lot may select, as a messenger to Salmoxis, charging him with such requests as they have to make on each occasion; and they send him thus:--certain of them who are appointed for this have three javelins, and others meanwhile take hold on both sides of him who is being sent to Salmoxis, both by his hands and his feet, and first they swing him up, then throw him into the air so as to fall upon the spear-points: and if when he is pierced through he is killed, they think that the god is favourable to them; but if he is not killed, they find fault with the messenger himself, calling him a worthless man, and then having found fault with him they send another: and they give him the charge beforehand, while he is yet alive. These same Thracians also shoot arrows up towards the sky when thunder and lightning come, and use threats to the god, not believing that there exists any other god except their own.         94. [1] athanatizoysi de tonde ton tropon. oyte apothneskein euytous nomizoysi ienai te ton apollumenon para Salmoxin daimona. oi de aytun ton ayton touton onomazoysi Gebeleizin. [2] dia penteteridos te ton palui laxonta aiei sfeun aytun apopempoysi aggelon para ton Salmoxin, entellomenoi tun an ekastote deuntai, pempoysi de ude. oi men aytun taxthentes akontia tria exoysi, alloi de dialabontes tou apopempomenoy para ton Salmoxin tas xeiras kai tous podas, anakinesantes ayton meteuron rhiptoysi es tas logxas. en men de apothanei anapareis, toisi de ileos o theos dokeei einai. [3] en de me apothanei, aitiuntai ayton ton aggelon, famenoi min andra kakon einai, aitiesamenoi de touton allon apopempoysi. entellontai de eti zunti. [4] oytoi oi aytoi Threikes kai pros bronten te kai astrapen toxeuontes anu pros ton oyranon apeileoysi tui theui, oydena allon theon nomizontes einai ei me ton sfeteron.   
      95. This Salmoxis I hear from the Hellenes who dwell about the Hellespont and the Pontus, was a man, and he became a slave in Samos, and was in fact a slave of Pythagoras the son of Mnesarchos. Then having become free he gained great wealth, and afterwards returned to his own land: and as the Thracians both live hardly and are rather simple-minded, this Salmoxis, being acquainted with the Ionian way of living and with manners more cultivated than the Thracians were used to see, since he had associated with Hellenes (and not only that but with Pythagoras, not the least able philosopher of the Hellenes), prepared a banqueting-hall, where he received and feasted the chief men of the tribe and instructed them meanwhile that neither he himself nor his guests nor their descendants in succession after them would die; but that they would come to a place where they would live for ever and have all things good. While he was doing that which has been mentioned and was saying these things, he was making for himself meanwhile a chamber under the ground; and when his chamber was finished, he disappeared from among the Thracians and went down into the underground chamber, where he continued to live for three years: and they grieved for his loss and mourned for him as dead. Then in the fourth year he appeared to the Thracians, and in this way the things which Salmoxis said became credible to them.         95. [1] us de egu pynthanomai tun ton Ellesponton oikeontun Ellenun kai Ponton, ton Salmoxin touton eonta anthrupon doyleusai en Samui, doyleusai de Pythagorei tui Mnesarxoy, [2] entheuten de ayton genomenon eleutheron xremata ktesasthai megala, ktesamenon de apelthein es ten euytou. ate de kakobiun te eontun tun Threikun kai ypafronesterun, ton Salmoxin touton epistamenon diaitan te Iada kai ethea bathutera e kata Threikas, oia Ellesi te omilesanta kai Ellenun oy tui asthenestatui sofistei Pythagore, [3] kataskeyasasthai andreuna, es ton pandokeuonta tun astun tous prutoys kai eyuxeonta anadidaskein us oyte aytos oyte oi sympotai aytou oyte oi ek toutun aiei ginomenoi apothaneontai, all' exoysi es xuron touton ina aiei perieontes exoysi ta panta agatha. [4] en ui de epoiee ta katalexthenta kai elege tauta, en toutui katagaion oikema epoieeto. us de oi panteleus eixe to oikema, ek men tun Threikun efanisthe, katabas de katu es to katagaion oikema diaitato ep' etea tria. [5] oi de min epotheon te kai epentheon us tethneuta. tetartu de etei efane toisi Threixi, kai oytu pithana sfi egeneto ta elege o Salmoxis. tauta fasi min poieisai.   
      96. Thus they say that he did; but as to this matter and the chamber under ground, I neither disbelieve it nor do I very strongly believe, but I think that this Salmoxis lived many years before Pythagoras. However, whether there ever lived a man Salmoxis, or whether he is simply a native deity of the Getai, let us bid farewell to him now.         96. [1] egu de peri men toutoy kai tou katagaioy oikematos oyte apisteu oyte un pisteuu ti lien, dokeu de polloisi etesi proteron ton Salmoxin touton genesthai Pythagoreu. [2] eite de egeneto tis Salmoxis anthrupos, eit' esti daimun tis Geteisi oytos epixurios, xairetu. oytoi men de tropui toioutui xreumenoi us exeiruthesan ypo Perseun, eiponto tui allui stratui.    
      97. These, I say, having such manners as I have said, were subdued by the Persians and accompanied the rest of the army: and when Dareios and with him the land-army arrived at the Ister, then after all had passed over, Dareios commanded the Ionians to break up the floating bridge and to accompany him by land, as well as the rest of the troops which were in the ships: and when the Ionians were just about to break it up and to do that which he commanded, Coes the son of Erxander, who was commander of the Mytilenians, said thus to Dareios, having first inquired whether he was disposed to listen to an opinion from one who desired to declare it: "O king, seeing that thou art about to march upon a land where no cultivated ground will be seen nor any inhabited town, do thou therefore let this bridge remain where it is, leaving to guard it those same men who constructed it. Then, if we find the Scythians and fare as we desire, we have a way of return; and also even if we shall not be able to find them, at least our way of return is secured: for that we should be worsted by the Scythians in fight I never feared yet, but rather that we might not be able to find them, and might suffer some disaster in wandering about. Perhaps some one will say that in speaking thus I am speaking for my own advantage, in order that I may remain behind; but in truth I am bringing forward, O king, the opinion which I found best for thee, and I myself will accompany thee and not be left behind." With this opinion Dareios was very greatly pleased and made answer to him in these words: "Friend from Lesbos, when I have returned safe to my house, be sure that thou appear before me, in order that I may requite thee with good deeds for good counsel."         97. [1] Dareios de us apiketo kai o pezos am' aytui stratos epi ton Istron, enthauta diabantun pantun Dareios ekeleyse tous te Iunas ten sxedien lusantas epesthai kat' epeiron euytui kai ton ek tun neun straton. [2] mellontun de tun Iunun luein kai poieein ta keleyomena, Kues o Erxandroy strategos eun Mytilenaiun elexe Dareiui tade, pythomenos proteron ei oi filon eie gnumen apodekesthai para tou boylomenoy apodeiknysthai. [3] <<u basileu, epi gein gar melleis strateuesthai teis oyte areromenon fanesetai oyden oyte polis oikeomene. su nyn gefyran tauten ea kata xuren estanai, fylakoys ayteis lipun toutoys oiper min ezeyxan. [4] kai en te kata noon prexumen eyrontes Skuthas, esti apodos emin, en te kai me sfeas eyrein dynumetha, e ge apodos emin asfales. oy gar edeisa ku me essutheumen ypo Skytheun maxei, alla mallon me oy dynamenoi sfeas eyrein pathumen ti alumenoi. [5] kai tade legein faie tis an me emeuytou eineken, us katamenu. egu de gnumen men ten eyriskon aristen soi, basileu, es meson feru, aytos mentoi epsomai toi kai oyk an leiftheien. [6] karta te esthe tei gnumei Dareios kai min ameipsato toiside. <<xeine Lesbie, suthentos emeu opisu es oikon ton emon epifanethi moi pantus, ina se anti xresteis symboylies xrestoisi ergoisi ameipsumai.>>   
      98. Having thus said and having tied sixty knots in a thong, he called the despots of the Ionians to speak with him and said as follows: "Men of Ionia, know that I have given up the opinion which I formerly declared with regard to the bridge; and do ye keep this thong and do as I shall say:--so soon as ye shall have seen me go forward against the Scythians, from that time begin, and untie a knot on each day: and if within this time I am not here, and ye find that the days marked by the knots have passed by, then sail away to your own lands. Till then, since our resolve has thus been changed, guard the floating bridge, showing all diligence to keep it safe and to guard it. And thus acting, ye will do for me a very acceptable service." Thus said Dareios and hastened on his march forwards.         98. [1] tauta de eipas kai apapsas ammata exekonta en imanti kalesas es logoys tous Iunun tyrannoys elege tade. [2] <<andres Iunes, e men proteron gnume apodextheisa es ten gefyran meteisthu moi, exontes de ton imanta tonde poieete tade. epean eme idete taxista poreyomenon epi Skuthas, apo toutoy arxamenoi tou xronoy luete amma en ekastes emeres. en de en toutui tui xronui me pareu alla diexelthusi ymin ai emerai tun ammatun, apopleete es ten ymeteren aytun. [3] mexri de toutoy, epeite oytu metedoxe, fylassete ten sxedien, pasan prothymien suteries te kai fylakeis parexomenoi. tauta de poieuntes emoi megalus xarieisthe.>> Dareios men tauta eipas es to prosu epeigeto.    
      99. Now in front of Scythia in the direction towards the sea lies Thrace; and where a bay is formed in this land, there begins Scythia, into which the Ister flows out, the mouth of the river being turned towards the South-East Wind. Beginning at the Ister then I am about to describe the coast land of the true Scythia, with regard to measurement. At once from the Ister begins this original land of Scythia, and it lies towards the midday and the South Wind, extending as far as the city called Carkinitis. After this the part which lies on the coast of the same sea still, a country which is mountainous and runs out in the direction of the Pontus, is occupied by the Tauric race, as far as the peninsula which is called the "Rugged Chersonese"; and this extends to the sea which lies towards the East Wind: for two sides of the Scythian boundaries lie along by the sea, one by the sea on the South, and the other by that on the East, just as it is with Attica: and in truth the Tauroi occupy a part of Scythia which has much resemblance to Attica; it is as if in Attica another race and not the Athenians occupied the hill region of Sunion, supposing it to project more at the point into the sea, that region namely which is cut off by a line from Thoricos to Anaphlystos. Such I say, if we may be allowed to compare small things such as this with great, is the form of the Tauric land. For him however who has not sailed along this part of the coast of Attica I will make it clear by another comparison:--it is as if in Iapygia another race and not the Iapygians had cut off for themselves and were holding that extremity of the land which is bounded by a line beginning at the harbour of Brentesion and running to Taras. And in mentioning these two similar cases I am suggesting many other things also to which the Tauric land has resemblance.         99. [1] teis de Skythikeis geis e Threike to es thalassan prokeitai. kolpoy de agomenoy teis geis tautes, e Skythike te ekdeketai kai o Istros ekdidoi es ayten, pros eyron anemon to stoma tetrammenos. [2] to de apo Istroy erxomai semaneun to pros thalassan ayteis teis Skythikeis xures es metresin. apo Istroy ayte ede e arxaie Skythie esti, pros mesambrien te kai noton anemon keimene, mexri polios Karkinitidos kaleomenes. [3] to de apo tautes ten men epi thalassan ten ayten feroysan, eousan oreinen te xuren kai prokeimenen to es Ponton, nemetai to Tayrikon ethnos mexri xersonesoy teis trexees kaleomenes. ayte de es thalassan ten pros apeliuten anemon katekei. [4] esti gar teis Skythikeis ta duo merea tun oyrun es thalassan feronta, ten te pros mesambrien kai ten pros ten eu, kata per teis Attikeis xures. kai paraplesia tautei kai oi Tauroi nemontai teis Skythikeis, us ei teis Attikeis allo ethnos kai me Athenaioi nemoiato ton goynon ton Soyniakon, mallon es ton ponton ten akren8 anexonta, ton apo Thorikou mexri Anaflustoy demoy. [5] legu de us einai tauta smikra megaloisi symballein. toiouton e Tayrike esti. os de teis Attikeis tauta me parapepluke, egu de allus delusu. us ei teis Iepygies allo ethnos kai me Iepyges arxamenoi ek Brentesioy limenos apotamoiato mexri Tarantos kai nemoiato ten akren. duo de legun tauta polla legu paromoia, toisi alloisi eoike e Tayrike.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [100]

     100. After the Tauric land immediately come Scythians again, occupying the parts above the Tauroi and the coasts of the Eastern sea, that is to say the parts to the West of the Kimmerian Bosphorus and of the Maiotian lake, as far as the river Tanais, which runs into the corner of this lake. In the upper parts which tend inland Scythia is bounded (as we know) by the Agathyrsians first, beginning from the Ister, and then by the Neuroi, afterwards by the Androphagoi, and lastly by the Melanchlainoi.         100. [1] to d' apo teis Tayrikeis ede Skuthai ta katuperthe tun Taurun kai ta pros thalasses teis eoies nemontai, tou te Bosporoy tou Kimmerioy ta pros esperes kai teis limnes teis Maietidos mexri Tanaidos potamou, os ekdidoi es myxon teis limnes tautes. [2] ede un apo men Istroy ta katuperthe es ten mesogaian feronta apokleietai e Skythike ypo prutun Agathursun, meta de Neyrun, epeita de Androfagun, teleytaiun de Melagxlainun.   
      101. Scythia then being looked upon as a four-sided figure with two of its sides bordered by the sea, has its border lines equal to one another in each direction, that which tends inland and that which runs along by the sea: for from Ister to the Borysthenes is ten days' journey, and from the Borysthenes to the Maiotian lake ten days' more; and the distance inland to the Melanchlainoi, who are settled above the Scythians, is a journey of twenty days. Now I have reckoned the day's journey at two hundred furlongs: and by this reckoning the cross lines of Scythia would be four thousand furlongs in length, and the perpendiculars which tend inland would be the same number of furlongs. Such is the size of this land.         101. [1] esti un teis Skythikeis us eouses tetragunoy, tun duo mereun katekontun es thalassan, pantei ison to te es ten mesogaian feron kai to para ten thalassan. [2] apo gar Istroy epi Borysthenea deka emereun odos apo Borystheneos te epi ten limnen ten Maieitin etereun deka. kai to apo thalasses es mesogaian es tous Melagxlainoys tous katuperthe Skypseun oikemenoys eikosi emereun odos. [3] e de odos e emeresie ana diekosia stadia symbebletai moi. oytu an eie teis Skythikeis ta epikarsia tetrakisxiliun stadiun kai ta orthia ta es ten mesogaian feronta eterun tosoutun stadiun. e men nyn gei ayte esti megathos tosaute.    
      102. The Scythians meanwhile having considered with themselves that they were not able to repel the army of Dareios alone by a pitched battle, proceeded to send messengers to those who dwelt near them: and already the kings of these nations had come together and were taking counsel with one another, since so great an army was marching towards them. Now those who had come together were the kings of the Tauroi, Agathyrsians, Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi, Gelonians, Budinoi and Sauromatai.         102. [1] oi de Skuthai dontes sfisi logon us oyk oioi te eisi ton Dareioy straton ithymaxiei diusasthai mounoi, epempon es tous plesioxuroys aggeloys. tun de kai de oi basilees synelthontes eboyleuonto us stratou epelaunontos megaloy. [2] Esan de oi synelthontes basilees Taurun kai Agathursun kai Neyrun kai Androfagun kai Melagxlainun kai Gelunun kai Boydinun kai Sayromateun.   
      103. Of these the Tauroi have the following customs:-- they sacrifice to the "Maiden" both ship-wrecked persons and also those Hellenes whom they can capture by putting out to sea against them; and their manner of sacrifice is this:--when they have made the first offering from the victim they strike his head with a club: and some say that they push the body down from the top of the cliff (for it is upon a cliff that the temple is placed) and set the head up on a stake; but others, while agreeing as to the heads, say nevertheless that the body is not pushed down from the top of the cliff, but buried in the earth. This divinity to whom they sacrifice, the Tauroi themselves say is Iphigeneia the daughter of Agamemnon. Whatsoever enemies they have conquered they treat in this fashion:-- each man cuts off a head and bears it away to his house; then he impales it on a long stake and sets it up above his house raised to a great height, generally above the chimney; and they say that these are suspended above as guards to preserve the whole house. This people has its living by plunder and war.         103. [1] toutun Tauroi men nomoisi toioiside xreuntai. thuoysi men tei, Parthenui tous te nayegous kai tous an labusi Ellenun epanaxthentes tropui toiuide. [2] katarxamenoi rhopalui paioysi ten kefalen. oi men de legoysi us to suma apo tou kremnou utheoysi katu (epi gar kremnou idrytai to iron), ten de kefalen anastayrousi. oi de kata men ten kefalen omologeoysi, to mentoi suma oyk utheesthai apo tou kremnou legoysi alla gei kruptesthai. ten de daimona tauten tei thuoysi legoysi aytoi Tauroi Ifigeneian ten Agamemnonos einai. [3] polemioys de andras tous an xeirusuntai poieusi tade. apotamun ekastos kefalen apoferetai es ta oikia, epeita epi xuloy megaloy anapeiras istai yper teis oikies yperexoysan pollon, malista de yper teis kapnodokes. fasi de toutoys fylakoys teis oikies pases yperaiureesthai. zusi de apo leies te kai polemoy.   
      104. The Agathyrsians are the most luxurious of men and wear gold ornaments for the most part: also they have promiscuous intercourse with their women, in order that they may be brethren to one another and being all nearly related may not feel envy or malice one against another. In their other customs they have come to resemble the Thracians.         104. [1] Agathyrsoi de abrotatoi andrun eisi kai xrysoforoi ta malista, epikoinon de tun gynaikun ten mixin poieuntai, ina kasignetoi te allelun eusi kai oikeioi eontes pantes mete fthonui mete exthei xreuntai es alleloys. ta de alla nomaia Threixi proskexurekasi.   
      105. The Neuroi practise the Scythian customs: and one generation before the expedition of Dareios it so befell them that they were forced to quit their land altogether by reason of serpents: for their land produced serpents in vast numbers, and they fell upon them in still larger numbers from the desert country above their borders; until at last being hard pressed they left their own land and settled among the Budinoi. These men it would seem are wizards; for it is said of them by the Scythians and by the Hellenes who are settled in the Scythian land that once in every year each of the Neuroi becomes a wolf for a few days and then returns again to his original form. For my part I do not believe them when they say this, but they say it nevertheless, and swear it moreover.         105. [1] Neyroi de nomoisi men xreuntai Skythikoisi, geneei de miei proteron sfeas teis Dareioy stratelasies katelabe eklipein ten xuren pasan ypo ofiun. ofias gar sfi pollous men e xure anefaine, oi de pleunes anuthen sfi ek tun eremun epepeson, es o piezomenoi oikesan meta Boydinun ten euytun eklipontes. kindyneuoysi de oi anthrupoi oytoi goetes einai. [2] legontai gar ypo Skytheun kai Ellenun tun en tei Skythikei katoikemenun us eteos ekastoy apax tun Neyrun ekastos lukos ginetai emeras oligas kai aytis opisu es tuyto katistatai. eme men nyn tauta legontes oy peithoysi, legoysi de oyden Esson, kai omnusi de legontes.   
      106. The Androphagoi have the most savage manners of all human beings, and they neither acknowledge any rule of right nor observe any customary law. They are nomads and wear clothing like that of the Scythians, but have a language of their own; and alone of all these nations they are man-eaters.         106. [1] androfagoi de agriutata pantun anthrupun exoysi ethea, oyte diken nomizontes oyte nomui oydeni xreumenoi. nomades de eisi, estheita te foreoysi tei Skythikei omoien, glussan de idien, androfageoysi de mounoi toutun.   
      107. The Melanchlainoi wear all of them black clothing, whence also they have their name; and they practise the customs of the Scythians.         107. [1] melagxlainoi de eimata men melana foreoysi pantes, ep' un kai tas epunymias exoysi, nomoisi de Skythikoisi xreuntai.   
      108. The Budinoi are a very great and numerous race, and are all very blue-eyed and fair of skin: and in their land is built a city of wood, the name of which is Gelonos, and each side of the wall is thirty furlongs in length and lofty at the same time, all being of wood; and the houses are of wood also and the temples; for there are in it temples of Hellenic gods furnished after Hellenic fashion with sacred images and altars and cells, all of wood; and they keep festivals every other year to Dionysos and celebrate the rites of Bacchus: for the Gelonians are originally Hellenes, and they removed from the trading stations on the coast and settled among the Budinoi; and they use partly the Scythian language and partly the Hellenic. The Budinoi however do not use the same language as the Gelonians, nor is their manner of living the same:         108. [1] Boydinoi de ethnos eon mega kai pollon glaykon te pan isxyrus esti kai pyrron. polis de en aytoisi pepolistai xyline, oynoma de tei poli esti Gelunos. tou de teixeos megathos kulon ekaston triekonta stadiun esti, ypselon de kai pan xulinon, kai ai oikiai aytun xulinai kai ta ira. [2] esti gar de aytothi Ellenikun theun ira Ellenikus kateskeyasmena agalmasi te kai bumoisi kai neoisi xylinoisi, kai tui Dionusui trieteridas anagoysi kai bakxeuoysi. eisi gar oi Gelunoi to arxaion Ellenes, ek tun de emporiun exanastantes oikesan en toisi Boydinoisi. kai glussei ta men Skythikei, ta de Ellenikei xreuntai.   
      109. for the Budinoi are natives of the soil and a nomad people, and alone of the nations in these parts feed on fir-cones; but the Gelonians are tillers of the ground and feed on corn and have gardens, and resemble them not at all either in appearance or in complexion of skin. However by the Hellenes the Budinoi also are called Gelonians, not being rightly so called. Their land is all thickly overgrown with forests of all kinds of trees, and in the thickest forest there is a large and deep lake, and round it marshy ground and reeds. In this are caught otters and beavers and certainly other wild animals with square-shaped faces. The fur of these is sewn as a fringe round their coats of skin, and the testicles are made use of by them for curing diseases of the womb.         109. [1] Boydinoi de oy tei aytei glussei xreuntai kai Gelunoi, oyde diaita e ayte. oi men gar Boydinoi eontes aytoxthones nomades te eisi kai ftheirotrageoysi mounoi tun tautei, Gelunoi de geis te ergatai kai sitofagoi kai kepoys ektemenoi, oyden ten ideen omoioi oyde to xruma. ypo mentoi Ellenun kaleontai kai oi Boydinoi Gelunoi, oyk orthus kaleomenoi. [2] e de xure sfeun pasa esti dasea ideisi pantoieisi. en de tei idei tei pleistei esti limne megale te kai polle kai elos kai kalamos peri ayten. en de tautei enudries aliskontai kai kastores kai alla theria tetragunoprosupa, tun ta dermata para tas sisurnas pararraptetai, kai oi orxies aytoisi eisi xresimoi es ystereun akesin.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [110]

     110. About the Sauromatai the following tale is told:--When the Hellenes had fought with the Amazons,--now the Amazons are called by the Scythians Oiorpata, which name means in the Hellenic tongue "slayers of men," for "man" they call oior, and pata means "to slay,"--then, as the story goes, the Hellenes, having conquered them in the battle at the Thermodon, were sailing away and conveying with them in three ships as many Amazons as they were able to take prisoners. These in the open sea set upon the men and cast them out of the ships; but they knew nothing about ships, nor how to use rudders or sails or oars, and after they had cast out the men they were driven about by wave and wind and came to that part of the Maiotian lake where Cremnoi stands; now Cremnoi is in the land of the free Scythians. There the Amazons disembarked from their ships and made their way into the country, and having met first with a troop of horses feeding they seized them, and mounted upon these they plundered the property of the Scythians.         110. [1] Sayromateun de peri ude legetai. ote Ellenes Amazosi emaxesanto (tas de Amazonas kaleoysi Skuthai Oiorpata, dunatai de to oynoma touto kata Ellada glussan androktonoi. oior gar kaleoysi andra, to de pata kteinein), tote logos toys Ellenas nikesantas tei epi Thermudonti maxe apopleein agontas trisi ploioisi tun Amazonun osas edyneato zugreisai, tas de en tui pelagei epithemenas ekkopsai tous andras. [2] ploia de oy ginuskein aytas oyde pedalioisi xrasthai oyde istioisi oyde eiresiei. all' epei exekopsan tous andras eferonto kata kuma kai anemon, kai apikneontai teis limnes teis Maietidos epi Kremnous. oi de Kremnoi eisi geis teis Skytheun tun eleytherun. enthauta apobasai apo tun ploiun ai Amazones odoiporeon es ten oikeomenen. entyxousai de prutui ippoforbiui touto dierpasan, kai epi toutun ippazomenai eleizonto ta tun Skytheun.   
      111. The Scythians meanwhile were not able to understand the matter, for they did not know either their speech or their dress or the race to which they belonged, but were in wonder as to whence they had come and thought that they were men, of an age corresponding to their appearance: and finally they fought a battle against them, and after the battle the Scythians got possession of the bodies of the dead, and thus they discovered that they were women. They took counsel therefore and resolved by no means to go on trying to kill them, but to send against them the youngest men from among themselves, making conjecture of the number so as to send just as many men as there were women. These were told to encamp near them, and do whatsoever they should do; if however the women should come after them, they were not to fight but to retire before them, and when the women stopped, they were to approach near and encamp. This plan was adopted by the Scythians because they desired to have children born from them.         111. [1] oi de Skuthai oyk eixon symbalesthai to preigma. oyte gar funen oyte estheita oyte to ethnos eginuskon, all' en thumati Esan okothen elthoien, edokeon d' aytas einai andras ten ayten elikien exontas, maxen te de pros aytas epoieunto. ek de teis maxes tun nekrun ekratesan oi Skuthai, kai oytu egnusan eousas gynaikas. [2] boyleyomenoisi un aytoisi edoxe kteinein men oydeni tropui eti aytas, euytun de tous neutatoys apopempsai es aytas, pleithos eikasantas osai per ekeinai Esan toutoys de stratopedeuesthai plesion ekeineun kai poieein ta per an kai ekeinai poieusi. en de aytous diukusi, maxesthai men me, ypofeugein de. epean de pausuntai, elthontas aytis plesion stratopedeuesthai. tauta eboyleusanto oi Skuthai boylomenoi ex ayteun paidas ekgenesesthai.   
      112. The young men accordingly were sent out and did that which had been commanded them: and when the Amazons perceived that they had not come to do them any harm, they let them alone; and the two camps approached nearer to one another every day: and the young men, like the Amazons, had nothing except their arms and their horses, and got their living, as the Amazons did, by hunting and by taking booty.         112. [1] apopemfthentes de oi neeniskoi epoieyn ta entetalmena. epei de emathon aytous ai Amazones ep' oydemiei delesi apigmenoys, eun xairein. prosexureon de plesiaiteru to stratopedon tui stratopedui ep' emerei ekaste. eixon de oyden oyd' oi neeniskoi, usper ai Amazones, ei me ta opla kai tous ippoys, alla zoen ezuon ten ayten ekeineisi, thereuontes te kai leizomenoi.   
      113. Now the Amazons at midday used to scatter abroad either one by one or by two together, dispersing to a distance from one another to ease themselves; and the Scythians also having perceived this did the same thing: and one of the Scythians came near to one of those Amazons who were apart by themselves, and she did not repulse him but allowed him to lie with her: and she could not speak to him, for they did not understand one another's speech, but she made signs to him with her hand to come on the following day to the same place and to bring another with him, signifying to him that there should be two of them, and that she would bring another with her. The young man therefore, when he returned, reported this to the others; and on the next day he came himself to the place and also brought another, and he found the Amazon awaiting him with another in her company. Then hearing this the rest of the young men also in their turn tamed for themselves the remainder of the Amazons;         113. [1] epoieyn de ai Amazones es ten mesambrien toionde. eginonto sporades kata mian te kai duo, prosu de ap' alleleun es eymareien aposkidnamenai. mathontes de kai oi Skuthai epoieyn tuyto touto. kai tis moynutheiseun tini ayteun enexrimpteto, [2] kai e Amazun oyk aputheeto alla perieide xresasthai. kai funeisai men oyk eixe, oy gar syniesan allelun, tei de xeiri efraze es ten ysteraien elthein es tuyto xurion kai eteron agein, semainoysa duo genesthai kai ayte eteren axein. [3] o de neeniskos, epei apeilthe, elexe tauta pros tous loipous. tei de deyteraiei Elthe es to xurion aytos te oytos kai eteron Ege, kai ten Amazona eyre deyteren ayten ypomenoysan. oi de loipoi neeniskoi us eputhonto tauta, kai aytoi ektilusanto tas loipas tun Amazonun.   
      114. and after this they joined their camps and lived together, each man having for his wife her with whom he had had dealings at first; and the men were not able to learn the speech of the women, but the women came to comprehend that of the men. So when they understood one another, the men spoke to the Amazons as follows: "We have parents and we have possessions; now therefore let us no longer lead a life of this kind, but let us go away to the main body of our people and dwell with them; and we will have you for wives and no others." They however spoke thus in reply: "We should not be able to live with your women, for we and they have not the same customs. We shoot with bows and hurl javelins and ride horses, but the works of women we never learnt; whereas your women do none of these things which we said, but stay in the waggons and work at the works of women, neither going out to the chase nor anywhither else. We therefore should not be able to live in agreement with them: but if ye desire to keep us for your wives and to be thought honest men, go to your parents and obtain from them your share of the goods, and then let us go and dwell by ourselves."         114. [1] meta de symmixantes ta stratopeda oikeon omou, gynaika exun ekastos tauten tei to pruton synemixthe. ten de funen ten men tun gynaikun oi andres oyk edyneato mathein, ten de tun andrun ai gynaikes synelabon. [2] epei de syneikan allelun, elexan pros tas Amazonas tade oi andres. <<emin eisi men tokees, eisi de ktesies. nun un meketi pleuna xronon zoen toiende exumen, all' apelthontes es to pleithos diaitumetha. gynaikas de exomen ymeas kai oydamas allas. ai de pros tauta elexan tade. [3] <<emeis oyk an dynaimetha oikeein meta tun ymetereun gynaikun. oy gar ta ayta nomaia emin te kakeineisi esti. emeis men toxeuomen te kai akontizomen kai ippazometha, erga de gynaikeia oyk emathomen. ai de ymeterai gynaikes toutun men oyden tun emeis katelexamen poieusi, erga de gynaikeia ergazontai menoysai en teisi amaxeisi, oyt' epi theren iousai oyte allei oydamei. [4] oyk an un dynaimetha ekeineisi symferesthai. all' ei boulesthe gynaikas exein emeas kai dokeein einai dikaioi, elthontes para tous tokeas apolaxete tun ktematun to meros, kai epeita elthontes oikeumen epi emeun aytun.>>   
      115. The young men agreed and did this; and when they had obtained the share of the goods which belonged to them and had returned back to the Amazons, the women spoke to them as follows: "We are possessed by fear and trembling to think that we must dwell in this place, having not only separated you from your fathers, but also done great damage to your land. Since then ye think it right to have us as your wives, do this together with us,--come and let us remove from this land and pass over the river Tanais and there dwell."         115. [1] epeithonto kai epoiesan tauta oi neeniskoi. epeite de apolaxontes tun ktematun to epiballon Elthon opisu para tas Amazonas, elexan ai gynaikes pros aytous tade. [2] <<emeas exei fobos te kai deos okus xre oikeein en tuide tui xurui, touto men ymeas aposteresasas paterun, touto de gein ten ymeteren delesamenas polla. [3] all' epeite axioute emeas gynaikas exein, tade poieete ama emin. ferete exanasteumen ek teis geis teisde kai peresantes Tanain potamon oikeumen.>>   
      116. The young men agreed to this also, and they crossed over the Tanais and made their way towards the rising sun for three days' journey from Tanais, and also towards the North Wind for three days' journey from the Maiotian lake: and having arrived at the place where they are now settled, they took up their abode there: and from thenceforward the women of the Sauromatai practise their ancient way of living, going out regularly on horseback to the chase both in company with the men and apart from them, and going regularly to war, and wearing the same dress as the men.         116. [1] epeithonto kai tauta oi neeniskoi, diabantes de ton Tanain odoiporeon pros elion anisxonta triun men emereun apo tou Tanaidos odon, triun de apo teis limnes teis Maietidos pros boreen anemon. apikomenoi de es touton ton xuron en tui nyn katoikentai, oikesan touton. [2] kai diaitei apo toutoy xreuntai tei palaiei tun Sayromateun ai gynaikes, kai epi theren ep' ippun ekfoitusai ama toisi andrasi kai xuris tun andrun, kai es polemon foitusai kai stolen ten ayten toisi andrasi foreoysai.   
      117. And the Sauromatai make use of the Scythian tongue, speaking it barbarously however from the first, since the Amazons did not learn it thoroughly well. As regards marriages their rule is this, that no maiden is married until she has slain a man of their enemies; and some of them even grow old and die before they are married, because they are not able to fulfil the requirement of the law.         117. [1] funei de oi Sayromatai nomizoysi Skythikei, soloikizontes aytei apo tou arxaioy, epei oy xrestus exemathon ayten ai Amazones. ta peri gamun de ude sfi diakeetai. oy gameetai parthenos oydemia prin an tun polemiun andra apokteinei. ai de tines ayteun kai teleytusi geraiai prin gemasthai, oy dynamenai ton nomon ekpleisai,    
      118. To the kings of these nations then, which have been mentioned in order, the messengers of the Scythians came, finding them gathered together, and spoke declaring to them how the Persian king, after having subdued all things to himself in the other continent, had laid a bridge over the neck of the Bosphorus and had crossed over to that continent, and having crossed over and subdued the Thracians, was making a bridge over the river Ister, desiring to bring under his power all these regions also. "Do ye therefore," they said, "by no means stand aloof and allow us to be destroyed, but let us become all of one mind and oppose him who is coming against us. If ye shall not do so, we on our part shall either be forced by necessity to leave our land, or we shall stay in it and make a treaty with the invader; for what else can we do if ye are not willing to help us? and for you after this it will be in no respect easier; for the Persian has come not at all less against you than against us, nor will it content him to subdue us and abstain from you. And of the truth of that which we say we will mention a strong evidence: if the Persian had been making his expedition against us alone, because he desired to take vengeance for the former servitude, he ought to have abstained from all the rest and to have come at once to invade our land, and he would thus have made it clear to all that he was marching to fight against the Scythians and not against the rest. In fact however, ever since he crossed over to this continent, he has compelled all who came in his way to submit to him, and he holds under him now not only the other Thracians but also the Getai, who are our nearest neighbours."         118. [1] epi toutun un tun katalexthentun ethneun tous basileas alismenoys apikomenos tun Skytheun oi aggeloi elegon ekdidaskontes us o Perses, epeide oi ta en tei epeirui tei eterei panta katestraptai, gefyran zeuxas epi tui ayxeni tou Bosporoy diabebeke es tende ten epeiron, diabas de kai katastrepsamenos Threikas gefyroi potamon Istron, boylomenos kai tade panta yp' euytui poiesasthai. [2] <<ymeis un medeni tropui ek tou mesoy katemenoi periidete emeas diaftharentas, alla tuyto noesantes antiazumen ton epionta. oykun poiesete tauta; emeis men piezomenoi e ekleipsomen ten xuren e menontes omologiei xresometha. [3] ti gar pathumen me boylomenun ymeun timureein; ymin de oyden epi toutui estai elafroteron. ekei gar o Perses oyden ti mallon ep' emeas e oy kai ep' ymeas, oyde oi kataxresei emeas katastrepsamenui ymeun apexesthai. [4] mega de ymin logun tunde marturion ereomen. ei gar ep' emeas mounoys estratelatee o Perses tisasthai teis prosthe doylosunes boylomenos, xrein ayton pantun tun allun apexomenon ienai oytu epi ten emeteren, kai an edeloy pasi us epi Skuthas elaunei kai oyk epi tous alloys. [5] nun de epeite taxista diebe es tende ten epeiron, tous aiei empodun ginomenoys emeroutai pantas. tous te de alloys exei yp' euytui Threikas kai de kai tous emin eontas plesioxuroys Getas.>>   
      119. When the Scythians proposed this, the kings who had come from the various nations took counsel together, and their opinions were divided. The kings of the Gelonians, of the Budinoi and of the Sauromatai agreed together and accepted the proposal that they should help the Scythians, but those of the Agathyrsians, Neuroi, Androphagoi, Melanchlainoi and Tauroi returned answer to the Scythians as follows: "If ye had not been the first to do wrong to the Persians and to begin war, then we should have surely thought that ye were speaking justly in asking for those things for which ye now ask, and we should have yielded to your request and shared your fortunes. As it is however, ye on the one hand made invasion without us into their land, and bare rule over the Persians for so long a time as God permitted you; and they in their turn, since the same God stirs them up, are repaying you with the like. As for us however, neither at that time did we do any wrong to these men nor now shall we attempt to do any wrong to them unprovoked: if however the Persians shall come against our land also, and do wrong first to us, we also shall refuse to submit: but until we shall see this, we shall remain by ourselves, for we are of opinion that the Persians have come not against us, but against those who were the authors of the wrong."         119. [1] tauta Skytheun epaggellomenun eboyleuonto oi basilees oi apo tun ethneun ekontes, kai sfeun esxisthesan ai gnumai. o men gar Gelunos kai o Boydinos kai o Sayromates kata tuyto genomenoi ypedekonto Skutheisi timuresein, o de Agathyrsos kai Neyros kai Androfagos kai oi tun Melagxlainun kai Taurun tade Skutheisi ypekrinanto. [2] <<ei men me ymeis eate oi proteroi adikesantes Persas kai arxantes polemoy, toutun deomenoi tun nun deesthe legein te an efainesthe emin ortha, kai emeis ypakousantes tuyto an ymin epressomen. [3] nun de ymeis te es ten ekeinun esbalontes gein aney emeun epekrateete Perseun oson xronon ymin o theos paredidoy, kai ekeinoi, epei sfeas uytos theos egeirei, ten omoien ymin apodidousi. [4] emeis de oyte ti tote edikesamen tous andras toutoys oyden oyte nun proteroi peiresometha adikeein. en mentoi epiei kai ten emeteren arxei te adikeun, kai emeis oy peisometha, mexri de touto idumen, meneomen par' emin aytoisi. ekein gar dokeomen oyk ep' emeas Persas all' epi tous aitioys teis adikies genomenoys.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [120]

     120. When the Scythians heard this answer reported, they planned not to fight a pitched battle openly, since these did not join them as allies, but to retire before the Persians and to drive away their cattle from before them, choking up with earth the wells and the springs of water by which they passed and destroying the grass from off the ground, having parted themselves for this into two bodies; and they resolved that the Sauromatai should be added to one of their divisions, namely that over which Scopasis was king, and that these should move on, if the Persians turned in that direction, straight towards the river Tanais, retreating before him by the shore of the Maiotian lake; and when the Persian marched back again, they should come after and pursue him. This was one division of their kingdom, appointed to go by the way which has been said; and the other two of the kingdoms, the large one over which Idanthyrsos was king, and the third of which Taxakis was king, were to join together in one, with the Gelonians and the Budinoi added to them, and they also were to retire before the Persians one day's march in front of them, going on out of their way and doing that which had been planned. First they were to move on straight for the countries which had refused to give their alliance, in order that they might involve these also in the war, and though these had not voluntarily undertaken the war with the Persians, they were to involve them in it nevertheless against their will; and after that they were to return to their own land and attack the enemy, if it should seem good to them in council so to do.         120. [1] tauta us apeneixthenta eputhonto oi Skuthai, eboyleuonto ithymaxien men medemian poieesthai ek tou emfaneos, ote de sfi oytoi ge summaxoi oy proseginonto, ypexiontes de kai ypexelaunontes ta freata ta parexioien aytoi kai tas krenas sygxoun, ten poien te ek teis geis ektribein, dixou sfeas dielontes. [2] kai pros men ten mian tun moireun, teis ebasileye Skupasis, prosxureein Sayromatas. toutoys men de ypagein, en epi touto trapetai o Perses ithu Tanaidos potamou para ten Maieitin limnen ypofeugontas, apelaunontos te tou Perseu epiontas diukein. ayte men sfi mia En moira teis basileies, tetagmene tauten ten odon e per eiretai. [3] tas de duo tun basileiun, ten te megalen teis Erxe Idanthyrsos kai ten triten teis ebasileye Taxakis, synelthousas es tuyto kai Gelunun te kai Boydinun prosgenomenun, emeres kai toutoys odu proexontas tun Perseun ypexagein, ypiontas te kai poieuntas ta beboyleymena. [4] pruta men nyn ypagein sfeas ithu tun xureun tun apeipamenun ten sfeteren symmaxien, ina kai toutoys ekpolemususi. ei gar me ekontes ge ypedysan ton polemon ton pros Persas, all' aekontas ekpolemusein. meta de touto ypostrefein es ten sfeteren kai epixeireein, en de boyleyomenoisi dokeei.   
      121. Having formed this plan the Scythians went to meet the army of Dareios, sending off the best of their horsemen before them as scouts; but all the waggons in which their children and their women lived they sent on, and with them all their cattle (leaving only so much as was sufficient to supply them with food), and charged them that they should proceed continually towards the North Wind. These, I say, were being carried on before:         121. [1] tauta oi Skuthai boyleysamenoi ypentiazon ten Dareioy stratien, prodromoys aposteilantes tun ippeun tous aristoys. tas de amaxas en teisi sfi diaitato ta tekna kai ai gynaikes pasas kai ta probata panta, plen osa sfi es forben ikana En tosauta ypolipomenoi, ta alla ama teisi amaxeisi proepempsan, enteilamenoi aiei to pros boreu elaunein.   
      122. but when the scouts who went in front of the Scythians discovered the Persians distant about three days' march from Ister, then the Scythians having discovered them continued to pitch their camp one day's march in front, destroying utterly that which grew from the ground: and when the Persians saw that the horsemen of the Scythians had made their appearance, they came after them following in their track, while the Scythians continually moved on. After this, since they had directed their march towards the first of the divisions, the Persians continued to pursue towards the East and the river Tanais; and when the Scythians crossed over the river Tanais, the Persians crossed over after them and continued still to pursue, until they had passed quite through the land of the Sauromatai and had come to that of the Budinoi.         122. [1] tauta men de proekomizeto. tun de Skytheun oi prodromoi us eyron tous Persas oson te triun emereun odon apexontas apo tou Istroy, oytoi men toutoys eyrontes, emeres odui proexontes, estratopedeuonto ta ek teis geis fyomena leainontes, [2] oi de Persai us eidon epifaneisan tun Skytheun ten ippon, epeisan kata stibon aiei ypagontun. kai epeita (pros gar ten mian tun moireun ithysan) oi Persai ediukon pros eu te kai ithu Tanaidos. [3] diabantun de toutun ton Tanain potamon oi Persai epidiabantes ediukon, es o tun Sayromateun ten xuren diexelthontes apikonto es ten tun Boydinun.   
      123. Now so long as the Persians were passing through Scythia and the land of the Sauromatai, they had nothing to destroy, seeing that the land was bare, but when they invaded the land of the Budinoi, then they fell in with the wooden wall, which had been deserted by the Budinoi and left wholly unoccupied, and this they destroyed by fire. Having done so they continued to follow on further in the tracks of the enemy, until they had passed through the whole of this land and had arrived at the desert. This desert region is occupied by no men, and it lies above the land of the Budinoi, extending for a seven days' journey; and above this desert dwell the Thyssagetai, and four large rivers flow from them through the land of the Maiotians and run into that which is called the Maiotian lake, their names being as follows,--Lycos, Oaros, Tanais, Syrgis.         123. [1] oson men de xronon oi Persai eisan dia teis Skythikeis kai teis Sayromatidos xures, oi de eixon oyden sinesthai ate teis xures eouses xersoy. epeite de es ten tun Boydinun xuren eseballon, enthauta de entyxontes tui xylinui teixei, ekleloipotun tun Boydinun kai kekenumenoy tou teixeos pantun, enepresan ayto. [2] touto de poiesantes eiponto aiei to prosu kata stibon, es o diexelthontes tauten es ten eremon apikonto. e de eremos ayte ypo oydamun nemetai andrun, keetai de yper teis Boydinun xures eousa pleithos epta emereun odou. [3] yper de teis eremoy Thyssagetai oikeoysi, potamoi de ex aytun tesseres megaloi rheontes dia Maieteun ekdidousi es ten limnen ten kaleomenen Maieitin, toisi oynomata keetai tade, Lukos Oaros Tanais Surgis.   
      124. When therefore Dareios came to the desert region, he ceased from his course and halted his army upon the river Oaros. Having so done he began to build eight large fortifications at equal distances from one another, that is to say about sixty furlongs, of which the ruins still existed down to my time; and while he was occupied in this, the Scythians whom he was pursuing came round by the upper parts and returned back to Scythia. Accordingly, since these had altogether disappeared and were no longer seen by the Persians at all, Dareios left those fortifications half finished, and turning back himself began to go towards the West, supposing that these were the whole body of the Scythians and that they were flying towards the West.         124. [1] epei un o Dareios Elthe es ten eremon, paysamenos tou dromoy idryse ten stratien epi potamui Oarui. touto de poiesas oktu teixea eteixee megala, ison ap' allelun apexonta, stadioys us exekonta malista kei. tun eti es eme ta ereipia soa En. [2] en ui de oytos pros tauta etrapeto, oi diukomenoi Skuthai perielthontes ta katuperthe ypestrefon es ten Skythiken. afanisthentun de toutun to parapan, us oyketi efantazonto sfi, oytu de o Dareios teixea men ekeina emierga meteike, aytos de ypostrepsas eie pros esperen, dokeun toutoys te pantas tous Skuthas einai kai pros esperen sfeas feugein.   
      125. And marching his army as quickly as possible, when he came to Scythia he met with the two divisions of the Scythians together, and having fallen in with these he continued to pursue them, while they retired out of his way one day's journey in advance: and as Dareios did not cease to come after them, the Scythians according to the plan which they had made continued to retire before him towards the land of those who had refused to give their alliance, and first towards that of the Melanchlainoi; and when Scythians and Persians both together had invaded and disturbed these, the Scythians led the way to the country of the Androphagoi; and when these had also been disturbed, they proceeded to the land of the Neuroi; and while these too were being disturbed, the Scythians went on retiring before the enemy to the Agathyrsians. The Agathyrsians however, seeing that their next neighbours also were flying from the Scythians and had been disturbed, sent a herald before the Scythians invaded their land and proclaimed to the Scythians not to set foot upon their confines, warning them that if they should attempt to invade the country, they would first have to fight with them. The Agathyrsians then having given this warning came out in arms to their borders, meaning to drive off those who were coming upon them; but the Melanchlainoi and Androphagoi and Neuroi, when the Persians and Scythians together invaded them, did not betake themselves to brave defence but forgot their former threat and fled in confusion ever further towards the North to the desert region. The Scythians however, when the Agathyrsians had warned them off, did not attempt any more to come to these, but led the Persians from the country of the Neuroi back to their own land.         125. [1] elaunun de ten taxisten ton straton us es ten Skythiken apiketo, enekyrse amfotereisi teisi moireisi tun Skytheun, entyxun de ediuke ypekferontas emeres odui. [2] kai oy gar aniei epiun o Dareios, oi Skuthai kata ta beboyleymena ypefeygon es tun apeipamenun ten sfeteren symmaxien, pruten de es tun Melagxlainun ten gein. [3] us de esbalontes toutoys etaraxan oi te Skuthai kai oi Persai, kategeonto oi Skuthai es tun Androfagun tous xuroys. taraxthentun de kai toutun ypeigon epi ten Neyrida. tarassomenun de kai toutun eisan ypofeugontes oi Skuthai es tous Agathursoys. [4] Agathursoi de oreontes kai tous omouroys feugontas ypo Skytheun kai tetaragmenoys, prin e sfi embalein tous Skuthas pempsantes keryka apegoreyon Skutheisi me epibainein tun sfeterun oyrun, prolegontes us ei peiresontai esbalontes, sfisi pruta diamaxesontai. [5] Agathyrsoi men proeipantes tauta eboetheon epi tous oyroys, erukein en noui exontes tous epiontas. Melagxlainoi de kai Androfagoi kai Neyroi esbalontun tun Perseun ama Skuthesi oyte pros alken etraponto epilathomenoi te teis apeileis efeygon aiei to pros boreu es ten eremon tetaragmenoi. [6] oi de Skuthai es men tous Agathursoys oyketi apeipantas apikneonto, oi de ek teis Neyridos xures es ten sfeteren kategeonto toisi Perseisi.   
      126. Now as this went on for a long time and did not cease, Dareios sent a horseman to Idanthyrsos king of the Scythians and said as follows: "Thou most wondrous man, why dost thou fly for ever, when thou mightest do of these two things one?--if thou thinkest thyself able to make opposition to my power, stand thou still and cease from wandering abroad, and fight; but if thou dost acknowledge thyself too weak, cease then in that case also from thy course, and come to speech with thy master, bringing to him gifts of earth and water."         126. [1] us de pollon touto egineto kai oyk epaueto, pempsas Dareios ippea para ton Skytheun basilea Idanthyrson elege tade. <<daimonie andrun, ti feugeis aiei, exeon toi tunde ta etera poieein; ei men gar axioxreos dokeeis einai seuytui toisi emoisi pregmasi antiutheinai, su de tas te kai paysamenos planes maxesthai. ei de sygginuskeai einai essun, su de kai oytu paysamenos tou dromoy despotei tui sui dura ferun gein te kai ydur elthe es logoys.>>   
      127. To this the king of the Scythians Idanthyrsos made answer thus: "My case, O Persian, stands thus:--Never yet did I fly because I was afraid, either before this time from any other man, or now from thee; nor have I done anything different now from that which I was wont to do also in time of peace: and as to the cause why I do not fight with thee at once, this also I will declare to thee. We have neither cities nor land sown with crops, about which we should fear lest they should be captured or laid waste, and so join battle more speedily with you; but if it be necessary by all means to come to this speedily, know that we have sepulchres in which our fathers are buried; therefore come now, find out these and attempt to destroy them, and ye shall know then whether we shall fight with you for the sepulchres or whether we shall not fight. Before that however, unless the motion comes upon us, we shall not join battle with thee. About fighting let so much as has been said suffice; but as to masters, I acknowledge none over me but Zeus my ancestor and Hestia the queen of the Scythians. To thee then in place of gifts of earth and water I shall send such things as it is fitting that thou shouldest receive; and in return for thy saying that thou art my master, for that I say, woe betide thee." This is the proverbial "saying of the Scythians."         127. [1] pros tauta o Skytheun basileus Idanthyrsos legei tade. <<oytu to emon exei, u Persa. egu oydena ku anthrupun deisas efygon oyte proteron oyte nun se feugu, oyde ti neuteron eimi poiesas nun e kai en eirene euthea poieein. [2] o ti de oyk aytika maxomai toi, egu kai touto semaneu. emin oyte astea oyte gei pefyteymene esti, tun peri deisantes me alui, e karei taxuteron an ymin symmisgoimen es maxen. ei de deoi pantus es touto kata taxos apikneesthai, tygxanoysi emin eontes tafoi patruioi. [3] ferete, toutoys aneyrontes sygxeein peirasthe aytous, kai gnusesthe tote eite ymin maxesometha peri tun tafun eite kai oy maxesometha. proteron de, en me emeas logos aireei, oy symmixomen toi. [4] amfi men maxei tosauta eiresthu, despotas de emous egu Dia te nomizu ton emon progonon kai Istien ten Skytheun basileian mounoys einai. soi de anti men durun geis te kai ydatos dura pempsu toiauta oia soi prepei elthein, anti de tou oti despotes efesas einai emos, klaiein legu.>> touto esti e apo Skytheun rheisis.   
      128. The herald then had departed to report this to Dareios; and the kings of the Scythians, having heard mention of subjection to a master, were filled with wrath. They sent accordingly the division which was appointed to be joined with the Sauromatai, that division of which Scopasis was in command, bidding them come to speech with the Ionians, namely those who were guarding the bridge of the Ister, and meanwhile they who were left behind resolved not to lead the Persians wandering about any more, but to attack them constantly as they were getting provisions. Therefore they observed the soldiers of Dareios as they got provisions, and did that which they had determined: and the cavalry of the Scythians always routed that of the enemy, but the Persian horsemen as they fled fell back upon the men on foot, and these would come up to their assistance; and meanwhile the Scythians when they had driven in the cavalry turned back, fearing the men on foot. Also by night the Scythians used to make similar attacks:         128. [1] o men de keiryx oixukee aggeleun tauta Dareiui, oi de Skytheun basilees akousantes teis doylosunes to oynoma orgeis eplesthesan. [2] ten men de meta Sayromateun moiran taxtheisan, teis Erxe Skupasis, pempoysi Iusi keleuontes es logoys apikesthai, toutoisi oi ton Istron ezeygmenon efroureon. aytun de toisi ypoleipomenoisi edoxe planan men meketi Persas, sita de ekastote anaireomenoisi epitithesthai. numuntes un sita anaireomenoys tous Dareioy epoieyn ta beboyleymena. [3] e men de ippos ten ippon aiei trapeske e tun Skytheun, oi de tun Perseun ippotai feugontes esepipton es ton pezon, o de pezos an epekouree. oi de Skuthai esaraxantes ten ippon ypestrefon ton pezon fobeomenoi. epoieonto de kai tas nuktas paraplesias prosbolas oi Skuthai.   
      129. and the thing which, strange to say, most helped the Persians and hindered the Scythians in their attacks upon the camp of Dareios, I will mention, namely the voice of the asses and the appearance of the mules; for Scythia produces neither ass nor mule, as I have declared before, nor is there at all in the Scythian country either ass or mule on account of the cold. The asses accordingly by riotously braying used to throw into confusion the cavalry of the Scythians; and often, as they were in the middle of riding against the Persians, when the horses heard the voice of the asses they turned back in confusion and were possessed with wonder, pricking up their ears, because they had never heard such a voice nor seen the form of the creature before.         129. [1] to de toisi Perseisi te En summaxon kai toisi Skutheisi antixoon epitithemenoisi tui Dareioy stratopedui, thuma megiston ereu, tun te onun e fune kai tun emionun to eidos. [2] oyte gar onon oyte emionon gei e Skythike ferei, us kai proteron moi dedelutai, oyde esti en tei Skythikei pasei xurei to parapan oyte onos oyte emionos dia ta psuxea. ybrizontes un oi onoi etarasson ten ippon tun Skytheun. [3] pollakis de epelaynontun epi tous Persas metaxu okus akouseian oi ippoi tun onun teis funeis, etarassonto te ypostrefomenoi kai en thumati eskon, ortha istantes ta uta, ate oyte akousantes proteron funeis toiautes oyte idontes to eidos. tauta men nyn epi smikron ti eferonto tou polemoy.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [130]

     130. So far then the Persians had the advantage for a small part of the war. But the Scythians, whenever they saw that the Persians were disquieted, then in order that they might remain a longer time in Scythia and in remaining might suffer by being in want of everything, would leave some of their own cattle behind with the herdsmen, while they themselves rode out of the way to another place, and the Persians would come upon the cattle and take them, and having taken them they were elated at what they had done.         130. [1] oi de Skuthai okus tous Persas idoien tethorybemenoys, ina paramenoien te epi pleu xronon en tei Skythikei kai paramenontes aniuiato tun pantun epideyees eontes, epoieon toiade. okus tun probatun tun sfeterun aytun katalipoien meta tun nomeun, aytoi an ypexelaynon es allon xuron. oi de an Persai epelthontes labeskon ta probata kai labontes epeeironto an tui pepoiemenui.   
      131. As this happened often, at length Dareios began to be in straits; and the kings of the Scythians perceiving this sent a herald bearing as gifts to Dareios a bird and a mouse and a frog and five arrows. The Persians accordingly asked the bearer of the gifts as to the meaning of the gifts which were offered; but he said that nothing more had been commanded to him but to give them and get away as speedily as possible; and he bade the Persians find out for themselves, if they had wisdom, that which the gifts were meant to express.         131. [1] pollakis de toioutoy ginomenoy, telos Dareios te en aporieisi eixeto, kai oi Skytheun basilees mathontes touto epempon keryka dura Dareiui feronta ornitha te kai mun kai batraxon kai oistous pente. [2] Persai de ton feronta ta dura epeiruteon ton noon tun didomenun. o de oyden. efe oi epestalthai allo e donta ten taxisten apallassesthai. aytous de tous Persas ekeleye, ei sofoi eisi, gnunai to thelei ta dura legein. tauta akousantes oi Persai eboyleuonto.   
      132. Having heard this the Persians took counsel with one another; and the opinion of Dareios was that the Scythians were giving to him both themselves and also earth and water, making his conjecture by this, namely that a mouse is produced in the earth and feeds on the same produce of the earth as man, and a frog in the water, while a bird has great resemblance to a horse; and moreover that in giving the arrows they were delivering up their own might in battle. This was the opinion expressed by Dareios; but the opinion of Gobryas, one of the seven men who killed the Magian, was at variance with it, for he conjectured that the gifts expressed this: "Unless ye become birds and fly up into the heaven, O Persians, or become mice and sink down under the earth, or become frogs and leap into the lakes, ye shall not return back home, but shall be smitten by these arrows."         132. [1] Dareioy men nyn e gnume En Skuthas euytui didonai sfeas te aytous kai gein te kai ydur, eikazun teide, us mus men en gei ginetai karpon ton ayton anthrupui siteomenos, batraxos de en ydati, ornis de malista eoike ippui, tous de oistous us ten euytun alken paradidousi. [2] ayte men Dareiui apededekto e gnume. synestekee de tautei tei gnume e Gobrueu, tun andrun tun epta enos tun ton Magon katelontun, eikazontos ta dura legein [3] <<en me ornithes genomenoi anapteisthe es ton oyranon, u Persai, e mues genomenoi kata teis geis kataduete, e batraxoi genomenoi es tas limnas espedesete, oyk aponostesete opisu ypo tunde tun toxeymatun ballomenoi.>>   
      133. The Persians then, I say, were making conjecture of the gifts: and meanwhile the single division of the Scythians, that which had been appointed at first to keep guard along the Maiotian lake and then to go to the Ister and come to speech with the Ionians, when they arrived at the bridge spoke as follows: "Ionians, we have come bringing you freedom, if at least ye are willing to listen to us; for we are informed that Dareios gave you command to guard the bridge for sixty days only, and then, if he had not arrived within that time, to get you away to your own land. Now therefore, if ye do as we say, ye will be without blame from his part and without blame also from ours: stay the appointed days and then after that get you away." They then, when the Ionians had engaged themselves to do this, hastened back again by the quickest way:         133. [1] Persai men de ta dura eikazon. e de Skytheun mia moira e taxtheisa proteron men para ten Maieitin limnen froyreein, tote de epi ton Istron Iusi es logoys elthein, us apiketo epi ten gefyran, elege tade. [2] <<andres Iunes, eleytherien ekomen ymin ferontes, en per ge ethelete esakouein. pynthanometha gar Dareion enteilasthai ymin exekonta emeras mounas froyresantas ten gefyran, aytou me paragenomenoy en toutui tui xronui, apallassesthai es ten ymeteren. [3] nun un ymeis tade poleuntes ektos men esesthe pros ekeinoy aities, ektos de pros emeun. tas prokeimenas emeras parameinantes to apo toutoy apallassesthe.>> oytoi men nyn ypodexamenun Iunun poiesein tauta opisu ten taxisten epeigonto.   
      134. and meanwhile, after the coming of the gifts to Dareios, the Scythians who were left had arrayed themselves against the Persians with both foot and horse, meaning to engage battle. Now when the Scythians had been placed in battle-array, a hare darted through them into the space between the two armies, and each company of them, as they saw the hare, began to run after it. When the Scythians were thus thrown into disorder and were raising loud cries, Dareios asked what was this clamour arising from the enemy; and hearing that they were running after the hare, he said to those men to whom he was wont to say things at other times: "These men have very slight regard for us, and I perceive now that Gobryas spoke rightly about the Scythian gifts. Seeing then that now I myself too think that things are so, we have need of good counsel, in order that our retreat homewards may be safely made." To this replied Gobryas and said: "O king, even by report I was almost assured of the difficulty of dealing with these men; and when I came I learnt it still more thoroughly, since I saw that they were mocking us. Now therefore my opinion is, that as soon as night comes on, we kindle the camp-fires as we are wont to do at other times also, and deceive with a false tale those of our men who are weakest to endure hardships, and tie up all the asses and get us away, before either the Scythians make for the Ister to destroy the bridge or something be resolved by the Ionians which may be our ruin."         134. [1] Perseisi de meta ta dura elthonta Dareiui antetaxthesan oi ypoleifthentes Skuthai pezui kai ippoisi us symbaleontes. tetagmenoisi de toisi Skutheisi lagos es to meson dieixe. tun de us ekastoi urun ton lagon ediukon. taraxthentun de tun Skytheun kai boei xreumenun, eireto o Dareios tun antipolemiun ton thorybon. pythomenos de sfeas ton lagon diukontas, eipe ara pros tous per euthee kai ta alla legein [2] <<oytoi undres emeun pollon katafroneoysi, kai moi nun fainetai Gobrues eipai peri tun Skythikun durun orthus. us un oytu ede dokeontun kai aytui moi exein, boyleis agatheis dei, okus asfaleus e komide emin estai to opisu.>> pros tauta Gobrues eipe <<u basileu, egu sxedon men kai logui epistamen toutun tun andrun ten aporien, elthun de mallon exemathon, oreun aytous empaizontas emin. [3] nun un moi dokeei, epean taxista nux epelthei, ekkausantas ta pyra us euthamen kai allote poieein, tun stratiuteun tous asthenestatoys es tas talaipurias exapatesantas kai tous onoys pantas katadesantas apallassesthai, prin e kai epi ton Istron ithusai Skuthas lusontas ten gefyran, e kai ti Iusi doxas to emeas oion te estai exergasasthai.>> Gobrues men tauta synebouleye.   
      135. Thus Gobryas advised; and after this, when night came on, Dareios acted on this opinion. Those of his men who were weakened by fatigue and whose loss was of least account, these he left behind in the camp, and the asses also tied up: and for the following reasons he left behind the asses and the weaker men of his army,--the asses in order that they might make a noise which should be heard, and the men really because of their weakness, but on a pretence stated openly that he was about to attack the Scythians with the effective part of the army, and that they meanwhile were to be defenders of the camp. Having thus instructed those who were left behind, and having kindled camp-fires, Dareios hastened by the quickest way towards the Ister: and the asses, having no longer about them the usual throng, very much more for that reason caused their voice to be heard; so the Scythians, hearing the asses, supposed surely that the Persians were remaining in their former place.         135. [1] meta de nux te egineto kai Dareios exrato tei gnumei tautei. tous men kamaterous tun andrun kai tun En elaxistos apollymenun logos, kai tous onoys pantas katadesas katelipe aytou en tui stratopedu. [2] katelipe de tous te onoys kai tous astheneas teis stratieis tunde eineken, ina oi men onoi boen parexuntai. oi de anthrupoi astheneies men eineken kateleiponto, profasios de teisde delade, us aytos men sun tui katharui tou stratou epithesesthai melloi toisi Skutheisi, oytoi de to stratopedon touton ton xronon rhyoiato. [3] tauta toisi ypoleleimmenoisi ypothemenos o Dareios kai pyra ekkausas ten taxisten epeigeto epi ton Istron. oi de onoi eremuthentes tou omiloy oytu de mallon pollui iesan teis funeis. akousantes de oi Skuthai tun onun pagxy kata xuren elpizon tous Persas einai.   
      136. But when it was day, those who were left behind perceived that they had been betrayed by Dareios, and they held out their hands in submission to the Scythians, telling them what their case was; and the Scythians, when they heard this, joined together as quickly as possible, that is to say the two combined divisions of the Scythians and the single division, and also the Sauromatai, Budinoi, and Gelonians, and began to pursue the Persians, making straight for the Ister: but as the Persian army for the most part consisted of men on foot, and was not acquainted with the roads (the roads not being marked with tracks), while the Scythian army consisted of horsemen and was acquainted with the shortest cuts along the way, they missed one another and the Scythians arrived at the bridge much before the Persians. Then having learnt that the Persians had not yet arrived, they said to the Ionians who were in the ships: "Ionians, the days of your number are past, and ye are not acting uprightly in that ye yet remain waiting: but as ye stayed before from fear, so now break up the passage as quickly as ye may, and depart free and unhurt, feeling thankfulness both to the gods and to the Scythians: and him who was formerly your master we will so convince, that he shall never again march with an army upon any nation."         136. [1] emeres de genomenes gnontes oi ypoleifthentes us prodedomenoi eien ypo Dareioy, xeiras te proeteinonto toisi Skutheisi kai elegon ta katekonta. oi de us ekoysan tauta ten taxisten systrafentes, ai te duo moirai tun Skytheun kai e mia kai Sayromatai kai Boydinoi kai Gelunoi, ediukon tous Persas ithu tou Istroy. [2] ate de tou Persikou men tou pollou eontos pezou stratou kai tas odous oyk epistamenoy, uste oy tetmemeneun tun odun, tou de Skythikou ippoteu kai ta suntoma teis odou epistamenoy, amartontes allelun, efthesan pollui oi Skuthai tous Persas epi ten gefyran apikomenoi. [3] mathontes de tous Persas oyku apigmenoys elegon pros tous Iunas eontas en teisi neysi <<andres Iunes, ai te emerai ymin tou arithmou dioixentai kai oy poieete dikaia eti paramenontes. [4] all' epei proteron deimainontes emenete, nun lusantes ton poron ten taxisten apite xairontes eleutheroi, theoisi te kai Skutheisi eidotes xarin. ton de proteron eonta ymeun despoten emeis parastesometha oytu uste epi medamous eti anthrupoys ayton strateusasthai.>>   
      137. Upon this the Ionians took counsel together; and Miltiades the Athenian on the one hand, who was commander and despot of the men of the Chersonese in Hellespont, was of opinion that they should follow the advice of the Scythians and set Ionia free: but Histiaios the Milesian was of the opposite opinion to this; for he said that at the present time it was by means of Dareios that each one of them was ruling as despot over a city; and if the power of Dareios should be destroyed, neither he himself would be able to bear rule over the Milesians, nor would any other of them be able to bear rule over any other city; for each of the cities would choose to have popular rather than despotic rule. When Histiaios declared his opinion thus, forthwith all turned to this opinion, whereas at the first they were adopting that of Miltiades.         137. [1] pros tauta Iunes eboyleuonto. Miltiadeu men tou Athenaioy, strategeontos kai tyranneuontos Khersonesiteun tun en Ellespontui, En gnume peithesthai Skutheisi kai eleytheroun Iunien, [2] Istiaioy de tou Milesioy enantie tautei, legontos us nun men dia Dareion ekastos aytun tyranneuei polios. teis Dareioy de dynamios katairetheises oyte aytos Milesiun oios te esesthai arxein oyte allon oydena oydamun. boylesesthai gar ekasten tun poliun demokrateesthai mallon e tyranneuesthai. [3] Istiaioy de gnumen tauten apodeiknymenoy aytika pantes Esan tetrammenoi pros tauten ten gnumen, proteron ten Miltiadeu aireomenoi.   
      138. Now these were they who gave the vote between the two opinions, and were men of consequence in the eyes of the king,--first the despots of the Hellespontians, Daphnis of Abydos, Hippoclos of Lampsacos, Herophantos of Parion, Metrodoros of Proconnesos, Aristagoras of Kyzicos, and Ariston of Byzantion, these were those from the Hellespont; and from Ionia, Strattis of Chios, Aiakes of Samos, Laodamas of Phocaia, and Histiaios of Miletos, whose opinion had been proposed in opposition to that of Miltiades; and of the Aiolians the only man of consequence there present was Aristagoras of Kyme.         138. [1] Esan de oytoi oi diaferontes te ten pseifon kai eontes logoy pros basileos, Ellespontiun men turannoi Dafnis te Abydenos kai Ippoklos Lampsakenos kai Erofantos Parienos kai Metroduros Prokonnesios kai Aristagores Kyzikenos kai Aristun Byzantios. [2] oytoi men Esan oi ex Ellespontoy, ap' Iunies de Strattis te Khios kai Aiakes Samios kai Laodamas Fukaieus kai Istiaios Milesios, tou En gnume e prokeimene enantie tei Miltiadeu. Aioleun de parein logimos mounos Aristagores, Kymaios.   
      139. When these adopted the opinion of Histiaios, they resolved to add to it deeds and words as follows, namely to break up that part of the bridge which was on the side towards the Scythians, to break it up, I say, for a distance equal to the range of an arrow, both in order that they might be thought to be doing something, though in fact they were doing nothing, and for fear that the Scythians might make an attempt using force and desiring to cross the Ister by the bridge: and in breaking up that part of the bridge which was towards Scythia they resolved to say that they would do all that which the Scythians desired. This they added to the opinion proposed, and then Histiaios coming forth from among them made answer to the Scythians as follows: "Scythians, ye are come bringing good news, and it is a timely haste that ye make to bring it; and ye on your part give us good guidance, while we on ours render to you suitable service. For, as ye see, we are breaking up the passage, and we shall show all zeal in our desire to be free: and while we are breaking up the bridge, it is fitting that ye should be seeking for those of whom ye speak, and when ye have found them, that ye should take vengeance on them on behalf of us as well as of yourselves in such manner as they deserve."         139. [1] oytoi un epeite ten Istiaioy aireonto gnumen, edoxe sfi pros tautei tade erga te kai epea prostheinai, teis men gefures luein ta kata tous Skuthas eonta, luein de oson toxeyma exikneetai, ina kai poieein ti dokeusi poieuntes meden kai oi Skuthai me peiruiato biumenoi kai boylomenoi diabeinai ton Istron kata ten gefyran, eipein te luontas teis gefures to es ten Skythiken exon us panta poiesoysi ta Skuthesi esti en edonei. [2] tauta men prosethekan tei gnumei. meta de ek pantun ypekrinato Istiaios tade legun. Andres Skuthai, xresta ekete ferontes kai es kairon, epeigesthe. kai ta te ap' ymeun emin, xrestus odoutai kai ta ap' emeun es ymeas epitedeus ypereteetai. us gar orate, kai luomen ton poron kai prothymien pasan exomen thelontes einai eleutheroi. [3] en ui de emeis tade luomen, ymeas kairos esti dizesthai ekeinoys, eyrontas de yper te emeun kai ymeun aytun tisasthai oytu us keinoys prepei.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [140]

     140. The Scythians then, believing for the second time that the Ionians were speaking the truth, turned back to make search for the Persians, but they missed altogether their line of march through the land. Of this the Scythians themselves were the cause, since they had destroyed the pastures for horses in that region and had choked up with earth the springs of water; for if they had not done this, it would have been possible for them easily, if they desired it, to discover the Persians: but as it was, by those things wherein they thought they had taken their measures best, they failed of success. The Scythians then on their part were passing through those regions of their own land where there was grass for the horses and springs of water, and were seeking for the enemy there, thinking that they too were taking a course in their retreat through such country as this; while the Persians in fact marched keeping carefully to the track which they had made before, and so they found the passage of the river, though with difficulty: and as they arrived by night and found the bridge broken up, they were brought to the extreme of fear, lest the Ionians should have deserted them.         140. [1] Skuthai men to deuteron Iusi pisteusantes legein alethea ypestrefon epi zetesin tun Perseun, kai emartanon pases teis ekeinun diexodoy. aitioi de toutoy aytoi oi Skuthai egenonto,tas nomas tun ippun tas tautei diaftheirantes kai ta ydata sygxusantes. [2] ei gar tauta me epoiesan, pareixe an sfi, ei eboulonto, eypeteus exeyrein tous Persas. nun de ta sfi edokee arista beboyleusthai, kata tauta esfalesan. [3] Skuthai men nyn teis sfeteres xures tei xilos te toisi ippoisi kai ydata En, tautei diexiontes edizento tous antipolemioys, dokeontes kai ekeinoys dia toioutun ten apodresin poieesthai. oi de de Persai ton proteron euytun genomenon stibon, touton fylassontes eisan, kai oytu mogis eyron ton poron. [4] oia de nyktos te apikomenoi kai lelymenes teis gefures entyxontes, es pasan arrudien apikonto me sfeas oi Iunes eusi apoleloipotes.   
      141. Now there was with Dareios an Egyptian who had a voice louder than that of any other man on earth, and this man Dareios ordered to take his stand upon the bank of the Ister and to call Histiaios of Miletos. He accordingly proceeded to do so; and Histiaios, hearing the first hail, produced all the ships to carry the army over and also put together the bridge.         141. [1] En de peri Dareion aner Aiguptios funeun megiston anthrupun. touton ton andra katastanta epi tou xeileos tu Istroy ekeleye Dareios kaleein Istiaion Milesion. o men de epoiee tauta, Istiaios de epakousas tui prutui keleusmati tas te neas apasas pareixe diaporthmeuein ten stratien kai ten gefyran ezeyxe.   
      142. Thus the Persians escaped, and the Scythians in their search missed the Persians the second time also: and their judgment of the Ionians is that on the one hand, if they be regarded as free men, they are the most worthless and cowardly of all men, but on the other hand, if regarded as slaves, they are the most attached to their master and the least disposed to run away of all slaves. This is the reproach which is cast against the Ionians by the Scythians.         142. [1] Persai men un oytu ekfeugoysi Skuthai de dizemenoi kai to deuteron emarton tun Perseun, kai touto men us eontas Iunas eleytheroys kakistoys te kai anandrotatoys krinoysi einai apantun anthrupun, touto de, us doulun eontun ton logon poieumenoi, andrapoda filodespota fasi einai kai adresta. tauta men de Skutheisi es Iunas aperriptai.    
      143. Dareios then marching through Thrace arrived at Sestos in the Chersonese; and from that place, he passed over himself in his ships to Asia, but to command his army in Europe he left Megabazos a Persian, to whom Dareios once gave honour by uttering in the land of Persia this saying:--Dareios was beginning to eat pomegranates, and at once when he opened the first of them, Artabanos his brother asked him of what he would desire to have as many as there were seeds in the pomegranate: and Dareios said that he would desire to have men like Megabazos as many as that in number, rather than to have Hellas subject to him. In Persia, I say, he honoured him by saying these words, and at this time he left him in command with eight myriads of his army.         143. [1] Dareios de dia teis Threikes poreyomenos apiketo es Seston teis Khersonesoy. entheuten de aytos men diebe teisi neysi es ten Asien, leipei de strategon en tei Eyrupei Megabazon andra Persen. tui Dareios kote eduke geras, toionde eipas en Perseisi epos. [2] ormemenoy Dareioy rhoias trugein, us anoixe taxista ten pruten tun rhoieun, eireto ayton o adelfeos Artabanos o ti bouloit' an oi tosouto pleithos genesthai osoi en tei rhoiei kokkoi. Dareios de eipe Megabazoys an oi tosoutoys arithmon genesthai boulesthai mallon e ten Ellada ypekoon. [3] en men de Persesi tauta min eipas etima, tote de ayton ypelipe strategon exonta teis stratieis teis euytou oktu myriadas.   
      144. This Megabazos uttered one saying whereby he left of himself an imperishable memory with the peoples of Hellespont: for being once at Byzantion he heard that the men of Calchedon had settled in that region seventeen years before the Byzantians, and having heard it he said that those of Calchedon at that time chanced to be blind; for assuredly they would not have chosen the worse place, when they might have settled in that which was better, if they had not been blind. This Megabazos it was who was left in command at that time in the land of the Hellespontians, and he proceeded to subdue all who did not take the side of the Medes.         144. [1] oytos de o Megabazos eipas tode to epos elipeto athanaton mnemen pros Ellespontiun. [2] genomenos gar en Byzantiui eputheto eptakaideka etesi proteron Kalxedonioys ktisantas ten xuren Byzantiun, pythomenos de efe Kalxedonioys touton ton xronon tygxanein eontas tyflous. oy gar an tou kallionos pareontos ktize xuroy ton aisxiona elesthai, ei me Esan tyfloi. [3] oytos de un tote o Megabazos strategos leiftheis en tei xurei Ellespontiun tous me medizontas katestrefeto.    
      145. He then was doing thus; and at this very same time a great expedition was being made also against Libya, on an occasion which I shall relate when I have first related this which follows.--The children's children of those who voyaged in the Argo, having been driven forth by those Pelasgians who carried away at Brauron the women of the Athenians,--having been driven forth I say by these from Lemnos, had departed and sailed to Lacedemon, and sitting down on Mount Taygetos they kindled a fire. The Lacedemonians seeing this sent a messenger to inquire who they were and from whence; and they answered the question of the messenger saying that they were Minyai and children of heroes who sailed in the Argo, for these, they said, had put in to Lemnos and propagated the race of which they sprang. The Lacedemonians having heard the story of the descent of the Minyai, sent a second time and asked for what purpose they had come into the country and were causing a fire to blaze. They said that they had been cast out by the Pelasgians, and were come now to the land of their fathers, for most just it was that this should so be done; and they said that their request was to be permitted to dwell with these, having a share of civil rights and a portion allotted to them of the land. And the Lacedemonians were content to receive the Minyai upon the terms which they themselves desired, being most of all impelled to do this by the fact that the sons of Tyndareus were voyagers in the Argo. So having received the Minyai they gave them a share of land and distributed them in the tribes; and they forthwith made marriages, and gave in marriage to others the women whom they brought with them from Lemnos.         145. [1] oytos men nyn tauta epresse. ton ayton de touton xronon egineto epi Libuen allos stratieis megas stolos, dia profasin ten egu apegesomai prodiegesamenos proteron tade. [2] tun ek teis Argous epibateun paidun paides exelasthentes ypo Pelasgun tun ek Brayrunos leisamenun tas Athenaiun gynaikas, ypo toutun exelasthentes ek, Lemnoy oixonto pleontes es Lakedaimona, izomenoi de en tui Teugetui pur anekaion. [3] Lakedaimonioi de idontes aggelon epempon peysomenoi tines te kai okothen eisi. oi de tui aggelui eirutunti elegon us eiesan men Minuai, paides de eien tun en tei Argoi pleontun eruun, prossxontas de toutoys es Leimnon fyteusai sfeas. [4] oi de Lakedaimonioi akekootes ton logon teis geneeis tun Minyeun, pempsantes to deuteron eirutun ti thelontes ekoien te es ten xuren kai pur aithoien. oi de efasan ypo Pelasgun ekblethentes ekein es tous pateras. dikaiotaton gar einai oytu touto ginesthai. deesthai de oikeein ama toutoisi moiran te timeun metexontes kai teis geis apolaxontes. [5] Lakedaimonioisi de eade dekesthai tous Minuas ep' oisi theloysi aytoi. malista de eneige sfeas uste poieein tauta tun Tyndarideun e naytilie en tei Argoi. dexamenoi de tous Minuas geis te metedosan kai es fylas diedasanto. oi de aytika men gamoys egeman, tas de ek Lemnoy egonto exedosan alloisi.   
      146. However, when no very long time had passed, the Minyai forthwith broke out into insolence, asking for a share of the royal power and also doing other impious things: therefore the Lacedemonians resolved to put them to death; and having seized them they cast them into a prison. Now the Lacedemonians put to death by night all those whom they put to death, but no man by day. When therefore they were just about to kill them, the wives of the Minyai, being native Spartans and daughters of the first citizens of Sparta, entreated to be allowed to enter the prison and come to speech every one with her own husband: and they let them pass in, not supposing that any craft would be practised by them. They however, when they had entered, delivered to their husbands all the garments which they were wearing, and themselves received those of their husbands: thus the Minyai having put on the women's clothes went forth out of prison as women, and having escaped in this manner they went again to Taygetos and sat down there.         146. [1] xronoy de oy pollou diexelthontos aytika oi Minuai exubrisan, teis te basileies metaiteontes kai alla poieontes oyk osia. [2] toisi un Lakedaimonioisi edoxe aytous apokteinai, syllabontes de sfeas katebalon es erkten. kteinoysi de tous an kteinusi Lakedaimonioi nyktos, met' emeren de oydena. [3] epei un emellon sfeas kataxresasthai, paraitesanto ai gynaikes tun Minyeun, eousai astai te kai tun prutun Spartieteun thygateres, eselthein te es ten erkten kai es logoys elthein ekaste tui euyteis andri. oi de sfeas pareikan, oydena dolon dokeontes ex ayteun esesthai. [4] ai de epeite eseilthon, poieoysi toiade. pasan ten eixon estheita paradousai toisi andrasi aytai ten tun andrun elabon, oi de Minuai enduntes ten gynaikeien estheita ate gynaikes exeisan exu, ekfygontes de tropui toioutui izonto aytis es to Teugeton.   
      147. Now at this very same time Theras the son of Autesion, the son of Tisamenos, the son of Thersander, the son of Polyneikes, was preparing to set forth from Lacedemon to found a settlement. This Theras, who was of the race of Cadmos, was mother's brother to the sons of Aristodemos, Eurysthenes and Procles; and while these sons were yet children, Theras as their guardian held the royal power in Sparta. When however his nephews were grown and had taken the power into their hands, then Theras, being grieved that he should be ruled by others after he had tasted of rule himself, said that he would not remain in Lacedemon, but would sail away to his kinsmen. Now there were in the island which is now called Thera, but formerly was called Callista, descendants of Membliaros the son of Poikiles, a Phenician: for Cadmos the son of Agenor in his search for Europa put in to land at the island which is now called Thera; and, whether it was that the country pleased him when he had put to land, or whether he chose to do so for any other reason, he left in this island, besides other Phenicians, Membliaros also, of his own kinsmen. These occupied the island called Callista for eight generations of men, before Theras came from Lacedemon.         147. [1] ton de ayton touton xronon Theras o Aytesiunos tou Tisamenou tou Thersandroy tou Polyneikeos estelle es apoikien ek Lakedaimonos. [2] En de o Theras oytos, genos eun Kadmeios, teis metros adelfeos toisi Aristodemoy paisi Eyrysthenei kai Prokles. eontun de eti tun paidun toutun nepiun epitropaien eixe o Theras ten en Spartei basileien. [3] ayxethentun de tun adelfideun kai paralabontun ten arxen, oytu de o Theras deinon poieumenos arxesthai yp' allun epeite egeusato arxeis, oyk efe menein en tei Lakedaimoni all' apopleusesthai es tous syggeneas. [4] Esan de en tei nun Therei kaleomene nesui, proteron de Kallistei tei aytei tautei, apogonoi Membliaroy tou Poikileu andros Foinikos. Kadmos gar o Agenoros Eyrupen dizemenos prosesxe es ten nun Theren kaleomenen. prossxonti de eite de oi e xure erese, eite kai allus ethelese poieisai touto. kataleipei gar en tei nesui tautei alloys te tun Foinikun kai de kai tun euytou syggeneun Membliaron. [5] oytoi enemonto ten Kallisten kaleomenen epi geneas, prin e Theran elthein ek Lakedaimonos, oktu andrun.   
      148. To these then, I say, Theras was preparing to set forth, taking with him people from the tribes, and intending to settle together with those who have been mentioned, not with any design to drive them out, but on the contrary claiming them very strongly as kinfolk. And when the Minyai after having escaped from the prison went and sat down on Taygetos, Theras entreated of the Lacedemonians, as they were proposing to put them to death, that no slaughter might take place, and at the same time he engaged himself to take them forth out of the land. The Lacedemonians having agreed to this proposal, he sailed away with three thirty-oared galleys to the descendants of Membliaros, not taking with him by any means all the Minyai, but a few only; for the greater number of them turned towards the land of the Paroreatai and Caucones, and having driven these out of their country, they parted themselves into six divisions and founded in their territory the following towns,--Lepreon, Makistos, Phrixai, Pyrgos, Epion, Nudion; of these the Eleians sacked the greater number within my own lifetime. The island meanwhile got its name of Thera after Theras who led the settlement.         148. [1] epi toutoys de un o Theras leun exun apo tun fyleun estelle, synoikesun toutoisi kai oydamus exelun aytous alla karta oikeioumenos. [2] epeite de kai oi Minuai ekdrantes ek teis erkteis izonto es to Teugeton, tun Lakedaimoniun boyleyomenun sfeas apollunai paraiteetai o Theras, okus mete fonos genetai, aytos te ypedeketo sfeas exaxein ek teis xures. [3] sygxuresantun de tei gnumei tun Lakedaimoniun, trisi triekonteroisi es tous Membiaroy apogonoys epluse, oyti pantas agun tous Minuas all' oligoys tinas. [4] oi gar pleunes aytun etraponto es tous Parureatas kai Kaukunas, toutoys de exelasantes ek teis xures sfeas aytous ex moiras dieilon, kai epeita ektisan polias tasde en aytoisi, Lepreon Makiston Frixas Purgon Epion Noudion. toyteun de tas pleunas ep' emeo Eleioi eporthesan. tei de nesui epi tou oikisteu Thera e epunymie egeneto.   
      149. And since his son said that he would not sail with him, therefore he said that he would leave him behind as a sheep among wolves; and in accordance with that saying this young man got the name of Oiolycos, and it chanced that this name prevailed over his former name: then from Oiolycos was begotten Aigeus, after whom are called the Aigeidai, a powerful clan in Sparta: and the men of this tribe, since their children did not live to grow up, established by the suggestion of an oracle a temple to the Avenging Deities of Laios and Oedipus, and after this the same thing was continued in Thera by the descendants of these men.         149. [1] o de pais oy gar efe oi sympleusesthai, toigarun efe ayton kataleipsein oin en lukoisi. epi toy epeos toutoy oynoma tui neeniskui toutui Oiolykos egeneto, kai kus to oynoma touto epekratese. Oiolukoy de ginetai Aigeus, ep' oy Aigeidai kaleontai fyle megale en Spartei. [2] toisi de en tei fylei tautei andrasi oy gar ypemeinan ta tekna, idrusanto ek theopropioy Erinuun tun Laioy te kai Oidipodeu iron. kai meta touto ypemeinan .... tuyto touto kai en Theei toisi apo tun andrun toutun gegonosi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [150]

     150. Up to this point of the story the Lacedemonians agree in their report with the men of Thera; but in what is to come it is those of Thera alone who report that it happened as follows. Grinnos the son of Aisanios, a descendant of the Theras who has been mentioned, and king of the island of Thera, came to Delphi bringing the offering of a hecatomb from his State; and there were accompanying him, besides others of the citizens, also Battos the son of Polymnestos, who was by descent of the family of Euphemos of the race of the Minyai. Now when Grinnos the king of the Theraians was consulting the Oracle about other matters, the Pythian prophetess gave answer bidding him found a city in Libya; and he made reply saying: "Lord, I am by this time somewhat old and heavy to stir, but do thou bid some one of these younger ones do this." As he thus said he pointed towards Battos. So far at that time: but afterwards when he had come away they were in difficulty about the saying of the Oracle, neither having any knowledge of Libya, in what part of the earth it was, nor venturing to send a colony to the unknown.         150. [1] mexri men nyn toutoy tou logoy Lakedaimonioi Theraioisi kata tayta legoysi, to de apo toutoy mounoi Theraioi ude genesthai legoysi. [2] Grinnos o Aisanioy eun Psera toutoy apogonos kai basileuun Theres teis nesoy apiketo es Delfous, agun apo teis polios ekatomben. eiponto de oi kai alloi tun polieteun kai de kai Battos o Polymnestoy, eun genos Eyfemides tun Minyeun. [3] xreumenui de tui Grinnui tui, basilei tun Theraiun peri allun xrai e Pythie ktizein en Libue polin. o de ameibeto legun <<egu men unax presbuteros te ede eimi kai barus aeiresthai. su de tina tunde tun neuterun keleye tauta poieein.>> ama te elege tauta kai edeiknye es ton Batton. [4] tote men tosauta. meta de apelthontes alogien eixon tou xresterioy, oyte Libuen eidotes okoy geis eie oyte tolmuntes es afanes xreima apostellein apoikien.   
      151. Then after this for seven years there was no rain in Thera, and in these years all the trees in their island were withered up excepting one: and when the Theraians consulted the Oracle, the Pythian prophetess alleged this matter of colonising Libya to be the cause. As then they had no remedy for their evil, they sent messengers to Crete, to find out whether any of the Cretans or of the sojourners in Crete had ever come to Libya. These as they wandered round about the country came also the city of Itanos, and there they met with a fisher for purple named Corobios, who said that he had been carried away by winds and had come to Libya, and in Libya to the island of Platea. This man they persuaded by payment of money and took him to Thera, and from Thera there set sail men to explore, at first not many in number; and Corobios having guided them to this same island of Platea, they left Corobios there, leaving behind with him provisions for a certain number of months, and sailed themselves as quickly as possible to make report about the island to the men of Thera.         151. [1] epta de eteun meta tauta oyk ye ten Theren, en toisi ta dendrea panta sfi ta en tei nesui plen enos exayanthe. xreumenoisi de toisi Theraioisi proefere e Pythie ten es Libuen apoikien. [2] epeite de kakou oyden En sfi meixos, pempoysi es Kreten aggeloys dizemenoys ei tis Kretun e metoikun apigmenos eie es Libuen. periplanumenoi de ayten oytoi apikonto kai es Itanon polin, en tautei de symmisgoysi andri porfyrei tui oynoma En Korubios, os efe yp' anemun apeneixtheis apikesthai es Libuen kai Libues es Platean neison. [3] misthui, de touton peisantes Egon es Theren, ek de Theres epleon kataskopoi andres ta pruta oy polloi. kategesamenoy de tou Korubioy es ten neison tauten de ten Platean, ton men Korubion leipoysi, sitia katalipontes osun de menun, aytoi de epleon ten taxisten apaggeleontes Theraioisi peri teis nesoy.   
      152. Since however these stayed away longer than the time appointed, Corobios found himself destitute; and after this a ship of Samos, of which the master was Colaios, while sailing to Egypt was carried out of its course and came to this island of Platea; and the Samians hearing from Corobios the whole story left him provisions for a year. They themselves then put out to sea from the island and sailed on, endeavouring to reach Egypt but carried away continually by the East Wind; and as the wind did not cease to blow, they passed through the Pillars of Heracles and came to Tartessos, guided by divine providence. Now this trading-place was at that time untouched by any, so that when these returned back home they made profit from their cargo greater than any other Hellenes of whom we have certain knowledge, with the exception at least of Sostratos the son of Laodamas the Eginetan, for with him it is not possible for any other man to contend. And the Samians set apart six talents, the tenth part of their gains, and had a bronze vessel made like an Argolic mixing- bowl with round it heads of griffins projecting in a row; and this they dedicated as an offering in the temple of Hera, setting as supports under it three colossal statues of bronze seven cubits in height, resting upon their knees. By reason first of this deed great friendship was formed by those of Kyrene and Thera with the Samians.         152. [1] apodemeontun de toutun pleu xronon tou sygkeimenoy ton Korubion epelipe ta panta, meta de tauta neus Samie, teis naukleros En Kulaios, pleoysa ep' Aiguptoy apeneixthe es ten Platean tauten. pythomenoi de oi Samioi para tou Korubioy ton panta logon, sitia oi eniaytou kataleipoysi. [2] aytoi de anaxthentes ek teis nesoy kai glixomenoi Aiguptoy epleon, apoferomenoi apeliutei anemui. kai oy gar aniei to pneuma, Erakleas stelas diekperesantes apikonto es Tartesson, theiei pompei xreumenoi. [3] to de emporion touto En akeraton touton ton xronon, uste aponostesantes oytoi opisu megista de Ellenun pantun tun emeis atrekeien idmen ek fortiun ekerdesan, meta ge Sustraton ton Laodamantos Aigineten. toutui gar oyk oia te esti erisai allon. [4] oi de Samioi ten dekaten tun epikerdiun exelontes ex talanta epoiesanto xalkeion kreteiros Argolikou tropon. perix de aytou grypun kefalai prokrossoi eisi. kai anethekan es to Eraion, ypostesantes aytu treis xalkeoys kolossous eptapexeas toisi gounasi erereismenoys. [5] Kyrenaioisi de kai Theraioisi es Samioys apo toutoy tou ergoy pruta filiai megalai synekrethesan.   
      153. The Theraians meanwhile, when they arrived at Thera after having left Corobios in the island, reported that they had colonised an island on the coast of Libya: and the men of Thera resolved to send one of every two brothers selected by lot and men besides taken from all the regions of the island, which are seven in number; and further that Battos should be both their leader and their king. Thus then they sent forth two fifty-oared galleys to Platea.         153. [1] oi de Theraioi epeite ton Korubion lipontes en tei nesui apikonto es ten Theren, apeggellon us sfi eie neisos epi Libuei ektismene. Theraioisi de eade adelfeon te ap' adelfeou pempein palui lagxanonta kai apo tun xurun apantun epta eontun andras, einai de sfeun kai egemona kai basilea Batton. oytu de stelloysi duo pentekonteroys es ten Platean.    
      154. This is the report of the Theraians; and for the remainder of the account from this point onwards the Theraians are in agreement with the men of Kyrene: from this point onwards, I say, since in what concerns Battos the Kyrenians tell by no means the same tale as those of Thera; for their account is this:--There is in Crete a city called Oaxos in which one Etearchos became king, who when he had a daughter, whose mother was dead, named Phronime, took to wife another woman notwithstanding. She having come in afterwards, thought fit to be a stepmother to Phronime in deed as well as in name, giving her evil treatment and devising everything possible to her hurt; and at last she brings against her a charge of lewdness and persuades her husband that the truth is so. He then being convinced by his wife, devised an unholy deed against the daughter: for there was in Oaxos one Themison, a merchant of Thera, whom Etearchos took to himself as a guest-friend and caused him to swear that he would surely serve him in whatsoever he should require: and when he had caused him to swear this, he brought and delivered to him his daughter and bade him take her away and cast her into the sea. Themison then was very greatly vexed at the deceit practised in the matter of the oath, and he dissolved his guest-friendship and did as follows, that is to say, he received the girl and sailed away, and when he got out into the open sea, to free himself from blame as regards the oath which Etearchos had made him swear, he tied her on each side with ropes and let her down into the sea, and then drew her up and came to Thera.         154. [1] tauta de Theraioi legoysi, ta d' epiloipa tou logoy symferontai ede Theraioi Kyrenaioisi. Kyrenaioi gar ta peri Batton oydamus omologeoysi Theraioisi legoysi gar oytu. esti teis Kretes Oaxos polis, en tei egeneto Etearxos basileus, os epi thygatri ametori tei oynoma En Fronime, epi tautei egeme allen gynaika. [2] e de epeselthousa edikaioy kai tui ergui einai metryie tei Fronimei, parexoysa te kaka kai pan ep' aytei mexanumene, kai telos maxlosunen epeneikasa oi peithei ton andra tauta exein oytu. o de anagnustheis ypo teis gynaikos ergon oyk osion emexanato epi tei; thygatri. [3] En gar de Themisun aner Theraios emporos en tei Oaxui. touton o Etearxos paralabun epi xeinia exorkoi E men oi diekonesein o ti an deethei. epeite de exurkuse, agagun oi paradidoi ten euytou thygatera kai tauten ekeleye katapontusai apagagonta. [4] o de Themisun periemektesas tei apatei tou orkoy kai dialysamenos ten xeinien epoiee toiade. paralabun ten paida apeplee. us de egineto en tui pelagei, aposieumenos ten exorkusin tou Etearxoy, sxoinioisi ayten diadesas kateike es to pelagos, anaspasas de apiketo es ten Theren.   
      155. After that, Polymnestos, a man of repute among the Theraians, received Phronime from him and kept her as his concubine; and in course of time there was born to him from her a son with an impediment in his voice and lisping, to whom, as both Theraians and Kyrenians say, was given the name Battos, but I think that some other name was then given, and he was named Battos instead of this after he came to Libya, taking for himself this surname from the oracle which was given to him at Delphi and from the rank which he had obtained; for the Libyans call a king battos: and for this reason, I think, the Pythian prophetess in her prophesying called him so, using the Libyan tongue, because she knew that he would be a king in Libya. For when he had grown to be a man, he came to Delphi to inquire about his voice; and when he asked, the prophetess thus answered him: 
"For a voice thou camest, O Battos, but thee lord Phoebus Apollo 
 Sendeth as settler forth to the Libyan land sheep-abounding," just as if she should say using the Hellenic tongue, "For a voice thou camest, O king." He thus made answer: "Lord, I came to thee to inquire concerning my voice, but thou answerest me other things which are not possible, bidding me go as a settler to Libya; but with what power, or with what force of men should I go?" Thus saying he did not at all persuade her to give him any other reply; and as she was prophesying to him again the same things as before, Battos departed while she was yet speaking, and went away to Thera.         155. [1] entheuten de ten Fronimen paralabun polumnestos, eun tun Theraiun aner dokimos, epallakeueto. xronoy de periiontos exegeneto oi pais isxofunos kai traylos, tui oynoma etethe Battos, us Theraioi te kai Kyrenaioi legoysi, us mentoi egu dokeu, allo ti. [2] Battos de metunomasthe, epeite es Libuen apiketo, apo te tou xresterioy tou genomenoy en Delfoisi aytui kai apo teis timeis ten esxe ten epunymien poieumenos. Libyes gar basilea batton kaleoysi, kai toutoy eineka dokeu thespizoysan ten Pythien kalesai min Libykei glussei, eidyian us basileus estai en Libuei. [3] epeite gar endruthe oytos, Elthe es Delfous peri teis funeis. epeirutunti de oi xrai e Pythie tade.     Batt' epi funen Elthes. anax de se Foibos Apollun
      es Libuen pempei melotrofon oikisteira,usper ei eipoi Elladi glussei xreumene <<u basileu, epi funen Elthes. [4] >> o d' ameibeto toiside. <<unax, egu men Elthon para se xresamenos peri teis funeis, su de moi alla adunata xrais, keleuun Libuen apoikizein teui dynami, koiei xeiri;>> tauta legun oyki epeithe alla oi xran. us de kata tayta ethespize oi kai proteron, oixeto metaxu apolipun o Battos es ten Theren.   
      156. After this there came evil fortune both to himself and to the other men of Thera; and the Theraians, not understanding that which befell them, sent to Delphi to inquire about the evils which they were suffering: and the Pythian prophetess gave them reply that if they joined with Battos in founding Kyrene in Libya, they would fare the better. After this the Theraians sent Battos with two fifty-oared galleys; and these sailed to Libya, and then came away back to Thera, for they did not know what else to do: and the Theraians pelted them with missiles when they endeavoured to land, and would not allow them to put to shore, but bade them sail back again. They accordingly being compelled sailed away back, and they made a settlement in an island lying near the coast of Libya, called, as was said before, Platea. This island is said to be of the same size as the now existing city of Kyrene.         156. [1] meta de aytui te toutui kai toisi alloisi Theraioisi synefereto paligkotus. agnoeuntes de tas symforas oi Theraioi epempon es Delfous peri tun pareontun kakun. [2] e de Pythie sfi exrese sygktizoysi Battui Kyrenen teis Libues ameinon prexein. apestellon meta tauta ton Batton oi Theraioi duo pentekonteroisi. plusantes de es ten Libuen oytoi, oy gar eixon o ti poieusi allo, opisu apallassonto es ten Theren. [3] oi de Theraioi katagomenoys eballon kai oyk eun tei gei prosisxein, all' opisu pluein ekeleyon. oi de anagkazomenoi opisu apepleon kai ektisan neison epi Libuei keimenen, tei oynoma, us kai proteron eirethe, esti Blatea. legetai de ise einai e neisos tei nun Kyrenaiun poli.    
      157. In this they continued to dwell two years; but as they had no prosperity, they left one of their number behind and all the rest sailed away to Delphi, and having come to the Oracle they consulted it, saying that they were dwelling in Libya and that, though they were dwelling there, they fared none the better: and the Pythian prophetess made answer to them thus: 
"Better than I if thou knowest the Libyan land sheep-abounding, 
 Not having been there than I who have been, at thy wisdom I wonder." Having heard this Battos and his companions sailed away back again; for in fact the god would not let them off from the task of settlement till they had come to Libya itself: and having arrived at the island and taken up him whom they had left, they made a settlement in Libya itself at a spot opposite the island, called Aziris, which is enclosed by most fair woods on both sides and a river flows by it on one side.         157. [1] tauten oikeontes duo etea, oyden gar sfi xreston synefereto, ena aytun katalipontes oi loipoi pantes apepleon es Delfous, apikomenoi de epi to xresterion exreunto, famenoi oikeein te ten Libuen kai oyden ameinon pressein oikeuntes. [2] e de Pythie sfi pros tauta xrai tade.     ai tu emeu Libuen melotrofon oidas ameinon,
      me elthun elthontos, agan agamai sofien sey.akousantes de toutun oi amfi ton Batton apepluon opisu. oy gar de sfeas apiei o theos teis apoikies, prin de apikuntai es ayten Libuen. [3] apikomenoi de es ten neison kai analabontes ton elipon, ektisan ayteis teis Libues xuron antion teis nesoy tui oynoma En Aziris. ton napai te kallistai ep' amfotera sygkleioysi kai potamos ta epi thatera pararreei.   
      158. In this spot they dwelt for six years; and in the seventh year the Libyans persuaded them to leave it, making request and saying that they would conduct them to a better region. So the Libyans led them from that place making them start towards evening; and in order that the Hellenes might not see the fairest of all the regions as they passed through it, they led them past it by night, having calculated the time of daylight: and this region is called Irasa. Then having conducted them to the so-called spring of Apollo, they said, "Hellenes, here is a fit place for you to dwell, for here the heaven is pierced with holes."         158. [1] touton oikeon ton xuron ex etea, ebdomui de sfeas etei paraitesamenoi oi Libyes us es ameinona xuron axoysi, anegnusan eklipein. [2] Egon de sfeas entheuten oi Libyes anastesantes pros esperen, kai ton kalliston tun xurun ina diexiontes oi Ellenes me idoien, symmetresamenoi ten uren teis emeres nyktos pareigon. esti de tui xurui toutu oynoma Irasa. [3] agagontes de sfeas epi krenen legomenen einai Apollunos eipan <<andres Ellenes, enthauta ymin epitedeon oikeein. enthauta gar o oyranos tetretai.   
      159. Now during the lifetime of the first settler Battos, who reigned forty years, and of his son Arkesilaos, who reigned sixteen years, the Kyrenians continued to dwell there with the same number as when they first set forth to the colony; but in the time of the third king, called Battos the Prosperous, the Pythian prophetess gave an oracle wherein she urged the Hellenes in general to sail and join with the Kyrenians in colonising Libya. For the Kyrenians invited them, giving promise of a division of land; and the oracle which she uttered was as follows: 
"Who to the land much desired, to Libya, afterwards cometh, 
 After the land be divided, I say he shall some day repent it." Then great numbers were gathered at Kyrene, and the Libyans who dwelt round had much land cut off from their possessions; therefore they with their king whose name was Adicran, as they were not only deprived of their country but also were dealt with very insolently by the Kyrenians, sent to Egypt and delivered themselves over to Apries king of Egypt. He then having gathered a great army of Egyptians, sent it against Kyrene; and the men of Kyrene marched out to the region of Irasa and to the spring Theste, and there both joined battle with the Egyptians and defeated them in the battle: for since the Egyptians had not before made trial of the Hellenes in fight and therefore despised them, they were so slaughtered that but few of them returned back to Egypt. In consequence of this and because they laid the blame of it upon Apries, the Egyptians revolted from him.         159. [1] epi men nyn Battoy te tou oikisteu teis zoes, arxantos epi tesserakonta etea, kai tou paidos aytou Arkesileu arxantos ekkaideka etea, oikeon oi Kyrenaioi eontes tosoutoi osoi arxen es ten apoikien estalesan. [2] epi de tou tritoy, Battoy tou eydaimonos kaleomenoy, Ellenas pantas urmese xresasa e Pythie pleein synoikesontas Kyrenaioisi Libuen. epekaleonto gar oi Kyrenaioi epi geis anadasmui. [3] exrese de ude exonta.     os de ken es Libuen polyeraton ysteron elthei
      gas anadaiomenas, meta oi poka fami melesein.[4] syllexthentos de omiloy pollou es ten Kyrenen, peritamnomenoi gein pollen oi perioikoi Libyes kai o basileus aytun tui oynoma En Adikran, oia teis te xures steriskomenoi kai periybrizomenoi ypo tun Kyrenaiun, pempsantes es Aigypton edosan sfeas aytous Apriei tui Aiguptoy basilei. [5] o de syllexas straton Aigyptiun pollon epempse epi ten Kyrenen. oi de Kyrenaioi ekstrateysamenoi es Irasa xuron kai epi krenen Thesten synebalon te toisi Aigyptioisi kai enikesan tei symbolei. [6] ate gar oy pepeiremenoi proteron oi Aiguptioi Ellenun kai paraxreumenoi dieftharesan oytu uste oligoi tines aytun apenostesan es Aigypton. anti toutun Aiguptioi kai tauta epimemfomenoi Apriei apestesan ap' aytou.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [160]

     160. This Battos had a son called Arkesilaos, who first when he became king made a quarrel with his own brothers, until they finally departed to another region of Libya, and making the venture for themselves founded that city which was then and is now called Barca; and at the same time as they founded this, they induced the Libyans to revolt from the Kyrenians. After this, Arkesilaos made an expedition against those Libyans who had received them and who had also revolted from Kyrene, and the Libyans fearing him departed and fled towards the Eastern tribes of Libyans: and Arkesilaos followed after them as they fled, until he arrived in his pursuit at Leucon in Libya, and there the Libyans resolved to attack him. Accordingly they engaged battle and defeated the Kyrenians so utterly that seven thousand hoplites of the Kyrenians fell there. After this disaster Arkesilaos, being sick and having swallowed a potion, was strangled by his brother Haliarchos, and Haliarchos was killed treacherously by the wife of Arkesilaos, whose name was Eryxo.         160. [1] toutoy de tou Battoy pais ginetai Arkesileus. os basileusas pruta toisi euytou adelfeoisi estasiase, es o min oytoi apolipontes oixonto es allon xuron teis Libues kai ep' euytun balomenoi ektisan polin tauten e tote kai nun Barke kleetai. ktizontes de ama ayten apistasi apo tun Kyrenaiun tous Libyas. [2] meta de Arkesileus es tous ypodexamenoys te tun Libuun kai apostantas tous aytous toutoys estrateueto. oi de Libyes deisantes ayton oixonto feugontes pros tous eoioys tun Libuun. [3] o de Arkesileus eipeto feugoysi, es oy en Leukuni te teis Libues egineto epidiukun kai edoxe toisi Libysi epithesthai oi. symbalontes de enikesan tous Kyrenaioys tosouto uste eptakisxilioys oplitas Kyrenaiun enthauta pesein. [4] meta de to truma touto Arkesileun men kamnonta te kai farmakon pepukota o adelfeos Aliarxos apopnigei, Aliarxon de e gyne e Arkesileu dolui kteinei, tei oynoma En Eryxu.   
      161. Then Battos the son of Arkesilaos succeeded to the kingdom, who was lame and not sound in his feet: and the Kyrenians with a view to the misfortune which had befallen them sent men to Delphi to ask what form of rule they should adopt, in order to live in the best way possible; and the Pythian prophetess bade them take to themselves a reformer of their State from Mantineia of the Arcadians. The men of Kyrene accordingly made request, and those of Mantineia gave them the man of most repute among their citizens, whose name was Demonax. This man therefore having come to Kyrene and having ascertained all things exactly, in the first place caused them to have three tribes, distributing them thus:--one division he made of the Theraians and their dependants, another of the Peloponnesians and Cretans, and a third of all the islanders. Then secondly for the king Battos he set apart domains of land and priesthoods, but all the other powers which the kings used to possess before, he assigned as of public right to the people.         161. [1] diedexato de ten basileien tou Arkesileu o pais Battos, xulos te eun kai oyk artipoys. oi de Kyrenaioi pros ten katalabousan symforen epempon es Delfous epeiresomenoys ontina tropon katastesamenoi kallista an oikeoien. [2] e de Pythie ekeleye ek Mantinees teis Arkadun katartisteira agagesthai. aiteon un oi Kyrenaioi, kai oi Mantinees edosan andra tun astun dokimutaton, tui oynoma En Demunax. [3] oytos un uner apikomenos es ten Kyrenen kai mathun ekasta touto men trifuloys epoiese sfeas, teide diatheis. Theraiun men kai tun perioikun mian moiran epoiese, allen de Peloponnesiun kai Kretun, triten de nesiuteun pantun. touto de tui basilei Battui temenea exelun kai irusunas, ta alla panta ta proteron eixon oi basilees es meson tui demui etheke.   
      162. During the reign of this Battos things continued to be thus, but in the reign of his son Arkesilaos there arose much disturbance about the offices of the State: for Arkesilaos son of Battos the Lame and of Pheretime said that he would not suffer it to be according as the Mantineian Demonax had arranged, but asked to have back the royal rights of his forefathers. After this, stirring up strife he was worsted and went as an exile to Samos, and his mother to Salamis in Cyprus. Now at that time the ruler of Salamis was Euelthon, the same who dedicated as an offering the censer at Delphi, a work well worth seeing, which is placed in the treasury of the Corinthians. To him having come, Pheretime asked him for an army to restore herself and her son to Kyrene. Euelthon however was ready to give her anything else rather than that; and she when she received that which he gave her said that this too was a fair gift, but fairer still would be that other gift of an army for which she was asking. As she kept saying this to every thing which was given, at last Euelthon sent out to her a present of a golden spindle and distaff, with wool also upon it: and when Pheretime uttered again the same saying about this present, Euelthon said that such things as this were given as gifts to women and not an army.         162. [1] epi men de toutoy tou Battoy oytu dietelee eonta, epi de tou toutoy paidos Arkesileu polle taraxe peri tun timeun egeneto. [2] Arkesileus gar o Battoy te tou xulou kai Feretimes oyk efe anexesthai kata ta o Mantineus Demunax etaxe, alla apaitee ta tun progonun gerea. entheuten stasiazun essuthe kai efyge es Samon, e de meter oi es Salamina teis Kuproy efyge. [3] teis de Salaminos touton ton xronon epekratee Eyelthun, os to en Delfoisi thymieterion, eon axiotheeton anetheke, to en tui Korinthiun thesayrui keetai. apikomene de para touton e Feretime edeeto stratieis e kataxei sfeas es ten Kyrenen. [4] o de Eyelthun pan mallon e stratien oi edidoy. e de lambanoysa to didomenon kalon men efe kai touto einai, kallion de ekeino, to dounai oi deomenei stratien. [5] touto epi panti gar tui didomenui elege, teleytaion oi exepempse duron o Eyelthun atrakton xruseon kai elakaten, prosein de kai eirion. epeipases de aytis teis Feretimes tuyto epos, o Eyelthun efe toioutoisi gynaikas dureesthai all' oy stratiei.   
      163. Arkesilaos meanwhile, being in Samos, was gathering every one together by a promise of dividing land; and while a great host was being collected, Arkesilaos set out to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle about returning from exile: and the Pythian prophetess gave him this answer: "For four named Battos and four named Arkesilaos, eight generations of men, Loxias grants to you to be kings of Kyrene, but beyond this he counsels you not even to attempt it. Thou however must keep quiet when thou hast come back to thy land; and if thou findest the furnace full of jars, heat not the jars fiercely, but let them go with a fair wind: if however thou heat the furnace fiercely, enter not thou into the place flowed round by water; for if thou dost thou shalt die, both thou and the bull which is fairer than all the rest."         163. [1] o de Arkesileus touton ton xronon eun en Samui synegeire panta andra epi geis anadasmui. syllegomenoy de stratou pollou, estale es Delfous Arkesileus xresomenos tui xresteriui peri katodoy. [2] e de Pythie oi xrai tade. <<epi men tesseras Battoys kai Arkesileus tesseras, oktu andrun geneas, didoi ymin Loxies basileuein Kyrenes, [3] pleon mentoi toutoy oyde peirasthai paraineei. su mentoi esyxos einai katelthun es ten seuytou. en de ten kaminon eyreis pleen amforeun, me exopteseis tous amforeas all' apopempe kat' oyron. ei de exopteseis ten kaminon, me eseltheis es ten amfirryton. ei de me apothaneai kai aytos kai tauros o kallisteuun.>>   
      164. Thus the Pythian prophetess gave answer to Arkesilaos; and he, having taken to him those in Samos, made his return to Kyrene; and when he had got possession of the power, he did not remember the saying of the Oracle but endeavoured to exact penalties from those of the opposite faction for having driven him out. Of these some escaped out of the country altogether, but some Arkesilaos got into his power and sent them away to Cyprus to be put to death. These were driven out of their course to Cnidos, and the men of Cnidos rescued them and sent them away to Thera. Some others however of the Kyrenians fled to a great tower belonging to Aglomachos a private citizen, and Arkesilaos burnt them by piling up brushwood round. Then after he had done the deed he perceived that the Oracle meant this, in that the Pythian prophetess forbade him, if he found the jars in the furnace, to heat them fiercely; and he voluntarily kept away from the city of the Kyrenians, fearing the death which had been prophesied by the Oracle and supposing that Kyrene was flowed round by water. Now he had to wife a kinswoman of his own, the daughter of the king of Barca whose name was Alazeir: to him he came, and men of Barca together with certain of the exiles from Kyrene, perceiving him going about in the market-place, killed him, and also besides him his father-in-law Alazeir. Arkesilaos accordingly, having missed the meaning of the oracle, whether with his will or against his will, fulfilled his own destiny.         164. [1] tauta e Pythie Arkesileui xrai. o de paralabun tous ek teis Samoy kateilthe es ten Kyrenen, kai epikratesas tun pregmatun tou manteioy oyk ememneto, alla dikas tous antistasiutas aitee teis euytou fygeis. [2] tun de oi men to parapan ek teis xures apallassonto, tous de tinas xeirusamenos o Arkesileus es Kupron apesteile epi diafthorei. toutoys men nyn Knidioi apeneixthentas pros ten sfeteren errusanto kai es Theren apesteilan. eteroys de tinas tun Kyrenaiun es purgon megan Aglumaxoy katafygontas idiutikon ylen perinesas o Arkesileus eneprese. [3] mathun de ep' exergasmenoisi to manteion eon touto, oti min e Pythie oyk ea eyronta en tei kaminui tous amforeas exopteisai, ergeto ekun teis tun Kyrenaiun polios, deimainun te ton kexresmenon thanaton kai dokeun amfirryton ten Kyrenen einai. [4] eixe de gynaika syggenea euytou, thygatera de tun Barkaiun tou basileos, tui oynoma En Alazeir. para touton apikneetai, kai min Barkaioi te andres kai tun ek Kyrenes fygadun tines katamathontes agorazonta kteinoysi, pros de kai ton pentheron aytou Alazeira. Arkesileus men nyn eite ekun eite aekun amartun tou xresmou exeplese moiran ten euytou.   
      165. His mother Pheretime meanwhile, so long as Arkesilaos having worked evil for himself dwelt at Barca, herself held the royal power of her son at Kyrene, both exercising his other rights and also sitting in council: but when she heard that her son had been slain in Barca, she departed and fled to Egypt: for she had on her side services done for Cambyses the son of Cyrus by Arkesilaos, since this was the Arkesilaos who had given over Kyrene to Cambyses and had laid a tribute upon himself. Pheretime then having come to Egypt sat down as a suppliant of Aryandes, bidding him help her, and alleging as a reason that it was on account of his inclination to the side of the Medes that her son had been slain.         165. [1] e de meter Feretime, eus men o Arkesileus en tei Barkei diaitato exergasmenos euytui kakon, e de eixe ayte tou paidos ta gerea en Kyrenei kai talla nemomene kai en boylei parizoysa. [2] epeite de emathe en tei Barkei apothanonta oi ton paida, feugoysa oixukee es Aigypton. Esan gar oi ek tou Arkesileu eyergesiai es Kambusea ton Kuroy pepoiemenai. oytos gar En o Arkesileus os Kyrenen Kambusei eduke kai foron etaxato. [3] apikomene de es ten Aigypton e Feretime Aryandeu iketis izeto, timureisai euytei keleuoysa, proisxomene profasin us dia ton medismon o pais oi tethneke.   
      166. Now this Aryandes had been appointed ruler of the province of Egypt by Cambyses; and after the time of these events he lost his life because he would measure himself with Dareios. For having heard and seen that Dareios desired to leave behind him as a memorial of himself a thing which had not been made by any other king, he imitated him, until at last he received his reward: for whereas Dareios refined gold and made it as pure as possible, and of this caused coins to be struck, Aryandes, being ruler of Egypt, did the same thing with silver; and even now the purest silver is that which is called Aryandic. Dareios then having learnt that he was doing this put him to death, bringing against him another charge of attempting rebellion.         166. [1] o de Aryandes En oytos teis Aiguptoy yparxos ypo Kambuseu katesteus, os ysterui xronui toutun parisoumenos Dareiui diefthare. pythomenos gar kai idun Dareion epithymeonta mnemosynon euytou lipesthai touto to me allui eie basilei katergasmenon, emimeeto touton, es oy elabe ton misthon. [2] Dareios men gar xrysion katharutaton apepsesas es to dynatutaton nomisma ekopsato, Aryandes de arxun Aiguptoy argurion tuyto touto epoiee, kai nun esti argurion katharutaton to Aryandikon. mathun de min Dareios tauta poieunta, aitien oi allen epeneikas us oi epanistaito, apekteine.   
      167. Now at the time of which I speak this Aryandes had compassion on Pheretime and gave her all the troops that were in Egypt, both the land and the sea forces, appointing Amasis a Maraphian to command the land-army and Badres, of the race of the Pasargadai, to command the fleet: but before he sent away the army, Aryandes despatched a herald to Barca and asked who it was who had killed Arkesilaos; and the men of Barca all took it upon themselves, for they said they suffered formerly many great evils at his hands. Having heard this, Aryandes at last sent away the army together with Pheretime. This charge then was the pretext alleged; but in fact the army was being sent out (as I believe) for the purpose of subduing Libya: for of the Libyans there are many nations of nations of various kinds, and but few of them are subject to the king, while the greater number paid no regard to Dareios.         167. [1] tote de oytos o Aryandes katoikteiras Feretimen didoi aytei straton ton ex Aiguptoy apanta kai ton pezon kai ton naytikon. strategon de tou men pezou Amasin apedexe andra Marafion, tou de naytikou Badren eonta Pasargaden genos. [2] prin de e aposteilai ten stratien, o Aryandes pempsas es ten Barken keryka epynthaneto tis eie o Arkesileun apokteinas. oi de Barkaioi aytoi ypedekonto pantes. polla te gar kai kaka pasxein yp' aytou. pythomenos de tauta o Aryandes oytu de ten stratien apesteile ama tei Feretimei. [3] ayte men nyn aitie prosxema tou stoloy egineto, apepempeto de e stratie, us emoi dokeein, epi Libues katastrofei. Libuun gar de ethnea polla kai pantoia esti, kai ta men aytun oliga basileos En ypekoa, ta de pleu efrontize Dareioy oyden.    
      168. Now the Libyans have their dwelling as follows:--Beginning from Egypt, first of the Libyans are settled the Adyrmachidai, who practise for the most part the same customs as the Egyptians, but wear clothing similar to that of the other Libyans. Their women wear a bronze ring upon each leg, and they have long hair on their heads, and when they catch their lice, each one bites her own in retaliation and then throws them away. These are the only people of the Lybians who do this; and they alone display to the king their maidens when they are about to be married, and whosoever of them proves to be pleasing to the king is deflowered by him. These Adyrmachidai extend along the coast from Egypt as far as the port which is called Plynos.         168. [1] oikeoysi de kata tade Libyes. ap' Aiguptoy arxamenoi prutoi Adyrmaxidai Libuun katoikentai, oi nomoisi men ta pleu Aigyptioisi xreuntai, estheita de foreoysi oien per oi alloi Libyes. ai de gynaikes aytun pselion peri ekaterei tun knemeun foreoysi xalkeon. tas kefalas de komusai, tous ftheiras epean labusi tous euyteis ekaste antidaknei kai oytu rhiptei. [2] oytoi de mounoi Libuun touto ergazontai , kai tui basilei mounoi tas parthenoys mellousas synoikeein epideiknuoysi. e de an tui basilei areste genetai, ypo toutoy diapartheneuetai. parekoysi de oytoi oi Adyrmaxidai ap' Aiguptoy mexri limenos tui oynoma Plynos esti.   
      169. Next after these come the Giligamai, occupying the country towards the West as far as the island of Aphrodisias. In the space within this limit lies off the coast the island of Platea, where the Kyrenians made their settlement; and on the coast of the mainland there is Port Menelaos, and Aziris, where the Kyrenians used to dwell. From this point begins the silphion and it extends along the coast from the island of Platea as far as the entrance of the Syrtis. This nation practises customs nearly resembling those of the rest.         169. [1] toutun de exontai Giligamai, nemomenoi to pros esperen xuren mexri Afrodisiados nesoy. en de tui metaxu toutoy xurui e te Platea neisos epikeetai, ten ektisan oi Kyrenaioi, kai en tei epeirui Menelaos limen esti kai Aziris, ten oi Kyrenaioi oikeon, kai to silfion arxetai apo toutoy. [2] parekei de apo Platees nesoy mexri tou stomatos teis Surtios to silfion. nomoisi de xreuntai oytoi paraplesioisi toisi eteroisi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [170]

     170. Next to the Giligamai on the West are the Asbystai: these dwell above Kyrene, and the Asbystai do not reach down the sea, for the region along the sea is occupied by Kyrenians. These most of all the Libyans are drivers of four-horse chariots, and in the greater number of their customs they endeavour to imitate the Kyrenians.         170. [1] Giligameun de exontai to pros esperes Asbustai. oytoi yper Kyrenes oikeoysi. epi thalassan de oy katekoysi Asbustai to gar para thalassan Kyrenaioi nemontai. tethrippobatai de oyk ekista alla malista Libuun eisi, nomoys de tous pleunas mimeesthai epitedeuoysi tous Kyrenaiun.   
      171. Next after the Asbystai on the West come the Auchisai: these dwell above Barca and reach down to the sea by Euesperides: and in the middle of the country of the Auchisai dwell the Bacales, a small tribe, who reach down to the sea by the city of Taucheira in the territory of Barca: these practise the same customs as those above Kyrene.         171. [1] Asbysteun de exontai to pros esperes Aysxisai. oytoi yper Barkes oikeoysi, katekontes epi thalassan kat' Eyesperidas. Aysxiseun de kata meson teis xures oikeoysi Bakales, oligon ethnos, katekontes epi thalassan kata Tauxeira polin teis Barkaies. nomoisi de toisi aytoisi xreuntai toisi kai oi yper Kyrenes.   
      172. Next after these Auschisai towards the West come the Nasamonians, a numerous race, who in the summer leave their flocks behind by the sea and go up to the region of Augila to gather the fruit of the date- palms, which grow in great numbers and very large and are all fruit- bearing: these hunt the wingless locusts, and they dry them in the sun and then pound them up, and after that they sprinkle them upon milk and drink them. Their custom is for each man to have many wives, and they make their intercourse with them common in nearly the same manner as the Massagetai, that is they set up a staff in front of the door and so have intercourse. When a Nasamonian man marries his first wife, the custom is for the bride on the first night to go through the whole number of the guests having intercourse with them, and each man when he has lain with her gives a gift, whatsoever he has brought with him from his house. The forms of oath and of divination which they use are as follows:--they swear by the men among themselves who are reported to have been the most righteous and brave, by these, I say, laying hands upon their tombs; and they divine by visiting the sepulchral mounds of their ancestors and lying down to sleep upon them after having prayed; and whatsoever thing the man sees in his dream, this he accepts. They practise also the exchange of pledges in the following manner, that is to say, one gives the other to drink from his hand, and drinks himself from the hand of the other; and if they have no liquid, they take of the dust from the ground and lick it.         172. [1] Aysxiseun de toutun to pros esperes exontai Nasamunes, ethnos eon pollon, oi to theros kataleipontes epi tei thalassei ta probata anabainoysi es Aygila xuron opurieuntes tous foinikas. oi de polloi kai amfilafees pefukasi, pantes eontes karpoforoi. tous de atteleboys epean thereususi, ayenantes pros ton elion kataleoysi kai epeita epi gala epipassontes pinoysi. [2] gynaikas de nomizontes pollas exein ekastos epikoinon ayteun ten mixin poieuntai tropui paraplesiui tui kai Massagetai. epean skipuna prostesuntai, misgontai. pruton de gameontos Nasamunos andros nomos esti ten numfen nykti tei prutei dia pantun diexelthein tun daitymonun misgomenen. tun de us ekastos oi mixthei, didoi duron to an exei feromenos ex oikoy. [3] orkioisi de kai mantikei xreuntai toieide. omnuoysi men tous para sfisi andras dikaiotatoys kai aristoys legomenoys genesthai, toutoys, tun tumbun aptomenoi. manteuontai de epi tun progonun foiteontes ta semata, kai kateyxamenoi epikatakoimuntai. to d' an ide en tei, opsi enupnion, toutui xratai. [4] pistisi de toieiside xreuntai. ek teis xeiros didoi piein kai aytos ek teis tou eteroy pinei. en de me exusi ygron meden, oi de teis xamathen spodou labontes leixoysi.   
      173. Adjoining the Nasamonians is the country of the Psylloi. These have perished utterly in the following manner:--The South Wind blowing upon them dried up all their cisterns of water, and their land was waterless, lying all within the Syrtis. They then having taken a resolve by common consent, marched in arms against the South Wind (I report that which is reported by the Libyans), and when they had arrived at the sandy tract, the South Wind blew and buried them in the sand. These then having utterly perished, the Nasamonians from that time forward possess their land.         173. [1] Nasamusi de prosomoyroi eisi Psulloi. oytoi exapolulasi tropui toiuide. o notos sfi pneun anemos ta elytra tun ydatun exeuene, e de xure sfi apasa entos eousa teis Surtios En anydros. oi de boyleysamenoi koinui logui estrateuonto epi ton noton (legu de tauta ta legoysi Libyes), kai epeite eginonto en tei psammui, pneusas o notos katexuse sfeas. exapolomenun de toutun exoysi ten xuren oi Nasamunes.   
      174. Above these towards the South Wind in the region of wild beasts dwell the Garamantians, who fly from every man and avoid the company of all; and they neither possess any weapon of war, nor know how to defend themselves against enemies.         174. [1] toutun de katuperthe pros noton anemon en tei, theriudei oikeoysi Garamantes, oi panta anthrupon feugoysi kai pantos omilien, kai oyte oplon ekteatai areion oyden oyte amunesthai episteatai.   
      175. These dwell above the Nasamonians; and next to the Nasamonians along the sea coast towards the West come the Macai, who shave their hair so as to leave tufts, letting the middle of their hair grow long, but round this on all sides shaving it close to the skin; and for fighting they carry shields made of ostrich skins. Through their land the river Kinyps runs out into the sea, flowing from a hill called the "Hill of the Charites." This Hill of the Charites is overgrown thickly with wood, while the rest of Libya which has been spoken of before is bare of trees; and the distance from the sea to this hill is two hundred furlongs.         175. [1] oytoi men de katuperthe oikeoysi Nasamunun. to de para ten thalassan exontai to pros esperes Makai, oi lofoys keirontai, to men meson tun trixun anientes ayxesthai, ta de enthen kai enthen keirontes en xroi, es de ton polemon stroythun katagaiun doras foreoysi problemata. [2] dia de aytun Kinyps potamos rheun ek lofoy kaleymenoy Kharitun es thalassan ekdidoi. o de lofos oytos o Kharitun dasus ideisi esti, eouses teis alles teis prokatalextheises Libues psileis. apo thalasses de es ayton stadioi diekosioi eisi.   
      176. Next to these Macai are the Gindanes, whose women wear each of them a number of anklets made of the skins of animals, for the following reason, as it is said:--for every man who has commerce with her she binds on an anklet, and the woman who has most is esteemed the best, since she has been loved by the greatest number of men.         176. [1] Makeun de toutun exomenoi Gindanes eisi, tun ai gynaikes perisfuria dermatun polla ekaste foreei kata toionde ti, us legetai. kat' andra ekaston mixthenta perisfurion perideetai. e de an pleista exei, ayte ariste dedoktai einai us ypo pleistun andrun filetheisa.   
      177. In a peninsula which stands out into the sea from the land of these Gindanes dwell the Lotophagoi, who live by eating the fruit of the lotos only. Now the fruit of the lotos is in size like that of the mastich-tree, and in flavour it resembles that of the date-palm. Of this fruit the Lotophagoi even make for themselves wine.         177. [1] akten de proexoysan es ton ponton toutun tun Gindanun nemontai Lutofagoi, oi ton karpon mounon tou lutou trugontes zuoysi. o de tou lutou karpos esti megathos oson te teis sxinoy, glykuteta de tou foinikos tui karpui proseikelos. poieuntai de ek tou karpou toutoy oi Lutofagoi kai oinon.   
      178. Next after the Lotophagoi along the sea-coast are the Machlyans, who also make use of the lotos, but less than those above mentioned. These extend to a great river named the river Triton, and this runs out into a great lake called Tritonis, in which there is an island named Phla. About this island they say there was an oracle given to the Lacedemonians that they should make a settlement in it.         178. [1] Lutofagun de to para thalassan exontai Maxlyes, tui lutui men kai oytoi xreumenoi, atar Esson ge tun proteron lexthentun, katekoysi de epi potamon megan tui oynoma Tritun esti. ekdidoi de oytos es limnen megalen Tritunida. en de aytei, neisos eni tei, oynoma Fla. tauten de ten neison Lakedaimonioisi fasi logion einai ktisai.    
      179. The following moreover is also told, namely that Jason, when the Argo had been completed by him under Mount Pelion, put into it a hecatomb and with it also a tripod of bronze, and sailed round Pelopponese, desiring to come to Delphi; and when in sailing he got near Malea, a North Wind seized his ship and carried it off to Libya, and before he caught sight of land he had come to be in the shoals of the lake Tritonis. Then as he was at a loss how he should bring his ship forth, the story goes that Triton appeared to him and bade Jason give him the tripod, saying that he would show them the right course and let them go away without hurt: and when Jason consented to it, then Triton showed them the passage out between the shoals and set the tripod in his own temple, after having first uttered a prophecy over the tripod and having declared to Jason and his company the whole matter, namely that whensoever one of the descendants of those who sailed with him in the Argo should carry away this tripod, then it was determined by fate that a hundred cities of Hellenes should be established about the lake Tritonis. Having heard this the native Libyans concealed the tripod.         179. [1] esti de kai ode logos legomenos. Iesona, epeite oi exergasthe ypo tui Peliui e Argu, esthemenon es ayten allen te ekatomben kai de kai tripoda xalkeon peripluein Peloponneson, boylomenon es Delfous apikesthai. [2] kai min, us pleonta genesthai kata Maleen, ypolabein anemon boreen kai apoferein pros ten Libuen. prin de katidesthai gein, en toisi braxesi genesthai limnes teis Tritunidos. kai oi aporeonti ten exagugen logos esti faneinai Trituna kai keleuein ton Iesona euytui dounai ton tripoda, famenon sfi kai ton poron dexein kai apemonas aposteleein. [3] peithomenoy de tou Iesonos, oytu de ton te diekploon tun braxeun deiknunai ton Trituna sfi kai ton tripoda theinai en tui euytou irui, epithespisanta te tui tripodi kai toisi sun Iesoni semenanta ton panta logon, us epean ton tripoda komisetai tun ekgonun tis tun en tei Argoi sympleontun, tote ekaton polias oikeisai peri ten Tritunida limnen Ellenidas pasan einai anagken. tauta akousantas tous epixurioys tun Libuun krupsai ton tripoda.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [180]

     180. Next to these Machlyans are the Auseans. These and the Machlyans dwell round the lake Tritonis, and the river Triton is the boundary between them: and while the Machlyans grow their hair long at the back of the head, the Auseans do so in front. At a yearly festival of Athene their maidens take their stand in two parties and fight against one another with stones and staves, and they say that in doing so they are fulfilling the rites handed down by their fathers for the divinity who was sprung from that land, whom we call Athene: and those of the maidens who die of the wounds received they call "false-maidens." But before they let them begin the fight they do this:--all join together and equip the maiden who is judged to be the fairest on each occasion, with a Corinthian helmet and with full Hellenic armour, and then causing her to go up into a chariot they conduct her round the lake. Now I cannot tell with what they equipped the maidens in old time, before the Hellenes were settled near them; but I suppose that they used to be equipped with Egyptian armour, for it is from Egypt that both the shield and the helmet have come to the Hellenes, as I affirm. They say moreover that Athene is the daughter of Poseidon and of the lake Tritonis, and that she had some cause of complaint against her father and therefore gave herself to Zeus, and Zeus made her his own daughter. Such is the story which these tell; and they have their intercourse with women in common, not marrying but having intercourse like cattle: and when the child of any woman has grown big, he is brought before a meeting of the men held within three months of that time, and whomsoever of the men the child resembles, his son he is accounted to be.         180. [1] toutun de exontas tun Maxluun Aysees. oytoi de kai oi Maxlyes perix ten Tritunida limnen oikeoysi, to meson de sfi oyrizei o Tritun. kai oi men Maxlyes ta opisu komusi teis kefaleis, oi de Aysees ta emprosthe. [2] ortei de eniaysiei Athenaies ai parthenoi aytun dixa diastasai maxontai pros allelas lithoisi te kai xuloisi, tui aythigenei theui legoysai ta patria apoteleein, ten Athenaien kaleomen. tas de apothneskousas tun parthenun ek tun trumatun pseydoparthenoys kaleoysi. [3] prin de aneinai aytas maxesthai, tade poieusi koinei. parthenon ten kallisteuoysan ekastote kosmesantes kyneei te Korinthiei kai panopliei Ellenikei kai ep' arma anabibasantes periagoysi ten limnen kuklui. [4] oteoisi de to palai ekosmeon tas parthenoys prin e sfi Ellenas paroikistheinai, oyk exu eipein, dokeu d' un Aigyptioisi oploisi kosmeesthai aytas. apo gar Aiguptoy kai ten aspida kai to kranos femi apixthai es tous Ellenas. [5] ten de Athenaien fasi Poseideunos einai thygatera kai teis Tritunidos limnes, kai min memftheisan ti tui patri dounai euyten tui Dii, ton de Dia euytou min poiesasthai thygatera. tauta men legoysi, mixin de epikoinon tun gynaikun poieontai, oyte synoikeontes ktenedon te misgomenoi. [6] epean de gynaiki to paidion adron genetai, symfoitusi es tuyto oi andres tritoy menos, kai tui an oikei tun andrun to paidion, toutoy pais nomizetai.    
      181. Thus then have been mentioned those nomad Libyans who live along the sea-coast: and above these inland is the region of Libya which has wild beasts; and above the wild-beast region there stretches a raised belt of sand, extending from Thebes of the Egyptians to the Pillars of Heracles. In this belt at intervals of about ten days' journey there are fragments of salt in great lumps forming hills, and at the top of each hill there shoots up from the middle of the salt a spring of water cold and sweet; and about the spring dwell men, at the furthest limit towards the desert, and above the wild-beast region. First, at a distance of ten days' journey from Thebes, are the Ammonians, whose temple is derived from that of the Theban Zeus, for the image of Zeus in Thebes also, as I have said before, has the head of a ram. These, as it chances, have also other water of a spring, which in the early morning is warm; at the time when the market fills, cooler; when midday comes, it is quite cold, and then they water their gardens; but as the day declines, it abates from its coldness, until at last, when the sun sets, the water is warm; and it continues to increase in heat still more until it reaches midnight, when it boils and throws up bubbles; and when midnight passes, it becomes cooler gradually till dawn of day. This spring is called the fountain of the Sun.         181. [1] oytoi men oi parathalassioi tun nomadun Libuun eireatai, yper de toutun es mesogaian e theriudes esti Libue, yper de teis theriudeos ofrue psammes katekei parateinoysa apo Thebeun tun Aigyptieun ep' Erakleas stelas. [2] en de tei ofruei tautei malista dia deka emereun odou alos esti trufea kata xondroys megaloys en kolunoisi, kai en koryfeisi ekastoy tou kolunou anakontizei ek mesoy tou alos ydur psyxron kai glyku, peri de ayton anthrupoi oikeoysi esxatoi pros teis eremoy kai yper teis theriudeos, prutoi men apo Thebeun dia deka emereun odou Ammunioi, exontes to iron apo tou Thebaieos Dios. kai gar to en Thebeisi, us kai proteron eiretai moi, krioprosupon tou Dios tugalma esti. [3] tygxanei de kai allo sfi ydur krenaion eon, to ton men orthron ginetai xliaron, agoreis de plethyouses psyxroteron, mesambrie te esti kai to karta ginetai psyxron. [4] tenikauta de ardoysi tous kepoys. apoklinomenes de teis emeres ypietai tou psyxrou, es oy duetai te o elios kai to ydur ginetai xliaron. epi de mallon ion es to thermon es mesas nuktas pelazei, tenikauta de zeei amboladen. parerxontai te mesai nuktes kai psuxetai mexri es eu. epiklesin de ayte e krene kaleetai elioy.   
      182. After the Ammonians, as you go on along the belt of sand, at an interval again of ten days' journey there is a hill of salt like that of the Ammonians, and a spring of water, with men dwelling about it; and the name of this place is Augila. To this the Nasamonians come year by year to gather the fruit of the date-palms.         182. [1] meta de Ammunioys dia teis ofrues teis psammoy di' alleun deka emereun odou kolunos te alos esti omoios tui Ammuniui kai ydur, kai anthrupoi peri ayton oikeoysi. tui de xurui toutui oynoma Aygila esti. es touton ton xuron oi Nasamunes opurieuntes tous foinikas foitusi.   
      183. From Augila at a distance again of ten days' journey there is another hill of salt and spring of water and a great number of fruit-bearing date-palms, as there are also in the other places: and men dwell here who are called the Garmantians, a very great nation, who carry earth to lay over the salt and then sow crops. From this point is the shortest way to the Lotophagoi, for from these it is a journey of thirty days to the country of the Garmantians. Among them also are produced the cattle which feed backwards; and they feed backwards for this reason, because they have their horns bent down forwards, and therefore they walk backwards as they feed; for forwards they cannot go, because the horns run into the ground in front of them; but in nothing else do they differ from other cattle except in this and in the thickness and firmness to the touch of their hide. These Garamantians of whom I speak hunt the "Cave-dwelling" Ethiopians with their four-horse chariots, for the Cave-dwelling Ethiopians are the swiftest of foot of all men about whom we hear report made: and the Cave-dwellers feed upon serpents and lizards and such creeping things, and they use a language which resembles no other, for in it they squeak just like bats.         183. [1] apo de Aygilun dia deka emereun alleun odou eteros alos kolunos kai ydur kai foinikes karpoforoi polloi, kata per kai en toisi eteroisi. kai anthrupoi oikeoysi en aytui toisi oynoma Garamantes esti, ethnos mega isxyrus, oi epi ton ala gein epiforeontes oytu speiroysi. [2] syntomutaton d' esti es tous Lutofagoys, ek tun triekonta emereun es aytous odos esti. en toisi kai oi opisthonomoi boes ginontai. opisthonomoi de dia tode eisi. ta kerea exoysi kekyfota es to emprosthe. [3] dia touto opisu anaxureontes nemontai. es gar to emprosthe oyk oioi te eisi proemballontun es ten gein tun kereun. allo de oyden diaferoysi tun allun boun oti me touto kai to derma es paxuteta te kai tripsin. [4] oi Garamantes de oytoi tous truglodutas Aithiopas thereuoysi toisi tethrippoisi. oi gar truglodutai Aithiopes podas taxistoi anthrupun pantun eisi tun emeis peri logoys apoferomenoys akouomen. siteontai de oi truglodutai ofis kai sauroys kai ta toiauta tun erpetun. glussan de oydemiei allei paromoien nenomikasi, alla tetrigasi kata per ai nykterides.   
      184. From the Garmantians at a distance again of ten days' journey there is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men dwell round it called Atarantians, who alone of all men about whom we know are nameless; for while all taken together have the name Atarantians, each separate man of them has no name given to him. These utter curses against the Sun when he is at his height, and moreover revile him with all manner of foul terms, because he oppresses them by his burning heat, both themselves and their land. After this at a distance of ten days' journey there is another hill of salt and spring of water, and men dwell round it. Near this salt hill is a mountain named Atlas, which is small in circuit and rounded on every side; and so exceedingly lofty is it said to be, that it is not possible to see its summits, for clouds never leave them either in the summer or in the winter. This the natives say is the pillar of the heaven. After this mountain these men got their name, for they are called Atlantians; and it is said that they neither eat anything that has life nor have any dreams.         184. [1] apo de Garamantun di' alleun deka emereun odou allos alos te kolunos kai ydur, kai anthrupoi peri ayton oikeoysi toisi oynoma esti Atarantes, oi anunymoi eisi mounoi anthrupun tun emeis idmen. alesi men gar sfi esti Atarantes oynoma, eni de ekastui aytun oynoma oyden keetai. [2] oytoi tui eliui yperballonti kataruntai kai pros toutoisi panta ta aisxra loidoreontai, oti sfeas kaiun epitribei, aytous te tous anthrupoys kai ten xuren aytun. [3] meta de di' alleun deka emereun allos kolunos alos kai ydur, kai anthrupoi peri ayton oikeoysi. exetai de tou alos Toutoy oros tui oynoma esti Atlas, esti de steinon kai kykloteres pante, ypselon de oytu de ti legetai us tas koryfas aytou oyk oia te einai idesthai. oydekote gar aytas apoleipein nefea oyte thereos oyte xeimunos. touto ton kiona tou oyranou legoysi oi epixurioi einai. [4] epi toutoy tou oreos oi anthrupoi oytoi epunymoi egenonto. kaleontai gar de Atlantes. legontai de oyte empsyxon oyden siteesthai oyte enupnia oran.   
      185. As far as these Atlantians I am able to mention in order the names of those who are settled in the belt of sand; but for the parts beyond these I can do so no more. However, the belt extends as far as the Pillars of Heracles and also in the parts outside them: and there is a mine of salt in it at a distance of ten days' journey from the Atlantians, and men dwelling there; and these all have their houses built of the lumps of salt, since these parts of Libya which we have now reached are without rain; for if it rained, the walls being made of salt would not be able to last: and the salt is dug up there both white and purple in colour. Above the sand-belt, in the parts which are in the direction of the South Wind and towards the interior of Libya, the country is uninhabited, without water and without wild beasts, rainless and treeless, and there is no trace of moisture in it.         185. [1] mexri men de tun Atlantun toutun exu ta oynomata tun en tei ofruei katoikemenun katalexai, to d' apo toutun oyketi. diekei d' un e ofrue mexri Erakleun steleun kai to exu toyteun. [2] esti de alos te metallon en aytei dia deka emereun odou kai anthrupoi oikeontes. ta de oikia toutoisi pasi ek tun alinun xondrun oikodomeatai. tauta gar ede teis Libues anombra esti. oy gar an edyneato menein oi toixoi eontes alinoi, ei ye. [3] o de als aytothi kai leykos kai porfureos to eidos orussetai. yper de teis ofrues to pros notoy kai es mesogaian teis Libues eremos kai anydros kai atheros kai anombros kai axylos esti e xure, kai ikmados esti en aytei oyden.    
      186. I have said that from Egypt as far as the lake Tritonis Libyans dwell who are nomads, eating flesh and drinking milk; and these do not taste at all of the flesh of cows, for the same reason as the Egyptians also abstain from it, nor do they keep swine. Moreover the women of the Kyrenians too think it not right to eat cows' flesh, because of the Egyptian Isis, and they even keep fasts and celebrate festivals for her; and the women of Barca, in addition from cows' flesh, do not taste of swine either.         186. [1] oytu men mexri teis Tritunidos limnes ap' Aiguptoy nomades eisi kreofagoi te kai galaktopotai Libyes, kai theleun te boun oyti geyomenoi, dioti per oyde Aiguptioi, kai ys oy trefontes. [2] boun men nyn theleun oyd' ai Kyrenaiun gynaikes dikaiousi pateesthai dia ten en Aiguptui Isin, alla kai nesteias aytei kai ortas epiteleoysi. ai de tun Barkaiun gynaikes oyde yun pros teisi boysi geuontai.   
      187. Thus it is with these matters: but in the region to the West of lake Tritonis the Libyans cease to be nomads, and they do not practise the same customs, nor do to their children anything like that which the nomads are wont to do; for the nomad Libyans, whether all of them I cannot say for certain, but many of them, do as follows:--when their children are four years old, they burn with a greasy piece of sheep's wool the veins in the crowns of their heads, and some of them burn the veins of the temples, so that for all their lives to come the cold humour may not run down from their heads and do them hurt: and for this reason it is (they say) that they are so healthy; for the Libyans are in truth the most healthy of all races concerning which we have knowledge, whether for this reason or not I cannot say for certain, but the most healthy they certainly are: and if, when they burn the children, a convulsion comes on, they have found out a remedy for this; for they pour upon them the water of a he-goat and so save them. I report that which is reported by the Libyans themselves.         187. [1] tauta men de oytu exei. to de pros esperes teis Tritunidos limnes oyketi nomades eisi Libyes oyde nomoisi toisi aytoisi xreumenoi, oyde kata ta paidia poieuntes oion ti kai oi nomades euthasi poieein. [2] oi gar de tun Libuun nomades, ei men pantes, oyk exu atrekeus touto eipein, poieusi de aytun syxnoi toiade. tun paidiun tun sfeterun, epean tetraetea genetai, oispei probatun kaioysi tas en teisi koryfeisi flebas, metexeteroi de aytun tas en toisi krotafoisi, toude eineka us me sfeas es ton panta xronon katarreon flegma ek teis kefaleis deleetai. [3] kai dia touto sfeas legoysi einai ygierotatoys. eisi gar us aletheus oi Libyes anthrupun pantun ygierotatoi tun emeis idmen, ei men dia touto, oyk exu atrekeus eipein, ygierotatoi d' un eisi. en de kaioysi ta paidia spasmos epigenetai, exeuretai sfi akos. tragoy gar oyron speisantes rhuontai sfea. legu de ta legoysi aytoi Libyes.   
      188. The following is the manner of sacrifice which the nomads have:--they cut off a part of the animal's ear as a first offering and throw it over the house, and having done this they twist its neck. They sacrifice only to the Sun and the Moon; that is to say, to these all the Libyans sacrifice, but those who dwell round the lake Tritonis sacrifice most of all to Athene, and next to Triton and Poseidon.         188. [1] thysiai de toisi nomasi eisi aide. epean tou utos aparxuntai tou kteneos, rhipteoysi yper ton domon, touto de poiesantes apostrefoysi ton ayxena aytou. thuoysi de eliui kai selenei mounoisi. toutoisi men nyn pantes Libyes thuoysi, atar oi peri ten Tritunida limnen nemontes tei Athenaiei malista, meta de tui; Trituni kai tui Poseideuni.   
      189. It would appear also that the Hellenes made the dress and the aigis of the images of Athene after the model of the Libyan women; for except that the dress of the Libyan women is of leather, and the tassels which hang from their aigis are not formed of serpents but of leather thongs, in all other respects Athene is dressed like them. Moreover the name too declares that the dress of the figures of Pallas has come from Libya, for the Libyan women wear over their other garments bare goat-skins (aigeas) with tasselled fringes and coloured over with red madder, and from the name of these goat-skins the Hellenes formed the name aigis. I think also that in these regions first arose the practice of crying aloud during the performance of sacred rites, for the Libyan women do this very well. The Hellenes learnt from the Libyans also the yoking together of four horses.         189. [1] ten de ara estheita kai tas aigidas tun agalmatun teis Athenaies ek tun Libysseun epoiesanto oi Ellenes. plen gar e oti skytine e esthes tun Libysseun esti kai oi thusanoi oi ek tun aigidun ayteisi oyk ofies eisi alla imantinoi, ta ge alla panta kata tuyto estaltai. [2] kai de kai to oynoma kategoreei oti ek Libues ekei e stole tun Palladiun. aigeas gar periballontai psilas peri ten estheita thysanutas ai Libyssai kexrimenas ereythedanui, ek de tun aigeun toyteun aigidas oi Ellenes metunomasan. [3] dokeei d' emoige kai ololyge en iroisi enthauta pruton genesthai. karta gar tautei xreuntai kalus ai Libyssai. kai tesseras ippoys syzeygnunai para Libuun oi Ellenes memathekasi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [190]

     190. The nomads bury those who die just in the same manner as the Hellenes, except only the Nasamonians: these bury bodies in a sitting posture, taking care at the moment when the man expires to place him sitting and not to let him die lying down on his back. They have dwellings composed of the stems of asphodel entwined with rushes, and so made that they can be carried about. Such are the customs followed by these tribes.         190. [1] thaptoysi de tous apothneskontas oi nomades kata per oi Ellenes, plen Nasamunun. oytoi de katemenoys thaptoysi, fylassontes, epean apiei ten psyxen, okus min katisoysi mede yptios apothaneetai. oikemata de sumpekta ex antherikun eneirmenun peri sxoinoys esti, kai tauta periforeta. nomoisi men toioutoisi oytoi xreuntai.    
      191. On the West of the river Triton next after the Auseans come Libyans who are tillers of the soil, and whose custom it is to possess fixed habitations; and they are called Maxyans. They grow their hair long on the right side of their heads and cut it short upon the left, and smear their bodies over with red ochre. These say that they are of the men who came from Troy. This country and the rest of Libya which is towards the West is both much more frequented by wild beasts and much more thickly wooded than the country of the nomads: for whereas the part of Libya which is situated towards the East, where the nomads dwell, is low-lying and sandy up to the river Triton, that which succeeds it towards the West, the country of those who till the soil, is exceedingly mountainous and thickly-wooded and full of wild beasts: for in the land of these are found both the monstrous serpent and the lion and the elephant, and bears and venomous snakes and horned asses, besides the dog-headed men, and the headless men with their eyes set in their breasts (at least so say the Libyans about them), and the wild men and wild women, and a great multitude of other beasts which are not fabulous like these.         191. [1] to de pros esperes tou Tritunos potamou Ayseun exontai aroteires ede Libyes kai oikias nomizontes ekteisthai, toisi oynoma keetai Maxyes. oi ta epi dexia tun kefaleun komousi, ta d' ep' aristera keiroysi, to de suma xriontai miltui. fasi de oytoi einai tun ek Troies andrun. [2] e de xure ayte te kai e loipe teis Libues e pros esperen pollui theriudestere te kai dasytere esti teis tun nomadun xures. [3] e men gar de pros ten eu teis Libues, ten oi nomades nemoysi, esti tapeine te kai psammudes mexri tou Tritunos potamou, e de apo toutoy to pros esperen e tun aroterun oreine te karta kai dasea kai theriudes. [4] kai gar oi ofies oi ypermegathees kai oi leontes kata toutoys eisi kai oi elefantes te kai arktoi kai aspides te kai onoi oi ta kerea exontes kai oi kynokefaloi kai oi akefaloi oi en toisi stethesi tous ofthalmous exontes, us de legontai ge ypo Libuun, kai oi agrioi andres kai gynaikes agriai, kai alla plethei polla theria akatapseysta.   
      192. In the land of the nomads however there exist none of these, but other animals as follows:--white-rump antelopes, gazelles, buffaloes, asses, not the horned kind but others which go without water (for in fact these never drink), oryes, whose horns are made into the sides of the Phenician lyre (this animal is in size about equal to an ox), small foxes, hyenas, porcupines, wild rams, wolves, jackals, panthers, boryes, land-crocodiles about three cubits in length and very much resembling lizards, ostriches, and small snakes, each with one horn: these wild animals there are in this country, as well as those which exist elsewhere, except the stag and the wild-boar; but Libya has no stags nor wild boars at all. Also there are in this country three kinds of mice, one is called the "two- legged" mouse, another the zegeris (a name which is Libyan and signifies in the Hellenic tongue a "hill"), and a third the "prickly" mouse. There are also weasels produced in the silphion, which are very like those of Tartessos. Such are the wild animals which the land of the Libyans possesses, so far as we were able to discover by inquiries extended as much as possible.         192. [1] kata tous nomadas de esti toutun oyden, all' alla toiade, pugargoi kai zorkades kai boybalies kai onoi, oyk oi ta kerea exontes all' alloi apotoi (oy gar de pinoysi), kai oryes, tun ta kerea toisi foinixi oi pexees poieuntai (megathos de to therion touto kata boun esti), [2] kai bassaria kai yainai kai ystrixes kai krioi agrioi kai diktyes kai thues kai pantheres kai boryes, kai krokodeiloi oson te tripexees xersaioi, teisi saureisi emferestatoi, kai stroythoi katagaioi, kai ofies mikroi, keras en ekastos exontes. tauta te de aytothi esti theria kai ta per tei alle, plen elafoy te kai yos agrioy. elafos de kai ys agrios en Libuei pampan oyk esti. [3] myun de genea trixa aytothi esti. oi men dipodes kaleontai, oi de zegeries (to de oynoma touto esti men Libystikon, dunatai de kat' Ellada glussan boynoi), oi de exinees. eisi de kai galai en tui silfiui ginomenai teisi Tartessieisi omoiotatai. tosauta men nyn theria e tun nomadun Libuun gei exei, oson emeis istoreontes epi makrotaton oioi te egenometha exikesthai.   
      193. Next to the Maxyan Libyans are the Zauekes, whose women drive their chariots for them to war.         193. [1] Maxuun de Libuun Zauekes exontai, toisi ai gynaikes enioxeusi ta armata es ton polemon.   
      194. Next to these are the Gyzantes, among whom honey is made in great quantity by bees, but in much greater quantity still it is said to be made by men, who work at it as a trade. However that may be, these all smear themselves over with red ochre and eat monkeys, which are produced in very great numbers upon their mountains.         194. [1] toutun de Guzantes exontai, en toisi meli pollon men melissai katergazontai, pollui d' eti pleon legetai demioergous andras poieein. miltountai d' un pantes oytoi kai pithekofageoysi. oi de sfi afthonoi osoi en toisi oresi ginontai.   
      195. Opposite these, as the Carthaginians say, there lies an island called Kyrauis, two hundred furlongs in length but narrow, to which one may walk over from the mainland; and it is full of olives and vines. In it they say there is a pool, from which the native girls with birds' feathers smeared over with pitch bring up gold-dust out of the mud. Whether this is really so I do not know, but I write that which is reported; and nothing is impossible, for even in Zakynthos I saw myself pitch brought up out of a pool of water. There are there several pools, and the largest of them measures seventy feet each way and is two fathoms in depth. Into this they plunge a pole with a myrtle-branch bound to it, and then with the branch of the myrtle they bring up pitch, which has the smell of asphalt, but in other respects it is superior to the pitch of Pieria. This they pour into a pit dug near the pool; and when they have collected a large quantity, then they pour it into the jars from the pit: and whatever thing falls into the pool goes under ground and reappears in the sea, which is distant about four furlongs from the pool. Thus then the report about the island lying near the coast of Libya is also probably enough true.         195. [1] kata toutoys de legoysi Karxedonioi keisthai neison tei oynoma einai Kurayin, meikos men diekosiun stadiun, platos de steinen, diabaton ek teis epeiroy, elaieun te mesten kai ampelun. [2] limnen de en aytei einai, ek teis ai parthenoi tun epixuriun pteroisi ornithun kexrimenoisi pissei ek teis iluos pseigma anaferoysi xrysou. tauta ei men esti aletheus oyk oida, ta de legetai grafu. eie d' an pan, okoy kai en Zakunthui ek limnes kai ydatos pissan anaferomenen aytos egu urun. [3] eisi men kai pleunes ai limnai aytothi, e d' un megiste ayteun ebdomekonta podun pantei, bathos de diorgyios esti. es tauten konton katieisi ep' akrui myrsinen prosdesantes kai epeita anaferoysi tei myrsinei pissan, odmen men exoysan asfaltoy, ta d' alla teis Pierikeis pisses ameinu. esxeoysi de es lakkon orurygmenon agxou teis limnes. epean de athroisusi syxnen, oytu es tous amforeas ek tou lakkoy kataxeoysi. [4] o ti d' an espesei es ten limnen, ypo gein ion anafainetai en tei thalassei. e de apexei us tessera stadia apo teis limnes. oytu un kai ta apo teis nesoy teis epi Libuei keimenes oikota esti aletheiei.   
      196. The Carthaginians say also this, namely that there is a place in Libya and men dwelling there, outside the Pillars of Heracles, to whom when they have come and have taken the merchandise forth from their ships, they set it in order along the beach and embark again in their ships, and after that they raise a smoke; and the natives of the country seeing the smoke come to the sea, and then they lay down gold as an equivalent for the merchandise and retire to a distance away from the merchandise. The Carthaginians upon that disembark and examine it, and if the gold is in their opinion sufficient for the value of the merchandise, they take it up and go their way; but if not, they embark again in their ships and sit there; and the others approach and straightway add more gold to the former, until they satisfy them: and they say that neither party wrongs the other; for neither do the Carthaginians lay hands on the gold until it is made equal to the value of their merchandise, nor do the others lay hands on the merchandise until the Carthaginians have taken the gold.         196. [1] legoysi de kai tade Karxedonioi. einai teis Libues xuron te kai anthrupoys exu Prakleun steleun katoikemenoys. es tous epean apikuntai kai exeluntai ta fortia, thentes ayta epexeis para ten kymatugen, esbantes es ta ploia tufein kapnon. tous d' epixurioys idomenoys ton kapnon ienai epi ten thalassan kai epeita anti tun fortiun xryson tithenai kai exanaxureein prosu apo tun fortiun. [2] tous de Karxedonioys ekbantas skeptesthai, kai en men fainetai sfi axios o xrysos tun fortiun, anelomenoi apallassontai, en de me axios, esbantes opisu es ta ploia kateatai. oi de proselthontes allon pros un ethekan xryson, es oy an peithusi. adikeein de oydeteroys. [3] oyte gar aytous tou xrysou aptesthai prin an sfi apisuthei tei axiei tun fortiun, oyt' ekeinoys tun fortiun aptesthai proteron e aytoi to xrysion labusi.    
      197. These are the Libyan tribes whom we are able to name; and of these the greater number neither now pay any regard to the king of the Medes nor did they then. Thus much also I have to say about this land, namely that it is occupied by four races and no more, so far as we know; and of these races two are natives of the soil and the other two not so; for the Libyans and the Ethiopians are natives, the one race dwelling in the Northern parts of Libya and the other in the Southern, while the Phenicians and the Hellenes are strangers.         197. [1] oytoi men eisi tous emeis exomen Libuun onomasai, kai toutun oi polloi basileos tou Medun oyte ti nun oyte tote efortizon oyden. [2] tosonde de eti exu eipein peri teis xures tautes, oti tessera ethnea nemetai ayten kai oy pleu toutun, oson emeis idmen, kai ta men duo aytoxthona tun ethneun ta de duo oy, Libyes men kai Aithiopes aytoxthones, oi men ta pros boreu oi de ta pros notoy teis Libues oikeontes, Foinikes de kai Ellenes epelydes.   
      198. I think moreover that (besides other things) in goodness of soil Libya does not very greatly excel as compared with Asia or Europe, except only the region of Kinyps, for the same name is given to the land as to the river. This region is equal to the best of lands in bringing forth the fruit of Demeter, nor does it at all resemble the rest of Libya; for it has black soil and is watered by springs, and neither has it fear of drought nor is it hurt by drinking too abundantly of rain; for rain there is in this part of Libya. Of the produce of the crops the same measures hold good here as for the Babylonian land. And that is good land also which the Euesperites occupy, for when it bears best it produces a hundred-fold, but the land in the region of Kinyps produces sometimes as much as three- hundred-fold.         198. [1] dokeei de moi oyd' areten einai tis e Libue spoydaie uste e Asiei e Eyrupei parabletheinai, plen Kinypos mounes. to gar de ayto oynoma e gei tui potamui exei. [2] ayte de omoie tei aristei geun Demetros karpon ekferein oyde eoike oyden tei allei Libuei. melaggaios te gar esti kai epydros pidaxi, kai oyte ayxmou frontizoysa oyden oyte ombron pleu piousa dedeletai. yetai gar de tauta teis Libues. tun de ekforiun tou karpou tayta metra tei Babyluniei gei katistatai. agathe de gei kai ten Eyesperitai nemontai. [3] ep' ekatosta gar, epean ayte euyteis arista eneikei, ekferei, e de en tei Kinypi epi triekosia.   
      199. Moreover the land of Kyrene, which is the highest land of the part of Libya which is occupied by nomads, has within its confines three seasons of harvest, at which we may marvel: for the parts by the sea-coasts first have their fruits ripe for reaping and for gathering the vintage; and when these have been gathered in, the parts which lie above the sea-side places, those situated in the middle, which they call the hills, are ripe for the gathering in; and as soon as this middle crop has been gathered in, that in the highest part of the land comes to perfection and is ripe; so that by the time the first crop has been eaten and drunk up, the last is just coming in. Thus the harvest for the Kyrenians lasts eight months. Let so much as has been said suffice for these things.         199. [1] exei de kai e Kyrenaie xure, eousa ypselotate tautes teis Libues ten oi nomades nemontai, treis uras en euytei axias thumatos. pruta men gar ta parathalassia tun karpun orgai amasthai te kai trygasthai. toutun te de sygkekomismenun ta yper tun thalassidiun xurun ta mesa orgai sygkomizesthai, ta boynous kaleoysi. [2] sygkekomistai te oytos o mesos karpos kai o en tei katypertatei teis geis pepainetai te kai orgai, uste ekpepotai te kai katabebrutai o prutos karpos kai o teleytaios symparaginetai. oytu ep' oktu meinas Kyrenaioys opure epexei. tauta men nyn epi tosouton eiresthu.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 4: Melpomene [200]

     200. Now when the Persian helpers of Pheretime, having been sent from Egypt by Aryandes, had arrived at Barca, they laid siege to the city, proposing to the inhabitants that they should give up those who were guilty of the murder of Arkesilaos: but as all their people had taken a share in the guilt, they did not accept the proposals. Then they besieged Barca for nine months, both digging underground passages which led to the wall and making vigorous attacks upon it. Now the passages dug were discovered by a worker of bronze with a shield covered over with bronze, who had thought of a plan as follows:-- carrying it round within the wall he applied it to the ground in the city, and whereas the other places to which he applied it were noiseless, at those places where digging was going on the bronze of the shield gave a sound; and the men of Barca would make a countermine there and slay the Persians who were digging mines. This then was discovered as I have said, and the attacks were repulsed by the men of Barca.         200. [1] oi de Feretimes timuroi Persai epeite ek teis Aiguptoy stalentes ypo Aryandeu apikato es ten Barken, epoliorkeon ten polin epaggellomenoi ekdidonai tous aitioys tou fonoy tou Arkesileu. tun de pan gar En to pleithos metaition, oyk edekonto tous logoys. [2] enthauta de epoliorkeon ten Barken epi meinas ennea, orussontes te orugmata ypogaia feronta es to teixos kai prosbolas karteras poieumenoi. ta men nyn orugmata aner xalkeus aneure epixalku aspidi, ude epifrastheis. periferun ayten entos tou teixeos prosisxe pros to dapedon teis polios. [3] ta men de alla eske kufa pros ta prosisxe, kata de ta oryssomena exeeske o xalkos teis aspidos. antorussontes d' an tautei oi Barkaioi ekteinon tun Perseun tous geuryxeontas. touto men de oytu exeyrethe, tas de prosbolas apekrouonto oi Barkaioi.   
      201. Then as they were suffering hardship for a long time and many were falling on both sides, and especially on that of the Persians, Amasis the commander of the land-army contrived as follows: --perceiving that the Barcaians were not to be conquered by force but might be conquered by guile, he dug by night a broad trench and over it he laid timber of no great strength, and brought earth and laid it above on the top of the timber, making it level with the rest of the ground: then at daybreak he invited the men of Barca to a parley; and they gladly consented, and at last they agreed to make a treaty: and the treaty they made with one another was taken over the hidden trench, namely that so long as this earth should continue to be as it was, so long the oath should remain firm, and that the men of Barca should promise to pay tribute of due amount to the king, and the Persians should do no further violence to the men of Barca. After the oath the men of Barca trusting to these engagements both went forth themselves from their city and let any who desired it of the enemy pass within their walls, having opened all the gates; but the Persians first broke down the concealed bridge and then began to run inside the city wall. And the reason why they broke down the bridge which they had made was that they might keep their goats, since they had sworn to the men of Barca that the oath should remain firm continually for so long time as the earth should remain as it then was, but after that they had broken it down, the oath no longer remained firm.         201. [1] xronon de de pollon tribomenun kai piptontun amfoterun pollun kai oyk Esson tun Perseun, Amasis o strategos tou pezou mexanatai toiade. mathun tous Borkaioys us kata men to isxyron oyk airetoi eien, dolui de airetoi, poieei toiade. nyktos tafren oruxas eyrean epeteine xula asthenea yper ayteis, katuperthe de epipoleis tun xulun xoun geis epeforese poieun tei allei gei isopedon. [2] ama emerei de es logoys proekaleeto tous Barkaioys. oi de aspastus ypekoysan, es o sfi eade omologiei xresasthai. ten de omologien epoieunto toiende tina, epi teis krypteis tafroy tamnontes orkia, est' an e gei ayte oytu exei, menein to orkion kata xuren, kai Barkaioys te ypoteleein fanai axien basilei kai Persas meden allo neoxmoun kata Barkaioys. [3] meta de to orkion Barkaioi men pisteusantes toutoisi aytoi te exeisan ek tou asteos kai tun polemiun eun parienai es to teixos ton boylomenon, tas pasas pulas anoixantes. oi de Persai katarrexantes ten krypten gefyran etheon esu es to teixos. katerrexan de toude eineka ten epoiesan gefyran, ina empedorkeoien, tamontes toisi Barkaioisi xronon menein aiei to orkion oson an e gei menei kata tote eixe. katarrexasi de oyketi emene to orkion kata xuren.   
      202. Now the most guilty of the Barcaians, when they were delivered to her by the Persians, Pheretime impaled in a ring round about the wall; and she cut off the breasts of their wives and set the wall round with these also in order: but the rest of the men of Barca she bade the Persians carry off as spoil, except so many of them as were of the house of Battos and not sharers in the guilt of the murder; and to these Pheretime gave the city in charge.         202. [1] tous men nyn aitiutatoys tun Barkaiun e Feretime, epeite oi ek tun Perseun paredothesan, aneskolopise kuklui tou teixeos, tun de sfi gynaikun tous mazous apotamousa periestixe kai toutoisi to teixos. [2] tous de loipous tun Barkaiun leien ekeleye thesthai tous Persas, plen osoi aytun Esan Battiadai te kai tou fonoy oy metaitioi. toutoisi de ten polin epetrepse e Feretime.   
      203. So the Persians having made slaves of the rest of the Barcaians departed to go back: and when they appeared at the gates of the city of Kyrene, the Kyrenians let them go through their town in order to avoid neglect of some oracle. Then as the army was going through, Badres the commander of the fleet urged that they should capture the city, but Amasis the commander of the land-army would not consent to it; for he said that they had been sent against no other city of the Hellenes except Barca. When however they had passed through and were encamping on the hill of Zeus Lycaios, they repented of not having taken possession of Kyrene; and they endeavoured again to pass into it, but the men of Kyrene would not allow them. Then upon the Persians, although no one fought against them, there fell a sudden panic, and they ran away for about sixty furlongs and then encamped. And when the camp had been placed here, there came to it a messenger from Aryandes summoning them back; so the Persians asked the Kyrenians to give them provisions for their march and obtained their request; and having received these, they departed to go to Egypt. After this the Libyans took them up, and killed for the sake of their clothes and equipment those of them who at any time were left or straggled behind, until at last they came to Egypt.         203. [1] tous un de loipous tun Barkaiun oi Persai andrapodisamenoi apeisan opisu. kai epeite epi tei Kyrenaiun poli epestesan, oi Kyrenaioi logion ti aposieumenoi diexeikan aytous dia tou asteos. [2] diexiouses de teis stratieis Badres men o tou naytikou stratou strategos ekeleye aireein ten polin, Amasis de o tou pezou oyk ea. epi Barken gar apostaleinai mounen Ellenida polin. es o diexelthousi kai izomenoisi epi Dios Lykaioy oxthon metemelese sfi oy sxousi ten Kyrenen. kai epeirunto to deuteron parienai es ayten. oi de Kyrenaioi oy periurun. [3] toisi de Perseisi oydenos maxomenoy fobos enepese, apodramontes te oson te exekonta stadia izonto. idrythenti de tui stratopedui tautei Elthe para Arynandeu aggelos apokaleun aytous. oi de Persai Kyrenaiun deethentes epodia sfi dounai etyxon, labontes de tauta apallassonto es ten Aigypton. [4] paralabontes de to entheuten aytous Libyes teis te estheitos eineka kai teis skeyeis tous ypoleipomenoys aytun kai epelkomenoys efoneyon, es o es ten Aigypton apikonto.   
      204. This army of the Persians reached Euesperides, and this was their furthest point in Libya: and those of the Barcaians whom they had reduced to slavery they removed again from Egypt and brought them to the king, and king Dareios gave them a village in the land of Bactria in which to make a settlement. To this village they gave the name of Barca, and it still continued to be inhabited by them even down to my own time, in the land of Bactria.         204. [1] oytos o Perseun stratos teis Libues ekastatu es Eyesperidas Elthe. tous de endrapodisanto tun Barkaiun, toutoys de ek teis Aiguptoy anaspastoys epoiesan para basilea, basileus de sfi Dareios eduke teis Baktries xures kumen egkatoikeisai. oi de tei kumei tautei oynoma ethento Barken, e per eti kai es eme En oikeomene en gei tei Baktriei.    
      205. Pheretime however did not bring her life happily to an end any more than they: for as soon as she had returned from Libya to Egypt after having avenged herself on the Barcaians, she died an evil death, having become suddenly full of worms while yet alive: for, as it seems, too severe punishments inflicted by men prove displeasing to the gods. Such and so great was the punishment inflicted by Pheretime the wife of Battos on the men of Barca.        205. [1] oy men oyde e Feretime ey ten zoen kateplexe. us gar de taxista ek teis Libues tisamene tous Barkaioys apenostese es ten Aigypton, apethane kakus. zusa gar eyleun exezese, us ara anthrupoisi ai lien isxyrai timuriai pros theun epifthonoi ginontai.ek men de Feretimes teis Battoy toiaute te kai tosaute timurie egeneto es Barkaioys.
    
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore

     BOOK V THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED TERPSICHORE         
I s t o r i u n   ET e r ps i x o r e
 
Persai   
      1. In the meantime those of the Persians who had been left behind in Europe by Dareios, of whom Megabazos was the commander, had subdued the people of Perinthos first of the Hellespontians, since they refused to be subject to Dareios. These had in former times also been hardly dealt with by the Paionians: for the Paionians from the Strymon had been commanded by an oracle of their god to march against the Perinthians; and if the Perinthians, when encamped opposite to them, should shout aloud and call to them by their name, they were to attack them; but if they should not shout to them, they were not to attack them: and thus the Paionians proceeded to do. Now when the Perinthians were encamped opposite to them in the suburb of their city, a challenge was made and a single combat took place in three different forms; for they matched a man against a man, and a horse against a horse, and a dog against a dog. Then, as the Perinthians were getting the better in two of the three, in their exultation they raised a shout of paion, and the Paionians conjectured that this was the very thing which was spoken of in the oracle, and said doubtless to one another, "Now surely the oracle is being accomplished for us, now it is time for us to act." So the Paionians attacked the Perinthians when they had raised the shout of paion, and they had much the better in the fight, and left but few of them alive.         1. [1] oi de en tei Eyrupei tun Perseun kataleifthentes ypo Dareioy, tun o Megabazos Erxe, prutoys men Perinthioys Ellespontiun oy boylomenoys ypekooys einai Dareioy katestrepsanto, periefthentas proteron kai ypo Paionun trexeus. [2] oi gar un apo Strymonos Paiones xresantos tou theou strateuesthai epi Perinthioys, kai en men antikatizomenoi epikalesuntai sfeas oi Perinthioi onomasti busantes, tous de epixeireein, en de me epibusuntai, me epixeireein, epoieon oi Paiones tauta. antikatizomenun de tun Perinthiun en tui proasteiui, enthauta moynomaxie trifasie ek proklesios sfi egeneto. kai gar andra andri kai ippon ippui synebalon kai kuna kyni. [3] nikuntun de ta duo tun Perinthiun, us epaiunizon kexarekotes, synebalonto oi Paiones to xresterion ayto touto einai kai eipan koy para sfisi aytoisi <<nun an eie o xresmos epiteleomenos emin, nun emeteron ergon.>> oytu toisi Perinthioisi paiunisasi epixeireoysi oi Paiones, kai pollon te ekratesan kai elipon sfeun oligoys.    
      2. Thus it happened with respect to those things which had been done to them in former times by the Paionians; and at this time, although the Perinthians proved themselves brave men in defence of their freedom, the Persians and Megabazos got the better of them by numbers. Then after Perinthos had been conquered, Megabazos marched his army through the length of Thracia, forcing every city and every race of those who dwell there to submit to the king, for so it had been commanded him by Dareios, to subdue Thracia.         2. [1] ta men de apo Paionun proteron genomena ude egeneto. tote de andrun agathun peri teis eleytheries ginomenun tun Perinthiun oi Persai te kai o Megabazos epekratesan plethei. [2] us de exeiruthe e Perinthos, elayne Megabazos ton straton dia teis Threikes, pasan polin kai pan ethnos tun tautei oikemenun emeroumenos basilei. tauta gar oi enetetalto ek Dareioy, Threiken katastrefesthai.    
      3. Now the Thracian race is the most numerous, except the Indians, in all the world: and if it should come to be ruled over by one man, or to agree together in one, it would be irresistible in fight and the strongest by far of all nations, in my opinion. Since however this is impossible for them and cannot ever come to pass among them, they are in fact weak for that reason. They have many names, belonging to their various tribes in different places; but they all follow customs which are nearly the same in all respects, except the Getai and Trausians and those who dwell above the Crestonians.         3. [1] Threikun de ethnos megiston esti meta ge Indous pantun anthrupun. ei de yp' enos arxoito e froneoi kata tuyto, amaxon t' an eie kai pollui kratiston pantun ethneun kata gnumen ten emen. alla gar touto aporon sfi kai amexanon me kote eggenetai, eisi de kata touto asthenees. [2] oynomata d' exoysi polla kata xuras ekastoi, nomoisi de oytoi paraplesioisi pantes xreuntai kata panta, plen Geteun kai Traysun kai tun katuperthe Krestunaiun oikeontun.    
      4. Of these the practices of the Getai, who believe themselves to be immortal, have been spoken of by me already: and the Trausians perform everything else in the same manner as the other Thracians, but in regard to those who are born and die among them they do as follows:--when a child has been born, the nearest of kin sit round it and make lamentation for all the evils of which he must fulfil the measure, now that he is born, enumerating the whole number of human ills; but when a man is dead, they cover him up in the earth with sport and rejoicing, saying at the same time from what great evils he has escaped and is now in perfect bliss.         4. [1] toutun de ta men Getai oi athanatizontes poieusi, eiretai moi. Traysoi de ta men alla panta kata tayta toisi alloisi Threixi epiteleoysi, kata de ton ginomenon sfi kai apoginomenon poieusi toiade. [2] ton men genomenon periizomenoi oi prosekontes olofurontai, osa min dei epeite egeneto anapleisai kaka, anegeomenoi ta anthrupeia panta pathea. ton d' apogenomenon paizontes te kai edomenoi gei kruptoysi, epilegontes osun kakun exapallaxtheis esti en pasei eydaimoniei.    
      5. Those who dwell above the Crestonians do as follows:--each man has many wives, and when any man of them is dead, a great competition takes place among his wives, with much exertion on the part of their friends, about the question of which of them was most loved by their husband; and she who is preferred by the decision and so honoured, is first praised by both men and women, then her throat is cut over the tomb by her nearest of kin, and afterwards she is buried together with her husband; and the others are exceedingly grieved at it, for this is counted as the greatest reproach to them.         5. [1] oi de katuperthe Krestunaiun poieusi toiade. exei gynaikas ekastos polla,. epean un tis aytun apothanei, krisis ginetai megale tun gynaikun kai filun spoydai isxyrai peri toude, etis ayteun efileeto malista ypo tou andros. e d' an krithei kai timethei, egkumiastheisa ypo te andrun kai gynaikun sfazetai es ton tafon ypo tou oikeiotatoy euyteis, sfaxtheisa de synthaptetai tui andri. ai de allai symforen megalen poieuntai. oneidos gar sfi touto megiston ginetai.    
      6. Of the other Thracians the custom is to sell their children to be carried away out of the country; and over their maidens they do not keep watch, but allow them to have commerce with whatever men they please, but over their wives they keep very great watch; and they buy their wives for great sums of money from their parents. To be pricked with figures is accounted a mark of noble rank, and not to be so marked is a sign of low birth. Not to work is counted most honourable, and to be a worker of the soil is above all things dishonourable: to live on war and plunder is the most honourable thing.         6. [1] tun de de allun Threikun esti ode nomos. puleusi ta tekna ep' exagugei, tas de parthenoys oy fylassoysi, all' eusi toisi aytai boulontai andrasi misgesthai. tas de gynaikas isxyrus fylassoysi kai uneontai tas gynaikas para tun goneun xrematun megalun. [2] kai to men estixthai eygenes kekritai, to de astikton agennes. argon einai kalliston, geis de ergaten atimotaton. to zein apo polemoy kai leistuos kalliston. oytoi men sfeun oi epifanestatoi nomoi eisi.   
      7. These are their most remarkable customs; and of the gods they worship only Ares and Dionysos and Artemis. Their kings, however, apart from the rest of the people, worship Hermes more than all gods, and swear by him alone; and they say that they are descended from Hermes.         7. [1] theous de sebontai mounoys tousde, Area kai Dionyson kai Artemin. oi de basilees aytun, parex tun allun polieteun, sebontai Ermeen malista theun, kai omnuoysi mounon touton, kai legoysi gegonenai apo Ermeu euytous.    
      8. The manner of burial for the rich among them is this:--for three days they expose the corpse to view, and they slay all kinds of victims and feast, having first made lamentation. Then they perform the burial rites, either consuming the body with fire or covering it up in the earth without burning; and afterwards when they have heaped up a mound they celebrate games with every kind of contest, in which reasonably the greatest prizes are assigned for single combat. This is the manner of burial among the Thracians.         8. [1] tafai de toisi eydaimosi aytun eisi aide. treis men emeras protitheisi ton nekron, kai pantoia sfaxantes ireia eyuxeontai, proklausantes pruton. epeita de thaptoysi katakausantes e allus gei krupsantes, xuma de xeantes aguna titheisi pantoion, en tui ta megista aethla tithetai kata logon moynomaxies. tafai men de Threikun eisi aide.    
      9. Of the region lying further on towards the North of this country no one can declare accurately who the men are who dwell in it; but the parts which lie immediately beyond the Ister are known to be uninhabited and vast in extent. The only men of whom I can hear who dwell beyond the Ister are those who are said to be called Sigynnai, and who use the Median fashion of dress. Their horses, it is said, have shaggy hair all over their bodies, as much as five fingers long; and these are small and flat-nosed and too weak to carry men, but when yoked in chariots they are very high-spirited; therefore the natives of the country drive chariots. The boundaries of this people extend, it is said, to the parts near the Enetoi, who live on the Adriatic; and people say that they are colonists from the Medes. In what way however these have come to be colonists from the Medes I am not able for my part to conceive, but everything is possible in the long course of ages. However that may be, the Ligurians who dwell in the region inland above Massalia call traders sigynnai, and the men of Cyprus give the same name to spears.         9. [1] to de pros boreu teis xures eti tautes oydeis exei frasai to atrekes oitines eisi anthrupoi oikeontes ayten, alla ta peren ede tou Istroy eremos xure fainetai eousa kai apeiros. mounoys de dunamai pythesthai oikeontas peren tou Istroy anthrupoys toisi oynoma einai Sigunnas, estheiti de xreumenoys Medikei. [2] tous de ippoys aytun einai lasioys apan to suma epi pente daktuloys to bathos tun trixun, mikrous de kai simous kai adynatoys andras ferein, zeygnymenoys de yp' armata einai oxytatoys. armatelateein de pros tauta tous epixurioys. katekein de toutun tous oyroys agxou Enetun tun en tui Adriei. [3] einai de Medun sfeas apoikoys legoysi. okus de oytoi Medun apoikoi gegonasi, egu men oyk exu epifrasasthai, genoito d' an pan en tui makrui xronui. Sigunnas d' un kaleoysi Digyes oi anu yper Massalies oikeontes tous kapeloys, Kuprioi de ta dorata.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [10]

     10. Now the Thracians say that the other side of the Ister is occupied by bees, and that by reason of them it is not possible to pass through and proceed further: but to me it seems that when they so speak, they say that which is not probable; for these creatures are known to be intolerant of cold, and to me it seems that the regions which go up towards the pole are uninhabitable by reason of the cold climate. These then are the tales reported about this country; and however that may be, Megabazos was then making the coast-regions of it subject to the Persians.         10. [1] us de Threikes legoysi, melissai katexoysi ta peren tou Istroy, kai ypo toyteun oyk einai dielthein to prosuteru. emoi men nyn tauta legontes dokeoysi legein oyk oikota. ta gar zuia tauta fainetai einai dusriga. alla moi ta ypo ten arkton aoiketa dokeei einai dia ta psuxea. tauta men nyn teis xures tautes peri legetai. ta parathalassia d' un ayteis Megabazos Perseun katekoa epoiee.    
      11. Meanwhile Dareios, so soon as he had crossed over the Hellespont and come to Sardis, called to mind the service rendered to him by Histiaios the Milesian and also the advice of the Mytilenian Coes, and having sent for them to come to Sardis he offered them a choice of rewards. Histiaios then, being despot of Miletos, did not make request for any government in addition to that, but he asked for the district of Myrkinos which belonged to the Edonians, desiring there to found a city. Histiaios chose this for himself; but Coes, not being a despot but a man of the people, asked to be made despot of Mitylene.         11. [1] Dareios de us diabas taxista ton Ellesponton apiketo es Sardis, emnesthe teis ex Istiaioy te tou Milesioy eyergesies kai teis parainesios tou Mytilenaioy Kueu, metapempsamenos de sfeas es Sardis edidoy aytoisi airesin. [2] o men de Istiaios, ate tyranneuun teis Miletoy, tyrannidos men oydemieis prosexreize, aiteei de Murkinon ten Edunun, boylomenos en aytei polin ktisai. oytos men de tauten aireetai, o de Kues, oia te oy turannos demotes te eun, aiteei Mytilenes tyranneusai. teleuthentun de amfoteroisi, oytoi men kata ta eilonto etraponto,   
      12. After the desires of both had been fulfilled, they betook themselves to that which they had chosen: and at this same time it chanced that Dareios saw a certain thing which made him desire to command Megabazos to conquer the Paionians and remove them forcibly from Europe into Asia: and the thing was this:--There were certain Paionians named Pigres and Mantyas, who when Dareios had crossed over into Asia, came to Sardis, because they desired themselves to have rule over the Paionians, and with them they brought their sister, who was tall and comely. Then having watched for a time when Dareios took his seat publicly in the suburb of the Lydian city, they dressed up their sister in the best way they could, and sent her to fetch water, having a water-jar upon her head and leading a horse after her by a bridle round her arm, and at the same time spinning flax. Now when the woman passed out of the city by him, Dareios paid attention to the matter, for that which was done by the woman was not of Persian nor yet of Lydian fashion, nor indeed after the manner of any people of Asia. He sent therefore some of his spearmen, bidding them watch what the woman would do with the horse. They accordingly followed after her; and she having arrived at the river watered the horse, and having watered him and filled her jar with the water, she passed along by the same way, bearing the water upon her head, leading the horse after her by a bridle round her arm, and at the same time turning the spindle.         12. [1] Dareion de syneneike preigma toionde idomenon epithymeisai enteilasthai Megabazui Paionas elonta anaspastoys poieisai es ten Asien ek teis Eyrupes. En Pigres kai Mantues andres Paiones, oi epeite Dareios diebe es ten Asien, aytoi ethelontes Paionun tyranneuein apikneontai es Sardis, ama agomenoi adelfeen megalen te kai eyeidea. [2] fylaxantes de Dareion prokatizomenon es to proasteion to tun Lydun epoiesan toionde. skeyasantes ten adelfeen us eixon arista, ep' ydur epempon aggos epi tei kefalei exoysan kai ek tou braxionos ippon epelkoysan kai kluthoysan linon. [3] us de parexeie e gyne, epimeles tui Dareiui egeneto. oyte gar Persika En oyte Ludia ta poieumena ek teis gynaikos, oyte pros tun ek teis Asies oydamun. epimeles de us oi egeneto, tun doryforun tinas pempei keleuun fylaxai o ti xresetai tui ippui e gyne. [4] oi men de opisthe eiponto. e de epeite apiketo epi ton potamon, Erse ton ippon, arsasa de kai to aggos tou ydatos emplesamene ten ayten odon parexeie, feroysa to ydur epi teis kefaleis kai epelkoysa ek tou braxionos ton ippon kai strefoysa ton atrakton.    
      13. Then Dareios, marvelling both at that which he heard from those who went to observe and also at that which he saw himself, bade them bring her into his presence: and when she was brought, her brothers also came, who had been watching these things at no great distance off. So then when Dareios asked of what country she was, the young men said that they were Paionians and that she was their sister; and he replied: "Who then are these Paionians, and where upon the earth do they dwell?" and he asked them also what they desired, that they had come to Sardis. They declared to him that they had come to give themselves up to him, and that Paionia was a country situated upon the river Strymon, and that the Strymon was not far from the Hellespont, and finally that they were colonists from the Teucrians of Troy. All these things severally they told him; and he asked whether all the women of that land were as industrious as their sister; and they very readily replied to this also, saying that it was so, for it was with a view to that very thing that they had been doing this.         13. [1] thumazun de o Dareios ta te ekoyse ek tun kataskopun kai ta aytos ura, agein ayten ekeleye euytui es opsin. us de axthe, pareisan kai oi adelfeoi ayteis oy kei prosu skopien exontes toutun. eirutuntos de tou Dareioy opodape eie, efasan oi neeniskoi einai Paiones kai ekeinen einai sfeun adelfeen. [2] o d' ameibeto, tines de oi Paiones anthrupoi eisi kai kou geis oikemenoi, kai ti keinoi ethelontes elthoien es Sardis. oi de oi efrazon us elthoien men ekeinui dusontes sfeas aytous, eie de e Paionie epi tui Strymoni potamui pepolismene, o de Strymun oy prosu tou Ellespontoy, eiesan de Teykrun tun ek Troies apoikoi. [3] oi men de tauta ekasta elegon, o de eiruta ei kai pasai aytothi ai gynaikes eiesan oytu ergatides. oi de kai touto efasan prothumus oytu exein. aytou gar un toutoy eineka kai epoieeto.    
      14. Then Dareios wrote a letter to Megabazos, whom he had left to command his army in Thrace, bidding him remove the Paionians from their place of habitation and bring them to the king, both themselves and their children and their wives. Then forthwith a horseman set forth to ride in haste bearing the message to the Hellespont, and having passed over to the other side he gave the paper to Megabazos. So he having read it and having obtained guides from Thrace, set forth to march upon Paionia:         14. [1] enthauta Dareios grafei grammata Megabazui, ton elipe en tei Threikei strategon, entellomenos exanasteisai ex etheun Paionas kai par' euyton agagein kai aytous kai ta tekna te kai tas gynaikas aytun. [2] aytika de ippeus ethee ferun ten aggelien epi ton Ellesponton, peraiutheis de didoi to byblion tui Megabazui. o de epilexamenos kai labun egemonas ek teis Threikes estrateueto epi ten Paionien.    
      15. and the Paionians, being informed that the Persians were coming against them, gathered all their powers together and marched out in the direction of the sea, supposing that the Persians when they invaded them would make their attack on that side. The Paionians then were prepared, as I say, to drive off the army of Megabazos when it came against them; but the Persians hearing that the Paionians had gathered their powers and were guarding the entrance which lay towards the sea, directed their course with guides along the upper road; and passing unperceived by the Paionians they fell upon their cities, which were left without men, and finding them without defenders they easily took possession of them. The Paionians when they heard that their cities were in the hands of the enemy, at once dispersed, each tribe to its own place of abode, and proceeded to deliver themselves up to the Persians. Thus then it happened that these tribes of the Paionians, namely the Siropaionians, the Paioplians and all up to the lake Prasias, were removed from their place of habitation and brought to Asia;         15. [1] pythomenoi de oi Paiones tous Persas epi sfeas ienai, alisthentes exestrateusanto pros thalasses, dokeontes tautei epixeiresein tous Persas emballontas. [2] oi men de Paiones Esan etoimoi ton Megabazoy straton epionta erukein. oi de Persai pythomenoi synalisthai tous Paionas kai ten pros thalasses esbolen fylassontas, exontes egemonas ten anu odon trepontai, lathontes de tous Paionas espiptoysi es tas polias aytun eousas andrun eremoys. oia de keineisi epipesontes eypeteus katesxon. [3] oi de Paiones us eputhonto exomenas tas polias, aytika diaskedasthentes kat' euytous ekastoi etraponto kai paredidosan sfeas aytous toisi Perseisi. oytu de Paionun Siriopaiones te kai Paioplai kai oi mexri teis Prasiados limnes ex etheun exanastantes egonto es ten Asien.    
      16. but those who dwell about mount Pangaion, and about the Doberians and Agrianians and Odomantians, and about the lake Prasias itself, were not conquered at all by Megabazos. He tried however to remove even those who lived in the lake and who had their dwellings in the following manner:--a platform fastened together and resting upon lofty piles stood in the middle of the water of the lake, with a narrow approach to it from the mainland by a single bridge. The piles which supported the platform were no doubt originally set there by all the members of the community working together, but since that time they continue to set them by observance of this rule, that is to say, every man who marries brings from the mountain called Orbelos three piles for each wife and sets them as supports; and each man takes to himself many wives. And they have their dwelling thus, that is each man has possession of a hut upon the platform in which he lives and of a trap-door leading through the platform down to the lake: and their infant children they tie with a rope by the foot, for fear that they should roll into the water. To their horses and beasts of burden they give fish for fodder; and of fish there is so great quantity that if a man open the trap-door and let down an empty basket by a cord into the lake, after waiting quite a short time he draws it up again full of fish. Of the fish there are two kinds, and they call them paprax and tilon.         16. [1] oi de peri te Paggaion oros kai Doberas kai Agrianas kai Odomantoys kai ayten ten limnen ten Prasiada oyk exeiruthesan arxen ypo Megabazoy. epeirethe de kai tous en tei limnei katoikemenoys exaireein ude. ikria epi stayrun ypselun ezeygmena en mesei esteke tei limnei, esodon ek teis epeiroy steinen exonta miei gefurei. [2] tous de stayrous tous ypesteutas toisi ikrioisi to men koy arxaion estesan koinei pantes oi polieitai, meta de nomui xreumenoi istasi toiuide. komizontes ex oreos tui oynoma esti Orbelos, kata gynaika ekasten o gameun treis stayrous ypistesi. agetai de ekastos syxnas gynaikas. [3] oikeoysi de toiouton tropon, krateun ekastos epi tun ikriun kalubes te en tei diaitatai kai thures katapakteis dia tun ikriun katu ferouses es ten limnen. ta de nepia paidia deoysi tou podos spartui, me katakylisthei deimainontes. [4] toisi de ippoisi kai toisi ypozygioisi parexoysi xorton ixthus. tun de pleithos esti tosouto uste, otan ten thuren ten katapakten anaklinei, katiei sxoinui spyrida keinen es ten limnen, kai oy pollon tina xronon episxun anaspai plerea ixthuun. tun de ixthuun esti genea duo, tous kaleoysi paprakas te kai tilunas.    
      17. So then those of the Paionians who had been conquered were being brought to Asia: and Megabazos meanwhile, after he had conquered the Paionians, sent as envoys to Macedonia seven Persians, who after himself were the men of most repute in the army. These were being sent to Amyntas to demand of him earth and water for Dareios the king. Now from lake Prasias there is a very short way into Macedonia; for first, quite close to the lake, there is the mine from which after this time there came in regularly a talent of silver every day to Alexander; and after the mine, when you have passed over the mountain called Dysoron, you are in Macedonia.         17. [1] Paionun men de oi xeiruthentes egonto es ten Asien. Megabazos de us exeirusato tous Paionas, pempei aggeloys es Makedonien andras epta Persas, oi met' ayton ekeinon Esan dokimutatoi en tui stratopedui. epemponto de oytoi para Amunten aitesontes gein te kai ydur Dareiui basilei. [2] esti de ek teis Prasiados limnes suntomos karta es ten Makedonien. pruton men gar exetai teis limnes to metallon ex oy ysteron toutun talanton argyrioy Alexandrui emeres ekastes efoita, meta de to metallon Dusuron kaleomenon oros yperbanta einai en Makedonin.    
      18. These Persians then, who had been sent to Amyntas, having arrived came into the presence of Amyntas and proceeded to demand earth and water for king Dareios. This he was willing to give, and also he invited them to be his guests; and he prepared a magnificent dinner and received the Persians with friendly hospitality. Then when dinner was over, the Persians while drinking pledges to one another said thus: "Macedonian guest-friend, it is the custom among us Persians, when we set forth a great dinner, then to bring in also our concubines and lawful wives to sit beside us. Do thou then, since thou didst readily receive us and dost now entertain us magnificently as thy guests, and since thou art willing to give to king Dareios earth and water, consent to follow our custom." To this Amyntas replied: "Persians, among us the custom is not so, but that men should be separate from women. Since however ye being our masters make this request in addition, this also shall be given you." Having so said Amyntas proceeded to send for the women; and when they came being summoned, they sat down in order opposite to the Persians. Then the Persians, seeing women of comely form, spoke to Amyntas and said that this which had been done was by no means well devised; for it was better that the women should not come at all, than that they should come and should not seat themselves by their side, but sit opposite and be a pain to their eyes. So Amyntas being compelled bade them sit by the side of the Persians; and when the women obeyed, forthwith the Persians, being much intoxicated, began to touch their breasts, and some no doubt also tried to kiss them.         18. [1] oi un Persai oi pemfthentes oytoi para ton Amunten us apikonto, aiteon elthontes es opsin ten Amunteu Dareiui basilei gein te kai ydur. o de tauta te edidoy kai sfeas epi xeinia kaleei, paraskeyasamenos de deipnon megaloprepes edeketo tous Persas filofronus. [2] us de apo deipnoy egenonto, diapinontes eipan oi Persai tade. <<xeine Makedun, emin nomos esti toisi Perseisi, epean deipnon protithumetha mega, tote kai tas pallakas kai tas koyridias gynaikas esagesthai paredroys. su nyn, epei per prothumus men edexao megalus de xeinizeis, didois de basilei Dareiui gein te kai ydur, epeo nomui tui emeterui.>> [3] eipe pros tauta Amuntes <<u Persai, nomos men emin ge esti oyk oytos, alla kexuristhai andras gynaikun. epeite de ymeis eontes despotai prosxreizete toutun, parestai ymin kai tauta.>> eipas tosauta o Amuntes metepempeto tas gynaikas. ai d' epeite kaleomenai Elthon, epexeis antiai izonto toisi Perseisi. [4] enthauta oi Persai idomenoi gynaikas eymorfoys elegon pros Amunten famenoi to poiethen touto oyden einai sofon. kresson gar einai arxeithen me elthein tas gynaikas e elthousas kai me parizomenas antias izesthai algedonas sfisi ofthalmun. [5] anagkazomenos de o Amuntes ekeleye parizein. peithomeneun de tun gynaikun aytika oi Persai mastun te aptonto oia pleonus oinumenoi, kai kou tis kai fileein epeirato.    
      19. Amyntas seeing this kept quiet, notwithstanding that he felt anger, because he excessively feared the Persians; but Alexander the son of Amyntas, who was present and saw this, being young and without experience of calamity was not able to endure any longer; but being impatient of it he said to Amyntas: "My father, do thou grant that which thy age demands, and go away to rest, nor persevere longer in the drinking; but I will remain here and give to our guests all that is convenient." On this Amyntas, understanding that Alexander was intending to do some violence, said: "My son, I think that I understand thy words, as the heat of anger moves thee, namely that thou desirest to send me away and then do some deed of violence: therefore I ask of thee not to do violence to these men, that it may not be our ruin, but endure to see that which is being done: as to my departure, however, in that I will do as thou sayest."         19. [1] Amuntes men de tauta oreun atremas eixe, kaiper dysforeun, oia yperdeimainun tous Persas. Alexandros de o Amunteu pareun te kai oreun tauta, ate neos te eun kai kakun apathes, oydamus eti katexein oios te En, uste de bareus ferun eipe pros Amunten tade. <<u pater, su men eike tei elikiei apiun te anapaueo, mede liparee tei posi. egu de prosmenun aytou teide panta ta epitedea parexu toisi xeinoisi.>> [2] pros tauta synieis Amuntes oti neutera pregmata pressein melloi o Alexandros, legei <<u pai, sxedon gar sey anakaiomenoy syniemi tous logoys, oti etheleis eme ekpempsas poieein ti neuteron. egu un sey xreizu meden neoxmusai kat' andras toutoys, ina me exergasei emeas, alla anexey oreun ta poieumena. amfi de apodui tei emei peisomai toi.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [20]

     20. When Amyntas after having made of him this request had departed, Alexander said to the Persians: "With these women ye have perfect freedom, guests, to have commerce with all, if ye so desire, or with as many of them as ye will. About this matter ye shall be they who give the word; but now, since already the hour is approaching for you to go to bed and I see that ye have well drunk, let these women go away, if so it is pleasing to you, to bathe themselves; and when they have bathed, then receive them back into your company." Having so said, since the Persians readily agreed, he dismissed the women, when they had gone out, to the women's chambers; and Alexander himself equipped men equal in number to the women and smooth-faced, in the dress of the women, and giving them daggers he led them into the banqueting-room; and as he led them in, he said thus to the Persians: "Persians, it seems to me that ye have been entertained with a feast to which nothing was wanting; for other things, as many as we had, and moreover such as we were able to find out and furnish, are all supplied to you, and there is this especially besides, which is the chief thing of all, that is, we give you freely in addition our mothers and our sisters, in order that ye may perceive fully that ye are honoured by us with that treatment which ye deserve, and also in order that ye may report to the king who sent you that a man of Hellas, ruler under him of the Macedonians, entertained you well at board and bed." Having thus said Alexander caused a Macedonian man in the guise of a woman to sit by each Persian, and they, when the Persians attempted to lay hands on them, slew them.         20. [1] us de o Amuntes xreisas toutun oixukee, legei o Alexandros pros tous Persas <<gynaikun toyteun, u xeinoi, esti ymin polle eypeteie, kai ei paseisi boulesthe misgesthai kai okoseisi un ayteun. [2] toutoy men peri aytoi aposemaneete. nun de, sxedon gar ede teis koites ure proserxetai ymin kai kalus exontas ymeas oru methes, gynaikas tautas, ei ymin filon esti, apete lousasthai, loysamenas de opisu prosdekesthe.>> [3] eipas tauta, synepainoi gar Esan oi Persai, gynaikas men exelthousas apepempe es ten gynaikeien, aytos de o Alexandros isoys teisi gynaixi arithmon andras leiogeneioys tei tun gynaikun estheiti skeyasas kai egxeiridia dous Ege esu, paragun de toutoys elege toisi Perseisi tade. [4] <<u Persai, oikate pandaisiei teleei istieisthai. ta te gar alla osa eixomen, kai pros ta oia te En exeyrontas parexein, panta ymin paresti, kai de kai tode to pantun megiston, tas te euytun meteras kai tas adelfeas epidapsileyometha ymin, us panteleus mathete timumenoi pros emeun tun per este axioi, pros de kai basilei tui pempsanti apaggeilete us aner Ellen Makedonun yparxos ey ymeas edexato kai trapezei kai koitei.>> [5] tauta eipas o Alexandros parizei Persei andri andra Makedona us gynaika tui logui. oi de, epeite sfeun oi Persai psauein epeirunto, diergazonto aytous.    
      21. So these perished by this fate, both they themselves and their company of servants; for there came with them carriages and servants and all the usual pomp of equipage, and this was all made away with at the same time as they. Afterwards in no long time a great search was made by the Persians for these men, and Alexander stopped them with cunning by giving large sums of money and his own sister, whose name was Gygaia; --by giving, I say, these things to Bubares a Persian, commander of those who were searching for the men who had been killed, Alexander stopped their search.         21. [1] kai oytoi men toutui tui morui dieftharesan, kai aytoi kai e therapeie aytun. eipeto gar de sfi kai oxemata kai therapontes kai e pasa polle paraskeye. panta de tauta ama pasi ekeinoisi efanisto. [2] meta de xronui oy pollui ysteron zetesis tun andrun toutun megale ek tun Perseun egineto, kai sfeas Alexandros katelabe sofiei, xremata te dous polla kai ten euytou adelfeen tei oynoma En Gygaie. dous de tauta katelabe o Alexandros Boybarei andri Persei, tun dizemenun tous apolomenoys tui strategui. o men nyn tun Perseun toutun thanatos oytu katalamftheis esigethe.   
      22. Thus the death of these Persians was kept concealed. And that these descendants of Perdiccas are Hellenes, as they themselves say, I happen to know myself, and not only so, but I will prove in the succeeding history that they are Hellenes. Moreover the Hellanodicai, who manage the games at Olympia, decided that they were so: for when Alexander wished to contend in the games and had descended for this purpose into the arena, the Hellenes who were to run against him tried to exclude him, saying that the contest was not for Barbarians to contend in but for Hellenes: since however Alexander proved that he was of Argos, he was judged to be a Hellene, and when he entered the contest of the foot-race his lot came out with that of the first.         22. [1] Ellenas de einai toutoys tous apo Perdikkeu gegonotas, kata per aytoi legoysi, aytos te oytu tygxanu epistamenos kai de kai en toisi opisthe logoisi apodexu us eisi Ellenes, pros de kai oi ton en Olympiei diepontes aguna Ellenodikai oytu egnusan einai. [2] Alexandroy gar aethleuein elomenoy kai katabantos ep' ayto touto, oi antitheysomenoi Ellenun exeirgon min, famenoi oy barbarun agunisteun einai ton aguna alla Ellenun. Alexandros de epeide apedexe us eie Argeios, ekrithe te einai Ellen kai agunizomenos stadion synexepipte tui prutui. tauta men nyn oytu kei egeneto.   
      23. Thus then it happened with regard to these things: and at the same time Megabazos had arrived at the Hellespont bringing with him the Paionians; and thence after passing over the straits he came to Sardis. Then, since Histiaios the Milesian was already engaged in fortifying with a wall the place which he had asked and obtained from Dareios as a reward for keeping safe the bridge of boats (this place being that which is called Myrkinos, lying along the bank of the river Strymon), Megabazos, having perceived that which was being done by Histiaios, as soon as he came to Sardis bringing the Paionians, said thus to Dareios: "O king, what a thing is this that thou hast done, granting permission to a Hellene who is skilful and cunning to found a city in Thracia in a place where there is forest for shipbuilding in abundance and great quantity of wood for oars and mines of silver and great numbers both of Hellenes and Barbarians living round, who when they have obtained a leader will do that which he shall command them both by day and by night. Therefore stop this man from doing so, that thou be not involved in a domestic war: and stop him by sending for him in a courteous manner; but when thou hast got him in thy hands, then cause that he shall never again return to the land of the Hellenes.         23. [1] Megabazos de agun tous Paionas apiketo epi ton Elleponton. entheuten diaperaiutheis apiketo es tas Sardis. ate de teixeontos ede Istiaioy tou Milesioy ten para Dareioy aitesas etyxe misthon dureen fylakeis teis sxedies, eontos de tou xuroy toutoy para Strymona potamon tui oynoma esti Murkinos, mathun o Megabazos to poieumenon ek tou Istiaioy, us Elthe taxista es tas Sardis agun tous Paionas, elege Dareiui tade. [2] <<u basileu, koion ti xreima epoiesas, andri Elleni deinui te kai sofui dous egktisasthai polin en Threikei, ina ide te naypegesimos esti afthonos kai polloi kupees kai metalla argurea, omilos te pollos men Ellen perioikeei pollos de barbaros, oi prostateu epilabomenoi poiesoysi touto to an keinos exegeetai kai emeres kai nyktos. [3] su nyn touton ton andra pauson tauta poieunta, ina me oikeiui polemui synexei. tropui de epiui metapempsamenos pauson. epean de ayton perilabeis, poieein okus meketi keinos es Ellenas apixetai.>>    
      24. Thus saying Megabazos easily persuaded Dareios, who thought that he was a true prophet of that which was likely to come to pass: and upon that Dareios sent a messenger to Myrkinos and said as follows: "Hisiaios, king Dareios saith these things:--By taking thought I find that there is no one more sincerely well disposed than thou art to me and to my power; and this I know having learnt by deeds not words. Now therefore, since I have it in my mind to accomplish great matters, come hither to me by all means, that I may communicate them to thee." Histiaios therefore, trusting to these sayings and at the same time accounting it a great thing to become a counsellor of the king, came to Sardis; and when he had come Dareios spoke to him as follows: "Histiaios, I sent for thee for this reason, namely because when I had returned from the Scythians and thou wert gone away out of the sight of my eyes, never did I desire to see anything again within so short a time as I desired then both to see thee and that thou shouldst come to speech with me; since I perceived that the most valuable of all possessions is a friend who is a man of understanding and also sincerely well-disposed, both which qualities I know exist in thee, and I am able to bear witness of them in regard to my affairs. Now therefore (for thou didst well in that thou camest hither) this is that which I propose to thee:--leave Miletos alone and also thy newly- founded city in Thracia, and coming with me to Susa, have whatsoever things I have, eating at my table and being my counseller."         24. [1] tauta legun o Megabazos eypeteus epeithe Dareion us ey proorun to mellon ginesthai. meta de pempsas aggelon es ten Murkinon o Dareios elege tade. <<Istiaie, basileus Dareios tade legei. egu frontizun eyrisku emoi te kai toisi emoisi pregmasi einai oydena seu andra eynoesteron. touto de oy logoisi all' ergoisi oida mathun. [2] nun un, epinoeu gar pregmata megala katergasasthai, apikeo moi pantus, ina toi ayta ypertheumai.>> toutoisi toisi epesi pisteusas o Istiaios, kai ama mega poieumenos basileos sumboylos genesthai, apiketo es tas Sardis. [3] apikomenui de oi elege Dareios tade. <<Istiaie, egu se metepempsamen tunde eineken. epeite taxista enostesa apo Skytheun kai su moi egeneo ex ofthalmun, oyden ku allo xreima oytu en braxei epezetesa us se idein te kai es logoys moi apikesthai, egnukus oti ktematun pantun esti timiutaton aner filos synetos te kai eynoos, ta toi egu kai amfotera syneidus exu martyreein es pregmata ta ema. [4] nun un, ey gar epoiesas apikomenos, tade toi egu proteinomai. Mileton men ea kai ten neoktiston en Threikei polin, su de moi epomenos es Sousa exe ta per an egu exu, emos te sussitos eun kai sumboylos.>>    
      25. Thus said Dareios, and having appointed Artaphrenes his own brother and the son of his father to be governor of Sardis, he marched away to Susa taking with him Histiaios, after he had first named Otanes to be commander of those who dwelt along the sea coasts. This man's father Sisamnes, who had been made one of the Royal Judges, king Cambyses slew, because he had judged a cause unjustly for money, and flayed off all his skin: then after he had torn away the skin he cut leathern thongs out of it and stretched them across the seat where Sisamnes had been wont to sit to give judgment; and having stretched them in the seat, Cambyses appointed the son of that Sisamnes whom he had slain and flayed, to be judge instead of his father, enjoining him to remember in what seat he was sitting to give judgment.         25. [1] tauta Dareios eipas, kai katastesas Artafrenea adelfeon euytou omopatrion yparxon einai Sardiun, apelayne es Sousa ama agomenos Istiaion, Otanea de apodexas strategon einai tun parathalassiun andrun. tou ton patera Sisamnen basileus Kambuses genomenon tun basileiun dikasteun, oti epi xremasi diken adikon edikase, sfaxas apedeire pasan ten anthrupeen, spadixas de aytou to derma imantas ex aytou etame kai eneteine ton thronon es ton izun edikaze. [2] entanusas de o Kambuses apedexe dikasten einai anti tou Sisamneu, ton apokteinas apedeire, ton paida tou Sisamneu, enteilamenos oi memneisthai en tui katizun thronui dikazei.    
      26. This Otanes then, who was made to sit in that seat, had now become the successor of Megabazos in the command: and he conquered the Byzantians and Calchedonians, and he conquered Antandros in the land of Troas, and Lamponion; and having received ships from the Lesbians he conquered Lemnos and Imbros, which were both at that time still inhabited by Pelasgians.         26. [1] oytos un o Otanes o egkatizomenos es touton ton thronon, tote diadoxos genomenos Megabazui teis strategies, Byzantioys te eile kai Kalxedonioys, eile de Antandron ten en tei Truiadi gei, eile de Lampunion, labun de para Lesbiun neas eile Leimnon te kai Imbron, amfoteras eti tote ypo Pelasgun oikeomenas.    
      27. Of these the Lemnians fought well, and defending themselves for a long time were at length brought to ruin; and over those of them who survived the Persians set as governor Lycaretos the brother of that Maiandrios who had been king of Samos. This Lycaretos ruled in Lemnos till his death. And the cause of it was this:--he continued to reduce all to slavery and subdue them, accusing some of desertion to the Scythians and others of doing damage to the army of Dareios as it was coming back from Scythia.         27. [1] oi men de Lemnioi kai emaxesanto ey kai amynomenoi ana xronon ekakuthesan, toisi de perieousi aytun oi Persai yparxon epistasi Lykareton ton Maiandrioy tou basileusantos Samoy adelfeon. [2] oytos o Lykaretos arxun en Lemnui teleytai. aitie de toutoy ede. pantas endrapodizeto kai katestrefeto tous men lipostraties epi Skuthas aitiumenos, tous de sinasthai ton Dareioy straton apo Skytheun opisu apokomizomenon.    
      28. Otanes then effected so much when he was made commander: and after this for a short time there was an abatement of evils; and then again evils began a second time to fall upon the Ionians, arising from Naxos and Miletos. For Naxos was superior to all the other islands in wealth, and Miletos at the same time had just then come to the very height of its prosperity and was the ornament of Ionia; but before these events for two generations of men it had been afflicted most violently by faction until the Parians reformed it; for these the Milesians chose of all the Hellenes to be reformers of their State.         28. [1] oytos de tosauta exergasato strategesas. meta de oy pollon xronon anesis kakun En, kai erxeto to deuteron ek Naxoy te kai Miletoy Iusi ginesthai kaka. touto men gar e Naxos eydaimoniei tun nesun proefere, touto de kata ton ayton xronon e Miletos ayte te euyteis malista de tote akmasasa kai de kai teis Iunies En prosxema, katuperthe de toutun epi duo geneas andrun nosesasa es ta malista stasi, mexri oy min Parioi katertisan. toutoys gar katartisteiras ek pantun Ellenun eilonto oi Milesioi.    
      29. Now the Parians thus reconciled their factions:--the best men of them came to Miletos, and seeing that the Milesians were in a grievously ruined state, they said that they desired to go over their land: and while doing this and passing through the whole territory of Miletos, whenever they saw in the desolation of the land any field that was well cultivated, they wrote down the name of the owner of that field. Then when they had passed through the whole land and had found but few of such men, as soon as they returned to the city they called a general gathering and appointed these men to manage the State, whose fields they had found well cultivated; for they said that they thought these men would take care of the public affairs as they had taken care of their own: and the rest of the Milesians, who before had been divided by factions, they commanded to be obedient to these men.         29. [1] katellaxan de sfeas ude Parioi. us apikonto aytun andres oi aristoi es ten Mileton, urun gar de sfeas deinus oikofthoremenoys, efasan aytun boulesthai diexelthein ten xuren. poieuntes de tauta kai diexiontes pasan ten Milesien, okus tina idoien en anestekyiei tei xurei agron ey exergasmenon, apegrafonto to oynoma tou despoteu tou agrou. [2] diexelasantes de pasan ten xuren kai spanioys eyrontes toutoys, us taxista katebesan es to asty, alien poiesamenoi apedexan toutoys men polin nemein tun eyron tous agrous ey exergasmenoys. dokeein gar efasan kai tun demosiun oytu de sfeas epimelesesthai usper tun sfeterun. tous de alloys Milesioys tous prin stasiazontas toutun etaxan peithesthai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [30]

     30. The Parians then had thus reformed the Milesians; but at the time of which I speak evils began to come to Ionia from these States in the following manner:--From Naxos certain men of the wealthier class were driven into exile by the people, and having gone into exile they arrived at Miletos. Now of Miletos it happened that Aristagoras son of Molpagoras was ruler in charge, being both a son- in-law and also a cousin of Histiaios the son of Lysagoras, whom Dareios was keeping at Susa: for Histiaios was despot of Miletos, and it happened that he was at Susa at this time when the Naxians came, who had been in former times guest-friends of Histiaios. So when the Naxians arrived, they made request of Aristagoras, to see if perchance he would supply them with a force, and so they might return from exile to their own land: and he, thinking that if by his means they should return to their own State, he would be ruler of Naxos, but at the same time making a pretext of the guest-friendship of Histiaios, made proposal to them thus: "I am not able to engage that I can supply you with sufficient force to bring you back from exile against the will of those Naxians who have control of the State; for I hear that the Naxians have an army which is eight thousand shields strong and many ships of war: but I will use every endeavour to devise a means; and my plan is this:--it chances that Artaphrenes is my friend: now Artaphrenes, ye must know, is a son of Hystaspes and brother of Dareios the king; and he is ruler of all the people of the sea-coasts in Asia, with a great army and many ships. This man then I think will do whatsoever we shall request of him." Hearing this the Naxians gave over the matter to Aristagoras to manage as best he could, and they bade him promise gifts and the expenses of the expedition, saying that they would pay them; for they had full expectation that when they should appear at Naxos, the Naxians would do all their bidding, and likewise also the other islanders. For of these islands, that is the Cyclades, not one was as yet subject to Dareios.         30. [1] Parioi men nyn Milesioys oytu katertisan. tote de ek toyteun tun poliun ude erxeto kaka ginesthai tei Iuniei. ek Naxoy efygon andres tun paxeun ypo tou demoy, fygontes de apikonto es Mileton. [2] teis de Miletoy etugxane epitropos eun Aristagores o Molpagoreu, gambros te eun kai anepsios Istiaioy tou Lysagoreu, ton o Dareios en Sousoisi kateixe. o gar Istiaios turannos En Miletoy kai etugxane touton ton xronon eun en Sousoisi, ote oi Naxioi Elthon xeinoi prin eontes tui Istiaiui. [3] apikomenoi de oi Naxioi es ten Mileton edeonto tou Aristagoreu, ei kus aytoisi parasxoi dunamin tina kai katelthoien es ten euytun. o de epilexamenos us en di' aytou katelthusi es ten polin, arxei teis Naxoy, skeipsin de poieumenos ten xeinien ten Istiaioy, tonde sfi logon prosefere. [4] <<aytos men ymin oy fereggyos eimi dunamin parasxein tosauten uste katagein aekontun tun ten polin exontun Naxiun. pynthanomai gar oktakisxilien aspida Naxioisi einai kai ploia makra polla. mexanesomai de pasan spoyden poieumenos. [5] epinoeu de teide. Artafrenes moi tygxanei eun filos. o de Artafrenes ymin Ystaspeos men esti pais, Dareioy de tou basileos adelfeos, tun d' epithalassiun tun en tei Asiei arxei pantun, exun stratien te pollen kai pollas neas. touton un dokeu ton andra poiesein tun an xreizumen.>> [6] tauta akousantes oi Naxioi prosethesan tui Aristagorei pressein tei dunaito arista, kai ypisxesthai dura ekeleyon kai dapanen tei stratiei us aytoi dialusontes, elpidas pollas exontes, otan epifaneusi es ten Naxon, panta poiesein tous Naxioys ta an aytoi keleuusi, us de kai tous alloys nesiutas. tun gar nesun toyteun tun Kykladun oydemia ku En ypo Dareiui.    
      31. Aristagoras accordingly having arrived at Sardis, said to Artaphrenes that Naxos was an island not indeed large in size, but fair nevertheless and of fertile soil, as well as near to Ionia, and that there was in it much wealth and many slaves: "Do thou therefore send an expedition against this land, and restore it to those who are now exiles from it: and if thou shalt do this, first I have ready for thee large sums of money apart from the expenses incurred for the expedition (which it is fair that we who conduct it should supply), and next thou wilt gain for the king not only Naxos itself but also the islands which are dependent upon it, Paros and Andros and the others which are called Cyclades; and setting out from these thou wilt easily attack Euboea, an island which is large and wealth, as large indeed as Cyprus, and very easy to conquer. To subdue all these a hundred ships are sufficient." He made answer in these words: "Thou makest thyself a reporter of good things to the house of the king; and in all these things thou advisest well, except as to the number of the ships: for instead of one hundred there shall be prepared for thee two hundred by the beginning of the spring. And it is right that the king himself also should join in approving this matter."         31. [1] apikomenos de o Aristagores es tas Sardis legei pros ton Artafrenea us Naxos eie neisos megathei men oy megale, allus de kale te kai agathe kai agxou Iunies, xremata de eni polla kai andrapoda. <<su un epi tauten ten xuren stratelatee, katagun es ayten tous fygadas ex ayteis. [2] kai toi tauta poiesanti touto men esti etoima par' emoi xremata megala parex tun anaisimumatun tei stratiei. tauta men gar dikaion emeas tous agontas parexein esti. touto de nesoys basilei proskteseai ayten te Naxon kai tas ek tautes ertemenas, Paron kai Andron kai allas tas Kykladas kaleymenas. [3] entheuten de ormumenos eypeteus epitheseai Eyboiei nesui megalei te kai eydaimoni, oyk elassoni Kuproy kai karta eypetei airetheinai. apoxrusi de ekaton nees tautas pasas xeirusasthai.>> o de ameibeto ayton toiside. [4] <<su es oikon ton basileos exegetes gineai pregmatun agathun, kai tauta ey paraineeis panta, plen tun neun tou arithmou. anti de ekaton neun diekosiai toi etoimoi esontai ama tui eari. dei de toutoisi kai ayton basilea synepainon ginesthai.>>    
      32. So Aristagoras hearing this went back to Miletos greatly rejoiced; and Artaphrenes meanwhile, when he had sent to Susa and communicated that which was said by Aristagoras, and Dareios himself also had joined in approving it, made ready two hundred triremes and a very great multitude both of Persians and their allies, and appointed to be commander of these Megabates a Persian, one of the Achaimenidai and a cousin to himself and to Dareios, to whose daughter afterwards Pausanias the son of Cleombrotus the Lacedaemonian (at least if the story be true) betrothed himself, having formed a desire to become a despot of Hellas. Having appointed Megabates, I say, to be commander, Artaphrenes sent away the armament to Aristagoras.         32. [1] o men de Aristagores us tauta ekoyse, perixares eun apeie es Mileton. o de Artafrenes, us oi pempsanti es Sousa kai yperthenti ta ek tou Aristagoreu legomena synepainos kai aytos Dareios egeneto, pareskeyasato men diekosias triereas, pollon de karta omilon Perseun te kai tun allun symmaxun, strategon de toutun apedexe Megabaten andra Persen tun Axaimenideun, euytou te kai Dareioy anepsion, tou Paysanies o Kleombrotoy Lakedaimonios, ei de alethes ge esti o logos, ysterui xronui toutun ermosato thygatera, eruta sxun teis Ellados turannos genesthai. apodexas de Megabaten strategon Artafrenes apesteile ton straton para ton Aristagorea.    
      33. So when Megabates had taken force together with the Naxians, he sailed with the pretence of going to the Hellespont; but when he came to Chios, he directed his ships to Caucasa, in order that he might from thence pass them over to Naxos with a North Wind. Then, since it was not fated that the Naxians should be destroyed by this expedition, there happened an event which I shall narrate. As Megabates was going round to visit the guards set in the several ships, it chanced that in a ship of Myndos there was no one on guard; and he being very angry bade his spearmen find out the commander of the ship, whose name was Skylax, and bind him in an oar-hole of his ship in such a manner that his head should be outside and his body within. When Skylax was thus bound, some one reported to Aristagoras that Megabates had bound his guest-friend of Myndos and was doing to him shameful outrage. He accordingly came and asked the Persian for his release, and as he did not obtain anything of that which he requested, he went himself and let him loose. Being informed of this Megabates was exceedingly angry and broke out in rage against Aristagoras; and he replied: "What hast thou to do with these matters? Did not Artaphrenes send thee to obey me, and to sail whithersoever I should order? Why dost thou meddle with things which concern thee not?" Thus said Aristagoras; and the other being enraged at this, when night came on sent men in a ship to Naxos to declare to the Naxians all the danger that threatened them.         33. [1] paralabun de o Megabates ton te Aristagorea ek teis Miletoy kai ten Iada stratien kai tous Naxioys eplee profasin ep' Ellespontoy, epeite de egeneto en Khiui, esxe tas neas es Kaukasa, us entheuten boreei anemui es ten Naxon diabaloi. [2] kai oy gar edee toutui tui stolui Naxioys apolesthai, preigma toionde syneneixthe genesthai. periiontos Megabateu tas epi tun neun fylakas, epi neos Myndies etyxe oydeis fylassun. o de deinon ti poiesamenos ekeleyse tous doryforoys exeyrontas ton arxonta tautes teis neos, tui oynoma En Skulax, touton deisai dia thalamies dielontas teis neos kata touto, exu men kefalen poieuntas esu de to suma. [3] dethentos de tou Skulakos, exaggellei tis tui Aristagorei oti ton xeinon oi ton Mundion Megabates desas lymainoito. o d' elthun paraiteeto ton Persen, tygxanun de oydenos tun edeeto, aytos elthun elyse. pythomenos de karta deinon epoiesato o Megabates kai esperxeto tui Aristagorei, [4] o de eipe <<soi de kai toutoisi toisi pregmasi ti esti; oy se apesteile Artafrenes emeo peithesthai kai pleein tei an egu keleuu; ti polla presseis;>> tauta eipe o Aristagores. o de thymutheis toutoisi, us nux egeneto, epempe es Naxon ploiui andras frasontas toisi Naxioisi panta ta pareonta sfi pregmata.    
      34. For the Naxians were not at all expecting that this expedition would be against them: but when they were informed of it, forthwith they brought within the wall the property which was in the fields, and provided for themselves food and drink as for a siege, and strengthened their wall. These then were making preparations as for war to come upon them; and the others meanwhile having passed their ships over from Chios to Naxos, found them well defended when they made their attack, and besieged them for four months. Then when the money which the Persians had brought with them had all been consumed by them, and not only that, but Aristagoras himself had spent much in addition, and the siege demanded ever more and more, they built walls for the Naxian exiles and departed to the mainland again with ill success.         34. [1] oi gar un Naxioi oyden pantus prosedekonto epi sfeas ton stolon touton ormesesthai. epei mentoi eputhonto, aytika men eseneikanto ta ek tun agrun es to teixos, pareskeyasanto de us poliorkesomenoi kai sita kai pota, kai to teixos esaxanto. [2] kai oytoi men pareskeyazonto us paresomenoy sfi polemoy. oi d' epeite diebalon ek teis Khioy tas neas es ten Naxon, pros pefragmenoys proseferonto kai epoliorkeon meinas tesseras. [3] us de ta te exontes Elthon xremata oi Persai, tauta katededapaneto sfi, kai aytui tui Aristagorei prosanaisimuto polla, tou pleunos te edeeto e poliorkie, enthauta teixea toisi fygasi tun Naxiun oikodomesantes apallassonto es ten epeiron kakus pressontes.    
      35. And so Aristagoras was not able to fulfil his promise to Artaphrenes; and at the same time he was hard pressed by the demand made to him for the expenses of the expedition, and had fears because of the ill success of the armament and because he had become an enemy of Megabates; and he supposed that he would be deprived of his rule over Miletos. Having all these various fears he began to make plans of revolt: for it happened also that just at this time the man who had been marked upon the head had come from Hisiaios who was at Susa, signifying that Aristagoras should revolt from the king. For Histiaios, desiring to signify to Aristagoras that he should revolt, was not able to do it safely in any other way, because the roads were guarded, but shaved off the hair of the most faithful of his slaves, and having marked his head by pricking it, waited till the hair had grown again; and as soon as it was grown, he sent him away to Miletos, giving him no other charge but this, namely that when he should have arrived at Miletos he should bid Aristagoras shave his hair and look at his head: and the marks, as I have said before, signified revolt. This thing Histiaios was doing, because he was greatly vexed by being detained at Susa. He had great hopes then that if a revolt occurred he would be let go to the sea-coast; but if no change was made at Miletos he had no expectation of ever returning thither again.         35. [1] Aristagores de oyk eixe ten yposxesin tui Artafrenei ektelesai. ama de epieze min e dapane teis stratieis apaiteomene, arrudee te tou stratou prexantos kakus kai Megabatei diabeblemenos, edokee te ten basileien teis Miletoy apairethesesthai. [2] arrudeun de toutun ekasta eboyleueto apostasin. synepipte gar kai ton estigmenon ten kefalen apixthai ek Sousun para Istiaioy, semainonta apistasthai Aristagoren apo basileos. [3] o gar Istiaios boylomenos tui Aristagorei semeinai aposteinai allus men oydamus eixe asfaleus semeinai uste fylassomeneun tun odun, o de tun doulun ton pistotaton apoxyresas ten kefalen estixe kai anemeine anafunai tas trixas, us de anefysan taxista, apepempe es Mileton enteilamenos aytui allo men oyden, epean de apiketai es Mileton, keleuein Aristagoren xyresanta min tas trixas katidesthai es ten kefalen. ta de stigmata esemaine, us kai proteron moi eiretai, apostasin. [4] tauta de o Istiaios epoiee symforen poieumenos megalen ten euytou katoxen ten en Sousoisi. apostasios un ginomenes pollas eixe elpidas metesesthai epi thalassan, me de neuteron ti poieuses teis Miletoy oydama es ayten exein eti elogizeto.    
      36. Accordingly Hisiaios with this intention was sending the messenger; and it chanced that all these things happened to Aristagoras together at the same time. He took counsel therefore with his partisans, declaring to them both his own opinion and the message from Hisiaios; and while all the rest expressed an opinion to the same effect, urging him namely to make revolt, Hecataios the historian urged first that they should not undertake war with the king of the Persians, enumerating all the nations over whom Dareios was ruler, and his power: and when he did not succeed in persuading him, he counselled next that they should manage to make themselves masters of the sea. Now this, he continued, could not come to pass in any other way, so far as he could see, for he knew that the force of the Milesians was weak, but if the treasures should be taken which were in the temple at Branchidai, which Croesus the Lydian dedicated as offerings, he had great hopes that they might become masters of the sea; and by this means they would not only themselves have wealth at their disposal, but the enemy would not be able to carry the things off as plunder. Now these treasures were of great value, as I have shown in the first part of the history. This opinion did not prevail; but nevertheless it was resolved to make revolt, and that one of them should sail to Myus, to make the force which had returned from Naxos and was then there, and endeavour to seize the commanders who sailed in the ships.         36. [1] Istiaios men nyn tauta dianoeumenos apepempe ton aggelon, Aristagorei de synepipte tou aytou xronoy panta tauta synelthonta. eboyleueto un meta tun stasiuteun, ekfenas ten te euytou gnumen kai ta para tou Istiaioy apigmena. [2] oi men de alloi pantes gnumen kata tuyto exeferonto, keleuontes apistasthai. Ekataios d' o logopoios pruta men oyk ea polemon basilei tun Perseun anaireesthai, katalegun ta te ethnea panta tun Erxe Dareios kai ten dunamin aytou. epeite de oyk epeithe, deutera synebouleye poieein okus naykratees teis thalasses esontai. [3] allus men nyn oydamus efe legun enoran esomenon touto. epistasthai gar ten dunamin tun Milesiun eousan asthenea. ei de ta xremata katairetheie ta ek tou irou tou en Bragxideisi, ta Kroisos o Lydos anetheke, pollas eixe elpidas epikratesein teis thalasses, kai oytu aytous te exein toisi xremasi xrasthai kai tous polemioys oy sylesein ayta. [4] ta de xremata En tauta megala, us dedelutai moi en tui prutui tun logun. ayte men de oyk enika e gnume, edokee de omus apistasthai, ena te aytun plusanta es Myounta es to stratopedon to apo teis Naxoy apelthon, eon enthauta, syllambanein peirasthai tous epi tun neun epipleontas strategous.    
      37. So Iatragoras was sent for this purpose and seized by craft Oliatos the son of Ibanollis of Mylasa, and Histiaios the son of Tymnes of Termera, and Coes the son of Erxander, to whom Dareios had given Mytilene as a gift, and Aristagoras the son of Heracleides of Kyme, and many others; and then Aristagoras openly made revolt and devised all that he could to the hurt of Dareios. And first he pretended to resign the despotic power and give to Miletos equality, in order that the Milesians might be willing to revolt with him: then afterwards he proceeded to do this same thing in the rest of Ionia also; and some of the despots he drove out, but those whom he had taken from the ships which had sailed with him to Naxis, these he surrendered, because he desired to do a pleasure to their cities, delivering them over severally to that city from which each one came.         37. [1] apopemfthentos de Ietragoreu kat' ayto touto kai syllabontos dolui Oliaton Ibanullios Mylassea kai Istiaion Tumneu Termerea kai Kuen Erxandroy, tui Dareios Mytilenen eduresato, kai Aristagoren Erakleideu Kymaion kai alloys syxnous, oytu de ek tou emfaneos o Aristagores apestekee, pan epi Dareiui mexanumenos. [2] kai pruta men logui meteis ten tyrannida isonomien epoiee tei Miletui, us an ekontes aytui oi Milesioi synapistaiato, meta de kai en tei allei Iuniei tuyto touto epoiee, tous men exelaunun tun tyrannun, tous d' elabe tyrannoys apo tun neun tun sympleysaseun epi Naxon, toutoys de fila boylomenos poieesthai teisi polisi exedidoy, allon es allen polin paradidous, othen eie ekastos.    
      38. Now the men of Mitylene, so soon as they received Coes into their hands, brought him out and stoned him to death; but the men of Kyme let their despot go, and so also most of the others let them go. Thus then the despots were deposed in the various cities; and Aristagoras the Milesian, after having deposed the despots, bade each people appoint commanders in their several cities, and then himself set forth as an envoy to Lacedemon; for in truth it was necessary that he should find out some powerful alliance.         38. [1] Kuen men nyn Mytilenaioi epeite taxista parelabon, exagagontes kateleysan, Kymaioi de ton sfeteron aytun apeikan. us de kai alloi oi pleunes apiesan. [2] tyrannun men nyn katapaysis egineto ana tas polias, Aristagores de o Milesios us tous tyrannoys katepayse, strategous en ekastei tun poliun keleusas ekastoys katasteisai, deutera aytos es Lakedaimona trierei apostolos egineto. edee gar de symmaxies tinos oi megales exeyretheinai.    
      39. Now at Sparta Anaxandrides the son of Leon was no longer surviving as king, but had brought his life to an end; and Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides was holding the royal power, not having obtained it by merit but by right of birth. For Anaxandrides had to wife his own sister's daughter and she was by him much beloved, but no children were born to him by her. This being so, the Ephors summoned him before them and said: "If thou dost not for thyself take thought in time, yet we cannot suffer this to happen, that the race of Eurysthenes should become extinct. Do thou therefore put away from thee the wife whom thou now hast, since, as thou knowest, she bears thee no children, and marry another: and in doing so thou wilt please the Spartans." He made answer saying that he would do neither of these two things, and that they did not give him honourable counsel, in that they advised him to send away the wife whom he had, though she had done him no wrong, and to take to his house another; and in short he would not follow their advice.         39. [1] teis de Spartes Anaxandrides men o Leontos oyketi perieun ebasileye alla eteteleytekee, Kleomenes de o Anaxandrideu eixe ten basileien, oy kat' andragathien sxun alla kata genos. Anaxandridei gar exonti gynaika adelfeeis euytou thygatera, kai eouses tautes oi katathymies, paides oyk eginonto. [2] toutoy de toioutoy eontos, oi eforoi eipan epikalesamenoi ayton <<ei toi su seuytou me proorais, all' emin tout' esti oy periopteon, genos to Eyrystheneos genesthai exitelon. su nyn ten men exeis gynaika, epeite toi oy tiktei, exeo, allen de geimon. kai poieun tauta Spartieteisi adeseis.>> o d' ameibeto fas toutun oydetera poiesein, ekeinoys te oy kalus symboyleuein leuein paraineontas, ten exei gynaika eousan anamarteton euytui, tauten apenta allen esagagesthai. oyde sfi peisesthai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [40]

     40. Upon this the Ephors and the Senators deliberated together and proposed to Anaxandrides as follows: "Since then we perceive that thou art firmly attached to the wife whom thou now hast, consent to do this, and set not thyself against it, lest the Spartans take some counsel about thee other than might be wished. We do not ask of thee the putting away of the wife whom thou hast; but do thou give to her all that thou givest now and at the same time take to thy house another wife in addition to this one, to bear thee children." When they spoke to him after this manner, Anaxandrides consented, having two wives, a thing which was not by any means after the Spartan fashion.         40. [1] pros tauta oi eforoi kai oi gerontes boyleysamenoi proseferon Anaxandridei tade. <<epei toinyn toi periexomenon se orumen teis exeis gynaikos, su de tauta poiee, kai me antibaine toutoisi, ina me ti alloion peri seu Spartieitai boyleusuntai. [2] gynaikos men teis exeis oy prosdeometha sey teis exesios, su de tautei te panta osa nun parexeis parexe kai allen pros tautei esagage gynaika teknopoion.>> tauta kei legontun synexurese o Anaxandrides, meta de gynaikas exun duo dixas istias oikee, poieun oydamus Spartietika.    
      41. Then when no long time had elapsed, the wife who had come in afterwards bore this Cleomenes of whom we spoke; and just when she was bringing to the light an heir to the kingdom of the Spartans, the former wife, who had during the time before been childless, then by some means conceived, chancing to do so just at that time: and though she was in truth with child, the kinsfolk of the wife who had come in afterwards, when they heard of it cried out against her and said that she was making a vain boast, and that she meant to pass off another child as her own. Since then they made a great show of indignation, as the time was fast drawing near, the Ephors being incredulous sat round and watched the woman during the birth of her child: and she bore Dorieos and then straightway conceived Leonidas and after him at once Cleombrotos,--nay, some even say that Cleombrotos and Leonidas were twins. The wife however who had born Cleomenes and had come in after the first wife, being the daughter of Primetades the son of Demarmenos, did not bear a child again.         41. [1] xronoy de oy pollou dielthontos e esusteron epelthousa gyne tiktei ton de Kleomenea touton. kai ayte te efedron basilea Spartieteisi apefaine, kai e protere gyne ton proteron xronon atokos eousa tote kus ekuese, syntyxiei tautei xresamene. [2] exoysan de ayten alethei logui oi teis epelthouses gynaikos oikeioi pythomenoi uxleon, famenoi ayten kompeein allus boylomenen ypobalesthai. deina de poieuntun aytun, tou xronoy syntamnontos, yp' apisties oi eforoi tiktoysan ten gynaika periizomenoi efulaxan. [3] e de us eteke Duriea itheus isxei Leuniden, kai meta touton itheus isxei Kleombroton. oi de kai didumoys legoysi Kleombroton kai Leuniden genesthai. e de Kleomenea tekousa kai to deuteron epelthousa gyne, eousa thygater Prinetadeu tou Demarmenoy, oyketi etikte to deuteron.    
      42. Now Cleomenes, it is said, was not quite in his right senses but on the verge of madness, while Dorieos was of all his equals in age the first, and felt assured that he would obtain the kingdom by merit. Seeing then that he had this opinion, when Anaxandrides died and the Lacedemonians followed the usual custom established the eldest, namely Cleomenes, upon the throne, Dorieos being indignant and not thinking it fit that he should be a subject of Cleomenes, asked the Spartans to give him a company of followers and led them out to found a colony, without either inquiring of the Oracle at Delphi to what land he should go to make a settlement, or doing any of the things which are usually done; but being vexed he sailed away with his ships to Libya, and the Theraians were his guides thither. Then having come to Kinyps he made a settlement in the fairest spot of all Libya, along the banks of the river; but afterwards in the third year he was driven out from thence by the Macai and the Libyans and the Carthaginians, and returned to Peloponnesus.         42. [1] o men de Kleomenes, us legetai, En te oy freneres akromanes te, o de Durieus En tun elikun pantun prutos, ey te epistato kat' andragathien aytos sxesun ten basileien. [2] uste un oytu froneun, epeide o te Anaxandrides apethane kai oi Lakedaimonioi xreumenoi tui nomui estesanto basilea ton presbutaton Kleomenea, o Durieus deinon te poieumenos kai oyk axiun ypo Kleomeneos basileuesthai, aitesas leun Spartietas Ege es apoikien, oyte tui en Delfoisi xresteriui xresamenos es entina gein ktisun iei, oyte poiesas oyden tun nomizomenun. oia de bareus ferun, apiei es ten Libuen ta ploia. kategeonto de oi andres Theraioi. [3] apikomenos de es Libuen oikise xuron kalliston tun Libuun para Kinypa potamon. exelastheis de entheuten tritui etei ypo Makeun te Libuun kai Karxedoniun apiketo es Peloponneson.    
      43. Then Antichares a man of Eleon gave him counsel out of the oracles of Laios to make a settlement at Heracleia in Sicily, saying that the whole land of Eryx belonged to the Heracleidai, since Heracles himself had won it: and hearing this he went forthwith to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle whether he would be able to conquer the land to which he was setting forth; and the Pythian prophetess replied to him that he would conquer it. Dorieos therefore took with him the armament which he conducted before to Libya, and voyaged along the coast of Italy.         43. [1] enthauta de oi Antixares aner Eleunios synebouleyse ek tun Laioy xresmun Erakleien ten en Sikeliei ktizein, fas ten Erykos xuren pasan einai Erakleideun aytou Erakleos ktesamenoy. o de akousas tauta es Delfous oixeto xresomenos tui xresteriui, ei aireei ep' en stelletai xuren. e de Pythie oi xrai airesein. paralabun de Durieus ton stolon ton kai es Libuen Ege, ekomizeto para ten Italien.    
      44. Now at this time, the men of Sybaris say that they and their king Telys were about to make an expedition against Croton, and the men of Croton being exceedingly alarmed asked Dorieos to help them and obtained their request. So Dorieos joined them in an expedition against Sybaris and helped them to conquer Sybaris. This is what the men of Sybaris say of the doings of Dorieos and his followers; but those of Croton say that no stranger helped them in the war against the Sybarites except Callias alone, a diviner of Elis and one of the descendants of Iamos, and he in the following manner:--he ran away, they say, from Telys the despot of the Sybarites, when the sacrifices did not prove favourable, as he was sacrificing for the expedition against Croton, and so he came to them.         44. [1] ton xronon de touton, us legoysi Sybaritai, sfeas te aytous kai Teilyn ton euytun basilea epi Krotuna mellein strateuesthai, tous de Krotunietas perideeas genomenoys deetheinai Durieos sfisi timureisai kai tyxein deethentas. systrateuesthai te de epi Subarin Duriea kai synelein ten Subarin. [2] tauta men nyn Sybaritai legoysi poieisai Duriea te kai tous met' aytou, Krotunieitai de oydena sfisi fasi xeinon prosepilabesthai tou pros Sybaritas polemoy ei me Kallien tun Iamideun mantin Eleion mounon, kai touton tropui toiuide. para Telyos tou Sybariteun tyrannoy apodranta apikesthai para sfeas, epeite oi ta ira oy proexuree xresta thyomenui epi Krotuna.    
      45. Such, I say, are the tales which these tell, and they severally produce as evidence of them the following facts:--the Sybarites point to a sacred enclosure and temple by the side of the dried-up bed of the Crathis, which they say that Dorieos, after he had joined in the capture of the city, set up to Athene surnamed "of the Crathis"; and besides they consider the death of Dorieos himself to be a very strong evidence, thinking that he perished because he acted contrary to the oracle which was given to him; for if he had not done anything by the way but had continued to do that for which he was sent, he would have conquered the land of Eryx and having conquered it would have become possessor of it, and he and his army would not have perished. On the other hand the men of Croton declare that many things were granted in the territory of Croton as special gifts to Callias the Eleisan, of which the descendants of Callias were still in possession down to my time, and that nothing was granted to Dorieos or the descendants of Dorieos: but if Dorieos had in fact helped them in the way with Sybaris, many times as much, they say, would have been given to him as to Callias. These then are the evidences which the two sides produce, and we may assent to whichever of them we think credible.         45. [1] tauta de oytoi legoysi. marturia de toutun ekateroi apodeiknuoysi tade, Sybaritai men temenos te kai neon eonta para ton xeron Krathin, ton idrusasthai synelonta ten polin Duriea legoysi Athenaiei epunumui Krathiei. touto de aytou Durieos ton thanaton marturion megiston poieuntai, oti para ta memanteymena poieun diefthare. ei gar de me pareprexe meden, ep' o de estale epoiee, eile an ten Erykinen xuren kai elun katesxe, oyd' an aytos te kai e stratie diefthare. [2] oi d' ay Krotunieitai apodeiknusi Kalliei men tui Eleiui exaireta en gei tei Krotunietidi polla dothenta, ta kai es eme eti enemonto oi Kallieu apogonoi, Duriei de kai toisi Durieos apogonoisi oyden. kaitoi ei synepelabeto ge tou Sybaritikou polemoy Durieus, dotheinai an oi pollaplesia e Kalliei. tauta men nyn ekateroi aytun marturia apofainontai, kai paresti, okoteroisi tis peithetai aytun, toutoisi prosxureein.    
      46. Now there sailed with Dorieos others also of the Spartans, to be joint-founders with him of the colony, namely Thessalos and Paraibates and Keleas and Euryleon; and these when they had reached Sicily with all their armament, were slain, being defeated in battle by the Phenicians and the men of Egesta; and Euryleon only of the joint-founders survived this disaster. This man then having collected the survivors of the expedition, took possession of Minoa the colony of Selinus, and he helped to free the men of Selinus from their despot Peithagoras. Afterwards, when he had deposed him, he laid hands himself upon the despotism in Selinus and became sole ruler there, though but for a short time; for the men of Selinus rose in revolt against him and slew him, notwithstanding that he had fled for refuge to the altar of Zeus Agoraios.         46. [1] synepleon de Duriei kai alloi sygktistai Spartieteun, Thessalos kai Paraibates kai Kelees kai Eyryleun. oi epeite apikonto panti stolui es ten Sikelien, apethanon maxei essuthentes ypo te Foinikun kai Egestaiun. mounos de Eyryleun tun sygktisteun periegeneto toutoy tou patheos. [2] syllabun de oytos teis stratieis tous perigenomenoys esxe Minuen ten Selinoysiun apoikien, kai syneleytheroy Selinoysioys tou moynarxoy Peithagoreu. meta de us touton kateile, aytos tyrannidi epexeirese Selinountos kai emoynarxese xronon ep' oligon. oi gar min Selinousioi epanastantes apekteinan katafygonta epi Dios agoraioy bumon.    
      47. There had accompanied Dorieos also and died with him Philip the son of Butakides, a man of Croton, who having betrothed himself to the daughter of Telys the Sybarite, became an exile from Croton; and then being disappointed of this marriage he sailed away to Kyrene, whence he set forth and accompanied Dorieos with a trireme of his own, himself supplying the expenses of the crew. Now this man had been a victor at the Olympic games, and he was the most beautiful of the Hellenes who lived in his time; and on account of his beauty he obtained from the men of Egesta that which none else ever obtained from them, for they established a hero-temple over his tomb, and they propitiate him still with sacrifices.         47. [1] synespeto de Duriei kai synapethane Filippos o Boytakideu Krotunietes aner, os armosamenos Telyos tou Sybariteu thygatera efyge ek Krotunos, pseystheis de tou gamoy oixeto pleun es Kyrenen, ek tautes de ormumenos synespeto oikeiei te trierei kai oikeiei andrun dapanei, eun te Olympionikes kai kallistos Ellenun tun kat' euyton. [2] dia de to euytou kallos eneikato para Egestaiun ta oydeis allos. epi gar tou tafoy aytou eruion idrysamenoi thysieisi ayton ilaskontai.    
      48. In this manner Dorieos ended his life: but if he had endured to be a subject of Cleomenes and had remained in Sparta, he would have been king of Lacedemon; for Cleomenes reigned no very long time, and died leaving no son to succeed him but a daughter only, whose name was Gorgo.         48. [1] Durieus men nyn tropui toioutui eteleutese. ei de enesxeto basileyomenos ypo Kleomeneos kai katemene en Spartei, ebasileyse an Lakedaimonos. oy gar tina pollon xronon Erxe o Kleomenes, all' apethane apais, thygatera mounen lipun, tei oynoma En Gorgu.    
      49. However, Aristagoras the despot of Miletos arrived at Sparta while Cleomenes was reigning: and accordingly with him he came to speech, having, as the Lacedemonians say, a tablet of bronze, on which was engraved a map of the whole Earth, with all the sea and all the rivers. And when he came to speech with Cleomenes he said to him as follows: "Marvel not, Cleomenes, at my earnestness in coming hither, for the case is this.--That the sons of the Ionians should be slaves instead of free is a reproach and a grief most of all indeed to ourselves, but of all others most to you, inasmuch as ye are the leaders of Hellas. Now therefore I entreat you by the gods of Hellas to rescue from slavery the Ionians, who are your own kinsmen: and ye may easily achieve this, for the Barbarians are not valiant in fight, whereas ye have attained to the highest point of valour in that which relates to war: and their fighting is of this fashion, namely with bows and arrows and a short spear, and they go into battle wearing trousers and with caps on their heads. Thus they are easily conquered. Then again they who occupy that continent have good things in such quantity as not all the other nations of the world together possess; first gold, then silver and bronze and embroidered garments and beasts of burden and slaves; all which ye might have for yourselves, if ye so desired. And the nations moreover dwell in such order one after the other as I shall declare:--the Ionians here; and next to them the Lydians, who not only dwell in a fertile land, but are also exceedingly rich in gold and silver,"--and as he said this he pointed to the map of the Earth, which he carried with him engraved upon the tablet,--"and here next to the Lydians," continued Aristagoras, "are the Eastern Phrygians, who have both the greatest number of sheep and cattle of any people that I know, and also the most abundant crops. Next to the Phrygians are the Cappadokians, whom we call Syrians; and bordering upon them are the Kilikians, coming down to this sea, in which lies the island of Cyprus here; and these pay five hundred talents to the king for their yearly tribute. Next to these Kilikians are the Armenians, whom thou mayest see here, and these also have great numbers of sheep and cattle. Next to the Armenians are the Matienians occupying this country here; and next to them is the land of Kissia here, in which land by the banks of this river Choaspes is situated that city of Susa where the great king has his residence, and where the money is laid up in treasuries. After ye have taken this city ye may then with good courage enter into a contest with Zeus in the matter of wealth. Nay, but can it be that ye feel yourselves bound to take upon you the risk of battles against Messenians and Arcadians and Argives, who are equally matched against you, for the sake of land which is not much in extent nor very fertile, and for confines which are but small, though these peoples have neither gold nor silver at all, for the sake of which desire incites one to fight and to die,--can this be, I say, and will ye choose some other way now, when it is possible for you easily to have the rule over all Asia?" Aristagoras spoke thus, and Cleomenes answered him saying: "Guest-friend from Miletos, I defer my answer to thee until the day after to-morrow."         49. [1] apikneetai de un o Aristagores o Miletoy turannos es ten Sparten Kleomeneos exontos ten arxen. tui de es logoys eie, us Lakedaimonioi legoysi, exun xalkeon pinaka en tui geis apases periodos enetetmeto kai thalassa te pasa kai potamoi pantes. [2] apikneomenos de es logoys o Aristagores elege pros ayton tade. <<Kleomenes, spoyden men ten emen me thumaseis teis enthauta apixios. ta gar katekonta esti toiauta. Iunun paidas douloys einai ant' eleytherun oneidos kai algos megiston men aytoisi emin, eti de tun loipun ymin, osui proestate teis Ellados. [3] nun un pros theun tun Elleniun rhusasthe Iunas ek doylosunes andras omaimonas. eypeteus de ymin tauta oia te xureein esti. oyte gar oi barbaroi alkimoi eisi, ymeis te ta es ton polemon es ta megista anekete areteis peri, e te maxe aytun esti toiede, toxa kai aixme braxea. anaxyridas de exontes erxontai es tas maxas kai kyrbasias epi teisi kefaleisi. [4] oytu eypetees xeirutheinai eisi. esti de kai agatha toisi ten epeiron ekeinen nemomenoisi osa oyde toisi synapasi alloisi, apo xrysou arxamenoisi, argyros kai xalkos kai esthes poikile kai ypozugia te kai andrapoda. ta thymui boylomenoi aytoi an exoite. [5] katoikentai de allelun exomenoi us egu frasu, Iunun men tunde oide Lydoi, oikeontes te xuren agathen kai polyargyrutatoi eontes.>> deiknus de elege tauta es teis geis ten periodon, ten efereto en tui pinaki entetmemenen. <<Lydun de>> efe legun o Aristagores <<oide exontai Fruges oi pros ten eu, polyprobatutatoi te eontes pantun tun egu oida kai polykarpotatoi. [6] Frygun de exontai Kappadokai, tous emeis Syrioys kaleomen. toutoisi de prosoyroi Kilikes, katekontes epi thalassan tende, en tei ede Kupros neisos keetai. oi pentakosia talanta basilei ton epeteion foron epiteleusi. Kilikun de tunde exontai Armenioi oide, kai oytoi eontes polyprobatoi, Armeniun de Matienoi xuren tende exontes. [7] exetai de toutun gei ede Kissie, en tei de para potamon tonde Khoaspen keimena esti ta Sousa tauta, entha basileus te megas diaitan poieetai, kai tun xrematun oi thesayroi enthauta eisi. elontes de tauten ten polin tharseontes ede tui Dii ploutoy peri erizete. [8] alla peri men xures ara oy polleis oyde oytu xresteis kai oyrun smikrun xreon esti ymeas maxas anaballesthai pros te Messenioys eontas isopaleas kai Arkadas te kai Argeioys, toisi oyte xrysou exomenon esti oyden oyte arguroy, tun peri kai tina enagei prothymie maxomenon apothneskein. parexon de teis Asies pases arxein eypeteus, allo ti airesesthe;>> [9] Aristagores men tauta elexe, Kleomenes de ameibeto toiside. <<u xeine Milesie, anaballomai toi es triten emeren ypokrineesthai.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [50]

     50. Thus far then they advanced at that time; and when the appointed day arrived for the answer, and they had come to the place agreed upon, Cleomenes asked Aristagoras how many days' journey it was from the sea of the Ionians to the residence of the king. Now Aristagoras, who in other respects acted cleverly and imposed upon him well, in this point made a mistake: for whereas he ought not to have told him the truth, at least if he desired to bring the Spartans out to Asia, he said in fact that it was a journey up from the sea of three months: and the other cutting short the rest of the account which Aristagoras had begun to give of the way, said: "Guest-friend from Miletos, get thee away from Sparta before the sun has set; for thou speakest a word which sounds not well in the ears of the Lacedemonians, desiring to take them a journey of three months from the sea."         50. [1] tote men es tosouton elasan. epeite de e kyrie emere egeneto teis ypokrisios kai Elthon es to sygkeimenon, eireto o Kleomenes ton Aristagoren okoseun emereun apo thalasses teis Iunun odos eie para basilea. [2] o de Aristagores talla eun sofos kai diaballun ekeinon ey en toutui esfale. xreon gar min me legein to eon, boylomenon ge Spartietas exagagein es ten Asien, legei d' un triun menun fas einai ten anodon. o de yparpasas ton epiloipon logon ton o Aristagores urmeto legein peri teis odou, eipe [3] <<u xeine Milesie, apallasseo ek Spartes pro duntos elioy. oydena gar logon eyepea legeis Lakedaimonioisi, ethelun sfeas apo thalasses triun menun odon agagein.>>    
      51. Cleomenes accordingly having so said went away to his house: but Aristagoras took the suppliant's branch and went to the house of Cleomenes; and having entered in as a suppliant, he bade Cleomenes send away the child and listen to him; for the daughter of Cleomenes was standing by him, whose name was Gorgo, and this as it chanced was his only child, being of the age now of eight or nine years. Cleomenes however bade him say that which he desired to say, and not to stop on account of the child. Then Aristagoras proceeded to promise him money, beginning with ten talents, if he would accomplish for him that for which he was asking; and when Cleomenes refused, Aristagoras went on increasing the sums of money offered, until at last he had promised fifty talents, and at that moment the child cried out: "Father, the stranger will do thee hurt, if thou do not leave him and go." Cleomenes, then, pleased by the counsel of the child, departed into another room, and Aristagoras went away from Sparta altogether, and had no opportunity of explaining any further about the way up from the sea to the residence of the king.         51. [1] o men Kleomenes tauta eipas eie es ta oikia, o de Aristagores labun iketerien eie es tou Kleomeneos, eselthun de esu ate iketeuun epakousai ekeleye ton Kleomenea apopempsanta to paidion. prosestekee gar de tui Kleomenei e thygater, tei oynoma En Gorgu. touto de oi kai mounon teknon etugxane eon eteun oktu e ennea elikien. Kleomenes de legein min ekeleye ta bouletai mede episxein tou paidioy eineka. [2] enthauta de o Aristagores arxeto ek deka talantun ypisxneomenos, en oi epitelesei tun edeeto. ananeuontos de tou Kleomeneos proebaine toisi xremasi yperballun o Aristagores, es oy pentekonta te talanta ypededekto kai to paidion eydaxato <<pater, diafthereei se o xeinos, en me apostas ieis.>> [3] o te de Kleomenes estheis tou paidioy tei parainesi eie es eteron oikema, kai o Aristagores apallasseto to parapan ek teis Spartes, oyde oi exegeneto epi pleon eti semeinai peri teis anodoy teis para basilea.    
      52. As regards this road the truth is as follows.--Everywhere there are royal stages and excellent resting-places, and the whole road runs through country which is inhabited and safe. Through Lydia and Phrygia there extend twenty stages, amounting to ninety-four and a half leagues; and after Phrygia succeeds the river Halys, at which there is a gate which one must needs pass through in order to cross the river, and a strong guard-post is established there. Then after crossing over into Cappadokia it is twenty-eight stages, being a hundred and four leagues, by this way to the borders of Kilikia; and on the borders of the Kilikians you will pass through two several gates and go by two several guard-posts: then after passing through these it is three stages, amounting to fifteen and a half leagues, to journey through Kilikia; and the boundary of Kilikia and Armenia is a navigable river called Euphrates. In Armenia the number of stages with resting-places is fifteen, and of leagues fifty-six and a half, and there is a guard-post on the way: then from Armenia, when one enters the land of Matiene, there are thirty-four stages, amounting to a hundred and thirty-seven leagues; and through this land flow four navigable rivers, which cannot be crossed but by ferries, first the Tigris, then a second and third called both by the same name, though they are not the same river nor do they flow from the same region (for the first-mentioned of them flows from the Armenian land and the other from that of the Matienians), and the fourth of the rivers is called Gyndes, the same which once Cyrus divided into three hundred and sixty channels. Passing thence into the Kissian land, there are eleven stages, forty-two and a half leagues, to the river Choaspes, which is also a navigable stream; and upon this is built the city of Susa. The number of these stages amounts in all to one hundred and eleven.         52. [1] exei gar amfi tei odui tautei ude. stathmoi te pantaxei eisi basileioi kai katalusies kallistai, dia oikeomenes te e odos apasa kai asfaleos. dia men ge Lydies kai Frygies stathmoi teinontes eikosi eisi, parasaggai de tesseres kai enenekonta kai emisy. [2] ekdeketai de ek teis Frygies o Alys potamos, ep' ui pulai te epeisi, tas diexelasai pasa anagke kai oytu diekperan ton potamon, kai fylakterion mega ep' aytui. diabanti de es ten Kappadokien kai tautei poreyomenui mexri oyrun tun Kilikiun stathmoi dyun deontes eisi triekonta, parasaggai de tesseres kai ekaton. epi de toisi toutun oyroisi dixas te pulas diexelais kai dixa fylakteria parameipseai. [3] tauta de diexelasanti kai dia teis Kilikies odon poieymenui treis eisi stathmoi, parasaggai de pentekaideka kai emisy. oyros de Kilikies kai teis Armenies esti potamos neysiperetos, tui oynoma Eyfretes. en de tei Armeniei stathmoi men eisi katagugeun pentekaideka, parasaggai de ex kai pentekonta kai emisy, kai fylakterion en aytoisi. [4] ek de tautes teis Armenies es ballonti es ten Matienen gein stathmoi eisi tesseres kai triekonta, parasaggai de epta kai triekonta kai ekaton. potamoi de neysiperetoi tesseres dia tautes rheoysi, tous pasa anagke diaporthmeusai esti, prutos men Tigres, meta de deuteros te kai tritos uytos onomazomenos, oyk uytos eun potamos oyde ek tou aytou rheun. o men gar proteron aytun katalextheis ex Armeniun rheei, o d' ysteron ek Matienun. [5] o de tetartos tun potamun oynoma exei Gundes, ton Kuros dielabe kote es diuryxas exekonta kai triekosias. [6] ek de tautes es ten Kissien xuren metabainonti endeka stathmoi, parasaggai de duo kai tesserakonta kai emisy esti epi potamon Khoaspen, eonta kai touton neysipereton. ep' ui Sousa polis pepolistai. oytoi oi pantes stathmoi eisi endeka kai ekaton. katagugai men nyn stathmun tosautai eisi ek Sardiun es Sousa anabainonti.   
      53. This is the number of stages with resting-places, as one goes up from Sardis to Susa: and if the royal road has been rightly measured as regards leagues, and if the league is equal to thirty furlongs, (as undoubtedly it is), the number of furlongs from Sardis to that which is called the palace of Memnon is thirteen thousand five hundred, the number of leagues being four hundred and fifty. So if one travels a hundred and fifty furlongs each day, just ninety days are spent on the journey.         53. [1] ei de orthus memetretai e odos e basileie toisi parasaggeisi kai o parasagges dunatai triekonta stadia, usper oytos ge dunatai tauta, ek Sardiun stadia esti es ta basileia ta Memnonia kaleomena pentakosia kai trisxilia kai muria, parasaggeun eontun pentekonta kai tetrakosiun. pentekonta de kai ekaton stadia ep' emerei ekastei diexiousi anaisimountai emerai aparti enenekonta.    
      54. Thus the Milesian Aristagoras, when he told Cleomenes the Lacedemonian that the journey up from the sea to the residence of the king was one of three months, spoke correctly: but if any one demands a more exact statement yet than this, I will give him that also: for we ought to reckon in addition to this the length of the road from Ephesos to Sardis; and I say accordingly that the whole number of furlongs from the sea of Hellas to Susa (for by that name the city of Memnon is known) is fourteen thousand and forty; for the number of furlongs from Ephesos to Sardis is five hundred and forty: thus the three months' journey is lengthened by three days added.         54. [1] oytu tui Milesiui Aristagorei eipanti pros Kleomenea ton Lakedaimonion einai triun menun ten anodon ten para basilea orthus eireto. ei de tis to atrekesteron toutun eti dizetai, egu kai touto semaneu. ten gar ex Efesoy es Sardis odon dei proslogisasthai tautei. [2] kai de legu stadioys einai tous pantas apo thalasses teis Ellenikeis mexri Sousun (touto gar Memnoneion asty kaleetai), tesserakonta kai tetrakisxilioys kai myrioys. oi gar ex Efesoy es Sardis eisi tesserakonta kai pentakosioi stadioi, kai oytu trisi emereisi mekunetai e trimenos odos.    
      55. Aristagoras then being driven out of Sparta proceeded to Athens; which had been set free from the rule of despots in the way which I shall tell.--When Hipparchos the son of Peisistratos and brother of the despot Hippias, after seeing a vision of a dream which signified it to him plainly, had been slain by Aristogeiton and Harmodios, who were originally by descent Gephyraians, the Athenians continued for four years after this to be despotically governed no less than formerly,--nay, even more.         55. [1] apelaynomenos de o Aristagores ek teis Spartes eie es tas Athenas genomenas tyrannun ude eleytheras. epei Ipparxon ton Peisistratoy, Ippieu de tou tyrannoy adelfeon, idonta opsin enypnioy tui euytou pathei enargestaten kteinoysi Aristogeitun kai Armodios, genos eontes ta anekathen Gefyraioi, meta tauta etyranneuonto Athenaioi ep' etea tessera oyden Esson alla kai mallon e pro tou.    
      56. Now the vision of a dream which Hipparchos had was this:--in the night before the Panathenaia it seemed to Hipparchos that a man came and stood by him, tall and of fair form, and riddling spoke to him these verses: 
"With enduring soul as a lion endure unendurable evil: 
 No one of men who doth wrong shall escape from the judgment appointed." These verses, as soon as it was day, he publicly communicated to the interpreters of dreams; but afterwards he put away thought of the vision and began to take part in that procession during which he lost his life.         56. [1] e men nyn opsis tou Ipparxoy enypnioy En ede. en tei proterei nykti tun Panathenaiun edokee o Ipparxos andra oi epistanta megan kai eyeidea ainissesthai tade ta epea.     tleithi leun atleta pathun tetleoti thymui.
      oydeis anthrupun adikun tisin oyk apotisei.[2] tauta de, us emere egeneto taxista, faneros En ypertithemenos oneiropoloisi. meta de apeipamenos ten opsin epempe ten pompen, en tei de teleytai.    
      57. Now the Gephyraians, of whom were those who murdered Hipparchos, according to their own account were originally descended from Eretria; but as I find by carrying inquiries back, they were Phenicians of those who came with Cadmos to the land which is now called Boeotia, and they dwelt in the district of Tanagra, which they had had allotted to them in that land. Then after the Cadmeians had first been driven out by the Argives, these Gephyraians next were driven out by the Boeotians and turned then towards Athens: and the Athenians received them on certain fixed conditions to be citizens of their State, laying down rules that they should be excluded from a number of things not worth mentioning here.         57. [1] oi de Gefyraioi, tun Esan oi fonees oi Ipparxoy, us men aytoi legoysi, egegonesan ex Eretries ten arxen, us de egu anapynthanomenos eyrisku, Esan Foinikes tun sun Kadmui apikomenun Foinikun es gein ten nun Boiutien kaleomenen, oikeon de teis xures tautes apolaxontes ten Tanagriken moiran. [2] entheuten de Kadmeiun proteron exanastantun yp' Argeiun, oi Gefyraioi oytoi deutera ypo Boiutun exanastantes etraponto ep' Atheneun. Athenaioi de sfeas epi rhetoisi edexanto sfeun aytun einai polietas, pollun teun kai oyk axiapegetun epitaxantes ergesthai.    
      58. Now these Phenicians who came with Cadmos, of whom were the Gephyraians, brought in among the Hellenes many arts when they settled in this land of Boeotia, and especially letters, which did not exist, as it appears to me, among the Hellenes before this time; and at first they brought in those which are used by the Phenician race generally, but afterwards, as time went on, they changed with their speech the form of the letters also. During this time the Ionians were the race of Hellenes who dwelt near them in most of the places where they were; and these, having received letters by instruction of the Phenicians, changed their form slightly and so made use of them, and in doing so they declared them to be called "phenicians," as was just, seeing that the Phenicians had introduced them into Hellas. Also the Ionians from ancient time call paper "skins," because formerly, paper being scarce, they used skins of goat and sheep; nay, even in my own time many of the Barbarians write on such skins.         58. [1] oi de Foinikes oytoi oi sun Kadmui apikomenoi, tun Esan oi Gefyraioi, alla te polla oikesantes tauten ten xuren esegagon didaskalia es tous Ellenas kai de kai grammata, oyk eonta prin Ellesi us emoi dokeein, pruta men toisi kai apantes xreuntai Foinikes. meta de xronoy probainontos ama tei funei meteballon kai ton rhythmon tun grammatun. [2] perioikeon de sfeas ta polla tun xurun touton ton xronon Ellenun Iunes, oi paralabontes didaxei para tun Foinikun ta grammata, metarrythmisantes sfeun oliga exreunto, xreumenoi de efatisan, usper kai to dikaion efere, esagagontun Foinikun es ten Ellada, Foinikeia kekleisthai. [3] kai tas bubloys diftheras kaleoysi apo tou palaiou oi Iunes, oti kote en spani bublun exreunto difthereisi aigeeisi te kai oieeisi. eti de kai to kat' eme polloi tun barbarun es toiautas diftheras grafoysi.    
      59. I myself too once saw Cadmeian characters in the temple of Ismenian Apollo at Thebes of the Boeotians, engraved on certain tripods, and in most respects resembling the Ionic letters: one of these tripods has the inscription, 
"Me Amphitryon offered from land Teleboian returning:" this inscription would be of an age contemporary with Laios the son of Labdacos, the son of Polydoros, the son of Cadmos.         59. [1] eidon de kai aytos Kadmeia grammata en tui irui tou Apollunos tou Ismenioy en Thebeisi teisi Boiutun, epi triposi tisi egkekolammena, ta polla omoia eonta toisi Iunikoisi. o men de eis tun tripodun epigramma exei.     Amfitruun m' anethek' enarun apo Teleboaun. tauta elikien eie an kata Laion ton Labdakoy tou Polyduroy tou Kadmoy.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [60]

     60. Another tripod says thus in hexameter rhythm: 
"Me did Scaios offer to thee, far-darting Apollo, 
 Victor in contest of boxing, a gift most fair in thine honour:" now Scaios would be the son of Hippocoon (at least if it were really he who offered it, and not another with the same name as the son of Hippocoon), being of an age contemporary with Oedipus the son of Laios:         60. [1] eteros de tripoys en exametrui tonui legei.     Skaios pygmaxeun me ekebolui Apolluni
      nikesas anetheke tein perikalles agalma.Skaios d' an eie o Ippokountos, ei de oytos ge esti o anatheis kai me allos tuyto oynoma exun tui Ippokountos, elikien kata Oidipoyn ton Laioy.    
      61. and the third tripod, also in hexameter rhythm, says: 
"Me Laodamas offered to thee, fair-aiming Apollo, 
 He, of his wealth, being king, as a gift most fair in thine honor:" now it was in the reign of this very Laodamas the son of Eteocles that the Cadmeians were driven out by the Argives and turned to go to the Enchelians; and the Gephyraians being then left behind were afterwards forced by the Boeotians to retire to Athens. Moreover they have temples established in Athens, in which the other Athenians have no part, and besides others which are different from the rest, there is especially a temple of Demeter Achaia and a celebration of her mysteries.         61. [1] tritos de tripoys legei kai oytos en exametrui.     Laodamas tripod' aytos eyskopui Apolluni
      moynarxeun anetheke tein perikalles agalma.[2] epi toutoy de tou Laodamantos tou Eteokleos moynarxeontos exanisteatai Kadmeioi yp' Argeiun kai trepontai es tous Egxeleas. oi de Gefyraioi ypoleifthentes ysteron ypo Boiutun anaxureoysi es Athenas. kai sfi ira esti en Atheneisi idrymena, tun oyden meta toisi loipoisi Athenaioisi, alla te kexurismena tun allun irun kai de kai Axaiies Demetros iron te kai orgia.    
      62. I have told now of the vision of a dream seen by Hipparchos, and also whence the Gephrynians were descended, of which race were the murderers of Hipparchos; and in addition to this I must resume and continue the story which I was about to tell at first, how the Athenians were freed from despots. When Hippias was despot and was dealing harshly with the Athenians because of the death of Hipparchos, the Alcmaionidai, who were of Athenian race and were fugitives from the sons of Peisistratos, as they did not succeed in their attempt made together with the other Athenian exiles to return by force, but met with great disaster when they attempted to return and set Athens free, after they had fortified Leipsydrion which is above Paionia,-- these Alomaionidai after that, still devising every means against the sons of Peisistratos, accepted the contract to build and complete the temple at Delphi, that namely which now exists but then did not as yet: and being wealthy and men of repute already from ancient time, they completed the temple in a manner more beautiful than the plan required, and especially in this respect, that having agreed to make the temple of common limestone, they built the front parts of it in Parian marble.         62. [1] e men de opsis tou Ipparxoy enypnioy kai oi Gefyraioi othen egegonesan, tun Esan oi Ipparxoy fonees, apegetai moi. dei de pros toutoisi eti analabein ton kat' arxas eia lexun logon, us tyrannun eleytheruthesan Athenaioi. [2] Ippieu tyranneuontos kai empikrainomenoy Athenaioisi dia ton Ipparxoy thanaton, Alkmeunidai genos eontes Athenaioi kai feugontes Peisistratidas, epeite sfi ama toisi alloisi Athenaiun fygasi peirumenoisi kata to isxyron oy proexuree katodos, alla proseptaion megalus peirumenoi katienai te kai eleytheroun tas Athenas, Leipsudrion to yper Paionies teixisantes, enthauta oi Alkmeunidai pan epi toisi Peisistratideisi mexanumenoi par' Amfiktyonun ton neon misthountai ton en Delfoisi, ton nun eonta tote de oyku, touton exoikodomeisai. [3] oia de xrematun ey ekontes kai eontes andres dokimoi anekathen eti, ton te neon exergasanto tou paradeigmatos kallion ta te alla kai sygkeimenoy sfi purinoy lithoy poieein ton neon, Parioy ta emprosthe aytou exepoiesan.    
      63. So then, as the Athenians say, these men being settled at Delphi persuaded the Pythian prophetess by gifts of money, that whenever men of the Spartans should come to inquire of the Oracle, either privately or publicly sent, she should propose to them to set Athens free. The Lacedemonians therefore, since the same utterance was delivered to them on all occasions, sent Anchimolios the son of Aster, who was of repute among their citizens, with an army to drive out the sons of Peisistratos from Athens, although these were very closely connected with them by guest-friendship; for they held that the concerns of the god should be preferred to those of men: and this force they sent by sea in ships. He therefore, having put in to shore at Phaleron, disembarked his army; but the sons of Peisistratos being informed of this beforehand called in to their aid an auxiliary force from Thessaly, for they had made an alliance with the Thessalians; and the Thessalians at their request sent by public resolution a body of a thousand horse and also their king Kineas, a man of Conion. So having obtained these as allies, the sons of Peisistratos contrived as follows:--they cut down the trees in the plain of Phaleron and made this district fit for horsemen to ride over, and after that they sent the cavalry to attack the enemy's camp, who falling upon it slew (besides many others of the Lacedemonians) Anchimolios himself also: and the survivors of them they shut up in their ships. Such was the issue of the first expedition from Lacedemon: and the burial-place of Anchimolios is at Alopecai in Attica, near the temple of Heracles which is at Kynosarges.         63. [1] us un de oi Athenaioi legoysi, oytoi oi andres en Delfoisi katemenoi anepeithon ten Pythien xremasi, okus elthoien Spartieteun andres eite idiui stolui eite demosiui xresomenoi, proferein sfi tas Athenas eleytheroun. [2] Lakedaimonioi de, us sfi aiei tuyto profanton egineto, pempoysi Agximolion ton Asteros, eonta tun astun andra dokimon, sun stratui exelunta Peisistratidas ex Atheneun omus kai xeinioys sfi eontas ta malista. ta gar tou theou presbutera epoieunto e ta tun andrun. pempoysi de toutoys kata thalassan ploioisi. [3] o men de prossxun es Faleron ten stratien apebese, oi de Peisistratidai propynthanomenoi tauta epekaleonto ek Thessalies epikoyrien. epepoieto gar sfi symmaxie pros aytous. Thessaloi de sfi deomenoisi apepempsan koinei gnumei xreumenoi xilien te ippon kai ton basilea ton sfeteron Kineen andra Koniaion. tous epeite esxon symmaxoys oi Peisistratidai, emexanunto toiade. [4] keirantes tun Falereun to pedion kai ippasimon poiesantes touton ton xuron epeikan tui stratopedui ten ippon. empesousa de dieftheire alloys te pollous tun Lakedaimoniun kai de kai ton Agximolion. tous de perigenomenoys aytun es tas neas kateirxan. o men de prutos stolos ek Lakedaimonos oytu apellaxe, kai Agximolioy eisi tafai teis Attikeis Alupekeisi, agxou tou Erakleioy tou en Kynosargei.    
      64. After this the Lacedemonians equipped a larger expedition and sent it forth against Athens; and they appointed to be commander of the army their king Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, and sent it this time not by sea but by land. With these, when they had invaded the land of Attica, first the Thessalian horse engaged battle; and in no long time they were routed and there fell of them more than forty men; so the survivors departed without more ado and went straight back to Thessaly. Then Cleomenes came to the city together with those of the Athenians who desired to be free, and began to besiege the despots shut up in the Pelasgian wall.         64. [1] meta de Lakedaimonioi mezu stolon steilantes apepempsan epi tas Athenas, strategon teis stratieis apodexantes basilea Kleomenea ton Anaxandrideu, oyketi kata thalassan steilantes alla kat' epeiron. [2] toisi esbalousi es ten Attiken xuren e tun Thessalun ippos prute prosemixe kai oy meta pollon etrapeto, kai sfeun epeson yper tesserakonta andras. oi de perigenomenoi apallassonto us eixon eythus epi Thessalies. Kleomenes de apikomenos es to asty ama Athenaiun toisi boylomenoisi einai eleytheroisi epoliorkee tous tyrannoys apergmenoys en tui Pelasgikui teixei.    
      64. And the Lacedemonians would never have captured the sons of Peisistratos at all; for they on their side had no design to make a long blockade, and the others were well provided with food and drink; so that they would have gone away back to Sparta after besieging them for a few days only: but as it was, a thing happened just at this time which was unfortunate for those, and at the same time of assistance to these; for the children of the sons of Peisistratos were captured, while being secretly removed out of the country: and when this happened, all their matters were thereby cast into confusion, and they surrendered receiving back their children on the terms which the Athenians desired, namely that they should depart out of Attica within five days. After this they departed out of the country and went to Sigeion on the Scamander, after their family had ruled over the Athenians for six-and-thirty years. These also were originally Pylians and sons of Neleus, descended from the same ancestors as the family of Codros and Melanthos, who had formerly become kings of Athens being settlers from abroad. Hence too Hippocrates had given to his son the name of Peisistratos as a memorial, calling him after Peisistratos the son of Nestor. Thus the Athenians were freed from despots; and the things worthy to be narrated which they did or suffered after they were liberated, up to the time when Ionia revolted from Dareios and Aristagoras the Milesian came to Athens and asked them to help him, these I will set forth first before I proceed further.         65. [1] kai oyden ti pantus an exeilon Peisistratidas oi Lakedaimonioi. oyte gar epedren epenoeon poiesasthai, oi te Peisistratidai sitoisi kai potoisi ey pareskeyadato, poliorkesantes te an emeras oligas apallassonto es ten Sparten. nun de syntyxie toisi men kake epegeneto, toisi de e ayte ayte summaxos. ypektithemenoi gar exu teis xures oi paides tun Peisistratideun elusan. [2] touto de us egeneto, panta aytun ta pregmata synetetarakto, parestesan de epi misthui toisi teknoisi, ep' oisi eboulonto oi Athenaioi, uste en pente emereisi ekxureisai ek teis Attikeis. [3] meta de exexuresan es Sigeion to epi tui Skamandrui, arxantes men Athenaiun ep' etea ex te kai triekonta, eontes de kai oytoi anekathen Pulioi te kai Neleidai, ek tun aytun gegonotes kai oi amfi Kodron te kai Melanthon, oi proteron epelydes eontes egenonto Athenaiun basilees. [4] epi toutoy de kai tuyto oynoma apemnemoneyse Ippokrates tui paidi thesthai ton Peisistraton, epi tou Nestoros Peisistratoy poieumenos ten epunymien. [5] oytu men Athenaioi tyrannun apallaxthesan. osa de eleytheruthentes erxan e epathon axioxrea apegesios, prin e Iunien te aposteinai apo Dareioy kai Aristagorea ton Milesion apikomenon es Athenas xreisai sfeun boetheein, tauta pruta frasu.    
      66. Athens, which even before that time was great, then, after having been freed from despots, became gradually yet greater; and in it two men exercised power, namely Cleisthenes a descendant of Alcmaion, the same who is reported to have bribed the Pythian prophetess, and Isagoras, the son of Tisander, of a family which was highly reputed, but of his original descent I am not able to declare; his kinsmen however offer sacrifices to the Carian Zeus. These men came to party strife for power; and then Cleisthenes was being worsted in the struggle, he made common cause with the people. After this he caused the Athenians to be in ten tribes, who were formerly in four; and he changed the names by which they were called after the sons of Ion, namely Geleon, Aigicoreus, Argades, and Hoples, and invented for them names taken from other heroes, all native Athenians except Ajax, whom he added as a neighbour and ally, although he was no Athenian.         66. [1] Atheinai, eousai kai prin megalai, tote apallaxtheisai tyrannun eginonto mezones. en de ayteisi duo andres edynasteyon, Kleisthenes te aner Alkmeunides, os per de logon exei ten Pythien anapeisai, kai Isagores Tisandroy oikies men eun dokimoy, atar ta anekathen oyk exu frasai. thuoysi de oi syggenees aytou Dii Kariui. [2] oytoi oi andres estasiasan peri dynamios, essoumenos de o Kleisthenes ton deimon prosetairizetai. meta de tetrafuloys eontas Athenaioys dekafuloys epoiese, tun Iunos paidun Geleontos kai Aigikoreos kai Argadeu kai Opletos apallaxas tas epunymias, exeyrun de eterun eruun epunymias epixuriun, parex Aiantos. touton de ate astygeitona kai summaxon, xeinon eonta prosetheto.    
      67. Now in these things it seems to me that this Cleisthenes was imitating his mother's father Cleisthenes the despot of Sikyon: for Cleisthenes when he went to war with Argos first caused to cease in Sikyon the contests of rhapsodists, which were concerned with the poems of Homer, because Argives and Argos are celebrated in them almost everywhere; then secondly, since there was (as still there is) in the market-place itself of the Sikyonians a hero-temple of Adrastos the son of Talaos, Cleisthenes had a desire to cast him forth out of the land, because he was an Argive. So having come to Delphi he consulted the Oracle as to whether he should cast out Adrastos; and the Pythian prophetess answered him saying that Adrastos was king of the Sikyonians, whereas he was a stoner of them. So since the god did not permit him to do this, he went away home and considered means by which Adrastos should be brought to depart of his own accord: and when he thought that he had discovered them, he sent to Thebes in Boeotia and said that he desired to introduce into his city Melanippos the son of Astacos, and the Thebans gave him leave. So Cleisthenes introduced Melanippos into his city, and appointed for him a sacred enclosure within the precincts of the City Hall itself, and established him there in the strongest position. Now Cleisthenes introduced Melanippos (for I must relate this also) because he was the greatest enemy of Adrastos, seeing that he had killed both his brother Mekisteus and his son-in-law Tydeus: and when he had appointed the sacred enclosure for him, he took away the sacrifices and festivals of Adrastos and gave them to Melanippos. Now the Sikyonians were accustomed to honour Adrastos with very great honours; for this land was formerly the land of Polybos, and Adrastos was daughter's son to Polybos, and Polybos dying without sons gave his kingdom to Adrastos: the Sikyonians then not only gave other honours to Adrastos, but also with reference to his sufferings they specially honoured him with tragic choruses, not paying the honour to Dionysos but to Adrastos. Cleisthenes however gave back the choruses to Dionysos, and the other rites besides this he gave to Melannipos.         67. [1] tauta de, dokeein emoi, emimeeto o Kleisthenes oytos ton euytou metropatora Kleisthenea ton Sikyunos turannon. Kleisthenes gar Argeioisi polemesas touto men rhapsuidous epayse en Sikyuni agunizesthai tun Omereiun epeun eineka, oti Argeioi te kai Argos ta polla panta ymneatai. touto de, eruion gar En kai esti en aytei tei agorei tun Sikyuniun Adrestoy tou Talaou, touton epethumese o Kleisthenes eonta Argeion ekbalein ek teis xures. [2] elthun de es Delfous exresteriazeto ei ekbaloi ton Adreston. e de Pythie oi xrai fasa Adreston men einai Sikyuniun basilea, keinon de leysteira. epei de o theos touto ge oy paredidoy, apelthun opisu efrontize mexanen tei aytos o Adrestos apallaxetai. us de oi exeyreisthai edokee, pempsas es Thebas tas Boiutias efe thelein epagagesthai Melanippon ton Astakou. oi de Thebaioi edosan. [3] epagagomenos de o Kleisthenes ton Melanippon temenos oi apedexe en aytui tui prytaneiui kai min idryse enthauta en tui isxyrotatui. epegageto de ton Melanippon o Kleisthenes ( kai gar touto dei apegesasthai) us exthiston eonta Adrestui, os ton te adelfeon oi Mekistea apektonee kai ton gambron Tydea. [4] epeite de oi to temenos apedexe, thysias te kai ortas Adrestoy apelomenos eduke tui Melanippui. oi de Sikyunioi euthesan megalusti karta timan ton Adreston. e gar xure En ayte Poluboy, o de Adrestos En Poluboy thygatrideos, apais de Polybos teleytun didoi Adrestui ten arxen. [5] ta te de alla oi Sikyunioi etimun ton Adreston kai de pros ta pathea aytou tragikoisi xoroisi egerairon, ton men Dionyson oy timuntes, ton de Adreston. Kleisthenes de xorous men tui Dionusui apeduke, ten de allen thysien Melanippui.    
      68. Thus he had done to Adrastos; and he also changed the names of the Dorian tribes, in order that the Sikyonians might not have the same tribes as the Argives; in which matter he showed great contempt of the Sikyonians, for the names he gave were taken from the names of a pig and an ass by changing only the endings, except in the case of his own tribe, to which he gave a name from his own rule. These last then were called Archelaoi, while of the rest those of one tribe were called Hyatai, of another Oneatai, and of the remaining tribe Choireatai. These names of tribes were used by the men of Sikyon not only in the reign of Cleisthenes, but also beyond that for sixty years after his death; then however they considered the matter and changed them into Hylleis, Pamphyloi, and Dymanatai, adding to these a fourth, to which they gave the name Aigialeis after Aigialeus the son of Adrastos.         68. [1] tauta men es Adreston oi epepoieto, fylas de tas Durieun, ina de me ai aytai eusi toisi Sikyunioisi kai toisi Argeioisi, metebale es alla oynomata. entha kai pleiston kategelase tun Sikyuniun. epi gar yos te kai onoy tas epunymias metatitheis ayta ta teleytaia epetheke, plen teis euytou fyleis. tautei de to oynoma apo teis euytou arxeis etheto. oytoi men de Arxelaoi ekaleonto, eteroi de Yatai, alloi de Oneatai, eteroi de Khoireatai. [2] toutoisi toisi oynomasi tun fyleun exreunto oi Sikyunioi kai epi Kleistheneos arxontos kai ekeinoy tethneutos eti ep' etea exekonta. metepeita mentoi logon sfisi dontes metebalon es tous Ylleas kai Pamfuloys kai Dymanatas, tetartoys de aytoisi prosethento epi tou Adrestoy paidos Aigialeos ten epunymien poieumenoi kekleisthai Aigialeas.    
      69. Thus had the Cleisthenes of Sikyon done: and the Athenian Cleisthenes, who was his daughter's son and was called after him, despising, as I suppose, the Ionians, as he the Dorians, imitated his namesake Cleisthenes in order that the Athenians might not have the same tribes as the Ionians: for when at the time of which we speak he added to his own party the whole body of the common people of the Athenians, which in former time he had despised, he changed the names of the tribes and made them more in number than they had been; he made in fact ten rulers of tribes instead of four, and by tens also he distributed the demes in the tribes; and having added the common people to his party he was much superior to his opponents.         69. [1] tauta men nyn o Sikyunios Kleisthenes epepoiekee. o de de Athenaios Kleisthenes eun tou Sikyunioy toutoy thygatrideos kai to oynoma epi toutoy exun, dokeein emoi kai oytos yperidun Iunas, ina me sfisi ai aytai eusi fylai kai Iusi, ton omunymon Kleisthenea emimesato. [2] us gar de ton Athenaiun deimon proteron apusmenon tote pantun pros ten euytou moiran prosethekato, tas fylas metunomase kai epoiese pleunas ex elassonun. deka te de fylarxoys anti tesserun epoiese, dekaxa de kai tous demoys kateneime es tas fylas. En te ton deimon prosthemenos pollui katuperthe tun antistasiuteun.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [70]

     70. Then Isagoras, as he was being worsted in his turn, contrived a plan in opposition to him, that is to say, he called in Cleomenes the Lacedemonian to help him, who had been a guest-friend to himself since the siege of the sons of Peisistratos; moreover Cleomenes was accused of being intimate with the wife of Isagoras. First then Cleomenes sent a herald to Athens demanding the expulsion of Cleisthenes and with him many others of the Athenians, calling them the men who were under the curse: this message he sent by instruction of Isagoras, for the Alcmaionidai and their party were accused of the murder to which reference was thus made, while he and his friends had no part in it.         70. [1] en tui merei de essoumenos o Isagores antitexnatai tade. epikaleetai Kleomenea ton Lakedaimonion genomenon euytui xeinon apo teis Peisistratideun poliorkies. ton de Kleomenea eixe aitie foitan para tou Isagoreu ten gynaika. [2] ta men de pruta pempun o Kleomenes es tas Athenas keryka exeballe Kleisthenea kai met' aytou alloys pollous Athenaiun, tous enageas epilegun. tauta de pempun elege ek didaxeis tou Isagoreu. oi men gar Alkmeunidai kai oi systasiutai aytun eixon aitien tou fonoy toutoy, aytos de oy meteixe oyd' oi filoi aytou.    
      71. Now the men of the Athenians who were "under the curse" got this name as follows:--there was one Kylon among the Athenians, a man who had gained the victory at the Olympic games: this man behaved with arrogance, wishing to make himself despot; and having formed for himself an association of men of his own age, he endeavoured to seize the Acropolis: but not being able to get possession of it, he sat down as a suppliant before the image of the goddess. These men were taken from their place as suppliants by the presidents of the naucraries, who then administered affairs at Athens, on the condition that they should be liable to any penalty short of death; and the Alcmaionidai are accused of having put them to death. This had occurred before the time of Peisistratos.         71. [1] oi d' enagees Athenaiun ude unomasthesan. En Kulun tun Athenaiun aner Olympionikes. oytos epi tyrannidi ekomese, prospoiesamenos de etaireien tun elikiuteun katalabein ten akropolin epeirethe, oy dynamenos de epikrateisai iketes izeto pros to agalma. [2] toutoys anistasi men oi prytanies tun naykrarun, oi per enemon tote tas Athenas, ypegguoys plen thanatoy. foneusai de aytous aitie exei Alkmeunidas. tauta pro teis Peisistratoy elikies egeneto.    
      72. Now when Cleomenes sent demanding the expulsion of Cleisthenes and of those under the curse, Cleisthenes himself retired secretly; but after that nevertheless Cleomenes appeared in Athens with no very large force, and having arrived he proceeded to expel as accursed seven hundred Athenian families, of which Isagoras had suggested to him the names. Having done this he next endeavoured to dissolve the Senate, and he put the offices of the State into the hands of three hundred, who were the partisans of Isagoras. The Senate however making opposition, and not being willing to submit, Cleomenes with Isagoras and his partisans seized the Acropolis. Then the rest of the Athenians joined together by common consent and besieged them for two days; and on the third day so many of them as were Lacedemonians departed out of the country under a truce. Thus was accomplished for Cleomenes the ominous saying which was uttered to him: for when he had ascended the Acropolis with the design of taking possession of it, he was going to the sanctuary of the goddess, as to address her in prayer; but the priestess stood up from her seat before he had passed through the door, and said, "Lacedemonian stranger, go back and enter not into the temple, for it is not lawful for Dorians to pass in hither." He said: "Woman, I am not a Dorian, but an Achaian." So then, paying no attention to the ominous speech, he made his attempt and then was expelled again with the Lacedemonians; but the rest of the men the Athenians laid in bonds to be put to death, and among them Timesitheos the Delphian, with regard to whom I might mention very great deeds of strength and courage which he performed.         72. [1] Kleomenes de us pempun exeballe Kleisthenea kai tous enageas, Kleisthenes men aytos ypexesxe, meta de oyden Esson parein es tas Athenas o Kleomenes oy sun megalei xeiri, apikomenos de agelateei eptakosia epistia Athenaiun, ta oi ypetheto o Isagores. tauta de poiesas deutera ten boylen kataluein epeirato, triekosioisi de toisi Isagoreu stasiuteisi tas arxas enexeirize. [2] antistatheises de teis boyleis kai oy boylomenes peithesthai, o te Kleomenes kai o Isagores kai oi stasiutai aytou katalambanoysi ten akropolin. Athenaiun de oi loipoi ta ayta fronesantes epoliorkeon aytous emeras duo. tei de tritei ypospondoi exerxontai ek teis xures osoi Esan aytun Lakedaimonioi. epeteleeto de tui Kleomenei e feme. [3] us gar anebe es ten akropolin mellun de ayten katasxesein, eie es to adyton teis theou us prosereun. e de ireie exanastasa ek tou thronoy, prin e tas thuras ayton ameipsai, eipe <<u xeine Lakedaimonie, palin xuree mede esithi es to iron. oy gar themiton Durieusi parienai enthauta.>> o de eipe <<u gunai, all' oy Durieus eimi all' Axaios.>> [4] o men de tei kleedoni oyden xreumenos epexeirese te kai tote palin exepipte meta tun Lakedaimoniun. tous de alloys Athenaioi katedesan ten epi thanatui, en de aytoisi kai Timesitheon ton Delfon, tou erga xeirun te kai lematos exoim' an megista katalexai.    
      73. These then having been thus laid in bonds were put to death; and the Athenians after this sent for Cleisthenes to return, and also for the seven hundred families which had been driven out by Cleomenes: and then they sent envoys to Sardis, desiring to make an alliance with the Persians; for they were well assured that the Lacedemonians and Cleomenes had been utterly made their foes. So when these envoys had arrived at Sardis and were saying that which they had been commanded to say, Artaphrenes the son of Hystaspes, the governor of Sardis, asked what men these were who requested to be allies of the Persians, and where upon the earth they dwelt; and having heard this from the envoys, he summed up his answer to them thus, saying that if the Athenians were willing to give earth and water to Dareios, he was willing to make alliance with them, but if not, he bade them begone: and the envoys taking the matter upon themselves said that they were willing to do so, because they desired to make the alliance.         73. [1] oytoi men nyn dedemenoi eteleutesan. Athenaioi de meta tauta Kleisthenea kai ta eptakosia epistia ta diuxthenta ypo Kleomeneos metapempsamenoi pempoysi aggeloys es Sardis, symmaxien boylomenoi poiesasthai pros Persas. episteato gar sfisi Lakedaimonioys te kai Kleomenea ekpepolemusthai. [2] apikomenun de tun aggelun es tas Sardis kai legontun ta entetalmena, Artafrenes o Ystaspeos Sardiun yparxos epeiruta tines eontes anthrupoi kai kou geis oikemenoi deoiato Perseun summaxoi genesthai, pythomenos de pros tun aggelun apekorufoy sfi tade. ei men didousi basilei Dareiui Athenaioi gein te kai ydur, o de symmaxien sfi synetitheto, ei de me didousi, apallassesthai aytous ekeleye. [3] oi de aggeloi epi sfeun aytun balomenoi didonai efasan, boylomenoi ten symmaxien poiesasthai. oytoi men de apelthontes es ten euytun aitias megalas eixon.    
      74. These, when they returned to their own land, were highly censured: and Cleomenes meanwhile, conceiving that he had been outrageously dealt with by the Athenians both with words and with deeds, was gathering together an army from the whole of the Peloponnese, not declaring the purpose for which he was gathering it, but desiring to take vengeance on the people of the Athenians, and intending to make Isagoras despot; for he too had come out of the Acropolis together with Cleomenes. Cleomenes then with a large army entered Eleusis, while at the same time the Boeotians by agreement with him captured Oinoe and Hysiai, the demes which lay upon the extreme borders of Attica, and the Chalkidians on the other side invaded and began to ravage various districts of Attica. The Athenians then, though attacked on more sides than one, thought that they would remember the Boeotians and Chalkidians afterwards, and arrayed themselves against the Peloponnesians who were in Eleusis.         74. [1] Kleomenes de epistamenos periybristhai epesi kai ergoisi yp' Athenaiun synelege ek pases Peloponnesoy straton, oy frazun es to syllegei, tisasthai te ethelun ton deimon ton Athenaiun kai Isagoren boylomenos turannon katasteisai. synexeilthe gar oi oytos ek teis akropolios. [2] Kleomenes te de stolui megalui esebale es Eleysina, kai oi Boiutoi apo synthematos Oinoen aireoysi kai Ysias demoys tous esxatoys teis Attikeis, Khalkidees te epi ta etera esinonto epiontes xuroys teis Attikeis. Athenaioi de, kaiper amfiboliei exomenoi, Boiutun men kai Khalkideun es ysteron emellon mnemen poiesesthai, Peloponnesioisi de eousi en Eleysini antia ethento ta opla.    
      75. Then as the armies were just about the join battle, the Corinthians first, considering with themselves that they were not acting rightly, changed their minds and departed; and after that Demaratos the son of Ariston did the same, who was king of the Spartans as well as Cleomenes, though he had joined with him in leading the army out from Lacedemon and had not been before this at variance with Cleomenes. In consequence of this dissension a law was laid down at Sparta that it should not be permitted, when an army went out, that both the kings should go with it, for up to this time both used to go with it, and that as one of the kings was set free from service, so one of the sons of Tyndareus also should be left behind; for before this time both of these two were called upon by them for help and went with the armies.         75. [1] mellontun de synapsein ta stratopeda es maxen, Korinthioi men prutoi sfisi aytoisi dontes logon us oy poieoien dikaia meteballonto te kai apallassonto, meta de Demaretos o Aristunos, eun kai oytos basileus Spartieteun kai synexagagun te ten stratien ek Lakedaimonos kai oyk eun diaforos en tui prosthe xronui Kleomenei. [2] apo de tautes teis dixostasies etethe nomos en Spartei me exeinai epesthai amfoteroys tous basileas exiouses stratieis. teus gar amfoteroi eiponto. paralyomenoy de toutun tou eteroy kataleipesthai kai tun Tyndarideun ton eteron. pro tou gar de kai oytoi amfoteroi epikletoi sfi eontes eiponto. [3] tote de en tei Eleysini oruntes oi loipoi tun symmaxun tous te basileas tun Lakedaimoniun oyk omologeontas kai Korinthioys eklipontas ten taxin, oixonto kai aytoi apallassomenoi,    
      76. At this time then in Eleusis the rest of the allies, seeing that the kings of the Lacedemonians did not agree and also that the Corinthians had deserted their place in the ranks, themselves too departed and got them away quickly. And this was the fourth time that the Dorians had come to Attica, twice having invaded it to make war against it, and twice to help the mass of the Athenian people,--first when they at the same time colonised Megara (this expedition may rightly be designated as taking place when Codros was king of the Athenians), for the second and third times when they came making expeditions from Sparta to drive out the sons of Peisistratos, and fourthly on this occasion, when Cleomenes at the head of the Peloponnesians invaded Eleusis: thus the Dorians invaded Athens then for the fourth time.         76. [1] tetarton de touto epi ten Attiken apikomenoi Duriees, dis te epi polemui esbalontes kai dis ep' agathui tou pletheos tou Athenaiun, pruton men ote kai Megara katoikisan. oytos o stolos epi Kodroy basileuontos Athenaiun orthus an kaleoito. deuteron de kai triton ote epi Peisistratideun exelasin ormethentes ek Spartes apikonto, tetarton de tote ote es Eleysina Kleomenes agun Peloponnesioys esebale. oytu tetarton tote Duriees esebalon es Athenas.    
      77. This army then having been ingloriously broken up, the Athenians after that, desiring to avenge themselves, made expedition first against the Chalkidians; and the Boeotians came to the Euripos to help the Chalkidians. The Athenians, therefore, seeing those who had come to help, resolved first to attack the Boeotians before the Chalkidians. Accordingly they engaged battle with the Boeotians, and had much the better of them, and after having slain very many they took seven hundred of them captive. On this very same day the Athenians passed over into Euboea and engaged battle with the Chalkidians as well; and having conquered these also, they left four thousand holders of allotments in the land belonging to the "Breeders of Horses": now the wealthier of the Chalkidians were called the Breeders of Horses. And as many of them as they took captive, they kept in confinement together with the Boeotians who had been captured, bound with fetters; and then after a time they let them go, having fixed their ransom at two pounds of silver apiece: but their fetters, in which they had been bound, they hung up on the Acropolis; and these were still existing even to my time hanging on walls which had been scorched with fire by the Mede, and just opposite the sanctuary which lies towards the West. The tenth part of the ransom also they dedicated for an offering, and made of it a four-horse chariot of bronze, which stands on the left hand as you enter the Propylaia in the Acropolis, and on it is the following inscription: 
"Matched in the deeds of war with the tribes of Boeotia and Chalkis 
   The sons of Athens prevailed, conquered and tamed them in fight: 
 In chains of iron and darkness they quenched their insolent spirit; 
   And to Athene present these, of their ransom a tithe."         77. [1] dialythentos un tou stoloy toutoy akleus, enthauta Athenaioi tinysthai boylomenoi pruta strateien poieuntai epi Khalkideas. Boiutoi de toisi Khalkideusi boetheoysi epi ton Eyripon. Athenaioisi de idousi tous Boiutous edoxe proteron toisi Boiutoisi e toisi Khalkideusi epixeireein. [2] symballoysi te de toisi Boiutoisi oi Athenaioi kai pollui ekratesan, karta de pollous foneusantes eptakosioys aytun ezugresan. teis de ayteis tautes emeres oi Athenaioi diabantes es ten Eyboian symballoysi kai toisi Khalkideusi, nikesantes de kai toutoys tetrakisxilioys klerouxoys epi tun ippoboteun tei xurei leipoysi. oi de ippobotai ekaleonto oi paxees tun Khalkideun. [3] osoys de kai toutun ezugresan, ama toisi Boiutun ezugremenoisi eixon en fylakei es pedas desantes. xronui de elysan sfeas dimneus apotimesamenoi. tas de pedas aytun, en teisi ededeato, anekremasan es ten akropolin. ai per eti kai es eme Esan perieousai, kremamenai ek teixeun peripefleysmenun pyri ypo tou Medoy, antion de tou megaroy tou pros esperen tetrammenoy. [4] kai tun lutrun ten dekaten anethekan poiesamenoi tethrippon xalkeon. to de aristereis xeiros esteke pruton esionti es ta propulaia ta en tei akropoli. epigegraptai de oi tade.     ethnea Boiutun kai Khalkideun damasantes
           paides Athenaiun ergmasin en polemoy,
      desmui en axlyoenti sidereui esbesan ybrin.
           tun ippoys dekaten Palladi tasd' ethesan.   
      78. The Athenians accordingly increased in power; and it is evident, not by one instance only but in every way, that Equality is an excellent thing, since the Athenians while they were ruled by despots were not better in war that any of those who dwelt about them, whereas after they had got rid of despots they became far the first. This proves that when they were kept down they were wilfully slack, because they were working for a master, whereas when they had been set free each one was eager to achieve something for himself.         78. [1] Athenaioi men nyn eyxento. deloi de oy kat' en mounon alla pantaxei e isegorie us esti xreima spoydaion, ei kai Athenaioi tyranneyomenoi men oydamun tun sfeas perioikeontun Esan ta polemia ameinoys, apallaxthentes de tyrannun makrui prutoi egenonto. deloi un tauta oti katexomenoi men ethelokakeon us despotei ergazomenoi, eleytheruthentun de aytos ekastos euytui proethymeeto katergazesthai.    
      79. These then were faring thus: and the Thebans after this sent to the god, desiring to be avenged on the Athenians; the Pythian prophetess however said that vengeance was not possible for them by their own strength alone, but bade them report the matter to the "many-voiced" and ask help of those who were "nearest" to them. So when those who were sent to consult the Oracle returned, they made a general assembly and reported the oracle; and then the Thebans heard them say that they were to ask help of those who were nearest to them, they said: "Surely those who dwell nearest to us are the men of Tanagra and Coroneia and Thespiai; and these always fight zealously on our side and endure the war with us to the end: what need is there that we ask of these? Rather perhaps that is not the meaning of the oracle."         79. [1] oytoi men nyn tauta epresson. Theibaioi de meta tauta es theon epempon, boylomenoi tisasthai Athenaioys. e de Pythie apo sfeun men aytun oyk efe aytoisi einai tisin, es polufemon de exeneikantas ekeleye tun agxista deesthai. [2] apelthontun un tun theopropun, exeferon to xresterion alien poiesamenoi. us epynthanonto de legontun aytun tun agxista deesthai, eipan oi Thebaioi akousantes toutun <<oyk un agxista emeun oikeoysi Tanagraioi te kai Korunaioi kai Thespiees; kai oytoi ge ama emin aiei maxomenoi prothumus syndiaferoysi ton polemon. ti dei toutun ge deesthai; alla mallon me oy touto ei to xresterion.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [80]

     80. While they commented upon it thus, at length one perceived that which the oracle means to tell us. Asopos is said to have had two daughters born to him, Thebe and Egina; and as these are sisters, I think that the god gave us for answer that we should ask the men of Egina to become our helpers." Then as there seemed to be no opinion expressed which was better than this, they sent forthwith and asked the men of Egina to help them, calling upon them in accordance with the oracle; and they, when these made request, said that they sent with them the sons of Aiacos to help them.         80. [1] toiauta epilegomenun eipe de kote mathun tis <<egu moi dokeu synienai to thelei legein emin to manteion. Asupou legontai genesthai thygateres Thebe te kai Aigina. toyteun adelfeun eoyseun, dokeu emin Aigineteun deesthai ton theon xreisai timureterun genesthai.>> [2] kai oy gar tis tautes ameinun gnume edokee fainesthai, aytika pempsantes edeonto Aigineteun epikaleomenoi kata to xresterion sfi boetheein, us eontun agxistun. oi de sfi aiteoysi epikoyrien tous Aiakidas sympempein efasan.    
      81. After that the Thebans, having made an attempt with the alliance of the sons of Aiacos and having been roughly handled by the Athenians, sent again and gave them back the sons of Aiacos and asked them for men. So the Eginetans, exalted by great prosperity and calling to mind an ancient grudge against the Athenians, then on the request of the Thebans commenced a war against the Athenians without notice: for while the Athenians were intent on the Boeotians, they sailed against them to Attica with ships of war, and they devastated Phaleron and also many demes in the remainder of the coast region, and so doing they deeply stirred the resentment of the Athenians.         81. [1] peiresamenun de tun Thebaiun kata ten symmaxien tun Aiakideun kai trexeus periefthentun ypo tun Athenaiun, aytis oi Thebaioi pempsantes tous men Aiakidas sfi apedidosan, tun de andrun edeonto. [2] Aigineitai de eydaimoniei te megalei epaerthentes kai exthres palaieis anamnesthentes exouses es Athenaioys, tote Thebaiun deethentun polemon akerykton Athenaioisi epeferon. [3] epikeimenun gar aytun Boiutoisi, epiplusantes makreisi neysi es ten Attiken kata men esyran Faleron kata de teis alles paralies pollous demoys, poieuntes de tauta megalus Athenaioys esikneonto.    
      82. Now the grudge which was due beforehand from the Eginetans to the Athenians came about from a beginning which was as follows:--The land of the Epidaurians yielded to its inhabitants no fruit; and accordingly with reference to this calamity the Epidaurians went to inquire at Delphi, and the Pythian prophetess bade them set up images of Damia and Auxesia, and said that when they had set up these, they would meet with better fortune. The Epidaurians then asked further whether they should make images of bronze or of stone; and the prophetess bade them not use either of these, but make them of the wood of a cultivated olive-tree. The Epidaurians therefore asked the Athenians to allow them to cut for themselves an olive-tree, since they thought that their olives were the most sacred; nay some say that at that time there were no olives in any part of the earth except at Athens. The Athenians said that they would allow them on condition that they should every year bring due offerings to Athene Polias and to Erechtheus. The Epidaurians, then, having agreed to these terms, obtained that which they asked, and they made images out of these olive-trees and set them up: and their land bore fruit and they continued to fulfil towards the Athenians that which they had agreed to do.         82. [1] e de exthre e proofeilomene es Athenaioys ek tun Aigineteun egeneto ex arxeis toieisde. Epidayrioisi e gei karpon oydena anedidoy. peri tautes un teis symforeis oi Epidaurioi exreunto en Delfoisi. e de Pythie sfeas ekeleye Damies te kai Ayxesies agalmata idrusasthai kai sfi idrysamenoisi ameinon synoisesthai. [2] epeiruteon un oi Epidaurioi kotera xalkou poieuntai ta agalmata e lithoy. e de Pythie oydetera toutun ea, alla xuloy emeres elaies. edeonto un oi Epidaurioi Athenaiun elaien sfi dounai tamesthai, irutatas de keinas nomizontes einai. legetai de kai us elaiai Esan allothi geis oydamou kata xronon ekeinon e en Atheneisi. [3] oi de epi toiside dusein efasan ep' ui apaxoysi eteos ekastoy tei Athenaiei te tei Poliadi ira kai tui Erexthei. katainesantes de epi toutoisi oi Epidaurioi tun te edeonto etyxon kai agalmata ek tun elaieun toyteun poiesamenoi idrusanto. kai e te gei sfi efere karpon kai Athenaioisi epeteleon ta synethento.    
      83. Now during this time and also before this the Eginetans were subject to the Epidaurians, and besides other things they were wont to pass over to Epidauros to have their disputes with one another settled by law: but after this time they built for themselves ships and made revolt from the Epidaurians, moved thereto by wilfulness. So as they were at variance with them, they continued to inflict damage on them, since in fact they had command of the sea, and especially they stole away from them these images of Damia and Auxesia, and they brought them and set them up in the inland part of their country at a place called Oia, which is about twenty furlongs distant from their city. Having set them up in this spot they worshipped them with sacrifices and choruses of women accompanied with scurrilous jesting, ten men being appointed for each of the deities to provide the choruses: and the choruses spoke evil of no man, but only of the women of the place. Now the Epidaurians also had the same rites; and they have also rites which may not be divulged.         83. [1] touton d' eti ton xronon kai pro tou Aigineitai Epidayriun ekoyon ta te alla kai dikas diabainontes es Epidayron edidosan te kai elambanon par' allelun oi Aigineitai. to de apo toude neas te pexamenoi kai agnumosunei xresamenoi apestesan apo tun Epidayriun. [2] ate de eontes diaforoi edeleonto aytous, uste thalassokratores eontes, kai de kai ta agalmata tauta teis te Damies kai teis Ayxesies ypaireontai aytun, kai sfea ekomisan te kai idrusanto teis sfeteres xures es ten mesogaian, tei Oie men esti oynoma, stadia de malista kei apo teis polios us eikosi apexei. [3] idrysamenoi de en toutui tui xurui thysieisi te sfea kai xoroisi gynaikeioisi kertomioisi ilaskonto, xoregun apodeiknymenun ekaterei tun daimonun deka andrun. kakus de egoreyon oi xoroi andra men oydena, tas de epixurias gynaikas. Esan de kai toisi Epidayrioisi ai aytai iroergiai. eisi de sfi kai arretoi iroyrgiai.    
      84. These images then having been stolen, the Epidaurians no longer continued to fulfil towards the Athenians that which they had agreed. The Athenians accordingly sent and expressed displeasure to the Epidaurians; and they declared saying that they were doing no wrong; for during the time when they had the images in their country they continued to fulfil that which they had agreed upon, but since they had been deprived of them, it was not just that they should make the offerings any more; and they bade them demand these from the men of Egina, who had the images. So the Athenians sent to Egina and demanded the images back; but the Eginetans said that they had nothing to do with the Athenians.         84. [1] klefthentun de tunde tun agalmatun oi Epidaurioi toisi Athenaioisi ta synethento oyk epeteleon. pempsantes de oi Athenaioi emenion toisi Epidayrioisi. oi de apefainon logui us oyk adikeoien. oson men gar xronon eixon ta agalmata en tei xurei, epiteleein ta synethento, epei de estereisthai aytun, oy dikaion einai apoferein eti, alla tous exontas ayta Aiginetas pressesthai ekeleyon. [2] pros tauta oi Athenaioi es Aiginan pempsantes apaiteon ta agalmata. oi de Aigineitai efasan sfisi te kai Athenaioisi einai oyden preigma.    
      85. The Athenians then report that in one single trireme were despatched those of their citizens who were sent by the State after this demand; who having come to Egina, attempted to tear up from off their pedestals the images, (alleging that they were made of wood which belonged to the Athenians), in order to carry them back with them: but not being able to get hold of them in this manner (say the Athenians) they threw ropes round them and were pulling them, when suddenly, as they pulled, thunder came on and an earthquake at the same time with the thunder; and the crew of the trireme who were pulling were made beside themselves by these, and being brought to this condition they killed one another as if they were enemies, until at last but one of the whole number was left; and he returned alone to Phaleron.         85. [1] Athenaioi men nyn legoysi meta ten apaitesin apostaleinai trierei miei tun astun toutoys oi apopemfthentes apo tou koinou kai apikomenoi es Aiginan ta agalmata tauta us sfeterun xulun eonta epeirunto ek tun bathrun exanaspan, ina sfea anakomisuntai. [2] oy dynamenoys de toutui tui tropui aytun krateisai, peribalontas sxoinia elkein ta agalmata, kai sfi elkoysi bronten te kai ama tei brontei seismon epigenesthai. tous de trieritas tous elkontas ypo toutun allofroneisai, pathontas de touto kteinein alleloys ate polemioys, es o ek pantun ena leifthenta anakomistheinai ayton es Faleron.    
      86. Thus the Athenians report that it came to pass: but the Eginetans say that it was not with a single ship that the Athenians came; for a single ship, and even a few more than one, they could have easily repelled, even if they had not happened to have ships of their own: but they say that the Athenians sailed upon their country with a large fleet of ships, and they gave way before them and did not fight a sea-battle. They cannot however declare with certainty whether they gave way thus because they admitted that they were not strong enough to fight the battle by sea, or because they intended to do something of the kind which they actually did. The Athenians then, they say, as no one met them in fight, landed from their ships and made for the images; but not being able to tear them up from their pedestals, at last they threw ropes round them and began to pull, until the images, as they were being pulled, did both the same thing (and here they report something which I cannot believe, but some other man may), for they say that the images fell upon their knees to them and that they continue to be in that position ever since this time. The Athenians, they say, were doing thus; and meanwhile they themselves (say the Eginetans), being informed that the Athenians were about to make an expedition against them, got the Argives to help them; and just when the Athenians had disembarked upon the Eginetan land, the Argives had come to their rescue, and not having been perceived when they passed over from Epidauros to the island, they fell upon the Athenians before these had heard anything of the matter, cutting them off secretly from the way to their ships; and at this moment it was that the thunder and the earthquake came upon them.         86. [1] Athenaioi men oytu genesthai legoysi, Aigineitai de oy miei nei apikesthai Athenaioys. mian men gar kai oligui pleunas mieis, kai ei sfisi me etyxon eousai nees, apamunesthai an eypeteus. alla polleisi neysi epipleein sfisi epi ten xuren, aytoi de sfi eixai kai oy naymaxeisai. [2] oyk exoysi de touto diasemeinai atrekeus, oyte ei essones sygginuskomenoi einai tei naymaxiei kata touto eixan, oyte ei boylomenoi poieisai oion ti kai epoiesan. [3] Athenaioys men nyn, epeite sfi oydeis es maxen katistato, apobantas apo tun neun trapesthai pros ta agalmata, oy dynamenoys de anaspasai ek tun bathrun ayta oytu de peribalomenoys sxoinia elkein, es oy elkomena ta agalmata amfotera tuyto poieisai, emoi men oy pista legontes, allui de teui. es gounata gar sfi ayta pesein, kai ton apo toutoy xronon diateleein oytu exonta. [4] Athenaioys men de tauta poieein. sfeas de Aigineitai legoysi pythomenoys tous Athenaioys us melloien epi sfeas strateuesthai, etoimoys Argeioys poieesthai. tous te de Athenaioys apobebanai es ten Aiginaien, kai ekein boetheontas sfisi tous Argeioys kai lathein te ex Epidauroy diabantas es ten neison kai oy proakekoosi toisi Athenaioisi epipesein ypotamomenoys to apo tun neun, ama te en toutui ten bronten te genesthai kai ton seismon aytoisi.    
      87. This is the report which is given by the Argives and Eginetans both, and it is admitted by the Athenians also that but one alone of them survived and came back to Attica: only the Argives say that this one remained alive from destruction wrought by them upon the army of Athens, while the Athenians say that the divine power was the destroyer. However, even this one man did not remain alive, but perished, they say, in the following manner:--when he returned to Athens he reported the calamity which had happened; and the wives of the men who had gone on the expedition to Egina, hearing it and being very indignant that he alone of all had survived, came round this man and proceeded to stab him with the brooches of their mantles, each one of them asking of him where her husband was. Thus he was slain; and to the Athenians it seemed that the deed of the women was a much more terrible thing even than the calamity which had happened; and not knowing, it is said, how they should punish the women in any other way, they changed their fashion of dress to that of Ionia,--for before this the women of the Athenians wore Dorian dress, very like that of Corinth,--they changed it therefore to the linen tunic, in order that they might not have use for brooches.         87. [1] legetai men nyn yp' Argeiun te kai Aigineteun tade, omologeetai de kai yp' Athenaiun ena mounon ton aposuthenta aytun es ten Attiken genesthai. [2] plen Argeioi men legoysi aytun to Attikon stratopedon diaftheirantun ton ena touton perigenesthai, Athenaioi de tou daimonioy. perigenesthai mentoi oyde touton ton ena, all' apolesthai tropui toiuide. komistheis ara es tas Athenas apeggelle to pathos. pythomenas de tas gynaikas tun ep' Aiginan strateysamenun andrun, deinon ti poiesamenas keinon mounon ex apantun sutheinai, perix ton anthrupon touton labousas kai kenteusas teisi peroneisi tun imatiun eirutan ekasten ayteun okoy eie o euyteis aner. [3] kai touton men oytu diafthareinai, Athenaioisi de eti tou patheos deinoteron ti doxai einai to tun gynaikun ergon. allui men de oyk exein oteui zemiususi tas gynaikas, ten de estheita metebalon ayteun es ten Iada. eforeon gar de pro tou ai tun Athenaiun gynaikes estheita Durida, tei Korinthiei paraplesiutaten. metebalon un es ton lineon kithuna, ina de peroneisi me xreuntai.    
      88. In truth however this fashion of dress is not Ionian originally but Carian, for the old Hellenic fashion of dress for women was universally the same as that which we now call Dorian. Moreover it is said that with reference to these events the Argives and Eginetans made it a custom among themselves in both countries to have the brooches made half as large again as the size which was then established in use, and that their women should offer brooches especially in the temple of these goddesses, and also that they should carry neither pottery of Athens nor anything else of Athenian make to the temple, but that it should be the custom for the future to drink there from pitchers made in the lands themselves.         88. [1] esti de alethei logui xreumenoisi oyk Ias ayte e esthes to palaion alla Kaeira, epei e ge Ellenike esthes pasa e arxaie tun gynaikun e ayte En ten nun Durida kaleomen. [2] toisi de Argeioisi kai toisi Aigineteisi kai pros tauta eti tode poieisai nomon einai para sfisi ekateroisi tas peronas emiolias poieesthai tou tote katesteutos metroy, kai es to iron tun theun toyteun peronas malista anatithenai tas gynaikas, Attikon de mete ti allo prosferein pros to iron mete keramon, all' ek xytridun epixurieun nomon to loipon aytothi einai pinein. Argeiun men nyn kai Aigineteun ai gynaikes ek tosoy kat' erin ten Athenaiun peronas eti kai es eme eforeon mezonas e pro tou.   
      89. The women of the Argives and Eginetans from this time onwards because of the quarrel with the Athenians continued to wear brooches larger than before, and still do so even to my time; and the origin of the enmity of the Athenians towards the Eginetans came in the manner which has been said. So at this time, when the Thebans invaded them, the Eginetans readily came to the assistance of the Boeotians, calling to mind what occurred about the images. The Eginetans then were laying waste, as I have said, the coast regions of Attica; and when the Athenians were resolved to make an expedition against the Eginetans, an oracle came to them from Delphi bidding them stay for thirty years reckoned from the time of the wrong done by the Eginetans, and in the one-and-thirtieth year to appoint a sacred enclosure for Aiacos and then to begin the war against the Eginetans, and they would succeed as they desired; but if they should make an expedition against them at once, they would suffer in the meantime very much evil and also inflict very much, but at last they would subdue them. When the Athenians heard the report of this, they appointed a sacred enclosure for Aiacos, namely that which is now established close to the market- place, but they could not endure to hear that they must stay for thirty years, when they had suffered injuries from the Eginetans.         89. [1] teis de exthres teis pros Aiginetas ex Athenaiun genomenes arxe kata ta eiretai egeneto. tote de Thebaiun epikaleomenun, prothumus tun peri ta agalmata genomenun anamimneskomenoi oi Aigineitai eboetheon toisi Boiutoisi. [2] Aigineitai te de edeioyn teis Attikeis ta parathalassia, kai Athenaioisi ormemenoisi ep' Aiginetas strateuesthai Elthe manteion ek Delfun, episxontas apo tou Aigineteun adikioy triekonta etea, tui eni kai triekostui Aiakui temenos apodexantas arxesthai tou pros Aiginetas polemoy, kai sfi xuresein ta boulontai. en de aytika epistrateuuntai, polla men sfeas en tui metaxu tou xronoy peisesthai polla de kai poiesein, telos mentoi katastrepsesthai. [3] tauta us apeneixthenta ekoysan oi Athenaioi, tui men Aiakui temenos apedexan touto to nun epi teis agoreis idrytai, triekonta de etea oyk anesxonto akousantes okus xreon eie episxein peponthotas yp' Aigineteun anarsia.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [90]

     90. While however they were preparing to take vengeance, a matter arose from the Lacedemonians which provided a hindrance to them: for the Lacedemonians, having learnt that which had been contrived by the Alcmaionidai with respect to the Pythian prophetess, and that which had been contrived by the Pythian prophetess against themselves and the sons of Peisistratos, were doubly grieved, not only because they had driven out into exile men who were their guest-friends, but also because after they had done this no gratitude was shown to them by the Athenians. Moreover in addition to this, they were urged on by the oracles which said that many injuries would be suffered by them from the Athenians; of which oracles they had not been aware of before, but they had come to know them, since Cleomenes had brought them to Sparta. In fact Cleomenes had obtained from the Acropolis of the Athenians those oracles which the sons of Peisistratos possessed before and had left in the temple when they were driven out; and Cleomenes recovered them after they had been left behind.         90. [1] es timurien de paraskeyazomenoisi aytoisi ek Lakedaimoniun preigma egeiromenon empodion egeneto. pythomenoi gar Lakedaimonioi ta ek tun Alkmeunideun es ten Pythien memexanemena kai ta ek teis Pythies epi sfeas te kai tous Peisistratidas symforen epoieunto diplein, oti te andras xeinoys sfisi eontas exelelakesan ek teis ekeinun, kai oti tauta poiesasi xaris oydemia efaineto pros Athenaiun. [2] eti te pros toutoisi eneigon sfeas oi xresmoi legontes polla te kai anarsia esesthai aytoisi ex Athenaiun, tun proteron men Esan adaees, tote de Kleomeneos komisantos es Sparten exemathon. ektesato de o Kleomenes ek teis Athenaiun akropolios tous xresmous, tous ektento men proteron oi Peisistratidai, exelaynomenoi de elipon en tui irui, kataleifthentas de o Kleomenes anelabe.    
      91. At this time, then, when the Lacedemonians had recovered the oracles and when they saw that the Athenians were increasing in power and were not at all willing to submit to them, observing that the Athenian race now that it was free was becoming a match for their own, whereas when held down by despots it was weak and ready to be ruled,--perceiving, I say, all these things, they sent for Hippias the son of Peisistratos to come from Sigeion on the Hellespont, whither the family of Peisistratos go for refuge; and when Hippias had come upon the summons, the Spartans sent also for envoys to come from their other allies and spoke to them as follows: "Allies, we are conscious within ourselves that we have not acted rightly; for incited by counterfeit oracles we drove out into exile men who were very closely united with us as guest-friends and who undertook the task of rendering Athens submissive to us, and then after having done this we delivered over the State to a thankless populace, which so soon as it had raised its head, having been freed by our means drove out us and our king with wanton outrage; and now exalted with pride it is increasing in power, so that the neighbours of these men first of all, that is the Boeotians and Chalkidians, have already learnt, and perhaps some others also will afterwards learn, that they committed an error. As however we erred in doing those things of which we have spoken, we will try now to take vengeance on them, going thither together with you; since it was for this very purpose that we sent for Hippias, whom ye see here, and for you also, to come from your cities, in order that with common counsel and a common force we might conduct him to Athens and render back to him that which we formerly took away."         91. [1] tote de us anelabon oi Lakedaimonioi tous xresmous kai tous Athenaioys urun ayxomenoys kai oydamus etoimoys eontas peithesthai sfisi, noui labontes us eleutheron men eon to genos to Attikon isorropon an tui euytun ginoito, katexomenon de ypo tyrannidos asthenes kai peitharxeesthai etoimon. mathontes de toutun ekasta metepemponto Ippien ton Peisistratoy apo Sigeioy tou en Ellespontui es o katafeugoysi oi Peisistratidai. [2] epeite de sfi Ippies kaleomenos Eke, metapempsamenoi kai tun allun symmaxun aggeloys elegon sfi Spartieitai tade. <<andres summaxoi, sygginuskomen aytoisi emin oy poiesasi orthus. epaerthentes gar kibdeloisi manteioisi andras xeinoys eontas emin ta malista kai anadekomenoys ypoxeirias parexein tas Athenas, toutoys ek teis patridos exelasamen, kai epeita poiesantes tauta demui axaristui paredukamen ten polin. os epeite di' emeas eleytherutheis anekypse, emeas men kai ton basilea emeun periybrisas exebale, doxan de fusas ayxanetai, uste ekmemathekasi malista men oi perioikoi aytun Boiutoi kai Khalkidees, taxa de tis kai allos ekmathesetai amartun. [3] epeite de ekeina poiesantes emartomen, nun peiresometha sfeas ama ymin apikomenoi tisasthai. aytou gar toutoy eineken tonde te Ippien metepempsametha kai ymeas apo tun poliun, ina koinui te logui kai koinui stolui esagagontes ayton es tas Athenas apodumen ta kai apeilometha.>>    
      92. Thus they spoke; but the majority of the allies did not approve of their words. The rest however kept silence, but the Corinthian Socles spoke as follows:         92. [1] oi men tauta elegon, tun de symmaxun to pleithos oyk enedeketo tous logoys. oi men nyn alloi esyxien Egon, Korinthios de Suklees elexe tade.   
      92. (a) "Surely now the heaven shall be below the earth, and the earth raised up on high above the heaven, and men shall have their dwelling in the sea, and fishes shall have that habitation which men had before, seeing that ye, Lacedemonians, are doing away with free governments and are preparing to bring back despotism again into our cities, than which there is no more unjust or more murderous thing among men. For if in truth this seems to you to be good, namely that the cities should be ruled by despots, do ye yourselves first set up a despot in your own State, and then endeavour to establish them also for others: but as it is, ye are acting unfairly towards your allies, seeing that ye have had no experience of despots yourselves and provide with the greatest care at Sparta that this may never come to pass. If however ye had had experience of it, as we have had, ye would be able to contribute juster opinions of it than at present.         92. a [1] <<E de o te oyranos enerthe estai teis geis kai e gei meteuros yper tou oyranou, kai anthrupoi nomon en thalassei exoysi kai ixthues ton proteron anthrupoi, ote ge ymeis u Lakedaimonioi isokratias kataluontes tyrannidas es tas polis katagein paraskeyazesthe, tou oyte adikuteron esti oyden kat' anthrupoys oyte miaifonuteron. [2] ei gar de touto ge dokeei ymin einai xreston uste tyranneuesthai tas polis, aytoi prutoi turannon katastesamenoi para sfisi aytoisi oytu kai toisi alloisi dizesthe katistanai. nun de aytoi tyrannun apeiroi eontes, kai fylassontes touto deinotata en tei Spartei me genesthai, paraxrasthe es tous symmaxoys. ei de aytou empeiroi eate kata per emeis, eixete an peri aytou gnumas ameinonas symbalesthai e per nun.    
      92. b) For the established order of the Corinthian State was this:--the government was an oligarchy, and the oligarchs, who were called Bacchiadai, had control over the State and made marriages among themselves. Now one of these men, named Amphion, had a daughter born to him who was lame, and her name was Labda. This daughter, since none of the Bacchiadai wished to marry her, was taken to wife by Aetion the son of Echecrates, who was of the deme of Petra, but by original descent a Lapith and of the race of Caineus. Neither from this wife nor from another were children born to him, therefore he set out to Delphi to inquire about offspring; and as he entered, forthwith the prophetess addressed him in these lines: "'Much to be honoured art thou, yet none doth render thee honour. 
 Labda conceives, and a rolling rock will she bear, which shall ruin 
 Down on the heads of the kings, and with chastisement visit Corinthos.' This answer given to Aetion was by some means reported to the Bacchiadai, to whom the oracle which had come to Corinth before this was not intelligible, an oracle which had reference to the same thing as that of Aetion and said thus: "'An eagle conceives in the rocks and shall bear a ravening lion, 
 Strong and fierce to devour, who the knees of many shall loosen. 
 Ponder this well in your minds, I bid you, Corinthians, whose dwelling 
 Lies about fair Peirene's spring and in craggy Corinthos.'         92. b [1] Korinthioisi gar En polios katastasis toiede. En oligarxie, kai oytoi Bakxiadai kaleomenoi enemon ten polin, edidosan de kai egonto ex allelun. Amfioni de eonti toutun tun andrun ginetai thygater xule. oynoma de oi En Labda. tauten Bakxiadeun gar oydeis ethele geimai, isxei Eetiun o Exekrateos, demoy men eun ek Petres, atar ta anekathen Lapithes te kai Kaineides. [2] ek de oi tautes teis gynaikos oyd' ex alles paides eginonto. estale un es Delfous peri gonoy. esionta de ayton itheus e Pythie prosagoreuei toiside toisi epesi.     Eetiun, oytis se tiei polutiton eonta.
      Labda kuei, texei d' olooitroxon. en de peseitai
      andrasi moynarxoisi, dikaiusei de Korinthon.[3] tauta xresthenta tui Eetiuni exaggelletai kus toisi Bakxiadeisi, toisi to men proteron genomenon xresterion es Korinthon En asemon, feron te es tuyto kai to tou Eetiunos kai legon ude.     aietos en petreisi kuei, texei de leonta
      karteron umesten. pollun d' ypo gounata lusei.
      tauta nyn ey frazesthe, Korinthioi, oi peri kalen
      Peirenen oikeite kai ofryoenta Korinthon.   
      92. (c) This oracle, I say, having come before to the Bacchiadai was obscure; but afterwards when they heard that which had come to Aetion, forthwith they understood the former also, that it was in accord with that of Aetion; and understanding this one also they kept quiet, desiring to destroy the offspring which should be born to Aetion. Then, so soon as his wife bore a child, they sent ten of their own number to the deme in which Aetion had his dwelling, to slay the child; and when these had come to Petra and had passed into the court of Aetion's house, they asked for the child; and Labda, not knowing anything of the purpose for which they had come, and supposing them to be asking for the child on account of friendly feeling towards its father, brought it and placed it in the hands of one of them. Now they, it seems, had resolved by the way that the first of them who received the child should dash it upon the ground. However, when Labda brought and gave it, it happened by divine providence that the child smiled at the man who had received it; and when he perceived this, a feeling of compassion prevented him from killing it, and having this compassion he delivered it to the next man, and he to the third. Thus it passed through the hands of all the ten, delivered from one to another, since none of them could bring himself to destroy its life. So they gave the child back to its mother and went out; and then standing by the doors they abused and found fault with one another, laying blame especially on the one who had first received the child, because he had not done according to that which had been resolved; until at last after some time they determined again to enter and all to take a share in the murder.         92. g [1] touto men de toisi Bakxiadeisi proteron genomenon En atekmarton. tote de to Eetiuni genomenon us eputhonto, aytika kai to proteron syneikan eon synuidon tui Eetiunos. synentes de kai touto eixon en esyxiei, ethelontes ton mellonta Eetiuni ginesthai gonon diaftheirai. us d' eteke e gyne taxista, pempoysi sfeun aytun deka es ton deimon en tui katoiketo o Eetiun apokteneontas to paidion. [2] apikomenoi de oytoi es ten Petren kai parelthontes es ten aylen ten Eetiunos aiteon to paidion. e de Labda eidyia te oyden tun eineka ekeinoi apikoiato, kai dokeoysa sfeas filofrosunes tou patros eineka aiteein, feroysa enexeirise aytun eni. toisi de ara ebebouleyto kat' odon ton pruton aytun labonta to paidion prosoydisai. [3] epei un eduke feroysa e Labda, ton labonta tun andrun theiei tuxei prosegelase to paidion, kai ton frasthenta touto oiktos tis isxei apokteinai, katoikteiras de paradidoi tui deyterui, o de tui tritui. oytu de diexeilthe dia pantun tun deka paradidomenon, oydenos boylomenoy diergasasthai. [4] apodontes un opisu tei tekousei to paidion kai exelthontes exu, esteutes epi tun thyreun allelun aptonto kataitiumenoi, kai malista tou prutoy labontos, oti oyk epoiese kata ta dedogmena, es o de sfi xronoy egginomenoy edoxe aytis parelthontas pantas tou fonoy metisxein.   
      92. (d) From the offspring of Aetion however it was destined that evils should spring up for Corinth: for Labda was listening to all this as she stood close by the door, and fearing lest they should change their mind and take the child a second time and kill it, she carried it and concealed it in the place which seemed to her the least likely to be discovered, that is to say a corn-chest, feeling sure that if they should return and come to a search, they were likely to examine everything: and this in fact happened. So when they had come, and searching had failed to find it, they thought it best to return and say to those who had sent them that they had done all that which they had been charged by them to do.         92. d [1] edei de ek tou Eetiunos gonoy Korinthui kaka anablastein. e Labda gar panta tauta ekoye esteusa pros ayteisi teisi thureisi. deisasa de me sfi metadoxei kai to deuteron labontes to paidion apokteinusi, feroysa katakruptei es to afrastotaton oi efaineto einai, es kypselen, epistamene us ei ypostrepsantes es zetesin apikneoiato panta ereynesein melloien. ta de kai egineto. [2] elthousi de kai dizemenoisi aytoisi us oyk efaineto, edokee apallassesthai kai legein pros tous apopempsantas us panta poieseian ta ekeinoi eneteilanto. oi men de apelthontes elegon tauta.   
      92. (e) They then having departed said this; and after this the son of Aetion grew, and because he had escaped this danger, the name of Kypselos was given him as a surname derived from the corn-chest. Then when Kypselos had grown to manhood and was seeking divination, a two-edged answer was given him at Delphi, placing trust in which he made an attempt upon Corinth and obtained possession of it. Now the answer was as follows: "'Happy is this man's lot of a truth, who enters my dwelling, 
 Offspring of Aetion, he shall rule in famous Corinthos, 
 Kypselos, he and his sons, but his children's children no longer.' Such was the oracle: and Kypselos when he became despot was a man of this character,--many of the Corinthians he drove into exile, many he deprived of their wealth, and very many more of their lives.         92. e [1] Eetiuni de meta tauta o pais eyxaneto, kai oi diafygonti touton ton kindynon apo teis kypseles epunymien Kupselos oynoma etethe. andruthenti de kai manteyomenui Kypselui egeneto amfidexion xresterion en Delfoisi, tui pisynos genomenos epexeirese te kai esxe Korinthon. o de xresmos ode En.     [2] olbios oytos aner os emon domon eskatabainei,
      Kupselos Eetides, basileus kleitoio Korinthoy
      aytos kai paides, paidun ge men oyketi paides.to men de xresterion touto En, tyranneusas de o Kupselos toioutos de tis aner egeneto. pollous men Korinthiun ediuxe, pollous de xrematun apesterese, pollui de ti pleistoys teis psyxeis.   
      92. (f) And when he had reigned for thirty years and had brought his life to a prosperous end, his son Periander became his successor in the despotism. Now Periander at first was milder than his father; but after he had had dealings through messengers with Thrasybulos the despot of Miletos, he became far more murderous even than Kypselos. For he sent a messenger to Thrasybulos and asked what settlement of affairs was the safest for him to make, in order that he might best govern his State: and Thrasybulos led forth the messenger who had come from Periander out of the city, and entered into a field of growing corn; and as he passed through the crop of corn, while inquiring and asking questions repeatedly of the messenger about the occasion of his coming from Corinth, he kept cutting off the heads of those ears of corn which he saw higher than the rest; and as he cut off their heads he cast them away, until he had destroyed in this manner the finest and richest part of the crop. So having passed through the place and having suggested no word of counsel, he dismissed the messenger. When the messenger returned to Corinth, Periander was anxious to hear the counsel which had been given; but he said that Thrasybulos had given him no counsel, and added that he wondered at the deed of Periander in sending him to such a man, for the man was out of his senses and a waster of his own goods,--relating at the same time that which he had seen Thrasybulos do.         92. z [1] arxantos de toutoy epi triekonta etea kai diaplexantos ton bion ey, diadoxos oi teis tyrannidos o pais Periandros ginetai. o toinyn Periandros kat' arxas men En epiuteros tou patros, epeite de umilese di' aggelun Thrasyboului tui Miletoy tyrannui, pollui eti egeneto Kypseloy miaifonuteros. [2] pempsas gar para Thrasuboylon keryka epynthaneto ontina an tropon asfalestaton katastesamenos tun pregmatun kallista ten polin epitropeuoi. Thrasuboylos de ton elthonta para tou Periandroy exeige exu tou asteos, esbas de es aroyran esparmenen ama te diexeie to leion epeirutun te kai anapodizun ton keryka kata ten apo Korinthoy apixin, kai ekoloye aiei okus tina idoi tun astaxuun yperexonta, kolouun de erripte, es o tou leioy to kalliston te kai bathutaton dieftheire tropui toioutu. [3] diexelthun de to xurion kai ypothemenos epos oyden apopempei ton keryka. nostesantos de tou kerykos es ten Korinthon En prothymos pynthanesthai ten ypotheken o Periandros. o de oyden oi efe Thrasuboylon ypothesthai, thumazein te aytou par' oion min andra apopempseie, us parapleiga te kai tun euytou sinamuron, apegeomenos ta per pros Thrasybouloy opupee.   
      92. (g) So Periander, understanding that which had been done and perceiving that Thrasybulos counselled him to put to death those who were eminent among his subjects, began then to display all manner of evil treatment to the citizens of the State; for whatsoever Kypselos had left undone in killing and driving into exile, this Periander completed. And in one day he stripped all the wives of the Corinthians of their clothing on account of his own wife Melissa. For when he had sent messengers to the Thesprotians on the river Acheron to ask the Oracle of the dead about a deposit made with him by a guest-friend, Melissa appeared and said she would not tell in what place the deposit was laid, for she was cold and had no clothes, since those which he had buried with her were of no use to her, not having been burnt; and this, she said, would be an evidence to him that she was speaking the truth, namely that when the oven was cold, Periander had put his loaves into it. When the report of this was brought back to Periander, the token made him believe, because he had had commerce with Melissa after she was dead; and straightway after receiving the message he caused proclamation to be made that all the wives of the Corinthians should come out to the temple of Hera. They accordingly went as to a festival in their fairest adornment; and he having set the spearmen of his guard in ambush, stripped them all alike, both the free women and their attendant; and having gathered together all their clothes in a place dug out, he set fire to them, praying at the same time to Melissa. Then after he had done this and had sent a second time, the apparition of Melissa told him in what spot he had laid the deposit entrusted to him by his guest-friend. "Such a thing, ye must know, Lacedemonians, is despotism, and such are its deeds: and we Corinthians marvelled much at first when we saw that ye were sending for Hippias, and now we marvel even more because ye say these things; and we adjure you, calling upon the gods of Hellas, not to establish despotisms in the cities. If however ye will not cease from your design, but endeavour to restore Hippias contrary to that which is just, know that the Corinthians at least do not give their consent to that which ye do."         92. e [1] Periandros de synieis to poiethen kai noui isxun us oi ypetitheto Thrasuboylos tous ypeiroxoys tun astun foneuein, enthauta de pasan kakoteta exefaine es tous polietas. osa gar Kupselos apelipe kteinun te kai diukun, Periandros sfea apetelese, miei de emerei apedyse pasas tas Korinthiun gynaikas dia ten euytou gynaika Melissan. [2] pempsanti gar oi es Thesprutous ep' Axeronta potamon aggeloys epi to nekyomanteion parakatathekes peri xeinikeis oyte semaneein efe e Melissa epifaneisa oyte katereein en tui keetai xurui e parakatatheke. rhigoun te gar kai einai gymne. tun gar oi sygkatethapse imatiun ofelos einai oyden oy katakaythentun. marturion de oi einai us alethea tauta legei, oti epi psyxron ton ipnon Periandros tous artoys epebale. [3] tauta de us opisu apeggelthe tui Periandrui, piston gar oi En to symbolaion os nekrui eousei Melissei emige, itheus de meta ten aggelien kerygma epoiesato es to Eraion exienai pasas tas Korinthiun gynaikas. ai men de us es orten eisan kosmui tui kallistui xreumenai, o d' ypostesas tous doryforoys apedyse sfeas pasas omoius, tas te eleytheras kai tas amfipoloys, symforesas de es orygma Melissei epeyxomenos katekaie. [4] tauta de oi poiesanti kai to deuteron pempsanti efrase to eidulon to Melisses es ton katetheke xuron tou xeinoy ten parakatatheken. toiouto men ymin esti e tyrannis, u Lakedaimonioi, kai toioutun ergun. [5] emeas de tous Korinthioys tote aytika thuma mega eixe ote ymeas eidomen metapempomenoys Ippien, nun te de kai mezonus thumazomen legontas tauta, epimartyrometha te epikaleomenoi ymin theous tous Ellenioys me katistanai tyrannidas es tas polis. oykun pausesthe alla peiresesthe para to dikaion katagontes Ippien. iste ymin Korinthioys ge oy synaineontas.>>    
      93. Socles being the envoy of Corinth thus spoke, and Hippias made answer to him, calling to witness the same gods as he, that assuredly the Corinthians would more than all others regret the loss of the sons of Peisistratos, when the appointed days should have come for them to be troubled by the Athenians. Thus Hippias made answer, being acquainted with the oracles more exactly than any other man: but the rest of the allies, who for a time had restrained themselves and kept silence, when they heard Socles speak freely, gave utterance every one of them to that which they felt, and adopted the opinion of the Corinthian envoy, adjuring the Lacedemonians not to do any violence to a city of Hellas.         93. [1] Suklees men apo Korinthoy presbeuun elexe tade, Ippies de ayton ameibeto tous aytous epikalesas theous ekeinui, E men Korinthioys malista pantun epipothesein Peisistratidas, otan sfi ekusi emerai ai kuriai aniasthai yp' Athenaiun. [2] Ippies men toutoisi ameipsato oia tous xresmous atrekestata andrun exepistamenos. oi de loipoi tun symmaxun teus men eixon en esyxiei sfeas aytous, epeite de Sukleos ekoysan eipantos eleytherus, apas tis aytun funen rhexas aireeto tou Korinthioy ten gnumen, Lakedaimonioisi te epemartyreonto me poieein meden neuteron peri polin Ellada.    
      94. Thus was this brought to an end: and Hippias being dismissed from thence had Anthemus offered to him by Amyntas king of the Macedonians and Iolcos by the Thessalians. He however accepted neither of these, but retired again to Sigeion; which city Peisistratos had taken by force of arms from the Mytilenians, and having got possession of it, had appointed his own natural son Hegesistratos, born of an Argive woman, to be despot of it: he however did not without a struggle keep possession of that which he received from Peisistratos; for the Mytilenians and Athenians carried on war for a long time, having their strongholds respectively at Achilleion and at Sigeion, the one side demanding that the place be restored to them, and the Athenians on the other hand not admitting this demand, but proving by argument that the Aiolians had no better claim to the territory of Ilion than they and the rest of the Hellenes, as many as joined with Menelaos in exacting vengeance for the rape of Helen.         94. [1] oytu men touto epausthe. Ippiei de entheuten apelaynomenui edidoy men Amuntes o Makedonun basileus Anthemounta, edidosan de Thessaloi Iulkon. o de toutun men oydetera aireeto, anexuree de opisu es Sigeion, to eile Peisistratos aixmei para Mytilenaiun, kratesas de aytou katestese turannon einai paida ton euytou nothon Egesistraton, gegonota ex Argeies gynaikos, os oyk amaxeti eixe ta parelabe para Peisistratoy. [2] epolemeon gar ek te Axilleioy polios ormumenoi kai Sigeioy epi xronon syxnon Mytilenaioi te kai Athenaioi, oi men apaiteontes ten xuren, Athenaioi de oyte sygginuskomenoi apodeiknuntes te logui oyden mallon Aioleusi meteon teis Iliados xures e oy kai sfisi kai toisi alloisi, osoi Ellenun syneprexanto Meneleui tas Elenes arpagas.    
      95. Now while these carried on the war, besides many other things of various kinds which occurred in the battles, once when a fight took place and the Athenians were conquering, Alcaios the poet, taking to flight, escaped indeed himself, but the Athenians retained possession of his arms and hung them up on the walls of the temple of Athene which is at Sigeion. About this matter Alcaios composed a song and sent it to Mytilene, reporting therein his misadventure to one Melanippos, who was his friend. Finally Periander the son of Kypselos made peace between the Athenians and the Mytilenians, for to him they referred the matter as arbitrator; and he made peace between them on the condition that each should continue to occupy that territory which they then possessed.         95. [1] polemeontun de sfeun pantoia kai alla egeneto en teisi maxeisi, en de de kai Alkaios o poietes symboleis genomenes kai nikuntun Athenaiun aytos men feugun ekfeugei, ta de oi opla isxoysi Athenaioi, kai sfea anekremasan pros to Athenaion to en Sigeiui. [2] tauta de Alkaios en melei poiesas epitithei es Mytilenen, exaggellomenos to euytou pathos Melanippui andri etairui. Mytilenaioys de kai Athenaioys katellaxe Periandros o Kypseloy. toutui gar diaitetei epetraponto. katellaxe de ude, nemesthai ekateroys ten exoysi.    
      96. Sigeion then in this matter had come under the rule of the Athenians. And when Hippias had returned to Asia from Lacedemon, he set everything in motion, stirring up enmity between the Athenians and Artaphrenes, and using every means to secure that Athens should come under the rule of himself and of Dareios. Hippias, I say, was thus engaged; and the Athenians meanwhile hearing of these things sent envoys to Sardis, and endeavoured to prevent the Persians from following the suggestions of the exiled Athenians. Artaphrenes however commanded them, if they desired to be preserved from ruin, to receive Hippias back again. This proposal the Athenians were not by any means disposed to accept when it was reported; and as they did not accept this, it became at once a commonly received opinion among them that they were enemies of the Persians.         96. [1] Sigeion men nyn oytu egeneto yp' Athenaioisi. Ippies de epeite apiketo ek teis Lakedaimonos es ten Asien, pan xreima ekinee, diaballun te tous Athenaioys pros ton Artafrenea kai poieun apanta okus ai Atheinai genoiato yp' euytui te kai Dareiui. [2] Ippies te de tauta epresse, kai oi Athenaioi pythomenoi tauta pempoysi es Sardis aggeloys, oyk euntes tous Persas peithesthai Athenaiun toisi fygasi. o de Artafrenes ekeleye sfeas, ei boyloiato sooi einai, katadekesthai opisu Ippien. oykun de enedekonto tous logoys apoferomenoys oi Athenaioi. oyk endekomenoisi de sfi ededokto ek tou fanerou toisi Perseisi polemioys einai.    
      97. While they had these thoughts and had been set at enmity with the Persians, at this very time Aristagoras the Milesian, ordered away from Sparta by Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, arrived at Athens; for this was the city which had most power of all the rest besides Sparta. And Aristagoras came forward before the assembly of the people and said the same things as he had said at Sparta about the wealth which there was in Asia, and about the Persian manner of making war, how they used neither shield nor spear and were easy to overcome. Thus I say he said, and also he added this, namely that the Milesians were colonists from the Athenians, and that it was reasonable that the Athenians should rescue them, since they had such great power; and there was nothing which he did not promise, being very urgent in his request, until at last he persuaded them: for it would seem that it is easier to deceive many than one, seeing that, though he did not prove able to deceive Cleomenes the Lacedemonian by himself, yet he did this to thirty thousand Athenians. The Athenians then, I say, being persuaded, voted a resolution to despatch twenty ships to help the Ionians, and appointed to command them Melanthios one of their citizens, who was in all things highly reputed. These ships proved to be the beginning of evils for the Hellenes and the Barbarians.         97. [1] nomizoysi de tauta kai diabeblemenoisi es tous Persas, en toutui de tui kairui o Milesios Aristagores, ypo Kleomeneos tou Lakedaimonioy exelastheis ek teis Spartes, apiketo es Athenas. ayte gar e polis tun loipeun edynasteye megiston. epelthun de epi ton deimon o Aristagores tayta elege ta kai en tei Spartei peri tun agathun tun en tei Asiei kai tou polemoy tou Persikou, us oyte aspida oyte dory nomizoysi eypetees te xeirutheinai eiesan. [2] tauta te de elege kai pros toisi tade, us oi Milesioi tun Athenaiun eisi apoikoi, kai oikos sfeas eie rhuesthai dynamenoys mega. kai oyden o ti oyk ypisxeto oia karta deomenos, es o anepeise sfeas. pollous gar oike einai eypetesteron diaballein e ena, ei Kleomenea men ton Lakedaimonion mounon oyk oios te egeneto diaballein, treis de myriadas Athenaiun epoiese touto. [3] Athenaioi men de anapeisthentes epsefisanto eikosi neas aposteilai boethous Iusi, strategon apodexantes aytun einai Melanthion andra tun astun eonta ta panta dokimon. aytai de ai nees arxe kakun egenonto Ellesi te kai barbaroisi.    
      98. Aristagoras however sailed on before and came to Miletos; and then having devised a plan from which no advantage was likely to come for the Ionians (nor indeed was he doing what he did with a view to that, but in order to vex king Dareios), he sent a man to Phrygia to the Piaonians who had been taken captive by Megabazos from the river Strymon, and who were dwelling in a district and village of Phrygia apart by themselves; and when the messenger came to the Paionians he spoke these words: "Paionians, Aristagoras the despot of Miletos sent me to offer to you salvation, if ye shall be willing to do as he says; for now all Ionia has revolted from the king and ye have an opportunity of coming safe to your own land: to reach the sea shall be your concern, and after this it shall be thenceforth ours." The Paionians hearing this received it as a most welcome proposal, and taking with them their children and their women they began a flight to the sea; some of them however were struck with fear and remained in the place where they were. Having come to the coast the Paionians crossed over thence to Chios, and when they were already in Chios there arrived in their track a large body of Persian horsemen pursuing the Paionians. These, as they did not overtake them, sent over to Chios to bid the Paionians return back: the Paionians however did not accept their proposal, but the men of Chios conveyed them from Chios to Lesbos, and the Lesbians brought them to Doriscos, and thence they proceeded by land and came to Paionia.         98. [1] Aristagores de proplusas kai apikomenos es ten Mileton, exeyrun bouleyma ap' oy Iusi men oydemia emelle ufelie esesthai, oyd' un oyde toutoy eineka epoiee all' okus basilea Dareion lypeseie, epempse es ten Frygien andra epi tous Paionas tous apo Strymonos potamou aixmalutoys genomenoys ypo Megabazoy, oikeontas de teis Frygies xuron te kai kumen ep' euytun. os epeide apiketo es tous Paionas, elege tade. [2] <<andres Paiones, epempse me Aristagores o Miletoy turannos suterien ypothesomenon ymin, en per boulesthe peithesthai. nun gar Iunie pasa apesteke apo basileos, kai ymin parexei suzesthai epi ten ymeteren aytun. mexri men thalasses aytoisi ymin, to de apo toutoy emin ede melesei.>> [3] tauta de akousantes oi Paiones karta te aspaston epoiesanto kai analabontes paidas kai gynaikas apedidreskon epi thalassan, oi de tines aytun kai katemeinan arrudesantes aytou. epeite de oi Paiones apikonto epi thalassan, entheuten es Khion diebesan. [4] eontun de ede en Khiui, kata podas eleluthee Perseun ippos polle diukoysa tous Paionas. us de oy katelabon, epeggellonto es ten Khion toisi Paiosi okus an opisu apelthoien. oi de Paiones tous logoys oyk enedekonto, all' ek Khioy men Khioi sfeas es Lesbon egagon, Lesbioi de es Doriskon ekomisan, entheuten de pezei komizomenoi apikonto es Paionien.    
      99. Aristagoras meanwhile, when the Athenians had arrived with twenty ships, bringing with them also five triremes of the Eretrians, he joined the expedition not for the sake of the Athenians but of the Milesians themselves, to repay them a debt which they owed (for the Milesians in former times had borne with the Eretrians the burden of all that war which they had with the Chalkidians at the time when the Chalkidians on their side were helped by the Samians against the Eretrians and Milesians),--when these, I say, had arrived and the other allies were on the spot, Aristagoras proceeded to make a march upon Sardis. On this march he did not go himself, but remained at Miletos and appointed others to be in command of the Milesians, namely his brother Charopinos and of the other citizens one Hermophantos.         99. [1] Aristagores de, epeide oi te Athenaioi apikonto eikosi neysi, ama agomenoi Eretrieun pente triereas, oi oy ten Athenaiun xarin estrateuonto alla ten aytun Milesiun, ofeilomena sfi apodidontes. oi gar de Milesioi proteron toisi Eretrieusi ton pros Khalkideas polemon syndieneikan, ote per kai Khalkideusi antia Eretrieun kai Milesiun Samioi eboetheon. oytoi un epeite sfi apikonto kai oi alloi summaxoi pareisan, epoieeto strateien o Aristagores es Sardis. [2] aytos men de oyk estrateueto all' emene en Miletui, strategous de alloys apedexe Milesiun einai, ton euytou te adelfeon Kharopinon kai tun astun allon Ermofanton.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [100]

     100. With this force then the Ionians came to Ephesos, and leaving their ships at Coresos in the land of Ephesos, went up themselves in a large body, taking Ephesians to guide them in their march. So they marched along by the river Cayster, and then when they arrived after crossing the range of Tmolos, they took Sardis without any resistance, all except the citadel, but the citadel Artaphrenes himself saved from capture, having with him a considerable force of men.         100. [1] apikomenoi de tui stolui toutui Iunes es Efeson ploia men katelipon en Koresui teis Efesies, aytoi de anebainon xeiri pollei, poieumenoi Efesioys egemonas teis odou. poreyomenoi de para potamon Kaustrion, entheuten epeite yperbantes ton Tmulon apikonto, aireoysi Sardis oydenos sfi antiuthentos, aireoysi de xuris teis akropolios talla panta. ten de akropolin errueto aytos Artafrenes exun andrun dunamin oyk oligen.    
      101. From plundering this city after they had taken it they were prevented by this:--the houses in Sardis were mostly built of reeds, and even those of them which were of brick had their roofs thatched with reeds: of these houses one was set on fire by a soldier, and forthwith the fire going on from house to house began to spread over the whole town. So then as the town was on fire, the Lydians and all the Persians who were in the city being cut off from escape, since the fire was prevailing in the extremities round about them, and not having any way out of the town, flowed together to the market-place and to the river Pactolos, which brings down gold-dust for them from Tmolos, flowing through the middle of their market-place, and then runs out into the river Hermos, and this into the sea;--to this Pactolos, I say, and to the market-place the Lydians and Persians gathered themselves together, and were compelled to defend themselves. The Ionians then, seeing some of the enemy standing on their defence and others in great numbers coming on to the attack, were struck with fear and retired to the mountain called Tmolos, and after that at nightfall departed to go to their ships.         101. [1] to de me leelateisai elontas sfeas ten polin esxe tode. Esan en teisi Sardisi oikiai ai men pleunes kalaminai, osai d' ayteun kai plinthinai Esan, kalamoy eixon tas orofas. toyteun de mian tun tis stratiuteun us eneprese, aytika ap' oikies ep' oikien ion to pur epenemeto to asty pan. [2] kaiomenoy de tou asteos oi Lydoi te kai osoi Perseun eneisan en tei poli, apolamfthentes pantothen uste ta periesxata nemomenoy tou pyros, kai oyk exontes exelysin ek tou asteos, synerreon es te ten agoren kai epi ton Paktulon potamon, os sfi pseigma xrysou kataforeun ek tou Tmuloy dia meses teis agoreis rheei kai epeita es ton Ermon potamon ekdidoi, o de es thalassan. epi touton de ton Paktulon kai es ten agoren athroizomenoi oi te Lydoi kai oi Persai enagkazonto amunesthai. [3] oi de Iunes oreontes tous men amynomenoys tun polemiun tous de sun plethei pollui prosferomenoys, exanexuresan deisantes pros to oros ton Tmulon kaleomenon, entheuten de ypo nukta apallassonto epi tas neas.    
      102. Sardis was then destroyed by fire, and in it also the temple of the native goddess Hybebe; which the Persians alleged afterwards as a reason for setting on fire in return the temples in the land of the Hellenes. However at the time of which I speak the Persians who occupied districts within the river Halys, informed beforehand of this movement, were gathering together and coming to the help of the Lydians; and, as it chanced, they found when they came that the Ionians no longer were in Sardis; but they followed closely in their track and came up with them at Ephesos: and the Ionians stood indeed against them in array, but when they joined battle they had very much the worse; and besides other persons of note whom the Persians slaughtered, there fell also Eualkides commander of the Eretrians, a man who had won wreaths in contests of the games and who was much celebrated by Simonides of Keos: and those of them who survived the battle dispersed to their various cities.         102. [1] kai Sardies men enepresthesan, en de ayteisi kai iron epixuries theou Kybebes. to skeptomenoi oi Persai ysteron antenepimprasan ta en Ellesi ira. tote de oi Persai oi entos Alyos potamou nomous exontes, propynthanomenoi tauta, synelizonto kai eboetheon toisi Lydoisi. [2] kai kus en men Sardisi oyketi eontas tous Iunas eyriskoysi, epomenoi de kata stibon aireoysi aytous en Efesui. kai antetaxthesan men oi Iunes, symbalontes de pollon essuthesan. [3] kai pollous aytun oi Persai foneuoysi alloys te onomastous, en de de kai Eyalkiden strategeonta Eretrieun, stefaneforoys te agunas anarairekota kai ypo Simunideu tou Keioy polla ainethenta. oi de aytun apefygon ten maxen, eskedasthesan ana tas polias.    
      103. Thus then they fought at that time; and after the battle the Athenians left the Ionians together, and when Aristagoras was urgent in calling upon them by messengers for assistance, they said that they would not help them: the Ionians, however, though deprived of the alliance of the Athenians, none the less continued to prepare for the war with the king, so great had been the offences already committed by them against Dareios. They sailed moreover to the Hellespont and brought under their power Byzantion and all the other cities which are in those parts; and then having sailed forth out of the Hellespont, they gained in addition the most part of Caria to be in alliance with them: for even Caunos, which before was not willing to be their ally, then, after they had burnt Sardis, was added to them also.         103. [1] tote men de oytu egunisanto. meta de Athenaioi men to parapan apolipontes tous Iunas, epikaleomenoy sfeas polla di' aggelun Aristagoreu, oyk efasan timuresein sfi. Iunes de teis Athenaiun symmaxies sterethentes, oytu gar sfi ypeirxe pepoiemena es Dareion, oyden de Esson ton pros basilea polemon eskeyazonto. [2] plusantes de es ton Ellesponton Byzantion te kai tas allas polias pasas tas tautei yp' euytoisi epoiesanto, ekplusantes te exu ton Ellesponton Karies ten pollen prosektesanto sfisi summaxon einai. kai gar ten Kaunon proteron oy boylomenen symmaxeein, us enepresan tas Sardis, tote sfi kai ayte prosegeneto.    
      104. The Cyprians too, excepting those of Amathus, were added voluntarily to their alliance; for these also had revolted from the Medes in the following manner:--there was one Onesilos, younger brother of Gorgos king of Salamis, and son of Chersis, the son of Siromos, the son of Euelthon. This man in former times too had been wont often to advise Gorgos to make revolt from the king, and at this time, when he heard that the Ionians had revolted, he pressed him very hard and endeavoured to urge him to it. Since however he could not persuade Gorgos, Onesilos watched for a time when he had gone forth out of the city of Salamis, and then together with the men of his own faction he shut him out of the gates. Gorgos accordingly being robbed of the city went for refuge to the Medes, and Onesilos was ruler of Salamis and endeavoured to persuade all the men of Cyprus to join him in revolt. The others then he persuaded; but since those of Amathus were not willing to do as he desired, he sat down before their city and besieged it.         104. [1] Kuprioi de ethelontai sfi pantes prosegenonto plen Amathoysiun. apestesan gar kai oytoi ude apo Medun. E Onesilos Gorgoy men tou Salaminiun basileos adelfeos neuteros, Khersios de tou Sirumoy tou Eyelthontos pais. [2] oytos uner pollakis men kai proteron ton Gorgon paregoreeto apistasthai apo basileos, tote de, us kai tous Iunas eputheto apestanai, pagxy epikeimenos eneige. us de oyk epeithe ton Gorgon, enthauta min fylaxas exelthonta to asty to Salaminiun o Onesilos ama toisi euytou stasiuteisi apekleise tun pyleun. [3] Gorgos men de steretheis teis polios efeyge es Medoys, Onesilos de Erxe Salaminos kai anepeithe pantas Kyprioys synapistasthai. tous men de alloys anepeise, Amathoysioys de oy boylomenoys oi peithesthai epoliorkee proskatemenos.    
      105. Onesilos then was besieging Amathus; and meanwhile, when it was reported to king Dareios that Sardis had been captured and burnt by the Athenians and the Ionians together, and that the leader of the league for being about these things was the Milesian Aristagoras, it is said that at first being informed of this he made no account of the Ionians, because he knew that they at all events would not escape unpunished for their revolt, but he inquired into who the Athenians were; and when he had been informed, he asked for his bow, and having received it and placed an arrow upon the string, he discharged it upwards towards heaven, and as he shot into the air he said: "Zeus, that it may be granted me to take vengeance upon the Athenians!" Having so said he charged one of his attendants, that when dinner was set before the king he should say always three times: "Master, remember the Athenians."         105. [1] Onesilos men nyn epoliorkee Amathounta. basilei de Dareiui us exaggelthe Sardis alousas empepreisthai ypo te Athenaiun kai Iunun, ton de egemona genesthai teis syllogeis uste tauta synyfantheinai ton Milesion Aristagoren, pruta men legetai ayton, us eputheto tauta, Iunun oydena logon poiesamenon, ey eidota us oytoi ge oy kataproixontai apostantes, eiresthai oitines eien oi Athenaioi, meta de pythomenon aiteisai to toxon, labonta de kai epithenta de oiston anu pros ton oyranon apeinai, kai min es ton eera ballonta eipein [2] <<u Zeu, ekgenesthai moi Athenaioys tisasthai,>> eipanta de tauta prostaxai eni tun therapontun deipnoy prokeimenoy aytui es tris ekastote eipein <<despota, memneo tun Athenaiun.>>    
      106. When he had given this charge, he called into his presence Histiaios the Milesian, whom Dareios had now been keeping with him for a long time, and said: "I am informed, Histiaios, that thy deputy, to whom thou didst depute the government of Miletos, has made rebellion against me; for he brought in men against me from the other continent and persuaded the Ionians also,--who shall pay the penalty to me for that which they did,--these, I say, he persuaded to go together with them, and thus he robbed me of Sardis. Now therefore how thinkest thou that this is well? and how without thy counsels was anything of this kind done? Take heed lest thou afterwards find reason to blame thyself for this." Histiaios replied: "O king, what manner of speech is this that thou hast uttered, saying that I counselled a matter from which it was likely that any vexation would grow for thee, either great or small? What have I to seek for in addition to that which I have, that I should do these things; and of what am I in want? for I have everything that thou hast, and I am thought worthy by thee to hear all thy counsels. Nay, but if my deputy is indeed acting in any such manner as thou hast said, be assured that he has done it merely on his own account. I however, for my part, do not even admit the report to be true, that the Milesians and my deputy are acting in any rebellious fashion against thy power: but if it prove that they are indeed doing anything of that kind, and if that which thou hast heard, O king, be the truth, learn then what a thing thou didst in removing me away from the sea-coast; for it seems that the Ionians, when I had gone out of the sight of their eyes, did that which they had long had a desire to do; whereas if I had been in Ionia, not a city would have made the least movement. Now therefore as quickly as possible let me set forth to go to Ionia, that I may order all these matters for thee as they were before, and deliver into thy hands this deputy of Miletos who contrived these things: and when I have done this after thy mind, I swear by the gods of the royal house that I will not put off from me the tunic which I wear when I go down to Ionia, until I have made Sardinia tributary to thee, which is the largest of all islands."         106. [1] prostaxas de tauta eipe, kalesas es opsin Istiaion ton Milesion, ton o Dareios kateixe xronon ede pollon, <<pynthanomai Istiaie epitropon ton son, tui su Mileton epetrepsas, neutera es eme pepoiekenai pregmata. andras gar moi ek teis eteres epeiroy epagagun, kai Iunas sun aytoisi tous dusontas emoi diken tun epoiesan, toutoys anagnusas ama ekeinoisi epesthai, Sardiun me apesterese. nun un kus toi tauta fainetai exein kalus; [2] kus de aney tun sun boyleymatun toutun ti eprexthe ; ora me ex ysteres seuyton en aitiei sxeis.>> [3] eipe pros tauta Istiaios <<basileu, koion efthegxao epos, eme boyleusai preigma ek tou soi ti e mega e smikron emelle lyperon anasxesein; ti d' an epidizemenos poieoimi tauta, teu de endees eun ; tui para men panta osa per soi, pantun de pros seo boyleymatun epakouein axioumai. [4] all' ei per ti toiouton oion su eirekas pressei o emos epitropos, isthi ayton ep' euytou balomenon pepoiekenai. arxen de eguge oyde endekomai ton logon, okus ti Milesioi kai o emos epitropos neuteron pressoysi peri pregmata ta sa. ei d' ara ti toiouto poieusi kai su to eon akekoas u basileu, mathe oion preigma ergasao eme apo thalasses anaspaston poiesas. [5] Iunes gar oikasi emeu ex ofthalmun sfi genomenoy poieisai tun palai imeron eixon. emeo d' an eontos en Iuniei oydemia polis ypekinese. nun un us taxos apes me poreytheinai es Iunien, ina toi keina te panta katartisu es tuyto kai ton Miletoy epitropon touton ton tauta mexanesamenon egxeiritheton paradu. [6] tauta de kata noon ton son poiesas, theous epomnymi tous basileioys me men proteron ekdusasthai ton exun kithuna katabesomai es Iunien, prin an toi Sardu neison ten megisten dasmoforon poiesu.>>    
      107. Thus saying Histiaios endeavoured to deceive the king, and Dareios was persuaded and let him go, charging him, when he should have accomplished that which he had promised, to return to him again at Susa.         107. [1] Istiaios men legun tauta dieballe, Dareios de epeitheto kai min apiei, enteilamenos, epean ta ypesxeto oi epitelea poiesei, paraginesthai oi opisu es ta Sousa.    
      108. In the meantime, while the news about Sardis was going up to the king, and while Dareios, after doing that which he did with the bow, came to speech with Histiaios, and Histiaios having been let go by Dareios was making his journey to the sea-coast,--during all that time the events were happening which here follow.--As Onesilos of Salamis was besieging those of Amathus, it was reported to him that Artybios a Persian, bringing with him in ships a large Persian army, was to be expected shortly to arrive in Cyprus. Being informed of this, Onesilos sent heralds to different places in Ionia to summon the Ionians to his assistance; and they took counsel together and came without delay with a large force. Now the Ionians arrived in Cyprus just at the time when the Persians having crossed over in ships from Kilikia were proceeding by land to attack Salamis, while the Phenicians with the ships were sailing round the headland which is called the "Keys of Cyprus."         108. [1] en ui de e aggelie te peri tun Sardiun para basilea aneie kai Dareios ta peri to toxon poiesas Istiaiui es logoys Elthe kai Istiaios memetimenos ypo Dareioy ekomizeto epi thalassan, en toutui panti tui xronui egineto tade. poliorkeonti tui Salaminiui Onesilui Amathoysioys exaggelletai neysi stratien pollen agonta Persiken Artubion andra Persen prosdokimon es ten Kupron einai. [2] pythomenos de tauta o Onesilos kerykas diepempe es ten Iunien epikaleumenos sfeas, Iunes de oyk es makren boyleysamenoi Ekon pollui stolui. Iunes te de pareisan es ten Kupron kai oi Persai neysi diabantes ek teis Kilikies eisan epi ten Salamina pezei. teisi de neysi oi Foinikes periepleon ten akren ai kaleuntai Kleides teis Kuproy.    
      109. This being the case, the despots of Cyprus called together the commanders of the Ionians and said: "Ionians, we of Cyprus give you a choice which enemy ye will rather fight with, the Persians or the Phenicians: for if ye will rather array yourselves on land and make trial of the Persians in fight, it is time now for you to disembark from your ships and array yourselves on the land, and for us to embark in your ships to contend against the Phenicians; but if on the other hand ye will rather make trial of the Phenicians,--whichever of these two ye shall choose, ye must endeavour that, so far as it rests with you, both Ionia and Cyprus shall be free." To this the Ionians replied: "We were sent out by the common authority of the Ionians to guard the sea, and not to deliver our ships to the Cyprians and ourselves fight with the Persians on land. We therefore will endeavour to do good service in that place to which we were appointed; and ye must call to mind all the evils which ye suffered from the Medes, when ye were in slavery to them, and prove yourselves good men."         109. [1] toutoy de toioutoy ginomenoy elexan oi turannoi teis Kuproy, sygkalesantes tun Iunun tous strategous, <<andres Iunes, airesin ymin didomen emeis oi Kuprioi okoteroisi boulesthe prosferesthai, e Perseisi e Foinixi. [2] ei men gar pezei boulesthe taxthentes Perseun diapeirasthai, ure an eie ymin ekbantas ek tun neun tassesthai pezei, emeas de es tas neas esbainein tas ymeteras Foinixi antagunieymenoys. ei de Foinikun mallon boulesthe diapeirasthai, poieein xreon esti ymeas, okotera an de toutun elesthe, okus to kat' ymeas estai e te Iunie kai e Kupros eleythere.>> [3] eipan Iunes pros tauta <<emeas de apepempse to koinon tun Iunun fylaxontas ten thalassan, all' oyk ina Kyprioisi tas neas paradontes aytoi pezei Perseisi prosferumetha. emeis men nyn ep' oy etaxthemen, tautei peiresometha einai xrestoi. ymeas de xreon esti anamnesthentas oia epasxete doyleuontes pros tun Medun, ginesthai andras agathous.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [110]

     110. The Ionians made answer in these words; and afterwards, when the Persians had come to the plain of Salamis, the kings of the Cyprians set in order their array, choosing the best part of the troops of Salamis and of Soloi to be arrayed against the Persians and setting the other Cyprians against the rest of the enemy's troops; and against Artybios, the commander of the Persians, Onesilos took up his place in the array by his own free choice.         110. [1] Iunes men toutoisi ameipsanto. meta de ekontun es to pedion to Salaminiun tun Perseun, dietasson oi basilees tun Kypriun, tous men alloys Kyprioys kata tous alloys stratiutas antitassontes, Salaminiun de kai Soliun apolexantes to ariston antetasson Perseisi. Artybiui de tui strategui tun Perseun ethelontes antetasseto Onesilos.    
      111. Now Artybios was riding a horse which had been trained to rear up against a hoplite. Onesilos accordingly being informed of this, and having a shield-bearer, by race of Caria, who was of very good repute as a soldier and full of courage besides, said to this man: "I am informed that the horse of Artybios rears upright and works both with his feet and his mouth against any whom he is brought to attack. Do thou therefore consider the matter, and tell me forthwith which of the two thou wilt rather watch for and strike, the horse or Artybios himself." To this his attendant replied: "O king, I am ready to do both or either of these two things, and in every case to do that which thou shalt appoint for me; but I will declare to thee the way in which I think it will be most suitable for thy condition. I say that it is right for one who is king and commander to fight with a king and commander; for if thou shalt slay the commander of the enemy, it turns to great glory for thee; and again, if he shall slay thee, which heaven forbid, even death when it is at the hands of a worthy foe is but half to be lamented: but for us who are under thy command it is suitable to fight with the others who are under his command and with his horse: and of the tricks of the horse have thou no fear at all, for I engage to thee that after this at least he shall never stand against any man more." Thus he spoke; and shortly afterwards the opposed forces joined battle both on land and with their ships.         111. [1] elayne de ippon o Artubios dedidagmenon pros opliten istasthai orthon. pythomenos un tauta o Onesilos, En gar oi ypaspistes genos men Kar ta de polemia karta dokimos kai allus lematos pleos, eipe pros touton [2] <<pynthanomai ton Artybioy ippon istamenon orthon kai posi kai stomati katergazesthai pros ton an proseneixthei. su un boyleysamenos eipe aytika okoteron bouleai fylaxas pleixai, eite ton ippon eite ayton Artubion.>> [3] eipe pros tauta o opaun aytou <<u basileu, etoimos men egu eimi poieein kai amfotera kai to eteron aytun, kai pantus to an su epitasseis. us mentoi emoige dokeei einai toisi soisi pregmasi prosferesteron, frasu. [4] basilea men kai strategon xreon einai femi basilei te kai strategui prosferesthai. en te gar kateleis andra strategon, mega toi ginetai, kai deutera, en se ekeinos, to me genoito, ypo axioxreoy kai apothanein emisea symfore. emeas de tous yperetas eteroisi te ypereteisi prosferesthai kai pros ippon. tou su tas mexanas meden fobetheis. egu gar toi ypodekomai me min andros eti ge medenos stesesthai enantion.>>    
      112. On that day the Ionians for their part greatly distinguished themselves and overcame the Phenicians, and of them the Samians were best: and meanwhile on land, when the armies met, they came to close quarters and fought; and as regards the two commanders, what happened was this:--when Artybios came to fight with Onesilos sitting upon his horse, Onesilos, as he had concerted with his shield-bearer, struck at Artybios himself, when he came to fight with him; and when the horse put its hoofs against the shield of Onesilos, then the Carian struck with a falchion and smote off the horse's feet.         112. [1] tauta eipe, kai metaytika synemisge ta stratopeda pezei kai neysi. neysi men nyn Iunes akroi genomenoi tauten ten emeren yperebalonto tous Foinikas, kai toutun Samioi eristeysan. pezei de, us syneilthe ta stratopeda, sympesonta emaxonto. [2] kata de tous strategous amfoteroys tade egineto. us prosefereto pros ton Onesilon o Artubios epi tou ippoy katemenos, o Onesilos kata ta synethekato tui ypaspistei paiei prosferomenon ayton ton Artubion. epibalontos de tou ippoy tous podas epi ten Onesiloy aspida, enthauta o Kar drepanui plexas aparassei tou ippoy tous podas.    
      113 So Artybios the commander of the Persians fell there on the spot together with his horse: and while the others also were fighting. Stesenor the despot of Curion deserted them, having with him a large force of men,--now these Curians are said to be settlers from Argos,--and when the Curians had deserted, forthwith also the war-chariots of the men of Salamis proceeded to do the same as the Curians. When these things took place, the Persians had the advantage over the Cyprians; and after their army had been put to rout, many others fell and among them Onesilos the son of Chersis, he who brought about the revolt of the Cyprians, and also the king of the Solians, Aristokypros the son of Philokypros,--that Philokypros whom Solon the Athenian, when he came to Cyprus, commended in verse above all other despots.         113. [1] Artubios men de o strategos tun Perseun omou tui ippui piptei aytou tautei. maxomenun de kai tun allun, Stesenur turannos eun Koyrioy prodidoi exun dunamin andrun peri euyton oy smikren. oi de Koyriees oytoi legontai einai Argeiun apoikoi. prodontun de tun Koyrieun aytika kai ta Salaminiun polemisteria armata tuyto toisi Koyrieusi epoiee. ginomenun de toutun katyperteroi Esan oi Persai tun Kypriun. [2] tetrammenoy de tou stratopedoy alloi te epeson polloi kai de kai Onesilos te o Khersios, os per ten Kypriun apostasin eprexe, kai o Soliun basileus Aristokypros o Filokuproy, Filokuproy de toutoy ton Solun o Athenaios apikomenos es Kupron en epesi ainese tyrannun malista.    
      114. So the men of Amathus cut off the head of Onesilos, because he had besieged them; and having brought it to Amathus they hung it over the gate of the city: and as the head hung there, when it had now become a hollow, a swarm of bees entered into it and filled it with honeycomb. This having so come to pass, the Amathusians consulted an Oracle about the head, and they received an answer bidding them take it down and bury it and sacrifice to Onesilos every year as a hero; and if they did this, it would go better with them.         114. [1] Onesiloy men nyn Amathousioi, oti sfeas epoliorkese, apotamontes ten kefalen ekomisan es Amathounta kai min anekremasan yper tun pyleun. kremamenes de teis kefaleis kai ede eouses koiles, esmos melisseun esdus es ayten keriun min eneplese. [2] toutoy de genomenoy toioutoy, exreunto gar peri ayteis oi Amathousioi, emanteuthe sfi ten men kefalen katelontas thapsai, Onesilui de thuein us erui ana pan etos, kai sfi poieusi tauta ameinon synoisesthai.    
      115. The Amathusians accordingly continued to do so even to my time. But the Ionians who had fought the sea-fight in Cyprus, when they perceived that the fortunes of Onesilos were ruined and that the cities of the Cyprians were besieged, except Salamis, and that this city had been delivered over by the Salaminians to Gorgos the former king,--as soon as they perceived this, the Ionians sailed away back to Ionia. Now of the cities in Cyprus Soloi held out for the longest time under the siege; and the Persians took it in the fifth month by undermining the wall round.         115. [1] Amathousioi men nyn epoieyn tauta kai to mexri emeu. Iunes de oi en Kuprui naymaxesantes epeite emathon ta pregmata ta Onesiloy dieftharmena kai tas polis tun Kypriun poliorkeymenas tas allas plen Salaminos, tauten de Gorgui tui proterui basilei tous Salaminioys paradontas, aytika mathontes oi Iunes tauta apepleon es ten Iunien. [2] tun de en Kuprui poliun antesxe xronon epi pleiston poliorkeymene Soloi, ten perix yporussontes to teixos pemptui meni eilon oi Persai.    
      116. The Cyprians then, after they had made themselves free for one year, had again been reduced to slavery afresh: and meanwhile Daurises, who was married to a daughter of Dareios, and Hymaies and Otanes, who were also Persian commanders and were married also to daughters of Dareios, after they had pursued those Ionians who had made the expedition to Sardis and defeating them in battle had driven them by force to their ships,--after this distributed the cities amongst themselves and proceeded to sack them.         116. [1] Kuprioi men de eniayton eleutheroi genomenoi aytis ek nees katededoulunto. Dayrises de exun Dareioy thygatera kai Ymaies te kai Otanes alloi Persai strategoi, exontes kai oytoi Dareioy thygateras, epidiuxantes tous es Sardis strateysamenoys Iunun kai esaraxantes sfeas es tas neas, tei maxei us epekratesan, to entheuten epidielomenoi tas polis eportheon.    
      117. Daurises directed his march to the cities on the Hellespont, and he took Dardanos and Abydos and Percote and Lampsacos and Paisos, of these he took on each day one; and as he was marching from Paisos against the city of Parion, the report came that the Carians had made common cause with the Ionians and were in revolt from the Persians. He turned back therefore from the Hellespont and marched his army upon Caria.         117. [1] Dayrises men trapomenos pros tas en Ellespontui polis eile men Dardanon, eile de Abydon te kai Perkuten kai Lampsakon kai Paison. tautas men ep' emerei ekastei airee, apo de Paisou elaunonti oi epi Parion polin Elthe aggelie tous Karas tuyto Iusi fronesantas apestanai apo Perseun. apostrepsas un ek tou Ellespontoy elayne ton straton epi ten Karien.    
      118. And, as it chanced, a report of this was brought to the Carians before Daurises arrived; and the Carians being informed of it gathered together at the place which is called the "White Pillars" and at the river Marsyas, which flows from the region of Idrias and runs out into the Maiander. When the Carians had been gathered together there, among many other counsels which were given, the best, as it seems to me, was that of Pixodaros the son of Mausolos, a man of Kindye, who was married to the daughter of the king of the Kilikians, Syennesis. The opinion of this man was to the effect that the Carians should cross over the Maiander and engage battle with the Persians having the river at their backs, in order that the Carians, not being able to fly backwards and being compelled to remain where they were, might prove themselves even better men in fight than they naturally would. This opinion did not prevail; but they resolved that the Persians rather than themselves should have the Maiander at their backs, evidently in order that if there should be a flight of the Persians and they should be worsted in the battle, they might never return home, but might fall into the river.         118. [1] kai kus tauta toisi Karsi exaggelthe proteron e ton Dayrisen apikesthai. pythomenoi de oi Kares synelegonto epi Leykas te stelas kaleomenas kai potamon Marsuen, os rheun ek teis Idriados xures es ton Maiandron ekdidoi. [2] syllexthentun de tun Karun enthauta eginonto boylai allai te pollai kai ariste ge dokeoysa einai emoi Pixudaroy tou Maysuloy andros Kindyeos, os tou Kilikun basileos Syennesios eixe thygatera. toutoy tou andros e gnume efere diabantas ton Maiandron tous Karas kai kata nutoy exontas ton potamon oytu symballein, ina me exontes opisu feugein oi Kares aytou te menein anagkazomenoi ginoiato eti ameinones teis fusios. [3] ayte men nyn oyk enika e gnume, alla toisi Perseisi kata nutoy ginesthai ton Maiandron mallon e sfisi, delade en fyge tun Perseun genetai kai essutheusi tei symbolei, us oyk aponostesoysi es ton potamon espiptontes.    
      119. After this, when the Persians had come and had crossed the Maiander, the Carians engaged with the Persians on the river Marsyas and fought a battle which was obstinately contested and lasted long; but at length they were worsted by superior numbers: and of the Persians there fell as many as two thousand, but of the Carians ten thousand. Then those of them who escaped were shut up in Labraunda within the sanctuary of Zeus Stratios, which is a large sacred grove of plane-trees; now the Carians are the only men we know who offer sacrifices to Zeus Stratios. These men then, being shut up there, were taking counsel together about their safety, whether they would fare better if they delivered themselves over to the Persians or if they left Asia altogether.         119. [1] meta de pareontun kai diabantun ton Maiandron tun Perseun, enthauta epi tui Marsuei potamui synebalon te toisi Perseisi oi Kares kai maxen emaxesanto isxyren kai epi xronon pollon, telos de essuthesan dia pleithos. Perseun men de epeson andres es disxilioys, Karun de es myrioys. [2] entheuten de oi diafygontes aytun kateilethesan es Labraynda es Dios stratioy iron, mega te kai agion alsos platanistun. mounoi de tun emeis idmen Kares eisi oi Dii stratiui thysias anagoysi. kateilethentes de un oytoi enthauta eboyleuonto peri suteries, okotera e paradontes sfeas aytous Perseisi e eklipontes to parapan ten Asien ameinon prexoysi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 5: Terpsichore [120]

     120. And while they were thus taking counsel, there came to their aid the Milesians and their allies. Then the Carians dismissed the plans which they were before considering and prepared to renew the war again from the beginning: and when the Persians came to attack them, they engaged with them and fought a battle, and they were worsted yet more completely than before; and while many were slain of all parties, the Milesians suffered most.         120. [1] boyleyomenoisi de sfi tauta paraginontai boetheontes Milesioi te kai oi toutun summaxoi. enthauta de ta men proteron oi Kares eboyleuonto meteikan, oi de aytis polemeein ex arxeis arteonto. kai epiousi te toisi Perseisi symballoysi kai maxesamenoi epi pleon e proteron essuthesan. pesontun de tun pantun pollun malista Milesioi eplegesan.    
      121. Then afterwards the Carians repaired this loss and retrieved their defeat; for being informed that the Persians had set forth to march upon their cities, they laid an ambush on the road which is by Pedasos, and the Persians falling into it by night were destroyed both they and their commanders, namely Daurises and Amorges and Sisimakes; and with them died also Myrsos the son of Gyges. Of this ambush the leader was Heracleides the son of Ibanollis, a man of Mylasa.         121. [1] meta de touto to truma anelabon te kai anemaxesanto oi Kares. pythomenoi gar us strateuesthai ormeatai oi Persai epi tas polis sfeun, eloxesan ten en Pedasui odon, es ten empesontes oi Persai nyktos dieftharesan kai aytoi kai oi strategoi aytun Dayrises kai Amorges kai Sisimakes. sun de sfi apethane kai Mursos o Gugeu. tou de loxoy toutoy egemun En Erakleides Ibanullios aner Mylasseus. oytoi men nyn tun Perseun oytu dieftharesan.   
      122. These then of the Persians were thus destroyed; and meanwhile Hymaies, who was another of those who pursued after the Ionians that had made the expedition to Sardis, directed his march to the Propontis and took Kios in Mysia; and having conquered this city, when he was informed that Daurises had left the Hellespont and was marching towards Caria, he left the Propontis and led his army to the Hellespont: and he conquered all the Aiolians who occupy the district of Ilion, and also the Gergithes, who were left behind as a remnant of the ancient Teucrians. While conquering these tribes Hymaies himself ended his life by sickness in the land of Troas.         122. [1] Ymaies de kai aytos eun tun epidiuxantun tous es Sardis strateysamenoys Iunun, trapomenos es ton Propontida eile Kion ten Mysien. [2] tauten de exelun, us eputheto ton Ellesponton ekleloipenai Dayrisen kai strateuesthai epi Karies, katalipun ten Propontida epi ton Ellesponton Ege ton straton, kai eile men Aioleas pantas osoi ten Iliada nemontai, eile de Gergithas tous ypoleifthentas tun arxaiun Teykrun. aytos te Ymaies aireun tauta ta ethnea nousui teleytai en tei Truiadi.    
      123. He thus brought his life to an end; and Artaphrenes the governor of the province of Sardis was appointed with Otanes the third of the commanders to make the expedition against Ionia and that part of Aiolia which bordered upon it. Of Ionia these took the city of Clazomenai, and of the Aiolians Kyme.         123. [1] oytos men de oytu eteleutese, Artafrenes de o Sardiun yparxos kai Otanes o tritos strategos etaxthesan epi ten Iunien kai ten prosexea Aiolida strateuesthai. Iunies men nyn Klazomenas aireoysi, Aioleun de Kumen.    
      124. While the cities were thus being taken, Aristagoras the Milesian, being, as he proved in this instance, not of very distinguished courage, since after having disturbed Ionia and made preparation of great matters he counselled running away when he saw these things, (moreover it had become clear to him that it was impossible to overcome king Dareios),--he, I say, having regard to these things, called together those of his own party and took counsel with them, saying that it was better that there should be a refuge prepared for them, in case that they should after all be driven out from Miletos, and proposing the question whether he should lead them from thence to Sardinia, to form a colony there, or to Myrkinos in the land of the Edonians, which Histiaios had been fortifying, having received it as a gift from Dareios. This was the question proposed by Aristagoras.         124. [1] aliskomeneun de tun poliun, En gar us diedexe Aristagores o Milesios psyxen oyk akros, os taraxas ten Iunien kai egkerasamenos pregmata megala dresmon ebouleye oreun tauta. pros de oi kai adunata efane basilea Dareion yperbalesthai. [2] pros tauta de un sygkalesas tous systasiutas eboyleueto, legun us ameinon sfisi eie kresfugeton ti yparxon einai, en ara exutheuntai ek teis Miletoy, eite de un es Sardu ek tou topoy toutoy agoi es apoikien, eite es Murkinon ten Edunun, ten Istiaios eteixee para Dareioy dureen labun. tauta epeiruta o Aristagores.    
      125. Now the opinion of Hecataios the son of Hegesander the historian was that he should not take a colony to either of these places, but build a wall of defence for himself in the island of Leros and keep still, if he should be forced to leave Miletos; and afterwards with this for his starting point he would be able to return to Miletos.         125. [1] Ekataioy men nyn tou Egesandroy, andros logopoiou, toyteun men es oydeteren stellein efere e gnume, en Lerui de tei nesui teixos oikodomesamenon esyxien agein, en ekpesei ek teis Miletoy. epeita de ek tautes ormumenon kateleusesthai es ten Mileton.    
      126. This was the counsel of Hecataios; but Aristagoras was most inclined to go forth to Myrkinos. He therefore entrusted the government of Miletos to Pythagoras, a man of repute among the citizens, and he himself sailed away to Thrace, taking with him every one who desired to go; and he took possession of the region for which he had set out. But starting from this to make war, he perished by the hands of the Thracians, that is both Aristagoras himself and his army, when he was encamped about a certain city and the Thracians desired to go out from it under a truce.        126. [1] tauta men de Ekataios synebouleye, aytui de Aristagorei e pleiste gnume En es ten Murkinon apagein. ten men de Mileton epitrapei Pythagorei andri tun astun dokimui, aytos de paralabun panta ton boylomenon eplee es ten Threiken, kai esxe ten xuren ep' en estale. [2] ek de tautes ormumenos apollytai ypo Threikun aytos te o Aristagores kai o stratos aytou, polin perikatemenos kai boylomenun tun Threikun ypospondun exienai.  
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato

     BOOK VI THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED ERATO         
I s t o r i u n   ZE r a t u
Miltiades   
      1. Aristagoras accordingly, after having caused Ionia to revolt, thus brought his life to an end; and meanwhile Histiaios the despot of Miletos, having been let go by Dareios had arrived at Sardis: and when he came from Susa, Artaphrenes the governor of Sardis asked him for what reason he supposed the Ionians had revolted; and he said that he could not tell, and moreover he expressed wonder at that which had happened, pretending that he knew nothing of the state of affairs. Then Artaphrenes seeing that he was using dissimulation said, having knowledge of the truth about the revolt: "Thus it is with thee, Histiaios, about these matters,--this shoe was stitched by thee, and put on by Aristagoras."         1. [1] Aristagores men nyn Iunien apostesas oytu teleytai. Istiaios de o Miletoy turannos memetimenos ypo Dareioy parein es Sardis. apigmenon de ayton ek tun Sousun eireto Artafrenes o Sardiun yparxos kata koion ti dokeoi Iunas apestanai. o de oyte eidenai efe ethumaze te to gegonos, us oyden deithen tun pareontun pregmatun epistamenos. [2] o de Artafrenes oreun ayton texnazonta eipe, eidus ten atrekeien teis apostasios, <<oytu toi Istiaie exei kata tauta ta pregmata. touto to ypodema errapsas men su, ypedesato de Aristagores.>>    
      2. Thus said Artaphrenes with reference to the revolt; and Histiaios fearing Artaphrenes because he understood the matter, ran away the next night at nightfall and went to the sea- coast, having deceived king Dareios, seeing that he had engaged to subdue Sardinia the largest of islands, and instead of that he was endeavouring to take upon himself leadership of the Ionians in the war against Dareios. Then having crossed over to Chios he was put in bonds by the Chians, being accused by them of working for a change of their State by suggestion of Dareios. When however the Chians learnt the whole story and heard that he was an enemy to the king, they released him.         2. [1] Artafrenes men tauta es ten apostasin exonta eipe. Istiaios de deisas us synienta Artafrenea ypo ten pruten epelthousan nukta apedre epi thalassan, basilea Dareion exepatekus. os Sardu neison ten megisten ypodexamenos katergasasthai ypedyne tun Iunun ten egemonien tou pros Dareion polemoy. [2] diabas de es Khion edethe ypo Khiun, katagnustheis pros aytun neutera pressein pregmata es aytous ek Dareioy. mathontes mentoi oi Khioi ton panta logon, us polemios eie basilei, elysan ayton.    
      3. Then Histiaios, being asked by the Ionians for what reason he had so urgently charged Aristagoras to revolt from the king and had wrought so great an evil for the Ionians, did not by any means declare to them that which had been in truth the cause, but reported to them that king Dareios had resolved to remove the Phenicians from their land and to settle them in Ionia, and the Ionians in Phenicia; and for this reason, he said, he had given the charge. Thus he attempted to alarm the Ionians, although the king had never resolved to do so at all.         3. [1] enthauta de eirutumenos ypo tun Iunun o Istiaios kat' o ti prothumus oytu epesteile tui Aristagorei apistasthai apo basileos kai kakon tosouton eie Iunas exergasmenos, ten men genomenen aytoisi aitien oy mala exefaine, o de elege sfi us basileus Dareios eboyleusato Foinikas men exanastesas en tei Iuniei katoikisai, Iunas de en tei Foinikei, kai toutun eineka episteileie. oyden ti pantus tauta basileos boyleysamenoy edeimatoy tous Iunas.    
      4. After this Histiaios acting through a messenger, namely Hermippos a man of Atarneus, sent papers to the Persians who were at Sardis, implying that he had already talked matters over with them about a revolt: and Hermippos did not deliver them to those to whom he was sent, but bore the papers and put them into the hands of Artaphrenes. He then, perceiving all that was being done, bade Hermippos bear the papers sent by Histiaios and deliver them to those to whom he was sent to bear them, and to deliver to him the replies sent back by the Persians to Histiaios. These things having been discovered, Artaphrenes upon that put to death many of the Persians.         4. [1] meta de o Istiaios di' aggeloy poieumenos Ermippoy andros Atarniteu toisi en Sardisi eousi Perseun epempe byblia, us prolelesxeneymenun aytui apostasios peri. o de Ermippos pros tous men apepemfthe oy didoi, ferun de enexeirise ta byblia Artafrenei. [2] o de mathun pan to ginomenon ekeleye ton Ermippon ta men para tou Istiaioy dounai feronta toisi per efere, ta de amoibaia ta para tun Perseun antipempomena Istiaiu euytui dounai. toutun de genomenun fanerun apekteine enthauta pollous Perseun o Artafrenes.    
      5. As regards Sardis therefore there was confusion of the design; and when Histiaios had been disappointed of this hope, the Chians attempted to restore him to Miletos at the request of Histiaios himself. The Milesians, however, who had been rejoiced before to be rid of Aristagoras, were by no means eager to receive another despot into their land, seeing that they had tasted of liberty: and in fact Histiaios, attempting to return to Miletos by force and under cover of night, was wounded in the thigh by one of the Milesians. He then, being repulsed from his own city, returned to Chios; and thence, as he could not persuade the Chians to give him ships, he crossed over to Mytilene and endeavoured to persuade the Lesbians to give him ships. So they manned eight triremes and sailed with Histiaios to Byzantion, and stationing themselves there they captured the ships which sailed out of the Pontus, excepting where the crews of them said that they were ready to do the bidding of Histiaios.         5. [1] peri Sardis men de egineto taraxe. Istiaion de tautes aposfalenta teis elpidos Khioi kateigon es Mileton, aytou Istiaioy deethentos. oi de Milesioi, asmenoi apallaxthentes kai Aristagoreu, oydamus prothymoi Esan allon turannon dekesthai es ten xuren, oia eleytheries geysamenoi. [2] kai de nyktos gar eouses biei epeirato katiun o Istiaios es ten Mileton, titrusketai ton meron ypo tey tun Milesiun. o men de us apustos teis euytou ginetai, apikneetai opisu es ten Khion. entheuten de, oy gar epeithe tous Khioys uste euytui dounai neas, diebe es Mytilenen kai epeise Lesbioys dounai oi neas. [2] oi de plerusantes oktu triereas epleon ama Istiaiui es Byzantion, enthauta de izomenoi tas ek tou Pontoy ekpleousas tun neun elambanon, plen e osoi aytun Istiaiui efasan etoimoi einai peithesthai.    
      6. While Histiaios and the men of Mytilene were acting thus, a large army both of sea and land forces was threatening to attack Miletos itself; for the commanders of the Persians had joined together to form one single army and were marching upon Miletos, considering the other towns of less account. Of their naval force the most zealous were the Phenicians, and with them also served the Cyprians, who had just been subdued, and the Kilikians and Egyptians.         6. [1] Istiaios men nyn kai Mytilenaioi epoieyn tauta. epi de Mileton ayten naytikos pollos kai pezos En stratos prosdokimos. systrafentes gar oi strategoi tun Perseun kai en poiesantes stratopedon elaynon epi ten Mileton, talla polismata peri elassonos poiesamenoi. tou de naytikou Foinikes men Esan prothymotatoi, synestrateuonto de kai Kuprioi neusti katestrammenoi kai Kilikes te kai Aiguptioi.    
      7. These, I say, were advancing upon Miletos and the rest of Ionia; and meanwhile the Ionians being informed of this were sending deputies chosen from themselves to the Panionion. When these had arrived at that place and took counsel together, they resolved not to gather a land-army to oppose the Persians, but that the Milesians should defend their walls by themselves, and that the Ionians should man their fleet, leaving out not one of their ships, and having done so should assemble as soon as possible at Lade, to fight a sea-battle in defence of Miletos. Now Lade is a small island lying opposite the city of the Milesians.         7. [1] oi men de epi ten Mileton kai ten allen Iunien estrateuonto, Iunes de pynthanomenoi tauta epempon probouloys sfeun aytun es Paniunion. apikomenoisi de toutoisi es touton ton xuron kai boyleyomenoisi edoxe pezon men straton medena syllegein antixoon Perseisi, alla ta teixea rhuesthai aytous Milesioys, to de naytikon pleroun ypolipomenoys medemian tun neun plerusantas de syllegesthai ten taxisten es Laden pronaymaxesontas teis Miletoy. e de Lade esti neisos mikre epi tei poli tei Milesiun keimene.    
      8. Then the Ionians manned their ships and came thither, and with them also those Aiolians who inhabit Lesbos; and they were drawn up in order thus:--the extremity of the line towards the East was held by the Milesians themselves, who furnished eighty ships; next to them were the Prienians with twelve ships and the men of Myus with three; next to those of Myus were the Teians with seventeen ships, and after the Teians the Chians with a hundred; after these were stationed the men of Erythrai and of Phocaia, the former furnishing eight ships and the latter three; next to the Phocaians were the Lesbians with seventy ships, and last, holding the extremity of the line towards the West, were stationed the Samians with sixty ships. Of all these the total number proved to be three hundred and fifty-three triremes.         8. [1] meta de tauta peplerumeneisi teisi neysi pareisan oi Iunes, sun de sfi kai Aioleun osoi ten Lesbon nemontai. etassonto de ude. to men pros ten eu eixon keras aytoi Milesioi, neas parexomenoi ogdukonta. eixonto de toutun Prienees dyudeka neysi kai Myesioi trisi neysi, Myesiun de Teioi eixonto eptakaideka neysi, Teiun de eixonto Khioi ekaton neysi. [2] pros de toutoisi Erythraioi te etassonto kai Fukaees, Erythraioi men oktu neas parexomenoi, Fukaees de treis. Fukaeun de eixonto Lesbioi neysi ebdomekonta. teleytaioi de etassonto exontes to pros esperen keras Samioi exekonta neysi. pantun de toutun o sumpas arithmos egeneto treis kai pentekonta kai triekosiai trierees.    
      9. These were the ships of the Ionians; and of the Barbarians the number of ships was six hundred. When these too were come to the Milesian coast and their whole land-army was also there, then the commanders of the Persians, being informed of the number of the Ionian ships, were struck with fear lest they should be unable to overcome them, and thus on the one hand should not be able to conquer Miletos from not having command of the sea, and at the same time should run a risk of being punished by Dareios. Reflecting upon these things they gathered together the despots of the Ionians who were exiles with the Medes, having been deposed from their governments by Aristagoras the Milesian, and who chanced to be then joining in the expedition against Miletos,--of these men they called together those who were present and spoke to them as follows: "Ionians, now let each one of you show himself a benefactor of the king's house, that is to say, let each one of you endeavour to detach his own countrymen from the body of the alliance: and make your proposals promising at the same time that they shall suffer nothing unpleasant on account of the revolt, and neither their temples nor their private houses shall be burnt, nor shall they have any worse treatment than they had before this; but if they will not do so, but will by all means enter into a contest with us, threaten them and tell them this, which in truth shall happen to them, namely that if they are worsted in the fight they shall be reduced to slavery, and we shall make their sons eunuchs, and their maidens we shall remove to Bactria, and deliver their land to others."         9. [1] aytai men Iunun Esan, tun de barbarun to pleithos tun neun Esan exakosiai. us de kai aytai apikato pros ten Milesien kai o pezos sfi apas parein, enthauta oi Perseun strategoi pythomenoi to pleithos tun Iadun neun katarrudesan me oy dynatoi genuntai yperbalesthai, kai oytu oyte ten Mileton oioi te eusi exelein me oyk eontes naykratores, pros te Dareioy kindyneususi kakon ti labein. [2] tauta epilegomenoi, syllexantes tun Iunun tous tyrannoys, oi yp' Aristagoreu men tou Milesioy katalythentes tun arxeun efeygon es Medoys, etugxanon de tote systrateyomenoi epi ten Mileton, toutun tun andrun tous pareontas sygkalesantes elegon sfi tade. [3] <<andres Iunes, nun tis ymeun ey poiesas fanetu ton basileos oikon. tous gar euytou ekastos ymeun polietas peirasthu aposxizun apo tou loipou symmaxikou. proisxomenoi de epaggeilasthe tade, us peisontai te axari oyden dia ten apostasin, oyde sfi oyte ta ira oyte ta idia empepresetai, oyde biaioteron exoysi oyden e proteron eixon. [4] ei de tauta men oy poiesoysi, oi de pantus dia maxes eleusontai, tade ede sfi legete epereazontes, ta per sfeas katexei, us essuthentes tei maxei exandrapodieuntai, kai us sfeun tous paidas ektomias poiesomen, tas de parthenoys anaspastoys es Baktra, kai us ten xuren alloisi paradusomen.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [10]

     10. They thus spoke; and the despots of Ionia sent each one by night to his own people announcing to them this. The Ionians however, that is those to whom these messages came, continued obstinate and would not accept the thought of treason to their cause; and each people thought that to them alone the Persians were sending this message.         10. [1] oi men de elegon tade. tun de Iunun oi turannoi diepempon nyktos ekastos es tous euytou exaggellomenos. oi de Iunes, es tous kai apikonto aytai ai aggeliai, agnumosunei te diexreunto kai oy prosiento ten prodosien. euytoisi de ekastoi edokeon mounoisi tauta tous Persas exaggellesthai. tauta men nyn itheus apikomenun es ten Mileton tun Perseun egineto.   
      11. This happened as soon as the Persians came to Miletos; and after this the Ionians being gathered together at Lade held meetings; and others no doubt also made speeches to them, but especially the Phocaian commander Dionysios, who said as follows: "Seeing that our affairs are set upon the razor's edge, Ionians, whether we shall be free or slaves, and slaves too to be dealt with as runaways, now therefore if ye shall be willing to take upon yourselves hardships, ye will have labour for the time being, but ye will be able to overcome the enemy and be free; whereas if ye continue to be self-indulgent and without discipline, I have no hope for you that ye will not pay the penalty to the king for your revolt. Nay, but do as I say, and deliver yourselves over to me; and I engage, if the gods grant equal conditions, that either the enemy will not fight with us, or that fighting he shall be greatly discomfited."         11. [1] meta de tun Iunun syllexthentun es ten Laden eginonto agorai, kai de kou sfi kai alloi egorounto, en de de kai o Fukaeus strategos Dionusios legun tade. [2] <<epi xyrou gar akmeis exetai emin ta pregmata, andres Iunes, e einai eleytheroisi e douloisi, kai toutoisi us drepeteisi. nun un ymeis en men boulesthe talaipurias endekesthai, to paraxreima men ponos ymin estai, oioi te de esesthe yperbalomenoi tous enantioys einai eleutheroi. ei de malakiei te kai ataxiei diaxresesthe, oydemian ymeun exu elpida me oy dusein ymeas diken basilei teis apostasios. [3] all' emoi te peithesthe kai emoi ymeas aytous epitrepsate. kai ymin egu, theun ta isa nemontun, ypodekomai e oy symmixein tous polemioys e symmisgontas pollon elassuthesesthai.>>    
      12. Hearing this the Ionians delivered themselves to Dionysios; and he used to bring the ships out every day in single file, that he might practise the rowers by making the ships break through one another's line, and that he might get the fighting-men in the ships under arms; an then for the rest of the day he would keep the ships at anchor; and thus he gave the Ionians work to do during the whole day. For seven days then they submitted and did that which he commanded; but on the day after these the Ionians, being unaccustomed to such toils and being exhausted with hard work and hot sun, spoke to one another thus: "Against which of the deities have we offended, that we thus fill up the measure of evil? for surely we have delivered ourselves to a Phocaian, an impostor, who furnishes but three ships: and he has taken us into his hands and maltreats us with evil dealing from which we can never recover; and many of us in fact have fallen into sicknesses, and many others, it may be expected, will suffer the same thing shortly; and for us it is better to endure anything else in the world rather than these ills, and to undergo the slavery which will come upon us, whatever that shall be, rather than to be oppressed by that which we have now. Come, let us not obey him after this any more." So they said, and forthwith after this every one refused to obey him, and they pitched their tents in the island like an army, and kept in the shade, and would not go on board their ships or practise any exercises.         12. [1] tauta akousantes oi Iunes epitrepoysi sfeas aytous tui Dionysiui. o de anagun ekastote epi keras tas neas, okus toisi ereteisi xresaito diekploon poieumenos teisi neysi di' alleleun kai tous epibatas opliseie, to loipon teis emeres tas neas exeske ep' agkyreun, pareixe te toisi Iusi ponon di' emeres. [2] mexri men nyn emereun epta epeithonto te kai epoieyn to keleyomenon. tei de epi tauteisi oi Iunes, oia apathees eontes ponun toioutun tetrymenoi te talaipurieisi te kai eliui, elexan pros euytous tade. [3] <<tina daimonun parabantes tade anapimplamen; oitines parafronesantes kai ekplusantes ek tou nooy andri Fukaei alazoni, parexomenui neas treis, epitrepsantes emeas aytous exomen. o de paralabun emeas lymainetai lumeisi anekestoisi, kai de polloi men emeun es nousoys peptukasi, polloi de epidoxoi tuyto touto peisesthai eisi, pro te toutun tun kakun emin ge kresson kai o ti un allo pathein esti kai ten melloysan doyleien ypomeinai etis estai, mallon e tei pareousei synexesthai. ferete, tou loipou me peithumetha aytou.>> [4] tauta elexan, kai meta tauta aytika peithesthai oydeis ethele, all' oia stratie skenas te pexamenoi en tei nesui eskietrofeonto kai esbainein oyk etheleskon es tas neas oyd' anapeirasthai.    
      13. Perceiving this which was being done by the Ionians, the commanders of the Samians then at length accepted from Aiakes the son of Syloson those proposals which Aiakes sent before at the bidding of the Persians, asking them to leave the alliance of the Ionians; the Samians, I say, accepted these proposals, perceiving that there was great want of discipline on the part of the Ionians, while at the same time it was clear to them that it was impossible to overcome the power of the king; and they well knew also that even if they should overcome the present naval force of Dareios, another would be upon them five times as large. Having found an occasion then, so soon as they saw that the Ionians refused to be serviceable, they counted it gain for themselves to save their temples and their private property. Now Aiakes, from whom the Samians accepted the proposals, was the son of Syloson, the son of Aiakes, and being despot of Samos he had been deprived of his rule by Aristagoras the Milesian, like the other despots of Ionia.         13. [1] mathontes de tauta ta ginomena ek tun Iunun oi strategoi tun Samiun enthauta de par' Aiakeos tou Sylosuntos keinoys tous proteron epempe logoys o Aiakes keleyontun tun Perseun, deomenos sfeun eklipein ten Iunun symmaxien. oi Samioi un oruntes eousan ama men ataxien pollen ek tun Iunun edekonto tous logoys, ama de katefaineto sfi einai adunata ta basileos pregmata yperbalesthai, ey de epistamenoi us ei kai to pareon naytikon yperbaloiato ton Dareion, allo sfi parestai pentaplesion. [2] profasios un epilabomenoi, epeite taxista eidon tous Iunas oy boylomenoys einai xrestous, en kerdei epoieunto peripoieisai ta te ira ta sfetera kai ta idia. o de Aiakes, par' otey tous logoys edekonto oi Samioi, pais men En Sylosuntos tou Aiakeos, turannos de eun Samoy ypo tou Milesioy Aristagoreu apestereto ten arxen kata per oi alloi teis Iunies turannoi.    
      14. So when the Phenicians sailed to the attack, the Ionians also put out their ships from shore against them, sailing in single file: and when they came near and engaged battle with one another, as regards what followed I am not able exactly to record which of the Ionians showed themselves cowards or good men in this sea-fight, for they throw blame upon one another. The Samians however, it is said, according to their agreement with Aiakes put up their sails then and set forth from their place in the line to sail back to Samos, excepting only eleven ships: of these the captains stayed in their places and took part in the sea-fight, refusing to obey the commanders of their division; and the public authority of the Samians granted them on account of this to have their names written up on a pillar with their fathers' names also, as having proved themselves good men; and this pillar exists still in the market-place. Then the Lesbians also, when they saw that those next them in order were taking to flight, did the same things as the Samians had done, and so also most of the Ionians did the very same thing.         14. [1] tote un epei epepleon oi Foinikes, oi Iunes antaneigon kai aytoi tas neas epi keras. us de kai agxou eginonto kai synemisgon alleloisi, to entheuten oyk exu atrekeus syggrapsai oitines tun Iunun eginonto andres kakoi e agathoi en tei naymaxiei tautei. alleloys gar kataitiuntai. [2] legontai de Samioi enthauta kata ta sygkeimena pros ton Aiakea aeiramenoi ta istia apoplusai ek teis taxios es ten Samon, plen endeka neun. toyteun de oi trierarxoi paremenon kai enaymaxeon anekoystesantes toisi strategoisi. [3] kai sfi to koinon tun Samiun eduke dia touto to preigma en stelei anagrafeinai patrothen us andrasi agathoisi genomenoisi, kai esti ayte e stele en tei agorei. idomenoi de kai Lesbioi tous prosexeas feugontas tuyto epoieyn toisi Samioisi. us de kai oi pleunes tun Iunun epoieyn ta ayta tauta.    
      15. Of those which remained in their places in the sea-fight the Chians suffered very severely, since they displayed brilliant deeds of valour and refused to play the coward. These furnished, as was before said, a hundred ships and in each of them forty picked men of their citizens served as fighting-men; and when they saw the greater number of their allies deserting them, they did not think fit to behave like the cowards among them, but left along with a few only of their allies they continued to fight and kept breaking through the enemy's line; until at last, after they had conquered many ships of the enemy, they lost the greater number of their own.         15. [1] tun de parameinantun en tei naymaxiei periefthesan trexutata Khioi us apodeiknumenoi te erga lampra kai oyk ethelokakeontes. pareixonto men gar, usper kai proteron eirethe, neas ekaton, kai ep' ekastes ayteun andras tesserakonta tun astun logadas epibateuontas. [2] oreontes de tous pollous tun symmaxun prodidontas oyk edikaieyn ginesthai toisi kakoisi aytun omoioi, alla met' oligun symmaxun memoynumenoi diekpleontes enaymaxeon, es o tun polemiun elontes neas syxnas apebalon tun sfetereun tas pleunas.    
      16. The Chians then with the remainder of their ships fled away to their own land; but those of the Chians whose ships were disabled by the damage which they had received, being pursued fled for refuge to Mycale; and their ships they ran ashore there and left them behind, while the men proceeded over the mainland on foot: and when the Chians had entered the Ephesian territory on their way, then since they came into it by night and at a time when a festival of Thesmophoria was being celebrated by the women of the place, the Ephesians, not having heard beforehand how it was with the Chians and seeing that an armed body had entered their land, supposed certainly that they were robbers and had a design upon the women; so they came out to the rescue in a body and slew the Chians.         16. [1] Khioi men de teisi loipeisi tun neun apofeugoysi es ten euytun. osoisi de tun Khiun adunatoi Esan ai nees ypo trumatun, oytoi de us ediukonto katafygganoysi pros ten Mykalen. neas men de aytou tautei epokeilantes katelipon, oi de pezei ekomizonto dia teis epeiroy. [2] epeide de esebalon es ten Efesien komizomenoi oi Khioi, nyktos te gar apikato es ayten kai eontun teisi gynaixi aytothi thesmoforiun, enthauta de oi Efesioi, oyte proakekootes us eixe peri tun Khiun idontes te straton es ten xuren esbeblekota, pagxy sfeas katadoxantes einai klupas kai ienai epi tas gynaikas, exeboetheon pandemei kai ekteinon tous Khioys.    
      17. Such was the fortune which befell these men: but Dionysios the Phocaian, when he perceived that the cause of the Ionians was ruined, after having taken three ships of the enemy sailed away, not to Pocaia any more, for he knew well that it would be reduced to slavery together with the rest of Ionia, and he sailed forthwith straight to Phenicia; and having there sunk merchant ships and taken a great quantity of goods, he sailed thence to Sicily. Then with that for his starting-point he became a freebooter, not plundering any Hellenes, but Carthaginians and Tyrsenians only.         17. [1] oytoi men toinyn toiauteisi periepipton tuxeisi. Dionusios de o Fukaeus epeite emathe tun Iunun ta pregmata dieftharmena, neas elun treis tun polemiun apeplee es men Fukaian oyketi, ey eidus us andrapodieitai sun tei allei Iuniei. o de itheus us eixe eplee es Foiniken, gauloys de enthauta katadusas kai xremata labun polla eplee es Sikelien, ormumenos de entheuten leistes katestekee Ellenun men oydenos, Karxedoniun de kai Tyrsenun.    
      18. The Persians, then, being conquerors of the Ionians in the sea- fight, besieged Miletos by land and sea, undermining the walls and bringing against it all manner of engines; and they took it completely in the sixth year from the revolt of Aristagoras, and reduced the people to slavery; so that the disaster agreed with the oracle which had been uttered with reference to Miletos.         18. [1] oi de Persai epeite tei naymaxiei enikun tous Iunas, ten Mileton poliorkeontes ek geis kai thalasses kai yporussontes ta teixea kai pantoias mexanas prosferontes, aireoysi kat' akres ektui etei apo teis apostasios teis Aristagoreu kai endrapodisanto ten polin, uste sympesein to pathos tui xresteriui tui es Mileton genomenui.    
      19. For when the Argives were inquiring at Delphi about the safety of their city, there was given to them an oracle which applied to both, that is to say, part of it had reference to the Argives themselves, while that which was added afterwards referred to the Milesians. The part of it which had reference to the Argives I will record when I reach that place in the history, but that which the Oracle uttered with reference to the Milesians, who were not there present, is as follows: 
"And at that time, O Miletos, of evil deeds the contriver, 
 Thou shalt be made for many a glorious gift and a banquet: 
 Then shall thy wives be compelled to wash the feet of the long-haired, 
 And in Didyma then my shrine shall be tended by others." At the time of which I speak these things came upon the Milesians, since most of the men were killed by the Persians, who are long- haired, and the women and children were dealt with as slaves; and the temple at Didyma, with the sacred building and the sanctuary of the Oracle, was first plundered and then burnt. Of the things in this temple I have made mention frequently in other parts of the history.         19. [1] xreumenoisi gar Argeioisi en Delfoisi peri suteries teis polios teis sfeteres exresthe epikoinon xresterion, to men es aytous tous Argeioys feron, ten de parentheken exrese es Milesioys. to men nyn es tous Argeioys exon, [2] epean kata touto genumai tou logoy, tote mnesthesomai. ta de toisi Milesioisi oy pareousi exrese, exei ude.     kai tote de, Milete kakun epimexane ergun,
      polloisin deipnon te kai aglaa dura genesei,
      sai d' aloxoi polloisi podas nipsoysi kometais,
      neou d' emeteroy Didumois alloisi melesei.[3] tote de tauta tous Milesioys katelambane, okote andres men oi pleunes ekteinonto ypo tun Perseun eontun kometeun, gynaikes de kai tekna en andrapodun logui eginonto, iron de to en Didumoisi kai o neos te kai to xresterion. sylethenta enepimprato. tun d' en tui irui toutui xrematun pollakis mnemen eteruthi tou logoy epoiesamen.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [20]

     20. After this the Milesians who had been taken prisoner were conducted to Susa; and king Dareios did to them no other evil, but settled them upon the Sea called Erythraian, in the city of Ampe, by which the Tigris flows when it runs out into the sea. Of the Milesian land the Persians themselves kept the surroundings of the city and the plain, but the heights they gave to the Carians of Pedasa for a possession.         20. [1] entheuten oi zugrethentes tun Milesiun egonto es Sousa. basileus de sfeas Dareios kakon oyden allo poiesas katoikise epi tei Erythrei kaleomenei thalassei en Ampei poli, par' en Tigres potamos pararreun es thalassan exiei. teis de Milesiun xures aytoi men oi Persai eixon ta peri ten polin kai to pedion, ta de yperakria edosan Karsi Pedaseusi ekteisthai.    
      21. When the Milesians suffered this treatment from the Persians, the men of Sybaris, who were dwelling in Laos and Skidros, being deprived of their own city, did not repay like with like: for when Sybaris was taken by the men of Croton, the Milesians all from youth upwards shaved their heads and put on great mourning: for these cities were more than all others of which we know bound together by ties of friendship. Not like the Sybarites were the Athenians; for these made it clear that they were grieved at the capture of Miletos, both in many other ways and also by this, that when Phrynichos had composed a drama called the "Capture of Miletos" and had put it on the stage, the body of spectators fell to weeping, and the Athenians moreover fined the poet a thousand drachmas on the ground that he had reminded them of their own calamities; and they ordered also that no one in future should represent this drama.         21. [1] pathousi de tauta Milesioisi pros Perseun oyk apedosan ten omoien Sybaritai, oi Laon te kai Skidron oikeon teis polios apesteremenoi. Sybarios gar alouses ypo Krotunieteun Milesioi pantes ebedon apekeiranto tas kefalas kai penthos mega prosethekanto. polies gar aytai malista de tun emeis idmen alleleisi exeinuthesan. [2] oyden omoius kai Athenaioi. Athenaioi men gar deilon epoiesan yperaxthesthentes tei Miletoy alusi tei te allei pollaxei, kai de kai poiesanti Frynixui drama Miletoy alusin kai didaxanti es dakrya te epese to theetron, kai ezemiusan min us anamnesanta oikeia kaka xilieisi draxmeisi, kai epetaxan medena xrasthai toutui tui dramati.    
      22. Miletos then had been stripped bare of its former inhabitants: but of the Samians they who had substance were by no means satisfied with that which had been concerted by the commanders of their fleet with the Medes; and taking counsel forthwith after the sea-fight it seemed good to them, before their despot Aiakes arrived in the country, to sail away and make a colony, and not to stay behind and be slaves of the Medes and of Aiakes: for just at this time the people of Zancle in Sicily were sending messengers to Ionia and inviting the Ionians to come to the "Fair Strand," desiring there to found a city of Ionians. Now this which is called the Fair Strand is in the land of the Sikelians and on that side of Sicily which lies towards Tyrsenia. So when these gave the invitation, the Samians alone of all the Ionians set forth, having with them those of the Milesians who had escaped: and in the course of this matter it happened as follows:--        22. [1] Miletos men nyn Milesiun eremuto. Samiun de toisi ti exoysi to men es tous Medoys ek tun strategun tun sfeterun poiethen oydamus ereske, edokee de meta ten naymaxien aytika boyleyomenoisi, prin e sfi es ten xuren apikesthai ton turannon Aiakea, es apoikien ekpleein mede menontas Medoisi te kai Aiakei doyleuein. [2] Zagklaioi gar oi apo Sikelies ton ayton xronon touton pempontes es ten Iunien aggeloys epekaleonto tous Iunas es Kalen akten, boylomenoi aytothi polin ktisai Iunun. e de Kale ayte akte kaleomene esti men Sikelun, pros de Tyrsenien tetrammene teis Sikelies. toutun un epikaleomenun oi Samioi mounoi Iunun estalesan, sun de sfi Milesiun oi ekpefeygotes.   
      23. The Samians as they made their way towards Sicily reached Locroi Epizephyroi, and at the same time the people of Zancle, both themselves and their king, whose name was Skythes, were encamped about a city of the Sikelians, desiring to conquer it. Perceiving these things, Anaxilaos the despot of Rhegion, being then at variance with those of Zancle, communicated with the Samians and persuaded them that they ought to leave the Fair Strand alone, to which they were sailing, and take possession of Zancle instead, since it was left now without men to defend it. The Samians accordingly did as he said and took possession of Zancle; and upon this the men of Zancle, being informed that their city was possessed by an enemy, set out to rescue it, and invited Hippocrates the despot of Gela to help them, for he was their ally. When however Hippocrates also with his army had come up to their rescue, first he put Skythes the ruler of the Zanclaians in fetters, on the ground that he had been the cause of the city being lost, and together with him his brother Pythogenes, and sent them away to the town of Incyos; then he betrayed the cause of the remaining Zanclaians by coming to terms with the Samians and exchanging oaths with them; and in return for this it had been promised by the Samians that Hippocrates should receive as his share the half of all the movable goods in the city and of the slaves, and the whole of the property in the fields round. So the greater number of the Zanclaians he put in bonds and kept himself as slaves, but the chief men of them, three hundred in number, he gave to the Samians to put to death; which however the Samians did not do.         23. [1] en ui toionde de ti syneneike genesthai. Samioi gar komizomenoi es Sikelien eginonto en Lokroisi toisi Epizefyrioisi, kai Zagklaioi aytoi te kai o basileus aytun, tui oynoma En Skuthes, perikateato polin tun Sikelun exelein boylomenoi. [2] mathun de tauta o RHegioy turannos Anaxileus, tote eun diaforos toisi Zagklaioisi, symmixas toisi Samioisi anapeithei us xreon eie Kalen men akten, ep' en epleon, ean xairein, ten de Zagklen sxein eousan eremon andrun. [3] peithomenun de tun Samiun kai sxontun ten Zagklen, enthauta oi Zagklaioi, us eputhonto exomenen ten polin euytun, eboetheon aytei kai epekaleonto Ippokratea ton Geles turannon. En gar de sfi oytos summaxos. [4] epeite de aytoisi kai o Ippokrates sun tei stratiei Eke boetheun, Skuthen men ton mounarxon tun Zagklaiun us apobalonta ten polin o Ippokrates pedesas kai ton adelfeon aytou Pythogenea es Inyka polin apepempse, tous de loipous Zagklaioys koinologesamenos toisi Samioisi kai orkoys dous kai dexamenos proeduke. [5] misthos de oi En eiremenos ode ypo tun Samiun, pantun tun epiplun kai andrapodun ta emisea metalabein tun en tei poli, ta d' epi tun agrun panta Ippokratea lagxanein. [6] tous men de pleunas tun Zagklaiun aytos en andrapodun logui eixe desas, tous de koryfaioys aytun triekosioys eduke toisi Samioisi katasfaxai. oy mentoi oi ge Samioi epoiesan tauta.    
      24. Now Skythes the ruler of the Zanclaians escaped from Incyos to Himera, and thence he came to Asia and went up to the court of Dareios: and Dareios accounted him the most righteous of all the men who had come up to him from Hellas; for he obtained leave of the king and went away to Sicily, and again came back from Sicily to the king; and at last he brought his life to an end among the Persians in old age and possessing great wealth. The Samians then, having got rid of the rule of the Medes, had gained for themselves without labour the fair city of Zancle.         24. [1] Skuthes de o tun Zagklaiun mounarxos ek teis Inykos ekdidreskei es Imeren, ek de tautes parein es ten Asien kai anebe para basilea Dareion. kai min enomise Dareios pantun andrun dikaiotaton einai, osoi ek teis Ellados par' euyton anebesan. [2] kai gar paraitesamenos basilea es Sikelien apiketo kai aytis ek teis Sikelies opisu para basilea, es o gerai mega olbios eun eteleutese en Perseisi. Samioi de apallaxthentes Medun aponeti polin kallisten Zagklen periebebleato.    
      25. After the sea-battle which was fought for Miletos, the Phenicians by the command of the Persians restored to Samos Aiakes the son of Syloson, since he had been to them of much service and had done for them great things; and the Samians alone of all who revolted from Dareios, because of the desertion of their ships which were in the sea-fight, had neither their city nor their temples burnt. Then after the capture of Miletos the Persians forthwith got possession of Caria, some of the cities having submitted to their power voluntarily, while others of them they brought over by force.         25. [1] meta de ten naymaxien ten yper Miletoy genomenen Foinikes keleysantun Perseun kateigon es Samon Aiakea ton Sylosuntos us pollou te axion genomenon sfisi kai megala katergasamenon. [2] kai Samioisi mounoisi tun apostantun apo Dareioy dia ten ekleipsin tun neun en tei naymaxiei oyte e polis oyte ta ira enepresthe. Miletoy de alouses aytika Karien esxon oi Persai, tas men ethelonten tun poliun ypokypsasas, tas de anagkei prosegagonto.    
      26. Thus it came to pass as regards these matters: and meanwhile Histiaios the Milesian, who was at Byzantion and was seizing the merchant vessels of the Ionians as they sailed forth out of the Pontus, received the report of that which had happened about Miletos. Upon that he entrusted the matters which had to do with the Hellespont to Bisaltes the son of Apollophanes, a man of Abydos, while he himself with the Lesbians sailed to Chios; and when a body of the Chians who were on guard did not allow him to approach, he fought with them at that spot in the Chian land which is called the "Hollows." Histiaios then not only slew many of these, but also, taking Polichne of the Chians as his base, he conquered with the help of the Lesbians the remainder of the Chians as well, since they had suffered great loss by the sea-fight.         26. [1] tauta men de oytu egineto. Istiaiui de tui Milesiui eonti peri Byzantion kai syllambanonti tas Iunun olkadas ekpleousas ek tou Pontoy exaggelletai ta peri ten Mileton genomena. ta men de peri Ellesponton exonta pregmata epitrapei Bisaltei Apollofaneos paidi Abydenui, aytos de exun Lesbioys es Khion eplee, kai Khiun froyrei oy prosiemenei min synebale en Koiloisi kaleomenoisi teis Khies xures. [2] toutun te de efoneyse syxnous, kai tun loipun Khiun, oia de kekakumenun ek teis naymaxies, o Istiaios exun tous lesbioys epekratese, ek Polixnes teis Khiun ormumenos.    
      27. And heaven is wont perhaps to give signs beforehand whenever great evils are about to happen to a city or a race of men; for to the Chians also before these events remarkable signs had come. In the first place when they had sent to Delphi a chorus of a hundred youths, two only returned home, the remaining ninety-eight of them having been seized by a plague and carried off; and then secondly in their city about the same time, that is shortly before the sea-fight, as some children were being taught in school the roof fell in upon them, so that of a hundred and twenty children only one escaped. These signs God showed to them beforehand; and after this the sea-fight came upon them and brought their State down upon its knees; and as the Chians had suffered great loss, he without difficulty effected the conquest of them.         27. [1] fileei de kus prosemainein, eyt' an mellei megala kaka e poli e ethnei esesthai. kai gar Khioisi pro toutun semeia megala egeneto. [2] touto men sfi pempsasi es Delfous xoron neenieun ekaton duo mounoi toutun apenostesan, tous de oktu te kai enenekonta aytun loimos ypolabun apeneike. touto de en tei poli ton ayton touton xronon, oligon pro teis naymaxies, paisi grammata didaskomenoisi enepese e stege, uste ap' ekaton kai eikosi paidun eis mounos apefyge. [3] tauta men sfi semeia o theos proedexe, meta de tauta e naymaxie ypolabousa es gony ten polin ebale, epi de tei naymaxiei epegeneto Istiaios Lesbioys agun. kekakumenun de tun Khiun, katastrofen eypeteus aytun epoiesato.    
      28. Thence Histiaios made an expedition against Thasos, taking with him a large force of Ionians and Aiolians; and while he was encamped about the town of Thasos, a report came to him that the Phenicians were sailing up from Miletos to conquer the rest of Ionia. Being informed of this he left Thasos unconquered and himself hastened to Lesbos, taking with him his whole army. Then, as his army was in want of food, he crossed over from Lesbos to reap the corn in Atarneus and also that in the plain of the Caicos, which belonged to the Mysians. In these parts there chanced to be a Persian named Harpagos commanding a considerable force; and this man fought a battle with him after he had landed, and he took Histiaios himself prisoner and destroyed the greater part of his army.         28. [1] entheuten de o Istiaios estrateueto epi Thason agun Iunun kai Aioleun syxnous. perikatemenui de oi Thason Elthe aggelie us oi Foinikes anapleoysi ek teis Miletoy epi ten allen Iunien. pythomenos de tauta Thason men aportheton leipei, aytos de es ten Lesbon epeigeto agun pasan ten stratien. [2] ek Lesboy de limainouses oi teis stratieis peren diabainei, ek tou Atarneos us amesun ton siton ton te entheuten kai ton ek Kaikoy pedioy ton tun Mysun. en de toutoisi toisi xurioisi etugxane eun Arpagos aner Perses strategos stratieis oyk oliges. os oi apobanti symbalun ayton te Istiaion zugriei elabe kai ton straton aytou ton pleu dieftheire.    
      29. And Histiaios was taken prisoner in the following manner:--As the Hellenes were fighting with the Persians at Malene in the district of Atarneus, after they had been engaged in close combat for a long time, the cavalry at length charged and fell upon the Hellenes; and the cavalry in fact decided the battle. So when the Hellenes had been turned to flight, Histiaios trusting that he would not be put to death by the king on account of his present fault, conceived a love of life, so that when he was being caught in his flight by a Persian and was about to be run through by him in the moment of his capture, he spoke in Persian and made himself known, saying that he was Histiaios the Milesian.         29. [1] ezugrethe de o Istiaios ude. us emaxonto oi Ellenes toisi Perseisi en tei Malenei teis Atarneitidos xures, oi men synestasan xronon epi pollon, e de ippos ysteron ormetheisa epipiptei toisi Ellesi. to te de ergon teis ippoy touto egeneto, kai tetrammenun tun Ellenun o Istiaios elpizun oyk apoleesthai ypo basileos dia ten pareousan amartada filopsyxien toiende tina anaireetai. [2] us feugun te katelambaneto ypo andros Perseu kai us kataireomenos yp' aytou emelle sygkentethesesthai, Persida glussan meteis katamenuei euyton us eie Istiaios o Milesios.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [30]

     30. If then upon being taken prisoner he had been brought to king Dareios, he would not, as I think, have suffered any harm, but Dareios would have forgiven the crime with which he was charged; as it was, however, for this very reason and in order that he might not escape from punishment and again become powerful with the king, Artaphrenes the governor of Sardis and Harpagos who had captured him, when he had reached Sardis on his way to the king, put him to death there and then, and his body they impaled, but embalmed his head and brought it up to Dareios at Susa. Dareios having been informed of this, found fault with those who had done so, because they had not brought him up to his presence alive; and he bade wash the head of Histiaios and bestow upon it proper care, and then bury it, as that of one who had been greatly a benefactor both of the king himself and of the Persians.         30. [1] ei men nyn, us ezugrethe, axthe agomenos para basilea Dareion, o de oyt' an epathe kakon oyden dokeein emoi, apeike t' an aytui ten aitien. nun de min aytun te toutun eineka kai ina me diafygun aytis megas para basilei genetai, Artafrenes te o Sardiun yparxos kai o labun Arpagos, us apiketo agomenos es Sardis, to men aytou suma aytou tautei anestaurusan, ten de kefalen tarixeusantes aneneikan para basilea Dareion es Sousa. [2] Dareios de pythomenos tauta kai epaitiesamenos tous tauta poiesantas oti min oy zuonta anegagon es opsin ten euytou, ten kefalen ten Istiaioy lousantas te kai peristeilantas ey eneteilato thapsai us andros megalus euytui te kai Perseisi eyergeteu.    
      31. Thus it happened about Histiaios; and meanwhile the Persian fleet, after wintering near Miletos, when it put to sea again in the following year conquered without difficulty the islands lying near the mainland, Chios, Lesbos, and Tenedos; and whenever they took one of the islands, the Barbarians, as each was conquered, swept the inhabitants off it; and this they do in the following manner:-- they extend themselves from the sea on the North to the sea on the South, each man having hold of the hand of the next, and then they pass through the whole island hunting the people out of it. They took also the Ionian cities on the mainland in the same manner, except that they did not sweep off the inhabitants thus, for it was not possible.         31. [1] ta men peri Istiaion oytu esxe. o de naytikos stratos o Perseun xeimerisas peri Mileton, tui deyterui etei us anepluse, aireei eypeteus tas nesoys tas pros tei epeirui keimenas, Khion kai Lesbon kai Tenedon. okus de laboi tina tun nesun, us ekasten aireontes oi barbaroi esageneyon tous anthrupoys. [2] sageneuoysi de tonde ton tropon. aner andros apsamenos teis xeiros ek thalasses teis boreies epi ten notien diekoysi, kai epeita dia pases teis nesoy dierxontai ekthereuontes tous anthrupoys. aireon de kai tas en tei epeirui polias tas Iadas kata tayta, plen oyk esageneyon tous anthrupoys. oy gar oia t' En.    
      32. Then the commanders of the Persians proved not false to the threats with which they had threatened the Ionians when these were encamped opposite to them: for in fact when they conquered the cities, they chose out the most comely of the boys and castrated them, making eunuchs of them, and the fairest of the maidens they carried off by force to the king; and not only this, but they also burnt the cities together with the temples. Thus for the third time had the Ionians been reduced to slavery, first by the Lydians and then twice in succession by the Persians.         32. [1] enthauta Perseun oi strategoi oyk epseusanto tas apeilas tas epepeilesan toisi Iusi stratopedeyomenoisi enantia sfisi. us gar de epekratesan tun poliun, paidas te tous eyeidestatoys eklegomenoi exetamnon kai epoieyn anti einai enorxias eynouxoys kai parthenoys tas kallisteyousas anaspastoys para basilea. tauta te de epoieyn kai tas polias enepimprasan aytoisi toisi iroisi. oytu te to triton Iunes katedoyluthesan, pruton men ypo Lydun, dis de epexeis tote ypo Perseun.    
      33. Departing from Ionia the fleet proceeded to conquer all the places of the Hellespont on the left as one sails in, for those on the right had been subdued already by the Persians themselves, approaching them by land. Now the cities of the Hellespont in Europe are these:--first comes the Chersonese, in which there are many cities, then Perinthos, the strongholds of the Thracian border, Selymbria, and Byzantion. The people of Byzantion and those of Calchedon opposite did not even wait for the coming of the Persian ships, but had left their own land first and departed, going within the Euxine; and there they settled in the city of Mesambria. So the Phenicians, having burnt these places which have been mentioned, directed their course next to Proconnesos and Artake; and when they had delivered these also to the flames, they sailed back to the Chersonese to destroy the remaining cities which they had not sacked when they touched there before: but against Kyzicos they did not sail at all; for the men of Kyzicos even before the time when the Phenicians sailed in had submitted to the king of their own accord, and had made terms with Oibares the son of Megabazos, the Persian governor at Daskyleion.         33. [1] apo de Iunies apallassomenos o naytikos stratos ta ep' aristera espleonti tou Ellespontoy airee panta. ta gar epi dexia aytoisi toisi Perseisi ypoxeiria En gegonota kat' epeiron. eisi de ai en tei Eyrupei aide tou Ellespontoy, Khersonesos te, en tei polies syxnai eneisi, kai Perinthos kai ta teixea ta epi Threikes kai Selymbrie te kai Byzantion. [2] Byzantioi men nyn kai oi perethe Kalxedonioi oyd' ypemeinan epipleontas tous Foinikas, all' oixonto apolipontes ten sfeteren esu es ton Eyxeinon ponton, kai enthauta polin Mesambrien oikesan. oi de Foinikes katakausantes tautas tas xuras tas katalextheisas trepontai epi te Prokonneson kai Artaken, pyri de kai tautas neimantes epleon aytis es ten Khersoneson exairesontes tas epiloipoys tun poliun, osas proteron prossxontes oy katesyran. [3] epi de Kuzikon oyde eplusan arxen. aytoi gar Kyzikenoi eti proteron tou Foinikun esplooy egegonesan ypo basilei, Oibarei tui Megabazoy omologesantes tui en Daskyleiui yparxui. teis de Khersonesoy plen Kardies polios tas allas pasas exeirusanto oi Foinikes.   
      34. In the Chersonese then the Phenicians made themselves masters of all the other cities except the city of Cardia. Of these cities up to that time Miltiades the son of Kimon, the son of Stesagoras, had been despot, Miltiades the son of Kypselos having obtained this government in the manner which here follows:--The inhabitants of this Chersonese were Dolonkian Thracians; and these Dolonkians, being hard pressed in war by the Apsinthians, sent their kings to Delphi to consult the Oracle about the war. And the Pythian prophetess answered them that they must bring into their land as founder of a settlement the man who should first offer them hospitality as they returned from the temple. The Dolonkians then passed along the Sacred Road through the land of the Phokians and of the Boeotians, and as no man invited them, they turned aside and came to Athens.         34. [1] etyranneye de ayteun mexri tote Miltiades o Kimunos tou Stesagoreu, ktesamenoy ten arxen tauten proteron Miltiadeu tou Kypseloy tropui toiuide. eixon Dologkoi Threikes ten Khersoneson tauten. oytoi un oi Dologkoi piesthentes polemui ypo Apsinthiun es Delfous epempsan tous basileas peri tou polemoy xresomenoys. [2] e de Pythie sfi aneile oikisten epagesthai epi ten xuren touton os an sfeas apiontas ek tou irou prutos epi xeinia kalesei. iontes de oi Dologkoi ten iren odon dia Fukeun te kai Boiutun eisan. kai sfeas us oydeis ekalee, ektrepontai ep' Atheneun.    
      35. Now at that time in Athens the government was held by Peisistratos, but Miltiades also the son of Kypselos had some power, who belonged to a family which kept four- horse chariot teams, and who was descended originally from Aiacos and Egina, though in more recent times his family was Athenian, Philaios the son of Ajax having been the first of his house who became an Athenian. This Miltiades was sitting in the entrance of his own dwelling, and seeing the Dolonkians going by with dress that was not of the native Athenian fashion and with spears, he shouted to them; and when they approached, he offered them lodging and hospitality. They then having accepted and having been entertained by him, proceeded to declare all the utterances of the Oracle; and having declared it they asked him to do as the god had said: and Miltiades when he heard it was at once disposed to agree, because he was vexed by the rule of Peisistratos and desired to be removed out of the way. He set out therefore forthwith to Delphi to inquire of the Oracle whether he should do that which the Dolonkians asked of him:         35. [1] en de teisi Atheneisi tenikauta eixe men to pan kratos Peisistratos, atar edynasteye ge kai Miltiades o Kypseloy eun oikies tethrippotrofoy, ta men anekathen ap' Aiakou te kai Aigines gegonus, ta de neutera Athenaios, Filaioy tou Aiantos paidos genomenoy prutoy teis oikies tautes Athenaioy. [2] oytos o Miltiades katemenos en toisi prothuroisi toisi euytou, oreun tous Dologkoys pariontas estheita exontas oyk egxurien kai aixmas prosebusato kai sfi proselthousi epeggeilato katagugen kai xeinia. oi de dexamenoi kai xeinisthentes yp' aytou exefainon pan to manteion, ekfenantes de edeonto aytou tui theui min peithesthai. [3] Miltiadea de akousanta paraytika epeise o logos oia axthomenon te tei Peisistratoy arxei kai boylomenon ekpodun einai. aytika de estale es Delfous, epeiresomenos to xresterion ei poioie ta per aytou oi Dologkoi prosedeonto.    
      36. and as the Pythian prophetess also bade him do so, Miltiades the son of Kypselos, who had before this been victor at Olympia with a four-horse chariot, now taking with him of the Athenians everyone who desired to share in the expedition, sailed with the Dolonkians and took possession of the land: and they who had invited him to come to them made him despot over them. First then he made a wall across the isthmus of the Chersonese from the city of Cardia to Pactye, in order that the Apsinthians might not be able to invade the land and do them damage. Now the number of furlongs across the isthmus at this place is six-and-thirty, and from this isthmus the Chersonese within is altogether four hundred and twenty furlongs in length.         36. [1] keleyouses de kai teis Pythies, oytu de Miltiades o Kypseloy, Olumpia anarairekus proteron toutun tethrippui, tote paralabun Athenaiun panta ton boylomenon metexein tou stoloy eplee ama toisi Dologkoisi, kai esxe ten xuren. kai min oi epagagomenoi turannon katestesanto. [2] o de pruton men apeteixise ton isthmon teis Khersonesoy ek Kardies polios es Paktuen, ina me exoien sfeas oi Apsinthioi deleesthai esballontes es ten xuren. eisi de oytoi stadioi ex te kai triekonta tou isthmou. apo de tou isthmou toutoy e Khersonesos esu pasa esti stadiun eikosi kai tetrakosiun to meikos.    
      37. Having made a wall then across the neck of the Chersonese and having in this manner repelled the Apsinthians, Miltiades made war upon the people of Lampsacos first of all others; and the people of Lampsacos laid an ambush and took him prisoner. Now Miltiades had come to be a friend of Croesus the Lydian; and Croesus accordingly, being informed of this event, sent and commanded the people of Lampsacos to let Miltiades go; otherwise he threatened to destroy them utterly like a pine-tree. Then when the people of Lampsacos were perplexed in their counsels as to what that saying should mean with which Croesus had threatened them, namely that he would destroy them utterly like a pine-tree, at length one of the elder men with difficulty perceived the truth, and said that a pine alone of all trees when it has been cut down does not put forth any further growth but perishes, being utterly destroyed. The people of Lampsacos therefore fearing Croesus loosed Miltiades and let him go.         37. [1] apoteixisas un ton ayxena teis Khersonesoy o Miltiades kai tous Apsinthioys tropui toioutui usamenos, tun loipun prutoisi epolemese Lampsakenoisi. kai min oi Lampsakenoi loxesantes aireoysi zugriei. En de o Miltiades Kroisui tui Lydui en gnumei gegonus. pythomenos un o Kroisos tauta, pempun proegoreye toisi Lampsakenoisi metienai Miltiadea. ei de me sfeas pityos tropon apeilee ektripsein. [2] planumenun de tun Lampsakenun en toisi logoisi to thelei to epos einai to sfi apeilese o Kroisos, pityos tropon ektripsein, mogis kote mathun tun tis presbyterun eipe to eon, oti pitys moune pantun dendreun ekkopeisa blaston oydena metiei alla panulethros exapollytai. deisantes un oi Lampsakenoi Kroison lusantes meteikan Miltiadea.    
      38. He then escaped by means of Croesus, but afterwards he brought his life to an end leaving no son to succeed him, but passing over his rule and his possessions to Stesagoras, who was the son of Kimon, his brother on the mother's side: and the people of the Chersonese still offer sacrifices to him after his death as it is usual to do to a founder, and hold in his honour a contest of horse-races and athletic exercises, in which none of the men of Lampsacos are allowed to contend. After this there was war with those of Lampsacos; and it happened to Stesagoras also that he died without leaving a son, having been struck on the head with an axe in the City Hall by a man who pretended to be a deserter, but who proved himself to be in fact an enemy and a rather hot one moreover.         38. [1] oytos men de dia Kroison ekfeugei, meta de teleytai apais, ten arxen te kai ta xremata paradous Stesagorei tui Kimunos adelfeou paidi omometrioy. kai oi teleytesanti Khersonesitai thuoysi us nomos oikistei, kai aguna ippikon te kai gymnikon epistasi, en tui Lampsakenun oydeni egginetai agunizesthai. [2] polemoy de eontos pros Lampsakenous kai Stesagorea katelabe apothanein apaida, plegenta ten kefalen pelekei en tui prytaneiui pros andros aytomoloy men tui logui polemioy de kai ypothermoteroy tui ergui.    
      39. Then after Stesagoras also had ended his life in this manner, Miltiades son of Kimon and brother of that Stesagoras who was dead, was sent in a trireme to the Chersonese to take possession of the government by the sons of Peisistratos, who had dealt well with him at Athens also, pretending that they had had no share in the death of his father Kimon, of which in another part of the history I will set forth how it came to pass. Now Miltiades, when he came to the Chersonese, kept himself within his house, paying honours in all appearance to the memory of his brother Stesagoras; and the chief men of the inhabitants of the Chersonese in every place, being informed of this, gathered themselves together from all the cities and came in a body to condole with him, and when they had come they were laid in bonds by him. Miltiades then was in possession of the Chersonese, supporting a body of five hundred mercenary troops; and he married the daughter of Oloros the king of the Thracians, who was named Hegesipyle.         39. [1] teleytesantos de kai Stesagoreu tropui toiuide, enthauta Miltiadea ton Kimunos, Stesagoreu de tou teleytesantos adelfeon, katalampsomenon ta pregmata epi Khersonesoy apostelloysi trierei oi Peisistratidai, oi min kai en Atheneisi epoieyn ey us oy syneidotes deithen tou patros Kimunos aytou ton thanaton, ton egu en allui logui semaneu us egeneto. [2] Miltiades de apikomenos es ten Khersoneson eixe kat' oikoys, ton adelfeon Stesagorea delade epitimeun. oi de Khersonesitai pynthanomenoi tauta synelexthesan apo paseun tun poliun oi dynasteuontes pantothen, koinui de stolui apikomenoi us syllypethesomenoi edethesan yp' aytou. Miltiades te de isxei ten Khersoneson, pentakosioys boskun epikouroys, kai gameei Oloroy tou Threikun basileos ten thygatera Egesipulen.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [40]

     40. Now this Miltiades son of Kimon had at the time of which we speak but lately returned to the Chersonese; and after he had returned, there befell him other misfortunes worse than those which had befallen him already; for two years before this he had been a fugitive out of the land from the Scythians, since the nomad Scythians provoked by king Dareios had joined all in a body and marched as far as this Chersonese, and Miltiades had not awaited their attack but had become a fugitive from the Chersonese, until at last the Scythians departed and the Dolonkians brought him back again. These things happened two years before the calamities which now oppressed him:         40. [1] oytos de o Kimunos Miltiades neusti men eleluthee es ten Khersoneson, katelambane de min elthonta alla tun katalabontun pregmatun xaleputera. tritui men gar etei pro toutun Skuthas ekfeugei. Skuthai gar oi nomades erethisthentes ypo basileos Dareioy synestrafesan kai elasan mexri teis Khersonesoy tautes. [2] toutoys epiontas oyk ypomeinas o Miltiades efeyge Khersoneson, es o oi te Skuthai apallaxthesan kai ekeinon Dologkoi kategagon opisu. tauta men de tritui etei proteron egegonee tun tote min katexontun.    
      41. and now, being informed that the Phenicians were at Tenedos, he filled five triremes with the property which he had at hand and sailed away for Athens. And having set out from the city of Cardia he was sailing through the gulf of Melas; and as he passed along by the shore of the Chersonese, the Phenicians fell in with his ships, and while Miltiades himself with four of his ships escaped to Imbros, the fifth of his ships was captured in the pursuit by the Phenicians. Of this ship it chanced that Metiochos the eldest of the sons of Miltiades was in command, not born of the daughter of Oloros the Thracian, but of another woman. Him the Phenicians captured together with his ship; and being informed about him, that he was the son of Miltiades, they brought him up to the king, supposing that they would lay up for themselves a great obligation; because it was Miltiades who had declared as his opinion to the Ionians that they should do as the Scythians said, at that time when the Scythians requested them to break up the bridge of boats and sail away to their own land. Dareios however, when the Phenicians brought up to him Metiochos the son of Miltiades, did Metiochos no harm but on the contrary very much good; for he gave him a house and possessions and a Persian wife, by whom he had children born who have been ranked as Persians. Miltiades meanwhile came from Imbros to Athens.         41. [1] tote de pynthanomenos einai tous Foinikas en Tenedui, plerusas triereas pente xrematun tun pareontun apeplee es tas Athenas. kai usper ormethe ek Kardies polios eplee dia tou Melanos kolpoy. parameibeto te ten Khersoneson kai oi Foinikes oi peripiptoysi teisi neysi. [2] aytos men de Miltiades sun teisi tessersi tun neun katafeugei es Imbron, ten de oi pempten tun neun kateilon diukontes oi Foinikes. teis de neos tautes etyxe tun Miltiadeu paidun o presbutatos arxun Metioxos, oyk ek teis Oloroy tou Threikos eun thygatros all' ex alles. [3] kai touton ama tei nei eilon oi Foinikes, kai min pythomenoi us eie Miltiadeu pais anegagon para basilea, dokeontes xarita megalen katathesesthai, oti de Miltiades gnumen apedexato en toisi Iusi peithesthai keleuun toisi Skutheisi, ote oi Skuthai prosedeonto lusantas ten sxedien apopleein es ten euytun. [4] Dareios de, us oi Foinikes Metioxon ton Miltiadeu anegagon, epoiese kakon men oyden Metioxon, agatha de syxna. kai gar oikon kai kteisin eduke kai Persida gynaika, ek teis oi tekna egeneto ta es Persas kekosmeatai. Miltiades de ex Imbroy apikneetai es tas Athenas.    
      42. In the course of this year there was done by the Persians nothing more which tended to strife with the Ionians, but these things which follow were done in this year very much to their advantage.-- Artaphrenes the governor of Sardis sent for envoys from all the cities and compelled the Ionians to make agreements among themselves, so that they might give satisfaction for wrongs and not plunder one another's land. This he compelled them to do, and also he measured their territories by parasangs,--that is the name which the Persians give to the length of thirty furlongs,--he measured, I say, by these, and appointed a certain amount of tribute for each people, which continues still unaltered from that time even to my own days, as it was appointed by Artaphrenes; and the tribute was appointed to be nearly of the same amount for each as it had been before.         42. [1] kai kata to etos touto ek tun Perseun oyden epi pleon egeneto toutun es neikos feron Iusi, alla tade men xresima karta toisi Iusi egeneto toutoy tou eteos. Artafrenes o Sardiun yparxos metapempsamenos aggeloys ek tun poliun synthekas sfisi aytoisi tous Iunas enagkase poieesthai, ina dusidikoi eien kai me alleloys feroien te kai agoien. [2] tauta te enagkase poieein, kai tas xuras metresas sfeun kata parasaggas, tous kaleoysi oi Persai ta triekonta stadia, kata de toutoys metresas foroys etaxe ekastoisi, oi kata xuren diateleoysi exontes ek toutoy tou xronoy aiei eti kai es eme us etaxthesan ex Artafreneos. etaxthesan de sxedon kata tayta kai proteron eixon. kai sfi tauta men eirenaia En.    
      43. These were things which tended to peace for the Ionians; but at the beginning of the spring, the other commanders having all been removed by the king, Mardonios the son of Gobryas came down to the sea, bringing with him a very large land-army and a very large naval force, being a young man and lately married to Artozostra daughter of king Dareios. When Mardonios leading this army came to Kilikia, he embarked on board a ship himself and proceeded together with the other ships, while other leaders led the land-army to the Hellespont. Mardonios however sailing along the coast of Asia came to Ionia: and here I shall relate a thing which will be a great marvel to those of the Hellenes who do not believe that to the seven men of the Persians Otanes declared as his opinion that the Persians ought to have popular rule; for Mardonios deposed all the despots of the Ionians and established popular governments in the cities. Having so done he hastened on to the Hellespont; and when there was collected a vast number of ships and a large land-army, they crossed over the Hellespont in the ships and began to make their way through Europe, and their way was directed against Eretria and Athens.         43. [1] ama de tui eari, tun allun katalelymenun strategun ek basileos, Mardonios o Gobrueu katebaine epi thalassan, straton pollon men karta pezon ama agomenos pollon de naytikon, elikien te neos eun kai neusti gegamekus basileos Dareioy thygatera Artozustren. [2] agun de ton straton touton o Mardonios epeite egeneto en tei Kilikiei, aytos men epibas epi neos ekomizeto ama teisi alleisi neysi, stratien de ten pezen alloi egemones Egon epi ton Ellesponton. [3] us de parapleun ten Asien apiketo o Mardonios es ten Iunien, enthauta megiston thuma ereu toisi me apodekomenoisi Ellenun Perseun toisi epta Otanea gnumen apodexasthai us xreon eie demokrateesthai Persas. tous gar tyrannoys tun Iunun katapausas pantas o Mardonios demokratias katista es tas polias. [4] tauta de poiesas epeigeto es ton Ellesponton. us de synelexthe men xreima pollon neun synelexthe de kai pezos stratos pollos, diabantes teisi neysi ton Ellesponton eporeuonto dia teis Eyrupes, eporeuonto de epi te Eretrian kai Athenas.    
      44. These, I say, furnished them the pretence for the expedition, but they had it in their minds to subdue as many as they could of the Hellenic cities; and in the first place they subdued with their ships the Thasians, who did not even raise a hand to defend themselves: then with the land-army they gained the Macedonians to be their servants in addition to those whom they had already; for all the nations on the East of the Macedonians had become subject to them already before this. Crossing over then from Thasos to the opposite coast, they proceeded on their way near the land as far as Acanthos, and then starting from Acanthos they attempted to get round Mount Athos; but as they sailed round, there fell upon them a violent North Wind, against which they could do nothing, and handled them very roughly, casting away very many of their ships on Mount Athos. It is said indeed that the number of the ships destroyed was three hundred,, and more than twenty thousand men; for as this sea which is about Athos is very full of sea monsters, some were seized by these and so perished, while others were dashed against the rocks; and some of them did not know how to swim and perished for that cause, others again by reason of cold.         44. [1] aytai men un sfi prosxema Esan tou stoloy. atar en noui exontes osas an pleistas dununtai katastrefesthai tun Ellenidun poliun, touto men de teisi neysi Thasioys oyde xeiras antaeiramenoys katestrepsanto, touto de tui pezui Makedonas pros toisi yparxoysi douloys prosektesanto. ta gar entos Makedonun ethnea panta sfi En ede ypoxeiria gegonota. [2] ek men de Thasoy diabalontes peren ypo ten epeiron ekomizonto mexri Akanthoy, ek de Akanthoy ormumenoi ton Athun perieballon. epipesun de sfi peripleoysi borees anemos megas te kai aporos karta trexeus periespe, plethei pollas tun neun ekballun pros ton Athun. [3] legetai gar triekosias men tun neun tas diafthareisas einai, yper de duo myriadas anthrupun. uste gar theriudestates eouses teis thalasses tautes teis peri ton Athun, oi men ypo tun theriun dieftheironto arpazomenoi, oi de pros tas petras arassomenoi. oi de aytun neein oyk episteato kai kata touto dieftheironto, oi de rhigei. o men de naytikos stratos oytu epresse,   
      45. Thus fared the fleet; and meanwhile Mardonios and the land-army while encamping in Macedonia were attacked in the night by the Brygian Thracians, and many of them were slain by the Brygians and Mardonios himself was wounded. However not even these escaped being enslaved by the Persians, for Mardonios did not depart from that region until he had made them subject. But when he had subdued these, he proceeded to lead his army back, since he had suffered great loss with his land- army in fighting against the Brygians and with his fleet in going round Athos. So this expedition departed back to Asia having gained no honour by its contests.         45. [1] Mardoniui de kai tui pezui stratopedeyomenui en Makedoniei nyktos Brugoi Threikes epexeiresan. kai sfeun pollous foneuoysi oi Brugoi, Mardonion de ayton trumatizoysi. oy mentoi oyde aytoi doylosunen diefygon pros Perseun. oy gar de proteron apaneste ek tun xureun toyteun Mardonios prin e sfeas ypoxeirioys epoiesato. [2] toutoys mentoi katastrepsamenos apeige ten stratien opisu, ate tui pezui te prosptaisas pros tous Brugoys kai tui naytikui megalus peri Athun. oytos men nyn o stolos aisxrus agunisamenos apallaxthe es ten Asien.    
      46. In the next year after this Dareios first sent a messenger to the men of Thasos, who had been accused by their neighbours of planning revolt, and bade them take away the wall around their town and bring their ships to Abdera. The Thasians in fact, as they had been besieged by Histiaios the Milesian and at the same time had large revenues coming in, were using their money in building ships of war and in surrounding their city with a stronger wall. Now the revenues came to them from the mainland and from the mines: from the gold-mines in Scapte Hyle there came in generally eighty talents a year, and from those in Thasos itself a smaller amount than this but so much that in general the Thasians, without taxes upon the produce of their soil, had a revenue from the mainland and from the mines amounting yearly to two hundred talents, and when the amount was highest, to three hundred.         46. [1] deyterui de etei toutun o Dareios pruta men Thasioys diablethentas ypo tun astygeitonun us apostasin mexanuiato, pempsas aggelon ekeleye sfeas to teixos periaireein kai tas neas es Abdera komizein. [2] oi gar de Thasioi, oia ypo Istiaioy te tou Milesioy poliorkethentes kai prosodun eoyseun megaleun, exreunto toisi xremasi neas te naypegeumenoi makras kai teixos isxyroteron periballomenoi. e de prosodos sfi egineto ek te teis epeiroy kai apo tun metallun. [3] ek men ge tun ek Skaptesules tun xryseun metallun to epipan ogdukonta talanta proseie, ek de tun en aytei Thasui elassu men toutun, syxna de oytu uste to epipan Thasioisi eousi karpun atelesi proseie apo te teis epeiroy kai tun metallun eteos ekastoy diekosia talanta, ote de to pleiston proseilthe, triekosia.    
      47. I myself saw these mines, and by much the most marvellous of them were those which the Phenicians discovered, who made the first settlement in this island in company with Thasos; and the island had the name which it now has from this Thasos the Phenician. These Phenician mines are in that part of Thasos which is between the places called Ainyra and Koinyra and opposite Samothrake, where there is a great mountain which has been all turned up in the search for metal. Thus it is with this matter: and the Thasians on the command of the king both razed their walls and brought all their ships to Abdera.         47. [1] eidon de kai aytos ta metalla tauta, kai makrui En aytun thumasiutata ta oi Foinikes aneuron oi meta Thasoy ktisantes ten neison tauten, etis nun apo tou Thasoy toutoy tou Foinikos to oynoma esxe. [2] ta de metalla ta Foinikika tauta esti teis Thasoy metaxu Ainurun te xuroy kaleomenoy kai Koinurun, antion de Samothreikes, oros mega anestrammenon en tei zetesi.   
      48. After this Dareios began to make trial of the Hellenes, what they meant to do, whether to make war with him or to deliver themselves up. He sent abroad heralds therefore, and appointed them to go some to one place and others to another throughout Hellas, bidding them demand earth and water for the king. These, I say, he sent to Hellas; and meanwhile he was sending abroad other heralds to his own tributary cities which lay upon the sea-coast, and he bade them have ships of war built and also vessels to carry horses.         48. [1] touto men nyn esti toiouton. oi de Thasioi tui basilei keleusanti kai to teixos to sfeteron kateilon kai tas neas tas pasas ekomisan es Abdera. meta de touto apepeirato o Dareios tun Ellenun o ti en noui exoien, kotera polemeein euytui e paradidonai sfeas aytous. [2] diepempe un kerykas alloys allei taxas ana ten Ellada, keleuun aiteein basilei gein te kai ydur. toutoys men de es ten Ellada epempe, alloys de kerykas diepempe es tas euytou dasmoforoys polias tas parathalassioys, keleuun neas te makras kai ippaguga ploia poieesthai.    
      49. They then were engaged in preparing these things; and meanwhile when the heralds had come to Hellas, many of those who dwelt upon the mainland gave that for which the Persian made demand, and all those who dwelt in the islands did so, to whomsoever they came to make their demand. The islanders, I say, gave earth and water to Dareios, and among them also those of Egina, and when these had done so, the Athenians went forthwith urgent against them, supposing that the Eginetans had given with hostile purpose against themselves, in order to make an expedition against them in combination with the Persians; and also they were glad to get hold of an occasion against them. Accordingly they went backward and forwards to Sparta and accused the Eginetans of that which they had done, as having proved themselves traitors to Hellas.         49. [1] oytoi te de pareskeyazonto tauta, kai toisi ekoysi es ten Ellada keryxi polloi men epeiruteun edosan ta proisxeto aiteun o Perses, pantes de nesiutai es tous apikoiato aitesontes. oi te de alloi nesiutai didousi gein te kai ydur Dareiui kai de kai Aigineitai. [2] poiesasi de sfi tauta itheus Athenaioi epekeato, dokeontes te epi sfisi epexontas tous Aiginetas dedukenai us ama tui Persei epi sfeas strateuuntai, kai asmenoi profasios epelabonto, foiteontes te es ten Sparten kategoreon tun Aigineteun ta pepoiekoien prodontes ten Ellada.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [50]

     50. In consequence of this accusation Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, king of the Spartans, crossed over to Egina meaning to seize those of the Eginetans who were the most guilty; but as he was attempting to seize them, certain of the Eginetans opposed him, and among them especially Crios the son of Polycritos, who said that he should not with impunity carry off a single Eginetan, for he was doing this (said he) without authority from the Spartan State, having been persuaded to it by the Athenians with money; otherwise he would have come and seized them in company with the other king: and this he said by reason of a message received from Demaratos. Cleomenes then as he departed from Egina, asked Crios what was his name, and he told him the truth; and Cleomenes said to him: "Surely now, O Ram, thou must cover over thy horns with bronze for thou wilt shortly have a great trouble to contend with."         50. [1] pros tauten de ten kategorien Kleomenes o Anaxandrideu basileus eun Spartieteun diebe es Aiginan, boylomenos syllabein Aigineteun tous aitiutatoys. [2] us de epeirato syllambanun, alloi te de eginonto aytui antixooi tun Aigineteun, en de de kai Krios o Polykritoy malista, os oyk efe ayton oydena axein xaironta Aigineteun. aney gar min Spartieteun tou koinou poieein tauta, yp' Athenaiun anagnusthenta xremasi. ama gar an min tui eterui basilei elthonta syllambanein. [3] elege de tauta ex epistoleis teis Demaretoy. Kleomenes de apelaynomenos ek teis Aigines eireto ton Krion o ti oi eie to oynoma. o de oi to eon efrase. o de Kleomenes pros ayton efe <<ede nun kataxalkou u krie ta kerea, us synoisomenos megalui kakui.>>    
      51. Meanwhile Demaratos the son of Ariston was staying behind in Sparta and bringing charges against Cleomenes, he also being king of the Spartans but of the inferior house; which however is inferior in no other way (for it is descended from the same ancestor), but the house of Eurysthenes has always been honoured more, apparently because he was the elder brother.         51. [1] en de tei Spartei touton ton xronon ypomenun Demaretos o Aristunos dieballe ton Kleomenea, eun basileus kai oytos Spartieteun, oikies de teis ypodeesteres, kat' allo men oyden ypodeesteres. apo gar tou aytou gegonasi. kata presbygeneien de kus tetimetai mallon e Eyrystheneos.    
      52. For the Lacedemonians, who herein agree with none of the poets, say that Aristodemos the son of Aristomachos, the son of Cleodaios, the son of Hyllos, being their king, led them himself (and not the sons of Aristodemos) to this land which they now possess. Then after no long time the wife of Aristodemos, whose name was Argeia,--she was the daughter, they say, of Autesion, the son of Tisamenes, the son of Thersander, the son of Polyneikes,--she, it is said, brought forth twins; and Aristodemos lived but to see his children and then ended his life by sickness. So the Lacedemonians of that time resolved according to established custom to make the elder of the children their king; but they did not know which of them they should take, because they were like one another and of equal size; and when they were not able to make out, or even before this, they inquired of their mother; and she said that even she herself did not know one from the other. She said this, although she knew in truth very well, because she desired that by some means both might be made kings. The Lacedemonians then were in a strait; and being in a strait they sent to Delphi to inquire what they should do in the matter. And the Pythian prophetess bade them regard both children as their kings, but honour most the first in age. The prophetess, they say, thus gave answer to them; and when the Lacedemonians were at a loss none the less how to find out the elder of them, a Messenian whose name was Panites made a suggestion to them: this Panites, I say, suggested to the Lacedemonians that they should watch the mother and see which of the children she washed and fed before the other; and if she was seen to do this always in the same order, then they would have all that they were seeking and desiring to find out, but if she too was uncertain and did it in a different order at different times, it would be plain to them that even she had no more knowledge than any other, and they must turn to some other way. Then the Spartans following the suggestion of the Messenian watched the mother of the sons of Aristodemos and found that she gave honour thus to the first-born both in feeding and in washing; for she did not know with that design she was being watched. They took therefore the child which was honoured by its mother and brought it up as the first-born in the public hall, and to it was given the name of Eurysthenes, while the other was called Procles. These, when they had grown up, both themselves were at variance, they say, with one another, though they were brothers, throughout the whole time of their lives, and their descendants also continued after the same manner.         52. [1] Lakedaimonioi gar omologeontes oydeni poietei legoysi ayton Aristodemon ton Aristomaxoy tou Kleodaioy tou Ylloy basileuonta agagein sfeas es tauten ten xuren ten nun ekteatai, all' oy tous Aristodemoy paidas. [2] meta de xronon oy pollon Aristodemui tekein ten gynaika, tei oynoma einai Argeien. thygatera de ayten legoysi einai Aytesiunos tou Tisamenou tou Thersandroy tou Polyneikeos. tauten de tekein didyma, epidonta de ton Aristodemon ta tekna nousui teleytan. [3] Lakedaimonioys de tous tote eontas boyleusai kata nomon basilea tun paidun ton presbuteron poiesasthai. oykun de sfeas exein okoteron eluntai uste kai omoiun kai isun eontun. oy dynamenoys de gnunai, e kai pro toutoy, epeirutan ten tekousan. [4] ten de oyde ayten fanai diaginuskein. eidyian men kai to karta legein tauta, boylomenen de ei kus amfoteroi genoiato basilees. tous un de Lakedaimonioys aporeein, aporeontas de pempein es Delfous epeiresomenoys o ti xresuntai tui pregmati. [5] ten de Pythien sfeas keleuein amfotera ta paidia egesasthai basileas, timan de mallon ton geraiteron. ten men de Pythien tauta sfi anelein, toisi de Lakedaimonioisi aporeoysi oyden Esson okus exeurusi aytun ton presbuteron, ypothesthai andra Messenion tui oynoma einai Paniten. [6] ypothesthai de touton ton Paniten tade toisi Lakedaimonioisi, fylaxai ten geinamenen okoteron tun paidun proteron louei kai sitizei. kai en men kata tayta fainetai aiei poieusa, tous de pan exein oson ti kai dizentai kai theloysi exeyrein, en de planatai kai ekeine enallax poieusa, deila sfi esesthai us oyde ekeine pleon oyden oide, ep' allen te trapesthai sfeas odon. [7] enthauta de tous Spartietas kata tas tou Messenioy ypothekas fylaxantas ten metera tun Aristodemoy paidun labein kata tayta timusan ton proteron kai sitoisi kai loytroisi, oyk eidyian tun eineken efylasseto. labontas de to paidion to timumenon pros teis geinamenes us eon proteron trefein en tui demosiui. kai oi oynoma tetheinai Eyrysthenea, tui de Proklea. [8] toutoys andruthentas aytous te adelfeous eontas legoysi diaforoys einai ton panta xronon teis zoes alleloisi, kai tous apo toutun genomenoys usautus diateleein.    
      53. This is the report given by the Lacedemonians alone of all the Hellenes; but this which follows I write in accordance with that which is reported by the Hellenes generally,--I mean that the names of these kings of the Dorians are rightly enumerated by the Hellenes up to Perseus the son of Danae (leaving the god out of account), and proved to be of Hellenic race; for even from that time they were reckoned as Hellenes. I said "up to Perseus" and did not take the descent from a yet higher point, because there is no name mentioned of a mortal father for Perseus, as Amphitryon is for Heracles. Therefore with reason, as is evident, I have said "rightly up to Perseus"; but if one enumerates their ancestors in succession going back from Danae the daughter of Acrisios, the rulers of the Dorians will prove to be Egyptians by direct descent.         53. [1] tauta men Lakedaimonioi legoysi mounoi Ellenun. tade de kata ta legomena yp' Ellenun egu grafu, toutoys tous Durieun basileas mexri men de Perseos tou Danaes, tou theou apeontos, katalegomenoys orthus yp' Ellenun kai apodeiknymenoys us eisi Ellenes. ede gar tenikauta es Ellenas oytoi eteleon. [2] elexa de mexri Perseos toude eineka, all' oyk anekathen eti elabon, oti oyk epesti epunymie Persei oydemia patros thnetou, usper Eraklei Amfitruun. ede un orthui xreumenui mexri Perseos orthus eiretai moi. apo de Danaes teis Akrisioy katalegonti tous anu aiei pateras aytun fainoiato an eontes oi tun Durieun egemones Aiguptioi ithagenees.    
      54. Thus I have traced the descent according to the account given by the Hellenes; but as the story is reported which the Persians tell, Perseus himself was an Assyrian and became a Hellene, whereas the ancestors of Perseus were not Hellenes; and as for the ancestors of Acrisios, who (according to this account) belonged not to Perseus in any way by kinship, they say that these were, as the Hellenes report, Egyptians.         54. [1] tauta men nyn kata ta Ellenes legoysi gegeneelogetai. us de o para Perseun logos legetai, aytos o Perseus eun Assurios egeneto Ellen, all' oyk oi Perseos progonoi. tous de Akrisioy ge pateras omologeontas kat' oikeioteta Persei oyden, toutoys de einai, kata per Ellenes legoysi, Aigyptioys.    
      55. Let it suffice to have said so much about these matters; and as to the question how and by what exploits being Egyptians they received the sceptres of royalty over the Dorians, we will omit these things, since others have told about them; but the things with which other narrators have not dealt, of these I will make mention.         55. [1] kai tauta men nyn peri toutun eiresthu. o ti de eontes Aiguptioi kai o ti apodexamenoi elabon tas Durieun basileias, alloisi gar peri aytun eiretai, easomen ayta. ta de alloi oy katelabonto, toutun mnemen poiesomai.    
      56. These are the royal rights which have been given by the Spartans to their kings, namely, two priesthoods, of Zeus Lakedaimon and Zeus Uranios; and the right of making war against whatsoever land they please, and that no man of the Spartans shall hinder this right, or if he do, he shall be subject to the curse; and that when they go on expeditions the kings shall go out first and return last; that a hundred picked men shall be their guard upon expeditions; and that they shall use in their goings forth to war as many cattle as they desire, and take both the hides and the backs of all that are sacrificed.         56. [1] gerea te de tade toisi basileusi Spartieitai dedukasi, irusunas duo, Dios te Lakedaimonos kai Dios oyranioy, kai polemon ekferein ep' en an bouluntai xuren, toutoy de medena einai Spartieteun diakulyten, ei de me ayton en tui agei enexesthai. strateyomenun de prutoys ienai tous basileas, ystatoys de apienai. ekaton de andras logadas epi stratieis fylassein aytous. probatoisi de xrasthai en teisi exodieisi okosoisi an un ethelusi, tun de thyomenun pantun ta dermata te kai ta nuta lambanein sfeas.    
      57. These are their privileges in war; and in peace moreover things have been assigned to them as follows:--if any sacrifice is performed at the public charge, it is the privilege of the kings to sit down at the feast before all others, and that the attendants shall begin with them first, and serve to each of them a portion of everything double of that which is given to the other guests, and that they shall have the first pouring of libations and the hides of the animals slain in sacrifice; that on every new moon and seventh day of the month there shall be delivered at the public charge to each one of these a full-grown victim in the temple of Apollo, and a measure of barley-groats and a Laconian "quarter" of wine; and that at all the games they shall have seats of honour specially set apart for them: moreover it is their privilege to appoint as protectors of strangers whomsoever they will of the citizens, and to choose each two "Pythians:" now the Pythians are men sent to consult the god at Delphi, and they eat with the kings at the public charge. And if the kings do not come to the dinner, it is the rule that there shall be sent out for them to their houses two quarts of barley-groats for each one and half a pint of wine; but if they are present, double shares of everything shall be given them, and moreover they shall be honoured in this same manner when they have been invited to dinner by private persons. The kings also, it is ordained, shall have charge of the oracles which are given, but the Pythians also shall have knowledge of them. It is the rule moreover that the kings alone give decision on the following cases only, that is to say, about the maiden who inherits her father's property, namely who ought to have her, if her father have not betrothed her to any one, and about public ways; also if any man desires to adopt a son, he must do it in presence of the kings: and it is ordained that they shall sit in council with the Senators, who are in number eight-and-twenty, and if they do not come, those of the Senators who are most closely related to them shall have the privileges of the kings and give two votes besides their own, making three in all.         57. [1] tauta men ta empolemia, ta de alla ta eirenaia kata tade sfi dedotai. en thysie tis demoteles poieetai, prutoys epi to deipnon izein tous basileas, kai apo toutun pruton arxesthai diplesia nemontas ekaterui ta panta e toisi alloisi daitymonesi, kai spondarxias einai toutun kai tun tythentun ta dermata. [2] neomenias de pasas kai ebdomas istamenoy tou menos didosthai ek tou demosioy ireion teleon ekaterui es Apollunos kai medimnon alfitun kai oinoy tetarten Lakuniken, kai en toisi agusi pasi proedrias exairetoys. kai proxeinoys apodeiknunai toutoisi proskeisthai tous an ethelusi tun astun, kai Pythioys aireesthai duo ekateron. oi de Puthioi eisi theopropoi es Delfous, siteomenoi meta tun basileun ta demosia. [3] me elthousi de toisi basileusi epi to deipnon apopempesthai sfi es ta oikia alfitun te duo xoinikas ekaterui kai oinoy kotulen, pareousi de diplesia panta didosthai. tuyto de touto kai pros idiuteun klethentas epi deipnon timasthai. [4] tas de manteias tas ginomenas toutoys fylassein, syneidenai de kai tous Pythioys. dikazein de mounoys tous basileas tosade mouna, patrouxoy te parthenoy peri, es ton ikneetai exein, en me per o pater ayten eggyesei, kai odun demosieun peri. [5] kai en tis theton paida poieesthai ethelei, basileun enantion poieesthai. kai parizein boyleuoysi toisi geroysi eousi dyun deoysi triekonta. en de me elthusi, tous malista sfi tun gerontun prosekontas exein ta tun basileun gerea, duo psefoys tithemenoys, triten de ten euytun.    
      58. These rights have been assigned to the kings for their lifetime by the Spartan State; and after they are dead these which follow:--horsemen go round and announce that which has happened throughout the whole of the Laconian land, and in the city women go about and strike upon a copper kettle. Whenever this happens so, two free persons of each household must go into mourning, a man and a woman, and for those who fail to do this great penalties are appointed. Now the custom of the Lacedemonians about the deaths of their kings is the same as that of the Barbarians who dwell in Asia, for most of the Barbarians practise the same customs as regards the death of their kings. Whensoever a king of the Lacedemonians is dead, then from the whole territory of Lacedemon, not reckoning the Spartans, a certain fixed number of the "dwellers round" are compelled to go to the funeral ceremony: and when there have been gathered together of these and of the Helots and of the Spartans themselves many thousands in the same place, with their women intermingled, they beat their foreheads with a good will and make lamentation without stint, saying that this one who has died last of their kings was the best of all: and whenever any of their kings has been killed in war, they prepare an image to represent him, laid upon a couch with fair coverings, and carry it out to be buried. Then after they have buried him, no assembly is held among them for ten days, nor is there any meeting for choice of magistrates, but they have mourning during these days.         58. [1] tauta men zusi toisi basileusi dedotai ek tou koinou tun Spartieteun, apothanousi de tade. ippees periaggelloysi to gegonos kata pasan ten Lakuniken, kata de ten polin gynaikes periiousai lebeta kroteoysi. epean un touto ginetai toiouto, anagke ex oikies ekastes eleytheroys duo katamiainesthai, andra te kai gynaika. me poiesasi de touto zemiai megalai epikeatai. [2] nomos de toisi Lakedaimonioisi kata tun basileun tous thanatoys esti uytos kai toisi barbaroisi toisi en tei Asiei. tun gar un barbarun oi pleunes tui aytui nomui xreuntai kata tous thanatoys tun basileun. epean gar apothanei basileus Lakedaimoniun, ek pases dei Lakedaimonos, xuris Spartieteun, arithmui tun perioikun anagkastous es to keidos ienai. [3] toutun un kai tun eiluteun kai aytun Spartieteun epean syllextheusi es tuyto pollai xiliades summiga teisi gynaixi, koptontai te ta metupa prothumus kai oimugei diaxreuntai apletui, famenoi ton ystaton aiei apogenomenon tun basileun, touton de genesthai ariston. os d' an en polemui tun basileun apothanei, toutui de eidulon skeyasantes en klinei ey estrumenei ekferoysi. epean de thapsusi, agore deka emereun oyk istatai sfi oyd' arxairesie synizei, alla pentheoysi tautas tas emeras.    
      59. In another respect too these resemble the Persians; that is to say, when the king is dead and another is appointed king, this king who is newly coming in sets free any man of the Spartans who was a debtor to the king or to the State; while among the Persians the king who comes to the throne remits to all the cities the arrears of tribute which are due.         59. [1] symferontai de allo oytoi tode toisi Perseisi. epean apothanontos tou basileos allos enistetai basileus, oytos o esiun eleytheroi ostis ti Spartieteun tui basilei e tui demosiui ufeile. en d' ay Perseisi o katistamenos basileus ton proofeilomenon foron metiei teisi polisi paseisi.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [60]

     60. In the following point also the Lacedemonians resemble the Egyptians; that is to say, their heralds and fluteplayers and cooks inherit the crafts of their fathers, and a fluteplayer is the son of a fluteplayer, a cook of a cook, and a herald of a herald; other men do not lay hands upon the office because they have loud and clear voices, and so shut them out of it, but they practise their craft by inheritance from their fathers.         60. [1] symferontai de kai tade Aigyptioisi Lakedaimonioi. oi kerykes aytun kai ayletai kai mageiroi ekdekontai tas patruias texnas, kai ayletes te ayleteu ginetai kai mageiros mageiroy kai keiryx kerykos. oy kata lamprofunien epitithemenoi alloi sfeas parakleioysi, alla kata ta patria epiteleoysi. tauta men de oytu ginetai.   
      61. Thus are these things done: and at this time of which we speak, while Cleomenes was in Egina doing deeds which were for the common service of Hellas, Demaratos brought charges against him, not so much because he cared for the Eginetans as because he felt envy and jealousy of him. Then Cleomenes, after he returned from Egina, planned to depose Demaratos from being king, making an attempt upon him on account of this matter which follows:--Ariston being king in Sparta and having married two wives, yet had no children born to him; and since he did not acknowledge that he himself was the cause of this, he married a third wife; and he married her thus:--he had a friend, a man of the Spartans, to whom of all the citizens Ariston was most inclined; and it chanced that this man had a wife who was of all the women in Sparta the fairest by far, and one too who had become the fairest from having been the foulest. For as she was mean in her aspect, her nurse, considering that she was the daughter of wealthy persons and was of uncomely aspect, and seeing moreover that her parents were troubled by it,--perceiving I say these things, her nurse devised as follows:--every day she bore her to the temple of Helen, which is in the place called Therapne, lying above the temple of Phoebus; and whenever the nurse bore her thither, she placed her before the image and prayed the goddess to deliver the child from her unshapeliness. And once as the nurse was going away out of the temple, it is said that a woman appeared to her, and having appeared asked her what she was bearing in her arms; and she told her that she was bearing a child; upon which the other bade her show the child to her, but she refused, for it had been forbidden to her by the parents to show it to any one: but the woman continued to urge her by all means to show it to her. So then perceiving that the woman earnestly desired to see it, the nurse showed her the child. Then the woman stroking the head of the child said that she should be the fairest of all the women in Sparta; and from that day her aspect was changed. Afterwards when she came to the age for marriage, she was married to Agetos the son of Alkeides, this friend of Ariston of whom we spoke.         61. [1] tote de ton Kleomenea eonta en tei Aiginei kai koina tei Elladi agatha proergazomenon o Demaretos diebale, oyk Aigineteun oytu kedomenos us fthonui kai agei xreumenos. Kleomenes de nostesas ap' Aigines ebouleye ton Demareton pausai teis basileies, dia preigma toionde epibasin es ayton poieumenos. Aristuni basileuonti en Spartei kai gemanti gynaikas duo paides oyk eginonto. [2] kai oy gar syneginusketo aytos toutun einai aitios, gameei triten gynaika. ude de gameei. En oi filos tun Spartieteun aner, tui prosekeito tun astun malista o Aristun. toutui tui andri etugxane eousa gyne kalliste makrui tun en Spartei gynaikun, kai tauta mentoi kalliste ex aisxistes genomene. [3] eousan gar min to eidos flauren e trofos ayteis, oia anthrupun te olbiun thygatera kai dyseidea eousan, pros de kai orusa tous goneas symforen to eidos ayteis poieymenoys, tauta ekasta mathousa epifrazetai toiade. eforee ayten ana pasan emeren es to teis Elenes iron. to d' esti en tei Therapnei kaleomenei yperthe tou Foibeioy irou. okus de eneikeie e trofos, pros te tugalma ista kai elisseto ten theon apallaxai teis dysmorfies to paidion. [4] kai de kote apiousei ek tou irou tei trofui gynaika legetai epifaneinai, epifaneisan de epeiresthai min o ti ferei en tei agkalei, kai ten frasai us paidion foreei, ten de keleusai oi dexai, ten de oy fanai. apeireisthai gar oi ek tun geinamenun medeni epideiknunai. ten de pantus euytei keleuein epidexai. [5] orusan de ten gynaika peri pollou poieymenen idesthai, oytu de ten trofon dexai to paidion. ten de katapsusan tou paidioy ten kefalen eipai us kallisteusei paseun tun en Spartei gynaikun. apo men de tautes teis emeres metapesein to eidos. gameei de de min es gamoy uren apikomenen Agetos o Alkeideu, oytos de o tou Aristunos filos.    
      62. Now Ariston it seems was ever stung by the desire of this woman, and accordingly he contrived as follows:--he made an engagement himself with his comrade, whose wife this woman was, that he would give him as a gift one thing of his own possessions, whatsoever he should choose, and he bade his comrade make return to him in similar fashion. He therefore, fearing nothing for his wife, because he saw that Ariston also had a wife, agreed to this; and on these terms they imposed oaths on one another. After this Ariston on his part gave that which Agetos had chosen from the treasures of Ariston, whatever the thing was; and he himself, seeking to obtain from him the like return, endeavoured then to take away the wife of his comrade from him: and he said that he consented to give anything else except this one thing only, but at length being compelled by the oath and by the treacherous deception, he allowed her to be taken away from him.         62. [1] ton de Aristuna eknize ara teis gynaikos tautes o erus. mexanatai de toiade. aytos te tui etairui, tou En e gyne ayte, ypodeketai dutinen dusein tun euytou pantun en, to an aytos ekeinos eletai, kai ton etairon euytui ekeleye usautus ten omoien didonai. o de oyden fobetheis amfi tei gynaiki, oreun eousan kai Aristuni gynaika, kataineei tauta. epi toutoisi de orkoys epelasan. [2] meta de aytos te o Aristun eduke touto, o ti de En, to eileto tun keimeliun tun Aristunos o Agetos, kai aytos ten omoien zeteun feresthai par' ekeinoy, enthauta de tou etairoy ten gynaika epeirato apagesthai. o de plen toutoy mounoy ta alla efe katainesai. anagkazomenos mentoi tui te orkui kai teis apates tei paragugei apiei apagesthai.    
      63. Thus had Ariston brought into his house the third wife, having dismissed the second: and this wife, not having fulfilled the ten months but in a shorter period of time, bore him that Demaratos of whom we were speaking; and one of his servants reported to him as he was sitting in council with the Ephors, that a son had been born to him. He then, knowing the time when he took to him his wife, and reckoning the months upon his fingers, said, denying with an oath, "The child would not be mine." This the Ephors heard, but they thought it a matter of no importance at the moment; and the child grew up and Ariston repented of that which he had said, for he thought Demaratos was certainly his own son; and he gave him the name "Demaratos" for this reason, namely because before these things took place the Spartan people all in a body had made a vow praying that a son might be born to Ariston, as one who was pre-eminent in renown over all the kings who had ever arisen in Sparta.         63. [1] oytu men de ten triten esegageto gynaika o Aristun, ten deyteren apopempsamenos. en de oi xronui elassoni kai oy plerusasa tous deka meinas e gyne ayte tiktei touton de ton Demareton. [2] kai tis oi tun oiketeun en thukui katemenui meta tun eforun exaggellei us oi pais gegone. o de epistamenos te ton xronon tui egageto ten gynaika kai epi daktulun symballomenos tous meinas, eipe apomosas <<oyk an emos eie.>> touto ekoysan men oi eforoi, preigma mentoi oyden epoiesanto to paraytika. o de pais eyxeto, kai tui Aristuni to eiremenon metemele. paida gar ton Demareton es ta malista oi enomise einai. [3] Demareton de aytui oynoma etheto dia tode. proteron toutun pandemei Spartieitai Aristuni, us andri eydokimeonti dia pantun de tun basileun tun en Spartei genomenun, aren epoiesanto paida genesthai. dia touto men oi to oynoma Demaretos etethe.   
      64. For this reason the name Demaratos was given to him. And as time went on Ariston died, and Demaratos obtained the kingdom: but it was fated apparently that these things should become known and should cause Demaratos to be deposed from the kingdom; and therefore Demaratos came to be at variance greatly with Cleomenes both at the former time when he withdrew his army from Eleusis, and also now especially, when Cleomenes had crossed over to take those of the Eginetans who had gone over to the Medes.         64. [1] xronoy de proiontos Aristun men apethane, Demaretos de esxe ten basileien. edee de, us eoike, anapysta genomena tauta katapausai Demareton teis basileies dia ta .. Kleomenei dieblethe megalus proteron te o Demaretos apagagun ten stratien ex Eleysinos, kai de kai tote ep' Aigineteun tous medisantas diabantos Kleomeneos.    
      65. Cleomenes then, being anxious to take vengeance on him, concerted matters with Leotychides the son of Menares, the son of Agis, who was of the same house as Demaratos, under condition that if he should set him up as king instead of Demaratos, he would go with him against the Eginetans. Now Leotychides had become a bitter foe of Demaratos on account of this matter which follows:--Leotychides had betrothed himself to Percalos the daughter of Chilon son of Demarmenos; and Demaratos plotted against him and deprived Leotychides of his marriage, carrying off Percalos himself beforehand, and getting her for his wife. Thus had arisen the enmity of Leotychides against Demaratos; and now by the instigation of Cleomenes Leotychides deposed against Demaratos, saying that he was not rightfully reigning over the Spartans, not being a son of Ariston: and after this deposition he prosecuted a suit against him, recalling the old saying which Ariston uttered at the time when his servant reported to him that a son was born to him, and he reckoning up the months denied with an oath, saying that it was not his. Taking his stand upon this utterance, Leotychides proceeded to prove that Demaratos was not born of Ariston nor was rightfully reigning over Sparta; and he produced as witnesses those Ephors who chanced then to have been sitting with Ariston in council and to have heard him say this.         65. [1] ormetheis un apotinysthai o Kleomenes syntithetai Leytyxidei tui Menareos tou Agios, eonti oikies teis ayteis Demaretui, ep' ui te, en ayton katastesei basilea anti Demaretoy, epsetai oi ep' Aiginetas. [2] o de Leytyxides En exthros tui Demaretui malista gegonus dia preigma toionde. armosamenoy Leytyxideu Perkalon ten Khilunos tou Demarmenoy thygatera, o Demaretos epiboyleusas apostereei Leytyxidea tou gamoy, fthasas aytos ten Perkalon arpasas kai sxun gynaika. [3] kata touto men tui Leytyxidei e exthre e es ton Demareton egegonee, tote de ek teis Kleomeneos prothymies o Leytyxides katomnytai Demaretui, fas ayton oyk ikneomenus basileuein Spartieteun oyk eonta paida Aristunos. meta de ten katumosien ediuke, anasuzun ekeino to epos to eipe Aristun tote ote oi exeggeile o oiketes paida gegonenai, o de symbalomenos tous meinas apumose fas oyk euytou min einai. [4] toutoy de epibateuun tou rhematos o Leytyxides apefaine ton Demareton oyte ex Aristunos gegonota oyte ikneymenus basileuonta Spartes, tous eforoys martyras parexomenos keinoys oi tote etugxanon paredroi te eontes kai akousantes tauta Aristunos.    
      66. At last, as there was contention about those matters, the Spartans resolved to ask the Oracle at Delphi whether Demaratos was the son of Ariston. The question then having been referred by the arrangement of Cleomenes to the Pythian prophetess, thereupon Cleomenes gained over to his side Cobon the son of Aristophantos, who had most power among the Delphians, and Cobin persuaded Perialla the prophetess of the Oracle to say that which Cleomenes desired to have said. Thus the Pythian prophetess, when those who were sent to consult the god asked her their question, gave decision that Demaratos was not the son of Ariston. Afterwards however these things became known, and both Cobon went into exile from Delphi and Perialla the prophetess of the Oracle was removed from her office.         66. [1] telos de eontun peri aytun neikeun, edoxe Spartieteisi epeiresthai to xresterion to en Delfoisi ei Aristunos eie pais o Demaretos. [2] anoistoy de genomenoy ek pronoies teis Kleomeneos es ten Pythien, enthauta prospoieetai Kleomenes Kobuna ton Aristofantoy, andra en Delfoisi dynasteuonta megiston, o de Kobun Periallan ten promantin anapeithei ta Kleomenes ebouleto legesthai legein. [3] oytu de e Pythie epeirutuntun tun theopropun ekrine me Aristunos einai Demareton paida. ysterui mentoi xronui anapysta egeneto tauta, kai Kobun te efyge ek Delfun kai Perialla e promantis epausthe teis timeis.    
      67. With regard to the deposing of Demaratos from the kingdom it happened thus: but Demaratos became an exile from Sparta to the Medes on account of a reproach which here follows:--After he had been deposed from the kingdom Demaratos was holding a public office to which he had been elected. Now it was the time of the Gymnopaidiai; and as Demaratos was a spectator of them, Leotychides, who had now become king himself instead of Demaratos, sent his attendant and asked Demaratos in mockery and insult what kind of a thing it was to be a magistrate after having been king; and he vexed at the question made answer and said that he himself had now had experience of both, but Leotychides had not; this question however, he said, would be the beginning either of countless evil or countless good fortune for the Lacedemonians. Having thus said, he veiled his head and went forth out of the theatre to his own house; and forthwith he made preparations and sacrificed an ox to Zeus, and after having sacrificed he called his mother.         67. [1] kata men de Demaretoy ten katapaysin teis basileies oytu egeneto, efyge de Demaretos ek Spartes es Medoys ek toioude oneideos. meta teis basileies ten katapaysin o Demaretos Erxe airetheis arxen. [2] Esan men de gymnopaidiai, theumenoy de tou Demaretoy o Leytyxides gegonus ede basileus aytos ant' ekeinoy, pempsas ton theraponta epi geluti te kai lasthei eiruta ton Demareton okoion ti eie to arxein meta to basileuein. [3] o de algesas tui epeirutemati eipe fas aytos men amfoterun ede pepeireisthai, keinon de oy, ten mentoi epeirutesin tauten arxein Lakedaimonioisi e myries kakotetos e myries eydaimonies. tauta de eipas kai katakalypsamenos eie ek tou theetroy es ta euytou oikia, aytika de paraskeyasamenos ethye tui Dii boun, thusas de ten metera ekalese.    
      68. Then when his mother had come, he put into her hands some of the inner parts of the victim, and besought her, saying as follows: "Mother, I beseech thee, appealing to the other gods and above all to this Zeus the guardian of the household, to tell me the truth, who is really and truly my father. For Leotychides spoke in his contention with me, saying that thou didst come to Ariston with child by thy former husband; and others besides, reporting that which is doubtless an idle tale, say that thou didst go in to one of the servants, namely the keeper of the asses, and that I am his son. I therefore entreat thee by the gods to tell me the truth; for if thou hast done any of these things which are reported, thou hast not done them alone, but with many other women; and the report is commonly believed in Sparta that there was not in Ariston seed which should beget children; for if so, then his former wives also would have borne children."         68. [1] apikomenei de tei metri estheis es tas xeiras oi tun splagxnun katiketeye, toiade legun. <<u meiter, theun se tun te allun kataptomenos iketeuu kai tou erkeioy Dios toude frasai moi ten aletheien, tis mey esti pater orthui logui. [2] Leytyxides men gar efe en toisi neikesi legun kyeoysan se ek tou proteroy andros oytu elthein para Aristuna. oi de kai ton mataioteron logon legontes fasi se elthein para tun oiketeun ton onoforbon, kai eme ekeinoy einai paida. [3] egu se un meterxomai tun theun eipein tulethes. oyte gar, ei per pepoiekas ti tun legomenun, moune de pepoiekas, meta polleun de. o te logos pollos en Spartei us Aristuni sperma paidopoion oyk enein. tekein gar an oi kai tas proteras gynaikas.>>    
      69. Thus he spoke, and she made answer as follows: "My son, since thou dost beseech me with entreaties to speak the truth, the whole truth shall be told to thee. When Ariston had brought me into his house, on the third night there came to me an apparition in the likeness of Ariston, and having lain with me it put upon me the garlands which it had on; and the apparition straitway departed, and after this Ariston came; and when he saw me with garlands, he asked who it was who had given me them; and I said that he had given them, but he did not admit it; and I began to take oath of it, saying that he did not well to deny it, for he had come (I said) a short time before and had lain with me and given me the garlands. Then Ariston, seeing that I made oath of it, perceived that the matter was of the gods; and first the garlands were found to be from the hero-temple which stands by the outer door of the house, which they call the temple of Astrabacos, and secondly the diviners gave answer that it was this same hero. Thus, my son, thou hast all, as much as thou desirest to learn; for either thou art begotten of this hero and the hero Astrabacos is thy father, or Ariston is thy father, for on that night I conceived thee: but as to that wherein thy foes most take hold of thee, saying that Ariston himself, when thy birth was announced to him, in the hearing of many declared that thou wert not his son, because the time, the ten months namely, had not yet been fulfilled, in ignorance of such matters he cast forth that saying; for women bring forth children both at the ninth month and also at the seventh, and not all after they have completed ten months; and I bore thee, my son, at the seventh month: and Ariston himself also perceived after no long time that he had uttered this saying in folly. Do not thou then accept any other reports about thy begetting, for thou hast heard in all the full truth; but to Leotychides and to those who report these things may their wives bear children by keepers of asses!"         69. [1] o men de toiauta elege, e de ameibeto toiside. <<u pai, epeite me liteisi meterxeai eipein ten aletheien, pan es se kateiresetai tulethes. us me egageto Aristun es euytou, nykti tritei apo teis prutes Elthe moi fasma eidomenon Aristuni, syneynethen de tous stefanoys tous eixe emoi perietithee. [2] kai to men oixukee, Eke de meta tauta Aristun. us de me eide exoysan stefanoys, eiruta tis eie moi o dous. egu de efamen ekeinon, o de oyk ypedeketo. egu de katumnumen famene ayton oy poieein kalus aparneomenon. oligui gar ti proteron elthonta kai syneynethenta dounai moi tous stefanoys. [3] oreun de me katomnymenen o Aristun emathe us theion eie to preigma. kai touto men oi stefanoi efanesan eontes ek tou eruioy tou para teisi thureisi teisi ayleieisi idrymenoy, to kaleoysi Astrobakoy, touto de oi manties ton ayton touton erua anaireon einai. [4] oytu u pai exeis pan, oson ti kai bouleai pythesthai. e gar ek tou eruos toutoy gegonas, kai toi pater esti Astrobakos o erus, e Aristun. en gar se tei nykti tautei anaireomai. tei de sey malista kataptontai oi exthroi, legontes us aytos o Aristun, ote aytui su eggelthes gegenemenos, pollun akoyontun oy feseie se euytou einai (ton xronon gar, tous deka meinas, oydeku exekein), aidreiei tun toioutun keinos touto aperripse to epos. [5] tiktoysi gar gynaikes kai enneamena kai eptamena, kai oy pasai deka meinas ektelesasai. egu de se u pai eptamenon etekon. egnu de kai aytos o Aristun oy meta pollon xronon us anoiei to epos ekbaloi touto. logoys de alloys peri genesios teis seuytou me dekeo. ta gar alethestata panta akekoas. ek de onoforbun aytui te Leytyxidei kai toisi tauta legoysi tiktoien ai gynaikes paidas.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [70]

     70. Thus she spoke; and he, having learnt that which he desired to learn, took supplies for travelling and set forth to go to Elis, pretending that he was going to Delphi to consult the Oracle: but the Lacedemonians, suspecting that he was attempting to escape, pursued after him; and it chanced that before they came Demaratos had passed over to Zakynthos from Elis; and the Lacedemonians crossing over after him laid hands on his person and carried away his attendants from him. Afterwards however, since those of Zakynthos refused to give him up, he passed over from thence to Asia, to the presence of king Dareios; and Dareios both received him with great honour as a guest, and also gave him land and cities. Thus Demaratos had come to Asia, and such was the fortune which he had had, having been distinguished in the estimation of the Lacedemonians in many other ways both by deeds and by counsels, and especially having gained for them an Olympic victory with the four-horse chariot, being the only one who achieved this of all the kings who ever arose in Sparta.         70. [1] e men de tauta elege, o de pythomenos te ta ebouleto kai epodia labun eporeueto es Elin, tui logui fas us es Delfous xresomenos tui xresteriui poreuetai. Lakedaimonioi de ypotopethentes Demareton dresmui epixeireein ediukon. [2] kai kus efthe es Zakynthon diabas o Demaretos ek teis Elidos. epidiabantes de oi Lakedaimonioi aytou te aptonto kai tous therapontas aytou apaireontai. meta de, oy gar exedidosan ayton oi Zakunthioi, entheuten diabainei es ten Asien para basilea Dareion. o de ypedexato te ayton megalusti kai gein te kai polias eduke. [3] oytu apiketo es ten Asien Demaretos kai toiautei xresamenos tuxei, alla te Lakedaimonioisi syxna ergoisi te kai gnumeisi apolampryntheis, en de de kai Olympiada sfi anelomenos tethrippui prosebale, mounos touto pantun de tun genomenun basileun en Spartei poiesas.    
      71. Demaratos being deposed, Leotychides the son of Menares succeeded to the kingdom; and he had born to him a son Zeuxidemos, whom some of the Spartans called Kyniscos. This Zeuxidemos did not become king of Sparta, for he died before Leotychides, leaving a son Archidemos: and Leotychides having lost Zeuxidemos married a second wife Eurydame, the sister of Menios and daughter of Diactorides, by whom he had no male issue, but a daughter Lampito, whom Archidemos the son of Zeuxidemos took in marriage, she being given to him by Leotychides.         71. [1] Leytyxides de o Menareos Demaretoy katapaysthentos diedexato ten basileien, kai oi ginetai pais Zeyxidemos, ton de Kyniskon metexeteroi Spartieteun ekaleon. oytos o Zeyxidemos oyk ebasileyse Spartes. pro Leytyxideu gar teleytai, lipun paida Arxidemon. [2] Deytyxides de steretheis Zeyxidemoy gameei deyteren gynaika Eyrydamen ten eousan Menioy adelfeen Diaktorideu de thygatera, ek teis oi ersen men ginetai oyden, thygater de Lampitu, ten Arxidemos o Zeyxidemoy gameei dontos aytui Leytyxideu.    
      72. Leotychides however did not himself live to old age in Sparta, but paid a retribution for Demaratos as follows:--he went as commander of the Lacedemonians to invade Thessaly, and when he might have reduced all to subjection, he accepted gifts of money amounting to a large sum; and being taken in the act there in the camp, as he was sitting upon a glove full of money, he was brought to trial and banished from Sparta, and his house was razed to the ground. So he went into exile to Tegea and ended his life there.         72. [1] oy men oyde Leytyxides kategera en Spartei, alla tisin toiende tina Demaretui exetise. estrategese Lakedaimonioisi es Thessalien, pareon de oi panta ypoxeiria poiesasthai edurodokese argurion pollon. [2] ep' aytofurui de alous aytou en tui stratopedui, epikatemenos xeiridi pleei argyrioy, efyge ek Spartes ypo dikasterion ypaxtheis, kai ta oikia oi kateskafe. efyge de es Tegeen kai eteleutese en tautei.    
      73. These things happened later; but at this time, when Cleomenes had brought to a successful issue the affair which concerned Demaratos, forthwith he took with him Leotychides and went against the Eginetans, being very greatly enraged with them because of their insults towards him. So the Eginetans on their part, since both the kings had come against them, thought fit no longer to resist; and the Spartans selected ten men who were the most considerable among the Eginetans both by wealth and by birth, and took them away as prisoners, and among others also Crios the son of Polycritos and Casambos the son of Aristocrates, who had the greatest power among them; and having taken these away to the land of Attica, they deposited them as a charge with the Athenians, who were the bitterest enemies of the Eginetans.         73. [1] tauta men de egeneto xronui ysteron. tote de us tui Kleomenei uduthe to es ton Demareton preigma, aytika paralabun Leytyxidea eie epi tous Aiginetas, deinon tina sfi egkoton dia ton propelakismon exun. [2] oytu de oyte oi Aigineitai, amfoterun tun basileun ekontun ep' aytous, edikaieyn eti antibainein, ekeinoi te epilexamenoi andras deka Aigineteun tous pleistoy axioys kai ploutui kai genei. Egon kai alloys kai de kai Krion te ton Polykritoy kai Kasaybon ton Aristokrateos, oi per eixon megiston kratos. agagontes de sfeas es gein ten Attiken paratheken paratithentai es tous exthistoys Aigineteisi Athenaioys.    
      74. After this Cleomenes, since it had become known that he had devised evil against Demaratos, was seized by fear of the Spartans and retired to Thessaly. Thence he came to Arcadia, and began to make mischief and to combine the Arcadians against Sparta; and besides other oaths with which he caused them to swear that they would assuredly follow him whithersoever he should lead them, he was very desirous also to bring the chiefs of the Arcadians to the city of Nonacris and cause them to swear by the water of Styx; for near this city it is said by the Arcadians that there is the water of Styx, and there is in fact something of this kind: a small stream of water is seen to trickle down from a rock into a hollow ravine, and round the ravine runs a wall of rough stones. Now Nonacris, where it happens that this spring is situated, is a city of Arcadia near Pheneos.         74. [1] meta de tauta Kleomenea epaiston genomenon kakotexnesanta es Demareton deima elabe Spartieteun, kai ypexesxe es Thessalien. entheuten de apikomenos es ten Arkadien neutera epresse pregmata, synistas tous Arkadas epi tei Spartei, alloys te orkoys prosagun sfi E men epsesthai sfeas aytui tei an exegeetai, kai de kai es Nunakrin polin prothymos En tun Arkadun tous proesteutas agineun exorkoun to Stygos ydur. [2] en de tautei tei poli legetai einai ypo tun Arkadun to Stygos ydur, kai de kai esti toionde ti. ydur oligon fainomenon ek petres stazei es agkos, to de agkos aimasieis tis peritheei kuklos. e de Nunakris, en tei e pege ayte tygxanei eousa, polis esti teis Arkadies pros Feneui.    
      75. The Lacedemonians, hearing that Cleomenes was acting thus, were afraid, and proceeded to bring him back to Sparta to rule on the same terms as before: but when he had come back, forthwith a disease of madness seized him (who had been even before this somewhat insane), and whenever he met any of the Spartans, he dashed his staff against the man's face. And as he continued to do this and had gone quite out of his senses, his kinsmen bound him in stocks. Then being so bound, and seeing his warder left alone by the rest, he asked him for a knife; and the warder not being at first willing to give it, he threatened him with that which he would do to him afterwards if he did not; until at last the warder fearing the threats, for he was one of the Helots, gave him a knife. Then Cleomenes, when he had received the steel, began to maltreat himself from the legs upwards: for he went on cutting his flesh lengthways from the legs to the thighs and from the thighs to the loins and flanks, until at last he came to the belly; and cutting this into strips he died in that manner. And this happened, as most of the Hellenes report, because he persuaded the Pythian prophetess to advise that which was done about Demaratos; but as the Athenians alone report, it was because when he invaded Eleusis he laid waste the sacred enclosure of the goddesses; and according to the report of the Argives, because from their sanctuary dedicated to Argos he caused to come down those of the Argives who had fled for refuge from the battle and slew them, and also set fire to the grove itself, holding it in no regard.         75. [1] mathontes de Kleomenea Lakedaimonioi tauta pressonta, kateigon ayton deisantes epi toisi aytoisi es Sparten toisi kai proteron Erxe. katelthonta de ayton aytika ypelabe manie nousos, eonta kai proteron ypomargoteron. okus gar teui entuxoi Spartieteun, enexraye es to prosupon to skeiptron. [2] poieonta de ayton tauta kai parafronesanta edesan oi prosekontes en xulu. o de detheis ton fulakon moynuthenta idun tun allun aiteei maxairan. oy boylomenoy de ta pruta tou fylakoy didonai apeilee ta min aytis poiesei, es o deisas tas apeilas o fulakos (En gar tun tis eiluteun) didoi oi maxairan. [3] Kleomenes de paralabun ton sideron arxeto ek tun knemeun euyton lubumenos. epitamnun gar kata meikos tas sarkas proebaine ek tun knemeun es tous merous, ek de tun merun es te ta isxia kai tas laparas, es o es ten gastera apiketo, kai tauten kataxordeuun apethane tropui toioutui, us men oi polloi legoysi Ellenun, oti ten Pythien anegnuse ta peri Demaretoy legein genomena, us de Athenaioi mounoi legoysi, dioti es Eleysina esbalun ekeire to temenos tun theun, us de Argeioi, oti ex irou aytun tou Argoy Argeiun tous katafygontas ek teis maxes katagineun katekopte kai ayto to alsos en alogiei exun eneprese.    
      76. For when Cleomenes was consulting the Oracle at Delphi, the answer was given him that he should conquer Argos; so he led the Spartans and came to the river Erasinos, which is said to flow from the Stymphalian lake; for this lake, they say, running out into a viewless chasm, appears again above ground in the land of Argos; and from thence onwards this water is called by the Argives Erasinos: having come, I say, to this river, Cleomenes did sacrifice to it; and since the sacrifices were not at all favourable for him to cross over, he said that he admired the Erasinos for not betraying the men of its country, but the Argives should not even so escape. After this he retired back from thence and led his army down to Thyrea; and having done sacrifice to the Sea by slaying a bull, he brought them in ships to the land of Tiryns and Nauplia.         76. [1] Kleomenei gar manteyomenui en Delfoisi exresthe Argos airesein. epeite de Spartietas agun apiketo epi potamon Erasinon, os legetai rheein ek teis Stymfalidos limnes. ten gar de limnen tauten es xasma afanes ekdidousan anafainesthai en Argei, to entheuten de to ydur ede touto yp' Argeiun Erasinon kaleesthai. apikomenos d' un o Kleomenes epi ton potamon touton esfagiazeto aytui. [2] kai oy gar ekallieree oydamus diabainein min, agasthai men efe tou Erasinoy oy prodidontos tous polietas, Argeioys mentoi oyd' us xairesein. meta de tauta exanaxuresas ten stratien kategage es Thyreen, sfagiasamenos de tei thalassei tauron ploioisi sfeas egage es te ten Tirynthien xuren kai Nayplien.    
      77. Being informed of this, the Argives came to the rescue towards the sea; and when they had got near Tiryns and were at the place which is called Hesipeia, they encamped opposite to the Lacedemonians leaving no very wide space between the armies. There the Argives were not afraid of the open fighting, but only lest they should be conquered by craft; for to this they thought referred the oracle which the Pythian prophetess gave in common to these and to the Milesians, saying as follows: 
"But when the female at length shall conquer the male in the battle, 
 Conquer and drive him forth, and glory shall gain among Argives, 
 Then many wives of the Argives shall tear both cheeks in their mourning; 
 So that a man shall say some time, of the men that came after, 
 'Quelled by the spear it perished, the three-coiled terrible serpent,' The conjunction of all these things caused fear to the Argives, and with a view to this they resolved to make use of the enemy's herald; and having so resolved they proceeded to do as follows:--whenever the Spartan herald proclaimed anything to the Lacedemonians, the Argives also did that same thing.         77. [1] Argeioi de eboetheon pynthanomenoi tauta epi thalassan. us de agxou men eginonto teis Tirynthos, xurui de en toutui tui keitai Esipeia oynoma, metaixmion oy mega apolipontes izonto antioi toisi Lakedaimonioisi. enthauta de oi Argeioi ten men ek tou fanerou maxen oyk efobeonto, alla me dolui airetheusi. [2] kai gar de sfi es touto to preigma eixe to xresterion to epikoina exrese e Pythie toutoisi te kai Milesioisi, legon ude.     all' otan e theleia ton arsena nikesasa
      exelasei kai kudos en Argeioisin aretai,
      pollas Argeiun amfidryfeas tote thesei.
      us pote tis ereei kai epessomenun anthrupun
      <<deinos ofis trieliktos apuleto doyri damastheis.>>[3] tauta de panta synelthonta toisi Argeioisi fobon pareixe. kai de sfi pros tauta edoxe tui keryki tun polemiun xrasthai, doxan de sfi epoieon toionde. okus o Spartietes keiryx prosemainoi ti Lakedaimonioisi, epoieyn kai oi Argeioi tuyto touto.    
      78. So Cleomenes, perceiving that the Argives were doing whatever the herald of the Lacedemonians proclaimed, passed the word to the Lacedemonians that when the herald should proclaim that they were to get breakfast, then they should take up their arms and go to attack the Argives. This was carried out even so by the Lacedemonians; for as the Argives were getting breakfast according to the herald's proclamation, they attacked them; and many of them they slew, but many more yet took refuge in the sacred grove of Argos, and upon these they kept watch, sitting round about the place. Then Cleomenes did this which follows:--        78. [1] mathun de o Kleomenes poieuntas tous Argeioys okoion ti o sfeteros keiryx semeneie, paraggellei sfi, otan semenei o keiryx poieesthai ariston, tote analabontas ta opla xureein es tous Argeioys. [2] tauta kai egeneto epitelea ek tun Lakedaimoniun. ariston gar poieymenoisi toisi Argeioisi ek tou kerugmatos epekeato, kai pollous men efoneysan aytun, pollui de ti pleunas es to alsos tou Argoy katafygontas periizomenoi efulasson.    
      79. He had with him deserters, and getting information by inquiring of these, he sent a herald and summoned forth those of the Argives who were shut up in the sanctuary, mentioning each by name; and he summoned them forth saying that he had received their ransom. Now among the Peloponnesians ransom is two pounds weight of silver appointed to be paid for each prisoner. So Cleomenes summoned forth about fifty of the Argives one by one and slew them; and it chanced that the rest who were in the enclosure did not perceive that this was being done; for since the grove was thick, those within did not see how it fared with those who were without, at least until one of them climbed up a tree and saw from above that which was being done. Accordingly they then no longer came forth when they were called.         79. [1] entheuten de o Kleomenes epoiee toionde. exun aytomoloys andras kai pynthanomenos toutun, exekalee pempun keryka onomasti legun tun Argeiun tous en tui irui apergmenoys, exekalee de fas aytun exein ta apoina. apoina de esti Peloponnesioisi duo mneai tetagmenai kat' andra aixmaluton ektinein. kata pentekonta de un tun Argeiun us ekastoys ekkaleumenos o Kleomenes ekteine. [2] tauta de kus ginomena elelethee tous loipous tous en tui temenei. ate gar pyknou eontos tou alseos, oyk urun oi entos tous ektos o ti epresson, prin ge de aytun tis anabas epi dendron kateide to poieumenon. oykun de eti kaleomenoi exeisan.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [80]

     80. So Cleomenes thereupon ordered all the Helots to pile up brushwood round the sacred grove; and they obeying, he set fire to the grove. And when it was now burning, he asked one of the deserters to what god the grove was sacred, and the man replied that it was sacred to Argos. When he heard that, he groaned aloud and said, "Apollo who utterest oracles, surely thou hast greatly deceived me, saying that I should conquer Argos: I conjecture that the oracle has had its fulfilment for me already."         80. [1] enthauta de o Kleomenes ekeleye panta tina tun eiluteun perineein ylei to alsos, tun de peithomenun eneprese to alsos. kaiomenoy de ede epeireto tun tina aytomolun tinos eie theun to alsos. o de efe Argoy einai. o de us ekoyse, anastenaxas mega eipe <<u Apollon xresterie, E megalus me epatekas famenos Argos airesein. symballomai d' exekein moi to xresterion.>>    
      81. After this Cleomenes sent away the greater part of his army to go back to Sparta, but he himself took a thousand of the best men and went to the temple of Hera to sacrifice: and when he wished to sacrifice upon the altar, the priest forbade him, saying that it was not permitted by religious rule for a stranger to sacrifice in that place. Cleomenes however bade the Helots take away the priest from the altar and scourge him, and he himself offered the sacrifice. Having so done he returned back to Sparta;         81. [1] meta de tauta o Kleomenes ten men pleu stratien apeike apienai es Sparten, xilioys de aytos labun tous aristeas eie es to Eraion thusun. boylomenon de ayton thuein epi tou bumou o ireus apegoreye, fas oyk osion einai xeinui aytothi thuein. o de Kleomenes ton irea ekeleye tous eilutas apo tou bumou apagontas mastigusai, kai aytos ethyse. poiesas de tauta apeie es ten Sparten.    
      82. and after his return his opponents brought him up before the Ephors, saying that he had received gifts and therefore had not conquered Argos, when he might easily have conquered it. He said to them,--but whether he was speaking falsely or whether truly I am not able with certainty to say,--however that may be, he spoke and said that when he had conquered the sanctuary of Argos, it seemed to him that the oracle of the god had had its fulfilment for him; therefore he did not think it right to make an attempt on the city, at least until he should have had recourse to sacrifice, and should have learnt whether the deity permitted him or whether she stood opposed to him: and as he was sacrificing for augury in the temple of Hera, a flame of fire blazed forth from the breasts of the image; and thus he knew the certainty of the matter, namely that he would not conquer Argos: for if fire had blazed forth from the head of the image, he would have been conqueror of the city from top to bottom, but since it blazed from the breasts, everything had been accomplished for him which the god desired should come to pass. Thus speaking he seemed to the Spartans to speak credibly and reasonably, and he easily escaped his pursuers.         82. [1] nostesanta de min ypeigon oi exthroi ypo tous eforoys, famenoi min durodokesanta oyk elein to Argos, pareon eypeteus min elein. o de sfi elexe, oyte ei pseydomenos oyte ei alethea legun, exu safeneus eipai, elexe d' un famenos, epeite de to tou Argoy iron eilon, dokeein oi exelelythenai ton tou theou xresmon. pros un tauta oy dikaioun peiran teis polios, prin ge de iroisi xresetai kai mathei eite oi o theos paradidoi eite empodun esteke. [2] kalliereymenui de en tui Eraiui ek tou agalmatos tun stetheun floga pyros eklampsai, mathein de aytos oytu ten atrekeien, oti oyk aireei to Argos. ei men gar ek teis kefaleis tou agalmatos exelampse, aireein an kat' akres ten polin, ek tun stetheun de lampsantos pan oi pepoieisthai oson o theos ebouleto genesthai. tauta legun pista te kai oikota edokee Spartieteisi legein, kai diefyge pollon tous diukontas.    
      83. Argos however was so bereft of men that their slaves took possession of all the State, ruling and managing it until the sons of those who had perished grew to be men. Then these, endeavouring to gain Argos back to themselves, cast them out; and the slaves being driven forth gained possession of Tiryns by fighting. Now for a time these two parties had friendly relations with one another; but afterwards there came to the slaves a prophet named Cleander, by race a Phigalian from Arcadia: this man persuaded the slaves to attack their masters, and in consequence of this there was war between them for a long time, until at last with difficulty the Argives overcame them.         83. [1] Argos de andrun exeruthe oytu uste oi douloi aytun esxon panta ta pregmata arxontes te kai diepontes, es o epebesan oi tun apolomenun paides. epeita sfeas oytoi anaktumenoi opisu es euytous to Argos exebalon. exutheumenoi de oi douloi maxei esxon Tiryntha. [2] teus men de sfi En arthmia es alleloys, epeita de es tous douloys Elthe aner mantis Kleandros, genos eun Figaleus ap' Arkadies. oytos tous douloys anegnuse epithesthai toisi despoteisi. ek toutoy de polemos sfi En epi xronon syxnon, es o de mogis oi Argeioi epekratesan.    
      84. The Argives then say that this was the reason why Cleomenes went mad and had an evil end: but the Spartans themselves say that Cleomenes was not driven mad by any divine power, but that he had become a drinker of unmixed wine from having associated with Scythians, and that he went mad in consequence of this: for the nomad Scythians, they say, when Dareios had made invasion of their land, desired eagerly after this to take vengeance upon him; and they sent to Sparta and tried to make an alliance, and to arrange that while the Scythians themselves attempted an invasion of Media by the way of the river Phasis, the Spartans should set forth from Ephesos and go up inland, and then that they should meet in one place: and they say that Cleomenes when the Scythians had come for this purpose, associated with them largely, and that thus associating more than was fit, he learnt the practice of drinking wine unmixed with water; and for this cause (as the Spartans think) he went mad. Thenceforth, as they say themselves, when they desire to drink stronger wine, they say "Fill up in Scythian fashion." Thus the Spartans report about Cleomenes; but to me it seems that this was a retribution which Cleomenes paid for Demaratos.         84. [1] Argeioi men nyn dia tauta Kleomenea fasi manenta apolesthai kakus. aytoi de Spartieitai fasi ek daimonioy men oydenos maneinai Kleomenea, Skutheisi de omilesanta min akretopoten genesthai kai ek toutoy maneinai. [2] Skuthas gar tous nomadas, epeite sfi Dareion embalein es ten xuren, meta tauta memonenai min tisasthai, pempsantas de es Sparten symmaxien te poieesthai kai syntithesthai us xreon eie aytous men tous Skuthas para Fasin potamon peiran es ten Mediken esballein, sfeas de tous Spartietas keleuein ex Efesoy ormumenoys anabainein kai epeita es tuyto apantan. [3] Kleomenea de legoysi ekontun tun Skytheun epi tauta omileein sfi mezonus, omileonta de mallon tou ikneomenoy mathein ten akretoposien par' aytun. ek toutoy de maneinai min nomizoysi Spartieitai. ek te tosoy, us aytoi legoysi, epean zuroteron bouluntai piein, Episkuthison legoysi. oytu de Spartieitai ta peri Kleomenea legoysi. emoi de dokeei tisin tauten o Kleomenes Demaretui ektisai.    
      85. Now when the Eginetans heard that Cleomenes had met his end, they sent messengers to Sparta to denounce Leotychides for the matter of the hostages which were being kept at Athens: and the Lacedemonians caused a court to assemble and judged that the Eginetans had been dealt with outrageously by Leotychides; and they condemned him to be taken to Egina and delivered up in place of the men who were being kept at Athens. Then when the Eginetans were about to take Leotychides, Theasides the son of Leoprepes, a man of repute in Sparta, said to them: "What are ye proposing to do, men of Egina? Do ye mean to take away the king of the Spartans, thus delivered up to you by his fellow-citizens? If the Spartans now being in anger have decided so, beware lest at some future time, if ye do this, they bring an evil upon your land which may destroy it." Hearing this the Eginetans abstained from taking him; but they came to an agreement that Leotychides should accompany them to Athens and restore the men to the Eginetans.         85. [1] teleytesantos de Kleomeneos us eputhonto Aigineitai, epempon es Sparten aggeloys katabusomenoys Leytyxideu peri tun en Atheneisi omerun exomenun. Lakedaimonioi de dikasterion synagagontes egnusan periybristhai Aiginetas ypo Leytyxideu, kai min katekrinan ekdoton agesthai es Aiginan anti tun en Atheneisi exomenun andrun. [2] mellontun de agein tun Aigineteun ton Leytyxidea, eipe sfi Theasides o Leuprepeos, eun en Spartei dokimos aner, <<ti boyleuesthe poieein, andres Aigineitai; ton basilea tun Spartieteun ekdoton genomenon ypo tun polieteun agein; ei nun orgei xreumenoi egnusan oytu Spartieitai, okus ex ysteres me ti ymin, en tauta pressete, panulethron kakon es ten xuren embalusi.>> [3] tauta akousantes oi Aigineitai esxonto teis agugeis, omologiei de exresanto toieide, epispomenon Leytyxidea es Athenas apodounai Aigineteisi tous andras.    
      86. When however Leotychides came to Athens and asked for the deposit back, the Athenians, not being willing to give up the hostages, produced pretexts for refusing, and alleged that two kings had deposited them and they did not think it right to give them back to the one without the other: so since the Athenians said that they would not give them back, Leotychides spoke to them as follows:         86. [1] us de apikomenos Leytyxides es tas Athenas apaitee ten paratheken, oi d' Athenaioi profasias eilkon oy boylomenoi apodounai, fantes duo sfeas eontas basileas parathesthai kai oy dikaioun tui eterui aney tou eteroy apodidonai.   
      86. (a) "Athenians, do whichever thing ye yourselves desire; for ye know that if ye give them up, ye do that which religion commands, and if ye refuse to give them up, ye do the opposite of this: but I desire to tell you what kind of a thing came to pass once in Sparta about a deposit. We Spartans report that there was in Lacedemon about two generations before my time on Glaucos the son of Epikydes. This man we say attained the highest merit in all things besides, and especially he was well reported of by all who at that time dwelt in Lacedemon for his uprightness: and we relate that in due time it happened to him thus:--a man of Miletos came to Sparta and desired to have speech with him, alleging the reasons which follow: 'I am a Milesian,' he said, 'and I am come hither desiring to have benefit from thy uprightness, Glaucos; for as there was much report of thy uprightness throughout all the rest of Hellas and also in Ionia, I considered with myself that Ionia is ever in danger, whereas Peloponnesus is safely established, and also that we never see wealth continue in the possession of the same persons long;--reflecting, I say, on these things and taking counsel with myself, I resolved to turn into money the half of my possessions, and to place it with thee, being well assured that if it were placed with thee I should have it safe. Do thou therefore, I pray thee, receive the money, and take and keep these tallies; and whosoever shall ask for the money back having the tokens answering to these, to him do thou restore it.'         86. a [1] oy famenun de apodusein tun Athenaiun, elexe sfi Leytyxides tade. <<u Athenaioi, poieete men okotera boulesthe aytoi. kai gar apodidontes poieete osia, kai me apodidontes ta enantia toutun. okoion mentoi ti en tei Spartei syneneixthe genesthai peri parakatathekes, boulomai ymin eipai. [2] legomen emeis oi Spartieitai genesthai en tei Lakedaimoni kata triten geneen ten ap' emeo Glaukon Epikudeos paida. touton ton andra famen ta te alla panta periekein ta pruta, kai de kai akouein arista dikaiosunes peri pantun osoi ten Lakedaimona touton ton xronon oikeon. [3] syneneixtheinai de oi en xronui ikneymenui tade legomen. andra Milesion apikomenon es Sparten boulesthai oi elthein es logoys proisxomenon toiade. 'eimi men Milesios, eku de teis seis Glauke boylomenos dikaiosunes apolausai. [4] us gar de ana pasan men ten allen Ellada, en de kai peri Iunien teis seis dikaiosunes En logos pollos, emeuytui logoys edidoyn kai oti epikindynos esti aiei kote e Iunie, e de Peloponnesos asfaleus idrymene, kai dioti xremata oydama tous aytous esti oran exontas. [5] tauta te un epilegomenui kai boyleyomenui edoxe moi ta emisea pases teis oysies exargyrusanta thesthai para se, ey exepistamenui us moi keimena estai para soi soa. su de moi kai ta xremata dexai kai tade ta sumbola suze labun. os d' an exun tauta apaiteei, toutui apodounai.'   
      86. (b) The stranger who had come from Miletos said so much; and Glaucos accepted the deposit on the terms proposed. Then after a long time had gone by, there came to Sparta the sons of him who had deposited the money with Glaucos; and they came to speech with Glaucos, and producing the tokens asked for the money to be given back: but he repulsed them answering them again thus: 'I do not remember the matter, nor does my mind bring back to me any knowledge of those things whereof ye speak; but I desire to recollect and do all that is just; for if I received it, I desire to restore it honestly; and if on the other hand I did not receive it at all, I will act towards you in accordance with the customs of the Hellenes: therefore I defer the settling of the matter with you for three months from now.'         86. b [1] o men de apo Miletoy ekun xeinos tosauta elexe, Glaukos de edexato ten parakatatheken epi tui eiremenui logui. xronoy de pollou dielthontos Elthon es Sparten toutoy tou parathemenoy ta xremata oi paides, elthontes de es logoys tui Glaukui kai apodeiknuntes ta sumbola apaiteon ta xremata. [2] o de diutheeto antypokrinomenos toiade. 'oyte memnemai to preigma oyte me periferei oyden eidenai toutun tun ymeis legete, boulomai te anamnestheis poieein pan to dikaion. kai gar ei elabon, orthus apodounai, kai ei ge arxen me elabon, nomoisi toisi Ellenun xresomai es ymeas. tauta un ymin anaballomai kyrusein es tetarton meina apo toude.'   
      86. (c) The Milesians accordingly went away grieved, for they supposed that they had been robbed of the money; but Glaucos set forth to Delphi to consult the Oracle: and when he inquired of the Oracle whether he should rob them of the money by an oath, the Pythian prophetess rebuked him with these lines: "'Glaucos, thou, Epikydes' son, yea, this for the moment, 
 This, to conquer their word by an oath and to rob, is more gainful. 
 Swear, since the lot of death waits also for him who swears truly. 
 But know thou that Oath has a son, one nameless and handless and footless, 
 Yet without feet he pursues, without hands he seizes, and wholly 
 He shall destroy the race and the house of the man who offendeth. 
 But for the man who swears truly his race is the better hereafter.' Having heard this Glaucos entreated that the god would pardon him for that which he had said, but the prophetess said that to make trial of the god and to do the deed were things equivalent.         86. g [1] oi men de Milesioi symforen poiesamenoi apallassonto us apesteremenoi tun xrematun, Glaukos de eporeueto es Delfous xresomenos tui xresteriui. epeirutunta de ayton to xresterion ei orkui ta xremata leisetai, e Pythie meterxetai toiside toisi epesi.     [2] Glauk' Epikydeide, to men aytika kerdion oytu
      orkui nikeisai kai xremata leissasthai.
      omny, epei thanatos ge kai eyorkon menei andra.
      all' orkoy pais estin, anunymos, oyd' epi xeires
      oyde podes. kraipnos de meterxetai, eis o ke pasan
      symmarpsas olesei geneen kai oikon apanta.
      andros d' eyorkoy genee metopisthen ameinun.tauta akousas o Glaukos syggnumen ton theon paraiteeto aytui isxein tun rhethentun. e de Pythie efe to peiretheinai tou theou kai to poieisai ison dunasthai.   
      86. (d) Glaucos then, having sent for the Milesians, gave back to them the money: but the reason for which, O Athenians, I set forth to relate to you this story, shall now be told. At the present time there is no descendant of Glaucos existing, nor any hearth which is esteemed to be that of Glaucos, but he has been utterly destroyed and rooted up out of Sparta. Thus it is good not even to entertain a thought about a deposit other than that of restoring it, when they who made it ask for it again."         86. d [1] Glaukos men de metapempsamenos tous Milesioys xeinoys apodidoi sfi ta xremata. tou de eineka o logos ode u Athenaioi ormethe legesthai es ymeas, eiresetai. Glaukoy nun oyte ti apogonon esti oyden oyt' istie oydemia nomizomene einai Glaukoy, ektetriptai te prorrizos ek Spartes. oytu agathon mede dianoeesthai peri parakatathekes allo ge e apaiteontun apodidonai.>>    
      87. When Leotychides had thus spoken, since not even so were the Athenians willing to listen to him, he departed back; and the Eginetans, before paying the penalty for their former wrongs wherein they did outrage to the Athenians to please the Thebans, acted as follows:--complaining of the conduct of the Athenians and thinking that they were being wronged, they made preparations to avenge themselves upon the Athenians; and since the Athenians were celebrating a four-yearly festival at Sunion, they lay in wait for the sacred ship which was sent to it and took it, the vessel being full of men who were the first among the Athenians; and having taken it they laid the men in bonds.         87. [1] Leytyxides men eipas tauta, us oi oyde oytu esekoyon oi Athenaioi, apallasseto. oi de Aigineitai, prin tun proteron adikematun dounai dikas tun es Athenaioys ybrisan Thebaioisi xarizomenoi, epoiesan toionde. memfomenoi toisi Athenaioisi kai axiountes adikeesthai, us timuresomenoi tous Athenaioys pareskeyazonto. kai En gar de toisi Athenaioisi penteteris epi Soyniui, loxesantes un ten theurida nea eilon plerea andrun tun prutun Athenaiun, labontes de tous andras edesan.    
      88. The Athenians after they had suffered this wrong from the Eginetans no longer delayed to contrive all things possible to their hurt. And there was in Egina a man of repute, one Nicodromos the son of Cnithos: this man had cause of complaint against the Eginetans for having before this driven him forth out of the island; and hearing now that the Athenians had resolved to do mischief to the Eginetans, he agreed with the Athenians to deliver up Egina to them, telling them on what day he would make his attempt and by what day it would be necessary for them to come to his assistance.         88. [1] Athenaioi de pathontes tauta pros Aigineteun oyketi aneballonto me oy to pan mexanesasthai ep' Aigineteisi. kai En gar Nikodromos Knoithoy kaleomenos en tei Aiginei aner dokimos, oytos memfomenos men toisi Aigineteisi proteren euytou exelasin ek teis nesoy, mathun de tote tous Athenaioys anartemenoys erdein Aiginetas kakus, syntithetai Athenaioisi prodosien Aigines, frasas en tei te emerei epixeiresei kai ekeinoys es ten ekein deesei boetheontas. meta tauta katalambanei men kata ta synethekato Athenaioisi o Nikodromos ten palaien kaleomenen polin, Athenaioi de oy paraginontai es deon.   
      89. After this Nicodromos, according as he had agreed with the Athenians, seized that which is called the old city, but the Athenians did not come to his support at the proper time; for, as it chanced, they had not ships sufficient to fight with the Eginetans; so while they were asking the Corinthians to lend them ships, during this time their cause went to ruin. The Corinthians however, being at this time exceedingly friendly with them, gave the Athenians twenty ships at their request; and these they gave by selling them at five drachmas apiece, for by the law it was not permitted to give them as a free gift. Having taken these ships of which I speak and also their own, the Athenians with seventy ships manned in all sailed to Egina, and they were later by one day than the time agreed.         89. [1] oy gar etyxon eousai nees sfi axiomaxoi teisi Aigineteun symbalein. en ui un Korinthiun edeonto xreisai sfisi neas, en toutui diefthare ta pregmata. oi de Korinthioi, Esan gar sfi touton ton xronon filoi es ta malista, Athenaioisi didousi deomenoisi eikosi neas, didousi de pentadraxmoys apodomenoi. dureen gar en tui nomui oyk exein dounai. tautas te de labontes oi Athenaioi kai tas sfeteras, plerusantes ebdomekonta neas tas apasas, epleon epi ten Aiginan kai ysteresan emerei miei teis sygkeimenes.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [90]

     90. Nicodromos meanwhile, as the Athenians did not come to his support at the proper time, embarked in a ship and escaped from Egina, and with him also went others of the Eginetans; and the Athenians gave them Sunion to dwell in, starting from whence these men continued to plunder the Eginetans who were in the island.         90. [1] Nikodromos de, us oi Athenaioi es ton kairon oy pareginonto, es ploion esbas ekdidreskei ek teis Aigines. sun de oi kai alloi ek tun Aigineteun eiponto, toisi Athenaioi Sounion oikeisai edosan. entheuten de oytoi ormumenoi eferon te kai Egon tous en tei nesui Aiginetas.    
      91. This happened afterwards: but at the time of which we speak the well-to-do class among the Eginetans prevailed over the men of the people, who had risen against them in combination with Nicodromos, and then having got them into their power they were bringing their prisoners forth to execution. From this there came upon them a curse which they were not able to expiate by sacrifice, though they devised against it all they could; but they were driven forth from the island before the goddess became propitious to them. For they had taken as prisoners seven hundred of the men of the people and were bringing them forth to execution, when one of them escaped from his bonds and fled for refuge to the entrance of the temple of Demeter the Giver of Laws, and he took hold of the latch of the door and clung to it; and when they found that they could not drag him from it by pulling him away, they cut off his hands and so carried him off, and those hands remained clinging to the latch of the door.         91. [1] tauta men de ysteron egineto. Aigineteun de oi paxees epanastantos tou demoy sfi ama Nikodromui epekratesan, kai epeita sfeas xeirusamenoi exeigon apoleontes. apo toutoy de kai agos sfi egeneto, to ekthusasthai oyk oioi te egenonto epimexanumenoi, all' efthesan ekpesontes proteron ek teis nesoy e sfi ileon genesthai ten theon. [2] eptakosioys gar de tou demoy zugresantes exeigon us apoleontes, eis de tis toutun ekfygun ta desma katafeugei pros prothyra Demetros thesmoforoy, epilambanomenos de tun epispasterun eixeto. oi de epeite min apospasai oyk oioi te apelkontes eginonto, apokopsantes aytou tas xeiras Egon oytu, ai xeires de ekeinai empefykyiai Esan toisi epispasteirsi.    
      92. Thus did the Eginetans to one another: and when the Athenians came, they fought against them with seventy ships, and being worsted in the sea-fight they called to their assistance the same whom they had summoned before, namely the Argives. These would no longer come to their help, having cause of complaint because the ships of Egina compelled by Cleomenes had put in to the land of Argos and their crews had landed with the Lacedemonians; with whom also had landed men from ships of Sikyon in this same invasion: and as a penalty for this there was laid upon them by the Argives a fine of a thousand talents, five hundred for each State. The Sikyonians accordingly, acknowledging that they had committed a wrong, had made an agreement to pay a hundred talents and be free from the penalty; the Eginetans however did not acknowledge their wrong, but were more stubborn. For this reason then, when they made request, none of the Argives now came to their help at the charge of the State, but volunteers came to the number of a thousand; and their leader was a commander named Eurybates, a man who had practised the five contests. Of these men the greater number never returned back, but were slain by the Athenians in Egina; and the commander himself, Eurybates, fighting in single combat killed in this manner three men and was himself slain by the fourth, Sophanes namely of Dekeleia.         92. [1] tauta men nyn sfeas aytous oi Aigineitai ergasanto, Athenaioisi de ekoysi enaymaxesan neysi ebdomekonta, essuthentes de tei naymaxiei epekaleonto tous aytous kai proteron, Argeioys. kai de sfi oytoi men oyketi boetheoysi, memfomenoi oti Aiginaiai nees anagkei lamftheisai ypo Kleomeneos esxon te es ten Argolida xuren kai synapebesan Lakedaimonioisi, synapebesan de kai apo Sikyunieun neun andres tei aytei tautei esbolei. [2] kai sfi yp' Argeiun epeblethe zemie xilia talanta ektisai, pentakosia ekateroys. Sikyunioi men nyn syggnontes adikeisai umologesan ekaton talanta ektisantes azemioi einai, Aigineitai de oyte syneginuskonto Esan te aythadesteroi. dia de un sfi tauta deomenoisi apo men tou demosioy oydeis Argeiun eti eboethee, ethelontai de es xilioys. Ege de aytous strategos aner ui oynoma Eyrybates, aner pentaethlon epaskesas. [3] toutun oi pleunes oyk apenostesan opisu, all' eteleutesan yp' Athenaiun en Aiginei. aytos de o strategos Eyrybates moynomaxien epaskeun treis men andras tropui toioutui kteinei, ypo de tou tetartoy Sufaneos tou Dekeleos apothneskei.    
      93. The Eginetans however engaged in contest with the Athenians in ships, when these were in disorder, and defeated them; and they took of them four ships together with their crews.         93. [1] Aigineitai de eousi ataktoisi toisi Athenaioisi symbalontes teisi neysi enikesan, kai sfeun neas tesseras aytoisi toisi andrasi eilon.    
      94. So the Athenians were at war with the Eginetans; and meanwhile the Persian was carrying forward his design, since he was put in mind ever by his servant to remember the Athenians, and also because of the sons of Peisistratos were near at hand and brought charges continually against the Athenians, while at the same time Dareios himself wished to take hold of this pretext and subdue those nations of Hellas which had not given him earth and water. Mardonios then, since he had fared miserably in his expedition, he removed from his command; and appointing other generals to command he despatched them against Eretria and Athens, namely Datis, who was a Mede by race, and Artaphrenes the son of Artaphrenes, a nephew of the king: and he sent them forth with the charge to reduce Athens and Eretria to slavery and to bring the slaves back into his presence.         94. [1] Athenaioisi men de polemos syneipto pros Aiginetas. o de Perses to euytou epoiee, uste anamimneskontos te aiei tou therapontos memneisthai min tun Athenaiun, kai Peisistratideun proskatemenun kai diaballontun Athenaioys, ama de boylomenos o Dareios tautes exomenos teis profasios katastrefesthai teis Ellados tous me dontas aytui gein te kai ydur. [2] Mardonion men de flaurus prexanta tui stolui paraluei teis strategies, alloys de strategous apodexas apesteile epi te Eretrian kai Athenas, Datin te eonta Meidon genos kai Artafrenea ton Artafreneos paida, adelfideon euytou. enteilamenos de apepempe exandrapodisantas Athenas kai Eretrian anagein euytui es opsin ta andrapoda.    
      95. When these who had been appointed to command came in their march from the king to the Aleian plain in Kilikia, taking with them a large and well-equipped land-army, then while they were encamping there, the whole naval armament came up, which had been appointed for several nations to furnish; and there came to them also the ships for carrying horses, which in the year before Dareios had ordered his tributaries to make ready. In these they placed their horses, and having embarked the land-army in the ships they sailed for Ionia with six hundred triremes. After this they did not keep their ships coasting along the mainland towards the Hellespont and Thrace, but they started from Samos and made their voyage by the Icarian Sea and between the islands; because, as I think, they feared more than all else the voyage round Athos, seeing that in the former year while making the passage by this way they had come to great disaster. Moreover also Naxos compelled them, since it had not been conquered at the former time.         95. [1] us de oi strategoi oytoi oi apodexthentes poreyomenoi para basileos apikonto teis Kilikies es to Aleion pedion, ama agomenoi pezon straton pollon te kai ey eskeyasmenon, enthauta stratopedeyomenoisi epeilthe men o naytikos pas stratos o epitaxtheis ekastoisi, paregenonto de kai ai ippagugoi nees, tas tui proterui etei proeipe toisi euytou dasmoforoisi Dareios etoimazein. [2] esbalomenoi de tous ippoys es tautas kai ton pezon straton esbibasantes es tas neas, epleon exakosieisi trieresi es ten Iunien. entheuten de oy para ten epeiron eixon tas neas ithu tou te Ellespontoy kai teis Threikes, all' ek Samoy ormumenoi para te Ikarion kai dia nesun ton ploon epoieunto, us men emoi dokeein, deisantes malista ton periploon tou Athu, oti tui proterui etei poieumenoi tautei ten komiden megalus proseptaisan. pros de kai e Naxos sfeas enagkaze proteron oyk alousa.    
      96. And when they had arrived at Naxos, coming against it from the Icarian Sea (for it was against Naxos first that the Persians intended to make expedition, remembering the former events), the Naxians departed forthwith fleeing to the mountains, and did not await their attack; but the Persians made slaves of those of them whom they caught and set fire to both the temples and the town. Having so done they put out to sea to attack the other islands.         96. [1] epei de ek tou Ikarioy pelageos prosferomenoi prosemixan tei Naxui, epi tauten gar de pruten epeixon strateuesthai oi Persai memnemenoi tun proteron oi Naxioi pros ta orea oixonto feugontes oyde ypemeinan, oi de Persai andrapodisamenoi tous katelabon aytun, enepresan kai ta ira kai ten polin. tauta de poiesantes epi tas allas nesoys anegonto.    
      97. While these were doing thus, the Delians also had left Delos and fled away to Tenos; and when the armament was sailing in thither, Datis sailed on before and did not allow the ships to anchor at the island of Delos, but at Rhenaia on the other side of the channel; and he himself, having found out by inquiry where the men of Delos were, sent a herald and addressed them thus: "Holy men, why are ye fled away and departed, having judged of me that which is not convenient? for even I of myself have wisdom at least so far, and moreover it has been thus commanded me by the king, not to harm at all that land in which the two divinities were born, neither the land itself nor the inhabitants of it. Now therefore return to your own possessions and dwell in your island." Thus he proclaimed by a herald to the Delians; and after this he piled up and burned upon the altar three hundred talents' weight of frankincense.         97. [1] en ui de oytoi tauta epoieyn, oi Delioi eklipontes kai aytoi ten Deilon oixonto feugontes es Teinon. teis de stratieis katapleouses o Datis proplusas oyk ea tas neas pros ten Deilon prosormizesthai, alla peren en tei RHenaiei. aytos de pythomenos ina Esan oi Delioi, pempun keryka egoreye sfi tade. [2] <<andres iroi, ti feugontes oixesthe, oyk epitedea katagnontes kat' emeu; egu gar kai aytos epi tosouto ge froneu kai moi ek basileos ude epestaltai, en tei xurei oi duo theoi egenonto, tauten meden sinesthai, mete ayten ten xuren mete tous oiketoras ayteis. nun un kai apite epi ta ymetera aytun kai ten neison nemesthe.>> tauta men epekerykeusato toisi Delioisi, meta de libanutou triekosia talanta katanesas epi tou bumou ethymiese.    
      98. Datis having done these things sailed away with his army to fight against Eretria first, taking with him both Ionians and Aiolians; and after he had put out to sea from thence, Delos was moved, not having been shaken (as the Delians reported to me) either before that time or since that down to my own time; and this no doubt the god manifested as a portent to men of the evils that were about to be; for in the time of Dareios the son of Hystaspes and Xerxes the son of Dareios and Artoxerxes the son of Xerxes, three generations following upon one another, there happened more evils to Hellas than during the twenty other generations which came before Dareios, some of the evils coming to it from the Persians, and others from the leaders themselves of Hellas warring together for supremacy. Thus it was not unreasonable that Delos should be moved, which was before unmoved. Now in the Hellenic tongue the names which have been mentioned have this meaning--Dareios means "compeller," Xerxes "warrior," Artoxerxes "great warrior." Thus then might the Hellenes rightly call these kings in their own tongue.         98. [1] Datis men de tauta poiesas eplee ama tui stratui epi ten Eretrian pruta, ama agomenos kai Iunas kai Aioleas. meta de touton entheuten exanaxthenta Deilos ekinethe, us elegon Delioi, kai pruta kai ystata mexri emeu seistheisa. kai touto men koy teras anthrupoisi tun mellontun esesthai kakun efaine o theos. [2] epi gar Dareioy tou Ystaspeos kai Xerxeu tou Dareioy kai Artoxerxeu tou Xerxeu, triun toyteun epexeis geneeun, egeneto pleu kaka tei Elladi e epi eikosi allas geneas tas pro Dareioy genomenas, ta men apo tun Perseun aytei genomena, ta de ap' aytun tun koryfaiun peri teis arxeis polemeontun. [3] oytu oyden En aeikes kinetheinai Deilon to prin eousan akineton. kai en xresmui En gegrammenon peri ayteis ude.     kinesu kai Deilon akineton per eousan.dunatai de kata Ellada glussan tauta ta oynomata, Dareios erxies, Xerxes areios, Artoxerxes megas areios. toutoys men de tous basileas ude an orthus kata glussan ten sfeteren Ellenes kaleoien.    
      99. The Barbarians then, when they had departed from Delos, touched at the islands as they went, and from them received additional forces and took sons of the islanders as hostages: and when in sailing round about the islands they put in also to Carystos, seeing that the Carystians would neither give them hostages nor consent to join in an expedition against cities that were their neighbours, meaning Eretria and Athens, they began to besiege them and to ravage their land; until at last the Carystians also came over to the will of the Persians.         99. [1] oi de barbaroi us apeeiran ek teis Deloy, prosisxon pros tas nesoys, entheuten de stratien te parelambanon kai omeroys tun nesiuteun paidas elambanon. [2] us de peripleontes tas nesoys prosesxon kai es Karyston, oy gar de sfi oi Karustioi oyte omeroys edidosan oyte efasan epi polias astygeitonas strateuesthai, legontes Eretrian te kai Athenas, enthauta toutoys epoliorkeon te kai ten gein sfeun ekeiron, es o kai oi Karustioi parestesan es tun Perseun ten gnumen.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [100]

     100. The Eretrians meanwhile being informed that the armament of the Persians was sailing to attack them, requested the Athenians to help them; and the Athenians did not refuse their support, but gave as helpers those four thousand to whom had been allotted the land of the wealthy Chalkidians. The Eretrians however, as it turned out, had no sound plan of action, for while they sent for the Athenians, they had in their minds two different designs: some of them, that is, proposed to leave the city and go to the heights of Euboea; while others of them, expecting to win gain for themselves from the Persian, were preparing to surrender the place. Having got knowledge of how things were as regards both these plans, Aischines the son of Nothon, one of the leaders of the Eretrians, told the whole condition of their affairs to those of the Athenians who had come, and entreated them to depart and go to their own land, that they might not also perish. So the Athenians did according to this counsel given to them by Aischines.         100. [1] Eretriees de pynthanomenoi ten stratien ten Persiken epi sfeas epipleoysan Athenaiun edeethesan sfisi boethous genesthai. Athenaioi de oyk apeipanto ten epikoyrien, alla tous tetrakisxilioys tous kleroyxeontas tun ippoboteun Khalkideun ten xuren, toutoys sfi didousi timurous. tun de Eretrieun En ara oyden ygies bouleyma, oi metepemponto men Athenaioys, efroneon de difasias ideas. [2] oi men gar aytun eboyleuonto eklipein ten polin es ta akra teis Eyboies, alloi de aytun idia kerdea prosdekomenoi para tou Perseu oisesthai prodosien eskeyazonto. [3] mathun de toutun ekatera us eixe Aisxines o Nothunos, eun tun Eretrieun ta pruta, fraxei toisi ekoysi Athenaiun panta ta pareonta sfi pregmata, prosedeeto te apallassesthai sfeas es ten sfeteren, ina me prosapoluntai. oi de Athenaioi tauta Aisxinei symboyleusanti peithontai.    
      101. And while these passed over to Oropos and saved themselves, the Persians sailed on and brought their ships to land about Temenos and Chioreai and Aigilea in the Eretrian territory; and having taken possession of these places, forthwith they began to disembark their horses and prepared to advance against the enemy. The Eretrians however did not intend to come forth against them and fight; but their endeavour was if possible to hold out by defending their walls, since the counsel prevailed not to leave the city. Then a violent assault was made upon the wall, and for six days there fell many on both sides; but on the seventh day Euphorbos the son of Alkimachos and Philagros the son of Kyneos, men of repute among the citizens, gave up the city to the Persians. These having entered the city plundered and set fire to the temples in retribution for the temples which were burned at Sardis, and also reduced the people to slavery according to the commands of Dareios.         101. [1] kai oytoi men diabantes es Urupon esuzon sfeas aytous. oi de Persai pleontes katesxon tas neas teis Eretrikeis xures kata Temenos kai Khoireas kai Aigilea, katasxontes de tauta ta xuria aytika ippoys te exeballonto kai pareskeyazonto us prosoisomenoi toisi exthroisi. [2] oi de Eretriees epexelthein men kai maxesasthai oyk epoieunto boylen, ei kus de diafylaxaien ta teixea, toutoy sfi peri emele, epeite enika me eklipein ten polin. prosboleis de ginomenes kartereis pros to teixos epipton epi ex emeras polloi men amfoterun. tei de ebdomei Eyforbos te o Alkimaxoy kai Filagros o Kyneoy andres tun astun dokimoi prodidousi toisi Perseisi. [3] oi de eselthontes es ten polin touto men ta ira sylesantes enepresan, apotinumenoi tun en Sardisi katakaythentun irun, touto de tous anthrupoys endrapodisanto kata tas Dareioy entolas.    
      102. Having got Eretria into their power, they stayed a few days and then sailed for the land of Attica, pressing on hard and supposing that the Athenians would do the same as the Eretrians had done. And since Marathon was the most convenient place in Attica for horsemen to act and was also very near to Eretria, therefore Hippias the son of Peisistratos was guiding them thither.         102. [1] xeirusamenoi de ten Eretrian kai episxontes oligas emeras epleon es gein ten Attiken, katergontes te pollon kai dokeontes tayta tous Athenaioys poiesein ta kai tous Eretrieas epoiesan. kai En gar o Marathun epitedeotaton xurion teis Attikeis enippeusai kai agxotatu teis Eretries, es touto sfi kategeeto Ippies o Peisistratoy.    
      103. When the Athenians had information of this, they too went to Marathon to the rescue of their land; and they were led by ten generals, of whom the tenth was Miltiades, whose father Kimon of Stesagoras had been compelled to go into exile from Athens because of Peisistratos the son of Hippocrates: and while he was in exile it was his fortune to win a victory at the Olympic games with a four-horse chariot, wherein, as it happened, he did the same thing as his half-brother Miltiades had done, who had the same mother as he. Then afterwards in the next succeeding Olympic games he gained a victory with the same mares and allowed Peisistratos to be proclaimed as victor; and having resigned to him the victory he returned to his own native land under an agreement for peace. Then after he had won with the same mares at another Olympic festival, it was his hap to be slain by the sons of Peisistratos, Peisistratos himself being no longer alive. These killed him near the City Hall, having set men to lie in wait for him by night; and the burial-place of Kimon is in the outskirts of the city, on the other side of the road which is called the way through Coile, and just opposite him those mares are buried which won in three Olympic games. This same thing was done also by the mares belonging to Euagoras the Laconian, but besides these by none others. Now the elder of the sons of Kimon, Stesagoras, was at that time being brought up in the house of his father's brother Miltiades in the Chersonese, while the younger son was being brought up at Athens with Kimon himself, having been named Miltiades after Miltiades the settler of the Chersonese.         103. [1] Athenaioi de us eputhonto tauta, eboetheon kai aytoi es ton Marathuna. Egon de sfeas strategoi deka, tun o dekatos En Miltiades. tou ton patera Kimuna ton Stesagoreu katelabe fygein ex Atheneun Peisistraton ton Ippokrateos. [2] kai aytui feugonti Olympiada anelesthai tethrippui synebe, kai tauten men ten niken anelomenon min tuyto exeneikasthai tui omometriui adelfeui Miltiadei. meta de tei ysterei Olympiadi teisi ayteisi ippoisi nikun paradidoi Peisistratui anakeryxtheinai, kai ten niken pareis toutui kateilthe epi ta euytou ypospondos. [3] kai min anelomenon teisi ayteisi ippoisi allen Olympiada katelabe apothanein ypo tun Peisistratoy paidun, oyketi perieontos aytou Peisistratoy. kteinoysi de oytoi min kata to prytaneion nyktos ypeisantes andras. tethaptai de Kimun pro tou asteos, peren teis dia Koiles kaleomenes odou. katantion d' aytou ai ippoi tethafatai aytai ai treis Olympiadas anelomenai. [4] epoiesan de kai allai ippoi ede tuyto touto Eyagoreu Lakunos, pleu de toyteun oydamai. o men de presbuteros tun paidun tui Kimuni Stesagores En tenikauta para tui patrui Miltiadei trefomenos en tei Khersonesui, o de neuteros par' aytui Kimuni en Atheneisi, oynoma exun apo tou oikisteu teis Khersonesoy Miltiadeu Miltiades.    
      104. This Miltiades then at the time of which we speak had come from the Chersonese and was a general of the Athenians, after escaping death in two forms; for not only did the Phenicians, who had pursued after him as far as Imbros, endeavour earnestly to take him and bring him up to the presence of the king, but also after this, when he had escaped from these and had come to his own native land and seemed to be in safety from that time forth, his opponents, who had laid wait for him there, brought him up before a court and prosecuted him for his despotism in the Chersonese. Having escaped these also, he had then been appointed a general of the Athenians, being elected by the people.         104. [1] oytos de un tote o Miltiades ekun ek teis Khersonesoy kai ekpefeygus diploon thanaton estrategee Athenaiun. ama men gar oi Foinikes ayton oi epidiuxantes mexri Imbroy peri pollou epoieunto labein te kai anagagein para basilea. [2] ama de ekfygonta te toutoys kai apikomenon es ten euytou dokeonta te einai en suteriei ede, to entheuten min oi exthroi ypodexamenoi ypo dikasterion ayton agagontes ediuxan tyrannidos teis en Khersonesui. apofygun de kai toutoys strategos oytu Athenaiun apedexthe, airetheis ypo tou demoy.    
      105. First of all, while they were still in the city, the generals sent off to Sparta a herald, namely Pheidippides an Athenian and for the rest a runner of long day-courses and one who practised this as his profession. With this man, as Pheidippides himself said and as he made report to the Athenians, Pan chanced to meet by mount Parthenion, which is above Tegea; and calling aloud the name of Pheidippides, Pan bade him report to the Athenians and ask for what reason they had no care of him, though he was well disposed to the Athenians and had been serviceable to them on many occasions before that time, and would be so also yet again. Believing that this tale was true, the Athenians, when their affairs had been now prosperously settled, established under the Acropolis a temple of Pan; and in consequence of this message they propitiate him with sacrifice offered every year and with a torch-race.         105. [1] kai pruta men eontes eti en tui astei oi strategoi apopempoysi es Sparten keryka Feidippiden Athenaion men andra, allus de emerodromen te kai touto meletunta. tui de, us aytos te elege Feidippides kai Athenaioisi apeggelle, peri to Parthenion oros to yper Tegees o Pan peripiptei. [2] busanta de to oynoma tou Feidippideu ton Pana Athenaioisi keleusai apaggeilai, di' o ti euytou oydemian epimeleien poieuntai eontos eynooy Athenaioisi kai pollaxei genomenoy sfi ede xresimoy, ta d' eti kai esomenoy. [3] kai tauta men Athenaioi, katastantun sfi ey ede tun pregmatun, pisteusantes einai alethea idrusanto ypo tei akropoli Panos iron, kai ayton apo tautes teis aggelies thysieisi epeteioisi kai lampadi ilaskontai.    
      106. However at that time, the time namely when he said that Pan appeared to him, this Pheidippides having been sent by the generals was in Sparta on the next day after that on which he left the city of the Athenians; and when he had come to the magistrates he said: "Lacedemonians, the Athenians make request of you to come to their help and not to allow a city most anciently established among the Hellenes to fall into slavery by the means of Barbarians; for even now Eretria has been enslaved, and Hellas has become the weaker by a city of renown." He, as I say, reported to them that with which he had been charged, and it pleased them well to come to help the Athenians; but it was impossible for them to do so at once, since they did not desire to break their law; for it was the ninth day of the month, and on the ninth day they said they would not go forth, nor until the circle of the moon should be full.         106. [1] tote de pemftheis ypo tun strategun o Feidippides oytos, ote per oi efe kai ton Pana faneinai, deyteraios ek tou Athenaiun asteos En en Spartei, apikomenos de epi tous arxontas elege [2] <<u Lakedaimonioi, Athenaioi ymeun deontai sfisi boetheisai kai me periidein polin arxaiotaten en toisi Ellesi doylosunei peripesousan pros andrun barbarun. kai gar nun Eretria te endrapodistai kai poli logimui e Ellas gegone asthenestere.>> [3] o men de sfi ta entetalmena apeggelle, toisi de eade men boetheein Athenaioisi, adunata de sfi En to paraytika poieein tauta, oy boylomenoisi luein ton nomon. En gar istamenoy tou menos einate, einatei de oyk exeleusesthai efasan me oy plereos eontos tou kukloy.    
      107. These men were waiting for the full moon: and meanwhile Hippias the son of Peisistratos was guiding the Barbarians in to Marathon, after having seen on the night that was just past a vision in his sleep of this kind,--it seemed to Hippias that he lay with his own mother. He conjectured then from the dream that he should return to Athens and recover his rule, and then bring his life to an end in old age in his own land. From the dream, I say, he conjectured this; and after this, as he guided them in, first he disembarked the slaves from Eretria on the island belonging to the Styrians, called Aigleia; and then, as the ships came in to shore at Marathon, he moored them there, and after the Barbarians had come from their ships to land, he was engaged in disposing them in their places. While he was ordering these things, it came upon him to sneeze and cough more violently than was his wont. Then since he was advanced in years, most of his teeth were shaken thereby, and one of these teeth he cast forth by the violence of the cough: and the tooth having fallen from him upon the sand, he was very desirous to find it; since however the tooth was not to be found when he searched, he groaned aloud and said to those who were by him: "This land is not ours, nor shall we be able to make it subject to us; but so much part in it as belonged to me the tooth possesses."         107. [1] oytoi men nyn ten panselenon emenon. toisi de barbaroisi kategeeto Ippies o Peisistratoy es ton Marathuna, teis paroixomenes nyktos opsin idun toiende. edokee o Ippies tei metri tei euytou syneynetheinai. [2] synebaleto un ek tou oneiroy katelthun es tas Athenas kai anasusamenos ten arxen teleytesein en tei euytou geraios. ek men de teis opsios synebaleto tauta, tote de kategeomenos touto men ta andrapoda ta ex Eretries apebese es ten neison ten Styreun, kaleomenen de Aigleien, touto de katagomenas es ton Marathuna tas neas ormize oytos, ekbantas te es gein tous barbaroys dietasse. [3] kai oi tauta dieponti epeilthe ptarein te kai beixai mezonus e us euthee. oia de oi presbyterui eonti tun odontun oi pleunes eseionto. toutun un ena tun odontun ekballei ypo bies bexas. ekpesontos de es ten psammon aytou epoieeto spoyden pollen exeyrein. [4] us de oyk efaineto oi o odun, anastenaxas eipe pros tous parastatas <<e gei ede oyk emetere esti, oyde min dynesometha ypoxeirien poiesasthai. okoson de ti moi meros metein, o odun metexei.>>    
      108. Hippias then conjectured that his vision had been thus fulfilled: and meanwhile, after the Athenians had been drawn up in the sacred enclosure of Heracles, there joined them the Plataians coming to their help in a body: for the Plataians had given themselves to the Athenians, and the Athenians before this time undertook many toils on behalf of them; and this was the manner in which they gave themselves: --Being oppressed by the Thebans, the Plataians at first desired to give themselves to Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides and to the Lacedemonians, who chanced to come thither; but these did not accept them, and said to them as follows: "We dwell too far off, and such support as ours would be to you but cold comfort; for ye might many times be reduced to slavery before any of us had information of it: but we counsel you rather to give yourselves to the Athenians, who are both neighbours and also not bad helpers." Thus the Lacedemonians counselled, not so much on account of their goodwill to the Plataians as because they desired that the Athenians should have trouble by being involved in a conflict with the Boetians. The Lacedemonians, I say, thus counselled the men of Plataia; and they did not fail to follow their counsel, but when the Athenians were doing sacrifice to the twelve gods, they sat down as suppliants at the altar and so gave themselves. Then the Thebans having been informed of these things marched against the Plataians, and the Athenians came to their assistance: and as they were about to join battle, the Corinthians did not permit them to do so, but being by chance there, they reconciled their strife; and both parties having put the matter into their hands, they laid down boundaries for the land, with the condition that the Thebans should leave those of the Boeotians alone who did not desire to be reckoned with the other Boeotians. The Corinthians having given this decision departed; but as the Athenians were going back, the Boeotians attacked them, and having attacked them they were worsted in the fight. Upon that the Athenians passed beyond the boundaries which the Corinthians had set to be for the Plataians, and they made the river Asopos itself to be the boundary of the Thebans towards the land of Plataia and towards the district of Hysiai. The Plataians then had given themselves to the Athenians in the manner which has been said, and at this time they came to Marathon to bring them help.         108. [1] Ippies men de tautei ten opsin synebaleto exelelythenai. Athenaioisi de tetagmenoisi en temenei Erakleos epeilthon boetheontes Plataiees pandemei. kai gar kai ededukesan sfeas aytous toisi Athenaioisi oi Plataiees, kai ponoys yper aytun oi Athenaioi syxnous ede anaraireato. edosan de ude. [2] piezeumenoi ypo Thebaiun oi Plataiees edidosan pruta paratyxousi Kleomenei te tui Anaxandrideu kai Lakedaimonioisi sfeas aytous. oi de oy dekomenoi elegon sfi tade. <<emeis men ekasteru te oikeomen, kai ymin toiede tis ginoit' an epikoyrie psyxre. fthaiete gar an pollakis exandrapodisthentes e tina pythesthai emeun. [3] symboyleuomen de ymin dounai ymeas aytous Athenaioisi, plesioxuroisi te andrasi kai timureein eousi oy kakoisi.>> tauta synebouleyon oi Lakedaimonioi oy kata ten eynoien oytu tun Plataieun us boylomenoi tous Athenaioys exein ponoys synesteutas Boiutoisi. [4] Lakedaimonioi men nyn Plataieusi tauta synebouleyon, oi de oyk epistesan, all' Athenaiun ira poieuntun toisi dyudeka theoisi iketai izomenoi epi ton bumon edidosan sfeas aytous. Thebaioi de pythomenoi tauta estrateuonto epi tous Plataieas, Athenaioi de sfi eboetheon. [5] mellontun de synaptein maxen Korinthioi oy perieidon, paratyxontes de kai katallaxantes epitrepsantun amfoterun oyrisan ten xuren epi toiside, ean Thebaioys Boiutun tous me boylomenoys es Boiutous teleein. Korinthioi men de tauta gnontes apallassonto, Athenaioisi de apiousi epethekanto Boiutoi, epithemenoi de essuthesan tei maxei. [6] yperbantes de oi Athenaioi tous oi Korinthioi ethekan Plataieusi einai oyroys, toutoys yperbantes ton Asupon ayton epoiesanto oyron Thebaioisi pros Plataieas einai kai Ysias. edosan men de oi Plataiees sfeas aytous Athenaioisi tropui tui eiremenui, Ekon de tote es Marathuna boetheontes.    
      109. Now the opinions of the generals of the Athenians were divided, and the one party urged that they should not fight a battle, seeing that they were too few to fight with the army of the Medes, while the others, and among them Miltiades, advised that they should do so: and when they were divided and the worse opinion was like to prevail, then, since he who had been chosen by lot to be polemarch of the Athenians had a vote in addition to the ten (for in old times the Athenians gave the polemarch an equal vote with the generals) and at that time the polemarch was Callimachos of the deme of Aphidnai, to him came Miltiades and said as follows: "With thee now it rests, Callimachos, either to bring Athens under slavery, or by making her free to leave behind thee for all the time that men shall live a memorial such as not even Harmodios and Aristogeiton have left. For now the Athenians have come to a danger the greatest to which they have ever come since they were a people; and on the one hand, if they submit to the Medes, it is determined what they shall suffer, being delivered over to Hippias, while on the other hand, if this city shall gain the victory, it may become the first of the cities of Hellas. How this may happen and how it comes to thee of all men to have the decision of these matters, I am now about to tell. Of us the generals, who are ten in number, the opinions are divided, the one party urging that we fight a battle and the others that we do not fight. Now if we do not, I expect that some great spirit of discord will fall upon the minds of the Athenians and so shake them that they shall go over to the Medes; but if we fight a battle before any unsoundness appear in any part of the Athenian people, then we are able to gain the victory in the fight, if the gods grant equal conditions. These things then all belong to thee and depend on thee; for if thou attach thyself to my opinions, thou hast both a fatherland which is free and a native city which shall be the first among the cities of Hellas; but if thou choose the opinion of those who are earnest against fighting, thou shalt have the opposite of those good things of which I told thee."         109. [1] toisi de Athenaiun strategoisi eginonto dixa ai gnumai, tun men oyk euntun symbalein (oligoys gar einai stratiei tei Medun symballein) tun de kai Miltiadeu keleyontun. [2] us de dixa te eginonto kai enika e xeirun tun gnumeun, enthauta, En gar endekatos psefidoforos o tui kyamui laxun Athenaiun polemarxeein (to Palaion gar Athenaioi omopsefon ton polemarxon epoieunto toisi strategoisi), En de tote polemarxos Kallimaxos Afidnaios. pros touton elthun Miltiades elege tade. [3] <<en soi nun Kallimaxe esti e katadoylusai Athenas e eleytheras poiesanta mnemosyna lipesthai es ton apanta anthrupun bion oia oyde Armodios te kai Aristogeitun leipoysi. nun gar de ex oy egenonto Athenaioi es kindynon ekoysi megiston, kai en men ge ypokupsusi toisi Medoisi, dedoktai ta peisontai paradedomenoi Ippiei, en de perigenetai ayte e polis, oie te esti prute tun Ellenidun poliun genesthai. [4] kus un de tauta oia te esti genesthai, kai kus es se toi toutun anekei tun pregmatun to kuros exein, nun erxomai frasun. emeun tun strategun eontun deka dixa ginontai ai gnumai, tun men keleyontun tun de oy symballein. [5] en men nyn me symbalumen, elpomai tina stasin megalen diaseisein empesousan ta Athenaiun fronemata uste medisai. en de symbalumen prin ti kai sathron Athenaiun metexeteroisi eggenesthai, theun ta isa nemontun oioi te eimen perigenesthai tei symbolei. [6] tauta un panta es se nun teinei kai ek seo ertetai. en gar su gnumei tei emei prosthei, esti toi patris te eleythere kai polis prute tun en tei Elladi. en de ten tun apospeydontun ten symbolen elei, yparxei toi tun egu katelexa agathun ta enantia.>>    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [110]

     110. Thus speaking Miltiades gained Callimachos to his side; and the opinion of the polemarch being added, it was thus determined to fight a battle. After this, those generals whose opinion was in favour of fighting, as the turn of each one of them to command for the day came round, gave over their command to Miltiades; and he, accepting it, would not however yet bring about a battle, until his own turn to command had come.         110. [1] tauta legun o Miltiades prosktatai ton Kallimaxon. prosgenomenes de tou polemarxoy teis gnumes ekekuruto symballein. meta de oi strategoi tun e gnume efere symballein, us ekastoy aytun egineto prytaneie teis emeres, Miltiadei paredidosan. o de dekomenos oyti ku symbolen epoieeto, prin ge de aytou prytaneie egeneto.    
      111. And when it came round to him, then the Athenians were drawn up for battle in the order which here follows:-- On the right wing the polemarch Callimachos was leader (for the custom of the Athenians then was this, that the polemarch should have the right wing); and he leading, next after him came the tribes in order as they were numbered one after another, and last were drawn up the Plataians occupying the left wing: for ever since this battle, when the Athenians offer sacrifices in the solemn assemblies which are made at the four-yearly festivals, the herald of the Athenians prays thus, "that blessings may come to the Athenians and to the Plataians both." On this occasion however, when the Athenians were being drawn up at Marathon something of this kind was done:--their army being made equal in length of front to that of the Medes, came to drawn up in the middle with a depth of but few ranks, and here their army was weakest, while each wing was strengthened with numbers.         111. [1] us de es ekeinon perieilthe, enthauta de etassonto ude oi Athenaioi us symbaleontes. tou men dexiou kereos egeeto o polemarxos Kallimaxos. o gar nomos tote eixe oytu toisi Athenaioisi, ton polemarxon exein keras to dexion. egeomenoy de toutoy exedekonto us arithmeonto ai fylai exomenai alleleun, teleytaioi de etassonto exontes to eyunymon keras Plataiees. [2] apo tautes [gar] sfi teis maxes, Athenaiun thysias anagontun es tas panegurias tas en teisi penteterisi ginomenas, kateuxetai o keiryx o Athenaios ama te Athenaioisi legun ginesthai ta agatha kai Plataieusi. [3] tote de tassomenun tun Athenaiun en tui Marathuni egineto toionde ti. to stratopedon exisoumenon tui Medikui stratopedui, to men aytou meson egineto epi taxias oligas, kai tautei En asthenestaton to stratopedon, to de keras ekateron erruto plethei.    
      112. And when they had been arranged in their places and the sacrifices proved favourable, then the Athenians were let go, and they set forth at a run to attack the Barbarians. Now the space between the armies was not less than eight furlongs: and the Persians seeing them advancing to the attack at a run, made preparations to receive them; and in their minds they charged the Athenians with madness which must be fatal, seeing that they were few and yet were pressing forwards at a run, having neither cavalry nor archers. Such was the thought of the Barbarians; but the Athenians when all in a body they had joined in combat with the Barbarians, fought in a memorable fashion: for they were the first of all the Hellenes about whom we know who went to attack the enemy at a run, and they were the first also who endured to face the Median garments and the men who wore them, whereas up to this time the very name of the Medes was to the Hellenes a terror to hear.         112. [1] us de sfi dietetakto kai ta sfagia egineto kala, enthauta us apeithesan oi Athenaioi dromui iento es tous barbaroys. Esan de stadioi oyk elassones to metaixmion aytun e oktu. [2] oi de Persai oreontes dromui epiontas pareskeyazonto us dexomenoi, manien te toisi Athenaioisi epeferon kai pagxy olethrien, oreontes aytous oligoys kai toutoys dromui epeigomenoys, oyte ippoy yparxouses sfi oyte toxeymatun. [3] tauta men nyn oi barbaroi kateikazon. Athenaioi de epeite athrooi prosemixan toisi barbaroisi, emaxonto axius logoy. prutoi men gar Ellenun pantun tun emeis idmen dromui es polemioys exresanto, prutoi de anesxonto estheita te Mediken oreontes kai tous andras tauten esthemenoys. teus de En toisi Ellesi kai to oynoma to Medun fobos akousai.    
      113. Now while they fought in Marathon, much time passed by; and in the centre of the army, where the Persians themselves and the Sacans were drawn up, the Barbarians were winning, --here, I say, the Barbarians had broken the ranks of their opponents and were pursuing them inland, but on both wings the Athenians and the Plataians severally were winning the victory; and being victorious they left that part of the Barbarians which had been routed to fly without molestation, and bringing together the two wings they fought with those who had broken their centre, and the Athenians were victorious. So they followed after the Persians as they fled, slaughtering them, until they came to the sea; and then they called for fire and began to take hold of the ships.         113. [1] maxomenun de en tui Marathuni xronos egineto pollos, kai to men meson tou stratopedoy enikun oi barbaroi, tei Persai te aytoi kai Sakai etetaxato. kata touto men de enikun oi barbaroi kai rhexantes ediukon es ten mesogaian, to de keras ekateron enikun Athenaioi te kai Plataiees. [2] nikuntes de to men tetrammenon tun barbarun feugein eun, toisi de to meson rhexasi aytun synagagontes ta kerea amfotera emaxonto, kai enikun Athenaioi. feugoysi de toisi Perseisi eiponto koptontes, es o es ten thalassan apikomenoi pur te aiteon kai epelambanonto tun neun.    
      114. In this part of the work was slain the polemarch Callimachos after having proved himself a good man, and also one of the generals, Stesilaos the son of Thrasylaos, was killed; and besides this Kynegeiros the son of Euphorion while taking hold there of the ornament at the stern of a ship had his hand cut off with an axe and fell; and many others also of the Athenians who were men of note were killed.         114. [1] kai touto men en toutui tui ponui o polemarxos diaftheiretai, aner genomenos agathos, apo d' ethane tun strategun Stesileus o Thrasuleu. touto de Kynegeiros o Eyforiunos enthauta epilambanomenos tun aflastun neos, ten xeira apokopeis pelekei piptei, touto de alloi Athenaiun polloi te kai onomastoi.    
      115. Seven of the ships the Athenians got possession of in this manner, but with the rest the Barbarians pushed off from land, and after taking the captives from Eretria off the island where they had left them, they sailed round Sunion, purposing to arrive at the city before the Athenians. And an accusation became current among the Athenians to the effect that they formed this design by contrivance of the Alcmaionidai; for these, it was said, having concerted matters with the Persians, displayed to them a shield when they had now embarked in their ships.         115. [1] epta men de tun neun epekratesan tropui toiuide Athenaioi. teisi de loipeisi oi barbaroi exanakroysamenoi, kai analabontes ek teis nesoy en tei elipon ta ex Eretries andrapoda, periepleon Sounion boylomenoi ftheinai tous Athenaioys apikomenoi es to asty. aitien de esxe en Athenaioisi ex Alkmeunideun mexaneis aytous tauta epinoetheinai. toutoys gar synthemenoys toisi Perseisi anadexai aspida eousi ede en teisi neysi.    
      116. These then, I say, were sailing round Sunion; and meanwhile the Athenians came to the rescue back to the city as speedily as they could, and they arrived there before the Barbarians came; and having arrived from the temple of Heracles at Marathon they encamped at another temple of Heracles, namely that which is in Kynosarges. The Barbarians however came and lay with their ships in the sea which is off Phaleron, (for this was then the seaport of the Athenians), they anchored their ships, I say, off this place, and then proceeded to sail back to Asia.         116. [1] oytoi men de periepleon Sounion. Athenaioi de us podun eixon taxista eboetheon es to asty, kai efthesan te apikomenoi prin e tous barbaroys ekein, kai estratopedeusanto apigmenoi ex Erakleioy tou en Marathuni en allui Erakleiui tui en Kynosargei. oi de barbaroi teisi neysi yperaiurethentes Faleroy, touto gar En epineion tote tun Athenaiun, yper toutoy anakuxeusantes tas neas apepleon opisu es ten Asien.    
      117. In this fight at Marathon there were slain of the Barbarians about six thousand four hundred men, and of the Athenians a hundred and ninety and two. Such was the number which fell on both sides; and it happened also that a marvel occurred there of this kind:--an Athenian, Epizelos the son of Cuphagoras, while fighting in the close combat and proving himself a good man, was deprived of the sight of his eyes, neither having received a blow in any part of his body nor having been hit with a missile, and for the rest of his life from this time he continued to be blind: and I was informed that he used to tell about that which had happened to him a tale of this kind, namely that it seemed to him that a tall man in full armour stood against him, whose beard overshadowed his whole shield; and this apparition passed him by, but killed his comrade who stood next to him. Thus, as I was informed, Epizelos told the tale.         117. [1] en tautei tei en Marathuni maxei apethanon tun barbarun kata exakisxilioys kai tetrakosioys andras, Athenaiun de ekaton kai enenekonta kai duo. epeson men amfoterun tosoutoi. [2] syneneike de aytothi thuma genesthai toionde, Athenaion andra Epizelon ton Koyfagoreu en tei systasi maxomenon te kai andra ginomenon agathon tun ommatun steretheinai oyte plegenta oyden tou sumatos oyte blethenta, kai to loipon teis zoes diateleein apo toutoy tou xronoy eonta tyflon. [3] legein de ayton peri tou patheos ekoysa toionde tina logon, andra oi dokeein opliten antisteinai megan, tou to geneion ten aspida pasan skiazein. to de fasma touto euyton men parexelthein, ton de euytou parastaten apokteinai. tauta men de Epizelon epythomen legein.    
      118. Datis, however, as he was going with his army to Asia, when he had come to Myconos saw a vision in his sleep; and of what nature the vision was it is not reported, but as soon as day dawned he caused a search to be made of the ships, and finding in a Phenician ship an image of Apollo overlaid with gold, he inquired from whence it had been carried off. Then having been informed from what temple it came, he sailed in his own ship to Delos: and finding that the Delians had returned then to the island, he deposited the image in the temple and charged the men of Delos to convey it back to Delion in the territory of the Thebans, which is situated by the sea-coast just opposite Chalkis. Datis having given this charge sailed away: the Delians however did not convey the statue back, but after an interval of twenty years the Thebans themselves brought it to Delion by reason of an oracle.         118. [1] Datis de poreyomenos ama tui stratui es ten Asien, epeite egeneto en Mykonui, eide opsin en tui ypnui. kai etis men En e opsis, oy legetai. o de, us emere taxista epelampse, zetesin epoieeto tun neun, eyrun de en nei Foinissei agalma Apollunos kexrysumenon epynthaneto okothen sesylemenon eie, pythomenos de ex oy En irou, eplee tei euytou nei es Deilon. [2] kai apikato gar tenikauta oi Delioi opisu es ten neison, katatithetai te es to iron to agalma kai entelletai toisi Delioisi apagagein to agalma es Delion to Thebaiun. to d' esti epi thalassei Khalkidos katantion. [3] Datis men de tauta enteilamenos apeplee, ton de andrianta touton Delioi oyk apegagon, alla min di' eteun eikosi Thebaioi aytoi ek theopropioy ekomisanto epi Delion.    
      119. Now as to those Eretrians who had been reduced to slavery, Datis and Artaphrenes, when they reached Asia in their voyage, brought them up to Susa; and king Dareios, though he had great anger against the Eretrians before they were made captive, because the Eretrians had done wrong to him unprovoked, yet when he saw that they had been brought up to him and were in his power, he did them no more evil, but established them as settlers in the Kissian land upon one of his own domains, of which the name is Ardericca: and this is distant two hundred and ten furlongs from Susa and forty from the well which produces things of three different kinds; for they draw from it asphalt, salt and oil, in the manner which here follows:--the liquid is drawn with a swipe, to which there is fastened half a skin instead of a bucket, and a man strikes this down into it and draws up, and then pours it into a cistern, from which it runs through into another vessel, taking three separate ways. The asphalt and the salt become solid at once, and the oil which is called by the Persians rhadinake, is black and gives out a disagreeable smell. Here king Dareios established the Eretrians as settlers; and even to my time they continued to occupy this land, keeping still their former language. Thus it happened with regard to the Eretrians.         119. [1] tous de tun Eretrieun andrapodismenoys Datis te kai Artafrenes, us prosesxon pros ten Asien pleontes, anegagon es Sousa. basileus de Dareios, prin men aixmalutoys genesthai tous Eretrieas, eneixe sfi deinon xolon, oia arxantun adikies proterun tun Eretrieun. [2] epeite de eide sfeas apaxthentas par' euyton kai euytui ypoxeirioys eontas, epoiese kakon allo oyden, alla sfeas teis Kissies xures katoikise en stathmui euytou tui oynoma esti Arderikka, apo men Sousun deka kai diekosioys stadioys apexonti, tesserakonta de apo tou freatos to parexetai trifasias ideas. kai gar asfalton kai alas kai elaion arussontai ex aytou tropui toiuide. [3] antleetai men keluneiui, anti de gaylou emisy askou oi prosdedetai. ypotupsas de toutui antleei kai epeita egxeei es dexamenen. ek de tautes es allo diaxeomenon trepetai trifasias odous. kai e men asfaltos kai oi ales pegnyntai paraytika. to de elaion oi Persai kaleoysi touto rhadinaken, esti de melan kai odmen parexomenon barean. [4] enthauta tous Eretrieas katoikise basileus Dareios, oi kai mexri emeo eixon ten xuren tauten, fylasontes ten arxaien glussan.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [120]

     120. Of the Lacedemonians there came to Athens two thousand after the full moon, making great haste to be in time, so that they arrived in Attica on the third day after leaving Sparta: and though they had come too late for the battle, yet they desired to behold the Medes; and accordingly they went out to Marathon and looked at the bodies of the slain: then afterwards they departed home, commending the Athenians and the work which they had done.         120. [1] ta men de peri Eretrieas esxe oytu. Lakedaimoniun de Ekon es tas Athenas disxilioi meta ten panselenon, exontes spoyden pollen katalabein, oytu uste tritaioi ek Spartes egenonto en tei Attikei. ysteroi de apikomenoi teis symboleis imeironto omus theesasthai tous Medoys. elthontes de es ton Marathuna etheesanto. meta de aineontes Athenaioys kai to ergon aytun apallassonto opisu.    
      121. Now it is a cause of wonder to me, and I do not accept the report, that the Alcmaionidai could ever have displayed to the Persians a shield by a previous understanding, with the desire that the Athenians should be under the Barbarians and under Hippias; seeing that they are evidently proved to have been haters of despots as much or more than Callias the son of Phainippos and father of Hipponicos, while Callias for his part was the only man of all the Athenians who dared, when Peisistratos was driven out of Athens, to buy his goods offered for sale by the State, and in other ways also he contrived against him everything that was most hostile:         121. [1] thuma de moi kai oyk endekomai ton logon Alkmeunidas an kote anadexai Perseisi ek synthematos aspida, boylomenoys ypo barbaroisi te einai Athenaioys kai ypo Ippiei. oitines mallon e omoius Kalliei tui Fainippoy, Ipponikoy de patri, fainontai misoturannoi eontes. [2] Kallies te gar mounos Athenaiun apantun etolma, okus Peisistratos ekpesoi ek tun Atheneun, ta xremata aytou keryssomena ypo tou demosioy uneesthai, kai talla ta exthista es ayton panta emexanato.    
      122. (Of this Callias it is fitting that every one should have remembrance for many reasons: first because of that which has been before said, namely that he was a man of excellence in freeing his country; and then also for that which he did at the Olympic games, wherein he gained a victory in the horse- race and was second in the chariot-race, and he had before this been a victor at the Pythian games, so that he was distinguished in the sight of all Hellenes by the sums which he expended; and finally because he showed himself a man of such liberality towards his daughters, who were three in number; for when they came to be of ripe age for marriage, he gave them a most magnificent dowry and also indulged their inclinations; for whomsoever of all the Athenians each one of them desired to choose as a husband for herself, to that man he gave her.)         122. [1] [Kallieu de toutoy axion pollaxou mnemen esti panta tina exein. touto men gar ta prolelegmena, us aner akros eleytherun ten patrida. touto de ta en Olympiei epoiese. ippui nikesas, tethrippui de deuteros genomenos, Puthia de proteron anelomenos, efaneruthe es tous Ellenas pantas dapaneisi megisteisi. [2] touto de kata tas euytou thygateras eousas treis oios tis aner egeneto. epeide gar eginonto gamoy uraiai, eduke sfi dureen megaloprepestaten ekeineisi te exarisato. ek gar pantun tun Athenaiun ton ekaste etheloi andra euytei eklexasthai, eduke toutui tui andri.]    
      123. and similarly, the Alcmaionidai were haters of despots equally or more than he. Therefore this is a cause of wonder to me, and I do not admit the accusation that these they were who displayed the shield; seeing that they were in exile from the despots during their whole time, and that by their contrivance the sons of Peisistratos gave up their rule. Thus it follows that they were the men who set Athens free much more than Harmodios and Aristogeiton, as I judge: for these my slaying Hipparchos exasperated the rest of the family of Peisistratos, and did not at all cause the others to cease from their despotism; but the Alcmaionidai did evidently set Athens free, at least if these were in truth the men who persuaded the Pythian prophetess to signify to the Lacedemonians that they should set Athens free, as I have set forth before.         123. [1] kai oi Alkmeunidai omoius e oyden Esson toutoy Esan misoturannoi. thuma un moi kai oy prosiemai ten diabolen toutoys ge anadexai aspida, oitines efeygon te ton panta xronon tous tyrannoys, ek mexaneis te teis toutun exelipon Peisistratidai ten tyrannida, [2] kai oytu tas Athenas oytoi Esan oi eleytherusantes pollui mallon e per Armodios te kai Aristogeitun, us egu krinu. oi men gar exegriusan tous ypoloipoys Peisistratideun Ipparxon apokteinantes, oyde ti mallon epaysan tous loipous tyranneuontas. Alkmeunidai de emfaneus eleytherusan, ei de oytoi ge aletheus Esan oi ten Pythien anapeisantes prosemainein Lakedaimonioisi eleytheroun tas Athenas, us moi proteron dedelutai.    
      124. It may be said however that they had some cause of complaint against the people of the Athenians, and therefore endeavoured to betray their native city. But on the contrary there were no men in greater repute than they, among the Athenians at least, nor who had been more highly honoured. Thus it is not reasonable to suppose that by them a shield should have been displayed for any such purpose. A shield was displayed, however; that cannot be denied, for it was done: but as to who it was who displayed it, I am not able to say more than this.         124. [1] alla gar isus ti epimemfomenoi Athenaiun tui demui proedidosan ten patrida. oy men un Esan sfeun alloi dokimuteroi en ge Athenaioisi andres oyd' oi mallon etetimeato. [2] oytu oyde logos aireei anadextheinai ek ge an toutun aspida epi toioutui logui. anedexthe men gar aspis, kai touto oyk esti allus eipein. egeneto gar. os mentoi En o anadexas, oyk exu prosuteru eipein toutun.    
      125. Now the family of Alcmaionidai was distinguished in Athens in the earliest times also, and from the time of Alcmaion and of Megacles after him they became very greatly distinguished. For first Alcmaion the son of Megacles showed himself a helper of the Lydians from Sardis who came from Croesus to the Oracle at Delphi, and assisted them with zeal; and Croesus having heard from the Lydians who went to the Oracle that this man did him service, sent for him to Sardis; and when he came, he offered to give him a gift of as much gold as he could carry away at once upon his own person. With a view to this gift, its nature being such, Alcmaion made preparations and used appliances as follows: --he put on a large tunic leaving a deep fold in the tunic to hang down in front, and he draw on his feet the widest boots which he could find, and so went to the treasury to which they conducted him. Then he fell upon a heap of gold-dust, and first he packed in by the side of his legs so much of the gold as his boots would contain, and then he filled the whole fold of the tunic with the gold and sprinkled some of the gold dust on the hair of his head and took some into his mouth, and having so done he came forth out of the treasury, with difficulty dragging along his boots and resembling anything in the world rather than a man; for his mouth was stuffed full, and every part of him was swelled out: and upon Croesus came laughter when he saw him, and he not only gave him all that, but also presented him in addition with more not inferior in value to that. Thus this house became exceedingly wealthy, and thus the Alcmaion of whom I speak became a breeder of chariot-horses and won a victory at Olympia.         125. [1] oi de Alkmeunidai Esan men kai ta anekathen lamproi en teisi Atheneisi, apo de Alkmeunos kai aytis Megakleos egenonto kai karta lamproi. [2] touto men gar Alkmeun o Megakleos toisi ek Sardiun Lydoisi para Kroisoy apikneomenoisi epi to xresterion to en Delfoisi symprektur te egineto kai synelambane prothumus, kai min Kroisos pythomenos tun Lydun tun es ta xresteria foiteontun euyton ey poieein metapempetai es Sardis, apikomenon de dureetai xrysui ton an dunetai tui euytou sumati exeneikasthai esapax. [3] o de Alkmeun pros ten dureen eousan toiauten toiade epitedeusas prosefere. endus kithuna megan kai kolpon bathun katalipomenos tou kithunos, kothornoys te tous eyriske eyrytatoys eontas ypodesamenos, eie es ton thesayron es ton oi kategeonto. [4] espesun de es suron psegmatos pruta men paresaxe para tas knemas tou xrysou oson exureon oi kothornoi, meta de ton kolpon panta plesamenos tou xrysou kai es tas trixas teis kefaleis diapasas tou psegmatos kai allo labun es to stoma, exeie ek tou thesayrou elkun men mogis tous kothornoys, panti de teui oikus mallon e anthrupui. tou to te stoma ebebysto kai panta exugkuto. [5] idonta de ton Kroison gelus eseilthe, kai oi panta te ekeina didoi kai pros etera dureetai oyk elassu ekeinun. oytu men eploutese e oikie ayte megalus, kai o Alkmeun oytos oytu tethrippotrofesas Olympiada anaireetai.    
      126. Then in the next generation after this, Cleisthenes the despot of Sikyon exalted the family, so that it became of much more note among the Hellenes than it had been formerly. For Cleisthenes the son of Arisonymos, the son of Myron, the son of Andreas, had a daughter whose name was Agariste; and as to her he formed a desire to find out the best man of all the Hellenes and to assign her to him in marriage. So when the Olympic games were being held and Cleisthenes was victor in them with a four- horse chariot, he caused a proclamation to be made, that whosoever of the Hellenes thought himself worthy to be the son-in-law of Cleisthenes should come on the sixtieth day, or before that if he would, to Sikyon; for Cleisthenes intended to conclude the marriage within a year, reckoning from the sixtieth day. Then all those of the Hellenes who had pride either in themselves or in their high descent, came as wooers, and for them Cleisthenes had a running- course and a wrestling-place made and kept them expressly for their use.         126. [1] meta de geneei deyterei ysteron Kleisthenes ayten o Sikyunios turannos exeeire, uste pollui onomastoteren genesthai en toisi Ellesi e proteron En. Kleisthenei gar tui Aristunumoy tou Murunos tou Andreu ginetai thygater tei oynoma En Agariste. tauten ethelese, Ellenun apantun exeyrun ton ariston, toutui gynaika prostheinai. [2] Olympiun un eontun kai nikun en aytoisi tethrippui o Kleisthenes kerygma epoiesato, ostis Ellenun euyton axioi Kleistheneos gambron genesthai, ekein es exekosten emeren e kai proteron es Sikyuna, us kyrusontos Kleistheneos ton gamon en eniaytui, apo teis exekosteis arxamenoy emeres. [3] enthauta Ellenun osoi sfisi te aytoisi Esan kai patrei exugkumenoi, efoiteon mnesteires. toisi Kleisthenes kai dromon kai palaistren poiesamenos ep' aytui toutui eixe.    
      127. From Italy came Smindyrides the son of Hippocrates of Sybaris, who of all men on earth reached the highest point of luxury (now Sybaris at this time was in the height of its prosperity), and Damasos of Siris, the son of that Amyris who was called the Wise; these came from Italy: from the Ionian gulf came Amphimnestos the son of Epistrophos of Epidamnos, this man from the Ionian gulf: from Aitolia came Males, the brother of that Titormos who surpassed all the Hellenes in strength and who fled from the presence of men to the furthest extremities of the Aitolian land: from Peloponnesus, Leokedes the son of Pheidon the despot of the Argives, that Pheidon who established for the Peloponnesians the measures which they use, and who went beyond all other Hellenes in wanton insolence, since he removed from their place the presidents of the games appointed by the Eleians and himself presided over the games at Olympia,--his son, I say, and Amiantos the son of Lycurgos an Arcadian from Trapezus, and Laphanes an Azanian from the city of Paios, son of that Euphorion who (according to the story told in Arcadia) received the Dioscuroi as guests in his house and from thenceforth was wont to entertain all men who came, and Onomastos the son of Agaios of Elis; these, I say, came from Peloponnesus itself: from Athens came Megacles the son of that Alcmaion who went to Croesus, and besides him Hippocleides the son of Tisander, one who surpassed the other Athenians in wealth and in comeliness of form: from Eretria, which at that time was flourishing, came Lysanias, he alone from Euboea: from Thessalia came Diactorides of Crannon, one of the family of the Scopadai: and from the Molossians, Alcon.         127. [1] apo men de Italies Elthe Smindyrides o Ippokrateos Sybarites, os epi pleiston de xlideis eis aner apiketo (e de Subaris ekmaze touton ton xronon malista), kai Sirites Damasos Amurios tou sofou legomenoy pais. [2] oytoi men apo Italies Elthon, ek de tou kolpoy tou Ionioy Amfimnestos Epistrofoy Epidamnios. oytos de ek tou Ionioy kolpoy. Aitulos de Elthe Titormoy tou yperfuntos te Ellenas isxui kai fygontos anthrupoys es tas esxatias teis Aitulidos xures, toutoy tou Titormoy adelfeos Males. [3] apo de Peloponnesoy Feidunos tou Argeiun tyrannoy pais Leukedes, Feidunos de tou ta metra poiesantos Peloponnesioisi kai ybrisantos megista de Ellenun pantun, os exanastesas tous Eleiun agunothetas aytos ton en Olympiei aguna etheke. toutoy te de pais kai Amiantos Lykourgoy Arkas ek Trapezountos, kai Azen ek Paioy polios Lafanes Eyforiunos tou dexamenoy te, us logos en Arkadiei legetai, tous Dioskouroys oikioisi kai apo toutoy xeinodokeontos pantas anthrupoys, kai Eleios Onomastos Agaioy. [4] oytoi men de ex ayteis Peloponnesoy Elthon, ek de Atheneun apikonto Megaklees te o Alkmeunos toutoy tou para Kroison apikomenoy, kai allos Ippokleides Tisandroy, ploutui kai eidei proferun Athenaiun. apo de Eretries antheuses touton ton xronon Lysanies. oytos de ap' Eyboies mounos. ek de Thessalies Elthe tun Skopadeun Diaktorides Krannunios, ek de Molossun Alkun.    
      128. So many in number did the wooers prove to be: and when these had come by the appointed day, Cleisthenes first inquired of their native countries and of the descent of each one, and then keeping them for a year he made trial continually both of their manly virtue and of their disposition, training and temper, associating both with each one separately and with the whole number together: and he made trial of them both by bringing out to bodily exercises those of them who were younger, and also especially in the common feast: for during all the time that he kept them he did everything that could be done, and at the same time he entertained them magnificently. Now it chanced that those of the wooers pleased him most who had come from Athens, and of these Hippocleides the son of Tisander was rather preferred, both by reason of manly virtues and also because he was connected by descent with the family of Kypselos at Corinth.         128. [1] tosoutoi men egenonto oi mnesteires. apikomenun de toutun es ten proeiremenen emeren, o Kleisthenes pruta men tas patras te aytun aneputheto kai genos ekastoy, meta de katexun eniayton diepeirato aytun teis te andragathies kai teis orgeis kai paideusios te kai tropoy, kai eni ekastui iun es synoysien kai synapasi, kai es gymnasia te exagineun osoi Esan aytun neuteroi, kai to ge megiston, en tei synestiei diepeirato. oson gar kateixe xronon aytous, touton panta epoiee kai ama exeinize megaloprepeus. [2] kai de koy malista tun mnesterun ereskonto oi ap' Atheneun apigmenoi, kai toutun mallon Ippokleides o Tisandroy kai kat' andragathien ekrineto kai oti to anekathen toisi en Korinthui Kypselideisi En prosekun.    
      129. Then when the appointed day came for the marriage banquet and for Cleisthenes himself to declare whom he selected from the whole number, Cleisthenes sacrificed a hundred oxen and feasted both the wooers themselves and all the people of Sikyon; and when the dinner was over, the wooers began to vie with one another both in music and in speeches for the entertainment of the company; and as the drinking went forward and Hippocleides was very much holding the attention of the others, he bade the flute-player play for him a dance-measure; and when the flute-player did so, he danced: and it so befell that he pleased himself in his dancing, but Cleisthenes looked on at the whole matter with suspicion. Then Hippocleides after a certain time bade one bring in a table; and when the table came in, first he danced upon it Laconian figures, and then also Attic, and thirdly he planted his head upon the table and gesticulated with his legs. Cleisthenes meanwhile, when he was dancing the first and the second time, though he abhorred the thought that Hippocleides should now become his son-in-law, because of his dancing and his shamelessness, yet restrained himself, not desiring to break out in anger against him; but when he saw that he thus gesticulated with his legs, he was no longer able to restrain himself, but said: "Thou hast danced away thy marriage however, son of Tisander!" and Hippocleides answered and said: "Hippocleides cares not!"         129. [1] us de e kyrie egeneto tun emereun teis te kataklisios tou gamoy kai ekfasios aytou Kleistheneos ton krinoi ek pantun, thusas bous ekaton o Kleisthenes eyuxee aytous te tous mnesteiras kai Sikyunioys pantas. [2] us de apo deipnoy eginonto, oi mnesteires erin eixon amfi te moysikei kai tui legomenui es to meson. proiouses de teis posios katexun pollon tous alloys o Ippokleides ekeleyse oi ton ayleten ayleisai emmeleien, peithomenoy de tou ayleteu orxesato. kai kus euytui men arestus orxeeto, o Kleisthenes de oreun olon to preigma ypupteye. [3] meta de episxun o Ippokleides xronon ekeleyse tina trapezan eseneikai, eselthouses de teis trapezes pruta men ep' ayteis orxesato Lakunika sxematia, meta de alla Attika, to triton de ten kefalen ereisas epi ten trapezan toisi skelesi exeironomese. [4] Kleisthenes de ta men pruta kai ta deutera orxeomenoy, apostygeun gambron an oi eti genesthai Ippokleidea dia ten te orxesin kai ten anaideien, kateixe euyton, oy boylomenos ekrageinai es ayton. us de eide toisi skelesi xeironomesanta, oyketi katexein dynamenos eipe <<u pai Tisandroy, aporxesao ge men ton gamon.>> o de Ippokleides ypolabun eipe <<oy frontis Ippokleidei.>> apo toutoy men touto onomazetai.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [130]

     130. and hence comes this saying. Then Cleisthenes caused silence to be made, and spoke to the company as follows: "Men who are wooers of my daughter, I commend you all, and if it were possible I would gratify you all, neither selecting one of you to be preferred, nor rejecting the remainder. Since however it is not possible, as I am deliberating about one maiden only, to act so as to please all, therefore to those of you who are rejected from this marriage I give as a gift a talent of silver to each one for the worthy estimation ye had of me, in that ye desired to marry from my house, and for the time of absence from your homes; and to the son of Alcmaion, Megacles, I offer my daughter Agariste in betrothal according to the customs of the Athenians." Thereupon Megacles said that he accepted the betrothal, and so the marriage was determined by Cleisthenes.         130. [1] Kleisthenes de sigen poiesamenos elexe es meson tade. <<andres paidos teis emeis mnesteires, egu kai pantas ymeas epaineu kai pasi ymin, ei oion te eie, xarizoimen an, met' ena ymeun exaireton apokrinun mete tous loipous apodokimazun. [2] all' oy gar oia te esti mieis peri parthenoy boyleuonta pasi kata noon poieein, toisi men ymeun apelaynomenoisi toude tou gamoy talanton argyrioy ekastui dureen didumi teis axiusios eineka teis ex emeu geimai kai teis ex oikoy apodemies, tui de Alkmeunos Megaklei eggyu paida ten emen Agaristen nomoisi toisi Athenaiun.>> famenoy de eggyasthai Megakleos ekekuruto o gamos Kleisthenei.    
      131. Thus it happened as regards the judgment of the wooers, and thus the Alcmaionidai got renown over all Hellas. And these having been married, there was born to them that Cleisthenes who established the tribes and the democracy for the Athenians, he being called after the Sikyonian Cleisthenes, his mother's father; this son, I say, was born to Megacles, and also Hippocrates: and of Hippocrates came another Megacles and another Agariste, called after Agariste, the daughter of Cleisthenes, who having been married to Xanthippos the son of Ariphron and being with child, saw a vision in her sleep, and it seemed to her that she had brought forth a lion: then after a few days she bore to Xanthippos Pericles.         131. [1] amfi men krisios tun mnesterun tosauta egeneto kai oytu Alkmeunidai ebusthesan ana ten Ellada. toutun de synoikesantun ginetai Kleisthenes te o tas fylas kai ten demokratien Athenaioisi katastesas, exun to oynoma apo tou metropatoros tou Sikyunioy. [2] oytos te de ginetai Megaklei kai Ippokrates, ek de Ippokrateos Megaklees te allos kai Agariste alle apo teis Kleistheneos Agaristes exoysa to oynoma. e synoikesasa te Xanthippui tui Arifronos kai egkyos eousa eide opsin en tui ypnui, edokee de leonta tekein, kai met' oligas emeras tiktei Periklea Xanthippui.    
      132. After the defeat at Marathon, Miltiades, who even before was well reputed with the Athenians, came then to be in much higher estimation: and when he asked the Athenians for seventy ships and an army with supplies of money, not declaring to them against what land he was intending to make an expedition, but saying that he would enrich them greatly if they would go with him, for he would lead them to a land of such a kind that they would easily get from it gold in abundance,-- thus saying he asked for the ships; and the Athenians, elated by these words, delivered them over to him.         132. [1] meta de to en Marathuni truma genomenon Miltiades, kai proteron eydokimeun para Athenaioisi, tote mallon ayxeto. aitesas de neas ebdomekonta kai stratien te kai xremata Athenaioys, oy frasas sfi ep' en epistrateusetai xuren, alla fas aytous kataploytiein en oi epuntai. epi gar xuren toiauten de tina axein othen xryson eypeteus afthonon oisontai. legun toiauta aitee tas neas. Athenaioi de toutoisi epaerthentes paredosan.    
      133. Then Miltiades, when he had received the army, proceeded to sail to Paris with the pretence that the Parians had first attacked Athens by making expedition with triremes to Marathon in company with the Persian: this was the pretext which he put forward, but he had also a grudge against the Parians on account of Lysagoras the son of Tisias, who was by race of Paros, for having accused him to Hydarnes the Persian. So when Miltiades had arrived at the place to which he was sailing, he began to besiege the Parians with his army, first having shut them up within their wall; and sending in to them a herald he asked for a hundred talents, saying that if they refused to give them, his army should not return back until it had conquered them completely. The Parians however had no design of giving any money to Miltiades, but contrived only how they might defend their city, devising various things besides and also this,--wherever at any time the wall proved to be open to attack, that point was raised when night came on to double its former height.         133. [1] paralabun de o Miltiades ten stratien eplee epi Paron, profasin exun us oi Parioi ypeirxan proteroi strateyomenoi trieresi es Marathuna ama tui Persei. touto men de prosxema logun En, atar tina kai egkoton eixe toisi Parioisi dia Lysagorea ton Tisieu, eonta genos Parion, diabalonta min pros Ydarnea ton Persen. [2] apikomenos de ep' en eplee o Miltiades tei stratiei epoliorkee Parioys kateilemenoys entos teixeos, kai espempun keryka aitee ekaton talanta, fas, en min oy dusi, oyk aponostesein ten stratien prin e exelei sfeas. [3] oi de Parioi okus men ti dusoysi Miltiadei argurion oyde dienoeunto, oi de okus diafylaxoysi ten polin touto emexanunto, alla te epifrazomenoi kai tei malista eske ekastote epimaxon tou teixeos, touto ama nykti exeeireto diplesion tou arxaioy.    
      134. So much of the story is reported by all the Hellenes, but as to what followed the Parians alone report, and they say that it happened thus: --When Miltiades was at a loss, it is said, there came a woman to speech with him, who had been taken prisoner, a Parian by race whose name was Timo, an under-priestess of the Earth goddesses; she, they say, came into the presence of Miltiades and counselled him that if he considered it a matter of much moment to conquer Paros, he could do that which she should suggest to him; and upon that she told him her meaning. He accordingly passed through to the hill which is before the city and leapt over the fence of the temple of Demeter Giver of Laws, not being able to open the door; and then having leapt over he went on towards the sanctuary with the design of doing something within, whether it were that he meant to lay hands on some of the things which should not be touched, or whatever else he intended to do; and when he had reached the door, forthwith a shuddering fear came over him and he set off to go back the same way as he came, and as he leapt down from the wall of rough stones his thigh was dislocated, or, as others say, he struck his knee against the wall.         134. [1] es men de tosouto tou logoy oi pantes Ellenes legoysi, to entheuten de aytoi Parioi genesthai ude legoysi. Miltiadei aporeonti elthein es logoys aixmaluton gynaika, eousan men Parien genos, oynoma de oi einai Timoun, einai de ypozakoron tun xthoniun theun. tauten elthousan es opsin Miltiadeu symboyleusai, ei peri pollou poieetai Paron elein, ta an ayte ypotheitai, tauta poieein. [2] meta de ten men ypothesthai, ton de dierxomenon epi ton kolunon ton pro teis polios eonta erkos thesmoforoy Demetros yperthorein, oy dynamenon tas thuras anoixai, yperthoronta de ienai epi to megaron o ti de poiesonta entos, eite kinesonta ti tun akinetun eite o ti de kote prexonta. pros teisi thureisi te genesthai kai prokate frikes ayton ypelthouses opisu ten ayten odon iesthai, katathruskonta de ten aimasien ton meron spastheinai. oi de ayton to gony prosptaisai legoysi.    
      135. Miltiades accordingly, being in a wretched case, set forth to sail homewards, neither bringing wealth to the Athenians nor having added to them the possession of Paros, but having besieged the city for six-and-twenty days and laid waste the island: and the Parians being informed that Timo the under-priestess of the goddesses had acted as a guide to Miltiades, desired to take vengeance upon her for this, and they sent messengers to Delphi to consult the god, so soon as they had leisure from the siege; and these messengers they sent to ask whether they should put to death the under-priestess of the goddesses, who had been a guide to their enemies for the capture of her native city and had revealed to Miltiades the mysteries which might not be uttered to a male person. The Pythian prophetess however forbade them, saying that Timo was not the true author of these things, but since it was destined that Miltiades should end his life not well, she had appeared to guide him to his evil fate.         135. [1] Miltiades men nyn flaurus exun apeplee opisu, oyte xremata Athenaioisi agun oyte Paron prosktesamenos, alla poliorkesas te ex kai eikosi emeras kai deiusas ten neison. [2] Parioi de pythomenoi us e ypozakoros tun theun Timu Miltiadei kategesato, boylomenoi min anti toutun timuresasthai, theopropoys pempoysi es Delfous us sfeas esyxie teis poliorkies esxe. epempon de epeiresomenoys ei kataxresuntai ten ypozakoron tun theun ten exegesamenen toisi exthroisi teis patridos alusin kai ta es ersena gonon arreta ira ekfenasan Miltiadei. [3] e de Pythie oyk ea, fasa oy Timoun einai ten aitien toutun, alla dein gar Miltiadea teleytan me ey, faneinai oi tun kakun kategemona.    
      136. Thus the Pythian prophetess replied to the Parians: and the Athenians, when Miltiades had returned back from Paros, began to talk of him, and among the rest especially Xanthippos the son of Ariphron, who brought Miltiades up before the people claiming the penalty of death and prosecuted him for his deception of the Athenians: and Miltiades did not himself make his own defence, although he was present, for he was unable to do so because his thigh was mortifying; but he lay in public view upon a bed, while his friends made a defence for him, making mention much both of the battle which had been fought at Marathon and of the conquest of Lemnos, namely how he had conquered Lemnos and taken vengeance on the Pelasgians, and had delivered it over to the Athenians: and the people came over to his part as regards the acquittal from the penalty of death, but they imposed a fine of fifty talents for the wrong committed: and after this Miltiades died, his thigh having gangrened and mortified, and the fifty talents were paid by his son Kimon.         136. [1] Parioisi men de tauta e Pythie exrese. Athenaioi de ek Paroy Miltiadea aponostesanta esxon en stomasi oi te alloi kai malista Xanthippos o Arifronos, os thanatoy ypagagun ypo ton deimon Miltiadea ediuke teis Athenaiun apates eineken. [2] Miltiades de aytos men pareun oyk apelogeeto. En gar adunatos uste sepomenoy tou merou. prokeimenoy de aytou en klinei yperapelogeonto oi filoi, teis maxes te teis en Marathuni genomenes polla epimemnemenoi kai ten Lemnoy airesin, us elun Leimnon te kai tisamenos tous Pelasgous pareduke Athenaioisi. [3] prosgenomenoy de tou demoy aytui kata ten apolysin tou thanatoy, zemiusantos de kata ten adikien pentekonta talantoisi, Miltiades men meta tauta sfakelisantos te tou merou kai sapentos teleytai, ta de pentekonta talanta exetise o pais aytou Kimun.    
      137. Now Miltiades son of Kimon had thus taken possession of the Lemnos:--After the Pelasgians had been cast out of Attica by the Athenians, whether justly or unjustly,--for about this I cannot tell except the things reported, which are these:--Hecataois on the one hand, the son of Hegesander, said in his history that it was done unjustly; for he said that when the Athenians saw the land which extends below Hymettos, which they had themselves given them to dwell in, as payment for the wall built round the Acropolis in former times, when the Athenians, I say, saw that this land was made good by cultivation, which before was bad and worthless, they were seized with jealousy and with longing to possess the land, and so drove them out, not alleging any other pretext: but according to the report of the Athenians themselves they drove them out justly; for the Pelasgians being settled under Hymettos made this a starting-point and committed wrong against them as follows:--the daughters and sons of the Athenians were wont ever to go for water to the spring of Enneacrunos; for at that time neither they nor the other Hellenes as yet had household servants; and when these girls came, the Pelasgians in wantonness and contempt of the Athenians would offer them violence; and it was not enough for them even to do this, but at last they were found in the act of plotting an attack upon the city: and the narrators say that they herein proved themselves better men than the Pelasgians, inasmuch as when they might have slain the Pelasgians, who had been caught plotting against them, they did not choose to do so, but ordered them merely to depart out of the land: and thus having departed out of the land, the Pelasgians took possession of several older places and especially of Lemnos. The former story is that which was reported by Hecataios, while the latter is that which is told by the Athenians.         137. [1] Leimnon de Miltiades o Kimunos ude esxe. Pelasgoi epeite ek teis Attikeis ypo Athenaiun exeblethesan, eite un de dikaius eite adikus. touto gar oyk exu frasai, plen ta legomena, oti Ekataios men o Egesandroy efese en toisi logoisi legun adikus. [2] epeite gar idein tous Athenaioys ten xuren, ten sfisi aytoisi ypo ton Ymesson eousan edosan Pelasgoisi oikeisai misthon tou teixeos tou peri ten akropolin kote elelamenoy, tauten us idein tous Athenaioys exergasmenen ey, ten proteron einai kaken te kai tou medenos axien, labein fthonon te kai imeron teis geis, kai oytu exelaunein aytous oydemian allen profasin proisxomenoys tous Athenaioys. [3] us de aytoi Athenaioi legoysi, dikaius exelasai. katoikemenoys gar tous Pelasgous ypo tui Ymessui, entheuten ormumenoys adikeein tade. foitan gar aiei tas sfeteras thygateras te kai tous paidas ep' ydur epi ten Enneakroynon. oy gar einai touton ton xronon sfisi ku oyde toisi alloisi Ellesi oiketas. okus de elthoien aytai, tous Pelasgous ypo ybrios te kai oliguries biasthai sfeas. kai tauta mentoi sfi oyk apoxran poieein, alla telos kai epiboyleuontas epixeiresin faneinai ep' aytofurui. [4] euytous de genesthai tosoutui ekeinun andras ameinonas, osui, pareon euytoisi apokteinai tous Pelasgous, epei sfeas elabon epiboyleuontas, oyk etheleisai, alla sfi proeipein ek teis geis exienai. tous de oytu de ekxuresantas alla te sxein xuria kai de kai Leimnon. ekeina men de Ekataios elexe, tauta de Athenaioi legoysi.    
      138. These Pelasgians then, dwelling after that in Lemnos, desired to take vengeance on the Athenians; and having full knowledge also of the festivals of the Athenians, they got fifty- oared galleys and laid wait for the women of the Athenians when they were keeping festival to Artemis in Brauron; and having carried off a number of them from thence, they departed and sailed away home, and taking the women to Lemnos they kept them as concubines. Now when these women had children gradually more and more, they made it their practice to teach their sons both the Attic tongue and the manners of the Athenians. And these were not willing to associate with the sons of the Pelasgian women, and moreover if any of them were struck by any one of those, they all in a body came to the rescue and helped one another. Moreover the boys claimed to have authority over the other boys and got the better of them easily. Perceiving these things the Pelasgians considered the matter; and when they took counsel together, a fear came over them and they thought, if the boys were indeed resolved now to help one another against the sons of the legitimate wives, and were endeavouring already from the first to have authority over them, what would they do when they were grown up to be men? Then they determined to put to death the sons of the Athenian women, and this they actually did; and in addition to them they slew their mothers also. From this deed and from that which was done before this, which the women did when they killed Thoas and the rest, who were their own husbands, it has become a custom in Hellas that all deeds of great cruelty should be called "Lemnian deeds."         138. [1] oi de Pelasgoi oytoi Leimnon tote nemomenoi kai boylomenoi tous Athenaioys timuresasthai, ey te exepistamenoi tas Athenaiun ortas, pentekonteroys ktesamenoi eloxesan Artemidi en Brayruni agousas orten tas tun Athenaiun gynaikas, entheuten de arpasantes toyteun pollas oixonto apopleontes, kai sfeas es Leimnon agagontes pallakas eixon. [2] us de teknun aytai ai gynaikes ypeplesthesan, glussan te ten Attiken kai tropoys tous Athenaiun edidaskon tous paidas. oi de oyte symmisgesthai toisi ek tun Pelasgidun gynaikun paisi ethelon, ei te tuptoito tis aytun tinos, eboetheon te pantes kai etimureon alleloisi. kai de kai arxein te tun paidun oi paides edikaieyn kai pollui epekrateon. [3] mathontes de tauta oi Pelasgoi euytoisi logoys edidosan. kai sfi boyleyomenoisi deinon ti esedyne, ei de diaginuskoien sfisi te boetheein oi paides pros tun koyridieun gynaikun tous paidas kai toutun aytika arxein peiruiato, ti de andruthentes deithen poiesoysi. [4] enthauta edoxe sfi kteinein tous paidas tous ek tun Attikeun gynaikun. poieusi de tauta, prosapolluoysi de sfeun kai tas meteras. apo toutoy de tou ergoy kai tou proteroy toutun, to ergasanto ai gynaikes tous ama Thoanti andras sfeteroys apokteinasai, nenomistai ana ten Ellada ta sxetlia erga panta Lemnia kaleesthai.    
      139. After the Pelasgians had killed their own sons and wives, the earth did not bear fruit for them, nor did their women or their cattle bring forth young as they did before; and being hard pressed by famine and by childlessness, they sent to Delphi to ask for a release from the evils which were upon them; and the Pythian prophetess bade them pay such penalty to the Athenians as the Athenians themselves should appoint. The Pelasgians came accordingly to Athens and professed that they were willing to pay the penalty for all the wrong which they had done: and the Athenians laid a couch in the fairest possible manner in the City Hall, and having set by it a table covered with all good things, they bade the Pelasgians deliver up to them their land in that condition. Then the Pelasgians answered and said: "When with a North Wind in one single day a ship shall accomplish the voyage from your land to ours, then we will deliver it up," feeling assured that it was impossible for this to happen, since Attica lies far away to the South of Lemnos.         139. [1] apokteinasi de toisi Pelasgoisi tous sfeteroys paidas te kai gynaikas oyte gei karpon efere oyte gynaikes te kai poimnai omoius etikton kai pro tou. piezomenoi de limui kai apaidiei es Delfous epempon lusin tina aitesomenoi tun pareontun kakun. [2] e de Pythie sfeas ekeleye Athenaioisi dikas didonai tautas tas an aytoi Athenaioi dikasusi. Elthon te de es tas Athenas oi Pelasgoi kai dikas epaggellonto boylomenoi didonai pantos tou adikematos. [3] Athenaioi de en tui prytaneiui klinen strusantes us eixon kallista kai trapezan epipleen agathun pantun parathentes, ekeleyon tous Pelasgous ten xuren sfisi paradidonai oytu exoysan. [4] oi de Pelasgoi ypolabontes eipan <<epean boreei anemui aytemeron exanusei neus ek teis ymeteres es ten emeteren, tote paradusomen,>> epistamenoi touto einai adunaton genesthai. e gar Attike pros noton keitai pollon teis Lemnoy.    
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 6: Erato [140]

     140. Such were the events which happened then: and very many years later, after the Chersonese which is by the Hellespont had come to be under the Athenians, Miltiades the son of Kimon, when the Etesian Winds blew steadily, accomplished the voyage in a ship from Elaius in the Chersonese to Lemnos, and proclaimed to the Pelasgians that they should depart out of the island, reminding them of the oracle, which the Pelasgians had never expected would be accomplished for them. The men of Hephaistia accordingly obeyed; but those of Myrina, not admitting that the Chersonese was Attica, suffered a siege, until at last these also submitted. Thus it was that the Athenians and Miltiades took possession of Lemnos.        140. [1] tote men toiauta. etesi de karta polloisi ysteron toutun, us e Khersonesos e ep' Ellespontui egeneto ypo Athenaioisi, Miltiades o Kimunos etesieun anemun katestekotun nei katanusas ex Elaiountos tou en Khersonesui es Leimnon proegoreye exienai ek teis nesoy toisi Pelasgoisi, anamimneskun sfeas to xresterion, to oydama elpisan sfisi oi Pelasgoi epiteleesthai. [2] Efaistiees men nyn epeithonto, Myrinaioi de oy sygginuskomenoi einai ten Khersoneson Attiken epoliorkeonto, es o kai oytoi parestesan. oytu de ten Leimnon esxon Athenaioi te kai Miltiades.
     
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia

     BOOK VII THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED POLYMNIA         
I s t o r i u n   E
 
P o l u m n i aThemistoklees
 
ostrakon   
      1. Now when the report came to Dareios the son of Hystaspes of the battle which was fought at Marathon, the king, who even before this had been greatly exasperated with the Athenians on account of the attack made upon Sardis, then far more than before displayed indignation, and was far more desirous of making a march against Hellas. Accordingly at once he sent messengers to the various cities and ordered that they should get ready a force, appointing to each people to supply much more than at the former time, and not only ships of war, but also horses and provisions and transport vessels; and when these commands were carried round, all Asia was moved for three years, for all the best men were being enlisted for the expedition against Hellas, and were making preparations. In the fourth year however the Egyptians, who had been reduced to subjection by Cambyses, revolted from the Persians; and then he was even more desirous of marching against both these nations.         1. [1] epei de aggelie apiketo peri teis maxes teis en Marathuni genomenes para basilea Dareion ton Ystaspeos, kai prin megalus kexaragmenon toisi Athenaioisi dia ten es Sardis esbolen, kai de kai tote pollui te deinotera epoiee kai mallon ormeto strateuesthai epi ten Ellada. [2] kai aytika men epeggelleto pempun aggeloys kata polis etoimazein stratien, pollui pleu epitassun ekastoisi e proteron parexein, kai neas te kai ippoys kai siton kai ploia. toutun de periaggellomenun e Asie edoneeto epi tria etea, katalegomenun te tun aristun us epi ten Ellada strateyomenun kai paraskeyazomenun. [3] tetartui de etei Aiguptioi ypo Kambuseu doyluthentes apestesan apo Perseun. enthauta de kai mallon ormeto kai ep' amfoteroys strateuesthai.   
      2. While Dareios was thus preparing to set out against Egypt and against Athens, there arose a great strife among his sons about the supreme power; and they said that he must not make his expeditions until he had designated one of them to be king, according to the custom of the Persians. For to Dareios already before he became king three sons had been born of his former wife the daughter of Gobryas, and after he became king four other sons of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus: of the first the eldest was Artobazanes, and of those who had been born later, Xerxes. These being not of the same mother were at strife with one another, Artobazanes contending that he was the eldest of all the sons, and that it was a custom maintained by all men that the eldest should have the rule, and Xerxes arguing that he was the son of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, and that Cyrus was he who had won for the Persians their freedom.         2. [1] stellomenoy de Dareioy ep' Aigypton kai Athenas, tun paidun aytou stasis egeneto megale peri teis egemonies, us dei min apodexanta basilea kata ton Perseun nomon oytu strateuesthai. [2] Esan gar Dareiui kai proteron e basileusai gegonotes treis paides ek teis proteres gynaikos, Gobrueu thygatros, kai basileusanti ex Atosses teis Kuroy eteroi tesseres. tun men de proterun epresbeye Artobazanes, tun de epigenomenun Xerxes. eontes de metros oy teis ayteis estasiazon, [3] o men Artobazanes katoti presbutatos te eie pantos tou gonoy kai oti nomizomenon eie pros pantun anthrupun ton presbutaton ten arxen exein, Xerxes de us Atosses te pais eie teis Kuroy thygatros kai oti Kuros eie o ktesamenos toisi Perseisi ten eleytherien.   
      3. Now while Dareios did not as yet declare his judgment, it chanced that Demaratos also, the son of Ariston, had come up to Susa at this very same time, having been deprived of the kingdom in Sparta and having laid upon himself a sentence of exile from Lacedemon. This man, hearing of the difference between the sons of Dareios, came (as it is reported of him) and counselled Xerxes to say in addition to those things which he was wont to say, that he had been born to Dareios at the time when he was already reigning as king and was holding the supreme power over the Persians, while Artobazanes had been born while Dareios was still in a private station: it was not fitting therefore nor just that another should have the honour before him; for even in Sparta, suggested Demaratos, this was the custom, that is to say, if some of the sons had been born first, before their father began to reign, and another came after, born later while he was reigning, the succession of the kingdom belonged to him who had been born later. Xerxes accordingly made use of the suggestion of Demaratos; and Dareios perceiving that he spoke that which was just, designated him to be king. It is my opinion however that even without this suggestion Xerxes would have become king, for Atossa was all-powerful.         3. [1] Dareioy de oyk apodeiknymenoy ku gnumen, etugxane kata tuyto toutoisi kai Demaretos o Aristunos anabebekus es Sousa, esteremenos te teis en Spartei basileies kai fygen epibalun euytui ek Lakedaimonos. [2] oytos uner pythomenos tun Dareioy paidun ten diaforen, elthun, us e fatis min exei, Xerxei synebouleye legein pros toisi elege epesi, us aytos men genoito Dareiui ede basileuonti kai exonti to Perseun kratos, Artobazanes de eti idiutei eonti Dareiui. [3] oykun oyte oikos eie oyte dikaion allon tina to geras exein pro euytou. epei ge kai en Spartei efe o Demaretos ypotithemenos oytu nomizesthai, en oi men progegonotes eusi prin e ton patera sfeun basileusai, o de basileuonti opsigonos epigenetai, tou epigenomenoy ten ekdexin teis basileies ginesthai. [4] xresamenoy de Xerxeu tei Demaretoy ypothekei, gnous o Dareios us legoi dikaia basilea min apedexe. dokeein de moi, kai aney tautes teis ypothekes basileusai an Xerxes. e gar Atossa eixe to pan kratos.   
      4. Then having designated Xerxes to the Persians as their king, Dareios wished to go on his expeditions. However in the next year after this and after the revolt of Egypt, it came to pass that Dareios himself died, having been king in all six-and-thirty years; and thus he did not succeed in taking vengeance either upon the revolted Egyptians or upon the Athenians.         4. [1] apodexas de basilea Perseisi Xerxea Dareios ormato strateuesthai. alla gar meta tauta te kai Aiguptoy apostasin tui ysterui etei paraskeyazomenon syneneike ayton Dareion, basileusanta ta panta ex te kai triekonta etea, apothanein, oyde oi exegeneto oyte tous apesteutas Aigyptioys oyte Athenaioys timuresasthai. apothanontos de Dareioy e basileie anexurese es ton paida ton ekeinoy Xerxen.   
      5. Dareios being dead the kingdom passed to his son Xerxes. Now Xerxes at the first was by no means anxious to make a march against Hellas, but against Egypt he continued to gather a force. Mardonios however, the son of Gobryas, who was a cousin of Xerxes, being sister's son to Dareios, was ever at his side, and having power with him more than any other of the Persians, he kept continually to such discourse as this which follows, saying: "Master, it is not fitting that the Athenians, after having done to the Persians very great evil, should not pay the penalty for that which they have done. What if thou shouldest at this present time do that which thou hast in thy hands to do; and when thou hast tamed the land of Egypt, which has broken out insolently against us, then do thou march an army against Athens, that a good report may be made of thee by men, and that in future every one may beware of making expeditions against thy land." Thus far his speech had to do with vengeance, and to this he would make addition as follows, saying that Europe was a very fair land and bore all kinds of trees that are cultivated for fruit, and was of excellent fertility, and such that the king alone of all mortals was worthy to possess it.         5. [1] o toinyn Xerxes epi men ten Ellada oydamus prothymos En kat' arxas strateuesthai, epi de Aigypton epoieeto stratieis agersin. pareun de kai dynamenos par' aytui megiston Perseun Mardonios o Gobrueu, os En Xerxei men anepsios Dareioy de adelfeeis pais, toioutoy logoy eixeto, legun [2] <<despota, oyk oikos esti Athenaioys ergasamenoys polla de kaka Persas me oy dounai diken tun epoiesan. all' ei to men nun tauta pressois ta per en xersi exeis. emerusas de Aigypton ten exybrisasan stratelatee epi tas Athenas, ina logos te se exei pros anthrupun agathos, kai tis ysteron fylassetai epi gein ten sen strateuesthai.>> [3] oytos men oi o logos En timuros. toude de tou logoy parentheken poieesketo tende, us e Eyrupe perikalles eie xure, kai dendrea pantoia ferei ta emera, areten te akre, basilei te mounui thnetun axie ekteisthai.   
      6. These things he was wont to say, since he was one who had a desire for perilous enterprise and wished to be himself the governor of Hellas under the king. So in time he prevailed upon Xerxes and persuaded him to do this; for other things also assisted him and proved helpful to him in persuading Xerxes. In the first place there had come from Thessaly messengers sent by the Aleuadai, who were inviting the king to come against Hellas and were showing great zeal in his cause, (now these Aleuadai were kings of Thessaly): and then secondly those of the sons of Peisistratos who had come up to Susa were inviting him also, holding to the same arguments as the Aleuadai; and moreover they offered him yet more inducement in addition to these; for there was one Onomacritos an Athenian, who both uttered oracles and also had collected and arranged the oracles of Musaios; and with this man they had come up, after they had first reconciled the enmity between them. For Onomacritos had been driven forth from Athens by Hipparchos the son of Peisistratos, having been caught by Lasos of Hermion interpolating in the works of Musaios an oracle to the effect that the islands which lie off Lemnos should disappear under the sea. For this reason Hipparchos drove him forth, having before this time been very much wont to consult him. Now however he had gone up with them; and when he had come into the presence of the king, the sons of Peisistratos spoke of him in magnificent terms, and he repeated some of the oracles; and if there was in them anything which imported disaster to the Barbarians, of this he said nothing; but choosing out of them the most fortunate things he told how it was destined that the Hellespont should be yoked with a bridge by a Persian, and he set forth the manner of the march. He then thus urged Xerxes with oracles, while the sons of Peisistratos and the Aleuadai pressed him with their advice.         6. [1] tauta elege oia neuterun ergun epithymetes eun kai thelun aytos teis Ellados yparxos einai. xronui de katergasato te kai anepeise uste poieein tauta Xerxen. synelabe gar kai alla oi summaxa genomena es to peithesthai Xerxen. [2] touto men apo teis Thessalies para tun Aleyadeun apigmenoi aggeloi epekaleonto basilea pasan prothymien parexomenoi epi ten Ellada. oi de Aleyadai oytoi Esan Thessalies basilees. touto de Peisistratideun oi anabebekotes es Sousa, tun te aytun logun exomenoi tun kai oi Aleyadai, kai de ti pros toutoisi eti pleon prosuregonto oi. [3] exontes Onomakriton andra Athenaion, xresmologon te kai diatheten xresmun tun Moysaioy, anabebekesan, ten exthren prokatalysamenoi. exelasthe gar ypo Ipparxoy tou Peisistratoy o Onomakritos ex Atheneun, ep' aytofurui alous ypo Lasoy tou Ermioneos empoieun es ta Moysaioy xresmon, us ai epi Lemnui epikeimenai neisoi afanizoiato kata teis thalasses. [4] dio exelase min o Ipparxos, proteron xreumenos ta malista. tote de synanabas okus apikoito es opsin ten basileos, legontun tun Peisistratideun peri aytou semnous logoys, katelege tun xresmun. ei men ti eneoi sfalma feron tui barbarui, tun men elege oyden, o de ta eytyxestata eklegomenos elege ton te Ellesponton us zeyxtheinai xreon eie yp' andros Perseu, ten te elasin exegeomenos. [5] oytos te de xresmuideun prosefereto kai oi te Peisistratidai kai oi Aleyadai gnumas apodeiknumenoi.   
      7. So when Xerxes had been persuaded to make an expedition against Hellas, then in the next year after the death of Dareios he made a march first against those who had revolted. Having subdued these and having reduced all Egypt to slavery much greater than it had suffered in the reign of Dareios, he entrusted the government of it to Achaimenes his own brother, a son of Dareios. Now this Achaimenes being a governor of Egypt was slain afterwards by Inaros the son of Psammetichos, a Libyan.         7. [1] us de anegnusthe Xerxes strateuesthai epi ten Ellada, enthauta deyterui men etei meta ton thanaton ton Dareioy pruta strateien poieetai epi tous apesteutas. toutoys men nyn katastrepsamenos kai Aigypton pasan pollon doyloteren poiesas e epi Dareioy En, epitrapei Axaimenei adelfeui men euytou, Dareioy de paidi. Axaimenea men nyn epitropeuonta Aiguptoy xronui metepeita efoneyse Inarus o Psammetixoy aner Libys.   
      8. Xerxes then after the conquest of Egypt, being about to take in hand the expedition against Athens, summoned a chosen assembly of the best men among the Persians, that he might both learn their opinions and himself in the presence of all declare that which he intended to do; and when they were assembled, Xerxes spoke to them as follows:         8. [1] Xerxes de meta Aiguptoy alusin us emelle es xeiras axesthai to strateyma to epi tas Athenas, sullogon epiketon Perseun tun aristun epoieeto, ina gnumas te puthetai sfeun kai aytos en pasi eipei ta thelei. us de synelexthesan, elexen Xerxes tade.   
      8. (a) "Persians, I shall not be the first to establish this custom in your nation, but having received it from others I shall follow it: for as I am informed by those who are older than myself, we never yet have kept quiet since we received this supremacy in succession to the Medes, when Cyrus overthrew Astyages; but God thus leads us, and for ourselves tends to good that we are busied about many things. Now about the nations which Cyrus and Cambyses and my father Dareios subdued and added to their possessions there is no need for me to speak, since ye know well: and as for me, from the day when I received by inheritance this throne upon which I sit I carefully considered always how in this honourable place I might not fall short of those who have been before me, nor add less power to the dominion of the Persians: and thus carefully considering I find a way by which not only glory may be won by us, together with a land not less in extent nor worse than that which we now possess, (and indeed more varied in its productions), but also vengeance and retribution may be brought about. Wherefore I have assembled you together now, in order that I may communicate to you that which I have it in my mind to do.         8. a [1] <<andres Persai, oyt' aytos kategesomai nomon tonde en ymin titheis, paradexamenos te aytui xresomai. us gar egu pynthanomai tun presbyterun, oydama ku etremisamen, epeite parelabomen ten egemonien tende para Medun, Kuroy katelontos Astyagea. alla theos te oytu agei kai aytoisi emin polla epepoysi symferetai epi to ameinon. ta men nyn Kuros te kai Kambuses pater te emos Dareios katergasanto kai prosektesanto ethnea, epistamenoisi ey oyk an tis legoi. [2] egu de epeite parelabon ton thronon touton, efrontizon okus me leipsomai tun proteron genomenun en timei teide mede elassu prosktesomai dunamin Perseisi. frontizun de eyrisku ama men kudos te emin prosginomenon xuren te teis nun ektemetha oyk elassona oyde flayroteren pamforuteren te, ama de timurien te kai tisin ginomenen. dio ymeas nun egu synelexa, ina to noeu pressein ypertheumai ymin.   
      8. (b) I design to yoke the Hellespont with a bridge, and to march an army through Europe against Hellas, in order that I may take vengeance on the Athenians for all the things which they have done both to the Persians and to my father. Ye saw how my father Dareios also was purposing to make an expedition against these men; but he has ended his life and did not succeed in taking vengeance upon them. I however, on behalf of him and also of the other Persians, will not cease until I have conquered Athens and burnt it with fire; seeing that they did wrong unprovoked to me and to my father. First they went to Sardis, having come with Aristagoras the Milesian our slave, and they set fire to the sacred groves and the temples; and then secondly, what things they did to us when we disembarked in their land, at the time when Datis and Artaphrenes were commanders of our army, ye all know well, as I think.         8. b [1] mellu zeuxas ton Ellesponton elan straton dia teis Eyrupes epi ten Ellada, ina Athenaioys timuresumai osa de pepoiekasi Persas te kai patera ton emon. [2] urate men nyn kai patera ton emon Dareion ithuonta strateuesthai epi tous andras toutoys. all' o men teteleuteke kai oyk exegeneto aytui timuresasthai. egu de yper te ekeinoy kai tun allun Perseun oy proteron pausomai prin e elu te kai pyrusu tas Athenas, oi ge eme kai patera ton emon ypeirxan adika poieuntes. [3] pruta men es Sardis elthontes, ama Aristagorei tui Milesiui doului de emeterui apikomenoi, enepresan ta te alsea kai ta ira. deutera de emeas oia erxan es ten sfeteren apobantas, ote Datis te kai Artafrenes estrategeon, ta epistasthe koy pantes.   
      8. (c) For these reasons I have resolved to make an expedition against them, and reckoning I find in the matter so many good things as ye shall hear:--if we shall subdue these and the neighbours of these, who dwell in the land of Pelops the Phrygian, we shall cause the Persian land to have the same boundaries as the heaven of Zeus; since in truth upon no land will the sun look down which borders ours, but I with your help shall make all the lands into one land, having passed through the whole extent of Europe. For I am informed that things are so, namely that there is no city of men nor any race of human beings remaining, which will be able to come to a contest with us, when those whom I just now mentioned have been removed out of the way. Thus both those who have committed wrong against us will have the yoke of slavery, and also those who have not committed wrong.         8. g [1] toutun men toinyn eineka anartemai ep' aytous strateuesthai, agatha de en aytoisi tosade aneyrisku logizomenos. ei toutoys te kai tous toutoisi plesioxuroys katastrepsometha, oi Pelopos tou Frygos nemontai xuren, gein ten Persida apodexomen tui Dios aitheri omoyreoysan. [2] oy gar de xuren ge oydemian katopsetai elios omoyron eousan tei emeterei, alla sfeas pasas egu ama ymin xuren thesu, dia pases diexelthun teis Eyrupes. [3] pynthanomai gar ude exein, oyte tina polin andrun oydemian oyte ethnos oyden anthrupun ypoleipesthai, to emin oion te estai elthein es maxen, toutun tun katelexa ypexarairemenun. oytu oi te emin aitioi exoysi doulion zygon oi te anaitioi.   
      8. (d) And ye will please me best if ye do this:-- whensoever I shall signify to you the time at which ye ought to come, ye must appear every one of you with zeal for the service; and whosoever shall come with a force best equipped, to him I will give gifts such as are accounted in our land to be the most honourable. Thus must these things be done: but that I may not seem to you to be following my own counsel alone, I propose the matter for discussion, bidding any one of you who desires it, declare his opinion." Having thus spoken he ceased;         8. d [1] ymeis d' an moi tade poieontes xarizoisthe. epean ymin semenu ton xronon es ton ekein dei, prothumus panta tina ymeun xresei pareinai. os an de exun ekei pareskeyasmenon straton kallista, dusu oi dura ta timiutata nomizetai einai en emeteroy. [2] poietea men nyn tauta esti oytu. ina de me idioboyleuein ymin dokeu, tithemi to preigma es meson, gnumen keleuun ymeun ton boylomenon apofainesthai.>> tauta eipas epaueto.   
      9. and after him Mardonios said: "Master, thou dost surpass not only all the Persians who were before thee, but also those who shall come after, since thou didst not only attain in thy words to that which is best and truest as regards other matters, but also thou wilt not permit the Ionians who dwell in Europe to make a mock of us, having no just right to do so: for a strange thing it would be if, when we have subdued and kept as our servants Sacans, Indians, Ethiopians, Assyrians, and other nations many in number and great, who have done no wrong to the Persians, because we desired to add to our dominions, we should not take vengeance on the Hellenes who committed wrong against us unprovoked.         9. [1] met' ayton de Mardonios elege <<u despota, oy mounon eis tun genomenun Perseun aristos alla kai tun esomenun, os ta te alla legun epikeo arista kai alethestata, kai Iunas tous en tei Eyrupei katoikemenoys oyk easeis katagelasai emin eontas anaxioys. [2] kai gar deinon an eie preigma, ei Sakas men kai Indous kai Aithiopas te kai Assyrioys alla te ethnea polla kai megala adikesanta Persas oyden, alla dunamin prosktasthai boylomenoi, katastrepsamenoi douloys exomen, Ellenas de yparxantas adikies oy timuresometha.   
      9. (a) Of what should we be afraid?--what gathering of numbers, or what resources of money? for their manner of fight we know, and as for their resources, we know that they are feeble; and we have moreover subdued already their sons, those I mean who are settled in our land and are called Ionians, Aiolians, and Dorians. Moreover I myself formerly made trial of marching against these men, being commanded thereto by thy father; and although I marched as far as Macedonia, and fell but little short of coming to Athens itself, no man came to oppose me in fight.         9. a [1] ti deisantes; koien pletheos systrofen; koien de xrematun dunamin; tun epistametha men ten maxen, epistametha de ten dunamin eousan asthenea. exomen de aytun paidas katastrepsamenoi, toutoys oi en tei emeterei katoikemenoi Iunes te kai Aiolees kai Duriees kaleontai. [2]  epeirethen de kai aytos ede epelaunun epi tous andras toutoys ypo patros tou sou keleystheis, kai moi mexri Makedonies elasanti kai oligon apoliponti es aytas Athenas apikesthai oydeis entiuthe es maxen.   
      9. (b) And yet it is true that the Hellenes make wars, but (as I am informed) very much without wise consideration, by reason of obstinacy and want of skill: for when they have proclaimed war upon one another, they find out first the fairest and smoothest place, and to this they come down and fight; so that even the victors depart from the fight with great loss, and as to the vanquished, of them I make no mention at all, for they are utterly destroyed. They ought however, being men who speak the same language, to make use of heralds and messengers and so to take up their differences and settle them in any way rather than by battles; but if they must absolutely war with one another, they ought to find out each of them that place in which they themselves are hardest to overcome, and here to make their trial. Therefore the Hellenes, since they use no good way, when I had marched as far as the land of Macedonia, did not come to the resolution of fighting with me.         9. b [1] kaitoi ge euthasi Ellenes, us pynthanomai, aboylotata polemoys istasthai ypo te agnumosunes kai skaiotetos. epean gar alleloisi polemon proeipusi, exeyrontes to kalliston xurion kai leiotaton, es touto kationtes maxontai, uste sun kakui megalui oi nikuntes apallassontai. peri de tun essoymenun oyde legu arxen. exulees gar de ginontai. [2]  tous xrein eontas omoglussoys keryxi te diaxreumenoys kai aggeloisi katalambanein tas diaforas kai panti mallon e maxeisi. ei de pantus edee polemeein pros alleloys, exeyriskein xrein tei ekateroi eisi dysxeirutotatoi kai tautei peiran. tropui toinyn oy xrestui Ellenes diaxreumenoi, emeo elasantos mexri Makedonies geis, oyk Elthon es toutoy logon uste maxesthai.   
      9. (c) Who then is likely to set himself against thee, O king, offering war, when thou art leading both all the multitudes of Asia and the whole number of the ships? I for my part am of opinion that the power of the Hellenes has not attained to such a pitch of boldness: but if after all I should prove to be deceived in my judgment, and they stirred up by inconsiderate folly should come to battle with us, they would learn that we are the best of all men in the matters of war. However that may be, let not anything be left untried; for nothing comes of itself, but from trial all things are wont to come to men."         9. g [1] soi de de mellei tis u basileu antiusesthai polemon proferun, agonti kai pleithos to ek teis Asies kai neas tas apasas; us men egu dokeu, oyk es touto thraseos anekei ta Ellenun pregmata. ei de ara eguge pseystheien gnumei kai ekeinoi epaerthentes aboyliei elthoien emin es maxen, mathoien an us eimen anthrupun aristoi ta polemia. estu d' un meden apeireton. aytomaton gar oyden, all' apo peires panta anthrupoisi fileei ginesthai.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [10]

     10. Mardonios having thus smoothed over the resolution expressed by Xerxes had ceased speaking: and when the other Persians were silent and did not venture to declare an opinion contrary to that which had been proposed, then Artabanos the son of Hystaspes, being father's brother to Xerxes and having reliance upon that, spoke as follows:         10. [1] Mardonios men tosauta epileenas ten Xerxeu gnumen epepayto. siupuntun de tun allun Perseun kai oy tolmuntun gnumen apodeiknysthai antien tei prokeimenei, Artabanos o Ystaspeos, patrus eun Xerxei, tui de kai pisynos eun elege tade.   
      10. (a) "O king, if opinions opposed to one another be not spoken, it is not possible to select the better in making the choice, but one must accept that which has been spoken; if however opposite opinions be uttered, this is possible; just as we do not distinguish the gold which is free from alloy when it is alone by itself, but when we rub it on the touchstone in comparison with other gold, then we distinguish that which is the better. Now I gave advice to thy father Dareios also, who was my brother, not to march against the Scythians, men who occupied no abiding city in any part of the earth. He however, expecting that he would subdue the Scythians who were nomads, did not listen to me; but he made a march and came back from it with the loss of many good men of his army. But thou, O king, art intending to march against men who are much better than the Scythians, men who are reported to be excellent both by sea and on land: and the thing which is to be feared in this matter it is right that I should declare to thee.         10. a [1] <<u basileu, me lextheiseun men gnumeun antieun alleleisi oyk esti ten ameinu aireomenon elesthai, alla dei tei eiremenei xrasthai, lextheiseun de esti, usper ton xryson ton akeraton ayton men ep' euytou oy diaginuskomen, epean de paratripsumen allui xrysui, diaginuskomen ton ameinu. [2]  egu de kai patri tui sui, adelfeui de emui Dareiui egoreyon me strateuesthai epi Skuthas, andras oydamothi geis asty nemontas. o de elpizun Skuthas tous nomadas katastrepsesthai emoi te oyk epeitheto, strateysamenos te pollous kai agathous teis stratieis apobalun apeilthe. [3]  su de u basileu melleis ep' andras strateuesthai pollon ameinonas e Skuthas, oi kata thalassan te aristoi kai kata gein legontai einai. to de aytoisi enesti deinon, eme soi dikaion esti frazein.   
      10. (b) Thou sayest that thou wilt yoke the Hellespont with a bridge and march an army through Europe to Hellas. Now supposing it chance that we are worsted either by land or by sea, or even both, for the men are reported to be valiant in fight, (and we may judge for ourselves that it is so, since the Athenians by themselves destroyed that great army which came with Datis and Artaphrenes to the Attic land),--suppose however that they do not succeed in both, yet if they shall attack with their ships and conquer in a sea-fight, and then sail to the Hellespont and break up the bridge, this of itself, O king, will prove to be a great peril.         10. b [1] zeuxas feis ton Ellesponton elan straton dia teis Eyrupes es ten Ellada. kai de kai syneneike se etoi kata gein e kai kata thalassan essutheinai, e kai kat' amfotera. oi gar andres legontai einai alkimoi, paresti de kai stathmusasthai, ei stratien ge tosauten sun Dati kai Artafrenei elthousan es ten Attiken xuren mounoi Athenaioi dieftheiran. [2]  oykun amfoterei sfi exurese. all' en teisi neysi embalusi kai nikesantes naymaxiei pleusi es ton Ellesponton kai epeita lususi ten gefyran, touto de basileu ginetai deinon.    
      10. (c) Not however by any native wisdom of my own do I conjecture that this might happen: I am conjecturing only such a misfortune as all but came upon us at the former time, when thy father, having yoked the Bosphorus of Thracia and made a bridge over the river Ister, had crossed over to go against the Scythians. At that time the Scythians used every means of entreaty to persuade the Ionians to break up the passage, to whom it had been entrusted to guard the bridges of the Ister. At that time, if Histiaios the despot of Miletos had followed the opinion of the other despots and had not made opposition to them, the power of the Persians would have been brought to an end. Yet it is a fearful thing even to hear it reported that the whole power of the king had come to depend upon one human creature.         10. g [1] egu de oydemiei sofiei oikeiei aytos tauta symballomai, all' oion kote emeas oligoy edeese katalabein pathos, ote pater sos zeuxas Bosporon ton Threikion, gefyrusas de potamon Istron diebe epi Skuthas. tote pantoioi egenonto Skuthai deomenoi Iunun lusai ton poron, toisi epetetrapto e fylake tun gefyreun tou Istroy. [2]  kai tote ge Istiaios o Miletoy turannos ei epespeto tun allun tyrannun tei gnumei mede enantiuthe, diergasto an ta Perseun pregmata. kaitoi kai logui akousai deinon, ep' andri ge eni panta ta basileos pregmata gegeneisthai.   
      10. (d) Do not thou therefore propose to go into any such danger when there is no need, but do as I say:--at the present time dissolve this assembly; and afterwards at whatever time it shall seem good to thee, when thou hast considered prudently with thyself, proclaim that which seems to thee best: for good counsel I hold to be a very great gain; since even if anything shall prove adverse, the counsel which has been taken is no less good, though it has been defeated by fortune; while he who took counsel badly at first, if good fortune should go with him has lighted on a prize by chance, but none the less for that his counsel was bad.         10. d [1] su un me bouley es kindynon medena toiouton apikesthai medemieis anagkes eouses, alla emoi peithey. nun men ton sullogon tonde dialyson. aytis de, otan toi dokeei, proskepsamenos epi seuytou proagoreye ta toi dokeei einai arista. [2]  to gar ey boyleuesthai kerdos megiston eyrisku eon. ei gar kai enantiutheinai ti thelei, bebouleytai men oyden Esson ey, essutai de ypo teis tuxes to bouleyma. o de boyleysamenos aisxrus, ei oi e tuxe epispoito, eyrema eyreke, Esson de oyden oi kakus bebouleytai.   
      10. (e) Thou seest how God strikes with thunderbolts the creatures which stand above the rest and suffers them not to make a proud show; while those which are small do not provoke him to jealousy: thou seest also how he hurls his darts ever at those buildings which are the highest and those trees likewise; for God is wont to cut short all those things which stand out above the rest. Thus also a numerous army is destroyed by one of few men in some such manner as this, namely when God having become jealous of them casts upon them panic or thundering from heaven, then they are destroyed utterly and not as their worth deserves; for God suffers not any other to have high thoughts save only himself.         10. e [1] orais ta yperexonta zuia us keraynoi o theos oyde eai fantazesthai, ta de smikra oyden min knizei. orais de us es oikemata ta megista aiei kai dendrea ta toiauta aposkeptei ta belea. fileei gar o theos ta yperexonta panta kolouein. oytu de kai stratos pollos ypo oligoy diaftheiretai kata toionde. epean sfi o theos fthonesas fobon embalei e bronten, di' un eftharesan anaxius euytun. oy gar eai froneein mega o theos allon e euyton.   
      10. (f) Moreover the hastening of any matter breeds disasters, whence great losses are wont to be produced; but in waiting there are many good things contained, as to which, if they do not appear to be good at first, yet one will find them to be so in course of time.         10. z [1] epeixtheinai men nyn pan preigma tiktei sfalmata, ek tun zemiai megalai fileoysi ginesthai. en de tui episxein enesti agatha, ei me paraytika dokeonta einai, all' ana xronon exeuroi tis an.   
      10. (g) To thee, O king, I give this counsel: but thou son of Gobryas, Mardonios, cease speaking foolish words about the Hellenes, since they in no way deserve to be spoken of with slight; for by uttering slander against the Hellenes thou art stirring the king himself to make an expedition, and it is to this very end that I think thou art straining all thy endeavour. Let not this be so; for slander is a most grievous thing: in it the wrongdoers are two, and the person who suffers wrong is one. The slanderer does a wrong in that he speaks against one who is not present, the other in that he is persuaded of the thing before he gets certain knowledge of it, and he who is not present when the words are spoken suffers wrong in the matter thus,--both because he has been slandered by the one and because he has been believed to be bad by the other.         10. e [1] soi men de tauta u basileu symboyleuu. su de, u pai Gobrueu Mardonie, pausai legun logoys mataioys peri Ellenun oyk eontun axiun flaurus akouein. Ellenas gar diaballun epaeireis ayton basilea strateuesthai. aytou de toutoy eineka dokeeis moi pasan prothymien ekteinein. me nyn oytu genetai. [2] diabole gar esti deinotaton. en tei duo men eisi oi adikeontes, eis de o adikeomenos. o men gar diaballun adikeei oy pareonti kategoreun, o de adikeei anapeithomenos prin e atrekeus ekmathei. o de de apeun tou logoy tade en aytoisi adikeetai, diabletheis te ypo tou eteroy kai nomistheis pros tou eteroy kakos einai.   
      10. (h) However, if it be absolutely needful to make an expedition against these men, come, let the king himself remain behind in the abodes of the Persians, and let us both set to the wager our sons; and then do thou lead an army by thyself, choosing for thyself the men whom thou desirest, and taking an army as large as thou thinkest good: and if matters turn out for the king as thou sayest, let my sons be slain and let me also be slain in addition to them; but if in the way which I predict, let thy sons suffer this, and with them thyself also, if thou shalt return back. But if thou art not willing to undergo this proof, but wilt by all means lead an army against Hellas, then I say that those who are left behind in this land will hear that Mardonios, after having done a great mischief to the Persians, is torn by dogs and birds, either in the land of the Athenians, or else perchance thou wilt be in the land of the Lacedemonians (unless indeed this should have come to pass even before that upon the way), and that thou hast at length been made aware against what kind of men thou art persuading the king to march."         10. th [1] all' ei de dei ge pantus epi tous andras toutoys strateuesthai, fere, basileus men aytos en ethesi toisi Perseun menetu, emeun de amfoterun paraballomenun ta tekna, stratelatee aytos su epilexamenos te andras tous etheleis kai labun stratien okosen tina bouleai. [2]  kai en men tei su legeis anabainei basilei ta pregmata, kteinesthun oi emoi paides, pros de aytoisi kai egu. en de tei egu prolegu, oi soi tauta pasxontun, sun de sfi kai su, en aponosteseis. [3]  ei de tauta men ypodunein oyk etheleseis, su de pantus strateyma anaxeis epi ten Ellada, akousesthai tina femi tun aytou teide ypoleipomenun Mardonion, mega ti kakon exergasamenon Persas, ypo kynun te kai ornithun diaforeumenon e koy en gei tei Athenaiun e se ge en tei Lakedaimoniun, ei me ara kai proteron kat' odon, gnonta ep' oioys andras anaginuskeis strateuesthai basilea.>>   
      11. Artabanos thus spoke; and Xerxes enraged by it made answer as follows: "Artabanos, thou art my father's brother, and this shall save thee from receiving any recompense such as thy foolish words deserve. Yet I attach to thee this dishonour, seeing that thou art a coward and spiritless, namely that thou do not march with me against Hellas, but remain here together with the women; and I, even without thy help, will accomplish all the things which I said: for I would I might not be descended from Dareios, the son of Hystaspes, the son of Arsames, the son of Ariaramnes, the son of Teispes, or from Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, the son of Teispes, the son of Achaimenes, if I take not vengeance on the Athenians; since I know well that if we shall keep quiet, yet they will not do so, but will again march against our land, if we may judge by the deeds which have been done by them to begin with, since they both set fire to Sardis and marched upon Asia. It is not possible therefore that either side should retire from the quarrel, but the question before us is whether we shall do or whether we shall suffer; whether all these regions shall come to be under the Hellenes or all those under the Persians: for in our hostility there is no middle course. It follows then now that it is well for us, having suffered wrong first, to take revenge, that I may find out also what is this terrible thing which I shall suffer if I lead an army against these men,--men whom Pelops the Phrygian, who was the slave of my forefathers, so subdued that even to the present day both the men themselves and their land are called after the name of him who subdued them."         11. [1] Artabanos men tauta elexe, Xerxes de thymutheis ameibetai toiside. <<Artabane, patros eis tou emou adelfeos. touto se rhusetai medena axion misthon labein epeun mataiun. kai toi tauten ten atimien prostithemi eonti kakui kai athumui, mete systrateuesthai emoige epi ten Ellada aytou te menein ama teisi gynaixi. egu de kai aney seo osa per eipa epitelea poiesu. [2] me gar eien ek Dareioy tou Ystaspeos tou Arsameos tou Ariaramneu tou Teispeos tou Kuroy tou Kambuseu tou Teispeos tou Axaimeneos gegonus, me timuresamenos Athenaioys, ey epistamenos oti ei emeis esyxien axomen, all' oyk ekeinoi, alla kai mala strateusontai epi ten emeteren, ei xre stathmusasthai toisi ypargmenoisi ex ekeinun, oi Sardis te enepresan kai elasan es ten Asien. [3] oykun exanaxureein oydeteroisi dynatus exei, alla poieein e pathein prokeitai agun, ina e tade panta ypo Ellesi e ekeina panta ypo Perseisi genetai. to gar meson oyden teis exthres esti. [4] kalon un propeponthotas emeas timureein ede ginetai, ina kai to deinon to peisomai touto mathu, elasas ep' andras toutoys, tous ge kai Pelops o Frux, eun paterun tun emun doulos, katestrepsato oytu us kai es tode aytoi te unthrupoi kai e gei aytun epunymoi tou katastrepsamenoy kaleontai.>>   
      12. Thus far was it spoken then; but afterwards when darkness came on, the opinion of Artabanos tormented Xerxes continually; and making night his counsellor he found that it was by no means to his advantage to make the march against Hellas. So when he had thus made a new resolve, he fell asleep, and in the night he saw, as is reported by the Persians, a vision as follows:--Xerxes thought that a man tall and comely of shape came and stood by him and said: "Art thou indeed changing thy counsel, O Persian, of leading an expedition against Hellas, now that thou hast made proclamation that the Persians shall collect an army? Thou dost not well in changing thy counsel, nor will he who is here present with thee excuse thee from it; but as thou didst take counsel in the day to do, by that way go."         12. [1] tauta men epi tosouto elegeto. meta de eyfrone te egineto kai Xerxen eknize e Artabanoy gnume. nykti de boylen didous pagxy eyriske oi oy preigma einai strateuesthai epi ten Ellada. dedogmenun de oi aytis toutun katupnuse, kai de koy en tei nykti eide opsin toiende, us legetai ypo Perseun. edokee o Xerxes andra oi epistanta megan te kai eyeidea eipein [2] <<meta de boyleueai, u Persa, strateyma me agein epi ten Ellada, proeipas alizein Persas straton; oyte un metaboyleyomenos poieeis ey oyte o syggnusomenos toi para. all' usper teis emeres eboyleusao poieein, tauten ithi tun odun.>> ton men tauta eiponta edokee o Xerxes apoptasthai,   
      13. After he had said this, Xerxes thought that he who had spoken flew away; and when day had dawned he made no account of this dream, but gathered together the Persians whom he had assembled also the former time and said to them these words: "Persians, pardon me that I make quick changes in my counsel; for in judgment not yet am I come to my prime, and they who advise me to do the things which I said, do not for any long time leave me to myself. However, although at first when I heard the opinion of Artabanos my youthful impulses burst out, so that I cast out unseemly words against a man older than myself; yet now I acknowledge that he is right, and I shall follow his opinion. Consider then I have changed my resolve to march against Hellas, and do ye remain still."         13. [1] emeres de epilampsases oneiroy men toutoy logon oydena epoieeto, o de Perseun synalisas tous kai proteron synelexe, elexe sfi tade. [2] <<andres Persai, syggnumen moi exete oti agxistrofa boyleuomai. frenun te gar es ta emeuytou pruta oyku aneku, kai oi paregoreomenoi ekeina poieein oydena xronon mey apexontai. akousanti mentoi moi teis Artabanoy gnumes paraytika men e neotes epezese, uste aeikestera aporripsai epea es andra presbuteron e xreon. nun mentoi syggnous xresomai tei ekeinoy gnumei. [3] us un metadedogmenon moi me strateuesthai epi ten Ellada, esyxoi este.>> Persai men us ekoysan tauta, kexarekotes prosekuneon.   
      14. The Persians accordingly when they heard this were rejoiced and made obeisance: but when night had come on, the same dream again came and stood by Xerxes as he lay asleep and said: "Son of Dareios, it is manifest then that thou hast resigned this expedition before the assembly of the Persians, and that thou hast made no account of my words, as if thou hadst heard them from no one at all. Now therefore be well assured of this:--if thou do not make thy march forthwith, there shall thence spring up for thee this result, namely that, as thou didst in short time become great and mighty, so also thou shalt speedily be again brought low."         14. [1] nyktos de genomenes aytis tuyto oneiron tui Xerxei katypnumenui elege epistan <<u pai Dareioy, kai de faineai en Perseisi te apeipamenos ten stratelasien kai ta ema epea en oydeni poiesamenos logui us par' oydenos akousas; ey nyn tod' isthi. en per me aytika stratelateeis, tade toi ex aytun anasxesei. us kai megas kai pollos egeneo en oligui xronui, oytu kai tapeinos opisu kata taxos eseai.>>   
      15. Xerxes then, being very greatly disturbed by fear of the vision, started up from his bed and sent a messenger to summon Artabanos; to whom when he came Xerxes spoke thus: "Artabanos, at the first I was not discreet, when I spoke to thee foolish words on account of thy good counsel; but after no long time I changed my mind and perceived that I ought to do these things which thou didst suggest to me. I am not able however to do them, although I desire it; for indeed, now that I have turned about and changed my mind, a dream appears haunting me and by no means approving that I should do so; and just now it has left me even with a threat. If therefore it is God who sends it to me, and it is his absolute will and pleasure that an army should go against Hellas, this same dream will fly to thee also, laying upon thee a charge such as it has laid upon me; and it occurs to my mind that this might happen thus, namely if thou shouldst take all my attire and put it on, and then seat thyself on my throne, and after that lie down to sleep in my bed."         15. [1] Xerxes men peridees genomenos tei opsi ana te edrame ek teis koites kai pempei aggelon epi Artabanon kaleonta. apikomenui de oi elege Xerxes tade. <<Artabane, egu to paraytika men oyk esufroneon eipas es se mataia epea xresteis eineka symboylies. [2] meta mentoi oy pollon xronon metegnun, egnun de tauta moi poietea eonta ta su ypethekao. oykun dynatos toi eimi tauta boylomenos poieein. tetrammenui gar de kai metegnukoti epifoiteon oneiron fantazetai moi oydamus synepaineon poieein me tauta. nun de kai diapeileisan oixetai. [3] ei un theos esti o epipempun kai oi pantus en edonei esti genesthai stratelasien epi Ellada, epiptesetai kai soi tuyto touto oneiron, omoius kai emoi entellomenon. eyrisku de ud' an ginomena tauta, ei labois ten emen skeyen pasan kai endus meta touto izoio es ton emon thronon, kai epeita en koitei tei emei katypnuseias.>>   
      16. Xerxes spoke to him thus; and Artabanos was not willing to obey the command at first, since he did not think himself worthy to sit upon the royal throne; but at last being urged further he did that which was commanded, first having spoken these words:         16. [1] Xerxes men tauta oi elege. Artabanos de oy prutui keleusmati peithomenos, oia oyk axieumenos es ton basileion thronon izesthai, telos us enagkazeto eipas tade epoiee to keleyomenon.   
      16. (a) "It is equally good in my judgment, O king, whether a man has wisdom himself or is willing to follow the counsel of him who speaks well: and thou, who hast attained to both these good things, art caused to err by the communications of evil men; just as they say that the Sea, which is of all things the most useful to men, is by blasts of winds falling upon it prevented from doing according to its own nature. I however, when I was evil spoken of by thee, was not so much stung with pain for this, as because, when two opinions were laid before the Persians, the one tending to increase wanton insolence and the other tending to check it and saying that it was a bad thing to teach the soul to endeavour always to have something more than the present possession,--because, I say, when such opinions as these were laid before us, thou didst choose that one which was the more dangerous both for thyself and for the Persians.         16. a [1] <<ison ekeino u basileu par' emoi kekritai, froneein te ey kai tui legonti xresta ethelein peithesthai. ta se kai amfotera periekonta anthrupun kakun omiliai sfalloysi, kata per ten pantun xresimutaten anthrupoisi thalassan pneumata fasi anemun empiptonta oy perioran fusi tei euyteis xrasthai. [2]  eme de akousanta pros seu kakus oy tosouto edake lupe oson gnumeun duo prokeimeneun Perseisi, teis men ybrin ayxanouses, teis de katapayouses kai legouses us kakon eie didaskein ten psyxen pleon ti dizesthai aiei exein tou pareontos, toioyteun prokeimeneun gnumeun oti ten sfaleruteren seuytui te kai Perseisi anaireo.   
      16. (b) And now that thou hast turned to the better counsel, thou sayest that when thou art disposed to let go the expedition against the Hellenes, a dream haunts thee sent by some god, which forbids thee to abandon thy enterprise. Nay, but here too thou dost err, my son, since this is not of the Deity; for the dreams of sleep which come roaming about to men, are of such nature as I shall inform thee, being by many years older than thou. The visions of dreams are wont to hover above us in such form for the most part as the things of which we were thinking during the day; and we in the days preceding were very much occupied with this campaign.         16. b [1] nun un, epeide tetrapsai epi ten ameinu, feis toi metienti ton ep' Ellenas stolon epifoitan oneiron theou tinos pompei, oyk eunta se kataluein ton stolon. [2]  all' oyde tauta esti, u pai, theia. enupnia gar ta es anthrupoys peplanemena toiauta esti oia se egu didaxu, etesi seu polloisi presbuteros eun. peplaneisthai aytai malista euthasi ai opsies tun oneiratun, ta tis emeres frontizei. emeis de tas pro tou emeras tauten ten stratelasien kai to karta eixomen meta xeiras.   
      16. (c) If however after all this is not such a thing as I interpret it to be, but is something which is concerned with God, thou hast summed the matter up in that which thou hast said: let it appear, as thou sayest, to me also, as to thee, and give commands. But supposing that it desires to appear to me at all, it is not bound to appear to me any the more if I have thy garments on me than if I have my own, nor any more if I take my rest in thy bed than if I am in thy own; for assuredly this thing, whatever it may be, which appears to thee in thy sleep, is not so foolish as to suppose, when it sees me, that it is thou, judging so because the garments are thine. That however which we must find out now is this, namely if it will hold me in no account, and not think fit to appear to me, whether I have my own garments or whether I have thine, but continue still to haunt thee; for if it shall indeed haunt thee perpetually, I shall myself also be disposed to say that it is of the Deity. But if thou hast resolved that it shall be so, and it is not possible to turn aside this thy resolution, but I must go to sleep in thy bed, then let it appear to me also, when I perform these things: but until then I shall hold to the opinion which I now have."         16. g [1] ei de ara me esti touto toiouto oion egu diaireu, alla ti tou theioy metexon, su pan ayto syllabun eirekas. fanetu gar de kai emoi us kai soi diakeleyomenon. faneinai de oyden mallon moi ofeilei exonti ten estheita e oy kai ten emen, oyde ti mallon en koitei tei sei anapayomenui e oy kai en tei emei, ei per ge kai allus ethelei faneinai. [2]  oy gar de es tosouto ge eyetheies anekei touto, o ti de kote esti, to epifainomenon toi en tui ypnui, uste doxei eme orun se einai, tei sei estheiti tekmairomenon. ei de eme men en oydeni logui poiesetai oyde axiusei epifaneinai, oyte en ten emen estheita exu oyte en ten sen, oyde epifoitesei, touto ede matheteon estai. ei gar de epifoitesei ge synexeus, faien an kai aytos theion einai. [3]  ei de toi oytu dedoketai ginesthai kai oyk oia te ayto paratrepsai, all' ede dei eme en koitei sei katypnusai, fere, toutun ex emeu epiteleymenun fanetu kai emoi. mexri de toutoy tei pareousei gnumei xresomai.>>   
      17. Having thus said Artabanos, expecting that he would prove that Xerxes was speaking folly, did that which was commanded him; and having put on the garments of Xerxes and seated himself in the royal throne, he afterwards went to bed: and when he had fallen asleep, the same dream came to him which used to come to Xerxes, and standing over Artabanos spoke these words: "Art thou indeed he who endeavours to dissuade Xerxes from making a march against Hellas, pretending to have a care of him? However, neither in the future nor now at the present shalt thou escape unpunished for trying to turn away that which is destined to come to pass: and as for Xerxes, that which he must suffer if he disobeys, hath been shown already to the man himself."         17. [1] tosauta eipas Artabanos, elpizun Xerxen apodexein legonta oyden, epoiee to keleyomenon. endus de ten Xerxeu estheita kai ixomenos es ton basileion thronon us meta tauta koiton epoieeto, Elthe oi katypnumenui tuyto oneiron to kai para Xerxen efoita, yperstan de tou Artabanoy eipe. [2] <<ara su de keinos eis o apospeudun Xerxen strateuesthai epi ten Ellada us de kedomenos aytou ; all' oyte es to metepeita oyte es to paraytika nun kataproixeai apotrepun to xreon genesthai. Xerxen de ta dei anekoysteonta pathein, aytui ekeinui dedelutai.>>   
      18. Thus it seemed to Artabanos that the dream threatened him, and at the same time was just about to burn out his eyes with hot irons; and with a loud cry he started up from his bed, and sitting down beside Xerxes he related to him throughout the vision of the dream, and then said to him as follows: "I, O king, as one who has seen before now many great things brought to their fall by things less, urged thee not to yield in all things to the inclination of thy youth, since I knew that it was evil to have desire after many things; remembering on the one hand the march of Cyrus against the Massagetai, what fortune it had, and also that of Cambyses against the Ethiopians; and being myself one who took part with Dareios in the campaign against the Scythians. Knowing these things I had the opinion that thou wert to be envied of all men, so long as thou shouldest keep still. Since however there comes a divine impulse, and, as it seems, a destruction sent by heaven is taking hold of the Hellenes, I for my part am both changed in myself and also I reverse my opinions; and do thou signify to the Persians the message which is sent to thee from God, bidding them follow the commands which were given by thee at first with regard to the preparations to be made; and endeavour that on thy side nothing may be wanting, since God delivers the matter into thy hands." These things having been said, both were excited to confidence by the vision, and so soon as it became day, Xerxes communicated the matter to the Persians, and Artabanos, who before was the only man who came forward to dissuade him, now came forward to urge on the design.         18. [1] tauta te edokee Artabanos to oneiron apeileein kai thermoisi siderioisi ekkaiein aytou mellein tous ofthalmous. kai os ambusas mega anathruskei, kai parizomenos Xerxei, us ten opsin oi tou enypnioy diexeilthe apegeomenos, deutera oi legei tade. [2] <<egu men, u basileu, oia anthrupos idun ede polla te kai megala pesonta pregmata ypo essonun, oyk eun se ta panta tei elikiei eikein, epistamenos us kakon eie to pollun epithymeein, memnemenos men ton epi Massagetas Kuroy stolon us eprexe, memnemenos de kai ton ep' Aithiopas ton Kambuseu, systrateyomenos de kai Dareiui epi Skuthas. [3] epistamenos tauta gnumen eixon atremizonta se makariston einai pros pantun anthrupun. epei de daimonie tis ginetai orme, kai Ellenas, us oike, katalambanei tis fthore theelatos, egu men kai aytos trepomai kai ten gnumen metatithemai, su de semenon men Perseisi ta ek tou theou pempomena, xrasthai de keleye toisi ek seo prutoisi proeiremenoisi es ten paraskeyen, poiee de oytu okus tou theou paradidontos tun sun endeesei meden.>> [4] toutun de lexthentun, enthauta epaerthentes tei opsi, us emere egeneto taxista, Xerxes te yperetitheto tauta Perseisi, kai Artabanos, os proteron apospeudun mounos efaineto, tote epispeudun faneros En.   
      19. Xerxes being thus desirous to make the expedition, there came to him after this a third vision in his sleep, which the Magians, when they heard it, explained to have reference to the dominion of the whole Earth and to mean that all men should be subject to him; and the vision was this:--Xerxes thought that he had been crowned with a wreath of an olive-branch and that the shoots growing from the olive- tree covered the whole Earth; and after that, the wreath, placed as it was about his head, disappeared. When the Magians had thus interpreted the vision, forthwith every man of the Persians who had been assembled together departed to his own province and was zealous by all means to perform the commands, desiring each one to receive for himself the gifts which had been proposed: and thus Xerxes was gathering his army together, searching every region of the continent.         19. [1] ormemenui de Xerxei stratelateein meta tauta trite opsis en tui ypnui egeneto, ten oi Magoi ekrinan akousantes ferein te epi pasan gein doyleusein te oi pantas anthrupoys. e de opsis En ede. edokee o Xerxes estefanusthai elaies thallui, apo de teis elaies tous kladoys gein pasan episxein, meta de afanistheinai peri tei kefalei keimenon ton stefanon. [2] krinantun de tauta tun Magun, Perseun te tun syllexthentun aytika pas aner es ten arxen euytou apelasas eixe prothymien pasan epi toisi eiremenoisi, thelun aytos ekastos ta prokeimena dura labein, kai Xerxes tou stratou oytu epagersin poieetai, xuron panta ereynun teis epeiroy.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [20]

     20. During four full years from the conquest of Egypt he was preparing the army and the things that were of service for the army, and in the course of the fifth year he began his campaign with a host of great multitude. For of all the armies of which we have knowledge this proved to be by far the greatest; so that neither that led by Dareios against the Scythians appears anything as compared with it, nor the Scythian host, when the Scythians pursuing the Kimmerians made invasion of the Median land and subdued and occupied nearly all the upper parts of Asia, for which invasion afterwards Dareios attempted to take vengeance, nor that led by the sons of Atreus to Ilion, to judge by that which is reported of their expedition, nor that of the Mysians and Teucrians, before the Trojan war, who passed over into Europe by the Bosphorus and not only subdued all the Thracians, but came down also as far as the Ionian Sea and marched southwards to the river Peneios.         20. [1] apo gar Aiguptoy alusios epi men tessera etea plerea pararteeto stratien te kai ta prosfora tei stratiei, pemptui de etei anomenui estratelatee xeiri megalei pletheos. [2] stolun gar tun emeis idmen pollui de megistos oytos egeneto, uste mete ton Dareioy ton epi Skuthas para touton medena fainesthai, mete ton Skythikon, ote Skuthai Kimmerioys diukontes es ten Mediken xuren esbalontes sxedon panta ta anu teis Asies katastrepsamenoi enemonto, tun eineken ysteron Dareios etimureeto, mete kata ta legomena ton Atreideun es Ilion, mete ton Mysun te kai Teykrun ton pro tun Truikun genomenon, oi diabantes es ten Eyrupen kata Bosporon tous te Threikas katestrepsanto pantas kai epi ton Ionion ponton katebesan, mexri te Peneiou potamou to pros mesambries elasan.   
      21. All these expeditions put together, with others, if there be any, added to them, are not equal to this one alone. For what nation did Xerxes not lead out of Asia against Hellas? and what water was not exhausted, being drunk by his host, except only the great rivers? For some supplied ships, and others were appointed to serve in the land- army; to some it was appointed to furnish cavalry, and to others vessels to carry horses, while they served in the expedition themselves also; others were ordered to furnish ships of war for the bridges, and others again ships with provisions.         21. [1] aytai ai pasai oyd' ei eterai pros tauteisi prosgenomenai stratelasiai mieis teisde oyk axiai. ti gar oyk egage ek teis Asies ethnos epi ten Ellada Xerxes; koion de pinomenon min ydur oyk epelipe, plen tun megalun potamun; [2] oi men gar neas pareixonto, oi de es pezon etetaxato, toisi de ippos prosetetakto, toisi de ippaguga ploia ama strateyomenoisi, toisi de es tas gefuras makras neas parexein, toisi de sita te kai neas.   
      22. Then in the first place, since the former fleet had suffered disaster in sailing round Athos, preparations had been going on for about three years past with regard to Athos: for triremes lay at anchor at Elaius in the Chersonese, and with this for their starting point men of all nations belonging to the army worked at digging, compelled by the lash; and the men went to the work regularly in succession: moreover those who dwelt round about Athos worked also at the digging: and Bubares the son of Megabazos and Artachaies the son of Artaios, Persians both, were set over the work. Now Athos is a mountain great and famous, running down to the sea and inhabited by men: and where the mountain ends on the side of the mainland the place is like a peninsula with an isthmus about twelve furlongs across. Here it is plain land or hills of no great size, extending from the sea of the Acanthians to that which lies off Torone; and on this isthmus, where Athos ends, is situated a Hellenic city called Sane: moreover there are others beyond Sane and within the peninsula of Athos, all which at this time the Persian had resolved to make into cities of an island and no longer of the mainland; these are, Dion, Olophyxos, Acrothoon, Thyssos, Cleonai.         22. [1] kai touto men, us prosptaisantun tun prutun peripleontun peri ton Athun proetoimazeto ek triun eteun koy malista ta es ton Athun. en gar Elaiounti teis Khersonesoy ormeon trierees. entheuten de ormumenoi urysson ypo mastigun pantodapoi teis stratieis, diadoxoi d' efoiteon. urysson de kai oi peri ton Athun katoikemenoi. [2] Boybares de o Megabazoy kai Artaxaies o Artaioy andres Persai epestasan tou ergoy. o gar Athus esti oros mega te kai onomaston, es thalassan kateikon, oikemenon ypo anthrupun. tei de teleytai es ten epeiron to oros, xersonesoeides te esti kai isthmos us dyudeka stadiun. pedion de touto kai kolunoi oy megaloi ek thalasses teis Akanthiun epi thalassan ten antion Torunes. [3] en de tui isthmui toutui, es ton teleytai o Athus, Sane polis Ellas oiketai, ai de ektos Sanes, esu de tou Athu oikemenai, tas tote o Perses nesiutidas anti epeirutidun ormeto poieein. eisi de aide, Dion Olofyxos Akrothuion Thussos Kleunai.   
      23. These are the cities which occupy Athos: and they dug as follows, the country being divided among the Barbarians by nations for the work:--at the city of Sane they drew a straight line across the isthmus, and when the channel became deep, those who stood lowest dug, while others delivered the earth as it was dug out to other men who stood above, as upon steps, and they again to others when it was received, until they came to those that were highest; and these bore it away and cast it forth. Now the others except the Phenicians had double toil by the breaking down of the steep edges of their excavation; for since they endeavoured to make the opening at the top and that at the bottom both of the same measure, some such thing was likely to result, as they worked: but the Phenicians, who are apt to show ability in their works generally, did so in this work also; for when they had had assigned to them by lot so much as fell to their share, they proceeded to dig, making the opening of the excavation at the top twice as wide as the channel itself was to be; and as the work went forward, they kept contracting the width; so that, when they came to the bottom, their work was made of equal width with that of the others. Now there is a meadow there, in which there was made for them a market and a place for buying and selling; and great quantities of corn came for them regularly from Asia, ready ground.         23. [1] polies men aytai ai ton Athun nemontai, urysson de ude dasamenoi ton xuron oi barbaroi kata ethnea. kata Sanen polin sxoinotenes poiesamenoi, epeite egineto bathea e diuryx, oi men katutata esteutes urysson, eteroi de paredidosan ton aiei exoryssomenon xoun alloisi katuperthe esteusi epi bathrun, oi d' ay ekdekomenoi eteroisi, eus apikonto es tous anutatu. oytoi de exeforeon te kai exeballon. [2] toisi men nyn alloisi plen Foinikun katarregnumenoi oi kremnoi tou orugmatos ponon diplesion pareixon. ate gar tou te anu stomatos kai tou katu ta ayta metra poieymenun, emelle sfi toiouto apobesesthai. [3] oi de Foinikes sofien en te toisi alloisi ergoisi apodeiknyntai kai de kai en ekeinui. apolaxontes gar morion oson aytoisi epeballe, urysson to men anu stoma teis diuryxos poieuntes diplesion e oson edee ayten ten diuryxa genesthai, probainontos de tou ergoy syneigon aiei. katu te de egineto kai exisouto toisi alloisi to ergon. [4] enthauta leimun esti, ina sfi agore te egineto kai preterion. sitos de sfi pollos efoita ek teis Asies alelesmenos.   
      24. It seems to me, making conjecture of this work, that Xerxes when he ordered this to be dug was moved by a love of magnificence and by a desire to make a display of his power and to leave a memorial behind him; for though they might have drawn the ships across the isthmus with no great labour, he bade them dig a channel for the sea of such breadth that two triremes might sail through, propelled side by side. To these same men to whom the digging had been appointed, it was appointed also to make a bridge over the river Strymon, yoking together the banks.         24. [1] us men eme symballomenon eyriskein, megalofrosunes eineken ayto Xerxes orussein ekeleye, ethelun te dunamin apodeiknysthai kai mnemosyna lipesthai. pareon gar medena ponon labontas ton isthmon tas neas dieirusai, orussein ekeleye diuryxa tei thalassei eyros us duo triereas pleein omou elastreomenas. toisi de aytoisi toutoisi, toisi per kai to orygma, prosetetakto kai ton Strymona potamon zeuxantas gefyrusai.   
      25. These things were being done by Xerxes thus; and meanwhile he caused ropes also to be prepared for the bridges, made of papyrus and of white flax, appointing this to the Phenicians and Egyptians; and also he was making preparations to store provisions for his army on the way, that neither the army itself nor the baggage animals might suffer from scarcity, as they made their march against Hellas. Accordingly, when he had learnt by inquiry of the various places, he bade them make stores where it was most convenient, carrying supplies to different parts by merchant ships and ferry-boats from all the countries of Asia. So they conveyed the greater part of the corn to the place which is called Leuke Acte in Thrace, while others conveyed stores to Tyrodiza of the Perinthians, others to Doriscos, others to Eion on the Strymon, and others to Macedonia, the work being distributed between them.         25. [1] tauta men nyn oytu epoiee, pareskeyazeto de kai opla es tas gefuras bublina te kai leykolinoy, epitaxas Foinixi te kai Aigyptioisi, kai sitia tei stratiei kataballein, ina me limeneie e stratie mede ta ypozugia elaynomena epi ten Ellada. [2] anapythomenos de tous xuroys kataballein ekeleye ina epitedeotaton eie, alla allei agineontas olkasi te kai porthmeioisi ek teis Asies pantaxothen. ton de un pleiston es Leyken akten kaleomenen teis Threikes agineon, oi de es Tyrodizan ten Perinthiun, oi de es Doriskon, oi de es Eiona ten epi Strymoni, oi de es Makedonien diatetagmenoi.   
      26. During the time that these were working at the task which had been proposed to them, the whole land-army had been assembled together and was marching with Xerxes to Sardis, setting forth from Critalla in Cappadokia; for there it had been ordered that the whole army should assemble, which was to go with Xerxes himself by the land: but which of the governors of provinces brought the best equipped force and received from the king the gifts proposed, I am not able to say, for I do not know that they even came to a competition in this matter. Then after they had crossed the river Halys and had entered Phrygia, marching through this land they came to Kelainai, where the springs of the river Maiander come up, and also those of another river not less than the Maiander, whose name is Catarractes; this rises in the market-place itself of Kelainai and runs into the Maiander: and here also is hanging up in the city the skin of Marsyas the Silenos, which is said by the Phrygians to have been flayed off and hung up by Apollo.         26. [1] en ui de oytoi ton prokeimenon ponon ergazonto, en toutui o pezos apas syllelegmenos ama Xerxei eporeueto es Sardis, ek ek Kritallun ormetheis tun en Kappadokiei. enthauta gar eireto syllegesthai panta ton kat' epeiron mellonta ama aytui Xerxei poreuesthai straton. [2] os men nyn tun yparxun straton kallista estalmenon agagun ta prokeimena para basileos elabe dura, oyk exu frasai. oyde gar arxen es krisin toutoy peri elthontas oida. [3] oi de epeite diabantes ton Alyn potamon umilesan tei Frygiei, di' ayteis poreyomenoi apikonto es Kelainas, ina pegai anadidousi Maiandroy potamou kai eteroy oyk elassonos e Maiandroy, tui oynoma tygxanei eon Katarrektes, os ex ayteis teis agoreis teis Kelaineun anatellun es ton Maiandron ekdidoi. en tei kai o tou Silenou Marsueu askos anakrematai, ton ypo Frygun logos exei ypo Apollunos ekdarenta anakremastheinai.   
      27. In this city Pythios the son of Atys, a Lydian, was waiting for the king and entertained his whole army, as well as Xerxes himself, with the most magnificent hospitality: moreover he professed himself ready to supply money for the war. So when Pythios offered money, Xerxes asked those of the Persians who were present, who Pythios was and how much money he possessed, that he made this offer. They said: "O king, this is he who presented thy father Dareios with the golden plane-tree and the golden vine; and even now he is in wealth the first of all men of whom we know, excepting thee only."         27. [1] en tautei tei poli ypokatemenos Puthios o Atoys aner Lydos exeinise ten basileos stratien pasan xeinioisi megistoisi kai ayton Xerxen, xremata te epaggelleto boylomenos es ton polemon parexein. [2] epaggellomenoy de xremata Pythioy, eireto Xerxes Perseun tous pareontas tis te eun andrun Puthios kai kosa xremata ektemenos epaggelloito tauta. oi de eipan <<u basileu, oytos esti os toi ton patera Dareion eduresato tei platanistui tei xryseei kai tei ampelui. os kai nun esti prutos anthrupun ploutui tun emeis idmen meta se.>>   
      28. Marvelling at the conclusion of these words Xerxes himself asked of Pythios then, how much money he had; and he said: "O king, I will not conceal the truth from thee, nor will I allege as an excuse that I do not know my own substance, but I will enumerate it to thee exactly, since I know the truth: for as soon as I heard that thou wert coming down to the Sea of Hellas, desiring to give thee money for the war I ascertained the truth, and calculating I found that I had of silver two thousand talents, and of gold four hundred myriads of daric staters all but seven thousand: and with this money I present thee. For myself I have sufficient livelihood from my slaves and from my estates of land."         28. [1] thumasas de tun epeun to teleytaion Xerxes aytos deutera eireto Puthion okosa oi eie xremata. o de eipe <<u basileu, oyte se apokrupsu oyte skepsomai to me eidenai ten emeuytou oysien, all' epistamenos toi atrekeus katalexu. [2] epeite gar taxista se epythomen epi thalassan katabainonta ten Ellenida, boylomenos toi dounai es ton polemon xremata exemanthanon, kai eyron logizomenos argyrioy men duo xiliadas eousas moi talantun, xrysioy de tetrakosias myriadas staterun Dareikun epideousas epta xiliadun. [3] kai toutoisi se egu dureomai, aytui de moi apo andrapodun te kai geupedun arkeun esti bios.>> o men tauta elege, Xerxes de estheis toisi eiremenoisi eipe.   
      29. Thus he said; and Xerxes was pleased by the things which he had spoken, and replied: "Lydian host, ever since I went forth from the Persian land I have encountered no man up to this time who was desirous to entertain my army, or who came into my presence and made offer of his own free will to contribute money to me for the war, except only thee: and thou not only didst entertain my army magnificently, but also now dost make offer of great sums of money. To thee therefore in return I give these rewards,--I make thee my guest-friend, and I will complete for thee the four hundred myriads of staters by giving from myself the seven thousand, in order that thy four hundred myriads may not fall short by seven thousand, but thou mayest have a full sum in thy reckoning, completed thus by me. Keep possession of that which thou hast got for thyself, and be sure to act always thus; for if thou doest so, thou wilt have no cause to repent either at the time or afterwards."         29. [1] <<xeine Lyde, egu epeite exeilthon ten Persida xuren, oydeni andri synemixa es tode ostis ethelese xeinia protheinai stratui tui emui, oyde ostis es opsin ten emen katastas aytepaggeltos es ton polemon emoi ethelese symbalesthai xremata, exu seu. su de kai exeinisas megalus straton ton emon kai xremata megala epaggelleai. [2] soi un egu anti aytun gerea toiade didumi. xeinon te se poieumai emon kai tas tetrakosias myriadas toi tun staterun apoplesu par' emeuytou dous tas epta xiliadas, ina me toi epideees eusi ai tetrakosiai myriades epta xiliadun, alla ei toi apartilogie yp' emeo peplerumene. [3] ekteso te aytos ta per aytos ektesao, epistaso te einai aiei toioutos. oy gar toi tauta poieunti oyte es to pareon oyte es xronon metamelesei.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [30]

     30. Having thus said and having accomplished his promise, he continued his march onwards; and passing by a city of the Phrygians called Anaua and a lake whence salt is obtained, he came to Colossai, a great city of Phrygia, where the river Lycos falls into an opening of the earth and disappears from view, and then after an interval of about five furlongs it comes up to view again, and this river also flows into the Maiander. Setting forth from Colossai towards the boundaries of the Phrygians and Lydians, the army arrived at the city of Kydrara, where a pillar is fixed, set up by Croesus, which declares by an inscription that the boundaries are there.         30. [1] tauta de eipas kai epitelea poiesas eporeueto to prosu aiei. Anaya de kaleomenen Frygun polin parameibomenos kai limnen ek teis ales ginontai, apiketo es Kolossas polin megalen Frygies. en tei Lukos potamos es xasma geis esballun afanizetai, epeita dia stadiun us pente malista kei anafainomenos ekdidoi kai oytos es ton Maiandron. [2] ek de Kolosseun o stratos ormumenos epi tous oyroys tun Frygun kai Lydun apiketo es Kudrara polin, entha stele katapepegyia, statheisa de ypo Kroisoy, katamenuei dia grammatun tous oyroys.   
      31. From Phrygia then he entered Lydia; and here the road parts into two, and that which goes to the left leads towards Caria, while that which goes to the right leads to Sardis; and travelling by this latter road one must needs cross the river Maiander and pass by the city of Callatebos, where men live whose trade it is to make honey of the tamarisk-tree and of wheat-flour. By this road went Xerxes and found a plane-tree, to which for its beauty he gave an adornment of gold, and appointed that some one should have charge of it always in undying succession; and on the next day he came to the city of the Lydians.         31. [1] us de ek teis Frygies esebale es ten Lydien, sxizomenes teis odou kai teis men es aristeren epi Karies ferouses teis de es dexien es Sardis, tei kai poreyomenui diabeinai ton Maiandron potamon pasa anagke ginetai kai ienai para Kallatebon polin, en tei andres demioergoi meli ek myrikes te kai pyrou poieusi, tauten iun o Xerxes ten odon eyre plataniston, ten kalleos eineka duresamenos kosmui xryseui kai meledunui athanatui andri epitrepsas deyterei emerei apiketo es tun Lydun to asty.   
      32. Having come to Sardis he proceeded first to send heralds to Hellas, to ask for earth and water, and also to give notice beforehand to prepare meals for the king; except that he sent neither to Athens nor Lacedemon to ask for earth, but to all the other States: and the reason why he sent the second time to ask for earth and water was this,--as many as had not given at the former time to Dareios when he sent, these he thought would certainly give now by reason of their fear: this matter it was about which he desired to have certain knowledge, and he sent accordingly.         32. [1] apikomenos de es Sardis pruta men apepempe kerykas es ten Ellada aitesontas gein te kai ydur kai proereontas deipna basilei paraskeyazein. plen oyte es Athenas oyte es Lakedaimona apepempe epi geis aitesin, tei de allei pantei. tunde de eineka to deuteron apepempe epi gein te kai ydur. osoi proteron oyk edosan Dareiui pempsanti, toutoys pagxy edokee tote deisantas dusein. boylomenos un ayto touto ekmathein akribeus epempe.   
      33. After this he made his preparations intending to march to Abydos: and meanwhile they were bridging over the Hellespont from Asia to Europe. Now there is in the Chersonese of the Hellespont between the city of Sestos and Madytos, a broad foreland running down into the sea right opposite Abydos; this is the place where no long time afterwards the Athenians under the command of Xanthippos the son of Ariphron, having taken Artayctes a Persian, who was the governor of Sestos, nailed him alive to a board with hands and feet extended (he was the man who was wont to take women with him to the temple of Protesilaos at Elaius and to do things there which are not lawful).         33. [1] meta de tauta pareskeyazeto us elun es Abydon. oi de en toutui ton Ellesponton ezeugnysan ek teis Asies es ten Eyrupen. esti de teis Khersonesoy teis en Ellespontui, Sestou te polios metaxu kai Madutoy, akte paxea es thalassan katekoysa Abudui katantion. entha meta tauta, xronui ysteron oy pollui, epi Xanthippoy tou Arifronos strategou Athenaioi Artaukten andra Persen labontes Sestou yparxon zunta pros sanida diepassaleysan, os kai es tou Prutesileu to iron es Elaiounta agineomenos gynaikas athemista erdeske.   
      34. To this foreland they on whom this work was laid were making their bridges, starting from Abydos, the Phenicians constructing the one with ropes of white flax, and the Egyptians the other, which was made with papyrus rope. Now from Abydos to the opposite shore is a distance of seven furlongs. But when the strait had been bridged over, a great storm came on and dashed together all the work that had been made and broke it up.         34. [1] es tauten un ten akten ex Abudoy ormumenoi egefuroyn toisi prosekeito, ten men leykolinoy Foinikes, ten d' eteren ten byblinen Aiguptioi. esti de epta stadioi ex Abudoy es ten apantion. kai de ezeygmenoy tou poroy epigenomenos xeimun megas synekopse te ekeina panta kai dielyse.   
      35. Then when Xerxes heard it he was exceedingly enraged, and bade them scourge the Hellespont with three hundred strokes of the lash and let down into the sea a pair of fetters. Nay, I have heard further that he sent branders also with them to brand the Hellespont. However this may be, he enjoined them, as they were beating, to say Barbarian and presumptuous words as follows: "Thou bitter water, thy master lays upon thee this penalty, because thou didst wrong him not having suffered any wrong from him: and Xerxes the king will pass over thee whether thou be willing or no; but with right, as it seems, no man doeth sacrifice to thee, seeing that thou art a treacherous and briny stream." The sea he enjoined them to chastise thus, and also he bade them cut off the heads of those who were appointed to have charge over the bridging of the Hellespont.         35. [1] us d' eputheto Xerxes, deina poieumenos ton Ellesponton ekeleyse triekosias epikesthai mastigi plegas kai kateinai es to pelagos pedeun zeugos. ede de ekoysa us kai stigeas ama toutoisi apepempse stixontas ton Ellesponton. [2] enetelleto de un rhapizontas legein barbara te kai atasthala. <<u pikron ydur, despotes toi diken epitithei tende, oti min edikesas oyden pros ekeinoy adikon pathon. kai basileus men Xerxes diabesetai se, en te su ge boulei en te me. soi de kata diken ara oydeis anthrupun thuei us eonti kai tholerui kai almyrui potamui.>> [3] ten te de thalassan enetelleto toutoisi zemioun kai tun epesteutun tei zeuxi tou Ellespontoy apotamein tas kefalas.   
      36. Thus then the men did, to whom this ungracious office belonged; and meanwhile other chief- constructors proceeded to make the bridges; and thus they made them:-- They put together fifty-oared galleys and triremes, three hundred and sixty to be under the bridge towards the Euxine Sea, and three hundred and fourteen to be under the other, the vessels lying in the direction of the stream of the Hellespont (though crosswise in respect to the Pontus), to support the tension of the ropes. They placed them together thus, and let down very large anchors, those on the one side towards the Pontus because of the winds which blow from within outwards, and on the other side, towards the West and the Egean, because of the South-East and South Winds. They left also an opening for a passage through, so that any who wished might be able to sail into the Pontus with small vessels, and also from the Pontus outwards. Having thus done, they proceeded to stretch tight the ropes, straining them with wooden windlasses, not now appointing the two kinds of rope to be used apart from one another, but assigning to each bridge two ropes of white flax and four of the papyrus ropes. The thickness and beauty of make was the same for both, but the flaxen ropes were heavier in proportion, and of this rope a cubit weighed one talent. When the passage was bridged over, they sawed up logs of wood, and making them equal in length to the breadth of the bridge they laid them above the stretched ropes, and having set them thus in order they again fastened them above. When this was done, they carried on brushwood, and having set the brushwood also in place, they carried on to it earth; and when they had stamped down the earth firmly, they built a barrier along on each side, so that the baggage- animals and horses might not be frightened by looking out over the sea.         36. [1] kai oi men tauta epoieon, toisi prosekeito ayte e axaris time, tas de alloi arxitektones ezeugnysan. ezeugnysan de ude, pentekonteroys kai triereas synthentes, ypo men ten pros tou Eyxeinoy pontoy exekonta te kai triekosias, ypo de ten eteren tessereskaideka kai triekosias, tou men Pontoy epikarsias tou de Ellespontoy kata rhoon, ina anakuxeuei ton tonon tun oplun. [2] synthentes de agkuras kateikan perimekeas, tas men pros tou Pontoy teis eteres tun anemun eineken tun esuthen ekpneontun, teis de eteres pros esperes te kai tou Aigaioy zefuroy te kai notoy eineka. diekploon de ypofaysin katelipon tun pentekonterun kai triereun, ina kai es ton Ponton exei o boylomenos pleein ploioisi leptoisi kai ek tou Pontoy exu. [3] tauta de poiesantes kateteinon ek geis streblountes onoisi xylinoisi ta opla, oyketi xuris ekatera taxantes, alla duo men leykolinoy dasamenoi es ekateren, tessera de tun byblinun. paxutes men En e ayte kai kallone, kata logon de embrithestera En ta linea, tou talanton o peixys eilke. [4] epeide de egefyruthe o poros, kormous xulun kataprisantes kai poiesantes isoys teis sxedies tui eyrei kosmui etithesan katuperthe tun oplun tou tonoy, thentes de epexeis enthauta aytis epezeugnyon. [5] poiesantes de tauta ylen epeforesan, kosmui de thentes kai ten ylen gein epeforesan, katanaxantes de kai ten gein fragmon pareirysan enthen kai enthen, ina me fobeetai ta ypozugia ten thalassan yperorunta kai oi ippoi.   
      37. When the construction of the bridges had been finished, and the works about Athos, both the embankments about the mouths of the channel, which were made because of the breaking of the sea upon the beach, that the mouths of it might not be filled up, and the channel itself, were reported to be fully completed, then, after they had passed the winter at Sardis, the army set forth from thence fully equipped, at the beginning of spring, to march to Abydos; and when it had just set forth, the Sun left his place in the heaven and was invisible, though there was no gathering of clouds and the sky was perfectly clear; and instead of day it became night. When Xerxes saw and perceived this, it became a matter of concern to him; and he asked the Magians what the appearance meant to portend. These declared that the god was foreshowing to the Hellenes a leaving of their cities, saying that the Sun was the foreshower of events for the Hellenes, but the Moon for the Persians. Having been thus informed, Xerxes proceeded on the march with very great joy.         37. [1] us de ta te tun gefyreun kateskeuasto kai ta peri ton Athun, oi te xytoi peri ta stomata teis diuryxos, oi teis rhexies eineken epoiethesan, ina me pimpletai ta stomata tou orugmatos, kai ayte e diuryx panteleus pepoiemene aggelleto, enthauta xeimerisas ama tu eari pareskeyasmenos o stratos ek tun Sardiun ormato elun es Abydon. [2] ormemenui de oi o elios eklipun ten ek tou oyranou edren afanes En oyt' epinefelun eontun aithries te ta malista, anti emeres te nux egeneto. idonti de kai mathonti touto tui Xerxei epimeles egeneto, kai eireto tous Magoys to thelei profainein to fasma. [3] oi de efrazon us Ellesi prodeiknuei o theos ekleipsin tun poliun, legontes elion einai Ellenun prodektora, selenen de sfeun. tauta pythomenos o Xerxes perixares eun epoieeto ten elasin.   
      38. Then as he was leading forth his army on its march, Pythios the Lydian, being alarmed by the appearance in the heavens and elated by the gifts which he had received, came to Xerxes, and said as follows: "Master, I would desire to receive from thee a certain thing at my request, which, as it chances, is for thee an easy thing to grant, but a great thing for me, if I obtain it." Then Xerxes, thinking that his request would be for anything rather than that which he actually asked, said that he would grant it, and bade him speak and say what he desired. He then, when he heard this, was encouraged, and spoke these words: "Master, I have, as it chances, five sons, and it is their fortune to be all going together with thee on the march against Hellas. Do thou, therefore, O king, have compassion upon me, who have come to so great an age, and release from serving in the expedition one of my sons, the eldest, in order that he may be caretaker both of myself and of my wealth: but the other four take with thyself, and after thou hast accomplished that which thou hast in thy mind, mayest thou have a safe return home."         38. [1] us d' exelayne ten stratien, Puthios o Lydos katarrudesas to ek tou oyranou fasma epaertheis te toisi duremasi, elthun para Xerxen elege tade. <<u despota, xreisas an ti seu boyloimen tyxein, to soi men elafron tygxanei eon ypoyrgeisai, emoi de mega genomenon.>> [2] Xerxes de pan mallon dokeun min xreisein e to edeethe, efe te ypoyrgesein kai de agoreuein ekeleye otey deoito. o de epeite tauta ekoyse, elege tharsesas tade. <<u despota, tygxanoysi moi paides eontes pente, kai sfeas katalambanei pantas ama soi strateuesthai epi ten Ellada. [3] su de, u basileu, eme es tode elikies ekonta oikteiras tun moi paidun ena paralyson teis strateies ton presbutaton, ina aytou te emeu kai tun xrematun E meledunos. tous de tesseras agey ama seuytui, kai prexas ta noeeis nosteseias opisu.>>   
      39. Then Xerxes was exceedingly angry and made answer with these words: "Thou wretched man, dost thou dare, when I am going on a march myself against Hellas, and am taking my sons and my brothers and my relations and friends, dost thou dare to make any mention of a son of thine, seeing that thou art my slave, who ought to have been accompanying me thyself with thy whole household and thy wife as well? Now therefore be assured of this, that the passionate spirit of man dwells within the ears; and when it has heard good things, it fills the body with delight, but when it has heard the opposite things to this, it swells up with anger. As then thou canst not boast of having surpassed the king in conferring benefits formerly, when thou didst to us good deeds and madest offer to do more of the same kind, so now that thou hast turned to shamelessness, thou shalt receive not thy desert but less than thou deservest: for thy gifts of hospitality shall rescue from death thyself and the four others of thy sons, but thou shalt pay the penalty with the life of the one to whom thou dost cling most." Having answered thus, he forthwith commanded those to whom it was appointed to do these things, to find out the eldest of the sons of Pythios and to cut him in two in the middle; and having cut him in two, to dispose the halves, one on the right hand of the road and the other on the left, and that the army should pass between them by this way.         39. [1] karta te ethymuthe o Xerxes kai ameibeto toiside. <<u kake anthrupe, su etolmesas, emeu strateyomenoy aytou epi ten Ellada kai agontos paidas emous kai adelfeous kai oikeioys kai filoys, mnesasthai peri seo paidos, eun emos doulos, ton xrein panoikiei aytei tei gynaiki synepesthai ; ey nyn tod' exepistaso, us en toisi usi tun anthrupun oikeei o thymos, os xresta men akousas terpsios empiplei to suma, ypenantia de toutoisi akousas anoideei. [2] ote men nyn xresta poiesas etera toiauta epeggelleo, eyergesieisi basilea oy kayxeseai yperbalesthai. epeite de es to anaidesteron etrapey, ten men axien oy lampseai, elassu de teis axies. se men gar kai tous tesseras tun paidun rhuetai ta xeinia. tou de enos, tou periexeai malista, tei psyxei zemiuseai.>> [3] us de tauta ypekrinato, aytika ekeleye toisi prosetetakto tauta pressein, tun Pythioy paidun exeyrontas ton presbutaton meson diatamein, diatamontas de ta emitoma diatheinai to men epi dexia teis odou to d' ep' aristera, kai tautei diexienai ton straton.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [40]

     40. When these had so done, the army proceeded to pass between; and first the baggage-bearers led the way together with their horses, and after these the host composed of all kinds of nations mingled together without distinction: and when more than the half had gone by, an interval was left and these were separated from the king. For before him went first a thousand horsemen, chosen out of all the Persians; and after them a thousand spearmen chosen also from all the Persians, having the points of their spears turned down to the ground; and then ten sacred horses, called "Nesaian," with the fairest possible trappings. Now the horses are called Nesaian for this reason:--there is a wide plain in the land of Media which is called the Nesaian plain, and this plain produces the great horses of which I speak. Behind these ten horses the sacred chariot of Zeus was appointed to go, which was drawn by eight white horses; and behind the horses again followed on foot a charioteer holding the reins, for no human creature mounts upon the seat of that chariot. Then behind this came Xerxes himself in a chariot drawn by Nesaian horses, and by the side of him rode a charioteer, whose name was Patiramphes, son of Otanes a Persian.         40. [1] poiesantun de toutun touto, meta tauta diexeie o stratos. egeonto de prutoi men oi skeyoforoi te kai ta ypozugia, meta de toutoys summiktos stratos pantoiun ethneun anamix, oy diakekrimenoi. tei de yperemisees Esan, enthauta dieleleipto, kai oy synemisgon oytoi basilei. [2] proegeunto men de ippotai xilioi, ek Perseun pantun apolelegmenoi. meta de aixmoforoi xilioi kai oytoi ek pantun apolelegmenoi, tas logxas katu es ten gein trepsantes. meta de iroi Nesaioi kaleomenoi ippoi deka kekosmemenoi us kallista. [3] Nesaioi de kaleontai ippoi epi toude. esti pedion mega teis Medikeis tui oynoma esti Nesaion. tous un de ippoys tous megaloys ferei to pedion touto. [4] opisthe de toutun tun deka ippun arma Dios iron epetetakto, to ippoi men eilkon leykoi oktu, opisthe de ay tun ippun eipeto pezei enioxos exomenos tun xalinun. oydeis gar de epi touton ton thronon anthrupun epibainei. toutoy de opisthe aytos Xerxes ep' armatos ippun Nesaiun. parabebekee de oi enioxos tui oynoma En Patiramfes, Otaneu andros Perseu pais.   
      41. Thus did Xerxes march forth out of Sardis; and he used to change, whenever he was so disposed, from the chariot to a carriage. And behind him went spearmen, the best and most noble of the Persians, a thousand in number, holding their spear-points in the customary way; and after them another thousand horsemen chosen out from the Persians; and after the horsemen ten thousand men chosen out from the remainder of the Persians. This body went on foot; and of these a thousand had upon their spears pomegranates of gold instead of the spikes at the butt-end, and these enclosed the others round, while the remaining nine thousand were within these and had silver pomegranates. And those also had golden pomegranates who had their spear-points turned towards the earth, while those who followed next after Xerxes had golden apples. Then to follow the ten thousand there was appointed a body of ten thousand Persian cavalry; and after the cavalry there was an interval of as much as two furlongs. Then the rest of the host came marching without distinction.         41. [1] exelase men oytu ek Sardiun Xerxes, metekbaineske de, okus min logos aireoi, ek tou armatos es armamaxan. aytou de opisthe aixmoforoi Perseun oi aristoi te kai gennaiotatoi xilioi, kata nomon tas logxas exontes, meta de ippos alle xilie ek Perseun apolelegmene, meta de ten ippon ek tun loipun Perseun apolelegmenoi murioi. oytos pezos En. [2] kai toutun xilioi men epi toisi dorasi anti tun sayruterun rhoias eixon xryseas kai perix synekleion tous alloys, oi de einakisxilioi entos toutun eontes argyreas rhoias eixon. eixon de xryseas rhoias kai oi es ten gein trepontes tas logxas, kai meila oi agxista epomenoi Xerxei. toisi de myrioisi epetetakto ippos Perseun myrie. meta de ten ippon dieleipe kai duo stadioys, kai epeita o loipos omilos eie anamix.   
      42. So the army proceeded on its march from Lydia to the river Caicos and the land of Mysia; and then setting forth from the Caicos and keeping the mountain of Cane on the left hand, it marched through the region of Atarneus to the city of Carene. From this it went through the plain of Thebe, passing by the cities of Adramytteion and Antandros of the Pelasgians; and taking mount Ida on the left hand, it came on to the land of Ilion. And first, when it had stopped for the night close under mount Ida, thunder and bolts of lightning fell upon it, and destroyed here in this place a very large number of men.         42. [1] epoieeto de ten odon ek teis Lydies o stratos epi te potamon Kaikon kai gein ten Mysien, apo de Kaikoy ormumenos, Kanes oros exun en aristerei, dia tou Atarneos es Karenen polin. apo de tautes dia Thebes pedioy eporeueto, Adramutteion te polin kai Antandron ten Pelasgida parameibomenos. [2] ten Iden de labun es aristeren xeira eie es ten Iliada gein. kai pruta men oi ypo tei Idei nukta anameinanti brontai te kai presteires epespiptoysi kai tina aytou tautei syxnon omilon dieftheiran.   
      43. Then when the army had come to the river Scamander,--which of all rivers to which they had come, since they set forth from Sardis and undertook their march, was the first of which the stream failed and was not sufficient for the drinking of the army and of the animals with it,--when, I say, Xerxes had come to this river, he went up to the Citadel of Priam, having a desire to see it; and having seen it and learnt by inquiry of all those matters severally, he sacrificed a thousand heifers to Athene of Ilion, and the Magians poured libations in honour of the heroes: and after they had done this, a fear fell upon the army in the night. Then at break of day he set forth from thence, keeping on his left hand the cities of Rhoition and Ophryneion and Dardanos, which last borders upon Abydos, and having on the right hand the Gergith Teucrians.         43. [1] apikomenoy de tou stratou epi potamon Skamandron, os prutos potamun, epeite ek Sardiun ormethentes epexeiresan tei odui, epelipe to rheethron oyd' apexrese tei stratiei te kai toisi ktenesi pinomenos. epi touton de ton potamon us apiketo Xerxes, es to Priamoy Pergamon anebe imeron exun theesasthai. [2] theesamenos de kai pythomenos ekeinun ekasta tei Athenaiei tei Iliadi ethyse bous xilias, xoas de oi Magoi toisi erusi exeanto. tauta de poiesamenoisi nyktos fobos es to stratopedon enepese. ama emerei de eporeueto entheuten, en aristerei men apergun RHoition polin kai Ofruneion kai Dardanon, e per de Abudui omoyros esti, en dexiei de Gergithas Teykrous.   
      44. When Xerxes had come into the midst of Abydos, he had a desire to see all the army; and there had been made purposely for him beforehand upon a hill in this place a raised seat of white stone, which the people of Abydos had built at the command of the king given beforehand. There he took his seat, and looking down upon the shore he gazed both upon the land-army and the ships; and gazing upon them he had a longing to see a contest take place between the ships; and when it had taken place and the Phenicians of Sidon were victorious, he was delighted both with the contest and with the whole armament.         44. [1] epei d' egeneto en Abudui mesei, ethelese Xerxes idesthai panta ton straton. kai proepepoieto gar epi kolunou epitedes aytui tautei proexedre lithoy leykou, epoiesan de Abydenoi enteilamenoy proteron basileos, enthauta us izeto, katorun epi teis eionos etheeito kai ton pezon kai tas neas, theeumenos de imerthe tun neun amillan ginomenen idesthai. epei de egeneto te kai enikun Foinikes Sidunioi, esthe te tei amillei kai tei stratiei.   
      45. And seeing all the Hellespont covered over with the ships, and all the shores and the plains of Abydos full of men, then Xerxes pronounced himself a happy man, and after that he fell to weeping.         45. [1] us de ura panta men ton Ellesponton ypo tun neun apokekrymmenon, pasas de tas aktas kai ta Abydenun pedia epiplea anthrupun, enthauta o Xerxes euyton emakarise, meta de touto edakryse.   
      46. Artabanos his uncle therefore perceiving him,--the same who at first boldly declared his opinion advising Xerxes not to march against Hellas,-- this man, I say, having observed that Xerxes wept, asked as follows: "O king, how far different from one another are the things which thou hast done now and a short while before now! for having pronounced thyself a happy man, thou art now shedding tears." He said: "Yea, for after I had reckoned up, it came into my mind to feel pity at the thought how brief was the whole life of man, seeing that of these multitudes not one will be alive when a hundred years have gone by." He then made answer and said: "To another evil more pitiful than this we are made subject in the course of our life; for in the period of life, short as it is, no man, either of these here or of others, is made by nature so happy, that there will not come to him many times, and not once only, the desire to be dead rather than to live; for misfortunes falling upon us and diseases disturbing our happiness make the time of life, though short indeed, seem long: thus, since life is full of trouble, death has become the most acceptable refuge for man; and God, having given him to taste of the sweetness of life, is discovered in this matter to be full of jealousy."         46. [1] mathun de min Artabanos o patrus, os to pruton gnumen apedexato eleytherus oy symboyleuun Xerxei strateuesthai epi ten Ellada, oytos uner frastheis Xerxen dakrusanta eireto tade. <<u basileu, us pollon allelun kexurismena ergasao nun te kai oligui proteron. makarisas gar seuyton dakrueis.>> [2] o de eipe <<eseilthe gar me logisamenon katoikteirai us braxus eie o pas anthrupinos bios, ei toutun ge eontun tosoutun oydeis es ekatoston etos periestai.>> o de ameibeto legun <<etera toutoy para ten zoen peponthamen oiktrotera. [3] en gar oytu braxei biui oydeis oytu anthrupos eun eydaimun pefyke oyte toutun oyte tun allun, tui oy parastesetai pollakis kai oyki apax tethnanai boulesthai mallon e zuein. ai te gar symforai prospiptoysai kai ai nousoi syntarassoysai kai braxun eonta makron dokeein einai poieusi ton bion. [4] oytu o men thanatos moxthereis eouses teis zoes katafyge airetutate tui anthrupui gegone, o de theos glykun geusas ton aiuna fthoneros en aytui eyrisketai eun.>>   
      47. Xerxes made answer saying: "Artabanos, of human life, which is such as thou dost define it to be, let us cease to speak, and do not remember evils when we have good things in hand: but do thou declare to me this:--If the vision of the dream had not appeared with so much evidence, wouldest thou still be holding thy former opinion, endeavouring to prevent me from marching against Hellas, or wouldest thou have changed from it? Come, tell me this exactly." He answered saying: "O king, may the vision of the dream which appeared have such fulfilment as we both desire! but I am even to this moment full of apprehension and cannot contain myself, taking into account many things besides, and also seeing that two things, which are the greatest things of all, are utterly hostile to thee."         47. [1] Xerxes de ameibeto legun <<Artabane, bioteis men nyn anthrupeies peri, eouses toiautes oien per su diaireai einai, paysumetha, mede kakun memnumetha xresta exontes pregmata en xersi, frason de moi tode. ei toi e opsis tou enypnioy me enarges oytu efane, eixes an ten arxaien gnumen, oyk eun me strateuesthai epi ten Ellada, e metestes an ; fere touto moi atrekeus eipe.>> [2] o de ameibeto legun <<u basileu, opsis men e epifaneisa tou oneiroy us boylometha amfoteroi teleyteseie, egu d' eti kai es tode deimatos eimi ypopleos oyd' entos emeuytou, alla te polla epilegomenos kai de kai orun toi duo ta megista pantun eonta polemiutata.>>   
      48. To this Xerxes made answer in these words: "Thou strangest of men, of what nature are these two things which thou sayest are utterly hostile to me? Is it that the land-army is to be found fault with in the matter of numbers, and that the army of the Hellenes appears to thee likely to be many times as large as ours? or dost thou think that our fleet will fall short of theirs? or even that both of these things together will prove true? For if thou thinkest that in these respects our power is deficient, one might make gathering at once of another force."         48. [1] Xerxes de pros tauta ameibeto toiside. <<daimonie andrun, koia tauta legeis einai duo moi polemiutata; kotera toi o pezos memptos kata pleithos esti kai to Ellenikon strateyma fainetai pollaplesion esesthai tou emeteroy, e to naytikon to emeteron leipsesthai tou ekeinun, e kai synamfotera tauta; ei gar toi tautei fainetai endeestera einai ta emetera pregmata, stratou an alloy tis ten taxisten agersin poieoito.>>   
      49. Then he made answer and said: "O king, neither with this army would any one who has understanding find fault, nor with the number of the ships; and indeed if thou shalt assemble more, the two things of which I speak will be made thereby yet more hostile: and these two things are--the land and the sea. For neither in the sea is there, as I suppose, a harbour anywhere large enough to receive this fleet of thine, if a storm should arise, and to ensure the safety of the ships till it be over; and yet not one alone ought this harbour to be, but there should be such harbours along the whole coast of the continent by which thou sailest; and if there are not harbours to receive thy ships, know that accidents will rule men and not men the accidents. Now having told thee of one of the two things, I am about to tell thee of the other. The land, I say, becomes hostile to thee in this way:--if nothing shall come to oppose thee, the land is hostile to thee by so much the more in proportion as thou shalt advance more, ever stealing on further and further, for there is no satiety of good fortune felt by men: and this I say, that with no one to stand against thee the country traversed, growing more and more as time goes on, will produce for thee famine. Man, however, will be in the best condition, if when he is taking counsel he feels fear, reckoning to suffer everything that can possibly come, but in doing the deed he is bold."         49. [1] o d' ameibeto legun <<u basileu, oyte straton touton, ostis ge sunesin exei, memfoit' an oyte tun neun to pleithos. en de pleunas syllexeis, ta duo toi ta legu pollui eti polemiutera ginetai. ta de duo tauta esti gei te kai thalassa. [2] oyte gar teis thalasses esti limen tosoutos oydamothi, us egu eikazu, ostis egeiromenoy xeimunos dexamenos sey touto to naytikon fereggyos estai diasusai tas neas. kaitoi oyki ena ayton dei einai ton limena, alla para pasan ten epeiron par' en de komizeai. [3] oykun de eontun toi limenun ypodexiun, mathe oti ai symforai tun anthrupun arxoysi kai oyki unthrupoi tun symforeun. kai de tun duo toi tou eteroy eiremenoy to eteron erxomai ereun. [4] gei de polemie teide toi katistatai. ei thelei toi meden antixoon katasteinai, tosoutui toi ginetai polemiutere osui an probaineis ekasteru, to prosu aiei kleptomenos. eyprexies de oyk esti anthrupoisi oydemia plethure. [5] kai de toi, us oydenos enantieymenoy, legu ten xuren pleuna en pleoni xronui ginomenen limon texesthai. aner de oytu an eie aristos, ei boyleyomenos men arrudeoi, pan epilegomenos peisesthai xreima, en de tui ergui thrasus eie.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [50]

     50. Xerxes made answer in these words: "Artabanos, reasonably dost thou set forth these matters; but do not thou fear everything nor reckon equally for everything: for if thou shouldest set thyself with regard to all matters which come on at any time, to reckon for everything equally, thou wouldest never perform any deed. It is better to have good courage about everything and to suffer half the evils which threaten, than to have fear beforehand about everything and not to suffer any evil at all: and if, while contending against everything which is said, thou omit to declare the course which is safe, thou dost incur in these matters the reproach of failure equally with him who says the opposite to this. This then, I say, is evenly balanced: but how should one who is but man know the course which is safe? I think, in no way. To those then who choose to act, for the most part gain is wont to come; but to those who reckon for everything and shrink back, it is not much wont to come. Thou seest the power of the Persians, to what great might it has advanced: if then those who came to be kings before me had had opinions like to thine, or, though not having such opinions, had had such counsellors as thou, thou wouldest never have seen it brought forward to this point. As it is however, by running risks they conducted it on to this: for great power is in general gained by running great risks. We therefore, following their example, are making our march now during the fairest season of the year; and after we have subdued all Europe we shall return back home, neither having met with famine anywhere nor having suffered any other thing which is unpleasant. For first we march bearing with us ourselves great store of food, and secondly we shall possess the corn-crops of all the peoples to whose land and nation we come; and we are making a march now against men who plough the soil, and not against nomad tribes."         50. [1] ameibetai Xerxes toiside. <<Artabane, oikotus men su ge toutun ekasta diaireai. atar mete panta fobeo mete pan omoius epilegeo. ei gar de bouloio epi tui aiei epesferomenui pregmati to pan omoius epilegesthai, poieseias an oydama oyden. kresson de panta tharseonta emisy tun deinun pasxein mallon e pan xreima prodeimainonta medama meden pathein. [2] ei de erixun pros pan to legomenon me to bebaion apodexeis, sfallesthai ofeileis en aytoisi omoius kai o ypenantia toutoisi lexas. touto men nyn ep' ises exei. eidenai de anthrupon eonta kus xre to bebaion; dokeu men oydamus. toisi toinyn boylomenoisi poieein us to epipan fileei ginesthai ta kerdea, toisi de epilegomenoisi te panta kai okneoysi oy mala ethelei. [3] orais ta Perseun pregmata es o dynamios prokexureke. ei toinyn ekeinoi oi pro emeu genomenoi basilees gnumeisi exreunto omoieisi kai su, e me xreumenoi gnumeisi toiauteisi alloys symbouloys eixon toioutoys, oyk an kote eides ayta es touto proelthonta. nun de kindunoys anarripteontes es touto sfea proegagonto. megala gar pregmata megaloisi kindunoisi ethelei kataireesthai. [4] emeis toinyn omoieumenoi ekeinoisi uren te tou eteos kallisten poreyometha, kai katastrepsamenoi pasan ten Eyrupen nostesomen opisu, oyte limui entyxontes oydamothi oyte allo axari oyden pathontes. touto men gar aytoi pollen forben feromenoi poreyometha, touto de, tun an koy epibeumen gein kai ethnos, toutun ton siton exomen. ep' aroteiras de kai oy nomadas strateyometha andras.>>   
      51. After this Artabanos said: "O king, since thou dost urge us not to have fear of anything, do thou I pray thee accept a counsel from me; for when speaking of many things it is necessary to extend speech to a greater length. Cyrus the son of Cambyses subdued all Ionia except the Athenians, so that it was tributary to the Persians. These men therefore I counsel thee by no means to lead against their parent stock, seeing that even without these we are able to get the advantage over our enemies. For supposing that they go with us, either they must prove themselves doers of great wrong, if they join in reducing their mother city to slavery, or doers of great right, if they join in freeing her: now if they show themselves doers of great wrong, they bring us no very large gain in addition; but if they show themselves doers of great right, they are able then to cause much damage to thy army. Therefore lay to heart also the ancient saying, how well it has been said that at the first beginning of things the end does not completely appear."         51. [1] legei Artabanos meta tauta <<u basileu, epeite arrudeein oyden eais preigma, su de mey symboylien endexai. anagkaius gar exei peri pollun pregmatun pleuna logon ekteinai. Kuros o Kambuseu Iunien pasan plen Athenaiun katestrepsato dasmoforon einai Perseisi. [2] toutoys un tous andras symboyleuu toi medemiei mexanei agein epi tous pateras. kai gar aney toutun oioi te eimen tun exthrun katyperteroi ginesthai. e gar sfeas, en epuntai, dei adikutatoys ginesthai katadoyloymenoys ten metropolin, e dikaiotatoys syneleytherountas. [3] adikutatoi men nyn ginomenoi oyden kerdos mega emin prosballoysi, dikaiotatoi de ginomenoi oioi te delesasthai megalus ten sen stratien ginontai. es thymon un baley kai to palaion epos us ey eiretai, to me ama arxei pan telos katafainesthai.>>   
      52. To this Xerxes made answer: "Artabanos, of all the opinions which thou hast uttered, thou art mistaken most of all in this; seeing that thou fearest lest the Ionians should change side, about whom we have a most sure proof, of which thou art a witness thyself and also the rest are witnesses who went with Dareios on his march against the Scythians,-- namely this, that the whole Persian army then came to be dependent upon these men, whether they would destroy or whether they would save it, and they displayed righteous dealing and trustworthiness, and nought at all that was unfriendly. Besides this, seeing that they have left children and wives and wealth in our land, we must not even imagine that they will make any rebellion. Fear not then this thing either, but have a good heart and keep safe my house and my government; for to thee of all men I entrust my sceptre of rule."         52. [1] ameibetai pros tauta Xerxes <<Artabane, tun apefenao gnumeun sfalleai kata tauten de malista, os Iunas fobeai me metabalusi, tun exomen gnuma megiston, tun su te martys gineai kai oi systrateysamenoi Dareiui alloi epi Skuthas, oti epi toutoisi e pasa Persike stratie egeneto diaftheirai kai peripoieisai, oi de dikaiosunen kai pistoteta enedukan, axari de oyden. [2] parex de toutoy, en tei emeterei katalipontas tekna kai gynaikas kai xremata oyd' epilegesthai xre neuteron ti poiesein. oytu mede touto fobeo, alla thymon exun agathon suze oikon te ton emon kai tyrannida ten emen. soi gar egu mounui ek pantun skeiptra ta ema epitrapu.>>   
      53. Having thus spoken and having sent Artabanos back to Susa, next Xerxes summoned to his presence the men of most repute among the Persians, and when they were come before him, he spoke to them as follows: "Persians, I assembled you together desiring this of you, that ye should show yourselves good men and should not disgrace the deeds done in former times by the Persians, which are great and glorious; but let us each one of us by himself, and all together also, be zealous in our enterprise; for this which we labour for is a common good for all. And I exhort you that ye preserve in the war without relaxing your efforts, because, as I am informed, we are marching against good men, and if we shall overcome them, there will not be any other army of men which will ever stand against us. Now therefore let us begin the crossing, after having made prayer to those gods who have the Persians for their allotted charge."         53. [1] tauta eipas kai Artabanon aposteilas es Sousa deutera metepempsato Xerxes Perseun tous dokimutatoys. epei de oi pareisan, elege sfi tade. <<u Persai, tund' egu ymeun xreizun synelexa, andras te genesthai agathous kai me kataisxunein ta prosthe ergasmena Perseisi, eonta megala te kai pollou axia, all' eis te ekastos kai oi sumpantes prothymien exumen. xynon gar pasi touto agathon speudetai. [2] tunde de eineka proagoreuu antexesthai tou polemoy entetamenus. us gar egu pynthanomai, ep' andras strateyometha agathous, tun en kratesumen, oy me tis emin allos stratos antistei kote anthrupun. nun de diabainumen epeyxamenoi toisi theoisi oi Persas lelogxasi.>>   
      54. During this day then they were making preparation to cross over; and on the next day they waited for the Sun, desiring to see him rise, and in the meantime they offered all kinds of incense upon the bridges and strewed the way with branches of myrtle. Then, as the Sun was rising, Xerxes made libation from a golden cup into the sea, and prayed to the Sun, that no accident might befall him such as should cause him to cease from subduing Europe, until he had come to its furthest limits. After having thus prayed he threw the cup into the Hellespont and with it a golden mixing-bowl and a Persian sword, which they call akinakes: but whether he cast them into the sea as an offering dedicated to the Sun, or whether he had repented of his scourging of the Hellespont and desired to present a gift to the sea as amends for this, I cannot for certain say.         54. [1] tauten men ten emeren pareskeyazonto es ten diabasin. tei de ysteraiei anemenon ton elion ethelontes idesthai anisxonta, thymiemata te pantoia epi tun gefyreun katagizontes kai myrsineisi stornuntes ten odon. [2] us d' epanetelle o elios, spendun ek xrysees fiales Xerxes es ten thalassan eyxeto pros ton elion medemian oi syntyxien toiauten genesthai, e min pausei katastrepsasthai ten Eyrupen proteron e epi termasi toisi ekeines genetai. eyxamenos de esebale ten fialen es ton Ellesponton kai xruseon kreteira kai Persikon xifos, ton akinaken kaleoysi. [3] tauta oyk exu atrekeus diakrinai oyte ei tui eliui anatitheis kateike es to pelagos, oyte ei metemelese oi ton Ellesponton mastigusanti kai anti toutun ten thalassan edureeto.   
      55. When Xerxes had done this, they proceeded to cross over, the whole army both the footmen and the horsemen going by one bridge, namely that which was on the side of the Pontus, while the baggage-animals and the attendants went over the other, which was towards the Egean. First the ten thousand Persians led the way, all with wreaths, and after them came the mixed body of the army made up of all kinds of nations: these on that day; and on the next day, first the horsemen and those who had their spear- points turned downwards, these also wearing wreaths; and after them the sacred horses and the sacred chariot, and then Xerxes himself and the spear-bearers and the thousand horsemen; and after them the rest of the army. In the meantime the ships also put out from shore and went over to the opposite side. I have heard however another account which says that the king crossed over the very last of all.         55. [1] us de tauta oi epepoieto, diebainon kata men ten eteren tun gefyreun ten pros tou Pontoy o pezos te kai e ippos apasa, kata de ten pros to Aigaion ta ypozugia kai e therapeie. [2] egeonto de pruta men oi murioi Persai, estefanumenoi pantes, meta de toutoys o summiktos stratos pantoiun ethneun. tauten men ten emeren oytoi, tei de ysteraiei prutoi men oi te ippotai kai oi tas logxas katu trepontes. estefanunto de kai oytoi. [3] meta de oi te ippoi oi iroi kai to arma to iron, epi de aytos te Xerxes kai oi aixmoforoi kai oi ippotai oi xilioi, epi de toutoisi o allos stratos. kai ai nees ama anegonto es ten apenantion. ede de ekoysa kai ystaton diabeinai basilea pantun.   
      56. When Xerxes had crossed over into Europe, he gazed upon the army crossing under the lash; and his army crossed over in seven days and seven nights, going on continuously without any pause. Then, it is said, after Xerxes had now crossed over the Hellespont, a man of that coast exclaimed: "Why, O Zeus, in the likeness of a Persian man and taking for thyself the name of Xerxes instead of Zeus, art thou proposing to lay waste Hellas, taking with thee all the nations of men? for it was possible for thee to do so even without the help of these."         56. [1] Xerxes de epei diebe es ten Eyrupen, etheeito ton straton ypo mastigun diabainonta. diebe de o stratos aytou en epta emereisi kai en epta eyfroneisi, elinusas oydena xronon. [2] enthauta legetai, Xerxeu ede diabebekotos ton Ellesponton, andra eipein Ellespontion <<u Zeu, ti de andri eidomenos Persei kai oynoma anti Dios Xerxen themenos anastaton ten Ellada theleis poieisai, agun pantas anthrupoys; kai gar aney toutun exein toi poieein tauta.>>   
      57. When all had crossed over, after they had set forth on their way a great portent appeared to them, of which Xerxes made no account, although it was easy to conjecture its meaning,--a mare gave birth to a hare. Now the meaning of this was easy to conjecture in this way, namely that Xerxes was about to march an army against Hellas very proudly and magnificently, but would come back again to the place whence he came, running for his life. There happened also a portent of another kind while he was still at Sardis,--a mule brought forth young and gave birth to a mule which had organs of generation of two kinds, both those of the male and those of the female, and those of the male were above. Xerxes however made no account of either of these portents, but proceeded on his way, and with him the land-army.         57. [1] us de diebesan pantes, es odon ormemenoisi teras sfi efane mega, to Xerxes en oydeni logui epoiesato kaiper eysumbleton eon. ippos gar eteke lagon. eysumbleton un teide touto egeneto, oti emelle men elan stratien epi ten Ellada Xerxes agayrotata kai megaloprepestata, opisu de peri euytou trexun exein es ton ayton xuron. [2] egeneto de kai eteron aytui teras eonti en Sardisi.  emionos gar eteke emionon dixa exoysan aidoia, ta men ersenos ta de thelees. katuperthe de En ta tou ersenos.   
      58. The fleet meanwhile was sailing out of the Hellespont and coasting along, going in the opposite direction to the land-army; for the fleet was sailing towards the West, making for the promontory of Sarpedon, to which it had been ordered beforehand to go, and there wait for the army; but the land-army meanwhile was making its march towards the East and the sunrising, through the Chersonese, keeping on its right the tomb of Helle the daughter of Athamas, and on its left the city of Cardia, and marching through the midst of a town the name of which is Agora. Thence bending round the gulf called Melas and having crossed over the river Melas, the stream of which did not suffice at this time for the army but failed,--having crossed, I say, this river, from which the gulf also has its name, it went on Westwards, passing by Ainos a city of the Aiolians, and by the lake Stentoris, until at last it came to Doriscos.         58. [1] tun amfoterun logon oydena poiesamenos to prosu eporeueto, sun de oi o pezos stratos. o de naytikos exu ton Ellesponton pleun para gein ekomizeto, ta empalin pressun tou pezou. [2] o men gar pros esperen eplee, epi Sarpedonies akres poieumenos ten apixin, es ten aytui proeireto apikomenui perimenein. o de kat' epeiron stratos pros eu te kai elioy anatolas epoieeto ten odon dia teis Khersonesoy, en dexiei men exun ton Elles tafon teis Athamantos, en aristerei de Kardien polin, dia meses de poreyomenos polios tei oynoma tygxanei eon Agore. [3] entheuten de kamptun ton kolpon ton Melana kaleomenon kai Melana potamon, oyk antisxonta tote tei stratiei to rheethron all' epiliponta, touton ton potamon diabas, ep' oy kai o kolpos oytos ten epunymien exei, eie pros esperen, Ainon te polin Aiolida kai Stentorida limnen parexiun, es o apiketo es Doriskon.   
      59. Now Doriscos is a sea-beach and plain of great extent in Thrace, and through it flows the great river Hebros: here a royal fortress had been built, the same which is now called Doriscos, and a garrison of Persians had been established in it by Dareios, ever since the time when he went on his march against the Scythians. It seemed then to Xerxes that the place was convenient to order his army and to number it throughout, and so he proceeded to do. The commanders of the ships at the bidding of Xerxes had brought all their ships, when they arrived at Doriscos, up to the sea-beach which adjoins Doriscos, on which there is situated both Sale a city of the Samothrakians, and also Zone, and of which the extreme point is the promontory of Serreion, which is well known; and the region belonged in ancient time to the Kikonians. To this beach then they had brought in their ships, and having drawn them up on land they were letting them get dry: and during this time he proceeded to number the army at Doriscos.         59. [1] o de Doriskos esti teis Threikes aigialos te kai pedion mega, dia de aytou rheei potamos megas Ebros. en tui teixos te ededmeto basileion touto to de Doriskos kekletai, kai Perseun froyre en aytui katestekee ypo Dareioy ex ekeinoy tou xronoy epeite epi Skuthas estrateueto. [2] edoxe un tui Xerxei o xuros einai epitedeos endiataxai te kai exarithmeisai ton straton, kai epoiee tauta. tas men de neas tas pasas apikomenas es Doriskon oi nauarxoi keleusantos Xerxeu es ton aigialon ton prosexea Doriskui ekomisan, en tui Sale te Samothreikie pepolistai polis kai Zune, teleytai de aytou Serreion akre onomaste. o de xuros oytos to palaion En Kikonun. [3] es touton ton aigialon katasxontes tas neas anepsyxon anelkusantes. o de en tui Doriskui touton ton xronon teis stratieis arithmon epoieeto.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [60]

     60. Now of the number which each separate nation supplied I am not able to give certain information, for this is not reported by any persons; but of the whole land-army taken together the number proved to be one hundred and seventy myriads: and they numbered them throughout in the following manner:--they gathered together in one place a body of ten thousand men, and packing them together as closely as they could, they drew a circle round outside: and thus having drawn a circle round and having let the ten thousand men go from it, they built a wall of rough stones round the circumference of the circle, rising to the height of a man's navel. Having made this, they caused others to go into the space which had been built round, until they had in this manner numbered them all throughout: and after they had numbered them, they ordered them separately by nations.         60. [1] oson men nyn ekastoi pareixon pleithos es arithmon, oyk exu eipein to atrekes. oy gar legetai pros oydamun anthrupun. sumpantos de tou stratou tou pezou to pleithos efane ebdomekonta kai ekaton myriades. [2] exerithmesan de tonde ton tropon. synegagon te es ena xuron myriada anthrupun, kai synnaxantes tauten us malista eixon periegrapsan exuthen kuklon. perigrapsantes de kai apentes tous myrioys aimasien periebalon kata ton kuklon, ypsos anekoysan andri es ton omfalon. [3] tauten de poiesantes alloys esebibazon es to perioikodomemenon, mexri oy pantas toutui tui tropui exerithmesan. arithmesantes de kata ethnea dietasson.   
      61. Now those who served were as follows:--The Persians with this equipment:--about their heads they had soft felt caps called tiaras, and about their body tunics of various colours with sleeves, presenting the appearance of iron scales like those of a fish, and about the legs trousers; and instead of the ordinary shields they had shields of wicker-work, under which hung quivers; and they had short spears and large bows and arrows of reed, and moreover daggers hanging by the right thigh from the girdle: and they acknowledged as their commander Otanes the father of Amestris the wife of Xerxes. Now these were called by the Hellenes in ancient time Kephenes; by themselves however and by their neighbours they were called Artaians: but when Perseus, the son of Danae and Zeus, came to Kepheus the son of Belos and took to wife his daughter Andromeda, there was born to them a son to whom he gave the name Perses, and this son he left behind there, for it chanced that Kepheus had no male offspring: after him therefore this race was named.         61. [1] oi de strateyomenoi oide Esan, Persai men ude eskeyasmenoi. peri men teisi kefaleisi eixon tiaras kaleomenoys piloys apageas, peri de to suma kithunas xeiridutous poikiloys, lepidos siderees opsin ixthyoeideos, peri de ta skelea anaxyridas, anti de aspidun gerra. ypo de faretreunes ekremanto. aixmas de braxeas eixon, toxa de megala, oistous de kalaminoys, pros de egxeiridia para ton dexion meron paraiureumena ek teis zunes. [2] kai arxonta pareixonto Otanea ton Amestrios patera teis Xerxeu gynaikos, ekaleonto de palai ypo men Ellenun Kefeines, ypo mentoi sfeun aytun kai tun perioikun Artaioi. [3] epei de Perseus o Danaes te kai Dios apiketo para Kefea ton Beloy kai esxe aytou ten thygatera Andromeden, ginetai aytui pais tui oynoma etheto Persen, touton de aytou kataleipei. etugxane gar apais eun o Kefeus ersenos gonoy. epi toutoy de ten epunymien esxon.   
      62. The Medes served in the expedition equipped in precisely the same manner; for this equipment is in fact Median and not Persian: and the Medes acknowledged as their commander Tigranes an Achaimenid. These in ancient time used to be generally called Arians; but when Medea the Colchian came from Athens to these Arians, they also changed their name. Thus the Medes themselves report about themselves. The Kissians served with equipment in other respects like that of the Persians, but instead of the felt caps they wore fillets: and of the Kissians Anaphes the son of Otanes was commander. The Hyrcanians were armed like the Persians, acknowledging as their leader Megapanos, the same who after these events became governor of Babylon.         62. [1] Meidoi de ten ayten tauten estalmenoi estrateuonto. Medike gar ayte e skeye esti kai oy Persike. oi de Meidoi arxonta men pareixonto Tigranen andra Axaimeniden, ekaleonto de palai pros pantun Arioi, apikomenes de Medeies teis Kolxidos ex Atheneun es tous Arioys toutoys metebalon kai oytoi to oynoma. aytoi peri sfeun ude legoysi Meidoi. [2] Kissioi de strateyomenoi ta men alla kata per Persai eskeyadato, anti de tun pilun mitreforoi Esan. Kissiun de Erxe Anafes o Otaneu. Yrkanioi de kata per Persai esesaxato, egemona parexomenoi Megapanon ton Babylunos ysteron toutun epitropeusanta.   
      63. The Assyrians served with helmets about their heads made of bronze or plaited in a Barbarian style which it is not easy to describe; and they had shields and spears, and daggers like the Egyptian knives, and moreover they had wooden clubs with knobs of iron, and corslets of linen. These are by the Hellenes called Syrians, but by the Barbarians they have been called always Assyrians: : and the commander of them was Otaspes the son of Artachaies.         63. [1] Assurioi de strateyomenoi peri men teisi kefaleisi eixon xalkea te kranea kai peplegmena tropon tina barbaron oyk eyapegeton, aspidas de kai aixmas kai egxeiridia paraplesia teisi Aigyptieisi eixon, pros de rhopala xulun tetylumena siderui, kai lineoys thurekas. oytoi de ypo men Ellenun kaleontai Surioi, ypo de tun barbarun Assurioi eklethesan. toutun de metaxu Khaldaioi. Erxe de sfeun Otaspes o Artaxaieu.   
      64. The Bactrians served wearing about their heads nearly the same covering as the Medes, and having native bows of reed and short spears. The Scaran Scythians had about their heads caps which were carried up to a point and set upright and stiff; and they wore trousers, and carried native bows and daggers, and besides this axes of the kind called sagaris. These were called Amyrgian Sacans, being in fact Scythians; for the Persians call all the Scythians Sacans: and of the Bactrians and Sacans the commander was Hystaspes, the son of Dareios and of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus.         64. [1] Baktrioi de peri men teisi kefaleisi agxotata tun Medikun exontes estrateuonto, toxa de kalamina epixuria kai aixmas braxeas. [2] Sakai de oi Skuthai peri men teisi kefaleisi kyrbasias es oxu apegmenas orthas eixon pepegyias, anaxyridas de enededukesan, toxa de epixuria kai egxeiridia, pros de kai axinas sagaris eixon. toutoys de eontas Skuthas Amyrgioys Sakas ekaleon. oi gar Persai pantas tous Skuthas kaleoysi Sakas. Baktriun de kai Sakeun Erxe Ystaspes o Dareioy te kai Atosses teis Kuroy.   
      65. The Indians wore garments made of tree-wool, and they had bows of reed and arrows of reed with iron points. Thus were the Indians equipped; and serving with the rest they had been assigned to Pharnazathres the son of Artabates.         65. [1] Indoi de eimata men endedykotes apo xulun pepoiemena, toxa de kalamina eixon kai oistous kalaminoys. epi de sideros En. estalmenoi men de Esan oytu Indoi, prosetetaxato de systrateyomenoi Farnazathrei tui Artabateu.   
      66. The Arians were equipped with Median bows, and in other respects like the Bactrians: and of the Arians Sisamnes the son of Hydarnes was in command. The Parthians and Chorasmians and Sogdians and Gandarians and Dadicans served with the same equipment as the Bactrians. Of these the commanders were, Artabazos the son of Pharnakes of the Parthians and Chorasmians, Azanes the son of Artaios of the Sogdians, and Artyphios the son of Artabanos of the Gandarians and Dadicans.         66. [1] Arioi de toxoisi men eskeyasmenoi Esan Medikoisi, ta de alla kata per Baktrioi. Ariun de Erxe Sisamnes o Ydarneos. Parthoi de kai Khorasmioi kai Sogdoi te kai Gandarioi kai Dadikai ten ayten skeyen exontes ten kai Baktrioi estrateuonto. [2] toutun de Erxon oide. Parthun men kai Khorasmiun Artabazos o Farnakeos, Sogdun de Azanes o Artaioy, Gandariun de kai Dadikeun Artufios o Artabanoy.   
      67. The Caspians served wearing coats of skin and having native bows of reed and short swords: thus were these equipped; and they acknowledged as their leader Ariomardos the brother of Artyphios. The Sarangians were conspicuous among the rest by wearing dyed garments; and they had boots reaching up to the knee, and Median bows and spears: of these the commander was Pherendates the son of Megabazos. The Pactyans were wearers of skin coats and had native bows and daggers: these acknowledged as their commander Artayntes the son of Ithamitres.         67. [1] Kaspioi de sisurnas te endedykotes kai toxa epixuria kalamina exontes kai akinakas estrateuonto. oytoi men oytu eskeyadato, egemona parexomenoi Ariomardon ton Artyfioy adelfeon, Saraggai de eimata men bebammena eneprepon exontes, pedila de es gony anateinonta eixon, toxa de kai aixmas Medikas. Saraggeun de Erxe Ferendates o Megabazoy. [2] Paktyes de sisyrnoforoi te Esan kai toxa epixuria eixon kai egxeiridia. Paktyes de arxonta pareixonto Artaunten ton Ithamitreu.   
      68. The Utians and Mycans and Paricanians were equipped like the Pactyans: of these the commanders were, Arsamenes the son of Dareios of the Utians and Mycans, and of the Paricanians Siromitres the son of Oiobazos.         68. [1] Oytioi de kai Mukoi te kai Parikanioi eskeyasmenoi Esan kata per Paktyes. toutun de Erxon oide, Oytiun men kai Mukun Arsamenes o Dareioy, Parikaniun de Siromitres o Oiobazoy.   
      69. The Arabians wore loose mantles girt up, and they carried at their right side bows that bent backward of great length. The Ethiopians had skins of leopards and lions tied upon them, and bows made of a slip of palm-wood, which were of great length, not less than four cubits, and for them small arrows of reed with a sharpened stone at the head instead of iron, the same stone with which they engrave seals: in addition to this they had spears, and on them was the sharpened horn of a gazelle by way of a spear-head, and they had also clubs with knobs upon them. Of their body they used to smear over half with white, when they went into battle, and the other half with red. Of the Arabians and the Ethiopians who dwelt above Egypt the commander was Arsames, the son of Dareios and of Artystone, the daughter of Cyrus, whom Dareios loved most of all his wives, and had an image made of her of beaten gold.         69. [1] Arabioi de zeiras ypezusmenoi Esan, toxa de palintona eixon pros dexia, makra. Aithiopes de pardaleas te kai leonteas enammenoi, toxa de eixon ek foinikos spathes pepoiemena, makra, tetrapexeun oyk elassu, epi de kalaminoys oistous mikrous. anti de sideroy epein lithos oxus pepoiemenos, tui kai tas sfregidas glufoysi. pros de aixmas eixon, epi de keras dorkados epein oxu pepoiemenon tropon logxes. eixon de kai rhopala tyluta. tou de sumatos to men emisy exeleifonto gupsui iontes es maxen, to de allo emisy miltui. [2] Arabiun de kai Aithiopun tun yper Aiguptoy oikemenun Erxe Arsames o Dareioy kai Artystunes teis Kuroy thygatros, ten malista sterxas tun gynaikun Dareios eiku xryseen sfyrelaton epoiesato. tun men de yper Aiguptoy Aithiopun kai Arabiun Erxe Arsames,   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [70]

     70. Of the Ethiopians above Egypt and of the Arabians the commander, I say, was Arsames; but the Ethiopians from the direction of the sunrising (for the Ethiopians were in two bodies) had been appointed to serve with the Indians, being in no way different from the other Ethiopians, but in their language and in the nature of their hair only; for the Ethiopians from the East are straight-haired, but those of Libya have hair more thick and woolly than that of any other men. These Ethiopians from Asia were armed for the most part like the Indians, but they had upon their heads the skin of a horse's forehead flayed off with the ears and the mane, and the mane served instead of a crest, while they had the ears of the horse set up straight and stiff: and instead of shields they used to make defences to hold before themselves of the skins of cranes.         70. [1] oi de apo elioy anatoleun Aithiopes (dixoi gar de estrateuonto ) prosetetaxato toisi Indoisi, diallassontes eidos men oyden toisi eteroisi, funen de kai trixuma mounon. oi men gar apo elioy Aithiopes ithutrixes eisi, oi d' ek teis Libues oylotaton trixuma exoysi pantun anthrupun. [2] oytoi de oi ek teis Asies Aithiopes ta men pleu kata per Indoi esesaxato, prometupidia de ippun eixon epi teisi kefaleisi sun te toisi usi ekdedarmena kai tei lofiei. kai anti men lofoy e lofie katexra, ta de uta tun ippun ortha pepegota eixon. problemata de ant' aspidun epoieunto geranun doras.   
      71. The Libyans went with equipments of leather, and they used javelins burnt at the point. These acknowledged as their commander Massages the son of Oarizos.         71. [1] Libyes de skeyen men skytinen eisan exontes, akontioisi de epikautoisi xreumenoi, arxonta de pareixonto Massagen ton Oarizoy.   
      72. The Paphlagonians served with plaited helmets upon their heads, small shields, and spears of no great size, and also javelins and daggers; and about their feet native boots reaching up to the middle of the shin. The Ligyans and Matienians and Mariandynoi and Syrians served with the same equipment as the Paphlagonians: these Syrians are called by the Persians Cappadokians. Of the Paphlagonians and Matienians the commander was Dotos the son of Megasidros, and of the Mariandynoi and Lygians and Syrians, Gobryas, who was the son of Dareios and Artystone.         72. [1] Paflagones de estrateuonto epi men teisi kefaleisi kranea peplegmena exontes, aspidas de mikras aixmas te oy megalas, pros de akontia kai egxeiridia, peri de tous podas pedila epixuria es mesen knemen anateinonta. Ligyes de kai Matienoi kai Mariandynoi te kai Surioi ten ayten exontes Paflagosi estrateuonto. oi de Surioi oytoi ypo Perseun Kappadokai kaleontai. [2] Paflagonun men nyn kai Matienun Dutos o Megasidroy Erxe, Mariandynun de kai Liguun kai Syriun Gobrues o Dareioy te kai Artystunes.   
      73. The Phrygians had an equipment very like that of the Paphlagonians with some slight difference. Now the Phrygians, as the Macedonians say, used to be called Brigians during the time that they were natives of Europe and dwelt with the Macedonians; but after they had changed into Asia, with their country they changed also their name and were called Phrygians. The Armenians were armed just like the Phrygians, being settlers from the Phrygians. Of these two together the commander was Artochmes, who was married to a daughter of Dareios.         73. [1] Fruges de agxotatu teis Paflagonikeis skeyen eixon, oligon parallassontes. oi de Fruges, us Makedones legoysi, ekaleonto Briges xronon oson Eyrupeioi eontes sunoikoi Esan Makedosi, metabantes de es ten Asien ama tei xurei kai to oynoma metebalon es Frugas. Armenioi de kata per Fruges esesaxato, eontes Frygun apoikoi. toutun synamfoterun Erxe Artoxmes Dareioy exun thygatera.   
      74. The Lydians had arms very closely resembling those of the Hellenes. Now the Lydians were in old time called Medonians, and they were named again after Lydos the son of Atys, changing their former name. The Mysians had upon their heads native helmets, and they bore small shields and used javelins burnt at the point. These are settlers from the Lydians, and from mount Olympos they are called Olympienoi. Of the Lydians and Mysians the commander was Artaphrenes the son of Artaphrenes, he who invaded Marathon together with Datis.         74. [1] Lydoi de agxotatu tun Ellenikun eixon opla. oi de Lydoi Meiones ekaleunto to palai, epi de Lydou tou Atoys esxon ten epunymien, metabalontes to oynoma. Mysoi de epi men teisi kefaleisi eixon kranea epixuria, aspidas de mikras, akontioisi de exreunto epikautoisi. [2] oytoi de eisi Lydun apoikoi, ap' Olumpoy de oreos kaleontai Olympienoi. Lydun de kai Mysun Erxe Artafrenes o Artafreneos os es Marathuna esebale ama Dati.   
      75. The Thracians served having fox-skins upon their heads and tunics about their body, with loose mantles of various colours thrown round over them; and about their feet and lower part of the leg they wore boots of deer-skin; and besides this they had javelins and round bucklers and small daggers. These when they had crossed over into Asia came to be called Bithynians, but formerly they were called, as they themselves report, Strymonians, since they dwelt upon the river Strymon; and they say that they were driven out of their abode by the Teucrians and Mysians. Of the Thracians who lived in Asia the commander was Bassakes the son of Artabanos.         75. [1] Threikes de epi men teisi kefaleisi alupekeas exontes estrateuonto, peri de to suma kithunas, epi de zeiras peribeblemenoi poikilas, peri de tous podas te kai tas knemas pedila nebrun, pros de akontia te kai peltas kai egxeiridia mikra. [2] oytoi de diabantes men es ten Asien eklethesan Bithynoi, to de proteron ekaleonto, us aytoi legoysi, Strymonioi, oikeontes epi Strymoni. exanasteinai de fasi ex etheun ypo Teykrun te kai Mysun. Threikun de tun en tei Asiei Erxe Bassakes o Artabanoy.   
      76. ... and they had small shields of raw ox-hide, and each man carried two hunting-spears of Lykian workmanship. On their heads they wore helmets of bronze, and to the helmets the ears and horns of an ox were attached, in bronze, and upon them also there were crests; and the lower part of their legs was wrapped round with red-coloured strips of cloth. Among these men there is an Oracle of Ares.         76. [1] .... aspidas de umoboinas eixon smikras, kai proboloys duo lykioergeas ekastos eixe, epi de teisi kefaleisi kranea xalkea. pros de toisi kranesi uta te kai kerea prosein boos xalkea, epeisan de kai lofoi. tas de knemas rhakesi foinikeoisi kateilixato. en toutoisi toisi andrasi Areos esti xresterion.   
      77. The Meonian Cabelians, who are called Lasonians, had the same equipment as the Kilikians, and what this was I shall explain when in the course of the catalogue I come to the array of the Kilikians. The Milyans had short spears, and their garments were fastened on with buckles; some of them had Lykian bows, and about their heads they had caps made of leather. Of all these Badres the son of Hystanes was in command.         77. [1] Kabelees de oi Meiones, Lasonioi de kaleumenoi, ten ayten Kilixi eixon skeyen, ten egu, epean kata ten Kilikun taxin diexiun genumai, tote semaneu. Miluai de aixmas te braxeas eixon kai eimata enepeporpeato. eixon de aytun toxa metexeteroi Lukia, peri de teisi kefaleisi ek difthereun pepoiemenas kyneas. toutun pantun Erxe Badres o Ystaneos.   
      78. The Moschoi had wooden caps upon their heads, and shields and small spears, on which long points were set. The Tibarenians and Macronians and Mossynoicoi served with equipment like that of the Moschoi, and these were arrayed together under the following commanders,--the Moschoi and Tibarenians under Ariomardos, who was the son of Dareios and of Parmys, the daughter of Smerdis son of Cyrus; the Macronians and Mossynoicoi under Artayctes the son of Cherasmis, who was governor of Sestos on the Hellespont.         78. [1] Mosxoi de peri men teisi kefaleisi kyneas xylinas eixon, aspidas de kai aixmas smikras. logxai de epeisan megalai. Tibarenoi de kai Makrunes kai Mossunoikoi kata per Mosxoi eskeyasmenoi estrateuonto. toutoys de synetasson arxontes oide, Mosxoys men kai Tibarenous Ariomardos o Dareioy te pais kai Parmyos teis Smerdios tou Kuroy, Makrunas de kai Mossynoikoys Artauktes o Kherasmios, os Seston ten en Ellespontui epetropeye.   
      79. The Mares wore on their heads native helmets of plaited work, and had small shields of hide and javelins; and the Colchians wore wooden helmets about their heads, and had small shields of raw ox-hide and short spears, and also knives. Of the Mares and Colchians the commander was Pharandates the son of Teaspis. The Alarodians and Saspeirians served armed like the Colchians; and of these the commander was Masistios the son of Siromitres.         79. [1] Mares de epi men teisi kefaleisi kranea epixuria plekta eixon, aspidas de dermatinas mikras kai akontia. Kolxoi de peri men teisi kefaleisi kranea xulina, aspidas de umoboinas mikras aixmas te braxeas, pros de maxairas eixon. Marun de kai Kolxun Erxe Farandates o Teaspios. Alarodioi de kai Saspeires kata per Kolxoi uplismenoi estrateuonto. toutun de Masistios o Siromitreu Erxe.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [80]

     80. The island tribes which came with the army from the Erythraian Sea, belonging to the islands in which the king settles those who are called the "Removed," had clothing and arms very like those of the Medes. Of these islanders the commander was Mardontes the son of Bagaios, who in the year after these events was a commander of the army at Mykale and lost his life in the battle.         80. [1] ta de nesiutika ethnea ta ek teis Erythreis thalasses epomena, nesun de en teisi tous anaspastoys kaleomenoys katoikizei basileus, agxotatu tun Medikun eixon estheita te kai opla. toutun de tun nesiuteun Erxe Mardontes o Bagaioy, os en Mykalei strategeun deyterui etei toutun eteleutese en tei maxei.   
      81. These were the nations which served in the campaign by land and had been appointed to be among the foot-soldiers. Of this army those who have been mentioned were commanders; and they were the men who sit it in order by divisions and numbered it and appointed commanders of thousands and commanders of tens of thousands, but the commanders of hundreds and of tens were appointed by the commanders of ten thousands; and there were others who were leaders of divisions and nations.         81. [1] tauta En ta kat' epeiron strateyomena te ethnea kai tetagmena es ton pezon. toutoy un tou stratou Erxon men oytoi oi per eireatai, kai oi diataxantes kai exarithmesantes oytoi Esan kai xiliarxas te kai myriarxas apodexantes, ekatontarxas de kai dekarxas oi myriarxai. teleun de kai ethneun Esan alloi semantores. Esan men de oytoi oi pereireatai arxontes,   
      82. These, I say, who have been mentioned were commanders of the army; and over these and over the whole army together that went on foot there were in command Mardonios the son of Gobryas, Tritantaichmes the son of that Artabanos who gave the opinion that they should not make the march against Hellas, Smerdomenes the son of Otanes (both these being sons of brothers of Dareios and so cousins of Xerxes), Masistes the son of Dareios and Atossa, Gergis the son of Ariazos, and Megabyzos the son of Zopyros.         82. [1] estrategeon de toutun te kai tou sumpantos stratoy tou pezou Mardonios te o Gobrueu kai Tritantaixmes o Artabanoy tou gnumen themenoy me strateuesthai epi Ellada kai Smerdomenes o Otaneu, Dareioy amfoteroi oytoi adelfeun paides, Xerxei de eginonto anepsioi, kai Masistes o Dareioy te kai Atosses pais kai Gergis o Ariazoy kai Megabyzos o Zupuroy.   
      83. These were generals of the whole together that went on foot, excepting the ten thousand; and of these ten thousand chosen Persians the general was Hydarnes the son of Hydarnes; and these Persians were called "Immortals," because, if any one of them made the number incomplete, being overcome either by death or disease, another man was chosen to his place, and they were never either more or fewer than ten thousand. Now of all the nations, the Persians showed the greatest splendour of ornament and were themselves the best men. They had equipment such as has been mentioned, and besides this they were conspicuous among the rest for great quantity of gold freely used; and they took with them carriages, and in them concubines and a multitude of attendants well furnished; and provisions for them apart from the soldiers were borne by camels and beasts of burden.         83. [1] oytoi Esan strategoi tou sumpantos pezou xuris tun myriun. tun de myriun toutun Perseun tun apolelegmenun estrategee men Ydarnes o Ydarneos, ekaleonto de athanatoi oi Persai oytoi epi toude. ei tis aytun exelipe ton arithmon e thanatui bietheis e nousui, allos aner araireto, kai eginonto oydama oyte pleunes myriun oyte elassones. [2] kosmon de pleiston pareixonto dia pantun Persai, kai aytoi aristoi Esan. skeyen men toiauten eixon e per eiretai, xuris de xryson te pollon kai afthonon exontes eneprepon, armamaxas te ama egonto, en de pallakas kai therapeien pollen te kai ey eskeyasmenen. sita de sfi, xuris tun allun stratiuteun, kameloi te kai ypozugia Egon.   
      84. The nations who serve as cavalry are these; not all however supplied cavalry, but only as many as here follow:--the Persians equipped in the same manner as their foot-soldiers, except that upon their heads some of them had beaten-work of metal, either bronze or iron.         84. [1] ippeuei de tauta ta ethnea. plen oy panta pareixeto ippon, alla tosade mouna, Persai men ten ayten eskeyasmenoi kai o pezos aytun. plen epi teisi kefaleisi eixon enioi aytun kai xalkea kai siderea exelelamena poiemata.   
      85. There are also certain nomads called Sagartians, Persian in race and in language and having a dress which is midway between that of the Persians and that of the Pactyans. These furnished eight thousand horse, and they are not accustomed to have any arms either of bronze or of iron excepting daggers, but they use ropes twisted of thongs, and trust to these when they go into war: and the manner of fighting of these men is as follows:--when they come to conflict with the enemy, they throw the ropes with nooses at the end of them, and whatsoever the man catches by the throw, whether horse or man, he draws to himself, and they being entangled in toils are thus destroyed.         85. [1] eisi de tines nomades anthrupoi Sagartioi kaleomenoi, ethnos men Persikon kai funei, skeyen de metaxu exoysi pepoiemenen teis te Persikeis kai teis Paktyikeis. oi pareixonto men ippon oktakisxilien, opla de oy nomizoysi exein oyte xalkea oyte siderea exu egxeiridiun, xreuntai de seireisi peplegmeneisi ex imantun. [2] tauteisi pisynoi erxontai es polemon. e de maxe toutun tun andrun ede. epean symmisgusi toisi polemioisi, balloysi tas seiras ep' akrui broxoys exousas. otey d' an tuxei, en te ippoy en te anthrupoy, ep' euyton elkei. oi de en erkesi empalassomenoi diaftheirontai. toutun men ayte e maxe, kai epetetaxato es tous Persas.   
      86. This is the manner of fighting of these men, and they were arrayed next to the Persians. The Medes had the same equipment as their men on foot, and the Kissians likewise. The Indians were armed in the same manner as those of them who served on foot, and they both rode horses and drove chariots, in which were harnessed horses or wild asses. The Bactrians were equipped in the same way as those who served on foot, and the Caspians likewise. The Libyans too were equipped like those who served on foot, and these also all drove chariots. So too the Caspians and Paricanians were equipped like those who served on foot, and they all rode on camels, which in swiftness were not inferior to horses.         86. [1] Meidoi de ten per en tui pezui eixon skeyen, kai Kissioi usautus. Indoi de skeyei men esesaxato tei aytei kai en tui pezui, elaynon de keletas kai armata. ypo de toisi armasi ypeisan ippoi kai onoi agrioi. Baktrioi de eskeyadato usautus kai en tui pezui, kai Kaspioi omoius. [2] Libyes de kai aytoi kata per en tui pezui. elaynon de kai oytoi pantes armata. us d' aytus Kaspioi kai Parikanioi esesaxato omoius kai en tui pezui. Arabioi de skeyen men eixon ten ayten kai en tui pezui, elaynon de pantes kameloys taxyteita oy leipomenas ippun.   
      87. These nations alone served as cavalry, and the number of the cavalry proved to be eight myriads, apart from the camels and the chariots. Now the rest of the cavalry was arrayed in squadrons, but the Arabians were placed after them and last of all, for the horses could not endure the camels, and therefore they were placed last, in order that the horses might not be frightened.         87. [1] tauta ta ethnea mouna ippeuei. arithmos de teis ippoy egeneto oktu myriades, parex tun kamelun kai tun armatun. oi men nyn alloi ippees etetaxato kata telea, Arabioi de esxatoi epetetaxato. ate gar tun ippun oyti anexomenun tas kameloys, ysteroi etetaxato, ina me fobeoito to ippikon.   
      88. The commanders of the cavalry were Harmamithras and Tithaios sons of Datis, but the third, Pharnuches, who was in command of the horse with them, had been left behind at Sardis sick: for as they were setting forth from Sardis, an accident befell him of an unwished-for kind,--as he was riding, a dog ran up under his horse's feet, and the horse not having seen it beforehand was frightened, and rearing up he threw Pharnuches off his back, who falling vomited blood, and his sickness turned to a consumption. To the horse however they forthwith at the first did as he commanded, that is to say, the servants led him away to the place where he had thrown his master and cut off his legs at the knees. Thus was Pharnuches removed from his command.         88. [1] Ipparxoi de Esan Armamithres te kai Tithaios Datios paides. o de tritos sfi synipparxos Farnouxes kateleleipto en Sardisi noseun. us gar ormunto ek Sardiun, epi symforen periepese anetheleton. elaunonti gar oi ypo tous podas tou ippoy ypedrame kuun, kai o ippos oy proidun efobethe te kai stas orthos apeseisato ton Farnouxea, pesun de aima te emee kai es fthisin perieilthe e nousos. [2] ton de ippon aytika kat' arxas epoiesan us ekeleye. apagagontes oi oiketai es ton xuron en tui per katebale ton despoten, en toisi gounasi apetamon ta skelea. Farnouxes men oytu pareluthe teis egemonies.   
      89. Of the triremes the number proved to be one thousand two hundred and seven, and these were they who furnished them:--the Phenicians, together with the Syrians who dwell in Palestine furnished three hundred; and they were equipped thus, that is to say, they had about their heads leathern caps made very nearly in the Hellenic fashion, and they wore corslets of linen, and had shields without rims and javelins. These Phenicians dwelt in ancient time, as they themselves report, upon the Erythraian Sea, and thence they passed over and dwell in the country along the sea coast of Syria; and this part of Syria and all as far as Egypt is called Palestine. The Egyptians furnished two hundred ships: these men had about their heads helmets of plaited work, and they had hollow shields with the rims large, and spears for sea-fighting, and large axes: the greater number of them wore corslets, and they had large knives.         89. [1] tun de triereun arithmos men egeneto epta kai diekosiai kai xiliai, pareixonto de aytas oide, Foinikes men sun Suroisi toisi en tei Palaistinei triekosias, ude eskeyasmenoi. peri men teisi kefaleisi kyneas eixon agxotatu pepoiemenas tropon ton Ellenikon, endedykotes de thurekas lineoys, aspidas de itys oyk exousas eixon kai akontia. [2] oytoi de oi Foinikes to palaion oikeon, us aytoi legoysi, epi tei Erythrei thalassei, entheuten de yperbantes teis Syries oikeoysi to para thalassan. teis de Syries touto to xurion kai to mexri Aiguptoy pan Palaistine kaleetai. Aiguptioi de neas pareixonto diekosias. [3] oytoi de eixon peri men teisi kefaleisi kranea xeleyta, aspidas de koilas, tas itys megalas exousas, kai dorata te naumaxa kai tuxoys megaloys. to de pleithos aytun thurekoforoi Esan, maxairas de megalas eixon.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [90]

     90. These men were thus equipped; and the Cyprians furnished a hundred and fifty ships, being themselves equipped as follows,--their kings had their heads wound round with fillets, and the rest had tunics, but in other respects they were like the Hellenes. Among these there are various races as follows,--some of them are from Salamis and Athens, others from Arcadia, others from Kythnos, others again from Phenicia and others from Ethiopia, as the Cyprians themselves report.         90. [1] oytoi men oytu estalato, Kuprioi de pareixonto neas pentekonta kai ekaton, eskeyasmenoi ude. tas men kefalas eilixato mitreisi oi basilees aytun, oi de alloi eixon kithunas, ta de alla kata per Ellenes. toutun de tosade ethnea eisi, oi men apo Salaminos kai Atheneun, oi de ap' Arkadies, oi de apo Kuthnoy, oi de apo Foinikes, oi de apo Aithiopies, us aytoi Kuprioi legoysi.   
      91. The Kilikians furnished a hundred ships; and these again had about their heads native helmets, and for shields they carried targets made of raw ox- hide: they wore tunics of wool and each man had two javelins and a sword, this last being made very like the Egyptian knives. These in old time were called Hypachaians, and they got their later name from Kilix the son of Agenor, a Phenician. The Pamphylians furnished thirty ships and were equipped in Hellenic arms. These Pamphylians are of those who were dispersed from Troy together with Amphilochos and Calchas.         91. [1] Kilikes de ekaton pareixonto neas. oytoi d' ay peri men teisi kefaleisi kranea epixuria, laiseia de eixon ant' aspidun umoboees pepoiemena, kai kithunas eirineoys endedykotes. duo de akontia ekastos kai xifos eixon, agxotatu teisi Aigyptieisi maxaireisi pepoiemena. oytoi de to palaion Ypaxaioi ekaleonto, epi de Kilikos tou Agenoros andros Foinikos esxon ten epunymien. Pamfyloi de triekonta pareixonto neas Ellenikoisi oploisi eskeyasmenoi. oi de Pamfyloi oytoi eisi tun ek Troies aposkedasthentun ama Amfiloxui kai Kalxanti.   
      92. The Lykians furnished fifty ships; and they were wearers of corslets and greaves, and had bows of cornel-wood and arrows of reeds without feathers and javelins and a goat-skin hanging over their shoulders, and about their heads felt caps wreathed round with feathers; also they had daggers and falchions. The Lykians were formerly called Termilai, being originally of Crete, and they got their later name from Lycos the son of Pandion, an Athenian.         92. [1] Lukioi de pareixonto neas pentekonta thurekoforoi te eontes kai knemidoforoi, eixon de toxa kraneina kai oistous kalaminoys apteroys kai akontia, epi de aigos derma peri tous umoys aiureumenon, peri de teisi kefaleisi piloys pteroisi periestefanumenoys. egxeiridia de kai drepana eixon. Lukioi de Termilai ekaleonto ek Kretes gegonotes, epi de Lukoy tou Pandionos andros Athenaioy esxon ten epunymien.   
      93. The Dorians of Asia furnished thirty ships; and these had Hellenic arms and were originally from the Peloponnese. The Carians supplied seventy ships; and they were equipped in other respects like Hellenes but they had also falchions and daggers. What was the former name of these has been told in the first part of the history.         93. [1] Duriees de oi ek teis Asies triekonta pareixonto neas, exontes te Ellenika opla kai gegonotes apo Peloponnesoy. Kares de ebdomekonta pareixonto neas, ta men alla kata per Ellenes estalmenoi, eixon de kai drepana kai egxeiridia. oytoi de oitines proteron ekaleonto, en toisi prutoisi tun logun eiretai.   
      94. The Ionians furnished a hundred ships, and were equipped like Hellenes. Now the Ionians, so long time as they dwelt in the Peloponnese, in the land which is now called Achaia, and before the time when Danaos and Xuthos came to the Peloponnese, were called, as the Hellenes report, Pelasgians of the Coast-land, and then Ionians after Ion the son of Xuthos.         94. [1] Iunes de ekaton neas pareixonto eskeyasmenoi us Ellenes. Iunes de oson men xronon en Peloponnesui oikeon ten nun kaleomenen Axaiien, kai prin e Danaon te kai Xouthon apikesthai es Peloponneson, us Ellenes legoysi, ekaleonto Pelasgoi Aigialees, epi de Iunos tou Xouthoy Iunes.   
      95. The islanders furnished seventeen ships, and were armed like Hellenes, this also being a Pelasgian race, though afterwards it came to be called Ionian by the same rule as the Ionians of the twelve cities, who came from Athens. The Aiolians supplied sixty ships; and these were equipped like Hellenes and used to be called Pelasgians in the old time, as the Hellenes report. The Hellespontians, excepting those of Abydos (for the men of Abydos had been appointed by the king to stay in their place and be guards of the bridges), the rest, I say, of those who served in the expedition from the Pontus furnished a hundred ships, and were equipped like Hellenes: these are colonists of the Ionians and Dorians.         95. [1] nesiutai de eptakaideka pareixonto neas, uplismenoi us Ellenes, kai touto Pelasgikon ethnos; ysteron de Iunikon eklethe kata ton ayton logon kai oi dyudekapolies Iunes oi ap' Atheneun. Aiolees de exekonta neas pareixonto, eskeyasmenoi te us Ellenes kai to palai kaleomenoi Pelasgoi, us Ellenun logos. [2] Ellespontioi de plen Abydenun (Abydenoisi gar prosetetakto ek basileos kata xuren menoysi fulakas einai tun gefyreun ) oi de loipoi oi ek tou Pontoy strateyomenoi pareixonto men ekaton neas, eskeyasmenoi de Esan us Ellenes. oytoi de Iunun kai Durieun apoikoi.   
      96. In all the ships there served as fighting-men Persians, Medes, or Sacans;: and of the ships, those which sailed best were furnished by the Phenicians, and of the Phenicians the best by the men of Sidon. Over all these men and also over those of them who were appointed to serve in the land-army, there were for each tribe native chieftains, of whom, since I am not compelled by the course of the inquiry, I make no mention by the way; for in the first place the chieftains of each separate nation were not persons worthy of mention, and then moreover within each nation there were as many chieftains as there were cities. These went with the expedition too not as commanders, but like the others serving as slaves; for the generals who had the absolute power and commanded the various nations, that is to say those who were Persians, having already been mentioned by me.         96. [1] epebateyon de epi paseun tun neun Persai kai Meidoi kai Saakai. toutun de arista pleousas pareixonto neas Foinikes kai Foinikun Sidunioi. toutoisi pasi kai toisi es ton pezon tetagmenoisi aytun epeisan ekastoisi epixurioi egemones, tun egu, oy gar anagkaiei exergomai es istories logon, oy paramemnemai. [2] oyte gar ethneos ekastoy epaxioi Esan oi egemones, en te ethnei ekastui osai per polies tosoutoi kai egemones Esan, eiponto de us oy strategoi all' usper oi alloi strateyomenoi douloi. epei strategoi ge oi to pan exontes kratos kai arxontes tun ethneun ekastun, osoi aytun Esan Persai, eireatai moi.   
      97. Of the naval force the following were commanders,--Ariabignes the son of Dareios, Prexaspes the son of Aspathines, Megabazos the son of Megabates, and Achaimenes the son of Dareios; that is to say, of the Ionian and Carian force Ariabignes, who was the son of Dareios and of the daughter of Gobryas; of the Egyptians Achaimenes was commander, being brother of Xerxes by both parents; and of the rest of the armament the other two were in command: and galleys of thirty oars and of fifty oars, and light vessels, and long ships to carry horses had been assembled together, as it proved, to the number of three thousand.         97. [1] tou de naytikou estrategeon Ariabignes te o Dareioy kai Prexaspes o Aspathineu kai Megabazos o Megabateu kai Axaimenes o Dareioy, teis men Iados te kai Karikeis stratieis Ariabignes o Dareioy te pais kai teis Gobrueu thygatros. Aigyptiun de estrategee Axaimenes Xerxeu eun ap' amfoterun adelfeos, teis de alles stratieis estrategeon oi duo. triekonteroi de kai pentekonteroi kai kerkoyroi kai ippaguga ploia makra synelthonta es ton arithmon efane trisxilia.   
      98. Of those who sailed in the ships the men of most note after the commanders were these,--of Sidon, Tetramnestos son of Anysos; of Tyre, Matten son of Siromos; or Arados, Merbalos son of Agbalos; of Kilikia, Syennesis son of Oromedon; of Lykia, Kyberniscos son of Sicas; of Cyprus, Gorgos son of Chersis and Timonax son of Timagoras; of Caria, Histiaios son of Tymnes, Pigres son of Hysseldomos, and Damasithymos son of Candaules.         98. [1] tun de epipleontun meta ge tous strategous oide Esan onomastotatoi, Sidunios Tetramnestos Anusoy, kai Turios Matten Sirumoy, kai Aradios Merbalos Agbaloy, kai Kilix Syennesis Uromedontos, kai Lukios Kyberniskos Sika, kai Kuprioi Gorgos te o Khersios kai Timunax o Timagoreu, kai Karun Istiaios te o Tumneu kai Pigres o Ysseldumoy, kai Damasithymos o Kandauleu.   
      99. Of the rest of the officers I make no mention by the way (since I am not bound to do so), but only of Artemisia, at whom I marvel most that she joined the expedition against Hellas, being a woman; for after her husband died, she holding the power herself, although she had a son who was a young man, went on the expedition impelled by high spirit and manly courage, no necessity being laid upon her. Now her name, as I said, was Artemisia and she was the daughter of Lygdamis, and by descent she was of Halicarnassos on the side of her father, but of Crete by her mother. She was ruler of the men of Halicarnassos and Cos and Nisyros and Calydna, furnishing five ships; and she furnished ships which were of all the fleet reputed the best after those of the Sidonians, and of all his allies she set forth the best counsels to the king. Of the States of which I said that she was leader I declare the people to be all of Dorian race, those of Halicarnassos being Troizenians, and the rest Epidaurians. So far then I have spoken of the naval force.         99. [1] tun men nyn allun oy paramemnemai taxiarxun us oyk anagkazomenos, Artemisies de teis malista thuma poieumai epi ten Ellada strateysamenes gynaikos. etis apothanontos tou andros ayte te exoysa ten tyrannida kai paidos yparxontos neenieu ypo lematos te kai andreies estrateueto, oydemieis oi eouses anagkaies. [2] oynoma men de En aytei Artemisie, thygater de En Lygdamios, genos de ex Alikarnessou ta pros patros, ta metrothen de Kreissa. egemoneye de Alikarnesseun te kai Kuiun kai Nisyriun te kai Kalydniun, pente neas parexomene. [3] kai synapases teis stratieis, meta ge tas Siduniun, neas eydoxotatas pareixeto, pantun te tun symmaxun gnumas aristas basilei apedexato. tun de katelexa poliun egemoneuein ayten, to ethnos apofainu pan eon Durikon, Alikarnesseas men Troizenioys, tous de alloys Epidayrioys.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [100]

     100. Then when Xerxes had numbered the army, and it had been arranged in divisions, he had a mind to drive through it himself and inspect it: and afterwards he proceeded so to do; and driving through in a chariot by each nation, he inquired about them and his scribes wrote down the names, until he had gone from end to end both of the horse and of the foot. When he had done this, the ships were drawn down into the sea, and Xerxes changing from his chariot to a ship of Sidon sat down under a golden canopy and sailed along by the prows of the ships, asking of all just as he had done with the land-army, and having the answers written down. And the captains had taken their ships out to a distance of about four hundred feet from the beach and were staying them there, all having turned the prows of the ships towards the shore in an even line and having armed all the fighting-men as for war; and he inspected them sailing within, between the prows of the ships and the beach.         100. [1] es men tosonde o naytikos stratos eiretai. Xerxes de, epei erithmethe te kai dietaxthe o stratos, epethumese aytos sfeas diexelasas theesasthai. meta de epoiee tauta, kai diexelaunun epi armatos para ethnos en ekaston epynthaneto. kai apegrafon oi grammatistai, eus ex esxatun es esxata apiketo kai teis ippoy kai tou pezou. [2] us de tauta oi epepoieto, tun neun katelkystheiseun es thalassan, enthauta o Xerxes metekbas ek tou armatos es nea Sidunien izeto ypo skenei xryseei kai pareplee para tas pruiras tun neun, epeirutun te ekastas omoius kai ton pezon kai apografomenos. [3] tas de neas oi nauarxoi anagagontes oson te tessera plethra apo tou aigialou anekuxeyon, tas pruiras es gein trepsantes pantes metupedon, kai exoplisantes tous epibatas us es polemon. o d' entos tun prureun pleun etheeito kai tou aigialou.   
      101. Now when he had sailed through these and had disembarked from his ship, he sent for Demaratos the son of Ariston, who was marching with him against Hellas; and having called him he asked as follows: "Demaratos, now it is my pleasure to ask thee somewhat which I desire to know. Thou art not only a Hellene, but also, as I am informed both by thee and by the other Hellenes who come to speech with me, of a city which is neither the least nor the feeblest of Hellas. Now therefore declare to me this, namely whether the Hellenes will endure to raise hands against me: for, as I suppose, even if all the Hellenes and the remaining nations who dwell towards the West should be gathered together, they are not strong enough in fight to endure my attack, supposing them to be my enemies. I desire however to be informed also of thy opinion, what thou sayest about these matters." He inquired thus, and the other made answer and said: "O king, shall I utter the truth in speaking to thee, or that which will give pleasure?" and he bade him utter the truth, saying that he should suffer nothing unpleasant in consequence of this, any more than he suffered before.         101. [1] us de kai tautas diexepluse kai exebe ek teis neos, metepempsato Demareton ton Aristunos systrateyomenon aytui epi ten Ellada, kalesas d' ayton eireto tade. <<Demarete, nun moi se edu ti esti eiresthai ta thelu. su eis Ellen te, kai us egu pynthanomai seu te kai tun allun Ellenun tun emoi es logoys apikneomenun, polios oyt' elaxistes oyt' asthenestates. [2] nun un moi tode frason, ei Ellenes ypomeneoysi xeiras emoi antaeiromenoi. oy gar, us egu dokeu, oyd' ei pantes Ellenes kai oi loipoi oi pros esperes oikeontes anthrupoi syllextheiesan, oyk axiomaxoi eisi eme epionta ypomeinai, me eontes arthmioi. [3] thelu mentoi kai to apo seu, okoion ti legeis peri aytun, pythesthai.>> o men tauta eiruta, o de ypolabun efe <<basileu, kotera aletheiei xresumai pros se e edonei;>> o de min aletheiei xresasthai ekeleye, fas oyden oi aedesteron esesthai e proteron En.   
      102. When Demaratos heard this, he spoke as follows: "O king, since thou biddest me by all means utter the truth, and so speak as one who shall not be afterwards convicted by thee of having spoken falsely, I say this:--with Hellas poverty is ever an inbred growth, while valour is one that has been brought in, being acquired by intelligence and the force of law; and of it Hellas makes use ever to avert from herself not only poverty but also servitude to a master. Now I commend all the Hellenes who are settled in those Dorian lands, but this which I am about to say has regard not to tall, but to the Lacedemonians alone: of these I say, first that it is not possible that they will ever accept thy terms, which carry with them servitude for Hellas; and next I say that they will stand against thee in fight, even if all the other Hellenes shall be of thy party: and as for numbers, ask now how many they are, that they are able to do this; for whether it chances that a thousand of them have come out into the field, these will fight with thee, or if there be less than this, or again if there be more."         102. [1] us de tauta ekoyse Demaretos, elege tade. <<basileu, epeide aletheiei diaxresasthai pantus keleueis tauta legonta ta me pseydomenos tis ysteron ypo seu alusetai, tei Elladi penie men aiei kote suntrofos esti, arete de epaktos esti, apo te sofies katergasmene kai nomoy isxyrou. tei diaxreumene e Ellas ten te penien apamunetai kai ten desposunen. [2] aineu men nyn pantas Ellenas tous peri ekeinoys tous Durikous xuroys oikemenoys, erxomai de lexun oy peri pantun tousde tous logoys alla peri Lakedaimoniun mounun, pruta men oti oyk esti okus kote sous dexontai logoys doylosunen ferontas tei Elladi, aytis de us antiusontai toi es maxen kai en oi alloi Ellenes pantes ta sa froneusi. [3] arithmou de peri, me puthei osoi tines eontes tauta poieein oioi te eisi. en te gar tuxusi exestrateymenoi xilioi, oytoi maxesontai toi, en te elassones toutun en te kai pleunes.>>   
      103. Xerxes hearing this laughed, and said: "Demaratos, what a speech is this which thou hast uttered, saying that a thousand men will fight with this vast army! Come tell me this:-- thou sayest that thou wert thyself king of these men; wilt thou therefore consent forthwith to fight with ten men? and yet if your State is such throughout as thou dost describe it, thou their king ought by your laws to stand in array against double as many as another man; that is to say, if each of them is a match for ten men of my army, I expect of thee that thou shouldest be a match for twenty. Thus would be confirmed the report which is made by thee: but if ye, who boast thus greatly are such men and in size so great only as the Hellenes who come commonly to speech with me, thyself included, then beware lest this which has been spoken prove but an empty vaunt. For come, let me examine it by all that is probable: how could a thousand or ten thousand or even fifty thousand, at least if they were all equally free and were not ruled by one man, stand against so great an army? since, as thou knowest, we shall be more than a thousand coming about each one of them, supposing them to be in number five thousand. If indeed they were ruled by one man after our fashion, they might perhaps from fear of him become braver than it was their nature to be, or they might go compelled by the lash to fight with greater numbers, being themselves fewer in number; but if left at liberty, they would do neither of these things: and I for my part suppose that, even if equally matched in numbers, the Hellenes would hardly dare to fight with the Persians taken alone. With us however this of which thou speakest is found in single men, not indeed often, but rarely; for there are Persians of my spearmen who will consent to fight with three men of the Hellenes at once: but thou hast had no experience of these things and therefore thou speakest very much at random."         103. [1] tauta akousas Xerxes gelasas efe <<Demarete, oion efthegxao epos, andras xilioys stratiei toseide maxesesthai. age eipe moi. su feis toutun tun andrun basileus aytos genesthai. su un etheleseis aytika mala pros andras deka maxesthai; kaitoi ei to politikon ymin pan esti toiouton oion su diaireeis, se ge ton keinun basilea prepei pros to diplesion antitassesthai kata nomoys tous ymeteroys. [2] ei gar keinun ekastos deka andrun teis stratieis teis emeis antaxios esti, se de ge dizemai eikosi einai antaxion, kai oytu men orthoit' an o logos o para seo legomenos. ei de toioutoi te eontes kai megathea tosoutoi, osoi su te kai oi par' eme foitusi Ellenun es logoys ayxeete tosouton, ora me maten kompos o logos oytos eiremenos ei. [3] epei fere idu panti tui oikoti. kus an dynaiato xilioi e kai murioi e kai pentakismurioi, eontes ge eleutheroi pantes omoius kai me yp' enos arxomenoi, stratui tosuide antisteinai; epei toi pleunes peri ena ekaston ginometha e xilioi, eontun ekeinun pente xiliadun. [4] ypo men gar enos arxomenoi kata tropon ton emeteron genoiat' an, deimainontes touton, kai para ten euytun fusin ameinones, kai ioien anagkazomenoi mastigi es pleunas elassones eontes. aneimenoi de es to eleutheron oyk an poieoien toutun oydetera. dokeu de eguge kai anisuthentas plethei xalepus an Ellenas Perseisi mounoisi maxesthai. [5] alla par' emin men mounoisi touto esti to su legeis, esti ge men oy pollon alla spanion. eisi gar Perseun tun emun aixmoforun oi ethelesoysi Ellenun andrasi trisi omou maxesthai. tun su eun apeiros polla flyereeis.>>   
      104. To this Demaratos replied: "O king, from the first I was sure that if I uttered the truth I should not speak that which was pleasing to thee; since however thou didst compel me to speak the very truth, I told thee of the matters which concern the Spartans. And yet how I am at this present time attached to them by affection thou knowest better than any; seeing that first they took away from me the rank and privileges which came to me from my fathers, and then also they have caused me to be without native land and an exile; but thy father took me up and gave me livelihood and a house to dwell in. Surely it is not to be supposed likely that the prudent man will thrust aside friendliness which is offered to him, but rather that he will accept it with full contentment. And I do not profess that I am able to fight either with ten men or with two, nay, if I had my will, I would not even fight with one; but if there were necessity or if the cause which urged me to the combat were a great one, I would fight most willingly with one of these men who says that he is a match for three of the Hellenes. So also the Lacedemonians are not inferior to any men when fighting one by one, and they are the best of all men when fighting in a body: for though free, yet they are not free in all things, for over them is set Law as a master, whom they fear much more even than thy people fear thee. It is certain at least that they do whatsoever that master commands; and he commands ever the same thing, that is to say, he bids them not flee out of battle from any multitude of men, but stay in their post and win the victory or lose their life. But if when I say these things I seem to thee to be speaking at random, of other things for the future I prefer to be silent; and at this time I spake only because I was compelled. May it come to pass however according to thy mind, O king."         104. [1] pros tauta Demaretos legei <<u basileu, arxeithen epistamen oti aletheiei xreumenos oy fila toi ereu. su d' epei enagkasas legein tun logun tous alethestatoys, elegon ta katekonta Spartieteisi. [2] kaitoi us egu tygxanu ta nun tade estorgus ekeinoys, aytos malista exepisteai, oi me timen te kai gerea apelomenoi patruia apolin te kai fygada pepoiekasi, pater de sos ypodexamenos bion te moi kai oikon eduke. oykun oikos esti andra ton sufrona eynoien fainomenen diutheesthai, alla stergein malista. [3] egu de oyte deka andrasi ypisxomai oios te einai maxesthai oyte dyoisi, ekun te einai oyd' an moynomaxeoimi. ei de anagkaie eie e megas tis o epotrunun agun, maxoimen an pantun edista eni toutun tun andrun oi Ellenun ekastos fesi triun axios einai. [4] us de kai Lakedaimonioi kata men ena maxomenoi oydamun eisi kakiones andrun, alees de aristoi andrun apantun. eleutheroi gar eontes oy panta eleutheroi eisi. epesti gar sfi despotes nomos, ton ypodeimainoysi pollui eti mallon e oi soi se. [5] poieusi gun ta an ekeinos anugei. anugei de tuyto aiei, oyk eun feugein oyden pleithos anthrupun ek maxes, alla menontas en tei taxi epikrateein e apollysthai. soi de ei fainomai tauta legun flyereein, talla sigan thelu to loipon. nun te anagkastheis elexa. genoito mentoi kata noon toi, basileu>>   
      105. He thus made answer, and Xerxes turned the matter to laughter and felt no anger, but dismissed him with kindness. Then after he had conversed with him, and had appointed Mascames son of Megadostes to be governor at this place Doriscos, removing the governor who had been appointed by Dareios, Xerxes marched forth his army through Thrace to invade Hellas.         105. [1] o men de tauta ameipsato, Xerxes de es geluta te etrepse kai oyk epoiesato orgen oydemian, all' epius ayton apepempsato. toutui de es logoys elthun Xerxes, kai yparxon en tui Doriskui toutui katastesas Maskamen ton Megadosteu, ton de ypo Dareioy stathenta katapausas, exelayne ton straton dia teis Threikes epi ten Ellada.   
      106. And Mascames, whom he left behind here, proved to be a man of such qualities that to him alone Xerxes used to send gifts, considering him the best of all the men whom either he himself or Dareios had appointed to be governors,--he used to send him gifts, I say, every year, and so also did Artaxerxes the son of Xerxes to the descendants of Mascames. For even before this march governors had been appointed in Thrace and everywhere about the Hellespont; and these all, both those in Thrace and in the Hellespont, were conquered by the Hellenes after this expedition, except only the one who was at Doriscos; but Mascames at Doriscos none were ever able to conquer, though many tried. For this reason the gifts are sent continually for him from the king who reigns over the Persians.         106. [1] katelipe de andra toionde Maskamen genomenon, tui mounui Xerxes dura pempeske us aristeuonti pantun osoys aytos katestese e Dareios yparxoys, pempeske de ana pan etos. us de kai Artoxerxes o Xerxeu toisi Maskameioisi ekgonoisi. katestasan gar eti proteron tautes teis elasios yparxoi en tei Threikei kai tou Ellespontoy pantaxei. [2] oytoi un pantes oi te ek Threikes kai tou Ellespontoy, plen tou en Doriskui, ypo Ellenun ysteron tautes teis stratelasies exairethesan. ton de en Doriskui Maskamen oydamoi ku edynasthesan exelein pollun peiresamenun. dia touto de oi ta dura pempetai para tou basileuontos aiei en Perseisi.   
      107. Of those however who were conquered by the Hellenes Xerxes did not consider any to be a good man except only Boges, who was at Eion: him he never ceased commending, and he honoured very highly his children who survived him in the land of Persia. For in truth Boges proved himself worthy of great commendation, seeing that when he was besieged by the Athenians under Kimon the son of Miltiades, though he might have gone forth under a truce and so returned home to Asia, he preferred not to do this, for fear that the king should that it was by cowardice that he survived; and he continued to hold out till the last. Then when there was no longer any supply of provisions within the wall, he heaped together a great pyre, and he cut the throats of his children, his wife, his concubines and his servants, and threw them into the fire; and after this he scattered all the gold and silver in the city from the wall into the river Strymon, and having so done he threw himself into the fire. Thus he is justly commended even to this present time by the Persians.         107. [1] tun de exairethentun ypo Ellenun oydena basileus Xerxes enomise einai andra agathon ei me Bogen mounon ton ex Eionos, touton de aineun oyk epaueto, kai tous perieontas aytou en Perseisi paidas etima malista, epei kai axios ainoy megaloy egeneto Boges. os epeide epoliorkeeto ypo Athenaiun kai Kimunos tou Miltiadeu, pareon aytui ypospondon exelthein kai nosteisai es ten Asien, oyk ethelese, me deiliei doxeie perieinai basilei, alla diekarteree es to esxaton. [2] us d' oyden eti forbeis enein en tui teixei, synnesas pyren megalen esfaxe ta tekna kai ten gynaika kai tas pallakas kai tous oiketas kai epeita esebale es to pur, meta de tauta ton xryson apanta ton ek tou asteos kai ton argyron espeire apo tou teixeos es ton Strymona, poiesas de tauta euyton esebale es to pur. oytu men oytos dikaius aineetai eti kai es tode ypo Perseun.   
      108. Xerxes from Doriscos was proceeding onwards to invade Hellas; and as he went he compelled those who successively came in his way, to join his march: for the whole country as far as Thessaly had been reduced to subjection, as has been set forth by me before, and was tributary under the king, having been subdued by Megabazos and afterwards by Mardonios. And he passed in his march from Doriscos first by the Samothrakian strongholds, of which that which is situated furthest towards the West is a city called Mesambria. Next to this follows Stryme, a city of the Thasians, and midway between them flows the river Lisos, which at this time did not suffice when supplying its water to the army of Xerxes, but the stream failed. This country was in old time called Gallaike, but now Briantike; however by strict justice this also belongs to the Kikonians.         108. [1] Xerxes de ek tou Doriskoy eporeueto epi ten Ellada, tous de aiei ginomenoys empodun systrateuesthai enagkaze. ededouluto gar, us kai proteron moi dedelutai, e mexri Thessalies pasa kai En ypo basilea dasmoforos, Megabazoy te katastrepsamenoy kai ysteron Mardonioy. [2] parameibeto de poreyomenos ek Doriskoy pruta men ta Samothreikia teixea, tun esxate pepolistai pros esperes polis tei oynoma esti Mesambrie. exetai de tautes Thasiun polis Strume, dia de sfeun tou mesoy Lisos potamos diarreei, os tote oyk antesxe to ydur parexun tui Xerxeu stratui all' epelipe. [3] e de xure ayte palai men ekaleeto Gallaike, nun de Briantike. esti mentoi tui dikaiotatui tun logun kai ayte Kikonun.   
      109. Having crossed over the bed of the river Lisos after it had been dried up, he passed by these Hellenic cities, namely Maroneia, Dicaia and Abdera. These I say he passed by, and also the following lakes of note lying near them,-- the Ismarian lake, lying between Maroneia and Stryme; the Bistonian lake near Dicaia, into which two rivers pour their waters, the Trauos and the Compsantos; and at Abdera no lake indeed of any note was passed by Xerxes, but the river Nestos, which flows there into the sea. Then after passing these places he went by the cities of the mainland, near one of which there is, as it chances, a lake of somewhere about thirty furlongs in circumference, abounding in fish and very brackish; this the baggage-animals alone dried up, being watered at it: and the name of this city is Pistyros.         109. [1] diabas de tou Lisoy potamou to rheethron apexerasmenon polias Ellenidas tasde parameibeto, Maruneian Dikaian Abdera. tautas te de parexeie kai kata tautas limnas onomastas tasde, Maruneies men metaxu kai Strumes keimenen Ismarida, kata de Dikaian Bistonida, es ten potamoi duo esieisi to ydur, Trauos te kai Kompsantos. kata de Abdera limnen men oydemian eousan onomasten parameipsato Xerxes, potamon de Neston rheonta es thalassan. [2] meta de tautas tas xuras iun tas epeirutidas polis pareie, tun en miei limne eousa tygxanei usei triekonta stadiun malista kei ten periodon, ixthyudes te kai karta almyre. tauten ta ypozugia mouna ardomena anexerene. tei de poli tautei oynoma esti Pistyros. tautas men de tas polias tas parathalassias te kai Ellenidas ex eyunumoy xeiros apergun parexeie.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [110]

     110. These cities, I say, lying by the sea coast and belonging to Hellenes, he passed by, leaving them on the left hand; and the tribes of Thracians through whose country he marched were as follows, namely the Paitians, Kikonians, Bistonians, Sapaians, Dersaians, Edonians, Satrians. Of these they who were settled along the sea coast accompanied him with their ships, and those of them who dwelt inland and have been enumerated by me, were compelled to accompany him on land, except the Satrians:         110. [1] ethnea de Threikun di' un teis xures odon epoieeto tosade, Paitoi Kikones Bistones Sapaioi Dersaioi Edunoi Satrai. toutun oi men para thalassan katoikemenoi en teisi neysi eiponto. oi de aytun ten mesogaian oikeontes katalexthentes te yp' emeu, plen Satreun, oi alloi pantes pezei anagkazomenoi eiponto.   
      111. the Satrians however never yet became obedient to any man, so far as we know, but they remain up to my time still free, alone of all the Thracians; for they dwell in lofty mountains, which are covered with forest of all kinds and with snow, and also they are very skilful in war. These are they who possess the Oracle of Dionysos; which Oracle is on their most lofty mountains. Of the Satrians those who act as prophets of the temple are the Bessians; it is a prophetess who utters the oracles, as at Delphi; and beyond this there is nothing further of a remarkable character.         111. [1] Satrai de oydenos ku anthrupun ypekooi egenonto, oson emeis idmen, alla diateleusi to mexri emeu aiei eontes eleutheroi mounoi Threikun. oikeoysi te gar orea ypsela, ideisi te pantoieisi kai xioni synerefea, kai eisi ta polemia akroi. [2] oytoi oi Dionusoy to manteion eisi ektemenoi. to de manteion touto esti men epi tun oreun tun ypselotatun, Bessoi de tun Satreun eisi oi profeteuontes tou irou, promantis de e xreusa kata per en Delfoisi, kai oyden poikiluteron.   
      112. Xerxes having passed over the land which has been spoken of, next after this passed the strongholds of the Pierians, of which the name of the one is Phagres and of the other Pergamos. By this way, I say, he made his march, going close by the walls of these, and keeping Mount Pangaion on the right hand, which is both great and lofty and in which are mines both of gold and of silver possessed by the Pierians and Odomantians, and especially by the Satrians.         112. [1] parameipsamenos de o Xerxes ten eiremenen, deutera toutun parameibeto teixea ta Pierun, tun eni Fagres esti oynoma kai eterui Pergamos. tautei men de par' ayta ta teixea ten odon epoieeto, ek dexieis xeiros to Paggaion oros apergun, eon mega te kai ypselon, en tui xrusea te kai argurea eni metalla, ta nemontai Pieres te kai Odomantoi kai malista Satrai.   
      113. Thus passing by the Paionians, Doberians and Paioplians, who dwell beyond Pangaion towards the North Wind, he went on Westwards, until at last he came to the river Strymon and the city of Eion, of which, so long as he lived, Boges was commander, the same about whom I was speaking a short time back. This country about Mount Pangaion is called Phyllis, and it extends Westwards to the river Angites, which flows into the Strymon, and Southwards it stretches to the Strymon itself; and at this river the Magians sacrificed for good omens, slaying white horses.         113. [1] yperoikeontas de to Paggaion pros boreu anemoy Paionas Doberas te kai Paioplas parexiun eie pros esperen, es o apiketo epi potamon te Strymona kai polin Eiona, teis eti zuos eun Erxe Boges tou per oligui proteron toutun logon epoieumen. [2] e de gei ayte e peri to Paggaion oros kaleetai Fyllis, katateinoysa ta men pros esperen epi potamon Aggiten ekdidonta es ton Strymona, ta de pros mesambrien teinoysa es ayton ton Strymona. es ton oi Magoi ekalliereonto sfazontes ippoys leykous.   
      114. Having done this and many other things in addition to this, as charms for the river, at the Nine Ways in the land of the Edonians, they proceeded by the bridges, for they had found the Strymon already yoked with bridges; and being informed that this place was called the Nine Ways, they buried alive in it that number of boys and maidens, children of the natives of the place. Now burying alive is a Persian custom; for I am informed that Amestris also, the wife of Xerxes, when she had grown old, made return for her own life to the god who is said to be beneath the earth by burying twice seven children of Persians who were men of renown.         114. [1] farmakeusantes de tauta es ton potamon kai alla polla pros toutoisi en Ennea odoisi teisi Edunun eporeuonto kata tas gefuras, ton Strymona eyrontes ezeygmenon. Ennea de odous pynthanomenoi ton xuron touton kaleesthai, tosoutoys en aytui paidas te kai parthenoys andrun tun epixuriun zuontas katurysson. [2] Persikon de to zuontas katorussein, epei kai Amestrin ten Xerxeu gynaika pynthanomai gerasasan dis epta Perseun paidas eontun epifaneun andrun yper euyteis tui ypo gein legomenui einai theui antixarizesthai katorussoysan.   
      115. As the army proceeded on its march from the Strymon, it found after this a sea-beach stretching towards the setting of the sun, and passed by the Hellenic city, Argilos, which was there placed. This region and that which lies above it is called Bisaltia. Thence, keeping on the left hand the gulf which lies of Posideion, he went through the plain which is called the plain of Syleus, passing by Stageiros a Hellenic city, and so came to Acanthos, taking with him as he went each one of these tribes and also of those who dwell about Mount Pangaion, just as he did those whom I enumerated before, having the men who dwelt along the sea coast to serve in the ships and those who dwelt inland to accompany him on foot. This road by which Xerxes the king marched his army, the Thracians do not disturb nor sow crops over, but pay very great reverence to it down to my own time.         115. [1] us de apo tou Strymonos eporeueto o stratos, enthauta pros elioy dysmeun esti aigialos en tui oikemenen Argilon polin Ellada parexeie. ayte de kai e katuperthe tautes kaleetai Bisaltie. [2] entheuten de kolpon ton epi Posideioy ex aristereis xeiros exun eie dia Syleos pedioy kaleomenoy, Stageiron polin Ellada parameibomenos, kai apiketo es Akanthon, ama agomenos toutun ekaston tun ethneun kai tun peri to Paggaion oros oikeontun, omoius kai tun proteron katelexa, tous men para thalassan exun oikemenoys ek neysi strateyomenoys, tous d' yper thalasses pezei epomenoys. [3] ten de odon tauten, tei basileus Xerxes ton straton elase, oyte sygxeoysi Threikes oyt' epispeiroysi sebontai te megalus to mexri emeu.   
      116. Then when he had come to Acanthos, Xerxes proclaimed a guest- friendship with the people of Acanthos and also presented them with the Median dress and commended them, perceiving that they were zealous to serve him in the war and hearing of that which had been dug.         116. [1] us de ara es ten Akanthon apiketo, xeinien te o Xerxes toisi Akanthioisi proeipe kai eduresato sfeas estheiti Medikei epainee te, oreun kai aytous prothumoys eontas es ton polemon kai to orygma akouun.   
      117. And while Xerxes was in Acanthos, it happened that he who had been set over the making of the channel, Artachaies by name, died of sickness, a man who was highly esteemed by Xerxes and belonged to the Achaimenid family; also he was in stature the tallest of all the Persians, falling short by only four fingers of being five royal cubits in height, and he had a voice the loudest of all men; so that Xerxes was greatly grieved at the loss of him, and carried him forth and buried him with great honour, and the whole army joined in throwing up a mound for him. To this Artachaies the Acanthians by the bidding of an oracle do sacrifice as a hero, calling upon his name in worship.         117. [1] en Akanthui de eontos Xerxeu syneneike ypo nousoy apothanein ton epesteuta teis diuryxos Artaxaien, dokimon eonta para Xerxei kai genos Axaimeniden, megathei te megiston eonta Perseun (apo gar pente pexeun basileiun apeleipe tesseras daktuloys ) funeonta te megiston anthrupun, uste Xerxen symforen poiesamenon megalen exeneikai te ayton kallista kai thapsai. etymboxoee de pasa e stratie. [2] toutui de tui Artaxaiei thuoysi Akanthioi ek theopropioy us erui, eponomazontes to oynoma. basileus men de Xerxes apolomenoy Artaxaieu epoieeto symforen.   
      118. King Xerxes, I say, was greatly grieved at the loss of Artachaies: and meanwhile the Hellenes who were entertaining his army and providing Xerxes with dinners had been brought to utter ruin, so that they were being driven from house and home; seeing that when the Thasians, for example, entertained the army of Xerxes and provided him with a dinner on behalf of their towns upon the mainland, Antipater the son of Orgeus, who had been appointed for this purpose, a man of repute among the citizens equal to the best, reported that four hundred talents of silver had been spent upon the dinner.         118. [1] oi de ypodekomenoi Ellenun ten stratien kai deipnizontes Xerxen es pan kakou apikato, oytu uste anastatoi ek tun oikun eginonto. okoy Thasioisi yper tun en tei epeirui poliun tun sfetereun dexamenoisi ten Xerxeu stratien kai deipnisasi Antipatros o Orgeos arairemenos, tun astun aner dokimos omoia tui malista, apedexe es to deipnon tetrakosia talanta argyrioy tetelesmena.   
      119. Just so or nearly so in the other cities also those who were set over the business reported the reckoning to be: for the dinner was given as follows, having been ordered a long time beforehand, and being counted by them a matter of great importance:--In the first place, so soon as they heard of it from the heralds who carried round the proclamation, the citizens in the various cities distributed corn among their several households, and all continued to make wheat and barley meal for many months; then they fed cattle, finding out and obtaining the finest animals for a high price; and they kept birds both of the land and of the water, in cages or in pools, all for the entertainment of the army. Then again they had drinking-cups and mixing-bowls made of gold and of silver, and all the other things which are placed upon the table: these were made for the king himself and for those who ate at his table; but for the rest of the army only the things appointed for food were provided. Then whenever the army came to any place, there was a tent pitched ready wherein Xerxes himself made his stay, while the rest of the army remained out in the open air; and when it came to be time for dinner, then the entertainers had labour; but the others, after they had been satiated with food and had spent the night there, on the next day tore up the tent and taking with them all the movable furniture proceeded on their march, leaving nothing, but carrying all away with them.         119. [1] us de paraplesius kai en teisi alleisi polisi oi epesteutes apedeiknysan ton logon. to gar deipnon toionde ti egineto, oia ek pollou xronoy proeiremenon kai peri pollou poieymenun. [2] touto men, us eputhonto taxista tun kerukun tun periaggellontun, dasamenoi siton en teisi polisi oi astoi aleyra te kai alfita epoieyn pantes epi meinas syxnous. touto de ktenea esiteyon exeyriskontes timeis ta kallista, etrefon te ornithas xersaioys kai limnaioys en te oikemasi kai lakkoisi, es ypodoxas tou stratou. touto de xrusea te kai argurea poteria te kai kreteiras epoieunto kai talla osa epi trapezan titheatai panta. [3] tauta men aytui te basilei kai toisi omositoisi met' ekeinoy epepoieto, tei de allei stratiei ta es forben mouna tassomena. okus de apikoito e stratie, skene men eske pepegyia etoime es ten aytos stathmon poieesketo Xerxes, e de alle stratie eske ypaithrios. [4] us de deipnoy egineto ure, oi men dekomenoi exeskon ponon, oi de okus plesthentes nukta aytou agagoien, tei ysteraiei ten te skenen anaspasantes kai ta epipla panta labontes oytu apelauneskon, leipontes oyden alla feromenoi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [120]

     120. Then was uttered a word well spoken by Megacreon, a man of Abdera, who advised those of Abdera to go in a body, both themselves and their wives, to their temples, and to sit down as suppliants of the gods, entreating them that for the future also they would ward off from them the half of the evils which threatened; and he bade them feel great thankfulness to the gods for the past events, because king Xerxes had not thought good to take food twice in each day; for if it had been ordered to them beforehand to prepare breakfast also in like manner as the dinner, it would have remained for the men of Abdera either not to await the coming of Xerxes, or if they stayed, to be crushed by misfortune more than any other men upon the Earth.         120. [1] entha de Megakreontos andros Abderiteu epos ey eiremenon egeneto, os synebouleyse Abderiteisi pandemei, aytous kai gynaikas, elthontas es ta sfetera ira izesthai iketas tun theun paraiteomenoys kai to loipon sfi apamunein tun epiontun kakun ta emisea, tun te paroixomenun exein sfi megalen xarin, oti basileus Xerxes oy dis ekastes emeres enomise siton aireesthai. [2] parexein gar an Abderiteisi, ei kai ariston proeireto omoia tui deipnui paraskeyazein, e me ypomenein Xerxen epionta e katameinantas kakista pantun anthrupun diatribeinai.   
      121. They then, I say, though hard put to it, yet were performing that which was appointed to them; and from Acanthos Xerxes, after having commanded the generals to wait for the fleet at Therma, let the ships take their course apart from himself, (now this Therma is that which is situated on the Thermaic gulf, from which also this gulf has its name); and thus he did because he was informed that this was the shortest way: for from Doriscos as far as Acanthos the army had been making its march thus:--Xerxes had divided the whole land-army into three divisions, and one of them he had set to go along the sea accompanying the fleet, of which division Mardonios and Masistes were commanders; another third of the army had been appointed to go by the inland way, and of this the generals in command were Tritantaichmes and Gergis; and meanwhile the third of the subdivisions, with which Xerxes himself went, marched in the middle between them, and acknowledged as its commanders Smerdomenes and Megabyzos.         121. [1] oi men de piezomenoi omus to epitassomenon epeteleon. Xerxes de ek teis Akanthoy, enteilamenos toisi strategoisi tou naytikou stratou ypomenein en Thermei, apeike ap' euytou poreuesthai tas neas, Thermei de tei en tui Thermaiui kolpui oikemenei, ap' Es kai o kolpos oytos ten epunymien exei. tautei gar epynthaneto syntomutaton einai. [2] mexri men gar Akanthoy ude tetagmenos o stratos ek Doriskoy ten odon epoieeto. treis moiras o Xerxes dasamenos panta ton pezon straton, mian ayteun etaxe para thalassan ienai omou tui naytikui. [3] tautes men de estrategeon Mardonios te kai Masistes, etere de tetagmene eie tou stratou tritemoris ten mesogaian, teis estrategeon Tritantaixmes te kai Gergis. e de trite tun moireun, met' Es eporeueto aytos Xerxes, eie men to meson aytun, strategous de pareixeto Smerdomenea te kai Megabyzon.   
      122. The fleet, when it was let go by Xerxes and had sailed right through the channel made in Athos (which went across to the gulf on which are situated the cities of Assa, Piloros, Singos and Sarte), having taken up a contingent from these cities also, sailed thence with a free course to the Thermaic gulf, and turning round Ampelos the headland of Torone, it left on one side the following Hellenic cities, from which it took up contingents of ships and men, namely Torone, Galepsos, Sermyle, Mekyberna, Olynthos: this region is called Sithonia.         122. [1] o men nyn naytikos stratos us apeithe ypo Xerxeu kai diexepluse ten diuryxa ten en tui Athui genomenen, diexoysan de es kolpon en tui Assa te polis kai Piluros kai Siggos kai Sarte oikentai, entheuten, us kai ek toyteun tun poliun stratien parelabe, eplee apiemenos es ton Thermaion kolpon, kamptun de Ampelon ten Torunaien akren parameibeto Ellenidas ge tasde polis, ek tun neas te kai stratien parelambane, Torunen Galepson Sermulen Mekubernan Olynthon. e men nyn xure ayte Sithunie kaleetai.   
      123. And the fleet of Xerxes, cutting across from the headland of Ampelos to that of Canastron, which runs out furthest to sea of all Pallene, took up there contingents of ships and men from Potidaia, Aphytis, Neapolis, Aige, Therambo, Skione, Mende and Sane, for these are the cities which occupy the region which now is called Pallene, but was formerly called Phlegra. Then sailing along the coast of this country also the fleet continued its course towards the place which has been mentioned before, taking up contingents also from the cities which come next after Pallene and border upon the Thermaic gulf; and the names of them are these,--Lipaxos, Combreia, Lisai, Gigonos, Campsa, Smila, Aineia; and the region in which these cities are is called even to the present day Crossaia. Then sailing from Aineia, with which name I brought to an end the list of the cities, at once the fleet came into the Thermaic gulf and to the region of Mygdonia, and so it arrived at the aforesaid Therma and at the cities of Sindos and Chalestra upon the river Axios. This river is the boundary between the land of Mygdonia and Bottiaia, of which district the narrow region which lies on the sea coast is occupied by the cities of Ichnai and Pella.         123. [1] o de naytikos stratos o Xerxeu syntamnun ap' Ampeloy akres epi Kanastraien akren, to de pares teis Pallenes anexei malista, entheuten neas te kai stratien parelambane ek Potidaies kai Afutios kai Nees polios kai Aigeis kai Therambu kai Skiunes kai Mendes kai Sanes. aytai gar eisi ai ten nun Pallenen proteron de Flegren kaleomenen nemomenai. [2] parapleun de kai tauten ten xuren eplee es to proeiremenon, paralambanun stratien kai ek tun prosexeun poliun tei Pallenei, omoyreoyseun de tui Thermaiui kolpui, teisi oynomata esti tade, Lipaxos Kumbreia Aisa Gigunos Kampsa Smila Aineia. e de toyteun xure Krossaie eti kai es tode kaleetai. [3] apo de Aineies, es ten eteleutun katalegun tas polis, apo tautes ede es ayton te ton Thermaion kolpon egineto tui naytikui stratui o ploos kai gein ten Mygdonien, pleun de apiketo es te ten proeiremenen Thermen kai Sindon te polin kai Khalestren epi ton Axion potamon, os oyrizei xuren ten Mygdonien te kai Bottiaiida, teis exoysi to para thalassan steinon xurion polies Ixnai te kai Pella.   
      124. Now while his naval force was encamped about the river Axios an the city of Therma and the cities which lie between these two, waiting for the coming of the king, Xerxes and the land-army were proceeding from Acanthos, cutting through the middle by the shortest way with a view to reaching Therma: and he was proceeding through Paionia and Crestonia to the river Cheidoros, which beginning from the land of the Crestonians, runs through the region of Mygdonia and comes out alongside of the marsh which is by the river Axios.         124. [1] o men de naytikos stratos aytou peri Axion potamon kai polin Thermen kai tas metaxu polias toutun perimenun Basilea estratopedeueto, Xerxes de kai o pezos stratos eporeueto ek teis Akanthoy ten mesogaian tamnun teis odou, boylomenos es ten Thermen apikesthai. eporeueto de dia teis Paionikeis kai Krestunikeis epi potamon Kheiduron, os ek Krestunaiun arxamenos rheei dia Mygdonies xures kai exiei para to elos to ep' Axiui potamui.   
      125. As he was proceeding by this way, lions attacked the camels which carried his provisions; for the lions used to come down regularly by night, leaving their own haunts, but they touched nothing else, neither beast of burden nor man, but killed the camels only: and I marvel what was the cause, and what was it that impelled the lions to abstain from all else and to attack the camels only, creatures which they had never seen before, and of which they had had no experience.         125. [1] poreyomenui de tautei leontes oi epethekanto teisi sitoforoisi kameloisi. katafoiteontes gar oi leontes tas nuktas kai leipontes ta sfetera ethea alloy men oydenos aptonto oyte ypozygioy oyte anthrupoy, oi de tas kameloys ekeraizon mounas. thumazu de to aition, o ti kote En tun allun to anagkazon apexomenoys tous leontas teisi kameloisi epitithesthai, to mete proteron opupesan therion met' epepeireato aytou.   
      126. Now there are in these parts both many lions and also wild oxen, those that have the very large horns which are often brought into Hellas: and the limit within which these lions are found is on the one side the river Nestos, which flows through Abdera, and on the other the Achelos, which flows through Acarnania; for neither do the East of the Nestos, in any part of Europe before you come to this, would you see a lion, nor again in the remaining part of the continent to the West of the Acheloos, but they are produced in the middle space between these rivers.         126. [1] eisi de kata tauta ta xuria kai leontes polloi kai boes agrioi, tun ta kerea ypermegathea esti ta es Ellenas foiteonta. oyros de toisi leoysi esti o te di' Abderun rheun potamos Nestos kai o di' Akarnanies rheun Axeluios. oyte gar to pros ten eu tou Nestoy oydamothi pases teis emprosthe Eyrupes idoi tis an leonta, oyte pros esperes tou Axeluioy en tei epiloipui epeirui, all' en tei metaxu toutun tun potamun ginontai.   
      127. When Xerxes had reached Therma he established the army there; and his army encamping there occupied of the land along by the sea no less than this,--beginning from the city of Therma and from Mygdonia it extended as far as the river Lydias and the Haliacmon, which form the boundary between the lands of Bottiaia and Macedonia, mingling their waters together in one and the same stream. The Barbarians, I say, were encamped in these regions; and of the rivers which have been enumerated, only the river Cheidoros flowing from the Crestonian land was insufficient for the drinking of the army and failed in its stream.         127. [1] us de es ten Thermen apiketo o Xerxes, idryse aytou ten stratien. epesxe de o stratos aytou stratopedeyomenos ten para thalassan xuren tosende, arxamenos apo Thermes polios kai teis Mygdonies mexri Lydieu te potamou kai Aliakmonos, oi oyrizoysi gein ten Bottiaiida te kai Makedonida, es tuyto rheethron to ydur symmisgontes. [2] estratopedeuonto men de en toutoisi toisi xurioisi oi barbaroi, tun de katalexthentun toutun potamun ek Krestunaiun rheun Kheiduros mounos oyk antexrese tei stratiei pinomenos all' epelipe.   
      128. Then Xerxes seeing from Therma the mountains of Thessaly, Olympos and Ossa, that they were of very great height, and being informed that in the midst between them there was a narrow channel, through which flows the Peneios, and hearing also that by this way there was a good road leading to Thessaly, formed a desire to sail thither and look at the outlet of the Peneios, because he was meaning to march by the upper road, through the land of the Macedonians who dwell inland, until he came to the Perraibians, passing by the city of Gonnos; for by this way he was informed that it was safest to go. And having formed this desire, so also he proceeded to do; that is, he embarked in a Sidonian ship, the same in which he used always to embark when he wished to do anything of this kind, and he displayed a signal for the others to put out to sea also, leaving there the land-army. Then when Xerxes had looked at the outlet of the Peneios, he was possessed by great wonder, and summoning his guides he asked them whether it was possible to turn the river aside and bring it out to the sea by another way.         128. [1] Xerxes de oreun ek teis Thermes orea ta Thessalika, ton te Olympon kai ten Ossan, megathei te ypermekea eonta, dia mesoy te aytun ayluna steinon pynthanomenos einai di' oy rheei o Peneios, akouun te tautei einai odon es Thessalien feroysan, epethumese plusas theesasthai ten ekbolen tou Peneiou, oti ten anu odon emelle elan dia Makedonun tun katuperthe oikemenun este Perraibous para Gonnon polin. tautei gar asfalestaton epynthaneto einai. [2] us de epethumese, kai epoiee tauta. esbas es Sidunien nea, es ten per esebaine aiei okus ti etheloi toiouto poieisai, anedexe semeion kai toisi alloisi anagesthai, katalipun aytou ton pezon straton. epei de apiketo kai etheesato Xerxes ten ekbolen tou Peneiou, en thumati megalui enesxeto, kalesas de tous kategemonas teis odou eireto ei ton potamon esti paratrepsanta eterei es thalassan exagagein.   
      129. Now it is said that Thessaly was in old time a lake, being enclosed on all sides by very lofty mountains: for the parts of it which lie towards the East are shut in by the ranges of Pelion and Ossa, which join one another in their lower slopes, the parts towards the North Wind by Olympos, those towards the West by Pindos and those towards the mid-day and the South Wind by Othrys; and the region in the midst, between these mountains which have been named, is Thessaly, forming as it were a hollow. Whereas then many rivers flow into it and among them these five of most note, namely Peneios, Apidanos, Onochonos, Enipeus and Pamisos, these, which collect their waters from the mountains that enclose Thessaly round, and flow into this plain, with names separate each one, having their outflow into the sea by one channel and that a narrow one, first mingling their waters all together in one and the same stream; and so soon as they are mingled together, from that point onwards the Peneios prevails with its name over the rest and causes the others to lose their separate names. And it is said that in ancient time, there not being yet this channel and outflow between the mountains, these rivers, and besides these rivers the lake Boibeis also, had no names as they have now, but by their waters they made Thessaly to be all sea. The Thessalians themselves say that Poseidon made the channel through which the Peneios flows; and reasonably they report it thus, because whosoever believes that it is Poseidon who shakes the Earth and that the partings asunder produced by earthquake are the work of this god, would say, if he saw this, that it was made by Poseidon; for the parting asunder of the mountains is the work of an earthquake, as is evident to me.         129. [1] ten de Thessalien logos esti to palaion einai limnen, uste ge sygkekleimenen pantothen ypermekesi oresi. ta men gar ayteis pros ten eu exonta to te Pelion oros kai e Ossa apokleiei symmisgonta tas ypureias alleloisi, ta de pros boreu anemoy Olympos, ta de pros esperen Pindos, ta de pros mesambrien te kai anemon noton e Othrys. to meson de toutun tun lexthentun oreun e Thessalie esti eousa koile. [2] uste un potamun es ayten kai allun syxnun esballontun, pente de tun dokimun malista tunde, Peneiou kai Apidanou kai Onoxunoy kai Enipeos kai Pamisoy, oi men nyn es to pedion touto syllegomenoi ek tun oreun tun perikleiontun ten Thessalien onomazomenoi di' enos aylunos kai toutoy steinou ekroon exoysi es thalassan, prosymmisgontes to ydur pantes es tuyto. [3] epean de symmixtheusi taxista, entheuten ede o Peneios tui oynomati katakrateun anunumoys tous alloys einai poieei. to de palaion legetai, oyk eontos ku tou aylunos kai diekrooy toutoy, tous potamous toutoys, kai pros toisi potamoisi toutoisi ten Boibeida limnen, oyte onomazesthai kata per nun rheein te oyden Esson e nun, rheontas de poieein ten Thessalien pasan pelagos. [4] aytoi men nyn Thessaloi fasi Poseideuna poieisai ton ayluna di' oy rheei o Peneios, oikota legontes. ostis gar nomizei Poseideuna ten gein seiein kai ta diesteuta ypo seismou tou theou toutoy erga einai, kan ekeino idun faie Poseideuna poieisai. esti gar seismou ergon, us emoi fainetai einai, e diastasis tun oreun.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [130]

     130. So the guides, when Xerxes asked whether there was any other possible outlet to the sea for the Peneios, said with exact knowledge of the truth: "O king, for this river there is no other outgoing which extends to the sea, but this alone; for all Thessaly is circled about with mountains as with a crown." To this Xerxes is said to have replied: "The Thessalians then are prudent men. This it appears was that which they desired to guard against in good time when they changed their counsel, reflecting on this especially besides other things, namely that they had a country which, it appears, is easy to conquer and may quickly be taken: for it would have been necessary only to let the river flow over their land by making an embankment to keep it from going through the narrow channel and so diverting the course by which now it flows, in order to put all Thessaly under water except the mountains." This he said in reference to the sons of Aleuas, because they, being Thessalians, were the first of the Hellenes who gave themselves over to the king; for Xerxes thought that they offered him friendship on behalf of their whole nation. Having said thus and having looked at the place, he sailed back to Therma.         130. [1] oi de kategeomenoi, eiromenoy Xerxeu ei esti alle exodos es thalassan tui Peneiui, exepistamenoi atrekeus eipon <<basileu, potamui toutui oyk esti alle exelysis es thalassan katekoysa, all' ede ayte. oresi gar periestefanutai pasa Thessalie.>> Xerxen de legetai eipein pros tauta <<sofoi andres eisi Thessaloi. [2] taut' ara pro pollou efylaxanto gnusimaxeontes kai talla kai oti xuren ara eixon eyaireton te kai taxyaluton. ton gar potamon preigma an En mounon epeinai sfeun epi ten xuren, xumati ek tou aylunos ekbibasanta kai paratrepsanta di' un nun rheei rheethrun, uste Thessalien pasan exu tun oreun ypobryxa genesthai.>> [3] tauta de exonta elege es tous Aleueu paidas, oti prutoi Ellenun eontes Thessaloi edosan euytous basilei, dokeun o Xerxes apo pantos sfeas tou ethneos epaggellesthai filien. eipas de tauta kai theesamenos apeplee es ten Thermen.   
      131. He then was staying in the region of Pieria many days, for the road over the mountains of Macedonia was being cut meanwhile by a third part of his army, that all the host might pass over by this way into the land of the Perraibians: and now the heralds returned who had been sent to Hellas to demand the gift of earth, some empty-handed and others bearing earth and water.         131. [1] o men de peri Pierien dietribe emeras syxnas. to gar de oros to Makedonikon ekeire teis stratieis tritemoris, ina tautei diexiei apasa e stratie es Perraibous. oi de de kerykes oi apopemfthentes es ten Ellada epi geis aitesin apikato oi men keinoi, oi de ferontes gein te kai ydur.   
      132. And among those who gave that which was demanded were the following, namely the Thessalians, Dolopians, Enianians, Perraibians, Locrians, Megnesians, Malians, Achaians of Phthiotis, and Thebans, with the rest of the Boeotians also excepting the Thespians and Plataians. Against these the Hellenes who took up war with the Barbarian made an oath; and the oath was this,-- that whosoever being Hellenes had given themselves over to the Persian, not being compelled, these, if their own affairs should come to a good conclusion, they would dedicate as an offering to the god at Delphi.         132. [1] tun de dontun tauta egenonto oide, Thessaloi Dolopes Enieines Perraiboi Lokroi Magnetes Meliees Axaioi oi Fthiutai kai Thebaioi kai oi alloi Boiutoi plen Thespieun te kai Plataieun. [2] epi toutoisi oi Ellenes etamon orkion oi tui barbarui polemon aeiramenoi. to de orkion ude eixe, osoi tui Persei edosan sfeas aytous Ellenes eontes me anagkasthentes, katastantun sfi ey tun pregmatun, toutoys dekateusai tui en Delfoisi theui. to men de orkion ude eixe toisi Ellesi.   
      133. Thus ran the oath which was taken by the Hellenes: Xerxes however had not sent to Athens or to Sparta heralds to demand the gift of earth, and for this reason, namely because at the former time when Dareios had sent for this very purpose, the one people threw the men who made the demand into the pit and the others into a well, and bade them take from thence earth and water and bear them to the king. For this reason Xerxes did not send men to make this demand. And what evil thing came upon the Athenians for having done this to the heralds, I am not able to say, except indeed that their land and city were laid waste; but I do not think that this happened for that cause:         133. [1] es de Athenas kai Sparten oyk apepempse Xerxes epi geis aitesin kerykas tunde eineka. proteron Dareioy pempsantos ep' ayto touto, oi men aytun tous aiteontas es to barathron oi d' es frear embalontes ekeleyon gein te kai ydur ek toutun ferein para basilea. [2] toutun men eineka oyk epempse Xerxes tous aitesontas. o ti de toisi Athenaioisi tauta poiesasi tous kerykas syneneike anetheleton genesthai, oyk exu eipai ti, plen oti sfeun e xure kai e polis edeiuthe. alla touto oy dia tauten ten aitien dokeu genesthai.   
      134. on the Lacedemonians however the wrath fell of Talthybios, the herald of Agamemnon; for in Sparta there is a temple of Talthybios, and there are also descendants of Talthybios called Talthybiads, to whom have been given as a right all the missions of heralds which go from Sparta; and after this event it was not possible for the Spartans when they sacrificed to obtain favourable omens. This was the case with them for a long time; and as the Lacedemonians were grieved and regarded it as a great misfortune, and general assemblies were repeatedly gathered together and proclamation made, asking if any one of the Lacedemonians was willing to die for Sparta, at length Sperthias the son of Aneristos and Bulis the son of Nicolaos, Spartans of noble birth and in wealth attaining to the first rank, voluntarily submitted to pay the penalty to Xerxes for the heralds of Dareios which had perished at Sparta. Thus the Spartans sent these to the Medes to be put to death.         134. [1] toisi de un Lakedaimonioisi meinis kateskepse Talthybioy tou Agamemnonos kerykos. en gar Spartei esti Talthybioy iron, eisi de kai apogonoi Talthybiadai kaleomenoi, toisi ai kerykeiai ai ek Spartes pasai geras dedontai. [2] meta de tauta toisi Spartieteisi kalliereisai thyomenoisi oyk edunato. touto d' epi xronon syxnon En sfi. axthomenun de kai symforei xreumenun Lakedaimoniun, alies te pollakis syllegomenes kai kerygma toionde poieymenun, ei tis bouloito Lakedaimoniun pro teis Spartes apothneskein, Sperthies te o Aneristoy kai Boulis o Nikoleu, andres Spartieitai fusi te gegonotes ey kai xremasi anekontes es ta pruta, ethelontai ypedysan poinen tisai Xerxei tun Dareioy kerukun tun en Spartei apolomenun. [3] oytu Spartieitai toutoys us apothaneymenoys es Medoys apepempsan.   
      135. And not only the courage then shown by these men is worthy of admiration, but also the following sayings in addition: for as they were on their way to Susa they came to Hydarnes (now Hydarnes was a Persian by race and commander of those who dwelt on the sea coasts of Asia), and he offered them hospitality and entertained them; and while they were his guests he asked them as follows: "Lacedemonians, why is it that ye flee from becoming friends to the king? for ye may see that the king knows how to honour good men, when ye look at me and at my fortunes. So also ye, Lacedemonians, if ye gave yourselves to the king, since ye have the reputation with him already of being good men, would have rule each one of you over Hellenic land by the gift of the king." To this they made answer thus: "Hydarnes, thy counsel with regard to us is not equally balanced, for thou givest counsel having made trial indeed of the one thing, but being without experience of the other: thou knowest well what it is to be a slave, but thou hast never yet made trial of freedom, whether it is pleasant to the taste or no; for if thou shouldest make trial of it, thou wouldest then counsel us to fight for it not with spears only but also with axes."         135. [1] ayte te e tolma toutun tun andrun thumatos axie kai tade pros toutoisi ta epea. poreyomenoi gar es Sousa apikneontai para Ydarnea. o de Ydarnes En men genos Perses, strategos de tun parathalassiun anthrupun tun en tei Asiei. os sfeas xeinia prothemenos istia, xeinizun de eireto tade. [2] <<andres Lakedaimonioi, ti de feugete basilei filoi genesthai; orate gar us epistatai basileus andras agathous timan, es eme te kai ta ema pregmata apoblepontes. oytu de kai ymeis ei doiete ymeas aytous basilei, dedoxusthe gar pros aytou andres einai agathoi, ekastos an ymeun arxoi geis Ellados dontos basileos.>> [3] pros tauta ypekrinanto tade. <<Ydarnes, oyk ex isoy ginetai e symboylie e es emeas teinoysa. tou men gar pepeiremenos symboyleueis, tou de apeiros eun. to men gar doulos einai exepisteai, eleytheries de oyku epeirethes, oyt' ei esti glyku oyt' ei me. ei gar ayteis peiresaio, oyk an dorasi symboyleuois emin peri ayteis maxesthai, alla kai pelekesi.>>   
      136. Thus they answered Hydarnes; and then, after they had gone up to Susa and had come into the presence of the king, first when the spearmen of the guard commanded them and endeavoured to compel them by force to do obeisance to the king by falling down before him, they said that they would not do any such deed, though they should be pushed down by them head foremost; for it was not their custom to do obeisance to a man, and it was not for this that they had come. Then when they had resisted this, next they spoke these words or words to this effect: "O king of the Medes, the Lacedemonians sent us in place of the heralds who were slain in Sparta, to pay the penalty for their lives." When they said this, Xerxes moved by a spirit of magnanimity replied that he would not be like the Lacedemonians; for they had violated the rules which prevailed among all men by slaying heralds, but he would not do that himself which he blamed them for having done, nor would he free the Lacedemonians from their guilt by slaying these in return.         136. [1] tauta men Ydarnea ameipsanto. entheuten de us anebesan es Sousa kai basilei es opsin Elthon, pruta men tun doryforun keleyontun kai anagken sfi prosferontun proskyneein basilea prospiptontas, oyk efasan utheomenoi yp' aytun epi kefalen poiesein tauta oydama. oyte gar sfisi en nomui einai anthrupon proskyneein oyte kata tauta ekein. us de apemaxesanto touto, deutera sfi legoysi tade kai logoy toioude exomena [2] <<u basileu Medun, epempsan emeas Lakedaimonioi anti tun en Spartei apolomenun kerukun poinen ekeinun tisontas,>> legoysi de aytoisi tauta Xerxes ypo megalofrosunes oyk efe omoios esesthai Lakedaimonioisi. keinoys men gar sygxeai ta pantun anthrupun nomima apokteinantas kerykas, aytos de ta ekeinoisi epiplessei tauta oy poiesein, oyde antapokteinas ekeinoys apolusein Lakedaimonioys teis aities.   
      137. Thus the wrath of Talthybios ceased for the time being, even though the Spartans had done no more than this and although Sperthias and Bulis returned back to Sparta; but a long time after this it was roused again during the war between the Peloponnesians and Athenians, as the Lacedemonians report. This I perceive to have been most evidently the act of the Deity: for in that the wrath of Talthybios fell upon messengers and did not cease until it had been fully satisfied, so much was but in accordance with justice; but that it happened to come upon the sons of these men who went up to the king on account of the wrath, namely upon Nicolaos the son of Bulis and Aneristos the son of Sperthias (the same who conquered the men of Halieis, who came from Tiryns, by sailing into their harbour with a merchant ship filled with fighting men),--by this it is evident to me that the matter came to pass by the act of the Deity caused by this wrath. For these men, sent by the Lacedemonians as envoys to Asia, having been betrayed by Sitalkes the son of Teres king of the Thracians and by Nymphodoros the son of Pythes a man of Abdera, were captured at Bisanthe on the Hellespont; and then having been carried away to Attica they were put to death by the Athenians, and with them also Aristeas the son of Adeimantos the Corinthian. These things happened many years after the expedition of the king; and I return now to the former narrative.         137. [1] oytu e Talthybioy meinis kai tauta poiesantun Spartieteun epausato to paraytika, kaiper aponostesantun es Sparten Sperthieu te kai Boulios. xronui de metepeita pollui epegerthe kata ton Peloponnesiun kai Athenaiun polemon, us legoysi Lakedaimonioi. touto moi en toisi theiotaton fainetai genesthai. [2] oti men gar kateskepse es aggeloys e Talthybioy meinis oyde epausato prin e exeilthe, to dikaion oytu efere. to de sympesein es tous paidas tun andrun toutun tun anabantun pros basilea dia ten meinin, es Nikolan te ton Boulios kai es Aneriston ton Sperthieu, os eile Alieas tous ek Tirynthos olkadi kataplusas plerei andrun, deilon un moi oti theion egeneto to preigma ek teis menios. [3] oi gar pemfthentes ypo Lakedaimoniun aggeloi es ten Asien, prodothentes de ypo Sitalkeu tou Tereu Threikun basileos kai Nymfoduroy tou Putheu andros Abderiteu, elusan kata Bisanthen ten en Ellespontui, kai apaxthentes es ten Attiken apethanon ypo Athenaiun, meta de aytun kai Aristeas o Adeimantoy Korinthios aner.   
      138. Now the march of the king's army was in name against Athens, but in fact it was going against all Hellas: and the Hellenes being informed of this long before were not all equally affected by it; for some of them having given earth and water to the Persian had confidence, supposing that they would suffer no hurt from the Barbarian; while others not having given were in great terror, seeing that there were not ships existing in Hellas which were capable as regards number of receiving the invader in fight, and seeing that the greater part of the States were not willing to take up the war, but adopted readily the side of the Medes.         138. [1] tauta men nyn polloisi etesi ysteron egeneto tou basileos stoloy, epaneimi de epi ton proteron logon. e de stratelasie e basileos oynoma men eixe us ep' Athenas elaunei, katieto de es pasan ten Ellada. pynthanomenoi de tauta pro pollou oi Ellenes oyk en omoiui pantes epoieunto. [2] oi men gar aytun dontes gein kai ydur tui Persei eixon tharsos us oyden peisomenoi axari pros tou barbaroy. oi de oy dontes en deimati megalui katestasan, ate oyte neun eoyseun en tei Elladi arithmon axiomaxun dekesthai ton epionta, oyte boylomenun tun pollun antaptesthai tou polemoy, medizontun de prothumus.   
      139. And here I am compelled by necessity to declare an opinion which in the eyes of most men would seem to be invidious, but nevertheless I will not abstain from saying that which I see evidently to be the truth. If the Athenians had been seized with fear of the danger which threatened them and had left their land, or again, without leaving their land, had stayed and given themselves up to Xerxes, none would have made any attempt by sea to oppose the king. If then none had opposed Xerxes by sea, it would have happened on the land somewhat thus:--even if many tunics of walls had been thrown across the Isthmus by the Peloponnesians, the Lacedemonians would have been deserted by their allies, not voluntarily but of necessity, since these would have been conquered city after city by the naval force of the Barbarian, and so they would have been left alone: and having been left alone and having displayed great deeds of valour, they would have met their death nobly. Either they would have suffered this fate, or before this, seeing the other Hellenes also taking the side of the Medes, they would have made an agreement with Xerxes; and thus in either case Hellas would have come to be under the rule of the Persians: for as to the good to be got from the walls thrown across the Isthmus, I am unable to discover what it would have been, when the king had command of the sea. As it is however, if a man should say that the Athenians proved to be the saviours of Hellas, he would not fail to hit the truth; for to whichever side these turned, to that the balance was likely to incline: and these were they who, preferring that Hellas should continue to exist in freedom, roused up all of Hellas which remained, so much, that is, as had not gone over to the Medes, and (after the gods at least) these were they who repelled the king. Nor did fearful oracles, which came from Delphi and cast them into dread, induce them to leave Hellas, but they stayed behind and endured to receive the invader of their land.         139. [1] enthauta anagkaiei exergomai gnumen apodexasthai epifthonon men pros tun pleonun anthrupun, omus de tei ge moi fainetai einai alethes oyk episxesu. [2] ei Athenaioi katarrudesantes ton epionta kindynon exelipon ten sfeteren, e kai me eklipontes alla meinantes edosan sfeas aytous Xerxei, kata ten thalassan oydamoi an epeirunto antioumenoi basilei. ei toinyn kata ten thalassan medeis entiouto Xerxei, kata ge an ten epeiron toiade egineto. [3] ei kai polloi teixeun kithunes Esan elelamenoi dia tou Isthmou Peloponnesioisi, prodothentes an Lakedaimonioi ypo tun symmaxun oyk ekontun all' yp' anagkaies, kata polis aliskomenun ypo tou naytikou stratou tou barbaroy, emoynuthesan, moynuthentes de an kai apodexamenoi erga megala apethanon gennaius. [4] e tauta an epathon, e pro tou oruntes an kai tous alloys Ellenas medizontas omologiei an exresanto pros Xerxen. kai oytu an ep' amfotera e Ellas egineto ypo Perseisi. ten gar ufelien ten tun teixeun tun dia tou Isthmou elelamenun oy dunamai pythesthai etis an En, basileos epikrateontos teis thalasses. [5] nun de Athenaioys an tis legun suteiras genesthai teis Ellados oyk an amartanoi to alethes. oytoi gar epi okotera tun pregmatun etraponto, tauta rhepsein emelle. elomenoi de ten Ellada perieinai eleytheren, touto to Ellenikon pan to loipon, oson me emedise, aytoi oytoi Esan oi epegeirantes kai basilea meta ge theous anusamenoi. [6] oyde sfeas xresteria fobera elthonta ek Delfun kai es deima balonta epeise eklipein ten Ellada, alla katameinantes anesxonto ton epionta epi ten xuren dexasthai.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [140]

     140. For the Athenians had sent men to Delphi to inquire and were preparing to consult the Oracle; and after these had performed the usual rites in the sacred precincts, when they had entered the sanctuary and were sitting down there, the Pythian prophetess, whose name was Aristonike, uttered to them this oracle: 
"Why do ye sit, O ye wretched? Flee thou to the uttermost limits, 
 Leaving thy home and the heights of the wheel-round city behind thee! 
 Lo, there remaineth now nor the head nor the body in safety,-- 
 Neither the feet below nor the hands nor the middle are left thee,-- 
 All are destroyed together; for fire and the passionate War-god, 
 Urging the Syrian car to speed, doth hurl them to ruin. 
 Not thine alone, he shall cause many more great strongholds to perish, 
 Yes, many temples of gods to the ravening fire shall deliver,-- 
 Temples which stand now surely with sweat of their terror down-streaming, 
 Quaking with dread; and lo! from the topmost roof to the pavement 
 Dark blood trickles, forecasting the dire unavoidable evil. 
 Forth with you, forth from the shrine, and steep your soul in the sorrow!         140. [1] pempsantes gar oi Athenaioi es Delfous theopropoys xresteriazesthai Esan etoimoi. kai sfi poiesasi peri to iron ta nomizomena, us es to megaron eselthontes izonto, xrai e Pythie, tei oynoma En Aristonike, tade.     [2] u meleoi, ti kathesthe; lipun feug' esxata gaies
      dumata kai polios troxoeideos akra karena.
      oyte gar e kefale menei empedon oyte to suma,
      oyte podes neatoi oyt' un xeres, oyte ti messes
      leipetai, all' azela pelei. kata gar min ereipei
      pur te kai oxus Ares, Syriegenes arma diukun.
      [3] polla de kall' apolei pyrgumata koy to son oion,
      pollous d' athanatun neous malerui pyri dusei,
      oi poy nun idruti rheoumenoi estekasi,
      deimati pallomenoi, kata d' akrotatois orofoisi
      aima melan kexytai, proidon kakotetos anagkas.
      all' iton ex adutoio, kakois d' epikidnate thymon.   
      141. Hearing this the men who had been sent by the Athenians to consult the Oracle were very greatly distressed; and as they were despairing by reason of the evil which had been prophesied to them, Timon the son of Androbulos, a man of the Delphians in reputation equal to the first, counselled them to take a suppliant's bough and to approach the second time and consult the Oracle as suppliants. The Athenians did as he advised and said: "Lord, we pray thee utter to us some better oracle about our native land, having respect to these suppliant boughs which we have come to thee bearing; otherwise surely we will not depart away from the sanctuary, but will remain here where we are now, even until we bring our lives to an end." When they spoke these words, the prophetess gave them a second oracle as follows: 
"Pallas cannot prevail to appease great Zeus in Olympos, 
 Though she with words very many and wiles close-woven entreat him. 
 But I will tell thee this more, and will clench it with steel adamantine: 
 Then when all else shall be taken, whatever the boundary of Kecrops 
 Holdeth within, and the dark ravines of divinest Kithairon, 
 A bulwark of wood at the last Zeus grants to the Trito-born goddess 
 Sole to remain unwasted, which thee and thy children shall profit. 
 Stay thou not there for the horsemen to come and the footmen unnumbered; 
 Stay thou not still for the host from the mainland to come, but retire thee, 
 Turning thy back to the foe, for yet thou shalt face him hereafter. 
 Salamis, thou the divine, thou shalt cause sons of women to perish, 
 Or when the grain is scattered or when it is gathered together."         141. [1] tauta akousantes oi tun Athenaiun theopropoi symforei tei megistei exreunto. proballoysi de sfeas aytous ypo tou kakou tou kexresmenoy, Timun o Androbouloy, tun Delfun aner dokimos omoia tui malista, synebouleye sfi iketerien labousi deutera aytis elthontas xrasthai tui xresteriui us iketas. [2] peithomenoisi de tauta toisi Athenaioisi kai legoysi <<unax, xreison emin ameinon ti peri teis patridos, aidestheis tas iketerias tasde tas toi ekomen ferontes, e oy toi apimen ek tou adutoy, all' aytou teide meneomen est' an kai teleytesumen,>> tauta de legoysi e promantis xrai deutera tade.     [3] oy dunatai Pallas Di' Olumpion exilasasthai
      lissomene polloisi logois kai metidi pyknei.
      soi de tod' aytis epos ereu adamanti pelassas.
      tun allun gar aliskomenun osa Kekropos oyros
      entos exei keythmun te Kithairunos zatheoio,
      teixos Tritogenei xulinon didoi eyruopa Zeus
      mounon aportheton telethein, to se tekna t' onesei.
      [4] mede su g' ipposunen te menein kai pezon ionta
      pollon ap' epeiroy straton esyxos, all' ypoxurein
      nuton epistrepsas. eti toi pote kantios essei.
      u theie Salamis, apoleis de su tekna gynaikun
      e poy skidnamenes Demeteros e syniouses.   
      142. This seemed to them to be (as in truth it was) a milder utterance than the former one; therefore they had it written down and departed with it to Athens: and when the messengers after their return made report to the people, many various opinions were expressed by persons inquiring into the meaning of the oracle, and among them these, standing most in opposition to one another:--some of the elder men said they thought that the god had prophesied to them that the Acropolis should survive; for the Acropolis of the Athenians was in old time fenced with a thorn hedge; and they conjectured accordingly that this saying about the "bulwark of wood" referred to the fence: others on the contrary said that the god meant by this their ships, and they advised to leave all else and get ready these. Now they who said that the ships were the bulwark of wood were shaken in their interpretation by the two last verses which the prophetess uttered: 
"Salamis, thou the divine, thou shalt cause sons of women to perish, 
 Or when the grain is scattered or when it is gathered together." In reference to these verses the opinions of those who said that the ships were the bulwark of wood were disturbed; for the interpreters of oracles took these to mean that it was fated for them, having got ready for a sea-fight, to suffer defeat round about Salamis.         142. [1] tauta sfi epiutera gar tun proterun kai En kai edokee einai, syggrapsamenoi apallassonto es tas Athenas. us de apelthontes oi theopropoi apeggellon es ton deimon, gnumai kai allai pollai ginontai dizemenun to manteion kai aide synestekyiai malista. tun presbyterun elegon metexeteroi dokeein sfisi ton theon ten akropolin xreisai periesesthai. e gar akropolis to palai tun Athenaiun rhexui epefrakto. [2] oi men de kata ton fragmon syneballonto touto to xulinon teixos einai, oi d' ay elegon tas neas semainein ton theon, kai tautas pararteesthai ekeleyon ta alla apentas. tous un de tas neas legontas einai to xulinon teixos esfalle ta duo ta teleytaia rhethenta ypo teis Pythies,      u theie Salamis, apoleis de su tekna gynaikun
      e poy skidnamenes Demeteros e syniouses.[3] kata tauta ta epea synexeonto ai gnumai tun famenun tas neas to xulinon teixos einai. oi gar xresmologoi tautei tauta elambanon, us amfi Salamina dei sfeas essutheinai naymaxien paraskeyasamenoys.   
      143. Now there was one man of the Athenians who had lately been coming forward to take a place among the first, whose name was Themistocles, called son of Neocles. This man said that the interpreters of oracles did not make right conjecture of the whole, and he spoke as follows, saying that if these words that had been uttered referred really to the Athenians, he did not think it would have been so mildly expressed in the oracle, but rather thus, "Salamis, thou the merciless," instead of "Salamis, thou the divine," at least if its settlers were destined to perish round about it: but in truth the oracle had been spoken by the god with reference to the enemy, if one understood it rightly, and not to the Athenians: therefore he counselled them to get ready to fight a battle by sea, for in this was their bulwark of wood. When Themistocles declared his opinion thus, the Athenians judged that this was to be preferred by them rather than the advice of the interpreters of oracles, who bade them not make ready for a sea-fight, nor in short raise their hands at all in opposition, but leave the land of Attica and settle in some other.         143. [1] En de tun tis Athenaiun aner es prutoys neusti pariun, tui oynoma men En Themistoklees, pais de Neokleos ekaleeto. oytos uner oyk efe pan orthus tous xresmologoys symballesthai, legun toiade. ei es Athenaioys eixe to epos eiremenon eontus, oyk an oytu min dokeein epius xrestheinai, alla ude <<u sxetlie Salamis>> anti tou <<u theie Salamis,>> ei per ge emellon oi oiketores amf' aytei teleytesein. [2] alla gar es tous polemioys tui theui eireisthai to xresterion syllambanonti kata to orthon, all' oyk es Athenaioys. paraskeyazesthai un aytous us naymaxesontas synebouleye, us toutoy eontos tou xylinoy teixeos. [3] tautei Themistokleos apofainomenoy Athenaioi tauta sfisi egnusan airetutera einai mallon e ta tun xresmologun, oi oyk eun naymaxien arteesthai, to de sumpan eipein oyde xeiras antaeiresthai, alla eklipontas xuren ten Attiken allen tina oikizein.   
      144. Another opinion too of Themistocles before this one proved the best at the right moment, when the Athenians, having got large sums of money in the public treasury, which had come in to them from the mines which are at Laureion, were intending to share it among themselves, taking each in turn the sum of ten drachmas. Then Themistocles persuaded the Athenians to give up this plan of division and to make for themselves with this money two hundred ships for the war, meaning by that the war with the Eginetans: for this war having arisen proved in fact the salvation of Hellas at that time, by compelling the Athenians to become a naval power. And the ships, not having been used for the purpose for which they had been made, thus proved of service at need to Hellas. These ships then, I say, the Athenians had already, having built them beforehand, and it was necessary in addition to these to construct others. They resolved then, when they took counsel after the oracle was given, to receive the Barbarian invading Hellas with their ships in full force, following the commands of the god, in combination with those of the Hellenes who were willing to join them.         144. [1] etere te Themistoklei gnume emprosthe tautes es kairon eristeyse, ote Athenaioisi genomenun xrematun megalun en tui koinui, ta ek tun metallun sfi proseilthe tun apo Layreioy, emellon laxesthai orxedon ekastos deka draxmas. tote Themistoklees anegnuse Athenaioys teis diairesios tautes paysamenoys neas toutun tun xrematun poiesasthai diekosias es ton polemon, ton pros Aiginetas legun. [2] oytos gar o polemos systas esuse es to tote ten Ellada, anagkasas thalassioys genesthai Athenaioys. ai de es to men epoiethesan oyk exresthesan, es deon de oytu tei Elladi egenonto. aytai te de ai nees toisi Athenaioisi propoietheisai ypeirxon, eteras te edee prosnaypegeesthai. [3] edoxe te sfi meta to xresterion boyleyomenoisi epionta epi ten Ellada ton barbaron dekesthai teisi neysi pandemei, tui theui peithomenoys, ama Ellenun toisi boylomenoisi.   
      145. These oracles had been given before to the Athenians: and when those Hellenes who had the better mind about Hellas came together to one place, and considered their affairs and interchanged assurances with one another, then deliberating together they thought it well first of all things to reconcile the enmities and bring to an end the wars which they had with one another. Now there were wars engaged between others also, and especially between the Athenians and the Eginetans. After this, being informed that Xerxes was with his army at Sardis, they determined to send spies to Asia to make observation of the power of the king; and moreover they resolved to send envoys to Argos to form an alliance against the Persian, and to send others to Sicily to Gelon the son of Deinomenes and also to Corcyra, to urge them to come to the assistance of Hellas, and others again to Crete; for they made it their aim that if possible the Hellenic race might unite in one, and that they might join all together and act towards the same end, since dangers were threatening all the Hellenes equally. Now the power of Gelon was said to be great, far greater than any other Hellenic power.         145. [1] ta men de xresteria tauta toisi Athenaioisi egegonee. syllegomenun de es tuyto tun peri ten Ellada Ellenun tun ta ameinu froneontun kai didontun sfisi logon kai pistin, enthauta edokee boyleyomenoisi aytoisi pruton men xrematun pantun katallassesthai tas te exthras kai tous kat' alleloys eontas polemoys. Esan de pros tinas kai alloys egkekremenoi, o de un megistos Athenaioisi te kai Aigineteisi. [2] meta de pynthanomenoi Xerxen sun tui stratui einai en Sardisi, eboyleusanto kataskopoys pempein es ten Asien tun basileos pregmatun, es Aros te aggeloys omaixmien synthesomenoys pros ton Persen, kai es Sikelien alloys pempein para Geluna ton Deinomeneos es te Kerkyran keleusontas boetheein tei Elladi kai es Kreten alloys, fronesantes ei kus en te genoito to Ellenikon kai ei sygkupsantes tuyto pressoien pantes, us deinun epiontun omoius pasi Ellesi. ta de Gelunos pregmata megala elegeto einai, oydamun Ellenikun tun oy pollon mezu.   
      146. When they had thus resolved, they reconciled their enmities and then sent first three men as spies to Asia. These having come to Sardis and having got knowledge about the king's army, were discovered, and after having been examined by the generals of the land-army were being led off to die. For these men, I say, death had been determined; but Xerxes, being informed of this, found fault with the decision of the generals and sent some of the spearmen of his guard, enjoining them, if they should find the spies yet alive, to bring them to his presence. So having found them yet surviving they brought them into the presence of the king; and upon that Xerxes, being informed for what purpose they had come, commanded the spearmen to lead them round and to show them the whole army both foot and horse, and when they should have had their fill of looking at these things, to let them go unhurt to whatsoever land they desired.         146. [1] us de tauta sfi edoxe, katalysamenoi tas exthras pruta men kataskopoys pempoysi es ten Asien andras treis. oi de apikomenoi te es Xardis kai katamathontes ten basileos stratien, us epaistoi egenonto, basanisthentes ypo tun strategun tou pezou stratou apegonto us apoleomenoi. [2] kai toisi men katekekrito thanatos, Xerxes de us eputheto tauta, memftheis tun strategun ten gnumen pempei tun tinas doryforun, enteilamenos, en katalabusi tous kataskopoys zuntas, agein par' euyton. [3] us de eti perieontas aytous katelabon kai Egon es opsin ten basileos, to entheuten pythomenos ep' oisi Elthon, ekeleye sfeas tous doryforoys periagontas epideiknysthai panta te ton pezon straton kai ten ippon, epean de tauta theeumenoi eusi plerees, apopempein es ten an aytoi ethelusi xuren asineas.   
      147. Such was the command which he gave, adding at the same time this saying, namely that if the spies had been put to death, the Hellenes would not have been informed beforehand of his power, how far beyond description it was; while on the other hand by putting to death three men they would not very greatly have damaged the enemy; but when these returned back to Hellas, he thought it likely that the Hellenes, hearing of his power, would deliver up their freedom to him themselves, before the expedition took place which was being set in motion; and thus there would be no need for them to have the labour of marching an army against them. This opinion of his is like his manner of thinking at other times; for when Xerxes was in Abydos, he saw vessels which carried corn from the Pontus sailing out through the Hellespont on their way to Egina and the Peloponnese. Those then who sat by his side, being informed that the ships belonged to the enemy, were prepared to capture them, and were looking to the king to see when he would give the word; but Xerxes asked about them whither the men were sailing, and they replied: "Master, to thy foes, conveying to them corn": he then made answer and said: "Are we not also sailing to the same place as these men, furnished with corn as well as with other things necessary? How then do these wrong us, since they are conveying provisions for our use?"         147. [1] epilegun de ton logon tonde tauta enetelleto, us ei men apulonto oi kataskopoi, oyt' an ta euytou pregmata proeputhonto oi Ellenes eonta logoy mezu, oyt' an ti tous polemioys mega esinanto, andras treis apolesantes. nostesantun de toutun es ten Ellada dokeein efe akousantas tous Ellenas ta euytou pregmata pro tou stoloy tou ginomenoy paradusein sfeas ten idien eleytherien, kai oytu oyde deesein ep' aytous stratelateontas pregmata exein. [2] oike de aytou ayte e gnume tei ge allei. eun gar en Abudui o Xerxes eide ploia ek tou Pontoy sitaguga diekpluonta ton Ellesponton, es te Aiginan kai Peloponneson komizomena. oi men de paredroi aytou us eputhonto polemia einai ta ploia, etoimoi Esan aireein ayta, esblepontes es ton basilea okote paraggeleei. [3] o de Xerxes eireto aytous okei pleoien. oi de eipan <<es tous sous polemioys, u despota, siton agontes.>> o de ypolabun efe <<oykun kai emeis ekei pleomen entha per oytoi, toisi te alloisi exertymenoi kai situi; ti deita adikeoysi oytoi emin sitia parakomizontes;>>   
      148. The spies then, having thus looked at everything and after that having been dismissed, returned back to Europe: and meanwhile those of the Hellenes who had sworn alliance against the Persian, after the sending forth of the spies proceeded to send envoys next to Argos. Now the Argives report that the matters concerning themselves took place as follows:--They were informed, they say, at the very first of the movement which was being set on foot by the Barbarian against Hellas; and having been informed of this and perceiving that the Hellenes would endeavour to get their alliance against the Persians, they had sent messengers to inquire of the god at Delphi, and to ask how they should act in order that it might be best for themselves: because lately there had been slain of them six thousand men by the Lacedemonians and by Cleomenes the son of Anaxandrides, and this in fact was the reason that they were sending to inquire: and when they inquired, the Pythian prophetess made answer to them as follows: 
"Thou to thy neighbours a foe, by the gods immortal beloved, 
 Keep thou thy spear within bounds, and sit well-guarded behind it: 
 Guard well the head, and the head shall preserve the limbs and the body." Thus, they say, the Pythian prophetess had replied to them before this; and afterwards when the messengers of the Hellenes came, as I said, to Argos, they entered the Council-chamber and spoke that which had been enjoined to them; and to that which was said the Council replied that the Argives were ready to do as they were requested, on condition that they got peace made with the Lacedemonians for thirty years and that they had half the leadership of the whole confederacy: and yet by strict right (they said) the whole leadership fell to their share, but nevertheless it was sufficient for them to have half.         148. [1] oi men nyn kataskopoi oytu theesamenoi te kai apopemfthentes enostesan es ten Eyrupen, oi de synumotai Ellenun epi tui Persei meta ten apopempsin tun kataskopun deutera epempon es Argos aggeloys. [2] Argeioi de legoysi ta kat' euytous genesthai ude. pythesthai gar aytika kat' arxas ta ek tou barbaroy egeiromena epi ten Ellada, pythomenoi de, kai mathontes us sfeas oi Ellenes peiresontai paralambanontes epi ton Persen, pempsai theopropoys es Delfous ton theon epeiresomenoys us sfi mellei ariston poieoysi genesthai. neusti gar sfeun tethnanai exakisxilioys ypo Lakedaimoniun kai Kleomeneos tou Anaxandrideu. tun de eineka pempein. [3] ten de Pythien epeirutusi aytoisi anelein tade.     exthre periktionessi, fil' athanatoisi theoisin,
      eisu ton probolaion exun pefylagmenos Eso
      kai kefalen pefulaxo. kare de to suma sausei.tauta men ten Pythien xreisai proteron. meta de us elthein tous aggeloys es de to Argos, epelthein epi to boyleyterion kai legein ta entetalmena. [4] tous de pros ta legomena ypokrinasthai us etoimoi eisi Argeioi poieein tauta, triekonta etea eirenen speisamenoi Lakedaimonioisi kai egeomenoi kata to emisy pases teis symmaxies. kaitoi kata ge to dikaion ginesthai ten egemonien euytun. all' omus sfisi apoxran kata to emisy egeomenoisi.    
      149. Thus they report that the Council made answer, although the oracle forbade them to make the alliance with the Hellenes; and they were anxious, they say, that a truce from hostilities for thirty years should be made, although they feared the oracle, in order, as they allege, that their sons might grow to manhood in these years; whereas if a truce did not exist, they had fear that, supposing another disaster should come upon them in fighting against the Persian in addition to that which had befallen them already, they might be for all future time subject to the Lacedemonians. To that which was spoken by the Council those of the envoys who were of Sparta replied, that as to the truce they would refer the matter to their public assembly, but as to the leadership they had themselves been commissioned to make reply, and did in fact say this, namely that they had two kings, while the Argives had one; and it was not possible to remove either of the two who were of Sparta from the leadership, but there was nothing to prevent the Argive king from having an equal vote with each of their two. Then, say the Argives, they could not endure the grasping selfishness of the Spartans, but chose to be ruled by the Barbarians rather than to yield at all to the Lacedemonians; and they gave notice to the envoys to depart out of the territory of the Argives before sunset, or, if not, they would be dealt with as enemies.         149. [1] tauta men legoysi ten boylen ypokrinasthai, kaiper apagoreuontos sfi tou xresterioy me poieesthai ten pros tous Ellenas symmaxien. spoyden de exein spondas genesthai triekontoetidas kaiper to xresterion fobeomenoi, ina de sfi oi paides andrutheusi en toutoisi toisi etesi. me de spondeun eoyseun epilegesthai, en ara sfeas katalabei pros tui gegonoti kakui allo ptaisma pros ton Persen, me to loipon eusi Lakedaimoniun ypekooi. [2] tun de aggelun tous apo teis Spartes pros ta rhethenta ek teis boyleis ameipsasthai toiside. peri men spondeun anoisein es tous pleunas, peri de egemonies aytoisi entetalthai ypokrinasthai, kai de legein, sfisi men einai duo basileas, Argeioisi de ena. oykun dynaton einai tun ek Spartes oydeteron pausai teis egemonies, meta de duo tun sfeterun omopsefon ton Argeion einai kuluein oyden. [3] oytu de oi Argeioi fasi oyk anasxesthai tun Spartieteun ten pleonexien, all' elesthai mallon ypo tun barbarun arxesthai e ti ypeixai Lakedaimonioisi, proeipein te toisi aggeloisi pro duntos elioy apallassesthai ek teis Argeiun xures, ei de me, periepsesthai us polemioys.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [150]

     150. The Argives themselves report so much about these matters: but there is another story reported in Hellas to the effect that Xerxes sent a herald to Argos before he set forth to make an expedition against Hellas, and this herald, they say, when he had come, spoke as follows: "Men of Argos, king Xerxes says to you these things:--We hold that Perses, from whom we are descended, was the son of Perseus, the son of Danae, and was born of the daughter of Kepheus, Andromeda; and according to this it would seem that we are descended from you. It is not fitting then that we should go forth on an expedition against those from whom we trace our descent, nor that ye should set yourselves in opposition to us by rendering assistance to others; but it is fitting that ye keep still and remain by yourselves: for if things happen according to my mind, I shall not esteem any people to be of greater consequence than you." Having heard this the Argives, it is said, considered it a great matter; and therefore at first they made no offer of help nor did they ask for any share; but afterwards, when the Hellenes tried to get them on their side, then, since they knew well that the Lacedemonians would not give them a share in the command, they asked for this merely in order that they might have a pretext for remaining still.         150. [1] aytoi men Argeioi tosauta toutun peri legoysi. esti de allos logos legomenos ana ten Ellada, us Xerxes epempse keryka es Argos proteron e per ormeisai strateuesthai epi ten Ellada. [2] elthonta de touton legetai eipein <<andres Argeioi, basileus Xerxes tade ymin legei. emeis nomizomen Persen einai ap' oy emeis gegonamen paida Perseos tou Danaes, gegonota ek teis Kefeos thygatros Andromedes. oytu an un eiemen ymeteroi apogonoi. oyte un emeas oikos epi tous emeteroys progonoys strateuesthai, oyte ymeas alloisi timureontas emin antixooys ginesthai, alla par' ymin aytoisi esyxien exontas kateisthai. en gar emoi genetai kata noon, oydamous mezonas ymeun axu.>> [3] tauta akousantas Argeioys legetai preigma poiesasthai, kai paraxreima men oyden epaggellomenoys metaiteein, epei de sfeas paralambanein tous Ellenas, oytu de epistamenoys oti oy metadusoysi teis arxeis Lakedaimonioi metaiteein, ina epi profasios esyxien agusi.   
      151. Also some of the Hellenes report that the following event, in agreement with this account, came to pass many years after these things:--there happened, they say, to be in Susa the city of Memnon envoys of the Athenians come about some other matter, namely Callias the son of Hipponicos and the others who went up with him; and the Argives at that very time had also sent envoys to Susa, and these asked Artoxerxes the son of Xerxes, whether the friendship which they had formed with Xerxes still remained unbroken, if they themselves desired to maintain it, or whether they were esteemed by him to be enemies; and king Artoxerxes said that it most certainly remained unbroken, and that there was no city which he considered to be more his friend than Argos.         151. [1] sympesein de toutoisi kai tonde ton logon legoysi tines Ellenun polloisi etesi ysteron genomenon toutun. tyxein en Sousoisi toisi Memnonioisi eontas eteroy pregmatos eineka aggeloys Athenaiun Kallien te ton Ipponikoy kai tous meta toutoy anabantas, Argeioys de ton ayton touton xronon pempsantas kai toutoys es Sousa aggeloys eirutan Artoxerxea ton Xerxeu ei sfi eti emmenei etheloysi ten pros Xerxen filien synekerasanto, e nomizoiato pros aytou einai polemioi. basilea de Artoxerxea malista emmenein fanai, kai oydemian nomizein polin Argeos filiuteren.   
      152. Now whether Xerxes did indeed send a herald to Argos saying that which has been reported, and whether envoys of the Argives who had gone up to Susa inquired of Artoxerxes concerning friendship, I am not able to say for certain; nor do I declare any opinion about the matters in question other than that which the Argives themselves report: but I know this much, that if all the nations of men should bring together into one place the evils which they have suffered themselves, desiring to make exchange with their neighbours, each people of them, when they had examined closely the evils suffered by their fellows, would gladly carry away back with them those which they had brought. Thus it is not the Argives who have acted most basely of all. I however am bound to report that which is reported, though I am not bound altogether to believe it; and let this saying be considered to hold good as regards every narrative in the history: for I must add that this also is reported, namely that the Argives were actually those who invited the Persian to invade Hellas, because their war with the Lacedemonians had had an evil issue, being willing to suffer anything whatever rather than the trouble which was then upon them.         152. [1] ei men nyn Xerxes te apepempse tauta legonta ke'ryka es Argos kai Argeiun aggeloi anabantes es Sousa epeirw'tun Artoxerxen peri filies, oyk exu atrekeus eipein, oyde tina gnw'men peri aytun apofainomai allen ge e ten per aytoi Argeioi legoysi. epistamai de tosouton, oti ei pantes anthrupoi ta oike'ia kaka es meson syneneikaien allaxasthai boylomenoi toisi plesioisi, egkupsantes an es ta tun pelas kaka aspasius ekastoi aytun apoferoiato opisu ta eseneikanto. oytu de oyd' Argeioisi aisxista pepoietai. egu de ofeilu legein ta legomena, peithesthai ge men oy pantapasin ofeilu, kai moi touto to epos exetu es panta ton logon. epei kai tauta legetai, us ara Argeioi Esan oi epikalesamenoi ton Persen epi ten Ellada, epeide' sfi pros tous Lakedaimonioys kakus e aixme este'kee, pan de boylomenoi sfisi einai pro teis pareouses lupes.   
      153. That which concerns the Argives has now been said: and meanwhile envoys had come to Sicily from the allies, to confer with Gelon, among whom was also Syagros from the Lacedemonians. Now the ancestor of this Gelon, he who was at Gela as a settler, was a native of the island of Telos, which lies off Triopion; and when Gela was founded by the Lindians of Rhodes and by Antiphemos, he was not left behind. Then in course of time his descendants became and continued to be priests of the mysteries of the Earth goddesses, an office which was acquired by Telines one of their ancestors in the following manner:-- certain of the men of Gela, being worsted in a party struggle, had fled to Mactorion, the city which stands above Gela: these men Telines brought back to Gela from exile with no force of men but only with the sacred rites of these goddesses; but from whom he received them, or whether he obtained them for himself, this I am not able to say; trusting in these however, he brought the men back from exile, on the condition that his descendants should be priests of the mysteries of the goddesses. To me it has caused wonder also that Telines should have been able to perform so great a deed, considering that which I am told; for such deeds, I think, are not apt to proceed from every man, but from one who has a brave spirit and manly vigour, whereas Telines is said by the dwellers in Sicily to have been on the contrary a man of effeminate character and rather poor spirit.         153. [1] ta men peri Argeiun eiretai. es de ten Sikelien alloi te apikato aggeloi apo tun symmaxun symmixontes Geluni kai de kai apo Lakedaimoniun Suagros. tou de Gelunos toutoy progonos, oiketur o en Gelei, En ek nesoy Teloy teis epi Triopiui keimenes. os ktizomenes Geles ypo Lindiun te tun ek RHodoy kai Antifemoy oyk eleifthe. [2] ana xronon de aytou oi apogonoi genomenoi irofantai tun xthoniun theun dieteleon eontes, Telineu enos tey tun progonun ktesamenoy tropui toiuide. es Makturion polin ten yper Geles oikemenen efygon andres Geluiun stasi essuthentes. [3] toutoys un o Telines kategage es Gelen, exun oydemian andrun dunamin alla ira toutun tun theun. othen de ayta elabe e aytos ektesato, touto de oyk exu eipein. toutoisi d' un pisynos eun kategage, ep' ui te oi apogonoi aytou irofantai tun theun esontai. [4] thuma moi un kai touto gegone pros ta pynthanomai, katergasasthai Telinen ergon tosouton. ta toiauta gar erga oy pros tou apantos andros nenomika ginesthai, alla pros psyxeis te agatheis kai rhumes andreies. o de legetai pros teis Sikelies tun oiketorun ta ypenantia toutun pefykenai thelydries te kai malakuteros aner.   
      154. He then had thus obtained the privilege of which I speak: and when Cleander the son of Pantares brought his life to an end, having been despot of Gela for seven years and being killed at last by Sabyllos a man of Gela, then Hippocrates succeeded to the monarchy, who was brother of Cleander. And while Hippocrates was despot, Gelon, who was a descendant of Telines the priest of the mysteries, was spearman of the guard to Hippocrates with many others and among them Ainesidemos the son of Pataicos. Then after no long time he was appointed by reason of valour to be commander of the whole cavalry; for when Hippocrates besieged successively the cities of Callipolis, Naxos, Zancle, Leontini, and also Syracuse and many towns of the Barbarians, in these wars Gelon showed himself a most brilliant warrior; and of the cities which I just now mentioned, not one except Syracuse escaped being reduced to subjection by Hippocrates: the Syracusans however, after they had been defeated in battle at the river Eloros, were rescued by the Corinthians and Corcyreans; these rescued them and brought the quarrel to a settlement on this condition, namely that the Syracusans should deliver up Camarina to Hippocrates. Now Camarina used in ancient time to belong to the men of Syracuse.         154. [1] oytos men nyn ektesato touto to geras. Kleandroy de tou Pantareos teleytesantos ton bion, os etyranneyse men Geles epta etea, apethane de ypo Sabulloy andros Geluioy, enthauta analambanei ten moynarxien Ippokrates Kleandroy eun adelfeos. exontos de Ippokrateos ten tyrannida, o Gelun eun Telineu tou irofanteu apogonos, pollun met' allun kai Ainesidemoy tou Pataikoy . . . os En doryforos Ippokrateos. [2] meta de oy pollon xronon di' areten apedexthe pases teis ippoy einai ipparxos. poliorkeontos gar Ippokrateos Kallipolitas te kai Naxioys kai Zagklaioys te kai Leontinoys kai pros Syrekosioys te kai tun barbarun syxnous, aner efaineto en toutoisi toisi polemoisi eun o Gelun lamprotatos. tun de eipon poliun toyteun plen Syrekoyseun oydemia diefyge doylosunen pros Ippokrateos. [3] Syrekosioys de Korinthioi te kai Kerkyraioi errusanto maxei essuthentas epi potamui Elurui, errusanto de oytoi epi toiside katallaxantes, ep' ui te Ippokratei Kamarinan Syrekosioys paradounai. Syrekosiun de En Kamarina to arxaion.   
      155. Then when it was the fate of Hippocrates also, after having been despot for the same number of years as his brother Cleander, to be killed at the city of Hybla, whither he had gone on an expedition against the Sikelians, then Gelon made a pretence of helping the sons of Hippocrates, Eucleides and Cleander, when the citizens were no longer willing to submit; but actually, when he had been victorious in a battle over the men of Gela, he robbed the sons of Hippocrates of the power and was ruler himself. After this stroke of fortune Gelon restored those of the Syracusans who were called "land-holders," after they had been driven into exile by the common people and by their own slaves, who were called Kyllyrians, these, I say, he restored from the city of Casmene to Syracuse, and so got possession of this last city also, for the common people of Syracuse, when Gelon came against them, delivered up to him their city and themselves.         155. [1] us de kai Ippokratea tyranneusanta isa etea tui adelfeui Kleandrui katelabe apothanein pros poli Yblei strateysamenon epi tous Sikelous, oytu de o Gelun tui logui timureun toisi Ippokrateos paisi Eykleidei te kai Kleandrui, oy boylomenun tun polieteun katekoun eti einai, tui ergui, us epekratese maxei tun Geluiun, Erxe aytos aposteresas tous Ippokrateos paidas. [2] meta de touto to eyrema tous gamoroys kaleomenoys tun Syrekosiun ekpesontas ypo te tou demoy kai tun sfeterun doulun, kaleomenun de Kyllyriun, o Gelun katagagun toutoys ek Kasmenes polios es tas Syrekousas esxe kai tautas. o gar deimos o tun Syrekosiun epionti Geluni paradidoi ten polin kai euyton.   
      156. So after he had received Syracuse into his power, he made less account of Gela, of which he was ruler also in addition, and he gave it in charge to Hieron his brother, while he proceeded to strengthen Syracuse. So forthwith that city rose and shot up to prosperity; for in the first place he brought all those of Camarina to Syracuse and made them citizens, and razed to the ground the city of Camarina; then secondly he did the same to more than half of the men of Gela, as he had done to those of Camarina: and as regards the Megarians of Sicily, when they were besieged and had surrendered by capitulation, the well-to-do men of them, though they had stirred up war with him and expected to be put to death for this reason, he brought to Syracuse and made them citizens, but the common people of the Megarians, who had no share in the guilt of this war and did not expect that they would suffer any evil, these also he brought to Syracuse and sold them as slaves to be carried away from Sicily: and the same thing he did moreover to the men of Euboia in Sicily, making a distinction between them: and he dealt thus with these two cities because he thought that a body of commons was a most unpleasant element in the State.         156. [1] o de epeite parelabe tas Syrekousas, Geles men epikrateun logon elassu epoieeto, epitrepsas ayten Ieruni adelfeui euytou, o de tas Syrekousas ekratyne, kai Esan oi panta ai Syrekoysai. [2] ai de paraytika ana t' edramon kai eblaston. touto men gar Kamarinaioys apantas es tas Syrekousas agagun polietas epoiese, Kamarines de to asty kateskapse, touto de Geluiun yperemiseas tun astun tuyto toisi Kamarinaioisi epoiese. Megareas te tous en Sikeliei, us poliorkeomenoi es omologien prosexuresan, tous men aytun paxeas, aeiramenoys te polemon aytui kai prosdokuntas apoleesthai dia touto, agagun es tas Syrekousas polietas epoiese. ton de deimon tun Megareun oyk eonta metaition tou polemoy toutoy oyde prosdekomenon kakon oyden peisesthai, agagun kai toutoys es tas Syrekousas apedoto ep' exagugei ek Sikelies. [3] tuyto de touto kai Eyboeas tous en Sikeliei epoiese diakrinas. epoiee de tauta toutoys amfoteroys nomisas deimon einai synoikema axaritutaton. toioutui men tropui turannos egegonee megas o Gelun.   
      157. In the manner then which has been described Gelon had become a powerful despot; and at this time when the envoys of the Hellenes had arrived at Syracuse, they came to speech with him and said as follows: "The Lacedemonians and their allies sent us to get thee to be on our side against the Barbarian; for we suppose that thou art certainly informed of him who is about to invade Hellas, namely that a Persian is designing to bridge over the Hellespont, and to make an expedition against Hellas, leading against us out of Asia all the armies of the East, under colour of marching upon Athens, but in fact meaning to bring all Hellas to subjection under him. Do thou therefore, seeing that thou hast attained to a great power and hast no small portion of Hellas for thy share, being the ruler of Sicily, come to the assistance of those who are endeavouring to free Hellas, and join in making her free; for if all Hellas be gathered together in one, it forms a great body, and we are made a match in fight for those who are coming against us; but if some of us go over to the enemy and others are not willing to help, and the sound portion of Hellas is consequently small, there is at once in this a danger that all Hellas may fall to ruin. For do not thou hope that if the Persian shall overcome us in battle he will not come to thee, but guard thyself against this beforehand; for in coming to our assistance thou art helping thyself; and the matter which is wisely planned has for the most part a good issue afterwards."         157. [1] tote d' us oi aggeloi tun Ellenun apikato es tas Syrekousas, elthontes aytui es logoys elegon tade. <<epempsan emeas Lakedaimonioi kai oi toutun summaxoi paralampsomenoys se pros ton barbaron. ton gar epionta epi ten Ellada pantus koy pynthaneai, oti Perses aner mellei, zeuxas ton Ellesponton kai epagun panta ton euion straton ek teis Asies, stratelatesein epi ten Ellada, prosxema men poieumenos us ep' Athenas elaunei, en noui de exun pasan ten Ellada yp' euytui poiesasthai. [2] su de dynamios te gar ekeis megalus kai moira toi teis Ellados oyk elaxiste meta arxonti ge Sikelies, boethee te toisi eleytherousi ten Ellada kai syneleytheroy. ales men gar genomene pasa e Ellas xeir megale synagetai, kai axiomaxoi ginometha toisi epiousi. en de oi men emeun kataprodidusi oi de me thelusi timureein, to de ygiainon teis Ellados ei oligon, touto de ede deinon ginetai me pesei pasa e Ellas. [3] me gar elpiseis, en emeas katastrepsetai o Perses maxei kratesas, us oyki exei para se ge, alla pro toutoy fulaxai. boetheun gar emin seuytui timureeis. tui de ey boyleythenti pregmati teleyte us to epipan xreste ethelei epiginesthai.>>   
      158. The envoys spoke thus; and Gelon was very vehement with them, speaking to them as follows: "Hellenes, a selfish speech is this, with which ye have ventured to come and invite me to be your ally against the Barbarian; whereas ye yourselves, when I in former time requested of you to join with me in fighting against an army of Barbarians, contention having arisen between me and the Carthaginians, and when I charged you to exact vengeance of the men of Egesta for the death of Dorieos the son of Anaxandrides, while at the same time I offered to help in setting free the trading-places, from which great advantages and gains have been reaped by you,--ye, I say, then neither for my own sake came to my assistance, nor in order to exact vengeance for the death of Dorieos; and, so far as ye are concerned, all these parts are even now under the rule of Barbarians. But since it turned out well for us and came to a better issue, now that the war has come round and reached you, there has at last arisen in your minds a recollection of Gelon. However, though I have met with contempt at your hands, I will not act like you; but I am prepared to come to your assistance, supplying two hundred triremes and twenty thousand hoplites, with two thousand horsemen, two thousand bowmen, two thousand slingers and two thousand light-armed men to run beside the horsemen; and moreover I will undertake to supply corn for the whole army of the Hellenes, until we have finished the war. These things I engage to supply on this condition, namely that I shall be commander and leader of the Hellenes against the Barbarian; but on any other condition I will neither come myself nor will I send others."         158. [1] oi men tauta elegon, Gelun de pollos enekeito legun toiade. <<andres Ellenes, logon exontes pleonekten etolmesate eme summaxon epi ton barbaron parakaleontes elthein. [2] aytoi de emeu proteron deethentos barbarikou stratou synepapsasthai, ote moi pros Karxedonioys neikos syneipto, episkeptontos te ton Durieos tou Anaxandrideu pros Egestaiun fonon ekprexasthai, ypoteinontos te ta emporia syneleytheroun ap' un ymin megalai ufeliai te kai epayresies gegonasi, oyte emeu eineka elthete boethesontes oyte ton Durieos fonon ekprexomenoi, to te kat' ymeas tade apanta ypo barbaroisi nemetai. [3] alla ey gar emin kai epi to ameinon kateste. nun de epeide perielelythe o polemos kai apiktai es ymeas, oytu de Gelunos mneistis gegone. [4] atimies de pros ymeun kyresas oyk omoiusomai ymin, all' etoimos eimi boetheein parexomenos diekosias te triereas kai dismyrioys oplitas kai disxilien ippon kai disxilioys toxotas kai disxilioys sfendonetas kai disxilioys ippodromoys psilous. siton te apasei tei Ellenun stratiei, est' an diapolemesumen, ypodekomai parexein. [5] epi de logui toiuide tade ypisxomai, ep' ui strategos te kai egemun tun Ellenun esomai pros ton barbaron. ep' allui de logui oyt' an aytos elthoimi oyt' an alloys pempsaimi.>>   
      159. Hearing this Syagros could not contain himself but spoke these words: "Deeply, I trow, would Agamemnon son of Pelops lament, if he heard that the Spartans had had the leadership taken away from them by Gelon and by the Syracusans. Nay, but make thou no further mention of this condition, namely that we should deliver the leadership to thee; but if thou art desirous to come to the assistance of Hellas, know that thou wilt be under the command of the Lacedemonians; and if thou dost indeed claim not to be under command, come not thou to our help at all."         159. [1] tauta akousas oyte enesxeto o Suagros eipe te tade. <<E ke meg' oimuxeie o Pelopides Agamemnun pythomenos Spartietas ten egemonien aparaireisthai ypo Gelunos te kai Syrekosiun. alla toutoy men tou logoy meketi mnestheis, okus ten egemonien toi paradusomen, all' ei men bouleai boetheein tei Elladi, isthi arxomenos ypo Lakedaimoniun. ei d' ara me dikaiois arxesthai, su de mede boethee.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [160]

     160. To this Gelon, seeing that the speech of Syagros was adverse, set forth to them his last proposal thus: "Stranger from Sparta, reproaches sinking into the heart of a man are wont to rouse his spirit in anger against them; thou however, though thou hast uttered insults against me in thy speech, wilt not bring me to show myself unseemly in my reply. But whereas ye so strongly lay claim to the leadership, it were fitting that I should lay claim to it more than ye, seeing that I am the leader of an army many times as large and of ships many more. Since however this condition is so distasteful to you, we will recede somewhat from our former proposal. Suppose that ye should be leaders of the land-army and I of the fleet; or if it pleases you to lead the sea-forces, I am willing to be leader of those on land; and either ye must be contented with these terms or go away without the alliance which I have to give."         160. [1] pros tauta o Gelun, epeide ura apestrammenoys tous logoys tou Syagroy, ton teleytaion sfi tonde exefaine logon. <<u xeine Spartieita, oneidea kationta anthrupui fileei epanagein ton thymon. su mentoi apodexamenos ybrismata en tui logui oy me peiseis asxemona en tei amoibei genesthai. [2] okoy de ymeis oytu periexesthe teis egemonies, oikos kai eme mallon ymeun periexesthai, stratieis te eonta pollaplesies egemona kai neun pollon pleunun. all' epeite ymin o logos oytu prosantes katistatai, emeis ti ypeixomen tou arxaioy logoy. ei tou men pezou ymeis egeoisthe, tou de naytikou egu. ei de ymin edone tou kata thalassan egemoneuein, tou pezou egu thelu. kai e toutoisi ymeas xreon esti areskesthai e apienai symmaxun toiunde eremoys.>>   
      161. Gelon, I say, made these offers, and the envoy of the Athenians, answering before that of the Lacedemonians, replied to him as follows: "O king of the Syracusans, it was not of a leader that Hellas was in want when it sent us to thee, but of an army. Thou however dost not set before us the hope that thou wilt send an army, except thou have the leadership of Hellas; and thou art striving how thou mayest become commander of the armies of Hellas. So long then as it was thy demand to be leader of the whole army of the Hellenes, it was sufficient for us Athenians to keep silence, knowing that the Lacedemonian would be able to make defence even for us both; but now, since being repulsed from the demand for the whole thou art requesting to be commander of the naval force, we tell that thus it is:--not even if the Lacedemonian shall permit thee to be commander of it, will we permit thee; for this at least is our own, if the Lacedemonians do not themselves desire to have it. With these, if they desire to be the leaders, we do not contend; but none others beside ourselves shall we permit to be in command of the ships: for then to no purpose should we be possessors of a sea-force larger than any other which belongs to the Hellenes, if, being Athenians, we should yield the leadership to Syracusans, we who boast of a race which is the most ancient of all and who are of all the Hellenes the only people who have not changed from one land to another; to whom also belonged a man whom Homer the Epic poet said was the best of all who came to Ilion in drawing up an army and setting it in array. Thus we are not justly to be reproached if we say these things."         161. [1] Gelun men de tauta proeteineto, fthasas de o Athenaiun aggelos ton Lakedaimoniun ameibeto min toiside. <<u basileu Syrekosiun, oyk egemonos deomene e Ellas apepempse emeas pros se, alla stratieis. su de okus men stratien pempseis me egeumenos teis Ellados oy profaineis, us de strategeseis ayteis glixeai. [2] oson men nyn pantos tou Ellenun stratou edeeo egeesthai, exerkee emin toisi Athenaioisi esyxien agein, epistamenoisi us o Lakun ikanos toi emelle esesthai kai yper amfoterun apologeumenos. epeite de apases apelaynomenos deeai teis naytikeis arxein, oytu exei toi. oyd' en o Lakun epiei toi arxein ayteis, emeis epesomen. emetere gar esti ayte ge, me aytun boylomenun Lakedaimoniun. toutoisi men un egeesthai boylomenoisi oyk antiteinomen, allui de paresomen oydeni nayarxeein. [3] maten gar an ude paralon Ellenun straton pleiston eiemen ektemenoi, ei Syrekosioisi eontes Athenaioi sygxuresomen teis egemonies, arxaiotaton men ethnos parexomenoi, mounoi de eontes oy metanastai Ellenun. tun kai Omeros o epopoios andra ariston efese es Ilion apikesthai taxai te kai diakosmeisai straton. oytu oyk oneidos oyden emin esti legein tauta.>>   
      162. To this Gelon made answer thus: "Stranger of Athens, it would seem that ye have the commanders, but that ye will not have the men to be commanded. Since then ye will not at all give way, but desire to have the whole, it were well that ye should depart home as quickly as possible and report to the Hellenes that the spring has been taken out of their year." Now this is the meaning of the saying: --evidently the spring is the noblest part of the year; and so he meant to say that his army was the noblest part of the army of the Hellenes: for Hellas therefore, deprived of his alliance, it was, he said, as if the spring had been taken out of the year.         162. [1] ameibeto Gelun toiside. <<xeine Athenaie, ymeis oikate tous men arxontas exein, tous de arxomenoys oyk exein. epei toinyn oyden ypientes exein to pan ethelete, oyk an fthanoite ten taxisten opisu apallassomenoi kai aggellontes tei Elladi oti ek tou eniaytou to ear aytei exarairetai.>> [2] oytos de o noos tou rhematos to ethelei legein. deila gar us en tui eniaytui esti to ear dokimutaton, teis de tun Ellenun stratieis ten euytou stratien. steriskomenen un ten Ellada teis euytou symmaxies eikaze us ei to ear ek tou eniaytou exarairemenon eie.   
      163. The envoys of the Hellenes, having thus had conference with Gelon, sailed away; and Gelon upon this, fearing on the one hand about the Hellenes, lest they should not be able to overcome the Barbarian, and on the other hand considering it monstrous and not to be endured that he should come to Peloponnesus and be under the command of the Lacedemonians, seeing that he was despot of Sicily, gave up the thought of this way and followed another: for so soon as he was informed that the Persian had crossed over the Hellespont, he sent Cadmos the son of Skythes, a man of Cos, with three fifty-oared galleys to Delphi, bearing large sums of money and friendly proposals, to wait there and see how the battle would fall out: and if the Barbarian should be victorious, he was to give him the money and also to offer him earth and water from those over whom Gelon had rule; but if the Hellenes should be victorious, he was bidden to bring it back.         163. [1] oi men de tun Ellenun aggeloi toiauta tui Geluni xrematisamenoi apepleon. Gelun de pros tauta deisas men peri toisi Ellesi me oy dununtai ton barbaron yperbalesthai, deinon de kai oyk anasxeton poiesamenos elthun es Peloponneson arxesthai ypo Lakedaimoniun eun Sikelies turannos, tauten men ten odon emelese, o de alles eixeto. [2] epeite gar taxista eputheto ton Persen diabebekota ton Ellesponton, pempei pentekonteroisi trisi Kadmon ton Skutheu andra Kuion es Delfous, exonta xremata polla kai filioys logoys, karadokesonta ten maxen tei peseetai, kai en men o barbaros nikai, ta te xremata aytui didonai kai gein te kai ydur tun arxei o Gelun, en de oi Ellenes, opisu apagein.   
      164. Now this Cadmos before these events, having received from his father in a prosperous state the government of the people of Cos, had voluntarily and with no danger threatening, but moved merely by uprightness of nature, placed the government in the hands of the people of Cos and had departed to Sicily, where he took from the Samians and newly colonised the city of Zancle, which had changed its name to Messene. This same Cadmos, having come thither in such manner as I have said, Gelon was now sending, having selected him on account of the integrity which in other matters he had himself found to be in him; and this man, in addition to the other upright acts which had been done by him, left also this to be remembered, which was not the least of them: for having got into his hands that great sum of money which Gelon entrusted to his charge, though he might have taken possession of it himself he did not choose to do so; but when the Hellenes had got the better in the sea-fight and Xerxes had marched away and departed, he also returned to Sicily bringing back with him the whole sum of money.         164. [1] o de Kadmos oytos proteron toutun paradexamenos para patros tyrannida Kuiun ey bebekyian, ekun te einai kai deinou epiontos oydenos alla ypo dikaiosunes es meson Kuioisi katatheis ten arxen oixeto es Sikelien, entha para Samiun esxe te kai katoikese polin Zagklen ten es Messenen metabalousan to oynoma. [2] touton de o Gelun ton Kadmon kai toioutui tropui apikomenon dia dikaiosunen, ten oi aytos allen syneidee eousan, epempe. os epi toisi alloisi dikaioisi toisi ex euytou ergasmenoisi kai tode oyk elaxiston toutun elipeto. kratesas gar megalun xrematun tun oi Gelun epetrapeto, pareon katasxesthai oyk ethelese, all' epei oi Ellenes epekratesan tei naymaxiei kai Xerxes oixukee apelaunun, kai de kai ekeinos apiketo es ten Sikelien apo panta ta xremata agun.   
      165. The story which here follows is also reported by those who dwell in Sicily, namely that, even though he was to be under the command of the Lacedemonians, Gelon would have come to the assistance of the Hellenes, but that Terillos, the son of Crinippos and despot of Himera, having been driven out of Himera by Theron the son of Ainesidemos the ruler of the Agrigentines, was just at this very time bringing in an army of Phenicians, Libyans, Iberians, Ligurians, Elisycans, Sardinians and Corsicans, to the number of thirty myriads, with Amilcas the son of Annon king of the Carthaginians as their commander, whom Terillos had persuaded partly by reason of his own guest-friendship, and especially by the zealous assistance of Anaxilaos the son of Cretines, who was despot of Rhegion, and who to help his father-in-law endeavoured to bring in Amilcas to Sicily, and had given him his sons as hostages; for Anaxilaos was married to the daughter of Terillos, whose name was Kydippe. Thus it was, they say, that Gelon was not able to come to the assistance of the Hellenes, and sent therefore the money to Delphi.         165. [1] legetai de kai tade ypo tun en tei Sikeliei oikemenun, us omus kai mellun arxesthai ypo Lakedaimoniun o Gelun eboethese an toisi Ellesi, ei me ypo Therunos tou Ainesidemoy Akragantinun moynarxoy exelastheis ex Imeres Terillos o Krinippoy turannos eun Imeres epeige yp' ayton ton xronon touton Foinikun kai Libuun kai Iberun kai Liguun kai Elisukun kai Sardoniun kai Kyrniun triekonta myriadas kai strategon aytun Amilkan ton Annunos, Karxedoniun eonta basilea, kata xeinien te ten euytou o Terillos anagnusas kai malista dia ten Anaxileu tou Kretineu prothymien, os RHegioy eun turannos ta euytou tekna dous omeroys Amilkai epeige epi ten Sikelien timureun tui pentherui. Terilloy gar eixe thygatera Anaxileus, tei oynoma En Kydippe. oytu de oyk oion te genomenon boetheein ton Geluna toisi Ellesi apopempein es Delfous ta xremata.   
      166. In addition to this they report also that, as it happened, Gelon and Theron were victorious over Amilcas the Carthaginian on the very same day when the Hellenes were victorious at Salamis over the Persian. And this Amilcas, who was a Carthaginian on the father's side but on the mother's Syracusan, and who had become king of the Carthaginians by merit, when the engagement took place and he was being worsted in the battle, disappeared, as I am informed; for neither alive nor dead did he appear again anywhere upon the earth, though Gelon used all diligence in the search for him.         166. [1] pros de kai tade legoysi, us synebe teis ayteis emeres en te tei Sikeliei Geluna kai Theruna nikan Amilkan ton Karxedonion kai en Salamini tous Ellenas ton Persen. ton de Amilkan Karxedonion eonta pros patros, metrothen de Syrekosion, basileusanta te kat' andragathien Karxedoniun, us e symbole te egineto kai us essouto tei maxei, afanistheinai pynthanomai. oyte gar zunta oyte apothanonta faneinai oydamou geis. to pan gar epexelthein dizemenon Geluna.   
      167. Moreover there is also this story reported by the Carthaginians themselves, who therein relate that which is probable in itself, namely that while the Barbarians fought with the Hellenes in Sicily from the early morning till late in the afternoon (for to such a length the combat is said to have been protracted), during this time Amilcas was remaining in the camp and was making sacrifices to get good omens of success, offering whole bodies of victims upon a great pyre: and when he saw that there was a rout of his own army, he being then, as it chanced, in the act of pouring a libation over the victims, threw himself into the fire, and thus he was burnt up and disappeared. Amilcas then having disappeared, whether it was in such a manner as this, as it is reported by the Phenicians, or in some other way, the Carthaginians both offer sacrifices to him now, and also they made memorials of him then in all the cities of their colonies, and the greatest in Carthage itself.         167. [1] esti de yp' aytun Karxedoniun ode logos legomenos, oikoti xreumenun, us oi men barbaroi toisi Ellesi en tei Sikeliei emaxonto ex eous arxamenoi mexri deiles opsies (epi tosouto gar legetai elkusai ten sustasin ), o de Amilkas en toutui tui xronui menun en tui stratopedui ethueto kai ekalliereeto epi pyreis megales sumata ola katagizun, idun de tropen tun euytou ginomenen, us etyxe epispendun toisi iroisi, use euyton es to pur. oytu de katakaythenta afanistheinai. [2] afanisthenti de Amilkai tropui eite toioutui us Foinikes legoysi, eite eterui us Karxedonioi kai Syrekosioi, touto men oi thuoysi, touto de mnemata epoiesan en paseisi teisi polisi tun apoikidun, en aytei te megiston Karxedoni. ta men apo Sikelies tosauta.   
      168. So far of the affairs of Sicily: and as for the Corcyreans, they made answer to the envoys as follows, afterwards acting as I shall tell: for the same men who had gone to Sicily endeavoured also to obtain the help of these, saying the same things which they said to Gelon; and the Corcyreans at the time engaged to send a force and to help in the defence, declaring that they must not permit Hellas to be ruined without an effort on their part, for if it should suffer disaster, they would be reduced to subjection from the very first day; but they must give assistance so far as lay in their power. Thus speciously they made reply; but when the time came to send help, they manned sixty ships, having other intentions in their minds, and after making much difficulty they put out to sea and reached Peloponnese; and then near Pylos and Tainaron in the land of the Lacedemonians they kept their ships at anchor, waiting, as Gelon did, to see how the war would turn out: for they did not expect that the Hellenes would overcome, but thought that the Persian would gain the victory over them with ease and be ruler of all Hellas. Accordingly they were acting of set purpose, in order that they might be able to say to the Persian some such words as these: "O king, when the Hellenes endeavoured to obtain our help for this war, we, who have a power which is not the smallest of all, and could have supplied a contingent of ships in number not the smallest, but after the Athenians the largest, did not choose to oppose thee or to do anything which was not to thy mind." By speaking thus they hoped that they would obtain some advantage over the rest, and so it would have happened, as I am of opinion: while they had for the Hellenes an excuse ready made, that namely of which they actually made use: for when the Hellenes reproached them because they did not come to help, they said that they had manned sixty triremes, but had not been able to get past Malea owing to the Etesian Winds; therefore it was that they had not come to Salamis, nor was it by any want of courage on their part that they had been left of the sea-fight.         168. [1] Kerkyraioi de tade ypokrinamenoi toisi aggeloisi toiade epoiesan. kai gar toutoys parelambanon oi aytoi oi per es Sikelien apikonto, legontes tous aytous logoys tous kai pros Geluna elegon. oi de paraytika men ypisxonto pempsein te kai amyneein, frazontes us oy sfi perioptee esti e Ellas apollymene. en gar sfalei, sfeis ge oyden allo e doyleusoysi tei prutei tun emereun. alla timureteon eie es to dynatutaton. [2] ypekrinanto men oytu eyprosupa. epei de edei boetheein, alla noeontes eplerusan neas exekonta, mogis de anaxthentes prosemixan tei Peloponnesui, kai peri Pulon kai Tainaron geis teis Lakedaimoniun anekuxeyon tas neas, karadokeontes kai oytoi ton polemon tei peseetai, aelpteontes men tous Ellenas yperbaleesthai, dokeontes de ton Persen katakratesanta pollon arxein pases teis Ellados. [3] epoieyn un epitedes, ina exusi pros ton Persen legein toiade. <<u basileu, emeis, paralambanontun tun Ellenun emeas es ton polemon touton, exontes dunamin oyk elaxisten oyde neas elaxistas parasxontes an alla pleistas meta ge Athenaioys, oyk ethelesamen toi enantiousthai oyde ti apothumion poieisai.>> toiauta legontes elpizon pleon ti tun allun oisesthai. ta per an kai egeneto, us emoi dokeei. [4] pros de tous Ellenas sfi skeipsis epepoieto, tei per de kai exresanto. aitiumenun gar tun Ellenun oti oyk eboetheon, efasan plerusai men exekonta triereas, ypo de etesieun anemun yperbalein Maleen oyk oioi te genesthai. oytu oyk apikesthai es Salamina, kai oydemiei kakoteti leiftheinai teis naymaxies. oytoi men oytu diekrousanto tous Ellenas.   
      169. These then evaded the request of the Hellenes thus: but the Cretans, when those of the Hellenes who had been appointed to deal with these endeavoured to obtain their help, did thus, that is to say, they joined together and sent men to inquire of the god at Delphi whether it would be better for them if they gave assistance to Hellas: and the Pythian prophetess answered: "Ye fools, do ye think those woes too few, which Minos sent upon you in his wrath, because of the assistance that ye gave to Menelaos? seeing that, whereas they did not join with you in taking vengeance for his death in Camicos, ye nevertheless joined with them in taking vengeance for the woman who by a Barbarian was carried off from Sparta." When the Cretans heard this answer reported, they abstained from the giving of assistance.         169. [1] Kreites de, epeite sfeas parelambanon oi epi toutoisi taxthentes Ellenun, epoiesan toionde. pempsantes koinei theopropoys es Delfous ton theon epeirutun ei sfi ameinon timureoysi ginetai tei Elladi. [2] e de Pythie ypekrinato <<u nepioi, epimemfesthe osa ymin ek tun Menelaoy timurematun Minus epempse meniun dakrumata, oti oi men oy synexeprexanto aytui ton en Kamikui thanaton genomenon, ymeis de ekeinoisi ten ek Spartes arpastheisan yp' andros barbaroy gynaika.>> tauta oi Kreites us apeneixthenta ekoysan, esxonto teis timuries.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [170]

     170. For the story goes that Minos, having come to Sicania, which is now called Sicily, in search of Daidalos, died there by a violent death; and after a time the Cretans, urged thereto by a god, all except the men of Polichne and Praisos, came with a great armament to Sicania and besieged for seven years the city of Camicos, which in my time was occupied by the Agrigentines; and at last not being able either to capture it or to remain before it, because they were hard pressed by famine, they departed and went away. And when, as they sailed, they came to be off the coast of Iapygia, a great storm seized them and cast them away upon the coast; and their vessels being dashed to pieces, they, since they saw no longer any way of coming to Crete, founded there the city of Hyria; and there they stayed and were changed so that they became instead of Cretans, Messapians of Iapygia, and instead of islanders, dwellers on the mainland: then from the city of Hyria they founded those other settlements which the Tarentines long afterwards endeavoured to destroy and suffer great disaster in that enterprise, so that this in fact proved to be the greatest slaughter of Hellenes that is known to us, and not only of the Tarentines themselves but of those citizens of Rhegion who were compelled by Mikythos the son of Choiros to go to the assistance of the Tarentines, and of whom there were slain in this manner three thousand men: of the Tarentines themselves however, who were slain there, there was no numbering made. This Mikythos, who was a servant of Anaxilaos, had been left by him in charge of Rhegion; and he it was who after being driven out of Rhegion took up his abode at Tegea of the Arcadians and dedicated those many statues at Olympia.         170. [1] legetai gar Minun kata zetesin Daidaloy apikomenon es Sikanien ten nun Sikelien kaleymenen apothanein biaiui thanatui. ana de xronon Kreitas, theou sfi epotrunantos, pantas plen Polixniteun te kai Praisiun apikomenoys stolui megalui es Sikanien poliorkeein ep' etea pente polin Kamikon, ten kat' eme Akragantinoi enemonto. [2] telos de oy dynamenoys oyte elein oyte paramenein limui synesteutas, apolipontas oixesthai. us de kata Iepygien genesthai pleontas, ypolabonta sfeas xeimuna megan ekbalein es ten gein. synaraxthentun de tun ploiun, oydemian gar sfi eti komiden es Kreten fainesthai, enthauta Yrien polin ktisantas katameinai te kai metabalontas anti men Kretun genesthai Iepygas Messapioys, anti de einai nesiutas epeirutas. [3] apo de Yries polios tas allas oikisai, tas de Tarantinoi xronui ysteron pollui exanistantes proseptaisan megalus, uste fonos Ellenikos megistos oytos de egeneto pantun tun emeis idmen, aytun te Tarantinun kai RHeginun, oi ypo Mikuthoy tou Khoiroy anagkazomenoi tun astun kai apikomenoi timuroi Tarantinoisi apethanon trisxilioi oytu. aytun de Tarantinun oyk epein arithmos. [4] o de Mikythos oiketes eun Anaxileu epitropos RHegioy kataleleipto, oytos os per ekpesun ek RHegioy kai Tegeen ten Arkadun oikesas anetheke en Olympiei tous pollous andriantas.   
      171. This of the men of Rhegion and of the Tarentines has been an episode in my narrative: in Crete however, as the men of Praisos report, after it had been thus stripped of inhabitants, settlements were made by various nations, but especially by Hellenes; and in the next generation but one after the death of Minos came the Trojan war, in which the Cretans proved not the most contemptible of those who came to assist Menelaos. Then after this, when they had returned home from Troy, famine and pestilence came upon both the men and their cattle, until at last Crete was stripped of its inhabitants for the second time, and a third population of Cretans now occupy it together with those which were left of the former inhabitants. The Pythian prophetess, I say, by calling these things to their minds stopped them from giving assistance to the Hellenes, though they desired to do so.         171. [1] alla ta men kata RHeginoys te kai Tarantinoys tou logoy moi parentheke gegone. es de ten Kreten eremutheisan, us legoysi Praisioi, esoikizesthai alloys te anthrupoys kai malista Ellenas, tritei de geneei meta Minun teleytesanta genesthai ta Truika, en toisi oy flayrotatoys fainesthai eontas Kreitas timurous Meneleui. [2] apo toutun de sfi aponostesasi ek Troies limon te kai loimon genesthai kai aytoisi kai toisi probatoisi, este to deuteron eremutheises Kretes meta tun ypoloipun tritoys ayten nun nemesthai Kreitas. e men de Pythie ypomnesasa tauta esxe boylomenoys timureein toisi Ellesi.   
      172. As for the Thessalians, they at first had taken the side of the Persians against their will, and they gave proof that they were not pleased by that which the Aleuadai were designing; for so soon as they heard that the Persian was about to cross over into Europe, they sent envoys to the Isthmus: now at the Isthmus were assembled representatives of Hellas chosen by the cities which had the better mind about Hellas: having come then to these, the envoys of the Thessalians said: "Hellenes, ye must guard the pass by Olympos, in order that both Thessaly and the whole of Hellas may be sheltered from the war. We are prepared to join with you in guarding it, but ye must send a large force as well as we; for if ye shall not send, be assured that we shall make agreement with the Persian; since it is not right that we, standing as outposts so far in advance of the rest of Hellas, should perish alone in your defence: and not being willing to come to our help, ye cannot apply to us any force to compel inability; but we shall endeavour to devise some means of safety for ourselves."         172. [1] Thessaloi de ypo anagkaies to pruton emedisan, us diedexan, oti oy sfi endane ta oi Aleyadai emexanunto. epeite gar eputhonto taxista mellonta diabainein ton Persen es ten Eyrupen, pempoysi es ton Isthmon aggeloys. en de tui Isthmui Esan alismenoi proboyloi teis Ellados arairemenoi apo tun poliun tun ta ameinu froneoyseun peri ten Ellada. [2] apikomenoi de epi toutoys tun Thessalun oi aggeloi elegon Andres Ellenes, dei fylassesthai ten esbolen ten Olympiken, ina Thessalie te kai e sumpasa ei Ellas en skepei tou polemoy. emeis men nyn etoimoi eimen symfylassein, pempein de xre kai ymeas stratien pollen, us, ei me pempsete, epistasthe emeas omologesein tui Persei. oy gar ti prokatemenoys tosouto pro teis alles Ellados mounoys pro ymeun dei apolesthai. [3] boetheein de oy boylomenoi anagkaien emin oydemian oioi te este prosferein. oydama gar adynasies anagke kressun efy. emeis de peiresometha aytoi tina suterien mexanumenoi.>> tauta elegon oi Thessaloi.   
      173. Thus spoke the Thessalians; and the Hellenes upon this resolved to send to Thessaly by sea an army of men on foot to guard the pass: and when the army was assembled it set sail through Euripos, and having come to Alos in the Achaian land, it disembarked there and marched into Thessaly leaving the ships behind at Alos, and arrived at Tempe, the pass which leads from lower Macedonia into Thessaly by the river Peneios, going between the mountains of Olympos and Ossa. There the Hellenes encamped, being assembled to the number of about ten thousand hoplites, and to them was added the cavalry of the Thessalians; and the commander of the Lacedemonians was Euainetos the son of Carenos, who had been chosen from the polemarchs, not being of the royal house, and of the Athenians Themistocles the son of Neocles. They remained however but few days here, for envoys came from Alexander the son of Amyntas the Macedonian, who advised them to depart thence and not to remain in the pass and be trodden under foot by the invading host, signifying to them at the same time both the great numbers of the army and the ships which they had. When these gave them this counsel, they followed the advice, for they thought that the counsel was good, and the Macedonian was evidently well- disposed towards them. Also, as I think, it was fear that persuaded them to it, when they were informed that there was another pass besides this to the Thessalian land by upper Macedonia through the Perraibians and by the city of Gonnos, the way by which the army of Xerxes did in fact make its entrance. So the Hellenes went down to their ships again and made their way back to the Isthmus.         173. [1] oi de Ellenes pros tauta eboyleusanto es Thessalien pempein kata thalassan pezon straton fylaxonta ten esbolen. us de synelexthe o stratos, eplee di' Eyripoy. apikomenos de teis Axaiies es Alon, apobas eporeueto es Thessalien, tas neas aytou katalipun, kai apiketo es ta Tempea es ten esbolen e per apo Makedonies teis katu es Thessalien ferei para potamon Peneion, metaxu de Olumpoy te oreos eonta kai teis Osses. [2] enthauta estratopedeuonto tun Ellenun kata myrioys oplitas syllegentes, kai sfi prosein e Thessalun ippos. estrategee de Lakedaimoniun men Eyainetos o Karenoy ek tun polemarxun arairemenos, geneos mentoi eun oy tou basileioy, Athenaiun de Themistoklees o Neokleos. emeinan de oligas emeras enthauta. [3] apikomenoi gar aggeloi para Alexandroy tou Amunteu andros Makedonos synebouleyon sfi apallassesthai mede menontas en tei esbolei katapatetheinai ypo tou stratou tou epiontos, semainontes to pleithos te teis stratieis kai tas neas. us de oytoi sfi tauta synebouleyon, xresta gar edokeon symboyleuein kai sfi eynoos efaineto eun o Makedun, epeithonto. [4] dokeein de moi, arrudie En to peithon, us eputhonto kai allen eousan esbolen es Thessalous kata ten anu Makedonien dia Perraibun kata Gonnon polin, tei per de kai esebale e stratie e Xerxeu. katabantes de oi Ellenes epi tas neas opisu eporeuonto es ton Isthmon.   
      174. Such was the expedition to Thessaly, which took place when the king was about to cross over from Asia to Europe and was already at Abydos. So the Thessalians, being stripped of allies, upon this took the side of the Medes with a good will and no longer half-heartedly, so that in the course of events they proved very serviceable to the king.         174. [1] ayte egeneto e es Thessalien strateie, basileos te mellontos diabainein es ten Eyrupen ek teis Asies kai eontos ede en Abudui. Thessaloi de eremuthentes symmaxun oytu de emedisan prothumus oyd' eti endoiastus, uste en toisi pregmasi efainonto basilei andres eontes xresimutatoi.   
      175. When the Hellenes had returned to the Isthmus, they deliberated, having regard to that which had been said by Alexander, where and in what regions they should set the war on foot: and the opinion which prevailed was to guard the pass at Thermopylai; for it was seen to be narrower than that leading into Thessaly, and at the same time it was single, and nearer also to their own land; and as for the path by means of which were taken those of the Hellenes who were taken by the enemy at Thermopylai, they did not even know of its existence until they were informed by the people of Trachis after they had come to Thermopylai. This pass then they resolved to guard, and not permit the Barbarian to go by into Hellas; and they resolved that the fleet should sail to Artemision in the territory of Histiaia: for these points are near to one another, so that each division of their forces could have information of what was happening to the other. And the places are so situated as I shall describe.         175. [1] oi de Ellenes epeite apikato es ton Isthmon, eboyleuonto pros ta lexthenta ex Alexandroy tei te stesontai ton polemon kai en oioisi xuroisi. e nikusa de gnume egineto ten en Thermopuleisi esbolen fylaxai. steinotere gar efaineto eousa teis es Thessalien kai ama agxotere teis euytun. [2] ten de atrapon, di' elusan oi alontes Ellenun en Thermopuleisi, oyde eidesan eousan proteron e per apikomenoi es Thermopulas eputhonto Trexiniun. tauten un eboyleusanto fylassontes ten esbolen me parienai es ten Ellada ton barbaron, ton de naytikon straton pleein geis teis Istiaiutidos epi Artemision. tauta gar agxou te allelun esti uste pynthanesthai ta kata ekateroys eonta, oi te xuroi oytu exoysi.   
      176. As to Artemision first, coming out of the Thracian Sea the space is contracted from great width to that narrow channel which lies between the island of Skiathos and the mainland of Magnesia; and after the strait there follows at once in Euboea the sea-beach called Artemision, upon which there is a temple of Artemis. Then secondly the passage into Hellas by Trechis is, where it is narrowest, but fifty feet wide: it is not here however that the narrowest part of this whole region lies, but in front of Thermopylai and also behind it, consisting of a single wheel- track only both by Alpenoi, which lies behind Thermopylai and again by the river Phoinix near the town of Anthela there is no space but a single wheel-track only: and on the West of Thermopylai there is a mountain which is impassable and precipitous, rising up to a great height and extending towards the range of Oite, while on the East of the road the sea with swampy pools succeeds at once. In this passage there are hot springs, which the natives of the place call the "Pots," and an altar of Heracles is set up near them. Moreover a wall had once been built at this pass, and in old times there was a gate set in it; which wall was built by the Phokians, who were struck with fear because the Thessalians had come from the land of the Thesprotians to settle in the Aiolian land, the same which they now possess. Since then the Thessalians, as they supposed, were attempting to subdue them, the Phokians guarded themselves against this beforehand; and at that time they let the water of the hot springs run over the passage, that the place might be converted into a ravine, and devised every means that the Thessalians might not make invasion of their land. Now the ancient wall had been built long before, and the greater part of it was by that time in ruins from lapse of time; the Hellenes however resolved to set it up again, and at this spot to repel the Barbarian from Hellas: and very near the road there is a village called Alpenoi, from which the Hellenes counted on getting supplies.         176. [1] touto men to Artemision. ek tou pelageos tou Threikioy ex eyreos synagetai es steinon eonta ton poron ton metaxu nesoy te Skiathoy kai epeiroy Magnesies. ek de tou steinou teis Eyboies ede to Artemision deketai aigialos, en de Artemidos iron. [2] e de ay dia Trexinos esodos es ten Ellada esti tei steinotate emiplethron. oy mentoi kata touto ge esti to steinotaton teis xures teis alles, all' emprosthe te Thermopyleun kai opisthe, kata te Alpenous opisthe eontas eousa amaxitos moune, kai emprosthe kata Foinika potamon agxou Antheles polios alle amaxitos moune. [3] tun de Thermopyleun to men pros esperes oros abaton te kai apokremnon, ypselon, anateinon es ten Oiten. to de pros ten eu teis odou thalassa ypodeketai kai tenagea. esti de en tei esodui tautei therma loytra, ta Khutroys kaleoysi oi epixurioi, kai bumos idrytai Erakleos ep' aytoisi. ededmeto de teixos kata tautas tas esbolas, kai to ge palaion pulai epeisan. [4] edeiman de Fukees to teixos deisantes, epei Thessaloi Elthon ek Thesprutun oikesontes gein ten Aiolida ten nun ekteatai. ate de peirumenun tun Thessalun katastrefesthai sfeas, touto proefylaxanto oi Fukees, kai to ydur to thermon tote epeikan epi ten esodon, us an xaradrutheie o xuros, pan mexanumenoi okus me sfi esbaloien oi Thessaloi epi ten xuren. [5] to men nyn teixos to arxaion ek palaiou te ededmeto kai to pleon aytou ede ypo xronoy ekeito. toisi de aytis orthusasi edoxe tautei apamunein apo teis Ellados ton barbaron. kume de esti agxotatu teis odou Alpenoi oynoma. ek tautes de episitieisthai elogizonto oi Ellenes.   
      177. These places then the Hellenes perceived to be such as their purpose required; for they considered everything beforehand and calculated that the Barbarians would not be able to take advantage either of superior numbers or of cavalry, and therefore they resolved here to receive the invader of Hellas: and when they were informed that the Persian was in Pieria, they broke up from the Isthmus and set forth for the campaign, some going to Thermopylai by land, and others making for Artemision by sea.         177. [1] oi men nyn xuroi oytoi toisi Ellesi einai efainonto epitedeoi. panta gar proskepsamenoi kai epilogisthentes oti oyte plethei exoysi xrasthai oi barbaroi oyte ippui, tautei sfi edoxe dekesthai ton epionta epi ten Ellada. us de eputhonto ton Persen eonta en Pieriei, dialythentes ek tou Isthmou estrateuonto aytun oi men es Thermopulas pezei, alloi de kata thalassan ep' Artemision.   
      178. The Hellenes, I say, were coming to the rescue with speed, having been appointed to their several places: and meanwhile the men of Delphi consulted the Oracle of the god on behalf of themselves and on behalf of Hellas, being struck with dread; and a reply was given them that they should pray to the Winds, for these would be powerful helpers of Hellas in fight. So the Delphians, having accepted the oracle, first reported the answer which had been given them to those of the Hellenes who desired to be free; and having reported this to them at a time when they were in great dread of the Barbarian, they laid up for themselves an immortal store of gratitude: then after this the men of Delphi established an altar for the Winds in Thuia, where is the sacred enclosure of Thuia the daughter of Kephisos, after whom moreover this place has its name; and also they approached them with sacrifices.         178. [1] oi men de Ellenes kata taxos eboetheon diataxthentes, Delfoi d' en toutui tui xronui exresteriazonto tui theui yper euytun kai teis Ellados katarrudekotes, kai sfi exresthe anemoisi eyxesthai. megaloys gar toutoys esesthai tei Elladi symmaxoys. [2] Delfoi de dexamenoi to manteion pruta men Ellenun toisi boylomenoisi einai eleytheroisi exeggeilan ta xresthenta aytoisi, kai sfi deinus katarrudeoysi ton barbaron exaggeilantes xarin athanaton katethento. meta de tauta oi Delfoi toisi anemoisi bumon te apedexan en Thyiei, tei per teis Kefisou thygatros Thyies to temenos esti, ep' Es kai o xuros oytos ten epunymien exei, kai thysieisi sfeas meteisan. Delfoi men de kata to xresterion eti kai nun tous anemoys ilaskontai.   
      179. The Delphians then according to the oracle even to this day make propitiary offerings to the Winds: and meanwhile the fleet of Xerxes setting forth from the city of Therma had passed over with ten of its ships, which were those that sailed best, straight towards Skiathos, where three Hellenic ships, a Troizenian, an Eginetan and an Athenian, were keeping watch in advance. When the crews of these caught sight of the ships of the Barbarians, they set off to make their escape:         179. [1] o de naytikos Xerxeu stratos ormumenos ek Thermes polios parebale neysi teisi arista pleouseisi deka ithu Skiathoy, entha Esan profylassoysai nees treis Ellenides, Troizenie te kai Aiginaie kai Attike. proidontes de oytoi tas neas tun barbarun es fygen ormesan.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [180]

     180. and the ship of Troizen, of which Prexinos was in command, was pursued and captured at once by the Barbarians; who upon that took the man who was most distinguished by beauty among the fighting-men on board of her, and cut his throat at the prow of the ship, making a good omen for themselves of the first of the Hellenes whom they had captured who was pre-eminent for beauty. The name of this man who was sacrificed was Leon, and perhaps he had also his name to thank in some degree for what befell him.         180. [1] ten men de Troizenien, teis Erxe Prexinos, aytika aireoysi epispomenoi oi barbaroi, kai epeita tun epibateun ayteis ton kallisteuonta agagontes epi teis pruires teis neos esfaxan, diadexion poieumenoi ton eilon tun Ellenun pruton kai kalliston. tui de sfagiasthenti toutui oynoma En Leun. taxa d' an ti kai tou oynomatos epauroito.   
      181. The ship of Egina however, of which Asonides was master, even gave them some trouble to capture it, seeing that Pytheas the son of Ischenoos served as a fighting-man on board of her, who proved himself a most valiant man on this day; for when the ship was being taken, he held out fighting until he was hacked all to pieces: and as when he had fallen he did not die, but had still breath in him, the Persians who served as fighting-men on board the ships, because of his valour used all diligence to save his life, both applying unguents of myrrh to heal his wounds and also wrapping him up in bands of the finest linen; and when they came back to their own main body, they showed him to all the army, making a marvel of him and giving him good treatment; but the rest whom they had taken in this ship they treated as slaves.         181. [1] e de Aiginaie, teis etrierarxee Asunides, kai tina sfi thorybon paresxe, Pytheu tou Isxenooy epibateuontos, andros aristoy genomenoy tauten ten emeren. os epeide e neus elisketo es touto anteixe maxomenos es o katekreoyrgethe apas. [2] us de pesun oyk apethane all' En empnoos, oi Persai, oi per epebateyon epi tun neun, di' areten ten ekeinoy peripoieisai min peri pleistoy epoiesanto, smurneisi te iumenoi ta elkea kai sindonos byssines telamusi kateilissontes. [3] kai min, us opisu apikonto es to euytun stratopedon, epedeiknysan ekpagleomenoi pasei tei stratiei periepontes ey. tous de alloys tous elabon en tei nei tautei perieipon us andrapoda.   
      182. Two of the three ships, I say, were captured thus; but the third, of which Phormos an Athenian was master, ran ashore in its flight at the mouth of the river Peneios; and the Barbarians got possession of the vessel but not of the crew; for so soon as the Athenians had run the ship ashore, they leapt out of her, and passing through Thessaly made their way to Athens.         182. [1] ai men de duo tun neun oytu exeiruthesan. e de trite, teis etrierarxee Formos aner Athenaiois, feugoysa exokellei es tas ekbolas tou Peneiou, kai tou men skafeos ekratesan oi barbaroi, tun de andrun oy. us gar de taxista epukeilan ten nea oi Athenaioi, apothorontes kata Thessalien poreyomenoi ekomisthesan es Athenas.   
      183. Of these things the Hellenes who were stationed at Artemision were informed by fire-signals from Skiathos; and being informed of them and being struck with fear, they removed their place of anchorage from Atermision to Chalkis, intending to guard the Euripos, but leaving at the same time watchers by day on the heights of Euboea. Of the ten ships of the Barbarians three sailed up to the reef called Myrmex, which lies between Skiathos and Magnesia; and when the Barbarians had there erected a stone pillar, which for that purpose they brought to the reef, they set forth with their main body from Therma, the difficulties of the passage having now been cleared away, and sailed thither with all their ships, having let eleven days go by since the king set forth on his march from Therma. Now of this reef lying exactly in the middle of the fairway they were informed by Pammon of Skyros. Sailing then throughout the day the Barbarians accomplished the voyage to Sepias in Magnesia and to the sea-beach which is between the city of Casthanaia and the headland of Sepias.         183. [1] tauta oi Ellenes oi ep' Artemisiui stratopedeyomenoi pynthanontai para pyrsun ek Skiathoy. pythomenoi de kai katarrudesantes apo tou Artemisioy metormizonto es Khalkida, fylaxontes men ton Eyripon, leipontes de emeroskopoys peri ta ypsela teis Eyboies. [2] tun de deka neun tun barbarun treis epelasan peri to erma to metaxu eon Skiathoy te kai Magnesies, kaleomenon de Murmeka. enthauta oi barbaroi epeide stelen lithoy epethekan komisantes epi to erma, ormethentes aytoi ek Thermes, us sfi to empodun egegonee katharon, epepleon paseisi teisi neysi, endeka emeras parentes meta ten basileos exelasin ek Thermes. [3] to de erma sfi kategesato eon en porui malista Pammun Skurios. panemeron de pleontes oi barbaroi exanuoysi teis Magnesies xures epi Sepiada te kai ton aigialon ton metaxu Kasthanaies te polios eonta kai Sepiados akteis.   
      184. So far as this place and so far as Thermopylai the army was exempt from calamity; and the number was then still, as I find by computation, this:--Of the ships which came from Asia, which were one thousand two hundred and seven, the original number of the crews supplied by the several nations I find to have been twenty-four myriads and also in addition to them one thousand four hundred, if one reckons at the rate of two hundred men to each ship: and on board of each of these ships there served as fighting-men, besides the fighting-men belonging to its own nation in each case, thirty men who were Persians, Medes, or Sacans; and this amounts to three myriads six thousand two hundred and ten in addition to the others. I will add also to this and to the former number the crews of the fifty-oared galleys, assuming that there were eighty men, more or less, in each one. Of these vessels there were gathered together, as was before said, three thousand: it would follow therefore that there were in them four-and-twenty myriads of men. This was the naval force which came from Asia, amounting in all to fifty-one myriads and also seven thousand six hundred and ten in addition. Then of the footmen there had been found to be a hundred and seventy myriads, and of the horsemen eight myriads: and I will add also to these the Arabian camel-drivers and the Libyan drivers of chariots, assuming them to amount to twenty thousand men. The result is then that the number of the ships' crews combined with that of the land-army amounts to two hundred and thirty-one myriads and also in addition seven thousand six hundred and ten. This is the statement of the Army which was brought up out of Asia itself, without counting the attendants which accompanied it or the corn-transports and the men who sailed in these.         184. [1] mexri men nyn toutoy tou xuroy kai Thermopyleun apathes te kakun En o stratos, kai pleithos En tenikauta eti, us egu symballomenos eyrisku, tun men ek tun neun tun ek teis Asies, eoyseun epta kai diekosieun kai xilieun, ton men arxaion ekastun tun ethneun eonta omilon tesseras kai eikosi myriadas kai pros xiliada te kai tetrakosioys, us ana diekosioys andras logizomenoisi en ekastei nei. [2] epebateyon de epi toyteun tun neun, xuris ekastun tun epixuriun epibateun, Perseun te kai Medun kai Sakeun triekonta andres. oytos allos omilos ginetai trismurioi kai exakisxilioi kai pros diekosioi te kai deka. [3] prosthesu d' eti toutui kai tui proterui arithmui tous ek tun pentekonterun, poiesas, o ti pleon En aytun e elasson, an' ogdukonta andras eneinai. synelexthe de tauta ta ploia, us kai proteron eirethe, trisxilia. ede un andres an eien en aytoisi tesseres myriades kai eikosi. [4] touto men de to ek teis Asies naytikon En, sumpan eon pentekonta myriades kai mia, xiliades de epeisi epi tauteisi epta kai pros ekatontades ex kai dekas. tou de pezou ebdomekonta kai ekaton myriades egenonto, tun de ippeun oktu myriades. prosthesu d' eti toutoisi tas kameloys tous elaunontas Arabioys kai tous ta armata Libyas, pleithos poiesas dismyrioys andras. [5] kai de to te ek tun neun kai tou pezou pleithos syntithemenon ginetai diekosiai te myriades kai triekonta kai mia, kai pros xiliades epta kai ekatontades ex kai dekas. touto men to ex ayteis teis Asies strateyma exanaxthen eiretai, aney te teis therapeies teis epomenes kai tun sitagugun ploiun kai osoi enepleon toutoisi.   
      185. There is still to be reckoned, in addition to all this which has been summed up, the force which was being led from Europe; and of this we must give a probable estimate. The Hellenes of Thrace and of the islands which lie off the coast of Thrace supplied a hundred and twenty ships; from which ships there results a sum of twenty-four thousand men: and as regards the land-force which was supplied by the Thracians, Paionians, Eordians, Bottiaians, the race which inhabits Chalkidike, the Brygians, Pierians, Macedonians, Perraibians, Enianians, Dolopians, Magnesians, Achaians, and all those who dwell in the coast- region of Thrace, of these various nations I estimate that there were thirty myriads. These myriads then added to those from Asia make a total sum of two hundred and sixty-four myriads of fighting men and in addition to these sixteen hundred and ten.         185. [1] to de de ek teis Eyrupes agomenon strateyma eti proslogistea toutui panti tui exerithmemenui. dokesin de dei legein. neas men nyn oi apo Threikes Ellenes kai oi ek tun nesun tun epikeimeneun tei Threikei pareixonto eikosi kai ekaton. ek men nyn toyteun tun neun andres tetrakisxilioi kai dismurioi ginontai. [2] pezou de ton Threikes pareixonto kai Paiones kai Eordoi kai Bottiaioi kai to Khalkidikon genos kai Brugoi kai Pieres kai Makedones kai Perraiboi kai Enieines kai Dolopes kai Magnetes kai Axaioi kai osoi teis Threikes ten paralien nemontai, toutun tun ethneun triekonta myriadas dokeu genesthai. [3] aytai un ai myriades ekeineisi prostetheisai teisi ek teis Asies, ginontai ai pasai andrun ai maximoi myriades diekosiai kai exekonta kai tesseres, epeisi de tauteisi ekatontades ekkaideka kai dekas.   
      186. Such being the number of this body of fighting-men, the attendants who went with these and the men who were in the small vessels which carried corn, and again in the other vessels which sailed with the army, these I suppose were not less in number but more than the fighting men. I assume them to be equal in number with these, and neither at all more nor less; and so, being supposed equal in number with the fighting body, they make up the same number of myriads as they. Thus five hundred and twenty-eight myriads three thousand two hundred and twenty was the number of men whom Xerxes son of Dareios led as far as Sepias and Thermopylai.         186. [1] tou maximoy de toutoy eontos arithmon tosoutoy, ten therapeien ten epomenen toutoisi kai tous en toisi sitagugoisi akatoisi eontas kai mala en toisi alloisi ploioisi toisi ama pleoysi tei stratiei, toutoys tun maximun andrun oy dokeu einai elassonas alla pleunas. [2] kai de sfeas poieu isoys ekeinoisi einai kai oyte pleunas oyte elassonas oyden. exisoumenoi de oytoi tui maximui ekplerousi tas isas myriadas ekeinoisi. oytu pentakosias te myriadas kai eikosi kai oktu kai xiliadas treis kai ekatontadas duo kai dekadas duo andrun egage Xerxes o Dareioy mexri Sepiados kai Thermopyleun.   
      187. This is the number of the whole army of Xerxes; but of the women who made bread for it, and of the concubines and eunuchs no man can state any exact number, nor again of the draught-animals and other beasts of burden or of the Indian hounds, which accompanied it, could any one state the number by reason of their multitude: so that it does not occur to me to wonder that the streams of some rivers should have failed them, but I wonder rather how the provisions were sufficient to feed so many myriads; for I find on computation that if each man received a quart of wheat every day and nothing more, there would be expended every day eleven myriads of medimnoi and three hundred and forty medimnoi besides: and here I am not reckoning anything for the women, eunuchs, baggage- animals, or dogs. Of all these men, amounting to so many myriads, not one was for beauty and stature more worthy than Xerxes himself to possess this power.         187. [1] oytos men de tou synapantos tou Xerxeu strateumatos arithmos, gynaikun de sitopoiun kai pallakeun kai eynouxun oydeis an eipoi atrekea arithmon. oyd' ay ypozygiun te kai tun allun kteneun tun axthoforun kai kynun Indikun tun epomenun, oyd' an toutun ypo pletheos oydeis an eipoi arithmon. uste oyden moi thuma paristatai prodounai ta rheethra tun potamun esti un, alla mallon okus ta sitia antexrese thuma moi myriasi tosauteisi. [2] eyrisku gar symballomenos, ei xoinika pyrun ekastos teis emeres elambane kai meden pleon, endeka myriadas medimnun teleomenas ep' emerei ekastei kai pros triekosioys te alloys medimnoys kai tesserakonta. gynaixi de kai eynouxoisi kai ypozygioisi kai kysi oy logizomai. andrun de eoyseun tosoyteun myriadun, kalleos te eineka kai megatheos oydeis aytun axionikoteros En aytou Xerxeu exein touto to kratos.   
      188. The fleet, I say, set forth and sailed: and when it had put in to land in the region of Magnesia at the beach which is between the city of Casthanaia and the headland of Sepias, the first of the ships which came lay moored by the land and the others rode at anchor behind them; for, as the beach was not large in extent, they lay at anchor with prows projecting towards the sea in an order which was eight ships deep. For that night they lay thus; but at early dawn, after clear sky and windless calm, the sea began to be violently agitated and a great storm fell upon them with a strong East Wind, that wind which they who dwell about those parts call Hellespontias. Now as many of them as perceived that the wind was rising and who were so moored that it was possible for them to do so, drew up their ships on land before the storm came, and both they and their ships escaped; but as for those of the ships which it caught out at sea, some it cast away at the place called Ipnoi in Pelion and others on the beach, while some were wrecked on the headland of Sepias itself, others at the city of Meliboia, and others were thrown up on shore at Casthanaia: and the violence of the storm could not be resisted.         188. [1] o de de naytikos stratos epeite ormetheis eplee kai katesxe teis Magnesies xures es ton aigialon ton metaxu Kasthanaies te polios eonta kai Sepiados akteis, ai men de prutai tun neun ormeon pros gei, allai d' ep' ekeineisi ep' agkyreun. ate gar tou aigialou eontos oy megaloy, prokrossai ormeonto es ponton kai epi oktu neas. [2] tauten men ten eyfronen oytu, ama de orthrui ex aithries te kai nenemies teis thalasses zesases epepese sfi xeimun te megas kai pollos anemos apeliutes, ton de Ellespontien kaleoysi oi peri tauta ta xuria oikemenoi. [3] osoi men nyn aytun ayxomenon emathon ton anemon kai toisi oytu eixe ormoy, oi d' efthesan ton xeimuna anaspasantes tas neas, kai aytoi te perieisan kai ai nees aytun. osas de tun neun metarsias elabe, tas men exefere pros Ipnoys kaleomenoys tous en Peliui, tas de es ton aigialon. ai de peri ayten ten Sepiada periepipton, ai de es Meliboian polin, ai de es Kasthanaien exebrassonto. En te tou xeimunos xreima aforeton.   
      189. There is a story reported that the Athenians had called upon Boreas to aid them, by suggestion of an oracle, because there had come to them another utterance of the god bidding them call upon their brother by marriage to be their helper. Now according to the story of the Hellenes Boreas has a wife who is of Attica, Oreithuia the daughter of Erechththeus. By reason of this affinity, I say, the Athenians, according to the tale which has gone abroad, conjectured that their "brother by marriage" was Boreas, and when they perceived the wind rising, as they lay with their ships at Chalkis in Euboea, or even before that, they offered sacrifices and called upon Boreas and Oreithuia to assist them and to destroy the ships of the Barbarians, as they had done before round about mount Athos. Whether it was for this reason that the wind Boreas fell upon the Barbarians while they lay at anchor, I am not able to say; but however that may be, the Athenians report that Boreas had come to their help in former times, and that at this time he accomplished those things for them of which I speak; and when they had returned home they set up a temple dedicated to Boreas by the river Ilissos.         189. [1] legetai de logos us Athenaioi ton Boreen ek theopropioy epekalesanto, elthontos sfi alloy xresterioy ton gambron epikoyron kalesasthai. Borees de kata ton Ellenun logon exei gynaika Attiken, Ureithyien ten Erextheos. [2] kata de to keidos touto oi Athenaioi, us fatis ormetai, symballomenoi sfisi ton Boreen gambron einai, nayloxeontes teis Eyboies en Khalkidi us emathon ayxomenon ton xeimuna e kai pro toutoy, ethuonto te kai epekaleonto ton te Boreen kai ten Ureithyien timureisai sfisi kai diaftheirai tun barbarun tas neas, us kai proteron peri Athun. [3] ei men nyn dia tauta toisi barbaroisi ormeoysi Borees epepese, oyk exu eipein. oi d' un Athenaioi sfisi legoysi boethesanta ton Boreen proteron kai tote ekeina katergasasthai, kai iron apelthontes Boreu idrusanto para potamon Ilisson.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [190]

     190. In this disaster the number of the ships which were lost was not less than four hundred, according to the report of those who state the number which is lowest, with men innumerable and an immense quantity of valuable things; insomuch that to Ameinocles the son of Cretines, a Magnesian who held lands about Sepias, this shipwreck proved very gainful; for he picked up many cups of gold which were thrown up afterwards on the shore, and many also of silver, and found treasure- chests which had belonged to the Persians, and made acquisition of other things of gold more than can be described. This man however, though he became very wealthy by the things which he found, yet in other respects was not fortunate; for he too suffered misfortune, being troubled by the slaying of a child.         190. [1] en toutui tui ponui neas oi elaxistas legoysi diafthareinai tetrakosieun oyk elassonas, andras te anarithmetoys xrematun te pleithos afthonon. uste Ameinoklei tui Kretineu andri Magneti geoxeonti peri Sepiada megalus e nayegie ayte egeneto xreste. os polla men xrusea poteria ysterui xronui ekbrassomena aneileto polla de argurea, thesayrous te tun Perseun eyre, alla te afata xremata periebaleto. all' o men talla oyk eytyxeun eyremasi mega plousios egeneto. En gar tis kai touton axaris symfore lypeusa paidofonos.   
      191. Of the corn-transplants and other vessels which perished there was no numbering made; and so great was the loss that the commanders of the fleet, being struck with fear lest the Thessalians should attack them now that they had been brought into an evil plight, threw round their camp a lofty palisade built of the fragments of wreck. For the storm continued during three days; but at last the Magians, making sacrifice of victims and singing incantations to appease the Wind by enchantments, and in addition to this, offering to Thetis and the Nereids, caused it to cease on the fourth day, or else for some other reason it abated of its own will. Now they offered sacrifice to Thetis, being informed by the Ionians of the story that she was carried off from the place by Peleus, and that the whole headland of Sepias belonged to her and to the other Nereids.         191. [1] sitagugun de olkadun kai tun allun ploiun diaftheiromenun oyk epein arithmos. uste deisantes oi strategoi tou naytikou stratou me sfi kekakumenoisi epitheuntai oi Thessaloi, erkos ypselon ek tun nayegiun periebalonto. [2] emeras gar de exeimaze treis. telos de entoma te poieuntes kai kataeidontes goesi oi Magoi tui anemui, pros te toutoisi kai tei Theti kai teisi Nereisi thuontes, epaysan tetartei emerei, e allus kus aytos ethelun ekopase. tei de Theti ethyon pythomenoi para tun Iunun ton logon. us ek tou xuroy toutoy arpastheie ypo Peleos, eie te apasa e akte e Sepias ekeines te kai tun alleun Nereidun.   
      192. The storm then had ceased on the fourth day; and meanwhile the day-watchers had run down from the heights of Euboea on the day after the first storm began, and were keeping the Hellenes informed of all that had happened as regards the shipwreck. They then, being informed of it, prayed first to Poseidon the Saviour and poured libations, and then they hastened to go back to Artemision, expecting that there would be but a very few ships of the enemy left to come against them.         192. [1] o men de tetartei emerei epepayto. toisi de Ellesi oi emeroskopoi apo tun akrun tun Eyboikun katadramontes deyterei emerei ap' Es o xeimun o prutos egeneto, esemainon panta ta genomena peri ten nayegien. [2] oi de us eputhonto, Poseideuni suteiri eyxamenoi kai spondas proxeantes ten taxisten opisu epeigonto epi to Artemision, elpisantes oligas tinas sfi antixooys esesthai neas.   
      193. They, I say, came for the second time and lay with their ships about Artemision: and from that time even to this they preserve the use of the surname "Saviour" for Poseidon. Meanwhile the Barbarians, when the wind had ceased and the swell of the sea had calmed down, drew their ships into the sea and sailed on along the shore of the mainland, and having rounded the extremity of Magnesia they sailed straight into the gulf which leads towards Pagasai. In this gulf of Magnesia there is a place where it is said that Heracles was left behind by Jason and his comrades, having been sent from the Argo to fetch water, at the time when they were sailing for the fleece to Aia in the land of Colchis: for from that place they designed, when they had taken in water, to loose their ship into the open sea; and from this the place has come to have the name Aphetai. Here then the fleet of Xerxes took up its moorings.         193. [1] oi men de to deuteron elthontes peri to Artemision enayloxeon, Poseideunos suteiros epunymien apo toutoy eti kai es tode nomizontes. oi de barbaroi, us epausato te o anemos kai to kuma estruto, kataspasantes tas neas epleon para ten epeiron, kampsantes de ten akren teis Magnesies ithean epleon es ton kolpon ton epi Pagaseun feronta. [2] esti de xuros en tui kolpui toutui teis Magnesies, entha legetai ton Eraklea kataleiftheinai ypo Iesonos te kai tun synetairun ek teis Argous ep' ydur pemfthenta, eyt' epi to kuas epleon es Aian ten Kolxida. entheuten gar emellon ydreysamenoi es to pelagos afesein. epi toutoy de tui xurui oynoma gegone Afetai. en toutui un ormon oi Xerxeu epoieunto.   
      194. Now it chanced that fifteen of these ships put out to sea a good deal later than the rest, and they happened to catch sight of the ships of the Hellenes at Artemision. These ships the Barbarians supposed to be their own, and they sailed thither accordingly and fell among the enemy. Of these the commander was Sandokes the son of Thamasios, the governor of Kyme in Aiolia, whom before this time king Dareios had taken and crucified (he being one of the Royal Judges) for this reason, namely that Sandokes had pronounced judgment unjustly for money. So then after he was hung up, Dareios reckoned and found that more good services had been done by him to the royal house than were equal to his offences; and having found this, and perceived that he had himself acted with more haste than wisdom, he let him go. Thus he escaped from king Dareios, and did not perish but survived; now, however, when he sailed in toward the Hellenes, he was destined not to escape the second time; for when the Hellenes saw them sailing up, perceiving the mistake which was being made they put out against them and captured them without difficulty.         194. [1] pentekaideka de tun neun toyteun etyxon te ystatai pollon exanaxtheisai kai kus kateidon tas ep' Artemisiui tun Ellenun neas. edoxan te de tas sfeteras einai oi barbaroi kai pleontes esepeson es tous polemioys. tun estrategee o apo Kumes teis Aiolidos yparxos Sandukes o Thamasioy ton de proteron toutun basileus Dareios ep' aitiei toieide labun anestauruse eonta tun basileiun dikasteun. o Sandukes epi xremasi adikon diken edikase. [2] anakremasthentos un aytou, logizomenos o Dareios eyre oi pleu agatha tun amartematun pepoiemena es oikon ton basileion. eyrun de touto o Dareios, kai gnous us taxutera aytos e sofutera ergasmenos eie, elyse. [3] basilea men de Dareion oytu diafygun me apolesthai periein, tote de es tous Ellenas kataplusas emelle oy to deuteron diafygun esesthai. us gar sfeas eidon prospleontas oi Ellenes, mathontes aytun ten ginomenen amartada, epanaxthentes eypeteus sfeas eilon.   
      195. Sailing in one of these ships Aridolis was captured, the despot of Alabanda in Caria, and in another the Paphian commander Penthylos son of Demonoos, who brought twelve ships from Paphos, but had lost eleven of them in the storm which had come on by Sepias, and now was captured sailing in towards Artemision with the one which had escaped. These men the Hellenes sent away in bonds to the Isthmus of the Corinthians, after having inquired of them that which they desired to learn of the army of Xerxes.         195. [1] en toyteun miei Aridulis pleun elu, turannos Alabandun tun en Kariei, en eterei de o Pafios strategos Penthulos o Demonooy, os Ege men dyudeka neas ek Pafoy, apobalun de sfeun tas endeka tui xeimuni tui genomenui kata Sepiada, miei tei perigenomenei katapleun ep' Artemision elu. toutoys oi Ellenes existoresantes ta eboulonto pythesthai apo teis Xerxeu stratieis, apopempoysi dedemenoys es ton Korinthiun isthmon.   
      196. The fleet of the Barbarians then, except the fifteen ships of which I said that Sandokes was in command, had arrived at Aphetai; and Xerxes meanwhile with the land-army, having marched through Thessalia and Achaia, had already entered the land of the Malians two days before, after having held in Thessaly a contest for his own horses, making trial also of the Thessalian cavalry, because he was informed that it was the best of all among the Hellenes; and in this trial the horses of Hellas were far surpassed by the others. Now of the rivers in Thessalia the Onochonos alone failed to suffice by its stream for the drinking of the army; but of the rivers which flow in Achaia even that which is the largest of them, namely Epidanos, even this, I say, held out but barely.         196. [1] o men de naytikos o tun barbarun stratos, parex tun pentekaideka neun tun eipon Sandukea strategeein, apikonto es Afetas. Xerxes de kai o pezos poreytheis dia Thessalies kai Axaiies esbeblekus En kai de tritaios es Melieas, en Thessaliei men amillan poiesamenos ippun tun te euytou apopeirumenos kai teis Thessalies ippoy, pythomenos us ariste eie tun en Ellesi. entha de ai Ellenides ippoi eleiponto pollon. tun men nyn en Thessaliei potamun Onoxunos mounos oyk apexrese tei stratiei to rheethron pinomenos. tun de en Axaiiei potamun rheontun oyde ostis megistos aytun esti Epidanos, oyde oytos antesxe ei me flaurus.   
      197. When Xerxes had reached Alos of Achaia, the guides who gave him information of the way, wishing to inform him fully of everything, reported to him a legend of the place, the things, namely, which have to do with the temple of Zeus Laphystios; how Athamas the son of Aiolos contrived death for Phrixos, having taken counsel with Ino, and after this how by command of an oracle the Achaians propose to his descendants the following tasks to be performed:--whosoever is the eldest of this race, on him they lay an injunction that he is forbidden to enter the City Hall, and they themselves keep watch; now the City Hall is called by the Achaians the "Hall of the People"; and if he enter it, it may not be that he shall come forth until he is about to be sacrificed. They related moreover in addition to this, that many of these who were about to be sacrificed had before now run away and departed to another land, because they were afraid; and if afterwards in course of time they returned to their own land and were caught, they were placed in the City Hall: and they told how the man is sacrificed all thickly covered with wreaths, and with what form of procession he is brought forth to the sacrifice. This is done to the descendants of Kytissoros the son of Phrixos, because, when the Achaians were making of Athamas the son of Aiolos a victim to purge the sins of the land according to the command of an oracle, and were just about to sacrifice him, this Kytissoros coming from Aia of the Colchians rescued him; and having done so he brought the wrath of the gods upon his own descendants. Having heard these things, Xerxes, when he came to the sacred grove, both abstained from entering it himself, and gave the command to his whole army to so likewise; and he paid reverence both to the house and to the sacred enclosure of the descendants of Athamas.         197. [1] es Alon de teis Axaiies apikomenui Xerxei oi kategemones teis odou boylomenoi to pan exegeesthai elegon oi epixurion logon, ta peri to iron tou Lafystioy Dios, us Athamas o Aioloy emexanesato Frixui moron sun Inoi boyleusas, metepeita de us ek theopropioy Axaioi protitheisi toisi ekeinoy apogonoisi aethloys toiousde. [2] os an ei tou geneos toutoy presbutatos, toutui epitaxantes ergesthai tou leitoy aytoi fylakas exoysi. leiton de kaleoysi to prytaneion oi Axaioi. en de eselthei, oyk esti okus exeisi prin e thusesthai mellei. us t' eti pros toutoisi polloi ede toutun tun mellontun thusesthai deisantes oixonto apodrantes es allen xuren, xronoy de proiontos opisu katelthontes en aliskuntai estellonto es to prytaneion. us thuetai te exegeonto stemmasi pas pykastheis kai us sun pompei exaxtheis. [3] tauta de pasxoysi oi Kytissuroy tou Frixoy paidos apogonoi, dioti katharmon teis xures poieymenun Axaiun ek theopropioy Athamanta ton Aioloy kai mellontun min thuein apikomenos oytos o Kytissuros ex Aies teis Kolxidos errusato, poiesas de touto toisi epigenomenoisi ex euytou meinin tou theou enebale. [4] Xerxes de tauta akousas us kata to alsos egineto, aytos te ergeto aytou kai tei stratiei pasei pareggeile, tun te Athamantos apogonun ten oikien omoius kai to temenos esebeto.   
      198. These then are the things which happened in Thessalia and in Achaia; and from these regions he proceeded to the Malian land, going along by a gulf of the sea, in which there is an ebb and flow of the tide every day. Round about this gulf there is a level space, which in parts is broad but in other parts very narrow; and mountains lofty and inaccessible surrounding this place enclose the whole land of Malis and are called the rocks of Trachis. The first city upon this gulf as one goes from Achaia is Antikyra, by which the river Spercheios flowing from the land of the Enianians runs out into the sea. At a distance of twenty furlongs or thereabouts from this river there is another, of which the name is Dyras; this is said to have appeared that it might bring assistance to Heracles when he was burning: then again at a distance of twenty furlongs from this there is another river called Melas.         198. [1] tauta men ta en Thessaliei kai ta en Axaiiei. apo de toutun tun xurun eie es ten Melida para kolpon thalasses, en tui amputis te kai rhexie ana pasan emeren ginetai. peri de ton kolpon touton esti xuros pedinos, tei men eyrus tei de kai karta steinos. peri de ton xuron orea ypsela kai abata perikleiei pasan ten Melida gein, Trexiniai petrai kaleomenai. [2] prute men nyn polis esti en tui kolpui ionti apo Axaiies Antikure, par' en Sperxeios potamos rheun ex Enienun es thalassan ekdidoi. apo de toutoy dia eikosi koy stadiun allos potamos tui oynoma keitai Duras, ton boetheonta tui Eraklei kaiomenui logos esti anafaneinai. apo de toutoy di' allun eikosi stadiun allos potamos esti os kaleetai Melas.   
      199. From this river Melas the city of Trachis is distant five furlongs; and here, in the parts where Trachis is situated, is even the widest portion of all this district, as regards the space from the mountains to the sea; for the plain has an extent of twenty-two thousand plethra. In the mountain-range which encloses the land of Trachis there is a cleft to the South of Trachis itself; and through this cleft the river Asopos flows, and runs along by the foot of the mountain.         199. [1] Trexis de polis apo tou Melanos toutoy potamou pente stadia apexei. tautei de kai eyrutaton esti pases teis xures tautes ek tun oreun es thalassan, kat' a Trexis pepolistai. disxilia te gar kai dismuria plethra tou pedioy esti. tou de oreos to perikleiei ten gein ten Trexinien esti diasfax pros mesambrien Trexinos, dia de teis diasfagos Asupos potamos rheei para ten ypureian tou oreos.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [200]

     200. There is also another river called Phoinix, to the South of the Asopos, of no great size, which flowing from these mountains runs out into the Asopos; and at the river Phoinix is the narrowest place, for here has been constructed a road with a single wheel-track only. Then from the river Phoinix it is a distance of fifteen furlongs to Thermopylai; and in the space between the river Phoinix and Thermopylai there is a village called Anthela, by which the river Asopos flows, and so runs out into the sea; and about this village there is a wide space in which is set up a temple dedicated to Demeter of the Amphictyons, and there are seats for the Amphictyonic councillors and a temple dedicated to Amphictyon himself.         200. [1] esti de allos Foinix potamos oy megas pros mesambrien tou Asupou, os ek tun oreun toutun rheun es ton Asupon ekdidoi. kata de ton Foinika potamon steinotaton esti. amaxitos gar moune dedmetai. apo de tou Foinikos potamou pentekaideka stadia esti es Thermopulas. [2] en de tui metaxu Foinikos potamou kai Thermopyleun kume te esti tei oynoma Anthele keitai, par' en de pararreun o Asupos es thalassan ekdidoi, kai xuros peri ayten eyrus, en tui Demetros te iron Amfiktyonidos idrytai kai edrai eisi Amfiktuosi kai aytou tou Amfiktuonos iron.   
      201. King Xerxes, I say, was encamped within the region of Trachis in the land of the Malians, and the Hellenes within the pass. This place is called by the Hellenes in general Thermopylai, but by the natives of the place and those who dwell in the country round it is called Pylai. Both sides then were encamped hereabout, and the one had command of all that lies beyond Trachis in the direction of the North Wind, and the others of that which tends towards the South Wind and the mid-day on this side of the continent.         201. [1] basileus men de Xerxes estratopedeueto teis Melidos en tei Trexiniei, oi de de Ellenes en tei diodui. kaleetai de o xuros oytos ypo men tun pleonun Ellenun Thermopulai, ypo de tun epixuriun kai perioikun Pulai. estratopedeuonto men nyn ekateroi en toutoisi toisi xurioisi, epekratee de o men tun pros boreen anemon exontun pantun mexri Trexinos, oi de tun pros noton kai mesambrien ferontun to epi tautes teis epeiroy.   
      202. These were the Hellenes who awaited the attack of the Persian in this place:--of the Spartans three hundred hoplites; of the men of Tegea and Mantineia a thousand, half from each place, from Orchomenos in Arcadia a hundred and twenty, and from the rest of Arcadia a thousand,--of the Arcadians so many; from Corinth four hundred, from Phlius two hundred, and of the men of Mykene eighty: these were they who came from the Peloponnese; and from the Boeotians seven hundred of the Thespians, and of the Thebans four hundred.         202. [1] Esan de oide Ellenun oi ypomenontes ton Persen en toutui tui xurui, Spartieteun te triekosioi oplitai kai Tegeeteun kai Mantineun xilioi, emisees ekaterun, ex Orxomenou te teis Arkadies eikosi kai ekaton, kai ek teis loipeis Arkadies xilioi. tosoutoi men Arkadun, apo de Korinthoy tetrakosioi kai apo Fleiountos diekosioi kai Mykenaiun ogdukonta. oytoi men apo Peloponnesoy pareisan, apo de Boiutun Thespieun te eptakosioi kai Thebaiun tetrakosioi.   
      203. In addition to these the Locrians of Opus had been summoned to come in their full force, and of the Phokians a thousand: for the Hellenes had of themselves sent a summons to them, saying by messengers that they had come as forerunners of the others, that the rest of the allies were to be expected every day, that their sea was safely guarded, being watched by the Athenians and the Eginetans and by those who had been appointed to serve in the fleet, and that they need fear nothing: for he was not a god, they said, who was coming to attack Hellas, but a man; and there was no mortal, nor would be any, with those fortunes evil had not been mingled at his very birth, and the greatest evils for the greatest men; therefore he also who was marching against them, being mortal, would be destined to fail of his expectation. They accordingly, hearing this, came to the assistance of the others at Trachis.         203. [1] pros toutoisi epikletoi egenonto Lokroi te oi Opountioi panstratiei kai Fukeun xilioi. aytoi gar sfeas oi Ellenes epekalesanto, legontes di' aggelun us aytoi men ekoien prodromoi tun allun, oi de loipoi tun symmaxun prosdokimoi pasan eien emeren, e thalassa te sfi eie en fylakei yp' Athenaiun te froyreomene kai Aigineteun kai tun es ton naytikon straton taxthentun, kai sfi eie deinon oyden. [2] oy gar theon einai ton epionta epi ten Ellada all' anthrupon, einai de thneton oydena oyde esesthai tui kakon ex arxeis ginomenui oy synemixthe, toisi de megistoisi aytun megista. ofeilein un kai ton epelaunonta, us eonta thneton, apo teis doxes pesein an. oi de tauta pynthanomenoi eboetheon es ten Trexina.   
      204. Of these troops, although there were other commanders also according to the State to which each belonged, yet he who was most held in regard and who was leader of the whole army was the Lacedemonian Leonidas son of Anaxandrides, son of Leon, son of Eurycratides, son of Anaxander, son of Eurycrates, son of Polydoros, son of Alcamenes, son of Teleclos, son of Archelaos, son of Hegesilaos, son of Doryssos, son of Leobotes, son of Echestratos, son of Agis, son of Eurysthenes, son of Aristodemos, son of Aristomachos, son of Cleodaios, son of Hyllos, son of Heracles; who had obtained the kingdom of Sparta contrary to expectation.         204. [1] toutoisi Esan men nyn kai alloi strategoi kata polias ekastun, o de thumazomenos malista kai pantos tou strateumatos egeomenos Lakedaimonios En Leunides o Anaxandrideu tou Leontos tou Eyrykratideu tou Anaxandroy tou Eyrykrateos tou Polyduroy tou Alkameneos tou Telekloy tou Arxeleu tou Egesileu tou Dorussoy tou Leubuteu tou Exestratoy tou Egios tou Eyrystheneos tou Aristodemoy tou Aristomaxoy tou Kleodaioy tou Ylloy tou Erakleos, ktesamenos ten basileien en Spartei ex aprosdoketoy.   
      205. For as he had two brothers each older than himself, namely Cleomenes and Dorieos, he had been far removed from the thought of becoming king. Since however Cleomenes had died without male child, and Dorieos was then no longer alive, but he also had brought his life to an end in Sicily, thus the kingdom came to Leonidas, both because was of elder birth than Cleombrotos (for Cleombrotos was the youngest of the sons of Anaxandrides) and also because he had in marriage the daughter of Cleomenes. He then at this time went to Thermopylai, having chosen the three hundred who were appointed by law and men who chanced to have sons; and he took with him besides, before he arrived, those Thebans whom I mentioned when I reckoned them in the number of the troops, of whom the commander was Leontiades the son of Eurymachos: and for this reason Leonidas was anxious to take up these with him of all the Hellenes, namely because accusations had been strongly brought against them that they were taking the side of the Medes; therefore he summoned them to the war, desiring to know whether they would send troops with them or whether they would openly renounce the alliance of the Hellenes; and they sent men, having other thoughts in their mind the while.         205. [1] dixun gar oi eontun presbyterun adelfeun, Kleomeneos te kai Durieos, apelelato teis frontidos peri teis basileies. apothanontos de Kleomeneos apaidos ersenos gonoy, Durieos te oyketi eontos alla teleytesantos kai toutoy en Sikeliei, oytu de es Leuniden anebaine e basileie, kai dioti proteros egegonee Kleombrotoy. oytos gar En neutatos Anaxandrideu pais kai de kai eixe Kleomeneos thygatera. [2] os tote eie es Thermopulas epilexamenos andras te tous katesteutas triekosioys kai toisi etugxanon paides eontes. paralabun de apiketo kai Thebaiun tous es ton arithmon logisamenos eipon, tun estrategee Leontiades o Eyrymaxoy. [3] toude de eineka toutoys spoyden epoiesato Leunides mounoys Ellenui paralabein, oti sfeun megalus kategoreto medizein. parekalee un es ton polemon, thelun eidenai eite sympempsoysi eite kai apereoysi ek tou emfaneos ten Ellenun symmaxien. oi de allofroneontes epempon.   
      206. These with Leonidas the Spartans had sent out first, in order that seeing them the other allies might join in the campaign, and for fear that they also might take the side of the Medes, if they heard that the Spartans were putting off their action. Afterwards, however, when they had kept the festival, (for the festival of the Carneia stood in their way), they intended then to leave a garrison in Sparta and to come to help in full force with speed: and just so also the rest of the allies had thought of doing themselves; for it chanced that the Olympic festival fell at the same time as these events. Accordingly, since they did not suppose that the fighting in Thermopylai would so soon be decided, they sent only the forerunners of their force.         206. [1] toutoys men tous amfi Leuniden prutoys apepempsan Spartieitai, ina toutoys oruntes oi alloi summaxoi strateuuntai mede kai oytoi medisusi, en aytous pynthanuntai yperballomenoys. meta de, Karneia gar sfi En empodun, emellon ortasantes kai fylakas lipontes en tei Spartei kata taxos boetheein pandemei. [2] us de kai oi loipoi tun symmaxun enenunto kai aytoi etera toiauta poiesein. En gar kata tuyto Olympias toutoisi toisi pregmasi sympesousa. oykun dokeontes kata taxos oytu diakrithesesthai ton en Thermopuleisi polemon epempon tous prodromoys.   
      207. These, I say, had intended to do thus: and meanwhile the Hellenes at Thermopylai, when the Persian had come near to the pass, were in dread, and deliberated about making retreat from their position. To the rest of the Peloponnesians then it seemed best that they should go to the Peloponnese and hold the Isthmus in guard; but Leonidas, when the Phokians and Locrians were indignant at this opinion, gave his vote for remaining there, and for sending at the same time messengers to the several States bidding them to come up to help them, since they were but few to repel the army of the Medes.         207. [1] oytoi men de oytu dienenunto poiesein. oi de en Thermopuleisi Ellenes, epeide pelas egeneto teis esboleis o Perses, katarrudeontes eboyleuonto peri apallageis. toisi men nyn alloisi Peloponnesioisi edokee elthousi es Peloponneson ton Isthmon exein en fylakei. Leunides de, Fukeun kai Lokrun perisperxeontun tei gnumei tautei, aytou te menein epsefizeto pempein te aggeloys es tas polias keleuontas sfi epiboetheein, us eontun aytun oligun straton ton Medun alexasthai.   
      208. As they were thus deliberating, Xerxes sent a scout on horseback to see how many they were in number and what they were doing; for he had heard while he was yet in Thessaly that there had been assembled in this place a small force, and that the leaders of it were Lacedemonians together with Leonidas, who was of the race of Heracles. And when the horseman had ridden up towards their camp, he looked upon them and had a view not indeed of the whole of their army, for of those which were posted within the wall, which they had repaired and were keeping a guard, it was not possible to have a view, but he observed those who were outside, whose station was in front of the wall; and it chanced at that time that the Lacedemonians were they who were posted outside. So then he saw some of the men practising athletic exercises and some combing their long hair: and as he looked upon these things he marvelled, and at the same time he observed their number: and when he had observed all exactly, he rode back unmolested, for no one attempted to pursue him and he found himself treated with much indifference. And when he returned he reported to Xerxes all that which he had seen.         208. [1] tauta boyleyomenun sfeun, epempe Xerxes kataskopon ippea idesthai okosoi eisi kai o ti poieoien. akekoee de eti eun en Thessaliei us alismene eie tautei stratie olige, kai tous egemonas us eiesan Lakedaimonioi te kai Leunides eun genos Erakleides. [2] us de proselase o ippeus pros to stratopedon, etheeito te kai katura pan men oy to stratopedon. tous gar esu tetagmenoys tou teixeos, to anorthusantes eixon en fylakei, oyk oia te En katidesthai. o de tous exu emanthane, toisi pro tou teixeos ta opla ekeito. etyxon de touton ton xronon Lakedaimonioi exu tetagmenoi. [3] tous men de ura gymnazomenoys tun andrun, tous de tas komas ktenizomenoys. tauta de theumenos ethumaze kai to pleithos emanthane. mathun de panta atrekeus apelayne opisu kat' esyxien. oyte gar tis ediuke alogies te enekurese polleis. apelthun te elege pros Xerxen ta per opupee panta.   
      209. Hearing this Xerxes was not able to conjecture the truth about the matter, namely that they were preparing themselves to die and to deal death to the enemy so far as they might; but it seemed to him that they were acting in a manner merely ridiculous; and therefore he sent for Demaratos the son of Ariston, who was in his camp, and when he came, Xerxes asked him of these things severally, desiring to discover what this was which the Lacedemonians were doing: and he said: "Thou didst hear from my mouth at a former time, when we were setting forth to go against Hellas, the things concerning these men; and having heard them thou madest me an object of laughter, because I told thee of these things which I perceived would come to pass; for to me it is the greatest of all ends to speak the truth continually before thee, O king. Hear then now also: these men have come to fight with us for the passage, and this is it that they are preparing to do; for they have a custom which is as follows;--whenever they are about to put their lives in peril, then they attend to the arrangement of their hair. Be assured however, that if thou shalt subdue these and the rest of them which remain behind in Sparta, there is no other race of men which will await thy onset, O king, or will raise hands against thee: for now thou art about to fight against the noblest kingdom and city of those which are among the Hellenes, and the best men." To Xerxes that which was said seemed to be utterly incredible, and he asked again a second time in what manner being so few they would fight with his host. He said; "O king, deal with me as with a liar, if thou find not that these things come to pass as I say."         209. [1] akouun de Xerxes oyk eixe symbalesthai to eon, oti paraskeyazointo us apoleomenoi te kai apoleontes kata dunamin. all' aytui geloia gar efainonto poieein, metepempsato Demareton ton Aristunos eonta en tui stratopedui. [2] apikomenon de min eiruta Xerxes ekasta toutun, ethelun mathein to poieumenon pros tun Lakedaimoniun. o de eipe <<Ekoysas men kai proteron mey, eyte ormumen epi ten Ellada, peri tun andrun toutun, akousas de geluta me ethey legonta tei per urun ekbesomena pregmata tauta. emoi gar ten aletheien askeein antia seu basileu agun megistos esti. [3] akoyson de kai nun. oi andres oytoi apikatai maxesomenoi emin peri teis esodoy, kai tauta paraskeyazontai. nomos gar sfi exun oytu esti. epean mellusi kindyneuein tei psyxei, tote tas kefalas kosmeontai. [4] epistaso de, ei toutoys ge kai to ypomenon en Spartei katastrepseai, esti oyden allo ethnos anthrupun to se basileu ypomeneei xeiras antaeiromenon. nun gar pros basileien te kai kallisten polin tun en Ellesi prosfereai kai andras aristoys.>> [5] karta te de Xerxei apista efaineto ta legomena einai, kai deutera epeiruta ontina tropon tosoutoi eontes tei euytou stratiei maxesontai. o de eipe <<u basileu, emoi xrasthai us andri pseustei, en me tauta toi tautei ekbei tei egu legu.>> tauta legun oyk epeithe ton Xerxen.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [210]

     210. Thus saying he did not convince Xerxes, who let four days go by, expecting always that they would take to flight; but on the fifth day, when they did not depart but remained, being obstinate, as he thought, in impudence and folly, he was enraged and sent against them the Medes and the Kissians, charging them to take the men alive and bring them into his presence. Then when the Medes moved forward and attacked the Hellenes, there fell many of them, and others kept coming up continually, and they were not driven back, though suffering great loss: and they made it evident to every man, and to the king himself not least of all, that human beings are many but men are few. This combat went on throughout the day:         210. [1] tesseras men de parexeike emeras, elpizun aiei sfeas apodresesthai. pemptei de, us oyk apallassonto alla oi efainonto anaideiei te kai aboyliei diaxreumenoi menein, pempei ep' aytous Medoys te kai Kissioys thymutheis, enteilamenos sfeas zugresantas agein es opsin ten euytou. [2] us d' esepeson feromenoi es tous Ellenas oi Meidoi, epipton polloi, alloi d' epeseisan, kai oyk apelaunonto, kaiper megalus prosptaiontes. deilon d' epoieyn panti teui kai oyk ekista aytui basilei, oti polloi men anthrupoi eien, oligoi de andres. egineto de e symbole di' emeres.   
      211. and when the Medes were being roughly handled, then these retired from the battle, and the Persians, those namely whom the king called "Immortals," of whom Hydarnes was commander, took their place and came to the attack, supposing that they at least would easily overcome the enemy. When however these also engaged in combat with the Hellenes, they gained no more success than the Median troops but the same as they, seeing that they were fighting in a place with a narrow passage, using shorter spears than the Hellenes, and not being able to take advantage of their superior numbers. The Lacedemonians meanwhile were fighting in a memorable fashion, and besides other things of which they made display, being men perfectly skilled in fighting opposed to men who were unskilled, they would turn their backs to the enemy and make a pretence of taking to flight; and the Barbarians, seeing them thus taking a flight, would follow after them with shouting and clashing of arms: then the Lacedemonians, when they were being caught up, turned and faced the Barbarians; and thus turning round they would slay innumerable multitudes of the Persians; and there fell also at these times a few of the Spartans themselves. So, as the Persians were not able to obtain any success by making trial of the entrance and attacking it by divisions and every way, they retired back.         211. [1] epeite de oi Meidoi trexeus perieiponto, enthauta oytoi men ypexeisan, oi de Persai ekdexamenoi epeisan, tous athanatoys ekalee basileus, tun Erxe Ydarnes, us de oytoi ge eypeteus katergasomenoi. [2] us de kai oytoi synemisgon toisi Ellesi, oyden pleon eferonto teis stratieis teis Medikeis alla ta ayta, ate en steinoporui te xurui maxomenoi kai dorasi braxyteroisi xreumenoi e per oi Ellenes, kai oyk exontes plethei xresasthai. [3] Lakedaimonioi de emaxonto axius logoy, alla te apodeiknumenoi en oyk epistamenoisi maxesthai exepistamenoi, kai okus entrepseian ta nuta, alees feugeskon deithen, oi de barbaroi oruntes feugontas boei te kai patagui epeisan, oi d' an katalambanomenoi ypestrefon antioi einai toisi barbaroisi, metastrefomenoi de kateballon plethei anarithmetoys tun Perseun. epipton de kai aytun tun Spartieteun enthauta oligoi. epei de oyden edyneato paralabein oi Persai teis esodoy peirumenoi kai kata telea kai pantoius prosballontes, apelaynon opisu.   
      212. And during these onsets it is said that the king, looking on, three times leapt up from his seat, struck with fear for his army. Thus they contended then: and on the following day the Barbarians strove with no better success; for because the men opposed to them were few in number, they engaged in battle with the expectation that they would be found to be disabled and would not be capable any longer of raising their hands against them in fight. The Hellenes however were ordered by companies as well as by nations, and they fought successively each in turn, excepting the Phokians, for these were posted upon the mountain to guard the path. So the Persians, finding nothing different from that which they had seen on the former day, retired back from the fight.         212. [1] en tauteisi teisi prosodoisi teis maxes legetai basilea theeumenon tris anadramein ek tou thronoy deisanta peri tei stratiei. tote men oytu egunisanto, tei d' ysteraiei oi barbaroi oyden ameinon aethleon. ate gar oligun eontun, elpisantes sfeas katatetrumatisthai te kai oyk oioys te esesthai eti xeiras antaeirasthai syneballon. [2] oi de Ellenes kata taxis te kai kata ethnea kekosmemenoi Esan, kai en merei ekastoi emaxonto, plen Fukeun. oytoi de es to oros etaxthesan fylaxontes ten atrapon. us de oyden eyriskon alloioteron oi Persai e tei proteraiei enurun, apelaynon.   
      213. Then when the king was in a strait as to what he should do in the matter before him, Epialtes the son of Eurydemos, a Malian, came to speech with him, supposing that he would win a very great reward from the king; and this man told him of the path which leads over the mountain to Thermopylai, and brought about the destruction of those Hellenes who remained in that place. Afterwards from fear of the Lacedemonians he fled to Thessaly, and when he had fled, a price was proclaimed for his life by the Deputies, when the Amphictyons met for their assembly at Pylai. Then some time afterwards having returned to Antikyra he was slain by Athenades a man of Trachis. Now this Athenades killed Epialtes for another cause, which I shall set forth in the following part of the history, but he was honoured for it none the less by the Lacedemonians.         213. [1] aporeontos de basileos o ti xresetai tui pareonti pregmati, Epialtes o Eyrydemoy aner Melieus Elthe oi es logoys. os mega ti para basileos dokeun oisesthai efrase te ten atrapon ten dia tou oreos feroysan es Thermopulas, kai dieftheire tous tautei ypomeinantas Ellenun. [2] ysteron de deisas Lakedaimonioys efyge es Thessalien, kai oi fygonti ypo tun Pylagorun tun Amfiktyonun es ten Pylaien syllegomenun argurion epekeruxthe. xronui de ysteron, kateilthe gar es Antikuren, apethane ypo Athenadeu andros Trexinioy. [3] o de Athenades oytos apekteine men Epialtea di' allen aitien, ten egu en toisi opisthe logoisi semaneu, etimethe mentoi ypo Lakedaimoniun oyden Esson. Epialtes men oytu ysteron toutun apethane.   
      214. Thus Epialtes after these events was slain: there is however another tale told, that Onetes the son of Phanagoras, a man of Carystos, and Corydallos of Antikyra were those who showed the Persians the way round the mountain; but this I can by no means accept: for first we must judge by this fact, namely that the Deputies of the Hellenes did not proclaim a price for the lives of Onetes and Corydallos, but for that of Epialtes the Trachinian, having surely obtained the most exact information of the matter; and secondly we know that Epialtes was an exile from his country to avoid this charge. True it is indeed that Onetes might know of this path, even though he were not a Malian, if he had had much intercourse with the country; but Epialtes it was who led them round the mountain by the path, and him therefore I write down as the guilty man.         214. [1] esti de eteros legomenos logos, us Onetes te o Fanagoreu aner Karustios kai Korydallos Antikyreus eisi oi eipantes pros basilea toutoys tous logoys kai periegesamenoi to oros toisi Perseisi, oydamus emoige pistos. [2] touto men gar tuide xre stathmusasthai, oti oi tun Ellenun Pylagoroi epekeryxan oyk epi Onetei te kai Korydallui argurion all' epi Epialtei tui Trexiniui, pantus koy to atrekestaton pythomenoi. touto de feugonta Epialten tauten ten aitien oidamen. [3] eideie men gar an kai eun me Melieus tauten ten atrapon Onetes, ei tei xurei polla umilekus eie. all' Epialtes gar esti o periegesamenos to oros kata ten atrapon, touton aition grafu.   
      215. Xerxes accordingly, being pleased by that which Epialtes engaged to accomplish, at once with great joy proceeded to send Hydarnes and the men of whom Hydarnes was commander; and they set forth from the camp about the time when the lamps are lit. This path of which we speak had been discovered by the Malians who dwell in that land, and having discovered it they led the Thessalians by it against the Phokians, at the time when the Phokians had fenced the pass with a wall and thus were sheltered from the attacks upon them: so long ago as this had the pass been proved by the Malians to be of no value.         215. [1] Xerxes de, epei erese ta ypesxeto o Epialtes katergasasthai, aytika perixares genomenos epempe Ydarnea kai tun estrategee Ydarnes. ormeato de peri luxnun afas ek tou stratopedoy. ten de atrapon tauten exeuron men oi epixurioi Meliees, exeyrontes de Thessaloisi kategesanto epi Fukeas, tote ote oi Fukees fraxantes teixei ten esbolen Esan en skepei tou polemoy. ek te tosoy de katededekto eousa oyden xreste Melieusi.   
      216. And this path lies as follows:--it begins from the river Asopos, which flows through the cleft, and the name of this mountain and of the path is the same, namely Anopaia; and this Anopaia stretches over the ridge of the mountain and ends by the town of Alpenos, which is the first town of the Locrians towards Malis, and by the stone called Black Buttocks and the seats of the Kercopes, where is the very narrowest part.         216. [1] exei de ude e atrapos ayte. arxetai men apo tou Asupou potamou tou dia teis diasfagos rheontos, oynoma de tui orei toutui kai tei atrapui tuyto keitai, Anopaia. teinei de e Anopaia ayte kata rhaxin tou oreos, legei de kata te Alpenon polin, pruten eousan tun Lokridun pros tun Melieun, kai kata Melampugoy te kaleomenon lithon kai kata Kerkupun edras, tei kai to steinotaton esti.   
      217. By this path thus situated the Persians after crossing over the Asopos proceeded all through the night, having on their right hand the mountains of the Oitaians and on the left those of the Trachinians: and when dawn appeared, they had reached the summit of the mountain. In this part of the mountain there were, as I have before shown, a thousand hoplites of the Phokians keeping guard, to protect their own country and to keep the path: for while the pass below was guarded by those whom I have mentioned, the path over the mountain was guarded by the Phokians, who had undertaken the business for Leonidas by their own offer.         217. [1] kata tauten de ten atrapon kai oytu exoysan oi Persai, ton Asupon diabantes, eporeuonto pasan ten nukta, en dexiei men exontes orea ta Oitaiun, en aristerei de ta Trexiniun. eus te de diefaine kai oi egenonto ep' akruteriui tou oreos. [2] kata de touto tou oreos efulasson, us kai proteron moi eiretai, Fukeun xilioi oplitai, rhyomenoi te ten sfeteren xuren kai froyreontes ten atrapon. e men gar katu esbole efylasseto ypo tun eiretai. ten de dia tou oreos atrapon ethelontai Fukees ypodexamenoi Leunidei efulasson.   
      218. While the Persians were ascending they were concealed from these, since all the mountain was covered with oak-trees; and the Phokians became aware of them after they had made the ascent as follows:--the day was calm, and not a little noise was made by the Persians, as was likely when leaves were lying spread upon the ground under their feet; upon which the Phokians started up and began to put on their arms, and by this time the Barbarians were close upon them. These, when they saw men arming themselves, fell into wonder, for they were expecting that no one would appear to oppose them, and instead of that they had met with an armed force. Then Hydarnes, seized with fear lest the Phokians should be Lacedemonians, asked Epialtes of what people the force was; and being accurately informed he set the Persians in order for battle. The Phokians however, when they were hit by the arrows of the enemy, which flew thickly, fled and got away at once to the topmost peak of the mountain, fully assured that it was against them that the enemy had designed to come, and here they were ready to meet death. These, I say, were in this mind; but the Persians meanwhile with Epialtes and Hydarnes made no account of the Phokians, but descended the mountain with all speed.         218. [1] emathon de sfeas oi Fukees ude anabebekotas. anabainontes gar elanthanon oi Persai to oros pan eon dryun epipleon. En men de nenemie, psofoy de ginomenoy pollou, us oikos En fullun ypokexymenun ypo toisi posi, ana te edramon oi Fukees kai enedynon ta opla, kai aytika oi barbaroi pareisan. [2] us de eidon andras endyomenoys opla, en thumati egenonto. elpomenoi gar oydena sfi fanesesthai antixoon enekuresan stratui. enthauta Ydarnes katarrudesas me oi Fukees eusi Lakedaimonioi, eireto Epialten opodapos eie o stratos, pythomenos de atrekeus dietasse tous Persas us es maxen. [3] oi de Fukees us eballonto toisi toxeumasi polloisi te kai pyknoisi, oixonto feugontes epi tou oreos ton korymbon, epistamenoi us epi sfeas ormethesan arxen, kai pareskeyadato us apoleomenoi. oytoi men de tauta efroneon, oi de amfi Epialten kai Ydarnea Persai Fukeun men oydena logon epoieunto, oi de katebainon to oros kata taxos.   
      219. To the Hellenes who were in Thermopylai first the soothsayer Megistias, after looking into the victims which were sacrificed, declared the death which was to come to them at dawn of day; and afterwards deserters brought the report of the Persians having gone round. These signified it to them while it was yet night, and thirdly came the day-watchers, who had run down from the heights when day was already dawning. Then the Hellenes deliberated, and their opinions were divided; for some urged that they should not desert their post, while others opposed this counsel. After this they departed from their assembly, and some went away and dispersed each to their several cities, while others of them were ready to remain there together with Leonidas.         219. [1] toisi de en Thermopuleisi Ellenun pruton men o mantis Megisties esidun es ta ira efrase ton mellonta esesthai ama eoi sfi thanaton, epi de kai aytomoloi Esan oi exaggeilantes tun Perseun ten periodon. oytoi men eti nyktos esemenan, tritoi de oi emeroskopoi katadramontes apo tun akrun ede diafainouses emeres. [2] enthauta eboyleuonto oi Ellenes, kai sfeun esxizonto ai gnumai. oi men gar oyk eun ten taxin eklipein, oi de anteteinon. meta de touto diakrithentes oi men apallassonto kai diaskedasthentes kata polis ekastoi etraponto, oi de aytun ama Leunidei menein aytou pareskeyadato.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [220]

     220. However it is reported also that Leonidas himself sent them away, having a care that they might not perish, but thinking that it was not seemly for himself and for the Spartans who were present to leave the post to which they had come at first to keep guard there. I am inclined rather to be of this latter opinion, namely that because Leonidas perceived that the allies were out of heart and did not desire to face the danger with him to the end, he ordered them to depart, but held that for himself to go away was not honourable, whereas if he remained, a great fame of him would be left behind, and the prosperity of Sparta would not be blotted out: for an oracle had been given by the Pythian prophetess to the Spartans, when they consulted about this war at the time when it was being first set on foot, to the effect that either Lacedemon must be destroyed by the Barbarians, or their king must lose his life. This reply the prophetess gave them in hexameter verses, and it ran thus: 
"But as for you, ye men who in wide-spaced Sparta inhabit, 
 Either your glorious city is sacked by the children of Perses, 
 Or, if it be not so, then a king of the stock Heracleian 
 Dead shall be mourned for by all in the boundaries of broad Lacedemon. 
 Him nor the might of bulls nor the raging of lions shall hinder; 
 For he hath might as of Zeus; and I say he shall not be restrained, 
 Till one of the other of these he have utterly torn and divided." I am of opinion that Leonidas considering these things and desiring to lay up for himself glory above all the other Spartans, dismissed the allies, rather than that those who departed did so in such disorderly fashion, because they were divided in opinion.         220. [1] legetai de kai us aytos sfeas apepempse Leunides, me apoluntai kedomenos. aytui de kai Spartieteun toisi pareousi oyk exein eyprepeus eklipein ten taxin es ten Elthon fylaxontes arxen. [2] tautei kai mallon ten gnumen pleistos eimi, Leuniden, epeite eistheto tous symmaxoys eontas aprothumoys kai oyk ethelontas syndiakindyneuein, keleusai sfeas apallassesthai, aytui de apienai oy kalus exein. menonti de aytou kleos mega eleipeto, kai e Spartes eydaimonie oyk exeleifeto. [3] ekexresto gar ypo teis Pythies toisi Spartieteisi xreumenoisi peri tou polemoy toutoy aytika kat' arxas egeiromenoy, e Lakedaimona anastaton genesthai ypo tun barbarun e ten basilea sfeun apolesthai. tauta de sfi en epesi exametroisi xrai legonta ude.     [4] ymin d', u Spartes oiketores eyryxoroio,
      e mega asty erikydes yp' andrasi Perseideisi
      perthetai, e to men oyxi, af' Erakleoys de genethles
      penthesei basilei fthimenon Lakedaimonos oyros.
      oy gar ton taurun sxesei menos oyde leontun
      antibien. Zenos gar exei menos. oyde e femi
      sxesesthai, prin tund' eteron dia panta dasetai.tauta te de epilegomenon Leuniden, kai boylomenon kleos katathesthai mounun Spartieteun, apopempsai tous symmaxoys mallon e gnumei dieneixthentas oytu akosmus oixesthai tous oixomenoys.   
      221. Of this the following has been to my mind a proof as convincing as any other, namely that Leonidas is known to have endeavoured to dismiss the soothsayer also who accompanied this army, Megistias the Acarnanian, who was said to be descended from Melampus, that he might not perish with them after he had declared from the victims that which was about to come to pass for them. He however when he was bidden to go would not himself depart, but sent away his son who was with him in the army, besides whom he had no other child.         221. [1] marturion de moi kai tode oyk elaxiston toutoy peri gegone, oti kai ton mantin os eipeto tei stratiei tautei, Megistien ton Akarneina, legomenon einai ta anekathen apo Melampodos, touton eipanta ek tun irun ta mellonta sfi ekbainein, faneros esti Leunides apopempun, ina me synapoletai sfi. o de apopempomenos aytos men oyk apelipe, ton de paida systrateyomenon, eonta oi moynogenea, apepempse.   
      222. The allies then who were dismissed departed and went away, obeying the word of Leonidas, and only the Thespians and the Thebans remained behind with the Lacedemonians. Of these the Thebans stayed against their will and not because they desired it, for Leonidas kept them, counting them as hostages; but the Thespians very willingly, for they said that they would not depart and leave Leonidas and those with him, but they stayed behind and died with them. The commander of these was Demophilos the son of Diadromes.         222. [1] oi men nyn summaxoi oi apopempomenoi oixonto te apiontes kai epeithonto Leunidei, Thespiees de kai Thebaioi katemeinan mounoi para Lakedaimonioisi. toutun de Thebaioi men aekontes emenon kai oy boylomenoi. kateixe gar sfeas Leunides en omerun logui poieumenos. Thespiees de ekontes malista, oi oyk efasan apolipontes Leuniden kai tous met' aytou apallaxesthai, alla katameinantes synapethanon. estrategee de aytun Demofilos Diadromeu.   
      223. Xerxes meanwhile, having made libations at sunrise, stayed for some time, until about the hour when the market fills, and then made an advance upon them; for thus it had been enjoined by Epialtes, seeing that the descent of the mountain is shorter and the space to be passed over much less than the going round and the ascent. The Barbarians accordingly with Xerxes were advancing to the attack; and the Hellenes with Leonidas, feeling that they were going forth to death, now advanced out much further than at first into the broader part of the defile; for when the fence of the wall was being guarded, they on the former days fought retiring before the enemy into the narrow part of the pass; but now they engaged with them outside the narrows, and very many of the Barbarians fell: for behind them the leaders of the divisions with scourges in their hands were striking each man, ever urging them on to the front. Many of them then were driven into the sea and perished, and many more still were trodden down while yet alive by one another, and there was no reckoning of the number that perished: for knowing the death which was about to come upon them by reason of those who were going round the mountain, they displayed upon the Barbarians all the strength which they had, to its greatest extent, disregarding danger and acting as if possessed by a spirit of recklessness.         223. [1] Xerxes de epei elioy anateilantos spondas epoiesato, episxun xronon es agoreis koy malista plethuren prosodon epoieeto. kai gar epestalto ex Epialteu oytu. apo gar tou oreos e katabasis syntomutere te esti kai braxuteros o xuros pollon e per e periodos te kai anabasis. [2] oi te de barbaroi oi amfi Xerxen proseisan, kai oi amfi Leuniden Ellenes, us ten epi thanatui exodon poieumenoi, ede pollu mallon e kat' arxas epexeisan es to eyruteron tou ayxenos. to men gar eryma tou teixeos efylasseto, oi de ana tas proteras emeras ypexiontes es ta steinopora emaxonto. [3] tote de symmisgontes exu tun steinun epipton plethei polloi tun barbarun. opisthe gar oi egemones tun teleun exontes mastigas errapizon panta andra, aiei es to prosu epotrunontes. polloi men de esepipton aytun es ten thalassan kai dieftheironto, pollui d' eti pleunes katepateonto zuoi yp' allelun. En de logos oydeis tou apollymenoy. [4] ate gar epistamenoi ton mellonta sfisi esesthai thanaton ek tun periiontun to oros, apedeiknynto rhumes oson eixon megiston es tous barbaroys, paraxreumenoi te kai ateontes.   
      224. Now by this time the spears of the greater number of them were broken, so it chanced, in this combat, and they were slaying the Persians with their swords; and in this fighting fell Leonidas, having proved himself a very good man, and others also of the Spartans with him, men of note, of whose names I was informed as of men who had proved themselves worthy, and indeed I was told also the names of all the three hundred. Moreover of the Persians there fell here, besides many others of note, especially two sons of Dareios, Abrocomes and Hyperanthes, born to Dareios of Phratagune the daughter of Artanes: now Artanes was the brother of king Dareios and the son of Hystaspes, the son of Arsames; and he in giving his daughter in marriage to Dareios gave also with her all his substance, because she was his only child.         224. [1] dorata men nyn toisi pleosi aytun tenikauta ede etugxane kateegota, oi de toisi xifesi diergazonto tous Persas. kai Leunides te en toutui tui ponui piptei aner genomenos aristos kai eteroi met' aytou onomastoi Spartieteun, tun egu us andrun axiun genomenun epythomen ta oynomata, epythomen de kai apantun tun triekosiun. [2] kai de Perseun piptoysi enthauta alloi te polloi kai onomastoi, en de de kai Dareioy duo paides Abrokomes te kai Yperanthes, ek teis Artaneu thygatros Fratagounes gegonotes Dareiui. o de Artanes Dareioy men tou basileos En adelfeos, Ystaspeos de tou Arsameos pais. os kai ekdidous ten thygatera Dareiui ton oikon panta ton euytou epeduke, us mounes oi eouses tautes teknoy.   
      225. Two brothers of Xerxes, I say, fell here fighting; and meanwhile over the body of Leonidas there arose a great struggle between the Persians and the Lacedemonians, until the Hellenes by valour dragged this away from the enemy and turned their opponents to flight four times. This conflict continued until those who had gone with Epialtes came up; and when the Hellenes learnt that these had come, from that moment the nature of the combat was changed; for they retired backwards to the narrow part of the way, and having passed by the wall they went and placed themselves upon the hillock, all in a body together except only the Thebans: now this hillock is in the entrance, where now the stone lion is placed for Leonidas. On this spot while defending themselves with daggers, that is those who still had them left, and also with hands and with teeth, they were overwhelmed by the missiles of the Barbarians, some of these having followed directly after them and destroyed the fence of the wall, while others had come round and stood about them on all sides.         225. [1] Xerxeu te de duo adelfeoi enthauta piptoysi maxomenoi, kai yper tou nekrou tou Leunideu Perseun te kai Lakedaimoniun uthismos egineto pollos, es o touton te aretei oi Ellenes ypexeirysan kai etrepsanto tous enantioys tetrakis. touto de synestekee mexri oy oi sun Epialtei paregenonto. [2] us de toutoys ekein eputhonto oi Ellenes, entheuten ede eteroiouto to neikos. es te gar to steinon teis odou anexureon opisu, kai parameipsamenoi to teixos elthontes izonto epi ton kolunon pantes alees oi alloi plen Thebaiun. o de kolunos esti en tei esodui, okoy nun o lithinos leun esteke epi Leunidei. [3] en toutui sfeas tui xurui alexomenoys maxaireisi, toisi aytun etugxanon eti perieousai, kai xersi kai stomasi katexusan oi barbaroi ballontes, oi men ex enanties epispomenoi kai to eryma tou teixeos sygxusantes, oi de perielthontes pantothen peristadon.   
      226. Such were the proofs of valour given by the Lacedemonians and Thespians; yet the Spartan Dienekes is said to have proved himself the best man of all, the same who, as they report, uttered this saying before they engaged battle with the Medes:--being informed by one of the men of Trachis that when the Barbarians discharged their arrows they obscured the light of the sun by the multitude of the arrows, so great was the number of their host, he was not dismayed by this, but making small account of the number of the Medes, he said that their guest from Trachis brought them very good news, for if the Medes obscured the light of the sun, the battle against them would be in the shade and not in the sun.         226. [1] Lakedaimoniun de kai Thespieun toioutun genomenun omus legetai aner aristos genesthai Spartietes Dienekes. ton tode fasi eipein to epos prin e symmixai sfeas toisi Medoisi, pythomenon pros tey tun Trexiniun us epean oi barbaroi apiusi ta toxeumata, ton elion ypo tou pletheos tun oistun apokruptoysi. tosouto pleithos aytun einai. [2] ton de oyk ekplagenta toutoisi eipein en alogiei poieumenon to Medun pleithos, us panta sfi agatha o Trexinios xeinos aggelloi, ei apokryptontun tun Medun ton elion ypo skiei esoito pros aytous e maxe kai oyk en eliui. tauta men kai alla toioytotropa epea fasi Dienekea ton Lakedaimonion lipesthai mnemosyna.   
      227. This and other sayings of this kind they report that Dienekes the Lacedemonian left as memorials of himself; and after him the bravest they say of the Lacedemonians were two brothers Alpheos and Maron, sons of Orsiphantos. Of the Thespians the man who gained most honour was named Dithyrambos son of Harmatides.         227. [1] meta de touton aristeusai legontai Lakedaimonioi duo adelfeoi, Alfeos te kai Marun Orsifantoy paides. Thespieun de eydokimee malista tui oynoma En Dithurambos Armatideu.   
      228. The men were buried were they fell; and for these, as well as for those who were slain before being sent away by Leonidas, there is an inscription which runs thus: 
"Here once, facing in fight three hundred myriads of foemen, 
   Thousands four did contend, men of the Peloponnese." This is the inscription for the whole body; and for the Spartans separately there is this: 
"Stranger, report this word, we pray, to the Spartans, that lying 
   Here in this spot we remain, faithfully keeping their laws." This, I say, for the Lacedemonians; and for the soothsayer as follows: 
"This is the tomb of Megistias renowned, whom the Median foemen, 
   Where Sperchios doth flow, slew when they forded the stream; 
 Soothsayer he, who then knowing clearly the fates that were coming, 
   Did not endure in the fray Sparta's good leaders to leave." The Amphictyons it was who honoured them with inscriptions and memorial pillars, excepting only in the case of the inscription to the soothsayer; but that of the soothsayer Megistias was inscribed by Simonides the son of Leoprepes on account of guest-friendship.         228. [1] thaftheisi de sfi aytou tautei tei per epeson, kai toisi proteron teleytesasi e ypo Leunideu apopemfthentas oixesthai, epigegraptai grammata legonta tade.     myriasin pote teide triekosiais emaxonto
      ek Peloponnasoy xiliades tetores.[2] tauta men de toisi pasi epigegraptai, toisi de Spartieteisi idiei.     u xein', aggellein Lakedaimoniois oti teide
      keimetha tois keinun rhemasi peithomenoi.[3] Lakedaimonioisi men de touto, tui de manti tode.     mneima tode kleinoio Megistia, on pote Meidoi
           Sperxeion potamon kteinan ameipsamenoi,
      mantios, os tote keiras eperxomenas safa eidus
           oyk etle Spartes egemona prolipein.[4] epigrammasi men nyn kai steleisi, exu e to tou mantios epigramma, Amfiktuones eisi sfeas oi epikosmesantes. to de tou mantios Megistieu Simunides o Leuprepeos esti kata xeinien o epigrapsas.    
      229. Two of these three hundred, it is said, namely Eurystos and Aristodemos, who, if they had made agreement with one another, might either have come safe home to Sparta together (seeing that they had been dismissed from the camp by Leonidas and were lying at Alpenoi with disease of the eyes, suffering extremely), or again, if they had not wished to return home, they might have been slain together with the rest,--when they might, I say, have done either one of these two things, would not agree together; but the two being divided in opinion, Eurystos, it is said, when he was informed that the Persians had gone round, asked for his arms and having put them on ordered his Helot to lead him to those who were fighting; and after he had led him thither, the man who had led him ran away and departed, but Eurystos plunged into the thick of the fighting, and so lost his life: but Aristodemos was left behind fainting. Now if either Aristodemos had been ill alone, and so had returned home to Sparta, or the men had both of them come back together, I do not suppose that the Spartans would have displayed any anger against them; but in this case, as the one of them had lost his life and the other, clinging to an excuse which the first also might have used, had not been willing to die, it necessarily happened that the Spartans had great indignation against Aristodemos.         229. [1] duo de toutun tun triekosiun legetai Eyryton te kai Aristodemon, pareon aytoisi amfoteroisi koinui logui xresamenoisi e aposutheinai omou es Sparten, us memetimenoi ge Esan ek tou stratopedoy ypo Leunideu kai katekeato en Alpenoisi ofthalmiuntes es to esxaton, e ei ge me eboulonto nosteisai, apothanein ama toisi alloisi, pareon sfi toutun ta etera poieein oyk etheleisai omofroneein, alla gnumei dieneixthentas Eyryton men, pythomenon tun Perseun ten periodon, aitesanta te ta opla kai endunta agein euyton keleusai ton eiluta es tous maxomenoys, okus de ayton egage, ton men agagonta oixesthai feugonta, ton de espesonta es ton omilon diafthareinai, Aristodemon de lipopsyxeonta leiftheinai. [2] ei men nyn e mounon Aristodemon algesanta aponosteisai es Sparten e kai omou sfeun amfoterun ten komiden genesthai, dokeein emoi, oyk an sfi Spartietas meinin oydemian prosthesthai. nyni de tou men aytun apolomenoy, tou de teis men ayteis exomenoy profasios oyk ethelesantos de apothneskein, anagkaius sfi exein menisai megalus Aristodemui.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 7: Polymnia [230]

     230. Some say that Aristodemos came safe to Sparta in this manner, and on a pretext such as I have said; but others, that he had been sent as a messenger from the camp, and when he might have come up in time to find the battle going on, was not willing to do so, but stayed upon the road and so saved his life, while his fellow-messenger reached the battle and was slain.         230. [1] oi men nyn oytu sutheinai legoysi Aristodemon es Sparten kai dia profasin toiende, oi de aggelon pemfthenta ek tou stratopedoy, exeon aytui katalabein ten maxen ginomenen oyk etheleisai, all' ypomeinanta en tei odui perigenesthai, ton de synaggelon aytou apikomenon es ten maxen apothanein.   
      213. When Aristodemos, I say, had returned home to Lacedemon, he had reproach and dishonour; and that which he suffered by way of dishonour was this,--no one of the Spartans would either give him light for a fire or speak with him, and he had reproach in that he was called Aristodemos the coward.         231. [1] aponostesas de es Lakedaimona o Aristodemos eixe oneidos te kai atimien. pasxun de toiade etimuto. oyte oi pur oydeis enaye Spartieteun oyte dielegeto. oneidos de eixe o tresas Aristodemos kaleomenos. all' o men en tei en Plataieisi maxei anelabe pasan ten epeneixtheisan aitien.   
      232. He however in the battle at Plataia repaired all the guilt that was charged against him: but it is reported that another man also survived of these three hundred, whose name was Pantites, having been sent as a messenger to Thessaly, and this man, when he returned back to Sparta and found himself dishonoured, is said to have strangled himself.         232. [1] legetai de kai allon apopemfthenta aggelon es Thessalien tun triekosiun toutun perigenesthai, tui oynoma einai Pantiten. nostesanta de touton es Sparten, us etimuto, apagxasthai.   
      233. The Thebans however, of whom the commander was Leontiades, being with the Hellenes had continued for some time to fight against the king's army, constrained by necessity; but when they saw that the fortunes of the Persians were prevailing, then and not before, while the Hellenes with Leonidas were making their way with speed to the hillock, they separated from these and holding out their hands came near to the Barbarians, saying at the same time that which was most true, namely that they were on the side of the Medes and that they had been among the first to give earth and water to the king; and moreover that they had come to Thermopylai constrained by necessity, and were blameless for the loss which had been inflicted upon the king: so that thus saying they preserved their lives, for they had also the Thessalians to bear witness to these words. However, they did not altogether meet with good fortune, for some had even been slain as they had been approaching, and when they had come and the Barbarians had them in their power, the greater number of them were branded by command of Xerxes with the royal marks, beginning with their leader Leontiades, the same whose son Eurymachos was afterwards slain by the Plataians, when he had been made commander of four hundred Thebans and had seized the city of the Plataians.         233. [1] oi de Thebaioi, tun o Leontiades estrategee, teus men meta tun Ellenun eontes emaxonto yp' anagkaies exomenoi pros ten basileos stratien. us de eidon katypertera tun Perseun ginomena ta pregmata, oytu de, tun sun Leunidei Ellenun epeigomenun epi ton kolunon, aposxisthentes toutun xeiras te proeteinon kai eisan asson tun barbarun, legontes ton alethestaton tun logun, us kai medizoysi kai gein te kai ydur en prutoisi edosan basilei, ypo de anagkaies exomenoi es Thermopulas apikoiato kai anaitioi eien tou trumatos tou gegonotos basilei. [2] uste tauta legontes perieginonto. eixon gar kai Thessalous toutun tun logun martyras. oy mentoi ta ge panta eytuxesan. us gar aytous elabon oi barbaroi elthontas, tous men tinas kai apekteinan prosiontas, tous de pleunas aytun keleusantos Xerxeu estizon stigmata basileia, arxamenoi apo tou strategou Leontiadeu. tou ton paida Eyrumaxon xronui metepeita efoneysan Plataiees strategesanta andrun Thebaiun tetrakosiun kai sxonta to asty to Plataieun.   
      234. Thus did the Hellenes at Thermopylai contend in fight; and Xerxes summoned Demaratos and inquired of him, having first said this: "Demaratos, thou art a good man; and this I conclude by the truth of thy words, for all that thou saidest turned out so as thou didst say. Now, however, tell me how many in number are the remaining Lacedemonians, and of them how many are like these in matters of war; or are they so even all of them?" He said: "O king, the number of all the Lacedemonians is great and their cities are many, but that which thou desirest to learn, thou shalt know. There is in Lacedemon the city of Sparta, having about eight thousand men; and these are all equal to those who fought here: the other Lacedemonians are not equal to these, but they are good men too." To this Xerxes said: "Demaratos, in what manner shall we with least labour get the better of these men? Come set forth to us this; for thou knowest the courses of their counsels, seeing that thou wert once their king."         234. [1] oi men de peri Thermopulas Ellenes oytu egunisanto, Xerxes de kalesas Demareton eiruta arxamenos enthende. <<Demarete, aner eis agathos. tekmairomai de tei aletheiei. osa gar eipas, apanta apebe oytu. nun de moi eipe, kosoi tines eisi oi loipoi Lakedaimonioi, kai toutun okosoi toioutoi ta polemia eite kai apantes.>> [2] o d' eipe <<u basileu, pleithos men pollon pantun tun Lakedaimoniun kai polies pollai. to de theleis ekmathein, eideseis. esti en tei Lakedaimoni Sparte polis andrun oktakisxiliun malista, kai oytoi pantes eisi omoioi toisi enthade maxesamenoisi. oi ge men alloi Lakedaimonioi toutoisi men oyk omoioi, agathoi de.>> [3] eipe pros tauta Xerxes <<Demarete, teui tropui aponetotata tun andrun toutun epikratesomen; ithi exegeo. su gar exeis aytun tas diexodoys tun boyleymatun oia basileus genomenos. >>   
      235. He made answer: "O king, if thou dost in very earnest take counsel with me, it is right that I declare to thee the best thing. What if thou shouldest send three hundred ships from thy fleet to attack the Laconian land? Now there is lying near it an island named Kythera, about which Chilon, who was a very wise man among us, said that it would be a greater gain for the Spartans that it should be sunk under the sea than that it should remain above it; for he always anticipated that something would happen from it of such a kind as I am now setting forth to thee: not that he knew of thy armament beforehand, but that he feared equally every armament of men. Let thy forces then set forth from this island and keep the Lacedemonians in fear; and while they have a war of their own close at their doors, there will be no fear for thee from them that when the remainder of Hellas is being conquered by the land-army, they will come to the rescue there. Then after the remainder of Hellas has been reduced to subjection, from that moment the Lacedemonian power will be left alone and therefore feeble. If however thou shalt not do this, I will tell thee what thou must look for. There is a narrow isthmus leading to the Peloponnese, and in this place thou must look that other battles will be fought more severe than those which have taken place, seeing that all the Peloponnesians have sworn to a league against thee: but if thou shalt do the other thing of which I spoke, this isthmus and the cities within it will come over to thy side without a battle."         235. [1] o d' ameibeto <<u basileu, ei men de symboyleueai moi prothumus, dikaion me soi esti frazein to ariston. ei teis naytikeis stratieis neas triekosias aposteileias epi ten Lakainan xuren. [2] esti de ep' aytei neisos epikeimene tei oynoma esti Kuthera, ten Khilun aner par' emin sofutatos genomenos kerdos mezon an efe einai Spartieteisi kata teis thalasses katadedykenai mallon e yperexein, aiei ti prosdokun ap' ayteis toiouto esesthai oion toi egu exegeomai, oyti ton son stolon proeidus, alla panta omoius fobeomenos andrun stolon. [3] ek tautes teis nesoy ormumenoi fobeontun tous Lakedaimonioys. paroikoy de polemoy sfi eontos oikeioy, oyden deinoi esontai toi me teis alles Ellados aliskomenes ypo tou pezou boetheusi tautei. katadoylutheises de teis alles Ellados asthenes ede to Lakunikon mounon leipetai. [4] en de tauta me poieeis, tade toi prosdoka esesthai. esti teis Peloponnesoy isthmos steinos. en toutui tui xurui pantun Peloponnesiun synomosantun epi soi maxas isxyroteras allas tun genomeneun prosdekeo esesthai toi. ekeino de poiesanti amaxeti o te isthmos oytos kai ai polies prosxuresoysi.>>;   
      236. After him spoke Achaimenes, brother of Xerxes and also commander of the fleet, who chanced to have been present at this discourse and was afraid lest Xerxes should be persuaded to do this: "O king," he said, "I see that thou art admitting the speech of a man who envies thy good fortune, or is even a traitor to thy cause: for in truth the Hellenes delight in such a temper as this; they envy a man for his good luck, and they hate that which is stronger than themselves. And if, besides other misfortunes which we have upon us, seeing that four hundred of our ships have suffered wreck, thou shalt send away another three hundred from the station of the fleet to sail round Peloponnese, then thy antagonists become a match for thee in fight; whereas while it is all assembled together our fleet is hard for them to deal with, and they will not be at all a match for thee: and moreover the whole sea- force will support the land-force and be supported by it, if they proceed onwards together; but if thou shalt divide them, neither wilt thou be of service to them nor they to thee. My determination is rather to set thy affairs in good order and not to consider the affairs of the enemy, either where they will set on foot the war or what they will do or how many in number they are; for it is sufficient that they should themselves take thought for themselves, and we for ourselves likewise: and if the Lacedemonians come to stand against the Persians in fight, they will assuredly not heal the wound from which they are now suffering."         236. [1] legei meta touton Axaimenes, adelfeos te eun Xerxeu kai tou naytikou stratou strategos, paratyxun te tui logui kai deisas me anagnusthei Xerxes poieein tauta, <<u basileu, oru se andros endekomenon logoys os fthoneei toi ey pressonti e kai prodidoi pregmata ta sa. kai gar de kai tropoisi toioutoisi xreumenoi Ellenes xairoysi. tou te eytyxeein fthoneoysi kai to kresson stygeoysi. [2] ei d' epi teisi pareouseisi tuxeisi, tun nees nenayegekasi tetrakosiai, allas ek tou stratopedoy triekosias apopempseis peripleein Peloponneson, axiomaxoi toi ginontai oi antipaloi. ales de eun o naytikos stratos dysmetaxeiristos te aytoisi ginetai, kai arxen oyk axiomaxoi toi esontai, kai pas o naytikos tui pezui arexei kai o pezos tui naytikui omou poreyomenos. ei de diaspaseis, oyte su eseai ekeinoisi xresimos oyte ekeinoi soi. [3] ta seutou de tithemenon ey gnumen exu ta tun antipolemun me epilegesthai pregmata, tei te stesontai ton polemon ta te poiesoysi osoi te pleithos eisi. ikanoi gar ekeinoi ge aytoi euytun peri frontizein eisi, emeis de emeun usautus. Lakedaimonioi de en iusi antia Perseisi es maxen, oyden to pareon truma akeuntai. >>   
      237. To him Xerxes made answer as follows: "Achaimenes, I think that thou speakest well, and so will I do; but Demaratos speaks that which he believes to be best for me, though his opinion is defeated by thine: for I will not certainly admit that which thou saidest, namely that he is not well-disposed to my cause, judging both by what was said by him before this, and also by that which is the truth, namely that though one citizen envies another for his good fortune and shows enmity to him by his silence, nor would a citizen when a fellow-citizen consulted him suggest that which seemed to him the best, unless he had attained to a great height of virtue, and such men doubtless are few; yet guest- friend to guest-friend in prosperity is well-disposed as nothing else on earth, and if his friend should consult him, he would give him the best counsel. Thus then as regards the evil-speaking against Demaratos, that is to say about one who is my guest-friend, I bid every one abstain from it in the future."         237. [1] ameibetai Xerxes toiside. <<Axaimenes, ey te moi dokeeis legein kai poiesu tauta. Demaretos de legei men ta arista elpetai einai emoi, gnumei mentoi essoutai ypo seu. [2] oy gar de keino ge endexomai okus oyk eynoeei toisi emoisi pregmasi, toisi te legomenoisi proteron ek toutoy stathmumenos kai tui eonti, oti polietes men polietei ey pressonti fthoneei kai esti dysmenes tei sigei, oyd' an symboyleyomenoy tou astou polietes aner ta arista oi dokeonta einai ypotheoito, ei me prosu areteis anekoi. spanioi de eisi oi toioutoi. [3] xeinos de xeinui ey pressonti esti eymenestaton pantun, symboyleyomenoy te an symboyleuseie ta arista. oytu un kakologies teis es Demareton, eontos emoi xeinoy peri, exesthai tina tou loipou keleuu. >>   
      238. Having thus said Xerxes passed in review the bodies of the dead; and as for Leonidas, hearing that he had been the king and commander of the Lacedemonians he bade them cut off his head and crucify him. And it has been made plain to me by many proofs besides, but by none more strongly than by this, that king Xerxes was enraged with Leonidas while alive more than with any other man on earth; for otherwise he would never have done this outrage to his corpse; since of all the men whom I know, the Persians are accustomed most to honour those who are good men in war. They then to whom it was appointed to do these things, proceeded to do so.         238. [1] tauta eipas Xerxes diexeie dia tun nekrun, kai Leunideu, akekous oti basileus te En kai strategos Lakedaimoniun, ekeleyse apotamontas ten kefalen anastayrusai. [2] deila moi polloisi men kai alloisi tekmerioisi, en de kai tuide oyk ekista gegone, oti basileus Xerxes pantun de malista andrun ethymuthe zunti Leunidei. oy gar an kote es ton nekron tauta parenomese, epei timan malista nomizoysi tun egu oida anthrupun Persai andras agathous ta polemia. oi men de tauta epoieyn, toisi epetetakto poieein.   
      239. I will return now to that point of my narrative where it remained unfinished. The Lacedemonians had been informed before all others that the king was preparing an expedition against Hellas; and thus it happened that they sent to the Oracle at Delphi, where that reply was given them which I reported shortly before this. And they got this information in a strange manner; for Demaratos the son of Ariston after he had fled for refuge to the Medes was not friendly to the Lacedemonians, as I am of opinion and as likelihood suggests supporting my opinion; but it is open to any man to make conjecture whether he did this thing which follows in a friendly spirit or in malicious triumph over them. When Xerxes had resolved to make a campaign against Hellas, Demaratos, being in Susa and having been informed of this, had a desire to report it to the Lacedemonians. Now in no other way was he able to signify it, for there was danger that he should be discovered, but he contrived thus, that is to say, he took a folding tablet and scraped off the wax which was upon it, and then he wrote the design of the king upon the wood of the tablet, and having done so he melted the wax and poured it over the writing, so that the tablet (being carried without writing upon it) might not cause any trouble to be given by the keepers of the road. Then when it had arrived at Lacedemon, the Lacedemonians were not able to make conjecture of the matter; until at last, as I am informed, Gorgo, the daughter of Cleomenes and wife of Leonidas, suggested a plan of which she had herself thought, bidding them scrape the wax and they would find writing upon the wood; and doing as she said they found the writing and read it, and after that they sent notice to the other Hellenes. These things are said to have come to pass in this manner.        239. [1] aneimi de ekeise tou logoy tei moi to proteron exelipe. eputhonto Lakedaimonioi oti basileus stelloito epi ten Ellada prutoi, kai oytu de es to xresterion to es Delfous apepempsan, entha de sfi exresthe ta oligui proteron eipon. eputhonto de tropui thumasiui. [2] Demaretos gar o Aristunos fygun es Medoys, us men egu dokeu kai to oikos emoi symmaxetai, oyk En eynoos Lakedaimonioisi, paresti de eikazein eite eynoiei tauta epoiese eite kai kataxairun. epeite gar Xerxei edoxe stratelateein epi ten Ellada, eun en Sousoisi o Demaretos kai pythomenos tauta ethelese Lakedaimonioisi exaggeilai. [3] allus men de oyk eixe semeinai. epikindynon gar En me lamftheie. o de mexanatai toiade. deltion diptyxon labun ton keron aytou exeknese, kai epeita en tui xului tou deltioy egrapse ten basileos gnumen, poiesas de tauta opisu epetexe ton keron epi ta grammata, ina feromenon keinon to deltion meden preigma parexoi pros tun odofylakun. [4] epei de kai apiketo es ten Lakedaimona, oyk eixon symbalesthai oi Lakedaimonioi, prin ge de sfi, us egu pynthanomai, Kleomeneos men thygater Leunideu de gyne Gorgu ypetheto epifrastheisa ayte, ton keron knan keleuoysa, kai eyresein sfeas grammata en tui xului. peithomenoi de eyron kai epelexanto, epeita de toisi alloisi Ellesi epesteilan. tauta men de oytu legetai genesthai.  
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania

     BOOK VIII THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED URANIA         
I s t o r i u n   Th
 
O y r a n i e   
      1. Those of the Hellenes who had been appointed to serve in the fleet were these:--the Athenians furnished a hundred and twenty-seven ships, and the Plataians moved by valour and zeal for the service, although they had had no practice in seamanship, yet joined with the Athenians in manning their ships. The Corinthians furnished forty ships, the Megarians twenty; the Chalkidians manned twenty ships with which the Athenians furnished them; the Eginetans furnished eighteen ships, the Sikyonians twelve, the Lacedemonians ten, the Epidaurians eight, the Eretrians seven, the Troizenians five, the Styrians two, the Keians two ships and two fifty-oared galleys, while the Locrians of Opus came also to the assistance of the rest with seven fifty-oared galleys.         1. [1] oi de Ellenun es ton naytikon straton taxthentes Esan oide, Athenaioi men neas parexomenoi ekaton kai eikosi kai epta. ypo de areteis te kai prothymies Plataiees apeiroi teis naytikeis eontes synepleroyn toisi Athenaioisi tas neas. Korinthioi de tesserakonta neas pareixonto, Megarees de eikosi. [2] kai Khalkidees epleroyn eikosi, Athenaiun sfi parexontun tas neas, Aigineitai de oktukaideka, Sikyunioi de dyokaideka, Lakedaimonioi de deka, Epidaurioi de oktu, Eretriees de epta, Troizenioi de pente, Styrees de duo, kai Keioi duo te neas kai pentekonteroys duo. Lokroi de sfi oi Opountioi epeboetheon pentekonteroys exontes epta.   
      2. These were those who joined in the expedition to Artemision, and I have mentioned them according to the number of the ships which they severally supplied: so the number of the ships which were assembled at Artemision was (apart from the fifty-oared galleys) two hundred and seventy-one: and the commander who had the supreme power was furnished by the Spartans, namely Eurybiades son of Eurycleides, since the allies said that they would not follow the lead of the Athenians, but unless a Lacedemonian were leader they would break up the expedition which was to be made:         2. [1] Esan men un oytoi oi strateyomenoi ep' Artemision, eiretai de moi kai us to pleithos ekastoi tun neun pareixonto. arithmos de tun syllextheiseun neun ep' Artemision En, parex tun pentekonterun, diekosiai kai ebdomekonta kai mia. [2] ton de strategon ton to megiston kratos exonta pareixonto Spartieitai Eyrybiaden Eyrykleideu. oi gar summaxoi oyk efasan, en me o Lakun egemoneuei, Athenaioisi epsesthai egeomenoisi, alla lusein to mellon esesthai strateyma.   
      3. for it had come to be said at first, even before they sent to Sicily to obtain allies, that the fleet ought to be placed in the charge of the Athenians. So as the allies opposed this, the Athenians yielded, having it much at heart that Hellas should be saved, and perceiving that if they should have disagreement with one another about the leadership, Hellas would perish: and herein they judged rightly, for disagreement between those of the same race is worse than war undertaken with one consent by as much as war is worse than peace. Being assured then of this truth, they did not contend, but gave way for so long time as they were urgently in need of the allies; and that this was so their conduct proved; for when, after repelling the Persian from themselves, they were now contending for his land and no longer for their own, they alleged the insolence of Pausanias as a pretext and took away the leadership from the Lacedemonians. This however took place afterwards.         3. [1] egeneto gar kat' arxas logos, prin e kai es Sikelien pempein epi symmaxien, us to naytikon Athenaioisi xreon eie epitrepein. antibantun de tun symmaxun eikon oi Athenaioi mega pepoiemenoi perieinai ten Ellada kai gnontes, ei stasiasoysi peri teis egemonies, us apoleetai e Ellas, ortha noeuntes. stasis gar emfylos polemoy omofroneontos tosoutui kakion esti osui polemos eirenes. [2] epistamenoi un ayto touto oyk anteteinon all' eikon, mexri osoy karta edeonto aytun, us diedexan. us gar de usamenoi ton Persen peri teis ekeinoy ede ton aguna epoieunto, profasin ten Paysanieu ybrin proisxomenoi apeilonto ten egemonien tous Lakedaimonioys. alla tauta men ysteron egeneto.   
      4. But at this time these Hellenes also who had come to Artemision, when they saw that a great number of ships had put in to Aphetai and that everything was filled with their armament, were struck with fear, because the fortunes of the Barbarians had different issue from that which they expected, and they deliberated about retreating from Artemision to the inner parts of Hellas. And the Euboeans perceiving that they were so deliberating, asked Eurybiades to stay there by them for a short time, until they should have removed out of their land their children, and their households; and as they did not persuade him, they went elsewhere and persuaded Themistocles the commander of the Athenians by a payment of thirty talents, the condition being that the fleet should stay and fight the sea-battle in front of Euboea.         4. [1] tote de oytoi oi kai ep' Artemision Ellenun apikomenoi us eidon neas te pollas kataxtheisas es tas Afetas kai stratieis apanta plea, epei aytoisi para doxan ta pregmata tun barbarun apebaine e us aytoi katedokeon, katarrudesantes dresmon eboyleuonto apo tou Artemisioy esu es ten Ellada. [2] gnontes de sfeas oi Eyboees tauta boyleyomenoys edeonto Eyrybiadeu prosmeinai xronon oligon, est' an aytoi tekna te kai tous oiketas ypektheuntai. us d' oyk epeithon, metabantes ton Athenaiun strategon peithoysi Themistoklea epi misthui triekonta talantoisi, ep' ui te katameinantes pro teis Eyboies poiesontai ten naymaxien.   
      5. Themistocles then caused the Hellenes to stay in the following manner:--to Eurybiades he imparted five talents of the sum with the pretence that he was giving it from himself; and when Eurybiades had been persuaded by him to change his resolution, Adeimantos son of Okytos, the Corinthian commander, was the only one of all the others who still made a struggle, saying that he would sail away from Artemision and would not stay with the others: to him therefore Themistocles said with an oath: "Thou at least shalt not leave us, for I will give thee greater gifts than the king of the Medes would send to thee, if thou shouldest desert thy allies." Thus he spoke, and at the same time he sent to the ship of Adeimantos three talents of silver. So these all had been persuaded by gifts to change their resolution, and at the same time the request of the Euboeans had been gratified and Themistocles himself gained money; and it was not known that he had the rest of the money, but those who received a share of this money were fully persuaded that it had come from the Athenian State for this purpose.         5. [1] o de Themistoklees tous Ellenas episxein ude poieei. Eyrybiadei toutun tun xrematun metadidoi pente talanta us par' euytou deithen didous. us de oi oytos anepepeisto, Adeimantos gar o Ukutoy o Korinthios strategos tun loipun espaire mounos, famenos apopleusesthai te apo tou Artemisioy kai oy parameneein, pros de touton eipe o Themistoklees epomosas [2] <<oy su ge emeas apoleipseis, epei toi egu mezu dura dusu e basileus an toi o Medun pempseie apoliponti tous symmaxoys. >> tauta te ama egoreye kai pempei epi ten nea ten Adeimantoy talanta argyrioy tria. [3] oytoi te de pantes duroisi anapepeismenoi Esan kai toisi Eyboeusi ekexaristo, aytos te o Themistoklees ekerdene, elanthane de ta loipa exun, all' episteato oi metalabontes toutun tun xrematun ek tun Atheneun elthein epi tui logui toutui ta xremata.   
      6. Thus they remained in Euboea and fought a sea-battle; and it came to pass as follows:--when the Barbarians had arrived at Aphetai about the beginning of the afternoon, having been informed even before they came that a few ships of the Hellenes were stationed about Artemision and now seeing them for themselves, they were eager to attack them, to see if they could capture them. Now they did not think it good yet to sail against them directly for this reason,--for fear namely that the Hellenes, when they saw them sailing against them, should set forth to take flight and darkness should come upon them in their flight; and so they were likely (thought the Persians) to get away; whereas it was right, according to their calculation, that not even the fire- bearer should escape and save his life.         6. [1] oytu de katemeinan te en tei Eyboiei kai enaymaxesan, egeneto de ude. epeite de es tas Afetas peri deilen pruien ginomenen apikato oi barbaroi, pythomenoi men eti kai proteron peri to Artemision nayloxeein neas Ellenidas oligas, tote de aytoi idontes, prothymoi Esan epixeireein, ei kus eloien aytas. [2] ek men de teis anties prospleein oy ku sfi edokee tunde eineka, me kus idontes oi Ellenes prospleontas es fygen ormeseian feugontas te eyfrone katalambanei. kai emellon deithen ekfeuxesthai, edei de mede pyrforon tui ekeinun logui ekfygonta perigenesthai.   
      7. With a view to this then they contrived as follows:--of the whole number of their ships they parted off two hundred and sent them round to sail by Caphereus and round Geriastos to the Euripos, going outside Skiathos so that they might not be sighted by the enemy as they sailed round Euboea: and their purpose was that with these coming up by that way, and blocking the enemies' retreat, and themselves advancing against them directly, they might surround them on all sides. Having formed this plan they proceeded to send off the ships which were appointed for this, and they themselves had no design of attacking the Hellenes on that day nor until the signal agreed upon should be displayed to them by those who were sailing round, to show that they had arrived. These ships, I say, they were sending round, and meanwhile they were numbering the rest at Aphetai.         7. [1] pros tauta un tade emexanunto. tun neun apaseun apokrinantes diekosias periepempon exuthen Skiathoy, us an me oftheiesan ypo tun polemiun peripleoysai Eyboian kata te Kaferea kai peri Geraiston es ton Eyripon, ina de perilaboien oi men tautei apikomenoi kai fraxantes aytun ten opisu feroysan odon, sfeis de epispomenoi ex enanties. [2] tauta boyleysamenoi apepempon tun neun tas taxtheisas, aytoi oyk en noui exontes tautes teis emeres toisi Ellesi epithesesthai, oyde proteron e to sunthema sfi emelle fanesesthai para tun peripleontun us ekontun. tautas men de periepempon, tun de loipeun neun en teisi Afeteisi epoieunto arithmon.   
      8. During this time, while these were numbering their ships, it happened thus:--there was in that camp a man of Skione named Skyllias, as a diver the best of all the men of that time, who also in the shipwreck which took place by Pelion had saved for the Persians many of their goods and many of them also he had acquired for himself: this Skyllias it appears had had an intention even before this of deserting to the side of the Hellenes, but it had not been possible for him to do so then. In what manner after this attempt he did actually come to the Hellenes, I am not able to say with certainty, but I marvel if the tale is true which is reported; for it is said that he dived into the sea at Aphetai and did not come up till he reached Artemision, having traversed here somewhere about eighty furlongs through the sea. Now there are told about this man several other tales which seem likely to be false, but some also which are true: about this matter however let it be stated as my opinion that he came to Artemision in a boat. Then when he had come, he forthwith informed the commanders about the shipwreck, how it had come to pass, and of the ships which had been sent away to go round Euboea.         8. [1] en de toutui tui xronui en ui oytoi arithmon epoieunto tun neun, En gar en tui stratopedui toutui Skyllies Skiunaios dutes tun tote anthrupun aristos, os kai en tei nayegiei tei kata Pelion genomenei polla men esuse tun xrematun toisi Perseisi, polla de kai aytos periebaleto. oytos o Skyllies en noui men eixe ara kai proteron aytomolesein es tous Ellenas, all' oy gar oi paresxe us tote. [2] oteui men de tropui to entheuten eti apiketo es tous Ellenas, oyk exu eipein atrekeus, thumazu de ei ta legomena esti alethea. legetai gar us ex Afeteun dus es ten thalassan oy proteron anesxe prin e apiketo epi to Artemision, stadioys malista kei toutoys es ogdukonta dia teis thalasses diexelthun. [3] legetai men nyn kai alla pseydesi eikela peri tou andros toutoy, ta de metexetera alethea. peri mentoi toutoy gnume moi apodedexthu ploiui min apikesthai epi to Artemision. us de apiketo, aytika esemene toisi strategoisi ten te nayegien us genoito, kai tas peripemftheisas tun neun peri Eyboian.   
      9. Hearing this the Hellenes considered the matter with one another; and after many things had been spoken, the prevailing opinion was that they should remain there that day and encamp on shore, and then, when midnight was past, they should set forth and go to meet those ships which were sailing round. After this however, as no one sailed out to attack them, they waited for the coming of the late hours of the afternoon and sailed out themselves to attack the Barbarians, desiring to make a trial both of their manner of fighting and of the trick of breaking their line.         9. [1] touto de akousantes oi Ellenes logon sfisi aytoisi edidosan. pollun de lexthentun enika ten emeren ekeinen aytou meinantas te kai aylisthentas, metepeita nukta mesen parentas poreuesthai kai apantan teisi peripleouseisi tun neun. meta de touto, us oydeis sfi epeplee, deilen opsien ginomenen teis emeres fylaxantes aytoi epanepleon epi tous barbaroys, apopeiran aytun poiesasthai boylomenoi teis te maxes kai tou diekplooy.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [10]

     10. And seeing them sailing thus against them with few ships, not only the others in the army of Xerxes but also their commanders judged them to be moved by mere madness, and they themselves also put out their ships to sea, supposing that they would easily capture them: and their expectation was reasonable enough, since they saw that the ships of the Hellenes were few, while theirs were many times as numerous and sailed better. Setting their mind then on this, they came round and enclosed them in the middle. Then so many of the Ionians as were kindly disposed to the Hellenes and were serving in the expedition against their will, counted it a matter of great grief to themselves when they saw them being surrounded and felt assured that not one of them would return home, so feeble did they think the power of the Hellenes to be; while those to whom that which was happening was a source of pleasure, were vying with one another, each one endeavouring to be the first to take an Athenian ship and receive gifts from the king: for in their camps there was more report of the Athenians than of any others.         10. [1] oruntes de sfeas oi te alloi stratiutai oi Xerxeu kai oi strategoi epipleontas neysi oligeisi, pagxy sfi manien epeneikantes aneigon kai aytoi tas neas, elpisantes sfeas eypeteus airesein, oikota karta elpisantes, tas men ge tun Ellenun oruntes oligas neas, tas de euytun plethei te pollaplesias kai ameinon pleousas. katafronesantes tauta ekyklounto aytous es meson. [2] osoi men nyn tun Iunun Esan eynooi toisi Ellesi, aekontes te estrateuonto symforen te epoieunto megalen oruntes periexomenoys aytous kai epistamenoi us oydeis aytun aponostesei. oytu asthenea sfi efaineto einai ta tun Ellenun pregmata. [3] osoisi de kai edomenoisi En to ginomenon, amillan epoieunto okus aytos ekastos prutos nea Attiken elun para basileos dura lampsetai. Athenaiun gar aytoisi logos En pleistos ana ta stratopeda.   
      11. The Hellenes meanwhile, when the signal was given, first set themselves with prows facing the Barbarians and drew the sterns of their ships together in the middle; and when the signal was given a second time, although shut off in a small space and prow against prow, they set to work vigorously; and they captured thirty ships of the Barbarians and also Philaon the son of Chersis, the brother of Gorgos kind of the Salaminians, who was a man of great repute in the army. Now the first of the Hellenes who captured a ship of the enemy was an Athenian, Lycomedes the son of Aischraios, and he received the prize for valour. So these, as they were contending in this sea-fight with doubtful result, were parted from one another by the coming on of night. The Hellenes accordingly sailed away to Artemision and the Barbarians to Aphetai, the contest having been widely different from their expectation. In this sea-fight Antidoros of Lemnos alone of the Hellenes who were with the king deserted to the side of the Hellenes, and the Athenians on account of this deed gave him a piece of land in Salamis.         11. [1] toisi de Ellesi us esemene, pruta men antipruiroi toisi barbaroisi genomenoi es to meson tas prumnas synegagon, deutera de semenantos ergoy eixonto en oligui per apolamfthentes kai kata stoma. [2] enthauta triekonta neas aireoysi tun barbarun kai ton Gorgoy tou Salaminiun basileos adelfeon Filaona ton Khersios, logimon eonta en tui stratopedui andra. prutos de Ellenun nea tun polemiun eile aner Athenaios Lykomedes Aisxraioy, kai to aristeion elabe oytos. [3] tous d' en tei naymaxiei tautei eteralkeus agunizomenoys nux epelthousa dielyse. oi men de Ellenes epi to Artemision apepleon, oi de barbaroi es tas Afetas, pollon para doxan agunisamenoi. en tautei tei naymaxiei Antiduros Lemnios mounos tun sun basilei Ellenun eontun aytomoleei es tous Ellenas, kai oi Athenaioi dia touto to ergon edosan aytui xuron en Salamini.   
      12. When the darkness had come on, although the season was the middle of summer, yet there came on very abundant rain, which lasted through the whole of the night, with crashing thunder from Mount Pelion; and the dead bodies and pieces of wreck were cast up at Aphetai and became entangled round the prows of the ships and struck against the blades of the oars: and the men of the army who were there, hearing these things became afraid, expecting that they would certainly perish, to such troubles had they come; for before they had had even breathing space after the shipwreck and the storm which had arisen off Mount Pelion, there had come upon them a hard sea-fight, and after the sea-fight a violent storm of rain and strong streams rushing to the sea and crashing thunder.         12. [1] us de eyfrone egegonee, En men teis ures meson theros, egineto de ydur te apleton dia pases teis nyktos kai sklerai brontai apo tou Pelioy. oi de nekroi kai ta nayegia exefeponto es tas Afetas, kai peri te tas pruiras tun neun eileonto kai etarasson tous tarsous tun kupeun. [2] oi de stratiutai oi tautei akouontes tauta es fobon katisteato, elpizontes pagxy apoleesthai es oia kaka Ekon. prin gar e kai anapneusai sfeas ek te teis nayegies kai tou xeimunos tou genomenoy kata Pelion, ypelabe naymaxie kartere, ek de teis naymaxies ombros te labros kai rheumata isxyra es thalassan ormemena brontai te sklerai.   
      13. These then had such a night as I have said; and meanwhile those of them who had been appointed to sail round Euboea experienced the very same night, but against them it raged much more fiercely, inasmuch as it fell upon them while they were making their course in the open sea. And the end of it proved distressful to them; for when the storm and the rain together came upon them as they sailed, being then off the "Hollows" of Euboea, they were borne by the wind not knowing by what way they were carried, and were cast away upon the rocks. And all this was being brought about by God in order that the Persian force might be made more equal to that of the Hellenes and might not be by very much the larger.         13. [1] kai toutoisi men toiaute e nux egineto, toisi de taxtheisi aytun peripleein Eyboian e ayte per eousa nux pollon En eti agriutere, tosoutu osui en pelagei feromenoisi epepipte, kai to telos sfi egineto axari. us gar de pleoysi aytoisi xeimun te kai to ydur epegineto eousi kata ta Koila teis Eyboies, feromenoi tui pneumati kai oyk eidotes tei eferonto exepipton pros tas petras. epoieeto te pan ypo tou theou okus an exisutheie tui Ellenikui to Persikon mede pollui pleon eie.   
      14. These then, I say, were perishing about the Hollows of Euboea, and meanwhile the Barbarians at Aphetai, when day had dawned upon them, of which they were glad, were keeping their ships quiet, and were satisfied in their evil plight to remain still for the present time; but to the Hellenes there came as a reinforcement three-and-fifty Athenian ships. The coming of these gave them more courage, and at the same time they were encouraged also by a report that those of the Barbarians who had been sailing round Euboea had all been destroyed by the storm that had taken place. They waited then for the same time of day as before, and then they sailed and fell upon some Kilikian ships; and having destroyed these, they sailed away when the darkness came on, and returned to Artemision.         14. [1] oytoi men nyn peri ta Koila teis Eyboies dieftheironto. oi d' en Afeteisi barbaroi, us sfi asmenoisi emere epelampse, atremas te eixon tas neas kai sfi apexrato kakus presoysi esyxien agein en tui pareonti. toisi de Ellesi epeboetheon nees treis kai pentekonta Attikai. [2] aytai te de sfeas eperrusan apikomenai kai ama aggelie elthousa, us tun barbarun oi peripleontes ten Eyboian pantes eiesan dieftharmenoi ypo tou genomenoy xeimunos. fylaxantes de ten ayten uren, pleontes epepeson neysi Kilisseisi. tautas de diaftheirantes, us eyfrone egineto, apepleon opisu epi to Artemision.   
      15. On the third day the commanders of the Barbarians, being exceedingly indignant that so small a number of ships should thus do them damage, and fearing what Xerxes might do, did not wait this time for the Hellenes to begin the fight, but passed the word of command and put out their ships to sea about the middle of the day. Now it so happened that these battles at sea and the battles on land at Thermopylai took place on the same days; and for those who fought by sea the whole aim of the fighting was concerned with the channel of Euripos, just as the aim of Leonidas and of his band was to guard the pass: the Hellenes accordingly exhorted one another not to let the Barbarians go by into Hellas; while these cheered one another on to destroy the fleet of the Hellenes and to get possession of the straits.         15. [1] tritei de emerei deinon ti poiesamenoi oi strategoi tun barbarun neas oytu sfi oligas lymainesthai, kai to apo Xerxeu deimainontes, oyk anemeinan eti tous Ellenas maxes arxai, alla parakeleysamenoi kata meson emeres aneigon tas neas. synepipte de uste tas aytas emeras tas te naymaxias ginesthai tautas kai tas pezomaxias tas en Thermopuleisi. [2] En de pas o agun toisi kata thalassan peri tou Eyripoy, usper toisi amfi Leuniden ten esbolen fylassein. oi men de parekeleuonto okus me paresoysi es ten Ellada tous barbaroys, oi d' okus to Ellenikon strateyma diaftheirantes tou poroy kratesoysi.   
      16. Now while the forces of Xerxes were sailing in order towards them, the Hellenes kept quiet at Artemision; and the Barbarians, having made a crescent of their ships that they might enclose them, were endeavouring to surround them. Then the Hellenes put out to sea and engaged with them; and in this battle the two sides were nearly equal to one another; for the fleet of Xerxes by reason of its great size and numbers suffered damage from itself, since the ships were thrown into confusion and ran into one another: nevertheless it stood out and did not give way, for they disdained to be turned to flight by so few ships. Many ships therefore of the Hellenes were destroyed and many men perished, but many more ships and men of the Barbarians. Thus contending they parted and went each to their own place.         16. [1] us de taxamenoi oi Xerxeu epepleon, oi Ellenes atremas eixon pros tui Artemisiui. oi de barbaroi menoeides poiesantes tun neun ekyklounto, us perilaboien aytous. entheuten oi Ellenes epanepleon te kai synemisgon. en tautei tei naymaxiei paraplesioi alleloisi eginonto. [2] o gar Xerxeu stratos ypo megatheos te kai pletheos aytos yp' euytou epipte, tarassomeneun te tun neun kai peripiptoyseun peri allelas. omus mentoi anteixe kai oyk eike. deinon gar xreima epoieunto ypo neun oligeun es fygen trepesthai. [3] pollai men de tun Ellenun nees dieftheironto polloi de andres, pollui d' eti pleunes nees te tun barbarun kai andres, oytu de agunizomenoi diestesan xuris ekateroi.   
      17. In this sea-fight the Egyptians did best of the men who fought for Xerxes; and these, besides other great deeds which they displayed, captured five ships of the Hellenes together with their crews: while of the Hellenes those who did best on this day were the Athenians, and of the Athenians Cleinias the son of Alkibiades, who was serving with two hundred man and a ship of his own, furnishing the expense at his own proper cost.         17. [1] en tautei tei naymaxiei Aiguptioi men tun Xerxeu stratiuteun eristeysan, oi alla te megala erga apedexanto kai neas aytoisi andrasi eilon Ellenidas pente. tun de Ellenun kata tauten ten emeren eristeysan Athenaioi kai Athenaiun Kleinies o Alkibiadeu, os dapanen oikeien parexomenos estrateueto andrasi te diekosioisi kai oikeiei nei.   
      18. Having parted, both sides gladly hastened to their moorings; and after they had separated and got away out of the sea-fight, although the Hellenes had possession of the bodies of the dead and of the wrecks of the ships, yet having suffered severely (and especially the Athenians, of whose ships half had been disabled), they were deliberating now about retreating to the inner parts of Hellas.         18. [1] us de diestesan, asmenoi ekateroi es ormon epeigonto. oi de Ellenes us diakrithentes ek teis naymaxies apellaxthesan, tun men nekrun kai tun nayegiun epekrateon, trexeus de periefthentes, kai oyk ekista Athenaioi tun ai emiseai tun neun tetrumenai Esan, dresmon de ebouleyon esu es ten Ellada.   
      19. Themistocles however had conceived that if there should be detached from the force of the Barbarians the Ionian and Carian nations, they would be able to overcome the rest; and when the people of Euboea were driving their flocks down to that sea, he assembled the generals and said to them that he thought he had a device by which he hoped to cause the best of the king's allies to leave him. This matter he revealed to that extent only; and with regard to their present circumstances, he said that they must do as follows:--every one must slaughter of the flocks of the Euboeans as many as he wanted, for it was better that their army should have them than the enemy; moreover he advised that each one should command his own men to kindle a fire: and as for the time of their departure he would see to it in such wise that they should come safe to Hellas. This they were content to do, and forthwith when they had kindled a fire they turned their attention to the flocks.         19. [1] noui de labun o Themistoklees us ei aporrageie apo tou barbaroy to te Iunikon fulon kai to Karikon, oioi te eiesan an tun loipun katuperthe genesthai, elaynontun tun Eyboeun probata epi ten thalassan tauten, syllexas tous strategous elege sfi us dokeoi exein tina palamen, tei elpizoi tun basileos symmaxun apostesein tous aristoys. [2] tauta men nyn es tosouto paregumnoy, epi de toisi katekoysi pregmasi tade poietea sfi einai elege, tun te probatun tun Eyboikun katathuein osa tis etheloi. kresson gar einai ten stratien exein e tous polemioys. parainee te proeipein toisi euytun ekastoys pur anakaiein. komideis de peri ten uren aytui melesein, uste asineas apikesthai es ten Ellada. tauta erese sfi poieein, kai aytika pur anakaysamenoi etraponto pros ta probata.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [20]

     20. For in fact the Euboeans, neglecting the oracle of Bakis as if it had no meaning at all, had neither carried away anything from their land nor laid in any store of provisions with a view to war coming upon them, and by their conduct moreover they had brought trouble upon themselves. For the oracle uttered by Bakis about these matters runs as follows: 
"Mark, when a man, a Barbarian, shall yoke the Sea with papyrus, 
 Then do thou plan to remove the loud-bleating goats from Euboea." In the evils which at this time were either upon them or soon to be expected they might feel not a little sorry that they had paid no attention to these lines.         20. [1] oi gar Eyboees, paraxresamenoi ton Bakidos xresmon us oyden legonta, oyte ti exekomisanto oyden oyte prosesaxanto us paresomenoy sfi polemoy, peripetea te epoiesanto sfisi aytoisi ta pregmata. [2] Bakidi gar ude exei peri toutun o xresmos.     frazeo, barbarofunos otan zygon eis ala ballei
      bublinon, Eyboies apexein polymekadas aigas.toutoisi oyden toisi epesi xresamenoisi en toisi tote pareousi te kai prosdokimoisi kakoisi parein sfi symforei xrasthai pros ta megista.    
      21. While these were thus engaged, there came to them the scout from Trachis: for there was at Artemision a scout named Polyas, by birth of Antikyra, to whom it had been appointed, if the fleet should be disabled, to signify this to those at Thermopylai, and he had a vessel equipped and ready for this purpose; and similarly there was with Leonidas Abronichos son of Lysicles, an Athenian, ready to carry news to those at Artemision with a thirty-oared galley, if any disaster should happen to the land-army. This Abronichos then had arrived, and he proceeded to signify to them that which had come to pass about Leonidas and his army; and then when they were informed of it no longer put off their retreat, but set forth in the order in which they were severally posted, the Corinthians first and the Athenians last.         21. [1] oi men de tauta epresson, parein de o ek Trexinos kataskopos. En men gar ep' Artemisiui kataskopos Poluas, genos Antikyreus, tui prosetetakto, kai eixe ploion kateires etoimon, ei paleseie o naytikos stratos, semainein toisi en Thermopuleisi eousi. us d' aytus En Abrunixos o Lysikleos Athenaios kai para Leunidei etoimos toisi ep' Artemisiu eousi aggellein triekonterui, en ti katalambanei neuteron ton pezon. [2] oytos un o Abrunixos apikomenos sfi esemaine ta gegonota peri Leuniden kai ton straton aytou. oi de us eputhonto tauta, oyketi es anabolas epoieunto ten apoxuresin, ekomizonto de us ekastoi etaxthesan, Korinthioi prutoi, ystatoi de Athenaioi.   
      22. Themistocles however selected those ships of the Athenians which sailed best, and went round to the springs of drinking-water, cutting inscriptions on the stones there, which the Ionians read when they came to Artemision on the following day. These inscriptions ran thus: "Ionians, ye act not rightly in making expedition against the fathers of your race and endeavouring to enslave Hellas. Best of all were it that ye should come and be on our side; but if that may not be done by you, stand aside even now from the combat against us and ask the Carians to do the same as ye. If however neither of these two things is possible to be done, and ye are bound down by too strong compulsion to be able to make revolt, then in the action, when we engage battle, be purposely slack, remember that ye are descended from us and that our quarrel with the Barbarian took its rise at the first from you." Themistocles wrote thus, having, as I suppose, two things together in his mind, namely that either the inscriptions might elude the notice of the king and cause the Ionians to change and come over to the side on which he was, or that having been reported and denounced to Xerxes they might cause the Ionians to be distrusted by him, and so he might keep them apart from the sea- fights.         22. [1] Athenaiun de neas tas arista pleousas epilexamenos Themistoklees eporeueto peri ta potima ydata, entamnun en toisi lithoisi grammata. ta Iunes epelthontes tei ysteraiei emerei epi to Artemision epelexanto. ta de grammata tade elege. <<andres Iunes, oy poieete dikaia epi tous pateras strateyomenoi kai ten Ellada katadoyloumenoi. [2] alla malista men pros emeun ginesthe. ei de ymin esti touto me dynaton poieisai, ymeis de eti kai nun ek tou mesoy emin ezesthe kai aytoi kai tun Karun deesthe ta ayta ymin poieein. ei de medeteron toutun oion te ginesthai, all' yp' anagkaies mezonos katezeyxthe e uste apistasthai, ymeis de en tui ergui, epean symmisgumen, ethelokakeete memnemenoi oti ap' emeun gegonate kai oti arxeithen e exthre pros ton barbaron ap' ymeun emin gegone.>> [3] Themistoklees de tauta egrafe, dokeein emoi, ep' amfotera noeun, ina e lathonta ta grammata basilea Iunas poiesei metabalein kai genesthai pros euytun, e epeite aneneixthei kai diablethei pros Xerxen, apistoys poiesei tous Iunas kai tun naymaxieun aytous aposxei.   
      23. Themistocles then had set these inscriptions: and to the Barbarians there came immediately after these things a man of Histaia in a boat bringing word of the retreat of the Hellenes from Artemision. They however, not believing it, kept the messenger under guard and sent swift-sailing ships to look on before. Then these having reported the facts, at last as daylight was spreading over the sky, the whole armament sailed in a body to Artemision; and having stayed at this place till mid-day, after this they sailed to Histaia, and there arrived they took possession of the city of Histaia and overran all the villages which lie along the coast in the region of Ellopia, which is the land of Histaia.         23. [1] Themistoklees men tauta enegrapse. toisi de barbaroisi aytika meta tauta ploiui Elthe aner Istiaieus aggellun ton dresmon ton ap' Artemisioy tun Ellenun. oi d' yp' apisties ton men aggellonta eixon en fylakei, neas de taxeas apesteilan prokatopsomenas. apaggeilantun de toutun ta En, oytu de ama eliui skidnamenui pasa e stratie epeplee ales epi to Artemision. episxontes de en toutui tui xurui mexri mesoy emeres, to apo toutoy epleon es Istiaien. apikomenoi de ten polin esxon tun Istiaieun, kai teis Ellopies moires geis de teis Istiaiutidos tas parathalassias xuras pasas epedramon.   
      24. While they were there, Xerxes, after he had made his dispositions with regard to the bodies of the dead, sent a herald to the fleet: and the dispositions which he made beforehand were as follows:--for all those of his army who were lying dead at Thermopylai, (and there were as many as twenty thousand in all), with the exception of about a thousand whom he left, he dug trenches and buried them, laying over them leaves and heaping earth upon them, that they might not be seen by the men of the fleet. Then when the herald had gone over to Histaia, he gathered an assembly of the whole force and spoke these words: "Allies, king Xerxes grants permission to any one of you who desires it, to leave his post and to come and see how he fights against those most senseless men who looked to overcome the power of the king."         24. [1] enthauta de toutun eontun, Xerxes etoimasamenos ta peri tous nekrous epempe es ton naytikon straton keryka, proetoimasato de tade. osoi tou stratou tou euytou Esan nekroi en Thermopuleisi (Esan de kai duo myriades ), ypolipomenos toutun us xilioys, tous loipous tafroys oryxamenos ethapse, fyllada te epibalun kai gein epamesamenos, ina me oftheiesan ypo tou naytikou stratou. [2] us de diebe es ten Istiaien o keiryx, sullogon poiesamenos pantos tou stratopedoy elege tade. <<andres summaxoi, basileus Xerxes tui boylomenui ymeun paradidusi ekliponta ten taxin kai elthonta theesasthai okus maxetai pros tous anoetoys tun anthrupun, oi elpisan ten basileos dunamin yperbaleesthai.>>   
      25. When the herald had proclaimed this, then boats were of all things most in request, so many were they who desired to see this sight; and when they had passed over they went through the dead bodies and looked at them: and every one supposed that those who were lying there were all Lacedemonians or Thespians, though the Helots also were among those that they saw: however, they who had passed over did not fail to perceive that Xerxes had done that which I mentioned about the bodies of his own dead; for in truth it was a thing to cause laughter even: on the one side there were seen a thousand dead bodies lying, while the others lay all gathered together in the same place, four thousand of them. During this day then they busied themselves with looking, and on the day after this they sailed back to the ships at Histaia, while Xerxes and his army set forth upon their march.         25. [1] tauta epaggeilamenoy, meta tauta oyden egineto ploiun spaniuteron. oytu polloi ethelon theesasthai. diaperaiuthentes de etheeunto diexiontes tous nekrous. pantes de episteato tous keimenoys einai pantas Lakedaimonioys kai Thespieas, oruntes kai tous eilutas. [2] oy men oyd' elanthane tous diabebekotas Xerxes tauta prexas peri tous nekrous tous euytou. kai gar de kai geloion En. tun men xilioi efainonto nekroi keimenoi, oi de pantes ekeato alees sygkekomismenoi es tuyto xurion, tesseres xiliades. [3] tauten men ten emeren pros theen etraponto, tei d' ysteraiei oi men apepleon es Istiaien epi tas neas, oi de amfi Xerxen es odon ormeato.   
      26. There had come also to them a few deserters from Arcadia, men in want of livelihood and desiring to be employed. These the Persians brought into the king's presence and inquired about the Hellenes, what they were doing; and one man it was who asked them this for all the rest. They told them that the Hellenes were keeping the Olympic festival and were looking on at a contest of athletics and horsemanship. He then inquired again, what was the prize proposed to them, for the sake of which they contended; and they told them of the wreath of olive which is given. Then Tigranes the son of Artabanos uttered a thought which was most noble, though thereby he incurred from the king the reproach of cowardice: for hearing that the prize was a wreath and not money, he could not endure to keep silence, but in the presence of all he spoke these words: "Ah! Mardonios, what kind of men are these against whom thou hast brought us to fight, who make their contest not for money but for honour!" Thus was it spoken by this man.         26. [1] Ekon de sfi aytomoloi andres ap' Arkadies oligoi tines, bioy te deomenoi kai energoi boylomenoi einai. agontes de toutoys es opsin ten basileos epynthanonto oi Persai peri tun Ellenun ti poieoien. eis de tis pro pantun En o eirutun aytous tauta. [2] oi de sfi elegon us Olumpia agoysi kai theureoien aguna gymnikon kai ippikon. o de epeireto o ti to aethlon eie sfi keimenon peri otey agunizontai. oi d' eipon teis elaies ton didomenon stefanon. enthauta eipas gnumen gennaiotaten Tigranes o Artabanoy deilien ufle pros basileos. [3] pynthanomenos gar to aethlon eon stefanon all' oy xremata, oyte enesxeto sigun eipe te es pantas tade. <<papai Mardonie, koioys ep' andras egages maxesomenoys emeas, oi oy peri xrematun ton aguna poieuntai alla peri areteis.>>   
      27. In the meantime, so soon as the disaster at Thermopylai had come about, the Thessalians sent a herald forthwith to the Phokians, against whom they had a grudge always, but especially because of the latest disaster which they had suffered: for when both the Thessalians themselves and their allies had invaded the Phokian land not many years before this expedition of the king, they had been defeated by the Phokians and handled by them roughly. For the Phokians had been shut up in Mount Parnassos having with them a soothsayer, Tellias the Eleian; and this Tellias contrived for them a device of the following kind:--he took six hundred men, the best of the Phokians, and whitened them over with chalk, both themselves and their armour, and then he attacked the Thessalians by night, telling the Phokians beforehand to slay every man whom they should see not coloured over with white. So not only the sentinels of the Thessalians, who saw these first, were terrified by them, supposing it to be something portentous and other than it was, but also after the sentinels the main body of their army; so that the Phokians remained in possession of four thousand bodies of slain men and shields; of which last they dedicated half at Abai and half at Delphi; and from the tithe of booty got by this battle were made the large statues which are contending for the tripod in front of the temple at Delphi, and others similar to these are dedicated as an offering at Abai.         27. [1] toutui men de tauta eireto. en de tui dia mesoy xronui, epeite to en Thermopuleisi truma egegonee, aytika Thessaloi pempoysi keryka es Fukeas, ate sfi exontes aiei xolon, apo de tou ystatoy trumatos kai to karta. [2] esbalontes gar panstratiei aytoi te oi Thessaloi kai oi summaxoi aytun es tous Fukeas, oy polloisi etesi proteron tautes teis basileos stratelasies, essuthesan ypo tun Fukeun kai periefthesan trexeus. [3] epeite gar kateilethesan es ton Parneson oi Fukees exontes mantin Tellien ton Eleion, enthauta o Tellies oytos sofizetai aytoisi toionde. gypsusas andras exakosioys tun fukeun tous, aristoys, aytous te toutoys kai ta opla aytun, nyktos epethekato toisi Thessaloisi, proeipas aytoisi, ton an me leykanthizonta iduntai, touton kteinein. [4] toutoys un ai te fylakai tun Thessalun prutai idousai efobethesan, doxasai allo ti einai teras, kai meta tas fylakas ayte e stratie oytu uste tetrakisxiliun krateisai nekrun kai aspidun Fukeas, tun tas men emiseas es Abas anethesan tas de es Delfous. [5] e de dekate egeneto tun xrematun ek tautes teis maxes oi megaloi andriantes oi peri ton tripoda synesteutes emprosthe tou neou tou en Delfoisi, kai eteroi toioutoi en Abeisi anakeatai.   
      28. Thus had the Phokians done to the Thessalian footmen, when they were besieged by them; and they had done irreparable hurt to their cavalry also, when this had invaded their land: for in the pass which is by Hyampolis they had dug a great trench and laid down in it empty wine-jars; and then having carried earth and laid it on the top and made it like the rest of the ground, they waited for the Thessalians to invade their land. These supposing that they would make short work with the Phokians, riding in full course fell upon the wine-jars; and there the legs of their horses were utterly crippled.         28. [1] tauta men nyn ton pezon ergasanto tun Thessalun oi Fukees poliorkeontas euytous. esbalousan de es ten xuren ten ippon aytun elymenanto anekestus. en gar tei esbolei e esti kata Yampolin, en tautei tafron megalen oruxantes amforeas keneous es ayten katethekan, xoun de epiforesantes kai omoiusantes tui allui xurui edekonto tous Thessalous esballontas. oi de us anarpasomenoi tous Fukeas feromenoi esepeson es tous amforeas. enthauta oi ippoi ta skelea dieftharesan.   
      29. Bearing then a grudge for both of these things, the Thessalians sent a herald and addressed them thus: "Phokians, we advise you to be more disposed now to change your minds and to admit that ye are not on a level with us: for in former times among the Hellenes, so long as it pleased us to be on that side, we always had the preference over you, and now we have such great power with the Barbarian that it rests with us to cause you to be deprived of your land and to be sold into slavery also. We however, though we have all the power in our hands, do not bear malice, but let there be paid to us fifty talents of silver in return for this, and we will engage to avert the dangers which threaten to come upon your land."         29. [1] toutun de sfi amfoterun exontes egkoton oi Thessaloi pempsantes keryka egoreyon tade. <<u Fukees, ede ti mallon gnusimaxeete me einai omoioi emin. [2] prosthe te gar en toisi Ellesi, oson xronon ekeina emin endane, pleon aiei kote ymeun eferometha. nun te para tui barbarui tosouto dynametha uste ep' emin esti teis geis estereisthai kai pros endrapodisthai ymeas. emeis mentoi to pan exontes oy mnesikakeomen, all' emin genesthu ant' aytun pentekonta talanta argyrioy, kai ymin ypodekometha ta epionta epi ten xuren apotrepsein. >>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [30]

     30. Thus the Thessalians proposed to them; for the Phokians alone of all the people in those parts were not taking the side of the Medes, and this for no other reason, as I conjecture, but only because of their enmity with the Thessalians; and if the Thessalians had supported the cause of the Hellenes, I am of opinion that the Phokians would have been on the side of the Medes. When the Thessalians proposed this, they said that they would not give the money, and that it was open to them to take the Median side just as much as the Thessalians, if they desired it for other reasons; but they would not with their own will be traitors to Hellas.         30. [1] tauta sfi epaggellonto oi Thessaloi. oi gar Fukees mounoi tun tautei anthrupun oyk emedizon, kat' allo men oyden, us egu symballomenos eyrisku, kata de to exthos to Thessalun. [2] ei de Thessaloi ta Ellenun eyxon, us emoi dokeein, emedizon an oi Fukees. tauta epaggellomenun Thessalun, oyte dusein efasan xremata, parexein te sfisi Thessaloisi omoius medizein, ei allus boyloiato. all' oyk esesthai ekontes einai prodotai teis Ellados.   
      31. When these words were reported, then the Thessalians, moved with anger against the Phokians, became guides to the Barbarian to show him the way: and from the land of Trachis they entered Doris; for a narrow strip of the Dorian territory extends this way, about thirty furlongs in breadth, lying between Malis and Phokis, the region which was in ancient time called Dryopis; this land is the mother-country of the Dorians in Peloponnese. Now the Barbarians did not lay waste this land of Doris when they entered it, for the people of it were taking the side of the Medes, and also the Thessalians did not desire it.         31. [1] epeide de aneneixthesan oytoi oi logoi, oytu de oi Thessaloi kexolumenoi toisi Fukeusi egenonto egemones tui barbarui teis odou. ek men de teis Trexinies es ten Durida esebalon. teis gar Duridos xures podeun steinos tautei katateinei, us triekonta stadiun malista kei eyros, keimenos metaxu teis te Melidos kai Fukidos xures, e per En to palaion Dryopis. e de xure ayte esti metropolis Durieun tun en Peloponnesui. tauten un ten Durida gein oyk esinanto esbalontes oi barbaroi. emedizon te gar kai oyk edokee Thessaloisi.   
      32. When however from Doris they entered Phokis, they did not indeed capture the Phokians themselves; for some of them had gone up to the heights of Parnassos,--and that summit of Parnassos is very convenient to receive a large number, which lies by itself near the city of Neon, the name of it being Tithorea,--to this, I say, some of them had carried up their goods and gone up themselves; but most of them had conveyed their goods out to the Ozolian Locrians, to the city of Amphissa, which is situated above the Crissaian plain. The Barbarians however overran the whole land of Phokis, for so the Thessalians led their army, and all that they came to as they marched they burned or cut down, and delivered to the flames both the cities and the temples:         32. [1] us de ek teis Duridos es ten Fukida esebalon, aytous men tous Fukeas oyk aireoysi. oi men gar tun Fukeun es ta akra tou Parnesou anebesan. esti de kai epitedee dexasthai omilon tou Parnesou e koryfe, kata Neuna polin keimene ep' euyteis. Tithorea oynoma aytei. es ten de aneneikanto kai aytoi anebesan. [2] oi de pleunes aytun es tous Ozolas Lokrous exekomisanto, es Amfissan polin ten yper tou Krisaioy pedioy oikemenen. oi de barbaroi ten xuren pasan epedramon ten Fukida. Thessaloi gar oytu Egon ton straton. okosa de epesxon, panta epeflegon kai ekeiron, kai es tas polis enientes pur kai es ta ira.   
      33. for they laid everything waste, proceeding this way by the river Kephisos, and they destroyed the city of Drymos by fire, and also the following, namely Charadra, Erochos, Tethronion, Amphikaia, Neon, Pedieis, Triteis, Elateia, Hyampolis, Parapotamioi and Abai, at which last-named place there was a temple of Apollo, wealthy and furnished with treasuries and votive offerings in abundance; and there was then, as there is even now, the seat of an Oracle there: this temple they plundered and burnt. Some also of the Phokians they pursued and captured upon the mountains, and some women they did to death by repeated outrage.         33. [1] poreyomenoi gar tautei para ton Kefison potamon edeioyn panta, kai kata men ekaysan Drymon polin kata de Kharadran kai Eruxon kai Tethrunion kai Amfikaian kai Neuna kai Pedieas kai Triteas kai Elateian kai Yampolin kai Parapotamioys kai Abas, entha En iron Apollunos plousion, thesayroisi te kai anathemasi polloisi kateskeyasmenon. En de kai tote kai nun eti xresterion aytothi. kai touto to iron sylesantes enepresan. kai tinas diukontes eilon tun Fukeun pros toisi oresi, kai gynaikas tinas dieftheiran misgomenoi ypo pletheos.   
      34. Passing by Parapotamioi the Barbarians came to Panopeus, and from this point onwards their army was separated and went different ways. The largest and strongest part of the army, proceeding with Xerxes himself against Athens, entered the land of the Boeotians, coming into the territory of Orchomenos. Now the general body of the Boeotians was taking the side of the Medes, and their cities were being kept by Macedonians appointed for each, who had been sent by Alexander; and they were keeping them this aim, namely in order to make it plain to Xerxes that the Boeotians were disposed to be on the side of the Medes.         34. [1] Parapotamioys de parameibomenoi oi barbaroi apikonto es Panopeas. entheuten de ede diakrinomene e stratie aytun esxizeto. to men pleiston kai dynatutaton tou stratou ama aytui Xerxei poreyomenon ep' Athenas esebale es Boiutous, es gein ten Orxomeniun. Boiutun de pan to pleithos emedize, tas de polis aytun andres Makedones diatetagmenoi esuzon, ypo Alexandroy apopemfthentes. esuzon de teide, deilon boylomenoi poieein Xerxei oti ta Medun Boiutoi froneoien.   
      35. These, I say, of the Barbarians took their way in this direction; but others of them with guides had set forth to go to the temple at Delphi, keeping Parnassos on their right hand: and all the parts of Phokis over which these marched they ravaged; for they set fire to the towns of Panopeus and Daulis and Aiolis. And for this reason they marched in that direction, parted off from the rest of the army, namely in order that they might plunder the temple at Delphi and deliver over the treasures there to king Xerxes: and Xerxes was well acquainted with all that there was in it of any account, better, I am told, than with the things which he had left in his own house at home, seeing that many constantly reported of them, and especially of the votive offerings of Croesus the son of Alyattes.         35. [1] oytoi men de tun barbarun tautei etraponto, alloi de aytun egemonas exontes ormeato epi to iron to en Delfoisi, en dexiei ton Parneson apergontes. osa de kai oytoi epesxon teis Fukidos, panta esinamureon. kai gar tun Panopeun ten polin enepresan kai Dayliun kai Aiolideun. [2] eporeuonto de tautei aposxisthentes teis alles stratieis tunde eineka, okus sylesantes to iron to en Delfoisi basilei Xerxei apodexaien ta xremata. panta d' epistato ta en tui irui osa logoy En axia Xerxes, us egu pynthanomai, ameinon e ta en toisi oikioisi elipe, pollun aiei legontun, kai malista ta Kroisoy tou Alyatteu anathemata.   
      36. Meanwhile the Delphians, having been informed of this, had been brought to extreme fear; and being in great terror they consulted the Oracle about the sacred things, whether they should bury them in the earth or carry them forth to another land; but the god forbade them to meddle with these, saying that he was able by himself to take care of his own. Hearing this they began to take thought for themselves, and they sent their children and women over to Achaia on the other side of the sea, while most of the men themselves ascended up towards the summits of Parnassos and carried their property to the Corykian cave, while others departed for refuge to Amphissa of the Locrians. In short the Delphians had all left the town excepting sixty men and the prophet of the Oracle.         36. [1] oi Delfoi de pynthanomenoi tauta es pasan arrudien apikato, en deimati de megalui katesteutes emanteuonto peri tun irun xrematun, eite sfea kata geis katoruxusi eite ekkomisusi es allen xuren. o de theos sfeas oyk ea kineein, fas aytos ikanos einai tun euytou prokateisthai. [2] Delfoi de tauta akousantes sfeun aytun peri efrontizon. tekna men nyn kai gynaikas peren es ten Axaiien diepempsan, aytun de oi men pleistoi anebesan es tou Parnesou tas koryfas kai es to Kurukion antron aneneikanto, oi de es Amfissan ten Lokrida ypexeilthon. pantes de un oi Delfoi exelipon ten polin, plen exekonta andrun kai tou profeteu.   
      37. When the Barbarians had come near and could see the temple, then the prophet, whose name was Akeratos, saw before the cell arms lying laid out, having been brought forth out of the sanctuary, which were sacred and on which it was not permitted to any man to lay hands. He then was going to announce the portent to those of the Delphians who were stil there, but when the Barbarians pressing onwards came opposite the temple of Athene Pronaia, there happened to them in addition portents yet greater than that which had come to pass before: for though that too was a marvel, that arms of war should appear of themselves laid forth outside the cell, yet this, which happened straightway after that, is worthy of marvel even beyond all other prodigies. When the Barbarians in their approach were opposite the temple of Athene Pronaia, at this point of time from the heaven there fell thunderbolts upon them, and from Parnassos two crags were broken away and rushed down upon them with a great crashing noise falling upon many of them, while from the temple of Pronaia there was heard a shout, and a battle-cry was raised.         37. [1] epei de agxou Esan oi barbaroi epiontes kai apurun to iron, en toutui o profetes, tui oynoma En Akeratos, orai pro tou neou opla prokeimena esuthen ek tou megaroy exeneneigmena ira, tun oyk osion En aptesthai anthrupun oydeni. [2] o men de eie Delfun toisi pareousi semaneun to teras. oi de barbaroi epeide eginonto epeigomenoi kata to iron teis Pronaies Athenaies, epiginetai sfi terea eti mezona tou prin genomenoy tereos. thuma men gar kai touto karta esti, opla areia aytomata faneinai exu prokeimena tou neou. ta de de epi toutui deutera epigenomena kai dia pantun fasmatun axia thumasai malista. [3] epei gar de Esan epiontes oi barbaroi kata to iron teis Pronaies Athenaies, en toutui ek men tou oyranou keraynoi aytoisi enepipton, apo de tou Parnesou aporrageisai duo koryfai eferonto pollui patagui es aytous kai katebalon syxnous sfeun, ek de tou irou teis Pronaies boe te kai alalagmos egineto.   
      38. All these things having come together, there fell fear upon the Barbarians; and the Delphians having perceived that they were flying, came down after them and slew a great number of them; and those who survived fled straight to Boeotia. These who returned of the Barbarians reported, as I am informed, that in addition to this which we have said they saw also other miraculous things; for two men (they said) in full armour and of stature more than human followed them slaying and pursuing.         38. [1] symmigentun de toutun pantun, fobos toisi barbaroisi enepeptukee. mathontes de oi Delfoi feugontas sfeas, epikatabantes apekteinan pleithos ti aytun. oi de perieontes ithu Boiutun efeygon. elegon de oi aponostesantes oytoi tun barbarun, us egu pynthanomai, us pros toutoisi kai alla urun theia. duo gar oplitas mezonas e kat' anthrupun fusin exontas epesthai sfi kteinontas kai diukontas.   
      39. These two the Delphians say were the native heroes Phylacos and Autonoos, whose sacred enclosures are about the temple, that of Phylacos being close by the side of the road above the temple of Pronaia and that of Autonoos near Castalia under the peak called Hyampeia. Moreover the rocks which fell from Parnassos were still preserved even to my time, lying in the sacred enclosure of Athene Pronaia, into which they fell when they rushed through the ranks of the Barbarians. Such departure had these men from the temple.         39. [1] toutoys de tous duo Delfoi legoysi einai epixurioys eruas, Fulakon te kai Aytonoon, tun ta temenea esti peri to iron, Fylakoy men par' ayten ten odon katuperthe tou irou teis Pronaies, Aytonooy de pelas teis Kastalies ypo tei Yampeiei koryfei. [2] oi de pesontes apo tou Parnesou lithoi eti kai es emeas Esan sooi, en tui temenei teis Pronaies Athenaies keimenoi, es to eneskepsan dia tun barbarun feromenoi. toutun men nyn tun andrun ayte apo tou irou apallage ginetai.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [40]

     40. Meanwhile the fleet of the Hellenes after leaving Artemision put in to land at Salamis at the request of the Athenians: and for this reason the Athenians requested them to put in to Salamis, namely in order that they might remove out of Attica to a place of safety their children and their wives, and also deliberate what they would have to do; for in their present case they meant to take counsel afresh, because they had been deceived in their expectation. For they had thought to find the Peloponnesians in full force waiting for the Barbarians in Boeotia; they found however nothing of this, but they were informed on the contrary that the Peloponnesians were fortifying the Isthmus with a wall, valuing above all things the safety of the Peloponnese and keeping this in guard; and that they were disposed to let all else go. Being informed of this, the Athenians therefore made request of them to put in to Salamis.         40. [1] o de Ellenun naytikos stratos apo tou Artemisioy Athenaiun deethentun es Salamina katisxei tas neas. tunde de eineka prosedeethesan aytun sxein pros Salamina Athenaioi, ina aytoi paidas te kai gynaikas ypexagaguntai ek teis Attikeis, pros de kai boyleusuntai to poieteon aytoisi estai. epi gar toisi katekoysi pregmasi boylen emellon poiesasthai us epseysmenoi gnumes. [2] dokeontes gar eyresein Peloponnesioys pandemei en tei Boiutiei ypokatemenoys ton barbaron, tun men eyron oyden eon, oi de epynthanonto ton Isthmon aytous teixeontas, us ten Peloponneson peri pleistoy te poieymenoys perieinai kai tauten exontas en fylakei, ta alla de apienai. tauta pynthanomenoi oytu de prosedeethesan sfeun sxein pros ten Salamina.   
      41. The others then put in their ships to land at Salamis, but the Athenians went over to their own land; and after their coming they made a proclamation that every one of the Athenians should endeavour to save his children and household as best he could. So the greater number sent them to Troizen, but others to Egina, and others to Salamis, and they were urgent to put these out of danger, both because they desired to obey the oracle and also especially for another reason, which was this:--the Athenians say that a great serpent lives in the temple and guards the Acropolis; and they not only say this, but also they set forth for it monthly offerings, as if it were really there; and the offering consists of a honey-cake. This honey-cake, which before used always to be consumed, was at this time left untouched. When the priestess had signified this, the Athenians left the city much more and with greater eagerness than before, seeing that the goddess also had (as they supposed) left the Acropolis. Then when all their belongings had been removed out of danger, they sailed to the encampment of the fleet.         41. [1] oi men de alloi katesxon es ten Salamina, Athenaioi de es ten euytun. meta de ten apixin kerygma epoiesanto, Athenaiun tei tis dunatai suzein tekna te kai tous oiketas. enthauta oi men pleistoi es Troizena apesteilan, oi de es Aiginan, oi de es Salamina. [2] espeysan de tauta ypekthesthai tui xresteriui te boylomenoi ypereteein kai de kai toude eineka oyk ekista. legoysi Athenaioi ofin megan fulaka teis akropolios endiaitasthai en tui irui. legoysi te tauta kai de us eonti epimenia epiteleoysi protithentes. ta d' epimenia melitoessa esti. [3] ayte de e melitoessa en tui prosthe aiei xronui anaisimoymene tote En apsaystos. semenases de tauta teis ireies, mallon ti oi Athenaioi kai prothymoteron exelipon ten polin, us kai teis theou apoleloipyies ten akropolin. us de sfi panta ypexekeito, epleon es to stratopedon.   
      42. When those who came from Artemision had put their ships in to land at Salamis, the remainder of the naval force of the Hellenes, being informed of this, came over gradually to join them from Troizen: for they had been ordered beforehand to assemble at Pogon, which is the harbour of the Troizenians. There were assembled accordingly now many more ships than those which were in the sea-fight at Artemision, and from more cities. Over the whole was set as admiral the same man as at Artemision, namely Eurybiades the son of Eurycleides, a Spartan but not of the royal house; the Athenians however supplied by far the greatest number of ships and those which sailed the best.         42. [1] epei de oi ap' Artemisioy es Salamina katesxon tas neas, synerree kai o loipos pynthanomenos o tun Ellenun naytikos stratos ek Troizenos. es gar Puguna ton Troizeniun limena proeireto syllegesthai. synelexthesan te de pollui pleunes nees e ep' Artemisiui enaymaxeon kai apo poliun pleunun. [2] nauarxos men nyn epein uytos os per ep' Artemisiui, Eyrybiades o Eyrykleideu aner Spartietes, oy mentoi geneos tou basileioy eun. neas de pollui pleistas te kai arista pleousas pareixonto Athenaioi.   
      43. The following were those who joined the muster:--From Peloponnese the Lacedemonians furnishing sixteen ships, the Corinthians furnishing the same complement as at Artemision, the Sikyonians furnishing fifteen ships, the Epidaurians ten, the Troizenians five, the men of Hermion three, these all, except the Hermionians, being of Doric and Makednian race and having made their last migration from Erineos and Pindos and the land of Dryopis; but the people of Hermion are Dryopians, driven out by Heracles and the Malians from the land which is now called Doris.         43. [1] estrateuonto de oide. ek men Peloponnesoy Lakedaimonioi ekkaideka neas parexomenoi, Korinthioi de to ayto pleruma parexomenoi kai ep' Artemisiui. Sikyunioi de pentekaideka pareixonto neas, Epidaurioi de deka, Troizenioi de pente, Ermionees de treis, eontes oytoi plen Ermioneun Durikon te kai Makednon ethnos, ex Erineou te kai Pindoy kai teis Dryopidos ystata ormethentes. oi de Ermionees eisi Druopes, ypo Erakleos te kai Melieun ek teis nun Duridos kaleomenes xures exanastantes.   
      44. These were the Peloponnesians who joined the fleet, and those of the mainland outside the Peloponnese were as follows:--the Athenians, furnishing a number larger than all the rest, namely one hundred and eighty ships, and serving alone, since the Plataians did not take part with the Athenians in the sea- fight at Salamis, because when the Hellenes were departing from Artemision and come near Chalkis, the Plataians disembarked on the opposite shore of Boeotia and proceeded to the removal of their households. So being engaged in saving these, they had been left behind. As for the Athenians, in the time when the Pelasgians occupied that which is now called Hellas, they were Pelasgians, being named Cranaoi, and in the time of king Kecrops they came to be called Kecropidai; then when Erechtheus had succeeded to his power, they had their name changed to Athenians; and after Ion the son of Xuthos became commander of the Athenians, they got the name from him of Ionians.         44. [1] oytoi men nyn Peloponnesiun estrateuonto, oi de ek teis exu epeiroy, Athenaioi men pros pantas tous alloys parexomenoi neas ogdukonta kai ekaton, mounoi. en Salamini gar oy synenaymaxesan Plataiees Athenaioisi dia toionde ti preigma. apallassomenun tun Ellenun apo tou Artemisioy, us eginonto kata Khalkida, oi Plataiees apobantes es ten peraien teis Boiuties xures pros ekkomiden etraponto tun oiketeun. oytoi men nyn toutoys suzontes eleifthesan. [2] Athenaioi de epi men Pelasgun exontun ten nun Ellada kaleomenen Esan Pelasgoi, onomazomenoi Kranaoi, epi de Kekropos basileos eklethesan Kekropidai, ekdexamenoy de Erextheos ten arxen Athenaioi metunomasthesan, Iunos de tou Xouthoy stratarxeu genomenoy Athenaioisi eklethesan apo toutoy Iunes.   
      45. The Megarians furnished the same complement as at Artermision; the Amprakiots came to the assistance of the rest with seven ships, and the Leucadians with three, these being by race Dorians from Corinth.         45. [1] Megarees de tuyto pleruma pareixonto kai ep' Artemisiui, Amprakiutai de epta neas exontes epeboethesan, Leykadioi de treis, ethnos eontes oytoi Durikon apo Korinthoy.   
      46. Of the islanders the Eginetans furnished thirty; these had also other ships manned, but with them they were guarding their own land, while with the thirty which sailed best they joined in the sea-fight at Salamis. Now the Eginetans are Dorians from Epidauros, and their island had formerly the name of Oinone. After the Eginetans came the Chalkidians with the twenty ships which were at Artemision, and the Eretrians with their seven: these are Ionians. Next the Keians, furnishing the same as before and being by race Ionians from Athens. The Naxians furnished four ships, they having been sent out by the citizens of their State to join the Persians, like the other islanders; but neglecting these commands they had come to the Hellenes, urged thereto by Democritos, a man of repute among the citizens and at that time commander of a trireme. Now the Naxians are Ionians coming originally from Athens. The Styrians furnished the same ships as at Artemision, and the men of Kythnos one ship and one fifty-oared galley, these both being Dryopians. Also the Seriphians, the Siphnians and the Melians served with the rest; for they alone of the islanders had not given earth and water to the Barbarian.         46. [1] nesiuteun de Aigineitai triekonta pareixonto. Esan men sfi kai allai peplerumenai nees, alla teisi men ten euytun efulasson, triekonta de teisi arista pleouseisi en Salamini enaymaxesan. Aigineitai de eisi Duriees apo Epidauroy. [2] tei de nesui proteron oynoma En Oinune. meta de Aiginetas Khalkidees tas ep' Artemisiui eikosi parexomenoi kai Eretriees tas epta. oytoi de Iunes eisi. meta de Keioi tas aytas parexomenoi, ethnos eon Iunikon apo Atheneun. [3] Naxioi de pareixonto tesseras, apopemfthentes men es tous Medoys ypo tun polieteun kata per oi alloi nesiutai, alogesantes de tun entoleun apikato es tous Ellenas Demokritoy speusantos, andros tun astun dokimoy kai tote trierarxeontos. Naxioi de eisi Iunes apo Atheneun gegonotes. [4] Styrees de tas aytas pareixonto neas tas per ep' Artemisiui, Kuthnioi de mian kai pentekonteron, eontes synamfoteroi oytoi Druopes. kai Serifioi te kai Sifnioi kai Melioi estrateuonto. oytoi gar oyk edosan mounoi nesiuteun tui barbarui gein te kai ydur.   
      47. These all who have been named dwelt inside the land of the Thesprotians and the river Acheron; for the Thesprotians border upon the land of the Amprakiots and Leucadians, and these were they who came from the greatest distance to serve: but of those who dwell outside these limits the men of Croton were the only people who came to the assistance of Hellas in her danger; and these sent one ship, of whom the commander was Phaylos, a man who had three times won victories at the Pythian games. Now the men of Croton are by descent Achaians.         47. [1] oytoi men apantes entos oikemenoi Thesprutun kai Axerontos potamou estrateuonto. Thesprutoi gar eisi omoyreontes Amprakiuteisi kai Leykadioisi, oi ex esxateun xureun estrateuonto. tun de ektos toutun oikemenun Krotunieitai mounoi Esan oi eboethesan tei Elladi kindyneyousei miei nei, teis Erxe aner tris pythionikes Fayllos. Krotunieitai de genos eisi Axaioi.   
      48. All the rest who served in the fleet furnished triremes, but the Melians, Siphnian and Seriphians fifty-oared galleys: the Melians, who are by descent from Lacedemon, furnished two, the Siphnians and Seriphians, who are Ionians from Athens, each one. And the whole number of the ships, apart from the fifty-oared galleys, was three hundred and seventy-eight.         48. [1] oi men nyn alloi triereas parexomenoi estrateuonto, Melioi de kai Sifnioi kai Serifioi pentekonteroys. Melioi men genos eontes apo Lakedaimonos duo pareixonto, Sifnioi de kai Serifioi Iunes eontes ap' Atheneun mian ekateroi. arithmos de egeneto o pas tun neun, parex tun pentekonterun, triekosiai kai ebdomekonta kai oktu.   
      49. When the commanders had assembled at Salamis from the States which have been mentioned, they began to deliberate, Eurybiades having proposed that any one who desired it should declare his opinion as to where he thought it most convenient to fight a sea-battle in those regions of which they had command; for Attica had already been let go, and he was now proposing the question about the other regions. And the opinions of the speakers for the most part agreed that they should sail to the Isthmus and there fight a sea-battle in defence of the Peloponnese, arguing that if they should be defeated in the sea- battle, supposing them to be at Salamis they would be blockaded in an island, where no help would come to them, but at the Isthmus they would be able to land where their own men were.         49. [1] us de es ten Salamina syneilthon oi strategoi apo tun eiremeneun poliun, eboyleuonto, prothentos Eyrybiadeu gnumen apofainesthai ton boylomenon, okoy dokeoi epitedeotaton einai naymaxien poieesthai tun aytoi xureun egkratees eisi. e gar Attike apeito ede, tun de loipeun peri proetithee. [2] ai gnumai de tun legontun ai pleistai synexepipton pros ton Isthmon plusantas naymaxeein pro teis Peloponnesoy, epilegontes ton logon tonde, us ei niketheusi tei naymaxiei, en Salamini men eontes poliorkesontai en nesui, ina sfi timurie oydemia epifanesetai, pros de tui Isthmui es tous euytun exoisontai.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [50]

     50. While the commanders from the Peloponnese argued thus, an Athenian had come in reporting that the Barbarians were arrived in Attica and that all the land was being laid waste with fire. For the army which directed its march through Boeotia in company with Xerxes, after it had burnt the city of the Thespians (the inhabitants having left it and gone to the Peloponnese) and that of the Plataians likewise, had now come to Athens and was laying waste everything in those regions. Now he had burnt Thespiai and Plataia because he was informed by the Thebans that these were not taking the side of the Medes.         50. [1] tauta tun apo Peloponnesoy strategun epilegomenun, eleluthee aner Athenaios aggellun ekein ton barbaron es ten Attiken kai pasan ayten pyrpoleesthai. [2] o gar dia Boiutun trapomenos stratos ama Xerxei, empresas Thespieun ten polin, aytun ekleloipotun es Peloponneson, kai ten Plataieun usautus, Eke te es tas Athenas kai panta ekeina edeioy. eneprese de Thespeian te kai Plataian pythomenos Thebaiun oti oyk emedizon.   
      51. So in three months from the crossing of the Hellespont, whence the Barbarians began their march, after having stayed there one month while they crossed over into Europe, they had reached Attica, in the year when Calliades was archon of the Athenians. And they took the lower city, which was deserted, and then they found that there were still a few Athenians left in the temple, either stewards of the temple or needy persons, who had barred the entrance to the Acropolis with doors and with a palisade of timber and endeavoured to defend themselves against the attacks of the enemy, being men who had not gone out to Salamis partly because of their poverty, and also because they thought that they alone had discovered the meaning of the oracle which the Pythian prophetess had uttered to them, namely that the "bulwark of wood" should be impregnable, and supposed that this was in fact the safe refuge according to the oracle, and not the ships.         51. [1] apo de teis diabasios tou Ellespontoy, enthen poreuesthai erxanto oi barbaroi, ena aytou diatripsantes meina en tui diebainon es ten Eyrupen, en trisi eteroisi mesi egenonto en tei Attikei, Kalliadeu arxontos Athenaioisi. [2] kai aireoysi eremon to asty, kai tinas oligoys eyriskoysi tun Athenaiun en tui irui eontas, tamias te tou irou kai penetas anthrupoys, oi fraxamenoi ten akropolin thureisi te kai xuloisi emunonto tous epiontas, ama men yp' astheneies bioy oyk ekxuresantes es Salamina, pros de aytoi dokeontes exeyrekenai to manteion to e Pythie sfi exrese, to xulinon teixos analuton esesthai. ayto de touto einai to kresfugeton kata to manteion kai oy tas neas.   
      52. So the Persians taking their post upon the rising ground opposite the Acropolis, which the Athenians call the Hill of Ares, proceeded to besiege them in this fashion, that is they put tow round about their arrows and lighted it, and then shot them against the palisade. The Athenians who were besieged continued to defend themselves nevertheless, although they had come to the extremity of distress and their palisade had played them false; nor would they accept proposals for surrender, when the sons of Peisistratos brought them forward: but endeavouring to defend themselves they contrived several contrivances against the enemy, and among the rest they rolled down large stones when the Barbarians approached the gates; so that for a long time Xerxes was in a difficulty, not being able to capture them.         52. [1] oi de Persai izomenoi epi ton katantion teis akropolios oxthon, ton Athenaioi kaleoysi Areion pagon, epoliorkeon tropon toionde. okus styppeion peri tous oistous perithentes apseian, etoxeyon es to fragma. enthauta Athenaiun oi poliorkeomenoi omus emunonto, kaiper es to esxaton kakou apigmenoi kai tou fragmatos prodedukotos. [2] oyde logoys tun Peisistratideun prosferontun peri omologies enedekonto, amynomenoi de alla te antemexanunto kai de kai prosiontun tun barbarun pros tas pulas oloitroxoys apiesan, uste Xerxen epi xronon syxnon aporieisi enexesthai oy dynamenon sfeas elein.   
      53. In time however there appeared for the Barbarians a way of approach after their difficulties, since by the oracle it was destined that all of Attica which is on the mainland should come to be under the Persians. Thus then it happened that on the front side of the Acropolis behind the gates and the way up to the entrance, in a place where no one was keeping guard, nor would one have supposed that any man could ascend by this way, here men ascended by the temple of Aglauros the daughter of Kecrops, although indeed the place is precipitous: and when the Athenians saw that they had ascended up to the Acropolis, some of them threw themselves down from the wall and perished, while others took refuge in the sanctuary of the temple. Then those of the Persians who had ascended went first to the gates, and after opening these they proceeded to kill the suppliants; and when all had been slain by them, they plundered the temple and set fire to the whole of the Acropolis.         53. [1] xronui d' ek tun aporun efane de tis exodos toisi barbaroisi. edee gar kata to theopropion pasan ten Attiken ten en tei epeirui genesthai ypo Perseisi. emprosthe un pro teis akropolios, opisthe de tun pyleun kai teis anodoy, tei de oyte tis efulasse oyt' an elpise me kote tis kata tauta anabaie anthrupun, tautei anebesan tines kata to iron teis Kekropos thygatros Aglauroy, kaitoi per apokremnoy eontos tou xuroy. [2] us de eidon aytous anabebekotas oi Athenaioi epi ten akropolin, oi men erripteon euytous kata tou teixeos katu kai dieftheironto, oi de es to megaron katefeygon. tun de Perseun oi anabebekotes pruton men etraponto pros tas pulas, tautas de anoixantes tous iketas efoneyon. epei de sfi pantes katestrunto, to iron sylesantes enepresan pasan ten akropolin.   
      54. Then Xerxes, having fully taken possession of Athens, sent to Susa a mounted messenger to report to Artabanos the good success which they had. And on the next day after sending the herald he called together the exiles of the Athenians who were accompanying him, and bade them go up to the Acropolis and sacrifice the victims after their own manner; whether it was that he had seen some vision of a dream which caused him to give this command, or whether perchance he had a scruple in his mind because he had set fire to the temple. The Athenian exiles did accordingly that which was commanded them:         54. [1] sxun de panteleus tas Athenas Xerxes apepempse es Sousa aggelon ippea Artabanui aggeleonta ten pareousan sfi eyprexien. apo de teis pempsios tou kerykos deyterei emerei sygkalesas Athenaiun tous fygadas, euytui de epomenoys, ekeleye tropui tui sfeterui thusai ta ira anabantas es ten akropolin, eite de un opsin tina idun enypnioy enetelleto tauta, eite kai enthumion oi egeneto empresanti to iron. oi de fygades tun Athenaiun epoiesan ta entetalmena.   
      55. and the reason why I made mention of this I will here declare:--there is in this Acropolis a temple of Erechtheus, who is said to have been born of the Earth, and in this there is an olive-tree and a sea, which (according to the story told by the Athenians) Poseidon and Athene, when they contended for the land, set as witnesses of themselves. Now it happened to this olive-tree to be set on fire with the rest of the temple by the Barbarians; and on the next day after the conflagration those of the Athenians who were commanded by the king to offer sacrifice, saw when they had gone up to the temple that a shoot had run up from the stock of the tree about a cubit in length. These then made report of this.         55. [1] tou de eineken toutun epemnesthen, frasu. esti en tei akropoli tautei Erextheos tou gegeneos legomenoy einai neos, en tui elaie te kai thalassa eni, ta logos para Athenaiun Poseideuna te kai Athenaien erisantas peri teis xures marturia thesthai. tauten un ten elaien ama tui allui irui katelabe emprestheinai ypo tun barbarun. deyterei de emerei apo teis empresios Athenaiun oi thuein ypo basileos keleyomenoi us anebesan es to iron, urun blaston ek tou stelexeos oson te pexyaion anadedramekota. oytoi men nyn tauta efrasan.   
      56. The Hellenes meanwhile at Salamis, when it was announced to them how it had been as regards the Acropolis of the Athenians, were disturbed so greatly that some of the commanders did not even wait for the question to be decided which had been proposed, but began to go hastily to their ships and to put up their sails, meaning to make off with speed; and by those of them who remained behind it was finally decided to fight at sea in defence of the Isthmus. So night came on, and they having been dismissed from the council were going to their ships:         56. [1] oi de en Salamini Ellenes, us sfi exeggelthe us esxe ta peri ten Athenaiun akropolin, es tosouton thorybon apikonto us enioi tun strategun oyde kyrutheinai emenon to prokeimenon preigma, all' es te tas neas esepipton kai istia aeironto us apotheysomenoi. toisi te ypoleipomenoisi aytun ekyruthe pro tou Isthmou naymaxeein. nux te egineto kai oi dialythentes ek tou synedrioy esebainon es tas neas.e naymaxia   
      57. and when Themistocles had come to his ship, Mnesiphilos an Athenian asked him what they had resolved; and being informed by him that it had been determined to take out the ships to the Isthmus and fight a battle by sea in defence of the Peloponnese, he said: "Then, if they set sail with the ships from Salamis, thou wilt not fight any more sea-battles at all for the fatherland, for they will all take their way to their several cities and neither Eurybiades nor any other man will be able to detain them or to prevent the fleet from being dispersed: and Hellas will perish by reason of evil counsels. But if there by any means, go thou and try to unsettle that which has been resolved, if perchance thou mayest persuade Eurybiades to change his plans, so as to stay here."         57. [1] enthauta de Themistoklea apikomenon epi ten nea eireto Mnesifilos aner Athenaios o ti sfi eie beboyleymenon. pythomenos de pros aytou us eie dedogmenon anagein tas neas pros ton Isthmon kai pro teis Peloponnesoy naymaxeein, eipe [2] <<oyt' ara, en apaeirusi tas neas apo Salaminos, peri oydemieis eti patridos naymaxeseis. kata gar polis ekastoi trepsontai, kai oyte sfeas Eyrybiades katexein dynesetai oyte tis anthrupun allos uste me oy diaskedastheinai ten stratien. apoleetai te e Ellas aboylieisi. all' ei tis esti mexane, ithi kai peiru diaxeai ta beboyleymena, en kus dunei anagnusai Eyrybiaden metaboyleusasthai uste aytou menein.>>   
      58. This advice very much commended itself to Themistocles; and without making any answer he went to the ship of Eurybiades. Having come thither he said that he desired to communicate to him a matter which concerned the common good; and Eurybiades bade him come into his ship and speak, if he desired to say anything. Then Themistocles sitting down beside him repeated to him all those things which he had heard Mnesiphilos say, making as if they were his own thoughts, and adding to them many others; until at last by urgent request he persuaded him to come out of his ship and gather the commanders to the council.         58. [1] karta te tui Themistoklei erese e ypotheke, kai oyden pros tauta ameipsamenos eie epi ten nea ten Eyrybiadeu. apikomenos de efe ethelein oi koinon ti preigma symmixai. o d' ayton es ten nea ekeleye esbanta legein, ei ti thelei. [2] enthauta o Themistoklees parizomenos oi katalegei ekeina te panta ta ekoyse Mnesifiloy, euytou poieumenos, kai alla polla prostitheis, es o anegnuse xreizun ek te teis neos ekbeinai syllexai te tous strategous es to synedrion.   
      59. So when they were gathered together, before Eurybiades proposed the discussion of the things for which he had assembled the commanders, Themistocles spoke with much vehemence being very eager to gain his end; and as he was speaking, the Corinthian commander, Adeimantos the son of Okytos, said: "Themistocles, at the games those who stand forth for the contest before the due time are beaten with rods." He justifying himself said: "Yes, but those who remain behind are not crowned."         59. [1] us de ara synelexthesan, prin e ton Eyrybiaden protheinai ton logon tun eineka synegage tous strategous, pollos En o Themistoklees en toisi logoisi oia karta deomenos. legontos de aytou, o Korinthios strategos Adeimantos o Ukutoy eipe <<u Themistoklees, en toisi agusi oi proexanistamenoi rhapizontai.>> o de apolyomenos efe <<oi de ge egkataleipomenoi oy stefanountai.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [60]

     60. At that time he made answer mildly to the Corinthian; and to Eurybiades he said not now any of those things which he had said before, to the effect that if they should set sail from Salamis they would disperse in different directions; for it was not seemly for him to bring charges against the allies in their presence: but he held to another way of reasoning, saying:         60. [1] tote men epius pros ton Korinthion ameipsato, pros de ton Eyrybiaden elege ekeinun men eti oyden tun proteron lexthentun, us epean apaeirusi apo Salaminos diadresontai. pareontun gar tun symmaxun oyk efere oi kosmon oydena kategoreein. o de alloy logoy eixeto, legun tade.   
      60. (a) "Now it is in thy power to save Hellas, if thou wilt follow my advice, which is to stay here and here to fight a sea-battle, and if thou wilt not follow the advice of those among these men who bid thee remove the ships to the Isthmus. For hear both ways, and then set them in comparison. If thou engage battle at the Isthmus, thou wilt fight in an open sea, into which it is by no means convenient for us that we go to fight, seeing that we have ships which are heavier and fewer in number than those of the enemy. Then secondly thou wilt give up to destruction Salamis and Megara and Egina, even if we have success in all else; for with their fleet will come also the land-army, and thus thou wilt thyself lead them to the Peloponnese and wilt risk the safety of all Hellas.         60. a [1] <<en soi nun esti susai ten Ellada, en emoi peithei naymaxien aytou menun poieesthai, mede peithomenos toutun toisi logoisi anazeuxeis pros ton Isthmon tas neas. antithes gar ekateron akousas. pros men tui Isthmui symballun en pelagei anapeptamenui naymaxeseis, es to ekista emin sumforon esti neas exoysi baryteras kai arithmon elassonas. touto de apoleeis Salamina te kai Megara kai Aiginan, en per kai ta alla eytyxesumen. ama de tui naytikui aytun epsetai kai o pezos stratos, kai oytu sfeas aytos axeis epi ten Peloponneson, kindyneuseis te apasei tei Elladi.   
      60. (b) If however thou shalt do as I say, thou wilt find therein all the advantages which I shall tell thee of:--in the first place by engaging in a narrow place with few ships against many, if the fighting has that issue which it is reasonable to expect, we shall have very much the better; for to fight a sea-fight in a narrow space is for our advantage, but to fight in a wide open space is for theirs. Then again Salamis will be preserved, whither our children and our wives have been removed for safety; and moreover there is this also secured thereby, to which ye are most of all attached, namely that by remaining here thou wilt fight in defence of the Peloponnese as much as if the fight were at the Isthmus; and thou wilt not lead the enemy to Peloponnese, if thou art wise.         60. b [1] en de ta egu legu poieseis, tosade en aytoisi xresta eyreseis. pruta men en steinui symballontes neysi oligeisi pros pollas, en ta oikota ek tou polemoy ekbainei, pollon kratesomen. to gar en steinui naymaxeein pros emeun esti, en eyryxuriei de pros ekeinun. aytis de Salamis periginetai, es ten emin ypekkeitai tekna te kai gynaikes. kai men kai tode en aytoisi enesti, tou kai periexesthe malista. omoius aytou te menun pronaymaxeseis Peloponnesoy kai pros tui Isthmui, oyde sfeas, ei per ey froneeis, axeis epi ten Peloponneson.   
      60. (c) Then if that which I expect come to pass and we gain a victory with our ships, the Barbarians will not come to you at the Isthmus nor will they advance further than Attica, but they will retire in disorder; and we shall be the gainers by the preservation of Megara and Egina and Salamis, at which place too an oracle tells us that we shall get the victory over our enemies. Now when men take counsel reasonably for themselves, reasonable issues are wont as a rule to come, but if they do not take counsel reasonably, then God is not wont generally to attach himself to the judgment of men."         60. g [1] en de ge kai ta egu elpizu genetai kai nikesumen teisi neysi, oyte ymin es ton Isthmon paresontai oi barbaroi oyte probesontai ekasteru teis Attikeis, apiasi te oydeni kosmui, Megaroisi te kerdaneomen perieousi kai Aiginei kai Salamini, en tei emin kai logion esti tun exthrun katuperthe genesthai. oikota men nyn boyleyomenoisi anthrupoisi us to epipan ethelei ginesthai. me de oikota boyleyomenoisi oyk ethelei oyde o theos prosxureein pros tas anthrupeias gnumas.>>   
      61. When Themistocles thus spoke, the Corinthian Adeimantos inveighed against him for the second time, bidding him to be silent because he had no native land, and urging Eurybiades not to put to the vote the proposal of one who was a citizen of no city; for he said that Themistocles might bring opinions before the council if he could show a city belonging to him, but otherwise not. This objection he made against him because Athens had been taken and was held by the enemy. Then Themistocles said many evil things of him and of the Corinthians both, and declared also that he himself and his countrymen had in truth a city and a land larger than that of the Corinthians, so long as they had two hundred ships fully manned; for none of the Hellenes would be able to repel the Athenians if they came to fight against them.         61. [1] tauta legontos Themistokleos aytis o Korinthios Adeimantos epefereto, sigan te keleuun tui me esti patris kai Eyrybiaden oyk eun epipsefizein apoli andri. polin gar ton Themistoklea parexomenon oytu ekeleye gnumas symballesthai. tauta de oi proefere oti elukesan te kai kateixonto ai Atheinai. [2] tote de o Themistoklees keinon te kai tous Korinthioys polla te kai kaka elege, euytoisi te edeloy logui us eie kai polis kai gei mezun e per ekeinoisi, est' an diekosiai nees sfi eusi peplerumenai. oydamous gar Ellenun aytous epiontas apokrousesthai.   
      62. Signifying this he turned then to Eurybiades and spoke yet more urgently: "If thou wilt remain here, and remaining here wilt show thyself a good man, well; but if not, thou wilt bring about the overthrow of Hellas, for upon the ships depends all our power in the war. Nay, but do as I advise. If, however, thou shalt not do so, we shall forthwith take up our households and voyage to Siris in Italy, which is ours already of old and the oracles say that it is destined to be colonised by us; and ye, when ye are left alone and deprived of allies such as we are, will remember my words."         62. [1] semainun de tauta tui logui diebaine es Eyrybiaden, legun mallon epestrammena. <<su ei meneeis aytou kai menun eseai aner agathos. ei de me, anatrepseis ten Ellada. to pan gar emin tou polemoy feroysi ai nees. all' emoi peitheo. [2] ei de tauta me poieseis, emeis men us exomen analabontes tous oiketas komieumetha es Sirin ten en Italiei, e per emetere te esti ek palaiou eti, kai ta logia legei yp' emeun ayten deein ktistheinai. ymeis de symmaxun toiunde moynuthentes memnesesthe tun emun logun.>>   
      63. When Themistocles thus spoke, Eurybiades was persuaded to change his mind; and, as I think, he changed his mind chiefly from fear lest the Athenians should depart and leave them, if he should take the ships to the Isthmus; for if the Athenians left them and departed, the rest would be no longer able to fight with the enemy. He chose then this counsel, to stay in that place and decide matters there by a sea-fight.         63. [1] tauta de Themistokleos legontos anedidasketo Eyrybiades. dokeein de moi, arrudesas malista tous Athenaioys anedidasketo, me sfeas apolipusi, en pros ton Isthmon agagei tas neas. apolipontun gar Athenaiun oyketi eginonto axiomaxoi oi loipoi. tauten de aireetai ten gnumen, aytou menontas dianaymaxeein.   
      64. Thus those at Salamis, after having skirmished with one another in speech, were making preparations for a sea-fight there, since Eurybiades had so determined: and as day was coming on, at the same time when the sun rose there was an earthquake felt both on the land and on the sea: and they determined to pray to the gods and to call upon the sons of Aiacos to be their helpers. And as they had determined, so also they did; for when they had prayed to all the gods, they called Ajax and Telamon to their help from Salamis, where the fleet was, and sent a ship to Egina to bring Aiacos himself and the rest of the sons of Aiacos.         64. [1] oytu men oi peri Salamina epesi akrobolisamenoi, epeite Eyrybiadei edoxe, aytou pareskeyazonto us naymaxesontes. emere te egineto kai ama tui eliui anionti seismos egeneto en te tei gei kai tei thalassei. [2] edoxe de sfi eyxasthai toisi theoisi kai epikalesasthai tous Aiakidas symmaxoys. us de sfi edoxe, kai epoieyn tauta. eyxamenoi gar pasi toisi theoisi, aytothen men ek Salaminos Aianta te kai Telamuna epekaleonto, epi de Aiakon kai tous alloys Aiakidas nea apestellon es Aiginan.   
      65. Moreover Dicaios the son of Theokydes, an Athenian, who was an exile and had become of great repute among the Medes at this time, declared that when the Attic land was being ravaged by the land-army of Xerxes, having been deserted by the Athenians, he happened then to be in company with Demaratos the Lacedemonian in the Thriasian plain; and he saw a cloud of dust going up from Eleusis, as if made by a company of about thirty thousand men, and they wondered at the cloud of dust, by what men it was caused. Then forthwith they heard a sound of voices, and Dicaios perceived that the sound was the mystic cry Iacchos; but Demaratos, having no knowledge of the sacred rites which are done at Eleusis, asked him what this was that uttered the sound, and he said: "Demaratos, it cannot be but that some great destruction is about to come to the army of the king: for as to this, it is very manifest, seeing that Attica is deserted, that this which utters the sound is of the gods, and that it is going from Eleusis to help the Athenians and their allies: if then it shall come down in the Peloponnese, there is danger for the king himself and for the army which is upon the mainland, but if it shall direct its course towards the ships which are at Salamis, the king will be in danger of losing his fleet. This feast the Athenians celebrate every year to the Mother and the Daughter; and he that desires it, both of them and of the other Hellenes, is initiated in the mysteries; and the sound of voices which thou hearest is the cry Iacchos which they utter at this feast." To this Demaratos said: "Keep silence and tell not this tale to any other man; for if these words of thine be reported to the king, thou wilt surely lose thy head, and neither I nor any other man upon earth will be able to save thee: but keep thou quiet, and about this expedition the gods will provide." He then thus advised, and after the cloud of dust and the sound of voices there came a mist which was borne aloft and carried towards Salamis to the camp of the Hellenes: and thus they learnt (said he) that the fleet of Xerxes was destined to be destroyed. Such was the report made by Dicaios the son of Theodykes, appealing to Demaratos and others also as witnesses.         65. [1] efe de Dikaios o Theokudeos, aner Athenaios fygas te kai para Medoisi logimos genomenos touton ton xronon, epeite ekeireto e Attike xure ypo tou pezou stratou tou Xerxeu eousa eremos Athenaiun, tyxein tote eun ama Demaretui tui Lakedaimoniui en tui Thriasiui pediui, idein de koniorton xureonta ap' Eleysinos us andrun malista kei trismyriun, apothumazein te sfeas ton koniorton oteun kote eie anthrupun, kai prokate funeis akouein, kai oi fainesthai ten funen einai ton mystikon iakxon. [2] einai d' adaemona tun irun tun en Eleysini ginomenun ton Demareton, eiresthai te ayton o ti to ftheggomenon eie touto. aytos de eipein <<Demarete, oyk esti okus oy mega ti sinos estai tei basileos stratiei. tade gar aridela, eremoy eouses teis Attikeis, oti theion to ftheggomenon, ap' Eleysinos ion es timurien Athenaioisi te kai toisi symmaxoisi. [3] kai en men ge kataskepsei es ten Peloponneson, kindynos aytui te basilei kai tei stratiei tei en tei epeirui estai, en de epi tas neas trapetai tas en Salamini, ton naytikon straton kindyneusei basileus apobalein. [4] ten de orten tauten agoysi Athenaioi ana panta etea tei Metri kai tei Kourei, kai aytun te o boylomenos kai tun allun Ellenun myeitai. kai ten funen teis akoueis en tautei tei ortei iakxazoysi. >> pros tauta eipein Demareton <<siga te kai medeni allui ton logon touton eipeis. [5] en gar toi es basilea aneneixthei ta epea tauta, apobaleeis ten kefalen, kai se oyte egu dynesomai rhusasthai oyt' allos anthrupun oyde eis. all' ex' esyxos, peri de stratieis teisde theoisi melesei. >> [6] ton men de tauta paraineein, ek de tou koniortou kai teis funeis genesthai nefos kai metarsiuthen feresthai epi Salaminos epi to stratopedon to tun Ellenun. oytu de aytous mathein oti to naytikon to Xerxeu apoleesthai melloi. tauta men Dikaios o Theokudeos elege, Demaretoy te kai allun marturun kataptomenos.   
      66. Meanwhile those who were appointed to serve in the fleet of Xerxes, having gazed in Trachis upon the disaster of the Lacedemonians and having passed over from thence to Histiaia, after staying three days sailed through Euripos, and in other three days they had reached Phaleron. And, as I suppose, they made their attack upon Athens not fewer in number both by land and sea than when they had arrived at Sepias and at Thermopylai: for against those of them who perished by reason of the storm and those who were slain at Thermopylai and in the sea-fights at Artemision, I will set those who at that time were not yet accompanying the king, the Malians, Dorians, Locrians, and Boeotians (who accompanied him in a body, except the Thespians and Plataians), and moreover those of Carystos, Andros, and Tenos, with all the other islanders except the five cities of which I mentioned the names before; for the more the Persian advanced towards the centre of Hellas, the more nations accompanied him.         66. [1] oi de es ton Xerxeu naytikon straton taxthentes, epeide ek Trexinos theesamenoi to truma to Lakunikon diebesan es ten Istiaien, episxontes emeras treis epleon di' Eyripoy, kai en etereisi trisi emereisi egenonto en Falerui. us men emoi dokeein, oyk elassones eontes arithmon esebalon es tas Athenas, kata te epeiron kai teisi neysi apikomenoi, e epi te Sepiada apikonto kai es Thermopulas. [2] antithesu gar toisi te ypo tou xeimunos aytun apolomenoisi kai toisi en Thermopuleisi kai teisi ep' Artemisiui naymaxieisi tousde tous tote oyku epomenoys basilei, Melieas kai Durieas kai Lokrous kai Boiutous panstratiei epomenoys plen Thespieun kai Plataieun, kai mala Karystioys te kai Andrioys kai Tenioys te kai tous loipous nesiutas pantas, plen tun pente poliun tun epemnesthemen proteron ta oynomata. osui gar de proebaine esuteru teis Ellados o Perses, tosoutui pleu ethnea oi eipeto.   
      67. So then, when all these had come to Athens except the Parians (now the Parians had remained behind at Kythnos waiting to see how the war would turn out),--when all the rest, I say, had come to Phaleron, then Xerxes himself came down to the ships desiring to visit them and to learn the opinions of those who sailed in them: and when he had come and was set in a conspicuous place, then those who were despots of their own nations or commanders of divisions being sent for came before him from their ships, and took their seats as the king had assigned rank to each one, first the king of Sidon, then he of Tyre, and after them the rest: and when they were seated in due order, Xerxes sent Mardonios and inquired, making trial of each one, whether he should fight a battle by sea.         67. [1] epei un apikato es tas Athenas pantes oytoi plen Pariun (Parioi de ypoleifthentes en Kuthnui ekaradokeon ton polemon kei apobesetai ), oi de loipoi us apikonto es to Faleron, enthauta katebe aytos Xerxes epi tas neas, ethelun sfi symmixai te kai pythesthai tun epipleontun tas gnumas. [2] epei de apikomenos proizeto, pareisan metapemptoi oi tun ethneun tun sfeterun turannoi kai taxiarxoi apo tun neun, kai izonto us sfi basileus ekastui timen ededukee, prutos men o Sidunios basileus, meta de o Turios, epi de ulloi. us de kosmui epexeis izonto, pempsas Xerxes Mardonion eiruta apopeirumenos ekastoy ei naymaxien poieoito.   
      68. So when Mardonios went round asking them, beginning with the king of Sidon, the others gave their opinions all to the same effect, advising him to fight a battle by sea, but Artemisia spoke these words:--        68. [1] epei de periiun eiruta o Mardonios arxamenos apo tou Sidunioy, oi men alloi kata tuyto gnumen exeferonto keleuontes naymaxien poieesthai, Artemisie de tade efe.   
      68. (a) "Tell the king I pray thee, Mardonios, that I, who have proved myself not to be the worst in the sea-fights which have been fought near Euboea, and have displayed deeds not inferior to those of others, speak to him thus: Master, it is right that I set forth the opinion which I really have, and say that which I happen to think best for thy cause: and this I say,--spare thy ships and do not make a sea-fight; for the men are as much stronger than thy men by sea, as men are stronger than women. And why must thou needs run the risk of sea-battles? Hast thou not Athens in thy possession, for the sake of which thou didst set forth on thy march, and also the rest of Hellas? and no man stands in thy way to resist, but those who did stand against thee came off as it was fitting that they should.         68. a [1] <<eipein moi pros basilea, Mardonie, us egu tade legu, oyte kakiste genomene en teisi naymaxieisi teisi pros Eyboiei oyte elaxista apodexamene. despota, ten de eousan gnumen me dikaion esti apodeiknysthai, ta tygxanu froneoysa arista es pregmata ta sa. kai toi tade legu, feideo tun neun mede naymaxien poieo. oi gar andres tun sun andrun kressones tosouto eisi kata thalassan oson andres gynaikun. [2] ti de pantus deei se naymaxieisi anakindyneuein; oyk exeis men tas Athenas, tun per eineka ormethes strateuesthai, exeis de ten allen Ellada ; empodun de toi istatai oydeis. oi de toi antestesan, apellaxan oytu us keinoys eprepe.   
      68. (b) Now the manner in which I think the affairs of thy adversaries will have their issue, I will declare. If thou do not hasten to make a sea-fight, but keep thy ships here by the land, either remaining here thyself or even advancing on to the Peloponnese, that which thou hast come to do, O master, will easily be effected; for the Hellenes are not able to hold out against thee for any long time, but thou wilt soon disperse them and they will take flight to their several cities: since neither have they provisions with them in this island, as I am informed, nor is it probable that if thou shalt march thy land-army against the Peloponnese, they who have come from thence will remain still; for these will have no care to fight a battle in defence of Athens.         68. b [1] tei de egu dokeu apobesesthai ta tun antipolemun pregmata, touto frasu. en men me epeixtheis naymaxien poieumenos, alla tas neas aytou exeis pros gei menun e kai probainun es ten Peloponneson, eypeteus toi despota xuresei ta noeun elelythas. [2] oy gar oioi te pollon xronon eisi toi antexein oi Ellenes, alla sfeas diaskedais, kata polis de ekastoi feuxontai. oyte gar sitos para sfi en tei nesui tautei, us egu pynthanomai, oyte aytous oikos, en su epi ten Peloponneson elauneis ton pezon straton, atremiein tous ekeithen aytun ekontas, oyde sfi melesei pro tun Atheneun naymaxeein.   
      68. (c) If however thou hasten to fight forthwith, I fear that damage done to the fleet may ruin the land-army also. Moreover, O king, consider also this, that the servants of good men are apt to grow bad, but those of bad men good; and thou, who art of all men the best, hast bad servants, namely those who are reckoned as allies, Egyptians and Cyprians and Kilikians and Pamphylians, in whom there is no profit."         68. g [1] en de aytika epeixtheis naymaxeisai, deimainu me o naytikos stratos kakutheis ton pezon prosdelesetai. pros de, u basileu, kai tode es thymon baley, us toisi men xrestoisi tun anthrupun kakoi douloi fileoysi ginesthai, toisi de kakoisi xrestoi. soi de eonti aristui andrun pantun kakoi douloi eisi, oi en symmaxun logui legontai einai eontes Aiguptioi te kai Kuprioi kai Kilikes kai Pamfyloi, tun ofelos esti oyden.>>   
      69. When she thus spoke to Mardonios, those who were friendly to Artemisia were grieved at her words, supposing that she would suffer some evil from the king because she urged him not to fight at sea; while those who had envy and jealousy of her, because she had been honoured above all the allies, were rejoiced at the opposition, supposing that she would now be ruined. When however the opinions were reported to Xerxes, he was greatly pleased with the opinion of Artemisia; and whereas even before this he thought her excellent, he commended her now yet more. Nevertheless he gave orders to follow the advice of the greater number, thinking that when they fought by Euboea they were purposely slack, because he was not himself present with them, whereas now he had made himself ready to look on while they fought a sea-battle.         69. [1] tauta legouses pros Mardonion, osoi men Esan eynooi tei Artemisiei, symforen epoieunto tous logoys us kakon ti peisomenes pros basileos, oti oyk ea naymaxien poieesthai. oi de agaiomenoi te kai fthoneontes aytei, ate en prutoisi tetimemenes dia pantun tun symmaxun, eterponto tei anakrisi us apoleomenes ayteis. [2] epei de aneneixthesan ai gnumai es Xerxen, karta te esthe tei gnumei tei Artemisies, kai nomizun eti proteron spoydaien einai tote pollui mallon ainee. omus de toisi pleosi peithesthai ekeleye, tade katadoxas, pros men Eyboiei sfeas ethelokakeein us oy pareontos aytou, tote de aytos pareskeuasto theesasthai naymaxeontas.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [70]

     70. So when they passed the word to put out to sea, they brought their ships out to Salamis and quietly ranged themselves along the shore in their several positions. At that time the daylight was not sufficient for them to engage battle, for night had come on; but they made their preparations to fight on the following day. Meanwhile the Hellenes were possessed by fear and dismay, especially those who were from Peloponnese: and these were dismayed because remaining in Salamis they were to fight a battle on behalf of the land of the Athenians, and being defeated they would be cut off from escape and blockaded in an island, leaving their own land unguarded. And indeed the land-army of the Barbarians was marching forward during that very night towards the Peloponnese.         70. [1] epei de pareggellon anapleein, aneigon tas neas epi ten Salamina kai parekrithesan diataxthentes kat' esyxien. tote men nyn oyk exexrese sfi e emere naymaxien poiesasthai. nux gar epegeneto. oi de pareskeyazonto es ten ysteraien. [2] tous de Ellenas eixe deos te kai arrudie, oyk ekista de tous apo Peloponnesoy. arrudeon de oti aytoi men en Salamini katemenoi yper geis teis Athenaiun naymaxeein melloien, nikethentes te en nesui apolamfthentes poliorkesontai, apentes ten euytun afulakton.   
      71. Yet every means had been taken that the Barbarians might not be able to enter Peloponnesus by land: for as soon as the Peloponnesians heard that Leonidas and his company had perished at Thermopylai, they came together quickly from the cities and took post at the Isthmus, and over them was set as commander Cleombrotos, the son of Anaxandrides and brother of Leonidas. These being posted at the Isthmus had destroyed the Skironian way, and after this (having so determined in counsel with one another) they began to build a wall across the Isthmus; and as they were many myriads and every man joined in the work, the work proceeded fast; for stones and bricks and pieces of timber and baskets full of sand were carried to it continually, and they who had thus come to help paused not at all in their work either by night or by day.         71. [1] tun de barbarun o pezos ypo ten pareousan nukta eporeueto epi ten Peloponneson. kaitoi ta dynata panta ememexaneto okus kat' epeiron me esbaloien oi barbaroi. us gar eputhonto taxista Peloponnesioi tous amfi Leuniden en Thermopuleisi teteleytekenai, syndramontes ek tun poliun es ton Isthmon izonto, kai sfi epein strategos Kleombrotos o Anaxandrideu, Leunideu de adelfeos. [2] izomenoi de en tui Isthmui kai sygxusantes ten Skirunida odon, meta touto us sfi edoxe boyleyomenoisi, oikodomeon dia tou Isthmou teixos. ate de eoyseun myriadun polleun kai pantos andros ergazomenoy, eneto to ergon. kai gar lithoi kai plinthoi kai xula kai formoi psammoy plerees eseferonto, kai elinyon oydena xronon oi boethesantes ergazomenoi, oyte nyktos oyte emeres.   
      72. Now those of the Hellenes who came in full force to the Isthmus to help their country were these,--the Lacedemonians, the Arcadians of every division, the Eleians, Corinthians, Sikyonians, Epidaurians, Phliasians, Troizenians and Hermionians. These were they who came to the help of Hellas in her danger and who had apprehension for her, while the rest of the Peloponnesians showed no care: and the Olympic and Carneian festivals had by this time gone by.         72. [1] oi de boethesantes es ton Isthmon pandemei oide Esan Ellenun, Lakedaimonioi te kai Arkades pantes kai Eleioi kai Korinthioi kai Epidaurioi kai Fliasioi kai Troizenioi kai Ermionees. oytoi men Esan oi boethesantes kai yperarrudeontes tei Elladi kindyneyousei. toisi de alloisi Peloponnesioisi emele oyden. Olumpia de kai Karneia paroixukee ede.   
      73. Now Peloponnesus is inhabited by seven races; and of these, two are natives of the soil and are settled now in the place where they dwelt of old, namely the Arcadians and the Kynurians; and one race, that of the Achaians, though it did not remove from the Peloponnese, yet removed in former time from its own land and dwells now in that which was not its own. The remaining races, four in number, have come in from without, namely the Dorians, Aitolians, Dryopians and Lemnians. Of the Dorians there are many cities and of great renown; of the Aitolians, Elis alone; of the Dryopians, Hermion and Asine, which latter is opposite Cardamyle in the Laconian land; and of the Lemnians, all the Paroreatai. The Kynurians, who are natives of the soil, seem alone to be Ionians, but they have become Dorians completely because they are subject to the Argives and by lapse of time, being originally citizens of Orneai or the dwellers in the country round Orneai. Of these seven nations the remaining cities, except those which I enumerated just now, stood aside and did nothing; and if one may be allowed to speak freely, in thus standing aside they were in fact taking the side of the Medes.         73. [1] oikeei de ten Peloponneson ethnea epta. toutun de ta men duo aytoxthona eonta kata xuren idrytai nun te kai to palai oikeon, Arkades te kai Kynourioi. en de ethnos to Axaiikon ek men Peloponnesoy oyk exexurese, ek mentoi teis euytun, oikeei de ten allotrien. [2] ta de loipa ethnea tun epta tessera epelyda esti, Duriees te kai Aituloi kai Druopes kai Lemnioi. Durieun men pollai te kai dokimoi polies, Aitulun de Elis moune, Dryopun de Ermiun te kai Asine e pros Kardamulei tei Lakunikei, Lemniun de Parureeitai pantes. [3] oi de Kynourioi aytoxthones eontes dokeoysi mounoi einai Iunes, ekdedurieyntai de ypo te Argeiun arxomenoi kai tou xronoy, eontes Orneeitai kai oi perioikoi. toutun un tun epta ethneun ai loipai polies, parex tun katelexa, ek tou mesoy kateato. ei de eleytherus exesti eipein, ek tou katemenoi emedizon.   
      74. Those at the Isthmus were struggling with the labour which I have said, since now they were running a course in which their very being was at stake, and they did not look to have any brilliant success with their ships: while those who were at Salamis, though informed of this work, were yet dismayed, not fearing so much for themselves as for Peloponnesus. For some time then they spoke of it in private, one man standing by another, and they marvelled at the ill-counsel of Eurybiades; but at last it broke out publicly. A meeting accordingly was held, and much was spoken about the same points as before, some saying that they ought to sail away to Peloponnesus and run the risk in defence of that, and not stay and fight for a land which had been captured by the enemy, while the Athenians, Eginetans and Megarians urged that they should stay there and defend themselves.         74. [1] oi men de en tui Isthmui toioutui ponui synestasan, ate peri tou pantos ede dromoy theontes kai teisi neysi oyk elpizontes ellampsesthai. oi de en Salamini omus tauta pynthanomenoi arrudeon, oyk oytu peri sfisi aytoisi deimainontes us peri tei Peloponnesui. [2] teus men de aytun aner andri parastas sigei logon epoieeto, thuma poieumenoi ten Eyrybiadeu aboylien. telos de exerrage es to meson. sullogos te de egineto kai polla elegeto tun aytun, oi men us es ten Peloponneson xreon eie apopleein kai peri ekeines kindyneuein mede pro xures dorialutoy menontas maxesthai, Athenaioi de kai Aigineitai kai Megarees aytou menontas amunesthai.   
      75. Then Themistocles, when his opinion was like to be defeated by the Peloponnesians, secretly went forth from the assembly, and having gone out he sent a man to the encampment of the Medes in a boat, charging him with that which he must say: this man's name was Sikinnos, and he was a servant of Themistocles and tutor to his children; and after these events Themistocles entered him as a Thespian citizen, when the Thespians were admitting new citizens, and made him a wealthy man. He at this time came with a boat and said to the commanders of the Barbarians these words: "The commander of the Athenians sent me privately without the knowledge of the other Hellenes (for, as it chances, he is disposed to the cause of the king, and desires rather that your side should gain the victory than that of the Hellenes), to inform you that the Hellenes are planning to take flight, having been struck with dismay; and now it is possible for you to execute a most noble work, if ye do not permit them to flee away: for they are not of one mind with one another and they will not stand against you in fight, but ye shall see them fighting a battle by sea with one another, those who are disposed to your side against those who are not."         75. [1] enthauta Themistoklees us essouto tei gnumei ypo tun Peloponnesiun, lathun exerxetai ek tou synedrioy, exelthun de pempei es to stratopedon to Medun andra ploiui enteilamenos ta legein xreon, tui oynoma men En Sikinnos, oiketes de kai paidagugos En tun Themistokleos paidun. ton de ysteron toutun tun pregmatun Themistoklees Thespiea te epoiese, us epedekonto oi Thespiees polietas, kai xremasi olbion. [2] os tote ploiui apikomenos elege pros tous strategous tun barbarun tade. <<epempse me strategos o Athenaiun lathrei tun allun Ellenun (tygxanei gar froneun ta basileos kai boylomenos mallon ta ymetera katuperthe ginesthai e ta tun Ellenun pregmata ) frasonta oti oi Ellenes dresmon boyleuontai katarrudekotes, kai nun parexei kalliston ymeas ergun apantun exergasasthai, en me periidete diadrantas aytous. [3] oyte gar alleloisi omofroneoysi oyte antistesontai ymin, pros euytous te sfeas opsesthe naymaxeontas tous ta ymetera froneontas kai tous me.>> o men tauta sfi semenas ekpodun apallasseto.   
      76. He then having signified to them this, departed out of the way; and they, thinking that the message deserved credit, landed first a large number of Persians in the small island of Psyttaleia, which lies between Salamis and the mainland; and then, as midnight came on, they put out the Western wing of their fleet to sea, circling round towards Salamis, and also those stationed about Keos and Kynosura put out their ships to sea; and they occupied all the passage with their ships as far as Munychia. And for this reason they put out their ships, namely in order that the Hellenes might not even be permitted to get away, but being cut off in Salamis might pay the penalty for the contests at Artemision: and they disembarked men of the Persians on the small island called Psyttaleia for this reason, namely that when the fight should take place, these might save the men of one side and destroy those of the other, since there especially it was likely that the men and the wrecks of ships would be cast up on shore, for the island lay in the way of the sea-fight which was to be. These things they did in silence, that the enemy might not have information of them.         76. [1] toisi de us pista egineto ta aggelthenta, touto men es ten nesida ten Psyttaleian, metaxu Salaminos te keimenen kai teis epeiroy, pollous tun Perseun apebibasanto. touto de, epeide eginonto mesai nuktes, aneigon men to ap' esperes keras kykloumenoi pros ten Salamina, aneigon de oi amfi ten Keon te kai ten Kynosoyran tetagmenoi, kateixon te mexri Moynyxies panta ton porthmon teisi neysi. [2] tunde de eineka aneigon tas neas, ina de toisi Ellesi mede fygein exei, all' apolamfthentes en tei Salamini doien tisin tun ep' Artemisiui agunismatun. es de ten nesida ten Psyttaleian kaleomenen apebibazon tun Perseun tunde eineken, us epean ginetai naymaxie, enthauta malista exoisomenun tun te andrun kai tun nayegiun (en gar de porui teis naymaxies teis mellouses esesthai ekeito e neisos ), ina tous men peripoieusi tous de diaftheirusi. [3] epoieyn de sigei tauta, us me pynthanoiato oi enantioi. oi men de tauta teis nyktos oyden apokoimethentes pararteonto.   
      77. They then were making their preparations thus in the night without having taken any sleep at all: and with regard to oracles, I am not able to make objections against them that they are not true, for I do not desire to attempt to overthrow the credit of them when they speak clearly, looking at such matters as these which here follow: 
"But when with ships they shall join the sacred strand of the goddess, 
 Artemis golden-sword-girded, and thee, wave-washed Kynosura, 
 Urged by a maddening hope, having given rich Athens to plunder, 
 Then shall Justice divine quell Riot, of Insolence first-born, 
 Longing to overthrow all things and terribly panting for bloodhshed: 
 Brass shall encounter with brass, and Ares the sea shall empurple, 
 Tinging its waves with the blood: then a day of freedom for Hellas 
 Cometh from wide-seeing Zeus and from Victory, lady and mother." Looking to such things as this, and when Bakis speaks so clearly, I do not venture myself to make any objections about oracles, nor can I admit them from others.         77. [1] xresmoisi de oyk exu antilegein us oyk eisi alethees, oy boylomenos enargeus legontas peirasthai kataballein, es toiade pregmata esblepsas.      all' otan Artemidos xrysaoroy ieron akten
      neysi gefyrususi kai einalien Kynosoyran
      elpidi mainomenei, liparas persantes Athenas,
      dia dike sbessei krateron koron, ybrios yion,
      deinon maimuonta, dokeunt' ana panta piesthai.
      [2] xalkos gar xalkui symmixetai, aimati d' Ares
      ponton foinixei. tot' eleutheron Ellados Emar
      eyruopa Kronides epagei kai potnia Nike.es toiauta men kai oytu enargeus legonti Bakidi antilogies xresmun peri oyte aytos legein tolmeu oyte par' allun endekomai.   
      78. Now between the commanders that were at Salamis there came to be great contention of speech and they did not yet know that the Barbarians were surrounding them with their ships, but they thought that they were still in their place as they saw them disposed in the day.         78. [1] tun de en Salamini strategun egineto uthismos logun pollos. eidesan de oyku oti sfeas periekyklounto teisi neysi oi barbaroi, all' usper teis emeres urun aytous tetagmenoys, edokeon kata xuren einai.   
      79. Then while the commanders were engaged in strife, there came over from Egina Aristeides the son of Lysimachos, an Athenian who had been ostracised by the people, a man whom I hold (according to that which I hear of his character) to have been the best and most upright of all Athenians. This man came into the council and called forth Themistocles, who was to him not a friend, but an enemy to the last degree; but because of the greatness of the present troubles he let those matters be forgotten and called him forth, desiring to communicate with him. Now he had heard beforehand that the Peloponnesians were pressing to take the ships away to the Isthmus. So when Themistocles came forth to him, Aristeides spoke these words: "Both at other times when occasion arises, and also especially at this time we ought to carry on rivalry as to which of us shall do more service to our country. And I tell thee now that it is indifferent whether the Peloponnesians say many words or few about sailing away from hence; for having been myself an eye-witness I tell thee that now not even if the Corinthians and Eurybiades himself desire to sail out, will they be able; for we are encompassed round by the enemy. Go thou in then, and signify this to them."         79. [1] synestekotun de tun strategun, ex Aigines diebe Aristeides o Lysimaxoy, aner Athenaios men exustrakismenos de ypo tou demoy. ton egu nenomika, pynthanomenos aytou ton tropon, ariston andra genesthai en Atheneisi kai dikaiotaton. [2] oytos uner stas epi to synedrion exekaleeto Themistoklea, eonta men euytui oy filon exthron de ta malista. ypo de megatheos tun pareontun kakun lethen ekeinun poieumenos exekaleeto, thelun aytui symmixai. proakekoee de oti speudoien oi apo Peloponnesoy anagein tas neas pros ton Isthmon. [3] us de exeilthe oi Themistoklees, elege Aristeides tade. <<emeas stasiazein xreon esti en te tui allui kairui kai de kai en tuide peri tou okoteros emeun pleu agatha ten patrida ergasetai. [4] legu de toi oti ison esti polla te kai oliga legein peri apoplooy tou entheuten Peloponnesioisi. egu gar aytoptes toi legu genomenos oti nun oyd' en thelusi Korinthioi te kai aytos Eyrybiades oioi te esontai ekplusai. periexometha gar ypo tun polemiun kuklui. all' eselthun sfi tauta semenon.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [80]

     80. He made answer as follows: "Thou advisest very well, and also the news which thou hast brought is good, since thou art come having witnessed with thine own eyes that which I desired might come to pass: for know that this which is being done by the Medes is of my suggestion; because, when the Hellenes would not come to a battle of their own will, it was necessary to bring them over to us against their will. Do thou however, since thou art come bearing good news, thyself report it to them; for if I say these things, I shall be thought to speak that which I have myself invented, and I shall not persuade them, but they will think that the Barbarians are not doing so. Do thou thyself however come forward to speak, and declare to them how things are; and when thou hast declared this, if they are persuaded, that will be the best thing, but if this is not credible to them, it will be the same thing so far as concerns us, for they will no longer be able to take to flight, if we are encompassed on all sides, as thou sayest."         80. [1] o d' ameibeto toisde. <<karta te xresta diakeleueai kai ey eggeilas. ta gar egu edeomen genesthai, aytos aytoptes genomenos ekeis. isthi gar ex emeo ta poieumena ypo Medun. edee gar, ote oyk ekontes ethelon es maxen katistasthai oi Ellenes, aekontas parastesasthai. su de epei per ekeis xresta apaggellun, aytos sfi aggeilon. [2] en gar egu ayta legu, doxu plasas legein kai oy peisu, us oy poieuntun tun barbarun tauta. alla sfi semenon aytos parelthun us exei. epean de semeneis, en men peithuntai, tauta de ta kallista, en de aytoisi me pista genetai, omoion emin estai. oy gar eti diadresontai, ei per periexometha pantaxothen, us su legeis.>>   
      81. Aristeides accordingly came forward and told them this, saying that he had come from Egina and had with difficulty escaped without being perceived by those who were blockading them; for the whole encampment of the Hellenes was encompassed by the ships of Xerxes; and he counselled them to get ready to defend themselves. He then having thus spoken retired, and among them again there arose dispute, for the greater number of the commanders did not believe that which was reported to them:         81. [1] enthauta elege parelthun o Aristeides, famenos ex Aigines te ekein kai mogis ekplusai lathun tous epormeontas. periexesthai gar pan to stratopedon to Ellenikon ypo tun neun tun Xerxeu. pararteesthai te synebouleye us alexesomenoys. kai o men tauta eipas metestekee, tun de aytis egineto logun amfisbasie. oi gar pleunes tun strategun oyk epeithonto ta esaggelthenta.   
      83. and while these were doubting, there came a trireme manned by Tenians, deserting from the enemy, of which the commander was Panaitios the son of Sosimenes, which brought them the whole truth. For this deed the Tenians were inscribed at Delphi on the tripod among those who had conquered the Barbarians. With the ship which deserted at Salamis and the Lemnian ship which deserted before and came to Artemision, the naval force of the Hellenes was completed to the number of three hundred and eighty ships, for before this two ships were yet wanting to make up this number.         82. [1] apisteontun de toutun Eke trieres andrun Teniun aytomoleoysa, teis Erxe aner Panaitios o Susimeneos, e per de efere ten aletheien pasan. dia de touto to ergon enegrafesan Tenioi en Delfoisi es ton tripoda en toisi ton barbaron katelousi. [2] sun de un tautei tei nei tei aytomolesasei es Salamina kai tei proteron ep' Artemision tei Lemniei exeplerouto to naytikon toisi Ellesi es tas ogdukonta kai triekosias neas. duo gar de neun tote katedee es ton arithmon.   
      83. The Hellenes then, since they believed that which was said by the Tenians, were preparing for a sea-fight: and as the dawn appeared, they made an assembly of those who fought on board the ships and addressed them, Themistocles making a speech which was eloquent beyond the rest; and the substance of it was to set forth all that is better as opposed to that which is worse, of the several things which arise in the nature and constitution of man; and having exhorted them to choose the better, and thus having wound up his speech, he bade them embark in their ships. These then proceeded to embark, and there came in meanwhile the trireme from Egina which had gone away to bring the sons of Aiacos.         83. [1] toisi de Ellesi us pista de ta legomena En tun Teniun rhemata, pareskeyazonto us naymaxesontes. eus te diefaine kai oi sullogon tun epibateun poiesamenoi, proegoreye ey exonta men ek pantun Themistoklees, ta de epea En panta kressu toisi essosi antitithemena, osa de en anthrupoy fusi kai katastasi egginetai. [2] parainesas de toutun ta kressu aireesthai kai kataplexas ten rheisin, esbainein ekeleye es tas neas. kai oytoi men de esebainon, kai Eke e ap' Aigines trieres, e kata tous Aiakidas apedemese. enthauta aneigon tas neas apasas Ellenes.   
      84. Then the Hellenes put out all their ships, and while they were putting out from shore, the Barbarians attacked them forthwith. Now the other Hellenes began backing their ships and were about to run them aground, but Ameinias of Pallene, an Athenian, put forth with his ship and charged one of the enemy; and his ship being entangled in combat and the men not being able to get away, the others joined in the fight to assist Ameinias. The Athenians say that the beginning of the battle was made thus, but the Eginetans say that the ship which went away to Egina to bring the sons of Aiacos was that which began the fight. It is also reported that an apparition of a woman was seen by them, and that having appeared she encouraged them to the fight so that the whole of the army of the Hellenes heard it, first having reproached them in these words: "Madmen, how far will ye yet back your ships?"         84. [1] anagomenoisi de sfi aytika epekeato oi barbaroi. oi men de alloi Ellenes epi prumnen anekrouonto kai ukellon tas neas, Ameinies de Palleneus aner Athenaios exanaxtheis nei emballei. symplakeises de teis neos kai oy dynamenun apallageinai, oytu de oi alloi Ameiniei boetheontes synemisgon. [2] Athenaioi men oytu legoysi teis naymaxies genesthai ten arxen, Aigineitai de ten kata tous Aiakidas apodemesasan es Aiginan, tauten einai ten arxasan. legetai de kai tade, us fasma sfi gynaikos efane, faneisan de diakeleusasthai uste kai apan akousai to tun Ellenun stratopedon, oneidisasan proteron tade, <<u daimonioi, mexri kosoy eti prumnen anakrouesthe ;>>   
      85. Opposite the Athenians had been ranged the Phenicians, for these occupied the wing towards Eleusis and the West, and opposite the Lacedemonians were the Ionians, who occupied the wing which extended to the East and to Piraeus. Of them however a few were purposely slack in the fight according to the injunctions of Themistocles, but the greater number were not so. I might mention now the names of many captains of ships who destroyed ships of the Hellenes, but I will make no use of their names except in the case of Theomestor, the son of Androdamas and Phylacos the son of Histiaios, of Samos both: and for this reason I make mention of these and not of the rest, because Theomestor on account of this deed became despot of Samos, appointed by the Persians, and Phylacos was recorded as a benefactor of the king and received much land as a reward. Now the benefactors of the king are called in the Persian tongue orosangai.         85. [1] kata men de Athenaioys etetaxato Foinikes (oytoi gar eixon to pros Eleysinos te kai esperes keras ), kata de Lakedaimonioys Iunes. oytoi d' eixon to pros ten eu te kai ton Peiraiea. ethelokakeon mentoi aytun kata tas Themistokleos entolas oligoi, oi de pleunes oy. [2] exu men nyn syxnun oynomata trierarxun katalexai tun neas Ellenidas elontun, xresomai de aytoisi oyden plen Theomestoros te tou Androdamantos kai Fylakoy tou Istiaioy, Samiun amfoterun. [3] toude de eineka memnemai toutun mounun, oti Theomestur men dia touto to ergon Samoy etyranneyse katastesantun tun Perseun, Fulakos de eyergetes basileos anegrafe kai xurei edurethe pollei. oi d' eyergetai basileos orosaggai kaleontai Persisti.   
      86. Thus it was with these; but the greater number of their ships were disabled at Salamis, being destroyed some by the Athenians and others by the Eginetans: for since the Hellenes fought in order and ranged in their places, while the Barbarians were no longer ranged in order nor did anything with design, it was likely that there would be some such result as in fact followed. Yet on this day they surpassed themselves much more than when they fought by Euboea, every one being eager and fearing Xerxes, and each man thinking that the king was looking especially at him.         86. [1] peri men nyn toutoys oytu eixe. to de pleithos tun neun en tei Salamini ekeraizeto, ai men yp' Athenaiun diaftheiromenai ai de yp' Aigineteun. ate gar tun men Ellenun sun kosmui naymaxeontun kai kata taxin, tun de barbarun oyte tetagmenun eti oyte sun noui poieontun oyden, emelle toiouto sfi synoisesthai oion per apebe. kaitoi Esan ge kai egenonto tauten ten emeren makrui ameinones aytoi euytun e pros Eyboiei, pas tis prothymeomenos kai deimainun Xerxen, edokee te ekastos euyton theesasthai basilea.   
      87. As regards the rest I cannot speak of them separately, or say precisely how the Barbarians or the Hellenes individually contended in the fight; but with regard to Artemisia that which happened was this, whence she gained yet more esteem than before from the king.--When the affairs of the king had come to great confusion, at this crisis a ship of Artemisia was being pursued by an Athenian ship; and as she was not able to escape, for in front of her were other ships of her own side, while her ship, as it chanced, was furthest advanced towards the enemy, she resolved what she would do, and it proved also much to her advantage to have done so. While she was being pursued by the Athenian ship she charged with full career against a ship of her own side manned by Calyndians and in which the king of the Calyndians Damasithymos was embarked. Now, even though it be true that she had had some strife with him before, while they were still about the Hellespont, yet I am not able to say whether she did this by intention, or whether the Calyndian ship happened by chance to fall in her way. Having charged against it however and sunk it, she enjoyed good fortune and got for herself good in two ways; for first the captain of the Athenian ship, when he saw her charge against a ship manned by Barbarians, turned away and went after others, supposing that the ship of Artemisia was either a Hellenic ship or was deserting from the Barbarians and fighting for the Hellenes,         87. [1] kata men de tous alloys oyk exu metexeteroys eipein atrekeus us ekastoi tun barbarun e tun Ellenun egunizonto. kata de Artemisien tade egeneto, ap' un eydokimese mallon eti para basilei. [2] epeide gar es thorybon pollon apiketo ta basileos pregmata, en toutui tui kairui e neus e Artemisies ediuketo ypo neos Attikeis. kai e oyk exoysa diafygein, emprosthe gar ayteis Esan allai nees filiai, e de ayteis pros tun polemiun malista etugxane eousa, edoxe oi tode poieisai, to kai syneneike poiesasei. diukomene gar ypo teis Attikeis feroysa enebale nei filiei andrun te Kalyndeun kai aytou epipleontos tou Kalyndeun basileos Damasithumoy. [3] ei men kai ti neikos pros ayton egegonee eti peri Ellesponton eontun, oy mentoi exu ge eipein oyte ei ek pronoies ayta epoiese, oyte ei synekurese e tun Kalyndeun kata tuxen parapesousa neus. [4] us de enebale te kai katedyse, eytyxiei xresamene dipla euyten agatha ergasato. o te gar teis Attikeis neos trierarxos us eide min emballoysan nei andrun barbarun, nomisas ten nea ten Artemisies e Ellenida einai e aytomoleein ek tun barbarun kai aytoisi amunein, apostrepsas pros allas etrapeto.   
      88.--first, I say, it was her fortune to have this, namely to escape and not suffer destruction; and then secondly it happened that though she had done mischief, she yet gained great reputation by this thing with Xerxes. For it is said that the king looking on at the fight perceived that her ship had charged the other; and one of those present said: "Master, dost thou see Artemisia, how well she is fighting, and how she sank even now a ship of the enemy?" He asked whether this was in truth the deed of Artemisia, and they said that it was; for (they declared) they knew very well the sign of her ship: and that which was destroyed they thought surely was one of the enemy; for besides other things which happened fortunately for her, as I have said, there was this also, namely that not one of the crew of the Calyndian ship survived to become her accuser. And Xerxes in answer to that which was said to him is reported to have uttered these words: "My men have become women, and my women men." Thus it is said that Xerxes spoke.         88. [1] touto men toiouto aytei syneneike genesthai diafygein te kai me apolesthai, touto de synebe uste kakon ergasamenen apo toutun ayten malista eydokimeisai para Xerxei. [2] legetai gar basilea theeumenon mathein ten nea embalousan, kai de tina eipein tun pareontun <<despota, orais Artemisien us ey agunizetai kai nea tun polemiun katedyse;>> kai ton epeiresthai ei aletheus esti Artemisies to ergon, kai tous fanai, safeus to episemon teis neos epistamenoys. ten de diafthareisan episteato einai polemien. [3] ta te gar alla, us eiretai, aytei syneneike es eytyxien genomena, kai to tun ek teis Kalyndikeis neos medena aposuthenta kategoron genesthai. Xerxen de eipein legetai pros ta frazomena <<oi men andres gegonasi moi gynaikes, ai de gynaikes andres.>> tauta men Xerxen fasi eipein.   
      89. And meanwhile in this struggle there was slain the commander Ariabignes, son of Dareios and brother of Xerxes, and there were slain too many others of note of the Persians and Medes and also of the allies; and of the Hellenes on their part a few; for since they knew how to swim, those whose ships were destroyed and who were not slain in hand-to-hand conflict swam over to Salamis; but of the Barbarians the greater number perished in the sea, not being able to swim. And when the first ships turned to flight, then it was that the largest number perished, for those who were stationed behind, while endeavouring to pass with their ships to the front in order that they also might display some deed of valour for the king to see, ran into the ships of their own side as they fled.         89. [1] en de tui ponui toutui apo men ethane o strategos Ariabignes o Dareioy, Xerxeu eun adelfeos, apo de alloi polloi te kai onomastoi Perseun kai Medun kai tun allun symmaxun, oligoi de tines kai Ellenun. ate gar neein epistamenoi, toisi ai nees dieftheironto, kai me en xeirun nomui apollumenoi, es ten Salamina dieneon. [2] tun de barbarun oi polloi en tei thalassei dieftharesan neein oyk epistamenoi. epei de ai prutai es fygen etraponto, enthauta ai pleistai dieftheironto. oi gar opisthe tetagmenoi, es to prosthe teisi neysi parienai peirumenoi us apodexomenoi ti kai aytoi ergon basilei, teisi sfetereisi neysi feygouseisi periepipton.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [90]

     90. It happened also in the course of this confusion that some of the Phenicians, whose ships had been destroyed, came to the king and accused the Ionians, saying that by means of them their ships had been lost, and that they had been traitors to the cause. Now it so came about that not only the commanders of the Ionians did not lose their lives, but the Phenicians who accused them received a reward such as I shall tell. While these men were yet speaking thus, a Samothrakian ship charged against an Athenian ship: and as the Athenian ship was being sunk by it, an Eginetan ship came up against the Samothrakian vessel and ran it down. Then the Samothrakians, being skilful javelin- throwers, by hurling cleared off the fighting-men from the ship which had wrecked theirs and then embarked upon it and took possession of it. This event saved the Ionians from punishment; for when Xerxes saw that they had performed a great exploit, he turned to the Phenicians (for he was exceedingly vexed and disposed to find fault with all) and bade cut off their heads, in order that they might not, after having been cowards themselves, accuse others who were better men than they. For whensoever Xerxes (sitting just under the mountain opposite Salamis, which is called Aigaleos) saw any one of his own side display a deed of valour in the sea-fight, he inquired about him who had done it, and the scribes recorded the name of the ship's captain with that of his father and the city from whence he came. Moreover also Ariaramnes, a Persian who was present, shared the fate of the Phenicians, being their friend. They then proceeded to deal with the Phenicians.         90. [1] egeneto de kai tode en tui thorubui toutui. tun tines Foinikun, tun ai nees dieftharato, elthontes para basilea dieballon tous Iunas, us di' ekeinoys apoloiato ai nees, us prodontun. syneneike un oytu uste Iunun te tous strategous me apolesthai Foinikun te tous diaballontas labein toionde misthon. [2] eti toutun tauta legontun enebale nei Attikei Samothreikie neus. e te de Attike katedueto kai epiferomene Aiginaie neus katedyse tun Samothreikun ten nea. ate de eontes akontistai oi Samothreikes tous epibatas apo teis katadysases neos ballontes aperaxan kai epebesan te kai esxon ayten. [3] tauta genomena tous Iunas errusato. us gar eide sfeas Xerxes ergon mega ergasamenoys, etrapeto pros tous Foinikas oia yperlypeomenos te kai pantas aitiumenos, kai sfeun ekeleyse tas kefalas apotamein, ina me aytoi kakoi genomenoi tous ameinonas diaballusi. [4] okus gar tina idoi Xerxes tun euytou ergon ti apodeiknumenon en tei naymaxiei, katemenos ypo tui orei tui antion Salaminos to kaleetai Aigaleus, anepynthaneto ton poiesanta, kai oi grammatistai anegrafon patrothen ton trierarxon kai ten polin. pros de ti kai prosebaleto filos eun Ariaramnes aner Perses pareun toutoy tou Foinikeioy patheos.   
      91. In the meantime, as the Barbarians turned to flight and were sailing out towards Phaleron, the Eginetans waited for them in the passage and displayed memorable actions: for while the Athenians in the confused tumult were disabling both those ships which resisted and those which were fleeing, the Eginetans were destroying those which attempted to sail away; and whenever any escaped the Athenians, they went in full course and fell among the Eginetans.         91. [1] oi men de pros tous Foinikas etraponto. tun de barbarun es fygen trapomenun kai ekpleontun pros to Faleron, Aigineitai ypostantes en tui porthmui erga apedexanto logoy axia. oi men gar Athenaioi en tui thorubui ekeraizon tas te antistamenas kai tas feygousas tun neun, oi de Aigineitai tas ekpleousas. okus de tines tous Athenaioys diafugoien, feromenoi esepipton es tous Aiginetas.   
      92. Then there met one another the ship of Themistocles, which was pursuing a ship of the enemy, and that of Polycritos the son of Crios the Eginetan. This last had charged against a ship of Sidon, the same that had taken the Eginetan vessel which was keeping watch in advance at Skiathos, and in which sailed Pytheas the son of Ischenoos, whom the Persians kept in their ship, all cut to pieces as he was, making a marvel of his valour. The Sidonian ship then was captured bearing with it this man as well as the Persians of whom I spoke, so that Pytheas thus came safe to Egina. Now when Polycritos looked at the Athenian vessel he recognised when he saw it the sign of the admiral's ship, and shouting out he addressed Themistocles with mockery about the accusation brought against the Eginetans of taking the side of the Medes, and reproached him. This taunt Polycritos threw out against Themistocles after he had charged against the ship of Sidon. And meanwhile those Barbarians whose ships had escaped destruction fled and came to Phaleron to be under cover of the land-army.         92. [1] enthauta synekureon nees e te Themistokleos diukoysa nea kai e Polykritoy tou Kriou andros Aigineteu nei embalousa Siduniei, e per eile ten profylassoysan epi Skiathui ten Aiginaien, ep' Es eplee Pythees o Isxenooy, ton oi Persai katakopenta areteis eineka eixon en tei nei ekpagleomenoi. ton de periagoysa ama toisi Perseisi elu e neus e Sidunie, uste Pytheen oytu sutheinai es Aiginan. [2] us de eseide ten nea ten Attiken o Polukritos, egnu to semeion idun teis strategidos, kai busas ton Themistoklea epekertomese es tun Aigineteun ton medismon oneidizun. tauta men nyn nei embalun o Polukritos aperripse es Themistoklea. oi de barbaroi tun ai nees periegenonto, feugontes apikonto es Faleron ypo ton pezon straton.   
      93. In this sea-fight the Eginetans were of all the Hellenes the best reported of, and next to them the Athenians; and of the individual men the Eginetan Polycritos and the Athenians Eumenes of Anagyrus and Ameinias of Pallene, the man who had pursued after Artemisia. Now if he had known that Artemisia was sailing in this ship, he would not have ceased until either he had taken her or had been taken himself; for orders had been given to the Athenian captains, and moreover a prize was offered of ten thousand drachmas for the man who should take her alive; since they thought it intolerable that a woman should make an expedition against Athens. She then, as has been said before, had made her escape; and the others also, whose ships had escaped destruction, were at Phaleron.         93. [1] en de tei naymaxiei tautei ekoysan Ellenun arista Aigineitai, epi de Athenaioi, andrun de Polukritos te o Aiginetes kai Athenaioi Eymenes te o Anagyrasios kai Ameinies Palleneus, os kai Artemisien epediuxe. ei men nyn emathe oti en tautei pleoi Artemisie, oyk an epausato proteron e eile min e kai aytos elu. [2] toisi gar Athenaiun trierarxoisi parekekeleysto, pros de kai aethlon ekeito muriai draxmai, os an min zuen elei. deinon gar ti epoieunto gynaika epi tas Athenas strateuesthai. ayte men de, us proteron eiretai, diefyge. Esan de kai oi alloi, tun ai nees periegegonesan, en tui Falerui.   
      94. As regards Adeimantos the commander of the Corinthians, the Athenians say that forthwith at the beginning when the ships were engaging in the fight, being struck with panic and terror he put up his sails and fled away; and the Corinthians, when they saw the admiral's ship fleeing, departed likewise: and after this, as the story goes, when they came in their flight opposite to the temple of Athene Skiras in the land of Salamis, there fell in with them by divine guidance a light vessel, which no one was ever found to have sent, and which approached the Corinthians at a time when they knew nothing of that which was happening with the fleet. And by this it is conjectured that the matter was of the Deity; for when they came near to the ships, the men in the light vessel said these words: "Adeimantos, thou hast turned thy ships away and hast set forth to flee, deserting the cause of the Hellenes, while they are in truth gaining a victory and getting the better of their foes as much as they desired." When they said this, since Adeimantos doubted of it, they spoke a second time and said that they might be taken as hostages and slain, if the Hellenes should prove not to be gaining the victory. Then he turned his ship back, he and the others with him, and they reached the camp when the work was finished. Such is the report spread by the Athenians against these: the Corinthians however do not allow this to be so, but hold that they were among the first in the sea- fight; and the rest of Hellas also bears witness on their side.         94. [1] Adeimanton de ton Korinthion strategon legoysi Athenaioi aytika kat' arxas, us synemisgon ai nees, ekplagenta te kai yperdeisanta, ta istia aeiramenon oixesthai feugonta, idontas de tous Korinthioys ten strategida feugoysan usautus oixesthai. [2] us de ara feugontas ginesthai teis Salaminies kata iron Athenaies Skirados, peripiptein sfi keleta theiei pompei, ton oyte pempsanta faneinai oydena, oyte ti tun apo teis stratieis eidosi prosferesthai toisi Korinthioisi. teide de symballontai einai theion to preigma. us gar agxou genesthai tun neun, tous apo tou keletos legein tade. [3] <<Adeimante, su men apostrepsas tas neas es fygen ormesai kataprodous tous Ellenas. oi de kai de nikusi oson aytoi erunto epikratesantes tun exthrun.>> tauta legontun apisteein gar ton Adeimanton, aytis tade legein, us aytoi oioi te eien agomenoi omeroi apothneskein, en me nikuntes fainuntai oi Ellenes. [4] oytu de apostrepsanta ten nea ayton te kai tous alloys ep' exergasmenoisi elthein es to stratopedon. toutoys men toiaute fatis exei ypo Athenaiun, oy mentoi aytoi ge Korinthioi omologeoysi, all' en prutoisi sfeas aytous teis naymaxies nomizoysi genesthai. martyreei de sfi kai e alle Ellas.   
      95. Aristeides moreover the son of Lysimachos, the Athenian, of whom I made mention also shortly before this as a very good man, he in this tumult which had arisen about Salamis did as follows:--taking with him a number of the hoplites of Athenian race who had been ranged along the shore of the land of Salamis, with them he disembarked on the island of Psyttaleia; and these slew all the Persians who were in this islet.         95. [1] Aristeides de o Lysimaxoy aner Athenaios, tou kai oligui ti proteron toutun epemnesthen us andros aristoy, oytos en tui thorubui toutui tui peri Salamina genomenui tade epoiee. paralabun pollous tun opliteun oi paratetaxato para ten akten teis Salaminies xures, genos eontes Athenaioi, es ten Psyttaleian neison apebese agun, oi tous Persas tous en tei nesidi tautei katefoneysan pantas.   
      96. When the sea-fight had been broken off, the Hellenes towed in to Salamis so many of the wrecks as chanced to be still about there, and held themselves ready for another sea-fight, expecting that the king would yet make use of the ships which remained unhurt; but many of the wrecks were taken by the West Wind and borne to that strand in Attica which is called Colias; so as to fulfil not only all that other oracle which was spoken about this sea-fight by Bakis and Musaios, but also especially, with reference to the wrecks cast up here, that which had been spoken in an oracle many years before these events by Lysistratos, an Athenian who uttered oracles, and which had not been observed by any of the Hellenes: 
"Then shall the Colian women with firewood of oars roast barley." This was destined to come to pass after the king had marched away.         96. [1] us de e naymaxie dielelyto, kateirusantes es ten Salamina oi Ellenes tun nayegiun osa tautei etugxane eti eonta, etoimoi Esan es allen naymaxien, elpizontes teisi perieouseisi neysi eti xresesthai basilea. [2] tun de nayegiun polla ypolabun anemos zefyros efere teis Attikeis epi ten eiona ten kaleomenen Kuliada. uste apoplestheinai ton xresmon ton te allon panta ton peri teis naymaxies tautes eiremenoi Bakidi kai Moysaiui, kai de kai kata ta nayegia ta tautei exeneixthenta to eiremenon polloisi etesi proteron toutun en xresmui Lysistratui Athenaiui andri xresmologui, to elelethee pantas tous Ellenas,      Kuliades de gynaikes eretmoisi fruxoysi.touto de emelle apelasantos basileos esesthai.    
      97. When Xerxes perceived the disaster which had come upon him, he feared lest some one of the Ionians should suggest to the Hellenes, or they should themselves form the idea, to sail to the Hellespont and break up the bridges; and so he might be cut off in Europe and run the risk of perishing utterly: therefore he began to consider about taking flight. He desired however that his intention should not be perceived either by the Hellenes or by those of his own side; therefore he attempted to construct a mole going across to Salamis, and he bound together Phenician merchant vessels in order that they might serve him both for a bridge and a wall, and made preparations for fighting as if he were going to have another battle by sea. Seeing him do so, all the rest made sure that he had got himself ready in earnest and intended to stay and fight; but Mardonios did not fail to perceive the true meaning of all these things, being by experience very well versed in his way of thinking.         97. [1] Xerxes de us emathe to gegonos pathos, deisas me tis tun Iunun ypotheitai toisi Ellesi e aytoi noesusi pleein es ton Ellesponton lusontes tas gefuras, kai apolamftheis en tei Eyrupei kindyneusei apolesthai, dresmon ebouleye. thelun de me epidelos einai mete toisi Ellesi mete toisi euytou, es ten Salamina xuma epeirato diaxoun, gauloys te Foinikeioys synedee, ina anti te sxedies eusi kai teixeos, arteeto te es polemon us naymaxien allen poiesomenos. [2]  oruntes de min pantes oi alloi tauta pressonta ey episteato us ek pantos nooy pareskeuastai menun polemesein. Mardonion d' oyden toutun elanthane us malista empeiron eonta teis ekeinoy dianoies.   
      98. While Xerxes was doing thus, he sent a messenger to the Persians, to announce the calamity which had come upon them. Now there is nothing mortal which accomplishes a journey with more speed than these messengers, so skilfully has this been invented by the Persians: for they say that according to the number of days of which the entire journey consists, so many horses and men are set at intervals, each man and horse appointed for a day's journey. These neither snow nor rain nor heat nor darkness of night prevents from accomplishing each one the task proposed to him, with the very utmost speed. The first then rides and delivers the message with which he is charged to the second, and the second to the third; and after that it goes through them handed from one to the other, as in the torch-race among the Hellenes, which they perform for Hephaistos. This kind of running of their horses the Persians call angareion.         98. [1] tauta te ama Xerxes epoiee kai epempe es Persas aggeleonta ten pareousan sfi symforen. toutun de tun aggelun esti oyden o ti thasson paraginetai thneton eon. oytu toisi Perseisi exeuretai touto. legoysi gar us oseun an emereun ei e pasa odos, tosoutoi ippoi te kai andres diestasi kata emeresien odon ekasten ippos te kai aner tetagmenos. tous oyte nifetos, oyk ombros, oy kauma, oy nux ergei me oy katanusai ton prokeimenon aytui dromon ten taxisten. [2] o men de prutos dramun paradidoi ta entetalmena tui deyterui, o de deuteros tui tritui. to de entheuten ede kat' allon kai allon diexerxetai paradidomena, kata per en Ellesi e lampadeforie ten tui Efaistui epiteleoysi. touto to dramema tun ippun kaleoysi Persai aggareion.   
      99. The first message then which came to Susa, announcing that Xerxes had Athens in his possession, so greatly rejoiced the Persians who had been left behind, that they strewed all the ways with myrtle boughs and offered incense perpetually, and themselves continued in sacrifices and feasting. The second message however, which came to them after this, so greatly disturbed them that they all tore their garments and gave themselves up to crying and lamentation without stint, laying the blame upon Mardonios: and this the Persians did not so much because they were grieved about the ships, as because they feared for Xerxes himself.         99. [1] e men de prute es Sousa aggelie apikomene, us exoi Athenas Xerxes, eterpse oytu de ti Perseun tous ypoleifthentas us tas te odous myrsinei pasas estoresan kai ethymiun thymiemata kai aytoi Esan en thysieisi te kai eypatheieisi. [2] e de deytere sfi aggelie epeselthousa synexee oytu uste tous kithunas katerrexanto pantes, boei te kai oimugei exreunto apletui, Mardonion en aitiei tithentes. oyk oytu de peri tun neun axthomenoi tauta oi Persai epoieyn us peri aytui Xerxei deimainontes.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [100]

     100. As regards the Persians this went on for all the time which intervened, until the coming of Xerxes himself caused them to cease: and Mardonios seeing that Xerxes was greatly troubled by reason of the sea-fight, and suspecting that he was meaning to take flight from Athens, considered with regard to himself that he would have to suffer punishment for having persuaded the king to make an expedition against Hellas, and that it was better for him to run the risk of either subduing Hellas or ending his own life honourably, placing his safety in suspense for a great end, though his opinion was rather that he would subdue Hellas;--he reckoned up these things, I say, and addressed his speech to the king as follows: "Master, be not thou grieved, nor feel great trouble on account of this thing which has come to pass; for it is not upon a contest of timbers that all our fortunes depend, but of men and of horses: and none of these who suppose now that all has been achieved by them will attempt to disembark from the ships and stand against thee, nor will any in this mainland do so; but those who did stand against us paid the penalty. If therefore thou thinkest this good to do, let us forthwith attempt the Peloponnese, or if thou thinkest good to hold back, we may do that. Do not despond however, for there is no way of escape for the Hellenes to avoid being thy slaves, after they have first given an account of that which they did to thee both now and at former times. Thus it were best to do; but if thou hast indeed resolved to retire thyself and to withdraw thy army, I have another counsel to offer for that case too. Do not thou, O king, let the Persians be an object of laughter to the Hellenes; for none of thy affairs have suffered by means of the Persians, nor wilt thou be able to mention any place where we proved ourselves cowards: but if Phenicians or Egyptians or Cyprians or Kilikians proved themselves cowards, the calamity which followed does not belong to the Persians in any way. Now therefore, since it is not the Persians who are guilty towards thee, follow my counsel. If thou hast determined not to remain here, retire thou to thine own abode, taking with thee the main body of the army, and it must then be for me to deliver over to thee Hellas reduced to subjection, choosing for this purpose thirty myriads from the army."         100. [1] kai peri Persas men En tauta ton panta metaxu xronon genomenon, mexri oy Xerxes aytos sfeas apikomenos epayse. Mardonios de orun men Xerxen symforen megalen ek teis naymaxies poieumenon, ypopteuun de ayton dresmon boyleuein ek tun Atheneun, frontisas pros euyton us dusei diken anagnusas basilea strateuesthai epi ten Ellada, kai oi kresson eie anakindyneusai e katergasasthai ten Ellada e ayton kalus teleyteisai ton bion yper megalun aiurethenta. pleon mentoi efere oi e gnume katergasasthai ten Ellada. logisamenos un tauta prosefere ton logon tonde. [2] <<despota, mete lypeo mete symforen medemian megalen poieu toude tou gegonotos eineka pregmatos. oy gar xulun agun o to pan ferun esti emin, all' andrun te kai ippun. soi de oyte tis toutun tun to pan sfisi ede dokeontun katergasthai apobas apo tun neun peiresetai antiutheinai oyt' ek teis epeiroy teisde. oi te emin entiuthesan, edosan dikas. [3] ei men nyn dokeei, aytika peirumetha teis Peloponnesoy. ei de kai dokeei episxein, parexei poieein tauta. mede dysthumee. oy gar esti Ellesi oydemia ekdysis me oy dontas logon tun epoiesan nun te kai proteron einai sous douloys. malista men nyn tauta poiee. ei d' ara toi bebouleytai ayton apelaunonta apagein ten stratien, allen exu kai ek tunde boylen. [4] su Persas, basileu, me poieseis katagelastoys genesthai Ellesi. oyde gar en Perseisi toi ti dedeletai tun pregmatun, oyd' ereeis okoy egenometha andres kakoi. ei de Foinikes te kai Aiguptioi kai Kuprioi te kai Kilikes kakoi egenonto, oyden pros Persas touto prosekei to pathos. [5] ede un, epeide oy Persai toi aitioi eisi, emoi peitheo. ei toi dedoktai me paramenein, su men es ethea ta seuytou apelayne teis stratieis apagun to pollon, eme de soi xre ten Ellada parasxein dedoylumenen, triekonta myriadas tou stratou apolexamenon.>>   
      101. Hearing this Xerxes was rejoiced and delighted so far as he might be after his misfortunes, and to Mardonios he said that when he had taken counsel he would reply and say which of these two things he would do. So when he was taking counsel with those of the Persians who were called to be his advisers, it seemed good to him to send for Artemisia also to give him counsel, because at the former time she alone had showed herself to have perception of that which ought to be done. So when Artemisia had come, Xerxes removed from him all the rest, both the Persian councillors and also the spearmen of the guard and spoke to her thus: "Mardonios bids me stay here and make an attempt on the Peloponnese, saying that the Persians and the land- army are not guilty of any share in my calamity, and that they would gladly give me proof of this. He bids me therefore either do this or, if not, he desires himself to choose thirty myriads from the army and to deliver over to me Hellas reduced to subjection; and he bids me withdraw with the rest of the army to my own abode. Do thou therefore, as thou didst well advise about the sea-fight which was fought, urging that we should not bring it on, so also now advise me which of these things I shall do, that I may succeed in determining well."         101. [1] tauta akousas Xerxes us ek kakun exare te kai esthe, pros Mardonion te boyleysamenos efe ypokrineesthai okoteron poiesei toutun. us de eboyleueto ama Perseun toisi epikletoisi, edoxe oi kai Artemisien es symboylien metapempsasthai, oti proteron efaineto moune noeoysa ta poietea En. [2] us de apiketo e Artemisie, metastesamenos tous alloys tous te symbouloys Perseun kai tous doryforoys, elexe Xerxes tade. <<keleuei me Mardonios menonta aytou peirasai teis Peloponnesoy, legun us moi Persai te kai o pezos stratos oydenos metaitioi patheos eisi, alla boylomenoisi sfi genoit' an apodexis. [3] eme un e tauta keleuei poieein, e aytos ethelei triekonta myriadas apolexamenos tou stratou parasxein moi ten Ellada dedoylumenen, ayton de me keleuei apelaunein sun tui loipui stratui es ethea ta ema. [4] su un emoi, kai gar peri teis naymaxies ey synebouleysas teis genomenes oyk eusa poieesthai, nun te symbouleyson okotera poieun epituxu ey boyleysamenos.>>   
      102. He thus consulted her, and she spoke these words: "O king, it is hard for me to succeed in saying the best things when one asks me for counsel; yet it seems good to me at the present that thou shouldest retire back and leave Mardonios here, if he desires it and undertakes to do this, together with those whom he desires to have: for on the one hand if he subdue those whom he says that he desires to subdue, and if those matters succeed well which he has in mind when he thus speaks, the deed will after all be thine, master, seeing that thy slaves achieved it: and on the other hand if the opposite shall come to pass of that which Mardonios intends, it will be no great misfortune, seeing that thou wilt thyself remain safe, and also the power in those parts which concerns thy house: for if thou shalt remain safe with thy house, many contests many times over repeated will the Hellenes have to pass through for their own existence. Of Mardonios however, if he suffer any disaster, no account will be made; and if the Hellenes conquer they gain a victory which is no victory, having destroyed one who is but thy slave. Thou however wilt retire having done that for which thou didst make thy march, that is to say, having delivered Athens to the fire."         102. [1] o men tauta syneboyleueto, e de legei tade. <<basileu, xalepon men esti symboyleyomenui tyxein ta arista eipasan, epi mentoi toisi katekoysi pregmasi dokeei moi ayton men se apelaunein opisu, Mardonion de, ei ethelei te kai ypodeketai tauta poiesein, aytou katalipein sun toisi ethelei. [2] touto men gar en katastrepsetai ta fesi thelein kai oi proxuresei ta noeun legei, son to ergon u despota ginetai. oi gar soi douloi katergasanto. touto de en ta enantia teis Mardonioy gnumes genetai, oydemia symfore megale estai seo te perieontos kai ekeinun tun pregmatun peri oikon ton son. [3] en gar su te perieis kai oikos o sos, pollous pollakis agunas drameontai peri sfeun aytun oi Ellenes. Mardonioy de, en ti pathei, logos oydeis ginetai, oyde ti nikuntes oi Ellenes nikusi, doulon son apolesantes. su de, tun eineka ton stolon epoiesao, pyrusas tas Athenas apelais.>>   
      103. With this advice Xerxes was greatly delighted, since she succeeded in saying that very thing which he himself was meaning to do: for not even if all the men and all the women in the world had been counselling him to remain, would he have done so, as I think, so much had he been struck with terror. He commended Artemisia therefore and sent her away to conduct his sons to Ephesos, for there were certain bastard sons of his which accompanied him.         103. [1] esthe te de tei symboyliei Xerxes. legoysa gar epetugxane ta per aytos enoee. oyde gar ei pantes kai pasai synebouleyon aytui menein, emene an dokeein emoi. oytu katarrudekee. epainesas de ten Artemisien, tauten men apostellei agoysan aytou paidas es Efeson. nothoi gar tines paides oi synesponto.   
      104. With these sons he sent Hermotimos to have charge of them, who was by race of Pedasa and was in the estimation of the king second to none of the eunuchs. (Now the Pedasians dwell above Halicarnassos, and at this Pedasa a thing happens as follows:--whenever to the whole number of those who dwell about this city some trouble is about to come within a certain time, then the priestess of Athene in that place gets a long beard; and this has happened to them twice before now.         104. [1] synepempe de toisi paisi fulakon Ermotimon, genos men eonta Pedasea, feromenon de oy ta deutera tun eynouxun para basilei. [oi de Pedasees oikeoysi yper Alikarnessou. en de toisi Pedasoisi toutoisi toionde symferetai preigma ginesthai. epean toisi amfiktyosi pasi toisi amfi tautes oikeoysi teis polios mellei ti entos xronoy esesthai xalepon, tote e ireie aytothi teis Athenaies fuei puguna megan. touto de sfi dis ede egeneto.   
      105. Of these Pedasians was Hermotimos.) And this man of all persons whom we know up to this time obtained the greatest revenge for a wrong done to him. For he had been captured by enemies and was being sold, and Panionios a man of Chios bought him, one who had set himself to gain his livelihood by the most impious practices; for whenever he obtained boys who possessed some beauty, he would make eunuchs of them, and then taking them to Sardis or Ephesos sold them for large sums of money, since with the Barbarians eunuchs are held to be of more value for all matters of trust than those who are not eunuchs. Panionios then, I say, made eunuchs of many others, since by this he got his livelihood, and also of this man about whom I speak: and Hermotimos, being not in everything unfortunate, was sent from Sardis to the king with other gifts, and as time went on he came to be honoured more than all the other eunuchs in the sight of Xerxes.         105. [1] ek toutun de tun Pedaseun o Ermotimos En] tui megiste tisis ede adikethenti egeneto pantun tun emeis idmen. alonta gar ayton ypo polemiun kai puleomenon uneetai Paniunios aner Khios, os ten zoen katestesato ap' ergun anosiutatun. okus gar ktesaito paidas eideos epammenoys, ektamnun agineun epulee es Sardis te kai Efeson xrematun megalun. [2] para gar toisi barbaroisi timiuteroi eisi oi eynouxoi pistios eineka teis pases tun enorxiun. alloys te de o Paniunios exetame pollous, ate poieumenos ek toutoy ten zoen, kai de kai touton. kai oy gar ta panta edystuxee o Ermotimos, apikneetai ek tun Sardiun para basilea met' allun durun, xronoy de proiontos pantun tun eynouxun etimethe malista para Xerxei.   
      106. And when the king, being at that time in Sardis, was setting the Persian army in motion to march against Athens, then Hermotimos, having gone down for some business to that part of Mysia which the Chians occupy and which is called Atarneus, found there Panionios: and having recognised him he spoke to him many friendly words, first recounting to him all the good things which he had by his means, and next making promises in return for this, and saying how many good things he would do for him, if he would bring his household and dwell in that land; so that Panionios gladly accepting his proposals brought his children and his wife. Then, when he had caught him together with his whole house, Hermotimos spoke as follows: "O thou, who of all men that ever lived up to this time didst gain thy substance by the most impious deeds, what evil did either I myself or any of my forefathers do either to thee or to any of thine, that thou didst make me to be that which is nought instead of a man? Didst thou suppose that thou wouldest escape the notice of the gods for such things as then thou didst devise? They however following the rule of justice delivered thee into my hands, since thou hadst done impious deeds; so that thou shalt not have reason to find fault with the penalty which shall be inflicted upon thee by me." When he had thus reproached him, the man's sons were brought into his presence and Panionios was compelled to make eunuchs of his own sons, who were four in number, and being compelled he did so; and then when he had so done, the sons were compelled to do the same thing to him. Thus vengeance by the hands of Hermotimos overtook Panionios.         106. [1] us de to strateyma to Persikon orma basileus epi tas Athenas eun en Sardisi, enthauta katabas kata de ti preigma o Ermotimos es gein ten Mysien, ten Khioi men nemontai Atarneus de kaleetai, eyriskei ton Paniunion enthauta. [2] epignous de elege pros ayton pollous kai filioys logoys, pruta men oi katalegun osa aytos di' ekeinon exoi agatha, deutera de oi ypisxneumenos anti toutun osa min agatha poiesei en komisas tous oiketas oikeei ekeinei, uste ypodexamenon asmenon tous logoys ton Paniunion komisai ta tekna kai ten gynaika. [3] us de ara panoikiei min perielabe, elege o Ermotimos tade. <<u pantun andrun ede malista ap' ergun anosiutatun ton bion ktesamene, ti se egu kakon e aytos e tun emun tis se progonun ergasato, e se e tun sun tina, oti me ant' andros epoiesas to meden einai; edokees te theous lesein oia emexanu tote. oi se poiesanta anosia, nomui dikaiui xreumenoi, ypegagon es xeiras tas emas, uste se me mempsasthai ten ap' emeo toi esomenen diken.>> [4] us de oi tauta uneidise, axthentun tun paidun es opsin enagkazeto o Paniunios tun euytou paidun tesserun eontun ta aidoia apotamnein, anagkazomenos de epoiee tauta. aytou te, us tauta ergasato, oi paides anagkazomenoi apetamnon. Paniunion men nyn oytu perieilthe e te tisis kai Ermotimos.   
      107. When Xerxes had entrusted his sons to Artemisia to carry them back to Ephesos, he called Mardonios and bade him choose of the army whom he would, and make his deeds, if possible, correspond to his words. During this day then things went so far; and in the night on the command of the king the leaders of the fleet began to withdraw their ships from Phaleron to the Hellespont, as quickly as they might each one, to guard the bridges for the king to pass over. And when the Barbarians were near Zoster as they sailed, then seeing the small points of rock which stretch out to sea from this part of the mainland, they thought that these were ships and fled for a good distance. In time however, perceiving that they were not ships but points of rock, they assembled together again and continued on their voyage.         107. [1] Xerxes de us tous paidas epetrepse Artemisiei apagein es Efeson, kalesas Mardonion ekeleyse min teis stratieis dialegein tous bouletai, kai poieein toisi logoisi ta erga peirumenon omoia. tauten men ten emeren es tosouto egineto, teis de nyktos keleusantos basileos tas neas oi strategoi ek tou Faleroy apeigon opisu es ton Ellesponton us taxeos eixe ekastos, diafylaxousas tas sxedias poreytheinai basilei. [2] epei de agxou Esan Zusteiros pleontes oi barbaroi, anateinoysi gar akrai leptai teis epeiroy tautes, edoxan te neas einai kai efeygon epi pollon. xronui de mathontes oti oy nees eien all' akrai, syllexthentes ekomizonto.   
      108. When day dawned, the Hellenes, seeing that the land-army was staying still in its place, supposed that the ships also were about Phaleron; and thinking that they would fight another sea-battle, they made preparations to repel them. When however they were informed that the ships had departed, forthwith upon this they thought it good to pursue after them. They pursued therefore as far as Andros, but did not get a sight of the fleet of Xerxes; and when they had come to Andros, they deliberated what they should do. Themistocles then declared as his opinion that they should take their course through the islands and pursue after the ships, and afterwards sail straight to the Hellespont to break up the bridges; but Eurybiades expressed the opposite opinion to this, saying that if they should break up the floating-bridges, they would therein do the greatest possible evil to Hellas: for if the Persian should be cut off and compelled to remain in Europe, he would endeavour not to remain still, since if he remained still, neither could any of his affairs go forward, nor would any way of returning home appear; but his army would perish of hunger: whereas if he made the attempt and persevered in it, all Europe might be brought over to him, city by city and nation by nation, the inhabitants being either conquered or surrendering on terms before they were conquered: moreover they would have for food the crops of the Hellenes which grew year by year. He thought however that conquered in the sea-fight the Persian would not stay in Europe, and therefore he might be allowed to flee until in his flight he came to his own land. Then after that they might begin the contest for the land which belonged to the Persian. To this opinion the commanders of the other Peloponnesians adhered also.         108. [1] us de emere egineto, oruntes oi Ellenes kata xuren menonta ton straton ton pezon elpizon kai tas neas einai peri Faleron, edokeon te naymaxesein sfeas pararteonto te us alexesomenoi. epei de eputhonto tas neas oixukyias, aytika meta tauta edokee epidiukein. ton men nyn naytikon ton Xerxeu straton oyk epeidon diuxantes mexri Androy, es de ten Andron apikomenoi eboyleuonto. [2] Themistoklees men nyn gnumen apedeiknyto dia nesun trapomenoys kai epidiuxantas tas neas pleein itheus epi ton Ellesponton lusontas tas gefuras. Eyrybiades de ten enantien tautei gnumen etitheto, legun us ei lusoysi tas sxedias, tout' an megiston pantun sfi kakun ten Ellada ergasaito. [3] ei gar anagkastheie o Perses menein en tei Eyrupei, peiruito an esyxien me agein, us agonti men oi esyxien oyte ti proxureein oion te estai tun pregmatun oyte tis komide ta opisu fanesetai, limui te oi e stratie diafthereetai, epixeireonti de aytui kai ergoy exomenui panta ta kata ten Eyrupen oia te estai prosxureisai kata polis te kai kata ethnea, etoi aliskomenun ge e pro toutoy omologeontun. trofen te exein sfeas ton epeteion aiei ton tun Ellenun karpon. [4] alla dokeein gar nikethenta tei naymaxiei oy meneein en tei Eyrupei ton Persen. eateon un einai feugein, es o elthoi feugun es ten euytou. to entheuten de peri teis ekeinoy poieesthai ede ton aguna ekeleye. tautes de eixonto teis gnumes kai Peloponnesiun tun allun oi strategoi.   
      109. When Themistocles perceived that he would not be able to persuade them, or at least the greater number of them, to sail to the Hellespont, he changed his counsel and turning to the Athenians (for these were grieved most at the escape of the enemy and were anxious to sail to the Hellespont even by themselves alone, if the others were not willing) to them he spoke as follows: "I myself also have been present before now on many occasions, and have heard of many more, on which something of this kind came to pass, namely that men who were forced into great straits, after they had been defeated fought again and repaired their former disaster: and as for us, since we have won as a prize from fortune the existence of ourselves and of Hellas by repelling from our land so great a cloud of men, let us not pursue enemies who flee from us: for of these things not we were the doors, but the gods and heroes, who grudged that one man should become king of both Asia and of Europe, and he a man unholy and presumptuous, one who made no difference between things sacred and things profane, burning and casting down the images of the gods, and who also scourged the Sea and let down into it fetters. But as things are at present, it is well that we should now remain in Hellas and look after ourselves and our households; and let each man repair his house, and have a care for sowing his land, after he has completely driven away the Barbarian: and then at the beginning of the spring let us sail down towards the Hellespont and Ionia." Thus he spoke, intending to lay up for himself a store of gratitude with the Persian, in order that if after all any evil should come upon him at the hands of the Athenians, he might have a place of refuge: and this was in fact that which came to pass.         109. [1] us de emathe oti oy peisei tous ge pollous pleein es ton Ellesponton o Themistoklees, metabalun pros tous Athenaioys (oytoi gar malista ekpefeygotun periemekteon, ormeato te es ton Ellesponton pleein kai epi sfeun aytun balomenoi, ei oi alloi me boyloiato ) elege sfi tade. [2] <<kai aytos ede polloisi paregenomen kai pollui pleu akekoa toiade genesthai, andras es anagkaien apeilethentas nenikemenoys anamaxesthai te kai analambanein ten proteren kakoteta. emeis de, eyrema gar eyrekamen emeas te aytous kai ten Ellada, nefos tosouto anthrupun anusamenoi, me diukumen andras feugontas. [3] tade gar oyk emeis katergasametha, alla theoi te kai erues, oi efthonesan andra ena teis te Asies kai teis Eyrupes basileusai eonta anosion te kai atasthalon. os ta te ira kai ta idia en omoiui epoieeto, empipras te kai kataballun tun theun ta agalmata. os kai ten thalassan apemastiguse pedas te kateike. [4] all' ey gar exei es to pareon emin, nun men en tei Elladi katameinantas emeun te aytun epimeletheinai kai tun oiketeun, kai tis oikien te anaplasasthu kai sporoy anakus exetu, panteleus apelasas ton barbaron. ama de tui eari katapleumen epi Ellespontoy kai Iunies.>> [5] tauta elege apotheken mellun poiesasthai es ton Persen, ina en ara ti min katalambanei pros Athenaiun pathos exei apostrofen. ta per un kai egeneto.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [110]

     110. Themistocles then speaking thus endeavoured to deceive them, and the Athenians followed his advice: for he had had the reputation even in former times of being a man of ability and he had now proved himself to be in truth both able and of good judgment; therefore they were ready in every way to follow his advice when he spoke. So when these had been persuaded by him, forthwith after this Themistocles sent men with a vessel, whom he trusted to keep silence, to whatever test they might be brought, of that which he himself charged them to tell the king; and of them Sikinnos his servant again was one. When these came to Attica, the rest stayed behind in the ship, while Sikinnos went up to Xerxes and spoke these words: "Themistocles the son of Neocles sent me, who is commander of the Athenians, and of all the allies the best and ablest man, to tell thee that Themistocles the Athenian, desiring to be of service to thee, held back the Hellenes when they were desirous to pursue after thy ships and to destroy the bridges on the Hellespont. Now therefore thou mayest make thy way home quite undisturbed." They having signified this sailed away again.         110. [1] Themistoklees men tauta legun dieballe, Athenaioi de epeithonto. epeide gar kai proteron dedogmenos einai sofos efane eun aletheus sofos te kai eyboylos, pantus etoimoi Esan legonti peithesthai. [2] us de oytoi oi anegnusmenoi Esan, aytika meta tauta o Themistoklees andras apepempe exontas ploion, toisi episteye sigan es pasan basanon apikneomenoisi ta aytos eneteilato basilei frasai. tun kai Sikinnos o oiketes aytis egeneto. oi epeite apikonto pros ten Attiken, oi men katemenon epi tui ploiui, Sikinnos de anabas para Xerxen elege tade. [3] <<epempse me Themistoklees o Neokleos, strategos men Athenaiun aner de tun symmaxun pantun aristos kai sofutatos, frasonta toi oti Themistoklees o Athenaios, soi boylomenos ypoyrgeein, esxe tous Ellenas tas neas boylomenoys diukein kai tas en Ellespontui gefuras luein. kai nun kat' esyxien pollen komizeo.>>   
      111. The Hellenes meanwhile, having resolved not to pursue after the ships of the Barbarians further, nor to sail to the Hellespont to break up the passage, were investing Andros intending to take it: for the Andrians were the first of the islanders who, being asked by Themistocles for money, refused to give it: and when Themistocles made proposals to them and said that the Athenians had come having on their side two great deities, Persuasion and Compulsion, and therefore they must by all means give them money, they replied to this that not without reason, as it now appeared, was Athens great and prosperous, since the Athenians were well supplied with serviceable deities; but as for the Andrians, they were poor, having in this respect attained to the greatest eminence, and there were two unprofitable deities which never left their island but always remained attached to the place, Poverty, namely, and Helplessness: and the Andrians being possessed of these deities would not give money; for never could the power of the Athenians get the better of their inability.         111. [1] oi men tauta semenantes apepleon opisu. oi de Ellenes, epeite sfi apedoxe met' epidiukein eti prosuteru tun barbarun tas neas mete pleein es ton Ellesponton lusontas ton poron, ten Andron perikateato exelein ethelontes. [2] prutoi gar Andrioi nesiuteun aitethentes pros Themistokleos xremata oyk edosan, alla proisxomenoy Themistokleos logon tonde, us ekoien Athenaioi peri euytous exontes duo theous megaloys, peithu te kai anagkaien, oytu te sfi karta dotea einai xremata, ypekrinanto pros tauta legontes us kata logon Esan ara ai Atheinai megalai te kai eydaimones, ai kai theun xrestun ekoien ey, [3] epei Andrioys ge einai geupeinas es ta megista anekontas, kai theous duo axrestoys oyk ekleipein sfeun ten neison all' aiei filoxureein, penien te kai amexanien, kai toutun tun theun epeboloys eontas Andrioys oy dusein xremata. oydekote gar teis euytun adynamies ten Athenaiun dunamin einai kressu. oytoi men de tauta ypokrinamenoi kai oy dontes ta xremata epoliorkeonto.   
      112. These, I say, having thus made answer and having refused to give the money, were being besieged: and Themistocles not ceasing in his desire for gain sent threatening messages to the other islands and asked them for money by the same envoys, employing those whom he had before sent to the king; and he said that if they did not give that which was demanded of them, he would bring the fleet of the Hellenes against them to besiege and take them. Thus saying he collected great sums of money from the Carystians and the Parians, who being informed how Andros was being besieged, because it had taken the side of the Medes, and how Themistocles was held in more regard than any of the other commanders, sent money for fear of this. Whether any others of the islanders also gave money I am not able to say, but I think that some others gave and not these alone. Yet to the Carystians at least there was no respite from the evil on this account, but the Parians escaped the attack, because they propitiated Themistocles with money. Thus Themistocles with Andros as his starting-point was acquiring sums of money for himself from the men of the islands without the knowledge of the other commanders.         112. [1] Themistoklees de, oy gar epaueto pleonekteun, espempun es tas allas nesoys apeileterioys logoys aitee xremata dia tun aytun aggelun, xreumenos toisi kai pros basilea exresato, legun us ei me dusoysi to aiteomenon, epaxei ten stratien tun Ellenun kai poliorkeun exairesei. [2] legun tauta synelege xremata megala para Karystiun te kai Pariun, oi pynthanomenoi ten te Andron us poliorkeoito dioti emedise, kai Themistoklea us eie en ainei megistei tun strategun, deisantes tauta epempon xremata. ei de de tines kai alloi edosan nesiuteun, oyk exu eipein, dokeu de tinas kai alloys dounai kai oy toutoys mounoys. [3] kaitoi Karystioisi ge oyden toutoy eineka tou kakou yperbole egeneto. Parioi de Themistoklea xremasi ilasamenoi diefygon to strateyma. Themistoklees men nyn ex Androy ormumenos xremata para nesiuteun ektato lathrei tun allun strategun.   
      113. Xerxes meanwhile with his army stayed for a few days after the sea-fight, and then they all began to march forth towards Boeotia by the same way by which they had come: for Mardonios thought both that it was well for him to escort the king on his way, and also that it was now too late in the year to carry on the war; it was better, he thought, to winter in Thessaly and then at the beginning of spring to attempt the Peloponnese. When he came to Thessaly, then Mardonios chose out for himself first all those Persians who are called "Immortals," except only their commander Hydarnes (for Hydarnes said that he would not be left behind by the king), and after them of the other Persians those who wore cuirasses, and the body of a thousand horse: also the Medes, Sacans, Bactrians and Indians, foot and horsemen both. These nations he chose in the mass, but from the other allies he selected by few at a time, choosing whose who had fine appearance of those of whom he knew that they had done good service. From the Persians he chose more than from any other single nation, and these wore collars of twisted metal and bracelets; and after them came the Medes, who in fact were not inferior in number to the Persians, but only in bodily strength. The result was that there were thirty myriads in all, including cavalry.         113. [1] oi d' amfi Xerxen episxontes oligas emeras meta ten naymaxien exelaynon es Boiutous ten ayten odon. edoxe gar Mardoniui ama men propempsai basilea, ama de anurie einai tou eteos polemeein, xeimerisai te ameinon einai en Thessaliei, kai epeita ama tui eari peirasthai teis Peloponnesoy. [2] us de apikato es ten Thessalien, enthauta Mardonios exelegeto prutoys men tous Persas pantas tous athanatoys kaleomenoys, plen Ydarneos tou strategou (oytos gar oyk efe leipsesthai basileos ), meta de tun allun Perseun tous thurekoforoys kai ten ippon ten xilien, kai Medoys te kai Sakas kai Baktrioys te kai Indous, kai ton pezon kai ten allen ippon. [3] tauta men ethnea ola eileto, ek de tun allun symmaxun exelegeto kat' oligoys, toisi eidea te ypeirxe dialegun kai ei teoisi ti xreston syneidee pepoiemenon. en de pleiston ethnos Persas aireeto, andras streptoforoys te kai pselioforoys, epi de Medoys. oytoi de to pleithos men oyk elassones Esan tun Perseun, rhumei de essones. uste sumpantas triekonta myriadas genesthai sun ippeusi.   
      114. During this time, while Mardonios was selecting his army and Xerxes was in Thessaly, there had come an oracle from Delphi to the Lacedemonians, bidding them ask satisfaction from Xerxes for the murder of Leonidas and accept that which should be given by him. The Spartans therefore sent a herald as quickly as possible, who having found the whole army still in Thessaly came into the presence of Xerxes and spoke these words: "O king of the Medes, the Lacedemonians and the sons of Heracles of Sparta demand of thee satisfaction for murder, because thou didst kill their king, fighting in defence of Hellas." He laughed and then kept silence some time, and after that pointing to Mardonios, who happened to be standing by him, he said: "Then Mardonios here shall give them satisfaction, such as is fitting for them to have."         114. [1] en de toutui tui xronui, en tui Mardonios te ten stratien diekrine kai Xerxes En peri Thessalien, xresterion eleluthee ek Delfun Lakedaimonioisi, Xerxen aiteein dikas tou Leunideu fonoy kai to didomenon ex ekeinoy dekesthai. pempoysi de keryka ten taxisten Spartieitai, os epeide katelabe eousan eti pasan ten stratien en Thessaliei, elthun es opsin ten Xerxeu elege tade. [2] <<u basileu Medun, Lakedaimonioi te se kai Erakleidai oi apo Spartes aiteoysi fonoy dikas, oti sfeun ton basilea apekteinas rhyomenon ten Ellada.>> o de gelasas te kai katasxun pollon xronon, us oi etugxane paresteus Mardonios, deiknus es touton eipe <<toigar sfi Mardonios ode dikas dusei toiautas oias ekeinoisi prepei.>>   
      115. The herald accordingly accepted the utterance and departed; and Xerxes leaving Mardonios in Thessaly went on himself in haste to the Hellespont and arrived at the passage where the crossing was in five-and-thirty days, bringing back next to nothing, as one may say, of his army: and whithersoever they came on the march and to whatever nation, they seized the crops of that people and used them for provisions; and if they found no crops, then they took the grass which was growing up from the earth, and stripped off the bark from the trees and plucked down the leaves and devoured them, alike of the cultivated trees and of those growing wild; and they left nothing behind them: thus they did by reason of famine. Then plague too seized upon the army and dysentery, which destroyed them by the way, and some of them also who were sick the king left behind, laying charge upon the cities where at the time he chanced to be in his march, to take care of them and support them: of these he left some in Thessaly, and some at Siris in Paionia, and some in Macedonia. In these parts too he had left behind him the sacred chariot of Zeus, when he was marching against Hellas; but on his return he did not receive it back: for the Paionians had given it to the Thracians, and when Xerxes asked for it again, they said that the mares while at pasture had been carried off by the Thracians of the upper country, who dwelt about the source of the Strymon.         115. [1] o men de dexamenos to rhethen apallasseto, Xerxes de Mardonion en Thessaliei katalipun aytos eporeueto kata taxos es ton Ellesponton, kai apikneetai es ton poron teis diabasios en pente kai tesserakonta emereisi, apagun teis stratieis oyden meros us eipein. [2] okoy de poreyomenoi ginoiato kai kat' oystinas anthrupoys, ton toutun karpon arpazontes esiteonto. ei de karpon medena eyroien, oi de ten poien ten ek teis geis anafyomenen kai tun dendreun ton floion perilepontes kai ta fulla katadrepontes katesthion, omoius tun te emerui kai tun agriun, kai eleipon oyden. tauta d' epoieon ypo limou. [3] epilabun de loimos te ton straton kai dysenterie kat' odon eftheire. tous de kai noseontas aytun kateleipe, epitassun teisi polisi, ina ekastote ginoito elaunun, meledainein te kai trefein, en Thessaliei te tinas kai en Siri teis Paionies kai en Makedoniei. [4] entha kai to iron arma katalipun tou Dios, ote epi ten Ellada elayne, apiun oyk apelabe, alla dontes oi Paiones toisi Threixi apaiteontos Xerxeu efasan nemomenas arpastheinai ypo tun anu Threikun tun peri tas pegas tou Strymonos oikemenun.   
      116. Here also a Thracian, the king of the Bisaltians and of the Crestonian land, did a deed of surpassing horror; for he had said that he would not himself be subject to Xerxes with his own will and had gone away up to Mount Rhodope, and also he had forbidden his sons to go on the march against Hellas. They however, either because they cared not for his command, or else because a desire came upon them to see the war, went on the march with the Persian: and when they returned all unhurt, being six in number, their father plucked out their eyes for this cause.         116. [1] entha kai o tun Bisalteun basileus geis te teis Krestunikeis Threiix ergon yperfyes ergasato. os oyte aytos efe tui Xerxei ekun einai doyleusein, all' oixeto anu es to oros ten RHodopen, toisi te paisi apegoreye me strateuesthai epi ten Ellada. [2] oi de alogesantes, e allus sfi thymos egeneto theesasthai ton polemon, estrateuonto ama tui Persei. epei de anexuresan asinees pantes ex eontes, exuryxe aytun o pater tous ofthalmous dia ten aitien tauten.   
      117. They then received this reward: and as to the Persians, when passing on from Thrace they came to the passage, they crossed over the Hellespont in haste to Abydos by means of the ships, for they did not find the floating-bridges still stretched across but broken up by a storm. While staying there for a time they had distributed to them an allowance of food more abundant than they had had by the way, and from satisfying their hunger without restraint and also from the changes of water there died many of those in the army who had remained safe till then. The rest arrived with Xerxes at Sardis.         117. [1] kai oytoi men touton ton misthon elabon, oi de Persai us ek teis Threikes poreyomenoi apikonto epi ton poron, epeigomenoi ton Ellesponton teisi neysi diebesan es Abydon. tas gar sxedias oyk eyron eti entetamenas all' ypo xeimunos dialelymenas. [2] enthauta de katexomenoi sitia te pleu e kat' odon elagxanon, kai oydena te kosmon empiplamenoi kai ydata metaballontes apethneskon tou stratou tou perieontos polloi. oi de loipoi ama Xerxe apikneontai es Sardis.   
      118. There is also another story reported as follows, namely that when Xerxes on his march away from Athens came to Eion on the Strymon, from that point he did not continue further to make marches by road, but delivered his army to Hydarnes to lead back to the Hellespont, while he himself embarked in a Phenician ship and set forth for Asia; and as he sailed he was seized by a wind from the Strymon, violent and raising great waves; and since he was tossed by the storm more and more, the ship being heavily laden (for there were upon the deck great numbers of Persians, those namely who went with Xerxes), the king upon that falling into fear shouted aloud and asked the pilot whether there were for them any means of safety. He said: "Master, there are none, unless some way be found of freeing ourselves of the excessive number of passengers." Then it is said that Xerxes, when he heard this, spoke thus: "Persians, now let each one of you show that he has care for the king; for my safety, as it seems, depends upon you." He, they say, thus spoke, and they made obeisance to him and leapt out into the sea; and so the ship being lightened came safe to Asia. As soon as they had landed Xerxes, they say, first presented the pilot with a wreath of gold, because he had saved the life of the king, and then cut off his head, because he had caused the death of many of the Persians.         118. [1] esti de kai allos ode logos legomenos, us epeide Xerxes apelaunun ex Atheneun apiketo ep' Eiona ten epi Strymoni, entheuten oyketi odoiporieisi diexrato, alla ten men stratien Ydarnei epitrapei apagein es ton Ellesponton, aytos d' epi neos Foinisses epibas ekomizeto es ten Asien. [2] pleonta de min anemon Strymonien ypolabein megan kai kymatien. kai de mallon gar ti xeimainesthai gemouses teis neos, uste epi tou katastrumatos epeontun syxnun Perseun tun sun Xerxei komizomenun, enthauta es deima pesonta ton basilea eiresthai busanta ton kyberneten ei tis esti sfi suterie, [3] kai ton eipai <<despota, oyk esti oydemia, ei me toutun apallage tis genetai tun pollun epibateun.>> kai Xerxen legetai akousanta tauta eipein <<andres Persai, nun tis diadexatu ymeun basileos kedomenos. en ymin gar oike einai emoi e suterie.>> [4] ton men tauta legein, tous de proskyneontas ekpedan es ten thalassan, kai ten nea epikoyfistheisan oytu de aposutheinai es ten Asien. us de ekbeinai taxista es gein ton Xerxen, poieisai toionde. oti men esuse basileos ten psyxen, duresasthai xryseei stefanei ton kyberneten, oti de Perseun pollous apulese, apotamein ten kefalen aytou.   
      119. This other story, I say, is reported about the return of Xerxes, but I for my part can by no means believe it, either in other respects or as regards this which is said to have happened to the Persians; for if this which I have related had in truth been said by the pilot to Xerxes, not one person's opinion in ten thousand will differ from mine that the king would have done some such thing as this, that is to say, he would have caused those who were upon the deck to go down below into the hold, seeing that they were Persians of the highest rank among the Persians; and of the rowers, who were Phenicians, he would have thrown out into the sea a number equal to the number of those. In fact however, as I have said before, he made his return to Asia together with the rest of the army by road.         119. [1] oytos de allos legetai logos peri tou Xerxeu nostoy, oydamus emoige pistos oyte allus oyte to Perseun touto pathos. ei gar de tauta oytu eirethe ek tou kyberneteu pros Xerxen, en myrieisi gnumeisi mian oyk exu antixoon me oyk an poieisai basilea toionde, tous men epi tou katastrumatos katabibasai es koilen nea eontas Persas kai Perseun tous prutoys, tun d' ereteun eontun Foinikun okus oyk an ison pleithos toisi Perseisi exebale es ten thalassan. all' o men, us kai proteron moi eiretai, odui xreumenos ama tui allui stratui apenostese es ten Asien.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [120]

     120. And this also which follows is a strong witness that it was so; for Xerxes is known to have come to Abdera on his way back, and to have made with them a guest-friendship and presented them with a Persian sword of gold and a gold-spangled tiara: and as the men of Abdera themselves say (though I for my part can by no means believe it), he loosed his girdle for the first time during his flight back from Athens, considering himself to be in security. Now Abdera is situated further towards the Hellespont than the river Strymon and Eion, from which place the story says that he embarked in the ship.         120. [1] mega de kai tode marturion. fainetai gar Xerxes en tei opisu komidei apikomenos es Abdera kai xeinien te sfi synthemenos kai duresamenos aytous akinakei te xryseui kai tierei xrysopastui. kai us aytoi legoysi Abderitai, legontes emoige oydamus pista, pruton elusato ten zunen feugun ex Atheneun opisu, us en adeiei eun. ta de Abdera idrytai pros tou Ellespontoy mallon e tou Strymonos kai teis Eionos, othen de min fasi epibeinai epi ten nea.   
      121. The Hellenes meanwhile, when it proved that they were not able to conquer Andros, turned towards Carystos, and having laid waste the land of that people they departed and went to Salamis. First then for the gods they chose out first-fruits of the spoil, and among them three Persian triremes, one to be dedicated as an offering at the Isthmus, which remained there still up to my time, another at Sunion, and the third to Ajax in Salamis where they were. After this they divided the spoil among themselves and sent the first-fruits to Delphi, of which was made a statue holding in its hand the beak of a ship and in height measuring twelve cubits. This statue stood in the same place with the golden statue of Alexander the Macedonian.         121. [1] oi de Ellenes epeite oyk oioi te eginonto exelein ten Andron, trapomenoi es Karyston kai deiusantes aytun ten xuren apallassonto es Salamina. pruta men nyn toisi theoisi exeilon akrothinia alla te kai triereas treis Foinissas, ten men es Isthmon anatheinai, e per eti kai es eme En, ten de epi Sounion, ten de tui Aianti aytou es Salamina. [2] meta de touto diedasanto ten leien kai ta akrothinia apepempsan es Delfous, ek tun egeneto andrias exun en tei xeiri akruterion neos, eun megathos dyudeka pexeun. esteke de oytos tei per o Makedun Alexandros o xruseos.   
      122. Then when the Hellenes had sent first-fruits to Delphi, they asked the god on behalf of all whether the first-fruits which he had received were fully sufficient and acceptable to him. He said that from the Hellenes he had received enough, but not from the Eginetans, and from them he demanded the offering of their prize of valour for the sea- fight at Salamis. Hearing this the Eginetans dedicated golden stars, three in number, upon a ship's mast of bronze, which are placed in the corner close to the mixing-bowl of Croesus.         122. [1] pempsantes de akrothinia oi Ellenes es Delfous epeirutun ton theon koinei ei lelabeke plerea kai aresta ta akrothinia. o de par' Ellenun men tun allun efese exein, para Aigineteun de oy, alla apaitee aytous ta aristeia teis en Salamini naymaxies. Aigineitai de pythomenoi anethesan asteras xryseoys, oi epi istou xalkeoy estasi treis epi teis gunies, agxotatu tou Kroisoy kreteiros.   
      123. After the division of the spoil the Hellenes sailed to the Isthmus, to give the prize of valour to him who of all the Hellenes had proved himself the most worthy during this war: and when they had come thither and the commanders distributed their votes at the altar of Poseidon, selecting from the whole number the first and the second in merit, then every one of them gave in his vote for himself, each man thinking that he himself had been the best; but for the second place the greater number of votes came out in agreement, assigning that to Themistocles. They then were left alone in their votes, while Themistocles in regard to the second place surpassed the rest by far:         123. [1] meta de ten diairesin teis leies epleon oi Ellenes es ton Isthmon aristeia dusontes tui axiutatui genomenui Ellenun ana ton polemon touton. [2] us de apikomenoi oi strategoi dienemon tas psefoys epi tou Poseideunos tui bumui, ton pruton kai ton deuteron krinontes ek pantun, enthauta pas tis aytun euytui etitheto ten pseifon, aytos ekastos dokeun aristos genesthai, deutera de oi polloi synexepipton Themistoklea krinontes. oi men de emoynounto, Themistoklees de deytereioisi ypereballeto pollon.   
      124. and although the Hellenes would not give decision of this by reason of envy, but sailed away each to their own city without deciding, yet Themistocles was loudly reported of and was esteemed throughout Hellas to be the man who was the ablest by far of the Hellenes: and since he had not received honour from those who had fought at Salamis, although he was the first in the voting, he went forthwith after this to Lacedemon, desiring to receive honour there; and the Lacedemonians received him well and gave him great honours. As a prize of valour they gave to Eurybiades a wreath of olive; and for ability and skill they gave to Themistocles also a wreath of olive, and presented him besides with the chariot which was judged to be the best in Sparta. So having much commended him, they escorted him on his departure with three hundred picked men of the Spartans, the same who are called the "horsemen," as far as the boundaries of Tegea: and he is the only man of all we know to whom the Spartans ever gave escort on his way.         124. [1] oy boylomenun de tauta krinein tun Ellenun fthonui, all' apopleontun ekastun es ten euytun akritun, omus Themistoklees ebusthe te kai edoxuthe einai aner pollon Ellenun sofutatos ana pasan ten Ellada. [2] oti de nikun oyk etimethe pros tun en Salamini naymaxesantun, aytika meta tauta es Lakedaimona apiketo thelun timetheinai. kai min Lakedaimonioi kalus men ypedexanto, megalus de etimesan. aristeia men nyn edosan . . Eyrybiadei elaies stefanon, sofies de kai dexiotetos Themistoklei kai toutui stefanon elaies. eduresanto te min oxui tui en Spartei kallisteusanti. [3] ainesantes de polla, proepempsan apionta triekosioi Spartieteun logades, oytoi oi per ippees kaleontai, mexri oyrun tun Tegeetikun. mounon de touton pantun anthrupun tun emeis idmen Spartieitai proepempsan.   
      125. When however he had come to Athens from Lacedemon, Timodemos of Aphidnai, one of the opponents of Themistocles, but in other respects not among the men of distinction, maddened by envy attacked him, bringing forward against him his going to Lacedemon, and saying that it was on account of Athens that he had those marks of honour which he had from the Lacedemonians, and not on his own account. Then, as Timodemos continued ceaselessly to repeat this, Themistocles said: "I tell thee thus it is:--if I had been a native of Belbina I should never have been thus honoured by the Spartans; but neither wouldest thou, my friend, for all that thou art an Athenian." So far then went these matters.         125. [1] us de ek teis Lakedaimonos apiketo es tas Athenas, enthauta Timodemos Afidnaios tun exthrun men tun Themistokleos eun, allus de oy tun epifaneun andrun, fthonui katamargeun eneikee ton Themistoklea, ten es Lakedaimona apixin proferun, us dia tas Athenas exoi ta gerea ta para Lakedaimoniun, all' oy di' euyton. [2] o de, epeite oyk epaueto legun tauta o Timodemos, eipe <<oytu exei toi. oyt' an egu eun Belbinites etimethen oytu pros Spartieteun, oyt' an su, unthrupe, eun Athenaios.>>   
      126. Artabazos meanwhile the son of Pharnakes, a man who was held in esteem among the Persians even before this and came to be so yet more after the events about Plataia, was escorting the king as far as the passage with six myriads of that army which Mardonios had selected for himself; and when the king was in Asia and Artabazos on his march back came near to Pallene, finding that Mardonios was wintering in Thessaly and Macedonia and was not at present urgent with him to come and join the rest of the army, he thought it not good to pass by without reducing the Potidaians to slavery, whom he had found in revolt: for the men of Potidaia, when the king had marched by them and when the fleet of the Persians had departed in flight from Salamis, had openly made revolt from the Barbarians; and so also had the others done who occupy Pallene.         126. [1] tauta men nyn es tosouto egeneto. Artabazos de o Farnakeos aner en Perseisi logimos kai prosthe eun, ek de tun Plataiikun kai mallon eti genomenos, exun ex myriadas stratou tou Mardonios exelexato, proepempe basilea mexri tou poroy. [2] us de o men En en tei Asiei, o de opisu poreyomenos kata ten Pallenen egineto, ate Mardonioy te xeimerizontos peri Thessalien te kai Makedonien kai oyden ku katepeigontos ekein es to allo stratopedon, oyk edikaioy entyxun apesteusi Potidaieteisi me oyk exandrapodisasthai sfeas. [3] oi gar Potidaieitai, us basileus parexelelakee kai o naytikos toisi Perseisi oixukee feugun ek Salaminos, ek tou fanerou apestasan apo tun barbarun. us de kai oi alloi oi ten Pallenen exontes.   
      127. So upon this Artabazos began to besiege Potidaia, and suspecting that the men of Olynthos also were intending revolt from the king, he began to besiege this city too, which was occupied by Bottiaians who had been driven away from the Thermaian gulf by the Macedonians. So when he had taken these men by siege, he brought them forth to a lake and slew them there; and the city he delivered to Critobulos of Torone to have in charge, and to the natives of Chalkidike; and thus it was that the Chalkidians got possession of Olynthos.         127. [1] enthauta de Artabazos epoliorkee ten Potidaian. ypopteusas de kai tous Olynthioys apistasthai apo basileos, kai tauten epoliorkee. eixon de ayten Bottiaioi ek tou Thermaioy kolpoy exanastantes ypo Makedonun. epei de sfeas eile poliorkeun, katesfaxe exagagun es limnen, ten de polin paradidoi Kritoboului Torunaiui epitropeuein kai tui Khalkidikui genei, kai oytu Olynthon Khalkidees esxon.   
      128. Having taken this city Artabazos set himself to attack Potidaia with vigour, and as he was setting himself earnestly to this work, Timoxeinos the commander of the troops from Skione concerted with him to give up the town by treachery. Now in what manner he did this at the first, I for my part am not able to say, for this is not reported; at last however it happened as follows. Whenever either Timoxeinos wrote a paper wishing to send it to Artabazos, or Artabazos wishing to send one to Timoxeinos, they wound it round by the finger-notches of an arrow, and then, putting feathers over the paper, they shot it to a place agreed upon between them. It came however to be found out that Timoxeinos was attempting by treachery to give up Potidaia; for Artabazos, shooting an arrow at the place agreed upon, missed this spot and struck a man of Potidaia in the shoulder; and when he was struck, a crowd came about him, as is apt to happen when there is fighting, and they forthwith took the arrow and having discovered the paper carried it to the commanders. Now there was present an allied force of the other men of Pallene also. Then when the commanders had read the paper and discovered who was guilty of the treachery, they resolved not openly to convict Timoxeinos of treachery, for the sake of the city of Skione, lest the men of Skione should be esteemed traitors for all time to come.         128. [1] exelun de tauten o Artabazos tei Potidaiei entetamenus proseixe. prosexonti de oi prothumus syntithetai prodosien Timoxeinos o tun Skiunaiun strategos, ontina men tropon arxen, eguge oyk exu eipein [oy gar un legetai ), telos mentoi toiade egineto. okus byblion grapseie e Timoxeinos ethelun para Artabazon pempsai e Artabazos para Timoxeinon, toxeumatos para tas glyfidas perieilixantes kai pterusantes to byblion etoxeyon es sygkeimenon xurion. [2] epaistos de egeneto o Timoxeinos prodidous ten Potidaian. toxeuun gar o Artabazos es to sygkeimenon, amartun tou xurioy toutoy ballei andros Potidaieteu ton umon, ton de blethenta periedrame omilos, oia fileei ginesthai en polemui, oi aytika to toxeyma labontes us emathon to byblion, eferon epi tous strategous. parein de kai tun allun Pallenaiun symmaxin. [3] toisi de strategoisi epilexamenoisi to byblion kai mathousi ton aition teis prodosies edoxe me katapleixai Timoxeinon prodosiei teis Skiunaiun polios eineka, me nomizoiato einai Skiunaioi es ton metepeita xronon aiei prodotai. o men de toioutui tropui epaistos egegonee.   
      129. He then in such a manner as this had been discovered; and when three months had gone by while Artabazos was besieging the town, there came to be a great ebb of the sea backwards, which lasted for a long time; and the Barbarians, seeing that shallow water had been produced, endeavoured to get by into the peninsula of Pallene, but when they had passed through two fifth-parts of the distance, and yet three- fifths remained, which they must pass through before they were within Pallene, then there came upon them a great flood-tide of the sea, higher than ever before, as the natives of the place say, though high tides come often. So those of them who could not swim perished, and those who could were slain by the men of Potidaia who put out to them in boats. The cause of the high tide and flood and of that which befell the Persians was this, as the Potidaians say, namely that these same Persians who perished by means of the sea had committed impiety towards the temple of Poseidon and his image in the suburb of their town; and in saying that this was the cause, in my opinion they say well. The survivors of his army Artabazos led away to Thessaly to join Mardonios. Thus it fared with these who escorted the king on his way.         129. [1] Artabazui de epeide poliorkeonti egegonesan treis meines, ginetai amputis teis thalasses megale kai xronon epi pollon. idontes de oi barbaroi tenagos genomenon pareisan es ten Pallenen. [2] us de tas duo men moiras diodoiporekesan, eti de treis ypoloipoi Esan, tas dielthontas xrein einai esu en tei Pallenei, epeilthe plemmyris teis thalasses megale, ose oydama ku, us oi epixurioi legoysi, pollakis ginomene. oi men de neein aytun oyk epistamenoi dieftheironto, tous de epistamenoys oi Potidaieitai epiplusantes ploioisi apulesan. [3] aition de legoysi Potidaieitai teis te rhexies kai teis plemmyridos kai tou Persikou patheos genesthai tode, oti tou Poseideunos es ton neon kai to agalma to en tui proasteiui esebesan oytoi tun Perseun oi per kai dieftharesan ypo teis thalasses. aition de touto legontes ey legein emoige dokeoysi. tous de perigenomenoys apeige Artabazos es Thessalien para Mardonion.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [130]

     130. The fleet of Xerxes, so much of it as remained, when it had touched Asia in its flight from Salamis, and had conveyed the king and his army over from the Chersonese to Abydos, passed the winter at Kyme: and when spring dawned upon it, it assembled early at Samos, where some of the ships had even passed the winter; and most of the Persians and Medes still served as fighting-men on board of them. To be commanders of them there came Mardontes the son of Bagaios, and Artayntes the son of Artachaies, and with them also Ithamitres was in joint command, who was brother's son to Artayntes and had been added by the choice of Artayntes himself. They then, since they had suffered a heavy blow, did not advance further up towards the West, nor did any one compel them to do so; but they remained still in Samos and kept watch over Ionia, lest it should revolt, having three hundred ships including those of the Ionians; and they did not expect that the Hellenes on their part would come to Ionia, but thought that it would satisfy them to guard their own land, judging from the fact that they had not pursued after them in their flight from Salamis but were well contented then to depart homewards. As regards the sea then their spirit was broken, but on land they thought that Mardonios would get much the advantage. So they being at Samos were taking counsel to do some damage if they could to their enemies, and at the same time they were listening for news how the affairs of Mardonios would fall out.         130. [1] oytoi men oi propempsantes basilea oytu eprexan. o de naytikos o Xerxeu perigenomenos us prosemixe tei Asiei feugun ek Salaminos kai basilea te kai ten stratien ek Khersonesoy dieporthmeyse es Abydon, exeimerize en Kumei. earos de epilampsantos pruios synelegeto es Samon. ai de tun neun kai exeimerisan aytou. Perseun de kai Medun oi pleunes epebateyon. [2] strategoi de sfi epeilthon Mardontes te o Bagaioy kai Artauntes o Artaxaieu. syneirxe de toutoisi kai adelfideos aytou Artaunteu proselomenoy Ithamitres. ate de megalus plegentes, oy proeisan anuteru to pros esperes, oyd' epenagkaze oydeis, all' en tei Samui katemenoi efulasson ten Iunien me apostei, neas exontes sun teisi Iasi triekosias. [3] oy men oyde prosedekonto tous Ellenas eleusesthai es ten Iunien all' apoxresein sfi ten euytun fylassein, stathmeumenoi oti sfeas oyk epediuxan feugontas ek Salaminos all' asmenoi apallassonto. kata men nyn ten thalassan essumenoi Esan tui thymui, pezei de edokeon pollui kratesein ton Mardonion. [4] eontes de en Samui ama men eboyleuonto ei ti dynaiato kakon tous polemioys poieein, ama de kai utakousteon okei peseetai ta Mardonioy pregmata.   
      131. The Hellenes on their part were roused both by the coming on of spring and by the presence of Mardonios in Thessaly. Their land-army had not yet begun to assemble, when the fleet arrived at Egina, in number one hundred and ten ships, and the commander and admiral was Leotychides, who was the son of Menares, the son of Hegesilaos, the son of Hippocratides, the son of Leotychides, the son of Anaxilaos, the son of Archidemos, the son of Anaxandriddes, the son of Theopompos, the son of Nicander, the son of Charilaos, the son of Eunomos, the son of Polydectes, the son of Prytanis, the son of Euryphon, the son of Procles, the son of Aristodemos, the son of Aristomachos, the son of Cleodaios, the son of Hyllos, the son of Heracles, being of the other royal house. These all, except the two enumerated first after Leotychides, had been kings of Sparta. And of the Athenians the commander was Xanthippos the son of Ariphon.         131. [1] tous de Ellenas to te ear ginomenon egeire kai Mardonios en Thessaliei eun. o men de pezos oyku synelegeto, o de naytikos apiketo es Aiginan, nees arithmon deka kai ekaton. [2] strategos de kai nauarxos En Leytyxides o Menareos tou Egesileu tou Ippokratideu tou Leytyxideu tou Anaxileu tou Arxidemoy tou Anaxandrideu tou Theopompoy tou Nikandroy tou Kharileu tou Eynomoy tou Polydekteu tou Prytanios tou Eyryfuntos tou Prokleos tou Aristodemoy tou Aristomaxoy tou Kleodaioy tou Ylloy tou Erakleos, eun teis eteres oikies tun basileun. [3] oytoi pantes, plen tun epta tun meta Leytyxidea prutun katalexthentun, oi alloi basilees egenonto Spartes. Athenaiun de estrategee Xanthippos o Arifronos.   
      132. When all the ships had arrived at Egina, there came Ionian envoys to the camp of the Hellenes, who also came a short time before this to Sparta and asked the Lacedemonians to set Ionia free; and of them one was Herodotus the son of Basileides. These had banded themselves together and had plotted to put to death Strattis the despot of Chios, being originally seven in number; but when one of those who took part with them gave information of it and they were discovered to be plotting against him, then the remaining six escaped from Chios and came both to Sparta and also at this time to Egina, asking the Hellenes to sail over to Ionia: but they with difficulty brought them forward as far as Delos; for the parts beyond this were all fearful to the Hellenes, since they were without experience of those regions and everything seemed to them to be filled with armed force, while their persuasion was that it was as long a voyage to Samos as to the Pillars of Heracles. Thus at the same time it so chanced that the Barbarians dared sail no further up towards the West than Samos, being smitten with fear, and the Hellenes no further down towards the East than Delos, when the Chians made request of them. So fear was guard of the space which lay between them.         132. [1] us de paregenonto es ten Aiginan pasai ai nees, apikonto Iunun aggeloi es to stratopedon tun Ellenun, oi kai es Sparten oligui proteron toutun apikomenoi edeonto Lakedaimoniun eleytheroun ten Iunien. [2] tun kai Erodotos o Basileideu En. oi stasiutai sfisi genomenoi epebouleyon thanaton Stratti tui Khioy tyrannui, eontes arxen epta. epiboyleuontes de us faneroi egenonto, exeneikantos ten epixeiresin enos tun metexontun, oytu de oi loipoi ex eontes ypexesxon ek teis Khioy kai es Sparten te apikonto kai de kai tote es ten Aiginan, tun Ellenun deomenoi kataplusai es ten Iunien. oi proegagon aytous mogis mexri Deloy. [3] to gar prosuteru pan deinon En toisi Ellesi oyte tun xurun eousi empeiroisi, stratieis te panta plea edokee einai, ten de Samon episteato doxei kai Erakleas stelas ison apexein. synepipte de toiouto uste tous men barbaroys to pros esperes anuteru Samoy me tolman kataplusai katarrudekotas, tous de Ellenas, xreizontun Khiun, to pros ten eu katuteru Deloy. oytu deos to meson efulasse sfeun.   
      133. The Hellenes, I say, sailed to Delos; and Mardonios meanwhile had been wintering in Thessaly. From thence he sent round a man, a native of Europos, whose name was Mys, to the various Oracles, charging him to go everywhere to consult, wherever they were permitted to make trial of the Oracles. What he desired to find out from the Oracles when he gave this charge, I am not able to say, for that is not reported; but I conceive for my part that he sent to consult about his present affairs and not about other things.         133. [1] oi men de Ellenes epleon es ten Deilon, Mardonios de peri ten Thessalien exeimaze. entheuten de ormumenos epempe kata ta xresteria andra Eyrupea genos, tui oynoma En Mus, enteilamenos pantaxei min xresomenon elthein, tun oia te En sfi apopeiresasthai. o ti men boylomenos ekmathein pros tun xresteriun tauta enetelleto, oyk exu frasai. oy gar un legetai. dokeu d' eguge peri tun pareontun pregmatun kai oyk allun peri pempsai.   
      134. This Mys is known to have come to Lebadeia and to have persuaded by payment of money one of the natives of the place to go down to Trophonios, and also he came to the Oracle at Abai of the Phokians; and moreover when he came for the first time to Thebes, he not only consulted the Ismenian Apollo,-- there one may consult just as at Olympia with victims,--but also by payment he persuaded a stranger who was not a Theban, and induced him to lie down to sleep in the temple of Amphiaraos. In this temple no one of the Thebans is permitted to seek divination, and that for the following reason:--Amphiaraos dealing by oracles bade them choose which they would of these two things, either to have him as a diviner or else as an ally in war, abstaining from the other use; and they chose that he should be their ally in war: for this reason it is not permitted to any of the Thebans to lie down to sleep in that temple.         134. [1] oytos o Mus es te Lebadeian fainetai apikomenos kai misthui peisas tun epixuriun andra katabeinai para Trofunion, kai es Abas tas Fukeun apikomenos epi to xresterion. kai de kai es Thebas pruta us apiketo, touto men tui Ismeniui Apolluni exresato. esti de kata per en Olympiei iroisi aytothi xresteriazesthai. touto de xeinon tina kai oy Thebaion xremasi peisas katekoimese es Amfiareu. [2] Thebaiun de oydeni exesti manteuesthai aytothi dia tode. ekeleyse sfeas o Amfiareus dia xresteriun poieumenos okotera boulontai elesthai toutun, euytui e ate manti xrasthai e ate symmaxui, tou eteroy apexomenoys. oi de summaxon min eilonto einai. dia touto men oyk exesti Thebaiun oydeni aytothi egkatakoimetheinai.   
      135. After this a thing which to me is a very great marvel is said by the Thebans to have come to pass:--it seems that this man Mys of Europos, as he journeyed round to all the Oracles, came also to the sacred enclosure of the Ptoan Apollo. This temple is called "Ptoon," and belongs to the Thebans, and it lies above the lake Copais at the foot of the mountains, close to the town of Acraiphia. When the man called Mys came to this temple with three men chosen from the citizens in his company, who were sent by the public authority to write down that which the god should utter in his divination, forthwith it is said the prophet of the god began to give the oracle in a Barbarian tongue; and while those of the Thebans who accompanied him were full of wonder, hearing a Barbarian instead of the Hellenic tongue, and did not know what to make of the matter before them, it is said that the man of Europos, Mys, snatched from them the tablet which they bore and wrote upon it that which was being spoken by the prophet; and he said that the prophet was giving his answer in the Carian tongue: and then when he had written it, he went away and departed to Thessaly.         135. [1] tote de thuma moi megiston genesthai legetai ypo Thebaiun. elthein ara ton Eyrupea Mun, peristrufumenon panta ta xresteria, kai es tou Ptuioy Apollunos to temenos. touto de to iron kaleetai men Ptuion, esti de Thebaiun, keitai de yper teis Kupaidos limnes pros orei agxotatu Akraifies polios. [2] es touto to iron epeite parelthein ton kaleomenon touton Mun, epesthai de oi tun astun airetous andras treis apo tou koinou us apograpsomenoys ta thespieein emelle, kai prokate ton promantin barbarui glussei xran. [2] kai tous men epomenoys tun Thebaiun en thumati exesthai akouontas barbaroy glusses anti Ellados, oyde exein o ti xresuntai tui pareonti pregmati. ton de Eyrupea Mun exarpasanta par' aytun ten eferonto delton, ta legomena ypo tou profeteu grafein es ayten, fanai de Kariei min glussei xran, syggrapsamenon de oixesthai apionta es Thessalien.   
      136. Mardonios having read that which the Oracles uttered, whatever that was, after this sent as an envoy to Athens Alexander the son of Amyntas, the Macedonian, both because the Persians were connected with him by marriage, (for Gygaia the sister of Alexander and daughter of Amyntas had been married to a Persian Bubares, and from her had been born to him that Amyntas who lived in Asia, having the name of his mother's father, to whom the king gave Alabanda, a great city of Phrygia, to possess), and also Mardonios was sending him because he was informed that Alexander was a public guest-friend and benefactor of the Athenians; for by this means he thought that he would be most likely to gain over the Athenians to his side, about whom he heard that they were a numerous people and brave in war, and of whom he knew moreover that these were they who more than any others had brought about the disasters which had befallen the Persians by sea. Therefore if these should be added to him, he thought that he should easily have command of the sea (and this in fact would have been the case), while on land he supposed himself to be already much superior in force. Thus he reckoned that his power would be much greater than that of the Hellenes. Perhaps also the Oracles told him this beforehand, counselling him to make the Athenian his ally, and so he was sending in obedience to their advice.         136. [1] Mardonios de epilexamenos o ti de legonta En ta xresteria meta tauta epempse aggelon es Athenas Alexandron ton Amunteu andra Makedona, ama men oti oi proskedees oi Persai Esan. Alexandroy gar adelfeen Gygaien, Amunteu de thygatera, Boybares aner Perses esxe, ek teis oi egegonee Amuntes o en tei Asiei, exun to oynoma tou metropatoros, tui de ek basileos teis Frygies edothe Alabanda polis megale nemesthai. ama de o Mardonios pythomenos oti proxeinos te eie kai eyergetes o Alexandros epempe. [2] tous gar Athenaioys oytu edokee malista prosktesesthai, leun te pollon ara akouun einai kai alkimon, ta te kata ten thalassan syntyxonta sfi pathemata katergasamenoys malista Athenaioys epistato. [3] toutun de prosgenomenun katelpize eypeteus teis thalasses kratesein, ta per an kai En, pezei te edokee pollui einai kressun, oytu te elogizeto katuperthe oi ta pregmata esesthai tun Ellenikun. taxa d' an kai ta xresteria tauta oi prolegoi, symboyleuonta summaxon ton Athenaion poieesthai. toisi de peithomenos epempe.   
      137. Now of this Alexander the seventh ancestor was that Perdiccas who first became despot of the Macedonians, and that in the manner which here follows:--From Argos there fled to the Illyrians three brothers of the descendents of Temenos, Gauanes, Aeropos, and Perdiccas; and passing over from the Illyrians into the upper parts of Macedonia they came to the city of Lebaia. There they became farm- servants for pay in the household of the king, one pasturing horses, the second oxen, and the youngest of them, namely Perdiccas, the smaller kinds of cattle; for in ancient times even those who were rulers over men were poor in money, and not the common people only; and the wife of the king cooked for them their food herself. And whenever she baked, the loaf of the boy their servant, namely Perdiccas, became double as large as by nature it should be. When this happened constantly in the same manner, she told it to her husband, and he when he heard it conceived forthwith that this was a portent and tended to something great. He summoned the farm-servants therefore, and gave notice to them to depart out of his land; and they said that it was right that before they went forth they should receive the wages which were due. Now it chanced that the sun was shining into the house down through the opening which received the smoke, and the king when he heard about the wages said, being infatuated by a divine power: "I pay you then this for wages, and it is such as ye deserve," pointing to the sunlight. So then Gauanes and Aeropos the elder brothers stood struck with amazement when they heard this, but the boy, who happened to have in his hand a knife, said these words: "We accept, O king, that which thou dost give;" and he traced a line with his knife round the sunlight on the floor of the house, and having traced the line round he thrice drew of the sunlight into his bosom, and after that he departed both himself and his fellows.         137. [1] tou de Alexandroy toutoy ebdomos genetur Perdikkes esti o ktesamenos tun Makedonun ten tyrannida tropui toiuide. ex Argeos efygon es Illyrious tun Temenoy apogonun treis adelfeoi, Gayanes te kai Aeropos kai Perdikkes, ek de Illyriun yperbalontes es ten anu Makedonien apikonto es Lebaien polin. [2] enthauta de etheteyon epi misthui para tui basilei, o men ippoys nemun, o de bous, o de neutatos aytun Perdikkes ta lepta tun probatun. e de gyne tou basileos ayte ta sitia sfi epesse. Esan gar to palai kai ai tyrannides tun anthrupun asthenees xremasi, oy mounon o deimos. [3] okus de optuie, o artos tou paidos tou thetos Perdikkeu diplesios egineto aytos euytou. epei de aiei tuyto touto egineto, eipe pros ton andra ton euyteis. ton de akousanta eseilthe aytika us eie teras kai feroi mega ti. kalesas de tous theitas proegoreye sfi apallassesthai ek geis teis euytou. [4] oi de ton misthon efasan dikaioi einai apolabontes oytu exienai. enthauta o basileus tou misthou peri akousas, En gar kata ten kapnodoken es ton oikon esexun o elios, eipe theoblabes genomenos <<misthon de ymin egu ymeun axion tonde apodidumi,>> dexas ton elion. [5] o men de Gayanes te kai o Aeropos oi presbuteroi estasan ekpeplegmenoi, us ekoysan tauta. o de pais, etugxane gar exun maxairan, eipas tade <<dekometha u basileu ta didois,>> perigrafei tei maxairei es to edafos tou oikoy ton elion, perigrapsas de, es ton kolpon tris arysamenos tou elioy, apallasseto aytos te kai oi met' ekeinoy.   
      138. They then were going away, and to the king one of those who sat by him at table told what manner of thing the boy had done, and how the youngest of them had taken that which was given with some design: and he hearing this and being moved with anger, sent after them horsemen to slay them. Now there is a river in this land to which the descendents of these men from Argos sacrifice as a saviour. This river, so soon as the sons of Temenos had passed over it, began to flow with such great volume of water that the horsemen became unable to pass over. So the brothers, having come to another region of Macedonia, took up their dwelling near the so-called gardens of Midas the son of Gordias, where roses grow wild which have each one sixty petals and excel all others in perfume. In these gardens too Silenos was captured, as is reported by the Macedonians: and above the gardens is situated a mountain called Bermion, which is inaccessible by reason of the cold. Having taken possession of that region, they made this their starting-point, and proceeded to subdue also the rest of Macedonia.         138. [1] oi men de apeisan, tui de basilei semainei tis tun paredrun oion ti xreima poieseie o pais kai us sun noui keinun o neutatos laboi ta didomena. o de tauta akousas kai oxyntheis pempei ep' aytous ippeas apoleontas. potamos de esti en tei xurei tautei, tui thuoysi oi toutun tun andrun ap' Argeos apogonoi suteiri. [2] oytos, epeite diebesan oi Temenidai, megas oytu errue uste tous ippeas me oioys te genesthai diabeinai. oi de apikomenoi es allen gein teis Makedonies oikesan pelas tun kepun tun legomenun einai Mideu tou Gordieu, en toisi fuetai aytomata rhoda, en ekaston exon exekonta fulla, odmei te yperferonta tun allun. [3] en toutoisi kai o Silenos toisi kepoisi elu, us legetai ypo Makedonun. yper de tun kepun oros keitai Bermion oynoma, abaton ypo xeimunos. entheuten de ormumenoi, us tauten esxon, katestrefonto kai ten allen Makedonien.   
      139. From this Perdiccas the descent of Alexander was as follows:--Alexander was the son of Amyntas, Amyntas was the son of Alketes, the father of Alketes was Aeropos, of him Philip, of Philip Argaios, and of this last the father was Perdiccas, who first obtained the kingdom.         139. [1] apo toutoy de tou Perdikkeu Alexandros ude egeneto. Amunteu pais En Alexandros, Amuntes de Alketeu, Alketeu de pater En Aeropos, tou de Filippos, Filippoy de Argaios, tou de Perdikkes o ktesamenos ten arxen.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 8: Urania [140]

     140. (a) Thus then, I say, Alexander the son of Amyntas was descended; and when he came to Athens sent from Mardonios, he spoke as follows:  "Athenians, Mardonios speaks these words:--There has come to me a message from the king which speaks in this manner:--To the Athenians I remit all the offences which were committed against me: and now, Mardonios, thus do,--first give them back their own land; then let them choose for themselves another in addition to this, whichsoever they desire, remaining independent; and set up for them again all their temples, which I set on fire, provided that they consent to make a treaty with me. This message having come to me, it is necessary for me to do so, unless by your means I am prevented: and thus I speak to you now:--Why are ye so mad as to raise up war against the king? since neither will ye overcome him, nor are ye able to hold out against him for ever: for ye saw the multitude of the host of Xerxes and their deeds, and ye are informed also of the power which is with me at the present time; so that even if ye overcome and conquer us (of which ye can have no hope if ye are rightly minded), another power will come many times as large. Do not ye then desire to match yourselves with the king, and so to be both deprived of your land and for ever running a course for your own lives; but make peace with him: and ye have a most honourable occasion to make peace, since the king has himself set out upon this road: agree to a league with us then without fraud or deceit, and remain free.         140. a [1] egegonee men de ude o Alexandros o Amunteu. us de apiketo es tas Athenas apopemftheis ypo Mardonioy, elege tade. <<andres Athenaioi, Mardonios tade legei. emoi aggelie ekei para basileos legoysa oytu. 'Athenaioisi tas amartadas tas es eme ex ekeinun genomenas pasas metiemi. [2] nun te ude Mardonie poiee. touto men ten gein sfi apodos, touto de allen pros tautei elesthun aytoi, entina an ethelusi, eontes aytonomoi. ira te panta sfi, en de bouluntai ge emoi omologeein, anorthuson, osa egu enepresa.' toutun de apigmenun anagkaius exei moi poieein tauta, en me to ymeteron aition genetai. [3] legu de ymin tade. nun ti mainesthe polemon basilei aeiromenoi; oyte gar an yperbaloisthe oyte oioi te este antexein ton panta xronon. eidete men gar teis Xerxeu stratelasies to pleithos kai ta erga, pynthanesthe de kai ten nun par' emoi eousan dunamin. uste kai en emeas yperbalesthe kai nikesete, tou per ymin oydemia elpis ei per ey froneete, alle parestai pollaplesie. [4] me un boulesthe parisoumenoi basilei steresthai men teis xures, theein de aiei peri ymeun aytun, alla katalusasthe. parexei de ymin kallista katalusasthai, basileos tautei ormemenoy. este eleutheroi, emin omaixmien synthemenoi aney te doloy kai apates.   
      140. (b) These things Mardonios charged me to say to you, O Athenians; and as for me, I will say nothing of the goodwill towards you on my part, for ye would not learn that now for the first time; but I ask of you to do as Mardonios says, since I perceive that ye will not be able to war with Xerxes for ever,--if I perceived in you ability to do this, I should never have come to you speaking these words,--for the power of the king is above that of a man and his arm is very long. If therefore ye do not make an agreement forthwith, when they offer you great things as the terms on which they are willing to make a treaty, I have fear on your behalf, seeing that ye dwell more upon the highway than any of your allies, and are exposed ever to destruction alone, the land which ye possess being parted off from the rest and lying between the armies which are contending together. Nay, but be persuaded, for this is a matter of great consequence to you, that to you alone of the Hellenes the great king remits the offences committed and desires to become a friend."         140. b [1] Mardonios men tauta u Athenaioi eneteilato moi eipein pros ymeas. egu de peri men eynoies teis pros ymeas eouses ex emeu oyden lexu, oy gar an nun pruton ekmathoite, prosxreizu de ymeun peithesthai Mardoniui. [2] enoru gar ymin oyk oioisi te esomenoisi ton panta xronon polemeein Xerxei. ei gar enurun touto en ymin, oyk an kote es ymeas Elthon exun logoys tousde. kai gar dunamis yper anthrupon e basileos esti kai xeir ypermekes. [3] en un me aytika omologesete, megala proteinontun ep' oisi omologeein etheloysi, deimainu yper ymeun en tribui te malista oikemenun tun symmaxun pantun aiei te ftheiromenun mounun, exaireton metaixmion te ten gein ektemenun. [4] alla peithesthe. pollou gar ymin axia tauta, ei basileus ge o megas mounoisi ymin Ellenun tas amartadas apieis ethelei filos genesthai.>>   
      141. Thus spoke Alexander; and the Lacedemonians having been informed that Alexander had come to Athens to bring the Athenians to make a treaty with the Barbarians, and remembering the oracles, who it was destined that they together with the other Dorians should be driven forth out of the Peloponnese by the Medes and the Athenians combined, had been very greatly afraid lest the Athenians should make a treaty with the Persians; and forthwith they had resolved to send envoys. It happened moreover that they were introduced at the same time with Alexander; for the Athenians had waited for them, protracting the time, because they were well assured that the Lacedemonians would hear that an envoy had come from the Barbarians to make a treaty, and that having heard it they would themselves send envoys with all speed. They acted therefore of set purpose, so as to let the Lacedemonians see their inclination.         141. [1] Alexandros men tauta elexe. Lakedaimonioi de pythomenoi ekein Alexandron es Athenas es omologien axonta tui barbarui Athenaioys, anamnesthentes tun logiun us sfeas xreon esti ama toisi alloisi Durieusi ekpiptein ek Peloponnesoy ypo Medun te kai Athenaiun, karta te edeisan me omologesusi tui Persei Athenaioi, aytika te sfi edoxe pempein aggeloys. [2] kai de synepipte uste omou sfeun ginesthai ten katastasin. epanemeinan gar oi Athenaioi diatribontes, ey epistamenoi oti emellon Lakedaimonioi peusesthai ekonta para tou barbaroy aggelon ep' omologiei, pythomenoi te pempsein kata taxos aggeloys. epitedes un epoieyn, endeiknumenoi toisi Lakedaimonioisi ten euytun gnumen.   
      142. So when Alexander had ceased speaking, the envoys from Sparta followed him forthwith and said: "As for us, the Lacedemonians sent us to ask of you not to make any change in that which concerns Hellas, nor to accept proposals from the Barbarian; since this is not just in any way nor honourable for any of the Hellenes to do, but least of all for you, and that for many reasons. Ye were they who stirred up this war, when we by no means willed it; and the contest came about for your dominion, but now it extends even to the whole of Hellas. Besides this it is by no means to be endured that ye Athenians, who are the authors of all this, should prove to be the cause of slavery to the Hellenes, seeing that ye ever from ancient time also have been known as the liberators of many. We feel sympathy however with you for your sufferings and because ye were deprived of your crops twice and have had your substance ruined now for a long time. In compensation for this the Lacedemonians and their allies make offer to support your wives and all those of your households who are unfitted for war, so long as this war shall last: but let not Alexander the Macedonian persuade you, making smooth the speech of Mardonios; for these things are fitting for him to do, since being himself a despot he is working in league with a despot: for you however they are not fitting to do, if ye chance to be rightly minded; for ye know that in Barbarians there is neither faith nor truth at all." Thus spoke the envoys:         142. [1] us de epausato legun Alexandros, diadexamenoi elegon oi apo Spartes aggeloi <<emeas de epempsan Lakedaimonioi deesomenoys ymeun mete neuteron poieein meden kata ten Ellada mete logoys endekesthai para tou barbaroy. [2] oyte gar dikaion oydamus oyte kosmon feron oyte ge alloisi Ellenun oydamoisi, ymin de de kai dia pantun ekista pollun eineka. egeirate gar tonde ton polemon ymeis oyden emeun boylomenun, kai peri teis ymeteres arxeithen o agun egeneto, nun de ferei kai es pasan ten Ellada. [3] allus te toutun apantun aitioys genesthai doylosunes toisi Ellesi Athenaioys oydamus anasxeton, oitines aiei kai to palai fainesthe pollous eleytherusantes anthrupun. piezeymenoisi mentoi ymin synaxthometha, kai oti karpun esterethete dixun ede kai oti oikofthoresthe xronon ede pollon. [4] anti toutun de ymin Lakedaimonioi te kai oi summaxoi epaggellontai gynaikas te kai ta es polemon axresta oiketeun exomena panta epithrepsein, est' an o polemos ode synestekei. mede ymeas Alexandros o Makedun anagnusei, leenas ton Mardonioy logon. [5] toutui men gar tauta poietea esti. turannos gar eun tyrannui sygkatergazetai. ymin de oy poietea, ei per ey tygxanete froneontes, epistamenoisi us barbaroisi esti oyte piston oyte alethes oyden.>> tauta elexan oi aggeloi.   
      143. and to Alexander the Athenians made answer thus: "Even of ourselves we know so much, that the Mede has a power many times as numerous as ours; so that there is no need for thee to cast this up against us. Nevertheless because we long for liberty we shall defend ourselves as we may be able: and do not thou endeavour to persuade us to make a treaty with the Barbarian, for we on our part shall not be persuaded. And now report to Mardonios that the Athenians say thus:--So long as the Sun goes on the same course by which he goes now, we will never make an agreement with Xerxes; but we will go forth to defend ourselves against him, trusting in the gods and the heroes as allies, for whom he had no respect when he set fire to their houses and to their sacred images. And in the future do not thou appear before the Athenians with any such proposals as these, nor think that thou art rendering them good service in advising them to do that which is not lawful; for we do not desire that thou shouldest suffer anything unpleasant at the hands of the Athenians, who art their public guest and friend."         143. [1] Athenaioi de pros men Alexandron ypekrinanto tade. <<kai aytoi touto ge epistametha oti pollaplesie esti tui Medui dunamis e per emin, uste oyden deei touto ge oneidizein. all' omus eleytheries glixomenoi amyneumetha oytu okus an kai dynumetha. omologeisai de tui barbarui mete su emeas peiru anapeithein oyte emeis peisometha. [2] nun te apaggelle Mardoniui us Athenaioi legoysi, est' an o elios ten ayten odon iei tei per kai nun erxetai, mekote omologesein emeas Xerxei. alla theoisi te symmaxoisi pisynoi min epeximen amynomenoi kai toisi erusi, tun ekeinos oydemian opin exun eneprese tous te oikoys kai ta agalmata. [3] su te tou loipou logoys exun toiousde me epifaineo Athenaioisi, mede dokeun xresta ypoyrgeein athemista erdein parainee. oy gar se boylometha oyden axari pros Athenaiun pathein eonta proxeinon te kai filon.>>   
      144. To Alexander they thus made answer, but to the envoys from Sparta as follows: "That the Lacedemonians should be afraid lest we should make a treaty with the Barbarian was natural no doubt; but it seems to be an unworthy fear for men who know so well the spirit of the Athenians, namely that there is neither so great quantity of gold anywhere upon the earth, nor any land so much excelling in beauty and goodness, that we should be willing to accept it and enslave Hellas by taking the side of the Medes. For many and great are the reasons which hinder us from doing this, even though we should desire it; first and greatest the images and houses of the gods set on fire or reduced to ruin, which we must necessarily avenge to the very utmost rather than make an agreement with him who did these deeds; then secondly there is the bond of Hellenic race, by which we are of one blood and of one speech, the common temples of the gods and the common sacrifices, the manners of life which are the same for all; to these it would not be well that the Athenians should become traitors. And be assured of this, if by any chance ye were not assured of it before, that so long as one of the Athenians remains alive, we will never make an agreement with Xerxes. We admire however the forethought which ye had with regard to us, in that ye took thought for us who have had our substance destroyed, and are willing to support the members of our households; and so far as ye are concerned, the kindness has been fully performed: but we shall continue to endure as we may, and not be a trouble in any way to you. Now therefore, with full conviction this is so, send out an army as speedily as ye may: for, as we conjecture, the Barbarian will be here invading our land at no far distant time but so soon as he shall be informed of the message sent, namely that we shall do none of those things which he desired of us. Therefore before he arrives here in Attica, it is fitting that ye come to our rescue quickly in Boeotia." Thus the Athenians made answer, and upon that the envoys went away back to Sparta.        144. [1] pros men Alexandron tauta ypekrinanto, pros de tous apo Spartes aggeloys tade. <<to men deisai Lakedaimonioys me omologesumen tui barbarui, karta anthrupeion En. atar aisxrus ge oikate exepistamenoi to Athenaiun fronema arrudeisai, oti oyte xrysos esti geis oydamothi tosoutos oyte xure kallei kai aretei mega yperferoysa, ta emeis dexamenoi etheloimen an medisantes katadoylusai ten Ellada. [2] polla te gar kai megala esti ta diakuluonta tauta me poieein med' en ethelumen, pruta men kai megista tun theun ta agalmata kai ta oikemata empepresmena te kai sygkexusmena, toisi emeas anagkaius exei timureein es ta megista mallon e per omologeein tui tauta ergasamenui, aytis de to Ellenikon eon omaimon te kai omoglusson kai theun idrumata te koina kai thysiai ethea te omotropa, tun prodotas genesthai Athenaioys oyk an ey exoi. [3] epistasthe te oytu, ei me proteron etygxanete epistamenoi, est' an kai eis periei Athenaiun, medama omologesontas emeas Xerxei. ymeun mentoi agametha ten pronoien ten pros emeas eousan, oti proeidete emeun oikofthoremenun oytu uste epithrepsai ethelein emeun tous oiketas. [4] kai ymin men e xaris ekpeplerutai, emeis mentoi liparesomen oytu okus an exumen, oyden lypeontes ymeas. nun de, us oytu exontun, stratien us taxista ekpempete. [5] us gar emeis eikazomen, oyk ekas xronoy parestai o barbaros esbalun es ten emeteren, all' epeidan taxista puthetai ten aggelien oti oyden poiesomen tun ekeinos emeun prosedeeto. prin un pareinai ekeinon es ten Attiken, emeas kairos esti proboetheisai es ten Boiutien.>> oi men tauta ypokrinamenun Athenaiun apallassonto es Sparten.
     
 

   
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope

     BOOK IX THE NINTH BOOK OF THE HISTORIES, CALLED CALLIOPE         
I s t o r i u n   I
 
K a l l i o p e   
      1. Mardonios, when Alexander had returned back and had signified to him that which was said by the Athenians, set forth from Thessaly and began to lead his army with all diligence towards Athens: and to whatever land he came, he took up with him the people of that land. The leaders of Thessaly meanwhile did not repent of all that which had been done already, but on the contrary they urged on the Persian yet much more; and Thorax of Larissa had joined in escorting Xerxes in his flight and at this time he openly offered Mardonios passage to invade Hellas.         1. [1] Mardonios de, us oi aponostesas Alexandros ta para Athenaiun esemene, ormetheis ek Thessalies Ege ten stratien spoydei epi tas Athenas. okoy de ekastote ginoito, toutoys parelambane. toisi de Thessalies egeomenoisi oyte ta pro tou pepregmena metemele oyden pollui te mallon epeigon ton Persen, kai symproepempse te Thurex o Lerisaios Xerxen feugonta kai tote ek tou fanerou pareike Mardonion epi ten Ellada.   
      2. Then when the army in its march came to Boeotia, the Thebans endeavoured to detain Mardonios, and counselled him saying that there was no region more convenient for him to have his encampment than that; and they urged him not to advance further, but to sit down there and endeavour to subdue to himself the whole of Hellas without fighting: for to overcome the Hellenes by open force when they were united, as at the former time they were of one accord together, was a difficult task even for the whole world combined, "but," they proceeded, "if thou wilt do that which we advise, with little labour thou wilt have in thy power all their plans of resistance. Send money to the men who have power in their cities, and thus sending thou wilt divide Hellas into two parties: after that thou wilt with ease subdue by the help of thy party those who are not inclined to thy side."         2. [1] epei de poreyomenos ginetai o stratos en Boiutoisi, oi Thebaioi katelambanon ton Mardonion kai synebouleyon aytui legontes us oyk eie xuros epitedeoteros enstratopedeuesthai ekeinoy, oyde eun ienai ekasteru, all' aytou izomenon poieein okus amaxeti ten pasan Ellada katastrepsetai. [2] kata men gar to isxyron Ellenas omofroneontas, oi per kai paros tayta eginuskon, xalepa einai periginesthai kai apasi anthrupoisi. <<ei de poieseis ta emeis paraineomen,>> efasan legontes, <<exeis aponus panta ta ekeinun isxyra boyleumata. [3] pempe xremata es tous dynasteuontas andras en teisi polisi, pempun de ten Ellada diasteseis. entheuten de tous me ta sa froneontas rheidius meta tun stasiuteun katastrepseai.>>   
      3. Thus they advised, but he did not follow their counsel; for there had instilled itself into him a great desire to take Athens for the second time, partly from obstinacy and partly because he meant to signify to the king in Sardis that he was in possession of Athens by beacon-fires through the islands. However he did not even at this time find the Athenians there when he came to Attica; but he was informed that the greater number were either in Salamis or in the ships, and he captured the city finding it deserted. Now the capture of the city by the king had taken place ten months before the later expedition of Mardonios against it.         3. [1] oi men tauta synebouleyon, o de oyk epeitheto, alla oi deinos enestakto imeros tas Athenas deutera elein, ama men yp' agnumosunes, ama de pyrsoisi dia nesun edokee basilei delusein eonti en Sardisi oti exoi Athenas. [2] os oyde tote apikomenos es ten Attiken eyre tous Athenaioys, all' en te Salamini tous pleistoys epynthaneto einai en te teisi neysi, aireei te eremon to asty. e de basileos airesis es ten ysteren ten Mardonioy epistrateien dekamenos egeneto.   
      4. When Mardonios had come to Athens, he sent to Salamis Morychides a man of the Hellespont, bearing the same proposals as Alexander the Macedonian had brought over to the Athenians. These he sent for the second time, being aware beforehand that the dispositions of the Athenians were not friendly, but hoping that they would give way and leave their obstinacy, since the Attic land had been captured by the enemy and was in his power.         4. [1] epei de en Atheneisi egeneto o Mardonios, pempei es Salamina Moyryxiden andra Ellespontion feronta tous aytous logoys tous kai Alexandros o Makedun toisi Athenaioisi dieporthmeyse. [2] tauta de to deuteron apestelle proexun men tun Athenaiun oy filias gnumas, elpizun de sfeas ypesein teis agnumosunes, us dorialutoy eouses teis Attikeis xures kai eouses yp' euytui. toutun men eineka apepempse Moyryxiden es Salamina.   
      5. For this reason he sent Morychides to Salamis; and he came before the Council and reported the words of Mardonios. Then one of the Councillors, Lykidas, expressed the opinion that it was better to receive the proposal which Morychides brought before them and refer it to the assembly of the people. He, I say, uttered this opinion, whether because he had received money from Mardonios, or because this was his own inclination: however the Athenians forthwith, both those of the Council and those outside, when they heard of it, were very indignant, and they came about Lykidas and stoned him to death; but the Hellespontian Morychides they dismissed unhurt. Then when there had arisen much uproar in Salamis about Lykidas, the women of the Athenians heard of that which was being done, and one woman passing the word to another and one taking another with her, they went of their own accord to the house of Lykidas and stoned his wife and his children to death.         5. [1] o de apikomenos epi ten boylen elege ta para Mardonioy. tun de boyleyteun Lykides eipe gnumen us edokee ameinon einai dexamenoys ton logon, ton sfi Moyryxides proferei, exeneikai es ton deimon. [2] o men de tauten ten gnumen apefaineto, eite de dedegmenos xremata para Mardonioy, eite kai tauta oi eandane. Athenaioi de aytika deinon poiesamenoi oi te ek teis boyleis kai oi exuthen us eputhonto, peristantes Lykiden kateleysan ballontes, ton de Ellespontion Moyryxiden apepempsan asinea. [3] genomenoy de thoruboy en tei Salamini peri ton Lykiden, pynthanontai to ginomenon ai gynaikes tun Athenaiun, diakeleysamene de gyne gynaiki kai paralabousa epi ten Lykideu oikien eisan aytokelees, kai kata men eleysan aytou ten gynaika kata de ta tekna.   
      6. The Athenians had passed over to Salamis as follows:--So long as they were looking that an army should come from the Peloponnese to help them, they remained in Attica; but as those in Peloponnesus acted very slowly and with much delay, while the invader was said to be already in Boeotia, they accordingly removed everything out of danger, and themselves passed over to Salamis; and at the same time they sent envoys to Lacedemon to reproach the Lacedemonians for having permitted the Barbarian to invade Attica and for not having gone to Boeotia to meet him in company with them, and also to remind them how many things the Persian had promised to give the Athenians if they changed sides; bidding the envoys warn them that if they did not help the Athenians, the Athenians would find some shelter for themselves.         6. [1] es de ten Salamina diebesan oi Athenaioi ude. eus men prosedekonto ek teis Peloponnesoy straton exein timuresonta sfi, oi de emenon en tei Attikei. epei de oi men makrotera kai sxolaitera epoieon, o de epiun kai de en tei Boiutiei elegeto einai, oytu de ypexekomisanto te panta kai aytoi diebesan es Salamina, es Lakedaimona te epempon aggeloys ama men mempsomenoys toisi Lakedaimonioisi oti perieidon embalonta ton barbaron es ten Attiken all' oy meta sfeun entiasan es ten Boiutien, ama de ypomnesontas osa sfi ypesxeto o Perses metabalousi dusein, proeipai te oti ei me amyneusi Athenaioisi, us kai aytoi tina aleuren eyresontai.   
      7. For the Lacedemonians in fact were keeping a feast during this time, and celebrating the Hyakinthia; and they held it of the greatest consequence to provide for the things which concerned the god, while at the same time their wall which they had been building at the Isthmus was just at this moment being completed with battlements. And when the envoys from the Athenians came to Lacedemon, bringing with them also envoys from Megara and Plataia, they came in before the Ephors and said as follows:         7. [1] oi gar de Lakedaimonioi ortazon te touton ton xronon kai sfi En Yakinthia, peri pleistoy d' Egon ta tou theou porsunein. ama de to teixos sfi, to en tui Isthmui eteixeon, kai ede epalxis elambane. us de apikonto es ten Lakedaimona oi aggeloi oi ap' Atheneun, ama agomenoi ek te Megarun aggeloys kai ek Plataieun, elegon tade epelthontes epi tous eforoys.   
      7. (a) "The Athenians sent us saying that the king of the Medes not only offers to give us back our land, but also desires to make us his allies on fair and equal terms without deceit or treachery, and is desirous moreover to give us another land in addition to our own, whichsoever we shall ourselves choose. We however, having respect for Zeus of the Hellenes and disdaining to be traitors to Hellas, did not agree but refused, although we were unjustly dealt with by the other Hellenes and left to destruction, and although we knew that it was more profitable to make a treaty with the Persian than to carry on war: nor shall we make a treaty at any future time, if we have our own will. Thus sincerely is our duty done towards the Hellenes:         7. a [1] <<epempsan emeas Athenaioi legontes oti emin basileus o Medun touto men ten xuren apodidoi, touto de symmaxoys ethelei ep' isei te kai omoiei poiesasthai aney te doloy kai apates, ethelei de kai allen xuren pros tei emeterei didonai, ten an aytoi elumetha. [2] emeis de Dia te Ellenion aidesthentes kai ten Ellada deinon poieumenoi prodounai oy katainesamen all' apeipametha, kaiper adikeomenoi yp' Ellenun kai kataprodidomenoi, epistamenoi te oti kerdaleuteron esti omologeein tui Persei mallon e per polemeein. oy men oyde omologesomen ekontes einai. kai to men ap' emeun oytu akibdelon nemetai epi tous Ellenas.   
      7. (b) but as for you, after having come then to great dread lest we should make a treaty with the Persian, so soon as ye learnt certainly what our spirit was, namely that we should never betray Hellas, and because your wall across the Isthmus is all but finished, now ye make no account of the Athenians, but having agreed with us to come to Boeotia to oppose the Persian, ye have now deserted us, and ye permitted the Barbarian moreover to make invasion of Attica. For the present then the Athenians have anger against you, for ye did not do as was fitting to be done: and now they bid you with all speed send out an army together with us, in order that we may receive the Barbarian in the land of Attica; for since we failed of Boeotia, the most suitable place to fight in our land is the Thriasian plain."         7. b [1] ymeis de es pasan arrudien tote apikomenoi me omologesumen tui Persei, epeite exemathete to emeteron fronema safeus, oti oydama produsomen ten Ellada, kai dioti teixos ymin dia tou Isthmou elaynomenon en telei esti, kai de logon oydena tun Athenaiun poieesthe, synthemenoi te emin ton Persen antiusesthai es ten Boiutien prodedukate, perieidete te proesbalonta es ten Attiken ton barbaron. [2] es men nyn to pareon Athenaioi ymin menioysi. oy gar epoiesate epitedeus. nun de oti taxos stratien ama emin ekeleysan ymeas ekpempein, us an ton barbaron dekumetha en tei Attikei. epeide gar emartomen teis Boiuties, teis ge emeteres epitedeotaton esti maxesasthai to Thriasion pedion.>>   
      8. When the Ephors heard this they deferred their reply to the next day, and then on the next day to the succeeding one; and this they did even for ten days, deferring the matter from day to day, while during this time the whole body of the Peloponnesians were building the wall over the Isthmus with great diligence and were just about to complete it. Now I am not able to say why, when Alexander the Macedonian had come to Athens, they were so very anxious lest the Athenians should take the side of the Medes, whereas now they had no care about it, except indeed that their wall over the Isthmus had now been built, and they thought they had no need of the Athenians any more; whereas when Alexander came to Attica the wall had not yet been completed, but they were working at it in great dread of the Persians.         8. [1] us de ara ekoysan oi eforoi tauta, aneballonto es ten ysteraien ypokrinasthai, tei de ysteraiei es ten eteren. touto kai epi deka emeras epoieon, ex emeres es emeren anaballomenoi. en de toutui tui xronui ton Isthmon eteixeon spoyden exontes pollen pantes Peloponnesioi, [2] kai sfi En pros telei. oyd' exu eipein to aition dioti apikomenoy men Alexandroy tou Makedonos es Athenas spoyden megalen epoiesanto me medisai Athenaioys, tote de uren epoiesanto oydemian, allo ge e oti o Isthmos sfi eteteixisto kai edokeon Athenaiun eti deisthai oyden. ote de Alexandros apiketo es ten Attiken, oyku apeteteixisto, ergazonto de megalus katarrudekotes tous Persas.   
      9. At last however the answer was given and the going forth of the Spartans took place in the following manner:--on the day before that which was appointed for the last hearing of the envoys, Chileos a man of Tegea, who of all strangers had most influence in Lacedemon, heard from the Ephors all that which the Athenians were saying; and he, it seems, said to them these words: "Thus the matter stands, Ephors:--if the Athenians are not friendly with us but are allies of the Barbarian, then though a strong wall may have been built across the Isthmus, yet a wide door has been opened for the Persian into Peloponnesus. Listen to their request, however, before the Athenians resolve upon something else tending to the fall of Hellas."         9. [1] telos de teis te ypokrisios kai exodoy tun Spartieteun egeneto tropos toiosde. tei proteraiei teis ystates katastasios mellouses esesthai Khileos aner Tegeetes, dynamenos en Lakedaimoni megiston xeinun, tun eforun eputheto panta logon ton de oi Athenaioi elegon. akousas de o Khileos elege ara sfi tade. [2] <<oytu exei, andres eforoi. Athenaiun emin eontun me arthmiun tui de barbarui symmaxun, kaiper teixeos dia tou Isthmou elelamenoy karterou, megalai klisiades anapepteatai es ten Peloponneson tui Persei. all' esakousate, prin ti allo Athenaioisi doxai sfalma feron tei Elladi.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [10]

     10. Thus he counselled them, and they forthwith took his words to heart; and saying nothing to the envoys who had come from the cities, while yet it was night they sent out five thousand Spartans, with no less than seven of the Helots set to attend upon each man of them, appointing Pausanias the son of Cleombrotos to lead them forth. Now the leadership belonged to Pleistarchos the son of Leonidas; but he was yet a boy, and the other was his guardian and cousin: for Cleombrotos, the father of Pausanias and son of Anaxandrides, was no longer alive, but when he had led home from the Isthmus the army which had built the wall, no long time after this he died. Now the reason why Cleombrotos led home the army from the Isthmus was this:--as he was offering sacrifice for fighting against the Persian, the sun was darkened in the heaven. And Pausanias chose as commander in addition to himself Euryanax the son of Dorieos, a man of the same house.         10. [1] o men sfi tauta synebouleye. oi de freni labontes ton logon aytika, frasantes oyden toisi aggeloisi toisi apigmenoisi apo tun poliun, nyktos eti ekpempoysi pentakisxilioys Spartieteun kai epta peri ekaston taxantes tun eilutun, Paysaniei tui Kleombrotoy epitaxantes exagein. [2] egineto men e egemonie Pleistarxoy tou Leunideu. all' o men En eti pais, o de toutoy epitropos te kai anepsios. Kleombrotos gar o Paysanieu men pater Anaxandrideu de pais oyketi periein, all' apagagun ek tou Isthmou ten stratien ten to teixos deimasan meta tauta oy pollon xronon tina bious apethane. [3] apeige de ten stratien o Kleombrotos ek tou Isthmou dia tode. thyomenui oi epi tui Persei o elios amayruthe en tui oyranui. prosaireetai de euytui Paysanies Eyryanakta ton Durieos, andra oikies eonta teis ayteis. oi men de sun Paysaniei exeleluthesan exu Spartes.   
      11. So Pausanias with his army had gone forth out of Sparta; and the envoys, when day had come, not knowing anything of this going forth, came in before the Ephors meaning to depart also, each to his own State: and when they had come in before them they said these words: "Ye, O Lacedemonians, are remaining here and celebrating this Hyakinthia and disporting yourselves, having left your allies to destruction; and the Athenians being wronged by you and for want of allies will make peace with the Persians on such terms as they can: and having made peace, evidently we become allies of the king, and therefore we shall join with him in expeditions against any land to which the Persians may lead us; and ye will learn then what shall be the issue for you of this matter." When the envoys spoke these words, the Ephors said and confirmed it with an oath, that they supposed by this time the men were at Orestheion on their way against the strangers: for they used to call the Barbarians "strangers." So they, not knowing of the matter, asked the meaning of these words, and asking they learnt all the truth; so that they were struck with amazement and set forth as quickly as possible in pursuit; and together with them five thousand chosen hoplites of the Lacedemonian "dwellers in the country round" did the same thing also.         11. [1] oi de aggeloi, us emere egegonee, oyden eidotes peri teis exodoy epeilthon epi tous eforoys, en noui de exontes apallassesthai kai aytoi epi ten euytou ekastos. epelthontes de elegon tade. <<ymeis men, u Lakedaimonioi aytou teide menontes Yakinthia te agete kai paizete, kataprodontes tous symmaxoys. Athenaioi de us adikeomenoi ypo ymeun xetei te symmaxun katalusontai tui Persei oytu okus an dununtai. [2] katalysamenoi de, deila gar oti summaxoi basileos ginometha, systrateysometha ep' en an ekeinoi exegeuntai. ymeis de to entheuten mathesesthe okoion an ti ymin ex aytou ekbainei.>> tauta legontun tun aggelun, oi eforoi eipan ep' orkoy kai de dokeein einai en Orestheiui steixontas epi tous xeinoys. xeinoys gar ekaleon tous barbaroys. [3] oi de us oyk eidotes epeirutun to legomenon, epeiromenoi de exemathon pan to eon, uste en thumati genomenoi eporeuonto ten taxisten diukontes. sun de sfi tun perioikun Lakedaimoniun logades pentakisxilioi oplitai tuyto touto epoieon.   
      12. They then, I say, were hastening towards the Isthmus; and the Argives so soon as they heard that Pausanias with his army had gone forth from Sparta, sent as a herald to Attica the best whom they could find of the long-distance runners, because they had before of their own motion engaged for Mardonios that they would stop the Spartans from going forth: and the herald when he came to Athens spoke as follows: "Mardonios, the Argives sent me to tell thee that the young men have gone forth from Lacedemon, and that the Argives are not able to stop them from going forth: with regard to this therefore may it be thy fortune to take measures well."         12. [1] oi men de es ton Isthmon epeigonto. Argeioi de epeite taxista eputhonto tous meta Paysanieu exelelythotas ek Spartes, pempoysi keryka tun emerodromun aneyrontes ton ariston es ten Attiken, proteron aytoi Mardoniui ypodexamenoi sxesein ton Spartieten me exienai. [2] os epeite apiketo es tas Athenas elege tade. <<Mardonie, epempsan me Argeioi frasonta toi oti ek Lakedaimonos exelelythe e neotes, kai us oy dynatoi ayten exein eisi Argeioi me oyk exienai. pros tauta tugxane ey boyleyomenos.>>   
      13. He having spoken thus departed and went back; and Mardonios was by no means anxious any more to remain in Attica when he heard this message. Before he was informed of this he had been waiting, because he desired to know the news from the Athenians as to what they were about to do; and he had not been injuring or laying waste the land of Attica, because he hoped always that they would make a treaty with him; but as he did not persuade them, being now informed of everything he began to retire out of the country before the force of Pausanias arrived at the Isthmus, having first set fire to Athens and cast down and destroyed whatever was left standing of the walls, houses or temples. Now he marched away for this cause, namely first because Attica was not a land where horsemen could act freely, and also because, if he should be defeated in a battle in Attica, there was no way of retreat except by a narrow pass, so that a few men could stop them. He intended therefore to retreat to Thebes, and engage battle near to a friendly city and to a country where horsemen could act freely.         13. [1] o men de eipas tauta apallasseto opisu, Mardonios de oydamus eti prothymos En menein en tei Attikei, us ekoyse tauta. prin men nyn e pythesthai anekuxeye, thelun eidenai to par' Athenaiun, okoion ti poiesoysi, kai oyte epemaine oyte esineto gein ten Attiken, elpizun dia pantos tou xronoy omologesein sfeas. [2] epei de oyk epeithe, pythomenos panta logon, prin e tous meta Paysanieu es ton Isthmon esbalein, ypexexuree empresas te tas Athenas, kai ei kou ti orthon En tun teixeun e tun oikematun e tun irun, panta katabalun kai sygxusas. [3] exelayne de tunde eineken, oti oyte ippasime e xure En e Attike, ei te nikuito symbalun, apallaxis oyk En oti me kata steinon, uste oligoys sfeas anthrupoys isxein. eboyleueto un epanaxuresas es tas Thebas symbalein pros poli te filiei kai xurei ippasimui.   
      14. Mardonios then was retiring out of the way, and when he was already upon a road a message came to him saying that another body of troops in advance of the rest had come to Megara, consisting of a thousand Lacedemonians. Being thus informed he took counsel with himself, desiring if possible first to capture these. Therefore he turned back and proceeded to lead his army towards Megara, and the cavalry going in advance of the rest overran the Megaran land: this was the furthest land in Europe towards the sun-setting to which this Persian army came.         14. [1] Mardonios men de ypexexuree, ede de en tei odui eonti aytui Elthe aggelie prodromon allen stratien ekein es Megara, Lakedaimoniun xilioys. pythomenos de tauta eboyleueto thelun ei kus toutoys pruton eloi. ypostrepsas de ten stratien Ege epi ta Megara. e de ippos proelthousa katippasato xuren ten Megarida. es tauten de ekastatu teis Eyrupes to pros elioy dunontos e Persike ayte stratie apiketo.   
      15. After this a message came to Mardonios that the Hellenes were assembled at the Isthmus; therefore he marched back by Dekeleia, for the chiefs of Boeotia had sent for those of the Asopians who dwelt near the line of march, and these were his guides along the road to Sphendaleis and thence to Tanagra. So having encamped for the night at Tanagra and on the next day having directed his march to Scolos, he was within the land of the Thebans. Then he proceeded to cut down the trees in the lands of the Thebans, although they were on the side of the Medes, moved not at all by enmity to them, but pressed by urgent necessity both to make a defence for his camp, and also he was making it for a refuge, in case that when he engaged battle things should not turn out for him as he desired. Now the encampment of his army extended from Erythrai along by Hysiai and reached the river Asopos: he was not however making the wall to extend so far as this, but with each face measuring somewhere about ten furlongs.         15. [1] meta de tauta Mardoniui Elthe aggelie us alees eiesan oi Ellenes en tui Isthmui. oytu de opisu eporeueto dia Dekelees. oi gar boiutarxai metepempsanto tous prosxuroys tun Asupiun, oytoi de aytui ten odon egeonto es Sfendaleas, entheuten de es Tanagran. [2] en Tanagrei de nukta enaylisamenos, kai trapomenos tei ysteraiei es Skulon en gei tei Thebaiun En. enthauta de tun Thebaiun kaiper medizontun ekeire tous xuroys, oyti kata exthos aytun all' yp' anagkaies megales exomenos eryma te tui stratui poiesasthai, kai en symbalonti oi me ekbainei okoion ti etheloi, kresfugeton touto epoieeto. [3] pareike de aytou to stratopedon arxamenon apo Erythreun para Ysias, kateteine de es ten Plataiida gein, para ton Asupon potamon tetagmenon. oy mentoi to ge teixos tosouto epoieeto, all' us epi deka stadioys malista kei metupon ekaston. [4] exontun de ton ponon touton tun barbarun, Attaginos o Frununos aner Thebaios paraskeyasamenos megalus ekalee epi xeinia ayton te Mardonion kai pentekonta Perseun tous logimutatoys, klethentes de oytoi eiponto. En de to deipnon poieumenon en Thebeisi.   
      16. While the Barbarians were engaged upon this work, Attaginos the son of Phyrnon, a Theban, having made magnificent preparations invited to an entertainment Mardonios himself and fifty of the Persians who were of most account; and these being invited came; and the dinner was given at Thebes. Now this which follows I heard from Thersander, an Orchomenian and a man of very high repute in Orchomenos. This Thersander said that he too was invited by Attaginos to this dinner, and there were invited also fifty men of the Thebans, and their host did not place them to recline separately each nation by themselves, but a Persian and a Theban upon every couch. Then when dinner was over, as they were drinking pledges to one another, the Persian who shared a couch with him speaking in the Hellenic tongue asked him of what place he was, and he answered that he was of Orchomenos. The other said: "Since now thou hast become my table- companion and the sharer of my libation, I desire to leave behind with thee a memorial of my opinion, in order that thou thyself also mayest know beforehand and be able to take such counsels for thyself as may be profitable. Dost thou see these Persians who are feasting here, and the army which we left behind encamped upon the river? Of all these, when a little time has gone by, thou shalt see but very few surviving." While the Persian said these words he shed many tears, as Thersander reported; and he marvelling at his speech said to him: "Surely then it is right to tell Mardonios and to those of the Persians who after him are held in regard." He upon this said: "Friend, that which is destined to come from God, it is impossible for a man to avert; for no man is willing to follow counsel, even when one speaks that which is reasonable. And these things which I say many of us Persians know well; yet we go with the rest being bound in the bonds of necessity: and the most hateful grief of all human griefs is this, to have knowledge of the truth but no power over the event." These things I heard from Thersander of Orchomenos, and in addition to them this also, namely that he told them to various persons forthwith, before the battle took place at Plataia.         16. [1] tade de ede ta epiloipa ekoyon Thersandroy andros men Orxomenioy, logimoy de es ta pruta en Orxomenui. efe de o Thersandros kletheinai kai aytos ypo Attaginoy epi to deipnon touto, kletheinai de kai Thebaiun andras pentekonta, kai sfeun oy xuris ekateroys klinai, alla Persen te kai Thebaion en klinei ekastei. [2] us de apo deipnoy Esan, diapinontun ton Persen ton omoklinon Ellada glussan ienta eiresthai ayton opodapos esti, aytos de ypokrinasthai us eie Orxomenios. ton de eipein <<epei nun omotrapezos te moi kai omospondos egeneo, mnemosyna toi gnumes teis emeis katalipesthai thelu, ina kai proeidus aytos peri seuytou boyleuesthai exeis ta symferonta. [3] orais toutoys tous dainymenoys Persas kai ton straton ton elipomen epi tui potamui stratopedeyomenon. toutun pantun opseai oligoy tinos xronoy dielthontos oligoys tinas tous perigenomenoys.>> tauta ama te ton Persen legein kai metienai polla tun dakruun. [4] aytos de thumasas ton logon eipein pros ayton <<oykun Mardoniui te tauta xreon esti legein kai toisi met' ekeinon en ainei eousi Perseun;>> ton de meta tauta eipein <<xeine, o ti dei genesthai ek tou theou amexanon apotrepsai anthrupui. oyde gar pista legoysi ethelei peithesthai oydeis. [5] tauta de Perseun syxnoi epistamenoi epometha anagkaiei endedemenoi, exthiste de odune esti tun en anthrupoisi ayte, polla froneonta medenos krateein.>> tauta men Orxomenioy Thersandroy ekoyon, kai tade pros toutoisi, us aytos aytika legoi tauta pros anthrupoys proteron e genesthai en Plataieisi ten maxen.   
      17. Mardonios then being encamped in Boeotia, the rest of the Hellenes who lived in these parts and took the side of the Medes were all supplying troops and had joined in the invasion of Attica, but the Phokians alone had not joined in the invasion,--the Phokians, I say, for these too were now actively taking the side of the Medes, not of their own will however, but by compulsion. Not many days however after the arrival of Mardonios at Thebes, there came of them a thousand hoplites, and their leader was Harmokydes, the man who was of most repute among their citizens. When these too came to Thebes, Mardonios sent horsemen and bade the Phokians take up their position by themselves in the plain. After they had so done, forthwith the whole cavalry appeared; and upon this there went a rumour through the army of Hellenes which was with the Medes that the cavalry was about to shoot them down with javelins, and this same report went through the Phokians themselves also. Then their commander Harmokydes exhorted them, speaking as follows: "Phokians, it is manifest that these men are meaning to deliver us to a death which we may plainly foresee, because we have been falsely accused by the Thessalians, as I conjecture: now therefore it is right that every one of you prove himself a good man; for it is better to bring our lives to an end doing deeds of valour and defending ourselves, than to be destroyed by a dishonourable death offering ourselves for the slaughter. Let each man of them learn that they are Barbarians and that we, against whom they contrived murder, are Hellenes."         17. [1] Mardonioy de en tei Boiutiei stratopedeyomenoy oi men alloi pareixonto apantes stratien kai synesebalon es Athenas, osoi per emedizon Ellenun tun tautei oikemenun, mounoi de Fukees oy synesebalon (emedizon gar de sfodra kai oytoi ) oyk ekontes all' yp' anagkaies. [2] emereisi de oy polleisi meta ten apixin ten es Thebas ysteron Elthon aytun oplitai xilioi, Ege de aytous Armokudes aner tun astun dokimutatos. epei de apikato kai oytoi es Thebas, pempsas o Mardonios ippeas ekeleyse sfeas ep' euytun en tui pediui izesthai. [3] epei de epoiesan tauta, aytika parein ippos e apasa. meta de tauta diexeilthe men dia tou stratopedoy tou Ellenikou tou meta Medun eontos feme us katakontiei sfeas, diexeilthe de di' aytun Fukeun tuyto touto. [4] entha de sfi o strategos Armokudes parainee legun toiade. <<u Fukees, prodela gar oti emeas oytoi oi anthrupoi melloysi prooptui thanatui dusein, diabeblemenoys ypo Thessalun, us egu eikazu. nun andra panta tina ymeun xreon esti genesthai agathon. kresson gar poieuntas ti kai amynomenoys teleyteisai ton aiuna e per parexontas diafthareinai aisxistui morui. alla mathetu tis aytun oti eontes barbaroi ep' Ellesi andrasi fonon errapsan.>>   
      18. While he was thus exhorting them, the horsemen having encompassed them round were riding towards them as if to destroy them; and they were already aiming their missiles as if about to discharge them, nay some perhaps did discharge them: and meanwhile the Phokians stood facing them gathered together and with their ranks closed as much as possible every way. Then the horsemen turned and rode away back. Now I am not able to say for certain whether they came to destroy the Phokians at the request of the Thessalians, and then when they saw them turn to defence they feared lest they also might suffer some loss, and therefore rode away back, for so Mardonios had commanded them; or whether on the other hand he desired to make trial of them and to see if they had in them any warlike spirit. Then, when the horsemen had ridden away back, Mardonios sent a herald and spoke to them as follows: "Be of good courage, Phokians, for ye proved yourselves good men, and not as I was informed. Now therefore carry on this way with zeal, for ye will not surpass in benefits either myself or the king." Thus far it happened as regards the Phokians.         18. [1] o men tauta parainee. oi de ippees epei sfeas ekyklusanto, epelaynon us apoleontes, kai de dieteinonto ta belea us apesontes, kai kou tis kai apeike. kai oi antioi estesan pantei systrepsantes euytous kai pyknusantes us malista. enthauta oi ippotai ypestrefon kai apelaynon opisu. [2] oyk exu d' atrekeus eipein oyte ei Elthon men apoleontes tous Fukeas deethentun Thessalun, epei de urun pros alexesin trapomenoys, deisantes me kai sfisi genetai trumata, oytu de apelaynon opisu. us gar sfi eneteilato Mardonios. oyt' ei aytun peiretheinai ethelese ei ti alkeis metexoysi. [3] us de opisu apelasan oi ippotai, pempsas Mardonios keryka elege tade. <<tharseete u Fukees. andres gar efanete eontes agathoi, oyk us egu epynthanomen. kai nun prothumus ferete ton polemon touton. eyergesieisi gar oy nikesete oyt' un eme oyte basilea.>> ta peri Fukeun men es tosouto egeneto.   
      19. When the Lacedemonians came to the Isthmus they encamped upon it, and hearing this the rest of the Peloponnesians who favoured the better cause, and some also because they saw the Spartans going out, did not think it right to be behind the Lacedemonians in their going forth. So from the Isthmus, when the sacrifices had proved favourable, they marched all together and came to Eleusis; and having performed sacrifices there also, when the signs were favourable they marched onwards, and the Athenians together with them, who had passed over from Salamis and had joined them at Eleusis. And then they had come to Erythrai in Boeotia, then they learnt that the Barbarians were encamping on the Asopos, and having perceived this they ranged themselves over against them on the lower slopes of Kithairon.         19. [1] Lakedaimonioi de us es ton Isthmon Elthon, en toutui estratopedeuonto. pynthanomenoi de tauta oi loipoi Peloponnesioi toisi ta ameinu eandane, oi de kai oruntes exiontas Spartietas, oyk edikaieyn leipesthai teis exodoy Lakedaimoniun. [2] ek de un tou Isthmou kallieresantun tun irun eporeuonto pantes kai apikneontai es Eleysina. poiesantes de kai enthauta ira, us sfi ekallieree, to prosu eporeuonto, Athenaioi de ama aytoisi, diabantes men ek Salaminos, symmigentes de en Eleysini. [3] us de ara apikonto teis Boiuties es Erythras, emathon te de tous barbaroys epi tui Asupui stratopedeyomenoys, frasthentes de touto antetassonto epi teis ypurees tou Kithairunos.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [20]

     20. Then Mardonios, as the Hellenes did not descend into the plain, sent towards them all his cavalry, of which the commander was Masistios (by the Hellenes called Makistios), a man of reputation among the Persians, who had a Nesaian horse with a bridle of gold and in other respects finely caparisoned. So when the horsemen had ridden up to the Hellenes they attacked them by squadrons, and attacking they did them much mischief, and moreover in contempt they called them women.         20. [1] Mardonios de, us oy katebainon oi Ellenes es to pedion, pempei es aytous pasan ten ippon, teis ipparxee Masistios eydokimeun para Perseisi, ton Ellenes Makistion kaleoysi, ippon exun Nesaion xrysoxalinon kai allus kekosmemenon kalus. enthauta us proselasan oi ippotai pros tous Ellenas, proseballon kata telea, prosballontes de kaka megala ergazonto kai gynaikas sfeas apekaleon.   
      21. Now it happened by chance that the Megarians were posted in the place which was the most assailable of the whole position and to which the cavalry could best approach: so as the cavalry were making their attacks, the Megarians being hard pressed sent a herald to the commanders of the Hellenes, and the herald having come spoke these words: "The Megarians say:--we, O allies, are not able by ourselves to sustain the attacks of the Persian cavalry, keeping this position where we took post at the first; nay, even hitherto by endurance and valour alone have we held out against them, hard pressed as we are: and now unless ye shall send some others to take up our position in succession to us, know that we shall leave the position in which we now are." The herald brought report to them thus; and upon this Pausanias made trial of the Hellenes, whether any others would voluntarily offer to go to this place and post themselves there in succession to the Megarians: and when the rest were not desirous to go, the Athenians undertook the task, and of the Athenians those three hundred picked men of whom Olympidoros the son of Lampon was captain.         21. [1] kata syntyxien de Megarees etyxon taxthentes tei te epimaxutaton En tou xurioy pantos, kai prosodos malista tautei egineto tei ippui. prosballouses un teis ippoy oi Megarees piezomenoi epempon epi tous strategous tun Ellenun keryka, apikomenos de o keiryx pros aytous elege tade. [2] <<Megarees legoysi. emeis, andres summaxoi, oy dynatoi eimen ten Perseun ippon dekesthai mounoi, exontes stasin tauten es ten estemen arxen. alla kai es tode lipariei te kai aretei antexomen kaiper piezomenoi. nun te ei me tinas alloys pempsete diadoxoys teis taxios, iste emeas ekleipsontas ten taxin.>> [3] o men de sfi tauta apeggelle, Paysanies de apopeirato tun Ellenun ei tines etheloien alloi ethelontai ienai te es ton xuron touton kai tassesthai diadoxoi Megareusi. oy boylomenun de tun allun Athenaioi ypedexanto kai Athenaiun oi triekosioi logades, tun eloxegee Olympioduros o Lampunos.   
      22. These they were who undertook the task and were posted at Erythrai in advance of the other Hellenes who ere there present, having chosen to go with them the bow-men also. For some time then they fought, and at last an end was set to the fighting in the following manner:--while the cavalry was attacking by squadrons, the horse of Masistios, going in advance of the rest, was struck in the side by an arrow, and feeling pain he reared upright and threw Masistios off; and when he had fallen, the Athenians forthwith pressed upon him; and his horse they took and himself, as he made resistance, they slew, though at first they could not, for his equipment was of this kind,--he wore a cuirass of gold scales underneath, and over the cuirass he had put on a crimson tunic. So as they struck upon the cuirass they could effect nothing, until some one, perceiving what the matter was, thrust into his eye. Then at length he fell and died; and by some means the other men of the cavalry had not observed this take place, for they neither saw him when he had fallen from his horse nor when he was being slain, and while the retreat and the turn were being made, they did not perceive that which was happening; but when they had stopped their horses, then at once they missed him, since there was no one to command them; and when they perceived what had happened, they passed the word to one another and all rode together, that they might if possible recover the body.         22. [1] oytoi Esan oi te ypodexamenoi kai oi pro tun allun tun pareontun Ellenun es Erythras taxthentes, tous toxotas proselomenoi. maxomenun de sfeun epi xronon telos toionde egeneto teis maxes. prosballouses teis ippoy kata telea, o Masistioy proexun tun allun ippos balletai toxeumati ta pleyra, algesas de istatai te orthos kai aposeietai ton Masistion. [2] pesonti de aytui oi Athenaioi aytika epekeato. ton te de ippon aytou lambanoysi kai ayton amynomenon kteinoysi, kat' arxas oy dynamenoi. eneskeuasto gar oytu. entos thureka eixe xruseon lepiduton, katuperthe de tou thurekos kithuna foinikeon enededukee. tuptontes de es ton thureka epoieyn oyden, prin ge de mathun tis to poieumenon paiei min es ton ofthalmon. oytu de epese te kai apethane. [3] tauta de kus ginomena elelethee tous alloys ippeas. oyte gar pesonta min eidon apo tou ippoy oyte apothneskonta, anaxuresios te ginomenes kai ypostrofeis oyk emathon to ginomenon. epeite de estesan, aytika epothesan, us sfeas oydeis En o tassun mathontes de to gegonos, diakeleysamenoi elaynon tous ippoys pantes, us an ton nekron aneloiato.   
      23. The Athenians upon that, seeing that the cavalry were riding to attack them no longer by squadrons but all together, shouted to the rest of the army to help them. Then while the whole number of those on foot were coming to their help, there arose a sharp fight for the body; and so long as the three hundred were alone they had much the worse and were about to abandon the body, but when the mass of the army came to their help, then the horsemen no longer sustained the fight, nor did they succeed in recovering the body; and besides him they lost others of their number also. Then they drew off about two furlongs away and deliberated what they should do; and it seemed good to them, as they had no commander, to ride back to Mardonios.         23. [1] idontes de oi Athenaioi oyketi kata telea proselaunontas tous ippeas alla pantas, ten allen stratien epebusanto. en ui de o pezos apas eboethee, en toutui maxe oxea peri tou nekrou ginetai. [2] eus men nyn mounoi Esan oi triekosioi, essounto te pollon kai ton nekron apeleipon. us de sfi to pleithos epeboethese, oytu de oyketi oi ippotai ypemenon oyde sfi exegeneto ton nekron anelesthai, alla pros ekeinui alloys prosapulesan tun ippeun. apostesantes un oson te duo stadia eboyleuonto o ti xreon eie poieein. edokee de sfi anarxies eouses apelaunein para Mardonion.   
      24. When the cavalry arrived at the camp, the whole army and also Mardonios made great mourning for Masistios, cutting off their own hair and that of their horses and baggage-animals and giving way to lamentation without stint; for all Boeotia was filled with the sound of it, because one had perished who after Mardonios was of the most account with the Persians and with the king.         24. [1] apikomenes de teis ippoy es to stratopedon penthos epoiesanto Masistioy pasa te e stratie kai Mardonios megiston, sfeas te aytous keirontes kai tous ippoys kai ta ypozugia oimugei te xreumenoi apletui. apasan gar ten Boiutien kateixe exu us andros apolomenoy meta ge Mardonion logimutatoy para te Perseisi kai basilei. oi men nyn barbaroi tropui tui sfeterui apothanonta etimun Masistion.   
      25. The Barbarians then were paying honours in their own manner to Masistios slain: but the Hellenes, when they had sustained the attack of the cavalry and having sustained it had driven them back, were much more encouraged; and first they put the dead body in a cart and conveyed it along their ranks; and the body was a sight worth seeing for its size and beauty, wherefore also the men left their places in the ranks and went one after the other to gaze upon Masistios. After this they resolved to come down further towards Plataia; for the region of Plataia was seen to be much more convenient for them to encamp in than that of Erythrai, both for other reasons and because it is better watered. To this region then and to the spring Gargaphia, which is in this region, they resolved that they must come, and encamp in their several posts. So they took up their arms and went by the lower slopes of Kithairon past Hysiai to the Plataian land; and having there arrived they posted themselves according to their several nations near the spring Gargaphia and the sacred enclosure of Androcrates the hero, over low hills or level ground.         25. [1] oi de Ellenes us ten ippon edexanto prosballoysan kai dexamenoi usanto, etharsesan te pollui mallon kai pruta men es amaxan esthentes ton nekron para tas taxis ekomizon. o de nekros En thees axios megatheos eineka kai kalleos, tun de eineka kai tauta epoieyn. ekleipontes tas taxis efoitun theesomenoi Masistion. [2] meta de edoxe sfi epikatabeinai es Plataias. o gar xuros efaineto pollui eun epitedeoteros sfi enstratopedeuesthai o Plataiikos tou Erythraioy ta te alla kai eyydroteros. es touton de ton xuron kai epi ten krenen ten Gargafien ten en tui xurui toutui eousan edoxe sfi xreon einai apikesthai kai diataxthentas stratopedeuesthai. [3] analabontes de ta opla eisan dia teis ypurees tou Kithairunos para Ysias es ten Plataiida gein, apikomenoi de etassonto kata ethnea plesion teis te krenes teis Gargafies kai tou temeneos tou Androkrateos tou eruos, dia oxthun te oyk ypselun kai apedoy xuroy.   
      26. Then in the arranging of the several posts there arose a contention of much argument between the Tegeans and the Athenians; for they each claimed to occupy the other wing of the army themselves, alleging deeds both new and old. The Tegeans on the one hand said as follows: "We have been always judged worthy of this post by the whole body of allies in all the common expeditions which the Peloponnesians have made before this, whether in old times or but lately, ever since that time when the sons of Heracles endeavoured after the death of Eurystheus to return to the Peloponnese. This honour we gained at that time by reason of the following event:--When with the Achaians and the Ionians who were then in Peloponnesus we had come out to the Isthmus to give assistance and were encamped opposite those who desired to return, then it is said that Hyllos made a speech saying that it was not right that the one army should risk its safety by engaging battle with the other, and urging that that man of the army of the Peloponnesians whom they should judge to be the best of them should fight in single combat with himself on terms concerted between them. The Peloponnesians then resolved that this should be done; and they made oath with one another on this condition,--that if Hyllos should conquer the leader of the Peloponnesians, then the sons of Heracles should return to their father's heritage; but he should be conquered, then on the other hand the sons of Heracles should depart and lead away their army, and not within a hundred years attempt to return to the Peloponnese. There was selected then of all the allies, he himself making a voluntary offer, Echemos the son of Aeropos, the son of Phegeus, who was our commander and king: and he fought a single combat and slew Hyllos. By reason of this deed we obtained among the Peloponnesians of that time, besides many other great privileges which we still possess, this also of always leading the other wing of the army, when a common expedition is made. To you, Lacedemonians, we make no opposition, but we give you freedom of choice, and allow you to command whichever wing ye desire; but of the other we say that it belongs to us to be the leaders as in former time: and apart from this deed which has been related, we are more worthy than the Athenians to have this post; for in many glorious contests have we contended against you, O Spartans, and in many also against others. Therefore it is just that we have the other wing rather than the Athenians; for they have not achieved deeds such as ours, either new or old."         26. [1] enthauta en tei diataxi egeneto logun pollun uthismos Tegeeteun te kai Athenaiun. edikaieyn gar aytoi ekateroi exein to eteron keras, kai kaina kai palaia paraferontes erga. touto men oi Tegeeitai elegon tade. [2] <<emeis aiei kote axieumetha tautes teis taxios ek tun symmaxun apantun, osai ede exodoi koinai egenonto Peloponnesioisi kai to palaion kai to neon, ex ekeinoy tou xronoy epeite Erakleidai epeirunto meta ton Eyrystheos thanaton kationtes es Peloponneson. [3] tote eyrometha touto dia preigma toionde. epei meta Axaiun kai Iunun tun tote eontun en Peloponnesui ekboethesantes es ton Isthmon izometha antioi toisi katiousi, tote un logos Yllon agoreusasthai us xreon eie ton men straton tui stratui me anakindyneuein symballonta, ek de tou Peloponnesioy stratopedoy ton an sfeun aytun krinusi einai ariston, touton oi moynomaxeisai epi diakeimenoisi. [4] edoxe te toisi Peloponnesioisi tauta einai poietea kai etamon orkion epi logui toiuide, en men Yllos nikesei ton Peloponnesiun egemona, katienai Erakleidas epi ta patruia, en de nikethei, ta empalin Erakleidas apallassesthai kai apagein ten stratien ekaton te eteun me zeteisai katodon es Peloponneson. [5] proskrithe te de ek pantun tun symmaxun ethelontes Exemos o Eeropoy tou Fegeos strategos te eun kai basileus emeteros, kai emoynomaxese te kai apekteine Yllon. ek toutoy tou ergoy eyrometha en Peloponnesioisi ge toisi tote kai alla gerea megala, ta diateleomen exontes, kai tou kereos tou eteroy aiei egemoneuein koineis exodoy ginomenes. [6] ymin men nyn u Lakedaimonioi oyk antieumetha, alla didontes airesin okoteroy boulesthe kereos arxein pariemen. tou de eteroy famen emeas ikneesthai egemoneuein kata per en tui prosthe xronui. xuris te toutoy tou apegemenoy ergoy axionikoteroi eimen Athenaiun tauten ten taxin exein. [7] polloi men gar kai ey exontes pros ymeas emin, andres Spartieitai, agunes agunidatai, polloi de kai pros alloys. oytu un dikaion emeas exein to eteron keras e per Athenaioys. oy gar sfi esti erga oia per emin katergasmena, oyt' un kaina oyte palaia.>>   
      27. Thus they spoke, and the Athenians replied as follows: "Though we know that this gathering was assembled for battle with the Barbarian and not for speech, yet since the Tegean has proposed to us as a task to speak of things both old and new, the deeds of merit namely which by each of our two nations have been achieved in all time, it is necessary for us to point out to you whence it comes that to us, who have been brave men always, it belongs as a heritage rather than to the Arcadians to have the chief place. First as to the sons of Heracles, whose leader they say that they slew at the Isthmus, these in the former time, when they were driven away by all the Hellenes to whom they came flying from slavery under those of Mykene, we alone received; and joining with them we subdued the insolence of Eurystheus. having conquered in fight those who then dwelt in Peloponnesus. Again when the Argives who with Polyneikes marched against Thebes, had been slain and were lying unburied, we declare that we marched an army against the Cadmeians and recovered the dead bodies and gave them burial in our own land at Eleusis. We have moreover another glorious deed performed against the Amazons who invaded once the Attic land, coming from the river Thermodon: and in the toils of Troy we were not inferior to any. But it is of no profit to make mention of these things; for on the one hand, though we were brave men in those times, we might now have become worthless, and on the other hand even though we were then worthless, yet now we might be better. Let it suffice therefore about ancient deeds; but if by us no other deed has been displayed (as many there have been and glorious, not less than by any other people of the Hellenes), yet even by reason of the deed wrought at Marathon alone we are worthy to have this privilege and others besides this, seeing that we alone of all the Hellenes fought in single combat with the Persian, and having undertaken so great a deed we overcame and conquered six-and-forty nations. Are we not worthy then to have this post by reason of that deed alone? However, since at such a time as this it is not fitting to contend for post, we are ready to follow your saying, O Lacedemonians, as to where ye think it most convenient that we should stand and opposite to whom; for wheresoever we are posted, we shall endeavour to be brave men. Prescribe to us therefore and we shall obey." They made answer thus; and the whole body of the Lacedemonians shouted aloud that the Athenians were more worthy to occupy the wing than the Arcadians. Thus the Athenians obtained the wing, and overcame the Tegeans.         27. [1] oi men tauta elegon, Athenaioi de pros tauta ypekrinanto tade. <<epistametha men sunodon tende maxes eineka syllegeinai pros ton barbaron, all' oy logun. epei de o Tegeetes proetheke palaia kai kaina legein ta ekateroisi en tui panti xronui katergastai xresta, anagkaius emin exei delusai pros ymeas othen emin patruion esti eousi xrestoisi aiei prutoisi einai mallon e Arkasi. [2] Erakleidas, tun oytoi fasi apokteinai ton egemona en Isthmui, touto men toutoys, proteron exelaynomenoys ypo pantun Ellenun es tous apikoiato feugontes doylosunen pros Mykenaiun, mounoi ypodexamenoi ten Eyrystheos ybrin kateilomen, sun ekeinoisi maxei nikesantes tous tote exontas Peloponneson. [3] touto de Argeioys tous meta Polyneikeos epi Thebas elasantas, teleytesantas ton aiuna kai atafoys keimenoys, strateysamenoi epi tous Kadmeioys anelesthai te tous nekrous famen kai thapsai teis emeteres en Eleysini. [4] esti de emin ergon ey exon kai es Amazonidas tas apo Thermudontos potamou esbalousas kote es gein ten Attiken, kai en toisi Truikoisi ponoisi oydamun eleipometha. all' oy gar ti proexei toutun epimemneisthai. kai gar an xrestoi tote eontes uytoi nun an eien flayroteroi, kai tote eontes flauroi nun an eien ameinones. [5] palaiun men nyn ergun alis estu. emin de ei meden allo esti apodedegmenon, usper esti polla te kai ey exonta ei teoisi kai alloisi Ellenun, alla kai apo tou en Marathuni ergoy axioi eimen touto to geras exein kai alla pros toutui, oitines mounoi Ellenun de moynomaxesantes tui Persei kai ergui tosoutui epixeiresantes periegenometha kai enikesamen ethnea ex te kai tesserakonta. [6] ar' oy dikaioi eimen exein tauten ten taxin apo toutoy mounoy tou ergoy; all' oy gar en tui toiuide taxios eineka stasiazein prepei, artioi eimen peithesthai ymin u Lakedaimonioi, ina dokeei epitedeotaton emeas einai estanai kai kat' oystinas. pantei gar tetagmenoi peiresometha einai xrestoi. exegeesthe de us peisomenun.>>   
      28. After this the Hellenes were ranged as follows, both those of them who came in continually afterwards and those who had come at the first. The right wing was held by ten thousand Lacedemonians; and of these the five thousand who were Spartans were attended by thirty-five thousand Helots serving as light-armed troops, seven of them appointed for each man. To stand next to themselves the Spartans chose the Tegeans, both to do them honour and also because of their valour; and of these there were one thousand five hundred hoplites. After these were stationed five thousand Corinthians, and they had obtained permission from Pausanias that the three hundred who were present of the men of Potidaia in Pallene should stand by their side. Next to these were stationed six hundred Arcadians of Orchomenos; and to these three thousand Sikyonians. Next after these were eight hundred Epidaurians: by the side of these were ranged a thousand Troizenians: next to the Troizenians two hundred Lepreates: next to these four hundred of the men of Mikene and Tiryns; and then a thousand Phliasians. By the side of these stood three hundred Hermionians; and next to the Hermionians were stationed six hundred Eretrians and Styrians; next to these four hundred Chalkidians; and to these five hundred men of Amprakia. After these stood eight hundred Leucadians and Anactorians; and next to them two hundred from Pale in Kephallenia. After these were ranged five hundred Eginetans; by their side three thousand Megarians; and next to these six hundred Plataians. Last, or if you will first, were ranged the Athenians, occupying the left wing, eight thousand in number, and the commander of them was Aristeides the son of Lysimachos.         28. [1] oi men tauta ameibonto, Lakedaimoniun de anebuse apan to stratopedon Athenaioys axionikoteroys einai exein to keras e per Arkadas. oytu de esxon oi Athenaioi kai yperebalonto tous Tegeetas. [2] meta de tauta etassonto ude oi epifoituntes te kai oi arxen elthontes Ellenun. to men dexion keras eixon Lakedaimoniun murioi. toutun de tous pentakisxilioys eontas Spartietas efulasson psiloi tun eilutun pentakisxilioi kai trismurioi, peri andra ekaston epta tetagmenoi. [3] prosexeas de sfisi eilonto estanai oi Spartieitai tous Tegeetas kai timeis eineka kai areteis. toutun d' Esan oplitai xilioi kai pentakosioi. meta de toutoys istanto Korinthiun pentakisxilioi, para de sfisi eyronto para Paysanieu estanai Potidaieteun tun ek Pallenes tous pareontas triekosioys. [4] toutun de exomenoi istanto Arkades Orxomenioi exakosioi, toutun de Sikyunioi trisxilioi. toutun de eixonto Epidayriun oktakosioi. para de toutoys Troizeniun etassonto xilioi, Troizeniun de exomenoi Lepreeteun diekosioi, toutun de Mykenaiun kai Tirynthiun tetrakosioi, toutun de exomenoi Fleiasioi xilioi. para de toutoys estesan Ermionees triekosioi. [5] Ermioneun de exomenoi istanto Eretrieun te kai Styreun exakosioi, toutun de Khalkidees tetrakosioi, toutun de Amprakieteun pentakosioi. meta de toutoys Leykadiun kai Anaktoriun oktakosioi estesan, toutun de exomenoi Palees oi ek Kefallenies diekosioi. [6] meta de toutoys Aigineteun pentakosioi etaxthesan. para de toutoys etassonto Megareun trisxilioi. eixonto de toutun Plataiees exakosioi. teleytaioi de kai prutoi Athenaioi etassonto, keras exontes to eyunymon, oktakisxilioi. estrategee d' aytun Aristeides o Lysimaxoy.   
      29. These all, excepting those who were appointed to attend the Spartans, seven for each man, were hoplites, being in number altogether three myriads eight thousand and seven hundred. This was the whole number of hoplites who were assembled against the Barbarian; and the number of the light-armed was as follows:--of the Spartan division thirty-five thousand men, reckoning at the rate of seven for each man, and of these every one was equipped for fighting; and the light-armed troops of the rest of the Lacedemonians and of the other Hellenes, being about one for each man, amounted to thirty-four thousand five hundred.         29. [1] oytoi, plen tun epta peri ekaston tetagmenun Spartieteisi, Esan oplitai, sumpantes eontes arithmon treis te myriades kai oktu xiliades kai ekatontades epta. oplitai men oi pantes syllegentes epi ton barbaron Esan tosoutoi, psilun de pleithos En tode, teis men Spartietikeis taxios pentakisxilioi kai trismurioi andres, us eontun epta peri ekaston andra, kai toutun pas tis parerteto us es polemon. [2] oi de tun loipun Lakedaimoniun kai Ellenun psiloi, us eis peri ekaston eun andra, pentakosioi kai tetrakisxilioi kai trismurioi Esan. psilun men de tun apantun tun maximun En to pleithos ex te myriades kai ennea xiliades kai ekatontades pente,   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [30]

     30. Of the light- armed fighting men the whole number then was six myriads nine thousand and five hundred; and of the whole Hellenic force which assembled at Plataia the number (including both the hoplites and the light-armed fighting men) was eleven myriads all but one thousand eight hundred men; and with the Thespians who were present the number of eleven myriads was fully made up; for there were present also in the army those of the Thespians who survived, being in number about one thousand eight hundred, and these too were without heavy arms. These then having been ranged in order were encamped on the river Asopos.         30. [1] tou de sumpantos tou Ellenikou tou synelthontos es Plataias sun te opliteisi kai psiloisi toisi maximoisi endeka myriades Esan, mieis xiliados, pros de oktakosiun andrun katadeoysai. sun de Thespieun toisi pareousi exeplerounto ai endeka myriades. pareisan gar kai Thespieun en tui stratopedui oi perieontes, arithmon es oktakosioys kai xilioys. opla de oyd' oytoi eixon.   
      31. Meanwhile the Barbarians with Mardonios, when they had sufficiently mourned for Masistios, being informed that the Hellenes were at Plataia came themselves also to that part of the Asopos which flows there; and having arrived there, they were ranged against the enemy by Mardonios thus:--against the Lacedemonians he stationed the Persians; and since the Persians were much superior in numbers, they were arrayed in deeper ranks than those, and notwithstanding this they extended in front of the Tegeans also: and he ranged them in this manner,--all the strongest part of that body he selected from the rest and stationed it opposite to the Lacedemonians, but the weaker part he ranged by their side opposite to the Tegeans. This he did on the information and suggestion of the Thebans. Then next to the Persians he ranged the Medes; and these extended in front of the Corinthians, Potidaians, Orchomenians and Sikyonians. Next to the Medes he ranged the Bactrians; and these extended in front of the Epidaurians, Troizenians, Lepreates, Tirynthians, Mykenians and Phliasians. After the Bactrians he stationed the Indians; and these extended in front of the Hermionians, Eretrians, Styrians and Chalkidians. Next to the Indians he ranged the Sacans, who extended in front of the men of Amprakia, the Anactorians, Leucadians, Palians and Eginetans. Next to the Sacans and opposite to the Athenians, Plataians and Megarians, he ranged the Boeotians, Locrians, Malians, Thessalians, and the thousand men of the Phokians: for not all the Phokians had taken the side of the Medes, but some of them were even supporting the cause of the Hellenes, being shut up in Parnassos; and setting out from thence they plundered from the army of Mardonios and from those of the Hellenes who were with him. He ranged the Macedonians also and those who dwell about the borders of Thessaly opposite to the Athenians.         31. [1] oytoi men nyn taxthentes epi tui Asupui estratopedeuonto. oi de amfi Mardonion barbaroi us apekedeysan Masistion, pareisan, pythomenoi tous Ellenas einai en Plataieisi, kai aytoi epi ton Asupon ton tautei rheonta. apikomenoi de antetassonto ude ypo Mardonioy. kata men Lakedaimonioys estese Persas. [2] kai de pollon gar perieisan plethei oi Persai, epi te taxis pleunas ekekosmeato kai epeixon tous Tegeetas. etaxe de oytu. o ti men En aytun dynatutaton pan apolexas estese antion Lakedaimoniun, to de asthenesteron paretaxe kata tous Tegeetas. tauta d' epoiee frazontun te kai didaskontun Thebaiun. [3] Perseun de exomenoys etaxe Medoys. oytoi de epesxon Korinthioys te kai Potidaietas kai Orxomenioys te kai Sikyunioys. Medun de exomenoys etaxe Baktrioys. oytoi de epesxon Epidayrioys te kai Troizenioys kai Lepreetas te kai Tirynthioys kai Mykenaioys te kai Fleiasioys. [4] meta de Baktrioys estese Indous. oytoi de epesxon Ermioneas te kai Eretrieas kai Styreas te kai Khalkideas. Indun de exomenoys Sakas etaxe, oi epesxon Amprakietas te kai Anaktorioys kai Leykadioys kai Paleas kai Aiginetas. [5] Sakeun de exomenoys etaxe antia Athenaiun te kai Plataieun kai Megareun Boiutous te kai Lokrous kai Melieas te kai Thessalous kai Fukeun tous xilioys. oy gar un apantes oi Fukees emedisan, alla tines aytun kai ta Ellenun eyxon peri ton Parnesson kateilemenoi, kai entheuten ormumenoi eferon te kai Egon ten te Mardonioy stratien kai tous met' aytou eontas Ellenun. etaxe de kai Makedonas te kai tous peri Thessalien oikemenoys kata tous Athenaioys.   
      32. These which have been named were the greatest of the nations who were arrayed in order by Mardonios, those, I mean, which were the most renowned and of greatest consideration: but there were in his army also men of several other nations mingled together, of the Phrygians, Thracians, Mysians, Paionians, and the rest; and among them also some Ethiopians, and of the Egyptians those called Hermotybians and Calasirians, carrying knives, who of all the Egyptians are the only warriors. These men, while he was yet at Phaleron, he had caused to disembark from the ships in which they served as fighting-men; for the Egyptians had not been appointed to serve in the land-army which came with Xerxes to Athens. Of the Barbarians then there were thirty myriads, as has been declared before; but of the Hellenes who were allies of Mardonios no man knows what the number was, for they were not numbered; but by conjecture I judge that these were assembled to the number of five myriads. These who were placed in array side by side were on foot; and the cavalry was ranged apart from them in a separate body.         32. [1] tauta men tun ethneun ta megista unomastai tun ypo Mardonioy taxthentun, ta per epifanestata te En kai logoy pleistoy. eneisan de kai allun ethneun andres anamemigmenoi, Frygun te kai Threikun kai Mysun te kai Paionun kai tun allun, en de kai Aithiopun te kai Aigyptiun oi te Ermotubies kai oi Kalasiries kaleomenoi maxairoforoi, oi per eisi Aigyptiun mounoi maximoi. [2] toutoys de eti en Falerui eun apo tun neun apebibasato eontas epibatas. oy gar etaxthesan es ton pezon ton ama Xerxei apikomenon es Athenas Aiguptioi. tun men de barbarun Esan triekonta myriades, us kai proteron dedelutai. tun de Ellenun tun Mardonioy symmaxun oide men oydeis arithmon. oy gar un erithmethesan. us de epeikasai, es pente myriadas syllegeinai eikazu. oytoi oi parataxthentes pezoi Esan, e de ippos xuris etetakto.   
      33. When all had been drawn up by nations and by divisions, then on the next day they offered sacrifice on both sides. For the Hellenes Tisamenos the son of Antiochos was he who offered sacrifice, for he it was who accompanied this army as diviner. This man the Lacedemonians had made to be one of their own people, being an Eleian and of the race of the Iamidai: for when Tisamenos was seeking divination at Delphi concerning issue, the Pythian prophetess made answer to him that he should win five of the greatest contests. He accordingly, missing the meaning of the oracle, began to attend to athletic games, supposing that he should win contests of athletics; and he practised for the "five contests" and came within one fall of winning a victory at the Olympic games, being set to contend with Hieronymos of Andros. The Lacedemonians however perceived that the oracle given to Tisamenos had reference not to athletic but to martial contests, and they endeavoured to persuade Tisamenos by payment of money, and to make him a leader in their wars together with the kings of the race of Heracles. He then, seeing that the Spartans set much store on gaining him over as a friend, having perceived this, I say, he raised his price and signified to them that he would do as they desired, if they would make him a citizen of their State and give him full rights, but for no other payment. The Spartans at first when they heard this displayed indignation and altogether gave up their request, but at last, when great terror was hanging over them of this Persian armament, they gave way and consented. He then perceiving that they had changed their minds, said that he could not now be satisfied even so, nor with these terms alone; but it was necessary that his brother Hegias also should be made a Spartan citizen on the same terms as he himself became one.         33. [1] us de ara pantes oi etetaxato kata ethnea kai kata telea, enthauta tei deyterei ethuonto kai amfoteroi. Ellesi men Tisamenos Antioxoy En o thyomenos. oytos gar de eipeto tui strateumati toutui mantis. ton eonta Eleion kai geneos tou Iamideun [Klytiaden] Lakedaimonioi epoiesanto leusfeteron. [2] Tisamenui gar manteyomenui en Delfoisi peri gonoy aneile e Pythie agunas tous megistoys anairesesthai pente. o men de amartun tou xresterioy proseixe gymnasioisi us anairesomenos gymnikous agunas, askeun de pentaethlon para en palaisma edrame nikan Olympiada, Ierunumui tui Andriui elthun es erin. [3] Lakedaimonioi de mathontes oyk es gymnikous all' es areioys agunas feron to Tisamenou manteion, misthui epeirunto peisantes Tisamenon poieesthai ama Erakleideun toisi basileusi egemona tun polemun. [4] o de oreun peri pollou poieymenoys Spartietas filon ayton prosthesthai, mathun touto anetima, semainun sfi us en min polieten sfeteron poiesuntai tun pantun metadidontes, poiesei tauta, ep' allui misthui d' oy. [5] Spartieitai de pruta men akousantes deina epoieunto kai metiesan teis xresmosunes to parapan, telos de deimatos megaloy epikremamenoy tou Persikou toutoy strateumatos kataineon metiontes. o de gnous tetrammenoys sfeas oyd' oytu eti efe arkeesthai toutoisi mounoisi, alla dein eti ton adelfeon euytou Egien ginesthai Spartieten epi toisi aytoisi logoisi toisi kai aytos ginetai.   
      34. By saying this he followed the example of Melampus in his request, if one may compare royal power with mere citizenship; for Melampus on his part, when the women in Argos had been seized by madness, and the Argives endeavoured to hire him to come from Pylos and to cause their women to cease from the malady, proposed as payment for himself the half of the royal power; and the Argives did not suffer this, but departed: and afterwards, when more of their women became mad, at length they accepted that which Melampus had proposed, and went to offer him this: but he then seeing that they had changed their minds, increased his demand, and said that he would not do that which they desired unless they gave to his brother Bias also the third share in the royal power. And the Argives, being driven into straits, consented to this also.         34. [1] tauta de legun oytos emimeeto Melampoda, us eikasai basileien te kai politeien aiteomenoys. kai gar de kai Melampoys tun en Argei gynaikun maneiseun, us min oi Argeioi emisthounto ek Puloy pausai tas sfeteras gynaikas teis nousoy, misthon proeteinato teis basileies to emisy. [2] oyk anasxomenun de tun Argeiun all' apiontun, us emainonto pleunes tun gynaikun, oytu de ypostantes ta o Melampoys proeteinato eisan dusontes oi tauta. o de enthauta de eporegetai oreun aytous tetrammenoys, fas, en me kai tui adelfeui Bianti metadusi to tritemorion teis basileies, oy poiesein ta boulontai. oi de Argeioi apeilethentes es steinon kataineoysi kai tauta.   
      35. Just so the Spartans also, being very much in need of Tisamenos, agreed with him on any terms which he desired: and when the Spartans had agreed to this demand also, then Tisamenos the Eleian, having become a Spartan, had part with them in winning five of the greatest contests as their diviner: and these were the only men who ever were made fellow- citizens of the Spartans. Now the five contests were these: one and the first of them was this at Plataia; and after this the contest at Tegea, which took place with the Tegeans and the Argives; then that at Dipaieis against all the Arcadians except the Mantineians; after that the contest with the Messenians at Ithome; and last of all that which took place at Tanagra against the Athenians and Argives. This, I say, was accomplished last of the five contests.         35. [1] us de kai Spartieitai, edeonto gar deinus tou Tisamenou, pantus synexureon oi. sygxuresantun de kai tauta tun Spartieteun, oytu de pente sfi manteyomenos agunas tous megistoys Tisamenos o Eleios, genomenos Spartietes, sygkataireei. mounoi de de pantun anthrupun egenonto oytoi Spartieteisi polieitai. [2] oi de pente agunes oide egenonto, eis men kai prutos oytos o en Plataieisi, epi de o en Tegeei pros Tegeetas te kai Argeioys genomenos, meta de o en Dipaieusi pros Arkadas pantas plen Mantineun, epi de o Messeniun o pros Ithumei, ystatos de o en Tanagrei pros Athenaioys te kai Argeioys genomenos. oytos de ystatos katergasthe tun pente agunun.   
      36. This Tisamenos was acting now as diviner for the Hellenes in the Plataian land, being brought by the Spartans. Now to the Hellenes the sacrifices were of good omen if they defended themselves only, but not if they crossed the Asopos and began a battle;         36. [1] oytos de tote toisi Ellesi o Tisamenos, agontun tun Spartieteun, emanteueto en tei Plataiidi. toisi men nyn Ellesi kala egineto ta ira amynomenoisi, diabasi de ton Asupon kai maxes arxoysi oy.   
      37. and Mardonios too, who was eager to begin a battle, found the sacrifices not favourable to this design, but they were of good omen to him also if he defended himself only; for he too used the Hellenic manner of sacrifice, having as diviner Hegesistratos an Eleian and the most famous of the Telliadai, whom before these events the Spartans had taken and bound, in order to put him to death, because they had suffered much mischief from him. He then being in this evil case, seeing that he was running a course for his life and was likely moreover to suffer much torment before his death, had done a deed such as may hardly be believed. Being made fast on a block bound with iron, he obtained an iron tool, which in some way had been brought in, and contrived forthwith a deed the most courageous of any that we know: for having first calculated how the remaining portion of his foot might be got out of the block, he cut away the flat of his own foot, and after that, since he was guarded still by warders, he broke through the wall and so ran away to Tegea, travelling during the nights and in the daytime entering a wood and resting there; so that, though the Lacedemonians searched for him in full force, he arrived at Tegea on the third night; and the Lacedemonians were possessed by great wonder both at his courage, when they saw the piece of the foot that was cut off lying there, and also because they were not able to find him. So he at that time having thus escaped them took refuge at Tegea, which then was not friendly with the Lacedemonians; and when he was healed and had procured for himself a wooden foot, he became an open enemy of the Lacedemonians. However in the end the enmity into which he had fallen with the Lacedemonians was not to his advantage; for he was caught by them while practising divination in Zakynthos, and was put to death.         37. [1] Mardoniui de prothymeomenui maxes arxein oyk epitedea egineto ta ira, amynomenui de kai toutui kala. kai gar oytos Ellenikoisi iroisi exrato, mantin exun Egesistraton andra Eleion te kai tun Telliadeun eonta logimutaton, ton de proteron toutun Spartieitai labontes edesan epi thanatui us peponthotes polla te kai anarsia yp' aytou. [2] o de en toutui tui kakui exomenos, uste trexun peri teis psyxeis pro te tou thanatoy peisomenos polla te kai lygra, ergon ergasato mezon logoy. us gar de ededeto en xului siderodetui, eseneixthentos kus siderioy ekratese, aytika de emexanato andreiotaton ergon pantun tun emeis idmen. stathmesamenos gar okus exeleusetai oi to loipon tou podos, apetame ton tarson euytou. [3] tauta de poiesas, us fylassomenos ypo fylakun, dioruxas ton toixon apedre es Tegeen, tas men nuktas poreyomenos, tas de emeras katadunun es ylen kai aylizomenos, oytu us Lakedaimoniun pandemei dizemenun tritei eyfronei genesthai en Tegee, tous de en thumati megalui enexesthai teis te tolmes, oruntas to emitomon tou podos keimenon, kakeinon oy dynamenoys eyrein. [4] tote men oytu diafygun Lakedaimonioys katafeugei es Tegeen eousan oyk arthmien Lakedaimonioisi touton ton xronon. ygies de genomenos kai prospoiesamenos xulinon poda katestekee ek teis ithees Lakedaimonioisi polemios. oy mentoi es ge telos oi syneneike to exthos to es Lakedaimonioys sygkekyremenon. elu gar manteyomenos en Zakunthui yp' aytun kai apethane.   
      38. However the death of Hegesistratos took place later than the events at Plataia, and he was now at the Asopos, having been hired by Mardonions for no mean sum, sacrificing and displaying zeal for his cause both on account of his enmity with the Lacedemonians and on account of the gain which he got: but as the sacrifices were not favourable for a battle either for the Persians themselves or for those Hellenes who were with them (for these also had a diviner for themselves, Hippomachos a Leucadian), and as the Hellenes had men constantly flowing in and were becoming more in number, Timagenides the son of Herpys, a Theban, counselled Mardonios to set a guard on the pass of Kithairon, saying that the Hellenes were constantly flowing in every day and that he would thus cut off large numbers.         38. [1] o mentoi thanatos o Egesistratoy ysteron egeneto tun Plataiikun, tote de epi tui Asupui Mardoniui memisthumenos oyk oligoy ethueto te kai proethymeeto kata te to exthos to Lakedaimoniun kai kata to kerdos. [2] us de oyk ekallieree uste maxesthai oyte aytoisi Perseisi oyte toisi met' ekeinun eousi Ellenun (eixon gar kai oytoi ep' euytun mantin Ippomaxon Leykadion andra ), epirreontun de tun Ellenun kai ginomenun pleunun, Timegenides o Erpyos aner Thebaios synebouleyse Mardoniui tas ekbolas tou Kithairunos fylaxai, legun us epirreoysi oi Ellenes aiei ana pasan emeren kai us apolampsoito syxnous.   
      39. Eight days had now passed while they had been sitting opposite to one another, when he gave this counsel to Mardonios; and Mardonios, perceiving that the advice was good, sent the cavalry when night came on to the pass of Kithairon leading towards Plataia, which the Boeotians call the "Three Heads" and the Athenians the "Oak Heads." Having been thus sent, the cavalry did not come without effect, for they caught five hundred baggage-animals coming out into the plain, which were bearing provisions from Peloponnesus to the army, and also the men who accompanied the carts: and having taken this prize the Persians proceeded to slaughter them without sparing either beast or man; and when they were satiated with killing they surrounded the rest and drove them into the camp to Mardonios.         39. [1] emerai de sfi antikatemenoisi ede egegonesan oktu, ote tauta ekeinos synebouleye Mardoniui. o de mathun ten parainesin ey exoysan, us eyfrone egeneto, pempei ten ippon es tas ekbolas tas Kithairunidas ai epi Plataieun feroysi, tas Boiutoi men Treis kefalas kaleoysi, Athenaioi de Dryos kefalas. pemfthentes de oi ippotai oy maten apikonto. [2] esballonta gar es to pedion lambanoysi ypozugia te pentakosia, sitia agonta apo Peloponnesoy es to stratopedon, kai anthrupoys oi eiponto toisi zeugesi. elontes de tauten ten agren oi Persai afeideus efoneyon, oy feidomenoi oyte ypozygioy oydenos oyte anthrupoy. us de aden eixon kteinontes, ta loipa aytun elaynon peribalomenoi para te Mardonion kai es to stratopedon.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [40]

     40. After this deed they spent two days more, neither side wishing to begin a battle; for the Barbarians advanced as far as the Asopos to make trial of the Hellenes, but neither side would cross the river. However the cavalry of Mardonios made attacks continually and did damage to the Hellenes; for the Thebans, being very strong on the side of the Medes, carried on the war with vigour, and always directed them up to the moment of fighting; and after this the Persians and Medes took up the work and were they who displayed valour in their turn.         40. [1] meta de touto to ergon eteras duo emeras dietripsan, oydeteroi boylomenoi maxes arxai. mexri men gar tou Asupou epeisan oi barbaroi peirumenoi tun Ellenun, diebainon de oydeteroi. e mentoi ippos e Mardonioy aiei prosekeito te kai elupee tous Ellenas. oi gar Thebaioi, ate medizontes megalus, prothumus eferon ton polemon kai aiei kategeonto mexri maxes, to de apo toutoy paradekomenoi Persai te kai Meidoi mala eskon oi apedeiknynto aretas.   
      41. For ten days then nothing more was done than this; but when the eleventh day had come, while they still sat opposite to one another at Plataia, the Hellenes having by this time grown much more numerous and Mardonios being greatly vexed at the delay of action, then Mardonios the son of Gobryas and Artabazos the son of Pharnakes, who was esteemed by Xerxes as few of the Persians were besides, came to speech with one another; and as they conferred, the opinions they expressed were these,--that of Artabazos, that they must put the whole army in motion as soon as possible and go to the walls of the Thebans, whither great stores of corn had been brought in for them and fodder for their beasts; and that they should settle there quietly and get their business done as follows:--they had, he said, great quantities of gold, both coined and uncoined, and also of silver and of drinking- cups; and these he advised they should send about to the Hellenes without stint, more especially to those of the Hellenes who were leaders in their several cities; and these, he said, would speedily deliver up their freedom: and he advised that they should not run the risk of a battle. His opinion then was the same as that of the Thebans, for he as well as they had some true foresight: but the opinion of Mardonios was more vehement and more obstinate, and he was by no means disposed to yield; for he said that he thought their army far superior to that of the Hellenes, and he gave as his opinion that they should engage battle as quickly as possible and not allow them to assemble in still greater numbers than were already assembled; and as for the sacrifices of Hegesistratos, they should leave them alone and not endeavour to force a good sign, but follow the custom of the Persians and engage battle.         41. [1] mexri men nyn tun deka emereun oyden epi pleun egineto toutun. us de endekate egegonee emere antikatemenoisi en Plataieisi, oi te de Ellenes pollui pleunes egegonesan kai Mardonios periemektee tei edrei, enthauta es logoys Elthon Mardonios te o Gobrueu kai Artabazos o Farnakeos, os en oligoisi Perseun En aner dokimos para Xerxei. [2] boyleyomenun de aide Esan ai gnumai, e men Artabazoy us xreon eie anazeuxantas ten taxisten panta ton straton ienai es to teixos to Thebaiun, etha siton te sfi eseneneixthai pollon kai xorton toisi ypozygioisi, kat' esyxien te izomenoys diapressesthai poieuntas tade. [3] exein gar xryson pollon men episemon pollon de kai asemon, pollon de argyron te kai ekpumata. toutun feidomenoys medenos diapempein es tous Ellenas, Ellenun de malista es tous proesteutas en teisi polisi, kai taxeus sfeas paradusein ten eleytherien. mede anakindyneuein symballontas. [4] toutoy men e ayte egineto kai Thebaiun gnume, us proeidotos pleun ti kai toutoy, Mardonioy de isxyrotere te kai agnumonestere kai oydamus sygginuskomene. dokeein te gar pollui kressona einai ten sfeteren stratien teis Ellenikeis, symballein te ten taxisten mede perioran syllegomenoys eti pleunas tun syllelegmenun, ta te sfagia ta Egesistratoy ean mede biazesthai, alla nomui tui Perseun xreumenoys symballein.   
      42. When he so expressed his judgment, none opposed him, and thus his opinion prevailed; for he and not Artabazos had the command of the army given him by the king. He summoned therefore the commanders of the divisions and the generals of those Hellenes who were with him, and asked whether they knew of any oracle regarding the Persians, which said that they should be destroyed in Hellas; and when those summoned to council were silent, some not knowing the oracles and others knowing them but not esteeming it safe to speak, Mardonios himself said: "Since then ye either know nothing or do not venture to speak, I will tell you, since I know very well. There is an oracle saying that the Persians are destined when they come to Hellas to plunder the temple at Delphi, and having plundered it to perish every one of them. We therefore, just because we know this, will not go to that temple nor will we attempt to plunder it; and for this cause we shall not perish. So many of you therefore as chance to wish well to the Persians, have joy so far as regards this matter, and be assured that we shall overcome the Hellenes." Having spoken to them thus, he next commanded to prepare everything and to set all in order, since at dawn of the next day a battle would be fought.         42. [1] toutoy de oytu dikaieuntos antelege oydeis, uste ekratee tei gnumei. to gar kratos eixe teis stratieis oytos ek basileos, all' oyk Artabazos. metapempsamenos un tous taxiarxoys tun teleun kai tun met' euytou eontun Ellenun tous strategous eiruta ei ti eideien logion peri Perseun us diafthereontai en tei Elladi. [2] siguntun de tun epikletun, tun men oyk eidotun tous xresmous, tun de eidotun men en adeiei de oy poieymenun to legein, aytos Mardonios elege <<epei toinyn ymeis e iste oyden e oy tolmate legein, all' egu ereu us ey epistamenos. [3] esti logion us xreon esti Persas apikomenoys es ten Ellada diarpasai to iron to en Delfoisi, meta de ten diarpagen apolesthai pantas. emeis toinyn ayto touto epistamenoi oyte imen epi to iron touto oyte epixeiresomen diarpazein, tautes te eineka teis aities oyk apoleometha. [4] uste ymeun osoi tygxanoysi eynooi eontes Perseisi, edesthe toude eineka us periesomenoys emeas Ellenun.>> tauta sfi eipas deutera esemaine pararteesthai te panta kai eykrinea poieesthai us ama emerei tei epiousei symboleis esomenes.   
      43. Now this oracle, which Mardonios said referred to the Persians, I know for my part was composed with reference with the Illyrians and the army of the Enchelians, and not with reference to the Persians at all. However, the oracle which was composed by Bakis with reference to this battle, 
"The gathering of Hellenes together and cry of Barbarian voices, 
 Where the Thermodon flows, by the banks of grassy Asopos; 
 Here very many shall fall ere destiny gave them to perish, 
 Medes bow-bearing in fight, when the fatal day shall approach them,"-- these sayings, and others like them composed by Musaios, I know had reference to the Persians. Now the river Thermodon flows between Tanagra and Glisas.         43. [1] touton d' eguge ton xresmon, ton Mardonios eipe es Persas exein, es Illyrious te kai ton Egxeleun straton oida pepoiemenon, all' oyk es Persas. alla ta men Bakidi es tauten ten maxen esti pepoiemena,      [2] ten d' epi Thermudonti kai Asupui lexepoiei
      Ellenun sunodon kai barbarofunon iygen,
      tei polloi peseontai yper laxesin te moron te
      toxoforun Medun, otan aisimon Emar epelthei,tauta men kai paraplesia toutoisi alla Moysaiui exonta oida es Persas. o de Thermudun potamos rheei metaxu Tanagres te kai Glisantos.    
      44. After the inquiry about the oracles and the exhortation given by Mardonios night came on and the guards were set: and when night was far advanced, and it seemed that there was quiet everywhere in the camps, and that the men were in their deepest sleep, then Alexander the son of Amyntas, commander and king of the Macedonians, rode his horse up to the guard-posts of the Athenians and requested that he might have speech with their generals. So while the greater number of the guards stayed at their posts, some ran to the generals, and when they reached them they said that a man had come riding on a horse out of the camp of the Medes, who discovered nothing further, but only named the generals and said that he desired to have speech with them.         44. [1] meta de ten epeirutesin tun xresmun kai parainesin ten ek Mardonioy nux te egineto kai es fylakas etassonto. us de prosu teis nyktos proelelato kai esyxie edokee einai ana ta stratopeda kai malista oi anthrupoi einai en ypnui, tenikauta proselasas ippui pros tas fylakas tas Athenaiun Alexandros o Amunteu, strategos te eun kai basileus Makedonun, edizeto toisi strategoisi es logoys elthein. [2] tun de fylakun oi men pleunes paremenon, oi d' etheon epi tous strategous, elthontes de elegon us anthrupos ekoi ep' ippoy ek tou stratopedoy tou Medun, os allo men oyden paragymnoi epos, strategous de onomazun ethelein fesi es logoys elthein.   
      45. Having heard this, forthwith they accompanied the men to the guard-posts, and when they had arrived there, Alexander thus spoke to them: "Athenians, I lay up these words of mine as a trust to you, charging you to keep them secret and tell them to no one except only to Pausanias, lest ye bring me to ruin: for I should not utter them if I did not care greatly for the general safety of Hellas, seeing that I am a Hellene myself by original descent and I should not wish to see Hellas enslaved instead of free. I say then that Mardonios and his army cannot get the offerings to be according to their mind, for otherwise ye would long ago have fought. Now however he has resolved to let the offerings alone and to bring on a battle at dawn of day; for, as I conjecture, he fears lest ye should assemble in greater numbers. Therefore prepare yourselves; and if after all Mardonios should put off the battle and not bring it on, stay where ye are and hold out patiently; for they have provisions only for a few days remaining. And if this way shall have its issue according to your mind, then each one of you ought to remember me also concerning liberation, since I have done for the sake of the Hellenes so hazardous a deed by reason of my zeal for you, desiring to show you the design of Mardonios, in order that the Barbarians may not fall upon you when ye are not as yet expecting them: and I am Alexander the Macedonian." Thus having spoken he rode away back to the camp and to his own position.         45. [1] oi de epei tauta ekoysan, aytika eiponto es tas fylakas. apikomenoisi de elege Alexandros tade. <<andres Athenaioi, paratheken ymin ta epea tade tithemai, aporreta poieumenos pros medena legein ymeas allon e Paysanien, me me kai diaftheirete. oy gar an elegon, ei me megalus ekedomen synapases teis Ellados. [2] aytos te gar Ellen genos eimi turxaion kai ant' eleytheres dedoylumenen oyk an etheloimi oran ten Ellada. legu de un oti Mardoniui te kai tei stratiei ta sfagia oy dunatai katathumia genesthai. palai gar an emaxesthe. nun de oi dedoktai ta men sfagia ean xairein, am' emerei de diafuskousei symbolen poieesthai. katarrudeke gar me pleunes syllextheite, us egu eikazu. pros tauta etoimazesthe. en de ara yperbaletai ten symbolen Mardonios kai me poieetai, lipareete menontes. oligeun gar sfi emereun leipetai sitia. [3] en de ymin o polemos ode kata noon teleytesei, mnestheinai tina xre kai emeu eleytherusios peri, os Ellenun eineka oytu ergon parabolon ergasmai ypo prothymies, ethelun ymin delusai ten dianoian ten Mardonioy, ina me epipesusi ymin exaifnes oi barbaroi me prosdekomenoisi ku. eimi de Alexandros o Makedun.>> o men tauta eipas apelayne opisu es to stratopedon kai ten euytou taxin.   
      46. Then the generals of the Athenians came to the right wing and told Pausanias that which they had heard from Alexander. Upon this saying he being struck with fear of the Persians spoke as follows: "Since then at dawn the battle comes on, it is right that ye, Athenians, should take your stand opposite to the Persians, and we opposite to the Boeotians and those Hellenes who are now posted against you; and for this reason, namely because ye are acquainted with the Medes and with their manner of fighting, having fought with them at Marathon, whereas we have had no experience of these men and are without knowledge of them; for not one of the Spartans has made trial of the Medes in fight, but of the Boeotians and Thessalians we have had experience. It is right therefore that ye should take up your arms and come to this wing of the army, and that we should go to the left wing." In answer to this the Athenians spoke as follows: "To ourselves also long ago at the very first, when we saw that the Persians were being ranged opposite to you, it occurred to us to say these very things, which ye now bring forward before we have uttered them; but we feared lest these words might not be pleasing to you. Since however ye yourselves have made mention of this, know that your words have caused us pleasure, and that we are ready to do this which ye say."         46. [1] oi de strategoi tun Athenaiun elthontes epi to dexion keras elegon Paysaniei ta per ekoysan Alexandroy. o de toutui tui logui katarrudesas tous Persas elege tade. [2] <<epei toinyn es eu e symbole ginetai, ymeas men xreon esti tous Athenaioys steinai kata tous Persas, emeas de kata tous Boiutous te kai tous kat' ymeas tetagmenoys Ellenun, tunde eineka. ymeis epistasthe tous Medoys kai ten maxen aytun en Marathuni maxesamenoi, emeis de apeiroi te eimen kai adaees toutun tun andrun. Spartieteun gar oydeis pepeiretai Medun. emeis de Boiutun kai Thessalun empeiroi eimen. [3] all' analabontas ta opla xreon esti ienai ymeas es tode to keras, emeas de es to eyunymon.>> pros de tauta eipan oi Athenaioi tade. <<kai aytoisi emin palai ap' arxeis, epeite eidomen kat' ymeas tassomenoys tous Persas, en noui egeneto eipein tauta ta per ymeis fthantes proferete. alla arrudeomen me ymin oyk edees genuntai oi logoi. epei d' un aytoi emnesthete, kai edomenoisi emin oi logoi gegonasi kai etoimoi eimen poieein tauta.>>   
      47. Both then were content to do this, and as dawn appeared they began to change their positions with one another: and the Boeotians perceiving that which was being done reported it to Mardonios, who, when he heard it, forthwith himself also endeavoured to change positions, bringing the Persians along so as to be against the Lacedemonians: and when Pausanias learnt that this was being done, he perceived that he was not unobserved, and he led the Spartans back again to the right wing; and just so also did Mardonios upon his left.         47. [1] us d' ereske amfoteroisi tauta, eus te diefaine kai diallassonto tas taxis. gnontes de oi Boiutoi to poieumenon exagoreuoysi Mardoniui. o d' epeite ekoyse, aytika metistanai kai aytos epeirato, paragun tous Persas kata tous Lakedaimonioys. us de emathe touto toiouto ginomenon o Paysanies, gnous oti oy lanthanei, opisu Ege tous Spartietas epi to dexion keras. us de oytus kai o Mardonios epi tou eyunumoy.   
      48. When they had been thus brought to their former positions, Mardonios sent a herald to the Spartans and said as follows: "Lacedemonians, ye are said forsooth by those who are here to be very good men, and they have admiration for you because ye do not flee in war nor leave your post, but stay there and either destroy your enemies or perish yourselves. In this however, as it now appears, there is no truth; for before we engaged battle and came to hand-to- hand conflict we saw you already flee and leave your station, desiring to make the trial with the Athenians first, while ye ranged yourselves opposite to our slaves. These are not at all the deeds of good men in war, but we were deceived in you very greatly; for we expected by reason of your renown that ye would send a herald to us, challenging us and desiring to fight with the Persians alone; but though we on our part were ready to do this, we did not find that ye said anything of this kind, but rather that ye cowered with fear. Now therefore since ye were not the first to say this, we are the first. Why do we not forthwith fight, ye on behalf of the Hellenes, since ye have the reputation of being the best, and we on behalf of the Barbarians, with equal numbers on both sides? and if we think it good that the others should fight also, then let them fight afterwards; and if on the other hand we should not think it good, but think it sufficient that we alone should fight, then let us fight it out to the end, and whichsoever of us shall be the victors, let these be counted as victorious with their whole army."         48. [1] epei de katestesan es tas arxaias taxis, pempsas o Mardonios keryka es tous Spartietas elege tade. <<u Lakedaimonioi, ymeis de legesthe einai andres aristoi ypo tun teide anthrupun, ekpagleomenun us oyte feugete ek polemoy oyte taxin ekleipete, menontes te e apollyte tous enantioys e aytoi apollysthe. [2] tun d' ar' En oyden alethes. prin gar e symmixai emeas es xeirun te nomon apikesthai, kai de feugontas kai stasin ekleipontas ymeas eidomen, en Athenaioisi te ten propeiran poieymenoys aytous te antia doulun tun emeterun tassomenoys. [3] tauta oydamus andrun agathun erga, alla pleiston de en ymin epseusthemen. prosdekomenoi gar kata kleos us de pempsete es emeas keryka prokaleumenoi kai boylomenoi mounoisi Perseisi maxesthai, artioi eontes poieein tauta oyden toiouto legontas ymeas eyromen alla ptussontas mallon. nun un epeide oyk ymeis erxate toutoy tou logoy, all' emeis arxomen. [4] ti de oy pro men tun Ellenun ymeis, epeite dedoxusthe einai aristoi, pro de tun barbarun emeis isoi pros isoys arithmon emaxesametha; kai en men dokeei kai tous alloys maxesthai, oi d' un metepeita maxesthun ysteroi. ei de kai me dokeoi all' emeas mounoys apoxran, emeis de diamaxesumetha. okoteroi d' an emeun nikesusi, toutoys tui apanti stratopedui nikan.>>   
      49. The herald having thus spoken waited for some time, and then, as no one made him any answer, he departed and went back; and having returned he signified to Mardonios that which had happened to him. Mardonios then being greatly rejoiced and elated by his empty victory, sent the cavalry to attack the Hellenes: and when the horsemen had ridden to attack them, they did damage to the whole army of the Hellenes by hurling javelins against them and shooting with bows, being mounted archers and hard therefore to fight against: and they disturbed and choked up the spring Gargaphia, from which the whole army of the Hellenes was drawing its water. Now the Lacedemonians alone were posted near this spring, and it was at some distance from the rest of the Hellenes, according as they chanced to be posted, while the Asopos was near at hand; but when they were kept away from the Asopos, then they used to go backwards and forwards to this spring; for they were not permitted by the horsemen and archers to fetch water from the river.         49. [1] o men tauta eipas te kai episxun xronon, us oi oydeis oyden ypekrinato, apallasseto opisu, apelthun de esemaine Mardoniui ta katalabonta. o de perixares genomenos kai epaertheis psyxrei nikei epeike ten ippon epi tous Ellenas. [2] us de epelasan oi ippotai, esinonto pasan ten stratien ten Elleniken esakontizontes te kai toxeuontes uste ippotoxotai te eontes kai prosferesthai aporoi. ten te krenen ten Gargafien, ap' Es ydreueto pan to strateyma to Ellenikon, synetaraxan kai synexusan. [3] Esan men un kata ten krenen Lakedaimonioi tetagmenoi mounoi, toisi de alloisi Ellesi e men krene prosu egineto, us ekastoi etyxon tetagmenoi, o de Asupos agxou. erykomenoi de tou Asupou oytu de epi ten krenen efoitun. apo tou potamou gar sfi oyk exein ydur foreesthai ypo te tun ippeun kai toxeymatun.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [50]

     50. Such then being the condition of things, the generals of the Hellenes, since the army had been cut off from its water and was being harassed by the cavalry, assembled to consult about these and other things, coming to Pausanias upon the right wing: for other things too troubled them yet more than these of which we have spoken, since they no longer had provisions, and their attendants who had been sent to Peloponnese for the purpose of getting them had been cut off by the cavalry and were not able to reach the camp.         50. [1] toutoy de toioutoy ginomenoy oi tun Ellenun strategoi, ate tou te ydatos steretheises teis stratieis kai ypo teis ippoy tarassomenes, synelexthesan peri aytun te toutun kai allun, elthontes para Paysanien epi to dexion keras. alla gar toutun toioutun eontun mallon sfeas elupee. oyte gar sitia eixon eti, oi te sfeun opeunes apopemfthentes es Peloponneson us episitieumenoi apekekleiato ypo teis ippoy, oy dynamenoi apikesthai es to stratopedon.   
      51. It was resolved then by the generals in council with one another, that if the Persians put off the battle for that day, they would go to the Island. This is distant ten furlongs from the Asopos and the spring Gargaphia, where they were then encamped, and is in front of the city of the Plataians: and if it be asked how there can be an island on the mainland, thus it is:-- the river parts in two above, as it flows from Kithairon down to the plain, keeping a distance of about three furlongs between its streams, and after that it joins again in one stream; and the name of it is Oeroe, said by the natives of the country to be the daughter of Asopos. To this place of which I speak they determined to remove, in order that they might be able to get an abundant supply of water and that the cavalry might not do them damage, as now when they were right opposite. And they proposed to remove when the second watch of the night should have come, so that the Persians might not see them set forth and harass them with the cavalry pursuing. They proposed also, after they had arrived at this place, round which, as I say, Oeroe the daughter of Asopos flows, parting into two streams as she runs from Kithairon, to send half the army to Kithairon during this same night, in order to take up their attendants who had gone to get the supplies of provisions; for these were cut off from them in Kithairon.         51. [1] boyleyomenoisi de toisi strategoisi edoxe, en yperbaluntai ekeinen ten emeren oi Persai symbolen poieumenoi, es ten neison ienai. e de esti apo tou Asupou kai teis krenes teis Gargafies, ep' ei estratopedeuonto tote, deka stadioys apexoysa, pro teis Plataieun polios. [2] neisos de oytu an eie en epeirui. sxizomenos o potamos anuthen ek tou Kithairunos rheei katu es to pedion, diexun ap' allelun ta rheethra oson per tria stadia, kai epeita symmisgei es tuyto. oynoma de oi Ueroe. [3] thygatera de tauten legoysi einai Asupou oi epixurioi. es touton de ton xuron eboyleusanto metanasteinai, ina kai ydati exusi xrasthai afthonui kai oi ippees sfeas me sinoiato usper katithu eontun. metakineesthai te edokee tote epean teis nyktos ei deytere fylake, us an me idoiato oi Persai exormumenoys kai sfeas epomenoi tarassoien oi ippotai. [4] apikomenun de es ton xuron touton, ton de e Asupis Ueroe perisxizetai rheoysa ek tou Kithairunos, ypo ten nukta tauten edokee tous emiseas apostellein tou stratopedoy pros ton Kithairuna, us analaboien tous opeunas tous epi ta sitia oixomenoys. Esan gar en tui Kithairuni apolelammenoi.   
      52. Having thus resolved, during the whole of that day they had trouble unceasingly, while the cavalry pressed upon them; but when the day drew to a close and the attacks of the cavalry had ceased, then as it was becoming night and the time had arrived at which it had been agreed that they should retire from their place, the greater number of them set forth and began to retire, not however keeping it in mind to go to the place which had been agreed upon; but on the contrary, when they had begun to move, they readily took occasion to flee from the cavalry towards the city of the Plataians, and in their flight they came as far as the temple of Hera, which temple is in front of the city of the Plataians at a distance of twenty furlongs from the spring Gargaphia; and when they had there arrived they halted in front of the temple.         52. [1] tauta boyleysamenoi keinen men ten emeren pasan proskeimenes teis ippoy eixon ponon atryton. us de e te emere elege kai oi ippees epepaynto, nyktos de ginomenes kai eouses teis ures es ten synekeito sfi apallassesthai, enthauta aerthentes oi polloi apallassonto, es men ton xuron es ton synekeito oyk en noui exontes, oi de us ekinethesan efeygon asmenoi ten ippon pros ten Plataieun polin, feugontes de apikneontai epi to Eraion. to de pro teis polios esti teis Plataieun, eikosi stadioys apo teis krenes teis Gargafies apexon. apikomenoi de ethento pro tou irou ta opla.   
      53. These then were encamping about the temple of Hera; and Pausanias, seeing that they were retiring from the camp, gave the word to the Lacedemonians also to take up their arms and go after the others who were preceding them, supposing that these were going to the place to which they had agreed to go. Then, when all the other commanders were ready to obey Pausanias, Amompharetos the son of Poliades, the commander of the Pitanate division, said that he would not flee from the strangers, nor with his own will would he disgrace Sparta; and he expressed wonder at seeing that which was being done, not having been present at the former discussion. And Pausanias and Euryanax were greatly disturbed that he did not obey them and still more that they should be compelled to leave the Pitanate division behind, since he thus refused; for they feared that if they should leave it in order to do that which they had agreed with the other Hellenes, both Amompharetos himself would perish being left behind and also the men with him. With this thought they kept the Lacedemonian force from moving, and meanwhile they endeavoured to persuade him that it was not right for him to do so.         53. [1] kai oi men peri to Eraion estratopedeuonto, Paysanies de orun sfeas apallassomenoys ek tou stratopedoy pareggelle kai toisi Lakedaimonioisi analabontas ta opla ienai kata tous alloys tous proiontas, nomisas aytous es ton xuron ienai es ton synethekanto. [2] enthauta oi men alloi artioi Esan tun taxiarxun peithesthai Paysaniei, Amomfaretos de o Poliadeu loxegeun tou Pitaneteun loxoy oyk efe tous xeinoys feuxesthai oyde ekun einai aisxyneein ten Sparten, ethumaze te oreun to poieumenon ate oy paragenomenos tui proterui logui. [3] o de Paysanies te kai o Eyryanax deinon men epoieunto to me peithesthai ekeinon sfisi, deinoteron de eti, keinoy taut' anainomenoy, apolipein ton loxon ton Pitaneten, me en apolipusi poieuntes ta synethekanto toisi alloisi Ellesi, apoletai ypoleiftheis aytos te Amomfaretos kai oi met' aytou. [4] tauta logizomenoi atremas eixon to stratopedon to Lakunikon, kai epeirunto peithontes min us oy xreon eie tauta poieein.   
      54. They then were exhorting Amompharetos, who had been left behind alone of the Lacedemonians and Tegeans; and meanwhile the Athenians were keeping themselves quiet in the place where they had been posted, knowing the spirit of the Lacedemonians, that they were apt to say otherwise than they really meant; and when the army began to move, they sent a horseman from their own body to see whether the Spartans were attempting to set forth, or whether they had in truth no design at all to retire; and they bade him ask Pausanias what they ought to do.         54. [1] kai oi men paregoreon Amomfareton mounon Lakedaimoniun te kai Tegeeteun leleimmenon, Athenaioi de epoieyn toiade. eixon atremas sfeas aytous ina etaxthesan, epistamenoi ta Lakedaimoniun fronemata us alla froneontun kai alla legontun. [2] us de ekinethe to stratopedon, epempon sfeun ippea opsomenon te ei poreuesthai epixeireoien oi Spartieitai, eite kai to parapan me dianoeuntai apallassesthai, epeiresthai te Paysanien to xreon eie poieein.   
      55. So when the herald came to the Lacedemonians, he saw that they were still in their place and that the chiefs of them had come to strife with one another: for when Euryanax and Pausanias both exhorted Amompharetos not to run the risk of remaining behind with his men, alone of all the Lacedemonians, they did not at all persuade him, and at last they had come to downright strife; and meanwhile the herald of the Athenians had arrived and was standing by them. And Amompharetos in his contention took a piece of rock in both his hands and placed it at the feet of Pausanias, saying that with this pebble he gave his vote not to fly from the strangers, meaning the Barbarians. Pausanias then, calling him a madman and one who was not in his right senses, bade tell the state of their affairs to the Athenian herald, who was asking that which he had been charged to ask; and at the same time he requested the Athenians to come towards the Lacedemonians and to do in regard to the retreat the same as they did.         55. [1] us de apiketo o keiryx es tous Lakedaimonioys, ura te sfeas kata xuren tetagmenoys kai es neikea apigmenoys aytun tous prutoys. us gar de paregoreonto ton Amomfareton o te Eyryanax kai o Paysanies me kindyneuein menontas mounoys Lakedaimoniun, oy kus epeithon, es o es neikea te sympesontes apikato kai o keiryx tun Athenaiun paristato sfi apigmenos. [2] neikeun de o Amomfaretos lambanei petron amfotereisi teisi xersi kai titheis pro podun tun Paysanieu tautei tei psefui psefizesthai efe me feugein tous xeinoys, legun tous barbaroys. o de mainomenon kai oy frenerea kaleun ekeinon, pros te ton Athenaion keryka epeirutunta ta entetalmena legein o Paysanies ekeleye ta pareonta sfi pregmata, exreize te tun Athenaiun prosxureisai te pros euytous kai poieein peri teis apodoy ta per an kai sfeis.   
      56. He then went away back to the Athenians; and as the dawn of day found them yet disputing with one another, Pausanias, who had remained still throughout all this time, gave the signal, and led away all the rest over the low hills, supposing that Amonpharetos would not stay behind when the other Lacedemonians departed (in which he was in fact right); and with them also went the Tegeans. Meanwhile the Athenians, following the commands which were given them, were going in the direction opposite to that of the Lacedemonians; for these were clinging to the hills and the lower slope of Kithairon from fear of the cavalry, while the Athenians were marching below in the direction of the plain.         56. [1] kai o men apallasseto es tous Athenaioys. tous de epei anakrinomenoys pros euytous eus katelambane, en toutui tui xronui katemenos o Paysanies, oy dokeun ton Amomfareton leipsesthai tun allun Lakedaimoniun aposteixontun, ta de kai egeneto, semenas apeige dia tun kolunun tous loipous pantas. eiponto de kai Tegeeitai. [2] Athenaioi de taxthentes eisan ta empalin e Lakedaimonioi. oi men gar tun te oxthun anteixonto kai teis ypurees tou Kithairunos fobeomenoi ten ippon, Athenaioi de katu trafthentes es to pedion.   
      57. As for Amonpharetos, he did not at first believe that Pausanias would ever venture to leave him and his men behind, and he stuck to it that they should stay there and not leave their post; but when Pausanias and his troops were well in front, then he perceived that they had actually left him behind, and he made his division take up their arms and led them slowly towards the main body. This, when it had got away about ten furlongs, stayed for the division of Amompharetos, halting at the river Moloeis and the place called Argiopion, where also there stands a temple of the Eleusinian Demeter: and it stayed there for this reason, namely in order that of Amonpharetos and his division should not leave the place where they had been posted, but should remain there, it might be able to come back to their assistance. So Amompharetos and his men were coming up to join them, and the cavalry also of the Barbarians was at the same time beginning to attack them in full force: for the horsemen did on this day as they had been wont to do every day; and seeing the place vacant in which the Hellenes had been posted on the former days, they rode their horses on continually further, and as soon as they came up with them they began to attack them.         57. [1] Amomfaretos de arxen ge oydama dokeun Paysanien tolmesein sfeas apolipein, perieixeto aytou menontas me eklipein ten taxin. protereontun de tun sun Paysaniei, katadoxas aytous itheei texnei apoleipein ayton, analabonta ton loxon ta opla Ege baden pros to allo stifos. [2] to de apelthon oson te deka stadia anemene ton Amomfaretoy loxon, peri potamon Moloenta idrymenon Argiopion te xuron kaleomenon, tei kai Demetros Eleysinies iron Estai. anemene de toude eineka, ina en me apoleipei ton xuron en tui etetaxato o Amomfaretos te kai o loxos, all' aytou menusi, boetheoi opisu par' ekeinoys. [3] kai oi te amfi ton Amomfaretos pareginonto sfi kai e ippos e tun barbarun prosekeito pasa. oi gar ippotai epoieyn oion kai euthesan poieein aiei, idontes de ton xuron keinon en tui etetaxato oi Ellenes teisi protereisi emereisi, elaynon tous ippoys aiei to prosu kai ama katalabontes prosekeato sfi.   
      58. Then Mardonios, when he was informed that the Hellenes had departed during the night, and when he saw their place deserted, called Thorax of Larissa and his brothers Eurypylos and Thrasydeios, and said: "Sons of Aleuas, will ye yet say anything, now that ye see these places deserted? For ye who dwell near them were wont to say that the Lacedemonians did not fly from a battle, but were men unsurpassed in war; and these men ye not only saw before this changing from their post, but now we all of us see that they have run away during the past night; and by this they showed clearly, when the time came for them to contend in battle with those who were in truth the best of all men, that after all they were men of no worth, who had been making a display of valour among Hellenes, a worthless race. As for you, since ye had had no experience of the Persians, I for my part was very ready to excuse you when ye praised these, of whom after all ye knew something good; but much more I marvelled at Artabazos that he should have been afraid of the Lacedemonians, and that having been afraid he should have uttered that most cowardly opinion, namely that we ought to move our army away and go to the city of the Thebans to be besieged there,--an opinion about which the king shall yet be informed by me. Of these things we will speak in another place; now however we must not allow them to act thus, but we must pursue them until they are caught and pay the penalty to us for all that they did to the Persians in time past."         58. [1] Mardonios de us eputheto tous Ellenas apoixomenoys ypo nukta eide te ton xuron eremon, kalesas ton Lerisaion Thureka kai tous adelfeous aytou Eyrupylon kai Thrasydeion elege [2] <<u paides Aleueu, eti ti lexete tade oruntes erema; ymeis gar oi plesioxuroi elegete Lakedaimonioys oy feugein ek maxes, alla andras einai ta polemia prutoys. tous proteron te metistamenoys ek teis taxios eidete, nun te ypo ten paroixomenen nukta kai oi pantes orumen diadrantas. diedexan te, epei sfeas edee pros tous apseydeus aristoys anthrupun maxei diakritheinai, oti oydenes ara eontes en oydamoisi eousi Ellesi enapedeiknuato. [3] kai ymin men eousi Perseun apeiroisi polle ek ge emeu egineto syggnume, epaineontun toutoys toisi ti kai syneideate. Artabazoy de thuma kai mallon epoieumen to kai katarrudeisai Lakedaimonioys katarrudesanta te apodexasthai gnumen deilotaten, us xreon eie anazeuxantas to stratopedon ienai es to Thebaiun asty poliorkesomenoys. ten eti pros emeu basileus peusetai. [4] kai toutun men eteruthi estai logos. nun de ekeinoisi tauta poieusi oyk epitreptea esti, alla diukteoi eisi es o katalamfthentes dusoysi emin tun de epoiesan Persas pantun dikas.>>   
      59. Thus having spoken he led on the Persians at a run, after they had crossed the Asopos, on the track of the Hellenes, supposing that these were running away from him; and he directed his attack upon the Lacedemonians and Tegeans only, for the Athenians, whose march was towards the plain, he did not see by reason of the hills. Then the rest of the commanders of the Barbarian divisions, seeing that the Persians had started to pursue the Hellenes, forthwith all raised the signals for battle and began to pursue, each as fast as they could, not arranged in any order or succession of post.         59. [1] tauta eipas Ege tous Persas dromui diabantas ton Asupon kata stibon tun Ellenun us de apodidreskontun, epeixe te epi Lakedaimonioys te kai Tegeetas mounoys. Athenaioys gar trapomenoys es to pedion ypo tun oxthun oy katura. [2] Persas de oruntes ormemenoys diukein tous Ellenas oi loipoi tun barbarikun teleun arxontes aytika pantes eeiran ta semeia, kai ediukon us podun ekastos eixon, oyte kosmui oydeni kosmethentes oyte taxi. kai oytoi men boei te kai omilui epeisan us anarpasomenoi tous Ellenas.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [60]

     60. These then were coming on with shouting and confused numbers, thinking to make short work of the Hellenes; and Pausanias, when the cavalry began to attack, sent to the Athenians a horseman and said thus: "Athenians, now that the greatest contest is set before us, namely that which has for its issue the freedom or the slavery of Hellas, we have been deserted by our allies, we Lacedemonians and ye Athenians, seeing that they have run away during the night that is past. Now therefore it is determined what we must do upon this, namely that we must defend ourselves and protect one another as best we may. If then the cavalry had set forth to attack you at the first, we and the Tegeans, who with us refuse to betray the cause of Hellas, should have been bound to go to your help; but as it is, since the whole body has come against us, it is right that ye should come to that portion of the army which is hardest pressed, to give aid. If however anything has happened to you which makes it impossible for you to come to our help, then do us a kindness by sending to us the archers; and we know that ye have been in the course of this present war by far the most zealous of all, so that ye will listen to our request in this matter also."         60. [1] Paysanies de, us prosekeito e ippos, pempsas pros tous Athenaioys ippea legei tade. <<andres Athenaioi, agunos megistoy prokeimenoy eleytheren einai e dedoylumenen ten Ellada, prodedometha ypo tun symmaxun emeis te oi Lakedaimonioi kai ymeis oi Athenaioi ypo ten paroixomenen nukta diadrantun. [2] nun un dedoktai to entheuten to poieteon emin. amynomenoys gar tei dynametha arista peristellein alleloys. ei men nyn es ymeas ormese arxen e ippos, xrein de emeas te kai tous met' emeun ten Ellada oy prodidontas Tegeetas boetheein ymin. nun de, es emeas gar apasa kexureke, dikaioi este ymeis pros ten piezomenen malista tun moireun amyneontes ienai. [3] ei d' ara aytous ymeas katalelabeke adunaton ti boetheein, ymeis d' emin tous toxotas apopempsantes xarin thesthe. synoidamen de ymin ypo ton pareonta tonde polemon eousi pollon prothymotatoisi, uste kai tauta esakouein.>>   
      61. When the Athenians heard this they were desirous to come to their help and to assist them as much as possible; and as they were already going, they were attacked by those of the Hellenes on the side of the king who had been ranged opposite to them, so that they were no longer able to come to the help of the Lacedemonians, for the force that was attacking them gave them much trouble. Thus the Lacedemonians and Tegeans were left alone, being in number, together with light-armed men, the former fifty thousand and the Tegeans three thousand; for these were not parted at all from the Lacedemonians: and they began to offer sacrifice, meaning to engage battle with Mardonios and the force which had come against them. Then since their offerings did not prove favourable, and many of them were being slain during this time and many more wounded,--for the Persians had made a palisade of their wicker-work shields and were discharging their arrows in great multitude and without sparing,--Pausanias, seeing that the Spartans were hard pressed and that the offerings did not prove favourable, fixed his gaze upon the temple of Hera of the Plataians and called upon the goddess to help, praying that they might by no means be cheated of their hope:         61. [1] tauta oi Athenaioi us eputhonto, ormeato boetheein kai ta malista epamunein. kai sfi ede steixoysi epitithentai oi antitaxthentes Ellenun tun meta basileos genomenun, uste meketi dunasthai boetheisai. to gar proskeimenon sfeas elupee. [2] oytu de moynuthentes Lakedaimonioi kai Tegeeitai, eontes sun psiloisi arithmon oi men pentakismurioi Tegeeitai de trisxilioi (oytoi gar oydama apesxizonto apo Lakedaimoniun ), esfagiazonto us symbaleontes Mardoniui kai tei stratiei tei pareousei. [3] kai oy gar sfi egineto ta sfagia xresta, epipton de aytun en toutui tui xronui polloi kai pollui pleunes etrumatizonto. fraxantes gar ta gerra oi Persai apiesan tun toxeymatun polla afeideus, oytu uste piezomenun tun Spartieteun kai tun sfagiun oy ginomenun apoblepsanta ton Paysanien pros to Eraion to Plataieun epikalesasthai ten theon, xreizonta medamus sfeas pseystheinai teis elpidos.   
      62. and while he was yet calling upon her thus, the Tegeans started forward before them and advanced against the Barbarians, and forthwith after the prayer of Pausanias the offerings proved favourable for the Lacedemonians as they sacrificed. So when this at length came to pass, then they also advanced against the Persians; and the Persians put away their bows and came against them. Then first there was fighting about the wicker-work shields, and when these had been overturned, after that the fighting was fierce by the side of the temple of Demeter, and so continued for a long time, until at last they came to justling; for the Barbarians would take hold of the spears and break them off. Now in courage and in strength the Persians were not inferior to the others, but they were without defensive armour, and moreover they were unversed in war and unequal to their opponents in skill; and they would dart out one at a time or in groups of about ten together, some more and some less, and fall upon the Spartans and perish.         62. [1] tauta d' eti toutoy epikaleomenoy proexanastantes proteroi oi Tegeeitai exureon es tous barbaroys, kai toisi Lakedaimonioisi aytika meta ten eyxen ten Paysanieu egineto thyomenoisi ta sfagia xresta. us de xronui kote egeneto, exureon kai oytoi epi tous Persas, kai oi Persai antioi ta toxa metentes. [2] egineto de pruton peri ta gerra maxe. us de tauta epeptukee, ede egineto e maxe isxyre par' ayto to Demetrion kai xronon epi pollon, es o apikonto es uthismon. ta gar dorata epilambanomenoi kateklun oi barbaroi. [3] lemati men nyn kai rhumei oyk essones Esan oi Persai, anoploi de eontes kai pros anepistemones Esan kai oyk omoioi toisi enantioisi sofien, proexaissontes de kat' ena kai deka, kai pleunes te kai elassones systrefomenoi, esepipton es tous Spartietas kai dieftheironto.   
      63. In the place where Mardonios himself was, riding on a white horse and having about him the thousand best men of the Persians chosen out from the rest, here, I say, they pressed upon their opponents most of all: and so long as Mardonios survived, they held out against them, and defending themselves they cast down many of the Lacedemonians; but when Mardonios was slain and the men who were ranged about his person, which was the strongest portion of the whole army, had fallen, then the others too turned and gave way before the Lacedemonians; for their manner of dress, without defensive armour, was a very great cause of destruction to them, since in truth they were contending light-armed against hoplites.         63. [1] tei de etugxane aytos eun Mardonios, ap' ippoy te maxomenos leykou exun te peri euyton logadas Perseun tous aristoys xilioys, tautei de kai malista tous enantioys epiesan. oson men nyn xronon Mardonios periein, oi de anteixon kai amynomenoi kateballon pollous tun Lakedaimoniun. [2] us de Mardonios apethane kai to peri ekeinon tetagmenon eon isxyrotaton epese, oytu de kai oi alloi etraponto kai eixan toisi Lakedaimonioisi. pleiston gar sfeas edeleeto e esthes eremos eousa oplun. pros gar oplitas eontes gymneites aguna epoieunto.   
      64. Then the satisfaction for the murder of Leonidas was paid by Mardonios according to the oracle given to the Spartans, and the most famous victory of all those about which we have knowledge was gained by Pausanias the son of Cleombrotos, the son of Anaxandrides; of his ancestors above this the names have been given for Leonidas, since, as it happens, they are the same for both. Now Mardonios was slain by Arimnestos, a man of consideration in Sparta, who afterwards, when the Median wars were over, with three hundred men fought a battle against the whole army of the Messenians, then at war with the Lacedemonians, at Stenycleros, and both he was slain and also the three hundred.         64. [1] enthauta e te dike tou Leunideu kata to xresterion toisi Spartieteisi ek Mardonioy epeteleeto, kai niken anaireetai kallisten apaseun tun emeis idmen Paysanies o Kleombrotoy tou Anaxandrideu. [2] tun de katuperthe oi progonun ta oynomata eiretai es Leuniden. uytoi gar sfi tygxanoysi eontes. apothneskei de Mardonios ypo Aeimnestoy andros en Spartei logimoy, os xronui ysteron meta ta Medika exun andras triekosioys synebale en Stenyklerui polemoy eontos Messenioisi pasi, kai aytos te apethane kai oi triekosioi.   
      65. When the Persians were turned to flight at Plataia by the Lacedemonians, they fled in disorder to their own camp and to the palisade which they had made in the Theban territory: and it is a marvel to me that, whereas they fought by the side of the sacred grove of Demeter, not one of the Persians was found to have entered the enclosure or to have been slain within it, but round about the temple in the unconsecrated ground fell the greater number of the slain. I suppose (if one ought to suppose anything about divine things) that the goddess herself refused to receive them, because they had set fire to the temple, that is to say the "palace" at Eleusis.         65. [1] en de Plataieisi oi Persai us etraponto ypo tun Lakedaimoniun, efeygon oydena kosmon es to stratopedon to euytun kai es to teixos to xulinon to epoiesanto en moirei tei Thebaidi. [2] thuma de moi okus para teis Demetros to alsos maxomenun oyde eis efane tun Perseun oyte eselthun es to temenos oyte enapothanun, peri te to iron oi pleistoi en tui bebelui epeson. dokeu de, ei ti peri tun theiun pregmatun dokeein dei, e theos ayte sfeas oyk edeketo empresantas to iron to en Eleysini anaktoron.   
      66. Thus far then had this battle proceeded: but Artabazos the son of Pharnakes had been displeased at the very first because Mardonios remained behind after the king was gone; and afterwards he had been bringing forward objections continually and doing nothing, but had urged them always not to fight a battle: and for himself he acted as follows, not being pleased with the things which were being done by Mardonios.--The men of whom Artabazos was commander (and he had with him no small force but one which was in number as much as four myriads of men), these, when the fighting began, being well aware what the issue of the battle would be, he led carefully, having first given orders that all should go by the way which he should lead them and at the same pace at which they should see him go. Having given these orders he led his troops on pretence of taking them into battle; and when he was well on his way, he saw the Persians already taking flight. Then he no longer led his men in the same order as before, but set off at a run, taking flight by the quickest way not to the palisade nor yet to the wall of the Thebans, but towards Phokis, desiring as quickly as possible to reach the Hellespont.         66. [1] ayte men nyn e maxe epi tosouto egeneto. Artabazos de o Farnakeos aytika te oyk eresketo kat' arxas leipomenoy Mardonioy apo basileos, kai tote polla apagoreuun oyden enye, symballein oyk eun. epoiese te aytos toiade us oyk areskomenos toisi pregmasi toisi ek Mardonioy poieymenoisi. [2] tun estrategee o Artabazos (eixe de dunamin oyk oligen alla kai es tesseras myriadas anthrupun peri euyton ), toutoys, okus e symbole egineto, ey exepistamenos ta emelle apobesesthai apo teis maxes, Ege katertemenus, paraggeilas kata tuyto ienai pantas tei an aytos exegeetai, okus an ayton orusi spoydeis exonta. [3] tauta paraggeilas us es maxen Ege deithen ton straton. protereun de teis odou ura kai de feugontas tous Persas. oytu de oyketi ton ayton kosmon kategeeto, alla ten taxisten etroxaze feugun oyte es to xulinon oyte es to Thebaiun teixos all' es Fukeas, ethelun us taxista epi ton Ellesponton apikesthai.   
      67. These, I say, were thus directing their march: and in the meantime, while the other Hellenes who were on the side of the king were purposely slack in the fight, the Boeotians fought with the Athenians for a long space; for those of the Thebans who took the side of the Medes had no small zeal for the cause, and they fought and were not slack, so that three hundred of them, the first and best of all, fell there by the hands of the Athenians: and when these also turned to flight, they fled to Thebes, not to the same place as the Persians: and the main body of the other allies fled without having fought constantly with any one or displayed any deeds of valour.         67. [1] kai de oytoi men tautei etraponto. tun de allun Ellenun tun meta basileos ethelokakeontun Boiutoi Athenaioisi emaxesanto xronon epi syxnon. oi gar medizontes tun Thebaiun, oytoi eixon prothymien oyk oligen maxomenoi te kai oyk ethelokakeontes, oytu uste triekosioi aytun oi prutoi kai aristoi enthauta epeson ypo Athenaiun. us de etraponto kai oytoi, efeygon es tas Thebas, oy tei per oi Persai kai tun allun symmaxun o pas omilos, oyte diamaxesamenos oydeni oyte ti apodexamenos, efeygon.   
      68. And this is an additional proof to me that all the fortunes of the Barbarians depended upon the Persians, namely that at that time these men fled before they had even engaged with the enemy, because they saw the Persians doing so. Thus all were in flight except only the cavalry, including also that of the Boeotians; and this rendered service to the fugitives by constantly keeping close to the enemy and separating the fugitives of their own side from the Hellenes.         68. [1] deloi te moi oti panta ta pregmata tun barbarun erteto ek Perseun, ei kai tote oytoi prin e kai symmixai toisi polemioisi efeygon, oti kai tous Persas urun. oytu te pantes efeygon plen teis ippoy teis te alles kai teis Boiuties. ayte de tosauta prosufelee tous feugontas, aiei te pros tun polemiun agxista eousa apergoysa te tous filioys feugontas apo tun Ellenun. oi men de nikuntes eiponto tous Xerxeu diukontes te kai foneuontes.   
      69. The victors then were coming after the troops of Xerxes, both pursuing them and slaughtering them; and during the time when this panic arose, the report was brought to the other Hellenes who had posted themselves about the temple of Hera and had been absent from the battle, that a battle had taken place and that the troops of Pausanias were gaining the victory. When they heard this, then without ranging themselves in any order the Corinthians and those near them turned to go by the skirts of the mountain and by the low hills along the way which led straight up to the temple of Demeter, while the Megarians and Phliasians and those near them went by the plain along the smoothest way. When however the Megarians and Phliasians came near to the enemy, the cavalry of the Thebans caught sight of them from a distance hurrying along without any order, and rode up to attack them, the commander of the cavalry being Asopodoros the son of Timander; and having fallen upon them they slew six hundred of them, and the rest they pursued and drove to Kithairon.         69. [1] en de toutui tui ginomenui fobui aggelletai toisi alloisi Ellesi toisi tetagmenoisi peri to Eraion kai apogenomenoisi teis maxes, oti maxe te gegone kai nikuien oi meta Paysanieu. oi de akousantes tauta, oydena kosmon taxthentes, oi men amfi Korinthioys etraponto dia teis ypurees kai tun kolunun ten feroysan anu ithu tou irou teis Demetros, oi de amfi Megareas te kai Fleiasioys dia tou pedioy ten leiotaten tun odun. [2] epeite de agxou tun polemiun eginonto oi Megarees kai Fleiasioi, apidontes sfeas oi tun Thebaiun ippotai epeigomenoys oydena kosmon elaynon ep' aytous tous ippoys, tun ipparxee Asupoduros o Timandroy, espesontes de katestoresan aytun exakosioys, tous de loipous kateraxan diukontes es ton Kithairuna.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [70]

     70. These then perished thus ingloriously; and meanwhile the Persians and the rest of the throng, having fled for refuge to the palisade, succeeded in getting up to the towers before the Lacedemonians came; and having got up they strengthened the wall of defence as best they could. Then when the Lacedemonians came up to attack it, there began between them a vigorous fight for the wall: for so long as the Athenians were away, they defended themselves and had much the advantage over the Lacedemonians, since these did not understand the art of fighting against walls; but when the Athenians came up to help them, then there was a fierce fight for the wall, lasting for a long time, and at length by valour and endurance the Athenians mounted up on the wall and made a breach in it, through which the Hellenes poured in. Now the Tegeans were the first who entered the wall, and these were they who plundered the tent of Mardonios, taking, besides the other things which were in it, also the manger of his horse, which was all of bronze and a sight worth seeing. This manger of Mardonios was dedicated by the Tegeans as an offering in the temple of Athene Alea, but all the other things which they took, they brought to the common stock of the Hellenes. The Barbarians however, after the wall had been captured, no longer formed themselves into any close body, nor did any of them think of making resistance, but they were utterly at a loss, as you might expect from men who were in a panic with many myriads of them shut up together in a small space: and the Hellenes were able to slaughter them so that out of an army of thirty myriads, if those four be subtracted which Artabazos took with him in his flight, of the remainder not three thousand men survived. Of the Lacedemonians from Sparta there were slain in the battle ninety-one in all, of the Tegeans sixteen, and of the Athenians two-and-fifty.         70. [1] oytoi men de en oydeni logui apulonto. oi de Persai kai o allos omilos, us katefygon es to xulinon teixos, efthesan epi tous purgoys anabantes prin e tous Lakedaimonioys apikesthai, anabantes de efraxanto us edyneato arista to teixos. proselthontun de tun Lakedaimoniun katestekee sfi teixomaxie errumenestere. [2] eus men gar apeisan oi Athenaioi, oi d' emunonto kai pollui pleon eixon tun Lakedaimoniun uste oyk epistamenun teixomaxeein. us de sfi Athenaioi proseilthon, oytu de isxyre egineto teixomaxie kai xronon epi pollon. telos de aretei te kai lipariei epebesan Athenaioi tou teixeos kai eripon. tei de esexeonto oi Ellenes. [3] prutoi de eseilthon Tegeeitai es to teixos, kai ten skenen ten Mardonioy oytoi Esan oi diarpasantes, ta te alla ex ayteis kai ten fatnen tun ippun eousan xalkeen pasan kai thees axien. ten men nyn fatnen tauten ten Mardonioy anethesan es ton neon teis Alees Athenaies Tegeeitai, ta de alla es tuyto, osa per elabon, eseneikan toisi Ellesi. [4] oi de barbaroi oyden eti stifos epoiesanto pesontos tou teixeos, oyde tis aytun alkeis ememneto, aluktazon te oia en oligui xurui pefobemenoi te kai pollai myriades kateilemenai anthrupun. [5] parein te toisi Ellesi foneuein oytu uste triekonta myriadun stratou, katadeoyseun tesserun tas exun Artabazos efeyge, tun loipeun mede treis xiliadas perigenesthai. Lakedaimoniun de tun ek Spartes apethanon oi pantes en tei symbolei eis kai enenekonta, Tegeeteun de ekkaideka, Athenaiun de duo kai pentekonta.   
      71. Among the Barbarians those who proved themselves the best men were, of those on foot the Persians, and of the cavalry the Sacans, and for a single man Mardonios it is said was the best. Of the Hellenes, though both the Tegeans and the Athenians proved themselves good men, yet the Lacedemonians surpassed them in valour. Of this I have no other proof (for all these were victorious over their opposites), but only this, that they fought against the strongest part of the enemy's force and overcame it. And the man who proved himself in my opinion by much the best was that Aristodemos who, having come back safe from Thermopylai alone of the three hundred, had reproach and dishonour attached to him. After him the best were Poseidonios and Philokyon and Amompharetos the Spartan. However, when there came to be conversation as to which of them had proved himself the best, the Spartans who were present gave it as their opinion that Aristodemos had evidently wished to be slain in consequence of the charge which lay against him, and so, being as it were in a frenzy and leaving his place in the ranks, he had displayed great deeds, whereas Poseidonios had proved himself a good man although he did not desire to be slain; and so far he was the better man of the two. This however they perhaps said from ill-will; and all these whose names I mentioned among the men who were killed in this battle, were specially honoured, except Aristodemos; but Aristodemos, since he desired to be slain on account of the before-mentioned charge, was not honoured.         71. [1] eristeyse de tun barbarun pezos men o Perseun, ippos de e Sakeun, aner de legetai Mardonios. Ellenun de, agathun genomenun kai Tegeeteun kai Athenaiun, yperebalonto aretei Lakedaimonioi. [2] allui men oydeni exu aposemenasthai (apantes gar oytoi tous kat' euytous enikun ), oti de kata to isxyroteron proseneixthesan kai toutun ekratesan. kai aristos egeneto makrui Aristodemos kata gnumas tas emeteras, os ek Thermopyleun mounos tun triekosiun sutheis eixe oneidos kai atimien. meta de touton eristeysan Poseidunios te kai Filokuun kai Amomfaretos o Spartietes. [3] kaitoi genomenes lesxes os genoito aytun aristos, egnusan oi paragenomenoi Spartieteun Aristodemon men boylomenon fanerus apothanein ek teis pareouses oi aities, lyssunta te kai ekleiponta ten taxin erga apodexasthai megala, Poseidunion de oy boylomenon apothneskein andra genesthai agathon. tosoutui touton einai ameinu. [4] alla tauta men kai fthonui an eipoien. oytoi de tous katelexa pantes, plen Aristodemoy, tun apothanontun en tautei tei maxei timioi egenonto. Aristodemos de boylomenos apothanein dia ten proeiremenen aitien oyk etimethe.   
      72. These obtained the most renown of those who fought at Plataia, for as for Callicrates, the most beautiful who came to the camp, not of the Lacedemonians alone, but also of all the Hellenes of his time, he was not killed in the battle itself; but when Pausanias was offering sacrifice, he was wounded by an arrow in the side, as he was sitting down in his place in the ranks; and while the others were fighting, he having been carried out of the ranks was dying a lingering death: and he said to Arimnestos a Plataian that it did not grieve him to die for Hellas, but it grieved him only that he had not proved his strength of hand, and that no deed of valour had been displayed by him worthy of the spirit which he had in him to perform great deeds.         72. [1] oytoi men tun en Plataieisi onomastotatoi egenonto. Kallikrates gar exu teis maxes apethane, elthun aner kallistos es to stratopedon tun tote Ellenun, oy mounon aytun Lakedaimoniun alla kai tun allun Ellenun. os, epeide esfagiazeto Paysanies, katemenos en tei taxi etrumatisthe toxeumati ta pleyra. [2] kai de oi men emaxonto, o d' exeneneigmenos edysthanatee te kai elege pros Arimneston andra Plataiea oy melein oi oti pro teis Ellados apothneskei, all' oti oyk exresato tei xeiri kai oti oyden esti oi apodedegmenon ergon euytou axion prothymeymenoy apodexasthai.   
      73. Of the Athenians the man who gained most glory is said to have been Sophanes the son of Eutychides of the deme of Dekeleia,--a deme of which the inhabitants formerly did a deed that was of service to them for all time, as the Athenians themselves report. For when of old the sons of Tyndareus invaded the Attic land with a great host, in order to bring home Helen, and were laying waste the demes, not knowing to what place of hiding Helen had been removed, then they say that the men of Dekeleia, or as some say Dekelos himself, being aggrieved by the insolence of Theseus and fearing for all the land of the Athenians, told them the whole matter and led them to Aphidnai, which Titakos who was sprung from the soil delivered up by treachery to the sons of Tyndareus. In consequence of this deed the Dekeleians have had continually freedom from dues in Sparta and front seats at the games, privileges which exist still to this day; insomuch that even in the war which many years after these events arose between the Athenians and the Peloponnesians, when the Lacedemonians laid waste all the rest of Attica, they abstained from injury to Dekeleia.         73. [1] Athenaiun de legetai eydokimeisai Sufanes o Eytyxideu, ek demoy Dekeleeithen, Dekeleun de tun kote ergasamenun ergon xresimon es ton panta xronon, us aytoi Athenaioi legoysi. [2] us gar de to palai kata Elenes komiden Tyndaridai esebalon es gein ten Attiken sun stratou plethei kai anistasan tous demoys, oyk eidotes ina ypexekeito e Elene, tote legoysi tous Dekeleas, oi de ayton Dekelon axthomenon te tei Theseos ybri kai deimainonta peri pasei tei Athenaiun xurei, exegesamenon sfi to pan preigma kategesasthai epi tas Afidnas, tas de Titakos eun aytoxthun kataprodidoi Tyndarideisi. [3] toisi de Dekeleusi en Spartei apo toutoy tou ergoy ateleie te kai proedrie diateleei es tode aiei eti eousa, oytu uste kai es ton polemon ton ysteron polloisi etesi toutun genomenon Athenaioisi te kai Peloponnesioisi, sinomenun ten allen Attiken Lakedaimoniun, Dekelees apexesthai.   
      74. To this deme belonged Sophanes, who showed himself the best of all the Athenians in this battle; and of him there are two different stories told: one that he carried an anchor of iron bound by chains of bronze to the belt of his corslet; and this he threw whensoever he came up with the enemy, in order, they say, that the enemy when they came forth out of their ranks might not be able to move him from his place; and when a flight of his opponents took place, his plan was to take up the anchor first and then pursue after them. This story is reported thus; but the other of the stories, disputing the truth of that which has been told above, is reported as follows, namely that upon his shield, which was ever moving about and never remaining still, he bore an anchor as a device, and not one of iron bound to his corslet.         74. [1] toutoy tou demoy eun o Sufanes kai aristeusas tote Athenaiun dixous logoys legomenoys exei, ton men us ek tou zusteiros tou thurekos eforee xalkeei alusi dedemenen agkyran sidereen, ten okus pelaseie apikneomenos toisi polemioisi ballesketo, ina de min oi polemioi ekpiptontes ek teis taxios metakineisai me dynaiato. ginomenes de fygeis tun enantiun dedokto ten agkyran analabonta oytu diukein. [2] oytos men oytu legetai, o d' eteros tun logun tui proteron lexthenti amfisbateun legetai, us ep' aspidos aiei peritheouses kai oydama atremizouses eforee agkyran, kai oyk ek tou thurekos dedemenen sidereen.   
      75. There was another illustrious deed done too by Sophanes; for when the Athenians besieged Egina he challenged to a fight and slew Eurybates the Argive, one who had been victor in the five contests at the games. To Sophanes himself it happened after these events that when he was general of the Athenians together with Leagros the son of Glaucon, he was slain after proving himself a good man by the Edonians at Daton, fighting for the gold mines.         75. [1] esti de kai eteron Sufanei lampron ergon exergasmenon, oti perikatemenun Athenaiun Aiginan Eyrybaten ton Argeion andra pentaethlon ek proklesios efoneyse. ayton de Sufanea xronui ysteron toutun katelabe andra genomenon agathon, Athenaiun strategeonta ama Leagrui tui Glaukunos, apothanein ypo Edunun en Datui peri tun metallun tun xryseun maxomenon.   
      76. When the Barbarians had been laid low by the Hellenes at Plataia, there approached to these a woman, the concubine of Pharandates the son of Teaspis a Persian, coming over of her own free will from the enemy, who when she perceived that the Persians had been destroyed and that the Hellenes were the victors, descended from her carriage and came up to the Lacedemonians while they were yet engaged in the slaughter. This woman had adorned herself with many ornaments of gold, and her attendants likewise, and she had put on the fairest robe of those which she had; and when she saw that Pausanias was directing everything there, being well acquainted before with his name and with his lineage, because she had heard it often, she recognised Pausanias and taking hold of his knees she said these words: "O king of Sparta, deliver me thy suppliant from the slavery of the captive: for thou hast also done me service hitherto in destroying these, who have regard neither for demigods nor yet for gods. I am by race of Cos, the daughter of Hegetorides the son of Antagoras; and the Persian took me by force in Cos and kept me a prisoner." He made answer in these words: "Woman, be of good courage, both because thou art a suppliant, and also if in addition to this it chances that thou art speaking the truth and art the daughter of Hegetorides the Coan, who is bound to me as a guest-friend more than any other of the men who dwell in those parts." Having thus spoken, for that time her gave her in charge to those Ephors who were present, and afterwards he sent her away to Egina, whither she herself desired to go.         76. [1] us de toisi Ellesi en Plataieisi katestrunto oi barbaroi, enthauta sfi epeilthe gyne aytomolos. e epeide emathe apolulotas tous Persas kai nikuntas tous Ellenas, eousa pallake Farandateos tou Teaspios andros Perseu, kosmesamene xrysui pollui kai ayte kai amfipoloi kai estheiti tei kallistei tun pareoyseun, katabasa ek teis armamaxes exuree es tous Lakedaimonioys eti en teisi foneisi eontas, orusa de panta ekeina dieponta Paysanien, proteron te to oynoma exepistamene kai ten patren uste pollakis akousasa, egnu te ton Paysanien kai labomene tun goynatun elege tade. [2] <<u basileu Spartes, rhusai me ten iketin aixmalutoy doylosunes. su gar kai es tode unesas, tousde apolesas tous oyte daimonun oyte theun opin exontas. eimi de genos men Kuie, thygater de Egetorideu tou Antagoreu. biei de me labun en Kui eixe o Perses.>> o de ameibetai toiside. [3] <<gunai, tharsee kai us iketis kai ei de pros toutui tygxaneis alethea legoysa kai eis thygater Egetorideu tou Kuioy, os emoi xeinos malista tygxanei eun tun peri ekeinoys tous xuroys oikemenun.>> tauta de eipas tote men epetrepse tun eforun toisi pareousi, ysteron de apepempse es Aiginan, es ten ayte ethele apikesthai.   
      77. After the arrival of the woman, forthwith upon this arrived the Mantineians, when all was over; and having learnt that they had come too late for the battle, they were greatly grieved, and said that they deserved to be punished: and being informed that the Medes with Artabazos were in flight, they pursued after them as far as Thessaly, though the Lacedemonians endeavoured to prevent them from pursuing after fugitives. Then returning back to their own country they sent the leaders of their army into exile from the land. After the Mantineians came the Eleians; and they, like the Mantineians, were greatly grieved by it and so departed home; and these also when they had returned sent their leaders into exile. So much of the Mantineians and Eleians.         77. [1] meta de ten apixin teis gynaikos, aytika meta tauta apikonto Mantinees ep' exergasmenoisi. mathontes de oti ysteroi ekoysi teis symboleis, symforen epoieunto megalen, axioi te efasan einai sfeas zemiusai. [2] pynthanomenoi de tous Medoys tous meta Artabazoy feugontas, toutoys ediukon mexri Thessalies. Lakedaimonioi de oyk eun feugontas diukein. oi de anaxuresantes es ten euytun tous egemonas teis stratieis ediuxan ek teis geis. [3] meta de Mantineas Ekon Eleioi, kai usautus oi Eleioi toisi Mantineusi symforen poiesamenoi apallassonto. apelthontes de kai oytoi tous egemonas ediuxan. ta kata Mantineas men kai Eleioys tosauta.   
      78. At Plataia among the troops of the Eginetans was Lampon the son of Pytheas, one of the leading men of the Eginetans, who was moved to go to Pausanias with a most impious proposal, and when he had come with haste, he said as follows: "Son of Cleombrotos, a deed has been done by thee which is of marvellous greatness and glory, and to thee God has permitted by rescuing Hellas to lay up for thyself the greatest renown of all the Hellenes about whom we have any knowledge. Do thou then perform also that which remains to do after these things, in order that yet greater reputation may attach to thee, and also that in future every one of the Barbarians may beware of being the beginner of presumptuous deeds towards the Hellenes. For when Leonidas was slain at Thermopylai, Mardonios and Xerxes cut off his head and crucified him: to him therefore do thou repay like with like, and thou shalt have praise first from all the Spartans and then secondly from the other Hellenes also; for if thou impale the body of Mardonios, thou wilt then have taken vengeance for Leonidas thy father's brother."         78. [1] en de Plataieisi en tui stratopedui tun Aigineteun En Lampun Pytheu, Aigineteun eun ta pruta. os anosiutaton exun logon ieto pros Paysanien, apikomenos de spoydei elege tade. [2] <<u pai Kleombrotoy, ergon ergastai toi yperfyes megathos te kai kallos, kai toi theos pareduke rhysamenon ten Ellada kleos katathesthai megiston Ellenun tun emeis idmen. su de kai ta loipa ta epi toutoisi poieson, okus logos te se exei eti mezun kai tis ysteron fylassetai tun barbarun me yparxein erga atasthala poieun es tous Ellenas. [3] Leunideu gar apothanontos en Thermopuleisi Mardonios te kai Xerxes apotamontes ten kefalen anestaurusan. tui su ten omoien apodidous epainon exeis pruta men ypo pantun Spartieteun, aytis de kai pros tun allun Ellenun. Mardonion gar anaskolopisas tetimureseai es patrun ton son Leuniden.>>   
      79. He said this thinking to give pleasure; but the other made him answer in these words: "Stranger of Egina, I admire thy friendly spirit and thy forethought for me, but thou hast failed of a good opinion nevertheless: for having exalted me on high and my family and my deed, thou didst then cast me down to nought by advising me to do outrage to a dead body, and by saying that if I do this I shall be better reported of. These things it is more fitting for Barbarians to do than for Hellenes; and even with them we find fault for doing so. However that may be, I do not desire in any such manner as this to please either Eginetans or others who like such things; but it is enough for me that I should keep from unholy deeds, yea and from unholy speech also, and so please the Spartans. As for Leonidas, whom thou biddest me avenge, I declare that he has been greatly avenged already, and by the unnumbered lives which have been taken of these men he has been honoured, and not he only but also the rest who brought their lives to an end at Thermopylai. As for thee however, come not again to me with such a proposal, nor give me such advice; and be thankful moreover that thou hast no punishment for it now."         79. [1] o men dokeun xarizesthai elege tade, o d' antameibeto toiside. <<u xeine Aigineita, to men eynoeein te kai prooran agamai sey, gnumes mentoi emartekas xresteis. exaeiras gar me ypsou kai ten patren kai to ergon, es to meden katebales paraineun nekrui lymainesthai, kai en tauta poieu, fas ameinon me akousesthai. ta prepei mallon barbaroisi poieein e per Ellesi. [2] kai ekeinoisi de epifthoneomen. egu d' un toutoy eineka mete Aigineteisi adoimi mete toisi tauta aresketai, apoxrai de moi Spartieteisi areskomenon osia men poieein, osia de kai legein. Leunidei de, tui me keleueis timureisai, femi megalus tetimureisthai, psyxeisi te teisi tunde anarithmetoisi tetimetai aytos te kai oi alloi oi en Thermopuleisi teleytesantes. su mentoi eti exun logon toionde mete proseltheis emoige mete symboyleuseis, xarin te isthi eun apathes.>>   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [80]

     80. He having heard this went his way; and Pausanias made a proclamation that none should lay hands upon the spoil, and he ordered the Helots to collect the things together. They accordingly dispersed themselves about the camp and found tents furnished with gold and silver, and beds overlaid with gold and overlaid with silver, and mixing-bowls of gold, and cups and other drinking vessels. They found also sacks laid upon waggons, in which there proved to be caldrons both of gold and of silver; and from the dead bodies which lay there they stripped bracelets and collars, and also their swords if they were of gold, for as to embroidered raiment, there was no account made of it. Then the Helots stole many of the things and sold them to the Eginetans, but many things also they delivered up, as many of them as they could not conceal; so that the great wealth of the Eginetans first came from this, that they bought the gold from the Helots making pretence that it was brass.         80. [1] o men tauta akousas apallasseto. Paysanies de kerygma poiesamenos medena aptesthai teis leies, sygkomizein ekeleye tous eilutas ta xremata. oi de ana to stratopedon skidnamenoi eyriskon skenas kateskeyasmenas xrysui kai argurui, klinas te epixrusoys kai eparguroys, kreteiras te xryseoys kai fialas te kai alla ekpumata. [2] sakkoys te ep' amaxeun eyriskon, en toisi lebetes efainonto eneontes xruseoi te kai argureoi. apo te tun keimenun nekrun eskuleyon pselia te kai streptous kai tous akinakas eontas xryseoys, epei estheitos ge poikiles logos egineto oydeis. [3] enthauta polla men kleptontes epuleon pros tous Aiginetas oi eilutes, polla de kai apedeiknysan, osa aytun oyk oia te En krupsai. uste Aigineteisi oi megaloi ploutoi arxen entheuten egenonto, oi ton xryson ate eonta xalkon deithen para tun eilutun uneonto.   
      81. Then having brought the things together, and having set apart a tithe for the god of Delphi, with which the offering was dedicated of the golden tripod which rests upon the three-headed serpent of bronze and stands close by the altar, and also for the god at Olympia, with which they dedicated the offering of a bronze statue of Zeus ten cubits high, and finally for the god at the Isthmus, with which was made a bronze statue of Poseidon seven cubits high,--having set apart these things, they divided the rest, and each took that which they ought to have, including the concubines of the Persians and the gold and the silver and the other things, and also the beasts of burden. How much was set apart and given to those of them who had proved themselves the best men at Plataia is not reported by any, though for my part I suppose that gifts were made to these also; Pausanias however had ten of each thing set apart and given to him, that is women, horses, talents, camels, and so also of the other things.         81. [1] symforesantes de ta xremata kai dekaten exelontes tui en Delfoisi theui, ap' Es o tripoys o xruseos anetethe o epi tou trikarenoy ofios tou xalkeoy epesteus agxista tou bumou, kai tui en Olympiei theui exelontes, ap' Es dekapexyn xalkeon Dia anethekan, kai tui en Isthmui theui, ap' Es eptapexys xalkeos Poseideun exegeneto, tauta exelontes ta loipa diaireonto, kai elabon ekastoi tun axioi Esan, kai tas pallakas tun Perseun kai ton xryson kai argyron kai alla xremata te kai ypozugia. [2] osa men nyn exaireta toisi aristeusasi aytun en Plataieisi edothe, oy legetai pros oydamun, dokeu d' eguge kai toutoisi dotheinai. Paysanie. de panta deka exairethe te kai edothe, gynaikes ippoi talanta kameloi, us de aytus kai talla xremata.   
      82. It is said moreover that this was done which here follows, namely that Xerxes in his flight from Hellas had left to Mardonios the furniture of his own tent, and Pausanias accordingly seeing the furniture of Mardonios furnished with gold and silver and hangings of different colours ordered the bakers and the cooks to prepare a meal as they were used to do for Mardonios. Then when they did this as they had been commanded, it is said that Pausanias seeing the couches of gold and of silver with luxurious coverings, and the tables of gold and silver, and the magnificent apparatus of the feast, was astonished at the good things set before him, and for sport he ordered his own servants to prepare a Laconian meal; and as, when the banquet was served, the difference between the two was great, Pausanias laughed and sent for the commanders of the Hellenes; and when these had come together, Pausanias said, pointing to the preparation of the two meals severally: "Hellenes, for this reason I assembled you together, because I desired to show you the senselessness of this leader of the Medes, who having such fare as this, came to us who have such sorry fare as ye see here, in order to take it away from us." Thus it is said that Pausanias spoke to the commanders of the Hellenes.         82. [1] legetai de kai tade genesthai, us Xerxes feugun ek teis Ellados Mardoniui ten kataskeyen katalipoi ten euytou. Paysanien un orunta ten Mardonioy kataskeyen xrysui te kai argurui kai parapetasmasi poikiloisi kateskeyasmenen, keleusai tous te artokopoys kai tous opsopoious kata tayta kathus Mardoniui deipnon paraskeyazein. [2] us de keleyomenoi oytoi epoieyn tauta, enthauta ton Paysanien idonta klinas te xryseas kai argyreas ey estrumenas kai trapezas te xryseas kai argyreas kai paraskeyen megaloprepea tou deipnoy, ekplagenta ta prokeimena agatha keleusai epi geluti tous euytou diekonoys paraskeyasai Lakunikon deipnon. [3] us de teis thoines poietheises En pollon to meson, ton Paysanien gelasanta metapempsasthai tun Ellenun tous strategous, synelthontun de toutun eipein ton Paysanien, deiknunta es ekateren tou deipnoy paraskeyen, <<andres Ellenes, tunde eineka egu ymeas synegagon, boylomenos ymin toude tou Medun egemonos ten afrosunen dexai, os toiende diaitan exun Elthe es emeas oytu oizyren exontas apairesomenos.>> tauta men Paysanien legetai eipein pros tous strategous tun Ellenun.   
      83. However, in later time after these events many of the Plataians also found chests of gold and of silver and of other treasures; and moreover afterwards this which follows was seen in the case of the dead bodies here, after the flesh had been stripped off from the bones; for the Plataians brought together the bones all to one place:--there was found, I say, a skull with no suture but all of one bone, and there was seen also a jaw-bone, that is to say the upper part of the jaw, which had teeth joined together and all of one bone, both the teeth that bite and those that grind; and the bones were seen also of a man five cubits high.         83. [1] ysterui mentoi xronui meta tauta kai tun Plataieun eyron syxnoi thekas xrysou kai arguroy kai tun allun xrematun. [2] efane de kai tode ysteron toutun epi tun nekrun peripsiluthentun tas sarkas. syneforeon gar ta ostea oi Plataiees es ena xuron. eyrethe kefale oyk exoysa rhafen oydemian all' ex enos eousa osteoy, efane de kai gnathos kata to anu teis gnathoy exoysa odontas moynofyeas ex enos osteoy pantas tous te prosthioys kai gomfioys, kai pentapexeos andros ostea efane.   
      84. The body of Mardonios however had disappeared on the day after the battle, taken by whom I am not able with certainty to say, but I have heard the names of many men of various cities who are said to have buried Mardonios, and I know that many received gifts from Artontes the son of Mardonios for having done this: who he was however who took up and buried the body of Mardonios I am not able for certain to discover, but Dionysophanes an Ephesian is reported with some show of reason to have been he who buried Mardonios.         84. [1] epeite de Mardonioy deyterei emerei o nekros efanisto, ypo otey men anthrupun to atrekes oyk exu eipein, pollous de tinas ede kai pantodapous ekoysa thapsai Mardonion, kai dura megala oida labontas pollous para Artonteu tou Mardonioy paidos dia touto to ergon. [2] ostis mentoi En aytun o ypelomenos te kai thapsas ton nekron ton Mardonioy, oy dunamai atrekeus pythesthai, exei de tina fatin kai Dionysofanes aner Efesios thapsai Mardonion. all' o men tropui toioutui etafe.   
      85. He then was buried in some such manner as this: and the Hellenes when they had divided the spoil at Plataia proceeded to bury their dead, each nation apart by themselves. The Spartans made for themselves three several burial-places, one in which they buried the younger Spartans, of whom also were Poseidonios, Amompharetos, Philokyon and Callicrates,--in one of the graves, I say, were laid the younger men, in the second the rest of the Spartans, and in the third the Helots. These then thus buried their dead; but the Tegeans buried theirs all together in a place apart from these, and the Athenians theirs together; and the Megarians and Phliasians those who had been slain by the cavalry. Of all these the burial-places had bodies laid in them, but as to the burial-places of other States which are to be seen at Plataia, these, as I am informed, are all mere mounds of earth without any bodies in them, raised by the several peoples on account of posterity, because they were ashamed of their absence from the fight; for among others there is one there called the burial-place of the Eginetans, which I hear was raised at the request of the Eginetans by Cleades the son of Autodicos, a man of Plataia who was their public guest-friend, no less than ten years after these events.         85. [1] oi de Ellenes us en Plataieisi ten leien dieilonto, ethapton tous euytun xuris ekastoi. Lakedaimonioi men trixas epoiesanto thekas. entha men tous irenas ethapsan, tun kai Poseidunios kai Amomfaretos Esan kai Filokuun te kai Kallikrates. [2] en men de eni tun tafun Esan oi irenes, en de tui eterui oi alloi Spartieitai, en de tui tritui oi eilutes. oytoi men oytu ethapton, Tegeeitai de xuris pantas aleas, kai Athenaioi tous euytun omou, kai Megarees te kai Fleiasioi tous ypo teis ippoy diaftharentas. [3] toutun men de pantun plerees egenonto oi tafoi. tun de allun osoi kai fainontai en Plataieisi eontes tafoi, toutoys de, us egu pynthanomai, epaisxynomenoys tei apestoi teis maxes ekastoys xumata xusai keina tun epiginomenun eineken anthrupun, epei kai Aigineteun esti aytothi kaleomenos tafos, ton egu akouu kai deka etesi ysteron meta tauta deethentun tun Aigineteun xusai Kleaden ton Aytodikoy andra Plataiea, proxeinon eonta aytun.   
      86. When the Hellenes had buried their dead at Plataia, forthwith they determined in common council to march upon Thebes and to ask the Thebans to surrender those who had taken the side of the Medes, and among the first of them Timagenides and Attaginos, who were leaders equal to the first; and if the Thebans did not give them up, they determined not to retire from the city until they had taken it. Having thus resolved, they came accordingly on the eleventh day after the battle and began to besiege the Thebans, bidding them give the men up: and as the Thebans refused to give them up, they began to lay waste their land and also to attack their wall.         86. [1] us d' ara ethapsan tous nekrous en Plataieisi oi Ellenes, aytika boyleyomenoisi sfi edokee strateuein epi tas Thebas kai exaiteein aytun tous medisantas, en prutoisi de aytun Timegeniden kai Attaginon, oi arxegetai ana prutoys Esan. en de me ekdidusi, me apanistasthai apo teis polios proteron e exelusi. [2] us de sfi tauta edoxe, oytu de endekatei emerei apo teis symboleis apikomenoi epoliorkeon Thebaioys, keleuontes ekdidonai tous andras. oy boylomenun de tun Thebaiun ekdidonai, ten te gein aytun etamnon kai proseballon pros to teixos.   
      87. So then, as they did not cease their ravages, on the twentieth day Timagenides spoke as follows to the Thebans: "Thebans, since it has been resolved by the Hellenes not to retire from the siege until either they have taken Thebes or ye have delivered us up to them, now therefore let not the land of Boeotia suffer any more for our sakes, but if they desire to have money and are demanding our surrender as a colour for this, let us give them money taken out of the treasury of the State; for we took the side of the Medes together with the State and not by ourselves alone: but if they are making the siege truly in order to get us into their hands, then we will give ourselves up for trial." In this it was thought that he spoke very well and seasonably, and the Thebans forthwith sent a herald to Pausanias offering to deliver up the men.         87. [1] kai oy gar epauonto sinomenoi, eikostei emerei elexe toisi Thebaioisi Timegenides tade. <<andres Thebaioi, epeide oytu dedoktai toisi Ellesi, me proteron apanasteinai poliorkeontas e exelusi Thebas e emeas aytoisi paradute, nun un emeun eineka gei e Boiutie pleu me anaplesei, [2] all' ei men xrematun xreizontes prosxema emeas exaiteontai, xremata sfi dumen ek tou koinou (sun gar tui koinui kai emedisamen oyde mounoi emeis ), ei de emeun aletheus deomenoi poliorkeoysi, emeis emeas aytous es antilogien parexomen.>> karta te edoxe ey legein kai es kairon, aytika te epekerykeuonto pros Paysanien oi Thebaioi thelontes ekdidonai tous andras.   
      88. After they had made an agreement on these terms, Attaginos escaped out of the city; and when his sons were delivered up to Pausanias, he released them from the charge, saying that the sons had no share in the guilt of taking the side of the Medes. As to the other men whom the Thebans delivered up, they supposed that they would get a trial, and they trusted moreover to be able to repel the danger by payment of money; but Pausanias, when he had received them, suspecting this very thing, first dismissed the whole army of allies, and then took the men to Corinth and put them to death there. These were the things which happened at Plataia and at Thebes.         88. [1] us de umologesan epi toutoisi, Attaginos men ekdidreskei ek tou asteos, paidas de aytou apaxthentas Paysanies apelyse teis aities, fas tou medismou paidas oyden einai metaitioys. tous de alloys andras tous exedosan oi Thebaioi, oi men edokeon antilogies te kyresein kai de xremasi epepoithesan diutheesthai. o de us parelabe, ayta tauta yponoeun ten stratien ten tun symmaxun apasan apeike kai ekeinoys agagun es Korinthon dieftheire. tauta men ta en Plataieisi kai Thebeisi genomena.   
      89. Artabazos meanwhile, the son of Pharnakes, in his flight from Plataia was by this time getting forward on his way: and the Thessalians, when he came to them, offered him hospitality and inquired concerning the rest of the army, not knowing anything of that which had happened at Plataia; and Artabazos knowing that if he should tell them the whole truth about the fighting, he would run the risk of being destroyed, both himself and the whole army which was with him, (for he thought that they would all set upon him if they were informed of that which had happened),--reflecting, I say, upon this he had told nothing of it to the Phokians, and now to the Thessalians he spoke as follows: "I, as you see, Thessalians, am earnest to march by the shortest way to Thracia; and I am in great haste, having been sent with these men for a certain business from the army; moreover Mardonios himself and his army are shortly to be looked for here, marching close after me. To him give entertainment and show yourselves serviceable, for ye will not in the end repent of so doing." Having thus said he continued to march his army with haste through Thessaly and Macedonia straight for Thracia, being in truth earnest to proceed and going through the land by the shortest possible way: and so he came to Byzantion, having left behind him great numbers of his army, who had either been cut down by the Thracians on the way or had been overcome by hunger and fatigue; and from Byzantion he passed over in ships. He himself then thus made his return back to Asia.         89. [1] Artabazos de o Farnakeos feugun ek Plataieun kai de prosu egineto. apikomenon de min oi Thessaloi para sfeas epi te xeinia ekaleon kai aneirutun peri teis stratieis teis alles, oyden epistamenoi tun en Plataieisi genomenun. [2] o de Artabazos gnous oti ei ethelei sfi pasan ten aletheien tun agunun eipein, aytos te kindyneusei apolesthai kai o met' aytou stratos. epithesesthai gar oi panta tina oieto pynthanomenon ta gegonota. tauta eklogizomenos oyte pros tous Fukeas exegoreye oyden pros te tous Thessalous elege tade. [3] <<egu men u andres Thessaloi, us orate, epeigomai te kata taxos elun es Threiken kai spoyden exu, pemftheis kata ti preigma ek tou stratopedoy meta tunde. aytos de ymin Mardonios kai o stratos aytou, oytos kata podas emeu elaunun prosdokimos esti. touton kai xeinizete kai ey poieuntes fainesthe. oy gar ymin es xronon tauta poieusi metamelesei.>> [4] tauta de eipas apelayne spoydei ten stratien dia Thessalies te kai Makedonies ithu teis Threikes, us aletheus epeigomenos, kai ten mesogaian tamnun teis odou. kai apikneetai es Byzantion, katalipun tou stratou tou euytou syxnous ypo Threikun katakopentas kat' odon kai limui systantas kai kamatui. ek Byzantioy de diebe ploioisi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [90]

     90. Now on the same day on which the defeat took place at Plataia, another took place also, as fortune would have it, at Mycale in Ionia. For when the Hellenes who had come in the ships with Leotychides the Lacedemonian, were lying at Delos, there came to them as envoys from Samos Lampon the son of Thrasycles and Athenagoras the son of Archestratides and Hegesistratos the son of Aristagoras, who had been sent by the people of Samos without the knowledge either of the Persians or of the despot Theomestor the son of Androdamas, whom the Persians had set up to be despot of Samos. When these had been introduced before the commanders, Hegesistratos spoke at great length using arguments of all kinds, and saying that so soon as the Ionians should see them they would at once revolt from the Persians, and that the Barbarians would not wait for their attack; and if after all they did so, then the Hellenes would take a prize such as they would never take again hereafter; and appealing to the gods worshipped in common he endeavoured to persuade them to rescue from slavery men who were Hellenes and to drive away the Barbarian: and this he said was easy for them to do, for the ships of the enemy sailed badly and were no match for them in fight. Moreover if the Hellenes suspected that they were endeavouring to bring them on by fraud, they were ready to be taken as hostages in their ships.         90. [1] oytos men oytu apenostese es ten Asien. teis de ayteis emeres teis per en Plataieisi to truma egeneto, synekurese genesthai kai en Mykalei teis Iunies. epei gar de en tei Delui kateato oi Ellenes oi en teisi neysi ama Leytyxidei tui Lakedaimoniui apikomenoi, Elthon sfi aggeloi apo Samoy Lampun te Thrasykleos kai Athenagores Arxestratideu kai Egesistratos Aristagoreu, pemfthentes ypo Samiun lathrei tun te Perseun kai tou tyrannoy Theomestoros tou Androdamantos, ton katestesan Samoy turannon oi Persai. [2] epelthontun de sfeun epi tous strategous elege Egesistratos polla kai pantoia, us en mounon iduntai aytous oi Iunes apostesontai apo Perseun, kai us oi barbaroi oyk ypomeneoysi. en de kai ara ypomeinusi, oyk eteren agren toiauten eyrein an aytous. theous te koinous anakaleun proetrape aytous rhusasthai andras Ellenas ek doylosunes kai apamunai ton barbaron. [3] eypetes te aytoisi efe tauta ginesthai. tas te gar neas aytun kakus pleein kai oyk axiomaxoys keinoisi einai. aytoi te, ei ti ypopteuoysi me dolui aytous proagoien, etoimoi einai en teisi neysi teisi ekeinun agomenoi omeroi einai.   
      91. Then as the stranger of Samos was urgent in his prayer, Leotychides inquired thus, either desiring to hear for the sake of the omen or perhaps by a chance which Providence brought about: "Stranger of Samos, what is thy name?" He said "Hegesistratos." The other cut short the rest of the speech, stopping all that Hegesistratos had intended to say further, and said: "I accept the augury given in Hegesistratos, stranger of Samos. Do thou on thy part see that thou give us assurance, thou and the men who are with thee, that the Samians will without fail be our zealous allies, and after that sail away home."         91. [1] us de pollos En lissomenos o xeinos o Samios, eireto Leytyxides, eite kledonos eineken thelun pythesthai eite kai kata syntyxien theou poieuntos, <<u xeine Samie, ti toi to oynoma;>> o de eipe <<Egesistratos.>> [2] o de yparpasas ton epiloipon logon, ei tina ormeto legein o Egesistratos, eipe <<dekomai ton oiunon ton Egesistratoy, u xeine Samie. su de emin poiee okus aytos te dous pistin apopleuseai kai oi sun soi eontes oide, E men Samioys emin prothumoys esesthai symmaxoys.>>   
      92. Thus he spoke and to the words he added the deed; for forthwith the Samians gave assurance and made oaths of alliance with the Hellenes, and having so done the others sailed away home, but Hegesistratos he bade sail with the Hellenes, considering the name to be an augury of good success. Then the Hellenes after staying still that day made sacrifices for success on the next day, their diviner being Deiphonos the son of Euenios an Apolloniate, of that Apollonia which lies in the Ionian gulf.         92. [1] tauta te ama egoreye kai to ergon proseige. aytika gar oi Samioi pistin te kai orkia epoieunto symmaxies peri pros tous Ellenas. [2] tauta de poiesantes oi men apepleon. meta sfeun gar ekeleye pleein ton Egesistraton, oiunon to oynoma poieumenos. oi de Ellenes episxontes tauten ten emeren tei ysteraiei ekalliereonto, manteyomenoy sfi Deifonoy tou Eyenioy andros Apollunieteu, Apollunies de teis en tui Ioniui kolpui. toutoy ton patera Eyenion katelabe preigma toionde.   
      93. To this man's father Euenios it happened as follows:--There are at this place Apollonia sheep sacred to the Sun, which during the day feed by a river running from Mount Lacmon through the land of Apollonia to the sea by the haven of Oricos; and by night they are watched by men chosen for this purpose, who are the most highly considered of the citizens for wealth and noble birth, each man having charge of them for a year; for the people of Apollonia set great store on these sheep by reason of an oracle: and they are folded in a cave at some distance from the city. Here at the time of which I speak this man Euenios was keeping watch over them, having been chosen for that purpose; and it happened one night that he fell asleep during his watch, and wolves came by into the cave and killed about sixty of the sheep. When he perceived this, he kept it secret and told no one, meaning to buy others and substitute them in the place of those that were killed. It was discovered however by the people of Apollonia that this had happened; and when they were informed of it, they brought him up before a court and condemned him to be deprived of his eyesight for having fallen asleep during his watch. But when they had blinded Euenios, forthwith after this their flocks ceased to bring forth young and their land to bear crops as before. Then prophesyings were uttered to them both at Dodona and also at Delphi, when they asked the prophets the cause of the evil which they were suffering, and they told them that they had done unjustly in depriving of his sight Euenios the watcher of the sacred sheep; for the gods of whom they inquired had themselves sent the wolves to attack the sheep; and they would not cease to take vengeance for him till the men of Apollonia should have paid to Euenios such satisfaction as he himself should choose and deem sufficient; and this being fulfilled, the gods would give to Euenios a gift of such a kind that many men would think him happy in that he possessed it.         93. [1] esti en tei Apolluniei tautei ira elioy probata, ta tas men emeras bosketai para Khuna potamon, os ek Lakmonos oreos rheei dia teis Apollunies xures es thalassan par' Urikon limena, tas de nuktas arairemenoi andres oi ploutui te kai genei dokimutatoi tun astun, oytoi fylassoysi eniayton ekastos. peri pollou gar de poieuntai Apollunieitai ta probata tauta ek theopropioy tinos. en de antrui aylizontai apo teis polios ekas. [2] entha de tote o Eyenios oytos arairemenos efulasse. kai kote aytou katakoimesantos fylaken parelthontes lukoi es to antron dieftheiran tun probatun us exekonta. o de us epeise, eixe sigei kai efraze oydeni, en noui exun antikatastesein alla priamenos. [3] kai oy gar elathe tous Apollunietas tauta genomena, all' us eputhonto, ypagagontes min ypo dikasterion katekrinan, us ten fylaken katakoimesanta, teis opsios steretheinai. epeite de ton Eyenion exetuflusan, aytika meta tauta oyte probata sfi etikte oyte gei efere omoius karpon. [4] profanta de sfi en te Dudunei kai en Delfoisi egineto, epeite epeirutun tous profetas to aition tou pareontos kakou, oi de aytoisi efrazon oti adikus ton fulakon tun irun probatun Eyenion teis opsios esteresan. aytoi gar epormeisai tous lukoys, oy proteron te pausesthai timureontes ekeinui prin e dikas dusi tun epoiesan tautas tas an aytos eletai kai dikaioi. toutun de teleomenun aytoi dusein Eyeniui dosin toiauten ten pollous min makariein anthrupun exonta.   
      94. These oracles then were uttered to them, and the people of Apollonia, making a secret of it, proposed to certain men of the citizens to manage the affair; and they managed it for them thus:--when Euenios was sitting on a seat in public, they came and sat by him, and conversed about other matters, and at last they came to sympathising with him in his misfortune; and thus leading him on they asked what satisfaction he should choose, if the people of Apollonia should undertake to give him satisfaction for that which they had done. He then, not having heard the oracle, made choice and said that if there should be given him the lands belonging to certain citizens, naming those whom he knew to possess the two best lots of land in Apollonia, and a dwelling-house also with these, which he knew to be the best house in the city,--if he became the possessor of these, he said, he would have no anger against them for the future, and this satisfaction would be sufficient for him if it should be given. Then as he was thus speaking, the men who sat by him said interrupting him: "Euenios, this satisfaction the Apolloniates pay to thee for thy blinding in accordance with the oracles which have been given to them." Upon this he was angry, being thus informed of the whole matter and considering that he had been deceived; and they bought the property from those who possessed it and gave him that which he had chosen. And forthwith after this he had a natural gift of divination, so that he became very famous.         94. [1] ta men xresteria tauta sfi exresthe, oi de Apollunieitai aporreta poiesamenoi proethesan tun astun andrasi diapreixai. oi de sfi dieprexan ude. katemenoy Eyenioy en thukui elthontes oi parizonto kai logoys alloys epoieunto, es o katebainon syllypeumenoi tui pathei. tautei de ypagontes eirutun tina diken an eloito, ei etheloien Apollunieitai dikas yposteinai dusein tun epoiesan. [2] o de oyk akekous to theopropion eileto eipas ei tis oi doie agrous, tun astun onomasas toisi epistato einai kallistoys duo kleroys tun en tei Apolluniei, kai oikesin pros toutoisi ten eidee kallisten eousan tun en poli. toutun de efe epebolos genomenos tou loipou amenitos einai, kai diken oi tauten apoxran genomenen. [3] kai o men tauta elege, oi de paredroi eipan ypolabontes <<Eyenie, tauten diken Apollunieitai teis ektyflusios ektinoysi toi kata theopropia ta genomena.>> o men de pros tauta deina epoiee, to entheuten pythomenos ton panta logon, us exapatetheis. oi de priamenoi para tun ektemenun didousi oi ta eileto. kai meta tauta aytika emfyton mantiken eixe, uste kai onomastos genesthai.   
      95. Of this Euenios, I say, Deiphonos was the son, and he was acting as diviner for the army, being brought by the Corinthians. I have heard however also that Deiphonos wrongly made use of the name of Euenios, and undertook work of this kind about Hellas, not being really the son of Euenios.         95. [1] toutoy de o Deifonos eun pais tou Eyenioy agontun Korinthiun emanteueto tei stratiei. ede de kai tode ekoysa, us o Deifonos epibateuun tou Eyenioy oynomatos exelambane epi ten Ellada erga, oyk eun Eyenioy pais.   
      96. Now when the sacrifices were favourable to the Hellenes, they put their ships to sea from Delos to go to Samos; and having arrived off Calamisa in Samos, they moored their ships there opposite the temple of Hera which is at this place, and made preparations for a sea-fight; but the Persians, being informed that they were sailing thither, put out to sea also and went over to the mainland with their remaining ships, (those of the Phenicians having been already sent away to sail home): for deliberating of the matter they thought it good not to fight a battle by sea, since they did not think that they were a match for the enemy. And they sailed away to the mainland in order that they might be under the protection of their land-army which was in Mycale, a body which had stayed behind the rest of the army by command of Xerxes and was keeping watch over Ionia: of this the number was six myriads and the commander of it was Tigranes, who in beauty and stature excelled the other Persians. The commanders of the fleet then had determined to take refuge under the protection of this army, and to draw up their ships on shore and put an enclosure round as a protection for the ships and a refuge for themselves.         96. [1] toisi de Ellesi us ekallierese, aneigon tas neas ek teis Deloy pros ten Samon. epei de egenonto teis Samies pros Kalamisoisi, oi men aytou ormisamenoi kata to Eraion to tautei pareskeyazonto es naymaxien, oi de Persai pythomenoi sfeas prospleein aneigon kai aytoi pros ten epeiron tas neas tas allas, tas de Foinikun apeikan apopleein. boyleyomenoisi gar sfi edokee naymaxien me poieesthai. [2] oy gar un edokeon omoioi einai. es de ten epeiron apepleon, okus eusi ypo ton pezon straton ton sfeteron eonta en tei Mykalei, os keleusantos Xerxeu kataleleimmenos tou alloy stratou Iunien efulasse. tou pleithos men En ex myriades, estrategee de aytou Tigranes kallei kai megathei yperferun Perseun. [3] ypo touton men de ton straton eboyleusanto katafygontes oi tou naytikou strategoi aneirusai tas neas kai peribalesthai erkos eryma te tun neun kai sfeun aytun kresfugeton.   
      97. Having thus determined they began to put out to sea; and they came along by the temple of the "Revered goddesses" to the Gaison and to Scolopoeis in Mycale, where there is a temple of the Eleusinian Demeter, which Philistos the son of Pasicles erected when he had accompanied Neileus the son of Codros for the founding of Miletos; and there they drew up their ships on shore and put an enclosure round them of stones and timber, cutting down fruit-trees for this purpose, and they fixed stakes round the enclosure and made their preparations either for being besieged or for gaining a victory, for in making their preparations they reckoned for both chances.         97. [1] tauta boyleysamenoi anegonto. apikomenoi de para to tun Potnieun iron teis Mykales es Gaisuna te kai Skolopoenta, tei Demetros Eleysinies iron, to Filistos o Pasikleos idrusato Neileui tui Kodroy epispomenos epi Miletoy ktistun, enthauta tas te neas aneirysan kai periebalonto erkos kai lithun kai xulun, dendrea ekkopsantes emera, kai skolopas peri to erkos katepexan, kai pareskeyadato us poliorkesomenoi kai us nikesontes, ep' amfotera epilegomenoi gar pareskeyazonto,   
      98. The Hellenes however, when they were informed that the Barbarians had gone away to the mainland, were vexed because they thought that they had escaped; and they were in a difficulty what they should do, whether they should go back home, or sail down towards the Hellespont. At last they resolved to do neither of these two things, but to sail on to the mainland. Therefore when they had prepared as for a sea- fight both boarding-bridges and all other things that were required, they sailed towards Mycale; and when they came near to the camp and no one was seen to put out against them, but they perceived ships drawn up within the wall and a large land-army ranged along the shore, then first Leotychides, sailing along in his ship and coming as near to the shore as he could, made proclamation by a herald to the Ionians, saying: "Ionians, those of you who chance to be within hearing of me, attend to this which I say: for the Persians will not understand anything at all of that which I enjoin to you. When we join battle, each one of you must remember first the freedom of all, and then the watchword 'Hebe'; and this let him also who has not heard know from him who has heard." The design in this act was the same as that of Themistocles at Artemision; for it was meant that either the words uttered should escape the knowledge of the Barbarians and persuade the Ionians, or that they should be reported to the Barbarians and make them distrustful of the Hellenes.         98. [1] oi de Ellenes us eputhonto oixukotas tous barbaroys es ten epeiron, exthonto us ekpefeygotun aporiei te eixonto o ti poieusi, eite apallassuntai opisu eite katapleusi ep' Ellespontoy. telos de edoxe toutun men medetera poieein, epipleein de epi ten epeiron. [2] paraskeyasamenoi un es naymaxien kai apobathras kai alla osun edee, epleon epi teis Mykales. epei de agxou te eginonto tou stratopedoy kai oydeis efaineto sfi epanagomenos, all' urun neas anelkysmenas esu tou teixeos, pollon de pezon parakekrimenon para ton aigialon, enthauta pruton men en tei nei parapleun, egxrimpsas tui aigialui ta malista, Leytyxides ypo kerykos proegoreye toisi Iusi legun [3] <<andres Iunes, oi ymeun tygxanoysi epakouontes, mathete ta legu. pantus gar oyden synesoysi Persai tun egu ymin entellomai. epean symmisgumen, memneisthai tina xre eleytheries men pantun pruton, meta de tou synthematos Ebes. kai tade istu kai o me akousas ymeun pros tou akousantos.>> [4] uytos de oytos eun tygxanei noos tou pregmatos kai o Themistokleos o ep' Artemisiui. e gar de lathonta ta rhemata tous barbaroys emelle tous Iunas peisein, e epeita aneneixthenta es tous barbaroys poiesein apistoys toisi Ellesi.   
      99. After Leotychides had thus suggested, then next the Hellenes proceeded to bring their ships up to land, and they disembarked upon the shore. These then were ranging themselves for fight; and the Persians, when they saw the Hellenes preparing for battle and also that they had given exhortation to the Ionians, in the first place deprived the Samians of their arms, suspecting that they were inclined to the side of the Hellenes; for when the Athenian prisoners, the men whom the army of Xerxes had found left behind in Attica, had come in the ships of the Barbarians, the Samians had ransomed these and sent them back to Athens, supplying them with means for their journey; and for this reason especially they were suspected, since they had ransomed five hundred persons of the enemies of Xerxes. Then secondly the Persians appointed the Milesians to guard the passes which lead to the summits of Mycale, on the pretext that they knew the country best, but their true reason for doing this was that they might be out of the camp. Against these of the Ionians, who, as they suspected, would make some hostile move if they found the occasion, the Persians sought to secure themselves in the manner mentioned; and they themselves then brought together their wicker-work shields to serve them as a fence.         99. [1] Leytyxideu de tauta ypothemenoy deutera de tade epoieyn oi Ellenes. prossxontes tas neas apebesan es ton aigialon. kai oytoi men etassonto, oi de Persai us eidon tous Ellenas paraskeyazomenoys es maxen kai toisi Iusi parainesantas, touto men yponoesantes tous Samioys ta Ellenun froneein apaireontai ta opla. [2] oi gar un Samioi apikomenun Athenaiun aixmalutun en teisi neysi tun barbarun, tous elabon ana ten Attiken leleimmenoys oi Xerxeu, toutoys lysamenoi pantas apopempoysi epodiasantes es Athenas. tun eineken oyk ekista ypopsien eixon, pentakosias kefalas tun Xerxeu polemiun lysamenoi. [3] touto de tas diodoys tas es tas koryfas teis Mykales ferousas prostassoysi toisi Milesioisi fylassein us epistamenoisi deithen malista ten xuren. epoieyn de touto toude eineken, ina ektos tou stratopedoy eusi. toutoys men Iunun, toisi kai katedokeon neoxmon an ti poieein dynamios epilabomenoisi, tropoisi toioutoisi proefylassonto oi Persai, aytoi de syneforesan ta gerra erkos einai sfisi.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [100]

     100. Then when the Hellenes had made all their preparations, they proceeded to the attack of the Barbarians; and as they went, a rumour came suddenly to their whole army, and at the same time a herald's staff was found lying upon the beach; and the rumour went through their army to this effect, namely that the Hellenes were fighting in Boeotia and conquering the army of Mardonios. Now by many signs is the divine power seen in earthly things, and by this among others, namely that now, when the day of the defeat at Plataia and of that which was about to take place at Mycale happened to be the same, a rumour came to the Hellenes here, so that the army was encouraged much more and was more eagerly desirous to face the danger.         100. [1] us de ara pareskeyadato toisi Ellesi, proseisan pros tous barbaroys. iousi de sfi feme te eseptato es to stratopedon pan kai kerykeion efane epi teis kymatugeis keimenon. e de feme dieilthe sfi ude, us oi Ellenes ten Mardonioy stratien nikuien en Boiutoisi maxomenoi. [2] deila de polloisi tekmerioisi esti ta theia tun pregmatun, ei kai tote, teis ayteis emeres sympiptouses tou te en Plataieisi kai tou en Mykalei mellontos esesthai trumatos, feme toisi Ellesi toisi tautei esapiketo, uste tharseisai te ten stratien pollui mallon kai ethelein prothymoteron kindyneuein.   
      101. Moreover this other thing by coincidence happened besides, namely that there was a sacred enclosure of the Eleusinian Demeter close by the side of both the battle-fields; for not only in the Plataian land did the fight take place close by the side of the temple of Demeter, as I have before said, but also in Mycale it was to be so likewise. And whereas the rumour which came to them said that a victory had been already gained by the Hellenes with Pausanias, this proved to be a true report; for that which was done at Plataia came about while it was yet early morning, but the fighting at Mycale took place in the afternoon; and that it happened on the same day of the same month as the other became evident to them not long afterwards, when they inquired into the matter. Now they had been afraid before the rumour arrived, not for themselves so much as for the Hellenes generally, lest Hellas should stumble and fall over Mardonios; but when this report had come suddenly to them, they advanced on the enemy much more vigorously and swiftly than before. The Hellenes then and the Barbarians were going with eagerness into the battle, since both the islands and the Hellespont were placed before them as prizes of the contest.         101. [1] kai tode eteron synepese genomenon, Demetros temenea Eleysinies para amfoteras tas symbolas einai. kai gar de en tei Plataiidi par' ayto to Demetrion egineto, us kai proteron moi eiretai, e maxe, kai en Mykalei emelle usautus esesthai. [2] gegonenai de niken tun meta Paysanieu Ellenun orthus sfi e feme synebaine elthousa. to men gar en Plataieisi prui eti teis emeres egineto, to de en Mykalei peri deilen. oti de teis ayteis emeres synebaine ginesthai menos te tou aytou, xronui oy pollui sfi ysteron deila anamanthanoysi egineto. [3] En de arrudie sfi, prin ten femen esapikesthai, oyti peri sfeun aytun oytu us tun Ellenun, me peri Mardoniui ptaisei e Ellas. us mentoi e kledun ayte sfi eseptato, mallon, ti kai taxuteron ten prosodon epoieunto. oi men de Ellenes kai oi barbaroi espeydon es ten maxen, us sfi kai ai neisoi kai o Ellespontos aethla proekeito.   
      102. Now for the Athenians and those who were ranged next to them, to the number perhaps of half the whole army, the road lay along the sea- beach and over level ground, while the Lacedemonians and those ranged in order by these were compelled to go by a ravine and along the mountain side: so while the Lacedemonians were yet going round, those upon the other wing were already beginning the fight; and as long as the wicker-work shields of the Persians still remained upright, they continued to defend themselves and had rather the advantage in the fight; but when the troops of the Athenians and of those ranged next to them, desiring that the achievement should belong to them and not to the Lacedemonians, with exhortations to one another set themselves more vigorously to the work, then from that time forth the fortune of the fight was changed; for these pushed aside the wicker-work shields and fell upon the Persians with a rush all in one body, and the Persians sustained their first attack and continued to defend themselves for a long time, but at last they fled to the wall; and the Athenians, Corinthians, Sikyonians and Troizenians, for that was the order in which they were ranged, followed close after them and rushed in together with them to the space within the wall: and when the wall too had been captured, then the Barbarians no longer betook themselves to resistance, but began at once to take flight, excepting only the Persians, who formed into small groups and continued to fight with the Hellenes as they rushed in within the wall. Of the commanders of the Persians two made their escape and two were slain; Artayntes and Ithamitres commanders of the fleet escaped, while Mardontes and the commander of the land-army, Tigranes, were slain.         102. [1] toisi men nyn Athenaioisi kai toisi prosexesi toutoisi tetagmenoisi, mexri koy tun emiseun, e odos egineto kat' aigialon te kai apedon xuron, toisi de Lakedaimonioisi kai toisi epexeis toutoisi tetagmenoisi kata te xaradran kai orea. en ui de oi Lakedaimonioi perieisan, oytoi oi epi tui eterui kerei eti kai de emaxonto. [2] eus men nyn toisi Perseisi ortha En ta gerra, emunonto te kai oyden elasson eixon tei maxei. epei de tun Athenaiun kai tun prosexeun o stratos, okus euytun genetai to ergon kai me Lakedaimoniun, parakeleysamenoi ergoy eixonto prothymoteron, entheuten ede eteroiouto to preigma. [3] diusamenoi gar ta gerra oytoi feromenoi esepeson alees es tous Persas, oi de dexamenoi kai xronon syxnon amynomenoi telos efeygon es to teixos. Athenaioi de kai Korinthioi kai Sikyunioi kai Troizenioi (oytu gar Esan epexeis tetagmenoi ) synepispomenoi synesepipton es to teixos. us de kai to teixos araireto, oyt' eti pros alken etraponto oi barbaroi pros fygen te ormeato oi alloi plen Perseun. [4] oytoi de kat' oligoys ginomenoi emaxonto toisi aiei es to teixos espiptoysi Ellenun. kai tun strategun tun Persikun duo men apofeugoysi, duo de teleytusi. Artauntes men kai Ithamitres tou naytikou strategeontes apofeugoysi, Mardontes de kai o tou pezou strategos Tigranes maxomenoi teleytusi.   
      103. Now while the Persians were still fighting, the Lacedemonians and those with them arrived, and joined in carrying through the rest of the work; and of the Hellenes themselves many fell there and especially many of the Sikyonians, together with their commander Perilaos. And those of the Samians who were serving in the army, being in the camp of the Medes and having been deprived of their arms, when they saw that from the very first the battle began to be doubtful, did as much as they could, endeavouring to give assistance to the Hellenes; and the other Ionians seeing that the Samians had set the example, themselves also upon that made revolt from the Persians and attacked the Barbarians.         103. [1] eti de maxomenun tun Perseun apikonto Lakedaimonioi kai oi met' aytun, kai ta loipa syndiexeirizon. epeson de kai aytun tun Ellenun syxnoi enthauta alloi te kai Sikyunioi kai strategos Perileus. [2] tun te Samiun oi strateyomenoi eontes te en tui stratopedui tui Medikui kai aparairemenoi ta opla, us eidon aytika kat' arxas ginomenen eteralkea ten maxen, erdon oson edyneato prosufeleein ethelontes toisi Ellesi. Samioys de idontes oi alloi Iunes arxantas oytu de kai aytoi apostantes apo Perseun epethento toisi barbaroisi.   
      104. The Milesians too had been appointed to watch the passes of the Persians in order to secure their safety, so that if that should after all come upon them which actually came, they might have guides and so get safe away to the summits of Mycale,--the Milesians, I say, had been appointed to do this, not only for that end but also for fear that, if they were present in the camp, they might make some hostile move: but they did in fact the opposite of that which they were appointed to do; for they not only directed them in the flight by other than the right paths, by paths indeed which led towards the enemy, but also at last they themselves became their worst foes and began to slay them. Thus then for the second time Ionia revolted from the Persians.         104. [1] Milesioisi de prosetetakto men ek tun Perseun tas diodoys tereein suteries eineka sfi, us en ara sfeas katalambanei oia per katelabe, exontes egemonas suzuntai es tas koryfas teis Mykales. etaxthesan men nyn epi touto to preigma oi Milesioi toutoy te eineken kai ina me pareontes en tui stratopedui ti neoxmon poieoien. oi de pan toynantion tou prostetagmenoy epoieon, allas te kategeomenoi sfi odous feugoysi, ai de eferon es tous polemioys, kai telos aytoi sfi eginonto kteinontes polemiutatoi. oytu de to deuteron Iunie apo Perseun apeste.   
      105. In this battle, of the Hellenes the Athenians were the best men, and of the Athenians Hermolycos the son of Euthoinos, a man who had trained for the pancration. This Hermolycos after these events, when there was war between the Athenians and the Carystians, was killed in battle at Kyrnos in the Carystian land near Geraistos, and there was buried. After the Athenians the Corinthians, Troizenians and Sikyonians were the best.         105. [1] en de tautei tei maxei Ellenun eristeysan Athenaioi kai Athenaiun Ermolykos o Eythoinoy, aner pagkration epaskesas. touton de ton Ermolykon katelabe ysteron toutun, polemoy eontos Athenaioisi te kai Karystioisi, en Kurnui teis Karysties xures apothanonta en maxei keisthai epi Geraistui. meta de Athenaioys Korinthioi kai Troizenioi kai Sikyunioi eristeysan.   
      106. When the Hellenes had slain the greater number of the Barbarians, some in the battle and others in their flight, they set fire to the ships and to the whole of the wall, having first brought out the spoil to the sea-shore; and among the rest they found some stores of money. So having set fire to the wall and to the ships they sailed away; and when they came to Samos, the Hellenes deliberated about removing the inhabitants of Ionia, and considered where they ought to settle them in those parts of Hellas of which they had command, leaving Ionia to the Barbarians: for it was evident to them that it was impossible on the one hand for them to be always stationed as guards to protect the Ionians, and on the other hand, if they were not stationed to protect them, they had no hope that the Ionians would escape with impunity from the Persians. Therefore it seemed good to those of the Peloponnesians that were in authority that they should remove the inhabitants of the trading ports which belonged to those peoples of Hellas who had taken the side of the Medes, and give that land to the Ionians to dwell in; but the Athenians did not think it good that the inhabitants of Ionia should be removed at all, nor that the Peloponnesians should consult about Athenian colonies; and as these vehemently resisted the proposal, the Peloponnesians gave way. So the end was that they joined as allies to their league the Samians, Chians, Lesbians, and the other islanders who chanced to be serving with the Hellenes, binding them by assurance and by oaths to remain faithful and not withdraw from the league: and having bound these by oaths they sailed to break up the bridges, for they supposed they would find them still stretched over the straits. These then were sailing towards the Hellespont;         106. [1] epeite de katergasanto oi Ellenes tous pollous tous men maxomenoys tous de kai feugontas tun barbarun, tas neas enepresan kai to teixos apan, ten leien proexagagontes es ton aigialon, kai thesayrous tinas xrematun eyron. empresantes de to teixos kai tas neas apepleon. [2] apikomenoi de es Samon oi Ellenes eboyleuonto peri anastasios teis Iunies, kai okei xreon eie teis Ellados katoikisai teis aytoi egkratees Esan, ten de Iunien apeinai toisi barbaroisi. adunaton gar efaineto sfi einai euytous te Iunun prokateisthai froyreontas ton panta xronon, kai euytun me prokatemenun Iunas oydemian elpida eixon xairontas pros tun Perseun apallaxein. [3] pros tauta Peloponnesiun men toisi en telei eousi edokee tun medisantun ethneun tun Ellenikun ta empolaia exanastesantas dounai ten xuren Iusi enoikeisai, Athenaioisi de oyk edokee arxen Iunien genesthai anastaton oyde Peloponnesioisi peri tun sfetereun apoikieun boyleuein. antiteinontun de toutun prothumus, eixan oi Peloponnesioi. [4] kai oytu de Samioys te kai Khioys kai Lesbioys kai tous alloys nesiutas, oi etyxon systrateyomenoi toisi Ellesi, es to symmaxikon epoiesanto, pisti te katalabontes kai orkioisi emmeneein te kai me apostesesthai. toutoys de katalabontes orkioisi epleon tas gefuras lusontes. eti gar edokeon entetamenas eyresein. oytoi men de ep' Ellespontoy epleon.   
      107. and meanwhile those Barbarians who had escaped and had been driven to the heights of Mycale, being not many in number, were making their way to Sardis: and as they went by the way, Masistes the son of Dareios, who had been present at the disaster which had befallen them, was saying many evil things of the commander Artayntes, and among other things he said that in respect of the generalship which he had shown he was worse than a woman, and that he deserved every kind of evil for having brought evil on the house of the king. Now with the Persians to be called worse than a woman is the greatest possible reproach. So he, after he had been much reviled, at length became angry and drew his sword upon Masistes, meaning to kill him; and as he was running upon him, Xeinagoras the son of Prexilaos, a man of Halicarnassos, perceived it, who was standing just behind Artayntes; and this man seized him by the middle and lifting him up dashed him upon the ground; and meanwhile the spearmen of Masistes came in front to protect him. Thus did Xeinagoras, and thus he laid up thanks for himself both with Masistes and also with Xerxes for saving the life of his brother; and for this deed Xeinagoras became ruler of all Kilikia by the gift of the king. Nothing further happened than this as they went on their way, but they arrived at Sardis. Now at Sardis, as it chanced, king Xerxes had been staying ever since that time when he came thither in flight from Athens, after suffering defeat in the sea-fight.         107. [1] tun de apofygontun barbarun es ta akra teis Mykales kateilethentun, eontun oy pollun, egineto komide es Sardis. poreyomenun de kat' odon Masistes o Dareioy paratyxun tui pathei tui gegonoti ton strategon Artaunten elege polla te kai kaka, alla te kai gynaikos kakiu fas ayton einai toiauta strategesanta, kai axion einai pantos kakou ton basileos oikon kakusanta. para de toisi Perseisi gynaikos kakiu akousai dennos megistos esti. [2] o de epei polla ekoyse, deina poieumenos spatai epi ton Masisten ton akinaken, apokteinai thelun. kai min epitheonta frastheis Xeinagores o Prexileu aner Alikarnesseus opisthe esteus aytou Artaunteu arpazei meson kai exaeiras paiei es ten gein. kai en toutui oi doryforoi oi Masisteu proestesan. [3] o de Xeinagores tauta ergasato xarita aytui te Masistei tithemenos kai Xerxei. eksuzun ton adelfeon ton ekeinoy. kai dia touto to ergon Xeinagores Kilikies pases Erxe dontos basileos. tun de kat' odon poreyomenun oyden epi pleon toutun egeneto, all' apikneontai es Sardis. en de teisi Sardisi etugxane eun basileus ex ekeinoy tou xronoy, epeite ex Atheneun prosptaisas tei naymaxiei fygun apiketo.   
      108. At that time, while he was in Sardis, he had a passionate desire, as it seems, for the wife of Masistes, who was also there: and as she could not be bent to his will by his messages to her, and he did not wish to employ force because he had regard for his brother Masistes and the same consideration withheld the woman also, for she well knew that force would not be used towards her), then Xerxes abstained from all else, and endeavoured to bring about the marriage of his own son Dareios with the daughter of this woman and of Masistes, supposing that if he should do so he would obtain her more easily. Then having made the betrothal and done all the customary rites, he went away to Susa; and when he had arrived there and had brought the woman into his own house for Dareios, then he ceased from attempting the wife of Masistes and changing his inclination he conceived a desire for the wife of Dareios, who was daughter of Masistes, and obtained her: now the name of this woman was Artaynte.         108. [1] tote de en teisi Sardisi eun ara era teis Masisteu gynaikos, eouses kai tautes enthauta. us de oi prospemponti oyk edunato katergastheinai, oyde bien prosefereto prometheomenos ton adelfeon Masisten. tuyto de touto eixe kai ten gynaika. ey gar epistato bies oy teyxomene. enthauta de Xerxes ergomenos tun allun pressei ton gamon touton tui paidi tui euytou Dareiui, thygatera teis gynaikos tautes kai Masisteu, dokeun ayten mallon lampsesthai en tauta poiesei. [2] armosas de kai ta nomizomena poiesas apelayne es Sousa. epei de ekei te apiketo kai egageto es euytou Dareiui ten gynaika, oytu de teis Masisteu men gynaikos epepayto, o de diameipsamenos era te kai etugxane teis Dareioy men gynaikos Masisteu de thygatros. oynoma de tei gynaiki tautei En Artaunte.   
      109. However as time went on, this became known in the following manner:--Amestris the wife of Xerxes had woven a mantle, large and of various work and a sight worthy to be seen, and this she gave to Xerxes. He then being greatly pleased put it on and went to Artaynte; and being greatly pleased with her too, he bade her ask what she would to be given to her in return for the favours which she had granted to him, for she should obtain, he said, whatsoever she asked: and she, since it was destined that she should perish miserably with her whole house, said to Xerxes upon this: "Wilt thou give me whatsoever I ask thee for?" and he, supposing that she would ask anything rather than that which she did, promised this and swore to it. Then when he had sworn, she boldly asked for the mantle; and Xerxes tried every means of persuasion, not being willing to give it to her, and that for no other reason but only because he feared Amestris, lest by her, who even before this had some inkling of the truth, he should thus be discovered in the act; and he offered her cities and gold in any quantity, and an army which no one else should command except herself. Now this of an army is a thoroughly Persian gift. Since however he did not persuade her, he gave her the mantle; and she being overjoyed by the gift wore it and prided herself upon it.         109. [1] xronoy de proiontos anapysta ginetai tropui toiuide. exyfenasa Amestris e Xerxeu gyne faros mega te kai poikilon kai thees axion didoi Xerxei. o de estheis periballetai te kai erxetai para ten Artaunten. [2] estheis de kai tautei ekeleyse ayten aiteisai o ti bouletai oi genesthai anti tun aytui ypoyrgemenun. panta gar teuxesthai aitesasan. tei de kakus gar edee panoikiei genesthai, pros tauta eipe Xerxei <<duseis moi to an se aitesu;>> o de pan mallon dokeun keinen aiteisai ypisxneeto kai umose. e de us umose adeus aiteei to faros. [3] Xerxes de pantoios egineto oy boylomenos dounai, kat' allo men oyden, fobeomenos de Amestrin, me kai prin kateikazousei ta ginomena oytu epeyrethei pressun. alla polis te edidoy kai xryson apleton kai straton, tou emelle oydeis arxein all' e ekeine. Persikon de karta o stratos duron. all' oy gar epeithe, didoi to faros. e de perixares eousa tui durui eforee te kai agalleto.   
    
     
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [110]

     110. And Amestris was informed that she had it; and having learnt that which was being done, she was not angry with the woman, but supposing that her mother was the cause and that she was bringing this about, she planned destruction for the wife of Masistes. She waited then until her husband Xerxes had a royal feast set before him:--this feast is served up once in the year on the day on which the king was born, and the name of this feast is in Persian tycta, which in the tongue of the Hellenes means "complete"; also on this occasion alone the king washes his head, and he makes gifts then to the Persians:--Amestris, I say, waited for this day and then asked of Xerxes that the wife of Masistes might be given to her. And he considered it a strange and untoward thing to deliver over to her his brother's wife, especially since she was innocent of this matter; for he understood why she was making the request.         110. [1] kai e Amestris pynthanetai min exoysan. mathousa de to poieumenon tei men gynaiki tautei oyk eixe egkoton, e de elpizoysa ten metera ayteis einai aitien kai tauta ekeinen pressein, tei Masisteu gynaiki ebouleye olethron. [2] fylaxasa de ton andra ton euyteis Xerxen basileion deipnon protithemenon. touto de to deipnon paraskeyazetai apax tou eniaytou emerei tei egeneto basileus. oynoma de tui deipnui toutui Persisti men tykta, kata de ten Ellenun glussan teleion. tote kai ten kefalen smatai mounon basileus kai Persas dureetai. tauten de ten emeren fylaxasa e Amestris xreizei tou Xerxeu dotheinai oi ten Masisteu gynaika. [3] o de deinon te kai anarsion epoieeto touto men adelfeou gynaika paradounai, touto de anaitien eousan tou pregmatos toutoy. syneike gar tou eineken edeeto.   
      111. At last however as she continued to entreat urgently and he was compelled by the rule, namely that it is impossible among them that he who makes request when a royal feast is laid before the king should fail to obtain it, at last very much against his will consented; and in delivering her up he bade Amestris do as she desired, and meanwhile he sent for his brother and said these words: "Masistes, thou art the son of Dareios and my brother, and moreover in addition to this thou art a man of worth. I say to thee, live no longer with this wife with whom thou now livest, but I give thee instead of her my daughter; with her live as thy wife, but the wife whom thou now hast, do not keep; for it does not seem good to me that thou shouldest keep her." Masistes then, marvelling at that which was spoken, said these words: "Master, how unprofitable a speech is this which thou utterest to me, in that thou biddest me send away a wife by whom I have sons who are grown up to be young men, and daughters one of whom even thou thyself didst take as a wife for thy son, and who is herself, as it chances, very much to my mind,--that thou biddest me, I say, send away her and take to wife thy daughter! I, O king, think it a very great matter that I am judged worthy of thy daughter, but nevertheless I will do neither of these things: and do not thou urge me by force to do such a thing as this: but for thy daughter another husband will be found not in any wise inferior to me, and let me, I pray thee, live still with my own wife." He returned answer in some such words as these; and Xerxes being stirred with anger said as follows: "This then, Masistes, is thy case,--I will not give thee my daughter for thy wife, nor yet shalt thou live any longer with that one, in order that thou mayest learn to accept that which is offered thee." He then when he heard this went out, having first said these words: "Master, thou hast not surely brought ruin upon me?"         111. [1] telos mentoi ekeines te lipareouses kai ypo tou nomoy exergomenos, oti atyxeisai ton xreizonta oy sfi dynaton esti basileioy deipnoy prokeimenoy, karta de aekun kataneuei, kai paradous poieei ude. ten men keleuei poieein ta bouletai, o de metapempsamenos ton adelfeon legei tade. [2] <<Masista, su eis Dareioy te pais kai emos adelfeos, pros d' eti toutoisi kai eis aner agathos. gynaiki de tautei tei nun synoikeeis me synoikee, alla toi ant' ayteis egu didumi thygatera ten emen. tautei synoikee. ten de nun exeis, oy gar dokeei emoi, me exe gynaika.>> [3] o de Masistes apothumasas ta legomena legei tade. <<u despota, tina moi logon legeis axreston, keleuun me gynaika, ek teis moi paides te neeniai eisi kai thygateres, tun kai su mian tui paidi tui seuytou egageo gynaika, ayte te moi kata noon tygxanei karta eousa. tauten me keleueis metenta thygatera ten sen geimai; [4] egu de basileu megala men poieumai axieumenos thygatros teis seis, poiesu mentoi toutun oydetera. su de medamus biu pregmatos toioude deomenos. alla tei te sei thygatri aner allos fanesetai emeu oyden essun, eme te ea gynaiki tei emei synoikeein.>> [5] o men de toioutoisi ameibetai, Xerxes de thymutheis legei tade. <<oytu toi, Masista, peprektai. oyte gar an toi doien thygatera ten emen geimai, oyte ekeinei pleuna xronon synoikeseis, us matheis ta didomena dekesthai.>> o de us tauta ekoyse, eipas tosonde exuree exu <<despota, oy de ku me apulesas.>>   
      112. During this interval of time, while Xerxes was conversing with his brother, Amestris had sent the spearmen of Xerxes to bring the wife of Masistes, and she was doing to her shameful outrage; for she cut away her breasts and threw them to dogs, and she cut off her nose and ears and lips and tongue, and sent her back home thus outraged.         112. [1] en de toutui dia mesoy xronui, en tui Xerxes tui adelfeui dielegeto, e Amestris metapempsamene tous doryforoys tou Xerxeu dialymainetai ten gynaika tou Masisteu. tous te mazous apotamousa kysi proebale kai rhina kai uta kai xeilea kai glussan ektamousa es oikon min apopempei dialelymasmenen.   
      113. Then Masistes, not yet having heard any of these things, but supposing that some evil had fallen upon him, came running to his house; and seeing his wife thus mutilated, forthwith upon this he took counsel with his sons and set forth to go to Bactria together with his sons and doubtless some others also, meaning to make the province of Bactria revolt and to do the greatest possible injury to the king: and this in fact would have come to pass, as I imagine, if he had got up to the land of the Bactrians and Sacans before he was overtaken, for they were much attached to him, and also he was the governor of the Bactrians: but Xerxes being informed that he was doing this, sent after him an army as he was on his way, and slew both him and his sons and his army. So far of that which happened about the passion of Xerxes and the death of Masistes.         113. [1] o de Masistes oyden ku akekous toutun, elpomenos de ti oi kakon einai, espiptei dromui es ta oikia. idun de dieftharmenen ten gynaika, aytika meta tauta symboyleysamenos toisi paisi eporeueto es Baktra sun te toisi euytou yioisi kai de koy tisi kai alloisi us apostesun nomon ton Baktrion kai poiesun ta megista kakun basilea. [2] ta per an kai egeneto, us emoi dokeein, ei per efthe anabas es tous Baktrioys kai tous Sakas. kai gar estergon min kai En yparxos tun Baktriun. alla gar Xerxes pythomenos tauta ekeinon pressonta, pempsas ep' ayton stratien en tei odui katekteine ayton te ekeinon kai tous paidas aytou kai ten stratien ten ekeinoy. kata men ton eruta ton Xerxeu kai ton Masisteu thanaton tosauta egeneto.   
      114. Now the Hellenes who had set forth from Mycale to the Hellespont first moored their ships about Lecton, being stopped from their voyage by winds; and thence they came to Abydos and found that the bridges had been broken up, which they thought to find still stretched across, and on account of which especially they had come to the Hellespont. So the Peloponnesians which Leotychides resolved to sail back to Hellas, while the Athenians and Xanthippos their commander determined to stay behind there and to make an attempt upon the Chersonese. Those then sailed away, and the Athenians passed over from Abydos to the Chersonese and began to besiege Sestos.         114. [1] oi de ek Mykales ormethentes Ellenes ep' Ellespontoy pruton men peri Lekton ormeon, ypo anemun apolamfthentes, entheuten de apikonto es Abydon kai tas gefuras eyron dialelymenas, tas edokeon eyresein eti entetamenas, kai toutun oyk ekista eineken es ton Ellesponton apikonto. [2] toisi men nyn amfi Leytyxiden Peloponnesiois edoxe apopleein es ten Ellada, Athenaioisi de kai Xanthippui tui strategui aytou ypomeinantas peirasthai teis Khersonesoy. oi men de apepleon, Athenaioi de ek teis Abudoy diabantes es ten Khersoneson Seston epoliorkeon.   
      115. To this town of Sestos, since it was the greatest stronghold of those in that region, men had come together from the cities which lay round it, when they heard that the Hellenes had arrived at the Hellespont, and especially there had come from the city of Cardia Oiobazos a Persian, who had brought to Sestos the ropes of the bridges. The inhabitants of the city were Aiolians, natives of the country, but there were living with them a great number of Persians and also of their allies.         115. [1] es de ten Seston tauten, us eontos isxyrotatoy teixeos tun tautei, syneilthon, us ekoysan pareinai tous Ellenas es ton Ellesponton, ek te tun alleun tun perioikidun, kai de kai ek Kardies polios Oiobazos aner Perses, os ta ek tun gefyreun opla enthauta En kekomikus. eixon de tauten epixurioi Aiolees, syneisan de Persai te kai tun allun symmaxun syxnos omilos.   
      116. And of the province Artayctes was despot, as governor under Xerxes, a Persian, but a man of desperate and reckless character, who also had practised deception upon the king on his march against Athens, in taking away from Elaius the things belonging to Protesilaos the son of Iphiclos. For at Elaius in the Chersonese there is the tomb of Protesilaos with a sacred enclosure about it, where there were many treasures, with gold and silver cups and bronze and raiment and other offerings, which things Artayctes carried off as plunder, the king having granted them to him. And he deceived Xerxes by saying to him some such words as these: "Master, there is here the house of a man, a Hellene, who made an expedition against thy land and met with his deserts and was slain: this man's house I ask thee to give to me, that every one may learn not to make expeditions against thy land." By saying this it was likely that he would easily enough persuade Xerxes to give him a man's house, not suspecting what was in his mind: and when he said that Protesilaos had made expedition against the land of the king, it must be understood that the Persians consider all Asia to be theirs and to belong to their reigning king. So when the things had been given him, he brought them from Elaius to Sestos, and he sowed the sacred enclosure for crops and occupied it as his own; and he himself, whenever he came to Elaius, had commerce with women in the inner cell of the temple. And now he was being besieged by the Athenians, when he had not made any preparation for a siege nor had been expecting that the Hellenes would come; for they fell upon him, as one may say, inevitably.         116. [1] etyranneye de toutoy tou nomou Xerxeu yparxos Artauktes, aner men Perses, deinos de kai atasthalos, os kai basilea elaunonta ep' Athenas exepatese, ta Prutesileu tou Ifikloy xremata ex Elaiountos ypelomenos. [2] en gar Elaiounti teis Khersonesoy esti Prutesileu tafos te kai temenos peri ayton, entha En xremata polla kai fialai xruseai kai argureai kai xalkos kai esthes kai alla anathemata, ta Artauktes esulese basileos dontos. legun de toiade Xerxen diebaleto. [3] <<despota, esti oikos andros Ellenos enthauta, os epi gein sen strateysamenos dikes kyresas apethane. toutoy moi dos ton oikon, ina kai tis mathei epi gein ten sen me strateuesthai.>> tauta legun eypeteus emelle anapeisein Xerxen dounai andros oikon, oyden ypotopethenta tun ekeinos efronee. epi gein de ten basileos strateuesthai Prutesileun elege noeun toiade. ten Asien pasan nomizoysi euytun einai Persai kai tou aiei basileuontos. epei de edothe, ta xremata ex Elaiountos es Seston exeforese, kai to temenos espeire kai enemeto, aytos te okus apikoito es Elaiounta en tui adutui gynaixi emisgeto. tote de epoliorkeeto ypo Athenaiun oyte pareskeyasmenos es poliorkien oyte prosdekomenos tous Ellenas, afuktus de kus aytui epepeson.   
      117. When however autumn came and the siege still went on, the Athenians began to be vexed at being absent from their own land and at the same time not able to conquer the fortress, and they requested their commanders to lead them away home; but these said that they would not do so, until either they had taken the town or the public authority of the Athenians sent for them home: and so they endured their present state.         117. [1] epei de poliorkeomenoisi sfi fthinopuron epegineto, kai esxallon oi Athenaioi apo te teis euytun apodemeontes kai oy dynamenoi exelein to teixos, edeonto te tun strategun okus apagoien sfeas opisu, oi de oyk efasan prin e exelusi e to Athenaiun koinon sfeas metapempsetai. oytu de estergon ta pareonta.   
      118. Those however who were within the walls had now come to the greatest misery, so that they boiled down the girths of their beds and used them for food; and when they no longer had even these, then the Persians and with them Artayctes and Oiobazos ran away and departed in the night, climbing down by the back part of the wall, where the place was left most unguarded by the enemy; and when day came, the men of the Chersonese signified to the Athenians from the towers concerning that which had happened, and opened the gates to them. So the greater number of them went in pursuit, and the rest occupied the city.         118. [1] oi de en tui teixei es pan ede kakou apigmenoi Esan, oytu uste tous tonoys epsontes tun klineun esiteonto. epeite de oyde tauta eti eixon, oytu de ypo nukta oixonto apodrantes oi te Persai kai o Artauktes kai o Oiobazos, opisthe tou teixeos katabantes, tei En eremotaton tun polemiun. [2] us de emere egeneto, oi Khersonesitai apo tun purgun esemenan toisi Athenaioisi to gegonos kai tas pulas anoixan. tun de oi men pleunes ediukon, oi de ten polin eixon.   
      119. Now Oiobazos, as he was escaping into Thrace, was caught by the Apsinthian Thracians and sacrificed to their native god Pleistoros with their rites, and the rest who were with him they slaughtered in another manner: but Artayctes with his companions, who started on their flight later and were overtaken at a little distance above Aigospotamoi, defended themselves for a considerable time and were some of them killed and others taken alive: and the Hellenes had bound these and were bringing them to Sestos, and among them Artayctes also in bonds together with his son.         119. [1] Oiobazon men nyn ekfeugonta es ten Threiken Threikes Apsinthioi labontes ethysan Pleisturui epixuriui theui tropui tui sfeterui, tous de met' ekeinoy allui tropui efoneysan. [2] oi de amfi ton Artaukten ysteroi ormethentes feugein, kai us katelambanonto oligon eontes yper Aigos potamun, alexomenoi xronon epi syxnon oi men apethanon oi de zuntes elamfthesan. kai syndesantes sfeas oi Ellenes Egon es Seston, met' aytun de kai Artaukten dedemenon ayton te kai ton paida aytou.   
    
    
The History of Herodotus, parallel English/Greek, tr. G. C. Macaulay, [1890], at sacred-texts.com

 

Herodotus Book 9: Calliope [120]

     120. Then, it is said by the men of the Chersonese, as one of those who guarded them was frying dried fish, a portent occurred as follows,--the dried fish when laid upon the fire began to leap and struggle just as if they were fish newly caught: and the others gathered round and were marvelling at the portent, but Artayctes seeing it called to the man who was frying the fish and said: "Stranger of Athens, be not at all afraid of this portent, seeing that it has not appeared for thee but for me. Protesilaos who dwells at Elaius signifies thereby that though he is dead and his body is dried like those fish, yet he has power given him by the gods to exact vengeance from the man who does him wrong. Now therefore I desire to impose this penalty for him,--that in place of the things which I took from the temple I should pay down a hundred talents to the god, and moreover as ransom for myself and my son I will pay two hundred talents to the Athenians, if my life be spared." Thus he engaged to do, but he did not prevail upon the commander Xanthippos; for the people of Elaius desiring to take vengeance for Protesilaos asked that he might be put to death, and the inclination of the commander himself tended to the same conclusion. They brought him therefore to that headland to which Xerxes made the passage across, or as some say to the hill which is over the town of Madytos, and there they nailed him to boards and hung him up; and they stoned his son to death before the eyes of Artayctes himself.         120. [1] kai teui tun fylassontun legetai ypo Khersonesiteun tarixoys optunti teras genesthai toionde. oi tarixoi epi tui pyri keimenoi epallonto te kai espairon okus per ixthues neoalutoi. [2] kai oi men perixythentes ethumazon, o de Artauktes us eide to teras, kalesas ton optunta tous tarixoys efe <<xeine Athenaie, meden fobeo to teras touto. oy gar soi pefene, all' emoi semainei o en Elaiounti Prutesileus oti kai tethneus kai tarixos eun dunamin pros theun exei ton adikeonta tinesthai. [3] nun un apoina moi tade ethelu epitheinai, anti men xrematun tun elabon ek tou irou ekaton talanta katatheinai tui theui, anti d' emeuytou kai tou paidos apodusu talanta diekosia Athenaioisi perigenomenos.>> [4] tauta ypisxomenos ton strategon Xanthippon oyk epeithe. oi gar Elaiousioi tui Prutesileui timureontes edeonto min kataxrestheinai, kai aytou tou strategou tautei noos efere. apagagontes de ayton es ten Xerxes ezeyxe ton poron, oi de legoysi epi ton kolunon ton yper Madutoy polios, pros sanidas prospassaleusantes anekremasan. ton de paida en ofthalmoisi tou Artaukteu kateleysan.   
      121. Having so done, they sailed away to Hellas, taking with them, besides other things, the ropes also of the bridges, in order to dedicate them as offerings in the temples: and for that year nothing happened further than this.         121. [1] tauta de poiesantes apepleon es ten Ellada, ta te alla xremata agontes kai de kai ta opla tun gefyreun us anathesontes es ta ira. kai kata to etos touto oyden epi pleon toutun egeneto.   
      122. Now a forefather of this Artayctes who was hung up, was that Artembares who set forth to the Persians a proposal which they took up and brought before Cyrus, being to this effect: "Seeing that Zeus grants to the Persians leadership, and of all men to thee, O Cyrus, by destroying Astyages, come, since the land we possess is small and also rugged, let us change from it and inhabit another which is better: and there are many near at hand, and many also at a greater distance, of which if we take one, we shall have greater reverence and from more men. It is reasonable too that men who are rulers should do such things; for when will there ever be a fairer occasion than now, when we are rulers of many nations and of the whole of Asia?" Cyrus, hearing this and not being surprised at the proposal, bade them do so if they would; but he exhorted them and bade them prepare in that case to be no longer rulers but subjects; "For," said he, "from lands which are not rugged men who are not rugged are apt to come forth, since it does not belong to the same land to bring forth fruits of the earth which are admirable and also men who are good in war." So the Persians acknowledged that he was right and departed from his presence, having their opinion defeated by that of Cyrus; and they chose rather to dwell on poor land and be rulers, than to sow crops in a level plain and be slaves to others.        122. [1] toutoy de Artaukteu tou anakremasthentos propatur Artembares esti o Perseisi exegesamenos logon ton ekeinoi ypolabontes Kurui proseneikan legonta tade. [2] <<epei Zeus Perseisi egemonien didoi, andrun de soi Kure, katelun Astyagen, fere, gein gar ektemetha oligen kai tauten trexean, metanastantes ek tautes allen sxumen ameinu. eisi de pollai men astygeitones pollai de kai ekasteru, tun mian sxontes pleosi esometha thumastoteroi. oikos de andras arxontas toiauta poieein. kote gar de kai parexei kallion e ote ge anthrupun te pollun arxomen pases te teis Asies; [3] >> Kuros de tauta akousas kai oy thumasas ton logon ekeleye poieein tauta, oytu de aytoisi parainee keleuun paraskeyazesthai us oyketi arxontas all' arxomenoys. fileein gar ek tun malakun xurun malakous ginesthai. oy gar ti teis ayteis geis einai karpon te thumaston fuein kai andras agathous ta polemia. [4] uste syggnontes Persai oixonto apostantes, essuthentes tei gnumei pros Kuroy, arxein te eilonto lypren oikeontes mallon e pediada speirontes alloisi doyleuein.  
   


===== BOOK: hhp.txt =====



The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

The House of the Hidden Places

  

A Clue to the Creed of Early Egypt

  

by W. Marsham Adams

  

John Murray: London

  

[1895]

Click to enlarge
THE "STONE OF GOD."
 Throne in the Luminous Hall of Truth.

Click to enlarge
The Path of Light in the House of the Hidden Places (350 Kb)

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2007, by John B. Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS.

           

       Preface

       <page vii>

     
      I.

       The Pyramid of   Light

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       The House of   Osiris

       <page 42>

     
      III.

       The Hidden God

       <page 80>

     
      IV.

       The Mystery of   the Heavens

       <page 110>

     
      V.

       The Mystery of   the Depths

       <page 147>

     
      VI.

       The Initiation   of the Postulant

       <page 190>

     
      VII.

       The   Illumination of the Adept

       <page 225>

     
   

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE.

THE singular correspondence which may be traced between the passage-chambers of the Grand Pyramid--called by the Egyptians of old The "Khut," or "Lights"--and the various stages traversed, according to the creed of that ancient nation, by the holy dead in passing from the light of earth to the light of eternal day, was first pointed out by me last year in the pages of the New Review. Previously to publication the article was submitted in substance to M. Maspero and Professor Sayce; and I desire to express my sincere thanks to those eminent authorities for the recognition and encouragement which they afforded me, as well as to Mr. Mengedoht, the hieroglyphic scholar, for

[p. viii]

his revision of my work. In the present book the same analogy is worked out in much fuller detail--not completely indeed, for that may well need the labour of years; but sufficiently, I would hope, to present a clear basis for further investigation in either direction. In the case of the Ritual, we obtain what appears to me to be a consistent and intelligible analysis of that hitherto impenetrable creed, through the gradual transformation of the faculties in successive stages of illumination. With regard to the Pyramid, we are led to suggest a spiritual and most far-sighted purpose for its construction. For in that marvellous edifice, the very stones of which in their silent harmony seem to rebuke the idle charges of folly and pride heaped by ignorance upon the architect, we have nothing less than an indestructible and immutable symbol of the national religion.

The value of the general theory here proposed depends therefore, it is evident, upon

[p. ix]

the accuracy of the correspondence established, or sought to be established, between the path so jealously concealed within the interior of the Pyramid of Light and the path described textually in the well-known collection of sacred Egyptian writings, which is called by us the "Book of the Dead," but which claims for its own title the "Book of the Master of the Hidden Places." But those points of correspondence are so numerous in themselves, and form so severe, a system of checks upon each other, as to reduce almost to nothing the chance of their arising from mere coincidence; while no amount of ingenuity--the deadliest perhaps of all opponents to truth--could suffice to satisfy the innumerable conditions connected with the worship, the kalendar, and the civil constitution of the country which such a correspondence must fulfil.

Nor let it be supposed that an inquiry of this kind is merely of archaeological interest,

[p. x]

or that a determination of that early creed can have no greater value than to satisfy an idle curiosity. Very far from it. If there be a fact in the general development of nations which historical research has clearly demonstrated, it is the extreme tenacity of antique belief, and its enduring influence on the organization of society; since religion, far more than convention, appears to have been the basis of ancient law. Each generation, as it passes, modifies no doubt, but only to a very slight extent, the form of the social bond; and that not for itself, but for the generation which succeeds. If therefore we would trace more clearly the relation of man in his complex individuality to the yet more complex organism of human society, wherein each individual has his particular function, we cannot do better than examine thoroughly the creed of the earliest civilization on record. And the side-lights which such an investigation will be found to throw on the political

[p. xi]

and social constitution of that remarkable nation, illustrating, in point after point, peculiarities which hitherto have appeared to be anomalies, appear to me to be strong confirmation of the principle I have set forth. More striking still, the religions of other nations of the ancient world become suddenly luminous when held up to the Light of Egypt. And as chord after chord is struck, the full diapason of the creeds responds.

A singular circumstance, which may illustrate this remark, arises from the necessity of expressing the secret analogies between the references to the Light, which abound in the Ritual, and the Hidden Places of the Grand Pyramid, the "Light" of the Egyptian world. For in dealing with the ideas thus masonified, so to speak, in that mysterious structure, I have been led, or rather compelled, to employ phrases and symbols current among the Masonic brotherhood of the present day, such as Grand Arch, Purple Arch, Royal Arch,

[p. xii]

the Star, the Open Angle (the princes of which as well as the princes of the Circle, are mentioned in the Papyrus of Sinahit, of very high antiquity), and other insignia of the craft. Whenever therefore such expressions occur--and they run necessarily through the entire work--it should be remembered that they are here designed to refer to the actual masonry of the Grand Pyramid, and the analogous features in the Ritual of ancient Egypt. At the same time, whether any vestige of this secret doctrine of the Light may survive in the esoteric doctrine of which those subject to Masonic rules are not permitted to speak, is an interesting question which naturally suggests itself, though it evidently cannot be established by open discussion.

The consideration however, which to my own mind tends most strongly to confirm the evidence of a connection between Pyramid and Ritual is, I confess, of a somewhat personal character. For in order to detect such an

[p. xiii]

analogy, if it be real, the chief qualification requisite is a certain patience in collating and analyzing the results which others have obtained in their respective departments of knowledge. But to call it into existence if not already latent; to construct in imagination the path of the just, and to express it in terms of the motions of light; to portray the mystery of the depths unseen by the mystery of the visible heavens, to shadow forth the features of light in the passages of profoundest darkness, and its motions in a building which for ages has remained immutable, that were an intellectual masterpiece which surely demands nothing less than a creative genius of the very loftiest order. So majestic is the outline of the conception as it rises solemnly on the view, so sublime is every feature of the prospect, now defining, now transcending, the utmost limits of space and time; with such graduated measure, yet such overwhelming splendour, does it illuminate mystery after mystery of

[p. xiv]

the invisible world, that I cannot for a moment believe it to be the offspring of my own imagination. Far more probable does it seem that, though much of the moral and spiritual imagery still remain obscure, yet we have here a genuine clue to the most profound and fascinating enigma of the ancient world; and that the more closely we study the Path of Light in its Masonic form, the more deeply shall we penetrate the earliest wisdom of which man has left record, and understand the Egyptian belief concerning the dark passage of death and the Entrance on Eternal Day.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE HOUSE

  

OF THE

  

HIDDEN PLACES.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE PYRAMID OF LIGHT.

CLOSE to the verge of the immense desert which stretches its arid wastes across the whole breadth of the continent to the shore of the Western Ocean, just at the apex of the famous delta which marks the meeting point of Upper and Lower Egypt, at the very spot where the busy life of the earliest civilization on record was bordered by the vast and barren solitude, stands the most majestic and most mysterious monument ever erected by the

[p. 2]

hand of man. Of all the other structures which made the marvels of the ancient world, scarcely a vestige is left. Where are the hanging gardens, the boast of the monarch of Babylon? Where is the far-famed Pharos of Alexandria? Centuries have passed since earthquake laid low the Colossus which bestrode the harbour of Rhodes; and a madman's hand reduced to ashes the temple of Artemis, the pride of Ephesus. But the Grand Pyramid of Ghizeh still remains undestroyed and indestructible, ages after the lesser marvels have passed away, as it stood ages before ever they came into being. Certainly more than fifty, it may be more than sixty, centuries have gone by since that building, which never since has needed the care of man, first concealed from view its hidden places, those secret chambers of which no other building on the globe contains the like. Upwards of two million times has the sun risen and set upon its mighty walls, since first the pure and

[p. 3]

unbroken surface of polished casing-stones flashed back the rays like a veil of dazzling lustre, and vindicated its ancient title of The Light.

What the concealed significance may be of that secret masonry; by whom, and for what purpose, the complex plan was designed; at what epoch the huge structure was erected, are questions which have perplexed many minds in many lands, and have resulted in a discord more akin to Babel, than to the grandeur of its silent majesty. It was built by the Jews in the days of their captivity, says, or rather said, one school of theorists. It was built by Chemmis, but attributed by Egyptians in hatred of him to the Shepherd Philition, is the account given by Herodotus. It was built by Ibn Salluk, say the Arabs, just before the Flood, to preserve the royal treasures from the predicted inundation. It was built by Melchisedec--or somebody--vehemently asserts the Scottish professor of astronomy,

[p. 4]

who seems always to write in a whirlwind of miscellaneous indignation. It was indisputably intended by the founder for his tomb, one party stoutly maintains,--a tomb in which he left especial instructions that he should not be buried, and in which nobody could possibly have been buried, replies another. It was an observatory, maintains a third,--where every place for observation was carefully closed up, retorts a fourth. It is the "prophetic floor-roll of human history," screams Professor Smyth,--with all the dates gone wrong, softly sneers Mr. Flinders Petrie.

Side by side with that masonic mystery, well nigh as impenetrable at the present moment as when the Hir Sheshta, or "Master of the Secret," was an officer of Pharaoh's household, has come down to us another enigma, the strange collections of sacred writings, or Ritual [**] of Ancient Egypt, which

[p. 5]

modern writers have called the "Book of the Dead," but which claims for itself the title of the "Book of the Master of the Hidden Places." Vivid as is the interest now awakened in those writings, little progress has been made in elucidating their meaning. The doctrines inculcated by their religion, the relations of the worshipper to the object or objects worshipped, the signification of the particular symbol under which those relations were at once veiled and expressed, are but little better understood at the present time, notwithstanding

[p. 6]

our greatly increased knowledge of the sacred writings, than when the hieroglyphs themselves were undeciphered. Yet, strange to say, prominently as these mysteries stand out in every matter that relates to ancient Egypt, no one has hitherto thought of collating the masonic secret of the monument with the doctrinal secret contained in the mysterious books of Thoth, to whom the origin of Egyptian wisdom is attributed. [**] Such an omission is the more singular, because indications are not wanting on either side to hint at the connection. That Khufu (miscalled by the Greeks, Cheops) should have adopted the pyramidal form in the hieroglyph of his name is not surprising, as he was the monarch under whom the building was erected. But it is not perhaps unworthy of notice, that the form of the Pyramid enters into the hieroglyph of the

[p. 7]

star Sothis, or Sirius. [**] For the Grand Orient, or position of that star when its rising forms the immediate harbinger of dawn on midsummer morning, was, as is well known, the great starting-point for the age-long cycles of the Egyptian reckoning. And whereas the figure usually employed to denote the Pyramid embraces both the edifice and the rocky platform on which it is built , the form used in the hieroglyph of Sothis consists of the masonic portion alone , that is to say, the structure which represented to the Egyptian mind the Eternal Light, apart from its earthly support; while a Papyrus dating from the time of Khufu, the founder of the building,

[p. 8]

speaks of Isis as the ruler of the Pyramid; and a later inscription, that of Syene, calls her also the "Mother of God," and identifies her with "The Divine Sothis, the Star, the Queen of the Heaven."

On the other hand, the sacred writings, or Ritual of ancient Egypt, are full of allusions which become vocal only when applied to the Pyramid of Light. Such are the festivals of the "Northern Passage" and of the "Southern Passage," that of the "Hidden Lintel," that of "Osiris, who dwells in the roofed house" and in the "Pool of the Great House." So in the Kalendar of Esne, we read of the "Festival of the Sockets," and again of the "Opening of the Doors," which is closely connected in the Ritual with the "Chapter of the Orientation," and the raising of Osiris from the Open Tomb. The whole progress of the Departed seems, in fact, to take place in some kind of building. The Ritual is full of references to his "Going in" and "Coming out," to "Going in after

[p. 9]

coming out," to passing gates and gateways, and doors and staircases. Nay, the very titles employed, whether in the written or the masonic record, point directly, though secretly, to each other. Where else, if not in these chambers, so jealously concealed, the like of which not even the later pyramids contain, shall we look for the Hidden Places, the master of which is claimed for its own master by the "Book of the Dead"? Again, hundreds of years before the date of the principal papyrus containing those writings, as early as the twelfth dynasty, the inscription on the coffin of Amamu, buried in the sacred city of Abydos, makes a similar allusion, and shows that the secret places determine the order of the Ritual. "Thou hast not gone dying, thou hast gone living to Osiris. [**] Now

[p. 10]

thou hast found the words of order, the mystery of the secret places."

What a sudden significance, then, attaches to the title "Ta Khut," "The Light," whereby the Grand Pyramid, that monument of flame, was known to the Pharaohs, when, turning to the sacred papyri, we find the title of the opening chapter to be the Pir M Hru, or Entrance on Light--that is, not the light of common day, which the deceased was quitting, but, as is shown by the image of the setting sun, wherewith the descent of the tomb was always associated, of the invisible Light of the Unseen World, renewed for ever in the splendour of Osiris. For the doctrine contained in those mystic writings was nothing else than an account of the path pursued by the just, when the bonds of the flesh being loosed, he passed through stage after stage of spiritual growth, until initiated in the new birth and illumined in the hidden life, he became indissolubly united with him whose

[p. 11]

name, says the Egyptian Ritual, "is Light, Great Creator." And that path which the Ritual gives in writing, the grand Pyramid of Light materializes in the masonry.

In the double symbolism of Pyramid and Ritual lie both the chief difficulties of decipherment and the strongest evidence of their correspondence. For as the departed in his progress was to become united in the fulness of intimacy with his Creator, so it was necessary that he should progress in the knowledge of the mysteries which envelop alike the spiritual and the material creation. To know Osiris in his forms of manifestation was the secret of power, to "understand Osiris in all his names, Osiris in all his places," conferred the crown of illumination. But in the attainment of that infinite knowledge there were many stages which must be traversed by the finite mortal, many grades which must be achieved by the holy departed, when the mouth of the tomb, the

[p. 12]

portal of Eternal Day, had been opened for him, and the Catechumen of the Divine Wisdom had been admitted as the Postulant of Immortality. The "inner man" or "person" of the deceased, the "Ka" (or postulant with the upraised arms, ) must be re-created in incorruption, the soul must be born anew, before that postulant could be initiated into things divine; the Initiate must pass the fiery ordeal, and become approved as Adept; the Adept must be justified in the Tribunal of Truth, before he could emerge from the shadow of the Halls of Death into the immediate presence of the Source of Light. The Justified must become the Illuminate, the Illuminate must be consummated as Master, before he could attain the innermost mansion in the divine house of Osiris. For each of such grades, according to the creed of Egypt, the Creator has assigned a distinct locality in the great exterior manifestation of Himself, the universe of space; and each of these localities

[p. 13]

is described symbolically in the books of the mystical Ritual, and inscribed masonically in the features and the dimensions of the Hidden Places of the Pyramid.

Not to every one therefore did that house lie open, nor could there be a more unpardonable offence than the profanation of its secrets. "This Book," says the final chapter of the Ritual, "is the greatest of mysteries. Do not let the eye of any one see it; that were abomination." So, too, the secrecy enjoined by the Ritual was enforced by the structure of the building; nor was it ever violated so long as Egypt remained Egyptian. And as it was the characteristic of that religion to be concealed, and as the manifestation of the Creator is deeper and more secret yet than the knowledge of His works, so it was essential that the symbols relating to Him, and to the connection of man with Him, should not betray their deepest mysteries even to the Initiate; but should reserve their more secret meaning for

[p. 14]

the Illuminate after full probation. Here, then, was the problem which lay before the first Hir Shesta, the "Master of the Secret," the originator of the "wisdom of the Egyptians;" to express, but in expressing to conceal, to veil, but with a veil of light, the mysteries of the Deity; to choose such symbols as would without betraying their nature convey their living energy, their illuminative power, and, above all, their illimitable endurance. No ordinary image, it is clear, no mineral, no animal, no plant, no man, could suffice for an expression such as this. Only the orbs of heaven, obeying in their lustrous course the laws that know no change, could fulfil the required conditions. Alike in the pictured and the masonic record the path of the just is traced amid the shining worlds, and his progress measured in the terms of celestial motion.

A remarkable instance is that of the orbit of the earth, involving a knowledge of the

[p. 15]

rotation of the earth on its axis, and its revolution around the sun, on which rested the ancient kalendar of Egypt. The "Lord of the Orbit" (Neb Sennen) was a title of the Egyptian monarch. And in the Pyramid we find the orbit, together with many other phenomena masonically expressed on the walls of the magnificent and unique upper Chamber of Ascent. Similarly, another great astronomical conception, viz. the horizon, runs not only through the "Book of the Dead," but through all the funereal imagery of the country, as in the "Sai-an-Sinsin," or "Book of the Migration of the Soul;" and in that of Queen Anchnes-ra-neferab and other papyri. What horizon then is the "horizon of heaven," to which such mystery attaches, and what is its apex, the Grand Zenith of the celestial dome? We have no such general conception, and consequently our ideas of the celestial mechanism lack something of simplicity. But suppose that on the day of Equinox, the equal

[p. 16]

division of light and darkness, we are standing on the Equator, the equal divider of the earth into the hemispheres of North and South, and that we take up our position, say at the point where it is cut by the meridian of Memphis, close to the lake from whence flow the waters of the life-giving river. At our feet is spread the great plane, passing through the celestial poles, and bounded by the Purple Arch which encircles the floor of the starry dome. From the midst of our Horizon on that day rises the sun right upwards, [**] and at the summit of his course, where day by day he equally divides the heaven East and West, on that day alone he equally divides also the Grand Arch, or Grand Meridian, which rises transverse from the same horizon, and stretches from pole to pole of the azure depths. Then we shall

[p. 17]

Click to enlarge
The "Horizon of Heaven"

[p. 18]

have marked out the four Cardinal Points of the universal sphere--the four points whereby the sides of the Pyramid of Light were defined; the fiery seats, according to the Egyptian theosophy, of the four "Sons of Light," whereof the most famous was Hapi, the presiding Spirit of the Nile. Into that Grand Horizon too, when the equal day is done, the sun passes beneath the Western waters. And out of it, the whole host of stars, from pole to pole, in serried array, each preserving his appointed distance from the solar path, follow him through the silent night--the "night of reckoning the spirits;" one-half springing into light as their leader disappears, the rest completing their numbers, just in time to herald his return from the Eastern point of the same Grand Horizon. "The road is of fire," says the Ritual;"they whirl in fire behind him."

Now this horizon seems strikingly indicated by the entrance passage of the Grand Pyramid,

[p. 19]

which, as is well known, may be defined by reference to the position of the pole-star. For, taking as the date of the IVth dynasty that given by Dr. Brugsch (about B.C. 3700), [**] we find that about two hundred and sixty years later (B.C. 3440), the pole-star of the period (Alpha-Draconis) occupied, as Professor Smyth has pointed out, just that position; so that it would shine right down the passage. And thus the disciples of the Master of the Secret, who in successive generations must have watched for more than two centuries the approach of the star, would receive in its final co-ordination the most convincing

[p. 20]

proof of the truth of those astronomical relations, wherein their mystical religion was embodied. Hence when we read in the Ritual, of the "Good Paddle of the North the Opener of the Disc," we recall at once the narrow paddle-shaped passage widened at the entrance towards the North, which opens the sacred interior to the outer universe; the pointer of the dial which sweeps through space, indicating perennially the position occupied by each successive star, which for a brief period of centuries keeps watch before the pole.

Taking in our hands now, the sacred writings of the Pir M Hru, let us approach the masonic Light; and opening the book at the first chapter, where Thoth the Eternal Wisdom commences to instruct the catechumen freed from the corruption of the body, let us with him penetrate the interior of the building, and take such a preliminary view of its secret places and their analogues in the Ritual, as

[p. 21]

may enable us to study more deeply the twofold expression of that masonic mystery. Reciting chapter by chapter as we mount, grade by grade along with the Catechumen of Light, we approach at the fifteenth step a gateway two courses yet above us, just as the catechumen in the fifteenth chapter approaches the "double gate of the horizon," the double-arched gate which points towards the pole-star; when he invokes "Haroeris the great guide of the world, the guide of the souls in their secret places, the light dwelling in the horizon." From this point the first veil of secrecy begins. For so effectually was the opening concealed from the uninstructed eyes by a revolving stone, that the position, once lost, was impossible to recover; and for two hundred years after passing under the barbarous Omar, the building remained impenetrable, until Caliph Al Mamoon, in the ninth century of our era, forced an opening at random through the solid masonry, and hit accidentally upon the

[p. 22]

entrance passage. Entering by the low gateway, thus built in the Northern side, at a considerable height above the ground, we have before us the passage of the horizon of the point of Equinox, which, while descending Southwards into the depths of darkness, points Northwards towards the star of the Purple Arch. As we cross the gate on the seventeenth

Click to enlarge
Gate of the Ascent. Northern Face: Course xvii.

course we recognize the point where, in the seventeenth chapter, the catechumen is admitted as a postulant, and exclaims, "I go from the Gate of Taser (the Ascent). What

[p. 23]

is the gate of Taser? It is the gate where the god Shu (the Light) lifts the disc of heaven. The Gate of the North is the Gate of the Great God: "he continues, speaking evidently of the same gate; exactly as in the Pyramid the only entrance is the Gate of the Ascent in the seventeenth course of Northern face. Bidding now with him farewell to the light of earthly day, and treading the descending passage, we pass, some little way down, a very fine and beautifully ruled double line, [**] scored perpendicularly on the

[p. 24]

slanting wall so as to point downwards to the foundation, and separating the upper section of the passage where the Departed in the Ritual is bereft of every faculty except that of motion, from the more advanced portion where his mental faculties are gradually restored to him. Continuing the long descent, we arrive at an aperture in the western wall, and passing through the opening thus disclosed mount gently into a kind of grotto at the bottom of the Well, a square perpendicular shaft, with footholds cut in the precipitous sides. Into that chamber of the Deep Waters the postulant descends on the Western side, as the sun at the close of day goes down into the Western waters, and bursts forth in splendour on the hidden world. From the top of the shaft a level passage runs to the place of the divine birth mentioned in the Ritual, the Chamber of the Moon, where, according to Egyptian teaching, Osiris each month renewed his birth. In that chamber,

[p. 25]

once rigidly blocked up, the liberated soul was born anew; and thence it came forth to descend the ladder of the shaft, as we see in the papyrus of Ani, [**] and to become re-united with the postulant awaiting it in the Well of Life. Then, when the soul is restored, initiation takes place and strength is given to endure the ordeal.

Returning from the bottom of the well to the Passage of the Horizon, and pursuing our course still further downwards, we come, after a short level continuation, to the subterranean chamber or the Place of the Central Fire, where the initiate undergoes his ordeal; a chamber hewn out of the solid rock, and having an inaccessible floor covered with huge blocks of varying height resembling a pool of petrified flame, or the masses of the mountain chains formed by the action of the earth's central

[p. 26]

fire; while beyond that terrible chamber a small passage leads to nothingness. Resuming our exploration of the edifice, and coming forth from the place of ordeal, as the Initiate, now become the Adept, turns back and avoids the place of annihilation; we remount the Passage of the Horizon until, at a little distance below the scored line, we come to a granite gate, or portcullis, built in the roof. This great gate, which originally was totally hidden by masonry and was only discovered by the falling of a stone when Al Mamoon was forcing his entrance into the pyramid, stands at the threshold of the Secret Places. Not only was the whole gate carefully hidden, but the lower portion of the passage within was blocked with enormous stones, still unremoved, and perhaps irremovable. So even now the Lintel is still hidden, and admission is only effected through a hole forced by violence in the wall of the passage above the blocks; while a precisely similar difficulty is experienced by the adept

[p. 27]

in passing the Lintel of Justice before entering the Double Hall of Truth. Creeping with difficulty through the hole, we find ourselves in a small low corridor about one hundred and twenty-nine feet long, inclined upwards at an elevation slightly less than that of the depression of the Entrance Passage, and corresponding to the lower portion of the Hall of Truth where the adept justifies himself before the forty-two judges of the unseen world, "The Gods of the Horizon, and the Gods of the Orbit." Then, stooping beneath the low gateway, by which it is terminated (but not obstructed) at the top, "The Gateway of the Festival," we stand upon a kind of landing-place, from which the whole system of the interior passages opens out. On every side, is "the crossing of the pure roads of life" of which the coffin of Amamu speaks. On the Western side, is the mouth of the well, "The gate of Anruhf" leading down to the "roads of darkness." Before us lie the fields of

[p. 28]

[paragraph continues] Aahlu, the blessed country where the justified executes the works, which he is privileged to perform for Osiris. "I have digged in Anruhf," he says later on, "I have drilled the holes," the holes, that is, for the good seed, the corn which grew seven cubits high, the holes which are drilled in the ramps of the Southern Ascending Passage, but to which no signification has yet been attached.

Beyond the fields, the road leads direct to the Queen's Chamber, the Place of the New Birth, where the soul received her second life; and here on the Eastern wall, within a staircase of five ascents, is a kind of niche or image, the "type," to use the expression of the Ritual, into which the soul is new born with the fivefold dominion of the regenerate senses. From the same point also, at the head of the well, diverge the interior ladders on the coffin already spoken of. Sheer down, "the ladder which has been made for Osiris," descends into the well. Northwards, "the

[p. 29]

ladder of Earth," slopes downward to the Hidden Lintel, the entrance of the upward path. Upwards to the South, but with a very slightly different inclination, runs the ascending passage, called by some writers "the Grand Gallery," forming the upper portion of the Hall of Truth, the Grand Lodge, or Luminous Chamber of the Orbit. This remarkable structure, consists of a corridor, about one hundred and fifty-seven feet long, and twenty feet high, built entirely on a slope, floor, walls, and roof, except a small portion at the Southern or upper end. On either side of the sloping floor, are twenty-eight ramps, each with a hole in it, a reference to which in the Ritual has been already noticed. And at the upper end the slope of the floor-line is closed abruptly, just above the Queen's Chamber by a block three feet high, forming a dais, or throne of judgment. From hence along the top of the block, or seat of the throne, the passage runs level for about sixty-one inches,

[p. 30]

the wall at the side being not quite vertical, but impending very slightly towards the slope. At the back of the throne the gallery is brought to a termination, by the Southern wall closing down in seven over-lappings within forty-two inches of the seat and leaving as an exit further South, a narrow and grave-like tunnel. In the sloping roof of the gallery, running downwards from South to North at a somewhat greater inclination than the floor, are thirty-six overlappings, like the waves of a river of light, and corresponding to the number of decades in the orbit of the Egyptian year. And on the side wall of the dais at the upper end of the gallery are also seven overlappings, one above another, arching over to the summit; while in the position corresponding to that occupied by our own globe among the planets, runs a deep groove or orbit along its entire length. Thus we are confronted with a vivid connection between the Orbit and "the Passage of the

[p. 31]

[paragraph continues] Sun" in the Double Hall of Truth, the Lower Hall of Truth in Darkness, and the Upper Hall of Truth in Splendour, with the Throne of Radiance at the higher end. And above that throne rises the habitation of the seven great spirits in the service of their Lord, the Creator, who, the Sacred Books tell us, "protect the coffin of Osiris."

Now comes the most mysterious portion of the building. Stripped of its noble proportions, and reduced to an altitude so low, that a man must creep on hand and knee to pass, the passage pierces the southern wall of the Grand Gallery, and runs straight on, first into the Ante-chamber, or "Place of Preparation," and then into the splendid hall called the King's Chamber, in the most secluded portion of the building. In each of these halls is one and only one object. In the antechamber is a kind of masonic veil, which no one can pass without bowing the head. In the King's Chamber is a sarkophagus, not

[p. 32]

closed, but open; while the air channels wherewith this deeply buried room is amply ventilated proclaim that it is not a chamber of the dead, but of the living, the place of "the Orient," where, in the Ritual, Osiris is awakened from his slumbers. In this portion of the building the structure changes its material for granite, forming, as it were, a house by itself within the Pyramid, an inner House yet within the House of Osiris, entered by the low and grave-like passage leading from behind the throne. This is the House of Glory described on the coffin of Amamu already quoted, the house to which the Illuminate approaches after passing the tribunal of Osiris. Here is the "Gate of the pure spirits," which they alone can enter who are washed in the waters of Life and radiant with the splendours of the Orbit. And here, too, it would seem, takes place the solemn address described in the Sai-an-Sinsin, "of the Gods in the House of Osiris," followed by the response

[p. 33]

of the "Gods in the House of Glory;" the joyous song of the holy departed who stand victorious before the judgment seat, echoed triumphantly by the inner chorus of their beloved who have gone before them into the fulness of light. Above is the "Empyrean Gate" ("the opening of Athor," as the Ritual calls it), which leads to the "Secret Places of Heaven;" the ascending spaces above the King's chamber, once completely closed, and constituting the innermost, the loftiest, and the most secret of the Hidden Places. And the whole is dominated and crowned by a gigantic triangle of granite, masonically expressing the divine Trinity of Egypt.

Such is the complex and hitherto unexplained system of gateways and passages, shafts, channels, and chambers; some leading upwards, some downwards, some level; some rough in the last degree, others exquisitely polished; some magnificent in their proportions, some so low that a man must creep,

[p. 34]

so narrow that he can with difficulty pass, to be found within the Pyramid of Light. It is absolutely unique; no other building, it may be safely averred (not even the later Pyramids), having contained any structure bearing the least resemblance to the higher chambers. Striking as it is in every feature, the most remarkable circumstance of all is the evident intention of the architect to preserve that secrecy which lends a majesty to the strange theosophy of Egypt. What then was the design, the secret and jealously guarded design, with which this wondrous edifice was constructed? That its various features are meaningless, or the mere result of caprice, is a suggestion to which the forethought and lavishness of calculation displayed in every detail unmistakably give the lie. Nor again can we maintain that they are necessary for the purposes of an ordinary tomb. For, in the first place, they are not to be found in the other Pyramids, which were used for that

[p. 35]

purpose; and, secondly, if there be any intention which the architect has openly manifested, it is to create such a series of obstructions, that no human body could be buried therein.

In truth, the Grand Pyramid is the House of a Tomb; but it is not a closed, but an open tomb. It is the tomb not of a man, but a god; not of the dead, but of the risen. It is the tomb of the divine Osiris, whose birth on earth, descent into the under-world, victory over the serpent Apep, resurrection and judgment of the dead, were the most prominent features in the creed of Egypt, and in union with whom the holy departed achieved the path of illumination, and passed in safety the divine tribunal.

Viewed in this light, the practical value of the structure begins to become clear. On that doctrine rested the whole organization of social life amongst the ancient Egyptians. The kalendar, the festivals, the duties of the monarch, the rights of the priesthood, the

[p. 36]

relations of the provinces to their paramount temples, all were illustrated in the Path of Light. Endless confusion therefore in the State would result, no less than injury to the religion, from any misconstruction, or misrepresentation of doctrine (such as seems to have taken place under Khu en Aten); a circumstance all the more likely to occur, on account of the obscurity of the symbols employed.

Now the masonic symbolism of the Grand Pyramid affords a simple and practically indestructible means for perpetuating without betraying the doctrine of Egyptian wisdom. That expression, once formulated, was never repeated; the other tombs and Pyramids of Egypt claiming kinship only by subordinate and particular features with the work of the Grand Master. While then the written records of the Ritual, none of which now extant probably possess a higher date than that of Khufu, were liable to change and error, no

[p. 37]

lapse of time could impair, no variation could affect in the secret places, the masonry of the Pyramid of Light. This embodiment, at once secret and unalterable, forming literally a Masonic Ritual of the whole doctrine of Light, accounts for the singularly piecemeal fashion in which the sacred words were committed to writing. During the first three dynasties one chapter alone has a dim traditional claim to have been written, while one other is said to have been revealed to Men Kau Ra, the grandson of the builder of the Grand Pyramid. And though on the later Pyramids sacred inscriptions begin to appear, it is not until the XIth dynasty that they become at all common. Of the various chapters so published (that is, used as inscriptions or written on papyri) at different times, there have been, as Mr. Budge mentions in his "Treatise on the Mummy," four principal recensions. The first is that of the Ancient Empire, written in hieroglyphics, to which the important inscription on the coffin of Amamu

[p. 38]

belongs. Then comes the Theban recension, also in hieroglyphics, of which the papyri have been with great labour collated and published by M. Naville; followed during the succeeding dynasty (XXth) by another written in the Hieratic (or priestly) characters. And last of all, we have the recension of the XXVIth or Saite dynasty, to which is due the great papyrus [**] now preserved at Turin, of which

[p. 39]

[paragraph continues] Lepsius published a facsimile in 1846, consisting of upwards of one hundred and sixty original, with three supplementary chapters. Now it was during that recension that the order of the chapters is said to have been fixed for the first time. What canon then, or standard of order, did the revisers employ? It certainly was not the relative antiquity of the chapters, for the only one which claims to remount to the Ist dynasty stands one hundred and thirtieth in the papyrus, while that which is attributed in it to the IVth dynasty--and which is entitled

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] "The Entrance on Light in one Chapter," as though it had once been the single chapter in use--comes sixty-fourth. But the answer to the question appears to be contained in the last of the supplementary chapters; for the papyrus proclaims the key to be within the reach of all who understand in full the masonic secrets. "This Book," it says, "is the Book of the Master of the Hidden Places." And in those Hidden Places therefore the Secret of the Master of the Hidden Places, the "Mystery of the words of order," as the coffin of Amamu says, is to be found. This is the version, therefore, which we shall compare with the Ritual in stone, its predecessor by more than three thousand years; the very magnitude of the intervening period serving to exhibit in a more striking light the closeness of the correspondence. Nobly indeed does that stupendous monument respond to the mystic title which it bore. Surrounded by darkness as profound as that which the Almighty has

[p. 41]

made His secret place; in the midst of scenery invisible to the eye, but faithfully pourtraying the glories of the celestial expanse, the Grand Architect has set up the throne which the lapse of ages has had no power to impair, and has immutably inscribed in its secret places the immutable path of the just in characters of light, embodied in the immutable motions of the heavenly orbs.

Footnotes

^4:* This title, which was conferred by Champollion, is vehemently repudiated by Mr. Budge, though without [p. 5]any particular reason assigned. But it appears to me to be as good a word as any which can be used as a popular expression; though doubtless the Catholic term, "Office of the Dead," would be preferable if it were sufficiently familiar to our ears. The title "Book of the Dead," devised by Lepsius, appears to me, I own, singularly unfortunate. For in the first place the Papyrus is not a book, but a collection of sacred writings; and in the second, that title appears to refer to the practice of burying copies or parts of the copy with the mummy; so that it gives the idea of regarding the holy departed as dead; whereas the whole conception of the doctrine was the entrance of the departed on life and light.

^6:* M. Maspero courteously informs me that the same idea has occupied himself, but that he has not published.

^7:* When a star rises, not simultaneously with the sun (in which case the star would be invisible), but just so long before dawn as to appear for a few moments on the horizon before it is swallowed up in the growing light, it is said to rise "heliacally," and "the heliacal rising of Sothis" on the day of the summer solstice, or midsummer--an event which occurs every 1461 years (viz. four times 365 1/4)--was the epoch of the Egyptian secular cycle.

^9:* More correctly written Ausar; but in this and other sacred names I have kept the older spelling, not as being in any way preferable in itself (which it certainly is not), but in order to avoid introducing a fresh and not absolutely necessary element of unfamiliarity.

^16:* The conception here described, though not explicitly defined by our astronomers, is implicitly contained in the terms Right (or direct) Ascension, the mounting straight upwards of the stars; and Declination, or the falling off on either side from the equinoctial plane.

^19:* In deference to the very high authority of Dr. Brugsch, on all matters connected with Egyptian history, I have adopted, and still adhere to the date which he estimated for the Grand Pyramid. The recent discoveries of Mr. F. Petrie may perhaps point to an earlier date; and the question cannot be considered as settled; but on such a point the general harmony with other historical records is the supreme test: and of that knowledge none was more skilled than the great master whom we have recently lost.

^23:* The detection of this line is connected with a circumstance of a highly singular character, which seemed at one time to lend some appearance of support to the historic theories of Professor Smyth. It was due not to any measurer or observer of the Pyramid, but to a student who had never seen the building, but believed that if the professor's theories were correct, some such special mark would point out that particular spot. Examination being made--for the professor had never noticed it--the prediction proved to be true; an act of divination which would have been remarkable enough if those theories had been true, but which seems strange indeed when one considers their palpable error.

^25:* I am indebted for this illustration to Mr. F. Compton Price, the well-known expert in ancient characters, who has just completed the splendid facsimile of that papyrus for the Trustees of the British  Museum.

^38:* An English translation has been published by Mr. Birch, in Bunsen's "Place of Egypt;" and one in French has been produced by M. Pierret. While speaking on this subject, it is impossible to refrain from a regret at the almost incredible carelessness with which the papyri, relating to every kind of topic, have been scattered loose-cast over half the museums of Europe, without the preservation of any general account of their contents, or even of their existence. Some are to be found at the Bodleian; others at the Louvre; others, again, in the museums of Bologna, of Naples, of Turin, of Leipsic, of Berlin, of Copenhagen, of Stockholm, and of Rome; while our insatiable sarkophagus, the British Museum, entombs them by the thousand. If France, the country to which belongs so distinguished a record in these matters, could be induced to join with us in urging the Government of Egypt to issue a Commission for the [p. 39] purpose of requesting from the various European Governments the fullest possible information with regard to the papyri and other relics of ancient Egypt, which they may happen respectively to possess, a favourable answer would doubtless be returned; so that a mass of invaluable evidence would be opened up, wherein we might not unreasonably hope to trace the action and inter-action of the religious, political, and economical factors in that complex constitution. And thus material might be collected for commencing a general Encyclopaedia of Archaic Sociology; and possibly for founding a science of organic society in its concrete development.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE HOUSE OF OSIRIS.

AMONG the innumerable transformations witnessed by the present century of revolution, none has a more startling character than that of the resurrection of primaeval Egypt. For more than a thousand years from the day when the barbarous Omar celebrated the funeral rites of the ancient learning in the flames of the great Library at Alexandria, to the day when Champollion, like another Sothis, heralded the dawn of a new era of Egyptian brilliance, an ever-growing obscurity buried the entire land. Less than a century has elapsed since the most appalling penalties, in

[p. 43]

this world and the next, were fulminated by the Sultan against the official who should dare to allow a Christian "to approach the sacred port of Suez, the starting-point of the holy Haj." To-day that port is the crowded entrance of the most cosmopolitan highway of the globe. For centuries Egypt, as it was the earliest, so it was the most jealously guarded seat of Moslem law. To-day its courts recognize a multiplex jurisdiction of alien nations, for which no precedent exists in the history of any other state. [**] Within living memory its hieroglyphs were an enigma hopelessly abandoned; its temples hidden beneath the accumulated filth of generations of Arabs; the very age of its ruins unguessed within thousands of years. To-day the mighty

[p. 44]

buildings stand clearly forth to attest their pristine majesty; the canons of the kings may be consulted in their original records; and the errors made by careless scribes, who thought no mortal eye would ever look upon the papyri concealed within the breast of the mummy, stand detected by the hieroglyphic scholarship of Europe.

A peculiar fascination surrounds every detail of life in early Egypt. For all other empires can be assigned with more or less certainty some point of historic origin. For China, for Assyria, for even Babylonia, we can dimly discern the traces of rude beginnings. The days of Romulus or of Kekrops are but the Middle Ages of history when compared with the days of Khufu or of Mena. India does not claim for her earliest Vedas an antiquity exceeding four thousand years. The sacred writings of China count less than a thousand more; the beginning of Babylonia about a thousand still beyond. On the banks of the

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Nile alone do we find, centuries before the date of the Accadian Sargon, a settled monarchy and a constituted state, an elaborate Ritual and organic hierarchy, a specific architecture and a copious alphabet. Hence it is that the principal anomaly which usually blurs our conception of antiquity, namely, the interference of an element alien to the environment in the formation of the customs of a race, more particularly when that race has been transplanted from some wholly diverse soil, is absent from the horizon of Egypt; and the picture which we may draw of Egyptian civilization has its source, its development, and its consummation in the conditions of Egypt alone. No feature of attraction is wanting in that remarkable scene. The stately river, the source of perennial life and freshness to the entire land, the long line of majestic temples crowning the banks, the laughing population crowding its waters, the dances, the games, the songs, the wrestlings, the perpetual feasts,

[p. 46]

the boats of pleasure jostling with the sacred boats of the dead, all these things make up a picture, which set in the dazzling clearness of the cloudless sky leaves a charm that can neither be rivalled nor forgotten.

That picture, too, demands no painful effort of the imagination to fill up for ourselves from broken and disjointed details. We are not called upon to piece out, into such consistency as we may, the fragmentary hints of social life laboriously gathered from chance allusions hidden in a score of different writers. Nor need we content ourselves with descriptions of events written centuries after their occurrence. We can go straight to the fountainhead, and consult the original records. On the huge propylaea of the temples, on the walls, on the enormous sarkophagi, on the architraves, on the pillars of the immense buildings, we find the deeds of the princes set out in the sacred hieroglyphs. For the battle of Lake  Regillus we must trust to the traditions

[p. 47]

preserved by Livy; for that first great battle of Megiddo, which took place hundreds of years before Josiah lost his life upon the same plain, long before ever Regillus was fought, we have the cotemporaneous account of the conqueror Thothmes, and the lists of the spoils drawn up by royal officers. Nay more, the monuments of Egypt give us not descriptions alone, but actual representations of the scenes. Of the triumphs celebrated by the renowned Julius, what trace is left for posterity to gaze upon? But the triumphs of Rameses, and of Seti, which took place well-nigh as long before the time of Caesar as Caesar's day was before our own, live yet in every detail. The garments, the ornaments, the countenances, even the colour of the hair of the different races which took part in those processions, all may be seen to-day upon the walls of the palaces which witnessed them. Of Moses and of Solomon, of the founder of Rome, nay, of the great apostle of the Gentiles, we possess not

[p. 48]

even a traditional likeness. But the features of Pharaoh may be as familiar to us as they were to his adoring subjects. A triple enclosure formed by massive columns, of infinite pathos in their lonely grandeur, is all that is left to tell us how the earth-shaking Poseidon was worshipped in his home at Paestum. But every feature of the procession which trod the long aisles of Karnak, the vessel of purification, the wings on the sacred scribe, the company of the singers, the quadruple ranks of priests, the sacred ark borne upon their shoulders, the cherubim with outstretched wings shadowing the Deity enthroned between, have all been preserved for our inspection, no less than the words of the solemn litany which the worshippers addressed to Ra, the unseen Light.

Two marked peculiarities characterize the records of the earliest times. Nothing is more striking than the knowledge of science which the priests of Egypt are more and more

[p. 49]

generally admitted to have possessed, in proportion as the facts are more carefully investigated. What architect of the present day would undertake to erect a building, more than four hundred feet high, full of chambers of the most elaborate description, which should never need repair for five thousand years? What other nation not only discovered the transcendental relation between radius and circumference--the foundation of all curvilinear measurement--but utilized it as a principle of architectural construction? What other building is oriented with such perfect accuracy that, if Mr. Flinders Petrie be correct, the minute displacement wrought in the course of ages represents (and consequently measures) the secular variation due to a recondite cosmical force? Where else shall we find expressed in masonic form the different proportions of the surface of the earth, given according to the various methods of calculation, as, according to the same authority, the

[p. 50]

architect of the Grand Pyramid has expressed them in the area of its pavement at the different levels? Where else shall we find an antique kalendar based on the periodic motion of the earth? What other people knew, as Dr. Brugsch and M. Maspero aver, the proper motion of the sun in space; or who possessed the lovely Sothiac cycle, the Cycle of Grand Orient, which measured whole ages by the herald star, as it dawned for a moment on the eastern horizon.

Equally striking, and even more distinct perhaps, is the perpetual presence of the life-giving river. From end to end of its territory, from age to age of its history, in the religion, in the commerce, in the honours of the dead, wherever we may turn, and on whatsoever object we may fix our eyes, we never for a moment lose sight of the blue waters of the Nile. That beautiful stream, flowing tranquilly for hundreds of miles beneath the serene sky, alone gave verdure and plenty

[p. 51]

to the long and narrow strip of fertile soil which lines its borders, cut off by deserts on either hand, and alone permits the very existence of an Egyptian people.

According to ancient tradition, and agreeably also to the records, the ancestors of the race in very remote times were not of Northern but of Southern [**] extraction, being originally natives of Poont, situated near the Equatorial sources of the Nile. In harmony with this tradition, we find that the central point of.

[p. 52]

the Egyptian universe, the horizon of which traces out, as we saw, the sacred Horizon of the Ritual, determined by the pole-star and defined by the Pyramid, was the Aptu, or Southern "Apex of the Earth," mentioned by Dr. Brugsch in "The Holy Land of Khent," situated in that immediate neighbourhood. For our point of reference was demarcated by the intersection of the Equator with the grand meridian of Memphis; and that intersection takes place just by the Western shore of the great Equatorial lake from which the famous river derives its life-giving streams: hence on the day of Equinox, an observer standing at the fount of the river in the patriarchal land of Egyptian tradition, would witness that grand "Passage of the Sun," and march of the universal hosts of space, which solemnizes the day of the "Reckoning of the Spirits." From that point of origin, we marked out the four Cardinal Points of the universal sphere the thrones of the four

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] Egyptian spirits of the Light, with Hapi in their midst, protecting the Southern fountains of the Nile. These four bright spirits, the guardians of the heavenly dome, were imaged to the Egyptians under the form of the cynocephalous ape, the creature which bears the closest resemblance to humanity; and from them, as the four living creatures before the throne of Ra, assistance was invoked by the Justified in the Ritual at the moment when the full splendour of the Orbit was bursting upon his illumined sight. Thus the whole system of Egyptian astronomy, in its scientific delineation no less than its mystical significance, would seem to have been devised originally, not with any reference to the later settlement of the race upon the lower streams of the Nile, but to their original dwelling-place among the sunny fountains of the South; while the Grand Meridian appears to have been defined, not by its local relation to Memphis, but from its passing through the apex of the

[p. 54]

earth, beneath the Grand Arch of the universe and the apex of the celestial dome over the point of origination.

Yet, remarkable as is this primaeval locality when viewed in the light of Egyptian tradition, its interest is increased tenfold when we regard it in combination with the other features of the great watershed of which it forms an essential part, and which reminds us irresistibly of the famous watershed described in our own Scriptures as forming the primaeval dwelling-place of man. There are--not the full streams but--as in Genesis, the "heads" of the four rivers, which go "forth to water the whole country." There, beyond the Zambesi, lies the land of gold, with its mines of unknown antiquity: while the odorous herb of which the hieroglyphic name is Betru (or Bedru, the L being in Egyptian identical with R) suggests the original of the Hebrew Betelu, converted by the Greeks into Bdellium. There is the fountain of the Niger, which

[p. 55]

encompasses in its windings the whole land of the Blacks. There is the source of the inundating Nei-los, in Egyptian "the Boundary Burster;" of which the Hebrew word Hiddekel, signifying "Violent," is but a pale reflection. And there is the Congo, the river of "Life," corresponding precisely with the Hebrew Perith (fruitful), transformed by the Greeks into the Euphrates. More striking still, in the eastward portion of the great basin lies the wonderful garden, or Paradise, three thousand square miles in extent, so glowingly described by Stanley, and full of animal life, the sceptre of which was one of the insignia (the "Tad") borne by the great deity Amen; while from that garden flows the single river, the Shari, exactly as in our scriptural account the single river flowed in the midst to water the garden which was placed in the eastward [**] part of the

[p. 56]

immense watershed of Eden. And as, according to the same account, the first traces of the never-ceasing current of human wandering commenced on the Eastward of the garden, so does the stream of the infant Nile, which takes its rise near this point, tend Eastward of the grand meridian before bending Southward towards the lake which still bears the patriarchal name of the Egyptian Nou; [**] and

[p. 57]

below it, to the ruins of Assur, discovered by Caillaud on the banks of hoary Meroe.

From that country their course appears to

[p. 58]

have been effected by a twofold route. In part, according to a very ancient tradition, mentioned by Dr. Brugsch, they proceeded along the banks of the river, sojourning for a while, it would seem, in the island of Meroe, where the hoary temple of Amen and the ruins of Assur, mentioned above, mark their ancient presence; while others appear to have come down by the Red Sea, as Mr. Petrie's discoveries indicate, and thence to have crossed the desert to Coptos. From this most important circumstance, it is essential to bear in mind that to the Egyptian the South was the "Great Quarter," to which especial reverence was due. Hence it was that every year the sacred images were carried into the ancestral country; an echo of which tradition is found in the visits of the gods of Homer to the "blameless Ethiopians." Hence, in the ancient inscription on the coffin of Amamu, we are told how the holy dead, "after flying over the whole face of heaven," is "established among the blessed

[p. 59]

company in the south." And in that same archaic papyrus we read of the celestial land of Khent, or Khent-Amenti, the habitation of the Hidden God, imaged on earth by the "Holy Land of Khent" at the Apatu or Southern apex of the earth. Hence also the most sacred portion of the temple was placed towards the same quarter; and the Grand Pyramid, from the entrance to the innermost chamber, was oriented North and South.

In truth, to the mind of the Egyptian, the whole bed of the immense river was but the sacred image of the unseen land watered by the "celestial Nile" of which the Ritual speaks;"The Nuter Khart," or Holy Land of the Dead, with its triple division into Rusta, the territory of Initiation; Aahlu, the district of Illumination; and Amenti, the secret home of the hidden God.

Far towards the South, beyond the alternate reaches of stream and desert, lay the patriarchal land of Poont, like Amenti, the distant home

[p. 60]

of the unseen Father. At the tropical extremity of Egypt, immediately below the celestial or tropical arch traversed by the sun at the summer solstice (at that epoch about 24 degrees N. the inclination of the earth's axis to the plane of its orbit, being at that time about half a degree greater than at present), was the cataract or "Gate of the Nile," through which the ancestors of the race entered the country. That cataract or throne of the life-giving waters, situated beneath the Royal Arch of the solstitial throne, marks the point attained by the Illuminate in the Ritual, when he has achieved, in Aahlu, the "passage of the sun," and "opens the gate of the Nile," the cataract of heavenly light.

As the deceased, in making that ascent, entered into the presence of the forty-two judges of the dead (the Gods of the Horizon and the Gods of the Orbit), each judge supreme in his particular province; so also was all the land of Egypt parcelled out into forty-two

[p. 61]

nomes or districts, twenty nomes in the Lower, and twenty-two nomes of the Upper country. To each nome was assigned a great temple as capital, with a specific function and priesthood. And as the temple formed the vast enclosure of the shrine, so also did the district become the vast enclosure of the temple. Nor were the temples alone dedicated to sacred things, but the structures of daily life shared the divine significance. And for every division of the country, as De Rouge has shown, the palace and the canal, no less than the temple and the district, bore a name of mystery and reflected the region of the holy dead.

All along the valley of the river, as it descends Northwards; at Thebes, at Abydos, at Tentera, were the great shrines sanctified by manifestations of the Deity. At the Northern extremity, where the ocean formed the boundary of the country, was the mouth of Rosetta, or Rusta, imaging, as we learn from the Papyrus of Khufu, the mouth of the tomb, and looking

[p. 62]

towards the pole-star, the never-failing light of the depths, that pointed for the Egyptians the path to the hidden life. In the midst of the land where the Nile branched out into the great angle of the delta, the dominating angle in the conformation of the valley, stood Memphis (or Mennofer), the "Holy Place;" the seat of the double government of Egypt, with its palace dedicated to the Creator-spirit Ptah, its cemetery bearing the title of "Blessed Immortality," like our own "God's Acre," and its canal called after the Voyage of the Unseen Waters. There, too, was the territory of "Sochet Ra," the Fields of the Sun. And close to the sacred city, on the western bank of the river, rose the "Pyramid of Light," built upon a lonely rock, which faces the great quarter of the South, the house of Osiris, to which, says the papyrus of Amen Hotep, "Thoth," the Eternal Wisdom, "conducts the Illuminate."

A degree of sanctity, peculiar even in that

[p. 63]

land of reverence, enveloped the mysterious building. "A sense of enchantment," we read in another papyrus, pervaded the whole territory surrounding the Great House; and even the hurried traveller to-day can with difficulty resist the spell, as he gazes on the solemn walls. But for the initiated of old, the supreme end of their existence, the order of their festivals, the purity of their religion, the stability of their monarchy were concentrated in the awful masonry. As the territorial constitution of the country, with its forty-two provinces of the Lower and Upper kingdoms, corresponded interiorly with the forty-two provinces of the Judges of the Dead, the Upper Gods of the Orbit and the Lower Gods of the Horizon, the political framework being the envelope of the spiritual theosophy; so was it with the exterior and interior of the Great House. For from the point where the adept appears before the forty-two judges in the Double Hall of Truth, on surmounting the

[p. 64]

blocks at the lower end of the Chamber of the Shadow, to the throne at the upper end of the Chamber of the Splendour, where he received the crown of illumination, there are exteriorly forty-two courses; so that they form the envelope of that Double Hall of inner Truth. And as the lucid river itself imaged the stream of the "celestial Nile," so also was the course of that river imaged masonically in the hidden places in the House of Osiris. Upon the walls of the Chamber of the Splendour was sculptured the orbit of our planet among the sevenfold company around the solar throne, the orbit which measures the rise and fall of the life-giving waters of the Nile. Along the roof descends the stream of sculptured rays, thirty-six in number, corresponding to the thirty-six decades of days in the orbit of the Egyptian year. At the upper or Southern end of the chamber, as at the upper or Southern end of the kingdom, beneath the Royal Arch of the Sevenfold Ascent, or "Burning Crown," as

[p. 65]

the Ritual calls it, is the Throne of the Cataract. Behind it, the low gate leads through the narrow channels to the chambers of the South with the hidden chambers in the height, crowned by the Grand Arch which dominates the whole interior of the building; as the gate of the Nile leads beyond the cataract to the Southern land of Poont and the long-hidden source of the river, where the land of Khent, beneath the Southern apex, imaged the celestial land of Khent, or Khent-Amenti, mentioned in the Papyrus of Amamu, the Interior Habitation of God in the supreme heaven. At the junction of the upper and lower chambers is the upper mouth of the Well, forming a key to the secret interior, just as the city of Memphis with the house of Osiris itself was the secret key to the constitution of the double kingdom. There too the lesser passage from the secret Chamber of Divine Birth, the "Chamber of Isis," "the Light of the Hidden Nile," unites with

[p. 66]

the main current of the masonic river; just as in the vignette of the celestial Nile, a branch of the stream pours into the main current, from "Annu (or On) the secret birthplace of the gods." From that point the masonic stream, like the Nile at the same point, forks out into a delta, one branch leading down to the Hidden Lintel, the other forming the Well of Life, in the territory of Rusta, wherein, as we learn from another papyrus, was the tree of immortality. And in the rock which bounds the Chamber of the Horizon, and upon which the house of Osiris is built, we recognize the "Rock of the Horizon of Heaven," of which the Ritual speaks.

Again, the very form of some of the hieroglyphs betrays a pyramidal origin. Thus if we outline the junction of the upper and lower chamber, by tracing the roof-line of the Well, below the roof-line of the gallery, with the three rampstones in front, and the projections of the upper and lower galleries at the place,

[p. 67]

we shall have the hieroglyph pronounced "Taui,"  which is well known to mean Upper and Lower Egypt, though no explanation of the form has hitherto been suggested. Similarly, suppose that we delineate the Double Hall of Truth (from the Hidden Lintel to the Empyrean Gate at the southern end of the

Click to enlarge
Pyramidal region of Thoth.

roof above the throne), together with the Chamber of New Birth and the Head of the Well, we shall have the portion of the structure more particularly subject to the dominion of Thoth: the divine person, by whom the initiation is effected. Then if we form a

[p. 68]

cypher of that region, by tracing a line-plan indicating only the direction of those parts in relation to the Head of the Well, where, as we shall presently see, the rite of initiation is accomplished, we shall have the sacred symbol reserved to that deity alone. And

Sacred hieroglyphic symbol peculiar to Thoth.

as by the power of Thoth the adept, after passing his ordeal, is introduced into the presence of the forty-two judges in the Double Hall, corresponding to the forty-two nomes or provinces of Egypt, so also does that symbol of Thoth enter into the hieroglyphic names of every one of the nomes with but a single exception.

Upon the same harmony between the celestial and the terrestrial country embodied in the masonry of the Pyramid of Light,

[p. 69]

depended also the order of the princes of Egypt. For as the Great House itself, the Place of Osiris, the universal God, was represented in its totality in the person of the supreme Monarch; so also the two great divisions of that House, the territory of initiation with its directing angle at the Hidden Lintel, and the territory of illumination with its Sculptured Orbit in the Grand Gallery, the places respectively of the Gods of the Horizon and the Gods of the Orbit, were represented in the two great divisions of the Egyptian Court, the princes of the Angle and the princes of the Circle. And so also was that seven-fold celestial company, the ranks of which were sculptured above the throne in the Chamber of the Splendour, represented in the seven-fold ranks of the "Companions of the King," which immediately surrounded the person of Pharaoh. Thus the Great House with the Double Hall of Truth within, formed a masonic organization not only of the

[p. 70]

religious but of the political constitution of the kingdom; with ascending grades from the Purple Arch of the Star defining the Sacred Horizon of Rusta (or Rosetta) to the Royal Arch of the solstice or limit of the solar seat above the water throne of the cataract, and beyond again along the Grand Arch of the Celestial Meridian to the culminating point of the sun at Equinox above the source of the river, in the primaeval land of Poont.

As we stand before the portal of that "Great House," the "Pir Aa," while we recall the familiar title which the Pharaohs thence derived, and as we contemplate the heaven reflected in the blue waters of the river as it flows without, and its image masonically expressed in the path within, "the disc" seems lifted "from the tomb," and we gaze upon the unseen world. Egypt, for so many centuries the land of the buried, has suddenly become the land of the risen dead. And the message which the long-silenced voice proclaims as

[p. 71]

with a tongue of fire, is the primitive belief in the divine origin and end of man. It is not the Ritual nor the Pyramid of Light alone, which speak to us of the eternal day. Everywhere and always throughout ancient Egypt the same doctrine is proclaimed. From the orbit of the earth, from the pole-star of the heavens, from the dawning of Sothis, from the radiance of the sun, from the waters of the river, from the palaces, from the temples, from the tombs, from the very bowels of the rifled dead, comes forth a voice which for ages has been hushed in the grave; and that voice with startling clearness bears testimony to a judgment beyond the tomb, and the fatherhood of the unseen God.

  

NOTE ON THE SACRED ANGLE.

AMONG the jewels placed as the last ornaments upon the sacred mummy, was sometimes included the Golden Angle; one of the most obscure, but at the same time

[p. 72]

most interesting symbols employed by the Egyptians. The Angle is found, not held in the hand, but borne aloft upon the arm of the great Deity, "Amen, the Eternal Father," and is also one of the sceptres carried by Ptah, the Creator-Spirit. What is more singular, the well-known image called the Pataikos which was carried by the ships of Phoenicia, has been identified very clearly by Champollion with the same god Ptah; and the meaning of Pat-Aik in Egyptian is the Dedication of the Angle.

Great Angle, borne aloft by Amen, Source of Life, in Trinity of Egypt.

[paragraph continues] The same figure is also found among the rock-sculptures on the coast of Asia  Minor.

While the sacred symbol of the Angle was thus widely diffused, the name itself (disguised to us in various languages) seems to have been borne by several races of the Levant. About the central or narrower part of the Mediterranean, just where the Italian peninsula juts out towards the projecting promontory of Africa, we meet the name of Angle in the important island of Sikelia or Sicily, a country which from its position has caught the

[p. 73]

current of many migrations and supplied the arena of many collisions. That island took its appellation not from the Romans--for they, as Ovid tells us, called it Trinacris, from its three-cornered shape--but from the Sikeli, a tribe who, according to Thucydides, immigrated into it from the Southern part of Italy, with which territory the island was for centuries intimately associated. Now the Sikeli bear a name which is meaningless in Greek or Latin, but in Egyptian signifies, without change or modification of any kind, "Sons of the Angle;" while the similar but more suggestive title of "Pirates of the Angle" is found in the Greek name Laestrygones, another race who dwelt there, of such high antiquity that Thucydides confesses his ignorance of their origin. From hence, too, we may not improbably derive our own word "sickle," or "sikel," as it used to be spelt. For the sickle-sword (of which an Angle was a symbol in the priestly alphabet of Egypt) was, as may still be seen upon the monuments, the sacred weapon with which the Egyptian monarch slew the captives; and as Captain Burton has shown in his well-known treatise on the sword, it is the instrument from which both the Eastern scimitar and the cutlass of our own sailors take shape.

Again, at the Eastern extremity of the Levant, the name of Angle once more appears in a double form, and a still more marked and suggestive connection. Right opposite the mouths of the Nile, just in the locality where sea-immigrants from Egypt would probably land after passing the almost harbourless coasts of Palestine, lie the countries of Kilikia and Phoenicia, each expressing

[p. 74]

that idea of Angle (in Egyptian Kilik, in Hebrew Phoene); while the two together form the Angle of the bight through which runs the great dividing line of East and West.

Yet once more in Egypt itself, according to the account contained in Genesis--and Moses, it must be remembered, was at least an expert in Egyptian tradition--we find among the descendants of Ham the tribe of the Patroosim, which in that language means the Frontiers of the Angle (Pat-Rois), and connects them with those princes of the Angle who formed, as we have seen, an integral portion of the court of Pharaoh.

What angle then is this of such supreme importance that it should be the symbol of the great Deity, and should give a name to the princely races of the earth? Of the highly important part played by the relation

Great Angle of the Nile Delta, Source of Life, in Triangle of Egypt.

between Angle and Circle in the structure of the Grand Pyramid we have already spoken; but there is another Angle which still remains for consideration, namely, that between the two branches of the Delta into which the river forks at Memphis below the Great House. Now this Angle supplies a simple key to a very curious problem in cosmography. Upon examining the well-known triple division of the ancient world, it is

[p. 75]

somewhat difficult to perceive upon what principle it was effected. Russia can even now be scarcely considered as forming, either by race or by conformation, a portion of Europe proper; while, as Scythia, it seems to have been regarded as entirely separate. Asia Minor, on the other hand, possesses a shore line almost continuous with that of Greece; and her population, at least upon the coasts, seem to have been derived in great measure from kindred sources. Nor is it easy to find the central point from which the three dividing lines branch out. It cannot, for instance, be situated in Babylonia, where some might be inclined to place it, because Syria lies to the west; neither again can it be in Armenia, where others might look for it, since a considerable space divides that country from Africa. If, however, we take up our stand in front of the Great House at Memphis, the masonic record of primaeval science, the entrance to which indicates the principal division of the universal sphere, and look abroad upon the great river which we have seen represented within, we shall find that the form which that river assumes at the spot suggests three divisions of the entire hemisphere. Behind us, towards the South, stretches the long valley leading up to the hidden sources of the far-distant primaeval land; indicating the huge peninsula of Africa enclosed between the seas, and constituting also the southern boundary of the vast Mediterranean basin. And right along that valley, above the Great House, through the whole kingdom of Upper Egypt, stretches the Grand Meridian, tracing out upon the earth the Grand Arch of the Universe, and traversing their ancient home beneath the supreme dome of highest

[p. 76]

heaven. Next, if the lines of the northern fork be prolonged indefinitely, then Eastward of the most Eastern branch lies the continent of Asia; Westward of the most Western is Europe proper. Finally, between the legs of that earth-dominating Angle, lies the famous kingdom of Lower Egypt, with the princes of the Angle; while on the coast beyond is Kilikia, the land of the Angle; and further again, but still within the legs of the same Angle, stretches the immense plain of Scythia, separating and yet uniting East and West. Upon the Southern borders of that plain, on the coast of the Black Sea, according to the ancient traditions of our Sagas, the ancestors of Odin and of the sea-going race, which still bears the proud name of Angles, had their pirate home. And it is not a little remarkable that the same Saga refers more than once to the boundary line of East and West as passing close by their ancient city upon the Black Sea, and mentions as their neighbours the tribe of the Vans, whose name appears frequently upon the ancient monuments, and is still preserved in the Armenian lake which lies by that boundary line.

It is strange too, to observe that no sooner are the records of our ancestors permitted to speak as to their own history, records incidentally confirmed both by classic historians, such as Florus, and by the ancient monuments, than a glimpse of still higher antiquity opens out through the title of our nation, connecting itself with the widespread symbol of the Egyptian Angle; and a flood of light is poured upon our words and customs by reference to Egyptian sources. Thus the familiar name of Viking, for which no meaning has been assigned, signifies in Egyptian

[p. 77]

an Angle-dweller, that is, an Englishman; and the two words composing it are still preserved in English as "wick," a place, and "kink," an indentation. Berserk again, another well-known but unintelligible appellation, means in that ancient tongue "foam-plough;" a striking and most natural image for those ploughers of the ocean to employ, and one which harmonizes exactly with the numerous poetic titles given by the Vikings to their true home, the ship. Odin himself, though the descendant of ancestors who had been settled for generations upon the Euxine, bore an Egyptian name--the significant name of Destroyer; and his standard, the raven, was the Egyptian symbol of destruction. Nor was it only in his character of pirate [**] (itself an Egyptian word), but as teacher also, that his associations connect themselves with the same source. According to tradition, he was acquainted in some measure with the process of embalmment, and he claimed to know the secret of the sacred writing, while his followers were distinguished by the winged headdress which was borne by the sacred scribe of Egypt, as representing the dominion of east and west bestowed by Ra upon Thoth, the Lord of Wisdom. So with the funeral feasts, the elaborate ceremonies and the intercourse with the dead which had so rooted a hold in the hearts of our Scandinavian forefathers. The Asars, or holy ancestors whom they worshipped, were the very counterpart both in name and in attributes with the holy souls of Egypt who had become united with Osiris (more properly Uasar), and were themselves described

[p. 78]

by his name. The title of Hersir, or Leader of the Host, which, as Du Chaillu has pointed out in his valuable work, was older than that of the king, bears in the hieroglyphic (Her-ser) the identical signification of Chief Organizer. The land of Kent (Khent) [**] was a territory of the holy dead, and its hieroglyph was a sail. Nay, there is scarcely a feature in the strange mythology of Scandinavia which does not reflect an image more or less distorted of some portion of the Egyptian Ritual. Or, to give but one more illustration of a different but equally curious character, our national shout, "Hip, Hip, Hurra!" which rises spontaneously though unmeaningly to our lips, and which is said to be the shout also of the Cossack dwellers by our ancient home upon the Black Sea, conveys in the hieroglyphic (Hep, Hep, Hura), "On, on, to plunder," the significant cry of our pirate ancestors at the moment of accomplishment. Strangest of all it is to think that the last of the Hidden Places of the earth to be opened to civilized man should have been the traditional scene of his earliest dwelling-place; that the source of the historic river which, by its mighty Angle, traces out the lines of the first settlement of the globe, should to-day be the centre of its latest division by the world-dividing nation of Angles; and that while the vast lake which marks the ancient "apex of the earth" bears the name of the monarch of that race, the Egyptian kingdom itself should be ruled at the dictation of her ministers.

[p. 79]

It is true that these traditions, like those of other nations also, are entirely at variance with the remarkable adventures of the famous "Aryan race," that marvellous creature of modern myth-making which flits with all the brilliance of a will of the wisp over the most impossible morasses of Imaginative History. Happily however, its illustrious creator, Professor Max Muller, has himself given what we may hope will prove the death-blow to his scarcely less celebrated offspring, by utterly denying before the British Association any reality to its existence; by laughing to scorn the idea of any such thing as an Aryan skull, and by stating plainly that the Aryan race is nothing more or less than a figment of philological convenience. For not until the last glimmer of that alluring but most misleading meteor has disappeared, will the ancient records of nations be permitted to throw their true light upon the past. Nor until then shall we understand our own laws and language, our customs and constitution, or trace the history of that Imperial nation of the waters which perpetuates the name of the sacred Angle. And surely no kingdom ever yet possessed a more romantic story in the past, or attained a position of more absorbing interest or more perilous pre-eminence than that occupied by England to-day, as she stands in the central land of highest antiquity, with hands stretching to every quarter of the globe--a solitary figure of commanding majesty, but uncertain in policy, unguarded in frontier, and almost unarmed in defence; while surrounded by the seething nations which count their hosts by the million, and listening with a careless ear to the muttered breathings of universal war.

Footnotes

^43:* The case of the Holy Roman Empire may perhaps suggest itself as a precedent; for foreign princes undoubtedly sat in the Diet. But those princes had jurisdiction not by virtue of treaties or in right of their foreign kingdoms, but of the Imperial principalities of which they happened to be possessed.

^51:* As a contrary opinion is still held by some Egyptologists, and was sanctioned by Dr. Brugsch himself, I may be permitted to quote the opinion of a very distinguished authority in support. M. Maspero, when I put the question to him, most courteously informed me that though years ago he had held the opinion then prevalent of a Northern origin, he had changed his views on further research, and now believes the Egyptians to have come from the South. If this view be correct--and many facts seem to support it--endless difficulties are resolved, or rather do not arise to require solution, which have resulted from a belief in the famous "prehistoric Asiatic family;" that is to say, in a family of the existence of which no record can be produced.

^55:* In the innumerable attempts at the identification of the birthplace of man, as recorded in Scripture--[p. 56]attempts which may be counted literally by the hundred, and which have gone far towards rendering any true exposition of human development an almost hopeless achievement--the garden is constantly confused with the watershed, and the "heads" of the rivers with their full courses, while the single river is omitted altogether.

^56:* From the same source a good deal of light may, I think, be thrown upon the scriptural account of the Deluge, regarded as a phenomenal inundation of the Nile valley, the dwelling-place of the primaeval family, as I have endeavoured to show elsewhere; and this, again, will be found to react upon various questions connected with the early settlement of Egypt; the worship of Nou, the deity of the water; the sacred ark of Amen, the prototype of the ark of Moses; the especial reverence paid to the Nilometer, or "Tat," the symbol of the divine Nou, with its threefold measure of the inundation; the sudden immergence of that lonely yet majestic [p. 57] civilization; the dim tradition of bygone generations; the intense reverence paid to the patriarchal monarchs; the universal jurisdiction claimed by the divine royalty of Egypt; and, above all, the serene contemplation of death as the luminous entrance to the fields of light. The Babylonian tradition also given in the Deluge tablet,

The sacred Tat or Measure of the Inundation.

translated in "Records of the Past," is in agreement of the same view; for, according to that tradition, the theatre of the cataclysm was certainly not Babylonia, since the hero declares positively that he crossed the sea. In fact, so far as I have been able to trace, there is no nation, from India and China in the East, to Mexico and Peru in the furthest West, whose native traditions and archaeological relics are in discord either with the Egyptian tradition of the primaeval land of Poont, or with the scriptural description of the primaeval watershed, if we are content to read, by the light of Egyptian tradition, the account handed down to us by Moses, whom those Scriptures expressly characterize as pre-eminent in Egyptian knowledge.

^77:* Some etymologists strangely derive this word from the Greek peirau, "to attempt;" as though a pirate, of all people in the world, were a man to leave his work half finished.

^78:* Pierret, in his Hieroglyphic Lexicon, states that Khent means always to ascend the Nile towards the south, and that the sail is always deployed; thus answering, in the Path of Light, to the ascent of the Orbit by the illuminate beneath the open sail of the firmament.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE HIDDEN GOD.

DEEPLY embedded in the heart of some ancient forest, we find here and there a massive and hoary boulder, its antiquity far exceeding that of the venerable trees, and its whole appearance telling of a distant soil and a by-gone day. As we sit upon the granite block, with the branches waving high above our heads, our wonder at its presence is deepened by the quiet scene. For countless ages that great stone has lain motionless, lifeless, changeless, amid all the infinite movement of changing life around it. No human power brought that huge mass where it lies; no eye can trace the path along which it was driven by the forces

[p. 81]

of nature. And not until we have traced the mighty variations and convulsions which in the recesses of time our whole globe has undergone, not until we have looked back far beyond the earliest seed-time of the forest, to the days when the surrounding country for hundreds of miles formed the bottom of an immense ocean, through which the icebergs bore the huge rocks torn from its frozen shores, can we understand the position of that primeval stone.

Something of a similar character may not unfrequently be discerned in regard to the religious belief and worship of a nation, when a tradition or custom survives the convulsions and changes of the centuries, and remains firmly embedded in the national life, though every trace of significance is long buried in the past. Most superstitions, it is probable, had once an intelligible meaning, even if that meaning were founded on a mistaken belief; but such survivals are by no means due to

[p. 82]

superstition alone. Who, for instance, can explain the Latin titles used for the psalms in the Prayer-book of the Church of England, without going back more than three hundred and fifty years to the time when England used the same language in her public worship as the rest of Christendom? So in the Latin Mass the Kyrie Eleison betrays its connection with the Greek; and the word Hosanna in the office for Palm Sunday carries us back to the Hebrew.

But there is one word in particular which is employed not on any special occasion but in every service, not once or twice but after every petition, not as a portion of the prayer but as its summary and its seal. If a stranger stand outside the closed doors of a church while service is going on, there is one word, and probably but one which he would hear distinctly repeated again and again. "Amen," "Amen," "Amen," that is the aspiration which time after time comes rolling forth with the

[p. 83]

full strength of choir and congregation. That is the word by which the apostle denotes the absolute nature of the Deity as compared with created matter. "In Him all things are Amen." That is the title with which the seer of the apocalypse invokes the advent of his Divine Master at the conclusion of the vision: "Amen, Veni Domine Jesu." That is the title which the Master assumed to Himself, "Amen, I say to you." And that is the title by which the Egyptian priests of old addressed the secret Deity--Amen, that is to say, in Egyptian, "The Hidden One."

That the existence of the one God was widely known by some classes of men at least among the nations of antiquity there can be little doubt. Among the Chinese, according to the most eminent authority, Dr. Legge, the word Ti represented the same idea as we express by the word God; and its assumption as a title by the earliest dynasty of the Emperors of China would be quite in accordance with the ancient belief

[p. 84]

that the monarch ruled as the divine representative. When the disciples of Manu approached that sage to beg for instruction in the wisdom which afterwards formed the foundation of Indian law, they addressed him as follows: "For thou, O lord, alone knowest the purport (or rites) and the knowledge taught in the whole ordinance of the Self-Existent (Svayam bhu), which is unknowable and unfathomable." And their master, in his reply, laid down the principle of the One Uncreated God, the Giver of Light. "The Divine Self-Existent," he said, "indiscernible, making the elements and the rest discernible, appeared with creative force, dispelling the darkness."

Again, in the Mahabharata, the earliest production of post-Vedic literature, a translation of which, as well as of the laws of Manu, is given in the magnificent series of the Sacred Books of the East, the most enduring monument to its illustrious editor, a similar doctrine is ascribed to Vyasa. "In the commencement

[p. 85]

was Brahman, without beginning or end, unborn, luminous, free from decay, immutable, eternal, unfathomable, not to be fully known."

Equally explicit are the utterances of some of the Greek poets.

"One Self-begotten, from whom all things sprang;" is one of the lines attributed to the famous Orpheus.

"To God all things are easy, nought impossible;" so sang Linus, a brother of the same bright band. A fuller but not less accurate description is given by Xenophanes--

"One God there is, greatest 'mongst gods and men;
  Not like to mortals, or in form or thought.
  In full he sees, he hears, in full he knows,
  And without labour doth his mind move all."

Another poet, Cleanthes, whom St. Paul quotes in his famous speech to the Athenians, strikes at the root of the exclusiveness arising from the characteristic principle of ancient idolatry, that a deity listens to no prayers except from his own descendants, by proclaiming

[p. 86]

that all men are the offspring of God, and that consequently the right of prayer to Him is universal--

"O thou most glorious and immortal One,
  O many-titled, O Omnipotent,
  Zeus, Lord of Nature, ruling all by Law,
  Hail! whom to worship is the right of all;
  Since all of us are of Thee."

Even the Roman mind, dim-eyed as it was for the invisible world, was not altogether without a glimpse of this truth, to which Horace has given expression when speaking of the supreme deity--

"From whom none greater than himself is born;
  Nor doth his equal, or his second, live."

But the truths which sparkle here and there in the teachings of India, China, or of Greece, fade and vanish before the blaze of Egyptian theosophy. Take, for example, the following extract given by Mr. Budge from the hymn to Amen-Ra, the hidden deity, the Self-Existent Light: "Hail to thee, Ra, Lord of

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] Law, whose shrine is hidden; Master of the gods, the god Chepera (Self-Existent Light) in his boat; by the sending forth of (his) Word the gods sprang into existence. Hail, god Atmu (Light), Maker of mortals. However many are their forms, he causes them to live, he makes different the colour of one man from another. He hears the prayers of him that is oppressed; he is kind of heart to him that calls unto him; he delivers him that is afraid from him that is strong of heart; he judges between the mighty and the weak.

"O Form, One, Creator of all things. O One, Only Maker of existences. Men came forth from his two eyes, the gods sprang into existence at the utterance of his mouth. He maketh the green herb to make the cattle live, and the staff of life for the (use of) man. He maketh the fish to live in the rivers, the winged fowl in the sky; he giveth the breath of life to the germ in the egg, he maketh birds of all kinds to live, and likewise the reptiles

[p. 88]

that creep and fly, he causeth the rats to live in their holes, and the birds that are on every green twig. Hail to thee, O maker of all these things, thou Only One."

Nor was the unity the only truth concerning the Godhead known to the priesthood of Egypt. Throughout the extent of the kingdom, at Thebes, at Ombos, at Tentera, at Memphis, at Annu (or On) a Triune God--of whom some knowledge seems to have been attained by Greece--invoked by many names, but everywhere consisting of three persons, consubstantial and co-eternal, was worshipped as supreme. "I am Tmu in the morning," says the Creator, in a well-known passage, "Ra at noon, and Harmachi in the evening;" that is to say, as the dawn, the noon, and the sunset (which these names denote) are three several forms co-existing perpetually and coequally in the substance of the sun, so also did the three divine persons co-exist perpetually and co-equally in the substance of the

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Uncreated Light. Thus, after declaring the sacred Unity in the most emphatic and explicit terms, the hymn already quoted proceeds to invoke the three persons by name, using, nevertheless, the singular pronoun for the collective Three. "He is of many forms;" so the hymn proceeds, "O Amen, establisher of all things, Atmu and Harmachi, all people adore thee, saying, Praise to thee because of thy resting among us, homage to thee because thou hast created us. All creatures say Hail to thee, and all lands praise thee. From the height of the sky, to the breadth of the earth, and to the depths of the sea art thou praised."

If the Divine Trinity however were the only secret of the Ritual, there would not be so great a difficulty in following its symbols. But there is a depth of mystery beyond, a mystery the greater because manifested in a visible form. We read in the Ritual of an incarnate, and not only of an incarnate, but of

[p. 90]

a suffering and a dying God. We are confronted with the tears of Isis, and with the agony of Osiris--an agony so overwhelming that gods and men and the very devils, says the Ritual, are aghast. Moreover, not only is the twofold action of the same sacred person as man and as God recognized, but it is embodied in an animal symbolism; just as, amongst Christians, the symbol of the Lamb is used for the Divine Person, the calf and the eagle for the Evangelists. Take, for example, the vignette of the Ritual representing the resurrection of Osiris as taking place in the presence of the Egyptian Trinity. The human form, being the highest available, is required by the supreme Three; and in order to represent the lower nature, or divine humanity, it is necessary to take a lower creature whose characteristic should indicate that of the Divine Person represented. Of such a form was the cat, whose eyes, varying in form like the sun with the period of the

[p. 91]

day, imaged to the Egyptian the splendour of the light. And thus we have the cat cutting off the head of the serpent of darkness in the presence of the sacred Three. And that symbolism, when its original meaning was lost, that is, when the knowledge of God was no longer retained in their science, would naturally give rise to the foolishness of animal worship.

No less profound was the relation between the Creator and His works, as intimated in their well-known symbol for created life, called the Ank [**] or Sacred Mirror, wherein every great deity contemplates perpetually his own image; but which is rarely grasped in the hand of any except Amen. But how should the universe be represented by a mirror, and, if it be, why should the heavenly powers behold themselves

[p. 92]

reflected in it? Since Egypt gives only the symbol, but betrays no clue to the secret, the great Master of mediaeval philosophy shall declare to us that profound relation, which alters not with the passing of ages. According to the teaching of Aquinas, the universe exists in a twofold manner, first ideally in the mind of God, and secondly materially externally to him, so that in creation the Almighty contemplates His own mind as in a mirror. As a dramatist before he gives living expression to his characters conceives in his own mind their forms, their countenances, their actions, passions, and conditions of life, with all the details of their environment; and as his work reflects the image of the author's mind, so in the theosophy of Egypt did the entire cosmos, embracing all space, all time, and all orders of created being, reflect a single thought in the mind of the Creator.

Man himself therefore had a "double" or

[p. 93]

counterpart in the Divine Idea, a sacred "type" of which the festival is celebrated in the Ritual, and which is masonically expressed within the niche of the Chamber of New Birth. Hence it was that the ideal counterpart possessed such divine sanctity, and the monarch offered sacrifice to his own double. For in the intelligible, no less than in the mechanical world, the expressed form is ever the counterpart of the impressed force; while conversely, in the mechanical world, the material form is due to an immaterial motive-power. For can any mathematician define the very nature of force, otherwise than as that which sets matter in motion? But if force be that which sets matter in motion, it cannot itself be material, if the fundamental law of motion be true that matter at rest remains at rest. Unless, therefore, the motions of the material universe--and it is of the motions of the heavenly bodies, and not merely of their existence that the Ritual continually speaks--be the result of an

[p. 94]

immaterial force impressing itself upon matter, our whole conception of dynamical science is wrong from the beginning. And reason itself becomes the mockery of reason; for there is not an achievement of the engineer, not a prediction of the astronomer, not an application of the mathematician, which does not prove the truth of a principle radically false. So, on the other hand, no philosopher can long maintain any substantiality as underlying the phenomena around him, who does not recognize them as the expression of creative thought impressing itself upon created matter; nor can poet or artist present new types of character unless he is gifted with the supreme power of the imagination, the faculty of perceiving and defining the unexhausted forms of human personality potentially existing in the sole creative mind. For genius is the power of giving form to potentialities.

Pursue Egyptian theosophy in which direction we may, the things of time speak ever of

[p. 95]

eternity, the self-existent Deity is always secretly reflected in his creatures. Accordingly each phenomenon of nature conveyed to them a corresponding manifestation of the divine personality, and according to the Ritual it was the Deity indwelling in the soul, which confers upon the man the power of perceiving these relations. "I am perception," we read, "the imperishable soul." In the noonday glow of the sun they beheld the splendour of Ra; in his setting the death of Osiris; in the new dawn his resurrection as the incarnate Horus; in the glowing fire the creator-spirit, Ptah; in the harmonious proportions of the universe the Eternal Wisdom, Thoth, "the mind and will of God;" in the starry firmament crowned by Alcyone and the Pleiades (the sacred bull and attendant cows) the ineffable beauty of Athor, [**] the living tabernacle of the sacred Light.

[p. 96]

Bearing now carefully in mind the extreme complexity of this secret parallelism, and the strict analogy between the visible and invisible worlds which constitutes the basis of the political organism, we have little difficulty in perceiving the importance of the function in regard to the Hidden God, discharged by the House of Osiris. Viewed independently, the great temples of Egypt present to us a heterogeneous collection of miscellaneous deities, amongst whom now the sun, now the moon, now the earth, now the river, now the orbit, now the horizon, is predominant without any apparent reason or purpose; while the Ritual breaks up into a chaos of broken images and grotesque distortions of astronomical conceptions. Seen by the inner light of the great house, where the Path of the Hidden Places reflects the river of celestial light, the great temple system of Egypt reveals itself as an organic whole with a simple majesty not unworthy of its unrivalled shrines. For since

[p. 97]

the chief localities on the material Nile represented the different stages on the Path of Light, so do the various worships naturally arise of the spirits exercising the corresponding functions--somewhat as among ourselves the water of the Jordan is peculiarly consecrated to the rite of baptism. Thus with regard to Annu, the divine birthplace, reference is constantly made to the new birth; Thebes is peculiarly connected with Amen, the Hidden God; while at Memphis, the key of the organism was the House of Osiris itself. And a knowledge of the spirits exercising special powers in these places, formed a conspicuous portion of the Ritual in the preparation of the Initiate for enduring the ordeal.

Had the case been otherwise, indeed; had the real objects of Egyptian worship been a mass of deities local and unrelated; then inasmuch as the form of government was well nigh a pure theocracy, the authority of the monarch being derived not merely from his

[p. 98]

descent but from his personal union with Ra, and inasmuch as heresy was punished with excommunication and even, as M. Maspero states, with death by fire, it would have been inevitable that each successive dynasty, as it proceeded now from This, now from Memphis, now from Thebes, now from Sais, should have torn up by the roots the religion established by its predecessors; and the annals of Egypt would have been as full of religious discord and confusion as those of our own Tudor princes. History however has produced, so far, but one instance of an endeavour on the part of the king to introduce novelty into the religion. Amenoph IV., who married a foreign princess, adopted the title of Khu-en-Aten, [**]

[p. 99]

or "Illuminate of the Disc"--a title which, as we may see, clearly outrages the Ritual which we have seen embodied in the masonry. For as the disc of the sun is but its visible surface, so the "disc" of the tomb was but its entrance gate which was lifted by Shu (the Light) "when the sun sets from the world of life;" and to place the illumination therefore at that point was to ignore all the grades of the Postulant, the Initiate, and the Adept, and to destroy the most essential conditions of illumination. In the same way the expression "Living in Truth," which, as Mr. Petrie points out, was constantly employed by Khuenaten,

[p. 100]

indicates, when applied to the disc, the same degraded and idolatrous conception, since it substitutes a material and visible object for that Truth which in the older worship was spiritual, interior, and unseen. And thus, under the succeeding monarch, while the word Aten was preserved, the offending title, Khu, was sedulously obliterated.

In the masonic record therefore, the House of Osiris, we have a key to the whole politico-religious constitution of the country--a key which none could imitate, none could alter, none destroy; which no man could comprehend unless initiated, nor any forget or mistake, who had once received illumination. Accordingly, in that masonry we find the originals of many of the mystic symbols, whereby the priests so expressed the divine and the royal authority as to be intelligible to those and those alone who had been initiated masonically. Thus, if we draw the groove of the orbit in the Chamber of the Splendour, with

[p. 101]

[paragraph continues] "The Wall of Earth" at the Northern end separating the Orbit from the Shadow, we shall have the hieroglyph for the orbit "Sennen," which is identical with the cartouche,  surrounding the titles of the monarch. That familiar symbol, by aid of which Champollion first divined the secret of the writing, is therefore nothing else than a masonic sign, signifying that not the circumference, but the immensely more extensive orbit of the earth is the limit of the royal authority; and indicating thereby (since the orbit implies renewal from age to age) its endurance no less than its universality. Again, if we represent the course of the celestial Nile by the rays traced in the roof of the same chamber,  we have the hieroglyph of the river, while the straight floor-line descending from the throne gives its hieratic equivalent. So if we draw the

          
Throne and axis.

       
Nuter Holy.

     
   [p. 102]

great throne in the Hall of Truth with the central line of the light, running down to depths of the rock on which it is built, we obtain the hieroglyph denoting holiness; and if we add to this the lower portion of the building, the territory of initiation, there results the hieroglyph for the territory of the holy dead.

The Place of the Holy Dead.

Again, suppose that we represent the same place interiorly by drawing the Well, where the re-born soul is reunited to the postulant, together with the line where the interior

Well of Life, Place of Initiation.

masonry is bounded by the natural rock through which entrance or initiation into the interior masonry is obtained from below--the

[p. 103]

entrance impassable by the postulant until the soul is restored to him. Then, if we indicate the image of the Well itself, shining in its own living but invisible waters, as seen by the soul from above, just as the Creator looks down on His own image in the universe, we obtain the symbol of the "Ank," or mirror

Ank, Symbol of Created Life.

of life. So, if we represent the descent traversed by the Initiate from the Head of the Well to the Opening into the Chamber

          
Sceptre of Ptah, Spirit of Divine   Fire.

       
Opening from Well of Life to Chamber of   Divine Fire.

     
   of the Fiery Ordeal, we have the Sceptre of Ptah, the Spirit of Divine Fire. And, if

[p. 104]

we represent the passage of the horizon together with the masonry of the entrance, we

          
Passage of Pole-star.

       
Sceptre of Anup.

     
   have the sceptre of Anup, the guide of the soul. Sometimes the whole hieroglyphic name receives illustration at least, if not origination, from the same pyramidal source; as, for instance, in the name of Hapi, the radiant guardian of the Nile. For if we draw the Grand Arch of the highest chamber, imaging the Grand Arch of the universe, the seat of that luminous spirit, we shall produce the initial of that word. And if we add the Entrance Gate (itself surmounted by the Double Arch), together with the scored line in the Passage of the Horizon, pointing downward to the foundation of the rock, we shall

[p. 105]

have the complete set of hieroglyphs which compose his name,  and thus masonically indicate his office as protector of the rock, the mouth, and the fount of the River of Light.

But by far the most important expression of these truths is contained in the kalendar, or recurrent series of festivals, which reflected on earth the rejoicings of heaven; and a full understanding of which was one of the glories reserved in the Ritual for the Illuminate. By means of that kalendar the "Mystery-Teachers of the Heavens" co-ordinated not only the political but the social life of the nation with the theosophy of The Light, while through its masonic expression the divine manifestations and the personal attributes of the Hidden Deity were at once communicated to the instructed and protected from the profane. To their sense indeed of the divine personality, far more probably than to any artificial pretension to a supposed exclusiveness which

[p. 106]

does not seem to have had any real existence, may be ascribed the mystery enshrouding their religion. For mystery is to God only what privacy is to man, our sense of which deepens with deepening intimacy. And though three hundred years of continuous wrangling over the secret truths which most profoundly affect the heart and mind have gone far to coarsen and deaden our spiritual sense, the soul still resents, as the most unpardonable offence, the profanation of a vulgar touch. For whether we acknowledge it or not, the springs of our entire existence are hidden. From the darkness of the womb to the darkness of the tomb, the source of our every action is veiled from us. Mystery is the beginning; mystery is the ending; mystery is the whole body of our life. We cannot breathe, nor sleep, nor eat, nor move, far less think or speak, without exercising powers which to us are inconceivable, by means of processes which to us are inscrutable. Who is so ignorant as not to

[p. 107]

know these things; who so learned as to make them clear?

Most powerful and most hidden of all is the passion which grows the more reticent in proportion as it is more enduring, the passion which dominates at once the senses and the spirit; the master-mystery of Love. But Love himself was none other than the hidden God. In Greece, where some rays of Egyptian wisdom penetrated with a brightness denied to more distant lands, this truth was not unknown. Love was the third in the Trinity of Hesiod. And in Parmenides we read how "strife has entered into the deepest places; but in the centre Love stands calm." But in the teaching of Egypt, the Creator's love so conspicuous in the sublime hymn already quoted, is the motive power of the universe, the secret energy of the Light. "I am the Inundation," says the Creator in the Ritual--the fulness of the Torrent of Life. And again, "I am the Fount of Joy," the

[p. 108]

inexhaustible source of happiness to the soul. Most striking too is the allusion which occurs in another hymn to Amen, where it speaks of the crown of illumination, or "Atf" crown of

"Atf," Crown of Supreme Light, Crown of Illuminate in Burning Circle of the Orbit.

the monarchs, fashioned after the form of the light which sometimes crowns the Zodiac, the Burning Circle of supreme heaven, before the

Light of Supreme Heaven, Crown of Burning Circle of Zodiac.

summer dawn. That crown, we learn from the Ritual, was placed upon the head of the illuminate on his accomplishing the "passage of the sun," in the ascent of "the orbit," and the hymn proclaims that "North and South of that crown

[p. 109]

is Love." So when the Illuminate in the masonic Light after ascending the Chamber of the Orbit stood before the throne at its higher end, Northward and Southward of him was Love--to the Northward, the Love manifested in the starry guide which led him to the knowledge of truth in its splendour, and before him the Love concealed in the heights of heaven, the Secret Places of the Hidden God.

Footnotes

^91:* Another signification, that of a fisherman's knot, has of late been adopted by some authorities; but the shape of the knot differs essentially from that of the Ank, the head of the latter being upright upon the stem. And again, how should a fisherman's knot stand upright on the knees of the gods? and, if it could, why should it?

^95:* Properly Hat-hor, The House of Horus, the Risen God of Light.

^98:* I have adopted the translation of the word Khou, given by M. Deveria in the passage above quoted, the hieroglyphs being identical; but the name, according to Mr. Flinders Petrie, is more correctly pronounced Akhenaten. That diligent explorer, in his interesting work on Tel-el-Amarna, the site of the palace built by Khuenaten, on the borders of Middle and Upper Egypt, has abundantly illustrated the theory that the monarch's object [p. 99]was to substitute the solar disc (Aten) as an object of worship for the personal Deity--Ra, the Hidden God and Untreated Light, Amen--previously worshipped under various symbols. This attempt, as well as the distinction between the disc and the rays--which he also considers Khuenaten to have introduced--Mr. Petrie characterizes as a striking advance in philosophical truth: though it is difficult to understand in what way the adoration of a material object in place of a Personal and Unseen God can be philosophically regarded as an advance.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE MYSTERY OF THE HEAVENS.

OF all the natural images familiar to the mind none is more radiant, and none more tranquil, than that of the rolling year as it circles perpetually about the feet of God. Even in the midst of cloud and fog, the mere striking of a clock, that record of planetary motion, serves to remind us how circumscribed is the surrounding gloom, and how the dull earth beneath our feet is, even as we gaze upon it, shining to its far companions in the fields of light. As that lustrous orbit is woven, revolution after revolution, with never-failing beauty, cycle after cycle of age-long periods, like golden serpents, twine themselves

[p. 111]

around it, and span the gulfs of time with the years of the Most High.

Such a system of harmonious periods and of measured intervals, corresponding to universal, not arbitrary, standards, was a natural, and indeed an essential, element in the theosophy of a priesthood whose religious teaching was intentionally veiled under the analogies of astronomy. In examining therefore the astronomical science of the "Mystery-Teachers of the Heavens," [**] to use the official title employed in the Court of Pharaoh, we may not unreasonably expect to trace the origin and signification of various familiar measures, of which the use is widely diffused, but the fundamental conception unknown. Nor shall we be altogether disappointed in

[p. 112]

this respect; while a sudden and vivid interest will be found to attach to the common units of time and space, when we perceive that they are not the fruit of any arbitrary arrangement, however ingenious, but are the products of universal concords, and represent, so to speak, the beats and bars of the music of the spheres.

That the moon was the sacred and, at least in early times, the secret standard of

Balance before Thoth.

[paragraph continues] Egyptian science, there seems little doubt. Thoth, the Great Lord of Wisdom and of Measure, the divine recorder, before whom stood the Balance of Justice, wherein the light and darkness of man's moral life were

[p. 113]

weighed, was lord, not of the sun, but of the moon; and to that latter orb we are indebted for our fundamental standards both of space and time, as we may easily see, remembering always that we are dealing with approximate measures, and "mean," or average motions. For the position of a heavenly body is, in general, not the same to an observer on the earth's surface as it would be if he were stationed at its centre, which is the chief point of astronomical reference. This difference, or parallax, must therefore be always taken into consideration; and in the case of the moon, when on the horizon, it is found to be about [**] the three hundred and sixtieth part of the circle of the heavens--that is, a degree; and conversely therefore the fundamental measure of the circle is given by the difference between the moon's apparent position on rising

[p. 114]

at any place as seen by an observer at the earth's surface, and the position in which it would appear at the same moment if viewed by an observer at the centre of the earth. Equally simple is the fundamental measure of time, viz. the hour or period required by the moon in her orbit, relatively to the sun, to traverse a space equal to her own disc; and this measure was peculiarly sacred in Egypt, each hour of the twenty-four which elapse during a single rotation [**] of the earth being consecrated to its own particular deity, twelve of light and twelve of darkness. "Explain the God in the Hour" is the demand made of the adept in the Hall of Justification. And that God in the Hour, we learn, was Thoth, the Lord of the Moon, and "the Reckoner of the Earth."

A singular relation of a similar kind exists

[p. 115]

between the lunar period and the risings of the stars, which was also utilized by the Egyptian astronomers. For whereas in regard to the apparent position of the sun, relatively to the rest of the heavens, the motion of the earth in her orbit has a perceptible effect; in regard to the stars, the distances are so enormous that the orbit of the earth shrinks into insignificance. The time therefore which elapses between any two successive risings of the same star at any given place will, on the average, be a little less than that between any two successive risings of the sun at that place; since in the first case the time depends only upon the complete rotation of the place round the centre of the earth, whereas in the latter, the motion of the earth's centre during the interval must be taken into account. This difference is, on the average, about four minutes in every twenty-four hours, and will, therefore, in fifteen days, amount to an hour. Accordingly, as we learn from a most interesting

[p. 116]

paper published by Professor Renouf on a kalendar of the XIXth dynasty, the observations of the stars were taken every fifteenth day, thus correlating the sidereal period with the lunar period of the hour.

Again, the interval which on the average elapses between the moments in which the moon successively comes to the full (always in relation to a given place such as Memphis), that is to say a lunar month or "lunation" is about 29 1/2 solar days. Suppose now we take as an unit of time thirty such solar days; then each lunar month would fall short of that period by half a day or one-sixtieth part, and the lunar year, consisting of twelve such periods, would fall short by six days, so that all the measures would be proportionate. Here, then, we possess the key to a most singular correlation between the lunar motions and the solar months (consisting always of thirty solar days), which Dr. Brugsch has pointed out in the Table of Edfu; which was published in the

[p. 117]

days of the Ptolemies, but never, apparently, while a native monarch reigned. On the first day was celebrated the "conception of the moon," when that orb was on the meridian at noon (while still invisible to the observer)--a refinement unknown to our kalendar; on the second day its birth, or first appearance, and so on throughout the month of thirty days. During the first month, therefore, the lunar intervals would of course correspond more or less precisely with the solar days. But whereas the two sets would grow progressively asunder, the lunar names remained affixed to the same solar days. Thus the first day of each solar month was called the conception of the moon, and the second new moon, although neither phenomenon might have taken place anywhere near the time--a method of expression necessitating, it would seem, a double form of register, and simple enough to those who held the clue, but to a stranger hopelessly misleading.

[p. 118]

Turning now to the motions of our own planet we find, as Dr. Brugsch has shown, that the Egyptian division of the solar, or to speak more correctly, of the terrestrial year, depended upon a knowledge of the 365 1/4 rotations performed by the earth while completing (approximately) one revolution, around the sun--an extra day being intercalated every fourth or "grand" year. But this method of regarding the matter arises out of our own slovenly method of expressing astronomical ideas, and our habitual employment of language embodying the confused and confusing conceptions of the Greeks; and it by no means does justice to the Egyptian exactness. The truth is that a single year or revolution of the earth is marked by no cosmic or universal correspondence. Only in the fourth or "grand" year, as it was termed, is a harmony established by the simultaneous (or nearly simultaneous) completion of the rotary and revolutionary motions; while at the same time

[p. 119]

the sun himself, drawing with him the whole planetary system, completes an arc of his own mighty orbit, about equal to the whole circuit of the course of the earth. Accordingly, every year appears to have included (as it does in reality) the three hundred and sixty-sixth day. But adhering strictly to the fact, the last solar day of the old year was identical with the first of the new, the day of "completion-beginning;" except in every fourth or grand year, when the earth's revolution being completed simultaneously, or very nearly simultaneously, with a rotation, the two festivals became distinct. Moreover, since four minutes (of time) a day, amounts in the course of a year to the time occupied by a complete rotation of the earth, it follows that the number of such rotations or sidereal days in each year exceeds by one the solar days; the difference being due to the fact that the change in the earth's position every twenty-four hours, owing to its orbital motion, must be taken into consideration

[p. 120]

in regard to the sun, but is imperceptible when compared with the distance of the stars. By the method of reckoning therefore, above described, the solar or apparent days are harmonized with the number of earth's true rotations. This being the principle, every year admitted of division into two portions, one consisting of an orbit of three hundred and sixty days, of which the lunar year fell short by the same number of days as the solar year exceeded it; the other, that of the sacred interval or "panegyric," as Dr. Brugsch applies the term, consisting of six days, each being a festival of special sanctity.

That orbit again of three hundred and sixty days, was itself divided not only into twelve equal solar months, but also into three equal seasons (each of one hundred and twenty days), corresponding, as Dr. Brugsch has shown, to the three great physical divisions of the Egyptian year--the season of the inundation ("Se"), commencing with the rise of the Nile, about

[p. 121]

the time of the new moon nearest the summer solstice; the season of winter ("Pir"), and the season of heat ("Semou") answering more or less to our spring. Hence in every year the period of three hundred and sixty days was divided either into three equal seasons, each containing twelve decades of days, or into twelve equal months, each containing three decades of days; while the sacred interval bore the same ratio to that whole period (one-sixtieth) as a minute (of circular arc) bears to a degree; and the excess quarter of a day upon which the whole arrangement depended bore the same ratio to the sacred interval (one twenty-fourth) as the solar hour to the complete day. It is not unworthy of remark also, that whereas in the order of the seasons, as corrected by Dr. Brugsch, their hieroglyphs have no correspondence with the physical year (as Champollion believed to be the case), and appear therefore to be arbitrary and unmeaning; yet

[p. 122]

when we refer to the course of the soul in the Ritual, we find them to symbolize three successive stages of its progress; the fields,  of Aahlu, into which it comes forth from the Chamber of New Birth; the Enclosure,  of the Hidden Lintel of Justice, the beginning of Justification; and the source of the Celestial Nile, , where it receives the crown of Illumination.

For ordinary purposes and comparatively short periods the reckoning of the Grand Cycle suffices; but for long intervals the correspondence is not sufficiently exact; the real difference each year falling short of a quarter of a day by nearly twelve minutes, or the fifth part of an hour (less a certain number of seconds). But the fifth part of an hour will, it is obvious, in thirty years, itself amount to six hours, that is, to a quarter of a day; and accordingly, every thirty years we find a special festival or Jubilee celebrated in the Kalendar of Egypt: thus commemorating

[p. 123]

the period said to have been occupied in building the Pyramid of Light. And in five hundred years, or the Egyptian Cycle of the Phoenix, the same difference will amount to between four and five days, that is, very nearly to the sacred interval; so that if that interval be omitted, the orbit of the coming year joins the orbit of the departing, and every five hundred years the Phoenix renews itself. All these cycles therefore centre round the adjustment of the quarter of a day; and so essential an element was that quarter in all calculations relating to the kalendar, that every fourth year, if we may trust Horapollo, the festival was celebrated by the addition of a quarter of an acre to the land belonging to the temples.

Of the three seasons, that of the inundation was the first and principal; and the flood of the Nile ran like a sparkling current through the religion of the country. "I am the Inundation," says the Creator in the sixty-fourth

[p. 124]

chapter, said to be the oldest of the Ritual, "the Light of the Second Birth." Every stage in the annual flood of the life-giving river was the subject of a special festival. Some little time before the summer solstice, the first symptom of the coming rise was given by the waters in Upper Egypt becoming suffused with a crimson colour. Of this singular phenomenon, which goes by the name of "Red Nile," Herodotus has left a very fine account; and it is curious to note, as an instance of strong accord between ancient and modern travellers, that his description is quoted at great length by the eminent living Egyptologist, Professor Maspero. The Red Nile is remarkable in every way; but in none perhaps more than in the fact that the waters are at that time peculiarly sweet, while at "Green Nile," as another period is called, the reverse is the case. To the former condition, in connection with the midsummer sun, allusion seems to be made in the "Eye filled with blood," mentioned in the Ritual; and to the

[p. 125]

latter in the "intolerable stench" made by Osiris in the river. About the period corresponding to our month of July, the waters begin to rise; and the "Sailing of the Bark of Ra" was celebrated, together with the birthday of Osiris. A few days later was held the great Assembly at the Nilometer, or sacred "Tat," the most venerated symbol known to their worship; and the first proclamation of the rise was made. Towards the middle of August took place the cutting of the Grand Dyke, whereby the risen stream was permitted to overflow into private channels; a ceremony celebrated in more modern times as the "Marriage of the Nile," but known to the ancient world as the festival of the "Digging of the Earth." No less a sanctity, in short, attached to every phase of that stream of life than to the "Celestial Nile" itself, of which the earthly river was the image and counterpart.

It may now be not uninteresting or uninstructive to compare for a moment the system

[p. 126]

of Egypt with our own Leap Year, for which we are, in fact, indebted to that country, through the astronomer Sosigenes, who was imported by Julius Caesar from Alexandria, to remedy in some degree the confusion of the Roman Kalendar. That famous Greek appears to have performed his task very much after a fashion not unknown to adapters. He cared--perhaps he knew--very little about the astronomical principle involved in the Egyptian reckoning, and nothing at all about the niceties of further adjustment which it demanded; indeed, before half a century was passed, his own corrections required to be corrected. He took no heed of standard or of measure, of orbit or of sacred interval. But first he cut up the year into twelve unequal and unmeaning bits--to say he divided it into portions is far too scientific an expression--which rags bore indeed the name of the insulted moon, but of which that mighty measurer condescended to make no sort of recognition. And

[p. 127]

then he threw the "odd day" in along with the "odd month"; much as a child, who has broken his toy-horse, glues a bit of tail to the shortest of the legs, and calls aloud on creation to admire his handiwork.

Nor is the difference between the Egyptian and the alien treatment of the kalendar accidental or unimportant. On the contrary, it suggests the key to its use in the ancient country, as the great politico-religious instrument whereby the social economy of the nation was co-ordinated with theosophy of the priesthood. Among modern nations monotony of recurrence seems to be the single object desired, so as to offer every facility for the arrangements of business or pleasure, and to confine within the strictest limits the diminutive period allotted to the life to come. Any system therefore which breaks the regular routine, more particularly if it be connected, as in ancient Egypt, with the commemoration of sacred events, provokes impatience much

[p. 128]

more than admiration. And the various adjustments of the kalendar appear to be regarded as if they were odds and ends of time left littering about the heavens by the sun and moon, and requiring an ingenious astronomer--like Sosigenes--to fold together and put away tidily.

Very different from this narrow and ungracious spirit was the joyous temper wherewith the Egyptian "Mystery-Teachers of the Heavens" regarded those sacred intervals. Throughout the symbology of that country, life was the centre, the circumference, the totality of good. Life was the sceptre in the hand of Amen; life was the richest "gift of Osiris." "Be not ungrateful to thy Creator," says the sage Ptah-Hotep, in what is perhaps the oldest document in existence;" for he has given thee life." "I am the Fount of Light," says the Creator in the Ritual. "I pierce the darkness. I make clear the path for all; the Lord of Joy." By them

[p. 129]

therefore the intervals were gratefully accepted as a kind of breathing-space, wherein time, like the sun at the solstice, appears for a while to rest, and man, like the immortals, might enjoy, without impairing, the treasure of life. Accordingly the panegyric, or time of praise, separating, or rather uniting year with year, took place not in the gloom of winter as with us, but in the full height and glow of summer; at the period at once of accomplishment and renovation, when the sun was in his fullest strength, and the rising of the waters of the Nile began to renew their life-giving floods. On the first day of the sacred interval of continuous praise was celebrated the birth of Osiris, the Lord of Light, Prime Mover of Creation. On the second, Horus; God, of God; Light, of Light; the eldest of creation, to use the expression of the Egyptian Ritual. On the third, Seb, Creator-Spirit of earth. On the fourth, Isis, with her double relation of human and divine

[p. 130]

motherhood. On the fifth, Neith, from whose divine personality gushed the stream of life eternal, who "gave to every mummy the draught for which he thirsted, that his soul might be separated from him no more for ever." And on the sixth day was celebrated the feast of "Hep-Tep," the crowning festival of Completion-Beginning.

Such was the symphony of light and joy which, for the Egyptian, preluded the glowing year; and such also was its masonic expression, wherein was struck the full diapason of lunar and solar, of terrestrial and celestial, of temporal and of spiritual harmony. As the lunar Chamber of New Birth, the Habitation of Isis, "the Mother of God" and the "Queen of the Pyramid," was originally closed up, thus forming the trebly veiled and most secret portion of the Hidden Places, so in the eastern staircase of that chamber we seem to discover the most secret masonic key, both to the astronomical form and the spiritual

[p. 131]

signification--the exterior and the interior light. For in its fivefold gradation we have the correlation of the lunar motion with the sun, in the five degrees of the moon's ascent and descent each month from the ecliptic. Again, since the sacred quarter of a day whereby the earth's rotation was harmonized with its revolution exceeds the true period by (very nearly) twelve minutes; so in five years does that annual excess make up (5 * 12 =) 60 minutes, the lunar measure of the hour. And thus we read in the Ritual of the "Chamber of the Hour in Rusta," the territory both

Thrones of Isis and Osiris.

of death and birth. In the same staircase, around the niche or "type," wherein the regenerate soul is formed--the image of the Queen of the Pyramid--we have the fivefold regeneration of the senses; and in it too we may recognize, in such a form

[p. 132]

as to preserve but not to betray this trebly hidden masonic key, the double throne of Isis and Osiris, pointing not improbably to a yet more secret staircase within.

Even this does not exhaust the fulness of this prolific symbol; but it gives a clue beyond its own immediate recess, and connects the Chamber of New Birth with the luni-solar Chamber of the Orbit, just as the New Birth itself connects Rusta with Aahlu; the place of Initiation with that of Illumination. For in the same ascent in the Chamber of Divine Birth, we have the five divine birthdays, which make up the sacred interval of the solar year. Immediately above is the great throne, crowning the lunar chamber, and masonically expressing the Egyptian "Hep-Tep," or crowning festival of completion-beginning; as the chamber which it surmounts represents the territory of both Death and Birth--the "Completion-Beginning" of mortal Immortality. By the over-lappings

[p. 133]

of the roof are formed thirty-six rays or indentations, marking the thirty-six decades of the luni-solar orbit. The Southern wall, impending about one degree North, points to the Northern boundary of the zodiacal belt; the lower line of overlapping wall to its Southern boundary, and between are the seven planetary spaces, with the groove of the luni-solar orbit running down the space corresponding to that of the earth.

Still further illustrations of the relations between our planet and her luminous assistant, as together they describe the doubly-ruled Orbit of Light, are to be found in this extraordinary Chamber of the Splendour. As the wall points secretly to the Northern, and the inclined floor to the Southern boundary of the Burning Circle of the Zodiac (about 89 degrees and 152 degrees of North Polar Distance) respectively; so does the inclination of the roof to the level passage (about 28 degrees 30') secretly define the limiting inclination of the

[p. 134]

lunar orbit (about 28 degrees 30') to the sacred plane of equinox. And the fifty-six ramp-stones, twenty-eight on either side of the gallery, give masonic expression to the fifty-six alternations of light and darkness which take place approximately in the period of the moon's rotation, twenty-eight of the ascent and twenty-eight of descent; the double position of the stones, partly horizontal, partly sloping, corresponding with the double attraction of the moon to the earth and the sun; and the holes in their centres, with the crosses marked above them, indicating the lunar transits over the Grand Meridian of the House of Osiris.

 

Recurring once more to the Kalendar, it is evident that a system combining so wonderful a harmony with such perfect simplicity could never have been constructed without some definite starting-point in time, a Grand Epoch absolutely defined by some singular conjunction

[p. 135]

of the heavenly bodies, and occurring only after long and clearly measured intervals. Such an interval is afforded by the famous Cycle of Sothis, of high antiquity in Egypt, and peculiar to that country, the principle of which, being dependent upon the relative rates of the earth's rotation and revolution respectively, has by no means been always thoroughly understood. [**]

Since the average interval between two successive risings of a given star at a particular place is determined only by the period of the earth's rotation, whereas in the case of the sun a period of about four minutes must be added, on account of the motion of revolution in her orbit during that period, it follows, as we have seen, that the star will on the average rise at that place about four minutes earlier every day, making the round of the twenty-four

[p. 136]

hours every year. Consequently there will be in each year one day when that star will rise at that place "heliacally," that is to say, just so long before the dawn as to be visible for a few moments on the horizon before vanishing in the increasing splendour. The position of the star relatively to the earth and sun at the moment of heliacal rising we may call its orient; and when the position is such as to coincide with the summer solstice, we may express that position as the Grand Orient of the star. Now the number of degrees by which the sun is below the horizon when the heliacal rising of a star takes place, is not fully determined, and varies to some extent with the locality; but ten degrees below is usually taken as the sun's position when the star is lost in dawn, so that the time would be about forty minutes before full sunrise. Let us consider now the interval between two such risings of some particular star; and for that purpose let us choose, like the

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues] Egyptians, Sirius or Sothis, the most brilliant of the distant suns, the flaming sentinel to us of the fiery hosts of space. Suppose, then, that on some particular day (such as that of summer solstice) Sothis is on the horizon of Memphis when the sun is eleven degrees below it, that is, one degree below the point of dawn. On that day Sothis will rise heliacally, and will remain visible on the horizon for about four minutes (while the earth rotates through one degree), after which it will be lost in the break of dawn. On the anniversary of that day it will again be on the horizon, when the earth completes her 365th rotation; that is, when our planet is a quarter of a degree less advanced in the orbit, since the full revolution takes 365 1/4 rotations. Hence, since the earth rotates through a quarter of a degree in a minute (of time), there will be the difference of a minute in the corresponding rising each year, and therefore of four minutes each grand cycle. But since

[p. 138]

four minutes makes the difference of a day in the star's first appearance, there will for every grand cycle be a difference of a day in the heliacal rising of the star: and consequently in 4 * 365 1/4 (or 1461) years the whole orbit will be traversed. That lovely cycle, with its tetrachord of starry light just gleaming on the horizon and then vanishing, lost in the growing splendour, appears from the allusions to the dawn to have had its spiritual analogue in the festival of the "Shapes," or divine forms of beauty; when the departed re-created in the divine image rose gloriously from the grave, and shone for a while amid the company of starry spirits, before merging his lustre, though not his existence, in the splendour of the manifested Godhead.

From this highly important cycle we may draw some conclusion as to the grand epoch of the Egyptian Kalendar; the date, that is to say, when mere tradition came to an end, and systematic records, organized upon astronomical

[p. 139]

principles, began to be preserved. Since in the course of the cycle, the heliacal risings take place on each day of the entire year, they will run during the first half of the cycle in one direction (relatively to the earth's orbit) and in the latter half in the opposite. And since there is also a corresponding series of settings, subject to a similar change of direction, the two series would in each cycle make up a double reversal, interchanging positions not once but twice. When therefore Herodotus tells us in a well-known passage (Euterp. 143), how, according to the Egyptian records, the risings and settings had been out of their orders four times since their reckoning commenced; "the risings twice taking the place of the settings, and the settings twice taking the place of the risings," the meaning becomes perfectly clear if referred (as Rawlinson suggests) to the heliacal risings and settings of Sothis, the determinator of the Kalendar. And the very circumstance

[p. 140]

that Herodotus himself in all probability did not understand--and was not intended to understand--the drift of the extract, strongly favours its authenticity; since it is very difficult to conceive that a person, ignorant of astronomy, should so misrepresent a statement made to him by astronomers, as to blunder by accident into the correct exposition of a different astronomical relation. We learn therefore that two Sothiac cycles (four reversals) had been completed since the institution of the scientific Kalendar; so that the cycle then current would be the third. And as there is evidence that that cycle was completed in A.D. 139, and therefore commenced in B.C. 1322, we conclude that the commencement of the first Sothiac cycle and the institution of the scientific Kalendar took place (2 x 1461 years previously, i.e.) at the summer solstice of B.C. 4244; the moment of commencement being marked by the heliacal rising of Sothis. In chapter lxiv., which describes

[p. 141]

the new birth of the soul, and thus supplies the key to the whole creed, or in its own words gives "The Entrance on Light in one Chapter," a passage occurs which appears to refer to this dawning of another age. "The twenty-four are passing," it says, "until the sixth. He remains in the Gate." In the sixth hour that is to say, reckoning from midnight (as Professor Renouf has shown to have been the custom), the march of the stars is stayed, and the sun enters the Gate of a new cycle; in the same way as for the regenerate soul the night is past, and he enters the Gate of Everlasting Day.

That the date in question was the true epoch of the institution of the Kalendar, to which all astronomical allusions are to be primarily referred whether in the Ritual or in the Pyramid of Light, is confirmed by a simple explanation which is thus afforded of a very marked peculiarity (and apparent anomaly) in its use. As is well known, the

[p. 142]

[paragraph continues] "node" or point where the earth at Equinox cuts the plane of the Equator, and consequently the point of solstice (which is always 90 degrees from that of Equinox), is not invariable, but year after year falls a little short of (or precedes) its previous position, so as to shift round in a direction opposite to the earth's revolution. And the rate at which that precession takes place (about 50" per annum) is such as to carry the node, or point of crossing, round the entire orbit in about twenty-six thousand years. Now attention has been drawn by Dr. Brugsch, who has so admirably illustrated the ancient kalendar, to the circumstance that during the later dynasties, a double series of months was employed, wherein, for instance, "The First of Thoth," that is, the first day of the first month, is given in the time of Thothmes III. (about B.C. 1600) both on the day corresponding to our 20th of July, and on the 27th of August, and similarly with the rest; but he has not offered any

[p. 143]

solution. Suppose now that in addition to the current date of the solstice the archaic date was also preserved--a suggestion entirely in agreement with Egyptian custom and mode of thought--that is to say, that a record was kept of the day of the Grand Epoch on which the earth arrived at the point in her orbit which she had reached when the kalendar was defined, then the peculiarity could be explained. For since the date of Equinox, and therefore of course of solstice, falls a little earlier relatively to the orbit every year, the archaic date will fall a little later. And as in twenty-six thousand years it traverses the circle of the year, and falls again on the anniversary; in two thousand six hundred and fifty years the archaic date would be thirty-seven or thirty-eight days later; so that if the kalendar were founded at the epoch assigned, the difference between the current and the archaic date in the days of Thothmes III. would just correspond to the difference which

[p. 144]

we find. Again, at the commencement of the third Sothiac cycle, in B.C. 1322, the archaic date would be later still, on the 29th or 30th of August. And this appears to have been adopted in the later times as the fixed archaic date, without further variation in the Alexandrine Kalendar.

By a similar reference to the archaic date, we may throw some light on the peculiar sanctity attaching to certain days of the month, for which it is otherwise difficult to account. For instance, in the Kalendars of the third Sothiac cycle, the fifteenth and the sixth of the month appear to be particularly sacred; and in the Turin papyrus of the "Book of the Dead" (the allusions in which would probably not go back so far as the first cycle, but might refer either to the second or third), command is given no less than three times that the most important festival of the year, the Birthday of Osiris, should be celebrated on the fifteenth of the month. But the Birthday of

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] Osiris was, as we have seen, the first festival of the New Year, and what connection could such a day have with any particular day of any month whatever? A very close connection if the archaic date is to be taken into consideration. At the commencement of the second Sothiac cycle the archaic date of Osiris's Birthday would fall twenty or twenty-one days later than at the foundation of the kalendar; and, remembering the five days for the sacred interval, we reach the fifteenth day of the first month; while a similar calculation, allowing in all forty-one days, brings us in the third Sothiac cycle to the sixth of the succeeding month. For a similar reason another great festival, that of the Bark of Ra, is ordered to be celebrated on the Birthday of Osiris, since at the foundation of the Kalendar that day coincided with the rising of the sacred Nile, the waters of which represent new life.

Hence, in order to preserve a true record of time, it is necessary to note the motion of the

[p. 146]

earth with reference to four, and only four, different standards; that is to say, in regard to the stars, to the moon, to the sun, and to the Equinox, the other relative motions of the earth having no perceptible effect upon our reckoning of time. All these standards, with their respective measures and harmonies, were known, as we have seen, to the Egyptians; and this accounts for the circumstance which Dr. Brugsch has remarked, that at a very early date the Kalendar of Egypt was kept upon four different reckonings. All these standards also, each with its spiritual signification corresponding with the Ritual, we have seen expressed in the masonry of the Grand Pyramid. For to the architect of the Egyptian Light, there was no celestial truth which was not manifested in the motions of the celestial orbs; nor was there any chamber among the Hidden Places of the Great House which did not secretly reflect the path of the just in the mystery of the heavens.

Footnotes

^111:* For most of the facts here stated with regard to Egyptian astronomy I am indebted to the invaluable researches of the late lamented Dr. Brugsch upon the kalendar, as I am also to his history for quotations from the papyri, and allusions to the customs of the country.

^113:* It falls short by not quite three (circular) minutes, or rather less than a seven-thousandth part of the circumference.

^114:* The word "rotation" is always applied in this work to the motion of a body about its own axis; "revolution," to its motion around another body.

^135:* As, for instance, by the famous scholar Scaliger, whose misunderstanding was exposed by Professor Greaves, the Oxford astronomer, in A.D. 1640.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE MYSTERY OF THE DEPTHS.

LIGHT is the first principle of created life. There is no life without growth; there is no growth without light. Colour, perfume, savour, every varied object of sense vanishes if light be absent. Each beam is a separate celestial gift, direct from the hand of the Creator; as in the bas-relief on the tomb at Thebes, discovered by Mr. Stuart, where the diverging rays form a pyramid of light, and to each ray is attached a hand of blessing.

Universal too, as is the necessity for light in living nature, equally extended is its manifestation in the form of motion. Wherever

[p. 148]

life exists, in man or bird, or beast or fish, there also is that power which is denied to inanimate matter--the power to originate motion. To live and move and have our being are three states inseparably connected with each other. Mathematician and poet alike acknowledge the universality of motion in living form. "Motion, fount of beauty," exclaims Pindar in one of his loftiest odes. "All nature is in motion," says Professor Price in his lucid treatise on infinitesimals. So too, the unfailing harmonies of the heavenly bodies express themselves in the periods of their orbits. And through the correlations of those luminous circuits, as through a veil of glory, the correlations of interior truth were shadowed forth by the Egyptian "Mystery-Teachers of the Depths." Depth beyond depth, space beyond space, height beyond height, from the company of planets around our sun, to where the "clusters of countless stars are but a faint nebulous gleam," Light is everywhere the

[p. 149]

[paragraph continues] Omnipotent Creator, the laws of Light the expression of infallible truth. [**]

But how to seize with material grasp the intellectual relations of the most ethereal element known to man? How imprison in stable form the flashes of the fiery spark as it darts with inconceivable speed from space to furthest space? How render palpable to the direct touch the distant courses of those flying orbs? In a word, how shall we build up the manifestation of Light, and find masonic expressions for the Mystery of the Depths? Light itself gives us a reply. For if, as in the bas-relief at Thebes, the diverging flood

[p. 150]

of rays be represented as it pours down at noon on the day of summer solstice, the opening day of the Egyptian year, we shall have one face of the Pyramid of Light. Suppose now that a quadrangular pyramid be erected with four such sides facing respectively the cardinal points of the heavens. Then since each revolution of the earth is completed by one quarter of a rotation later than the preceding, it follows that every fourth or grand year the same face will be turned towards the sun when the revolution of the earth is accomplished; and thus the Egyptian Grand Cycle (of four years) will be masonically expressed. Just such a form is found in the quadrangular Pyramid of Light, its sides so oriented as to have originally faced the cardinal points, and its summit so truncated as to permit the sun on one day in the year to rest upon it "with all its rays," so that the building "devours its own shadow."

[p. 151]

The general form determined, what proportions shall the dimensions assume, or in other words, at what angle shall the sides converge towards the invisible vertex? The earth in her orbit gives reply. For as that planet moves around the sun in an (approximately) circular path, while each ray travels towards it in a direct line, the relation between the illuminating force and the illuminated body may be expressed by the relation between the radius and the circumference of a circle. But this relation is such that the altitude of a pyramid when bearing the same ratio to its base-circuit subtends an angle of about 51 degrees 50'. And that is the Angle of Elevation of the Grand Pyramid. Nor is this most important, and indeed dominating, measure due to accident; since the angle in question is the most marked, and almost the only feature, which the lesser and later Pyramids share with the Pyramid of Light, so that it forms the masonic sign whereby the inferior buildings

[p. 152]

tacitly asserted their kinship with the Great House.

Although however, these general aspects of the radiance suffice to determine the general aspect of the building, yet a closer investigation of the light will disclose a more intimate relation. For since our atmosphere may be conceived as divided into successive layers of air, increasing in density as they approach the earth, each ray as it travels will be slightly deflected, or refracted, as it passes from a finer to a denser ring, the refraction being greatest when the body is on the horizon, and imperceptible when it is near the zenith. Conversely, if on any given day the position of the sun be observed at equal intervals from rising to noon, and from noon to sunset, the apparent place of the sun will, owing to refraction, be slightly different from its true position at any

[p. 153]

observation; and a diagram representing their mutual relations will offer the appearance of a house having many stories, with a small platform at the summit, since near the zenith the true and apparent positions are identical (and the only motion is that of transit)--that is to say, we shall have the appearance of the Grand Pyramid when the casing-stones are removed.

If then, on the first day of the (Egyptian) new year--when the sun is about fourteen hours visible above the horizon at Memphis--an observation be taken every two minutes (four observations for the period occupied by any ray in reaching the earth from the sun) there will be altogether about four hundred and forty observations, making two hundred and twenty courses of ascent and descent, of which a certain number will be wanting at the top since at the zenith there is no refraction. But this is precisely the case in the Pyramid of Light; the number of existing courses being

[p. 154]

about two hundred, and the number required to complete it reckoned at about twenty more. Further, since the moon in every two minutes of time completes a (circular) minute of her circuit relatively to the sun, and since at the commencement of every Sothiac cycle she commences a new lunation and comes (invisibly) to the meridian at the same time with the sun at noon, it follows that these unit-intervals of observation correspond with the minute-intervals of her motion; and each course of the Grand Pyramid corresponds to the change in the altitude of the sun for one circular minute of the moon's motion relatively to that body.

The true and apparent forms of the Grand Pyramid being thus determined by the true and apparent motions of light, we have now to inquire with what scale we are to build up the chambers of the house. The rolling earth once more suggests the standard. The cosmic unit of space--the Sceptre of Anup, the Guide

[p. 155]

of the Horizon of Heaven--must be clearly defined, and incapable of confusion; it must be self-evolved, and yet immutable; it must be within man's power to compass, but not within his grasp to alter. Now these conditions are fulfilled by one line, and one only known to man, the polar axis of the earth--the line, that is to say, about which takes place the earth's daily rotation, while itself performs the annual circuit around the sun. Let that line be carried far as the eye can follow or thought can reach, the depths through which it pierces remain for us for ever at rest. That is the line which directs the axis of the Sacred Horizon of the Point of Equinox, and which indicated to the mind of Egypt the entrance path for the holy departed as they passed from the created to the Uncreated Light. A beautiful allusion is made in the Ritual to the illuminative action of the sun in reference to this double motion of the axis, as the earth, the vessel of God, performs her daily and

[p. 156]

annual course in the heavens. For we read there how the holy departed "has appeared in the Bark of Ra in the course of every day;" and how Thoth, the Divine Wisdom, "clothes the spirits of the justified a million times in a garment of true linen;" of that substance, that is to say, which by its purity and brilliancy reminds us of the mantle woven out of rays of light wherewith the sun enwraps the earth afresh each day she rotates before him, just as the soul of man is invested with new radiance each time that he turns to the presence of his Creator.

How then shall we avail ourselves of this mighty measure, this rule of light and standard of space? This time the building itself answers through its familiar title. According to Dr. Brugsch, the term Pir-am-us in Egyptian signifies the EDGE; and on examining the base-circuit of the building, we find it to be composed of casing-stones with a bevelled horizontal edge, so exquisitely finished that

[p. 157]

according to Mr. Flinders Petrie, it is equal "to the finest work of the optician." On the occasion of the visit of the Empress Eugenie to Egypt, in 1869, one of these casing-stones was measured in situ by Mr. W. Dixon, and found to contain just 25.025 British inches. But the relation of this length to the polar radius (or semi-axis) of the earth is of the very last importance in universal measurement. Several years ago Sir John Herschel pointed out that our inch is contained in the earth's polar radius just 250,250,000 times; so that if that unit be increased by its thousandth part (less than the fineness of the finest hair) it will be contained in the polar radius just two hundred and fifty million times. Since therefore this stone contains twenty-five inches so increased, it measures the earth's polar radius exactly ten million times; and as the Egyptians were certainly familiar with the decimal system, expressing units, tens, hundreds, thousands, and millions by distinct hieroglyphs, this stone

[p. 158]

in the base circuit of the Great House supplies a simple masonic unit of cosmic length, a standard of universal measurement.

Were this ratio an isolated instance, some question might not unnaturally arise as to the accidental nature of the connection; but the intention of the architect is strongly confirmed by the kindred discovery due to Mr. Flinders Petrie. That acute observer has pointed out that the length of the raised pavement was a simple measure (one-twentieth) of a geographical mile. And since a geographical mile is a measure of the earth's circumference at the Equator, a knowledge of it implies a knowledge of the measurement of the polar radius.

Striking however as is the ratio which this stone bears to the cosmic standard, its relation to the Pyramidal Edge, of which it forms a part, is no less prolific of universal results. For, taking as the length of that base-line, [**]

[p. 159]

the average of the results obtained by the principal surveys executed since the great Napoleon opened the dull eyes of Europe to the inexhaustible treasures of ancient Egypt, we find that the casing-stone is contained in the line so measured just 365.25 times, and consequently in the entire circuit (4 x 365 1/4) 1461 times. Hence, as the form suggests the

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] Grand Cycle, so also does the measure of the base-circuit; the number of times the cosmic unit is repeated in that circuit, defining the number of solar days in the Grand Cycle, and consequently also the number of the solar years in the cycle of Sothis.

It seems, therefore, not unreasonable to conceive that before the casing-stones finally shut up the secret, the relations of the sun and moon to the position of Sothis and of the pole-star should have been correlated with the courses of the Pyramid in the manner above described; and thus a starting-point for all the motions of the earth, whether in relation to the moon, the sun, the equinox, or the stars, have been registered unalterably in the masonic light.

To measure the motions of the earth however is the commencement, but only the commencement, of the universal scale. That which we need for the Mystery of the Depths is nothing less than the span of solar or

[p. 161]

measurable space. In other words, we require to define the extreme limits on either hand within which no fount of original light is found except our own sun, since the distances of the stars are beyond accurate measurement. But the distance of the limiting point of solar or measurable space, or rather the radius of the limiting horizon (since the distance will be the same in every direction) is about twenty-five hundred million times the length of the earth's polar axis; so that that axis is contained in the radius of measurable space two hundred and fifty times as often as itself contains the edge of the casing-stone. Now, if that casing-stone be divided into twenty-five equal parts, each of such parts will, as we have seen, contain our own inch increased by its thousandth part. This unit, therefore, which we may call the polar inch, measures not only the axis of the earth, but of the depths of solar or measurable space, being contained in the former two hundred and fifty

[p. 162]

million times, and in the latter two hundred and fifty thousand billion times. But in that ancient chapter of the Ritual (lxiv.) which claims to have been revealed in the days of the IVth dynasty, we read that the Creator, when revealing Himself to the new-born soul as the Measurer of space, employs this very ratio as standard. "'I who know the Depths' is my Name," so runs the text of this sublime chapter;" I make the cycles of the shining millions of years; and billions are My measurement." [**]

The mention of these cycles of the shining years suggests a principle of singular beauty, as the key to the architectural measures of ancient Egypt. Among the many valuable results due to the industry of Mr. Flinders Petrie is a collection of cubits of various lengths, employed by the architects of the

[p. 163]

IVth and XIth dynasties. These architectural units are very numerous, and, unless referred to cosmic principles, quite miscellaneous, having no apparent co-ordination either among themselves or with anything else. When however taking as our unit the polar inch, [**] we compare them with the measures of light, as expressed in the shining circuits and radii of the celestial periods--remembering always that the radii and semi-radii of the cycles of years are both consonant with the angular construction of the Pyramid and are secretly involved in the analogy of Illumination--we find a most remarkable correspondence in measure after measure, not absolute indeed, but different only by decimals of an inch.

Take for example, the number of polar

[p. 164]

inches into which the casing-stone is divided, when considered as a measure of space, viz. twenty-five; a close approximation to which is found in two specimens [**] belonging to the IVth dynasty, which were discovered at Ghizeh--that is to say, which were employed in the neighbourhood of the Grand Pyramid about the time of its erection. Again, taking as unit the semi-radius of the cycle of Equinox, the radius of which cycle is about 4122 years, and expressing an inch to a century, the half of it gives us the cubit of 20.6 inches; and this measure is the more common form of the Egyptian cubit, the standard employed for the sacred "Tat," or Nilometer, which measured the waters of life, the symbol regarded as the

[p. 165]

highest expression of sanctity, and the final ornament placed upon the holy dead. From the moon also we (approximately) obtain two standards of Egyptian measure. For the number of days in a lunar month gives closely, at an inch for a day, the 29.3 inch cubit of the IVth dynasty. And, at an inch for a year, the number of years (about 18.6) in the cycle of the lunar nodes--(that is, the interval which elapses between two successive crossings of the equinoctial plane by the moon at precisely the same point of her orbit)--yields (very nearly) the 18.7 inch cubit of the XIIth dynasty. And, once more, since the orbit of the earth is not strictly a circle, but an ellipse with the sun in one focus, there will always be one point in the orbit which will be in "perihelion," that is, nearer the sun than any other. And this point is not stationary, but makes a circuit of the earth's orbit in about 114,000 years; whereof the half-circuit gives us the fifty-seven inch cubit

[p. 166]

of the XIth dynasty (at an inch to ten thousand years), and the quarter radius the forty-five inch cubit of the IVth dynasty (at an inch to a thousand years). It would seem therefore, that a table of the cubits employed by the architects of those early times would represent a general system of cosmic measures, the scale being marked off upon the axis of the earth, the sole standard of immutable space, and the ratios of the different cubits being proportional to the immutable time-periods of the heavenly bodies. And thus, when the film is brushed away which the dust of ages has cast over these relics of antique science, their aspect remains no longer lifeless and repulsive; but we recognize in them the glowing insignia of universal truth, the gems from the azure depths, sparkling with the lustre of intrinsic light.

No sooner do we apply this key to the Book of the Master, than a series of concealed significations begins to unclose. The famous

[p. 167]

[paragraph continues] Uroeus, or symbol of the snake--connected in some not very definite manner with solar phenomena--has always been intimately associated with the royalty of Egypt. But it appears to have escaped attention that in the Ritual are to be found several serpentine forms of various lengths, and--what is most striking in itself but easily explained by the results already attained,--that when those several lengths are expressed in inches, they prove to be proportional to the measures of the various serpentine curves traced by the motions of the earth and moon. For instance, in chapter cxxx., we read of "a snake seventy cubits in his coil." But taking the well-known cubit of 20.6 inches and repeating it seventy times, we obtain one thousand four hundred and forty-two inches; which is proportional (within the seven hundredth part) to the number of minutes of time (24 * 60) in the average daily rotation of the Equator or coil of the snake; so that it expresses our own division of the heavens into

[p. 168]

twenty-four hour-circles, each divided again into sixty equal parts or minutes of time; both which measures, we have already seen, were familiar to the Egyptians. Moreover the number of the sun's rotations about his own axis is, approximately, one hundred and forty-four in a period of ten years, so that the snake expresses an axial motion common both to the sun and its satellite: and appears therefore to be "the chief Uroeus, gleaming and guiding millions of years," of which we read in chapter xxxiv. On the other hand, in another passage of the chapter previously mentioned, an extent of seven cubits gives the length--not of the snake's coil but--of his back: and this length (one hundred and forty-four inches) just gives the back of the tropical snake, or spiral, that is, the distance of the sun at solstice from the Equator, at that epoch about twenty-four degrees, or one hundred and forty-four decades of circular minutes. Other examples of a more complex character might be adduced;

[p. 169]

but these may be sufficient to show that in the inch we possess a clue to the secret significance of numerous symbols; and that for very reason it was not openly set forth as the standard, but its place was supplied by the cubit, which betrays no meaning except to one already so far initiated in the Mysteries of the Depths.

Turning now to the Pyramid of Light, we find the same principle conspicuous throughout the building; the lengths of its various passages and chambers, when expressed in polar inches, being apparently proportional to the radii (or semi-radii) of the celestial periods corresponding respectively to the stages in the progress of the departed. And so strongly marked is the prevalence of this principle, that while a mere knowledge of the measures, however exact, suggests nothing of the spiritual meaning, the insight which we have already attained into the co-ordination of the building with the Ritual enables us to determine for

[p. 170]

ourselves the dimensions of many of the parts. For throughout the teaching of Egypt progress in Light is effected by increased instruction and experience in Truth; and in the Wisdom of that ancient country, the measures of Truth were the years of the Most High.

At the very point of entrance, indicating the sacred horizon of the pole-star (as the hieroglyph of the star signifies the invisible world), we find that a consideration of the particular position occupied by the star, when in conjunction, so to speak, with the Pyramid, widens and elevates our view from an earthly to a celestial plane. For though to a dweller on our globe the great plane of reference is the plane passing through the celestial poles and containing the horizon of the point of Equinox; yet when we proceed to regard our companion orbs, circling around the same parent luminary, and when we take into account the influence which those members of the same luminous family exert upon each

[p. 171]

other, we are compelled to recognize what is called the Invariable Plane of the Planetary System, the plane, that is to say, about which, as La Place demonstrates, certain highly important relations between the masses and the motions of the planets are always fulfilled. Now this plane has never a greater inclination than about 3 degrees 6' to the apparent ecliptic, that is, the plane of the orbit of the earth. But that arc (3 degrees 6') measures within a few minutes the distance of the pole from the pole-star when in conjunction, so to speak, with the Grand Pyramid. When therefore the pole-star shines down the entrance passage, its position in regard to the pole (due allowance being made for corrections), defines the limiting position of the invariable plane to the plane of the orbit.

Similarly in regard to the inconceivably slow variation [**] in the inclination of the axis

[p. 172]

to the ecliptic, a variation which, while never exceeding 2 1/2 degrees on either side, requires no less than thirty thousand years to accomplish. And from this majestic depression and elevation of the polar axis in its course around the sun--the inexpressibly stately obeisance made by the sceptre of Anup before the throne of Ra--we may determine relatively to each other the inclinations of the interior passages. The difference between the limits of the solstices (calculated at about 2 degrees 22') gives the difference between the inclination of the roof and of the floor-line of the Grand Gallery, or Chamber of the Orbit, while the inclination of that roof to the level passage leading to the Lunar Chamber of New Birth (28 degrees 30') defines, as we have already seen, the limiting inclination of the moon to the Equator. The variation during one Sothiac cycle corresponds with the difference between the floor-lines of the upper and lower galleries. And if we may place the completion of the building at B.C. 3732 (only

[p. 173]

a generation earlier than the estimate of Dr. Brugsch, which is not designed to be exact), then, since it occupied thirty years building, the number of years from the foundation of the Kalendar to foundation of Pyramid will be about four hundred and eighty-two; that is, will correspond with the number of inches between the entrance and the scored line which points to the foundation; while the interval between the foundation of the Kalendar and the co-ordination of the Pyramid with the pole-star (viz. about eight hundred years), the difference during the inclination (about 4'), corresponds closely with the difference between the inclinations of the Lower Ascending Gallery and the Passage of the Pole-star: so that to such as understood the meaning of that inclination, the periods of the star's co-ordination with the entrance would be foreknown. If this were the principle employed--and considering the difficulty of obtaining exact measures, the points of

[p. 174]

correspondence are surprisingly close--none could understand the relation of the star to the building without first understanding the masonic relation embodied in the edifice, between the standard of space, as represented in the entrance passage, and the solar throne at the head of the Grand Gallery or Chamber of the Orbit. Nor could any one be instructed in that secret by the Master without acquiring masonic evidence of its truth, in the Path of the Horizon of Heaven, and its orientation with the hidden interior--the beginning and the ending of the Ritual of Light.

Penetrating now to the innermost recesses of the Hidden Places, let us review the celestial significance which we have attached to the various chambers, and (remembering always that we are dealing with approximations) let us note the proportion of their measures to the corresponding celestial periods; the celestial unit varying in each case according to the nature of the celestial cycle (and demanding

[p. 175]

in each case therefore a knowledge of the connection of the Ritual with the particular chamber); while the masonic unit throughout is the polar inch, the twenty-fifth part of the Pir-am-us, or edge of the base-circuit casing-stone, the twenty-fifth ten-millionth part of the polar radius of the earth, and the twenty-fifth thousand-billionth part of the radius of solar space. For "millions and billions are the measure of things."

Commencing with the highest and most secret source of life and light, the Eternal and Self-Begotten Energy of the Hidden God, we find it illustrated in the never-ceasing rotation of the sun about its own axis, the energy of which we know not the origin, and to which we attribute the birth of the planets. Of such rotations about two thousand five hundred and twenty-five are performed by the sun, while the earth is performing one hundred thousand similar rotations, and that number gives the number of polar inches in the height

[p. 176]

of the extreme point of the huge granite triangle [**] which dominates the secret places of the interior. Descending thence to the King's Chamber, where the birth of the Eternal Day is celebrated in the open tomb of Osiris, we have recourse to the measure of light, not in its interior energy, but in its emission; and find that the cubit proportional to the radius of the cycle of equal Light and Darkness (20.6 inches) is a measure of that chamber, as it is also of the Chamber of the New Birth of the Soul.

As we proceed towards the outer portion, the manifestation of the splendour defines the proportions of the Chamber of the Orbit, the Upper Hall of Truth, where so many lunar and solar phenomena have already been noticed. At the head of that chamber is the great

[p. 177]

throne, "the stone of God," to use the expression of the Ritual, surrounded on every hand by masonified radiance. The seat of that throne (about 61.3 inches) measures the number of times the radius of the earth is contained in the radius of the orbit of the moon; while its height is proportioned to the number of decades in the orbit of the Egyptian year, the five divine birthdays being expressed in the Chamber of New Birth immediately beneath. Above that throne at the higher end of the chamber rises the seven-pointed arch of the planetary heavens, its boundary lines defining the flaming belt of the zodiac. And from its foot runs downward the floor-line ascended by the Illuminate, and measured by the radius of the cycle of perihelion, or Circle of Nearest Approach, formed by "the Assembly of Ministers of Truth," but along the midst of which none might pass save the Illuminate alone. And if we may estimate the distance of Sothis (whose chamber lies beyond) to be 1,374,000

[p. 178]

instead of 1,375,000 times the distance of the sun, the number of thousands of hours occupied by light in reaching us from that star (between 1881 and 1882), will be defined by the number of polar inches in the continuous floor-line of the Grand Gallery (1881-2) ascended by the Illuminate before passing to Sothis; while the integral years (21) in the same period gives the number of the Gates of Aahlu corresponding to the (21) Stages of Judgment traversed by him in ascending the same Chamber of the Splendour.

As we descend yet further towards the outer world, the Chamber of the Shadow, where Truth is manifested in darkness, with its Seven Halls of Death leading upwards from the Hidden Lintel, and its final projection into the Place of Light (1561 inches), is measured by the number of lunations in seven cycles of eclipse (7 * 223=1561). And finally, as the Horizon of the Point of Equinox determines the entrance for the departed to the path of

[p. 179]

light; so does the radius of the equinoctial cycle (about 4122 years) determine the descent of the entrance passage (about 4122 polar inches) on the side of the west, where "the sun sets from the land of life."

With this brief survey of the celestial periods and their masonic analogues, we take up once more the Book of the Master, and approach the House of the Hidden Places, wherein are concealed the Mystery of the Heavens and the Mystery of the Depths. In every standard, every unit, angle, ratio and multiple employed by the great Architect of the Masonic Light, we have seen reflected the proportions of the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, the house which the divine Horus built for his father Osiris; the "House of the Great God," to which, as the papyrus of Amen-Hotep tells us, Thoth, the Eternal Wisdom, conducts the Illuminate. And as we gaze around in silent contemplation, from every corner of the universe the profound words of

[p. 180]

the Ritual come echoing back to us: "Millions and billions are my measurements. 'I who know the Depths' is my name."

  

NOTE ON CERTAIN MEASURES AT BABYLONIA AND EARLY CHINA.

Since, supposing the views put forward in the f ore-going chapters to be correct, the Egyptian measures of time and space are certainly the oldest on record, it may not be amiss if, before passing to the inner mysteries, we compare with them two other famous systems of antiquity, and observe how certain anomalies which have hitherto been incapable of explanation, become simple and intelligible when regarded as misconceptions of the Egyptian reckoning. Take, for example, that of Chaldaea. That the Babylonian astronomers measured their time by periods of 60, of 600, and of 3600 years (the soss, the ner, and the sar) is well known, and that they also divided the circle into degrees, and again into sixty and sixty times sixty measures. But upon what principle they chose the sexagesimal measure, and whether they regarded the two sets of multiples as possessing any connection with each other, is not so clear. According to Lenormant, they calculated their periods "on the great astronomical cycle of 43,200 solar years, representing,

[p. 181]

according to their calculation, the total period of the precession of the Equinoxes" (!)--a theory which, if true, does not say much for their astronomical skill.

There is, however, another cycle, closely connected with that of precession, which, while suggesting the sexagesimal measure, will be found to yield a convenient unit for both divisions. For since the two points of perihelion and Equinox revolve gradually in opposite directions, they will increase their distance from each other every year by the sum of their annual movements, which is reckoned at about 61.9", and is called the Anomaly. Hence, neglecting the decimal of the second, and remembering that 61" = 1' 1", and 61' = 1 degrees 1', we have the following table:--

Now, as the cycles of precession and perihelion are involved in the construction of the Egyptian measures, so also would this cycle (which is a mere deduction from the other two) also be known; and, in fact, we find standards of lengths in Egypt corresponding to this cycle as to the others. Suppose then, that some visitor

[p. 182]

or half-educated native should acquire a smattering of the astronomy, so far as to obtain the measure of one cycle and the name of another; then we should have the confusion between Anomaly and Equinox contained in the Babylonian measures. And suppose again, that the same ingenious inquirer should hear, without understanding, of the double reckoning involved in the Sothiac cycle; and in order to make things quite correct, should apply it to the period he had devised for precession; then we should have the 43,200 years (2 * 21,600) above described. Whether or not this be the explanation, a remarkable example of a very similar misconception is supplied by the orientation of their buildings. For, as the late Professor De Lacouperie pointed out, their cardinal points, though relatively correct, are all shifted through one-eighth of a circle, their South really being South-West. And this, it will be easily seen, is precisely what would be done by any one who, having obtained his notion of the cardinal points in Egypt without understanding the principle, should imagine them to be fixed, and should use the Egyptian points while dwelling in Babylonia.

Such an origin is quite in agreement with other points connected with Babylonian civilization. That certain of their principal measures, such as the standard of Telloh, were derived from Egypt is undoubted. And their tradition that the elements of their civilization were imparted by Oannes, half man and half fish, who retired every night into the sea, just answers the description of an immigrant sailing up the Persian Gulf from the Eastern coast of Egypt, and retiring to his ship each night; while

[p. 183]

such a course itself would be a natural continuation of the course pursued by the ancestors of the Egyptians in their emigration from Poont in the South.

 

Far to the Eastward again, a problem, or rather a whole set of problems, given up for many centuries by the native archaeologists, receive simple solution when we apply the same principle to the ancient Kalendar of China. From a highly interesting paper read in the Victoria Institute by the Rev. Dr. Legge, University Professor of Chinese at Oxford, and prince of Sinologists, we find that after the ninth century before the Christian era, the Chinese year was divided into periods of sixty days. These days were expressed in writing by means of two classes of characters, called respectively the ten heavenly stems and the twelve earthly branches, which were taken together in pairs, each branch being taken with each stem, but the stem always preceding, never following, the branch; whereby each day of the cycle was represented by a different pair. And he observes that the sexagesimal cycle was of extreme antiquity, and that "how it arose is a mystery; but that he would make little account of that if he could tell from whence the inventors got the component parts, the ten stems and the twelve branches." But a reference to the far more ancient Egyptian Kalendar naturally suggests the sexagesimal measure; while the sixty alternations of light and darkness which constituted the Egyptian month easily resolve themselves in foreign hands into a period of sixty days. Again, the two hieroglyphs which express the year, the stem ("Se") for its totality, and the

[p. 184]

branch (Apu-ter) for its commencement, supply the titles of the characters; while the number of days in the sacred decade give the ten heavenly stems, and the number of months in the civil year the twelve earthly branches. There seems therefore little difficulty in conceiving that the elements of the Eastern calculations may have been obtained from that more central and far more ancient civilization, particularly if we consider, as many now admit, that the elements of religion and of science were first imported into China from the head of the Persian Gulf (the direct route from Egypt) [**] by the famous tribe which bore the name of Bak; which in the hieroglyphic signifies the land of Egypt.

Turning now for a while from Professor Legge's valuable paper to the oldest of the religious books of China, the Shu King, of which he has himself given a translation to the world, we are met by more than one passage referring unmistakably to a superior condition of culture formerly enjoyed and irrecoverably lost. At the end of

[p. 185]

the third Book the chiefs lament the loss of the "Standard Stone and the Equalizing Quarter, [**] formerly preserved in the treasury." A standard stone kept in the royal treasury as a reference for weights and measures is intelligible enough, and reminds us of the allusion in the Egyptian Ritual to "the Stone from the building of those who possess the Ark of Osiris." But an "Equalizing Quarter!" A quarter of what? And what did it equalize? We know indeed of one quarter--a quarter of a day by which in the older country the rotations of the earth were equalized or harmonized with its revolutions, and which served as a standard for all manner of periods and measures. And this very quarter suggests at once a connection with the Standard Stone, since that stone itself, the throne of Ra in the House of Osiris, crowning the Chamber of the five Divine Birthdays, and containing the measure of the thirty-six sacred decades, represented the "Hep-Tep" or sacred Festival of Completion-Beginning, involving the secret of the Grand Cycle, and the equalizing quarter of a day.

That such a quarter had been lost we have proof from another part of the same sacred books of China. About

[p. 186]

twenty-two or twenty-three centuries before the Christian era, and some fourteen or fifteen hundred years before the earliest extant trace of the Chinese Kalendar, the Emperor of China was seized with a fit of archaeological fervour, and instituted the first historical records of that country of which any traces remain. One result of his researches had an unfortunate effect upon certain of his subjects. Filled as he felt himself to be with the ancient wisdom, he summoned his astronomers and laid down to them the broad and simple principle that every year consists of three hundred and sixty-six days--a statement which is, as we have seen, more strictly correct than three hundred and sixty-five days if understood properly and as the Egyptians understood it; but which, without the secret either of the sidereal day or of the Grand Cycle, inevitably leads to calculations which events would refuse to verify. Accordingly it is not surprising that the unlucky astronomers when next engaged in predicting an eclipse went altogether wide of the mark. But the Emperor rose to the occasion. He had been, he said, "searching into antiquity," and had no doubt what was due to so gross an ignorance of their office. Everything, he observed severely, "had been done which ought to have been done. The tom-toms were beaten; the petty officers galloped; the inhabitants ran about the streets." And yet when the sun took no notice of these proceedings, the astronomers sat like a log and did nothing! It was disgraceful. However, the law was clear on the matter. If the astronomers predicted the eclipse too soon, off with their heads; if too late, off with their heads. And as in this case it must have

[p. 187]

been either too soon or too late, their heads went off accordingly. No wonder the Chinese men of science lamented the loss of the Equalizing Quarter.

In these cases however, the suggestion of an Egyptian origin is only indirect, through that country supplying the clue which the later nation apparently lost. But there is another problem to which Professor Legge invites particular attention, observing that he looks forward to its solution with no slight interest; and that is the origin of certain "dissyllables and trissyllables," introduced in the place of the days of the month by the illustrious archaeologist and reviser of the Chinese Kalendar, Szema Ch'ien, descended of a long line of imperial historiographers, who wrote towards the close of the second century B.C. Although all the terms which Ch'ien uses appear in a rudimentary dictionary of the time of the Han Dynasty, Professor Legge is strongly of opinion, or rather entertains no manner of doubt, that they are of foreign extraction; and he states that a famous Taoistic scholar, Kwo P'o, who died A.D. 324, put the terms on one side as incapable of explanation. "A discovery," the eminent scholar goes on to say, "may be in store for the explorers in Sanskrit or Assyriology, or some other Eastern mine. But let it be borne in mind that the use of the cycle of sixty for the measurement of days, and possibly for other periods, was long--very long--anterior to Szema Ch'ien." Now it is a most singular circumstance, and one which testifies strongly to the penetration of that eminent scholar, that these same names when referred to the Coptic or vulgar tongue of Egypt, not only possess an intelligible meaning, but

[p. 188]

that in almost every case they signify an Egyptian festival, as follows:--

          Titles employed by Szema Ch'ien.

       Egyptian Phonetic Equivalent.

       Signification of Egyptian Equivalent.

       Corresponding Egyptian Festival or Doctrine.

     
      Yu Chao

       Ioh-Khaou

       Moon-Day

       Birth of Moon.

     
      Chiang Wu

       Chinka-Oue

       Separation

       Separation   (celebrated twice a month).

     
      Chu-Li

       Khouo-Lai

       Abundant   Rejoicing

       Great Festival   (Kalendar).

     
      Shun-Hang

       Sheu-N-Ankh

       Altar of Life

       Fire Altar   (Ritual).

     
      Sheh-ti-Ko

       Sheu-Ti-Koi

       Altar of the   Fields of God

       Fields of Aahlu   (Paradise).

     
      Chao Yang

       Khao-Ch'ink'

       Separation of   Day

       Burial of   Osiris.

     
      Tan-eh

       Tanghe

       Preservation

       One of the   stages in the Path of Light.

     
      Chih-Hsu

       Khi-Shu

       Dart of Shu

       Dart of Shu   (turn of the year).

     
      Ta Mang-Lo

       Taia-Maein-Laou

       Panegyric of   the Sail

       Sail of the   Bark of Ra (Ritual).

     
      Ch'ih-Fun-Jo

       Khi-Foon-Ioh

       Dart of Hairs   of Moon

       Locks of Athor.

     
      Kwan-tu

       Koun-Tou

       Within the Wall

       Festival of   "Hidden Lintel" (Ritual).

     
      Hsieh Hsiah

       Hsiohe Hssa

       Measure the   Fields and Regions

       Fields and   Paths of the Dead.

     
   The expression "Within the wall" is particularly

[p. 189]

notable, for its accordance with an Egyptian festival is in itself so extraordinary as to render it very difficult to regard it as a mere coincidence. Although therefore it is far from probable that a Chinese scholar should deliberately adopt foreign, in the place of native titles, yet, on the other hand, if the elements of the kalendar were imported into China by its first civilizers from the more primaeval country, nothing is more likely than that a man so devoted to archaeology as Professor Legge describes Szema Ch'ien to have been, should have hunted out these archaic titles from the earliest records of China, and should have endeavoured to bring them into use as more correct terms, although possibly he himself may have been unable to understand their meaning. In any case the table, wherein the strange titles employed by Ch'ien are paralleled with their phonetic equivalent in the Egyptian tongue, and the translation of those equivalents in the festival to which they seem to correspond, will enable the reader to judge for himself how far the Egyptian key avails to open the Chinese lock which for fifteen hundred years has been given up by the Chinese experts.

Footnotes

^149:* In the same way Moses, who never claims for himself direct revelation in regard to any matter contained in Genesis (though in subsequent books that claim is repeated again and again), and whose fame as an expert in Egyptian science was quoted hundreds of years after his death by St. Stephen in his address to his countrymen, commences his exposition of the Mystery of the Depths by the initiation, of Light and Motion. "The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the deep. And God said, Let there be light: and there was Light."

^158:* These results are as follows, expressed in our inches:--

[p. 159]

          French   Commission

       9163

     
      Colonel Howard   Vyse

       9168

     
      Professor Smyth

       9110

     
      Royal   Engineers, 1st survey

       9130

     
                "        2nd  "

       9140

     
      Mr. F. Petrie

       9126

     
      Mean

       9140

     
   [paragraph continues] This length differs therefore from that obtained by Mr. Flinders Petrie. But, as for some reason, which is not very clear, Mr. Petrie allows no less than 4 1/2 inches for each socket to "play," a most extraordinary condition, surely, in the case of workmanship "equal to the finest work of the optician," it is difficult to place our usual reliance on his accuracy. The average here taken, it will be observed, of the whole results coincide precisely with one of the measurements, and also with the mean of the greatest and least.

^162:* In the original: "Ari Kherti Khuu aha pu tefnut pu krastuf." The translation above given differs slightly both from the version of Dr. Birch and that of M. Pierret.

^163:* This inch is of course the same as that adopted by Professor Smyth, and called by him the "Pyramid Inch;" but he has so inextricably associated that name with views directly opposed to Egyptological research, that I prefer to use an expression which denotes an undoubted relation, first pointed out by Sir John Herschel.

^164:* Mr. Petrie maintains this cubit to be "evidently an Egyptian edition of the royal twenty-five inch cubit of Persia;" but why a Persian cubit should be employed at Ghizeh, or what we know of Persia some thousands of years before the time of Darius, he does not tell us. It is difficult to see why he might not with equal reason pronounce the Capitol of Romulus to be "evidently an Italian edition of the Capitol at Washington."

^171:* See the table and memoir published by the Smithsonian Institute of Washington.

^176:* This is the number given of British inches; and the correction for their conversion into polar inches will about be counter-balanced by the thickness of the granite apex.

^184:* The late Professor De Lacouperie, to whose labours is chiefly due the tracing of a connection between the civilization of China and the Bak tribe (proceeding, not from Babylonia itself, but from the country immediately to the Eastward of it), has detected a certain resemblance, in a considerable number of instances, between the archaic characters employed by the two countries. But if a further comparison be made with the corresponding characters of Egypt, the Chinese will be found to resemble the latter with at least equal, if not greater closeness, a circumstance which seems to point to a common origin from the source more ancient than either. And an immigration, it is to be observed, from the country East of Babylonia into China would be a natural continuation of an emigration to the head of the Persian Gulf; just as the latter course would be a natural continuation of the original migration from Poont.

^185:* Professor De Lacouperie, who favoured me with a discussion on this subject, pointed out that Midleton translates this expression simply by the general word "measure." To this I have no reply to make, except that Professor Legge is a very high authority, and that he can scarcely have been unacqainted with that translation. The expression, moreover, seems to speak for itself, for it is just of that peculiar character which no translator would be likely to assign gratuitously, while a very able scholar might fail to render it with precision.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE INITIATION OF THE POSTULANT.

As the created light is the primary force manifested in the system of creation, so also is the Uncreate, or Self-Begotten Light (Kheper-Ra), the prime mover and creator whether of the visible or of the unseen universe. "Light Great Creator is his Name;" we read in one of the chapters added to the Egyptian Ritual at the Saite recension. And again in another ancient papyrus: "The God of the Universe is in the light above the firmament; and His symbols are upon the earth." Now it was with that divine Light, immortal, invisible, intolerable to mortal eye, the Light which none may look upon in the

[p. 191]

flesh and live, that in the ancient creed of Egypt, as in that of Christendom, the holy dead was to be at last united, person with person, and indissoluble bond. No language less universal than that of faith can enable us to express this sublime belief. For in no other creed do we find that man never loses his individuality which is yet united personally with the Deity in so intimate an unity, that in the Ritual the Osiris-soul can with difficulty be distinguished from the Osiris-Godhead. "The sun is worshipping thy face;" says Osiris in the Ritual, to the soul new born into the divine existence; that is to say, the very splendour of creation, the source of light and life to the visible world, bows down in worship before him who has become a participator in the divinity of its creator. "He is I, I am he;" the soul responds, almost in the actual words of the Gospel.

Long and manifold was the process whereby, in the teaching of Egypt, the human

[p. 192]

nature became united with the divine--an union effected, through the God-Man Osiris, not as in the gross and distorted myths of the classic nations, by the conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by the interior taking of the manhood into God. Without and within, the transfiguration was complete. The soul, instantly illumined by the fulness of the Godhead, became forthwith capable of corresponding with the divine Energy. The senses, restored to incorruption, were gradually fashioned into instruments capable of expressing the soul's assimilation to that infinite power, for which the bounds of space and time exist not, but past and future alike stand open in an endless present; that transcendent freedom, wherein Act is coincident with Will, and Will commensurate with Thought. In order then that the senses may be so quickened and irradiated as to perceive the action of the Creative Mind in the exterior universe, that progress must be made by the departed in

[p. 193]

person, which, while still unreleased from subjection to the senses, the student of science makes dimly through the intellect. For whoever would understand the framework of the heavens, the structure of man's sacred dwelling place, must commence with the polestar, and tracing out the horizon of the point of Equinox, which equally divides the light from the darkness, must apprehend how the axis of the earth is for man the prime measure of space, and the standard rule of the Depths. If he would learn the secret of living form, the ocean will be his teacher, as he passes from shore to profoundest depths and fathoms the secret places of the teeming waters. The measure of the celestial orbits will be revealed to him by the moon, as from that companion orb he watches the rotation and the revolution of our planet. To understand not merely the motion but the evolution of our globe, he must dare the place of the earth's central fire, undismayed by the

[p. 194]

cavernous glooms of the lurid abysses. And there, gazing backwards for uncounted ages, he will trace amid convulsions and cataclysms inconceivable the "Lord of Law" and the "Words of Order;" as the huge mountain chains rise higher and higher from the chaos, to prepare the surface of the globe for the dwelling-place of man. Before him next stretches the shadow of the earth, that dim and vast expanse; where the majesty of the open heaven is enshrouded in night; and he perceives how the conjunctions of eclipse are due to the same power as the orbits of illumination, and the hour of darkness is measured by the Giver of Light. That shadow traversed, a yet more awful vision, the terrible splendour of the solar fount in all its fulness, bursts upon his sight; and as he mounts the sevenfold ascent of the planetary spheres, he gazes undazzled on the stupendous jets and sprays of flame that dart on a sudden thousands and myriads of miles on high. Then far beyond in the

[p. 195]

infinite depths of space, his eyes, now radiant "as the eyes of Athor," seek out the well-loved Sothis, the harbinger of the new dawn, the portal of the illimitable heavens, "that land of a million fortresses." And in anticipation of each successive stage of this amazing progress, this reconquest of the senses to the dominion of the reason, we may watch the course of the masonic postulant accepted by the "Master of the Secret," as he is inducted, chamber by chamber, into the Hidden Places in the Pyramid of Light.

Yet though a man understand the material forces of the universe, though he know all the phenomena of the heavens, and the composition of the most distant suns; nay, though he wield with so masterly a grasp the wand of science as to evolve at will an organic world from the atoms of the abysmal depths, all this, in the mind of Egypt, was not sufficient, even for initiation into the inner mysteries of divine realities. No mere expansion of the intellect,

[p. 196]

however pure and lofty; not even the scientific definition of absolute truth, could suffice to open the secret things of God, any more than the most exact acquaintance with the features and the proportions of the Pyramid would disclose their interior signification without the teaching of the hidden Wisdom. And hence, at the commencement of the Ritual, in the heading of the first chapter, before a word of doctrine has been revealed, we are told how it proceeds from Thoth, "The Mind and Will of God," as the inscription of Hermopolis entitles him.

Now there are three modes in which such knowledge may be communicated to those prepared to receive it; namely, by simple instruction, by distant vision, or by personal participation. Each of these modes is, it is evident, an advance upon that which precedes, a preparation for that which follows it. No man can become a participator in the Divine Nature who has never been illuminated by its

[p. 197]

contemplation. No man can contemplate the Deity who has not been instructed in Truth; nor can any receive that initiation until he be dead to the flesh. As, therefore, in the masonic induction the catechumen could ascend but a few steps in the light of common day, and passed, when the disc of the starry heaven was opened by the Master of the Secret, into the profound darkness of the Descending Passage; so too, when the great preparation of Death had been accomplished, when soul and spirit had been released from the dominion of the senses, when, by the sacred purification of embalmment, the corruptible body had put on incorruption, then "On the day of the funeral," we read, the Unseen Master commenced to instruct the catechumen in the stages which must be undergone preparatory to his initiation. And so closely does the masonic path in the Pyramid correspond with the path of the departed in the Ritual, that the traveller to-day who penetrates the recesses

[p. 198]

of the mysterious building may follow, well-nigh step by step, the mystical progress of the departed through the unseen world. For to the Egyptian of old, to have mastered the secret of the House of the Hidden Places was to have mastered the secret of the tomb. For him the grave had no darkness, death held no terror; for he knew beforehand the starry path, wherein each step brought him nearer to the Creator-Light.

Ritual in hand, let us now take up our position once more at the foot of the exterior ascent, beneath the entrance of the star, along with the catechumen of the Secret; and with him let us forecast the time when, bereft of sense, of will, of life, he will go forth, dumb and helpless, to the mouth of the tomb, and commence "The entrance on Light" (chap. i.) while "borne to the land of the holy dead." Then, reciting chapter by chapter, as we mount step by step, we become informed, in the course of that brief but steep ascent, of the

[p. 199]

preparation which awaits him when the last glimpse of earth is hidden from his sight. Thus we learn how (ii., iii.) [**] after death, the departed comes forth into the light of immortality, even as the sun when he sets, bursts forth in radiance on the world which is hidden from our view. Then, since the departed cannot yet bear the judgment of interior justice, he is warned beforehand (iv.) that when he has commenced the descent, he must "pass the Road above the Earth," the ascending passage concealed by the Hidden Portcullis behind the fourth exterior course. And behind that secret portal in the vignette illustrating the chapter, we descry the face of the Unseen Teacher, that countenance of which the holy dead, when initiation has begun, shall presently be strengthened to bear the distant but unveiled vision. Before that lintel can be

[p. 200]

passed, and the road above the earth be traversed, many trials, he now learns, are waiting for him. There are tasks of justice to be fulfilled, if he omitted those good works on earth, the memorials of which may be his sponsors ("Ushabti") (v., vi.). Apep, too, the dark serpent that devours the hidden Light, as the winding darkness of the autumnal equinox devours the light of the year, lies in wait (vii.) to crush him in its multitudinous folds, while he treads the path where Light and Darkness balance. Still mounting upward, and at each step approaching nearer the grave, the catechumen is instructed how, when that serpent shall be passed, the Gate of the West (viii., ix.), the aperture of the western wall, will conduct him into the Well, or Chamber of the deep Waters, as the setting sun goes down into the deep waters of the western ocean and comes forth thence in triumph (x., xi.). Passing in silence over that which shall happen to him in the Well, since that knowledge cannot

[p. 201]

yet be imparted, the Divine Teacher directs him, when the mystery of new life is accomplished, to retrace his steps to the Passage of the Heavenly Horizon; and, after entering and coming forth from (xii., xiii.) the Chamber of Ordeal, to approach once more the Lintel of Justice. For then, and then only, can he set foot upon the threshold of justification, when "the stains have been burnt from his heart" by the raging fire (xiv.).

On the fifteenth course now high above the horizon of the earth, our eyes (two courses higher than our feet) already face the double-arched gateway defined by the pole-star, the outer entrance of the secret places revealing the path of the Horizon of Heaven. And similarly in chapter xv. the departed comes towards the land of Eternity. "May I proceed," he continues, "as thou dost, without halt, like thy holiness, Ra, thou who hast no master, great traverser of waters, with whom millions of years are but a moment." Then,

[p. 202]

as he bends his head towards the entrance of the Pyramid and gazes on the dark passage now open within, "I proceed to heaven," he says; "I kneel among the stars." And at the conclusion of the chapter he learns the words to recite when his sun is setting, and he kneels with his hands towards the land (of the unseen), "O height of Love, thou openest the double Gate of the Horizon."

With these sublime words of thanksgiving, the instruction of the catechumen comes to a close; sufficient knowledge having been imparted to direct his course as postulant to the places of Initiation and Ordeal, until which point be passed he can look no further into the mysteries. In the following chapter (xvi.), as we ascend the last course before quitting the outer light, the divine voice is for a season hushed; and the Ritual silently offers three pictures for our contemplation. On one of these the sole object presented is the sacred Scarab, a symbol of the Eternal One, the

[p. 203]

[paragraph continues] Self-Created Being who knows no beginning and no end. On the second is the figure of the departed standing before Amen, the Hidden Deity. The third contains simply a blank stele or Egyptian form of tombstone. And that stele, as we learn from the very ancient papyrus of Unas, the "prophet of the Pyramid," was fashioned in the form of a false door for the pyramidal entrance, the entrance, that is to say, which lies on the seventeenth course of the northward face, and which is oriented by the northern star.

In that moment of silence, the departed is alone. The friends have left him. The sun of earth, which from his earliest years has greeted him, is for ever hidden. The "Gate of the Earth" is passed (xvii.); and the Catechumen of Wisdom has been accepted as the Postulant of Immortality. Dense, utter darkness is before him; but under the direction of Anup, the guide of souls, he passes on beyond that Gate of the Ascent, where the

[p. 204]

divine Light lifts the disc of the tomb. "It is the region of his father Shu" (the Light), the Ritual continues: "he effaces his sins, he destroys his stains." Then as the departed advances through the darkness, and fearlessly commences the Descending Path, the inner Light, unseen by mortal eye, reveals itself in vision. He beholds the lower world (xvii.), the territory of Initiation, the entry of the Hidden Places, concerning which the divine Wisdom has instructed him, the place "wherein he must enter and from whence he must come forth," the transformations which he must desire to make, that he may be transformed into the likeness of God, the good works which he must do, the "throne" of the regenerate soul, and the blessed company of Osiris after the body has been laid to rest. In that same vision too he sees the whole lower world, the "Angle of Fire;" and "the Pool" or Well of Life, with its summit opening into the Double Hall of Truth (xvii.).

[p. 205]

With the eighteenth chapter begins the "Book of Performing the Days," that is, the period of preparation for Initiation and Ordeal, the due performance of which entitles him to pass "the road above the earth" (xviii.), there to receive the Crown of Justification (xix., xx.), when his victory is assured. As he pursues the descending Passage of the Heavenly Horizon, the reconstruction of the inner man, the new creation to life immortal, slowly commences (xxi.). One by one his faculties are reawakened to spiritual life; his mouth (xxii.) is opened, that he may respond to the teaching of the divine voice; his mind and his name are restored (xxiv., xxv.); his heart (xxvi.) is given back to him, and he knows no more the icy numbness of the paralyzed affections. Gradually the new-formed body gathers force and substance; that is to say, not the natural body, which never bursts its sacred swaddling-bands till wakened in the last chapter of the Ritual and the last chamber

[p. 206]

of the building by the Grand Orient of the open tomb, but the spiritual or astral body wherewith the man, already raised in incorruption yet still awaiting the open manifestation of Osiris's resurrection, converses with the "Starry Spirits," the intelligences of the transcendent spheres. With the new life commences the attack of his spiritual enemies, now rendered palpable to his sight (xxvii.-xxxii.), the dread inhabitants of the under world, that wage in man the great battle of contending light and darkness. Sloth, the tortoise, strives to delay his steps; the asps put forth their venom; crawling reptiles infest his path. From every side the raging passions, the devouring crocodiles which inhabit the waters of life, rush furiously to the attack; but he repels all those creatures of darkness by the astral brightness of his starry nature. "Back, Crocodile of the South," he exclaims; "I am Sothis"--the star of the Eternal Dawn. His foes, defeated by the divine

[p. 207]

protection (xxxiii.-xli.), the body raised in in-corruption (xlii.) acquires in every limb and every feature the seal of God. His hair, from which the light glows forth in streams, is as "the hair of Nu," the sacred Nile glowing with the streams of life; his countenance, shining as the sun, is radiant as the face of Ra; his eyes, glorious as are eyes of Athor, gleaming with immortal beauty; his fingers are as the Uri, the insignia of the royal power; his feet burn with the fire of the Creator-Spirit Ptah; his humanity is as the humanity of Osiris, the incarnate God. "There is not a member of him," says the Ritual, "which is not divine."

Resplendently beautiful as is the astral body assumed by the new being, he is not yet prepared for initiation; but fresh trials still await him as he approaches the granite block which obstructs the descending passage. His self-dominion, the head of his glory, may be taken from him; he may incur the second

[p. 208]

death of defilement from the creatures of darkness (xliii.-li.). But still, by the same guidance avoiding all these dangers, he comes forth as the day through the Gate of the West, to the passage which conducts him to the Well of Life; and as he passes that threshold, he is fed with the celestial food which they may not eat who are partakers of defilement (li.-lii.). "The enemies do not eat of my body," says Osiris, in another part of the Ritual. Avoiding defilement through the strength of that food (lii., liii.) he receives the breath of Ptah (liv.-lviii.), and drawing near to the Well of Life, is granted a first draught of its refreshing streams (lix.-lxiii.). In the depths of that well, wherein, as the Sai-an-Sinsin tells us, approach is made to Osiris, shall presently take place the regeneration of the renewed man (or "Ka"), by reunion with the new-born soul amid the living waters. "I give the waters of life to every mummy," says the Goddess Nout, who presides over

[p. 209]

the waters, in the inscription on the vase of Osur-Ur (given in "Records of the Past"), "to reunite it with the soul, that it may henceforth be separated from it no more for ever. The Resident of the West has established thy person amid the sages of the divine Lower Region. He giveth stability to thy body, and causeth thy soul not to distance itself from thee. He keepeth remembrance of thy person, and saveth thy body now and for ever."

During this arduous preparation, while the departed passes from earth in absolute weakness to wage the prolonged conflict of light and darkness, the imperishable soul, restored to her native element, is born a second time in the Chamber of the Queen of the Pyramid, wherein was born the divine Osiris, at once her Son, her Maker, and her Spouse. "I am Yesterday," says Osiris, in the sixty-fourth chapter, said to be almost coeval with the Pyramid of Light; that is, "I am He who was before time began," since, however far

[p. 210]

back in time a day may be, yesterday was always before it. "I am the Dawn," he continues, "the Light of the Second Birth, the Mystery of the Soul, Maker of the gods, by whom are fed the hidden ones of heaven." So in the inscription on the coffin of Anches-Ra-Neferab--that is, of her "whose life was the Sacred Heart of Ra"--we read concerning Isis, that is, she "who opens for thee the secret places by those mighty names of thine. Thy name is Infant and Old Man, Germ and Growth, Son of Heaven, who makes the road for thee according to his word. Thy name is Everlasting, Self-Begotten, the Dawn, the Day, the Evening, the Night, the Darkness. Thy name is the Moon, the Heart of Silence, the Lord of the Unseen World." And on another part of the coffin of the same holy queen, the spirits of Annu, called in the Ritual the "secret birthplace of the gods," are invoked as those "who preside over the sacred birth."

With the new birth of the soul comes also

[p. 211]

the restoration of power in its original divine image. For as in the condition which is subject to decay the corruptible senses dominate and inform the soul, so according to the theosophy of Egypt, in the condition of immortality, does the illuminate spirit inform and dominate the regenerate senses. While we are subject to the flesh, the external universe impresses itself continually upon the mind, dimming and imprisoning the original "type" or image of the Deity, which feebly struggles to express itself in the masterpieces of poet or artist. But when the soul is born into new life, it regains that Creative Image, and is endowed with the power of co-operating with the divine Energy. For, as we learn from an exquisite chapter in the Ritual, it is the fragrance of Innocence, which perfumes the breath of the Creative Beauty. Hence, in the masonry on the eastern wall of that most secret Chamber of New Birth, we find expressed the fivefold dominion informed by

[p. 212]

the soul, new-born in the sacred type of the image of the Queen. Now thus the senses themselves become so essentially divine, that the departed pays worship to his own faculties. "I have adored Touch and Taste," he says later on; for touch and taste are the channels whereby is communicated to man the food of immortality. From that Secret Chamber, the regenerate soul comes forth glorious as the day (lxv., lxvi.), and "opening the door" (lxvii.), once so carefully concealed, comes forth in full radiance to the fields of Aahlu (lxviii.-lxxii.), the territory of illumination: to take its seat (lxxv.) upon the lower throne above the head of the Well, between the Chamber of the Orbit and the Chamber of the Shadow. "The gates of heaven open to me," he says;" the gates of earth open to me."

That solemn enthronization being witnessed by the postulant in the depths below; he remembers that the time of ordeal draws near, and after praying, as instructed beforehand,

[p. 213]

that his sin may be rubbed out, he celebrates the "festival of the soul passing to his body." But not immediately may that passage be accomplished. Raised though he be in incorruption, glowing as he is in every member with the immortal light, he cannot yet bear unveiled the overwhelming glory of the soul. Therefore, in the teaching of Egypt, around the radiant being which in its regenerate life could assimilate itself to the glory of the Godhead, was formed the "Khaibit" or luminous atmosphere, consisting of a series of ethereal envelopes, at once shading and diffusing its flaming lustre, as the earth's atmosphere shades and diffuses the solar rays. And at each successive transformation (lxxvii.-lxxxvii.) it descended nearer to the moral conditions of humanity. From the form of the golden hawk, the semblance of the absolute divine substance, the One Eternal, Self-Existent Being, it passes to the "Lord of Time," the image of the Creator, since with the Creation time

[p. 214]

began. Presently it assumes the form of a lily, the vignette in the Ritual representing the head of Osiris enshrined in that flower; the Godhead manifested in the flesh, coming forth from immaculate purity. "I am the pure lily," we read, "coming forth from the lily of light. I am the source of illumination (the nostril of the sun) and the channel of the breath of immortal beauty (Athor). I bring the messages (of heaven), Horus (the Eternal Son) accomplishes them." Later the soul passes into the form of the Uroeus, "the soul of the earth;" the serpentine path traced upon the earth irradiated by the vertical sun, as the senses are irradiated by the supreme illumination of the soul.

And finally it assumes the semblance of a crocodile; becoming subject, that is, to the passions of humanity. For the human passions, being part of the nature wherein man was originally created, are not intrinsically evil, but only become evil when insubordinate to

[p. 215]

the soul. And thus the crocodile, which attacked the departed before new birth, is rendered divine in the regenerate form.. Therefore it was that the crocodile was held in high reverence by the Egyptians, for it spoke to them of the time when man should regain the mastery of his passions, and when the last barrier between himself and his glorious soul should be removed for ever.

Immeasurable as is the distance which thus separates the two beings which make up the perfect manhood, there is no hesitation or delay on the part of the soul. That radiant creature in its glory has not forgotten the frail companion in union with whom it dwelt during the days of its humiliation. Restored to its native purity, welcomed by the Almighty to a participation in his own energy, throned on its seat of absolute dominion, yet such is the ardour with which that soul returns the love of man, that like the Creator Himself it cannot rest satisfied with its own inexhaustible

[p. 216]

bliss; but hastens to come down from its seat of power, that it may raise and glorify expectant humanity. And thus the vignette shows us the winged creature flying towards the postulant. Meanwhile the latter, from below watching its flight, prays in an ecstasy for the reunion. "O bringer," he cries, "O runner in his hall!"--the Hall of Truth, where the throne of the soul is erected. "Great God, let my soul go where it desires (lxxxix.). O conductors of the bark of millions of years, led through the gateway, clearing the path of heaven and earth, accompany ye the souls to the holy dead."

The prayer is granted. Leaving its throne on high, and passing through its various transformations, the soul descends the ladder of the well, as in the papyrus of Ani. Then the divine protection is obtained (xci.); and, amid the living waters in the pool of the Persea, the Tree of Immortality (as the Ritual elsewhere calls it), the earnest desire of the

[p. 217]

postulant is fulfilled, and he is re-united with his living soul (xciii.); "My soul is front the beginning," he says, "from the commencement of time (reckoning of years). The eye of Horus "(the Divine Son) made for me my soul, preparing its substance. The darkness is before them; the arms of Osiris hold them. Open the path to my soul and my shadow (Khaibit) and my spirit, to see the great God within his sepulchre the day of making up the souls." If that knowledge is possessed, the Ritual adds, he enters on Light; he is not detained in the lower world.

That priceless gift conceded, the postulant, though he cannot yet participate in the divine splendour until his ordeal be passed, yet can he behold it openly from afar, and enter on his initiation into the sacred mysteries. Ascending, in the strength imparted to him by his soul, the ladder of the well, he offers a prayer to the Divine Teacher (xciv.), and, "holding in his hand the Sacred Mysteries," he turns

[p. 218]

his opened eyes successively in the three directions which we saw indicated by the hieroglyph of the divine Initiator Thoth. First he gazes down "the opening where Thoth is," the Chamber of the Shadow, now no longer closed to his view, though not yet accessible to his person; and he beholds the secret Wisdom which gives to Truth its splendour (xcv., xcvi.), the countenance of the Divine Teacher, whose voice instructed the catechumen, and whose power protected the postulant. Then, as his eyes grow clearer, he offers a prayer to Anup (xcvii.), the starry guide, who has led him thus far towards his heart's desire; and, turning towards the Chamber of the New Birth, he discerns the Bark of Ra (xcviii.-cii.), the vessel of God, foretold to him before his entry on the path by the Divine Teacher--the vessel which shall bear him safely across the Deep Waters. Even while he looks, the whole interior of the building is lit with a sudden glow; and the masonry, pourtraying each portion

[p. 219]

of the sacred vessel, reveals their mystical significance, which the Initiate must know before permission can be granted to embark. Within the Inner House the vast granite Triangle dominating the secret heights assumes for him the form of an "Anchor," with its central axis indicated, but not delineated, by the equality of the members: as we saw the central mystery of the Supreme Secret, the Unity of the divine Substance to be indicated but not defined by the equality of the Persons in the Egyptian Trinity. And that "anchor" firmly fixed, not in the depths below, but in the heights above the open sarkophagus, speaks to him of Osiris, "the

The Anchor and the Coffin of the Lord of Earth. (Sarkophagus and highest chamber.)

[paragraph continues] Lord of the earth in his coffin;" the vision

[p. 220]

which awhile ago he prayed that he might behold on the Great Day of Reckoning. At the head of the Grand Gallery is the "seat" of the "Dweller in Space:" the radiant throne at the top of the long incline to which the Initiate now lifts his eyes. Right through the midst of the throne rises unseen the Axis of the Great House, the Central Ray of the Grand Light of Egypt, like a huge but impalpable mast towering from foundation to summit of the vessel of Light. That axis passes through the Chamber of New Birth below, and separates the Outer from the Inner House which lies beyond the throne, as the central but impalpable truth of Death separates the glory which now is from the glory which lies beyond. And in the truth of Death, to the Egyptian the "Completion-Beginning" of the New Birth, the Initiate discerns "the great bringer and taker away," as the Ritual calls the mast of the vessel of Ra. Aloft upon the same axis, above the solar throne, the roof of the

[p. 221]

lustrous chamber, with its starry rays, images to him whose eyes are opened, the "Sail of the Firmament," which, by its starry grandeur,

The Sail of the Firmament.

draws the soul irresistibly to God. The Well reflects to him the "Paddle" shining in the invisible waters, as the image of the Creator shines invisibly in the Waters of Life: the "Planks," the rungs of the ladder whereby the soul came down to visit him, each guarded by a spirit of celestial intelligence. In the subterranean chamber he discerns the "hold" of "darkness," and in the Chamber of New Birth the Cabin, or Secret Place of the Divine Vessel. A remarkable instance of pyramidal allusion is supplied by the form of the cabin. For the roof proper was surmounted by another roof of the singular and apparently unmeaning shape given in the text. But if above the Chamber

[p. 222]

of New Birth we indicate the throne of Ra, which immediately surmounts it, we shall have

The Cabin.

the shape in question; so that the form implies the enthronization of the Uncreated Light upon the Mystery of the Divine Mother, Isis.

Chamber of New Birth, surmounted by Throne.

[paragraph continues] Upon that bark of safety take place both his present Initiation and the Illumination which is to come; and each of these ascents finds its appropriate expression in the masonry, the one in the place of New Birth, the other in the Chamber of the Splendour. And in the

[p. 223]

vignettes of the Ritual, we see the vessel bearing upon it at one time a fivefold, at another a sevenfold staircase; the fivefold dominion of the regenerate senses, and the sevenfold elevation of the illuminate intellect.

Yet one more vision opens out to the Initiate. As he raises his eyes more upward yet to the extreme height of the Chamber of the Splendour, far removed from the head of the well, yet forming part of the same divine structure, he discerns the "opening where Athor is" (ciii.), the azure depths of ethereal loveliness leading to the secret heights above the Chamber of Grand Orient. For a moment he gazes in silent rapture on the far-off opening of the unimaginable vision, and then calls to his aid "the Opener of the Great Sanctuary" (cv., cvi.). "Oh, assistant--oh, assistant!" he exclaims; "I am among the servants of Immortal Beauty!"

Fortified then by that enduring remembrance, he turns from the scene of future

[p. 224]

illumination, and descends towards the place of impending trial. Around him stand revealed the "Gods of the Western Gate" (cvii.), the Western opening to the Well of Life, where dwell the spirits who came unseen to his assistance at the hour when the sun of earthly life went down into the West. From the "Chamber of the Waters of Heaven" flows down the torrent of the "Celestial Nile" (cx.), and mingles at his side with the stream from the "Chamber of the Birthplace of the Gods"--that stream which waters the fields of Aahlu, the home of the regenerate. And high above, far as his quickened eyes can pierce, are assembled the bright companies of starry spirits from every quarter (cxi.-cxiv.) to assist at his victory, his judgment, and his coronation. In the memory of that unfading vision, and the strength of those protecting spirits, the Initiate enters and comes forth (cxvi.) from the subterranean Chamber of the Fiery Ordeal.

Footnotes

^199:* If these numbers be placed on a print of the interior of the Pyramid, in the order here indicated, they will show how the titles here assigned to the different parts are obtained from the Ritual.

The House of the Hidden Places, by W. Marsham Adams, [1895], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

THE ILLUMINATION OF THE ADEPT.

INITIATION achieved, and Ordeal undergone, the character both of building and of Ritual seem to undergo a transformation. Not that the air of mystery is in any way lessened, rather it deepens if possible, as we penetrate into the more secret parts. But the period of weakness and of expectancy once passed, a sense of power and triumph grows more and more distinctly perceptible as we enter the secret places of absolute "Truth." Turning back with the Initiate, now become the Adept from the "Meskwa" or Place of Ordeal, we retrace our steps upwards, under the direction

[p. 226]

of the celestial guide, who conducts us to the "Gate on the Hill" (cxvii.); the lintel hidden in the roof far up along the Passage of the Star. In remounting the ascent the adept once more "enters and comes forth" (cxx.) from the Gateway of the Well, that he may again receive strength for the coming judgment. And as he approaches the hidden portcullis, which now he is called upon to pass, where sits in person the Eternal Wisdom, he recites for himself (cxxi.) the unforgotten words wherein the Divine Teacher warned him of the hour now drawing near of entering into (xiii.) judgment and of issuing from thence. Arrived at the hidden portcullis (cxxii., cxxiii.), carefully concealed within the roof, that arduous "Gateway reserved for the Gods," the divine Osiris-souls, the gateway which none can enter, except "after coming out" from the place of initiation, obstruction meets him at every step. Alike in the Ritual, and in the building, each portion of that most

[p. 227]

mysterious gateway, the secret of whose masonry still remains undisclosed, refuses entrance to the upward path except to the adept. "'I will not let thee go over me,'" says the sill, "'unless you tell me my name.' 'The weight in the right place is thy name,'" is the profound reply of the adept. For, as the raising of the portcullis depends upon the true adjustment of the weight, so also is justice the virtue without which the path on high remains for ever closed. "'I will not let thee pass me,'" says the Left Lintel--so continues this strange dialogue--"'unless you tell me my name.' 'Return of the true is thy name.' 'I will not let thee pass me,'" says the Right Lintel, "'unless you tell me my name.' 'Return of judged hearts is thy name.'" For without truth, and without self-judgment, no step can be taken of progress in the Path of Truth (cxxv.). With that doctrine we may compare the "Golden Words" of Pythagoras, himself a pupil of the priests of Egypt--

[p. 228]

"Do innocence; take heed before thou act;
  Nor let soft sleep upon thy eyelids fall,
  E'er the day's actions thou hast three times scanned,
  What have I done, where erred, what left unwrought?
  Go through the whole account, and if the sum
  Be evil, chide thee; but if good, rejoice.
  This do, this meditate, this ever love,
  And it shall guide thee into virtue's path."

But to him who has learned of wisdom, however long, however arduous the search, the entrance into Truth cannot finally be denied. The Hidden Lintel is crossed; and the memory of that passage is for ever kept sacred by the grateful departed. "I have come through the Hidden Lintel," he cries triumphantly, later on, "I have come like the sun through the gate of the festival." The lintel crossed, the Person of the Divine Teacher is disclosed, having before him the true Balance of Light and Darkness (cxxv.). The "secret faces at the gate" unveil themselves; and the adept stands within the Double Hall of Truth--of Truth in Death and Truth in Life, of Truth in Justice and Truth in Mercy, of Truth in Darkness and

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Truth in Splendour. Then, as he surmounts each obstacle besetting the entrance to the path which leads on high, and achieves the triumph over Death, he beholds the long array of the Judges of the Dead, the celestial powers who take account of the moral actions of mankind, each supreme in his own province of the holy land; and to each in turn the adept, whose stains have been washed from his heart in the furnace of the ordeal, pleads his innocence of the sin of which that power is the special avenger. Very terrible are the images under which those heart-searching spirits are presented--terrible as the moral effects of our own transgression, when viewed by the inner light of Truth. "The Eyes of Fire," the passion which shrivels the intellect; the "Face of Smoke," the pride that clouds the judgment; the "Crackler of Bones," the sin which corrodes the entire manhood, these and such as these are the fearful insignia of the supernal powers. Most terrible of all is the spirit "whose mouth

[p. 230]

is twisted when he speaks, because his face is behind him," the spirit of conscience, which keeps its dread eyes inexorably on our past, and speaks to us with mouth contorted in the agony of self-condemnation--like the cry of the penitent, which echoes as bitterly now as when uttered three thousand years ago, "My sin is ever before me."

Undeterred by that august tribunal, which as we learn at the threshold, none can endure but he who has truly judged himself, the departed, protected by the Divine Guardian, ascends the Passage of the Shadow where the light is eclipsed, and achieves through Truth his victory over Death. Gradually, as he draws near the low but unobstructed gateway, the glow of the splendour begins to appear; and he sees before him the Sacred Orbit of the circling earth defined by the four burning points of Solstice and Equinox, like a basin of fire surrounded by four jets of flame (cxxvi.). In front of each of those cardinal points of the

[p. 231]

heaven, are seated four divine spirits having the assemblance of an ape, the form nearest akin to humanity. To those four universal guardians and heralds of truth, the justified prays, that he may be purified yet further from his transgressions. "O ye," he says, "who send forth truth to the universal Lord, nurtured without fraud, who abominate wickedness, extract all the evil from me. Obliterate my faults and annihilate my sins." "Thou mayest go," is the gracious reply of the four heavenly teachers; "we obliterate all thy faults, we annihilate all thy sins." In this manner, as the Ritual declares, is separation of his sins effected "after he has seen the faces of the Gods." From henceforth death has no more power over him, and in rapture he returns thanksgiving to the supreme judges, the Gods of the Orbit, towards whom he now advances, and to Osiris on his throne (cxxvii., cxxviii.).

As he stands at the entrance of the upper chamber, where the slight projection of the

[p. 232]

lower floor bears witness to the passage from death to life, the divine voice, which has been silent till its first lesson is exhausted, recommences his illumination, and he is "instructed" (cxxix.) how "to stand at the Bark of Ra"--no longer in the lower portion of the vessel, but free of every part. Obedient to the divine command, he passes the "Gate of the Gateway" (cxxx.), and celebrates the Birthday of Osiris, the Opening of the Eternal Year. Then, as he advances a step and stands within the hall upon the slight projection, he beholds the whole building before him, the vast universe of space, in its immeasurable grandeur, now free to his immaculate spirit. And as at the Lintel of Justice all is barred, so here every part lies open. "The heaven opens," we read (cxxx.)--the Chamber of the Splendour with its seven-fold rays around the solar throne; "the earth opens," the Chamber of the Shadow; "the North opens" to the Chamber of the Pole-star;" the South opens"

[p. 233]

to the Chamber of Grand Orient; "the West opens" to the Entrance of the Well; "the East opens" to the Chamber of New Birth, with its Eastern ascent of the regenerate senses;" the Northern and Southern Chapels open," the Ante-chamber and the Place of Grand Orient, the Northern and Southern chapels of the inner house. Here, too, is the "crossing of the pure roads of life," of which the coffin of Amamu speaks. Behind are "the roads of darkness," which the departed in the Ritual once prayed so earnestly that he might pass. In front lie the fields of Aahlu, the blessed country where the justified executes the works which he is privileged to do for Osiris.

A burst of triumph greets the justified, when having accomplished the Passage of the Sun, he enters the Chamber of the Orbit, the Hall of Illumination. "The deceased," we read, "passes through the Gate of the Gateway. Prepare ye his hall when he comes. Justify his words against the accusers. There is given

[p. 234]

to him the food of the gods of the Gate. There has been made for him the crown which belongs to him as the dweller in the Secret Place." In another place the justified himself exclaims, "I have opened the gate of heaven and earth" (at the junction of the Halls of the Orbit and of the Shadow). "The soul of Osiris rests there. I cross through the halls. No defect or evil is found in me." And once more the deceased prays that he may pass this hall. "Place me before thee, O Lord of Eternity. Hail, Dweller of the West, good Being, Lord of Abydos. Let me pass the roads of darkness; let me follow thy servants in the gate."

A similar note of exultation marks the passage in the Sai-an-Sinsin, where we read of the great tribunal and the House of Light. "Thou comest into the House of God with much purity," exclaim the mourners, addressing the departed. "The gods have abundantly purified thee in the great tribunal. Thou art

[p. 235]

not shut out of heaven; thy body is renewed in the presence of Osiris. Thou hast not been shut out from the House of Glory. Thou seest the Path of Beauty, completing every transformation which thou desirest." And the ancient coffin of Amamu bore on the outside this inscription, full of desire and hope: "An act of homage to Anup, who passes the deceased over the distant paths, the fairest of the Karneter"--that is, the land of the holy dead. "Thine eyes," say our own sacred writings, "shall see the King in his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off."

The gateway passed (cxxx.), the divine voice resumes its instruction; and teaches him of "going to the heaven where Osiris is;" of being "received into the Sacred Heart of Ra," the fount of life (cxxxi.-cxxxiii.), of "the adoration which he must render," of the vessel of eternity in which the holy souls for ever move, of the rejoicings of heaven (cxxxiv.-cxxxvi.)

[p. 236]

in the manifestations of the Godhead to man, and of the names and places wherein those manifestations are made (cxli.-cxliii.).

And now the justified stands within the full glory of the orbit, and looks forth, not with the vision of mortal seer, but as the deathless spirits who encircle the throne. While he stands gazing, splendour after splendour, revelation beyond revelation, bursts upon his sight. Down from the radiant throne, along the floor, along the walls, along the roof, streams, floods, rivers of light come sweeping on like the torrent of the summer rays, like the inundation of the overwhelming Nile. But the justified breathes freely the air of opened heaven. His senses "for ever vivified," pierce through the utmost bounds of space; his quickened intellect grasps each starry law and harmony; his purified spirit, undazzled by the blinding radiance, discerns the Hidden Love that occupies the throne. No longer as a stranger, or at a distance, but as a prince

[p. 237]

Click to enlarge
The Gate of the Burning Crown.

[p. 238]

admitted to the highest honour of the court, the justified takes his place in the very line of direct approach; while around and above him, the measureless expanse is filled with rank beyond rank of spirit-ministers. "He has passed his billions," we read, "the circle of flaming ministers is around him. His blessings follow him. 'Come,' says Truth; and he approaches her Lord."

At that gracious word of Truth, the abysses of mystery reveal their most secret depths. First, the Chamber of the Shadow is lit by the irradiating brightness; and the Illuminate discerns the nature of sin viewed in the light of truth. The Seven Halls of Death (cxliv.), each measured by its cycle of eclipse, lie open to him who has looked upon the face of God; and each name of mystery betrays the form of darkness. "Babbling" Malice, that delights in "overthrow;" "Fire-faced" Anger, "leaping on a sudden to the front;" Envy, the "Eater of Dirt;" Hatred, silent and

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] "vigilant;" Lust, "the consumer, the overthrower in a moment," that "lives off reptiles;" Pride, with its "face of stone;" Sloth, that hardens irretrievably the heart, the "final stopper of the rejected;" all these betray their nature to him over whom death has power no longer. And he discerns (as in the vignette) the seven avenging spirits, each armed with the two swords of physical and spiritual destruction.

Mounting then the steep ascent, he beholds the mystery of judgment disclose itself in successive stages as the twenty-one Gates of Aahlu--their spaces measured by the years of Light, as it speeds from Sothis, the gates which open only to "the meek-hearted" (cxlvi.) unfold before him. At each of the first ten portals flows a celestial stream of sparkling waters, which shed their undying lustre over the person of the Illuminate. Ascending still towards the throne of Ra, at the nineteenth portal he is clothed with robes of power; and

[p. 240]

at "the Gate of the Burning Crown," he stands beneath the Royal Arch of the Planetary Spheres. Immediately beyond is the "Stone of God," where he receives from the Divine Occupant a "Crown of Illumination," the "Atf"-crown of Egypt, fashioned after the zodiacal light of highest heaven. And behind the throne rises the final "Gate of Peace" with its seven crowns of joy.

But not as yet can the Illuminate attain the infinite serenity which lies beyond that gate. Death and judgment are not the only secrets to be disclosed when the eye of faith becomes the eye of sight. The place of the divine birth, the chamber in the "Fields of Aahlu," must be visited before the Illuminate become the Master of the secret. And as he passes portal after portal of the fields (cxlvii.), he recites the titles of her whose habitation he now approaches: the "Mistress of Holy Awe," the "Mistress of Heaven," the "Regent of the Earth," the "Help of the Meek-hearted,"

[p. 241]

the "Mistress of Prayer," the "Light of the Secret River." Then, having learnt the majesty of its queen, he scans the sevenfold arch, the Mystery of the Transcendent Heaven (cxlviii.); to hold converse with the seven Supreme Intelligences who overarch the Splendour of Creation.

Yet once again must the Depths be sounded, and the Secret Places be traversed, before the Illuminate can pass as master through the Gate of Peace. One secret of death still remains, most terrible and most inscrutable of all. While we are yet imperfect, we can gain some knowledge of the effect of moral death upon ourselves, and even form a faint adumbration of its nature when viewed in the light of absolute truth. But the mystery of its divine permission who can penetrate? If the Omnipotent be all good, why did He ever allow of evil? If He be all-merciful, why does He permit His creatures to suffer? How can our actions be justly

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] "balanced" (cli.) when the forces which produced them were not of our own creation? Why are we to be made parties to the battle of light and darkness, when no choice was given whether we would exist or not? Why are the souls of just men secretly snared and overthrown? Whence comes the "foul flux" which is purged from man, and which causes all living creatures to shudder? Such questions as these we ask, and ask in vain. Yet if that darkest shadow, that horror which forms the depth of human agony, the enshrouding of the Eternal Justice in the blackness of utter eclipse, is still liable to arise and overpower the soul, how can man ever repose in safety; and what revelation or degree of glory will suffice to bring him peace? But that it too is destined to pass away in light, when the secrets are revealed, and illumination is transformed into union, who can doubt? So at least we read in the creed of Ancient Egypt; where, when the

[p. 243]

other mysteries of death and of judgment have been disclosed to the Illuminate; when he has entered into the secrets of the new birth, and conversed with the Supreme Intelligences who "watch before the tomb of Osiris;" when time exists for him no more, and he understands the design of the Eternal House, from foundation to consummation, he makes a final circuit of its Secret Places. Clothed in power, and crowned with light, he traverses the "Abodes" (cli.) or scenes of his former weakness; there to discern, by his own enlightened perception, how it is "Osiris who satisfies the balance of him who rules the heavens;" to exert in its supernal freedom his creative will, now the lord, not the slave, of the senses; and to rejoice in the just suffering which wrought his illumination and emancipation.

Finally, when that grand progress through the Habitations of Humanity has been completed, the Master returns in majesty to the

[p. 244]

celestial company assembled in the Grand Lodge of the solar throne. Mounting beneath the Royal Arch of the Burning Crown, he treads the Stone of God itself, and passes through the Gate of Peace, with its seven crowns and titles of Victory. Then, outstripping in his flight the power of mortal thought, he passes beyond the shining orbit of the earth, beyond the vast expanse of solar glory, across the awful chasms of the unfathomable depths, to far-off Sothis, the land of Eternal Dawn, the ante-chamber of the infinite morning. He "has his star established to him in Sothis," says the Ritual. And here the Illuminate, now become a Master, is instructed in the last mysteries which precede the universal glory; the mysteries of the divine sorrow, the "tears of Isis" (clii.), whence comes the source of the celestial Nile, the fount of illumination to man. Here he passes within the triple veil, and is invested with the imperishable jewels of supernal lustre (cliii.-clxi.).

[p. 245]

One chapter and one chamber yet remain--the chapter of Orientation, and the Chamber of Grand Orient beneath the Secret Places of the Most High. "Awake, awake, Osiris?" so sing the mourners to the beloved departed, now glorious in the House of Light, and united indissolubly with the divine Being; "awake? see what thy son Horus bath done for thee. See what thy father Seb hath done for thee. Raised is the Osiris." "I have opened the doors," replies the Osiris-soul, "I have opened the doors. . . . Well is the Great One who is in the Coffer. For all the dead shall have passages made to him through their embalming," when their body in the flesh shall be raised in incorruption. Again and again is celebrated the Mystery of the Open Tomb. As the eclipsing planet which moves nearest to the sun crawls like a tortoise across the face of that orb, defacing it for a moment by its own darkness, and then is swallowed in the radiance, so also death, that dark spot

[p. 246]

which crawls across the vision of the eternal splendour, is swallowed in the resurrection of Osiris-Ra, the Uncreated Light. Four times is that Gospel of ancient Egypt proclaimed in the chapter which bears the title of the Orient. "The tortoise dies; Ra lives!" Death is swallowed in Light; God lives for evermore. "O Amen, Amen," so continues that chapter of mystery, "Amen, who art in heaven, give thy face to the body of thy Son. Make him well in Hades. It is finished."

Thus ends the strange and solemn dirge of ancient Egypt. Once perceived, the intimate connection between the secret doctrine of Egypt's most venerated books and the secret significance of her most venerable monument seems impossible to dissever, and each form illustrates and interpenetrates the other. As we peruse the dark utterances and recognize the mystic allusions of the Book, we seem to stand amid the profound darkness enwrapping the whole interior of the building. All around

[p. 247]

are assembled the spirits and the powers that make the mystery of the unseen world: the "Secret Faces at the Gate," the "Gods of the Horizon and of the Orbit." And dimly before our eyes, age after age, the sacred procession of the Egyptian dead moves silently along, as they pass through the "Gate of the Hill" to the tribunal of Osiris. In vain do we attempt to trace their footsteps till we enter with them into the Hidden Places, and penetrate the secret of the House of Light. But no sooner do we approach the passage and tread the chambers of the mysterious Pyramid, than the teaching of the Sacred Books seems lit up as with a tongue of flame. The luminous veil itself melts slowly away, disclosing the Path of Illumination and the Splendours of the Orbit; the celestial Powers and Intelligences shine forth from beneath their enshrouding symbols; the spirits of the just grow lustrous with the rays that proceed from the tribunal. For though none may look upon these things

[p. 248]

unveiled till the Guardian of the Starry Gate has opened for him the Portal of the Light, yet for the adept, who has been mystically initiated in the deep waters, and illuminated by the sevenfold Beauty, the invisible things become manifest by the visible creation. And a Light which is not of earth reveals in its divine unity the full secret of the Hidden Places; the Entrance to the Path of Heaven; the Well of Life, the Place of New Birth, the Ordeal of Fire, the Lintel of Justice, the Victory over Death, the Judgment of Truth, the Splendour of Illumination, the Throne of Radiance, the Veil of Perfection, and the Grand Orient of the Open Tomb, beneath secret chambers of the Height, crowned by the Grand Arch of the Supreme Trinity.

Thus only according to that primeval creed could man fulfil his marvellous destiny; and thus only can that destiny accomplish his heart's desire. No skill in the secrets of the material universe, no dominion over the forces

[p. 249]

of life and death, no power to pierce the veil which hangs before the unseen world and to hold communion with the spiritual intelligences, will satisfy his secret aspirations. For the soul of man--so every form of creed declares--can know no rest, nor can his spirit ever be satisfied, so long as the thinnest film remains to interrupt the unclouded vision of the Hidden Love; until he stand face to face, and eye to eye with "Him who knows the Depths."

We quit that solemn monument of primeval mystery; and as we turn a farewell glance upon the Gate of Heaven, the veil of the majestic masonry once more hides from view the interior splendour, and enwraps the Secret Places of the Hidden God.

THE END.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hmvp.txt =====


    
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic

  

By W. J. Wilkins

  

Calcutta: Thacker, Spink & Co.; London: W. Thacker & Co.

  

[1900]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, May 2009. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
DURGA. Lakshmi. Sarasvati. Ganesa. The Demon Durga. Kartikeya.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE.

ON reaching India, one of my first inquiries was for a full and trustworthy account of the mythology of the Hindus; but though I read various works in which some information of the kind was to be found, I sought in vain for a complete and systematic work on this subject. Since then two classical dictionaries of India have been published, one in Madras and one in London; but though useful books of reference, they do not meet the want that this book is intended to supply. For some years I have been collecting materials with the intention of arranging them in such a way that any one without much labour might gain a good general idea of the names, character, and relationship of the principal deities of Hinduism. This work does not profess to supply new translations of the Hindu Scriptures, nor to give very much information that is not already scattered through many other books. In a few cases original extracts have been made; but, generally speaking, my work has been to collect and arrange translations ready to hand. It has been my endeavour to give a fair and impartial account of these deities, as far as possible in the words of the sacred books; such an account as I should expect an honest-minded Hindu to give of God from a careful study of the Bible. I have honestly

[p. viii]

striven to keep free from prejudice and theological bias; and, wishing to let the sacred books speak for themselves, have refrained from commenting on the passages quoted, excepting where some explanation seemed necessary. I have not selected those texts which describe the darker side only of the Hindu gods, nor have such been altogether suppressed. There was much that could not be reproduced. Of what was fit for publication I have taken a proportionate amount, that this, together with what is worthy of commendation, may give a faithful picture. To magnify either the good or the evil is the work of the advocate--a work I, in this book, distinctly disclaim. An honest effort has been made to give a reliable account of the things commonly believed by millions of our Hindu fellow-subjects.

In order to render the work more interesting and instructive, a number of illustrations of the principal deities have been introduced. Most of them have been copied from pictures drawn by the Hindus themselves, and which may be seen in the houses of the people. No attempt has been made to idealize them; they are, what they profess to be, faithful representations of the designs of Hindu artists. For their kindness in making these drawings from the original highly-coloured pictures, I am very greatly indebted to my friends the Rev. A. J. Bamford, B.A., and Messrs. H. T. Ottewill and C. A. Andrews, B.A.

By the introduction of a full index it is hoped that this work will serve as a classical dictionary of India; whilst the classification of the gods will enable the student to obtain a general view of Hindu mythology, and of the relation in which one deity stands to others. And as many legends are given at some length, the book can hardly fail to be interesting to the general reader,

[p. ix]

who may not have time or opportunity to refer to the sacred writings from which they are taken.

A word of explanation respecting the classification of the deities is called for. It will be noticed that some of those described as belonging to the Vedic Age appear under the same or other names in the Puranas; whilst others spoken of as belonging to the Puranic Age have their origin, traceable indeed with difficulty in some cases, in the Vedas. It was a common practice with the writers of the later books to claim a remote antiquity, and the authority of the Vedas, for the more recent additions to the Pantheon. In some instances an epithet, descriptive of one of the old deities, is attached as the name of a later one. And by this means the old and the new are linked together. The Vedic gods are those whose description is chiefly to be found in the Vedas, and whose worship was more general in the Vedic Age; the Puranic are those who are more fully described in the Puranas, and whose worship was more general in the Puranic Age. Any very rigid classification it is impossible to make.

W. J. W.

CALCUTTA, February 22, 1882.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. x]

[p. xi]

  

PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION.

AS a large edition of this work has been sold out, and a new one called for, an opportunity is presented of adding a few words to what was said eighteen years ago. The reception given to it both in India and in England was most gratifying, practically the only serious condemnation of it being that I had not pronounced judgment on much that I had quoted from the Hindu sacred books. This was a task that I distinctly disavowed in my preface. I set out with the intention of rigidly abstaining from comment, commendatory or condemnatory. I feel that a mere statement of much that was written in books professedly inspired by God, carried its own condemnation. And at the same time it was a pleasure to indicate how, amid much evil, there was also much good. The sages of India were not in complete darkness. As we examine the earlier writings, the light was bright indeed contrasted with what came later. It is most instructive to notice the marked deterioration in the quality of the teaching, deities as described by the earlier sages being vastly better than their successors declare them to be. "Non-Christian Bibles are all developments in the wrong direction. They begin with some flashes of true light, and end in darkness." As Max-Muller says, "The more we go back, the more we examine the earliest

[p. xii]

germs of any religion, the purer I believe we shall find the conceptions of the Deity."

In this edition there is some added matter. Errors have been corrected, and an attempt made to render certain passages more clear that were somewhat obscure. Substantially the book remains the same. An account of the ordinary worship and the festivals of these gods will be found in another work--"Modern Hinduism."

W. J. W.

1900.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

CONTENTS.

           

       PART I.--THE VEDIC DEITIES.

        

     
      CHAPTER.

        

       PAGE

     
      I.

       THE VEDAS

       <page 3>

     
      II.

       THE VEDIC GODS GENERALLY

       <page 9>

     
      III.

       DYAS AND PRITHIVI

       <page 13>

     
      IV.

       ADITI AND THE ADITYAS

       <page 17>

     
      V.

       AGNI

       <page 21>

     
      VI.

       SUN OR LIGHT DEITIES--

        

     
       

       1. SURYA

       <page 30>

     
       

       2. PUSHAN

       <page 36>

     
       

       3. MITRA AND VARUNA

       <page 37>

     
       

       4. THE ASVINS

       <page 44>

     
       

       5. USHAS

       <page 48>

     
      VII.

       THE STORM DEITIES--

        

     
       

       1. INDRA

       <page 53>

     
       

       2. INDRaNI

       <page 63>

     
       

       3. PARJANYA

       <page 63>

     
       

       4. VaYU

       <page 64>

     
       

       5. THE MARUTS

       <page 67>

     
      VIII.

       SOMA

       <page 69>

     
      IX.

       TVASTRI OR VISVAKARMA

       <page 75>

     
      X.

       YAMA

       <page 78>

     
       

        

        

     
       

       PART II.--THE PURANIC   DEITIES.

        

     
      I.

       THE PURaNAS

       <page 89>

     
      II.

       BRAHMA

       <page 93>

     
       

       [p. xiv]

        

     
      CHAPTER

        

       PAGE

     
      III.

       BRAHMa

       <page 98>

     
       

       SARASVATI

       <page 107>

     
      IV.

       VISHNU

       <page 116>

     
       

       LAKSHMI

       <page 127>

     
      V.

       THE INCARNATIONS OR AVATaRAS OF VISHNU--

        

     
       

       1. THE MATSYA OR FISH AVATaRA

       <page 134>

     
       

       2. THE KuRMA OR TORTOISE AVATaRA

       <page 141>

     
       

       3. THE VARaHA OR BOAR AVATaRA

       <page 144>

     
       

       4. THE NRISINGHA OR MAN-LION AVATaRA

       <page 149>

     
       

       5. THE VaMANA OR DWARF AVATaRA

       <page 155>

     
       

       6. THE PARASURaMA AVATaRA

       <page 162>

     
       

       7. THE RaMA CHANDRA AVATaRA

       <page 170>

     
       

       8. THE KRISHNA AVATaRA

       <page 197>

     
       

       8a. THE BALARaMA AVATaRA

       <page 220>

     
       

       9. THE BUDDHA AVATaRA

       <page 225>

     
       

       10. THE KALKI AVATaRA

       <page 245>

     
       

       JAGANNaTH

       <page 248>

     
       

       CHAITANYA

       <page 253>

     
       

       KaMADEVA

       <page 256>

     
      VI.

       SIVA

       <page 262>

     
       

       PANCHaNANA

       <page 283>

     
      VII.

       UMa

       <page 285>

     
       

       PaRVATI

       <page 289>

     
       

       DURGa

       <page 296>

     
       

       THE CHIEF FORMS OF DURGa--

        

     
       

       1. DURGa

       <page 307>

     
       

       2. DASABHUJa

       <page 307>

     
       

       3. SINGHAVaHINI

       <page 308>

     
       

       4. MAHISHAMaRDINI

       <page 308>

     
       

       5. JAGADDHaTRI

       <page 308>

     
       

       6. KaLI

       <page 309>

     
       

       7. MUKTAKESI

       <page 317>

     
       

       8. TaRA

       <page 317>

     
       

       9. CHINNAMUSTAKA

       <page 317>

     
       

       10. JAGADGAURI

       <page 317>

     
       

       11. PRATYANGIRa

       <page 318>

     
       

       12. ANNAPURNa

       <page 318>

     
       

       13. GANESAJANANI

       <page 320>

     
       

       14. KRISHNAKRORA

       <page 320>

     
       

       THE SAKTIS

       <page 320>

     
       

       [p. xv]

        

     
      CHAPTER

        

       PAGE

     
      VIII.

       SONS OF SIVA AND PaRVATI--

        

     
       

       1. GANESA

       <page 323>

     
       

       2. KARTIKEYA

       <page 334>

     
      IX.

       THE PURANIC ACCOUNT OF THE CREATION

       <page 342>

     
      X.

       THE PURaNIC DIVISIONS OF TIME

       <page 353>

     
       

        

        

     
       

       PART III.--THE INFERIOR DEITIES.

        

     
       

       I. THE DIVINE RISHIS--

        

     
       

       1. BHRIGU

       <page 363>

     
       

       2. PULASTYA

       <page 368>

     
       

       3. PULAHA

       <page 369>

     
       

       4. KRATU

       <page 369>

     
       

       5. ANGIRAS

       <page 369>

     
       

       6. MARICHI

       <page 370>

     
       

       7. ATRI

       <page 371>

     
       

       8. DAKSHA

       <page 372>

     
       

       9. VASISHTHA

       <page 380>

     
       

       10. NaRADA

       <page 382>

     
      II.

       KUVERA

       <page 388>

     
      III.

       THE DEMIGODS OF THE RaMaYANA--

        

     
       

       1. SUGRIVA

       <page 394>

     
       

       2. HANUMaN

       <page 401>

     
       

       3. NALA

       <page 406>

     
       

       4. NiLA

       <page 408>

     
       

       5. SUSHENA

       <page 408>

     
      IV.

       THE DEMIGODS OF THE MAHaBHaRATA

       <page 411>

     
      V.

       THE PLANETS--

        

     
       

       1. RAVI, OR SURYA

       <page 432>

     
       

       2. CHANDRA, OR SOMA

       <page 432>

     
       

       3. MANGALA

       <page 432>

     
       

       4. BUDHA

       <page 433>

     
       

       5. VRIHASPATI

       <page 433>

     
       

       6. SUKRA

       <page 434>

     
       

       7. SANI

       <page 435>

     
       

       8. RaHU AND KETU

       <page 435>

     
       

       [p. xvi]

        

     
      CHAPTER

        

       PAGE

     
      VI.

       THE ASURAS

       <page 437>

     
       

       JALANDHARA

       <page 441>

     
      VII.

       SACRED ANIMALS AND BIRDS

       <page 448>

     
       

       GARUDA

       <page 449>

     
       

       JATaYUS AND SAMPaTI

       <page 456>

     
      VIII.

       GANGa

       <page 460>

     
      IX.

       SACRED TREES

       <page 469>

     
      X.

       MISCELLANEOUS MINOR DEITIES--

        

     
       

       1. SHITALA

       <page 473>

     
       

       2. MANASa

       <page 474>

     
       

       3. SASTi

       <page 477>

     
       

       4. THE SHaLGRaMA

       <page 478>

     
       

       5. THE DHENKi

       <page 479>

     
       

       6. KA? WHO?

       <page 480>

     
      XI.

       SUPERHUMAN, THOUGH NOT DIVINE BEINGS--

        

     
       

       1. APSARAS AND GANDHARVAS

       <page 482>

     
       

       2. RaKSHASAS

       <page 485>

     
       

       3. JaIN DEITIES

       <page 488>

     
       

       Index

       <page 491>

     
   

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

  

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

           

        

       PAGE

     
      DURGa AND OTHER DEITIES.

       From a native picture

       (Frontispiece.)

     
      AGNI.

       From Moor's "Hindu Pantheon"

       22

     
      SURYA.

       "

       31

     
      VARUNA.

       From a native picture

       38

     
      INDRA

       "

       53

     
      VaYU

       "

       65

     
      YAMA

       "

       78

     
      BRAHMa

       "

       98

     
      SARASVATI

       "

       108

     
      VISHNU

       "

       117

     
      LAKSHMI

       "

       129

     
      THE MATSYA AVATaRA

       "

       135

     
      THE KuRMA AVATaRA

       "

       143

     
      THE NRISINGHA AVATaRA

       "

       149

     
      THE VaMANA AVATaRA

       "

       158

     
      THE PARASURaMA AVATaRA

       "

       164

     
      THE RaMA CHANDRA AVATaRA

       "

       171

     
      RaVANA

       "

       185

     
      THE KRISHNA AVATaRA

       "

       198

     
      KRISHNA SLAYING BAKaSURA

       "

       205

     
      KRISHNA HOLDING UP MOUNT GOVARDDHANA

       "

       208

     
      RaDHa WORSHIPPING KRISHNA AS KaLI

       "

       211

     
      BALARaMA

       "

       221

     
      BUDDHA.

       Drawn from an image in Ceylon by Rev. A. J. Bamford, B. A.

       225

     
      BUDDHIST TEMPLE AND DAGOBA AT KELANIYA, CEYLON.

       Original sketch by Rev. A. J. Bamford, B.A.

       226

     
      BUDDHA.

       Drawn from an image in Ceylon by Rev. A. J. Bamford, B. A.

       232

     
      KALKI.

       From a native picture

       246

     
      JAGANNaTH

       "

       249

     
       

       [p. xviii]

        

     
       

        

       PAGE

     
      KaMADEVA.

       From a native picture.

       257

     
      SIVA SLAYING KaMADEVA.

       "

       258

     
      SIVA.

       "

       262

     
      SIVA TEMPLE AT BENARES.

       From a photograph

       264

     
      HAR-HARI.

       From a native picture

       276

     
      SIVA SLAYING AN ASURA.

       "

       279

     
      PANCHaNANA.

       "

       284

     
      SIVA AND PaRVATI.

       "

       290

     
      PaRVATI WORSHIPPING THE LINGA.

       From Moor's "Hindu Pantheon"

       294

     
      DASARHUJa.

       From a native picture.

       301

     
      JAGADDHaTRI.

       "

       308

     
      KaLI.

       "

       310

     
      KaLI DANCING ON SIVA.

       "

       311

     
      ANNAPURNa.

       "

       319

     
      GANESA.

       From Moor's "Hindu Pantheon"

       323

     
      KARTIKEYA.

       From a native picture.

       334

     
      DAKSHA.

       "

       373

     
      SUGRIVA.

       "

       394

     
      MONKEYS CONSTRUCTING THE BRIDGE AT LANKA.

       "

       397

     
      HANUMaN.

       From Moor's "Hindu Pantheon"

       402

     
      ARJUNA SHOOTING AT THE FISH.

       From a native picture

       419

     
      BATTLE OF THE KURuS AND THE PANDaVAS.

       "

       423

     
      GARUDA.

       From Moor's "Hindu Pantheon"

       450

     
      JATaYUS.

       From a native picture.

       457

     
      GANGa.

       "

       460

     
      SHITALA.

       "

       473

     
      MANASa.

       "

       475

     
      SASTi.

       "

       477

     
      SACRED TREES.

       Drawn by the Rev. A. J. Bamford, B.A.--

        

     
          Soma-plant.

        

       70

     
          The Tulsi

        

       362

     
          The Lotus

        

       459

     
          Banyan Tree

        

       469

     
          The Bel

        

       470

     
          The Fig Tree

        

       472

     
          The Nim

        

       481

     
          Pipal Leaves.

        

       500

     
   The tail pieces are taken from drawings of Hindu temples and decorations in the works of RAM RAZ, RaJENDRALaLA MITRA, FERGUSSON, and others.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

PART I.

  

THE VEDIC DEITIES.

[p. 2] [p. 3]

  

HINDU MYTHOLOGY.

  

THE VEDIC DEITIES.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE VEDAS.

BEFORE speaking of the Vedic Deities, it is necessary that something be said concerning the Vedas themselves, the source of our information concerning them. The root of the word is vid, "to know;" hence the term Veda signifies knowledge; and as these books were not written for centuries after they were originally composed, it signifies knowledge that was heard, or orally communicated. The Vedas are not the work of a single person, but, according to popular belief, were communicated to a number of Rishis or saints, who in their turn transmitted them to their disciples. The Seer Vyasa is styled the arranger, or, as we should now say, the editor, of these works.

The instruction contained in these writings is said to have been breathed forth by God Himself. Other writers teach that it issued from Him like smoke from fire. Sometimes the Vedas are said to have sprung from the

[p. 4]

elements. The accounts of their origin, though differing in form, agree in teaching that they were the direct gift of God to man; and hence they are regarded with the greatest veneration. They are the special property of the Brahmans. As early as Manu, the nominal author or compiler of a law book probably not more than two or three centuries later than the Vedas, though some suppose it to have been no earlier than A.D. 500, it was regarded as a grave offence for a single word of these divinely given books to be heard by a man of a lower caste.

The Vedas are four in number; of these the Rig-Veda is the oldest, next in order was the Yajur-Veda, then the Sama-Veda, and last of all the Atharva-Veda. Each of these Vedas consists of two main parts: a Sanhita, or collection of mantras or hymns; and a Brahmana, containing ritualistic precept and illustration, which stands in somewhat the same relation to the Sanhita as the Talmud to the Law. In these are found instructions to the priests who conduct the worship of the gods addressed in. the hymns. Attached to each Brahmana is an Upanishad, containing secret or mystical doctrine. These are regarded as of lesser authority than the Mantras and Brahmanas. For whilst they are spoken of as Sruti, i.e. heard, the Upanishads are Smriti, learned. Though based on the older compositions, if there is any discrepancy between them, the teaching of the later ones is rejected. The Sanhita and Brahmana are for the Brahmans generally; the Upanishads for philosophical inquirers. Yet, strange to say, whereas the older portions had, until recent years, been almost entirely neglected, with some parts of the Upanishads there was considerable acquaintance amongst the learned pundits of Benares and other places. In many parts

[p. 5]

of India not a man could be found able to read and interpret them. Of the Sanhitas, the "Rig-Veda Sanhita--containing one thousand and seventeen hymns--is by far the most important; whilst the Atharva-Veda-Sanhita, though generally held to be the most recent, is perhaps the most interesting. Moreover, these are the only two Vedic hymn-books worthy of being called separate original collections;" [**] the others being almost entirely made up of extracts from the Rig-Veda. Between the time of the composition of the Rig-Veda and that of the Atharva, considerable changes in the religious faith of the people had come about. The childlike trust of the earlier hymns has disappeared, and the deities now seem more cruel, and there is greater need of propitiatory offerings. Probably the old religion of the people whom they had conquered had begun to tell on that of the Aryans.

The Sanhitas of three of the Vedas are said to have some peculiarity. "If a mantra is metrical, and intended for loud recitation, it is called Rich (from rich, praise) whence the name Rig Veda; i.e. the Veda containing such praises. If it is prose (and then it must be muttered inaudibly), it is called Yajus (yaj, sacrifice, hence, literally, the means by which sacrifice is effected); therefore Yajur-Veda signifies the Veda containing such yajus. And if it is metrical, and intended for chanting, it is called Saman [equal]; hence Saman Veda means the Veda containing such Samans. The author of the Mantra, or as the Hindus would say, the inspired 'Seer,' who received it from the Deity, is termed its Rishi; and the object with which it is concerned is its devata--a word which generally means a 'deity,' but the meaning of which, in its reference to mantras, must not

[p. 6]

always be taken literally, as there are hymns in which not gods nor deified beings, but, for instance, a sacrificial post, weapons, etc., invoked, are considered as the devata. [**] It should, however, be noticed that the deifying of a "sacrificial post" or a "weapon" is in perfect harmony with the general pantheistic notions which prevailed amongst the people then as now: so that there is nothing unnatural according to their religious ideas in speaking even of inanimate objects as deities. There is little doubt that the Brahmanas are more recent than the Sanhitas.

The Vedas have not come down to the present time without considerable dispute as to the text. As might have been expected, seeing that this teaching was given orally, discrepancies arose. One account mentions no less than twenty-one versions (Sakhas) of the Rig-Veda; another gives five of the Rig-Veda, forty-two of the Yajur-Veda, mentions twelve out of a thousand of the Saman-Veda, and twelve of the Atharva-Veda. And as each school believed that it possessed the true Veda, it anathematized those who taught and followed any other. The Rig-Veda Sanhita that has survived to the present age is that of one school only, the Sakala; the Yajur-Veda is that of three schools; the Sama-Veda is that of perhaps two, and the Atharva-Veda of one only.

"The history of the Yajur-Veda differs in so far from that of the other Vedas, as it is marked by a dissension between its own schools far more important than the differences which separated the school of each [of the] other Vedas. It is known by the distinction between a Yajur-Veda called the Black--and another called the White--Yajur-Veda. Tradition, especially that of the

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] Puranas, records a legend to account for it. Vaisampayana, it says, a disciple of Vyasa, who had received from him the Yajur-Veda, having committed an offence, desired his disciples to assist him in the performance of some expiatory act. One of these, however, Yajnavalkya, proposed that he should alone perform the whole rite; upon which Vaisampayana, enraged at what he considered to be the arrogance of his disciple, uttered a curse on him, the effect of which was that Yajnavalkya disgorged all the Yajus texts he had learned from Vaisampayana. The other disciples, having been meanwhile transformed into partridges (tittiri), picked up these tainted texts and retained them. Hence these texts are called Taittiriyas. But Yajnavalkya, desirous of obtaining Yajus texts, devoutly prayed to the Sun, and had granted to him his wish--'to possess such texts as were not known to his teacher.'" [**] And thus there are two Yajur-Vedas to this day; the Black being considered the older of the two.

As to the date of the Vedas, there is nothing certainly known. There is no doubt that they are amongst the oldest literary productions of the world. But when they were composed is largely a matter of conjecture. Colebrooke seems to show from a Vaidick Calendar that they must have been written before the 14th century B.C. Some assign to them a more recent, some a more ancient, date. Dr. Haug considers the Vedic age to have extended from B.C. 2000 to B.C. 1200, though he thinks some of the oldest hymns may have been composed . B.C. 2400. Max-Muller gives us the probable date of the Mantra, or hymn portion of the Vedas, from B.C. 1200 to B.C. 800, and the Brahmanas from B.C. 800 to B.C. 600, and the rest from B.C. 600 to B.C. 200.

[p. 8]

There is nothing whatever in the books themselves to indicate when they were written. All references in them are to their being given orally, learned, and then again taught audibly to others. Probably for centuries after the art of writing was known in India it was not employed for preserving the sacred books, as in the Mahabharata those who write the Vedas are threatened with the punishment of hell.( 9 )

Footnotes

^5:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 9.

^6:* Goldstucker, art. "Vedas," Chambers's Cyclopaedia.

^7:* Art. "Vedas," Chambers's Cyclopaedia.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

THE VEDIC GODS GENERALLY.

YASKA (probably the oldest commentator on the Vedas) gives the following classification of the Vedic gods. "There are three deities, according to the expounders of the Vedas: Agni, whose place is on the earth; Vayu or Indra, whose place is in the air; and Surya, whose place is in the sky. These deities receive severally many appellations in consequence of their greatness, or of the diversity of their functions." [**] In the Rig-Veda itself this number is increased to thirty-three, of whom eleven are said to be in heaven, eleven on earth, and eleven in mid-air. "Agni, the wise god, lends an ear to his worshippers. God with the ruddy steeds, who lovest praise, bring hither those three-and-thirty." This is the number usually mentioned, though it is by no means easy to decide which are the thirty-three intended, as the lists found in various places vary considerably; whilst in another verse it is said that "three hundred, three thousand, thirty-and-nine gods have worshipped Agni."

These deities, though spoken of as immortal, are not said to be self-existent beings; in fact their parentage in most cases is given; but the various accounts of their origin do not agree with each other. Agni and Savitri

[p. 10]

are said to have conferred immortality upon the other gods; whilst it is also taught that Indra obtained this boon by sacrifice. An interesting account is given in the Satapatha Brahmana [**] of the means by which the gods obtained immortality, and superiority over the asuras or demons. All of them, gods and demons alike, were mortal, all were equal in power, all were sons of Prajapati the Creator. Wishing to be immortal, the gods offered sacrifices liberally, and practised the severest penance; but not until Prajapati had taught them to offer a particular sacrifice could they become immortal. They followed his advice, and succeeded. Wishing to become greater than the asuras, they became truthful. Previously they and the asuras spoke truthfully or falsely, as they thought fit; but gradually, whilst they ceased from lying, the asuras became increasingly false; the result was that the gods after protracted struggles gained the victory. Originally the gods were all equal in power, all alike good. But three of them desired to be superior to the rest, viz. Agni, Indra, and Surya. They continued to offer sacrifices for this purpose until it was accomplished. Originally there was not in Agni the same flame as there is now. He desired, "May this flame be in me," and, offering a sacrifice for the attainment of this blessing, obtained it. In a similar manner Indra increased his energy, and Surya his brightness. These three deities form what is commonly described as the Vedic Triad. In later times other three took their place, though an attempt is made to show them to be the same.

It will be noticed that each of the gods is in turn regarded by the worshipper as superior to all the others. In the Vedas this superlative language is constantly

[p. 11]

employed, and identical epithets are indiscriminately given to various deities. Professor Max-Muller says, "When these individual gods are invoked, they are not conceived as limited by the power of others, as superior or inferior in rank. Each god, to the mind of the supplicants, is as good as all the gods. He is felt at the time as a real divinity, as supreme and absolute, in spite of the limitations which, to our mind, a plurality of gods must entail on every single god. All the rest disappear for a moment from the vision of the poet, and he only who is to fulfil their desires, stands in full light before the eyes of the worshippers. . . . It would be easy to find, in the numerous hymns of the Rig-Veda, passages in which almost every single god is represented as supreme and absolute."

The will of these gods is sovereign; no mortal can thwart their designs. They exercise authority over all creatures. In their hands is the life of mortals. They know the thoughts and intentions of men, and whilst they reward the worshipper, they punish those who neglect them.

When the Puranic deities are described it will be noticed that the representations of the deities of that age are far more clearly defined than those of earlier times. Though the Vedic gods are spoken of as possessing human forms and acting as human beings, there is considerable vagueness in the outline. But as time goes on this is lost. The objects of worship are no longer indistinct and shadowy, but are so minutely described that their portraits could be easily painted. And as their physical features are no longer left to the imagination, so their mental and moral characters are fully delineated. They are of like passions with those who depict them, only possessing vastly greater powers.

[p. 12]

Professor Williams says [**] "that the deified forces addressed in the Vedic hymns were probably not represented by images or idols in the Vedic period, though doubtless the early worshippers clothed their gods with human forms in their own imaginations." Professor Muller [*+] speaks more positively: "The religion of the Veda knows of no idols. The worship of idols in India is a secondary formation, a later degradation of the more primitive worship of ideal gods." The guarded language of Professor Williams seems to be better suited to the facts, as far as they are known, for Dr. Bollensen [*++] speaks quite as strongly on the other side. He writes, "From the common appellation of the gods as divo naras, 'men of the sky,' or simply naras, 'men,' and from the epithet nripesas, 'having the form of men,' we may conclude that the Indians did not merely in imagination assign human forms to their gods, but also represented them in a sensible manner. Thus a painted image of Rudra (Rig-Veda, ii. 33, 9) is described with strong limbs, many-formed, awful, brown, he is painted with shining colours.'" "Still clearer appears the reference to representations in the form of an image. 'I now pray to the gods of these (Maruts).' Here it seems that the Maruts are distinguished from their gods, i.e. their images.'" "There is in the oldest language a word, 'Sandris,' which properly denotes 'an image of the gods.'

We shall now proceed to the consideration in detail of the deities as described in the Vedas.

Footnotes

^9:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 8.

^10:* Muir O. S. T., iv. 54-62.

^12:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 15.

^12:+ "Chips from a German Workshop," i. 38.

^12:++ Muir, C. S. T., v. 453

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

DYAUS AND PRITHIVI.

THE general opinion respecting Dyaus (Heaven) and Prithivi (Earth) is that they are amongst the most ancient of the Aryan deities, hence they are spoken of in the hymns of the Rig-Veda as the parents of the other gods. [**] They are described as "great, wise and energetic;" those who "promote righteousness, and lavish gifts upon their worshippers." And in another place they are said to have "made all creatures," and through their favour "immortality is conferred upon their offspring." Not only are they the creators, but also the preservers of all creatures; and are beneficent and kind to all. In other passages Heaven and Earth are said to have been formed by Indra, who is declared to transcend them in greatness, whom they follow "as a chariot follows the horse." They are described as bowing down before him; as trembling with fear on account of him; and as being subject to his control. Again, they are said to have been formed by Soma; and in other verses other deities are said to have made them. This confusion of thought respecting the origin of the gods led very naturally to the question being asked in other hymns, "How have they been produced? Who of the sages knows?"

[p. 14]

There seems to be considerable ground for the opinion that Indra gradually superseded Dyaus in the worship of the Hindus soon after their settlement in India. As the praises of the newer god were sung, the older one was forgotten; and in the present day, whilst Dyaus is almost unknown, Indra is still worshipped, though in the Vedas both are called the god of heaven. The following statement of Professor Benfey [**] gives a natural explanation of this. "It may be distinctly shown that Indra took the place of the god of heaven, who, in the Vedas, is invoked in the vocative as Dyauspitar (Heaven-father). This is proved by the fact that this phrase is exactly reflected in the Latin Jupiter, and the Greek Zeu-pater as a religious formula, fixed, like many others, before the separation of the languages. When the Sanskrit people left the common country, where for them, as well as for other kindred tribes, the brilliant radiance of heaven appeared to them, in consequence of the climate there prevailing, as the holiest thing, and settled in sultry India, where the glow of the heavens is destructive, and only its rain operates beneficially, this aspect of the Deity must have appeared the most adorable, so that the epithet Pluvius, in a certain sense, absorbed all the other characteristics of Dyauspitar. This found its expression in the name In-dra, in which we unhesitatingly recognize a word (which arose in some local dialect, and was then diffused with the spread of the worship) standing for Sind-ra, which again was derived from Syand, 'to drop.' The conceptions which had been attached to Dyaus were then transferred to Indra." The opinion that Indra has taken the place of Dyaus is now pretty generally believed, and the above explanation appears natural.

Of Prithivi we hear again. The "Vishnu Purana" [*+]

[p. 15]

gives the following account of her birth. There was a king named Vena, notorious for his wickedness and general neglect of religious duties. When the Rishis of that age could bear with his impiety no longer, they slew him. But now a worse evil happened; anarchy prevailed, and they felt that a bad king was better than none at all. Upon this they rubbed the thigh of Vena, when there came forth a black dwarf, resembling a negro in appearance. Immediately after his birth the dwarf asked, "What am I to do?" He is told, "Nisida" (sit down), and from this his descendants are called "Nisidis" unto this day. The corpse was now pure, as all sin had left it in the body of this black dwarf. The right arm was then rubbed, and from it there came a beautiful shining prince, who was named Prithu, and reigned in the place of his father. Now during his reign there was a terrible famine. As the Earth would not yield her fruits, great distress prevailed. Prithu said, "I will slay the Earth, and make her yield her fruits." Terrified at this threat, the Earth assumed the form of a cow, and was pursued by Prithu, even to the heaven of Brahma. At length, weary with the chase, she turned to him and said, "Know you not the sin of killing a female, that you thus try to slay me?" The king replied that "when the happiness of many is secured by the destruction of one malignant being, the slaughter of that being is an act of virtue." "But," said the Earth, "if, in order to promote the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to me, whence, best of monarchs, will thy people derive their support?" Overcome at length, the Earth declared that all vegetable products were old, and destroyed by her, but that at the king's command she would restore them "as developed from her milk." "Do you, therefore, for the benefit of mankind, give me that

[p. 16]

calf by which I may be able to secrete milk. Make also all places level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of all vegetation, to flow everywhere around."

Prithu acted upon this advice. "Before his time there was no cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no highways for merchants; all these things (or all civilization) originated in the reign of Prithu. Where the ground was made level, the king induced his subjects to take up their abode. . . . He therefore having made Swayambhuva Manu the calf, milked the Earth, and received the milk into his own hand, for the benefit of mankind. Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and vegetables upon which people now subsist. By granting life to the Earth, Prithu was as her father, and she thence derived the patronymic appellation Prithivi."

In a note Professor Wilson adds, [**] the commentator observes that "by the 'calf,' or Manu in that character, is typified the promoter of the multiplication of progeny;" Manu, as will be seen in the account of the Creation, being regarded by some of the Puranas as the first parent of mankind. This legend, with considerable variation, is found in most of the Puranas; Soma, Indra, Yama, and others taking the place of Manu as the calf, whilst Prithu's place as the milker is taken by the Rishis, Mitra, etc. In the same note Professor Wilson says, "These are all probably subsequent modifications of the original simple allegory, which typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every class of beings the milk that they desired, or the object of their wishes."

It should be noticed that, later in the "Vishnu Purana," Prithivi is said to have sprung from the foot of Vishnu.

Footnotes

^13:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 23.

^14:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 18.

^14:+ Page 103.

^16:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 104.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

ADITI, AND THE ADITYAS.

ADITI has the honour of being almost the only goddess mentioned by name in the Rig-Veda, as the mother of any of the gods; but it is by no means an easy task to delineate her character, as the most contradictory statements are made concerning her. She was invoked as the bestower of blessings on children and cattle; and she is declared to be the mother of Varuna, and other deities, sometimes eight, sometimes twelve in number. She is supposed to be the impersonation of "infinity, especially the boundlessness of heaven, in opposition to the finiteness of earth." Another supposition is that Aditi is the personification of "universal, all-embracing Nature or Being." This latter idea seems to be the more correct from the following verses, [**] where a man about to be immolated says, "Of which god, now, of which of the immortals, shall we invoke the amiable name, who shall give us back to the great Aditi, that I may behold my father and my mother?" Whatever may have been intended by the poets to be expressed by this name, or whatever may have been the precise power personified by Aditi, she is connected with the forgiveness of sin. Thus, "May Aditi make us sinless." "Aditi be gracious, if we have committed any sin against you." "Whatever

[p. 18]

offence we have, oh Agni, through our folly committed against you, oh most youthful god, make us free from sins against Aditi." "Whatever sin we have committed, may Aditi sever us from it." [**] Probably the term Aditi "the boundless," was originally employed as an epithet of Dyauspitar, the Heaven-father. When the heavens came to be divided into a number of parts, over each of which a ruler was nominated, a mother was wanted for them, and the name Aditi was given to her.

In the account of the Creation given in the Rig-Veda, Aditi is said to have sprung from Daksha, and in the same verse Daksha is called her son. There is also a reference to her other sons. In the "Vishnu Purana" we have no less than three somewhat differing accounts of the origin of Daksha the father of Aditi. In the first account, his name appears amongst the mind-born sons of Brahma; and in this connection he is said to have had twenty-four daughters; but Aditi is not mentioned as one of them. In the second account of Daksha, Aditi is said to have been one of his sixty daughters, and was given in marriage to Kasypa, by whom she had twelve sons--the Adityas. Elsewhere we read that Vishnu, when incarnate as the Dwarf, was a result of this marriage. In the third account of Daksha, Aditi is again mentioned as his daughter, and the mother of Vivasat (the Sun). The sons of Aditi are termed

  

THE ADITYAS.

This name signifies simply the descendants of Aditi. In one passage in the Rig-Veda [*+] the names of six are given: Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Varuna, Daksha and Amsa. In another passage they are said to be seven in

[p. 19]

number, though their names are not given. In a third, eight is the number mentioned; but "of the eight sons of Aditi, who were born from her body, she approached the gods with seven, and cast out Marttanda (the eighth)." [**] As the names of these sons given in different parts of the Vedas do not agree with each other, it is difficult to know who were originally regarded as Adityas. Judging from the number of hymns addressed to them, some of these deities occupied a conspicuous position in the Vedic Pantheon; whilst others are named once or twice only, and then in connection with their more illustrious brethren. In the "Satapatha Brahmana," and the Puranas, the number of the Adityas is increased to twelve. In addition to the six whose names are given above, the following are also described in some hymns of the Rig-Veda as the offspring of Aditi: Surya, "as an Aditya identified with Agni, is said to have been placed by the gods in the sky;" [*+] Savitri, and Indra too, are in one passage addressed as an Aditya along with Varuna and the Moon. In the Taittiriya Texts, the following are described as Adityas:--Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, Amsu, Bhaga, Indra, and Vivasvat (Surya).

Professor Roth says [*++] of these deities, "In the highest heaven dwell and reign those gods who bear in common the name of Adityas. We must, however, if we would discover their earliest character, abandon the conceptions which in a later age, and even in that of the heroic poems, were entertained regarding these deities. According to this conception they were twelve Sun-gods, there being evident reference to the twelve months. But for the most ancient period we must hold fast to the primary significance of their names. They are

[p. 20]

inviolable, imperishable, eternal things. Aditi, Eternity, or The Eternal, is the element which sustains them, or is sustained by them. The eternal and inviolable element in which the Adityas dwell, and which forms their essence, is the celestial light. The Adityas, the gods of this light, do not therefore by any means coincide with any of the forms in which light is manifested in the universe. They are neither the sun, nor moon, nor stars, nor dawn, but the eternal sustainers of this luminous life, which exists, as it were, behind these phenomena."

As noticed above, the text of the Rig-Veda says, [**] "Of the eight sons who were born from the body of Aditi, she approached the gods with seven, but cast away the eighth." In the commentary, the following explanation of this circumstance is given. "The eighth son was deformed. His brothers, seeing his deformity, improved his appearance. He was afterwards known as Vivasvat (the Sun). From the superfluous flesh cut off his body an elephant was formed, hence the proverb, Let no man catch an elephant, for the elephant partakes of the nature of man.'"

According to a passage quoted in Chapter II. [*+] from the "Satapatha Brahmana," Agni, Indra, and Surya, obtained superiority over the other gods by means of sacrifice. By whatever means this position was obtained, it is certain that they were the most popular deities of the Vedic Age. Agni stands in a class by himself; but with Indra and Surya there are other deities closely associated, and possessing very similar attributes. Nearly the whole of the more conspicuous Vedic deities may be classified as follows:--(1) Agni, the god of Fire; (2) Sun Gods, or gods of Light; and (3) Storm Gods, or those associated with Indra.

Footnotes

^17:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 45.

^18:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 46, 47.

^18:+ Ibid. v. 54.

^19:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 49.

^19:+ Ibid. v. 54.

^19:++ Ibid. v. 56.

^20:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 49.

^20:+ Page 10.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

AGNI.

AGNI, the god of Fire, is one of the most prominent of the deities of the Vedas. With the single exception of Indra, more hymns are addressed to him than to any other deity. Professor Williams gives the following spirited description of Agni:--

"Bright, seven-rayed god, how manifold thy shapes
  Revealed to us thy votaries: now we see thee
  With body all of gold; and radiant hair
  Flaming from three terrific heads, and mouths,
  Whose burning jaws and teeth devour all things.
  Now with a thousand glowing horns, and now
  Flashing thy lustre from a thousand eyes,
  Thou'rt borne towards us in a golden chariot,
  Impelled by winds, and drawn by ruddy steeds,
  Marking thy car's destructive course with blackness."

Various accounts are given of the origin of Agni. He is said to be a son of Dyaus and Prithivi; he is called the son of Brahma, and is then named Abhimani; and he is reckoned amongst the children of Kasyapa and Aditi, and hence one of the Adityas. In the later writings he is described as a son of Angiras, king of the Pitris (fathers of mankind), and the authorship of several hymns is ascribed to him. In pictures he is represented as a red man, having three legs and seven

[p. 22]

arms, dark eyes, eyebrows and hair. He rides on a ram, wears a poita (Brahmanical thread), and a garland of fruit. Flames of fire issue from his mouth, and seven streams of glory radiate from his body. The following passage, for every sentence of which Dr. Muir [**] quotes a text from the Vedas, gives a good idea of the character and functions of this deity in the Vedic Age.

Click to enlarge
AGNI.

Agni is an immortal who has taken up his abode with mortals as their guest. He is the domestic priest who rises before the dawn, and who concentrates in his own person and exercises in a higher sense all the various sacrificial offices which the Indian ritual assigns to a

[p. 23]

number of different human functionaries. He is a sage, the divinest among the sages, immediately acquainted with all the forms of worship; the wise director, the successful accomplisher, and the protector of all ceremonies, who enables men to serve the gods in a correct and acceptable manner in cases where they could not do this with their own unaided skill. He is a swift messenger, moving between heaven and earth, commissioned both by gods and men to maintain their mutual communication, to announce to the immortals the hymns, and to convey to them the oblations of their worshippers; or to bring them (the immortals) down from the sky to the place of sacrifice. He accompanies the gods when they visit the earth, and shares in the reverence and adoration which they receive. He makes the oblations fragrant; without him the gods experience no satisfaction.

Agni is the lord, protector, king of men. He is the lord of the house, dwelling in every abode. He is a guest in every home; he despises no man, he lives in every family. He is therefore considered as a mediator between gods and men, and as a witness of their actions; hence to the present day he is worshipped, and his blessing sought on all solemn occasions, as at marriage, death, etc. In these old hymns Agni is spoken of as dwelling in the two pieces of wood which being rubbed together produce fire; and it is noticed as a remarkable thing that a living being should spring out of dry (dead) wood. Strange to say, says the poet, the child, as soon as born, begins with unnatural voracity to consume his parents. Wonderful is his growth, seeing that he is born of a mother who cannot nourish him; but he is nourished by the oblations of clarified butter which are poured into his mouth, and which he consumes.

[p. 24]

The highest divine functions are ascribed to Agni. Although in some places he is spoken of as the son of heaven and earth, in others he is said to have stretched them out; to have formed them, and all that flies or walks, or stands or moves. He formed the sun, and adorned the heavens with stars. Men tremble at his mighty deeds, and his ordinances cannot be resisted. Earth, heaven, and all things obey his commands. All the gods fear, and do homage to him. He knows the secrets of mortals, and hears the invocations that are addressed to him.

The worshippers of Agni prosper, are wealthy, and live long. He watches with a thousand eyes over the man who brings him food, and nourishes him with oblations. No mortal enemy can by any wondrous power gain the mastery over him who sacrifices to this god. He also confers and is the guardian of immortality. In a funeral hymn, Agni is asked to warm with his heat the unborn (immortal) part of the deceased, and in his auspicious form to carry it to the world of the righteous. He carries men across calamities, as a ship over the sea. He commands all the riches in earth and heaven; hence he is invoked for riches, food, deliverance, and in fact all temporal good. He is also prayed to as the forgiver of sins that may have been committed through folly. All gods are said to be comprehended in him; he surrounds them as the circumference of a wheel does the spokes.

The main characteristics of this deity are taught in the following verses by Dr. Muir:-- [**]

"Great Agni, though thine essence be but one,
    Thy forms are three; as fire thou blazest here,
    As lightning flashest in the atmosphere,
  In heaven thou flamest as the golden sun

[p. 25]

"It was in heaven thou hadst thy primal birth;
    By art of sages skilled in sacred lore
    Thou wast drawn down to human hearths of yore,
  And thou abid'st a denizen of earth.

"Sprung from the mystic pair, [**] by priestly hands
    In wedlock joined, forth flashes Agni bright;
    But, oh! ye heavens and earth, I tell you right,
  The unnatural child devours the parent brands.

"But Agni is a god; we must not deem
    That he can err, or dare to comprehend
    His acts, which far our reason's grasp transcend;
  He best can judge what deeds a god beseem.

"And yet this orphaned god himself survives:
    Although his hapless mother soon expires,
    And cannot nurse the babe as babe requires,
  Great Agni, wondrous infant, grows and thrives.

"Smoke-bannered Agni, god with crackling voice
    And flaming hair, when thou dost pierce the gloom
    At early dawn, and all the world illume,
  Both heaven and earth and gods and men rejoice.

"In every home thou art a welcome guest,
    The household tutelary lord, a son,
    A father, mother, brother, all in one,
  A friend by whom thy faithful friends are blest.

"A swift-winged messenger, thou tallest down
    from heaven to crowd our hearths the race divine,
    To taste our food, our hymns to hear, benign,
  And all our fondest aspirations crown.

"Thou, Agni, art our priest: divinely wise,
    In holy science versed, thy skill detects
    The faults that mar our rites, mistakes corrects,
  And all our acts completes and sanctifies.

[p. 26]

"Thou art the cord that stretches to the skies,
    The bridge that scans the chasm, profound and vast,
    Dividing earth from heaven, o'er which at last
  The good shall safely pass to Paradise.

"But when, great god, thine awful anger glows,
    And thou revealest thy destroying force,
    All creatures flee before thy furious course,
  As hosts are chased by overpowering foes.

"Thou levellest all thou touchest; forests vast
    Thou shear'st, like beards which barber's razor shaves.
    Thy wind-driven flames roar loud as ocean's waves,
  And all thy track is black when thou hast past.

"But thou, great Agni, dost not always wear
    That direful form; thou rather lov'st to shine
    Upon our hearths, with milder flame benign,
  And cheer the homes where thou art nursed with care.

"Yes! thou delightest all those men to bless
    Who toil unwearied to supply the food
    Which thou so lovest--logs of well-dried wood,
  And heaps of butter bring, thy favourite mess.

"Though I no cow possess, and have no store
    Of butter, nor an axe fresh wood to cleave,
    Thou, gracious god, wilt my poor gift receive:
  These few dry sticks I bring--I have no more.

"Preserve us, lord; thy faithful servants save
    From all the ills by which our bliss is marred;
    Tower like an iron wall our homes to guard,
  And all the boons bestow our hearts can crave.

"And when away our brief existence wanes,
    When we at length our earthly homes must quit,
    And our freed souls to worlds unknown shall flit,
  Do thou deal gently with our cold remains.

"And then, thy gracious form assuming, guide
    Our unborn part across the dark abyss
    Aloft to realms serene of light and bliss,
  Where righteous men among the gods abide."

[p. 27]

"In a celebrated hymn of the Rig-Veda, attributed to Visishtha, Indra and the other gods are called upon to destroy the Kravyads (the flesh-eaters), or Rakshas, enemies of the gods. Agni himself is a Kravyad, and as such takes an entirely different character. He is then represented under a form as hideous as the beings he, in common with the other gods, is called upon to devour. He sharpens his two iron tusks, puts his enemies into his mouth, and devours them. He heats the edges of his shafts, and sends them into the hearts of the Rakshasas." [**]

"In the Mahabharata, Agni is represented as having exhausted his vigour by devouring too many oblations, and desiring to consume the whole Khandava forest, as a means of recruiting his strength. He was [at first] prevented from doing this by Indra; but having obtained the assistance of Krishna and Arjuna, he baffled Indra, and accomplished his object." [*+]

According to the Ramayana, in order to assist Vishnu when incarnate as Rama, Agni became the father of Nila by a monkey mother; and according to the "Vishnu Purana," he married Swaha, by whom he had three sons--Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suchi.

Agni has many names; those more generally known are the following:--

Vahni, "He who receives the hom, or burnt sacrifice."

Vitihotra, "He who sanctifies the worshipper."

Dhananjaya, "He who conquers (destroys) riches."

Jivalana, "He who burns."

Dhumketu, "He whose sign is smoke."

[p. 28]

Chhagaratha, "He who rides on a ram."

Saptajihva, "He who has seven tongues."

Brihaspati and Brahmanaspati are generally regarded as being identical with Agni. Nearly the same epithets are applied to them, with this additional one--of presiding over prayer. In some few hymns they are addressed as separate deities. In "The Religions of India," M. Barth, regarding these as names of one and the same deity, thus describes him:--

"Like Agni and Soma, he is born on the altar, and .thence rises upwards to the gods; like them, he was begotten in space by Heaven and Earth; like Indra, he wages war with enemies on the earth and demons in the air; like all three, he resides in the highest heaven, he generates the gods, and ordains the order of the universe. Tinder his fiery breath the world was melted and assumed the form it has, like metal in the mould of the founder. At first sight it would seem that all this is a late product of abstract reflection; and it is probable, in fact, from the very form of the name, that in so far as it is a distinct person, the type is comparatively modern; in any case, it is peculiarly Indian; but by its elements it is connected with the most ancient conceptions. As there is a power in the flame and the libation, so there is in the formula; and this formula the priest is not the only person to pronounce, any more than he is the only one to kindle Agni or shed Soma. There is a prayer in the thunder, and the gods, who know all things, are not ignorant of the power in the sacramental expressions. They possess all-potent spells that have remained hidden from men and are as ancient as the first rites, and it was by these the world was formed at first, and by which it is preserved up to the present. It is this omnipresent power of prayer which Brahmanaspati personifies, and

[p. 29]

it is not without reason that he is sometimes confounded with Agni, and especially with Indra. In reality each separate god and the priest himself become Brahmanaspati at the moment when they pronounce the mantras which gave them power over the things of heaven and of earth."

Click to enlarge

Footnotes

^22:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 119 ff.

^24:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 221.

^25:* The two pieces of wood from which fire is produced.

^27:* Dowson, "Dictionary of Hindu Mythology.''

^27:+ Ibid. s.v.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

SUN OR LIGHT DEITIES.

  

1. SURYA.

SURYA and Savitri are two names by which the Sun is commonly addressed in the Vedic hymns. Sometimes one name is used exclusively, sometimes they are used interchangeably, and sometimes they are used as though they represented quite distinct objects. It is supposed that Savitri refers to the sun when invisible; whilst Surya refers to him when he is visible to the worshippers. This at any rate gives some reason for the two names being employed, though it may not explain the case satisfactorily in every instance.

Although the hymns in which Surya is addressed are not very numerous, his worship was most common in the olden time, and has continued to the present hour. It is to him that the Gayatri, the most sacred text of the Vedas, is addressed at his rising by every devout Brahman. Simple in its phraseology, this short verse is supposed to exert magical powers. It is as follows:--

"Let us meditate on that excellent glory of the divine Vivifier;
  May he enlighten (or stimulate) our understandings." [**]

As a specimen of the language employed in some of the later writings in reference to this verse, read the

[p. 31]

following few lines from the Skanda Purana":--"Nothing in the Vedas is superior to the Gayatri. No invocation is equal to the Gayatri, as no city is equal to Kasi (Benares). The Gayatri is the mother of the Vedas, and of Brahmans. By repeating it a man is saved. By the power of the Gayatri the Kshetriya

Click to enlarge
SURYA

[paragraph continues] (Warrior caste) Vishvamitra became a Brahmarsi (Brahman saint), and even obtained such power as to be able to create a new world. What is there indeed that cannot be effected by the Gayatri? For the Gayatri is Vishnu, Brahma, and Siva, and the three Vedas." [**]

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] With promise of such blessings, it is not to be wondered at that the worship of Surya should continue.

The following translation [**] of hymns from the Rig-Veda gives a fair specimen of the language used in addresses to Surya

"Behold the rays of Dawn, like heralds, lead on high
  The Sun, that men may see the great all-knowing god.
  The stars slink off like thieves, in company with Night,
  Before the all-seeing eye, whose beams reveal his presence,
  Gleaming like brilliant flames, to nation after nation.
  With speed, beyond the ken of mortals, thou, O Sun!
  Dost ever travel on, conspicuous to all.
  Thou dost create the light, and with it dost illume
  The universe entire; thou risest in the sight
  Of all the race of men, and all the host of heaven.
  Light-giving Varuna! thy piercing glance dost scan,
  In quick succession, all this stirring, active world,
  And penetrateth too the broad ethereal space,
  Measuring our days and nights, and spying out all creatures.
  Surya with flaming locks, clear-sighted god of day,
  Thy seven ruddy mares bear on thy rushing car.
  With these, thy self-yoked steeds, seven daughters of thy chariot
  Onward thou dost advance. To thy refulgent orb
  Beyond this lower gloom, and upward to the light
  Would we ascend, O Sun! thou god among the gods."

Surya, as we have already noticed, is regarded as a son of Aditi; at other times he is said to be a son of Dyaus. Ushas (the Dawn) is called his wife, though in another passage he is said to be produced by the Dawn. Some texts state that he is the Vivifier of all things; whilst others state that he was formed and made to shine by Indra, Soma, Agni, and others.

From the character ascribed to Savitri in some hymns, it seems more natural to regard him as the sun shining in his strength, and Surya as the sun when rising and

[p. 33]

setting. Savitri is golden-eyed, [**] golden-handed, golden- tongued. He rides in a chariot drawn by radiant, white-footed steeds. He illuminates the earth; his golden arms stretched out to bless, infusing energy into all creatures, reach to the utmost ends of heaven. He is leader and king in heaven; the other gods follow him, and he it is who gives them immortality. He is prayed to for deliverance from sin, and to conduct the souls of the departed to the abode of the righteous.

In the Puranic Age, Surya sustains quite a different character. He is there called the son of Kasyapa and Aditi. He is described as a dark-red man, with three eyes and four arms: in two hands are water-lilies; with one he is bestowing a blessing, with the other he is encouraging his worshippers. He sits upon a red lotus, and rays of glory issue from his body. In addition to the daily worship that is offered him by Brahmans in the repetition of the Gayatri, he is worshipped once a year by the Hindus of all castes, generally on the first Sunday in the month of Magh; and in seasons of sickness it is no uncommon thing for the low-caste Hindus to employ a Brahman to repeat verses in his honour, in the hope that thus propitiated he will effect their recovery.

In the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] we find the following account of Surya. He married Sangna, the daughter of Visvakarma; who, after bearing him three children, was so oppressed with his brightness and glory that she was compelled to leave him. Before her departure, she arranged with Chhaya (Shadow) to take her place. For years Surya did not notice the change of wife. But one day, in a fit of anger, Chhaya pronounced a curse upon Yama (Death), a child of Sangna's, which

[p. 34]

immediately took effect. As Surya knew that no mother's curse could destroy her offspring, he looked into the matter and discovered that his wife had forsaken him, leaving this other woman in her place. Through the power of meditation, Surya found Sangna in a forest in the form of a mare; and, in order that he might again enjoy her society, he changed himself into a horse. After a few years, growing tired of this arrangement, they returned in proper form to their own dwelling. But in order that his presence might be bearable to his wife, his father-in-law Visvakarma, who was the architect of the gods, ground the Sun upon a stone, and by this means reduced his brightness by one-eighth. The part thus ground from Surya was not wasted. From it were produced the wonder-working discus of Vishnu, the trident of Siva, the lance of Kartikeya (the god of war), and the weapons of Kuvera (the god of riches).

The "Bhavishya Purana" says, "Because there is none greater than he (i.e. Surya), nor has been, nor will be, therefore he is celebrated as the supreme soul in all the Vedas." Again, "That which is the sun, and thus called light or effulgent power, is adorable, and must be worshipped by those who dread successive births and deaths, and who eagerly desire beatitude." In the "Brahma Purana" [**] is a passage in which the sun is alluded to under twelve names, with epithets peculiar to each, as though they were twelve distinct sun-deities:--

"The first form of the sun is Indra, the lord of the gods, and the destroyer of their enemies; the second, Dhata, the creator of all things; the third, Parjanya, residing in the clouds, and showering rain on the earth from its beams; the fourth, Twasta, who dwells in all corporeal forms; the fifth, Pushan, who gives nutriment

[p. 35]

to all beings; the sixth, Aryama, who brings sacrifices to a successful conclusion; the seventh derives his name from almsgiving, and delights mendicants with gifts; the eighth is called Vivasvan, who ensures digestion; the ninth, Vishnu, who constantly manifests himself for the destruction of the enemies of the gods; the tenth, Ansuman, who preserves the vital organs in a sound state; the eleventh, Varuna, who, residing in the waters, vivifies the universe; and the twelfth, Mitra, who dwells in the orb of the moon, for the benefit of the three worlds. These are the twelve splendours of the sun, the supreme spirit, who through them pervades the universe, and irradiates the inmost souls of men."

Surya is said to have Aruna (Rosy), the Dawn, the son of Kasyapa and Kadru, as his charioteer.

According to the Ramayana, Sugriva, the king of the monkey host which assisted Rama in his great expedition to regain possession of Vita his wife, was a son of Surya by a monkey. According to the Mahabharata, the hero Karna also was the son of this deity; and when he was in the form of a horse, he became father of the Asvins, and communicated the white Yajur-Veda.

When speaking of the planets, Surya will be noticed again under the name of Ravi.

Among the many names and epithets by which this deity is known, the following are the most common:--

Dinakara, "The Maker of the day."

Bhaskara, "The Creator of light."

Vivaswat, "The Radiant one."

Mihira, "He who waters the earth;" i.e. he draws up the moisture from the seas so that the clouds are formed.

Grahapati, "The Lord of the stars."

Karmasakshi, "The Witness of (men's) works."

Martanda, "A descendant of Mritanda."

[p. 36]

  

2. PUSHAN.

Pushan is the name of a sun-god to whom some hymns are exclusively addressed, and whose praise at other times is sung in connection with that of Indra and other gods. In these hymns his character is not very clearly defined. He is said [**] to behold the entire universe; is addressed as the guide of travellers, and the protector of cattle. He is called upon to protect his servants in battle, and to defend them as of old. He is invoked in the marriage ceremonial, and asked to take the bride's hand, to lead her away, and to bless her in her conjugal relations. He is said also to conduct the spirits of the departed from this world to the next. In one text he is called "the nourisher," as Vishnu in later times was called "the preserver." By far the greater number of prayers addressed to him seem to regard him as the guide and protector of travellers, both along the ordinary journeys of life and in the longer journey to the other world; and as he is supposed to be constantly travelling about, he is said to know the road by which they have to go.

The following is a specimen of the hymns addressed to Pushan in the Rig-Veda:--"Conduct us, Pushan, over our road; remove distress, son of the deliverer; go on before us. Smite away from before us the destructive and injurious wolf which seeks after us. Drive away from our path the waylayer, the thief and the robber. Tread with thy foot upon the burning weapons of that deceitful wretch, whoever he be. O wonder-working and wise Pushan, we desire that help of thine wherewith thou didst favour our fathers! O god, who bringest all blessings, and art distinguished by the golden spear,

[p. 37]

make wealth easy of acquisition! Convey us past our opponents; make our paths easy to travel; gain strength for us here. Lead us over a country of rich pastures; let no new trouble (beset our) path. Bestow, satiate, grant, stimulate us; fill our belly. We do not reproach Pushan, we praise him with hymns; and we seek riches from the wonder-working god." [**] "May we, O Pushan! meet with a wise man who will straightway direct us and say, 'It is this.' May Pushan follow our kine; may he protect our horses; may he give us food. . . . Come hither, glowing god, the deliverer, may we meet." [*+]

In the Puranas Pushan occupies a far less exalted position. It seems almost like a burlesque to see him, who in the Vedas is reverently approached as the giver of good to his worshippers, described as being obliged to feed upon gruel, because his teeth have been knocked out of his mouth. The earliest form of the legend describing this event is found in the Taittiriya Sanhita. Rudra, the name by which Siva was then known, not being invited to a great sacrifice that Daksha, his father-in-law, was celebrating, in his anger shot an arrow which pierced the sacrificial victim. Pushan ate his share, and in doing so broke his teeth. In describing Daksha, [*++] an account of this sacrifice will be given. In the "Vishnu Purana" Pushan appears as one of the Adityas.

  

3. MITRA AND VARUNA.

These deities are most frequently named together in the hymns; Varuna is often addressed alone, but Mitra very seldom. The idea of the older commentators was that Mitra represented and ruled over the day, whilst Varuna was ruler of the night. "Varuna is sometimes

[p. 38]

visible to the gaze of his worshippers; he dwells in a house having a thousand doors, so that he is ever accessible to men. He is said to have good eyesight, for he knows what goes on in the hearts of men. He

Click to enlarge
VARUNA.

is king of gods and men; is mighty and terrible; none can resist his authority. He is sovereign ruler of the universe." "It is he who makes the sun to shine in heaven; the winds that blow are but his breath; he has hollowed out the channels of the rivers which flow at

[p. 39]

his command, and he has made the depths of the sea. His ordinances are fixed and unassailable; through their operation the moon walks in brightness, and the stars, which appear in the nightly sky, vanish in daylight. The birds flying in the air, the rivers in their sleepless flow, cannot attain a knowledge of his power and wrath. But he knows the flight of the birds in the sky, the course of the far travelling wind, the paths of ships on the ocean, and beholds all the secret things that have been or shall be done. He witnesses men's truth and falsehood." [**]

The following is a metrical version of one of the hymns of the Rig-Veda as given by Dr. Muir:-- [*+]

"The mighty lord on high our deeds as if at hand espies;
  The gods know all men do, though men would fain their deeds disguise:
  Whoe'er stands, whoe'er moves, or steals from place to place,
  Or hides him in his secret cell, the gods his movements trace.
  Wherever two together plot, and deem they are alone,
  King Varuna is there, a third, and all their schemes are known.
  This earth is his, to him belong those vast and boundless skies,
  Both seas within him rest, and yet in that small pool he lies.
  Whoever far beyond the sky should think his way to win,
  He could not there elude the grasp of Varuna the king.
  His spies descending from the skies glide all this world around;
  Their thousand eyes, all scanning, sweep to earth's remotest bound.
  Whate'er exists in heaven and earth, whate'er beyond the skies,
  Before the eye of Varuna the king unfolded lies.
  The secret winkings all he counts of every mortal's eyes;
  He wields this universal frame as gamester throws his dice.
  Those knotted nooses which thou flingst, O god! the bad to snare,
  All liars let them overtake, but all the truthful spare."

Professor Roth says of this hymn, "There is no hymn in the whole Vedic literature which expresses the divine omniscience in such forcible terms;" and it would not

[p. 40]

be easy to find in any literature many passages to surpass it in this respect.

In other hymns we learn that the affairs of men are under his control; he is asked to prolong life, to punish transgressors; and a hope is held out that the righteous shall see him reigning in the spirit world in conjunction with Yama, the ruler of that region. Varuna in fact has attributes and functions ascribed to him in the Vedas, of a higher moral character than any other of the gods, and therefore men call upon him for pardon and purity. "Release us," they say, "from the sins of our fathers, and from those which we have committed in our own persons." And again, "Be gracious, O mighty god, be gracious. I have sinned through want of power; be gracious."

In the hymns addressed to Mitra and Varuna together, almost the same terms are employed as when Varuna is addressed alone. Both are spoken of as righteous, and as the promoters of religion. They are said to avenge sin and falsehood.

In the Vedic literature, though Varuna is not regarded chiefly as the god of the ocean, as he is in the later writings, but rather, as the above hymns show, as one of the gods of light, yet there are passages which describe him as being connected with the waters of the atmosphere and on the earth, which afford some foundation for the later conceptions of his kingdom. Thus, for instance, we read, "May the waters which are celestial, and those which flow; those for which channels are dug, and those which are self-produced; those which are proceeding to the ocean, and are bright and purifying, preserve me! May those (waters) in the midst of which King Varuna goes . . . preserve me!" [**] In other places

[p. 41]

he is said to dwell in the waters as Soma does in the woods. Professor Roth gives a probable explanation as to the manner in which Varuna, who was originally the god of the heavens, came to be regarded as the god of the ocean. He says: [**] "When, on the one hand, the conception of Varuna as the all-embracing heaven had been established, and, on the other hand, the observation of the rivers flowing towards the ends of the earth and to the sea had led to the conjecture that there existed an ocean enclosing the earth in its bosom, then the way was thoroughly prepared for connecting Varuna with the ocean."

In the Brahmana of the Rig-Veda [*+] is an interesting legend showing that probably human sacrifices were at one time offered to Varuna. A certain king named Harischandra had no son. Being greatly distressed on this account, as a son was necessary to the due performance of his funeral ceremonies, the king, acting upon the advice of Narada the sage, went to Varuna, saying--

"Let but a son be born, O king! to me,
  And I will sacrifice that son to thee."

[paragraph continues] Varuna heard the prayer, and granted a son. When the boy grew up, his father told him of the vow he had made; but unfortunately the son was not willing to be sacrificed, and left his home. Varuna, not being at all pleased at the non-fulfilment of the king's vow, afflicted him with dropsy. For six years the boy wandered in the forest; at length, happening to meet with a poor Brahman with his three sons, the prince proposed to purchase one of them to offer to the god as a substitute for himself. The father could not give up his firstborn,

[p. 42]

the mother would not yield her youngest; the middle one was therefore taken. The prince then returned home, taking with him the Brahman's son. At first the king was delighted at the prospect of being able to keep his promise to the deity; but a difficulty now arose as to who would slay the boy. After some time, on the consideration of a large present being made to him, the boy's father consented to do this The boy was bound, the father ready to strike, when the boy asked permission to recite some texts in praise of the gods. Of course this was granted; and as a result the deities thus lauded were so pleased with the boy's piety, that they interceded with Varuna to spare him. Varuna granted their request, suffered the boy to live, and Harischandra recovered from his sickness.

In the Puranas, as mentioned before, Varuna is described as the god of the ocean. After a great conflict between the powers of heaven and earth, when order was again restored, the "Vishnu Purana" records the position assigned to the various deities. In that account Varuna is said to rule over the waters. In the same Purana we read that an old Brahman named Richika was most anxious to obtain in marriage a daughter of King Gadhi, who was really an incarnation of Indra. Gadhi refused to give his daughter to Richika except on one condition: that he would present him with a thousand fleet horses, each having one white ear. Horses of this colour were special favourites of Indra; hence those sacrificed to him usually had this peculiarity. The Brahman is said to have propitiated Varuna, the god of the ocean, who gave him the thousand steeds, by means of which he was able to obtain the princess in marriage.

Varuna is represented in pictures as a white man

[p. 43]

sitting upon a fabulous marine monster called a makara. This animal has the head and front legs of an antelope, and the body and tail of a fish. In his right hand he carries a noose. He is occasionally worshipped in seasons of drought, and by fishermen as they cast their nets, but nowadays no images of him are made.

The following legend is found in the "Padma Purana." [**] On one occasion Ravana, the demon king of the island, was travelling home to Ceylon, carrying with him a stone linga, the emblem of Siva. He was desirous of setting up the worship of the great god there, and was taking the image from the Himalayas for this purpose. But the gods, fearing he would grow too powerful through his devotion to Siva, wished to frustrate his purpose. Siva, in giving the stone, made Ravana promise that wherever it first touched the ground, after leaving Siva's abode, it should remain. Aware of this fact, the gods tried to induce him to let it rest on the earth before he reached Ceylon. At last it was agreed that Varuna should enter Ravana's body, so that, in attempting to free himself, he might be compelled to loose his hold of the linga. Accordingly Varuna entered Ravana, and caused him such intense pain that he could scarcely bear it. When thus suffering, Indra, in the form of an old Brahman, passed by, and offered to take hold of the stone. No sooner did Ravana entrust it to hire, than he let it fall to the ground. It is said that it sank into the earth, the top of it being visible at Vaidyanath in Birbhum to this day. The river Khursu is said to have taken its rise from Varuna when he left Ravana at this place; and, as a result, the Hindus will not drink of its waters.

Although Varuna is described in the Vedas as a

[p. 44]

holy being, according to the teaching of the Puranas his heaven is a place of sensual delights. He sits with his queen Varuni on a throne of diamonds; Samudra (the sea), Ganga (the Ganges), and the gods and goddesses of different rivers, lakes, springs, etc., form his court. And stories are told of conduct the very opposite to what would be expected in one who once was addressed in such language as is found in the Vedic hymns. He is said, conjointly with Surya, to have been enamoured of Urvasi, a nymph of Indra's heaven, by whom they had a son named Agastya, one of the most eminent of Hindu ascetics.

Varuna is also known as Prachetas, the wise; Jalapati, the lord of water; Yadapati, the lord of aquatic animals; Amburaja, the king of waters; Pasi, the noose-carrier.

  

4. THE ASVINS.

From the hymns addressed to these deities it is not at all easy to know who or what they are. Yaska, the commentator of the Vedas, deriving the name from a root meaning "to fill," says they are called Asvins because they pervade everything, the one with light, the other with moisture. Another commentator says they are called Asvins because they ride upon horses. Some say that by them heaven and earth are indicated; others that they are day and night; others, again, that they are the sun and moon. Professor Roth says, "They hold a perfectly distinct position in the entire body of the Vedic deities of light. They are the earliest bringers of light in the morning sky, who hasten on in the clouds before the Dawn and prepare the way for her." [**] In some hymns they are said to be sons of the sun (vide 

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Surya); in others are called children of the sky; in others, again, as the offspring of the ocean. They seem to represent the transition from night to morning--night when it is passing into day.

The Asvins are said to have had Surya, the daughter of Savitri, as their common wife. She chose them, as her life was lonely. Her father had intended her to marry Soma; but, as the gods were anxious to obtain so beautiful a bride, it was agreed that they should run a race, Surya being the prize of the winner. The Asvins were successful, and she ascended their chariot. [**] In another passage Soma is said to have been her husband; the Asvins being friends of the bridegroom.

The Asvins are regarded as the physicians of the gods, and are declared to be able to restore to health the blind, the sick, the lame, and the emaciated amongst mortals. They are the special guardians of the slow and backward; the devoted friends of elderly women who are unmarried. They are said to preside over love and marriage, and are implored to bring together hearts that love. [*+]

A number of legends are found illustrating the power of the Asvins in healing the sick and assisting those in trouble, from which we learn that they could restore youth and vigour to the aged and decrepit; they rescued a man from drowning, and carried him in safety to his home. The leg of Vispala, that was cut off in battle, they replaced by an iron one. At the request of a wolf, they restored sight to a man who had been blinded by his father as a punishment for slaughtering a hundred and one sheep, which he gave to the wolf to eat. They restored sight and power to walk to one who was blind and lame. As a result of these and other similar legends,

[p. 46]

the Asvins are invoked for "offspring, wealth, victory, destruction of enemies, the preservation of the worshippers themselves, of their houses and cattle."

The following legend of the cure they effected on Chyavana, from the "Satapatha Brahmana," [**] will illustrate the peculiar features of the work of the Asvins:--Chyavana, having assumed a shrivelled form, was abandoned by his family. Saryata, a Rishi, with his tribe settled in the neighbourhood; when his sons seeing the body of Chyavana, not knowing it was a human being, pelted it with stones. Chyavana naturally resented this, and sowed dissension amongst the family of Saryata. Anxious to learn the cause of this, Saryata inquired of the shepherds near if they could account for it; they told him that his sons had insulted Chyavana. Saryata thereupon took his daughter Sukanya in his chariot, and, apologizing for what had been done, gave his daughter to the decrepit man as a peace-offering.

Now the Asvins were in the habit of wandering about the world performing cures, and, seeing Sukanya, they were delighted with her beauty and wished to seduce her. They said, "What is that shrivelled body by which you are lying? Leave him and follow us." She replied that whilst he lived she would not leave the man to whom her father had given her. When they came to her a second time, acting on her husband's suggestion she said, "You speak contemptuously of my husband, whilst you are incomplete and imperfect yourselves." And on condition that they would make her husband young again, she consented to tell them in what respect they were imperfect and incomplete. Upon this they told her to take her husband to a certain pond.

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] After bathing there, he came forth with his youth renewed. Sukanya told the Asvins that they were imperfect because they had not been invited to join the other gods in a great sacrifice that was to be celebrated at Kurukshetra. The Asvins proceeded to the place of sacrifice, and, asking to be allowed to join in it, were told that they could not do so, because they had wandered familiarly among men, performing cures. In reply to this, the Asvins declared that the gods were making a headless sacrifice. The gods inquiring how this could be, the Asvins replied, "Invite us to join you, and we will tell you." To this the gods consented.

In another account of this legend, it is said that, as the Asvins were physicians, they were consequently unclean; hence no Brahman must be a physician, or he is thereby unfitted for the work of a priest; but as the work of the Asvins was necessary, they were purified, and then allowed to join the gods. They then restored the head of the sacrifice.

Professor Goldstucker [**] says, "The myth of the Asvins is one of that class of myths in which two distinct elements, the cosmical and the human or historical, have gradually become blended into one. . . . The historical or human element in it, I believe, is represented by those legends which refer to the wonderful cures effected by the Asvins, and to their performances of a kindred sort; the cosmical element is that relating to their luminous nature. The link which connects both seems to be the mysteriousness of the nature and effects of light and of the healing art at a remote antiquity. It would appear that these Asvins, like the Ribhus, were originally renowned mortals, who, in the course of time, were translated into the companionship of the gods."

[p. 48]

  

5. USHAS.

This goddess, representative of the Dawn, is a favourite object of celebration with the Vedic poets, and "the hymns addressed to her are among the most beautiful--if not the most beautiful--in the entire collection." [**] She is described as the daughter of the Sky, has Night for her sister, and is related to Varuna. She is at times spoken of as the wife of the Sun; at other times Agni is given as her lover; the Asvins are her friends. Indra is at one time regarded as her creator; at another time he assumes a hostile position, and even crushed her chariot with his thunderbolt.

Ushas is said [*+] to travel in a shining chariot drawn by ruddy horses or cows. Like a beautiful maiden dressed by her mother, a dancing girl covered with jewels, a gaily-attired wife appearing before her husband, or a beautiful girl corning from her bath, she, smiling and confiding in the irresistible power of her attractions, unfolds her bosom to the gaze of the beholders. She dispels the darkness, disclosing the treasures it concealed. She illuminates the world, revealing its most distant extremities. She is the life and health of all things, causing the birds to fly from their nests, and, like a young housewife, awaking all her creatures, sends them forth to the pursuit of their varied occupations. She does good service to the gods, by causing the worshippers to awake, and the sacrificial fires to be lighted. She is asked to arouse only the devout and liberal, while she allows the niggardly to sleep on. She is young, being born every day; and yet she is old, being immortal, wearing out the lives of successive generations, which

[p. 49]

disappear one after another, whilst she continues undying. The souls of the departed are said to go to her and to the sun.

In the following lines [**] will be found the main teaching of the Vedas respecting this goddess:--

"Hail, ruddy Ushas, golden goddess, borne
  Upon thy shining car, thou comest like
  A lovely maiden by her mother decked,
  Disclosing coyly all thy hidden grace
  To our admiring eyes; or like a wife
  Unveiling to her lord, with conscious pride,
  Beauties which, as he gazes lovingly,
  Seem fresher, fairer, each succeeding morn.
  Through years and years thou hast lived on, and yet
  Thou'rt ever young. Thou art the breath and life
  Of all that breathes and lives, awaking day by day
  Myriads of prostrate sleepers, as from death,
  Causing the birds to flutter in their nests,
  And rousing men to ply with busy feet
  Their daily duties and appointed tasks,
  Toiling for wealth, or pleasure, or renown."

In the following verses by Dr. Muir [*+] we have a still more vivid picture of this goddess as represented in the Vedic hymns:--

"Hail, Ushas, daughter of the sky,
    Who, borne upon thy shining car
    By ruddy steeds from realms afar,
  And ever lightening drawest nigh--

"Thou sweetly smilest, goddess fair,
    Disclosing all thy youthful grace,
    Thy bosom bright, thy radiant face,
  And lustre of thy golden hair--

"She shines a fond and winning bride,
    Who robes her form in brilliant guise,
    And to her lord's admiring eyes
  Displays her charms with conscious pride--

[p. 50]

"Or virgin by her mother decked,
    Who, glorying in her beauty, shows
    In every glance her power she knows
  All eyes to fix, all hearts subject--

"Or actress, who by skill in song
    And dance, and graceful gestures light,
    And many-coloured vestures bright,
  Enchants the eager, gazing throng--

"Or maid, who, wont her limbs to lave
    In some cold stream among the woods,
    Where never vulgar eye intrudes,
  Emerges fairer from the wave--

"But closely by the amorous Sun
    Pursued and vanquished in the race,
    Thou soon art locked in his embrace,
  And with him blendest into one.

"Fair Ushas, though through years untold
    Thou hast lived on, yet thou art born
    Anew on each succeeding morn,
  And so thou art both young and old.

"As in thy fated ceaseless course
    Thou risest on us day by day,
    Thou wearest all our lives away
  With silent, ever-wasting force.

"Their round our generations run:
    The old depart, and in their place
    Springs ever up a younger race,
  Whilst thou, immortal, lookest on.

"All those who watched for thee of old
    Are gone, and now 'tis we who gaze
    On thy approach; in future days
  Shall other men thy beams behold.

"But 'tis not thoughts so grave and sad
    Alone that thou dost with thee bring,
    A shadow o'er our hearts to fling
  Thy beams returning make us glad.

[p. 51]

"Thy sister, sad and sombre Night,
    With stars that in the blue expanse,
    Like sleepless eyes, mysterious glance,
  At thy approach is quenched in light;

"And earthly forms, till now concealed
    Behind her veil of dusky hue,
    Once more come sharply out to view,
  By thine illuming glow revealed.

"Thou art the life of all that lives,
    The breath of all that breathes; the sight
    Of thee makes every countenance bright,
  New strength to every spirit gives.

"When thou dost pierce the murky gloom,
    Birds flutter forth front every brake,
    All sleepers as from death awake,
  And men their myriad tasks resume.

"Some, prosperous, wake in listless mood,
    And others every nerve to strain
    The goal of power or wealth to gain,
  Or what they deem the highest good.

"But some to holier thoughts aspire,
    In hymns the race celestial praise,
    And light, on human Hearths to blaze,
  The heaven-born sacrificial fire.

"And not alone do bard and priest
    Awake--the gods thy power confess
    By starting into consciousness
  When thy first rays suffuse the east;

"And hasting downward from the sky,
    They visit men devout and good,
    Consume their consecrated food,
  And all their longings satisfy.

"Bright goddess, let thy genial rays
    To us bring store of envied wealth
    In kine and steeds, and sons, with health,
  And joy of heart, and length of days."

[p. 52]

In the later writings we find merely the name of Ushas. The people lost much of their poetic fire; hence the more human and practical deities caused the more poetical ones to pass into oblivion. Some of the figures in the preceding extracts are most beautifully drawn. The changing colours of the dawn are compared to the many-coloured robes of the dancing girl; the golden tipped clouds that appear ere the sun shines in his strength, are like the jewels of a bride decked for her husband; whilst the quiet modesty of the dawn herself is like a shy maiden, conscious indeed of her beauty, entering society under the protection of her mother. And from the last four lines of the metrical sketch it will be noticed that she was believed to be able to bestow upon her worshippers cattle, horses, sons, health, joy, and length of days.

Footnotes

^30:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 20.

^31:* Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 345.

^32:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 19.

^33:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 162 ff.

^33:+ Book iii. chap. ii.

^34:* Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 349.

^36:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 171 ff.

^37:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 175.

^37:+ Ibid. v. 177.

^37:++ Part iii. chap. i.

^39:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 58 ff.

^39:+ Ibid. v. 64.

^40:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 73.

^41:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 75.

^41:+ "Indian Wisdom," p. 29.

^43:* "Ward on the Hindoos," i. 57.

^44:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 235.

^45:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 236.

^45:+ Ibid. v. 234.

^46:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 250.

^47:* Chambers's "Cyclopaedia."

^48:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 181.

^48:+ Ibid. v. 194.

^49:* Indian Wisdom," p, 20.

^49:+ Muir, O. S. T., v. 196.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

THE STORM DEITIES.

  

1. INDRA.

As was noticed previously, Indra, together with Agni and Surya, by means of sacrifice obtained supremacy

Click to enlarge
INDRA.

over the other gods; and if we may judge from the number of hymns addressed to him in the Vedas, he was the most popular deity,

[p. 54]

He is the god of the firmament, in whose hands are the thunder and the lightning; at whose command the refreshing showers fall to render the earth fruitful. When it is borne in mind that in India for months together the earth, exposed to the scorching rays of the sun, becomes so hard that it is impossible for the fields to be ploughed or the seed to be sown, it will not be regarded as wonderful that the god who is supposed to bestow rain should frequently be appealed to, and that the most laudatory songs should be addressed to him. To the poetic, minds of the Vedic age, the clouds that the winds brought from the ocean were enemies who held their treasures in their fast embrace until, conquered by Indra, they were forced to pour them upon the parched soil. And very naturally when, in answer to the cry of his worshippers, the genial rains descended, and the earth was thereby changed from a desert to a garden, songs of thanksgiving and praise, couched in the strongest terms, were addressed to him. The attributes ascribed to him refer principally to his physical superiority; and the blessings sought from him are chiefly of a physical rather than a spiritual character.

Indra is not regarded as an uncreated deity. In some hymns he is spoken of as the twin-brother of Agni, and therefore the son of Heaven and Earth; whilst, in other hymns, heaven and earth are said to have been formed by him. Although his parents are often referred to, it is but seldom that they are named; and when they are named, they are not always the same. He is the king of the gods; and in post-Vedic ages his reign is said to extend for a hundred divine years only; at the end of which time he may be superseded as king by some other of the gods, or even by

[p. 55]

man, if any be able to perform the severe penance necessary to obtain this exalted position.

In pictures, Indra is often represented as a man with four arms and hands; with two he holds a lance, in the third is a thunderbolt, whilst the fourth is empty. He is also sometimes painted with two arms only, and, having eyes all over his body, is then called Sahasraksha (the thousand-eye). He is generally depicted as riding upon the wonderful elephant Airavata, who was produced at the churning of the ocean, [**] carrying a thunderbolt in his right hand and a bow in his left. In the Vedic Age his worship was far more popular than it is at present.

The position and attributes of Indra as taught by the Vedas will be seen from the following description, abbreviated from that given by Dr. Muir:-- [*+]

"Come, Indra, come, thou much invoked,
  Our potent hymn thy steeds has yoked.
  Friend Indra, from the sky descend,
  Thy course propitious hither bend.
  But, Indra, though of us thou thinkest,
  And our libations gladly drinkest,
  We, mortal men, can only share
  A humble portion of thy care.
  We know how many potent ties
  Enchain thee in thy paradise.
  Thou hast at home a lovely wife,
  The charm and solace of thy life.
  Thou hast a ceaseless round of joys
  Which all thy circling hours employs;
  Joys such as gods immortal know,
  Unguessed by mortals here below."

Being invoked by mortals, Indra is born. The Sky and the Earth trembled at his appearance, and the Sky exclaimed

[p. 56]

"Thy father was a stalwart wight;
  Of most consummate skill was he,
  The god whose genius fashioned thee."

Immediately after his birth the god gave unmistakable evidence of his divinity. Grasping his weapons, he cried--

"Where, mother, dwell those warriors fierce,
  Whose haughty hearts these bolts must pierce?"

Borne in his chariot, hastened by the prayers of his people, the god appears.

"Yet not one form alone he bears,
  But various shapes of glory wears,
  His aspect changing at his will,
  Transmuted, yet resplendent still.
  In warlike semblance see him stand,
  Red lightnings wielding in his hand."

Ready prepared for him is a feast, the principal attraction of which is the Soma juice. [**] Indra was particularly fond of this intoxicating drink. It is a most strange circumstance that, whilst the Hindus of the present day are prohibited from the use of intoxicants, Indra is described as being addicted to the Soma; whilst the drink itself is deified and worshipped as a god. Indra on his arrival is invited to quaff the invigorating cup:--

"Thou, Indra, oft of old hast quaffed
  With keen delight our Soma draught.
  All gods the luscious Soma love,
  But thou all other gods above.
  Thy mother knew how well this juice
  Was fitted for her infant's use.
  Into a cup she crushed the sap,
  Which thou didst sip upon her lap.

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues]  Yes, Indra, on thy natal morn,
  The very hour that thou wast born, 
  Thou didst those jovial tastes display,
  Which still survive in strength to-day."

Indra, after singing the praises of the Soma juice, drinks the proffered cup, and as a result is most graciously disposed towards the worshippers, ready to give whatever they ask. When thus strengthened by the draught, he goes forth to meet the great enemy he came to conquer. This enemy is Vritra (Drought). And in the conflict and victory are seen the peculiar blessings to the earth and man that Indra is able to grant. Vritra is thus described:--

                 "He whose magic powers
  From earth withhold the genial showers;
  Of mortal men the foe malign,
  And rival of the race divine;
  Whose demon hosts from age to age
  With Indra war unceasing wage;
  Who, times unnumbered crushed and slain,
  Is ever newly born again,
  And evermore renews the strife
  In which again he forfeits life."

The battle is described at length; in which we have a graphic description of the commencement of the rainy season, with the severe thunderstorms which usually accompany this change of the seasons. At last the conflict is over:

"And soon the knell of Vritra's doom
  Was sounded by the clang and boom
    Of Indra's iron shower.
  Pierced, cloven, crushed, with horrid yell,
  The dying demon headlong fell
    Down from his cloud-built tower."

As a result of the victory of the god, the rains descend and the earth is made fruitful:

[p. 58]

"Now bound by Sushna's spell no more,
  The clouds discharge their liquid store;
  And long by torrid sunbeams baked
  The plains by copious showers are slaked;
  The rivers swell, and seawards sweep
  Their turbid torrents broad and deep.
  The peasant views with deep delight,
  And thankful heart, the auspicious sight.
  His leafless fields, so sere and sad,
  Will soon with waving crops be glad;
  And mother Earth, now brown and bare,
  A robe of brilliant green will wear."

After this blessing has been received, the sun shines, and earth again is bright; the gods come with their congratulations to their king, and men present their thanksgivings.

Such was Indra in ancient times; and though worshipped still, he occupies a very inferior position in the present age. As mentioned previously, according to the teaching of the later books, his rule over the gods continues for a hundred divine [**] years; at the expiration of which time he may be superseded by another god, or even by a man. The Puranas teach that, in each age of the world, a different being has enjoyed this position. In the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] is the following story of a man raising himself to the throne of Indra.

There was a war between the gods and demons; both parties inquired of Brahma, which would be victorious. Brahma replied, "The side for which Raji (an earthly king) shall take up arms." The demons called first upon Raji to invoke his aid. He promised to assist them provided they would make him their Indra or king. They could not promise this, as Prahlada their Indra's term of office was not yet expired. The same

[p. 59]

condition being proposed to the gods, they consented, and Raji became their Indra. He fought for them, and conquered. Upon this, Indra bowed down before him, and, placing Raji's foot upon his head, said, "Thou hast preserved me from a great danger. I acknowledge thee as my father: thou art king over all; I am thy son." Raji, however, was contented to remain as king on earth, and appointed Indra to continue as his representative on the throne of heaven. On the death of Raji, his sons wished to assume the position their father had declined. This Indra opposed, but was at length compelled to yield. After a time, being sad because deprived of his share in the sacrifices of mortals, Indra met with his spiritual preceptor Vrihaspati, and asked him for a morsel of the sacrificial butter. The teacher replied that, had Indra applied to him earlier, he would not have been reduced to such straits; but "as it is," he said, "I will regain your sovereignty in a few days." Upon this he commenced a sacrifice, with the special purpose of obtaining power for Indra. The result was, that Raji's sons were led into sin, they became enemies of the Brahmans, despised the Vedas, and neglected their religious duties. When thus weakened, India fell upon and slew them.

The most effectual way by which a mortal could obtain the position of Indra was by the sacrifice of a hundred horses; and, as will be seen in the account of Ganga, [**] the Indra of that time did not object to play the part of a thief, so as to prevent the completion of the rites by which he was to be deprived of his sovereignty. The most common and generally successful method by which these ambitious mortals were frustrated in their design was by his sending down

[p. 60]

some celestial nymphs; called Apsaras, who, by their beauty, distracted the thoughts of the devotees, and rendered them unfit to offer this great sacrifice.

In the "Vishnu Purana," [**] there is a legend of a conflict between Indra and Krishna, in which Indra is overcome. Krishna, accompanied by his wife Satyabhama, visits Indra in his heaven. On her arrival, this lady was most anxious to obtain possession of the wonderful Parijata tree, which was produced at the churning of the ocean, and planted in Indra's heavenly garden. This tree was beautiful in form, was adorned with lovely and sweet-scented flowers, and bore most luscious fruit. The flowers had this virtue, that, worn in the hair by a wife, they enabled her to retain the love of her husband; whilst those who ate the fruit of this tree could remember what had occurred in their previous states of existence. At the request of his wife, Krishna took the tree, and placed it upon Garuda, his wonderful bird-vehicle. Immediately there was an uproar in heaven; but though Indra and his attendant deities tried to prevent the removal of his property, they could not do so. Krishna caught a thunderbolt of Indra in his hand, and, returning home unhurt, planted the tree in his garden.

The Ramayana has a story showing that Indra was believed to have been guilty of the grossest immorality--the seduction of the wife of his spiritual teacher. He is said to have visited the house of Gautama, in the form of a sage, hoping to be mistaken by the preceptor's wife for her husband, who was absent from home. But although Ahalya knew him to be Indra, she yielded to his wishes. As Indra was about to leave, Gautama returned, and, knowing what had happened, cursed the

[p. 61]

god and his wife. Indra in consequence lost his man- hood; and Ahalya was doomed to live for many years

invisible in a forest, until Rama should come to restore her to her former state. [**] Another account of this curse of Gautama was that Indra was compelled to carry a thousand disgraceful marks upon his body, that all might know the sin of which he had been guilty. At the god's earnest request these were changed from their original form into eyes; which by the ignorant came to be regarded as an indication of his omniscience.

The heaven of Indra must not be passed over without notice, as it is there the good on earth hope to go for a time, as a reward of their holy lives. To go to Swarga, as his heaven is named, is not the highest happiness a man can obtain, because he cannot remain there for ever. When his allotted years of happiness are over, he must return to earth and live other lives, until he becomes perfect and fit to enjoy the highest felicity--absorption into the Divine Being. The "Vishnu Purana" [*+] says: "Not in hell alone do the souls of the deceased undergo pain: there is no cessation even in heaven; for its temporary inhabitant is ever tormented with the prospect of descending again to earth. Again must he be born upon earth, and again must he die. Whatever is produced that is most acceptable to man becomes a seed whence springs the tree of sorrow."

The home of Indra is situated on Mount Meru. [*++] It

[p. 62]

has beautiful houses for its inhabitants; and the splendour of its capital is unequalled in the universe. Its gardens are stocked with trees that afford a grateful shade, yield the most luscious fruits, and are adorned with beautiful and fragrant flowers. Most beautiful nymphs (Apsaras) charm the happy inhabitants, whilst choristers and musicians, unrivalled in the universe, discourse sweet music. The city was built by Visvakarma. It is eight hundred miles in circumference, and forty miles high. Its pillars are diamonds; its palaces, thrones, and furniture, pure gold. [**]

In Bengal this deity is worshipped one day in each year. His image is made of mud, prettily painted; on the day after it has been worshipped it is cast into the river. At the commencement of a sacrifice, too, he is invoked, in the hope that he will convey the prayers and offerings to the deity specially worshipped at that time, or that he will conduct the deity into the presence of the worshippers. In seasons of drought special offerings are made to him in some parts of the country, that through his power the clouds may pour their streams upon the parched country.

The more common of Indra's other names are the following:--Sakra, the able one; Divapati, the lord of the gods; Bajri, he who wields the thunderbolt; Vritraha, the destroyer of Vritra; Meghavahana, he who rides on the clouds; Mahendra, the great Indra; Swargapati, the lord of heaven.

[p. 63]

  

2. INDRANI.

Of Indrani, the wife of Indra (called also Sachi), very little is said. In the Rig-Veda [**] we read, "Among all females Indrani is the most fortunate; for her husband shall not at any future time die of old age." This may be explained by the fact that Indrani is wife to all who successively attain to the throne of Indra. There is always some one ruling in heaven; the office is perpetual, and as she is the wife of the reigning king, whoever he may be, her husband can never die of old age. Though kings may come and go, she continues queen. She is said to have a son, Chitragupta by name, who was born of a cow; for, owing to a curse pronounced by Uma, none of the goddesses could become a mother. She practised austerities, in order that she might not be childless; and by means of this expedient her desire was gratified. At the birth of this child, the reputed mother suffered all the pains attendant on childbirth, and was able to nurse him.

  

3. PARJANYA.

There are a few hymns addressed to this deity in the Rig-Veda; but from the character and functions ascribed to him it is difficult to see wherein he differs from Indra. Professor Roth [*+] says, "Taking a review of the whole, we find that Parjanya is a god who presides over the lightning, the thunder, the rain, and the procreation of plants and living creatures. But it is by no means clear whether he is originally a god of the rain, or a god of the thunder." In another essay he says Parjanya is "the god of the thunderstorms and rain, the generator

[p. 64]

and nourisher of plants and living creatures. Seeing that the hymns addressed to this deity are so very similar to those sung to Indra, may not Parjanya (whose name signifies one acting for another) be merely another name for Indra? " In these hymns are the following passages, [**] all of which are in perfect harmony with those in honour of Indra:--"Laud Parjanya, worship him with reverence--the procreative and stimulating fructifier. . . . He splits the trees; he destroys the Rakshasas (cloud demons who withhold the rains). The whole creation is afraid of his mighty stroke; even the innocent man flees before the vigorous god, when Parjanya thundering smites the evildoers. Like a charioteer urging forward his horses with a whip, the god brings into view his showery scouts. From afar, the lions' roarings arise when Parjanya charges the clouds with rain. The winds blow, the lightnings fall, the plants shoot up, the heaven fructifies; food is produced for all created things when Parjanya thundering replenishes the earth with moisture. Raise aloft thy vast water-vessel, and pour down showers; let the discharged rivulets roll on forward, moisten the heaven and earth with fatness; let there be well-filled drinking-places for the cows."

In all this there is not a single idea that was not expressed in the hymns to Indra noticed previously. In the Puranas Indra is generally styled the king of the gods; whilst Parjanya is spoken of as the ruler over, and as dwelling in, the clouds.

  

4. VAYU.

Another of the storm-gods is Vayu, the god of the winds. He is often associated with Indra, and is

[p. 65]

regarded, equally with him, as representing or ruling over the atmosphere. He won the race for the first draught of the Soma juice; and, at Indra's request, allowed him to have a quarter of it. He does not occupy a very prominent position in the Vedic hymns. In one passage [**] we read, "The two worlds (heaven and earth) generated him for wealth." This may be intended to teach his parentage; and Dr. Muir says that he is not aware of any other passage where his

Click to enlarge
VAYU.

parentage is declared. He is said to be the son-in-law of Tvastri (Visvakarma); but here a difficulty occurs: only one daughter of Tvastri is mentioned, and, as was noticed in the account of Surya, he was said to be husband of this girl.

Vayu is described [*+] as being most handsome in form; one who moves noisily in a shining car, drawn by a pair of red or purple horses. At times the number of horses is increased to ninety-nine, a hundred, or even a thousand.

[p. 66]

[paragraph continues] This latter number would probably be employed during a cyclone. He is seldom mentioned in connection with the Maruts (storm-deities), though in one place he is said to have begotten them by the rivers of heaven.

Another name for Vayu in the Vedas is Vata. The praise of Vata is sung in the following hymn:-- [**] (I celebrate) the glory of Vata's chariot; his noise comes rending and resounding. Touching the sky, he moves onward, making all things ruddy; and he comes propelling the dust of the earth. The gusts of air rush after him, and congregate upon him as women in an assembly. Sitting along with them on the same car, the god [Indra] who is king of this universe is borne along. Hasting forward . . . he never rests. Friend of the waters, first-born, holy, in what place was he born His sounds have been heard, but his form is not (seen)."

In a later age, when it was thought necessary to connect the heroes, whose exploits are then sung, with the gods, Vayu, or Pavan as he is then called, is said to have had a son, Hanuman, by a monkey mother. Hanuman played a most conspicuous part in Rama's expedition in search of Sita. In the Mahabharata, Bhima (the Strong), one of the bravest of the warriors whose history is given there, is also said to be a son of Vayu. Kunti, the mother of Bhima, had a boon granted as a reward of her devotion, that she could obtain a child by any of the gods she might wish. As her husband, owing to a curse, could not become a father, she employed this charm, and so Vayu became the father of Bhima.

Vayu or Pavan (the Purifier) is represented in pictures as a white man riding on a deer, and carries a white flag in his hand. In the Puranas he is said to be son of Aditi.

Other names by which this deity is known are the

[p. 67]

following:--Anila, breath; Marut, air that is necessary to life; Sparsana, he who touches; Gandhavaha, he who carries odours.

  

5. THE MARUTS.

In one passage in the Rig-Veda these gods are said to be one hundred and eighty in number; in another text, twenty-seven is the number given; whilst in the Puranas they are said to be forty-nine. In the Vedas they are called the sons of Rudra. They are the companions of Indra; at times they worship him, and thus acknowledge his superiority; at others they seem to assert their inherent power, and remind Indra of the aid they have given him. They are addressed in the following strain:-- [**] "Spears rest upon your shoulders, ye Maruts; ye have anklets on your feet, golden ornaments on your breasts, lustre in your ears, fiery lightnings in your hands, and golden helmets placed on your heads." They are armed with golden weapons and lightnings; they dart thunderbolts, gleam like flames of fire, and are borne along with the fury of boisterous winds. They split Vritra (Drought) to pieces, are clothed with rain, create darkness during the day, water the earth, and avert heat. They cause the earth and the mountains to quake. They were accustomed to the use of the soma; and were appealed to, to bring healing remedies, which are described as abiding in the (river) Sindhu, the seas, and the hills.

In the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] we find quite a different account of the Maruts. They are there said to be the sons of Kasyapa and Diti. Diti having lost her children, propitiated her husband, who promised her a boon. She

[p. 68]

asked that she might have a son of irresistible prowess and valour, who should destroy Indra. The Muni promised to grant this request on one condition. "You shall bear a son," he said, "who shall slay Indra, if with thoughts wholly pious, and person entirely pure, you carefully carry the babe in your womb for a hundred years." Diti accepted the boon with this condition. Indra hearing of this, tried his best to distract her mind, and so prevent the birth of this wonderful child. When ninety-nine years had passed, an opportunity offered itself. Diti retired to rest one night without having washed her feet, and thus violated a rule of ceremonial purity. Indra, ever-watchful, availing himself of this neglect, was able to accomplish his purpose. With his thunderbolt he cut the embryo into seven parts. The children cried bitterly, and Indra was unable to console them. Incensed at their obstinacy in crying, he cut each of these seven parts into seven, and thus formed the forty-nine Maruts. The name Maruts was given to them from the words "Ma rodih " (Weep not), used by Indra when trying to quiet them; and they became subordinate deities--the associates of the wielder of the thunderbolt.

It is not difficult to see how the dwellers in India should have imagined that one god, even though he was the king of the gods, should sometimes need assistance in the management of the winds. The farther the Aryan immigrants travelled south and eastward, the fiercer were the storms they experienced. Hence arose the hymns addressed to the lesser deities who were invoked to assist Indra in his mighty task of controlling them.

Footnotes

^55:* See part ii. chap. iv.

^55:+ Muir, O. S. T., v. 126.

^56:* See chap. viii.

^58:* See part ii, chap. x.

^58:+ Book iv. chap. ix.

^59:* Part iii. chap. viii.

^60:* Book v. chap. xxx.

^61:* One result of this sin of India was the fact that a son of Ravana, a demon king, who ruled in Ceylon, was able to carry him off as a captive, when he made war upon the gods; and it was not until Brahma promised immortality to this warrior, that he consented to release his prisoner. Brahma gave this prince the name of Indrajita (conqueror of Indra).

^61:+ Book vi. chap. v.

^61:++ Meru is a fabulous mountain, supposed to be the centre of the [p. 62] earth. It is believed to be somewhere to the north of the Himalayas. The heavens of the other gods are situated in its vicinity. From the fact that they regarded heaven to be near their former home, it would seen that the Indo-Aryans retained pleasant recollections of the place whence they migrated; or perhaps the inaccessibility of these mountains was a reason for heaven being placed on their summits.

^62:* "Mahabharata," quoted by Ward, ii. 36.

^63:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 82.

^63:+ Ibid. v, 142.

^64:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 140.

^65:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 140.

^65:+ Ibid. v. 143.

^66:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 146.

^67:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 147 ff.

^67:+ Book i. chap. xxi.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

SOMA.

SOMA, according to the Vedic hymns, is the god who "represents and animates the juice of the Soma [**] plant." He was the Indian Bacchus. Not only are all the hymns of the ninth book of the Rig-Veda, one hundred and fourteen in number, besides a few in other places, dedicated to his honour, but constant references occur to him in a large proportion of other hymns. [*+] In some of these hymns he is extolled as the Creator, or Father of the gods. Evidently at that time he was a most popular deity. Indra, as was stated before, was an enthusiastic worshipper of Soma.

The following lines will show the warmth of feeling that was cherished towards him:--

[p. 70]

"This Soma is a god; he cures
  The sharpest ills that man endures.
  He heals the sick, the sad he cheers,
  He nerves the weak, dispels their fears;

Click to enlarge
THE SOMA-PLANT.

The faint with martial ardour fires,
 With lofty thoughts the bard inspires;
 The soul from earth to heaven he lifts;
 So great and wondrous are his gifts,
 Men feel the god within their veins,
 And cry in loud exulting strains:

[p. 71]

'We've quaffed the Soma bright
 And are immortal grown:
 We've entered into light,
 And all the gods have known.
 What mortal now can harm,
 Or foeman vex us more?
 Through thee, beyond alarm,
 Immortal god, we soar.'" [**]

From the Vedas the following account of Soma is derived. [*+] In some passages the plant is said to have been brought from a mountain and given to Indra; in others, King Soma is said to have dwelt amongst the Gandharvas, a race of demi-gods that form the choir in Indra's heaven. The gods, knowing the virtues of this king or plant--for the two terms seem to be indiscriminately applied--wished to obtain it. Not knowing how to get it, Vach (the goddess of speech) said, "The Gandharvas are fond of women; let me go, and I will obtain it for you." The gods said, "How can we spare you?" She replied, "Obtain the god; and I will then return to you, whenever you may want me." Another account of this affair is, that whilst the gods were living on earth, Soma was in the sky. Wishing to possess it, they sent Gayatri (a name of Brahma's wife or daughter) to fetch it. She went in the form of a bird, and was returning with it, when the Gandharvas seized it, and only gave it up when the goddess Vach went amongst them as narrated above.

When Soma was brought to the gods, a dispute arose as to who should have the first draught. At length, this was decided by a race. Vayu first reached the goal, Indra being second. Indra tried hard to win, and when near the winning post proposed that they should reach it together, Vayu taking two-thirds of the drink. Vayu

[p. 72]

said, "Not so! I will be the winner alone." Then Indra said, "Let us come in together, and give me one-fourth of the draught divine!" Vayu consented to this, and so the juice was shared between them. [**]

Soma is said to have had thirty-three wives, the daughters of Prajapati; of these Rohini was the favourite. Being dissatisfied with the partiality shown to their sister, the other wives returned to their father. Soma asked that they might come back to him; the father consented to restore them, provided Soma would treat them all alike. Soma promised to do this; but, failing to keep his promise, he was smitten with consumption for breaking his word.

In the verses descriptive and songs in praise of Soma, the actual juice, and the god supposed to dwell in and manifested by it, are not at all distinct. All the gods drink of it; and Soma, the god in the juice, is said to clothe the naked and heal the sick. Many divine attributes are ascribed to him. He is "addressed as a god in the highest strains of adulation and veneration. All powers belong to him; all blessings are besought of him, as his to bestow." He is said to be divine, immortal, and also to confer immortality on gods and men. "In a passage where the joys of paradise are more distinctly anticipated and more fervently implored than in most other parts of the Rig-Veda, Soma is addressed as the god from whom the gift of future felicity is expected. Thus it is there said, "Place me, O purified god, in that everlasting and imperishable world, where there is eternal light and glory. O Indu (Soma), flow for Indra! Make me immortal in the world where Vaivasvata lives, where is the universal sphere of the sky, where those great waters flow." [*+]

[p. 73]

From the hymns addressed to this deity it is evident that at one time it was considered right for the Hindus to use intoxicants. Now as a rule they are forbidden. Amongst the members of one branch of the worshippers of Kali they are commonly indulged in, but with almost this single exception, the people do not touch them, and Soma, in his Vedic character has ceased to be worshipped.

In later years the name Soma was, and still is, given to the moon. How and why this change took place is not known; but in the later of the Vedic hymns there is some evidence of the transition. In the following passage Soma seems to he used in both senses--as god of the intoxicating juice, and as the moon ruling through the night. " By Soma the Adityas are strong; by Soma the earth is great; and Soma is placed in the midst of the stars. When they crush the plant, he who drinks regards it as Soma. Of him whom the priests regard as Soma (the moon) no one drinks." [**] In another passage this prayer is found: "May the god Soma, he whom they call the Moon, free me." Again, "Soma is the moon, the food of the gods." "The sun has the nature of Agni, the moon of Soma."

In the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] we read, "Soma was appointed monarch of the stars and plants, of Brahmans and plants, of sacrifices and penance." In this Purana we have quite a different account of the origin of Soma; but it must be borne in mind that in this account the term refers only to the moon. At the time the "Vishnu Purana" was written, intoxicants were strictly forbidden; hence Soma, as the god of the intoxicating juice, was no longer known and praised. According to that Purana, [*++]

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] Soma was the son of Atri, the son of Brahma. He performed the Rajasuya sacrifice, and from the glory-thence acquired, and the immense dominion with which he had been invested, became so arrogant and licentious, that he carried off Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. In vain Vrihaspati sought to recover his bride; in vain Brahma commanded, and the holy sages remonstrated. In consequence of this there was a great war; the gods fighting with Indra on the one side trying to recover Tara; Soma with the demons on the other. At length she appealed to Brahma for protection, who thereupon commanded Soma to restore her. On her return, Vrihaspati finding she was pregnant, refused to receive her until after the birth of her child. In obedience to his orders, the child was immediately born; who being wonderful in beauty and power, both Vrihaspati and Soma claimed him as their son. Tara being referred to, was too much ashamed to speak. The child was so indignant at this, that he was about to curse her, saying, "Unless you declare who is my father, I will sentence you to such a fate as shall deter every female from hesitating to speak the truth." On this Brahma again interfered, pacifying the child, and saying to Tara, "Tell me, my child, is this the child of Vrihaspati or Soma?" "Of Soma," she said, blushing. As soon as she had spoken, the lord of the constellations, his countenance being bright, embraced his son and said, "Well done, my boy; verily thou art wise;" and hence his name was Budha. [**]

Footnotes

^69:* The Soma-plant of the Rig-Veda is the Asclepias acida of Roxburgh. It is a creeping plant, almost destitute of leaves. It has small white fragrant flowers collected round the extremities of the branches. Roxburgh says that it yields purer milky juice than any other plant he knows; and that this juice is mild, and of an acid nature. The tender shoots are often plucked by native travellers. It grows on hills of the Punjab, in the Bolan Pass, in the neighbourhood of Poona, etc. In the Brahmana of the Rig-Veda (Haug's Translation), is a most interesting account of the Soma sacrifice. This is occasionally made in the present day, but very few priests are acquainted with the ritual of this once celebrated sacrifice.

^69:+ Muir, O. S. T., v. 258.

^71:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 130.

^71:+ Ibid. v. 263 ff.

^72:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 144.

^72:+ Ibid., v. 266.

^73:* Muir, O. S. T.. v. 271.

^73:+ Book i. chap. xxii.

^73:++ Book iv. chap. vi.

^74:* This Budha, son of Soma, and regent of the planet Mercury, must not be confounded with Buddha, the teacher whose tenets are held by the Buddhists of the present day. The two beings have nothing in common; and the names are identical only when one or other of them is misspelt.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

TVASTRI OR VISVAKARMA.

TVASTRI, or, as he is called in the later works, Visvakarma, is the architect and workman of the gods--the Hindu Vulcan. The heavenly places were formed by him, and the warlike gods are indebted to him for their wonder-working weapons. He sharpens the iron axe of Brahmanaspati (Agni), and forges the thunderbolts of Indra. He is intimately associated with men; he forms husband and wife for each other from the womb, and blesses the married couple with offspring. This accounts for the fact that the wives of the gods are his most constant companions. He made the world and all that is in it; and he is the protector of the creatures he has made. He shares with the other gods in the sacrifices offered by mortals. [**]

Tvastri is in several passages connected with the Ribhus. These were sons of a man named Sudhanvan; who, owing to their great skill in working, obtained immortality and divine honours. The Ribhus made Indra's chariot and horses; also by their great austerities restored their parents to youth. They are spoken of as the pupils of Tvastri. It was through their skill in manufacturing four sacrificial cups out of one their

[p. 76]

master had fashioned that they became divine. This exhibition was made at the command of the gods, and exaltation to deity the promised reward. Tvastri was very angry at their success; and, ashamed of being seen, hid himself amongst the women. It is said that he even tried to slay his pupils. According to other accounts, he admired their skill and was pleased at the result. Tvastri was the father-in-law of Vivasvat (the Sun).

Indra is occasionally described as being in a state of hostility towards Tvastri and his son Visvarupa, and ultimately caused the death of both. This Visvarupa had three heads, called respectively, the Soma-drinker the Wine-drinker, and the Food-eater. On one occasion he declared in public that the sacrifices should be shared by the gods only; but in private he said the asuras (demons) should share them too. And as it is customary to keep promises that are privately made, Indra was afraid that the asuras, obtaining a share of the sacrifices, would be so strengthened as to be able to overthrow his kingdom; he therefore cut off the heads of Visvarupa with his thunderbolt. The three heads were turned into birds: the Soma-drinker became a Kapinjala (a Francoline partridge), for Soma was of a brown colour the Wine-drinker became a Kalavinka (sparrow), because when men are intoxicated they make a noise like a sparrow; the Food-eater became a Tittiri (partridge), which consequently has a great variety of colour, for its body appears to be sprinkled with glut-and honey. Tvastri, enraged because Indra had slain his son, made a libation to the gods, but did not invite Indra to it. Indra, noticing this slight, by force took the vessel containing the Soma juice, and drank it. But he drank more than was good for him. Tvastri, being angry, at once broke off the sacrifice, and used the few drops of

[p. 77]

[paragraph continues] Soma left to give effect to a curse. He employed the right formula for accomplishing the death of Indra, but unfortunately laid stress upon the wrong word. So, instead of slaying Indra, he was himself slain by him. [**]

In the Puranas, Tvastri appears under the name of Visvakarma. In the "Vishnu Purana" he is styled "the author of a thousand arts, the mechanist of the gods, the fabricator of ornaments, the chief of artists, the constructor of the self-moving chariots of the deities, by whose skill men obtain subsistence." Though not named as an Aditya in the Vedas, he is generally reckoned as one in the Puranas. In other places he is called a son of Brahma. In pictures he is represented as a white man with three eyes. In his right hand he carries a club. He wears a crown, and is adorned with a necklace and bracelets of gold. He is worshipped once, twice, thrice, or four times each year, according to the devotion of his worshippers. Nowadays, no images of him are set up; each man worships the implements of his trade, as representatives. The carpenter bows down to his hammer, saw, etc.; the bricklayer to his trowel; the peasant to his plough; the student to his books; the clerk to his pen. When the worship is over, the day is spent in feasting and enjoyment.

Though, as we have seen in the Vedas, he is regarded in some hymns as the Creator and the Preserver, in the later books he occupies a much lower position. Brahma is styled the Creator, and Vishnu the Preserver--whilst Visvakarma becomes a valued servant who fulfils the behests of his superiors. It is for skill and power to work in their ordinary avocations that his aid is now sought.

Footnotes

^75:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 224.

^77:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 232.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

YAMA.

YAMA, the judge of men and king of the unseen world, was the son of Vivasvat (the sun) and Saranya, the daughter of Tvastri. He was born before his mother

Click to enlarge
YAMA.

had become afraid of her glorious husband. He was twin-brother of Yami, and, in the opinion of Professor Roth, they were regarded as the primeval pair from

[p. 79]

whom the human family has sprung. In another verse of the Rig-Veda they are described as the offspring of the heavenly choristers, the Gandharvas. As there were no others to perpetuate the race, Yami entreated Yama to become her husband. She urged the fact that Tvastri had formed them as man and wife in the womb; and therefore it was useless for him to refuse her request, as none can act contrary to the ordinances of Tvastri. But Yama was firm, and resisted her overtures on the ground that it was monstrous for those who are preachers of righteousness to act unrighteously. [**] It is not at all easy to determine what was intended to be represented by these deities. Max-Muller understands Vivasvat to be the sky, Saranya the dawn, Yama the day, and Yami the night. Others suggest that Yama may be the hot air current caused by the rising sun, and Yami the cooler air of the night, and their antagonism would be represented by Yama repelling the advances of Yami.

Yama was the first of mortals who died, and, having discovered the way to the other world, is the guide of those who depart this life, and is said to conduct them to a home which is made secure for them for ever. He is a king, and dwells in celestial light in the innermost sanctuary of heaven. He grants bright homes to the pious who dwell with him. [*+]

"In the Rig-Veda, Yama is nowhere represented (as he is in the later mythology) as having anything to do with the punishment of the wicked. Nevertheless he is still to some an object of terror. He is said to have two insatiable dogs, with four eyes and wide nostrils, which guard the road to his abode, and which the departed are advised to hurry past with all possible

[p. 80]

speed. These dogs are said to wander about among men as messengers, no doubt for the purpose of summoning them to the presence of their master, who in another place is identified with; death, and is described as sending a bird as the herald of doom." [**]

"When the remains of the deceased have been placed upon the funeral pile, and the process of cremation has commenced, Agni, the god of Fire, is prayed not to scorch or consume the departed, not to tear asunder his skin or his limbs, but, after the flames have done their work, to convey to the fathers the mortal who has been presented to him as an offering. Leaving behind on earth all that is evil and imperfect, and proceeding by the paths which the fathers trod, invested with a lustre like that of the gods, it soars to the realms of eternal light in a car, or on wings, and recovers there its ancient body in a complete and glorified form; meets with the forefathers who are living in festivity with Yama; obtains from him, when recognized by him as one of his own, a delectable abode, and enters upon more perfect life, which is crowned with the fulfilment of all desires, is passed in the presence of the gods, and employed in the fulfilment of their pleasure." [*+]

In this kingdom, over which Yama reigns, friends meet with their departed friends--husband with wife, children with parents--and together live in a state of blessedness, free from the evils and infirmities that belong to the present life. As the gods are described as enjoying the pleasures common to men on earth, the kingdom of Yama, the abode of the departed, is not at all less sensual than the present world; and when mortals have been privileged to enter this happy land, they become objects of veneration to their descendants

[p. 81]

still living, and joyfully partake of the oblations they offer to them.

In the following lines Dr. Muir [**] has given an epitome of the teaching of the Vedas respecting Yama:--

"To great King Yama homage pay,
    Who was the first of men that died,
    That crossed the mighty gulf and spied
  For mortals out the heavenward way.

   *           *           *           *

 "By it our fathers all have passed;
    And that same path we too shall trace,
    And every new succeeding race,
  Of mortal men, while time shall last.

"The god assembles round his throne
    A growing throng, the good and wise
    All those whom, scanned with searching eyes,
  He recognizes as his own.

"Departed mortal, speed from earth
    By those old ways thy sires have trod;
    Ascend, behold the expectant god
  Who calls thee to a higher birth.

   *           *           *           *

"And calmly pass without alarm
    The four-eyed hounds that guard the road
    Which leads to Yama's bright abode;
  Their master's friends they dare not harm.

"All imperfections leave behind:
    Assume thine ancient frame once more--
    Each limb and sense thou hadst before,
  From every earthly taint refined.

"And now with heavenly glory bright,
    With life intenser, nobler, blest,
    With large capacity to taste
  A fuller measure of delight,

[p. 82]

"Thou there once more each well-known face
    Shalt see of those thou lovedst here;
    Thy parents, wife, and children dear,
  With rapture shalt thou soon embrace

"The father, too, shalt thou behold,
    The heroes who in battle died,
    The saints and sages glorified,
  The pious, bounteous kings of old.

"The gods whom here in humble wise
    Thou worshippedst with doubt and awe,
    Shall there the impervious veil withdraw
  Which hid their glory from thine eyes.

"The good which thou on earth hast wrought.
    Each sacrifice, each pious deed,
    Shall there receive its ample meed;
  No worthy act shall be forgot.

"In those fair realms of cloudless day,
    Where Yama every joy supplies,
    And every longing satisfies,
  Thy bliss shall never know decay."

In the Puranas Yama is called the judge of men, and is said to rule over the many hells in which the wicked are made to suffer. Thus the "Padma Purana" says: "Yama fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as sovereign of the damned; all that die appearing before him, and being confronted with Chitragupta the recorder, by whom their actions have been registered. The virtuous are then conveyed to Swarga (Indra's heaven), whilst the wicked are driven to the different regions of Naraka (hell)." [**] In the "Vishnu Purana" the names of the different hells are given, and it is there stated that " there are many other fearful hells which are the awful provinces of Yama, terrible with instruments of torture and fire." In the same Purana [*+] it is said that

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] "all men at the end of their existence (life) become slaves to the power of Yama, by whom they are sentenced to painful punishments." Inquiry is then made as to how men can be free from his authority. The answer is that "Yama is the lord of all men, excepting the worshippers of Madhusudan (Vishnu). Worship him in one of his many forms, and Yama can exert no authority over you."

According to the popular ideas now prevailing, Yama is represented as a green man, clothed in red garments. He has a crown on his head, and a flower in his hair; is armed with a club, and rides upon a buffalo. He is regularly worshipped once a year; and daily a little water is poured out to him. For a whole month each year unmarried girls present offerings to him in the hope that he will provide them with a husband; and that, having granted this boon, he will not recall his gift, and leave them widows. In his presence the good and evil deeds of the departed are weighed: according to the turn of the scale, the soul goes to heaven or hell. The soul is believed to reach Yama's abode in four hours and forty minutes; consequently a dead body cannot be burned until that time has passed after death.

In the "Bhavishya Purana" the following legend of Yama's marriage is found. He was exceedingly pleased with a girl named Vijaya, a Brahman's daughter. When first she saw him she was greatly alarmed, alike at his appearance and on learning who he was. At length he allayed her fears; and, although her brother tried to dissuade her, she consented to become his wife. On her arrival at Yama's abode, he particularly cautioned her against going into the southern quarter of his kingdom. After a time, thinking he must have another wife there, her curiosity overpowered her, and going into the

[p. 84]

forbidden region, she was greatly distressed, as she saw the wicked in torment: Amongst other sufferers was her own mother. Meeting Yama there, she tried to obtain her release. Yama declared that this could not be granted unless some one then living on earth would perform a certain sacrifice, and transfer the merit of the act to the poor woman then suffering. After some difficulty, one was found willing to perform this act of kindness, and Yama's mother-in-law obtained release.

Stories are told in the Puranas to show how the power of Vishnu is exercised on behalf of his worshippers in rescuing them from Yama's bonds. If a man repeat his name in teaching it to his parrot, or utter it in death without any intention of asking his help, his messengers will be sent to snatch him from the punishments of hell and conduct him to his blest abode.

It is very strange to notice how the character of Yama's rule and kingdom has entirely changed in the conceptions of the Hindus. According to the Vedas, the pure and good went with gladness to Yama's realm of light; now, as taught in the Puranas, it is the wicked who are sent to him for punishment.

In the Mahabharata [**] is a most interesting story, showing that sometimes Yama is propitious to prayer, and will allow those who have entered his abode to return to earth.

A princess named Savitri loved Satyavan, the son of an old hermit, but was warned by a seer to overcome her attachment, as Satyavan was a doomed man, having only one year to live. Savitri replies:

"Whether his years be few or many, be he gifted with all grace
  Or graceless, him my heart hath chosen, and it chooseth not again."

[p. 85]

They were married, and the bride strove to forget the prophecy; but, as the last day of the year approached, her anxiety became irrepressible. She exhausted herself in prayers and penances, hoping to stay the hand of the destroyer, yet all the while dared not reveal the fatal secret to her husband. At last the dreaded day arrived, and Satyavan set out to cut wood in the forest. His wife asked leave to accompany him, and walked behind him, smiling, but with a heavy heart. Satyavan soon made the wood resound with his hatchet, when suddenly a thrill of agony shot through his temples, and, feeling himself falling, called his wife to support him.

"Then she received her fainting husband in her arms, and sat herself
  On the cold ground, and gently laid his drooping head upon her lap:
  Sorrowing, she called to mind the sage's prophecy, and reckoned up
  The days and hours. All in an instant she beheld an awful shape
  Standing before her, dressed in blood-red garments, with a glittering crown
  Upon his head; his form, though. glowing like the Sun, was yet obscure,
  And eyes lie had like flames, a noose depended from his hand; and he
  Was terrible to look upon, as by her husband's side he stood
  And gazed upon him with a fiery glance. Shuddering she started up,
  And laid her dying Satyavan upon the ground, and, with her hands
  Joined reverently, she thus with beating heart addressed the shape:
  Surely thou art a god; such form as thine must more than mortal be!
  Tell me, thou god-like being, who thou art, and wherefore art thou here?'"

The figure replied that he was Yama, king of the dead; that her husband's time was come, and that he must bind and take his spirit.

"Then from her husband's body forced he out, and firmly with his cord
  Bound and detained the spirit, clothed in form no larger than a thumb.
  Forthwith the body, reft of vital being and deprived of breath,
  Lost all its grace and beauty, and became ghastly and motionless."

[p. 86]

After binding the spirit, Yama proceeds with it towards the quarter of which he is guardian--the south.

The faithful wife follows him closely. Yama bids her go home and perform the funeral rites; but she persists in following, till Yama, pleased with her devotion, grants her any boon she pleases, except the life of her husband. She chooses that her husband's father, who is now blind, may recover his sight. Yama consents, and bids her now return home. Still she persists in following. Two other boons are granted in the same way, and still Savitri follows closely on the heels of the king of death. At last, overcome by her constancy, Yama grants a boon without exception. The delighted Savitri exclaims:

"Nought, mighty king, this time hast thou excepted: let my husband live;
  Without him I desire not happiness, nor even heaven itself;
  Without him I must die.' 'So be it, faithful wife,' replied the king of death:
  Thus I release him;' and with that he loosed the cord that bound his soul."

Amongst the many names by which Yama is known, the following are the most common:--

Dharmaraja, "King of righteousness."

Pitripati, "Lord of the fathers."

Samavurti, "He who judges impartially."

Kritanta, "The finisher."

Samana, "The leveller."

Kala, "Time."

Dandadhara, "He who carries the rod."

Sraddhadeva, "The god of funeral ceremonies."

Vaivasvata, "The son of Vivasvata."

Antaka, "He who puts an end to life."

Footnotes

^79:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 289.

^79:+ Ibid., v. 284.

^80:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 302.

^80:+ Ibid., v. 302 ff.

^81:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 327.

^82:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 207, note.

^82:+ Ibid., p. 286.

^84:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 395.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

PART II.

  

THE PURANIC DEITIES.

[p. 88]

Click to enlarge
GANESA.

[p. 89]

  

THE PURANIC DEITIES.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE PURANAS.

THE chief sources of information respecting the modern mythology of the Hindus are the two great Epics--the Ramayana and the Mahabharata--the Puranas, or "old traditional stories," eighteen in number, and the five principal Tantras.

There is nothing definitely known as to the date of the Epics, beyond the fact that they are later than the Vedas, and earlier than the Puranas. Some place the Ramayana as early as B.C. 500, whilst others affirm that it could not have been composed before B.C. 100, and that a considerable portion was added much later. The Mahabharata is supposed to be fully a century nearer our own time. Unlike the Vedas, they, as well as the Puranas and Tantras, may be read by other than Brahmans. Each of these books is of immense bulk, and the same stories frequently reappear in them. Yet to this day they retain a firm hold of the faith and veneration of the mass of the people of India. Nor is this to be wondered at when we read such words as these, often repeated in these works: "He who reads

[p. 90]

and repeats this holy life-giving Ramayana [or the Mahabharata], is liberated from all sins, and exalted with all his posterity to the highest heaven."

It is almost equally difficult to determine the date of the Puranas. It is, however, believed that none of them are older than the 8th century A.D., though some of the legends incorporated in them may have come from much earlier times. That they are considerably later than the two great Epics is evident from the fact that many, who are described there as men and heroes only, in the Puranas, are said to be divine beings. These books differ from the Vedas in this respect, that whilst the older scriptures treat of the religion common to the Hindus of that period, all of whom worshipped the same deities, each Purana is chiefly concerned with some one god whose excellences are extolled, whilst others are spoken of in a depreciatory manner. There is a general respect shown to the rest of the gods of the Pantheon; yet the particular deity to whose praise the Purana is devoted, is declared to be supreme; and of him the others are said to be incarnations. Now Brahma, now Siva, now Vishnu in some of his many forms, is the great god, whose will is that all men should worship him. It may be that originally the Puranas were written in praise of the three great gods, but as the Hindu conquest extended over the continent, there being no central religious authority, a spirit of sectarianism arose and the writers extolled their own special deity at the expense of the others.

The Puranas may be classified as follows:--

I. Those which are devoted to the praise of Brahma; viz. the Brahma; the Brahmanda, the Brahmavaivarta, the Markandeya, the Bhavishya, and the Vaman.

II. Those which relate to Vishnu; viz. the Vishnu,

[p. 91]

the Bhagavata, the Naradiya, the Garuda, the Padma, and the Varaha.

III. Those which are chiefly connected with Siva; viz. the Siva, the Linga, the Skanda, the Agni, the Matsya, the Karma. For the Agni Purana another called the Vayu is sometimes substituted.

These Puranas are the authority for nearly the whole of the popular Hinduism of the present day. They are largely read by the people. Parts of some and the whole of others have been translated into the vernaculars from the Sanskrit; and where the people cannot read, it is a common practice for their Guru or teacher to read a portion to them at his periodic visits. By this means the contents of these books are widely known.

The fact that each Purana is devoted to the praise of some special deity, who, according to its teaching, is supreme, whilst other deities, described in other Puranas in equally extravagant language, are slighted, and in some cases their worship forbidden, seems to prove that these books must have been written at different times and in different places, and probably by those who were ignorant of what others had written. And yet the popular belief is that they were all the work of the great sage Vyasa, the arranger of the Vedas and the Mahabharata.

The ideal Purana--and the Vishnu Purana approaches more nearly to this ideal than any other--should treat of [**] five chief topics:--"I. The creation of the universe; II. Its destruction and re-creation; III. The genealogy of gods and patriarchs; IV. The reigns and periods of the Manus (rulers over long periods of time); and V. The history of the two great races of kings, the Solar and the Lunar." The Puranas, as at present known,

[p. 92]

omit some of these great questions and introduce others. Great discrepancies, too, are found in the different genealogies. [**]

The last class of religious books to be mentioned here are the Tantras. The word signifies "a means of faith," and they teach that faith in the revelations they record will save from the greatest sin. They are in the form of a dialogue between Siva and his wife. In answer to her questions, the god gives manifold instructions concerning worship. The date of these works is involved in great obscurity; but as far as can be known they probably are not earlier than the 6th century of our era. They form the authority for the faith and ceremonies of the Saktas, as the worshippers of the wife of Siva are called, and are by them regarded as a fifth Veda. The doctrines, or at least a part of the doctrines, of these sects is kept secret and communicated to those only who receive solemn initiation into the mysteries.

In describing the Puranic deities, I shall follow the common order. The Hindus speak of three great gods--Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, who form what is often spoken of as the Hindu Triad. After giving an account of each of these and their consorts, I shall describe those who are regarded as their incarnations, or descendants; and then proceed to speak of others who have no formal connection with any of them. It will be seen that most of the principal deities are connected with one or other of these three.

Footnotes

^91:* Wilson's Preface to the "Vishnu Purana."

^92:* For an outline of the contents of the different Puranas, see Introduction to Wilson's "Vishnu Purana."

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

BRAHMA. [**]

BRAHMA is regarded as the Supreme Being, the God of gods; of whom Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are manifestations. It is true that, in some verses of the Vedas, attributes ascribed to him are also ascribed to other deities, and in some of the Puranas various gods are said to be identical with the supreme Brahma; nevertheless Brahma is regarded by the Hindus (for which opinion there is abundant authority in their scriptures) as the Supreme God--the origin of all the others, and of whom they are manifestations. Thus we read in the "Atharva-Veda":-- [*+] "All the gods are in (Brahma) as cows in a cow-house. In the beginning Brahma was this [universe]. He created gods. Having created gods, he placed them in these worlds, viz. Agni in this world, Vayu in the atmosphere, and Surya in the sky. And in the worlds which are yet higher, he placed the gods which are still higher. Then Brahma proceeded to the higher sphere [which is explained by the commentator to mean the Satyaloka, the most excellent and limit of all the worlds]. The gods were originally mortal; but when they were pervaded by Brahma, they became immortal." In the "Taittiriya Brahmana" it is said:

[p. 94]

[paragraph continues] "Brahma generated the gods, Brahma (generated) this entire world. Within him are all these worlds. Within him is this entire universe. It is Brahma who is the greatest of beings. Who can vie with him? In Brahma, the thirty-three gods; in Brahma, Indra and Prajapati; in Brahma all things are contained as in a ship."

Prof. Monier Williams [**] says:--"Only a few hymns of the Vedas appear to contain the simple conception of one divine self, existent, omnipresent being; and even in these, the idea of one god present in all nature is somewhat nebulous and undefined." Further on he says: "In the Purusha Sukta of the Rig-Veda, the one spirit is called Purusha. The more common name in the later system is Brahman, neuter (nom. Brahma), derived from the root brih, 'to expand,' and denoting the universally expanding essence, or universally diffused substance of the universe . . . Brahman, in the neuter, being 'simple, infinite being'--the only real eternal essence--which, when it passes into actual manifested existence, is called Brahma; when it develops itself in the world, is called Vishnu; and when it again dissolves itself into simple being, is called Siva; all the other innumerable gods and demi-gods being also mere manifestations of the neuter Brahman, who is eternal."

In the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] Brahma is translated as "abstract supreme spirit." Later on [*++] the question is asked, "How can creative agency be attributed to Brahma, who [as abstract spirit] is without qualities, illimitable, and free from imperfection?" The answer is, that "the essential properties of existent things are objects of observation, of which no foreknowledge is attainable; and creation and hundreds of properties

[p. 95]

belong to Brahma as inseparable, parts of his essence, as heat is inherent in fire." The Purana goes on to say that creation is effected through the agency of Brahma, the first manifestation of Brahma; and then declares that Vishnu is one with Brahma.

Again, the same Purana [**] says: "There are two states of this Brahma--one with, and one without shape; one perishable, one imperishable; which are inherent in all beings. The imperishable is the supreme being; the perishable is all the world. The blaze of fire burning in one spot diffuses light and heat around; so the world is nothing more than the manifested energy of the supreme Brahma; and inasmuch as the light and heat are stronger or feebler as we are near to the fire or far off from it, so the energy of the supreme is more or less intense in the beings that are less or more remote from him. Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva are the most powerful energies of God; next to them are the inferior deities; then the attendant spirits; then men; then animals, birds, insects, vegetables; each becoming more and more feeble as they are farther from their primitive source."

The "Vishnu Purana" [*+] gives the following derivation of the word Brahma:--It "is derived from the root vriha (to increase), because it is infinite (spirit), and because it is the cause by which the Vedas (and all things) are developed." Then follows this hymn to Brahma:--"Glory to Brahma, who is addressed by that mystic word (Om), [*++] associated eternally with the triple universe (earth, sky, and heaven), and who is one with

[p. 96]

the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma, who alike in the destruction and renovation of the world is called the great and mysterious cause of the intellectual principle; who is without limit in time or space, and exempt from diminution and decay. . .. He is the invisible, imperishable Brahma; varying in form, invariable in substance; the chief principle, self-engendered; who is said to illuminate the caverns of the heart; who is indivisible, radiant, undecaying, multiform. To that supreme Brahma be for ever adoration."

In perfect harmony with this teaching of the "Vishnu Purana" is the common belief of the Hindus. No phrase is more commonly used by them when speaking of the divine being than this: "God (Brahma) is one without a second." The word used by them for God as distinguished from his manifestations, is Brahma; and when charged with Polytheism, and of violating the primary law respecting the unity of God, they reply that Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, etc., are only manifestations of the supreme Brahma. [**]

In the earliest writings Brahma signified a hymn or mantra, whilst Brahma was the term used to denote a priest or worshipper. It is in the later parts of the Vedas that Brahma is identified with the supreme, and Brahma becomes his great manifestation. Prajapati, the lord of creatures, was the Creator according to the earlier teaching of the Vedas, and occupied the position in the earlier Pantheon that Brahma did in the later. In several texts of the Vedas the two are identified, and thus authority is found for the idea that Brahma is to be worshipped as the Maker of all things.

[p. 97]

This Brahma, though satisfactory to the priests, was not so to the common people. In process of time local gods absorbed their worship, and the non-Aryan deities of the people whom they had conquered exercised their influence on the Aryans themselves. Rather than lose their hold of the people, the priests adopted these new deities, and found a parentage for them from amongst the old Vedic gods. By the time the Epics were composed, Vishnu and Siva had been thus assimilated. The different names by which these deities are now known may possibly have been the local names of local or tribal gods; by retaining these the priests also retained their hold upon the people. In the "Satapatha Brahmana" attempts are made to identify Siva with Agni, as though the writer wished to show that the later triad--Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva--was identical with the older one composed of Agni, Indra-Vayu, and Surya.

Footnotes

^93:* It will be noticed that the final vowel in the name of this deity is short, whilst in that of the first incarnation it is long.

^93:+ Muir, O. S. T., v. 387 ff.

^94:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 12.

^94:+ Page 2.

^94:++ Book i. chap. iii.

^95:* Page 157.

^95:+ Page 273.

^95:++ This word occurs at the commencement of prayers and religious ceremonies. It is so sacred that none must hear it pronounced. Originally the three letters (a u m) of which it is formed typified the three Vedas; afterwards it became a mystical symbol of the three deities--Brahma, Vishnu, Siva.

^96:* The Theistic sect that arose in Bengal during the present century, for a long time gloried in the name Brahmo Somaj; i.e. the Society that worshipped the supreme Brahma or God.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

BRAHMA AND SARASVATI.

  

BRAHMA.

BRAHMa, the first of the three great Hindu gods, is called the Creator; he is the father of gods and men, the

Click to enlarge
BRAHMA.

[paragraph continues] Vedic Prajapati, the lord of creatures. As nearly all the writers of the Puranas seem to regard it a duty to describe

[p. 99]

the work of creation as performed by this god, and as each account differs in detail from the others, it is a perfectly hopeless task to attempt to give a harmonized statement of this great event. I shall therefore give Manu's [**] account of it, which is largely founded upon the teaching of the Vedas, though considerably mixed up with more modern views.

"This universe was enveloped in darkness--unperceived, undistinguishable, undiscoverable, unknowable, as it were, entirely sunk in sleep. The irresistible self-existent lord, undiscerned, creating this universe with the five elements, and all other things, was manifested dispelling the gloom. He who is beyond the cognizance of the senses, subtile, undiscernible, eternal, who is the essence of all things, and inconceivable, himself shone forth. He, desiring, seeking to produce various creatures from his own body, first created the waters, and deposited in them a seed. This (seed) became a golden egg, resplendent as the sun, in which he himself was born as Brahma, the progenitor of all worlds. The waters are called narah, because they are the offspring of Nara; and since they were formerly the place of his movement (ayana), he is therefore called Narayana. [*+] Being formed by that First Cause, undiscernible, eternal, which is both existent and non-existent, that male is

[p. 100]

known in the world as Brahma. That lord having continued a year in the egg, divided it into two parts by his mere thought." [**] In the Mahabharata, and some of the Puranas, Brahma is said to have issued from a lotus that sprang from the navel of Vishnu.

The egg referred to above is thus described in the "Vishnu Purana" [*+]:--"Its womb, vast as the mountain Meru, was composed of the mountains, and the mighty oceans were the waters which filled its cavity. In that egg were the continents, seas, and mountains; the planets and divisions of the universe; the gods, the demons and mankind. Brahma is said to be born; a familiar phrase to signify his manifestation." This wonderful egg, after the Creator had inhabited it for a thousand years, burst open, and Brahma issuing forth by meditation commenced the work of creation. Seeing that the earth was sunk beneath the waters, he assumed the form of a boar, [*++] and, diving, raised it upon his tusks. After this, he continued the work of creation.

In pictures Brahma is represented as a red man with four heads, though in the Puranas he is said to have had originally five. He is dressed in white raiment, and rides upon a goose. In one hand he carries a staff, in the other a dish for receiving alms. A legend in the "Matsya Purana" [* section] gives the following account of the formation of his numerous heads:--"Brahma formed from his own immaculate substance a female who is celebrated under the names of Satarupa, Savitri, Sarasvati, Gayatri, and Brahmani. Beholding his daughter, born from his body, Brahma became wounded with the

[p. 101]

arrows of love, and exclaimed, How surpassingly lovely she is!' Satarupa turned to the right side from his gaze; but as Brahma wished to look after her, a second head issued from his body. As she passed to the left, and behind him, to avoid his amorous glances, two other heads successively appeared. At length she sprang into the sky; and as Brahma was anxious to gaze after her there, a fifth head was immediately formed. Brahma then said to his daughter, 'Let us produce all kinds of animated beings, men, suras (gods), and asuras (demons). Hearing this, she descended, and Brahma having espoused her, they withdrew to a secluded spot where they dwelt together for one hundred divine years; [**] at the expiration of which time was born Manu, who is also called Swayambhuva and Viraj." [*+]

The following legend [*++] occurs, with some variations, in several Puranas, showing why Brahma was deprived of his fifth head:--

"Once when they were assembled on the top of Meru, the holy sages, having saluted Brahma, requested him to declare the true nature of the godhead; but the Creator, influenced by the delusion of Mahesha (a demon), and his mind obscured by spiritual darkness, asserted his own pre-eminence, and said: 'I am the womb of the universe, without beginning or end, and the sole and self-existent lord; and he who does not worship me

[p. 102]

shall never obtain beatitude.' On hearing this, Kratu, a form of Narayana (Vishnu), smiled and said: ' Hadst thou not been misled by ignorance, thou wouldst not have made an assertion so contrary to truth; for I am the framer of the universe, the source of life, the unborn, eternal and supreme Narayana; and, had I not willed it, creation would not have taken place.'

"Thus Vishnu and Brahma disputed, and at length they agreed to allow the matter to be decided by the Vedas. The Vedas declared that Siva was creator, preserver, destroyer. Having heard these words, Vishnu and Brahma, still bewildered by the darkness of delusion, said, 'How can the lord of goblins, the delighter in graveyards, the naked devotee covered with ashes, haggard in appearance, wearing twisted locks ornamented with snakes, be the supreme being? ' The incorporeal Prana (Life), then assuming a form, said, 'This is not the real form of Siva; but when united to his energy, he sometimes, under the figure of Rudra, delights himself in various illusive sports.' But even these words dispelled not the spiritual darkness of Vishnu and Brahma; when suddenly appeared between them a wondrous effulgence filling the heavens, earth, and mid-air. In the midst of this they beheld a human form, vast, uncreated, of a dark hue, holding in his hand a trident and a rosary, and wearing a serpent for a Brahmanical thread. On seeing whom, the fifth head of Brahma glowed with anger and said, 'I know thee well, O Chandra Shekera, for from my forehead didst thou spring, and because thou didst weep I called thee Rudra. Hasten then to seek the refuge of my feet, and I will protect thee, O my son! ' At these proud words of Brahma, Siva was incensed; and from his anger sprang into existence a terrific form (Bhairava), whom he thus addressed:

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] 'Chastise this lotus-born!' No sooner did Bhairava receive this order, than instantly he cut off the head of Brahma with the thumb of his left hand. That member which had committed the fault received punishment; and therefore Brahma was deprived of his fifth head." Upon this Vishnu and Brahma praised Siva.

In another part of the same Purana [**] is another legend, giving a somewhat different account of this circumstance:--

"Formerly all things movable and immovable having been destroyed, nought remained but one boundless ocean; nor fire, nor air, nor sun, nor atmosphere, nor stars, nor planets, nor light, nor earth, nor heaven, nor gods nor demons existed then; and all was involved in impenetrable darkness. One being alone, Maha Kala (Siva), pervaded all space; who being desirous of creation, churned his left arm with his right forefinger; whence issued a bubble, which increasing in size became an egg resembling gold. This egg Maha Kala divided with his hand; of the upper part he formed the heavens, and of the lower half the earth, and in the centre of it appeared Brahma with five hands and four arms, to whom Maha Kala thus said, 'Through my favour effect creation.' Having thus spoken, he disappeared.

"Brahma having then considered in what manner he could accomplish this object, propitiated his lord Bhava with a severe tapas (meditation), and in consequence received from him the four Vedas, and was thus enabled to become the Creator. But as Siva had not revealed himself, Brahma continued his meditation in order that he might behold that god. Siva was propitiated; but, still invisible, thus said, 'O Brahma, choose whatever boon thou choosest!' Brahma craved that Siva would

[p. 104]

become his son. Siva replied: 'Propitiated by thy piety, I will become thy son under the form of Rudra; but as thou hast craved a boon which ought not to have been asked, I shall on this account hereafter cut off one of thy heads. Nevertheless, though thou shalt afterwards possess but four heads, yet as thou hast been formed by me, from my own substance which is that Brahma, thou shalt in remembrance of this circumstance be denominated Brahma. Also from my becoming thy son, shalt thou be called Pitamaha (the great father).'

"Brahma having obtained both a boon and a curse, proceeded, in order to effect creation, to sacrifice to that fire which had sprung from his own effulgence; and from the heat, perspiration collected on his forehead. In wiping this off with a small piece of wood, a drop of blood fell into the fire, from which by the will of Siva sprang Rudra, of a dark hue, with five heads, ten hands, and fifteen eyes; having a serpent for his Brahmanical thread, wearing twisted locks, and the moon on his head, and clothed in the skin of a lion. Having seen such a son, Brahma was delighted, and bestowed on him various appellations. Brahma having created various classes of beings, they all adored him, except Rudra; to whom Brahma said, 'Why dost thou not also adore me?' Rudra replied, 'I worship none other than that effulgence from which I sprang! ' Having thus spoken, he departed to Siva's abode. But Brahma from the impurity of his nature became immersed in spiritual darkness, and thought that it was by his own power alone that he had effected creation, and there was no other god equal to him. His fifth head also having read the Vedas, which the other four heads had delivered, acquired a splendour which neither suras (gods) nor asuras (demons) could endure."

[p. 105]

The "Padma Purana" [**] thus concludes this story: "Unable therefore to approach or behold it, they determined to apply to Siva for relief. Being propitiated by them, Siva granted their request, and proceeded with them to where Brahma remained inflated with pride. On seeing Siva, Brahma did not pay him the customary honours. Siva, seeing Brahma's fifth head inflicting distress on the universe by its effulgent beams, brighter than a thousand suns, approached him and said, 'Oh! this head shines with too much splendour,' and immediately cut it off with the nail of his left thumb, with as much ease as a man cuts off the stem of a plantain tree."

The Mahabharata says that Siva did not actually cut off Brahma's head on this occasion, but was only prevented from doing so through the intercession of the gods. It was because of his attempting to seduce his own daughter that Siva decapitated him. This crime was attempted when in a fit of intoxication; hence Brahma pronounced a curse upon the gods who should hereafter drink spirits.

In the passages just quoted, Brahma is represented as worshipping Siva for his own personal benefit; in the Vishnu Purana," [*+] he is described as joining with gods and men in the worship of this same deity, and as officiating as priest on that occasion. And in another part of the Purana [*++] is the following hymn addressed to Vishnu by Brahma:--"Thou art the common centre of all, the protector of the world, and all things exist in thee. All that has been, or will be, thou art. There is nothing else but thee, O lord; nothing else has been, or will be. Thou art independent, and without beginning." The object of this laudation was to induce

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Vishnu to save the earth from its load of sorrow; in answer to it, Vishnu appeared here as Krishna.

At the present time Brahma is not largely worshipped by the Hindus. "The Brahmans in their morning and evening worship repeat an incantation containing a description of the image of Brahma; at noon they present to him a single flower; at the time of burnt-offering, ghi is presented to him. In the month of Magh, at the full moon, an earthen image of him is worshipped, with that of Siva on his right hand, and Vishnu on his left." [**] Brahma as Creator is supposed to have finished his work; hence, excepting in one place, viz. at Pushkara in Ajmir, there is no temple to him now existing. It is evident that for centuries the worship of Brahma has not been common, for in the "Skanda Purana " [*+] is an indelicate legend, in which the charge of falsehood is proved against him, and this fact is given to account for the fact that his worship had ceased. It concludes as follows:--"Since thou hast childishly and with weak understanding asserted a falsehood, let no one henceforth perform worship to thee."

The Mahabharata says that Brahma's heaven is eight hundred miles long, four hundred wide, and forty high. Narada declared himself incompetent to describe it. In two hundred years he could not mention all its excellences. He said that it contained in a superior degree all the excellences of the other heavens; and that whatever existed in the creation of Brahma' on earth, from the smallest insect to the largest animal, was to be found there.

In the later mythology, a deity named Dhata (the Creator), who in the Rig-Veda has no very clearly-defined powers, but is there said to operate in the

[p. 107]

production of life and the preservation of health, is identified with Prajapati, or Brahma; and in the sense of "maker " the term is also applied to Vishnu and Krishna. Sometimes he is said to be a son of Brahma. [**]

In addition to the names of Brahma already referred to, the following are those most commonly known:--

Atmabhu, "The self-existent."

Paramesthi, "The chief sacrificer." He as the first Brahman performed all the great sacrifices of the Hindu religion.

Lokesha, "The god of the world."

Hiranyagarbha, "He who came from the golden egg."

Savitripati, "The husband of Savitri."

Adikavi, The first poet."

  

SARASVATI.

Brahma's wife is Sarasvati, the goddess of wisdom and science, the mother of the Vedas, and the inventor of the Devanagari letters. She is represented as a fair young woman, with four arms. With one of her right hands she is presenting a flower to her husband, by whose side she continually stands; and in the other she holds a book of palm-leaves, indicating that she is fond of learning. In one of her left hands she has a string of pearls, called Sivamala (Siva's garland), which serves as a rosary; and in the other is a damaru, or small drum. At other times she is represented with two arms only, seated on a lotus, playing a kind of banjo. She dwells on earth amongst men, but her special abode is with her husband in Brahmaloka.

Sarasvati having been produced from Brahma, was regarded as his daughter; hence her union with him

[p. 108]

was said to be criminal by the other gods. Sometimes she is called the wife of Vishnu, but this difficulty is explained by a legend. [**] "Sarasvati, by the standard mythological authorities, is the wife of Brahma. The Vaishnavas of Bengal have a popular legend that she was the wife of Vishnu, as were also Lakshmi and Ganga. The ladies disagreed, Sarasvati, like the other

Click to enlarge
SARASVATI.

type of learned ladies, Minerva, being something of a termagant; and Vishnu, finding that one wife was as much as even a god could manage, transferred Sarasvati to Brahma and Ganga to Siva, and contented himself with Lakshmi alone.

"Sarasvati is a goddess of some, though not of very great, importance in the Vedas. . . . She is celebrated

[p. 109]

both as a river and a goddess. She was primarily a river deity, as her name, 'the watery,' clearly denotes; and in this capacity she is celebrated in a few separate passages. Allusion is made in the hymns, as well as in the Brahmanas, to sacrifices being performed on the banks of this river, and of the adjoining Drishadvati; and the Sarasvati in particular seems to have been associated with the reputation for sanctity which . . . was ascribed to the whole region called Brahmavartta, lying between these two small streams, and situated immediately to the westward of the Jumna. The Sarasvati thus appears to have been to the early Indians what the Ganges (which is only twice named in the Rig-Veda) is to their descendants. . . . When once the river had acquired a divine character, it was quite natural that she should be regarded as the patroness of ceremonies which were celebrated on the margin of her holy waters, and that her direction and blessing should be invoked as essential to their proper performance and success. The connection into which she was thus brought with sacred rites may have led to the further step of imagining her to have an influence on the composition of the hymns which formed so important a part of the proceedings, and of identifying her with Vach, the goddess of speech. At least I have no other explanation to offer to this double character and identification. [**]

"Sarasvati is frequently invited to the sacrifices along with several other goddesses, who, however, were never, like her, river nymphs, but personifications of some department of religious worship, or sacred science. She is frequently invoked along with other deities.

"In many passages where she is celebrated, her original character is, as I have intimated, distinctly

[p. 110]

preserved. Thus in two places she is mentioned along with rivers, or fertilizing waters: 'Ye opulent waters, command riches; ye possess excellent power and immortality; ye are mistresses of wealth and progeny; may Sarasvati bestow this vitality on her worshipper.' And she is mentioned with the other well-known streams which are there named, the Sindhu, the Ganges, &c. In another place she is said to 'surpass all other rivers, and to flow pure from the mountains to the sea.' In other verses she is called upon to 'descend from the sky, from the great mountain, to the sacrifice;' and is supplicated to combine with the spouses of the other gods to afford secure protection to the worshippers. . . . It is difficult to say whether in any of the passages in which Sarasvati is invoked, even in those where she appears as the patroness of holy rites, her character as a river goddess is entirely left out of sight. . . .

"In the later mythology, as is well known, Sarasvati was identified with Vach, and became under various names the spouse of Brahma, and the goddess of wisdom and eloquence, and is invoked as a Muse. In the Mahabharata she is called the mother of the Vedas, and the same is said of Vach in the Taittariya Brahmana where she is said to be the wife of Indra, to contain within herself all worlds, and to have been sought after by the Rishis who composed the Vedic hymns, as well as by the gods through austerity." [**]

In the Puranas, Sarasvati is spoken of under other titles. A verse in the "Matsya Purana" gives authority for the belief that one goddess only is intended, though she is called by several names: "Brahma next formed from his own immaculate substance a female, who is celebrated under the names of Satarupa, Savitri,

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] Sarasvati, Gayatri, and Brahmani." In the following legend from the "Skanda Purana," [**] though by Savitri Sarasvati is intended, Gayatri represents some other person who became a second wife of Brahma. Iswara (Siva) is addressing Devi (Parvati):--

"Listen, O Devi, and I will tell you how Savitri forsook Brahma, and he in consequence espoused Gayatri. The Vedas have declared the great advantages which are derived from sacrifice, by which the gods are delighted, and therefore bestow rain upon the earth. . . . To secure therefore the verdure and vitality of the three worlds, I perform sacrifices; and, in imitation of me, sacrifices are performed by gods and men. For the same purpose Brahma and his wife Savitri, the immortals, and the holy sages repaired to Pushkara; but when all the preparations had been made, with all due rites and ceremonies, for performing the sacrifices, Savitri, detained by some household affairs, was not in attendance. A priest accordingly went to call her; but she replied, I have not yet completed my dress, nor arranged several affairs. Lakshmi, and Bhavani, and Ganga, and Svaha, and Indrani, and the wives of the other gods and of the holy sages, have not yet arrived, and how therefore can I enter the assembly alone?'

"The priest returned, and thus addressed Brahma: 'Savitri is engaged and will not come; but without a wife what advantage can be derived from these rites?' The god, incensed at the conduct of Savitri, thus spoke to Indra: 'Hasten, and, in obedience to my order, bring a wife from wherever you can find one.' Indra proceeded accordingly; and as he passed hastily along, saw a milkmaid, young, beautiful, and of a smiling countenance, carrying a jar of butter. He seized her and

[p. 112]

brought her to the assembly, when Brahma thus spoke: 'O gods and holy sages, if it seem good unto you I will espouse this Gayatri, and she shall become the mother of the Vedas, and the cause of purity to these worlds!' Upon this Brahma was united to Gayatri, who was led into the bower of the bride, and there arrayed in silken garments, and adorned with the costliest ornaments.

"At this time Savitri, accompanied by the wives of Vishnu, Rudra, and the other gods, came to the place of sacrifice. Seeing the milkmaid in the bride's bower, and the priests engaged in the performance of the sacred rites, incensed with anger, she thus addressed Pitamaha: 'O Brahma! hast thou conceived so sinful an intention as to reject me, who am thy wedded wife? Hast thou no sense of shame, that thus, influenced by love, thou committest so reprehensible an act? Thou art called the great father of gods and holy sages, and yet thou here publicly actest in a manner which must excite the derision of the three worlds. But how can I now show my face; or, deserted by my husband, call myself a wife?' Brahma replied: 'The priests informed me that the time for the sacrifice was passing away, and that it could not profitably be performed unless my wife were present, . . . and Indra having brought Gayatri, Vishnu and Rudra gave her in marriage to me. Forgive, therefore, this one act, and I will never again offend thee!'

"On hearing these words, Savitri exclaimed, 'By the powers which I have obtained by the performance of tapas, may Brahma never be worshipped in temple or sacred place, except one day in each year. . . . And, Indra, since thou didst bring that milkmaid to Brahma, thou shalt be bound in chains by thine enemies, and confined in a strange country; and thy city and station shall be occupied by thine enemies.' Addressing Vishnu,

[p. 113]

she said, 'Since thou gayest her in marriage to Brahma, shalt thou, in consequence of Bhrigu's curse, be born amongst men, and shalt endure the agony of having thy wife ravished from thee by thine enemy; and long also shalt thou wander, the humble keeper of cattle!' To Rudra she said: 'By the curse of the holy sages, shalt thou be deprived of thy manhood!' To Agni: 'Mayest thou be a devourer of all things, clean and unclean!' To the priests and Brahmans: 'Henceforth shall ye perform sacrifices solely from the desire of obtaining the usual gifts: and from covetousness alone shall ye attend temples and holy places; satisfied only shall ye be with the food of others, and dissatisfied with that of your own houses; and in quest of riches shall ye unduly perform holy rites and ceremonies! '

"Having pronounced these curses, Savitri left the assembly, and was accompanied for a short distance by Lakshmi and the other goddesses, when they all declared their intention of returning. On hearing this, Savitri was incensed, and thus addressed them: 'Since you now forsake me, O Lakshmi! mayest thou never remain stationary in one place; [**] and mayest thou always abide with the vile, the inconstant, the contemptible, the sinful, the cruel, the foolish, and the barbarian! And, Indrani, when Indra incurs the guilt of Brahmanicide by slaying Tvastri's son, then shall Nahusha acquire his kingdom, and, desirous of obtaining thee, shall exclaim, "Am I not Indra? why then does not the young and lovely Indrani wait upon me? If I do not obtain her, I will slay all the gods." Thou on learning his wishes shalt remain in thy house immersed in grief, and borne down by the weight of my curse!' Savitri then pronounced this curse on the wives of the gods collectively: 'May

[p. 114]

you all remain barren; and may you never enjoy the pleasure of having children!' Vishnu then tried in vain to appease her."

After Savitri's angry departure from the assembly, Gayatri modified the curses that had been pronounced. She promised all kinds of blessing, including final absorption into him, to all the worshippers of Brahma. Though Indra be bound, his son should release him. Though Vishnu lost his wife, he should regain her. Though Rudra be deprived of his manhood, the Linga as his representative should be universally worshipped. Though men made gifts to the Brahmans, it would be because they reverenced them as gods. And though the goddesses could not have children of their own, this would not cause them regret.

The "Padma Purana" gives a happier termination to the story. Vishnu and Lakshmi, at Brahma's request, followed Savitri when she left the assembly, and induced her to return. On re-entering, Brahma asked what she wished him to do with Gayatri. Savitri was too bashful to speak; whereupon Gayatri threw herself at her feet. Savitri raised her, and embracing her said: "A wife ought to obey the wishes and orders of her husband; for that wife who reproaches her husband, who is complaining and quarrelsome, and instead of being his life, deprives him by her conduct of length of years, shall, when she dies, most assuredly go to hell. Considering this, the virtuous wife will do nothing displeasing to her husband; therefore let us both be attached to Brahma." "So be it," said Gayatri; "thy orders will I always obey, and esteem thy friendship precious as my life. Thy daughter am I, O goddess! Deign to protect me!" It would appear that between the time when the "Matsya Purana" was composed and the date of the Padma,

[p. 115]

considerable change had come in the character of the ideal woman. Or it may be that the writer of the Padma wished to give a better ideal to the wives of his day.

In a legend in the "Varaha Purana," Sarasvati is addressed as Gayatri, Sarasvati, Maheshvari (one of the names of Parvati), and also Savitri. Her most common name is Sarasvati, by which name, as the goddess of learning, she is regularly worshipped once a year.

Footnotes

^99:* "Dharma Shastra," chaps. i.--v.

^99:+ According to the "Brahma Purana," another name, Apava (who sports on the waters), is given Brahma, which has a similar, though not identical, application with Narayana. Apava, according to that Purana, divided himself into two parts, male and female, from whom proceeded Vishnu, who in his turn created Viraj, who brought the first man into the world. Wilson says, "According to the commentator on this passage, the first stage was the creation of Apava, or Vishistha, or Viraj by Vishnu, through the agency of Brahma; and the next was the creation of Manu by Viraj."--Dowson, s.v. "Apave."

^100:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 31.

^100:+ Page 18.

^100:++ In later writings Vishnu, in a special incarnation, is said to have assumed this form.

^100: section Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 317.

^101:* See Part ii. chap. x.

^101:+ The "Bhagavata Purana" says there was another son from this marriage, named Priyavrata. Being dissatisfied with the work of the Sun because he illuminated only one-half of the world at a time, he followed him seven times in a flaming chariot of equal velocity, like another sun, and thus turned night into day. Brahma stopped him. The ruts made by his chariot wheels became the seven oceans; and thus the seven continents were made.--Dowson.

^101:++ Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 273.

^103:* Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 276.

^105:* Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 276.

^105:+ Page 102.

^105:++ Page 496.

^106:* Ward, ii. 30.

^106:+ Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 271.

^107:* Dowson, s.v.

^108:* Wilson's Works, ii. 187.

^109:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 339.

^110:* Muir, O. S. T., y. 337 ff.

^111:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 320.

^113:* Lakshmi is the goddess of fortune.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 116]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

VISHNU AND LAKSHMI.

  

VISHNU.

VISHNU is called the second person of the Hindu Trimurti, or Triad: but though called second, it must not be supposed that he is regarded as in any way inferior to Brahma. In some books Brahma is said to be the first cause of all things, in others it is as strongly asserted that Vishnu has this honour; while in others it is claimed for Siva. As Brahma's special work is creation, that of Vishnu is preservation. In the following passage from the "Padma Purana," it is taught that Vishnu is the supreme cause, thus identifying him with Brahma, and also that his special work is to preserve:--"In the beginning of creation, the great Vishnu, desirous of creating the whole world, became threefold; Creator, Preserver, Destroyer. In order to create this world, the Supreme Spirit produced from the right side of his body himself as Brahma; then, in order to preserve the world, he produced from his left side Vishnu; and in order to destroy the world, he produced from the middle of his body the eternal Siva. Some worship Brahma, others Vishnu, others Siva; but Vishnu, one yet threefold, creates, preserves, and destroys: therefore let the pious make no difference between the three."

[p. 117]

The essence of the teaching of the "Vishnu Purana" is given in a few lines. [**] "Listen to the complete compendium of the Purana according to its tenor. The world was produced from Vishnu; it exists in him; he

Click to enlarge
VISHNU.

is the cause of its continuance and cessation; he is the world." Immediately afterwards is a hymn addressed to him which commences as follows:--"Glory to the unchangeable, holy, eternal, supreme Vishnu, of one

[p. 118]

universal nature, the mighty over all; to him who is Hiranyagarbha (Brahma), Hari (Vishnu), and Sankara (Siva); the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the world." As will be noticed later on, Siva is commonly called Mahadeva (the great god). By those who make him the supreme object of worship, Vishnu is commonly called Narayana, though this was originally a name of Brahma. These generally, to a large extent, disregard his incarnations, and address their praise to him as the greatest of all. And frequently he is indicated by the word Ishwar (God), as though he were the God. But this term is far more frequently employed for Siva.

"The word Vishnu in the Puranas is generally said to be derived from the root vis (to enter); entering in or pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the Vedas: 'Having created that (world), he then afterwards enters into it.' According to the 'Matsya Purana,' the name alludes to his entering into the mundane egg; according to the 'Padma Purana,' it refers to his entering into or combining with Prakriti, as Purush or spirit." [**]

In the "Bhagavata Purana" [*+] is the following legend to show the superiority of Vishnu:--"Once when the holy sages were performing a sacrifice on the banks of the Sarasvati, a dispute arose amongst them as to which of the three gods was greatest. They sent Bhrigu, the son of Brahma, to ascertain this point. He first went to the heaven of Brahma, and, desirous of discovering the truth, entered his court without paying him the usual honours. Incensed at this disrespect, Brahma, glowed with anger; but recollecting that it was caused by his own son, he assuaged the fire of wrath which had risen in his mind. Bhrigu then proceeded to Kailasa;

[p. 119]

but when Maheshwara (Siva) hastened to embrace him as a brother, he turned away from the proffered embrace. Enraged at such misconduct, the god, seizing his trident, prepared to kill the divine sage; but Parvati fell at his feet, and by her words appeased the anger of her lord. Bhrigu next went to Vishnu's heaven, and kicked the god's breast, as he lay slumbering in the lap of Lakshmi. The lord, rising from his couch, and bowing respectfully to Bhrigu, thus addressed him: 'Welcome to thee, O Brahman! Be seated for a little, and deign to excuse the fault which through ignorance I have committed [in not performing duties due to a guest], and the hurt which your tender foot must have received!' Having thus spoken, he rubbed the foot of Bhrigu with his own hands, and added, 'To-day am I a highly honoured vessel, since thou, O lord! hast imprinted on my breast the dust of thy sin-dispelling foot.' When Vishnu had finished speaking, Bhrigu was so affected by these benevolent words, that he was unable to reply, and departed in silence, whilst tears of devout emotion rushed from his eyes. On his narrating his adventures to the saints on the banks of the Sarasvati, their doubts were immediately dispelled; they believed Vishnu to be the greatest of the three gods, because he was exempt from impatience and passion."

In the "Padma Purana " [**] Siva is represented as admitting Vishnu's superiority to himself. Addressing his wife, he says: "I will acquaint thee with the real essence and form of Vishnu: know then that he is in truth Narayana, the Supreme Spirit, and Parabrahma (the great Brahma), without beginning or end, omniscient, and omnipresent; eternal, unchangeable, and supremely happy. He is Siva, Hiranyagarbha, and

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] Surya; he is more excellent than all the gods, even than I myself., But it is impossible for me, or Brahma, or the gods, to declare the greatness of Vasudeva, the originator and lord of the universe."

In the "Varaha Purana" [**] the special work of Vishnu as preserver is described:--"The supreme god Narayana having conceived the thought of creating this universe, considered also that it was necessary that it should be protected after it was created; 'but as it is impossible for an incorporeal being to exert action, let me produce from my own essence a corporeal being, by means of whom I may protect the world.' Having thus reflected, the pre-existing Narayana created from his own substance an ungenerated and divine form, on whom he bestowed these blessings: 'Be thou the framer of all things, O Vishnu! Be thou always the protector of the three worlds, and the adored of all men. Be thou omniscient and almighty; and do thou at all times accomplish the wishes of Brahma, and the gods.' The Supreme Spirit then resumed his essential nature. Vishnu, as he meditated on the purpose for which he had been produced, sank into a mysterious slumber; and as in his sleep he imagined the production of various things, a lotus sprang from his navel. In the centre of this lotus Brahma appeared; and Vishnu, beholding the production of his body, was delighted." The phraseology of this passage gives countenance to what was said before, that in the worship of some of the Hindus, Narayana is regarded as identical with Brahma the Supreme.

In pictures Vishnu is represented as a black man with four arms: in one hand he holds a club; in another a shell; in a third a chakra, or discus, with

[p. 121]

which he slew his enemies; and in the fourth a lotus. He rides upon the bird Garuda, and is dressed in yellow robes.

The following description of Vaikuntha, the heaven of Vishnu, is from the Mahabharata. [**] It is made entirely of gold, and is 80,000 miles in circumference. All its buildings are made of jewels. The pillars and ornaments of the buildings are of precious stones. The crystal waters of the Ganges fall from the higher heavens on the head of Druva; from thence into the hair of the seven Rishis; and from thence they fall and form a river. Here are also five pools containing blue, red, and white lotuses. On a seat glorious as the meridian sun, sitting on white lotuses, is Vishnu; and on his right hand Lakshmi, who shines like a continued blaze of lightning, and from whose body the fragrance of the lotus extends 800 miles.

This deity is worshipped not only under the name and in the form of Vishnu, but also in one of his many incarnations. Whenever any great calamity occurred in the world, or the wickedness of any of its inhabitants proved an unbearable nuisance to the gods, Vishnu, as Preserver, had to lay aside his invisibility, come to earth in some form, generally human, and, when his work was done, he returned again to the skies. There is no certainty as to the number of times he has become incarnate. Some Puranas describe ten Avataras, as they are called; some mention twenty-four; and sometimes declare that they are innumerable. Ten is the commonly received number, and these are the most important ones. They will be considered in due order. Of these ten, nine have already been accomplished; one, the Kalki, is still future. "Some of these Avataras are of an entirely cosmical

[p. 122]

character; others, however, are probably based on historical events, the leading personage of which was gradually endowed with divine attributes, until he was regarded as the incarnation of the deity himself." In the "Matsya Purana" [**] is the following legend, which gives a reason for the manifold and varied appearances of this deity:--

"The asuras (demons, lit. non-suras) having been repeatedly defeated by the suras (gods), and deprived of all share of the sacrifices, were meditating to withdraw from the unavailing contest, when Sukra, their preceptor, determined to propitiate Siva by a severe tapas (penance), and procure from him a charm by means of which they could conquer. Having left them for this purpose, the asuras said amongst themselves, 'As our preceptor has laid aside his arms and assumed the ascetic dress, how shall we be able to gain a victory over the suras? Let us seek refuge with the mother of Kavya (Sukra), and endure this distress till he shall return; and then let us fight!' Having thus resolved, they hastened to Kavya's mother, who, protecting them, said, 'Fear not! remain near me, and no danger shall approach you!'

"The suras, seeing the asuras thus protected, were about to attack them, when the goddess in anger thus addressed Indra: 'If thou desist not, I will deprive you of the sovereignty of heaven.' Alarmed at her angry words, and dreading her magic power, Indra was yielding to her desire, when Vishnu appeared and said to him, Yield not, for I will assist you!' The goddess observing that Indra was protected by Vishnu, angrily said, 'Now let the contending foes behold how the power of my devotions shall subdue both Indra and

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] Vishnu.' Finding themselves likely to be overcome, they asked each other, 'How shall we liberate ourselves from this difficulty?' Indra then said to Vishnu, 'Hasten to conquer before she has finished her invocations, or we shall be defeated!' Then Vishnu, considering the detriment that must be incurred by the gods should the mother of Kavya bring her incantations to a successful issue, deemed that the slaying of a woman under such circumstances was allowable, seized his discus, and smote off her head. Bhrigu, seeing this horrid deed of the slaughter of a woman and the death of his wife, was violently incensed, and thus cursed Vishnu: 'Since thou hast knowingly murdered a woman, thou shalt be born seven times amongst men;' he afterwards somewhat modified its force as he said, 'but each birth shall be for the advantage of the world, and for the restoration of justice.'"

It is interesting to know the character of the tapas (penance) by which Sukra hoped to gain power over the gods. He was to imbibe the smoke of a fire of chaff with his head downwards for a thousand years. He accomplished this difficult feat, and by it so pleased Siva, that he gave him many boons, including that of superiority over the gods. But the asuras did not profit long by this penance of their preceptor, as they were deceived by the preceptor of the gods, who, assuming Sukra's form, gave them bad advice, which they followed to their hurt.

In the "Vishnu Purana" [**] the benefits to be hoped for from the worship of Vishnu are taught. The question is asked, "By what acts can men free themselves from Yama?" The reply given is that which was once told by a holy Muni who recollected his former births,

[p. 124]

and by whom "what was, and what will be, was accurately told." "Yama, beholding one of his servants with a noose in his hands, whispered to him and said, 'Keep clear of the worshippers of Madhusudana (Vishnu). I am lord of all men, the Vaishnavas (worshippers of Vishnu) excepted. I was appointed by Brahma to restrain mankind, and regulate the consequences of good and evil in the universe. But he who worships Hari is independent of me. He who through holy knowledge diligently adores the lotus-foot of Hari is released from all the bonds of sin, and you must avoid him as you would fire fed with oil.' And again: 'He who pleases Vishnu obtains all terrestrial enjoyments, heaven, and a place in heaven; and, what is best of all, final liberation: whatever he wishes, and to whatever extent, whether much or little, he receives it when Achyuta (the undecaying one) is content with him.'"

The means by which the favour of this god is to be obtained are then explained:--"The supreme Vishnu is propitiated by a man who observes the institutions of caste, order, and purificatory practices; no other path is the way to please him. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to him; he who murmurs prayer, prays to him; he who injures living creatures, injures him: for Hari is all things. Kesava is most pleased with him who does good to others; who never utters abuse, calumny, or untruth; who never covets another's wife or another's wealth, and who bears ill-will towards none; who never beats nor slays any animate or inanimate thing; who is ever diligent in the service of the gods, of the Brahmans, and of his spiritual preceptor; who is ever desirous of the welfare of all creatures, of his children, and of his own soul; in whose pure heart no pleasure is derived from the imperfections of love and

[p. 125]

hatred. The man who conforms to the duties enjoined by scriptural authority for every caste and condition of life is he who best worships Vishnu; there is no other mode."

Of all the deities now reverenced in India, Vishnu in his many forms has perhaps the largest number of worshippers; and the account of his life and the praises presented to him occupy a very large portion of the later Hindu scriptures. This pre-eminence was certainly not recognized in the Vedic Age, as the following passage will show:--

"In the Rig-Veda are the following verses:--'May the gods preserve us from the place from which Vishnu strode over the seven regions of the earth. Vishnu strode over this [universe]; in three places he planted his step; [the world or his step] was enveloped in his dust. Vishnu, the unconquerable preserver, strode three steps.' [**] In these verses there is probably the germ of the Dwarf Incarnation, and also of the attribute of Preserver. The interpretations of two commentators of the three strides of Vishnu are as follows:--One regards him 'as a god, who, in what are called his three strides, is manifested in a threefold form as Agni on earth, as Indra or Vayu in the atmosphere, and as the Sun in heaven;' [*+] the other interprets Vishnu's three strides as 'the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun.'" [*++]

Vishnu, in the Rig-Veda, is said "to have established the heavens and the earth; to contain all the world in his strides; to have, with Indra, made the atmosphere wide, stretched out the worlds, produced the Sun, the Dawn, and Fire; to have received the homage of Varuna; whilst his greatness is described as having no limit within

[p. 126]

the ken of present or future beings. The attributes ascribed to Vishnu in some of these passages are such that, if the latter stood alone in the Rig-Veda, they might lead us to suppose that he was regarded by the Vedic Rishis as the chief of all the gods. But Indra is associated with Vishnu even in some of those texts in which the latter is most highly magnified: nay, in one place, the power by which Vishnu takes his three strides is described as being derived from Indra; in another text, Vishnu is represented as celebrating Indra's praise; whilst in another verse, Vishnu is said to have been generated by Soma. It is also a fact that the hymns and verses which are dedicated to the praises of Indra, Agni, etc., are extremely numerous, whilst the entire hymns and separate verses in which Vishnu is celebrated are much fewer . . . Vishnu is introduced as the subject of laudation among a crowd of other divinities, from which he is there in no way distinguished as being in any respect superior. From this fact we may conclude that he was regarded by those writers as on a footing of equality with the other deities. Further, the Rig-Veda contains numerous texts in which the Rishis ascribe to Indra, Varuna, and other gods, the same high and awful attributes and functions which are spoken of in other hymns as belonging to Vishnu. . . . If then we look to the large number of texts in which some of the other gods are celebrated, and to the comparatively small number of those in which Vishnu is exclusively or prominently magnified, we shall come to the conclusion that the latter deity occupied a somewhat subordinate place in the estimation and affections of the ancient Rishis." [**]

Amongst the thousand names of Vishnu, the following,

[p. 127]

in addition to those already given, are most commonly known:--

Madhusudana, the destroyer of Madhu; and Kaitabhajit, the conqueror of Kaitabha. These were two demons who issued from Vishnu's ear as he lay asleep on the serpent Sesha at the end of a Kalpa, [**] and were about to destroy Brahma, as he sat on the lotus which sprang from Vishnu's navel, when this deity slew them, and hence obtained these names

Vaikunthanath, "The Lord of Paradise."

Kesava, "He who has excellent hair."

Madhava, "Made of honey; or a descendant of Madhu."

Swayambhu, "The self-existent one."

Pitamvara, "He who wears yellow garments."

Janarddana, "He who causes the people to worship."

Vishvamvara, "The protector of the world."

Hari, "The saviour; " lit. he who takes possession of.

Ananta, "The endless."

Damodara, "Bound with a rope."

Mukunda, "The deliverer."

Purusha, "The man," or "The spirit."

Purushottama, "The supreme man or spirit."

Yajneswara, "The lord of sacrifice."

  

LAKSHMI.

Lakshmi, or very commonly Sri, is the wife of Vishnu, and under various names appears in this relation in his various incarnations. "As the lord of the worlds, the god of gods, Janarddana descends amongst mankind in various shapes; so does his coadjutor Sri. Thus, when Hari was born a dwarf, the son of Aditi, Lakshmi

[p. 128]

appeared from the lotus as Padma, or Kamala; when he was born as Rama (Parasurama) of the race of Bhrigu, she was Dharani; when he was Raghava (Ramachandra), she was Sita; and when he was Krishna, she was Rukmini. In the other descents of Vishnu she was his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vishnu to assume." [**]

There are two somewhat contradictory accounts of her origin; the "Vishnu Purana" explains this. [*+] "The divinities Dhata and Vidhata were born to Bhrigu by Khyati, as was a daughter Sri, the wife of Narayana, the god of gods." The question is asked, "It is commonly said that Sri was born from the sea of milk, when it was churned for ambrosia; how then can you say that she was the daughter of Bhrigu and Khyati?" In answer to this question, a most elaborate account of her virtues is given: "Sri, the bride of Vishnu, the mother of the world, is eternal, imperishable; as he is all-pervading, so she is omnipresent. Vishnu is meaning, she is speech; Hari is polity, she is prudence; Vishnu is understanding, she is intellect; he is righteousness, she is devotion; Sri is the earth, Hari is its support. In a word, of gods, animals, and men, Hari is all that is called male; Lakshmi is all that is termed female; there is nothing else than they." Later on [*++] we read, "Her first birth was as the daughter of Bhrigu and Khyati; it was at a subsequent period that she was produced from the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the demons and the gods."

The account of the churning of the ocean, to which

[p. 129]

frequent reference is made in the Hindu scriptures, is found in the Ramayana, and several of the Puranas; though there are some discrepancies, they agree in the main. The reason for this great act is as follows:-- [**] A saint named Durvaras, a portion of Siva, was travelling, when he met a celestial nymph with a sweet-smelling

Click to enlarge
LAKSHMI.

garland, which at his request she gave to him. Excited with the scent, he was dancing, when he met Indra, seated on his elephant. To please the mighty god, the saint presented him with the garland, who placed it upon his elephant's bead. The elephant in his turn

[p. 130]

becoming excited, seized the garland with his trunk and threw it upon the ground. Durvaras, seeing his gift slighted, cursed the god in his anger, and told him that his kingdom should be overwhelmed with ruin. From that time Indra's power began to wane; for though he sought forgiveness, the Brahman's anger was not to be appeased. As the effects of the curse were experienced by the gods, they, fearing they should be overcome by the asuras, fled to Brahma for help. He told them he could not assist them; that Vishnu alone could do this, whom he advised them to seek. Brahma conducted them to Vishnu; and, having sufficiently lauded him, caused him to lend a willing ear to their request. In the following lines, [**] put into verse, from the "Vishnu Purana," we have their prayer, Vishnu's advice and its result:--

"The gods addressed the mighty Vishnu thus:
  Conquered in battle by the evil demons,
  We fly to thee for succour; soul of all,
  Pity and by thy might deliver us!'
  Hari, the lord, creator of the world,
  Thus by the gods implored, all graciously
  Replied, 'Your strength shall be restored, ye gods--
  Only accomplish what I now command:
  Unite yourselves in peaceful combination
  With these your foes; collect all plants and herbs
  Of diverse kinds from every quarter; cast them
  Into the sea of milk; take Mandara,
  The mountain, for a churning stick, and Vasuki,
  The serpent, for a rope; together churn
  The ocean to produce the beverage--
  Source of all strength and immortality--
  Then reckon on mine aid: I will take care
  Your foes shall share your toil, but not partake
  In its reward, or drink th' immortal draught.'

[p. 131]

[paragraph continues]  Thus by the god of gods advised, the host
  United in alliance with the demons.
  Straightway they gathered various herbs, and cast them
  Into the waters; then they took the mountain
  To serve as churning-staff; and next the snake
  To serve as cord, and in the ocean's midst
  Hari himself, present in tortoise form,
  Became a pivot for the churning-staff.
  Then did they churn the sea of milk; and first
  Out of the waters rose the sacred cow--
  God-worshipped Surabhi--eternal fountain
  Of milk and offerings of butter; next,
  While holy Siddhas wondered at the sight,
  With eyes all rolling, Varuni uprose--
  Goddess of Wine. Then from the whirlpool sprang
  Fair Parijata, tree of Paradise, delight
  Of heavenly maidens, with its fragrant blossoms
  Perfuming the whole world. Th' Apsarasas,
  Troop of celestial nymphs, matchless in grace,
  Perfect in loveliness, were next produced.
  Then from the sea uprose the cool-rayed moon,
  Which Mahadeva seized; terrific poison
  Next issued from the waters--this the snake-gods
  Claimed as their own. Then, seated on a lotus,
  Beauty's bright goddess, peerless Sri, arose
  Out of the waves; and with her, robed in white,
  Came forth Dhanvantari, the gods' physician.
  High in his hand he bore the cup of nectar--
  Life-giving draught--longed for by gods and demons."

On Sri's appearance the sages were enraptured, the heavenly choristers sang her praises, and the celestial nymphs danced before her. Ganga and the other sacred streams followed her, and the heavenly elephants took up their pure waters in golden vessels and poured them upon her. The sea of milk presented her with a wreath of unfading flowers; and the artist of the gods decorated her with lovely ornaments. Thus bathed, attired, and adorned, the goddess, in the presence of the gods, cast herself upon the breast of Hari, and, reclining there,

[p. 132]

gazed upon the gods, who were enraptured with her. Siva was most violent and wished to possess himself of her. From the demons she turned away; hence they were miserable. Seeing the cup of nectar, they tried to seize it, when Vishnu, assuming the appearance of a beautiful woman, attracted their attention, whilst the gods quaffed the divine cup. The result was that in the conflict which followed the gods were successful.

The following account of Sri is from the Ramayana:--

      "When many a year had fled,
  Up floated, on her lotus bed,
  A maiden fair, and tender-eyed,
  In the young flush of beauty's pride.
  She shone with pearl and golden sheen,
  And seals of glory stamped her queen.
  On each round arm glowed many a gem,
  On her smooth brows a diadem.
  Rolling in waves beneath her crown,
  The glory of her hair rolled down.
  Pearls on her neck of price untold,
  The lady shone like burnished gold.
  Queen of the gods, she leapt to land,
  A lotus in her perfect hand,
  And fondly, of the lotus sprung,
  To lotus-bearing Vishnu clung.
  Her, gods above and men below
  As Beauty's Queen and Fortune know." [**]

As noticed in this last extract, Lakshmi, or Sri, is regarded as the goddess of Love, Beauty, and Prosperity. When a man is growing rich, it is said that Lakshmi has come to dwell with him; whilst those in adversity are spoken of as "forsaken of Lakshmi." In pictures she is painted as a lady of a bright golden colour, seated on a lotus, with two arms.

"The name of Lakshmi as that of a goddess does not

[p. 133]

occur in the Rig-Veda, though the word itself is found in its signification as prosperity." [**]

Lakshmi is known also by the following names:--

Haripriya, "The beloved of Hari."

Padma, "The Lotus," and Padmalaya, "She who dwells on a lotus."

Jaladhija, "The ocean-born."

Chanchala, "The fickle one."

Lokamata, "The mother of the world."

Footnotes

^117:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 607.

^118:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 3, note.

^118:+ Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 240.

^119:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 246.

^120:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 246.

^121:* Ward. ii. 14.

^122:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 244.

^123:* Pp. 287-290.

^125:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 63.

^125:+ Ibid. iv. 78 ff.

^125:++ Ibid.

^126:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 98.

^127:* See part ii. chap. x.

^128:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 80.

^128:+ Page 59.

^128:++ Page 80.

^129:* "Vishnu Purana," book i. chap. ix.

^130:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 499.

^132:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 204.

^133:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 348.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 134]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE INCARNATIONS OR AVATARAS OF VISHNU.

  

1. THE MATSYA OR FISH AVATARA.

THE earliest account of what was afterwards regarded as an incarnation of Vishnu is found in the "Satapatha Brahmana." It will be noticed that though in this passage a wonderful fish is described, it is not said to have been an incarnation of any of the gods. The Mahabharata says that Brahma assumed this form; whilst the Puranas teach that the fish here spoken of was Vishnu. This transfer of work from one deity to another is not a matter of much surprise, when we remember how frequently it is declared that all the various gods are but forms of one supreme being. "It should be noticed that the Manu here referred to is regarded as a progenitor of the human race, and is represented as conciliating the Supreme Being by his piety in an age of universal depravity." Here is the passage: [**]

"There lived in ancient time a holy man
  Called Manu, who, by penances and prayers,
  Had won the favour of the lord of heaven.
  One day they brought him water for ablution;

[p. 135]

 Then, as he washed his hands,. a little fish
  Appeared, and spoke in human accents thus:
  'Take care of me, and I will be thy saviour.'
  'From what wilt thou preserve me?' Manu asked.
  The fish replied, 'A flood will sweep away

Click to enlarge
THE MATSYA AVATARA.

 All creatures; I will rescue thee from that.'
  'But how shall I preserve thee?' Manu said.
  The fish rejoined, 'So long as we are small,
  We are in constant danger of destruction,
  For fish eat fish; so keep me in a jar.

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues]  When I outgrow the, jar, then dig a trench,
  And place me there; when I outgrow the trench,
  Then take me to the ocean--I shall then
  Be out of reach of danger.' Having thus
  Instructed Manu, straightway rapidly
  The fish grew larger; then he spake again:
  'In such and such a year the flood will come;
  Therefore construct a ship, and pay me homage.
  When the flood rises, enter thou the ship,
  And I will rescue thee.' So Manu did
  As he was ordered, and preserved the fish,
  Then carried it in safety to the ocean;
  And in the very year the fish enjoined
  He built a ship, and paid the fish respect,
  And there took refuge when the flood arose.
  Soon near him swam the fish, and to its horn
  Manu made fast the cable of his vessel.
  Thus drawn along the waters, Manu passed
  Beyond the northern mountain. Then the fish,
  Addressing Manu, said, 'I have preserved thee,
  Quickly attach the ship to yonder tree;
  But, lest the waters sink from under thee,
  As fast as they subside, so fast shalt thou
  Descend the mountain gently after them.'
  Thus he descended front the northern mountain.
  The flood had swept away all living creatures;
  Manu alone was left."

The account from the Mahabharata which now follows has also been put into verse by Professor Monier Williams:-- [**]

"Along the ocean in that stately ship was borne the lord of men, and through
  Its dancing, tumbling billows, and its roaring waters; and the bark,
  Tossed to and fro by violent winds, reeled on the surface of the deep,
  Staggering and trembling like a drunken woman. Land was seen no more,

[p. 137]

[paragraph continues]  Nor far horizon, nor the space between; for everywhere around
  Spread the wild waste of waters, reeking atmosphere, and boundless sky.
  And now when all the world was deluged, nought appeared above the waves
  But Manu and the seven sages, and the fish that drew the bark.
  Unwearied, thus for years on years the fish propelled the ship across
  The heaped-up waters, till at length it bore the vessel to the peak
  Of Himavan; then softly smiling, thus the fish addressed the sage:
  'Haste, now, to bind thy ship to this high crag. Know me, the lord of all,
  The great Creator Brahma, mightier than all might, omnipotent.
  BBy me, in fishlike shape, hast thou been saved in dire emergency.
  From Manu all creation, gods, asuras, men, must be produced;
  By him all the world must be created--that which moves and moveth not.'"

The typical Puranic account of this Avatara is that of the "Bhagavata Purana" which is given by Sir William Jones in the "Asiatic Soc. Res." [**] With this the accounts in the other Puranas agree in the main: some are more condensed, others, as the "Matsya Purana," are considerably extended; for it was as the fish was guiding the vessel in which Manu was saved that Vishnu, in this form, is said to have dictated the whole of that Purana. All the Puranas agree in regarding the fish as an incarnation of Vishnu, and not of Brahma. Now follows the account from the Bhagavata:--

"Desiring the preservation of herds, Brahmans, genii, and virtuous men--of the Vedas, of law, and of precious things--the Lord of the Universe assumes many bodily shapes; but though he pervades, like the air, a variety of beings, yet he is himself unvaried, since he has no qualities subject to change. At the close of the last Kalpa there was a general destruction, occasioned by the sleeping Brahma, whence his creatures in different worlds

[p. 138]

were drowned in a vast ocean. Brahma being inclined to slumber, desiring repose after a lapse of ages, the strong demon Hayagriva came near him, and stole the Vedas, which had flowed from his lips.

"When Hari, the preserver of the universe, discovered this deed of the prince of the Danavas, he took the shape of a minute fish, called Saphari. A holy king named Satyavrata then reigned--a servant of the spirit which moved on the waves; and so devout, that water was his only sustenance. He was the child of the Sun, and in the present Kalpa [**] is invested by Narayana with the office of Manu (i.e. the progenitor and lord of men), by the name of Sraddhadeva, or the god of obsequies. One day as he was making a libation in the river Kritamala, and held water in the palm of his hand, he perceived a small fish moving in it. The King of Dravira immediately dropped the fish into the river, together with the water which he had taken from it; when the Saphari thus addressed the benevolent monarch: 'How canst thou, O king, who showiest affection to the oppressed, leave me in this river water, where I am too weak to resist the monsters of the stream, who fill me with dread?' He, not knowing who had assumed the form of a fish, applied his mind to the preservation of the Saphari, both from good-nature and from regard to his own soul; and, having heard his very suppliant address, he kindly placed it under his protection in a small vase full of water; but in a single night its bulk was so increased that it could not be contained in the jar, and thus again addressed the illustrious prince: I am not pleased with living miserably in this little vase; make me a large mansion, where I may dwell in comfort.' The king, removing it thence, placed it in the water of

[p. 139]

a cistern; but it grew three cubits in less than fifty minutes, and said, 'O king! it pleases me not to stay vainly in this narrow cistern; since thou hast granted me an asylum, give me a spacious habitation.' He then removed it and placed it in a pool, where, having ample space around its body, it became a fish of considerable size. 'This abode, O king, is not convenient for me, who must swim at large in the waters; exert thyself for my safety, and remove me to a deep lake!' Thus addressed, the pious monarch threw the suppliant into a lake, and, when it grew of equal bulk with that piece of water, he cast the vast fish into the sea. When the fish was thrown into the waves, he thus again spoke to Satyavrata: 'Here the horned sharks and other monsters of great strength will devour me; thou shouldest not, O valiant man, leave me in this ocean.'

"Thus repeatedly deluded by the fish, who had addressed him with gentle words, the king said, 'Who art thou that beguilest me in that assumed shape? Never before have I seen or heard of so prodigious an inhabitant of the waters, who, like thee, has filled up in a single day a lake a hundred leagues in circumference. Surely thou art Bhagavat who appears before me; the great Hari, whose dwelling was on the waves; and who now, in compassion to thy servants, bears the form of the natives of the deep. Salutation and praise to thee, O first male, the lord of creation, of preservation, of destruction! Thou art the highest object, the supreme ruler, of us thy adorers, who piously seek thee. All thy delusive descents in this world give existence to various beings; yet I am anxious to know for what cause that shape has been assumed by thee. Let me not, O lotus-eyed, approach in vain the feet of a deity whose perfect benevolence has been extended to all; when thou hast

[p. 140]

shown us to our amazement the appearance of other bodies, not in reality existing, but successively exhibited.'

"The lord of the universe, loving the pious man who thus implored him, and intending to preserve him from the sea of destruction caused by the depravity of the age, thus told him how he was to act: 'In seven days from the present time, O thou tamer of enemies! the three worlds will be plunged in an ocean of death; but, in the midst of the destroying waves, a large vessel sent by me for thy use shall stand before thee. Then thou shalt take all medicinal herbs, all the varieties of seeds, and accompanied by seven saints, encircled by pairs of brute animals, thou shalt enter the spacious ark, and continue in it secure from the flood, on one immense ocean without light, except the radiance of thy holy companions. When the ship shall be agitated with an impetuous wind, thou shalt fasten it with a large sea serpent on my horn; for I will be near thee, drawing the vessel, with thee and thy attendants. I will remain. on the ocean, O chief of men, until a night of Brahma [**] shall be completely ended. Thou shalt then know my true greatness, rightly named the Supreme Godhead; by my favour all thy questions shall be answered, and thy mind abundantly instructed.'

"Hari, having thus directed the monarch, disappeared; and Satyavrata humbly waited for the time which the ruler of our senses had appointed. The pious king having scattered toward the east the pointed blades of the grass darbha, and turning his face towards the north, sat meditating on the feet of the god who had borne the form of a fish. The sea, overwhelming its shores, deluged the whole earth, and it was soon perceived to be augmented by showers from immense clouds. He,

[p. 141]

still meditating on the command of Bhagavat, saw the vessel advancing, and entered it with the chiefs of Brahmans, having carried into it the medicinal plants, and conformed to the directions of Hari. The saints thus addressed him: 'O king, meditate on Kesava; who will surely deliver us from this danger, and grant us prosperity.' The god being invoked by the monarch, appeared again distinctly on the vast ocean in the form. of a fish, blazing like gold, extending a million of leagues, with one stupendous horn; on which the king, as he had been before commanded by Hari, tied the ship with a cable made of a vast serpent, and, happy in his preservation, stood praising the destroyer of Madhu. When the monarch had finished his hymn, the primeval male, Bhagavat, who watched for his safety on the greater expanse of water, spake aloud to his own divine essence, pronouncing a sacred Purana [the 'Matsya Purana'], which contained the rules of the Sankhya philosophy; but it was an infinite mystery to be concealed within the breast of Satyavrata; who, sitting in the vessel with the saints, heard the principle of soul, the Eternal Being, proclaimed by the preserving power. Then Hari, rising together with Brahma from the destructive deluge, which was now abated, slew the demon Hayagriva, and recovered the sacred books."

Footnotes

^134:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 32.

^136:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 394.

^137:* Vol. i. 230 ff.

^138:* See part ii. chap. x.

^140:* See part ii. chap. x.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

2. THE KURMA OR TORTOISE AVATARA.

This incarnation was necessitated by the fact that the gods were in danger of losing their authority over the demons. In their distress they applied to Vishnu for help, who told them to churn the sea of milk that they might procure the Amrita, or water of life, by which they would be made strong, and promised to become the

[p. 142]

tortoise on which the mountain Mandara as a churning stick should rest. As a full account of this operation has been already given when describing Lakshmi, who was one of its chief products, there is no necessity to repeat it here. A few additional particulars will be found in the following extract from the "Vishnu Purana:"-- [**]

"Hari having been entreated to help the gods, thus spoke: 'I will restore your strength. Do you act as I enjoin. Let all the gods and asuras cast all sorts of medicinal herbs into the sea of milk, and together churn the ocean for ambrosia, depending on my aid. To secure the assistance of the daityas, you must be at peace with them, and engage to give them an equal share of your associated toil; promising them that by drinking of the amrita . . . they shall become mighty and immortal. I will take care that the enemies of the gods shall not partake of the precious draught; they shall only share in the labour.'"

The gods entered into an arrangement with the asuras, and together they made the necessary preparations. " The assembled gods were stationed by Krishna at the tail of the serpent Vasuki (the churning rope), and the daityas and danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by the flames emitted from his inflated hood, the demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the clouds, driven by his breath towards his tail, refreshed the gods by vivifying showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari himself, in the form of a tortoise, served as a pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled around. The holder of the mace and discus was present in other forms amongst the gods and demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of the serpent race; and in another vast body sat upon

[p. 143]

the summit of the mountain. With one portion of his energy, unseen by gods and demons, he sustained the serpent king; and with another infused vigour unto the gods."

Click to enlarge
THE KURMA AVATARA.

Such is the account of this incarnation of Vishnu as taught by the Puranas; but in the earlier books, where the probable origin of this legend is found, it is Brahma, and not Vishnu, that is said to have assumed the form

[p. 144]

of a tortoise. In the "Satapatha Brahmana" are these words: "Having assumed the form of a tortoise, Prajapati (Brahma) created offspring. That which he created, he made; " hence the word Kurma. Kasyapa means tortoise; hence men say, "All creatures are descendants of Kasyapa. This tortoise is the same as Aditya." As the worship of Brahma became less popular, whilst that of Vishnu increased in its attraction, the names, attributes, and works of the one deity appear to have been transferred to the other.

Footnotes

^142:* Page 73.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

3. THE VARAHA OR BOAR AVATARA.

There is the same conflicting account of this as of the two preceding incarnations; the older books, and some of the more modern ones, describing it as an Avatara of Brahma; and some of the modern books and popular belief regarding it as the work of Vishnu. There is, however, this distinction, that in the former, the transformation of the deity into a boar has apparently a purely cosmical character," the earth being immersed in the ocean. Brahma, the Creator, in the shape of a boar, raised it on his tusk; "whereas, in the latter, it altogether represents the extrication of the world from a deluge of iniquity by the rites of religion." [**]

The first mention of this incarnation is in the "Taittiriya Sanhita," [*+] and is as follows: "The universe was formerly water, fluid. On it Prajapati (Brahma) becoming wind, moved. Becoming a boar, he took it up." In harmony with this is a verse in the "Taittiriya Brahmana":--"This universe was formerly water, fluid. With that (water) Prajapati practised arduous devotions

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] (saying), 'How shall this universe be (developed)?' He beheld a lotus leaf standing. He thought, 'There is something on which this rests.' He as a boar--having assumed that form--plunged beneath towards it. He found the earth down below. Breaking off (a portion of) her, he rose to the surface." In the "Satapatha Brahmana" [**] there is a similar reference, but there the boar is called "Emusha." Formerly the earth was only of the size of a span. A boar called Emusha raised her up.

Dr. Muir [*+] gives two accounts of this incarnation from two recensions of the Ramayana. In one, which he considers the older, it is said that Brahma assumed the form of a boar; in the other, Vishnu in the form of Brahma is said to have accomplished this work. The alteration of the text is very noticeable. "All was water only, in which the earth was formed. Thence arose Brahma, the self-existent, with the deities. He then becoming a boar, raised up the earth, and created the whole world with the saints his sons." So far the probably older recension. In the later one we read, "All was water only, through which the earth was formed. Thence arose Brahma, the self-existent, the imperishable Vishnu. He then, becoming a boar, raised up this earth and created the whole world."

In the following account from the "Vishnu Purana" [*++] it will be noticed that, as in the last quotation from the Ramayana, it was Vishnu in the form of Brahma who became a boar. As the earlier writers had declared this to have been Brahma's work, it was necessary to identify Vishnu with him.

"Tell me how at the commencement of the present age, Narayana, who is named Brahma, created all existing

[p. 146]

things. At the close of the last age, the divine Brahma endowed with the quality of goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and beheld the universal void. He, the supreme Narayana, . . . invested with the form of Brahma, . . . concluding that within the waters lay the earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created another form for that purpose. And as in the preceding ages he had assumed the shape of a fish, or a tortoise, so in this he took the form of a boar. Having adopted a form composed of the sacrifices of the Vedas for the preservation of the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and universal soul plunged into the ocean." In a note on this passage in the "Vishnu Purana," by Professor Wilson, it is stated that, according to the "Vayu Purana," the form of a boar was chosen because it is an animal delighting in water; but in other Puranas, as in the Vishnu, it is said to be a type of the ritual of the Vedas, for which reason the elevation of the earth on the tusks of a boar is regarded as an allegorical representation of the extrication of the world from a deluge of sin, by the rites of religion.

The earth, bowing with devout adoration, addressed the boar, as he approached, in a hymn of great beauty, in which she reminds him that she sprang from him, and is dependent on him, as in fact are all things. Being thus praised, "the auspicious supporter of the world emitted a low murmuring sound, like the chanting of the Sama-Veda; and the mighty boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, whose body was vast as the Nila mountains, and of the dark colour of the lotus leaves, uplifted upon his ample tusks the earth from its lowest regions. As he reared up his head, the waters that rushed from his brow purified the great sages, Sanandana and others residing in the sphere of the saints. Through

[p. 147]

the indentations made by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower worlds with a thundering noise. Before his breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka (abode of men) were scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter amongst the bristles upon the body of the boar, trembling as he rose up supporting the earth, and dripping with moisture. Then the great sages Sanandana and the rest, residing continually in the sphere of the saints, were inspired with delight, and bowing lowly, they praised the stern-eyed upholder of the earth."

Before noticing the hymn of these saints, in which the boar is identified with the various parts of worship, we can gather a little more information from the other Puranas respecting the dimensions, etc., of this animal. The Vayu says, "The boar was ten yojanas [**] in breadth, and a thousand yojanas in height; his colour was like a dark cloud, and his roar like thunder. His bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his eyes like lightning, and he was radiant as the sun. His shoulders were round, fat, and large; he strode along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat, his loins slender, and his body smooth and beautiful." With this the Matsya agrees. The Bhagavata describes the boar "as issuing from the nostrils of Brahma; at first of the size of a thumb, and presently increasing to the size of an elephant." This Purana adds a legend of the slaying of Hiranyaksha, who, in a former birth, was a doorkeeper of Vishnu's palace. He having refused admission to a number of Munis, so enraged them, that they cursed him; in consequence of this he was re-born as a son of Diti. When the earth sunk in the waters, Vishnu was seen by this

[p. 148]

demon in the act of raising it. Hiranyaksha claimed the earth, and defying Vishnu, they fought, and the demon was slain.

Now follow the hymns to the Varaha as sung by the saints: "Triumph, lord of lords, supreme! Kesava, sovereign of the earth . . . cause of production, destruction and existence. Thou art, O god! there is none other supreme condition than thou. Thou, lord, art the person of the sacrifice; thy feet are the Vedas; thy tusks are the stake to which the victim is bound; thy teeth are the offerings; thy mouth is the altar; thy tongue is the fire; and the hairs of thy body are the sacrificial grass. Thy eyes, O omnipotent! are day and night; thy head is the seat of all--the place of Brahma; thy name is all the hymns of the Vedas; thy nostrils are all oblations. O thou, whose snout is the ladle of oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of the Sama-Veda; whose body is the hall of sacrifice; whose joints are the different ceremonies; and whose ears have the properties of both voluntary and obligatory rites; do thou, who art eternal, who art in size a mountain, be propitious . . . raise up this earth for the habitation of created beings!"

"The supreme being thus eulogized, upholding the earth, raised it quickly, and placed it on the summit of the ocean, where it floats like a mighty vessel, and, on account of its expansive surface, does not sink beneath the waters." This seems rather to contradict the common notion of the Hindus, that the earth rests upon the back of a tortoise; and that earthquakes are the result of the tortoise changing the foot on which he stands, when weary.

Footnotes

^144:* Goldstucker, Chambers's Cyclopedia, s.v. "Vishnu."

^144:+ Muir, O. S. T., i. 52.

^145:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 33.

^145:+ Ibid.

^145:++ Page 27 ff.

^147:* A yojan is at least four miles and a half; some reckon it at nine miles.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

4. THE NRISINGHA OR MAN-LION AVATARA.

In the account of the preceding incarnation, it was stated that Vishnu, ere he raised the earth on his tusk, slew a demon named Hiranyaksha. This daitya had a

Click to enlarge
THE NRISINGHA AVATARA.

brother named Hiranyakasipu, who, the "Vayu Purana" says, had obtained a boon from Brahma, that he should not be slain by any created being; the "Kurma Purana" adds, excepting Vishnu. When therefore his pride,

[p. 150]

fostered by his supposed immunity from danger, had led him to great excesses, so that his death was desired both by gods and men, Vishnu descended in the form of a living being, half-man and half-lion, and so neither man nor animal, and slew him. By the assumption of this form the letter of Brahma's promise was kept. The story of the demon's hatred of the deity, because in a former incarnation he had slain his brother, is a most interesting one. And as it teaches the wonderful efficacy of Vishnu's worship, it is given at some length. It is taken mostly from the "Vishnu Purana." [**]

"Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, had formerly brought the three worlds under his authority, confiding in a boon bestowed upon him by Brahma,. He had usurped the sovereignty of Indra, and exercised himself the functions of the sun, of air, of the lord of waters, of fire, and of the moon. He himself was the god of riches; he was the judge of the dead; and he appropriated to himself without reserve all that was offered in sacrifice to the gods. The deities, therefore, flying from their seats in heaven, wandered, through fear of the daitya, upon the earth, disguised in mortal shapes. Having conquered the three worlds, he was inflated with pride, and, eulogized by the Gandharvas, enjoyed whatever he desired."

This demon had a son named Prahlada, who was a very devout worshipper of Vishnu, whom his father hated most intensely. "On one occasion Prahlada came, accompanied by his teacher, to the court of his father, and bowed himself before his feet as he was drinking. Hiranyakasipu desired his prostrate son to rise, and said to him, 'Repeat in substance and agreeably what during the period of your studies you have acquired.' Prahlada said, 'I have learned to admire him who is without

[p. 151]

beginning, middle, or end, increase or diminution; the imperishable lord of the world, the universal cause of causes.' On hearing these words, the sovereign of the daityas, his eyes red with wrath and his lips swollen with indignation, turned to the preceptor of his son, and said, 'Vile Brahman! what is this preposterous commendation of my foe that, in disrespect to me, you have taught this boy to utter?' 'Phe preceptor denies the charge, and Prahlada himself replies, 'Vishnu is the instructor of the whole world; what else should any one learn or teach, save him, the supreme spirit? ' 'Blockhead!' exclaimed the king, 'who is this Vishnu, whose name you thus reiterate so impertinently before me, who am the sovereign of the three worlds?' 'The glory of Vishnu,' replied Prahlada, 'is to be meditated upon by the devout; it cannot be described; he is the supreme lord, who is all things, and from whom all things proceed.' The king threatens death; but the son says, 'Vishnu is the creator and protector not of me alone, but of all human beings, and even, father, of you.' The father can bear this no longer, so orders his son to return to his preceptor's house.

"Prahlada is taken away, but after a time is sent for again. When requested to recite some poetry, he commenced to sing the praises of Vishnu, which so exasperated the king, that he cried out, 'Kill the wretch! He is not fit to live who is a traitor to his friends, a burning brand to his own race.' Upon this the attendants rushed upon Prahlada with their weapons, and, though hundreds struck him, none could injure him. His father then entreated him to desist from praising Vishnu; but this the son would not do, as he said he bad no fear, as long as his immortal guardian against all dangers was present in his mind.'

[p. 152]

"Hiranyakasipu, highly exasperated, commanded the serpents to fall upon his disobedient and insane son, and bite him to death. The serpents did their worst, but Prahlada felt them not. The snakes cried out to the king, 'Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are burst; there is fever in our hoods, and fear in our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still unscathed. Have recourse, O king of the daityas? to some other expedient.'

"The young prince" (by his father's orders) "was then assailed by the elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain peaks; cast down upon the earth, and trampled on and gored by their tusks; but he continued to meditate on Govinda, and the tusks of the elephants were blunted against his breast.

"Failing in this, the king said, 'Let fire consume him; and do thou, deity of the winds, blow up the fire, that this wicked wretch may be consumed.' And the danavas piled a mighty heap of wood around the prince, and kindled a fire to burn him, as their master had commanded. But Prahlada cried, 'Father, this fire, though blown by the winds, burneth me not; and all around I behold the face of the skies, cool and fragrant with beds of lotus flowers.'

"The Brahmans now interceded with the king on the prince's behalf, promising either to teach him to recant his errors, or to find some means of accomplishing his death; but instead of profiting by their instructions, he spends his time in speaking to all about him of the glory of Vishnu and the happiness of his worshippers. They informed the king of their failure to bring the prince to a right state of mind; whereupon the cooks are ordered to mix poison with his food. But this expedient was futile, as the others had been. The

[p. 153]

[paragraph continues] Brahmans now reason with him, and try to show him that it is the chief duty of a son to honour his father; but their sophistry is unsuccessful. They remind him that they had promised to use incantations to accomplish his death. This menace he meets with these words: 'What living creature slays or is slain? What living creature preserves or is preserved? Each is his own destroyer or preserver as he follows evil or good.' Enraged by this reply, they now produce a magical female figure, enwreathed in a flame of fire, whose tread parched the earth, and who struck Prahlada upon the breast. Her blow fell harmless upon him; but turning towards the Brahmans, she slew them all, and disappeared. In answer to the prince's prayer, they were, however, restored to life, and, having blessed Prahlada, departed and told the king all that had happened.

"Having sent for his son, Hiranyakasipu inquired again, by what magical art he was able thus to protect himself. Prahlada said that it was not by magic at all, but simply by the indwelling of Vishnu that he was able to ward off evil; and further that the same power was within the reach of all who would trust him. The king, enraged at this avowal, commanded his attendants to cast his son from the summit of the palace where he was sitting, and which was many yojans in height, upon the tops of the mountains, where his body would be dashed to pieces against the rocks. Accordingly the daityas hurled the boy down, but as he fell cherishing Hari in his heart, Earth, the nurse of all creatures, received him gently in her lap, thus entirely devoted to Kesava, the protector of the world."

Hiranyakasipu, seeing that this fall had not injured his son in any way, asks Samvara, the mightiest of enchanters, to try his hand; but though he puts forth

[p. 154]

all his skill, the boy remains unhurt. After this, the prince goes again to his preceptor's house, where he is instructed in politics. When his education in this science was completed, he is taken to the king for examination; but on being questioned as to his mode of government, he admits that though he has been instructed in these subjects, he does not approve of what his teachers had said, and again sings the praises of Vishnu. His father, "burning with rage, exclaimed, Bind him with strong bands and cast him into the ocean. Death is the just retribution of the disobedient.' The daityas bound the prince with strong bands, as their lord had commanded, and threw him into the sea. As he floated on the waters, the ocean was convulsed throughout its whole extent, and rose in mighty indulations, threatening to submerge the earth. When Hiranyakasipu observed this, he commanded the daityas to hurl rocks into the sea, and pile them closely on one another, burying beneath their incumbent mass him whom fire could not burn. . . . 'Here, since he cannot die, let him live for thousands of years at the bottom of the ocean, overwhelmed by mountains.' This was done. But Prahlada was uninjured. His mind was filled with thoughts of Hari, and he came to recognize his real identity with Vishnu. As soon as Prahlada, through the force of contemplation, had become one with Vishnu, the bands with which he was bound burst instantly asunder. Prahlada, after hymning the praises of Vishnu, again returns to his father, who no sooner saw him, than he kissed him on the forehead, embraced him, and shed tears, and said, 'Dost thou live, my son?'"

For a time there was complete reconciliation between them. And only in a very cursory manner does the

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] "Vishnu Purana" allude to the death of Hiranyakasipu. After speaking of the reconciliation between the father and son, without any intimation of further dispute, it goes on to say: "After his father had been put to death by Vishnu in the form of the man-lion, Prahlada became the sovereign of the daityas." In the Bhagavat we are told that Prahlada had said that Vishnu was in him, in his father; in fact, was everywhere. "Hiranyakasipu says, 'Why, if Vishnu is everywhere, is he not visible in this pillar?' Being told that Vishnu, though unseen, was really present there, he struck the pillar, saying, Then I will kill him.' Immediately Vishnu, in the form of a being half-man and half-lion, came forth from the pillar, laid hold of Hiranyakasipu by the thighs with his teeth, and tore him up the middle. Brahma's boon to this daitya king, as a reward of his religious observances, was that no common animal should destroy him, that he should die neither in the day nor night, in earth or in heaven, by fire, by water, or by the sword. This promise was kept in the letter, for it was evening when Vishnu slew him; this is neither day nor night. It was done under the droppings of the thatch, and this, according to a Hindu proverb, is out of the earth, and he was not killed by a man or an ordinary animal." 

Footnotes

^150:* Page 126 ff.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

5. THE VAMANA OR DWARF AVATARA.

The four Avataras that have already been described are said to have occurred in the Satya-yuga, or age of Truth, corresponding with the golden age of classic writers; it was in the Treta-yuga, or second age, that this incarnation is supposed to have occurred. It is

[p. 156]

not easy to see how this belief could be formed; for if the story of Prahlada be regarded as a true picture of the Satya-yuga, it was not very far superior to the present, the last and worst of all.

This incarnation was undertaken to recover heaven for the gods. Bali, a demon, grandson of Prahlada whose story has just been given, was king over the three worlds--heaven, earth and sky. In the form of a Brahman dwarf, Vishnu appears, and asks, as a gift, all he could cross over in three steps. This the king grants. Immediately the pigmy becomes a giant, and with one step strides over heaven, and with the second over the earth, and thus fulfils his purpose. The "Skanda Purana" [**] gives the following legend as the reason of this incarnation.

In the battle between the gods and asuras for the possession of the amrita produced at the churning of the ocean, the demons were defeated. Bali prepared a costly sacrifice in order that he might regain his power. As he presented his offerings to the sacred fire, he obtained from it a wondrous car drawn by four white horses, a banner displaying a lion, and celestial armour and weapons. The sacred rites being finished, he raised a large army, and in his newly-acquired chariot went and laid siege to Amravati, the capital of Indra's heaven. The gods in terror turned to their preceptor for advice. He told them that their enemies had been rendered invincible by penance. On hearing this, they were greatly alarmed, and Indra besought the preceptor, Vrihaspati, to tell them what to do. He advised them to forsake Amravati, assume other forms, and find a home elsewhere. They obeyed; Indra became a peacock, Kuvera a lizard, and the other gods, variously

[p. 157]

disguised, went to the hermitage of Kasyapa, to whom they related their misfortunes. On hearing their story, the sage desired his wife Aditi to perform a severe

Click to enlarge
THE VAMANA AVATARA.

penance, in order to induce Vishnu to become her son, that through him the gods might be restored to heaven.

As the origin of this incarnation is probably found in the metaphorical language of the Vedas, it will be

[p. 158]

well to consider the teaching of the Hindu scriptures as far as possible in chronological order.

The legend just quoted from the "Skanda Purana" was written as an answer to the question why Vishnu had appeared in this strange form. In the Rig-Veda [**] the germ of the story is found: "Vishnu strode over this [universe]; in three places he planted his step." This passage is interpreted by the commentators in various ways. One taught "that the triple manifestation of the god in the form of fire on earth, of lightning in the atmosphere, and of the solar slight in the sky, was intended in this hymn." Another understands the three steps of Vishnu to represent "the different positions of the sun at his rising, his culmination, and his setting." According to this, therefore, Vishnu is simply the sun. Frequently in the Rig-Veda the term "wide-stepping" is applied to him, an evident allusion to his three steps.

In the "Satapatha Brahmana," [*+] the simple statement of the earlier book respecting Vishnu's strides assumes a larger form. " The gods and the asuras, who both sprung from Prajapati, strove together. Then the gods were worsted; and the asuras said, 'This world is now certainly ours! Let us divide the earth, and let us subsist thereon.' The gods heard of it and said, 'The asuras are dividing the earth: come, we will go to the spot where they are dividing it!' Placing at their head Vishnu, the sacrifice, they proceeded [thither], and said, 'Put us with yourselves in possession of this earth; let us have a share of it.' The asuras grudgingly said, 'We will give you as much as this Vishnu can lie upon.' Now Vishnu was a dwarf. The gods did not reject this offer. They placed Agni in the East, and thus they

[p. 159]

went on toiling and worshipping. By this means they acquired the whole earth."

The next form of the legend is that of the Ramayana. Visvamitra, a sage, addressing Rama, tells him the story. "Formerly Bali, the son of Virochana, after conquering the chief of the gods, enjoyed the empire of the three worlds, intoxicated with the increase of his power. When Bali was celebrating a sacrifice, Indra and the other gods addressed Vishnu in this hermitage [saying], 'That mighty Bali is now performing sacrifice; he who grants the desire of all creatures; the prosperous lord of the asuras. Whatever suppliants wait upon him, he bestows on them whatever [they wish]. Do thou take the form of a dwarf, and bring about our highest welfare.' [Kasyapa now appears, and, after praising Vishnu, asks a boon, that Vishnu will be born as the son of Aditi and himself.] Thus addressed by the gods, Vishnu took the form of a dwarf, and, approaching the son of Virochana, begged three of his own paces. Having obtained three paces, Vishnu assumed a miraculous form, and with three paces took possession of the world. With one step he occupied the whole earth; with a second, the eternal atmosphere; and with a third, the sky. Having assigned to the asura Bali an abode in Patala (the infernal region), he gave the empire of the world to Indra."

The notice of this Avatara in the Mahabharata is not lengthy. Vishnu is represented as foretelling it to Narada. "The great asura Bali shall be indestructible by all beings, including gods, asuras, and Rakshasas. He shall oust Indra; and when the three worlds have been taken by Bali, and Indra put to flight, I shall be born in the form of the twelve Adityas, the son of Kasyapa and Diti. I will then restore his kingdom to

[p. 160]

[paragraph continues] Indra, reinstate the gods in their several positions, and place Bali in Patala."

The "Vishnu Purana" barely notices this event, but it is fully described in the Bhagavata. The question is there asked, "Why did Hari, the lord of creatures, ask, like a poor man, three pieces of land from Bali? And why, when he had obtained his object, did he bind him? And why was an innocent being bound by the lord of sacrifice?" The answer given is as follows:--After Bali had been killed by Indra, he was restored by the Brahmans of the race of Bhrigu, who consecrated him for supreme dominion, and performed a sacrifice to obtain it for him. He then sets out for Amravati, as before narrated; and Indra is told, when he applies to his preceptor for advice, that Bali had obtained this power "by virtue of the Brahman's sacrifice;" and that, save by Hari, he is unconquerable. "He now reaps the fruit of Brahmanical power; through contempt of these same Brahmans he shall perish with all his descendants."

The gods forsake their capital, which is occupied by Bali. Aditi, the mother of the gods, is distressed as she sees the condition of her children; and acting upon the advice of her husband, propitiates Vishnu, who says: "I shall with a portion of myself become thy son, and deliver thy children. Wait upon thy husband, the sinless Prajapati, virtuous female, meditating upon me, who in this form abide within him." Aditi followed the advice of the god; and Kasyapa knew by meditation that a portion of Hari had entered into him. In due time the son was born, and became a dwarfish Brahmanical student.

As the Bhrigus are performing a sacrifice for Bali on the banks of the Narmada river, this dwarf visits Bali at Indra's heaven. "Acquainted with his duty, Bali

[p. 161]

placed upon his head the auspicious water with which the Brahman's feet had been washed, and said, 'Welcome to thee, O Brahman! What can we do for thee? Ask of me, student, whatever thou desirest. Son of a Brahman, I conclude thou art a suppliant; ask a cow, pure gold, an embellished house, food and drink, a Brahman's daughter, flourishing villages, horses, elephants, and carriages." The dwarf concludes a speech with the semblance of moderation as follows: "I ask from thee a small portion of ground, three paces measured step by step. I desire no more from thee. A wise man incurs no sin, when he asks [only] as much as he needs." The king, though astonished at the smallness of the request, takes a vessel of water in his hand, and is about to confirm the gift; when his preceptor, seeing through Vishnu's device, tries to dissuade his pupil. In a long speech he seeks to show that rather than be left homeless it would be better for him to break his word. But the king persists in fulfilling his promise; even though cursed by his preceptor for doing so. With two steps Vishnu strode over the universe; there was nowhere for him to take a third.

The gods congratulate Hari; Bali is bound by Garuda and then reproached by Vishnu for not fulfilling his promise. "Asura, three paces of ground were given to me by thee; with two paces the entire world has been traversed; find a place for the third. As thou hast not given what was promised, it is my pleasure that thou shouldst dwell in the infernal regions. That man falls downward who, after promising a Brahman, does not deliver to him what he had solicited. I have been deluded by thee." Bali offers his head as a place for Vishnu's foot, saying, "I fear not the infernal regions so much as a bad name." Bali goes to Patala, and is there

[p. 162]

visited by his grandfather Prahlada. First Vishnu's wife and then Brahma intercede with him on the demon's behalf, who, in reply, promises that Bali shall again become Indra; but that in the mean time he must dwell in Sutala, where "by my will, neither mental nor bodily pains, nor fatigue, nor weariness, nor discomfiture, nor diseases afflict the inhabitants." Bali gladly left Patala, and went to Sutala, to wait until the time came when, in accordance with the promise of Vishnu, he should again rule over gods and men.

Another legend teaches that Vishnu gave Bali the choice of going to heaven, taking with him five ignorant people, or of going to hell with five wise. He chose the latter, for there is no pleasure anywhere in the company of the ignorant; whilst a bad place with good company is enjoyable.

Footnotes

^155:* Ward, ii. 7, 8.

^156:* Kennedy's "Hindu Mythology," p. 363.

^158:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 63-156.

^158:+ Ibid.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

6. THE PARASURAMA AVATARA.

The incarnation of Parasurama, or Rama with axe, was undertaken by Vishnu for the purpose of exterminating the Kshattriya, or Warrior caste, [**] which had tried to assert its authority over the Brahmanical. Twenty-one times Rama is said to have cleared the earth of these men, but by various means some few were preserved alive who were able to perpetuate the race.

[p. 163]

[paragraph continues] The story of this incarnation evidently points to a time when there was a severe and prolonged struggle for supremacy between the members of these two classes. Eventually success lay with the Brahmans. It should be noticed that the scene of Vishnu's exploits in this Avatara, and in those which follow it, was the earth; and not, as in those preceding, the abode of the gods.

The following legend of the birth of Parasurama is from the "Vishnu Purana." [**] A prince named Gadhi, who was himself an incarnation of Indra, had a daughter named Satyavati. Richika, a descendant of Bhrigu, [*+] demanded her in marriage. The king asked from the decrepit old Brahman a thousand fleet white horses, each having one black ear, as a wedding present. These horses were obtained, by the help of Varuna, and the Brahman received the hand of the princess.

In order to effect the birth of a son, Richika prepared a dish of rice, barley, and pulse, with butter and milk, for his wife to eat, and, at her request, consecrated a similar mixture for her mother, by partaking of which she hoped to give birth to a prince of martial prowess, Leaving both dishes with his wife, after carefully describing which was for herself and which for her mother, the sage went away into the forest. When the time for eating the food came, the mother said to Satyavati, "Daughter! all mothers wish their children to be possessed of excellent qualities, and would be mortified to see them surpassed by the merits of their brother. Give me, therefore, the mess your husband has set apart for you, and you eat that which was intended for me. The son which it is intended to procure for me, is destined to be the monarch of the whole world; whilst that which your dish will give you must be a Brahman,

[p. 164]

alike devoid of affluence, valour, and power." Satyavati consented to this proposal, and they exchanged messes.

Click to enlarge
THE PARASURAMA AVATARA.

On Richika's return, perceiving what had happened, he said to his wife, "Sinful woman! what hast thou

[p. 165]

done? I see thy body of a fearful appearance. Thou hast eaten of the consecrated food that was prepared for thy mother; thou hast done wrong. In that food I had infused the properties of power, and strength, and heroism; in thine, the qualities suited to a Brahman--gentleness, knowledge, and resignation. In consequence of having reversed my plans, thy son shall follow a warrior's propensities, and use weapons, and fight, and slay. Thy mother's son shall be born with the inclinations of a Brahman, and be addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati, hearing this, fell at her husband's feet, and asked that she might not have such a son as he had described; "but if such there must be, let it be my grandson and not my son." The Muni relented, and said, "So be it." Accordingly in due time she gave birth to a son named Jamadagni, who married Renuka, and had by her the destroyer of the Kshattriya race, Parasurama, who was a portion of Narayana, the spiritual guide of the universe.

This is all we find about Parasurama's work in the "Vishnu Purana." The story of his exploits is told at length twice over in the Mahabharata, and is found in the Bhagavata, Padma, and Agni Puranas. The following account is from the Mahabharata. [**]

Jamadagni, the son of Richika (whose birth was just described), having married Renuka, "conducted the princess to his hermitage, and she was contented to partake in his ascetic life. They had four sons, and then a fifth, who was Jamadagnya (Parasurama), the last, but not the least, of the brethren. Once when her sons were absent gathering the fruits on which they fed, Renuka, who was exact in the discharge of all her duties, went forth to bathe. On her way to the stream

[p. 166]

she beheld Chitraratha, the Prince of Mrittikavati, with a garland of lotuses on his neck, sporting with his queen in the water, and she felt envious of their felicity. Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted, but not purified by the stream, she returned disquieted to the hermitage. Beholding her fallen from her perfection, and shorn of the lustre of her sanctity, Jamadagni reproved her, and was exceeding wroth.

"Upon this, her sons came from the wood, and each as he entered was successively commended by his father to put his mother to death; but, amazed and influenced by natural affection, neither of them made any reply; therefore Jamadagni cursed them, and they became idiots. Lastly Rama returned to the hermitage, when the mighty and holy Jamadagni said to him, 'Kill thy mother, who has sinned; and do it without repining.' Rama accordingly took up his axe [this was the Parasu, or axe, which Siva had given him] and struck off his mother's head; whereupon the wrath of Jamadagni was assuaged, and, pleased with his son, said: 'Since thou hast obeyed my commands, and done what was hard to be performed, demand from me whatever blessing thou wilt, and thy desires shall be fulfilled.' Rama begged these boons: the restoration of his mother to life, with forgetfulness of having been slain, and purification from all defilement; the return of his brothers to their natural condition; and for himself, invincibility in single combat, and length of days. All these his father bestowed.

"It happened on one occasion that, during the absence of the Rishi's sons, the mighty monarch Karttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya tribe, endowed by the favour of Dattatreya [**] with a thousand arms, and a

[p. 167]

golden chariot that went wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the hermitage of Jamadagni, where the wife of the sage received him with proper respect. This Karttavirya, by reason of his strength, had greatly oppressed the gods, Rishis, and all creatures. The gods and Rishis applied to Vishnu, who, with Indra, devised the means of destroying him. The king, inflated with the pride of valour, made no return for the hospitality of the Rishi's wife; but carried off with him the calf of the milch cow of the sacred oblation, and cast down the tall trees of the hermitage."

In the Ramayana is an account of the wonderful cow whose calf this king stole. When commanded by her owner, on the occasion of the visit of a king to the hermitage, to supply the varied wants of the great multitude which accompanied him--

"'The cow from whom all plenty flows,
  Obedient to her saintly lord,
  Viands to suit each taste outpoured.
  Honey she gave, and roasted grain,
  Mead sweet with flowers, and sugar-cane.
  Each beverage of flavour rare,
  And food of every sort, were there:
  Hills of hot rice, and sweetened cakes,
  And curdled milk, and soup in lakes.
  Vast beakers flowing to the brim
  With sugared drink prepared for him;
  And dainty sweetmeats, deftly made,
  Before the hermit's guests were laid.'

"When Rama returned, his father told him what had happened; and seeing the cow in distress, he was filled with wrath. Taking up his splendid bow, he assailed Karttavirya, and overthrew him in battle. With sharp arrows Rama cut off his thousand arms, and he perished. The sons of Karttavirya, to avenge their father's death,

[p. 168]

attacked the hermitage of Jamadagni when Rama was absent, and slew the pious and unresisting sage, who called repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon his valiant son. Rama deeply lamented his father's death, performed the last obsequies, and lighted the funeral pile. He then made a vow that he would extirpate the whole Kshattriya race. In fulfilment of which, with remorseless and fatal rage, he destroyed the sons of Karttavirya; and, after them, whatever Kshattriyas he encountered. Thrice seven times [**] did he clear the earth of the Kshattriya caste. After he had cleared the world of Kshattriyas, their widows came to the Brahmans, praying for offspring. The religious Brahmans, free from any impulse of lust, cohabited with these women, who, in consequence, brought forth valiant Kshattriya boys and girls."

In another passage in the Mahabharata it is taught that it was in consequence of the curse of a sage named Apava, that Rama was able to kill Karttavirya. The king had permitted Agni to devour the hermitage of this Rishi, who, in revenge, declared that his thousand arms should be cut off by Parasurama.

In the Ramayana is an interesting legend in which Parasurama, himself an incarnation of Vishnu, is described as meeting with Rama Chandra, the next avatara of the same deity, and in which the superiority of Rama Chandra is declared. [*+] "As King Dasaratha was returning to his capital with Rama (Chandra), he was alarmed by the ill-omened sounds uttered by certain birds. The

[p. 169]

alarming event indicated was the arrival of Parasurama. He was fearful to behold, brilliant as fire, and bore his axe and a bow on his shoulder. Being received with honour, he proceeded to say to Rama, the son of Dasaratha, that he had heard of his prowess in breaking the bow produced by Janaka, and had brought another which he asked him to bend, and to fit an arrow on the string; and offered, if he succeeded in doing so, to engage with him in single combat. Parasurama went on to say that the bow Rama had broken was Siva's; but that the one he now brought was Vishnu's. The gods, anxious to discover which was the greater, Siva or Vishnu, and considering this a favourable opportunity for doing so, sought Brahma's help. He thereupon excited the passions of the two Ramas. A great fight ensued. Siva's bow of dreadful power was relaxed, and the three-eyed Mahadeva was arrested by a muttering. The gods were satisfied, and judged Vishnu to be superior. Parasurama, however, did not agree to their judgment, so offered Vishnu's bow for his antagonist to try his strength on. Thus challenged, Rama snatches the bow, bends it, and fits an arrow to the string; and then tells his challenger that as he is a Brahman he will not slay him, but will either take away his superhuman capacity of movement, or deprive him of the blessed abodes he had gained by austerity. Parasurama entreats that his power of movement may not be taken away, but consents that his blissful abodes may be destroyed. 'By bending this bow,' he said, 'I recognize thee to be the imperishable slayer of Madhu, the great lord.' Rama shoots the arrow, and destroys Parasurama's abodes."

The explanation of this strange legend seems to be the one that is commonly received by Oriental scholars, that the passages in the Epic poems which speak of Rama as

[p. 170]

an incarnation of Vishnu are interpolations of a later date than the original poem; and this interview of Parasurama with Rama Chandra was introduced for the purpose of giving a quasi-divine sanction to the teaching of these interpolations. If Parasurama, an admitted incarnation of Vishnu, acknowledged that Rama was superior to himself, what stronger proof could be given that Rama too was divine?

Footnotes

^162:* There are four chief castes or jatis of Hindus: the Brahman, or Priestly; the Kshattriya, or Warrior; the Vaisya, or Merchant; and the Sudra, or Servant. These four classes are commonly said to have sprung respectively from the head, arms, thighs, and feet of the Creator, though there is good reason for the belief that in the olden time no such ideas of the divine origin of caste prevailed. The four original castes have become subdivided into an immense number. This subdivision has been brought about by inter-marriage with members of other classes.

^163:* Page 400.

^163:+ See part iii. chap. i.

^165:* "Vishnu Purana," note p. 401; and Muir, O. S. T., i. 447.

^166:* A Brahman saint in whom a portion of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva was incarnate.

^168:* The reason why Parasurama had to perform his work so many times was this:--Some Kshattriya children were hidden from his rage amongst the other castes, and in time grew up to be warriors. It was when his work was effectually accomplished, and there was not a single Kshattriya man left, that their widows resorted to the Brahmans, as noticed above.

^168:+ Muir, O. S. T., iv. 175.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

7. THE RAMA CHANDRA AVATARA.

In Northern India this is perhaps the most popular of all the incarnations of Vishnu, and certainly the Ramayana, in which his history is found, contains some of the most beautiful legends in the whole of the sacred writings of the Hindus. The Ramayana is very largely occupied with the story of Rama's life, and the poets have found in its legends subjects for their most attractive poems. A whole volume might easily be written, giving a biography of this most popular hero; we must, however, content ourselves with the merest outline of his doings.

Mr. Griffiths, in the preface to his translation of the Ramayana, says, "The great exploit and main subject of the Epic is the war which Rama waged with the giant Ravan, the fierce and mighty King of Lanka or Ceylon, and the dread oppressor of gods and nymphs, and saints and men." "The army," to borrow the words of Gorresio, "which Rama led on this expedition was, as appears from the poem, gathered in great part from the region of the Vindhya hills; [**] but the races which he

[p. 171]

assembled are represented in the poem as monkeys, either out of contempt for their barbarism, or because at that time they were little known to the Sanskrit-speaking Hindus. The poet calls the people whom

Click to enlarge
THE RAMA CHANDRA AVATARA.

[paragraph continues] Rama attacked Rakshasas. Rakshasas, according to the popular Indian belief, are malignant beings, demons of

[p. 172]

many shapes, terrible and cruel, who disturb the sacrifices and religious rites of the Brahmans. It appears indubitable that the poet of the Ramayana applied the hated name of Rakshasas to an abhorred and hostile people, and that this denomination is here rather an expression of hatred and horror than a real historical name." The account of Rama which follows is taken from the translation of the Ramayana in verse by Mr. Griffiths.

Dasaratha, the King of Ayodha, being childless, determined to make an asvamedh, or horse sacrifice, to obtain a son. It was necessary, in order to make an acceptable offering, that the horse destined for sacrifice be allowed to wander at will for a whole year, as a sign that the authority of its owner was acknowledged by the neighbouring princes. The people loved their king, and during his reign were very prosperous; but, owing to the want of a son, the happiness of king and subjects was incomplete. The sacrifice therefore was determined on, the holy place fixed, the horse set free, and the king, encouraged by the Brahmans, invited the neighbouring princes to attend the great preparations made. At length the rite was satisfactorily accomplished and the presiding Brahman addressing Dasaratha said:--

"Four sons. O monarch, shall be thine,
  Upholders of the royal line. [**]
    *         *         *         *
  Another rite will I begin,
  Which shall the sons thou cravest win,
  When all things shall be duly sped
  And first Atharva texts be read." [*+]

The gods having graced the assembly the saint who performed the rite thus addressed them:--

[p. 173]

"For you has Dasaratha, slain
  The votive steed, a son to gain;
  Stern penance rites the king has tried,
  And in firm faith on you relied.
  And now with undiminished care
  A second rite would now prepare.
  But, O ye gods, consent to grant
  The longing of your suppliant." [**]

The gods, pleased with the Brahman's prayer, led by Indra, proceeded to Brahma, and presented to him their united petition, in which they mention the great work they wished Rama, as one of Dasaratha's sons, to perform:

"O Brahma, mighty by thy grace,
  Ravan, who rules the giant race,
  Torments us in his senseless pride
  And penance-loving saints beside.
  For thou, well-pleased in days of old,
  Gayest the boon that makes him bold,
  That gods nor demons e'er should kill
  His charmed life, for so thy will.
  We, honouring that high behest,
  Bear all his rage, though sore distrest.
  That lord of giants, fierce and fell,
  Scourges the earth, and heaven and hell.
  Mad with thy boon, his impious rage
  Smites saint and bard, and god and sage.
  The sun himself withholds his glow,
  The wind, in fear, forbears to blow;
  The fire restrains his wonted heat
  Where stands the dreaded Ravan's feet,
  And, necklaced with the wandering wave.
  The sea before him fears to rave.
  Kuvera's self, in sad defeat,
  Is driven from his blissful seat.
  We see, we feel, the giant's might,
  And woe comes o'er us and affright.

[p. 174]

To thee, O lord, thy suppliants pray
 To find some cure this plague to stay." [**]

To this request Brahma makes answer--

     "One only way I find
  To slay this fiend of evil mind.
  He prayed me once his life to guard
  From demon, god, and heavenly bard,
  And spirits of the earth and air;
  And I, consenting, heard his prayer.
  But the proud giant, in his scorn,
  Reeked not of man of woman born.
  None else may take his life away,
  But only man the fiend may slay." [*+]

Upon this Vishnu appears, is gladly welcomed by the assembled gods, and asks what request they have to make:

"King Dasaratha, thus cried they,
  Fervent in penance many a day,
  The sacrificial steed has slain,
  Longing for sons, but all in vain.
  Now, at the cry of us forlorn,
  Incarnate as his seed be born.
  Three queens has he; each lovely dame
  Like Beauty, Modesty, or Fame.
  Divide thyself in four, and be
  His offspring by these noble three;
  Man's nature take, and slay in fight
  Ravan, who laughs at heavenly might:
  This common scourge, this rankling thorn,
  Whom the three worlds too long have borne." [*++]

Vishnu asks why it is necessary for him to effect their deliverance. Being told of Brahma's promise to Ravan, he at length consents to be born as man, in order to slay the giant and his family.

[p. 175]

Not long after this, a messenger comes from Vishnu, laden with a golden vase of nectar, which, as he gives it to the king, instructs him to hand it to his queens, assuring them that

"They the princely sons shall bear,
  Long sought by sacrifice and prayer." [**]

To Queen Kausalya the king gave half the nectar, who through it became the mother of Rama; the other half he gave to his other wives, who in consequence became mothers too--Kaikeya bore Bharat, and Sumitra gave birth to Lakshman and Satrughna.

Before leaving heaven, Vishnu besought the gods, for whose benefit he was about to undertake the work, to assist him, and they did so in various ways, chiefly by begetting powerful sons to enter his army.

"Each god, each sage became a sire,
  Each minstrel of the heavenly quire,
  Each faun, of children strong and good." [*+]

The names of some of the leaders who assisted Rama in answer to this prayer run as follows:--

"Bali, the woodland hosts who led,
  High as Mahendra's lofty head,
  Was Indra's child. That noblest fire,
  The Sun, was great Sugriva's sire.
  Tara, the mighty monkey, he
  Was offspring of Vrihaspati:
  Tara, the matchless chieftain, boast
  For wisdom of the Vanar host.
  Of Gandhamadan, brave and bold,
  The father was the Lord of gold.
  Nala the mighty, dear to fame,
  Of skilful Visvakarma came.
  From Agni, Nila bright as flame,

[p. 176]

[paragraph continues]  Who in his splendour, might, and worth,
  Surpassed the sire who gave him birth.
  The heavenly Asvins, swift and fair,
  Were fathers of a noble pair,
  Who, Dwivida and Mainda named,
  For beauty like their sires were famed.
  Varun was father of Sushen;
  Of Sarabh, he who sends the rain [Parjanya].
  Hanuman, best of monkey kind,
  Was son of him who breathes the wind;
  Like thunderbolt in frame was he,
  And swift as Garud's self could flee.
  These thousands did the gods create,
  Endowed with might which none could mate,
  In monkey forms that changed at will,
  So strong their wish the fiend to kill." [**]

In due time the four sons of Dasaratha were born; and from infancy the strongest affection existed between Rama the firstborn and Lakshman, and between Bharat and Satrughna.

When Rama was about sixteen years of age, a saint named Visvamitra came to Dasaratha's court, asking his assistance against two demons, named Maricha and Suvahu, who were commanded by Ravana to annoy him, and prevent the completion of his sacrifices. At first the king pleaded the youthfulness of his son as an excuse for refusing to allow him to undertake a work so arduous; but at length his scruples were overcome, and Rama with the faithful Lakshman set out for the hermitage. When the travellers reached the banks of the Sarju, the saint gave Rama two spells which he was to employ whilst bathing, and which were so to affect him that he should have no equal in heaven or hell:

"None in the world with thee shall vie,
  O sinless one, in apt reply,

[p. 177]

[paragraph continues]  In knowledge, fortune, wit, and tact,
  Wisdom to plan, and skill to act." [**]

On their journey to the hermitage they visit several places of importance, and Visvamitra beguiles the time with numerous legends; he also bestows on Rama various arms and powers. On reaching the end of their journey, for six days and nights they have to watch for the demons; just as the sacrifice was about to end, these disturbers of the hermitage appear, are conquered by Rama, and their attendants by Lakshman. The saint, addressing Rama, says--

"My joy, O prince, is now complete:
  Thou hast obeyed my will;
  Perfect before, this calm retreat
  Is now more perfect still." [*+]

Next morning the hermits tell Rama that King Janaka of Mithila [*++] had arranged for a sacrifice to which they are invited. Rama is asked to accompany them, and is induced to do so by the mention of a wonderful bow in possession of the king, which no one was able to bend. The bow was a gift from Siva, as a reward for sacrifice. On the way to Mithila they pass through a grove, in which, unseen by gods and men, Ahalya, the wife of Gautama the sage, had been undergoing penance for countless ages, on account of her adultery with Indra. Though the god came to her in the form of her husband, she saw through his disguise, yet did not resist his overtures. Her husband condemned her to live unknown in the forest until Rama should liberate her. Her hour of release had now come: Rama sees her, touches her feet, and, the curse being at an end, her husband receives her back.

[p. 178]

In due time they reach Mithila. The princes are introduced to the king, who gives them a hearty welcome, and narrates the history of the world-famed bow they have come to see. He tells them it was the bow with which Siva, when angry at not being invited to Daksha's sacrifice, wrought such havoc amongst the assembled gods. It was held by successive monarchs of his line as a mark of sovereignty, and as a means of defence against their foes.

               "This gem of bows,
  That freed the God of gods from woes,
  Stored by our great forefathers, lay
  A treasure and a pride for aye." [**]

One day, as Janaka was ploughing, an infant sprang from the ground, whom he named Sita (a furrow), on account of her secret birth. In the "Uttara Kanda," [*+] is a legend, the object of which is to show that Sita is another form of Lakshmi, and that it was she who wished to accomplish the death of Ravana. "Ravana in the course of his wanderings comes to the Himalayas, where he meets with a young woman of marvellous beauty, named Vedavati, dressed in ascetic garments, and living the life of a devotee. He speaks of love; but she indignantly rejects his overtures, saying that it was her father's wish she should wed Vishnu, and that she had already wedded him with her heart. Ravana presses his suit, assuring her that he is superior to Vishnu. She says that none but he would contemn that deity. Ravana replies by touching her hair. Being very indignant at this, she declares that she will enter the fire (die) before his eyes. Before doing so, she says, 'Since I have been insulted in the forest by thee, who art wicked-hearted, I

[p. 179]

shall be born again for thy destruction. For a man of evil design cannot be slain by a woman; and the merit of my austerity would be lost if I were to launch a curse against you. But if I have performed, or bestowed, or sacrificed aught, may I be born a virtuous daughter--not produced from the womb--of a righteous man.' She then entered the blazing fire. It was she who was born as the daughter of King Janaka. The mountain-like enemy (Ravana), who was virtually destroyed before by her wrath, has now been destroyed by her after she had associated herself with Vishnu's superhuman energy."

Regarding the child thus mysteriously found to be other than of mortal birth, to all suitors for her hand Janaka gave one reply--

"I give not this my daughter; she
  Prize of heroic worth shall be." [**]

She was to be the wife of him who could bend the wonder-working bow. Many of the neighbouring princes had tried, but failed. And now Janaka says--

"This heavenly bow, exceeding bright,
  These youths shall see, O anchorite.
  Then if young Rama's hand can string
  The bow that baffled lord and king,
  To him I give, as I have sworn,
  My Sita, not of woman born." [*+]

The bow is brought, and Rama invited to try his strength. He takes it up easily in his hand, and as he was drawing the string, it snapped in two, to the wonder and fright of the beholders. Rama thus becomes the successful suitor of Sita, and messengers are despatched

[p. 180]

to invite his father to the wedding. His two brothers also come; and not only Rama and Sita are united, but his three brothers are wedded to the three other daughters of Janaka. They then return home and live in happiness and prosperity.

After a time King Dasaratha wishes to abdicate in favour of Rama his firstborn. When he had fixed upon a suitable time, the old man sends for his son, and enjoins him to prepare himself for the great event, by passing the night in holy exercises. The people hearing of the king's intention are delighted; the city is illuminated, and they spend the night in festivities. In the mean time a servant goes to Kaikeya, the mother of Bharata, and succeeds in exciting her jealousy of Rama to such an extent, that she secludes herself in the room of discontent in the palace. The king visits her, when she says to him--

"Now pledge thy word, if thou incline
  To listen to this prayer of mine." [**]

Ignorant of what her petition is, the king foolishly promises to grant it, before it is expressed. She, calling the gods to witness the promise and oath of her husband, reminds him that on an occasion of great danger she alone had stood by him, and that he then promised her a boon.. She now requested the fulfilment of that vow; or,

"If thou refuse thy promise sworn,
  I die despised before the morn," [*+]

and concludes her address by asking that her son be installed as Prince Regent, and Rama be sent to live a hermit's life in the forest for fourteen years.

[p. 181]

The king, almost mad with grief at this request, being bound by word and oath, is compelled to comply. The city is in tears that but yesterday was bright with joy; and the ceremony that was arranged for Rama is performed in favour of Bharata, much against his will. Rama tried to persuade Sita to allow him to proceed to the forest alone; but to this she will not for a moment consent. The interview between them on this occasion is one of the most beautiful and touching incidents in the whole story. She despises difficulties, dangers and discomforts, if she is with her husband; and avers that death would be preferable to separation. Lakshman's entreaty to accompany them is very touching too:

"I need not homes of god on high,
  I need not life that cannot die;
  Nor would I wish, with thee away,
  O'er the three worlds to stretch my sway." [**]

At length Rama, Sita, and Lakshman depart, amidst the tears of the whole city. When they reach the forest Dandaka, they seek a quiet spot, and at last settle down at. Chitrakuta.

Dasaratha dies of grief a short time after their departure, and the city is again flooded with tears. Bharata visits the exiles, with the intention of bringing his brother home to occupy the throne, but to this Rama will not consent. Bharata therefore continues to rule in his stead, but always regards him as the rightful king, and keeps a pair of his shoes, which are exposed to view on state occasions, to indicate that Bharata is acting only as Viceroy.

The three meet with many adventures in the forest, where they live the life of ascetics. One day they see

[p. 182]

an immense giant, named Viradha, clothed in a tiger's skin, and

"Three lions, tigers four, ten deer,
  He carried on his iron spear." [**]

This giant, taking Sita aside, threatens to kill and eat her; but after a time, changing his mind, proposes to keep her; and, thinking that he is acting generously towards Rama, offers to allow him to go off unharmed. At length they fight; but as the giant is proof against their weapons, they do not make much progress. After a time he takes up Rama and Lakshman on his shoulders, and runs away with them. As they are being carried each succeeds in cutting off one of his arms. The giant falls, weak from loss of blood; and, seeing that their weapons cannot deprive hire of life, they bury him alive. After this adventure, they reach the hermitage, and Rama becomes the protector of hermits throughout the district.

When ten years of his forest life were past, Rama sets off for the hermitage of Agastya, a man who had gained great merit by his austerities. There they build a cottage, but are not able to live in peace very long. As Rama and Sita are sitting together under a tree, a giantess named Suparnakha, the sister of Ravana, passes by, and falls madly in love with Rama.

"She, grim of eye and foul of face,
  Loved his sweet glance and forehead's grace;
  She of unlovely figure, him
  Of stately form and shapely limb;
  She whose dim locks disordered hung,
  Him whose bright hair on high brows clung." [*+]

The giantess questions Rama as to the reason of his being in the forest. After giving a full account of himself

[p. 183]

and Sita, he inquires who she may be. She says she is Ravana's sister, and openly avows her love:

"This poor misshapen Sita leave,
  And me, thy worthier bride, receive.
  Look on my beauty, and prefer
  A spouse more meet than one like her;
  I'll eat that ill-formed woman there;
  Thy brother, too, her fate shall share.
  But come, beloved, thou shalt roam
  With me through all our woodland home." [**]

Rama, smiling, told her that as he was married he could not accept her kind offer, but advised her to try his brother. She acts upon this advice; but Lakshman sends her back to Rama. Thinking that Sita was the obstacle to the attainment of her wishes, she was about to slay her; Rama prevented her from doing this, and Lakshman cut off her nose and ears. She fled to her brother Khara, whose anger she roused by the tale of her mutilation, who sent fourteen giants, giving them strict orders to kill Rama, Sita, and Lakshman. These giants are easily slain. Khara is terribly angry when he hears of their death; and, quickly raising an army of 14,000 warriors, goes against his foes. Rama, single-handed, destroyed them nearly all.

One of the giants, named Akampan, rushed away to inform Ravana of the catastrophe. Ravana, intensely angry, asks--

"Who is the wretch shall vainly try
  In earth, heaven, hell, from me to fly?
  Vaisravan, Indra, Vishnu, He
  A Who rules the dead, must reverence me;
  For not the mightiest lord of these
  Can brave my will, and live at ease. . . .
  With unresisted influence, I
  Can force e'en Death himself to die." [*+]

[p. 184]

He then asks particulars of the fight, and determines to avenge his sister. The messenger informs him that it is useless for him to attempt to conquer Rama by force, and advises him rather to carry off Sita; for,

"Reft of his darling wife, be sure
  Brief days the mourner will endure." [**]

Ravana orders his chariot, starts off alone to Maricha, and asks his assistance, who dissuades him from attempting to fight with Rama; but soon afterwards, when Suparnakha, with her mutilated face, appears before Ravana, she arouses his indignation. As he sat on his throne he is thus described:--

"A score of arms, ten necks, had he,
  His royal gear was brave to see;
  His stature like a mountain height,
  His arms were strong, his teeth were white.
     *          *          *          *
 "Ten thousand years the giant spent
  On dire austerities intent;
  And of his heads an offering, laid
  Before the Self-existent, made." [*+]

The giantess retells her tale, exciting her brother's anger afresh. He immediately sets off again for the hermitage of the fiend Maricha, and asks him to assist in his exploit by assuming the form of a golden deer with silver spots, by which Sita's attention would be attracted.

"Doubt not the lady, when she sees
  The wondrous deer among the trees,
  Will bid her lord and Lakshman take
  The creature for its beauty's sake."

Maricha, remembering the power of Rama when as a mere boy he went to assist the hermit Visvamitra, and

[p. 185]

how he himself was wounded by him, again tries to dissuade Ravana. But this time he cannot prevail, and there is not much choice left him, for Ravana declares--

"Thy life, if thou the task essay,
    In jeopardy may stand;
  Oppose me, and this very day
    Thou diest by this hand." [**]

Click to enlarge
RAVANA.

Maricha assumes the form of a deer, and, proceeding to the vicinity of the hermitage, attracts the attention

[p. 186]

of Sita, who becomes anxious to possess it. Rama, leaving Lakshman to guard the home, goes in pursuit, and shoots it. As the fiend was dying, assuming Rama's voice, he cried out loudly enough to be heard by the wife and brother, "Ho, Sita! Ho, Lakshman!" They imagining that some evil had come to Rama, Lakshman hurried towards the spot whence the cry proceeded; whilst Ravana, who was waiting near, seized the opportunity to carry off the defenceless Sita. The demon did his best to induce her to yield herself an easy prey; but though she struggled hard, and cried for help to all who came near, none were able to deliver her. Held in his magical car, they reached Lanka, where she was placed in one of Ravana's palaces. He tried both by kind words and fearful threatenings to win her love; but kindness and cruelty were equally ineffective. To comfort her, Brahma sent Indra, who managed to elude the vigilance of her guards, and assured her of the sympathy of the gods, and of the fact that all would yet be well with her husband and herself.

Whilst this was happening at Lanka, Rama was almost mad with grief. When Lakshman came to him after the deer was slain, he feared some evil had happened; and on their return to the cottage, as Sita was not to be found, his anguish was intolerable. He wandered about calling upon the trees, mountains, and rivers to tell him what had happened to his loved one; but they were silent as the grave. A vulture at the point of death, who had fought with Ravana on Sita's behalf, informs him of her capture by the great fiend. (See part iii. chap. vii.)

In their wanderings, the brothers meet with a giant named Kabandha, who, owing to a curse, had to wear the hideous form in which he appeared, until his arms

[p. 187]

should be cut off by Rama. As he was running away with the brothers on his shoulders, they fulfilled this condition, there being no other way of escape for them. On learning who they were, he was delighted, and asked them, as a favour, to burn his body in order that he might regain his proper form, and ascend to heaven. As the flames encircled him, he assumed a heavenly shape, and when in mid-air, told them where Sita was taken, and advised them to seek the help of Sugriva, the King of the Vanar [**] (Monkey) tribes, as only through his aid could they recover her. Acting upon this advice, they proceed to Pampa, Sugriva's home; where the sight of the beauty of the lake causes Rama's lamentations to burst forth afresh:

"By sights like these of joy and peace,
  My pangs of hopeless love increase." [*+]

When Sugriva saw the brothers, imagining them to be friends of his brother Bali, by whom he had been deprived of his throne, he was greatly alarmed, and sent Hanuman, his commander-in-chief, to learn who they

[p. 188]

were, and why they had come. When Hanuman learns the object of their visit, thinking they might be induced to assist his master to regain his kingdom, he promises Sugriva's help, and, taking them upon his shoulders, hurries off with them into the presence of the Vanar king. A league is made immediately, and after Rama had promised that the usurper Bali should fall that day, Sugriva says of Sita--

"Yea, though in heaven the lady dwell,
  Or prisoned in the depths of hell,
  My friendly care her way shall track,
  And bring thy ransomed darling back." [**]

Sugriva produces a robe, bracelets, and anklets that fell from Sita as she was being carried off by Ravana; the anklets Rama recognizes at once, and is greatly comforted as Sugriva tells him that though at present unable to inform him where Sita has been taken, he will be able to obtain this information, and assist him in his attempt to rescue her. Sugriva then narrates the story of his quarrel with his brother, but, ere he believes that Rama can materially assist him, wished to test the wonderful bow of the hero. He was greatly astonished as he saw an arrow Rama discharged pierce seven palm-trees in line, pass through a hill behind them, and, after traversing six subterranean worlds, return to the quiver. The Vanar king, seeing he has secured no common ally, goes forth fearlessly against his brother; and in the fight, when Sugriva was getting worsted, Rama sends an arrow which slays his brother. This was regarded by the dying man as an act of gross injustice, because Rama slew him without informing him who he was; had

[p. 189]

he only known he would gladly have assisted him in his quest for Sita.

Sugriva, on the fall of his brother, re-ascends the throne, but is so fully occupied with the pleasures of his position as to forget the promise of help he had given Rama, by whose prowess his dominion had been regained. Hanuman, ever faithful to Rama's cause, reminds him--

"The realm is won, thy name advanced,
  The glory of thy house enhanced;
  And now thy foremost care should be
  To aid the friends who succoured thee." [**]

But this reminder of his duty is insufficient to arouse the king from his selfish enjoyment; it was not until Rama sends a strong message by Lakshman that he is alive to his duty. When, however, he does move, it is to collect a mighty army. Of the troops collected for this enterprise it is said--

"Thousands, yea, millions shall there be
  Obedient to their king's decree.
         *        *        *        *
  Fierce bears and monkey troops combined,
  And apes of every varied kind,
  Terrific in their forms, who dwell
  In grove and wood and bosky dell." [*+]

The king gave instructions to each leader of a division, as to the limits of the district he was to search for the lost princess; but as Ravana was believed to have gone towards the south, Hanuman's district, special instruction was given to him; and Rama entrusted him with a ring which, if successful in discovering Sita, he could show her as a proof that he was a messenger from her husband. For a long time the search was fruitless, and would have been given up as

[p. 190]

hopeless, but for Hanuman's perseverance. When they were about to relinquish the search, they met the vulture Sampati, brother of Jatayus, whom Ravana had slain as he attempted to prevent him from carrying off Sita. This bird was the first to put Rama on the right track for obtaining his wife. Sampati, hearing that Ravana had slain his brother, was most anxious to avenge his death, and willingly rendered all the assistance he could. He informs the seekers that Sita is at Lanka.

"A hunched leagues your course must be,
  Beyond this margin of the sea;
  Still to the south your way pursue,
  And there the giant Ravan view." [**]

But here a difficulty occurred: there were a hundred leagues of water to be crossed; who could make the leap? Hanuman again comes to the front and declares--

"Swift as a shaft from Rama's bow,
  To Ravan's city I will go." [*+]

According to his promise, Hanuman made the marvellous spring. After meeting with various adventures, at length he reaches the capital of Lanka, and, diminishing in size until he is no bigger than a cat, passes through the city unnoticed, and finally enters the Asoka grove where Sita was confined. He was just in time to witness an unsuccessful attempt of Ravana to induce his lovely captive to forget her husband, and become his bride. Ravana's parting words to Sita on this occasion were not very love-inspiring; he declared that unless within two months she consented to become his bride,

"My cooks shall mince thy limbs with steel,
  And serve thee for my morning meal." [*++]

[p. 191]

When she is alone, Hanuman addresses her. At first, on hearing a monkey speak, she imagines herself dreaming; but the sight of her husband's ring convinces her that the strange messenger is a friend, and she is delighted to hear all he has to tell:

"'Thou bringest me,' she cried again,
  'A mingled draught of bliss and pain:
  Bliss that he wears me in his heart,
  Pain that he wakes and weeps apart.'" [**]

Though Hanuman had found Sita, and offered to carry her on his shoulders to her long-lost husband, a difficulty arose; she feared that in rising to the height which so long a leap necessitated, she might be giddy, and find it necessary to lay hold of him; but of her own free will she would on no account so much as touch the limbs of living man except those of her husband. Instead, then, of availing herself of the monkey's offer, she prefers to remain where she is for the present, and simply sends back a kind message to Rama, with a gem to assure him that she has received his. Hanuman does not care to return without having effected some injury on his foe; he therefore destroys the grove and temple, and slays several of Ravana's heroes. At length he is made captive. When taken before Ravana, he confesses that he is a messenger from Rama to Sita, and earnestly advises her restoration. This so exasperates the giant that he would have slain him at once had he not been an envoy--and an envoy's life is sacred. Some of Ravana's people, however, set fire to his tail, and though he does not experience much pain, he manages to set fire to the city in several places.

When Hanuman had completed his work in Lanka, he made a return leap to India, placed Sita's gem in

[p. 192]

[paragraph continues] Rama's hand, and told him all that had transpired in Ravana's capital. The prince was delighted to hear of his wife's constancy; but as the difficulty of transferring an army from the mainland over a hundred leagues of sea seemed impossible to surmount, he despaired of seeing her again. Sugriva, more practical and fuller of resource, says--

                     "Thy task must be
  To cast a bridge across the sea,
  The city of our foe to reach,
  That crowns the mountain by the beach;
  And when our feet that isle shall tread,
  Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead." [**]

The army, which had remained some distance away, now marches to the seashore, and Rama is very curious to learn by what means so vast a bridge can be built. He in his anguish calls upon the sea to withdraw and allow his followers to march across as on dry land; but although the Ocean will not grant this prayer, he does assist with his advice, as he tells him to enlist the services of a tribe of Dasyas (servants), who, together with the monkey host, construct a bridge in five days. No sooner is this completed than the troops march across, Rama being carried by Hanuman, and Lakshman by Angad; and though Ravana hears of their approach, and his spies, terrified at the appearance of the invading army, counsel him to yield, he obstinately refuses, and at last the attack upon his city is made.

After fierce fighting, with considerable loss on both sides, Rama and Lakshman are dangerously wounded by Indrajit, a son of Ravana; but on some wonderful herbs being applied to them by Garuda, the marvellous bird of Vishnu, they are restored. A second time they

[p. 193]

fall, and are again restored by herbs which Hanuman fetched in an incredibly short space of time from the Himalayas. At last Rama and Ravana meet face to face. Rama's destructive arrows seem at first to have met with a foe as wonderful as themselves:

"Straight to its mark the arrow sprang,
  And from the giant's body shred,
  With trenchant steel, the monstrous head.
  There might the triple world behold
  The severed head adorned with gold.
  But when all eyes were bent to view,
  Swift in its stead another grew." [**]

Acting on the advice of Matali, Rama, tired of this fruitless toil, launched an arrow " whose fire was kindled by the Almighty Sire," which pierced the giant's heart and laid him dead at his feet. Hanuman is despatched to assure Sita of the death of her captor, and in a few hours she is carefully sent in a litter by Vibhishan, the brother and successor of Ravana. This litter Rama causes to be opened, that the monkeys may see his wife's face, as he says--

"A woman's guard is not her bower,
  The lofty wall, the fenced tower:
  Her conduct is her best defence,
  And not a king's magnificence." [*+]

This speech struck terror in the hearts of all around, and Sita especially is almost heartbroken as, instead of the warm and loving welcome she had anticipated, he coolly tells her--

"Lady, at length my task is done,
  And thou, the prize of war, art won.
         *       *       *       *

[p. 194]

"If from my home my queen was reft,
  This arm hath well avenged the theft;
  And in the field has wiped away
  The blot that on my honour lay.
          *       *       *       *
 "But, lady, 'twas not love for thee
  That led mine army o'er the sea.
          *       *       *       *
 "I battled to avenge the cause
  Of honour and insulted laws.
  My love is fled, for on thy fame
  Lies the dark blot of sin and shame;
  And thou art hateful as the light
  That flashes on the injured sight.
  The world is all before thee: flee:
  Go where thou wilt, but not with me.
          *       *       *       *
 "For Ravan bore thee through the sky,
  And fixed on thine his evil eye;
  About thy waist his arms he threw,
  Close to his breast his captive drew;
  And kept thee, vassal of his power,
  An inmate of his ladies' bower." [**]

Hearing these cruel and unexpected words, Sita makes a most pathetic appeal, in which she vehemently asserts her innocence; but as there are no signs of relenting in her husband, she wishes to die, or to prove her innocence by the fire-ordeal, and asks Lakshman to prepare a funeral pile:

"I will not live to bear this weight
  Of shame, forlorn and desolate.
  The kindled fire my woes shall end,
  And be my best and surest friend." [*+]

Lakshman performs this sad office; and when all is ready, she walks round it, and, before entering the fire, addresses Agni:

[p. 195]

"As this fond heart, by virtue swayed,
  From Raghu's son has never strayed,
  So universal witness, Fire,
  Protect my body on the pyre.
  As Raghu's son has idly laid
  This charge on Sita, hear and aid." [**]

Having made this appeal to Agni to proclaim her innocence, she enters the fire. The gods, descending from heaven in their glory, address Rama, saying:

"Couldst thou, the Lord of all, couldst thou,
  Creator of the worlds, allow
  Thy queen, thy spouse to brave the fire,
  And give her body to the pyre?
  Dost thou not yet, Supremely Wise,
  Thy heavenly nature recognize?" [*+]

Rama frankly confesses that he believes himself to be only a mortal; Brahma tries to enlighten him, as he assures him that he is Vishnu incarnate for the purpose of slaying Ravana, and that Sita, whom his cruel conduct had driven into the fire, was no other than Lakshmi, his celestial spouse. In confirmation of this, Agni appears in the fire, and, taking Sita by the hand, conducts her to her husband, and declares her to be pure and spotless. Rama receives her with the greatest joy, and states that he was certain of her innocence all along, but that as others might have doubted her, he had caused her to pass through this ordeal.

Dasaratha, the father of Rama, now descends from heaven, and tells him that even in that happy place he had been sad to witness the sorrows of his beloved son. Indra next appears, and, at Rama's request, brings back to life the many Vanars who had perished in his cause; and then other gods thank Rama for the relief he has

[p. 196]

given them by the death of Ravana. When these congratulations are over, Rama, Sita, and Lakshman mount a magic car, lent him by Vibhishan, in which in a single day they travel from Lanka to his own city. On arriving near it, Hanuman is sent to inform Bharat of their return; and the joy this intelligence gives to the faithful Bharat, and to the citizens generally, is indescribable. Rama quickly assumes his position as king and the people enjoy unexampled prosperity:

"Ten thousand years Ayodha, blest
  With Rama's rule, had peace and rest.
  No widow mourned her murdered mate,
  No house was ever desolate.
  The happy land no murrain knew,
  The flocks and herds increased and grew,
  The earth her kindly fruits supplied,
  No harvest failed, no children died.
  Unknown were want, disease, and crime,
  So calm, so happy was the time." [**]

This state of universal happiness does not continue for ever. People in the city have doubts regarding the purity of their queen, which at length reach the ears of Rama, who, taking advantage of a wish of Sita once again to see a hermitage, leaves her to live an ascetic life. When her twin sons, born in her forest home, come of age, she sends them to their father's court. The king on seeing them, deeply feels the injustice he had done their mother, and determines at any cost to reinstate her as his queen. On her arrival he asks her to assert her innocence before the assembled court; but even Situ could not bear this. She calls to the earth which gave her birth now to give her a home; the earth opened and received her into her bosom. After this Rama grows

[p. 197]

tired of life, and Time comes to inform him that his work is done. Hearing this, the good king goes to the banks of the sacred stream, and forsaking his body ascends to his home in heaven.

Rama, to a vast number of Hindus, is not merely the King of Ayodha, whose history is so pathetically told in the Ramayana; nor the benefactor of gods, as he slew their enemy, Ravana; but their saviour and friend. As the dead are carried to the river-side to be burned, the friends repeatedly cry, "Rama, Rama, Satya Nama," i.e. " Rama, Rama, the true name." Probably this is owing to the fact that in life his power of intercession for the dead was great; whilst his kindness to and care for his followers were such as to encourage men's trust. He is said to have taken the whole of the inhabitants of his beloved city Ayodha to Brahma's heaven without their suffering death. At his intercession Ravana's spies were saved; and the Vanar hosts that had fallen in battle were restored to life. He entreated his father Dasaratha to remove the curse which he had pronounced upon Kaikeya, the mother of Bharata, through whose unkindness Rama had been exiled.

Footnotes

^170:* It is a strange though real confirmation of the truth of the underlying history of the hero that to this day the aboriginal tribes inhabiting the Vindhya hills have many legends relating to the life of Rama and Sita, although they are not Hindus, and know but little of [p. 171] Hinduism. These people are not at all like the Hindus in appearance. They are black, have curly hair and thick lips, not very unlike some African races.

^172:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 81.

^172:+ Ibid. i. 82.

^173:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 83.

^174:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 83.

^174:+ Ibid. i. 84.

^174:++ Ibid. i. 85.

^175:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 89.

^175:+ Ibid. i. 93.

^176:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 93.

^177:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 125.

^177:+ Ibid. i. 156.

^177:++ Tirhoot.

^178:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 278.

^178:+ Muir, O. S. T., iv. 458.

^179:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 279.

^179:+ Ibid. i. 280.

^180:* "Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 373.

^180:+ Ibid.

^181:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 94.

^182:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iii. 5.

^182:+ Ibid. iii. 80.

^183:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iii. 82.

^183:+ Ibid. iii. 143.

^184:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iii. 143.

^184:+ Ibid. iii. 148.

^185:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iii. 185.

^187:* Siva had foretold that Rama would obtain the aid of the monkeys for the destruction of Ravana, when the demon was travelling in the Himalayas. Siva appeared to him as a dwarf, and tried to prevent him from going along a certain road, Ravana disregarded the prohibition, and contemptuously asked who Siva was, to give an order that no one should pass that way; he also ridiculed the monkey-like appearance of the dwarf. Nandeshwara (Siva) replied that monkeys in appearance and power would be produced to destroy Ravana and his family. In order to show his power, Ravana raised the mountain in his arms; but Siva pressed it down with his toe, and crushed Ravana in his arms, until he cried out with pain; and not until he had propitiated Siva for a thousand years did he release him. When he released him, he said that his name should be Ravana, from the cry (Rava) which he uttered.

^187:+ Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 6.

^188:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 37.

^189:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 149.

^189:+ Ibid. iv. 188.

^190:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 254.

^190:+ Ibid. iv. 280.

^190:++ Ibid. iv. 334.

^191:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 365.

^192:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 3.

^193:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 254.

^193:+ Ibid. v. 271.

^194:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 273.

^194:+ Ibid. v. 276.

^195:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 277.

^195:+ Ibid. v. 278.

^196:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 314.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

8. THE KRISHNA AVATARA.

Professor Goldstucker says [**] that this "is the most interesting incarnation of Vishnu, both on account of the opportunity which it affords to trace in Hindu antiquity the gradual transformation of mortal heroes into representatives of a god; and on account of the numerous legends connected with it, as well as the influence which it exercised on the Vaishnava cult. In the Mahabharata, Krishna--which literally means 'the black or dark one'

[p. 198]

--is sometimes represented as rendering homage to Siva, and therefore acknowledging his own inferiority to that deity, or as recommending the worship of lima, the consort of Siva, and as receiving boons from both these deities. In some passages, again, he bears merely the

Click to enlarge
THE KRISHNA AVATARA.

character of a hero endowed with extraordinary powers, and in others his divine nature is even disputed or denied by adversaries, though they are eventually punished for this unbelief. As the intimate ally of Arjuna, he claims the rank of the supreme deity; but

[p. 199]

there are other passages, again, in the Mahabharata in which the same claim of Siva is admitted, and an attempt is made at compromising their rival claims, by declaring both deities one and the same. Sometimes, moreover, Krishna is in this Epos declared to represent merely a very small portion--'a portion of a portion,' as it is called--of the divine essence of Vishnu. In the Mahabharata, therefore, which is silent also; regarding many adventures in Krishna's life fully detailed in the Puranas, the worship of Vishnu in this incarnation was by no means so generally admitted or settled as it is in many Puranas of the Vaishnait sect; nor was there at that period that consistency in the conception of a Krishna Avatara, which is traceable in the later works."

In the "Prem Sagar," the Hindi version of the "Bhagavata Purana," is the following account of the object of this incarnation. A king of Mathura, named Ugrasena, had a beautiful wife, who was barren. One day, when walking in a wood, she lost her companions; and when alone, a demon becoming enamoured of her assumed her husband's form, and as a result a son was born, who was named Kansa. When a mere child Kansa manifested a most cruel disposition--his great delight being to catch and kill children--and he grew up to be a source of sorrow to his father, family, and country. He advised his father to give up the worship of Rama, the god of his race; and to call in secret only on Mahadeva (Siva). His father replied with sorrow: "Rama is my lord, and the dispeller of my grief; if I do not worship him, how shall I as a sinful man cross over the sea of the world?" Kanza hearing this, dethroned his father, and having usurped his place issued a proclamation throughout his dominions forbidding men to worship Rama, and commanding them to reverence Siva;

[p. 200]

and his tyranny at length became so unbearable, that the Earth, assuming the form of a cow, went to Indra and, complaining of all this, said: "Evil spirits have begun to commit great crimes in the world; in dread of whom Religion and Justice have departed; and if you will permit me, I, too, will abandon the world, and descend into the lower regions." Indra hearing this went in company with the other gods to Brahma to see what redress could be afforded. Brahma conducted them to Siva, who, in his turn, conducted them to Vishnu; and reminding him of the deliverance he had afforded to gods and men in his previous manifestations, they induce him again to become a man for the destruction of Kansa. The gods and goddesses, delighted at this assurance of help, promise also to forsake their heavenly homes that they may be his companions during his earthly sojourn; and Vishnu himself arranges that Lakshman, who in the Rama incarnation had been his brother and constant and faithful companion, and Bharata also and Sutraghna, should accompany him; and that Sita, under the name of Rukmini, should be his wife.

The "Vishnu Purana," [**] from which most of the following legends are taken, gives a somewhat different account of Vishnu's reply. Krishna was the incarnation of "a part of a part of the supreme being." When entreated to become incarnate, "the supreme lord plucked off two hairs, one white and one black, and said to the gods, 'These my hairs shall descend upon the earth, and shall relieve her of the burden of her distress!'" The white hair was impersonated as Balarama, and the black as Krishna. "The asuras shall all be destroyed. This my black hair shall be impersonated in the eighth

[p. 201]

conception of Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva, who is like a goddess, and shall slay Kansa, who is the demon Kalanemi." [**]

When Vasudeva and his wife Devaki were being driven by King Kansa in a chariot, "a voice in the sky, sounding loud and deep like thunder, addressing Kansa, said, 'Fool that you are, the eighth child of the damsel you are now driving shall take away your life!'" Kansa hearing this drew his sword, and was about to slay Devaki; but Vasudeva interposed, saying, "Kill not Devaki, great warrior! Spare her life, and I will deliver to you every child she may bring forth." Kansa, appeased with this promise, spared the lady, but, to prevent any mistake, placed a guard by day and night over their apartments; and as child after child was born, it was given up to him and slain.

Kansa was under the impression that he had destroyed Devaki's children, but this was not the case. The children that were handed over to him were children of Hiranyakasipu, whom Vishnu slew as the Man-Lion, who were brought from the nether regions by Yoganindra, "the great illusory energy of Vishnu," and lodged in Devaki's womb in order that the cruel Kansa might be overreached. Vishnu said to this goddess: "Go, Nidra (Sleep), to the nether regions, and by my command conduct successively six of their princes to be conceived by Devaki. When these shall have been put to death by Kansa, the seventh conception shall be formed of a portion of Sesha (the serpent-deity), who is part of me; and this

[p. 202]

you shall transfer before the time of birth to Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at Gokula." This child was Balarama. "The report shall run that Devaki miscarries. I will myself become incarnate in her eighth conception; and you shall take a similar character as the embryo offspring of Yasoda, the wife of a herdsman named Nanda. In the night of the eighth of the dark half of the month Nabhas I shall be born; and you will be born on the ninth. Impelled and aided by my power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of Yasoda, and you to the bed of Devaki. Kansa shall take you and hold you up to dash you against a stone; but you shall escape into the sky, where Indra shall meet and do homage to you through reverence of me."

When Devaki gives birth to her eighth son, Vasudeva takes the child, and, eluding the vigilance of the guards, hurries through the city, with the serpent Sesha following. On reaching the river Yamuna, which he has to cross, though ordinarily both wide and deep, it assists him in his flight, the water only rising to his knees. Just as he reaches Nanda's house, Yasoda had given birth to her child, which Vasudeva seizes, and, leaving Devaki's child in its place, returns to his prison home, and manages to re-enter unobserved. Soon after this the cry of the new-born child being heard by the guard, Kansa is quickly informed of its birth, and, rushing into the room, seized and dashed it against a stone. But fate was too strong for him. Immediately the child touched the ground, "it rose into the sky, and, expanding into a gigantic figure, having eight arms, each wielding some formidable weapon, laughed and said to Kansa, 'What avails it thee to have hurled me to the ground? He is born that shall kill thee, the mighty one amongst the

[p. 203]

gods, who was formerly thy destroyer.'" The reference of the last sentence as taught by other Puranas is to the fact that Kansa was no other than Kalanemi, whom Vishnu had slain when incarnate as Rama.

Greatly alarmed by the unexpected frustration of his plans, Kansa collects his friends, and, addressing them, said: "The vile and contemptible denizens of heaven are assiduously plotting against my life; they dreading my prowess, I hold them of no account. Have I not seen the king of the gods, when he had ventured into the conflict, receiving my shafts upon his back, and not bravely upon his breast? Now, it is my determination to inflict still deeper degradation upon these evil-minded and unprincipled gods. Let therefore every man who is notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods and Brahmans), every man who is remarkable for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to death; that thus the gods shall be deprived of the means by which they subsist. The goddess who has been born as the infant child of Devaki has announced to me that he is again alive who in a former being was .my death. Let therefore active search be made for whatever young children there may be upon earth, and let every boy in whom there are signs of unusual vigour be slain without remorse." Soon after this, as he feared nothing more from them, he released Vasudeva and Devaki from their confinement, and, in dread of meeting his great enemy, withdrew into the inner apartments of his house.

On regaining his liberty, Vasudeva speedily sought out Nanda, who of course was unaware of the change of children effected by Vasudeva, and, after congratulating him on the birth of a son, suggested the advisability of his returning home; as, having paid his taxes, there was nothing to detain him in the city. He feared

[p. 204]

lest the spies of Kansa should notice the peculiar excellences of the child, and destroy him according to Kansa's order. At the same time he took his other child by Rohini (Balarama), and placed him under the care of Nanda to be brought up as his own child. By this means, as Rama and Lakshman were inseparable companions in the previous incarnation, Krishna and Balarama were as intimately connected in this.

The herdsman Nanda and his family had not been long settled at Gokula before efforts were made to destroy the infant Krishna. A female fiend named Putana, the sucking of whose breast was instant death to an infant, came by night, and, taking the child in her arms, offered him her breast. Krishna seized it with both hands, and sucked with such violence that the hideous being roared with pain, and giving way in every joint fell down dead. The villagers hearing the shrieks rushed into the house to see what was the matter. Yasoda waved a cow's tail brush over him, whilst Nanda put dried cow-dung upon his head, and, placing an amulet on his arm, besought Vishnu to protect the child.

There are many legends connected with his boyhood, which teach his extraordinary power. On one occasion, when a mere infant, lying under Nanda's wagon, he cried for the breast, and, being impatient because his mother did not come quickly, kicked the wagon over, to the great astonishment of the bystanders. He and Balarama played with and tormented the calves to such an extent, that Yasoda became angry; and to prevent its repetition, tied Krishna to a heavy wooden mortar in which corn is threshed, and went on with her work. Krishna, trying to free himself from this, dragged it until it became wedged fast between two

[p. 205]

Arjuna trees, and with a strong pull the trees were uprooted. The people, astonished because the trees fell when no storm was blowing, thought the place must be unlucky, and moved away to Vrindavana. The Bhagavata

Click to enlarge
KRISHNA SLAYING BAKASURA.

says that these trees were two sons of Kuvera, the god of riches, who, owing to a curse of the sage Narada, were thus metamorphosed, and that it was for the purpose of liberating them that Krishna accomplished this feat.

[p. 206]

[paragraph continues] Krishna and Balarama, the guardians of the world, were keepers of cattle in the cowpens of Vrindavana," until they were seven years of age, during which years, according to the "Bhagavata Purana," the boys were full of childish tricks: stealing butter from the neighbouring cowherds appears to have been their favourite pastime.

In the "Bhagavata Purana" there are legends also of attempts being made by Kansa to rid himself of his dreaded foe. One day a demon was sent who hoped to surprise him when wandering with the cattle in the woods; but the boy, seeing through his disguise, seized him by the foot, swung him round his head and dashed him so violently on the ground that he immediately died. The next day, another demon, assuming the form of an immense crane, seized Krishna with its bill; but he became so hot that the crane immediately released him: Krishna then crushed its beak under his foot. Yet another came as a great serpent, and swallowed Krishna and his companions, the cowherds, with their cows; but he was no sooner in the reptile's stomach than he expanded himself, and burst open his prison. Krishna was not always defending himself; often he benefited his companions. When Brahma stole some calves, and carried off the boys who tended them, Krishna made other calves and other boys, so that the theft was never known by the cowherds.

We now return to the narrative of the "Vishnu Purana." The river Yamuna was the home of the serpent Kaliya, who made its waters boil with the fires of passion, so that the trees on its banks were blighted by its fumes, and birds were killed by its heat. Krishna, seeing how his friends at Vrindavana were inconvenienced by this, plunged into the stream, to the dismay of the cowherds, and, after challenging the serpent to fight, was

[p. 207]

about to slay him. Moved, however, by the intercession of the lady serpents, he allowed him to live on condition that he and his family forsook the Yamuna, and took up their abode in, the sea.

On one occasion Krishna wished to annoy Indra. Seeing the Gopas (cowherds) preparing to worship the giver of rain, he dissuaded them from it, and urged them rather to worship the mountain that supplied their cattle with food, and their cattle that yielded them milk. Acting upon this advice, they presented to the mountain Govarddhana "curds, milk, and flesh." This was merely a device by which Krishna diverted the worship of Indra to himself; for "upon the summit of the mountain Krishna appeared, saying, 'I am the mountain,' and partook of much food presented by the Gopas; whilst in his own form as Krishna he ascended the hill along with the cowherds, and worshipped his other self." Having promised them many blessings, the mountain-person of Krishna vanished. Indra, greatly incensed at the disregard shown him by Nanda and others, sent floods to destroy them and their cattle; but Krishna, raising the mountain Govarddhana aloft on one hand, held it as an umbrella and thus sheltered his friends from the storm for seven days and nights. Indra then visited Krishna and praised him for what he had done; and his wife Indrani entreated Krishna to be a friend of their son Arjuna.

Krishna did not by any means confine his attention to the wants of the cowherds amongst whom he spent his early days. On one occasion Satrajit, a worshipper of the Sun, who had received from his lord a magnificent jewel named Syamantaka, came to visit Krishna at Dwaraka, adorned with his jewel, which shone so brightly that the inhabitants thought the Sun himself

[p. 208]

was present. It was a most marvellous gem, for its possessor received through it "eight loads of gold daily, and was free from all fear of portents, wild beasts, fire,

Click to enlarge
KRISHNA HOLDING UP MOUNT GOVARDDHANA.

robbers, and famine;" but there was this strange condition attached to its possession: "although it was an inexhaustible source of good to a virtuous person, when

[p. 209]

worn by a man of bad character it was the cause of his death." Thinking it possible that Krishna, on learning the excellence of the gem, might wish to keep it, Satrajit gave it to his brother Prasena. When this brother was hunting, having taken the gem with him, he was killed by a lion. Jambavat, the king of the bears, seeing the gem in the lion's mouth, killed him and took possession of the jewel. When Prasena did not return as he was expected, the Yadavas (Krishna's tribesmen) began to think that Krishna had slain him. To convince them of his innocency, taking a number of his brethren, he traced the horse upon which Prasena rode to the place where the lion slew its rider, and was acquitted of all blame in the matter. He then followed Jambavat to his cave, and finding the bear-prince Sukumara playing with the gem, he entered and fought with his father the king for twenty-one days. As no tidings of him reached his home at Dwaraka, his friends concluded that he must be dead; but the food and water offered in the performance of his funeral ceremonies supporting him during his lengthened conflict, enabled him to overcome Jambavat, who gave him his daughter Jambavati to wife. He returned home in triumph, carrying the gem with him, which he restored to Satrajit, and received from him his daughter Satyabhama. This gem, after causing several other disputes, was finally given to a good king, Akrura. When it was offered to Krishna he confessed that as he had 16,000 wives it was not possible for him to retain it; and also that his wife Satyabhama would not comply with the conditions imposed upon its possessor.

The Gopis (wives of the cowherds) are represented as being madly in love with Krishna. As he and Balarama played the flute, they came to dance with them; but as

[p. 210]

all could not hold Krishna's hand as they danced, he multiplied himself into as many forms as there were women, each woman believing she held the hand of the true Krishna. [**] On one occasion he watched the Gopis as they went to bathe in the Yamuna river, and, stealing their clothes, sat in a tree and refused to restore them until each came in the form of a suppliant with uplifted hands to fetch them. The Bhagavata teaches that these women, impelled though they were by passion to seek Krishna, obtained through him final emancipation from sin. "In whatever way a man may worship him he will obtain deliverance. Some knew and sought him as a son, some as a friend, some as an enemy, some as a lover, but in the end all obtained the blessing of deliverance and emancipation."

Of all these women Krishna's favourite was Radha, the wife of Ayanagosha. Her sister-in-law told her brother of his wife's misconduct, and Radha was in fear lest he should murder her. When, however, she communicated her fears to her lover, he easily reassured her. He told her that when her husband came, he (Krishna) would transform himself into Kali, and instead of finding her with a lover, he would see her engaged in worshipping a goddess. Her husband happening to pass that way soon after, noticed Radha bowing down, and joined in worshipping Krishna, whom he mistook for Kali. It is Radha whose name is ever associated with Krishna in hymns, songs, prayers, and pictures, and whilst the wives of the deity are forgotten, Radha is worshipped along with her lover.

As Krishna was dancing on one occasion with these women, a demon named Arishta, in the form of a fierce

[p. 211]

bull, savagely attacked him. Krishna quietly waited its approach, and, seizing him as an alligator would have done, held him by the horns whilst he pressed his sides with his knees; he then wrung his neck as if it had been a piece of wet cloth, and at last tearing off his horns beat him to death with them.

After some years Kansa is informed of Krishna's

Click to enlarge
RADHA WORSHIPPING KRISHNA AS KALI.

existence, and, as we have noticed above, sent various demons to slay him; but as these efforts failed, the king determined on a grand scheme by which he hoped to rid himself of his dreaded foe. He accordingly sent Akrura, one of the few good men in his kingdom, with a most polite invitation to Krishna and Balarama to visit him

[p. 212]

at his capital, to witness some athletic sports; and, in the hope that they, being off their guard, would fall an easy prey, ordered a demon named Kesin, in the form of a horse, to attack them on the road. But Krishna is more than a match for the fiend; he meets the horse and fearlessly thrusts his hand in its mouth, and, causing it to swell, bursts the animal into two parts: hence one of Krishna's many names is Kesava, the slayer of Kesin.

Akrura, having told Krishna of the ill-feeling of Kansa and of the plots he had made against his life, was greatly encouraged with the assurance that in three days Kansa and his adherents would be slain. He took leave of the guests when they approached the city of Mathura. Entering the city unattended, and dressed as poor country people, they meet a washerman of Kansa at work, whom they first annoy by throwing his clothes on the ground, and, when he expostulates with them, kill him, and robe themselves in Kansa's garments. Seeing the gaily-dressed, strong, and good-looking young men, a flower-seller presents them with some of his choicest flowers; for his generosity Krishna bestows rich blessings upon him in this life and promises heaven after death. After this they meet a deformed girl named Kubja, carrying ointments and perfumes to the palace, some of which, at his request, she gives to Krishna. For her kindness her deformity is cured, she is made beautiful, and invites the brothers to her home.

The day following was fixed for the sports. The lists were prepared, the trumpets sounded, and two fierce wrestlers were commanded by fair means or foul to slay Krishna and his brother; and in case they should fail to do this, an enormous elephant was in readiness to trample them to death. But wrestlers and elephant

[p. 213]

were themselves slain. Seeing his grand scheme signally fail, the king lost his temper and called out loudly to his guards to slay the youths-; instead of this, however, Krishna rushed upon and slew the king in the midst of the assembly, and falling at the feet of his father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, placed Ugrasena, Kansa's father, upon the throne, and with his brother took up his abode at Mathura.

Krishna is of immense service to the people of Mathura, for very soon after his arrival there, Jarasandha, Kansa's father-in-law, attacks them, and is beaten eighteen times by his prowess. When the people were almost exhausted with these protracted struggles, a new enemy appears in Kalayavana, King of the Yavanas, who wish to try their strength with the Yadavas under Krishna. He, thinking that by a struggle with two foes at once the people would be exhausted, provided a new city, so strong that women could protect it, to which he conducted the inhabitants of Mathura. No sooner had he made the people secure than he went forth unarmed and alone, and attracted the attention of the King of the Yavanas, whose army still surrounded the city. Krishna, seeing the king was following him, entered a cave, and concealed himself; the king seeing a man lying at its entrance, thinking it must be Krishna, kicked it, and in an instant became a heap of ashes. The secret of his destruction was this: a man named Muchukunda had received as a boon from the gods the power to sleep for a long period, with this condition, that whoever awoke him should be instantly consumed by fire emanating from his body. Unwittingly the King of the Yavanas kicked him and received the penalty of his ignorance; whilst Krishna escaped, and seized the army and treasures left without an owner.

[p. 214]

Amongst many others, Krishna fell in love with Rukmini, the daughter of Bhismaka, King of Vidhabha (Berar); but her brother Rukmin hated him, and refusing to give his consent, at the advice of Jarasandha, she was betrothed to Sisupala. This Sisupala was no other than Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whom in previous incarnations Vishnu had slain. On the eve of the wedding Krishna carries off Rukmini, leaving Balarama and his friends to take care of themselves; and when Rukmin follows him with an immense army, Krishna easily destroys his companions, and, but for the intercession of Rukmini, would have killed his brother-in-law too. This Rukmini was none other than Lakshmi, Sita and others, who, in her earlier incarnations, had stood in a similar relationship to him.

Soon after this occurrence, Indra pays a visit to Krishna, to enlist his sympathy and help against Naraka, King of Pragyotisha, who was inflicting all kinds of evil upon the whole creation. "Carrying off maidens belonging to gods, saints, demons and kings, he shuts them up in his own palace. He has taken away Varuna's umbrella, the celestial nectar-dropping earrings of my mother Aditi, and now demands my elephant." Krishna at once consents to help, marches off to meet the king, conquers his forces, slays Naraka and obtains the stolen property, for which on its restoration he receives the thanks of its owners. In the women's apartment he finds 16,100 damsels, and "at an auspicious moment received the hands of all, according to the ritual, in separate houses; 16,100 was the number of the maidens, and into so many forms did the foe of Madhu multiply himself; so that each of the damsels thought he had wedded her in his single person, and he abode severally in the dwelling-place of each of his wives. It

[p. 215]

was as a present from Uma, the wife of Siva, that he received these wives."

There was once a severe conflict between Krishna and Siva. Aniruddha, a grandson of Krishna, was enamoured of Usha, a daughter of Bana, a devout worshipper of Siva, whom he visited secretly. Being caught by Bana's guard, the prince was imprisoned, and, as the king would not release him, Krishna attacked him; but Siva and his son Kartikeya fought for Bana. After a severe encounter, as Siva sat weary in his car, and Kartikeya had fled from the field, Krishna, tired of using ordinary weapons, let fly his wonderful discus, which never failed of accomplishing his wish, and cut off the hundred arms of Bana. When about to throw it a second time, Siva came and interceded for the life of his friend; to whom, in granting his request, Krishna said, "You are fit to apprehend that you are not distinct from me; that which I am, thou art."

As Krishna was marching towards Sonitapura, the city in which his grandson was confined, as narrated above, a strange enemy met him. "Fever, an emanation from Maheshwara (Siva), having three feet and three heads, fought desperately with Krishna in defence of Bana. Baladeva (Balarama), upon whom his ashes were scattered, was seized with burning heat, and his eyelids trembled; but he obtained relief by clinging to the body of Krishna. Contending thus with the divine holder of the bow, the Fever emanating from Siva was quickly expelled from the body of Krishna by Fever which he himself engendered. Brahma, beholding the impersonated malady, bewildered by the beating inflicted by the arms of the deity, entreated the latter to desist, and the foe of Madhu refrained, and absorbed into himself the Fever he had created. The rival Fever then

[p. 216]

departed, saying to Krishna, "Those who call to memory the combat between us shall be exempt from febrile diseases."

Krishna was not without a rival. A man named Paundraka professed that he was the true incarnation of Vishnu, and that Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva) was a pretender. The King of Benares was induced to believe in this false Krishna, and at his request sent an order for the real Krishna to come and do him homage, and at the same time to bring with him his discus and other insignia of office. Krishna did not hesitate. Setting off next day, he destroyed the army of his rival in a moment, and addressing Paundraka himself said, "You desired me by your envoy to resign to you my insignia: I now deliver them to you. Here is my discus, here my mace, here is Garuda; let him mount upon thy standard." The discus did its work, the rival of Krishna was cut to pieces; but, as the Raja of Benares continued to fight, his head was cut off, and fell in the city. The people in their distress cried to Siva, who, in answer, sent a fierce female form to their help. But the discus, obedient to Krishna's command, pursued her, and its radiancy, unfortunately, was such that i t consumed the whole city in which she had hid herself.

When Krishna had finished his work, and had destroyed demons and wicked men, especially Kansa, the time came for him to return to heaven; but, before his departure, owing to a curse pronounced by angry Brahmans, it was necessary that the Yadava race from which he sprang should pass away. This curse was pronounced to avenge an insult offered by some Yadu boys to Narada and other Rishis when engaged with their devotions. These boys, as a joke, dressed up a son of

[p. 217]

[paragraph continues] Krishna, named Samba, in woman's clothes, and taking him to the Rishis asked, "What child will this female give birth to?" The Rishis, greatly annoyed, said, "She will bring forth a club which shall crush the whole Yadava race." Accordingly a club came from Samba's body, which King Ugrasena ordered to be ground to powder and thrown into the sea. The dust that fell on the shore became rushes, but a small part of the club, like a lance head, could not be broken: this was thrown into the sea, was swallowed by a fish, which was caught by a fisherman, and made into an arrow point by a huntsman named Jara.

A messenger from the gods now visited Krishna, telling him that, as his work was done, he should ascend to his home. This he was quite willing to do; but, wishing to save his race from the threatened destruction, advised the Yadavas to forsake their city and go to Prabhasa. By his advice he unintentionally hastened their end; for on reaching the seashore they indulged in liquor and began to fight violently amongst themselves, and for arms seized the rushes which sprang from the dust of the fatal club that came from Samba. Krishna and Balarama trying to make peace between the combatants only led to their swifter destruction, until at last the two brothers were left alone of their race. Whilst sitting and talking on the banks of a river, a serpent crawled out of Balarama's mouth--the serpent Sesha, of which he was an incarnation, and so his end was come. Krishna, left alone, sat meditating, with his foot upon his knee, when the hunter Jara, armed with the fatal arrow, passed by, and taking Krishna for a deer, shot him, and thus his death was unwittingly caused by the last part of the cursed club. Jara, seeing his mistake, fell at Krishna's feet and asked

[p. 218]

forgiveness, to whom Krishna said, "Fear not thou in the least. Go, hunter, through my favour to heaven, the abode of the gods." Immediately a celestial car appeared, in which the man ascended to heaven; and Krishna abandoned his mortal body.

In this account of Krishna we have followed the "Vishnu Purana," with which the Bhagavata agrees; though the latter has many additional legends, similar to those given above. The writers of these Puranas have no doubt regarding his divinity; in fact a large part of these books is occupied with praises and prayers addressed to him as supreme. In the Mahabharata, however, Krishna is little more than a hero, excepting in those passages which are believed to be of much later origin than the body of the book. By the writers of that age Krishna is described as a worshipper of Siva, from whom he received the chief blessings he enjoyed.

Amongst the references to Krishna in the Mahabharata are the following: [**]--"Krishna then reverenced Siva with voice, mind, understanding, and act;" i.e. when he accompanied Arjuna to Siva's abode to beg heavenly weapons. Siva replies, "I have been duly worshipped by Krishna, wherefore no one is clearer to me than Krishna." In a hymn Krishna thus praises Siva: "I know Mahadeva, and his various works of old. For he is the beginning, middle, and end of (all) creatures." Bhisma says, "Through his devotion to Rudra, the world is pervaded by the mighty Krishna. This Madhava performed austerities for a full thousand years, propitiating Siva, the god who bestows boons." It was through propitiating Siva that Krishna had a son by Jambavati; from him he received the discus Sudarsana,

[p. 219]

and from him he received eight boons, to which Uma added eight others: among the eight granted by Siva were "a hundred hundreds of sons," and by Uma sixteen thousand one hundred wives. According to Krishna, Siva "is the most excellent of beings in the three worlds." "As he is the greatest of gods, he is called Mahadeva, since he constantly prospers all men in all their acts: seeking their welfare (Siva), he is called Siva."

The following legend will show that the belief in Krishna's divinity was not by any means common at the time the Mahabharata was written. When King Yudhishthira offered a sacrifice, it was proposed that Krishna, as the greatest chief present, should receive the presents that were made. Sisupala strongly objected to this, and supported his objection by a recital of Krishna's misdeeds. Krishna listened patiently for a time, but at last declared that the time had come when he must slay his detractor. He said, "I have promised to forgive him a hundred offences--he has now offended more than a hundred times;" and then the never-failing discus did its work. In other passages of the Mahabharata, Siva praises Krishna in almost as extravagant language as that employed by Krishna to him; but this is so thoroughly opposed to his general position throughout the poem, there can be little doubt that these passages were introduced when the worship of Krishna had to a large extent superseded that of Siva.

Krishna, as described in the Mahabharata, was not above employing deception, and leading others to do it too. On one occasion during the great war between the Kurus and Pandavas, the Pandavas were in great distress, owing to the bravery and skill of a Kuru chief named

[p. 220]

Dronacharjya. This chief had a son whom he deeply loved, named Ashwatthama; and it was thought that if a report could be spread to the effect that this son was slain, his father would be too distressed to fight. Dronacharjya at last heard the rumour, but refused to believe it unless  confirmed it. At first the good king refused to speak an untruth; but at Krishna's suggestion he repeated the words, "Ashwatthama is dead," meaning an elephant of that name, yet wishing the father to understand he referred to his son. The trick succeeded; but the king as a punishment for his prevarication had to endure the sight of the lost in hell, whilst being conducted to heaven.

Amongst Krishna's many names the following are the most common:--

Gopal, "The Cowherd."

Gopinath, "The Lord of the Milkmaids."

Mathuranath, "The Lord of Mathura."

Footnotes

^197:* Chambers's Cyclopaedia, s.v.

^200:* Book v.

^201:* It should be noticed here that a commentator says on this passage that the statement that two hairs of Vishnu became incarnate must not be taken literally, but that the work to be done by him on this occasion was so small that it could easily have been effected by two hairs. In Krishna, Vishnu himself was manifested.

^210:* It is this incident in Krishna's history which is celebrated yearly at the Rasajattra.

^218:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 184.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

8A. THE BALARAMA AVATARA.

According to some accounts of Vishnu's incarnations, Balarama is the eighth; Krishna in that case not being called an incarnation, but an appearance of the deity himself; whilst, according to others, the two brothers together form the eighth, Krishna having been produced from a black and Balarama from a white hair of Vishnu: As they were constant companions during their stay on earth, many of the exploits in which Balarama shared have already been narrated in speaking of Krishna. There are a few legends, [**] however, referring chiefly to Balarama.

[p. 221]

Balarama is an incarnation of the serpent Sesha, [**] who himself was part of Vishnu, and thus is said to be "a part of a part" of that deity. When appealed to by the

Click to enlarge
BALARAMA.

distressed gods to appear on earth to save them from their oppressor Kansa, Vishnu, a year before his own birth, transferred by means of Yoganindra, the embryo

[p. 222]

of Balarama from Devaki to Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva, residing at Gokula, to save it from the cruel anger of Kansa, who had ordered the destruction of Devaki's children as soon as they were born. When about a year old, this child was placed under the care of a herdsman named Nanda and his wife Yasoda, the reputed parents of Krishna, that the two boys might be brought up together; Vasudeva, on the night of Krishna's birth, having carried him to the house of Nanda, and substituted him for the infant daughter of these people.

Balarama was second only to Krishna in the possession of miraculous powers. One day, as he was with the young cow-keepers in a wood, his companions asked him to shake some fruit trees belonging to a demon called Dhenuka, that they might enjoy the fruit. As he was complying with their request, the demon, in the form of a monster ass, appeared. As he tried to kick Balarama, the hero seized him by his hind legs, swung him round his head, and threw him to the ground with such force that he died immediately: the dead body Balarama threw to the top of a palm tree, and the demon's relatives who came to his rescue received similar treatment at his hands. After Dhenuka's death, his orchard became a favourite spot of the cowherds. Whilst they were playing there, a demon named Pralamba came in the form of a boy, and joining them in their game, persuaded Balarama to get up on his shoulders. No sooner had he mounted than the demon ran off with him, and, feeling the hero to be heavy, he increased his bulk until he became like a mountain in size, causing Balarama to tremble with fear, and to call upon Krishna for help. Krishna reminding him of his divine nature says, "Calling to memory who thou art, O being of illimitable might, destroy the demon yourself. Suspending

[p. 223]

awhile your mortal character, do what is right." Balarama acting upon this advice, squeezed the demon with his knees, and pommelled him with his fists so fiercely that he fell down dead. When boxing with Kansa's wrestler in the lists at Mathura he easily managed to slay his antagonist.

After Balarama had dwelt for some time in Dwaraka, a city Krishna had provided for the safety of the people of Mathura, Krishna sent him to Vraja to see their old friends the herdsmen, with whom they had been brought up as boys. During his stay there, Varuna, addressing Varuni his wife, said, "Thou, Madira, art ever acceptable to the powerful Ananta (Sesha); go therefore and promote his enjoyments." Thus ordered by her husband, she took up her abode in a Kadamba tree in the forest of Vrindavana. Balarama, in his walks smelling the pleasant fragrance of the liquor produced from that tree, resumed his ancient passion for strong drink. Whilst in a state of intoxication caused by this juice he ordered the river Yamuna to come to him that he might bathe in her. As she refused, he threw his ploughshare into the stream, and dragging her towards him, made her follow him wherever he went, until, his anger being appeased, he set her free.

On his return to Dwaraka, after this visit to his friends, he married Revati, daughter of King Raivata. This king wishing to obtain a suitable husband for his daughter repaired to Brahma for advice, who, expatiating on the glories of Vishnu, detained his suppliant in heaven for ages. On his return, he was surprised to find that during his long absence men had deteriorated in goodness, size, and strength; but following Brahma's counsel, he went to Dwaraka, and offered his daughter to Balarama, who accepted the offer. Balarama was

[p. 224]

astonished at her immense height, but by the use of his ploughshare, however, managed to reduce her to a proper size. On one occasion, as Balarama and Devaki were together, they were greatly annoyed by a demon named Dwivida, who had the power to assume various forms. He came as a monkey, and being a source of annoyance to gods and men, chiefly through interrupting the sacrifices, was felled by a blow of Balarama's heavy fist.

Though the brothers Krishna and Balarama were generally the best of friends, there was once a most violent quarrel between them. A man named Satadhanwan was suspected of stealing a most valuable jewel. [**] Krishna and Balarama pursuing him, came to a part of the country where the roads were so bad that the horses could not drag their chariot. Balarama therefore remained behind, whilst Krishna followed the supposed thief on foot. When within reach, the never-missing discus was thrown, and the man fell headless, but the gem was not to be found. On Krishna's return to his brother without the jewel, Balarama, believing he had stolen it, "flew into a violent rage, and said to Vasudeva: 'Shame light upon you to be thus greedy of wealth! I acknowledge no brotherhood with you. Here lies my path; go whither you please, I have done with you, with Dwaraka, with all our house. It is of no use to seek to impose on me with your perjuries." Balarama proceeded to Videha, where for three years he remained the guest of King Janaka; then, his anger being appeased, he acknowledged that he had misjudged his brother, and returned to his home at Dwaraka.

As the two brothers died about the same time an account of Balarama's end will be found in the chapter descriptive of Krishna.

Footnotes

^220:* "Vishnu Purana," book v.

^221:* Sesha (the end), or Ananta (endless), the serpent deity, has a thousand heads, and forms the couch on which Vishnu reposes during the intervals of creation. The world is said to rest on the head of Sesha, who stands upon a tortoise; when, therefore, the tortoise moves his feet, or Sesha yawns, earthquakes result. It was this serpent that formed the rope at the churning of the ocean; and by fires that issue from his body the world is destroyed at the end of each age, or Kalpa. He is sometimes called a son of Kasyapa and Kadru, a daughter of Daksha.

^224:* For a fuller account of this jewel, see <page 207>.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

9. THE BUDDHA AVATARA.

This incarnation of Vishnu is "originally foreign to the cycle of the Avataras of Vishnu, and therefore is only briefly alluded to in some of Puranas. Where this is done, the intention must have been to effect a compromise between Brahmanism and Buddhism, by trying to represent the latter religion as not irreconcilably

Click to enlarge
BUDDHA.

antagonistic to the former." [**] Colonel Kennedy, [*+] on the other hand, argues that the Buddha of the Puranas and Buddha the founder of the Buddhist system of religion have nothing in common but the name, and that the attempted identification of these two is simply

[p. 226]

the work of European scholars, who have not been sufficiently careful to collect information, and to weigh the evidence they have had before them. There can be

Click to enlarge
BUDDHIST TEMPLE AND DAGOBA AT KELANIYA, CEYLON.

[p. 227]

little doubt that Colonel Kennedy's view is untenable. Seeing the bitter antagonism that existed between the advocates of the rival systems, it need occasion no surprise that full accounts of Buddha are not to be found in Brahmanical books, nor that the meagre accounts that are there should try to represent him as a despicable character. The Brahmanical writers were far too shrewd to admit that one who exerted such immense influence, and won so many disciples, could be other than an incarnation of deity; but as his teaching was opposed to their own they cleverly say that it was to mislead the enemies of the gods that he promulgated his doctrine, that they, becoming weak and wicked through error, might be led once again to seek the help and blessing of those whom they had previously neglected.

The Puranic account of Buddha will be given, supplemented by further particulars of his life and work from Buddhist writings.

In the "Bhagavata Purana" [**] are only four short passages respecting him. "At the commencement of the Kali-yuga will Vishnu become incarnate in Kikata, under the name of Buddha, the son of Jina, for the purpose of deluding the enemies of the gods." "The Undiscernible Being, having assumed a mortal form, preached heretical doctrines in the three cities founded by Maya (and in Kasi), for the purpose of destroying, by deluding them, the enemies of the gods, steadfast in the religion prescribed by the Vedas." "Praise to the pure Buddha, the deluder of the Daityas and the Danavas." "By his words, as Buddha, Vishnu deludes the heretics."

In the Skanda, [*+] the legend, of which the Bhagavata gives but the merest outline, is more fully given. There was a dire famine in the earth, owing to the failure of

[p. 228]

rains for six successive years. On this account Brahma in great distress visited a prince named Ripanjaya, and told him that if he would become king, the gods would serve him, and his name should be changed to Divodasa. On asking why he was chosen before all others, Brahma tells him, "All other kings are wicked, and the gods will not shower rain upon the earth unless you accept the government. Divodasa accedes to Brahma's request on condition that that deity would assist him and that all the other gods would forsake the earth, so that he might reign without a rival, and be the only one who could confer happiness on men. Brahma, in fulfilling this condition, with some difficulty persuaded Siva to forsake Kasi (Benares), his favourite dwelling-place.

Divodasa fixed his throne at Kasi, where for 8000 years he ruled with the greatest benefit to men. The gods becoming jealous of his power went to Vrihaspati, their preceptor, and, whilst they spoke well of the effects of the king's government, complained that he, and not the gods, was benefited by it. Siva especially was annoyed at his enforced absence from Kasi; for although he sent several times to make inquiries about its inhabitants, his messengers were too happy on earth to return to their lord in heaven. Vishnu, accompanied by Lakshmi and Garuda, at Siva's request, "then proceeded to Kasi, a little to the north of which he formed by his divine power a pleasant abode named Dharmakshetra, and there, attended by his lovely spouse, did he reside under the form of Buddha, while Lakshmi became a female recluse of that sect. Garuda also appeared under the name of Panyakirti, as a pupil with a book in his hand, and attentively listening to the delusive instructions of his preceptor (Buddha), who with a low,

[p. 229]

sweet, and affectionate voice taught him various branches of natural and supernatural religion."

Vishnu, as Buddha, taught that "the universe was without a creator; it is false therefore to assert that there is one universal and Supreme Spirit, for Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and the rest are names of mere corporeal beings like ourselves. Death is a peaceful sleep: why fear it?" He further taught that "we should guard as our own life the life of another; that pleasure is the only heaven, and pain the only hell, and liberation from ignorance the sole beatitude. Sacrifices are acts of folly." Through the exertions of Panyakirti, these doctrines soon spread through the city; whilst Lakshmi deluded the women by teaching them to "place all happiness in sensual pleasures; as the body must decay, let us, before it becomes dust, enjoy the pleasures which it gives. The distinction of castes has been vainly imagined." As Lakshmi gave numerous boons to her disciples, her influence was great, and her teaching spread widely.

As a result of the dissemination of these doctrines in the city, Divodasa became dispirited. Vishnu in the form of a Brahman appeared to him, and hears an account of his troubles, and is delighted as he expresses a wish to resign his crown, The king mentions a number of cases in which virtuous men have had to suffer, owing to the power of the gods, and inquires how he can obtain final beatitude. Vishnu informs him that he has acted unwisely in compelling Siva to forsake Kasi, and advises him to consecrate an image of that god, by worshipping which he will obtain the fulfilment of his desires. Divodasa follows this counsel, inaugurates his son as king, and as he is worshipping the Linga he had set up, Siva appears and conducts him to Kailasa (Siva's heaven). It is the common belief of the people

[p. 230]

in the west of India, that when Vishnu had effected the apostasy of Divodasa, he was prevailed upon to terminate the propagation of his heretical opinions, and disappeared in a deep well at Gya.

The following legend from the "Siva Purana" [**] gives another reason for the rise of Buddhism. A famous Rishi named Gautama, with his virtuous wife named Ahalya, performed during a thousand years a severe tapas (penance) in the southern country near the mountain Brahmadri. During this time there was a severe drought, to remove which, Gautama worshipped Varuna for six months with great fervour, when the deity promised to grant any boon that should be asked. Gautama asked for rain, but Varuna said, "How can I transgress the divine command? Ask some boon which it is in my power to grant." Gautama then desired Varuna to cause a surpassingly beautiful hermitage to appear, shaded from the sun by fragrant and fruit-bearing trees, where holy men and women by meditation shall be liberated from pain, sorrow, and anxiety; "and as thou art lord of water, let it enjoy a perennial fountain." Varuna granted this request, and the hermitage of Gautama became "the loveliest on the terrestrial orb."

One day as the disciples of Gautama went to the fountain, some Brahman women tried to prevent them drawing water until they had filled their own pots. Ahalya going herself was subjected daily to the same annoyance: the Brahman women would not allow her to draw water before they had themselves obtained all they required. These women, not satisfied with annoying the ascetics, complained to their husbands of the unkind treatment they alleged they had received from Ahalya.

[p. 231]

[paragraph continues] Their husbands resorted to Ganesa for advice, who being pleased with their devotion promised a boon; they asked that Gautama might be made to leave his hermitage without their incurring the sin of driving him away. To this Ganesa reluctantly consented; and in order to effect this object he transformed himself into a poor debilitated cow, and walked into a field of rice where Gautama was standing, and began to eat the grain. The sage, knowing nothing of this disguise, took up a straw and tried to drive the cow away; no sooner did he touch it than it fell down dead. Having incurred the enormous guilt of killing a cow, the poor man had to leave the neighbourhood.

Gautama and his wife removed to a distance; but until he had expiated his sin they could not perform acceptable worship. Gautama seeks the Brahmans, and asking how he can be free from his crime, is told to walk round the mountain of Brahma a hundred times; bathe in the Ganges, and consecrate and worship ten million images of Siva. As he is propitiating him, Siva, delighted with the man's earnestness, appears, informs him of the trick by which Ganesa had driven him from the hermitage, and brings the Ganges so near that he can bathe in it easily. Tradition says that Gautama was so disgusted with the conduct of the Brahmans that he separated himself from their communion, and established a new system of religion, which for a time eclipsed Brahmanism.

The following extracts, giving an account of Buddha, are from the "Lalita-Vistara," [**] a Buddhist work from which M. Barthelemy St. Hilaire has taken the materials for his work, "La Boudda et sa Religion."

"Buddha, or more correctly The Buddha--for Buddha

[p. 232]

is an appellative, meaning enlightened--was born at Kapilavastu, the capital of a kingdom of that name, situated at the foot of the mountains of Nepal, north of the present Oude. His father, the King of Kapilavastu, was of the family of the Sakyas, and belonged to the clan of the Gautamas. His mother was Mayadevi, daughter of King Suprabuddha, and need we say that she was beautiful, as he was powerful and just? Buddha

Click to enlarge
BUDDHA.

was therefore by birth of the Kshattriya, or warrior caste, and he took the name of Sakya from his family, and that of Gautama from his clan, claiming a kind of spiritual relationship with the honoured race of Gautamas. The name of Buddha, or The Buddha, dates from a latter period of his life, and so probably does Siddhartha (he whose objects have been accomplished), though we are told that it was given him in his childhood.

[p. 233]

[paragraph continues] His mother died seven days after his birth, and the father confided the child to the care of his deceased wife's sister, who, however, had been his wife even before the mother's death. The child grew up a most beautiful and most accomplished boy, who soon knew more than his masters could teach him. He refused to take part in the games of his playmates, and never felt so happy as when he could sit alone, lost in meditation in the deep shadows of the forest. It was there that his father found him when he had thought him lost; and, in order to prevent the young prince from becoming a dreamer, the king determined to marry him at once. When the subject was mentioned by the aged ministers to the future heir to the throne, he demanded seven days for reflection, and, convinced at last that not even marriage could disturb the calm of his mind, he allowed the ministers to look out for a princess. The princess selected was the beautiful Gopa, the daughter of Dandapani. Though her father objected at first to her marrying a young prince who was represented to him as deficient in manliness and intellect, he gladly gave his consent when he saw the royal suitor distancing all his rivals in feats of arms and power of mind. Their marriage proved one of the happiest, but the prince remained, as he had been before, absorbed in meditations on the problems of life and death. 'Nothing is stable on earth,' he used to say; 'nothing is real. Like is like the spark produced by the friction of wood. It is lighted and is extinguished--we know not whence it came, or whither it goes. It is like the sound of a lyre, and the wise man asks in vain from whence it came and whither it goes. There must be some supreme intelligence where we can find rest. If I attained it I could bring light to man; if I were free myself, I could deliver

[p. 234]

the world.' The king, who perceived the melancholy mood of the young prince, tried everything to divert him from his speculations; but all was in vain. Three of the most ordinary events that could happen to any man proved of the utmost importance in the career of Buddha.

"One day, when the prince with a large retinue was driving through the Eastern gate of the city on the way to one of his parks, he met on the road an old man, broken and decrepit. One could see the veins and muscles over the whole of his body; his teeth chattered, he was covered with wrinkles, bald, and hardly able to utter hollow and unmelodious sounds. He was bent on his stick, and all his limbs and joints trembled. 'Who is this man?' said the prince to his coachman. 'He is small and weak, his flesh and his blood are dried up, his muscles stick to his skin, his teeth chatter, his body is wasted away; leaning on his stick, he is hardly able to walk, stumbling at every step. Is there something peculiar in his family, or is this the common lot of all created beings?'

"'Sir,' replied the coachman, 'that man is sinking under old age, his senses have become obscure, suffering has destroyed his strength, and he is despised by his relations. He is without support and useless, and people have abandoned him, like a dead tree in a forest. But this is not peculiar to his family. In every creature youth is defeated by old age. Your father, your mother, all your relations, all your friends, will come to the same state: this is the appointed end of all creatures.'

"'Alas!' replied the prince, 'are creatures so ignorant, so weak and foolish, as to be proud of the youth by which they are intoxicated, not seeing the old age which awaits them? As for me, I go away. Coachman, turn

[p. 235]

my chariot quickly. What am I, the future prey of old age--what have I to do with pleasure? ' and the young prince returned to the city without going to the park.

"Another time the prince was driving through the Southern gate to his pleasure-garden, when he perceived in the road a man suffering from illness, parched with fever, his body wasted, covered with mud, without a friend, without a home, hardly able to breathe, and frightened at the sight of himself and the approach of death. Having questioned his coachman, and received from him the answer which he expected, the young prince said: 'Alas! health is but the sport of a dream, and the fear of suffering must take this frightful form. Where is the wise man, who, after having seen what he is, could any longer think of joy and pleasure?' The prince turned his chariot, and returned to the city.

"A third time he was driving to his pleasure-garden through the Western gate, when he saw a dead body on the road, lying on a bier and covered with a cloth. The friends stood about crying, sobbing, tearing their hair, covering their heads with dust, striking their breasts, and uttering wild cries. The prince, again calling his coachman to witness this painful scene, exclaimed: 'Oh, woe to youth, which must be destroyed by old age! Woe to health, which must be destroyed by so many diseases! Woe to this life, where a man must remain for so short a time!' Then, betraying for the first time his intentions, the young prince said, 'Let us turn back; I must think how to accomplish deliverance.'

"A last meeting put an end to his meditation. He was driving through the Northern gate on the way to his pleasure-gardens, when he saw a mendicant who appeared outwardly calm, subdued, looking downwards,

[p. 236]

wearing with an air of dignity his religious vestment and carrying an alms-bowl.

"'Who is this man? ' asked the prince.

"'Sir,' replied the coachman, 'this man is one of those who are called bhikshus or mendicants. He has renounced all pleasures, all desires, and leads a life of austerity. He tries to conquer himself. He has become a devotee. Without passion, without envy, he walks about asking for alms.'

"'This is good and well said,' replied the prince. The life of a devotee has always been praised by the wise. It will be my refuge, and the refuge of all other creatures. It will lead us to a real life, to happiness and immortality.' With these words, the young prince turned his chariot and returned to the city.

"After having declared to his father and his wife his intention of retiring from the world, Buddha left his palace one night when all the guards that were to have watched him were asleep. After travelling the whole night, he gave his horse and his ornaments to his groom, and sent him back to Kapilavastu. 'A monument,' remarks the author of the 'Lalita-Vistara,' 'is still to be seen on the spot where the coachman turned back.' Hiouen Thsang saw the same monument at the edge of a large forest; on his road to Kusinagara, a city now in ruins, and situated about fifty miles E.S.E. from Gorakpore.

"Buddha first went to Vaisali, and became the pupil of a famous Brahman, who had gathered round him 300 disciples. Having learnt all that the Brahman could teach him, Buddha went away disappointed. He had not found the road to salvation. He then tried another Brahman at Rajagriha, the capital of Magadha or Behar, who had 700 disciples, and there, too, he looked in vain

[p. 237]

for the means of deliverance. He left him, followed by five of his fellow-students, and for six years retired into solitude, near a village named Uruvilva, subjecting himself to the most severe penances, previous to his appearing in the world as a teacher. At the end of this period, however, he arrived at the conviction that asceticism, far from giving peace of mind and preparing the way to salvation, was a snare and a stumbling-block in the way of truth. He gave up his exercises, and was at once deserted as an apostate by his five disciples. Left to himself, he now began to elaborate his own system. He had learned that neither the doctrines nor the austerities of the Brahmans were of any avail for accomplishing the deliverance of man, and for freeing him from the fear of old age, disease, and death. After long meditations and ecstatic visions, he at last imagined that he had arrived at that true knowledge which discloses the cause, and thereby destroys the fear, of all the changes inherent in life. It was from the moment when he arrived at this knowledge that he claimed the name of Buddha the enlightened. Buddha hesitated for a time whether he should keep his knowledge to himself or communicate it to the world. Compassion for the sufferings of man prevailed, and the young prince became the founder of a religion which, after more than 2000 years, is still professed by 455,000,000 of human beings.

"The further history of the new teacher is very simple. He proceeded to Benares, which at all times has been the principal seat of learning in India, and the first converts he made were the five fellow-students who had left him when he threw off the yoke of the Brahmanical observances. Many others followed, but as the Lalita-Vistara ' breaks off at Buddha's arrival at Benares, we have no further consecutive account of the

[p. 238]

rapid progress of his doctrine. From what we can gather from scattered notices in the Buddhist canon, he was invited by the King of Magadha, Bimbisara, to his capital, Rajagriha. Many of his lectures are represented as having been delivered at the monastery of Kalavataka, with which the king or some rich merchant had presented him; others on the Vulture Peak, one of the five hills which surround the ancient capital.

"Three of his most famous disciples--Sariputra, Katyayana, and Maudgalyayana joined him during his stay in Magadha, where he enjoyed for many years the friendship of the king. The king was afterwards assassinated by his son Ajatasatru, and then we hear of Buddha as settled for a time at Sravasti, north of the Ganges. Most of Buddha's lectures were delivered at Sravasti, the capital of Kosala, and the King of Kosala himself, Prasenagit, became a convert to his doctrine. After an absence of twelve years, we are told that Buddha visited his father at Kapilavastu, on which occasion he performed several miracles, and converted all the Sakyas to his faith. His own wife became one of his followers, and, with his aunt, offer the first instance of female Buddhist devotees in India.

"We have fuller particulars again of the last days of Buddha's life. He had attained the good age of threescore years and ten, and had been on a visit to Rajagriha, where the king, Ajatasatru, the former enemy of Buddha and the assassin of his own father, had joined the congregation, after making a public confession of his crimes. On his return he was followed by a large number of disciples, and when on the point of crossing the Ganges, he stood on a square stone, and, turning his eyes back towards Rajagriha, he said, full of emotion, 'This is the last time that I shall see that city.' He likewise visited

[p. 239]

[paragraph continues] Vaisali, and, after taking leave . of it, he had nearly reached the city of Kusinagara, when his vital strength began to fail. He halted in a forest, and, while sitting under a Sal tree, he gave up the ghost, or, as a Buddhist would say, entered into Nirvana."

The following verses by Dr. Muir [**] are a translation of part of the "Lalita-Vistara," from which the quotations given above were made:--

"On Himalaya's lonely steep
    There lived of old an holy sage,
    Of shrivelled form, and bent with age,
  Inured to meditation deep.

"He--when great Buddha had been born,
    The glory of the Sakya race,
    Endowed with every holy grace,
  To save the suffering world forlorn--

"Beheld strange portents, signs which taught
    The wise that that auspicious time
    Had witnessed some event sublime,
  With universal blessing fraught.

"The sky with joyful gods was thronged:
    He heard their voice with glad acclaim
    Resounding loudly Buddha's name,
  While echoes clear their shouts prolonged.

"The cause exploring, far and wide
    The sage's vision ranged; with awe,
    Within a cradle laid, he saw
  Far off the babe, the Sakyas' pride.

"With longing seized this child to view
    At hand, and clasp, and homage pay,
    Athwart the sky he took his way
  By magic art, and swan-like flew;

[p. 240]

"And came to King Suddhodan's gates;
    And entrance craved--'Go, royal page,
    And tell thy lord an ancient sage
  To see the king permission waits.'

"The page obeyed, and joined his hands
    Before the prince, and said, 'A sage
    Of shrivelled form, and bowed with age,
  Before the gate, my sovereign, stands,

"'And humbly asks to see the king.'
    To whom Suddhodan cried, 'We greet
    All such with joy; with honour meet
  The holy man before us bring!'

"The saint beside the monarch stood,
    And spake his blessing--'Thine be health,
    With length of life, and might, and wealth;
  And ever seek thy people's good.'

"With all due forms and meet respect
    The king received the holy man
    And bade him sit; and then began--
  'Great sage, I do not recollect

"'That I thy venerable face
    Have ever seen before; allow
    That I inquire what brings thee now
  From thy far distant dwelling-place.'

"'To see thy babe,' the saint replies,
    'I come from Himalaya's steeps.'
    The king rejoins, 'My infant sleeps;
  A moment wait until he rise.'

"'Such great ones ne'er,' the Rishi spike,
    In torpor long their senses steep,
    Nor softly love luxurious sleep;
  The infant prince will soon awake.'

"The wondrous child, alert to rise,
    At will his slumbers light dispelled.
    His father's arms the infant held
  Before the sage's longing eyes.

[p. 241]

"The babe beholding, passing bright,
    More glorious than the race divine,
    And marked with every noble sign,
  The saint was whelmed with deep delight;

"And crying, 'Lo! an infant graced
    With every charm of form I greet!'
    He fell before the Buddha's feet,
  With fingers joined, and round him paced.

"Next round the babe his arms he wound,
    And 'One,' he said, 'of two careers
    Of fame awaits in coming years
  The child in whom these signs are found.

"'If such an one at home abide,
    He shall become a king, whose sway
    Supreme a mighty armed array
  On earth shall 'stablish far and wide.

"'If, spurning worldly pomp as vain,
    He choose to lead a tranquil life,
    And wander forth from home and wife,
  He then a Buddha's rank shall gain.'

"He spoke, and on the infant gazed,
    When tears suffused his aged eyes;
    His bosom heaved with heavy sighs;
  Then King Suddhodan asked, amazed--

"'Say, holy man, what makes thee weep
    And deeply sigh? Does any fate
    Malign the child await?
  May heavenly powers my infant keep!

"'For thy fair infant's weal no fears
    Disturb me, king,' the Rishi cried;
    'No ill can such a child betide;
  My own sad lot commands my tears.

"'In every grace complete, thy son
    Of truth shall perfect insight gain,
    And far sublimer fame attain
  Than ever lawgiver has won.

[p. 242]

"'He such a wheel of sacred lore
    Shall speed on earth to roll, as yet
    Hath never been in motion set
  By priest, or sage, or god of yore.

"'The world of men and gods to bless,
    The way of rest and peace to teach,
    A holy law thy son shall preach--
  A law of stainless righteousness.

"'By him shall suffering men be freed
    From weakness, sickness, pain, and grief;
    From all the ills shall find relief
  Which hatred, love, illusion breed.

"'His hands shall loose the chains of all
    Who groan in earthly bonds confined;
    With healing touch the wounds shall bind
  Of those whom pain's sharp arrows gall.

"'His words of power shall put to flight
    The dull array of leaden clouds
    Which helpless mortals' vision shrouds,
  And clear their intellectual sight.

"'By him shall men, who, now untaught,
    In devious paths of error stray,
    Be led to find a perfect way--
  To final calm at last be brought.

"'But once, O king, in many years,
    The fig-tree somewhere flowers, perhaps;
    So, after countless ages lapse,
  A Buddha once on earth appears.

"'And now, at length, this blessed time
    Has come: for he, who cradled lies
    An infant there before thine eyes,
  Shall be a Buddha in his prime.

"'Full, perfect insight gaining, he
    Shall rescue endless myriads tost
    On life's rough ocean waves, and lost,
  And grant them immortality.

[p. 243]

"'But I am old, and frail, and worn;
    I shall not live the day to see
    When this thy wondrous child shall free
  From woe the suffering world forlorn.

"''Tis thus mine own unhappy fate
    Which bids me mourn, and weep, and sigh;
    The Buddha's triumph now is nigh,
  But, ah! for me it comes too late!'

"When thus this aged saint, inspired,
    Had all the infant's greatness told,
    The king his wondrous son extolled,
  And sang, with pious ardour fired--

"'Thee, child, th' immortals worship all,
    The great Physician, born to cure
    All ills that hapless men endure;
  I, too, before thee prostrate fall!'

"And now--his errand done--the sage,
    Dismissed with gifts and human due,
    Athwart the ether swanlike flew,
  And reached again his hermitage."

Buddhism, the system of religion taught by Buddha, starts with the doctrine common to it and Hinduism of transmigration. [**] It then goes on to say that pain and

[p. 244]

pleasure are simply the result of Karma (works), no notice whatever being taken of the existence or nonexistence of God. It assumes that existence is and must be miserable; and that the highest conceivable good is to obtain entire exemption from existence. Death does not necessarily bring this exemption; it may be but an entrance into a worse form of it than is at present endured. Buddha's four " Sublime verities," containing the germ of his system, are as follows:--The first is that pain exists; the second, that desire is the cause of pain; the third, that pain can be ended by Nirvana, or exemption from existence, practical annihilation; the fourth shows the way that leads to Nirvana. The great thing is to get rid of desire, and when this is accomplished, the soul is ready for complete Nirvana, and a man dying in this state will not again be born. He taught the evil of caste distinctions, and all who embraced his tenets became members of a great brotherhood. Instead of the painful mortifications and costly sacrifices by which the Hindus were compelled to make expiation for sin, he taught that confession and promise of amendment were all that was necessary. Its moral code is one of the most perfect in the world: the spring of all virtue is Maitri, which can only be translated as charity or love. "It does not express friendship, or the feeling of particular affection which a man has for one or more of his fellow-creatures, but that universal feeling which inspires us with good-will towards all men and constant willingness to help them." [**]

There is one peculiarity of the followers of Buddha as compared with the Hindus, viz. the preservation of and veneration for relics of their founder. With the exception of a legend stating that Krishna's bones were

[p. 245]

placed in the image of Jagannath, and another teaching that Vishnu cut the dead body of Sati into fifty-one parts, each of which is now enshrined in a temple, we have no record of relics being preserved by the Hindus. But the Buddhists profess to have carefully preserved parts of their great leader, and enshrine them in Dagobas. One of the most celebrated of these is represented on page <page 226>. A tooth of Buddha is believed to be kept in it; in others a single hair is most religiously guarded. These Dagobas are not temples, though in some cases they form part of buildings that are, or have been, used for worship.

Footnotes

^225:* Goldstucker, Chambers's Cyclopaedia.

^225:+ "Hindu Mythology," p. 248.

^227:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 250.

^227:+ Ibid., p. 423.

^230:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 253.

^231:* Max-Muller, "Chips," vol. i. p. 210 ff.

^239:* O. S. T., ii. 496.

^243:* In Hinduism it is the transmigration of souls from the lowest to the highest scale, until they become fit for absorption into the Divine from whence they came. At its close each life is carefully judged, and when next the person returns to the earth he is born in a higher stage if good preponderated; in a lower if the evil turned the scale. In Buddhism, which denies the existence of souls, the transmigration is somewhat different in form. As soon as a person dies a new being is produced in a more or less miserable condition, according to the "Karma," the sum total of the good or evil in all its many previous lives. Practically there is no great difference between these views. For though the Hindu believes that the same soul passes through countless changes in successive lives, there is no memory of previous experience, so that each life is separate and distinct from what went before. It is a formal rather than a real difference.

^244:* Burnouf, quoted by Max-Muller, "Chips," i. 222.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

10. THE KALKI AVATARA.

This incarnation, unlike those already described, has yet to be made. It is the hope of the Hindus, that he who has so frequently visited the earth to restore order and happiness will come yet again to inaugurate a reign of universal goodness, peace, and prosperity. When Vishnu in the form of Krishna reascended to heaven, the Fourth or Kali Yuga commenced, which, as its name implies, is an age of strife and dissension. In the "Vishnu Purana" the character of this age is vividly described in words that seem prophetic. At its termination Vishnu is expected to come again, bearing the name Kalki, to put an end to wickedness, and establish a kingdom of righteousness similar to the First or Krita Yuga--the age of Truth. These four ages, in the same order and with similar characteristics, will again and again be experienced until the final end of all things shall come. The following extract from the "Vishnu Purana" [**]

[p. 246]

will give an idea of the evils of the present age, which Kalki is to remove.

In Magadha a sovereign named Viswasphatika will extirpate the Kshattriya race, elevate fishermen, barbarians, Brahmans, and other castes to power; whilst Sudras, outcasts and barbarians will be masters of the Indus, Darvika, Chandrabhaga, and Kashmir. "The

Click to enlarge
KALIKI.

kings will be of churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict death on women, children, and cows; they will seize the property of subjects, be of limited power, and will, for the most part, rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be short, their desires insatiable, and they will display but little piety. The people of various countries intermingling with them will follow their example; and the

[p. 247]

barbarians being powerful in the patronage of princes, whilst purer tribes are neglected, the people will perish. Wealth and piety will decrease day by day, until the world shall be wholly depraved. Property alone will confer rank, wealth will be the only source of devotion, passion will be the sole bond of union between the sexes, falsehood will be the only means of success in litigation, and women will be the objects merely of sensual gratification. Earth will be venerated only for its mineral treasures (i.e. no spot will be peculiarly sacred); the Brahmanical thread will constitute a Brahman; external types will be the only distinctions of the several orders of life, dishonesty will be the universal means of subsistence, weakness will be the cause of dependence, menace and presumption will be the subterfuge for learning, liberality will be devotion, simple ablution will be purification (i.e. gifts will be made from the impulse of ordinary feeling, not in connection with religious rites or as an act of devotion, and ablution will be performed for pleasure or comfort, not religiously with prescribed ceremonies and prayers). Mutual assent will be marriage, fine clothes will be dignity, and water afar off will be esteemed a holy spring. The people, unable to bear the heavy burdens imposed upon them by their avaricious sovereigns, will take refuge among the valleys, and be glad to feed upon wild honey, herbs, roots, fruits, flowers, and leaves; their only covering will be the bark of trees, and they will be exposed to cold and wind, and sun and rain. No man's life will exceed three-and-twenty years. Thus in the Kali Age shall decay flourish, until the human race approaches annihilation." It is rather strange that the condition of men, in what appeared to the writer of this Purana as the most miserable he could imagine, where their dress was bark and their food

[p. 248]

consisted of roots and fruits, was in the earliest ages regarded as the most desirable. It was thus the old Rishis lived, who are held in the greatest esteem.

"When the practices taught by the Vedas and the institutes of law shall nearly have ceased, and the close of the Kali Age shall be nigh, a portion of that divine being who exists of his own spiritual nature in the character of Brahma, and who is the beginning and the end, and who comprehends all things, shall descend upon the earth. He will be born in the family of Vishnuyasas, an eminent Brahman of Sambhal village, as Kalki, endowed with the eight superhuman faculties. By his irresistible might he will destroy all the Mlechchhas (outcasts), thieves, and all whose minds are devoted to iniquity. He will then re-establish righteousness upon earth; and the minds of those who live at the end of the Kali Age shall be awakened and be made pellucid as crystal. The men who are changed in virtue of that particular time shall be as the seeds of human beings, and shall give birth to a race who shall follow the laws of the Krita Age, or Age of Purity."

In the descriptions of Kalki, and in pictures, he is represented as a white man riding upon or bowing down before a white horse, and with a sword in his hand: he is the purifier of the present degenerate age, and the restorer of purity and goodness.

Footnotes

^245:* Page 622.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

JAGANNATH.

This deity is not reckoned as one of the Avataras of Vishnu in the Puranic lists. Tradition declares him to be, and common belief accepts him as, an appearance of Vishnu himself, and not the incarnation of a portion of his essence. There is, however, considerable reason

[p. 249]

for doubting whether originally Jagannath--the Lord of the World--had any connection with Vishnu. It is possible that he was the local divinity of some now unknown tribe, whose worship was engrafted into Hinduism; and the new god, when admitted into the Pantheon, was regarded as another manifestation of Vishnu; or what is more probable, as Puri was a head centre of Buddhism, when that system was placed under a ban and its followers persecuted, the temple was

Click to enlarge
JAGANNATH.

utilized for Hinduism, and Jagannath, nominally a Hindu deity, was really Buddhistic; the strange, unfinished image being nothing else than a disguised form of the symbols of the central doctrine of the Buddhist faith. Possibly, in order to be free from persecution, it was taught that this was a form of Vishnu. There are several legends professing to account for the form in which he is worshipped, and for the peculiar sanctity of Puri, the chief place of his worship.

[p. 250]

[paragraph continues] There is a peculiarity in, the phraseology employed by the people who visit his shrine: they speak of going to see Jagannath, not to worship him as is the case with other gods; and it is the sight of the image in the temple, or as it is being bathed, or drawn in its ponderous car, that is so eagerly desired as a means by which sin in the worshipper is destroyed.

Professor Goldstucker [**] gives the following legend from the Ain-i-Akbari, in which some of the ordinary notions of the people respecting Jagannath are described. A king desirous of founding a city sent a learned Brahman to select a proper site. The Brahman after a long search reached the seashore, and there saw a crow diving into the water, which, having washed its body, made obeisance to the sea. Understanding the language of birds, he learned from the crow that if he remained there a short time, he would comprehend the wonders of the land. The king, apprised of this occurrence, built a large city and temple on the spot near where the crow had appeared. One night the Raja in a dream heard a voice saying to him: "On a certain day cast thine eyes on the seashore, when there will arise from the water a piece of wood 52 in. long and 18 in. broad: this is the true form of the deity; take it up and keep it hidden in thine house seven days, and in whatever shape it shall then appear, place it in the temple and worship it." The Raja acted upon the advice given in his dream; and, when he had set up the image received from the sea, called it Jagannath, the Lord of the World, and it became the object of worship of all ranks of people.

Ward [*+] gives a somewhat fuller account. When Krishna was accidentally shot by the hunter Jara, his

[p. 251]

bones were left to rot under the tree where he died, until some pious person collected and placed them in a box. [**] There they remained, until Indradhumna, a king who was earnestly striving to propitiate Vishnu, was directed to form an image, and place in it these bones, with the assurance that he would afterwards obtain a rich reward for his religious deeds. Indradhumna wishing to follow this advice, prayed to Visvakarma to assist him by making the image. The architect of the gods consented to do this, but was most careful in explaining to the king that if any one looked at him, or in any way disturbed him whilst he was at work, he would immediately desist, and leave the image in an unfinished state. The king promised to observe this condition, and Visvakarma commenced his work. In one night he raised a grand temple in the blue mountains of Orissa, and then began to make the image. For fifteen days the king managed, with difficulty, to restrain his impatience, but then foolishly tried to see the god at work. The angry deity at once ceased, as he had threatened, and the image was left with a most ugly face, and with- out hands or feet. The king, exceedingly grieved as he saw the result of his curiosity, went in his distress to Brahma, who comforted him with the promise that he would render the image famous in its present form. The king invited the gods to be present at its inauguration.

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Several accepted the invitation, Brahma himself officiated as priest, and gave eyes and a soul to the god. Thus the fame of Jagannath was completely established. The original image of this deity is closely copied in other places besides Puri; and by his side there is generally an image of Krishna's favourite brother Balarama, and his sister Subhadra.

The following is translated from a Bengali account of Jagannath:--Narayana (Vishnu) and his wife having taken up their abode in the blue mountains of Orissa, where he was known by the name of Nilmadhava, was visited by great numbers of gods and men, and the neighbourhood obtained the name of Mokshyakhettra (the field of emancipation from births). A king named Indradhumna, a son of the Sun, a devout worshipper of Vishnu, being anxious to pay a visit to Nilmadhava, before starting, sent Vidyapati, the brother of his family priest, to learn the way to Orissa, that he might act as guide. On his return he gave such an account of all he had seen, that the king was more anxious to go than ever. Having made his arrangements, taking his family with him, the king went under the guidance of Vidapati, but, on his arrival there, was most grievously disappointed to learn that the god had withdrawn himself from the public gaze. As he cried with sorrow and vexation, a voice from the sky reached his ear: "As you cannot see Nilmadhava, make a wooden image and worship that; Narayana will inhabit it, and by the sight of the image you and others will obtain final emancipation." The king followed this advice. As he was preparing to make the image, Narayana himself, in the form of an old Brahman named Visvakarma, came and offered to form the image in fifteen days. The offer was accepted, and within the specified time

[p. 253]

the image of Jagannath, with those of his brother and sister, was made.

The peculiarity of the worship of Jagannath is that his image is not only worshipped in its proper temple but on three days of the year is exposed to public view. On the first of these days, called the Snan Jattra (Bathing Festival), the idol is taken from its shrine, and on a lofty platform, in sight of vast multitudes, bathed by the priests. This exposure is supposed to be productive of a cold, so that, ten days after, the Rath Jattra (Car Festival) is held; at this time the image is placed on an immense car made expressly for the purpose, and taken to the temple of another god for a change of air. The car is drawn by the excited crowd; the poorer and more ignorant people believing it to be a meritorious act to assist in dragging it. After remaining for a few days, the third festival (the Return) is held, at which, with somewhat diminished fervour, the idol is dragged back to its home. Puri is the place where it is believed the deity is seen with greater benefit to the worshippers; but it is considered that there is considerable religious merit obtained by seeing, and assisting to draw, his car in places nearer home. Every town and almost every large village has its festival of this god; and with the promise of so desirable a gift--salvation from sin--it is not to be wondered at that there should be a great wish to see him.

Footnotes

^250:* Chambers's Cyclopaedia, s.v.

^250:+ Vol. ii. 163.

^251:* What appears far more likely is that some valued relics of Buddha were placed in the image, but as it was dangerous at that time to avow any connection with him and his worship, these relics were said to be the bones of Krishna. To touch a dead body, according to Hinduism, is pollution; it seems, therefore, altogether opposed to the spirit of Hinduism to enshrine a bone in an image. Only by some such fiction could the relics of Buddha be saved. There is much in the rites at Puri to countenance the idea that though professedly Hindu it is really a Buddhist shrine.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAITANYA.

Chaitanya is believed by his followers to have been an incarnation of Vishnu; and as he lived in historical times, about 300 years ago, it is interesting to notice

[p. 254]

how a human being came to be regarded as divine. He is worshipped in Nadiya in Bengal, and it is a singular fact, that, at his shrine, there is a very small image of Krishna, of whom he was a disciple and apostle, whilst the image of Chaitanya is large and conspicuous. The Hindus who acknowledge this god say that, amongst the many incarnations of Vishnu, four are most important. The first, in the Satya-yuga, called the Suklavarna (the white), was Ananta; the second, in the Treta-yuga, called the Raktavarna (the red), was that of Kapiladeva; the third, in the Dwarpara-yuga, called the Krishnavarna (the black), was Krishna; and the last, in the Kali-yuga, called the Pitavarna (the yellow), was Chaitanya.

The founder of the sect, of which Chaitanya was the most illustrious member, was a Brahman named Adaitya, who lived at Santipore in Bengal. Another leader, named Nityananda, was born at Nadiya a short time before Chaitanya. Chaitanya's father was a Brahman, named Jagannath Misra; his mother's name was Suchi; their first son, Visvambhara, was a religious mendicant. When their renowned son was born, his mother was rather old; and as the child seemed weak, in accordance with a custom which prevailed in those times, he was hung in a basket on a tree to die. Adaitya happening to pass by the house at the time, imagining that the child thus exposed might be the incarnation of deity he was expecting, and which he had foretold, wrote with his foot on the soft earth the incantation employed at the initiation of a disciple into the mysteries of the worship of Krishna. The mother, impressed by this act, lifted the child from the tree, who immediately took kindly to his food, which he had before neglected, and showed signs of strength and vigour.

[p. 255]

Chaitanya made great progress in learning. At sixteen he married Vishnupriya, with whom he lived until he was forty-four years of age, when he was persuaded by Adaitya and other mendicants to renounce his poita (Brahmanical thread) and join them in their religious life. This was to lose his high position as a Brahman. Leaving home, parents and wife, he removed to Benares, and many thought him guilty of a great crime in forsaking a large family that was dependent upon him for support. On his arrival at that city he began to teach the doctrines of his sect and gathered many disciples. He called them Vaishnavas--worshippers of Vishnu--and although his teaching was diametrically opposed in many important matters to orthodox Hinduism he was eminently successful. Many who had formerly chiefly worshipped Siva and other deities, adopting his teaching, made Krishna the supreme. The main tenets of his teaching were these: That men should renounce a secular life, and spend their time in visiting shrines; that they abandon the distinctions of caste, and eat freely with all who joined their sect, whatever their caste might be; and that they honour the name of Vishnu, and exercise bhakti (or trust) in that god as the means of salvation. He allowed widows to remarry; forbade the eating of flesh and fish, and the worshipping of those deities to whom animal sacrifices were offered; and further, that his disciples should not hold fellowship with those who offered such sacrifices. It is a curious coincidence that about the same time that Luther was preaching salvation by faith, in Europe, Chaitanya in India was giving prominence to the doctrine that salvation was to be obtained through faith (bhakti) in Krishna.

From Benares Chaitanya went to Puri, the great

[p. 256]

shrine of Jagannath, where he proclaimed his doctrines to the many pilgrims he met there; and whilst there it is said that he obtained four additional arms. Adaitya and Nityananda, who had induced him to assume the position of leader, remained for some years in Benares doing similar work; but though they afterwards returned to the secular state, their descendants are greatly respected by the members of this sect. It is reckoned that about one-fifth of the Hindus of Bengal are followers of this teacher. Immoral women generally profess to be his disciples. By their conduct they have excommunicated themselves from orthodox Hindu society, and being outcasts cannot secure the proper performance of their funeral rites. As members of this casteless sect these rites are not refused them.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

KAMADEVA.

Kamadeva, the Indian Cupid, is generally regarded as the son of Vishnu and Lakshmi, under the forms of Krishna and Rukmini, but he is also described in some places as a son of Brahma. The latter account of his origin arises probably from the following. In the "Rig-Veda," [**] Kama is described as the first movement that arose in the One, after it had come into life through the power of fervour or abstraction. In the "Atharva-Veda," this Kama or desire, not of sexual enjoyment, but of good in general, is celebrated as a great power superior to all the gods, and is supplicated for deliverance from enemies. According to one hymn in the "Rig-Veda," Kama is worshipped and said to be unequalled by the gods; according to another, he is the god of sexual love, like Eros of the Greeks, and Cupid of the Latins. In

[p. 257]

the latter aspect he is thus addressed: "May Kama, having well directed the arrow, which is winged with pain, barbed with longing, and has desire for its shaft, pierce thee in the heart." It is in this character that he appears in the Puranas.

Kama is known in Hindu mythology as a victim of Siva's anger. A demon named Taraka, having greatly distressed the gods, they wished to destroy him. But only a son of Siva could accomplish this. In consequence of his intense grief at the loss of his wife Sati, Siva had

Click to enlarge
KAMADEVA.

unfortunately become insensible to love. The gods therefore instigated Kama to assist by wounding him with his arrows. At last he was successful, just as Parvati (Sati in a new form) was near, who at once captivated the stricken deity. Angry with Kama for his presumption, he caused a flame to issue from his third eye, which consumed the god who had interrupted his devotions. In the "Vamana Purana" [**] is a lengthy account of the effect of Kama's arrows. The wounded

[p. 258]

god could find no rest. He threw himself in the Kalindi river, but "the waters were dried up and changed into blackness; and ever since, its dark stream, though holy, has flown through the forest like the string that binds a maiden's hair." As he wandered about from place to place seeking relief, the wives of the saints in the forest of Daruvanam forsook their homes and followed him.

Click to enlarge
SIVA SLAYING KAMADEVA.

This led their husbands to curse Siva, who, being enraged at the evil Kama had done to him, consumed him.

The Bhagavata [**] continues the story as follows:--Rati, the wife of Kama, being almost mad with grief at the loss of her husband, entreated Parvati to intercede with Siva that he might restore him to life. Parvati encourages her by showing how her wish will

[p. 259]

be gratified. " He will be born as the son of Sri Krishna, and his name will be Pradyumna. A demon named Sambara will carry him off and cast him into the sea. Having entered the body of a fish, he will re-appear in the food of Sambara. Go, take up your abode in the house of Sambara, and when your husband arrives, take him and bring him up; eventually he will slay Sambara and will live happily with you." Acting on this advice, Rati became a servant in the house of the demon.

From the "Vishnu Purana" [**] we gather the completion of this story: When Pradyumna was but six days old, he was stolen from the lying-in chamber by Sambara, terrible as death; for the demon knew (having been told by the sage Narada) that Pradyumna, if he lived would be his destroyer. Sambara cast him into the sea, the haunt of the huge creatures of the deep. A large fish swallowed him, and he was born again from his body: for the fish was caught by fishermen and by them delivered to the great asura, Sambara. His wife Mayadevi (the Bhagavata says, servant), the mistress of his household, superintended the operations of the cooks, and, when the fish was cut open, saw a beautiful child.

Whilst wondering who this could be, and how it came there, Narada appeared to satisfy her curiosity, and said to the graceful dame: "This is the son of him by whom the whole world is created and destroyed; the son of Vishnu, who was stolen by Sambara from the lying-in chamber, and tossed by him into the sea, where he was swallowed by the fish. He is now in thy power; do thou, beautiful woman, tenderly rear the jewel of mankind." Thus counselled by Narada, Mayadevi took charge of the boy, and carefully reared him from childhood, being fascinated by the beauty of his person. The

[p. 260]

affection became still more impassioned when he was decorated with the bloom of adolescence. The gracefully-moving Mayadevi, then fixing her heart and eyes upon the high-minded Pradyumna, gave him, whom she regarded as herself, all her magic and illustrative arts.

"Observing these. marks of passionate affection, the son of Krishna said to the lotus-eyed Mayadevi: 'Why do you indulge in feelings so unbecoming the character of a mother? " To which she replied: 'Thou art not a son of mine; thou art the son of Vishnu, whom Kala Sambara carried away and threw into the sea; thou wast swallowed by a fish, but wast rescued by me from its belly. Thy fond mother is still weeping for thee.' When the valiant Pradyumna heard this, he was filled with wrath, and defied Sambara to battle. In the conflict the son of Madhava slew the hosts of Sambara. Seven times he foiled the delusions of the enchanter, and, making himself master of the eighth, turned it against Sambara and killed him. By the same faculty he ascended into the air, and proceeded to his father's house, where he alighted, along with Mayavati, in the inner apartments. When the women beheld Pradyumna, they thought it was Krishna himself. Rukmini, her eyes dimmed with tears, spoke tenderly to him, and said: 'Happy is she who has a son like this, in the bloom of youth. Such would be the age of my Pradyumna, if he were alive. Who is the fortunate mother adorned by thee? And yet from thy appearance, and from the affection I feel for thee, thou art assuredly the son of Hari.'

"At this moment Krishna and Narada arrived; and the latter said to Rukmini: 'This is thine own son, who has come hither after killing Sambara, by whom when an infant he was stolen. This is the virtuous Mayavati,

[p. 261]

his wife, and not the wife of Sambara. Hear the reason. When Manmatha (Kama), the deity of love, perished, the goddess of beauty, desirous to secure his revival, assumed a delusive form, and by her charms fascinated the demon Sambara, and exhibited herself to him in various illusory enjoyments. This thy son is the descended Kama; and this is the goddess Rati, his wife.'"

Kama is usually represented as a beautiful youth, holding in his hands a bow and arrows of flowers. He travels about through the three worlds accompanied by his wife Rati, the cuckoo, the humming-bee, spring personified, and gentle breezes. Although in Bengal no images are made to represent him, he is worshipped at the time of marriage, and happiness in the married state, and offspring, are sought from him. Part of the hymn referred to above from the "Atharva-Veda" is recited in the Hindu marriage ritual.

Kama has many names indicative of the influence he is supposed to exert amongst men. Amongst others may be mentioned:--

Madan, "He who intoxicates with love."

Manmatha, "He who agitates the mind."

Mara, "He who wounds."

Pradyumna, "He who conquers all."

Ananga, "He who is without a body."

Kushumesu, "He whose arrows are flowers."

Footnotes

^256:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 402.

^257:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology."

^258:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology."

^259:* Page 574.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 262]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

SIVA.

SIVA is the third person of the Hindu Triad. As Brahma was Creator, Vishnu Preserver, in order to

Click to enlarge
SIVA.

[p. 263]

complete the system, as all things are subject to decay, a Destroyer was necessary; and destruction is regarded as the peculiar work of Siva. This seems scarcely in harmony with the form by which he is usually represented. It must be remembered, however, that, according to the teaching of Hinduism, death is not death in the sense of passing into non-existence, but simply a change into a new form of life. He who destroys, therefore, causes beings to assume new phases of existence--the Destroyer is really a re-Creator; hence the name Siva, the Bright or Happy One, is given to him, which would not have been the case had he been regarded as the destroyer in the ordinary meaning of that term.

In the later Hinduism, as taught in the Epics and Puranas, Siva plays a most important part, several books having been written for the purpose of celebrating his praise; yet his name as that of a god does not occur in the Vedas. In order, therefore, to gain greater reverence for him amongst men, he is declared to be the Rudra of the Vedras. In some passages in the Vedras, Rudra is identified with Agni; yet "the distinctive epithets applied to him in the Rig-Veda appear sufficiently to prove that he was generally discriminated from Agni by his early worshippers." [**]

Between the texts from the Brahmanas relative to Rudra, and the earliest descriptions of the same deity which we discover in the Epic poems, a wide chasm intervenes, which, as far as I am aware, no genuine ancient materials exist for bridging over. The Rudra of the Mahabharata is not indeed very different in his general character from the god of the same name who is portrayed in the Satarudriya, but in the later literature his importance is immensely increased, his attributes are

[p. 264]

Click to enlarge
SIVA TEMPLE AT BENARES.

[p. 265]

more clearly defined, and the conceptions entertained of his person are rendered more distinct by the addition of various additional features and illustrated by numerous legends. Instead of remaining a subordinate deity, as he was in the Vedic Age, Rudra has thrown Agni, Vayu, Surya, Mitra, and Varuna completely into the shade; and although Indra still occupies a prominent place in the Epic legends, he bas sunk down into a subordinate position, and is quite unable to compete in power and dignity with Rudra, who, together with Vishnu, now engrosses the almost exclusive worship of the Brahmanical world." [**]

In the following texts from the Vedas, [*+] referring to Rudra, will be seen the germs of some of the legends found in the later books concerning Siva:--"What can we utter to Rudra, the intelligent, the strong, the most bountiful, which shall be most pleasant to his heart, that so Aditi may bring Rudra's healing to our cattle, and men, and kine, and children? We seek from Rudra, the lord of songs, the lord of sacrifices, who possesses healing remedies, his auspicious favour; from him who is brilliant as the sun, who shines like gold, who is the best and most bountiful of the gods." "We invoke with obeisance the ruddy boar of the sky, with spirally braided hair, a brilliant form." "Far be from us thy cow-slaying and man-slaying weapon." In the same hymn Rudra is called the father of the Maruts or Storm-gods; to explain which the commentator introduces a legend of a later date which is found in the account of the Maruts. [*++] In another hymn Rudra is thus addressed: "Thou fitly holdest arrows and a bow; fitly thou [wearest] a glorious necklace of every form [of beauty]."

[p. 266]

[paragraph continues] The name Siva may have been connected with Rudra from a verse in the Vajasaneyi recension of the white "Yajur Veda," wherein Rudra is thus addressed: "Thou art gracious (Siva) by name." [**] Other epithets, which are afterwards extended into legends, are seen in a prayer in the same Veda: "Shine upon us, dweller in the mountain, with that blessed body of thine which is auspicious." [*+] " May he who glides away, blue-necked and red-coloured, be gracious unto us." "Reverence to the blue-necked, to the thousand-eyed, to the bountiful, and to the lord of spirits, and to the lord of thieves."

In the following account of Rudra's birth, he is identified with Agni:--"The lord of beings was a householder, and Ushas (The Dawn) was his wife. A boy was born (to them) in a year. The boy wept. Prajapati said to him, 'Boy, why dost thou weep, since thou hast been born after toil and austerity?" The boy said, 'My evil has not been taken away, and a name has not been given to me. Give me a name.' Prajapati said, 'Thou art Rudra.' Inasmuch as he gave him that name, Agni became his form, for Rudra is Agni. He was Rudra because he wept (from rud, to weep)." [*++] This account of the birth of Rudra agrees with that of the Vishnu and Markandeya Puranas, and to some extent with that of others.

It is impossible to give a connected account of the life of this deity. His career was not clearly defined like an Avatara of Vishnu, of which we have a history of his birth, life, and death. Though he often appeared on earth in human form, and frequently dwelt at his favourite city, Benares, his heavenly home was at Kailasa on the Himalayas. All that can be done is to

[p. 267]

give a few out of the many legends found in the sacred books in which his character and works are described. From these we may learn something of the idea of the age in which they were written respecting Siva.

Rudra, according to the Ramayana, married Uma, the daughter of Daksha, who reappears in various stages of the life of Siva as Parvati, Durga, Kali, etc. Fearing that the children of such parents would be dangerous to live with, the gods entreated Siva and Uma to live a life of chastity: to this they consented. The request, however, came too late to prevent the birth of Kartikeya. Uma declared that the wives of the other gods should also be childless. Rudra took a prominent position at the churning of the ocean; he drank the poison, as nectar, that was produced before the amrita, which caused his neck to become dark-coloured--hence one of his names is Nilkanta, "the blue-necked."

As Uma was sitting with her husband in their home on Mount Kailasa, seeing the gods driving by in their chariots, she was told that they were proceeding, at her father's invitation, to take part in a great sacrifice he was about to make. As Siva had offended him, Daksha had not invited him. The "Bhagavata Purana" [**] gives the cause of this slight upon Siva: "On one occasion the gods and Rishis were assembled at a sacrifice celebrated by the Prajapatis. On Daksha's entrance, all rose to salute him excepting his father Brahma and Mahadeva (Siva). Daksha, after making his obeisance to Brahma, sat down by his command, but was offended at the treatment he received from Siva. Seeing him previously seated, Daksha did not brook this want of respect; but looking at him obliquely with his eyes, as if consuming him, thus spake: 'Hear me, ye Brahman

[p. 268]

[paragraph continues] Rishis, with the gods and the Agnis, while I, neither from ignorance nor passion, describe what is the practice of virtuous persons. But this shameless being (Siva) detracts from the reputation of the guardians of the world--he by whom, stubborn as he is, the course pursued by the good is transgressed. He assumed the position of my disciple, inasmuch as, like a virtuous person, in the face of Brahmans and of fire, he took the hand of my daughter who resembled Savitri. This monkey-eyed [god], after having taken the hand of [my] fawn-eyed [daughter], has not even by word shown suitable respect to me, whom he ought to have risen and saluted. Though unwilling, I yet gave my daughter to this impure and proud abolisher of rites and demolisher of barriers, like the word of a Veda to a Sudra. He roams about in dreadful cemeteries, attended by hosts of ghosts and sprites, like a madman, naked, with dishevelled hair, wearing a garland of dead men's [skulls] and ornaments of human bones, pretending to be Siva (auspicious), but in reality Asiva (inauspicious), insane, beloved by the insane, the lord of Bhutas (spirits), beings whose nature is essentially darkness. To this wicked-hearted lord of the infuriate, whose purity has perished, I have, alas! given my virtuous daughter, at the instigation of Brahma.' Having thus reviled Siva, who did not oppose him, Daksha, having touched water, incensed, began to curse him: 'Let this Bhava (Siva), lowest of the gods, never at the worship of the gods receive any portion along with the gods Indra, Upendra (Vishnu), and others.'

"Daksha then left the assembly. After his departure a follower of Mahadeva pronounced a curse upon him, and the Brahmans who sympathized with him: 'Let Daksha, brutal, be excessively devoted to women, and

[p. 269]

have speedily the head of a goat. Let this stupid being continue to exist in this world in ceremonial ignorance!' Upon this, Bhrigu (a brother of Daksha, and a Rishi) launched a counter-curse upon the followers of Siva: 'Let those who practise the rites of Bhava be heretics and opponents of the true scriptures. Having lost their purity, deluded in understanding, wearing matted hair and ashes and bones, let them undergo the initiation of Siva, in which spirituous liquors are the deity.' Hearing this imprecation, Siva and his followers left the assembly, while Daksha and the other Prajapatis [**] celebrated for a thousand years the sacrifice in which Vishnu was the object of veneration."

The enmity thus commenced between Siva and Daksha continued; and in consequence, at the great sacrifice made when his father-in-law was appointed chief of the Prajapatis, Siva was not invited. Uma was greatly grieved, as her husband told her, "The former practice of the gods has been that in all sacrifices no portion should be divided to me. By custom, established by the earliest arrangement, the gods lawfully allot me no share in the sacrifice." According to the Mahabharata, he then sets off for the assembly and with his attendants puts an end to the sacrifice, which, taking the form of a deer, is followed by Siva into the sky. A drop of perspiration falls from his forehead, from which a fire proceeds, out of which issues a dreadful being Jvara (Fever), which burns up the other things prepared for the sacrifice, and even puts to flight the gods. Brahma, now appears to Siva, promises that the gods shall henceforth give him a share in the sacrifices, and proposes that Jvara shall be allowed to range over the earth.

[p. 270]

The Bhagavata [**] gives a more lengthy and somewhat different account of the termination of Daksha's ceremony. Sati (Uma) was most anxious to attend it. Though her husband tries to dissuade her, she "disregards his warning and goes; but, being slighted by her father, reproaches him for his hostility to her husband, and threatens to abandon her corporeal frame by which she was connected with her parent. She then voluntarily gives up the ghost. Seeing this, Siva's attendants, who had followed, rush on Daksha to slay him." This, however, is prevented, and Siva's followers are put to flight. When Siva heard of his wife's death, he was greatly angered, and "from a lock of his hair a gigantic demon arose (named Virabhadra), whom he commanded to destroy Daksha and his sacrifice." This was accomplished. He plucked out Bhrigu's beard, tore out Bhaga's eyes, knocked out Pushan's teeth, and cut off Daksha's head. In their distress, the gods are advised to propitiate Siva. For this purpose they resort to Kailasa, where they see Siva "carrying the linga desired by devotees, ashes, a staff, a tuft of hair, an antelope's skin, and a digit of the moon, his body shining like an evening cloud." Siva in part relents, and allows Daksha to have a goat's head: the sacrifice is completed, and Vishnu gives an address in which he shows that he is the supreme deity, and that the troubles of his worshippers arise from imagining themselves to be different from him. Daksha himself worships Siva, and Uma, who had voluntarily given up herself to the flames, and thus become a Sati, [*+]

[p. 271]

was re-born as Parvati, being then the daughter of Himavat, the god of the Himalayas and Mena.

Siva adopted the garb, and lived the life of an ascetic. Though generally worshipped under the form of the linga, he "is represented in human form, living in the Himalayas along with Parvati, sometimes in the act of trampling on or destroying demons, wearing round his black neck a serpent, and a necklace of skulls, and furnished with a whole apparatus of external emblems, such as a white bull on which he rides, a trident, tiger's skin, elephant's skin, rattle, noose, etc. He has three eyes, one being in his forehead, in allusion either to the three Vedas, or time past, present and future. He has a crescent on his forehead, the moon having been given to him as his share of the products of the churning of the ocean. Again, Mahadeva, or the great deity Siva, is sometimes connected with humanity in another personification very different from that just noted, viz. that of an austere ascetic, with matted hair, living in a forest and teaching men by his own example, first, the power to be obtained by penance (tapas), mortification of the body and suppression of the passions; and, secondly, the great virtue of abstract meditation, as leading to the loftiest spiritual knowledge, and ultimately to union, or actual identification with the great spirit of the universe." [**]

The following legend from the "Vamana Purana," [*+] describes the ordinary life of Siva as an ascetic. Devi (Parvati), oppressed with violent heat, thus addressed her lord: "O Isha! the heat increases in violence; hast thou no house to which we might repair, and there abide, protected from the wind, the heat, the cold?"

[p. 272]

[paragraph continues] Sankara replied: "I am, O lovely one, without a shelter, a constant wanderer in forests." Having thus spoken, Sankara with Sati remained during the hot season under the shade of trees, and when it was passed, the rainy season with its dark clouds succeeded. On beholding which, Sati said to Siva, "Heart-agitating winds do blow, O Maheshwara, and rushing torrents roar; let me entreat thee to build a house on Kailasa, where I may abide with thee in comfort." Siva replied, "O my beloved, I have no riches for the erection of a house, nor am I possessor of aught else than an elephant's skin for a garment, and serpents for my ornaments." The soul of Siva, having heard these harsh words, seemingly true, but devoid of truth, was alarmed, and looking on the ground with bashfulness and anger said, "Then say, O Sambhu, how can we pass in comfort the rainy season under the shade of trees?" Siva replied, "With our bodies covered with a cloud, O lovely one, shall the rainy season pass without any rain falling on thy tender frame." Having thus spoken, Siva stopped a cloud, and with the daughter of Daksha, fixed his abode within it, and hence has he since been celebrated in heaven under the name of Jimula-Kitu (he whose banner is a cloud). When the rains were over, they took up their abode in Mount Mandara.

The home life of Siva and his spouse does not appear to have been of the happiest. As they could each bestow gifts upon their worshippers, it sometimes happened that the one wanted to bless those whom the other wished to curse. In the Ramayana and Mahabharata [**] is an account of a dispute between them in connection with the struggle between Rama and Ravana. In the earlier part of the contest, Rama being unable

[p. 273]

to overthrow his enemy because of the assistance afforded him by Siva, the gods whom Ravana had oppressed went, with Rama at their head, to ask him to withdraw his help. Siva consented to accompany them on the seventh day of the conflict to witness the destruction of their foe. Durga (Parvati) severely reproached her husband, asking how he could witness the destruction of his own worshipper, a worshipper who had stood praying to him in the most sultry weather surrounded by four fires; who had continued his devotions in the chilling cold, standing in water; and had persevered in his applications, standing on his head, amid torrents of rain. She then poured forth a torrent of abuse, calling him a withered old man, who smoked intoxicating herbs, lived in cemeteries and covered himself with ashes, and asked if he thought she would accompany him on such an errand. Siva now gets angry, and reminds his wife that she was only a woman and therefore could know nothing; and further that she does not act like a woman, because she too wandered about from place to place, engaged in war, was a drunkard, spent her time in the company of degraded beings, killed giants, drank their blood and hung their skulls around her neck. Durga became so enraged at these reproaches, that the gods were frightened. They entreated Rama to join them in supplication to her, or Ravana would never be destroyed. He did so; she then became propitious and consented to the destruction of the demon. Durga is represented in the Sivopakhyana as being exceedingly jealous because her husband, in his begging excursions, visited the quarters of the town inhabited by women of ill-fame, and in the Ramayana is an account of a terrible quarrel between them because Parasurama beat her sons Kartikeya and Ganesa.

[p. 274]

In the "Vamana Purana" [**] is a legend explaining why Siva adopted the dress and habits of a religious mendicant. Formerly, when all things had been destroyed, and naught remained but one vast ocean, that lord who is incomprehensible (Brahma) reposed in slumber for a thousand years. When the night had passed, desirous of creating the three worlds, the skilled in the Vedas, investing himself with the quality of impurity, assumed a corporeal form with five heads (Brahma). Then also was produced from the quality of darkness another form with three eyes, and twisted locks, and bearing a rosary and a trident. Brahma next created Ahankara (consciousness of individual existence), which immediately pervaded the nature of both gods; and under its influence Rudra said to Brahma, "Say, O lord? how earnest thou hither, and by whom wert thou created?" Brahma asks in return, "And where have you come from?" The result is a terrible quarrel, in which Siva, inflamed with anger, cut off the fifth head of Brahma, which had uttered the boastful words. But when Siva tried to throw the head to the ground it would not fall, but remained in his hand. Brahma then created a giant to slay Siva in his weakened state, which was caused by the sin of injuring Brahma, the father of Brahmans. To escape from him Siva fled to Benares. The peculiar sanctity of Benares arises from the fact that it was there Siva became absolved from his great sin, and was freed from the dissevered head of Brahma, which, as a penance, he was doomed to carry with him wherever he went. It was his attempts to get free from the sin of Brahmanicide that made Siva a wandering mendicant.

The ordinary name by which Siva is known is

[p. 275]

[paragraph continues] Mahadeva, the great god; the origin of this is taught in the Mahabharata. [**] The asuras had a boon bestowed by Brahma, that they should possess three castles which could be "destructible only by the deity who was able to overthrow them by a single arrow." Owing to this defence, they became hateful to the other gods, who, in their distress, went to Brahma, and he again conducts them to Mahadeva. Siva tells them that he alone cannot destroy these castles, but that with the aid of half his strength, they themselves would be able to accomplish this. They answered that as they could not sustain half his strength, they proposed that he should undertake the work aided by half their strength. Mahadeva consented to this, and thus became stronger than all the gods, and was thenceforward called Mahadeva. Notwithstanding this, in the account of Parasurama a legend is given in which Vishnu's superiority to Siva is shown; whilst in the Puranas devoted to Siva's praise it is distinctly affirmed that Brahma and Vishnu are inferior to him.

The unity of the various deities is taught in the following legend. [*+] As Lakshmi and Durga were sitting together in the presence of Siva, Lakshmi contended that her husband (Vishnu) was greater than Siva, because Siva had worshipped him. As they were conversing, Vishnu himself appeared, and, in order to convince his wife that he and Siva were equal, entered his body, and they became one. Another form of this story is found in the "Skanda Purana." [*++] Siva asked Vishnu on one occasion to assume the form of a beautiful woman, such as he did at the churning of the ocean to attract the attention of the asuras whilst the gods drank the amrita. Vishnu consenting, Siva became

[p. 276]

excited and sought to embrace her. As Vishnu ran away, Siva followed him, and though Vishnu resumed his proper form, Siva clasped him so tightly that their

Click to enlarge
HAR-HARI.

bodies became one, and a name Har-Hari, is given to the deities thus united.

Siva is always represented as having a third eye situated in the middle of his forehead; the reason of

[p. 277]

this peculiarity is given in the Mahabharata. [**] As he was seated on the Himalayas, where he had been engaged in austerities, Uma, attended by her companions, and dressed as an ascetic, came behind him and playfully put her hands over his eyes. The effect was tremendous. Suddenly the world became dark, lifeless and destitute of oblations. The gloom, however, is as suddenly dispelled. A great flame burst from Mahadeva's forehead, in which a third eye, luminous as the sun, was formed. By fire from this eye the mountain was scorched, and everything upon it consumed. 'Lima hereupon stands in a submissive attitude before her husband, and in a moment, the Himalaya, her father, is restored to his former condition.

Each god is represented as having special fondness for some bird or animal, on which he is supposed to travel, and which therefore is called his Vahan or vehicle. The bull is Siva's; and the image of his favourite bull, Nandi, is seen in front of many of the shrines sacred to Mahadeva. Owing probably to this circumstance, a curious custom prevails, similar in many respects to the setting loose of the scapegoat by the Israelites. At the death of a worshipper of Siva, if his friends are pious and can afford it, they set a bullock loose, and allow it to wander at will. By the Hindus generally it is considered a meritorious act to feed these sacred bulls, and a sin to injure them. In country places many of them are seen, and they become a great nuisance to the cultivators into whose fields they wander; for though they do much damage, as they have no owner, no compensation can be obtained. If a man were specially devout, or his friends eminently pious, as many as seven bulls are set loose at his decease.

[p. 278]

The idea seems to be this: as Siva was delighted with Nandi, he will graciously receive into his presence those on whose behalf these bullocks are given.

As Siva himself lived the life of an ascetic, and practised severe penance, a similar life is supposed to be pleasing to him; hence many of the Saivites, or worshippers of Siva, practise great austerities, and resort to cruel rites as a means of gaining his favour. Wandering through the country are tens of thousands of Sanyasis, or pilgrims, who subsist upon charity, and expose themselves to cold and heat and many discomforts, in the belief that their life is pleasing to this deity. Some of them inflict upon themselves great physical pain by retaining their arms or legs in one posture for years, until it has become impossible to move them; others allow the thumb nail to grow through their finger; others gaze into the sun until they become blind; others again impose upon themselves a vow of silence, until at length they cannot speak. At certain festivals held in his honour, the lower orders of the people used to swing from bamboos, having iron hooks forced into their bodies, whilst others threw themselves from a height upon sharp knives; at the present time, though these cruel practices are prohibited by the Government, in out-of-the-way places they are still carried on. To assist them to bear the pain, an intoxicating drug made from hemp is freely indulged in; the authority for this practice being the life of the god, as described in the Puranas. As Krishna is believed to be pleased with songs and dances, not always of a highly moral character, Siva is believed to delight in the cruel practices of his ignorant and intoxicated worshippers.

The following extract from the Bhagavata, descriptive of Siva's appearance and conduct, countenances much

[p. 279]

that now forms part of his worship. Understanding that one of his worshippers was in distress, Siva

Click to enlarge
SIVA SLAYING AN ASURA.

[paragraph continues] "assumed half the body of Parvati, fastened up his matted hair, rubbed his body over with ashes, ate a large quantity of hemp, swallow-wort and thorn-apple;

[p. 280]

and wearing a Brahmanical thread composed of white snakes, clad in an elephant's hide, with a necklace of beads, and a garland of skulls, riding upon Nandi, accompanied by ghosts, goblins, spectres, witches, imps, sprites and evil spirits, Bholonath came forth. On his forehead was the moon; he placed the Ganges on his head, [**] and his eyes were very red. His most destructive weapon was a trident: with this he slew the foe who was obnoxious to his follower."

Though Siva's appearance is repeatedly described with considerable minuteness in the Puranas, and in pictures he is usually represented in the human form, it is in the form of the Linga that he is almost universally worshipped. This image does not suggest anything offensive to those unacquainted with its symbolic meaning, and some writers speak of its being innocuous to the Hindus themselves. But it is impossible for any one acquainted with the legends which account for its being the symbol of Siva, to see and worship it without impure thoughts being suggested. It is intended to represent the male and female reproductive organs.

Several legends are given to explain how it came to be the representative of Siva. The probability is that it was an object of worship of some aboriginal tribe, incorporated into Hinduism. The "Padma Purana" [*+] teaches that it was the result of a curse pronounced by Bhrigu. When that Sage was sent to discover which of the three gods was the greatest, he came to Siva's abode, but was prevented from entering immediately he arrived by a doorkeeper, who informed him that his master was with Devi his wife. After waiting for some time, Bhrigu's patience being exhausted, he said, "Since thou, O

[p. 281]

[paragraph continues] Sankara! hast treated me with contempt, in preferring the embraces of Parvati, your forms of worship shall be the Linga and Yoni."

The Vamana [**] makes it the result of a curse pronounced by a number of Sages. When Sati died at Daksha's sacrifice, Siva wandered from place to place like a madman, mourning her absence. He travelled from hermitage to hermitage, but could find no rest. When the hermits' wives saw him they fell desperately in love with him and followed him from place to place. Their husbands, incensed at this, cursed the god, and deprived him of his manhood. A great commotion followed. Brahma and Vishnu interceded on his behalf with the hermits, who consented to withdraw their curse on condition that the offender should be represented by the Linga; and thus it became an object of worship to gods and men.

As a specimen of the legends by which the worship of Siva under this form is inculcated, I give the following extract from the "Siva Purana." [*+] A Rakshas named Bhima, have obtained invincible might as a boon from Rama, commenced exerting his newly acquired power by attacking the king of Kamrupa. Having conquered the king, and seized his kingdom and riches, he placed him in chains in a solitary prison. The king, being eminently pious, notwithstanding his confinement, continued daily to make clay figures of the Linga, and to worship Siva with all the prescribed rites and ceremonies. Meanwhile the Rakshas continued his conquests, and everywhere abolished religious observances, and the worship enjoined in the Vedas. The gods being reduced by his power to great distress, appealed to Siva for help, and propitiated him by the worship of clay Lingas.

[p. 282]

[paragraph continues] Sambhu assured them that he would effect the destruction of their enemy by means of the king of Kamrupa, then a prisoner. At this very moment the prisoner was engaged in profound meditation before a Linga, when one of the guards, seeing him thus occupied, went and informed the Rakshas that his captive was performing some improper ceremonies in order to injure him. Hearing this, the monster, enraged, seized his sword and hastening to the prison, thus addressed the king: "Speak the truth, and tell me who it is that thou worshippest, and I will not slay thee; otherwise I will instantly put thee to death!"

The king, placing firm reliance on the protection of Siva, undauntedly replied, "In truth, I worship Sankara; do then what thou pleasest!" The Rakshas asked, "What can Sankara do to me? I know him well, that he was once obliged to become the servant of my uncle (Ravana); and thou trusting in his power didst endeavour to conquer me; but defeat was the result of thy attempt. However, until thou showest me thy lord, and convincest me of his might, I will not believe in his divinity!" The king replied, "Vile as I am, what power have I over the god? But mighty as he is, I know he will never forsake me!" To which the Rakshas said, "How can that delighter in ganja, and inebriation, that wandering mendicant, protect his worshippers? Let but thy lord appear, and I will immediately engage with him in battle." He then ordered the attendance of his army; and reviling the king, the mighty Rakshas smiting the Linga with his sword, said, laughing, "Now, behold the power of thy lord!" Scarcely had his sword touched the Linga than Hara issued from it, and exclaimed, "Behold I am Iswara (god), who appears for the protection of his

[p. 283]

worshipper, on whom he always bestows safety and happiness; now learn to dread my might!" Siva then attacked the Rakshas, and with the glory which issued from his third eye, consumed him and his army to ashes.

Siva is said to have a thousand names; in addition to those already mentioned the following are most common:--

Maheswara, "The great god."

Ishwar, "The glorious."

Chandrashekara, "He who wears a half-moon on his forehead."

Bhuteswara, "Lord of Bhuts, or goblins."

Mritunjaya, "He who conquers death."

Sri Kanta, "He whose neck is beautiful."

Smarahara, "The destroyer of Smara or Kamdeva."

Gangadhara, "He who holds Ganga (the Ganges) in his hair."

Sthanu, "The everlasting."

Girisha, "The lord of the hills."

Digambara, "He who is clothed with space (naked)."

Bhagavat, "The lord."

Isana, "The ruler."

Mahakala, "The great time."

Tryambaka, "The three-eyed."

  

PANCHANANA.

This is a form of Siva in which he is represented, as his name teaches, with five faces; the appearance of his body and the ascetic's dress being the same as in his ordinary forms. It is under this name that prayers for recovery from sickness are addressed to him as the physician or healer. In places where there is no temple, and no image of this deity, worship is offered to him before a shapeless stone, painted red, placed under a

[p. 284]

tree. This is a very common form of worship in the villages of Bengal. Some shrines of Panchanana have acquired considerable celebrity, to which women resort to obtain the gift of children as well as other blessings. In times of sickness offerings are made to this deity

Click to enlarge
PANCHANANA.

without scruple, though the sufferer is not ordinarily a worshipper of Siva. In cases of epilepsy it is the common belief that the victim is possessed by Panchanana, and offerings are made to induce him to depart; recovery is. believed to be the result of the god's departure.

Footnotes

^263:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 404.

^265:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 404.

^265:+ Ibid., iv. 299 ff.

^265:++ Part i. chap. vii.

^266:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 322.

^266:+ Ibid., p. 326.

^266:++ Ibid., iv. 341.

^267:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 378 ff.

^269:* The Prajapatis, seven, ten, or twenty-one in number, according to various authorities, are the fathers of the human race.

^270:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 382.

^270:+ It is in imitation of the wifely devotion of Uma, that widows were burned alive with the dead body of their husbands. Hence they were called Satis--faithful ones.

^271:* "Indian Wisdom," p. 325.

^271:+ "Hindu Mythology," p. 293.

^272:* Ward, ii. 179.

^274:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 296.

^275:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 223.

^275:+ Ward, ii. 190.

^275:++ Ibid.

^277:* Muir, iv. 269.

^280:* See "Ganga," part iii. chap. v.

^280:+ Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 301.

^281:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 299.

^281:+ Ibid., p. 310.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 285]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

UMA.

UMa is the name by which the consort of Siva is first known. In the sacred books she appears in many forms, and is known by many names; but as there are legends giving the circumstances connected with the names and forms more generally known, these will be given as far as possible in chronological order.

When Devi (the goddess) appears as Uma, she is said to be the daughter of Daksha, a son of Brahma. Her father was at first very unwilling that his daughter should marry a mendicant, but his scruples were overcome by the persuasion of Brahma. As Siva is styled Mahadeva, Uma is frequently called simply Devi. At this period of her existence she is also called Sati, in allusion to the fact that when her father slighted her husband by not inviting him to the great sacrifice he made, she voluntarily entered the sacrificial fire and was burned to death in the presence of the gods and Brahmans; or, according to another account, was, under the same circumstances, consumed by her own glory. The name Sati means "the true, or virtuous woman," and is given to those widows who ascend the funeral pile of their husbands, and undergo a voluntary death by being burned with his corpse. Ambika, another name of Uma, in one of the earliest books, is said to be the sister of

[p. 286]

[paragraph continues] Rudra; and yet in the later ones she is declared to be his wife.

"The earliest work, so far as I am aware, in which the name of Uma appears, is the Talavakara, or Kena Upanishad. In the third section of that treatise it is mentioned that on one occasion Brahma gained a victory for the gods. As, however, they were disposed to ascribe the credit of their success to themselves, Brahma appeared for the purpose of disabusing them of their mistake. The gods did not know him, and commissioned first Agni and then Vayu, to ascertain what this apparition was. When, in answer to Brahma's inquiry, these two gods represented themselves, the one as having power to burn, and the other to blow away anything whatever, he desired them respectively to burn and blow away a blade of grass; but they were unable to do this, and returned without ascertaining who he was. Indra was then commissioned to ascertain who this apparition was. 'So be it,' he replied, and approached that being, who vanished from him. In the sky he came to a woman, who was very resplendent, Uma Haimavati. To her he said: 'What is this apparition?' She said, It is Brahma; in this victory of Brahma exult.' By this he knew that it was Brahma. The commentators on this passage declare that Uma means 'knowledge,' and speak of Uma as the impersonation of 'divine knowledge.'" [**]

Professor Weber [*+] says: "As in Siva, first of all two gods, Agni and Rudra are combined, so too his wife is to be regarded as a compound of several divine forms; and this becomes quite evident as we look over the mass of her epithets. While one set of these as Uma, Ambika, Parvati, Haimavati, belong to the wife of Rudra, others

[p. 287]

as Kali carry us back to the wife of Agni; while Gauri and others perhaps refer to Nirriti the goddess of all evil." And he adds: "The most remarkable instance of this is to be found in the Mahabharata in the hymn of Yudhishthira to Durga, where he calls her Yasoda Krishna, 'born in the cowherd family of Nanda,' 'sister of Vasudeva,' 'enemy of Kansa,' and as 'having the same features as Sankarshana.' Some such explanation is certainly necessary when we see that Kali is said to be the same with Uma, the embodiment of 'heavenly wisdom.'"

In the following passage from the Ramayana, [**] Uma is said to be the daughter of Himavat and Mena; the two forms of lima and Parvati being confounded in the writer's mind. "To Himavat, the chief of mountains, the great mine of metal, two daughters were born in beauty unequalled upon earth. The daughter of Meru, Mend by name, the pleasing and beloved wife of Himavat, was their slender-waisted mother. Of her was born Ganga, the eldest daughter of Himavat, and his second daughter was Uma, who, rich in austere observances, having undertaken an arduous rite, fulfilled a course of severe austerity. This daughter lima, distinguished by severe austerity, adored by the worlds, the chief of the mountains gave to the matchless Rudra. These were the two daughters of the King of the Mountains: Ganga, the most eminent of rivers, and Uma the most excellent of goddesses."

"The Harivansa [*+] mentions three daughters of Himavat and Mena, but Ganga is not amongst them. "Their (the Pitris) mental daughter was Mena, the eminent wife of the great mountain Himavat. The King of the Mountains begat three daughters upon

[p. 288]

[paragraph continues] Mena, viz. Aparna, Ekaparna, and Ekapatala. These three performing very great austerity, such as could not be performed by gods or Danavas, distressed [with alarm] both the stationary and the moving worlds. Ekaparna (one leaf) fed upon one leaf. Ekapatala took only one patala (Bignonia) for her food. One (Aparna) took no sustenance; but her mother, distressed through maternal affection, forbade her, dissuading her with her words u ma (Oh, don't). The beautiful goddess, performing arduous austerity, having been thus addressed by her mother, became known in the three worlds as Uma. In this manner the contemplative goddess became renowned under that name. All these three had mortified bodies, were distinguished by the force of contemplation, and were all chaste, and expounders of divine knowledge. Uma was the eldest and most excellent of the three. Distinguished by the force derived from deep contemplation, she obtained Mahadeva [for her husband]."

Several of the names under which Uma is now known and worshipped are to be found in the older writings of the Hindus, though at that time they did not refer to Siva's wife. Uma, as we have already seen, was "Wisdom;" Ambika was a sister of Rudra; Durga "in a hymn of the Taittiriya Aranyaka is an epithet of the sacrificial flame; and Kali, a word which occurs in the Mandaka Upanishad, is the name of one of the seven flickering tongues of Agni, the god of fire." [**]

Uma is called the mother of Kartikeya, and in a certain sense of Ganesa too; but it is not at all clear whether it was really as Uma or in her succeeding birth as Parvati that she had these children.

[p. 289]

The "Kurma Purana" [**] has an account of Uma's creation which takes us back, a stage anterior to her birth as a daughter of Daksha. "When Brahma was angry with his sons for adopting an ascetic life [and refusing to perpetuate the human race], a form half male and half female was produced from that anger, to whom Brahma said, 'Divide thyself,' and then disappeared. The male half became Rudra, and the female, at the command of Brahma, became the daughter of Daksha under the name of Sati, and was given in marriage to Rudra, and when she subsequently gave up her life on being treated with disrespect by her father, she was born a second time as the daughter of Himavat and Mena, and named Parvati."

It should be noticed that although Uma is called the wife of Siva, it is understood that she represents the energy or active power of that deity; she assumed a body in order that she might be united to him in due form; in like manner Vishnu's energy became incarnate in Lakshmi, Sita, etc.

  

PARVATI.

The goddess in this form is the constant companion of her husband, but few independent actions are ascribed to her. In the Puranas, Siva and Parvati are generally represented as engaged in making love to each other, or (rather a singular change) as seated on Mount Kailasa discussing the most abstruse questions of Hindu philosophy. Occasionally, however, quarrels arose between them, and on one occasion Siva reproached her for the blackness of her skin. This taunt so grieved her that she left him for a time, and, repairing to a deep forest,

[p. 290]

performed a most severe course of austerities, until Brahma granted her as a boon that her complexion should be golden, and from this circumstance she is known as Gauri. [**]

Click to enlarge
SIVA AND PARVATI.

The following legend from the "Varaha Purana" [*+] describes her origin. Brahma when on a visit to Siva

[p. 291]

on Mount Kailasa is thus addressed by him: "Say quickly, O Brahma, what has induced you to come to me?" Brahma replies, "There is a mighty asura named Andhaka (Darkness), by whom all the gods, having been distressed, came for protection, and I have hastened to inform you of their complaints." Brahma then looked intently at Siva, who by thought summoned Vishnu into their presence. As the three deities looked at each other, "from their three refulgent glances sprang into being a virgin of celestial loveliness, of hue cerulean, like the petals of a blue lotus, and adorned with gems, who bashfully bowed before Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. On their asking her who she was, and why she was distinguished by the three colours black, white, and red, she said, "From your glances was I produced; do you not know your own omnipotent energies? " Brahma then praising her, said, "Thou shalt be named the goddess of three times (past, present and future), the preserver of the universe, and under various appellations shalt thou be worshipped, as thou shalt be the cause of accomplishing the desires of thy votaries. But, O goddess, divide thyself into three forms, according to the colours by which thou art distinguished." She then, as Brahma had requested, divided herself into three parts; one white, one red, and one black. The white was " Sarasvati, of a lovely, felicitous form, and the cooperator with Brahma in creation; the red was Lakshmi, the beloved of Vishnu, who with him preserves the universe; the black was Parvati, endowed with many qualities and the energy of Siva." In the preceding legend it was narrated how Parvati, originally black, became golden-coloured.

The "Vaivarta Purana" [**] relates the circumstance

[p. 292]

which led to the re-appearance on earth of Uma, who had sacrificed herself and became a Sati, under the form of Parvati. Siva, hearing of the death of his wife, fainted from grief; on his recovery he hastened to the banks of the river of heaven, where he beheld "the body of his beloved Sati arrayed in white garments, holding a rosary in her hand, and glowing with splendour bright as burnished gold. No sooner did he see the lifeless form of his spouse, than, through grief for her loss, his senses forsook him." When he revived, gazing on her beautiful countenance, with tears in his eyes and sorrow in his voice, he thus addressed her: "Arise, arise, O my beloved Sati! I am Sankara, thy lord; look therefore on me, who have approached thee. With thee I am almighty, the framer of all things, and the giver of every bliss; but without thee, my energy! I am like a corpse, powerless and incapable of action: how then, my beloved, canst thou forsake me? With smiles and glances of thine eyes, say something sweet as amrita, and with the rain of thy gentle words sprinkle my heart, which is scorched with grief. Formerly, when thou didst see me from a distance, thou wouldst greet me with the fondest accents; why then to-day art thou angry, and wilt not speak to me, thus sadly lamenting? O lord of my soul, arise! O mother of the universe, arise! Dost thou not see me here weeping? O beauteous one! thou .canst not have expired. Then, O my faithful spouse! why dost thou not honour me as usual? And why dost thou thus, disobedient to my voice, infringe thy marriage vow?"

"Siva, having thus spoken, raised the lifeless body, and in the anguish of separation pressed it to his bosom, and kissed it again and again. Lip to lip, and breast to breast, Sankara clasped the corpse of his beloved; and,

[p. 293]

after frequent Paintings, arose, and, pressing Sati closely to his bosom, rushed forward maddened with grief. Like a man deprived of his senses, the preceptor of the universe wandered over the seven dwipas, until, exhausted by fatigue and anguish, he fell down in a swoon at the foot of a banyan tree. The gods, seeing Siva in this state, were greatly astonished, and, accompanied by Brahma and Vishnu, hastened to the spot where he lay. Vishnu placed the head of the fainting Siva on his bosom and wept aloud; after a little time he encouraged his friend by saying, 'O Siva! recover thy senses, and listen to what I say. Thou wilt certainly regain Sati, since Siva and Sati are as inseparable as cold from water, heat from fire, smell from earth, or radiance from the sun!"

"Hearing these words, Siva faintly opened his eyes, bedewed with tears, and said: 'O form of splendour! who art thou? Who are these that accompany thee? Who am I, and where are my attendants? Where art thou and these going? Where am I, and where proceeding?' As Vishnu heard these words he wept, and his tears, uniting with those of Siva, formed a lake, which hence became a famous place of pilgrimage. Vishnu at length calmed Siva, who, delighted with his words, beheld Sati, seated before him in a gem-adorned car, accompanied by numerous attendants, arrayed in costly garments; resplendent with ornaments, her placid face being irradiated with a gentle smile. The anguish of separation ceased, and joy filled his soul as Sati thus addressed him: 'Be firm, O Mahadeva! lord of my soul! In whatever state of my being I may exist, I shall never be separated from my lord; and now have I been born the daughter of Himavat in order to become again thy wife; therefore no longer grieve on account of

[p. 294]

our separation.' Having thus consoled Siva, Sati disappeared."

In another chapter of the same Purana we have an account of their reunion. [**] " Sati soon obtained another birth in the womb of Himavat's wife; and Siva, collecting the bones and ashes from her funeral pile, made a necklace of the bones and covered his body with the ashes, and thus preserved them as memorials of his

Click to enlarge
PARVATI WORSHIPPING THE LINGA.

beloved. Not long after this, Sati was born as the daughter of Mena, excelling in beauty and virtue all created beings, and she grew up in her mountain home like the young moon increasing to its full splendour. Whilst still a girl, she heard a voice from heaven saying, 'Perform a severe course of austerity, in order to obtain Siva for a husband, as he cannot otherwise be obtained.' Parvati, proud of her youth, smiling disdainfully at this

[p. 295]

instruction, thought within herself, 'Will he who, on account of the grief he felt for my having formerly consumed myself, not accept me as his spouse when redolent of life? And how can disjunction exist between those who have been predestined from their first being to be husband and wife?' Confident in her youth, loveliness, and numerous attractions, and persuaded that on the first mention of her name Siva would be anxious to espouse her, Parvati did not seek to gain him by the performance of austerity, but night and day gave herself to joyous sports with her companions." Her hopes, however, were disappointed. She had to perform most severe penance before she was reunited to her husband; and it was only by the assistance of Kamadeva, who, at the instigation of the gods, wounded him with his arrows as he was engaged in meditation, whilst Parvati was seated in front of him, that her wish was gratified. Siva at first was anything but grateful for this interference; and as before narrated he rewarded Kama by destroying him with a flame of glory that issued from his third eye.

In a Bengali account of Durga, a legend is given from a later work than the Purana from which the above extract was taken. It is to the following effect:--When Siva raised the dead body of Sati in his arms he began to dance in a frantic manner. The earth trembled beneath the weight of such a load; and Vishnu, fearing there would be an utter destruction of the universe if this were allowed to continue, let fly his wonder-working discus, and cut the body into fifty-one pieces. These fell in different places, a leg here, a hand there; but wherever a part touched the earth, the spot became sacred, an image of the goddess was set up, and a temple rose--in some places it is said they grew to her honour

[p. 296]

[paragraph continues] --which pilgrims still visit as shrines. The renowned temple at Kali Ghat, near Calcutta, is said to possess the big toe of her left foot; and the other principal shrines of Parvati profess to contain a relic of her body.

Parvati is represented in pictures as a fair and beautiful woman, with no superfluity of limbs. Few miraculous deeds are claimed for her. It is when she appears as Durga, Kali, etc., that she manifests divine powers, and exhibits a very different spirit from that which appears in her as Parvati. Hence the supposition that these were originally distinct deities, though now believed to be one and the same.

  

DURGA.

The consort of Siva now assumes a very different character from that in which she has so far been represented. In those incarnations, though the wife of Siva, she acted as an ordinary woman, and manifested womanly virtues; as Durga she was a most powerful warrior, and appeared on earth, under many names, for the destruction of demons who were obnoxious to gods and men.

She obtained the name Durga because she slew an asura named Durga, the name of the goddess being the feminine form of the demon's name. The " Skanda Purana" [**] gives the following account of this occurrence. Kartikeya, being asked by Agastya, the sage, why his mother was called Durga, says: "A giant named Durga, the son of Ruru, having performed penance in favour of Brahma, obtained his blessing, and grew so mighty that he conquered the three worlds, and dethroned Indra and the other gods. He compelled the wives of the Rishis

[p. 297]

to sing his praise, and sent the gods from heaven to dwell in the forests, and by a mere nod summoned them to reverence him. He abolished religious ceremonies; Brahmans through fear of him gave up the reading of the Vedas; rivers changed their course; fire lost its energy, and the terrified stars retired from sight. He assumed the shape of the clouds, and gave rain whenever he pleased; the earth, through fear, yielded an abundant harvest, and the trees flowered and gave fruit out of the proper season."

The gods in their distress appealed to Siva. Indra, their king, said, "He has dethroned me!" Surya said, "He has taken my kingdom!" Siva, pitying them, desired Parvati to go and destroy this giant. She, accepting the commission willingly, calmed the fears of the gods, and first sent Kalaratri (Dark Night), a female whose beauty bewitched the inhabitants of the three worlds, to order the demon to restore things to their ancient order. He, however, full of fury, sent his soldiers to lay hold of Kalaratri; but by the breath of her mouth she reduced them to ashes. Durga then sent 30,000 other giants, who were such monsters in size that they covered the surface of the earth. At the sight of these giants, Kalaratri fled to Parvati, followed by the giants. Durga, with 100,000,000 chariots, 120,000,000,000 elephants, 10,000,000 swift-footed horses, and innumerable soldiers, went to fight Parvati, on the Vindhya mountain. As soon as he drew near, Parvati assumed 1000 arms, called to her assistance different beings, and produced a number of weapons from her body (a long list of these is given in the Purana). The troops of the giant poured their arrows on Parvati as she sat on the mountain Vindhya, thick as the drops of rain in a storm; they even tore up trees, mountains, etc., and hurled them

[p. 298]

at her; in return she threw a weapon which carried away the arms of many of the giants. Durga himself then hurled a flaming dart at the goddess, which she turned aside; another being sent, she stopped it by a hundred arrows. He next aimed an arrow at Parvati's breast; this too she repelled, and two other weapons, a club and a pike. At last coming to close quarters, Parvati seized Durga and set her left foot on his breast, but he, managing to disengage himself, renewed the fight.

Parvati then caused a number of helpers to issue from her body, which destroyed the soldiers of the giants. In return, Durga sent a dreadful shower of hail, the effect of which Parvati counteracted by an instrument called Sosuna. The demon now assumed the shape of an elephant as large as a mountain, and approached the goddess; but she tied his legs, and, with her nails, which were like scimitars, tore him to pieces. He rose again in the form of a buffalo, and with his horns cast stones, trees, and mountains, tearing up the trees by the breath of his nostrils. Parvati then pierced him with her trident; he reeled to and fro, and, renouncing the form of a buffalo, assumed his original body as a giant, with a thousand arms, having a weapon in each. Approaching Parvati, she seized him by his arms, and carried him into the air, whence she threw him to the ground with fearful force. Seeing that the fall had not destroyed him, she pierced him in the breast with an arrow, whereupon blood issued from his mouth in streams, and he died. The gods were delighted at the result, and soon regained their former splendour.

Still another account of the origin of Durga is found in the Chandi, a part of the "Markandeya Purana." [**] Mahisha, king of the giants, at one time overcame the

[p. 299]

gods in war, and reduced them to such a state of want that they wandered through the earth as beggars. Indra first conducted them to Brahma, and then to Siva; but as these gods could render no assistance, they turned to Vishnu, who was so grieved at the sight of their wretchedness, that streams of glory issued from his face, whence came a female figure named Mahamaya (another name of Durga). Streams of glory issued from the faces of the other gods also, which in like manner entered Mahamaya; in consequence of which she became a body of glory, like a mountain of fire. The gods then handed their weapons to this dreadful being, who with a frightful scream ascended into the air, slew the giant, and gave redress to the gods.

The account, as found in the "Vamana Purana," [**] differs in some details. When the gods had sought Vishnu in their distress, he, and at his command Sankara (Siva), Brahma, and the other gods, emitted such flames from their eyes and countenances that a mountain of effulgence was formed, from which became manifest Katyayini, refulgent as a thousand suns, having three eyes, black hair, and eighteen arms. Siva gave her his trident, Vishnu a discus, Varuna a conch-shell, Agni a dart, Vayu a bow, Surya a quiver full of arrows, Indra a thunderbolt, Kuvera a mace, Brahma a rosary and water-pot, Kala a shield and sword, Visvakarma a battle-axe and other weapons. Thus armed, and adored by the gods, Katyayini proceeded to the Vindhya hills. Whilst there, the asuras Chanda and Manda saw her, and being captivated by her beauty they so described her to Mahisha, their king, that he was anxious to obtain her. On asking for her hand, she told him she must be won in fight. He came, and fought; at length Durga

[p. 300]

dismounted from her lion, and sprang upon the back of Mahisha, who was in the form of a buffalo, and with her tender feet so smote him on the head that he fell to the ground senseless, when she cut off his head with her sword.

In pictures and images Durga is represented as a golden-coloured woman, with a gentle and beautiful countenance. She has ten arms; in one hand she holds a spear, with which she is piercing the giant Mahisha; with one of her left hands she holds the tail of a serpent, with another the hair of the giant whose breast the snake is biting; her other hands are filled with various weapons. Her lion leans against her right leg, and the giant against her left. The images of Lakshmi, Sarasvati, Kartikeya, and Ganesa are frequently made and worshipped with that of Durga. The frontispiece is a representation of Durga and the other goddesses and gods, as they are made in Bengal at the time of the great autumnal festival.

In Bengal the worship of this goddess forms the most popular of all the Hindu festivals; it continues for three days, and is the great holiday of the year. At this season, as at Christmas in England, the members of the family whom business detains from home during the year return; and with the worship of Durga is associated all that is bright and cheerful. Sacrifices of buffaloes and goats are made to her; feasting, singing, and dancing are continued through the greater part of the night. Though her chief festival is in the autumn, she is also worshipped, though not so generally, in the spring. The reason of this as taught in a Bengali account is as follows:--Ravana was a devout worshipper of Durga, and had the Chandi (an extract from one of the Puranas) read daily. When, therefore, Rama attacked

[p. 301]

him, the goddess assisted her servant. It was in the spring that Ravana observed her festival. Rama, seeing the help his enemy received from this goddess, began himself to worship her. This was in the autumn. Durga was delighted with the devotion of Rama, and at once transferred her aid to him.

Durga is said to have assumed ten forms for the

Click to enlarge
DASABHUJA.

destruction of two giants, Sumbha and Nisumbha; the "Markandeya Purana" describes these incarnations in the following order:--(1) As Durga she received the message of the giants; (2) As Dasabhuja (the ten-armed) she slew part of their army; (3) As Singhavahini (seated on a lion) she fought with Raktavija; (4) As Mahishamardini (destroyer of a buffalo) she slew Sumbha in the

[p. 302]

form of a buffalo; (5) As Jagaddhatri (the mother of the world) she overcame the army of the giants; (6) As Kali (the black woman) she slew Raktavija; (7) As Muktakesi (with flowing hair) she overcame another of the armies of the giants; (8) As Tara (the saviour) she slew Sumbha in his own proper shape; (9) As Chinnamustaka (the headless) she killed Nisumbha; (10) As Jagadgauri (the golden-coloured lady renowned through the world) she received the praises and thanks of the gods. [**]

The great conflict for success in which Durga assumed so many forms is described as follows in the "Markandeya Purana." [*+] At the close of the Treta Age, two giants, named Sumbha and Nisumbha, performed religious austerities for 10,000 years, the merit of which brought Siva from heaven, who discovered that by this extraordinary devotion, they sought to obtain the blessing of immortality. He reasoned long with them, and vainly endeavoured to persuade them to ask for any other gift. Being denied what they specially wanted, they entered upon still more severe austerities, for another thousand years, when Siva again appeared, but still refused to grant what they asked. They now suspended themselves with their heads downwards over a slow fire, till the blood streamed from their necks: they continued thus for 800 years. The gods began to tremble, lest, by performing such rigid acts of holiness, these demons should supplant them on their thrones. The king of the gods thereupon called a council, and imparted to them his fears. They admitted that there was ground for anxiety, but asked what was the remedy.

"Acting upon the advice of Indra, Kandarpa (the god of love), with Rambha and Tilatama, the most beautiful of the celestial nymphs, were sent to fill the minds of

[p. 303]

the giants with sensual desires. Kandarpa with his arrow wounded both; upon which, awaking from their absorption, and seeing two beautiful women, they were taken in the snare, and abandoned their devotions. With these women they lived for 5000 years; after which they saw the folly of renouncing their hopes of immortality for the sake of sensual gratifications. They suspected this snare must have been a contrivance of Indra; so, driving back the nymphs to heaven, they renewed their devotions, cutting the flesh off their bones, and making burnt offerings of it to Siva. They continued in this way for 1000 years, till at last they became mere skeletons; Siva again appeared and bestowed upon them his blessing--that in riches and strength they should excel the gods.

"Being exalted above the gods, they began to make war upon them. After various successes on both sides, the giants became everywhere victorious; when Indra and the gods, reduced to a most deplorable state of wretchedness, solicited the interference of Brahma and Vishnu. They referred them to Siva, who declared that he could do nothing for them. When, however, they reminded him that it was through his blessing they had been ruined, he advised them to perform religious austerities to Durga. They did so; and after some time the goddess appeared, and gave them her blessing; then disguising herself as a common female carrying a pitcher of water, she passed through the assembly of the gods. She then assumed her proper form, and said, 'They are celebrating my praise.'

"This new goddess now ascended Mount Himalaya, where Chanda and Manda, two of Sumbha and Nisumbha's messengers, resided. As these demons wandered over the mountain, they saw the goddess;

[p. 304]

and being exceedingly struck with her charms, which they described to their masters, advised them to engage her affections, even if they gave her all the glorious things which they had obtained in plundering the heavens of the gods.

"Sumbha sent Sugriva as messenger to the goddess, to inform her that the riches of the three worlds were in his palace; that all the offerings which used to be presented to the gods were now offered to him, and that all these offerings, riches, etc., would be hers, if she would come to him. The goddess replied that the offer was very liberal, but that she had resolved that the person she married must first conquer her in war, and destroy her pride. Sugriva, unwilling to return unsuccessful, pressed for a favourable answer, promising that he would conquer her in war, and subdue her pride; and asked in an authoritative strain: 'Did she know his master, before whom none of the inhabitants of the worlds had been able to stand, whether gods, demons, or men? How then could she, a female, think of resisting his offers? If his master had ordered him, he would have compelled her to go into his presence immediately.' She agreed that this was very correct, but that she had taken her resolution, and exhorted him, therefore, to persuade his master to come and try his strength with her.

"The messenger went and related what he had heard. On hearing his account, Sumbha was filled with rage, and, without making any reply, called for Dhumlochana his commander-in-chief, and gave him orders to go to Himalaya and seize the goddess and bring her to him, and, if any attempted a rescue, utterly to destroy them.

"The commander went to Himalaya, and acquainted the goddess with his master's orders. She, smiling,

[p. 305]

invited him to execute them. On the approach of this hero, she set up a dreadful roar, by which he was reduced to ashes. After which she destroyed the army of the giant, leaving only a few fugitives to communicate the tidings. Sumbha and Nisumbha, infuriated, sent Chanda and Manda, who, on ascending the mountain, perceived a female sitting on an ass, laughing. On seeing them she became enraged, and drew to her ten, twenty, or thirty of their army at a time, devouring them like fruit. She next seized Manda by the hair, cut off his head, and holding it over her mouth, drank the blood. Chanda, on seeing the other commander slain in this manner, himself came to close quarters with the goddess. But she, mounted on a lion, sprang on him, and, despatching him as she had done Manda, devoured part of his army, and drank the blood of the slain.

"The giants no sooner heard this alarming news than they resolved to go themselves, and collecting their forces, an infinite number of giants, marched to Himalaya. The gods looked down with astonishment on this vast army, and the goddesses descended to help Mahamaya (Durga), who, however, soon destroyed her foes. Raktavija, the principal commander under Sumbha, and Nisumbha, seeing all his men destroyed, encountered the goddess in person. But though she covered him with wounds, from every drop of blood which fell to the ground a thousand giants arose equal in strength to Raktavija himself. Hence innumerable enemies surrounded Durga, and the gods were filled with alarm at the amazing sight. At length Chandi, a goddess who had assisted Kali (Durga) in the engagement, promised that if she would drink the giant's blood before it fell to the ground, she (Chandi) would engage him and destroy the whole of his strangely-formed

[p. 306]

offspring. Kali consented, and the commander and his army were soon despatched.

"Sumbha and Nisumbha, in a state of desperation, next engaged the goddess in single combat, Sumbha making the first onset. The battle was inconceivably dreadful on both sides, till at last both the giants were slain, and Kali sat down to feed on the carnage she had made. The gods and goddesses chanted the praises of the celestial heroine, who in return bestowed a blessing on each."

It seems scarcely correct to speak of these forms of Durga as incarnations; they are rather epithets descriptive of her appearance or method of fighting at different times during the great conflict. There is, however, so great a difference in appearance and character between Parvati and Kali that it is not easy to regard them as the same being; yet Durga, whilst represented as a warrior fully armed, has the calm features and golden colour of the goddess in her earlier manifestation. It appears a reasonable hypothesis that Kali was originally altogether distinct from Uma or Parvati.

In the following hymn of Arjuna to Durga in the Mahabharata, [**] her many names are mentioned:--"Reverence be to thee, Siddha-Senani (generaless of the Siddhas), the noble, the dweller on Mandara, Kumari (Princess), Kali, Kapali, Kapila, Krishnapingala. Reverence to thee, Bhadrakali; reverence to thee, Maha Kali, Chandi, Chanda, Tarini (deliveress), Varavarini (beautiful-coloured). O fortunate Kalyayani, O Karali, O Vijaya, O Jaya (victory), younger sister of the chief of cowherds (Krishna), delighting always in Mahisha's blood! O Uma, Sakambhari, thou white one, thou black one!

[p. 307]

[paragraph continues] O destroyer of Kaitabha! Of sciences, thou art the science of Brahma (or of the Vedas), the great sleep of embodied beings. O mother of Skanda (Kartikeya), divine Durga, dweller in wildernesses! Thou, great goddess, art praised with a pure heart. By thy favour let me ever be victorious in battle." In another verse of this same book she is said to dwell perpetually in the Vindhya hills, and "to delight in spirituous liquors, flesh, and sacrificial victims."

The statement that Durga was the younger sister of Krishna refers to the fact that it was she who took Krishna's place in Devaki's womb after Vasudeva had carried the infant Krishna to Nanda, and whom Kansa attempted to destroy by dashing her against a stone immediately after her birth. Krishna promised, if she would take his place as Devaki's child, "becoming assimilated to him in glory, she would obtain an eternal place in the sky, be installed by Indra amongst the gods, obtain a perpetual abode on the Vindhya mountains, where meditating upon him (Vishnu) she would kill two demons, Sumbha and Nisumbha, and would be worshipped with animal sacrifices." [**]

  

THE CHIEF FORMS OF DURGA.

1. DURGa received Chanda and Manda, the messengers of the giants; they, struck with her beauty, spoke so rapturously of her to their lords that Sumbha sent her an offer of marriage by Sugriva.

2. DASABHUJa, [*+] the ten-handed, destroyed Sumbha's army under the commander-in-chief Dhumlochana. Of these troops only a few fugitives escaped to carry the news of their defeat to their master.

[p. 308]

3. SINGHAVaHINI (riding on a lion) fought with Chanda and Manda, and has four arms only. She drank the blood of the leaders, and devoured a large part of their troops.

4. MAHISHAMaRDINI (the slayer of Mahisha) slew Sumbha as he attacked her in the form of a buffalo. She had eight or, according to other accounts, ten arms.

Click to enlarge
JAGADDHATRI.

[paragraph continues] There is little to distinguish the account of this form from that of Durga.

5. JAGADDHaTRI (the mother of the world) destroyed another army of the giants; is dressed in red garments, and is seated on a lion. She, too, has four arms only, and is very similar to Singhavahini; the difference being in the weapons she wields, As Singhavahini, she

[p. 309]

carries a sword and spear, and with two hands is encouraging her worshippers; as Jagaddhatri, she carries a conch-shell, discus, bow and arrow. In all the above forms she is represented as a fair, beautiful, gentle-looking lady.

6. KaLI (the black woman), or, as she is more commonly called, Kali Ma, the black mother, with the aid of Chandi, slew Raktavija, the principal leader of the giant's army. Seeing his men fall, he attacked the goddess in person; when from every drop of blood that fell from his body a thousand giants equal in power to himself arose. At this crisis another form of the goddess, named Chandi, came to the rescue. As Kali drank the giant's blood and prevented the formation of new giants, Chandi slew the monster herself.

Kali is represented as a black woman with four arms; in one hand she has a sword, in another the head of the giant she has slain, with the other two she is encouraging her worshippers. For earrings she has two dead bodies; wears a necklace of skulls; her only clothing is a girdle made of dead men's hands, and her tongue protrudes from her mouth. Her eyes are red as those of a drunkard, and her face and breasts are besmeared with blood. She stands with one foot on the thigh, and another on the breast of her husband. This position of Kali is accounted for by the fact that, when her victory over the giants was won, she danced for joy so furiously that the earth trembled beneath her weight. At the request of the gods Siva asked her to desist, but as, owing to her excitement, she did not notice him, he lay down amongst the slain. She continued dancing until she caught sight of her husband under her feet; immediately she thrust out her tongue with shame at the disrespect she had shown him.

[p. 310]

In the "Adhyatma [**] Ramayana," [*+] is a legend giving quite a different origin of Kali; the object of the writer evidently being to enhance the glory of Sita, by showing that Kali was but a form that she had assumed. On Rama's return from the destruction of Ravana, he was boasting of his prowess, when Sita smiled and said, "You rejoice because you have slain Havana with ten

Click to enlarge
KALI.

heads, but what would you say to a Ravana with a thousand?" "Destroy him too," said Rama. Sita advised him to remain at home; but he collected his army of monkeys, and with his wife and brothers set off for Satadwipa to meet this new Ravana. Hanuman

[p. 311]

was despatched to discover the residence of the monster, and to gather all the information he could about him, and on his return Rama went to the attack. The giant regarded the army of his assailant as so many children.

Click to enlarge
KALI DANCING ON SIVA.

He shot three arrows. One of these sent all the monkeys to their home at Kiskindha; a second drove the giants and demons to Lanka; whilst the third despatched the soldiers to Ayodha, Rama's capital. Rama was thunderstruck as he found himself alone, and, imagining that

[p. 312]

all his forces were destroyed, began to weep. Sita, laughing at her husband, assumed the terrific form of Kali, and furiously attacked the thousand-headed Ravana. The conflict lasted ten years, but at length she slew the giant, drank his blood, and began to dance and toss about the limbs of his lifeless body. Her dancing shook the earth to its centre; but not until Siva lay on the ground, and her attention was called to the disrespect she was showing him, could she be prevailed upon to desist. Thus Siva saved the universe; and Sita, assuming her proper form, went home with Rama and his brothers.

The "Skanda Purana" [**] explains that Chandi, who came to the rescue and assisted Kali in the destruction of Raktavija, was a form of Devi, assumed on another occasion for the destruction of Chanda. It is interesting to see that these leaders of Sumbha's army reappear, although they were slain, and their blood was drunk by Singhavahini. Two asuras, named Chanda and Manda, through a boon received from the divine mothers, became so powerful as to subdue the three worlds. The gods besought Devi, who appeared to them under the form of Chandi, to deliver them; she replied, "that she could do nothing for them until she had propitiated Siva." To accomplish this she retired to a forest, and, whilst engaged in worship, Siva first appeared, under the form of a vast Linga, and then, in answer to Chandi's prayer, revealed himself, and in answer to her praises thus addressed her: O goddess! Thou art celebrated in the three worlds as Parasakti (the energy of the supreme being). Wherever thou art, there am I; and wherever I am, there is Chandika. There is no difference between us. What shall I do for you? " Chandi replies:

[p. 313]

[paragraph continues] "Formerly I slew Chanda and Manda in battle; but they have been born again as mighty asuras, and have oppressed the three worlds. It is therefore to be enabled to destroy them that I seek thy protection." Siva promises his help, and sends her in the guise of a messenger to challenge them to fight. They accept the challenge, and are slain by Siva.

The "Linga Purana" [**] seems to teach that Kali, though produced by Durga, was yet distinct from her. Formerly a female asura named Daruka had through devotion obtained such power that she consumed like fire the gods and Brahmans. But as she was attended by a host of female asuras, Vishnu and the gods feared to attack her, lest they should be guilty of the great sin of slaying a woman. Siva is then appealed to, who, addressing Devi, said, "Let me request, O lovely one! that thou wouldst effect the destruction of this Daruka." Parvati, having heard these words, created from her own substance a maiden of black colour, with matted locks, having an eye in her forehead, bearing in her hand a trident and a skull; she was of aspect terrible to behold, was arrayed in celestial garments, and adorned with all kinds of ornaments. On beholding this terrific form of darkness, the gods retreated in alarm. Parvati then created innumerable ghosts, goblins, and demons; attended by these, Kali, in obedience to her order, attacked and destroyed Daruka.

Maurice [*+] gives another account of Kali: "The origin of this singular deity is perfectly in union with her life and history. Arrayed in complete armour, she sprang from the eye of the dreadful war-bred goddess Durga, the vanquisher of demons and giants, at the very instant

[p. 314]

that she was sinking under their united assaults. Kali joining her extraordinary powers to those of her parent, they renew the combat and rout their foes with great slaughter."

The "Markandeya Purana" [**] makes Kali a production of Lakshmi. The origin of all things is Maha Lakshmi, who visibly or invisibly pervades and dwells in all that is. Separating from herself the quality of darkness, she gave origin to a form black as night, with dreadful tusks and large eyes, and holding a sword, a goblet, a head and a shield, and adorned with a necklace of skulls. She is distinguished by the names of Mahakali, Ekavira, Kalaratri, and other similar appellations. Then from the quality of purity she produced Sarasvati. As soon as they were formed, Maha Lakshmi thus addressed Mahakali and Sarasvati: "Let us from our own forms produce twin deities." She then generated a male and female, named Brahma and Lakshmi; in the same manner Mahakali produced Siva and Sarasvati, and Sarasvati produced Gauri and Vishnu. Maha Lakshmi then gave in marriage Sarasvati to Brahma, Gauri to Siva, and Lakshmi to Vishnu.

In the accounts of the forms of Durga, and also in those of the other deities, if the writer of the book is commending Lakshmi, as in the last quotation, she is declared to be the source of all: if the book is in praise of Durga, she is equally declared to be the source. Unless this is borne in mind the varying origins of the deities become somewhat confusing. But when it is ascertained on whose special behalf a book was written, it may be expected that he or she will be described as the source, the greatest of all.

There can be no doubt that human sacrifices were

[p. 315]

formerly offered to Kali, though now they are forbidden both by British law and the Hindu scriptures; the prohibition in Hindu books, however, is in a more recent class of books than those in which they were ordained. In the "Kalika Purana," [**] from which the following extracts are made, nothing could be clearer than the instruction regarding this cruel practice. Siva is addressing his sons the Bhairavas, initiating them in these terrible mysteries.

"The flesh of the antelope and the rhinoceros give my beloved (Kali) delight for five hundred years. By a human sacrifice, attended by the forms laid down, Devi is pleased for a thousand years; and by the sacrifice of three men, a hundred thousand years. By human flesh Kamakhya, Chandika, and Bhairava, who assume my shape, are pleased a thousand years. An oblation of blood which has been rendered pure by holy texts, is equal to ambrosia; the head and flesh also afford much delight to Chandika. Blood drawn from the offerer's own body is looked upon as a proper oblation to the goddess Chandika.

"Let the sacrificer repeat the word Kali twice, and say, 'Hail, Devi! goddess of thunder; hail, iron-sceptred goddess!' Let him then take the axe in his hand, and again invoke the same by the Kalaratri text, as follows: Let the sacrificer say, Hrang, Hrang! Kali, Kali! O horrid-toothed goddess! Eat, cut, destroy all the malignant; cut with this axe; bind, bind; seize, seize; drink blood! Spheng, spheng! secure, secure. Salutation to Kali.' The axe being invoked by this text, called the Kalaratri Mantra, Kalaratri herself presides over the axe, uplifted for the destruction of the sacrificer's enemies.

[p. 316]

"Different mantras (or forms) are used in reference to the description of the victim to be immolated. If a lion, this--

"'O Hari! who in the shape of a lion bearest Chandika, bear my evils and avert my misfortunes. Thy shape, O lion! was assumed by Hari [in the Nrisingha incarnation of Vishnu] to punish the wicked part of the human race; and under that form, by truth, the tyrant Hiranyakasipu was slain!'

"Females are not to be immolated, except on very particular occasions; the human female never.

"Let princes, ministers of State, councillors, and vendors of spirituous liquors make human sacrifices, for the purpose of attaining prosperity and wealth. Let the victim offered to Devi, if a buffalo, be four years old; and if human, twenty-five. On these occasions this is the mantra to be used: 'Hail! three-eyed goddess, of most terrifying appearance, around whose neck a string of human skulls is pendent; who art the destroyer of evil spirits; who art armed with an axe and a spear, salutation to thee with this blood.'

"An enemy may be immolated by proxy, substituting a buffalo or a goat, and Calling the victim by the name of the enemy through the whole ceremony, thereby infusing, by holy texts, the soul of the enemy into the body of the victim; which will when immolated deprive the foe of life also. On this occasion, let the sacrificer say: 'O goddess of horrid forms! O Chandika! Eat, devour such an one my enemy. Consort of fire! salutation to fire. This is the enemy who has done me mischief, now personated by an animal--destroy him, O Mahamari!'"

A great variety of regulations and invocations, rites, etc., are laid down for the performance of sanguinary

[p. 317]

offerings, whether the immolation of a victim, or an offering of the sacrificer's own blood, or burning his flesh. Until very recent times commonly, and in some quiet places even now, at certain festivals, the worshippers cut their flesh and burn their bodies in order to please this cruel deity. Before the Thugs set out on their murderous projects they first sacrificed to Kali to obtain her blessing; and, on their return, paid a portion of the spoils as an offering for her help.

7. MUKTAKESI [**] (having flowing hair) destroyed another part of the giant's forces. In appearance there is little to distinguish her from Kali: she has four arms; holds a sword and a helmet in her left hands, and with her right she is bestowing a blessing and dispelling fear. She, too, is standing upon the body of her husband.

8. TaRa (the saviour) slew Sumbha, and holds his head in one hand and a sword in another. Her appearance, too, is similar to that of Kali. She must not be confounded with Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati; or Tara, the wife of Bali, the asura king.

9. CHINNAMUSTAKA (the beheaded) slew Nisumbha, the other giant. It is evident from her appearance that she found her task rather difficult, for her head is half-severed from her body. She is painted as a fair woman, naked, and wearing a garland of skulls, standing upon the body of her husband.

10. JAGADGAURI (the yellow woman [renowned] through the world) received the thanks and praises of the gods and men for the deliverance she wrought; in her four hands she holds a conch-shell, a discus, a club, and a lotus.

Images are made of Durga at different seasons of the

[p. 318]

year in nearly all of these forms, and various blessings are sought from her by her worshippers. In addition to these she is worshipped under other names; some of the more generally known will now be given. It should be noticed that the Hindus who worship Durga in any of her forms, and the other female deities, when they represent the Sakti, or energy of their husbands, are called Saktas, and form a class distinct from the Hindus generally. An exception, however, must be made in respect to Sarasvati, Lakshmi, and the autumnal worship of Durga; this particular form of worship being common to almost all Hindus.

11. PRATYANGIRa (the well-proportioned one). Of this form of Durga no images are made, but at night the officiating priest, wearing red clothes, offers red flowers, liquors, and bloody sacrifices. The flesh of animals dipped in some intoxicating drink is burned; the worshipper believing that the flesh of the enemy for whose injury the ceremony is performed will swell, as the flesh of the sacrifice swells in the fire.

12. ANNAPURNa (she who fills with food) is represented as a fair woman, standing on a lotus, or as sitting on a throne. In one hand she holds a rice bowl, and in the other a spoon used for stirring rice when it is being boiled. Siva, as a mendicant, is receiving alms from her. She is the guardian deity of many Hindus, who have a proverb to the effect that a sincere disciple of this deity will never want rice. It is in connection with this form of Durga that the "Linga Purana" [**] gives a legend explaining an image called Ardhanarishwara, which represents Siva and Durga as together forming one body. Siva as a mendicant supported his wife and children by begging; but on one occasion,

[p. 319]

owing to his use of intoxicating. herbs, he was unable to go his rounds. Durga told him there was nothing in the house to eat; half the previous day's contributions they had eaten; Ganesa's rat and Kartikeya's peacock

Click to enlarge
ANNAPURNA

having finished the rest. Siva then went out to beg, and Durga started for her father's house with the children, but was met by Narada, who advised her, as Annapurna, to lay an embargo on the food of the houses where Siva asked for alms. The result was no one

[p. 320]

would give him anything. Narada meeting him advised him to go home; Annapurna met him at the door, and so pleased him by giving him food, that he pressed her to his breast with such force that they became one body.

13. GANESAJANANI (the mother of Ganesa) is worshipped with her infant in her arms.

14. KRISHNAKRORA (she who holds Krishna on her breast). When Krishna fought with the serpent Kaliya in the river Yamuna, he was bitten, and in pain called upon Durga for help. She heard his cry, and, by suckling him from her breast, restored him to health.

This list might be almost indefinitely enlarged. From the number of her names, it is evident she is largely worshipped in North India; and from the number of Hindus bearing one or other of her names, it is certain she is most popular. It is a common custom for the Hindus to give their children names indicating the god or goddess through whose favour they are believed to have been given, and Durga seems to have had a part in the bestowal of a very large proportion of the children in Bengal. "By the favour of Kali, or Durga, or Tara," is expressed in the names of multitudes, and every day witnesses the payment of vows made to this goddess when some desired good is granted, or threatened evil averted.

  

THE SAKTIS.

Although a full account of the three chief goddesses, Sarasvati, Lakshmi, and Parvati, has already been given, there still remains something to be said in order to indicate the position they occupy in the Pantheon. By far the greater part of the Hindus in Bengal, and a

[p. 321]

considerable number in other provinces, devote their chief, almost their exclusive worship to the wives of the gods rather than to their husbands; and by these people they are declared to be the source and support of all things. Of the three, Parvati, chiefly in her more dreadful forms, is by far the most popular. Comparatively few assign to the other two a similarly exalted position.

All the Hindus acknowledge the consorts of the gods in a general way, and on the days commonly devoted to their worship are careful to present the customary offerings. But the sects now under consideration are not content with this. As the goddesses fill their field of vision, their husbands are almost entirely neglected. Originally the term Sakti signified the energy, or power of a deity. In process of time this energy was supposed to dwell in the wife, and as a result the devotion of the worshippers was transferred to her. And for many centuries a special name has been given to those who pay their supreme worship to the energy of the gods that are, so to speak, incarnated in their wives. These are known as Saktas, just as those who make Siva their chief object of adoration are Saivites; or those who regard Vishnu as the supreme are Vaishnavas.

There is a respectable and recognized cult of Sakti worship, known as the right-handed; and there is one that is quite the opposite, known as the left-handed. The rites and ceremonies in the one case are openly performed, and do not greatly differ from those in common with other Hindu sects. But amongst the left-handed sects the greatest care is taken to keep secret, from the uninitiated, the doctrines and practices that regulate and form their worship. But enough is known to make the members generally ashamed of their

[p. 322]

connection with the system. Meat, strictly prohibited by ordinary Hinduism, intoxicating drinks, also strictly forbidden by the same authority, and grossly obscene acts are performed as part of the worship that is offered to the deity. Of old, without doubt, human sacrifices were offered at such festivals. But as this forms part of Hindu worship, rather than of mythology, it does not call for further notice here. The goddesses, and especially Devi, or Durga, the wife of Siva, are the supreme objects of worship amongst the Saktas; and they are worshipped as the incarnation of the energy or force of their divine husbands. The authority for this form of Hinduism are the Tantras, not the Puranas. As in the case of the more modern deities an attempt is made to identify them with the older, so expressions in the more ancient books are caught up and explained in such a way as to make it appear that the Tantric teaching is in harmony with, or a legitimate development of them.

Footnotes

^286:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 420.

^286:+ Ibid., iv. 425.

^287:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 430.

^287:+ Ibid., iv. 432.

^288:* Goldstucker, Chambers's Cyclopaedia, s.v. "Uma."

^289:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 329.

^290:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 334.

^290:+ Ibid., p. 209.

^291:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 331.

^294:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 334.

^296:* Ward, ii. 83.

^298:* Ward, ii. 88.

^299:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 335.

^302:* Ward, ii. 101.

^302:+ Ibid., p. 98.

^306:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 432.

^307:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 34.

^307:+ See illustration, p. 301.

^310:* There are four recensions of the Ramayana: Valmiki's, Vyasadeva's, the Adhuta, and the Adhyatma.

^310:+ Ward, ii. 116.

^312:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 338.

^313:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 337.

^313:+ "Indian Antiquities," ii. 184.

^314:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 210.

^315:* Moor's " Hindu Pantheon," 144 ff.

^317:* Ward, ii. 101-117.

^318:* Ward, ii. 187.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 323]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

SONS OF SIVA AND PARVATI.

  

1. GANESA.

GANESA is usually regarded as the elder son of Siva and Parvati, but the Puranas differ very considerably in their

Click to enlarge
GANESA.

accounts of his origin. Sir W. Jones says [**] that " Ganesa, the Indian god of Wisdom, has the same

[p. 324]

characteristics as Janus of the Latins. All sacrifices and religious ceremonies, all serious compositions in writing, and all worldly affairs of importance are begun by pious Hindus with an invocation to Ganesa; a word composed of Isa, the governor or leader, and gana, a company (of deities). Instances of opening business auspiciously by an ejaculation to him might be multiplied with ease. Few books are begun without the words, 'Salutation to Ganesa;' and he is first invoked by Brahmans who conduct the trial by ordeal, or perform the ceremony of the homa or sacrifice to fire." M. Sonnerat represents him as highly revered on the coast of Coromandel, where, according to him, "the Indians would not on any account build a house without having placed on the ground an image of this deity, which they sprinkle with oil and adorn every day with flowers. They set up his image in all their temples, in the streets, in the high roads, and in the open plains at the foot of some tree, so that persons of all ranks may invoke him before they undertake any business, and travellers worship him before they proceed on a journey." What is true of the Coromandel coast, is true of most parts of India so far as the worship of this deity is concerned.

"Ganesa is the Hindu god of Prudence and Policy. He is the reputed eldest son of Siva and Parvati (the 'Padma Purana' alone declares that he was the actual child of these deities), and is represented with an elephant's head--an emblem of sagacity--and is frequently attended by, or is riding upon, a rat. He has generally four hands, but sometimes six, or eight, or only two." [**] He is always described as being very corpulent; and pictures or images of him are seen over the doors of most shopkeepers. It is not easy to see why Ganesa

[p. 325]

has become so universally worshipped, as there are few legends in the Puranas attesting his divine power.

The "Brahmavaivarta Purana" [**] gives the following account of his birth:--"Parvati, after her marriage with Siva, being without a child, and very desirous to obtain one, was advised by her husband to perform the Panyakavrata. This is the worship of Vishnu, to be begun on the thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of Magha, and continued for a year, on every day of which flowers, fruits, cakes, vessels, gems, gold, etc., are to be presented, and a thousand Brahmans fed; and the performer of the rite is to observe most carefully a life of inward purity, and to fix the mind on Hari (Vishnu). Parvati having, with the aid of Sanat Kumara, as directing priest, accomplished the ceremony on the banks of the Ganges, returns after some interval, in which she sees Krishna, first as a body of light, and afterwards as an old Brahman, come to her dwelling. The reward of her religious zeal being delayed, she is plunged in grief, when a viewless voice tells her to go to her apartment, where she will find a son who is the lord of Goloka, or Krishna, that deity having assumed the semblance of her son as a recompense for her devotions.

"In compliment to this occasion, all the gods came to congratulate Siva and Parvati, and were severally admitted to see the infant. Amidst the splendid cohort was Sand, the planet Saturn, who, although anxious to pay his homage to the child, kept his eyes stedfastly fixed on the ground. Parvati asking him the reason of this, he told her that, being immersed in meditation upon Vishnu, he had disregarded the caresses of his wife, and in resentment of his neglect, she had denounced upon him the curse that whomsoever he gazed upon he should

[p. 326]

destroy. To obviate the evil consequences of this imprecation, he avoided looking any one in the face. Parvati, having heard his story, paid no regard to it, but, considering that what must be, must be, gave him

permission to look on her son. Sani, calling Dharma to witness his having leave, took a peep at Ganesa, on which the child's head was severed from his body, and flew away to the heaven of Krishna, where it re-united with the substance of him of whom it formed a part.

"Durga, taking the headless trunk in her arms, cast herself weeping on the ground, and the gods thought it decent to follow her example, all except Vishnu, who mounted Garuda, and flew off to the river Pushpabhadra, where, finding an elephant asleep, he took off his head, and, flying back with it, clapped it on to the body of Ganesa; hence the body of that deity is crowned with its present uncouth capital. On the restoration of Ganesa to life, valuable gifts were made to the gods and Brahmans by the parents, and by Parvati's father, the personified Himalaya. The unfortunate Sani was again anathematized, and, in consequence of Parvati's curse, has limped ever since.

"In another part of the same Purana, further particulars are given somewhat at variance with the above. Siva, offended with Aditya (the sun), slew him, and although he restored him to life incurred the wrath of the sage Kasyapa, who doomed his (Siva's) son to lose his head. The elephant whose head was placed upon Ganesa's body was Indra's elephant, which was decapitated because Indra threw over his neck the garland of flowers which the sage Durvasas gave him, and the disrespect of which, with the consequent degradation of Indra, is noticed in various Puranas, although with different results. Indra was no loser of an elephant by

[p. 327]

this transaction, as Vishnu, moved by the prayers of his wife, gave him another in place of that which he took away.

"Ganesa has only one tusk, and hence is called Ekadanta. The reason of this is as follows:--Parasurama, who was a favourite disciple of Siva, went to Kailasa to visit his master. On arriving at the inner apartment, his entrance was opposed by Ganesa, as his father was asleep. Parasurama nevertheless urged his way, and, after a long dialogue, the two came to blows. Ganesa had at first the advantage, seizing Parasurama in his trunk, and giving him a twirl that left him sick and senseless. On recovering, Rama threw his axe at Ganesa, who, recognizing it as his father's weapon--Siva having given it to Parasurama--received it with all humility upon one of his tusks, which it immediately severed, and hence Ganesa has but one tusk. Parvati was highly incensed at this, and was about to curse Rama, when Krishna, of whom he was a worshipper, appeared as a boy and appeased her indignation. Brahma is said to have promised that her son should be worshipped before the other gods. This result of his contest with Rama was in consequence of a curse pronounced upon him by the sage Tulasi, with whom he had quarrelled."

We have quite a different account of the origin of Ganesa in the "Matsya Purana." [**] When Parvati was bathing, she took the oil and ointments used at the bath, together with the impurities that came from her body, and formed them into the figure of a man, to which she gave life by sprinkling it with the water of the Ganges. This figure had the head of the elephant. The "Siva Purana" relates that, after giving Ganesa life, Parvati placed him at her door to prevent intrusion

[p. 328]

whilst she was bathing. On his refusal to allow Siva to enter, a struggle ensued, in which that deity cut off Ganesa's head; but when Parvati showed her husband that it was by her orders that the door was closed, and wept because of the loss of her son, Siva ordered the first head that could be found to be brought to him; this happened to be an elephant's, which he fitted to the headless trunk and resuscitated his son.

In the "Varaha Purana" [**] Ganesa is said to have been produced by Siva alone. "The immortals and holy sages observing that no difficulty occurred in accomplishing good or evil deeds which they and others commenced, consulted together respecting the means by which obstacles might be opposed to the commission of bad actions, and repaired to Siva for counsel, to whom they said: 'O Mahadeva! God of gods, three eyed, bearer of the trident, it is thou alone who canst create a being capable of opposing obstacles to the commission of improper acts.' Hearing these words, Siva looked at Parvati, and whilst thinking how he could effect the wishes of the gods, from the splendour of his countenance there sprang into existence a youth shedding radiance around, endowed with the qualities of Siva, and evidently another Rudra, and captivating by his beauty the female inhabitants of heaven.

"Uma seeing his beauty was excited with jealousy, and in her anger pronounced this curse: 'Thou shalt not offend my sight with the form of a beautiful youth; therefore assume an elephant's head and a large belly, and thus shall all thy beauties vanish.' Siva then addressed his son, saying, 'Thy name shall be Ganesa, and the son of Siva; thou shalt be chief of the Vinayakas and Ganas; success and disappointment shall

[p. 329]

spring from thee; and great shall be thine influence amongst the gods, and in sacrifices and all affairs. Therefore shalt thou be worshipped and invoked the first on all occasions, otherwise the object and prayers of him who omits to do so shall fail.

"The origin and purpose of Ganesa's existence are more fully taught in the Skanda. [**] Siva addressing Parvati says, "During the twilight that intervened between the Dwarpara and Kali Yugas, women, barbarians, Sudras, and other workers of sin obtained entrance to heaven by visiting the celebrated shrine of Someswara (Somnath). Sacrifices, ascetic practices, charitable gifts, and all the other prescribed ordinances ceased, and men thronged only to the temple of Siva. Hence old and young, those skilled in the Vedas and those ignorant of them, and even women and Sudras, ascended to heaven, until at length it became crowded to excess. Then Indra and the gods, afflicted because thus overcome by men, sought the protection of Siva, and thus addressed him: 'O Sankara! by thy favour heaven is crowded with men, and we are nearly expelled from it. These mortals wander wherever they please, exclaiming, "1 am the greatest, I am the greatest; " and Dharmaraja (Yama), beholding the register of their good and evil deeds, is lost in astonishment. The seven hells were intended for their reception; but, having visited thy shrine, their sins have been remitted, and they have attained to a most excellent future!' Siva replied, Such was my promise to Soma, nor can it be infringed; all men, therefore, who visit the temple of Someswara must ascend to heaven; but supplicate Parvati, and she will contrive some means for extricating you from this distress.'

[p. 330]

"The gods then invoked Parvati in laudatory strains: 'Praise be to thee, O supreme of goddesses! Supporter of the universe, praise be to thee, who createst and destroyest! Grant us thy aid, and save us from this distress!' Having heard the prayer of Indra and the gods, thou, O goddess! wert moved with compassion; and gently rubbing thy body, there was produced a wondrous being with four arms and an elephant's head, and then thou didst thus address the gods: 'Desirous of your advantage, have I created this being, who will occasion obstacles to men, and, deluding them, will deprive them of the wish to visit Somnath, and thus shall they fall into hell.' Hearing this, the gods returned to their homes delighted.

"The Elephant-faced then, addressing Devi, said, 'Command, O lovely goddess! what shall I now do?' Thou didst reply, 'Oppose obstacles to men's visiting Somnath, and entice them to give up such a purpose by the allurements of wives, children, possessions, and wealth. But from those who propitiate thee with the following hymn, do thou remove all obstacles, and enable them to obtain the favour of Siva, by worshipping his shrine at Somnath:--"Om, I praise thee, O lord of difficulties! The beloved spouse of Siddhi (knowledge) and Buddhi (understanding); Ganapati, invincible, and the giver of victory; the opposer of obstacles to the success of men who do not worship thee! I praise thee, O Ganesa! The dreadful son of Uma, but firm and easily propitiated! O Vinayaka! I praise thee! O elephant-faced, who didst formerly protect the gods, and accomplish their wishes, I praise thee!" Thus,' continued Parvati, shalt thou be praised and worshipped.' And whoever previously invokes the god Vinayaka, no difficulties shall impede the attainment of his purposed

[p. 331]

object, and a most beneficial result shall he derive from sacrifices, pilgrimages, and all other devotional acts."

The following extract from the "Ganapati Upanishad" [**] is a specimen of the addresses to Ganesa used by the Ganapatyas: [*+] "Praise to thee, O Ganesa! Thou art manifestly the truth; thou art undoubtedly the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer, the Supreme Brahma, the eternal Spirit. I speak what is right and true; preserve me therefore, when speaking, listening, giving, possessing, teaching, learning; continually protect me everywhere. By thee was this universe manifested; for thou art earth, water, fire, air and ether. Thou art Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra. We acknowledge thy divinity, O Ekadanta! and meditate on thy countenance; enlighten, therefore, our understanding. He who continually meditates upon thy divine form, conceiving it to be with one tooth, four hands, bearing a rat on thy banner, of a red hue, with a large belly, anointed with red perfumes, arrayed in red garments, worshipped with offerings of red flowers, abounding in compassion, the cause of this universe, imperishable, unproduced and unaffected by creation, becomes the most excellent of Yogis. Praise, therefore, be to thee, O Ganapati. Whoever meditates upon this figure of the 'Atharva Siras' (the name of the Upanishad of which the Ganapati forms a part) never will be impeded by difficulties, will be liberated from the five great sins, and all lesser ones; and will acquire riches, the objects of his desires, virtue and final beatitude."

Ganesa is said to have written the Mahabharata at Vyasa's dictation. In the Adiparva of that book it is declared that when the sage was about to compose it

[p. 332]

[paragraph continues] Brahma advised him to ask Ganesa to become his amanuensis. Vyasa at first gave a few difficult sentences to puzzle him, which to this day the composer only and his disciple Suka have been able to understand. As Ganesa paused to think out the meaning of what he was writing, Vyasa composed other difficult passages.

In recent times there has been a supposed incarnation of Ganesa, whose descendant and representative was visited by Captain E. Moor during the present century. The following is the account of his visit: [**]--"Muraba Goseyn was a Brahman of Poona who by abstinence, mortification, and prayer, merited above others the favourable regards of the Almighty. Ganapati accordingly vouchsafed to appear to him at Chinchoor in a vision by night; desired him to arise and bathe; and, whilst in the act of ablution, to seize and hold sacred to the Godhead the first tangible substance that his hand encountered. The god covenanted that a portion of his Holy Spirit should pervade the person thus favoured, and he continued as far as the seventh generation to his seed, who were to become successively hereditary guardians of this sacred substance, which proved to be a stone, in which the god was understood as mystically typified. This type is duly reverenced, carefully preserved, and has ever been the constant companion of the sanctified person inheriting with it the divine patrimony. This annunciation happened about A.D. 1640; and at the time Captain Moor visited the place, the sixth descendant was the representative of the Deity.

"It does not now appear what was the precise extent of the divine energy originally conceded, but it is inferred to have been a limited power of working miracles, such as healing sickness, answering the prayers

[p. 333]

of pious suppliants, and the faculty of foretelling future events. These gifts were enjoyed in a more extensive degree by the earlier representatives of the god; but the person whom Moor saw professed to have performed several miracles. The third in descent is reported to have performed a wonderful work. It was in his time that the Moghul army of Hyderabad so successfully invaded the Mahratta country. After plundering and burning Poona, a party proceeded to Chinchoor, the residence of this Deity, to lay it under contribution. To this the Deo refused to submit, confiding in the divine influence wherewith he was invested. The Mussulmans derided such superstition, and with a view of rendering it ridiculous offered to send a Nuzur (present) to the Deo. The offer was accepted, the Deo betook himself to prayers, and the insulting bigots deputed certain persons to see the result, as apparently a decorous and appropriate present was given. It consisted, however, of cow's flesh, an abomination in the eyes of a Hindu. When the trays were uncovered, they were greatly astonished to find that, instead of the cow's flesh, the trays were filled with the finest and most sacred flowers of the Hindus. The Mussulmans, seeing this, recognized the finger of God in the transaction, and so struck were they with the reality of the miracle that a valuable grant of land was made to the Deo, which his temple enjoys to this day."

The Deo eats, sleeps, marries, and lives the life of an ordinary mortal; and though he is regarded as a fool in worldly matters, he is worshipped as a god. On special occasions his actions and movements are most carefully watched, as they are transient manifestations of the divine will, and are regarded as prophetic. Thus, on a particular night of the year, should he remain in

[p. 334]

peaceful sleep, national repose is predicted; should his slumbers or his waking moments be disturbed, national calamities are expected. If he start wildly from his seat, seize a sword, or make any warlike movement, war may be looked for."

  

2. KARTIKEYA.

Kartikeya, the god of war, and generalissimo of the armies of the gods, though called the younger son of

Click to enlarge
KARTIKEYA.

[paragraph continues] Siva and Parvati, according to most of the Puranic legends, is their son only in the sense that they formed

[p. 335]

him. Brahma arranged for his birth in answer to the prayers of the gods for a competent leader of their forces. The Ramayana [**] says: "While Siva, the lord of the gods, was performing austerities, the other deities went to Brahma and asked for a general in the room of Mahadeva, who, it seems, had formerly acted in that capacity. 'He,' said they, 'whom thou didst formerly give as a leader of our armies (Mahadeva), is now performing great austerities, along with Uma.' Brahma says that in consequence of the curse of Uma no son could be born of any wives of the gods, but that Agni should have a son by the river Ganga, who should be their general."

In the following extract from the Mahabharata [*+] is an explanation of the statement in the preceding paragraph that Agni was to be the father of this god. Kartikeya has just been installed as general, when, "the god whose banner is a bull (Siva), arriving with his goddess, paid him honour, well pleased. Brahmans called Agni Rudra, consequently he (Kartikeya) is the son of Rudra. Having seen him thus honoured by Rudra, all the deities consequently call him, who is the most excellent of the gifted, the son of Rudra. For this child was produced by Rudra when he entered into fire. Skanda (Kartikeya), that most eminent deity, being born of Agni, [who was] Rudra, and from Svaha (Uma) [and] the six wives [of the Rishis], was the son of Rudra."

This quotation will be more intelligible after reading what precedes it: "Indra being distressed at the defeat of the armies of the gods by the Danavas, is meditating on this subject, when he hears the cry of a female calling for help, and asking for a husband to protect her. Indra sees that she has been seized by the demon Kesin, with

[p. 336]

whom he remonstrates; but the demon hurls his club at Indra, who, however, splits it with his thunderbolt. Kesin is disabled in the next stage of the combat, and goes off. Indra then finds out from the female that her name is Devasena (army of the gods), that she has a sister named Daityasena (army of the daityas), and that they are both daughters of Prajapati. She wishes Indra to find her a proper husband, who shall be able to overcome the enemies of the gods. Indra takes Devasena with him to Brahma, and desires him to provide her with a martial husband; and Brahma promises that a helpmate of that description shall be born. It happened that Vasishtha and other Rishis had been offering a sacrifice, whither the gods, headed by Indra, proceeded to drink the Soma juice. Agni, too, being invoked, descended from the region of the sun, entered into the fire, received the oblations of the Rishis, and presented them to the gods.

"Issuing forth [from the fire], he beheld the wives of these great [Rishis] reclining in their own hermitages, and sweetly sleeping, resembling golden altars, pure as beams of the moon, like to flames of fire, all wonderful as stars. Perceiving that his senses became agitated, beholding the wives of the Rishis, Agni was overcome with desire. Again and again he said, 'It is not proper that I should be thus agitated; they are not in love with me. Entering into the domestic fire, I shall gaze upon them close at hand.' Entering the domestic fire, touching, as it were, with his flames, all of them, and beholding them, he was delighted. Dwelling thus there for a long time, fixing his attention on these beautiful women, and enamoured of them, Agni was overcome.

"Agni failing to obtain the Brahmans' wives, resolved to abandon his corporeal form, and went into the forest.

[p. 337]

[paragraph continues] Then Svaha, the daughter of Daksha, first fell in love with him. This amorous and blameless goddess for a long time sought for his weak point, but could not find any. But being aware that he had gone into the wood, and that he was really disturbed by desire, the amorous goddess thus reflected: 'I, who am distressed with love, will take the forms of the seven Rishis' wives, and will court the affection of Agni. By doing so he will be pleased, and I shall obtain my desire.' Assuming first the form of Siva, the wife of Angiras, the handsome goddess went to Agni, and thus addressed him: 'Agni, thou oughtest to love me, who am disturbed with love for thee; if thou wilt not do so, look upon me as dead. Agni, I, Siva, the wife of Angiras, have come, sent by virtuous women.' Agni replied: 'How dost thou, and how do the other beloved wives of the seven Rishis, know that I am distressed with love?'"

Agni was not able to resist the temptation. After the interview, lest the wives of the Rishis should be blamed for their misconduct if she happened to be seen in their form, she assumed the figure of Garuda, the bird of Vishnu, and unnoticed, as she thought, flew from the forest. She visited Agni a second time, as the wife of another Rishi, and so on until she had paid six visits. The germs obtained from Agni she deposited in a golden reservoir, which, "being worshipped by the Rishis, generated a son. Kumara (Kartikeya) was born with six heads, a double number of ears, twelve eyes, arms, and feet, one neck and one belly.

"Kartikeya marries Devasena. The six Rishis' wives, his mothers, afterwards come to him, complaining that they had been abandoned by their husbands, and degraded from their former positions, and asking him to secure their admission into paradise (Swarga). When

[p. 338]

[paragraph continues] Skanda had done what was gratifying to his mothers, Svaha said to him, 'Thou art my genuine son. I desire the love difficult to obtain which thou givest.' Skanda then asked her, 'What love dost thou desire?' Svaha replied, 'I am the beloved daughter of Daksha, by name Svaha. From my childhood I have been enamoured of Agni; but, my son, Agni does not thoroughly know me, who am enamoured of him.' Skanda replied, 'Whatever oblation of Brahmans is introduced by hymns, they shall always, goddess, lift and throw it into the fire, saying Svaha (happiness). Thus, O beautiful goddess, Agni shall dwell with thee continually." Then Brahma Prajapati said to Skanda, Go to thy father Mahadeva, the vexer of Tripura. Thou, unconquered, hast been produced for the good of all worlds by Rudra, who had entered into Agni, and Uma, who had entered into Svaha.'"

The allusion to Rudra's entering into Agni is explained in the Ramayana. The gods, fearing that the descendants of such a pair as Siva and Parvati would be too dreadful to live with, entreated those deities not to have offspring. Siva consented, but Uma, being angry, declared that as she could not have children the other goddesses should suffer similar deprivation. Unfortunately, the gods came too late to prevent the production of Kartikeya; the germ from which he was born having been received by the earth. Agni and Vayu entered it, and deposited it with Ganga, the sister of Uma, and thus this deity was produced.

The "Siva Purana" [**] gives a different account of his origin, and teaches that he was produced to effect the destruction of Tarika. This demon, who was King of Tripura, was " exceedingly ambitious and oppressive.

[p. 339]

He forced Brahma, by his penance and austerities, to promise him any boon that he should demand. Among his austerities he went through the following series, each of the eleven specific mortifications continuing 100 years:--1. He stood on one foot, holding the other and both hands up towards heaven, with his eyes fixed on the sun. 2. He stood on one great toe. 3. He took only water as sustenance. 4. He lived similarly on air. 5. He remained in water. 6. He was buried in the earth, but continued as under the last infliction, in incessant adoration. 7. The same in fire. 8. He stood on his head. 9. He hung on a tree by his hands. 10. He bore the weight of his body on one hand. 11. He hung on a tree with his head downwards. [**]

"Such merit was irresistible, and Indra and a host of demi-gods, alarmed lest their sovereignty should be usurped through the potency of this penance, resorted to Brahma for consolation. Brahma, however, said that, although he could not resist such austerities, he would, after rewarding them by granting the boon demanded, devise a method of rendering it ultimately inoffensive to them.

"The demand by Tarika was that he should be unrivalled in strength, and that no hand should slay him but that of a son of Mahadeva. He now became so arrogant that Indra was forced to yield to him the white eight-headed horse Ukhisrava; Kuvera gave up his thousand sea-horses; the Rishis were compelled to resign the cow Kamdhenu, that yielded everything that could be wished. The Sun in dread gave no heat, and the Moon in terror remained always at full. The Winds

[p. 340]

blew as he dictated, and, in short, he usurped the entire management of the universe.

"Narada prophesied the marriage whence should arise the deliverer of the world; but at first Mahadeva could not be influenced with the passion of love. Indra persuaded Kama to lie in ambush, and contrived that Parvati should be seen by Siva while engaged in the amiable and graceful act of gathering flowers, wherewith to decorate his image. Kama, accompanied by his wife Rati (Desire), and his bosom friend Vasantu (the Spring), took his aim, and launched an arrow at Mahadeva, who, enraged at the attempt (to interrupt his devotion), reduced Kama to ashes by a beam of fire that issued from his third eye. At length, however, by ardent devotion and austerities, Parvati propitiated Siva, and the deity consented to espouse his persevering devotee."

For some time after their marriage, as there was no child born to them, the distressed and disappointed deities who had been anxiously expecting a deliverer, renewed their lamentations and complaints.

"Agni arrived in the presence of Mahadeva, having been deputed to express the desires of the other gods, that he would provide them with a son, who should destroy Tarika. Siva had just left his wife, and Agni, assuming the form of a dove, received from Mahadeva the germ from which Kartikeya arose. Unable to carry it further, he let it fall into the Ganges, on the banks of which river arose a boy, beautiful as the moon, and bright as the sun, who was called Agnibhuva (produced from Agni), Skanda, Kartikeya, etc.

"It happened that six daughters (the Pleiades) of as many Rajas, coming to bathe, saw the boy, and each called him her son; and, offering the breast, the child assumed to himself six mouths, and received nurture

[p. 341]

from each; whence he is called Sasthimatriya (having six mothers). But in fact the child had no mother, for he came from his father alone. In course of time a conflict ensued between Kartikeya and Tarika, in which the demon was slain."

A story is told showing how Kartikeya was outwitted by his brother Ganesa. As the two brothers fell in love with two ladies named Siddhi and Buddhi, it was agreed that whoever first travelled round the world should have them. Ganesa proved by his logical talents and aptness at quotation that he had done this, and obtained the prize long before his brother returned from his weary pilgrimage, to the disquiet of both families when Ganesa's sophistry was discovered.

We have still another account [**] of the origin of Kartikeya: "Siva emitted sparks of fire from his eyes, which, being thrown into the lake Saravana, became six infants, who were nursed by the wives of the Rishis, who are seen in the sky as the Pleiades. When Parvati saw these children, she was transported with their beauty, and embraced all of them together so forcibly that their six bodies became one; while their six heads and twelve arms remained."

Kartikeya is better known in South India under the name of Subramanya. The "Skanda Purana" gives a full account of his war with Sura, and relates how he was sent by his father to interrupt Daksha's sacrifice; and how, at the instigation of the latter, he was delayed on his journey by beautiful damsels, who entertained him with dance and song. Hence it is the practice for dancing girls, who are attached to the pagodas, to be betrothed and married to him; and, though allowed to prostitute themselves, cannot marry any one.

Footnotes

^323:* "Asiatic Researches," i. 227.

^324:* Moor's "Hindu Pantheon," p. 169.

^325:* Wilson's Works, iii.

^327:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 353.

^328:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 353.

^329:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 354.

^331:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 493.

^331:+ Hindus of whom Ganesa is the supreme object of worship.

^332:* "Asiatic Researches," vii. 381.

^335:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 364.

^335:+ Ibid., iv. 350.

^338:* Moor's " Hindu Pantheon," p. 51.

^339:* Many of these forms of penance are resorted to, with some modifications, at the present time; these devotees may be seen at Benares, and other shrines.

^341:* Garrett's "Classical Dictionary of India."

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 342]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

THE PURANIC ACCOUNT OF THE CREATION.

BEFORE passing on to the inferior deities, an account of the creation will be given. It is not at all easy to make out a consistent one from the Hindu scriptures, because the imagination of the writers seems to have run wild on this subject; not having any authority, each writer has written what seemed good to himself. As in the accounts of the deities, the germs are found in the older books of what is told at considerable length in the more recent. The following hymn from the Rig-Veda [**] describes the primal condition of things before the creative power of the Deity was exercised:--

"There was neither aught nor naught, nor air, nor sky beyond.
  What covered all? Where rested all? In watery gulf profound?
  Nor death was then, nor deathlessness, nor change of night and day.
  The One breathed calmly, self-sustained; nought else beyond it lay.

"Gloom, hid in gloom, existed first--one sea, eluding view.
  That One, a void in chaos wrapt, by inward fervour grew.
  Within it first arose desire, the primal germ of mind,
  Which nothing with existence links, as sages searching find.

"The kindling ray that shot across the dark and drear abyss--
  Was it beneath? or high aloft? What bard can answer this?
  There fecundating powers were found, and mighty forces strove--
  A self-supporting mass beneath, and energy above.

[p. 343]

"Who knows, who ever told, from whence this vast creation rose?
  No gods had then been born--who then can e'er the truth disclose?
  Whence sprang this world, and whether framed by hand divine or no--
  Its lord in heaven alone can tell, if even he can show."

This hymn contains perhaps the earliest speculations of the Hindus respecting the creation that have come down to us; and the wise conclusion was arrived at that God alone knew how the world came into being. But as time went on this confession of ignorance did not satisfy the cravings of the human mind: hence succeeding ages sought by its conjectures, which are given with the assurance of exact knowledge, to throw light upon the unknowable.

The next quotation is from the "Purusha Sakta" of the Rig-Veda, which from its thought and language is generally believed to be of much later origin than the preceding hymn.

Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. On every side enveloping the earth, he overpassed (it) by a space of ten fingers. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever has been and whatever shall be. He is also lord of immortality, since (or when) by food he expands. All existences are a quarter of him, and three-fourths of him are that which is immortal in the sky. With three-quarters Purusha mounted upward. A quarter of him was again produced here. From him was born Viraj; and from Viraj, Purusha. When the gods performed a sacrifice, with Purusha as the oblation, the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the autumn its (accompanying) offering. From that universal sacrifice were provided curds and butter. From that universal sacrifice sprang the Rich and Saman verses, the metres and the Yajush;

[p. 344]

from it sprang horses and all animals with two rows of teeth, kine, goats and sheep. When (the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut him up? The Brahman was his mouth, the Rajanya was made his arms, the being (called) Vaisya was his thighs, and the Sudra sprang from his feet. The morn sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from his eye, Indra and Agni from his mouth, and Vaya from his breath. From his navel arose the air, from his head the sky, from his feet the earth, from his ear the (four) quarters; in this manner (the gods) formed the worlds." [**]

Now follows an extract from the "Satapatha Brahmana," which gives the words used at the creation. "(Uttering) 'bhuh,' Prajapati generated this earth. (Uttering) 'bhuvah,' he generated the air; and (Uttering) 'svah,' he generated the sky. This universe is coextensive with these worlds. Saying 'bhuh,' Prajapati generated the Brahman; (saying) 'bhuvah,' he generated the Kshattra; (and saying) 'svah,' he generated the Vis. All this world is as much as the Brahman, Kshattra and Vis. (Saying) 'bhuh,' Prajapati generated himself; (saying) 'bhuvah,' he generated offspring; (saying) 'svah,' he generated animals. This world is so much as self, offspring, and animals." [*+]

The "Taittiriya Brahmana" says, "This entire (universe) has been created by Brahma," and gives an account of the creation of the asuras, pitris (or fathers), and gods. "Prajapati desired, 'May I propagate.' He practised austerity. His breath became alive. With that breath (asu) he created asuras. Having created the asuras, he regarded himself as a father. After that he created the fathers (pitris). That constitutes the fatherhood of the fathers. Having created the fathers,

[p. 345]

he reflected. After that he created men. That constitutes the manhood of men. He who knows the manhood of men becomes intelligent. To him, when he was creating men, day appeared in the heavens. After that he created the gods." [**]

The "Satapatha Brahmana" relates the creation of men and animals. "Prajapati was formerly this (universe) only. He desired, 'Let me create food, and be propagated.' He formed animals from his breaths, a man from his soul, a horse from his eye, a bull from his breath, a sheep from his ear, a goat from his voice. Since he formed animals from his breaths, therefore men say, 'The breaths are animals.' The soul is the first of breaths. Since he formed a man from his soul, therefore they say, 'Man is the first of the animals and the strongest.' The soul is all the breaths; for all the breaths depend upon the soul. Since he formed man from his soul, therefore they say, 'Man is all the animals;' for all these are man's." [*+]

In another passage this Brahmana gives quite a different account. Purusha, as the soul of the universe, was alone. Hence "he did not enjoy happiness. He desired a second. He caused this same self to fall asunder into two parts. Thence arose a husband and wife. From them men were born. She reflected, 'How does he, after having produced me from himself, cohabit with me? Ah! let me disappear!' She became a cow, and the other a bull; from them kine were produced. The one became a mare, the other a stallion; the one a she-ass, the other a male-ass. From them the class of animals with undivided hoofs were produced. The one became a she-goat, the other a he-goat; the one an ewe, the other a ram. From them goats and sheep were

[p. 346]

produced. In this manner pairs of all creatures whatsoever, down to ants, were created." [**]

Again, this Brahmana says, "Prajapati created living beings. From his upper vital airs he created the gods; from his lower vital airs, mortal creatures." [*+]

Manu's account of the creation most probably follows the preceding one in order of time; and it will be noticed that he has developed some germs of thought expressed there. "He (the self-existent) having felt desire, and willing to create various living beings from his own body, first created the waters, and threw into them a seed. That seed became a golden egg, of lustre equal to the Sun; in it he himself was born as Brahma, the parent of all the world. The waters are called narah, for they are sprung from Nara; and as they were his first sphere of motion (ayana, i.e. path), he is therefore called Narayana. Produced from the imperceptible, eternal, existent and non-existent cause, that male (purusha) is celebrated in the world as Brahma. After dwelling for a year in the egg, the glorious being, by his own contemplation, split in twain. . . . Having divided his own body into two parts, the lord (Brahma) became, with the half a male, and with the half a female; and in her he created Viraj. Know, O most excellent twice-born men, that I, whom that male Viraj himself created, am the creator of all this world."

The Puranas enter very minutely into the details of the creation. It is one of the specified topics of which a Purana ought to treat. The first book of the "Vishnu Purana" is largely filled with the accounts of this work. In his preface [*++] to the translation of the "Vishnu Purana," Wilson says: "The first book of the six into

[p. 347]

which the work is divided is occupied chiefly with the details of creation, primary and secondary; the first explaining how the universe proceeds from Prakriti, or eternal crude matter; the second, in what manner the forms of things are developed from the elementary substance previously evolved, or how they reappear after their temporary destruction. Both these creations are periodical, but the termination of the first occurs only at the end of the life of Brahma; when not only all the gods and other forms are annihilated, but the elements are again merged into primary substance; besides which one only spiritual being exists: the latter takes place at the end of every Kalpa, a day of Brahma, and affects only the forms of inferior creatures and lower worlds, leaving the substance of the universe entire, and sages and gods unharmed."

The account in the "Vishnu Purana" was, according to that authority, "originally imparted by the great father of all (Brahma) in answer to the questions of Daksha and other venerable sages, and repeated by them to Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of the Narmada." [**] " Who can describe him who is not to be apprehended by the senses? He is Brahma, supreme, lord, eternal, unborn, imperishable. He then existed in the form of Purusha and of Kala. Purusha (Spirit) is the first form of the supreme; next proceeded two other forms, the discreet and indiscreet; and Kala (time) was the last. These four--Pradhana (primary or crude matter), Purusha (Spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala (time)--in their due proportions, are the causes of the production of the phenomena of creation, preservation, and destruction. The supreme Brahma, the supreme soul, the substance of the world, the lord of all

[p. 348]

creatures, the universal soul, the supreme ruler Hari (Vishnu), of his own will having entered into matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and immutable principles, the season of creation having arrived, in the same manner as fragrance affects the mind from its proximity merely, and not from any immediate operation upon mind itself; so the supreme influenced the elements of creation." [**]

After giving an account of the creation, or rather the evolution of the elements, the "Vishnu Purana" [*+] goes on to say: Then (the elements) ether, air, light, water and earth, severally united with the properties of sound, and the rest existed as distinguishable according to their qualities as soothing, terrific, or stupefying; but possessing various energies, and being unconnected, they could not without combination create living beings, not having blended with each other. Having combined, therefore, with one another, they assumed, through their mutual association, the character of one mass of entire unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the acquiescence of the indiscreet principle, intellect, and the rest, to the gross elements inclusive, formed an egg, which gradually expanded like a bubble of water. This vast egg, compounded of the elements, and resting on the waters, was the excellent natural abode of Vishnu in the form of Brahma; and there Vishnu, the lord of the universe, whose essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible form, and even he himself abided in it in the character of Brahma. Its womb, vast as the mountain Meru, was composed of the mountains; and the mighty oceans were the waters that filled its cavity. In that egg were the continents and seas and mountains, the planets and divisions of the universe, the gods, demons, and mankind.

[p. 349]

"Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari the lord of all, himself becoming Brahma, engaged in the creation of the universe. Vishnu, with the quality of goodness and of immeasurable power, preserves created things through successive ages, until the close of the period termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty deity, invested with the quality of darkness, assumes the awful form of Rudra, and swallows up the universe. Having thus devoured all things, and converted the world into one vast ocean, the supreme reposes upon his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma, becomes the author of creation."

The Purana next gives an account of the creation in the present Kalpa or age. This is a secondary creation, for water and the earth also are already in existence; it is not creation properly speaking, but the change of pre-existing matter into their present forms. Vishnu knew that the earth lay hidden in the waters; he, therefore, assuming the form of a boar, [**] raised it upon his tusks.

In answer to a request for a full account of the creation of gods and other beings, the following passages [*+] occur:--"Created beings, although they are destroyed (in their original forms) at the periods of dissolution, yet, being affected by the good or evil acts of former existence, are never exempted from their consequences; and when Brahma creates the world anew, they are the progeny of his will, in the fourfold condition of gods, men, animals, and inanimate things. Brahma then, being desirous of creating the four orders of beings--termed gods, demons, progenitors, and men--collected his mind into itself.

"Whilst thus concentrated, the quality of darkness

[p. 350]

pervaded his body, and thence the demons (the asuras) were first born, issuing from his thigh. Brahma then abandoned that form which was composed of the rudiment of darkness, and which, being deserted by him, became night. Continuing to create, but assuming a different shape, he experienced pleasure, and thence from his mouth proceeded the gods. The form abandoned by him became day, in which the good quality predominates; and hence by day the gods are most powerful, and by night the demons. He next adopted another person (form) in which the rudiment of good men also prevailed; and thinking of himself as the father of the world, the progenitors (or Pitris) were born from his side. The body, when he abandoned it, became the Sandhya, or evening twilight. Brahma then assumed another person, pervaded by the quality of foulness; and from this, men in whom foulness (or passion) predominates, were produced. Quickly abandoning that body, it became the dawn. At the appearance of this light of day men feel most vigour; whilst the progenitors are most powerful in the evening.

"Next from Brahma, in a form composed of the quality of foulness, was produced hunger, of whom anger was born; and the god put forth in darkness beings emaciated with hunger, of hideous aspect and with long beards. These beings hastened to the deity. Such of them as exclaimed, 'Oh, preserve us,' were thence called Rakshasas (from Raksha, to preserve); others who cried out, 'Let us eat,' were denominated from that expression Yakshas (from Yaksha, to eat). Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of Brahma were shrivelled up, and first falling from his head were again renewed upon it; from their falling they became serpents, called Sarpa (Srip, to creep), from their creeping, and Ahi

[p. 351]

[paragraph continues] (from Ha, to abandon), because they had deserted the head. The creator of the world, being incensed, then created fierce beings, who were denominated goblins, bhutas, malignant fiends, and eaters of flesh. The Gandharvas (choristers) were next born: imbibing melody, drinking of the goddess of speech, they were born, and hence their appellation.

"The divine Brahma, influenced by their material energies, having created these beings, made others of his own will. Birds he formed from his vital vigour; sheep from his heart; goats from his mouth; kine from his belly and sides; and horses, elephants, sarabhas, gayals, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and other animals from his feet: whilst from the hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and fruits." In this manner all things are said to have sprung from Brahma; they were with him in the egg: hence this is an account of evolution, rather than of creation. The creation of man, as divided into four castes, is described in this Purana, in similar terms to those in Manu.

Following this is the account of the mind-born sons of Brahma--Bhrigu, Daksha, and others--nine in number, who became the progenitors of men. [**] Next "Brahma created himself as Manu Swayambhu, born of, and identical with, his original self, for the protection of created beings: and the female portion of himself he constituted Satarupa, whom austerity purified from the sin (forbidden nuptials), and whom the divine Manu Swayambhu took to wife." After this follows a long account of the descendants of these mind-born sons; and it is then shown how by the production of the amrita at the churning of the ocean the gods obtained immortality, and the work of creation for this age was complete.

[p. 352]

With some variations this is the story of the creation as told in the Puranas. In some, greater prominence is given to parts that are only lightly touched upon in this account; whilst other incidents are more fully described here than in the other Puranas.

Footnotes

^342:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 356.

^344:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 9.

^344:+ Ibid., i. 17.

^345:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 23.

^345:+ Ibid., i. 24.

^346:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 26.

^346:+ "Vishnu Purana," p. 31.

^346:++ Ibid., p. 39.

^347:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 9.

^348:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 13.

^348:+ Page 18.

^349:* See ante, <page 144>.

^349:+ "Vishnu Purana," p. 39.

^351:* See part iii. chap. i.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 353]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

THE PURANIC DIVISIONS OF TIME.

THE three main divisions of time employed in the Hindu Scriptures are YUGAS, MANVANTARAS, and KALPAS. [**] These will now be described.

There are four Yugas, which together extend to 12,000 divine years. Their respective duration is as follows:--

          The Krita Yuga

       = 4,800

       divine years.

     
      The Treta Yuga

       = 3,600

       " "

     
      The Dvapara Yuga

       = 2,400

       " "

     
      The Kali Yuga

       = 1,200

       " "

     
   "One year of mortals is equal to one day of the gods." As 360 is taken as the number of days in the year--

          The Krita Yuga

       = 4,800 x 360

       =

       1,728,000

       years of mortals.

     
      The Treta, Yuga

       = 3,600 x 360

       =

       1,296,000

       " "

     
      The Dvapara Yuga

       = 2,400 x 360

       =

       864,000

       " "

     
      The Kali Yuga

       = 1,200 x 360

       =

       432,000

       " "

     
   One Mahayuga, or Great Age, including the four lesser Yugas, therefore, being 12,000 divine years = 4,320,000 years of mortals. "A thousand such Mahayugas are a

[p. 354]

day of Brahma," and his nights are of equal duration; a Kalpa, therefore, or Day, of Brahma extends over 4,320,000,000 ordinary years. "Within each Kalpa 14 Manus reign; a Manvantara, or period of a Manu, therefore, is consequently one-fourteenth part of a Kalpa, or day of Brahma.

"In the present Kalpa, six Manus, of whom Swyambhuva was the first, have already passed away; the present being Vaivasata. In each Manvantara (period of a Manu), seven Rishis, certain deities, an Indra and a Manu, and the kings, his sons, are created and perish. A thousand systems of the four Yugas occur coincidentally with these fourteen Manvantaras, and consequently about 71 systems of four Yugas elapse during each Manvantara, and measure the lives of the Manus and the deities of the period. At the close of this day of Brahma, a collapse of the universe takes place, which lasts through a night of Brahma, equal in duration to his day, during which period the worlds are converted into one great ocean, when the lotus-born god (Brahma), expanded by his deglutition of the universe, and contemplated by the Yogis and gods in Janaloka, sleeps on the serpent Sesha. At the end of that night he awakes and creates anew.

"A year of Brahma is composed of the proper number of such days and nights, and a hundred of such years constitute his whole life. The period of his life is called Para, and the half of it Pararddha, or the half of a Para. One Pararddha, or half of Brahma's existence, has now expired, terminating with the great Kalpa called the Padma Kalpa. The now existing Kalpa, or day of Brahma, called Varaha (or that of the boar), is the first of the second Pararddha of Brahma's existence. The dissolution which occurs at the end of each Kalpa,

[p. 355]

or day of Brahma, is called naimittika, incidental, occasional, or contingent." [**]

The dissolution of existing beings is of three kinds: "incidental, elemental, and absolute." [*+] The first is naimittika, occasional, incidental, or Brahmya, as occasioned by the intervals of Brahma's days; the destruction of creatures, though not of the substance of the world, occurring during the night. The second is the general resolution of the elements into their primitive source, or Prakriti, the Prakritika destruction, and occurs at the end of Brahma's life. The third, the absolute, or final, Alyantika, is individual annihilation, Moksha, exemption for ever from future existence.

The process of destruction is described as follows:--

"At the end of a thousand periods of four ages the earth is for the most part exhausted. A total death then ensues, which lasts a hundred years, and in consequence of the failure of food all beings become languid and exanimate, and at last entirely perish. The eternal Vishnu then assumes the character of Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to reunite all his creatures with himself. He enters into the seven rays of the sun, drinks up all the waters of the globe, and causes all moisture whatever, in living bodies or in the soil, to evaporate, thus drying up the whole earth. The seas, the rivers, the mountain-torrents, and springs are all exhaled, and so are all the waters of Patala, the regions .below the earth.

"Thus fed, through his intervention, with abundant moisture, the seven solar rays dilate to seven suns, whose radiance glows above, below, and on every side, and sets the three worlds and Patala on fire. The three worlds, consumed by these suns, become rugged and deformed

[p. 356]

throughout the whole extent of their mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare of verdure and destitute of moisture, alone remains, resembling in appearance the back of a tortoise. The destroyer of all things, Hari, in the form of Rudra, who is the flame of time, becomes the scorching breath of the serpent Sesha, and thereby reduces Patala to ashes. The great fire, when it has burnt all the divisions of Patala, proceeds to the earth and consumes it also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then spreads to the region of the atmosphere and the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin. The three spheres show like a frying-pan amidst the surrounding flames, that prey upon all movable or stationary things. The inhabitants of the two upper spheres, having discharged their functions, and being annoyed by the heat, remove to the sphere above, or Maharloka. When that becomes heated, its tenants, who after the full period of their stay, are desirous of ascending to higher regions, depart for the Janaloka." [**]

The "Vayu Purana" [*+] gives more explicit teaching on this subject.

"Those sainted mortals who have diligently worshipped Vishnu and are distinguished for piety, abide at the time of dissolution in Maharloka, with the Pitris, the Manus, the seven Rishis, the various orders of celestial spirits and the gods. These, when the heat of the flames that destroy the world reaches to Maharloka, repair to Janaloka in their subtle forms, destined to become re-embodied in similar capacities as their former, when the world is renewed, at the beginning of the succeeding Kalpa. This continues throughout the life of Brahma; at the expiration of his life all are destroyed; but those who have then attained a residence in the Brahmaloka,

[p. 357]

by having identified themselves in spirit with the Supreme, are finally resolved into the sole existing Brahma."

The "Vishnu Purana" [**] continues as follows: "Janarddana, in the person of Rudra, having consumed the whole world, breathes forth heavy clouds. Mighty in size, and loud in thunder, they fill all space. Showering down torrents of water, these clouds quench the dreadful fires which involve the three worlds, and then they rain uninterruptedly for a hundred years and deluge the whole world. Pouring down in drops as large as dice, these rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle region and inundate heaven. The world is now enveloped in darkness, and all things, animate and inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue to pour down their waters for more than a hundred years."

The four Yugas mentioned above--viz. the Krita, Treta, Dvapara, and Kali--have characteristic qualities. The Krita is the golden, and Kali the iron age. The Mahabharata [*+] gives these characteristics very distinctly. Hanuman, the monkey-god, is the speaker, describing the four ages to Bhimasena, one of the Pandus.

"The Krita is that age in which righteousness is eternal. In the time of that most excellent of Yugas (everything) had been done (Krita), and nothing (remained) to be done. Duties did not then languish, nor did the people decline. Afterwards through (the influence of) time, this Yuga fell into a state of inferiority. In that age there were neither gods, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshasas, Rakshasas, nor Pannagas; no buying and selling went on, no efforts were made by men; the fruit (of the earth was obtained) by their mere wish; righteousness and abandonment of the world (prevailed).

[p. 358]

[paragraph continues] No disease or decline of the organs of sense arose through the influence of age; there was no malice, weeping, pride, or deceit; no contention, no hatred, cruelty, fear, affliction, jealousy, or envy. Hence the Supreme Brahma was the transcendent resort of these Yogins. Then Narayana, the soul of all beings, was white. In that age were born creatures devoted to their duties. They were alike in the object of their trust, in observance, and in their knowledge. At that period the castes, alike in their functions, fulfilled their duties, were unceasingly devoted to one deity, and used one formula (mantra), one rule, and one rite. They had but one Veda.

"Understand now the Treta, in which sacrifice commenced, righteousness decreased by a fourth, Vishnu became red; and men adhered to truth, and were devoted to a righteousness dependent on ceremonies. Then sacrifices prevailed, with holy arts and a variety of rites. In the Treta men acted with an object in view, seeking after reward for their rites and their gifts, and no longer disposed to austerities, and to liberality from (a simple feeling of) duty. In this age, however, they were devoted to their own duties and to religious ceremonies.

"In the Dvapara age righteousness was diminished by two quarters, Vishnu became yellow, and the Veda fourfold. Some studied four Vedas, some three, others two, and some none at all. The scriptures being thus divided, ceremonies were celebrated in a great variety of ways; and the people, being: occupied with austerity and the bestowal of gifts, became full of passion (rajasi). Owing to ignorance of the one Veda, Vedas were multiplied. And now from the decline of goodness (Sattva), few only adhered to truth. When men had fallen away from goodness, many diseases, desires, and calamities, caused by destiny, assailed them, by which they were

[p. 359]

severely afflicted, and driven to, practise austerities. Others, desiring enjoyments and heavenly bliss, offered sacrifices. Thus, when they had reached the Dvapara, men declined through unrighteousness.

"In the Kali, righteousness remained to the extent of one-fourth only. Arrived in that age of darkness, Vishnu became black; practices enjoined by the Vedas, works of righteousness, and rites of sacrifices ceased. Calamities, diseases, fatigue, faults, such as anger, etc., distresses, anxiety, hunger, fear, prevailed. As the ages revolve, righteousness again declines; when this takes place, the people also decline. When they decay, the impulses which actuate them also decay. The practices generated by this declension of the Yugas frustrate men's aims. Such is the Kali Yuga, which has existed for a short time. Those who are long-lived act in conformity with the character of the age." In the "Bhishmaparvan" there is a paragraph in which it is said that "Four thousand years are specified as the duration of life in the Krita Yuga, three thousand in the Treta, and two thousand form the period at present established on earth in the Dvapara. There is no fixed measure in the Tishya (Kali)." [**]

It should be noticed that the immense duration of the ages as quoted above from the "Vishnu Purana" is peculiar to the Puranas. In the text of the Mahabharata "no mention is made of the years comprising the different Yugas being divine years," [*+] though the earlier books certainly favour far more extravagant notions of chronology than those which Western nations accept.

It is interesting to notice that in the account of the Krita Yuga, or Age of Righteousness, it is said that the castes were alike in their functions. This must evidently

[p. 360]

mean that the modern caste distinctions did not then exist, and that all were devoted to the worship of one deity with one rule and one rite, evidently pointing to the time when their forefathers were monotheists. And in the judgment of the writer this happy condition was in the age of which the prevailing characteristic was righteousness.

Footnotes

^353:* See "Vishnu Purana," book i. chap. iii., and book vi. chap. i.

^355:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 45.

^355:+ "Vishnu Purana," p. 630, note.

^356:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 631.

^356:+ Ibid., p. 632, note.

^357:* Page 633.

^357:+ Muir, O. S. T., i. 144.

^359:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 148.

^359:+ Ibid., i. 148.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 361]

  

PART III.

  

THE INFERIOR DEITIES.

[p. 362]

Click to enlarge
THE TULSI.

[p. 363]

  

THE INFERIOR DEITIES.

  

CHAPTER I.

  

THE DIVINE RISHIS.

  

1. BHRIGU.

"WHEN Brahma wished to populate the world, he created mind-born sons, like himself; viz. Bhrigu, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Angiras, Marichi, Daksha, Atri, and Vasishtha: these are the nine Brahmas or Brahmarishis celebrated in the Puranas." [**] Originally seven only were mentioned in the Mahabharata; but the lists found in different parts of that Epic do not agree with each other. These seven are supposed to be visible in the Great Bear, as their wives shine in the Pleiades. These Brahmarishis are also called Prajapatis (lords of offspring), Brahmaputras (sons of Brahma), and Brahmanas. The "Vishnu Purana" teaches that Bhrigu married his niece Khyati, a daughter of Daksha, who bore to him Sri or Lakshmi; but as it was the common belief that she was one of the products of the churning of the ocean, the reciter of the Purana is asked to explain this discrepancy. The substance of his answer was, that

[p. 364]

[paragraph continues] "of gods, animals, and man, Hari is all that is called male, Lakshmi is all that is termed female."

In his account of the creation, Manu mentions ten Maharishis as having been created by himself, one of whom is Bhrigu, who in his turn created seven other Manus, from whom all that is has sprung. [**] The Mahabharata says: "Six great Rishis are known as the mind-born sons of Brahma;" but Bhrigu is not named amongst them. In another passage it describes him as a son of Varuna, but Brahma is there identified with Varuna. At a sacrifice at which Brahma officiated, a portion of Varuna was thrown into the sacrificial fire, whence there arose three men endowed with bodies. Bhrigu sprang first from bhrik (the blazing of the fire), Angiras from the cinders, and Kavi from a heap of ashes. The god called Mahadeva, Varuna, and Pavana, claimed these three as his own. Agni and Brahma also claimed them. [*+] It was agreed that Bhrigu was Varuna's son. Agni received Angiras, and Brahma took Kavi. In another part of that poem it is said, "We have heard that the great and venerable Rishi Bhrigu was produced by Brahma from fire at the sacrifice of Varuna." [*++] The "Bhagavata Purana" says that "he sprang from the skin of the Creator;" and the Mahabharata, in another verse, declares that "the venerable Bhrigu, having split Brahma's heart, issued forth."

At the great sacrifice of Daksha, to which Siva was not invited, Bhrigu officiated as priest; and because he reviled that god and his followers, and justified Daksha in slighting him, he suffered the loss of his beard.

The Mahabharata gives a legend of Bhrigu cursing Indra. The Indra of that age, named Nahusha, being

[p. 365]

filled with pride, lost the benefit of his previous good works, and in his presumption caused the Rishis to carry him about. When it came to Agastya's turn to carry him, Bhrigu said to him, "Why do we submit to the insults of this wicked king of the gods?" Agastya replied that none of the Rishis had cursed Nahusha, because he had received as a boon the power to subject to his service any on whom he fixed his eye; but that at the same time he was quite ready to act upon any suggestion Bhrigu might make. Bhrigu then told him that he had been sent by Brahma to take vengeance on Nahusha, who would that very day attach Agastya to his car and kick him; but incensed at this insult, he (Bhrigu) would by a curse condemn the oppressor to become a serpent.

The mighty Nahusha summoned Agastya from the banks of the Sarasvati to carry him. The glorious Bhrigu then said to Maitravarum (Agastya), "Close thy eyes, whilst I enter into the knot of thy hair!" With the view of overthrowing the king, Bhrigu hid himself in the hair of Agastya, who then stood motionless as a stock. Nahusha came to Agastya, when the sage desired to be attached to the vehicle, and agreed to carry the king of the gods wherever he pleased. Nahusha attached him, but Bhrigu did not venture to look at him, knowing his power of subduing by a glance. Agastya kept his temper; even when urged by a goad, he remained unmoved. The king at last kicked him; then Bhrigu, invisible in the hair of Agastya, became enraged, and violently cursed him: "Since, fool, thou hast in thine anger smitten the great Muni on the head with thy foot, therefore become a serpent, and fall swiftly to the earth." [**] Thus cursed, Nahusha fell to

[p. 366]

the earth; had the sage been seen by Indra, he would have been unable to punish the oppressor.

Bhrigu on another occasion cursed Agni. The Mahabharata says:--A woman named Puloma was betrothed to a demon; Bhrigu, seeing her beauty, married her according to Vedic rites, and carried her off secretly. The demon, by the aid of Agni, discovered the bride's hiding-place, and took her away to his home. For rendering the demon this assistance, Bhrigu, cursing Agni, said, "From this day, you shall eat everything." Agni asked Bhrigu why he had cursed him, seeing that by speaking the truth he had simply done his duty; and reminded him that "when a person is asked a question, and intentionally speaks what is false, he, with seven preceding and seven succeeding generations, is cast into hell; and that he who withholds information is equally guilty." He goes on to say, "I, too, can curse, but respecting Brahmans restrain my anger. I am really the mouth of the gods and ancestors. When ghi is offered to them, they partake of it through me as their mouth; how then can I be said to eat everything?" Bhrigu hearing this consented to modify his curse, by saying that, "as the Sun by his light and heat purifies all nature, so Agni should purify all that passed through him."

Bhrigu is said to have performed a most wonderful deed; the transforming of a Kshattriya king into a Brahman. The Mahabharata [**] gives the following account of this unique work:--"Divodasa, King of Kasi (Benares), was attacked by the sons of Vitahavya, and all his family slain in battle. The afflicted monarch therefore resorted to the sage Bharadvaja, who performed for him a sacrifice, in consequence of which a son named

[p. 367]

[paragraph continues] Pratardana was born to him. Pratardana, becoming an accomplished warrior, was sent by his father to take vengeance on the Vitahavyas. Vitahavya had now to fly to another sage, Bhrigu, who promised his protection. The avenger Pratardana, however, followed, and demanded that the refugee should be given up. Bhrigu, the most eminent of religious men, filled with compassion, said, 'There is no Kshattriya here; all these are Brahmans.' Hearing this true assertion of Bhrigu, Pratardana was glad, and, gently touching the sage's feet, rejoined, 'Even thus, O glorious saint, I have gained my object, for I have compelled this king to relinquish his caste.' This Vitahavya, by the mere word of Bhrigu, became a Brahman Rishi, and an utterer of the Vedas."

The names of nineteen Bhrigus are given in the "Matsya Purana," who are said to be composers of hymns; Bhrigu himself being one of the narrators of the Mahabharata. Professor Roth [**] speaks of the Bhrigus as a class of mythological beings, who belonged to the aerial or middle class of gods. They were the discoverers of fire, and then brought it to men. He adds that the race has a connection with history, as one of the chief Brahmanical families bears the name, and allusions are made to the fact in the hymns of the Rig-Veda.

In the Ramayana there are not many references to Bhrigu; he is there called a Maharishi; and Rama is induced to slay a female demon by the remembrance that Vishnu slew Brigu's wife when she aspired to Indra's throne. He is the saint whom the childless wives of Sagar worshipped in order to obtain a son; and he gave to one lady one, to the other sixty thousand. Parasurama was one of his most illustrious descendants.

[p. 368]

  

2. PULASTYA.

Pulastya, another of Brahma's mind-born sons, is reverenced because it was through him that the Puranas were made known to men. The reason of his being regarded as the Revealer of Scripture is taught in the "Vishnu Purana," [**] where the narrator Parasara, in answer to a question of his disciple Maitreya, says: "You recall to my mind what was of old narrated by my father's father, Vasishtha. I had heard that my father had been devoured by a Rakshas, employed by Visvamitra: violent anger seized me, and I commenced a sacrifice for the destruction of the Rakshasas; hundreds of them were reduced to ashes by the rite, when, as they were about to be entirely extirpated, my grandfather Vasishtha thus spake to me: 'Enough, my child; let thy wrath be appeased; the Rakshasas are not culpable: thy father's death was the work of destiny.'"

Parasara ceased from his sacrifice, and his grandfather was pleased; then Pulastya coming said to him: "Since, in the violence of animosity, you have listened to the words of your progenitor, and exercised clemency, you shall become learned in every science. Since you have forborne, even though incensed, to destroy my posterity, I will bestow on you another boon; you shall become the author of a summary of the Puranas, shall know the true nature of the deities, and your understanding through my favour shall be perfect and free from doubts." Parasara relates the Purana as told him formerly "by Vasishtha and the wise Pulastya."

Pulastya married Prithi, a daughter of Daksha, by whom he had a son, the sage Agastya; the Bhagavata

[p. 369]

calls his wife Havisbhu, whose sons were Agastya and Visravas, the father of Kuvera, Ravana, and other Rakshasas.

The reason of Parasara's attack upon the Rakshasas is given in a legend in the Mahabharata. King Kalmashapada, meeting with Sakti (Parasara's father) in a narrow path in a forest, wished him to get out of his way. This the sage refused to do; whereupon the king thrashed him with his whip; in return Sakti cursed him, and he became a cannibal Rakshas. When in this form, the king killed and ate Sakti and all the other sons of Vasishtha. Sakti's wife being pregnant at the time of his death, Parasara was born soon after and brought up with his grandfather. When he grew up, he commenced the slaughter of the Rakshasas, but was restrained by Vasishtha, Pulastya, and others.

  

3. PULAHA.

This Rishi does not figure largely in Hindu mythology. He married a daughter of Daksha named Kshama (Patience), by whom he had three sons.

  

4. KRATU.

Kratu is no more widely known than Pulaha. He married Sannati (Humility), another daughter of Daksha, by whom he had "sixty thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy sages no bigger than the joint of the thumb; chaste, pious, and resplendent as the rays of the sun." [**]

  

5. ANGIRAS.

Angiras is famed as the author of several hymns of Rig-Veda. He first married Smriti (Memory), by

[p. 370]

whom he had four daughters, and afterwards he married Swaddha (Oblation) and Sati, also Daksha's daughters. His so-called daughters, the Pratyangirasa Bichas, are thirty-five verses addressed to presiding divinities. There is some ambiguity in the use of his name; it comes from the same root as Agni, of which deity it is used as an epithet; it is also used of Agni's father, and is the name of a son of Agneya, Agni's daughter. Angiras is supposed to have been associated with Bhrigu in introducing fire-worship into India.

  

6. MARICHI.

Marichi is better known through his descendants than from any work of his own, his most illustrious child being Kasyapa, as a son of whom Vishnu came, in his incarnation as a dwarf. Amongst Kasyapa's thirteen wives were Diti and Aditi, who by him became the mothers of gods. "There were twelve celebrated deities in a former age called Tushitas, who, on the approach of the present period, or during the reign of the last Manu Chakshusa, said amongst themselves, 'Come, let us quickly enter into the womb of Aditi, that we may be born in the next Manvantara, for thereby we shall again enjoy the rank of gods. Accordingly they were born the sons of Kasyapa, the son of Marichi by Aditi; thence named the twelve Adityas, whose names were Vishnu, Sakra, Aryaman, Dhuti, Tvastri, Pushan, Vivasvat, Savitri, Mitra, Varuna, Ansa, and Bhaga." [**]

An explanation of the fact that gods undergo successive births is found in the "Vayu Purana." In the beginning of the Kalpa, twelve gods, named Jayas, were created by Brahma as his deputies and assistants in

[p. 371]

creation. They, lost in meditation, neglected his commands, on which he declared that they should be reborn in each Manvantara until the seventh. [**] The writer of the "Vishnu Purana" tries to explain this fact: "These classes of divinities are born again at the end of a thousand ages according to their own pleasure, and their appearance and disappearance are spoken of as a birth and death; but they exist age after age in the same manner as the sun sets and rises again."

By his wife Diti, Kasyapa had two sons, Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksha, whom Vishnu, here said to be the son of her sister Aditi; became incarnate to destroy; these mortal enemies were therefore cousins.

  

7. ATRI.

Atri was the author of many Vedic hymns, especially those "praising Agni, Indra, the Asvins, and the Viswadevas." He married Anasuya, who bore him Durvasas, the sage who was slighted by Indra. Soma, the moon, is said to proceed from the eyes of his father Atri.

When this sage and his wife were old, they received a visit at their hermitage from Rama, Sita, and Lakshman, who were then wandering from place to place--

"He came to Atri's pure retreat,
  Paid reverence to his holy feet,
  And from the saint such welcome won
  As a fond father gives his son." [*+]

Atri, in introducing his wife to his illustrious guests, thus describes her--

"Ten thousand years this votaress, bent
  On sternest rites of penance, spent;

[p. 372]

[paragraph continues]  She, when the clouds withheld their rain,
  And drought ten years consumed the plain,
  Caused grateful roots and fruits to grow
  And ordered Ganga here to flow;
  So from their cares the saints she freed,
  Nor let these checks their rites impede.
  She wrought in heaven's behalf, and made
  Ten nights of one, the gods to aid." [**]

Anasuya then joins with her husband in welcoming the exiles to their hermitage, and, delighted with the princess, tells her to ask a boon. As, however, Sita appeared to want nothing particular, the aged saint said--

                  "My gift to-day
  Thy sweet contentment shall repay:
  Accept this precious robe to wear,
  Of heavenly fabric, rich and rare;
  These gems thy limbs to ornament,
  This precious balsam sweet of scent.
  O Maithil dame! this gift of mine
  Shall make thy limbs with beauty shine,
  And, breathing o'er thy frame, dispense
  Its pure and lasting influence.
  This balsam, on thy fair limbs spread,
  New radiance on thy lord shall shed,
  As Lakshmi's beauty lends a grace
  To Vishnu's own celestial face." [*+]

  

8. DAKSHA.

Daksha, the father of Uma, the consort of Siva, has attained pre-eminence amongst his brethren largely through the greatness of his son-in-law. He, too, is a mind-born son of Brahma; or, according to other accounts, sprang from the thumb of his father. He is

[p. 373]

one of the chief Prajapatis. Before speaking of Daksha, as the term Prajapati is of frequent occurrence, it will not be out of place here to describe the position of these beings.

The term Prajapati means a lord of creatures; the Prajapatis, therefore, are regarded as the progenitors of mankind. The word is used in much the same manner

Click to enlarge
DAKSHA.

as Patriarch in the Christian Scriptures. Sometimes Brahma alone is intended by the term Prajapati; he is the "lord of creatures;" sometimes it is employed for the first-formed men from whom the human race sprang. The word was originally employed as an epithet of Savitri and Soma, as well as of Hiranyagarbha, or Brahma. It afterwards, however, came to denote a separate deity, who appears in three places in the

[p. 374]

[paragraph continues] Rig-Veda. Prajapati is sometimes identified with the universe, and described (in the same way as Brahma, or entity, or non-entity in other places) as having alone existed in the beginning, as the source out of which creation was evolved: "e.g. Prajapati was this universe; Vach was a second to him. She became pregnant, she departed from him, she produced these creatures. She again entered into Prajapati." [**] At the same time he is "sometimes described as a secondary or subordinate deity, and treated as one of thirty-three deities."

By the time Manu wrote, creation had come to be regarded as the special work of Brahma, hence the term Prajapati is applied to him in the Dharmasastra, and in the later writings it is given to those who sprang from him, and carried on his work of populating the world.

The Mahabharata [*+] gives two distinct accounts of the origin of Daksha:--"Daksha, the glorious Rishi, tranquil in spirit, and great in austere fervour, sprang from the right thumb of Brahma. From the left thumb sprang the great Muni's wife, by whom he begot fifty daughters." "Born with all splendour, like that of the great Rishis, the ten sons of Prachetas (another Prajapati) are reputed to have been virtuous and holy, and by them the glorious beings (trees, plants, etc.), were formerly burnt up by fire springing from their mouth. From them was born Daksha Prachetasa; and from Daksha, the parent of the world, (were produced) these creatures. Cohabiting with Virini, the Muni Daksha begat a thousand sons like himself, famous for their religious observances." In the Harivansa, Vishnu is identified with Daksha. At the end of a thousand Yugas the Brahmans of a previous age, "perfect in knowledge and contemplation, became involved in the

[p. 375]

dissolution of the world. Then. Vishnu, sprung from Brahma, removed beyond the sphere of sense, absorbed in contemplation, became the Prajapati Daksha, and formed numerous creatures." [**]

Fuller particulars of Daksha's origin we find in the "Vishnu Purana." [*+] "From Brahma, continuing to meditate, were born mind-engendered progeny, with forms and faculties derived from his corporeal nature, embodied spirits produced from the person of that all-wise deity. But as they did not multiply themselves, Brahma created other mind-born sons like himself, viz. Bhrigu, etc. Considerable variety prevails in this list of Prajapatis, but the variations are of the nature of additions made to an apparently original enumeration of but seven, whose names generally occur. The names mentioned in all the Puranas make up altogether seventeen. The simple statement that the first Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of Brahma has not contented the depraved taste of the mystics, and in some of the Puranas, as the Bhagavata, Vayu and Linga, they are said to be derived from the body of their progenitor; Bhrigu from his skin, Marichi from his mind, Atri from his eyes, Angiras from his mouth, Pulastya from his ear, Pulaha from his navel, Kratu from his hand, Vasishtha from his breath, Daksha from his thumb, and Narada from his lips. They do not exactly agree, however, in the [description of the places] whence these beings proceed." [*++]

The "Vishnu Purana" [* section] also speaks of Daksha as a son of the Prachetasas, and gets over the difficulty by the statement that he was born first as a son of Brahma, and afterwards as the son of the Prachetasas. These

[p. 376]

progenitors of Daksha were the sons of a mighty patriarch named Prachinaverhis, so called "from his placing upon the earth the sacred grass pointing to the East." At the termination of a season of rigid penance, he married Savarna, the daughter of the ocean, who had by him ten sons, styled Prachetasas, who were skilled in military science; "they all observed the same duties, practised religious austerities, and remained immersed in the bed of the sea for ten thousand years." The reason for this prolonged penance was the fact that their father had been enjoined by Brahma to increase the human family. In harmony with his promise of obedience, he told his sons that the performance of severe penance was the best way of fulfilling Brahma's order; "for whoever worships Vishnu, the bestower of good, attains undoubtedly the object of his desires: there is no other mode."

As the sons were immersed in the ocean, intent on the worship of Vishnu, that deity appeared to them, and, hearing their request, said, "Receive the boon you have desired; for I, the giver of good, am content with you." Whilst the Prachetasas were absorbed in their devotions, "the trees grew and overshadowed the unprotected earth, the people perished, the winds could not blow, the sky was shut out from view by the boughs, and mankind unable to labour for ten thousand years. When the sages saw this, wind (which tore up the trees) and flames (which then consumed them) issued from their mouths, and the forests were soon cleared away. Soma, the sovereign of the vegetable world, seeing nearly all the trees destroyed, went to the patriarchs and said, Restrain your indignation, and listen to me. I will make an alliance between you and the trees. Prescient of futurity, I have nourished this maiden, the daughter

[p. 377]

of the woods. She is called Marisha, and, as your bride, she shall be the multiplier of the race of Druva. From a portion of your and my lustre the patriarch Daksha shall be born, who, endowed with a part of me and composed of your vigour, shall be resplendent as fire, and shall multiply the human race.'"

Soma then informs the brothers respecting Marisha's origin. "There was formerly a sage named Kandu, eminent in wisdom and austerity, on the banks of the Gomati. Indra sent the nymph Pramlocha to divert the sage from his devotions: they lived together for 150 years, during which time the Muni was given up to pleasure. The nymph at the close of this period asked leave to depart, but the Muni entreated her to continue with him. And though at the end of several centuries she preferred the same request, again and again she was asked to remain.

"On one occasion, as the sage was going forth from their cottage in a great hurry, the nymph asked where he was going. 'The day,' he replied, 'is drawing fast to a close. I must perform the Sandhya worship, or a duty will be neglected.' The nymph smiled mirthfully as she rejoined, 'Why do you talk, grave sir, of this day drawing to a close; your day is a day of many years, a day that must be a marvel to all: explain what this means.' The Muni said, 'Fair maiden, you came to the river-side at dawn. I beheld you then, and you entered the hermitage. It is now the revolution of evening, and the day is gone. What is the meaning of this laughter? Tell me the truth.' Pramlocha answered, 'You say rightly, venerable Brahman, that I carne hither at morning dawn, but several hundred years have passed since the time of my arrival. This is the truth.'" She informed him that they had lived

[p. 378]

together nine hundred and seven years, six months, and three days. The Muni sees now that the nymph must have been sent by Indra purposely to interrupt his devotions, and deprive him of the divine knowledge he had desired. And though very angry with her at first, he bids her depart in peace, as he says, "The sin is wholly mine."

"Thus addressed by the Muni, Pramlocha stood trembling, whilst big drops of perspiration started from every pore, till he angrily cried to her, 'Begone, begone!' She then, reproached by him, went forth from his dwelling, and, passing through the air, wiped the perspiration from her person with the leaves of the trees. The nymph went from tree to tree, and as with dusky shoots that crowned their summits she dried her limbs, which were covered with moisture, the child she had conceived by the Rishi came forth from the pores of her skin in drops of perspiration. The trees received the living dews, and the winds collected them into one mass. 'This,' said Soma, 'I matured by my rays, and gradually it increased in size, till the exhalation that had rested on the tree-tops became the lovely girl named Marisha. The trees will give her to you, Prachetasas; let your indignation be appeased. She is the progeny of Kandu, the child of Pramlocha, the nursling of the trees, the daughter of the wind and moon.'"

Soma then informs the Prachetasas that Marisha, in her previous birth, was the widow of a prince, but left childless. She therefore earnestly worshipped Vishnu, who told her to desire some boon. She replied, "I pray thee that in succeeding births I may have honourable husbands, and a son equal to a patriarch among men, . . . . and may I be born out of the ordinary course." Vishnu promised her: "In another life you

[p. 379]

shall have ten husbands of mighty prowess, and renowned for glorious acts; and you shall have a son magnanimous and valiant, distinguished by the rank of a patriarch, from whom the various races of men shall multiply, and by whose posterity the universe shall be filled. You, virtuous lady, shall be of marvellous birth, and delighting the hearts of men." Thus having spoken, the deity disappeared, and Soma informs his hearers that it was this princess who was born as Marisha.

"Soma having concluded, the Prachetasas took Marisha, as he had enjoined them, righteously to wife,  their indignation against the trees, and upon her they begot the eminent patriarch Daksha, who had (in a former life) been born as the son of Brahma. This great sage, for the furtherance of creation and the increase of mankind, created progeny. Obeying the command of Brahma, he made movable and immovable things, the bipeds and quadrupeds, and subsequently by his will gave birth to females, ten of whom he bestowed on Dharma, thirteen on Kasyapa, and twenty-seven, who regulate the course of time, on Soma (the moon). Of these the gods, the Titans, the snake gods, cattle and birds, the singers and dancers of the courts of heaven, the spirits of evil and other beings, were born. From that period forward living creatures were engendered in an ordinary manner; before the time of Daksha, they were variously propagated by the will, by sight, by touch, and by the influence of religious austerities by devout sages and holy saints."

Daksha's first attempts at populating the world were unsuccessful. A thousand sons were born to him by Asikni, but these were induced by Narada not to propagate offspring. A thousand other sons by the same wife were

[p. 380]

born, who also were advised by Narada not to be troubled with children. The Prajapati, incensed, cursed Narada, and proceeded to create sixty daughters by Asikni, whom he gave to various husbands, by whom they had children. At length, when a time of peace and prosperity prevailed on the earth, and the gods had their proper places assigned to them, to Daksha was given the position as chief of the Prajapatis--progenitors of mankind.

In the account of Siva it was noticed that as a punishment for the insults Daksha had offered to his illustrious son-in-law, the great god changed his head for that of a goat; a perpetual sign of his ignorance and stupidity.

  

9. VASISHTHA.

Vasishtha, together with Pulastya, is said to have narrated the "Vishnu Purana," and he, too, is believed to have been the writer of many of the Vedic hymns. It was he who allayed the anger of Parasara when that sage was about to extirpate the Rakshas race, because one of their kings had slain his father. He is said to have been the Vyasa, or arranger of the Vedas, in the Dvapara Age; this work of arranging having a different agent in each age.

Vasishtha served as the family priest of several kings. One of these, named Saudasa, when out hunting, seeing a couple of tigers, shot one of them with an arrow. It happened that these tigers were really Rakshasas, for, as the one shot by Saudasa was dying, it assumed a fiendish shape; the other, threatening vengeance, disappeared. Not long after this, as the king was engaged in a sacrifice, Vasishtha being out of the room, the Rakshas who escaped, assuming the form of Vasishtha,

[p. 381]

came to the king and said, "Now that the sacrifice is ended, give me something to eat.; let it be cooked, and I will presently return." The Rakshas next transformed himself into the cook, and, having prepared a dish of human flesh, brought it to the king. When the real Muni entered, the king offered him the dish; but he discovered, by the force of meditation, that it was human flesh that was presented to him. Indignant at the insult, cursing the king, he said, "Your appetite shall be excited by similar food to that now offered me." The king was astonished at this outburst of anger, and Vasishtha, seeing this, by further meditation, discovered the whole trick; but as he could not entirely recall the effects of his curse, he modified it so that it was to work for twelve years only. [**] It was this same king who was cursed by Vasishtha's son Sakti to become a Rakshas, and who, in that state, devoured the sage that cursed him.

Vasishtha also cursed a king named Nimi. As the king was about to commence a sacrifice that was to continue for a thousand years, he asked Vasishtha to officiate as priest; but the Muni being engaged in a similar work for Indra, he could not do so for the next five hundred years. The king proceeded with his sacrifice, engaging Gautama as priest. As soon as his engagement was over with Indra, the sage, coming to conduct Nimi's sacrifice, found another priest had been appointed. He was so angry that, cursing the king, he declared that he should cease to exist in a bodily form. On learning what was done, the king in return pronounced a similar curse upon the sage. Both took effect; but as Vasishtha's spirit became united to the spirits of Mitra and Varuna, when these deities were smitten with the beauty of the nymph Urvasi, the

[p. 382]

spirit of the sage fell from them, and he became again incorporated through her. [**] A verse in the Rig-Veda ascribes Vasishtha's birth to Mitra and Varuna, in harmony with the legend just quoted: "Thou, O Vasishtha, art a son of Mitra and Varuna, born a Brahman from the soul of Urvasi. All the gods placed in the vessel thee--the drop which had fallen through divine contemplation."

There are several stories of quarrels between this sage and Visvamitra, who was anxious to obtain the position of priest to Saudasa, which was held by Vasishtha. At another time, when he was priest to Harischandra, he was so greatly incensed at the treatment the king had received at Visvamitra's hands that he cursed him, and he became a crane. His rival returned the compliment, and he too became a bird. In this form the sages fought so violently that it was necessary for Brahma to pacify them. The real cause of all this unpleasantness was the fact that Visvamitra was a Kshattriya by birth, who, by penance and various rites, had obtained admission into the Brahmanical caste. Previous to his exaltation he was a king. Being desirous of obtaining a wonderful cow that belonged to Vasishtha, which had the power to grant whatever her owner desired, as he could not overcome the Brahmans, owing to their superhuman power, he first sought to raise himself to equality with them, and at length his efforts were crowned with success.

  

10. NARADA.

Narada's name is not found in the list of Brahma's sons in the "Vishnu Purana," yet he is generally regarded

[p. 383]

as one, though, according to some authorities, he had a different origin. He is the messenger of the gods, and is often described as imparting information that was only known to them. It was he who persuaded the sons of Daksha not to beget offspring, and who was cursed for his interference; it was he who informed Kansa of the approaching birth of Krishna, which led that king to slay the children of Vasudeva: hence his common name is Kalikaraka, the strife-maker, and in modern plays he is introduced as a spy and marplot. The name Narada is frequently employed as a term of abuse. It is used to describe a quarrelsome, meddling person.

"A distinguished son of Brahma, named Narada, whose actions are the subject of a Purana, bears a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury. He was a wise legislator, great in arts and arms, an eloquent messenger of the gods, either to one another or to favoured mortals, and a musician of exquisite skill. His inventing the vina, or Indian lute, is thus described in the poem entitled 'Magha:' 'Narada sat watching from time to time his large vina, which, by the impulse of the breeze, yielded notes that pierced successively the regions of his ear, and proceeded by musical intervals.' The Law Tract, supposed to have been revealed by Narada, is at this hour cited by Pundits, and we cannot therefore believe him to have been the patron of thieves, though an innocent theft of Krishna's cattle, by way of putting his divinity to the test, he strangely imputed, in the Bhagavata Purana,' to his father Brahma." [**]

The accounts of Narada's origin vary considerably. According to the Bhagavata, he was the third incarnation of Vishnu. Manu declares that he was one of the Maharishis whom he created at the beginning of the

[p. 384]

age. Moor [**] quotes as . follows: "Brahma said, 'Rise up, Rudra, and form man to govern the world.' Rudra obeyed; but the men he made were fiercer than tigers, having nothing but the destructive quality in their composition. Anger was their only passion. Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra then joined their different powers, and created ten men whose names were Narada," etc. The "Siva Purana" teaches that Narada sprang from the thigh of his father: "Brahma, in view of peopling the world, produced four beings, who, being refractory, caused their parent to weep. To comfort him, Siva, in the character of Rudra, issued from a fold in his forehead, with five heads and ten arms, and, endowing Brahma with additional might, he (Brahma) produced Bhrigu and the seven Rishis, and after that Narada from his thigh." [*+]

In another birth Narada was the son of Kasyapa [*++] and a daughter of Daksha. Daksha was greatly incensed when he dissuaded the Prajapati's sons from peopling the world, and declared that he should not have a resting-place; hence his wandering nature.

On one occasion Narada was cursed by his own father, and he in return cursed Brahma. "Brahma exhorted his son Narada to take a wife, and assist in peopling the world. Narada, who was a votary of Krishna, becomes angry, affirms that devotion to that god is the sole way to attain felicity, and denounces his father as an erring instructor. Brahma, in reply, curses Narada, and dooms him to a life of sensuality, and subjection to women. Narada pays back the imprecation as follows: 'Wretch! become no object of adoration: how shall any

[p. 385]

one be devoted to the forms of thy worship? Thou shalt without doubt lust after her who is no fit object of thy desires!' Through this curse of Narada, the creator of the world ceased to be an object of worship. Beholding the beauty of his daughter, he ran after her. Narada, having made obeisance to his lotus-born father, forsook his Brahmanical body, and became a Gandharva, [**] a chorister of Indra's heaven."

In the Mahabharata, Narada figures as a religious teacher; and in the "Uttara Kanda" of the Ramayana is a specimen of his teaching. [*+] A Brahman, carrying the dead body of his son, came to the door of Rama's palace at Ayodha; and bewailing his loss, as he himself was unconscious of any fault, he believed it to be owing to some misconduct on the part of the king. Rama summoned his councillors, when the divine sage Narada spoke as follows: "Hear, O king, how the boy's untimely death occurred; and, having heard the truth regarding what ought to be done, do it." The story, briefly told, is as follows: "A presumptuous Sudra, paying no regard to the fact that during the age in which he lived the prerogative of practising self-mortification had not descended to the humble class to which he belonged, had been guilty of seeking to secure a store of religious merit by its exercise. Rama, after considerable search, comes upon a person who was engaged in the manner described by Narada. The Sudra avows his caste, and his desire to conquer for himself the rank of a god, by the self-mortification he was undergoing. Rama instantly cuts off the offender's head; the gods applaud the deed, and, having been encouraged by them to ask a boon, Rama requests that the Brahman's boy may be

[p. 386]

resuscitated. He is informed that he was restored to life the very moment that the Sudra was slain."

Narada was the friend and companion of Krishna, and was famed for his musical talents, but, becoming presumptuous on account of them, he emulated the divine strains of Krishna, who severely punished him for his presumption by placing his vina in the paws of a bear, when it emitted sounds far sweeter than those of the minstrelsy of the mortified musician. Krishna played many practical jokes on his friend; on one occasion he went so far as to metamorphose him into a woman. [**]

Great honour is given to Narada because he is said to have revealed to Valmiki the "Ramayana," which opens as follows:--

"To sainted Narad, prince of those
  Whose lore in words of wisdom flows,
  Whose constant care and chief delights
  Were scripture and ascetic rites,
  The good Valmiki, first and best
  Of hermit saints, these words addressed:
  'In all the world, I pray thee, who
  Is virtuous, heroic, true?
  Firm in his vows, of grateful mind,
  To every creature good and kind?
  Bounteous and holy, just and wise,
  Alone most fair to all men's eyes?
  Grant, saint divine, the boon I ask,
  For thee, I ween, an easy task,
  To whom the power is given to know
  If such a man breathes here below.'
  Then Narad, clear before whose eye
  The present, past, and future lie,
  Made ready answer!" [*+]

[p. 387]

Narada proceeds to narrate the life of Rama to Valmiki, who feels that the task of writing down what was told him is too great a" work for his powers, until Brahma himself appears, and encourages him to proceed--

"Then come, O best of seers, relate
  The life of Rama, good and great;
  The tale that saintly Narad told
  In all its glorious length unfold." [**]

Footnotes

^363:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 49.

^364:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 36.

^364:+ Ibid., i. 445.

^364:++ Ibid.

^365:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 314.

^366:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 229.

^367:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 442.

^368:* Page 4.

^369:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 83.

^370:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 122.

^371:* Page 123.

^371:+ Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 468.

^372:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 473.

^372:+ Ibid., ii. 474.

^374:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 390.

^374:+ Ibid. i. 224.

^375:* Muir, O. S. T., i. 153.

^375:+ Page 49.

^375:++ Wilson in note, p. 49, "Vishnu Purana."

^375: section Page 116.

^381:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 381.

^382:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 388.

^383:* Sir W. Jones, "Asiatic Researches," i. 264.

^384:* "Hindu Pantheon," p. 91.

^384:+ Ibid., p. 78.

^384:++ "Vishnu Purana," p. 118.

^385:* "Narada Pancharatna," Muir, O. S. T., preface, iv. p. 6.

^385:+ Ibid. i. 117.

^386:* Moor, "Hindu Pantheon," p. 205.

^386:+Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 3.

^387:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 22.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 388]

  

CHAPTER II.

  

KUVERA.

KUVERA, the god of riches, does not occupy a very conspicuous position in the mythology of the Hindus. No images or pictures of him are to be had, though he is frequently referred to in the Ramayana as the lord of gold and wealth. "Brahma had a mental son named Pulastya, who again had a mental son named Gaviputra Vaisravana (Kuvera). The latter deserted his father, and went to Brahma, who as a reward made him immortal, and appointed him to be the god of riches, with Lanka for his capital, and the car Pushpaka for his vehicle. [**] This car was of immense size, and moved at its owner's will at a marvellous speed; Ravana took it by force from Kuvera, at whose death it was restored by Rama to its original possessor.

"Pulastya being incensed at this desertion (of his son Kuvera) reproduced the half of himself in the form of Vaisravas, who looked upon Vaisravana with indignation. The latter strove to pacify his father, and with this view gave him three elegant Rakshasis to attend on him: Pushpotkata, who had two sons, Ravana and Kumbhakarna; Malini, who bore Vibhishana; and Raka, who bore Khara and Suparnakha. These sons were all

[p. 389]

valiant, skilled in the Vedas and observers of religious rites, but, perceiving the prosperity of Vaisravana, were filled with jealousy. Excepting Khara and Suparnakha, they began to practise austerities to propitiate Brahma, and at the end of a thousand years Ravana cut off his own head and threw it as an oblation into the fire. Brahma appeared to put a stop to their austerities, and to offer them boons (except that of immortality). He ordained that Ravana should have heads and shapes at will and be invincible, except by men; that Kumbhakarna should enjoy a long sleep. Having obtained these powers, Ravana expelled Vaisravana from Lanka. Kuvera retired to Gandamardana. Ravana having been installed as king, and begun to exercise his power tyrannically, the Rishis resort to Brahma, who promises that, as Ravana could not be killed by gods or asuras, the four-armed Vishnu, the chief of warriors, should by his (Brahma's) appointment descend to earth for his destruction." [**]

The Ramayana (Uttara Kanda) [*+] makes Kuvera the grandson, not the son, of Pulastya. In the Krita Yuga the pious Pulastya, being teased with the singing and dancing of different damsels, proclaimed that any one of them whom he saw near his hermitage should become a mother. This threat had not been heard by the daughter of Trinavindu, who came near the hermitage, and incurred Pulastya's threatened punishment. Her father, on learning her condition, gave her as wife to Pulastya, and she bore him a son named Visravas; who, becoming a sage, married a daughter of the Muni Bharadvaja, whose son Brahma, named Vaisravana (Kuvera). He performed austerities for thousands of years, and received as a boon from Brahma that he should be the

[p. 390]

god of riches, and one of the guardians of the world. At the suggestion of his father Visravas, he took possession of Lanka for his abode, which was formerly built by Visvakarma for the Rakshasas, who through fear of Vishnu had recently forsaken it.

A Rakshas prince named Sumali, who had been driven to Patala, happening to visit the earth, saw Kuvera travelling in his chariot to visit his father. This leads him to devise a plan by which he might regain his former position. He sends his daughter Kaikasi to woo Visravas; she is kindly received and becomes the mother of Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Suparnakha and Vibhishana. When Kaikasi saw the splendour of Kuvera, she urges Ravana to resemble him in glory; who, in order to effect this, undergoes most severe austerities for a thousand years, when Brahma grants him as a boon invincibility against all beings more powerful than men, and other gifts. Kuvera on Ravana's demand yields the city of Lanka.

It was noticed above that Kuvera was one of the guardians of the world; these are commonly said to be four in number. Rama mentions their names:

"May he whose hands the thunder wield [Indra],
  Be in the East thy guard and shield:
  May Yama's care the South befriend,
  And Varuna's arm the West defend;
  And let Kuvera, Lord of Gold,
  The North with firm protection hold." [**]

[paragraph continues] When eight guardians are spoken of, the additional four are these: Agni has charge of the South-East, Surya of the South-West, Soma of the North-East, and Vayu of the North-West.

[p. 391]

Kuvera is called the King of the Yakshasas--savage beings who, because the moment they were born said, "Let us eat," were called Yakshasas. These beings were ever on the watch for prey, and ate those they slew in battle.

Throughout the Ramayana there are brief references to Kuvera as the giver of riches, and also to the beauty of his palace and gardens. Thus Bharadvaja the sage, desirous of giving Rama and Lakshman a fitting reception, said--

"Here let Kuvera's garden rise,
  Which far in Northern Kuru lies;
  For leaves let cloth and gems entwine,
  And let its fruit be nymphs divine." [**]

His garden is a place "where the inhabitants enjoy a natural perfection, attended with complete happiness, obtained without exertion. There is there no vicissitude, nor decrepitude, nor death, nor fear; no distinction of virtue and vice, none of the inequalities denoted by the words 'best,' 'worst,' and 'intermediate,' nor any change resulting from the succession of the four Yugas. There is neither grief, weariness, anxiety, hunger, nor fear. The people live in perfect health, free from every suffering, for ten or twelve thousand years." [*+] As Sugriva was sending forth his armies to search for Sita, he thus speaks of this garden to Satabal, the leader of the army of the North--

"Pursue your onward way, and haste
  Through the dire horrors of the waste,
  Until triumphant with delight
  You reach Kailasa's glittering height.

[p. 392]

[paragraph continues]  There stands a palace decked with gold,
  For King Kuvera wrought of old,
  A home the heavenly artist planned,
  And fashioned with his cunning hand.
  There lotuses adorn the flood
  With full-blown flower and opening bud,
  Where swans and mallards float, and gay
  Apsarasas [**] come down to play.
  There King Vaisravan's self, the lord
  By all the universe adored,
  Who golden gifts to mortals sends,
  Lives with the Guhyakas, [*+] his friends." [*++]

As Rama and Lakshman were wandering in the forest, they were attacked by a giant named Viradha; but as they could not slay him with their weapons, they buried him alive, and as a result he regained his proper form. Formerly Kuvera had cursed him, for "loving Rambha's charms too well," to assume the hideous form in which Rama met with him, and the only relief Kuvera would give him was--

"When Rama, Dasaratha's son,
  Destroys thee, and the fight is won,
  Thy proper shape once more assume,
  And heaven again shall give thee room." [* section]

When Ravana had risen to the summit of his power, he made the gods perform various offices in his house: thus Indra prepared garlands, Agni was his cook, Surya gave light by day and Chandra by night, and Kuvera became his cash-keeper.

Kuvera married Yakshi or Charvi; and two of his sons, through a curse of the sage Narada, became trees, in which condition they remained until Krishna, when

[p. 393]

an infant, uprooted them. Narada met with them in a forest, bathing with their wives, in a state of intoxication. The wives, ashamed of themselves, fell at Narada's feet and sought for pardon; but as their husbands disregarded the presence of the sage, they suffered the full effects of his curse.

Footnotes

^388:* "Mahabharata: "Muir, O. S. T., iv. 481.

^389:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 483.

^389:+ Ibid., iv. 488.

^390:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 20.

^391:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 358.

^391:+ "Bhagavata Purana:" Muir, O. S. T., i. 492.

^392:* Nymphs of Paradise.

^392:+ Guardians of treasures.

^392:++ Griffiths's " Ramayana," iv. 24.

^392: section Ibid., iii. 14.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 394]

  

CHAPTER III.

  

THE DEMIGODS OF THE RAMAYANA.

  

1. SUGRIVA.

OVER the mighty leaders of the Monkey army associated with Rama in the destruction of Ravana was King

Click to enlarge
SUGRIVA.

[paragraph continues] Sugriva. When Vishnu, before leaving heaven to become incarnate as Rama, asked the gods to--

[p. 395]

"Make helps, in war to lend him aid,
  In forms that change at will arrayed,
  Of wizard skill and hero might,
  Outstrippers of the wind in flight," [**]

they consented, and "begot in countless swarms brave sons disguised in sylvan forms." Of Sugriva it is said--

               "That noblest fire,
 The Sun, was great Sugriva's sire." [*+]

When Rama finds this King of the Monkeys, he was an exile, having been driven from his throne by his brother Bali. Kabandha, a giant slain by Rama, gives the following description of the king to the wandering hero:--

"O Rama, hear my words and seek
  Sugriva, for of him I speak.
  His brother Bali, Indra's son,
  Expelled him, when the fight he won.
  With four great chieftains, faithful still,
  He dwells on Rishyanuka's hill.
       *       *       *       *
  Lord of the Vanars, just and true,
  Strong, very glorious, bright to view,
  Unmatched in counsel, firm and meek,
  Bound by each word his lips may speak,
  Good, splendid, mighty, bold and brave,
  Wise in each plan to guide and save.
  His brother, fired by lust of sway,
  Drove forth the king in woods to stray;
  In all thy search for Sita, he
  Thy ready friend and help will be." [*++]

Rama discovers his retreat, hears the story of his wrongs, promises to slay , the usurper, and assist Sugriva to regain his throne; Sugriva on his part

[p. 396]

solemnly promises to aid Rama in his search and to enable him to release Sita from Ravana's bonds. Rama very soon fulfils his part of the compact. He marches with Sugriva and the others to Bali's city; Sugriva challenges  to fight, and just as he is getting the worst of it, Rama lets fly his arrow, which gives Bali his mortal wound. Ere this chief dies, he strongly reproves Rama for slaying one who had never harmed him and for slaying him too in a secret and cowardly manner. He asks--

"What fame, from one thon hast not slain
  In front of battle, canst thou gain,
  Whose secret hand has laid me low,
  When madly fighting with my foe?
       *       *       *       *
  I held that thou wouldst surely scorn
  To strike me as I fought my foe,
  And thought not of a stranger's blow.
  But now thine evil heart is shown,
  A yawning well, with grass o'ergrown.
  Thou wearest virtue's badge, [**] but guile
  And meanest sin thy soul defile." [*+]

Rama reminds Bali that Fate had ordained his death, against which it was useless to contend, with which statement Bali agrees, and, withdrawing his unkind words, asks for Rama's forgiveness.

On the death of Bali, Sugriva is again installed as King of the Vanars, and Rama gives him four months for the enjoyment of his long-lost wife and kingdom. At its expiration, as Sugriva appeared to be so absorbed with pleasure as to forget his engagement to assist Rama, Lakshman reminds him of his duty in no measured terms. At length the order is given to collect the forces. An army of monkeys, bears, etc., goes forth in search of Sita,

[p. 397]

Click to enlarge
MONKEYS CONSTRUCTING THE BRIDGE AT LANKA.

[p. 398]

who, it is discovered, is somewhere in the southern district over which Hanuman is supposed to rule, who after diligent inquiry learns her whereabouts. The army marches to the seashore; a bridge connecting the island of Lanka (Ceylon) with the mainland is erected by Nala, and the attacking army surrounds the city. No sooner were they in sight of the city of the foe than

"Up sprang Sugriva from the ground,
  And reached the turret at a bound.
  Unterrified the Vanar stood,
  And wroth, with wondrous hardihood,
  The king in bitter words addressed,
  And thus his scorn and hate expressed:
  'King of the giant race, in me
  The friend and slave of Rama see.
  Lord of the world, he gives me power
  To smite thee in thy fenced tower.'
  While through the air his challenge rang,
  At Ravan's face the Vanar sprang,
  Snatched from his head the kingly crown,
  And dashed it in his fury down.
  Straight at his foe the giant flew,
  His mighty arms around him threw,
  With strength resistless swung him round,
  And dashed him panting to the ground.
  Unharmed amid the storm of blows,
  Swift to his feet Sugriva rose.
  Again in furious fight they met;
  With streams of blood their limbs were wet,
  Each grasping his opponent's waist." [**]

[paragraph continues] They continue to fight with uncertain result until Ravana calls to his aid his magical arts--

"But brave Sugriva, swift to know
  The guileful purpose of his foe,

[p. 399]

[paragraph continues]  Gained with light leap the upper air,
  And breath, and strength, and spirit there;
  Then, joyous as for victory won,
  Returned to Raghu's royal son." [**]

In the course of the great fight, a giant named Kumbhakarna, a brother of Ravana, came forth from the city and did great execution amongst the Vanar host, devouring his victims as fast as they were slain, though they were numbered by thousands. Some idea of the size of this monster may be gained from the fact that

"There was no respite then, no pause:
  Fast gaped and closed his hell-like jaws:
  Yet prisoned in that gloomy cave,
  Some Vanars still their lives could save;
  Some through his nostrils found a way,
  Some through his ears resought the day." [*+]

[paragraph continues] Bali's son Angad tried to rally the Vanar host, but he was soon dashed senseless on the ground." Hanuman had already been severely wounded by the monster. And now he attacks Sugriva, who hurled a hill at him, but

"The giant's chest the stroke repelled." [*++]

[paragraph continues] This compliment the monster returns by throwing his spear, which Hanuman caught as it flew, and broke it across his knee. Then

"At Sugriva's head he sent
  A peak from Lanka's mountain rent.
  The rushing mass no might could stay:
  Sugriva fell, and senseless lay.
  The giant stooped his foe to seize,
  And bore him thence, as bears the breeze
  A cloud in autumn through the sky." [* section]

[p. 400]

[paragraph continues] The giant enters Lanka with his captive, and is greatly lauded by the people; but his triumph was of short duration, for

"By slow degrees the Vanars' lord
  Felt life, and sense, and strength restored.
  He heard the giant's joyful boast:
  He thought upon his Vanar host.
  His teeth and feet he fiercely plied,
  And bit and rent the giant's side,
  Who, mad with pain and smeared with gore,
  Hurled to the ground the load he bore.
  Regardless of a storm of blows,
  Swift to the sky the Vanar rose,
  Then lightly, like a flying ball,
  High overleapt the city wall." [**]

Lakshman tried to slay this monster; but it was left for Rama to finish the work, whose arrows cut off limb after limb, and at last severed head from body. After his death, two brothers, Nikumbha and Kumbha, came forth to do battle for their chief. Sugriva seized Kumbha and hurled him into the sea; on his reaching the shore he struck Sugriva such a blow on his chest that he broke his own wrist with the shock. Sugriva returned the blow by another beneath the neck, which proved fatal. His brother now attacked Sugriva;

"And red with fury flashed his eye.
  He dashed with mighty sway and swing
  His axe against the Vanar king;
  But shattered on that living rock,
  It split in fragments at the shock.
  Sugriva, rising to the blow,
  Raised his huge hand and smote his foe,
  And in the dust the giant lay,
  Gasping in blood his soul away." [*+]

[p. 401]

Sugriva and his heroic army continued faithful to their king's promise until Rama's victory was won, though death had considerably thinned their ranks; but this loss was made good as, in answer to Rama's prayer, Yama gave up the whole of the Vanars who had died in the struggle. When Rama was about to return home in the magic car, Sugriva asked that he and the Vanar chiefs might accompany him to his capital. Their request being granted, they took part in the installation of Rama as king, and received from that grateful monarch rich presents as a reward for their faithful service.

  

2. HANUMAN.

Hanuman, on the whole the most useful of the Monkey leaders of the expedition to Ceylon, was the son of Vayu, by a Vanar or monkey mother. "His birth is thus described--

"An Apsaras, the fairest found
  Of nymphs, for heavenly charms renowned,
  Sweet Punjikasthala, became
  A noble Vanar's wedded dame.
  Her heavenly title heard no more,
  Anjana was the name she bore,
  When, cursed by gods, from heaven she fell,
  In Vanar form on earth to dwell.
      *       *       *       *       *
  In youthful beauty wondrous fair,
  A crown of flowers about her hair.
  In silken robes of richest dye,
  She roamed the hills that kiss the sky.
  Once in her tinted garments dressed,
  She stood upon the mountain crest.
  The god of wind beside her came,
  And breathed upon the lovely dame;
  And as he fanned her robe aside,
  The wondrous beauty that he eyed,

[p. 402]

 In rounded lines of breast and limb,
  And neck and shoulders, ravished him,
  And captured by her peerless charms,
  He strained her in his amorous arms.
  Then to the eager god she cried,
  In trembling accents, terrified,
  'Whose impious love has wronged a spouse
  So constant to her nuptial vows?'

Click to enlarge
HANUMAN.

 He heard, and thus his answer made:
  'Oh, be not troubled, nor afraid,
  But trust, and thou shalt know ere long
  My love has done thee, sweet, no wrong.
  So strong, and brave, and wise shall be
  The glorious son I give to thee;
  Might shall be his, that nought can tire,
  And limbs to spring as springs his sire.'

[p. 403]

[paragraph continues]  Thus spoke the god: the conquered dame
  Rejoiced in heart, nor feared the shame." [**]

At length the son was born. When a child, seeing the sun rising, and thinking it to be the fruit of a tree, he sprang up three hundred leagues to clutch it. On another occasion Indra let a bolt fly at him which caused him to fall violently on a rock. The fall shattered his cheek, and hence the name Hanuman, the long-jawed one, was given to him. His father seeing this became angry, and the breezes ceased to blow, until the gods in terror came to appease Vayu: Brahma promised that this boy should not be slain in battle, and Indra declared that his bolts should never injure him in the future.

The Monkey leader rendered most valuable service to Rama. It was he who discovered Sita's abode, and carried a message to her from Rama. It was he who set fire to Lanka and caused fear to enter the hearts of the Rakshasas dwelling there. It was he who bore Rama on his shoulders as he crossed over from India to Lanka. Hanuman thus speaks of his wondrous power:

"Sprung from that glorious Father, I
  In power and speed with him may vie.
  A thousand times, with airy leap,
  Can circle loftiest Meru's steep:
  With my fierce arms can stir the sea
  Till from their beds the waters flee,
  And rush at my command to drown
  This land with grove and tower and town.
  I through the fields of air can spring
  Far swifter than the feathered king,
  And leap before him as he flies
  On sounding pinions through the skies.
  I can pursue the Lord of Light
  Uprising from the eastern height,

[p. 404]

[paragraph continues]  And reach him ere his course be sped,
  With burning beams engarlanded." [**]

All these powers he devoted to the service of Rama; for, when that hero and his brother were wounded in the fight, and nothing else could restore them, Hanuman fled to the Himalayas from Ceylon, and returned almost immediately with the medicinal herbs that grew there, though, on reaching the hills, he had some difficulty [*+] in finding them:

"But when he thought to seize the prize,
  They hid them from his eager eyes.
  Then to the hill in wrath he spake:
  Mine arm this day shall vengeance take
  If thou wilt feel no pity, none,
  In this great need of Raghu's son.'
  He ceased: his mighty arms he bent,
  And from the trembling mountain rent
  His huge head, with the life it bore,
  Snakes, elephants, and golden ore.
  O'er hill and plain and watery waste
  His rapid way again he traced,
  And mid the wondering Vanars laid
  His burden, through the air conveyed.

[p. 405]

 The wondrous herbs' delightful scent
  To all the host new vigour lent.
  Free from all darts, and wounds, and pain,
  The sons of Raghu lived again;
  And dead and dying Vanars, healed,
  Rose vigorous from the battle-field." [**]

[paragraph continues] Hanuman is described in the "Uttara Kanda" of the Ramayana, [*+] as a being possessed of great learning. "The chief of the monkeys, measureless, seeking to acquire grammar, looking up to the sun, bent on inquiry, go went from the mountain where the sun rises to that where he sets, apprehending the mighty collection. The chief of the monkeys is perfect: no one equals him in the Sastras, in learning, and in ascertaining the sense of the Scriptures. In all sciences, in the rules of austerity, he rivals the preceptor of the gods."

Rama himself thus speaks of Hanuman's knowledge of the Scriptures, when he came to the exile as Sugriva's envoy:

        "One whose words so sweetly flow,
  The whole Rig-Veda needs must know,
  And in his well-trained memory store
  The Yajush and the Saman's lore.
  He must have bent his faithful ear
  All grammar's varied rules to hear.
  For his long speech how well he spoke!
  In all its length no rule he broke." [*++]

To this day Hanuman is regarded as divine, and in some parts of India is largely worshipped. Living monkeys are regarded as his representatives: hence many temples swarm with them, and it is regarded a meritorious act to feed them, and a sacrilegious act to injure them.

[p. 406]

  

3. NALA. [**]

Nala, another of the monkey chiefs, was a son of Visvakarma; and as the son of the architect of the gods, the builder of their beautiful cities, and the forger of their wonder-working weapons, as might have been expected, his work was of a similar nature to that for which his illustrious parent was celebrated. When the army reached the sea, and the difficulty of crossing to Lanka presented itself, as Rama was preparing to shoot one of his mighty arrows to dry up the ocean, the Sea Deity presented himself, amidst a great commotion of the elements, and thus addressed him:

"Air, ether, fire, earth, water, true
  To Nature's will, their course pursue;
  And I, as ancient laws ordain,
  Unfordable must still remain.
  Yet, Raghu's son, my counsel hear:
  I ne'er for love, or hope, or fear,
  Will pile my waters of a heap,
  And leave a pathway through the deep.
  Still shall my care for thee provide
  An easy passage o'er the tide,
  And like a city's paven street
  Shall be the road beneath thy feet." [*+]

His first word of advice was this, that Rama, instead of shooting at the sea, should direct his arrow towards the North, to destroy a race of demons who were hateful to him, and then he went on to say--

"Now let a wondrous task be done
  By Nala, Visvakarma's son,

[p. 407]

[paragraph continues]  Who, born of one of Vanar race,
  Inherits by his father's grace
  A share of his celestial art.
  Call Nala to perform his part,
  And he, divinely taught and skilled,
  A bridge athwart the sea shall build." [**]

Nala declares that he has the will and power to accomplish this great and necessary work; and as an encouragement to Rama to believe that he will complete it, said--

"My mother, ere she bore her son,
  This boon from Visvakarma won:
  'O Mandari, this child shall be
  In skill and glory next to me.'
  But why unbidden should I fill
  Thine ear with praises of my skill?
  Command the Vanar hosts to lay
  Foundations for the bridge to-day." [*+]

Rama trusts Nala's skill, and orders the Vanars to bring materials for the bridge:

"Up sprang the Vanars from their rest,
  The mandate of the king obeyed,
  And sought the forest's mighty shade.
  Uprooted trees to earth they threw,
  And to the sea the timber drew.
       *        *        *        *
  With mighty engines piles of stone
  And seated hills were overthrown:
  Imprisoned waters sprang on high,
  In rain descending from the sky:
  And ocean with a roar and swell
  Heaved wildly when the mountains fell.
  Then the great bridge of wondrous strength
  Was built, a hundred leagues in length.
  Rocks, huge as autumn clouds, bound fast
  With cordage from the shore, were cast,

[p. 408]

 And fragments of each riven hill,
  And trees whose flowers adorned them still.
  Wild was the tumult, loud the din,
  As ponderous rocks went thundering in.
  Each set of sun, so toiled each crew,
  Ten leagues and four the structure grew;
  The labours of the second day
  Gave twenty more of ready way,
  And on the fifth, when sank the sun,
  The whole stupendous work was done.
  O'er the broad way the Vanars sped,
  Nor swayed it with their countless tread." [**]

  

4. NILA.

This chief is said to have sprung from Agni, and is described as

                     "Bright as flame,
  Who in his splendour, might, and worth,
  Surpassed the sire who gave him birth." [*+]

Though thus eulogized, no very special feats of his are recorded in the Ramayana. He held a post of honour as the leader of a division of the army, and his special work appears to have been to provide sentries, and generally to guard the forces of Sugriva from the sudden attacks of the enemy. As the son of Agni he was able to see clearly, and by his watchfulness rendered good service.

  

5. SUSHENA.

Varuna aided Rama by the gift of this leader, who was the father of Tara, the wife of Bali, Sugriva's brother and the usurper of his throne. To him was

[p. 409]

given the command of the army of the West. Sugriva, addressing him, said--

"Two hundred thousand of our best
  With thee, my lord, shall seek the West." [**]

After searching in vain for traces of the missing princess, he and the other unsuccessful leaders returned to Rama and Sugriva, and said--

"On every hill our steps have been,
  By wood, and cave, and deep ravine;
  And all the wandering brooks we know,
  Throughout the land that seaward flow;
  Our feet by thy command have traced
  The tangled thicket and the waste,
  And dens and dingles hard to pass
  For creeping plants and matted grass." [*+]

Though they could not learn the exact spot where Sita was hidden, they discovered that she had been carried towards the South, the quarter under Hanuman's special charge, and thus considerably narrowed the sphere of the quest. In the great encounter with the foe, Sushena did good service; for when Rama and Lakshman were overcome by Indrajit's magical noose, Sugriva and his comrades were greatly distressed. The Vanar king, however, being aware that Garuda could release them from the spell by which they were bound, told Sushena, when they regained their strength and senses, to fly with them to Kishkindha hermitage, where they could dwell in safety, whilst he himself fought against Ravana, and rescued the royal lady. Then Sushena, as the physician, said--

                      "Hear me yet:
 When gods and fiends in battle met,

[p. 410]

[paragraph continues]  So fiercely fought the demon crew,
  So wild a storm of arrows flew,
  That heavenly warriors, faint with pain,
  Sank smitten by the ceaseless rain.
  Vrihaspati, with herb and spell,
  Cured the sore wounds of those who fell,
  And, skilled in arts that heal and save,
  New life and sense and vigour gave.
  Far, on the milky ocean's shore,
  Still grow those herbs in boundless store;
  Let swiftest Vanars thither speed
  And bring them for our utmost need.
  Let Panas and Sampati bring,
  For well the wondrous leaves they know
  That heal each wound and life bestow.
  Beside that sea, which, churned of yore,
  The Amrit on its surface bore,
  Where the white billows lash the land,
  Chandra's fair height and Drona stand.
  Planted by gods, each glittering steep
  Looks down upon the milky deep.
  Let fleet Hanuman bring us thence,
  Those herbs of wondrous influence." [**]

These plants were brought by Hanuman; the wounded recovered, and fought with renewed vigour.

Footnotes

^395:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 92.

^395:+ Ibid., i. 93.

^395:++ Ibid., iii. 337.

^396:* The dress of a hermit.

^396:+ Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 91.

^398:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 121.

^399:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 122.

^399:+ Ibid., v. 197.

^399:++ Ibid., v. 198.

^399: section Ibid., v. 199.

^400:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 199.

^400:+ Ibid., v. 229.

^403:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 272.

^404:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 275.

^404:+ In seeking for these leaves, Hanuman was exposed to considerable danger. Kalanemi, an uncle of Ravana, was promised the half of the kingdom if he would slay Hanuman. To effect this, he went to the Himalayas and, disguised as a devotee, invited Hanuman to eat with him. Hanuman refused; but on entering a tank near, a crocodile seized his foot. This reptile Hanuman dragged out of the tank and killed it, from whose body a lovely Apsaras arose, whom Daksha had cursed to live in that form until her release was accomplished by Hanuman. This nymph, in gratitude for his kindness, warned Hanuman of his danger. The monkey god went to Kalanemi, and telling him that he saw through his disguise, took him by the feet, and whirled him through the air to Lanka, where he fell before the throne in Ravana's palace.

^405:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 225.

^405:+ Muir, O. S. T., iv. 490.

^405:++ Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 25.

^406:* This Nala must not be confounded with another person of the same name, whose history is given in the Mahabharata. Nala of the Mahabharata was King of Nishadha, the husband of Damayanti, whom he obtained in marriage, although Indra, Agni, Varuna, and Yama were amongst the suitors for her hand.

^406:+ Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 66.

^407:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 67.

^407:+ Ibid., v. 68.

^408:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 68.

^408:+ Ibid., v. 94.

^409:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iv. 208.

^409:+ Ibid., iv. 224.

^410:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 152.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 411]

  

CHAPTER IV.

  

THE DEMIGODS OF THE MAHABHARATA.

AS these heroes are so intimately connected with each other, a separate account of each would necessitate frequent repetition; they will therefore be noticed together, in a brief outline of the main story of the Mahabharata. [**]

In the fifth generation from Soma (the Moon), the progenitor of the Lunar race, who reigned at Hastinapur, came two sons, Puru [*+] and Yadu; from whom proceeded two branches of the Lunar line. In the account of Krishna and Balarama, who were born in the Yadu tribe, we have seen the end of that branch of the family. Sixteenth from Puru, the founder of the other

[p. 412]

branch, came Bharata, from whom India takes its name, Bharatvarsha (the country of Bharata), in the present day. Twenty-third from Bharata came Santanu. This Santanu had two sons, Bhishma, by the goddess Ganga (the Ganges), and Vichitravirya, by Satyavati. [**] Satyavati had a son named Vyasa before her marriage with Santanu; so that Bhishma, Vichitravirya, and Vyasa were half-brothers. Bhishma became a Brahmachari (i.e. took a vow of celibacy). Vyasa retired to the wilderness to live a life of contemplation, but promised his mother that he would obey her in everything.

Now it so happened that Vichitravirya died childless, and Satyavati was therefore obliged to ask her son Vyasa to marry the childless widows. The result was that the one wife, Ambika, had a son who was born blind, named Dhritarashtra. This blindness is said to have been caused by the fact that Vyasa, coming in from his ascetic life, was so repulsive in appearance that Ambika kept her eyes closed all the time he remained with her. The other wife, named Ambalika, had a son who was born of a pale complexion, and named Pandu; this paleness was the result of the fear that Vyasa caused to the mother. Satyavati, not satisfied with either of these children, wished for another and perfect child. But Ambika, dressing up one of her slaves, sent her to Vyasa in her stead; the result was that this girl had a son who was called Vidura. After fulfilling his

[p. 413]

mother's commands, Vyasa returned to his ascetic life in the forest.

Bhishma, the uncle of these children, conducted the government of Hastinapur in their name during their minority, and their education was also entrusted to him. Dhritarashtra, though blind, is described as excelling the others in strength; Pandu, as being skilled in the use of the bow; and Vidura, as pre-eminent in virtue and wisdom.

When the boys came of age, Dhritarashtra was disqualified for the throne by reason of his blindness; Vidura could not be king because his mother was a Sudra; Pandu was therefore installed as king. Dhritarashtra married Gandhari (also called Saubaleyi, or Saubali), daughter of Subala, King of Gandhara. Pandu married Pritha (or Kunti), the adopted daughter of Kuntibhoja. This Pritha, "one day, before her marriage, paid such respect and attention to a powerful sage named Durvasas, a guest in her father's house, that he gave her a charm, and taught her an incantation, by virtue of which she might have a child by any god she liked to call into her presence. Out of curiosity, she invoked the Sun, by whom she had a son who was born clothed in armour. But Pritha, fearing the censure of her relatives, deserted her offspring, after exposing it in the river. It was found by Adhirata, a charioteer, and nurtured by his wife Radha; whence the child was afterwards called Radheya, though named by his foster-parents Vasushena. When he was grown up, the god Indra conferred upon him enormous strength, and changed his name to Karna." He is also called Vaikartana, being the son of Vikartana (the Sun).

Pandu, at his uncle Bhishma's request, next marries Madri, sister of Salya, King of Madra. Soon after this

[p. 414]

marriage, Pandu undertook a great campaign, and extended his kingdom to the dimensions it had reached in the time of his great ancestor Bharata. He then, with his two wives, retired to the woods, that he might indulge in his passion for hunting. The blind Dhritarashtra, with Bhishma as regent, ruled in his stead.

Dhritarashtra had a hundred sons. The story of their birth is as follows: "One day, the sage Vyasa was hospitably entertained by Queen Gandhari, and in return granted her a boon. She chose to be the mother of a hundred sons. After two years she produced a mass of flesh, which was divided by Vyasa into a hundred and one pieces, as big as the joint of a thumb. From these, in due time, the eldest, Duryodhana, was born. The miraculous birth of the remaining ninety-nine occurred in due course. There was also one daughter, named Duhsala." These sons of Dhritarashtra are generally called "The Kurus," or Kauravas.

Pandu's children were of divine origin. This circumstance happened in the following manner: Pandu, as noticed above, was addicted to hunting. One day, he "transfixed with five arrows a male and female deer. These turned out to be a certain sage and his wife, who had assumed the form of these animals. The sage cursed Pandu, and predicted that he would die in the embraces of one of his wives. In consequence of this curse, Pandu took the vow of a Brahmachari, gave all his property to the Brahmans, and became a hermit."

Upon this, Pritha, his wife, with his approval, employed the charm and incantation given to her by Durvasas, and had three children: by the god Dharma, Yudhishthira; by Vayu, Bhima; and by Indra, Arjuna. Madri, the other wife of Pandu, was now anxious to have children, and, acting on the advice of Pritha, she

[p. 415]

thought of the Asvins, who appeared to her according to her wish, through whom she became the mother of twin sons, Nakula and Sahadeva. Soon after this, Pandu, forgetting the curse of the sage, died in the embraces of his wife Madri, who was burned with the dead body of her husband.

Pritha and the five children, generally known as the Pandus, or Pandavas, now returned to Hastinapur, and informed Dhritarashtra of the death of his brother; he seemed to be deeply moved by the event, and the Pandus were allowed to live with his own sons, the Kurus.

But even when the cousins were children, enmity arose, and on one occasion the jealousy of Duryodhana was excited to such a pitch that he tried to poison Bhima, and, when under its effect, threw him into the water. "Bhima, however, was not drowned, but descended to the abode of the Nagas (or serpent demons), who freed him from the poison, and gave him a liquid to drink which endued him with strength of ten thousand Nagas. From that moment he became a second Hercules." Several schemes were formed for the destruction of the Pandus, but without success.

"The characters of the five Pandavas are drawn with much artistic delicacy of touch, and maintained with general consistency throughout the poem. The eldest, Yudhishthira (the son of Dharma, virtue), is the Hindu ideal of excellence--a pattern of justice; calm, passionless composure; chivalrous honour and cold heroism." As the name implies (firm in battle), "he was probably of commanding stature and imposing presence. He is described as having a majestic, lion-like gait, with a Wellington-like profile and long lotus-eyes.

"Bhima (the son of Vayu) is a type of brute courage and strength; he is of gigantic stature, impetuous,

[p. 416]

irascible, somewhat vindictive, and cruel even to the verge of ferocity, making him, as his name implies, 'terrible.' It would appear that his great strength had to be maintained by plentiful supplies of food, as his name Vrikodara, 'wolf-stomached,' indicates a voracious appetite; and we are told that at the daily meals of the five brothers, half of the whole dish had to be given to Bhima. But he has the capacity for warm, unselfish love, and is ardent in his affection for his mother and brothers.

"Arjuna (the son of Indra) rises more to the European standard of perfection. He may be regarded as the real hero of the Mahabharata, of undaunted bravery, generous, with refined and delicate sensibilities, tender-hearted, forgiving, and affectionate as a woman, yet of superhuman strength, and matchless in arms and athletic exercises. Nakula and Sahadeva (sons of the Asvins) are both amiable, noble-hearted, and spirited. All five are as unlike as possible to the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra, who are represented as mean, spiteful, dishonourable, and vicious." Karna (the son of the Sun), though half-brother of these five Pandus, in the great conflict is a valuable ally of the Kurus; though in character he is entirely their opposite. "He exhibited in a high degree fortitude, chivalrous honour, self-sacrifice, and devotion. Especially remarkable for a liberal and generous disposition, he never stooped to ignoble practices, like his friends, the Kurus, who were emphatically bad men."

The cousins were educated together at Hastinapur by a Brahman named Drona; all were instructed in arms, but Arjuna, "by the help of Drona, who gave him magical weapons, excelled all." Both Bhima and the Kuru Duryodhana learnt the use of the club from their

[p. 417]

cousin Balarama; Pritha, Bhima's mother, was a sister of Vasudeva, and therefore aunt of Krishna. When their education was completed, a tournament was held, in which the youths displayed their skill in archery; in the management of chariots, horses, and elephants; in sword, spear, and club exercises, and in wrestling. "Arjuna, after exhibiting prodigies of strength, shot five arrows simultaneously into the jaws of a revolving iron boar, and twenty-one arrows into the hollow of a cow's horn, suspended by a string." When he had accomplished this feat, Karma came and did precisely the same deeds of skill, and challenged Arjuna to single combat; but as he could not tell his parentage, he was not considered worthy to enter the lists with the royal youth.

After the tournament was over, Yudhishthira was installed as heir apparent, and soon made his name even more famous than his father's had been. The people wished Yudhishthira to be crowned king at once, but the Kurus tried hard to prevent it. First of all, the Pandus and their mother were sent to a house at Varanavata, in which a quantity of combustible materials was placed, with the intention of burning the whole family. The Pandus were informed of this by Vidura, and escaped; but the man who conducted them, and a woman with her five sons, whom Bhima led there in a state of intoxication, were consumed instead. By this device, the Kurus were under the impression that their plan had been successful. The brothers, with their mother, now hastened to the woods, where Bhima slew a giant named Hidimba, and then married his sister.

By the advice of Vyasa they now went to live in the city of Ekachakra, disguised as mendicant Brahmans. Near this city was a Rakshas named Vaka, who

[p. 418]

compelled the citizens to send him a dish of food daily, and the messenger who took it was devoured as the daintiest morsel of the whole. One day it happened that the turn came to a Brahman to supply the Rakshas with a meal. The man determined to go himself, but his wife and daughter each asked to be allowed to go with him. Lastly, the little son, too young to speak distinctly, in prattling accents said, "Weep not, father; sigh not, mother." Then, breaking off and brandishing a pointed spike of grass, he exclaimed, "With this spike will I slay the fierce, man-eating giant." Bhima, overhearing this, offered to go; he went, and killed the giant.

After this occurrence, Vyasa appeared to his grandsons, and informed them that Draupadi, the daughter of Drupada, King of Panchala, was destined to be their common wife. This girl, in a former birth, was the daughter of a sage, and had performed a most severe penance in order that she might have a husband. Siva, pleased with her devotion, said, "You shall have five husbands; for five times you said, 'Give me a husband.'" When the brothers returned from Draupadi's Svayambara (a tournament in which the princess chose for herself a husband), Arjuna having been selected from amongst many suitors on account of his skill in archery, their mother, hearing their footsteps, and, fancying they were bringing alms, said, "Divide it amongst yourselves." The word of a mother could not be set aside, so Vyasa showed them that it was appointed that Draupadi should be the wife of each. At this tournament Arjuna displayed great skill in the use of the bow, by piercing a fish that was suspended in the air, without looking directly at the object; he saw its image only, reflected in a pan of water on the ground.

Vyasa, seeing the discrepancy between the conduct of

[p. 419]

Click to enlarge
ARJUNA SHOOTING AT THE FISH

[p. 420]

the five brothers having a wife in common and that which prevailed in his day, explains it by the fact that Arjuna was really a portion of the essence of Indra, and his brothers portions of the same god, whilst Draupadi herself was a form of Lakshmi; as, therefore, the five brethren were parts of Indra, there was no impropriety in their having but one wife. It is a fact to be noticed, that to this day polyandry prevails amongst some of the hill-tribes of India. Draupadi is said to have had a son by each of the brothers, and the brothers had other wives besides Draupadi. It was noticed above that Bhima married Hidimba. Arjuna married Krishna's sister, Subhadra, and also a serpent-nymph named Uludi, and Chitrangada, daughter of the King of Manipura.

When the Pandus, by their marriage with Draupadi, had allied themselves with the King of Panchala, they threw off their disguise, and their uncle Dhritarashtra divided the kingdom: to his sons he gave Hastinapur; to the Pandus a district near the Yamuna (Jumna), called Khandavaprastha. Here they built Indraprastha (Delhi), and, under Yudhishthira, their kingdom grew.

Arjuna wandered in the forest alone for twelve years, in fulfilment of a vow, and there met Krishna, who invited him to Dwaraka, where he married Subhadra. Krishna was invited to a great festival in honour of the inauguration of Yudhishthira as sovereign. Acting on Narada's advice, Bhishma proposed that an oblation should be made to the best and strongest person present, and selected Krishna. Sisupala objected, and, as he openly reviled Krishna, the deity struck off his head with his discus.

After this, a festival was held at Hastinapur, to which the Pandus were invited. Yudhishthira was induced to

[p. 421]

play; and having staked his kingdom, his possessions, and, last of all, Draupadi, he lost everything. A compromise was effected. Duryodhana was made ruler over the whole kingdom for twelve years; whilst the Pandus with Draupadi were to live in the forest for the same period, and to pass the thirteenth year under assumed names, in various disguises. Whilst enjoying this forest life, Arjuna went to the Himalayas to perform severe penance in order to obtain celestial arms. "After some time, Siva, to reward him and prove his bravery, approached as a Kirata, [**] or wild mountaineer, at the moment that a demon named Muka, in the form of a boar, attacked him. Siva and Arjuna shot together at the boar, which fell dead, and both claimed to have hit him first. This served as a pretext for Siva to have a battle with him. Arjuna fought long with the Kirata but could not conquer him. At last he recognized the god, and threw himself at his feet, when Siva, pleased with his bravery, gave him the celebrated weapon Pasupata, to enable him to conquer Karna and the Kuru princes in war."

In the thirteenth year of exile the Pandus journeyed to the court of King Virata, and entered his service in disguise. Yudhishthira called himself a Brahman, and took the name of Kanka. Arjuna called himself Vrihanala, and, pretending to be a eunuch, adopted a sort of woman's dress, and taught music and dancing. One day when Virata and four of the Pandus were absent, Duryodhana and his brother attacked Virata's capital, and carried off some cattle. Uttara, the king's son, followed them, having Arjuna as his charioteer. When

[p. 422]

they came in sight of the enemy, Uttara's heart failed him. Arjuna changed places with him, having told him who he was. This gave him courage, the Kuru army was defeated, and the stolen cattle reclaimed. Arjuna asked Uttara to keep the secret of his real character for the present. A short time afterwards, at a great assembly called by Virata, the Pandus took their places amongst the princes, and were welcomed heartily by the king.

A council of princes was soon held, at which Krishna and Balarama were present, to consider how the Pandus could regain their possessions. Some were for immediate war; Krishna and Balarama urged that attempts at negotiation should first be made. This advice was acted upon, but without result. In the mean time, Krishna and his brother returned to Dwaraka. Not long after his arrival at his capital, Duryodhana, the Kuru prince, visited Krishna to ask his aid in the coming struggle; and on the same day, Arjuna, the Pandu prince, arrived there for the same purpose. And " it happened that they both reached the door of Krishna's apartment, where he was asleep, at the same moment. Duryodhana succeeded in entering first, and took up his station at Krishna's head; Arjuna followed, and stood reverently at his feet." Krishna, on awaking, first saw Arjuna; and when the cousins mentioned the object of their visit, he gave the right of choice to Arjuna. He offered himself to one side, but said he should not himself fight; and to the other side his army of a hundred million warriors. Arjuna at once chose Krishna, and Duryodhana was delighted with the prospect of having Krishna's immense army on his side. Duryodhana then asked Balarama's aid, but was informed that both the brothers had decided to take no active part in the

[p. 423]

Click to enlarge
BATTLE OF THE KURUS AND PANDAVAS

[p. 424]

conflict. Krishna, however, consented to act as Arjuna's charioteer, and joined the Pandus at Virata's capital.

Fresh negotiations were commenced, and Krishna himself went as mediator to the Kurus; but although in the assembly he assumed his divine form, and "Brahma appeared in his forehead, Rudra on his breast, the guardians of the world issued from his arms, and Agni from his mouth"--although the other gods were visible in and about his person--his attempt at reconciliation failed. War was determined on between the cousins. Bhishma was made the commander-in-chief of the Kuru army; and Dhrishtadyumna, son of Drupada, was the leader of the Pandus. Vyasa offered to give sight to Dhritarashtra, to enable him to witness the conflict, but, as the blind man declined the offer, he gave to his charioteer, Sanjaya, the faculty of knowing everything that took place, made him invulnerable, and bestowed on him the power to transport himself by a thought to any part of the field of battle.

The armies met on Kurukshetra, a plain to the north-west of the modern Delhi, and we are told that "monstrous elephants career over the field, trampling on men and horses, and dealing destruction with their huge tusks; enormous clubs and iron maces clash together with the noise of thunder; rattling chariots dash against each other; thousands of arrows hurtle in the air, darkening the sky; trumpets, kettledrums, and horns add to the uproar; confusion, carnage, and death are everywhere."

The Pandus are described as performing prodigies of might. Arjuna killed five hundred warriors simultaneously, covered the plain with dead, and filled rivers with blood: Yudhishthira "slaughtered a hundred men" in a mere twinkle: Bhima annihilated a monstrous

[p. 425]

elephant, including all mounted upon it, and fourteen foot soldiers besides, with one blow of his club: Nakula and Sahadeva, when fighting from their chariots, cut off heads by the thousand, and sowed them like seed upon the ground. Of the weapons employed, about a hundred are named; and the conch shell which served as the trumpet of each leader had its distinct name, as had also the weapons of each of the chiefs.

The first great single combat was between Bhishma and Arjuna, which resulted in Bhishma being so transfixed with arrows that "there was not a space of two fingers' breadth on his whole body unpierced. Falling from his chariot, his body could not touch the ground, as it was surrounded by countless arrows, and thus it reclined on its arrowy couch. He had received from his father the power of fixing the time of his own death, and now declared that lie intended retaining life till the sun entered the summer solstice. The warriors on both sides ceased fighting that they might view the wonderful sight and do homage to their dying relative. As he lay on his uncomfortable bed, with his head hanging down, he begged for a pillow, whereupon the chiefs brought him soft supports; these the hardy old soldier sternly rejected. Arjuna then made a rest for him with three arrows, which Bhishma quite approved; and soon afterwards asked him to bring a little water. Arjuna struck the ground with an arrow, and forthwith a pure spring burst forth, which so refreshed Bhishma that he called for Duryodhana, and begged him, before it was too late, to restore half the kingdom to the Pandavas."

Drona, the tutor of the princes, is appointed to take the command of the Kuru army after the fall of Bhishma; and a number of single combats are described. Bhima's

[p. 426]

son by the Rakshasi Hidimba is slain by Karna; Drupada's son, Dhrishtadyumna, the leader of the Pandus, overcomes Drona; Drona being a Brahman, when overpowered by his foe, voluntarily laid down his life, and is conducted to heaven "in a glittering shape like the sun," to save Dhrishtadyumna from the enormous crime of killing a Brahman. Karna was then made leader of the Kurus in place of Drona. Bhima next slew Duhsasana, and remembering how this prince had insulted Draupadi, he drank the blood of his fallen foe. Arjuna then slew Karna, and Salya, King of Madra, was appointed to fill the vacant post. Bhima challenges Salya, and the following is the account of their encounter:--

"Soon as he saw his charioteer struck down,
  Straightway the Madra monarch grasped his mace,
  And like a mountain, firm and motionless,
  Awaited the attack. The warrior's form
  Was awful as the world-consuming fire,
  Or as the noose-armed god of death, or as
  The peaked Kailasa, or the Thunderer
  Himself, or as the trident-bearing god,
  Or as a maddened forest elephant.
  Him to defy did Bhima hastily
  Advance, wielding aloft his massive club.
  A thousand conchs and trumpets, and a shout,
  Firing each champion's ardour, rent the air.
  From either host, spectators of the fight,
  Burst forth applauding cheers: 'The Madra king
  Alone,' they cried, 'can bear the rush of Bhima;'
  'None but heroic Bhima can sustain
  The force of Salya.' Now like two fierce bulls
  Sprang they towards each other, mace in hand.
  And first, as cautiously they circled round,
  Whirling their weapons as in sport, the pair
  Seemed matched in equal combat. Salya's club,
  Set with red fillets, glittered as with flame,
  While that of Bhima gleamed like flashing lightning.

[p. 427]

[paragraph continues]  Anon the clashing irons met, and scattered round
  A fiery shower; then, fierce as elephants
  Or butting bulls, they battered each the other.
  Thick fell the blows, and soon each stalwart frame,
  Spattered with gore, glowed like the Kinsuka,
  Bedecked with scarlet blossoms; yet beneath
  The rain of strokes, unshaken as a rock,
  Bhima sustained the mace of Salya, he
  With equal firmness bore the other's blows.
  Now, like the roar of crashing thunder-clouds,
  Sounded the clashing iron; then, their clubs
  Brandished aloft, eight paces they retired,
  And swift again advancing to the fight,
  Met in the midst like two huge mountain crags
  Hurled into contact. Nor could either bear
  The other's shock; together down they rolled,
  Mangled and crushed, like two tall standards fallen."

Yudhishthira then fought with and eventually slew Salya. After suffering continual reverses, the Kurus rallied for a final charge, which led to so great a slaughter, that only four of their leaders, Duryodhana, Asvatthaman (son of Drona), Kritavarman, and Kripa remained, whilst "nothing remained of eleven whole armies." Whereupon Duryodhana resolved upon flight, and taking refuge in a lake, by his magical power supported it so as to form a chamber round his body. The Pandus discovered his retreat; but when taunted by them, he told them to take the kingdom, as, his brothers having all been slain, he had no pleasure in life. At last, enraged by the sarcasms of his cousins, he came forth and fought with Bhima, from whom he received his death-wound. The remaining three Kuru chiefs left their wounded companion and took refuge in a forest.

Whilst resting under a tree at night, Asvatthaman, seeing an owl approach stealthily and kill numbers of sleeping crows, the thought occurred to him that in this manner he might destroy the Pandu forces. Accordingly

[p. 428]

he quietly entered their camp, leaving Kripa and Kritavarman to watch the gates. Under cover of darkness they slew the whole army: the Pandu princes and Krishna, happening to be stationed outside the camp, alone escaped. These three then return to Duryodhana, and tell him what they had done. Hearing their narrative, his spirit revived for a moment; he thanked them, bade them farewell, and expired.

The funeral obsequies of the chief are performed, and Yudhishthira is installed as King of Hastinapur. But he is most unhappy as he thinks of the great slaughter that has taken place. Acting on Krishna's advice, he and his brothers visit Bhishma, who is still lingering on his " spiky bed." For fifty-eight nights he had lain there, and ere his departure gave utterance to a series of most lengthy didactic discourses, after which his spirit ascended to the skies.

As Yudhishthira was entering the capital in triumph, an incident occurred to lessen his joy in victory. A Rakshas named Charvaka, disguised as a Brahman, met him and reproached him for the slaughter he had caused; but the Brahmans, discovering the imposture, consumed the Rakshas to ashes with fire from their eyes. Yet even now the spirit of the king is not at rest. After a little time, he resigns his kingdom, and, together with his brothers and Draupadi, starts on his journey towards Indra's heaven on Mount Meru,

"When the four brothers knew the high resolve of King Yudhishthira
  Forthwith with Draupadi they issued forth, and after them a dog
  Followed; the king himself went out the seventh from the royal city,
  And all the citizens and women of the palace walked behind;
  But none could find it in their heart to say unto the king,
  Return.' And so at length the train of citizens went back, bidding adieu."

These went, "bent on abandonment of worldly things;

[p. 429]

their hearts yearning for union with the Infinite." In their journey they reach the sea, and there Arjuna cast away his bow and quiver. At last they came in sight of Mount Meru, and Draupadi "lost hold of her high hope, and faltering fell upon the earth." One by one the others fall, until only Yudhishthira, Bhima, and the dog are left. Bhima cannot understand why such pure beings should die: his brother informs him that Draupadi's fall was the result of her excessive affection for Arjuna; that Sahadeva's death was the result of pride in his own knowledge; that Nakula's personal vanity was his ruin, and that Arjuna's fault was a boastful confidence in his power to destroy his foes. Bhima now falls, and is told that the reason of his death is his selfishness, pride, and too great love of enjoyment. Yudhishthira, left alone with the dog, is walking on:

"When, with a sudden sound that rang through earth and heaven, the mighty god
  Came towards him in a chariot, and he cried, Ascend, O resolute prince.'
  Then did the king look back upon his fallen brothers, and addressed
  These words unto the Thousand-eyed in anguish; 'Let my brothers here
  Come with me. Without them, O god of gods, I could not wish to enter
  E'en heaven! and yonder tender princess Draupadi, the faithful wife,
  Worthy of endless bliss, let her come too. In mercy hear my prayer.'"

Indra informs him that the spirits of Draupadi and his brothers are already in heaven, but that he alone is permitted to enter in bodily form. The king asks that the dog may accompany him. But as this is refused, he declines to go alone. Indra says, "You have abandoned your brothers; why not forsake the dog?" Yudhishthira replies, "I had no power to bring them back to

[p. 430]

life: how can there be abandonment of those who no longer live?" It now appears that the dog was no other than his father Dharma in disguise; who, assuming his proper form, enters with him.

On reaching heaven, though Duryodhana and his cousins are already in bliss, as he does not see Arjuna and the rest, Yudhishthira declines to remain there without them. An angel accompanies him to hell, where he hears their voices calling upon him for help. He therefore bids the angel depart, as he prefers to suffer in hell with his brethren rather than to remain in heaven without them. As soon as his resolution is taken, the scene suddenly changes, and it appears that this was simply a trial of his faith. He bathes in the heavenly Ganges, and in heaven, with " Draupadi and his brothers, finds the rest and happiness that were unattainable on earth."

Footnotes

^411:* This account of the Mahabharata is taken in an abbreviated form almost entirely from Lecture XIII. of Monier Williams's "Indian Wisdom."

^411:+ An interesting story is told of Puru. His father, Yayati, married Devayani, daughter of Sukra, the preceptor of the Daityas. Her husband loving her servant Sarmistha also, Puru was born as their youngest son. The wife being highly indignant at the unfaithfulness of her husband, returning to her father's home, so excited the old priest that he cursed Yayati with old age; but afterwards consented to withdraw the curse provided one of his sons would bear it for him. They all refused to do this excepting Puru. As a reward for his piety, his father disinherited his other sons, and made Puru sole heir to his dominions.

^412:* Satyavati was the daughter of an Apsaras named Adrika, who was condemned to live on earth in the form of a fish. Parasara, a sage, met her daughter as he was crossing the river Yamuna, and Vyasa was the result. He was born on an island of the river, and hence he had the name Dwaipayana (who moves on an island). Vyasa is said to have been the arranger of the Vedas, the compiler of the Mahabharata and the Puranas, and the founder of the Vedanta system of philosophy.

^421:* The Kiratas were mountaineers, or foresters. In the Ramayana they are described as "islanders, who eat raw flesh, live in the waters, and are men-tigers."

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 431]

  

CHAPTER V.

  

THE PLANETS.

"AT the great festivals of the Hindus a small offering is made to all the planets at once; but, excepting on these occasions, they are never worshipped together. They are, however, frequently worshipped separately by the sick and unfortunate who suppose themselves to be under the baneful influence of one or other of them. At these times they are worshipped one after the other in regular succession." [**] Seven of the planets give names to the days of the week; the other two represent the ascending and descending nodes. Surya and Chandra (Soma) have already been noticed at length among the Vedic Deities; they are again described briefly along with the planets, under the names they bear in this connection.

"To Surya or Ravi are offered in the burnt sacrifice small pieces of the shrub arka (Asclepias gigantica); to Chandra those of the palasa (Butea frondosa); to Mangala (Mars) those of the khudiru (Mimosa catechu); to Budha (Mercury) those of the aparmarga (Achryranthes aspera); to Vrihaspati (Jupiter) those of the asvattha (Ficus religiosa); to Sukra (Venus) those of the urumbara; to Sani (Saturn) those of the Sami (Mimosa albida); to Rahu (the ascending node) blades of Durva 

[p. 432]

grass; and to Keta (the descending node) blades of Kusa grass." [**]

"The image of Surya is a round piece of mixed metal twelve fingers in diameter; of Chandra, a piece like a half-moon, a cubic from end to end; of Mangala, a triangular piece six fingers in width; of Budha, a golden bow two fingers in breadth; of Vrihaspati, a piece like a lotus; of Sukra, a square piece of silver; of Sani, an iron scimitar; of Rahu, an iron makara (a fabulous animal, half stag and half fish); and of Ketu, an iron snake." [*+]

1. RAVI (the Sun), hence Ravibara (Sunday), is the son of Kasyapa and Aditi. Though as Surya he is daily worshipped, as Ravi he is only worshipped at the greater festivals. "The 'Jyotish-tatwa,' a great work on astrology, says that if a person is born under the planet Ravi, he will possess an anxious mind, be subject to disease and other sufferings, be an exile, a prisoner, and suffer the loss of wife, children, and property." [*++]

2. CHANDRA or SOMA, hence Somavara (Monday). "If a person be born under the planet Soma he will have many friends; will possess elephants, horses, and palanquins; be honourable and powerful; will live on excellent food, and rest on superb couches." A race of kings are said to be the descendants of Soma, by his wife Rohini (the Hyades), who are called the children of the moon.

3. MANGALA, hence Mangalavara (Tuesday), is represented as a red man with four arms, riding on a sheep; he wears a red necklace and clothes of the same colour. " If a person be born under the planet Mangala, he will be full of anxious thoughts, wounded with offensive weapons, imprisoned, oppressed with fear of robbers, fire, etc., and will lose his lands, trees, and good name." This deity is identical with Kartikeya.

[p. 433]

4. BUDHA, [**] hence Budhavara (Wednesday), was the son of Soma by Tara, the wife of Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. At his birth, on the confession of his mother that he was Soma's son, her husband reduced her to ashes. Brahma afterwards raised her to life, and, being purified by the fire, her husband received her back. Samudra (the Sea), incensed at his son for the great crime of dishonouring his preceptor's wife, disinherited him; but owing to his sister [*+] Lakshmi's influence, part of his sin was removed, and he became bright as the moon when three days old; and, through her intercession with Parvati, he was restored to heaven, by being placed on Siva's forehead, who, thus ornamented, went to a feast of the gods. Vrihaspati on seeing Chandra again in heaven was greatly incensed, but was appeased on Brahma's declaring that the lascivious god should be excluded from heaven and placed among the stars; and that the sin which had obscured his glory should remain for ever. " If a person be born under the planet Budha, he will be fortunate, obtain an excellent wife," etc.

5. VRIHASPATI, hence Vrihaspativara (Thursday), was the preceptor of the gods, and is regarded as identical with Agni, almost the same epithets being applied to both in the Vedic hymns. In later times he is said to be a Rishi, a son of Angiras. "If a person be born under this planet, he will be endowed with an amiable disposition, possess palaces, gardens, lands, and be rich in money and corn. He will possess much religious merit, and have all his wishes gratified. Brahmans, however, will not be so fortunate as those of other castes, for Vrihaspati

[p. 434]

being a Brahman does not wish to exalt those of his own caste."

6. SUKRA, hence Sukravara (Friday), was the son of Bhrigu. He was the preceptor and the priest of the demons, and blind in one eye. The reason of this affliction is told in the following legend: When Vishnu, in the Dwarf Incarnation, went to Bali, king of the daityas, to solicit a blessing, Sukra, as Bali's preceptor, forbade the king to give him anything. The king being determined to give what was asked, it was the duty of the priest to read the customary formula and to pour out water from a vessel as a ratification of the gift. Sukra, anxious to prevent his master from giving what was asked, as he foresaw that it would prove his ruin, entered the water in an invisible form, and by his magical powers prevented it from falling. Vishnu, aware of the device, put a straw into the vessel, which, entering Sukra's eye, gave him so much pain that he could remain there no longer; so the water fell, the gift was ratified, and Sukra lost an eye. "If a person be born under the planet Sukra, he will have the faculty of knowing things past, present, and future. He will have many wives, a kingly umbrella (an emblem of royalty), and other kings will worship him."

Sukra is said to have possessed the power of raising the dead, as the following legend [**] shows:--Devajani, the daughter of Sukra, was deeply in love with Kacha, a son of Vrihaspati and a pupil of her father, who had been sent to Sukra for the express purpose of learning from him the incantation for raising the dead. One day Devajani sent Kacha to gather flowers from a wood belonging to some giants, who, on previous occasions had eaten him; but Sukra, by the above incantation, had

[p. 435]

restored him to life. The giants now resolved to make Sukra himself eat the boy; for which purpose, they cut him into small pieces, boiled him in spirits, and invited Sukra to an entertainment. As Kacha did not return with the flowers, Devajani with many tears told her father that, if he did not restore her lover, she would certainly destroy herself. Sukra learned by the power of meditation that he had eaten the boy, but did not know how to restore him to life, without the attempt being fatal to himself. At length, whilst the boy was in his stomach, he restored him to life, and then taught him the incantation he was so wishful to learn. Kacha, tearing open Sukra's stomach, came forth, and immediately using the wonderful incantation restored his teacher to life.

7. SANI, hence Sanivara (Saturday), is said to be the son of Surya, and Chhaya, the servant whom his wife Savarna substituted for herself; or, according to other accounts, he sprang from Balarama and Revati. He is represented as a black man, clothed in black garments, riding on a vulture, with four arms. "If a person be born under the planet Sani, he will be slandered, his riches dissipated, his son, wife, and friends destroyed; he will live at variance with others and endure many sufferings." Many stories are told of his evil influence, consequently the Hindus are under fear of evil from this planet. It was Sani who was said to have burnt off Ganesa's head.

8. RaHU (the ascending node) was the son of Vrihaspati and Sinhika. He is described as a black man, riding on a lion. "If a person be born under the planet Rahu, his wisdom, riches, and children will be destroyed; he will be exposed to many afflictions and be subject to his enemies." According to the popular notions of the Hindus, at the time of an eclipse Rahu devours the sun and moon; hence, as soon as an eclipse is noticed, the

[p. 436]

people make a dreadful noise, shouting, blowing horns, and beating drums, to cause Rahu to restore these luminaries. The reason of this custom is probably found in the following story: Rahu was originally an asura or giant, who took his present form at the churning of the sea. As the gods and demons churned, Surya and Chandra, who were sitting together, hinted to Vishnu, when the amrita appeared, that one of the demons had tasted it. Vishnu immediately cut off the head of the offender; but as he had drunk of the water of life, neither head nor trunk could perish. The head, taking the name of Rahu, and the trunk, that of Ketu, were placed in heaven as the ascending and descending nodes, and leave was granted, as a means of revenge on Surya and Chandra, that on certain occasions Rahu should approach these gods and render them unclean, so that their bodies at these times become thin and black. [**]

Footnotes

^431:* Ward, E. 70.

^432:* Ward, ii. 70.

^432:+ Ibid., 71.

^432:++ Page 72.

^433:* This Budha must not be confounded with Buddha, the Incarnation of Vishnu.

^433:+ Soma (the Moon) and Lakshmi were produced together at the churning of the ocean.

^434:* Ward, ii. 71.

^436:* Ward, ii. 81.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 437]

  

CHAPTER VI.

  

THE ASURAS.

IN the Puranas and other of the later writings of the Hindus, and also in the popular mind, the asuras are powerful evil beings; in translations the word is represented by such terms as demons, giants, etc. As the suras [**] were the gods, the asuras were not-gods, and therefore the enemies or opponents of the gods. In the Vedas the name asura is applied more frequently to the gods themselves than to their enemies, whilst it is also used very much in the same manner as in the later writings. In the Rig-Veda, Varuna is accosted as follows: "King Varuna has made a highway for the sun to go over. O thou wise asura and king, loosen our sins!" Again: "The all-knowing asura established the heavens, and fixed the limits of the earth. He sat as the supreme ruler of all worlds. These are the works of Varuna." "Asura stands for the Supreme Spirit," in another verse, and "also as an appellative for Prajapati or creation's lord." [*+] Again and again Varuna alone, and also in conjunction with Mitra, is called

[p. 438]

an asura. "All the Vedic gods have shared the same title, not excepting even goddesses." "Varuna was the all-knowing asura, Prajapati the Supreme Being; Indra, the Maruts, Tvastri, Mitra, Rudra, Agni, Vayu, Pushan, Savitri, Parjanya, the sacrificial priests, were all asuras. In fine, Deva (god) and asura were synonymous expressions in a multitude of texts." [**]

On the other hand, in the Rig-Veda, Indra is the destroyer of asuras. "The same Veda which speaks of the asuras as celestial beings supplies its readers also with the Mantras, by means of which devas overcame asuras. The texts which are condemnatory of the suras as impure and ungodly are far less in number than those which recognize the term as applicable to gods and priests." Dr. Banerjea, in the most interesting and ingenious article from which the above extracts are made, suggests a means of reconciling these contradictory uses of the word "asura." Before the Indo-Aryans arrived in India, they had lived in close proximity to the Persians, the original worshippers of fire. "What could be more natural," he asks, "than that the Asura-Pracheta, or Asura-Viswaveda of the one branch, was but the translation of the Ahura-Mazda (the Wise Lord, according to the 'Zend-Avesta') of the other branch; and that the word 'Ahura,' which the one used in a divine sense, would become a household word in the other branch, in the same sense?" the word "Ahura" being changed into "Asura," in a way common to many other words. He then goes on to say, that as "Assur" was the term used in Assyria for the Supreme Lord, and the Assyrians were for some time the rulers of the Persians, it was natural that this word should find its way into Persia; the only change being this, that the Persians added

[p. 439]

Mazda (wise or good) to the term "Assur," and the Indo-Aryans received it from them. So much for the good use of the term "Asura."

But the word "Assur" was not only used for the Supreme Lord, it also represented the Assyrian nation, his worshippers, who were most cruel in their treatment of their foes; and as, later on, the bitterest hatred is known to have existed between the Indo-Aryans and the Persians, the followers of Ahura-Mazda, Dr. Banerjea concludes that owing to the cruelties perpetrated by the Assyrians on the one hand, and the hatred cherished towards them by the Persians on the other, the branch of the Aryan family that migrated into India brought with them very bitter feelings towards Assur (the Assyrian people) and Ahuri (the belongings of Ahura); and thus the term "Asura," which at one time was considered a becoming epithet for the Supreme Being, became descriptive only of those who were the enemies of the gods. In order to afford sanction for this altered sense of a word, a new derivation has been given to it. The word was originally derived from the root as, through asu, "breath," and means a spirit, or "the Great Spirit." Now, however, it is explained to be simply a compound of a privative, and sura, "god," meaning a non-god: therefore a demon.

Whatever be the cause of it, there is no doubt that at the present day, and throughout the later writings of the Hindus, the term "asura" is used only for the enemies of the gods. In the "Taittirya Sanhita" [**] we read "that the gods and asuras contended together, and that the former, being less numerous than the latter, took some bricks, and placing them in a proper position to receive the sacrificial fire, with the formula, Thou

[p. 440]

art a multiplier,' they became numerous." In the "Satapatha Brahmana" [**] it is said that "the gods and asuras, both descendants of Prajapati, [*+] obtained their father's inheritance, truth and falsehood. The gods, abandoning falsehood, adopted truth; the asuras, abandoning truth, adopted falsehood. Speaking truth exclusively, the gods became weaker, but in the end became prosperous; the asuras, speaking falsehood exclusively, became rich, but in the end succumbed." The gods tried to sacrifice, but though interrupted at first by the asuras, at length succeeded, and so became superior to their foes. Another legend in the same book teaches that the asuras, when offering sacrifices, placed the oblations in their own mouths, whilst the gods gave their oblations to each other; at length Prajapati giving himself to them, the sacrifices, which supply the gods with food, were henceforth enjoyed by them.

Although there were frequent wars between the gods and asuras, the suras were not averse to receive the aid of their foes at the churning of the ocean; and some of them were not inferior in power and skill to the gods. Bali, one of their number, is worshipped by the Hindus on their birthday; and Jalandhara conquered in battle even Vishnu himself; Indra and the other gods fled before him, and Siva, unaided, could not destroy him. Rahu is an asura, and it was to destroy some of these mighty beings who distressed the gods, that Durga and Kali had to put forth their strength. In the constant wars between these rivals, Sukra, the preceptor of the asuras, was frequently called to resuscitate the fallen. The following story of Jalandhara from the Uttara

[p. 441]

[paragraph continues] Khanda of the "Padma Purana" [**] will illustrate the teaching of the later Hindu Scriptures respecting the asuras.

  

JALANDHARA.

The story of Jalandhara's birth and life was narrated by Narada to the Pandavas to encourage them when they were in distress on account of their misfortunes. He reminds them that adversity and prosperity come to all: Rahu, who swallows the sun, is the same Rahu whose head was severed from his body by Vishnu; and the valiant Jalandhara, the son of the Ocean and the river Ganges, who on one occasion conquered Vishnu, was himself slain by Siva. The mention of this fact excites the curiosity of his hearers; and in answer to their inquiry about him, Narada gives the following history.

Indra and the other gods, arriving at Siva's home on Mount Kailasa to pay him a visit, informed the bull Nandi, the chief of Siva's attendants, that they had come to amuse his master with song and dance. Siva invites them to enter, and, being delighted with their music, tells Indra to ask a boon, who, in a defiant tone, asks that he might be a warrior like Siva himself. The boon is granted, and the gods depart. No sooner have they left than Siva asks his attendants if they had not noticed Indra's haughty tone, when immediately there stood before him a form of anger, black as darkness, who said to Siva, "Give me thy similitude, and then what can I do for you?" Siva tells him to incorporate himself with the river of heaven (Ganga), form a union between her and the Ocean, and conquer Indra.

[p. 442]

In obedience to Siva's command, Ganga left the skies, and becoming united to the Ocean, from them a son proceeded, at whose birth the earth trembled and wept, and the three worlds resounded with noise. Brahma coming to inquire the cause of this commotion, and asking to see the child, Ganga lays it in his lap, when it seized his head, and would not loose it until its father opened its hand. Brahma, admiring the child's strength, said, "From his holding so firmly, let him be named Jalandhara," and bestowed upon him this boon, that he " should be unconquered by the gods, and enjoy the three worlds."

Jalandhara's boyhood was full of wonders. Borne up by the wind, he flew over the ocean; his pets were lions which he had caught; and the largest birds and fishes were subject to him. When he grew up to manhood, at Sukra's request, his father withdrew the sea from Jambadwipa, the residence of holy men, which became his home, and bearing his name has become celebrated. [**] Maya, the architect of the asuras, there built him a beautiful city, his father installed him as king, and Sukra gave him the charm by which he could raise the dead to life. He married Vrinda, the daughter of an Apsaras named Swarna, and soon after his wedding made war upon the gods.

In order to lead to a conflict, he sent a messenger to Indra, whom he found "surrounded by three hundred and thirty-three millions of deities," to demand the restoration of the moon, the amrita, elephant, horse, gem, tree, and other things of which he said Indra had robbed him, at the churning of his uncle, the Sea of Milk; and also to resign Swarga. As Indra refuses to accede to this request, Jalandhara raises an army of warriors

[p. 443]

having the heads of horses, elephants, camels, cats, tigers and lions, with which Indra's abode is soon surrounded. The gods in their extremity resort to Vishnu for aid.

On Vishnu's arrival the battle commences. Multitudes are slain on both sides, but the gods, when wounded, resort to the mountains, where they find herbs which quickly restore them. At length the greater gods and the leaders of the daityas personally engage in conflict; Indra falls insensible, Rudra is taken prisoner, and Kuvera is laid low by a blow of a mace. After this, the tide turns in favour of the gods. When Indra struck Bali, the most costly gems dropped from his mouth; he therefore asked for his body, and with his thunderbolt cut it into many parts. "From the purity of his actions, the parts of his body became the germs of the various gems. From his bones came diamonds, from his eyes sapphires, from his blood rubies, from his marrow emeralds, from his flesh crystals, from his tongue coral, and from his teeth pearls."

Indra being in his turn attacked by Jalandhara, Vishnu comes to the rescue; and though the asuras attack him in immense numbers, and the sky is dark with their arrows, Vishnu overthrows them as if they were leaves. One of their number, named Shailaroma, losing his head, seized hold of Garuda, Vishnu's marvellous bird, when the severed head immediately rejoined his body; Garuda, seeing this wonderful event, flew oft with his master. Jalandhara was prevent from following him, as he had to call in the aid of Sukra to restore his warriors to life.

Hearing that the soldiers of the gods were also restored to life through using herbs obtained from an island called Drona, situated in the Sea of Milk, he asked his uncle to submerge it. Being deprived of this

[p. 444]

means of restoration, they appealed to Vishnu, who, attacking Jalandhara, was laid low by the daitya, and would have been slain but for Lakshmi's intercession with her cousin. In return for his life Vishnu promised to remain near the Sea of Milk. Jalandhara, having now conquered the gods, enjoyed peace and happiness.

The gods, however, being expelled from heaven, and deprived of sacrifices and the amrita, did not long remain contented with their lot. They went together to Brahma, who conducted them to Siva, whom they found "seated on a throne and attended by myriads of devoted servants, naked, deformed, curly-haired, with matted locks and covered with dust." On Brahma' stating the case for the gods, Siva declared that, if Vishnu had been unsuccessful in fighting the demon, it was impossible that he alone could overcome him; he therefore advised that the gods should unite to form a weapon by which their common enemy might be destroyed. Acting on this advice, the gods, glowing with anger, darted forth volumes of flames, to which Siva added the consuming beams of his third eye. Vishnu, too, when summoned, added his flame of anger, and asked Siva to destroy the daitya, excusing himself from the task on the ground that Jalandhara was a relative of Lakshmi. Visvakarma and the deities were alarmed as they saw the glowing mass; but Siva, placing his heel on it, whirled round with it, and formed it into the discus called Sudarsana, which sent forth such fiery beams that the gods cried out, "Preserve us!" Brahma's beard was scorched as he took it into his hand--"such is the result of offering a gift to a blockhead"--but Siva hid it under his arm.

Narada informed Jalandhara of the intended attack

[p. 445]

of Siva, and, enlarging on Parvati's beauty, excited him to attack her husband that he might win her. With this object he sent Rahu as an ambassador, to summon the god to submission. On his arrival at the court the envoy delivered his master's message to Siva, in the form of Panchanana, who did not deign to speak; but the snake Vasuki, falling to the ground from his hair, began to eat Ganesa's rat. Seeing this, Kartikeya's peacock made such an awful noise that the snake disgorged the rat and returned to his proper place.

Lakshmi then entered the assembly with a vessel of amrita, with which she resuscitated Brahma's fifth head that was in Siva's hand; the head rolling on the ground uttered most boastful language, until myriads of hideous forms from Siva's locks quieted it. Rahu, seeing all this, asked Siva to forsake his wife and children, and live a mendicant's life. At a sign from Siva, Nandi, the bull, showed him the door; this was the answer vouchsafed to the illustrious master's demand.

War being determined on, Jalandhara marched first to Kailasa; but finding that Siva had forsaken it and taken up a position on a mountain near Lake Manasa, he surrounded the mountain with his troops. Nandi marched against them, and spread destruction "like the waters of the deluge;" reserves, however, being brought up, the army of the gods suffers loss. Parvati, hearing that her sons, Ganesa and Kartikeya, are hardly pressed, urged her husband to go in person and put forth his energy, though not to expose himself unnecessarily. Before leaving home, Siva carefully warned Parvati to be on her guard during his absence, as it was possible the daitya in some disguise might visit her; after this, accompanied by Virabhadra and Manibhadra, two forms

[p. 446]

of his anger, he went to the field of battle. When the conflict between the daityas and the attendants of Siva had continued for some time, Jalandhara devised a plan by which he hoped to succeed more easily than by fighting. Giving his own form and the command of his troops to a chief, the daitya king assumed the form of Siva, changed Durwarana into Nandi, and, taking the heads of Ganesa and Kartikeya under his arms, hastened to Siva's abode. Seeing this, Parvati was overwhelmed with grief; but having some doubt of his being the real Siva, she hid herself and would not listen to his overtures of love. To make certain of his identity, she caused one of her attendants to assume her form and visit the daitya, who, returning with the information that he was not the true Siva, Parvati hid herself in a lotus, and her companions were changed into bees which hovered around her.

In the mean time Vishnu had been more successful with Vrinda, the wife of Jalandhara. In the guise of a Brahman, he made a hermitage near her palace, and caused her to dream that she saw her husband's head severed from his body, his flesh eaten by wild animals, and his eyes plucked out by vultures. Distracted with her dream, in a high fever she rushed into the forest, where an ogress met her, ate her mules, and was about to attack her, when the Brahman came to her rescue. On reaching the hermitage, Vishnu induced her to enter, changed himself into the form of her husband, and there they lived together for some time. At length Vrinda, seeing through the disguise, cursed Vishnu, telling him that, as he had wronged Jalandhara, he would himself be wronged, and, having purified herself from her sin, died. Her body was burned, her mother collected the ashes, and threw them into the Ganges. The forest in

[p. 447]

which she was burned has ever since borne the name of Vrindavana, [**] near Mount Govardhana.

Jalandhara, hearing of his wife's deception and death, was mad with rage; and, leaving the neighbourhood of Parvati's home, returned to the field of battle. By Sukra's power his dead heroes were restored to life, and a grand final charge was made. At length Siva and Jalandhara personally fight; after a desperate encounter, in which the daitya employs various magical powers, Siva cuts off his head; but it is no sooner severed than it resumes its place. Siva in his extremity summonses to his aid the female forms or energies of the gods, Brahmi, Vaishnavi and the rest, who drink up the blood of the giant, and with their aid Siva succeeds in destroying him, and the gods regain their kingdom and possessions.

Footnotes

^437:* Originally the suras were a class of inferior deities, connected with Surya; afterwards the term was employed to signify the gods generally.

^437:+ Dr. Banerjea, Bengal Magazine, April, 1880.

^438:* Dr. Banerjea, Bengal Magazine, April, 1880.

^439:* Muir, O. S. T., v. 15.

^440:* Muir, O. S. T., iv. 60.

^440:+ The Mahabharata says the asuras were the elder, the gods the younger, sons.

^441:* Kennedy, "Hindu Mythology," p. 457.

^442:* The present Jallander.

^447:* Brindaban.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 448]

  

CHAPTER VII.

  

SACRED ANIMALS AND BIRDS.

SOME of the animals regarded as sacred have already been mentioned in connection with the deities to whom they are specially dear, and in whose worship they participate. They are regarded as the Vahans, or vehicles, upon which these gods and goddesses travel. Thus Indra rides upon the elephant Airavata; Siva on the bull Nandi; Yama on a buffalo; Durga, as Singhavahini, on a lion, as Durga on a tiger; Agni on a ram; Vayu on an antelope; Ganesa on a rat, and Sasti on a cat. Virabhadra, the emanation of Siva which destroyed Daksha's sacrifice, rode on a dog, and Kamadeva travelled either on the monster Makara or a parrot. The jackal is regarded as a representative of Durga, who in this form assisted in preserving Krishna, on the night of his birth, from Kansa's anger. Monkeys, as representatives of Hanuman, are very commonly worshipped; the dog, though worshipped by some, by others is regarded as unclean.

Amongst birds, the goose is the Vahan of Brahma, the peacock that of Kartikeya, Sani rides upon a vulture; the Brahmani kite is said to be a form of Durga, and the Khanjana, or wagtail, represents Vishnu, because the mark on its throat is thought to resemble the Shalgrama; the owl, too, is worshipped at the festivals of

[p. 449]

[paragraph continues] Kartikeya, Brahma, and Lakshmi. Garuda, the Vahan of Vishnu, and Jatayus and Sampati, the vultures who assisted Rama, will be described separately.

The cow, though not regarded as the Vahan of any deity, is worshipped too. Brahma is said to have created cows and Brahmans at the same time; the Brahman to officiate at worship, and the cow to provide milk, ghi, etc., as offerings, whilst cow-dung is necessary for various purifying ceremonies. Regular worship of the cow takes place yearly, at which similar ceremonies are performed to those which are employed at the worship of images; the horns and bodies of the cows are painted, and they are then bathed in the rivers. Some people are said to worship the cow daily.

  

GARUDA.

Garuda or Superna is a mythical being, half-man and half-eagle, the Vahan of Vishnu. Though not strictly divine, he appears frequently in Vishnu's exploits, and, being worshipped together with his lord, it is necessary to give some description of his birth and deeds.

When Daksha's sons refused to people the world, he produced sixty daughters, thirteen of whom he gave to Kasyapa the sage; of these, two come into prominence in connection with Garuda. Vinata bore him two celebrated sons, Garuda and Aruna: the former, also called Superna, was the king of the feathered tribes, and the remorseless enemy of the serpent race. Aruna became famous as the charioteer of the Sun. "The progeny of Kadru (the other sister) were a thousand powerful many-headed snakes, of immeasurable might, subject to Garuda." [**] The mother of Garuda is said to have laid an egg; hence her son assumed a bird-like form.

[p. 450]

Another legend makes "Garuda the son of Kasyapa and Diti. This all-prolific dame laid an egg, which, it was predicted, would yield her a deliverer from some great evil. After the lapse of five hundred years, Garuda sprang from the egg, flew to Indra's abode, extinguished the fire that surrounded it, conquered its

Click to enlarge
GARUDA.

guards, and bore off the amrita, which enabled him to liberate his captive mother. A few drops of the immortal beverage falling on some Kusa grass, it became eternally consecrated; and the serpents greedily licking it, so lacerated their tongues with the sharp grass, that they have ever since remained forked. But the boon of immortality was ensured to them by their partaking

[p. 451]

of the amrita." [**] "As soon as Garuda was born, his body expanded till it touched the sky; the other animals were terrified. His eyes were like the lightning. The mountains were driven away with the wind caused by the flapping of his wings. The rays which issued from his body set the four quarters of the world on fire; the affrighted gods imagining that Garuda must be an incarnation of Agni, resorted to that deity for protection." [*+]

Garuda is the mortal enemy of snakes. His mother Vinata quarrelled with her sister, Kadru, the mother of the snakes, respecting the colour of the horse that was produced at the churning of the ocean; since that time there has been constant enmity between their descendants. On the occasion of his marriage, the serpents, alarmed at the thought of his having children who might destroy them, made. a fierce attack on him; but the result was that he slew them all, save one, which he has ever since worn as an ornament round his neck. To this day superstitious Hindus repeat the name of Garuda three times before going to sleep at night, as a safeguard against snakes.

The following legend from the Mahabharata [*++] gives the account of his liberating his mother from servitude, and of his appointment as the Vahan of Vishnu. His mother, having lost her wager with her sister respecting the colour of the sea-produced horse, was reduced to servitude to the serpents, who, being anxious to become immortal, promised to liberate her on condition that her son Garuda should bring them Chandra (the Moon), whose bright spots are filled with amrita. Before starting on this expedition he went to his mother for

[p. 452]

food, who advised him to go to the seashore and gather whatever he could find, but entreated him to be most careful not to eat a Brahman; adding, "Should you at any time feel a burning sensation in your stomach, be sure you have eaten a Brahman."

After receiving this warning, he set off on his journey. Passing through a country inhabited by fishermen, he at one inspiration drew in houses, trees, cattle, men, and other animals. But among the inhabitants swallowed, one was a Brahman, who caused such an intolerable burning in his stomach that Garuda, unable to bear it, called in the greatest haste for him to come out. The Brahman refused unless his wife, a fisherman's daughter, might accompany him. To this Garuda consented.

Pursuing his journey, Garuda met his father Kasyapa (he shines as the Pole Star), who directed him to appease his hunger at a certain lake where an elephant and tortoise were fighting. The tortoise was eighty miles long, and the elephant one hundred and sixty. Garuda with one claw seized the elephant, with the other the tortoise, and perched with them on a tree eight hundred miles high. But the tree was unable to bear the ponderous weight, and, unhappily, thousands of pigmy Brahmans were then worshipping on one of its branches. Trembling lest he should destroy any of them, he took the bough in his beak, continuing to hold the elephant and tortoise in his claws, and flew to a mountain in an uninhabited country, where he finished his repast on the tortoise and elephant.

Garuda having surmounted astonishing dangers, at last seized the Moon and concealed it under his wing. On his return, however, being attacked by Indra and the gods, he overcame all, excepting Vishnu. Even Vishnu was so severely put to it in the contest, that he

[p. 453]

came to terms with Garuda, made him immortal, and promised him a higher seat than his own; while on his part Garuda became the Vahan or carrier of Vishnu. Since then, Vishnu rides upon Garuda, while the latter, in the shape of a flag, sits at the top of Vishnu's car.

In the Ramayana Garuda is represented as doing great service to Rama and his followers, and his powers and peculiarities are repeatedly referred to. Thus, in the description of Hanuman it is said, that

"Like a thunderbolt in frame was he,
  And swift as Garud's self could flee." [**]

In like manner it is said of two heroes:

"Sugriva, offspring of the Sun,
  And Bali, Indra's mighty one,
  They, both endowed with Garud's might,
  And skilled in all the arts of fight,
  Wandered in arms the forest through,
  And lions and snakes and tigers slew." [*+]

When Ansuman found the ashes of the sixty thousand sons of Sagar, [*++] who, owing to Kapila's curse, had been destroyed, and was in distress because he could obtain no water with which to offer oblations for the dead, he sees their uncle--

"King Garud, best beyond compare,
  Of birds who wing the fields of air.
  Then thus unto the weeping man
  The son of Vinata began:
  'Grieve not, O hero, for their fall,
  Who died a death approved of all.'" [* section]

Garuda then tells Ansuman that if he can succeed in inducing Ganga to descend from heaven, and with her

[p. 454]

streams to touch these ashes, the dead shall return to life, and finally ascend to Indra's heaven.

In the description of the city of Ayodha, when Rama had gone into the forest, is a reference to Garuda's antipathy to snakes:--

           "The city wore
  No look of beauty as before--
  Like a dull river or a lake
  By Garud robbed of every snake." [**]

In the following lines is an account of Garuda's resting on a tree when he was carrying off the elephant and the tortoise as narrated above. Ravana impelled by the accounts of Sita's beauty, goes to see her, and on his journey

"He saw a fig-tree like a cloud,
  With mighty branches earthward bowed.
  It stretched a hundred leagues, and made
  For hermit bands a welcome shade.
  Thither the feathered king of yore
  An elephant and tortoise bore,
  And lighted on a bough to eat
  The captives of his taloned feet.
  The bough, unable to sustain
  The crushing weight and sudden strain,
  Loaded with sprays and leaves of spring,
  Gave way beneath the feathered king.
       *         *         *         *
  The feathered monarch raised the weight
  Of the huge bough, and bore away
  The loosened load and captured prey.
       *         *         *         *
  His soul conceived the high emprise
  To snatch the amrit from the skies.
  He rent the nets of iron first,
  Then through the jewel chamber burst,
  And bore the drink of heaven away
  That watched in Indra's palace lay." [*+]

[p. 455]

In the great conflict with Ravana, as Rama and his brother were wounded and well-nigh dead, owing to a flight of serpents sent by Indrajit, Garuda appeared to restore them, and thus enabled them to carry on the war. His approach and work are thus described:--

            "The rushing wind grew loud,
  Red lightnings flashed from banks of cloud,
  The mountains shook, the wild waves rose,
  And, smitten by resistless blows,
  Uprooted fell each stately tree
  That fringed the margin of the sea.
  All life within the waters feared:
  Then, as the Vanars gazed, appeared
  King Garud's self, a wondrous sight,
  Disclosed in flames of fiery light.
  From his fierce eye in sudden dread
  All serpents in a moment fled;
  And those transformed to shafts, that bound
  The princes, vanished in the ground.
  On Raghu's sons his eyes he bent,
  And hailed the lords omnipotent.
  Then o'er them stooped the feathered king,
  And touched their faces with his wing.
  His healing touch their pangs allayed,
  And closed each rent the shafts had made.
  Again their eyes were bright and bold;
  Again the smooth skin shone like gold." [**]

For this great work of restoration Rama expressed his gratitude, whereupon Garuda replied--

"In me, O Raghu's son, behold
  One who has loved thee from of old.
  Garud, the lord of all that fly,
  Thy guardian and thy friend am I.
  Not all the gods in heaven could loose
  These numbing bonds, this serpent noose,
  Wherewith fierce Ravan's son, renowned
  For magic arts, your limbs had bound.

[p. 456]

[paragraph continues]  Those arrows fixed in every limb
  Were mighty snakes, transformed by him.
  Bloodthirsty race, they live beneath
  The earth, and slay with venomed teeth."

Garuda is represented in pictures and sculpture in various ways. Sometimes he has the head and wings of a bird, with a human body; sometimes he has a bird's claws; and at others he has a human face, and the body of a bird.

  

JATAYUS AND SAMPATI.

Garuda had two sons, named Jatayus and Sampati, who also assisted Rama. As he, Lakshman and Sati reached the hermitage in the forest where they intended to remain, they saw "a mighty vulture, of size and strength unparalleled." Struck with his appearance, Rama inquired who he was, when Jatayus informed them of his parentage, and offered to be their friend:

"Thy ready helper will I be
  And guard thy house, if thou agree:
  When thou and Lakshman urge the chase,
  By Sita's side shall be my place." [**]

This offer was accepted; and when Rama saw the stag which Ravana sent to attract him from his home, he went after it with the greater sense of security because Jatayus was there to guard his wife. When Ravana seized Sita, she cried out to Jatayus--

"Oh see, the king who rules the race
  Of giants, cruel, fierce, and base!
  Ravan, the spoiler, bears me hence,
  The helpless prey of violence." [*+]

[p. 457]

Jatayus first tries by reasoning to lead Ravana to restore Sita to her home, and warned him that death would result from his act of violence. When, however,

Click to enlarge
JATAYUS.

neither advice nor threats availed, he prepared to fight.

"With clash and din and furious blows
  Of murderous battle met the foes:
       *         *         *         *

[p. 458]

[paragraph continues]  Then fierce the dreadful combat raged,
  As fiend and bird in war engaged,
  As if two winged mountains sped
  To dire encounter overhead." [**]

Jatayus succeeded in breaking Ravana's bow, but--

"A second bow soon armed his hand,
  Whence pointed arrows swift and true
  In hundreds, yea, in thousands flew." [*+]

The giant's arrows wounded the vulture; the vulture in return threw darts which injured Ravana, struck the steeds of the chariot, and broke the chariot itself; whilst with his beak and claws he tore the coachman to pieces. Ravana descended from his chariot and fought on foot; but gradually the strength of Jatayus, who was weak with age, gave way. Ravana, therefore, re-ascends the chariot, and is about to fly through the air, when the vulture a second time intercepts his flight, and--

"Swooped down upon the giant's back:
  Down to the bone the talons went;
  With many a wound the flesh was rent." [*++]

Jatayus was able to tear off the ten left arms of Ravana, but unfortunately others grew to replace them. At length Ravana seizes his sword, and, after giving the vulture a mortal blow, hurries off with Sita to Lanka.

When Rama and Lakshman commence their search for Sita, they come upon the dying bird, and, seeing the marks of blood upon him, at first think that he has been guilty of carrying off the lady; but, after hearing from him the story of Ravana's visit and flight, they watch the bird expire, and perform his funeral rites.

In their search, reaching the seashore, but still ignorant

[p. 459]

of Sita's whereabouts, some of their monkey followers see an immense vulture, weak with age, who, hearing them mention Jatayus' name, inquires of his welfare. When told that he had been slain by Ravana, the vulture informs them that this victim of the giant was no other than his own brother; and in revenge assists them, by informing them where Ravana and Sita were at that moment. He told them that he had Garuda's power to see immense distances, and, mounting into the sky, saw Lanka, and told the Vanar chiefs that the object of their search was there. Hearing this, Hanuman was despatched to communicate with Sita, and to assure her of Rama's coming to rescue her.

Click to enlarge
THE LOTUS.

Footnotes

^449:* "Vishnu Purana," p. 119.

^451:* Moor's "Hindu Pantheon," 341.

^451:+ Ward, ii. 200.

^451:++ Ibid., ii. 201.

^453:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 94.

^453:+ Ibid., i. 96.

^453:++ See Ganga.

^453: section Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 186.

^454:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," ii. 167.

^454:+ Ibid., iii. 162.

^455:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," v. 153.

^456:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," iii. 68.

^456:+ Ibid., 230.

^458:* "Griffiths's Ramayana," iii. 236.

^458:+ Ibid., 237.

^458:++ Ibid., 240.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 460]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

  

GANGA.

GANGa (the Ganges), the chief of the sacred streams of India, whose waters are said to have the power of cleansing from all past, present, and future sins, is

Click to enlarge
GANGA.

believed to be divine, and the account of her birth and appearance on earth forms an interesting episode in the Ramayana. The story is told to Rama by the hermit

[p. 461]

[paragraph continues] Visvamitra, as he was travelling with Rama and his brother Lakshman. As soon as they reach the banks of the sacred stream,

"They bathed, as Scripture bids, and paid
  Oblations due to god and shade."

As soon as they were seated, Rama said-

            "'O saint, I yearn
  The three-pathed Ganga's tale to learn.
  Thus urged, the saint recounted both
  The birth of Ganga and her growth:
  The mighty hill with metals stored,
  Himalaya, is, the mountains' lord,
  The father of a lovely pair
  Of daughters, fairest of the fair.
  Their mother, offspring of the will
  Of Meru, everlasting hill,
  Mena, Himalaya's darling, graced
  With beauty of her dainty waist.
  Ganga was elder-born; then came
  The fair one known by Uma's name.
  Then all the gods of heaven, in need
  Of Ganga's help their vows to speed,
  To great Himalaya came and prayed
  The mountain king to yield the maid.
  He, not regardless of the weal
  Of the three worlds, with holy zeal
  His daughter to the Immortals gave--
  Ganga, whose waters cleanse and save,
  Who roams at pleasure, fair and free,
  Purging all sinners, to the sea.
  The three-pathed Ganga thus obtained,
  The gods their heavenly homes regained.'" [**]

The sage next tells Rama that there was a mighty King of Ayodha named Sagara [*+] who, being childless, 

[p. 462]

and most anxious to have a son, propitiated the saint Bhrigu (or, according to other accounts, his grandson) by penances extending over a hundred years. At length the saint, pleased with Sagara's worship, said--

"From thee, O Sagar, blameless king,
  A mighty host of sons shall spring,
  And thou shalt win a glorious name,
  Which none, O chief, but thou shalt claim;
  One of thy queens a son shall bear,
  Maintainer of thy race and heir;
  And of the other there shall be
  Some sixty thousand born to thee." [**]

Hearing this, the wives are anxious to know which of them is to have the one son, and which the multitude; but this the Brahman leaves them to decide. Kesini wishes for the one; and Sumati is pleased with the prospect of having sixty thousand.

"Time passed. The elder consort bare
  A son called Ansuman, the heir.

[p. 463]

[paragraph continues]  Then Sumati, the younger, gave
  Birth to a gourd, O hero brave,
  Whose rind, when burst and cleft in two,
  Gave sixty thousand babes to view.
  All these with care the nurses laid
  In jars of oil; and there they stayed,
  Till, youthful age and strength complete,
  Forth speeding from each dark retreat,
  All peers in valour, years, and might,
  The sixty thousand came to light." [**]

After a time King Sagara determined to make an Asvamedha, or horse sacrifice, with the object of becoming the reigning Indra, or king of the gods. Preparations for this are accordingly made, and Prince Ansuman, the son of the elder wife, is appointed by the king to follow the horse set apart for the sacrifice; for, according to the ritual, it was to be set free, and allowed to wander for a whole year wherever it would. Indra, knowing the great merit that Sagar would obtain by this sacrifice, and fearing that he might even lose his crown,

"Veiling his form in demon guise,
  Came down upon the appointed day,
  And drove the victim horse away." [*+]

The officiating priest, being aware of this, cries out--

"Haste, king! now let the thief be slain;
  Bring thou the charger back again;
  The sacred rite prevented thus
  Brings scathe and woe to all of us."

King Sagara, incited by the Brahman, urges his sons to search until they find the stolen horse:

"Brave sons of mine, I know not how
  These demons are so mighty now;

[p. 464]

[paragraph continues]  The priests began the rites so well,
  All sanctified with prayer and spell.
  If in the depths of earth he hide,
  Or lurk beneath the ocean's tide,
  Pursue, dear sons, the robber's track;
  Slay him and bring the charger back.
  The whole of this broad earth explore,
  Sea-garlanded from shore to shore;
  Yea, dig her up with might and main,
  Until you see the horse again." [**]

The sons commence their search. Each digs a league in depth, and by this means they reach the centre of the earth; but cannot see the horse. Alarmed at their destructive work, the gods repair to Brahma, and tell him what is happening. He cheers them with the information that Vishnu, in the form of Kapila, will protect the Earth, his bride, and that these sons of Sagara will be consumed to ashes. The gods, encouraged by these words, repair to their home and patiently wait for deliverance.

After digging sixty thousand leagues into the earth without obtaining any tidings of the horse, the princes return to their father, asking what can be done. Sagara commands them to dig on, and continue their search until the horse is found. At length they

"Saw Vasudeva (Vishnu) standing there.
  In Kapil's form he loved to wear;
  And near the everlasting God
  The victim charger cropped the sod.
  They saw with joy and eager eyes
  The fancied robber and the prize,
  And on him rushed the furious band,
  Crying aloud, 'Stand, villain! Stand!'

[p. 465]

'Avaunt! avaunt!' great Kapil cried,
  His bosom flusht with passion's tide;
  Then, by his might, that proud array
  All scorched to heaps of ashes lay." [**],

Hearing no news of his sons, the king became anxious, and sent his grandson Ansuman to look after them. He inquires of all he meets on the earth, and is encouraged by the information that he shall certainly bring back the stolen horse. At length he reaches the spot where his brothers were consumed, and is overwhelmed with grief at their fate. At this moment his uncle Garuda appears and consoles him, saying--

"Grieve not, O hero, for their fall,
  Who died a death approved of all.
  Of mighty strength they met their fate
  By Kapil's hand, whom none can mate.
  Pour forth for them no earthly wave,
  A holier flood their spirits crave.
  If, daughter of the Lord of Snow,
  Ganga would turn her stream below,
  Her waves, that cleanse all mortal stain,
  Would wash their ashes pure again.
  Yea, when her flood, whom all revere,
  Rolls o'er the dust that moulders here,
  The sixty thousand, freed from sin,
  A home in Indra's heaven shall win.
  Go, and with ceaseless labours try
  To draw the goddess from the sky.
  Return, and with thee take the steed;
  So shall thy grandsire's rite succeed." [*+]

The prince takes the steed; the sacrifice is completed, and for 30,000 years King Sagara was thinking how he could induce Ganga to come down from heaven. At length, not having succeeded in forming a successful plan, the monarch himself went to heaven. Ansuman

[p. 466]

reigned in his stead, who, in his turn, tried to find some means of liberating his brothers. His son Dilipa also made a similar, but equally unsuccessful, effort. It was given to Dilipa's son Bhagirath to accomplish this work. Bhagirath had no son. He, in order to obtain this boon, and also to free his kinsmen from their sad fate, practised most severe austerities, until at length Brahma said--

"Blest monarch, of a glorious race,
  Thy fervent rites have won my grace.
  Well hast thou wrought thine awful task:
  Some boon in turn, O hermit, ask." [**]

To which Bhagirath replies as follows--

"Let Sagar's sons receive from me
  Libations that they long to see.
  Let Ganga with her holy wave
  The ashes of the heroes lave,
  That so my kinsmen may ascend
  To heavenly bliss that ne'er shall end.
  And give, I pray, O god, a son,
  Nor let my house be all undone."

To this the god replies--

       "As thou prayest, it shall be.
  Ganga, whose waves in Swarga (Heaven) flow,
  Is daughter of the Lord of Snow.
  Win Siva, that his aid be lent
  To hold her in her mid descent,
  For earth alone will never bear
  These torrents hurled from upper air." [*+]

Brahma then re-ascended to the skies; but Bhagirath remained for a whole year--

"With arms upraised, refusing rest,
  While with one toe the earth he prest."

[p. 467]

Siva, pleased with this devotion, promised to sustain the shock of the descent of the waters on his head; but Ganga was not at all pleased when commanded to descend to earth:

"'He calls me,' in her wrath she cried,
  'And all my flood shall sweep
  And whirl him in its whelming tide
  To hell's profoundest deep.'" [**]

Siva, however, was a match for the wrathful deity. He held her in the coils of his hair until her anger abated, and then she fell into the Vindu lake, from whence proceed the seven sacred streams of India. This lake is not known; and of the seven streams mentioned, two only are familiar to geographers, the Ganges and the Indus. One branch of this stream followed Bhagirath wherever he went. On the way the waters flooded the sacrificial flame of Jahnu, a saint. In his anger he drank up its waters, and Bhagirath's work seemed to be fruitless. But at the intercession of the king and Brahma, the saint allowed the waters to flow from his ears. From this fact one of the many names of Ganga is Jahnavi, or daughter of Jahnu. At length Bhagirath reached the ocean, and descending to the depths where Sagara's sons were lying, Ganga followed until her waters touched the ashes, when--

"Soon as the flood their dust bedewed,
  Their spirits gained beatitude,
  And all in heavenly bodies dressed
  Rose to the skies' eternal rest." [*+]

As a reward for his meritorious work, Brahma' said to him--

"Long as the ocean's flood shall stand
  Upon the border of the land,

[p. 468]

So long shall Sagar's sons remain,
  And, god-like, rank in heaven retain.
  Ganga thine eldest child shall be,
  Called from thy name Bhagirathi." [**]

As a consequence of faith in this legend, one of the most frequented places of pilgrimage in India is Sagar Island, the place where the river Ganges and ocean meet.

In addition to the Ganges, there are many other rivers regarded as sacred by the Hindus; the worship of these, and bathing in them, being productive of almost as great blessings as are to be obtained from Ganga herself. Some of these are considered as males and some as females. The following is not a complete list, but it contains the names of the rivers most generally worshipped.

Male rivers:--The Sona and the Brahmaputra.

Female rivers:--The Godavari, the Kaveri, the Atreyi, the Karaloya, the Bahuda, the Gomati, the Sarayu, the Gandaki, the Varahi, the Charmanwati, the Shatadru, the Vipasha, the Goutami, the Karmanasha, the Airavati, the Chandrabhaga, the Vitasta, the Sindhu, the Krishna, the Vetravati, the Bhairava. [*+]

Footnotes

^461:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 171.

^461:+ Sagara's birth was supernatural. His father Bahu, King of Ayodha, was expelled from his kingdom. The mother of Sagara [p. 462] accompanied her husband to the forest, but, owing to a poisonous drug having been given her by a rival wife, she could not bring forth her son, with whom she had been pregnant for seven years. When her husband died, she wished to be burned with his body; but this was prevented by a sage named Aurva, who assured her that her son would yet be born, and grow up to be a mighty king. When he was born, Aurva gave him the name Sagara (sa, with, and gara, poison). Aurva himself was also born in an extraordinary manner. A king named Kritavirya was very liberal to the Bhrigus, and through his liberality they became rich. His descendants being poor, they asked help of the Bhrigus. On this being refused them, they made an onslaught on the Brahmans of this family, slaying all they could find, even to children in the womb. One woman concealed her unborn child in her thigh. The Kshattriyas, hearing of this, tried to slay him, but he issued from his mother's thigh with such lustre that he blinded his persecutors. And because he was born from the thigh (uru) of his mother, he was called Aurva.

^462:* Griffiths's " Ramayana," i. 174.

^463:* Griffiths's Ramayana," i. 175.

^463:+ Ibid., 177.

^464:* Griffiths's " Ramayana," i. 177.

^465:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 183.

^465:+ Ibid., 186.

^466:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 190.

^466:+ Ibid.

^467:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 193.

^467:+ Ibid., 196.

^468:* Griffiths's "Ramayana," i. 197.

^468:+ Ward, ii. 217.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 469]

  

CHAPTER IX.

  

SACRED TREES.

SEVERAL trees are regarded as sacred; they being representative of, or peculiarly dear to, some of the deities. It is a meritorious act to plant and water them, and such is the respect cherished for them, that even their withered branches are not allowed to be burnt. The

Click to enlarge
THE BANYAN TREE.

same ceremonies are observed at the planting of these trees, or, when they have been taken care of for some time, at their consecration, as are observed at the setting up of an image. The following are the names of the sacred trees:--

[p. 470]

The Asvatta, or Pipul. Tree (Ficus religiosa), sacred to Vishnu.

The Vata, Banyan or Indian Fig Tree [**] (Ficus Indica), also sacred to Vishnu.

The Vilva, or Wood-apple, or Bel Tree (Aegle Marmelos), sacred to Siva.

The Vakula (Mimusops Elengi).

The Harltaki (Terminalia chebula).

Click to enlarge
THE BEL.

The Amalaki, or Emblic Myrobalans (Phyllanthus emblica).

The Nimba, or Nim Tree (Melia azadirachta).

The Tulsi (Ocimum gratissimum or sanctum).

The Tulsi is very commonly worshipped by the followers of Vishnu; and the plant is most carefully tended

[p. 471]

as his representative. Every morning the ground near it is cleaned with cow-dung and water; at night a lamp is hung before it. During the two hottest months of the year, a vessel of water is hung over it so that it constantly receives moisture. When a plant dies, it is cast into a river, the same honour being given to it as to an image as soon as the worship of it is concluded. It is a common custom to place a sprig of Tulsi near the head of a dying person. The origin of the worship of this plant is said to be the following: A woman named Tulsi engaged in religious austerities for a long period, and asked, as a boon, that she might become the wife of Vishnu. Lakshmi, hearing of this, cursed her, and changed her into the plant which bears her name. Vishnu, however, comforted his follower with the assurance that he would assume the form of the Shalgrama, and continue near her. [**] The Vayu and the Padma Puranas teach that the Tulsi was one of the products of the churning of the ocean.

In addition to these trees should be mentioned the Durva grass (Agrostis linearis) and Kusa grass (Poa cynosuroides), which form part of the offerings made to the gods; as do the leaves or flowers of most of the trees previously mentioned. The Mahabharata has a legend accounting for the sacredness of the Kusa grass. When Garuda brought some of the amrita from the moon for the Nagas, or serpent deities, as the price to be paid for his mother's release from servitude, Indra tried to induce him not to give it to them lest they, becoming immortal, should oust him from his throne. Garuda would not consent to this arrangement, but told Indra that after it was given to them he could steal it.

[p. 472]

Garuda therefore placed the amrita in a vessel on the grass, and whilst the Nagas were bathing, Indra stole it. They, thinking that the ambrosia must be on the Kusa grass, licked it; the sharp spikes slit their tongues, and hence the serpents' tongues are forked; and the grass, having been touched by the amrita, is holy.

Click to enlarge
THE FIG TREE.

Footnotes

^470:* See <page 472>.

^471:* Ward, ii. 204.

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 473]

  

CHAPTER X.

  

MISCELLANEOUS MINOR DEITIES.

  

1. SHITALA.

SHITALA is the Bengali name for the small-pox, and for the deity who is supposed to have charge of that disease. The meaning of the word is "She who makes cold."

Click to enlarge
SHITALA.

This goddess is represented as a golden-complexioned woman sitting on a lotus, or riding on an ass, dressed in red clothes. Before an image of this kind, or more

[p. 474]

commonly a pan of water merely, Shitala is worshipped in the hope that she will preserve her worshippers from this dire disease.

In the spring of the year, the Hindus formerly inoculated their children for this disease when they were about two years of age. The Brahman who performed the operation made presents to render Shitala propitious, and promised, in case the work was successful, to give still greater gifts. At the close of the operation the flowers that were presented to the goddess were placed in the hair of the child as a charm. On behalf of those afflicted with small-pox, offerings are made daily; and when the patient is thought to be dangerously ill, he is placed in front of an image of Shitala, bathed in, and given to drink, water that has been offered to her. Beggars go about with a stone, partly gilded, which they teach is sacred to Shitala, and, in seasons when the disease is prevalent, receive presents from the superstitious. [**]

  

2. MANASA.

Manasa is the sister of Vasuki, king of the snakes; the wife of Jaratkaru, a sage; and being the queen of the snakes is regarded as the protectress of men from those reptiles. Another name by which she is known is Vishahara, "the destroyer of poison." Generally, offerings are made to her without any image being made, a branch of a tree, a pan of water, an earthen snake being her representative; when her image is made, it is that of a woman clothed with snakes, sitting on a lotus, or standing upon a snake. A song founded upon the following story concludes the worship of this deity.

[p. 475]

A merchant named Chanda not only refused to worship Manasa, but professed the profoundest contempt for her. In process of time six of his sons died from snake-bites. To avoid a similar fate, his eldest son Lakindara dwelt in an iron house; but Manasa caused a snake to enter through a crevice, which bit him on his wedding-day and caused his death too. His widow, however, escaped, and went weeping to her mother-in-law,

Click to enlarge
MANASA.

who, with the neighbours, vainly tried to induce Chanda to propitiate the goddess through whose influence so much evil had come to the family; Manasa herself urged his friends to prevail upon him not to remain so hostile to her. At last he so far yielded to

[p. 476]

their wishes as to throw a single flower with his left hand towards her image, which so delighted her that she restored his sons to life, and from that time, as men came to know of her power, her worship has become celebrated. [**]

The Mahabharata gives the following particulars regarding her marriage. Jagatakaru, her husband, was an eminent sage, who had practised great austerities, bathed in all the holy tanks, abstained from matrimony, and, as a result of his penance and fasting, had a dry and shrivelled body. In the course of his wanderings, he came to a place where he saw a number of men hanging from a tree with their heads downwards over a deep abyss, with a rat gnawing the rope by which they were suspended, and learned that they were his own ancestors, doomed to endure this misery because, their children being dead, they had no one to release them (i.e. by performing religious ceremonies); and he, who, by having a son might have set them free, was given up to a life of austerity, and refused to marry. When they are told that Jagatakaru is the man through whose abstinence they are suffering, they entreat him to seek a wife and secure their deliverance. He consents to do so on condition that the parents of the girl he marries give her to him willingly. Vasuki hearing of this, offers his sister to the sage, who marries her and has a son named Asika. This son effected the deliverance of his ancestors and also rendered good service to the serpent race in saving them from destruction when Janamejaya was wishful to exterminate them.

[p. 477]

  

3. SASTI.

Sasti is peculiarly the goddess of married women; she is the giver of children, assists at childbirth, and is the guardian of young children. She is represented as a golden-complexioned woman with a child in her arms, riding upon a cat; hence no Hindu woman would under

Click to enlarge
SASTI.

any circumstances injure that animal, lest she should offend the goddess and be made to suffer for it. Six times a year festivals in honour of Sasti are held; in addition to which, women who have lost their children by death worship her monthly. When a child is six days old, the father worships her; and when three

[p. 478]

weeks old, the mother presents offerings to her. The ordinary representative of Sasti is a stone about the size of a man's head, placed under a Banyan tree, which is decorated with flowers, and offerings of rice, fruit, etc., are made to it. [**]

  

4. THE SHALGRAMA.

By the worshippers of Vishnu, the Shalgrama is regarded as a most sacred object. It does not derive its sacredness from consecrating rites, as images and other representatives of deities, but is believed to be inherently holy. It is a black ammonite, found in Mount Gandaki in Nepal. The popular belief is that in this mountain there are insects which perforate the stones; and when perforated, falling into the river Gandaka, they are taken out by means of nets. The more common ones are about the size of a watch, and their price varies according to their size, hollowness, and inside colouring, according to which peculiarities special names are given. For the rarer kinds as much as Rs. 2000 are given; and as it is the common belief of the people that the possessor of one of these, and a shell called Dakshinavarta (i.e. a shell whose convolutions are towards the right), can never be poor, it is not to be wondered at that large prices should be paid for them. As it is also believed that in parting with them they invite misfortune, it is natural that few should wish to part with them; to sell them for gain is regarded as a most dishonourable deed.

A reason for the sacredness of the Shalgrama is found in the "Bhagavata Purana." Sani commenced his reign with a request to Brahma to become subject to him;

[p. 479]

[paragraph continues] Brahma referred him to Vishnu, who asked him to call upon him the next day. When he called, finding that Vishnu had transformed himself into a mountain, he became a worm named Vajrakita, and afflicted him for twelve years. At the expiration of that time Vishnu resumed his proper shape, and ordered that henceforth the stones of this mountain (Gandaki) should be worshipped as representatives of himself. [**]

The Brahmans usually worship Vishnu in this form in their daily puja at home. In the hot season a vessel is suspended over it, and the water continually dropping on it keeps it cool; another vessel is placed under it to catch the water, which is drunk in the evening by the worshipper. The marks of it are shown to men when dying, in the belief that the concentration of the mind on them at this time will ensure the soul a safe passage to Vishnu's heaven. [*+]

  

5. THE DHENKI.

The Dhenki is a log of wood fixed to a pivot, used for husking rice, pounding bricks for mortar, etc. It is generally worked by women, who, by standing on the one end, raise it to a certain height and then let it fall by its own weight. It is said to be the Vahan or vehicle of Narada, and it is believed that, owing to his blessing, it became an object of worship. A religious teacher, when initiating a disciple into the mysteries of Hinduism, told him to say, "Dhenki, Dhenki." Narada, hearing this, was delighted, and coming upon his Vahan gave him another incantation by which he became

[p. 480]

perfect and was admitted into heaven. It is worshipped at the time of marriage, at the investiture of a son with the Poita or Brahmanical thread, at the ceremony of giving rice to a child, and on other festive occasions. At the close of the last century a Raja of Naladanga is said to have spent Rs. 300,000 in celebrating the worship of the Dhenki.

  

6. KA? WHO?

The Athenians were not alone in worshipping the "Unknown God." "The authors of the Brahmanas had so completely broken with the past, that, forgetful of the poetical character of the hymns (of the Vedas), and the yearning of the poets after the unknown god, they exalted the interrogative pronoun itself into a deity, and acknowledged a god, Ka? or 'Who?' In the 'Taittiriya Brahmana,' in the 'Kanshitaki Brahmana,' in the 'Tandya Brahmana,' and in the 'Satapatha Brahmana,' wherever interrogative verses occur, the author states that Ka is Prajapati, or the lord of creatures. Nor did they stop here. Some of the hymns in which the interrogative pronoun occurred were called Kadvat, i.e., having kad or quid. But soon a new adjective was formed, and not only the hymns, but the sacrifices also, offered to the god, were called Kaya, or 'Who-ish.' At the time of Panini (the great grammarian), this word had acquired such legitimacy as to call for a separate rule explaining its formation. The commentator here explains Ka by Brahman. After this, we can hardly wonder that in the later Sanskrit literature of the Puranas, Ka appears as a recognized god, with a genealogy of his own, perhaps even a wife; and that in the laws of Manu one of the recognized forms of marriage, genet ally known by the name of the Prajapati

[p. 481]

marriage, occurs under the monstrous title of Kaya." [**] In the Mahabharata Ka is identified with Daksha, and in the "Bhagavata Purana" it is applied to Kasyapa, probably on account of their similarity to Prajapati.

 

Click to enlarge
THE NIM.

 

Footnotes

^474:* Ward, ii. 139.

^476:* Ward, ii. 142.

^478:* Ward, ii. 143.

^479:* For another account of the origin of the worship of the Shalgrama, see the account of Tulsi, chap. ix.

^479:+ Ward, ii. 221.

^481:* Max-Muller, quoted in Dowson's Classical Dictionary, s.v. "Ka?"

     
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 482]

  

CHAPTER XI.

  

SUPERHUMAN, THOUGH NOT DIVINE BEINGS.

  

APSARAS AND GANDHARVAS.

THE Apsaras are nymphs, and the Gandharvas choristers in Indra's heaven. The Apsaras are not as a class prominently noticed in the Vedas, but Urvasi and a few others are mentioned by name. In the Institutes of Manu they are said to be the creations of the Seven Manus, the progenitors of mankind. In the Epic poems more is said about them--the Ramayana attributing their origin to the churning of the ocean, and with this the Puranic account of their origin agrees. It is said that when they rose from the waters neither gods nor asuras would wed them, so they became the common property of both classes. They are sometimes called "the wives of the gods," and "daughters of pleasure."

"Then from the agitated deep up sprung
  The legion of Apsarasas, so named
  That to the watery element they owed
  Their being. Myriads were they born, and all
  In vestures heavenly clad, and heavenly gems;
  Yet more divine their native semblance, rich
  With all the gifts of grace, of youth and beauty.
  A train innumerous followed; yet thus fair,
  Nor god nor demon sought their wedded love;
  Thus Raghava! they still remain--their charms
  The common treasure of the host of heaven."

[p. 483]

"In the Puranas various ganas or classes of them are mentioned; the Vayu Purana enumerates fourteen, the Hari Vansa seven. They are again divided, as being daivika, 'divine,' or laukika, 'worldly.' The former are said to be ten in number, and the latter thirty-four, and these are the heavenly charmers who fascinated heroes as Urvasi, allured austere sages from their devotions and penances as Meneka and Rembha. The Kasi Khand says there are forty-five millions of them, but only one thousand and sixty are the principal. The Apsaras, then, are fairylike beings, beautiful and voluptuous. They are the wives or mistresses of the Gandharvas, and are not prudish in the dispensation of their favours. Their amours upon earth have been numerous, and they are the rewards in Indra's heaven held out to heroes who fall in battle. They have the power of changing their forms, and give good luck to whom they favour." [**]

In the Satapatha Brahmana is a story, which has been copied into the Puranas, concerning Pururavas and the Apsaras Urvasi which will give some idea of the character of these beings. Owing to the imprecation of Indra and Varuna, Urvasi was compelled to leave heaven. Pururavas, son of Budha and a daughter of Manu, fell deeply in love with her; and she agreed, on certain conditions, to live with him. She said, "I have two rams which must always remain with me, both by day and night; you must never be seen by me undressed; and I must eat only ghi, or clarified butter." The inhabitants of heaven being anxious for her return, the Gandharvas came at night and carried off her rams. Pururavas, in order to rescue them, rushed into her room hurriedly, without being dressed, trusting to the

[p. 484]

darkness to hide him. Unfortunately a flash of lightning revealed him to her gaze, and, the condition of her remaining with him being broken, she returned to her celestial home. Pururavas was distracted at his loss, and wandered from place to place searching for her. At length he was successful in his quest, and obtained a promise that she would meet him yearly and present him with a son. After five visits, she assured him that if he offered a sacrifice with the express object of gaining her, he would succeed. He followed her advice, became a Gandharva, and so obtained eternal possession of his strange bride.

The Gandharvas, according to the Vishnu Purana, were sons of Brahma. "The Gandharvas were next born, imbibing melody; drinking of the goddess of speech, they were born, and thence their appellation. (gam dhayantah, 'drinking speech')." [**] In another place the same Purana [*+] makes them the offspring of Kasyapa and Arishta, and therefore grandchildren of Brahma. The Padma Purana speaks of them as the children of Vach. They are said to be sixty millions in number. They defeated the Nagas, or snake-gods, seized their jewels, and usurped their kingdom. In their distress the snakes resorted to Vishnu, who promised to enter into Purukutsa and destroy them. The Nagas sent their sister Narmada (the river Nerbudda) to ask the help of Purukutsa, who consented to do her bidding. As a reward the Nagas gave this power to their sister, that whoever worshipped her and repeated her name should be safe not only from the poison of snakes, but other poison too.

It would appear from the earlier books that the

Gandharvas were assistants of Indra, the Storm King,

[p. 485]

and were rewarded by the later writers with a place in his heaven. And as the deities were all provided with a wife or wives, the Gandharvas were not neglected in this respect. The beautiful though frail Apsaras were allotted to them, and when Indra was in danger of losing his throne, or the other gods were in a similar plight through the austerity of the devout, some of the more attractive were commissioned to visit them and distract their minds.

The name of these heavenly musicians and their loose matrimonial alliances with the Apsaras has come into common use to designate one of the five forms of marriage--that where the mutual consent of man and woman to live together is all that is necessary, without any civil or religious ceremony.

  

THE RAKSHASAS.

These formidable beings are frequently referred to, and their actions described at some length in Hindu legend. Though Brahmans by birth, strange to say they are described as cannibals. The goddess Parvati gave to the whole tribe the power to arrive at maturity the moment they were born. They are said to be able to assume any form at will; and we read of them appearing as horses, buffaloes, and tigers. Some of them had a hundred heads. Amongst the most noted of them was Ravana, the hereditary foe of Vishnu, who in several incarnations left his heavenly home to slay him. The demon reappeared on the earth after remaining some years in hell; it was therefore necessary for the god in like manner to revisit the earth to get rid of him. Some of Ravana's relatives, such as

[p. 486]

[paragraph continues] Kumbhakarna, Vibhishena, Indrajit, and others, were almost equally notorious.

Kumbhakarna, a brother of Ravana, as soon as he was born, stretched forth his arms, and gathered everything he could reach to stay his hunger. Later on in life, on one occasion he seized five hundred Apsaras, and at another time he laid violent hands on the wives of a hundred sages, besides cows and Brahmans innumerable. Brahma threatened to destroy him unless he moderated his demands. Fearing he might come to an untimely end, he commenced a life of austerity, which was to continue ten thousand years. But as this proceeded, the gods feared lest, as a result of such a penance, he should be stronger than ever, and, especially that he might obtain immortality and be able to swallow up everything, gods and men included. In their distress they appealed to Brahma, who caused his wife Sarasvati to enter the demon's mind, and delude him so far as to lead him to ask as a boon that he might sleep for ever. The plan succeeded. But the Rakshasas were not pleased with the result, and asked Brahma, to allow him to awake once in six months for one day only, and then eat as much as he wished. This request was granted. At one meal he is said to have eaten six thousand cows, ten thousand sheep, ten thousand goats, four hundred buffaloes, five thousand deer, and drank four thousand hogsheads of spirits, with other things in proportion, and then was angry with his brother Ravana for not providing him with more! His home in Ceylon is said to have been 20,000 miles long, and his bed occupied the full length; but according to the Ramayana the island itself was only 800 miles in circumference!

What can be represented by these monsters? In

[p. 487]

[paragraph continues] Manu, [**] amongst instructions concerning sacrifice, we read: "As a preservative of the oblation to the patriarchs, let the housekeeper begin with an offering to the gods; for the Rakshasas rend in pieces an oblation which has no such preservative." According to Professor Wilson these beings may be divided into three classes: "One is of a semi-celestial kind, and is ranked with the attendants of Kuvera, the god of wealth; another is a sort of goblin, imp, or ogre, haunting cemeteries, animating dead bodies, disturbing sacrifices, and ensnaring and devouring human beings; the third kind approaches more to the Titan, or relentless and powerful enemy of the gods." Can it be that men, finding it difficult to abstain from evil and do good, have invented these mighty beings to represent the forces of evil that are arrayed against them? They are described as eating cows and also men, when, according to the ordinary belief of the people, these are the greatest imaginable crimes. May this not be a vigorous method of teaching that the enemies of God and man will not stop at anything in order to secure success in their work of destruction? It may be that the Rakshasas of the Epics were the rude barbarians of India, who were conquered by the Aryans, and their manners of life and religious ceremonies caricatured in this strange fashion. Some of the more intelligent were styled monkeys, possibly the more savage were styled Rakshasas.

The name Bhuta is given to a similar class of beings who are the common attendants of Siva; hence. his name of Bhutanatha, the lord of spirits. The term Pisarch is given to beings similar to, though if possible more offensive than, the Rakshasas.

[p. 488]

  

THE JAIN DEITIES.

As there are considerable numbers of Jains, chiefly in the north and north-west of India, some account should be given of their objects of worship.

The origin of this sect is obscure, especially as their chronology is so wild and extravagant. Hindu notions of time are reasonable compared with those of the Jains.

In some respects, there is much in the tenets of this religion that closely resembles those of Buddhism. Both reject the divine origin and authority of the Vedas; though when a Vedic text agrees with his own belief, a learned Jain will not scruple to employ it to buttress his own teaching. Both may be regarded as heretical sects of Hinduism. Both reject the divine institution of caste, and profess to believe in the social and religious equality of man: though the Jains are not regarded as outside the pale of Hinduism. For when, as it sometimes happens, a Jain wishes to worship as an orthodox Hindu, a place is found for him in the caste system; he is not treated as an outcast. Both acknowledge in a general way the more common and modern of the Hindu deities; and very much of the worship of both is very similar to that which prevails amongst the Hindus. In both systems a number of saints have been raised to the dignity of deities, and have largely taken the place of the inferior gods of the Hindu Pantheon. In fact, at one time it was a commonly received opinion that the Jains were the present-day representatives of the Buddhists, But fuller and more correct knowledge has shown that the two religions, though strikingly similar, have distinct and separate origins. Possibly they originated about the same time, when there was

[p. 489]

considerable religious excitement in India; or it may be, that very soon after Gautama Buddha commenced his work as a teacher, some of his followers broke away from his leadership, and from that time have formed a separate and independent stream. At the present time Jains and Buddhists worship a succession of deified saints in place of the many gods adored by the Hindus; but in the two systems the names of these saints are quite different. The main lines of the religions are very similar, but the differences are sufficiently great to show that they have run a separate, though to a large extent parallel, course.

The Jain saints belonging to the present age are twenty-four in number; in a previous age there were twenty-four, and in a succeeding age there will be a similar number. These twenty-four as represented in the temples are seated in an attitude of contemplation. In features they greatly resemble each other, and in order to distinguish them, they are painted in different colours, and have either their names engraved on their pedestals, or some distinguishing sign, commonly an animal by their side. In the stories of their lives there is little of a distinctive character. But there is this noticeable fact, that in height of stature and in length of life there has been a steady decline. A brief account of the first and last two of these saints, now regarded as divine beings, may be taken as fairly representative of the whole.

1. Vrishabha, of the kingly race of Ikohwaku, was son of Nabhi and Marudeva. He is usually painted yellow, and has a bull as his characteristic mark. His stature was 500 poles in height, and he lived 8,400,000 great years. He was born at Oude. When crowned king he was 2,000,000; he reigned 6,300,000 years, and

[p. 490]

spent 100,000 in the practice of austerity, by which he became qualified for sainthood.

23. Parswanatha was also of the same race as the first. He is represented as blue in colour, and has a snake to distinguish him. Possibly this was the real founder of the Jain sect. He was born at Benares, and commenced his saintly life when he was thirty years of age, and, continuing his asceticism for seventy years, died when he was just a hundred years old.

24. Mahavir is the last and much the best known of all. His common title is "The Saint." His image is golden in colour, and his symbol a lion. He resigned his position as a god in order to obtain immortality as a saint, when there was a little over seventy-five years to run before the end of the age. His parents were Brahmans; but as Indra considered it improper that one whom he recognized as a saint before he was born, who was to occupy such a position, should be born in a humble family, he removed the foetus to the womb of a princess of the royal race, Trisala, wife of Siddharta. At twenty-eight he lost his father, became king and reigned for two years. Then resigning his royal state, he entered upon a life of austerity, and after forty-two years of preparation, at the age of seventy-two he became exempt from pain for ever. In other words he died, and obtained moksha, deliverance from birth and death, absorption. According to tradition, the death of the last Jain occurred two thousand four hundred years ago.

Footnotes

^483:* Dowson, s.v.

^484:* Page 41.

^484:+ Page 150.

^487:* Manu, bk. iii.

    
Hindu Mythology, Vedic and Puranic, by W.J. Wilkins, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 491]

  

INDEX.

A.

Adikavi, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

Aditi, character and attributes of, <page 17>; resorted to for pardon, <page 17>; origin of, <page 18>; the mother of Vishnu in the Dwarf incarnation, <page 18>

Adityas, the, <page 18>; various lists of, <page 19>; probably sun-gods, <page 19>

Agastya, a son of Varuna, <page 44>

Agni, description of, <page 21>; cause of his superiority, <page 10>; Vedic attributes of, <page 22>; a Rakshas, <page 27>; the father of Nila, <page 27>; the reputed father of Kartikeya, <page 337>; cursed by Bhrigu, <page 36>

Ahalya, wife of Gautama, seduced by Indra, <page 60>; released from her husband's curse, <page 177>

Airavata, Indra's elephant, <page 448>

Ambika, a name of Uma, <page 285>

Amburaja, a name of Varuna, <page 44>

Ananga, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Ananta, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Anasuya, wife of Atri, <page 371>

Anginas, a son of Brahma, <page 369>

Anila, a name of Vayu, <page 67>

Animals, sacred, <page 448> ff.

Annapurna, a name of Durga, <page 318>

Ansuman, a son of Sagara, <page 463>

Antaka, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Apava, a name of Brahma, <page 99>

Apsaras, the, <page 482>

Ardhanarishwara, a form of Siva and Parvati united, <page 318>

Arjuna, son of Indra, <page 414>; character of, <page 416>; fights with Siva, <page 421>

Asuras, the dispute between them and the gods, <page 158>; description of, <page 437>; word used in different senses, <page 438> ff.

Asvamedha, or horse sacrifice, <page 463>

Asvins, the, <page 35>; description of, <page 44>; marry Surya, <page 45>; physicians of the gods, <page 45>; legends of cures wrought by, <page 45>; unclean because practising as physicians, <page 47>

Atmabhu, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

Atri, a son of Brahma, <page 371>

B.

Bajri, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Balarama, incarnation of Vishnu, <page 220> ff.; also of Sesha, <page 221>

Bali, a Daitya king, slain by Vishnu, <page 156> ff.; a monkey chief, the son of Indra, <page 175>

Bali, a monkey king, the usurper of Sugriva's throne, <page 395>

[p. 492]

Bhadrakali, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Bhagavata, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Bharata, a brother of Rama Chandra, <page 175>

Bhaskara, a name of Surya, <page 35> Bhima, a son of Vayu, <page 414>; character of, <page 415>; conflicts of, <page 426> ff.

Bhishma, a son of Ganga, <page 414>; commander-in-chief of the Kuru army, <page 413>; death of, <page 428>

Bhrigu, a son of Brahma, <page 363>; origin of, <page 364>; priest at Daksha's sacrifice, <page 364>; curses Indra, <page 364>; also Agni, <page 366>; changes a Kshattriya into a Brahman, <page 367>

Bhutanath, a name of Siva, <page 487>

Bhuteshwara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Brahma, the supreme deity, <page 93>; derivation of the name, <page 95>; hymn to, <page 95>

Brahma, the creator, <page 99>; called Narayana, <page 99>; formation of his five heads, <page 100>; why he lost his fifth head, <page 101>; worships Siva, <page 105>; his worship now ceased, <page 106>; cursed by his son Narada, <page 384>

Brahmana, a, defined, <page 4>

Brahmanaspati, a name of Agni, <page 28>

Bridge, building of the, to Lanka, <page 398>

Brihaspati, a name of Agni, <page 28>;

explanation of attributes, <page 28>

Buddha, incarnation of Vishnu, <page 225> ff.; Was this Buddha the founder of Buddhism? <page 226>; Puranic account of, <page 227> ff.; Lalita-Vistara, account of, <page 231> ff.; relics of Buddha preserved, <page 244>

Budha, one of the planets, <page 433>

C.

Chaitanya, incarnation of Vishnu, <page 253> ff.

Chanchala, name of Lakshmi, <page 133>

Chanda, a demon slain by Durga, <page 312>

Chandi, a form of Durga, <page 309>, <page 312>

Chandra, one of the planets, <page 432>. See also SOMA.

Chandrashekara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Chhagaratha, a name of Agni, <page 28>

Chinnamustaka, a name of Durga, <page 317>

Chitragupta, son of Indrani, <page 63>

Chyavana, a sage cured by the Asvins, <page 46>

Civilization, origin of, <page 16>

Cow of plenty, the, <page 167>

Creation, the, Vedic account of, <page 343>; Manu's, <page 346>; Puranic, <page 347>

D.

Daksha, a son of Brahma, <page 372>

Damodara, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Dandadhara, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Dasabhuja, a name of Durga, <page 307>

Dasaratha, the father of Rama Chandra, <page 172>

Dasyas, the, a tribe who assisted in building Rama's bridge, <page 192>

Devaki, mother of Krishna, <page 201>

Devasena, wife of Kartikeya, <page 337>

Devi, a name of Uma, <page 284>

Dhananjaya, a name of Agni, <page 27>

Dharmaraja, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Dhata, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

Dhenki, the vahan of Narada, <page 479>

Dhenuka, an asura slain by Balarama, <page 222>

Dhritarashtra, the father of the Kurus, <page 412>

[p. 493]

Dhumketu, a name of Agni, <page 27>

Digambara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Discus, the, of Vishnu, how made, <page 34>

Diti, the wife of Kasyapa, <page 67>

Divakara, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Divapati, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Divodasa, King of Benares, misled by Vishnu as Buddha, <page 228>

Draupadi, the wife of the Pandus, <page 418>

Drona, the preceptor of the Kurus and Pandus, <page 416>

Durga, a demon slain by Durga, <page 296>

Durga, various accounts of her origin, <page 297> ff.; when worshipped, <page 300>; names of, <page 301>; her great conflict, <page 302>

Durvasas, a sage, <page 413>

Duryodhana, the ruler of Hastinapur, <page 414>, <page 421>

Dyaus and Prithivi, the most ancient of the Vedic gods, <page 13>; Dyaus superseded by Indra, <page 14>; Puranic account of Prithivi, <page 15>

E.

Ekadanta, a name of Ganesa, <page 327>

Ekavira, a name of Kali, <page 314>

F.

Flood, the, account of, from the Vedas, <page 134>; the Mahabharata, <page 136>; and from the Bhagavata Purana, <page 137>

G.

Gandharvas, the, <page 483> Gandhavaha, a name of Vayu, <page 67>

Ganesa, <page 323>; birth of, <page 325>; object of his birth, <page 329>; hymn to, <page 331>; writer of the Mahabharata, <page 331>; recent incarnation of, <page 332>; he outwits Kartikeya, <page 341>

Ganesajanani, a name of Durga, <page 320>

Ganga, the daughter of Himalaya, <page 460>; brought to earth by Bhagirath, <page 466>

Gangadhara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Garuda, Vishnu's vehicle, acts as a disciple of Vishnu, <page 228>; birth of, <page 449>; antipathy to snakes, <page 454>; assists Rama, <page 453>; encourages Ansuman to seek his uncles, <page 453>

Gautama, Indra's spiritual guide, <page 60>; a name of Buddha, <page 230>, <page 232>

Gayatri, the, quoted, <page 30>; praise of, <page 31>; a wife of Brahma, <page 111>

Girisha, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Gods, the, how they became superior to the asuras, <page 10>; they and the goddesses cursed by Savitri, <page 112>

Gopal, a name of Krishna, <page 200>

Gopinath, a name of Krishna, <page 200>

Grahapati, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Guardians of the world, the, <page 390>

H.

Hanuman, the ally of Rama, <page 66>; his birth and work, <page 401>

Har-Hari, a form of Siva and Vishnu united, <page 276>

Hari, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Haripriya, a name of Lakshmi, <page 133>

Harischandra, <page 41>

Hayagriva, a demon who stole the Vedas, <page 138>

Hiranyagarbha, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

[p. 494]

Hiranyakasipu, a demon slain by Vishnu, <page 149>; a son of Kasyapa, <page 371>

Hiranyaksha, a demon slain by Vishnu, <page 147>; a son of Kasyapa, <page 371>

I.

Indra, attributes of, <page 53>; appearance of, <page 55>; Vedic account of birth of, <page 54>; invited to drink of the Soma, <page 56>; his conflict with Vritra, <page 57>; legend of a mortal raised to the position of, <page 59>; conflict with Krishna, <page 60>; immorality of, <page 60>; heaven of, <page 61>; quarrels with Tvastri and Visvarupa, <page 76>; outwitted by Krishna, <page 207>; cursed by Bhrigu, <page 364>

Indrajit, a son of Ravana, <page 192>

Indrani, the wife of Indra, <page 63>

Isana, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Ishwar, a name of Siva, <page 283>

J.

Jagaddhatri, a form of Durga, <page 308>

Jagadgauri, a form of Durga, <page 317>

Jagannath, an incarnation of Vishnu, <page 248> ff; Is the worship of this deity disguised Buddhism? <page 251>

Jain deities, the, <page 488>

Jaladhija, a name of Lakshmi, <page 133>

Jalandhara, an asura, <page 441>; his conflict with Indra, <page 442>; overcomes Vishnu, <page 444>; assumes the form of Siva, <page 445>; is robbed of his wife by Vishnu, <page 446>; slain by Siva, <page 447>

Jalapati, a name of Varuna, <page 44>

Jamadagni, the father of Parasurama, <page 165>

Jamadagnya, a name of Parasurama, <page 165>

Janaka, father-in-law of Rama Chandra, <page 177> ff.

Janarddana, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Jatayus, a vulture who fought with Ravana, <page 456>

Jaya, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Jivalana, a name of Agni, <page 27>

K.

Ka? <page 480>

Kabandha, a giant slain by Rama, <page 186>

Kaitabhajit, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Kala, a name of Yama, <page 86> Kalanemi, a demon attacked by Hanuman, <page 404>

Kalaratri, a name of Kali, <page 314>

Kali, a form of Durga, <page 309>; her form assumed by Krishna, <page 211>; and by Sita, <page 310>; regarded as a distinct deity, <page 313>; a production of Lakshmi, <page 314>; human sacrifices offered to, <page 315>

Kali Yuga, description of, <page 246>

Kalki Avatara of Vishnu, <page 245>

Kalpa, explanation of, <page 354>

Kalyayani, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Kamadeva, <page 256>; consumed by Siva, <page 257>

Kamdhenu, the cow of plenty, <page 339>

Kandarpa, a name of Kamadeva, <page 302>

Kansa, an asura slain by Krishna, <page 199>

[p. 495]

Kapali, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Kapila, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Kapila, a form of Krishna, <page 464>

Karali, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Karmasakshi, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Karna, a son of Surya, <page 35>; character of, <page 416>

Kartikeya, <page 334> ff.

Karttavirya, a Kshattriya king, slain by Parasurama, <page 166> ff.

Kasyapa, the father of Garuda, <page 450>

Katyayini, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Kesava, a name of Vishnu, <page 124>

Ketu, the descending node, <page 436>

Kratu, a son of Brahma, <page 369>

Krishna, an incarnation of Vishnu, <page 197>; reason of this incarnation, <page 199>; saved by Vasudeva, <page 202>; destroys Putana, <page 204>; releases the sons of Kuvera from a curse, <page 205>; destroys the Bakasura, <page 206>; outwits Indra, <page 207>; restores the jewel Syamantaka, <page 207>; beloved by the Gopis, <page 209>; protects Radha, <page 211>; slays Arishta, Kesin and Kansa, <page 211>; relieves Mathura, <page 213>; conquers Naraka, <page 214>; fights with Siva, <page 215>; destroys Fever, <page 215>; overcomes a rival Krishna, <page 216>; his death, <page 217>; references to him in the Mahabharata, <page 218>; a deceiver, <page 219>

Krishnakrora, a name of Durga, <page 320>

Kritarita, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Kumari, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Kumbhakarna, a Rakshas, <page 486>

Kurma, an incarnation of Vishnu, <page 141> ff.

Kurus, the sons of Dritarashtra, <page 422> ff.

Kushumesu, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Kuvera, the god of wealth, <page 388>

L.

Lakshman, a brother of Rama Chandra, <page 175>

Lakshmi, origin of, <page 127>; description of, from the Vishnu Purana, <page 130>; and from the Ramayana, <page 132>

Lokamata, a name of Lakshmi, <page 133>

Lokesha, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

M.

Madan, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Madhava, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Madhusudana, a-name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Mahabharata, the heroes of the, <page 411>

Mahadeva, a name of Siva, <page 275>

Mahakala, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Mahamari, a name of Kali, <page 316>

Mahamaya, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Mahendra, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Maheshwara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Mahisha, a demon slain by Durga, <page 308>

Mahishamardini, a name of Durga, <page 308>

Manasa, the snake goddess, <page 474>

Mangala, a planet, <page 432>. See also KARTIKEYA.

Manmatha, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Manu, a patriarch, <page 16>, <page 134>

--, author of the Institutes quoted, <page 4>

Manvantara, <page 353>

Mara, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Maricha, a hermit who assisted Ravana, <page 184>

[p. 496]

Marichi, a son of Brahma, <page 370>

Martanda, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Marut, a name of Vayu, <page 67>

Maruts, the, <page 12>, <page 67>; origin of name of, <page 68>

Mathuranath, a name of Krishna, <page 200>

Matsya Avatara, the, <page 134> ff.

Meghavahana, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Mihira, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Mitra and Varuna, <page 37>; hymns descriptive of, <page 39>

Mritunjaya, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Muktakesi, a name of Durga, <page 317>

Mukunda, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

N.

Nakula, a son of the Asvins, <page 415>

Nala, the builder of Rama's bridge, <page 406>

Nanda, the foster-father of Krishna, <page 202>

Nandi, Siva's bull, <page 448>

Narada, a son of Brahma, <page 382>; his appearance at the court of Yudhisthira, <page 420>; his advice to Jalandhara, <page 444>

Narayana, a name of Brahma, <page 99>; also of Vishnu, <page 118>

Nila, a son of Agni, <page 175>, <page 408>

Nilmadhava, a name of Vishnu, <page 252>

Nisumbha, a giant slain by Durga, <page 305>

Nrisingha Avatara, the, <page 149> ff.

O.

Ocean, the churning of the, <page 128>

Om, explanation of the word, <page 95>

P.

Padma, a name of Lakshmi, <page 128>

Padmalaya, a name of Lakshmi, <page 128>

Panchanana, a form of Siva, <page 283>

Pandu, the father of the Pandus, <page 413>

Pandus, heroes of the Mahabharata, <page 413> ff.

Panyakirti, a name of Garuda, <page 228>

Paramesthi, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

Parasakti, a name of Durga, <page 312>

Parasurama Avatara, the, of Vishnu, <page 162> if.

Parijata tree, the, <page 60>

Parjanya, a storm deity, <page 63>

Parvati, wife of Siva, <page 289>; how she became fair, <page 290>; Puranic account of her origin, <page 291>; why she visited the earth, <page 292>

Pasi, a name of Varuna, <page 44>

Patala, the infernal regions, <page 161>

Pavan, a name of Vayu, <page 66> Penance, forms of, <page 123>, <page 339>

Pisachas, the, <page 487>

Pitamvara, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Pitripati, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Planets, the, <page 431>

Prachetas, a name of Varuna, <page 44>

Prachetasas, the reputed parents of Daksha, <page 374>

Pradyumna, a name of Kamadeva, <page 261>

Prahlada, a son of Hiranyakasipu, <page 150> ff.

Prajapati, the term explained, <page 96>, <page 373>

Pratyangira, a name of Durga, <page 318>

Prithi, the wife of Pulastya, <page 368>

Prithivi. See DYAUS.

Prithu, the father of Prithivi, <page 16>

Pulaha, a son of Brahma, <page 369> ff.

Pulastya, <page 368> ff.

Puranas, the, <page 89>

Puranic deities identified with Vedic, <page 97>

[p. 497]

Purus, the, heroes of the Mahabharata, <page 411> ff.

Purusha, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Purusha Sukta quoted, <page 94>

Purushottama, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Pushan, a sun-god, <page 36>; Puranic, account of, <page 37>

R.

Rahu, the ascending node, <page 435>; an ambassador of Siva, <page 445>

Raji, an earthly king who became Indra, <page 58>

Rakshasas, the, cloud demons, <page 64>; description of, in later books, <page 171>, <page 485>

Rama Chandra Avatara, the, <page 170> ff.; worshipped Durga; superiority acknowledged by Parasurama, <page 168>; the saviour, <page 197>

Ramayana, the gods of the, <page 170> ff. Rati, wife of Kamadeva, <page 258>

Ravana, a Rakshas, <page 171>; his destruction foretold by Sita, <page 179>; slain by Rama Chandra, <page 193>

Ravi, <page 432>. See also SURYA.

Revati, wife of Balarama, <page 223>

Ribhus, the, <page 75>

Richika, grandfather of Parasurama, <page 163>

Rivers, the sacred, <page 468>

Rudra, <page 12>; his quarrel with Brahma, <page 102>; origin of, <page 266>. See also SIVA.

Rukmini, the wife of Krishna, <page 200>

S.

Sagara, asvamedha, or horse sacrifice of, <page 463>

Sahadeva, a son of the Asvins, <page 415> Sakambhari, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Sakra, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Saktis; the, <page 320>

Salya, a leader in the Pandu war, <page 413>, <page 427>

Samana, a name of Yama, <page 86> Samavurti, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Sambhu, a name of Siva, <page 272>

Sampati, <page 456>

Samvara, a demon who carried off Kamadeva, <page 259>

Sangna, wife of Surya, <page 33>

Sanhita, definition of a, <page 4>

Sani, a planet, <page 435>

Sankara, a name of Siva, <page 280>

Saptajihva, a name of Agni, <page 28>

Sarasvati, the wife of Brahma, <page 107>

Sasti, the goddess, <page 477>

Sati, a name of Uma, <page 285>

Satrughna, a brother of Rama Chandra, <page 175>

Satyavan, a hermit restored to life by Yama, <page 84>

Savitri, identical with Surya, <page 32>;

wife of Satyavan, <page 85>; name of

Sarasvati, <page 111>. See also SURYA.

Savitripati, a name of Brahma, <page 107>

Sesha, the serpent deity, incarnate in Balarama, <page 221>

Shalgrama, the, <page 478>

Shitala, <page 473>

Siddha-Senani, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Singhavahini, a name of Durga, <page 308>

Sita, origin and previous birth of, <page 178>. See RaMA CHANDRA.

Siva, the Destroyer, <page 263>; worshipped by Brahma, <page 105>; foretells the destruction of Ravana, <page 187>; overcome by Krishna, <page 215>; identified with Rudra, <page 263>; and with Agni, <page 266>; marries Uma, <page 267>; slighted by Daksha, <page 267>; reason for living an ascetic life,

[p. 498]

[paragraph continues] <page 267>, <page 274>; why called Mahadeva, <page 275>; origin of third eye of, <page 277>; represented by the Linga, <page 280>

Skanda, a name of Kartikeya, <page 335>, <page 338>

Smarahara, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Soma, description of, <page 69>; how the soma-plant was brought to earth, <page 71>; his marriage, <page 72>; identified with the moon, <page 73>; seduces Tara, <page 74>. See also CHANDRA.

Sparsana, a name of Vayu, <page 67>

Sraddhadeva, a name of Yama, <page 86>

Sri, a name of Lakshmi, <page 127>, <page 128>

Sri Kanta, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Sthanu, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Subhadra, sister of Krishna, <page 420>

Subramanya, a name of Kartikeya, <page 341>

Sugriva, king of the monkeys, <page 35>, <page 394>; a son of Surya, <page 175>

Sugriva, a messenger of the demons, sent to Durga, <page 304>

Sukra, preceptor of the asuras, <page 122>, <page 442>; a planet, <page 434>

Sumbha, a demon slain by Durga, <page 304> ff.

Superiority of one god, the, <page 11>

Supernakha, sister of Ravana, <page 182> ff.

Superna, a name of Garuda, <page 449>

Surya, <page 9>; an Aditya, <page 32>; hymns to, <page 32>; Puranic account of his origin, <page 33>; marriage, <page 33>; becomes a horse, <page 34>; names of, <page 34>, <page 35>; his children, <page 35>. See also RAVI.

Surya, wife of the Asvins, <page 45>

Sushena, <page 408>

Sushna, a name of Vritra, <page 58>

Swarga, Indra's heaven, <page 61>

Swargapati, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Swayambhu, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

T.

Taittiriyas, origin of the, <page 7>

Tara, a monkey leader, <page 175>

Tara, wife of Vrihaspati, <page 74>; a name of Durga, <page 317>

Taraka, a demon, <page 257>

Tarika, a demon, <page 338>

Tarini, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Time, divisions of, <page 353>

Trees, sacred, <page 469>

Triad, the Vedic, <page 10>, <page 20>

Trident of Siva, the, how produced, <page 34>

Tryambaka, a name of Siva, <page 283>

Tulsi, a sacred plant, <page 470>

Tvastri, or Visvakarma, <page 74>; quarrels with, and is slain by Indra, <page 77>; the builder for the gods, <page 77>

U.

Uma, wife of Siva, <page 285> ff.; a compound of two distinct deities, <page 286>; early meaning of her later names, <page 288>; earlier account of her origin, <page 289>

Ushas, the, origin and attributes of, <page 48>; Vedic hymns addressed to, <page 49>

V.

Vach, the goddess of speech, identified with Sarasvati, <page 109>, <page 110>

Vahans, or vehicles of the gods, the, <page 448>

Vahni, a name of Agni, <page 27>

Vaikunthanatha, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Vaisravana, a name of Kuvera, <page 388>

Vaisravas, a name of Pulastya, <page 388>

Vaivasvata, a name of Yama, <page 86>

[p. 499]

Vaka, an asura slain by Bhima, <page 417>

Vaman incarnation, the, <page 155> ff.

Vanars, the monkeys who assisted Rama Chandra, <page 187>

Varaha incarnation, the, <page 144> ff.

Varuna and Mitra, <page 37>; characteristics of, <page 38>; human sacrifices offered to, <page 41>; the god of the ocean, <page 42>; worshipped in seasons of drought, <page 41>; assists the gods, <page 43>; refuses to accede to Rama's prayer, <page 406>

Vasishtha, a son of Brahma, <page 380>

Vasudeva, the father of Krishna, <page 201>

Vata, a name of Vayu, <page 66>

Vayu, a storm-god, <page 9>, <page 64>; description of, <page 65>

Vedas, the, <page 3> ff.

Vedavati, a name of Sita, <page 178>

Vedic deities, the; how they obtained superiority over the asuras, <page 10>

Vijaya, a name of Durga, <page 306>

Virabhadra, an emanation of Siva, <page 445>

Viradha, a giant slain by Rama Chandra, <page 182>; cursed by Kuvera, <page 392>

Vishnu, the preserver, <page 116>; superior to other gods, <page 118>; this admitted by Siva, <page 119>; reason for his many incarnations, <page 121>; benefit obtainable by his worship, <page 123>; his pre-eminent position not acknowledged in Vedic age, <page 125>; conquered in battle by Jalandhara, <page 444>; his identity with Brahma affirmed, <page 145>

Vishvamvara, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Visvakarma. See TVASTRI. The maker of Jagannath's image, <page 251>

Visvamitra, a hermit, <page 176> ff.

Visvarupa, a son of Visvakarma, <page 76>

Vitihotra, a name of Agni, <page 27>

Vivaswat, a name of Surya, <page 35>

Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, <page 228>; one of the planets, <page 433>

Vritraha, a name of Indra, <page 62>

Vyasa, a Rishi, <page 5>, <page 412> ff.

Y.

Yadapati, a name of Varuna, <page 44>

Yadus, heroes of the Mahabharata, <page 411> ff.

Yajneswara, a name of Vishnu, <page 127>

Yakshi, wife of Kuvera, <page 392>

Yama, origin of, <page 78>; his kingdom, <page 80>; hymns addressed to, <page 81>; marriage, <page 83>; interview with Savitri, <page 84>

Yoganindra, the energy of Krishna, <page 201>

Yudhisthira, a son of Dharma, <page 414>; character of, <page 415>; ruler of Hastinapur, <page 417> ff.

Yugas, the four, <page 357>

 

[p. 500]

Click to enlarge
PIPAL LEAVES.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hod.txt =====


    History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE
 HISTORY OF THE DEVIL
 AND THE
 IDEA OF EVIL
 FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES TO THE PRESENT DAY

  

by
 PAUL CARUS

             

Ich kann   nicht bereden lassen
   Macht mir den Teufel nur nicht klein;
   Ein Kerl den alle Menchen hassen,
   Der Muss was sein!
        Goethe

     
     

Open Court [1900]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, May-September 2002, Proofed and formatted by J.B. Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923

Click to view
Frontispiece

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

CONTENTS

           

       PAGE

     
      Good and Evil as Religious Ideas

       <page 1>

     
      Devil Worship

       <page 6>

     
      Ancient Egypt

       <page 15>

     
      Accad and the Early Semites

       <page 29>

     
      Persian Dualism

       <page 50>

     
      Israel

       <page 65>

     
      Brahmanism and Hinduism

       <page 74>

     
      Buddhism

       <page 104>

     
      The Dawn of a New Era

       <page 137>

     
      Early Christianity

       <page 157>

     
      The Idea of Salvation in Greece and Italy

       <page 193>

     
      The Demonology of Northern Europe

       <page 241>

     
      The Devil's Prime

       <page 262>

     
      The Inquisition

       <page 306>

     
      The Age of the Reformation

       <page 338>

     
      The Abolition of Witch-Prosecution

       <page 370>

     
      In Verse and Fable

       <page 407>

     
      The Philosophical Problem of Good and Evil

       <page 439>

     
   
     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iv] [p. v]

  

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

           

       PAGE

     
      Frontispiece

       vi

     
      Demonolatrous Ceremonies of the Old Inhabitants of Haiti. After Picart

       <page 11>

     
      Human Sacrifices Among the Greeks. After an ancient cameo in Berlin

       <page 12>

     
      A Hind Substituted for Iphigenia. After a Pompeian fresco

       <page 13>

     
      Apapi (Apophis) and Atmu. After Rawlinson

       <page 16>

     
      Forms of Taourt. After Rawlinson

       <page 16>

     
      Seth. After Brugsch

       <page 16>

     
      The Soul Visiting the Mummy. From the Ani Papyrus

       <page 16>

     
      Set Teaching the King the Art of War. After Erman

       <page 18>

     
      The Weighing of the Heart in the Hall of Truth. After Lepsius's   reproduction of the Turin papyrus

       <page 21>

     
      The Abode of Bliss. After Lepsius's reproduction of the Turin papyrus

       <page 25>

     
      Xisuthrus (the Babylonian Noah) in the Ark. After an ancient Babylonian   cylinder. Reproduced from Smith

       <page 32>

     
      Wall Decorations of the Royal Palace at Nineveh in Their Present State.   After Place, reproduced from Lenormant

       <page 33>

     
      Sacred Tree and Serpent. From an ancient Babylonian cylinder. After Smith

       <page 35>

     
      The Tree of Life. Decorations on the embroidery of a royal mantle. British   Museum

       <page 36>

     
      Merodach Delivering the Moon-God from the Evil Spirits. From a Babylonian   cylinder. Smith

       <page 37>

     
      The Chaldean Trinity Blessing the Tree of Life. British Museum

       <page 40>

     
      [p. vi]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Goddess Anna. Bas-relief in the British Museum

       <page 40>

     
      Fight Between Bel-Merodach and Tiamat. British Museum

       <page 41>

     
      Evil Demons. British Museum

       <page 43>

     
      Demon of the Southwest Wind. Statue in the Louvre. After Lenormant

       <page 44>

     
      Nirgalli. British Museum. After Lenormant

       <page 45>

     
      An Ancient Assyrian Bronze Tablet Representing the World in the Clutches   of an Evil Demon. Collection of M. de Clercq. After Lenormant

       <page 46>

     
      An Assyrian Cameo

       <page 59>

     
      A Persian Cameo

       <page 59>

     
      Assyrian Cylinder

       <page 59>

     
      Sculptures on a Royal Tomb. Lenormant

       <page 60>

     
      Bas-Relief of Persepolis. Lenormant

       <page 61>

     
      The King Slaying a Unicorn. Bas-relief of Persepolis

       <page 63>

     
      Saul and the Witch of Endor. After Schnorr von Carolsfeld

       <page 68>

     
      Assyrian Goat Demons. Carvings on a boulder. After Lenormant

       <page 69>

     
      The Brahman Trimurti. After Coleman

       <page 75>

     
      Brahma. Fragment of a car. Musee Guimet

       <page 76>

     
      Brahma and Suraswati. Reproduced from Hermann Goll

       <page 77>

     
      Vishnu, Lakshmi, and Brahma. After a native illustration, reproduced from   Hermann Goll

       <page 78>

     
      The Matsya Avatar or Fish Incarnation. From Picart

       <page 79>

     
      The Kurm Avatar or Tortoise Incarnation From Picart

       <page 79>

     
      The Varaha Avatar or Wild Boar Incarnation. From Picart

       <page 79>

     
      The Narasinha Avatar or Man-Lion Incarnation. From Picart

       <page 79>

     
      Lakshmi, the Goddess of Beauty. Musee Guimet

       <page 80>

     
      Vishnu Narasinha. Fragment of a car. Musee Guimet

       <page 81>

     
      Hanuman, the Monkey King, Building the Bridge Over the Strait Between   India and Lanka. Reproduced from Hermann Goll

       <page 82>

     
      The Vamana Avatar or Dwarf Incarnation

       <page 83>

     
      The Parashura Avatar, or Battle-Ax Incarnation

       <page 83>

     
      The Rama Chandra Avatar

       <page 83>

     
      The Krishna Avatar

       <page 83>

     
      [p. vii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Monkey King Sugriva Fighting. Reproduced from Coleman

       <page 84>

     
      Vishnu and Shri-Lakshmi as Rama Chandra and Sita After Their Happy   Reunion. Reproduced from Coleman

       <page 85>

     
      Hanuman Reciting His Adventures to Rama Chandra and Sita. Reproduced   from Coleman

       <page 86>

     
      Krishna Nursed by Devaki. Reproduced from Moore's Hindu Pantheon

       <page 87>

     
      Krishna. Bronze statue, Musee Guimet

       <page 88>

     
      Krishna, the Favorite of the Country Lasses of Gokula. Reproduced from   Coleman

       <page 89>

     
      Krishna's Adventures. Reproduced from Coleman

       <page 90>

     
      The Battle Between the Kurus and Pandus on the Field of Kurukshetra.   Reproduced from Wilkins 

       <page 91>

     
      Jagannath with His Two Companions. After Schlagintweit

       <page 92>

     
      Shiva with Parvati. Musee Guimet

       <page 93>

     
      Shiva-Trimurti. Musee Guimet

       <page 93>

     
      Shiva Dancing Surrounded by a Halo of Flames. Bronze Statue, Musee   Guimet

       <page 94>

     
      The Buddha Avatar or Vishnu's Incarnation as the Enlightened Teacher of   Mankind. Reproduced from Picart

       <page 95>

     
      The Kalki Avatar or the White-Horse Incarnation. From Picart

       <page 95>

     
      Shiva Worship. From Picart

       <page 95>

     
      Shiva and Parvati. From Goll

       <page 96>

     
      Kali. After an Indian picture. From Schlagintweit

       <page 97>

     
      Durga. Indian sculpture. From Schlagintweit

       <page 98>

     
      mKha's Groma, the Tibetan Kali. Musee Guimet

       <page 99>

     
      Kali-Durga in the Hindu Pantheon. From Wilkins

       <page 100>

     
      Hari Hara. From Wilkins

       <page 101>

     
      Ganesa. From Wilkins

       <page 102>

     
      Agni. From Hermann Goll

       <page 102>

     
      Kama. From Wollheim da Fonceka

       <page 102>

     
      Shiva Slaying a Demon. From Wilkins

       <page 102>

     
      The Demon of Lightning. A Japanese temple statue

       <page 106>

     
      The Demon of Thunder. A Japanese temple statue

       <page 107>

     
      [p. viii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Mara's Army. Gandhara sculptures. Museum of Lahore. From Grunwedel

       <page 110>

     
      Buddha, Tempted by Mara's Daughters. Gandhara sculptures. Reproduced from   Grunwedel

       <page 114>

     
      An Indian Wheel of Life. From L. E. Waddell's picture

       <page 119>

     
      A Tibetan Wheel of Life. From Bastian

       <page 121>

     
      A Japanese Wheel of Life. From Bastian

       <page 123>

     
      Meifu, the Dark Tribunal. From Karma

       <page 128>

     
      Kongo, the Sheriff. From a Japanese art print

       <page 130>

     
      Emma, the Judge. From a Japanese art print

       <page 130>

     
      The Devil as a Monk. Japanese wood carving, Musee Guimet

       <page 131>

     
      Oni-no-Nembutzu. After a wood carving in the author's possession

       <page 132>

     
      Hono-Kuruma, the Cart of Hell. After an old Japanese painting

       <page 133>

     
      Tibetan Devil's Altar. From Waddell

       <page 134>

     
      Buddha Extending His Help to a Sufferer in Hell. From Karma

       <page 136>

     
      The Christian Trinity, God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Reproduced from   Muther

       <page 139>

     
      Asmodi, an Evil Spirit, Cast Out by Prayer. After Schnorr von Carolsfeld

       <page 141>

     
      Heaven and Hell. After H. F., an unknown Old-German master

       <page 144>

     
      The Holy Trinity in the Vatican. After Pietro Berrettini

       <page 146>

     
      The Buddhist Trinity, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha. Musee   Gulmet

       <page 147>

     
      The Trinity and Mary. After Lubke

       <page 148>

     
      The Christian Trinity. From Bastian

       <page 149>

     
      The Trinity of Salerno. Sketched by the artist of the Gartenlaube

       <page 150>

     
      Jacob Bohme

       <page 151>

     
      Vignette of Jacob Bohme's Book on the Threefold Life of Man

       <page 152>

     
      The Three Principles. Frontispiece of Jacob Bohme's book

       <page 153>

     
      Jesus Casting Out Devils. After Schnorr von Carolsfeld

       <page 158>

     
      [p. ix]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Fiend, Sowing Tares Among the Wheat. From a German Picture-Bible

       <page 158>

     
      Dives Enjoying Life, and Lazarus Suffering. From a German Picture-Bible

       <page 160>

     
      Dives Tormented in Hell. From a German Picture-Bible

       <page 160>

     
      Cast Into Outer Darkness Where There Shall be Weeping and Gnashing of   Teeth. From a German Picture-Bible

       <page 161>

     
      The Day of the Lord. After Michelangelo

       <page 162>

     
      The Last judgment. A fresco in the Campo Santo, Pisa

       <page 164>

     
      The Christian World-Dispensation According to St. John the Divine. After   Schnorr von Carolsfeld

       <page 169>

     
      The Four Riders of the Apocalypse. Wall-painting on the Campo Santo,   Berlin

       <page 170>

     
      The Woman of Abominations. By Albrecht Durer

       <page 172>

     
      Christ's Descent Into Hell. By Sasha Schneider

       <page 176>

     
      Christian Representation of the Last judgment. From Klassischer   Skulpturenschatz

       <page 180>

     
      Christian Representation of Hell. From Klassischer Skulpturenschatz

       <page 181>

     
      The Typical Conception of Hell. German woodcut of the age of the   Reformation

       <page 185>

     
      Weighing the Evil and the Good of the Soul. From the cathedral in Autun,   France

       <page 188>

     
      The Doom of the Damned. After Luca Signorelli

       <page 189>

     
      The Trinity Ideal of Mediaeval Christianity. Reproduced from Muther

       <page 190>

     
      Hades. From Mon. Inst.

       <page 194>

     
      Human Sacrifices at the Funeral Pyre of Patroclus. From Michaelis, Handbuch   der Kunstgeschichte

       <page 195>

     
      Christ's Death on the Cross and its Prototypes. Biblia Pauperum.   Woodcut of the fifteenth century

       <page 196>

     
      Tuchulcha, the Demon of Infernal Tortures According to the Belief of the   Etruscans. Part of a wall-picture of a tomb in Corneto

       <page 197>

     
      Charun, the Etruscan Demon of Death, Waiting for a Victim. From an   Etruscan vase

       <page 197>

     
      [p. x]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Oknos and the Daughters of Danaos in Hades. Frieze of a Roman wall   decoration

       <page 197>

     
      Ixion on the Fiery Wheel

       <page 198>

     
      Gigantomachy; the Giants Storming Heaven. Vatican Museum

       <page 199>

     
      Zeus Conquering Typhoeus. Baumeister

       <page 199>

     
      Gigantomachy; the Giants Storming Heaven. Greek frieze

       <page 200>

     
      War in Heaven. By Albrecht Durer

       <page 201>

     
      Chimaera of Arezzo. Now at Florence

       <page 202>

     
      Theseus and Pirithous. Baumeister

       <page 203>

     
      Perseus with the Head of the Decapitated Medusa. Baumeister

       <page 204>

     
      Perseus and Andromeda. Baumeister

       <page 205>

     
      Sicilian Coin with Medusa Head

       <page 206>

     
      The Gorgoneion on the Shield of Phidias's Athene

       <page 206>

     
      Gorgoneion, Ancient Face of the Gorgon Medusa. Glyptothek, Munich

       <page 207>

     
      Medusa Rondanini. Glyptothek, Munich

       <page 207>

     
      Bellerophon Slaying the Chimaera. British Museum

       <page 208>

     
      The Lion-Killing Hero of Khorsabad

       <page 209>

     
      Prometheus Tied by Zeus to the Stake (or Cross) and Exposed to the Eagle;   Rescued by Hercules. Vase now at Berlin, Baumeister

       <page 210>

     
      The Myth of Prometheus on a Sarcophagus

       <page 212>

     
      The Temptations of Christ. Mosaic in the cathedral of Monreale, Sicily

       <page 213>

     
      Christian Gem

       <page 218>

     
      Mithras Monument of Ostburken

       <page 220>

     
      Mithraic Symbols. From C. W. King

       <page 220>

     
      Mithras the Saviour. Borghesi monument, the Louvre

       <page 221>

     
      Aeon of Zrvan Akarana. From Layard

       <page 225>

     
      Abraxas Gem

       <page 227>

     
      Agathodaemon. From C. W. King

       <page 227>

     
      Iao Gem

       <page 227>

     
      Serapis

       <page 228>

     
      Serapis Gem

       <page 229>

     
      [p. xi]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Hermes, Saviour of Souls

       <page 230>

     
      Staff of Hermes

       <page 230>

     
      Hermes as Jupiter

       <page 230>

     
      A Ship Symbolising the Church

       <page 233>

     
      A Christian Gem with Serpent

       <page 233>

     
      A Gnostic Gem

       <page 233>

     
      Christian Symbols of the Catacombs

       <page 234>

     
      Aramaean Warriors, Wearing the Cross as an Amulet for Protection in   Battle. After Wilkinson

       <page 235>

     
      St. Anthony Fighting the Devil with the Cross. After Salvator Rosa

       <page 236>

     
      St. George, the Princess and the Dragon

       <page 236>

     
      Archangel Michael Conquering Satan. By Raphael. In the Louvre

       <page 238>

     
      Archangel Michael Holding the Scales for Weighing Souls. After Lorenzo   Sabbatieri

       <page 238>

     
      Hel, the Goddess of the Nether World. By Johannes Gehrts

       <page 242>

     
      Ragnarok, or Doomsday of the Teutons. By Johannes Gehrts

       <page 244>

     
      Dante's Ice Hell. By Gustave Dore

       <page 248>

     
      St. Dunstan and the Devil. From Scheible

       <page 255>

     
      The Legend of St. Cuthbert. From the Ingoldsby Legends

       <page 257>

     
      The Legend of St. Medard. From the Ingoldsby Legends

       <page 258>

     
      The Devil's Bridge Over the Reuss

       <page 260>

     
      Modern Snake Charmers. Reproduced from Brehm

       <page 262>

     
      Moses and Aaron Performing the Snake Miracle Before Pharaoh. After Schnorr   von Carolsfeld

       <page 263>

     
      The Egyptian Snake Naja Haje Made Motionless by a Pressure on the Neck.   From Verworn after photographs

       <page 264>

     
      A Successful Rain-Maker Slaying His Rivals. After Schnorr von Carolsfeld

       <page 267>

     
      Tenskwatawa, the Shawano Prophet in 1808. Reproduced from the Fourteenth   Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology

       <page 268>

     
      Tenskwatawa, the Shawano Prophet in 1831. Reproduced from the Fourteenth   Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology

       <page 269>

     
      [p. xii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Ecstasy of the Ghost Dance of the North American Indians

       <page 271>

     
      The Blessing. A Ceremony In the Ghost Dance of the North American Indians

       <page 273>

     
      Henricus Cornelius Agrippa ab Nettesheim. Reproduced from the original   edition of his works

       <page 274>

     
      Illustrations from the Original Edition of Occulta Philosophia

       <page 276>,<page 277>

     
      Exorcising by the Cross. Bas-relief on a water vessel found near Pisama 

       <page 278>

     
      Text of the Baptismal Abjuration Formula in Old Low-German. From O. Henne   am Rhyn

       <page 281>

     
      Specimen Page of an Illuminated Initial in Heisterbach's Dialogus   Miraculorum. Original in Royal Library at Dusseldorf

       <page 283>

     
      Witches Conjuring a Hail-Storm

       <page 285>

     
      The Devil of Conceit as Seen by a Clergyman on the Dress of a Fashionable   Lady

       <page 285>

     
      The Main Actors in Mediaeval Mysteries. From Dr. Gustav Konnecke

       <page 288>

     
      Witches. From Horndorff

       <page 290>

     
      The Witches' Sabbath. After Picart

       <page 291>

     
      Virgulta Divina. From an old MS. by George Conrad Horst

       <page 294>

     
      A Seal of Petrus de Albano for Conjuring Good Spirits

       <page 295>

     
      The Twelve Houses of a Horoscope. From Gerhard

       <page 295>

     
      The Sign of the First Hour of Sunday

       <page 296>

     
      The Divine Name Arranged for Conjuration

       <page 296>

     
      Knight and Devil

       <page 297>

     
      The Bishop of Lodi Preaching at the Trial of John Huss. From Castelar

       <page 301>

     
      Savonarola

       <page 302>

     
      Savonarola Praying in His Cell. From Castelar

       <page 303>

     
      Burning of Savonarola. After Don Ricardo Balaca

       <page 304>

     
      Pope Urban V. Proclaiming the Bull In Caena Domini, 1362,   Condemning Heretics

       <page 311>

     
      The Banner of the Spanish Inquisition. From Picart

       <page 312>

     
      [p. xiii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Banner of the Inquisition of Goa. From Picart

       <page 312>

     
      The Chamber of the Inquisition. From Picart

       <page 313>

     
      Various Manners of Cross-Examining the Defendants. From Picart

       <page 314>

     
      A Man and a Woman Convicted of Heresy. From Picart

       <page 315>

     
      Heretics Condemned to be Burned. From Picart

       <page 316>

     
      A Man and a Woman Condemned to be Burned. From Picart

       <page 317>

     
      The Inquisition in Session on the Market Square at Madrid. From Picart

       <page 318>

     
      Procession of the Inquisition of Goa. From Picart

       <page 319>

     
      The Last Sermon Preached to the Condemned. From Picart

       <page 319>

     
      The Heretics' Death on the Fagots. From Picart

       <page 320>

     
      The Water Ordeal

       <page 327>

     
      The Torture-Room at Nuremberg. After C. Rau. Reproduced from B. E.   Konig

       <page 329>

     
      Agnes Bernauer Drowned as a Witch at the Request of Ernest, Duke of   Bavaria. Reproduced from B. E. Konig

       <page 335>

     
      Satanic Temptations and the Ladder of Life. From Heradis von Lansperg's Hortus   Deliciarum

       <page 339>

     
      Calvinism Tearing Down the Roman Empire

       <page 340>

     
      The Kingdom of Satan or the Seven-Headed beast of the Revelation

       <page 341>

     
      Temptation. A Protestant Conception of Evil. German woodcut of the time of   Luther

       <page 344>

     
      The Race for Fortune. After Henneberg's oil painting

       <page 345>

     
      The Devil of Unchastity. From a German woodcut

       <page 346>

     
      The Devil of Niggardliness Making the Miser Hard-Hearted. By Hans Holbein 

       <page 347>

     
      The Latest Fad In Clothes Pilloried. From Sigismund Feyerabend's Theatrum   Diabolorum

       <page 347>

     
      Scenes from M. Jacob Ruff's Religious Drama

       <page 348>

     
      Macbeth Consulting the Witches

       <page 349>

     
      The Natural State of Man

       <page 354>

     
      The Holy Ghost Illumines the Heart

       <page 354>

     
      The Holy Ghost in Possession

       <page 355>

     
      [p. xiv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      The Passion of Christ in the Heart

       <page 355>

     
      The Holy Trinity Resides in the Heart

       <page 356>

     
      New Temptations

       <page 356>

     
      Satan's Return with Seven Other Spirits More Wicked than Himself

       <page 357>

     
      The Impious Man Is Doomed When He Dies

       <page 357>

     
      A Heart Fortified in Christ

       <page 358>

     
      The Pious Man is Saved at Death

       <page 358>

     
      Poster of the Sixteenth Century

       <page 361>

     
      Facsimile of the Contract Which Urban Grandier is Reported to have Made   with the Devil

       <page 364>

     
      Apparitions of the Cross. From Grunbeck

       <page 371>

     
      Friedrich von Spee. After a picture in the Marzellen-Gymnasium at Cologne

       <page 376>

     
      Illustrations from the Drutenzeitung, 1627

       <page 378>

     
      Balthasar Bekker. From a portrait on the title-page of Die bezauberte   Welt

       <page 380>

     
      Bekker's Autograph. From his original handwriting

       <page 381>

     
      Christian Thomasius. From a copper engraving by M. Bernigroth

       <page 382>

     
      Signature of Christian Thomasius

       <page 383>

     
      Schottel's Wheel of Hell

       <page 385>

     
      The Christian Hell

       <page 388>

     
      Schwenter's Hen Experiment. Reproduced by Father Athanasius Kircher

       <page 391>

     
      Pater Gassner. Etching by Daniel Chodowiecki

       <page 392>

     
      Demons on the Tomb of Dagobert. Church of St. Denys, near Paris

       <page 412>

     
      Covetousness. Library of St. Genevieve, Paris

       <page 413>

     
      Faust Signing the Contract with the Devil in Blood. By Franz Simm

       <page 414>

     
      The Legend of Theophilus. From Monk Conrad's illumined MS.

       <page 416>

     
      Mephistopheles Making His Appearance in Faust's Study. After Schnorr von   Carolsfeld

       <page 419>

     
      [p. xv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Faust Beholding the Emblem of the Macrocosm. After p. Rembrandt

       <page 419>

     
      Faust Riding on a Barrel out of Auerbach's Cellar. Fresco

       <page 420>

     
      The Sense-Illusions of the Riotous Students and Faust's Escape. After p.   Cornelius

       <page 420>

     
      Faust Enjoying Himself in Auerbach's Cellar. Fresco

       <page 421>

     
      Mephistopheles Having Faust Buried by the Devils. After Retzsch

       <page 421>

     
      Studying Black Magic. Widman's Faust

       <page 426>

     
      Conjuring the Devil. Widman's Faust

       <page 426>

     
      Some Pleasantries of Black Magic. Widman's Faust

       <page 426>

     
      Miracles and Conjurations. Widman's Faust

       <page 426>

     
      Last Hours and Death. Widman's Faust

       <page 427>

     
      Wagner Conjuring the Devil Auerhan

       <page 428>

     
      Auerhan's Services

       <page 428>

     
      Wagner's jokes

       <page 428>

     
      Last Hours and Death

       <page 428>

     
      The Devil in the Puppet Play

       <page 429>

     
      Witches Celebrating Walpurgis Night. By Franz Simm

       <page 431>

     
      Der Teuffel lest Keyn Lantzknecht mehr inn die Helle faren. Hans Sachs

       <page 432>

     
      Hell According to Dionysius Klein's Tragico-Comoedia. Reproduced from   Bastian's Die Denkschopfung

       <page 433>

     
      The Devil in Modern Satirical Journals

       <page 436>

     
      Hell Up To Date. By permission from A. Young's Hell Up To Date

       <page 437>

     
      Egyptian Devil. Post-classic age

       <page 440>

     
      Mahamaya, the Slayer of Mahisha. From Moor's Hindu Pantheon

       <page 440>

     
      The Christian View of the Chained Ruler of Hell. Didron

       <page 441>

     
      Persian Devil. Didron

       <page 442>

     
      Turkish Devil. From a Turkish MS

       <page 442>

     
      Satan Accusing Job. Fresco in the Campo Santo at Pisa

       <page 443>

     
      Satan in His Ugliness. From a MS. in the National Library, Paris

       <page 444>

     
      [p. xvi]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Satan in His Ugliness. From an Anglo-Saxon MS. in the British Museum

       <page 444>

     
      The Trinity Fighting Behemoth and Leviathan. After Didron

       <page 445>

     
      A Trinity of the Tenth Century. From Muller and Mathe's   Archaeology

       <page 445>

     
      Milton's Satan. After Dore

       <page 451>

     
      Lucifer Before the Fall. From the Hortus Deficiarum

       <page 462>

     
      The Fallen Lucifer. After Dore

       <page 463>

     
      The Feeling of Dependence. After Sasha Schneider

       <page 470>

     
      Time as a Trinity of Past, Present, and Future. French miniature

       <page 472>

     
      The Divine Trinity. From a MS. in the Bibliotheque de Sainte   Genevieve

       <page 472>

     
      Italian Trinity. Didron

       <page 473>

     
      Satanic Trinity. Didron

       <page 473>

     
      The Trinity. From a window in the Church of Notre Dame, at Chalons, France

       <page 474>

     
      The Trinity of Evil. From a French MS. in the Bibliotheque Royale   at Paris

       <page 474>

     
      The Three-Headed Serapis. From Bartoli's Lucernae Veterum   Sepulchrales

       <page 475>

     
      Aziel, the Guardian of Hidden Treasures. From Francisci's Proteus   infernalis

       <page 475>

     
      God Supporting the World. Fresco in the Campo Santo of Pisa

       <page 476>

     
      Hercules with Cerberus. From a vase found in Alta mura

       <page 477>

     
      St. Anthony Assaulted by Devils. After Schoengauer's copper engraving,   1420-1499

       <page 479>

     
      The Good Lord and the Devil. By Franz Simm

       <page 480>

     
      The Devil in the Campo Santo (Pisa)

       <page 485>

     
      Seal of Satan. Didron

       <page 486>

     
    

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

GOOD AND EVIL AS RELIGIOUS IDEAS.

THIS WORLD OF OURS is a world of opposites. There is light and shade, there is heat and cold, there is good and evil, there is God and the Devil.

The dualistic conception of nature has been a necessary phase in the evolution of human thought. We find the same views of good and evil spirits prevailing among all the peoples of the earth at the very beginning of that stage of their development which, in the phraseology of Tylor, is commonly called Animism. But the principle of unity dominates the development of thought. Man tries to unify his conceptions in a consistent and harmonious Monism. Accordingly, while the belief in good spirits tended towards the formation of the doctrine of Monotheism, the belief in evil spirits led naturally to the acceptance of a single supreme evil deity, conceived as embodying all that is bad, destructive, and immoral.

Monotheism and Monodiabolism, both originating simultaneously in the monistic tendencies of man's mental evolution, together constitute a Dualism which to many is still the most acceptable world-conception. Nevertheless, it is not the final goal of human philosophy. As

[p. 2]

soon as the thinkers of mankind become aware of the Dualism implied in this interpretation of the world, the tendency is again manifested towards a higher conception, which is a purely monistic view.

Will Monism eliminate the idea of the Devil in order to make God the One and All? Or will it abolish both God and the Devil, to leave room only for a world of matter in motion? Will the future of mankind be, as M. Guyau prophesies, a period in which religion will disappear and give way to irreligion?

Those who do not appreciate the mission of Dualism in the evolution of human thought, and only know its doctrines to be untenable, naturally expect that the future of mankind will be irreligious, and there are freethinkers who declare that Atheism will supersede all the different conceptions of God. But this is not probable. The monistic tendencies of the age will not destroy, but purify and elevate religion. The Animism of the savage is a necessary stage of man's mental evolution: it appears as an error to the higher-developed man of a half-civilised period; but the error contains a truth which naturally develops into a more perfect conception of the surrounding world. Similarly, the religious ideas of the present time are symbols. Taken in their literal meaning, they are untenable, but understood in their symbolical nature they are seeds from which a purer conception of the truth will grow. The tendencies of philosophic thought prevailing to-day lead to a positive conception of the world, which replaces symbols by statements of fact and brings with it not a denial of religious allegories but a deeper and more correct conception.

[p. 3]

A state of irreligion in which mankind would adopt and publicly teach a doctrine of Atheism is an impossibility. Atheism is a negation, and negations cannot stand, for they have sense only as confronted with the positive issues which they reject. Yet our present anthropomorphic view of God, briefly called Anthropotheism, which as a rule conceives him as an infinitely big individual being, will have to yield to a higher view in which we shall understand that the idea of a personal God is a mere simile. God is much more than a person. When we speak of God as a person, we ought to be conscious of the fact that we use an allegory which, if it were taken literally, can only belittle him. The God of the future will not be personal, but superpersonal.

But how shall we reach this knowledge of the superpersonal God? Our answer is, with the help of science. Let us pursue in religion the same path that science travels, and the narrowness of sectarianism will develop into a broad cosmical religion which shall be as wide and truly catholic as is science itself.

Symbols are not lies; symbols contain truth. Allegories and parables are not falsehoods; they convey information: moreover, they can be understood by those who are not as yet prepared to receive the plain truth. Thus, when in the progress of science religious symbols are recognised and known in their symbolical nature, this knowledge will not destroy religion but will purify it and will cleanse it from mythology.

We define God as "that authoritative presence in the All, which enforces a definite moral conduct." God is that something which constitutes the harmony of the

[p. 4]

laws of nature; God is the intrinsic necessity of mathematics and logic; God above all is what experience teaches us to be the inalienable features of righteousness, justice, morality. This presence is both immanent and transcendent: it is immanent as the constituent characteristic of the law that pervades the universe; it is transcendent, for it is the condition of any possible cosmic order; and in this sense it is supercosmic and supernatural. [*1]

We do not say that God is impersonal, for the word "impersonal" implies the absence of those features which constitute personality; it implies vagueness, indefiniteness, and lack of character. God, however, as he manifests himself in the order of the universe is very definite. He is not vague but possesses quite marked qualities. He is such as he is and not different. His being is universal, but not indeterminable. His nature does not consist of indifferent generalities, but exhibits a distinct suchness. Indeed; all suchness in the world, in physical nature as well as in the domain of spirit, depends upon God as here defined, and what is the personality of man but the incarnation of that cosmic logic which we call reason? God, although not an individual being, is the prototype of personality; although not a person, thinking thoughts as we do, deliberating, weighing arguments, and coming to a decision, he is yet that which conditions personality; he possesses all those qualities which, when reflected in animated creatures, adds unto their souls the nobility of

[p. 5]

[paragraph continues] God's image, called personality. Therefore we say, God is not impersonal, but superpersonal.

While the idea of God has received much attention from philosophers and progressive theologians, its counterpart, the dark figure of the Evil One, has been much neglected. And yet the Devil is, after all, a very interesting personality, grotesque, romantic, humorous, pathetic, nay, even grand and tragic. And if we have to declare that the idea of God is a symbol signifying an actual presence in the world of facts, should we not expect that the idea of the Devil also represents a reality?

It is almost impossible to exhaust the subject, for it would take volumes to write an approximately complete history of demonology. Accordingly, we must confine ourselves to merely outlining some of the most salient features of the development of the belief in the Devil and the nature of the idea of evil.

Footnotes

^4:1 See the author's Idea of God; Soul of Man, pp. 338 et seq.; Fundamental Problems, p. 152 et passim; Primer of Philosophy, p 170 et passim; The Monist, Vol. III., pp. 357 et seq.; Homilies of Science, pp. 79-120.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

DEVIL WORSHIP.

FROM A SURVEYAL of the accounts gleaned from Waitz, Lubbock, and Tylor, on the Primitive state of religion, the conviction impresses itself upon the student of demonology that Devil-worship naturally precedes the worship of a benign and morally good Deity. There are at least many instances in which we can observe a transition from the lower stage of Devil-worship to the higher stage of God-worship, and there seems to be no exception to the rule that fear is always the first incentive to religious worship. This is the reason why the dark figure of the Devil, that is to say, of a powerful evil deity, looms up as the most important personage in the remotest past of almost every faith. Demonolatry, or Devil-worship, is the first stage in the evolution of religion, for we fear the bad, not the good.

Mr. Herbert Spencer bases religion on the Unknown, declaring that the savage worships those powers which he does not understand. In order to give to religion a foundation which even the scientist does not dare to touch, he asserts the existence of an absolute Unknowable, and recommends it as the basis of the religion of the future. But

[p. 7]

facts do not agree with Mr. Spencer's proposition. A German proverb says:

"Was ich nicht weiss
 Macht mich nicht heiss."

Or, as is sometimes said in English:

"What the eyes don't see
 The heart doesn't grieve for."

What is absolutely unknowable does not concern us, and the savage does not worship the thunder because he does not know what it is, but because he knows enough about the lightning that may strike his hut to be in awe of it. He worships the thunder because he dreads it; he is afraid of it on account of its known and obvious dangers which he is unable to control.

Let us hear the men who have carefully collected and sifted the facts. Waitz, in speaking in his Anthropologie (Vol. III., pp. 182, 330, 335, 345) of the Indians, who were not as yet semi-Christianised, states that the Florida tribes are said to have solemnly worshipped the Bad Spirit, Toia, who plagued them with visions, and to have had small regard for the Good Spirit, who troubled himself little about mankind. And Martins makes this characteristic remark of the rude tribes of Brazil:

"All Indians have a lively conviction of the power of an evil principle over them; in many there dawns also a glimpse of the good; but they revere the one less than they fear the other. It might be thought that they hold the Good Being weaker in relation to the fate of man than the Evil." [*1]

Capt. John Smith, the hero of the colonisation of Virginia, in 1607, describes the worship of Okee (a word

[p. 8]

which apparently means that which is above our control) as follows: [*1]

"There is yet in Virginia no place discouered to bee so Savage in which the savages haue not a religion, Deare, and Bow and Arrowes. All thinges that were able to do them hurt beyond their prevention they adore with their kinde of divine worship; as the fire, water, lightning, thunder, our ordinance peeces, horses, &c. But their chiefe God they worship is the Diuell. Him they call Oke, [*2] and serue him more of feare than loue. They say they haue conference with him and fashion themselues as neare to his shape as they can imagine. In their Temples they haue his image euill favouredly carued and then painted and adorned with chaines, copper, and beades, and couered with a skin in such manner as the deformity may well suit with such a God." (Original ed., p. 29.)

"In some part of the Country, they haue yearely a sacrifice of children. Such a one was at Quiyoughcohanock, some 10 miles from Iames Towne, and thus performed.

"Fifteene of the properest young boyes, betweene 10 and 15 yeares of age, they painted white. Hauing brought them forth, the people spent the forenoone in dancing and singing about them with rattles.

"In the afternoone, they put those children to the roote of a tree. By them, all the men stood in a guard, every one hauing a Bastinado in his hand, made of reeds bound together. This [these] made a lane betweene them all along, through which there were appointed 5 young men to fetch these children. So every one of the fiue went through the guard, to fetch a child, each after other by turnes: the guard fearelessly beating them with their Bastinadoes, and they patiently enduring and receauing all; defending the children with their naked bodies from the vnmercifull blowes they pay them soundly, though the children escape. All this while,

[p. 9]

the women weepe and crie out very passionately; prouiding mats, skinnes, mosse, and drie wood, as things fitting their childrens funerals.

"After the children were thus passed the guard, the guard tore down the tree, branches and boughs, with such violence, that they rent the body and made wreathes for their heads, or bedecked their haire with the leaues. What else was done with the children was not seene; but they were all cast on a heape in a valley, as dead: where they made a great feast for al the company.

"The Werowance [chief] being demanded the meaning of this sacrifice, answered that the children were not all dead, but [only] that the Oke or Divell did sucke the blood from their left breast [of those], who chanced to be his by lot, till they were dead. But the rest were kept in the wildernesse by the yong men till nine moneths were expired, during which time they must not conuerse with any: and of these, were made their Priests and Coniurers.

"This sacrifice they held to bee so necessarie, that if they should omit it, their Oke or Divel and all their other Quiyoughcosughes (which are their other Gods) would let them haue no Deare, Turkies, Corne, nor fish: and yet besides, hee would make great slaughter amongst them.

"To divert them from this blind idolatrie, many vsed their best indeauours, chiefly with the Werowances of Quiyoughcohanock; whose devotion, apprehension, and good disposition much exceeded any in those Countries: who though we could not as yet preuaile withall to forsake his false Gods, yet this he did beleeue, that our God as much exceeded theirs, as our Gunnes did their Bowes and Arrows; and many times did send to the President, at Iames towne, men with presents, intreating them to pray to his God for raine, for his Gods would not send him any.

"And in this lamentable ignorance doe these poore soules sacrifice themselues to the Diuell, not knowing their Creator." (Original ed., pp. 32, 33, 34.) [*1]

[p. 10]

Similar practices prevailed among almost all the Indian tribes who inhabited the islands and the two continents of America a few centuries ago. M. Bernhard Picart's illustration [*1], drawn according to the report of Peter Martyr, [*2] an eye-witness, proves that the tribes of Hispaniola, now commonly called Haiti, paid homage to the Supreme Being under the name of Jocanna, and their practices show that they were devil-worshippers of the worst kind. Even the most civilised Americans, the Mexicans, had not as yet outgrown this stage of religious belief. It is true that the idea of a white God of Love and Peace was as not quite foreign to them, but the fear of the horrible Huitzilopochtli still prompted them to stain the altars of his temples with the blood of human victims.

Human sacrifices are frequently mentioned in the Bible. Thus the King of Moab, when pressed hard by. the children of Israel, "took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead and offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall" (2 Kings, iv. 27). He succeeded by this terrible expedient in saving the city, for the biblical report continues: "And there was great indignation against Israel; and they [the Israelites] departed from him and returned to their own land."

The prophets were constantly preaching against the pagan practice of those Israelites who, in imitation of the religion of their neighbors, sought to "sacrifice their sons and daughters to devils," or let them "pass through the fire of Moloch to devour them"; but so near to the religious

[p. 11]

Click to view
DEMONOLATROUS CEREMONIES OF THE OLD INHABITANTS OF HAITI. (After Picart.)

[p. 12]

conception of the savage was even the purer faith of Israel that Jephtha still believed that God required of him "to offer his daughter up as a burnt offering." (Judges, xi. 29-40).

Click to view
HUMAN SACRIFICE AMONG THE GREEKS.
 [Polyxena dies by the hand of Neoptolemus on the tomb of Achilles.--After an ancient cameo in Berlin.]

The most civilised nations on earth still preserve in their ancient legends traces of having at an early period of their religious development immolated human beings in propitiation of angry deities. When the glory of Athens was at its climax, Euripides dramatically represented the tragic fate of Polyxena who was sacrificed on the tomb of Achilles in order to pacify the dead hero's spirit and thereby ensure the safe return of the Greek army.

Progress in civilisation led to a modification but not to a direct abolition of human sacrifices. We find among more advanced savages, and even at the dawn of a higher civilisation, a practice whereby the victim, be it a child, a virgin, or a youth is offered up without slaughtering, and has a chance either to escape by good luck or to be rescued by some daring deed. Traces of this conception are found in the tales of Perseus and Andromeda, of Palnatoke the marksman, who, like William Tell, shot an apple from his

[p. 13]

child's head, of Susano, in Japanese folk-lore, who slew the eight-headed serpent that annually devoured one of the daughters of a poor peasant, and similar ancient legends. At the same time human victims were supplanted by animals, as is indicated by various religious legends. Thus a hind was substituted for Iphigenia and a ram for Isaac.

Click to view
A HIND SUBSTITUTED FOR IPHIGENIA.
 [Agamemnon, her father, veils his head, while Diomedes and Odysseus deliver the virgin over to Kalchas, the priest. Artemis appears in the clouds and a nymph brings the hind.--After a Pompeian fresco.]

Human sacrifices are one of the principal characteristic traits of Devil-worship, but not the only one. There are in addition other devilish practices which are based on the idea that the Deity takes delight in witnessing tortures, and the height of abomination is reached in cannibalism, which, as anthropology teaches us, is not due to scarcity of food, but can always be traced back to some religious superstition, especially to the notion that he who partakes of the heart or brain of his adversary acquires the courage, strength, and other virtues of the slain man.

The last remnants of the idea that the wrath of the Deity must be appeased by blood, and that we acquire spiritual powers by eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the victim still linger with us to-day in the medieval

[p. 14]

interpretations of certain church dogmas, and will only disappear before the searching light of a fearless and consistent religious reformation. We must remember, however, that certain superstitions, at early stages of the religious development of mankind, are as unavoidable as the various errors which science and philosophy pass through in their natural evolution.

Religion always begins with fear, and the religion of savages may directly be defined as "the fear of evil and the various efforts made to escape evil." Though the fear of evil in the religions of civilised nations plays no longer so prominent a part, we yet learn through historical investigations that at an early stage of their development almost all worship was paid to the powers of evil, who were regarded with special awe and reverence.

Actual Devil-worship continues until the positive power of good is recognised and man finds out by experience that the good, although its progress may be ever so slow, is always victorious in the end. It is natural that the power that makes for righteousness is by and by recognised as the supreme ruler of all powers, and then the power of evil ceases to be an object of awe; it is no longer worshipped and not even propitiated, but struggled against, and the confidence prevails of a final victory of justice, right, and truth.

Footnotes

^7:1 Quoted from Tylor, Primitive Culture, II., p. 325.

^8:1 "A map of Virginia. With a description of the covntrey, etc., written by Captaine Smith, etc. Oxford. Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612."

^8:2 In the little dictionary of the language of the savages of Virginia which is printed in the same pamphlet, Captain Smith translates "Oke" simply by "gods."

^9:1 See The Works of Capt. John Smith of Willoughby etc. Edited by Edward Arber. Birmingham, 1884, pp. 74 ff.

^10:1 The Religious Ceremonies and Customs of the Several Nations of the Known World. III., p. 129.

^10:2 See his work, De rebus oceanicis et novo orbe.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

ANCIENT EGYPT.

SET, OR SETH, whom the Greeks called Typhon, the nefarious demon of death and evil in Egyptian mythology, is characterised as "a strong god (a-pahuti), whose anger is to be feared." The inscriptions call him "the powerful one of Thebes," and "Ruler of the South." He is conceived as the sun that kills with the arrows of heat; he is the slayer, and iron is called the bones of Typhon. The hunted animals are consecrated to him; and his symbols are the griffin (akhekh), the hippopotamus, the crocodile, the swine, the tortoise, and, above all the serpent apapi (in Greek "apophis") who was thought to await the dying man in the domain of the god Atmu (also called Tmu or Tum), who represents the sun below the western horizon.

Set's pictures are easily recognised by his long, erect, and square-tipped ears and his proboscis-like snout, which are said to indicate the head of a fabulous animal called Oryx. The consort and feminine counterpart of Set is called Taour or Taourt. The Greeks called her Theouris. She appears commonly as a hippopotamus in erect posture, her back covered with the skin and tail of a crocodile.

[p. 16]

Click to view
APAPI (APOPHIS) AND ATMU. (After Rawlinson)

Click to view
FORMS OF TAOURT. (After Rawlinson)

Click to view
SET (After Brugsch)

Click to view
THE SOUL VISITING THE MUMMY. (From the Ani Papyrus)

See page <page 24>.

[p. 17]

Set is often contrasted with Osiris. Set was the deity of the desert, of drought and feverish thirst, and of the sterile ocean; Osiris represents moisture, the Nile, the fertilising powers and life. Plutarch says:

"The moon (representing Osiris) is, with his fertilising and fecundative light, favorable to the produce of animals and growth of plants; the sun, however (representing Typhon), is determined, with its unmitigated fire, to overheat and parch animals; it renders by its blaze a great part of the earth uninhabitable and conquers frequently even the moon (viz., Osiris)."

As an enemy to life, Set is identified with all destruction. He is the waning of the moon, the decrease of the waters of the Nile, and the setting of the sun. Thus he was called the left or black eye of the decreasing sun, governing the year from the summer solstice to the winter solstice, which is contrasted with the right or bright eye of Hor, the increasing sun, which symbolises the growth of life and the spread of light from the winter solstice to the summer solstice.

Set was not always nor to all Egyptians alike a Satanic deity. He was officially worshipped in an unimportant province west of the Nile, but this was the natural starting-point of the road to the northern oasis. The inhabitants, who were mostly guides to desert caravans, had good reasons to remain on friendly terms with Set, the Lord of the desert.

Further, we know that a great temple was devoted to Set, as the god of war, in Tanis, near the swamps between the eastern branches of the Delta, an important town of the frontier, and during the time of invasion the probable seat of the foreign dominion of the Hyksos and

[p. 18]

the Hyttites, who identified their own god Sutech with the Egyptian Set. But even among the Hyksos, Set was revered as the awful God of irresistible power, of brute force, of war, and of destruction.

There is an old wall-picture of Karnak, belonging to the era of the eighteenth dynasty, in which the god Set appears as an instructor of King Thothmes III. in the science of archery. [*1]

Click to view
SETH TEACHING THE KING THE ART OF WAR. (After Erman.)

Sety I., the second king of the nineteenth dynasty, the shepherd kings, derives his name from the god Seta sign of the high honor in which he was held among the shepherd kings; and indeed we are informed that they regarded Set, or Sutech, as the only true God, the sole deity, who alone was worthy of receiving divine honors.

If the time of the shepherd kings is to be identified with the settlement of Jacob's sons in Egypt, and if the

[p. 19]

monotheism of the Hyksos is the root of Moses's religion, what food for thought lies in the fact that the same awe of a fearful power that confronts us in life, changes among the Egyptians into the demonology of Set, and among the Israelites into the cult of Yahveh!

In spite of the terror which he inspired, Set was originally not merely an evil demon but one of the great deities, who, as such, was feared and propitiated.

Says Heinrich Brugsch (Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter, p. 706):

"The Book of the Dead of the ancient Egyptians and the numerous inscriptions of the recently opened pyramids are, indeed, nothing but talismans against the imagined Seth and his associates. Such is also, I am sorry to say, the greater part of the ancient literature that has come down to us."

When a man dies, he passes the western horizon and descends through Atmu's abode into Amenti, the Nether World. The salvation of his personality depends, according to Egyptian belief, upon the preservation of his "double," or his "other self," which, remaining in the tomb, resides in the mummy or in any statue of his body.

The double, just as if it were alive, is supposed to be in need of food and drink, which is provided for by incantations. Magic formulas satisfy the hunger and thirst of the double in the tomb, and frustrate, through invocations of the good deities, all the evil intentions of Set and his host. We read in an inscription of Edfu (Brugsch, Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter, p. 767):

[p. 20]

Hail Ra, thou art radiant in thy radiance,
 While there is darkness in the eyes of Apophis!
 Hail Ra, good is thy goodness,
 While Apophis is bad in its badness!"

The dread of hunger, thirst, and other ills, or even of destruction which their double might suffer in the tomb, was a perpetual source of fearful anticipations to every pious Egyptian. The anxiety to escape the tortures of their future state led to the embalming of the dead and to the building of the pyramids. Yet, in spite of all superstitions and the ridiculous pomp bestowed upon the burial of the body we find passages in the inscriptions which give evidence that in the opinion of many thoughtful people the best and indeed the sole means of protection against the typhonic influences after death was a life of righteousness. This is forcibly expressed in the illustration of Chapter CXXV. of the Book of the Dead, which is here reproduced according to Lepsius's edition of the Turin papyrus. (Republished by Putnam, Book of the Dead).

The picture of the Hall of Truth as preserved in the Turin papyrus shows Osiris with the atef-crown on his head and the crook and whip in his hands. Above the beast of Amenti we see the two genii Shai and Ranen, which represent Misery and Happiness. The four funeral genii, called Amset, Hapi, Tuamutef, and Kebhsnauf, hover over an altar richly laden with offerings. The frieze shows twelve groups of uraeus snakes, flames and feathers of truth; on both sides scales are poised by a baboon who is the sacred animal of Thoth, and in the middle Atmu stretches out his hands over the right and

[p. 21]

Click to view
THE WEIGHING OF THE HEART IN THE HALL OF TRUTH (After Lepsius's reproduction of the Turin Papyrus)

[p. 22]

left eye, symbolising sunset and sunrise, death and resurrection.

Ma, [*1] the goddess of truth and "the directress of the gods," decorated with an erect feather which is her emblem, ushers the departed one into the Hall of Truth. Kneeling, the departed one invokes the forty-two assessors by name and disclaims having committed any one of the forty-two sins of the Egyptian moral code. Omitting the names of the assessors, we quote here an extract of the confession. The departed one says:

"I did not do evil.--I did not commit violence.--I did not torment any heart.--I did not steal. I did not cause any one to be treacherously killed.--I did not lessen the offerings.--I did not do any harm.--I did not utter a lie.--I did not make any one weep.--I did not commit acts of self-pollution. --I did not fornicate.--I did not trespass.--I did not commit any perfidy.--I did no damage to cultivated land.--I was no accuser.--I was never angry without sufficient reason.--I did not turn a deaf ear to the words of truth.--I did not commit witchcraft.--I did not blaspheme.--I did not cause a slave to be maltreated by his master.--I did not despise God in my heart."

Then the departed one places his heart on the balance of truth, where it is weighed by the hawk-headed Hor and the jackal-headed Anubis, "the director of the weight," the weight being shaped in the figure of the goddess of truth. Thoth, the ibis-headed scribe of the gods, reads Hor's report to Osiris, and if it announces that the weight of the heart is equal to truth, Thoth orders it to be placed back into the breast of the departed

[p. 23]

one, which act indicates his return to life. If the departed one escapes all the dangers that await him in his descent to Amenti, and if the weight of his heart is not found wanting, he is allowed to enter into "the boat of the sun,)' in which he is conducted to the Elysian fields of the blessed.

Should the evil deeds of the departed one outweigh his good deeds, he was sentenced to be devoured by Amemit (i. e., the devourer), which is also called "the beast of Amenti," or was sent back to the upper world in the shape of a pig.

While the double stays in the tomb, the soul, represented as a bird with a human head, soars to heaven where it becomes one with all the great gods. The liberated soul exclaims (Erman, ib., p. 343 et seq.):

"I am the god Atum, I who was alone,

"I am the god Ra at his first appearing,

"I am the great god who created himself, and created his name I Lord of the gods, who has not his equal.'

"I was yesterday, and I know the to-morrow. The battlefield of the gods -was made when I spoke.

"I come into my home, I come into my native city.

"I commune daily with my father Atum.

"My impurities are driven out, and the sin that was in me is conquered.

"Ye gods above, reach out your hands, I am like you, I have become one of you.

"I commune daily with my father Atum.

Having become one with the gods, the departed soul suffers the same fate as Osiris. Like him, it is slain by Set, and like Osiris, it is reborn in Hor who revenges the death of his father. At the same time the soul is supposed

[p. 24]

frequently to visit the double of the departed man in the tomb, as depicted in the tomb of the scribe Ani.

The Abode of Bliss (in Egyptian Sechnit aanru, also written aahlu), as depicted in the Turin papyrus of the Book of the Dead, shows us the departed one with his family, and Thoth, the scribe of the gods, behind them, in the act of sacrificing to three gods, the latter being decorated with the feather of truth. He then crosses the water. On the other side, he offers a perfuming pan to his soul which appears in the shape of a man-headed bird. There are also the three mummy-form gods of the horizon, with an altar of offerings before the hawk, symbolising Ra, "the master of heaven." In the middle part of the picture the departed one ploughs, sows, reaps, threshes, stores up the harvest, and celebrates a thanksgiving with offerings to the Nile. The lower part shows two barks, one for Ra Harmakhis, the other one for Unefru; and the three islands: the first is inhabited by Ra, the second is called the regenerating place of the gods, the third is the residence of Shu, Tefnut, and Seb.

A very instructive illustration of Egyptian belief is afforded us in the well-preserved tomb of Rekhmara, the prefect of Thebes under Thothmes III. of the eighteenth dynasty, the inscriptions of which have been translated into French by Ph. Virey and were published in 1889 by the Mission Archeologique Francaise.

The visitor to the tomb enters through a door on the eastern end; when proceeding westward, we see Rekhmara on the left wall pass from life to death. Here he attends to the affairs of the government, there he receives in the name of Pharaoh the homage of foreign princes;

[p. 25]

Click to view
THE ABODE OF BLISS. (After Lepsius's reproduction of the Turin Papyrus)

[p. 26]

further on he organises the work of building magazines at Thebes. He superintends the artists engaged at the Temple of Ammon and is then buried in pomp. At last he assumes the appearance of the Osiris of the West and receives sacrifices in his capacity as a god. We are now confronted with a blind door through which Rekhmara-Osiris descends into the West and returns to life toward the East as the Osiris of the East. Through funeral sacrifices and incantations his double is again invested with the use of the various senses; he is honored at a festival and graciously received by Pharaoh; in a word, he acts as he did in life. When we return to the entrance where we started, Rekhmara receives the offerings of his family and inspects the progress of the works to which he attended in life.

In the tomb of Rekhmara, Set receives offerings like other great gods. The departed one is called the inheritor of Set (Suti), and is purified by both Hor and Set. As an impersonation of Osiris, the departed one is approached and slain by Set, who then is vanquished in the shape of sacrificial animals which are slaughtered. But when the departed one is restored to the use of his senses and mental powers, Set again plays an important part, and appears throughout as one of the four points of the compass, which are "Hor, Set, Thoth, and Seb." [*1]

According to the original legend, Set represented the death of the sun, and as a personality he is described as the murderer of Osiris, who was finally reconciled with Hor. He remained, however, a powerful god, and had important functions to perform for the souls of the dead.

[p. 27]

Above all, he must bind and conquer the serpent Apophis (Apap), as we read in the Book of The Dead (108, 4 and 5):

"They use Set to circumvent it [the serpent]; they use him to throw an iron chain around its neck, to make it vomit all that it has swallowed."

1n the measure that the allegorical meaning of the Osiris legend is obliterated, and that Osiris is conceived as a real person who as the representative of moral goodness, succumbs in his struggle with evil and dies, but is resurrected in his son Hor, Set is more and more deprived of his divinity and begins to be regarded as an evil demon.

The reign of Men-Kau-Ra, the builder of the third pyramid of Gizeh (according to Brugsch, 3633 B. C., and according to Mariette, 4100 B. C.), must have changed the character of the old Egyptian religion. "The prayer to Osiris on his coffin lid," says Rawlinson (Vol. II., p. 67), "marks a new religious development in the annals of Egypt. The absorption of the justified soul in Osiris, the cardinal doctrine of the Ritual of the Dead, makes its appearance here for the first time."

According to the older canon Set is always mentioned among the great deities, but later on he is no longer recognised as a god, and his name is replaced by that of some other god. The Egyptians of the twenty-second dynasty went so far as to erase Set's name from many of the older inscriptions and even to change the names of former kings that were compounds of Set, such as Set-nekht and others. The crocodile-headed Ceb (also called. Seb or Keb) and similar deities, in so far as their

[p. 28]

nature was suggestive of Set, suffered a similar degradation; and this, we must assume, was the natural consequence of an increased confidence in the final victory of the influence of the gods of goodness and virtue.

Plutarch, speaking of his own days, says (On Isis and Osiris, Chapter XXX.) that:

"The power of Typhon, although dimmed and crushed, is still in its last agonies and convulsions. The Egyptians occasionally humiliate and insult him at certain festivals. They nevertheless propitiate and soothe him by means of certain sacrifices."

Set, the great and strong god of prehistoric times, was converted into Satan with the rise of the worship of Osiris. Set was strong enough to slay Osiris, as night overcomes the light of the sun; but the sun is born again in the child-god Hor, who conquers Set and forces him to make the old serpent of death surrender its spoil. As the sun sets to rise again, so man dies to be reborn. The evil power is full of awe, but a righteous cause cannot be crushed, and, in spite of death, life is immortal.

Footnotes

^18:1 See Lepsius, Denkmaler, Vol. V., p. 36. The picture is reproduced in outline by Adolf Erman in his Life in Ancient Egypt, Engl. trans., p. 282.

^22:1 Also called Maa't, or "the two truths," i. e., of the upper and of the nether world.

^26:1 Le Tombeau de Rakhmara, by Ph. Virey. Paris: Le Roux. 1889.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

ACCAD AND THE EARLY SEMITES.

BOUT THE YEAR 3000 B. C., long before the Arise of the Semitic nations, among whom the Babylonians, Assyrians, Israelites, and later the Arabians, were most prominent, there lived in Mesopotamia a nation of great power and importance, which is known by the name of Accad. And, strange to say, the Accadians were not a white, but a dark race. They are spoken of as "blackheads" or "blackfaces"; yet we need not for that reason assume that they were actually as black as the Ethiopians, for the bilingual tablets found in the mounds of Babylonia speak also of them as Adamatu [*1] or red-skins, which makes it probable that they were reddish-dark or brown. How much the Semites owe to the Accadians, whose dominion ceased about 1500 B. C., and whose language began to die out under the reign of the Assyrian king Sargon (722-705), we may infer from the fact that many religious institutions, legends, and customs among the Semites were of Accadian origin.

[p. 30]

Thus we know for certain that in their mode of determining the time they already possessed the institution of a week of seven days, and that the Sabbath was their holy day of rest. The literal meaning of the original Accadian word is explained as "a day on which work is unlawful," and the Assyrian translation Sabattu signifies cc a day of rest for the heart." Further, the legends of creation, of the tree of life, and of the deluge, mentioned in Genesis and also in Assyrian records, were well known to the Accadians, and from the conventional form of the tree of life, which in the most ancient pictures bears fir-cones, we may infer that the idea is an old tradition which the Accadians brought with them from their former and colder home in the fir-covered mountains of Media. In addition we have reminiscences of Accadian traditions in many Hebrew names, which proves beyond the shadow of a doubt the long-lasting influence of the ancient civilisation of Accad. The rivers of paradise, mentioned in Genesis, are Babylonian names. Thus, the Euphrates, or Purat, is the curving water; Tigris is Tiggur, the current; Hid-Dekhel, "the river with the high bank," is another name for the Tigris, which in inscriptions is called Idikla or Idikna; Gihon has been identified by some Assyriologists with Arakhtu (Araxes), and by Sir H. Rawlinson with Jukha; and King Sargon calls Elam "the country of the four rivers."

The names of the rivers of Eden indicate that the people with whom the legend of paradise originated must have lived on the banks of the Euphrates and Tigris. Under these circumstances we are surprised to find that the cultivated portion of the desert lands west of the

[p. 31]

Euphrates was called Edinna, [*1] a name that sounds very much like Eden.

About the time of Alexander the Great, a Babylonian priest by the name of Berosus wrote an interesting book on the history and religion of Babylon. It is now lost, but as various Greek authors, Alexander Polyhistor, Apollodorus, Abydenus, Damascius, [*2] and Eusebius have largely quoted from his reports, we know quite a good deal about the information he gave to the world concerning his country.

All this was very interesting, but there was no evidence of the reliability of Berosus's records. The Babylonian legends might have been derived from the Old Testament. However, since the successful excavations of the Assyrian stone-libraries we have the most positive evidences as to the source and the great age of these traditions. A great part of them have come down to us from the old Accadians.

We know that the Babylonians possessed several legends which have been received into the Old Testament, the most striking ones being the legend of the deluge, of the tower of Babel, of the destruction of corrupt cities by a rain of fire (reminding us of Sodom and Gomorrah), of the babyhood adventures of King Sargon I. (reminding us of Moses), and of the creation of the world. The name of Babel, which is in Assyrian bab-ilani, or bab-ilu, i. e. the Gate of God, is a Semitic translation of the Accadian Ka-dingirra-ki, with the same meaning; literally:

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] "Gate + of God + the place." The etymology of the name Babel from balbel, "to confound," which is suggested both in the Assyrian account of the story and in Genesis, is one of those popular etymologic errors which are frequently found in ancient authors.

Click to view
XISUTHRUS (THE BABYLONIAN NOAH) IN THE ARK.
 Saved through the assistance of the gods from the deluge. [After an ancient Babylonian cylinder. Reproduced from Smith-Sayce. Ch. A. of G., p. 300]

In the legend of the destruction of the cities there occur several names which indicate an Accadian source. The legend of the deluge [*1] agrees in all important details with the analogous story in Genesis. It is the eleventh part of a larger epic celebrating Izdubar, [*2] a sun-hero and an Assyrian Hercules, who goes through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, the eleventh being Aquarius, corresponding to the eleventh mouth of the Accadians, called "the rainy." [*3]

Who has not yet seen, even in our most modern cathedrals, pictures and statues of the four Evangelists adorned with the four representative beings of the animal creation? Matthew is accompanied by an angel or a

[p. 33]

winged man, Mark by a lion, Luke by a steer, and St. John by an eagle. The creatures represent the cherubim of the Old Testament, who by the early Christians were conceived as the guardians and heavenly prototypes of the Gospel-writers. But these symbols are not original with the Jews; they are of a more venerable

Click to view
WALL DECORATION OF THE ROYAL PALACE AT NINEVEH IN THEIR PRESENT STATE. (After Place, reproduced from Lenormant.)

age than even the Old Testament; for we find them on the walls of the ancient royal palaces of Nineveh, and there can be no doubt about it that the Jewish conception of the cherubim is the heirloom of a most hoary antiquity.

About Sargon I., king of Agade, who, according to a tablet of King Nabonidus, lived 3754 B. C. and built

[p. 34]

a temple to Samas, Mr. E. A. Wallis Budge says in his Babylonian Life and History, p. 40,:

"A curious legend is extant respecting this king, to the effect that he was born in a city on the banks of the Euphrates, that his mother conceived him in secret and brought him forth in a humble place that she placed him in an ark of rushes and closed it with pitch that she cast him upon the river in the water-tight ark; that the river carried him along; that he was rescued by a man called Akki, who brought him up to his own trade; and that from this position the goddess Istar made him king."

As to the Assyrio-Babylonian origin of these legends there can be no doubt. The best authorities agree--

"that Chaldea was the original home of these stories and that the Jews received them originally from the Babylonians." (Smith Sayce, The Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. 312.)

The numerous illustrations that have been found or early Assyrian and Babylonian seals prove--

"that the legends were well known and formed part of the literature of the country before the second millennium B. C." (Ib., p. 331.)

It is probable that all the old Chaldean legends existed in several versions. Of the creation story we possess two accounts which vary considerably; but one of them, which is narrated on seven tablets, is of special interest to us, not only on account of its being the main source of the first chapter of the Old Testament, but also because we possess in it one of the oldest documents in which the existence of the Evil One is mentioned. He is called in Assyrian Tiamtu, i. e., the deep, and is represented as the serpent that beats the sea, the serpent of the

[p. 35]

night, the serpent of darkness, the wicked serpent, and the mighty and strong serpent.

The derivation of the biblical account of Creation from Assyrian sources can as little be doubted as that of other legends, not only because of its agreement in several important features, and in many unimportant ones, but also because sometimes the very words used in Genesis are the same as in the Assyrian inscriptions. We find in both records such coincidences as the creation of woman from the rib of man and the sending out of birds from the ark to ascertain whether the waters had subsided. First the birds returned at once, then they returned, according to the cuneiform tablet-inscriptions of the Assyrians, with their feet covered with mud; at last they returned no more. Further, the Hebrew Mehumah, confusion, chaos, is the Assyrian Mummu, while the Hebrew tehom, the deep, and tohu, desolate, correspond to the Assyrian Tiamtu (= Tiamat).

Click to view
SACRED TREE AND SERPENT.
 From an ancient Babylonian cylinder. After Smith-Sayce (L. c., p. 88.)

Our excavators have not as yet found a report of the fall of man and of the serpent that seduced Adam and Eve to taste the fruit of the tree of life. There is, however, a great probability that some similar legend existed, as we are in possession of pictures which represent two persons seated under a tree and a serpent near by.

The tree of life is an idea which must have been very popular among the Assyrians and Babylonians, for

[p. 36]

their artists do not tire of depicting it in every form. It may date back to that remote period when the fruits of

Click to view
THE TREE OF LIFE.
 Decorations on the embroidery of a royal mantle. (British Museum. Layard, Monuments, 1st series, pl. 6. Lenormant, l. l. V., p. 108).

trees constituted an important part of the food by which human life was sustained. [*1]

[p. 37]

Tiamat is the original watery chaos from which heaven and earth were generated. Babylonian philosophers see in it the mother of the world and the source of all things, while in mythology it appears as the representative of disorder and the mother of the monsters of the deep.

After a long struggle Tiamat was conquered, as we read in the fourth tablet of the creation-story, by the Sun-god, Belus or Bel-Merodach. The struggle, however, is not finished, for the demon of evil is living still and Bel

Click to view
MERODACH DELIVERING THE MOON-GOD FROM THE EVIL SPIRITS.
 (From a Babylonian cylinder. From Smith's Chaldean Account of Genesis.)

has to fight the seven wicked storm-demons who darken the moon. He kills dragons and evil spirits, and the reappearance of divine intelligence in rational creatures is symbolised in the myth that Bel commanded one of the gods to cut off his, i. e. Bel's head, in order to mix the blood with the earth for the procreation of animals which should be able to endure the light.

We here reproduce a brief statement of the Babylonian story of the creation, in which Tiamat plays an important part. Professor Sayce says (Records of the Past, New Series, Vol. I., pp. 128-131):

[p. 38]

"A good deal of the poem consists of the words put into the mouth of the god Merodach, derived possibly from older lays. The first tablet or book, however, expresses the cosmological doctrines of the author's own day. It opens before the beginning of time, the expression 'at that time' answering to the expression 'in the beginning' of Genesis. The heavens and earth had not yet been created, and since the name was supposed to be the same as the thing named, their names had not as yet been pronounced. A watery chaos alone existed, Mummu Tiamat, 'the chaos of the deep.' Out of the bosom of this chaos proceeded the gods as well as the created world. First came the primaeval divinities, Lakhmu and Lakhamu, words of unknown meaning, and then An-sar and Ki-sar, 'the upper' and 'lower firmament.' Last of all were born the three supreme gods of the Babylonian faith, Ann the sky-god, Bel or Illil the lord of the ghost-world, and Ea the god of the river and sea.

"But before the younger gods could find a suitable habitation for themselves and their creation, it was necessary to destroy 'the dragon' of chaos with all her monstrous offspring. The task was undertaken by the Babylonian sun-god Merodach, the son of Ea, An-sar promising him victory, and the other gods providing for him his arms. The second tablet was occupied with an account of the preparations made to ensure the victory of light over darkness, and order over anarchy.

"The third tablet described the success of the god of light over the allies of Tiamat. Light was introduced into the world, and it only remained to destroy Tiamat herself. The combat is described in the fourth tablet, which takes the form of a poem in honor of Merodach, and is probably an earlier poem incorporated into his text by the author of the epic. Tiamat was slain and her allies put in bondage, while the books of destiny which had hitherto been possessed by the older race of gods were now transferred to the younger deities of the new world. The visible heaven was formed out of the skin of Tiamat, and became the outward symbol of Ansar

[p. 39]

and the habitation of Ann, Bel, and Ea, while the chaotic waters of the dragon became the law-bound sea ruled over by Ea.

"The heavens having been thus made, the fifth tablet tells us how they were furnished with mansions for the sun, and moon, and stars, and how the heavenly bodies were bound down by fixed laws that they might regulate the calendar and determine the year. The sixth tablet probably described the creation of the earth, as well as of vegetables, birds, and fish. In the seventh tablet the creation of animals and reptiles was narrated, and doubtless also that of mankind.

"It will be seen from this that in its main outlines the Assyrian epic of the creation bears a striking resemblance to the account of it given in the first chapter of Genesis. In each case the history of the creation is divided into seven successive acts; in each case the present world has been preceded by a watery chaos. In fact the self-same word is used of this chaos in both the Biblical and Assyrian accounts--tehom, Tiamat--the only difference being that in the Assyrian story 'the deep' has become a mythological personage, the mother of a chaotic brood. The order of the creation, moreover, agrees in the two accounts; first the light, then the creation of the firmament of heaven, subsequently the appointment of the celestial bodies 'for signs and for seasons and for days and years,' and next, the creation of beasts and 'creeping things.' But the two accounts also differ in some important particulars. In the Assyrian epic the earth seems not to have been made until after the appointment of the heavenly bodies, instead of before it, as in Genesis, and the seventh day is a day of work instead of rest, while there is nothing corresponding to the statement of Genesis that 'the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.' But the most important difference consists in the interpolation of the struggle between Merodach and the powers of evil, as a consequence of which light was introduced into the universe, and the firmament of the heavens was formed.

"It has long since been noted that the conception of this struggle stands in curious parallelism to the verses of the Apocalypse

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] (Rev. xii, 7-9): 'And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world.' We are also reminded of the words of Isaiah, xxiv. 21, 22: 'The Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison.'"

The Babylonians worshipped many deities, but their favorite god was Bel, who is frequently identified with Merodach, on account of his struggle with Tiamat.

          
Click to view
THE CHALDEAN   TRINITY BLESSING THE TREE OF LIFE.
   (British Museum. Lenormant, V., p. 234 )

       
Click to view
THE GODDESS   ANNA.
   (Bas-relief in the British Museum. Lenormant, V., p. 259.)

     
   Bel-Merodach is one of the great trinity of Anu, Ea, and Bel, which on an ancient cylinder is pictured as hovering above the tree of life before which two human forms, apparently king and queen, are seen in an attitude of adoration.

The Babylonian trinity was thought to be male and

[p. 41]

female, and it is noteworthy that the female representative of the divine father Anu, the god-mother Anna, also called Istar, was worshipped under the symbol of a dove, which in a purer and nobler form reappears in Christianity as an emblem of most significant spirituality.

Bel-Merodach is the Christ of the Babylonians, for he is spoken of as the son of the god Ea, the personification of all knowledge and wisdom. Professor Budge says:

Click to view
FIGHT BETWEEN BEL-MERODACH AND TIAMAT.
 From an ancient Assyrian bas-relief, now in the British Museum

"The omnipresent and omnipotent Marduk (Merodach) was the god, who 'went before Ea' and was the healer and mediator for mankind. He revealed to mankind the knowledge of Ea; in all incantations he is invoked as the god 'mighty to save' against evil and ill."--Babylonian Life and History, p. 127.

The struggle between Bell-Merodach and Tiamat was a favorite subject with Assyrian artists. In one of them,

[p. 42]

which is now preserved in the British Museum, the Evil One is represented as a monster with claws and horns, with a tail and wings, and covered with scales.

Concerning the Evil One and hell, as conceived by the Babylonians, Mr. Budge says, pp. 139, 140:

"Their Hades was not so very far different from Sheol, or the 'pit' of the Bible, nor the Devil much to be distinguished from the Satan we read of."

"The Babylonian conception of hell is made known to us by a tablet which relates the descent of Istar thither in search of her lovely young husband, Tammuz. It has been stated that the same word for Hades, i. e. Sheol, as that used in the Hebrew Scriptures, has been found in Babylonian texts; but this assertion has been made while the means for definitely proving it do not at present exist. The lady of the Babylonian Hades was called Nin-kigal, and the place itself had a river running through it, over which spirits had to cross. There was also 'a porter of the waters' (which reminds us of the Charon of the Greeks), and it had seven gates. The tablet mentioned above tells us that--

1. To the land of no return, to the afar off, to regions of corruption,
 2. Istar, the daughter of the Moon-god, her attention firmly
 3. fixed, the daughter of the Moon-god, her attention fixed
 4. the house of corruption, the dwelling of the deity Irkalla (to go)
 5 to the house whose entrance is without exit
 6. to the road whose way is without return
 7. to the house whose entrance is bereft of light
 8. a place where much dust is their food, their meat mud,
 9. where light is never seen, where they dwell in darkness
 10. ghosts (?) like birds whirl round and round the vaults
 11. over the doors and wainscoting there is thick dust.

"The outer gate of this 'land of no return' was strongly guarded and bolted, for the porter, having refused to grant Istar admission, the goddess says--

[p. 43]

'Open thy gate and let me enter in;
 If thou openest not the gate, and I come not in,
 I force the gate, the bolt I shatter,
 I strike the threshold, and I cross the doors,
 I raise the dead, devourers of the living,
 (for) the dead exceed the living.'

"There is another name for Hades, the signs which form it meaning 'the house of the land of the dead.' A gloss gives its pronunciation as Arali. Such, then, is the Babylonian hell. It is difficult to say where they imagined their Hades to be, but it has been conjectured by some that they thought it to be in the west."

Click to view
EVIL DEMONS.
 (From a Chaldean stele in the British Museum. After Lenormant.)

Besides Tiamat there were in Assyrian and Babylonian mythology innumerable demons whose names are known through the inscriptions and whose portraits are preserved on statues, bas-reliefs, and cylinders. The magic formulae which were employed to ward off their influence are always uttered seven times in the Sumero-Accadian language which was deemed more sacred on account of its age, for it had become unintelligible for the common people and remained in use only for liturgic purposes. The Assyrians expected to frighten demons away by showing them their own shape and by exhorting them to destroy themselves mutually in an internecine combat.

[p. 44]

Lenormant briefly sets forth the demonology of the Assyrians Histoire ancienne de l'Orient, V., page 494.

Click to view
DEMON OF THE SOUTHWEST WIND.
 (Statue in the Louvre. After Lenormant.)

"In the army of the Good as well as in the army of Evil, there obtains a hierarchical system of more or less powerful spirits according to their rank. The texts mention the ekim and the telal or warrior; the maskin or trapper; the alal or destroyer; the labartu, the labassu, the ahharu, kind of ghosts, phantoms, and vampires. Frequently the mas, the lamma, and the utuq are quoted; and a distinction is made between the good and the evil mas, the good and the evil lamma, the good and the evil utuq. There are also the alapi or winged bulls, the nirgalli or winged lions, and the innumerable kinds of heavenly archangels. The gods Anna and Ea, called the spirit of heaven (zi an na) and the spirit of the earth (zi ki a), as the gods of every science, are commonly invoked in incantations as alone able to protect mankind against the attacks of the evil spirits. The monuments of Chaldea prove the existence of an extremely complex demonology the exact gradation of which is not yet sufficiently known."

Concerning the Devil of the disease-engendering southwest wind Lenormant says (ibid. V., p. 212):

"The Louvre possesses the image of a horrible demon in upright posture, with a dog's head, eagle's feet, lion's paws, and a scorpion's tail. Half of the head shows the skull fleshless. He has four spread wings. A ring at the top of the head served to

[p. 45]

suspend the figure. On the back of the statue is the inscription in sumero-accadian, indicating that it represents the demon of the southwest wind and that it should be placed at the door or the window for the sake of warding off his injurious influence. The south-west

Click to view
NIRGALLI.
 Lion-headed and eagle-claw-footed demons. (British Museum. After Lenormant, l. c. V. p. 204.)

wind in Chaldea comes from the deserts of Arabia, and its burning breath parches everything, producing the same ravages as the khamsin in Syria and the simoon in Africa."

The Nirgalli are described by the same scholar as follows (ibid. V., p. 215):

[p. 46]

'At Kuyunjik, in the palace of Asurbanipal, we see in several corners a series of monsters with human bodies, lions' heads, and eagles' feet. They appear in groups of two, combating one another with daggers and clubs. They, too, are demons and express in the language of the sculptor the formula so frequently met with

          
Click to view

       
Click to view

     
   AN ANCIENT ASSYRIAN BRONZE TABLET REPRESENTING THE WORLD IN THE CLUTCHES OF AN EVIL DEMON. Collection of M. de Clercq. (After Lenormant).

in incantation: 'The evil demons should get out, they should mutually kill one another.'"

There is an ancient bronze tablet which shows the picture of the world in the clutches of the Devil. Lenormant, when speaking of the Chaldean conception of hell, alludes to this remarkable piece of antiquity and describes it as follows:

"A bronze plate in the collection of M. De Clercq contains in a synoptic world-picture a representation of hell, and it is necessary

[p. 47]

that we here give a description of it. One side of the bronze plate is entirely occupied by a four-footed monster, with four wings, standing on eagle's claws. Raising himself on his hind feet, be looks as though he intended to jump over the plate against which he leans. His head reaches over the border as over the top of a wall. The face of the wild and roaring monster towers, on the other side of the plate, above a picture which is divided into four horizontal strips representing the heavens, the earth, and hell. In the top strip one sees the symbolic representations of the celestial bodies. Underneath appears a series of seven persons clad in long robes and having beads of a lion, a dog, a bear, a ram, a horse, an eagle, and a serpent. These are the celestial genii called ighigs. The third strip exhibits a funeral scene, which undoubtedly happens on earth. Two personages dressed in the skin of a fish, after the fashion of the god Anu, are standing at the head and foot of a mummy. Further on there are two genii--one with a lion's head, the other with a jackal's head--who threaten one another with their daggers, and a man seems to flee from this scene of horror. The picture of the fourth strip is bathed in the floods of the ocean, which according to the traditional mythology of the Chaldeans reaches underneath the foundations of the earth. An ugly monster, half bestial, half human, with eagles' wings and claws, and a tail terminating in a snake's head, stands on the shore of the ocean, on which a boat is floating. This is the boat of the deity Elippu, frequently mentioned in the religious texts and probably the prototype of the boat of Charon in Greek mythology. In the boat is a horse which carries upon its back a gigantic lion-headed deity, holding in her hands two serpents; and two little lions jump to her breast to suck her milk. In the corner there are fragments of all kinds, human limbs, vases, and the remainders of a feast.

"Thus this little bronze tablet contains the picture of the world such as the imagination of the Chaldeans represented it to be: the gods and the sidereal powers, angels and demons, ighigs and anunnaks, the earth and men, with supernatural beings who exercise a direct influence upon them: the dead protected by certain demons

[p. 48]

and attacked by others according to the philosophical conception of good and evil, and the antagonism of the two principles which constitutes the basis of the Assyrio-Chaldean religion. Anu protects the dead in the same way as does the Egyptian Osiris. There is the subterranean river reminding one of the Styx and Acheron of the Greeks as well as of the subterranean Nile of Amenti." (P. 291.)

It goes without saying that the old biblical legends, far from losing their value by being proved to be much older, gain air additional value; they are now more interesting to us than ever. Formerly the biblical account of the creation was thought to be the very beginning of the religious evolution of man, but now we know that it is merely a milestone on the road. It is neither the beginning nor the end. It is simply the summary of a long history of anxious inquiry and speculation, which would have remained forgotten had we not discovered the Assyrian tablets bearing witness to the aspirations that preceded the composition of the Old Testament. But there is one thing which seems strange: the Chaldean belief in the immortality of the soul found no echo in the literature of the Jews. Did they refuse to incorporate it into the Hebrew world-conception because they disbelieved it; or did they merely ignore it because they were too realistic and would not allow themselves to be carried away by illusions even of the loftiest kind?

The civilisation of Assyria and Babylon was more brilliant, more powerful, and more cosmopolitan than the civilisation of Israel. Nevertheless, there is this important difference between the religious legends and speculations of these two nations, that while the Assyrian tablets are polytheistic and mythological, the Hebrew text is

[p. 49]

monotheistic. The mythological ornaments of the original story have been chastened and simplified. Without being blind to the poetic beauties of the original, which in its way is not less venerable than the later Hebrew version, we must say that the latter is a decided improvement. Its greater simplicity and freedom from fantastic details gives it a peculiar soberness and grandeur which is absolutely lacking in the Assyrian myth of the creation.

While unequivocally recognising the superiority of the Hebrew account, we must, however, mention in justice to the Assyrian and Babylonian civilisation that monotheism was by no means an exclusively Jewish belief. There were monotheistic hymns of great strength and religious beauty, both in Egypt and in Babylon, long before the existence of the people of Israel, and it is not impossible that what Sir Henry Rawlinson calls "the monotheistic party" of Babylon or their brethren in Egypt were the founders of Jewish monotheism. It is certain that the philosophers of Egypt and Babylonia were not without influence upon the development of the Israelitic religion.

Egyptian and Babylonian monotheists apparently suffered the popular mythology as a symbolical expression of religious truth, while in later periods the religious leaders of the Jews had no patience with idolators, and, becoming intolerant of polytheism, succeeded in blotting out from their sacred literature the popular superstitions of their times; some vestiges only were left, which are now valuable hints indicating the nature of the text before it was changed by the hands of later redactors.

Footnotes

^29:1 A popular etymology connected this word Adamatu with Adamu or Admu, "man," which later, as Rawlinson pointed out, reappears in the Bible as the name of the first man. See The Chaldean Account of Genesis, by George Smith. p. 83.

^31:1 Sir Henry Rawlinson believes that Gan Eden or the Garden of Eden is Gan-Duniyas (also called Gan-Duni), meaning "enclosure," which is a name of Babylonia in Assyrian inscriptions.

^31:2 See Cory's Ancient Fragments, pp. 51-56.

^32:1 See George Smith, The Chaldean Account of Genesis, edited by Prof. A. H.

Sayce, p. 304, and also Dr. Paul Haupt's habilitation lecture Der keilinschriftliche Sintfluthbericht, Leipzig, 1881.

^32:2 This is the commonly adopted form of the name; although the proper transcription is Gilgamesh. He is also called "Gistubar." The literal meaning of the word is "mass of fire." See Lenormant's Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient, V., p. 199.

^32:3 Some of the pictures of the Zodiac are strikingly like those which modern charts employ; for instance the centaur and the scorpion, which can be seen on an Assyrian bas-relief in the British Museum reproduced in Lenormant's Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient, V., p. 180.

^36:1 It is noteworthy that fagus, the beechtree, and fegos, the oak, which are both etymologically identical with the English word beech and the German Buche, mean "eating" or "the tree with eatable fruit." The word acorn, which is not derived from oak, but is connected with acre, the field, means "harvest or fruit"; it has no connexion with the German Eichel (acorn), but it is the same as the German Ecker, which is the name of the beechtree fruit.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

PERSIAN DUALISM.

HE TRANSITION from Devil-worship to God-worship marks the origin of civilisation; and among the nations of antiquity the Persians seem to have been the first who took this step with conscious deliberation, for they most earnestly insisted upon the contrast that obtains between good and evil, so much so that their religion is even to-day regarded as the most consistent form of dualism.

The founder of Persian dualism was Zarathustra, or, as the Greeks called him, "Zoroaster"--a name which in its literal translation means "golden splendor."

Zoroaster, the great prophet of Mazdaism (the belief in Mazda, the Omniscient One), it is rightly assumed, was not so much the founder of a new era as the concluding link in a long chain of aspiring prophets before him. The field was ripe for the harvest when he appeared, and others must have prepared the way for his movement.

Zoroaster is in all later writings represented as a demigod, a fact which suggested to Professor Darmesteter the idea that he was a mythical figure. Nevertheless, and although we know little of Zoroaster's life, we

[p. 51]

have the documentary evidence in the "Gathas" that he was a real historical personality.

Prof. A. V. Williams Jackson in an essay "On the Date of Zoroaster" [*1] arrives at the conclusion that he lived between the latter half of the seventh and the middle of the sixth century, and Dr. E. W. West [*2] points out that the calendar reform, in which the old Persian names of the months were supplanted by Zoroastrian names, was introduced in the year 505 B. C. This proves that the kings of the Achaemenian dynasty were Zoroastrians. [*3] Professor Jackson says:

"The kingdom of Bactria was the scene of Zoroaster's zealous ministry, as I presume. Born, as I believe, in Atropatene, to the west of Media, this prophet without honor in his own country met with a congenial soil for the seeds of his teaching in eastern Iran His ringing voice of reform and of a nobler faith found an answering echo in the heart of the Bactrian king Vishtaspa, whose strong arm gave necessary support to the crusade that spread the new faith west and east throughout the land of Iran. Allusions to this crusade are not uncommon in Zoroastrian literature. Its advance must have been rapid. A fierce religious war, which in a way was fatal to Bactria, seems to have ensued with Turan. This was that same savage race in history at whose door the death of victorious Cyrus is laid. Although tradition tells us the sad story that the fire of the sacred altar was quenched in the blood of the priests when Turan stormed Balkh, this momentary defeat was but the gathering

[p. 52]

force of victory; triumph was at hand. The spiritual spark of regeneration lingered among the embers and was destined soon to burst into the flame of Persian power that swept over decaying Media and formed the beacon-torch that lighted up the land of Iran in early history."

The Gathas are hymns; they are a product of the fifth and sixth centuries before Christ, the authenticity of which is sufficiently proved not only by the later Persian literature, the Pahlavi books, but also by Greek authors, especially by passages quoted in Plutarch and Diogenes Laertes from Theopompus, who wrote at the end of the fourth century before Christ. The Gathas profess to be written by Zoroaster who appears in them not as a demigod but as a struggling and suffering man, sometimes elated by the grandeur of his aspirations, firmly convinced of his prophetic mission, and then again dejected and full of doubt as to the final success of the movement to which he devoted all his energies. Says Prof. L. H. Mill, the translator of the Gathas:

"Their doctrines and exhortations concern an actual religious movement taking place contemporaneously with their composition; and that movement was exceptionally pure and most earnest.

"That any forgery is present in the Gathas, any desire to palm off doctrines upon the sacred community in the name of the great prophet, as in the Vendidad and later Yasna, is quite out of the question. The Gathas are genuine in their mass."

There were two religious parties in the days of Zoroaster: the worshippers of the daevas or nature-gods, and the worshippers of Ahura, the Lord. Zoroaster appears in the Gathas as a priest of the highest rank who became the leader of the Ahura party. Zoroaster not only degraded the old nature-gods, the daevas, into demons,

[p. 53]

but also regarded them as representatives of a fiendish power which he called Angro Mainyush, or Ahriman, which means "the evil spirit," and Druj, [*1] i. e., falsehood.

The Scythians in the plains of Northern Asia, the most dangerous neighbors of Persia, worshipped their highest deity under the symbol of a serpent, and it was natural that the snake Afrasiab, [*2] the god of the enemy, became identified with the archfiend Ahriman.

The Persians are often erroneously called fire worshippers, but it goes without saying that as the sun is not a god and cannot, according to Zoroaster, in and for itself receive divine honor or be worshipped, so the flame which is lit in praise of Ahura Mazda is a symbol only of him who is the light of the soul and the principle of all goodness.

Zoroaster taught that Ahriman was not created by Ahura, but that he was possessed of independent existence. The evil spirit, to be sure, was not equal to the Lord in dignity, nor even in power; nevertheless, both were creative, and both were original in being themselves uncreated. They were the representatives of contradictory principles. And this doctrine constitutes the dualism of the Persian religion, which is most unmistakably expressed in the words of the thirtieth Yasna. [*3]

"Well known are the two primeval spirits correlated but independent; one is the better and the other is the worse as to thought, as to word, as to deed, and between these two let the wise choose aright."

[p. 54]

Ahura Mazda, the Omniscient Lord, reveals himself through "the excellent, the pure and stirring word." [*1] On the rock inscription of Elvend, which had been made by the order of king Darius, we read these lines [*2]:

"There is one God, omnipotent Ahura Mazda,
 It is He who has created the earth here;
 It is He who has created the heaven there;
 It is He who has created mortal man."

The noble spirit of Zoroaster's religion appears from the following formula, which was in common use among the Persians and served as an introduction to every liturgic worship: [*3]

"May Ahura be rejoiced! May Angro be destroyed by those who do truly what is God's all-important will.

"I praise well-considered thoughts, well-spoken words, and well-done deeds. I embrace all good thoughts, good words, and good deeds; I reject all evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds.

"I give sacrifice and prayer unto you, O Amesha-Spenta! [*4] even with the fulness of my thoughts, of my words, of my deeds, and of my heart: I give unto you even my own life.

[p. 55]

"I recite the, 'Praise of Holiness,' the Ashem Vohu: [*1]

"'Holiness is the best of all good. Well is it for it, well is it for that holiness which is perfection of holiness!

"'I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathustra, one who hates the daevas (devils) and obeys the laws of Ahura.'"

Lenormant characterises the God of Zoroaster as follows:

"Ahura Mazda has created asha, purity, or rather the cosmic order; he has created both the moral and material world constitution; he has made the universe; he has made the law; he is, in a word, creator (datar), sovereign (ahura), omniscient (mazdao), the god of order (ashavan). He corresponds exactly to Varuna, the highest god of Vedism.

"This spiritual conception of the Supreme Being is absolutely pure in the Avesta, and the expressions that Ormuzd has the sun for his eye, the heaven for his garment, the lightning for his sons, the waters for his spouses, are unequivocally allegorical. Creator of all things, Ormuzd is himself uncreated and eternal. He had no beginning and will have no end. He has accomplished his creation work by pronouncing the Word,' the 'Ahuna-Vairyo, Honover,' i. e., 'the Word that existed before everything else,' reminding us of the eternal Word, the Divine Logos of the Gospel." Histoire Ancienne de l'Orient, V., p. 388.

[p. 56]

Concerning Ahriman, Lenormant says:

"The creation came forth from the hands of Ormuzd, pure and perfect like himself. It was Ahriman who perverted it by his infamous influence, and labored continually to destroy and overthrow it, for he is the destroyer (paurou marka) as well as the spirit of evil. The struggle between these two principles, of good and of evil, constitutes the world's history. In Ahriman we find again the old wrathful serpent of the Indo-Iranian period, who is the personification of evil and who in Vedism, under the name of Ahi, is regarded as an individual being. The myth of the serpent and the legends of the Avesta are mingled in Ahriman under the name of Aji Dahaka, who is said to have attacked Atar, Traetaona, and Yima, but is himself dethroned. It is the source of the Greek myth that Apollo slays the dragon Python. The Indo-Iranian religion knows only the struggle that was carried on in the atmosphere between the fire-god and the serpent-demon Afrasiab. And it was, according to Professor Darmesteter, the doctrine of this struggle, which, when generalised and applied to all things in the world, finally led to the establishment of dualism."

Says James Darmesteter, the translator of the Zend-Avesta:

"There were two general ideas at the bottom of the Indo-Iranian religion; first, that there is a law in nature, and secondly, that there is a war in nature (Sacred Books of the East, IV., p. lvii),

The law in nature: proves the wisdom of Ahura, who is therefore called Mazda, the Wise. The war in nature is due to the intrusion of Ahriman into the creation of Ahura.

The fire sacrifice was accompanied by partaking of the haoma drink, a ceremony which reminds us on the one hand of the soma sacrifice of the Vedic age in India and on the other hand of the Lord's Supper of the Christians.

[p. 57]

We know through the sacred scriptures of the Persians that little cakes (the draona) covered with small pieces of holy meat (the myazda) were consecrated in the name of a spiritual being, a god or angel, or of some great deceased personality, and then distributed among all the worshippers that were present. But more sacred still than the draona with the myazda is the haoma drink which was prepared from the white haoma plant, also called gaokerena. Says Professor Darmesteter: "It is by the drinking of gaokerena that men, on the day of the resurrection, will become immortal."

The way in which the Persian sacrament of drinking the gaokerena was still celebrated in the times of early Christianity, must have been very similar to the Christian communion, for Justinus, when speaking of the Lord's Supper among the Christians, adds "that this very solemnity, too, the evil spirits have introduced in the mysteries of Mithra."

After death, according to the Zoroastrian doctrine, the soul must pass over cinvato pertush, that is, the "accountant's bridge," where its future fate is decided. This bridge stretches over the yawning abyss of hell, from the peak of Judgment to the divine Mount Alborz, and becomes, according to the most common statements of the doctrine, broad to the good, a pathway of nine javelins in breadth, while to the wicked it is like the edge of a razor. Evil doers fall into the power of Ahriman and are doomed to hell; the good enter garo demana, the life of bliss; while those in whom good and evil are equal, remain in an intermediate state, the Hamestakans of the Pahlavi books, until the great judgment-day (called aka).

[p. 58]

The most characteristic features of the Persian 'religion after the lifetime of Zoroaster consist in the teaching that a great crisis is near at hand, which will lead to the renovation of the world called frashokereti in the Avesta, and frashakart in Pahlavi. Saviours will come, born of the seed of Zoroaster, and in the end the great Saviour who will bring about the resurrection of the dead. He will be the "son of a virgin" and the "All-conquering." His name shall be the Victorious (verethrajan), Righteousness-incarnate (astvat-ereta), and the Saviour (saoshyant). Then the living shall become immortal, yet their bodies will be transfigured so that they will cast no shadows, and the dead shall rise, "within their lifeless bodies incorporate life shall be restored." (Fr. 4. 3.)  [*1] The Persian belief in the advent of a saviour who will make mankind immortal seems to reappear in an intenser form in the days of John the Baptist and Jesus of Nazareth, who preached that the kingdom of heaven is near at hand. St. Paul still believed that the second advent of Christ would take place during his own life-time. The dead who sleep in the Lord be resurrected, and the bodies of those that are still in the flesh will be transfigured and become immortal.

The influence of Zoroaster's religion upon Judaism and early Christianity cannot be doubted. Not only does the original text of the book of Ezra directly declare that "Cyrus, the King, built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, where they worship him with the eternal fire"

[p. 59]

[paragraph continues] (dia pyros endelexous), but there are many Jewish ceremonies preserved to the present day, which bear a close resemblance to the ritual of ancient Mazdaism. In addition there is a documentary evidence preserved in "The Arabic Gospel of the Infancy" (Chapter 7), that the Magi came from the Fast to Jerusalem according to a prophecy of Zoroaster.

The Persian world-conception, like the religion of the Jews, was too abstract to favor any artistic development. [*1] Therefore we do not possess representations of

          
Click to view
AN ASSYRIAN   CAMEO

       
Click to view
ASSYRIAN   CYLINDER.

       
Click to view
A PERSIAN   CAMEO

     
   Lajard, Culte de Mithra, pl. xxx., No. 7.
 (Lenormant, V., p. 248.)

either good or evil spirits which are exclusively and peculiarly Persian. Even the picture of Ahura Mazda (as we find it on various bas-reliefs) is not based upon a conception that could be said to be regarded as original. The figure from which the bust of the god of light and goodness rises can be traced to Assyrian emblems, and may, for all we know, be of Accadian origin. There is, for instance, an Assyrian cylinder which represents a

[p. 60]

worshipper standing before the idol of a god. Behind him is the tree of life and a priest carrying in his left hand a rosary, while the deity hovers above them in a similar shape to the Ahura-Mazda pictures of the Persians.

Ahura Mazda is pictured as a winged disc without any head, in the style of Chaldean sun-pictures, in a cameo representing him as worshipped by two sphinxes, between whom the sacred haoma plant is seen (see <page 59>). In another cameo (see <page 59>) he appears as a human

Click to view
SCULPTURES ON A ROYAL TOMB.
 (Coste et Flandin, Perse Ancienne, at Persepolis, pl. 164. Lenormant, V., p. 23.)

figure without wings, rising from a crescent that hovers above the sacrificial fire. Above him is a picture of the sun, and before him stands a priest or a king in an attitude of adoration.

There are some magnificent representations of Ahura-Mazda on ancient Persian monuments, which claim our special attention. There is a loftiness and majesty about

[p. 61]

Click to view
BAS-RELIEF OF PERSEPOLIS.
 (After Coste et Flandin, Perse Ancienne, Pl. 156 . From Lenormant, V., p. 485.)

[p. 62]

his appearance, which lifts his picture above the Assyrian conception of deities. In his hands he holds either a ring or the short royal staff of rulers, appearing at the top like a lotus flower.

Prof. A. V. Williams Jackson explains the ring in the hands of Ahura Mazda as "the Circle of Sovereignty," [*1] and interprets the loop with streamers in which the figure floats as a variation of the same idea, for in some of the pictures it appears as a chaplet, or waist-garland with ribbons. [*2]

It is not possible that the loop with streamers is originally a disc representing the disc of the sun after the fashion of Egyptian temple decorations. At any rate, there are a great number of Assyrian sculptures of the same type which are unequivocally representations of the sun. A cylinder (published in Lajard's Culte de Mithra, plate XLIX., No. 2) illustrating the myth of god Isdubar's descent to Hasisatra, shows the two scorpion-genii of the horizon watching the rise and the setting of the sun. Here the sun appears, like the figure from which Ahura Mazda rises, as a winged disc with feather-tail and streamers. In addition, we find the same picture in the deity that protects the tree of life, which can only signify the benign influence of the sun on plants (see <page 36>); and the old Babylonian cylinder representing Merodach's fight with the evil spirit that darkens

[p. 63]

the moon (see p. <page 37>), shows the feathered dial in this same conventional shape covered with clouds. [*1]

A representation of Ahriman has not yet been discovered among the Persian antiquities. There is, however, a bas-relief in Persepolis which depicts the king in the act of slaying a unicorn. The monster is very similar to the Assyrian Tiamat (see <page 41>), and we cannot doubt that the Persian sculptor imitated the style of his Assyrian predecessors.

Click to view
THE KING SLAYING A UNICORN.
 (Bas-relief of Persepolis.)

We have little information concerning the origin of Zoroaster's dualism, but we can nevertheless reconstruct it at least in rough outlines. For there are witnesses left, even to-day, of the historical past of the old Persian religion. A sect called the Izedis are the fossil representatives of the Devil-worship that preceded the purer notions of the Zoroastrian worship prevailing in the Zend-Avesta. Following the authority of a German traveller, Tylor says (Primitive Culture, Vol. II., p. 329):

"The Izedis or Yezidis, the so-called Devil-worshippers, still remain a numerous though oppressed people in Mesopotamia and adjacent countries. Their adoration of the sun and horror of defiling fire accord with the idea of a Persian origin of their religion (Persian "ized" = God), an origin underlying more superficial admixture

[p. 64]

of Christian and Moslem elements. This remarkable sect is distinguished by a special form of dualism. While recognising the existence of a Supreme Being, their peculiar reverence is given to Satan, chief of the angelic host, who now has the means of doing evil to mankind, and in his restoration will have the power of rewarding them. 'Will not Satan then reward the poor Izedis, who alone have never spoken ill of him, and have suffered so much for him?' Martyrdom for the rights of Satan! exclaims the German traveller, to whom an old white-bearded Devil-worshipper thus set forth the hopes of his religion."

This peculiar creed of the Izedis is similar to the religion of Devil-worshipping savages in so far as the recognition of the good powers is not entirely lacking, but it is, as it were, a merely negative element; the positive importance of goodness is not yet recognised. It is probable that the Persians in prehistoric times were as much Devil-worshippers as are the Izedis. The daevas, the deities of the irresistible forces of nature, were pacified by sacrifices. A recognition of the power of moral endeavor as represented in the personified virtues, the Amesha Spenta, was the product of a slow development. Thus in Persia the Devil-worship of the daevas yielded to the higher religion of God-worship; and this change marks a decided step in advance, resulting soon afterwards in the Persians' becoming one of the leading nations of the world.

Footnotes

^51:1 Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. XVII., p. 96.

^51:2 In a letter to Professor Jackson alluded to on page 20 of his essay.

^51:3 The story that Croesus's life was saved through Zoroastrian influences upon the mind of Cyrus, as told by Nicolaus Damascenus who wrote in the first century B. C., is quite probable. We read (in fragm. 65, Muller, Fragm. Hist. Gr., iii., 409) that religious scruples rose in addition to other considerations, and the words of Zoroaster (Zuroastroy logia) were called to mind that the fire should not be defiled. Therefore the Persians shouted that the life of Croesus should be spared. Compare Harlez, Avesta traduit, Introd., pp. xliv., lxvii.

^53:1 Druj, fiend, is always feminine, while Ahriman is masculine.

^53:2 The Turanian form of Afrasiab, was probably Farrusarrabba.

^53:3 Compare Sacred Books of the East, XXXI., p. 29.

^54:1 "The creative Word which was in the beginning" (Ahuna-Vairyo, Honover) reminds one not only of the Christian idea of the logos os En en arxe, but also of the Brahman Vach (word, etymologically the same as the Latin vox), which is glorified in the fourth hymn of the Rig Veda, as "pervading heaven and earth, existing in all the worlds and extending to the heavens."

^54:2 Translated from Lenormant's French rendering, 1. c., p. 388.

^54:3 Cf. Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXIII., p. 22.

^54:4 The six Amesha-Spenta (the undying and well-doing ones) are what Christians might call archangels. Originally they had been seven, but the first and greatest among them, Ahura Mazda, came to overshadow the divinity of the other six. They remained powerful gods, but he was regarded as their father arid creator. We read in Yast, XIX., 16, that they have "one and the same thinking, one and the same speaking, one and the same doing, one and the same father and lord, who is Ahura Mazda."

At first the Amesha Spenta were mere personifications of virtues, but later on they were entrusted with the government of the various domains of the universe. [p. 55] Haurvatat and Ameretat (health and immortality) had charge of waters and trees. Khshathrem Vairim (perfect sovereignty), represented the flash of lightning. His emblem being molten brass, he was revered as the master of metals. Asha Vahita (excellent holiness), the moral world-order as symbolised by sacrifice and burnt-offering, ruled over the fire. Spenta Armaiti (divine piety) continued to be regarded as the goddess of the earth, which position, according to old traditions, she had held since the Indo-Iranian era; and Vohu Mano (good thought) superintended the creation of animate life. (See Darmesteter, Ormuzd et Ahriman, Paris: 1877. pp. 55, 202-206. Comp. Encyclopaedia Britannica, s. v. "Zoroaster," and Sacred Books of the East, Vol. IV., p. LXXI., et seq.) For an exposition of the modern Parseeism of India see Mr. Dosabhai Framji Karaka's History of the Parsis, London, 1884.

^55:1 Says Darmesteter: "The 'Ashem Vohu' is one of the holiest and most frequently recited prayers."

^58:1 For a concise statement of the Persian religion, which in many respects foreshadows the Christian doctrines of a Saviour and of the bodily resurrection of the dead, see Prof. A. V. Williams Jackson's excellent article, "The Ancient Persian Doctrine of a Future Life," published in the Biblical World, August, 1896.

^59:1 For Persian art see Marcell Dienlafoy's work L'art antique de la Perse, in which for the present purpose the title vignette and the illustrations on page 4 are of interest.

^62:1 See his article on "The Circle of Sovereignty," in the American Oriental Society's Proceedings, May, 1889.

^62:2 See K. O. Kiash, Ancient Persian Sculptures; and also Rawlinson, J. R. A. S., X.. p. 187. Kossowicz, Inscriptiones Palaeo Persicae Achaemeniodorum, P. 46 et seq.

^63:1 There is no need of enumerating other cylinders and bas-reliefs of the same kind, as they are too frequently found in Assyrian archaeology. See for instance the illustrations in Lenormant, 1. 1. V., pp. 177, 230, 247, 296, 299, etc.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

ISRAEL.

Azazel, the God of the Desert.

THE PRIMITIVE STAGES of the Hebrew civilisation are not sufficiently known to describe the changes and phases which the Israelitic idea of the Godhead had to undergo before it reached the purity of the Yahveh conception. Yet the Israelites also must have had a demon not unlike the Egyptian Typhon, for the custom of sacrificing a goat to Azazel, the demon of the desert, suggests that the Israelites had just emerged from a dualism in which both principles were regarded as equal.

We read in Leviticus xvi.:

"And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one for the Lord, and the other for Azazel. And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the Lord's lot fell, and offer him for a sin-offering. But the goat on which the lot fell for Azazel, shall be presented alive before the Lord, to make atonement with him and to let him go to Azazel in the desert."

The name Azazel is derived from aziz, which means strength, and El, God. The god of war at Edessa is called Asisos (Asisos) the strong one. Bal-aziz was the

[p. 66]

strong god, and Rosh-aziz, the head of the strong one, is the name of a promontory on the Phoenician coast. Azazel, accordingly, means the Strength of God.

The mention of Azazel must be regarded as a last remnant of a prior dualism. Azazel, the god of the desert, ceased to be the strong god, and became a mere shadow of his former power, for the scapegoat is no longer a sacrifice. Yahveh's goat alone is offered for a sin-offering, while the scapegoat carries out into the desert the curse of the people's sin, and thus the worship of Azazel changed into a mere recognition of his existence.

These sacrificial ceremonies, however, which, on account of their being parts of religious performances, were only reluctantly discarded, are the lingering vestiges in Hebrew literature of an older dualism in which the power of evil received an equal share of worship with the power of good.

Superstitions.

The Old Testament contains many noble ideas and great truths; indeed it is a most remarkable collection of religious books, than which there is none more venerable in the literature of the world. Yet there are tares among the wheat, and many lamentable errors were, even by some of the leaders of the old Israelites, regarded as essential parts of their religion. The writers of the Bible not only made God responsible for, and accessory to, the crimes which their own people committed, e. g., theft (Exodus xi.), and murder and rape (Numbers xxxi. 17-18); but they cherished also the same superstitions that were commonly in vogue among savages. Thus the

[p. 67]

custom of burying people alive under foundation stones is mentioned as having been sanctioned by the God of Israel. When Jericho was destroyed at the special command of God, all its inhabitants were slain, "both man and woman, young and old, and ox and sheep and ass," with the sole exception of Rahab, a disreputable woman who had betrayed the city into the hands of the enemies of her countrymen. And Joshua adjured the people, saying:

"Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his first born and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it."

Jericho, however, was sure to be rebuilt sooner or later, for, being the key to Palestine, and commanding the entrance into the country from the desert routes, it was too important both for commercial and strategic purposes to be left in ruins; and the man who undertook the work was still superstitious and savage enough to heed Joshua's curse: We read in the first Book of Kings, with reference to the reign of Ahab (Chap. xvi. 34):

"In his days, Hiel the Bethelite built Jericho; he laid the foundation stones thereof in Abiram, his first born, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son, Segub, according to the word of the Lord which he spake by Joshua, the son of Nun."

The terrible witch-prosecutions which in the Middle Ages harassed Christianity have their root in passages of the Old Testament.

The laws of Exodus (xxii. 18) provide capital punishment for witchcraft, and the same command is repeated in Leviticus, where we read:

[p. 68]

"The soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people." (Lev. xx. 6.)

"A man also or a woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them." (Lev. xx. 27.)

In spite of the severity of the law against wizards and witches, the Israelites were always inclined to resort

Click to view
SAUL AND THE WITCH OF ENDOR. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

to their help. Saul, who had done his best to exterminate soothsayers (I Sam. xxviii. 9), when in greatest anxiety, called on the witch of Endor.

It is evident from various passages that the Israelites believed in evil spirits dwelling in darkness and waste places. (See Lev. xvii. 7; Deut. xxx. 17,; ib. xxxii. 17;

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] 2 Chron. xi. 15; Isaiah xiii. 21; ib. xxxiv. 14; Jer. 1. 39; Psalms cvi. 37.) Their names are Seirim (chimeras or goat-spirits), Lilith (the nightly one), Shedim (demons). The Seirim remind us of Assyrian pictures which represent evil spirits in the shape of goats. It is difficult to say whether these various demons of the Hebrews

Click to view
ASSYRIAN GOAT DEMONS. (Carvings on a boulder. After Lenormant.)

are to be regarded as the residuum of a lower religious stage preceding the period of the monotheistic Yahveh cult, or as witnesses to the existence of superstitions which certainly haunted the imagination of the uncultured not less in those days than they do now in this age of advanced civilisation.

Apparently the rise of a purer religion was slow and

[p. 70]

the habits of a savage age were long-lingering. The vestiges of devil-worship with several of its most bestial rites and even human sacrifices [*1] continued to exist even when a more radiant light began to shine in the world.

Satan.

When Azazel began to be neglected, Satan rose into existence. The belief in a God of Evil was replaced by the belief in all evil demon. And Satan, the tempter and originator of all evil, was naturally identified with the serpent that "was more subtil than ally beast of the field" (Genesis iii. 1).

Satan, the fiend, as a name in the sense of Devil, is rarely mentioned in the Old Testament. The word Satan, which means "enemy" is freely used, but, as a proper name, signifying the Devil, appears only five times. And it is noteworthy that the same event is, in two parallel passages, attributed, in the older one to Yahveh, and in the younger one, to Satan.

We read in 2 Samuel xxiv. 1:

"The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah."

The same fact is mentioned in 1 Chron. xxi. 1:

"Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to number Israel."

In all the older books of Hebrew literature, especially in the Pentateuch, Satan is not mentioned at all. All acts of punishment, revenge, and temptation are performed by Yahveh himself, or by his angel at his direct

[p. 71]

command. So the temptation of Abraham, the slaughter of the first-born in Egypt, the brimstone and fire rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, the evil spirit which came upon Saul, the pestilence to punish David-all these things are expressly said to have come from God. Even the perverse spirit which made the Egyptians err (Isaiah xix. 14), the lying spirit which was in the mouths of the prophets of Ahab (1 Kings xxii. 23; see also 2 Chron. xviii. 20-22), ignorance and indifference (Isaiah xxix. 10), are directly attributed to acts of God.

The prophet Zechariah speaks of Satan as an angel whose office it is to accuse and to demand the punishment of the wicked. In the Book of Job, where the most poetical and grandest picture of the Evil One is found, Satan appears as a malicious servant of God, who enjoys performing the functions of a tempter, torturer, and avenger. He accuses unjustly, like a State's attorney who prosecutes from a mere habit of prosecution, and delights in convicting even the innocent, while God's justice and goodness are not called in question.

It is noteworthy that Satan, in the canonical books of the Old Testament, is an adversary of man, but not of God; he is a subject of God and God's faithful servant.

The Jewish idea of Satan received some additional features from the attributes of the gods of surrounding nations. Nothing is more common in history than the change of the deities of hostile nations into demons of evil. In this way Beelzebub, the Phoenician god, became another name for Satan; and Hinnom (i. e. Gehenna), the place where Moloch had been worshipped, in the valley of Tophet, became the Hebrew name for hell in

[p. 72]

place of the word Sheol, the world of the dead under ground. The idol of Moloch was made of brass, and its stomach was a furnace. According to the prophets (Is. lvii. 5; Ez. xvi. 20; Jer. xix. 5), children were placed in the monster's arms to be consumed by the heat of the idol. The cries of the victims were drowned by drums, from which ("toph," meaning drum) the place was called "Tophet." Even the king, Manasseh, long after David, made his son pass through the fire of Moloch (2 Kings xxi.). [*1] Josiah endeavored to make an end of this terrible practice by defiling Tophet, in the valley of the children of Hinnom (2 Kings xxxiii 10).

Thus the very name of this foreign deity naturally and justly became among the Israelites the symbol of abomination and fiendish superstition.

The historical connexion of Israel's religion with the mythologies of Assyria and Babylon, begins now to be better understood; since we have learned to decipher the ancient cuneiform records. There are many most significant reminiscences of Bel Merodach's combat with Tiamat left in the Old Testament, and Hemann Gunkel after having given a literal translation of the several passages with explanatory comments says (Schopfung und Chaos, p. 88):

"Nowhere in extant literature is the myth of Yahveh's combat with the dragon actually narrated. Judaism, the distinctive work of which was the collection of the canon, did not admit myths that

[p. 73]

savored of heathendom. Nevertheless, the fact that in all the passages that speak of the dragon the myth is not portrayed but simply presupposed, proves that it was very well known and very popular with the people. The absence of the myth in the canon,--and this in the interest of the Christian reader need not be deplored,--is distinct and conclusive evidence that we possess in our Old Testament a fragment only of the old religious literature.

Click to view
THE SEVEN-ARMED CANDLESTICK SHOWING THE MONSTERS OF THE DEEP.

"The myth was from the very beginning in Israel a hymn to Yahveh. The Yahveh-hymn therefore is the favorite place for making reference to the dragon-myth,--of which we have a beautiful instance in Psalm lxxxix. The poet that portrays Yahveh's oppression of humanity (Job xl. et seq.; ix. 13; xvi. 13; also Psalm civ.); the prophet that terrorises the sinning people with pictures of Yahveh's omnipotence (Am. ix.); he that arouses the people languishing under a foreign dominion (Isaiah li. 9 et seq.): all make direct reference to Yahveh's power even over the dragon." [*1]

It is noteworthy that the seven-armed candlestick of the arch of Titus contains on its base figures of dragons, which we may justly assume to be Leviathan, Behemoth, and Rahab, the mythological monsters of Israel.

Footnotes

^70:1 See pp. 10-12 of this book.

^72:1 There is no reason to doubt the Biblical reports concerning Moloch, for Diodorus (20, 14) describes the cult of the national god of Carthage, whom be identifies with the Greek "Kronos," in the same way; so that in consideration of the fact that Carthage is a Phoenician colony, we have good reasons to believe this Kronos to be the same deity as the Ammonite Moloch, who was satiated by the same horrible sacrifices.

^73:1 It may be added that the references in the passages in question are absolutely unintelligible unless interpreted by some such light as that given by Gunkel. To the reader without a commentary they are sealed utterances, for the mere translation in our Bible offers no help to their understanding.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

  

BRAHMANISM AND HINDUISM.

INDIA, the primitive home of religion and philosophy, exhibits as strong a tendency for monism as the Persian nation has shown for dualism. But the ancient monism of India is apt to lose itself in pantism,--a theory according to which the All alone (or rather the conception of the absolute as the All) is possessed of reality, while all concrete existences are considered as a mere sham, an illusion, a dream. [*1]

The polytheism of the popular Hinduism [*2] is practically a pantheism in which the various deities are regarded as aspects of the One and All in which a discrimination between good and evil is entirely lost sight of. Thus the struggle between good and evil is contemplated as a process of repeated God-incarnations made necessary, according to the idea of the Brahmans, by the appearance of tyranny and injustice, lack of reverence for the priests, encroachments of the warrior caste

[p. 75]

on the supremacy of the Brahmans, or some other disorder. While the enemies of the gods-giants, demons,

Click to view
THE BRAHMAN TRIMURTI. Underneath the marks of the sects of Vishnu (1-12), Siva (13-30), Rama (36), Durga (31-32), and the Trimurti (33-35). (After Coleman.)

and other monsters--are not radically bad, and cannot be regarded as devils in the sense of the Christian Satan,

[p. 76]

the Brahman gods in their turn are by no means the representatives of pure goodness. Not only do they frequently assume shapes that to the taste of any Western nation would be exceedingly ugly and diabolical, but the same deities who in one aspect are beneficent powers of life, are in another respect demons of destruction.

Brahm, the highest god of Brahmanism, represents the All, or the abstract idea of being. He is conceived as a trinity which is called Trimurti, consisting of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva.

Click to view
BRAHMA.
 (Fragment of a car. Musee Guimet.)

Brahma, the first-originated of all beings, the lord of all creatures, the father of all the universes, is the divine mind who is the beginning of all. He is called Aja, the not-born, because he has originated, but was not begotten.

Brahma originated from tat, i. e., undifferentiated being, in which he existed from eternity in an embryonic form.

Brahma's consort, Sarasvati, also called Brahmi or Brahmini, is the goddess of poetry, learning, and music.

Brahma is the creator of man. We are told in the Yajurveda that the god produced from himself the soul, which is accordingly a part of his own being, and clothed it with a body-a process which is reported in the reverse

[p. 77]

order in the Hebrew Genesis, where Elohim creates first the body and then breathes the life into the body, which makes of man a living soul.

Click to view
BRAHMA AND SURASWATI.
 (Reproduced from Hermann Goll.)

Brahma is pictured with four heads and four hands, in which he holds a spoon, a sacrificial basin, a rosary, and the Vedas. One of the four hands is frequently represented as empty. He sits on a lotus which grows from Vishnu's navel, representing the spirit that broods over the waters.

Brahma keeps the first place in the speculations of philosophers, where he is identified with the life-breath of the world, the Atman or self that appears in man's soul, but he has not exercised a great influence on the people. The gods of the people must be less abstract, more concrete and more human. Thus it is natural that Vishnu, the second person of the trinity, the deity of avatars or incarnations, is, for all practical purposes, by far more important than Brahma.

Vishnu appears in the following ten incarnations: [*1]

In the first incarnation, called the Matsya-Avatar, Vishnu assumes the form of a fish in order to recover the Vedas stolen by evil demons and bidden in the floods of a deluge that covered the whole earth. This incarnation

[p. 78]

is of interest because we read in the Pistis Sophia (one of the most important gnostic books) that the books of Ieou, which were dictated by God to Enoch in paradise, were preserved by Kalapatauroth from destruction in the deluge." [*1]

In order to enable the gods to procure the immortality-giving drink, amrita, Vishnu appeared as an immense

Click to view
VISHNU, LAKSHMI, AND BRAHMA.
 [Vishnu reclines on a flower, supported by the serpent Ananta (a symbol of eternity), floating on the primeval waters of the undifferentiated world-substance.] After a native illustration, reproduced from Hermann Goll.

tortoise in the kurm-avatar, his second incarnation. He lifted on his back the world-pillar, the mountain Mandaras, and the world-serpent, Vasuki (or Anantas, i. e., infinite), was wound about it like a rope. The gods seized the tail, the demons (daityas) the head, and they

[p. 79]

          
Click to view
THE MATSYA   AVATAR OR FISH INCARNATION.

       
Click to view
THE KURM AVATAR   OR TORTOISE INCARNATION.

     
      
Click to view
THE VARAHA   AVATAR OR WILD BOAR INCARNATION.

       
Click to view
THE NARASINHA   AVATAR OR MAN-LION INCARNATION.

     
       

        [*1]

     
   

[p. 80]

began to churn the ocean, which produced Vishnu's gem, Kaustubha; Varunani, the goddess of the sea; the Apsaras, lovely sprites, corresponding to the Greek nymphs; Indra's horse, with seven heads; Kamadhenu, the cow of plenty; Airavata, Indra's elephant; the tree of abundance; Chandra, the god of the moon; Sura, the goddess of wine; and, filially, Dhanvantari, the Indian Aesculapius, who is in possession of the water of life. The serpent began now to spit venom, which blinded the demons, while the gods drank the Amrita.

Click to view
LAKSHMI, THE GODDESS OF BEAUTY (Musee Guimet.)

Varunani, when conceived as goddess of beauty, is called Lakshmi or Shri; and it is noteworthy that like Aphrodite of the Greeks she originates from the froth of the ocean.

The third incarnation is the Varaha-avatar, in which Vishnu, in the shape of a wild boar, kills, with his tusks, the demon Hiranyaksha, who threatened to destroy the world.

Hiranyaksha's brother, Hiranya-Kasipu, had a son by the name of Prahlada, who was a pious devotee of

[p. 81]

Vishnu. The unnatural father tried to kill his son, but the latter escaped all danger because he did not cease to pray to Vishnu. When Hiranya-Kasipu expressed a doubt of Vishnu's omnipresence, mockingly declaring that he could not possibly be in a column to which he pointed, the wrathful god decided to punish the scoffer. The column rent in twain, and Vishnu, proceeding from its interior in the shape of a monster half man half lion, tore Hiranya-Kasipu to pieces. This fourth incarnation is called the Narasinha-avatar. Its moral is to impress upon the people the sad fate of those who do not believe in Vishnu.

Click to view
VISHNU NARASIMHA.
 (Fragment of a car. Musee Guimet.)

Pralada's grandson, Balis, was a pious king, but on that very account dangerous to the gods, for he was just about to complete the hundredth grand sacrifice, by which he would have acquired sufficient power to dethrone Indra. Vishnu came to the assistance of the god of heaven and appeared before Balis as a dwarf in guise of a Brahman mendicant. Balis honored him with presents and promised to fulfil his desire, whereupon the dwarf requested three paces of ground. This was gladly granted under a rigid oath that would be binding on gods and men. Then the dwarf assumed a huge shape and stepped with the first pace over the whole earth, with

[p. 82]

the second over the atmosphere, with the third into the infinity of the heavens. This is the reason why Vishnu is called Tripadas, or Trivikramas, the three-paced god. Thus Balis was prevented completing the hundredth sacrifice, and Indra was again safe on his throne. This dwarf incarnation is called the Vamana-avatar.

Click to view
HANUMAN, THE MONKEY KING, BUILDING THE BRIDGE OVER THE STRAIT BETWEEN INDIA AND LANKA. (Reproduced from Hermann Goll.)

The sixth incarnation, called the Parashura avatar, is historical in its character, for it reflects the struggles between the warrior-caste and the Brahmans for supremacy. It is said that Jamadagni, a pious Brahman, had received from the gods the miraculous cow, Kamadugha (or Surabhi), which provided him, his wife, Renuka, and their son, Rama, with every luxury. Karttavirya, a king of the warrior-caste, visits him, and seeing the
 [p. 83]

          
Click to view
THE VAMANA   AVATAR OR DWARF INCARNATION.

       
Click to view
THE PARASHURA   AVATAR OR BATTLE-AX INCARNATION.

     
      
Click to view
THE RAMA CHANDRA   AVATAR.
   Vishnu and his incarnation in Rama Chandra, assisted by the Monkey King   Hanuman, vanquish Ravana.

       
Click to view
THE KRISHNA   AVATAR.
   Vishnu is born as Krishna and miraculously saved from the prosecutions of the   tyrant of Mathura.

     
   [p. 84]

wealth of the Brahman, tries to take the cow from him, but the cow kills all who dare to approach her, and rises into heaven, whereupon Karttavirya in his wrath slays the pious Jamadagni. Rama, the son of the murdered Brahman, invokes Vishnu's help for the punishment of the wicked king, and the god not only presents him with a bow and a battle-ax, which latter is called in Sanskrit paracus, the Greek pelekys (hence the name of this avatar), but also incarnates himself in Rama. Karttavirya is described as being in possession of a thousand arms, wielding a thousand weapons, but Rama, endowed with the divine powers of Vishnu, conquers him after a decisive struggle.

Click to view
THE MONKEY KING SUGRIVA FIGHTING. (Reproduced from Coleman.)

The Rama Chandra avatar has taken a firm hold on the Indian mind, and is described in the Ramayana, an epic which is the Hindu Odyssey, to the narrative of which the legend of Rama. bears a great resemblance.

Rama Chandra lived with his wife Sita (frequently regarded as an incarnation of Lakshmi) and with his half-brother Lakshmana in the wilderness of the south, where he had withdrawn in order to obey his father, who had unjustly banished him and appointed Bharata, another son of his, as heir to the throne. The demon-king, Ravana, waged war against Rama, and carried off Sita while he and his brother were hunting. It is impossible to relate here Rama's adventures in detail, how he fought

[p. 85]

with giants and demons, how the monkey kings, Lugriva and Hanuman, became his allies, how Hanuman jumped

Click to view
VISHNU AND SHRI-LAKSHMI AS RAMA CHANDRA AND SITA AFTER THEIR HAPPY REUNION. (Reproduced from Coleman.)

over to Lanka, the island of Ceylon, to reconnoitre the enemy's country, how the monkeys built a bridge over the strait by throwing stones into the water, bow Rama

[p. 86]

pursued Ravana to Lanka, and finally how he vanquished Ravana and recovered his faithful wife Sita.

Like the sixth avatar, the Rama Chandra avatar probably contains historical reminiscences. It also resembles both the Trojan War and the Gudrun Saga, the epics of Western nations that relate the story of an abducted wife. The mythical part of all these stories describes the wanderings of the sun god in search of his consort, the moon.

Click to view
HANUMAN RECITING HIS ADVENTURES TO RAMA CHANDRA AND SITA. (Reproduced from Coleman.)

In his eighth incarnation, the Krishna avatar, Vishnu has reached the ideal man-god of the Hindus. Kansa, called Kalankura (i. e., crane), the tyrant of Mathura, receives the prophecy that the eighth son of his sister, Devaki, will take his throne. He therefore decides to kill all the children of his sister. Her eighth son, Krishna, however, was an incarnation of Vishnu, who spoke at once after his birth, comforted his mother, and gave directions to his father, Vasudeva, how to save him. Vasudeva carried the infant, protected by the serpent king, over the river Jamuna, and exchanged him in Gokula for a girl which Yasuda had just borne to the cowherd Nanda. Kansa seized at once the girl baby, but before he could kill her she raised herself into the air, explained to the wrathful king that Krishna had been saved, and disappeared in the form of lightning. Kansa now decided

[p. 87]

Click to view
KRISHNA NURSED BY DEVAKI.
 After an old and richly-colored Hindu painting. (Reproduced from Moore's Hindu Pantheon, plate, 59.)

to have all the babies in his empire killed, but Krishna escaped again. A demon nurse was sent to poison him with her venomous milk, but be bit and killed her, while his stepfather decided to remove to a more distant country in order to escape the continued hostilities of the king. Krishna slew the huge serpent, Kali-naga, overcame the giant Shishoo-polu, killed the monster bird that tried to peck out his eyes, and also a malignant wild ass. He also burnt the entrails of the alligator-shaped Peck-Assoort who had devoured him, and choked Aghi-Assoor, the dragon who attempted to swallow him. When Krishna had grown to youth he became the favorite of the lasses of Gokula. When he played the flute every one of the dancing girls believed that the swain whom she embraced was Krishna himself. He fell in love with the country girl Radha, the story of which is sung in the Jagadeva's poem, Gitagovinda. He protected the cowherds against storm and fire, and finally marched against Kansa, killed him and took possession of his throne.

Krishna plays also a prominent part in the Mahabharata,

[p. 88]

Click to view
KRISHNA.
 As a shepherd lad playing the flute [the flute is missing]. (Bronze statue. Musee Guimet.)

the Iliad of the Hindus, which describes the war between the Kurus and the Pandus, [*1] both descendants of Bharata and both grandchildren of Vyasa. Dhritarashtra, the father of the Kurus, was king of Hastinapur, but being blind, Bhishma, his uncle, reigned in his stead. After a test of the faculties of the young princes, in which the Pandu Arjuna, the skilled bowman and the Hindu Tell, showed himself superior to all the others, the oldest Pandu-prince, Yudhishthira, was installed as heir apparent. The Kurus, however, who managed to remain in power, tried to burn the Pandus, but they escaped and lived for some time in the disguise of mendicant Brahmans. Having allied themselves, by marriage with Draupadi, [*2] the daughter of Drupada, king of Panchala, with a powerful monarch, the Pandus reappeared at Hastinapur and induced Dhritarashtra to divide the kingdom between his sons, the Kurus, and his nephews, the Pandus; but at a festival, held at Hastinapur, Yudhishthira, the chief

[p. 89]

of the Pandus, staked in a game of dice his kingdom, all his possessions, and Draupadi herself, and lost everything. The Kurus promised their cousins to return their share of the kingdom after thirteen years, if they would live twelve years with Draupadi in the forest and remain another year in exile; but when this period had elapsed the Kurus refused to give up the country or any part of

Click to view
KRISHNA, THE FAVORITE OF THE COUNTRY LASSES OF GOKULA.
 (Reproduced from Coleman.)

it, and thus the war became unavoidable. Then Duryodhana, the Kuru prince, and Arjuna, the main hero of the Pandus, called on Krishna for succor and assistance. Krishna decided not to take an active part in the fight himself, but left to Arjuna, whom he had seen first, the

[p. 90]

choice between his (Krishna's) company as a mere adviser or his (Krishna's) army of a hundred million warriors.

Click to view
KRISHNA'S ADVENTURES. (Reproduced from Coleman.)

Arjuna chose Krishna himself, and left the hundred million warriors to his rivals, the Kurus. The two armies met on the field of Kurukshetra, near Delhi.

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] During the battle, as we read in the Bhagavadgita, Krishna accompanies Arjuna as his charioteer and explains to him the depth and breadth of the religious philosophy of the Hindus. The Pandus conquer the Kurus, and Yudhishthira becomes king of Hastinapur.

After sundry additional adventures the Pandus die and go to heaven, where they find that rest and happiness which is unattainable on earth.

Click to view
THE BATTLE BETWEEN THE KURUS AND PANDUS ON THE FIELD OF KURUKSHETRA.
 (Reproduced from Wilkins.)

The Mahabharata, like the Wars of the Roses, shows neither party in a favorable light; but the epic is written from the standpoint of the Pandus, whose demeanor is always extolled, while the Kurus are throughout characterised as extremely unworthy and mean.

Krishna is the Hindu Apollo, Orpheus, and Hercules in one person, and there is no god in the Hindu Pantheon who is dearer to the Brahman heart than he. Many

[p. 92]

of his adventures, such as his escape from the Hindu Herod, the massacre of babes, his transfiguration, etc., reappear in a modified form in Buddhist legends and bear some resemblance to the events told of Christ in the New Testament.

In his ninth incarnation Vishnu appears as Buddha, the enlightened one, to be a teacher of morals, of purity, charity, and compassionate love toward all beings. It is

Click to view
JAGANNATH WITH HIS TWO COMPANIONS. (After Schlagintweit.)

difficult to state the differences between the Buddha avatar of the Brahmans and the Buddha of the Buddhists. The latter, there can be no doubt, was a historical personality, by the name of Gautama, the son of Shuddhodana of the warrior caste, while the former is a mere ideal figure of ethical perfection. Burnouf [*1] proposes to regard both as quite distinct, and he is right, but we need not for that reason deny that, on the one hand, the ideal of a

[p. 93]

Buddha avatar was a prominent factor in the formation of Buddhism, while on the other hand Gautama's teachings have, since the rise of Buddhism, powerfully affected and considerably modified the Buddha ideal of the Brahmans. Whatever may be the historical relation between the Hindu Buddha and the Buddha of the Buddhists, this

          
Click to view
SHIVA WITH   PARVATI.
   On Nanda, the sacred bull (Musee Guimet.)

       
Click to view
SHIVA-TRIMURTI.
   Leaning on the linga, the symbol of the creative faculty. (Musee   Guimet.)

     
   much is sure: the Buddha has been received by the Brahmans as one of the members of the Hindu Pantheon.

The Hindu deity that is nearest in spirit to the Buddha avatar is Jagannath, the god of love and mercy.

The tenth avatar has not yet been completed. Vishnu is expected to appear on a winged white horse to reward the virtuous, convert the sinners, and destroy all evil.

[p. 94]

The horse has one foot raised, and when it places its foot down, the time of the incarnation will find its fulfilment.

The third person of the Indian trinity is Siva, the Auspicious One, representing the end of the world and its regeneration. He is commonly represented by the linga as a symbol of the creative faculty and by the all-devouring fire, the tongued flame of which is pictured in a triangle turning its point upwards.

Click to view
SHIVA DANCING SURROUNDED BY A HALO OF FLAMES. (Bronze Statue. Musee Guimet.)

Sir Monier Monier Williams (in Brahmanism and Hinduism, p. 68) says of this deity, which is "more mystical and less human than the incarnated Vishnu," that his symbol, the linga, is "never in the mind of a Saiva (or Siva-worshipper) connected with indecent ideas, nor with sexual love." The linga, or, as the Romans called it, the phallus, the male organ of generation, becomes at the first dawn of civilisation, almost among all the nations of the world, an object of great awe and reverence. As the symbol of the creative principle it is regarded as the most essential attribute of both the God-Creator himself and all those who hold authority in his name. The linga develops in the hand of the medicine man into a wand, in the hand of the priest into a staff,

[p. 95]

          
Click to view
THE BUDDHA   AVATAR OR VISHNU'S INCARNATION AS THE ENLIGHTENED TEACHER OF MANKIND.

       
Click to view
THE KALKI AVATAR   OR THE WHITE HORSE INCARNATION.

     
      
Click to view
SIVA WORSHIP.   (Reproduced from Picart.)

     
   [p. 96]

and in the hand of the king into a sceptre. The yoni, or female organ, is regarded as the symbol of Siva's consort, Parvati, and is worshipped in connexion with the linga by the sect of the Sactis. Perforated rocks are considered as emblems of the yoni, through which pilgrims pass for the purpose of being regenerated, a ceremony in which Hindus place great faith for its sin-expelling significance. (See Charles Coleman, The Mythology of The Hindus, p. 175.)

Click to view
SIVA AND PARVATI. (Reproduced from Hermann Goll)

Siva's consort, Kali, is one of the greatest divinities of India. She is the goddess of a hundred names, representing not only the power of nature, but also the ruthless cruelty of nature's laws. She is called Parvati, the blessed mother, and Durga, which means "hard to go through," symbolising war and all kinds of danger. She is in the pantheon of modern Hinduism the central figure; and in spite of the universality of Brahma in philosophical

[p. 97]

speculations, in spite of the omnipresence of Vishnu and his constant reincarnations as told in ancient

Click to view
KALI, After an Indian picture. (Reproduced from Schlagintweit.)

myths and legends, in spite of the omnipotence of Siva, and the high place given him in Hindu dogmatology, she

[p. 98]

is the main recipient of Hindu worship all over the country. As Kali she is identified with time, the all-devourer, and is pictured as enjoying destruction, perdition, and

Click to view
DURGA. Indian sculpture, (Reproduced from Schlagintweit.)

murder in any form, trampling under foot even her own husband. There is scarcely a village without a temple devoted to her, and her images can be seen in thousands of forms. Her appearance is pleasant only as Pavarti; in

[p. 99]

all other shapes she is frightful, and it is difficult to understand the reverence which the pious Hindu cherishes

Click to view
mKHA' sGROMA, THE TIBETAN KALI. Bronze. (Musee Guimet.)

for this most diabolical deity, who among the Buddhists of Thibet is changed into a devilish demon under the name of mKha' sGroma.

[p. 100]

The Pantheism which lies at the bottom of the whole Hindu mythology finds expression in the worship of HariHara, who is a combination of Vishnu and Siva. In

Click to view
KALI-DURGA IN THE HINDU PANTHEON. (Reproduced from Wilkins.)

the Mahatmya, or collection of temple legends of the HariHara, a town in the province of Mysore, Isvara says:" [*1]

[p. 101]

"There are heretics among men who reject the Vedas and the Shastras, who live without purificatory ceremonies and established rules of conduct, and are filled with hatred of Vishnu: so also there are heretical followers of Vishnu, who are similarly filled with hatred of Shiva. All these wicked men shall go to hell so long as this world endures. I will not receive worship from any man who makes a distinction between Vasudeva and my own divinity: I will divide every such man in two with my saw. For I have assumed the form of HariHara in order to destroy the teaching that there is a difference between us: and he who knows within himself that HariHara is the god of gods, shall inherit the highest heaven."

Click to view
HARIHARA. (Reproduced from Wilkins.)

HariHara is depicted as a combination of the two gods in one figure, which is half male and half female, for according to the Southern version of the legend Vishnu assumed the form of a beautiful woman who was embraced so fervently by Siva that both became one.

There are in Hindu mythology innumerable other deities, among whom Indra, the thunder-god, is the greatest, as the hero among the gods of secondary rank, reminding us of the Thor of the Norsemen; but Varuna, the Hindu Kronos, Agni the god of fire, have also at times been very prominent.

There are in addition gods of third degree, such as

[p. 102]

          
Click to view
GANESA.   (Reproduced from Wilkins.)

       
Click to view
AGNI.   (Reproduced from Hermann Goll.)

     
      
Click to view
KAMA.   (Reproduced from Wollheim da Fonceka)

       
Click to view
SIVA SLAYING A   DEMON. (Reproduced from Wilkins.)

     
   [p. 103]

Kama, the Hindu Amor, Ganesa, the elephant-headed god of wisdom, [*1] and Karttikeya, [*2] the leader of the good demons., on the peacock, both sons of Siva, and others. In addition, we have a great number of devas, sprites, and goblins. Some of them are good, as the Gandharvas, others at least not naturally ill-intentioned, as for instance the Apsaras (a kind of Hindu elves), but most of them are dangerous and demoniacal. Such are the general mischief-makers, the Asuras, the Pretas, or ghosts, the Bhutas, or spook-spirits, the baby-killing Grahas, the Rakshasas, who are either giants or vampires, not to mention all the other demons of less power and importance.

Footnotes

^74:1 Pantism, the theory of the All (from pan, root PANT), is different from Pantheism, the theory which identifies the All (pan) with God (theos).

^74:2 Sir Monier-Monier Williams distinguishes between Brahmanism, the old faith of the Indian Aryas, and Hinduism, the modern form of this same religion, as it developed after the expulsion of Buddhism from India.

^77:1 Since it is our intention to be brief, we do not enter in this exposition of the ten avatars into any details that could be omitted and neglect to mention the variants of the myths.

^78:1 MS., P 354, English translation from Schwartze's latest translation by G. R. S. Meade, p. 354.

^79:1 All the Avatar pictures are from Picart.

^88:1 The Pandus are also called Pandavas, and the Kurus Kamavas.

^88:2 That the five Pandus held Draupadi in common as their wife, proves the high antiquity of the story. Polyandry was apparently a practice not uncommon in ancient times. It prevails still to-day among the less cultured hill tribes. But being at variance with the Aryan customs of the age in which the Mahabharata was versified, [p. 89] Vyasa (the Homer or "arranger" of the poem, and its supposed author) tries to explain it allegorically by declaring that Draupadi is Lakshmi, and the five Pandu brothers represent five different forms of one and the same Indra.

^92:1 Histoire du Buddhisme, I., 338.

^100:1 The legends of the shrine of HariHara, translated from the Sanskrit by Rev. Thomas Foulkes.

^103:1 Ganesa, which means the lord (isa) of hosts (gana), is originally Siva himself, and he was invoked under that name by writers of books to drive away evil demons.

^103:2 Karttikeya is also called Subrahmanya and Skanda.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 104]

  

BUDDHISM.

BUDDHISM is a religious revolution against the evils that are dominant in Brahmanism. Gautama Shakyamuni, who claimed to be the Enlightened One, the Buddha, rejected bloody sacrifices, the authority of the Vedas, trust in rituals and the caste system, and taught a religion of moral endeavor which was to be obtained by enlightenment, or the bodhi. He recognised the existence of evil and sought salvation in the radical abolition of all selfishness through the extension of an all-comprehensive love toward all creatures.

The many-sidedness of Buddhism is well illustrated in the Buddhistic conception of evil and of a final escape from evil, which is taught to the thinker in the shape of a philosophy, and to the uneducated masses in the garb of a poetical myth, affording the artist a good opportunity for representing deep thoughts in allegorical form.

Mara, the Evil One.

Evil is personified in Mara, the Buddhist Devil, who represents temptation, sin, and death. He is identified with Namuche, one of the wicked demons in Indian mythology

[p. 105]

with whom Indra struggles. Namuche is the mischievous spirit who prevents rain and produces drought. The name Namuche means "not letting go the waters." However, Indra, the god of thunder-storms, forces him to surrender the fertilising liquids and restores the life-bringing element to the earth.

Mara is also called Papiyan [*1] the Wicked One or the Evil One, the Murderer, the Tempter. In addition he is said to be Varsavarti, [*2] meaning "he who fulfils desires." Varsavarti, indeed, is one of his favorite names. In his capacity as Varsavarti, Mara personifies the fulfilment of desire or the triple thirst, [*3] viz., the thirst for existence, the thirst for pleasure, the thirst for power. He is the king of the Heaven of sensual delight.

There is a deep truth in this conception of Mara as Varsavarti. It means that the selfishness of man is Satan and the actual satisfaction of selfishness is Hell.

This reminds us of one of Leander's Marchen, in which we are told that once a man died and awoke in the other world. There St. Peter appeared before him and asked him what he wanted. He then ordered breakfast, the daily papers, and all the comforts he was accustomed to in life, and this kind of life lasted for many centuries until he got sick of it and began to swear at St. Peter and to complain of how monotonous it was in Heaven, whereupon St. Peter informed him that he was in Hell,

[p. 106]

for hell is where everybody has his own sweet will, and heaven is where everybody follows God's will alone. Similarly, according to the Buddhist conception, the heaven of sensual delight is hell, the habitation of the Evil One.

Click to view
THE DEMON OF LIGHTNING. A Japanese temple statue.

In the Dhammapada, Mara is not so much a person as a personification. The allegorical nature of the Evil One is plainly felt in every passage in which Mara's name occurs. We read, for instance:

"He who lives looking for pleasures only, his senses uncontrolled,

[p. 107]

immoderate in his food, idle and weak, him Mara will certainly overthrow as the wind throws down a feeble tree."

Buddhism in its original and orthodox purity knows nothing of devils except Mara, representing the egotistical pleasures, sensuality, sin, and death; but Buddhist

Click to view
THE DEMON OF THUNDER. A Japanese temple statue.

mythology from the ancient Jatakas down to the most modern folklore of China and Japan has peopled the universe with evil spirits of all kinds, such as the demons of thunder and lightning, to personify the various ills of life and the dangers that lurk everywhere in nature.

[p. 108]

While the evil consequences of sin are depicted in the tortures of Hell which are similar to the Christian belief, the final escape from evil is expressed in the belief that all good Buddhists will be reborn in the Western Paradise.

Mara, the Enemy of Buddha.

In the life of Buddha, Mara plays an important part. He is that principle which forms an obstacle to the attainment of Buddhahood. Having told how, in the night of the great renunciation, the deity of the door swung the gate open to let the future Buddha out, the Jataka continues:

"At that moment Mara came there with the intention of stopping the Bodisat; and standing in the air, he exclaimed, 'Depart not, O my lord! in seven days from now the wheel of empire will appear, and will make you sovereign over the four continents and the two thousand adjacent isles. Stop, O my lord!"

The prince refused to listen to Mara's wily insinuation.

When Buddha, in his search for enlightenment, had tried for seven years to find the right path in asceticism and self-mortification, his health began to give way and he was shrunken like a withered branch. At this moment Mara drew near and suggested to him the thought of giving up his search for enlightenment. We read in the Padhana Sutta: [*1]

"Came Namuche speaking words full of compassion: 'Thou art lean, ill-favored, death is in thy neighborhood. Living life, O thou Venerable One, is better! Living, thou wilt be able to do good works. Difficult is the way of exertion, difficult to pass, difficult to enter upon.'

[p. 109]

"To Mara, thus speaking, Bhagavat said: 'O thou friend of the indolent, thou wicked one, for what purpose hast thou come here? Even the least good work is of no use to me, and what good works are required ought Mara to tell? I have faith and power; and understanding is found in me. While thus exerting myself, why do you ask me to live? While the flesh is wasting away the mind grows more tranquil, and my attention, understanding, and meditation becomes more steadfast. Living thus, my mind does not look for sensual pleasures. Behold a being's purity!

"Lust thy first army is called; discontent thy second; thy third is called hunger and thirst; thy fourth desire; thy fifth is called sloth and drowsiness; thy sixth cowardice; thy seventh doubt; thy eighth hypocrisy and stupor, gain, fame, honor, and what celebrity is falsely obtained by him who exalts himself and despises others. This, O Namuche, is thine, the Black One's fighting army. None but a hero conquers it, and whoever conquers it obtains joy. Woe upon life in this world! Death in battle is better for me than that I should live defeated.

"Seeing on all sides an army arrayed and Mara on his elephant, I am going out to do battle that he may not drive me from my place. This army of thine, which the world of men and gods cannot conquer, I will crush with understanding, as one crushes an unbaked earthen pot with a stone.

"Having made my thoughts subject to me and my attention firm, I shall wander about from kingdom to kingdom training disciples. They will be zealous and energetic, obedient to the discipline of one free from lust, and they will go to the place where there is no mourning.

"And Mara said: 'For seven years I followed Bhagavat, step by step, but found no fault in the Perfectly Enlightened and Thoughtful One.'"

When Buddha went to the Bo-tree Mara, the Evil One, proposed to shake his resolution, either through the allurements of his daughters or by force. "He sounded

[p. 110]

Click to view
MARA'S ARMY.
 Ghandara sculptures. Museum of Lahore. (Reproduced from Grunwedel.)

[p. 111]

the war cry and drew out for battle." The earth quaked, when Mara, mounted on his elephant, approached the Buddha. The gods, among them Sakka, the king of the gods, and Brahma, tried to stay Mara's army, but none of them was able to stand his ground, and each fled straight before him. Buddha said:

"'Here is this multitude exerting all their strength and power against me alone. My mother and father are not here, nor a brother, nor any other relative. But I have these Ten Perfections, like old retainers long cherished at my board. It therefore behooves me to make the Ten Perfections my shield and my sword, and to strike a blow with them that shall destroy this strong array.' And he remained sitting and reflected on the Ten Perfections."--Buddhism in Translations. By H. C. Warren, pp. 77-78.

Mara caused a whirlwind to blow, but in vain; he caused a rain-storm to come in order to drown the Buddha, but not a drop wetted his robes; he caused a shower of rocks to come down, but the rocks changed into bouquets; he caused a shower of weapons--swords, spears, and arrows--to rush against him, but they became celestial flowers; he caused a shower of live coals to come down from the sky, but they, too, fell down harmless. In the same way hot ashes, a shower of sand, and a shower of mud were transmuted into celestial ointments. At last he caused a darkness, but the darkness disappeared before Buddha, as the night vanishes before the sun. Mara shouted: "Siddhattha, arise from the seat. It does not belong to you. It belongs to me." Buddha replied: "Mara, you have not fulfilled the ten perfections. This seat does not belong to you, but to me, who have fulfilled the ten perfections." Mara denied

[p. 112]

Buddha's assertion and called upon his army as witnesses, while Buddha declared: "I have no animate witnesses present;" but, stretching out his right hand towards the mighty earth, he said: "Will you bear me witness?" And the mighty earth thundered: "I bear you witness." And Mara's elephant fell upon its knees, and all the followers of Mara fled away in all directions. When the hosts of the gods saw the army of Mara flee, they cried out: "Mara is defeated! Prince Siddhattha has conquered! Let us celebrate the victory!"

When Buddha had attained enlightenment, Mara tempted him once more, saying:

"Pass away now, Lord, from existence! Let the Blessed One now die! Now is the time for the Blessed One to pass away!"

Buddha made reply as follows:

"I shall not die, O Evil One! until not only the brethren and sisters of the order, but also the lay-disciples of either sex shall have become true hearers, wise and well trained, ready and learned, versed in the Scriptures, fulfilling all the greater and the lesser duties, correct in life, walking according to the precepts,--until they, having thus themselves learned the doctrine, shall be able to tell others of it, preach it, make it known, establish it, open it, minutely explain it and make it clear,--until they, when others start vain doctrines, shall be able by the truth to vanquish and refute it, and so to spread the wonder-working truth abroad!

"I shall not die until this pure religion of mine shall have become successful, prosperous, wide-spread, and popular in all its full extent, until, in a word, it shall have been well proclaimed among men!"

When, shortly before Buddha's death, Mara repeated his words as quoted above, "Pass away now, Lord, from existence," Buddha answered:

[p. 113]

"Make thyself happy; the final extinction of the Tathagata shall take place before long."

Mara in Buddhist Art.

In the various sculptures representing scenes of Buddha's life there is a figure holding in his hand a kind of double club or vajra--i. e., thunderbolt, as it is usually called. Since the expression of this man with the thunderbolt decidedly shows malevolence, the interpretation naturally suggested itself that he must be one of Buddha's disciples who was antagonistic to his teachings. The common explanation of this figure, accordingly, designated him as Devadatta, the Buddhistic Judas Iscariot, who endeavored to found a sect of his own, and who according to Buddhistic legends is represented as an intriguer bent on the murder of Buddha. The various representations of this figure, however, are not altogether those of a disciple who tries to outdo Buddha in sternness and severity of discipline, but frequently bear the character of a Greek faun, and resemble, rather, Silenus, the foster-father of Bacchus, representing all kinds of excesses in carousing and other pleasures. Moreover, the same figure with the thunderbolt appears in representations of Buddha's entering Nirvana, at a time when Devadatta had been long dead. Alfred Grunwedel, for these reasons, proposes to abandon the traditional interpretation of the thunderbolt-bearer as Devadatta, and it appears that he has found the right interpretation when he says: [*1]

"This figure which accompanies Buddha from the moment he leaves his father's house until he enters Nirvana, and who waylays

[p. 114]

him in the hope of awakening in him a thought of lust or hatred or envy, who follows him like a shadow, can be no one but Mara Papiyan, the Wicked One, the demon of passion. The thunderbolt in Mara's hand is nothing but the old attribute of all Indian gods. In his capacity as the god of pleasure, Mara is especially entitled to this attribute of the Hindu gods. As Vasavatti he reigns in the highest domain of the pleasure heaven, surrounded by dancing girls and musicians."

Click to view
BUDDHA TEMPTED BY MARA'S DAUGHTERS.
 Gandhara sculptures. (Reproduced from Grunwedel.)

It seems probable that the contrast in which Mara or Varsavarti stands to the Buddha began by and by to be misunderstood. For the thunderbolt-bearer Vajrapani is gradually changed into a regular attendant of Buddha, and the Vajra, or thunderbolt, is now interpreted as an attribute of Buddha himself. Thus it happened that among the northern Buddhists the Vaira became the indispensable

[p. 115]

attribute of the lamas. It is called Dorje in Tibet and Ojir in Mongolia.

*      *      *

The attack of Mara upon Buddha under the bo-tree is a favorite subject of Buddhist artists, who gladly avail themselves of this opportunity to show their ingenuity in devising all kinds of beautiful and hideous shapes. Beautiful women represent the temptations of the daughters of Mara, and the hideous monsters describe the terrors of Mara's army.

In Buddhistic mythology Mara, the Evil One, is, in harmony with the spirit of Buddha's teachings, represented as the Prince of the World. It is Mara who holds the wheel of life and death (Chavachakra, i. e., wheel of becoming) in his hands, for all living beings reside in the domain of death. The hand of death is upon every one who is born. He is the ruler in the domains of the nidanas, the twelve links of the chain of causation, or dependent origination.

The Twelve Nidanas.

The twelve nidanas are a very old doctrine, which possibly goes back to Buddha himself, and may contain elements that are older. While the general meaning of the chain of causation is clearly indicated by the first and last links, which imply that ignorance, not-knowing, or infatuation is at the bottom of all evil, there are great difficulties in the interpretation of the details, and Mr. Warren thinks that it is a combination of two chains of causation representing similar thoughts. He says:

[p. 116]

"The Buddhist Sacred Books seem to claim Dependent Origination as the peculiar discovery of the Buddha, and I suppose they would have us understand that he invented the whole formula from beginning to end. But it is to be observed that the formula repeats itself, that the human being is brought into existence twice--the first time under the name of consciousness, and name and form and by means of ignorance and karma, the second time in birth and by means of desire (with its four branches called attachments) and karma again, this time called existence. [*1] Therefore, though Buddhaghosa is at great pains to explain this repetition as purposely intended for practical ends, yet one is much inclined to surmise that the full formula in its present shape is a piece of patchwork put together of two or more that were current in the Buddha's time and by him--perhaps expanded, perhaps contracted, but at any rate made into one. If the Buddha added to the formula of Dependent Origination, it would appear that the addition consisted in the first two propositions. For ignorance, of course, is the opposite of wisdom, and wisdom is the method for getting rid of ignorance."--Buddhism in Translations, p. 115.

Whatever may have been the original wording, the traditional formula of the causation of evil has been, without change, faithfully preserved in the triumphal progress of Buddhism from India to Japan. One of the oldest passages in which the twelve nidanas are enumerated is found in the Questions of King Milinda, p. 79, where we read:

"By reason of ignorance came the Confections, [*2] by reason of the Confections consciousness, by reason of consciousness name-and-form, by reason of name-and-form the six organs of sense, by reason of them contact, by reason of contact sensation, by reason

[p. 117]

of sensation thirst, by reason of thirst craving, by reason of craving becoming, by reason of becoming birth, by reason of birth old age and death, grief, lamentation, sorrow, pain, and despair. Thus is it that the ultimate point in the past of all this time is not apparent."--Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids in Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXV.

The Samyutta Nikaya enumerates as the second nidana "karma," i. e., action. The passage reads:

"On ignorance depends karma;

"On karma depends consciousness

"On consciousness depend name and form;

"On name and form depend the six organs of sense;

"On the six organs of sense depends contact

"On contact depends sensation

"On sensation depends desire;

"On desire depends attachment;

"On attachment depends existence;

"On existence depends birth;

"On birth depend old age and death, sorrow, lamentation. misery, grief, and despair. Thus does this entire aggregation of misery arise.

"But on the complete fading out and cessation of ignorance ceases karma;

"On the cessation of karma ceases consciousness On the cessation of consciousness ceases name and form;

"On the cessation of name and form cease the six organs of sense;

"On the cessation of the six organs of sense ceases contact; On the cessation of contact ceases sensation

"On the cessation of sensation ceases desire;

"On the cessation of desire ceases attachment

"On the cessation of attachment ceases existence

"On the cessation of existence ceases birth;

"On the cessation of birth cease old age and death, sorrow,

[p. 118]

lamentation, misery, grief, and despair. Thus does this entire aggregation of misery cease."--Buddhism in Translations, Warren, p. 166.

The Pali terms are: (1) avijja (ignorance), (2) sankhara (organised formation) or kamma (Karma), (3) vinnyana (sentiency), (4) nama-rupa (name and form, i. e., individuality), (5) salayatana (the six fields, i. e., the five senses and mind), (6) phasso (contact), (7) vedana (sensation), (8) tanha (thirst), (9) upadana (craving), (10) bhava (growth), (11) jati (birth), (12) jaramarana, etc. (old age, death, sorrow, etc.).

It seems that we have three chains of causation combined into one. One chain explains that Karma, i. e., deed or activity, produces first vinnyana (sentiency), and then nama-rupa (name and form, or personality); the other begins with sensation, as known in the six senses or salayatana, which by contact (phasso) produces first consciousness (vedana) and then thirst (tanha). The third group, which may be the peculiarly Buddhistic addition to the two older formulas, is founded in the first, or first and second, and the four concluding links of the traditional chain, stating that ignorance (avijja) produces blindly in its random work organisations (sankharas). These sankharas or elementary organisms are possessed of craving (upadana), which leads to conception (bhava) and birth (jati), thus producing old age, death, sorrow, and misery of any kind.

The Wheel of Life.

Life in its eternal rotation is represented in Buddhist mythology as a wheel that is held in the clutches of the Evil One.

[p. 119]

Judging from a communication of Caroline A. Foley (in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1894, p. 389), the allegory of the world-wheel, the wheel of life,

Click to view
AN INDIAN WHEEL OF LIFE.
 Preserved in the Cave Temples of Ajanta, Central India.
 (Reproduced from L. E. Waddell's picture in the J. R. A, S.)

must be much older than is commonly thought, for it is mentioned already in the Divyavadana, pp. 299-300.

Caroline Foley says:

[p. 120]

"There it is related how Buddha instructed Ananda to make a wheel (cakram karayitavyam) for the purpose of illustrating what another disciple, Maudgalyayana, saw when he visited other spheres, which it seems he was in the habit of doing. The wheel was to have five spokes (pancagandakam), between which were to be depicted the hells, animals, pretas, gods, and men. In the middle a dove, a serpent, and a hog, were to symbolise lust, hatred, and ignorance. All round the tire was to go the twelve-fold circle of causation (pratityasamutpado) in the regular and in the inverse order. Beings were to be represented 'as being born in a supernatural way (aupapadukah), as by the machinery of a waterwheel, falling from one state and being produced in another.' The wheel was made and placed in the 'grand entrance gateway' (dvarakoshtake), and a bhikshu appointed to interpret it."

Samsara, or the circuit of life, the eternal round of birth, death, and rebirth, as summarily expressed in the doctrine of the twelve nidanas or twelve-linked chain of causation, is painted around the tire of the wheel.

How carefully the Buddhistic conception of Mara, as the Prince of the world, holding in his clutches the wheel of life, has been preserved, we can learn from a comparison of an old fresco in the deserted caves of Ajanta, Central India, [*1] with Tibetan and Japanese pictures of the same subject. [*2] All of them show in the centre the three causes of selfhood, viz., hatred, spite, and sloth, symbolised in a serpent, a cock, and a pig. They are also called the three fires, or the three roots of evil, which are raga (passion), doso (sin), moho (infatuation).

[p. 121]

The Hindu picture exhibits six divisions,--the realm of gods, the realm of men, the realm of nagas (or snakes), [*1]

Click to view
A TIBETAN WHEEL OF LIFE. (Reproduced from Bastian.)

[p. 122]

the realm of paradise, the realm of ghosts, and the realm of hell. The Tibetan picture shows the same domains, only less distinctly separated, while the Japanese picture shows only five divisions. In order to show the omnipresence of the Buddha as the principle that sustains all life, the Japanese picture shows a Buddha statue in the hub, while in the Hindu wheel every division contains a Buddha figure. This Buddha in the world is the Buddha of transformations, Nirmana-Kaya, representing the tendency of life toward enlightenment. Outside of the wheel two other Buddha figures appear. At the right-hand corner there is Buddha, the teacher, in the attitude of expounding the good law of righteousness. It is the Dharma-Kaya, the Buddha embodied in the dharma, i. e. the law, religion, or truth. In the left-hand corner there is Buddha in the state of rest, represented as Sambhoga-Kaya, the Buddha who has entered into Nirvana and attained the highest bliss.

The twelve nidanas are an essential element in the Buddhist wheel of life, and are commonly represented by twelve little pictures either on the tire or surrounding the tire.

On the Japanese wheel, which exhibits the nidanas more clearly than the older wheels, the series begins at the bottom, rising to the left-hand side and turning down again on the right-hand side.

The first nidana (in Pali Avijja), ignorance, is pictured as a passionate man of brutish appearance.

The second nidana (in Pali Sankhara, Sanskrit Samskara), which is commonly but badly translated in English by "confection," represents the ultimate constitutions

[p. 123]

of life or primary forms of organisation, meaning a disposition of structures that possess the tendency to repeat the function once performed. It is represented as a potter's wheel on which vessels are manufactured. The word should not be confused with samsara, which is

Click to view
A JAPANESE WHEEL OF LIFE. (Reproduced from Bastian.)

the whole wheel of life, or the eternal round of transmigration.

The third nidana is vinnyana, or awareness, being the sentiency that originates by the repetition of function in the dispositions or organised structures previously formed. It is animal sense-perception, represented as a monkey.

[p. 124]

The fourth nidana is "nama-rupa," i. e., name and form, which expression denotes what we call personality, the name of a person and his personal appearance. It is represented by a pilot steering a boat.

The fifth nidana is called the six fields or "shadayatana," which are what we call the five senses and mind, or thinking, which is considered by Buddhists as a sixth sense. It is pictured as a human organism.

The sixth nidana is "phasso" or "sparsa," i. e., the contact of the six fields, with their objects, represented as a lover's embrace.

Rising from a contact of the six fields with their objects, the seventh nidana is produced as "vedana," i. e., sensation or sentiment, illustrated by a sighing lover. If the sixth nidana is enacted in the garden scene of Goethe's "Faust," the seventh is characterised by Margaret's song, "My peace is gone, my heart is sore." (Scene xv.)

From sentiment, as the eighth nidana, "tanha," i. e., thirst or desire, rises. The picture exhibits the flirtation of two separated lovers.

The ninth nidana is "upadana," i. e., the clinging to existence. The picture shows us the lover following the footsteps of his love.

The tenth nidana is "bhava" (bridal embrace), or existence in its continuation, finding its artistic expression in the union of the lovers, who, seated on the back of an elephant, are celebrating their marriage feast.

The eleventh nidana is birth, "jati," in the picture represented as a woman in her throes.

The remaining groups represent the twelfth nidana

[p. 125]

and its various sufferings, which consist of old age, disease, death, lamentation, complaints, punishments, and all kinds of tribulations.

The twelve pictures on the Hindu wheel are less distinct, but there is no question about their meaning being exactly the same. Beginning at the top on the right-hand side, we find first an angry man, representing ignorance, then a figure which might be a potter forming vessels of clay on the potter's wheel, representing the formation of dispositions or primary soul-forms. The third picture represents a monkey climbing a tree, symbolising animal perception or the individuality of organisms. The fourth- picture shows a ship on a stream, representing the origin of mind under the allegory of a pilot. The fifth picture seems to be a house built upon five foundation stones, which we interpret as the five senses, the superstructure representing mind, the sixth sense. Then follows the sixth picture, a woman, kindling desire of contact. The seventh represents sentiment in the shape of two sighing lovers. The eighth picture represents thirst or desire as two separated lovers. The ninth picture, reminding us of Adam and Eve in Paradise, is a man plucking flowers or fruits from a tree; it illustrates the tasting of the apple of sexual love. The tenth picture illustrates pregnancy, the eleventh birth, and the twelfth is the demon of death carrying away the white body of a dead man.

*      *      *

The wheel of life as now frequently pictured in Buddhist temples of Japan can, in its wanderings from India through Tibet and China, be traced back to a remote antiquity,

[p. 126]

for we know positively that this conception of the Evil One in his relation to the world, existed about two thousand years ago, in the days when Buddhism still flourished in India, but it is not improbable that it must be dated back to a time preceding Buddha. We may fairly assume that when Buddha lived, such or similar representations of the significance of evil in life existed and that he utilised the traditional picture for the purposes of spreading his own religion, adding thereto his own interpretation, and thus pouring new wine into old bottles. There is a possibility that the picture must be dated back to the age of demonolatry, when the idea prevailed that the good god need not be worshipped but only the evil god, because he alone is dangerous to mankind.

That the same idea as expressed in the Buddhist wheel of life existed in the remotest antiquity of our earliest civilisations can be seen at a glance by looking at the picture of the Chaldean bronze tablet (on page 46 of this volume), which represents the three worlds, the realm of the gods, the abode of men, and the domain of the dead, as being held in the clutches of a terrible monster. The similarity of the tablet to the Buddhist wheel of life is too striking to be fortuitous.

Religious symbols, formulas, and rites are, as a rule, punctiliously preserved even after a radical change of the fundamental ideas that are embodied therein. Judging by analogy from the religious evolution of other nations, we must assume that the original form of worship among the Accadians was as much demonolatrous as it is at a certain stage of civilisation among all savage tribes, and this bronze plate appears to preserve the lingering features

[p. 127]

of a prehistoric world-conception. The simplest explanation that suggests itself is to regard the monster holding the world-picture as the deity of evil, who in the period when religion still consisted merely in the fear of evil, was worshipped as the actual prince of the world whose wrath was propitiated by bloody sacrifices.

If this view should prove to be correct, the Chaldean bronze plate of the monster holding in its claws the world would be the connecting link between the very dawn of religious notions with the foundation of Buddhism, where the worship of the evil deity has disappeared entirely. But the influence of this old mode of expression extends even into the sphere of the origin of Christianity, although here it fades from sight. In the New Testament the Buddhist term "the wheel of life" is used once more, but it is a mere echo of a remote past; its original significance is no longer understood. Speaking of the great damage caused in the world by the tongue, St. James says:

"oytus e glussa kathistatai en tois melesin emun e spilousa olon to suma. kai flogisoysa ton troxon teis geneseus, kai flogisomene ypo teis geennes."

[Thus the tongue that defileth the whole body standeth among our limbs; and it setteth on fire the wheel of becoming and is set on fire by hell.]

The version of King James translates the term troxos geneseus which in the Vulgate reads rosa nativitatis, by course of nature."

Northern Buddhism.

The Buddhism of Tibet is not yet sufficiently explored on account of the inaccessibility of the country,

[p. 128]

but it is safe to say that its demonology is highly developed and shows traces of strong Hindu influences. Prominent

Click to view
MEIFU, THE DARK TRIBUNAL.
 (Reproduced from a colored Japanese illustration in Karma.)

among, the evil spirits is mKha'sGroma, the Tibetan form of the Hindu Goddess Kali (see page <page 99>), who is represented as a frightful monster with a leonine head,

[p. 129]

surrounded by a halo of flames and ready to devour everything she sees.

In China Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism exist peacefully side by side, and there is scarcely a home in the country where the customary homage would not be paid to Lao-Tsze and Confucius as well as to Buddha. Indeed, there are numerous illustrations in which these three great masters are together represented as dominating the moral life of China.

In Japan the conditions are similar, except that in the place of the popular Taoism we find Shintoism, which is the aboriginal nature-worship of the country, consisting at present in the observation of national festivals, in which form it has of late been declared to be the official state religion of the country.

The folklore of Chinese Taoism and Japanese Shintoism was naturally embodied in the mythology of the Buddhists, and we find therefore in their temples innumerable representations of hell with all their traditional belongings; Emma, the stern judge of Meifu, the dark tribunal; Kongo, the sheriff, and all the terrible staff of bailiffs, torturers, and executioners, among whom the steer-headed Gozu and the horse-headed Mezu are never missing. By the side of the judge's desk stands the most perfect mirror imaginable, for it reflects the entire personality of every being. Since man's personality, according to the Buddhistic soul-conception, is constituted by the deeds done during life, the glass makes apparent all the words, thoughts, and actions of the delinquent who is led before it; whereupon he is dealt with according to his deserts. If good deeds prevail, he is rewarded by being

[p. 130]

Click to view
KONGO, THE SHERIFF.       EMMA, THE JUDGE.
 Carved wood, Japanese. (Reproduced from a Japanese art print.)

[p. 131]

reincarnated in a higher state of existence, be it on earth, or in the Western Paradise, or in one of the heavens of the gods; or, if bad deeds prevail, he sinks into lower spheres, in which case he must go back to life in the shape of that creature which represents his peculiar character; or, if he has been very wicked, he is doomed to hell, whither he is carried in the ho nokuruma, the fiery cart, the conveyance of the infernal regions. The sentence is pronounced in these words:

"Thy evil deeds are not the work of thy mother, father, relatives, friends, advisers. Thou alone hast done them all; thou alone must gather the fruit." (Devad. S.)

Click to view
THE DEVIL AS A MONK.
 Japanese wood carving of the seventeenth century. Musee Guimet.)

Dragged to the place of torment, he is fastened to red hot irons, plunged into fiery lakes of blood, raked over burning coals, and "he dies not till the last residue of his guilt has been expiated."

But the Devil is not always taken seriously, and it appears that the Chinese and Japanese exhibit all the humor they are capable of in their devil pictures and statues, among which the Oni-no-Nembutzu, the Devil as a monk, is perhaps the most grotesque figure.

In the later development of Northern Buddhism, all

[p. 132]

Click to view
ONI-NO-NEMBUTZU.
 The demon repeating Buddha's name, representing greed and hypocrisy. He goes about with a subscription list and a bowl, carried by his little assistant, to collect money.
 (After a wood carving in the author's possession.)

[p. 133]

the evils of this world, represented in various devil personalities, are conceived as incarnations of Buddha himself, who, by showing the evil consequences of sin, endeavors to convert mankind to holiness and virtue.

We find in the Buddhist temples of China and Japan so-called Mandaras, which represent the world-conception of Buddhism in its cosmic entirety. The word Mandara means "a complete ensemble," and it exhibits a systematically arranged group of Buddha-incarnations. The

Click to view
HONO KURUMA, THE CART OF HELL, (After an old Japanese painting.)

statue of the highest Buddha who dwells in Nirvana always stands in the centre. It is "Bodhi," enlightenment, or "Sambodhi," perfect enlightenment, that is to say, the Truth, eternal rightness, or rather, Verity, the objective reality that is represented in truth, which is the same forever and aye. He is personified under the name Amitabha, which means boundless light, being that something the recognition of which constitutes Buddhahood. He is like God, the Father of the Christians, omnipresent and eternal, the light and life of the world, and the

[p. 134]

Click to view
TIBETAN DEVIL'S ALTAR. (From Waddell.)

[p. 135]

ultimate authority of moral conduct. Another prominent Buddha incarnation is Maitreya, the Buddha to come, who is the Christian holy spirit. He is the comforter whose appearance was promised by Buddha shortly before parting from his disciples.

The catalogue of the Musee Guimet of Paris, the best religious museum in the world, describes a Mandara, in which the highest Buddha in the centre of the group is surrounded by a number of his incarnations of various degrees and dignities. These are the Bodhisattvas, prophets and sages of the world, who have either taught mankind or set them good examples by their virtuous lives. On the right we see a group of personified abstracts, piety, charity, science, religion, the aspiration for progress. On the left is a third class, consisting of the ugly figures of demons, whose appearance is destined to frighten people away from sensuality, egotism, and evil desires.

The devils of Buddhism, accordingly, are not the enemies of Buddha, and not even his antagonists, but his ministers and co-workers. They partake of Buddha's nature, for they, too, are teachers. They are the rods of punishment, representing the curse of sin, and as such have also been fitly conceived as incarnations of the Bodhi. In this interpretation, the Buddhist devils cease to be torturers and become instruments of education who contribute their share to the general system of working out the final salvation of man.

Christian salvation consists in an atonement of sin through the bloody sacrifice of a sinless redeemer; Buddhist salvation is attained through enlightenment. Hence

[p. 136]

Christ is the sufferer, the innocent man who dies to pay with his life the debt of others who are guilty. Buddha,

Click to view
BUDDHA EXTENDING HIS HELP TO A SUFFERER IN HELL.
 The goodwill that a poor wretch had shown in his former life to a spider, his only good deed, serves him in hell as a means of escape. (Reproduced from a colored Japanese illustration in Karma.)

is the teacher who by example and instruction shows people the path of salvation.

Footnotes

^105:1 Papiyan means "more or very wicked"; it is the comparative form of the Sanskrit, papin, wicked.

^105:2 Varsavarti is Sanskrit. The Pali form is Vasavatti, derived from vasa, wish, desire. Childers explains the word as "bringing into subjection." Mara is also called Paranimmita Vasavatti, which means "bringing into subjection that which is created by others."

^105:3 Pali, tanha; Sanskrit, trishna.

^108:1 Sacred Books of the East, Vol. X., second part, pp. 69-71.

^113:1 Buddhistische Kunst in Indien. Berlin: Speman, p. 87.

^116:1 The Visudhi Magga declares karma-existence is equivalent to existence.

^116:2 Confection is a bad translation of formation or deed-form. See The Dharma, pp. 16-18.

^120:1 Described by L. A. Waddell, M. B., M. R. A. S., in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, April, 1894. Luxuriously reproduced in colors on Plate 8, Vol. I., of The Paintings in the Buddhist Cave Temples of Ajanta, by John Griffiths. London, Griggs, 1896.

^120:2 The Tibetan and Japanese pictures are explained by Professor Bastian in his Ethnologisches Bilderbuch.

^121:1 We must remember that in some parts of India the serpent is the symbol of perfection and wisdom,--a belief which was adopted by the Ophites, a gnostic sect that revered the snake of the. Garden of Eden as the instructor in the knowledge of good and evil and the originator of science.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

THE DAWN OF A NEW ERA.

Gnostic Societies and Congregations.

THE TRANSITION from the Old to the New Testament is an age of unrest. The Jews had become familiar with the civilisation of Assyria and Babylonia, and enjoyed friendly relations with the Persians. But the intercourse and general exchange of thought among the nations of Western Asia became more extended and grew livelier since Alexander the Great's time, for now Greek as well as Indian views mixed and produced a powerful fermentation in the religious beliefs of the people. We may fairly assume that the doctrines of the Hindu reached Syria in vague and frequently self-contradictory forms, but they were new and attractive, and apt to revolutionise the traditional ethics of the people. Formerly procreation of children was regarded as a duty and the acquisition of wealth as a blessing, now it became known that there were also people who sought salvation in absolute chastity and poverty. The highest morality of the monks of India was no longer the strength of maintaining oneself in the struggle for existence, but the surrender of all strife and a radical renunciation of self.

[p. 138]

There are especially three ideas which dominated the whole movement and acted as a leaven in the dough: the idea of the spirituality of the soul, the hope of the soul's escape from bodily existence, and the method of obtaining this liberation by wisdom (sofia) or enlightenment (gnusis).

The realisation of the Gnostic ideal was called pleruma or fulfilment, which was either expected by the soul's attainment of salvation after the fashion of the Buddhist Nirvana, or for the whole world through the appearance of a savior--a messiah.

The spirit of the times showed itself in the foundation of various religious societies, which originated somewhat after the fashion of the modern theosophical movements. There were bands of students of the new problems in almost all larger cities, who investigated the doctrines of salvation and immortality, and in addition there were enthusiasts who tried to apply the new principles in practical life. The former called themselves mathetai, learners or disciples, the latter holy ones (agioi), or healers (therapeytai, therapeutae). [*1]

With regard to the problem of evil, the most peculiar sect were the Gnostics of Syria whom the Church fathers called serpent-worshippers or Ophites, because on becoming acquainted with the Biblical books they regarded Yahveh, the demiurge or author of this visible and material world, as an evil deity while the serpent

[p. 139]

with his promise of giving knowledge or gnosis to man, appeared to them as a messenger of the true and good God. This God of goodness, they declared, was unlike Yahveh free of passions and full of love and mercy. He was, as Irenaeus informs us, triune, being at once the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. The Father is the prototype of man, an idea which is carried out in the Cabala as the Adam Kadmon; the Son is the eternal reason or comprehension (Ennoia), and the Spirit is the female principle of spiritual generation.

Click to view
THE CHRISTIAN TRINITY, GOD FATHER, SON, AND HOLY GHOST. (Old German School. Reproduced from Muther.)

Similar ideas concerning the triune Godhead and the salvation from evil are reported of other sects and especially of Simon Magus who is mentioned in the Acts as having been baptised by St. Peter and condemned for his opinion that the Holy Ghost could be bought with money.

We know of sects in Judaea the Nazarenes, the Sabians [*1] or Baptisers, the Essenes, and the Ebionites, which were born of the same seeking spirit of the age. But we must bear in mind that the members of these societies

[p. 140]

belonged exclusively to the poorer class of society and formed a third party which was quite distinct from the orthodox Pharisees and the liberal Sadducees. [*1] They are to us of importance, however, because from their midst proceeded the man who was destined to become the standard bearer of a new faith and the representative incarnation of the new religion--Jesus of Nazareth.

The Apocrypha of the Old Testament.

The literature of this period was no longer received into the canon of the Old Testament and is therefore in spite of many good qualities even to the present day regarded as apocryphal.

[p. 141]

The new world-conception which emphasised the contrast between body and soul developed a new moral ideal; and the conception of evil underwent the same subtle changes as the conception of goodness. Since the lower classes began to make their influence felt, it is natural that in the Apocryphal Books of the Old Testament

Click to view
ASMODI, AN EVIL SPIRIT, CAST OUT BY PRAYER.
 (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

the conception of Satan grew more mythological and at the same time more dualistic. He developed into an independent demon of evil, and now, perhaps under the influence of Persian views, the adversary of man became the adversary of God himself.

In the story of Tobit (150 B. C.) an evil spirit called Asmodi plays an important part. His name which in its

[p. 142]

original form is Aeshma Daeva, indicates a Persian origin. He tries to prevent Sarah's marriage, because he is in love with her himself. In the Talmud, Asmodi develops into the demon of lust.

Very valuable books among the Apocrypha are the book of Daniel and the two books of Esdras; but the noblest thoughts are mixed with Judaistic chauvinism and bitter hatred of the Gentile nations.

Esdras anticipates the general eschatology as well as many smaller details of the Christian doctrines in a more definite shape than any other author of the period. He even proclaims (2 Esdras, vii. 28) the name of the Saviour whom the Lord calls "my son Jesus." [*1]

Esdras mentions two abysmal beings, Enoch and Leviathan, but they do not take any part in the production of evil. He might as well have omitted to mention them. In the name of God, an angel explains to him the origin of evil as follows in a simile which reminds us of both the Buddhist parable of the city of Nirvana and Christ's Sermon on the Mount:

"A city is builded, and set upon a broad field, and is full of all good things: The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a dangerous place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on the left a deep water: And one only path between them both, even between the fire and the water, so small that there could but one man go there at once. If this city now were given unto man for an inheritance, if he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall he receive this inheritance?'

"And I said, 'It is so, Lord.'

"Then said he unto me, Even so also is Israel's portion.

[p. 143]

[paragraph continues] Because for their sakes I made the world: and when Adam transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done. Then were the entrances of this world made narrow, full of sorrow and travail; they are but few and evil, full of peril and very painful. For the entrances of the elder world were wide and sure, and brought immortal fruit. If then they that live labor not to enter these strait and painful things, they can never receive those that are laid up for them.'" (2 Esdras, vii, 6-14.)

A peculiarly interesting apocryphal work is ascribed to the patriarch Enoch.

The book of Enoch undertakes to explain in allegorical form God's plan of the world's history. The book is not yet Christian but shows many traces of doctrines professed by the sects which appeared at the beginning of the Christian era as competitors of Christianity.

While Enoch's demonology smacks of the religious myths of the Gentiles, his ideas of salvation from evil betray Gnostic tendencies.

We read, for example, in Chapter 42:

"Wisdom came to live among men and found no dwelling-place. Then she returned home and took her seat among the angels."

We read of the Messiah, commonly designated "the son of a woman," sometimes "the son of man," and once "the son of God," that he existed from the beginning:

"Ere the sun and the signs [in the zodiac] were made, ere the stars of the heavens were created, his name was pronounced before the Lord of the spirits. Before the creation of the world he was chosen and hidden before Him [God], and before Him he will be from eternity to eternity."

[p. 144]

Click to view
HEAVEN AND HELL.
 (After H. F., an Unknown Old-German master.)
 Preserving the gnostic Trinity-ideal of God father, God mother, and God son.

[p. 145]

"All the secrets of wisdom will flow from the thoughts of his mouth, for the Lord of the spirits has given wisdom unto him and has glorified him. In him liveth the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit of Him who giveth comprehension, and the spirit of the doctrine and of the power, and the spirit of all those who are justified and are now sleeping. And He will judge all hidden things, and no one will speak trifling words before Him, for He is chosen before the Lord of the spirits. He is powerful in all secrets of justification, and injustice has no place before Him."

And God says of the sons of the earth:

"I and my son shall unite ourselves with them for ever and aye in the paths of righteousness for all their lives."

The spiritualistic views in the Book of Enoch, especially the supernatural personality of the Messiah, are not peculiarly Christian, but Essenic or Gnostic, standing even in contradiction to the idea that the Messiah would become flesh and live among men as a real man.

It is a pity that we do not possess the original, but only an Ethiopian version of the Book of Enoch, which has been translated into German by Dr. A. Dillmann, for it is of great interest to the historian. It breathes the spirit of a Judaistic Gnosticism, and it is probable that the original Book of Enoch was written in the year 110 B. C. by a Jew of the Pharisee party. [*1]

The Book of Wisdom and the Gnostic Trinity Idea.

The Book of Wisdom, a product of Alexandrian Judaism, showing traces of both Greek and Eastern influences, speaks of the Devil as having through envy introduced death into the world. We read:

[p. 146]

Click to view
THE HOLY TRINITY IN THE VATICAN.
 (After Pietro Berrettini. Reproduced from Il Vaticano, plate xx.)

[p. 147]

"God created man to be immortal, and made him to be an image of his own eternity; nevertheless, through envy of the Devil came death into the world, and they that do hold of his side do find it."

The Wisdom literature shows many traces of Indian influence. The very word wisdom, or sophia, seems to

Click to view
THE BUDDHIST TRINITY, THE BUDDHA, THE DHARMA, THE SANGHA.
 (Japanese wood carving; Musee Guimet.)

be a translation of the term bodhi. At the same time, the trinity idea begins to take root in the Jewish mind, the oldest form of it being moulded after the pattern of the family, which consists of father, mother, and child. The Wisdom books represent the relation of Sophia to God as his spouse and the Messiah as their son. Many Gnostics used the terms Sophia, Pneuma, and Logos as names for

[p. 148]

the second person of the Deity, who represented the divine motherhood of the God-man. But during the first period of the development of the Christian Church, the ideal of a God-mother was abandoned, the Logos was identified with God the Son, who now became the second person of the Trinity; and the name Pneuma or spirit was alone retained for the third person. The Gnostic Trinity-conception, however, left its trace in the Christian apocrypha, for in "the Gospel according to the Hebrews" Christ spoke of the Holy Ghost as his mother. [*1]

Click to view
THE TRINITY AND MARY.
 (By Ambrogio Fossano, called Borgognone. Formerly in the S. Simpliciano at Milan, now at the Brera. After Lubke.)

The Trinity idea is of a very ancient origin. We encounter it in the religion of Babylon (see <page 40>), in Brahmanism (see <page 75>), and in Buddhism. The Buddhists take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, called the three jewels, representing (1) Buddha the teacher, (2) the Buddhist religion or the good law, and (3) the Buddhist brotherhood or Church. The Trinity doctrine is not contained in the New Testament, all

[p. 149]

the passages which seem to involve it being spurious; but it forms an integral part of almost all Gnostic systems, where it either appears as three abstract principles, or as the family relation of Father, Mother, and Child, viewed as one.

Click to view
THE CHRISTIAN TRINITY.
 From the Iconographie Chretienne. (Reproduced from Bastian's Ethnol. Bilderbuch, plate xvii.)

The Trinity idea of God as a divine unity of Father, Mother, and Christ-child was retained among the Oriental Christians to the days of the rise of Mohammedanism. The Koran knows as yet nothing of the spiritualised Trinity conception of the Western Church, but represents the Christian Trinity as consisting of God, Christ, and Mary. And this Gnostic Trinity-conception is a natural ideal which in the further development of Christianity proved strong enough to influence the Roman Catholic Church in her devotion to Mary, the mother of Christ, whose personality was sometimes superadded to the Trinity, and sometimes even suffered to replace the Holy Ghost.

The more abstract form of the Trinity, emphasising it as a triunity, found its artistic expression in pictures

[p. 150]

of God as possessed of three faces. The most striking among these productions is an old oil painting which was discovered by a German artist at Salerno and published for the first time in Die Gartenlaube (1882, No. 47). The four eyes in their meditative attitude make a weird impression on the spectator, the three elongated noses show a freedom from sensuality, the brown hair and beard indicate strength, the broad forehead wisdom.

Click to view
THE TRINITY OF SALERNO.
 Byzantine style of Lower Italy, probably of the XIII. century. Sketched by the artist of the Gartenlaube in an inn at Salerno from the original painting which has been sold in the mean time to an Englishman.

A Modern Gnostic.

Jacob Bohme's philosophy is, in this connexion, of interest because it represents a revival of the spirit of Gnosticism in its best and most typical form. It may serve as a substitute to characterise by way of example the modes of thought of the ancient Gnostic systems and their comprehension of the problem of evil.

Jacob Bohme was a German mystic, born in 1575 at Alt-Seidenberg near Gorlitz in Silesia. Like David he was in his childhood a shepherd. Having served from his fourteenth year as a shoemaker's apprentice and being

[p. 151]

Click to view
JACOB BOHME.

affiliated with the shoemaker guild, he established himself as a master shoemaker in Gorlitz in 1599. Later on in his life he changed his trade for that of a glover. His books circulated during his life-time in manuscript-form only, but even this sufficed to make his name known beyond the limits of his native town. He died on Sunday, November 17th, 1624, at his home in Gorlitz, much admired by his friends and persecuted by some narrow-minded enemies who showed their malice even after his death by defacing the monument of the deceased philosopher. The best evidence, however, of his genius and the recognition which his honest aspirations found among his fellow citizens appears in the fact that the son of the Rev. Gregorius Richter, the pastor primarius of Gorlitz and the bitterest antagonist of Jacob Bohme, edited a collection of extracts from his writings, which were afterwards published complete at Amsterdam in the year 1682.

The similarity of Jacob Bohme's speculations to Gnosticism is apparent, but the coincidence is almost

[p. 152]

spontaneous. His education was very limited, and he was only superficially familiar with the theories of Paracelsus (Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim, 1493-1541), Kaspar Schwenkfeld (1490-1561), and Valentin Weigel (1533-1588). His own system is original with him. It is mainly due to a reflection on the Bible, which he read with a deeply religious spirit but preserving at the same time great independence of thought.

Click to view
VIGNETTE OF JACOB BOHME'S BOOK ON THE THREEFOLD LIFE OF MAN,
 Illustrating the three principles which pervade life, consisting of the principles of Good and Evil as unfolded in Time.

Jacob Bohme conceives God as the unfathomable ground of existence, as the Ungrund. His biographer in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, says of his philosophy:

"Nature rises out of Him, we sink into Him.... The same view when offered in the colder logic of Spinoza, is sometimes set aside as atheistical.

"Translating Bohme's thought out of the uncouth dialect of material symbols (as to which one doubts sometimes whether he means them as concrete instances, or as pictorial illustrations, or as a more memoria technica) we find that Bohme conceives of the correlation of two triads of forces. Each triad consists of a thesis, an antithesis, and a synthesis, and the two are connected by an important link. In the hidden life of the Godhead, which is at once Nichts and Alles, exists the original triad, viz., Attraction, Diffusion, and their resultant, the Agony of the unmanifested Godhead. The transition is made; by an act of will the divine Spirit comes to Light; and immediately the manifested life appears in the triad of Love, Expression,

[p. 153]

and their resultant Visible Variety. As the action of contraries and their resultant are explained the relations of soul, body, and spirit, of good, evil, and free will; of the spheres of the angels, of Lucifer, and of this world.

"It is a more difficult problem to account on this philosophy for the introduction of evil. . . . Evil is a direct outcome of the primary principle of divine manifestation-it is the wrath side of God."

Click to view
THE THREE PRINCIPLES
 Frontispiece of Jacob Bohme's book on the subject and illustrating his religious philosophy.

 [*1]

The problem of the idea of evil is very prominent in Jacob Bohme's philosophy, and has found a monistic solution. Without identifying good and evil, he arrives at the conclusion that the existence of evil is intrinsically necessary and unavoidable; it is ultimately rooted in the nature of God himself. The yearning for self-realisation constitutes a suffering in God himself, and in the act of revealing himself his will manifests both the bright and the dark aspect of life.

Jacob Bohme anticipates Schopenhauer. He says, in his book on "The Threefold Life of Man," p. 56: [*1]

[p. 154]

"For all things stand in the will, and in the will they are conducted. If I do not conceive a will to walk, my body remaineth at a stand-still. Therefore my will beareth me, and if I have no desire for [moving to] some place, there is no will in me. But if I desire something else, it is of the essence the will.

"The eternal word is the eternal will."--Ibid., p. 17.

Materiality and sensuality are identified with sin, and sin begins not with the actual fall but with lusting, sleep being a symptom of this condition.

"Before his sleep Adam was in the form of an angel, but after his sleep he had flesh and blood, and there was a clod of the ground in his flesh."--Die drey Principien, p. 221.

With all his gnostic tendencies Jacob Bohme is not a dualist but a monist. The duality of life viewed under the aspect of a higher unity constitutes a trinity whose three principles are represented in the frontispiece of Jacob Bohme's book on the subject [*1] as two overlapping spheres which by meeting produce a third domain. There is an eternal goodness, and there is an eternal badness, and there is an eternal mixture of both. The eternal goodness contains the divine spirit and all the angels. But the sphere of badness is no less eternal. It is in its ultimate constitution the materiality of the world. The original Adam (a kind of Platonic prototype of man) was spiritual: his fall begins with his falling to sleep (p. 124), the result of carnal desire which changes his nature and leads to the creation of the woman to tempt him.

But Jacob Bohme is not a dualist, for he conceives of the three spheres as being one. He says in his book on The Threefold Life of Man, p. 16:

[p. 155]

"We remind the God-loving and seeking reader to recognise this of God. He should not concentrate his mind and senses to seek the pure Godhead in loneliness, high above the stars, as living solely in the heavens.... No, the pure Godhead is everywhere, entirely present in all places and ends. There is everywhere the birth of the Holy Trinity in one Being, and the angelic world reaches unto all the ends wherever thou mayest think; even into the middle of the earth, stones, and rocks; consequently also into Hell; briefly, the empire of the wrath of God is also everywhere."

Jacob Bohme does not believe in the letter but in the spirit of the Bible; and although he is counted a mystic, the illumination which he seeks is as sober as you can expect of a man of his culture. He freely utilises the Scriptures, but urges good Christians to seek the key to the problems of existence deeper. He says: "No one can come to God except through the Holy Ghost," and by the "Holy Ghost" he understands this spiritual illumination of heart and mind. He says (ibid., 15-16):

"Search for the ground of nature. Thus you will comprehend all things. And do not madly go for the mere letter of the histories, nor make any blind laws according to your own imaginings wherewith you persecute one another. In this you are blinder than the heathen. Search for the heart and spirit of the Scriptures that the spirit may be born in you, and that the center of the Divine Love may be unlocked in you. Thus you may recognise God and speak of him rightly. For out of the histories merely, no one shall call himself a master, cogniser, and knower of the Divine essence, but out of the Holy Ghost which appeareth in another principium in the center of man's life, and only to him who searches rightly and seriously."

Jacob Bohme condenses his philosophy in his explanation of the frontispiece of his Threefold Life, where he says:

[p. 156]

"Every work indicates by its form, essence, and character, the wisdom and virtue of its maker. Now if we contemplate the grandly marvellous edifice of the visible heaven and earth, consider their motions, inquire into their efficiencies and forces, and judge of the differences of the bodies of the creature, how they are hard and soft, gross and subtile, dark and radiant, opaque and pellucid, heavy and light: we shall at once discover the twofold mother of the revelation of God, viz., darkness and light which have breathed themselves out of all their forces and sealed miracles and form themselves together with the firmament, the stars, the elements, and all the visible conceivable creatures, where life and death, goodness and evil are at once in each thing. That is the third of the two hidden lives and it is called time contending with vanity. . . .

"Thus this world standeth in the mixed life of time between light and darkness as a genuine mirror of the two, in which the marvels of eternity are revealed in the form of time through the Word, as John announces. All things were made by it, and without it was not anything made that was made."

The Gnostic movement and especially its Jewish phase, manifesting itself in sectarian life and in the post-canonical literature, is of greater importance than is generally admitted, for it prepared the way for Christianity. Many Christian dogmas, such as the bodily resurrection of the dead, the Messiah as the soul of man, the approach of the day of judgment, are in the Old Testament Apocrypha, as it were, tentatively pronounced. A comprehensive formulation of the new religious ideals begins to be needed; and the people find at last in Jesus of Nazareth a leader whose powerful personality affords a centre around which the fermenting innovations can crystallise into an organised institution, the Christian Church, destined to become a new and most influential factor in the history of the world.

Footnotes

^138:1 Philo explains the name "therapeutae" also as "worshippers." The genuineness of Philo's book De vita contemplativa and with it the very existence of the therapeutae has been doubted by p. E. Lucius, whose views, however, are thoroughly refuted by Fred. C. Conybeare, Philo About the Contemplative Life (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1895)

^139:1 St. John the Baptist was a Sabian. The name is derived from tzaba` (tsabha). to baptise.

^140:1 The word Essenes, or Essees (in Greek Essenoi and Essaioi, in Latin Esseni), is derived by Ewald from chatzauw preserver, guardian, a rabbinical term, because they called themselves "watchers, guardians, servants of God." Others derive the word from 'asa' (to heal). Both derivations would remind one of the Therapeutae. The root hasah (to fly, to take refuge) seems to be quite probable, philologically considered, especially as the word is used in the sense in which the Buddhist takes refuge in the Dharma, illustrated in such phrases as chasah bua yhwh (to take refuge in God), Psalms ii. 12; v. 15; vii. 2; xxv. 20; xxxi. 2; xxxvii 40, etc. A fourth derivation is from chasar (to be pious, to be enthusiastic, to be zealous in love). Philo says they are called "Essenes" on account of their holiness (para ten osioteta) and uses the term osioi, i. e., "the saints," or "the holy ones," as a synonym for Essenes. This hint, however, is of little avail, as it would suit almost any one of the various derivations.

The word Ebionites 'ebuyniym means the poor.

The early Christians seem to have been most closely allied with the Nazarenes, for as early as in the year 54 of our era (see Harnack's Chronologie, p. 237) St. Paul was accused by the Jewish authorities of being a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. (Acts, xxiv. 5.)

The name Nazuraioi (sometimes Nazarenoi) has nothing to do with the name of the town of Nazareth (Nazareth), which was presumably written with a tz (Tsaddi) or sharp ts sound. The name Nazareth is nowhere mentioned in its original Aramaic form, and occurs only in the New Testament whence it made its way into the patristic literature of later Christianity. Neither must the name Nazarene be confounded with Nazarite naziyr an abstainer, who as a visible sign of his vow let his hair grow, but both words may have been derived from the same root nazary, the former in the sense of "Separatist." The Niphel of the verb means "to separate oneself from others; to abstain. to vow, to devote oneself to."

^142:1 The passage is of course subject to the suspicion of being a later interpolation.

^145:1 See Dillmann, Das Buch Henoch, p. xliv.

^148:1 Hieron. adv. Pelag. III., 2.

^153:1 Hohe und teife Grunde von dem Dreyfachen Leben des Menschen nach dem Geheimnuss der drey Principien gottlicher Offenbahrung. Geschrieben nach gottlicher Erleuchtung, Amsterdam, 1682.

^154:1 Beschreibung der drey Principien gottlichen Wesens. Amsterdam, 1682.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 157]

  

EARLY CHRISTIANITY.

Jesus and the New Testament.

THE EVIL ONE played an important part in the imagination of the people in the time of Christ. Satan is mentioned repeatedly by the scribes and the people of Israel in the synoptic gospels, by the Apostles, especially by St. Paul, and very often in the revelation of St. John. Jesus follows the common belief of the time in attributing mental diseases to the possession of demons, and we may assume that he shared the popular view. Nevertheless, he speaks, upon the whole, less of the Devil than do his contemporaries.

The Jesus of the Gospels is said to have been tempted by the Devil in much the same way that Buddha was tempted by Mara, the Evil One. Even the details of the two stories of temptation possess many features of resemblance.

Christ is very impressive in depicting the evil consequences of sin. He compares the last judgment to the selection made by fishermen who gather the good fishes into vessels, but cast the bad away (Math. xiii., 47). He speaks of the reward of "the good and faithful"

[p. 158]

Click to view
JESUS CASTING OUT DEVILS. (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

Click to view
THE FIEND, SOWING TARES AMONG THE WHEAT. (From a German Picture-Bible.)

[p. 159]

while "the unprofitable servant" will be cast "into outer darkness where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." Hell is described as "the fire that shall never be quenched" and "the worm that dieth not." And the wicked people are compared to goats to whom the Son of Man will say: "Depart from me ye cursed ones, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels."

Christ represents the Devil as the enemy that sows tares among the wheat, and once addresses as Satan one of his favorite disciples who speaks words that might lead him into temptation. We read in Mark, viii., 33, and Matth., xvi., 23:

"He rebuked Peter, saying: 'Get thee behind me, Satan, for thou savorest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.'"

This fact alone appears sufficient to prove that, while it is natural that Christ used the traditional idea of Satan as a personification of the evil powers to furnish him with materials for his parables, Satan to him was mainly a symbol of things wicked or morally evil.

If the Gospel stories actually reflect the real views of the historical Jesus, it appears that his idea of justice was based on the notion that the future life would be an exact inversion of the present order of things. According to the literal meaning of the language of the parable, Dives is not punished for his sins, and Lazarus is not rewarded for his good deeds: the future fate of the former in Hell and the latter in Heaven is the result of an equalisation, as we read in Luke xvi. 25:

"But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime

[p. 160]

Click to view
DIVES, ENJOYING LIFE, AND LAZARUS SUFFERING. (From a German Picture-Bible.)

Click to view
DIVES TORMENTED IN HELL. (From a German Picture-Bible.)

[p. 161]

receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.'"

And as on earth Dives had the distress of Lazarus before his eyes, so now Lazarus, seated in the bosom of Abraham, sees with complacency the pains of Dives.

Click to view
CAST INTO OUTER DARKNESS WHERE THERE SHALL BE WEEPING AND GNASHING OF TEETH.
 (From a German Picture-Bible.)

The keynote of the Christian sentiment of the apostolic age is expressed in the second epistle to the Thessalonians, where St. Paul says:

"Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,

"That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, that the day of Christ is at hand."

[p. 162]

St. Paul's belief "that the day of Christ is at hand is based upon Christ's own utterances. We read in Mark ix. 1:

Click to view
THE DAY OF THE LORD. (After Michelangelo.)

"And he (Jesus) said unto them: 'Verily I say unto you that there be some of them that stand here which shall not taste of death till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power."

[p. 163]

That in this passage the second advent of Christ is referred to there can be no doubt, especially as there are parallel passages which are written in the same spirit. In Matt. x. 23, Christ declares that his disciples preaching the Gospel in Palestine and fleeing from one city to another when persecuted for his name's sake, "shall not have gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of Man be come."

St. Paul confidently expected that he himself would see the day of the Lord, and in consideration of its nearness he deemed all worldly care unnecessary. Having explained in his epistle to the Corinthians the significance of the events in Jewish history and the punishments of sinners, he adds:

"Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come." [*1] (I Cor. x. ii.)

When some of the Thessalonian Christians died, St. Paul comforted them by declaring that those who sleep will be resurrected and taken together up to heaven with those who survive. And the words of Paul expressly implied that he himself, together with the Thessalonians whom be addresses, will remain, of which fact he is so sure as to pronounce his opinion as being "the word of the Lord." He says:

'But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.

[p. 164]

Click to view
THE LAST JUDGEMENT: Fresco in Campo Santo, Pisa.
 Illustrating St. Paul's prophecy: "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first."

[p. 165]

"For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

"For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.

"For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first.

"Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

"Wherefore comfort one another with these words."

When the early disciples became more and more disappointed at the non-appearance of the Lord in the clouds of heaven, a prominent leader of the Christian Church wrote an epistle to revive their faith, which was apt to suffer by the ridicule of those who did not share this belief. We read in the second epistle of St. Peter:

"This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

"That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us, the apostles of the Lord and Savior:

"Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

"And saying, 'Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.'

". . . . The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

"But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the

[p. 166]

elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

"Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,

"Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?

"Nevertheless, we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."

The present world remains in the power of Satan until the prophecy of the second advent of Christ be fulfilled, and we had better be prepared for meeting his onslaughts; as says the author of the first epistle of St. Peter:

"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary, the Devil, as a roaring lion walketh about, seeking whom he may devour."

In addition to his old names of Satan, Beelzebub, and Devil (which latter appears first in Jesus Sirach), the Evil One is called in the New Testament the prince of this world, the great dragon, the old serpent, the prince of the devils, the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disbelief, the Antichrist. Satan is represented as the founder of an empire that struggles with and counteracts the kingdom of God upon earth. He is powerful, but less powerful than Christ and his angels. He is conquered and doomed through Christ, but he is still unfettered.

The newly discovered fourth book of Daniel [*1] contains a story which characterises the expectations of the

[p. 167]

early Church. We read of a certain man, holding the office of president (proestus) in a Christian congregation of Syria:

"He persuaded many of the brethren, with their wives and children, to go out into the wilderness to meet the Christ, and they went wandering In the mountains and wastes, there losing their way; and the end was that all but a few were apprehended as robbers and would have been executed by the mayor of the city (egemun) had it not been that his wife was a believer and that in response to her entreaties he put a stop to the proceedings to prevent a persecution arising because of them."

Cases of this kind happened frequently. We read of another Christian officer (also a proestus) in Pontus that he also preached the approaching day of judgment:

"He brought the brethren to such a pitch of fear and trembling that they abandoned their lands and fields, letting them become waste, and sold, the most of them, their possessions."

The belief in the imminent approach of the day of judgment waned during the third century, but was temporarily revived in the year 1000, which was commonly believed to be the end of the millennium prophesied by St. John the Divine in the Revelation. The disorder and misery which resulted from the foolish acts that people committed in anticipation of the approaching day of judgment all over Christendom are beyond description. Some squandered their property in order to enjoy the last days of their lives; some sold all they had and gave to the poor; some invested all their possessions in masses and Church donations; and thus almost all who were filled with the belief in the coming of the Lord fell a prey to the most wretched poverty and distress.

[p. 168]

Jewish-Christian Eschatology.

The Revelation of St. John, written between 68 and 70 A. D., after Nero's death and before the destruction of Jerusalem, propounds the eschatology of early Christianity, which closely follows such traditions of the Jews as are preserved in the prophetic books of the Old Testament Apocrypha.

The author of the Revelation is a Jew-Christian, who in the name of the son of man informs the seven churches of Asia Minor that God hates the Nicolaitanes (i., 6 and 15), an antinomistic sect among the Gnostics who according to Irenaeus (I., Chap. 26) regarded the Mosaic law, the nomos, as unessential to salvation. The warning given out against "those who say that they are Apostles and are not" seems to be directed against St. Paul, who, like the Nicolaitanes, is also known for his strong antinomistic principles and finding no sin in eating with pagans, even though the meat might have been offered as a sacrifice to idols. [*1]

An unpleasant denunciation of a follower of antinomistic, i. e., Pauline Christianity in the city of Thyatira, is mentioned in chapter ii., verses 20-29, which probably has reference to Lydia, a seller of purple, who was baptised by Paul (Acts xvi. 14-15). The great promises of the Lord offered to the faithful through John the Divine, are strictly limited to the Jew Christian, to him who keeps the law and holds fast to it till Christ's second advent (ii. 25). As a reward Christ, according

[p. 169]

to John the Divine's vision, allows him the great pleasure of destroying the Gentiles, saying:

"And he that overcometh and keepeth my works (i. e., the law) unto the end, to him will I give the power over the nations;

Click to view
THE CHRISTIAN WORLD DISPENSATION ACCORDING TO ST. JOHN THE DIVINE.
 (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers; even as I received from my Father."

[p. 170]

St. John believes that the judgment of the world is near at hand. The Lamb opens the seven seals, and four

Click to view
THE FOUR RIDERS OF THE APOCALYPSE. Wall-painting on the Campo Santo, Berlin (By P. Von Cornelius.)

men on horseback, one with a crown, one with a sword, one with a pair of balances, and the last one Death, followed by Hell, are let loose. The martyrs of God receive

[p. 171]

white robes, the sun becomes black as sackcloth, and the moon becomes as blood. Then an angel pronounces a triple woe upon the inhabitants of the earth. The pit is opened and four angels who had been bound are loosed to slay the third part of men. A struggle ensues between a women that travaileth and the dragon, but the dragon is cast down. A beast with seven heads and ten horns appears; another beast follows and makes an image of the first beast that should be worshipped by men. "The number of the beast" is "six hundred and three score and six," which according to cabalistic symbolism means "Nero." The Roman Emperor is thus regarded as an incarnation of Satan, and for a short time power is given to the pagan government over the world. But the victorious Lamb stands on Mount Zion; the Gospel is preached, and the sickle of the harvest is ready for gathering in the clusters of the vine. Then the seven vials of wrath are poured out upon mankind. The city "which reigneth over the kings of the earth" (i. e., Rome), the old Babylon, the mother of abominations, shall fall, and the fowls of the air are called to fill themselves with the flesh of the slain. Satan is bound for a thousand years, but let loose again. In a final struggle, Gog and Magog are conquered, whereupon a new heaven and a new earth are created. A heavenly Jerusalem descends upon earth and the twelve tribes inhabit the city, which needs no sun because God is its light. The pagan Christians remain outside: "The nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the kings of the earth bring their glory and honor into it."

Such is briefly the contents of the Revelation of St.

[p. 172]

Click to view
THE WOMAN OF ABOMINATION. After the Revelation of St. John, (By Albrecht Durer.)

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] John the Divine, which is a very important book, as it embodies the views of the early Jew-Christians concerning God's plan in the history of the world, and the powers of evil play in it a most important part.

The main prophecy of the Jewish Christian author of the revelation remained unfulfilled. By a strange irony of fate Judaic Christianity disappeared from the face of the earth, while Rome became the centre of the Gentile Christianity, in which capacity she rose almost to more glorious power than pagan Rome ever possessed through her political superiority. Christianity was thoroughly Romanised and remained under the sway of Rome until the Reformation split the Church in twain and opened new possibilities for a progressive development of Christianity, no longer subject to the dictates of a conclave of Italian cardinals and a Roman pope.

The Descent Into Hell.

The belief in Satan and Hell form an essential part of early Christianity, and Christ was believed immediately after his death on the cross to have battled with and to have conquered the prince of hell. Although the oldest manuscripts of the so-called Apostle's Creed do not contain the passage "descended into hell," which is an addition of the seventh century, there can be no doubt that the idea actually prevailed as early as the second century. The Gospel of Nicodemus, which is commonly regarded as a product of the third century, dwells on this part of the Christian belief and offers a detailed account of Christ's descent into Hell, which in Chapters xv-xvi reads as follows:

[p. 174]

"Satan, the prince and captain of death, said to the prince of hell, Prepare to receive Jesus of Nazareth himself, who boasted that he was the Son of God, and yet was a man afraid of death, and said, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. [*1] Besides he did many injuries to me and to many others; for those whom I made blind and lame and those also whom I tormented with several devils, he cured by his word; yea, and those whom I brought dead to thee, he by force takes away from thee.

"To this the prince of hell replied to Satan, Who is that so powerful prince, and yet a man who is afraid of death? For all the potentates of the earth are subject to my power, whom thou broughtest to subjection by thy power. But if he be so powerful in his nature, I affirm to thee for truth, that he is almighty in his divine nature, and no man can resist his power. When, therefore, he said he was afraid of death, he designed to ensnare thee, and unhappy it will be to thee for everlasting ages.

"Then Satan, replying, said to the prince of hell, Why didst thou express a doubt, and wast afraid to receive Jesus of Nazareth, both thy adversary and mine? As for me, I tempted him and stirred up my old people, the Jews, with zeal and anger against him. I sharpened the spear for his suffering; I mixed the gall and vinegar, and commanded that he should drink it; I prepared the cross to crucify him, and the nails to pierce through his hands and feet; and now his death is near at hand, I will bring him hither, subject both to thee and me.

"Then the prince of hell answering said, Thou saidst to me just now, that he took away the dead from me by force. They who have been kept here till they should live again upon earth were taken away hence, not by their own power, but by prayers made to God, and their almighty God took them from me. Who, then, is that Jesus of Nazareth that by his word hath taken away the dead from me without prayer to God? Perhaps it is the same who took away from me Lazarus, after he had been four days dead, and did

[p. 175]

both stink and was rotten, and of whom I had possession as a dead person, yet he brought him to life again by his power.

"Satan, answering, said to the prince of hell, It is the very same person, Jesus of Nazareth, which, when the prince of hell heard, he said to him, I adjure thee by the powers which belong to thee and me, that thou bring him not to me. For when I heard of the power of his word, I trembled for fear, and all my impious company were at the same time disturbed; and we were not able to detain Lazarus, but he gave himself a shake, and with all the signs of malice he immediately went away from us; and the very earth in which the dead body of Lazarus was lodged, presently turned him out alive. And I know now that he is Almighty God who could perform such things, who is mighty in his dominion, and mighty in his human nature, who is the Saviour of mankind. Bring not, therefore, his person hither, for be will set at liberty all those whom I hold in prison under unbelief, and bound with the fetters of their sins, and will conduct them to everlasting life.

"And while Satan and the prince of hell were discoursing thus to each other, on a sudden there was a voice as of thunder and the rushing of winds, saying, Lift up your gates, O ye princes; and be ye lift up, O everlasting gates, and the King of Glory shall come in.

"When the prince of hell heard this, he said to Satan, Depart from me and begone out of my habitations; if thou art a powerful warrior, fight with the King of Glory. But what hast thou to do with him? And then he cast him forth from his habitations. And the prince said to his impious officers, Shut the brass gates of cruelty and make them fast with iron bars, and fight courageously, lest we be taken captives.

"But when all the company of the saints heard this they spake with a loud voice of anger to the prince of hell, Open thy gates that-the King of Glory may come in.

"And the divine prophet David cried out, saying, Did not I when on earth truly prophesy and say, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness and for his wonderful works to the children of men. For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the

[p. 176]

Click to view
CHRIST'S DESCENT INTO HELL (By Sasha Schneider.)

[p. 177]

bars of iron in sunder. He hath taken them because of their iniquity, and because of their unrighteousness they are afflicted.

"After this another prophet, namely, holy Isaiah, spake in like manner to all the saints, Did not I rightly prophesy to you when I was alive on earth? The dead men shall live, and they shall rise again who are in their graves, and they shall rejoice who are in earth; for the dew which is from the Lord shall bring deliverance to them. And I said in another place, O death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting?

"When all the saints heard these things spoken by Isaiah, they said to the prince of hell, Open now thy gates, and take away thine iron bars, for thou wilt now be bound, and have no power.

"Then there was a great voice, as of the sound of thunder, saying, Lift up your gates, O princes; and be ye lifted up, ye gates of hell, and the King of Glory will enter in.

"The prince of hell perceiving the same voice repeated, cried out as though he had been ignorant, Who is that King of Glory? David replied to the prince of hell, and said, I understand the words of that voice, because I spake them by his spirit. And now, as I have above said, I say unto thee, the Lord strong and powerful, the Lord mighty in battle: he is the King of Glory, and he is the Lord in heaven and in earth. He hath looked down to hear the groans of the prisoners, and to set loose those that are appointed to death. And now, thou filthy and stinking prince of hell, open thy gates, that the King of Glory may enter in; for he is the Lord of heaven and earth.

"While David was saying this, the mighty Lord appeared in the Form of a man, and enlightened those places which had ever before been in darkness, and broke asunder the fetters which before could not be broken; and with his invincible power visited those who sate in the deep darkness by iniquity, and the shadow of death by sin. Impious Death and her cruel officers hearing these things, were seized with fear in their several kingdoms, when they saw the clearness of the light, and Christ himself on a sudden appearing in their habitations; they cried out therefore, and said,

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] We are bound by thee; thou seemest to intend our confusion before the Lord. Who art thou, who hast no sign of corruption. but that bright appearance which is a full proof of thy greatness, of which yet thou seemest to take no notice? Who art thou, so powerful and so weak, so great and so little, a mean and yet a soldier of the first rank, who can command in the form of a servant as a common soldier? The King of Glory, dead and alive, though once slain upon the cross? Who layest dead in the grave, and art come down alive to us, and in thy death all the creatures trembled, and all the stars were moved, and now hast thou thy liberty among the dead, and givest disturbance to our legions? Who art thou, who dost release the captives that were held in chains by original sin, and bringest them into their former liberty? Who art thou, who dost spread so glorious and divine a light over those who were made blind by the darkness of sin?

"In like manner all the legions of devils were seized with the like horror, and with the most submissive fear cried out, and said, Whence comes it, O thou Jesus Christ, that thou art a man so powerful and glorious in majesty, so bright as to have no spot, and so pure as to have no crime? Then the King of Glory trampling upon death, seized the prince of hell, deprived him of all his power, and took our earthly father Adam with him to his glory.

"Then the prince of hell took Satan, and with great indignation said to him, O thou prince of destruction, author of Beelzebub's defeat and banishment, the scorn of God's angels and loathed by all righteous persons! What inclined thee to act thus? Why didst thou venture without either reason or justice, to crucify him, and hast brought down to our regions a person innocent and righteous, and thereby hast lost all the sinners, impious and unrighteous persons in the whole world?

"While the prince of hell was thus speaking to Satan, the King of Glory said to Beelzebub, the prince of hell, Satan the prince shall be subject to thy dominion forever, in the room of Adam and his righteous sons, who are mine. Then Jesus stretched forth his hand, and said, Come to me, all ye saints, who are created

[p. 179]

in my image, who were condemned by the tree of the forbidden fruit, and by the devil and death; live now by the wood of my cross; the devil, the prince of this world, is overcome, and death is conquered."

Hell.

The idea of Hell among the early Christians has found a detailed description in the revelation of St. Peter, which was counted as canonical by Clement of Alexandria who annotated it together with the Catholic Epistles, while the Muratorian Fragment mentions it as,!. book of the New Testament. According to the testimony of Sozomenos it was read in some of the churches of Palestine annually, as a preparation for the celebration of Easter in about 440 A. D. [*1] It was used in Rome and Alexandria at the end of the second century, together with the revelation of St. John, where, according to Eusebius, both writings belonged to the contested canonical books, that is to say, they were received as canonical but not without protest in some quarters.

According to the revelation of St. Peter, Heaven and Hell are places. Heaven is described by St. Peter as follows: [*2]

"And I spake to him (the Lord): 'And where are the just, and what is their aeon in which, they that possess this glory live?' And the Lord showed me a large space outside of this world overflowed with light, and the air there was illuminated all through by the rays of the sun. And the earth itself was blooming with unfading flowers, and filled with sweet odors, and grandly blossoming and imperishable and blessed fruit-bearing plants. Such was the fulness

[p. 180]

of flowers that the sweet odor thence penetrated even unto us. The inhabitants of that space were clothed with the robes of radiant angels; and similar were their robes to their surroundings. Angels were hovering about them. The glory of all who lived there was the same, and with one voice they sang in gladness responsive hymns of praise to God the Lord in that place. Said the Lord to us That is the place of your high priests, of the just people.'"

Click to view
CHRISTIAN REPRESENTATION OF THE LAST JUDGMENT.
 Sculptures on the main entrance of the Cathedral at Bourges, France. Fourteenth century. (Reproduced from Klassischer Skulpturenschatz.)

Hell is described in the following words:

"And I saw another place right opposite, rough and being the place of punishment. And those who are punished there and the punishing angels had their robes dark; as the color of the air of the place is also dark: and some people were hung up by their tongues: they were those who had blasphemed the path of righteousness; and underneath them a bright baneful fire was lit. And

[p. 181]

there was a pit large and filled with burning dirt (borboros), in which several people stuck who had perverted justice, and the avenging angels assaulted them. There were others there: women hung up by their braids above the seething dirt. They were those who had adorned themselves for adultery; but those who had soiled themselves with the miasma of the adultery of those women were hung up by their feet and had their heads in the dirt, and I said, 'I did not believe that I should enter into this place.' I saw murderers

Click to view
CHRISTIAN REPRESENTATION OF HELL.
 Sculptures on the main entrance of the Cathedral at Bourges, France. Fourteenth century. (Reproduced from Klassischer Skulpturenschatz.)

and their accomplices thrown into a narrow place filled with evil vermin and tormented by those animals and squirming under this punishment. Worms like dark clouds assaulted them. The souls of the murdered people, however, stood by and gazed at the punishment of their murderers and said: 'O God, just is thy judgment.' But near unto that place I saw a place of torment in which the blood and the stench of the punished flowed down so as to

[p. 182]

make a pool, and there were women to whom the blood reached up to the neck; opposite them many infants sat who had been brought into the world before their season, and they were weeping. And fiery rays proceeded from the children and bit the eyes of the women. For they were the cursed ones who had conceived and made abortions. And there were men and women standing in flames with half their bodies, and they were thrown into a dark place and were scourged by evil spirits. And they were devoured in their bowels by worms which do not die. They were those who had persecuted the righteous and surrendered them; and near by to those again were women and men who bit their lips and were punished and received hot irons on their eyes. They were those who had blasphemed and betrayed the path of righteousness. Opposite them were other men and women who bit their tongues and had burning fire in their mouths. They were those who bore false witness. In another place were flints sharper than swords and lances, rendered burning hot, and women and men in dirty rags were wallowing on them in torment. They were the rich and those who relying on their riches had not taken compassion on orphan,; and widows, who had a contempt for the commands of God. In another large field with matter and blood and seething dirt were those who take interest and interest on interest. Other men and women were thrown from a high precipice, and having reached the bottom were urged up again by their assaulters to climb the precipice, and were then again thrown down, and they were given no respite from this torment. They were those who had polluted their own bodies. [*1]... And by the side of this precipice was a place which was filled entirely with fire, and there stood the people who had made with their own hands carved images and worshipped them instead of God, and near them were men and women with switches who beat them and did not cease from this castigation. And again other women and men stood near by, burning, and wriggling, and roasting. They were those who had left the path of God."

[p. 183]

Another description of Hell according to the views of the Christian Gnostics of the third century is contained in the Pistis Sophia, where all the places of torment are described at considerable length in all details. "It is remarkable," says Professor Harnack, [*1] "that the Pistis Sophia anticipates on this subject as well as in many other respects the development of the Catholic Church . It insists on the power of salvation of the sacraments, of the mysteries, of penance, and ascetic practices. At the same time it recognises Apostolic authority, and attempts in every respect to base its doctrines on the canon of the Old and New Testament." Its date has been fixed with great accuracy on the second part of the third century. [*2] This strange book contains questions of Mary and of some of the apostles, which Christ after his resurrection answers on the Mount of Olives, and it is probably identical with a gnostic book  by Epiphanius under the title The Minor Questions of Mary. Harnack calls attention to the fact that the book is an evidence of the astonishing agreement of this later Gnosticism with later Catholic Christianity. The author of the Pistis Sophia is apparently imbued with the spirit of Syrian Gnosticism or Ophitism; but he wrote in Egypt where the Syrian Gnostics exercised quite a powerful influence. The revelation of mysteries culminates in the doctrine of Christ's identity with his disciples, which is uttered repeatedly and with emphasis. [*3] The peculiarly

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Gnostic features of the book consist in the idea of reincarnation. So, for instance, St. John is directly said to be a reincarnation of Elias, and the Apostles are, as much as Christ, regarded as being possessed of a mystical pre-existence.

The Pistis Sophia reveals all the mysteries of the world, among them the mysteries of Hell, or, as the Egyptians called it, Amenti, which is described as follows:

"And Mary continued further and said unto Jesus: 'Again, Master, of what type is the outer darkness? How many regions of punishment are there therein?'

"And Jesus answered and said unto Mary: 'The outer darkness is a huge dragon, with its tall in its mouth; it is outside the world and surroundeth it completely. [*1] There are many regions of punishment therein, for there are in it twelve [main] dungeons of horrible torment.

"'In each dungeon there is a ruler; and the faces of the rulers are all different from one another.

"'The first ruler, in the first dungeon, is crocodile-faced, and it hath its tail in its mouth. From the jaws of this dragon there come forth cold of every kind and freezing; and all diseases of every kind: it is called by its authentic name, in its region, Enchthonin.

"'And the ruler in the second dungeon; its authentic face is a cat's it is called, in its region, Charachar.

"'And the ruler in the third dungeon; its authentic face is a dog's: it is called, in its region, Acharoch.

"'And the ruler in the fourth dungeon.; its authentic face is a serpent's: it is called, in its region, Achrochar.

[p. 185]

Click to view
THE TYPICAL CONCEPTION OF HELL.
 German Woodcut of the age of the Reformation.

[p. 186]

"'And the ruler in the fifth dungeon; its authentic face is a black bull's: it is called, in its region, Marchour.

"'And the ruler in the sixth dungeon; its authentic face is a boar's: it is called, in its region, Lamchamor.

"'And the ruler in the seventh dungeon; its authentic face is a bear's: it is called, in its region, by its authentic name, Louchar.

"'And the ruler in the eighth dungeon; its authentic face is a vulture's: it is called, in its region, Laraoch.

"'And the ruler in the ninth dungeon; its authentic face is a basilisk's: it is called, in its region, Archeoch.

"'And in the tenth dungeon are many rulers; each of them, in its authentic face, hath seven dragons' heads: and that which is above them all, in their region, is called Xarmaroch.

"'And in the eleventh dungeon, in this region also, are many rulers; each of them, with authentic faces, hath seven cats' heads: and the great one that is over them, is called, in their region, Rhochar.

"'And in the twelfth dungeon there are also many rulers exceedingly numerous, each of them in its authentic face, hath seven dogs' heads: and the great one that is over them, is called in their region, Chremaor.

"'These rulers, then, of these twelve dungeons, which are in the inside of the dragon of outer darkness, each hath a name for every hour, and each of them changeth its face every hour.

"'And each of these dungeons hath a door which openeth to the height, so that the dragon of outer darkness containeth twelve dungeons of darkness, each of which hath a door that openeth to the height; and an angel of the height watched at each of the doors of the dungeons.

"'These Ieou, [*1] the first man, the overseer of the light, the ancient of the first statute, hath set to watch over the dragon, lest

[p. 187]

the dragon and its rulers should turn the dungeons that are in it, upside down.'

"And when the saviour had thus spoken, Mary Magdalene answered and said: 'Master, are the souls, then, that are brought into that region, led into it by these twelve doors, by each according to the judgment they have merited?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'No soul is brought into the dragon by these doors; but the souls of blasphemers, and of them that remain in the doctrines of error, and of those who teach such doctrines, and also of them that have intercourse with males, of the polluted and impious, atheists, murderers, adulterers, sorcerers, all souls, then, of this kind, if they have not repented while still in life, and have remained persistently in their sin, and all the other souls which have remained without [the light-world], that is to say, who have exhausted the number of the cycles apportioned to them in the sphere without repenting,--they take hold of these souls, in their last cycle, them and all the souls which I have just enumerated to you, and carry them through the opening in the tail of the dragon into the dungeons of the outer darkness. And when they have finished bringing those souls into the outer darkness by the opening in its tail, it putteth back its tail again into its mouth and shutteth them in. This is the way in which souls are brought into the outer darkness. [*1]

"And the dragon of the outer darkness hath twelve authentic names which are written on its doors, a name for the door of every dungeon; and these-twelve names are all different from one another, but all twelve are contained one in the other, so that he who uttereth one name will utter all. And these will I tell you, when I explain the emanation of the pleroma. This, then, is the way in which is the outer darkness, which is also the dragon.'

"When the saviour had spoken these things, Mary answered

[p. 188]

and said unto the saviour: I Master, are the torments of this dragon terrible beyond the punishment of all the judgments?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'Not only are they more painful than all the chastisements of the judgments, but every soul that shall be carried into that region shall be imprisoned in relentless ice, [*1] in the hail and scorching fire which are therein. And in the dissolution of the world, that is to say, in the ascension of the pleroma, these souls shall perish in the relentless ice and scorching fire, and shall be non-existent for the eternity.'

"Mary answered and said: 'Woe for the souls of sinners! Now, therefore, O Master, whether is the fire in the world of human kind or the fire in Amenti the fiercer?'

"The saviour answered and said unto Mary: 'Amen, I say unto thee, the fire in Amenti scorcheth far more than the fire among men, nine times more.

Click to view
WEIGHING THE EVIL AND THE GOOD OF THE SOUL
 Reminding one of similar notions prevalent in ancient Egypt. (About 1150. From the cathedral in Auntun, France.)

"'And the fire which is in the punishments of the great chaos is nine times fiercer than the fire in Amenti.

"'And the fire which is in the judgments of the rulers who are in the way of the midst, is nine times fiercer than the fire of the punishments which are in the great chaos.

"'And the fire which is in the dragon of outer darkness, and all the torments which it containeth, are fiercer far than the fire

[p. 189]

which is in the chastisements and judgments of the rulers who are in the way of the midst,--this fire is fiercer than they seventy times.'

"And when the saviour had said this unto Mary, she smote her breast, she cried out aloud, with tears, and all the disciples with her, saying: 'Woe for the sinners, for their torments are exceedingly great'"

Click to view
THE DOOM OF THE DAMNED. (After Luca Signorelli.)

The Gnostic Christian view of Doomsday and Hell embodies many ancient traditions of Egyptian, Indian, and Persian mythology and foreshadows at the same time the later Roman Catholic view as represented in mediaeval art, finding its poetical consummation in Dante's Divina Comedia.

Satan was regarded by the early Christians as the

[p. 190]

Click to view
THE TRINITY IDEAL OF MEDIAeVAL CHRISTIANITY. (Old German.)
 Representing God as Emperor, Christ as King, and the Holy Ghost as the principle of light, of order and good government. (Reproduced from Muther.)

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] Prince of this World, and this belief dominated in the Church as long as pagan authorities remained in power. As soon as they were replaced by Christian rulers, and when Christianity became established as the state religion of the Roman Empire, Satan was gradually dethroned and God reinstated in the government of the world.

The empire of the Caesars broke to pieces under the repeated assaults of Vandals, Huns, and Goths, but Charlemagne founded a new empire on its ruins, which, being based upon the rising power of the Teutonic tribes, the Franconians and the Germans, was called the "Holy Roman Empire of German nationality," lasting about a thousand years, from 800 until 1806. This period (by Stahl actually regarded as the realisation of the millennium of Revelation) is the age in which Christianity was officially recognised and the attempt was made to apply its ethics by all means to the private and public affairs of the people. It is natural that the Trinity was now conceived after the pattern of the Imperial government of the age; God was represented as the emperor, Christ as the king, vicegerent and heir, while the Holy Ghost hovered above them as the spirit of order and authority.

The most essential and at any rate practically most important dogma of the early Christian Church, the doctrine of the imminent approach of the day of judgment, faded away when the Church rose to power, but it reappeared from time to time, sometimes not unlike an acute attack of a frightful alienation of men's minds rendering them forgetful of the duties of the living present for the sake of trying to escape the imaginary evils of the

[p. 192]

doom to come. The scenes of the last judgment, however, have always remained a favorite subject of Christian artists and poets, the keynote of which vibrates through the old Church hymn:

"Dies irae, dies illa,
 Solvet saeclum in favila,
 Tests David cum Sibylla."

Footnotes

^163:1 ta tele tun aiunun. See also Hebr. ix. 26, where the appearance of Christ is said to have taken place at the consummation of the time (epi synteleiai tun aiunun).

^166:1 Edited by Dr. Ed. Bratke, Bonn, 1891.

^168:1 Rom. 14 and I Cor. 8.

^174:1 See Matth., xxvi. 38.

^179:1 See Harnack, Bruchstucke des Evangeliums und der Apokalypse des Petrus, p. 5-6.

^179:2 Translated into English from Harnack's edition.

^182:1 We prefer to omit further details.

^183:1 See Harnack, Texte und Untersuchungen, etc., p. 98.

^183:2 Ibid., pp. 94 et seq.

^183:3 "Qui acceperit mysterion Ineffabilis, ille est ego."--"Ego sum isti, isti sum ego."--"Ego sum mysterium illud."--"Vis quae est in vobis, e me est." Harnack says (p. 30): "These brief significant sentences are not invented by the author who [p. 184] makes his Christ express himself in quite different sermons: they point, in my opinion, to an older gnostic book, or a gnostic gospel."

^184:1 This reminds us of the myths of the Midgard-serpent and anticipates the innumerable mediaeval representations of Hell as a big-mouthed dragon.

^186:1 The idea of "Ieou, the first man, the overseer of the light, the ancient of the first statue," reminds us of the archetypal man of Simon Magus and other Gnostics and also of the Adam of the Cabala.

^187:1 In mediaeval Hell-representations, which rarely are lacking in coarse humor, the souls are thrown with pitchforks into the open jaws of the dragon. The coarseness of the description of Hell in the Pistis Sophia is apparently serious.

^188:1 An anticipation of Dante's ice hell.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

THE IDEA OF SALVATION IN GREECE AND ITALY.

alla rhusai emas apo tou poerou.
                             Matt. vi. 14.

THE first century of our era is a time in which the fear of evil leads to the organisation of religious institutions having in view the atonement of sin and the redemption of the soul from the terrors of hell. The ideas evil, sin, hell, salvation, and immortal life were familiar to the Greek mind even before the days of Plato, but were still mixed up with the traditional mythology. When philosophers began to wage war against the gross idolatry of Greek polytheism, a fermentation set in which prepared the Greek nation for the reception of Christianity. We say "prepared," but we might just as well say that it resulted in the formation of the Christian Church as an institution to deliver mankind from evil. The fear of punishment in the life to come led in the days of savagery to human sacrifices as a vicarious atonement. This barbarous practice was abandoned in the progress of civilisation by a substitution of animal victims. But the idea lingered in the minds of the people and was retained in

[p. 194]

Click to view
HADES.
 (Greatly reduced from Mon. Inst., VIII., 9.)

          Picture of a vase found at Altamura, representing a period in which the   fear of Hell had become greatly subdued and the belief in its terrors is   offset by the legend of a return from the realm of the dead and the conquest   of death.

[The upper center shows Pluto and Persephone, the rulers of the Nether   World, in their palace, the former with scepter and Kantharos, or sacred cup,   the latter holding the cross-torch and a dish filled with fruits and flowers.   Kantharos means both scarabaeus-beetle, the Egyptian symbol of   immortality, and the drinking vessel used in the mysteries which probably   derives its name from some unknown connexion with the scarabaeus.   Underneath we see Heracles taming the three-headed Cerberus in the moment of   crossing the Acheron, which originates (see Homer, Odyssey, X, 513) in the   conflux of Cocytos and Pyriphlegethon. Hermes points out the road leading   back to the upper world. The Danaides with the water vessels on the right   bear their punishment with placidity, while Sisyphos on the left seems to be   more severely taxed. Dire Necessity (Anagke) holds the whip in   her right hand, but her left extends to the sufferer a laurel branch. (The   branch is missing in many similar pictures. It is apparently not an apple   branch, which was a symbol of Nemesis, as some archaeologists suggest.)

The upper scene on the right shows Hippodameia and Pelops, the latter in a   Phrygian cap conversing with Myrtilos, who promises to remove a nail from the   wheel of Oinomaos's chariot in the race for Hippodameia, his future bride, a   trick by which he remains victorious. Underneath are the judges of the dead,   Triptolemos, Aiacus, and Rhadamanthys, the latter in the attitude of pleading   a case with great zeal.

The upper scene on the left represents Megara and her sons, the   Heraclides, innocent victims of a cruel fate in life, who are here comforted.   Below this group we see Orpheus with lyre in hand, approaching the palace to   ask Persephone for a release of Eurydice. The Erinyes, or avenging demons   (called POINAI) in the picture have lost their terrible appearance and   let the singer pass by unmolested.]

     
   [p. 195]

Christianity, where, however, it received a new significance when restated under the influence of Paul's message of the crucified, and therefore glorified, Saviour. Christ's death was now declared to be a sacrifice that would be sufficient for all the ages to come. [*1]

The Greeks, equally with other nations, feared punishment after death as the greatest evil, and their belief in hell can be traced back to the dawn of the history of Greece.

Click to view
HUMAN SACRIFICES AT THE FUNERAL PYRE OF PATROCLUS.
 Wall picture of a tomb in Vulci.
 (From Michaelis, Handbuch der Kunstgeschichte, I., p. 235.)

The most ancient description of the Greek conception of the land of the dead, which is found in Homer, resembles the Jewish Sheol in so far as Hades is the abode of the shades of the dead, both good and evil. It is a gloomy place; there is a grove of willow and poplar trees, and a large lawn covered with asphodels. The

[p. 196]

Click to view
CHRIST'S DEATH ON THE CROSS AND ITS PROTOTYPES.
 Biblia Pauperum. (Woodcut of the fifteenth century.)
 
 The immolation of Isaac shows Christ's death in its connexion with human sacrifice, and the story of the serpent lifted up in the wilderness exemplifies the healing power of faith.

[p. 197]

shade of Achilles declares that he would rather be upon earth a day laborer in a poor man's employ than ruler in

          
Click to view
TUCHULCHA, THE   DEMON OF INFERNAL TORTURES ACCORDING TO THE BELIEF OF THE ETRUSCANS.
   (Part of a wall picture of a tomb in Corneto.)

       
Click to view
CHARUN, THE   ETRUSCAN DEMON OF DEATH, WAITING FOR A VICTIM.
   (From an Etruscan vase, Hellenised style.)

     
   the land of the dead. While the oldest reports do not as yet contain any reference to a reward of the good (for even Achilles shares the sad fate of all mortals), we learn

Click to view
OKNOS AND THE DAUGHTERS OF DANAOS IN HADES.
 Oknos (i. e., the Tardy or Inattentive One) weaving a rope of hay which is devoured by the donkey, and the daughters of Danaos endeavoring to fill the urn without a bottom.
 (Frieze of a Roman well decoration. Vatican.)

of the tortures to which the wicked are subjected,--Tantalus, the Danaides, Sisyphos, Ixion, Oknos.

[p. 198]

Homer represents the dead as unsubstantial forms, like dream images. However, an exception is made in the case of Hercules, whose shadow is in Hades, while Hercules himself, who is an Immortal, lives among the gods in Olympus (Odyssey, XI., 601-626). Another hero whose fate after death is more cheerful than that of common people is Menelaos. Being a son-in-law of Zeus,

Click to view
IXION ON THE FIERY WHEEL.

          Underneath an avenging Erinys, Hephaestos, the Smith of the gods, looks   at the wheel, his handiwork, with apparent satisfaction. Hermes is ready to   return to the Upper World. Archaeologists have not yet succeeded in   interpreting the significance of the angel-like figures on both sides of   Ixion.

Ixion, a Thessalian king, committed a murder, but was lustrated by Zeus   himself who admitted him as a guest to his own table. But the criminal lusted   after Hera, the queen of the gods. In her place he embraced a cloud which   bore to him the unruly race of Centaurs. Thereupon Zeus had Ixion fastened to   a fiery wheel in Hades.

The suffering Ixion is commonly regarded as the mythological precipitate of   a former god of the sky, a rival of Zeus; but the features of his divinity   have paled in the human conception of a later age which was no longer   conscious of the mythological significance of his deeds.

     
   [p. 199]

the husband of Helen, who is apparently conceived as the goddess of the moon, he lives in Elysion where Rhadamanthys rules. There the people live in ease. There is

Click to view
GIGANTOMACHY; THE GIANTS STORMING HEAVEN.
 Bas relief of an ancient sarcophagus. Now in the Museum of the Vatican.

no snow, no winter, no storm, but only gentle and refreshing zephyrs blow from the ocean.

The Egyptian origin of the belief in Elysion is

Click to view
ZEUS CONQUERING TYPHOEUS.
 Picture on an antique water pitcher. (Baumeister, Denkm. d. class. Alt., p. 2135.)

guaranteed by the name Rhadamanthys which is the god Ra Amenthes, the Lord of the Hidden World, Amenti.

When the spread of gnostic views prepared the Greek nation for Christianity, the ancient pagan myths

[p. 200]

were not abandoned but transformed. Hesiod tells us in the Theogony of the terrible struggle between Zeus and the Titans; and St. Peter, [*1] when speaking in his second letter of the revolution of the angels that sinned, says that "God hurled them down to Tartarus." The expression, however, is obliterated in the version of King James, for the word tarutarsas (having hurled them to Tartarus) is translated "sent them down to hell."

Click to view
GIGANTOMACHY; THE GIANTS STORMING HEAVEN. An ancient Greek frieze.

We read in the Theogony of the battle between Zeus and the monster Typhon (also called Typhoeus):

"When Zeus had driven the Titans out from heaven, huge Earth bare her youngest born son, Typhoeus, . . . . whose hands, indeed, are fit for deeds on account of their strength. . . . . On his shoulders there were one hundred heads of a serpent, of a fierce dragon, playing with dusky tongues. From the eyes in his wondrous heads fire struggled beneath the brows. From his terrible mouths voices were sending forth every kind of sound ineffable, the bellowing of a bull, the roar of a lion, the barking of whelps, and the hiss of a serpent. The huge monster would have reigned over mortals unless the sire of gods and men quickly observed him.

[p. 201]

Click to view
WAR IN HEAVEN. After the Revelation of St. John. (By Albrecht Durer.)

[p. 202]

[paragraph continues] Harshly he thundered, and heavily and terribly the earth re-echoed around. Beneath Jove's immortal feet vast Olympus trembled, and the earth groaned. Heaven and sea were boiling. Pluto trembled, monarch of the dead. The Titans in Tartarus trembled also, but Jove smote Typhoeus and scorched all the wondrous heads of the terrible monster. When at last the monster was quelled, smitten with blows, it fell down lame, and Zeus hurled him into wide Tartarus."

Click to view
CHIMAeRA OF AREZZO. The monster slain by Bellerophon. (Now at Florence.)

This description reminds us not only of the Second Epistle of St. Peter, but also of Revelation, xii. 7-9:

"And there was war in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels; and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world; he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him."

[p. 203]

Thus the old Greek demons merely changed names and reappeared in new personalities. In this shape they were embodied into the canonical books of the New Testament and became the integral part of the new religion, which at that time began to conquer the world.

Click to view
THESEUS AND PIRITHOUS.
 Venturing down to Hades for the purpose of bringing up Persephone, the daughter of Ceres, they are made prisoners and bound by an Erinys. Theseus is at last rescued by Hercules. Pluto holds in his hand a scepter on the top of which sits the dismal owl as an avis funebris, Persephone carries two cross-torches.
 (From an Etruscan Vase. Baumeister, Denkmaler des class. Altertums.)

The Greek idea of salvation is mirrored in the legends of Hercules, Bellerophon, Theseus, , and other myths, which had become dear to the Greek mind through the tales of poets and the works of artists.

The powers of evil which Hercules overcomes are represented as a lion, a dragon, a wild boar, harpy-like

[p. 204]

birds, and a bull. In addition he captures the swift hind of Arcadia, he cleanses the stables of Augeas, tames the man-eating mares of Diomedes, conquers Hypolyte, the queen of the Amazons, brings the oxen of Geryon from the far West, and carries Cerberus to the upper world.

Click to view
PERSEUS WITH THE HEAD OF THE DECAPITATED MEDUSA.
 The soul of the latter is represented as a small figure leaving the body and still trying to retain the head. (Terra cotta from Melos. Baumeister, Denkmaler des class. Altertums.)

The poet Peisander (who lived about 650 B. C.) wrote an apotheosis of Hercules, called the Heracley, which contributed much toward idealising the hero.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] Later Greek philosophers, such men as Xenophon and the sophist Prodicus, [*1] regarded him as the realisation of divine perfection, and now it became customary to look

Click to view
PERSEUS AND ANDROMEDA.
 Picture of an ancient Amphora in Naples. (From Baumeister, D. d. cl. A., p. 1291.)

 [*2]

[p. 206]

upon the old legends as perversions of a deeper religious truth. Epictetus, who speaks of Hercules as the saviour,

Click to view
SICILIAN COIN WITH MEDUSA-HEAD.
 The use of the Triquetra (three legs) is frequent in the three-cornered island. The ears of wheat indicate the proverbial fertility of Sicily, the granary of Rome.

Click to view
THE GORGONEION ON THE SHIELD OF PHIDIAS'S ATHENE.
 The head of the Medusa is surrounded by scenes of a battle with Amazons. One of the fighters (the man with the bald head) is supposed to be a portrait of the artist Phidias.

and as the son of Zeus, says (iii. 24) Do you believe all the fables of Homer? "Hercules is called repeller of evil (alexikakos), leader

[p. 207]

Click to view
GORGONEION, ANCIENT FACE OF THE GORGON MEDUSA.

Click to view
MEDUSA RONDANINI.
 Beautiful yet ghastly. (Glyptothek, Munich.)

[p. 208]

in the fray (promaxos), the brightly victorious (kallinikos), [*1] the celestial (olumpios), destroyer of flies, vermin, and grasshoppers (myiargos, ipoktonos, kornopiun). He, the solar hero, is identified with Apollo, the sun-god, in the names prophet (mantis), and leader of the Muses (moysagetes).

Click to view
BELLEROPHON SLAYING THE CHIMERA.
 (A terra cotta statue of Melos, now at the British Museum.)

The legends of Perseus are in many respects similar to the tales of Hercules. Perseus, too, the Greek prototype of the Christian St. George, is a divine saviour. Assisted by Athene, he liberates Andromeda, the bride of Death, held captive by the horrible Medusa, a symbol of deadly fright. [*2]

[p. 209]

As a symbol which destroys evil influences, the Medusa-head frequently appears on shields and coins.

Bellerophon is another solar hero. He rides on Pegasus, a mythological representation of the thundercloud, [*1] and slays the Chimera, a monster half lion, half goat, representing barbarism and savagery, or some similar evils.

Click to view
THE LION-KILLING HERO OF KHORSABAD

 [*2]

Some of the tales of divine saviours may be ultimately founded upon local Greek traditions, but many features of these religious myths indicate that they were introduced early from the Orient whose religions began to influence the occidental nations at the very dawn of their civilisation. Thus Hercules is the Tyrian Baal Melkarth, probably identical with the Babylonian Bel,--the conqueror of Tiamat; and his twelve labors are the deeds of the sun-god in the twelve months of the year. Phoenix-like, he dies by

[p. 210]

self-combustion and rises in a transfigured shape from the flames of the pyre. The Jews also appropriated the figure of this solar hero in the shape of  whose strength is conditioned by his hair, as the power of the sun lies in his rays.

In spite of the strong admixture of foreign mythology, Hercules has become the national hero of Greece, and the Greek idea of salvation has found in him the most typical expression, which has been most beautifully worked out by Aeschylus in a grand tragedy which represents

Click to view
PROMETHEUS TIED BY ZEUS TO THE STAKE (OR CROSS) AND EXPOSED TO THE EAGLE; RESCUED By HERCULES.
 (A vase found at Chiusi, now in Berlin. Baumeister, D. d. cl. A., p. 1410.)

[paragraph continues] Prometheus (the fore-thinker) as struggling and suffering mankind, tied to the pole of misery by Zeus as a punishment for the sin of having brought the bliss of light and fire down to the earth. But at last the divine saviour, Hercules, arrives, and, killing the eagle that lacerates the liver of the bold hero, sets him free.

Prometheus and Hercules are combined into one person in the Christian Saviour, Jesus Christ. The similarity of the story of Golgotha with the myth of Prometheus is not purely accidental. For observe that in some of the older pictures, as for instance in the vase of

[p. 211]

Chiusi (see illustration on <page 210>), Prometheus is not chained to a rock but tied to a pole, i. e., to a stayros or cross, and Greek authors frequently use expressions such as the verb anaskolopisesthai (Aeschylus) and anastay rousthai, (Lucian) which mean "to be crucified." [*1]

Seneca speaks of Hercules as the ideal of the good man who lives exclusively for the welfare of mankind. Contrasting him to Alexander the Great, the conqueror of Asia, he says (De Benef., I., 14):

"Hercules never gained victories for himself. He wandered through the circle of the earth, not as a conqueror, but as a protector. What, indeed, should the enemy of the wicked, the defensor of the good, the peace-bringer, conquer for himself either on land or sea!"

Epictetus praises Hercules frequently and declares that the evils which he combated served to elicit his virtues, and were intended to try him (I., 6). Zeus, who is identified with God, is called his father and Hercules is said to be his son (III., 26). Hercules, when obliged to leave his children, knew them to be in the care of God. Epictetus says (III., 24):

"He knew that no man is an orphan, but that there is a father always and constantly for all of them. He had not only heard the words that Zeus was the father of men, for he regarded him as his father and called him such; and looking up to him he did what Zeus did. Therefore he could live happily everywhere."

In Christianity the struggles of the saviour receive a dualistic interpretation and are spiritualised into a victory

[p. 212]

THE MYTH OF PROMETHEUS ON A SARCOPHAGUS

          
Click to view
I. Deukalion and   Pyrrha, naked and unacquainted with the use of fire.

       
Click to view
III. Prometheus tied   to a rock and delivered by Hercules. In the background the mountain-god   Caucasus.

     
      
Click to view
II. Prometheus   forming man out of clay, and shaping his fate with the assistance of the   gods.

     
   [p. 213]

over the temptations of the flesh and other worldly passions.

*      *      *

The conception of evil as hell received a philosophical foundation in the dualism of Plato who did not shrink from depicting its minutest details; and his views of the future state of the soul, its rewards in heaven and hell, are in close agreement with Christian doctrines, even in

Click to view
THE TEMPTATIONS OF CHRIST.
 (Seventh century. Mosaic in the cathedral of Monreale, Sicily.)

most of their details, with the exception of the doctrine of the transmigration of the soul.

Plato concludes his book on the Republic (X., 614-621) with the tale of Er, the son of Armenius, a man who had died and come back to life for the purpose of giving information to mankind concerning the other world which might serve to warn people as to what they had to expect in the life to come. Plato says that this Er, a Pamphylian by birth, was slain in battle, but when the dead were taken up his body was found unaffected by decay, and, on the twelfth day, as he was lying on the funeral pile, he returned to life. Plato continues:

[p. 214]

"He [Er, the son of Armenius] said that when his soul left the body he went on a journey with a great company, and that they came to a mysterious place at which there were two openings in the earth; they were near together, and over against them were two other openings in the heaven above. In the intermediate space there were judges seated, who commanded the just, after they had given judgment on them and had bound their sentences in front of them, to ascend by the heavenly way on the right hand; and in like manner the unjust were bidden by them to descend by the lower way on the left hand; these also bore the symbols of their deeds, but fastened on their backs.

"Er said that for every wrong which they had done to any one they suffered tenfold."

Hell is described as follows:

"'And this,' said Er, 'was one of the dreadful sights which we ourselves witnessed. We were at the mouth of the cavern, and, having completed all our experiences, were about to reascend, when of a sudden Ardiaeus [the tyrant] appeared and several others, most of whom were tyrants; and there were also, besides the tyrants, private individuals who had been great criminals: they were, as they fancied, about to return into the upper world, but the mouth, instead of admitting them, gave a roar, whenever any of these incurable sinners or some one who had not been sufficiently punished, tried to ascend; and then wild men of fiery aspect, who were standing by and heard the sound, seized and carried them off; and Ardiaeus and others they bound head and foot and hand, and threw them down and flayed them with scourges, and dragged them along the road at the side, carding them on thorns like wool, and declaring to passers-by what were their crimes, and that they were being taken away to be cast into hell.' And of all the many terrors which they had endured, he said that there was none like the terror which each of them felt at that moment, lest they should hear the voice; and when there was silence, one by one they ascended with exceeding joy. These, said Er, were the penalties and retributions, yet there were blessings as great."

[p. 215]

The idea of the rising and sinking of the wicked in hell is similar to the Buddhist view of Buddhagosha who in his parables (translated by Capt. T. Rogers, R. E., pp. 128-129) tells us how the condemned go up and down like grains of rice in a boiling cauldron. The conceptions of the mouth of hell, of the fierce tormentors and the various punishments are probably older than Plato; they reappear in the gnostic doctrines and were retained by Christianity down to the age of the Reformation.

The belief in hell and the anxiety to escape its terrors produced conditions which are drastically described by Plato, who says, speaking of the desire of the wicked to ransom their souls from a deserved punishment:

"Mendicant prophets go to rich men's doors and persuade them that they have a power committed to them by the gods of making an atonement for a man's own or his ancestor's sins by sacrifices or charms, with rejoicings and feasts. . . . And they produce a host of books written by Musaeus and Orpheus, who were children of the Moon and the Muses--that is what they say--according to which they perform their ritual, and persuade not only individuals, but whole cities, that expiations and atonements for sin may be made by sacrifices and amusements which fill a vacant hour, and are equally at the service of the living and the dead; the latter sort they call mysteries, and they redeem us from the pain of hell, but if we neglect them no one knows what awaits us."

The dualism that underlies Plato's views began to be taken more seriously by his disciples, the Neo-Platonists, and reached an extraordinary intensity in the beginning of the Christian era. The philosopher longed for death, and the common people feared the terrors of the next life.

[p. 216]

The philosophical longing for death is satirically described in one of the epigrams of Callimachus, who says (No. XXIV):

"Cleombrot, [*1] he of Ambracia, took leave of the sun in the heavens:
     Leapt from a wall in the hope Sooner to reach the Beyond;
 Not that he e'er had encountered an ill that made life to him hateful;
     Merely because he had read Plato's grand book on the soul."

The idea of immortality became more and more accepted by the masses of the people; but there were many to whom it was no welcome news, for it served only to enhance the fears of man's fate after death. Acquaintance with other religions revealed new terrors everywhere. The Egyptians' dread of judgment in the nether world, the Jews' horror of Gehenna, the Hindus' longing for an escape from future sufferings, were now added to the Greek notions of Hades, and rendered them more terrible than before. The Christian conception of hell is more fearful and at the same time drastic than any one of the older beliefs in future punishment.

Lucian tells the story of Peregrinus, surnamed Proteus, who after various adventures became a convert to Christianity. He would have been forgotten and his name would never have been mentioned in history but for the fact that in the presence of a great crowd at the Olympian festivals he burned himself to death on a big pile of wood.

All these strange facts were symptoms which illustrated the religious zeal of the people and characterised

[p. 217]

the unrest of the times. Further, Plutarch tells us in his Morals that the superstitious are chastised by "their own imagination of an anguish that will never cease." He says:

"Wide open stand the deep gates of the Hades that they fable and there stretches a vista of rivers of fire and Stygian cliffs; and all is canopied with a darkness full of fantasms, of spectres threatening us with terrible faces and uttering pitiful cries."

Mr. F. C. Conybeare, in his Monuments of Early Christianity, says, concerning the belief in hell:

"We make a mistake if we think that this awful shadow was not cast across the human mind long before the birth of Christianity. On the contrary, it is a survival from the most primitive stage of our intellectual and moral development. The mysteries of the old Greek and Roman worlds were intended as modes of propitiation and atonement, by which to escape from these all-besetting terrors, and Jesus the Messiah, was the last and best of the lyterioi theoi, of the redeeming gods. In the dread of death and in the belief in the eternal fire of hell, which pervaded men's minds, a few philosophers excepted, Christianity had a point d'appui, without availing itself of which it would not have made a single step towards the conquest of men's minds."

And why was Christ a better Saviour than the gods and heroes of Greece? Simply because he was human and realistic, not mythological and symbolical; he was a sufferer and a man,--the son of man, and not a slayer, not a conqueror, not a hero of the ferocious type, ruthless and bloodstained; he fulfilled the moral ideal which had been set up by Plato, who, perhaps under the impression of Aeschylus's conception of the tragic fate of

[p. 218]

[paragraph continues] Prometheus, [*1] says of the perfect man who would rather be than appear just:

"They will tell you that the just man who is thought unjust will be scourged, racked, bound; will have his eyes burnt out; and, at last, after suffering every kind of evil, he will be hung up at the pale."

The strangest thing about this passage is that the word anasxindyleythesetai, which means "he will be hung up at the stake," or "fixed on a pale," is an older synonym of the New Testament term stayroein, commonly translated "to crucify."

Alluding to Plato, Apollonius, a Christian martyr, declares:

Click to view
CHRISTIAN GEM

 [*2]

One of the Greek Philosophers said: The just man shall be tortured, he shall be spat upon, and last of all be shall be crucified. just as the Athenians Passed an unjust sentence of death, and charged him falsely, because they yielded to the mob, so also our Saviour was at last sentenced to death by the lawless." [*3]

In the days of Augustus and his successors the people were taught to expect salvation, the dispensation of justice, protection, peace, and prosperity from the emperor; and just as we have to-day monarchies where the king regards himself as the Anointed One by the grace of God and a representative of God on earth, so the Roman emperor arrogated to himself divine honors, and even philosophers such as Seneca did not hesitate to acknowledge

[p. 219]

the claim. The practical significance of this view is that the government should be regarded with religious awe, and its officers, as such, are divine. The Christians who refused to worship before the emperor's images must have appeared to the Romans of those days as anarchists and rebels. But when Nero committed matricide and other most outrageous crimes, the belief in the emperor's divinity dwindled away, and the idea of the suffering God, the man who died on the cross because he would rather be than appear just, gained ground among the people.

Christianity was not the only religion which promised deliverance from evil through the saving power of blood and by means of a vicarious atonement, for we know of the immortality-promising mysteries, and especially of the cult of Mithras, which had embodied many ideas and ceremonies that are also met with in Christianity.

The early Christians belonged exclusively to the lower walks of life, and the earliest Church authorities, with few exceptions, were by no means cultured or highly educated persons. Some Christian writers were quite talented men; but few of the Church fathers can be said to have enjoyed more than a mediocre education. Platonic philosophy, for instance, did not enter into Christian minds directly, but only through the channels of Philo's books. Thus it is natural that Christians were lacking both in knowledge as to the origin of many of their rites and also in critique, and when they were confronted with the same practices and conceptions

[p. 220]

Click to view
MITHRAS MONUMENT OF OSTBURKEN.

among non-Christians, they were puzzled and found no other explanation for such remarkable coincidences, than the guiles of Satan. Even the most peculiarly Christian sacrament, the Lord's Supper, was, according to the testimony of Justin Martyr, celebrated by the Persians in the same way as by the Christians; [*1] and Justin is ingenuous enough to attribute this coincidence without the slightest hesitation to the influence of evil spirits. Tertullian is also aware of many similarities between Church institutions and the pagan modes of Mithras worship, which observation prompted him to declare that "Satan imitates the sacraments of God." [*2] The Devil appears to have been very cunning in those days, for if he had not daring spies in heaven, he must himself have anticipated the Lord's plans; for the pagan institutions spoken of as Satanic imitations, such as the Persian haoma sacrifice, the eating of consecrated cakes in commemoration

Click to view
MITHRAIC SYMBOLS.

 [*3]

[p. 221]

of the dead for the sake of obtaining life immortal are older than Christianity.

The competitors of Christianity which endeavored to

Click to view
MITHRAS THE SAVIOUR. (Borghesi Monument, now at the Louvre in Paris.)

 [*1]

[p. 222]

embody the religious ideals of the age, for various reasons failed to be satisfactory, leaving the field to Christianity, which in its main doctrines was simple and in its morality direct and practical. But it is to be regretted that the fanaticism of Christian monks has almost totally wiped out the traces of other religious aspirations, leaving only scattered fragments, which are, however, very interesting to the historian, partly on account of their similarity to Christianity, partly through their dissimilarities.

We know of several Oriental gods who became fashionable at Rome, among whom Mithras, the Egyptian Serapis, and Iao-Abraxas were the most celebrated.

The influence of Mithras worship on Christianity is well established. [*1] We mention especially the rites of baptism, the Eucharist, facing the Orient in prayer, the sanctification of the day of the sun, and the celebration of the winter solstice as the birthday of the Saviour. Concerning this latter institution, the Rev. Robert Sinker says in William Smith's Dictionary of Christian Antiquities (pp. 357-8):

"As Mithraicism gradually blended with Christianity, changing its name but not altogether its substance, many of its ancient notions and rites passed over too, and the Birthday of the Sun, the visible manifestation of Mithras himself, was transferred to the commemoration of the Birth of Christ.

"Numerous illustrations of the above remarks may be found in ancient inscriptions, e. g., SOLI INVICTO ET LUNAE AETERNAE C. VETTI GERMANI LIB. DUO PARATUS

[p. 223]

[paragraph continues] ET HERMES DEDERUNT, [*1] or EAIU MIThRA ANIKETU [*2] (Gruter, Inscriptiones Antiquae, p. xxxiii). In the legend on the reverse of the copper coins of Constantine, SOLI INVICTO COMITI, [*3] retained long after his conversion, there is at once an idea of the ancient Sun-God, and of the new Sun of Righteousness.

"The supporters of this theory cite various passages from early Christian writers indicating a recognition of this view. The sermon of Ambrose, quoted by Jablonsky, is certainly spurious, and is so marked in the best editions of his works; it furnishes, however, an interesting illustration of an early date. The passage runs thus: 'Bene quodammodo sanctum hunc diem Natalis Domini Solem novum vulgus appellat, et tanta sui auctoritate id confirmat, ut Judaei etiam atque Gentiles in hanc vocem consentiant. Quod libenter amplectandum nobis est, quia oriente Salvatore, non solum humani generis salus, sed etiam solis ipsius claritas innovatur.' [*4] (Serm. 6, in Appendice, p. 397, ed. Bened.)

"In the Latin editions of Chrysostom is a homily, wrongly ascribed to him, but probably written not long after his time, in which we read: 'Sed et Invicti Natalem appellant. Quis utique tam invictus nisi Dominus noster, qui mortem subactam devicit? Vel quod dicunt Solis esse Natalem, ipse est Sol Justitiae, de quo Malachias propheta dixit, Orietur vobis timentibus nomen ipsius Sol Justitiae et sanitas est in pennis ejus.' [*5] (Sermo de Nativitate S. Joannis Baptistae; vol. ii. 1113, ed. Paris, 1570.

[p. 224]

"Leo the Great finds fault with the baneful persuasion of some 'quibus haec dies solemnitatis nostrae, non tam de Nativitate Christi, quam de novi ut dicunt solis ortu, honorabilis videtur.' [*1] (Serm. 22,  section 6, vol. i. p. 72, ed. Ballerini.) Again, the same father observes: 'Sed hanc adorandam in caelo et in terra Nativitatem nullus nobis dies magis quam hodiernus insinuat, et nova etiam in elementis luce radiante, coram (al. totam) sensibus nostris mirabilis sacramenti ingerit claritatem.' [*2] (Serm. 26,  section I, p. 87.)

"We may further cite one or two instances from ancient Christian poets: Prudentius, in his hymn Ad Natalem Domini, thus speaks (Cathemerinon, xi. init., p. 364, ed Arevalus):

'Quid est, quod arctum circulum sol jam recurrens deserit?
 Christusne terris nascitur qui lucis auget tramitem?' [*3]

Paulinus of Nola also (Poema xiv. 15-19, p. 382, ed. Muratori):

'Nam post solstitium, quo Christus corpore natus
 Sole novo gelidae mutavit tempora brumae,
 Atque salutiferum praestans mortalibus ortum,
 Procedente die, secum decrescere noctes
 Jussit.' [*4]

Reference may also be made to an extract in Assemani (Bibl. Or. i. 163) from Dionysius Bar-Salibi, bishop of Amida, which shows

[p. 225]

traces of a similar feeling in the East; also to a passage from an anonymous Syrian writer, who distinctly refers the fixing of the day to the above cause; we are not disposed, however, to attach much weight to this last passage. More important for our purpose is the injunction of a council of Rome (743 A. D.): 'Ut nullus Kalendas Januarias et broma (= brumalia) colere praesumpserit' [*1] (can. 9, Labbe vi. 1548), which shows at any rate that for a long time after the fall of heathenism, many traces of heathen rites still remained."

Click to view
AeON OR ZRVAN AKARANA.
 Unlimited Time.

 [*2]

Aeon, the lion faced, with key, torch, and measuring staff is a divinity of considerable importance in the religion of Mithras. He is the Zrvan Akarana (Time unlimited) of the Zend-avesta, not so much a personality as a personified abstraction, representing the primordial state of existence from which Ahura Mazda is born. The serpent's coils that surround his body represent the revolutions of time, his wings the four seasons. His relation to the deities of the Greek pantheon, Hephaestus, Aesculapius, Hermes, and Dionysius, is indicated by the presence of their emblems.

[p. 226]

Mr. W. C. King quotes from Flaminius Vacca (No. 117) the interesting story of the discovery of an Aeon statue as follows:

"I remember there was found in the vineyard of Sig. Orazio Muti (where the treasure was discovered), opposite S. Vitale, an idol in marble, about 5 palms high (31/2 feet), standing erect upon a pedestal in an empty chamber, with the door walled up. Around him were many little lamps in terra cotta, set with their nozzles towards the idol. This had a lion's head, and the rest of the body that of a man. Under his feet was a globe, whence sprang a serpent which encompassed all the idol, and its head entered into his mouth. He had his hands crossed upon the breast: a key in each, four wings fastened upon the shoulders, two pointing upwards, two downwards. I do not consider it a very antique work, being done in a rude manner; or perhaps it is so ancient that at the time it was made the good style was not yet known. Sig. Orazio, however, told me that a theologian, a Jesuit Father, explained its meaning, saying it signified the Devil, who in the time of heathenism ruled over the world; hence the globe under his feet; the serpent which begirt him and entered into his mouth, his foretelling the future with ambiguous responses; the keys in his hands, his sovereignty over the world; the lion's head, the ruler of all beasts. The wings signified his presence everywhere. Such was the version given by the aforesaid Father. I have done everything to see the idol, but Sig. Orazio being now dead, his heirs do not know what has become of it. It is not unlikely that by the advice of the theologian, Sig. Orazio may have sent it to some lime-kiln to cure its dampness, for it had been buried many and many a year."

Iao, the god with the adorable name (i. e., Abraxas), [*1] bears the cock's head, which is the emblem of Aesculapius, the god of healing. When Socrates died he requested

[p. 227]

his friends to sacrifice a cock to Aesculapius because his soul had recovered from the disease of bodily existence. The serpent (the emblem of mystery, of eternity, of wisdom, the prophet of the gnosis) walks without feet, and therefore Iao is serpent-legged.

The God of Goodness, or Agathodaemon, exercised a great charm upon the minds of the people. He is represented on gems in the shape of a serpent whose head is surrounded with solar rays, hovering about the sacred

          
Click to view
ABRAXAS   GEM.

       
Click to view
AGATHODAeMON.

       
Click to view
IAO GEM.

     
       [*1]

        [*2]

        

     
   cista, the cylindrical box, from which the priest emerged at the celebration of the mystery.

The design of the Agathodaemon is as common as the Iao design and that it was used as an amulet appears from a passage of Galen, who says:

"Some, indeed, assert that a virtue of this kind is inherent in certain stones, such as is in reality possessed by the green jasper, which benefits the chest and mouth of the stomach, if tied upon

[p. 228]

them. Some, indeed, set the stone in a ring and engrave upon It a serpent with his head crowned with rays, according as is prescribed by King Nechepsos in his thirteenth book."

How excusable these gnostic superstitions were in those days appears from the strange fact that such a sober man as Galen believed in the efficiency of these amulets. He continues:

"Of this I have had ample experience, having made a necklace of such stones and hung it round the patient's neck, descending low enough for the stones to touch the mouth of the stomach, and they proved to be of no less benefit thus than if they had been engraved in the manner laid down by King Nechepsos." (De Simp. Med., IX.)

Click to view

To us who have grown up under the influence of Christian traditions, the idea of representing the Good God under the allegory of a serpent seems strange, but we must bear in mind that other people and other ages had different ideas associated with the serpent. To the people of the Orient the limbless serpent was a symbol of mystery, and represented health and immortality. Eusebius (I., 7) informs us:

"The serpent never dies naturally, but only when injured by violence, whence the Phoenicians have named it the good genius (Agathodaemon). Similarly the Egyptians have called him Cneph and given him a hawk's head on account of the special swiftness of that bird."

Serapis, which is a Hellenised form of Osiris-Apis,

[p. 229]

was a religion which in many respects resembled Christianity. Their sacred symbol was the cross, as we know through Christian authors, [*1] and Emperor Adrian (no mean authority in such matters) speaks of Serapis worshippers as Christians, saying that those who consecrated themselves to Serapis called themselves "bishops of Christ." Even if a local blending of Christianity with the Serapis cult in Egypt had not taken place we must recognise that the monkish institutions of the Serapean temples were an exact prototype of the Christian monasteries which originated in Egypt and flourished there better than anywhere else.

The Serapis cult was a reformation of the old Egyptian Osiris worship, introduced by Ptolemy Soter for the purpose of adapting the old traditions of Egypt to the Hellenic culture of Alexandria.

Click to view
SERAPIS GEM.

Akin in spirit but independent in its development, is the worship of the Egyptian Tot, the ibis-headed scribe of the gods. Originally a personification of the moon, Tot, or Tehuti, was the deity of all measure, and thus his importance grew to signify the divine cosmic order. He is called "Ibis the Glorious," and "the Ibis who proceeded from Ptah." Osiris, the dying and resurrected God, is identified with him as "Osiris the Ibis, the Blessed One." Together with the moon god, Xunsu and Maut, he is worshipped in the trinity Xunsu-Maut-Tehuti as the "child ever being born again." [*2]

[p. 230]

Among the Greeks, Tot was identified with Hermes, who now begins to play a very prominent role as Hermes Trismegistos, the thrice great, the saviour of souls. Hermes is now adored as the first-born son of Zeus, and is even identified with the father of the gods as his representative and plenipotentiary.

The philosophers of the time bear the stamp of their age. Thus Seneca, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and other pagan sages are kindred in spirit to the Christian religion; they are under the influence of Platonism; they object to the idolatry of polytheism and demand a

          
Click to view
HERMES,
   SAVIOUR OF SOULS.

       
Click to view
STAFF OF   HERMES.

       
Click to view
HERMES AS   JUPITER
.

     
   pure theism; they speak of the fatherhood of God; they insist upon morality and are inclined to conceive the soul as distinct from, and superior to, the body which is regarded as its temporal tabernacle, and as the seat, if not cause, of all evil. Yet they are philosophers, not pastors. They are too aristocratic to appreciate their kinship to Christianity. They even show a contempt for the religion of the vulgar, and they themselves appeal to the thinkers, not to the toilers, not to the multitudes, not to the poor in spirit.

Graeco-Egyptians developed a religious philosophy upon the basis of ancient Egyptian traditions, compiled

[p. 231]

in a book called the Divine Pymander, [*1] which contains many beautiful sayings that remind us of Christian views; but the Divine Pymander (like other philosophical books) is addressed to the few not to the many, and its mysticism rendered it unfit to become the religion of mankind.

Apollonius of Tyana is a figure in many respects similar, but by no means superior, to Jesus Christ. For in him the philosophy of the age becomes a religion. His followers, however, were neither better nor wiser than the early Christians; they shared with them the same superstitions, cherishing the same trust in miracles, yet for all we know, they had only few of their redeeming features.

Julian, surnamed by Christian authors the Apostate, is in spite of his idealism a reactionary man who set his face against Christianity because he recognised in the latter the most powerful representative of the coming faith. This last pagan emperor, it is true, was a noble-minded and thoughtful man who opposed Christianity mainly on account of its shortcomings, its Jewish affiliations, and the narrowness of its devotees, but he was enamored with the past, and his highest ambition was to revive the barbarism of pagan institutions, which tendency appears most plainly in his retention of bloody sacrifices, his esteem for oracles and a general indulgence in the mysteries of Neo-Platonism.

The various schools of post-Christian gnosticism were in all probability the most dangerous competitors of

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Christianity, which explains the bitterness with which the Church-fathers revile gnostic doctrines. But the gnostics were after all so similar to the Christians that some Church-fathers use the name "Gnostic" as a synonym for Christians. Gnostic teachers are looked upon less as strangers than as heretics, and their speculations have been an important factor in the development of Christian dogmas.

The gnostics, as a rule, represent the demiurge, i. e., the architect of the world, whom they identify with the Jewish Yahveh, as the father of all evil. They describe him as irascible, jealous, and revengeful, and contrast him with the highest God who had nothing to do with the creation. As the demiurge created the world, he has a right to it, but he was overcome through the death of Jesus. The demiurge thought to conquer Jesus when he let him die on the cross, but his triumph was preposterous, for through the passion and death of the innocent Jesus the victory of God was won and the salvation of mankind became established.

One peculiarly interesting sect of gnostics is called the Ophites, or serpent worshippers. The demiurge (so they hold), on recognising the danger that might result from the emancipation of man through gnosis (i. e., knowledge or enlightenment), forbade him to eat from the fruit of the tree of knowledge. But the God, the highest Lord, the all-good and all-wise Deity, took compassion on man and sent the serpent to induce him to eat of the tree of knowledge so that he might escape the bondage of ignorance in which Yahveh, the demiurge, tried to hold him.

[p. 233]

The serpent appears on many gnostic gems and is never missing in the Mithras monuments. Frequently it is found on Christian devices where it is sometimes difficult to interpret it as the representative of evil.

Irenaeus, an adversary of the gnostic view, replaced the demiurge by the Devil, whom he regards as a rebel angel, having fallen by pride and arrogance, envying God's creation (Adv. haer., No. 40). He agrees, however, with the gnostics, in that he maintains that the Devil had claims upon man because of man's sin. Jesus,

          
Click to view
A SHIP   SYMBOLISING THE CHURCH.

       
Click to view
A CHRISTIAN GEM   WITH SERPENT.

       
Click to view
A GNOSTIC   GEM.

     
   however, having paid the debt of mankind, has the power to redeem the souls of men from the clutches of the Devil who, by having treated a sinless man as a sinner, became now himself a debtor of mankind.

This juridical theory of the death of Jesus and his relation to the Devil was further elaborated by Origen. According to Origen the sacrifice of Jesus is not rendered to make an atonement to God or satisfy his feeling of justice (which is the Protestant conception), but to pay off the Devil. Jesus is, as it were, a bait for the Devil. Satan imagines he must destroy Jesus, but having succeeded

[p. 234]

in killing him, finds out to his unspeakable regret that he has been outwitted by the Lord. God had set a trap, and the Devil was foolish enough to allow himself to be caught.

Manes, a man educated in the Zoroastrian faith, endeavored to found a universal religion through the synthesis of all the religions he knew; and because Manicheism, as this view is called, contains many Christian elements, it is commonly regarded as a Christian or a gnostic sect, but it was strongly denounced as heretical by St. Augustine. Manes taught the Persian dualism,

          
Click to view

       
Click to view

       
Click to view

     
   CHRISTIAN SYMBOLS OF THE CATACOMBS.

but St. Augustine, who formulated the orthodox Christian doctrine denying the independent existence of evil, explains the presence of sin in the world by the free will with which Adam was endowed at creation, and regards evil as a means to an end in God's plan of education.

*      *      *

Christianity triumphed over paganism, and it did so by embodying in its fabric everything that in those days was regarded as true and good and elevating. Thus the adoration of statues and images, at first so vehemently denounced by Christians as heathenish, was reintroduced with all the pagan methods of worship, the burning of

[p. 235]

incense, processions, sprinkling with holy water, and other rituals. The old symbol of the labarum was interpreted as the monogram of Christ; and the sacred mark of two intersecting lines, a religious emblem of great antiquity, was identified with the cross of Golgotha. The figure of two intersecting lines was a mark of salvation among the Syrians and other nations, and the probability is that it represented the four quarters of the compass; [*1] but now since is was called a cross, it recovered in a higher degree its traditional reputation as a powerful magic charm and was extensively used for exorcisms. [*2] There is no doctrine on which the Christian fathers so thoroughly agree as on the belief that the Devil is afraid of the cross.

Click to view
ARAMAeAN WARRIORS, WEARING THE CROSS AS AN AMULET FOR PROTECTION IN BATTLE.

 [*3]

The Greek gods were regarded as demons by the early Christians, but the ideas which found expression in the mythology of Greece, in the tales of Greek deities

[p. 236]

and heroes, were retained and Christianised. The old Greek saviours simply changed names and became Christian saints, or at least contributed important features to the legends of their lives.

Christianity is a religion of peace, but the Western nations are warlike, and at the very beginning of the Christian era the need was felt to have the spirit of belligerency

          
Click to view
ST. ANTHONY   FIGHTING THE DEVIL WITH THE CROSS.
   (After Salvator Rosa.)

       
Click to view
ST. GEORGE, THE   PRINCESS, AND THE DRAGON.
   (Traditional representation.)

     
   See pp. <page 239>-<page 240>

consecrated by religious sentiment and represented in struggling saints and angels.

The Christian patron saint of fighters is St. George, and it is natural that the English, who among the Christian nations are not the least pious and at the same time not the least belligerent, have chosen the name of St. George for their battle-cry.

[p. 237]

The legend and pictures of St. George remind us strongly of the myths of Perseus. In its Christian form the tale appears first in the Legendae Sanctorum of Jacobus de Voragine, who tells us of a pagan city, the neighborhood of which was infested by a dragon that had to be appeased by human sacrifices. The monster was finally slain by St. George, a chivalrous Christian knight, who arrived at the moment the king's daughter was offered as a victim. The princess, at the request of the knight, tied her girdle round the dragon's neck, who now, although the beast had been reported dead, rises and follows the virgin like a tame lamb to the city. The people are frightened by the sight, but St. George kills him once more, this time for good. St. George is richly rewarded, but he distributes his wealth among the poor, converts the King and his subjects to Christianity, and goes to another land, where he dies a martyr's death.

The historical St. George, an archbishop of Alexandria and a follower of Arius, possesses no features whatever of the heroic dragon-slayer of the legend. According to the unanimous report of Christian and pagan historians, he was an abject, cringing fellow, and when he had attained the high position of archbishop, proved a cruel and extortionate tyrant who was greatly hated by the people. He was deposed by the worldly authorities and put in jail on Christmas eve, 361. But his enemies, mostly poor people belonging to his diocese, grew tired of the delay of the law; a mob broke open the prison doors and lynched the deposed archbishop on January 17, 362. His violent death was later on regarded as a sufficient title to the glory of the martyr's crown. The most

[p. 238]

important service he rendered the Church consisted in the fact, that the official recognition of an Arian saint helped to reconcile the followers of Arius.

Gelarius seems to be the first Roman Catholic Pope who mentions St. George, and he knows nothing of his life, but counts him among those saints "who are better

          
Click to view
ARCHANGEL   MICHAEL CONQUERING SATAN.
   (By Raphael. In the Louvre.)

       
Click to view
ARCHANGEL   MICHAEL HOLDING THE SCALES FOR WEIGHING SOULS.
   (After Lorenzo Sabbatieri.)

     
       

        [*1]

     
    

known to God than to mankind." [*2] It is difficult to say whether His Holiness was conscious of the irony of this passage.

It is an unsolved problem how St. George could have been identified with the dragon-slaying deities of ancient

[p. 239]

pagan mythologies. The connecting links are missing, but it is probable that there is no deeper reason than a similarity in the sound of names. Perhaps a solar deity was somewhere worshipped under the name geurgos, i. e., tiller of the ground, because the civilisation of agriculture overcame the dragon of savage barbarism.

The final conqueror of the dragon, however, is not St. George, but the Archangel Michael, who, on the day of judgment, plays the part of Zeus defeating the giants and Typhaeus, or the Teuton God Thor, slaying the Midgard serpent; and when the victory is gained Michael will hold the balances in which the souls are weighed.

The belligerent spirit did not remain limited to Michael and St. George, but was also imputed to other saints who proved their prowess in various ways in their encounters with the Evil One. St. Anthony, of Egypt (251-356), the founder of the Christian monastery system, is reported to have battled with evil spirits in the desert near Thebes, whither he withdrew from the world to practise severe penances. His heroic deeds, which consist of frightful struggles with the demons of his imagination, have been recorded by the good Bishop Athanasius, whose book on the subject is of special interest because it contains an essay written by St. Anthony himself, containing the gist of his wisdom and experience in struggling with evil spirits. [*1] The artistic genius of Salvator Rosa gave a concrete plausibility to the story in a highly dramatic picture illustrating the combat in a critical

[p. 240]

moment when only the cross saved the undaunted saint from defeat during a daring onslaught of the fiend in his most horrible shape. (See the illustration on page <page 236>.)

There can scarcely be any doubt that the original doctrine of Jesus of Nazareth was an ethics of peace; not only peacefulness and gentleness of mind in general, but peace at any price, and a non-resistance to evil. The warlike spirit among later Christians and the worship of belligerent archangels and saints were introduced into the writings of the early Church from pagan sources and the importance of this phase of Christianity grew with its expanse among the energetic races of the North. The Teutonic nations, the Norsemen, the Germans, the Anglo-Saxons and their kin, whose conversion is the greatest conquest Christianity ever made, proved no less belligerent than the Greek and Roman, but they were their superiors in strength, in generosity, in fairness toward their enemies, and in purity of morals.

Footnotes

^195:1 The Christian Church never lost sight of the idea that a human sacrifice is indispensable for the expiation of sin, the atonement being procured by the mystic effects of faith. Hence the constant reference of Christ's death on the cross to both Abraham's offering of Isaac and the miraculous healing power of the brazen serpent in the desert.

^200:1 Or rather the author of the second epistle of St. Peter, so called.

^205:1 Xen., Mem., ii. I. Plato, Symp., 177 B.

^205:2 Trendelenburg has discovered a passage commenting on this or a similar picture in Achilles Tatius, and explains it as follows: Andromeda, adorned as the bride of death with girdle, crown, and veil, is tied to two poles. Above her Cupid stands engaged with women in the preparation of a wedding. Andromeda's old nurse hands her a twig. Behind and above the nurse are guards with Phrygian caps and arms. On the left, Cassiopeia, Andromeda's mother, who exhibits the vanity of which the legend accuses her, is seated in conversation with her servants. Underneath Perseus fights the monster, which scene is witnessed by three Nereids, one riding on a sea-horse, one on a dolphin, and the third resembling the typical figure of Scylla. The monster differs here from the typical Medusa figure.

^208:1 The Greek kalos is not limited to the definition of beautiful as we use the word.

^208:2 The Medusa is mentioned by Homer, l 634, as a terrible monster of the Nether World; it was used as an amulet to avert evil, and became therefore a favorite device [p. 209] on shields. The original of the upper illustration on <page 207> is colored,--which adds to the frightful appearance of this picture found on the Acropolis at Athens.

^209:1 The statue reproduced on <page 208> belongs to an older period of Greek art, and the horse Pegasus is not as yet endowed with wings, which became very soon its never-missing attributes. The modern notion that Pegasus is the symbol of poetical enthusiasm only dates back to the fifteenth century of our era, and was foreign to the Greek.

^209:2 Figures of the lion -killing saviour are also found on Asiatic coins and on Assyrian cylinders.

^211:1 In the beautiful sarcophagus (see illustration on <page 212>) which represents the Prometheus myth, the first design is apparently incomplete; for we should expect to see Prometheus represented as stealing the fire and offering it to Deukalion.

^216:1 Cleombrotus may have been the same disciple of Socrates who is mentioned in Phaedo II-- p. 59, c. This strange case of suicide is alluded to by St. Augustine in de Civ. Dei, I., 22--The verses are translated in the original metre.

^218:1 See above, page <page 210>.

^218:2 This gem (a Christian New Year's present) represents the death of a martyr. The letters A N F T mean annum novum felicem tibi.

^218:3 The Apology and Acts of Apollonius, 40-41. Translated by F. C. Conybeare in Monuments of Early Christianity, p. 47.

^220:1 Apol., 86.

^220:2 Dei sacramenta Satanas affectat. De exh. cast., 13.

^220:3 After Chiflet, reproduced from C. W. King. Two erect serpents stand like supporters, on both sides. Mithras, between the stars of the twins (the Dioscuri), holds the horses of the rising and of the setting sun, or of life and death. Above his head, the raven; in the sky, the emblems of sun and moon. Underneath. the table with the consecrated bread and the cup of the Eucharist.

^221:1 The Monument bears the inscription "Den Soli Invicto Mithrae." Mithras sacrifices in a cave a bull for the forgiveness of sins. A dog licks the dripping blood, called "nama sebesion" (the sacred fluid). A serpent crawls on the ground. A scorpion pinches off the bull's testicles. A youth at the left turns a torch upwards; at the right, downwards. A raven, which here looks like an owl, witnesses the scene. Over the cave, the sungod, Helios, and the goddess of the moon, Selene, drive past in their chariots. Whether the sacrifice of the bull was practised or only commemorated is not known. Concerning the significance of the Mithras mysteries little is known, except that initiations were by penances, fasts, self-mortifications, lustrations, and water and fire probations. Baptism was practised, and Mithras was called the mediator for the remission of sin. The most important references besides the monuments are passages in Justin Martyr, Apol., I., 66, and Tertullian, Praescr. haeret., 40. The Mithras cult had many votaries among the Roman soldiery garrisoned in the northern provinces.

^222:1 The mysteries of Mithras were introduced into Greece at the time of Alexander. They gained more and more influence until they reached a climax in the second century of the Christian era, Most of the many monuments which the Mithras worship left all over the Roman empire, especially in Gallia and Germany, date from this period when it had almost become a rival of Christianity.

^223:1 "To the unconquerable sun and the eternal moon this is given by P. and H., the two children of C. V. G."

^223:2 I. e., Helios (or the sun) Mithras the invincible.

^223:3 "To the invincible Sun, the protector."

^223:4 "Well do the common people call this somehow sacred day of the birth of the Lord 'a new sun,' and confirm it with so great an authority of theirs that Jews and Gentiles concur in this mode of speech. And this should willingly be accepted by us, because with the birth of the Saviour there comes not only the salvation of mankind, but the brightness of the sun itself is renewed."

^223:5 "But they call it the birthday of the Invincible (i. e., Mithras). Who, however, is invincible if not our Lord, who has conquered death? Further, if they say 'it is the birthday of the sun,' He is the sun of righteousness, about whom the prophet Malachi says, 'Unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings.'" Observe in this passage that the prophet [p. 224] thinks of the sun of God after the Babylonian and Egyptian fashion, as having wings which are of a wholesome or healing influence.

The preceding lines of this quotation from Chrysostom (Hom. 31) plainly state that Christ's birthday has been fixed upon the day of the birth of Mithras: "On this day (the birthday of Mithras) also the birthday of Christ was lately fixed at Rome in order that whilst the heathen were busied with their profane ceremonies, the Christians might perform their holy rites undisturbed."

^224:1 "Some to whom this day of our celebration is worthy of honor not so much on account of the birth of Christ as for the sake of the renewal of the sun."

^224:2 "But no other day appears to us more appropriate than to-day for worshipping in heaven and earth the Feast of the Nativity, and while even in the material world (in the elements) a new light shines, He confers on us before our very senses, the brightness of His wonderful sacrament."

^224:3 "Why does the sun already leave the circle of the arctic north?
 Is not Christ born upon the earth who will the path of light increase?

^224:4 "Truly, after the solstice, when Christ is born in the body,
 With a new sun he will change the frigid days of the north wind.
 While he is offering to mortals the birth that will bring them salvation,
 Christ with the progress of days gives command that the nights be declining."

^225:1 "No one shall celebrate the 1st of January and the Brumalia."

^225:2 The statue here reproduced was found in the Mithraeum of Ostia, where C. Valerius Heracles and his sons dedicated it in the year 190 A. D.; it was figured for the first time by Layard in his Recherches sur Mithra, Plate LXX. Similar statues are found in various Mithras caves.

^226:1 Abrak is Egyptian, and means "bow down" or "adore." The word occurs in the Bible, Gen. 41, 43. Sas (standing for Sadshi) means "name." Abraxas is the name to be adored. (See King, The Gnostics, p. 36.)

^227:1 The inscription reads, "Gabriel Sabaoth," i. e., The strong God Zebaoth. The second R (i. e., R) is a mistake which the stone cutter made for L (i. e., L).

Bellermann, in his remarks on Abraxas-gems, in a "Programm des Grauen Klosters" (Berlin, 1817-1819) describes the gem. The priest of Abraxas carries a serpent coiled up in the form of a ring, and a lance round which entwines another serpent. His head is crowned by a strange head-dress of four feathers (presumably of the Phoenikopteros) and surrounded by three stars.

^227:2 From C. W. King. The first line of the inscription is between Kh crosses; it is explained to mean "I am the Good Spirit, the Eternal Sun."

^229:1 See Socrates, Eccl. Hist., 5, 17, which report is repeated by Sozomenes.

^229:2 R. Pietschmann. Hermes Trismegistos, p. 7.

^231:1 The term "Pymander" is commonly explained to mean poimen androun, i. e., shepherd of man."

^235:1 The equilateral cross of Paganism is frequently, though not always, ornamented with four dots, one in each corner. We believe we are not mistaken when we interpret the dots as emblems of the sun in its four respective positions, in the east, south, west and north. Egyptian wall-pictures show the Apis covered with this sacred symbol, (see e. g. Lenormant, L'Hist. Anc. de l'Orient, V., 183,) and it serves as a not uncommon pattern on the dresses of various Greek deities.

^235:2 For further details see the author's articles on The Cross, Its History and Significance in The Open Court, 1899 and 1900. Their publication in book form is contemplated by The Open Court Publishing Co.

^235:3 From Egyptian monuments of the eighteenth dynasty. (After Wilkinson.) The same use of the cross, as an amulet worn round the neck, was made in Greece, as we know from ancient pictures, published by Gerhard.

^238:1 Reproduced from Scheible, Das Kloster.

^238:2 Qui Deo magis quam hominibus noti sunt.

^239:1 See the Acta Sanctorum of the Bolandists for January 17, which is observed as St. Anthony's day. In addition there are several Latin translations of St. Anthony's letters extant in the Biblioteca Patrum.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 241]

  

THE DEMONOLOGY OF NORTHERN EUROPE.

THE religion of the Teutons was in the main a religion of fighters, and we do not hesitate to say that they, more than any other people on earth, developed the ethics of struggle. War, strife, and competition, are frequently regarded as in themselves detestable and immoral, but the Teutons discovered that life means strife, and that therefore courage is the root of all virtue. Their highest ideal was not to shrink from the unavoidable, but to face it squarely and unflinchingly. Their chief god was the god of war, and their noblest consummation of life was death on the battlefield. They despised the coward who was afraid of wounds and death. They respected and even honored their enemies if they were but brave. They scorned deceit and falsity and would rather be honestly defeated than gain a victory by trickery. And this view did not remain a mere theory with them, but was practised in life. The Teutons were repeatedly defeated by the Romans, by Marius, Caesar, and others who were less scrupulous in their methods of fighting, but in the long run they remained victorious and built a Teutonic empire upon the debris of Rome.

[p. 242]

Click to view
HEL, THE GODDESS OF THE NETHER WORLD. (By Johannes Gehrts.)

[p. 243]

The idea of evil played an important part in the religion of the Teutons.

Loki, the god of fire, the cunning mischief-maker among the Asas, is believed to have brought sin and evil into the world. In the younger Edda, Loki takes part in the creation of man, whom he endows with the senses, passions, and evil desires. Loki's children are (1) the Fenris wolf, (2) the Jormungander, i. e., the Midgard serpent, and (3) Hel, the queen of Nifelheim, the world of the dead.

Loki induced the gods to build fortifications, for which the architect, who was one of the giants and an enemy of the gods, should, if he finished his work in a stipulated time, receive as remuneration Freyja, the goddess of beauty and love. But when it became apparent that the walls would be soon completed, Loki, true to his treacherous character, assisted the gods in cheating the architect. He further helped the giant Thjasse to steal Idun with her immortality-giving golden apples. Only when the gods threatened to punish him did he become accessory in bringing Idun back again. The worst deed which Loki accomplished was the death of Baldur, the god of light and purity. After that he was outlawed and resided no longer in Asgard. But he came back and mocked the gods when they were assembled at Aegir's banquet. At last he was captured and in punishment for his crimes tied upon three pointed rocks right beneath the mouth of a serpent. Sigyn, Loki's wife, remains with him to catch the dripping venom in a bowl, which from time to time she empties. Whenever the bowl is withdrawn the venom drops into Loki's face

[p. 244]

and he writhes with pain, which makes the world tremble in what men call earthquakes.

Click to view
RAGNAROK, OR THE DOOMSDAY OF THE TEUTONS (By Johannes Gehrts.)

The most remarkable feature of Teutonic mythology is the conception of doomsday or Ragnarok (the twilight

[p. 245]

of the gods), boding a final destruction of the world, including all the gods. At present the powers of evil are fettered and subdued, but the time will come when they will be set loose. Loki, the Fenris wolf, the Midgard serpent, and Hel, with their army of frost giants and other evil beings, will approach; Heimdall, the watchman of the gods, will blow his horn, and the Asas prepare for battle. The combat on the field Vigrid will be internecine, for the Asas are to die while killing the monsters of wickedness whom they encounter, and the flames of Muspil will devour the wrecks of the universe.

The world had a beginning, it therefore must come to an end; but when the world is destroyed a new heaven and a new earth will rise from the wreck of the old one, and the new world will be better than the old one. Leifthraser and his wife Lif (representing the desire for Life and potential Life) remained concealed during the catastrophe in Hodmimer's grove and were not harmed by the flames. They now become the parents of a new race that will inhabit the new abode, called Gimel (the German Himmel), and among them will be found Odhin with his sons, Thor, Baldur, Fro, and all the other Asas.

Christianity Teutonised.

When Christianity spread over Northern Europe it came into contact with the Teutonic and Celtic nations, who added new ideas to its system and transformed several characteristic features of its world-view. Christianity to-day is essentially a Teutonic religion. The ethics of Christianity, which formerly was expressed in the sentence "Resist not evil," began, in agreement with the

[p. 246]

combative spirit of the Teuton race, more and more to emphasise the necessity of struggle. Not only was the figure of Christ conceived after the model of a Teutonic war-king, the son of the emperor, while his disciples became his faithful vassals; not only did the archangels assume the features of the Asas, the great northern gods, Wodan, Donar, Fro, and others; not only were the old pagan feasts changed into Christian festivals; the Yuletide became Christmas and the Ostara feast in the spring was celebrated in commemoration of Christ's resurrection; but the individual features of the evil powers of the North were also transferred to Satan and his host.

Teutonic legends and fairy tales frequently mention the Devil, and there he possesses many features that remind us of Loki. In addition, the ice giants of the Norsemen, the Nifelheim of the Saxons, the Nether-world of the Irish, all contributed their share to the popular notions of the Christian demonology of the Middle Ages. The very name "hell" is a Teutonic word which originally signified a hollow space or a cave underground, and denotes the realm of Hel, Loki's daughter. The weird and terrible appearances of the gods, too, were retained for the adornment of demoniacal legends; and Odhin as storm-god became "the wild hunter."

Dr. Ernst Krause, who is best known under his nom de plume of Carus Sterne, has undertaken the work of proving the Northern influence upon Southern fairy tales and legends. [*1] He finds that all the myths which symbolise the death and resurrection of the sun, giving

[p. 247]

rise to the idea of immortality, doomsday, and the final restoration of the world, have originated in Northern countries where on Christmas day the sun that seemed lost returns spreading again light and life. Our philologists believe that the Nibelungenlied contains features of Homer's great epics; but, according to Dr. Krause, it would seem that the original source of the Nibelungenlied is older than Homer, and that the theme of the Voluspa, the first song of the Edda, being a vision that proclaims the final destruction and degeneration of heaven and earth, antedates Christ's prophecies of the coming judgment. (Matt., 24.) Christianity comes to us from the Orient, but the idea that a God will die and be resurrected is of Northern origin.

Dr. Krause proceeds to prove that the conception of hell as depicted in Dante's Divina Comedia, which may be regarded as the classical conception of Roman Catholic Christianity, is in all its essential elements the product of a Northern imagination. [*1] Dante followed closely Teutonic traditions, which in his time had become a common possession in the Christian world through the writings of Saxo Grammaticus, Beda Venerabilis, Albericus, Caedmon, Caesarius of Heisterbach, and others. It is specially noteworthy that the deepest hell of Dante's Inferno is not, as Southern people are accustomed to describe the place of torture, a burning sulphur lake, but the wintry desolation of an ice-palace. That this ice hell can be traced back to the days of Gnosticism would only prove that this Northern influence may, in many of its most characteristic features, date back to a prehistoric age.

[p. 248]

Dante's vision is by no means the product of his own imagination. It embodies a great number of old traditions. Dante reproduced in his description of Satan and hell the mythological views of the North so popular in his days. His cantos not only remind us of Ulysses's and Virgil's journey to the Nether-world, but also and mainly of Knight Owain's descent into St. Patrick's Purgatory

Click to view
DANTE'S ICE HELL. (By Gustave Dore.)

in Ireland, and of the vision of hell as described by Beda, Albericus, and Chevalier Tundalus. In the last song of the Inferno, Dante describes the residence of the sovereign of hell, which is surrounded by a thick fog, so as to make it necessary for the poet to be led by the hand of his guide. There the ice-palace stands almost inaccessible through the cold blizzards that blow about it; and

[p. 249]

there the ruler of hell and his most cursed fellows stand with their bodies partly frozen in the transparent ice.

Dante's portraiture of the evil demon whom he calls "Dis" agrees exactly with the appearance of the principal Northern deity of evil, as he was commonly revered among the Celts, the Teutons, and the Slavs. Dis has three faces: one in front, and one on each side. The middle face is red, that on the right side whitish-yellow, that on the left side, black. Thus the trinity idea was transferred to Satan on account of the ill-shaped idols of the crude art of Northern civilisation. Dante's description of Dis reminds us not only of the three-headed hoar-giant of the Edda, Hrim-Grimnir, who lives at the door of death, but also of the trinity of various pagan gods, especially of Triglaf, the triune deity of the Slavs.

When Bishop Otto of Bamberg converted the Pomeranians to Christianity, he broke, in 1124, the three-headed Triglaf idol in the temple of Stettin and sent its head to Pope Honorius II. at Rome. Dr. Krause suggests that since Dante, who as an ambassador of Florence visited Rome in 1301, must have seen with his own eyes the head of the Pomeranian Triglaf, it is by no means impossible that he used it as a prototype for the description of his trinitarian Satan.

The Giants.

It is interesting to observe the transformation of the old Teutonic giants who were plain personifications of the crude forces of nature, into Christian devils. Northern mythology represents the giants, be they mountain-giants, storm-giants, frost-giants, fog-giants, or what not,

[p. 250]

as stupid, and they are frequently conquered by the wisdom of the gods, or by human cunning and invention. There are innumerable legends which preserve the old conception and simply replace the names of giants by devils; and we can observe that all the conquests of man over nature are, in the old sense of the Teutonic mythology, described as instances in which giants or devils are outwitted in one way or another.

Tile giants, as representatives of mountains, forests, rivers, lakes, and the soil of the earth, are always bent on collecting the rent that is due to the owner of the land, for men are merely tenants of the earth, which by right belongs to the giants. The giants envy men their comfort and try to destroy their work. Thus the fog-giant Grendel appears at night-time in the hall of King Hrodhgar and devours at each visit thirty men. Beowulf, the sun-hero, fights with him and cuts off his arm; he then encounters Grendel's mother, the giantess of the marsh whence the fog rises, and finally succeeds in killing both Grendel and his mother.

The parades of giant families which form an important feature of Dutch and Flemish carnivals may be a relic of older customs representing visits of the lords of the ground collecting their rents, which is given in refreshments while the people sing the giant-song [*1] with the refrain:

"Keer u eens om, reuzjen, reuzjen!"
 [Return once more little giant, little giant.]

[p. 251]

Burying Alive.

The privilege of collecting rent which the forces of nature, be they gods, demons, or giants, and later on in their stead, the Devil, were supposed to possess, led to the idea of offering sacrifices in payment of the debt due to the powerful and evil-minded landlords, the owners of the soil. And this notion resulted in the superstition of burying alive either human beings or animals, a practice which at a certain stage of civilisation probably was all but universal and received even the sanction of the God of Israel. [*1]

Grimm says (Mythology, p. 109):

"Frequently it was regarded as necessary to entomb within the foundation of a building living creatures and even men, an act which was regarded as a sacrifice to the soil which had to endure the weight of the structure. By this cruel custom people hoped to attain permanence and stability for great buildings."

There are innumerable stories which preserve records of this barbaric custom, and there can be no doubt that many of them are historical and that the practice continued until a comparatively recent time. We read in Thiele (Danische Volkssagen, I., 3) that the walls of Copenhagen always sank down again and again, although they were constantly rebuilt, until the people took an innocent little girl, placed her on a chair before a table, gave her toys and sweets, and while she merrily played, twelve masons covered the vault and finished the wall, which since that time remained stable. Scutari is said to have

[p. 252]

been built in a similar way. A ghost appeared while the fortress was in the process of building, and demanded that the wife of one of the three kings who should bring the food to the masons on the next day should be entombed in the foundation. Being a young mother, she was permitted to nurse her baby, and a hole was left for that purpose which was closed as soon as the child was weaned.

We read in F. Nork's Sitten und Gebrauche (Das Kloster, Vol. XII.) that when in 1813 the ice broke the dam of the river Elbe and the engineers had great trouble in repairing it, an old man addressed the dike-inspector, saying: "You will never repair the dike unless you bury in it an innocent little child," and Grimm adduces even a more modern instance (Sagen, p. 1095) which dates from the year 1843. "When the new bridge in Halle was built," Grimm tells us, "the people talked of a child which should be buried in its foundations."

So long did these superstitions continue after the cruel rite had been abandoned; and they were held, not only in spite of the higher morality which Christianity taught, but even in the name of Christianity. In Tommaseo's Canti Populari an instance is quoted of the voice of an archangel from heaven bidding the builders of a wall entomb the wife of the architect in its foundation. The practice is here regarded as Christian and it is apparent that there are instances in which Christian authorities were sufficiently ignorant to sanction it, for even the erection of churches was supposed to require the same cruel sacrifice; and there were cases in which, according to the special sanctity of the place, it was deemed

[p. 253]

necessary to bury a priest, because children or women were not regarded as sufficient. In Gunther's Sagenbuch des Deutschen Volkes (Vol. I., p. 33 ff.) we read that the Strassburg cathedral required the sacrifice of two human lives, and that two brothers lie buried in its foundation.

The Power of Evil Outwitted.

The presence of all the big bowlders that lie scattered in the low lands of Germany is attributed either to giants or to the devils; they are sometimes said to be sand-grains which giants removed from their shoes, or they were thrown down in anger when they found themselves cheated out of their own by the wit of mortals.

There is a Marchen of a farmer who undertook to till heretofore uncultivated ground and the Devil (that is to say, the giant who owned the land and had seen nothing except sterile rocks and desolate deserts) gazed with astonishment at the green plants that sprang from the earth. He demanded half the crop, and the farmer left him his choice whether he would take the upper or the lower half. When the Devil chose the lower half, the farmer planted wheat, and when the upper half, he planted turnips, leaving him now the stubble and now the useless turnip tops. Whichever way the Devil turned he was outwitted. [*1]

The story came in its migration south to Arabia, where it was discovered by Friedrich Ruckert, who retold it in his poem "The Devil Outwitted," [*2] which Mr. E.

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] F. L. Gauss, of Chicago, has kindly translated for the special purpose of quotation in this connection:

"The Arabs tilled their fields align,
     Then came the Devil in a flare
 Protesting: 'Half the world is mine,
     Of your crops, too, I want my share.'

"The Arabs said, for they are sly,
     'The lower half we'll give to thee,'
 But the Devil, always aiming high,
     Replied: 'It shall the upper be!'

"They turnips sowed all o'er their field,
     And when he came to share the crop,
 The Arabs took the subsoil yield,
     And the Devil got the turnip tops.

"And when another year came round
     The Devil spoke in wrathful scorn:
 'To have the lower half I'm bound!'
     The Arabs then sowed wheat and corn,

"When came the time again to share,
     The Arabs took the sheaves pell-mell,
 The Devil took the stubbles bare
     And fed with them the fire of hell."

There are innumerable other legends of stupid devils. A miller of the Devil-mill in Kleinbautzen tied the Devil to the water-wheel. [*1] A smith who for his hospitality once had a wish granted by Christ, bewitched the Devil and placed Lucifer, the chief of devils, on his anvil, which frightened him so much that the smith, when he died, was not admitted to hell. [*2] And there is a humorous German folk-song of a tailor, which begins:

[p. 255]

A tailor went to wander,
     On Monday, in the morn,
 And there he met the Devil,
     His clothes and shoes all torn.
 Hey, tailor, follow me
 In hell the boys need thee;
     For thou must clothe the devils
 Whatever the cost may be.

The tailor, on arriving in hell, maltreated all the devils with his tailor utensils in the attempt at dressing

Click to view
ST. DUNSTAN AND THE DEVIL. (Reproduced from Scheible.)

them, and they swore that they would never again allow a tailor to come near them, even though he might have stolen ever so much cloth. [*1]

Another comical story is told of Dunstan, abbot of Glaston, later archbishop of Canterbury. While busily

[p. 256]

engaged in the fabrication of a Eucharist cup, the Devil suddenly appeared to him. But the saint was not afraid; he took the pincers out of the fire and seized the nose of Satan, who ran off with a howl and never again dared to molest him. The event is commemorated in an old rhyme, thus:

"St. Dunstan, as the story goes,
 Once pulled the Devil by the nose
 With red-hot tongs, which made him roar
 That he was heard three miles or more."

An act of bravery is told of St. Cuthbert. Sir Guy Le Scoope (as Thomas Ingoldsby tells us, closely following the chronicle of Bolton) expected company, but finding at the appointed hour the banquet hall empty, because the guests had been kept away through a bad joke of the inviting messenger, he called on the Devil and ten thousand fiends to eat the dinner and take all that was there with them to the infernal regions. The Devil came with his devilish company and all the folk of Sir Guy fled, leaving the little heir behind, who was at once seized by Black Jim, the leader of the fiendish company. In his anxiety Sir Guy cried to St. Cuthbert of Bolton, who actually made his appearance in the shape of ail old palmer and forced the demoniac crowd to surrender the child, but he generously allowed them to remain as the guests of Sir Guy, adding:

"'But be moderate, pray,--and remember thus much,
 Since you're treated as Gentlemen, shew yourselves such,
     And don't make it late, But mind and go straight
 Home to bed when you've finished--and don't steal the plate!
 Nor wrench of the knocker--or bell from the gate. [p. 257]

Walk away, like respectable Devils, in peace,
 And don't "lark" with the watch or annoy the police!
     Having thus said his say, That Palmer grey
 Took up little Le Scoope and walk'd coolly away,
 While the Demons all set up a 'Hip! hip! hurray!'

Click to view
THE LEGEND OF ST. CUTHBERT. (From the Ingoldsby Legends.)

Then fell tooth and claw on the victuals, as they
 Had been guests at Guildhall upon Lord Mayor's day,
 All scrambling and scuffling for what was before 'em,
 No care for precedence or common decorum."

Still another story of saintly courage is told of St. Medard, who while once promenading on the shore of

[p. 258]

the Red Sea in Egypt, saw Old Nick carrying in a bag a number of lost sinners. The saint took compassion on the poor souls and slit Satan's bag open, whereupon Old Nick's prisoners escaped.

Click to view
THE LEGEND OF ST. MEDARD. (From the Ingoldsby Legends.)

"Away went the Quaker,--away went the Baker,
 Away went the Friar--that fine fat Ghost,
 Whose marrow Old Nick Had intended to pick,
 Dressed like a Woodcock, and served on toast!

Away went the nice little Cardinal's Niece,
 And the pretty Grisettes, and the Dons from Spain,
 And the Corsair's crew, And the coin-clipping Jew,
 And they scamper'd, like lamplighters, over the plain![p. 259]

Old Nick is a black-looking fellow at best,
 Ay, e'en when he's pleased; but never before
 Had he looked so black As on seeing his sack
 Thus cut into slits on the Red Sea shore."

Old Nick took up a stone and threw it at the saint.

"But Saint Medard Was remarkably hard
 And solid about the parietal bone."

The stone recoiled.

And it curl'd, and it twirl'd, and it whirl'd in the air,
 As this great big stone at a tangent flew!
 Just missing his crown, It at last came down
 Plump upon Nick's Orthopedical shoe!

It smashed his shin, and it smash'd his hoof,
 Notwithstanding his stout Orthopedical shoe
 And this is the way That, from that same day,
 Old Nick became what the French call Boiteux!"

One of the oldest triumphs of human skill in bridge-building gave rise to the Marchen of the Devil's Bridge which boldly overspans the yawning gorge of the Reuss where the mountain road passes up to the furca of the St. Gotthard. A new bridge has been built by engineers of the nineteenth century right above the old one; but the old one remained for a long time in its place, until it broke down in recent years. The legend goes that a shepherd-lad engaged the Devil to build the bridge on the condition that the soul of the first living creature that crossed it should be forfeited. When the work was finished the lad drove a chamois over the bridge, which, seeing that he was cheated out of the price he had expected, the Devil wrathfully tore into pieces. [*1]

[p. 260]

All these stories are Christianised pagan notions of evil conquered either through cleverness and wit or by divine assistance; and even the church doctrines of sin

Click to view
THE DEVIL'S BRIDGE OVER THE REUSS.

and salvation are based upon pre-Christian conceptions ultimately dating back to human sacrifices and the mystic rites of cannibalism in which man hoped to partake of

[p. 261]

divinity and immortality by eating the flesh and drinking the blood of his incarnated God or his representative.

The Christian scheme of salvation may be briefly called the vicarious atonement of man's sin through the blood of Christ. God's wrath upon the guilty human race is purified through the sufferings and death of the innocent god-man. Divine Justice is satisfied by the sacrifice of Divine Love.

The mystery of this doctrine and also of the doctrine of original sin, which in its literal sense can hardly be regarded as commendable, has a deep sense which appears when we consider the organic unity of the human race. We not only inherit the evil consequences of our ancestors' evil deeds, but we actually consist of their evil dispositions themselves. Thus the sin of our fathers is our curse because it is our own, and, in the same way, the merit of our brothers becomes, or may become, our own blessing. We can easily share in the benefit that will accrue from inventions or other advances made by one man if we are only willing to accept the lesson which his example teaches.

The idea of a salvation through vicarious atonement has grown dimmer of late. The old interpretation reminding us of the bloody sacrifices of savages is beginning to wane, although it can scarcely be regarded as entirely abandoned; it is not surrendered but merely transformed, and may now be called the idea of salvation through sacrifice.

Footnotes

^246:1 Die Trojaburgen Nord-Europas. Glogau, Carl Flemming, 1893.

^247:1 Vossische Zeitung, 1896, Feb. 2, 9, 10; Sonntagsbeilagen.

^250:1 Floegel's Geschichte des Grotesk-Komischen, by Ebeling, p. 286, quotes the giant-song as sung in Ypern.

^251:1 I Book of Kings, xvi. 34.

^253:1 Grimm, Marchen, No. 189. Deutsche Mythologie, No. 981. Mullenhoff. No. 377. Thiele, Danische Sagen, No. 122.

^253:2 Der betrogene Teufel.

^254:1 Preusker, Blicke in die vaterlandische Vorzeit, I., p. 182.

^254:2 Mentioned in Grimm's Marchen.

^255:1 Translated by the author. The song may be found in various collections of German folk-songs. Its first verse runs:

Es wollt ein Schneider wandern,
 Des Montags in der Fruh.
 Begegnet ihm der Teufel,
 Hat weder Weider noch Schuh.

He, he, du Schneidergesoll,
 Du musst mit mir zur Holl,
 Du sollst die Teufel kleiden,
 Es koste was es woll."

^259:1 Grimm, Deutsche Sagen, 336, and Tobler, Appenzeller Sprachschatz, 214.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 262]

  

THE DEVIL'S PRIME.

Miracles and Magic.

A LATIN proverb says: "Si duo faciunt idem, non est idem" (if two do the same thing, it is not the

Click to view
MODERN SNAKE CHARMERS.
 (Reproduced from Brehm.)

same thing); and this is true not only of individuals, but also of nations and of religions. It is a habit common

[p. 263]

among all classes of people to condone the faults of their own kind but to be severe with those of others. The oracles of Delphi were divine to a Greek mind, but they were of diabolical origin according to the judgment of Christians. Jesus was a magician in the eyes of the pagans, while the Christians worshipped him as the son of God, and a man who performed miracles.

Click to view
MOSES AND AARON PERFORMING THE SNAKE MIRACLE BEFORE PHARAOH.
 (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

The priests of Pharaoh and Moses perform the same tricks still performed by the snake charmers of Egypt and India, but the deeds of Moses alone are regarded as miracles, and the Israelites claim that he could accomplish more than the Egyptians. Father Juan Bautista (of about 1600) tells us that among the natives of Mexico

[p. 264]

there are magicians who "conjure the clouds, and can make a stick look like a serpent, a mat like a centipede, a stone like a scorpion, and similar deceptions." [*1]

Simon Magus and his disciples were believed by the early Christians to possess power over demons; [*2] but Simon was a competitor of the Apostles, and therefore his deeds were not regarded as divine. Before an impartial tribunal the methods and aspirations of both parties would

Click to view
THE EGYPTIAN SNAKE NAJA HAJE MADE MOTIONLESS BY PRESSURE ON THE NECK.
 (Reproduced from Verworn after photographs.)

 [*3]

resemble one another more than the one-sided statements of Christian authors at first sight seem to warrant. The accusation made against Simon by Luke, of having offered money to the Apostles for communicating to him the Holy Ghost, does not prove a depravity of heart, as the later Christians thought; for Simon took the rebuke

[p. 265]

in the proper spirit and apparently remained on good terms with the Apostles. The reports of the church fathers which make Peter and Simon rivals in working miracles, develop the story in the spirit of the age; they characterise the superstitions of the time; yet, although they probably reflect historical facts, they are as unreliable as are the charges of pagan authors hurled against the Christians.

The early Christians practised healing the sick by the laying on of hands and by praying; so did the Therapeutae and other Gnostics; yet faith-cure and Christian science are not countenanced by the churches to-day.

Minucius Felix [*1] puts the common notions, which in his days prevailed in Greece and Italy concerning the practices of the Christians, into the mouth of Caecilius who describes them as a desperate class of vulgar men and credulous women threatening the welfare of mankind. He states that they are atheists, for they cherish a contempt for temples, spit at the gods, and ridicule religious ceremonies; that their own cult is a mixture of superstition and depravity; that they possess secret symbols by which they recognise one another; they call themselves brothers and sisters, and degrade these sacred words by sensuality. Further, it is said that they adore a donkey's head, and that their worship is obscene. The libel culminates in the assertion that the reception of new members is celebrated by slaughtering and devouring a child covered all over with flour, which is an obvious perversion of the Communion, but Caecilius declares that it

[p. 266]

is done because partnership in guilt is the best means of securing secrecy. Lastly, he adds, that on festival days they celebrate love feasts which after the extinction of the lights end with sexual excesses.

Similar accusations are found in various authors, and even the noble-hearted and high-minded Tacitus speaks of the Christians with contempt; while on the other hand the Christians do not shrink from ridiculing the holiest and noblest of paganism. For instance, Minucius Felix, a Christian of the highest type and best education, speaks of Socrates as "the Athenian buffoon." [*1]

Justinus Martyr in his Apologia makes the asseveration that the Christians are innocent, but leaves the question open whether the heretics, such as the Gnostics, might not be guilty of these abominations (App. II., p. 70), and Eusebius directly claims that the practices that prevailed among the heretics were the direct cause of the evil rumors concerning the life of the Christians.

While we must bear in mind that the moral rigidity of the Gnostics leaves upon the whole no doubt about the purity of their life, we may grant the probability of the presence of black sheep among them. But the same is true of the Christians, as we know for certain on the good authority of St. Paul who in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, after an enumeration of such sinners as will not inherit the kingdom (v. 8-11,--the passage had better remain unquoted) says, "and such were some of you." Accordingly, there can be no doubt that there were abuses in the Church of Corinth. St. Paul believes the rumor of a sin, "that is not so much as named among

[p. 267]

the Gentiles," and the Second Epistle is the best evidence that the Corinthians did not deny the facts. They repent, whereupon St. Paul recommends charity toward the main offender (2 Cor. ii. 6-11), saying: "To whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also."

The various aberrations among the Christians which

Click to view
A SUCCESSFUL RAIN-MAKER SLAYING HIS RIVALS.
 (Elijah and Baal priests. After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

(See pp. <page 268>-<page 269>)

were very apparent in many of their most prominent leaders, such as Constantine the Great, must not astonish us, because Christianity originated in an age of unrest, and the new movement was the centre of attraction for all kinds of eccentricity. In spite of various excrescences, we cannot but say that Christianity opened to the world

[p. 268]

new vistas of truth. Represented by such men as St. Paul, it tended toward purity of heart; but the same is true of the Gnostics and the Manichees. The accusations on both sides rest mainly upon partisan statements and cannot be trusted, or at least must be used with due reserve. But it is natural that here as always, the same things are no longer the same when reported of people of another faith. Thus the virtues of the pagans are to St. Augustine only "polished vices," and the heroism of Christian martyrs is mere obstinacy in the opinion of Roman praetors.

Click to view
TENSKWATAWA, THE SHAWANO PROPHET IN 1808.

 [*1]

We look with contempt upon the Indian prophet who poses as a rain-maker, but read the story of Elijah with great edification, and while we justify the holy zeal of the latter, we would make no allowance for the severity of Indian reformers who fail to spare the lives of their rivals. One instance will suffice: Tenskwatawa, the Shawano prophet, preached in the beginning of the nineteenth century a nobler religion and a purer morality to the tribes of the prairie, and was revered by his followers as an incarnation of Manabozho

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] (i. e., first doer). Drunkenness, the besetting sin of the Indians since their acquaintance with the whites, and the traditional superstition practised by the medicine-men ceased. But reform was coupled with persecution. Tenskwatawa "inaugurated a crusade against all who were suspected of dealing in witchcraft or magic arts," and he took advantage of the faith of his followers "to effectually rid himself of all who opposed his sacred claims." All his rivals were successively marked by the prophet, and doomed to be burned alive. [*1]

Click to view
TENSKWATAWA, THE SHAWANO PROPHET IN 1831.

 [*2]

All these facts are so many instances which prove the truth of the proverb, that if two do the same thing it will not be regarded as the same thing: and thus the miracle of our own religion is mere magic and witchcraft in other religions.

*      *      *

One of the most characteristic features of the pre-scientific age is man's yearning for the realisation of that which is unattainable by natural means. The belief in

[p. 270]

magic will inevitably prevail so long as the dualistic world-conception dominates the minds of the people, and in that period of civilisation supernatural deeds are expected as the indispensable credentials of all religious prophets. It is the age of miracles and witchcraft.

Now we know that wherever contra-natural things are believed, there the strangest events will be experienced by those who are under the suggestion of the, belief; and then at once a competition will originate between those who represent the established religion and others who perform, or pretend to perform, similar deeds. The former are prophets and saints, and they work miracles; the latter are wizards and witches, and their art is called witchcraft.

Miracles and witchcraft possess this in common that both are supposed to supersede the laws of nature, but there is this difference that the miracle is believed to be the supernatural power of one's own religion, while witchcraft is the miracle of heretics. Miracle is anything contra-natural that is legitimate; and witchcraft is the same thing, but illegitimate; the former is supposed to be done with the help of God, the latter with the help of Satan; the former is boasted of as the highest glory of the Church, the latter is denounced as the greatest abomination possible.

It is natural that wizards and witches are always represented as obnoxious, and it is said that their art is practised to injure the welfare of mankind. Nevertheless, miracles, [*1] while some very mean deeds are counted as

[p. 271]

Click to view
THE ECSTASY OF THE GHOST DANCE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS.

[p. 272]

good deeds if only performed by believers in other gods are branded as witchcraft. Moreover, all priests are unanimous in condemning the application of charms and spells, except those of their own religion, even though they be used for the best and purest ends. A faith-cure by heretics, and even a successful operation through the unusual skill of a surgeon, would be set down as deeds of darkness by those who believe in a religion of miracles, [*1] but official processions with prayers and sprinkling of holy water are still employed, as could be observed during a late small-pox epidemic in French Canada.

The belief in magic is a natural phase in the evolution of mankind, producing the medicine-man who dispels diseases by charms, the prophet who by an appeal to his Deity (be it the sun-god of the American Indians, or the Baal of the Phoenicians, or El or Yahveh of the Israelites) undertakes to make rain, and the medium who vaticinates or foretells fortunes and calls the dead from Spirit-Land.

The rain-priests play a most important part in the life of all the American Indians. The snake-dance among the Pueblo Indians of Mexico is a prayer for rain. [*2] Frequently the sun is invoked for rain. Dreams, visions, and ecstasies are regarded as the best means of divine revelation, and the medicine-bag possesses magic powers. The devotional spirit is not less intense among, the

[p. 273]

Click to view
THE BLESSING. A CEREMONY IN THE GHOST DANCE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS.

[p. 274]

pagans of the prairie than it was among the ancient Israelites and the early Christians. [*1]

Click to view
HENRICUS CORNELIUS AGRIPPA AB NETTESHEIM.
 (Reproduced from the original edition of his works.)

All attempt to practise magic, and a religion that promises success in life and proposes to accomplish the salvation of man by miracles, be it the miracles of their founders or the continued miracles of Church institutions, such as sacraments, pilgrimages, sprinkling of holy water, mass-reading, or other rites supposed to possess other than a purely symbolical significance, is a religion of magic. In brief, a religion of magic is based on a belief in the contra-natural, and as soon as a religion of magic becomes an established institution, it will develop the notion of witchcraft by a discrimination between its own miracles and those of other people who are unbelievers.

How similar the notions of legitimate and illegitimate miracles are, may be learned from the writings of

[p. 275]

[paragraph continues] Agrippa of Nettesheim (1486-1535), one of the greatest sages and philosophers of the age of the Reformation, who proclaimed that the perfection of philosophy could be attained by magic, which in distinction to black magic [*1] he called "natural" or "celestial" magic, and which, he assumed, leads to a perfect union with God. His book, De Occulta Philosophia, written in 1510 but published only in 1531, exhibits his belief in the possibility of creating hatred and love by spells, of discovering thieves, confounding armies, making thunderstorms and rain, all of which he expects to accomplish by magic through a mystical union with God. It is difficult for us to understand how a man of his caliber could believe in the efficacy of spells and mystic keys; but grant the reality of magic, and such aberrations become legitimate experiments. Witches have been frequently accused of the very same feats, only they were said to have performed them through the assistance of the Devil. In spite of the resemblance which Agrippa unconsciously had discovered between witchcraft and miracles, he remained unmolested, for his views were at the time commonly accepted. Nor would he ever have excited the hostility of the Papal party had he not lectured with fervor, at the University of Dole, Burgundy (1509), on Reuchlin's book, De Verbo Mirifico, and had he not, in 1519, when syndic at Metz, ventured to save the life of a witch that had fallen into the hands of the Inquisitor Nicolas Savini. [*2]

What a strange mixture of occultism with exact observation,

[p. 276]

based upon anatomical measurements, is contained in the chapter on "The Proportions of the Human Body." Mathematics, natural science, and mysticism are all combined in Agrippa's Occulta Philosophia, and the learned author is unable to discriminate between facts and fancy. [*1]

          
Click to view

     
      
Click to view

       
Click to view

     
   Agrippa's celestial magic is not different from black magic; for both kinds of magic consist in the hope of contra-natural accomplishments. When after years of varied disappointments Agrippa discovered that there

[p. 277]

was no magic, be it black or white, he came to the conclusion that there was no science. As the agnostic who, after having wrongly formulated the problems of philosophy, and finding his mind hopelessly entangled in confusion, pronounces the dreary doctrine of the impossibility of knowledge, so Agrippa of Nettesheim began to despair

          
Click to view

     
      
Click to view

       
Click to view

     
   not only of magic, but also of science; and he wrote, in 1526, his "Proposition about the Incertitude and Vanity of the Sciences and Arts; and about the excellence of the word of God." [*1]

[p. 278]

All in all, we find that a religion of magic involves a belief in witchcraft. Where sacraments are employed as exorcisms, every attempt at exercising extraordinary powers is regarded not as impossible but as a lack of loyalty. Hence heresy and witchcraft are always declared to be closely allied, for witchcraft is nothing but the performance of miracles without the licence of an established Church, which claims to have a monopoly in supernaturalism.

Click to view
EXORCISING BY THE CROSS.
 (Bas-relief on a water vessel of the seventh century found near Pisama.)

 [*1]

The belief in and the prosecution of witchcraft are the necessary result of a firmly established religion of magic. All the religions of magic are naturally intolerant. As soon as one of them triumphs over its rivals, as soon as it is worked out into a systematic creed and organised in an institution such as the Church, it will,

[p. 279]

like all combinations or trusts, with all means at its command, insure and perpetuate its supremacy. Considering that the mediaeval Church was practically a religion of magic, witch prosecution was the inevitable result of the Pope's ascendancy, and it continued in Protestant countries as an heirloom of the Dark Ages so long as the belief in magic was retained.

Exorcism.

The belief in Satan as held by many Christians today is harmless and tame in comparison with the old conception, which was taken seriously. Satan, it is true, was regarded as the foe of mankind, but there was no doubt about his power, and the idea prevailed that his services could easily be procured by those ready to surrender to him their souls.

As soon as the Church became possessed of power, it was at once bent on the suppression of magic and witchcraft. Constantine began the policy of threatening the severest punishment on all kinds of black art, allowing its application only for curing diseases and preventing hail and rain storms during the harvest. And Constantine's successors did not fail to preserve the tradition.

A prohibition to fish implies that there is good fishing, which tempts many to try. In the same way, the policy of the Christian authorities was tantamount to an official recognition of witchcraft as a mighty and powerful weapon that could be wielded by the initiated both for good and for evil; and thus it could not fail to strengthen the Devil's credit, as well as to develop most

[p. 280]

exuberantly a peculiar mediaeval demonology. Belief in witchcraft rapidly became so common that almost all countries were in possession of laws against magicians, soothsayers, and witches. One remarkable exception only is found in the law-code of the Lombards, which contains the declaration that witches cannot perform any such feats as devouring people alive, and therefore the burning of a woman on the pretext of her being a witch is prohibited.

There is a remarkable Latin book of "Dialogues on the Life and Miracles of the Italian Fathers," [*1] which characterises the superstitious spirit that prevailed among both the laity and the clergy. It is replete with all kinds of ridiculous tales which are taken in good earnest. We are told, for instance, that Gregory the Great, when consecrating an Arian church for Roman Catholic worship, successfully exorcised the Devil with the help of sacred relies; Satan flew before him in the shape of a huge pig and vacated the place completely the following night with great noise.

The Devil came more and more into prominence in the eighth and ninth centuries. Baptism was regarded as an expulsion of the evil spirit. The convert had, according to Dionysius, to exhale three times, and according to the Greek euchologion, also to spit at him upon the floor. The Synod of Leptinae in the year 743 added to the confession of faith an "abrenunciation" of the Devil.

A Low-German formula which renounces the three

[p. 281]

foremost German deities with all their hosts [*1] consists of questions and answers, which read as follows:

"Q. Forsakest thou the Devil?

"A. I forsake the Devil!

"Q. And all Devil guilds?

"A. And I forsake all Devil guilds.

"Q. And all Devil works?

"A. And I forsake all Devil works, and words, Thonar (Thor) and Wodan and Saxnot (Fro) and all the evil ones that are his companions." [*2]

Click to view
TEXT OF THE BAPTISMAL ABJURATION FORMULA IN OLD LOW-GERMAN.
 (Reproduced from O. Henne am Rhyn.)

The fact is that Christianity itself was regarded as a kind of magic which in distinction to the black magic or necromancy would have to be classed together with white

[p. 282]

magic. The sacraments were supposed to be miraculous methods of performing supernatural feats quite analogous to exorcisms, and the church itself was, in the minds of the people, an institution of sacred sorcery.

Belief in Witchcraft.

With the belief in witchcraft a new period begins in the evolution of mankind. The Devil becomes greater and more respected than ever; indeed, this is the classical period of his history and the prime of his life. Contracts were made with the Devil in which men surrendered their souls for all kinds of services on his part.

In the thirteenth century the Devil reached the acme of his influence, and it is only possible to give a meagre sketch of the Devil's activity during this period. Nothing extraordinary could happen without its being attributed to him, and to the people of the Middle Ages many things, ordinary to us, were very extraordinary.

Gervasius Tilberiensis composed a collection of stupid fables which he published in 1211 under the title Otia Imperialia, dedicating them to Emperor Otto IV. He repeats some spook stories of Apuleius as events that happened in France and England and invents new tales which surpass the old ones only in crudity. He accepts the medical explanation of nightmares as due to an overheated imagination, but proves even then the presence of demoniacal influence, on the authority of St. Augustine.

In the Dialogus Miraculorum, [*1] by Caesarius von

[p. 283]

[paragraph continues] Heisterbach (who died about 1245), we find that not only thunder-storms, hail-storms, inundations, diseases, but

Click to view
SPECIMEN PAGE OF AN ILLUMINATED INITIAL IN HEISTERBACH'S Dialogus Miraculorum.
 Illustrating the pious spirit of this most nefarious work. Reproduced from Joseph Strange's text edition, published by Heberle, Cologne, Bonn, and Brussels, 1861.

 [*1]

also unexpected noises, the rustling of leaves, the howling of the wind, were attributed to Old Nick. He appears

[p. 284]

as a bear, a monkey, a toad, a raven, a vulture, as a gentleman, a soldier, a hunter, a peasant, a dragon, and a negro.

Caesarius's book has become famous, and rightly so, not on account of any peculiar merit of its author but because it is a true picture of the average conception of the times. [*1]

The book is written mainly for the instruction of young monks. The initials of the original editions are emblazoned with pious pictures, and the tendency of all stories is that there is no surer salvation than in the brotherhood of the Cistercian monks, the order to which the author belongs. He declares that "there is no safer road than the order of the Cistercians; nor do fewer people go down to the lower regions than the members of that religion." [*2] Caesarius makes the Lord appear as a sovereign who regards it as his duty to protect his faithful servants and takes an interest in concealing their crimes. He works a special miracle, lest the slander of a clergyman become public (Book I., p. 23). The Devil having caused a man to sin against the sixth commandment, is unable to accuse and punish the sinner, or make his guilt known, because the latter escapes all evil effects through the confessional (Book III., p. 4). The Devil once went to a confessor and confessed. Having enumerated his sins, the confessor declared that a thousand years would not have sufficed to commit them all, and the Devil

[p. 285]

answered that indeed he was much older than a thousand years, for he was one of the demons who fell with Lucifer. The priest considered his sins unpardonable, and asked him whether he wanted to do penance. "Yes," he said, "if the penance is not too heavy for me." "Well," replied the confessor, "bow down thrice a day, saying: 'God, my Lord and Creator, I have sinned against thee;

          
Click to view
WITCHES   CONJURING A HAIL-STORM.
   (After an old German print.)

       
Click to view
THE DEVIL OF   CONCEIT AS SEEN BY A CLERGYMAN ON THE DRESS OF A FASHIONABLE LADY.

     
   forgive me." "No, said the Devil," that would be too humiliating for me (III., 26, and IV., 5).

Arrogance and self-conceit are the main-springs of Satan's character. A curious parallel to Peregrinus is the story of a woman who, for the sake of clearing her soul of sin, burns herself to death (Book VI., p. 35). Imps are seen playing with cupids upon the train of a

[p. 286]

gentlewoman (Book. V., p. 7). A man games with the Devil and loses his soul (V., 34).

The theory of incubi and succubi is presented in all its indecency on the authority of St. Thomas Aquinas, who in his commentary on Job (Chap. 40) interprets Behemoth (a large animal, probably the elephant) as the Devil, and derives from the mention of the animal's sexual strength (verse 16) the theory that evil demons can have intercourse with human beings. Satan is supposed to serve first as a succubus (or female devil) to men, and then as an incubus (or male devil) to women; and St. Thomas declares that children begotten in this way ought to be regarded as the children of the men whom Satan served as succubus. They would, however, The more cunning than normal children on account of the demoniacal influence to which they were exposed in their pre-natal condition. Matthaeus Paris mentions that within six months one such incubus-baby developed all its teeth and attained the size of a boy of seven years, while his mother became consumptive and died.

The superstitions of the belief in the personal interference of the Devil with human affairs passed away, but they left us an extensive and interesting literature which for all time to come will remain a rich mine for the anthropologist, the antiquarian, the historian, the psychologist, the poet, and the philosopher. There are innumerable miracles and tales of St. Mary, the mother of Jesus, but few of them are endurable, while the general tone of the narration is unworthy of any woman,--let alone the highest woman-ideal of Christianity. A dog has been baptised by rascals, and he turns mad (X., 145). In the

[p. 287]

hour of death, pious people see the heavens open, while infidels are tortured by black men, ravens and vultures (XL); and for the edification of the faithful the damned are thrown into the crater of a volcano (XII.).

The Abbot Richalmus, who wrote about 1270 a book of revelations about the intrigues and persecutions of demons, recognises the Devil's hand in every little inconvenience he might happen to experience. It is devils that make him feel qualmish when he has eaten too much; they make him fall asleep over his breviary. When he exposes his hand, they make it feel chilly; when he hides it under his cloak, they tickle and bite it like fleas. "Once, he says, "when we were gathering stones for building a wall, I heard a devil exclaim, 'What tiresome work!' He only did it to tempt us and make us rebellious." There is no noise but some devil speaks out of it. "While I pull my sleeve," he says, "a rustling is heard, and devils speak through this sound. When I scratch myself, the scratching is their voice. . . . Lowly people are mostly seduced by anger and sadness, but the rich and powerful by arrogance and pride." [*1]

Another favorite conception of Christianity originated in the Roman idea of looking upon religion as a legal affair. It must have been a lawyer who made that happy hit of presenting the case of Satan versus mankind or versus Christ juridically, in the form of a regular lawsuit, in which, of course, Satan in the end is worsted. The booklet, which bears the title Processus Sathanae, became so popular that it was repeatedly edited by various authors and is still extant in various redactions, one

[p. 288]

of the best and oldest being by Bartolus, a lawyer who lived 1313-1355. [*1]

The Devil played the role of a joker in the Passion plays, and his part became more and more prominent. In France the idea prevailed that the great mysteries should always have not less than four devils, a usage which is mentioned in Rabelais. Hence the proverb, "Faire le diable a quatre." In Mediaeval mysteries God the Father, God the Son, and Satan appear on the stage, and

          
Click to view
GOD THE   FATHER

       
Click to view
SATAN

       
Click to view
GOD THE   SON

     
       

        

        [*2]

     
   THE MAIN ACTORS IN MEDIAeVAL MYSTERIES

 

the last one is practically the main actor in the whole drama. He was the intriguer who, after his successful revolution against the Lord, set up an empire of his own in Hell; and without the Devil's intrigues the whole plot of man's fall and Christ's salvation would be impossible. [*3] The works of Caesarius, of Heisterbach, Richalmus,

[p. 289]

[paragraph continues] Bartolus, and others are by no means the only ones that treat on devil-lore; they are typical of a large class of similar literary productions.

While the Church in her struggles for supremacy, aspiring for worldly power, began to neglect her spiritual duties, people sought comfort in sects. The Manichees increased, Catharism spread rapidly and many new sects, such as the Albigenses, were founded. Almost all sectarians were morally earnest and sincere, yet the general character of these sects was similar to the Manichees, an openly avowed dualism. The tendencies of the time were dualistic, and the Church also was under the influence of dualistic views. Nevertheless, orthodox Christianity, at least in her noblest expositors, such as Thomas Aquinas and other Christian philosophers, never lost sight of the monistic ideal, in spite of all its demonological errors. The demonology of the Middle Ages was at bottom a mythical excrescence, for the Devil's power was all the time regarded as a mere sham, as Blendwerk. He still served the higher purposes of the omnipotent God, who used him for his wise and well-calculated ends. Thus it was a natural consequence that the Devil appeared in spite of his smartness as the dupe of God; his fate was always to be defeated and ridiculed. As such he figures in the mysteries, the Easter and Christmas plays, in which he acts one of the most important parts, that of intriguer, harlequin, and fool.

Kindred Superstitions.

Belief in witchcraft was only the main result of the established authority of a religion of magic, involving the

[p. 290]

belief in a personal Devil. There are other consequences which, though less important, are sometimes bad enough in themselves. We mention a few of them: (1) There were persons who actually tried to make contracts with the Devil. (2) People possessed of a lively imagination began to dream that they stood in all kinds of relations to the Evil One. There are cases in which imaginary witches surrendered themselves voluntarily to the Inquisition. (3) Soldiers entertained the hope of rendering themselves bullet-proof. (4) Many methods were devised

Click to view
WITCHES. (From Horndorff De magicis artibus.)

to predict the future. (5) There were plenty of fools who tried to become rich by magic; and (6) worst of all, men who knew better than the self-constituted guardians of the right faith, were relentlessly persecuted even unto death.

The Devil was believed to hold court and to celebrate witches' sabbaths, on which occasions homage was paid him and the Christian sacraments were travestied with diabolical malice.

The most remarkable case of bestial demonolatry with all its incidental crimes, is recorded in the annals of

[p. 291]

Click to view
THE WITCHES' SABBATH (After Picart.)

[p. 292]

[paragraph continues] France where Giles De Rais (also spelled Raiz and Retz) one of the greatest dignitaries of the State, a descendant of the highest noble families of Brittany, and a marshal of France, was charged with kidnapping about one hundred and fifty women and children, who, after being subjected to all kinds of outrages, were solemnly sacrificed to Satan. [*1] The facts seem impossible but the complete records of the case are still extant, according to which Rais was convicted and executed in 1440. The history of his life has apparently contributed to the formation of the legend of Bluebeard.

Among the persons who gave themselves up to the Inquisition we mention Katharine Jung of Amdorf, Hessia, who confessed to her own father that she was a witch. The poor man regarded it as his duty to denounce her, and after ten days, on May, 11, 1631, the girl was executed.

Another case of comparatively recent date happened in Alvebrode, Hanover. An old spinster, daughter of the widow Steingrob, had a brother who suffered from attacks of asthma. Her mother was blind and lame, and her sister had died of consumption. Some people in the village suggested that the attacks which came upon her brother were due to witchcraft, and at last the old spinster herself declared she was a witch and described her relations with the Devil in the minutest terms. She was convinced herself that she had bewitched her mother and sister and could injure people by a mere glance. Anxious about the welfare of the villagers, she warned them to avoid her, and tried to drown herself during an attack of melancholy,

[p. 293]

but she was rescued and imprisoned. The physician, a sensible and humane man, declared, judging from bodily symptoms, that she suffered from a disease which had confused her mind, but she could not be prevailed upon to submit to treatment. She insisted that she was as healthy as a fish and that the Devil could not be driven out by medicine. She said: "It is in vain to try to cure a witch. I deserve death and shall gladly die, but please do not burn me, have me dispatched with the sword. Everything will be well when I am dead." Thereupon the physician resorted to a stratagem. He persuaded her that her neck was sword-proof, and succeeded in inducing her to take medicine to make her neck soft again for decapitation. She was then treated according to the prescriptions of her physician, with bodily exercise and regular diet and sleep until her mind improved, and she forgot all about witchcraft and her sword-proof neck.

Christian Elsenreiter, a student of Passau, palmed off upon credulous soldiers for making them bullet-proof a slip of paper upon which he wrote, "Devil help me, body and soul I give to thee!" The paper had to be swallowed, and Elsenreiter claimed that he who would die of it within twenty-four hours would go to hell, but he who survived would be bullet-proof all his life.

A Saxon Colonel had been hit twice during his military career by a bullet, but in each case a Mansfeld-Thaler had protected him. This incident gave rise to the notion that Mansfeld-Thalers make one bullet-proof, and there was no officer in the imperial army during the Turkish wars who did not carry at least one of them about

[p. 294]

his person. The price of Mansfeld-Thalers at that time was fifteen times their face value.

Various kinds of magic wands and divining-rods which were supposed to indicate the place where treasures

Click to view
VIRGULTA DIVINA.
 (According to the Pneumatologia occulta. This divining rod must be made of copper or brass.)

 [*1]

lay hidden, were made in great quantities. There are innumerable magic formulas and exorcisms, most of them invoking God or the Trinity, or Jesus Christ, in

[p. 295]

[paragraph continues] Hebrew or Latin; especially the words Yahveh (yhwh) and Adonai ('dny) play an important part and were believed to be very effective. Among the magic symbols which are met with in old documents, the triangle, the cross, the pentagram, and the signs of the planets are preferred; but other figures, such as squares, hexagrams, circles, and fantastic combinations of irregular lines are also quite frequent. Conjurations were made according to various prescriptions; a circle was drawn at midnight where two roads cross; it was lit with wax candles made after specific

          
Click to view
A SEAL OF PETRUS   DR ALBANO FOR CONJURING GOOD SPIRITS.

       
Click to view
THE TWELVE   HOUSES OF A HOROSCOPE.

     
       [*1]

        [*2]

     
   recipes. The conjurer had to prepare himself by fasts and prayers, sometimes by partaking of the holy communion at church, and when at last he failed to find the treasure or to accomplish his purpose, whatever it may have been, he had reason to believe that he made some trifling mistake in his preparations.

The most fashionable method of predicting the

[p. 296]

future was the casting of horoscopes, which still served astronomers in the seventeenth century as a means of making a living. Kepler, who enjoyed the confidence of the superstitious Emperor Rudolf IL, felt the deep humiliation of his position, but he bore it with good humor, as we know from himself. He writes:

"Astrology is indeed a foolish child, but, good gracious, where would her mother, the wise astronomy, be if she had not this foolish child is not the world more foolish still, so foolish, indeed, that the old sensible mother (i. e., astronomy) must be introduced

          
Click to view
THE SIGN OF THE   FIRST HOUR OF SUNDAY.

       
Click to view
THE DIVINE NAME   ARRANGED FOR CONJURATION.

     
       [*1]

        [*2]

     
   to the people . . . through her daughter's foolishness.... But when guesses are limited to yes and no, one has always about half the chances in one's favor. . . . Right guesses are remembered, failures forgotten, and so the astrologer remains in honor." [*3]

One reason why there were always so many fools who in spite of their fear of eternal damnation tried to make contracts with the Prince of Darkness was the prevalent idea illustrated in many old legends that it was

[p. 297]

quite possible to shirk one's obligations; indeed God and all the saints were supposed to be always ready to assist people in cheating the Devil out of his own. As an instance that characterises this belief, quite common in the

Click to view
KNIGHT AND DEVIL. (Old German Print.)

Middle Ages, we quote the legend of St. Gertrude, an Old-German poem of unknown authorship. [*1]

[p. 298]

"A knight was stricken by poverty great,
     His goods he all had wasted,
 And gone from him was his whole estate;
     Such bitter want he'd tasted
         That to take his life he intended.

"He rode to the forest dark and dim,
     But there, the Devil awaited
 The knight and said to him
     'Thou shalt be reinstated
         If thou wilt assist me in secret.'

"'I'll give thee chests full of glittering gold
     In exchange for thy loving maiden,
 Then canst thou live well and free and bold,
     Until thou diest. Well laden
         With joys shalt thou be while living.'

"And happy was the maiden fair,
     The new wealth her heart delighted
 'But say, my Lord,' she asked, from where
     Do the riches come?' Then affrighted
         Was the knight at her look and her query.

"'O, lady dear wilt thou ride with me
     Through a forest green and pleasant?
 The birds of the forest there play in glee,
     And the songs are now heard incessant
         Which gaily the birds are singing.'

"Together a green forest they reached;
     And near the road was standing
 A little chapel, where men beseeched
     Mary, whose arms were expanding
         To all: our worthy mother, our lady.

"To the knight the maiden said: Let me
     Here stop in pious feeling [p. 299]
 In the chapel to pray an Ave Marie.'
     At the altar she was kneeling
         With her arms acrosswise folded.

"She there fell asleep, forgetting her care,
     And Mary stepped forth from the altar
 And to the knight she came blooming fair,
     In her hand bearing rosary and psalter,
         And mounted, as if 'twere the maiden.

"They both reached soon, in the forest dense,
     The cross-road where the Devil was standing,
 His rage on seeing them was intense.
     'Thou hast cheated me!' he was demanding,
         'Thou treacherous liar, thou trickster!

'Thou hast promised to bring here thy lady fair,
     And thou bringest the Queen of Heaven!
 With her I cannot my conquests share,
     From her presence I must be driven
         Yea, driven from her forever.'

              "Said Mary:

    Thou evil spirit, away with thee,
 To thy fellows thou shalt be given,
 The lady thou must leave with me!
     My Son's kingdom she shall live in,
         Now and forever! Amen.'"

What charms the idea of magic exercises upon a man's mind may be learned from the fact that even Goethe, one of the clearest-headed men of modern times, passed through a period of his life (as we know from his Wahrheit und Dichtung) in which he pondered upon the possibility of occultism. Reminiscences of this kind found classical expression in his ballad "The Treasure

[p. 300]

[paragraph continues] Digger," which on account of its practical beauty and sound moral lesson deserves to be translated and quoted. [*1] The treasure-digger speaks:

"Sick at heart, poor in possession
 Dragged my days unto the latest,
 Poverty is of curses greatest,
 Riches are the highest good!
 And to end my sore depression 
 I went forth to dig for treasure,
 'Thine my soul be at thy pleasure!'
 I wrote down with my own blood.

"Circle within circle drawing,
 Wondrous flames I then collected
 Unto herbs and bones, selected,
 And conjured a spell of might,
 Then in manner overawing,
 As I'd learned, I dug for treasure
 On the spot I found by measure.
 Black and stormy was the night.

"And I saw a light's formation
 Brightening to a star's consistence,
 Coming from the farthest distance
 Just as struck the midnight hour.
 Vain was further preparation,
 And a beauteous youth, with glowing
 Splendor from a cup o'erflowing
 Spread a flash with searching power.

"Yet his eyes my soul delighted;
 'Neath a wealth of flowers tender,
 With that cup of heavenly splendor
 Stepped he in the magic ring;

[p. 301]

Click to view
THE BISHOP OF LODI PREACHING AT THE TRIAL OF JOHN HUSS (From Castelar.)

[p. 302]

Friendly me to drink invited,
 And I thought: this youth so purely
 Off'ring gifts of heaven, surely
 Cannot be the evil king.

"'Courage drink, and life's pure pleasure,'
 Quoth he. 'Learn from this occasion,
 That by anxious conjuration
 No boon can this place afford.
 Dig no longer for vain treasure
 Work by day, and guests at leisure,
 Toilsome weeks and feastdays' pleasure,
 Be thy future magic word!'" [*1]

Click to view
SAVONAROLA.

The height of folly that the belief in a religion of magic is capable of, was actually attained in the persecution of men of science whose doctrines came in conflict with tradition. Not only religious reformers, like Savonarola and Huss, were condemned to be burned alive and to die a heretic's death, but also thinkers like Giordano Bruno. Galileo at the age of seventy was imprisoned and surrendered to the Inquisition at the demand of Pope Urban. Threatened with torture, he was forced to recant publicly the heresy of the motion of the earth. [*2]

[p. 303]

The religion of miracles had in the natural course of evolution become the religion of magic. The religion of

Click to view
SAVONAROLA PRAYING IN HIS CELL. (From Castelar)

magic had proved to be a belief in witchcraft and the belief in witchcraft had brought forth the terrible fruit of

[p. 304]

Click to view
BURNING OF SAVONAROLA (After Don Ricardo Balaca.)

[p. 305]

witch-prosecution with all kindred superstitions, among which the hatred of science was not the least injurious to true religion and the highest interests of mankind.

The belief in witchcraft ceased naturally with the ascendancy of science. The more Christianity became imbued with the scientific spirit of the eighteenth century, the rarer became the fagot, and the fires were at last extinguished forever. So long as Christianity was interpreted as a religion of magic, nothing could stop the terrible mania for burning witches, neither the fear of future punishments for the tortures inflicted upon many innocent victims, nor the pangs of conscience that were now and then felt by the judges, nor Christian charity and love. There was only one remedy, viz., a clear insight into the nature of things revealing the impossibility of witchcraft; but that one remedy afforded an unfailing cure.

Footnotes

^264:1 Cf. Fourteenth Annual Report of the B. of Eth., 1892-1893, p. 150.

^264:2 Iren. adv. haer., I., 20-21; Justin Martyr., App. II., pp. 69-70; Epiphan. ad. haer., XXII., 1; Euseb., H. E., II., p. 13.

^264:3 The snake resembles a stick; still it is not stiff but flaccid and pliant.

^265:1 Octavius, ein Dialog des M. Minucius Felix. Edited by B. Dombart. Second edition. Erlangen, 1881. Ante Nicene Chr. Libr., Vol. XIII., p. 451 ff.

^266:1 Octavius, Chap. 38. "Socrates scurra Atticus."

^268:1 Reproduced from the Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, p. 670.

^269:1 For details see the Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part 2, p. 673 ff., and Drake, Tecumseh, 2.

^269:2 Reproduced from the Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, p. 670.

^270:1 There are miracles attributed in the Christian Apocrypha even to Jesus himself, which would be criminal.

^272:1 In 1521, a surgeon of Hamburg was executed for witchcraft because he had saved the life of a babe which the midwife had given up as lost. (See Soldan, Hexenprocesse, p. 326.)

^272:2 See, e. g., Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 1892-1893, p. 561.

^274:1 Notice, for instance, the deeply religious spirit of the ghost dance taught the North American Indian by the prophet Wovoka. The devotion of Wovoka's followers is well illustrated in the accompanying illustrations of some characteristic attitudes in the ghost dance. Cf. Annual Report of the American Bureau of Ethnology, 1892-1893.

^275:1 The idea and name of black magic originated from a corruption of the word necromancy into nigromancy.

^275:2 De Vanitate Scientiarum, Chap. 96; Epist. libr., II., pp. 38-40, quoted by Soldan, Hexenprocesse, p. 325.

^276:1 The accompanying illustrations are reproduced from the original edition of Occulta Philosophia, Chap. XXVII.

^277:1 De Incertitudine et Vanitate Scientiarum et Artium, atque Excellentia Verbi Dei Declamatio. Published in 1530.

^278:1 Paciandi De Cliristianorum balneis, pp. 136 ff. and 143 ff. The Rev. Samuel Cheetham says in Smith-Cheetham Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, p. 652: "The contortions of the person on the ground seem to show that it was an exorcism of one possessed. Now, if the vessel was a font for holding the baptismal water, it would seem more appropriate to represent upon it the ordinary pre-baptismal exorcism. It seems therefore more probable that it was intended for the Atrium of a church, where it might be used to contain holy water."

^280:1 De vita et miraculis patr, Italic. libri, IV. See Roskoff, Geschichte des Teufels, p. 292.

^281:1 Massmann, "Die deutschen Abschworungs-, Glaubens-, Beicht- und Bet- formeln." Bibliographie der Geschichte der Nationalliteratur. Vol. VII. Roskoff, Geschichte des Teufels, p. 292; Otto Henne am Rhyn, Kulturgreschichte des deutschen Volkes.

^281:2 The original, which is Old Low-German, reads as follows:

Q. "Forsachistu diabolae?" A. "Ec forsacho diabolae!"--Q. "End allum diabol gelde?" A. "End ec forsacho allum diabol gelde."--Q. "End allum diaboles uuercum?" A. "End ec forsacho allum diaboles uuercum, end uuordum, Thunaer, ende Uuoden, ende Saxnote, ende allem dem unholdum the hira genotas sint."

^282:1 Illustrium miraculorum et historiarum memorabilium libri XII, ante annos fere CCCC a Caesario Heisterbacensi, ordinis Cisterniensis, . . . . Colon. 1599. A new edition was made by Josephus Strange, published by J. M. Heberle.

^283:1 The original is fol. 2a column 1 of Codex miso (D) in the Royal Library at Dusseldorf.

^284:1 For a brief summary see Wolfgang Menzel, Deutsche Literaturgeschichte, pp. 310-312. See also Roskoff, Geschichte des Teufels, pp. 317--326.

^284:2 "Non est via securior quam ordo Cisterniencis neque inter omne genus hominum, pauciones descendunt ad inferos quam personae illius religionis." I., Chap. 33.

^287:1 Roskoff, pp. 535-545.

^288:1 Concerning the Processus Sathanae, see Dr. R. Stintzing, Geschichte der popularen Litteratur des rom. can. Rechts in Deutschland, Leipsic, 1867. Roskoff's book on the Devil contains on pages 349-355 extracts from Stintzing.

^288:2 From Bilderatlas zur Geschichte der deutschen Nationallitteralur, by Dr. Gustav Konnecke, Marburg, 1895, p. 93.

^288:3 Floegel's Geschichte des Grotesk-Komischen, bearbeitet von Fr. W. Ebeling, pp. 70-71, 119-120.

^292:1 See Encyclo. Brit., Vol. XX., p. 258.

^294:1 Published from an old MS. by Georg Conrad Horst in his Zauberbibliothek, I., pp. 92 ff. We abstain here from reproducing the incantations that must be used in order to be successful.

^295:1 Agrippa ab Nettesheim, De occ. phil., p. 459.

^295:2 After Gerhard's Geomantic Astronomy. See Agrippa ab Nettesheim de occulta Philosophia, liber III., chap. XI. "De divinis nominibus eorundemque potentia et virtute."

^296:1 Devised by Petrus de Albano for the "exploration" of the week. Reproduced from "Elementa Magica" in De occ. phil. p. 465.

^296:2 Agrippa ab Nettesheim de occulta philosophia. p. 560.

^296:3 Translated from Carus Sterne, Die allgemeine Weltanschauung, p. 56.

^297:1 Translated by E. F. L. Gauss from Deutscher Liederhort, (Erk & Bohme) Vol.. III. See also Das Kloster, Stuttgart, 1846, Vol. II., Part I., p. 176. The original MS. of the poem is preserved in the Heidelburg Library.

^300:1 Translation by E. F. L. Gauss, of Chicago, Ill.

^302:1 This is most likely the poem of which Schiller writes to Goethe in a letter dated May 23, 1797: "It is so exemplary, beautiful, and round and perfect, that I felt very forcibly, while reading it, how even a small whole, a simple idea, can give us the enjoyment of the highest, by perfect presentation."

^302:2 The most thorough exposition of this sad chapter in the history of civilisation is found in President Andrew Dickson White's two volumed work A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom. New York. 1896.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 306]

  

THE INQUISITION.

Heretics Outlawed.

THE saddest side of the Devil's history appears in the persecution of those who were supposed to be adherents of the Devil; namely, sectarians, heretics, and witches. The most ridiculous accusations were made and believed of the Manichees, the Montanists, the Novatian Puritans or Cathari (katharoi), the Albigenses, and other dissenters. They were said to worship the Devil by most obscene ceremonies, and their intercourse with him was described most minutely as indecent and outrageous. In times of a general belief in witchcraft and the Devil's power, nobody was safe against the accusation of being in the service of Satan. Thus the Stedingers, having effectually resisted the Bishop of Bremen when he tried to take their tithes from them by force of arms, were vanquished and cruelly slaughtered after having been denounced as Devil-worshippers. The order of the Templars, the richest and most powerful and even the most orthodox order of Christianity, was accused of the meanest and most bestial idolatry, simply because an avaricious king of France was anxious to deprive them of their

[p. 307]

wealth and valuable possessions; and innumerable private citizens, poor people as a rule recklessly and rich people deliberately, were made in some way or other victims of this most shameful superstition, sometimes to benefit ecclesiasticism, sometimes to serve the interests of the powerful, sometimes out of sheer ignorance, and sometimes even with the purest and sincerest intentions of doing the right thing for the best of mankind, and with the pious desire of obeying the word of the Lord, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (Exodus xxii. 18).

The witch-prosecution mania was a general and a common disease of the age. On the one hand, it cannot (as is often supposed) be attributed to the influence of the Church alone, and it would, on the other hand, be a grave mistake to absolve the ecclesiastical institutions of the fearful crimes of this superstition; for the highest authorities of both Catholic and Protestant Christianity not only upheld the idea of witch-prosecution, but enforced it in the execution of the law in all its most terrible consequences.

It was natural that heretics should always be regarded as belonging to the same category as witches and wizards, for they, too, were according to the logic of ecclesiastical reasoning "worshippers of Satan." Deuteronomy commands that prophets and dreamers of dreams, who by signs or wonders that come to pass would persuade Israelites to obey other gods, "shall be put to death" (xiii. 5-11). We read:

"If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine

[p. 308]

own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

"Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;

"Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

"But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.

"And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

"And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you."

Relying on this passage, St. Jerome (340-420 A. D.) did not hesitate to advise the infliction of capital punishment upon heretics; and Leo the Great (Pope, 440-461 A. D.) takes the same view. [*1]

Priscillian, a bishop of Spain, a man of learning and pure morals, was the first heretic who was put to torture and together with some of his adherents decapitated at Treves in the year 385. The followers of Priscillian revered the memory of their teacher as that of a martyr, and formed a sect which continued to exist for a long time in spite of the excommunication of the Church. Pope Leo the Great justified and praised the condemnation of Priscillian.

Under Pope Alexander III., the title "Inquisitor," in the sense of judge in matters of faith, was used for the first time at the council of Tours (in 1163). The synod

[p. 309]

of Verona (in 1184) cursed all heretics, and ordered them, in case they relapsed, to be handed over to the secular authorities for capital punishment. Pope Innocent III. (1198-1216) for the sake of crushing the Albigenses gave power to papal emissaries to sue the heretics, and enjoined all bishops on penalty of deposition to assist in the discovery and prosecution of unbelievers. Following in the footsteps of Gregory VII., he vindicated the supremacy of the Church over the State; he humiliated Philip Augustus of France, deposed Emperor Otto IV., compelled John of England to acknowledge the feudal sovereignty of the Pope and pay tribute. He instigated the fourth crusade (1202-1204) and exterminated the Albigenses. Under his papacy, at the suggestion of Castilian Dominic and the Bishop of Toulouse, the new order of Dominicans was instituted, which was destined to become the working force of the Inquisition. Pope Gregory IX. pursued the traditional policy with great vigor, establishing a regular inquisitorial office for Italy under the name of the "Holy Office," in 1224.

Gregory's policy was codified in an instrument of forty-five articles by the Council of Toulouse, in 1229, and thus the Inquisition became an established Church-institution, the appointment and superintendence of which formed an important prerogative of the Pope. It was not until this period that the Pope became the absolute ruler of the Church, for now even bishops could be cited before the papal tribunal of the Inquisition. Gregory IX. appointed (in 1232) the Dominicans as papal inquisitors, who performed the terrible duties of their office so faithfully that they truly earned the title of Domini canes,

[p. 310]

[paragraph continues] "the sleuth-hounds of the Lord," which originated in a word-play on their name.

A famous fresco in the Santa Maria Novella at Florence entitled Domini canes, painted by Simone Memmi, represents the inquisitorial idea under the allegory of a pack of hounds chasing off the wolves from the sheepfold.

Gregory IX. (1227-1241) sent Conrad of Marburg to Germany and gave him unlimited power of citing before his tribunal all people suspected of witchcraft, commanding him to bring the guilty to the fagot. And this fiendish man obeyed with joy his master, whom he revered as the Vicar of Christ on earth. He encountered much opposition, for the people became rebellious, and even the Archbishops of Cologne, Treves, and Mayence attempted to resist him. But Conrad remained firm; his practices had the unequivocal sanction of his Holiness the Pope, and he did not hesitate to begin proceedings even against these three highest dignitaries of the Church in Germany. Wherever Conrad appeared, the fagots were lit, and many innocent people became the victims of his fanaticism. The Archbishop of Mayence, bent on stopping this fiend, wrote a letter to the Pope, in which he said:

"Whoever fell into his hands had only the choice between a ready confession for the sake of saving his life and a denial, whereupon he was speedily burnt. Every false witness was accepted, but no just defence granted,--not even to people of prominence. The person arraigned had to confess that he was a heretic, that he had touched a toad, that he had kissed a pale man, or some monster. Many Catholics suffered themselves to be burnt innocently rather than confess to such vicious crimes, of which they knew they were not guilty. The weak ones, in order to save their lives,

[p. 311]

Click to view
POPE URBAN V. PROCLAIMING THE BULL. In Caena Domini, 1362, CONDEMNING HERETICS.

[p. 312]

lied about themselves and other people, especially about such prominent ones whose names were suggested to them by Conrad. Thus brothers accused their brothers, wives their husbands, servants their masters. Many gave money to the clergy for good advice as to how to protect themselves, and the greatest confusion originated." (Alberici Monachi chron. ad. a. 1233.) [*1]

The Archbishop's letter failed to impress his Holiness and did not in the least change the course of things.

          
Click to view
THE BANNER OF   THE SPANISH INQUISITION.

       
Click to view
THE BANNER OF   THE INQUISITION OF GOA.

     
       

        [*2]

     
   On the contrary, Rome pursued more vigorously than ever its old policy, which was at last definitely formulated by Pope Urban V. in his bull "In caena Domini," proclaimed in 1362, which sounded the slogan against all who ventured to dissent from Rome, and solemnly condemned heresy in strong and unequivocal terms.

[p. 313]

Meanwhile the success of the Inquisition had been greatly imperilled by the opposition which Conrad of Marburg encountered in Germany. When the Inquisitor-General indicted Count Henry of Sayn for heresy, he wag cited before the German Diet that was held in Mayence. The Diet was not inclined to respect Conrad's authority and passed a vote of censure. Bent on vengeance for the

Click to view
THE CHAMBER OF THE INQUISITION. LISTENING TO AN INFORMER.

insult received, the Inquisitor left for Paderborn, but before he could do further mischief he was overtaken by several noblemen on the 30th of July, 1233, near Marburg, on the Lahn, and slain. [*1] Thus he fell a martyr

[p. 314]

to his bloody profession. The Germans breathed more freely, but Gregory IX. canonised him as a saint and martyr, and ordered that a chapel be built on the spot on which he was killed.

While the establishment of the Holy Office in Germany met with serious difficulties, the inquisitors were

Click to view
VARIOUS MANNERS OF CROSS-EXAMINING THE DEFENDANTS.

welcomed in France by Louis the Pious, Philip the Fair, and Charles IV.

The Inquisitor Hugo de Beniols had a number of prominent people burned alive at Toulouse, in 1275, among them Angele, Lady of Labarthe, a woman of

[p. 315]

sixty-five years accused of sexual intercourse with Satan. It is stated that she had borne a monster with a wolf's head and a serpent's tail, whose sole food consisted of babies. Under the rule of Charles IV. the ill-famed Bastile was built, because the prisons no longer sufficed to hold the indicted heretics.

The reign of Charles VI. is distinguished by a temporary

Click to view
A MAN AND A WOMAN CONVICTED OF HERESY WHO HAVE PLEADED GUILTY BEFORE BEING CONDEMNED TO DEATH.

lull in the witchcraft-prosecution in France, mainly due to the weakness of the papacy arising from the great schism between Rome and Avignon. The curses which the two popes mutually visited on their adherents appeared to change into blessings. The Synod of Langres (1404) speaks of soothsayers as impostors, and holds out to those who are in the power of Satan the hope of salvation through repentance and penance. The

[p. 316]

tribunal of Toulouse (1606) enacted no other punishments upon thirteen persons than fines, fasts, pilgrimages, and almsgiving, while the Inquisitor was tried and convicted for the misappropriation of confiscated property. King Charles VI. ordered that he be deprived of his salary. [*1]

In Spain the Inquisition prospered best. The Directorium

Click to view
HERETICS CONDEMNED TO BE BURNED.

inqusitorum of N. Eymerich (Rome 1587), the inquisitor-general for Castile, affords us a complete insight into the proceedings of the Holy Office, its spy-system, its modes of cross-examination and torture, and its spoils. Torquemada and Ximenes were the most determined and unrelenting successors of Eymerich. [*2] The

[p. 317]

wealthiest, the most powerful, the most learned, were threatened alike, and even Archbishop Carranza, the primate of the Church of Spain, could not escape the prosecution of the inquisitors.

In the beginning of the fifteenth century, Johannes Nider, a German and a Dominican monk, published a book on Witches and Their Deceptions. [*1] At the same

Click to view
A MAN AND A WOMAN CONDEMNED TO BE BURNED BUT PARDONED ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR CONFESSION.

time Pope Eugene IV. (1431-1447) encouraged the inquisitors in a circular letter to proceed with severity, "summarily, without ado, and without any judiciary form." [*2]

[p. 318]

The Prior of St. Germain, William von Edelin, who had preached against the reality of witchcraft, had to beg pardon publicly in the Episcopal Chapel at Evreux on September 12, 1453, and to confess that he himself had worshipped Satan, had renounced his faith in the cross, and preached that witchcraft was an illusion at the especial command of the Devil for the propagation of the Satanic

Click to view
THE INQUISITION IN SESSION ON THE MARKET SQUARE AT MADRID

          A. King and Queen.
   B. Grand Inquisitor.
   C. Counsellors.
   D. Nobility.
   F. The defendants and their families.
   F. Two cages in which the criminals were placed when their sentence   was read.
   G. Altar for saying mass.
   H. H. Escutcheon of the Inquisition.
   I. The preacher's pulpit.
   K. K. Stands for those who read the sentences.
   L. Effigies of those who died in prison.

     
   dominion. [*1] Edelin remained incarcerated and was soon released from further persecution by death.

In 1458 J. Nicolaus Jaquerius appeared in the field with another publication called the heretics' scourge or

[p. 319]

Click to view
PROCESSION OF THE INQUISITION OF GOA.

          A. The Banner.
   B. Dominican friars.
   C. Criminals condemned to be burned alive
   D. Criminals who, having pleaded guilty, were pardoned.
   E. Crucifix turning its back upon those that we condemned to be   burned.
   F. Criminals condemned to be burned.
   G. Effigies of those who escape the fagots by having died in prison.
   H. Grand Inquisitor.

     
   
Click to view
THE LAST SERMON PREACHED TO THE CONDEMNED.

[p. 320]

[paragraph continues] Flagellum heriticorum fascinariorum [*1] (Frankfort, 1581) in which Edelin's case is reported [*2] as one argument among many others for the reality of witchcraft. And now at last all opposition to the practices of witch-prosecutors were put down.

The Inquisitor Pierre le Broussart, member of the Dominican order, cited during the absence of the Bishop

Click to view
THE HERETICS' DEATH ON THE FAGOTS.

of Arras a number of persons before his tribunal and made them confess on the rack that they had been with the Waldenses; he promised to spare their lives if they agreed publicly to confess all the abominable crimes of which the Waldenses had been accused. At a public

[p. 321]

meeting the accused persons appeared on a scaffold; they wore caps exhibiting pictures of Devil-worship. The various ceremonies of obscene demonolatry were read to them, and they were asked whether they were guilty. All the accused affirmed their guilt, whereupon, in utter neglect of previous promises, they were sentenced and turned over to the secular authorities to be burned alive. In vain did they now shout that they had been cheated, that they knew nothing of the crimes of which they had been accused, and that they had only confessed because they had been promised to be let off with a nominal punishment. Broussart was determined to set an example, and had them executed in 1560 in spite of the protestations of their innocence.

The Witch-Hammer.

Witch-prosecutions received a new impulse in the year 1484 through . the bull of Pope Innocent VIII., beginning with the words Summis desiderantes affectibus. The inquisitors of Germany, Heinrich Institoris (whose German name was Kramer) and Jacob Sprenger, complained of having met with resistance while attending to their duties, and the Pope afforded them the desired assistance for the sake of strengthening the Catholic faith [*1]

[p. 322]

and of preventing the horrible crimes and excesses of witchcraft. [*1]

The bull of Pope Innocent VIII. had reference to Germany only; but other popes, Alexander VI., Julius II., Leo X., and Hadrian IV., issued bulls written in the same spirit, instigating the zeal of the inquisitors to do their best for the purification of the faith and the supression of witchcraft.

The heinous bull of Pope Innocent VIII. was the immediate cause of the writing of the Malleus Maleficarum, or Witch-Hammer, which received the sanction of the Pope, and a patent from Emperor Maximilian. With the Witch-Hammer in hand, Sprenger and Institoris appeared in 1487 before the theological faculty of Cologne and demanded their approbation, which was given with reluctance and after long hesitation. The original form of the document is very guarded and approves of the principles of punishing witchcraft only "in so far as they do not contradict the sacred canons." This did not appear sufficient and the inquisitors insisted upon a more decisive verdict. There are four further articles which contain an unequivocal request to the secular authorities to assist the inquisition in the interest of the Catholic faith.

In addition the inquisitors secured a notary's certificate concerning the Emperor's patent and the approbation

[p. 323]

of the theological faculty; but it is noteworthy that the Emperor's patent is not literally reproduced; nor has it (according to Soldan's [*1] opinion) ever been published. The notary declares merely that the Emperor promises to protect the papal bull and to assist both inquisitors.

Such is the first introduction of the Witch-Hammer in Germany, and the book was at once recognised by zealots as the main source of information on witchcraft. Damhouder, the great criminalist of the sixteenth century, esteemed its authority as almost equal to the law; [*2] and its baneful influence extends over a period of three centuries.

The Malleus Maleficarum, or Witch-Hammer, is one of the most famous and infamous works ever written. Its name indicated that it was intended to crush witchcraft. No author is mentioned but Sprenger's spirit is recognised in both its preface (the Apologia) and the various chapters of the book.' Its style is poor, its ideas are foolish, its intentions are villainous, and the advice given to the inquisitors concerning their procedure betrays a diabolical perfidiousness. The book contains the most confounded nonsense, often self-contradictory, and is throughout irrational and superstitious. The Witch-Hammer advises beginning the trial with the question "whether or not the person on trial believes in witchcraft." The statement is added: "Mind that witches generally deny the question." If the culprit denies, the inquisitor continues: "Well, then, whenever witches are

[p. 324]

burnt, they are innocently condemned. "A denial of witchcraft sealed the doom of the accused at once, for the Witch-Hammer declares: "The greatest heresy is not to believe in witchcraft" (haeresis est maxima opera maleficarum non credere). However, if the accused affirmed the question, the tortures made him confess all that he knew about it and whether or not he had learned and practised the black art. To plead ignorance would not avail, for the very refusal of a confession was counted a crime under the name maleficium taciturnitatus. There was no escape, and the best course for the victim on the rack was to confess all at once without a relapse into denials, for that at least abbreviated the procedure and ended the tragedy without its incidental terrors. As a rule the prisoners of the inquisition ask for death as a boon and wherever possible commit suicide; for torture made of every one a hopeless cripple unfit for either work or enjoyment of life, even though he might be released. Acquittals, however, were rare and the Witch-Hammer advises the inquisitors never to acquit, but only temporarily to stop proceedings. A nolle pros was recommended as the safer way. The culprit should be handed over to the secular authorities for capital punishment, especially if the sentence of being burned alive was mitigated to decapitation, [*1] a penalty which the Church avoided inflicting; for "the Church thirsts not for blood" (ecclesia non sitit sanguinem). A confessor and even the judge himself is advised to speak in private with the prisoner

[p. 325]

and upon the promise of pardon and mercy to extort a confession. The Witch-Hammer suggests that the judge may say: "'If you confess, I shall not condemn you to death,' for he may at any time call in another judge to take his place, who is at liberty to pronounce the sentence."

The victims of the Inquisition were practically without any assistance, for witchcraft was regarded as an exceptional crime (crimen atrocissimum and crimen exceptum) for which the usual rules of procedure were not binding. It belonged before the secular and also the ecclesiastical tribunal (crimen fori mixti). The culprit must be dealt with according to the maxim of Pope Boniface VIII. (1294-1303), "simply and squarely, without the noise and form of lawyers and judges." [*1]

To us who live in an age of calmer thought and more exact investigation, it is difficult to understand how the Witch-Hammer could ever have been believed.

The Torture.

Witch-prosecution appears to us as rascality pure and simple, but it was not. It was the result of a firm and deep-seated religious conviction, as may be learned from the Malleus Maleficarum, a work of John Trithemius, Abbot of the Monastery of Spongheim (1442-1516), who at the request of Joachim, Markgrave of Brandenburg, investigated the subject, and after years of conscientious study presented to the world his views in a

[p. 326]

book of four volumes, which was completed October 16, in the year 1508, when the pious abbot had reached the mature age of sixty-six years.

Trithemius distinguishes four classes of wizards and witches: (1) Those who hurt and kill others through poison and other natural means. (2) Those who injure others by the art of magic formulas. (3) Those who converse with the Devil personally. (4) Those who have actually concluded a contract with the Devil and have thus procured his assistance for evil designs. Trithemius believes that there is no other way of protecting the commonwealth against the obnoxious influence of these malefactors than by extirpating them, but best by burning them alive. He says:

"It is to be lamented that the number of witches in all countries is very great, for indeed there is not a village, be it ever so small, which does not harbor at least one of the third and of the fourth class. But how rare are the judges who punish these crimes against God and nature."

And in another passage the abbot utters the complaint:

"Men and animals die through the infamy of these women, and none considers that it is due to the malignity of witchcraft. There are many who suffer from serious diseases and do not even know that they are bewitched."

The great dangers of witchcraft seemed to demand extraordinary means for combating its evils; and thus the torture, which had formerly been applied only in exceptional and special cases, began to be developed in a most formidable and barbaric way.

Suspected persons were subjected to fire and water

[p. 327]

ordeals, but the latter test was preferred; and this is the reason, as we read in Konig's work on the subject:

Click to view
THE WATER ORDEAL.

"A case is known in which the accused person successfully passed through the fire ordeal. It happened immediately before the appearance of the Witch-Hammer. In the archives of Donau-Eschingen there is a document according to which a certain Anna Henne from Rothenbach, in the Black Forest, in 1485, cleared herself of the suspicion of witchcraft by carrying a hot iron."

Concerning the water ordeal the same author says:

"The water ordeal is very old. Ludwig, the Pious, abolished it, but Hinkmar of Rheims defended its practice. In the times of Bernhard of Clairvaux, it was used against the Manichees. Pope Innocent III.

[p. 328]

again abolished it in the Lateran Council, 1215. The famous law book, The Saxon Mirror, written by Eike von Repkow, in the year 1230, provides that if two men lay claim to the same thing and the neighbors can bear no witness, the water-ordeal shall decide."

The Mirror of the Swabians, also of the thirteenth century, contains the same proposition. In the sixteenth century the practice was almost universally established. As to the underlying idea, Konig says:

"There are opposite views applied to the ordeal of water. According to the one, the question was how long the accused could remain under water; according to the other the innocence of the accused was proved by sinking, the guilt by swimming. In both cases, the view prevailed that witches possessed a specific levity, and the rule was adopted that 'The water refused to receive in its depths those who had shaken off the baptismal water through a renunciation of their faith.'" (Ausgeb. d. Menschenwahns, pp. 100 ff.)

Who can contemplate without indignation and holy wrath the instruments of torture used by inquisitors in their infamous vocation? There are thumbscrews, there are blacksmith's tongs and pincers to tear out the fingernails or to be used red-hot for pinching; there is the rack, Spanish boots, collars, chains, etc., there are boards and rollers covered with sharp spikes; there is the "Scavenger' s Daughter," also the "Iron Virgin," a hollow instrument the size and figure of a woman, with knives inside which are so arranged that, when closing, the victim would be lacerated in its deadly embrace.

Incredible ingenuity was displayed in the invention of these instruments of torture; and one of the executioner's swords, which still hangs in the Torturers' Vault at Nuremberg on the left side of the entrance, exhibits

[p. 329]

Click to view
THE TORTURE ROOM AT NUREMBERG. (After C. Rau. Reproduced from B. E. Konig.)

[p. 330]

in bad Latin the blasphemous inscription, "Solo Deo Gloria!" [*1]

The hangmen took pride in their profession and regarded themselves as disgraced if they could not make their victims confess whatever the inquisitors wanted. Their usual threat, when a heretic, a wizard, or a witch was handed over to them, was: "You will be tortured until you are so thin that the sun will shine through you." The instruments look horrible enough, but the practice was more horrible than the wildest imagination can depict.

Before the torture began, the accused were forced to drink the witch-broth, a disgusting concoction mixed with the ashes of burnt witches, and supposed to protect the torturers against the evil influence of witchcraft. The filth [*2] of the dungeons was a very effective means of making the prisoner despondent and preparing him for any confession upon which he could be condemned. He was frequently secured by iron manacles fixed in the wall or placed under heavy timbers which prevented the free use of his limbs, rendering him a helpless prey to rats, mice, and vermin of all sorts.

Consider only the fiendish details of the torture applied to a woman in the year 1631 on the first day of her trial:  [*3]

"(1) The hangman binds the woman, who was pregnant, and places her on the rack. Then he racked her till her heart would fain

[p. 331]

break, but had no compassion. (2) When she did not confess, the torture was repeated, the hangman tied her hands, cut off her hair, poured brandy over her head and burned it. (3) He placed sulphur in her armpits and burned it. (4) Her hands were tied behind her, and she was hauled up to the ceiling and suddenly dropped down. (5) This hauling up and dropping down was repeated for some hours, until the hangman and his helpers went to dinner. (6) When they returned, the master-hangman tied her feet and hands upon her back; brandy was poured on her back and burned. (8) Then heavy weights were placed on her back and she was pulled up. (9) After this she was again stretched on the rack. (10) A spiked board is placed on her back, and she is again hauled up to the ceiling. (11) The master again ties her feet and hangs on them a block of fifty pounds, which makes her think that her heart will burst. (12) This proved insufficient; therefore the master unties her feet and fixes her legs in a vise, tightening the jaws until the blood oozes out at the toes. (13) Nor was this sufficient; therefore she was stretched and pinched again in various ways. (14) Now the hangman of Dreissigacker began the third grade of torture. When he placed her on the bench and put the I shirt' on her, he said: 'I do not take you for one, two, three, not for eight days, nor for a few weeks, but for half a year or a year, for your whole life, until you confess: and if you will not confess, I shall torture you to death, and you shall be burned after all. (15) The hangman's son-in-law hauled her up to the ceiling by her hands. (16) The hangman of Dreissigacker whipped her with a horsewhip. (17) She was placed in a vise where she remained for six hours. (18) After that she was again mercilessly horsewhipped. This was all that was done on the first day."

This is not barbarous, this is not bestial, it is satanic. And such deeds could be done in the name of God, for the sake of the religion of Jesus, and by the command of the highest authorities of the Christian Church!

[p. 332]

From the great number of prosecutions for witchcraft we select one instance only, which, however, is neither typical nor extraordinary in its horrors.

We read in Konig's popular exposition of human superstitions, [*1] p. 240:

"There was a farmer by the name of Veit, living in a village of Southern Bohemia. He was famous for his wit and unusual humor. At the same time he was physically strong, and whenever there was a quarrel at the inn he came off victor. The rumor spread that he was inviolable, as sometimes hunters are supposed to be bullet-proof, and Veit never denied it. By and by he was regarded as a wizard, and as his cattle prospered best and his fields yielded the richest crops, he was soon supposed to be in league with the Evil One. Now it happened that the village was troubled with mice, and Veit was suspected of having caused the plague. When questioned about it, he granted in a moment of humor that he had sent the mice but would soon drive them away again, and he promised to prove at the next church-fair that he could actually make mice. When the day appointed came, the inn was overcrowded, and farmer Veit appeared with a big bag under his arm, into which he requested the company to throw twenty pebbles. They did so without noticing that the bag was double. And while one part was empty the other contained twenty mice. When the pebbles were put in the bag,  murmured a magic formula and let the mice loose in the presence of his frightened audience.

"This performance, however, had unexpected and tragic results. The people were convinced that it was the work of hell, and Veit escaped with difficulty from the inn. Veit was arrested the next night and delivered to the criminal court. A mole on his body was thought to be a stigma of the Devil, and all the witnesses agreed that he was a genuine wizard. His case was thoroughly investigated, and even the University of Prague was consulted; the verdict signed by the Rector Magnificus with his own hand was

[p. 333]

against him, and Veit, who stoutly maintained his innocence, had to endure all the tortures of the inquisition. At last he was burned alive and the ashes of his body were thrown to the winds. We read in the records of the law-suit that Veit mounted the stake 'without showing repentance or doing penance.' And when chains were put on his neck, around his body, and around his feet, he cried with a loud voice, 'My God, I die innocently.' judges, professors, physicians, and theologians agreed unanimously in the conviction of this innocent man."

Volumes might be filled with accounts of the many thousand various instances of witch-prosecutions, and every single case is so soul-harrowing that we prefer to pass them by in silence. The accusations are almost always very circumstantial and definite, mostly of brutal indecency and ridiculously impossible.

The Angel of Augsburg.

Witch-prosecution was a convenient weapon in the bands of unscrupulous men for accomplishing crooked ends or satisfying some private vengeance. One of the most tragic and pathetic cases is the sad death of Agnes Bernauer, a beautiful woman, the daughter of a barber and the sweetheart of Albrecht, Duke of Bavaria.

Agnes was born about 1410 in Biberach, and it appears that she was a mere servant girl in Augsburg at the time Duke Albrecht of Wurtemberg, the son of Duke Ernest, made her acquaintance. The story that Agnes was of patrician birth and that the lovers met at the great tournament is mere legend, but this much is sure that Agnes was extraordinarily beautiful, with golden hair, and delicate, noble features. Even her enemies could not help praising the nobility of her appearance. We

[p. 334]

know little or nothing about the relations between Duke Albrecht and Agnes, except that he courted her and took her with him to his residence in the County Vohnburg.

Duke Ernest, Albrecht's father, knew about Agnes's presence at Vohnburg but he cared little, until he became anxious about having a legal heir to his duchy. Then he requested his soil to marry the daughter of Duke Erik of Brunswick, but Albrecht refused on account of the love he bore to Agnes.

When persuasion appeared to be without avail, Duke Ernest thought of other means to separate his son from the lowly-born maiden. At a public tournament, he ordered the judges to refuse admittance to Albrecht on the ground that for the sake of a concubine he neglected his filial duties. Albrecht was greatly exasperated and as soon as he returned to Vohnburg he recognised Agnes as his wife. With the consent of his uncle, Duke William, he moved to the castle Straubing, which he donated to her and surrounding her with a ducal court, called her henceforth Duchess Agnes.

The poor woman did not enjoy the splendor of the court. She feared the wrath of the old Duke, and built, in a melancholy presentiment of her sad fate, her own burial chapel, in the monastery of the Carmelites at Straubing. Her happiness was of short duration.

In Albrecht's absence, Duke Ernest seized Agnes, had her imprisoned and denounced her as a witch. Her condemnation had been decided upon before the trial began, and the verdict pronounced her guilty of having bewitched Duke Albrecht and thus committed a criminal offence against Duke Ernest. The judgment ordered her

[p. 335]

to be drowned in the river, and Duke Ernest signed the verdict.

The hangmen carried the young woman to the bridge at Straubing and thrust her, in the presence of a multitude

Click to view
AGNES BERNAUER DROWNED AS A WITCH AT THE REQUEST OF ERNEST, DUKE OF BAVARIA.
 Shows how the unscrupulous availed themselves of the extraordinary power of witch tribunals. (Woodcut by G. Dietrich. Reproduced from B. E. Konig.)

of spectators, into the water. But the current drifted her ashore and she held up her white arms appealing to

[p. 336]

the people for help. The people were moved and she might have been saved, had not one of the hangmen, fearing the wrath of the old duke, seized a pole and catching her long golden hair held her under water until she expired. This happened in the year 1435.

She was buried in St. Peter's cemetery of Straubing.

When the young Duke on his return was informed of the terrible death of his beloved Agnes he swore vengeance, and in alliance with his cousin Duke Ludwig of Bavaria-Ingolstadt, began to wage a vigorous war against his own father. Through the mediation of the Emperor, however, he was reconciled with his father at the council of Basel.

Duke Ernest built a chapel over the grave of his innocent victim and had an annual mass read over her for the welfare of her soul. Duke Albrecht thereupon agreed to marry Anna, Princess of Brunswick, by whom he had ten children, although it cannot be said that his married life was a happy one.

In 1447 Duke Albrecht had the body of Agnes transferred to the chapel which she had built for herself in the Carmelite monastery; and he had the resting-place of her remains adorned with a beautiful marble image of her in full figure with the simple inscription:

"Obiit Agnes Bernauerin. Requiescat in pace."

Poets who have immortalised her name, [*1] and the

[p. 337]

people of Bavaria among whom her memory is still cherished, call her "the angel of Augsburg."

*      *      *

One of the most comical witch-prosecutions took place in 1474 against a diabolical rooster who had been so presumptuous as to lay an egg. The poor creature was solemnly tried, whereupon he was condemned to die at the stake and publicly burned by order of the authorities of the good city of Basel.

We abstain from entering further into the details of the prosecution of witches, which gradually developed into a systematic business involving great emoluments to judges, torturers, hangmen, inquisitors, denouncers, witnesses, and all persons connected with the process. It is a doleful work to go over the mere statistics of the autos-da-fe, and every single story of a trial for witchcraft cannot but rouse our deepest indignation; and even now the belief in witchcraft is not yet extinct among the so-called civilised races of mankind.

Footnotes

^308:1 See Epist. xv., ad Turribium.

^312:1 Roskoff, Geschichte des Teufels, II., pp. 215-216.

^312:2 The illustrations on pages 312-320 are reproduced from Picart.

^313:1 See Konrad von Marburg, by Henke (Marburg, 1861), and another work of the same title by Beck (Breslau, 1861).

Conrad was the father confessor of Elizabeth, the widow of the Landgrave of Thuringia. The poor woman submitted to most indecent corporal punishments, and was sainted as a reward. If the same events happened to-day, both the Landgravine [p. 314] and her father confessor would probably have been transferred from the Wartburg to an insane asylum. It is scarcely credible, but nevertheless true, that a, book appeared in defense of Conrad as an inquisitor and of his fiendish deeds by Kaltner under the title Konrad von Marburg und die Inquisition in Deutschland. Prague, 1882.

^316:1 Lamothe-Langon, III., p. 299, and Soldan, p. 193.

^316:2 F. Hoffmann, Geschichte der Inquisition, Bonn, 1878. Llorente, Geschichte der spanischen Inquisition. German, from the Spanish.

^317:1 Fr. Joannes Nider, Suevi ordin. praedicat. s. theolog. profess. et hereticae pestis inquisitoris, liber insignis de maleficiis et eorum deceptionibus.

^317:2 "Summarie simpliciter et de plano, ac sine strepitu et figura judicii."--Pope Eugene in his circular letter to the Inquisitors of 1437.

^318:1 See Raynald ad. ann. 1451.

^320:1 The book is frequently appended to the Malleus Maleficarum.

^320:2 f Chapter IV. contains the abjuration formula.

^321:1 ". . . . ut fides catholica nostris potissime temporibus ubique augeatur et floreat, ac omnis heretica pravitas de finibus fidelium procul pellatur. . . . Sane nuper ad nostrum non sine ingenti molestia pervenit auditum quod . . . . complures utriusque sexus personae . . . . cum daemonibus incubis et succubis abuti, ac suis incantationibus . . . . mulierum partus, animatium foetus, terrae fruges .... periri, suffocari et extingui facere . . . ." (See Soldan, Hexenprocesse, p. 222. Roskoff, I., pp. 226-292.)

^322:1 Giovanno Ballista Cibo, when elected pope in 1484, chose the name Innocent, probably in commemoration of Innocent VII. The people of his time, thinking that he did not deserve the name, called him Nocens. He had seven natural children, perhaps more. A humorous distich castigates him as follows:

"Octo Nocens pueros genuit, totidenique puellas.
 Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem."

^323:1 Hexenprocesse, p. 222.

^323:2 "Ita recepta est in hoc scribendi genere eorum authoritas ut pro lege apud omnes habeatur."--Damhouder's Praxis rerum criminalium.

^324:1 "Saecularem curiam affectuose deprecamur quatenus citra sanguinis effusionem et mortis periculum suam sententiam moderatur," was the usual clause when the inquisition handed their victims over to the secular authorities.

^325:1 "Simpliciter et de plano, absque advocatorum et judiciorum strepitu et figura,"--a phrase, which, as we saw, was almost literally repeated by Pope Eugenius IV.

^330:1 It ought to be Soli Deo Gloria.

^330:2 Carceris squalores is the expression used by the author of the Witch-Hammer.

^330:3 Translated from Konig, Ausgeburten des Menschenwahns, p. 130 See also Soldan, Hexenprocesse, pp. 269-270.

^332:1 Ausgeburten des Menschenwahns, ein Volksbuch, Rudolstadt.

^336:1 Folksong on Agnes die Pernawerin. Count Torring (1780), Bottger (1846), Melchior Meyr (1862), Friedrich Hebbel (1855), Otto Ludwig (a posthumous fragmentary design of a drama begun in 1852). Konig, Ausgeburten des Menschenwahns recapitulates the story as the legend has it. For a critical review and an exposition of the historical facts see Dr. Christian Meyer's article on Agnes Bernauer in Die Gartenlaube, 1873, p. 454.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 338]

  

THE AGE OF THE REFORMATION.

THE Reformation, although in many respects a great advance did not introduce a sudden change in the belief in the Devil. Nevertheless, the tendency becomes more and more apparent to interpret Satan in psychological terms, and instead of expecting him in the horrors of nature or in the objective reality of our surroundings, to find. him in our own hearts where he appears as temptation in all forms, as allurement, ambition, vanity, as the vain pursuit of fortune, power, and worldly pleasures.

Christianity was split up into two parties, the conservatives who remained faithful to Rome's spiritual supremacy and the progressive Protestants who opposed the traditional authorities of the Church and clamored for reform in the various ways of life. Restless times of this kind are favorable for satire and sarcasm, and the Devil therefore naturally played an important part in the polemics on either side.

At the same time, the moral earnestness of the reformers forced the authorities of the Church to abandon many of the worst misuses, and thus the reform of the

[p. 339]

Click to view
SATANIC TEMPTATIONS AND THE LADDER OF LIFE.
 Reproduced from Heradis von Lansperg's Hortus Deliciarum.

 [*1]

[p. 340]

[paragraph continues] Reformation did not remain limited to the reformed Churches, but extended its blessings to the Roman Church itself. The anti-reformation, whose backbone was the Jesuits, was a most serious and rigorously pure movement born of a deep religious piety; but it was darkened in its very start by a mysticism verging on coarse superstition, and lacked that love of freedom, of

Click to view
CALVINISM TEARING DOWN THE ROMAN EMPIRE. Roman Catholic burlesque of the seventeenth century.

 [*1]

progress, of Scientific investigation, and the desire to learn the truth which characterises the exponents of Protestantism.

[p. 341]

It is noticeable, however, that the moral element is pushed into the foreground, and both parties begin to agree in this that morality is the ultimate test of religion.

Click to view
THE KINGDOM OF SATAN OR THE SEVEN-HEADED BEAST OF THE REVELATION.
 A Protestant caricature of the papal trade in dispensations. (From a Flugblatt of the sixteenth century. Henne am Rhyn.)

The idea of conceiving Satan as sin and temptation is not new (think only of the illustrations in the Hortus Deliciarum), but the conception of sin and temptation

[p. 342]

begins now to be better understood as a psychological condition of subjective states.

Luther.

Luther was, in his demonology, a real child of his time; he saw the Devil everywhere, he struggled with him constantly, and overcame him by his confidence in God. He regarded the Pope as an incarnation of Satan, or as the Anti-Christ, and the Roman Church as the kingdom of the Devil. He sang of him:

"And were this world with devils filled
 That threaten to undo its;
 We will not fear, for God hath willed
 His truth to triumph through us.
 Our ancient vicious foe
 Still seeks to work his woe.
 His craft and power are great
 And armed with cruel hate.
 On earth is not his equal.

.    .    .    .    .    .

"The Prince of this world
 His banner has unfurled
 And yet he will harm none
 For he is all undone;
 One little word defeats him."

The Devil was to Luther a real, living power, a concrete personality, and he used to characterise him as the good Lord's hangman, and the instrument of his anger and punishment. [*1] God needs the Devil for a servant and utilises his malignity for the procreation of the good (x, 1259).

[p. 343]

Luther's belief in the Devil was not only very realistic but also almost childishly ingenuous. When at work he was prepared for his incessant interference, and when going to rest he expected to be disturbed by him. Luther was not afraid of him, yet the efforts he made in conquering the Evil One are sufficient evidence that he regarded him as very powerful. He protested he would go to Worms though every tile on the roofs of the city were a Devil; he saw the fiend grinning at him while he translated the Bible, and threw his inkstand at his Satanic Majesty. [*1]

By and by the familiarity between Luther and the Devil increased: "Early this morning," Luther tells us in his Tischreden, "when I awoke the fiend came and began disputing with me. 'Thou art a great sinner,' said he. I replied, 'Canst not tell me something new, Satan?'"

Luther was inclined to believe in the Devil's power of assisting wizards and witches in their evil designs. Following St. Augustine's authority he conceded the possibility of incubi and succubi, because Satan, in the shape of a handsome young man, loves to decoy young girls. He also accepted the superstition of changelings and declared that witches should suffer death; but when once confronted with a real case, he insisted, when his counsel was sought, on the most scrupulous circumspection. He wrote to the judge:

"I request you to explore everything with exactness so as to leave no trace of fraud . . . for I have experienced so many deceits,

[p. 344]

frauds, artifices, lies, treacheries, etc., that I can scarcely make up my mind to believe. Therefore see and convince yourself to your own satisfaction, lest you be mistaken and I may be mistaken through you." [*1]

Although it is true that Luther's views of the Devil were as childish as those of his contemporaries, it would be rash to denounce the Reformation for having accomplished no progress and having done nothing to suppress the barbarous superstitions of demonology. Luther's God-conception was purer and nobler than the God-conception of the leading churchmen and popes of his time, and thus his faith, in spite of its crudities, led, after all, to purer conceptions, which were destined gradually to overcome the old traditional dualism.

Click to view
TEMPTATION. A PROTESTANT CONCEPTION OF EVIL.
 German woodcut of the time of Luther.

Luther demanded that Christ should not only be recognised as the Saviour of mankind, but that every man should be able to say, "He has come to save me personally and individually." Luther thus carried the religious life into the very hearts of men and declared that there was no salvation in ceremonies, absolutions, or sacraments;

[p. 345]

unless one had individually, in one's own nature and being, vanquished the temptations of Satan. The most dangerous idols are, according to Luther, the pulpit and the altar, for sacraments and ceremonies cannot save. They are symbols instituted to assist us. Those who believe that ceremonies possess any power of their own are still under the influence of the pagan notion that evils can be averted by sacrifices and exorcisms.

Click to view
THE RACE FOR FORTUNE.
 A modern illustration of the conception of evil. A development of the idea represented in the woodcut on the opposite page. (After Henneberg's oil painting.)

Luther's Successors.

While Luther instinctively abhorred persecutions of any kind, he still retained those beliefs which were the ultimate cause of witch prosecution. We must, therefore, not be astonished to see even in Protestant countries a revival of the horrors which had been inaugurated by the Inquisition.

The most curious work of Protestant demonology is the Theatrum Diabolorum by Sigmund Feyerabend, a

[p. 346]

voluminous collection of the orthodox views of Luther's followers concerning the existence, power, nature, and demeanor of devils.

Luther's belief in the Devil was crude, but he was even here morally great, strong in his religious sentiment, and serious in his demand that every one personally should honestly wage a war with the powers of evil, and that no church, no intercession of saints, no formulas or rituals had any saving power. Luther's followers retain all the crudities of their master and to some extent his moral seriousness, but they fall below the manliness of his spirit.

Click to view
THE DEVIL OF UNCHASTITY.
 German woodcut, illustrating the subjectivity of the conception of Satan. (Time of the Reformation.)

Feyerabend's Theatrum Diabolorum, "which," as the title says, "is a useful and sensible book," contains a great number of essays written by such prominent little authorities as Jodocus Hockerus Osnaburgensis, Hermannus Hamelmannus, Andreas Musculus, Andreas Fabricius Chemnicensis, Ludovicus Milichius, and others. The Reverend Hocker explains in forty-eight chapters almost all possible problems connected with devils whose number in Chapter VIII. is, according to Borrhaus, calculated to be not less than 2,665,866,746,664.

[p. 347]

[paragraph continues] Others describe special kinds of devils, such as the devil of blasphemy, VI; the dance-devil, VII; the servant's devil, VIII; the hunting devil, IX; the drink-devil, X; the wedlock-devil, XI; the devil of unchastity, XII; the miser's devil, XIII; the devil of tyranny, XIV; the laziness devil, XV; the pride devil, XVI; the pantaloon devil, XVII; the gambling devil, XVIII; the courtier's devil (represented in a drama of five acts, the scene being

          
Click to view
THE DEVIL OF   NIGGARDLINESS MAKING THE MISER HARD-HEARTED.
   (By Hans Holbein.)

       
Click to view
THE LATEST FAD   IN CLOTHES PILLORIED.
   (From Sigismund Feyerabend's Theatrum Diabolorum.)

     
   at the court of Darius), XIX; and the pestilence devil, XX. The author of this last chapter, the Rev. Hermann Strack, concludes by saying: "When we can obtain medicine let us not have a contempt for God's valuable gifts, but withal let us always and all the time rest our confidence and main comfort upon the only God."

The same conception of the Devil is presented with somewhat more poetical skill by Jacob Ruffs who dramatised

[p. 348]

the story of Job and the parable of the vineyard. The latter, which was performed at Zurich, Switzerland, in 1539, May 26, introduces Satan as he sows the seeds of sedition in the minds of the servants of the vineyard and induces them to slay the son of their master.

          
Click to view
1. SATAN,   ATTIRED AS A BISHOP, SLAYS THE PREACHER ZACHARIJAH WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF THE   COOK.

       
Click to view
3. THE SON IS   SLAIN.

     
      
Click to view
2. SATAN APPEARS   IN DISGUISE AT THE VINTAGE.

       
Click to view
4. SATAN   ANNOUNCES THE DEATH OF THE SON AT THE MOUTH OF HELL.

     
   SCENES FROM M. JACOB RUFF'S RELIGIOUS DRAMA "VON DESS HERREN WINGARTEN EIN HUIPSCH NUIW SPIL GEZOGEN USZ MATHEO AM 21, MARCO AM 12, LUCA AM 20 CAPITEL." (Performed at Zurich, 1539 A. D., on May 26.) [*1]

Almost all these treatises, poor though they may be as literary, theological, or pastoral exhortations, yet show the rationalistic tendency of discovering the Devil in the vices of man, and this method became more and more

[p. 349]

Click to view
MACBETH CONSULTING THE WITCHES.

[p. 350]

established until in these latter days Satan himself was boldly and directly by Protestant theologians declared to be a mere abstract idea and a personification of evil. Yet this step was not taken at once, and mankind had to pass first through a long period o wavering opinions, of conflicting propositions, uncertainties, venomous controversies, and anxious research for the truth.

Shakespeare.

The Protestant Devil became somewhat more cultured than the Catholic Devil, for the advancement noticeable in the civilisation of Protestant countries extended also to him. Says Mephistopheles in Faust:

"Culture which smooth the whole world licks
 Also unto the Devil sticks."

To note the progress, let us compare Wyntoun who wrote early in the fifteenth century and Shakespeare. Wyntoun's witches are ugly, old hags; Shakespeare's, although by no means beautiful, are yet interesting and poetical; they are "so withered and so wild in their attire that look not like the inhabitants o' th' earth and yet are on it." It is a poetical fiction representing temptation. And in this same sense the very word Devil is frequently used by Shakespeare. We are told, "'tis the eye of childhood that fears a painted Devil," and one fiend, as we read in Shakespeare, is the invisible spirit of wine. "The Devil," we read in Hamlet, "hath power to assume a pleasing shape." And the meaning of this sentence is plainly psychological, as we learn from another passage in which Polonius says to his daughter:

[p. 351]

     "With devotion's visage
 And pious action we do sugar o'er
 The Devil himself."

Milton.

The Protestant Devil, as a poetical figure, received his finishing touches from Milton. And Milton's Devil acquires a nobility of soul, moral strength, independence, and manliness which none of his ancestors possessed, neither Satan, nor Azazel, nor his proud cousins the Egyptian Typhon and the Persian Ahriman. The best characterisation of Milton's Satan is given by Taine. He ridicules Milton's description of Adam and Eve, who talk like a married couple of the poet's days. "I listen, and hear an English household, two reasoners of the period--Colonel Hutchinson and his wife. Heavens! Dress them! Folk so cultivated should have invented first of all a pair of trousers." The picture of the Good Lord is still more severely criticised. He says: "What a contrast between God and Satan!" Taine continues:

"Milton's Jehovah is a grave king who maintains a suitable state, something like Charles I.

"Goethe's God, half abstraction, half legend, source of calm oracles, a vision just beheld after a pyramid of ecstatic strophes, greatly excels this Miltonic God, a business man, a schoolmaster, a man for show! I honor him too much in giving him these titles. He deserves a worse name.

"He also talks like a drill-sergeant. 'Vanguard to right and left the front unfold.' He makes quips as clumsy as those of Harrison, the former butcher turned officer. What a heaven! It is enough to disgust one with Paradise; one would rather enter Charles the First's troop of lackeys, or Cromwell's Ironsides. We

[p. 352]

have orders of the day, a hierarchy, exact submission, extra duties, disputes, regulated ceremonials, prostrations, etiquette, furbished arms, arsenals, depots of chariots and ammunition."

How different is the abode of Satan. Taine says:

"The finest thing in connexion with this Paradise is Hell.

"Dante's hell is but a hall of tortures, whose cells, one below another, descend to the deepest wells."

Milton's hell is the asylum of independence; it may be dreary but it is the home of liberty that scorns abject servility. Milton describes the place as follows:

"'Is this the region, this the soil, the clime,'
 Said then the last Archangel, 'this the seat
 That we must change for heaven? this mournful gloom
 For that celestial light? Be it so, since he,
 Who now is Sovran, can dispose and bid
 What shall be right: farthest from him is best,
 Whom reason has equal'd, force hath made supreme
 Above his equals. Farewell, happy fields,
 Where joy for ever dwells! Hail, horrors, hail,
 Infernal world! and thou, profoundest hell
 Receive thy new possessor; one who brings
 A mind not to be changed by place or time.
 The mind is its own place, and in itself
 Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.
 What matter where, if I be still the same,
 And what I should be, all but less than he
 Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least
 We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
 Here for his envy; will not drive us hence:
 Here we may reign secure; and in my choice
 To reign is worth ambition, though in hell:
 Better to reign in hell, than serve in heaven."'

It has been frequently remarked that Milton's Satan

[p. 353]

is the hero of Paradise Lost, and, indeed, he appears as the most sympathetic figure in the greatest religious epic of English literature. His pride is not without self-respect which we cannot help admiring; Satan exclaims:

                       "Is there no place
 Left for repentance, none for pardon left?
 None left but by submission: and
 That word disdain forbids me. . . ."

And how noble appears Milton's Satan! Milton personifies in Satan the spirit of the English Revolution; Milton's Satan represents the honor and independence of the nation asserted in the face of an incapable government. Satan's appearance shows strength and dignity:

                "He above the rest
 In shape and gesture proudly eminent
 Stood like a tower."

And his character is distinguished by love of liberty. Taine describes him as follows:

"The ridiculous Devil of the Middle Ages, a horned enchanter, a dirty jester, a petty and mischievous ape, band-leader to a rabble of old women, has become a giant and a hero.

"Though feebler in force, he remains superior in nobility, since he prefers suffering independence to happy servility, and welcomes his defeat and his torments as a glory, a liberty, and a joy."

The Devil naturally acquires noble features which make him less diabolical and more divine in the measure that the God-conception of all age becomes the embodiment of the conservatism of the ruling classes. When the name and idea of God are misapplied to represent stagnation, Satan might change places with God. A new sect of Devil-worshippers who aspire for advancement

[p. 354]

and progress in the name of Satan might have arisen had not Protestantism, decried centuries ago as the work of the Devil, gained so much influence that in time it became itself a great conservative power in the world; and that its noble aspirations were first attributed to the influence of the Devil is only preserved in verse and fable.

          
Click to view
THE NATURAL   STATE OF MAN.

       
Click to view
THE HOLY GHOST   ILLUMINES THE HEART.

     
   The Devil in the Human Heart.

The common people in Protestant countries knew nothing of the mighty hero of Paradise Lost; they knew Satan only through the New Testament, and, being little affected by the progress of the natural sciences, took him as seriously as did the early Christians and the Dominicans of the Inquisition. But there is this difference; the spirit of the Reformation rested upon them with both its

[p. 355]

moral earnestness and its subjectivism. The middle classes as a rule did not fall a prey to the aberrations of former times; they practised no exorcisms and showed no inclination to prosecute, but confined their endeavors to the salvation of their own souls

The classical productions of the literature of this type are Pilgrim's Progress and The Heart of Man, both

          
Click to view
THE HOLY GHOST   IN POSSESSION.

       
Click to view
THE PASSION OF   CHRIST IN THE HEART

     
   highly interesting from a psychological standpoint, for both exhibit the subjective methods of introspection in a high degree, and will, as instances of a naive but extraordinary self -observation and analysis, retain a lasting value.

While the author of Pilgrim's Progress, his name and the vicissitudes of his life, are well known, The Heart

[p. 356]

of Man appeared anonymously, first in French and then in German. The French original seems to be lost and with it the date of its first appearance. The first German translation was published in Wurzburg, in the year 1732, under the title Geistlicher Sittenspiegel. It was reprinted once more in 1815 under the more appropriate title Das Herz des Menschen, exhibiting a series of illustrations

          
Click to view
THE HOLY TRINITY   RESIDES IN THE HEART.

       
Click to view
NEW   TEMPTATIONS.

     
   which represent the human heart as the battlefield of the powers of good and evil.

The first picture shows the human heart in its natural perversity, but the sinner repents in the second picture, and the Holy Ghost takes possession of his soul, ill the third picture. The fourth picture shows us a contemplation of the sufferings of the Saviour and the Holy

[p. 357]

Trinity resides in the soul as is illustrated in the fifth picture. But worldly temptations and prosecutions, represented the former by a man with a goblet and the latter by another man with a dagger, prevail upon the heart and shake its good resolutions, which is seen in the sixth picture; until at last, in the seventh picture, Satan with seven other spirits more wicked than himself re-enters,

          
Click to view
SATAN'S RETURN   WITH SEVEN OTHER SPIRITS MORE WICKED THAN HIMSELF.

       
Click to view
THE IMPIOUS MAN   IS DOOMED WHEN HE DIES.

     
   and the last state of that man is worse than the first. The practical application of this analysis of the human heart is given in two illustrations picturing the death of the pious and impious man. The former, whose heart is depicted in the ninth picture, is portrayed in the tenth picture, as being called by the Saviour to enjoy the eternal

[p. 358]

bliss of Heaven; while the eighth picture exhibits the doom of the latter who is lost forever in Hell.

The interesting feature of these illustrations consists in the method of showing the elements of man's soul, his passions and aspirations as foreign powers which enter, pass out, and re-enter. The heart itself appears as an empty blank and its character is established by the tendencies

          
Click to view
A HEART   FORTIFIED IN CHRIST.

       
Click to view
THE PIOUS MAN IS   SAVED AT DEATH.

     
   which dwell in it. The psychology which lies at the bottom of the author's belief, is not clearly pronounced; it may be either the Brahmanical theory of the self, as a being in itself, or the Buddhist doctrine of the illusoriness of the self, but it appears that the self, as represented in the head above the heart, is a mere reflex of the process that takes place within the human soul,

[p. 359]

and should therefore be regarded merely as the principle of unity, the moral worth of which depends upon the nature of its elements. The author of these drawings has in his naive analysis of the human heart, approached a scientific conception of the soul more closely than presumably he was aware of himself.

A Revival of Witch Prosecution.

At the time of the Reformation witch prosecution ceased for a while. It made room for another mania not less ugly and condemnable. Its place was filled by heresy persecution. Not only did Roman Catholic governments worry their Protestant subjects almost to death by confiscating their property, chasing them with hounds to mass, exiling entire districts, and ignominiously executing their leaders; but Protestants in their turn, too, regarded it as their religious duty to do the same to all dissenters. Luther himself, be it said to his everlasting honor, did not persecute; and so long as he lived he succeeded in preventing among his followers all persecutions. Calvin, however, ordered Servetus to be burned alive, because his belief in the trinity differed from his own; and King Henry VIII. of England resolutely suppressed with a high hand all opposition to the religious views he happened to hold at the time; nor did he shrink from shedding blood, although we must grant that he exercised much judgment by confining his persecution to a comparatively few powerful opponents.

While the fear of witchcraft was thus set aside for a time, the dangerous belief in the power of Satan continued and lay bidden like burning coals under ashes. The

[p. 360]

religions superstitions remained practically the same, and it is natural that the epidemic reappeared, although in a less virulent form. Even Protestant countries (North Germany, Sweden, England, Scotland, and the English colonies in North America) were visited by this spiritual plague, and a number of lay judges appeared who showed the same zeal as the Dominican inquisitors in Catholic countries.

With the waning of the zeal for burning witches the defenders of witchcraft grew rather more numerous than before. Among them are Dr. Thomas Erastus of Heidelberg, [*1] and Jean Bodin, a Frenchman. [*2] The Suffragan Bishop Peter Binsfeld [*3] and Justice Nicolaus Remigius [*4] defended in voluminous books with new arguments the policy of the Witch-Hammer, and King James I. of England wrote a demonology [*5] filled with all the superstition of the Middle Ages; Martin Delrio, [*6] a Jesuit, deems a revision of the belief in witchcraft in order, but comes to the conclusion that the evil exists and that there is no remedy save the use of relies, holy water, exorcisms, the holy sacraments of the Roman Catholic Church.

The National Museum of Germanic Antiquities at Nuremberg possesses a large poster which contains an account of three women who were burned as witches at Dernburg in the year 1555. Although they were not

[p. 361]

Click to view
POSTER OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

[p. 362]

burned on the same day, the illustration represents them as standing on the fagots together and the statement is made that in one instance, when the fire was lit, Satan appeared and visibly carried away his paramour through the air.

The tragedy of Dernburg is one case only among many. Mayor Pheringer, of Nordlingen, swore to exterminate the whole brood of sorcerers, and Judge Benedict Carpzov, Jr. (1595-1666), of Leipsic, following in the footsteps of his father, condemned more than a hundred persons to die at the stake for witchcraft.

Sensible Prelates.

The Protestants of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were on the average perhaps more serious in their religious beliefs than the Roman Catholics of the same period, and thus it happened that some French prelates of the Roman Church, being more worldly wise and more deeply imbued with the advancing spirit of the age than many bigoted Protestants, displayed infinitely more common sense than their brethren of the Reformed Churches.

This became particularly patent in the famous case of Martha Brossier, a French peasant girl, who, in 1588, claimed to be possessed of a devil. The excitement was great, and the pulpits resounded with alarming denunciations apt to renew all the terrors of former witch prosecutions. But Bishop Miron of Angers, and Cardinal De Gondi, Archbishop of Paris, retained their tranquillity, and had the case investigated not only according to a truly rational method, but even in a spirit of humor.

[p. 363]

When the never-failing tests with exorcisms through sacred books and holy water were administered, Bishop Miron so arranged matters that the possessed girl was induced to draw wrong conclusions, and lo! simple spring-water and the reading of a line from Virgil regularly brought on epileptic fits, while neither the old reliable exorcisms nor the holy water produced any effect when the girl did not apprehend the sacred texts.

Believers in Satanic possession were not satisfied with Bishop Miron's experiments, for they regarded them as a proof of the cunning of the Devil who thus slyly deceived his enemies. The case was brought before the Archbishop De Gondi, but he, too, proved sceptical and declared after some judicious experiments that the demeanor of the possessed girl was a mixed result of insanity and simulation.

Urban Grandier.

In spite of the sound judgment shown by these and other prelates, the prosecutions of witches continued. In the case of Urban Grandier, a priest, who was accused by the Ursuline nuns at Loudun in Western France of having exercised Satanic powers upon their minds, the Archbishops of Bordeaux recognised the malicious hostility and hysterical bitterness with which the nuns bore witness against their preacher. Grandier was not innocent in other respects, but there were many priests whose morals were no better. Considering the innumerable contradictions in the statements of his enemies, the Archbishop dismissed the case and he was honorably reinstalled in his position. But that was not the end of it.

[p. 364]

Click to view
FAC-SIMILE OF THE CONTRACT WHICH URBAN GRANDIER IS REPORTED TO HAVE MADE WITH THE DEVIL, AND WHICH WAS PRODUCED AND ACCEPTED AS EVIDENCE IN COURT.

[p. 365]

It happened that M. de Laubordemont, a cousin of the prioress, while attending to some business of the French Government in Loudun, heard of the story and gave a highly colored report to Cardinal Richelieu, at whose instance the investigation was renewed. In the second trial Grandier had no chance; for Laubordemont was appointed judge. He accepted the most ridiculous evidence. The devils who spoke out of the mouths of the obsessed nuns were called upon as witnesses, and two documents were produced which purported to be the original pact of Grandier with Satan. One of them is signed by Grandier, the other bears the signature of six devils, the authenticity of which is vouched for by Baalbarith, the Secretary of his Satanic Majesty. The script is in mirror writing. Four expert Doctors of the Sorbonne, although they never doubted either the documents or the reality of the devils of the obsessed nuns, saw fit to caution the judges not to admit the testimony of Satan, because the slanderer and liar could not be a trustworthy witness. But the exorcising fathers, all of whom were Carmelite monks, laid down the principle that a properly exorcised devil cannot help confessing the truth. Grandier was cruelly tortured and executed on August 18; but Peter Lactantius, the chief exorcist whom the dying Grandier had challenged to appear before the tribunal of God, died a raving maniac exactly one month after the death of his victim, on September 18.

A Protestant Witch-Execution.

Much has been said and written about the cruelty of the Roman Catholic methods of witch-prosecution, but

[p. 366]

the Protestants were not a whit better, except perhaps that they added to the proceedings a good deal more of pious cant and accompanied executions with a religious unction which made their conduct the more detestable. As a typical case we quote an abbreviated report of the execution of three witches, Susanna, Ilse, and their mother Catharine, which took place at Arendsee, 1687, August 5:  [*1]

"The case was submitted for another revision, during which time six clergymen attended daily upon the three prisoners and exhorted them to pray and sing and repent. Then they were cited before the court one after the other and the clergymen stood behind them. The president of the court asked them once more, first Susanna, whether she had received an incubus; (answer: Yes!) Secondly Ilse, whether her mother had given her an incubus; (answer: Yes!) and thirdly Catharine, whether she had given an incubus to Ilse; (answer: Yes!) Thereupon the Notary, Mr. Anton Werneccius, read the judgment, and the executioner went to the court and asked for mercy in case he should not succeed at once in decapitating Susanna and Ilse. The question was asked whether there was any additional grievance. Then the rod was broken, table and chairs of the court upset, and the procession moved out to the Koppenberg, the place of execution.

"Part of the guards opened the way. Each one of the three witches was accompanied on either side by a clergyman and led with a rope by a hangman. At the same time six armed citizens surrounded her. Another part of the guard closed the procession.

"On the way prayers alternated with exhortations and singing of hymns.

"Before the Seehausen gate a circle was made and Susanna was led round until the public had finished singing the hymn 'God our father, dwell with us.'

[p. 367]

'When her head was taken off, the people sang, 'To thee we pray, O Holy Ghost.' [*1]

"Next came Ilse who was killed in the same way, accompanied by the singing of the same hymns.

"While the singing continued Catharine was placed upon the fagots and her neck fastened with an iron chain, which was drawn so tight that her face swelled and became suffused with a brown color. The fagots were lit and all present, clergy, school-children, and spectators sang until her body was consumed in the fire."

Witch-Prosecution in America.

Not less terrible fruit than in Europe did the belief in witchcraft bear on the free soil of Protestant America. Death-sentences for witchcraft occurred several times after the foundation of the New England colonies; but the last and most terrible outbreak took place in Salem, Massachusetts, as recorded in Upham's History of Salem Witchcraft, and in Drake's Witchcraft Delusion in New England. Under the baneful influence of the religious teachings of Increase Mather and his son, Cotton Mather, [*2] two Boston clergymen, the Rev. Samuel Parris, minister of the Church in Salem, began to have a case of witchcraft investigated, which, as says President Andrew Dickson White, [*3] "would have been the richest

[p. 368]

of farces had they not led to events so tragical." The possessed behaved like maniacs in court and charged a poor old Indian woman with having bewitched them. Her husband, an ignorant fool, was induced to testify against her. This easy success emboldened the believers in witchcraft, among whom the Putnam family played a prominent part. They began to prosecute some of the foremost people of New England; several men and women were executed, many fled for their lives, and a reign of terror ensued. Any person once suspected and accused was doomed. As an instance we quote the case of Mr. Burroughs, a clergyman, who on account of petty parish quarrels with the Putnam family had been dismissed from the ministry. President White says:

"Mr. Burroughs had led a blameless life, the only thing ever charged against him by the Putnams being that he insisted strenuously that his wife should not go about the parish talking of her own family matters. He was charged with afflicting the children, convicted, and executed. At the last moment he repeated the Lord's Prayer solemnly and fully, which it was supposed no sorcerer could do, and this, together with his straightforward Christian utterances at the execution, shook the faith of many in the reality of diabolical possession."

President White continues:

"Ere long it was known that one of the girls had acknowledged that she had belied some persons who had been executed, and especially Mr. Burroughs, and that she had begged forgiveness; but this for a time availed nothing. Persons who would not confess were tied up and put to a sort of torture which was effective in securing new revelations.

"In the case of Giles Cory the horrors of the persecution culminated. Seeing that his doom was certain, and wishing to preserve

[p. 369]

his family from attainder and their property from confiscation, he refused to plead. He was therefore pressed to death, and, when in his last agonies his tongue was pressed out of his mouth, the sheriff with his walking-stick thrust it back again."

Increase and Cotton Mather were the last defenders of diabolical possession and witchcraft on American soil; the latter saw in his later years a new era dawning upon his country. Vigorously and successfully censured by Robert Calef, a courageous Boston merchant, he bemoaned the decay of the religious spirit among the growing generation, and even to his dying hour regarded the mere unbelief in witchcraft as an attack upon the glory of the Lord.

The present generation may well smile at his mistaken religious notions; but granting him that the old conception of God as a miracle-worker and an individual ego-being after the fashion of pagan personifications be right, his idea of the importance of a belief in witchcraft is logically correct. If witchcraft is impossible, then there can be no wizard-god who changes sticks into serpents, who stops the sun in his course, reverses the shadow of the dial, is jealous of other gods and of the familiar spirits of witches. The abandonment of the belief in witchcraft tacitly implied the abandonment of a belief in God as a miracle-worker, and prepared the way for a nobler religious faith which surrendered the idea of seeking God in the suppositions possibility of breaking the laws of nature, and finally found him in the cosmic order itself, i. e., in the unity, the harmony, the rightness of those eternal factors of existence which are the conditions of reason, of truth, and of justice.

Footnotes

^339:1 The Hortus Deliciarum was written in the latter part of the twelfth century for the edification of monks, and the present picture illustrates the various temptations which lure them away from the crown of life: city life and precious garments; or the military power of abbots in monasteries with its worldly comforts; further money, the couch of laziness, the joy of gardening.

^340:1 "The building representing the Empire bears the inscription "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it." The German princes of the Reformed Faith are pictured in effigy in the company of devils. The Count Palatine Frederick V, son-in-law of the King of England, who had just lost the crown of Bohemia, is seen falling down. On the right-hand the Prince Elector of Saxony, a Lutheran, and on the left hand the city of Venice are represented as refusing to join the Calvinists. The picture purports to elucidate to the common man what scholars can learn by studying scripture.

"Was Glerte durch die Schrift verstahn,
 Das lehrt das Gmahl den gmainen Mann."

^342:1 Walch, Tischreden, v, 839; v, 1109; viii, 1234, x, 1257; xii, 481, and 2043.

^343:1 The story has been doubted, yet, considering the character of Luther, it is not only possible but probable. If Luther did not throw the inkstand at the Devil, the anecdote is, to say the least, ben trovato; it characterises excellently his attitude toward Satan.

^344:1 Angeli Annales Marchiae Brandenburgicae, p. 326 (quoted by Soldan, p. 302), The original reads: "Rogo te, omnia velis certissime explorare, ne subit aliquid doli. . . . Nam ego tot fucis, dolis, technis, mendaciis, artibus, etc., hactenus sum exagitatus ut cogar difficilis esse ad credendum. . . . Quare vide et prospice tibi quoque ne fallare et ego per te fallar.

^348:1 From Konnecke after contemporaneous illustrations.

^360:1 De Lamiis et strigibus, 1577.

^360:2 De Magorum daemonomania seu detestando laminarum et Magorum cum Satana commercio, 1579.

^360:3 Tractatus de confessionibus maleficorum et sagarum, 1589.

^360:4 Daemonolatria, which appeared in Latin and in German. See Soldan, p. 351.

^360:5 Daemonologie, 1597. See also the advice to suppress witchcraft, given to his son in the second book of his Basilicon Doron, 1599.

^360:6 Disquisitiones magicae, 1599.

^366:1 See Horst, Zauberbibliothek, 2. pp. 411-413, quoted from Reichardt, Vol. I., pp. 100-126.

^367:1 Especially the latter song, Nun bitten wir den Heilgen Geist, was believed to afford protection against witchcraft. When a pious superintendent in the University of Giessen was once surrounded by students dressed as devils he chanted in his anxiety this hymn in the hope of driving away thereby his tormentors.

^367:2 Compare Cotton Mather, The Wonders of the Invisible World; being an Account of the Tryals of Several VVitches, lately Ex[e]cuted in New England (first London edition, 1693).

^367:3 See his "New Chapters in the Warfare of Science," Popular Science Monthly, May, 1889, p. ii. Compare also Konig, Ausgeburten des Menschenwahns, pp. 488-494.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 370]

  

THE ABOLITION OF WITCH-PROSECUTION.

Molitor and Erasmus.

THE horrors of Devil worship, of the Inquisition, and of witch-prosecution were the natural consequences of a misconception of the nature of evil. They were the visitations that necessarily followed in the footsteps of a most abandoned ignorance. They oppressed mankind like a dreadful nightmare, like ghastly hallucinations of a feverish brain, and the disease passed away slowly, very slowly, only when the light of science, which is the divine revelation that is taking place now, gradually began to dispel the gloomy shadows of the night and revealed the superstitious character of the belief that had begotten the crimes of the dark ages.

The first protests against witch-prosecution were raised at the time when the two inquisitors Sprenger and Institutoris, fortified with the unequivocal authority of his Holiness the Pope, carried on their criminal profession in the boldest way. The outrages of the Inquisition were pointed out in a pamphlet entitled Dialogus de lamiis et pythonibus mulieribus, written in 1489 by Dr. Ulrich Molitoris, an attorney of Constance. Two other

[p. 371]

prominent men of the juridical profession, Alciatus and Ponzinibius, expressed themselves in the same spirit; they declared bodily excursions of witches and similar things to be pure imagination. But their arguments

Click to view
APPARITIONS OF THE CROSS.
 From Grunbeck's Eine neuve auszlegung der seltzamen wunderzaichen (1507)

were of no avail, for Bartholomaeus de Spina, the master of the holy palace, declared that jurists could not understand the case of witchcraft.

[p. 372]

The time was not yet ripe; the people still clung to the belief in visions and miracles, dreams, apparitions and sorcery. Most insane productions (such as, e. g., Grunbeck's New Interpretation of Strange Miracles, which appeared in the year 1507) attracted the attention of the world and passed for divine revelations. The more uncanny they were, the higher was the credit they received. [*1]

There is a remarkable instance on record that the hangman of Vienna refused to perform his office on Oct. 21, 1498. The execution had to be delayed until another hangman could be procured. [*2] Another case is mentioned by Soldan. [*3] Katharine Hensel of Feckelberg was sentenced to die in June, 1576, but when at the place of execution she pleaded her innocence, the hangman refused to execute her. The case was referred to the Palsgrave George John of Veldenz who after a careful examination of the trial ordered an acquittal and condemned the township Feckelberg to bear the costs. [*4]

The famous Erasmus of Rotterdam published a letter in the year 1500 in which be spoke of devil-contracts as an invention made by the witch-prosecutors; but his satire had no effect; for, in the meantime, fagots were constantly burning all over Europe.

[p. 373]

Weier, Meyfart, and Loos.

The first successful attempt--successful only temporarily and in a limited degree--of stopping witch-prosecution came from a Protestant physician, Johannes Weier (Latin "Wierus" or "Piscinarius") . He was born in Grave, 1515, had studied medicine in Paris, and travelled in Africa, where, as he tells us, he had had a good opportunity of studying sorcery. Then he went to Crete, and on his return was elected body-physician to Duke William of Cleves. His work of six books, De praetigiis Daemonum et incantationibus ac Veneficiis, appeared in 1563. He still believes in the Devil and in magic, but he rejects the possibility of witchcraft and compacts with the Devil. He boldly accuses monks and clergymen of being, under the pretext of serving religion, most zealous servants of Beelzebub. William, Duke of Cleves, Frederic, Count of Palatine, and the Count of Niurwenar followed Weier's advice and suppressed all witch-prosecution.

Twenty years after Weier another heroic man, a Protestant, named Meyfart, rector of the Latin school of Coburg, raised his voice of warning. His booklet was a sermon of "Admonitions to the powerful princes and the conscientious preachers," by which words he meant the Dominican fathers who were the official witch-prosecutors. He reminded them of the day of judgment, when they would be held to account for every torture and tear of their victims.

Weier and Meyfart made a deep impression. But a

[p. 374]

reaction followed. How little, after all, Weier succeeded in conquering the belief in witchcraft, which he had temporarily shaken, can be learned from the fact that in the Protestant Electorate of Saxony a criminal ordinance was issued in the year 1572, which threatened all people making a compact with the Devil "to be brought from life to death on the fagot."

Cornelius Loos, a canonicus and professor at the University of Treves and a devout Catholic Christian, was unfortunate enough to be more clear-headed than his bishop, Peter Binsfeld. Recognising the baseness of judges in the cases of witchcraft, he wrote a book De vera et falsa magia. The book was never published; it was stopped in the press and its author sent to prison. In 1593 Loos was forced to recant on his knees before the assembled dignitaries of the Church. He died in 1595 of the plague, which probably saved him from an execution at the stake. Loos's manuscript was supposed to be lost but was recently discovered by Prof. George Lincoln Burr of Cornell University. [*1]

Three Noble Jesuits.

Adam Tanner [*2] (1572-1632) and Paul Laymann (1575-1635), two Jesuits of South Germany, strongly advised the judges to be very careful in lawsuits against witches. When death overtook Tanner on a journey, in a little place called Unken, the parishioners refused to grant him a Christian burial, because a "hairy little

[p. 375]

imp" on a glass plate was found among his things. It was an insect prepared for the microscope. [*1] The curate of Unken, however, succeeded in convincing his congregation of the harmless nature of the "imp," and they at last consented to the interment in their cemetery.

Most touching is the narrative of another Jesuit, a noble-minded man, who takes a prominent place among the strugglers against the dreary superstition of burning witches. This man is Friedrich Spee von Langenfeld (1591-1635), a poet and the author of a collection of songs called Trutznachtigall (spite-nightingale), whose warnings remained unheeded, "as a voice crying in the wilderness." His Cautio criminalis (published anonymously [*2] in 1631) was an appeal, much needed at the time, to the German authorities anent their legal proceedings against witches.

Spee was engaged in Franconia as pastor, and had prepared for their death at the stake not fewer than two hundred persons accused of witchcraft. Scarcely thirty years of age, he was asked one day by Philip of Schoenborn, Bishop of Wurzburg, why his hair had turned gray. "Through grief," he said. "Of the many witches whom I have prepared for death, not one was guilty." The reply must have burnt into the soul of the questioner, for ever after Philip of Schoenborn remained under its influence. Spee confessed to the Bishop that he was the author of the Cautio criminalis, and the Bishop did not betray the confidence of the young Jesuit.

[p. 376]

Says Spee in his Cautio criminalis:

"In these proceedings no one is allowed to have legal assistance or defence, however honestly it may be conducted. For it is claimed that the crime is a crimen exceptum, one not subject to the rules of ordinary legal proceedings. And even if an attorney were

Click to view
FRIEDRICH VON SPEE.
 After a photograph of the oil picture in the Marzellen-Gymnasium at Cologne.

allowed to the prisoner, the former would from the outset be suspected himself, as a patron and protector of witches, so that all mouths are shut and all pens are blunted, and one can neither speak nor write. . . . I swear solemnly that of the many persons whom I accompanied to the stake, there was not one who could be

[p. 377]

said to have been duly convicted; and two other pastors made me the same confession from their experience. Treat the heads of the Church, the judges, myself, in the same way as those unfortunate ones, make us undergo the same tortures, and you will convict us all as wizards."

Spee did not deny the possibility of witchcraft; he was a faithful believer in the dogmas held by the Church of his age. He merely objected to the abuses of witchcraft and recommended clemency.

Philip of Schoenborn became Archbishop of Mayence and to his honor be it said that under his government no fagots were lit.

Abatement of Witch-Prosecution.

Horst (in his Zauberbibliothek, Vi., 310) publishes a strange instance of the fanaticism of the seventeenth century which appeared anonymously under the title Druten-Zeitung, in 1627, praising in poor verses the great deeds of the Inquisition. According to Horst's authority, they are written by a Protestant who expresses his joy and gratitude to God that in the adjoining Catholic countries the extirpation of witchcraft was carried on with unabating vigor. Thus it is apparent that in spite of Weier and Spee the idea of witchcraft and of the necessity of witch-prosecution was still deeply rooted in the minds of many people. Still, the authorities began to lose faith in the necessity of witch-prosecution, and the champions of the lost cause deem it wiser to seek the shelter of anonymous publication.

In Holland witch-prosecution was abolished in 1610; in Geneva, Switzerland, it ceased in 1632.

[p. 378]

Click to view
ILLUSTRATION FROM THE "DRUTENZEITUNG," 1627

[p. 379]

Christina, Queen of Sweden., as the first act after her accession to the throne, issued a proclamation on February 16, 1649, which applied also to all the Swedish possessions on German soil, to stop all proceedings of witch-prosecution. Gabriel Naude, a Frenchman (he died 1680) wrote against witch-prosecution, and, although the Parliament of France which convened at Rouen insisted on the existence of witchcraft and on the necessity of the capital punishment of witches, Louis XIV. decreed in 1672 that all cases of witchcraft be dismissed. He was obliged to re-introduce the law of capital punishment of witches in 1683, but did not fail to limit the power of the judges.

Matthias Hopkins, commonly called "witchfinder general," took advantage of the disorders of the English civil wars of the seventeenth century and made a special business of the discovery of witches. He was quite successful, until his own methods were tried on his own person, and as he did not sink in the water ordeal, the people declared him to be a wizard and slew him (1647). [*1] Butler describes Hopkins's career in Hudibras as follows:

"Hath not this present Parliament
 A lieger to the devil sent,
 Fully empower'd to treat about
 Finding revolted witches out?
 And has he not within a year
 Hang'd threescore of them in one shire?
 Some only for not being drown'd,
 And some for sitting above ground
 Whole days and nights upon their breeches,

[p. 380]

And feeling pain, were hang'd for witches.
 And some for putting knavish tricks
 Upon green geese or turkey chicks
 Or pigs that suddenly deceased
 Of griefs unnatural, as he guess'd,
 Who proved himself at length a witch
 And made a rod for his own breech."

Witch-prosecution was finally abolished in England in the year 1682. Glanville, a fanatic Englishman of Somerset, felt himself called upon to refute the writings of Gabriel Naude and found many followers, but Dr. Webster, a physician, stood up against Glanville's superstitions propositions. Glanville thereupon proceeded to hunt witches, but the English government ordered Mr. Hunt, a justice of the peace of Somerset, to stop him.

Click to view
BALTHASAR BEKKER.

 [*1]

At the end of the seventeenth century the polemics against the belief in the Devil began to grow bolder and ever bolder. A Dutch physician, Anton van Dale, no longer attributes the pagan oracles to the influence of the Devil, but to priestly fraud (De oraculis Ethnicorum, Amsterdam, 1685), and set the people to thinking on witch-prosecution (see his work Dissertationes de origine ac progressu Idolalriae, etc., 1696). He thus prepared

[p. 381]

the way for the two great reformers Bekker and Thomasius, who openly and squarely denounced witchcraft as a superstition and at last succeeded in abolishing the official prosecutions of witches by the authorities of State and Church.

Balthasar Bekker, a Dutch clergyman of German

Click to view
BEKKER'S AUTOGRAPH.
 Reproduced from his original handwriting in the first Dutch edition of De betoverde Weereld.

descent, published in 1691-1693 a work entitled "The Enchanted World" (De betoverde Weereld), which was a thorough and careful examination of the belief in devils, witches, and the legal suits conducted against witches. Bekker is a faithful Christian who undertakes to prove that the existence of a personal Devil is a superfluous assumption.

[p. 382]

[paragraph continues] His book is a formidable attack upon the Inquisition and its habits of ensnaring its innocent victims.

Click to view
CHRISTIAN THOMASIUS.
 Reduced from a copper engraving by M. Bernigroth.

And the success of the book was as great as it was deserved. Within two months four thousand copies were

[p. 383]

sold. And yet did Bekker fail to convince his contemporaries. A flood of refutations appeared, and the synod to whom he presented his work, a Protestant body, condemned his views and discharged him from the ministry.

The seeds sown by Bekker were reaped by Christian Thomasius (1656-1718), professor at the University of Halle, who waged a relentless war against witch-prosecution. In the year 1698 a case of witchcraft was submitted to him and against the advice of one of his colleagues he condemned a poor woman to death. However, when the judgment had been executed, the arguments of his opponent gained on him until he became convinced of his own error; and now he deemed it his duty to devote the

Click to view
SIGNATURE OF CHRISTIAN THOMASIUS.

whole influence of his authority to the abolition of witch-prosecution. He came out boldly and squarely in condemnation of the practice and denied the bodily corporeality of the Devil, which served him as an argument to disprove the possibility of making a compact with him. His main writings are Dissertatio de crimine magiae and De origine et progressu processus inquisitoriii contra sagas.

Thomasius was more successful than his predecessors. All official witch-prosecutions ceased, and the Devil was no longer an object of universal awe.

The Last Traces.

The Inquisition was still in existence during the first quarter of the nineteenth century in Spain, a country distinguished

[p. 384]

by its ultra-Roman conception of Christianity. When in 1808, after the battle of Ramosiera, the French troops under General La Salle conquered Toledo, they opened the dungeons of the Inquisition. The cells were dark and unclean holes, scarcely large enough to allow a man to stand upright, and most of the prisoners that were brought up to daylight had become stiff and crippled by the maltreatment of their torturers. Unhappily they and their liberators, a detached troop of lancers, were cut off by a furious mob of Spaniards from the main body of the French army. General La Salle hurried to their rescue but came too late; he found only the mangled bodies of the slaughtered.

In a subterranean vault General La Salle found a wooden statue of the holy virgin dressed in silk, her head surrounded with a golden halo, her right hand holding the standard of the Inquisition. She was fair to look at, but her breast was covered with spiked armor; and her arms and hands were movable by machinery concealed behind the statue. The servants of the Inquisition explained to General La Salle that it was used for bringing heretics to confession. The delinquent received the sacrament at the altar in the presence of the dimly illumined statue, and was once more requested to confess. Then two priests led him to the statue of the Madre dolorosa which miraculously seemed to welcome him by extending her arms. "She beckons you to her bosom," they said; "in her arms the most obdurate sinner will confess," whereupon the arms closed, pressing their victim upon the spikes and knives.

Napoleon I. suppressed the Inquisition (in Spain

[p. 385]

December 4, 1808, and in Rome one year later), but it was revived by Ferdinand VII., King of Spain, June 21, 1813. Its last victims were a Jew who was burned, and a Quaker school-master who was hanged in 1826.

Descriptions of Hell.

The Jesuit Father, Caussin, the father confessor of King Louis XIII. writes on hell in his book, La Cour Sainte,--a work which attained considerable fame in his days, as follows:

Click to view
SCHOTTEL'S WHEEL OF HELL.

"What is hell? A silence for all that which is said of hell is less than hell itself. No just man can think of it without shedding thousands of tears. But do you want to know what hell is? Ask Tertullian. He will tell you that hell is a deep, dark pit of stench in which all the offal of the whole world flows together. Ask Hugo of St. Victor. He will answer: 'Hell is an abyss without a bottom, which opens the gates of despair, and where all hope is abandoned.' 'It is an eternal pool of fire,' says St. John the divine (Rev. xiv. 20); 'its air comes from glowing coals, its light from flickering flames. The nights of hell are darkness; the places of rest of the damned are serpents and vipers; their hope is despair. O, eternal death! O, life without life! O, misery without end!'"

Justus Georg Schottel, [*1] whilom member of the Consistory of Brunswick-Luneburg, and councillor to the

[p. 386]

duke, doctor of jurisprudence, and a learned man who was not without merit in German poetry and literature, took special interest in the mysteries of the infernal regions, and published his views in a book of 328 pages, in which he explained the tortures of the iron wheel of eternal hell torture:

"Dear reader," he says, look at this wheel all round and read carefully what is written on it. How much time and suffering, how much anxiety and torture of despair, must be gone through in hell, must be endured, borne, experienced and realised, by hundreds, by thousands, by hundreds of thousands, by millions of years in burning pitch, in flaming sulphur, in red-hot iron, in poignant blow-pipe flames, with weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth infinite; with hunger and thirst miraculous; in stench and darkness cruelly; before this wheel be turned around only once. But now this wheel of eternity is made of purely everlasting iron, and must turn round many hundred, yea million, and millions of millions of times, and can never wax old, never perish, never be worn out, and can never stand still in all eternity. Whereas you can conclude and find out by reflexion this all-discomforting, all-terrible, and all-cruelest infinity of hell-torture. One might grow mad and insane when considering this fiery eternity and these iron eternal years, etc., etc."

Dr. Schottel's Wheel of Life is of special interest as it reminds one of the Buddhist Wheel of Life which the Evil Spirit holds in his clutches. [*1]

Similar ideas as to the awfulness of the sufferings in hell are offered in the sermons of Abraham a Sancta-Clara who was the most influential preacher in Vienna in the beginning of the eighteenth century.

The eighteenth century is the age of an intellectual

[p. 387]

dawn, but while the rays of light begin to spread the shadows of the night linger and their darkness seems rather more intense than before.

The Rev. Father Gilbert Baur, writes in the year 1785 as follows:

"You know what happens when meat is salted. The salt enters all parts, every nerve and every bone, and communicates to all parts its acrid qualities; and yet the meat is not dissolved nor annihilated by the salt, but on the contrary preserved from decay. In the same way the hellish fire will enter into the innermost marrow, and be distributed throughout the entrails. It will take hold of all the arteries and nerves and make the brain boil with furious pains, without causing death or annihilation."

Some theological geographers have placed hell in the sun, others in the moon, still others in the center of the earth. But the question as to which of the three opinions is right has not yet been decided.

A Slavonian folk song sings of hell as follows: [*1]

"Look at the terrible maw! How fiery and deep is the place of torture! No eye can discover its bottom.

"A spark alone causes immense pain, but against the fury of this fire it is but a dewdrop.

"Reason cannot comprehend and tongue cannot utter what it may be to be in the fires of Hell.

"Devils transform themselves into dogs, into wild animals, into snakes and dragons; they howl, and they bellow, and they bawl; what terrors they cause 1

"Every poor sinner must pay tribute here to the justice of God; and for every vicious deed he must suffer special pain."

After an enumeration of the sufferings for various sins and vices, the poem continues:

[p. 388]

Click to view
THE CHRISTIAN HELL.

[p. 389]

"Can there be worse misery? Indeed, there is not; for from this place of darkness the eye of the damned will never see the face of God.

"'Woe, woe!' thus they howl; Whither have we gone, we miserable creatures? Oh! that men would believe us; they would never fall into sin.'

"'Death, where art thou? O thunder-holts, slay us! O, God, we want to die, for we cannot endure these pains!'

"Alas! In vain you wish for death, ye souls lost in eternity. You are damned to live, eternally dying.

"Even a toothache you could not endure forever. How much more terrible must be the fire everlasting!

"Consider then. O sinner, the misery that awaits you. Who knows whether you may not reach your destiny to-morrow?

"To-night you go to bed in your sin, and to-morrow you may wake up burning in the fires of Hell."

These descriptions of hell are, in all their essential features, still current in "darkest Europe" and also in "darkest America." The picture of hell, here reproduced, surpasses in drastic beauty and graudeur of stage-effect the paintings of the famous Hell Breughel. It possesses the additional interest of being still in the market, being even now advertised and sold among other religious pictures.

No wonder that there are good Christians who would gladly change places with brute animals. A young Jesuit who afterwards turned  said in his memoirs that he used to envy the watch dog in the courtyard to whom death meant annihilation without the terrors of hell.

There is a good deal of moral courage in the comfort which, as the story goes, an old infidel farmer gave to

[p. 390]

his dying son, saying: "We do not go to church, and the parson hates us; now, when you die you will go to hell; but don't shame our family by howling and gnashing of teeth. What others can stand we can stand too." Must not the Lord have been better pleased with infidel grit than with the submissiveness of the slavish believer?

Schwenter and Kircher.

The Jesuit order carries the principle of Romanism and obedience to church-authorities to extremes. It was founded for the purpose of creating and sustaining a counter-reformation to Protestantism, and to Protestants therefore it is the most objectionable Roman Catholic order. But whatever may be said against the Jesuits, their methods and narrow principles, we must acknowledge that some of their members have been very prominent and scholarly men; and Athanasius Kircher is one of the greatest scientists they have produced. Born at Geisa, near Fulda, Germany, in 1601, he was professor of philosophy and mathematics at the University of Wurzburg, which he left during the Thirty Years' War, for Avignon, in France. He journeyed with Cardinal Frederick of Saxony to Malta, and ended his life as professor of mathematics and Hebrew at Rome. His investigations have no direct, but only an indirect, bearing on witchcraft-prosecutions. He made some curious experiments with hens and pigeons, which remained a problem to psychologists, and are still repeated by them to-day. He placed a hen on the floor, and made a stroke of chalk along its bill, whereupon the hen lay quiet as if paralysed, remaining in this awkward position until she was

[p. 391]

released by some motion of the hands of the experimenter.

We ought to add here that although Kircher is generally credited with the invention of this experiment because it became known mainly through him. [*1] Professor Preyer has proved that he simply reproduced the experiment made by Daniel Schwenter, [*2] who published his discovery

Click to view
SCHWENTER'S HEN EXPERIMENT, REPRODUCED BY FATHER ATHANASIUS KIRCHER.

ten years before the appearance of Kircher's Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae.

The attitude of the hen, which Kircher ascribes to her imagination, was later, in the eighteenth century, called a phenomenon of magnetism or mesmerism, and in the nineteenth century, hypnotism. Whatever scientific

[p. 392]

value this isolated fact may possess, its discovery marked the beginning of a scientific treatment of psychical phenomena which naturally tended to a better comprehension of the abnormal conditions of the human mind, and thus could not but exercise a wholesome influence.

Diabolism Developing Into Pathology.

In the middle of the eighteenth century Pater John Joseph Gassner, vicar of Klosterle in Chur, a Roman Catholic clergyman, acted on the theory that the majority of diseases arose from demoniacal possession and he cured himself and his parishioners by exorcism. The success of his cures made a great stir in the world and threatened a dangerous reaction. Some declared he was a charlatan, while others believed in him.

Click to view
Etching by Daniel Chodowiecki.

Mesmer, at the request of the Elector of Bavaria, made investigations and said that he explained his miracles as spiritualistic magnetic influences, while Lavater maintained that the curative element consisted solely in the glorious name of Jesus. Gassner lived some time in Constance, afterwards in Ratisbon, partly protected,

[p. 393]

partly distrusted by his ecclesiastical superiors. In 1775 he went to Amberg, then to Sulzbach, where the halo of his miraculous cures waned. The Prince-Bishop of Ratisbon declared in his favor, but Emperor Joseph II. forbade his exorcisms in the whole Roman empire. The Archbishops of Prague and Salzburg rejected him, and even Pope Pius VI. disapproved of him.

Gassner's exorcisms renewed the interest taken in the problem of the existence of the Devil. The question was discussed in several publications, among which we mention "a humble petition for information to the great men who do no longer believe in a Devil," written anonymously from the orthodox standpoint by Professor Koster, of Giessen, editor of a religious periodical. It was answered in another pamphlet: "Humble reply of a country-clergyman," whose author claims that the biblical Satan is an allegory, idols are called "nothings" in Hebrew, and the Devil is one of these nothings. He offers rationalistic explanations of the Bible, representing, for instance, the tempter of Christ as "a sly messenger and spy of the synagogue," and declaring the theory of a Devil to be idolatry disguised in orthodoxy, and a sublimated Manicheeism. The author concludes: "I had rather that the people fear God than the Devil. The fear of God is the be, ginning of wisdom, but the fear of the Devil, whatever be its results, is no Christian adornment. "

The number of anti-diabolists increased rapidly, even among the clergy; yet the belief in a personal Devil remained the orthodox view, and if we are not mistaken it is still regarded as an essential dogma of the Christian

[p. 394]

faith by many theologians, especially among those who display a contempt for worldly culture and secular science.

The worst superstitions had grown harmless, but the hankering after miracles had not yet ceased. Diabolism had lost its hold on mankind, but mysticism reappeared in new forms; and the contrasts that prevailed in the eighteenth century cannot be better characterised than by the visions of Swedenborg as against the refutation of the dreams of visionaries by Kant.

The belief in mysticism begets frauds; and the boldest, wiliest, and most successful imposter of the eighteenth century was Giuseppe Balsamo of Sicily, who travelled under the assumed name of Count Cagliostro, finding easy victims among the credulous of all descriptions, especially the Free Masons. His tricks, however, were exposed by Countess Elizabeth von der Recke, and being thereafter exiled from every country which he entered, he fell at last into the hands of the Inquisition, as whose prisoner he died in the year 1795.

Demonology of the Nineteenth Century.

The free-thought movement of the eighteenth century and a better scientific conception of nature relieved mankind of the unnecessary fear of the Devil, and the nineteenth century could begin to study the question impartially in its historical and philosophical foundations.

Kant found the principle of evil in the reversal of the moral world-order. "The Scriptures lay down," he says, "man's moral relation in the form of a history, representing the opposite principles in man as eternal facts, as heaven and hell. The significance of this popular

[p. 395]

conception, dropping all mysticism, is that there is but one salvation for man, which lies in his embracing in his heart the moral maxims."

Following the example of Kant, theologians began to give a rational explanation of the Devil. Daub, a disciple of Schelling, attempted to construct a philosophical devil, in his book Judas Iscariot, or Evil in its Relation to Goodness, defining Satan, the Antichrist and enemy of God, as the hatred of all that is good.

Schenkel regards the Evil One as a manifestation that appears in the totality of things, and characterises him as that which is collectively bad. "Satan, accordingly, is a 'juridical person,'" and this explains his extraordinary and superindividual power; but he has not as yet succeeded in becoming a single, concrete personality, and let us hope that he probably never will. Hase does not deny the possibility of an influence of spiritual powers, good as well as evil, upon man, "but," says he, "the Devil appears only when he is believed to exist; and the effects of his influence being explicable only in the light of man's nature, the reality of such beings remains problematic."

Reinhard, although inclined to supernaturalism, doubts whether the Scriptural Devil is to be taken seriously; and De Wette speaks of the Devil as a popular conception (Volksvorstellung). Schleiermacher in his famous work The Christian Faith According to the Doctrines of the Evangelical Church (1821; fourth edition, 1842) declares the idea of the Devil, as historically developed, to be "untenable" and "unessential to a Christian's belief in God."

[p. 396]

Martensen believes in the Devil not as an idea, but as an "historical person." He is in the beginning only the principle of temptation; as such he is a cosmical principle. He is not yet bad, but the potentiality of badness. He does not really become the Devil until man has allowed him to enter his consciousness. Man, accordingly, gives existence to the Devil. Lucke opposes Martensen: "The Devil as a symbol is absolutely bad, but as a fallen creature he cannot be absolutely bad. We have no other conception of the Devil than as the representative of sin." This is an attempt to reconcile the theological conception with the philosophy of his time.

David Friedrich Strauss did not consider it necessary to refute the doctrine of Satan's personality, which he regarded as utterly overthrown. Modern mysticism, on the other hand, shows an inclination to emphasise the importance of the traditional Satanology.

Dogmatic theologians in the ranks of English and American Protestants endeavor to preserve the traditional views of hell and the Devil, without, however, making much practical use of these doctrines. They no longer discuss the problem at length but still uphold the belief in the personality of the Evil One. For instance, Professor Schaff scarcely enters into a detailed exposition of the subject, and Dr. William G. T. Shedd, who devotes in his great work Dogmatic Theology one or several chapters to every Christian dogma, omits a particular discussion of Satan. Passages in the chapter on hell nevertheless prove that he believes in both a personal Satan and an eternal personal punishment on the ground of scriptural evidence.

[p. 397]

The liberal theology of to-day urges that Jesus makes thirst for justice, love of God and man, the conditions for entering into the Kingdom of God. A belief in the Devil, it is claimed, is nowhere demanded and can, to say the least, not be regarded as essential; it is not so much Christian and Jewish, as pagan; it is a survival of polytheistic nature-worship and of pagan dualism, quite natural at a time when the sciences were still in their infancy, characterised by astrology and alchemy, and when the irrefragability of nature's laws was not as yet understood. The belief in a personal Devil, accordingly, and all the practices resulting therefrom, were rather due to ignorance than to religion.

There are still plenty of believers in a personal Devil among those who call themselves orthodox, but their influence has ceased to be of any consequence. Vilmar regards the belief in an individual devilish personality as an indispensable qualification of a real theologian, saying: "In order rightly to teach and take charge of souls, one must have seen the Devil gnashing his teeth, and I mean it bodily, not figuratively; he must have felt his power over poor souls, his blasphemy, especially his sneer." Similarly, another German theologian, Superintendent Sanders, shows great zeal in defence of the Biblical Devil in his pamphlet The Doctrine of the Scriptures Concerning the Devil (1858), and Dr. Sartorius, following Hengstenberg's orthodoxy, says that, "he who denies Satan cannot truly confess Christ." Twesten, however, although accepting the belief in a personal Devil, concedes that the necessity of his existence cannot be deduced from the contents of our religious consciousness.

[p. 398]

[paragraph continues] Fr. Reiff (in Zeitfragen des christlichen Volkslebens, VI., 1, 1880) declares that there is a Kingdom of Evil as much as there is a Kingdom of God. The belief in a personal Prince of Darkness is the counterpart of a personal God. And Erhard wrote an apology of the Devil, not so much for the sake of the Devil as for the traditional idea that evil and sin are actualities.

Present Conditions.

The Roman Catholic Church of to-day still holds in theory the same views as in the Middle Ages; but the secular authorities will never again allow themselves to be influenced in their legal proceedings by the opinions of inquisitors.

Gorres, [*1] one of the ablest and most modern defenders of the Roman Church, complains about "the purely medical view" of historians who regard witch-prosecution as a mere epidemic. He finds the ultimate cause of witchcraft and sorcery in apostacy from the Church, which had become fashionable in those days. Dr. Haas, another Roman Catholic, takes the same view in his inquiry into witch-prosecution. [*2] He concedes that witchcraft is a revival of pagan notions mixed with a false conception of Christianity (p. 68), but he still shares with the inquisitors of yore and with Pope Innocent III. the belief in the actuality of witchcraft. Like Gorres, Haas regards "witchcraft as the product of heresy," and calls the former "a cousin" and "a daughter" of the latter. Both to him result from "unbelief, unclearness, pride,

[p. 399]

eccentricity." Both are manias or illusions (Wahngeschopfe); "they maltreat and are maltreated, and thus they increase until they are opposed with reason and vigor." The only trouble was that the remedy of inquisitorial "reason and vigor" was worse than the disease. Haas continues: "For the minds of many were not yet free from error (i. e., heresy), and when the house was swept and cleaned worse spirits entered, and matters were worse than ever."

The Inquisition, the natural result of a belief in the Devil, is now powerless; "still," says the Rev. G. W. Kitchin, in the Encyclopaedia Britannica:

"Its voice is sometimes heard; in 1856 Pius IX. issued an encyclical against somnambulism and clairvoyance, calling on all bishops to inquire into and suppress the scandal, and in 1865 he uttered an anathema against freemasons, the secular foes of the Inquisition."

The Rev. Mr. Kitchin sums up the present state of things as follows:

"The occupation of Rome in 1870 drove the papacy and the Inquisition into the Vatican, and there at last John Bunyan's vision seems to have found fulfilment. Yet, though powerless, the institution is not hopeless; the Catholic writers on the subject, after long silence or uneasy apology, now acknowledge the facts and seek to justify them. In the early times of the 'Holy Office' its friends gave it high honor; Paramo, the inquisitor, declares that it began with Adam and Eve ere they left Paradise; Paul IV. announced that the Spanish Inquisition was founded by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; Muzarelli calls it 'an indispensable substitute to the Church for the original gift of miracles exercised by the apostles.' And now again, from 1875 to this day, a crowd of defenders has risen up: Father Wieser and the Insbruck Jesuits in

[p. 400]

their journal (1877) yearn for its re-establishment; Orti y Lara in Spain, the Benedictine Gams in Germany, and C. Poullet in Belgium take the same tone; it is a remarkable phenomenon, due partly to despair at the progress of society, partly to the fanaticism of the late pope, Plus IX. It is hardly credible that any one can really hope and expect to see in the future the irresponsible judgments of clerical intolerance again humbly carried out, even to the death, by the secular arm."

Roman Catholic authors are, as a rule, too worldly wise to precipitate or provoke a discussion of the history of either the Inquisition or the doctrine of the Devil, but whenever they cannot avoid a discussion of the subject they claim that the Inquisition was a secular institution (so Gains of Ratisbon and Bishop Hefele), or defend the measures taken by the Inquisition. They have not as yet acquired sufficient insight, or, if they have the insight, they do not possess the moral courage to condemn the whole institution, and with it the policy of the Popes Innocent III., Gregory IX., Urban IV., John XXII., and others whose names are compromised in matters of witch-prosecution.

Devil-exorcism is not yet extinct in Roman Catholic countries. The exorcism performed in Germany by Father Aurelian on Michael Zilk, the son of a Catholic Father and Protestant mother, with the especial permission of the Bishop Leopold von Eichstadt, is a sufficient evidence of the Egyptian darkness that still penetrates the minds of a great mass of our Christian brethren, among them members of the higher clergy. [*1]

[p. 401]

Mr. E. P. Evans, who quotes the curious occurrence, [*1] furnishes another interesting fact. He says:

Pope Leo XIII. is justly regarded as a man of more than ordinary intelligence and more thoroughly imbued with the modern spirit than any of his predecessors, yet he composed and issued, November 19, 1890, a formula of an 'Exorcismus in Satanam et Angelos Apostatas.' His Holiness never fails to repeat this exorcism in his daily prayers, and commends it to the bishops and other clergy as a potent means of warding off the attacks of Satan and casting out devils."

The holy coat of Treves is still exercising its power over the minds of many credulous people and works miracles that are seriously believed, while the dancing-procession of Echternach is not only not abolished but encouraged by the Church. Pope Leo XIII. has granted a six years' absolution to all those who take part in the performance. There are on an average about ten thousand persons who annually join in this stupid survival of the Middle Ages.

*      *      *

The personal Devil is dead in science, but he is still alive even in Protestant countries among the uneducated, and the number of those who belong to this category is legion. The Salvation Army is still in our midst singing:

"Come join our army, the foe must be driven;
 To Jesus, our captain, the world shall be given.
 If hell should surround us we'll press through the throng.
 The Salvation Army is marching along."

The following vigorous verse reminds one of Parseeism:

[p. 402]

"Christian, rouse thee, war is raging.
 God and fiends are battle waging,
 Every ransomed power engaging,
     Break the Tempter's spell.
 Dare ye still lie fondly dreaming,
 Wrapt in ease and worldly scheming,
 While the multitudes are streaming
     Downwards into hell?"

A good illustration of their personal attitude towards the Evil One appears in these lines:

"The Devil and me, we can't agree,
 I hate him and he hates me.
 He had me once, but he let me go,
 He wants me again, but I will not go."

The Devil of the Salvation Army proves that there is still a need of representing spiritual ideas in drastic allegories; but though Satan is still painted in glaring colors, he has become harmless and will inaugurate no more witch-prosecutions. He is curbed and caged, so that he can do no more mischief. We smile at him as we do at a tiger behind the bars in a zoological garden.

The Religious Import of Science.

The inquisitors and witch-prosecutors were by no means scoundrels pure and simple. Most assuredly there were scoundrels among them; but there is no doubt that the movement of the Inquisition and witch-prosecution took its origin from purer motives. It was to the popes and grand inquisitors and to many princes and other people who promoted the policy, a matter of conscience; they simply attended to it as a religious duty, sometimes even with a heavy heart and not without great pain.

[p. 403]

Torquemada, the grand inquisitor of Spain, was in his private life one of the purest and most conscientious of men, and he was so tender-hearted that he was obliged to leave the inquisitorial tribunal and quit the room as soon as the torture of a heretic began. He would cry about the obstinacy of those who had given themselves over to Satan; but though his heart was bleeding, he condemned thousands and thousands to the cruelest tortures and the most dreadful death for the sake of salvation and the glory of God--of that monster-god in whom he believed, that abominable idol which was worse than the Moloch of ancient Phoenicia.

When complaints reached Pope Innocent III. about the cruelty of Conrad of Marburg, the first Inquisitor General of Germany, he said, "the Germans were always furious and therefore needed furious judges." Pope Leo X., referring to cases of witchcraft that happened in Brixen and Bergamo, grieves in a brief of 1521 at "the obstinacy of the culprits, who would rather die than confess their crimes." In the same document the Holy Father complains about the impiety of the Venetian Senate who prevented the inquisitors from performing their duties. And similar expressions are not infrequent in later papal bulls and briefs, all of which prove that the horrors of the Inquisition are ultimately due, not to ill will or even to the desire for power, but to error which had assumed the shape of a deep-seated religious conviction.

Among the Protestants, the Calvinists come nearest in zeal to the Roman Catholic inquisitors. In Geneva, Switzerland, the home of Calvin, five hundred persons were, within three months, executed for heresy and witchcraft.

[p. 404]

[paragraph continues] The protocols of the city in the year 1545 declare that the labor of torture and execution exceeded the strength of the hangman; and the complaint is made that, "whatever torture be applied, the malefactors still refuse to confess."

The facts of witch-prosecution with its kindred superstitions are an object lesson. How mistaken are those who believe that religion has nothing to do with ethics, and that a religious conviction exercises no influence upon a man's conduct! There are ethicists, professors of ethics, and ethical preachers, who imagine that ethics may be taught without teaching religion, and that the morality of the people can be improved without an interference with their convictions as to the nature of the world and the import of life. But a wrong world-conception will beget a wrong morality; a false religion will unfailingly produce bad and injurious ethics; and the grossest errors will, if they have their way, find expression in the grossest abominations of misguided conduct. A radical cure on the other hand must go to the root of the evil. It is not sufficient to remove the symptoms of the disease, you must replace false religion by true religion.

It would not do to say with our agnostic friends that religion is concerned with matters unknowable; and that therefore we must leave it alone! Religion is the most important problem of life, and we can ignore it as little as a reckless storage of dynamite in crowded parts of great cities. We must investigate the religious problem and replace the old errors, with their dualistic superstitions by sound and scientifically correct views. At the

[p. 405]

bottom of all the terrors of the Inquisition and witch-prosecution lies a serious endeavor to do what is right; and this power can be utilised as well for the progress and elevation of mankind as for the suppression of reason and sound judgment.

Religion is the strongest motive power in the world; nothing therefore is more injurious than false religious convictions, and nothing more desirable than truth.

Let us make the love of truth our religion. Beware of mysticism and endeavor to be clear and exact. There is as little truth in mysticism as there is light in fog. Nor should we rely on tradition, for tradition is uncertain, but the truth (i. e., generalised statements of facts or laws of nature) can be made unequivocally certain and will remain verifiable to every competent inquirer. It is man's duty, in all departments of life, to seek the truth with the best and most scientific methods at his disposal, and the adherence to this principle is "the Religion of Science."

It is a fact that the confidence in science has already become a religious conviction with most of us. The faith in scientifically provable truth has slowly, very slowly, and by almost imperceptible degrees, but steadily and surely, taken root in the hearts of men. To-day it is the most powerful factor of our civilisation, in spite of various church-dogmas which are declared to be above scientific critique and argument; for these dogmas are becoming a dead letter. There are several conservative and prominent churchmen who publicly confess that the dogmas of the Church must be regarded as historical documents and not as eternal verities.

[p. 406]

Those who doubt the religious import of science need only consider what science has done for mankind by the radical abolition of witch-prosecution, and they will be convinced that science is not religiously indifferent, but that it is the most powerful factor in the purification of the religions of mankind.

The world-conception of our industrial and social life, of international intercourse, and all serious movements on the lines of human progress, has even now to a great extent practically become the Religion of Science, although the fact is not as Yet definitely and openly acknowledged; and any sectarian faith that endeavors to set forth its claim of recognition does it and can do it only on the ground that it is one with scientific truth. For there is nothing universally true, nothing catholic, nothing genuinely orthodox, except those truths that are positively demonstrated by science.

Footnotes

^372:1 Crosses were seen everywhere; in the dress of the people and in the sky also crowns of thorns, nails, scourges, etc., which caused the Bishop of Liege to order special fasts and call the emperor's attention to the dangers that threatened the world.

^372:2 Schlager, Wiener Skizzen aus dem Mittelalter, II., n. F., P 35; mentioned by Roskoff, II., p. 294; Konig and others.

^372:3 Hexenprocesse, p. 255

^372:4 Quoted in Neue Zusatze of the German translation of Weier's De praestigiis daemonum

^374:1 See The New York Evening Post, November 13. 1886.

^374:2 Sometimes spelled "Thanner." See Konig, ib., II., p. 572, and Roskoff, II., p. 308.

^375:1 Konig says it was a mosquito, and Roskoff a flea.

^375:2 That Spee von Langenfeld was the author of the Cautio criminalis was discovered by Leibnitz.

^379:1 For details see Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, by Walter Scott.

^380:1 Reproduced from the portrait on the title page of Die bezauberte Welt (the first German translation of De betoverde Weereld).

^385:1 This as well as the quotations following are taken from J. Scheible, Vol. I., pages 196 ff.

^386:1 Compare the illustrations on pages 119, 121, and 123.

^387:1 Quoted in a German translation by Scheible, Vol. I., p. 208 ff.

^391:1 See the chapter "A Marvellous Experiment with the Imagination of a Hen (Experimentum Mirabile de Imaginatione Gallinae), in Kircher's Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae, Rome, 1646.

^391:2 See Daniel Schwenter, Deliciae Physico-Mathematicae, etc. Nurnberg, 1636.

^398:1 Die Hexenprocesse, ein culturhistorischer Versuch. Tubingen. 1865.

^398:2 Quoted from Roskoff, p. 239, from Christliche Mystik, III., 66.

^400:1 Die Teufelsaustreibung in Werndive. Nach den Berichten des P. Aurelian fur das Volk critisch beleuchtet von Richard Treufels. Munich, Schuh & Co. 1892. This curious treatise can no longer be obtained in the book-market.

^401:1 Popular Science Monthly, December, 1892, p. 161.

     History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 407]

  

IN VERSE AND FABLE.

THE DEVIL in folklore is entitled to our ungrudging admiration for his indefatigable energy. There are innumerable devil-stones thrown at churches, there are devil-walls, devil-bridges, cathedrals, monasteries, castles, dikes, and mills, built by him for the purpose of seducing and gaining souls. He has had his finger in the pie everywhere and appears to be all but omnipresent and omniscient.

In popular literature the Devil plays a most important role. While he is still regarded as the incarnation of all physical and moral evil, his main office has become that of a general mischief-worker in the universe; without him there would be no plot, and the story of the world would lose its interest. He appears as the critic of the good Lord, as the representative of discontent with existing conditions, he inspires men with the desire for an increase of wealth, power, and knowledge; he is the mouth-piece of all who are anxious for a change in matters political, social, and ecclesiastical. He is identified with the spirit of progress so inconvenient to those who are satisfied with the existing state of things, and thus

[p. 408]

he is credited with innovations of all kinds, the aspiration for improvement as well as the desire for the overthrow of law and order. In a word, he is characterised as the patron of both reform and evolution.

Devil-Stories.

The literature of devil-stories is very extensive. We select from them a number of the most representative tales.

Several legends indicate an origin by hallucination: For instance, St. Hilarion when hungry, saw a number of exquisite dishes. St. Pelagia, who had been an actress in Antioch, lived the life of a religious recluse in a cave on the Mount of Olives. Once the Devil offered her a number of rings, bracelets, and precious stones, which disappeared as quickly as they came. Rufinus of Aquileja relates the story of a monk, a man of great abstinence, living in a desert. One evening a beautiful woman appeared at his hermitage asking for a night's shelter. She conducts herself with modesty at first, but soon begins to smile, to stroke his beard, and to caress him. The monk grows excited and embraces her fervently, when, lo! the whole apparition vanishes, leaving him lonely in his cell. He hears the laughter of devils in the air, and, despairing of salvation, he goes back into the world and falls an easy prey to the temptations of Satan.

While Christianity was still under the influence of orientalised Gnosticism, the Church believed in the perversity of bodily existence, and therefore clung to the notion that all nature was the work of the Devil. Thus

[p. 409]

the monk retired from the world, but he took with him into his solitude the memory-pictures of his life. Memory-pictures are part of our soul, and a man who suddenly cuts off all new impressions so that his present life becomes a blank, will have hallucinations as naturally as a man who falls asleep will have dreams. The darkness of the present throws into strong relief the most vivid recollections of the past; the emptiness of a solitary mode of existence causes the slumbering memory-images to appear almost in bodily reality.

A very interesting letter of St. Jerome to the virgin Eustochia, which exemplifies the truth of this explanation, is still extant. St. Jerome writes:

"Alas! how often, when living in the desert, in that dreary, sunburnt loneliness, which serves as an habitation to the monks, did I believe myself revelling in the pleasures of Rome. I sat lonely, my soul filled with affliction, clothed in wretched rags, my skin sunburnt like an Ethiopian's. No day passed without tears and sighs, and when sleep overcame me I had to lie on the naked ground. I do not mention eating and drinking, for the monks drink, even if sick, only water, and regard cooking as a luxury. And if I, who had condemned myself from fear of hell to such a life, without any other society than scorpions and wild beasts, often imagined myself surrounded by dancing girls, my face was pale from fasting, but in the cold body the soul was burning with desires, and in a man whose flesh was dead the flames of lust were kindled. Then I threw myself helpless at the feet of Jesus, wetted them with tears, dried them again with my hair, and subdued the rebellious flesh by fasts of a whole week. I am not ashamed to confess my misery; I am rather sorry for no longer being such as I was. I remember still how often, when fasting and weeping, the night followed the day, and how I did not cease to beat my breast until at the command of God peace had returned."

[p. 410]

The legend of Merlin, as told by Bela in the old chronicles, characterises a whole class of stories.

The defeated Satan proposes to regain his power by the same means by which God has vanquished him. He decides to have a son who shall undo Christ's work of redemption. All the intrigues of hell are used to ruin a noble family until only two daughters are left. The one falls into shame, while the other remains chaste and resists all temptations. One night, however, she forgot to cross herself, and thus the Devil could approach her,--even against her will. The pious girl underwent the severest penance, and when her time came she had a son whose hairy appearance betrayed his diabolical parentage. The child, however, was baptised and received the name Merlin. The excitement in heaven was great. What a triumph would it be to win the Devil's own son over to the cause of Christ. The Devil gave to his son all the knowledge of the past and the present; God added the knowledge of the future, and this proved the best weapon against the evil attempts of his wicked father. When Merlin grew up, he slighted his father and performed many marvellous things. He was full of wisdom, and his prophecies were reliable. It is generally assumed that after his death he did not descend into hell but went to heaven.

Similar is the story of Robert the Devil, the hero of a modern opera. The Duchess of Normandy, the old legend tells us, had no children. Having implored the help of God in vain, she addressed herself to the Devil who satisfied her wish at once. She had a son who was a rogue from babyhood. Being very, courageous and

[p. 411]

strong, he became the chief of a band of robbers. He was knighted, to temper his malignity, but this appeal to his feeling of honor failed to have any effect. In a tournament he slew thirty knights, then he went out into the world to seek adventures. On his return he became a robber again. One day, when he had just strangled all the nuns of a cloister, he remembered that he had a mother and decided to visit her. But when he made his appearance, her servants dispersed in wild fear. For the first time in his life he was impressed with the idea that he had become odious to his fellow-men, and becoming conscious of his evil nature, he wanted to know why he was worse than others. With his sword drawn, he forced his mother to confess the secret of his birth. He was horror-struck, but did not despair. He went to Rome, confessed to a pious hermit, submitted willingly to the severest penance and combated the Saracens who happened to be laying siege to Rome. The emperor offered him his daughter as a reward. And now the two records of Robert's fate become contradictory. Not knowing the truth, we state both impartially. Some say that Robert married the emperor's daughter who was in love with him; others declare that he refused the match and crown, and returned to his hermit confessor, into the wilderness where he died blessed by God and mankind.

Not all the sons of the Devil, however, join the cause of the good Lord. Eggelino, the tyrant of Padua, forces his mother to confess the secret, that he and his brother Alberico were sons of Satan. Eggelino boasts that he will live as befits the son of the Evil One. He succeeds with the assistance of his brother in becoming the tyrant

[p. 412]

of Padua, commits terrible crimes and dies at last in misery and despair. The story is dramatised by Albertino Mussato in his Eccerius.

On the right side of the high altar of the church of St. Denys, near Paris, a bas-relief illustrates the legend of St. Dagobert's death, which proves the soul-saving power of Christian saints. We are told that "a hermit on an island in the Mediterranean was warned in a vision to pray for the Frankish King's soul. He then saw Dagobert in chains, hurried along by a troop of fiends,

Click to view
DEMONS ON THE TOMB OF DAGOBERT.
 (On the right of the high altar in the church of St. Denys, near Paris.)

who were about to cast him into a volcano. At last his cries to St. Denys, St. Michael, and St. Martin, brought to his assistance those three venerable and glorious persons, who drove off the devils, and with songs of triumph conveyed the rescued soul to Abraham's bosom." [*1]

Among the romances which represent the struggle of man with temptation and the powers of evil Spenser's Faerie Queene and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress are well

[p. 413]

known and need no further comment. The underlying idea, however, is not original with these authors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, but dates back to the fourteenth and thirteenth centuries. A manuscript-copy of Le Romant des trois Pelerinages by Guillaume de Guillauille describes the adventures of a man in his pilgrimage through life. In a deep valley the pilgrim meets covetousness, which Didron [*1] describes as follows:

Click to view
COVETOUSNESS.
 (From the manuscript-copy in the Library of St. Genevieve, Paris.)

"The idol worn upon her head is 'the peny of gold or of silver whereon is emprinted the figure of the hye Lord of the countree.' The false God that blindeth him that turneth his eyes towards him and maketh fools to bend their eyes downwards. This God by whom she hath been disfigured and defamed is Avarice. The hands behind like griffin's claws are to symbolise Rapine, Coutteburse, and Latrosynie.'

"In the next pair of hands she holds a bowl for alms, or for the money she extorts through beggary, and a hook, with which she enters the house of Christ and seizes his servants. Taking their croziers and shepherds' crooks, she furnishes them with this devil's prong instead, fished up by her out of the darkness of Hell, and this hand is named Simony. in the next hands she holds a yard measure, purse, and scales. With the measure she deals out false lengths, with the balances she weighs false measure, and into

[p. 414]

the purse she puts the ill-won gains of her treachery, gambling, and dishonesty. Round her neck hangs a bag, and nothing that is put therein can ever come out again; all things remain there to rot.

Devil-Contracts.

The Devil, fighting with God for the possession of mankind, was supposed to have a special passion for

Click to view
FAUST SIGNING THE CONTRACT WITH THE DEVIL IN BLOOD.
 (By Franz Simm)

catching souls. Being the prince of the world he could easily grant even the most extravagant wishes, and was sometimes willing to pay a high price when a man promised to be his for time and eternity. Thus originated the idea of making compacts with the Devil; and it is worthy of note that in these compacts the Devil is very careful

[p. 415]

to establish his title to the soul of man by a faultless legal document. He has, as we shall learn, sufficient reason to distrust all promises made him by men and saints. Following the authority of the old legends, we find that even the good Lord frequently lends his assistance to cheating the Devil out of his own. He is always duped and the vilest tricks are resorted to to cheat him. While thus the Devil, having profited by experience, always insists upon having his rights insured by an unequivocal instrument (which in later centuries is signed with blood); he, in his turn, is fearlessly trusted to keep his promise, and this is a fact which must be mentioned to his honor, for although he is said to be a liar from the beginning, not one case is known, in all devil-lore in which the Devil attempts to cheat his stipulators. Thus he appears as the most unfairly maligned person, and as a martyr of simple-minded honesty.

The oldest story of a devil-contract is the legend of Theophilus, first told by Eutychian, who declares he had witnessed the whole affair with his own eyes.

Theophilus, an officer of the church and a pious man, living in Adana, a town of Cilicia, was unanimously elected by the clergy and by the laymen as their bishop, but he refused the honor from sheer modesty. So another man became bishop in his stead. The new bishop unjustly deprived Theophilus of his office, who now regretted his former humility. But in his humiliation Theophilus went to a famous wizard and made with his assistance a compact with Satan, renouncing Christ and the Holy Virgin. Satan at once causes the bishop to restore Theophilus to his position, but now Theophilus

[p. 416]

Click to view
THE LEGEND OF THEOPHILUS.
 From Monk Conrad's illumined MS. (Thirteenth Century; Monastery Scheiern Now in the Royal Library of Munich.)

[p. 417]

repents and prays to the Holy Virgin for forgiveness. After forty days of fasting and praying he is rebuked for his crime but not comforted; so he fasts and prays thirty days more, and receives at last absolution. Satan, however, refuses to give up his claim on Theophilus, and the Holy Virgin then actually castigates the enemy of God and men so severely that he at last surrenders the fatal document. Now Theophilus relates the whole story in the presence of the bishop to the assembled congregation in church; and after having divided all his possessions among the poor dies peacefully and enters into the glories of Paradise.

Even popes are said to have made compacts with the Devil. An English Benedictine monk, William of Malmesbury, says of Pope Sylvester II., who was born in France, his secular name being Gerbert, that he entered the cloister when still a boy. Full of ambition, he flew to Spain where he studied astrology and magic among the Saracens. There he stole a magic-book from a Saracen philosopher, and returned flying through the air to France. Now he opened a school and acquired great fame, so that the king himself became one of his disciples. Then he became Bishop of Rheims, where he had a magnificent clock and an organ constructed. Having raised the treasure of Emperor Octavian which lay hidden in a subterranean vault at Rome, he became Pope. As Pope he manufactured a magic head which replied to all his questions. This head told him that he would not die until he had read Mass in Jerusalem. So the Pope decided never to visit the Holy Land. But once he fell sick, and, asking his magic head, was informed that the

[p. 418]

church's name in which he had read Mass the other day was "The Holy Cross of Jerusalem." The Pope knew at once that he had to die. He gathered all the cardinals around his bed, confessed his crime, and, as a penance, ordered his body to be cut up alive and the pieces to be thrown out of the church as unclean.

Sigabert tells the story of the Pope's death in a different way. There is no penance on the part of the Pope, and the Devil takes his soul to hell. Others tell us that the Devil constantly accompanied the Pope in the shape of a black dog, and this dog gave him the equivocal prophecy.

The historical truth of the story is that Gerbert was unusually gifted and well educated. He was familiar with the, wisdom of the Saracens, for Borrell, Duke of Hither Spain, carried him as a youth to his country where he studied mathematics and astronomy. He came early in contact with the most influential men of his time, and became Pope in 999. He was liberal enough to denounce some of his unworthy predecessors as "monsters of more than human iniquity," and as "Antichrist, sitting in the temple of God and playing the part of God;" but at the same time he pursued an independent and vigorous papal policy, foreshadowing in his aims both the pretensions of Gregory the Great and the Crusades.

The most famous, most significant, and the profoundest story among the legends of devil-contracts is the saga of Dr. Johannes Faustus. Whether the hero of the Faust legend derives his name from the Latin faustus, i. e., the favored one, or from the well-known Mayence goldsmith Fust, the companion of Gensfleisch

[p. 419]

vom Gutenberg, the inventor of printing, or whether he was no historical personality at all, is an open question. Certain it is that all the stories of the great naturalists and thinkers whom the people at the time regarded as wizards were by and by attributed to him, and the figure of Dr. Faustus became the centre of an extensive circle of traditions. The tales about Albertus Magnus, Johannes

          
Click to view
MEPHISTOPHELES MAKING   HIS APPEARANCE IN FAUST'S STUDY.
   (After Schnorr von Carolsfeld.)

       
Click to view
FAUST BEHOLDING   THE EMBLEM OF THE MACROCOSM.
   (After P. Rembrandt.)

     
   [paragraph continues] Teutonicus (Deutsch), Trithemius, Abbot of Sponheim, Agrippa of Nettesheim, Theophrastus, and Paracelsus, were retold of Faust, and Faust became a poetical personification of the great revolutionary aspirations in the time immediately preceding and following the Reformation.

The original form of the Faust-legend represents the Roman Catholic standpoint. Faust allies himself with

[p. 420]

the Devil, works his miracles by the black art, and pays for its practice with his soul. He begins, his career in Wittenberg, the university at which Luther taught, and

          
Click to view
FAUST RIDING ON   A BARREL OUT OF AUERBACH'S CELLAR. Fresco.

     
      
Click to view
THE   SENSE-ILLUSIONS OF THE RIOTOUS STUDENTS AND FAUST'S ESCAPE.
   (After p. Cornelius.)

     
   is the embodiment of natural science, of historical investigation, of the Renaissance, and of modern discoveries and inventions. As such he subdues nature, restores to

[p. 421]

life the heroes of ancient Greece, gathers knowledge about distant lands, and revives Helen, the ideal of classic beauty.

          
Click to view
FAUST ENJOYING   HIMSELF IN AUERBACH'S CELLAR. Fresco.

     
      
Click to view
MEPHISTOPHELES   HAVING FAUST BURIED BY DEVILS. (After Retzsch.)

     
   As the fall of the Devil is, according to Biblical authority, attributed to pride and ambition, so progress and the spirit of investigation were denounced as Satan's

[p. 422]

work, and all inquiry into the mysteries of nature was regarded as magic. Think only of Roger Bacon, that studious, noble monk, and a greater scientist than his more famous namesake, Lord Bacon! In the thirties of the thirteenth century, at the University of Paris, when Roger Bacon, making some experiments with light, made the rainbow-colors appear on a screen, the audience ran away from him terrified, and his life was endangered because he was suspected of practising the black art.

The Faust Legend.

Faust is the representative of scientific manliness. He investigates, even though it may cost him the Christian's title to heavenly bliss; he boldly studies nature, although he will be damned for it in hell; he seeks the truth at the risk of forfeiting his soul. According to the mediaeval theology Satan fell simply on account of his manly ambition and high aspiration, and yet Faust dares to break and eat of the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge. According to Marlowe's Faustus, Lucifer fell, not only by insolence, but first of all "by aspiring pride." Mephistopheles seems to regret, but Faustus comforts him, saying:

"What is great Mephistopheles so passionate,
 For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
 Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,
 And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess."

The oldest Faust book, dated 1587 (called the Volksbuch) exists in one single copy only which is now carefully preserved in Ulm, and Scheible has re-published it

[p. 423]

in his work Dr. Johannes Faust (3 Volumes, Stuttgart, 1846).

The preface of the Volksbuch states that the publisher had received the manuscript from a good friend in Speyer, and that the original story had been written in Latin. The contents of this oldest version of the Faust legend are as follows:

Faust, the son of a farmer in Rod, near Weimar, studied theology at Wittenberg. Ambitious to be omniscient and omnipotent like God, he dived into the secret tore of magic, but unable to make much progress, he conjured the Devil in a thick forest near Wittenberg. Not in the least intimidated by the Devil's noisy behavior, he forced him to become his servant. Faust, having gained mastery over demons, did not regard his salvation endangered, and when the Devil told him that he should nevertheless receive his full punishment after death, he grew extremely angry with him and bade him quit his presence, saying: "For your sake I do not want to be damned." When the Devil had left, Faust felt an uneasiness not experienced before, for he had become accustomed to his services. Accordingly, he ordered the Devil to return, who now introduced himself as Mephistopheles. The name is derived from the Greek , "not-the-light-loving," and was afterwards changed to Mephistopheles. He now made a compact with the Devil who consented to serve him for twenty-four years, Faust to allow him afterwards to deal with him as he pleased. The contract was signed by Faust with his blood, which he drew with a penknife from his left arm. The blood, running out of the wound, formed

[p. 424]

the words: Homo fuge (man, fly!). This startles Faust, but he remains resolute.

Mephistopheles entertained his master with all kinds of merry illusions, with music and visions. He brought him dainty dishes and costly clothes stolen from royal households. Faust became luxurious and desired to marry. The Devil refused, because marriage is a sacrament. Faust insisted. Then the Devil appeared in his real shape which was so terrific that Faust was frightened. He gave up the idea of marriage, but Mephistopheles sent him devils who assumed the shape of beautiful women, and made him dissolute.

Faust conversed with his servant about eschatological subjects, and heard many things which greatly displeased his vanity. Mephistopheles said, "I am a devil and act according to my nature. But if I were a man, I would rather humiliate myself before God than before Satan."

Faust became sick of his empty pleasures. His ambition was to be recognised in the world as a man who could explain nature, presage future events, and so excite admiration. Having received sufficient information concerning the other world, he wanted to come into direct contact with it, and Mephistopheles introduced to him a number of distinguished devils. When the visitors left, the house was so full of vermin that Faust had to withdraw. However, he did not neglect his new acquaintances on that account, but paid them a visit in their own home. Riding upon a chair built of human bones, he visited hell and contemplated with leisure the flames of its furnaces and the torments of the damned.

[p. 425]

Having safely returned from the infernal region, he was carried in a carriage drawn by dragons up to heaven. He took a ride high in the air, first eastwards over the whole of Asia, then upwards to the stars, until they grew before his eyes on his approach into big worlds, while the earth became as small as the yolk of an egg.

His curiosity being satisfied in that direction, he concentrated his attention upon the earth. Mephistopheles assumed the shape of a winged horse upon which he visited all the countries of our planet. He visited Rome and regretted not having become Pope, seeing the luxuries of the latter's life. He sat down invisible at the Pope's table and took away his daintiest morsels, and the wine from his very lips. The Pope, believing himself beset by a ghost, exorcised its poor soul, but Faust laughed at him. In Turkey he visited the Sultan's harem, and introduced himself as the prophet Mohammed, which gave him full liberty to act as he pleased. Beyond India he saw at a distance the blest gardens of Paradise.

Faust, being invited in his capacity of magician to visit the Emperor Charles the Fifth, made Alexander the Great, the beautiful Helen, and other noted persons of antiquity appear before the whole court. Faust fell in love with Helen, so that he could no longer live without her. He kept her in his company and had a child by her, a marvellous boy who could reveal the future.

When the twenty-four years had almost elapsed, Faust grew melancholy, but the Devil mocked him. At midnight, on the very last day, some students who had been in his company heard a frightful noise, but did not

[p. 426]

          
Click to view
STUDYING BLACK   MAGIC.

       
Click to view

     
      
Click to view
SOME   PLEASANTRIES OF BLACK MAGIC.

       
Click to view
MIRACLES AND   CONJURATIONS.

     
   WIDMAN's FAUST. (Reduced from Scheible's Reproductions.)

[p. 427]

dare to enter his room. The next morning they found him torn to pieces. Helen and her child had disappeared, and his famulus Wagner inherited his books on magic art.

This briefly is the contents of the Volksbuch on Faust.

          
Click to view

       
Click to view

     
   LAST HOURS AND DEATH. (Widman's Faust.) [*1]

A transcription of the Faust-legend in rhymes was published as early as 1587 in Tubingen. Another version by Widman appeared in Hamburg in 1599. It is less complete than the first Faust-book and lacks depth of conception while it abounds rather more in coarse incidents.

[p. 428]

          
Click to view
WAGNER CONJURING   THE DEVIL AUERHAN.

       
Click to view
AUERHAN'S   SERVICES.

     
      
Click to view
WAGNER'S   JOKES.

       
Click to view
LAST HOURS AND   DEATH.

     
   CHRISTOPH WAGNER. (From an old popular edition, illustrated by J. Nisle.)

[p. 429]

[paragraph continues] Widmann's edition became the basis of several further renderings, one in 1674 by Pfitzer in Nuremberg, another in 1728 in Frankfort and Leipsic. Faust must have appeared on the stage in the seventeenth century, for the clergy of Berlin filed a complaint that Faust publicly abjured God on the stage. The puppet-play Faust was compiled for the amusement of peasants and children, in fairs and market places. Yet it was powerful enough to inspire Goethe who saw it still performed when

Click to view
THE DEVIL IN THE PUPPET PLAY

a boy, to write the great drama which became the most famous work of his life.

The Faust-legend found a continuation in the story of Christoph Wagner, Faust's famulus and companion. The Wagner-story, however, contains nothing new and is nothing but a bare repetition of Faust's adventures and sorry end.

English editions appeared very early, and Marlowe, the greatest pre-Shakespearian dramatist, used the Faust-story for one of his dramas, which is still extant.

[p. 430]

Goethe's Faust.

Goethe's conception of Faust represents the Protestant standpoint. Faust allies himself with the spirit of negation and promises to pay the price of his soul on condition that he shall find satisfaction; but Faust finds no satisfaction in the gifts of the spirit that denies. However, he does find satisfaction, after having abandoned the chase for empty pleasures, in active and successful work for the good of mankind. Goethe's Faust uses the Devil but rises above his negativism. However, he inherits from the revolutionary movement of the age that gave birth to the legend, the love of liberty. Says the dying Faust:

"And such a throng I fain would see--
 Stand on free soil among a people free."

This Faust cannot be lost. His soul is saved. Mephistopheles now ceases to be a mere incarnation of badness; his negation becomes the spirit of critique. The spirit of critique, although destructive, leads to the positive work of construction; and thus Faust becomes a representative of the bold spirit of investigation and progress which characterises the present age.

The Devil of the Volksbuch is real; actors and spectators believe in his power and are afraid to fall into his clutches. In Goethe's Faust the mythology of the story is felt to be mere allegory and has become part of the dramatic machinery. This is plainly seen in the Walpurgis night scene which has become a satirical intermezzo of Goethe's time.

[p. 431]

Click to view
WITCHES CELEBRATING WALPURGIS NIGHT.
 (By Franz Simm.)

[p. 432]

Humorists.

The figure of the Evil One began slowly to lose the awe which it exercised during the Middle Ages upon the imagination of the people, and Hans Sachs treats the Devil in his poems as a being of whom no courageous man need be afraid. Thus the German halberdier, he says, laughs at him, for Old Nick would not dare to admit a Landsknecht of their rank into his kingdom.

Click to view

The first man, however, who (so far as I am aware) was wise enough to take, as a matter of principle, a humorous view of the Devil and hell was Dionysius Klein. In his Tragico-Comoedia, published in the year 1622, he describes his trip both to heaven and to the infernal region, which latter place is reported to be well equipped with water-power and good machinery, as these were used in the beginning of the seventeenth century.

In modern times the humorous character of Satan develops ill the degree that he is no longer regarded as all individual being but changes to the principle of evil.

In the British Islands where the majority of the people

[p. 433]

still believe in a personal Devil, there exists all unwritten law which reads, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Devil in vain." In Germany and France, however, and in all other countries of the European continent, people use the word freely in a way that must shock the feelings of a well-bred Englishman.

Click to view
HELL ACCORDING TO DIONYSIUS KLEIN'S TRAGICO-COMOeDIA.
 (Reproduced from Bastian's Die Denkschopfung.)

Victor Hugo uses the Devil as a setting for his political satire. No more trenchant sarcasm in poetic form can be imagined than his lines on Napoleon III. and Pope Pius IX. He says:

"One day the Lord was playing
 For human souls (they're saving)
 With Satan's Majesty.
 And each one showed his art
 The one played Bonaparte,
 The other Mastai.

[p. 434]

"An abbot sly and keen,
 A princelet wretched mean,
 And a rascal, upon oath.
 God Father played so poorly,
 He lost the game, and surely
 The Devil won them both.

'Well, take them!' cried God Father,
 'You'll find them useless rather!'
 The Devil laughed and swore:
 'They'll serve my cause, I hope.
 The one I'll make a pope,
 The other emperor!'" [*1]

["Un jour Dieu sur la table
 Jouait avec le diable
 Du genre humain hai;
 Chacun tenait sa carte,
 L'un jouait Bonaparte
 Et l'autre Mastai.

"Un pauvre abbe bien mince,
 Un mechant petit prince,
 Polisson hasardeux!
 Quel enjeu pitoyable
 Dieu fit tant que le diable
 Les gagna tous les deux.

"'Prends! cria Dieu le pere,
 Tu ne sauras qu'en faire!'
 Le diable dit: 'erreur!
 Et, ricanant sous cape,
 Il fit de l'un un pape,
 De l'autre un empereur.'"]

The Devil in the literature of to-day is of the same kind: a harmless fellow at whose expense the reader enjoys

[p. 435]

a hearty laugh. Lesage's novel The Devil on Two Sticks is a poor piece of fiction, and Hauff's Memoirs of Satan are rather lengthy.

Heinrich Heine said jestingly:

Don't, my friend, scoff at the Devil,
 For the path of life is short
 And eternal reprobation
 Is not merely parson sport."

["Freund verspotte nicht den Teufel,
 Kurz ist ja die Lebensbahn;
 Und die ewige Verdammniss
 Ist kein blosser Pobelwahn."]

In another poem Heine tells how he made the acquaintance of Satan and what impression he made on the poet. According to Miss Emma Lazarus's translation Heine says:

I called the Devil and he came,
 His face with wonder I must scan
 He is not ugly, he is not lame,
 He is a delightful, charming man;
 A man in the prime of life, in fact,
 Courteous, engaging, and full of tact.
 A diplomat, too, of wide research
 Who cleverly talks about State and Church.
 A little pale, but that is en regle
 For now he is studying Sanskrit and Hegel.

He said he was proud my acquaintance to make
 And should prize my friendship, and bowed as he spake.
 And asked if we had not met before
 At the house of the Spanish ambassador.
 Then I noted his features line by line,
 And found him an old acquaintance of mine."

[p. 436]

In modern times it has become quite customary in French, German, and American papers to picture the Devil without fear and in good humor, and few are they who would take offence at the sight.

Hell Up to Date is a genuine Chicago production of modern style. The author introduces himself as a newspaper reporter who interviews "Sate," and is shown round the Inferno. He finds that "Hell is now run on

          
Click to view
Satan stretching   forth his hand from Devil's Island to disturb the peace of France--
   From El Hijodel Ahiuzote (Mexico).

       
Click to view
"One   captain escaped," says the master of Devil's Island, "but in his place   I've got a handful of generals,"--From Lustige Blutter   (Germany).

     
   THE DEVIL IN MODERN SATIRICAL JOURNALS.

the broad American plan." "Captain" Charon, who began his career as a ferryman with a little tub of a "rowboat," is now running big steamers on the Styx, "the only navigable river in hell." Judge Minos sits in court, and an Irish policeman introduces the poor wretches one by one. The lawyers are condemned to be gagged, and their objections are overruled by Satan; the inventor of the barbwire fence is seated naked oil a barbwire

[p. 437]

Click to view
HELL UP TO DATE.

 [*1]

[p. 438]

fence; tramps are washed; policemen are clubbed until they see stars; quack doctors are cured according to their own methods; poker fiends, board of trade gamblers, and fish-story tellers are treated according to their deserts; monopolists are baked like pop-corn, and clergymen are condemned to listen to their own sermons which have been faithfully recorded in phonographs.

*      *      *

Devil-stories are myths in which Christian mythology is carried to the extreme. Symbols are taken seriously, and from the literal belief of the Christian dogma the imagination weaves these pictures which to our ancestors were more than mere tales that adorn a moral.

Footnotes

^412:1 Gesta Dagob. (cc. 23, 44). Baronius (647, 5). D. Bouquet. Rec. des histoires de France, t. ii. p. 593. Didron, Christian Iconography, ii. p. 132.

^413:1 A manuscript-copy of an old English translation exists in the University Library of Cambridge, England.

^427:1 Most of these illustrations need no further comments. The last three represent the storm that was raging during Faust's funeral, the inheritance of Wagner, consisting of Faust's books and instruments, and also Helen and her son. The last picture shows Faust's ghost haunting his old residence at Wittenberg.

^434:1 Translation specially made by E. F. L Gauss.

^437:1 By permission from A. Young's Hell Up to Date. Copyright 1892 by F. J. Schulte.

    History of the Devil, by Paul Carus, [1900], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 439]

  

THE PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEM OF GOOD AND EVIL.

THE question as to the nature of evil is by far the most important problem for philosophical, religious, and moral consideration. The intrinsic presence of suffering is the most obvious feature that determines the character of existence throughout, but gives at the same time origin to the most important blessings that make life worth living. It is pain that sets thoughts to thinking; a state of undisturbed happiness would make reflexion, inquiry, and invention redundant. It is death which begets the aspiration of preserving oneself beyond the grave. Without death there would be no religion. And it is sin that imparts worth to virtue. If there were no going astray, there would be no seeking for the right path; there would be no merit in goodness. Blame and praise would have no meaning. In this absence of want, imperfection, and all kinds of ill, there would be no ideals, no progress, no evolution to higher goals.

The Mythology of Evil.

Mythology being always a popular metaphysics, it is a matter of course that the idea of evil has been personified

[p. 440]

Click to view
EGYPTIAN DEVIL.
 Postclassic age.

 [*1]

among all nations. There is no religion in the world but has its demons or evil monsters who represent pain, misery, and destruction. In Egypt the powers of darkness were feared and worshipped under various names as Set or Seth, Bess, Typhon, etc. Though the ancient Gods of Brahmanism are not fully differentiated into evil and good deities, we have yet the victory of Mahamaya, the great goddess, over Mahisha, the king of the giants. [*2] Buddhists call the personification of evil Mara, the tempter, the father of

Click to view
MAHAMAYA, THE SLAYER OF MAHISHA.
 (From Moor's Hindu Pantheon, Plate xix. Cf. Wilson, Hindu Mythology, p. 249)

[p. 441]

lust and sin, and the bringer of death. Chaldean sages personify the chaos that was in the beginning, in Tiamat,

Click to view
THE CHRISTIAN VIEW OF THE CHAINED RULER OF HELL. Missal of Poitiers.

 [*1]

[p. 442]

the monster of the deep. The Persians call him Angra Mainyu or Ahriman, the demon of darkness and of mischief, the Jews call him Satan the fiend, the early Christians, Devil (diabolos), i. e., slanderer, because, as in the

          
Click to view
PERSIAN   DEVIL.

       
Click to view
TURKISH   DEVIL.

     
       [*1]

        [*2]

     
   

[p. 443]

story of Job, he accuses man, and his accusations are false. The old Teutons and Norsemen called him Loki. The Middle Ages are full of devils, and demonologies of the Japanese and Chinese are perhaps more extensive than our own.

The evolution of the idea of evil as a personification is one of the most fascinating chapters in history, and

Click to view
SATAN ACCUSING JOB.
 Fresco by Francesco da Volterra, in the Campo Santo at Pisa.

 [*1]

the changes which characterise the successive phases are instructive. While the old Pagan views survive in both Hebrew and Christian demonologies, we are constantly confronted with accretions and new interpretations. Franz Xaver Kraus, in his History of Christian Art [*2]concedes

[p. 444]

that our present conception of the demons of evil is radically different from that of the early Christians. He says:

"The popular conceptions of the early Christians concerning devils are essentially different from those of the present time. The serpent or the dragon as a picture of the Devil appears not only in the Old Testament (Genesis iii. 1), but also in Babylonian literature, in the Revelation of St. John (xii. 9), and in the Acts of the

          
Click to view
From a MS. of   the Duc d'Anjou in the National Library of Paris. Thirteenth century.   (Didron, Ann., I., 75.)

       
Click to view
From an   Anglo-Saxon MS. in the British Museum, belonging to the earlier half of the   eleventh century (Wright's History of Caricature and Grotesque in   Literature and Art, p. 56).

     
   SATAN IN HIS UGLINESS.

Martyrs. We read in the Vision of Perpetua: "Under the scales themselves [i. e., for weighing the souls] the dragon lies, of wonderful magnitude.'" [*1]

The intellectual life of mankind develops by gradual growth. The old views are, as a rule, preserved but transformed. There is nowhere an absolutely new start. Either the main idea is preserved and details are changed, or vice versa, the main idea is objected to while the details

[p. 445]

remain the same. Gunkel has proved [*1] that the splendid description of Leviathan (in Job xli) as a monster of the deep protected by scales is a reproduction of Chaldaean mythology, and God's fight with the monsters of the deep is a repetition of Bel Merodach's conquest of Tiamat. Changes of a radical nature take place in the religious conceptions of mankind, yet the historical connexion is preserved.

          
Click to view
THE TRINITY   FIGHTING BEHEMOTH AND LEVIATHAN.
   Italian miniature of the thirteenth century. (After Didron.)

       
Click to view
A TRINITY OF THE   TENTH CENTURY.
   From Muller and Mathe's Archaeology.

     
       

        [*2]

     
   The conception of evil in its successive personifications would be humorous if most of its pages (especially those on witch-prosecution) were not at the same time very sad. But for that reason we must recognise the prestige of the Devil. The pedigree of the Evil One is older than the oldest European aristocracy and royal

[p. 446]

families; it antedates the Bible and is more ancient than the Pyramids.

Having outlined in the preceding chapters the history of the Devil, we shall now devote the conclusion of this book to a philosophical consideration of the idea of evil; and here we are first of all confronted with the problem of the objective existence of evil.

The Era of Subjectivism.

The question presents itself: "Is not evil the product of mere illusion? Is it not a relative term which ought to be dropped as a one-sided conception of things? Does it not exist simply because we view life from our own subjective standpoint, and must it not disappear as soon as we learn to comprehend the world in its objective reality?" The tendency to regard evil as a purely negative term is at present very prevalent, for it agrees with the spirit of the times and is one of the most popular notions of to-day.

In ancient times man was in the habit of objectifying the various aspirations and impulses of his soul. In order to understand beauty the Greek mind fashioned the ideal of Aphrodite, and the moral authority of righteousness appeared to the Jew as Yahveh the Lord, the Legislator of Mount Sinai. Religious aspirations were actualised in the Church by means of ceremonials and ecclesiastical institutions.

Things changed at the opening of that era in the evolution of mankind which is commonly called modern history. A new age was prepared through the inventions of gunpowder, the compass, and printing, and began at

[p. 447]

the end of the fifteenth century with the discovery of America, and the Reformation. The more the horizon of the known world grew, the more man began to comprehend the importance of his own subjectivity. The tendency of philosophy since Descartes and of religion since Luther, has been to concentrate everything in man's individual consciousness. That alone should have value which had become part of man's soul. Man's consciousness became his world, and thus, in religion, conscience began to be regarded as the ultimate basis of conduct. Men felt that religion should not be an external, but an internal, factor. Toleration became a universal requirement, and subjectivity was made the cornerstone of public and private life. Thus the era of the Reformation showed itself as a revolutionary movement, which, proclaiming the right of individualism and subjectivity, overthrew the traditional authority of an external objectivity.

The originators of this movement did not intend to discard all objective authority, but the spirit of nominalism which dominated them prevailed over their movement in its further progress. The last consequences of the principle of subjectivity, which starts with the famous assumption cogito ergo sum, were not anticipated by Descartes, for he naively assumes objective existence on one of the most trivial arguments. Nor would Luther with his peculiar education and stubborn narrowness, which were by no means inconsistent accompaniments of his greatness, ever have endorsed later theories based upon the purely subjective aspect of conscience; but the fact remains that the last consequence of the recognition of

[p. 448]

the supremacy of the subjective principle is a denial of any objective authority in philosophy, politics, religion, and ethics, which leads in politics to anarchism, i. e., individualism pushed to its extreme; in philosophy to agnosticism, i. e., the denial of any cognisable objectivity, worked out most systematically in Kant's critical idealism. In ethics it is the refusal to recognise any objective authority in morals; which leads either to Bentham's ethical egotism and hedonism or to intuitionism, and finally to Nietzsche's immoralism.

Our present civilisation is based upon the Protestant ideal of individualism, and nobody who lives and moves in our time can be blind to the enormous benefits which we derive from it. Nevertheless, we must beware of the onesidedness of subjectivism. Objectivism is not so utterly erroneous in principle as it appears from the point of view of modern subjectivism. The external methods of the Roman Church are mistaken; the tyranny of its hierarchical system which substitutes the priest's authority and an infallible papacy for God's authority is radically wrong; and the main task of Protestantism consisted in protesting against this authority, which, in spite of its self-asserted catholicity, is based upon the human authority of fallible mortals, an authority that was more frequently misused through bigotry and ignorance than through malice and selfishness.

There are Protestants who might object that Protestantism is not merely negative; it is also positive. It is not only a protest, but also an affirmation. True, indeed! But most of the Protestant affirmations are simply relies of the old Romanism which bound the consciences

[p. 449]

of man and crippled his reasoning power. The fanatics among the Protestants are by no means friends of liberty and free inquiry; and the positive power, the new factor in history that was destined to build up a new civilisation, was nothing else than Science. Therefore, Protestantism is not as yet the last word spoken in the religious development of mankind. We must look to higher aims and more positive issues, and a new reformation of the Church will obtain them only on the condition of its again recognising the importance of objectivity.

Mankind will not return to the dogmatic system of hierarchical institutions, which would only bind again the consciences of men by man-made authority. But the fact must be recognised that truth is not a mere subjective conception; it must be seen that truth is a statement of facts, and, accordingly, that it contains an objective element, and that this objective element is the essential part of established truth.

In the old period of objectivism, the ultimate authority was lodged in great men, prophets, reformers, and priests, whose spirit, after it had been adapted to the needs of the powerful, was embodied in Church institutions. The new objectivism discards all human authority; it rests ultimately upon science, which is an appeal to facts. Truth is no longer what the Church teaches, or what some infallible man may deem wise to proclaim; nor is it what appears to me as true, or to you as true; but it is that which according to methodical critique has been proved to be objectively true, i. e., so proved that everybody who investigates it will find it to be so.

Objective truth, demonstrable by evidence and capable

[p. 450]

of revision, or, in a word, Science, is the highest, the most reliable and the most valuable revelation of God. God reveals himself in the facts of life, among which we include our afflictions and personal experiences; God speaks in our conscience, which is, as it were, the moral instinct, the result of all our inherited and acquired experiences, and this is the reason why the voice of conscience makes itself heard in our soul with that automatic force which is characteristic of all deep-seated subconscious reactions. God also appears in our sentiments, our ideal aspirations, our devotions, our hopes and our yearnings. All these various manifestations are important and must not be lost sight of; but above them all is the objectivity of truth which speaks through science.

It is impossible for all men to be scientists, but for that reason it is not necessary that their minds and hearts should be enslaved by blind faith. The faith of every man should be the trust in truth, not in fairy tales that must be taken for granted, but in the truth,--the truth which in its main outlines is simple enough to be comprehensible to all,--the truth that this world of ours is a cosmic harmony in which no wrong can be done without producing evil effects all around.

Faith in the objective authority of truth is the next step in the religious evolution of mankind. We stand now at the threshold of the third period which will be, to characterise it in a word, an era of scientific objectivism. The tendency of the second era was negative, revolutionising, theorising; the tendency of the third will be positive, constructive, practical.

Negativism and subjectivism appear from the standpoint

[p. 451]

of the positivism and objectivism of the first period as the work of the destroyer, of the negative spirit, the Devil. It is a reaction. This explains why Milton's Satan actually became a hero. Milton was a Protestant, a revolutionist, a subjectivist, and he unconsciously sympathised with Satan, who in the terms of a philosopher of the age declares:

The mind is its own place and in itself
 Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.
 What matter where, if I be still the same
 And what I should be."

Click to view
MILTON'S SATAN. (After Dore.)

The negativism of the second period is not a mistake. It was an indispensable condition of the third period; for it manufactured the tools for a higher and better positivism,--criticism. But criticism is insufficient for positive construction; we must have actual results, methodical work, and positive issues; and the prophet of the twentieth century finds it necessary again to emphasise the importance of objectivity.

[p. 452]

Is Evil Positive?

A modern fable characterises the relativity of good and evil in the story of a farmer, who, weeding his field with a cultivator, curses the morning-glories which grow luxuriantly on his maize stalks as being created by the Devil. In the meantime his little daughter weaves a wreath of the same flowers and praises the beauty of God's handiwork. Evil and good may be relative, but relativity does not imply non-existence. Relations are facts too. If mischief is wrought by good things being out of place, the evil does not become chimerical but is as positive as any other reality.

In the same way, the relativity of knowledge does not prove (as some agnostic philosophers claim) the impossibility of knowledge. Concrete things, such as stones and other material bodies, are not the only realities; relations, too, are actual, and the same thing may under different conditions be either good or evil.

A proper comprehension of the relativity of goodness and badness, far from invalidating the objectivity of the moral ideal, will become a great stimulus that will work for the realisation of goodness, for there ought to be nothing so bad but that it can by judicious management be turned to good account. Badness, however, is sometimes spoken of as a mere negation, and the assertion is made that it is not a positive factor. Looking for the most characteristic representative of this view among the ablest authors of our time, we find a statement written by the well-known author of the novel Ground

[p. 453]

Arms! Bertha von Suttner, one of the most prominent advocates of universal peace on earth. She knows as well as Schopenhauer that the ills of life are positive, for she describes all the horrors of war in their drastic reality. Nevertheless, Bertha von Suttner devotes in her ingenious book The Inventory of a Soul a whole chapter to the proposition "The Principle of Evil a Phantom." [*1] She says:

"I do not believe in the phantoms of badness, misery, and death. They are mere shadows, zeros, nothingnesses. They are negations of real things, but not real things themselves.... There is light, but there is no darkness: darkness is only the non-existence of light. There is life, death is only a local ceasing of life-phenomena. . . . We grant that Ormuzd and Ahriman, God and Devil, are at least thinkable, but there are other opposites in which it is apparent that one is the non-existence of the other. For instance: noise and silence. Think of a silence so powerful as to suppress a noise. . . . Darkness has no degree, while light has. There is more light or less light, but various shades of darkness can mean only little or less light. Thus, life is a magnitude, but death is a zero. Something and nothing cannot be in struggle with each other. Nothing is without arms, nothing as an independent idea is only an abortion of human weaknesses . . . two are necessary to produce struggle. If I am in the room, I am here; if I leave it, I am no longer here. There can be no quarrel between my ego-present and ego-absent."

This is the most ingenious and completest denial of the existence of evil that we know of, and it is presented with great force. It is the expression of the negativism of philosophy from Descartes to Spencer. It seems to be consistent monism. And yet, we cannot accept it.

[p. 454]

True enough, the idea of a personal Devil is as imaginary as a fairy, or an elf, or a hobgoblin; true also that there is no evil in itself, and no goodness in itself; the dualism of the Manichees is untenable. The evil principle cannot be conceived as an independent substance, essence, or entity. But for that reason we cannot shut our eyes to its real and positive existence. Granted that silence is the absence of noise; yet noise is not goodness, neither is silence badness. While I think or write, noise is to me an evil, while silence is bliss. Silence, where a word of cheer is expected or needed, may be a very positive evil, and a lie is not merely an absence of truth. The absence of food is a mere negation, but considered in relation to its surroundings, as an empty stomach, it is hunger; and hunger is a positive factor in this world of ours. Sickness can be considered as a mere absence of health, but sickness is caused either by a disorder in the system or the presence of injurious influences, both of which are unquestionably positive. A debt is a negative factor in the books of the debtor, but what is negative to the debtor is positive to the creditor.

If negative ideas were "mere abortions of human weakness," as Bertha von Suttner claims, how could mathematicians have any use for the minus sign? And if the idea of evil were an empty superstition, how could its influence upon mankind have been so lasting? On the one hand it is true that all existence is positive, but on the other hand we ought to know that existence in the abstract is neither good nor bad; goodness and badness depend upon the relations among the various existent things. And these relations may be good as well as

[p. 455]

evil. Some existences destroy other existences. Certain bacilli are destructive of human life, certain antidotes destroy bacilli. There are everywhere parasites living upon other lives, and what is positive or life-sustaining to the one is negative and destructive to the other, and every such negation is a reality, the effectiveness of which neutralises the action of another reality. [*1]

The idea of goodness is by no means equivalent with existence, and badness with non-existence. Existence is the reality; it is the indivisible whole, the one and all. Good and evil, however, are views taken from a certain given standpoint, and from this standpoint good and evil are features forming a contrast, but as such they are always actualities; neither the one nor the other is a mere nothing. The question is only whether we have a right to regard our own standpoint as the positive one, representing that which is good, and all the powers that hinder human life as negative or evil.

The answer to this question seems to be that any and every being will naturally regard its own standpoint as the positively given fact, and every factor that destroys it as negative; his pleasure appears to him the standard of goodness.

And we grant that every being is entitled to take this standpoint, and that subjectivism naturally forms the initial stage of all ethical valuation. But we cannot rest satisfied with the principle of subjective autonomy as a solution of the problem of good and evil.

[p. 456]

Is there an Objective Standard of Goodness?

Supposing that good were indeed simply that which gives pleasure or enhances my life, and bad that which gives pain or threatens to destroy it, the standard of goodness and badness would be purely subjective. The famous savage chief quoted by Tylor, and from Tylor by Spencer, would have fathomed the problem of good and evil when he declared that "bad is if anybody took away his wife, but if he took away the wife of some one else, that would be good." [*1] Good would be that which pleases me; and the good as an objective reality would not exist. There would be something good for me, for you, and for many others, but what might be good for me might be bad for you. Goodness and badness would be purely subjective qualities without any objective value.

The view which bases ethics upon a consideration of pleasure and pain and defines goodness as that which affords the greatest amount of pleasurable feelings is called hedonism. The coarsest form of hedonism (as represented by Bentham) makes the pleasure of the individual supreme; it bases its ethics upon selfishness, and sees in altruism only refined egotism. The altruist is said to love but himself in others.

Let me add here that the intuitionalist basing ethics upon the voice of his conscience is, closely considered, also a hedonist, or at least a subjectivist, for he finds the ultimate authority for conduct in himself, viz., in the pleasure of those motor ideas of his which he calls his

[p. 457]

conscience: what he is pleased to consider as ethical, he thinks is ethical. His standard of morality is the subjectivity of his conviction, which he is unable either to analyse or to trace to its origin. He differs from Bentham's hedonism of ethical egotism only in this, that the pleasure of his conscience overrules the lower pleasures of the senses.

Modern utilitarianism, as represented by Mr. Spencer, remains a purely subjective ethics, for it makes the greatest happiness of the greatest number the maxim of ethics; and by doing so it introduces no objective principle, but it simply proposes to replace every single subjectivity by the sum total of all subjectivities; and subjective ethical maxims are not as yet truly ethical; they remain on the level of the world-conception of Tylor's savage.

All subjective ethical theories fail to see the cardinal point of ethics, for the very nature of ethics is objective. If there is no objective authority for moral conduct, we had better openly declare that ethics is an illusion and what we call ethics is simply all arithmetical calculation in which pleasures and pains are weighed against one another and morality is at best only a dietetics of the soul. As a matter of fact, however, he who opens his eyes will see that there is an objective authority for conduct in life. Life and the factors in life are not purely what we make them. Here we are to run a race, and the course of the individual as much as that of mankind and all living beings is prescribed in a very definite and unmistakable way on the lines of what since Darwin we have accustomed ourselves to call evolution. We must learn to

[p. 458]

recognise the necessity of progress which leads us onward on a straight and narrow path. Those who willingly obey the laws of progress advance on the path in spite of its thorns, joyously and gladly. The reluctant are urged forward and feel the smart of nature's whip, while he who obstinately refuses to heed the laws of the cosmic order goes to the wall.

Nature has no consideration for our sentiments, be they pleasures or pains. Happy is he who delights in acting according to her laws. But he who seeks other pleasures is doomed. Look at the situation from whatever standpoint you may, the criterion of right and wrong, of good and bad, of true and false, lies not in the greater or lesser amount of pleasure and pain, but in the agreement of our actions with the cosmic order; and morality is that which is in accord with the law of evolution. Ethics teaches us to do voluntarily what after all we must do whether or not it may please us.

In a word, ethics is unthinkable without duty, and the essential element of duty is its objective reality, its inflexible sternness, and its austere authority.

We say to the hedonist, a good action is not moral because it gives pleasure, but because it accords with duty; and we must not be on the search for that which gives us pleasure but must endeavor to find our highest pleasure in doing that which the cosmic law (or, religiously speaking, God) demands of us.

Those who deny that there is any objective norm of right and wrong in the universe, are inclined to claim with Huxley, that man survived not on account of his morality, but on the contrary, on account of his immorality.

[p. 459]

[paragraph continues] It has been said that man is more rapacious, more egotistical, more immoral, than brutes. Without denying that an immoral man may sometimes appear more brutish than a brute, we cannot see that man is as immoral as, or even more immoral than, brutes. But the case is worth considering.

Says the wolf in Aesop's fable: "Why is it right for you to eat the lamb, when for me it is supposed to be wrong?" Is not man in the same predicament as the wolf, and does not mankind slaughter more animals than all the wolves in the world ever ate?

Granted that the wolf's pleadings are substantiated, we observe that man lives, but wolves are exterminated, which seems good evidence in favor of man's being in greater accord with the cosmic laws. And yet the actions of both, the wolf and the man, seem to be identical; or rather, if the blackness of a crime depended upon quantitative measurement by addition, we should have to decide in favor of the wolves; for man at the present time kills more sheep, pigs, and other animals in one year than wolves could devour in a century. Yet man possesses the impudence to call the wolf a robber and to drive him from the fold whenever he attempts to imitate man's voracity. What is the justification of slaughter in the one case, and what its condemnation in the other?

In answering this question we shall not idealise man's mode of living on the flesh of his fellow-creatures. For it appears that from a moral standpoint it would be preferable to sustain life without slaughtering lambs and calves, fowl and fishes. The case must not be considered from an abstract or ideal standpoint, but simply treated

[p. 460]

as a comparison of the wolf's conduct with man's conduct; and we find that the more sheep a man eats, the more he raises. The wolf eats them without raising them. The wolf murders the lamb. However, the slaughter of the lamb by man is no murder, for it serves to increase and to sustain human souls, and the souls of man possess more truth and a higher insight into nature. The lamb dies as a sacrifice on the altar of humanity, and this sacrifice is right and good if, and in so far as, it substitutes higher life for lower life. Subjectively considered the wolf has the same right as man to kill a lamb; and also the same right as the lamb would have to kill wolves or men. The difference between man's and the wolf's actions appears only when we take into account the objective conditions of man's superiority, giving him a wider dominion of power which he can maintain because his soul is a better reflector of truth than are the notions of a wolf.

We must insist here that the attainment of a higher life, consisting in a fuller comprehension of truth and a greater acquisition of power, is one of the most essential requisites of morality. Morality is not a negative quality, but a very positive endeavor. We must abandon the old standpoint of negativism, that goodness consists in not doing certain things which are forbidden. Genuine goodness consists in daring and doing; and in doing the right thing. One genuine and positive virtue atones for many sins that consist in mere omissions. The sheep is by no means (as is frequently claimed) more moral than the wolf. The wolf is bad enough, but he is at least courageous and keen; the sheep is a coward, and with

[p. 461]

all its cowardice it is stupid. It is time to discard the ovine ideal of morality which praises all lack of energy and of accomplishments as the highest type of goodness. What we need is a positive conception of virtue based upon a careful consideration of the requirements of life.

What higher life and lower life is cannot be declared to be an arbitrary distinction. It is not purely subjective, but can be defined according to an objective standard. Good to the savage is that which pleases him, and bad that which hurts him. Good, to him who has deciphered the religious mystery of the universe and understands the nature of God, is that which produces higher life, and bad is that which hinders, or perverts, or destroys it.

The God-Idea.

God is a religious term, and it is often claimed that knowledge of God does not fall within the domain of science; the idea of God and all other religious terms are claimed to be extra-scientific. Thus there are two parties both of which are under the influence of nominalistic subjectivism: religious agnostics and infidel agnostics. The belief of the former is as irrational as the disbelief of the latter. If there is an objective authority for conduct, we must be able to know it; we can obey it only in so far as we know it. Now experience teaches us that there is an authority for conduct, and the theory of evolution promises to prove it by positive evidence. This authority for conduct is called in the language of religion "God." Our scientists formulate under the name "laws of nature" that which is immutable in the various phenomena, that which is universal in the variety of happenings, that

[p. 462]

which is eternal in the transient, and every law of nature is in its sphere a rigorous authority for conduct which in this sense is part and parcel of God's being.

The most important laws of nature in the ethical domain are those which regulate all the various and sometimes very delicate relations of man to man, which concatenate our fates and set soul to soul in a mutually helpful responsion.

Existence is one harmonious entirety; there is not a thing in the world but is embraced in the whole as a part

Click to view
LUCIFER BEFORE THE FALL. From the Hortus Deliciarum.

of the whole. The One and All is the condition of every creature's being; it is the breath of our breath, the sentiency of our feelings, the strength of our strength. Nothing exists of itself or to itself. All things are interrelated; and as all masses are held together by their gravity in a mutual attraction, so there is at the bottom of all sentiment a mysterious longing, a yearning for the fulness of the whole, a panpathy which finds a powerful utterance in the psalms of all the religions on earth. No

[p. 463]

creature is an isolated being, for the whole of existence affects the smallest of its parts. Says Emerson:

"All are needed by each one,
 Nothing is fair or good alone."

The unity of the whole, the intercoherence of all things, the oneness of all norms that shape life, is not a

Click to view
THE FALLEN LUCIFER. (After Dore.)

mere theory but an actual reality; and in this sense the scriptural saying "God is Love" is a truth demonstrable by natural science.

Science proves that the whole of existence presents itself throughout as regulated by law; that it is not a chaos, not an incomprehensible riddle, but a cosmos. As a cosmos it is intelligible, and sentient creatures can

[p. 464]

learn to understand its nature and adapt themselves to it. God is that feature in the world which conditions and produces reason; and reason is nothing but a reflexion of the world-order. The cosmic order of existence, the harmony of its laws, its systematic regularity, makes intelligence possible, and sentient beings will naturally develop into minds. God is that which changes individuals into persons, for reason and a rational will are the essential characteristic of personality.

Taking this ground we say, (adopting here, for the sake of simplicity, the religious term God,) those beings are good which are images of God.

The nature of progress is not (as Mr. Spencer has it) an increase of heterogeneity, but growth of soul. Evolution is not mere adaptation to surroundings, but a more and more perfect incarnation of truth. Adaptation to surroundings is, from an ethical point of view, an incidental blessing only of the power afforded by right conduct. [*1]

All facts of experience are revelations, but those facts which teach us morality (man's conduct to his fellow-beings) embody truths of special importance. They exercise a wholesome influence upon the development of our souls, even though the primitive man was not able to fully understand their why and wherefore. In the lack of a clear comprehension of facts themselves, man's imagination clothes them in the garb of mythological imagery. In our own days the great teachers of morality are still regarded as the Indian regards the medicine-man, and

[p. 465]

the sacraments of the Church are treated like the totems of savages. Religion is now slowly passing out of the old stage of magic into the higher stage of a direct comprehension of facts. Myth changes into knowledge, and the allegory of the parable begins to be understood.

As astrology changed into astronomy, so the religion of miracles will give way to the religion of science.

We often bear God spoken of as good, and he is sometimes represented as goodness in general. But God is more than goodness. God is the objective reality of existence regarded as the ultimate authority for conduct. God is thus the standard of goodness; to call God good is an anthropomorphism. His creatures are more or less good, according as they are more or less faithful portraits of him, and as they obey his will. God is neither good nor bad, neither moral nor immoral, he is unmoral; yet, his nature and character is the ultimate criterion of goodness and of morality. And God's will can be learned from his revelations, which in the terms of science are called experiences, and which we formulate with exactness in what is called "the laws of nature."

God is not existence itself; He is not, either singly or collectively, the facts of the world; He is not the sum total of objects or existences. God is the norm of existence, that factor which conditions the cosmic order and is formulated by naturalists as laws of nature. Being the norm of existence, God is, above all, that omnipresent feature in the facts, in the objects of the world, in reality, which commands obedience. God's will appears as that something in experience to which we have to conform. In a word, God is the standard of morality and the ultimate

[p. 466]

authority for conduct. This is nomotheism, but not pantheism, for it recognises the distinction between God and the All or sum total of existence. God is something distinct and definite, not an indifferent omneity. This is monotheism, but not the old monotheism, for it no longer looks upon God as one individual ego-being. Yet it preserves the nucleus of the oldest conception of God, and accepts at the same time all that is true in pantheism. [*1]

God was always an idea of moral import. God was and will remain (so long as the word is retained) the ultimate authority for conduct. Since the order of the world in its most general features is of intrinsic necessity, which means that under no conditions could it be imagined otherwise, God is the raison d'etre not only of the world as it actually exists but of any possible world; and in this sense nomotheism teaches that God is supernatural. Supernaturalism may be untenable as it was understood by dogmatists, yet there is a truth in supernaturalism which will remain true forever.

Those who see in the facts of nature only matter in motion will naturally be surprised at the fact that a cosmos with living and morally aspiring beings can develop out of it. A deeper insight into the conditions of nature reveals to us that the world is a well regulated cosmos, having its own definite and immutable laws, and these laws are realities as much as material things. They are

[p. 467]

not concrete entities, but they are real, nevertheless., and indeed of greater importance than the existence of sense-perceptible objects. The cosmos is not only an enormous mass of innumerable atoms, and molecules, and masses of suns and stars, but its finer texture shows that down into its most delicate details it is a wonderful systematic whole, full of life and consistency, and possessing an outspoken and clearly intelligible character, and the world-order which makes the world a whole possesses objectivity, i. e., it is a reality independent of what we think it to be. The world is not as we think it to be, but we must think the world as it is, and our duty is to act accordingly.

These are the plain facts of science which even the man who has no idea of science must heed. Only those creatures can in the long run of evolution survive who act according to the truth. Thus, the truth became embodied in moral rules, even before science could deduce or explain them. Religion is a revelation in so far as it is an anticipation of certain truths which were at the time of their invention still uncomprehended. Religious ideas, accordingly, had to be symbols, and could be communicated only in parables. Now, the more science progresses, the better shall we learn to understand the meaning of these parables.

God is in all things, but he is best revealed in man,--especially in the morally aspiring man, and this is the meaning of the ideal of a God-man, or Christ,--a Saviour whose teachings are the way, the truth, and the life.

Every man's conception of God is a measure of his own stature. He pictures God according to his comprehension,

[p. 468]

and thus it is natural that every man has a different notion of God, every one's God being characteristic of his mental and moral caliber. On the lowest stages of civilisation devils and gods are almost indistinguishable, but while they become properly differentiated in the onward march of mankind we cannot fail to detect the parallelism between God and Satan which is never lost. The god of savages is a bloodthirsty chieftain; the god of sentimentalists is a good old papa; the god of the superstitious is a magician and a trickster; the god of the slave is a tyrannical master; the god of the egotist is an ego-world-soul; and the gods of the wise, of the just, of the free, of the courageous are wisdom, justice, freedom, and courage. The conception of evil in all these phases will always be the contrast to the ideal embodiment of all goodness.

Satan is at once a rebel and a tyrant. He proclaims independence but his rule bodes oppression and slavery. He himself is represented in chains, for the liberty of sin, which is licence, enthralls the mind. As Satan is a captive of his own making, so all the beings that belong to him are his prisoners. He is their torturer and destroyer.

A most drastic picture of Satan which is found in the missal of Poitiers, [*1] is described by Didron as follows:

"He is chained to the mouth of hell as a dog to its kennel, and yet wields his trident sceptre as the monarch of the place which he guards. Cerberus and Pluto in one, he is yet a Cerberus of Christian art, a demon more hideous and more filled with energy than Pagan art has offered. . . . This image figures the various aspects

[p. 469]

of infernal sin, by its many faces, having a face on the breast as well as on the head, a face on each shoulder and a face at each hip. How many more behind? With long ears like those of a hound, thick short horns of a bull, his legs and arms are covered with scales, and seem to issue from the mouths of the faces at his joints. He has a lion's head with tusks, and hands like the claws of a bear. His body, open at the waist, reveals a nest of serpents darting forth and hissing. In this monster we find all the elements of a dragon, leviathan, lion, fox, viper, bear, bull, and wild boar. It is a compound of each evil quality in these animals, embodied in a human form." Didron, Iconography II., p. 118.

While Satan is the rebel who seeks liberty for himself and oppression of others, God's kingdom signifies the establishment of right, which insures the liberties of all. Satan promises liberty, but God gives liberty. Schleiermacher, a learned and thoughtful man but of a weak constitution, physically as well as spiritually, still bows down in submissive awe before a God whom he conceived most probably after the model of the Prussian government, and defines religion as the "feeling of absolute dependence."

Poor Schleiermacher! What an abominable religion didst thou preach in spite of thy philosophical caution which, in the eyes of zealous believers, amounted to heresy!

It is worth while to criticise Schleiermacher's definition of religion, because it found favor with many people, especially in liberal circles; for it appealed to the free religious people as a definition which omitted the name of God and retained the substance of religion. Would it not be better to retain the name of God and purify its significance, than to discard the word and retain the substance

[p. 470]

Click to view
THE FEELING OF DEPENDENCE.
 (After Sasha Schneider.)

[p. 471]

and source of the old superstitions? But it is an old experience that the Liberals are iconoclasts of external formalities and idolators of reactionary thoughts. They retain the cause of obstruction, and discard some of its indifferent results, in which it happens to find expression. They cure the symptoms of the disease but are very zealous in extolling its cause as the source of all that is good.

Schopenhauer in comment upon Schleiermacher's definition, said that if religion be the feeling of absolute dependence, the most religious animal would not be man, but the cur.

To the lovers of freedom the feeling of dependence is a curse, and Sasha Schneider has well pictured it as a terrible monster whose prey are the weak--those whose religion is absolute submissiveness.

Truly if we cannot have a religion which makes us free and independent, let us discard religion! Religion must be in accord not only with morality but also with philosophy; not only with justice, but also with science; not only with order, but also with freedom.

Man is dependent upon innumerable conditions of his life; yet his aspiration is not to be satisfied with the consciousness of his plight; his aspiration is to become independent and to become more and more the master of his destiny. If religion is the expression of that which constitutes the humanity of man, Schleiermacher's definition is, wrong and misleading, for religion is the very opposite. Religion is that which makes man more of a man, which develops his faculties and allows him more independence.

[p. 472]

Monarchical Europe has generally characterised the Devil as the rebel in the universe, and in a certain sense he is. But he represents revolution only in its misguided attempts to gain liberty. Every rebellion which is not in its own nature self-destructive, is an expression of the divine spirit. Every dash for liberty is a righteous deed, and a revolutionary movement that has the power and inherent good sense to be able to stay, is of God.

          
Click to view
TIME AS A   TRINITY OF PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE.
   French miniature. Fourteenth century.

       
Click to view

     
       [*1]

        [*1]

     
   Satan may be the representative of rebellion; God symbolises liberty. Satan may promise independence by a call to arms against rules and order; God gives independence by self-control and discretion. Satan is sham freedom, in God we find true freedom. Satan is an indispensable phase in the manifestation of God; he is the protest against God's dispensation as a yoke and an imposition,

[p. 473]

and thus revolting against the law prepares the way to the covenant of love and spontaneous good-will.

We must only learn that independence cannot be gained by a rebellion against the constitution of the universe, or by inverting the laws of life and evolution, but by comprehending them and adapting ourselves to the world in which we live. By a recognition of the truth, which must be acquired by painstaking investigation and by accepting the truth as our maxim of conduct, man

          
Click to view
ITALIAN TRINITY.
   Of the fifteenth century. (Didron)

       
Click to view
SATANIC TRINITY.
   French miniature of the thirteenth century. (Didron.)

     
   rises to the height of self-determination, of dominion over the forces of nature, of freedom. It is the truth that makes us free.

So long as the truth is something foreign to us, we speak of obedience to the truth; but when we have learned to identify ourselves with truth, the moral ought ceases to be a tyrannical power above us, and we feel ourselves as its representatives; it changes into aspirations in us. True religion is love of truth, and being

[p. 474]

such it will not end in a feeling of dependence, but reap the fruit of truth, which is liberty, freedom, independence.

The Devil-Conception in Its Relation to the God-Conception.

The evolution of the conception of evil is by no means an unimportant chapter in the history of religion,

          
Click to view
THE TRINITY.
   From a painted window of the Sixteenth century in the church of Notre Dame at   Chalons, France. (Didron, Ann. II., page 32.)

       
Click to view
THE TRINITY OF   EVIL.
   From a French MS. of the fifteenth century, preserved in the   Bibliotheque Royale at Paris. (Didron, Iconography, II., p.   23.)

     
   for the idea a man has of Satan is characteristic of his mental and moral nature.

While the Bible declares that man is made in the image of God, anthropologists say that men make their

[p. 475]

gods after their own image: and the truth is that every God-conception is characteristic of the man who holds it. It has been said: I will tell you who you are when you tell me what your conception of God is.

          
Click to view
THE THREE-HEADED   SERAPIS.
   With the head of a lion in the centre, of a dog on the right, and of a wolf   on the left side. (From Bartoli's Lucernae Veterum Sepulchrates, II., fig.   7.)

       
Click to view
AZIEL, THE   GUARDIAN OF HIDDEN TREASURES.
   From Francisci's Proteus infernalis

     
       [*1]

        

     
   But the same observation holds good as to the conception of the Devil, and we might as well say, "I will tell you who you are when you tell me what your conception of the Devil is."

[p. 476]

Click to view
GOD SUPPORTING THE WORLD. (By Buonamico Buffamalco.) 
 Fresco in the Campo Santo of Pisa.

 [*1]

[p. 477]

There is a similarity between our conceptions of good and evil which cannot be accidental, for it is natural that all our thoughts should possess a certain family likeness. Your idea of the Devil is your best interpretation of your idea of God. It will be interesting to compare one of the most famous representations of God, holding the universe in his hands with the pictures of Mara, the Buddhist Satan with the world-wheel in his clutches. (See pages <page 119>, <page 121>, <page 123>.)

This similarity can be proved from history.

Click to view
HERCULES WITH CERBERUS.
 From a vase found in Alta mura.

 [*1]

The Trinity conception of Satan is as old as the Trinity conception of God. As we have Trinities among the Pagan deities, for instance among the Greeks, the three-headed Hecuba; so we have three-headed monsters as for instance, the three-headed Cerberus; and in the history of Christian art a similar parallelism obtains between God-representations arid Devil -representations. The idea of representing the divine trinity as a person having three faces may have originated in a modification of the two-headed Janus.

Professor Kraus says concerning the trinitarian demons of Christianity:

"The diabolical dragon is described as a three-headed monster (probably in recollection of Cerberus) in the Apocryphal Gospel of

[p. 478]

Nicodemus, and in the Good Friday Sermon of Eusebius of Alexandria, who addresses the Devil 'Three-headed Beelzebul' (trikefale beelzeboul). The idea of the Demon as a serpent with the head of a woman appears not earlier than the Middle Ages, in Bede, from whom it is quoted by Vincent de Beauvais."

Dante describes the three-faced Satan in these lines:

                     "Oh, what a sight!
 How passing strange it seemed when I did spy
 Upon his head three faces: one in front
 Of hue vermilion, the other two with this
 Midway each shoulder joined and at the crest;
 The right 'twixt wan and yellow seemed; the left
 To look on, such as come from whence old Nile
 Stoops to the lowlands. Under each shot forth
 Two mighty wings, enormous as became
 A bird so vast. No plumes had they,
 But were in texture like a bat, and these
 He flapped in the air, that from him issued still
 Three winds wherewith Cocytus to its depth
 Was frozen. At six eyes he wept: the tears
 Adown three chins distilled with bloody foam.
 At every mouth his teeth a sinner champed,
 Bruised as with ponderous engine; so that three
 Were in this guise tormented." (Hell. Canto xxxiv.)

As according to Christian doctrine God is actualised in the God-man, so Satan in his turn is represented as the Antichrist and is pictured as a human caricature full of ugliness and wickedness. Professor Kraus continues:

"Simultaneously with the conception of the Devil as a dragon are found in the Acts of the Martyrs notions of him as an awful negro (a Moor or Ethiopian). The same views are found in Augustine, Gregory the Great, and the Apocryphal Acts of St. Bartholomew. In the latter, the idea is so far developed as to represent

[p. 479]

the Devil as the archetype of deformity: he becomes a negro with a dog's snout, covered with hair down to his toes, with glowing

Click to view
ST. ANTHONY ASSAULTED BY DEVILS.
 (After Schoengauer's copper engraving, 1420-1499.)

eyes, fire in his mouth, smoke issuing from his nostrils, and with the wings of a bat. We see that this pleasant description of

[p. 480]

the Evil One, which perhaps is based on job xli. 9 et seq., contains all the elements of the grotesque conception of the Middle Ages. They are found also in the Vita S. Antonii where also the horns of the Devil are mentioned."

Compare for instance Milton's Satan with Goethe's Mephistopheles! The one heroic like the English nation,

Click to view
THE GOOD LORD AND THE DEVIL.
 (In Goethe's Faust, by Franz Simm.)

a Protestant, a rebel, a dissenter, a subjectivist (see page 351 ff.), the other a sage, a scholar, a philosopher, like a German poet. Goethe's Mephistopheles is not as grand as Milton's Satan, but he is in his way not less interesting, for he is more ingenious, more learned, more

[p. 481]

poetical. He is a philosophical principle, being the spirit of criticism; and as such he plays an important part in the economy of nature.

Mephistopheles characterises himself in these words:

I am the spirit that denies!
 And justly so: For all things from the void
 Called forth, deserve to be destroyed.
 T'were better, then, were nought created. 
 Thus, all which you as sin have rated,--
 Destruction,--aught with evil blent,--
 That is my proper element."

And what a sympathy exists between Mephistopheles, the spirit of criticism and the dignified author of the Universe. The Lord says in the Prelude to Faust:

"In self-indulgence man finds soon his level
 He seeks repose and ease; and stops to grow.
 Gladly on him the comrade I'll bestow
 Who will provoke and must create as Devil."

As God, now and then, needs the Devil, so the Devil is anxious from time to time to pay his respects to the good Lord. After the heaven is closed Mephistopheles remains alone on the stage and says:

"At times the Ancient Gent I like to see,
 Keep on good terms with him and am most civil."

Hobbling away, he stops before leaving the stage and turning to the audience adds:

"'Tis truly fine of such a grand grandee
 So humanly to gossip with the Devil."

[p. 482]

Conclusion.

Evil personified appears at first sight repulsive. But the more we study the personality of the Devil, the more fascinating it becomes. In the beginning of existence the Evil One is the embodiment of everything unpleasant, then of everything bad, evil, and immoral. He is hatred, destruction, and annihilation incarnate, and as such he is the adversary of existence, of the Creator, of God. The Devil is the rebel of the cosmos, the independent in the empire of a tyrant, the opposition to uniformity, the dissonance in universal harmony, the exception to the rule, the particular in the universal, the unforeseen chance that breaks the law; he is the individualising tendency, the craving for originality, which bodily upsets the ordinances of God that enforce a definite kind of conduct; he overturns the monotony that would permeate the cosmic spheres if every atom in unconscious righteousness and with pious obedience slavishly followed a generally prescribed course.

The ingenuous question, "Why does not God kill the Devil?" is comical enough, because we feel instinctively that it is impossible. I know of a good old lady who prayed daily with great fervor and piety that God might have mercy on the Devil and save him. Think of it closely, and this attitude is touching! How many great theologians have seriously discussed the problem whether the Devil could be saved. Like that good old lady, they were so engrossed in the literal belief of their mythology that they did not see that the problem implied a

[p. 483]

contra-diction. For God and Devil are relative terms, and God would cease to be God if there were no Devil.

The universe is such that the evolution of a higher life is possible only through great strain. The evolution of the warm glow of a soul out of the cold clay of the earth, of moral aspirations out of the fierce hatred that animates the struggle for existence, of intelligence, thought and foresight out of the brute indifference of that unthinking something which we call matter in motion, is due to extraordinary exertions; it is the product of work performed by the expenditure of enormous energy, and constant efforts are required merely to preserve the treasures already won. Difficulties to be overcome are called in the terminology of mechanics "the power of resistance," and this power of resistance is, closely considered, an essential and even a beneficial factor in the constitution of the universe.

If there were no power of resistance, if no efforts were needed to reach any end desired, if the world were pleasure and goodness throughout, we should have no evolution, no progress, no ideals; for all spheres of existence would float in one universal ocean of bliss, and all things would be intoxicated with heavenly delight.

Pain produces the want of something better, and deficiencies arouse the desire for improvement. If the feeling substance of moners had all their wants satisfied without further exertion, man would never have risen out of the bythos of amaeboid existence, and if the man of to-day lived in a Schlaraffia, he would not trouble about new inventions, progress, or any amelioration; he would simply live on in unthinking enjoyment. There would

[p. 484]

be no need of making any effort, no need of struggling against evils, no need of virtue, no need of working out our salvation. There would be no badness, but there would be no goodness, either. All existence would be soaked with moral indifference.

Good is good only because there is evil, and God is God because there is a Devil.

As evil is not a mere negation, so the figure of Satan in religion is not an idle fancy. Goethe says:

"Ich kann mich nicht bereden lassen,
 Macht mir den Teufel nur nicht klein:
 Ein Kerl, den alle Menschen hassen,
 Der muss was sein!"

["You have the Devil underrated.
 I cannot yet persuaded be!
 A fellow who is all-behated,
 Must something be."]

Now, let us look at the mythical figure of Satan as represented in theology, folklore, and poetry. Is he not really a most interesting man? Indeed, in spite of being a representative of all kinds of crimes, be possesses many redeeming features so as to be great and noble. According to the account in the second chapter of Genesis, Satan is the father of science, for he induced Eve to make Adam taste of the fruit of knowledge, and the Ophites, a gnostic sect, worshipped the serpent for that reason. Satan produces the unrest in society, which, in spite of many inconveniences, makes the world move onward an(l forward; he is the patron of progress, investigation, and invention. Giordano Bruno, Galileo, and other men of science were regarded as his offspring and persecuted on

[p. 485]

Click to view
THE DEVIL IN THE CAMPO SANTO (PISA).

 [*1]

[p. 486]

his account by the Church. And when we glance over the records of the Devil-contracts, we learn to have respect for the old gentleman. Milton's Satan is a grand character, a noble-souled rebel, who would rather undergo an eternity of torture than suffer humiliation.

Click to view
SEAL OF SATAN.
 Probably used in mystic plays of the fifteenth century. (From Didron, Chr. Iconography.)

 [*1]

Consider but the fact that, taking the statement of his adversaries alone, the Devil is the most trustworthy person in existence. He has been cheated by innumerable sinners, saints, angels, and (according to various old Church legends) even by the good Lord himself; and yet he has never been found wanting in the literal and punctilious fulfilment of all his promises; and all the bad experiences he has had in the course of millenniums have not in the least lowered his character. His mere word is honored as the holiest oath, or as the best signature verified with seals and legal witnesses. The instances are rare in which it is known that persons with whom he has had business transactions have requested him to sign a contract, to give a pledge, or to show any proof that he would honestly abide by his word; his honesty was never doubted by anybody. And mind you, it is not the Devil who boasts of his integrity, but this is the conclusion at which we arrive from the evidences adduced by his enemies.

Our sympathy for this martyr of honest conduct, the

[p. 487]

dupe of God and man, grows when we consider our own nature and relation to his Satanic majesty. With our hands upon our hearts, must we not confess that every one of us, in spite of man's boastful claim of a likeness to God, has some trait or other that makes him kin to the Devil? I do not mean here to make reference to actual sin or grievous transgressions, but to things of which we scarcely think of repenting. Did we never in an hour of humor laugh at our neighbor? Did we never joke at the cost of somebody else? Did we never bulldoze, tease, or tantalise our very best friends? Did we never enjoy the awkward situation in which some poor innocent had been caught? And why should we not? If we took away from life its satire, jokes, and other "deviltries," it would lose part of its most fragrant zest, and if we constructed a man consisting of virtues only, would not that fellow be the most unbearable bore in the world, wearisome beyond description? For it is a sprinkling of petty vices that makes even a great man human. A mere ethical machine would neither be attractive nor arouse our sympathies.

The Devil is the father of all misunderstood geniuses. It is he who induces us to try new paths; he begets originality of thought and deed. He tempts us to venture out boldly into unknown seas for the discovery of new ways to the wealth of distant Indias. He makes us dream of and hope for more prosperity and greater happiness. He is the spirit of discontent that embitters our hearts, but in the end often leads to a better arrangement of affairs. In truth, he is a very useful servant of the Almighty, and all the heinous features of his character

[p. 488]

disappear when we consider the fact that he is necessary in the economy of nature as a wholesome stimulant to action and as the power of resistance that evokes the noblest efforts of living beings.

God, being the All in All, regarded as the ultimate authority for conduct, is neither evil itself nor goodness itself; but, nevertheless, he is in the good, and he is in the evil. He encompasses good and evil. God is in the growth and in the decay; he reveals himself in life, and he reveals himself in death. He will be found in the storm, he will be found in the calm. He lives in good aspirations and in the bliss resting upon moral endeavors; but he lives also in the visitations that follow evil actions. It is his voice that speaks in the guilty conscience, and he, too, is in the curse of sin, and in this sense he is present even in the evil itself. Even evil, temptation, and sin elicit the good: they teach man. He who has eyes to see, ears to hear, and a mind to perceive, will read a lesson out of the very existence of evil, a lesson which, in spite of the terrors it inspires, is certainly not less impressive, nor less divine, than the sublimity of a holy life; and thus it becomes apparent that the existence of Satan is part and parcel of the divine dispensation. Indeed we must grant that the Devil is the most indispensable and faithful helpmate of God. To speak mystically, even the existence of the Devil is filled with the presence of God.

 

 

Footnotes

^440:1 Egyptian Devil, reproduced from Montfaucon, has a human head from which project the heads of six animals, one of an ox, one of a bird, and four others, apparently those of serpents.

^440:2 As to the myth of the origin of Mahamaya, who is identified with Durga, see "the Chandi" in the Markandyea Purana. Vishnu, beholding the wretchedness of the gods to which the powers of the victorious giant-king Mahisha had reduced [p. 441] them, grew so enraged that streams of glory issued from his countenance taking shape in the figure of Mahamaya. Similar effulgences came forth from the other gods and entered into the system of the goddess who then went forth and slew the buffalo-shaped monster Mahisha. Another account of the same myth is contained in the Vamana Purana. For details see Hindu mythologies under Mahisha and Mahishamardini (the slayer of Mahisha).

^441:1 Didron, Chr. Icon., II., p. 119 (See pp. <page 468> and <page 469> of the present work.)

^442:1 I A Persian Devil appears in an engraving in the Didron collection in the form of a man, clothed and wearing necklets, bracelets, and anklets, but with claws on his heels and toes, and horns on his head. He is named Ahriman, Spirit of Darkness, the Iranian enemy of Ormuzd, second-born of the Eternal One, like Ormuzd an emanation from the Primal Light; equally pure, but ambitious and full of pride, he had become jealous of the first-born of God."--Didron, Iconography, II., p. 122.

^442:2 From a Turkish MS. obtained by Napoleon I. at Cairo and presented to the National Library at Paris (S.C. 242). Its author is Saiaidi Mahammed ebu emer Hassan esseoudi (990an), and the picture is described as follows: "The flesh of this monster is olive, his eyes are green with red pupils, and his tongue is also red. He wears a green scarf around his loins, pale purple trousers lined with blue, and necklets and armlets of gold."--Didron, Iconography, II., 122.

^443:1 From Kugler's Italian Schools of Painting.

^443:2 Geschichte der christlichen Kunst, Vol. I., p. 210.

^444:1 Sub ipsa scala draco cubans mirae magnitudinis.

^445:1 Schopfung und Chaos. Gottingen, 1891.

^445:2 The remarkable feature of this picture consists not only in admitting the Virgin Mary to the throne of the Trinity (which is quite frequent in similar representations) but in the double presence of Christ, as a full-grown man and as an infant.

^453:1 Inventarium einer Seele. Chap. XV.

^455:1 This exposition appeared first in The Monist, Vol. VI. No. 4. pp. 585 fl. In reply the Baroness Bertha von Suttner wrote a few courteous lines of recognition which may indicate that she is inclined to accept the author's arguments.

^456:1 Tylor, Primitive Culture, Vol. II., p. 318.

^464:1 Cf. Homilies of Science, "The Test of Progress," p. 36, and "The Ethics of Evolution," p. 41.

^466:1 Pantheism identifies God and the All. Nomotheism teaches that the laws of nature are not laws given by God as a lawgiver may issue ordinances, but that they are manifestations of God and as such parts of the Deity. They are particular aspects of the eternal and all comprehensive norm of existence. Monotheism is the theory that there is one God, and monotheism is commonly understood to mean that this one God is a personal being. See the author's Religion of Science, pp., 19 et seq., The Authority for Conduct.

^468:1 See the illustration on page <page 441>.

^472:1 Didron, Icon. Chr., pages 25 and 64

^475:1 This conception of Serapis reminds one of Cerberus, and Manobius (Sal., I. 20) actually says that the heads of Cerberus are those of a lion, a wolf, and a dog. See Menzel, Vorchr. Unsterblichkeitslehre, II., p. 5

^476:1 This picture is the embodiment of the Christian world-conception of the fourteenth century. A sonnet accompanies the fresco and explains that nine choirs of angels surround the world, in whose inner circles the constellations roll round the earth which occupies the centre of the universe.

^477:1 This picture is a part of the representation of Hades, given on page <page 194>.

^485:1 Compare <page 164>.

^486:1 The inscription reads "Seel Lucifer matre (i. e., maistre) d'abisme d'enfer.'

 

    


===== BOOK: hou.txt =====


    
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

  

HISTORY OF UTAH
 1540-1886

  

by Hubert Howe Bancroft

  

San Francisco : History Co.,

  

[1889]

Formatted, additional proofing and scanning at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, January 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

Preface

    In the history of Utah we come upon a new series of social phenomena, whose multiformity and unconventionality awaken the liveliest interest. We find ourselves at once outside the beaten track of conquest for gold and glory; of wholesale robberies and human slaughters for the love of Christ; of encomiendas, repartimientos, serfdoms, or other species of civilized imposition; of missionary invasion resulting in certain death to the aborigines, but in broad acres and well filled storehouses for the men of practical piety; of emigration for rich and cheap lands, or for colonization and empire alone; nor have we here a hurried scramble for wealth, or a corporation for the management of a game preserve. There is the charm of novelty about the present subject, if no other; for in our analyses of human progress we never tire of watching the behavior of various elements under various conditions.

    There is only one example in the annals of America of the organization of a commonwealth upon principles of pure theocracy. There is here one example only where the founding of a state grew out of the founding of a new religion. Other instances there have been of the occupation of wild tracts on this continent by people flying before persecution, or desirous

[p. vi]

of greater religious liberty; there were the quakers, the huguenots, and the pilgrim fathers, though their spiritual interests were so soon subordinated to political necessities; religion has often played a conspicuous part in the settlement of the New World, and there has at times been present in some degree the theocratic, if not indeed the hierarchal, idea; but it has been long since the world, the old continent or the new, has witnessed anything like a new religion successfully established and set in prosperous running order upon the fullest and combined principles of theocracy, hierarchy, and patriarchy.

    With this new series of phenomena, a new series of difficulties arises in attempting their elucidation: not alone the perplexities always attending unexplored fields, but formidable embarrassments which render the task at once delicate and dangerous.

    If the writer is fortunate enough to escape the many pitfalls of fallacy and illusion which beset his way; if he is wise and successful enough to find and follow the exact line of equity which should be drawn between the hotly contending factions; in a word, if he is honest and capable, and speaks honestly and openly in the treatment of such a subject, he is pretty sure to offend, and bring upon himself condemnation from all parties. But where there are palpable faults on both sides of a case, the judge who unites equity with due discrimination may be sure he is not in the main far from right if he succeeds in offending both sides. Therefore, amidst the multiformity of conflicting ideas and evidence, having abandoned all hope of satisfying others, I fall back upon the next most reasonable proposition left--that of satisfying myself.

[p. vii]

    In regard to the quality of evidence I here encounter, I will say that never before has it been my lot to meet with such a mass of mendacity. The attempts of almost all who have written upon the subject seem to have been to make out a case rather than to state the facts. Of course, by any religious sect dealing largely in the supernatural, fancying itself under the direct guidance of God, its daily doings a standing miracle, commingling in all the ordinary affairs of life prophecies, special interpositions, and revelations with agriculture, commerce, and manufactures, we must expect to find much written which none but that sect can accept as true.

    And in relation to opposing evidence, almost every book that has been put forth respecting the people of Utah by one not a Mormon is full of calumny, each author apparently endeavoring to surpass his predecessor in the libertinism of abuse. Most of these are written in a sensational style, and for the purpose of deriving profit by pandering to a vitiated public taste, and are wholly unreliable as to facts. Some few, more especially among those first appearing, whose data were gathered by men upon the spot, and for the purpose of destroying what they regarded as a sacrilegious and pernicious fanaticism, though as vehement in their opposition as any, make some pretensions to honesty and sincerity, and are more worthy of credit. There is much in government reports, and in the writings of the later residents in Utah, dictated by honest patriotism, and to which the historian should give careful attention. In using my authorities, I distinguish between these classes, as it is not profitable either to pass by anything illustrating principles or affecting progress, or

[p. viii]

to print pages of pure invention, palpable lies, even for the purpose of proving them such. Every work upon the subject, however, receives proper bibliographical notice.

    The materials for Mormon church history are exceptionally full. Early in his career the first president appointed a historiographer, whose office has been continuous ever since. To his people he himself gave their early history, both the inner and intangible and the outer and material portions of it. Then missionaries to different posts were instructed to make a record of all pertinent doings, and lodge the same in the church archives. A sacred obligation seems to have been implied in this respect from the beginning, the Book of Mormon itself being largely descriptive of such migrations and actions as usually constitute the history of a people. And save in the matters of spiritual manifestations, which the merely secular historian cannot follow, and in speaking of their enemies, whose treatment we must admit in too many instances has been severe, the church records are truthful and reliable. In addition to this, concerning the settlement of the country, I have here, as in other sections of my historical field, visited the people in person, and gathered from them no inconsiderable stores of original and interesting information.

    Upon due consideration, and with the problem fairly before me, three methods of treatment presented themselves from which to choose: first, to follow the beaten track of calumny and vituperation, heaping upon the Mormons every species of abuse, from the lofty sarcasm employed by some to the vulgar scurrility applied by others; second, to espouse

[p. ix]

the cause of the Mormons as the weaker party, and defend them from the seeming injustice to which from the first they have been subjected; third, in a spirit of equity to present both sides, leaving the reader to draw his own conclusions. The first course, however popular, would be beyond my power to follow; the second method, likewise, is not to be considered; I therefore adopt the third course, and while giving the new sect a full and respectful hearing, withhold nothing that their most violent opposers have to say against them.

    Anything written at the present day which may properly be called a history of Utah must be largely a history of the Mormons, these being the first white people to settle in the country, and at present largely occupying it. As others with opposing interests and influences appear, they and the great principles thereby brought to an issue receive the most careful consideration. And I have deemed it but fair, in presenting the early history of the church, to give respectful consideration to and a sober recital of Mormon faith and experiences, common and miraculous. The story of Mormonism, therefore, beginning with chapter iii., as told in the text, .is from the Mormon standpoint, and based entirely on Mormon authorities; while in the notes, and running side by side with the subject-matter in the text, I give in full all anti-Mormon arguments and counter-statements, thus enabling the reader to carry along both sides at once, instead of having to consider first all that is to be said on one side, and then all that is to be said on the other.

    In following this plan, I only apply to the history of Utah the same principles employed in all my historical efforts, namely, to give all the facts on every

[p. x]

side pertinent to the subject. In giving the history of the invasion and occupation of the several sections of the Pacific States from Panama to Alaska, I have been obliged to treat of the idiosyncrasies, motives, and actions of Roman catholics, methodists, presbyterians, episcopalians, and members of the Greek church: not of the nature or validity of their respective creeds, but of their doings, praising or blaming as praise or blame were due, judged purely from a standpoint of morals and humanity according to the highest standards of the foremost civilization of the world. It was not necessary--it was wholly outside the province of the historian, and contrary to my method as practised elsewhere--to discuss the truth or falsity of their convictions, any more than when writing the history of Mexico, California, or Oregon to advance my opinions regarding the inspiration of the scriptures, the divinity of Christ, prophecies, miracles, or the immaculate conception. On all these questions, as on the doctrines of the Mormons and of other sects, I have of course my opinions, which it were not only out of place but odious to be constantly thrusting upon the attention of the reader, who is seeking for facts only.

    In one respect only I deem it necessary to go a little further here: inasmuch as doctrines and beliefs enter more influentially than elsewhere into the origin and evolution of this society, I give the history of the rise and progress of those doctrines. Theirs was not an old faith, the tenets of which have been fought for and discussed for centuries, but professedly a new revelation, whose principles are for the most part unknown to the outside world, where their purity is severely questioned. The settlement of this section sprung

[p. xi]

primarily from the evolution of a new religion, with all its attendant trials and persecutions. To give their actions without their motives would leave the work obviously imperfect; to give their motives without the origin and nature of their belief would be impossible.

    In conclusion, I will say that those who desire a knowledge of people and events impartially viewed, a statement of facts fairly and dispassionately presented, I am confident will find them here as elsewhere in my writings.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.

          CHAPTER I.

        

     
      DISCOVERIES OF THE SPANIARDS.

        

     
      1540-1777.

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      Francisco Vazquez de Coronado at Cibola--Expedition of Pedro de Tobar   and Father Juan de Padilla--They Hear of a Large River--Garcia Lopez   de Cardenas Sent in Search of It--The First Europeans to Approach   Utah--Route of Cardenas--Mythical Maps--Part of the Northern   Mystery--Journey of Dominguez and Escalante--The Course They   Followed--The Rivers They Crossed--The Comanches--Region of   the Great Lakes--Rivers Timpanogos, San Buenaventura, and   Others--The Country of the Yutas--Route from Santa Fe to   Monterey--The Friars Talk of the Lake Country--Return of the   Spaniards to Zuni and March to Santa Fe

       <page 1>

     
      
   CHAPTER II.

        

     
      ADVENT OF TRAPPERS AND TRAVELLERS.

        

     
      1778-1846.

        

     
      Invasion by Fur-hunters--Baron la Hontan and his Fables--The   Popular Geographic Idea--Discovery of the Great Salt Lake--James   Bridger Deciding a Bet--He Determines the Course of Bear River, and   Comes upon the Great Lake--Henry, Ashley, Green, and Beckwourth on the   Ground--Fort Built at Utah Lake--Peter Skeen Ogden--Journey of   Jedediah S. Smith--A Strange Country--Pegleg Smith--Wolfskill,   Yount, and Burton Traverse the Country--Walker's Visit to   California--Some Old Maps--The Bartleson Company--Statements   of Bidwell and Belden Compared--Whitman and   Lovejoy--Fremont--Pacific Coast Immigrations of 1845 and   1846--Origin of the Name Utah

       <page 18>

     
      
   CHAPTER III.

        

     
      THE STORY OF MORMONISM.

        

     
      1820-1830.

        

     
      A Glance Eastward--The Middle States Sixty Years Ago--Birth and   Parentage of Joseph Smith--Spiritual Manifestations--Joseph Tells

        

     
      [p. xiv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      his Vision--And is Reviled--Moroni   Appears--Persecutions--Copying the Plates--Martin   Harris--Oliver Cowdery--Translation--The Book of   Mormon--Aarouic Priesthood Conferred--Conversions--The   Whitener Family--The Witnesses--Spaulding Theory--Printing of   the Book--Melchisedec Priesthood Conferred--Duties of Elders and   Others--Church of Latter-day Saints Organized--First   Miracle--First Conference--Oliver Cowdery Ordered to the West

       <page 36>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV.

        

     
      THE STORY OF MORMONISM.

        

     
      1830-1835.

        

     
      Parley Pratt's Conversion--Mission to the Lamanites--The   Missionaries at Kirtland--Conversion of Sidney Rigdon--Mormon   Success at Kirtland--The Missionaries in Missouri--Rigdon Visits   Smith--Edward Partridge--The Melchisedec Priesthood   Given--Smith and Rigdon Journey to Missouri--Bible   Translation--Smith's Second Visit to Missouri--Unexampled   Prosperity--Causes of Persecutions--Mobocracy--The Saints are   Driven from Jackson County--Treachery of Boggs--Military   Organization at Kirtland--The Name Latter-day Saints--March to   Missouri

       <page 71>

     
      
   CHAPTER V.

        

     
      THE STORY OF MORMONISM.

        

     
      1835-1840.

        

     
      President Smith at Kirtland--First Quorum of Twelve   Apostles--The Kirtland Temple Completed--Kirtland Safety Society   Bank--In Zion Again--The Saints in   Missouri--Apostasy--Zeal and Indiscretion--Military Organization--The   War Opens--Depredations on Both Sides--Movements of Atchison,   Parks, and Doniphan--Attitude of Boggs--Wight and   Gilliam--Death of Patten--Danite Organization--Order   Lodge--Haun Mill Tragedy--Mobs and Militia--The Tables   Turned--Boggs' Exterminating Order--Lucas and Clark at Far   West--Surrender of the Mormons--Prisoners--Petitions and   Memorials--Expulsion--Gathering at Quincy--Opinions

       <page 111>

     
      
   CHAPTER VI.

        

     
      THE STORY OF MORMONISM.

        

     
      1840-1844.

        

     
      The City of Nauvoo--Its Temple and University--The Nauvoo   Legion--The Mormons in Illinois--Evil Reports--Revelation on   Polygamy--Its Reception and Practice--The Prophet a Candidate for   the Presidency--The Nauvoo Expositor--Joseph   Arrested--Governor Ford and his Measures--Joseph and Hyrum Proceed   to Carthage--Their Imprisonment--The Governor's   Pledge--Assassination of the Prophet

        

     
      [p. xv]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      and his Brother--Character of Joseph Smith--A Panic at   Carthage--Addresses of Richards and Taylor--Peaceful Attitude of   the Mormons

       <page 143>

     
      
   CHAPTER VII.

        

     
      BRIGHAM YOUNG SUCCEEDS JOSEPH.

        

     
      1844-1845.

        

     
      The Question of Succession--Biography of Brigham Young--His   Early Life--Conversion--Missionary Work--Made President of the   Twelve--His Devotion to the Prophet--Sidney Rigdon and Brigham   Young Rival Aspirants for the Presidency--Rigdon's Claims--Public   Meetings--Brigham Elected President of the Church--His   Character--Temple-building--Fresh Disasters--The Affair at   Morley--The Men of Quincy and the Men of Carthage--The Mormons   Consent to Abandon their City

       <page 193>

     
      
   CHAPTER VIII.

        

     
      EXPULSION FROM NAUVOO.

        

     
      1845-1846.

        

     
      A Busy City--Meeting in the Temple--Sacrifice of   Property--Detachments Move Forward--A Singular Exodus--The   First Encampment--Cool Proposal from Brother Brannan--The   Journey--Courage and Good Cheer--Swelling of their Numbers--The   Remnant of the Saints in Nauvoo--Attitude of the Gentiles--The   Mormons Attacked--Continued Hostilities--The Final   Departures--The Poor Camp--A Deserted City

       <page 214>

     
      
   CHAPTER IX.

        

     
      AT THE MISSOURI.

        

     
      1846-1847.

        

     
      Native Races of the Missouri--The Pottawattamies and the   Omahas--The Mormons Welcomed as Brethren--War with   Mexico--California Territory--Mexican Boundaries--Application   to the United States Government for Aid--An Offer to Serve as Soldiers   Accepted--Organization of the Mormon Battalion--Departure of the   Battalion--Bounty Money--March across the Continent--The   Battalion in California--Matters on the Missouri

       <page 236>

     
      
   CHAPTER X.

        

     
      MIGRATION TO UTAH.

        

     
      1547.

        

     
      Camp Near the Missouri--Preparations at Winter   Quarters--Departure of the Pioneer Band--Elkhorn   Rendezvous--Route and Routine--Incidents of Journey--Approach   to Zion--In the Cation--Hosannal

        

     
      [p. xvi]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      [paragraph continues] Hallelujah!--Entry into the Valley of the Great Salt Lake--Ploughing   and Planting--Raying and Praising--Site for a City Chosen Temple   Block Selected--Return of Companies to Winter Quarters--Their   Meeting with the Westward-bound--General Epistle of the Twelve

       <page 252>

     
      
   CHAPTER XI.

        

     
      IN THE VALLEY OF THE GREAT SALT   LAKE.

        

     
      1848.

        

     
      Food and Raiment--Houses--Home Manufactures--The   Fort--Wild Beasts--Cannon from Sutter's Fort--Indian Children   for Sale--Measles--Population--Mills and Farming   Machinery--The Plague of Crickets--They are Destroyed by   Gulls--Scarcity of Provisions--The Harvest   Feast--Immigration--Five Thousand Saints Gathered in the   Valley--Fencing and Farming--Distribution of   Lots--Organization of County Government--Association for the   Extermination of Wild Beasts

       <page 275>

     
      
   CHAPTER XII.

        

     
      IN THE VALLEY OF THE GREAT SALT   LAKE.

        

     
      1849.

        

     
      Food Supply and Shelter--Building Lots--Currency   Issue--Bank Notes and Coinage--Private and Public   Buildings--Wide Area of the City--Second Anniversary of the   Pioneers--Festivals and Amusements--Labor a Duty among the   Saints--Effect of the California Gold   Discovery--Immigration--Carrying Company--California-bound   Emigrants--Their Traffic with the Mormons--Products and   Prices--Gold-hunting Frowned upon by the Church

       <page 288>

     
      
   CHAPTER XIII.

        

     
      SETTLEMENT AND OCCUPATION OF THE   COUNTRY.

        

     
      1847-1852.

        

     
      Founding of   Centreville--Bountiful--Ogden--Lynne--Easton--Marriotsville--San   Pete--Provo--Indian War--Walled   Cities--Evansville--Lehi--Battle Creek--Pleasant   Grove--American Fork--Payson--Nephi--Manti--Chief   Walker--Fillmore--Site Chosen for the   Capital--Tooele--Grantsville--Kaysville--Little Salt   Lake--Parowan--Cedar City--Paragoonah--Forts Walker and   Harmony--Box Elder Creek--Brigham City--Willard City--San   Bernardino in California.

       <page 305>

     
      
   CHAPTER XIV.

        

     
      EDUCATION, MANUFACTURES, COMMERCE,   AGRICULTURE, SOCIETY.

        

     
      1850-1852.

        

     
      Boundaries and Extent of Utah--Configuration and Physical Features of   the Country--Its Lands and Waters--Flora and Fauna--State   University--

        

     
      [p. xvii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      [paragraph continues] Curriculum--Educational   Ideas--Library--Periodicals--Tabernacle and Temple--New   Fort--Progress of the Useful Arts--Mills, Factories, and   Manufactures--Farm Products--Traffic--Population--Revenue--Mortality--Healthful   Airs and Medicinal Springs.

       <page 321>

     
      
   CHAPTER XV.

        

     
      MORMONISM AND POLYGAMY.

        

     
      What is Mormonism?--Tenets of the Church--Sacred Books and   Personages--Organization--Priesthood--First   Presidency--The Twelve Apostles--Patriarchs--Elders, Bishops,   Priests, Teachers, and Deacons--The Seventies--Stakes and   Wards--Marriage--Temple-building--Tabernacle--Political   Aspect--Polygamy as a Church Tenet--Celestial   Marriage--Attitude and Arguments of Civilization--Polygamy's   Reply--Ethics and Law--The Charge of Disloyalty--Proposed   Remedies

       <page 333>

     
      
   CHAPTER XVI.

        

     
      MISSIONS AND IMMIGRATION.

        

     
      1830-1883.

        

     
      Mormon Missionaries--Parley Pratt and his Colleagues--Missionary   Labor in Canada--In Great Britain--Missionaries in Europe--And   in Other Parts of the World--The Perpetual Emigration Fund--A General   Epistle of the Twelve--From Liverpool to Salt Lake City for Fifty   Dollars--Emigrant Ships--Report of a Liverpool Manager--The   Passage to New Orleans--Overland Travel--Classes of   Emigrants--George A. Smith's Companies at South Pass--The Handcart   Emigration--Biographical

       <page 397>

     
      
   CHAPTER XVII.

        

     
      UTAH AS A TERRITORY.

        

     
      1849-1858.

        

     
      Need of Civil Government--The State of Deseret   Organized--Memorials for Admission into the Union--Proposed   Consolidation with California--Administration of Justice--Proceedings   of the Legislature--Babbit's Reception at Washington--The State of   Deseret before Congress--Act to Establish a Territorial   Government--Appointment of Officials--Ill Feeling between Them and   the Mormons--The Officials Depart for Washington--Measures of the   Legislative Assembly--Stansbury's Survey--The Gunnison   Massacre--Indian Outbreaks--The Walker War--Mexican   Slave-traders

       <page 439>

     
      
   CHAPTER XVIII.

        

     
      THE GOVERNMENT IN ARMS.

        

     
      1853-1857.

        

     
      Brigham as Dictator--Utah Seeks Admission as a State--Dissatisfaction   among the Saints--Conflicting Judiciaries--The New Federal   Officials--

        

     
      [p. xviii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      [paragraph continues] Disputes with Judge Drummond--Colonel Steptoe--An   Expedition Ordered to Utah--Official Blunders--The Troops Assemble at   Fort Leavenworth--Hockaday and Magraw's Mail Contract--The Brigham   Young Express--Celebration of the Pioneer Anniversary--News of the   Coming Invasion--Its Effect on the Mormons--Arrival of Major Van   Vliet--The Nauvoo Legion--Mormon Tactics

       <page 481>

     
      
   CHAPTER XIX.

        

     
      TIIE UTAH WAR.

        

     
      1857-1858.

        

     
      Opening of the Campaign--Burning of Supply Trains--Strategic   Movement of Colonel Alexander--His Retreat--Arrival of Albert   Sidney Johnston--The March to Fort Bridger--Winter at Camp   Scott--Mission of Colonel Kane--Governor Cumming at Salt Lake   City--Pardon Proclaimed--The Peace Commissioners--The Army of   Utah Advances on Lion--The City Deserted--The Mormons Return to   Their Homes--The Troops Cantoned at Camp Floyd--Conduct of the   Soldiery and Camp Followers--Judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh--The   Reformation in Utah

       <page 512>

     
      
   CHAPTER XX.

        

     
      THE MOUNTAIN MEADOWS MASSACRE.

        

     
      1857.

        

     
      An Arkansas Emigrant Party Arrives at Salt Lake City--Assassination   of Parley P. Pratt--Ill Feeling against the Emigrants--Alleged   Outrages--Their Arrival at Mountain Meadows--They are Attacked by   Indians--A Flag of Truce--Plan of the Massacre--Surrender of   the Emigrants--The Butchery--Burial of the Slain--The   Survivors--Judge Cradlebaugh's Investigation--The Aiken   Massacre--John D. Lee on Trial--The Jury Disagree--The Second   Trial--Lee Convicted, and Sentenced--His Confession and Execution

       <page 543>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXI.

        

     
      POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND   INSTITUTIONAL.

        

     
      1859-1862.

        

     
      Brigham Threatened with Arrest--The Federal Judges   Reproved--Departure of Governor Cumming--And of the Army of   Utah--Population of the   Territory--Mortality--Wealth--Industries--PricesWages--Trade--Salt   Lake City in 1860--The Temple Block--Social   Gatherings--Theatricals--Scientific and Other   Institutions--Char.acter of the Population--Carson Valley--San   Bernardino--Summit County and Its Settlements--Purchase of Fort   Bridger--Wasatch County--Morgan County--Cache Valley--Settlements   in Southern Utah

       <page 572>

     
      [p. xix]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      CHAPTER XXII.

        

     
      PROGRESS OF EVENTS,

        

     
      1861-1869.

        

     
      Governor Dawson's Gallantry--Utah Refused Admission as a   State--Passage of a Bill against Polygamy--Measures of the   Legislature--Arrival of Governor Harding--Disputes between Brigham and   the Federal Officials--Arrival of the California Volunteers--A   False Alarm--The Morrisite Troubles--Governors Doty and   Durkee--The Limits of Utah Curtailed--Celebration of Lincoln's   Second Inauguration--The Brassfield and Robinson Murders--Indian   Outbreaks--The Battle of Bear River--Disturbances in Southern   Utah--Treaties with Indian Tribes--The Uintah Valley   Reservation--Bibliographical

       <page 604>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXIII

        

     
      SCHISMS AND APOSTASIES.

        

     
      1844-1869.

        

     
      The Strangites--The Gatherers--Brannan's Followers--The   Gladdenites--The Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints--Alexander   and David Hyrum Smith--The Utah Magazine--Trial of Godbe and   Harrison--Success of the Godbeite Movement--The Struggle for Commercial   Control--Persecution of Gentile Merchants--Zion's Cooperative   Mercantile Institution--Extent of its Operations--Disastrous Effect   on Gentile Trade--Reaction in Favor of the Reformers

       <page 641>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXIV.

        

     
      THE LAST DAYS OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.

        

     
      1869-1877.

        

     
      Visit of Schuyler Colfax--Godbe's Interview with President   Grant--Governor Shaffer--Military Riot at Provo--Governor   Woods--Judge McKean--Burlesque of Justice--Arrest of Brigham   Young and Others--George Q. Cannon Chosen Delegate--Axtell's   Administration--Governor Emery--Death of Brigham--His   Obsequies--His Character--His Will

       <page 656>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXV.

        

     
      CHURCH AND STATE.

        

     
      1877-1885.

        

     
      Conference of the Church--Reorganization of the First   Presidency--John Taylor Appointed President--His Appearance and   Mien--The Edmunds Bill--Its Penalties--An Ex Post Facto   Law--Polygamists Disfranchised--Utah again Refused Admission as a   State--Operations of the Utah Commission--Governor Murray's   Message--His Administration

       <page 677>

     
      [p. xx]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVI.

        

     
      SETTLEMENT, SOCIETY, AND EDUCATION.

        

     
      1862-1886.

        

     
      Population and Statistics--Salt Lake City--The Temple--The   New Tabernacle--The Museum--Condition of the   Inhabitants--Distinctive Features--Salt Lake County--Davis   County--Ogden--Cache County--Rich County--Summit   County--Brigham City--Nephi--Provo--Uintah, Emery, San   Juan, Garfield, and Piute Counties--Sanpete and Sevier   Counties--Iron, Kane, and Washington Counties--Schools--The   University of Deseret--The Deseret   Alphabet--Libraries--Journals and Journalism

       <page 691>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVII.

        

     
      AGRICULTURE, STOCK-RAISING,   MANUFACTURES, AND MINING.

        

     
      1852-1886.

        

     
      Agricultural Products and Yield per Acre--Irrigation--Character   of the Soil--Fruit   Culture--Viticulture--Sericulture--Timber and   Timberlands--Bunch-grass--Cattle-raising--Dairy   Products--Horses--Sheep--Woollen   Manufactures--Leather--Other   Manufactures--Iron-mining--Coal-mining--Copper--Sulphur--Gypsum   and Mica--Other Minerals--Building Stone--Gold and   Silver--The West Mountain District--The Rush Valley District--The   Cottonwood District--The American Fork District--The Tintic   District--The Ontario Mine--Other Mining Districts--Mining   Products--Milling, Smelting, and Reduction-works

       <page 720>

     
      
   CHAPTER XXVIII.

        

     
      COMMERCE AND COMMUNICATION.

        

     
      1852-1885.

        

     
      Common Roadways--Railroads--The Union and Central   Pacific--The Utah Central--The Utah Southern--The Utah and   Northern--The Utah Eastern--The Salt Lake and Western--The   Utah and Nevada--The Denver and Rio Grande Western--Imports and   Exports--Commerce and Trade--Banking--Insurance--Taxation   and Revenue--Mails and Mail Services--The First Telegraphic   Message--The Deseret Telegraph Company

       <page 751>

     
      
   INDEX

       <page 785>

     
    

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxi]

 

  

Authorities Consulted
 in the
 History of Utah

Adams (G. J.), A Few Plain Facts, etc. Bedford (Eng.), 1841; Letter to President John Tyler. New York, 1844.

Address by a Minister of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the People of the United States. Printed while the Mormons were at Nauvoo. Philadelphia, n.d.

A Friendly Warning to the Latter-day Saints. London, 1860.

Albany (Or.), Journal.

Aldrich (Hazen), The Olive Branch, monthly. Kirtland (O.), 1851-2.

Alegre, Hist. Comp. Jesus, i. 233-8.

Alexander (W. C.), Princ. Mag., xxiv. 687.

Alta (Utah), Times.

Amberley, in Fortnightly Rev., xii. 511.

American Almanac. Boston and New York, 1830 et seq.

American Geog. and Statis. Soc. Mag. New York, 1850 et seq.

American Quarterly Register and Magazine. Philadelphia, 1848 et seq.

American Whig Review. New York, 1845-51. 13 vols.

Among the Mormons, in All the Year Round. x. 1863.

Among the Mormons, in Gent. Mag., new ser., vii.

Ampere (J. J.), Promenade en Amerique, etc. Paris, 1855. 2 vols. Paris, 1860. 2 vols.

Ancient American Records. n.d.

Ancient and Modern Michilimackinac. (History of James J. Strang's Movement.) n.d.

Anderson (R. R.), Salt Lake City Street-Railroad, MS. Andouard, Far West.

Andree (Karl), Die Mormonen und ihr Land. Dresden, 1859.

An Exposure of Mormonism. Dunstable (Eng.), n.d.

Anti-Mormon Almanac. New York, 1842.

Antioch (Cal.), Ledger.

A Plan to Solve the Utah Problem. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Apples of Sodom. Cleveland (O.), 1883.

Appleton (D. & Co.), Amer. Cycloped., N.Y., 1873, 1875; Journal, N.Y.

Appleton's Illustrated Hand-book of Amer. Travel. New York, 1856 et seq.

Arch. Cal., Prov. Rec. MS., i. 47-8, vi. 59.

Archives du Christianisme (1852-3).

Ashland (Or.), Tidings.

Astoria (Or.), Astorian.

Athrawiaeth a Chyfammodau (Wales). n.d.

Atlantic Monthly. Boston, 1858 et seq.

[p. xxii]

Austin (Nev.), Reese River Reveille.

Authentic History of Remarkable Persons, etc. New York, 1849.

A Visit to the Mormons, in Westin. Rev., lxxvi. 1861.

A Voice from the Mountains. Salt Lake City, 1881.

 

Balch (W. R.), Mines of the U.S. Philadelphia, 1882.

Ballantyne (Richard), Proclamation of the Gospel. Madras (Hind.), 1853; Only Way to be Saved. Madras (Hind.), 1853; Replies to Rev. J. Richards. Madras (Hind.), 1853; Millennial Star. Madras (Hind.), 1854.

Bancroft (H. H.), History of California; History of Nevada; History of New Mex.; History of North Mex. States; History of Northwest Coast; Native Races, etc.

Barber (F. C.), in De Bow, Comml. Rev., xvi. 368.

Barber (J. W.), History of the Western States, etc. Cincinnati, 1867.

Barclay (Jas W.), Mormonism Exposed. London, 1884.

Barfoot (J. L.), Brief History of the Deseret Museum. MS.; Hand-book Guide to the Salt Lake Museum. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Barneby (W. H.), Life and Labor in the Far, Far West. London, Paris, and New York, 1884.

Barnes (D.), From the Atlantic to the Pacific, Overland. New York, 1866.

Barr, Treatise on the Atonement, etc.

Bates (Geo. C.), Argument on Jurisdiction of Probate Courts, etc. Salt Lake City, n.d.

Battle of Bear River, 1863.

Bays (Joseph), The Blood of Christ. Chatteris (Eng.), 1849.

Beadle (J. H.), Bill Hickman, Brigham's Destroying Angel. New York, 1872; Life in Utah. Philadelphia, 1870; Undevel. West. Philadelphia, 1873; Western Wilds. Cincinnati, 1879; in Harper's Mag., liii. 641; Pop. Sci. Monthly, ix. 479; Scribner's Monthly, xiv. 397.

Beatie (A. S.), The First in Nevada. MS.

Beaumont, Hist. Mich. MS., 407-22, etc.

Beaver City (Utah) Chronicle; Enterprise.

Beckwith (E. G.), Report on Route, etc. Washington, 1855; Washington, 1856.

Belden (J.), Statement. MS.

Bell (J. F.), Reply to John Theobald. Liverpool, n.d.

Belmont (Nev.), Courier.

Bennett (J. C.), History of the Saints, or Mormonism Exposed. Boston, 1842.

Benton (Thos H.), Speech in U. S. Senate, 1861.

Benzoni, Hist. Mundo Nuevo, 107.

Bernal Diaz, Hist. Verdad., 235.

Bertrand (L. A.), Autorite Divine, ou Reponse, etc. Paris, 1853; Memoires d'un Mormon. Paris, 1862.

Bidwell, Cal., 184-8. MS.

Bigamy and Polygamy, Review of the Opinion of the Supreme Court of the U.S., Oct. 1878.

Bigler (Henry W.), Diary of a Mormon. MS., passim.

Bill to Establish a Territorial Government for Utah. Liverpool, 1852.

Bingham (Utah), Pioneer.

Bird (Isabella L.), Lady's Life in the Rocky Mountains. New York, 1881.

Bishop (Gladden), Address to the Sons and Daughters of Zion, etc. Kirtland, (O.), 1851.

Black (Judge), Argument on Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Bliss (C. H.), Is Baptism Essential ? Baptism for the Remission of Sins. Salt Lake City, n.d.

Blodget (L.), Meteorological Report. Washington, 1855.

Boadicea, The Mormon Wife. New York, etc., 1855.

Boise (Idaho), News; Statesman.

Boller (H. A.), Among the Indians. Philadelphia, 1868.

[p. xxiii]

Bonanza City (Idaho), Yankee Fork Herald.

Bonner (T. D.), Life and Advent. of James P. Beckwourth, 71-3.

Benwick (J.), The Mormons and the Silver Mines. London, 1872.

Book of Commandments. Independence, Missouri, 1833.

Book of Mormon. Kirtland, 1837; Liverpool, 1841, 1852, 1854, 1883; New York, n.d. Salt Lake City (First Utah ed.), 1871; Salt Lake City, 1879, and many others.

Book of Mormon Examined, etc. (Anon.) n.d.

Book of Mormon; Littell's Museum of For. Lit., xlii.

Boston Christ. Exam., 5th ser. ii., 1858. Boston Journal.

Bowes (John), in Christian Magazine, nos. 13-18; Mormonism. London, Manchester, Glasgow, and Edinburgh, 1848; Mormonism Exposed, 1851.

Bowles (S.), Across the Continent. Springfield (Mass.), 1866; Our New West. Hartford, 1869.

Bowne, Jr. (A. G.), in Atlantic Monthly, iii., 361, 474, 570.

Boyer (Lanson), From Orient to Occident. New York, 1878.

Brackett (A. G.), History of the U.S. Cavalry. New York, 1865.

Bradford (W. J. A.), Origin and Fate of Mormonism, in Christ. Exam., liii. 201.

Brewster (James C.), Address to the Church of Latter-day Saints. Springfield (Ill.), 1848; Very Important to the Mormon Money-diggers. Springfield (Ill.), 1843.

Briggs (E. C.), and Artwood (R. M.), Address to the Saints in Utah and California. Plano (Ill.), 1869.

Brigham (C. H.), in No. Amer. Rev., xcv. 189; Old and New, i. 628, ii. 320.

Brigham (Wm J.), The Church of Latter-day Saints, in Old and New. Sept. and Oct. 1870.

Brigham Young Academy--Circulars.

Brigham Young and his Women, in Galaxy, Dec. 1866.

Brigham Young's Will.

Brighamism; Its Promises and Failure. Plano (Ill.)

British and American Commercial Joint-stock Company, Deed of Settlement. Liverpool, 1846.

Brit. Quat. Rev., xxxv. 175.

Bromfield (Edward T.), Picturesque Journeys, etc. New York, 1883.

Brother Bertrand's Conversion, in All the Year Round, ix. 68.

Brotherton (Edward), Mormonism, etc. Manchester (Eng.), n.d.

Brown (Albert G. ), The Utah Expedition, in Atlantic Monthly, March, April, and May, 1859.

Brown (Benjamin), Testimonies for the Truth, etc. Liverpool, 1853.

Brown (Joseph E.), Speech in U. S. Senate. Washington, 1884.

Brown (Mrs M.), Letter. MS.

Brown's Statement. MS.

Brown (Thos D.), Utah! Its Silver Mines, etc.

Browne (Charles F.), Artemus Ward's Lecture. London, 1882.

Browne (J. R.), Report upon the Mineral Resources of the States and Territories west of the Rocky Mountains. Washington, 1867, 1868. San Francisco, 1868; Resources of the Pacific Slope. San Francisco, 1869.

Budge (Wm), Views of the Latter-day Saints on Marriage. Liverpool, 1879; The Gospel Message. Liverpool, 1879; The Only True Gospel. Liverpool, 1878.

Bulfinch (S. G.), The Mormons, in Christ. Exam., lxiv. 421.

Burchard (H. C.), Director, Report upon the Statistics of the Production of the Precious Metals in the U.S. Washington, 1881.

Burgess (J. M.), The Book of Mormon. Liverpool, 1850.

Burnett (Peter H.), Recollections, etc., of an Old Pioneer. New York, 1880.

Burton (R. F.), The City of the Saints. London, 1861. New York, 1862.

Burton's City of the Saints, Review of, Edinb. Rev., cxv. 185; Littell's Liv. Age, lxxi. 630.

[p. xxiv]

Busch (M.), Die Mormonen. Leipzig, 1855; Geschichte der Mormonen, Liepzig, 1870.

Bush (C. S.), Plain Facts. Macclesfield (Eng.), 1840.

Byers (W. N.), The Mormons at the Missouri. MS.

 

California: Its Past History, etc. London, 1850.

California Journals of Assembly and Senate, 1850-1881.

Californian. San Francisco, 1880 et seq.

Call (Anson), and Others, Fragments of Experience. Salt Lake City.

Call to the Unconverted, etc. Liverpool, n.d.

Camp (D. W.), The American Year-Book, 1869 et seq. Hartford.

Campbell (A.), Analysis of the Book of Mormon. Boston, 1832; Mormonism Weighed in the Balances. London, Edinburgh, and Nottingham, n.d. The Millennial Harbinger. Bethany, Va.

Campbell (A.), and Hines (J. V.), Delusions, and Mormon Monstrosities. Boston, 1842.

Campbell (J. H.), My Circular Notes. London, 1876.

Campbell (J. L.), Idaho; Six Mouths in the New Gold-diggings. Chicago, 1864.

Campbell (Robt), in Pac. R. Rept, xi. 35.

Cannon (Geo. Q.), Speeches in the U.S. House of Rep. for his admission to a seat. Salt Lake City, 1882; The Western Standard. San Francisco, Cal., 1856 et seq; Sunday Schools in Utah. MS.; Juvenile Instructor, Ills. Salt Lake City, 1866 et seq.; Review of Decision of U.S. Supreme Court in the case of Geo. Reynolds. Salt Lake City, 1879; Speech in U.S. House of Rep. Washington, 1882; Utah and its People in No. Amer. Rev., cxxxii. 451; George Q. Pukuniahi He Olelo Hoolaha, etc.San Francisco, 1855; My First Mission. Salt Lake City, 1879; The Life of Nephi. Salt Lake City, 1883; Writings from the Western Standard. Liverpool, 1864.

Carson (Nev.), Appeal; State Register.

Carvalho (S. N.), Incidents of Travel and Adventure in the Far West. New York, 1858.

Carver (J.), Travels through the interior parts of North America. London, 1778.

Caswall (Henry), The City of the Mormons, etc. London, 1843; The Prophet of the 19th Century, etc. London, 1843; Joseph Smith and the Mormons, etc. London, 1851; Mormonism and its Author, etc. London, 1852.

Catechism Cards. Salt Lake City.

Cavo, Tres Siglos, i. 127-9.

Chalmers, Jr (E. B.), Mormonism a Delusion. London, 1852.

Chambers, History of the Mormons. Edinburgh and London, n.d.; History and Ideas of the Mormons, in Westm. Rev., Jan. 1853; Religious Im- postors. Edinburgh, n.d.

Champagnac (J. B. L. ), Le Jeune Voyageur en Californie. Paris, n.d.

Chandless (W.), A Visit to Salt Lake. London, 1857.

Cherry Creek (Nev.), White Pine News.

Chicago (Ill.), Inter-Ocean; Journal.

Christ or Barabbas? Weston--super mare. London and Bristol, n.d.

Cincinnati (O.), Commercial Advertiser; Gazette; Inquirer.

Circular of the First Presidency. Salt Lake City, July 11, 1877.

Circular from the Twelve Apostles. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Clagett (Wm H.), Speech in House of Rep., Jan. 28, 29, 1873. Washington, 1873.

Clark (John A.), Gleanings by the Way. New York and Philadelphia, 1842.

Clarke (F. W.), The Mormon Widow's Lament, in Galaxy, May 1871.

Clarke (Mrs H. T.), The Emigrant Trail. MS.

Clarke, The Mormons in a Fix. London, n.d, Clarke (R.), Mormonism Unmasked. n.d.

[p. xxv]

Clavigero, Storia Cal., 153.

Clay (Edmund), Tracts on Mormonism. London, Leamington, and Liver- pool, 1851, 1852.

Clayton (W.), Journal. MS.

Clemens (S. L.), (Mark Twain), Roughing It. Hartford, etc., 1874.

Coast Review. San Francisco, 1871-80. 15 vols.

Cobb (J. J.), The Mormon Problem. MS.

Codman (J.), in Intern. Rev., xi. 1881; The Round Trip. New York, 1879; Through Utah, in The Galaxy, xx. 1875, in Intl. Rev., ii. 227; The Mormon Country. New York, 1874.

Coffin (C. C.), Our New Way round the World. Boston, 1869.

Colburn's United Service Mag., etc. London, 1829 et seq.

Cole (Wm L.), California, etc. New York, 1871.

Colfax (Schuyler), Speech at Salt Lake City, Oct. 5, 1869; Letter in New York Independent, Dec. 2, 1869.

Col. Doc., xiv. 321-3.

Comettant (O.), Les Civilisations Inconnues. Paris, 1863.

Como (Nev.), Lyon County Sentinel.

Concordance and Reference Guide to the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. Plano (Ill.), 1870.

Congressional Globe. Washington, 1836 et seq.

Constitution of State of Deseret, and Memorial to Congress. S. L City, 1872.

Constitution of the State of Utah. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Contested Election. Maxwell vs Cannon. Argument. n.d.

Contributor. Salt Lake City, 1879 et seq.

Convbeare (J. W.), Mormonism. London, 1854.

Conyer (Josiah B.), The Leading Causes of the Hancock Mob, etc. Quincy (Ill.), 1846.

Cook (Joseph), Speeches, etc. n.d.

Cooke (Mrs S. A.), Theatrical and Social Affairs in Utah. MS.

Cooper (A. R.), Polygamy and Prostitution. MS.

Copenhagen Skandinavisk Stjerne. Ungdommens Raadgiver.n.d.

Copperopolis (Cal.), Courier.

Corinne (Utah), Enterprise; Reporter.

Cornabv (H.) Autobiography and Poems. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Correspondence between Joseph Smith and Col John Wentworth, Gen. Jas A. Bennett, and Hon. John C. Calhoun. New York, 1844.

Correspondence, Orders, etc., in Relation to the Disturbances with the Mormons. Fayette (Mo.), 1841.

Corrill (John), Brief History of the Church, etc. St. Louis, 1839.

Cortez (J.), Report on Indian Tribes. Washington, 1856.

Country Clergyman's Warning to his Parishioners. London, n.d.

Coyner (J. M.), Letters to Best. Educ. Jour. Salt Lake City, 1878-9; Hand-book of Mormonism. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Cradlebaugh (John), Mormonism. S. L. City, 1877; Nevada Biography. MS.; Speech in House of Rep., Feb. 7, 1863. Washington, 1863.

Cragin (Aaron H.), Speech in U. S. Senate, May 18, 1870, on Execution of Laws in Utah. Washington, 1870.

Cram (Capt. T. J.), Topog. Memoir on the Department of the Pacific. Washington, 1859; 35th cong. 2d sess., H. Ex. Dec. 114.

Crawford (P. W.), Narrative. MS.; Overland to Oregon. 2 vols. MS.

Crimes of Latter-day Saints. San Francisco, 1884.

Crocheron (A. J.), Representative Women of Deseret. Salt Lake City, 1884; Wild Flowers of Deseret. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Crofutt (G. A.), New Overland Tourist. Chicago, 1879.

Crouise (T. F.), Nat. Wealth of Cal. San Francisco, 1868.

Culmer (H. L. A.). Tourists' Guide-book to Salt Lake City. Salt Lake City, 1879; Utah Directory and Gazetteer. Salt Lake City, 1879.

Curtis (W. E.), in Amer. Christ. Rev., viii. 367.

 

[p. xxvi]

Dall (Caroline H.), My First Holiday. Boston, 1881.

Dallas (Tex.), Herald.

Dalles (Or.), Mountaineer.

Dalton (Mrs L. L.), Autobiography. MS.

Damon (S. C.), The Friend. Honolulu, 1843-7.

Dana (C. W.), The Great West. Boston, 1861.

Daniels (Wm N.), A Correct Account of the Murder of Generals Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Nauvoo, 1844.

Das Buch Mormon. n.d.

Davies (John), Yr hyn sydd o ran, etc.; Epistol Cyffredinol Cyntaf; Traethawd ar Wyrthiau; Etto Adolygiad, etc.; Chwech Rhifyn; Pregethu i'r Ysbrydion yn Ngharchar, etc.; Ewch a Dysgwch; Darlithiau ar Ffydd; Y Doniau Ysbrydol yn Mrawdlys y Gelyn; Tracthawd ar Fedydd; Corff Crist; neu yr Eglwys; Ffordd y Bywyd Tragywyddol; Yr Achos Mawr Cyntaf, gan O. Pratt; Profivch Bob Peth, etc.; Athraniaeth Iachus; Ymddyddanion yn Gymraeg a Saesonaeg; Llythyron Capt. Jones o Ddyffryn y li. H. Mawr, yn desgrifio arderchawgrwydd Seion: no dates (pub. in Wales).

Davis (E. J.), Manufacture and Sale of Intoxicating Liquors. MS. Davis (Geo. T. M.), Massacre of Joseph Smith, etc. St Louis, 1844.

Davis (John E.), Mormonism Unveiled. Bristol (Eng.), 1856, second edition.

Dawson's Hist. Mag., new series, vi. 1869.

Dayton (Nev.), Lyon County Sentinel.

De Bow (J. D. B.), De Bow's Review and Industrial Resources. New Orleans, etc., 1854-7. 7 vols.

Declarations of Principles of Utah Territorial Convention, People's Party. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Deck (J. G.), The Mormons, etc. Bombay, 1853.

Deer Lodge (Mont.), New Northwest.

Defence of the Constitutional and Religious Rights of the People of Utah, 1882.

De Groot (Henry), Report on Mineral Deposits, etc. San Francisco, 1871; Sketches of Washoe Silver Mines. San Francisco, 1860.

Delano (A.), the Plains. New York, 1861.

Democrat, Bear River, 1880 et seq.

Democratic Review.

Demoralizing Doctrines and Disloyal Teachings of the Mormon Hierarchy. New York, 1866.

Denver (Col.), News.

Derby (E. H.), The Over land Route to the Pacific. Boston, 1869.

Der Mormonismus. Bern (Switz.), 1872.

De Rupert (A. E. D.), Californians and Mormons. New York, 1881.

Description of Huntsville, Weber Co., Utah. MS.

Deseret Agric. and Manufac. Soc. Reports. Salt Lake City, 1867 et seq.; List of Premiums. Salt Lake City, 1878.

Deseret Alphabet: The following works printed in--Deseret First Book, by the Regents of the Deseret University, 1868; Book of Mormon, part i. New York, 1869; Book of Mormon. New York, 1869.

Deseret and Nauvoo, Natl. Mag., iv. 481, v. 343.

Deseret Home, A Monthly Journal. Salt Lake City, Jan. 1882 et seq.

Deseret News. Salt Lake City, 1850 et seq.; Extra, Sept. 14, 1852.

Deseret Sunday-school: Catechism, no. i., Joseph the Prophet. Salt Lake City, 1882; Reader, First and Second Books. Salt Lake City, 1880, 1881, and 1883; Union Music Book. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Deseret Telegraph Company. Memoranda. MS.

De Smet (P. J.), Western Missions and Missionaries New York, 1868.

D'Haussonville, One Day in Utah. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Dialogues: Between Joseph Smith and the Devil. Salt Lake City and New York, 1844; between Tradition, Reason, and Scriptus. n.d. (Liverpool).

[p. xxvii]

Diamond (Utah), Rocky Mountain Husbandman.

Diario, in Doc. Hist. Mex., ser. ii. tom. i. 378, 392.

Dickeson (M. W.), The American Numismatic Manual. Philadelphia, 1860.

Dickinson (E. E.), in Scribner's Monthly, xx. 613.

Diehl (C.), History of the Masonic Fraternity in Utah. MS.

Dilke (C. W.), Greater Britain. Philadelphia, 1869. 2 vols. Directories: Utah, Pacific Coast, San Francisco, Nevada.

Discourses delivered by Joseph Smith (30th June, 1843) and Brigham Young (18th February, 1855) on the Relation of the Mormons to the Government of the U.S. Salt Lake City.

Dixon, in All the Year Round. No. 17,252.

Dixon (W. H.), New America. London and New York, 1867; White Conquest. London, 1876. 2 vols.

Doctrine and Covenants, etc. Nauvoo, 1846; Liverpool, 1854; Liverpool, n.d.; Liverpool, 1882; Salt Lake City, 1876.

Doctrines of Mormonism. London, n.d.

Documentos Historicos Mexicanos, three set. Mexico, 1853, 1854, 1856.

Documentos Historicos Mexicanos. MS.

Domenech (Abbe Em.), Seven Years' Residence in the Great Deserts of North America. London, 1860.

Dooly (J. E.), History of the Express and Banking Business in Utah. MS.

D'Orbigny (A.), Voyage dans les deux Ameriques. Paris, 1859.

Douglas' Private Papers. MS. 2d ser., i.

Drummond (P.), Mormonism an Imposture. n.d.; The Mormons' Only Way to be Saved not the Way to be Saved. Stirling (Scot.), 1854.

Duffus-Hardy (Lady), Through Cities and Prairie Lands. London, 1881.

Dunbar (E. E.), The Romance of the Age. New York, 1867.

Dunn (B. S.), How to Solve the Mormon Problem. New York, 1877.

Dutton (J. R.), in Gent. Meg., new ser., vii. 675.

 

Early Scenes in Church History. Salt Lake City, 1882.

East Portland (Or.), Democratic Era.

Eaton (Mrs), Origin of Mormonism. Ebey's Journal. MS.

Eckman (E.), Medicinal Herbs and their Use. MS.

Edinburgh Review. Edinburgh, 1850 et seq.

Eine Gottliche Offenbarung; und Belchrung uber den Chestand. n.d.

Elder's Journal, Kirtland, Ohio, and Far West, Missouri, 1838-9.

Elko (Nev.) Independent.

Engelmann (H.), Geolog. Survey of Utah. Washington, 1860.

Enoch's Advocate, 1874.

Epistle of the Twelve Apostles, etc. Salt Lake City, 1877.

Epitome of the Faith and Doctrines of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Plano (Ill.)

Epitre du President de la Mission Francaise a l'Eglise des Saints des Derniers-jours en France et dans les Iles de la Manche. n.d.

Erb (G. S.), Recollections. MS.

Escalante, Carta de 28 Oct., 1775. MS.

Etourneau (M.), Lea Mormons. Paris, 1856.

Eureka (Nev.), Leader; Sentinel.

Eustis (W. T.), Rev. of Ferris, Utah, etc., in New Englander, xii. 553.

Evidence Taken on the Trial of Mr Smith, before the Municipal Court of Nauvoo, on Saturday, July 1, 1843. Nauvoo.

Exposures of a Rotten Priesthood. Salt Lake City, 1878.

Eyring (Henry), Ein Wort der Vertherdigung, etc. Bern (Switz.), 1875.

 

F. (W. B.), The Mormons, the Dream and the Reality, etc. London, 1857.

Fabian (B.), Statistics concerning Utah. Salt Lake City, 1874.

Farmer (E. J.), The Resources of the Rocky Mountains.

Farnham (A.), The Zion's Watchman. Sidney (N. S. W.), Aug. 1853 et seq.

[p. xxviii]

Farnham (T. J.), Travels in the Great Western Prairies. Poughkeepsie, 1841; New York, 1843.

Far West (Mo.), Elder's Journal.

Faulconer (M. A.), Fulness of the Atonement. Plano (Ill.); Questions for the Use of Scholars in the Latter-day Saints Sunday-schools. Plano (Ill.), 1869.

Favez, Fragments sur J. Smith et les Mormons. n.d.

Female Life among the Mormons. New York, 1855.

Ferris (B. G.), Utah and the Mormons. New York, 1854, 1856.

Ferris (Mrs G. B.), The Mormons at Home. New York, 1856.

Fiftieth Annual Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Findlay (Hugh), The Mormons, or Latter-day Saint. Bombay (India), 1853.

Fire Department, Report of Chief Engineer. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Fisher (L. P.), Advertiser's Guide. San Francisco, 1870.

Fisher (R. S.) and Colby (C.), American Statistical Annual. N.Y., 1854.

Fitch (Mrs Thos), in Overland Monthly, vii. 235.

Fitch (Thos), Speeches in House of Rep., Feb. 23, 1870, and April 29, 1870. Washington, 1870; Speech in Utah Constitutional Convention, Feb. 20, 1872. Salt Lake City, 1872; Argument before House Judiciary Committee, Feb. 10, 1873. Washington, 1873.

Flanigan (J. H.), Reply to Palmer's Internal Evidence against the Book of Mormon. Liverpool, 1849.

Font's Journal. MS.

Forbes' Hist. Cal., 157-62.

Ford (Thomas), Message, Dec. 23, 1844, to Illinois Senate, etc. Springfield, 1844; History of Illinois. Chicago, 1854.

Fort Jones (Utah), Scott Valley News.

Foster (J. E.), Prehistoric Races of U.S. of America. Chicago, 1873.

Fraser's Magazine. London, 1830 et seq.

Fremont (J. C.), Narrative of Exploring Expedition. New York, 1849; Report of Exploring Expedition. Washington, 1845.

Friendly Warnings on the Subject of Mormonism. London, 1850, Frignet, La Californie, 58-60.

Frisco (Utah), Times.

Froiseth (Jennie Anderson), Women of Mormonism. Detroit (Mich.). 1882.

Frost (W.), Dialogue between a Latter-day Saint and a Methodist. Aylsham (Eng.), 1849.

Fry (F.), Traveler's Guide, etc. Cincinnati, 1865.

Fuller (Metta Victoria), (M. F. Victor), Lives of Female Mormons. Philadelphia, 1860; Mormon Wives, etc. New York, 1856.

Fullmer (John s.), Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, etc. Liverpool, 1855; Expulsion from Nauvoo. Liverpool, n.d.

 

Gapers, Diario, 246-348.

Garden of the World. Boston, 1856.

Gardener (A.), Mormonism Unmasked. Rochdale (Eng.), 1841.

Gardner (J. G.), Iron Ore and Iron Manufacture. MS.

Geese of Ganderica. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Geikie (A.), in Nature, xxii. 324.

Gems for the Young Folks. Salt Lake City, 1881.

General Epistle from the Council of the Twelve Apostles, etc., dated at Winter Quarters, Omaha Nation (now Florence, Neb.), Dec. 23, 1847.

Geneva, (Switzerland), Le Reflecteur.

Genoa (Carson Valley), Territorial Enterprise, 1858 et seq.

Gerstacker (Freidrich), Adventures d'une Colorite d'emigrants en Amerique, Paris, 1855; Travels, London, 1854; Western Lands and Western Waters. London, 1864.

Gibbon (J. G.), in Phila. Cath. Quart. Rev., iv. 664.

[p. xxix]

Gibson (Wm), Three Nights' Public Discussion, etc. Liverpool, 1851.

Glad Tidings of Great Joy. Salt Lake City.

Goddard (F. B.), Where to Emigrate, and Why. New York, 1869.

Gold Hill (Nev.), News.

Gomara, Hist. Ind., 272-4.

Gooch (Daniel W.), Speech in the U. S. House of Rep. April 4, 1860, on Polygamy in Utah. Washington.

Goodrich (E. S.), Mormonism Unveiled; The Other Side. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Goodrich (L. D.), Rocky Mountain Rovings. MS.

Good Tidings, eta. Liverpool, n.d.

Goodwin (C. C.), in Harpers Mag., lxiii. 756; No, Amer. Rev., cxxxii. 276.

Gordon (J. B.), Historical and Geographical Memoir of the N. A. Continent. Dublin, 1820.

Gospel, The [broadsheet]. Plano (Ill.)

Gospel Witness (Anon.) Liverpool, 1848.

Graham (J. C.), Utah Directory. Salt Lake City, 1883-4.

Grant (J. M.), A Collection of Facts Relative to the Course of Sidney Rigdon. Philadelphia, 1844, 1884; Three Letters to the "N.Y. Herald," etc., 1852; Letter to the President (of the U. S.), May 1, 1852.

Grass Valley (Cal.), Republican.

Gray (J. H.), Principles and Practices of the Mormons. Douglas (Isle of Man), 1853.

Gray (W. H.), History of Oregon. Portland, S. F., and N. Y., 1870.

Great Contrast, etc. Liverpool, n.d.

Great Proclamation, etc. Liverpool, n.d.

Greeley (H.), Overland Journey. New York, 1860.

Green (N. W.), Fifteen Years among the Mormons; New York, 1858; Mormonism, etc. Hartford, 1870; Narrative of Mrs Mary Ettie V. Smith. New York, 1860.

Greene (John P.), Facts Relative to the Expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri. Cincinnati, 1839.

Greenhow (R.), History of Oregon and California. Boston and London, 1844; New York, 1845; Boston, 1845; Boston, 1847.

Greenlagh (James), Narrative, To Nauvoo and Back. Liverpool, 1842.

Greenwood (Grace), New Life in New Lands. New York, 1873.

Guers, L'Irvingisme et le Mormonisme juges par la parole de Dieu. n.d.

Gunnison (J. w.), The Mormons, or Latter-day Saints. Philadelphia, 1852, 1857, 1860.

Gurley (Z. H.), The Polygamic Revelation. Lamoni {Iowa), 1882.

Gurley (Z. H.) and Kelley (E. L.), The Utah Problem and the Solution. Washington, 1882.

Gwin (W. M.), Memoirs on History. MS.

 

Haefeli (L.), One Day in Utah. Ogden, 1883.

Haefeli (L.) and Cannon (F. J.), Directory of Ogden City and Weber County. Ogden City, 1883.

Haefer, Biographie Generale. 1858.

Haintug (Samuel), Mormonism Weighed, etc. Douglas (Isle of Man), 1840.

Hakluyt's Voy., iii. 373-9.

Hall (E. H.), Guide to the Great West. New York, 1865; New York, 1866.

Hall (William), Abominations of Mormonism. Cincinnati, 1852.

Hand-book Guide to Salt Lake Museum. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Hand-book on Mormonism. Salt Lake City, Chicago, and Cincinnati, 1882.

Hand-book of Reference. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Hardy (J. D.), in Gent. Mag., xxv. 233.

Harper (C.), Agricultural Products of Utah. MS.

Harper's New Month. Mag. New York, 1856 et seq.

Harris (W.), Mormonism Portrayed, etc. Warsaw (Ill.), 1841.

Hartley (R.) and Rich (B. E.), Public Discussion. Salt Lake City, 1884.

[p. xxx]

Hassard (J. R. G.), in Cath. World, xxvi. 227.

Hastings (L. W.), Emigrants' Guide to Oregon and California. Cin. 1845.

Have You Read the Book of Mormon? n.d.

Havilah (Cal.), Courier.

Hawthornwaite, Adventures among the Mormons. Manchester (Eng.), 1857.

Hay (John), The Mormon Prophet's Tragedy, in Atlantic Monthly, xxiv. 669.

Hayden (F. V.), Survey. Meteor. Obsver., by Gannett. Washington, 1872; Report. Washington, 1872.

Hayden (--), Early History of the Disciples in the Western Reserve.

Hayes (Benjamin), Diary of a Journey Overland, 1849-50. MS.; Emigrant Notes. MS., and Scraps; California Politics (Scraps); Utah (Scraps).

Haynes (John), The Book of Mormon Examined. Brighton and London, 1853; Refutation of the Mormon Doctrines. Brighton and London, 1853.

Hays (Rev.), Addresses on Mormonism. Douglas (Isle of Man), 1839.

Head (F. H.), in Overland Monthly, v. 270; Chamb. Jour., xxxvii. 29.

Healdsburg (Cal.) Enterprise; Russian River Flag.

Heap (G. H.), Central Route to the Pacific. Philadelphia, 1854.

Helena (Mont.), Independent.

Hepburn (A. B.), Mormonism Exposed. London and Swansea, 1855.

Herrera, dec. vi. lib. ix. cap. xi.-xii.

Hewill (w.), Exposure of the Errors and Fallacies of the Self-named Latter-day Saints. Staffordshire, n.d.

Hewlett (Alfred), One Wife, or Many Wives. Manchester and London, n.d.

Hickman (Edward B.), Mormonism Sifted. London, Norwich, and Brandon, 1850.

Higbie (Rev. A.), Polygamy vs Christianity. San Francisco, 1857.

Hill (H. A.), in Penn. Monthly, ii. 129.

Hill (H. C.), Remarks on Mines and Mining in Utah. MS.

Hines (G.), Voyage round the World. Buffalo, 1850.

Hist. Nevada. Oakland (Cal.), 1881.

Historical Magazine, and Notes and Queries. Boston, etc., 1857-69. 15 vols.

Hittell (John S.), Comm. and Indus. of the Pac. Coast. San Francisco, 1882. Scraps.

Hollister (O. J.), Resources and Attractions of Utah. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Holman (J.), The Peoria Party. MS.

'Homespun,' Lydia Knight's History. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Honolulu Friend. Polynesian, 1845 et seq.

Hooper (W. H.), Speeches in House of Rep., Feb. 25, 1869, March 23, 1870: and 28th and 29th Jan., 1873. Washington, 1870, 1873.

Hopper, Narrative. MS.

Horn (H. B.), The Overland Guide. New York, 1852.

Horne (Mrs J.), Migration and Settlement of the Latter-day Saints. MS.

Hours at Home. New York, 1865 et seq.

Howe (E. D.), Mormonism Unvailed. Painesville (O.), 1834, 1841.

Howe (Mrs J.), Migration and Settlement of the Latter-day Saints. MS.

Howitt (Mary), History of the U.S. New York, 1860.

Hoyt (J.P.), Arizona Events. MS.

Hubner (Le Baron de), A Ramble round the World. New York, 1874.

Huffaker's Early Cattle Trade. MS.

Hughes (Elizabeth), Voice from the West to the Scattered People of the Twelve, and all the Seed of Abraham. San Francisco, 1879.

Hunt (J. H.), Mormonism: Origin, Rise, and Progress. St Louis, 1844.

Hunt's Merchants' Magazine. New York, 1839 et seq.

Huntington (D. B.), Vocabulary of the Utah and Shoshone Dialects. Salt Salt Lake City, 1872.

Hurlburt, Mormonism Unveiled. n.d.

Hutchings' Illus. Cal. Mag. San Francisco, 1857-61.

Hyde, Jr (John), Mormonism: Its Leaders and Designs. York, 1857.

Hyde (Mrs M. A. P.), Autobiograhpy. MS.

[p. xxxi]

Hyde (Orson), Address to the Hebrews. Rotterdam (Holland), 1841; Cry out of the Wilderness, 1842 (first published in Germany and in German); News from the Old World; Sketch of Travels and Ministry. Salt Lake City, 1869; Speech on Sidney Rigdon. Nauvoo, 1844.

Hyde (Mrs Orson), Workings of Mormonism. MS.

Hygiene of U. S. Army, etc. Washington, 1875.

Hymns, A Collection of Sacred. Voree (Wis.), 1850, second edition; New York, 1838; The Saints' Harp, etc. Plano (Ill.), 1870; Of Latter-day Saints. Liverpool, 1841, 1881; London, 1851; Salt Lake City, 1st Utah ed. (14th ed.), 1871.

 

Idaho City, Idaho World.

Idolatry. Plano (Ill.)

L'Illustration. Journal Universel, 1858 et seq.

Important Documents Bearing on Political Questions in Utah. Logan, 1882.

Independence (Mo.), Elder's Journal; Evening and Morning Star, 1832 et seq.; Upper Missouri Advertiser, 1832.

Indian Hostilities: Letter Sec. of War. 41st cong. 2d sess., H. Ex. Doc. 44; Memorial Leg. Assemb. Utah. 41st cong. 1st sess., H. Misc. Doc. 19. 1869.

Indictment for the Murder of James Monroe, etc. Liverpool, 1851.

Insane Ayslum of Utah, Report of Board of Directors. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Intemperance. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Internal. Rev. New York, 1870 et seq.

Interview between Pres. John Taylor and U. S. Int. Rev. Col. O. J. Hollister. Salt Lake City, Jan. 13, 1879.

Investigation into the Murder of Dr J. K. Robinson. Salt Lake City, 1866.

Irving (Edward), and the Catholic and Apostolic Church. London and Liverpool, 1856.

Irving (Wash.), Bonneville's Adven., 186.

Is Mormonism True or Not? (Religious Tract Society.) London, n.d.

Items of Church History. Salt Lake City, 1884.

 

J. (H. S.), The Latter-day Saints, and their Spiritual Views. n. d.

Jackson (D. J.), Early Overland Emigration. MS.

Jackson (Helen H.), (H. H.), Bits of Travel at Home. Boston, 1878.

Jacksonville (Or.), Dem. Times.

Jacob (May), Peace-maker. Nauvoo (Ill.), 1842.

Jacob (U. H.), Extract from a Manuscript Entitled The Peace-maker. Nauvoo, n.d.

Jaques (John), Der Kateehismus fur Kinder. Bern (Switz.), 1872; Catechism for Children. Salt Lake City, 1870, 1877; Exclusive Salvation; Salvation: A Dialogue in Two Parts. n.d.; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, etc. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Jenkins (H. D.), The Mormon Hymn-book, in Our Monthly, Dec. 1870.

Jennings (Wm), Carson Valley. MS. Material Progress of Utah. MS.

Jepson (Ring), Among the Mormons. San Francisco, 1879.

Johnson (Benjamin F.), Why the Latter-day Saints Marry a Plurality of Wives, etc. San Francisco, 1854.

Johnson (J. H.), Voice from the Mountains. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Johnston (James F. W.), Joe Smith and the Mormons, in Harper's Mag., June 1851.

Jones (Dan.), Yr Eurgrawn Ysgrythyrol; Pwy yw Duw y Saint; Yr Hen Grefvdd Newydd; Annerchiad i'r Peirch, etc.; Gwrthbrofion i'r Spaulding Story am Lyfr Mormon; Anmhoblogrwydd Mormoniacth; Arweinydd i Seion; Pa beth yw Mormoniaeth? Pa beth yw gras Cadwedigol? Dadl ar Mormoniaeth? Anffyddiaeth Sectyddiaeth; Amddiffyniad rhag Camgyhuddiadau; Y Lleidr ar y Groes; "Peidiwch a'u Gwrando;" Egwyddorion Cyntaf a Gwahoddiadau; Ai duw a Ddanfonodd Joseph Smith; Llofruddiad Joseph a Hyrum Smith; Tarddiad Llfyr Mormon; Dammeg y Pren Ffrwythtawn; Darlun o'r Byd Crefyddol. n.d. (Pub. in Wales.)

[p. xxxii]

Jones (Nathaniel V.), Reply to 'Mormonism Unveiled.' Calcutta, 1853.

Jones (Wm A.), Reconnoissance of Northwestern Wyoming. 1873. Washington, 1875.

Jonveaux L'Amerique Actuelle. Paris, 1869.

 

Kane (Thos. L.), The Mormons: Discourse before Hist. Soc. of Penn., March 26, 1850. Philadelphia.

Kanesville (Iowa), Frontier Guardian.

Kelley (E. L.) and Braden (c.), Public Discussion. St Louis, 1884.

Kelly (Wm.), An Excursion to Cal. London, 1851. 2 vols.; The Pretensions of Mormonism. Guernsey (Chan. Isles), 1848.

Kelson (J. H.), Seth's Work is Done. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Kendall (H.), A Week in Great Salt Lake City, in Hours at Home, i. 63.

Kidder (Dan'l P.), Mormonism and the Mormons. New York, 1842.

Kimball (David C.), Fireside Visiter. Liverpool, n.d.

Kimball (H. C.), Journal. Salt Lake City, 1882; Journal. MS.

Kimball (H. C.) and Woodruff (W.), The Word of our Lord to the Citizens of London. 1839.

King (Hannah Tapfield), An Epic Poem. Salt Lake City, 1884; Brief Memoir of Early Mormon Life of. MS.; Songs of the Heart. Salt Lake City, 1876; Women of the Scriptures. Salt Lake City, 1874.

Kinney (John F.), Speech in House of Rep., Jan. 27, 1864, on Loyalty of Utah to U.S.; Speech on March 17, 1864, on Territories and Settlement of Utah. Washington, 1864.

Kirchhoff (Theodor), Reisebilder und skissen aus Amerika. New York, 1875-6. 2 vols.

Kirtland (Ohio), Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate; Northern Times.

Kneeland (S.), The Wonders of Yosemite. Boston, 1871.

 

Labors in the Vineyard. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Lapham (F.), in Dawson's Hist. Mag., 2d ser., vii. 1870.

Latter-day Saints. Cape Town (Africa).

Latter-day Saints in Utah. Opinion of Judge Snow, etc. n.d.

Lausanne (Switzerland) Reflecteur.

Lawrence (C. W.), A Few Words from a Pastor. n.d.

Laws concerning Naturalization, etc., quoted from statutes, etc.

Lee (John D.), Trial. Salt Lake City, 1875.

Leslie (Mrs Frank), California: A Pleasure Trip from Gotham to the Golden Gate. New York, 1877.

L'Eoile du Deseret. Paris, 1851-2.

Lewis (M. G.), Cooperation in Theory and Practice. MS.

Liberty (No.), Missouri Enquirer.

Libro de Mormon, Trozos Selectos. Salt Lake City, 1875.

Libro di Mormon. n.d.

Lieber (F.), in Putnam's Monthly, v. 225.

Life among the Mormons, in Putnam's Monthly, Aug. to Dec. 1855.

Life among the Mormons. By an Officer of the U.S.A. New York, 1868.

Life of Bill Hickman, Brigham Young's Destroying Angel. New York, 1872.

Linforth (James), Reply to "Few Words from a Pastor," etc. Liverpool, n.d.; Route from Liverpool to Great Salt Lake Valley. Liverpool, 1855.

Lippincott's Magazine, etc. Philadelphia, 1868 et seq.

Littell's Living Age Boston, 1844 et seq.

Little (F.), Mail Service across the Plains. MS.

Little (J. A.), Jacob Hamlin. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Littlefield (L. O.), Narrative of the Massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. Nauvoo, 1844; The Martyrs. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Liverpool Mormon.

Livesey (Richard), An Exposure of Mormonism. Preston (Eng.), 1838.

Livre de Mormon. n.d.

Llyfr Hymnau (Wales). n.d.

Llyfr Mormon (Wales). n.d.

[p. xxxiii]

Logan (Utah), Journal; Leader.

London Monthly Rev., new. ser., iii. 1842, vi. 1852, Lorenzana, in Cortes, Hist. Mex., 325. Los Angeles Herald; News; Star.

Lossing (B. J.), The Mormons, in Harper's Mag., vi. 605.

Louisville Courier-Journal.

Lovejoy (A. L.), Founding of Portland. MS.

Lowe (J. B.), Mormonism Exposed. Liverpool, 1852.

Ludlow (F. H.), Among the Mormons, in Atlantic Monthly, xiii. 479; The Heart of the Continent. New York, 1870.

Lynn (Catherine Lewis), Narrative of Some of the Proceedings of the Mormons, etc. 1848.

Lyon (J.), The Harp of Zion. London and Liverpool, 1853.

 

Mac (R. W.), Mormonism in Illinois, in Amer. Whig Review, April, June, and Dec. 1352.

Mackay (Chas), The Mormons, or Latter-day Saints. London, 1851; London, 1852; Auburn, N. Y., 1853; London, 1854. London. 2 vols. n. impr.

Madan (M.), Thelyphthora; or, A Treatise on Federal Ruin. London, 1781.

Magasin Pittoresque. Paris, 1859 et seq.

Marcy (Col R. B.), Thirty Years of Army Life on the Border. N. Y., 1866.

Mariposa (Cal.), Gazette.

Marsh (R. K.), Cotton Growing and Manufacture. MS.

Marshall (C.), Characteristics of Mormonism, in Transatlantic Mag., Aug. 1871; Id., in Frazer's Mag., no. 83, 692; no. 84, 97.

Marshall (W. G.), Through America. London, 1881.

Martin (Moses), A Treatise on the Fulness of the Everlasting Gospel. New York, 1842.

Martin (T. S.), Narrative of Fremont's Expedition. 1845-7. MS.

Marurier (X.), Les Voyageurs Nouveaux. Paris, 1860.

Marysville (Cal.), Appeal.

Mather (F. G.), Early Days of Mormonism, in Lippincott's Mag. August, 1880.

Mayer (B.), Mexico, Aztec, Spanish, and Republican. Hartford, 1852.

Mayhew (H.), The Mormons. London, 1851, 1852.

McBride (J. R.), The Route by Which the Mormons Entered Salt Lake Valley in 1847. MS.; Utah and Mormonism, in Internat. Rev. New York, February, 1882.

McCabe, Jr (J. D.), A Comprehensive View of our Country and its Resources. Philadelphia, 1876.

McCarthy (Justin), Brigham Young, in Galaxy, Feb. 1870.

McCauley (I. H.), History of Franklin County, Pennsylvania.

McChesney (James), An Antidote to Mormonism. New York, 1838.

McClellan (R. G.), The Golden State. San Francisco, 1872.

McClure (A. K.), Three Thousand Miles through the Rocky Mountains. Philadelphia, 1869.

McGlashan (C. F.), History of the Donner Party. Truckee, 1879; San Francisco, 1880.

McGrorty vs Hooper; 40th cong. 2d sess., H. Com. Rept, 79.

McKinley (Henry J.), Brigham Young, etc. San Francisco, 1870.

McLaughlin (A. C.), Mormonism Measured by the Gospel Rule. Covington (Ky.), 1842.

McNierce (R. G.), in Presb. Rev., ii. 331.

Memoir of the Mormons. South. Lit. Messenger, Nov. 1848.

Memorial of Citizens of Salt Lake City, March 31, 1870, against "Cullom" Bill. Washington, 1870.

Memorial of Legislative Assembly of Utah. Salt Lake City, 1882; Washington (D. C.), 1884.

Memorial to Congress. Plano (Ill.), 1870.

[p. xxxiv]

Mendocino (Cal.), Democrat.

Merewether (H. A.), By Sea and by Land. London, 1874.

Merrish (W. J.), The Latter-day Saints, etc. Ledbury, n.d.

Meteor. Observations. Washington, 1826.

Meteor. Register. Washington, 1851.

Mexico, Anales del Ministerio de Fomento. Mex. 1854, vol. 1, 1855, vol. 2.

Miles (J.) vs The U. S.

Millennial Star. Manchester, 1841; Liverpool, 1842-54; Liverpool and London, 1855 et seq.

Miller (Joaquin), Danites in the Sierras. Chicago, 1881; First Families of the Sierras. Chicago, 1876.

Miller (N. K.), Federal Affairs in Utah. MS.

Miller (Reuben), James J. Strang Weighed in the Balances, etc. Burlington (Iowa), 1846.

Mines of Utah, List of. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Missions, Reports of the Scandinavian, Italian, and Prussian. Liverpool, 1853.

Mokelumne Hill (Cal.), Calaveras Chronicle.

Mollhausen (B.), Tagebauch einer Reise vom Mississippi, etc. Liepzig, 1858; Der Halbindianes. Leipzig, 1861; Des Mormonmadchen. Jena and Leipzig, 1864.

Monogamy and Polygamy. Boston, 1882.

Montonus (A.), De Nieuwe Weereld. Amsterdam, 1671.

Moore (Aug.), Pioneer Experience. MS.

Morgan (J.), Doctrines of the Church; Plan of Salvation. Salt Lake City, n.d.

Morgan (Martha M.), A Trip across the Plains. San Francisco, 1864.

Morgan (Wm B.), Mormonism and the Bible. London and Bristol, n.d.

Mormon Battalion, Report of the First General Festival of the Renowned. Salt Lake City, n.d.

Mormon Doctrine. Salt Lake City.

Mormon Hymn-book. Liverpool and London, 1851.

Mormonism: Additional Articles on in the following magazines: All the Year Round, x. 247; Amer. Bib. Repos., 2d ser., ix.; Amer. Ch. Rev., viii.; Amer. Natur., ix.; Bentley, Miscel., xxxviii. 61; Brit. Quart. Rev., xxiii. 62, xxxv., cxxii. 450; Chamb. Jour., xxxvii., liii. 193; Christ. Exam., liii.; Christ. Obser., lxii. 183; Christ. Rememb., iv. 278, xxxiii. 257, xlv. 185; Colburn Monthly, cxiv. 239, cxxi. 253, cxxxvi. 369; Cong. Mag., xxvii. 641; De Bow, Com. Rev., xvi.; Dem. Rev., xl. 184, xliii. 294; Dub. Rev. xxxiii. 77; Dub. Univ. Mag., xxi. 288, lviii.; Eclec. Mag., xxi. 400, xcvii. 773; Eclec. Rev., xcvi. 669, xcviii. 479; Edinb. Rev., xcix.; Evan. Rev., x.; Every Sat. xi. 291, 541; Fraser Mag., lxxxiii., lxxxiv.; Galaxy, ii., iv., xiv. 677, 822; Gent. Mag., new ser., vii. xxv.; Hogg, Instruc., viii. 107, 321; Hours at Home, i.; Lakeside Monthly, i.; Lippincott, Mag., vi. 41; Littell, Liv. Age, xxx. 429, xlii. 99, 147, xlix. 602, 1, 429, lvi. 494, lxxviii. 124, 2d ser., xx.; Id., Mus. For. Lit., xlii., xlv.; Lond. Quart. Rev., ii. 95, xviii. 351; Meth. Quart., iii.; Monthly Rev., clix. 190; Museum For. Lit., xlii. 370; Natl. Mag., ix,., v.; Natl. Quart. Rev., xxxix.; New Englander, xii.; New Quart. Rev., iv.; No. Brit. Rev., xxxix. 207, 485; Penn. Monthly, ii.; Potter, Amer. Monthly, xvii. 298; Presbt. Rev., ii.; Princeton Rev., xxiv.; Putnam Mag., v. 641, vi. 144, 602; Sharpe, London Mag., xx. 55, 1, 29; South Lit. Messen., x. 526, xiv. 641, xvii. 170; South. Rev., new ser., xx. 438; Tait, Edinb. Mag., xxiv. 763; Temp. Bar, iv. 181; U. S. Cath. Mag., iv. 354; U. S. Westm. lxxxvii. 401; Westminst. Rev., lix., lxxvi. 360, lxxxvii.

Mormonism. Cuttack (Ind.), 1855.

Mormonism Examined, etc. Birmingham, 1855.

Mormonism, Its Character, Origin, and Tendency. n.d.

Mormonism. London, n.d.

Mormonism or the Bible, etc. Cambridge and London, 1852.

Mormonism, Past and Present. Nor. Brit. Review, Aug. 1863.

[p. xxxv]

Mormonism Self-refuted (by D. K.) London, n.d.

Mormonism Unveiled. Calcutta, 1852.

Mormonism Unveiled, etc. London, 1855.

Mormonism Unveiled, Life and Confessions of John D. Lee. St Louis, 1877.

Mormonismen och Swedenborgianismen. Upsala, 1854.

Mormon Pamphlets. A collection of thirteen brochures referred to by titles.

Mormon Politics and Policy in San Bernardino Co., Cal. Los Angeles, 1856.

Mormons Bog. n.d.

Mormons (The), History of their Leading Men, in Phren. Jour., Nov. 1866.

Mormons (The), in Utah. Bentley's Miscel., Jan. 1855.

Mormons (The). London, 1851, 1852.

Mormons: their Politics and Policy. Los Angeles, 1856.

Mormon's Wife (The), in Putnam's Monthly, June 1855.

Mormon Women in Mass Meeting. Salt Lake City, Nov. 16, 1878.

Morris (Annie), A Week among the Mormons. Lipp. Mag., July 1870.

Morrish (W. J.), Latter-day Saints and Book of Mormon. Ledbury (Eng.), 1840.

Morse, Washington Territory. MS.

Mota-Padilla, Conq. N. Gal., iii. 14, 158-69.

Mountain Meadows Massacre. Trial of John D. Lee. Salt Lake City, 1875.

Mountain of the Lord's House. Plano (Ill.)

Muhlenpfordt (E.), Versuch einer getreuen Schilder. Repub. Mex. Hanover, 1844. 3 vols.

Mulholland (James), An Address to Americans. Nauvoo, 1841.

Murdock (John), Persecutions of the Latter-day Saints, etc.; Sydney (Australia), 1852; Zion's Watchman. Sydney, 1852.

Murphy (J. R.), Mineral Resour. of Utah. San Francisco, 1872.

Murray (Eli H.), Message to the Legislative Assembly, 1884; Remarks on the Way out of the Difficulty. MS.

Musser (A.M.), Defence of our People. Philadelphia, 1877; Fruits of Mormonism. Salt Lake City, 1878.

 

Napa County Reporter.

Narrative of Some of the Proceedings of the Mormons. n.d.

Narrative of the Massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. (Anon.) n.d.

Natl. Almanac. Phila., San Francisco, London, and Paris, 1863 et seq.

Natl. Democ. Quart. Rev. Washington, 1859 et seq.

Nauvoo (Ill.), Ensign and Zarahemla Standard; L'Etoile du Deseret; Expositor; Neighbor; Patriot; Wasp.

Nebeker (John), Early Justice. MS.

Neill (E. D.), in Hist. Mag., xvi. 68.

Nelson's Picture Guide Books. New York, n.d.

Nevada (Cal.), Journal.

Nevada, Journals of Assembly and Senate, 1864 et seq Nevers, Nevada Pioneers. MS.

New Amer., in All the Year Round, xvii. 1867.

New Amer. Religions, in Lend. Quart. Rev., cxxii. 1867.

Newman (J. P.), A Sermon with an Answer by O. Pratt. Salt Lake City, 1870.

New Orleans Picayune.

Newspapers of Utah and other territories of the Pacific U.S., etc. The most important are cited under the name of the town where published, and many of them named in this list.

New York Courier and Enquirer; Herald; Mail; Mormon Intelligence; Observer; Prophet; Sun; Times; Wall St Journal.

Nicholay (C. G.), Oregon Territory. London, 1846.

Nicholson (John), Comprehensive Salvation. Liverpool, 1880; The Latter-day Prophet. Salt Lake City, n.d.; The Means of Escape. Liverpool, 1878; The Modern Prophet; The Preceptor. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Nickerson (Freeman), Death of the Prophet. Boston, 1844.

[p. xxxvi]

Nidever, Life and Adv. MS.

Niles' Register, Baltimore, etc., 1847 et seq.

Nineteenth Century. London, 1884.

Nordoff (Chas), California for Health, Pleasure, etc. New York, 1873. North American Review. Boston, 1850 et seq.

Noticias, in Doc. Hist. Mex., 671-2.

Nouvelles Annales des Voyages. Paris, 1847 et seq.

 

Oakland Monthly Review; Tribune.

O'Bit O Tauk between Two Berry Chaps obeawt th' Latter-day Saints, etc. Bury (Eng.), 1848.

Observations in Utah. MS.

Ogden (Utah), Freeman; Herald; Junction; Times.

Olive Branch. Kirtland (O.), and Springfield (Ill.), 1848-50. Olshausen (Theeder), Geschichte der Mormonen, etc. Gottingen, 1856. Olympia (Wash.), Pioneer and Democrat; Puget Sound Courier; Puget Sound Herald; Washington Standard.

Omaha (Neb.), New West, Republican. Onderdonk (J. L.), in Nat. Quart. Rev., xxxix. 80.

Ontario Mining Company, Report, 1881-3.

Origin and History of the Mormonites, in Eclectic Mag., Nov. 1850.

Origin of the Morm. Imposture, in Littell's Liv. Age, xxx. 1851.

Orr (Adrian), Mormonism Dissected. Bethania (Pa.), 1841.

Overland Monthly. San Francisco, 1868 et seq. Oviedo, iv. 19.

Oxford, Idaho Enterprise.

 

Pacific Railroad Reports. Washington, 1855-60. 13 vols.

Paddock (Comelia), Fate of Madame La Tour. New York, 1881; In the Toils, etc. Chicago, 1879.

Page (John E.), The Spaulding Story, etc., Exposed. Plano (Ill.), 1866.

Palmer (Joel), Journal of Travels over the Rocky Mountains, 1845-6. Cincinnati, 1852.

Palmer (W.), Mormonism Briefly Examined. London, n.d.

Palou, Not., ii. 281-2.

Panama, Star and Herald.

Park (J. R.), Educational Affairs in Utah. MS.

Parker (Samuel), Journey beyond the Rocky Mountains. Ithaca (N. Y.), etc., 1840, 1842, 1846.

Parry (C. C.), in Amer. Natural., ix. 14-346.

Parry (J. H.), The Mormon Metropolis. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Parsons (T.), Mormon Fanaticism Exposed. Boston, 1841.

Patterson (R.), History of Washington County, Pa. Philadelphia, 1882.

Patterson (Robt), Who Wrote the Book of Mormon? Philadelphia, 1882.

Pearl of Great Price. Salt Lake City, 1878.

Peck (G.), in Meth. Quart., iii. 111.

Penrose (C. W.), Mormon Doctrine. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Perpetual Emigrating Fund. MS.

Petaluma (Cal.), Argus; Crescent; Journal and Argus.

Peters (De W. C.), Life and Adventures of Kit Carson. New York, 1859.

Phelps (W. W.), Deseret Almanac, 1851 et seq.

Philadelphia (Pa), Gospel Reflector.

Philip Harry, in Simpson's Explor., 490.

Pierrepont (Edward), Fifth Avenue to Alaska. N. Y. and Lend. 1884.

Pioche (Nev.), Record.

Pittsburg (Pa), Baptist Witness; Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate.

Placer (Cal.), Herald; Times.

Placerville (Cal.), Tri-weekly Register, June 24, 1858.

Plain Questions for Mormonites. By One Who Knows They are not Saints. London, 1852.

[p. xxxvii]

Plano (Ill.), True Latter-day Saints' Herald; Saints' Advocate.

Player-Frowd (J. G.), Six Months in California. London, 1872.

Political Pamphlets. A collection of twenty brochures referred to by title and number. Salt Lake City, 1879.

Polygamy and Monogamy Compared. The History and Philosophy of Marriage. Boston, 1875.

Popular Science Monthly. New York, 1872 et seq.

Portland (Or.), Bee; Deutsch Zeitnng; Herald; Lantern; Oregonian; Standard. Port Townsend (Wash.), Democratic Press.

Powell (J. W.), Explor. of the Colorado River of the West. Washington, 1875; Geol. of East. Uinta Mountains. Wash., 1876; Geol. Surv. of Rocky Mountains. Wash., 1877; Rept on Lands of Arid Region. Wash., 1879.

Pratt (Belinda Marden), Defence of Polygamy by a Lady of Utah. Salt Lake City, 1854. Republished in Millennial Star of July 29, 1854.

Pratt (Orson), Remarkable Visions. Edinburgh, 1840; Liverpool, 1848; Account of Several Remarkable Visions. New York, 1841, 1842; Was Joseph Smith Sent of God? Liverpool, 1848; Kingdom of God, in 4 parts. Liverpool, 1848-9; New Jerusalem, etc. Liverpool, 1849; Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon. 6 nos. Liverpool, 1850-1; Reply to "Remarks on Mormonism," etc. Liverpool, 1849; Reply to T. W. P. Taylder. Liverpool, 1849; Great First Cause, etc. Liverpool, 1851; Twenty-four Miracles Liverpool, 1857; Spiritual Gifts. Liverpool and London, 1857; Universal Apostacy, etc. Liverpool, 1857; The Seer, vol. i. 12 numbers, ii. 8 numbers. Washington, 1853 et seq.; A Series of Pamphlets on Faith, Repentance, Baptism, Holy Spirit, Spiritual Gifts, etc. Liverpool, 1851, 1857; Reply to Newman's Sermon. Salt Lake City, 1870; Bible and Polygamy. Salt Lake City, 1877; Cubic and Biquadratic Equations. London and Liverpool, 1866; Key to the Universe. London and Liverpool, (--); Salt Lake City, 1879; Works, A Series of Pamphlets on the Doctrines of the Gospel. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Pratt (Orson) and Newman (J. P.), Discussion on Polygamy. Salt Lake City, Aug. 12-14, 1870.

Pratt (Orson), Smith (G. A.), and Cannon (G. Q.), Discourses on Celestial Marriage. Salt Lake City, Oct. 7, 1869.

Pratt (Parley P.), Journal of the Eiders and their Missions. Liverpool, 1837-8; The Millennium and Other Poems, etc. New York, 1840; Late Persecution. New York, 1840; Appeal to the Inhabitants of New York State. Nauvoo (Ill.), 1841; Letter to Queen Victoria. Manchester, 1841; Heaven on Earth. Liverpool, 1841; Voice of Warning and Instruction. New York, 1837; Liverpool (--); London, 1854; Salt Lake City, 1874; Mormon Herald. San Francisco (Cal.), 1855 et seq.; Voix d'Avertissement. n.d.; Fountain of Knowledge. n.d.; Intelligence and Affection. n.d.; Immortality of the Body. n.d.; Priodas a Moesau yn Utah (Wales). n.d.; Key to the Science of Theology. Liverpool and London, 1855; Salt Lake City, 1874; Marriage and Morals in Utah. Liverpool, 1856; Autobiography. New York, 1874; An Address to the People of England, etc. Manchester, 1840; Mormonism Unveiled, etc New York, 1838; Proclamation, etc. Sydney (N. S. W.), 1852; Repent, Ye People of California. San Francisco, 1854; Scriptural Evidences in Favor of Polygamy. San Francisco, 1856; The Angel of the Prairies. Salt Lake City, 1880; Treatise on the Regeneration and Eternal Duration of Matter. New York, 1840.

Prescott (Ariz.), Miner.

Price (R. L.), The Two Americas. Philadelphia, 1877.

Prichard (Jas C.), Researches into the Physical History of Mankind. London, 1836; London, 1847. 5 vols.

Prieto (G.), Viaje a los Estados Unides. Mexico, 1877-9. 3 vols.

Prime (E. D. G.), Around the World. New York, 1872.

[p. xxxviii]

Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles, etc. N.Y. and Liverpool, 1845.

Prophwyd y Jubili. Merthyr Tydvil, South Wales.

Provo (Utah), Enquirer; Times.

Putnam's Magazine. New York, 1863 et seq.

 

Quigley (Hugh), The Irish Race in California, etc. San Francisco, 1878.

 

Rae (W. F.), Westward by Rail. London, 1870.

Raffensperger (Mrs), in Scribner's Monthly, iii. 672.

Ramustc, Viaggi, iii. 359-63.

Randolph's Oration, 313-14.

Raymond (Rossiter w.), Mining Industry of the States and Territories of the Rocky Mountains. New York, 1874; Silver and Gold. New York, 1873; Statistics of Mines and Mining. Washington, 1873.

Reasons Why I cannot Become a Mormonite. London, n.d.

Red Bluff (Cal.), Independent; Sentinel.

Reese (J.), Mormon Station. MS.

Reid (Mayne), The Mormon Monsters, in Onward, Nov. 1869.

Rejection of the Church. Plano (Ill.)

Relacion de Castaneda. Ternaux-Compans, serie i. tom. ix. 61-5.

Religious Pamphlets. A collection of 25 pamphlets. S. L. City, 1879.

Remarks on Mormonism. Glasgow (Scot.), n.d.

Reme, Orientale et Americane. n.d.

Remonstrance and Resolutions adopted by a mass meeting of the citizens of Utah against the Cullom Bill. Salt Lake City, 1870.

Remy (Jules), Voyage au pays des Mormons. Paris, 1860. 2 vols.

Remy (Jules) and Julius Brenchley, A Journey to Great Salt Lake City. London, 1861. 2 vols.

Reno (Nev.), Gazette; State Journal.

Reorganization of the Legislative Power of Utah Territory. Minority Report of Committee on Territories. Washington, 1884.

Report of the First General Festival of the Renowned Mormon Battalion. Salt Lake City, 1855.

Report of the Grand Jury, 1878.

Report of Three Nights' Public Discussion in Bolton (Eng.), etc. Liverpool, 1851.

Report of Utah Commission. Washington, 1884.

Report on Governor's Message. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Review of the Opinion of the U.S. Supreme Court in Reynolds vs U. S. Salt Lake City, 1878.

Revised Laws of the Nauvoo Legion. Nauvoo, 1844.

Revised Ordinances of Provo City. Salt Lake City, 1877.

Revoil, Les Harems du Nouveau Monde. Paris, 1850.

Revue des Deux Mondes. Paris, 1839 et seq.

Revue Orientale et Americaine. Paris, 1859 et seq.

Reynolds (George), Are We of Israel? Salt Lake City, 1883; Myth of the Manuscript Found. Salt Lake City, 1883; The Book of Abraham. Salt Lake City, 1879; Plaintiff in Error vs U. S. n.d.

Rhinehart Memoranda. MS.

Ribas, Hist. Triumphos, 26-7.

Richards (Franklin D.), Bibliography of Utah. MS.; European Emigration to Utah. MS.; Compendium of the Faith and Doctrines of the Church, etc. Liverpool, 1857. Narrative. MS.; Private Journal. MS.; The Book of Mormon. MS.; The Pearl of Great Price. Liverpool, 1851; Revised. Salt Lake City, 1878; Tracts.

Richards (F. D.) and Little (James A.), Compendium of the Doctrines of the Gospel. Salt Lake City, 1882, 1884.

Richards (Franklin S.), Bennett, Harkness, and Kirkpatrick, Argument on the Elections in Utah. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Richards (J.), What is Mormonism? Madras (Hind.), 1853.

[p. xxxix]

Richards (Mrs F. D.), Reminiscences. MS.; The Inner Facts of Social Life in Utah. MS.

Richards (Willard), Address to Chancellor and Regents of Deseret University. Great Salt Lake City, April 17, 1850.

Richardson (A.D.), Beyond the Mississippi. Hartford, 1867.

Richardson (D.), Preexistence of Man, etc. n.d.; Faith of the Latter-day Saints.

Richardson (David M.), Address to Congress. Detroit (Mich.), 1882.

Rise and Progress of the Mormon Faith and People, in South. Lit. Messenger, Sept. 1844.

Roberts (C. M.), Politics and Religion: MS.

Robinson (Phil.), Sinners and Saints. Boston, 1883.

Rockwell (O. P. ), The Destroying Angels, etc. San Francisco, 1878.

Rockwood (A. P.), Report on Zion Coop. Fish Association. S. L. City, 1878.

Rodenbough (Theo. F.), From Everglade to Canon with the Second Dragoons. New York, 1875.

Relic (J. B.), Mormonism Exposed. Edinburgh, 1841.

Ross (James) and George Gary, From Wisconsin to Cal. and Return. Madison, 1869.

Ruby City (Idaho), Avalanche.

Ruby Hill (Nev.), Mining News.

Ruffner (E. H.), Report of Reconnais. in the Ute Country. Wash., 1876.

Rules and Practice of the District Court, etc. Salt Lake City, 1868.

Rusling (Jas F.), Across America. New York, 1874.

Ruxton (Geo. F.), Life in the Far West. New York, 1855.

 

Sacramento (Cal.), Bee; Record-Union; Union.

Safford (A. K. P.), Narrative. MS.

Saint Abe and his Seven Wives. A Tale of Salt Lake City. (Poem.) London, 1872.

Sala (George A.), America Revisited. London, 1882. 2 vols.

Salem (Or.), Oregon Argus; Oregon Statesman.

Salmeron, in Doc. Hist. Mex., 3d set., pt iv. 7-9.

Salt Lake City (Utah), Newspapers: Anti-Polygamy Standard; Birkuben (Scandinavian); Christian Advocate; City Review; College Lantern; Contributor; Deseret News; Educational Journal; Footlights; Grocer; Herald; Independent; Journal; Juvenile Instructor; Leader; Mail; Miner; Monthly Record; Mormon Expositor; Mormon Tribune; Mountaineer; New Endowment; News; Peep o' Day; Press; Real Estate Circular; Rocky Mountain Christian Advocate; Skandinav; Telegraph; Tribune; Union Vidette; Utah Commercial; Utah Magazine; Utah Mining Gazette; Utah Mining Journal; Utah Musical Tinms; Utah Posten (Danish); Utah Reporter; Utah Review; Valley Tan; Western Magazine (Utah ed. ); Woman's Exponent.

Salt Lake Fruit. Boston, 1884.

Samson (G. w.), in Scribner's Monthly, iii. 1872.

San Bernadino Guardian.

San Buenaventura Ventura Free Press.

San Diego News; Union.

San Francisco (Cal.), Newspapers: Abend Post; Alta California; Cal. Christian Advocate; Cal. Courier; Cal. Farmer; Cal. Mercantile Journal; Cal. Star; Cal. Teacher; Call; Chronicle; Commercial Herald and Market Review; Despatch and Vanguard; Echo du Pacifique; Evening Bulletin; Examiner; Golden Era; Herald; Mercantile Gazette; Mercantile Journal; Mining Review, etc.; Mining and Scientific Press; Monitor; News Letter; Occident; Pacific Baptist; Pacific Churchman; Pacific News; Pacific Observer; Pacific Rural Press; Picayune; Pioneer; Post; Scientific Press; Stock Exchange; Stock Report; Times; Town Talk; Visitor; Western Standard, 1856-8; Wide West.

San Jose (Cal.), Argus; Mercury; Pioneer; Times.

[p. xl]

San Luis Obispo Tribune.

Santa Barbara Index.

Santa Cruz Sentinel.

Santa Rosa Times.

Sargent (A. A.), Speech in House of Rep., Feb. 23, 1870. Washington, 1870.

Saxon (Isabella), Five Years within the Golden State. Philadelphia, 1868.

Scenes in the Rocky Mountains. Philadelphia, 1846.

Schiel (Doct. J.), Reise durch die Felsengebirge Schaffhausen. 1859.

Schott (Chas A.), Tables of Temperature, etc. Washington, 1876; Tables of Rain and Snow, etc. Washington, 1872.

Scribner's Monthly Magazine (later the Century). New York, 1871 et seq.

Seattle (Wash.), Intelligencer; Pacific Tribune; Puget Sound Despatch.

Second General Epistle of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1849; Third ditto. Salt Lake City, 1850.

Seeley (R. H.), The Mormons and their Religion, in Scribner's Monthly, iii. 396.

Seer (The). Washington and Liverpool.

Serra, Memorial, March 1873. MS.

Sexton (Geo.), A Portraiture of Mormonism. London, 1849.

Shearer (Joel), Mysteries Revealed. Council Bluffs (Iowa), 1854.

Shearer (Joel) and Swett (Wm), Comments on the Kingdom of God. Council Bluffs (Iowa), 1854.

Shearer, Journal of a Trip to California. 1849. MS.

Sheen (Isaac), The Narrow Way. Plano (Ill.); The Plan of Salvation. Plano (Ill.)

Shepherd (M. L.), Colonizing of San Bernardino. MS.

Shuck (O. T.), Cal. Scrap-book. San Francisco, 1869; Rep. Men. San Francisco, 1870, 1875.

Silliman (Benjamin), Amer. Jour. of Science and Art. New Haven, 1846 et seq.

Silver City (Idaho), Avalanche.

Silver Reef (Utah), Echo; Miner.

Simonin (L.), Le Grand-Ouest des Etats-Unis. Paris, 1869; Lea Mines d'Or et d'Argent aux Etats-Unis, in Reveue des Deux Mondes. Nov. 1875.

Simons (John), A Few More Facts, etc. Dymock (Eng.), 1840.

Simpson (J. H.), On the Change of Route West from Omaha, proposed by the U. P. Railroad. Washington, 1865; Rept. on U. P. Railroad and Branches. Washington, 1865; Shortest Route to Cal. Philadelphia, 1869; Report of Explorations across the Great Basin, etc. Washington, 1876.

Simpson (S.), Mormonism: Its History, Doctrine, etc. London, n.d.

Siskiyou Couuty Affairs. MS.

Skelton (Robt) and Meik (J. P.), Defence of Mormonism. Calcutta, 1855.

Sketches of Mormonism, as Drawn by Brigham Young and the Elders, in Western Lit. Messenger, July 1856.

Slater (N.), Fruits of Mormonism. Coloma (Cal.), 1851.

Slosh (E. L.), Gazetteer of Utah. Salt Lake City, 1874.

Sloan (R. W.), Utah Gazetteer. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Sloan (Robt W.), and Others, Utah, Her Attractions and Resources. S. L. City, 1881.

Smith (Alexander H.), Polygamy, etc. Piano (Ill.)

Smith (Charles H.), The Mormonites. Bristol (Eng.), 1849.

Smith (Clark), Mystery and Crime in the Land of the Ute. Cornelius (Or.), 1878.

Smith (David H.), The Bible versus Polygamy. Plano (Ill.)

Smith (Emma), Selection of Hymns. Independence (Mo.), 1832.

Smith (Geo. A.), Plea on Trial of Howard Egan. Liverpool, 1852; Rise, Progress, etc., of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1869, 1872; Liverpool and London, 1873; Discourse on Celestial Marriage. Oct. 8, 1869.

[p. xli]

Smith (J.), Items of Church History, etc. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Smith (J. L.), Einige Worte on die Heiligen der Lezten Tage. Zurich (Switz.), 1861.

Smith (Joseph), Reply to Orson Pratt. Plano (Ill.); "Who then can be Saved?" Plano (Ill.)

Smith, Jr (Joseph), Book of Mormon. Palmyra (N. Y.), 1830; Completely Revised by the Translator. Nauvoo (Ill.), 1840; Liverpool, 1852; New York, (--); Salt Lake City, 1871, 1879; The Holy Scriptures Translated and Corrected by the Spirit of Revelation. Piano (Ill.), 1867; Book of Doctrine and Covenants, etc. Nauvoo, 1846; Liverpool, 1854; Liverpool, n.d.; Liverpool, 1882; Salt Lake City, 1876; Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States. Nauvoo, 1844.

Smith, Jr (Joseph), Correspondence between, and John Wentworth, James A. Bennett, and John C. Calhoun. New York, 1844; and Young (Brigham), Discourses on the Relation of the Mormons to the Government. Salt Lake City, 1855.

Smith (Lucy), Biog. Sketches of Joseph Smith, etc. Liverpool, 1853.

Smith (Mary Ettie V.), Fifteen Years among the Mormons. N. Y., 1858. Smith, Narrative of the Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum. By an Eye-witness.

Smith (The Prophet Joseph), Questions and Answers. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Smith (T. W.), Spiritualism Viewed from a Scriptural Standpoint. Plano (Ill.); The "One Baptism," etc. Plano (Ill.) The "One Body." Plano (Ill.)

Smith (Wm), Revelation Given to. Philadelphia, 1848; Slanders Refuted, etc., n.d.

Smithsonian Institution, Annual Reports. Washington, 1853 et seq.

Smoot (Margaret S.), Experience of a Mormon Wife. MS.

Smucker (Sam'l H.), The Religious, Social, and Political History of the Mormons. N. Y., 1856, 1860.

Smyth (John H.), Homestead Law, etc.

Snow (Eliza R.), Hymns and Songs. Salt Lake City, 1880; Poems, Religious, Historical, and Political. Liverpool and London, 1856. vol. i.; Salt Lake City, 1877. vol. ii.; Women's Organizations in Utah. MS.; Bible Questions and Answers. Salt Lake City, 1881 and 1884; Brief Sketch. MS.; Biography of Lorenzo Snow. Salt Lake City, 1884; Children's Primary Hymn Book. Salt Lake City, 1880 and 1882; Correspondence of Palestine Tourists. Salt Lake City, 1875; Recitations for the Primary Associations, Books nos. 1 and 2. Salt Lake City, 1882; Sketch of my Life. MS.; Time Book. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Snow (Erastus), En rost fran lander Zion. Copenhagen (Den.), 1852; One Year in Scandinavia, etc. n.d.; Skandinabieus Stierne. Copenhagen, 1851.

Snow (E.) and Winchester (B.), Address to the Citizens of Salem (Mass.), 1841.

Snow (Lorenzo), Voice of Joseph, etc. Liverpool and Lond. 1852.; Only Way to be Saved. London, 1851; Madras, 1853; Italian Mission. n.d.; La Voix de Joseph, etc. Turin (Italy), 1851; Exposition des Premier Principes de la Doctrine de l'Eglise de Jesus Christ, etc. Turin (Italy), 1851.

Snow (Z.) (Atty-Genl.), Communications to Utah Legislature. Salt Lake City, 1872; Salt Lake City, 1874; Correspondence with Wm Clayton (Auditor, etc.) Salt Lake City, 1872; Opinion on Brigham Young. Liverpool, 1852.

Sonoma (Cal.), Democrat.

Southern Quarterly Review. New Orleans, etc., 1842 et seq.

Spaulding (Samuel J.), Spaulding Memorial; A Genealogical History, etc. Boston, 1872.

Spence (Thos), Settlers' Guide. New York, 1862.

Spencer (Orson), Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of the Church, etc. Liverpool, 1848; London, 1852; Patriarchal Order, or Plurality of Wives, etc. Liverpool, 1853; Report to President Young on the Prussian Mission. Liverpool and London, 1853; Most Prominent Doctrines of the Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1874.

[p. xlii]

Spiritual Courtship and Marriage of the Mormons. London, n.d.

Spiritual-Wife Doctrine of the Mormons. Report of the Judges of Utah Territory. Cheltenham (Eng.), 1852.

Spring Lake Villa (Utah), Farmer's Oracle.

Stanford (Jos), Sketch of Weber County. MS.; Ogden City. MS.

Stansbury (Howard), Die Mormonen, etc. Stuttgart, 1854; Exped. to Valley of Great Salt Lake. Philadelphia, 1855. 2 vols.

Staples (Day. J.), Incidents and Information. MS.

Statistical Report of Stakes of Zion. MS.

Stayner (Arthur), Report on the Manufacture of Sugar. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Staynor (C. W.), Farmers' and Miners' Manual. Salt Lake City, 1883.

St Clair (D. L.), To the Followers of the Latter-day Saints. Cheltenham (Eng.), 1840.

Stenhouse (T. B. H.), Expose of Polygamy. New York, 1872; Les Mormons, etc. Lausanne, 1854; The Rocky Mountain Saints. New York, 1873.

Stenhouse (Mrs T. B. H.), Tell it All, etc. Hartford, 1879; An Englishwoman in Utah. London, 1880; A Lady's Life among the Mormons. New York, 1872.

Stevenson (H.), Lecture on Mormonism. Newcastle (Eng.), 1839.

St George (Utah), Pomologist and Gardener.

Stillman (Jas W.), Speech on the Mormon Question. Boston, 1884.

St Louis Democrat; Luminary.

Stockton (Cal.), Herald; Independent.

Stone (W. F.), The Mormon Problem. MS.; The Saints at Pueblo. MS.

Sturtevant (J. M.), Review of Mormonism in All Ages, in Amex. Bib. Repos., 2d set., ix. 109.

Successor in the Prophet's Office, etc. Plano (Ill.) Suisun (Cal.), Republican.

Sunday-school Dialogues and Recitations, Book no. 1. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Sunderland (L.), Mormonism Exposed, 1841; New York, 1842.

Sutter Co. Hist. 17.

Sweet (J. B.), The Book of Mormon and the Latter-day Saints. London, 1857.

 

Talmage (De Witt), Speeches, etc.

Tanner (Mary J.), Fugitive Poems. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Taylder (T. W. P.), Mormon's Own Book, etc. London, 1845, 1857; Materialism of the Mormons, etc. Woolwich (Eng.), 1849.

Taylor (B. F.), Summer Savory, etc. Chicago, 1879.

Taylor (John), Three Nights' Public Discussion, at Boulogne-sur-mer. Liverpool, 1850; Aux Amis de la Verite Religieuse. n.d.; De la Necessite de Nouvelles Revelations prouvee par la Bible. n.d.; Traite sur le Bapteme. n.d; Buch der Mormonen. Hamburg, 1851; Zion's Panier, Hamburg, 1851; Government of God. Liverpool and London, 1852; Replies to Vice-President Colfax. Salt Lake City, 1870; On the decision of the Supreme Court of the U.S. in the case of Geo. Reynolds. Jan. 13, 1879, Salt Lake City; Discourse at the General Conference. Salt Lake City, April 9, 1882; Early Recollections. MS.; Epistle to the Presidents of Stakes, etc. Salt Lake City, 1882; Items on Priesthood. Salt Lake City, 1881, 1882; On Marriage and Succession in the Priesthood. Salt Lake City, 1882; Reminiscences of the First Year's Journey across the Plains. MS.; The Mediation and Atonement of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Salt Lake City, 1882; Truth Defended, etc. Liverpool, 1840.

Taylor (John) and Others, Epistle of the Twelve Apostles, etc. S. L. City, 1877; Circular from the Twelve Apostles. S. L. City, April 16, 1880; A String of Pearls. Salt Lake City, 1882.

T. C. R., What I Saw in Utah. MS.

Testimony of the Great Prophet, etc. Liverpool, n. impt.

[p. xliii]

The Book of Mormon a Forgery. London and Leamington, 1850.

The Book of Mormon, History and Contents. London and Leamington, 1850.

The Church of Latter-day Saints, in Old and New, ii. 1870.

The City of the Saints, in Littell's Liv. Age, lxxi. 1861.

The Delegate from Utah (Geo. Q. Cannon). n.d.

The Diamond. Voree (Wis.), 1848.

The Doctrine of the Latter-day Saints. London, n.d.

The Doctrines of Mormonism. London, n.d.

The Emigrant Caravan, in Chambers's Jour., liii. 1876.

The External Evidences of the Book of Mormon Examined. London, n.d.

The Fowlers' Snare. London, 1860.

The Galaxy. New York, 1866 et seq.

The Gates of the Mormon Hell Opened. London, n.d.

The Hand-book of Reference to History, etc., of Latter day Saints. Salt Lake City, 1884.

The Latter-day Saints, in Fortnightly Rev., xii. 1869.

The Life and Character of Joseph Smith. London and Leamington, 1850.

The Mining Industry. Denver (Col.), 1881.

The Mormon Doctrine of Polygamy. London, 1853.

The Mormon Imposture, etc. London, 1851.

The Mormon Metropolis. Salt Lake City, 1883.

The Mormon Problem, in Old and New, i. 1870.

The Mormonites, in Lond. Month. Rev., new ser., iii. 1842.

The Mormons in Utah, in Littell's Liv. Age, xlvi. 1855.

The Mormons or Latter-day Saints, with Memoirs of the Life of Joseph Smith, the American Mahomet. London (--).

The Mormons, or Life in Utah. Birmingham, n.d.

The Mysteries of Mormonism. New York, 1882.

The Restorer (in English and Welsh), Monthly; Merthyr Tydfil. Wales, 1864.

The Spiritual-Wife Doctrine of the Mormons. Manchester (Eng.), n.d.

The Two Prophets of Mormonism, in Cath. World, xxvi. 1878.

The Utah Magazine, 1868-69.

The Voice of Truth, etc. Nauvoo, 1844.

The Yankee Mahomet, in Am. Whig Rev., new ser., vii. 1851.

Theobald (J.), Mormonism Dissected.

Thomas (E. A.), in No. Amer. Rev.; 1884. Fortnightly Rev., xxxvi. 414; Potter's Amer. Monthly, xvii. 298.

Thomas (John), Rise, Progress, and Dispersion of the Mormons. London, Edinburgh, and Nottingham.

Thompson (Charles), Evidences in Proof of the Book of Mormon; Batavia (N.Y.) and New York, 1841; Proclamation and Warning to the Inhabitants of America.

Thornton (J. Q.), Oregon and California in 1848. N. Y., 1849. 2 vols. Three Nights' Public Discourse at Boulogne-sur-mer, etc. Liverpool, 1850.

Tice (J. H.), Over the Plains, etc. St Louis, 1872.

Times and Seasons. Commerce (Ill.), 1830; Nauvoo (Ill.), 1840-46. 6 vols. in 2.

Tithing. Plano (Ill.)

Todd (John), The Sunset Land. Boston, 1870.

Torquemada, i. 609-10.

Townsend (G. A.), The Mormon Trials at Salt Lake City. New York, 1871.

Townsend (J. K.), Narrative of a Journey, etc. Philadelphia, 1839.

Townsend, Mormon Trials. n.d.

Townshend (F. T.), Ten Thousand Miles of Travel, etc. London, 1869.

Tracy (Mrs N. N.), Narrative. MS.

Trial of Jos Smith, Jr, and Others, for High Treason and Other Crimes against the State of Missouri. 26th cong. 2d sess., Sen. Doc. 189, Feb. 15, 1841.

Trial of the Witnesses to the Resurrection of Jesus. Plane (Ill.), 1870.

[p. xliv]

Tribune Almanac. N. Y., 1838 et seq.

Triplett (Frank), Conquering the Wilderness. New York and St Louis, 1883.

True Latter-day Saints' Herald. Cincinnati (O.) and Plano (Ill.), 1860-72.

Truth by Three Witnesses: A Warning Voice. Plano (Ill.)

Truth made Manifest: A Dialogue. Plano (Ill.)

Tucker (Pomeroy), Origin, Rise, etc., of Mormonism. New York, 1867.

Tullidge (Edward W.), Life of Brigham Young. N.Y., 1876; Life of Joseph the Prophet. Salt Lake City, 1878; Women of Mormondom. N.Y., 1877; Quarterly Magazine. S. L. City, 1880 et seq.; Morm. Commonwealth, in Galaxy, ii. 356. Morm. Theco., in Id., ii. 209, iv. 541; Reformation, etc., Harper's Mag., xliii. 602; Autobiograhpy. MS.; Brigham Young and Mormonism, in Galaxy, Sept. 1867; Views of Mormonism, in Id., Oct. 1, 1866; Leaders in the Mormon Reform Movement, in Phren. Jour., July 1871; The Mormons, etc., in Id., Jan. 1870; The Utah Gentiles, etc., in Id., May 1871; Wm H. Hooper, of Utah, in Id., Nov. 1870; History of Salt Lake City.

Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine. Salt Lake City, 1880 et seq. Turnbull (W.), A Call to the Unconverted. Liverpool, n.d.

Turner (J. B.), Mormonism in All Ages. New York, 1842.

Turner (O.), Origin of the Mormon Imposture, in Littell's Liv. Age, Aug. 30, 1851.

Tuscarora (Nev.), Times; Review.

Tuthill, Colorado.

Tuthill, Hist. Cal. San Francisco, 1866.

Tyler (Daniel), History of the Mormon Battalion. Salt Lake City, 1881.

Tyson (Thomas), Joseph Smith, the Great American Impostor. London, 1852.

 

Udgorn Scion. Wales.

Unionville (Nev.), Silver State.

United States Geolog. Explor. of 40th Parallel, by Clarence King. Washington, 1870.

United States Geolog. Surv. West of 100th Merid. (Geo. W. Wheeler); Bulletins; Reports and Various Publications. Washington, 1874 et seq. 4to. Atlas sheets. Maps.

United States Government Documents: Accounts; Agriculture; Army Regulations; Army Meteorological Register; Banks; Bureau of Statistics; Census; Commerce, Foreign and Domestic; Commerce and Navigation; Commercial Relations; Congressional Directory; Education; Engineers; Finance; Indian Affairs; Interior; Land Office; Meteorological Reports; Mint; Ordnance; Pacific Railroad; Patent Office; Postmaster-General; Post-offices; Quartermaster-general; Revenue; U.S. Official Register--cited by their dates.

United States Government Documents: House Exec. Doc.; House Journal; House Miscel. Doc.; House Com. Reports; Message and Documents; Senate Exec. Doc.; Journal; Miscel. Doc; Com. Repts--cited by congress and session. Many of these documents have, however, separate titles, for which see author or topic.

University of Deseret. Annual Catalogues, 1868 et seq.; Circulars; Biennial Reports.

Upper Missouri Advertiser. 1838.

U. P. R. R., Report of Saml B. Reed.

U. S. Charters and Constitutions. Washington, 1877. 2 vols.

Utah: A Bill to Establish a Territorial Government. Washington, 1850.

Utah Almanac.

Utah and its People. New York, 1882.

Utah and the Mormons, in The New Englander, vi. 1854.

Utah Board of Trade, Resources and Attractions, etc. Salt Lake City, 1879.

Utah Central R. R. Company, Grants, Rights and Privileges, etc. Salt Lake City, 1871.

Utah Commission, Special Report. Washington, 1884.

[p. xlv]

Utah Commission, the Edmunds Act, Reports of the Commissioners, Rules, Regulations, etc. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Utah, Constitution of the State of. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Utah, County Sketches by various authors. MS.

Utah, Election Laws. Salt Lake City. n.d.

Utah, in Beadle's Monthly, July 1866.

Utah: Its Silver Mines and Other Resources. n.d.

Utah Journals of Council and House, 1851 et seq., together with the other Public Documents printed by the territory, which are cited in my notes by their titles and dates, the title consisting of 'Utah,' followed by one of the following headings: Act; Adjutant General's Report; Agricultural; Chancellor of University Reports; Corporations; Council and House Bills, County Financial Reports, Deseret Agric. and Manufac. Society; Stat. Reports; Domestic Relations; Elections, Fisheries; Inaugural Addresses of Governors, Messages and Documents; Joint Resolutions; Land Acts; Laws; Memorials; Militia; Mines and Mining; Political Code; Revenue Laws; School Law; Secretary of Territory Reports; Superintendent of District Schools Reports; Territorial Auditor Reports; Territorial Librarian Reports; Transportation; Warden of Penitentiary Reports.

Utah Miscellany. MS.

Utah Notes. MS.

Utah Pamphlets, Political, containing the following: Argument before Commr of Intl Revenue, etc.; Bates (George C.), Argument in Baker habeas corpus case; Cannon (Geo. Q.), Review of decision of U. S. Supreme Court; Clagett (Win H.), Speech against admission of Utah as a state; Constitution of State of Deseret said Memorial; Cragin (A. H.), Speech on execution of laws in Utah; Fitch (Thos), Speech on Utah Bill; Speech on Land Grants and Indian Policy; Speech on the Utah Problem; Reply to Memorial of Salt Lake Bar; Hooper (W. H.), Speech against the "Cullom Bill;" Reply to Clagett; Kinney (Jno. F.), Reply to Fernando Wood; Laws concerning Naturalization, etc.; Memorial of Citizens of Salt Lake City; Musser (A. M.), Fruits of Mormonism; Paine (H. E.), Argument in Contested Election, etc.; Review of Opinion of U. S. Supreme Court by an old Lawyer; Reynolds (Geo.), vs U. S.; Snow (Z.), (Terrtl Atty.-Genl.), Communication to Legislative Assembly; Communication to Terr. House of Rep.; Taylor (John), Interview with O. J. Hollister, etc.

Utah Pamphlets, Religious, containing the following: Minutes of Special Conference of August 28, 1852, at Salt Lake City; Extract from a MS. entitled The Peace-maker; Skelton (Robt) and Meik (J. P.), A Defence of Mormonism; Pratt (O.), Smith (Geo. A.), and Cannon (Geo. Q.), Discourses on Celestial Marriage; Hyde (O.), Sketch of Travels and Ministry; Colfax (S.), The Mormon Question; Taylor (John), Reply to Colfax; Newman (Rev. Dr.), A Sermon on Plural Marriage; Pratt (O.), Reply to Newman; Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, Constitution and By-laws; Utah Central R. R. Grants, Rights and Privileges; Smith (Geo. A.), Rise, Progress, and Travels of the Church, etc.; Young (B.), The Resurrection; Circular of the First Presidency; Death and Funeral of Brigham Young; Young, Sen. (Joseph), History of the Organization of the Seventies; Gibbs (G. F.), Report of Convention of Mormon Women, etc.; The Great Proclamation, etc.; Good Tidings, etc.; The Testimony of the Great Prophet; The Great Contrast; Death of the Prophets Joseph and Hyrum Smith; Smith (Jos), Pearl of Great Price; Reynolds (Geo.), Book of Abraham.

Utah. Perpetual Emigration Fund. MS.

Utah Pioneers, Anniversary Meetings; Proceedings 33d Anniversary. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Utah, Speeches on the Edmunds Bill.

Utah Tracts, A collection of eleven pamphlets cited by titles and dates. Salt Lake City, 1879.

 

[p. xlvi]

Vancouver (Wash.), Register.

Van Deusen (Increase and Maria), Hidden Orgies of Mormonism. Nottingham (Eng.), n.d.; Spiritual Delusions. New York, 1855; Startling Disclosures of the Great Mormon Conspiracy. New York, 1849; Sublime and Ridiculous Blended. New York, 1848.

Van Dyke (Walter), Recollections of Utah. MS.

Van Sickles (H.), Utah Desperadoes.

Van Tramp (John C.), Prairies and Rocky Mountains. St Louis, 1860.

Venegas, Not. Cal., i. 167-9.

Vest, Morgan, Call, Brown, Pendleton, and Lamar, in U.S. Senate. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Vetromile (Eugene), Tour in Both Hemispheres. New York, etc., 1880.

Victor (Frances F.), All Over Oregon and Washington. San Francisco, 1872; River of the West. Hartford, 1870.

"Vidette" (The Union). Camp Douglas and Salt Lake City, 1864 to 1867.

Villagra, Hist. N. Mex., 19 et seq.

Virginia (Mont.), Madisonian.

Virginia and Helena (Mont.), Post.

Virginia City (Nev.), Chronicle; Territorial Enterprise.

Visit of the Wyoming Legislature to Utah. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Visit to the Crazy Swede. MS.

Visit to the Mormons, in Westmin. Rev., Oct. 1861.

Voice from the West, etc.; History of the Morrisites. San Francisco, 1879.

Voice of the Good Shepard. Plano (Ill.)

 

Wadsworth (W.), National Wagon-road Guide. San Francisco, 1858.

Waite (C. B.), The Western Monthly. Salt Lake City, 1869 et seq.; in Lakeside, i. 290.

Waite (Mrs C. V.), Adventures in the Far West, etc. Chicago, 1882; The Mormon Prophet and his Harem. Chicago, 1857; Cambridge, 1866.

Walker (W.), Industrial Progress and Prospects of Utah. MS.

Walla Walla (Wash.), Statesman.

Wendell (C. W.), History of the Persecutions Endured by the Church, etc. Sidney (N. S. W.), 1852; Reply to "Shall we Believe in Mormon?" Sidney (N. S. W.), 1852.

Ward (Austin N.), Husband in Utah. New York, 1857; Male Life among the Mormons. Philadelphia, 1863.

Ward (J. H.), Gospel Philosophy. Salt Lake City, 1884; The Hand of Providence. Salt Lake City, 1883.

Ward (Maria), Female Life among the Mormons. New York, 1855; The Mormon Wife, etc. Hartford, 1873.

Warner, Rem. MS., 21-9.

Warren (G. K.), Preliminary Report, etc. Washington, 1875.

Warsaw (Ill.), Signal.

Washington (D. C.), Natl Intelligencer; Seer; Star.

Waters (--), Life among the Mormons. New York, 1868.

Watsonville (Cal.), Pajaronian; Pajaro Times.

Way to End the Mormon War, in Littell's Liv. Age, 2d ser., xx. 1858.

Webster (Thomas), Extracts from the Doctrine and Covenants. Preston (Eng.), n.d.

Wedderburn (D.), Mormonism from a Mormon Point of View, in Fortnightly Rev., 1876; Pop. Scien. Monthly, x. 156.

Weightman (Hugh), Mormonism Exposed; The Other Side. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Weiser (R.), in Evang. Rev., x. 80.

Wells (D. H.), Journal. MS.

Wells (E. B.) and Williams (Z. Y.), Memorial to U.S. Congress. Washington, 1879.

Wells (J. F.), The Contributor, A Monthly Magazine, Salt Lake City, Oct, 1879 et seq.

[p. xlvii]

Wells (Samuel R.), The Mormon Question, in Phren. Jour., Dec, 1871; Our Visit to Salt Lake City, in Id., Dec. 1870.

Wentworth, Great West.

West (P. R.), The Brewing Business. MS.

Westbrook (G. W.), Appendix to Hunt's Mormonism. St Louis, 1844; The Mormons in Illinois. St Louis, 1844.

West Coast Reporter, iv. 415.

Westmins. Rev., lix. 196.

Whatcom (Wash.), Bellingham Bay Mail.

White (F. P.), Cattle Raising and Grazing. MS.

Whitney (H.), Journal. MS.

Whitney (H. M.), Plural Marriage. Salt Lake City, 1882.

Whittier (J. G.), in Howitt, Journal, ii. 157; Littell's Liv. Age, xv. 461.

Why We Practise Plural Marriage. Salt Lake City, 1884.

Wight (Lyman), Abridged Account of my Life. n.d.

Willard (Emma), Last Leaves of American History. New York, 1853.

Willes (W.), What is Mormonism? Calcutta, n.d.; The Mountain Warbler. Salt Lake City. 1872.

Williams (H. T.), Pacific Tourist. New York, 1876.

Williams (S.), Mormonism Exposed. 1842.

Willmore (Benj.), Mormonism Unmasked. West Bromwich (Eng.), 1855.

Winchester (Benj.), A History of the Priesthood. Philadelphia, 1843; Origin of the Spaulding Story. Philadelphia, 1840; Synopsis of the Holy Scriptures, etc. Philadelphia, 1842.

Winnemucca (Nev.), Silver State.

With the False Prophet, in Scrib. Monthly, iii. 1872.

Wolfe (J. M.), Gazetteer. Omaha, 1878.

Woodruf (W.) and Richards (F. D.), Historial Events of Mormonism. MS.

Woodruff (Phebe W.), Autobiog. Sketch. MS.

Woodruff (W.), Leaves from my Journal. Salt Lake City, 1881, 1882; Overland to Utah. MS.; Private Journal. MS.

Woods (C. L.), Recollections. MS.

Worthington (C. J.), The Woman in Battle, etc. Hartford, 1876.

Wray (G. W.), Mormonism Exhibited in its Own Minor. Middlesbrough (Eng.), 1854.

 

Yankee Mahomet (The), in Amer. Whig Rev., June 1851.

Year of Jubilee, etc. Salt Lake City, 1880.

Young (Ann Eliza), Wife No. 19, etc. Hartford, 1876.

Young (Brigham), Resurrection: A Discourse. Salt Lake City, 1875; Death of, etc. Salt Lake City, 1877; History and Private Journal. MS.

Young (Brigham) and Others, Circular of the First Presidency, etc. Salt; Lake City, July 11, 1877; Journal of Discourses. Liverpool and London, 1854 et seq.

Young (L.), Early Experiences. MS.

Young (Mrs C. D.), A Woman's Experiences with the Pioneer Band. MS.

Young, Sen. (Jos), Organization of the Seventies, etc. Salt Lake City, 1878. Y Perl o Fawr Bris. n.d. (Wales).

Yr Curgrawn Ysgrythyrol. Mcrthyr Tydvil, South Wales.

Yuma (Arizona), Sentinel.

 

Zabriskie (Jas C.), Public Land Laws of the U.S. San Francisco, 1870.

Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution; Constitution, By-Laws, and Articles Of Incorporation. S. L. City, 1870. MS.; Argument before U. S. Commissioner of Internal Revenue. S. L. City, 1878; Mercantile and Manufacturing Establishments. S. L. City, 1884; Semi-annual Statement. S. L. City, 1880; Wholesale Price List. S. L. City, 1880.

Zion's Watchman (Australia and New Zealand).

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

HISTORY OF UTAH.

  

CHAPTER I.
 DISCOVERIES OF THE SPANIARDS.
 1540-1777.

FRANCISCO VAZQUEZ DE CORONADO AT CiBOLA--EXPEDITION OF PEDRO DE TOBAR AND FATHER JUAN DE PADILLA--THEY HEAR OF A LARGE RIVER--GARCiA LOPEZ DE CaRDENAS SENT IN SEARCH OF IT--THE FIRST EUROPEANS TO APPROACH UTAH--ROUTE OF CaRDENAS--MYTHICAL MAPS--PART OF THE NORTHERN MYSTERY--JOURNEY OF DOMINGUEZ AND ESCALANTE--THE COURSE THEY FOLLOWED--THE RIVERS THEY CROSSED--THE COMANCHES--REGION OF THE GREAT LAKES--RIVERS TIMPANOGOS, SAN BUENAVENTURA, AND OTHERS--THE COUNTRY OF THE YUTAS--ROUTE FROM SANTA Fe TO MONTEREY--THE FRIARS TALK OF THE LAKE COUNTRY--RETURN OF THE SPANIARDS TO ZUnI AND MARCH TO SANTA Fe.

    AS Francisco Vazquez de Coronado was journeying from Culiacan to the north and east in 1540, he rested at Cibola, that is to say Zuni, and while waiting for the main army to come forward, expeditions were sent out in various directions. One of these, consisting of twenty men under Pedro de Tobar, and attended by Father Juan de Padilla, proceeded north-westward, and after five days reached Tusayan, or the Moqui villages, which were quickly captured. Among other matters of interest, information was here given of a large river yet farther north, the people who lived upon its banks being likewise very large.

    Returning to Cibola, Tobar reported what had been said concerning this river; whereupon Captain Garcia Lopez de Cardenas was sent with twelve men to explore it, Pedro de Sotomayor accompanying to

[p. 2]

chronicle the expedition. Obtaining at Tusayan, where he was well received, guides and carriers, with an ample supply of provisions, Cardenas marched for twenty days, probably in a north-westerly direction, [*1]

[p. 3]

through a desert country until he discovered the river, but from such high banks that he could not reach it. It was the river called the Tizon, and it flowed from the north-east toward the south-west. It seemed to the Spaniards when they first descried it that they were on mountains through which the river had cut

[p. 4]

a chasm only a few feet wide, but which if they might believe the natives was half a league across. In vain for several days, with their faces toward the south and west, they sought to escape from the mountains that environed them, and descend to the river, for they were suffering from thirst. At length

[p. 5]

one morning three of the lightest and most active of the party crept over the brink and descended until they were out of sight. They did not return till toward evening, when they reported their failure to reach the bottom, saying that the river, and distances and objects, were all much larger than they seemed to the beholder above, rocks apparently no higher than a man being in fact larger than the cathedral at

Click to enlarge
PROBABLE ROUTE OF CARDENAS.

[paragraph continues] Seville. Compelled by thirst they retired from the inhospitable stream, and finally returned to Tusayan and Cibola.

[p. 6]

It was not necessary in those days that a country should be discovered in order to be mapped; even now we dogmatize most about what we know least. It is a lonely sea indeed that cannot sport mermaids and monsters; it were a pity to have so broad an extent of land without a good wide sheet of water in it; so the Conibas Regio cum Vicinis Gentibvs shows a large lake, called Conibas, connecting by a very wide

Click to enlarge
MAP FROM MAGIN, 1611.

river apparently with a northern sea. I give herewith another map showing a lake large enough to swallow

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] Utah and Idaho combined, and discharging its waters by two great rivers into the Pacific. This species of geography was doubtless entirely satisfactory to the wise men of this world until they came to know better about it. If the reader will look over the chapters on the Northern Mystery in my History of the 

Click to enlarge
MAP BY JOHN HARRIS, 1705.

[paragraph continues] Northwest Coast he may learn further of absurdities in map-making.

 

    A more extended and pronounced exploration was that of two Franciscan friars, one the visitador comisario

[p. 8]

of New Mexico, Francisco Atanasio Dominguez, and the other ministro doctrinero of Zuni, Silvestre Velez de Escalante, who set out from Santa Fe July 29, 1776, for the purpose of discovering a direct route to Monterey, on the seaboard of Alta California. New Mexico had now been known nearly two and a half centuries; the city of Santa Fe had been founded over a century and a half, Monterey had been occupied since 1770, and yet there had been opened no direct route westward with the sea, communication between Mexico and Santa Fe being by land, the road following the Rio Grande. In his memorial of March 1773, while in Mexico, Father Junipero Serra had urged that two expeditions be made, one from Sonora to California, which was carried out the following year by Captain Anza, and one froth New Mexico to the sea, which Dominguez and Escalante now proposed to undertake. Again in 1775 Anza made a similar journey, this time leaving at the junction of the Colorado and Gila Father Garces who ascended the former stream to the Mojave country, whence crossing to Mission San Gabriel he proceeded to the Tulare Valley. There he heard from the natives of a great river coming in from the east or northeast. [*2] Indeed it was long the prevailing opinion that there existed such a stream in that vicinity. From the Tulare country Garces returned to San Gabriel and Mojave, and thence proceeded to the villages of the Moquis. From this place he probably wrote to Santa Fe concerning the rumor of this river; for all through the journey of Dominguez and Escalante they were in search of it. [*3]

[p. 9]

The party consisted in all of nine persons. Besides the two priests there were Juan Pedro Cisneros, alcalde mayor of Zuni, Bernardo Miera y Pacheco, capitan miliciano of Santa Fe, and five soldiers. [*4] Having implored divine protection, on the day before named they took the road to Abiquiu, passed on to the Rio Chama, and on the 5th of August reached a point called Nieves, on the San Juan River, three leagues below the junction of the Navajo. Thence they passed down the north bank of the San Juan, crossing the several branches, until on the 10th they found themselves on a branch of the Mancos, some distance from the San Juan, and beyond the line of the present state of Colorado. [*5] The 12th they camped on the north bank of the Rio Dolores, in latitude 38 degrees 13', [*6] and were there joined by two natives from Abiquiu, who had deserted their homes to follow the expedition. [*7]

    They now followed the general course of the Dolores [*8] until the 23d, when they left the San Pedro, which flows into the Dolores near La Sal, and crossed

[p. 10]

over north-east to Rio San Francisco, [*9] and again to the Rio San Javier [*10] on the 28th, their course being for some distance east of north.

Not far from their path was a rancheria of Yutas, which the Spaniards visited, endeavoring to obtain guides to the land of the Timpanogos, Timpangotzis, or Lagunas, where they had been told to look for

Click to enlarge
ESCALANTE'S ROUTE FROM SANTA FE TO UTAH LAKE

[paragraph continues] Pueblo towns. A Laguna guide was there, but the Yutas did all in their power to dissuade the explorers

[p. 11]

from proceeding, pretending ignorance of the country and danger from the Comanches. But the 3d of September saw them again on their way. Pursuing a north-west course, the second day they crossed and camped on the north bank of the Rio San Rafael, or Colorado, [*11] in latitude 41 degrees 4'. Their course thence was north-westerly, and on the 9th they crossed a river called San Clemente, [*12] flowing west. Signs of buffaloes were abundant, and on the 11th they killed one. Two days afterward they crossed the Rio de San Buenaventura, [*13] the boundary between the Yutas and the Comanches, in latitude 41 degrees 19', at a place which the priests call Santa Cruz. Here were six large black poplars, on one of which they left an inscription. After resting two days they took the course of the San Buenaventura south-west ten leagues, and from a hill saw the junction of the San Clemente. Descending a little farther they found a river flowing in from the west, following which they reached a branch the 17th, naming it the San Cosme. [*14]

    From this point they proceeded westward, following up the Uintah, across the Duchesne, and over the mountains, with no small difficulty, to a river which they called Purisima, [*15] and which they followed till on the 23d they came in sight of the lake which the natives called Timpanogos, but which is known now as Utah Lake.

 

    Several reasons combined to bring the Spaniards so far to the north of what would be a direct road

[p. 12]

from Santa Fe to Monterey. First, Escalante entertained a theory that a better route to the Pacific could be found northward than toward the south. Then there was always a fascination attending this region, with its great and perpetual Northern Mystery; perhaps the Arctic Ocean came down hereabout, or at least an arm of the Anian Strait might be found; nor were forgotten the rivers spoken of by different persons on different occasions as flowing hence into the Pacific. And last of all it may be that the rumor of Pueblo villages in this quarter carried the explorers further north than otherwise they would have gone.

    However this may have been, they were now of opinion that they had penetrated far enough in a northerly direction, and from this point must take a southerly course. There were here no town builders like the Moquis and Zunis, as the priests had been led to suppose, but there were wild Indians, and the first they had seen in this vicinity. At first these savages manifested fear, but when assured that the strangers had not come to harm them, and were in no way leagued with the dreaded Comanches, they welcomed them kindly and gave them food. They were simple-minded and inoffensive, these native Yutas, very ready to guide the travellers whithersoever they would go; but they begged them to return and establish a mission in their midst; in token of which, and of their desire to adopt the Christian faith, they gave the priests a kind of hieroglyphic painting on deerskin. [*16]

[p. 13]

    Then the Spaniards talk of the country, and of the people about them. They are in the valley and by the lake of Nuestra Senora de la Merced de los

Click to enlarge
TIMPANOGOS VALLEY.

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] Timpanogos, [*17] and north of the river San Buenaventura are the mountains which they have just crossed, extending north-east and south-west some seventy leagues, and having a width of forty leagues. From the surrounding heights flow four rivers of medium size, discharging their waters into the lake, where thrive fish and wild fowl. The valley which surrounds this lake extends from south-east to north-west sixteen Spanish leagues; it is quite level, and has a width of ten or twelve leagues. Except the marshes on the lake borders the land is good for agriculture. Of the four rivers which water the valley the southernmost, which they call Aguas Calientes, passes through rich meadows capable of supporting two large towns. The second, three leagues from the first, flowing northerly, and which they call the San Nicolas, fertilizes enough good land to support one large town or two smaller ones. Before reaching the lake it divides into two branches, on the banks of which grow tall poplars and alders. The third river, which is three and a half leagues to the north-east, and which they call the San Antonio de Padua, carries more water than the others, and from its rich banks, which would easily support three large towns, spring groves of larger trees. Santa Ana, they call the fourth river, which is north-west of the San Antonio, and not inferior to the others [*18]--so they are told, for they do not visit it. Besides these rivers, there are good springs of water both on plain and mountain-side; pasture lands are abundant, and in parts the fertile soil yields such quantities of flax and hemp that it seems they must have been planted there by man. On the San Buenaventura the Spaniards had been

[p. 15]

troubled by the cold; but here the climate is so delightful, the air so balmy, that it is a pleasure to breathe it, by day and by night. In the vicinity are other valleys equally delightful. Besides the products of the lake the Yutas hunt hares, and gather seeds from which they make atole. They might capture some buffaloes in the north-north-west but for the troublesome Comanches. [*19] They dwell in huts of osier, of which, likewise, many of their utensils are made; some of them wear clothes, the best of which are of the skins of rabbits and antelopes. There are in this region many people, of whom he who would know more may consult the Native Races.

    The Spaniards are further told by the Yutas of a large and wonderful body of water toward the northwest, and this is what Father Escalante reports of it. "The other lake, with which this communicates," he says, "occupies, as they told us, many leagues, and its waters are injurious and extremely salt; because the Timpanois [*20] assure us that he who wets any part of his body with this water, immediately feels an itching in the wet part. We were told that in the circuit of this lake there live a numerous and quiet nation, called Puaguampe, which means in our language Sorcerers; they speak the Comanche language, feed on herbs, and drink from various fountains or springs of good water which are about the lake; and they have their little houses of grass and earth, which latter forms the roof. They are not, so they intimated, enemies of those living on this lake, but since a certain time when the people there approached and killed a man, they do not consider them as neutral as before.

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] On this occasion they entered by the last pass of the Sierra Blanca de los Timpanogos, which is the same in which they are, by a route north one fourth north-west, and by that same way they say the Comanches make their raids, which do not seem to be very frequent." [*21]

    Continuing their journey the 26th of September with two guides, the Spaniards bend their course south-westwardly in the direction of Monterey, through the Sevier lake and river region, which stream they call Santa Isabel. The 8th of October they are in latitude 38 degrees 3' with Beaver River behind them. Passing on into what is now Escalante Valley they question the natives regarding a route to the sea, and as to their knowledge of Spaniards in that direction. The savages know nothing of either. Meanwhile winter is approaching, provisions are becoming low, the way to the sea must be long and difficult; therefore the friars resolve to abandon the attempt; they will continue south, turning perhaps to the east until they come to the Colorado, when they will return to Santa Fe by way of the Moqui and Zuni villages.

    Some of the party object to this abandonment of

[p. 17]

purpose. They have come far; they can surely find a way: why turn back? To determine the matter prayers are made and lots cast, the decision being against Monterey. As they turn eastward, the 11th, in latitude 36 degrees 52', they are obliged to make bread of seeds purchased from the natives, for their supplies are wholly exhausted. Reaching the Colorado the 26th, twelve days are passed in searching for a ford, which they find at last in latitude 37 degrees, the line dividing Utah from Arizona. Their course is now south-east, and the 16th of November they reach Oraybi, as they call the residence of the Moquis. There they are kindly received; but when for food and shelter they offer presents and religious instruction the natives refuse. Next day the Spaniards visit Xongopabi, and the day after Gualpi, at which latter place they call a meeting and propose to the natives temporal and spiritual submission. The Moquis will be friendly they say, but the further proposals they promptly decline. Thereupon the friars continue their way, reaching Zuni November 24th and Santa Fe the 2d of January 1777. [*22]

Footnotes

^2:1 I say probably, though in my own mind there is little doubt. The Spaniards were exploring northward. They had lately traversed the region to their south-west, and instead of wishing to retrace their steps they would be likely to keep up well away from their former track. It is true that one narrative gives the direction as west; but then the same writer places Tusan, or Tusayan, west of Cibola, which if the latter be Zuni, and the former Moqui, is incorrect. Then, if their direction from the Moqui towns was the same as this writer declares it to have been in travelling to that place, the Spaniards at this time certainly struck the Colorado within the limits of the present Utah. Escalante, Carta de 28 Oct. 1775, MS., placed Moqui west of Zuni, but a little north of west, with the Yutas their neighbor on the north. It is sufficiently plain that Cibola was Zuni, and Tusayan Moqui, and as a matter of fact the latter is in a north-westerly direction from the former. That they went due west and crossed the Little Colorado without any mention of that stream is not likely; because, first, it is not twenty days distant from the Moquis, and the stream when reached does not answer to their description. It was the great river they wished to find, and a northwest course would be the most direct. Further than this, it is stated plainly that the point at which they discovered the river was much nearer its source than where the Spaniards had previously seen it. Upon the direction then taken hangs the question as to the first Europeans to enter Utah. I deem the matter of sufficient importance to give both the originals and the translations of two of the most complete and reliable narratives of the expedition. The first and fullest we find in the Relation de Castaneda of Coronado's expedition, Ternaux-Compans, serie i. tom. ix. 61-5, which reads as follows:

    'Comme don Pedro de Tobar avait rempli sa mission, il revint sur ses pas et rendit compte au general de ce qu'il avait vu. Celui-ci fit partir sur-le-champ don Garci-Lopez de Cardenas et douze autres personnes pour aller visiter cette riviere; cet officier fur tres-bien recu et parfaitement traite par les indiens de Tusayan, qui lui donnerent des guides pour continuer sa route. Nos soldats partirent charges de vivres, les indiens les ayant avertis qu'il fallait traverser un desert de vingt journees de long avant d'entrer dans un pays habite. Apres ces vingt journees de marche ils arriverent en effet a cette riviere, dent les bords sont tellement eleves qu'ils croyaient etre a trois ou quatre lieues en l'air. Le pays est couvert de pins bas et rabougris; il est expose au nord, et le froid y est si violent, que, quoique l'on fut en ete, ou pouvait a peine le supporter. Les Espagnols marcherent pendant trois jours le long de ces montagnes, esperant toujours trouver une descente pour arriver ne paraissait pas avoir plus d'une brasse de large, la riviere qui, d'en haut, et qui, selon les Indiens, avait plus d'une demi-lieue; mais il fut impossible de s'y rendre. etant parvenus deux ou trois jours apres dans un endroit ou la descente leur parut plus facile, le capitaine Melgosa, Juan Galeras et un soldat qui etaient les plus legers de la bande, resolurent de faire une tentative. Ils descendirent jusqu'a ce que ceux qui etaient restes en haut les eussent perdus de ven. Ils revinrent vers les quatre heures du soir, disant qu'ils avaient trouve tant des difficultes, qu'ils n'avaient pu arriver jusqu'en bas; car ce qui d'en haut semblait facile, ne l'etait pas du tout quand en approchait. Ils ajouterent qu'ils etaient parvenus a environ un tiers de la descente, et que de la, la riviere paraissait deja tres grande, ce qui confirmait ce que les indiens avaient dit. Ils assurerent que quelques rochers que l'on voyait d'en haut, et qui paraissait a peine de la hauteur d'un homme etaient plus hauts que la tour de la cathedrale de Seville. Les Espagnols cesserent [p. 3] de suivre les rochers qui bordent la riviere, parce qu'on y manquait d'eau. Jusque-la ils avaient ete obliges chaque soir de s'avancer une lieue ou deux dans l'interieur pour en trouver. Quand ils eurent marche pendant trois ou passaient cette route, ils emmenaient avec eux des femmes chargees de calebasses remplies d'eau, et qu'ils en enterraient une partie pour les retrouver au retour; que d'ailleurs ils parcouraient en un jour autant de chemin que les Espagnols en deux. Cette riviere etait celle del Tizon. On arriva beaucoup plus pres de sa source que de l'endroit ou Melchior Diaz et ses gens l'avaient traversee, et l'on sut plus tard que les Indiens dont on avant parle taitent de la meme nation que ceux que Diaz avait vus. Les Espagnols revinrent donc sur leurs pas, et cette expedition n'eut pas d'autre resultat. Pendant la marche, ils arriverent a une cascade qui tombait d'un rocher. Los guides dirent que les cristaux blancs qui pendaient a l'entour etaient du sel. On en recueillit une quantite que l'on emports, et qu'on distribua a Cibola, ou l'on rendit compte par crit au general de tout ce que l'on avait vu. Garci-Lopez avait emmene avec lui un certain Pedro de Sotomayor, qui etait chroniqueur de l'expedition. Tous les villages de cette province sont restes nos allies, mais on ne les a pas visites depuis, et l'on n'a tente aucune decouverte de ce cote.'

    As soon as Don Pedro de Tobar had fulfilled his mission, he returned and gave the general an account of what he had seen. The latter immediately ordered Don Garci-Lopez de Cardenas, and 12 other persons, to go and visit that river; this officer was well received and politely treated by the Indians of Tusayan, who furnished him with guides to continue his journey. Our soldiers departed loaded with provisions, the Indians having notified them that it was necessary to travel 20 days through a desert before entering any inhabited country. After this 20 days march, they arrived at that river whose banks are of such a height that it seemed to them that they were three or four leagues up in the air. The country is covered with low and stunted pines, exposed to the north, and the cold is so violent that, although it was summer, one could hardly endure it. The Spaniards during three days skirted those mountains, always in the hope of finding a descent to reach the river, which from above appeared to be no more than a fathom in width, and which, according to the Indians, was more than half a league wide; but all their efforts were vain. Two or three days later, they arrived at a place where the descent seemed easier; Captain Melgosa Juan Galeras and a soldier who were the lightest men of the band, resolved to make an attmept. They descended until those who had remained on the top had lost sight of them. They returned at about four o'clock in the afternoon, saying they had found so many difficulties that they could not reach the bottom; for, what seemed easy from above was not at all so when approaching the water. They added that they came down about one third of the descent, and that even from there the river seemed very large. This statement confirmed what the Indians had said. The three men affirmed that some rocks seen from above and which appeared to he of the height of a man, were higher than the tower of the cathedral of Seville. The Spaniards stopped following the rocks that bordered the river on account of the lack of water. Until then, they had been obliged to advance one or two leagues in the interior to find [p. 4] some. When they had marched during three or four days, the guides declared to them that it was impossible to go further, that water would not be found before four days; that when the Indians travelled on this road, they took with them women who carried calabashes filled with water, and they buried a certain part, so that they might find it when returning; and besides they made in one day as many miles as the Spaniards would in two. This was the river del Tizon. They arrived much nearer to its source than the place Where Melchor Diaz anti his people had crossed, and it was known later that the Indians spoken of belonged to the same nation as those seen by Diaz. The Spaniards therefore came back, and the expedition had no other result. While marching, they arrived at a cascade falling from a rock. The guides affirmed that the white crystals hanging around were salt. A quantity of it was gathered, carried away, and distributed at Cibola, where a written account of all that had been seen was sent to the general. Garci-Lopez had taken with him a certain Pedro de Sotomayor, who was the chronicler of the expedition. All the villages of this province have remained our allies, but they have not been visited since, and no attempt at discovery has been made in that direction.

    The other is from a relation by an unknown author, found in the archives of the Indies, and printed in Pacheco and Cardenas, Col. Doc., xiv. 321-3, under title of Relacion del suceso de la Jornada que Francisco Vazquez hizo en el descubrimiento de Cibola, and from which I give the extract covering the same incident:

    'Vuelto D. Pedro de Tobar, e dada relacion de aquenos pueblos, luego despacho a D. Garcia Lopez de Cardenas, maestre de campo, por el mesmo camino que habia venido D. Pedro, e que pasase de aquella provincia de Tuzan, al Poniente, e para ida e vuelta de la jornada e descobrimiento, le senalo ochenta dias de termino de ida e vuelta, el qual fue echado adelante de Tuzan con guias de los naturales que decian que habia adelante, poblado, aunque lejos, andadas cincuenta leguas de Tuzan al Poniente, e ochenta de Cibola, hallo una barranca de un rio que fue imposible por una parte ni otra hallarle baxada para caballo, ni aun para pie, sino por una parte muy traba-xosa, por donde tenia casi dos leguas de baxada. Estaba la barranca tan scantillada de penas, que apenas podian ver el rio, el cual, aunque es segun dicen, tanto o mucho mayor que el de Sevilla, de arriba aparescia un arroyo; pot manera que aunque con harta diligencia se busco pasada, e por muchas partes no se halla, en la cual estuvieron artos dias con mucha necesidad de agua, que no la hallaban, e la del rio no se podian aprovechar della aunque la vian; e a esta causa le fue forzado a don Garcia Lopez volverse a donde hallaron; este rio venia del Nordeste e volvia al Sur Sudueste, por manera que sin falta ninguna es aquel donde Ilego Melchor Diaz.'

    Don Pedro de Tobar having returned, and having made a report concerning those towns, D. Garcia Lopez de Cardenas, maestre de campo, was ordered to take the same route by which Don Pedro had come, and to go on from the province of Tuzan to the westward. He was given 80 days in which to make the journey, from his departure until his return. He went on beyond Tuzan, accompanied by Indian guides, who told him that farther on there was a settlement. Having gone 50 leagues to the westward of Tuzan, and 80 from Cibola, he came to the canon of a river adown the side of which there was no descent practicable for home, nor even for those on foot, except [p. 5] by a way full of difficulties, and nearly two leagues in length. The side of the canon was of rock so steep that the river was barely discernible, although, according to report, it is as great as the river of Seville, or greater; and from above appeared a brook. During many days, and in many places, a way by which to pass the river was sought in vain. During this time there was much suffering from a lack of water, for although that of the river was in view, it was unattainable. For this reason Don Garcia Lopez was forced to return. This river comes from the north-east, and makes a bend to the south-south-eastward; hence, beyond a doubt, it must be that reached by Melchor Diaz.

    Thus the reader will be able to determine the matter for himself as clearly as may be. For details on Coronado's expedition see the following authorities, [p. 6] though comparatively few of them make mention of the adventures of Captain Cardenas on the Colorado: Ramusio, Viaggi, iii. 359-63; Hakluyt's Voy., iii. 373-9; Mota-Padilla, Conq. N. Gal., iii. 14, 158-69; Torquemada, i. 609-10; Herrera, dec. vi. lib. ix. cap. xi.-xii.; Beaumont, Hist. Mich., MS., 407-22, 482-546, 624-5; Oviedo, iv. 19; Villagrd, Hist. N. Mex., 19 et seq.; Gomara, Hist. Ind., 272-4; Bernal Diaz, Hist. Verdad., 235; Benzoni, Hist. Mundo Nuovo, 107; Ribas, Hist. Triumphos, 26-7; Venegas, Not. Cal., i. 167-9; Clavigero, Storia Cal., 153; Alegre, Hist. Comp. Jesus, i. 233-8; Salmeron, in Doc. Hist. Mex., 3d ser. pt. iv. 7-9; Noticias, in Id., 671-2; Cavo, Tres Siglos, i. 127-9; Lorenzana, in Cortes, Hist. Mex., 325. These might be followed by a long list of modem writers, for which I will refer the reader to Hist. North Mexican States, this series.

^8:2 On Father Font's map, 1777, are laid down two rivers entering the region of the Tulare lakes from the north-east, one the Rio de San Phelipe, and the other called the Rio de que se Viene Noticia por el P. Garces. See Font's Journal, MS.; Serra, Memorial, March 1773, MS.; Garces, Diario, 246-348; Forbes' Hist. Cal., 157-62; Arch. Cal., Prov. Rec., MS., i. 47-8, vi. 59; Palou, Not., ii. 281-2; Hist. Cal.; Hist..New Mew.; Hist. North Mex. States, this series.

^8:3 Probably it was the San Joaquin, or the Sacramento, of which they heard. Concerning a route from New Mexico to California Humboldt says: 'En considerant les voyages hardis des premiers conquerans espagnols au [p. 9] Mexique, an Perou, et sur la riviere des Amazones, on est etonne de voir que depuis deux sieclcs cette meme nation n'a pas su trouver un chemin de terre dans la Nouvelle-Espagne, depuis Taos au port de Monterey.' Essai Pol., i. 317.

^9:4 Don Joaquin Lain, vecino de la misma villa, Lorenzo Olivares de la villa del Paso, Lucrecio Muniz, Andres Muniz, Juan de Aguilar y Simon Lucero.' Diario, in Doc. Hist. Mex., ser. ii. tom. i. 378.

^9:5 At the beginning of the journey their route was identical with what was later known as the old Spanish trail from Santa Fe to Los Angeles. Their course was at first north-west, but shortly after passing Abiquiu it pointed due north into Colorado, then west, and again north-west into Utah, being about the same as was later called the old Spanish trail from Santa Fe to Great Salt Lake. Captain J. N. Macomb of the topographical engineers has surveyed and mapped essentially the same trail.

^9:6 Probably not so far north by some 40'.

^9:7 Esta tarde nos alcanzaron un coyote y un genizaro de Abiquiu, nombrados el primero Felipe y el segundo Juan Domingo; por vagar entre los gentiles, se huyeron sin permiso de sus superiores del dicho pueblo, pretestando querer acompanarnos. No necesitabamos de ellos; mas por evitar las culpas, que o por su ignorancia o por su malicia podian cometer andando mas tiempo solos entre los yutas, si intentabamos que regresasen, los admitimos por companeros.' Disrio, Doc. Hist. Mex., ser. ii. tom. i. 392.

^9:8 These streams are doubtless those emptying into the Colorado not far from its junction with the Bunkara: Latitude 39 degrees 13' is here given, but that must be too high. Philip Harry, in Simpson's Explor., 490, says that up to the point first touched on the Dolores the priests' path and Macomb's survey are identical, but that they here diverge.

^10:9 An affluent of the San Javier, or Grand River.

^10:10 Called by the Yutas Tomiche; to-day Grand River. It may here be observed that the route toward this region had been visited by Spaniards before, notably by Juan Maria de Ribera in 1761, and Spanish names had been given to places, though the present Utah was probably not entered by him. Escalante states that the San Javier is formed by four small streams coming in above the point at which he crossed, and these, says Harry, Simpson's Explor., 490, correspond 'remarkably with the Uncompagre River, Grand River, Smith's Fork, and another large fork...It seems evident that after crossing the San Xavier he follows up stream a different fork from what we call Grand River, but which fork he calls the main river, or San Xavier.' Gunnison maps his explorations, showing the mouth of this last named stream. In Simpson's Explor., 489, is given a map of the present expedition, but it does not conform in every particular to Escalante's text.

^11:11 Grand River; but the latitude given was about 1 degrees 30' too high.

^11:12 White River, the point of crossing being near the Utah line.

^11:13 Green River. The latitude given is at least 50' too high. The crossing was above the junctions of White River and the Uintah with Green River. See Rep. Fr. Alonso de Posada, custodio de N. Mex., in Doc. Hist. Mex., i. 439.

^11:14 This is the north branch of the Uintah. Indeed the narrative of the explorers makes their route in this vicinity unmistakable.

^11:15 Now the Timpanogos. 'Proseguimos al noroeste media legua, pasamos a la otra bands del rio, subimos una corta cuesta y divisamos la laguna y dila-tado valle de Nuestra Senora de la Merced de los Timpanogotzis--asi lo nom-bramos desde aqui.' Diario, Doc. Hist. Mex., serie ii. tom. i. 454.

^12:16 The Spaniards asked from them some token to show that they wished them to return, and the day after they brought them one; 'pero al traer la sena vio un companero, que no sabia el orden dado, a las figuras de ella, y rnostrandole la cruz del rosario, les dio a entender, que la pintasen sobre una de las figuras, y entonces la volvieron a llevar, y sobre cada una pintaron una cruz pequena; lo demas quedo como antes y nos la dieron diciendo que la figura que per uno y otro lade tenia mas almagre, o como ellos decian, sangre, representaba al capitan mayor, porque en las batalias con los cumanches habia recibido mas heridas: las otras dos que no estaban tan ensangren-tadas, a los otros dos capitanes inferiores al primero, y la que no tenia sangre ninguna, a uno que no era capitan de guerra, pero era, do autoridad entre [p. 13] ellos. Estas cuatro figuras de hombres estaban rudamente pintadas con tierra y almagre en un corto pedazo de gamuza.' Diario, Doc. Hist. Mex.. serie ii. tom. i. 462-3.

^14:17 Or, as it was also called, Timpagtzis, Timpanoautzis, o Come Pescado. Doc. Hist. Mex., serie ii. tom. i. 464.

^14:18 There is no difficulty in recognizing these land-marks, the Uintah Mountains, the San Buenaventura, or Green River; and in the four streams of the valley, their Aguas Calientes is Currant Creek; the second, their San Nicolas, though more than three leagues from the first, and not corresponding in every other particular, is the Spanish River; the San Antonio is the Provo; and the Santa Aria, the River Jordan.

^15:19 This is directly opposite the direction in which we would expect to find the Comanches of to-day; but the Utes applied the term comanche to all hostile Indians. Buffaloes were common in aboriginal times in Cache and Powder River valleys as well as in eastern Oregon and Boise valley.

^15:20 Yet another form for the name Timpanogos, as indeed before the end of the following page we have 'Timpanosis,' 'Timpanogotzis,' and 'Timpanogo.' See note 17 this chapter. On Froisett's map, published at Salt Lake City in 1875, is the 'Provo, or Timponayas' river.

^16:21 As this is the first account we have of the Great Salt Lake and its people I will give the original entire: 'La otra laguna con quien esta se cominica, ocupa, segun nos informaron, muchas leguas y sus aguas son nocivas o estre-madamente saladas; porque nos aseguran los timpanois que el que se mojaba alguna parle del cuerpo con ellas, al punto sentia mucha comenzon en la parte mojada. En su circuito nos dijeron habita una nacion numerosa y quieta, que se nombra Puaguampe, que en nuestro vulgar dice hechiceros; la cual usa el idioma cumanche; se alimenta de las yervas, bebe de varias fuentes u ojos de buena agua, qne estan en el circuito de la laguna, y tienen sus casitas de zacate y tierra, que era et techo de ellas. No son enemigos de los lagunas, segun insinuaron, pero desde cierta ocasion que se acercaron y les mataron un hombre, no los tienen por tan neutrales como antes. En esta ocasion entraron por la puerta final de la Sierra Blanca de los Timpanosis, que es la misma en que estan, por el norte cuarta al noroeste, y por aqui mismo dicen hacer sus entradas los cumanches, las que no parecieron ser muy frecuentes.' Diario, Doc. Hist. Mex., serie ii. tom. i. 468.

    Mr Harry is evidently not very thoroughly versed in the Spanish language, or his manuscript copy of Escalante's journey is defective. For example he translates echizeros--which being old Spanish he could not find in his modern dictionary--'throwers or slingers' when the word "witches,' or rather 'sorcerers' is clearly implied. Again he queries sacate, not knowing its meaning--a common enough Mexican word, formerly written zacate, and signifying hay or grass. For further inaccuracies see his summary in Simpson's Explor., 494. Warren, Pacific Railroad Report, xi. 35, examined the same copy of Escalante's narrative, then in the Peter Force library, which was used by Harry.

^17:22 The journey into Utah of Dominguez and Escalante, as given in Doc. Hist. Mex., serie ii. tom. i. 375-558, under title of Diario y derrotero de los R. R. PP. Fr. Francisco Atanasio Dominguez y Fr. Silvestre Velez de Escalante, para descubrir el camino desde el Presidio de Santa Fe del Nuevo Mexico, al de Monterey, en la California Septentrional, is full and clear as to route and information regarding the country and its inhabitants. As must be expected in all such narratives it is tull of trivial detail which is tiresome, but which we can readily excuse for the worth of the remainder. The priests were close and intelligent observers, and have much to say regarding configuration, soil, climate, plants, minerals, animals, and people. A summary is given in Simpson's Explor., app. R by Philip Harry, from a manuscript copy of the original in the archives in the city of Mexico which answers the purpose therein required, but is not sufficiently reliable or exact for historical purposes. The map accompanying the summary is better, being for the most part correct. Of the two padres and what riley saw Humboldt says, Essai Pol.: 'Ce terrain est la continuation de la Cordillere des Grues, qui se prolonge vers la Sierra Verde et vers le lac de Timpanogos, celebre dans l'histoire mexicaine. Le Rio S. Rafael et le Rio S. Xavier sont les sources principales du fleuve Zaguananas, qui, avec le Rio de Nabajoa, forme le Rio Colorado: ce dernir a son embouchure dans le golfe de Californie. Ces regions abondantes en sel gemme out ete examinees, en 1777, par deux voyageurs remplis de zele et d'intrepidite, moines de l'order de S. Francois, le pere Escalante et le pere Antonio Velez.' From the last clause it is clear that Humboldt was confused as to names, Velez and Escalante belonging to the same person. Simpson, Explor., 13, enters upon a long dissertation over a simple and very transparent mistake. See also Hist. North Mex. States; Hist. New Mex.; and Hist. Cal., this series.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

CHAPTER II.
 ADVENT OF TRAPPERS AND TRAVELLERS.
 1778-1846.

INVASION BY FUR HUNTERS--BARON LA HONTAN AND HIS FABLES--THE POPULAR GEOGRAPHIC IDEA--DISCOVERY OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE--JAMES BRIDGER DECIDING A BET--HE DETERMINES THE COURSE OF BEAR RIVER AND COMES UPON THE GREAT LAKE--HENRY, ASHLEY, GREEN, AND BECKWOURTH ON THE GROUND--FORT BUILT AT UTAH LAKE--PETER SKEEN OGDEN--JOURNEY OF JEDEDIAH S. SMITH--A STRANGE COUNTRY--PEGLEG SMITH--WOLFSKILL, YOUNT, AND BURTON TRAVERSE THE COUNTRY--WALKER'S VISIT TO CALIFORNIA--SOME OLD MAPS--THE BARTLESON COMPANY--STATEMENTS OF BIDWELL AND BELDEN COMPARED--WHITMAN AND LOVEJOY--FReMONT--PACIFIC COAST IMMIGRATIONS OF 1845 AND 1846--ORIGIN OF THE NAME UTAH.

    HALF a century passes, and we find United States fur hunters standing on the border of the Great Salt Lake, tasting its brackish waters, and wondering if it is an arm of the sea. [*1]

[p. 19]

    First among these, confining ourselves to authentic records, was James Bridger, to whom belongs the honor of discovery. It happened in this wise. During the winter of 1824-5 a party of trappers, who had ascended the Missouri with Henry and Ashley, found

[p. 20]

themselves on Bear River, in Cache, or Willow Valley. A discussion arose as to the probable course of Bear River, which flowed on both sides of them. A wager was made, and Bridger sent to ascertain the truth. Following the river through the mountains the first view of the great lake fell upon him, and when he went to the margin and tasted the water he found that it was salt. Then he returned and reported to his companions. All were interested to know if there emptied into this sheet other streams on which they might find beavers, and if there was an outlet; hence in the spring of 1826 four men explored the lake in skin boats. [*2]

    During this memorable year of 1825, when Peter

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] Skeen Ogden with his party of Hudson's Bay Company trappers was on Humboldt River, and James P. Beckwourth was pursuing his daring adventures, and the region round the great lakes of Utah first became familiar to American trappers, William H. Ashley, of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, at the head of one hundred and twenty men and a train of well packed horses, came out from St Louis, through the South Pass and down by Great Salt Lake to Lake Utah. There he built a fort, and two years later brought from St Louis a six-pounder which thereafter graced its court. Ashley was a brave man, shrewd and honest; he was prosperous and commanded the respect of his men. Nor may we impute to him lack of intelligence, or of common geographical knowledge, when we find him seriously considering the project of descending the Colorado in boats, by means of which he would eventually reach St Louis, Mr Green, who gave his name to Green River, had been with Ashley the previous year; and now for three years after the establishing of Fort Ashley at Utah Lake, Green with his trappers occupied the country to the west and north. [*3]

[p. 22]

    From Great Salt Lake in August, 1826, Jedediah S. Smith sets out on a trapping and exploring tour with fifteen men. Proceeding southward he traverses Utah Lake, called for a time Ashley Lake, [*4] and after ascending Ashley River, which, as he remarks, flows into the lake through the country of the Sam-patches, he bends his course to the west of south, passes over some mountains running south-east and northwest, and crosses a river which he calls Adams, [*5] in

[p. 23]

honor of the president. After ten days' march, still in a south-westerly direction, through the country of the Pah Utes, he recrosses the same stream, and after two days comes to the junction of the Adams with what he calls the Seedskeeder, or Siskadee, river, [*6] a stream full of shallows and rapids and flowing through a sterile country. Then he reaches a fertile wooded valley which belongs to the Amajabes, or Mojaves, where the party rests fifteen days, meeting with the kindest treatment from the natives, who provide food and horses. Thence they are guided by two neophytes westward through a desert country, and reach the mission of San Gabriel in December, their appearance causing no small commotion in California. After many strange adventures, fully narrated in my History of California, Smith works his way northward up the San Joaquin Valley, and in May 1827 crosses the Sierra Nevada and returns eastward to Great Salt Lake. With Jedediah Smith, during some part of his stay in Utah, was Thomas L. Smith, whom we must immortalize in history as Pegleg Smith. He did not possess a very estimable character, as, I am sorry to say, few of his class did in those days. The leaders of American fur companies, however, were exceptions, and in points of intelligence, integrity, and daring were in no wise behind their British brethren. [*7]

 

    From south-east to north-west a portion of Utah was traversed in the autumn of 1830 by a trapping party under William Wolfskill. The company was fitted out in New Mexico, and the great valley of California was their objective point. Wolfskill had been a partner of Ewing Young, who was then in California. Leaving Taos in September they struck

[p. 24]

north-westerly, crossing the Colorado, Grande, Green, and Sevier rivers, and then turned south to the Rio Virgen, all the time trapping on the way. Then passing down by the Mojaves they reached Los Angeles in February 1831. George C. Yount and Louis Burton were of the party. [*8]

Click to enlarge
GREEN RIVER COUNTRY.

    During the winter of 1832-3 B. L. E Bonneville made his camp on Salmon River, and in July following was at the Green River rendezvous. [*9] Among the several trapping parties sent by him in various directions

[p. 25]

was one under Joseph Walker, who with some thirty-six men, among them Joe Meek, went to trap on the streams falling into the Great Salt Lake.

    Bonneville affirms that Walker's intention was to pass round the Great Salt Lake and explore its borders; but George Nidever who was of Walker's company, and at the rendezvous while preparations were made, says nothing of such purpose, and it was probably not thought of by Bonneville until afterward. Nidover had suffered severely from the cold during the previous winter, and had come to the Green River rendezvous that season for the express purpose of joining some party for California or of forming such a party himself, having been informed that the climate there was milder than in the mountains where he had been. [*10]

    If the intention was, as Bonneville asserts, that this party should pass round the great lake, in their endeavor they presently found themselves in the midst of desolation, between wide sandy wastes and broad brackish waters; and to quench their thirst; they hastened westward where bright snowy mountains promised cooling streams. The Ogden River [*11] region being to them so new, and the thought of California so fascinating, they permitted themselves to stray from original intentions, and cross the Sierra Nevada to Monterey. All that is known of their doings before reaching the Snowy Range is given in my History of Nevada, and their exploits after reaching California are fully narrated in that part of this series devoted to the history of the latter country. [*12]

[p. 26]

    In Winterbotham's history published in New York in 1795 is given a map of North America showing an enormous nameless inland sea above latitude 42 degrees with small streams running into it, and south of said parallel and east of the meridian of the inland sea is a smaller body of water with quite a large stream flowing in from the west, besides three smaller ones from the south and north. As both of these bodies of

Click to enlarge
BONNEVILLE'S MAP, 1837.

water were laid down from the imaginations of white men, or from vague and traditionary reports of the natives, it may be that only the one Great Salt Lake was originally referred to, or it may be that the original description was applied to two lakes or inland seas. The native village on one of the southern tributaries, Taguayo, refers to the habitations of the Timpanogos, and may have been derived from the Spaniards; but more probably the information was obtained through

[p. 27]

natives who themselves had received it from other natives.

Click to enlarge

    In the map of William Rector, a surveyor in the service of the general government, Utah has open and easy communication with the sea by way of the

Click to enlarge
RECTOR'S MAP, 1818.

[p. 28]

valley of the Willamette River, whose tributaries drain the whole of Nevada and Utah.

    Mr Finley in his map of North America claimed to have included all the late geographical discoveries, which claim we may readily allow, and also accredit him with much not yet and never to be discovered. The mountains are artistically placed, the streams made to run with remarkable regularity and directness, and they are placed in positions affording the best

Click to enlarge
FINLEY'S MAP, 1826.

facilities for commerce. The lakes and rivers Timpanogos, Salado, and Buenaventura, by their position, not to say existence, show the hopeless confusion of the author's mind.

    A brief glance at the later visits of white men to Utah is all that is necessary in this place. The early emigrants to Oregon did not touch this territory, and those to California via Fort Bridger for the most part merely passed through leaving no mark. the emigrants to Oregon and California in 1841 came together by the usual route up the Platte, along the Sweet-water, and through the South Pass to Bear River Valley. When near Soda Springs those for Oregon

[p. 29]

went north to Fort Hall, while those for California followed Bear River southward until within ten miles of Great Salt Lake, when they turned westward to find Ogden River. Of the latter party were J. Bartleson, C. M. Weber, Talbot H. Green, John Bidwell, Josiah Belden, and twenty-seven others. Their adventures while in Utah were not startling. Little was known of the Salt Lake region, [*13] particularly of the country to the west of it.

    Mr Belden in his Historical Statement, which I number among my most valuable manuscripts, says: "We struck Bear River some distance below where the town of Evanston now is, where the coal mines are, and the railroad passes, and followed the river down. It maked a long bend to the north there, and comes down to Salt Lake. We arrived at Soda Springs, on Bear River, and there we separated from the company of missionaries, who were going off towards Snake River or Columbia. There we lost the services of the guide Fitzpatrick. Several of our party who had started to go with us to California also left us there, having decided to go with the missionaries. Fitzpatrick advised us to give up our expedition and go with them to Fort Hall, one of the Hudson's Bay stations, as there was no road for us to follow, nothing was known of the country, and we had nothing to guide us, and so he advised us to give up the California project. He thought it was doubtful if we ever got there, we might get caught in the snow of the mountains and perish there, and he considered it very hazardous to attempt it. Some four or five of our party withdrew and went with the missionaries.

[p. 30]

    About thirty-one of us adhered to our original intention and declined to give up our expedition."

    While the party were slowly descending Bear River four of them rode over to Fort Hall to obtain if possible a "pilot to conduct us to the gap in the California Mountains, or at least to the head of Mary's River," and to make inquiries of Mr Grant, then in charge. No guide could be found, and Grant was not able greatly to enlighten them. The fur-trader could have told them much concerning the route to Oregon, but this way to California as an emigrant road had hardly yet been thought of.

    "As we approached Salt Lake," writes Bidwell, [*14] "we were misled quite often by the mirage. The country too was obscured by smoke. The water in Bear River became too salt for use. The sage brush on the small hillocks of the almost level plain became so magnified as to look like trees. Hoping to find water, and supposing these imaginary trees to be growing on some stream, and knowing nothing about the distance to Salt Lake, we kept pushing ahead mile after mile. Our animals almost perished for want of water while we were travelling over this salt plain, which grew softer and softer till our wagons cut into the ground five or six inches, and it became impossible to haul them. We still thought we saw timber but a short distance ahead, when the fact; really was there was no timber, and we were driving straight for the Great Salt Lake."

    The truth is they had wandered from their course; they had passed Cache Valley where they intended to rest and hunt; they were frequently obliged to leave

[p. 31]

the river, turned aside by the hills. It was past mid-summer, and the sun's rays beat heavily on the white salted plain. The signal fires of the Shoshones illuminated the hills at night. "In our desperation we turned north of east a little and struck Bear River again a few miles from its mouth. the water here was too salt to quench thirst; our animals would scarcely taste it, yet we had no other." The green fresh-looking grass was stiffened with salt. Mr Belden says: "After separating from the missionaries we followed Bear River down nearly to where it enters Salt Lake, about where Corinne is now. We had some knowledge of the lake from some of the trappers who had been there. We turned off more to the west and went round the northerly end of Salt Lake. There we found a great difficulty in getting water for several days, all the water near the lake being very brackish. We had to make it into strong coffee to drink it."

    On the 20th of August the company rested while two of their number went out to explore. They found themselves encamped ten miles from the mouth of the river. Thence next day, Sunday, they took a north-west course, crossing their track of the Thursday previous; on the 23d they were in full view of Salt Lake. Men and animals were almost dying of thirst, and "in our trouble," says Bidwell, "we turned directly north toward some high mountains, and in the afternoon of the next day found springs of good water and plenty of grass." This was the 27th, and here the company remained while two of their number again advanced and discovered a route to Ogden River. What befell them further on their way across to the mountains the reader will find in my History of Nevada. [*15]

[p. 32]

    In 1842 Marcus Whitman and A. L. Lovejoy, on their way from Oregon to the United States, passed through Utah from Fort Hall, by way of Uintah, Taos, and Santa Fe. For further information concerning them, and the object of their journey, I would refer the reader to my History of Oregon.

    In 1843 John C. Fremont followed the emigrant trail through the south pass, and on the 6th of September stood upon an elevated peninsula on the east side of Great Salt Lake, a little north of Weber River, beside which stream his party had encamped the previous night. Fremont likens himself to Balboa discovering the Pacific; but no one else would think of doing so. He was in no sense a discoverer; and though he says he was the first to embark on that inland sea, he is again in error, trappers in skin boats having performed that feat while the pathfinder was still studying his arithmetic, as I have before mentioned. It is certainly a pleasing sight to any one, coming upon it from either side, from the cover of rolling mountains or the sands of desert plains, and under almost any circumstance the heart of the beholder is stirred within him. A number of large islands raised their rocky front out of dense sullen waters whose limit the eye could not reach, while myriads of wild fowl boat the air, making a noise "like distant thunder."

    Black clouds gathered in the west, and soon were pouring their floods upon the explorers. Camping sonic distance above the mouth on Weber River, they made a corral for the animals, and threw up a small fort for their own protection. Provisions being scarce, seven of the party under Francois Lajeunesse were sent to Fort Hall, which place they reached with

[p. 33]

difficulty, after separation from each other and several days' wanderings.

    Leaving three men in camp, with four others, including Kit Carson who was present, Fremont on the 8th embarked in a rubber boat and dropped down to the mouth of the stream, which the party found shallow and unnavigable. Next morning they were out on the lake, fearful every moment lest their air-blown boat should collapse and let them into the saline but beautiful transparent liquid. At noon they reached one of the low near islands and landed. They found there, washed up by the waves, a dark brown bank, ten or twenty feet in breadth, composed of the skins of worms, about the size of oats, while the rocky cliffs were whitened by incrustations of salt. Ascending to the highest point attainable they took a surrounding view, and called the place Disappointment Island, [*16] because they had failed to find the fertile lands and game hoped for. Then they descended to the edge of the water, constructed lodges of drift-wood, built fires, and spent the night there, returning next day in a rough sea to their mainland camp. Thence they proceeded north to Bear River, and Fort Hall, and on to Oregon. [*17] On his return by way of Klamath and Pyramid lakes, Fremont crossed the Sierra to Sutter Fort, proceeded up the San Joaquin into Southern California, and taking the old Spanish trail to the Rio Virgen followed the Wahsatch Mountains to Utah Lake.

    There was a party under Fremont in Utah also in 1845. Leaving Bent Fort in August they ascended the Arkansas, passed on to Green River, followed its left bank to the Duchesne branch, and thence crossed to the head-waters of the Timpanogos, down which stream they went to Utah Lake. Thence

[p. 34]

they passed on to Great Salt Lake, made camp near where Great Salt Lake City is situated, crossed to Antelope Island, and examined the southern portion of the lake. After this they passed by way of Pilot Peak into Nevada. [*18]

    Of the six companies comprising the California immigration of 1845, numbering in all about one hundred and fifty, five touched either Utah or Nevada, the other being from Oregon. But even these it is not necessary to follow in this connection, Utah along the emigrant road being by this time well known to travellers and others. With some it was a question while on the way whether they should go to Oregon or California. Tustin, who came from Illinois in 1845, with his wife and child and an ox team, says in his manuscript Recollections: "My intention all the way across the plains was to go on to Oregon; but when I reached the summit of the Rocky Mountains where the trail divides, I threw my lash across the near ox and struck off on the road to California."

    For the Oregon and California emigrations of 1846, except when they exercised some influence on Utah, or Utah affairs, I would refer the reader to the volumes of this series treating on those states. An account of the exploration for a route from southern Oregon, over the Cascade Mountains, and by way of Klamath and Goose lakes to the Humboldt River, and thence on to the region of the Great Salt Lake by Scott and the Applegates in 1846, is given in both the History of Oregon, and the History of Nevada, to which volumes of this series the reader is referred. [*19]

[p. 35]

Footnotes

^18:1 There are those who soberly refer to the Baron la Hontan and his prodigious falsehoods of 1689 for the first information of Great Salt Lake. Because among the many fabulous wonders reported he somewhere on the western side of the continent placed a body of bad-tasting water, Stansbury, Exped., 151, does not hesitate to affirm 'that the existence of a large lake of salt water somewhere amid the wilds west of the Rocky Mountains seems to have been known vaguely as long as 150 years since.' Perhaps it was salt, and not silver that the Winnebagoes reported to Carver, Travels, 33-6, as coming down in caravans from the mountains lying near the heads of the Colorado River.' Warren, in Pacific Railroad Report, xi. 34, repeats and refutes the La Hontan myth. He says, 'the story of La Hontan excited much speculation, and received various additions in his day; and the lake finally became represented on the published English maps'. Long before this date, however, reliable information had been received by the Spaniards, and the same may have come to English trappers; so that by 1826 reports of the existence of such a sheet may have reached civilization. It is needless to say that neither La Hontan nor Carver ever received information from the natives, or elsewhere, sufficient to justify map-makers in placing a large lake in that vicinity. In Gordon's Historical and Geographical Memoir of the North American Continent, published in Dublin in 1820, it is written: 'Concerning the lakes and rivers of this as yet imperfectly explored region we have little to say. Of the former [p. 19] we have no certain account. Two have been noticed in the western parts, a salt lake about the thirty-ninth degree of latitude, the western limits of which are unknown, and the lake of Timpanogos, about the forty-first degree, of great but unascertained extent.'

Click to enlarge
MAP OF UTAH, 1826.

    In a report submitted to congress May 15, 1826, by Mr Baylies it is stated that 'many geographies have placed the Lake Timpanogos in latitude 40, but they have obviously confounded it with the Lake Theguayo, which extends from 39 degrees 40' to 41 degrees, and from which it appears separated by a neck or peninsula; the two lakes approaching in one direction as near as 20 miles.' 19th Cong., 1st Sess., House Rept. No. 213. Such statements as this amount to nothing--the honorable gentleman, with all due respect, not knowing what he was writing about--except as going to show the vague and imperfect impression of the popular mind concerning this region at that time.

    I will give for what it is worth a claim, set up in this same congressional [p. 20] report, by one Samuel Adams Ruddock, that in the year 1821 he journeyed from Council Bluff to Santa Fe, and thence with a trading party proceeded by way of Great Salt Lake to Oregon. The report says: 'On the 9th of June this party crossed the Rio del Norte, and pursuing a north-west direction on the north bank of the river Chamas, and over the mountains, reached Lake Trinidad; and then pursuing the same direction across the upper branches of the Rio Colorado of California, reached Lake Timpanagos, which is intersected by the 42d parallel of latitude, the boundary between the United States of America anti the United States of Mexico. This take is the principal source of the river Timpanagos, and the Multnomah of Lewis and Clarke. They then followed the course of this river to its junction with the Columbia, and reached the mouth of the Columbia on the first day of August, completing the journey from the Council Bluffs in seventy-nine days.'

^20:2 This, upon the testimony of Robert Campbell, Pac. R. Rept., xi. 35, who was there at the time 'and found the party just returned from the exploration of the lake, and recollect their report that it was without any outlet.' Bridger's story of his discovery was corroborated by Samuel Tullock in Campbell's counting-room in St Louis at a later date. Campbell pronounces them both 'men of the strictest integrity and truthfulness.' Likewise Ogden's trappers met Bridger's party in the summer of 1825 and were told of the discovery. See Hist. Nevada, this series. Irving, Bonneville's Adv., 186, says it was probably Sublette who sent out the four men in the skin canoe in 1826. Bonneville professes to doubt this exploration because the men reported that they suffered severely from thirst, when in fact several fine streams flow into the lake; but Bonneville desired to attach to his name the honor of an early survey, and detract from those entitled to it. the trappers in their canoes did not pretend to make a thorough survey, and as for scarcity of fresh water in places Stansbury says, Exped., 103, that during his explorations he frequently was obliged to send fifty miles for water. Other claimants appear prior to Bridger's discovery. W. M. Anderson writing to the National Intelligencer under date of Feb. 26, 1860, says that Provost trapped in this vicinity in 1820, and that Ashley was there before Bridger. Then it was said by Seth Grant that his partner, Vazquez, discovered the great inland sea, calling it an arm of the ocean because the water was salt. That no white man ever saw the Great Salt Lake before Bridger cannot be proven; but his being the only well authenticated account, history must rest there until it finds a better one.

^21:3 See Hist. Northwest Coast, ii. 447-8, this series. T. D. Bonner in his Life and Adventures of James P. Beckwourth, 71-3, gives what purports to be an account of Ashley's descent of Green River to Great Salt Lake on a certain occasion in Ashley's own language. There may be some truth in it all, though Beckwourth is far astray in his dates, as he places the occurrence in 1822. Beckwourth goes on to say that one day in June a beautiful Indian girl offered him a pair of moccasins if he would shoot for her an antelope and bring her the brains, that with them she might dress a deer-skin. Beckwourth started out, but failing to secure an antelope, and seeing as he supposed an Indian coming, he thought he would shoot the Indian and take his brains to the girl, who would not know the difference. Just as he was about to fire he discovered the supposed Indian to be Ashley, who thereupon told him of his adventures down Green River and through the carton to Great Salt Lake. I have no doubt it is three fourths fiction, and what there is of fact must be placed forward four years. 'We had a very dangerous passage down the river,' said Ashley to Beckwourth, 'and suffered more than I ever wish to see men suffer again. You are aware that we took but little provision with us, not expecting that the cation extended so far. In passing over the rapids, where we lost two boats and three guns, we made use of ropes in letting down our boats over the most dangerous places. Our provisions soon gave out. We found plenty of beaver in the cation for some miles, and, expecting to find them in as great plenty all the way, we saved none of their carcasses, which constituted our food. As we proceeded, however, they became more and more scarce, until there were none to be seen, and we were entirely out of provisions. To trace the river was impossible, and to ascend the perpendicular [p. 22] cliffs, which hemmed us in on either side, was equally impossible. Our only alternative was to go ahead. After passing six days without food, the only men were weak and dishearted. I listened to all their murmurings and heart-rending complaints. They often spoke of home and friends, declaring they would never see them more. Some spoke of wives and children whom they dearly loved, and who must shortly become widows and orphans. They had toiled, they said, through every difficulty; had risked their lives among wild beasts and hostile Indians in the wilderness, all of which they were willing to undergo; but who could bear up against actual starvation? I encouraged them all in my power, telling them that I bore an equal part in their sufferings; that I too was toiling for those I loved, and whom I yet hoped to see again; that we should all endeavor to keep up our courage, and not add to our misfortunes by giving way to despondency. Another night was passed amid the barren rocks. The next morning the fearful proposition was made by some of the party for the company to cast lots, to see which should be sacrificed to afford food for the others, without which they must inevitably perish. My feelings at such a proposition cannot be described. I begged of them to wait one day more, and make all the way they could meanwhile. By doing so, I said, we must come to a break in the canon, where we could escape. They consented, and moving down the river as fast as the current would carry us, to our inexpressible joy we found a break, and a camp of trappers therein. All now rejoiced that they had not carried their fearful proposition into effect. We had fallen into good hands, and slowly recruited ourselves with the party, which was under the charge of one Provo, a man with whom I was well acquainted. By his advice we left the river and proceeded in a north-westerly direction. Provo was well provided with provisions and horses, and he supplied us with both. We remained with his party until we arrived at the Great Salt Lake. Here I fell in with a large company of trappers, composed of Canadians and Iroquois Indians, under the command of Peter Ogden, in the service of the Northwest Fur Company. With this party I made a very good bargain, as you will see when they arrive at our camp, having purchased all their peltry on very reasonable terms.'

^22:4 Jedediah Smith in 1826 calls the lake Utah, and the stream flowing into it from the south Ashley River. 'Je traversai le petit lac Uta, et je remontai le cours de l'Ashley qu'il recoit.' Extrait d'une lettre, in Nouvelles An. des Voy., xxxvii. 208. For an account of this journey see Hist. Cal., this series, where are fully discussed the several conflicting authorities. Warner's Rem., MS., 21-9, dates the journey 1824, and carries the company from Green River, south of Salt Lake, and over the mountains near Walker Pass. Accounts in Cruise's Nat. Wealth Cal.; Hutchings' Mag., v. 351-2; S. F. Times, June 14, 1867; Randolph's Oration, 313-14; Tuthill's Hist. Cal., 124-5; Frignet, La Californie, 58-60; Douglas' Private Papers, MS., 2d ser. i.; Victor's River of the West, 34; Hines' Voy., 110, are mentioned.

^22:5 The Sevier; or possibly he crossed from the Sevier to the Virgen and supposed them to be one stream.

^23:6 The Adams now is clearly the Rio Virgen, and the Seedskeeder, or Siskadee, the Colorado. See Hist. Northwest Coast, ii. 583, this series.

^23:7 P. W. Crawford, Nar., MS., 27, says he saw Pegleg Smith in 1847 on Ham Fork, in a beautiful valley of the Bear River Mountains, where he then lived with his native wife and a few savage retainers.

^24:8 There was little of importance to Utah history in this expedition, for full particulars of which see Hist. Cal., this series.

^24:9 For an account of Bonneville and his several excursions see Hist. Northwest Coast, ii. chap. xxv.; Hist. Cal., and Hist. Nevada, this series.

^25:10 Such being the case he would hardly have joined Walker's expedition had it been understood that the exploration of Salt Lake was intended. See Nidever's Life and Adv:, MS., 58.

^25:11 Previously called the Mary River, and now the Humboldt. See Hist. Nevada; Hist. Northwest Coast; and Hist. Cal., this series.

^25:12 See Nidever's Life and Adv., MS.; Warner's Mem., in Pac. R. Report, xi. pt. i. 31-4. In giving his dictation to Irving, Bonneville professed great interest in the exploration of Great Salt Lake though he had done nothing to speak of in that direction. Irving, however, humored the captain, whose vanity prompted him to give his own name to the lake, although he had not a shadow of title to that distinction.

^29:13 'Previous to setting out,' says Bidwell, California, 1841-8, MS., 24-5, 'I consulted maps so as to learn as much as possible about the country...As for Salt Lake, there was a large lake marked in that region, but it was several hundred miles long from north to south, with two large rivers running from either end, diverging as they ran west, and entering the Pacific Ocean.' it was Finley's map of North America, 1826, herein reproduced, which he alludes to. 'My friends in Missouri advised me to bring tools, and in case we could not get through with our wagons to build canoes and go down one of these rivers.' The region to the west of Salt Lake was indeed a terra incognita to these explorers.

^30:14 California, 1841-8, MS., 33--4. The author, then little more than boy, being but 21, has a long story to tell about straying from camp one day in company witch a comrade, James John, bent on a visit to the adjacent heights for a handful of snow; and how they slept in the mountains in a bear's nest, and reached next day their company, some of whom had spent the night in search. They had been given up as slain by the Blackfeet; and there were those so ungracious as to say that it would have served them right had it been so.

^31:15 The expedition entire is given in Hist. Cal., this series. See also Belden's Hist. Statement, MS.; Hopper's Narrative, MS.; Taylor's Dis. and Founders, i. No. 7; Satter Co. Hist., 17; S. F. Bulletin, July 27, 1868; S. F. Alta, Aug. 5, 1856, and Sept 1868; Santa Cruz Sentinel, Aug. 29, 1868; Los Angeles News, Sept. 1, 1868; San Diego Union, Jan. 16, 1869; San Jose Pioneer, [p. 32] Feb. 1877; Shuck's Scrap Book, 182-4; Petaluma Crescent, Sept. 10, 1872; Santa Clara News, Feb. 6, 1869; Hayes' Scrap Books, Cal. Notes, iii. 171; Napa Reporter, March 23, Sept. 21, 1872; S. F. Bulletin, July 19, 1860; Shuck's Rep. Men, 920-1.

^33:16 Now Castle Island, or as some call it Fremont Island.

^33:17 For an account of Fremont's Oregon adventures see Hist. Oregon.; and for his doings in California see Hist. Cal., this series. We also meet with him again in our History of Nevada.

^34:18 Fremont's Expl. Ex., 151-60. Warner in Pac. R. Rep., xi. 49-50.

^34:19 The word Utah originated with the people inhabiting that region. Early in the 17th century. when New Mexico was first much talked of by the Spaniards, the principal nations of frequent mention as inhabiting the several sides of the locality about that time occupied were the Navajos, the Yutas, the Apaches, and the Comanches. Of the Utah nation, which belongs to the Shoshone family, there were many tribes. See Native Races, i. 422, 463-8, [p. 35] this series. There were the Pah Utes, or Pyutes, the Pi Edes, the Gosh Utes, or Goshutes, the Uinta Utes, the Yam Pah Utes, and many others. Pah signifies water; pah guampe, salt water, or salt lake; Pah Utes, Indians that live about the water. The early orthography of the word Utah is varied. Escalante, prior to his journey to Utah Lake, Carts de 23 Oct. 1775, MS., finds the 'Yutas' inhabiting the region north of the Moquis. This was a common spelling by the early Spaniards, and might be called the proper one, Later we have 'Youta,' 'Eutaw,' 'Utaw,' and 'Utah.'

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

CHAPTER III.
 THE STORY OF MORMONISM.
 1820-1830.

A GLANCE EASTWARD--THE MIDDLE STATES SIXTY YEARS AGO--BIRTH AND PARENTAGE OF JOSEPH SMITH--SPIRITUAL MANIFESTATIONS--JOSEPH TELLS HIS VISION--AND IS REVILED--MORONI APPEARS--PERSECUTIONS--COPYING THE PLATES--MARTIN HARRIS--OLIVER COWDERY--TRANSLATION--THE BOOK OF MORMON--AARONIC PRIESTHOOD CONFERRED--CONVERSIONS--THE WHITMER FAMILY--THE WITNESSES--SPAULDING THEORY--PRINTING OF THE BOOK--MELCHISEDEC PRIESTHOOD CONFERRED--DUTIES OF ELDERS AND OTHERS--CHURCH OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS ORGANIZED--FIRST MIRACLE--FIRST CONFERENCE--OLIVER COWDERY ORDERED TO THE WEST.

    LET us turn now to the east, where have been evolving these several years a new phase of society and a new religion, destined presently to enter in and take possession of this far-away primeval wilderness. For it is not alone by the power of things material that the land of the Yutas is to be subdued; that mysterious agency, working under pressure of high enthusiasm in the souls of men, defying exposure, cold, and hunger, defying ignominy, death, and the destruction of all corporeal things in the hope of heaven's favors and a happy immortality, a puissance whose very breath of life is persecution, and whose highest glory is martyrdom--it is through this subtile and incomprehensible spiritual instrumentality, rather than from a desire for riches or any tangible advantage that the new Israel is to arise, the new exodus to be conducted, the new Canaan to be attained.

    Sixty years ago western New York was essentially a new country, Ohio and Illinois were for the most

[p. 37]

part a wilderness, and Missouri was the United States limit, the lands beyond being held by the aborigines. There were some settlements between Lake Erie and the Mississippi River, but they were recent and rude, and the region was less civilized than savage. The people, though practically shrewd and of bright intellect, were ignorant; though having within them the elements of wealth, they were poor. There was among them much true religion, whatever that may be, yet they were all superstitious--baptists, methodists, and presbyterians; there was little to choose between them. Each sect was an abomination to the others; the others were of the devil, doomed to eternal torments, and deservedly so. The bible was accepted literally by all, every word of it, prophecies, miracles, and revelations; the same God and the same Christ satisfied all; an infidel was a thing woful and unclean. All the people reasoned. How they racked their brains in secret, and poured forth loud logic in public, not over problems involving intellectual liberty, human rights and reason, and other like insignificant matters appertaining to this world, but concerning the world to come, and more particularly such momentous questions as election, justification, baptism, and infant damnation. Then of signs and seasons, God's ways and Satan's ways; likewise concerning promises and prayer, and all the rest, there was a credulity most refreshing. In the old time there were prophets and apostles, there were visions and miracles; why should it not be so during these latter days? It was time for Christ to come again, time for the millennial season, and should the power of the almighty be limited? There was the arch-fanatic Miller, and his followers, predicting the end and planning accordingly. "The idea that revelation from God was unattainable in this age, or that the ancient gifts of the gospel had ceased forever, never entered my head," writes a young quaker; and a methodist of that epoch says: "We believed in the gathering of Israel, and in the restoration

[p. 38]

of the ten tribes; we believed that Jesus would come to reign personally on the earth; we believed that there ought to be apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, as in former days, and that the gifts of healing and the power of God ought to be associated with the church." These ideas, of course, were not held by all; in many respects the strictly orthodox evangelical churches taught the contrary; but there was enough of this literal interpretation and license of thought among the people to enable them to accept in all honesty and sincerity any doctrine in harmony with these views.

    Such were the people and the place, such the atmosphere and conditions under which was to spring up the germ of a new theocracy, destined in its development to accomplish the first settlement of Utah--a people and an atmosphere already sufficiently charged, one would think, with doctrines and dogmas, with vulgar folly and stupid fanaticism, with unchristian hate and disputation over the commands of God and the charity of Christ. All this must be taken into account in estimating character, and in passing judgment on credulity; men of one time and place cannot with justice be measured by the standard of other times and places.

    Before entering upon the history of Mormonism, I would here remark, as I have before said in the preface to this volume, that it is my purpose to treat the subject historically, not as a social, political, or religious partisan, but historically to deal with the sect organized under the name of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as I would deal with any other body of people, thus carrying over Utah the same quality of work which I have applied to my entire field, whether in Alaska, California, or Central America. Whatever they may be, howsoever righteous or wicked, they are entitled at the hand of those desirous of knowing the truth to a dispassionate and

[p. 39]

respectful hearing, which they have never had. As a matter of course, where there is such warmth of feeling, such bitterness and animosity as is here displayed on both sides, we must expect to encounter in our evidence much exaggeration, and many untruthful statements. Most that has been written on either side is partisan--bitterly so; many of the books that have been published are full of vile and licentious abuse--disgustingly so. Some of the more palpable lies, some of the grosser scurrility and more blasphemous vulgarity, I shall omit altogether.

    Again, the history of the Mormons, which is the early history of Utah, is entitled in its treatment to this consideration, as differing from that of other sections of my work, and to this only--that whereas in speaking of other and older sects, as of the catholics in Mexico and California, and of the methodists and presbyterians in Oregon, whose tenets having long been established, are well known, and have no immediate bearing aside from the general influence of religion upon the subjugation of the country, any analysis of doctrines would be out of place, such analysis in the present instance is of primary importance. Ordinarily, I say, as I have said before, that with the religious beliefs of the settlers on new lands, or of the builders of empire in any of its several phases, social and political, the historian has nothing to do, except in so far as belief influences actions and events. As to attempting to determine the truth or falsity of any creed, it is wholly outside of his province.

    Since the settlement of Utah grew immediately out of the persecution of the Mormons, and since their persecutions grew out of the doctrines which they promulgated, it seems to me essential that the origin and nature of their religion should be given. And as they are supposed to know better than others what they believe and how they came so to believe, I shall let them tell their own story of the rise and progress of their religion, carrying along with it the commentaries

[p. 40]

of their opponents; that is, giving in the text the narrative proper, and in the notes further information, elucidation, and counter-statements, according to my custom. All this by no means implies, here or elsewhere in my work, that when a Mormon elder, a catholic priest, or a baptist preacher says he had a vision, felt within him some supernatural influence, or said a prayer which produced a certain result, it is proper or relevant for me to stop and dispute with him whether he really did see, feel, or experience as alleged.

    As to the material facts connected with the story of Mormonism, there is but little difference between the Mormons and their opposers; but in the reception and interpretation of acts and incidents, particularly in the acceptation of miraculous assertions and spiritual manifestations, they are as widely apart as the two poles, as my text and notes clearly demonstrate. And finally, I would have it clearly understood that it is my purpose, here as elsewhere in all my historical efforts, to impart information rather than attempt to solve problems.

    In Sharon, Windsor county, Vermont, on the 23d of December, 1805, was born Joseph Smith junior, presently to be called translator, revelator, seer, prophet, and founder of a latter-day dispensation. When the boy was ten years old, his father, who was a farmer, moved with his family to Palmyra, Wayne county, New York, and four years afterward took up his abode some six miles south, at Manchester, Ontario county. Six sons and three daughters comprised the family of Joseph and Lucy Smith, namely, Alvin, Hyrum, Joseph junior, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos, Sophronia, Catharine, and Lucy. [*1]

[p. 41]

There was much excitement over the subject of religion in this section at the time, with no small discussion of doctrines, methodist, baptist, and the rest; and about a year later, the mother and four of the children joined the presbyterians.

    But young Joseph was not satisfied with any of the current theologies, and he was greatly troubled what to do. Reading his bible one day, he came upon the passage, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God." He retired to the woods and threw himself upon his knees. It was his first attempt at prayer.

    While thus engaged a vision fell upon him. Suddenly he was seized by some supernatural power of evil import, which bound him body and soul. He could not think; he could not speak; thick darkness gathered round. Presently there appeared above his head a pillar of light, which slowly descended and enveloped him. Immediately he was delivered from the enemy; and in the sky he saw two bright personages, one of whom said, pointing to the other, "This is my beloved son; hear him." Then he asked what he should do; to which sect he should unite himself.

[p. 42]

And he was told to join none of them, that all were corrupt, all were abomination in the eyes of the Lord. When he came to himself he was still gazing earnestly up into heaven. This was in the spring of 1820, and Joseph was yet scarcely fifteen.

    When the young prophet began to proclaim his vision, the wise men and preachers of the several sects laughed at him; called him a silly boy, and told him that if his mind had really been disturbed. it was the devil's doing. "Signs and revelations," said they, "are of by-gone times; it ill befits one so young to lie before God and in the presence of his people." "Nevertheless," replied Joseph, "I have had a vision." Then they reviled him, and the boy became disheartened and was entangled again in the vanities of the world, under the heavy hand of their oppression.

    But the spirit of the Lord could not thus be quenched. The young man repented, and sought and found forgiveness. Retiring to his bed, midst prayer and supplication, on the night of September 21, 1823, presently the room grew light, and a figure robed in exceeding whiteness stood by the bedside, the feet not touching the floor. And a voice was heard, saying, "I am Moroni, and am come to you, Joseph, as a messenger from God." Then the angel told the youth that the Lord had for him a great work to do, that his name should be known to all people, and of him should be spoken both good and evil. He told him of a book written on plates of gold, and containing an account of the early inhabitants of this continent, and the gospel as delivered to them by Christ. He said that deposited with those plates were two stones in silver bows, which, fastened to a breastplate, constituted the Urim and Thummim; and that now as in ancient times the possession and use of the stones constituted a seer, and that through them the book might be translated. After offering many scriptural quotations from both the old and the new testament, and charging the young man that when the book and the breastplate were delivered

[p. 43]

to him he should show them to no one, under pain of death and destruction--the place where the plates were deposited meanwhile being clearly revealed to his mental vision--the light in the room grew dim, as Moroni ascended along a pathway of glory into heaven, and finally darkness was there as before. The visit was made three times, the last ending with the dawn, when Joseph arose greatly exhausted and went into the field to work.

    His father, observing his condition, sent him home; but on the way Joseph fell in a state of unconsciousness to the ground. Soon, however, the voice of Moroni was heard, commanding him to return to his father, and tell him all that he had seen and heard. The young man obeyed. The father answered that it was of God; the son should do as the messenger had said. Then Joseph, knowing from the vision where the plates were bidden, went to the west side of a hill, called the hill Cumorah, near the town of Manchester, and beneath a large stone, part of whose top appeared above the ground, in a stone box, [*2] he found the plates, [*3] the urim and

[p. 44]

thummim, [*4] and the breastplate. [*5] But when he was about to take them out Moroni stood beside him and said, "Not yet; meet me here at this time each year for four years, and I will tell you what to do." Joseph obeyed.

    The elder Smith was poor, and the boys were sometimes obliged to hire themselves out as laborers. It was on the 22d of September, 1823, that the plates were found. The following year Alvin died, and in October 1825 Joseph went to work for Josiah Steal, in Chenango county. This man had what he supposed to be a silver mine at Harmony, Pennsylvania, said to have been once worked by Spaniards. Thither Joseph went with the other men to dig for silver, [*6]

[p. 45]

boarding at the house of Isaac Hale. After a month's fruitless effort Stoal was induced by Joseph to abandon the undertaking; but meanwhile the youth had fallen in love with Hale's pretty daughter, Emma, and wished to marry her. Hale objected, owing to his continued assertions that he had seen visions, and the resulting persecutions; so Joseph took Emma to the house of Squire Tarbill, at South Bainbridge, where they were married the 18th of January, 1827, and thence returned to his father's farm, where he worked during the following season. [*7]

     Every year went Joseph to the hill Cumorah to hold communion with the heavenly messenger, and on the 22d of September, 1827, Moroni delivered to him the plates, [*8] and the urim and thummim with which to translate them, charging him on pain of dire disaster

[p. 46]

to guard them well until he should call for them. Persecutions increased when it was known that Joseph had in his possession the plates of gold, and every art that Satan could devise or put in force through the agency of wicked men was employed to

[p. 47]

wrest them from him. But almighty power and wisdom prevailed, and the sacred relies were safely kept till the day the messenger called for them, when they were delivered into his hands, Joseph meanwhile haying accomplished by them all that was required of him.

     And now so fierce becomes the fiery malevolence of the enemy that Joseph is obliged to fly. [*9] He is very poor, having absolutely nothing, until a farmer named Martin Harris has pity on him and gives him fifty dollars, [*10] with which he is enabled to go with his wife to her old home in Pennsylvania. [*11] Immediately after his arrival there in December, he begins copying the

[p. 48]

characters on the plates, Martin Harris coming to his assistance, and by means of the urim and thummim manages to translate some of them, which work is continued till February 1828. Harris' wife is exceedingly curious about the matter, and finally obtains possession through her husband of a portion of the manuscript. [*12] About this time Harris takes a copy

[p. 49]

of some of the characters to New York city, where he submits them to the examination of Professor Anthon and Dr Mitchell, who pronounce them to be Egyptian, Syriac, Chaldaic, and Arabic. [*13] Then

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] Joseph buys of his wife's father a small farm and goes to work on it. In February 1829 he receives a visit from his own father, at which time a revelation comes to Joseph Smith senior, through the son, calling him to faith and good works. The month following Martin Harris asks for and receives a revelation, by the mouth of the latter, regarding the plates, wherein the said Harris is told that Joseph has in his possession the plates which he claims to have, that they were delivered to him by the Lord God, who likewise gave him power to translate them, and that he, Harris, should bear witness of the same. Three months later, Harris having meanwhile acted as his scribe, Joseph is commanded to rest for a season in his work of translating until directed to take it up again.

[p. 51]

    The tenor of the book of Mormon [*14] is in this wise: Following the confusion of tongues at the tower of Babel, the peoples of the earth were scattered abroad, one colony being led by the Lord across the ocean to America. Fifteen hundred years after, or six hundred years before Christ, they were destroyed for their wickedness. Of the original number was Jared, among whose descendants was the prophet Ether, who was their historian. Ether lived to witness the extinction of his nation, and under divine direction he deposited his history in a locality where it was found by a second colony, Israelites of the tribe of Joseph, who came from Jerusalem about the time of the destruction of the first colony, namely, six hundred years before Christ. Thus was America repeopled; the second colony occupied the site of the first, multiplied and became rich, and in time divided into two nations, the Nephites and the Lamanites, so called from their respective founders, Nephi and Laman. The former advanced in civilization, but the Lamanites lapsed into barbarism, and were the immediate progenitors of the American aboriginals.

    The Nephites were the beloved of the Lord. To them were given visions and angels' visits; to them the Christ appeared with gifts of gospel and prophecy. It was, indeed, the golden age of a favored people; but in a time of temptation, some three or four centuries after Christ, they fell, and were destroyed by

[p. 52]

the wicked Lamanites. The greatest prophet of the Nephites, in the period of their declension, was Mormon, their historian, who after having completed his abridgment of the records of his nation, committed it to his son Moroni, and he, that they might not fall into the hands of the Lamanites, deposited them in the hill of Cumorah, where they were found by Joseph Smith.

 

    On the 5th of April, 1829, there comes to Joseph Smith a school-teacher, Oliver Cowdery by name, to whom the Lord had revealed himself at the house of the elder Smith, where the teacher had been boarding. Inquiring of the Lord, Joseph is told that to Oliver shall be given the same power to translate the book of Mormon, [*15] by which term the writing on

[p. 53]

[p. 54]

[p. 55]

[p. 56]

[p. 57]

the golden plates is hereafter known, and that he also shall bear witness to the truth.

    Two days after the arrival of Oliver, [*16] Joseph and he begin the work systematically, the former translating while the latter writes; [*17] for Oliver has a vision, meanwhile,

[p. 58]

telling him not to exercise his gift of translating at present, but simply to write at Joseph's dictation. Continuing thus, on the 15th of May the two men go into the woods to ask God concerning baptism, found mentioned in the plates. Presently a messenger descends from heaven in a cloud of light. It is John the Baptist. And he ordains them, saying, "Upon you, my fellow-servants, in the name of messiah, I confer the priesthood of Aaron." Baptism by immersion is directed; the power of laying-on of hands for the gift of the holy ghost is promised, but not now bestowed; then they are commanded to be baptized, each one baptizing the other, which is done, each in turn laying his hands upon the head of the other, and ordaining him to the Aaronic priesthood. As they come up out of the water the holy ghost falls upon them, and they prophesy.

    Persecutions continue; brethren of Christ threaten to mob them, but Joseph's wife's father promises protection. Samuel Smith comes, and is converted, receiving baptism and obtaining revelations; and later Joseph's father and mother, Martin Harris, and others. Food is several times charitably brought to the translators by Joseph Knight, senior, of Colesville, New York, concerning whom is given a revelation. In June comes David Whitmer with a request from his father, Peter Whitmer, of Fayette, New York, that the translators should occupy his house thenceforth until the completion of their work, and brings with him a two-horse wagon to carry them and their effects. Not only is their board to be free, but one of the brothers Whitmer, of whom there are David, John, and Peter junior, will assist in the writing. Thither they go, and find all as promised; David and Peter Whitmer and Hyrum Smith are baptized, and receive revelations through Joseph, who inquires of the Lord for them by means of the urim and thummim. The people thereabout being friendly, meetings are held, and the new revelation taught, many believing,

[p. 59]

certain priests and others disputing. Three special witnesses are provided by Christ, namely, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, [*18] to whom the plates are shown by an angel after much prayer and meditation in the woods. These are the three witnesses. And there are further eight witnesses, namely, Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer junior, John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith senior, Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith, who testify that the plates were shown to them by Joseph Smith junior, that they handled them with their hands, and saw the characters engraven thereon. [*19]

[p. 60]

[p. 61]

[p. 62]

[p. 63]

    The translation of the book of Mormon being finished, Smith and Cowdery go to Palmyra, secure the copyright, and agree with Egbert B. Grandin to print five thousand copies for three thousand dollars. Meanwhile, a revelation comes to Martin Harris, at Manchester, in March, commanding him to pay for the printing of the book of Mormon, under penalty of destruction of himself and property. [*20] The title-page

[p. 64]

is not a modern production, but a literal translation from the last leaf of the plates, on the left-hand side, and running like all Hebrew writing.

    And now in a chamber of Whitmer's house Smith, Cowdery, and David Whitmer meet, and earnestly ask God to make good his promise, and confer on them the Melchisedec priesthood, which authorizes the laying-on of hands for the gift of the holy ghost. Their prayer is answered; for presently the word of the Lord comes to them, commanding that Joseph Smith should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an elder in the church of Jesus Christ, and Oliver in like manner should so ordain Joseph, and the two should ordain others as from time to time the will of the Lord should be made known to them. [*21] But this ordination must not take place until the baptized brethren assemble and give to this act their sanction, and accept the ordained as spiritual teachers, and then only after the blessing and partaking of bread and wine. It is next revealed that twelve shall be called to be the disciples of Christ, the twelve apostles of these last days, who shall go into all the world preaching and baptizing.

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] By the spirit of prophecy and revelation it is done. The rise of the church of Jesus Christ in these last days is on the 6th of April, 1830, at which date the church was organized under the provisions of the statutes of the state of New York by Joseph Smith junior, Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith, and Peter Whitmer. Joseph Smith, ordained an apostle of Jesus Christ, is made by the commandment of God the first elder of this church, and Oliver Cowdery, likewise an apostle, is made the second elder. Again the first elder falls into worldly entanglements, but upon repentance and self-humbling he is delivered by an angel.

    The duties of elders, priests, teachers, deacons, and members are as follow: All who desire it, with honesty and humility, may be baptized into the church; old covenants are at an end, all must be baptized anew. An apostle is an elder; he shall baptize, ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, administer bread and wine, emblems of the flesh and blood of Christ; he shall confirm, teach, expound, exhort, taking the lead at meetings, and conducting them as he is taught by the holy ghost. The priest's duty is to preach, teach, expound, exhort, baptize, administer the sacrament, and visit and pray with members; he may also ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons, giving a certificate of ordination, and lead in meetings when no elder is present. The teacher's duty is to watch over and strengthen the members, preventing evil speaking and all iniquity, to see that the meetings are regularly held, and to take the lead in them in the absence of elder or priest. The deacon's duty is to assist the teacher; teacher and deacon may warn, expound, exhort, but neither of them shall baptize, administer the sacrament, or lay on hands. The elders are to meet in council for the transaction of church business every three months, or oftener should meetings be called. Subordinate officers will receive from the elders a license defining their authority; elders will

[p. 66]

receive their license from other elders by vote of church or conference. There shall be presidents, bishops, high counsellors, and high priests; the presiding elder shall be president of the high priesthood, and he, as well as bishops, high counsellors, and high priests, will be ordained by high council or general conference. The duty of members is to walk in holiness before the Lord according to the scriptures, to bring their children to the elders, who will lay their hands on them and bless them in the name of Jesus Christ. The bible, that is to say, the scriptures of the old and new testaments, is accepted wholly, save such corruptions as have crept in through the great and abominable church; the book of Mormon is a later revelation, supplementary thereto. Thus is organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, [*22] in accordance with special revelations and commandments, and after the manner set forth in the new testament.

    The first public discourse, following the meetings held in Whitmer's house, was preached on Sunday, the 11th of April, 1830, by Oliver Cowdery, who the

[p. 67]

same day baptized in Seneca Lake several persons, among whom were Hyrum and Katherine Page, some of the Whitmers, and the Jolly family. The first miracle likewise occurred during the same month, Joseph Smith casting out a devil from Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight, who with his family had been universalists. Newel had been a constant attendant at the meetings, and was much interested; but when he attempted to pray the devil prevented him, writhing his limbs into divers distortions, and hurling him about the room. "I know that you can deliver me from this evil spirit," cried Newel. Whereupon Joseph rebuked the devil in the name of Jesus Christ, and the evil spirit departed from the young man. Seeing this, others came forward and expressed their belief in the new faith, and a church was established at Colesville.

    On the 1st of June the first conference as an organized church was held, there being thirty members. The meeting was opened by singing and prayer, after which they partook of the sacrament, which was followed by confirmations and further ordinations to the several offices of the priesthood. The exercises were attended by the outpouring of the holy ghost, and many prophesied, to the infinite joy and gratification of the elders. Some time after, on a Saturday previous to an appointed sabbath on which baptism was to be performed, the brethren constructed, across a stream of water, a dam, which was torn away by a mob during the night. The meeting was held, however, though amid the sneers and insults of the rabble, Oliver preaching. Present among others was Emily Coburn, Newel Knight's wife's sister, formerly a presbyterian. Her pastor, the Rev. Mr Shearer, arrived, and tried to persuade her to return to her father. Failing in this, he obtained from her father a power of attorney, and bore her off by force; but Emily returned. The dam was repaired, and baptism administered to some thirteen persons the following morning; whereupon fifty

[p. 68]

men surrounded Mr Knight's house, threatening violence. The same night Joseph was arrested by a constable on a charge of disorderly conduct, and for preaching the book of Mormon. It was the purpose of the populace to capture Joseph from the constable and use him roughly, but by hard driving he escaped. At the trial which followed, an attempt was made to prove certain charges, namely, that he obtained a horse from Josiah Stoal, and a yoke of oxen from Jonathan Thompson, by saying that in a revelation he was told that he was to have them; also as touching his conduct toward two daughters of Mr Stoal; but all testified in his favor, and he was acquitted. As he was leaving the court-room, he was again arrested on a warrant from Broome county, and taken midst insults and buffetings to Colesville for trial. The old charges were renewed, and new ones preferred. Newel Knight was made to testify regarding the miracle wrought in his behalf, and a story that the prisoner had been a money digger was advanced by the prosecution. Again he was acquitted, and again escaped from the crowd outside the court-house, whose purpose it was to tar and feather him, and ride him on a rail. These persecutions were instigated, it was said, chiefly by presbyterians.

    While Joseph rested at his home at Harmony further stories were circulated, damaging to his character, this time by the methodists. One went to his father-in-law with falsehoods, and so turned him and his family against Joseph and his friends that he would no longer afford them protection or receive their doctrine. This was a heavy blow; but proceeding in August to Colesville, Joseph and Hyrum Smith and John and David Whitmer continued the work of prayer and confirmation. Fearing their old enemies, who lay in wait to attack them on their way back, they prayed that their eyes might be blinded; and so it came to pass. Then they held service and returned safely, although five dollars reward had been offered

[p. 69]

for notification of their arrival. Removing his family to Fayette, Joseph encountered further persecutions, to which was added a fresh grief. Hiram Page was going astray over a stone which he had found, and by means of which he had obtained revelations at variance with Joseph's revelations and the rules of the new testament. It was thought best not to agitate the subject unnecessarily, before the meeting of the conference to be held on the 1st of September; but the Whitmer family and Oliver Cowdery seeming to be too greatly impressed over the things set forth by the rival stone, it was resolved to inquire of the Lord concerning the matter; whereupon a revelation came to Oliver Cowdery, forbidding such practice; and he was to say privately to Hiram Page that Satan had deceived him, and that the things which he had written from the stone were not of God. Oliver was further commanded to go and preach the gospel to the Lamanites, [*23] the remnants of the house of Joseph living in the west, [*24] where he was to establish

[p. 70]

a church and build a city, [*25] at a point to be designated later.

    "Behold, I say unto thee, Oliver, that it shall be given unto thee that thou shalt be heard by the church in all things whatsoever thou shalt teach them by the comforter concerning. the revelations and commandments which I have given. But behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church, excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jr, for he receiveth them even as Moses; and thou shalt be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him, even as Aaron, to declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations with power and authority unto the church. And if thou art led at any time by the comforter to speak or teach, or at all times by the way of commandment unto the church, thou mayest do it. But thou shalt not write by way of commandment, but by wisdom; and thou shalt not command him who is at thy head and at the head of the church; for I have given him the keys of the mysteries and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead."

Footnotes

^40:1 Much has been said by the enemies of Mormonism against the Smith family. 'All who became intimate with them during this period [1820 to 1830] unite in representing the general character of old Joseph and wife, the parents of the pretended prophet, as lazy, indolent, ignorant, and superstitious, [p. 41] having a firm belief in ghosts and witches; the telling of fortunes; pretending to believe that the earth was filled with hidden treasures, buried there by Kid or the Spaniards. Being miserably poor, and not much disposed to obtain an honest livelihood by labor, the energies of their minds seemed to be mostly directed toward finding where these treasures were concealed, and the best mode of acquiring their possession.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 11. In the towns of Palmyra and Manchester, in 1833, documents defamatory to the family were circulated for signature, one receiving 11 and another 51 names. Given with signatures in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 251-2, and in Kidder's Mormonism, 20-1. See also Olshausen, Gesch. d. Morm., 9-14, 103-10, 200-1; Gazette of Utah, 1874, 17; Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 11-20. In one of these documents, signed and sworn to by Peter Ingersoll, he said that the Smith family employed most of their time in gold-digging. At one time Joseph Smith senior told Ingersoll to hold a mineral rod in his hand, a piece of witch-hazel, and selected a place to stand where he was to whisper directions to the rod; Smith stood apart, throwing himself into various shapes, but was unable to produce the desired effect. Again he took a stone that Ingersoll had picked up and exclaimed that it was invaluable; looking at it earnestly, he said it revealed to him chests of gold and silver at the back of his house; and putting it into his hat, threw himself into various attitudes, and soon appeared exhausted; then in a faint voice, said, 'If you only knew what I had seen you would believe.' Some time before Joseph's discovery of the gold plates, the elder Smith told Ingersoll that a book had been found in Canada in a hollow tree which treated of the discovery of this continent.

^43:2 Oliver Cowdery stated that he visited the spot, and that 'at the bottom of this [hole] lay a stone of suitable size, the upper surface being smooth. At each edge was placed a large quantity of cement and into this cement at the four edges of this stone were placed erect four others, their lower edges resting in the cement at the outer edges of the first stone. The four last named when placed erect formed a box, the corners, or where the edges of the four came in contact, were also cemented so firmly that the moisture from without was prevented from entering. It is to be observed also that the inner surfaces of the four erect or side stones were smooth. The box was sufficiently large to admit a breastplate. From the bottom of the box or from the breastplate arose three small pillars, composed of the same description of cement as that used on the edges; and upon these three pillars were placed the records. The box containing the records was covered with another stone, the lower surface being flat and the upper crowning.' Mackay's The Mormons, 20.

^43:3 Orson Pratt thus describes the plates, Visions, 14: 'These records were engraved on plates which had the appearance of gold. Each plate was not far from seven by eight inches in width and length, being not quite as thick as common tin. They were filled on both sides with engravings in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book, and fastened at one edge with three rings running through the whole. This volume was about six inches in thickness, and a part of it was sealed. the characters or letters upon the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, as well [p. 44] as much skill in the art of engraving.' In the introduction to the Book of Mormon (New York ed.), viii., is given essentially the same description. See also Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines, 61; Bertrand, Mem. d'un Mor., 25; Olshausen, Gesch. d. Morm., 12-29; Stenhouse, Les Mormons, i.-vii.; Ferris' Utah and The Mormons, 58; Mackay's The Mormons, 15-22; Smucker's Hist. Mormons, 13-28. For facsimile of writing on golden plates, see Beadle's Life in Utah, 25. For illustrations of the hill, finding the plates, etc., see Mackay's The Mormons, 15; Smucker's Hist. Mormons, 24; Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., frontispiece. When sceptics ask, Why are not the plates forthcoming? believers ask in turn, Why are not forthcoming the stone tables of Moses? And yet the ten commandments are to-day accepted.

^44:4 'With the book were found the urim and thummim, two transparent crystals set in the rims of a bow. These pebbles were the seer's instrument whereby the mystery of hidden things was to be revealed!' Introduction to Book of Mormon (New York ed.), viii. 'The best attainable definition of the ancient urim and thummim is quite vague and indistinct. An accepted biblical lexicographer gives the meaning as "light and perfection," or the "shining and the perfect." The following is quoted from Butterworth's Concordance: "There are various conjectures about the urim and thummim, whether they were the stones in the high-priest's breastplate, or something distinct from them; which it is not worth our while to inquire into, since God has left it a secret. It is evident that the urim and thummim were appointed to inquire of God by, on momentous occasions, and continued in use, as some think, only till the building of Solomon's temple, and all conclude that this was never restored after its destruction."' Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 32.

^44:5 'A breastplate such as was used by the ancients to defend the chest from the arrows and weapons of their enemy.' Mackay's The Mormons, 20.

^44:6 'Hence arose the very prevalent story of my having been a money digger.' Hist. Joseph Smith, in Times and Seasons, May 2, 1842. It seems from this, or some other cause, that the followers of Smith have never regarded mining with favor, although some of them at times have engaged in that occupation. Upon the discovery of gold in California, the Mormons were among the first in the field, at Coloma, at Mormon Bar, and elsewhere. Left there a little longer, they would soon have gathered barrels of the precious dust; but promptly upon the call they dropped their tools, abandoned their brilliant prospects, and crossing the Sierra, began to build homes among their people in the untenanted desert.

^45:7 Among the many charges of wrong-doing ascribed to Smith from first to last, was that of having stolen Hale's daughter. In answer it is said that the young woman was of age, and had the right to marry whom and as she chose.

^45:8 'When the appointed hour came, the prophet, assuming his practised air of mystery, took in hand his money-digging spade and a large napkin, and went off in silence and alone in the solitude of the forest, and after an absence of some three hours, returned, apparently with his sacred charge concealed within the folds of the napkin. Reminding the (Smith) family of the original "command" as revealed to him, strict injunction of non-intervention and non-inspection was given to them, under the same terrible penalty as before denounced for its violation. Conflicting stories were afterwards told in regard to the manner of keeping the book in concealment and safety, which are not worth repeating further than to mention that the first place of secretion was said to be under a heavy hearthstone in the Smith family mansion. Smith told a frightful story of the display of celestial pyrotechnics on the exposure to his view of the sacred book--the angel who had led him to the discovery again appearing as his guide and protector, and confronting ten thousand devils gathered there, with their menacing sulphurous flame and smoke, to deter him from his purpose! This story was repeated and magnified by the believers, and no doubt aided the experiment upon superstitious minds which eventuated so successfully.' Tucker's Orig. and Prog. Mor., 30-31. 'A great variety of contradictory stories were related by the Smith family before they had any fixed plan of operation, respecting the finding of the plates from which their book was translated. One is, that after the plates were taken from their hiding-place by Jo he again laid them down, looked into the hole, where he saw a toad, which immediately transformed itself into a spirit and gave him a tremendous blow. Another is, that after he had got the plates, a spirit assaulted him with the intention of getting them from his possession, and actually jerked them out of his hands. Jo, nothing daunted, seized them again, and started to run, when his Satanic majesty, or the spirit, applied his foot to the prophet's seat of honor which raised three or four feet from the ground.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 275-6. The excavation was at the time said to be 160 feet in extent, though that is probably an exaggeration. [p. 46] It had a substantial door of two-inch plank, and a secure lock. Lapse of time and other causes have almost effaced its existence. Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 48. 'In 1843, near Kinderhook, Illinois, in excavating a large mound, six brass plates were discovered of a bell-shape four inches in length and covered with ancient characters. They were fastened together with two iron wires almost entirely corroded, and were found along with charcoal, ashes, and human bones, more than twelve feet below the surface of a mound of the sugar-loaf form, common in the Mississippi Valley. Large trees growing upon these artificial mounds attest their great antiquity...No key has yet been discovered for the interpretation of the engravings upon these brass plates, or of the strange gylphs upon the ruins of Otolum in Mexico.' Daniel Wedderburn, in Popular Science Monthly, Dec. 1876; see also Times and Seasons, iv. 186-7, and engraved cuts in Taylor's Discussions, and in Mackay's The Mormons, 26-7. On the authority of Kidder, Mormonism, 23-6, Willard Chase, a carpenter, said: 'In the fore part of September (I believe) 1827, the prophet requested me to make him a chest, informing me that he designed to move back to Pennsylvania, and expecting soon to get his gold book, he wanted a chest to lock it up, giving me to understand, at the same time, that if I would make the chest he would give me a share in the book. I told him my business was such that I could not make it; but if he would bring the book to me, I would lock it up for him. He said that would not do, as he was commanded to keep it two years without letting it come to the eye of any one but himself. This commandment, however, he did not keep, for in less than two years twelve men said they had seen it. I told him to get it and convince me of its existence, and I would make him a chest; but he said that would not do; as he must have a chest to lock the book in as soon as he took it out of the ground. I saw him a fews days after, when he told me I must make the chest. I told him plainly that I could not, upon which he told me that I could have no share in the hook. A few weeks after this conversation he came to my house and related the following story: That on the 22d of September he arose early in the morning and took a one-horse wagon of some one that had stayed over night at their house, without leave or license; and, together with his wife, repaired to the hill which contained the book. He left his wife in the wagon, by the road, and went alone to the hill, a distance of thirty or forty rods from the road; he said he then took the book out of the ground and hid it in a tree-top and returned home. He then went to the town of Macedon to work. After about ten days, it having been suggested that some one had got his book, his wife went utter him; he hired a horse, and went home in the afternoon, stayed long enough to drink one cup of tea, and then went for his book, found it safe, took off his frock, wrapt it round it, put it under his arm, and ran all the way home, a distance of about two miles. He said he should think it would weigh sixty pounds, and was sure it would weigh forty. On his return home he said he was attacked by two men in the woods, and knocked them both down and made his escape, arrived safe, and secured his treasure. He then observed that if it had not been for that stone (which he acknowledged belonged to me) he would not have obtained the book. A few days afterward he told one of my neighbors that he had not got any such book, and never had; but that he told the story to deceive the damned fool (meaning me), to get him to make a chest.' Others give other accounts, but it seems to me not worth while to follow them further.

^47:9 'Soon the news of his discoveries spread abroad throughout all those parts...The house was frequently beset by mobs and evil-designing persons. Several times he was shot at, and very narrowly escaped. Every device was used to get the plates away from him. And being continually in danger of his life from a gang of abandoned wretches, he at length concluded to leave the place, and go to Pennsylvania; and accordingly packed up his goods, putting the plates into a barrel of beans, and proceeded upon his journey. He had not gone far before he was overtaken by an officer with a search-warrant, who flattered himself with the idea that he should surely obtain the plates; after searching very diligently, he was sadly disappointed at not finding them. Mr Smith then drove on, but before he got to his journey's end he was again overtaken by an officer on the same business, and after ransacking the wagon very carefully, he went his way as much chagrined as the first at not being able to discover the object of his research. Without any further molestation, he pursued his journey until he came to the northern part of Pennsylvania, near the Susquehanna River, in which part his father-in-law resided.' Pratt's Visions, 15.

^47:10 'In the neighborhood (of Smith's old home) there lived a farmer possessed of some money and more credulity. Every wind of doctrine affected him. tie had been in turn a quaker, a Wesleyan, a baptist, a presbyterian. His heterogeneous and unsettled-views admirably qualified him for discipleship where novelty was paramount, and concrete things were invested with the enchantment of mystery. He was enraptured with the young prophet, and offered him fifty dollars to aid in the publication of his new bible.' Tayldler's Mormons, xxviii.-ix.

^47:11 'Soon after Smith's arrival at Harmony, Isaac Hale (Smith's father-in-law) heard he had brought a wonderful box of plates with him. Hale "was shown a box in which it is said they were contained, which had to all appearances been used as a glass box of the common window-glass. I was allowed to feel the weight of the box, and they gave me to understand that the book of plates was then in the box--into which, however, I was not allowed to look. I inquired of Joseph Smith, Jr., who was to be the first who would be allowed to see the book of plates. He said it was a young child. After this I became dissatisfied, and informed him that if there was anything in my house of that description, which I could not be allowed to see, he must take it away; if he did not, I was determined to see it. After that the plates were said to be hid in the woods."' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 264.

^48:12 Martin Harris 'says he wrote a considerable part of the book as Smith dictated; and at one time the presence of the Lord was so great that a screen was hung up between him and the prophet; at earlier times the prophet would sit in a different room, or up stairs, while the Lord was communicating to him the contents of the plates. He does not pretend that he ever saw the wonderful plates but once, although he and Smith were engaged for months in deciphering their contents.' Mormonism Unveiled, 14. 'Harris rendered Smith valuable assistance by transcribing for him, since he could not write himself. Poor Martin was unfortunately gifted with a troublesome wife. Her inquisitive and domineering nature made him dread unpleasant results from his present engagement. His manuscript had reached 116 pages, and he therefore begged permission to read it to her "with the hope that it might have a salutary effect upon her feelings." His request was at length granted; but through carelessness or perfidy, while in his house, the precious document was irrecoverably lost. Joseph suffered greatly in consequence of this hinderance, but more from the anger of heaven which was manifested against him. As soon as possible, he resumed his task, having secured the services of another scribe, Oliver Cowdery, a school-master in the neighborhood. Martin Harris, earnest as he was, had never yet been favored with a sight of the golden plates. He had not attained to sufficient purity of mind; but a copy of a small portion of their contents was placed in his hands, and this he was told he might show to any scholar in the world, if he wished to be satisfied. Accordingly he started for New York, sought Professor Anthon (Charles Anthon, LL.D., then adjunct professor of ancient languages in Columbia College), and requested his opinion.' Taylder's Mormons, xxxviii.-ix. 'She (Harris's wife) contrived in her husband's sleep to steal from him the particular source of her disturbance, and burned the manuscript to ashes. For years she kept this incendiarism a profound secret to herself, even until after the book was published. Smith and Harris held her accountable for the theft, but supposed she had handed the manuscript to some "evil-designing persons," to be used somehow in injuring their cause. A feud was thus produced between husband and wife which was never reconciled. Great consternation now pervaded the Mormon circles. The reappearance of the mysterious stranger (who had before visited the Smiths) was again the subject of inquiry and conjecture by observers, from whom was withheld all explanation of his identity or purpose. It was not at first an easy task to convince the prophet of the entire innocency of his trusted friend Harris in the matter of tills calamitous event, though mutual confidence and friendship were ultimately restored.' Tucker's Orig. and Prog. Mor., 46. Of this lost manuscript Smith afterward wrote: 'Some time after Mr Harris had begun to write for me he began to tease me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them, and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord through the urim and thummim if he might not do so.' To two inquiries the reply was no, but a third application resulted in permission being granted under certain restrictions, which were, that Harris might show the papers to his brother, his wife, her sister, his father and mother, and to no one else. Accordingly Smith required Harris to bind himself in a covenant to him in the most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. 'He [p. 49] did so,' says Smith. 'He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding...he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him.' Smith, in Times and Seasons, iii. 785-6.

^49:13 In a letter to E. D. Howe, printed in his book, and in the introduction to the New York edition of the Book of Mormon, Prof. Anthon, among other statements, denies that he ever gave a certificate. The letter reads as follows:

  'NEW YORK, February 17, 1834.

      'DEAR SIR: I received your letter of the 9th, and lose no time in making a reply. The whole story about my pronouncing the Mormon inscription to be reformed Egyptian hierogylphies is perfectly false. Some years ago, a plain, apparently simple-hearted farmer called on me with a note from Dr Mitchell, of our city, now dead, requesting me to decipher, if possible, the paper which the farmer would hand me. Upon examining the paper in question, I soon came to the conclusion that it was all a trick--perhaps a hoax. When I asked the person who brought it how he obtained the writing, he gave me the following account: A gold book consisting of a number of plates, fastened together by wires of the same material, had been dug up in the northern part of the state of New York, and along with it an enormous pair of spectacles. These spectacles were so large that if any person attempted to look through them, his two eyes would look through one glass only, the spectacles in question being altogether too large for the human face. "Whoever," he said, "examined the plates through the glasses was enabled not only to read them, but fully to understand their meaning." All this knowledge, however, was confined to a young man, who had the trunk containing the book and spectacles in his sole possession. This young man was placed behind a curtain in a garret in a farm-house, and being thus concealed from view, he put on the spectacles occasionally, or rather looked through one of the glasses, deciphered the characters in the book, and having committed some of them to paper, handed copies from behind the curtain to those who stood outside. Not a word was said about their being deciphered by the gift of God. Everything in this way was effected by the large pair of spectacle. The farmer added that he had been requested to contribute a sum of money toward the publication of the golden book, the contents of which would, as he was told, produce an entire change in the world, and save it from ruin. So urgent had been these solicitations, that he intended selling his farm and giving the amount to those who wished to publish the plates. As a last precautionary step, he had resolved to come to New York, and obtain the opinion of the learned about the meaning of the paper which he brought with him, and which had been given him as part of the contents of the book, although no translation had at that time been made by the young man with spectacles. On hearing this odd story, I changed my opinion about the paper, and instead of viewing it any longer as a hoax, I began to regard it as part of a scheme to cheat the farmer of his money, and I communicated my suspicions to him, warning him to beware of rogues. He requested an opinion from me in writing, which, of course, I declined to give, and he then took his leave, taking his paper with him. This paper in question was, in fact. a singular scroll. It consisted of all kinds of singular characters disposed in columns, and had evidently been prepared by some person who had before him at the time a book containing various alphabets, Greek and Hebrew letters, crosses and flourishes; Roman letters inverted or placed sideways were arranged and placed in perpendicular columns, and the whole ended in a rude delineation of a circle, divided into [p. 50] various compartments, arched with various strange marks, and evidently copied after the Mexican calendar given by Humboldt, but copied in such a way as not to betray the source whence it was derived. I am thus particular as to the contents of the paper, inasmuch as I have frequently conversed with friends on the subject since the Mormon excitement began, and well remember that the paper contained anything else but Egyptian hieroglyphics. Some time after, the farmer paid me a second visit. He brought with him the gold book in print, and offered it to me for sale. I declined purchasing. He then asked permission to leave the book with me for examination. I declined receiving it, although his manner was strangely urgent. I adverted once more to the roguery which, in my opinion, had been practised upon him, and asked him what had become of the gold plates. He informed me they were in a trunk with the spectacles. I advised him to go to a magistrate and have the trunk examined. He said the curse of God would come upon him if he did. On my pressing him, however, to go to a magistrate, he told me he would open the trunk if I would take the curse of God upon myself. I replied I would do so with the greatest willingness, and would incur every risk of that nature, provided I could only extricate him from the grasp of the rogues. He then left me. I have given you a full statement of all that I know respecting the origin of Mormonism, and must beg of you, as a personal favor, to publish this letter immediately, should you find my name mentioned again by these wretched fanatics.

Yours respectfully,

'CHARLES ANTHON.'

    It is but fair to state that Smith never claimed that the characters were the ordinary Greek or Hebrew, but were what he called Reformed Egyptian. Harris says: 'He gave me a certificate which I took and put into my pocket, and was just leaving the house when Mr Anthon called me back, and asked me how the young man found out that there were gold plates in the place where he found them. I answered that an angel of God had revealed it unto him. He then said unto me, Let me see that certificate. I accordingly took it out of my pocket and gave it to him, when he took it and tore it to pieces, saying that there was no such thing now as ministering of angels, and that if I would bring the plates to him he would translate them. I informed him that part of the plates were sealed, and that I was forbidden to bring them; he replied, "I cannot read a sealed book." I left him and went to Dr Mitchell, who sanctioned what Professor Anthon had said respecting both the characters and the translation.' Pearl of Great Price, xiii. 54.

^51:14 'The word "Mormon," the name given to his book, is the English termination of the Greek word mormoo, which we find defined in an old, obsolete dictionary to mean bugbear, hobgoblin, raw head, and bloody bones.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 21. 'The word "Mormon" is neither Greek nor derived from the Greek, but from the "reformed Egyptian."' Bell's Reply to Theobald, 2. In Times and Seasons, Mr Smith writes as follows with regard to the meaning of the word 'Mormon:' 'We say from the Saxon, good; the Dane, god; the Goth, goda; the German, gut; the Dutch, good; the Latin, bonus; the Greek, kalos; the Hebrew, tob; and the Egyptian, mon. Hence, with the addition of more, or the contraction mor, we have the word "Mormon," which means, literally more good.' 'Joseph Smith, annoyed at the profane wit which could derive the word "Mormon" from the Greek mormo, a bugbear, wrote an epistle on the subject, concluding with an elaborate display of his philological talent such as he was accustomed to make on every possible occasion.' Taylder's Mormon's Own Book, xxxiv., xxxv.

^52:15 The Book of Mormon; an account written by The Hand of Mormon, upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi. Wherefore it is an abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, who are a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile; written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation. Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord, that they might not be destroyed; to come forth by the girl and power of God unto the interpretation thereof; sealed by the hand of Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by the way of Gentile; the interpretation thereof by the gift of God. An abridgment taken from the Book of Ether also; which is a record of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord confounded the language of the people when they were building a tower to get to heaven; which is to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not east off forever; and also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations. And now if there are faults, they are the mistakes of men; wherefore condemn not the things of God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ. By Joseph Smith, Jun., Author and Proprietor. (Printed by E. B. Grandin, for the author, Palmyra, New York, 1830.) Several editions followed. This first edition has 588 pages, and is prefaced among other things by an account of 117 pages, which Mrs Harris burned. This preface is omitted in subsequent editions. The testimony of three witnesses, and also of eight witnesses which in subsequent editions is placed at the beginning, is here at the end. The testimony of witnesses affirms that the signers saw the plates and the engravings thereon, having been shown them by an angel from heaven; they knew of the translation, that it had been done by the gift and power of God, and was therefore true. The book was reprinted at Nauvoo, at New York, at Salt Lake City, and in Europe. An edition printed by Jas O. Wright & Co., evidently by way of speculation, contains eight pages of introduction, and an advertisement asserting that it is a reprint from the third American edition, and that the work was originally published at Nauvoo, which latter statement is incorrect. The publishers further claim that at the time of this printing, 1848, the book was out of print, notwithstanding the several preceding [p. 54] editions. The edition at present in common use was printed at Salt Lake City, at the Deseret News office, and entered according to act of congress in 1879, by Joseph F. Smith. It is divided into chapters and verses, with references by Orson Pratt, senior. The arrangement is as follows.

    The first book of Nephi, his reign and ministry, 22 chapters; the second book of Nephi, 33 chapters; the book of Jacob, the brother of Nephi, 7 chapters; the book of Enos, 1 chapter; the book of Jarom, 1 chapter; the book of Omni, 1 chapter; the words of Mormon, 1 chapter; the book of Mosiah, 29 chapters; the book of Alma, the son of Alma, 63 chapters; the book of Helaman, 16 chapters; the book of Nephi, the son of Nephi, who was the son of Helaman, 30 chapters; the book of Nephi, who is the son of Nephi, one of the disciples of Jesus Christ, 1 chapter; book of Mormon, 9 chapters; book of Ether, 15 chapters; the book of Moroni, 10 chapters. In all 239 chapters.

    I give herewith the contents of the several books. The style, like that of the revelations, is biblical.

    'First Book of Nephi. Language of the record; Nephi's abridgment; Lehi's dream; Lehi departs into the wilderness; Nephi slayeth Laban; Sariah complains of Lehi's vision; contents of the brass plates; Ishmael goes with Nephi; Nephi's brethren rebel, and bind him; Lehi's dream of the tree, rod, etc.; Messiah and John prophesied of; olive branches broken off; Nephi's vision of Mary; of the crucifixion of Christ; of darkness and earthquake; great abominable church; discovery of the promised land; bible spoken of; book of Mormon and holy ghost promised; other books come forth; bible and book of Mormon one; promises to the gentiles; two churches; the work of the Father to commence; a man in white robes (John); Nephites come to knowledge; rod of iron; the sons of Lehi take wives; director found (ball); Nephi breaks his bow; directors work by faith; Ishmael died; Lehi and Nephi threatened; Nephi commanded to build a ship; Nephi about to be worshipped by his brethren; ship finished and entered; dancing in the ship; Nephi bound; ship driven back; arrived on the promised land; plates of ore made; Zenos, Neum, and Zenock; Isaiah's writing; holy one of Israel.

    'Second Book of Nephi. Lehi to his sons; opposition in all things; Adam fell that man might be; Joseph saw our day; a choice seer; writings grow together; prophet promised to the Lamanites; Joseph's prophecy on brass plates; Lehi buried; Nephi's life sought; Nephi separated from Laman; temple built; skin of blackness; priests, etc., consecrated; make other plates; Isaiah's words by Jacob; angels to a devil; spirits and bodies reunited; baptism; no kings upon this land; Isaiah prophesieth; rod of the stem of Jesse; seed of Joseph perisheth not; law of Moses kept; Christ shall shew himself; signs of Christ, birth and death; whisper from the dust; book sealed up; priestcraft forbidden; sealed book to be brought forth; three witnesses behold the book; the words (read this; I pray thee); seal up the book again; their priests shall contend; teach with their learning, and deny the holy ghost; rob the poor; a bible, a bible; men judged of the books; white and a delightsome people; work commences among all people; lamb of God baptized; baptism by water and holy ghost.

    'Book of Jacob. Nephi anointeth a king; Nephi dies; Nephites and Lamanites; a righteous branch from Joseph; Lamanites shall scourge you; more than one wife forbidden; trees, waves, and mountains obey us; Jews look beyond the mark; tame olive tree; nethermost part of the vineyard; fruit laid up against the season; another branch; wild fruit had overcome; lord of the vineyard weeps; branches overcome the roots; wild branches plucked off; Sherein, the anti-Christ; a sign, Sherem smitten; Enos takes the plates from his father.

    'The Book of Enos. Enos, thy sins are forgiven; records threatened by Lamanites; Lamanites eat raw meat.

    'The Book of Jarom. Nephites wax strong; Lamanites drink blood; fortify cities; plates delivered to Omni.

    'The Book of Omni. Plates given to Amaron; plates given to Chemish; [p. 54] Mosiah warned to flee; Zarahemla discovered; engravings on a stone; Coriantumr discovered; his parents come from the tower; plates delivered to King Benjamin.

    'The words of Mormon. False Christs and prophets.

    'Book of Mosiah. Mosiah made king; the plates of brass, sword, and director; King Benjamin teacheth the people; their tent doors toward the temple; coming of Christ foretold; beggars not denied; sons and daughters; Mosiah began to reign; Ammon, etc., bound and imprisoned; Limhi's proclamation; twenty-four plates of gold; seer and translator.

    'Record of Zeniff. A battle fought; King Laman died; Noah made king; Abinadi the prophet; resurrection; Alma believed Abinadi; Abinadi cast into prison and scourged with fagots; waters of Mormon; the daughters of the Lamanites stolen by King Noah's priests; records on plates of ore; last tribute of wine; Lamanites' deep sleep; King Limhi baptized; priests and teachers labor; Alma saw an angel; Alma fell (dumb); King Mosiah's sons preach to the Lamanites; translation of records; plates delivered by Limhi; translated by two stones; people back to the Tower; records given to Alma; judges appointed; King Mosiah died; Alma died; Kings of Nephi ended.

    'The Book of Alma. Nehor slew Gideon; Amlici made king; Amlici slain in battle; Amlicites painted red; Alma baptized in Sidon; Alma's preaching; Alma ordained elders; commanded to meet often; Alma saw an angel; Amulek saw an angel; lawyers questioning Amulek; coins named; Zeesrom the lawyer; Zeesrom trembles; election spoken of; Melchizedek priesthood; Zeesrom stoned; records burned; prison rent; Zeesrom healed and baptized; Nehor's desolation; Lamanites converted; flocks scattered at Sebus; Ammon smote off arms; Ammon and King Lamoni; King Lamoni fell; Ammon and the queen; king and queen prostrate; Aaron, etc., delivered; Jerusalem built; preaching in Jerusalem; Lamoni's father converted; land desolation and bountiful; anti-Nephi-Lehies; general council; swords buried; 1,005 massacred; Lamanites perish by fire; slavery forbidden; anti-Nephi-Lehies removed to Jershon, called Ammonites; tremendous battle; anti-Christ, Korihor; Korihor struck dumb; the devil in the form of an angel; Korihor trodden down; Alma's mission to Zoramites; Rameumptom (holy stand); Alma on hill Onidah; Alma on faith; prophecy of Zenos; prophecy of Zenock; Amulek's knowledge of Christ; charity recommended; same spirit possess your body; believers cast out; Alma to Helaman; plates given to Helaman; twenty-four plates; Gazelem, a stone (secret); Liahona, or compass; Alma to Shiblon; Alma to Corianton; unpardonable sin; resurrection; restoration; justice in punishment; if, Adam, took, tree, life; mercy rob justice; Moroni's stratagem; slaughter of Lamanites; Moroni's speech to Zerahamnah; prophecy of a soldier; Lamanites' covenant of peace; Alma's prophecy 400 years after Christ; dwindle in unbelief; Alma's strange departure; Amalickiah leadeth away the people destroyeth the church; standard of Moroni; Joseph's coat rent; Jacob's prophecy of Joseph's seed; fevers in the land, plants and roots for diseases; Amalickiah's plot; the king stabbed; Amalickiah marries the queen, and is acknowledged king; fortifications by Moroni; ditches filled with dead bodies; Amalickiah's oath; Pahoran appointed judge; army against king-men; Amalickiah slain; Ammoron made king; Bountiful fortified; dissensions; 2,000 young men; Moroni's epistle to Ammoron; Ammoron's answer; Lamanites made drunk; Moroni's stratagem; Helaman's epistle to Moroni; Helaman's stratagem; mothers taught faith; Lamanites surrendered; city of Antiparah taken; city of Cumeni taken; 200 of the 2,000 fainted; prisoners rebel, slain; Manti taken by stratagem; Moroni to the governor; governor's answer; King Pachus slain; cords and ladders prepared; Nephihah taken; Teancum's stratagem, slain; peace established; Moronihah made commander; Helaman died; sacred things, Shiblon; Moroni died; 5,400 emigrated north; ships built by Hagoth; sacred things committed to Helaman; Shiblon died.

    'The Book of Helaman. Pahoran died; Pahoran appointed judge; Kishkumen slays Pahoran; Pacumeni appointed judge; Zarahemla taken; Pacumeni [p. 55] killed; Coriantumr slain; Lamanites surrendered; Helaman appointed judge; secret signs discovered and Kishkumen stabbed; Gadianton fled; emigration northward; cement houses; many books and records; Helaman died; Nephi made judge; Nephites become wicked; Nephi gave the judgment-seat to Cezoram; Nephi and Lehi preached to the Lamanites; 8,000 baptized; Alma and Nephi surrounded with fire; angels administer; Cezoram and son murdered; Gadianton robbers; Gadianton robbers destroyed; Nephi's prophecy; Gadianton robbers are judges; chief judge slain; Seantum detected; keys of the kingdom; Nephi taken away by the spirit; famine in the land; Gladianton band destroyed; famine rendered; Samuel's prophecy; tools lost; two days and a night, light; sign of the crucifixion; Samuel stoned, etc.; angels appeared.

    'Third Book of Nephi. Lachoneus chief judge; Nephi receives the records; Nephi's strange departure; no darkness at night; Lamanites become white; Giddianhi to Lachoneus; Gidgiddoni chief judge; Giddianhi slain; Zemnarihah hanged; robbers surrendered; Mormon abridges the records; church begins to be broken up; government of the land destroyed; chief judge murdered; divided into tribes; Nephi raises the dead; sign of the crucifixion; cities destroyed, earthquakes, darkness, etc.; law of Moses fulfilled; Christ appears to Nephites; print of the nails; Nephi and others called; baptism commanded; doctrine of Christ; Christ the end of the law; other sheep spoken of; blessed are the Gentiles; Gentile wickedness on the land. of Joseph; Isaiah's words fulfilled; Jesus heals the sick; Christ blesses children; little ones encircled with fire; Christ administers the sacrament; Christ teaches his disciples; names of the twelve; the twelve teach the multitude; baptism, holy ghost, and fire; disciples made white; faith great; Christ breaks bread again; miracle, bread and wine; Gentiles destroyed (Isaiah); Zion established; from Gentiles, to your seed; sign, Father's work commenced; he shall be marred; Gentiles destroyed (Isaiah); New Jerusalem built; work commence among all the tribes; Isaiah's words; saints did arise; Malachi's prophecy; faith tried by the book of Mormon; children's tongues loosed; the dead raised; baptism and holy ghost; all things common; Christ appears again; Moses, church; three Nephites tarry; the twelve caught up; change upon their bodies.

    'Book of Nephi, son of Nephi. Disciples raise the dead; Zarahemia rebuilt; other disciples are ordained in their stead; Nephi dies; Amos keeps the records in his stead; Amos dies, and his son Amos keeps the records; prisons rent by the three; secret combinations; Ammaron hides the records.

    'Book of Mormon. Three disciples taken away; Mormon forbidden to preach; Mormon appointed leader; Samuel's prophecy fulfilled; Mormon makes a record; lands divided; the twelve shall judge; desolation taken; women and children sacrificed; Mormon takes the records hidden in Shim; Mormon repents of his oath and takes command; coming forth of records; records hid in Cumorah; 230,000 Nephites slain; shall not get gain by the plates; these things shall come forth out of the earth; the state of the world; miracles cease, unbelief; disciples go into all the world and preach; language of the book.

    'Book of Ether. Twenty-four plates found; Jared cries unto the Lord; Jared goes down to the valley of Nimrod; Deseret, honey-bee; barges built; decree of God, choice land; free from bondage; four years in tents at Moriancumer; Lord talks three hours; barges like a dish; eight vessels, sixteen stones; Lord touches the stones; finger of the Lord seen; Jared's brother sees the Lord; two stones given; stones sealed up; goes aboard of vessels; furious wind blows; 344 days' passage; Orihah anointed king; King Shule taken captive; Shule's sons slay Noah; Jared carries his father away captive; the daughters of Jared dance; Jared anointed king by the hand of wickedness; Jared murdered and Akish reigns in his stead; names of animals; poisonous serpents; Riplakish's cruel reign; Morianton anointed king; poisonous serpents destroyed; many wicked kings; Moroni on faith; miracles by faith; Moroni sees Jesus; New Jerusalen spoken of; Ether cast out; records finished [p. 56] in the cavity of a rock; secret combinations; war in all the land; King Gilead murdered by his high priest; the high priest murdered by Lib; Lib slain by Coriantumr; dead bodies cover the land and none to bury them; 2,000,000 men slain; hill Ramah; cries rend the air; sleep on their swords; Coriantumor slays Shiz; Shiz falls to the earth; records hidden by Ether.

    'Book of Moroni. Christ's words to the twelve; manner of ordination; order of sacrament; order of baptism; faith, hope and charity; baptism of little children; women fed on their husbands' flesh; daughters murdered and eaten; sufferings of women and children; cannot recommend them to God; Moroni to the Lamanites; 420 years since the sign; records sealed up (Moroni); gifts of the spirits; God's word shall hiss forth.'

    From a manuscript furnished at my request by Franklin D. Richards, entitled The Book of Mormon, I epitomize as follows: Several families retaining similar forms of speech were directed by God to America, where they became numerous and prosperous. They lived righteously at first, but afterward became sinful, and about 600 B.C. broke up as a nation, leaving records by their most eminent historian Ether. During the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah, two men, Lehi and Mulek, were warned of God of the approaching destruction of Jerusalem, and were directed how they and their families could make their escape, and were led to this land where they found the records of the former people. Lehi landed at Chili. His people spread to North America, became numerous and wealthy, lived under the law of Moses which they had brought with them, and had their judges, kings, prophets, and temples. Looking confidently for the coming of Christ in the flesh, in due time he came, and afar his crucifixion organized the church in America as he had done in Judea, an account of which, together with their general history, was preserved on metallic plates in the language of the times. An abridgment was made on gold plates about A. D. 400 by a prophet named Mormon, from all the historical plates that had come down to him. Thus were given not only the histories of the Nephites and Lamanites--his own people--but of the Jaredites, who had occupied the land before them, and his book was called the Book of Mormon. Destruction coming upon the people, Mormon's son, Moroni, was directed of God where to deposit the plates, the urim and thummim being deposited with them so that the finder might be able to read them. And as Moroni had left them so were they found by Joseph Smith. The Book of Mormon was translated in 1851 into Italian, under the auspices of Lorenzo Snow, and into Danish under the direction of Erastus Snow; in 1852 John Taylor directed its translation into French and German, and Franklin D. Richards into Welsh. In 1855 George Q. Cannon brought out an edition in the Hawaiian language at San Francisco; in 1878 N. C. Flygare supervised its publication in the Swedish, and Moses Thatcher in 1884 in the Spanish language.

    In December 1874, Orson Pratt, at that time church historian, prepared an article for insertion in the Universal Cyclopedia, a portion of which is as follows: 'The first edition of this wonderful book was published early in 1830. It has since been translated and published in the Welsh, Danish, German, French, and Italian languages of the east, and in the language of the Sandwich Islands of the west. It is a volume about one third as large as the bible, consisting of sixteen sacred books...One of the founders of the Jaredite nation, a great prophet, saw in vision all things from the foundation of the world to the end thereof, which were written, a copy of which was engraved by Moroni on the plates of Mormon, and then sealed up. It was this portion which the prophet, Joseph Smith, was forbidden to translate or to unloose the seal. In due time this also will be revealed, together with all the sacred records kept by the ancient nations of this continent, preparatory to the time when the knowledge of God shall cover the earth as the waters cover the great deep.' Deseret News, Sept. 27, 1876. Orson Pratt afterward stated that the book of Mormon had been translated into ten different languages. Deseret News, Oct. 9, 1878. See also Taylder's Mormons, 10. For further criticisms on the book of Mormon, see Millennial Star, xix., index v.; [p. 57] Times and Seasons, ii. 305-6; Pratt's Pamphlets, i. to vi. 1-96; Hyde's Mormonism, 210-83; Olshausen Gesch. der Mormen, 15-29; Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 17-123; Salt Lake City Tribune, Apr. 11, June 5 and 6, and Nov. 5, 1879; Juvenile Instructor, xiv. 2-3; Reynolds' Myth of the Manuscript Found, passim; Lee's Mormonism, 119-26; Clements' Roughing It, 127-35; Pop. Science Monthly, lvi. 165-73; Bennett's Mormonism Exposed, 103-40. See letter from Thurlow Weed, also statement by Mrs Matilda Spaulding McKinstry in Scribner's Mag., Aug. 1880, 613-16.

^57:16 Oliver Cowdery 'is a blacksmith by trade, and sustained a fair reputation until his intimacy commenced with the money digger. He was one of the many in the world who always find time to study out ways and means to live without work. He accordingly quit the blacksmithing business, and is now the editor of a small monthly publication issued under the directions of the prophet, and principally filled with accounts of the spread of Mormonism, their persecutions, and the fabled visions and commands of Smith.' He was 'chief scribe to the prophet, while transcribing, after Martin had lost 116 pages of the precious document by interference of the devil. An angel also has shown him the plates from which the book of Mormon proceeded, as he says.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 15, 265; see also Pearl of Great Price, xiii. 54; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 28; Taylder's Mormons, xxxii.

^57:17 'Instead of looking at the characters inscribed upon the plates, the prophet was obliged to resort to the old peep-stone which he formerly used in money digging. This he placed in a hat, or box, into which he also thrust his face...Another account they give of the transaction is, that it was performed with the big spectacles,' which enabled 'Smith to translate the plates without looking at them.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 17-18. 'These were days never to be forgotten,' Oliver remarks, 'to sit under the sound of a voice dictated by the inspiration of heaven, awakened the utmost gratitude of this bosom! Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his mouth, as he translated with the urim and thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, "interpreters," the history or record called the "Book of Mormon,"' Pearl of Great Price, 55. See also Mackay's The Mormons, 30-31; Millennial Star, iii. 148; Smucker's Hist. Mormons, 35; Pratt's Pamphlets, iv. 58-9; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 61-2. In relation to the peep-stone alluded to, Williard Chase says in his sworn testimony that he discovered a singular stone while digging a well in the year 1822. Joseph Smith was assisting him, and borrowed the stone from him, alleging that he could see into it. After he obtained the stone Smith published abroad the wonders that he could see in the stone, and made much disturbance among the credulous members of the community. See Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 241. 'This stone attracted particular notice on account of its peculiar shape, resembling that of a child's foot. It was of a whitish, glassy appearance, though opaque, resembling quartz...He (Joseph Jr) manifested a special fancy for this geological curiosity; and he carried it home with him, though this act of plunder was against the strenuous protestations of Mr Chase's children, who claimed to be its rightful owners. Joseph kept this stone, and ever afterward refused its restoration to the claimants Very soon the pretension transpired that he could see wonderful things by its aid. The idea was rapidly enlarged upon from day to day and in a short time his spiritual endowment was so developed that he asserted the gift and power (with the stone at his eyes) of revealing both things existing and things to come.' Tucker's Mormonism, 19-20.

^59:18 The objections raised against this testimony are, first, there is no date nor place; second, there are not three separate affidavits, but one testimony signed by three men; third, compare with Smith's revelation Doctrine and Covenants, p. 173, and it appears that this testimony is drawn up by Smith himself. But who are these witnesses? Sidney Rigdon, at Independence, Missouri, in 1838, charged Cowdery and Whitmer with 'being connected with a gang of counterfeiters, thieves, liars, blacklegs of the deepest dye, to deceive and defraud the saints.' Joseph Smith (Times and Seasons, vol. i. pp. 81, 83-4) charges Cowdery and Whitmer with being busy in stirring up strife and turmoil among the brethren in 1838 in Missouri; and he demands, 'Are they not murderers then at the heart? Are not their consciences seared as with a hot iron?' These men were consequently cut off from the church. In 1837 Smith prints this language about his coadjutor and witness: 'There are negroes who have white skins as well as black ones--Granny Parish and others, who acted as lackeys, such as Martin Harris! But they are so far beneath my contempt that to notice any of them would be too great a sacrifice for a gentleman to make.' Hyde's Mormonism, 252-5. Of David Whitmer, Mr Howe says: 'He is one of five of the same name and family who have been used as witnesses to establish the imposition, and who are now head men and leaders in the Mormonite camp. They were noted in their neighborhood for credulity and a general belief in witches, and perhaps were fit subjects for the juggling arts of Smith. David relates that he was led by Smith into an open field, on his father's farm, where they found the book of plates lying upon the ground. Smith took it up and requested him to examine it, which he did for the space of half an hour or more, when he returned it to Smith, who placed it in its former position, alleging that it was in the custody of an angel. He describes the plates as being about eight inches square, the leaves being metal of a whitish yellow color, and of the thickness of tin plates.' Mormonism Unveiled, 16. See also Kidder's Mormons, 49-51; Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 69-71; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 29-30; Bertrand's Memoires d'un Mormon, 29-31.

^59:19 'It will be seen that the witnesses of this truth were principally of the two families of Whitmer and Smith. The Smiths were the father and brothers of Joseph. Who the Whitmers were is not clear, and all clew to their character and proceedings since this date, though probably known to the Mormons themselves, is undiscoverable by the profane vulgar.' Mackay's The Mormons, 23.

    The theory commonly accepted at present by those not of the Mormon faith, in regard to the origin of the book of Mormon, is thus given in the introduction [p. 60] to the New York edition of the Book of Mormon, essentially the same as that advanced previously by E. D. Howe, and subsequently elaborated by others: 'About the year 1809, the Rev. Solomon Spaulding, a clergy-man who had graduated from Dartmouth college, and settled in the town of Cherry Valley, in the State of New York, removed from that place to New Salem (Conneaut). Ashtubula county, Ohio. Mr Spaulding was an enthusiastic archaeologist. The region to which he removed was rich in American antiquities. The mounds and fortifications which have puzzled the brains of many patient explorers attracted his attention, and he accepted the theory that the American continent was peopled by a colony of the ancient Israelites. The ample material by which he was surrounded, full of mythical interest and legendary suggestiveness, led him to the conception of a curious literary project. He set himself the task of writing a fictitious history of the race which had built the mounds. The work was commenced and progressed slowly for some time. Portions of it were read by Mr Spaulding's friends, as its different sections were completed, and after three years' labor, the volume was sent to the press, bearing the title of The Manuscript Found. Mr Spaulding had removed to Pittsburgh, Pa., before his book received the final revision, and it was in the hands of a printer named Patterson, in that city, that the manuscript was placed with a view to publication. This was in the year 1812. The printing, however, was delayed in consequence of a difficulty about the contract, until Mr Spaulding left Pittsburgh, and went to Amity, Washington county, New York, where in 1816 he died. The manuscript seems to have lain unused during this interval. But in the employ of the printer Patterson was a versatile genius, one Sidney Rigdon, to whom no trade came amiss, and who happened at the time to be a journeyman at work with Patterson. Disputations on questions of theology were the peculiar delight of Rigdon, and the probable solution of the mystery of the book of Mormon is found in the fact that, by this man's agency, information of the existence of the fictitious record was first communicated to Joseph Smith. Smith's family settled in Palmyra, New York, about the year 1815, and removed subsequently to Ontario county, where Joseph became noted for supreme cunning and general shiftlessness. Chance threw him in the company of Rigdon soon after Spaulding's manuscript fell under the eye of the erratic journeyman, and it is probable that the plan of founding a new system of religious imposture was concocted by these two shrewd and unscrupulous parties. The fact that the style of the book of Mormon so closely imitates that of the received version of the bible--a point which seems to have been constantly kept in view by Mr Spaulding, probably in order to invest the fiction with a stronger character of reality--answered admirably for the purposes of Rigdon and Smith.' Mr Howe testifies that 'an opinion has prevailed to a considerable extent that Rigdon has been the Iago, the prime mover of the whole conspiracy. Of this, however, we have no positive proof.' Mormonism Unveiled, 100.

    To prove the foregoing, witnesses are brought forward. John Spaulding, brother of Solomon, testifies: 'He then told me that he had been writing a book, which he intended to have printed, the avails of which he thought would enable him to pay all his debts. The book was entitled The Manuscript Found, of which he read to me many passages. It was an historical romance of the first settlers of America,' etc. He goes on to speak of Nephi and Lehi as names familiar, as does also Martha Spaulding, John's wife. Henry Lake, formerly Solomen's partner, testifies to the same effect; also John N. Miller, who worked for Lake and Spaulding in building their forge; also Aaron Wright, Oliver Smith, and Nahum Howard, neighbors; also Artemas Cunningham, to whom Spaulding owed money. To these men Solomon Spaulding used to talk about and read from his Manuscript Found, which was an account of the ten lost tribes in America, which he wanted to publish and with the profits pay his debts. After the book of Mormon was printed, and they saw it, or heard it read, they were sure it was the same as Spaulding's Manuscript Found. Id., 278-87. [p. 61]

    Who Wrote the Book of Mormon? is the title of a 4to pamphlet of 16 pages by Robert Patterson of Pittsburgh. Reprinted from the illustrated history of Washington county, Philadelphia, 1882. This Patterson is the son of printer Patterson, to whose office the Spaulding MS. is said to have been sent. Little new information is brought out by this inquisition. First he extracts passages from Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, quoting at secondhand from Kidder's Mormonism and the Mormons, in the absence of the original, stating erroneously that Howe's book was first printed in 1835. I give elsewhere an epitome of the contents of Howe's work. Ballantyne in his Reply to a Tract, by T. Richards, What is Mormonism? wherein is advanced the Spaulding theory, asserts in answer that Spaulding's manuscript was not known to Smith or Rigdon until after the publication of the Book of Mormon, and that the two were not the same, the latter being about three times larger than the former. 'Dr Hurlburt,' he says, 'and certain other noted enemies of this cause, having heard that such a manuscript existed, determined to publish it to the world in order to destroy the book of Mormon, but after examining it, found that it did not read as they expected, consequently declined its publication.' The Spaulding theory is advanced and supported by the following, in addition to the eight witnesses whose testimony was given by Howe in his Mormonism Unveiled. Mrs Matilda Spaulding Davidson, once wife of Solomon Spaulding, said to Rev. D. R. Austin, who had the statement printed in the Boston Recorder, May 1839, that Spaulding was in the habit of reading portions of his romance to his friends and neighbors. When John Spaulding heard read for the first time passages from the book of Mormon he 'recognized perfectly the work of his brother. He was amazed and afflicted that it should have been perverted to so wicked a purpose. His grief found vent in a flood of tears, and he arose on the spot and expressed to the meeting his sorrow and regret that the writings of his deceased brother should be uses for a purpose so vile and shocking.' Statements to the same effect are given as coming from Mrs McKinstry, daughter of Spaulding, printed in Scribner's Monthly, August 1880; W. H. Sabine, brother of Mrs Spaulding; Joseph Miller, whose statements were printed in the Pittsburgh Telegraph, Feb. 6, 1879; Redick McKee in the Washington Reporter, April 21, 1869; Rev. Abner Jackson in a communication to the Washington County Historical Society, printed in the Washington Reporter, Jan. 7, 1881, and others. See also Kidder's Mormonism, 37-49; California--Its Past History, 198-9; Ferris' Utah and Mormons, 50-1; Gunnison's Mormons, 93-7; Bertrand's Memoires d'un Mormon, 33-44; Hist. of Mormons, 41-50; Bennett's Mormonism, 115-24; Howe's Mormonism, 289-90.

    Robert Patterson, in his pamphlet entitled Who Wrote the Book of Mormon? thus discusses the case of Sidney Rigdon: 'It was satisfactorily proven that Spaulding was the author of the book of Mormon; but how did Joseph Smith obtain a copy of it? The theory hitherto most widely published,' says Patterson, 'and perhaps' generally accepted, has been that Rigdon was a printer in Patterson's printing-office when the Spaulding manuscript was brought there in 1812-14, and that he either copied or purloined it. Having it thus in his possession, the use made of it was an after thought suggested by circumstances many years later. More recently another theory has been advanced, that Rigdon obtained possession of the Spaulding manuscript during his pastorate of the first baptist church or soon thereafter, 1822-4, without any necessary impropriety on his part, but rather through the courtesy of some friend, in whose possession it remained unclaimed, and who regarded it as a literary curiosity. The friends of Rigdon, in response to the first charge, deny that he ever resided in Pittsburgh previous to 1822, or that he ever was a printer, and in general answer to both charges affirm that he never at any time had access to Spaulding's manuscript.' Rigdon denies emphatically that he ever worked in Patterson's printing-office or knew of such an establishment; and the testimony, produced by Patterson of Carvil Rigdon, Sidney's brother, Peter Boyer, his brother-in-law, Isaac King, Samuel Cooper, Robert Dubois, and Mrs Lambdin points in the same direction. On [p. 62] the other hand, Mrs Davidson, Joseph Miller, Redick McKee, Rev. Cephas Dodd, and Mrs Eichbaum are quite positive that either Rigdon worked in the printing office, or had access to the manuscript. 'These witnesses,' continues Patterson, 'are all whom we can find, after inquiries extending through some three years, who can testify at all to Rigdon's residence in Pittsburgh before 1816, and to his possible employment in Patterson's printing-office or bindery. Of this employment none of them speak from personal knowledge. In making inquiries among two or three score of the oldest residents of Pittsburgh and vicinity, those who had any opinion on the subject invariably, so far as now remembered, repeated the story of Rigdon's employment in Patterson's office as if it were a well known and admitted fact; they could tell all about it, but when pressed as to their personal knowledge of it or their authority for the conviction, they had none.' Nevertheless he concludes, 'after an impartial consideration of the preceding testimony, that Rigdon as early as 1823 certainly had possession of Spaulding's manuscript; how he obtained it is unimportant for the present purpose; that during his career as a minister of the Disciples church in Ohio, he carefully preserved under lock and key this document, and devoted an absorbed attention to it; that he was aware of the forthcoming book of Mormon and of its contents long before its appearance; that the said contents were largely Spaulding's romance, and partly such modifications as Rigdon had introduced; and that, during the preparation of the book of Mormon, Rigdon had repeated and long interviews with Smith, thus easily supplying him with fresh instalments of the pretended revelation.' In a letter to the editors of the Boston Journal, dated May 27, 1839, Rigdon says: 'There was no man by the name of Patterson during my residence at Pittsburgh who had a printing-office; what might have been before I lived there I know not. Mr Robert Patterson, I was told, had owned a printing-office before I lived in that city, but had been unfortunate in business, and failed before my residence there. This Mr Patterson, who was a presbyterian preacher, I had a very slight acquaintance with during my residence in Pittsburgh. He was then acting under an agency in the book and stationery business, and was the owner of no property of any kind, printing-office or anything else, during the time I resided in the city.' Smucker's Mormons, 45-8.

    In Philadelphia, in 1840, was published The Origin of the Spaulding Story, concerning the Manuscript Found; with a short biography of Dr P. Hulbert, the originator of the same; and some testimony adduced, showing it to be a sheer fabrication so far as its connection with the Book of Mormon is concerned. By B. Winchester, minister of the Gospel. The author goes on to say that Hulbert, a methodist preacher at Jamestown, N. Y., joined the Mormons in 1833, and was expelled for immoral conduct, whereupon he swore vengeance and concocted the Spaulding story. Hearing of a work written by Solomon Spaulding entitled The Manuscript Found, he sought to prove to those about him that the book of Mormon was derived from it, 'not that any of these persona had the most distant idea that this novel had ever been converted into the book of Mormon, or that there was any connection between them. Indeed Mr Jackson, who had read both the book of Mormon and Spaulding's manuscript, told Mr H. when he came to get his signature to a writing testifying to the probability that Mr S.'s manuscript had been converted into the book of Mormon, that there was no agreement between them; for, said he, Mr S.'s manuscript was a very small work, in the form of a novel, saying not one word about the children of Israel, but professed to give an account of a race of people who originated from the Romans, which Mr S. said he had translated from a Latin parchment that he had found.' Winchester states further that Hurlburt, or Hulbert, wrote Mormonism Unveiled and sold it to Howe for $500.

    The Myth of the Manuscript Found; or the absurdities of the Spaulding story; By Elder George Reynolds, was published at Salt Lake City in 1883. It is a 12mo vol. of 104 pages, and gives first the history of the Spaulding manuscript and names Hurlburt as the originator of the story. Chap. iii. is entitled 'the bogus affidavit,' referring to the alleged sworn statement of Mrs [p. 63] Davison, the widow of Spaulding, published by Storrs, but denied by Mrs Davison. Rigdon's connection, or rather lack of connection with the manuscript is next discussed. Then is answered an article in Scribner's Magazine by Mrs Dickenson, grand niece of Mr Spaulding, and probably the most shallow treatment of the subject yet presented on either side. Further discussions on the book are followed by an analysis of the life of Joseph, and finally internal evidences and prophecies are considered. 'It is evident,' Mr Reynolds concludes, 'that if Mr Spaulding's story was what its friends claim, then it never could have formed the ground-work of the book of Mormon; for the whole historical narrative is different from beginning to end. And further, the story that certain old inhabitants of New Salem, who, it is said, recognized the book of Mormon, either never made such a statement, or they let their imagination run away with their memory into the endorsement of a falsehood and an impossibility.'

^63:20 Speaking of Martin Harris, E. D. Howe says: 'Before his acquaintance with the Smith family he was considered an honest, industrious citizen by his neighbors. His residence was in the town of Palmyra, where he had accumulated a handsome property. He was naturally of a very visionary turn of mind on the subject of religion, holding one sentiment but a short time.' Mortgaged his farm for $3,000, and printed the Book of Mormon, as he said, to make money. The price first was $1.75, then $1.25, afterward whatever they could get. 'Since that time the frequent demands on Martin's purse have reduced it to a very low state. He seems to have been the soul and body of the whole imposition, and now carries the most incontestable proofs of a religious maniac...Martin is an exceedingly fast talker. He frequently gathers a crowd around in bar-rooms and in the streets. Here he appears to be in his element, answering and explaining all manner of dark and abstruse theological questions...He is the source of much trouble and perplexity to the honest portion of his brethren, and would undoubtedly long since have been cast off by Smith were it not for his money, and the fact that he is one of the main pillars of the Mormon fabric.' Mormonism Unveiled, 13-15. 'The wife of Martin Harris instituted a lawsuit against him [Joseph Smith, Jr], and stated in her affidavit that she believed the chief object he had in view was to defraud her husband of all his property. the trial took place at New York, and the facts, as related even by the mother of the prophet, are strongly condemnatory of his conduct...Harris denied in solemn terms that Smith had ever, in any manner, attempted to get possession of his money, and ended by assuring the gentlemen of the court that, if they did not believe in the existence of the plates, and continued to resist the truth, it would one day be the means of damning their souls.' Taylder's Mormons, xxxi.-ii. 'In the beginning of the printing the Mormons professed to hold their manuscripts as sacred, and insisted upon maintaining, constant vigilance for their safety during the progress of the work, each morning carrying to the printing-office the instalment required for the day, and withdrawing the same at evening. No alteration from copy in any manner was to be made. These things were "strictly commanded," as they said. Mr [p. 64] John H. Gilbert, as printer, had the chief operative trust of the type-setting and press-work of the job. After the first day's trial he found the manuscripts in so very imperfect a condition, especially in regard to grammar. that he became unwilling further to obey the "command," and so announced to Smith and his party; when finally, upon much friendly expostulation, he was given a limited discretion in correcting, which was exercised in the particulars of syntax, orthography, punctuation, capitalizing, paragraphing, etc. Many errors under these heads, nevertheless, escaped correction, as appear in the first edition of the printed book. Very soon, too--after some ten days--the constant vigilance by the Mormons over the manuscripts was relaxed by reason of the confidence they came to repose in the printers. Mr Gilbert has now (1867) in his possession a complete copy of the book in the original sheets, as laid off by him from the press in working...Meanwhile, Harris and his wife had separated by mutual arrangement, on account of her persistent unbelief in Mormonism and refusal to be a party to the mortgage. The family estate was divided, Harris giving her about eighty acres of the farm, with a comfortable house and other property, as her share of the assets; and she occupied this property until the time of her death.' Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 50-7.

^64:21 Speaking of the manner in which Smith delivered these revelations, Howe says: 'In this operation he abandoned his spectacles, or peep-stone, and merely delivered it with his eyes shut. In this manner he governs his followers, by asking the Lord, as he says, from day to day.' Mormonism Unveiled, 102.

^66:22 The church was not at that time so called, nor indeed until after the 4th of May, 1834. See chap. iv., note 50; also Millennial Star, iv. 115; Burton's City of the Saints, 671-2. Kidder, Mormonism, 68, affirms that this name was not adopted till some years later. Mather is only a year and a day astray when he says, 'The conference of elders on May 3, 1833, repudiated the name of "Mormons" and adopted that of "Latter-Day Saints."' Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880. The term 'Mormons,' as first applied by their enemies to members of the church of Latter-Day Saints, was quite offensive to them, though later they became somewhat more reconciled to it. As at present popularly employed, it is by no means a term of reproach, though among themselves they still adhere to the appellation 'Saints,' just as quakers speak of themselves as the 'Society of Friends.' The term 'Mormon' seems to me quite fitting for general use, fully as much so as presbyterian, reformed Dutch, universalist, and others, few of which were of their own choosing. 'Mormon was the name of a certain man, and also of a particular locality upon the American continent; but was never intended to signify a body of people. The name by which we desire to be known and to walk worthy of is Saints. Bell's Reply to Theobald, 2. At the time of the riots in Missouri, in addressing communications to the governor, and in many other instances, they designate themselves as members of the church of Christ, vulgarly called Mormons.' See also De Smet's Western Missions, 393; Mackay's The Mormons, 41-2. The term 'gentile' was generally applied to unbelievers of the white race. The Indians, originally, were denominated 'of the house of Israel,' 'of the house of Joseph,' or 'of the house of Jacob,' also the Lamanites.

^69:23 'The Lamanites originally were a remnant of Joseph, and in the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, King of Judah, were led in a miraculous manner from Jerusalem to the eastern borders of the Red Sea, thence for some time along its borders in a nearly south-east direction, after which they altered their course nearly eastward, until they came to the great waters, where by the command of God they built a vessel in which they were safely brought across the great Pacific Ocean, and landed upon the western coast of South America. The original party included also the Nephites, their leader being a prophet called Nephi; but soon after landing they separated, because the Lamanites, whose leader was a wicked man called Laman, persecuted the others. After the partition the Nephites, who had brought with them the old testament down to the time of Jeremiah, engraved on plates of brass, in the Egyptain language, prospered and built large cities. But the bold, bad Lamanites, originally white, became dark and dirty, though still retaining a national existence. They became wild, savage, and ferocious, seeking by every means the destruction of the prosperous Nephites, against whom they many times arrayed their hosts in battle; but were repulsed and driven back to their own territories, generally with great loss to both sides. The slain, frequently amounting to tens of thousands, were piled together in great heaps and overspread with a thin covering of earth, which will satisfactorily account for those ancient mounds filled with human bones, so numerous at the present day, both in North and South America.' Pratt (Orson), Series of Pamphlets, vi. 7-8; Pratt (P. P.), Voice of Warning, 81-117.

^69:24 'The attention of the little band was directed, from the very commencement of their organization, to the policy and expediency of fixing their headquarters in the far west, in the thinly settled and but partially explored territories belonging to the United States, where they might squat upon or purchase good lands at a cheap rate, and clear the primeval wilderness. [p. 70] They required elbow-room, and rightly judged that a rural population would be more favorable than an urban one to the reception of their doctrine.' Mackay's The Mor., 63.

^70:25 The most ancient prophecy which the saints are now in possession of relating to the New Jerusalem was one delivered by Enoch, the seventh from Adam. This was revealed anew to Joseph Smith in December 1830. In it the Lord is represented as purposing 'to gather out mine own elect from the four quarters of the earth unto a place which I shall prepare...But this revelation does not tell in what part of the earth the New Jerusalem should be located. The book of Mormon, which the Lord has brought out of the earth, informs us that this holy city is to be built upon the continent of America, but it does not inform us upon what part of that vast country it should be built.' Pratt's Series of Pamphlets, vii. 4; Pratt's Interesting Account, 16-25; First Book of Nephi in Book of Mormon.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

CHAPTER IV.
 THE STORY OF MORMONISM.
 1830-1835.

PARLEY PRATT'S CONVERSION--MISSION TO THE LAMANITES--THE MISSIONARIES AT KIRTLAND--CONVERSION OF SIDNEY RIGDON--MORMON SUCCESS AT KIRTLAND--THE MISSIONARIES IN MISSOURI--RIGDON VISITS SMITH EDWARD PARTRIDGE--THE MELCHISEDEC PRIESTHOOD GIVEN--SMITH AND RIGDON JOURNEY TO MISSOURI BIBLE TRANSLATION SMITH'S SECOND VISIT TO MISSOURI--UNEXAMPLED PROSPERITY--CAUSES OF PERSECUTIONS--MOBOCRACY--THE SAINTS ARE DRIVEN FROM JACKSON COUNTY--TREACHERY OF BOGGS--MILITARY ORGANIZATION AT KIRTLAND--THE NAME LATTER-DAY SAINTS--MARCH TO MISSOURI.

    ONE evening as Hyrum Smith was driving cows along the road toward his father's house, he was overtaken by a stranger, who inquired for Joseph Smith, translator of the book of Mormon. "He is now residing in Pennsylvania, a hundred miles away," was the reply.

    "And the father of Joseph?"

    "He also is absent on a journey. That is his house yonder, and I am his son.'

    The stranger then said that he was a preacher of the word; that he had just seen for the first time a copy of the wonderful book; that once it was in his hands he could not lay it down until he had devoured it, for the spirit of the Lord was upon him as he read, and he knew that it was true; the spirit of the Lord had directed him thither, and his heart was full of joy.

    Hyrum gazed at him in amazement; for converts of this quality, and after this fashion, were not common in those days of poverty and sore trial. He was little more than a boy, being but twenty-three,

[p. 72]

and of that fresh, fair innocence which sits only on a youthful face beaming with high enthusiasm. But it was more than a boy's soul that was seen through those eyes of deep and solemn earnestness; it was more than a boy's strength of endurance that was indicated by the broad chest and comely, compact limbs; and more than a boy's intelligence and powers of reasoning that the massive brow betokened.

    Hyrum took the stranger to the house, and they passed the night in discourse, sleeping little. The convert's name was Parley P. Pratt. He was a native of Burlington, New York, and born April 12, 1807. His father was a farmer of limited means and education, and though not a member of any religious society, had a respect for all. the boy had a passion for books; the bible especially he read over and over again with deep interest and enthusiasm. He early manifested strong religious feeling; mind and soul seemed all on fire as he read of the patriarchs and kings of the old testament, and of Christ and his apostles of the new. In winter at. school, and in summer at work, his life passed until he was sixteen, when he went west with his father William, some two hundred miles on foot, to Oswego, two miles from which town they bargained for a thickly wooded tract of seventy acres, at four dollars an acre, paying some seventy dollars in cash. After a summer's work for wages back near the old home, and a winter's work clearing the forest farm, the place was lost through failure to meet the remaining payments. Another attempt to make a forest home, this time in Ohio, thirty miles west of Cleveland, was more successful; and after much tell and many hardships, he found himself; in 1827, comfortably established there, with Thankful Halsey as his wife.

    Meanwhile religion ran riot through his brain. His mind, however, was of a reasoning, logical caste. "Why this difference," he argued, "between the ancient and modern Christians, their doctrines and their

[p. 73]

practice? Had I lived and believed in the days of the apostles, and had so desired, they would have said, 'Repent, be baptized, and receive the holy ghost.' The scriptures are the same now as then; why should not results be the same?" In the absence of anything better, he joined the baptists, and was immersed; but he was not satisfied. In 1829 Sidney Rigdon, of whom more hereafter, preached in his neighborhood; he heard him and was refreshed. It was the ancient gospel revived--repentance, baptism, the gift of the holy ghost. And yet there was something lacking--the authority to minister; the power which should accompany the form of apostleship. At length he and others, who had heard Rigdon, organized a society on the basis of his teachings, and Parley began to preach. The spirit working in him finally compelled him to abandon his farm and go forth to meet his destiny, he knew not whither. In this frame of mind he wandered eastward, and while his family were visiting friends, he came upon the book of Mormon and Hyrum Smith. Now did his soul find rest. Here was inspiration and revelation as of old; here was a new dispensation with attendant signs and miracles.

    As he left Smith's house the following morning, having an appointment to preach some thirty miles distant, Hyrum gave him a copy of the sacred book. Travelling on foot, and stopping now and then to rest, he read at intervals, and found to his great joy that soon after his ascension Christ had appeared in his glorified body to the remnant of the tribe of Joseph in America, that he had administered in person to the ten lost tribes, that the gospel had been revealed and written among nations unknown to the apostles, and that thus preserved it had escaped the corruptions of the great and abominable church.

    Returning to Smith's house, Parley demanded of Hyrum baptism. They went to Whitmer's, where they were warmly welcomed by a little branch of the church there assembled. The new convert was baptized

[p. 74]

by Cowdery, and was ordained an elder. He continued to preach in those parts with great power. Congregations were moved to tears, and many heads of families came forward and accepted the faith. Then he went to his old home. His father, mother, and some of the neighbors believed only in part; but his brother Orson, nineteen years of age, embraced with eagerness the new religion, and preached it from that time forth. Returning to Manchester, Parley for the first time met Joseph Smith, who received him warmly, and asked him to preach on Sunday, which he did, Joseph following with a discourse.

    Revelations continued, now in the way of command, and now in the spirit of prophecy. In Harmony, to the first elder it was spoken: "Magnify thine office; and after thou hast sowed thy fields and secured them, go speedily unto the churches which are in Colesville, Fayette, and Manchester, and they shall support thee; and I will bless them, both spiritually and temporally; but if they receive thee not, I will send on them a cursing instead of a blessing, and thou shalt shake the dust off thy feet against them as a testimony, and wipe thy feet by the wayside." And to Cowdery, thus: "Oliver shall continue in bearing lily name before the world, and also to the church; and he shall take neither purse nor scrip, neither staves nor even two coats." To Emma, wife of Joseph: "Thy sins are forgiven thee, and thou art an elect lady, whom I have called; and thou shalt comfort thy husband, my servant Joseph, and shalt go with him, and be unto him as a scribe in the absence of my servant Oliver, and he shall support thee." Emma was also further directed to make a selection of hymns to be used in church. [*1]

[p. 75]

    In the presence of six elders, at Fayette, in September 1880, came the voice of Jesus Christ, promising them every blessing, while the wicked should be destroyed. The millennium should come; but first dire destruction should fall upon the earth, and the great and abominable church should be cast down. Hiram Page renounced his stone. David Whitmer was ordered to his father's house, there to await further instructions. Peter Whitmer junior, Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson were directed to go with Oliver and assist him in preaching the gospel to the Lamanites, that is to say, to the Indians in the west, the remnant of the tribe of Joseph. Thomas B. Marsh was promised that he should begin to preach. Miracles were limited to casting out devils and healing the sick. Wine for sacramental purposes must not be bought, but made at home. [*2]

    Taking with them a copy of the revelation assigning to them this work, these first appointed missionaries set out, and continued their journey, preaching in the villages through which they passed, and stopping at Buffalo to instruct the Indians as to their ancestry, until they came to Kirtland, Ohio. There they remained some time, as many came forward and embraced their faith, among others Sidney Rigdon, a preaching elder in the reformed baptist church, who presided over a congregation there, a large portion of whom likewise became interested in the latter-day church. [*3]

[p. 76]

    Rigdon was a native of Pennsylvania, and was now thirty-seven years of age. He worked on his father's farm until he was twenty-six, when he went to live with the Rev. Andrew Clark, and the same year, 1819, was licensed to preach. Thence he went to Warren, Ohio, and married; and after preaching for a time he was called to take charge of a church at Pittsburgh, where he met with success, and soon became very popular. But his mind was perplexed over the doctrines he was required to promulgate, and in 1824 he retired from his ministry. There were two friends who had likewise withdrawn from their respective churches, and with whom he conferred freely, Alexander Campbell, of his own congregation, and one Walter Scott, of the Scandinavian church of that city. Campbell had formerly lived at Bethany, Virginia, where was issued under his auspices a monthly journal called the Christian Baptist. Out of this friendship and association arose a new church, called the Campbellites, its doctrines having been published by Campbell in his paper. During the next two years Rigdon was obliged to work in a tannery to support his family; then he removed to Bainbridge, Ohio, where he again began to preach, confining himself to no creed, but leaning toward that of the Campbellites. Crowds flocked to hear him, and a church was established in a neighboring town through his instrumentality. After a year of this work he accepted a call to Mentor, thirty miles distant. Slanderous reports followed him, and a storm of persecution set in against him; but by his surpassing eloquence and deep reasoning it was not only soon allayed, but greater multitudes than ever waited on his ministrations.

[p. 77]

    Rigdon was a cogent speaker of imposing mien and impassioned address. As a man, however, his character seems to have had a tinge of insincerity. He was fickle, now and then petulant, irascible, and sometimes domineering. Later, Joseph Smith took occasion more than once to rebuke him sharply, fearing that he might assume the supremacy.

    Upon hearing the arguments of Pratt and Cowdery, and investigating the book of Mormon, Rigdon was convinced that he had not been legally ordained, and that his present; ministry was without the divine authority. In regard to the revival of the old dispensation, he argued thus: "If we have not familiarity enough with our creator to ask of him a sign, we are no Christians; if God will not give his creatures one, he is no better than Juggernaut." The result was, that he and others accepted the book and its teachings, [*4] received baptism and the gift of the holy ghost, and were ordained to preach.

    On one occasion Cowdery preached, followed by Rigdon. After service they went to the Chagrin River to baptize. Rigdon stood in the stream and poured forth his exhortations with eloquent fervor. One after another stepped forward until thirty had been baptized. Present upon the bank was a hard-headed lawyer, Varnem J. Card, who as he listened grew pale with emotion. Suddenly he seized the arm of a friend and whispered, Quick, take me away, or in a moment more I shall be in that water!" One hundred and twenty-seven converts at once, the number

[p. 78]

afterward increasing to a thousand, were here gathered into the fold. [*5]

    After adding to their number one Frederic G. Williams, the missionaries continued on their way, arriving first at Sandusky, where they gave instructions to the Indians in regard to their forefathers, as they had done at Buffalo, and thence proceeded to Cincinnati and St Louis. In passing by his old forest home, Pratt was arrested on some trivial charge, but made his escape. The winter was very severe, and it was some time before they could continue their journey. At length they set out again, wading in snow knee-deep, carrying their few effects on their backs, and having to eat corn bread and frozen raw pork; and after travelling in all fifteen hundred miles, most of the way on foot, preaching to tens of thousands by the way, and organizing hundreds into churches, they reached Independence, Missouri, in the early part of 1831. There Whitmer and Peterson went to work as tailors, while Pratt and Cowdery passed over the

[p. 79]

border, crossed the Kansas River, and began their work among the Lamanites, or Indians, thereabout.

    The chief of the Delawares was sachem of ten tribes. He received the missionaries with courtesy, and set food before them. When they asked him to call a council before which they might expound their doctrines, he at first declined, then assented; whereupon Cowdery gave them an account of their ancestors, as contained in the wonderful book, a copy of which he left with the chief on taking his departure, which soon occurred; for when it was known upon the border settlements what the missionaries were doing, they were ordered out of the Indian country as disturbers of the peace. [*6] After preaching a short time in Missouri, the five brethren thought it best that one of their number should return east and report. The choice fell on Pratt. Starting out on foot, he reached St Louis, three hundred miles distant, in nine days. Thence he proceeded by steamer to Cincinnati, and from that point journeyed on foot to Strongville, forty miles from Kirtland. Overcome by fatigue and illness, he was forced to remain at this place some ten days, when he continued his journey on horseback. He was welcomed at Kirtland by hundreds of the saints, Joseph Smith himself being present.

    In December 1830 comes Sidney Rigdon to Joseph Smith at Manchester, and with him Edward Partridge, to inquire of the Lord; and they are told what they shall do; they shall preach thereabout, and also on the Ohio. [*7]

[p. 80]

    The year 1831 opens with flattering prospects. On the 2d of January a conference is held at Fayette, attended by revelations and prophecy. James Colville, a baptist minister, accepts the faith, but shortly recants, being tempted of Satan, and in fear of persecution. [*8] Smith and his wife go with Rigdon and

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] Partridge to Kirtland, arriving there early in February, and taking up their residence with N. K. Whitney, who shows them great kindness. Among the hundred believers there at the time, certain false doctrines have crept in; these are quickly overcome, and a plan for community of goods which the family of saints had adopted is abolished. Commandment comes by revelation that a house shall be built for Joseph; that Sidney shall live as seems to him good, for his heart is pure; that Edward Partridge shall be ordained a bishop; [*9] that all but Joseph and Sidney shall go forth, two by two, into the regions westward and preach the gospel. [*10]

    "And now, behold, I speak unto the church: thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not lie; thou shalt love thy wife, cleaving unto her and to none else; thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not speak evil of thy neighbor, nor do him any harm. Thou knowest my laws, given in my scriptures; he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be east out. And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support, laying the same before the bishop of my church, the residue not to be taken back, but to be used by the church in buying lands and building houses of worship, for I will consecrate of the riches of those who embrace my gospel among the gentiles unto the poor of my people who are of the house of Israel. Let him that goeth to

[p. 82]

the east tell them that shall be converted to flee to the west. And again, thou shalt not be proud; let thy garments be plain, the work of thine own hand, and cleanly. Thou shalt not be idle. And whosoever among you is sick, and has faith, shall be healed; and if he has not faith to be healed, but believe, he shall be nourished with all tenderness. If thou wilt ask, thou shalt receive revelation and knowledge. Whosoever hath faith sufficient shall never taste death. Ye shall live together in love; that whether ye live ye may live in me, or if ye die ye may die in me. So saith the Lord."

 

    Edward Partridge was born at Pittsfield, Massachusetts, August 27, 1793. At the age of sixteen he was apprenticed to a hatter. His was an earnest, thoughtful nature, and his mind much troubled about religion. In 1828 he entered Sidney Rigdon's Campbellite church, and in that faith remained until met by the missionaries Pratt, Cowdery, and the others, when he accepted the new revelation, and was subsequently baptized by Joseph in the Seneca River. He had a profitable business at the time; but when it was revealed that he should leave his merchandise and devote his whole time to the church, he obeyed without a murmur.

    Joseph and Sidney were much together now in their revelations and rulings. A woman attempted prophesying and was rebuked. Sarcasm was employed, and scurrilous stories were printed in the newspapers; an account of a great Asiatic earthquake was headed "Mormonism in China." Revelations during March were frequent. In one of them John Whitmer was appointed church historian; and it was revealed that he should keep the church records, write and keep a regular history, and act as secretary to Joseph, as had Oliver Cowdery formerly. [*11] Lands might be bought

[p. 83]

for immediate necessity; but remember the city to be presently built, and be prudent. [*12] And now from the shaking quakers came one Lemon Copley and accepted the gospel, though not in its fullness, as he retained

[p. 84]

somewhat of his former faith; whereupon a revelation ordered him to go with Parley P. Pratt and preach to the shakers, not according to his old ideas, but as Parley should direct.

    "And again, I say unto you that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man; wherefore it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. Beware of false spirits. Given May 1831."

    The saints from New York began to come in numbers, and Bishop Partridge was ordered to look after them and attend to their requirements. It was ordered that if any had more than they required, let them give to the church; if any had less, let the church relieve their necessities. The 6th of June a conference of elders was held at Kirtland, and several received the authority of the Melchisedec priesthood. The next conference should be held in Missouri, whither Joseph and Sidney should proceed at once, and there it would be told them what to do. And to the same place others should go, two by two, each couple taking different routes and preaching by the way. Among those who went forth were Lyman Wight and John Corrill, John Murdock and Hyrum Smith by the way of Detroit, Thomas B. Marsh and Selah J. Griffin, Isaac Morley and Ezra Booth, David Whitmer and Harvey Whitlock, Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt, Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter, Edson Fuller and Jacob Scott, Levi Hancock and Zebedee Coltrin, Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith, Wheeler Baldwin and William Carter, Joseph Wakefield and Solomon Humphrey. With Joseph and Sidney were to go Martin Harris and Edward Partridge, taking with them a letter of recommendation from the church. [*13] "And thus, even as I have

[p. 85]

said, if ye are faithful, ye shall assemble yourselves together to rejoice upon the land of Missouri, which is the land of your inheritance, which is now the land of your enemies. Behold, I the Lord will hasten the city in its time, and will crown the faithful with joy and with rejoicing. Behold I am Jesus Christ the son of God, and I will lift them up at the last day. Amen."

 

    While preparing for the journey to Missouri, a letter was received from Oliver Cowdery, reporting on his missionary work, and speaking of another tribe of Lamanites, living three hundred miles west of Santa Fe, called the Navarhoes (Navajoes), who had large flocks of sheep and cattle, and who made blankets. W. W. Phelps, [*14] with his family joining the society, was commissioned to assist Oliver Cowdery in selecting, writing, and printing books for schools. Thus the move from Ohio to Missouri was begun, Joseph and his party starting from Kirtland the 19th of June, going by wagon, canal-boat, and stage to Cincinnati, by steamer to St Louis, and thence on foot to Independence, arriving about the middle of July.

[p. 86]

    "Harken, O ye elders of my church, saith the Lord your God, who have assembled yourselves together, according to my commandments, in this land, which is the land of Missouri, which is the land which I have appointed and consecrated for the gathering of the saints; wherefore this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. And thus saith the Lord your God, if you will receive wisdom here is wisdom. Behold the place which is now called Independence is the centre place, and the spot for the temple is lying westward upon a lot which is not far from the court-house: wherefore it is wisdom that the land should be purchased by the saints; and also every tract lying westward, even unto the line running directly between jew and gentile; and also every tract bordering by the prairies, inasmuch as my disciples are enabled to buy lands."

    Further, Sidney Gilbert was made church agent, to receive money and buy lands; he was also directed to establish a store. Partridge was to partition the lands purchased among the people; Phelps was made church printer. But the last two becoming a little headstrong on entering upon their new duties, Joseph found it necessary to reprimand and warn them. Harris was held up as an example to emulate, for he had given much to the church. It was ordered that an agent be appointed to raise money in Ohio to buy lands in Missouri, and Rigdon was commissioned to write a description of the new land of Zion for the same purpose. Ziba Peterson was dispossessed of his lands, and made to work for others, in punishment for his misdemeanors.

    Thus the latter-day saints had come to the border line of civilization, and looking over it into the west they thought here to establish themselves forever. Here was to be the temple of God; here the city of refuge; here the second advent of the savior. Meanwhile their headquarters were to be at the town of Independence.

[p. 87]

    In Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence, the Colesville branch of the church built a log house; the visible head of the church, on the 2d of August, laying the first log, brought thither by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. Next day the ground for the temple, situated a little west of Independence, [*15] was dedicated, and the day following was held the first conference in the land of Zion. [*16]

    It was now commanded that Smith, Rigdon, Cowdery, and others should return east, and make more proselytes, money for the purpose to be furnished them out of the general fund. [*17] Accordingly on the

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] 9th Joseph and ten elders started down the river in sixteen canoes, the leaders arriving at Kirtland the 27th, [*18] after having suffered hardship and mortification through disaffection among the elders. Titus Billings, who had charge of the church property there, was ordered to dispose of the lands, and prepare to remove to Missouri in the following spring, together with part of the people, and such money as could be raised. It was provided that those wishing to buy land in Zion could do so by forwarding the purchase-money. The account of the new country written by Sidney Rigdon did not please Joseph, and he was ordered to write another; if that should not prove satisfactory, he was to be deprived of office. [*19]

    On the 12th of September Joseph removed to the town of Hiram, thirty miles away, and prepared to begin again the translation of the bible, with Rigdon as scribe. The farm of Isaac Morley was ordered sold, while Frederic G. Williams should retain his, for it was desirable to keep a footing at Kirtland yet for

[p. 89]

five years. The store kept by Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert should likewise be continued. A system of tithes should be established. Ezra Booth apostatized, and wrote letters against the church. [*20] Orson Hyde, clerk in Gilbert and Whitney's store, was baptized, and later make an elder. Phelps was told to buy at Cincinnati a printing-press and type, and start a monthly paper at Independence, to be called the Evening and Morning Star, which was done. Oliver Cowdery was instructed in November to return to Missouri, and with him John Whitmer, the latter to visit the several stations, and gather further materials for church history. Newel K. Whitney

[p. 90]

was appointed bishop, to receive and account for church funds collected by the various elders. Many of the eiders who went to Missouri were by this time at work in different parts of the east and the west. [*21]

    On the 16th of February, 1832, while Smith and Rigdon were translating the gospel of St John, they were favored by a glorious vision from the Lord, [*22] which gave them great comfort and encouragement. The revelations about this time were frequent and lengthy, their purport being in great part to direct the movements of missionaries. Simonds Rider and Eli, Edward, and John Johnson now apostatized.

    On the night of the 25th of March, Smith and Rigdon were seized by a mob, composed partly of the Campbellites, methodists, and baptists of Hiram, twelve or fifteen being apostate Mormons. The captives were roughly treated, and expected to be killed; but after they had been stripped, beaten, and well covered with tar and feathers, they were released. Smith preached and baptized as usual the next day, Sunday, but Rigdon was delirious for some time afterward. [*23] This broke up for the present the translation

[p. 91]

of the bible; Rigdon went to Kirtland, and on the 2d of April, in obedience to a revelation, Smith started for Missouri, having for his companions Whitney, Peter Whitmer, and Gause. The spirit of mobocracy was aroused throughout the entire country. Joseph even feared to go to Kirtland, and escaped by way of Warren, where he was joined by Rigdon, whence the two proceeded to Cincinnati and St Louis by way of Wheeling, Virginia, a mob following them a good part of the way. The brethren at Independence and vicinity welcomed their leaders warmly, but the unbelievers there as elsewhere hourly threatened violence. [*24] In May the first edition of the Book of Commandments [*25] was ordered printed; the following month, published

[p. 92]

in connection with the Upper Missiouri Advertiser, appeared the first number of the Evening and Morning Star, under the auspices of W. W. Phelps, whose printing-press was the only one within a hundred and twenty miles of Independence. On the 6th of May Smith, Rigdon, and Whitney again set out on their return to Kirtland. [*26] On the way Whitney broke his leg. Smith was poisoned, and that so badly that he dislocated his jaw in vomiting, and the hair upon his head became loosened; Whitney, however, laid his hands on him, and administered in the name of the Lord, and he was healed in an instant. [*27]

    Some three or four hundred saints being now gathered in Missouri, most of them settled on their own inheritances in this land of Zion, besides many others scattered abroad throughout the land, who were yet to come hither, it was deemed best to give the matter of schools some attention. Parley P. Pratt was laboring in Illinois. Newel K. Whitney was directed in September to leave his business in other hands, visit

[p. 93]

the churches, collect money, and administer to the wants of the poor. The new translation of the bible was again taken up and continued through the winter, the new testament being completed and sealed up, not to be opened till it reached Zion. [*28]

 

    On January 23, 1833, the ceremony of washing feet is instituted after John's gospel. Each elder washes his own feet first, after which Joseph girds himself with a towel and washes the feet of them all. "Behold, verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, in consequence of evils and designs, which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarned you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom by revelation, that inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, nor meet in the sight of your father. And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and it is not good for man. And again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly."

[p. 94]

    The first presidency is organized on the 8th of March, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams being Smith's councillors. Money flows in, and a council of high priests, March 23d, orders the purchasing for $11,100 of three farms at Kirtland, upon which the saints may build a stake, or support, in Zion, [*29] and the foundations of the temple are laid, for here they will remain for five years and make money until the western Zion shall be made ready and a temple built there also. On the land is a valuable quarry of stone, and good clay for bricks; they also buy a tannery. In April the school of the prophets closes, to reopen in the autumn. Shederlaomach is made by revelation a member of the united firm. It is not the will of the Lord to print any of the new translation in the Star; but when it is published, it will all go to the world together, in a volume by itself, and the new testament and the book of Mormon will be printed together. Those preparing to go to Zion should organize.

    Commandment comes to lay at Kirtland the foundation of the city of the stake in Zion, with a house of the Lord, a school-house for the instruction of elders, a house for the presidency, a house of worship and for the school of the prophets, an endowment house with a room for the school of apostles, and a house in which to print the translation of the scriptures. A church is established in Medina county,

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Ohio, by Sidney Rigdon, who sometimes proves himself unruly. Dr Hurlbut is tried before the bishop's council of high priests on a charge of unchristian-like conduct with the female sex, and condemned, but on confession is pardoned. [*30]

    Temples are ordered built in the city of Zion, in Missouri, as follow: a house of the Lord for the presidency of the high and most holy priesthood after the order of Melchisedec; the sacred apostolic repository,

[p. 96]

for the use of the bishop; the holy evangelical house, for the high priesthood of the holy order of God; house of the Lord for the elders of Zion; house of the Lord for the presidency of the high priesthood; house of the Lord for the high priesthood after the order of Aaron; house of the Lord for the teachers in Zion; house of the Lord for the deacons in Zion; and others. There are also to be farms, barns, and dwellings. The ground secured for the purpose is a mile square, and will accommodate fifteen or twenty thousand people. [*31]

 

    Affairs in Missouri were very prosperous. "Immigration had poured into the county of Jackson in great numbers," says Parley P. Pratt, "and the church

[p. 97]

in that county now numbered upward of one thousand souls. These had all purchased lands and paid for them, and most of them were improving in buildings and in cultivation. Peace and plenty had crowned their labors, and the wilderness became a fruitful field, and the solitary place began to bud and blossom as the rose. They lived in peace and quiet, no lawsuits with each other or with the world; few or no debts were contracted, few promises broken; there were no thieves, robbers, or murderers; few or no idlers; all seemed to worship God with a ready heart. On Sundays the people assembled to preach, pray, sing, and receive, the ordinances of God. Other days all seemed busy in the various pursuits of industry. In short, there has seldom, if ever, been a happier people upon the earth than the church of the saints now were." They were for the most part small farmers, tradesmen, and mechanics, and were not without shrewdness in the management of their secular affairs.

    But all this must now be changed. The saints of God must be tried as by fire. Persecutions such as never before were witnessed in these latter days, and the coming of which were foretold by Joseph, are upon them; they shall be buffeted for five years, and the end is not yet. "Political demagogues were afraid we should rule the country," says Parley, "and religious priests and bigots felt that we were powerful rivals." [*32] Moreover, there is no doubt that they were indiscreet; they were blinded by their prosperity; already the kingdom of God and the kingdom of this world had come unto them; now let the gentiles tremble! [*33]

[p. 98]

    And the gentiles did tremble, as they saw so rapidly increasing their unwelcome neighbors, whose compact organization gave them a strength disproportionate to their numbers. Since there was no law to stop their coming, they determined to face the issue without law. [*34]

    In April the people held consultations as to the best way of disposing of the Mormons; and again about the middle of July three hundred persons met at Independence to form a plan for driving them out. A declaration, in substance as follows, was drawn up and signed by nearly all present. The citizens of Jackson county fear the effect upon society of a pretended religious sect, fanatics or knaves, settling among them, and mean to get rid of them at any hazard, and for the following reasons: They blasphemously pretend to personal intercourse with the deity, to revelations, miracles, healing the sick, casting out devils, and other delusions; they are the dregs of society, held together by the acts of designing leaders, and are idle and vicious. They are poor. They tamper with the slaves and free negroes. They declare the Indian region to be theirs by heavenly inheritance.

    In answer, Parley P. Pratt asks if their supernatural pretensions are more extravagant than those of the old and new testament; if it is anywhere written that there shall be no more spiritual manifestations as of old; does the word of God or the law of man make poverty a crime? and have they not paid for all the land they occupy? They are no more dregs than their neighbors, and the charge of fraternizing with the blacks is not true; neither is that of vice or crime, as

[p. 99]

the county records will show. In regard to the lands of the Indians, no violence or injustice is contemplated; and if it were, what record of robbery, murder, and treacherous betrayal could excel that already made by the people of Missouri and others in the United States for our example? [*35]

    On the 20th the people again met according to appointment. The old charges were reiterated, and the old resolutions renewed, with some additions. [*36] To put them into action the men of Jackson county

[p. 100]

sallied forth for the office of the Star, [*37] and demanded that the publication be discontinued. Compliance being refused, Phelps' house, containing the printing-office, was torn down, materials and paper destroyed, [*38] and Bishop Partridge and Elder Allen were tarred and feathered. [*39] Meanwhile, clergymen of other denominations, and officers of the state and county, looked on, saying, "Mormons are the common enemies of mankind, and ought to be destroyed," and "You now know what our Jackson boys can do, and you must leave the country." [*40]

    Again the mob appeared on the morning of the 23d, bearing a red flag, and demanding the departure of the Mormons. Seeing no way of escape, the elders entered into treaty with the assailants, and promised to leave the county within a certain time. [*41] Cowdery

[p. 101]

was despatched to Kirtland to consult as to what was best to be done. Meanwhile, incendiary articles appeared in the Western Monitor, printed at Fayette, Missouri. "Two years ago," said that journal, "some two or three of this people made their appearance on the upper Missouri, and they now number some twelve hundred souls in this county." They look at the land as theirs to inherit, by either fair means or foul; and when the officers of law and government shall be Mormon, we must go. "One of the means resorted to by them, in order to drive us to emigrate, is an indirect invitation to the free brethren of color in Illinois to come up like the rest to the land of Zion." True, they deny this, but that is only subterfuge. So it is resolved that no more Mormons shall be permitted to come; that those here must go within a reasonable time; and that the Star printing-office shall be declared confiscated.

    An appeal was made to the governor, Daniel Dunklin, for redress, and while awaiting the answer matters were continued much in the usual way. The brethren were instructed by their elders not to retaliate, but to bear all with meekness and patience. At length a letter came from the governor, assuring them of his protection, and advising them to resort to the courts for damages. The church leaders ordered that none should leave Independence except those who had signed an agreement to that effect. Four lawyers were engaged for one thousand dollars to carry the matter into the courts. No sooner was this known than the whole country rose in arms and made war upon the Mormons. On the nights of October 30th, 31st, and November 1st, armed men attacked branches of the church west of Big Blue, and at the prairie unreeled the houses and beat the men. Almost simultaneously attacks were made at other points. Stones flew freely in Independence, and houses were destroyed and the inmates wounded. Gilbert's store was broken open, and the goods scattered

[p. 102]

in the streets. On November 2d thirty saints retired with their families and effects to a point half a mile from town. Next day four of the brethren went to Lexington for a peace warrant, but the circuit judge refused to issue one through fear of the mob. "You had better fight it out and kill the outlaws if they come upon you," said the judge. [*42] The saints then armed, and on the 4th there was a fight, in which two gentiles and one Mormon were killed, and several on both sides wounded. One of the store-breakers was brought before the court, and during the trial the populace became so furious that Gilbert, Morley, and Corrill were thrust into jail for protection. The morning of the 5th broke with signs of yet more bloody determination on both sides. The militia were called out to preserve the peace, but this only made matters worse. The lieutenant-governor, Boggs, pretending friendship, got possession of the Mormons' arms, and seized a number to be tried for murder. [*43] Further and yet more violent attacks were made; hope was abandoned; the now defenceless saints were forced to fly in every direction, some out into the open prairie, some up and some down the river. "The struggle was over," writes Pratt, "our liberties were gone!" On the 7th both banks were lined with men, women, and children, with wagons, provisions, and personal effects. Cold weather came on with wind and rain, to which most of the fugitives were exposed, few of them having tents. Some took refuge in Clay county, some in Lafayette county, and elsewhere. [*44]

    Throughout all these trying scenes, Governor

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] Dunklin endeavored to uphold the law, but Boggs, lieutenant-governor, was with the assailants. Wells, attorney-general, wrote to the council for the church, the 21st, saying that if they wished to replace their houses in Jackson county the governor would send them an adequate force, and if they would organize themselves into companies, he would supply them with arms. Application was made accordingly. "It is a disgrace to the state," writes Judge Ryland, "for such acts to happen within its limits, and the disgrace will attach to our official characters if we neglect to take proper means to insure the punishment due such offenders." In view of this advice from the state authorities, the saints resolved to return to their homes as soon as protection should be afforded them, and it was ordered by revelation that they should do so, but with circumspection and not in haste. [*45]

    All this time President Joseph Smith was at Kirtland, harassed with anxiety over affairs in Missouri, still pursuing the usual tenor of his way, and not knowing what moment like evils might befall him and his fold there. [*46] It was resolved by the first presidency that the Star should be published at Kirtland

[p. 104]

until it could be reinstated in Missouri; another journal, the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, was also established at Kirtland, and a mission organized for Canada. [*47]

 

    The work of proselyting continued east and west without abatement through the year 1834. Two by two and singly the elders went forth: Lyman Johnson and Milton Holmes to Canada, also Zebedee Coltrin and Henry Harriman; John S. Carter and Jesse Smith should go eastward together, also James Durfee and Edward Marvin. Elders Oliver Granger, Martin Harris, and Brigham Young preferred to travel alone. To redeem the farm on which stood the house of the Lord, elders Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt were sent east to solicit funds. The movements of many others of the brethren are given. Parley Pratt and Lyman Wight were instructed not to return to Missouri until men were organized into companies of

[p. 105]

ten, twenty, fifty, or one hundred. Thereupon these and others went out in various directions to raise men and means for a religio-military expedition to Missouri. There were churches now in every direction, and the brethren were scattered over a broad area.

    Several appeals for redress were made by the saints at Independence to the governor of Missouri, and to the president of the United States. The president said it was a matter for the governor to regulate, and the governor did not see what could be done except through the courts. A court of inquiry was instituted, which decided, but to little purpose, that there was no insurrection on the 5th of November, 1833, and therefore the arms taken by the militia from the Mormons on that occasion must be restored to them. [*48] "And now a commandment I give unto you concerning Zion, that you shall no longer be bound as an united order to your brethren of Zion, only in this wise; after you are organized you shall be called the united order of this stake of Zion, the city of Shinehah, [*49] and your brethren, after they are organized, shall be called the united order of the city of Zion."

    On the 7th of May, 1834, a military company was organized at Kirtland under the name of Zion's camp, consisting of one hundred and fifty brethren, mostly young men, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, with

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] F. G. Williams paymaster and Zerubbabel Snow commissary general. They had twenty wagons loaded with arms and effects, and next day set out for Missouri, President Smith joining them, leaving Rigdon and Cowdery to look after matters in Ohio. They passed through Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, reaching Missouri [*50] in June, Pratt and others still continuing

[p. 107]

their efforts en route as recruiting officers. It was an army of the Lord; they would not be known as Mormons, which was a name they hated; moreover, they would be incognito; and the better to accomplish all these purposes, three days before they started, Sidney Rigdon proposed in conference that the name by which hereafter they would call themselves should be The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which proposal was adopted. [*51] On the way the brethren

[p. 108]

learned of the outrages which had again occurred in Jackson county.

    Just before his arrival in Clay county, Missouri, a committee of citizens waited on President Smith and proposed the purchase of the lands in Jackson county from which the Mormons had been driven. The offer was declined, the president and council making the following proposal in return: Let each side choose six men, and let the twelve determine the amount of damages due to the Mormons, and also the value of the possessions of all those who do not wish to live near them in peace, and the money shall be paid within a year. The offer was not accepted. [*52]

    On the 3d of July a high council of twelve was organized by the head of the church, with David Whitmer as president and W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer as assistant presidents. The twelve were: Simeon Carter, Parley P. Pratt, Wm E. McLellan, Calvin Beebe, Levi Jackman, Solomon Hancock, Christian Whitmer, Newel Knight, Orson Pratt, Lyman Wight, Thomas B. Marsh, and John Murdock. Later Phelps became president of the church in Missouri. In company with his brother Hyrum, F. G. Williams, and W. E. McLellan, President Joseph returned to Kirtland, arriving about the 1st of August.

    "Now, that the world may know that our faith in the work and word of the Lord is firm and unshaken, and to shew all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples that our object is good, for the good of all, we come before the great family of mankind for peace, and ask their hospitality and assurance for our comfort, and the preservation

[p. 109]

of our persons and property, and solicit their charity for the great cause of God. We are well aware that many slanderous reports and ridiculous stories are in circulation against our religion and society; but as wise men will hear both sides and then judge, we sincerely hope and trust that the still small voice of truth will be heard, and our great revelations read and candidly compared with the prophecies of the bible, that the great cause of our redeemer may be supported by a liberal share of public opinion, as well as the unseen power of God. The faith and religion of the latter-day saints are founded upon the old scriptures, the book of Mormon, and direct revelation from God."

    Thus far have I given the History of Joseph Smith, in substance as written by himself in his journal, [*53] and

[p. 110]

printed in the Times and Seasons, which ends here. It is taken up in the Millennial Star, in diary form, beginning with volume xv. and continuing to the day of his death.

Footnotes

^74:1 The hymn-book of Emma Smith does not appear to have been published, but a little book containing hymns selected by Brigham Young passed through eight editions up to 1849, the eighth being published in Liverpool in that year. Smucker's Hist. of Mor., 57-61; Millenial Star, iv. 150-1. The preface to the first edition was signed by Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and John [p. 75] Taylor. The preface to the ninth edition, published at Liverpool and London in 1851, is by Franklin D. Richards, who states that 54,000 copies of the several editions have been sold in the European missions alone within eleven years. Several editions have since been published in Europe and America.

^75:2 Smith says: 'In order to prepare for this (confirmation) I set out to go to procure some wine for the occasion, but had gone only a short distance when I was met by a heavenly messenger, and received the revelation.' Millennial Star, iv. 151; Times and Seasons, iv. 117-18.

^75:3 At the town of Kirtland, two miles from Rigdon's residence, was a number of the members of his church who lived together, and had all things in common, from which circumstance, Smith says, the idea arose that this was the case with the Mormon believers. To these people the missionaries repaired and preached with some success, gathering in seventeen on the first occasion. Rigdon after spending some time in the study of the book of Mormon [p. 76] concluded to accept its doctrines, and together with his wife was baptized into the church, which now numbered about twenty in this section. Millennial Star, iv. 181-4; v. 4-7, 17; Times and Seasons, iv. 177, 193-4. Rigdon had for nearly three years already taught the literal interpretation of scripture prophecies, the gathering of the Israelites to receive the second coming, the literal reign of the saints on earth, and the use of miraculous gifts in the church. Gunnison's Mormons, 101.

^77:4 Howe intimates that Rigdon knew more of the book and the people than he pretended. Of the proselytes made in his church he says: 'Near the residence of Rigdon, in Kirtland, there had been for some time previous a few families belonging to his congregation, who had formed themselves into a common stock society, and had become considerably fanatical, and were daily looking for some wonderful event to take place in the world. Their minds had become fully prepared to embrace Mormonism, or any other mysteriousism that should first, present itself. Seventeen in number of these persons readily believed the whole story of Cowdery about the finding of the golden plates and the spectacles. They were all reimmersed in one night by Cowdery.' Mormonism Unveiled, 103.

^78:5 Speaking of the doings at Kirtland after the departure of the Lamanite mission, Mr Howe says: 'Scenes of the most wild, frantic, and horrible fanaticism ensued. They pretended that the power of miracles was about to be given to all those who embraced the new faith, and commenced communicating the holy spirit by laying their hands upon the heads of the converts, which operation at first produced an instantaneous prostration of body and mind. Many would fall upon the floor, where they would lie for a long time apparently lifeless. They thus continued these enthusiastic exhibitions for several weeks. The fits usually came on during or after their prayer meetings, which were held nearly every evening. The young men and women were more particularly subject to this delirium. They would exhibit all the apish actions imaginable, making the most ridiculous grimaces, creeping upon their hands and feet, rolling upon the frozen ground, go through with all the Indian modes of warfare, such as knocking down, scalping, ripping open and tearing out the bowels. At other times they would run through the fields, get upon stumps, preach to imaginary congregations, enter the water and perform all the ceremony of baptizing, etc. Many would have fits of speaking all the different Indian dialects, which none could understand. Again, at the dead hour of night the young men might be seen running over the fields and hills in pursuit, as they said, of the balls of fire, light, etc., which they saw moving through the atmosphere...On the arrival of Smith in Kirtland he appeared astonished at the wild enthusiasm and scalping performances of his proselytes there. He told them that he had inquired of the Lord concerning the matter, and had been informed that it was all the work of the devil, as heretofore related. The disturbance therefore ceased.' Mormonism Unveiled, 104, 116.

^79:6 'One of their leading articles of faith is, that the Indians of North America, in a very few years, will be converted to Mormonism, and through rivers of blood will again take possession of their ancient inheritance.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 145.

^79:7 'We before had Moses and Aaron in the persons of Smith and Cowdery, and we now have John the Baptist, in the person of Sidney Rigdon. Their plans of deception appear to have been more fully matured and developed after the meeting of Smith and Rigdon. The latter being found very intimate with the scriptures, a close reasoner, and as fully competent to make [p. 80] white appear black and black white as any other man; and at all times prepared to establish, to the satisfaction of great numbers of people, the negative or affirmative of any and every question from scripture, he was forthwith appointed to promulgate all the absurdities and ridiculous pretensions of Mormonism, and call on the holy prophets to prove all the words of Smith. But the miraculous powers conferred upon him we do not learn have yet been put in requisition. It seems that the spirit had not, before the arrival of Rigdon, told Smith anything about the promised land, or his removal to Ohio. It is therefore very questionable what manner of spirit it was which dictated most of the after movements of the prophet. The spirit of Rigdon, it must be presumed, however, generally held sway; for a revelation was soon had that Kirtland, the residence of Rigdon and his brethren, was to be the eastern border of the promised land, and from thence to the Pacific Ocean. On this land the New Jerusalem, the city of refuge, was to be built. Upon it all true Mormons were to assemble, to escape the destruction of the world which was so soon to take place.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 109-10. Tucker, Origin and Prog. Mor., 76-8, thus speaks of the first appearance of this first regular Mormon preacher before a Palmyra congregation: 'Rigdon introduced himself as the messenger of God, declaring that he was commanded from above to proclaim the Mormon revelation. After going through with a ceremonious form of prayer, in which he expressed his grateful sense of the blessings of the glorious gospel dispensation now opening to the world, and the miraculous light from heaven to be displayed through the instrumentality of the chosen revelator, Joseph Smith Jr,...he announced his text as follows: First book of Nephi, chapter iv.--"And the angel spoke unto me, saying, These last records which thou hast seen among the gentiles shall establish the truth of the first, which is of the twelve apostles of the lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people that the lamb of God is the son of the eternal father and saviour of the world; and that all men must come unto him or they cannot be saved." The preacher assumed to establish the theory that the book of Mormon and the old bible were one in inspiration and importance, and that the precious things now revealed had for wise purposes been withheld from the book first promulgated to the world, and were necessary to establish its truth. In the course of his argument he applied various quotations from the two books to prove his position. Holding the book of Mormon in his right hand, and the bible in his left hand, he brought them together in a manner corresponding to the emphatic declaration made by him, that they were both equally the word of God; that neither was perfect without the other; and that they were inseparably necessary to complete the everlasting gospel of the saviour Jesus Christ.' It is said that Rigdon, after his return to Kirtland from his visit to Smith, in one of his eloquent discourses on the new faith, 'gave a challenge to the world to disprove the new bible, and the pretensions of its authors.' Rigdon's old friend, Thomas Campbell, hearing of it, wrote him from Mentor accepting, at the same time enclosing an outline of what his line of argument would be. There the matter dropped.

^80:8 See Millennial Star, v. 33-5; Times and Seasons, iv. 352-4. Mather, in Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880, states that to escape persecution sixty believers [p. 81] abandoned their homes in the Susquehanna valley and moved westward. 'Some of the followers,' he says, 'were moved by a spirit of adventure, while others placed their property in the common lot and determined to accompany the prophet to his earthly as well as to his heavenly kingdom. Smith Baker was one of the teamsters, and reports that the train consisted of three baggage and eleven passenger wagons. The exodus was along the old state road, north of Binghamton, to Ithaca, and thence across Cayuga Lake to Palmra.'

^81:9 'Smith had appointed as his bishop one Edward Partridge, a very honest and industrious hatter of Painesville, Ohio, who had withal a comfortable stock of the good things of the world. He was stationed at Independence, and had the sole control of all the temporal and spiritual affairs of the colony, always obedient, however, to the revelations promulgated by Smith.'

^81:10 'Some of the members pretended to receive parchment commissions miraculously, which vanished from their sight as soon as they had been copied.' For a copy of one of these, with seal attached, see Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 107; Kidder's Mormonism, 73.

^82:11 'Since the organization of the church on the sixth day of April, 1830, there has been a record kept in our church of its general transactions, of its [p. 83] persecutions and general history. The one in charge of this duty is called by us "the historian and general church recorder. The first who occupied this position was John Whitmer, until 1838, when he was excommunicated from the church for transgression, and took portions of the church records with him.' Richards' Bibliography of Utah, MS., 2. 'The earliest clerk service rendered the prophet Joseph, of which there is any account, was by Martin Harris; Joseph's wife, Emma, then Oliver Cowdery, who, as is claimed, wrote the greater portion of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon, as he translated it from the gold plates by the urim and thummim which he obtained with the plates. In March 1831 John Whitmer was appointed to keep the church record and history continually, Oliver having been appointed to other labors. Whitmer was assisted, temporarily, on occasions of absence or illness by Warren Parrish. At a meeting of high council at Kirtland, Sept. 14, 1835, it was decided that "Oliver Cowdery be appointed, and that he act hereafter as recorder for the church," Whitmer having just been called to be editor of the Messenger and Advocate. At a general conference held in Far West April 6, 1838, John Corrill and Elias Higbee were appointed historians, and George W. Robinson "general church recorder and clerk for the first presidency." On the death of Elder Robert B. Thompson, which occurred at Nauvoo on the twenty-seventh of August 1841, in his obituary it is stated: "Nearly two years past he had officiated as scribe to President Joseph Smith and clerk for the church, which important stations he filled with that dignity and honor befitting a man of God." During the expulsion from Missouri, and the early settlement of Nauvoo, James Mulholland, William Clayton, and perhaps others rendered temporary service in this line until the 13th of December, 1841 when Willard Richards was appointed recorder, general clerk, and private secretary to the prophet, which offices he occupied until his death, in March 1854, when he was succeeded by George A. Smith, who held it until his death on the first of September, 1875, with Wilford Woodruff as his assistant. Soon after, Orson Pratt succeeded to the office, retaining Woodruff as his assistant, until his demise on the third of October, 1881. Directly after President Woodruff was appointed to the office, and in January 1884, Apostle Franklin D. Richards was appointed his assistant.' See Times and Seasons, v. 401; Millennial Star, v. 82; Richards' Narrative, MS., 94-8.

^83:12 Of the future of this city there were many revelations and many conjectures. 'It was said that it would in a few years exceed in splendor everything known in ancient times. Its streets were to be paved with gold; all that escaped the general destruction which was soon to take place would there assemble with all their wealth; the ten lost tribes of Israel had been discovered in their retreat in the vicinity of the north pole, where the had for ages been secluded by immense barriers of ice, anti became vastly rich; the ice in a few years was to be melted away, when those tribes, with St John and some of the Nephites, which the book of Mormon bad immortalized, would be seen making their appearance in the new city, loaded with immense quantities of gold and silver. Whether the prophet himself ever declared nat these things bad been revealed to him, or that he had seen them through his magic stone or silver spectacles, we will not say; but that such stories and hundreds of others equally absurd were told by those who were in daily Intercourse with him, as being events which would probably take place, are susceptible of proof.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 127-8. 'Kirtland was never intended to be the metropolis of Mormonism; it was selected as a temporary abiding place, to make money in reference to a removal farther west.' Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 72.

^84:13 'From this point in the history of this delusion,' says Howe, 'it began to spread with considerable rapidity. Nearly all of their male converts, however ignorant and worthless, were forthwith transformed into elders, and sent forth to proclaim, with all their wild enthusiasm, the wonders and mysteries of Mormonism. All those having a taste for the marvellous and delighting [p. 85] in novelties flocked to hear them. Many travelled fifty and a hundred miles to the throne of the prophet in Kirtland, to hear from his own mouth the certainty of his excavating a bible and spectacles. Many, even in the New England states, after hearing the frantic story of some of these elders, would forthwith place their all into a wagon, and wend their way to the promised land, in order, as they supposed, to escape the judgments of heaven, which were soon to be poured out upon the land. The state of New York, they were privately told, would most probably be sunk, unless the people thereof believed in the pretensions of Smith.' Mormonism Unveiled, 115-16.

^85:14 Howe writes thus of Phelps: 'Before the rise of Mormonism he was an avowed infidel; having a remarkable propensity for fame and eminence, he was supercilious, haughty, and egotistical. His great ambition was to embark in some speculation where he could shine preeminent. He took an active part for several years in the political contests of New York, and made no little display as an editor of a partisan newspaper, and after being foiled in his desires to become a candidate for lieutenant-governor of that state, his attention was suddenly diverted by the prospects which were held out to him in the gold-bible speculation. In this he was sure of becoming a great man, and made the dupes believe he was master of fourteen different languages, of which they frequently boasted. But he soon found that the prophet would suffer no growing rivalships, whose sagacity he had not well calculated, until he was met by a revelation which informed him that he could rise no higher than a printer.' Mormonism Unveiled, 274.

^87:15 Of Independence one of them says: 'It is a new town, containing a court-house built of brick, two or three merchants' stores, and 15 or 20 dwelling-houses built mostly of logs hewed on both sides; and is situated on a handsome rise of ground about three miles south of Missouri River, and about 12 miles east of the dividing line between the United States and the Indian reserve, and is the county scat of Jackson county.' Booth's letter in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 196. On the south side of the Missouri, Parley Pratt says, Autobiography, 78, some families were entirely dressed in skins, without any other clothing, including ladies young and old. Buildings were generally without glass windows, and the door open in winter for a light.'

^87:16 Booth, in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 196-9, says: 'The designation of the site where the city of Zion was to begin was attended with considerable parade and an ostentatious display of talents, both by Rigdon and Cowdery. And the next day the ground for the temple was consecrated, Smith claiming the honor of laying the corner-stone himself. The location of the stone was marked by a sapling from which the bark was removed on the north and east sides: on the south side a letter T was cut, which stood for temple, and on the east side Zom., for Zomas; which Smith said is the original word for Zion. This stone was placed near the foot of the sapling and covered with bushes cut for the purpose; the spot being on an elevation half a mile from Independence.' 'The Colesville branch was among the first organized by Joseph Smith, and constituted the first settlers of the members of the church in Missouri. They had arrived late in the summer and cut some hay for their cattle, sowed a little grain, prepared some ground for cultivation, and were engaged during the fall and winter in building log cabins, etc. The winter was cold, and for some time about 10 families lived in one cabin, which was open and unfinished, while the frozen ground served for a floor. Our food consisted of beef, and a little bread made of corn which had been grated into coarse meal by rubbing the ears on a tin grater.' Pratt's Autobiography, 76. See also Millennial Star, v. 131. It was revealed through Joseph the seer that the property of the Colesville branch should be held in common, and that Partridge (its bishop) have charge and distribute from the community storehouse according to the needs of each. Smith's Doctrine and Covenants (1876), 187-8 Smith in the beginning of the church attempted establish communism, each giving their all to the bishop, and only drawing out of the office sufficient to live upon. This was found to be impracticable, and it was silently permitted to glide into the payment of tithing. Hyde's Mormonism, 37.

^87:17 'This year, 1831, passed off with a gradual increase, and considerable wealth was drawn in, so that they began to boast of a capital stock of ten or [p. 88] fifteen thousand dollars. Their common-stock principles appear to be somewhat similar to those of the shakers.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 128-9.

^88:18 Booth intimates that Smith and Rigdon preferred living in Ohio to enduring the hardships of Missouri. 'Before they went to Missouri their language was, "We shall winter in Ohio but one winter more;" and when in Missouri, "It will be many years before we come here, for the lord has a great work for us to do in Ohio." And the great work is to make a thorough alteration of the bible, and invent new revelations, and these are to be sent to Missouri in order to be printed.' Letter in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 199.

^88:19 'Some dispute, of which the nature is not clearly known, appears to have arisen between Joseph and his friend Sidney Rigdon before their return. It is probable, from the course of subsequent events, that Sidney, even at this time, aspired to greater power in the church than suited the prophet,... who saw fit to rebuke him by a revelation accusing him of "being exalted in his heart, and despising the counsel of the lord. They afterward became reconciled."' Smucker's Mormons, 75-6, confirmed by Millennial Star, v. 149; Times and Seasons, v. 467. From this time till January 1832, Joseph continued preaching in various parts of the United States, making converts with great rapidity. He found it necessary, however, further to check the presumption of some new and indiscreet converts who also had revelations from the Lord, which they endeavored to palm off upon the public. Among others, one W. E. McLellan was rebuked for endeavoring to 'write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's.' Mackay's Mormons, 67-8. See anecdote of 'The Swamp Angel;' also account of raising the dead by Smith, about this time. Ward's Mormon Wife, 10-11, 15-24. For text of rebuke, where the name of the offender is given William E. M'Lellin, see Millennial Star, v. 185-6; Times and Seasons, v. 496.

^89:20 Booth's letters were first printed at Ravenna, in the Ohio Star, and afterward by E. D. Howe in his book, Mormonism Unveiled, 175-221. They are nine in number, and are full of general denunciation and sorrow over his past blindness, and an account of the hardships and disappointments attending his journey to and from Missouri. I quote the more pertinent points. When I embraced Mormonism I conscientiously believed it to be of God.' 'The relation in which Smith stands to the church is that of a prophet, seer, revealer, and translator; and when he speaks by the spirit, or says he knows a thing by the communication of the spirit, it is received as coming directly from the mouth of the Lord.' 'This system, to some, carries the force of plausibility, and appears under an imposing form. It claims the bible for its patron, and proffers the restoration of the apostolic church, with all the gifts and graces with which the primitive saints were endowed.' 'Many of them have been ordained to the high priesthood, or the order of Melchisedec, and profess to be endowed with the same power as the ancient apostles were. But they have been hitherto unsuccessful in finding the lame, the halt, and the blind who had. the faith sufficient to become the subjects of their miracles, and it is now concluded that this work must be postponed until they get to Missouri; for the Lord will not show those signs to this wicked and adulterous generation. In the commandment given to the churches in the state of New York to remove to the state of Ohio, they were assured that these miracles should be wrought in the state of Ohio; but now they must be deferred until they are settled in Missouri.' 'Everything in the church is done by commandment; and yet it is said to be done by the voice of rite church. For instance. Smith gets a commandment that he shall be the head of the church, or that he shall rule the conference, or that the church shall build him an elegant house and give him 1,000 dollars. For this the members of the church must vote, or they will be cast off for rebelling against the commandments of the Lord.' 'Smith describes an angel as having the appearance of a tall, slim, well built, handsome man, with a bright pillar upon his head.' The bishop's 'business is to superintend the secular concerns of the church. He holds a deed el the lands; and the members receive a writing from him signifying that they are to possess the land as their own so long as they are obedient to Smith's commandments.' 'The Lord's storehouse is to be furnished with goods suited to the Indian trade, and persons are to obtain license from the government to dispose of them to the Indians in their own territory; at the Same time they are to disseminate the principles of Mormonism among them.'

^90:21 'Thirty or forty elders were sent off in various directlens in pursuit of proselytes, and the year passed off with a gradual increase.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 128-9. The men, after baptism, are elders, and are empowered to perform the ceremony upon others. Carvalho's Incidents of Travel, 148. For names of apostates at this time, see Smucker's Hist. Mor., 77. For instances of young women induced to unite with the sect about this time, see Ward's Mormon Wife, 42-81. Mackay erroneously states that the number of saints in Kirtland at this time, including women and children, was but 150. The Mormons, 71-2.

^90:22 In January it was revealed that the work of translating should be proceeded with by Smith and Rigdon until finished; and that several of the elders, among whom was Orson Hyde, a recent convert, should go forth in various directions in pairs as before, and preach. Smith and some of the elders attended a conference at Amherst, Loraine Co., after returning from which both himself and Rigdon were shown the devil in a vision, and had the revelation of St John explained to them. In March it was revealed that steps should be taken to regulate and establish storehouses for the benefit of the poor, both at Kirtland and at Zion. More missionaries were sent out, and word was received that the emigrants had safely reached Missouri. Times and Seasons, v. 576-7, 592-6, 608-9.

^90:23 Times and Seasons, v. 611-12. Mackay, Mormons, 68-71, erroneously dates the outrage Jan. 25th. One account says aqua-fortis was poured into Smith's mouth. Deseret News Aug. 6, 1862. Smith says 'they tried to force a vial into my mouth, and broke it in my teeth.' One reason assigned for this treatment was that they were attempting to establish communism and [p. 91] dishonorable dealing, forgery, and swindling. Burton's City of the Saints, 672. Smith merely says that Rigdon was mad; but his mother asserts that he counterfeited the madness in order to mislead the saints into the belief that the keys of the kingdom had been taken from the church, and would not be restored, as he said, until they had built him a new house. This, she says, gave rise to great scandal, which Joseph however succeeded in silencing. Rigdon repented and was forgiven. He stated that as a punishment for his fault, the devil had three times thrown him out of his bed in one night. Remy's Journey to Great Salt Lake, i. 283 (note).

^91:24 The 26th of April Smith called a general council, which acknowledged him as president of the high priesthood, to which he had been ordained at the Amherst conference in January, and Bishop Partridge and Rigdon, who had quarrelled, were reconciled, probably by Smith, as Rigdon was supposed to be at Kirtland at the time. This greatly rejoiced Smith; and he immediately received a revelation, in which it was announced that the stakes must be strengthened, and all property was to be held in common. Times and Seasons, v. 624-5; Mackay's The Mormons, 71.

^91:25 The first edition of Doctrine and Covenants presents the following title page: A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ organized according to law on the 6th of April, 1830. Zion: Published by W. W. Phelps & Co., 1833. This edition contains the revelations given up to September, 1831. There were 3,000 copies printed of this edition. Then there was The Book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints; Selected from the Revelations of God. By Joseph Smith, President. First European Edition, Liverpool, no date. The preface, however, by Thomas Ward, is dated Liverpool, June 14, 1845. There are two principal divisions and an appendix. The first consists of seven lectures on faith, delivered by Sidney Rigdon before a class of elders at Kirtland; the second is called Covenants and Commandments, and consists chiefly of revelations given 1830-42, to Joseph Smith, the same for the most part that are also printed in Times and Seasons, under title of History of Joseph Smith. There are also rules, minutes of council, visions, and expositions. The appendix contains rules on marriage, a dissertation on government and laws, and a brief account of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. 'The book of Mormon, although most known, is not the chief book of the sect. The Book of Teachings and Covenants, containing some of the revelations which Smith pretended to have re ceived from heaven, is regarded by his disciples as a book of the law which God [p. 92] has given this generation. Smith also published other revelations, which are contained in a little book called The Pearl of Great Price.' De Smet's Western Missions, 393. 'This book abounds in grammatical inaccuracies, even to a greater extent than the book of Mormon.' Mackay's The Mormons, 43. A bungling statement is made by Mather, Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880, to the effect that in 1835 'Rigdon's Book of Doctrine and Covenants and his Lectures on Faith were adopted.'

^92:26 Arrangements were early made for the establishment of a store. Ferris' Utah and Mormons, 75. When the printing press was bought--see Deseret News, June 30, 1869--a supply of goods was purchased; and arrangements were made at the May council to keep up the supply, which, with few exceptions, were considered satisfactory. On April 27th considerable business was transacted 'for the salvation of the saints who were settling among a ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves.' On the 28th and 29th Smith visited the settlement above Big Blue River in Kaw township, 12 miles west of Independence, including the Colesville branch, and returned on the 30th, when it was revealed that all minors should be supported by their parents, but after becoming of age 'they had claims upon the church, or in other words, the Lord's storehouse,' as was also the case with widows left destitute. Times and Seasons, v. 625-6.

^92:27 On May 6th, leaving affairs as he supposed in a flourishing condition, Smith started for Kirtland to look after the mill, store, and farm in that neighborhood, but owing to an accident which resulted in the breaking of Whitney's leg, Smith was delayed 4 weeks en route. Rigdon, who was also of the party, proceeded through without stopping, and the other two arrived some time in June. The season was passed by Smith in his work of translating the scriptures, and in attending to business affairs. Times and Seasons, v. 626.

^93:28 Hardly had President Smith turned his back upon Zion, when dissensions broke out among the saints there. He corresponded regularly with the Star, giving advice and warning, but matters apparently grew worse, for in January 1833 a conference of twelve high priests was held at Kirtland, or Kirtland Mills, as they now called their settlement, at which Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith were appointed to write an epistle to the brotherhood of Zion. The document was dated Jan. 14th, and began: 'From a conference of 12 high priests to the bishop, his council, and the inhabitants of Zion.' After premising that Smith and certain others had written on this all-important subject, and that the replies received had not given satisfactory assurances of confession and repentance, charges were made that old grievances, supposed to be settled, had been again brought up in a censorious spirit, and that they had accused Brother Smith of seeking after monarchical power and authority. This complaint was made by Carroll in a letter dated June 2d. Again, Brother Gilbert, on Dec. 10th, wrote a letter which contained 'low, dark, and blind insinuations, which they declined to entertain, though the writer's claims and pretensions to holiness were great.' Brother Phelps, Dec. 15th, Wrote a letter betraying 'a lightness of spirit that ill becomes a man placed in the important and responsible station that he is placed in.' To a request that Smith should come to Zion, made by Phelps in a previous letter, it was answered that 'Brother Smith will not settle in Zion until she repent and purify herself...and remember the commandments that have been given her to do them as well as say them.' Finally, it was threatened that unless these disturbances should cease, they should all be cut off, and the Lord would seek another place. Brother Ziba Peterson was delivered 'over to the buffetings of Satan, in the name of the Lord, that he may learn not to transgress the commandments of God.' Times and Seasons, v. 801.

^94:29 'The church that was to be established in Jackson county was called Zion, the centre of gathering, and those established by revelation in other places were called stakes of Zion, or stakes; hence the stake at Kirtland, the stake at Far West, etc. Each stake was to have a presidency, consisting of three high priests, chosen and set apart for that purpose, whose jurisdiction was confined to the limits of the stake over which they took the watch care.' Kidder's Mormonism, 121-2. A stake of Zion is an organization comprising a presidency, high priests, and its council of 12 high priests. The latter is a tribunal for the trial of brethren. It is a court of appeal from the bishops, and has also jurisdiction in spiritual matters. Richards' Narrative, MS., 55. For origin of name, see Doctrine and Convenants (1876), 263. 'The next year, 1833, commenced with something like a change of operations. Instead of selling their possessions in Ohio, they again began to buy up improved land, mills, and water privileges. It would seem that the Missouri country began to look rather dreary to the prophet and his head men, supposing that they could not enjoy their power there as well as in Ohio.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 130.

^95:30 Four years after the first printing of the Book of Mormon, at Palmyra, New York, was issued in Ohio the following work: Mormonism Unveiled: or, A faithful account of that singular Imposition and Delusion, from its rise to the present time. With sketches of the characters of its Propagators, and a full detail of the manner in which the famous Golden Bible was brought before the World. To which are added inquiries into the probability that the historical part of the said bible was written by one Solomon Spaulding, more than twenty years ago, and by him intended to have been published as a romance. By E. D. Howe. Painesville, Printed and Published by the Author, 1834. 12mo, 290 pages. Painesville is situated but a short distance from Kirtland, then the headquarters of Mormonism, where about that time was ordained the first quorum of the twelve apostles, and Sidney Rigdon was delivering Joseph Smith's famous lectures on faith, subsequently printed in Doctrine and Covenants, already noticed. Here also, shortly afterward, the first Mormon temple was dedicated. Great excitement prevailed throughout that section regarding religion, and the book was widely circulated. It was a powerful weapon, and promptly and skillfully handled; yet it seems to have been no serious barrier to the dissemination of the new doctrines. The work is well written; and while not vehement in its denunciations, it brings forward a large mass of evidence to prove, as he says, 'the depths of folly, degradation, and superstition to which human nature can be carried.' He observes that 'the difficulty of procuring, or arriving at the whole truth, in relation to a religious imposition which has from its birth been so studiously veiled in secrecy, and generally under a belief that the judgments of God would follow any disclosures of what its votaries had seen or heard, will be readily discovered.' The author begins with some account of the Smith family. Their thoughts turned greatly toward gaining possession of hidden treasures. Young Joseph 'had become very expert in the arts of necromancy, juggling, the use of the divining rod, and looking into what they termed a peep-stone, by which means he soon collected about him a gang of idle, credulous young men, to perform the labor of digging into the hills and mountains, and other lonely places in that vicinity in search of gold.' After comments on Cowdery, Harris, and Whitmer, Mr Howe gives a commentary on the golden bible. Some 63 pages are devoted to this, and to observations on the credibility of the three and the eight witnesses. Sarcasm is the weapon employed, and generally with effect; the exposition in regard to contradictions and historical inaccuries might apply with equal force to the bible, the koran, or any other sacred book. Mention is next made of Pratt's conversion, which, he intimates, was not accidental, followed by an account of the expedition to the Lamanites. Thus the line of events is followed by Mr Howe to the time of the publication of his book, at the end of which are given letters amid testimonials to disprove the statements and doctrines of the Mormons, and also to prove that the book of Mormon was the work of Spaulding. On the whole, besides being the first book published in opposition to the Mormons, it is also one of the most ably written, the most original, and the most respectable.

^96:31 A plan and specifications for the new city of Zion were sent out from Kirtland. The plot was one mile square, drawn to a scale of 660 feet to one inch. Each square was to contain ten acres, or 660 feet fronts. Lots were to be laid out alternately in the squares; in one, fronting north or south; in the next east or west; each lot extending to the centre line of its square, with a frontage of 66 feet and a depth of 330 feet, or half an acre. By this arrangement in one square the houses would stand on one street, and in the square opposite on another street. Through the middle of the plot ran a range of blocks 660 feet by 990 feet set apart for the public buildings, and in these the lots were all laid off north and south, the greatest length of the blocks being from east to west: thus making all the lots equal in size. The whole plot was supposed to be sufficient for the accommodation of from 15,000 to 20,000 people. All stables, barns, etc., were to be built north or south of the plot, none being permitted in the city among the houses. Sufficient adjoining ground on all sides was to be reserved for supplying the city with vegetables, etc. All streets were to be 132 feet (8 perches) wide, and a like width was to be laid off between the temple and its surrounding streets. But one house was to be built on a lot, and that must front on a line 25 feet from the street, the space in front to be set out with trees, shrubs, etc., according to the builder's taste. All houses to be of either brick or stone. The house of the Lord for the presidency was to be 61 feet by 87 feet, 10 feet of the length for a stairway. The interior was so arranged as to permit its division into 4 parts by curtains. At the east and west ends were to be pulpits arranged for the several grades of president and council, bishop and council, high priests and elders, at the west; and the lesser priesthood, comprising presidency, priests, teachers, and deacons, at the east. Provision was also made to seat visiting officers according to their grades. The pews were fitted with sliding seats, so that the audience could face either pulpit as required. There was to be no gallery, but the house was to be divided into 2 stories of 14 feet each. A bell of very large size was also ordered. Finally, on each public building must be written, Holiness to the Lord. When this plot was settled, another was to be laid out, and so on. Times and Seasons, vi. 785-7, 800. Zion City--its prototype in Enoch's City. Young's History of the Seventies, 9-15, no. 10, in Mormon Pamphlets. It was revealed to Smith that the waters of the gulf of Mexico covered the site of a prehistoric city, built by and named for Enoch; and that it was translated because its inhabitants had become so far advanced that further earthly residence was unnecessary. Zion, Smith's ideal city, was finally to reach a like state of perfection.

^97:32 Autobiography, 103.

^97:33 'Their prophet had declared that Zion should be established, and should put down her enemies under her feet. Why, then, should they hesitate to proclaim their anticipations? They boasted openly that they should soon possess the whole country, and that the unbelievers should be rooted out from the land.' Edinburgh Review, April 1854. 'We have been, credibly informed that Rigdon has given it as his opinion that the Mormons will be able to elect a member of congress in five years, and that in three years they would take the offices in the town of Kirtland. They say that when they get the [p. 98] secular power into their hands, everything will be performed by immediate revelations from God. We shall then have Pope Joseph the First and his hierarchy.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 145.

^98:34 'So early as April 1832, the saints were made to feel themselves unwelcome sojourners in Jackson co. Stones and brickbats were thrown through the windows of their houses, and they were otherwise annoyed and insulted. Meetings were held during that year and the early part of 1833, at which resolutions were sometimes passed, and sometimes the assembly indulged in a fight among its members; but nothing more serious resulted. Stoning houses, however, was resumed in the early summer of the last-mentioned year.' Times and Season, i. 17; vi. 851.

^99:35 Persecution of the Saints, 21-8. Mackay, The Mormons, 72-4, says 'the manner in which the Mormons behaved in their Zion was not calculated to make friends. The superiority they assumed gave offense, and the rumors that were spread by some false friends, who had been turned out of the church for misconduct, excited against them an intense feeling of alarm and hatred. They were accused of communism, and not simply a community of goods and chattels, but of wives...Joined to the odium unjustly cast upon them for these reasons, they talked so imprudently of their determination to possess the whole state of Missouri, and to suffer no one to live in it who would not conform to their faith, that a party was secretly formed against them, of which the object was nothing less than their total and immediate expulsion from their promised Zion...The anti-Mormon press contained at the same time an article entitled "Beware of false prophets," written by a person whom Joseph called a black rod in the hand of Satan. This article was distributed from house to house in Independence and its neighborhood, and contained many false charges against Smith and his associates, reiterating the calumny about the community of goods and wives.' Smith calls this man 'one Pixley,' and says he was sent by the missionary society, to civilize and christianize the heathen of the west, and that he was not only a black red, but 'a poisoned shaft in the power of our foes, to spread lies and falsehoods'...It is also probable that the more indolent Missourians gazed with jealous eyes as the new-comers exhibited that agricultural thrift which has always characterized them as a people; for we find the twelve high priests, through Hyde and Hyrum Smith, reprimanding Brother Phelps as follows: "If you have fat beef and potatoes, eat them in singleness of heart, and boast not yourselves in these things."' Times and Seasons, v. 721; vi. 816. 'It was conjectured by the inhabitants of Jackson county that the Mormonites as a body are wealthy, and many of them entertain fears that next December, when the list of land is exposed for sale, they will outbid others, and establish themselves as the most powerful body in the county.' Booth, in Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 195.

^99:36 It was further declared: '1st, That no Mormon shall in future move and settle in this county. 2d, That those nowhere, who shall give a definite pledge of their intention, within a reasonable time, to remove out of the county, shall be allowed to remain unmolested until they shall have sufficient time to sell their property and close their business without any sacrifice. 3d, That the editor of the Star be required forthwith to close his office, and discontinue the business of printing in this county; and as to all other stores and shops belonging to the sect, their owners must in every case comply with the terms strictly agreeably to the 2d article of this declaration; and upon failure, prompt and efficient measures will be taken to close the same. 4th, That the Mormon leaders here are required to use their influence in preventing any further emigration of their distant brethren to this county, and [p. 100] counsel and advise their brethren to comply with the above requisitions. 5th, That those who fail to comply with the above requisitions be referred to those of their brethren who have the gift of tongues, to inform them of the lot that awaits them.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 141.

^100:37 'Six of the principal elders met the mob's committee. The latter demanded that the printing-office, the shops, and the store, be closed forthwith, and that the society leave the county immediately. The elders asked for three months' delay, which was refused; then for ten days, which was also refused; the latter refusal being accompanied with a notification that fifteen minutes was the longest time that could be granted. Each elder having declined to accede to the terms, one of the mob remarked on leaving that he was sorry, for, said he, "the work of destruction will commence immediately."' Times and Seasons, i. 18. Phelps, the editor, Partridge, the bishop, and Gilbert, the store-keeper, are mentioned. Smucker's Hist. Mor., 89.

^100:38 'In a short time time hundreds of the mob gathered around the printing-office (a two-story brick building), which they soon threw down. The press was thrown from the upper story, and all the books, stock, and material scattered through the streets. After destroying the printing house, they proceeded to Gilbert and Whitney's store for the same purpose, but Gilbert agreeing to shut it, and box the goods soon, they concluded to let it alone.' Times and Seasons, i. 18; Pratt's Persecution of the Saints, 29.

^100:39 'A number more were taken, but succeeded in escaping through the over-anxiety of their keepers, who crowded forward to enjoy the sport.' Times and Seasons, i. 18. Phelps the editor was one. Smucker's Hist. Mor., 89. Partridge says the mob was led by George Simpson. Times and Seasons, vi. 819.

^100:40 Spoken by Lilburn W. Boggs, lieutenant-governor, a man who thenceforward appears to have persecuted the Mormons with unrelenting hostility. He 'was in the immediate neighborhood of the riot, but declined to take any part in preserving the peace.' Smucker's Hist. Mor., 89-90; Times and Seasons, vi. 819.

^100:41 Six persons signed the agreement that one half of the Mormons should leave in January and one half in April 1834, the publication of the paper to be discontinued. Mackay's The Mormons, 76; Pratt's Persecution, 30.

^102:42 Pratt's Autobiography, 105; Mackay's The Mormons, 77-8; Pratt's Persecution, 31-6.

^102:43 In a memorial to the legislature of Missouri, dated Far West, Dec. 10, 1838, and signed by nine prominent Mormons, is this statement: 'A battle took place in which some two or three of the mob and one of our people were killed. This raised, as it were, the whole county in arms, and nothing could satisfy them but an immediate surrender of the arms of our people, and they forthwith had to leave the county. Fifty-one guns were given up, which have never been returned or paid for to this day.'

^102:44 'About 1,500 people were expelled from Jackson co. in Nov. 1833, and about 300 of their houses burned.' Geo. A. Smith, in Deseret News, June 30, 1869, 247. 'Several women thus driven from their homes gave birth to children in the woods and on the prairies.' Greene's Facts, 18. Pratt says 203 houses were burned, according to the estimate of the enemy.

^103:45 On Dec. 15th, Phelps writes to Smith from Clay co.: 'The situation of the saints, as scattered, is dubious, and affords a gloomy prospect...We are in Clay, Ray, Lafayette, Jackson, Van Buren, etc. [countres], and cannot hear from each other oftener than we do from you...The governor is willing to restore us, but as the constitution gives him no power to guard us when back, we are not willing to go. The mob swear if we come we shall die! Our people fare very well, and when they are discreet, little or no persecution is felt. The militia in the upper counties is in readiness at a moment's warning, having been ordered out by the governor, to guard a court-martial and court of inquiry etc., but we cannot attend a court of inquiry on account of the expense, until we are restored and protected.' Times and Seasons, vi. 944.

^103:46 Smith wrote to the saints about this time that he had heard they had surrendered their arms and fled across the river. If this report was true, he advised them not to recommence hostilities; but if they were still in possession, they should 'maintain the ground as long as there is a man left.' They were also advised to prosecute to the extent of the law; but must not look for pecuniary assistance from Kirtland, for matters there were by no means in a flourishing condition. It was recommended that a tract of land be purchased in Clay co. for present necessaries. Times and Seasons, vi. 914-15.

^104:47 'Concerning our means of diffusing the principles we profess, we have used the art of printing almost from the beginning of our work. At Independence, Missouri in 1832-3-4 two volumes of the Evening and Morning Star were issued by William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery. This was a monthly octavo of 16 pages, devoted to the faith and doctrines of the church, and was continued from Independence from June 1832 until July 1833, when its publication was transferred to Kirtland, Ohio, from whence it was continued until September 1834, when it gave place to the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, which continued to cheer the prospectus saints until August 1837, when there appeared in its columns a prospectus for a new paper to be published at Kirtland, called the Elders' Journal of the Church of Latter-day Saints, also a monthly, the first number of which bore date October 1837. The gathering of the people from Kirtland to Far West in Missouri transferred the publication of the journal also to that place, from whence it issued until stopped by the persecution and extermination of the saints in the fall and winter of 1838 from the state of Missouri. The first number of the Millennial Star was issued at Liverpool in May 1840, at first a monthly, then fortnightly, and for many years a weekly, with at one time a circulation of 22,000 copies, edited and published variously by elders appointed and sent to edit the paper, manage the emigration, and preside over the work generally in the European countries. This work is still issued weekly, and greatly aids the cause in Europe. The Skandinaviens' Stjerne has been published in Copenhagen nearly thirty years in the Danish language, edited by those who have from time to time presided over the Scandinavian missions. The first number was issued in 1851, and is well supported, being a great aid in the missionary service in northern Europe. For several years a periodical entitled the Udgorn Seion was published at Merthyr Tydfil, and was continued until the number of saints in the Welsh mission was so reduced by emigration as to render its further publication impracticable.' Richards' Bibliography of Utah, MS., 7-9.

^105:48 'About this time a court of inquiry held at Liberty for the purpose of investigating the action of Col Pitcher in connection with the expulsion of the saints from Jackson co., found sufficient evidence against that officer to result in his being placed in arrest for trial by court-martial. The plant of the printing-office was given by the citizens to Davis & Kelly, who removed it to Liberty, where they commenced the publication of a weekly paper called the Missouri Enquirer.' 'The citizens also paid $300 on the $1,000 note given by the elders to their lawyers, thus acknowledging their action had been wrong.' Times and Seasons, vi. 961. 'The governor also ordered them to restore our arms which they had taken from us, but they never were restored.' Pratt's Persecution, 52. See also Tayler's Mormons, xliii.-xlvi.; Deseret News, Dec. 27, 1851, and June 30, 1860; Utah Tracts, no. 4, 56-64; Millennial Star, xxv. 535-6, 550-2; Gunnison's Mormons, 104-14; Ferris' Utah and Mormons, 87-8.

^105:49 They 'called their Kirtland colony Shinahar.' Gunnison's Mormons, 167.

^106:50 'They were trying times, requiring the combined wisdom of the prophet and his head men...But the prophet more readily discovered the new advantages that would ultimately accrue to his cause by a little perseverance. He well knew that the laws could not continue to be violated in our country for any length of time, and that he and his followers would, in the end, be the greatest gainers by the cry of persecution which they could raise...A revelation was printed in the form of a handbill. it was taken up by all their priests and carried to all their congregations, some of which were actually sold for one dollar per copy. Preparations immediately began to be made for a crusade to their holy land to drive out the infidels...Old muskets, rifles, pistols, rusty swords, and butcher knives were soon put in a state of repair and scoured up. Some were borrowed and some were bought, on a credit if possible, and others were manufactured by their own mechanics...About the first of May the grand army of fanatics commenced its march in small detachments from the different places of concentration. On the 3d the prophet, with a life guard of about 80 men, the elite of his army, left his quarters in Kirtland with a few baggage wagons, containing their arms, ammunition, stores, etc. ...On arriving at Salt Creek, Illinois, they were joined by Lyman Wight and Hyrum Smith, brother of the prophet, with a reinforcement of twenty men, which they had picked up on the way. Here the grand army, which being fully completed, encamped for the space of three days. the whole number was now estimated at 220, rank and file. During their stay here the troops were kept under a constant drill of manual exercise with guns and swords, and their arms put in a state of repair; the prophet became very expert with a sword, and felt himself equal to his prototype Coriantumr. He had the best sword in the army; probably a true model of Laban's, if not the identical one itself, an elegant brace of pistols, which were purchased on a credit of six months, a rifle, and four horses. Wight was appointed second in command, or fighting general, who, together with the prophet, had an armor-bearer appointed, selected from among the most expert tacticians, whose duty it was to be in constant attendance upon their masters with their arms.' Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 147-59. ' Cholera broke out in his camp on the 24th of June, and Joseph attempted to cure it by laying on of hands and prayer...Joseph lost thirteen of his band by the ravages of the disease... He arrived in Clay co. on the 2d, and started back for Kirtland on the 9th... Short as was the time he stayed, he did not depart without organizing and encouraging the main body...and establishing the community in Clay co. on a better footing than when he arrived.' Mackay's The Mormons, 85. Churches were visited in New York, Pennsylvania, and the New England States, about 100 recruits obtained, and 50 more in the vicinity of Kirtland. the first detachment, about 160 strong, left Kirtland May 5th, and by the next Sunday about 60 more had joined, part from Ohio and part from the east. The body was organized in companies of tens, each being furnished with camp equipage. Messes for cooking purposes were formed, and guards mounted at night. Deseret News, Oct. 10, 1869. These men were well armed. A detachment of twenty men had preceded them as an advanced guard. Remy's Journey, i. 297. They were divided into companies of 12, consisting of 2 cooks, 2 fire-men, 2 tent-makers, 2 watermen, one runner or scout, one commissary, and 2 [p. 108] wagoners. 20 wagons accompanied them, and they had fire-arms and all sorts of munitions of war of the most portable kind for self-defence. Smucker's Hist. Mor., 95; Times and Seasons, vi. 1074. On June 3d, when in camp on the Illinois River, Smith had a mound opened and took out a skeleton, between whose ribs an arrow was sticking. A revelation followed, in which the prophet was informed that the bones were those of a white Lamanite, a warrior named Zelph, who served under the great prophet Omandagus. Times and Seasons, vi. 1076; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 95-6; Remy's Journey, i. 297; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 83-4. June 4th to 6th was occupied in crossing the Mississippi, there being but one boat. The company now consisted of 205 men and 25 wagons, with 2 or 3 horses each. The company camped on Rush Creek, Clay co., on June 23d, and on the night of the 24th the cholera broke out among them, causing several deaths. On the 25th Smith broke up his command, and the men were scattered among their neighbors. Times and Seasons, vi. 1076, 1088, 1105-6; Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1864. Up to June 22d, Smith had travelled incognito, apparently fearing assassination. Times and Seasons, vi. 1104. A list of the members of Zion's camp will be found in Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1864, and those living in 1876 in Id., Apr. 26, 1876. Smith disbanded his forces in obedience to a revelation. Doctrine and Covenants, 345-9. As the prophet approached Missouri he selected a body-guard of 20 men, appointing his brother Hyrum as their captain, and another brother, George, his armor-bearer. He also appointed a general, who daily inspected the army and drilled them. Smucker's Hist. Mor., 99. On April 10, 1834, the president was again petitioned from Liberty, Mo. (a petition had been sent on in October 1833); the persecutions were recounted, it was related that an unavailing appeal had been made to the state executive, and it was asked that they be restored to the lands in Jackson co. they had purchased from the U.S. For text of correspondence, etc., see Times and Seasons, vi. 1041-2, 1056-9, 1071-8, 1088-92, 1103, 1107-9, 1120-4. On the march Pratt still acted as recruiting officer, and visited the churches in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri, obtaining men and money which he forwarded to the main betty from time to time. Pratt's Autobiog., 122-3. The band finally numbered 205 in all. Utah Pioneers, 33d Anniversary, 17. The march to Clay co., Mo., occupied 46 days, 9 of which were spent in camp. During the existence of the body 2 deserted because they could not fight the mob, and one left without a discharge; the rest remained faithful. Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1864. Further details of the march will be found in Mackay's Mormons, 80-5; Kidder's Mormonism, 111-167 Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 156-63. Campbell and others who threatened to attack Smith were drowned by the upsetting of a boat whilst attempting to cross the Missouri. Campell's vow, and what became of it. Smucker's Hist. Mor., 100. When the prophet returned to Kirtland, in August, the council met and proeeeded to investigate charges against Smith and others on this march. Deseret News, Nov. 15 and 29, 1851.

^107:51 The society never styled themselves Mormons; it is a name popularly attached to them. The true name is Latter-day Saints. Pratt's Persecution, 21. [p. 108] Hyde, Mormonism, 202, states that the sect was first called The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints by Sidney Rigdon at a convention at Kirtland May 4, 1834. See chap. iii., note 22.

^108:52 When the camp arrived near Salt River, Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt were despatched to Jefferson City to request military aid from Gov. Dunklin, in repossessing the saints of their lands in Jackson co., which aid was refused. Pratt's Autobiog., 123-4. Upon the approach of Smith and his party the people of Jackson co. held a meeting and sent a committee to Smith with proposals to buy all the Mormon property in the county. The offer was declined, and the Mormons in turn offered to buy out the Missourians. See correspondence in Howe's Mormonism, 164-76.

^109:53 The most complete history of the early Mormon church is the Journal of Joseph Smith, extracts from which were made by himself, so as to form a consecutive narrative, under title of History of Joseph Smith, and published in Times and Seasons, beginning with vol. iii. no. 10, March 15, 1842, and ending Feb. 15, 1846, after the prophet's death. The narrative would fill a good-sized 12mo volume. It is composed largely of revelations, which, save in the one point of commandment which it was the purpose specially to give, are all quite similar. Publication of the Times and Seasons was begun at Commerce, afterward called Nauvoo, Illinois, Nov. 1839, and issued monthly. The number for May 1840 was dated Nauvoo. Later it was published semi-monthly, and was so continued till Feb. 1846. It is filled with church proceedings, movements of officers, correspondence of missionaries, history, and general information, with some poetry. To write a complete history of the Mormons down to 1846 without these volumes would not be possible. The names of E. Robinson and D. C. Smith first appear as publishers, then Robinson alone, then D. C. Smith, then E. Robinson and G. Hills, next Joseph Smith, and finally John Taylor. The organ of that branch of the church which remained in Iowa was the Frontier Guardian, published by Orson Hyde at Potawatamie, or Kanesville, 1849-52, and of the church in Utah the Deseret News, which was first issued at Salt Lake City in June 1850.

    'At the organization of this church, the Lord commanded Joseph the prophet to keep a record of his doings in the great and important work that he was commencing to perform. It thus became a duty imperative. After John Whitmer anti others had purloined the records in 1838, the persecution and expulsion from Missouri soon followed. When again located, now in Nauvoo, Illinois, and steamboat loads of emigrants were arriving from England via New Orleans, the sound thereof awakened an interest in the country that led Hon. John Wentworth of Chicago to write to the prophet, Joseph Smith, making inquiries about the rise, progress, persecution, and faith of the Latter-day Saints, the origin of this work, the Book of Mormon, the plates from which the record was translated, etc.; and it is the answer to this letter contained in Times and Seasons, March 1, 1842, that precedes or prefaces the present history of Joseph Smith, which is the history of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This request of Mr Wentworth's seethed to forcibly remind the prophet of the importance of having the history of his wonderful work restored to such a condition that correct [p. 110] information could be given to editors, authors, publishers, and any or all classes of inquirers that might apply, and be undertook with his clerks, recorder, and all available aid from private journals, correspondence, and his own indelible memory, and made it a labor to get his own history, which was indeed that of the church in all the stages of its growth, while he remained with his people, compiled and written up to date, which with his own current journal enabled the historian to complete the history to the time of his assassination, with the utmost fidelity to facts as they occurred. Our method of verification, afar compilation and rough draft, was to read the same before a session of the council, composed of the First Presidency and Twelve Apostles, and there scan everything under consideration.' Richards' Bibliography of Utah, MS., 2-6.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 111]

  

CHAPTER V.
 THE STORY OF MORMOMISM.
 1835-1840.

PRESIDENT SMITH AT KIRTLAND--FIRST QUORUM OF TWELVE APOSTLES--THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE COMPLETED--KIRTLAND SAFETY SOCIETY BANK--IN ZION AGAIN--THE SAINTS IN MISSOURI--APOSTASY--ZEAL AND INDISCRETION--MILITARY ORGANIZATION--THE WAR OPENS--DEPREDATIONS ON BOTH SIDES--MOVEMENTS OF ATCHISON, PARKS, AND DONIPHAN--ATTITUDE OF BOGGS--WIGHT AND GILLIAM--DEATH OF PATTEN--DANITE ORGANIZATION--ORDER LODGE--HAUN MILL TRAGEDY--MOBS AND MILITIA--THE TABLES TURNED--BOGGS' EXTERMINATING ORDER--LUCAS AND CLARK AT FAR WEST--SURRENDER OF THE MORMON'S--PRISONERS--PETITIONS AND MEMORIALS--EXPULSION--GATHERING AT QUINCY--OPINIONS.

    MEANWHILE, although the frontier of Zion was receiving such large accessions, the main body of the church was still at Kirtland, where President Smith remained for some time.

    On the 14th of February, 1835, twelve apostles were chosen at Kirtland, Brigham Young, Orson Hyde, and Heber C. Kimball being of the number; likewise a little later Parley P. Pratt. Thence, the following summer, they took their departure for the east, holding conferences and ordaining and instructing elders in the churches throughout New York and New England, and the organization of the first quorum of seventies was begun. Classes for instruction, and a school of prophets were commenced, and Sidney Rigdon delivered six lectures on faith, of which Joseph Smith was author. [*1] Preaching on the steps of a

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Campbellite church at Mentor, Parley P. Pratt was mobbed midst music and rotten eggs.

    The temple at Kirtland being finished, was dedicated on the 27th of March, 1836, and on the 3d of April Joseph and Oliver had interviews with the messiah, Moses, Elias, and Elijah, and received from them the several keys of priesthood, which insured to their possessors power unlimited in things temporal and spiritual for the accomplishment of the labors assigned by them for him to perform. [*2] The building of this structure by a few hundred persons, who, during the period between 1832 and 1836, contributed voluntarily of their money, material, or labor, the women knitting and spinning and making garments for the men who worked on the temple, was regarded with wonder throughout all northern Ohio. It was 60 by 80 feet, occupied a commanding position, and cost $40,000.

    During its erection the saints incurred heavy debts for material and labor. They bought farms at high prices, making part payments, and afterward forfeiting them. They engaged in mercantile pursuits,

[p. 113]

buying merchandise in New York and elsewhere in excess of their ability to pay. They built a steam-mill, which proved a source of loss, and started a bank, but were unable to obtain a charter; they issued bills without a charter, however, in consequence of which they could not collect the money loaned, and after a brief struggle, and during a period of great apostasy, the bank failed. It was called the Kirtland Safety Society Bank, of which Rigdon was president and Smith cashier. All this time, writes Corrill, "they suffered pride to arise in their hearts, and became desirous of fine houses and fine clothes, and indulged too much in these things, supposing for a few months that they were very rich." Upon the failure of the bank in 1838, Smith and Rigdon went to Missouri, leaving the business in the hands of others to wind up. [*3]

[p. 114]

    An endowment meeting, or solemn assembly, held in 1836 in the temple at Kirtland, is thus described by William Harris: "It was given out that those who were in attendance at that meeting should receive an endowment, or blessing, similar to that experienced by the disciples of Christ on the day of pentecost.

[p. 115]

When the day arrived great numbers convened from the different churches in the country. They spent the day in fasting and prayer, and in washing and perfuming their bodies; they also washed their feet, and anointed their heads with what they called holy oil, and pronounced blessings. In the evening they met for the endowment. The fast was then broken."

    Midsummer of 1837 saw Parley P. Pratt in New York city, where he printed the first edition of his Voice of Warning, [*4] and where he labored with great earnestness, at first under many discouragements, later with signal success. After that he went once more to Missouri. Others were going in the same direction from Kirtland and elsewhere during the entire period between 1831 and 1838. The Messenger and Advocate having been discontinued, the Elder's Journal was started by Joseph Smith in Kirtland in October 1837.

 

    After the emeutes which occurred in Jackson county in the autumn of 1833, as before related, the saints escaped as best they were able to Clay county, where they were kindly received. Some took up their abode in Lafayette and Van Buren counties, and a few in Ray and Clinton counties. [*5] For their lands, stock, furniture, buildings, and other property destroyed in Jackson county, they received little or no compensation; on the contrary, some who went back for their effects were caught and beaten. [*6] Nevertheless, there

[p. 116]

were three years of comparative rest for the people of God, the effect of which soon appeared in Zion's wilderness.

    The men of Missouri were quite proud of what they had done; they were satisfied on the whole with the results, and though their influence was still felt, no further violence was offered till the summer of 1836. Then the spirit of mobocracy again appeared. The Jackson-county boys had served themselves well; why should they not help their neighbors? So they crossed the river, in small squads at first, and began to stir up enmity, often insulting and plundering their victims, until the people of Clay county, fearing actions yet worse, held a meeting, and advised the saints to seek another home. [*7]

    For their unrelenting hostility toward the latter-day saints, for the services rendered to their country in defying its laws and encouraging the outrages upon citizens at Independence and elsewhere during the first Mormon troubles in Missouri, Boggs was made governor of that state, Lucas major-general, and Wilson brigadier-general. [*8] After his election, as before, Boggs did not hesitate to let it be known that

[p. 117]

any reports of misconduct, however exaggerated, would, if possible, be accepted as reliable. Such reports were accordingly circulated, and without much regard to truth. Right or wrong, law or no law, and whether in accord with the letter or spirit of the constitution or government of the United States or not, the people of Missouri had determined that they would go any length before they would allow the saints to obtain political ascendency in that quarter. It was well understood that war on the Mormons, war on their civil, political, and religious rights, nay, on their presence as members of the commonwealth, or if need be on their lives, was part of the policy of the administration.

    Thereupon the Mormons petitioned the legislature to assign them a place of residence, and the thinly populated region afterward known as Caldwell county was designated. Moving there, they bought the claims of most of the inhabitants, and entered several sections of government lands. Almost every member of the society thus became a landholder, some having eighty acres, and some forty. A town was laid out, called Far West, which was made the county seat; they were allowed to organize the government of the county, and to appoint from among their own people the officers. [*9] Again they found peace for a season, during which their numbers increased, while settlements were made in Daviess county, and elsewhere. [*10] Those in Daviess county were on terms of amity with their gentile neighbors. Wight was there, and when Smith and Rigdon arrived from the east they laid out a town named Diahman, [*11] which soon rivalled Gallatin, and gradually the

[p. 118]

people of Daviess, like the rest, began to war upon the Mormons. [*12]

    To add to the ever-thickening troubles of the prophet, a schism broke out in the church about this time, and there were apostates and deserters, some because of disappointed ambition, and some from shame of what they now regarded as a delusion, but all carrying away with them vindictive feelings toward their former associates, whom they did not hesitate to denounce as liars, thieves, counterfeiters, and everything that is vile. Among these were Joseph's old friends Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer, the three witnesses to the book of Mormon; Orson Hyde, Thomas B. Marsh, and W. W. Phelps also seceding. [*13]

[p. 119]

    At Far West on the 4th of July, 1838, assemble from the surrounding districts thousands of the saints, to lay the corner-stone of a temple of God, and to declare their rights as citizens of the commonwealth to safety and protection, as promised by the constitution. They are hated and despised, though they break not the laws of God; they are hunted down and killed, though they break not the laws of the land. To others their faith is odious, their words are odious, their persons and their actions are altogether detestable. They are not idlers, or drunkards, or thieves, or murderers; they are diligent in business as well as fervent in spirit, yet they are devils; they worship what they choose and in their own way, like the dissenters in Germany, the quakers in Pennsylvania, and the pilgrims from England, yet their spiritual father is Satan. And now, though thus marked for painful oppression by their fellow-citizens, they come together on the birthday of the nation to raise the banner of the nation, and under it to declare their solemn prerogative to the enjoyment of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, to the maintainance of which they stand ready to pledge their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor. This they do. They raise the pole of liberty; they unfold the banner of liberty; they register their vows. Is it all in irony? Is it all a mockery? Or is it the displeasure of omnipotence, which is now displayed because of the rank injustice wrought by the sons of belial under this sacred emblem? God knoweth. We know only that out of heaven conics fire, blasting the offering of the saints! [*14]

[p. 120]

    Sidney Rigdon delivered the oration on this occasion; and being an American citizen, and one of the founders of an American religion, it was perhaps natural for him to indulge in a little Fourth-of-July oratory; it was natural, but under the circumstances it was exceedingly impolitic. "We take God to witness," cries Sidney, "and the holy angels to witness this day, that we warn all men, in the name of Jesus Christ, to come on us no more forever. The man or the set of men who attempt it, do it at the expense of their lives; and that mob that comes on us to disturb us, there shall be between us and them a war of extermination, for we will follow them till the last drop of their blood is spilled, or else they will have to exterminate us; for we will carry the war to their own houses, and their own families, and one party or the other shall be utterly destroyed."

    On the 8th of July there was a revelation on tithing. Early in August a conference was held at Diahman, and a military company, called the Host of Israel, was organized after the manner of the priesthood, including all males of eighteen years and over. There were captains of ten, of fifty, and of a hundred; the organization included the entire military force of the church, as had the Kirtland army previously a part of it. [*15]

    At length the storm burst. The state election of 1838 was held in Daviess county at the town of Gallatin on the 6th of August. Soon after the polls were opened, William Peniston, candidate for the legislature, mounted a barrel and began to speak, attacking the Mormons with degrading epithets, calling them horse-thieves and robbers, and swearing they should not vote in that county. Samuel Brown, a Mormon, who stood by, pronounced the charges untrue, and said that for one he should vote. Immediately Brown was struck by one Weldin, whose arm, in attempting to repeat the blow, was caught by

[p. 121]

another Mormon, named Durfee. Thereupon eight or ten men, with clubs and stones, fell upon Durfee, whose friends rallied to his assistance, and the fight became general, but with indecisive results. The Mormons voted, however, and the rest of the day passed quietly.

Click to enlarge
THE WAR IN MISSOURI.

    On the next day two or three of Peniston's party, in order it was said to stir up the saints to violence, rode over to Far West, one after another, and reported

[p. 122]

a battle as having been fought at Gallatin, in which several of the fraternity were killed. Considerable excitement followed the announcement, and several parties went to Diahman to learn the truth of the matter. Ascertaining the facts, and being desirous of preventing further trouble, one of the brethren went to the magistrate, Adam Black, and proposed bonds on both sides to keep the peace. the proposition was accepted, Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight signing for the Mormons, and Black for the gentiles. The Mormons then returned to Far West; but the people of Daviess county, not approving the action of the magistrate, disputed Black's right to bind them; whereupon, to appease them, Black went to the circuit judge and obtained a writ for the arrest of Smith and Wight on a charge of having forced him, by threats of violence, to sign the agreement. Brought before Judge King at Gallatin, Smith and Wight were released on their own recognizances.

    Nevertheless the excitement increased. In Daviess and adjacent counties, three hundred gentiles met and armed. The Mormons say that the gentiles made prisoners, and shot and stole cattle, and the gentiles say that the Mormons did the same. [*16] Finally affairs became so alarming that Major-General Atchison concluded to call out the militia of Ray and Clay counties, under command of generals Doniphan and Parks, the latter being stationed in Daviess county. [*17] Their purposes in that quarter being thus defeated, the men of Missouri threw themselves on a small settlement of saints at Dewitt, where they were joined by a party with a six-pounder from Jackson county. Setting fire

[p. 123]

to the houses, they drove off the inmates and destroyed their property. General Parks then moved his troops to Dewitt, but found the mob too many for him. They openly defied him, would make no compromise, and swore "they would drive the Mormons from Daviess to Caldwell, and from Caldwell to hell." General Atchison then went to Dewitt and told the Mormons that his men were so disaffected [*18] that they had better apply for protection to Governor Boggs. This official returned answer that, as they had brought the war upon themselves, they must fight their own battles, and not look to him for help. Thereupon they abandoned the place, and fled to Far West.

    In order to intercept the mob General Doniphan entered Daviess county with two hundred men, and thence proceeded to Far West, where he camped for the night. In consultation with the civil and military officers of the place, who, though Mormons, were nevertheless commissioned by the state, Doniphan advised them to arm and march to Daviess county and defend their brethren there. Acting on this advice, all armed, some going to Daviess county and some remaining at Far West. [*19] The former were met by Parks, who inquired of them all particulars. Shortly afterward some families came in from beyond Grand River, who stated that they had been driven away and their houses burned by a party under C. Gilliam. [*20] Parks then ordered Colonel Wight, who held a commission under him as commander of the

[p. 124]

[paragraph continues] Mormon militia, to disperse the party, which was done, and the cannon in their possession seized, without firing a shot. Spreading into other counties, Gilliam's men raised everywhere the cry that the Mormons were killing people and burning property.

    Soon afterward the Mormon militia returned from Daviess county to Far West, where they learned that a large force under Samuel Bogart, a methodist clergyman, was plundering and burning houses south of that point, in Ray county, and had taken three men prisoners, one only of whom was a Mormon. Elias Higbee, county judge, ordered the Mormon militia under Captain Patten [*21] to retake the prisoners. In passing through a wood Patten came without knowing it upon the encampment of Bogart, whose guard fired without warning, killing one of Patten's men. Patten then attacked, routing Bogart's force, but not preventing the shooting of the Mormon prisoner, though he afterward recovered. In the charge one man was killed, and Patten and one other were mortally wounded. The company captured forty wagons. [*22]

    About this time arose the mysterious and much dreaded band that finally took the name of Danites, or sons of Dan, concerning which so much has been said while so little is known, some of the Mormons even denying its existence. But of this there is no question. Says Burton: "The Danite band, a name of fear in the Mississippi Valley, is said by anti-Mormons to consist of men between the ages of seventeen and forty-nine. They were originally termed Daughters of Gideon, Destroying Angels--the gentiles say devils--and, finally, Sons of Dan, or Danites, from one of whom was prophesied he should be a serpent in the path. They were organized about 1837 under

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] D. W. Patten, popularly called Captain Fearnot, for the purpose of dealing as avengers of blood with gentiles; in fact, they formed a kind of death society, desperadoes, thugs, hashshashiyun--in plain English, assassins in the name of the Lord. The Mormons declare categorically the whole and every particular to be the calumnious invention of the impostor and arch apostate, Mr John C. Bennett." [*23]

    John Hyde, a seceder, states that the Danite band, or the United Brothers of Gideon, was organized on the 4th of July, 1838, and was placed under the command of the apostle David Patten, who for the purpose assumed the name of Captain Fearnot. [*24]

[p. 126]

    It is the opinion of some that the Danite band, or Destroying Angels as again they are called, was organized at the recommendation of the governor of Missouri as a means of self-defense against persecutions in that state. [*25] Thomas B. Marsh, late president of the twelve apostles, and president of the church at Far West, but now a dissenter, having "abandoned the faith of the Mormons from a conviction of their immorality and impiety," testifies that in October, 1838, they "had a meeting at Far West, at which they appointed a company of twelve, by the name of the Destruction Company, for the purpose of burning and destroying." [*26]

    The apostate Bennett gives a number of names by which the same society, or divisions of it, were known, such as Daughter of Zion, Big Fan, [*27] "inasmuch as it fanned out the chaff from the wheat," Brother of Gideon, Destructive, Flying Angel. The explanation of Joseph, the prophet, was that one Doctor Sampson Arvard, who after being a short time in the church, in order to add to his importance and influence secretly initiated the order of Danites, and held meetings

[p. 127]

organizing his men into companies of tens and fifties, with captains. Then he called the officers together and told them that they were to go forth and spoil the gentiles; but they rejected the proposal, and Arvard was cut off from the church. All the present leaders of the Mormon church deny emphatically the existence of any such band or society as a part of or having anything to do with their organization. [*28]

[p. 128]

    Meanwhile was being matured the bloody tragedy which occurred on the 30th of October near Haun's [*29] mill, on Shoal creek, about twenty miles below Far West. Besides the Mormons living there, were a number of emigrants awaiting the cessation of hostilities before proceeding on their journey. It had been agreed between the Mormons and Missourians of that locality that they would not molest each other, but live together in peace. But the men of Caldwell and Daviess counties would not have it so. Suddenly and without warning, on the day above mentioned, mounted and to the number of two hundred and forty, they fell upon the fated settlement. While the men were at their work out of doors, the women in the house, and the children playing about the yards, the crack of a hundred rifles was heard, and before the firing ceased, eighteen of these unoffending people were stretched dead upon the ground, while many more were wounded. I will not enter upon the sickening details, which are copious and fully proven; suffice it to say, that never in savage or other warfare was there perpetrated an act more dastardly and brutal. [*30] Indeed, it was openly avowed by the men of Missouri that it was no worse to shoot a Mormon than to shoot an Indian, and killing Indians was no worse than killing wild beasts.

    A somewhat singular turn affairs take at this juncture. It appears that Boggs, governor, and sworn enemy of the saints, does not like the way the war is going on. Here are his own soldiers fighting his own voters, the state forces killing the men who have put

[p. 129]

him in office! This will not do. There is bad blundering somewhere. It is the Mormons only that are to be killed and driven off, and not the free and loyal American Boggs voters. Ho, there! Let the state arms be turned against these damned saints! On what pretext? Any. Say that they are robbing, and burning, and killing right and left, and that they swear they will never stop until they have the country. Easy enough. No doubt they do kill and burn; the men of Missouri are killing them and burning; why should they not retaliate? No doubt there are thieves and bad men among them, who take advantage of the time to practise their vile calling. No doubt there are violent men among them, who swear roundly at those who are hunting them to death, who swear that they will drive them off their lands and kill them if they can. But this does not make insurrectionists and traitors of the whole society. No matter; down with the Mormons! And so Boggs, the governor, seats himself and coolly writes off to his generals to drive out or exterminate the vermin. [*31]

[p. 130]

    Thus it appears that the Missouri state militia, called out in the first instance to assist the Mormon state militia in quelling a Missouri mob, finally joins the mob against the Mormon militia. In none of their acts had the saints placed themselves in an attitude of unlawful opposition to the state authorities; on the other hand, they were doing all in their power to defend themselves and support law and order, save in the matter of retaliation.

    The first the saints of Caldwell county know of the new tactics is the appearance, within half a mile of Far West, [*32] of three thousand armed men, under General Lucas, generals Wilson and Doniphan being present, and General Clark with another army being a few days' march distant. General Lucas states that the main business there is to obtain possession of three individuals, whom he names, two of them not Mormons; and for the rest he has only to inform the saints that it is his painful duty either wholly to drive them from the state or to exterminate them. [*33] Gilliam and his comrades, who as disguised Indians and white men had been fighting the Mormons, now that the state espouses their cause, join Lucas. [*34] General Atchison was at Richmond, in Ray county, when the governor's exterminating order was issued. "I will have nothing to do with so infamous a proceeding," he said, and immediately resigned.

[p. 131]

    The day following his arrival General Lucas orders George M. Hinckle, colonel commanding the Mormon militia, to bring before him Joseph Smith, junior, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRae, which is done, though not without charge of fraud and treachery on the part of Hinckle. A court-martial is immediately held; the prisoners are all condemned, and sentenced to be shot next morning at eight o'clock. "In the name of humanity I protest against any such cold-blooded murder," says General Doniphan who further threatens to withdraw his men if such a course is persisted in; whereupon the sentence is not executed. All the Mormon troops in Far West, however, are required to give up their arms and consider themselves prisoners of war. [*35] They are further required to execute a deed of trust pledging all Mormon property to the payment of the entire cost of the war, and to give a promise to leave the state before the coming spring.

    Thus in the name of law and justice the Mormon soldiery, whose chief crime it would seem was that, in common with the rest of the militia, they had assisted

[p. 132]

the state in putting down a mob, were forced at the point of the bayonet to sign an obligation, binding not only themselves but the civilians within their settlements to defray the entire expense of the war. This proceeding was sufficiently peculiar; but, as a climax to their conduct, some of the officers and men laid hands on the Mormons' property wherever they could find it, taking no thought of payment.

    General Clark [*36] now comes forward, and entering the town of Far West, collects the saints in the public square, reads them a lecture, [*37] and selecting fifty of their number, thrusts them into prison. Next day forty-six of the fifty are taken to Richmond, [*38] and after a fortnight's confinement half are liberated, [*39]

[p. 133]

most of the remainder being set free a week later on giving bail. Lucas [*40] then retires with his troops, leaving the country to be ravaged by armed squads that burn houses, insult women, and drive off stock ad libitum. [*41] The faint pretext of justice on the part of the state, attending forced sales and forced settlements, might as well have been dispensed with, as it was but a cloak to cover official iniquity. [*42]

[p. 134]

    It did not seem possible to a community convicted of no crime, and living in the nineteenth century, under the flag of the world's foremost republic, that such flagrant wrongs as the Boggs exterminating order, and the enforced treaty under which they were deprived of their property, could be carried into effect. They appealed, therefore, to the legislature, [*43] demanding justice. But that body was too much with the people and with Boggs to think of justice. To make a show of decency, a committee was appointed and sent to Caldwell and Daviess counties, to look into the matter, but of course did nothing. Another was appointed with like result. Debates continued with more or less show of interest through the month of December. In January, 1839, the Mormons were plainly told that they need expect no redress at the hand of the legislature or other body of Missouri.

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] There was no help for them; they must leave the state or be killed; of this they were assured on all sides, publicly and privately.

    And now begins another painful march--painful in the thought of it, painful in the telling of it. It is midwinter; whither can they go, and how? They have homes, but they may not enjoy them; land which they have bought, houses which they have built, and barns and cattle and food, but hereabout they are hunted to death. Is it Russia or Tartary or Hindostan, that people are thus forced to fly for opinion's sake? True, the people of the United States do not like such opinions; they do not like a religious sect that votes solid, or a class of men whom they look upon as fools and fanatics talking about taking the country, claimed as theirs by divine right; but in any event this was no way to settle the difficulty. Here are men who have been stripped in a moment of the results of years of toil--all that they have in the world gone; here are women weighed down with work and care, some whose husbands are in prison, and who are thus left to bear the heavy burden of this infliction alone; here are little children, some comfortably clad, others obliged to encounter the wind and frozen ground with bare heads and bleeding feet.

    Whither can they go? There is a small following of the prophet at Quincy, Illinois; some propose to go there, some start for other places. But what if they are not welcome at Quincy, and what can they do with such a multitude? There is no help for it, however, no other spot where the outcasts can hope for refuge at the moment. Some have horses and cattle and wagons; some have none. Some have tents and bedding; some have none. But the start is made, and the march is slowly to the eastward. In the months of February and March [*44]

[p. 136]

over one hundred and thirty families are on the west bank of the Mississippi unable to cross the river, which is full of floating ice. There they wait and suffer; they scour the country for food and clothing for the destitute; many sicken and die.

    Finally they reach Quincy, and are kindly received. Not only the saints but others are there who have human hearts and human sympathies. Indeed, upon the expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri the

Click to enlarge
SETTLEMENTS IN ILLINOIS.

people of Illinois took a stand in their favor. The citizens of Quincy, in particular, offered their warmest sympathy and aid, on the ground of humanity. A select committee, appointed to ascertain the facts in the case, reported, on the 27th of February, 1839, "that the

[p. 137]

strangers recently arrived here from the state of Missouri, known by the name of latter-day saints, are entitled to our sympathy and kindest regard." The working-men of the town should be informed "that these people have no design to lower the wages of the laboring class, but to procure something to save them from starving." Finally it was resolved: "That we recommend to all the citizens of Quincy, in all their intercourse with the strangers, that they use and observe a becoming decorum and delicacy, and be particularly careful not to indulge in any conversation or expressions calculated to wound their feelings, or in any way to reflect upon those who, by every law of humanity, are entitled to our sympathy and commiseration." [*45]

    How in regard to neighboring states? In case the people of Illinois soon tire of them, what will they then do? From Commerce, Isaac Galland writes to Robert Lucas, governor of Iowa, asking about it. The answer is such as one would expect from the average American citizen--neither better nor worse. It is such, however, as to condemn throughout all time the conduct of the people of Missouri. [*46]

[p. 138]

    During these trying times the prophet was moving about among his people, doing everything in his power to protect and encourage thorn. Late in September he was in the southern part of Caldwell county, whence in October he passed into Carroll county, where he soon found himself hemmed in by an enraged populace. He appealed to the people, he applied to the governor, but all to no purpose. Afterward he went to Daviess county, and then back to Far West, where he was arrested and incarcerated with the others. Shortly afterward the prisoners, now

[p. 139]

consisting of the prophet Joseph Smith, with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Amass Lyman, and George W. Robinson, were removed to Independence; why they did not know, but because it was the hot-bed of mobocracy, they said, and peradventure they might luckily be shot or hanged. A few days later they were taken to Richmond and put in irons, and later to Liberty jail in Clay county, where they were kept confined for four months. Habeas corpus was tried, and many petitions were forwarded to the authorities on their behalf, but all to no purpose. At length they obtained a hearing in the courts, with a change of venue to Boone county where they were still to be incarcerated. Rigdon had been previously released on habeas corpus, and one night, when the guard was asleep, Smith and the others escaped and made their way to Quincy.

    "I was in their hands as a prisoner," says Smith, "about six months; but notwithstanding their determination to destroy me, with the rest of my brethren who were with me, and although at three different times we were sentenced to be shot without the least shadow of law, and had the time and place appointed for that purpose, yet through the mercy of God, in answer to the prayers of the saints, I have been preserved, and delivered out of their hands." [*47]

[p. 140]

    Notwithstanding their enormous losses, and the extreme indigence of many, the saints were not all as destitute of credit as they were of ready means, if we may judge by their business transacted during the year 1839. Bishop Knight bought for the church part of the town of Keokuk, Iowa, situated on the west bank of the Mississippi, forty miles above Quincy, Illinois. He also purchased the whole of another town-site called Nashville, six miles above Keokuk. Four miles above Nashville was a settlement called Montrose, part of which Knight bought, together with thirty thousand acres of land. [*48]

    Opposite Montrose, on the east bank of the Mississippi where was a good landing, stood a village

[p. 141]

called Commerce, where were some twenty houses. This was purchased by the saints, with the lands surrounding, and a town laid out which was named Nauvoo, "from the Hebrew, which signifies fair, very beautiful, and it actually fills the definition of the word; for nature has not formed a parallel on the banks of the Mississippi from New Orleans to Galena." The post-office there was first called Commerce, after the Mormons had purchased the village, but the name was changed to that of Nauvoo in May, 1840. [*49] The place was started by a company from New York, but it was so sickly that when the agent for the Mormons came they were glad to sell. The Mormons drained it and made the place comparatively healthy.

    On his escape from prison, Smith visited Commerce among other places, and seeing at once the advantages of its site, determined to establish there the headquarters of the church. For so great had his power now become, so extensive his following, that he might choose any spot whereon to call into existence a city, had but to point his finger and say the word to transform a wilderness into a garden. During the winter of 1840 the church leaders applied to the legislature of Illinois for several charters, one for the city of Nauvoo, one for agricultural and manufacturing purposes, one for a university, and one for a military body called the Nauvoo Legion. The privileges asked were very extensive, but were readily granted; for the two great political parties were pretty equal in numbers in Illinois at this time, and the leaders of the party in office, perceiving what a political power these people were, determined to secure them.

[p. 142]

    There were now saints everywhere, all over the United States, particularly throughout the western portion; there were isolated believers, and small clusters, and small and great congregations. There were also many travelling preachers, men full of the holy ghost, or believing themselves so, who travelled without purse or scrip, whom no buffetings, insults, hunger, or blows could daunt, who feared nothing that man could do, heaven's door being always open to them. See now the effects of these persecutions in Missouri. Twelve thousand were driven from their homes and set moving by Boggs and his generals; three fourths of them found new homes at Quincy, Nauvoo, and elsewhere; but three thousand, who, but for the persecutions, would have remained at home and tilled their lands, were preaching and proselyting, making new converts and establishing new churches wherever they went. One of their number, William Smith, was a member of the Illinois legislature. In the very midst of the war they were preaching in Jackson county, among their old enemies and spoilers, striving with all their souls to win back their Zion, their New Jerusalem. From New York, February 19, 1840, Brigham Young, H. C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, and Parley P. Pratt indited a letter to the saints at Commerce, speaking of the wonderful progress of the faith, and of their own intended departure for England. [*50]

    Thus, despite persecution, the saints increased in number year by year. Before the end of 1840 there were fifteen thousand souls at Nauvoo, men, women, and children, not all of them exiles from Missouri, but from every quarter, old believers and new converts from different parts of the United States, from Canada, and from Europe; hither came they to the city of their God, to the mountain of his holiness.

Footnotes

^111:1 They were printed and bound in Doctrine and Covenants. See Hyde's Mormonism, 202; Remy's Journey, 504; Pratt's Auobiography, 139. Mather, in Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880, states that the twelve apostles started in May.

^112:2 'A square mile was laid out in half-acre lots, and a number of farms were bought, the church farm being half a mile down one of the most beautiful valleys which it is possible to conceive in a range of country so uniformly level.' Mather, in Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880. In May 1833 it was revealed that building should begin. Two houses 55 by 65 feet each were ordered, one for the presidency, the other for printing. Hyrum Smith and two others were presented with lots, and directions were sent to the faithful to subscribe money to aid in building a temple at Kirtland. Times and Seasons, vi. 769-70. Before its completion, private assemblies were held at the houses of the faithful, frequently at Smith's. When partly finished, schools were opened in several of the apartments. It was begun in June 1833, and dedicated March 27, 1836. A brief dcscription of the building, arrangement of interior, etc., and a full account of the dedication and ordinary services are given in Tullidge's Women; 76, 80-95, 99-101. Daniel Tyler, in Juvenile Intructor, xiv. 283; Busch, Gesch. der Morm., 74; Kidder's Mormonism, 124-6. Probably but little work was done on it in 1833, for about the front entrances the gilded inscription, 'Built by the church of Jesus Christ, 1834,' still shines bright as ever. Salt Lake Herald, June 6, 1877. See also Smith's account in Times and Seasons, vi. 708-11, 723-6, and Remy's Journey, i. 302-4. For cuts of building, see Young's Hist. of the Seventies, 8; Juvenile Instructor, xiv. 283; Pratt's Autobiog., 140. When nearly finished there was a debt on the building of from $15,000 to $20,000. Kidder's Mormonism, 124-6. Most of the workmen were dependent upon their labor for their daily food, which often consisted of corn meal alone, and that had been donated. Juvenile Instructor, 283. Writing in 1880, Mather says: 'The residences of Smith and Rigdon are almost under the eaves of the temple, and the theological seminary is now occupied by the methodists for a church.' Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880.

^113:3 'They also suffered jealousies to arise among them, and several persons dissented from the church, and accused the leaders of the church with bad management, selfishness, etc...On the other hand, the leaders of the church accused the dissenters with dishonesty, want of faith and righteousness,...and this strife or opposition arose to a great height, until Smith and Rigdon were obliged to leave Kirtland.' Corrill, in Kidder's Mormonism, 126-7. 'Subsequently they had a revelation,' another says, 'commanding them to establish a bank, which should swallow up all other banks. This was soon got into operation on a pretended capital of four millions of dollars, made up of real estate round about the temple.' John Hyde, Mormonism, 201, says that the bank, a store, and. mill were started in Aug. 1831. Before me is one of their bills, dated Jan. 17, 1837, payable to C. Scott, or bearer. Mather says, Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880: 'Richard Hilliard, a leading merchant of Cleveland, received their bills for a few days, and then took possession of all their available assets. They were also in debt for their farms, and for goods bought in New York. The bubble burst, and many in the vicinity of Kirtland were among the sufferers. Smith and Rigdon fled to Far West, after having been tarred and feathered for their peculiar theories of finance.' 'Chauneey G. Webb (father of Ann Eliza Young) assisted in founding this bank, giving Smith all he possessed outside of his house and simp toward completing the amount necessary for a capital on which to start the new enterprise. With the failure of the bank Webb lost everything.' Young's Wife No. 19, 33, 40-41; see account of formation of bank in Bennett's Mormonism, 135-6. 'Smith had a sort of bank issue on what was then called the wild-cat principle. His circulating medium had no redeeming basis, and was worthless in the hands of the people.' Tucker's Mormonism, 154-5. 'Smith had a revelation from the Lord, to the effect that his bank would be a pattern of all the banks in the United States, that it would speedily break, and that all the rest would follow the example. The bank was closed the same day.' Hall's Mormonism, 19. The bank failed in Nov. 1837. Remy's Journey, i. 504; Busch, Gesch. der Morm., 84. 'By means of great activity and an actual capital of about $5,000, they succeeded in setting afloat from $50,000 to $100,000. the concern was closed up after [p. 114] flourishing 3 or 4 weeks.' Kidder's Mormonism, 128. The building is now occupied by a private family. Salt Lake S. W. Herald, June 6, 1877. 'In order to pay the debt on the temple, they concluded to try mercantile business, and ran in debt in New York and elsewhere some $30,000 for goods, and shortly after, $50,000 or $60,000 more. In consequence of their ignorance of business and extravagance, the scheme proved a failure.' Kidder's Mormonism, 126, 128; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 76. 'Gilbert and Whitney's store is still used for original purposes.' Salt Lake Herald, June 6, 1877. 'A poorly furnished country store, where commerce looks starvation in the face.' Id., Nov. 17, 1877. 'Smith's store was seized and goods sold in Nov. 1839.' Hyde's Mormonism, 203; Bennett's Mormonism, 135. They also spent some thousands of dollars in building a steam-mill, which never profiled them anything. Kidder's Mormonism, 126. 'The skeleton of a superannuated engine and its contrivances half buried in a heap of ashes--the shed that covered it having recently burned to the ground--marks the spot where stood the ashery and its successor, the Mormon saw-mill, at the foot of Temple hill.' Salt Lake Herald, Nov. 17, 1877. Heber C. Kimball, who went to Nauvoo in 1839, built a pottery at Kirtland, the ruins of which were to be seen in 1877. Ibid. 'After the temple was dedicated, the Kirtland high school was taught in the attic story by H. M. Hawes, prof. of Greek and Latin. There were from 130 to 140 students, divided into three departments--the classic, where only languages were taught; the English, where mathematics, common arithmetic, geography, English grammar, and reading and writing were taught; and the juvenile department. The last two departments were under assistant instructors. The school was begun in Nov. 1836.' Tullidge's Women, 99. 'On the 3d floor are a succession of small rooms containing crippled benches, blackboards, ruined walls, and other paraphernalia, which indicated that at some period of the temple's history this part had been used as a primary school.' Salt Lake S. W. Herald, June 6, 1877. A Hebrew professorship is also mentioned. Remy's Journey, i. 504. 'Immediately after the closing of the bank, and before the news of its failure had time to spread, Smith with some 4 or 5 terriers (understrappers in the priesthood) went to Toronto, Canada, where he preached, whilst his followers circulated the worthless notes of the defunct bank. Brigham Young also succeeded in spreading about $10,000 of the paper through several states.' Hall's Mormonism, 19-20. 'In January 1838 Smith and Rigdon, being at Kirtland together, were both arrested on charges of swindling in connection with their worthless paper bank,' etc. 'The prisoners, however, escaped from the sheriff in the night and made their way on horseback to Missouri.' Tucker's Mormonism, 155-6. Smith and Rigdon ran away on the night of Jan. 12, 1838. Hyde's Mormonism, 203. 'A new year dawned upon the church at Kirtland,' writes Smith, 'in all the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy, which continued to rage anti grow hotter and hotter, until Elder Rigdon and myself were obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the apostles and prophets of old, anti as Jesus said, "When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another;" and on the evening of the 12th of January, about ten o'clock, we left Kirtland on horseback to escape mob violence, which was about to burst upon us, under the color of legal process to cover their hellish designs and save themselves from the just judgment of the law.'

^115:4 It consisted of 4,000 copies. The author states that 'it has since been published and republished in America and Europe, till some 40,000 or 50,000 copies have not been sufficient resupply the demand.' Pratt's Autobiography, 184.

^115:5 Most of these fled into Clay co., where they were received with some degree of kindness, and encamped on the banks of the Missouri. Those who went into Van Buren and Lafayette counties were soon expelled, and had to move. Pratt's Persecution, 51; Mackay's Mormons, 78; Times and Seasons, vi. 913. The Missouri River bends to the east as it enters the state, and runs in a generally east direction through the western counties. Jackson co. is immediately south of Clay--the river being the dividing line--and Van Buren lies next south of Jackson. All west of the state line was Indian territory, as I have said. See map, p. 121 this vol.

^115:6 The Jackson co. exiles being in a destitute condition, a conference was [p. 116] held at P. P. Pratt's house in Clay co. some time during the winter of 1833-4--date not given), at which it was resolved to appeal to Smith, at Kirtland, for aid and counsel; and P. P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, having volunteered their services, were despatched with the message. Starting from Liberty on Feb. 1, 1834, on horseback, but penniless, on a journey of from 1,080 to 1,500 miles through a country but partially settled, they arrives at their destination early in the spring with plenty of money received from friends along their route. Pratt's Autobiog., 114-161; Utah Pioneers, 33d Aniversary, 17; Horne's Migrations, MS., 3; Young's Woman's Experiences, MS., 2.

^116:7 'From threats, public meetings were called, resolutions were passed, vengeance and destruction were threatened, and affairs again assumed a fearful attitude.' Cor. Joseph Smith, etc., 5. See also Greene's Facts, 12. 'A meeting of the citizens was held at Liberty on the 29th of June, 1836, in which these matters were taken into consideration. The Mormons were reminded of the circumstances under which they were received, and requested to leave, time being given them to harvest their crops and dispose of their property. Fortunately for all concerned, the saints...agreed to leave on the terms proposed, denying strenuously that they had ever tampered with the slaves, or had any idea of exciting an Indian war.' Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 82-3.

^116:8 These officers 'all very readily received their commissions from their accomplice, Gov. Boggs; and thus corruption, rebellion, and conspiracy had spread on every side, being fostered and encouraged by a large majority of the state; and thus treason became general.' Pratt's Persecution, 55-6.

^117:9 John Hyde, Mormonism, 203, says that on their arrival in Missouri, Smith and Rigdon began 'to scatter the saints in order to obtain political ascendency in other counties.'

^117:10 Of the officers then appointed, two of the judges, thirteen magistrates, all the military officers, and the county clerk were Mormons. 'These steps were taken, be it carefully observed, by the advice of the state legislature, and the officers were appointed in the manner directed by law.' Greene's Facts, 18. The gentiles murmur because of their being under Mormon rule. Hyde's Mormonism, 203.

^117:11 'Smith gave it the name of Adamondiamon, which he said was formerly [p. 118] given to a certain valley where Adam, previous to his death, called his children together and blessed them.' Corrill's Brief History, in Kidder's Mormonism, 131. 'The earth was divided,' says Mr Richards, 'all the land being together and all the water. Adam dwelt there with his people for some time previous to his death. Adam constructed an altar there, and it was there that he bestowed his final blessings upon his descendants.' The place was also called Adam-On-Diahman, Adam-on-di-ahman, and again Diahman. The second of these names appears to have been the one in use among the saints. After the foundations of the temple at Far West were relaid, between midnight of the 25th and dawn of the 26th of April, 1839, the quorum sang the song which they called Adam-on-di-ahman. Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young.

^118:12 They were afraid the Mormons would 'rule the county, and they did not like to live under the laws and administration of Jo Smith.' Ibid.

^118:13 The first three were themselves accused of counterfeiting coin, and defaming Smith's character; and others charged Smith with 'being accessory to several murders and many thefts, and of designing to rule that part of the state of Missouri, and eventually the whole republic.' Hyde's Mormonism, 204; Mackay's The Mormons, 86. 'At Independence, Rigdon publicly charged Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer with being connected with a gang of counterfeiters, etc. Cowdery was afterward arraigned before the church, and found guilty of "disgracing the church by being connected with the bogus business, as common report says."' Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 158-9. 'Brother Turley could not be surpassed at "bogus." A press was prepared, and the money, composed of zinc, glass, etc., coated with silver, was executed in the best style. Imitations both of gold and silver were in general circulation and very difficult to detect. In fact, for a time, scarcely any other circulating medium was to be found among them.' When leaving Illinois for Council Bluffs, Hall carried in his wagon for some distance on the way a bogus press, which was afterwards sold on credit in Missouri, but the seller never got his money, being afraid to go for it. Hall's Mor., 20-1. Hall, who was a Mormon from 1840 to 1847, mentions this counterfeiting in connection with the Kirtland bank swindle, but does not state when the work was begun. It may have originated in Kirtland, but probably was not carried on to any great extent before the migration to Illinois. These rambling and general charges should be received with every allowance. 'From some [p. 119] distant bank,' continued Hall, 'they would buy quantities of its unsigned bank notes, which they took home, and after having them signed by competent artists, placed in circulation. In procuring these bills, no persons met. the package would be left by a window of the bank, with a pane out, and the package taken and its price left by the purchaser.'

^119:14 'In a day or two after these transactions, the thunder rolled in awful majesty over the city of Far West, and the arrows of lightning fell from the clouds, and shivered the liberty pole from top to bottom; thus manifesting to many that there was an end to liberty and law in that state, and that our little city strove in vain to maintain the liberties of a country which was ruled by wickedness and rebellion.' Pratt's Persecution, 57.

^120:15 'Every man obeyed the call.' Lee's Mormonism, 57.

^122:16 In Daviess county the saints killed between 100 and 200 hogs and a number of cattle, took at least forty or fifty stands of honey, and at the same time destroyed several fields of corn. The word was out that the Lord had consecrated through the bishop the spoils unto his host. Harris' Mormonism Portrayed, 30-1.

^122:17 'One thousand men were then ordered into service under the command of Major-General Atchison and brigadier-generals Parks and Doniphan. These marched to Daviess co., and remained in service thirty days. But judging from the result, they had no intention of coming in contact with the mob, but only to make a show of defending one neighborhood while the mob was allowed to attack another.' Pratt's Autobiography, 191.

^123:18 'At length the general (Atchison) informed the citizens that his forces were so small, and many of them so much in favor of the insurrectionists, that it was useless to look any longer to theta for protection...After the evacuation of Dewitt, when our citizens were officially notified that they must protect themselves, they assembled in Far West to the number of one thousand men, or thereabout, and resolved to defend their rights to the last.' Pratt's Autobiography, 192-3.

^123:19 'The Mormons in Caldwell were the regular state militia for that county, and were at the time acting under the legal authorities of the county.' Greene's Facts, 20.

^123:20 'A noted company of banditti, under the command of Cornelius Gilliam, who had long infested our borders and been notorious for their murders and daring robberies anti who painted themselves as Indian warriors, came pouring in from the west to strengthen the camp of the enemy.' Pratt's Autobiography, 202.

^124:21 Pratt, Persecution, 68, says that the detachment was under the command of Captain Durphey, aided by Patten.

^124:22 'The enemy had left their horses, saddles, camp, and baggage in the confusion of their flight, which fell into our hands.' Pratt's Persecutions, 72. 'We delivered the horses and spoils of the enemy to Col. Hinckle, the commanding officer of the regiment.' Id., 74.

^125:23 John Corrill says that some time in June a secret society was formed of a few individuals who should be agreed in all things, and stand by each other, right or wrong, under all circumstances. Next to God was the first presidency; and they bound themselves by the most solemn covenants before the almighty that the presidency should be obeyed. 'Who started this society I know not,' writes Corrill; 'but Doctor Samson Arvard was the most prominent leader and instructor, and was assisted by others. The first presidency did not seem to have much to do with it,...but I thought they stood as wire-workers behind the curtain.' 'Arvard was very forward and indefatigable in accomplishing their purposes, for he devoted his whole talents to it, and spared no pains; and, I thought, was as grand a villain as his wit and ability would admit of...They ran into awful extremes,' seeming to think that they were called upon to execute the judgments of God on all their enemies. 'Dr Arvard received orders from Smith, Rigdon, and company to destroy the paper containing the constitution of the Danite society, as, if it should be discovered, it would be considered treasonable. He did not, however, obey the orders, but after he was made prisoner he handed it to General Clark.' Kidder's Mormonism, 143. The constitution is published in Bennett's Mormonism Exposed, 265. 'The oath by which the Danites were bound in Missouri was altered in a secret council of the inquisition at Nauvoo so as to read: "In the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, I do solemnly obligate myself ever to regard the prophet and first presidency of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, as the supreme head of the church on earth and to obey them in all things the same as the supreme God; that I will stand by my brethren in danger or difficulty, and will uphold the presidency, right or wrong; and that I will ever conceal, and never reveal, the secret purposes of this society, called the Daughter of Zion. Should I ever do the same, I hold my life as the forfeiture, in a caldron of boiling oil."' Id., 267. The origin of the name Daughter of Zion may be found in Micah iv. 13.

^125:24 Hyde's Mormonism, 104. In Id., 104-5, Hyde writes as follows: 'When the citizens of Carroll and Daviess counties, Mo., began to threaten the Mormons with expulsion in 1838, a death society was organized under the direction of Sidney Rigdon, and with the sanction of Smith. Its first captain was Captain Fearnot, alias David Patten an apostle. Its object was the punishment of the obnoxious. Some time elapsed before finding a suitable name. They desired one that should seem to combine spiritual authority with a suitable stored. Micah iv. 13, furnished the first name. "Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion! for I will make thy horn iron, and thy hoofs brass; and thou shall beat in pieces many people; and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth." This furnished them with [p. 126] a pretext; it accurately described their intentions, and they called themselves the Daughters of Zion. Some ridicule was made at these bearded and bloody daughters, and the name did not sit easily. Destroying Angels came next; the Big Fan of the thresher that should thoroughly purge the floor was tried and dropped. Genesis, xlix. 17, furnished the name that they finally assumed. The verse is quite significant: "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse's heels, so that his rider shall fall backward." The sons of Dan was the style they adopted; and many have been the times that they have been adders in the path, and many a man has fallen backward, and has been seen no more.'

^126:25 See Smucker's Hist. Mor., 108.

^126:26 'The members of this order were placed under the most sacred obligations that language could invent...to stand by each other unto death, to sustain, protect, defend, and obey the leaders of the church under any and all circumstances unto death.' To divulge a Danite secret was death. There were signs and tokens, the refusal to respect which was death. 'This signs or token of distress is made by placing the right hand on the right side of the face, with the points of the fingers upwards, shoving the hand upwards until the ear is snug up between the thumb and forefinger.' Lee's Mormonism, 57-8.

^126:27 'The society was instituted for the purpose of driving out from the holy land, their earthly paradise, in Missouri, all apostates or dissenters...They make no scruple whatever to commit perjury, when deemed requisite for the welfare of their church...The number of Danites is now, 1842, about 2,000 or 2,500. From the elite of the Danites, or Daughters of Zion, twelve men are selected, who are called Destructives, or Destroying Angels, or Flying Angels.' Mormonism Exposed, 265-9.

^127:28 'It was intended to enable him,' Smith, 'more effectually to execute his clandestine purposes.' '"Milking the gentiles" is a kind of vernacular term of the Mormons, and signifies the obtaining of money or property from these who are not members of the Mormon church.' Id., 272-8. 'In an examination before Judge King Samuel (Samson?) Arvard testified that the first object of the Danite band was to drive from the county of Caldwell all those who dissented from the Mormon church, in which they succeeded admirably...The prophet Joseph Smith, Jr, together with his two counsellors Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, were considered the supreme head of the church, and the Danite band felt themselves as much bound to obey them as to obey the supreme God.' John Corrill swore: 'I think the original object of the Danite band was to operate on the dissenters; but afterwards it grew into a system to carry out the designs of the presidency, and if it was necessary, to use physical force to uphold the kingdom of God.' John Cleminson said: 'Whoever opposed the presidency in what they said or desired done should be expelled the county or have their lives taken.' Wm W. Phelps, for a season an apostate, testified: 'If any person spoke against the presidency they would hand him over to the hands of the Brothers of Gideon.' 'The object of the meeting seemed to be to make persons confess and repent of their sins to God and the presidency.' 'Wight asked Smith, Jr, twice if it had come to the point now to resist the laws. Smith replied the time had come when he should resist all law.' Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 92-3. Arvard 'swore false concerning a constitution, as he said, that was introduced among the Danites, and made many other lying statements in connection therewith.' Mem. to Leg., in Greene's Facts, 32-3. Says John Corrill in his Brief History, 'A company, called the Fur Company, was raised for the purpose of procuring provisions, for pressing teams, and even men sometimes, into the army in Caldwell.' Reed Peck testified that small companies were sent out on various plundering expeditions; that he 'saw one of these companies on its return. It was called a fur company. Some had one thing, some another; one had a feather-bed; another some spun yarn, etc. This fur they were to take to the bishop's store, where it was to be deposited, and if they failed to do this it would be considered stealing.' Kidder's Mormonism, 147-8. Affidavit of the city council, Nauvoo: 'We do further testify that there is no such thing as a Danite society in this city, nor any combination other than the Masonic of which we have any knowledge.' Signed by Wilson Law, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and 10 others. Millennial Star, xix. 614. References to authorities speaking of the Danites: Mackay's The Mormons, 89-90, 116; Lee's Mormonism, 57-8, 156-60; Olshausen, Gesch. d. Morm., 48; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 89; Beadle's Life in Utah, 389-90; Burton's City of the Saints, 359; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 108-9; Young's Wife No 19, 47-8, 268; Busch, Gesch. der Morm., 87; Marshall's Through Am., 215-16; Hyde's Mormonism, 104-5; Bennett's Mormonism Exposed, 263-72; Miller's First Families, 64-5; Hickman's Brigham's Destroying Angel; Hall's Mormonism, 94-5; E. M. Webb, in Utah County Sketches, MS., 49-50, the last named referring to the rules and principles of the order of Enoch.

^128:29 Spelled also Hahn, Hohn, Hawn.

^128:30 'Immediately after this, there came into the city a messenger from Haun's mill, bringing the intelligence of an awful massacre of the people who were residing in that place, and that a force of two or three hundred, detached from the main body of the army, under the superior command of Col. Ashley, but under the immediate command of Capt. Nehemiah Compstock, who, the day previous, had promised them peace and protection, but on receiving a copy of the governor's order to exterminate or to expel, from the hands of Col. Ashley, he returned upon them the following day, and surprised and massacred the whole population, and then came on to the town of Far West, and entered into conjunction with the main body of the army.' Mackay's The Mormons, 88-9.

^129:31 Several of them write to Boggs: 'There is no crime, from treason down to petit larceny, but these people, or a majority of them, have been guilty of; all, too, under the counsel of Joseph Smith, Jr, the prophet. They have committed treason, murder, arson, burglary, robbery, larceny, and perjury. They have societies formed under the most binding covenants in form, and the most horrid oaths, to circumvent the laws and put them at defiance; and to plunder and burn and murder, and divide the spoils for the use of the church.' Tucker's Mormonism, 164.

    And thus Boggs makes answer, Oct. 27th: 'Since the order of the morning to you directing you to cause four hundred mounted men to be raised within your division, I have received by Amos Rees, Esq., and Wiley E. Williams, Esq., one of my aids, information of the most appalling character, which changes entirely the face of things, and places the Mormons in the attitude of an open and avowed defiance of the laws, and of having made open war upon the people of this state. Your orders are therefore to hasten your operations, and endeavor to reach Richmond in Pray county, with all possible speed. The Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the state if necessary, for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all description. If you can increase your force, you are authorized to do so to any extent you may think necessary. I have just issued orders to Maj.-Gen. Wollock of Marion county to raise 500 men, and to march them to the northern part of Daviess, and there unite with Gen. Doniphan of Clay, who has been ordered with 500 men to proceed to the same point for the purpose of intercepting the retreat of the Mormons to the north. They have been directed to communicate with you by express. You can also communicate with them if you find it necessary. Instead, therefore, of proceeding as at first directed, to reinstate the citizens of Daviess in their homes, you will proceed [p. 130] immediately to Richmond and there operate against the Mormons. Brig.-Gen. Parks of Ray has been ordered to have 400 men of his brigade in readiness to join you at Richmond. The whole force will be placed under your command.'

^130:32 'The governor's orders and these military movements were kept an entire secret from the citizens of Caldwell and Daviess...even the mail was withheld from Far West.' Pratt's Autobiography, 200.

^130:33 'This letter of the governor's was extremely unguarded, and seems to have been too literally construed...Making all due allowance for the exasperated state of the public mind, these threats of extermination sound a little too savage in Anglo-Saxon ears...But they were impolitic, because they gave plausibility to the idea that the saints were the victims of a cruel and unrelenting religious persecution, and furnished them with one of the surest means of future success.' Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 90-1.

^130:34 'About the time that Lucas came out to Far West, Smith assembled the Mormon troops, and said that for every one they lacked in number of those who came out among them, the Lord would send angels, who would fight for them, and they should be victorious.' Kidder's Mormonism, 143.

^131:35 They were 'confined to the limits of the town for about a week.' During this time much property was destroyed, and women abused. The number of arms taken was 630, besides swords and pistols, worth between $12,000 and $15,000. Mem. to Leg., in Greene's Facts, 15. 'General Lucas demanded the Caldwell militia to give up their arms, which was done to the number of upward of 500, the rest of the troops having fled during the night. After the troops had surrendered, the city of Far West was surrounded by the robbers, and all the men detained as prisoners, none being permitted to pass out of the city, although their families were starving for want of sustenance.' Pratt's Persecution, 84. 'We determined not to resist anything in the shape of authority, however tyrannical or unconstitutional might be the proceedings against us. 'With this request (to surrender ourselves as prisoners we readily complied as soon as we were assured by the pledge of the honor of the principal officers that our lives should be safe...We were marched into camp, surrounded by thousands of savage-looking beings, many of whom were painted like Indian warriors. These all set up a constant yell, like so many blood-hounds let loose on their prey...A hint was given us that the general officers held a secret council...in which we were all sentenced to be shot.' Pratt's Persecution, 80-2. 'If the vision of the infernal regions could suddenly open to the mind, with thousands of malicious fiends, all clamoring, exulting, deriding, blaspheming, mocking, railing, raging, and foaming like a troubled sea, then could some idea be formed of the hell which we had entered.' Pratt's Autobiography, 204. See Young's Woman's Experience, MS.; Horne's Migrations, MS.

^132:36 Pratt says that Clark has been commended by some writers for his heroic merciful, and prudent conduct toward the Mormons, but that the truth is that he openly avowed his approval of all the proceedings of Gen. Lucas, and said that he should not alter his decrees. Autobiography, 227-8.

^132:37 It runs as follows: 'Gentlemen, You whose names are not attached to this list of names will now have the privilege of going to your fields to obtain corn for your families, wood, etc. Those that are now taken will go from thence to prison, to be tried, and receive the due demerit of their crimes, but you are now at liberty, all but such as charges may be hereafter preferred against. It now devolves upon you to fulfil the treaty that you have entered into, the leading items of which I now lay before you. The first of these you have already complied with, which is, that you deliver up your leading men to be tried according to law. Second, that you deliver up your arms; this has been attended to. The third is, that you sign over your property to defray the expenses of the war; this you have also done. Another thing yet remains for you to comply with, that is, that you leave this state forthwith, and whatever your feelings concerning this affair, whatever your innocence, it is nothing to me. Gen. Lucas, who is equal in authority with me, has made this treaty with you. I am determined to see it executed. The orders of the governor to me were, that you should be exterminated, and not allowed to continue in the state, and had your leaders not been given up and the treaty complied with before this, you and your families would have been destroyed, and your houses in ashes.'

^132:38 Pratt says in his Autobiography, p. 210, that a revelation to Joseph Smith buoyed up their spirits continually during their captivity. 'As we arose and commenced our march on the morning of the 3d of November, Joseph Smith spoke to me and the other prisoners in a low but cheerful and confidential tone; said he, "Be of good cheer, brethren; the word of the Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that whatever we may suffer during this captivity, not one of our lives should be taken."' 'When we arrived in Richmond as prisoners there were some fifty others, mostly heads of families, who had been marched from Caldwell on foot, distance thirty miles, and were now penned up in a cold, open, unfinished court-house, in which situation they remained for some weeks, while their families were suffering severe privations.' Id., 227.

^132:39 A court of inquiry was instituted at Richmond before Judge Austin A. King, lasting from the 11th to 28th of November. Pratt says: 'The judge could not be prevailed on to examine the conduct of the murderers and robbers [p. 133] who had desolated our society, nor would he receive testimony except against us...The judge in open court, while addressing a witness, proclaimed that if the members of the church remained on their lands to put in another crop they should be destroyed indiscriminately, and their bones be left to bleach on the plains without a burial...Mr Doniphan, attorney for the defence, and since famed as a general in the Mexican war, finally advised the prisoners to offer no defence; "for," said he, "though a legion of angels from the opening heavens should declare your innocence, the court and populace have decreed your destruction." Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRay were committed to the jail of Clay co. on charge of treason; and Morris Phelps, Lyman Gibbs, Darwin Chase, Norman Shearer, and myself were committed to the jail of Richmond, Ray co., for the alleged crime of murder, said to be committed in the act of dispersing the bandit Bogart and his gang.' Id., 230-3.

^133:40 Ingloriously conspicuous in the Missouri persecutions were generals Clark, Wilson, and Lucas, Colonel Price, Captain Bogart, and Cornelius Gilliam, 'whose zeal in the cause of oppression and injustice,' says Smith, 'was unequalled, and whose delight has been to rob, murder, and spread devastation among the saints...All the threats, murders, and robberies which these officers have been guilty of are entirely ignored by the executive of the state, who to hide his own iniquity must of course shield and protect those whom he employed to carry into effect his murderous purposes.' Times and Seasons, i. 7.

^133:41 Pages of evidence, both Mormon and anti-Mormon, might be given, and can indeed at any time be produced, to prove the commission of innumerable wrongs and revolting atrocities on the part of the people of Missouri, while abetted therein by state forces, commanded by state officers, and all under guidance of the state governor.

^133:42 There is abundance of testimony from disinterested sources, even from the opposers of Mormonism themselves, to prove the persecution on the part of the people of Missouri unjust and outrageous. I will quote only three from many similar comments that have been made on this subject, and all, be it remembered, emanating from the open and avowed enemies of this religion.

    Says Prof. Turner of Illinois college: 'Who began the quarrel? Was it the Mormons? Is it not notorious, on the contrary, that they were hunted like wild beasts, from county to county, before they made any desperate resistance? Did they ever, as a body, refuse obedience to the laws, when called upon to do so, until driven to desperation by repeated threats and assaults from the mob? Did the state ever make one decent effort to defend them as fellow-citizens in their rights, or to redress their wrongs? Let the conduct of its governors, attorneys, and the fate of their final petitions answer. Have any who plundered and openly massacred the Mormons ever been brought to the punishment due to their crimes? Let the boasting murderers of begging and helpless infancy answer. Has the state ever remunerated even those known to be innocent, for the loss of either their property or their arms? Did either the pulpit or the press through the state raise a note of remonstrance or alarm? Let the clergymen who abetted and the editors [p. 134] who encouraged the mob answer.' Correspondence Joseph Smith, 2. On the 16th of March, 1839, the editor of the Quincy Argus wrote as follows: 'We have no language sufficiently strong for the expression of our indignation and shame at the recent transaction in a sister state, and that state Missouri, a state of which we had long been proud, alike for her men and history, but now so fallen that we could wish her star stricken out from the bright constellation of the Union. We say we know of no language sufficiently strong for the expression of our shame and abhorrence of her recent conduct. She has written her own character in letters of blood, and stained it by acts of merciless cruelty and brutality that the waters of ages cannot efface. it will be observed that an organized mob, aided by many of the civil and military officers of Missouri, with Gov. Boggs at their head, have been the prominent actors in this business, incited, too, it appears, against the Mormons by political hatred, and by the additional motives of plunder and revenge. They have but too well put in execution their threats of extermination and expulsion, and fully wreaked their vengeance on a body of industrious and enterprising men who had never wronged nor wished to wrong them, but on the contrary had ever comported themselves as good and honest citizens, living under the same laws, and having the same right with themselves to the sacred immunities of life, liberty, and property.' 'By enlightened people the Mormons were regarded as the victims of misguided vengeance in Missouri. The ruffianly violence they encountered at the hands of lawless mobs, in several instances eventuating in deliberate murder, finds no extenuation in any alleged provocation. The due process of law might have afforded adequate redress for the criminalities of which they should be found guilty on legal trial. Such was the view of the subject rightly taken by the people of Illinois and of the world, though it may have been wrongfully applied in favor of the cause of the persecuted.' Tucker's Mormonism, 166.

^134:43 A memorial was sent to the legislature of Missouri, dated Far West, Dec. 10, 1838, setting forth these facts, and praying that the governor's novel, unlawful, tyrannical, and oppressive order be rescinded. It was signed by Edward Partridge, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Theodore Turley, Brigham Young, Isaac Morley, George W. Harris, John Murdock, John M. Burk.

^135:44 'On the 20th of April, 1839, the last of the society departed from Far West. Thus had a whole people, variously estimated at from ten to fifteen [p. 136] thousand souls, been driven from houses and lands and reduced to poverty, and had removed to another state, daring one short winter and part of a spring. The sacrifice of property was immense.' Pratt's Autobiography, 245.

^137:45 Pratt's Persecution of the Saints, 185.

^137:46 'On my return to this city,' writes Lucas from the executive office at Burlington, Iowa, 'after a few weeks' absence in the interior of the territory, I received your letter of the 25th ult. [Feb. 1839], in which you give a short account of the sufferings of the people called Mormons, and ask whether they could be permitted to purchase lands and settle upon them in the territory of Iowa, and there worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own consciences, secure from oppression, etc. In answer to your inquiry, I would say that I know of no authority that can constitutionally deprive them of this right. They are citizens of the United States, and are all entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens. The 2d section of the 4th article of the constitution of the United States (which all are solemnly bound to support) declares that "the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states;" this privilege extends in full force to the territories of the United States. The first amendment to the constitution of the United States declares that "congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof." The ordinances of congress of the 13th July, 1787, for the government of the territory north-west of the river Ohio, secures to the citizens of said territory and the citizens of the states thereafter to be formed therein, certain privileges which were by the late act of congress organizing the territory of Iowa extended to the citizens of this territory. The first fundamental article in that ordinance, which is [p. 138] declared to be forever unalterable except by common consent, reads as follows, to wit: No person demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship or religious sentiments in said territory. These principles I trust will ever be adhered to in the territory of Iowa. They make no distinction between religious sects. They extend equal privileges and protection to all; each must rest upon its own merits and will prosper in proportion to the purity of its principles, and the fruit of holiness and piety produced thereby. With regard to the peculiar people mentioned in your letter, I know but little. They had a community in the northern part of Ohio for several years, and I have no recollection of ever having heard in that state of any complaint against them of violating the laws of the country. Their religious opinions I conceive have nothing to do with our political transactions. They are citizens of the United States, and are entitled to the same political rights and legal protection that other citizens are entitled to. The foregoing are briefly my views on the subject of your inquiries.'

    In a memorial sent to Washington in the autumn of 1839, it was claimed by the Mormons that their property destroyed in Jackson co. was worth $120,000; that 12,000 souls were banished; that they purchased and improved lands in Clay co., and in three years were obliged to leave there with heavy loss; that they then purchased and improved lands in Daviess and Carroll counties; that for the most part these counties were wild and uncultivated; that they had converted them into large and well improved farms, well stocked, which were rapidly advancing in cultivation and wealth; and that they were finally compelled to fly from these counties. In a petition presented by Sidney Rigdon to the state of Pennsylvania, it is stated that 'Lilburn Boggs, governor of the state, used his executive influence to have us all massacred or driven into exile; and all this because we were not lawless and disobedient. For if the laws had given them a sufficient guaranty against the evils complained of...then would they bare had recourse to the laws. If we had been transgressors of laws, our houses would not have been rifled, our women ravished, our farms desolated, and our goods and chattels destroyed, our men killed, our wives and children driven into the prairies, and made to suffer all the indignities that the most brutal barbarity could inflict; but would only have had to suffer that which the laws would inflict, which were founded in justice, framed in righteousness, and administered in humanity... Why, then, all this cruelty? Answer: because the people had violated no law; and they could not be restrained by law, nor prevented from exercising the rights according to the laws, enjoyed, and had a right to be protected in, in any state of file Union.' Mr Corrill remarks: 'My opinion is, that if the Mormons had been let alone by the citizens, they would have divided and subdivided, so as to have completely destroyed themselves and their power as a people in a short time.'

^139:47 In 1839 Carlin was governor of Illinois, and on him the governor of Missouri made a formal demand for the surrender to the authorities of Smith and Rigdon, but little attention was paid to it. One of the most complete documents extant covering this period is, Facts Relative to the Expulsion of the Mormons, or Latter-day Saints, from the State of Missouri under the Exterminating Order. By John P. Greene, an authorized representative of the Mormons (Cincinnati, 1839). The work consists of 43 8vo pages, and was written for the purpose of showing to what wrongs the Mormons had been subjected at the hands of the people and politicians of Missouri, and also to obtain contributions for the destitute. The contents are largely documentary, and if we allow for some intensity of feeling, bear the impress of truth.

    Pointing in the same direction but less pretentious and less important is Correspondence between Joseph Smith, the prophet, and Col. John Wentworth, editor of the 'Chicago Democrat,' and member of congress from Illinois; General James Arlington Bennett, of Arlington House, Long Island; and the Honorable John C. Calhoun, Senator from South Carolina, in which is given a sketch of the life of Joseph Smith, Rise and Progress of the Church of Latter-day Saints, and their persecution by the state of Missouri; with the peculiar views of Joseph Smith in relation to Political and Religious matters generally; to which is added a concise account of the present state and prospects of the city of [p. 140] Nauvoo. (New York, 1844). With a title-page from which so much information is to be derived, we must not expect too much from the book itself. A portion of this correspondence was published in the Times and Seasons.

    Late Persecution of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Ten thousand American citizens robbed, plundered, and banished; others imprisoned, and others martyred for their Religion. With a sketch of their Rise, Progress, and Doctrine. By P. P. Pratt, Minister of the Gospel. Written in prison (New York, 1840). This is a 16mo vol. of 215 pages, most of which is devoted to the Missouri persecutions, with but little other history, except what is thrown in incidentally. All appendix of 37 pages is made up mostly from Greene's Facts. Pratt gives a graphic account of his life in prison, and of the means whereby, with the cooperation of his wife, he rescued from jail the manuscript of this book, which was written there. After mentioning them, he says: 'Thus, kind reader, was this little book providentially, and I may say miraculously, preserved, and by this means you have it to read.' The first edition was published at Detroit, Michigan, the book consisting then of 84 pages.

    Full reference for the persecutions of the Mormons in 1831-39. Memorial to Legislature Mass. in 1844, against such conduct, in Times and Seasons, i. 17-20, 33-6, 49-56, 65-6, 81-6, 94, 97-104, 113-16, 128-34, 145-50, 161-7, 177; v. 514-19; Pratt's Persecution of the Saints, 21-215; Utah Tracts, no. 4, 56-64; Pratt's Autobiography, 190-237, 311-22, 336-40; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 86; Deseret News, Dec. 27, 1851, Nov. 29 and Dec. 27, 1851, June 30, 1869; Mackay's The Mormons, 106-14; Tucker's Origin and Prog. Mor., 160-6; Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, 133-76; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 87-8, 90; White's Ten Years in Or., 144; Taylder's Mormon's Own Book, xliii.-xlvi.; Gunnison's Mormons, 104-14; Millennial Star, xxv., 535-6, 550-2, 599-600, 614-16, 631; Burnett's Rec., 56; Beadle's Life in Utah, 60; Lee's Mormonism, 55-96; Tullidge's Women, 116-74; Richards' Narrative, MS., 6-9; Young's Wife No. 19, 43-53; Atlantic Monthly, Dec. 1869; Stenhouse, Les Mormons, 154-71; Liberty Tribune; Margaret Smoot's Eperiences of a Mormon Wife, MS., 2-3: Farnham's Travels Rocky Mts., 6; Bertrand's Mem. Mor., 51; Busch, Gesch. der Mor., 85-7, 90-7; Juvenile Instructor, xv. 78; Kidder's Mormonism, 133-5; Iowa Frontier Guardian, March 21, 1849; Rabbison's Growth of Towns, MS, 2-5.

^140:48 'Since their expulsion from Missouri a portion of them, about one hundred families, have settled in Lee county, Iowa Territory, and are generally considered industrious, inoffensive, and worthy citizens.' Letter from Robert Lucas, governor of Iowa, to A. Ripley, dated Jan. 4, 1840.

^141:49 'Nauvoo was one of the names of one of the numerous petty chiefs in British India.' Ferris' The Mor., 97. 'Nauvoo is a Hebrew word, and signifies a beautiful habitation for man, carrying with it the idea of rest; it is not, however, considered by the Mormons their final home, but a resting place only; for they only intend to remain there until they have gathered force sufficient to enable them to conquer Independence in Jackson co., Missouri, which is one of the most fertile, pleasant, and desirable countries on the face of the earth, possessing a soil unsurpassed in any region. Independence they consider their Zion, and there they intend to rear their great temple, the corner-stone of which is already laid. There is to be the great gathering [p. 142] place for all the saints, and in that delightful country they expect to find their Eden, and build the New Jerusalem.' Bennett's Mormonism Exp., 192-3.

^142:50 See J. D. Hunter's letter of Dec. 26, 1839, from Jackson county, Ill., in Times and Seasons, i. 59.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

  

CHAPTER VI.
 THE STORY OF MORMONISM.
 1840-1844.

THE CITY OF NAUVOO--ITS TEMPLE AND UNIVERSITY--THE NAUVOO LEGION--THE MORMONS IN ILLINOIS--EVIL REPORTS--REVELATION ON POLYGAMY--ITS RECEPTION AND PRACTICE--THE PROPHET A CANDIDATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY--THE 'NAUVOO EXPOSITOR'--JOSEPH ARRESTED--GOVERNOR FORD AND HIS MEASURES--JOSEPH AND HYRUM PROCEED TO CARTHAGE--THEIR IMPRISONMENT--THE GOVERNOR'S PLEDGE--ASSASSINATION OF THE PROPHET AND HIS BROTHER--CHARACTER OF JOSEPH SMITH--A PANIC AT CARTHAGE--ADDRESSES OF RICHARDS AND TAYLOR--PEACEFUL ATTITUDE OF THE MORMONS.

    TO the saints it is indeed a place of refuge, the city of Nauvoo, the Holy City, the City of Joseph. [*1] It stands on rolling land, covering a bed of limestone yielding excellent building material, and bordered on three sides by the river which here makes a majestic curve, and is nearly two miles in width. The aborigines were not indifferent to the advantages of the spot, as the presence of their mounds testifies. In area it is three miles by four. The city is regularly laid out in streets at right angles, of convenient width, along which are scattered neat, whitewashed log cabins, also frame, brick, and stone houses, with grounds and gardens. It is incorporated by charter, [*2] and contains the best institutions of the latest civilization; in the

[p. 144]

country are hundreds of tributary farms and plantations. The population is from seven to fifteen thousand, varying with the ebb and flow of new converts and new colonizations. [*3]

    Conspicuous among the buildings, and chief architectural feature of the holy city, is the temple, glistening in white limestone upon the hill-top, a shrine in the western wilderness whereat all the nations of the earth may worship, whereat all the people may inquire of God and receive his holy oracles. [*4] Next in

[p. 145]

the City of Joseph in prominence and importance is the house of Joseph, hotel and residence, called the Nauvoo House, [*5] which is to the material man as the

[p. 146]

temple to the spiritual man. Unfortunately both the one and the other are destined to an occupancy and enjoyment all too brief in view of the vast labor bestowed upon them. Besides these buildings are the Hall of Seventies, in which is a library, the Masonic Hall, and Concert Hall; also there a university and other institutions are established, though having as yet no separate edifices.

    The president of the university and professor of mathematics and English literature is James Kelly, a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, and a ripe scholar; Orson Pratt, a man of pure mind and high order of ability, who without early education and amidst great difficulties had to achieve learning as best he could, and in truth has achieved it; professor of languages, Orson Spencer, graduate of Union College and the Baptist Theological Seminary, New York; professor of church history, Sidney Rigdon, versed in history, belles-lettres, and oratory. In the board of regents we find the leading men of the church; [*6] connected with the university were four common-school wards, with three wardens to each.

    In 1840 all the male members of the church between the ages of sixteen and fifty were enrolled in a military organization known as the Nauvoo Legion, which eventually numbered some four thousand men, and constituted part of the state militia. It was divided into two cohorts, and then into regiments, battalions, and companies, Lieutenant-general Joseph Smith being commander-in-chief. [*7] The organization

[p. 147]

was modelled after the Roman legion. The men were well disciplined, brave, and efficient. These troops carried their name to Utah, where they were reorganized in May 1857.

    Though all are soldiers, there are no dandy warriors in their midst. Each one returns after drill to his occupation--to his farm, factory, or merchandise. Among other workshops are a porcelain factory established by a Staffordshire company, two steam sawmills, a steam flouring-mill, a foundry, and a tool-factory. A joint-stock company is organized under the style of the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. Just outside the city is a community farm, worked by the poor for their own benefit; to each family in the city is allotted one acre of ground; the system of community of property does not obtain.

    Most of the people in and about Nauvoo are Mormons, but not all. The population is made up chiefly from the farming districts of the United States and the manufacturing districts of England; though uneducated, unpolished, and superstitious, they are for the most part intelligent, industrious, competent, honest, and sincere. [*8] With a shrewd head to direct,

[p. 148]

like that of the prophet, a wisdom like his to concentrate, a power like his to say to ten thousand men, do this, and it is done, with plenty of cheap, virgin land, with a collective knowledge of all arts, and with habits of economy and industry, it were a wonder if they did not rapidly accumulate property, and some of them acquire wealth. This they do, though tithed by the church, and detested by the gentiles, and they prosper in a remarkable degree. Of course, in political, as in spiritual and pecuniary affairs, the prophet's word is law.

    "Nauvoo is the best place in the world!" exclaims an enthusiastic saint. Nauvoo, the beautiful indeed! And "as to the facilities, tranquillities, and virtues of the city, they are not equalled on the globe." Here the saints find rest. "No vice is meant to be tolerated; no grog-shops allowed; nor would we have any trouble, if it were not for our lenity in suffering the world, [*9] as I shall call them, to come in and trade, and

[p. 149]

enjoy our society, as they say." "They are a wonderfully enterprising people, writes a gentile. "Peace and harmony reign in the city. The drunkard is scarcely ever seen, as in other cities, neither does the awful imprecation or profane oath strike upon your ear; but while all is storm and tempest and confusion abroad respecting the Mormons, all is peace and harmony at horne." [*10]

    About this time there comes to Joseph Smith a somewhat, singular individual making somewhat singular advances. He is a yankee huckster of the first class, only for his merchandise, instead of patent clocks and wooden nutmegs, he offers for sale theology, medicine, and a general assortment of political and military wares. The thing is a fraud, and before long he openly announces himself as such. As his manhood is far inferior to his duplicity, so his name--the Reverend General John C. Bennett, M. D., U.S.A., president, chancellor, and master in chancery--as we may observe, is subordinate to his titles. He has ability, he has brains and fingers; but

[p. 150]

he has no soul. He comes to Joseph and says, "Hail, master!" and worships him. He professes all that the Mormons profess, and more; he does all that the Mormons do, and more. So the prophet makes him general of his legion, mayor of the city, chancellor of the university, not to mention his functions as attorney, doctor, and privy counsellor. All this is done with quick despatch; and the result is that the great man soon tires of his greatness, or thinks to become yet greater by turning renegade, and writing a book against his late friends and associates. [*11]

[p. 151]

    There is another individual of similar name, and yet more similar character, James Arlington Bennett,

[p. 152]

also called general, whom Mackay, Smucker, a reviewer in the Edinburgh, and others have

[p. 153]

mistaken for the original. The quality of impudence appears as fully in the second Bennett as in the first. [*12]

 

    As I have before observed, the misfortunes of the saints by no means dampened their ardor, or impoverished them as a society. Some lost their all; in that case the others helped them. Old scores were

[p. 154]

cancelled, old debts forgiven. [*13] There were no great riches among them; yet he who had nothing could not be called poor amid such surroundings. Head over all, temporal and spiritual, was Joseph Smith, not only prophet and president, but general and mayor. [*14] He had now approached the summit of his career, and for a brief space was permitted to enjoy his fame, wealth, and power in some degree of quiet.

    They were salutary lessons that the prophet and his people had received in Missouri, and for a time their speech and manner were less arrogant than of old. But soon prosperity was far greater here than ever before, and as with Israel of old the chastisements of the Lord were soon forgotten. From the moment they crossed the river from Missouri into Illinois their position as men and members of the commonwealth was changed. In the one state they were regarded as fanatics, dangerous to the government and to the people, having associated assassins to do their bidding, and holding to a doctrine of divine inheritance with regard to all that country; in the

[p. 155]

other they were esteemed as hard-working and thrifty American citizens, whose votes, to the party in power, were worth as much as those of the baptist or the methodist.

    Such was their past and present status in the community. They were now treated, politically and socially, with consideration, especially by politicians. Thomas Carlin, governor of Illinois, was their friend, and granted them all the privileges they asked; Robert Lucas, governor of Iowa, was their friend, and promised them the protection due to every citizen of the United States, of whatsoever religion, creed, superstition, fanaticism, craze, or whatever people might choose to call it.

    But soon there came a governor, named Thomas Ford, who knew not Joseph. He was a well meaning man enough, not blood-thirsty like Boggs, nor strong and cool-headed like Carlin, nor yet a man of positive action and opinion like Lucas; still, Ford was not a bad man, and if the saints had conducted themselves according to the wisdom of the world, they might in time, perhaps, have overcome the prejudices of the people. But prosperity seemed as fatal to them as adversity was profitable. All the best of heaven and earth was now theirs, and again Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked, revelations becoming less frequent as the cares of this world, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life crept in among the people.

    The city charter of Nauvoo [*15] allowed the enactment of any laws not in conflict with those of the State or of the United States, and particularly that a writ of habeas corpus might be issued in all cases arising under city ordinance. In the interpretation of this

[p. 156]

provision the saints allowed themselves rattler a wide latitude, even assuming authority opposed to superior powers, and sometimes questioning the validity of state documents not countersigned by the mayor of Nauvoo. The counties surrounding Hancock, in which was Nauvoo, were fearful of the prosperity of the saints, and of their political influence; there were angry words and bickerings between the opposing societies, and then blows. The old Missouri feud was kept alive by suits instituted against Smith and others. [*16] All attempt made to assassinate Governor Boggs was, of course, charged to the Mormons, and probably with truth. In fact, if we may believe their enemies, they did not deny it. Boggs had unlawfully ordered all the Mormons in Missouri killed if they did not leave the state: why had not they the same right, they argued, to break the law and kill him? [*17]

    Among the reports circulated, besides those of assassination and attempted assassination, the following will serve as specimens: That the plan of Smith

[p. 157]

was to take the county, then the state, after that the United States, and finally the whole world; that any section making a move against the saints should be destroyed by the Danites; that Smith declared his prophecies superior to law, and threatened that if not let alone he would prove a second Mahomet, and send streams of blood from the Rocky Mountains to the sea.

    In an address to the saints at Nauvoo, September 1, 1812, Joseph stated that on account of the enemies in pursuit of him, both in Missouri and in Illinois, he deemed it best to retire for a time, and seek safety. He ordered his debts paid as they fell due, his property to be sold if necessary to meet requirements, and exhorted all officers to be faithful to their trust. "When the storm is past I will return," he said; "and as for perils, they seem small things to me, for the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life." And again: "Verily thus saith the Lord, let the work of my temple, and all the works which I have appointed unto you, be continued and not cease. Let all the records be had in order, that they may be put in the archives of my holy temple. I will write the word of the Lord from time to time and send it to you by mail. I now close my letter for the present, for the want of more time, for the enemy is on the alert; and as the savior said, the prince of this world cometh, but he hath nothing in me."

    Five days later the prophet sent an address to the saints, mainly touching the baptism for the dead, of which more hereafter. "Now what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth, glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and dead; glad tidings of great joy. And again what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets--the book to be revealed. A voice of the Lord in the wilderness

[p. 158]

of Fayette, Seneca county, declaring the three witnesses to bear record of the book. The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light. The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Boone county, on the Susquehanna River, declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times. And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in Fayette, Seneca county, and at sundry times and in divers places, through all the travels and tribulations of this church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

 

    We come now to a most momentous epoch in the history of the church, to the most important act of the prophet during the entire course of his wonderful life, to the act of all others pregnant with mighty results, if we except the primary proceedings relative to the sacred book and its translation.

    Twenty years had passed since the plates of Mormon had been revealed to Joseph, during which time he had suffered divers and continued persecution. lie and his followers had been reviled and spit upon from the beginning; some of them had been robbed, and beaten, hunted down, imprisoned, and slain. Yet they had prospered; the church had rapidly increased, and its members were blessed with plenty. Their neighbors spoke much evil of them and committed many violent acts. The saints were exceedingly annoying; they voted solid and claimed the whole world as theirs, including Jackson county, Missouri; they were wild in their thoughts, extravagant in their pretensions, and by no means temperate in the use of their tongues; they were not always prudent; they were not always without reproach.

    Just how far certain members or leaders erred, bringing evil on all, it is impossible at this day to

[p. 159]

determine. The evidence comes to us in the form of rumors, general assertions, and bold statements from the mouths of men filled with deadly hate, and cannot be altogether trusted. Some of these have said that the leaders of the church, finding their power over the minds and bodies of their female associates so greatly increased, so rapidly becoming absolute, could not resist temptation, but fell into grievous sins like Jeroboam and David, and were thereby obliged to adopt some plan either to cover or make right their conduct.

    It was easy for the gentiles to make such a charge appear plausible, in view of the fact that about this time the doctrine of plurality of wives as practised and promulgated in the scriptures attracted much attention. Most of the other acts, customs, and ordinances of the old and new testaments had been adopted in common with those contained in the book of Mormon by the latter-day church; why should not this? Wives and concubines without restriction had been permitted to the worthy men of old; the holy scriptures had nowhere condemned the custom; God had at no time ordered otherwise. On the contrary, it seemed in the line of example and duty; it seemed necessary to make the holy fabric symmetrical and complete. True, it was not now in vogue with either Jews or Christians; but neither were miracles nor special revelations. Surely, if God disapproved, he would have so declared; his commands he makes clear; particularly acts heinous in his sight he denounces loudly and with many repetitions.

    Thus argued the elders. They did not consider, nor indeed care for, the fact that, viewed from the standpoint of intellectual progress, the revival of polygamy, or concubinage, in common with other practices of the half-savage Hebrews, was a retrogression, a turning back toward savagism. They found it sanctioned in the holy book in use by the most civilized nations of the earth, and they felt themselves able to make

[p. 160]

it appear plausible. If any had the right to adopt part of the bible as their rule of conduct, accepting it all as true, they claimed the right to adopt the whole of it for their rule of conduct if they chose. It was civilization, and not the holy scriptures, that forbade polygamy, and they cared very little comparatively for civilization.

    Finally, on the 12th of July, 1843, while the chief men of the church were thinking the matter over, though saying little even among themselves, it is stated that there came to Joseph a revelation, the last of the prophet's revelations of which there is any record.

    "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; as also Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principles and doctrine of their having many wives and concubines: Behold! and lo, I am the Lord thy God. and will answer thee, as touching this matter.

    "Abraham received concubines, and they bare him children, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him, and he abode in my law; as Isaac also, and Jacob, did none other things than that which they were commanded. David also received many wives and concubines, as also Solomon, and Moses, my servant, as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of creation until this time, and in nothing did they sin, save in those things which they received not of me.

    "David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me, save in the case of Uriah and his wife: and, therefore, he hath fallen from his exaltation, and received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord.

[p. 161]

    "Verily, I say unto you, a commandment I give unto mine handmaid, Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay herself, and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham, and that I might require an offering at your hand by convenant and sacrifice; and let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me.

    "And I command mine handmaid, Emma Smith, to abide and cleave unto my servant Joseph, and to none else. And again, verily, I say, let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses, and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses, wherein she hath trespassed against me; and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her and multiply her, and make her heart to rejoice.

    "And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood: if any man espouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her consent; and if he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have vowed to no other man, then he is justified; he cannot commit adultery, for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery with that belonging unto him, and to none else; and if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law he cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him, and they are given unto him; therefore he is justified."

    It is said that as early as 1831 the will of the Lord in this respect had been revealed to Joseph. In translating the bible he had come upon the passages relating to plural wives and concubines, and had inquired of the Lord what he should do. He was told to wait, and not make the matter public then, the people not yet having faith to receive it. It was one of the severest trials the church had yet been called upon to undergo, and the wisest circumspection was necessary lest Joseph should be repudiated by his followers

[p. 162]

as a false prophet. So he approached persons singly, first the man of the family and then the woman. In 1841 Joseph began to take to himself plural wives, and his example was followed by some of the others. Finally, in order that all might know that he was not acting on his own responsibility alone, the revelation came, sanctioning and enforcing the system. This, as I have given it, is the orthodox and authorized explanation of the matter.

    Thus came to the saints the doctrine of polygamy, first to the leaders and for a time kept secret, and finally to the whole church, as one of its most prominent tenets. [*18] For years it was known only to a few, and it was not formally promulgated until after the great exodus, when the church had become well established in the valleys of the Yutas. [*19]

    There were several reasons for adopting this course. First, the hate and obloquy which would be engendered by its publication, and the wide-spread and bitter opposition it would meet. The work of missionaries in the field would greatly suffer. Many in the church would oppose it; women would rebel, while their sisters throughout christendom would hold them in derision. It was all so new and strange. Even in theory it was startling enough; but put it in practice, and who could foretell the result? The very foundations of

[p. 163]

the church might thereby be broken up. If it must needs be, then let discretion be used. Let the matter be broken to the church as it is able to receive it; let the system be introduced gradually, and practised secretly; by the chief men at first, and later by all. [*20]

    It was indeed a heavy load that the saints thus took upon themselves, willingly or unwillingly, in the service of God or in the service of Satan. Up to this

[p. 164]

time, though citizens of the commonwealth, they had not been in sympathy with other citizens; though religionists, they were in deadly opposition to all other religions; as a fraternity, bound by friendly compact, not alone spiritually but in temporal matters, in buying and selling, in town-building, farming, and stock-raising, in all trades and manufactures, they stood on vantage-ground. They were stronger than their immediate neighbors--stronger socially, politically, and industrially; and the people about them felt this, and while hating, feared them.

    It is true, that on their first arrival in Zion they were not wealthy; neither were their neighbors. They were not highly educated or refined or cultured; neither were their neighbors. They were sometimes loud and vulgar of speech: so were their neighbors. Immorality cropped out in certain quarters; so it did among the ancient Corinthians and the men of modern Missouri; there was some thieving among them; but they were no more immoral or dishonest than their persecutors who made war on them, and as they thought without a shadow of right.

    There is no doubt that among the Mormons as among the gentiles, perhaps among the Mormon leaders as among the gentile leaders, fornication and adultery were practised. It has been so in other ages and nations, in every age and nation; it is so now, and is likely to be so till the end of the world. But when the testimony on both sides is carefully weighed, it must be admitted that the Mormons in Missouri and Illinois were, as a class, a more moral, honest, temperate, hard-working, self-denying, and thrifty people than the gentiles by whom they were surrounded. Says John D. Lee on entering the Missouri fraternity and, at the time of this remarking, by no means friendly to the saints, "The motives of the people who composed my neighborhood were pure; they were all sincere in their devotions, and tried to square their actions through life by the golden rule...

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] The word of a Mormon was then good for all it was pledged to or for. I was proud to be an associate with such honorable people." And thus Colonel Kane, a disinterested observer, and not a Mormon: As compared with the other "border inhabitants of Missouri, the vile scum which our society, like the great ocean, washes upon its frontier shores," the saints were "persons of refined and cleanly habits and decent language."

    Nevertheless the sins of the entire section must be visited on them. Were there any robberies for miles around, they were charged by their enemies upon the Mormons; were there any house-burnings or assassinations anywhere among the gentiles, it was the Danites who did it. Of all that has been laid at their door I find little proved against them. The charges are general, and preferred for the most part by irresponsible men; in answer to them they refer us to the records. On the other hand, the outrages of their enemies are easily followed; for they are not denied, but are rather gloried in by the perpetrators. To shoot a Mormon was indeed a distinction coveted by the average gentile citizen of Illinois and Missouri, and was no more regarded as a crime than the shooting of a Blackfoot or Pawnee. Of course the Mormons retaliated.

    Polygamy was a heavy load in one sense; in another sense it was a bond of strength. While in the eyes of the world its open avowal placed the saints outside the pale of respectability, and made them amenable to the law, among themselves as law-breakers, openly defying the law, and placing themselves and their religion above all law, the very fact of being thus legal offenders, subject to the penalties and punishments of the law, brought the members of the society so acting into closer relationship, cementing them as a sect, and making them more dependent on each other and on their leaders. It is plain that while thus bringing upon themselves ignominy and reproach,

[p. 166]

while laying themselves open to the charge of being law-breakers, and assuming an attitude of defiance toward the laws and institutions of the country in which they lived, this bond of sympathy, of criminality if you will, particularly when made a matter of conscience, when recognized as a mandate from the almighty, higher than any human law, and in whose obedience God himself was best pleased, and would surely afford protection, could but prove in the end a bond of strength, particularly if permitted to attain age and respectability among themselves, and assume the form of a concrete principle and of sacred obligation.

    If instead of falling back upon the teachings of the old testament, and adopting the questionable practices of the half-civilized Jews; if instead of taking for their models Abraham, David, and Solomon, the saints at Nauvoo had followed the advice of Paul to the saints at Ephesus, putting away fornication and all uncleanness, and walking worthy of their vocation, in all lowliness and meekness, as children of light, they would probably have remained in their beautiful city, and come into the inheritance of their Missouri Zion as had been prophesied. Had they consulted more closely the signs of the times, had they been less orthodox in their creed, less patriarchal in their practices, less biblical in their tenets, less devoted in their doctrines--in a word, had they followed more closely the path of worldly wisdom, and, like opposing christian sects, tempered religion with civilization, giving up the worst parts of religion for the better parts of civilization, I should not now be writing their history, as one with the history of Utah.

    But now was brought upon them this overwhelming issue, which howsoever it accorded with ancient scripture teachings, and as they thought with the rights of man, was opposed to public sentiment, and to the conscience of all civilized nations. Forever after they must have this mighty obstacle to contend with; forever

[p. 167]

after they must live under the ban of the christian world; though, with unshaken faith in their prophet and his doctrine of spiritual wedlock, they might scorn the world's opinion, and in all sincerity and singleness of heart thank God that they were accounted worthy to have all manner of evil spoken of them falsely.

    During this period of probation the church deemed it advisable to deny the charge, notably by Elder Pratt in a public sermon, and also by Joseph Smith. "Inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication and polygamy, we declare that we believe that one man should have one wife, and one woman but one husband, except in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again." [*21] In the Times and Seasons of February 1, 1844, we have a notice signed by Joseph and Hyrum Smith: "As we have lately been credibly informed that an elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by the name of Hiram Brown, has been preaching polygamy and other false and corrupt doctrines in the county of Lapeer, state of Michigan, this is to notify him and the church in general that he has been cut of from the church for his iniquity."

    Notwithstanding these solemn denials and denunciations in high places, the revelation and the practices which it sanctioned were not easily concealed. [*22] As yet, however, the calumny of the gentiles and the bickering of the saints vexed not the soul of Joseph. He was now in the zenith of his fame and power; his followers in Europe and America numbered

[p. 168]

more than a hundred thousand; his fortune was estimated at a million dollars; he was commander-in-chief of the Nauvoo Legion, a body of troops "which," remarks an artillery officer, from his own observation, "would do honor to any body of armed militia in any of the states, and approximates very closely to our regular forces;" he was mayor of the city; and now, as the crowning point of his earthly glory, he was announced in February 1844 as a candidate for the presidency of the United States, while Sidney Rigdon was named for vice-president. Whether this was done for effect or in earnest is somewhat doubtful, for it appears that the prophet's head was a little turned about this time; but it is certain that the people of Illinois and Missouri believed him to be in earnest. Addressing letters to Clay and Calhoun, near the close of 1843, he asked each of them what would be his rule of action toward the Mormons as a people should he be elected to the presidency. The reply in both cases was non-committal and unsatisfactory; [*23] whereupon Joseph issues an address setting forth his views on the government and policy of the United States, and foreshadows his own policy, in which we find many excellent features and many absurdities. "No honest man can doubt. for a moment," he says, "but the glory of American liberty is on the wane; and that calamity and confusion will sooner or later destroy the peace of the people. Speculators will urge a national bank as a savior of credit and comfort. A hireling pseudo-priesthood will plausibly push abolition doctrines and doings and 'human rights' into congress, and into every other place where conquest smells of fame or opposition swells to popularity." [*24]

[p. 169]

    The aspirations of the prophet, pretended or otherwise, to the highest office in the republic, together with renewed, and at this juncture exceedingly dangerous, claims, pointing toward almost universal empire, [*25] brought upon him afresh the rage of the surrounding gentile populace, and resulted in an awful tragedy, the circumstances of which I am now about to relate. "The great cause of popular fury," writes Governor Ford shortly after the occurrence, "was that the Mormons at several preceding elections had cast their vote as a unit; thereby making the fact; apparent that no one could aspire to the honors or offices of the country, within the sphere of their influence, without their approbation and votes."

    Indeed, a myriad of evils about this time befell the church, all portending bloody destruction. There were

[p. 170]

suits and counter-suits at law; arrests and rearrests; schisms, apostasies, and expulsions; charges one against another of vice and immorality, Joseph himself being implicated. Here was one elder unlawfully trying his hand at revelations, and another preaching polygamy. Many there were whom it was necessary not only to cut off from the church, but to eradicate with their evil influences from society. Among the prophet's most inveterate enemies were William Law, who sought to betray Smith into the hands of the Missourians, and almost succeeded--Doctor Foster and Francis M. Higbee, who dealt in scandal, charging Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney, and others with seducing women, and having more wives than one. Suits of this kind brought by the brethren against each other, but more particularly by the leaders against high officials, were pending in the Nauvoo municipal court for over two years.

    Early in June 1844 was issued the first number of the Nauvoo Expositor, the publishers being apostate Mormons and gentiles. [*26] The primary object of the publication was to stir up strife in the church, and aid its enemies in their work of attempted extermination. Its columns were at once filled with foul abuse of the prophet and certain elders of the church, assailing their character by means of affidavits, and charging them with all manner of public and private crimes, and abusing and misrepresenting the people. The city council met, and pronouncing the journal a nuisance, ordered its abatement. Joseph Smith being mayor, it devolved on him to see the order executed, and he issued instruction to the city marshal and the policemen accordingly. The officers of the law forthwith entered the premises, and destroyed

[p. 171]

the establishment, tearing down the presses and throwing the type into the street. [*27] For this act the proprietors obtained from the authorities of the town of Carthage, some twenty miles distant, a warrant for the arrest of Joseph Smith, which was placed in the hands of the Carthage constable to be served.

    It was a proceeding not at all to the taste of the Mormons that their mayor should be summoned for misdemeanor before the magistrate of another town, and Smith refused to go. He was willing to be tried before a state tribunal. Meanwhile the offenders were brought before the municipal court of Nauvoo, on a writ of habeas corpus, and after examination were discharged. The cry was then raised throughout the country that Joseph Smith and associates, public offenders, ensconced among their troops in the stronghold of Nauvoo, defied the law, refusing to respond to the call of justice; whereupon the men of Illinois, to the number of two or three thousand, some coming even from Missouri, rallied to the support of the Carthage constable, and stood ready, as they said, not only to arrest Joe Smith, but to burn his town and kill every man, woman, and child in it.

    As the forces of the enemy enlarged and grew yet more and more demonstrative in their wrath, the town prepared for defence, the Nauvoo Legion being called out and placed under arms, by instructions from Governor Ford to Joseph Smith, as general in command. This gave rise to a report that they were about to make a raid on the neighboring gentile settlements. [*28]

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] In consequence of these rumors and counter-rumors the governor went to Carthage. Previous to this, frequent communications were sent to him at Springfield by Joseph Smith, informing him of the position of affairs in and around Nauvoo. The governor in his History of Illinois, referring to these times, writes: "These also were the active men in blowing up the fury of the people, in hopes that a popular movement might be set on foot, which would result in the expulsion or extermination of the Mormon voters. For this purpose public meetings had been called, inflammatory speeches had been made, exaggerated reports had been extensively circulated, committees had been appointed, who rode night and day to spread the reports and solicit the aid of neighboring counties, and at a public meeting at Warsaw resolutions were passed to expel or exterminate the Mormon population. This was not, however, a movement which was unanimously concurred in. The county contained a goodly number of inhabitants in favor of peace, or who at least desired to be neutral in such a contest. These were stigmatized by the name of Jack Mormons, and there were not a few of the more furious exciters of the people who openly expressed their intention to involve them in the common expulsion or extermination."

    Thomas Ford, governor of Illinois, was as a man rather above the average politician usually chosen among these American states to fill that position. Not specially clear-headed, and having no brain power to spare, he was quite respectable and had some conscience, as is frequently the case with mediocre men. He had a good heart, too, was in no wise vindictive, and though he was in no sense a strong man, his sense of right and equity could be quite stubborn upon occasion.

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] Small in body, he was likewise small in mind; indeed, there was a song current at the time that there was no room in his diminutive organism for such a thing as a soul. Nevertheless, though bitterly censured by some of the Mormons, I do not think Ford intended to do them wrong. That he did not believe all the rumors to their discredit is clearly shown in his statement of what was told him during the days he was at Carthage. He says: "A system of excitement and agitation was artfully planned and executed with tact. It consisted in spending reports and rumors of the most fearful character. As examples: On the morning before my arrival at Carthage, I was awakened at an early hour by the frightful report, which was asserted with confidence and apparent consternation, that the Mormons had already commenced the work of burning, destruction, and murder, and that every man capable of bearing arms was instantly wanted at Carthage for the protection of the county. We lost no time in starting; but when we arrived at Carthage we could hear no more concerning this story. Again, during the few days that the militia were encamped at Carthage, frequent applications were made to me to send a force here, and a force there, and a force all about the country, to prevent murders, robberies, and larcenies which, it was said, were threatened by the Mormons. No such forces were sent, nor were any such offences committed at that time, except the stealing of some provisions, and there was never the least proof that this was done by a Mormon."

    On the morning to which he refers, the report was brought to him with the usual alarming accompaniments of fears being expressed of frightful carnage, and the like. Hastily dressing, he assured the crowd collected outside of the house in which he had lodged that they need have no uneasiness respecting the matter, for he was very sure he could settle the difficulty peaceably. The Mormon prophet knew him well,

[p. 174]

and would trust him. What he purposed doing was to demand the surrender of Joseph Smith and others. He wished them to promise him that they would lend their assistance to protect the prisoners from violence, which they agreed to do.

    After his arrival at Carthage the governor sent two men to Nauvoo as a committee to wait on Joseph Smith, informing him of his arrival, with a request that Smith would inform him in relation to the difficulties that then existed in the county. Dr J. M. Bernhisel and Elder John Taylor were appointed as a committee by Smith, and furnished with affidavits and documents in relation both to the proceedings of the Mormons and those of the mob; in addition to the general history of the transaction they took with them a duplicate of those documents which had previously been forwarded by Bishop Hunter, Elder James, and others. This committee waited on the governor, who expressed an opinion that Joseph Smith and all parties concerned in passing or executing the city law in relation to the press had better come to Carthage; however repugnant it might be to their feelings, he thought it would have a tendency to allay public excitement, and prove to the people what they professed, that they wished to be governed by law. The next day the constable and a force of ten men were despatched to Nauvoo to make the arrests. The accused were told that if they surrendered they would be protected; otherwise the whole force of the state would be called out, if necessary, to take them.

    Upon the arrival of the constable and his posse, the mayor and the members of the city council declared that they were willing to surrender. Eight o'clock was the hour appointed, but the accused failed to make their appearance; whereupon the constable returned, and reported that they had fled. The governor was of opinion that the constable's action was part of a plot to get the troops into Nauvoo and exterminate the Mormons. He called a council of officers and proposed to

[p. 175]

march on the town with the small force under his command, but was dissuaded. He hesitated to make a further call on the militia, as the harvest was nigh and the men were needed to gather it. Meanwhile, ascertaining that the Mormons had three pieces of cannon and two hundred and fifty stand of arms belonging to the state, the possession of which gave offence to the gentiles, he demanded a surrender of the state arms, again promising protection.

    On the 24th of June [*29] Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the members of the council, and all others demanded, proceeded to Carthage, gave themselves up, and were charged with riot. All entered into recognizances before the justice of the peace to appear for trial, and were released from custody. Joseph and Hyrum, however, were rearrested, and, says Ford, were charged with overt treason, having ordered out the legion to resist the posse comitatus, though, as he states, the degree of their crime would depend on circumstances. The governor's views on this matter are worthy of note. "The overt act of treason charged against them," he remarks, "consisted in the alleged levying of war against the state by declaring martial law in Nauvoo, and in ordering out the legion to resist the posse comitatus. Their actual guiltiness of the charge would depend upon circumstances. If their opponents had been seeking to put the law in force in good faith, and nothing more, then an array of a military force in open resistance to the posse comitatus and the militia of the state most probably would have amounted to treason. But if those opponents merely intended to use the process of the law, the militia of the state, and the posse comitatus as cat's-paws to compass the possession of their persons for the purpose of murdering them afterward, as the

[p. 176]

sequel demonstrated the fact to be, it might well be doubted whether they were guilty of treason."

    With the Nauvoo Legion at their back, the two brothers voluntarily placed themselves in the power of the governor who, demanding and accepting their surrender, though doubting their guilt, nevertheless declared that they were not his prisoners, but the prisoners of the constable and jailer. Leaving two companies to guard the jail, he disbanded the main body of his troops, and proceeding to Nauvoo, addressed the people, beseeching them to abide by the law. "They claimed," he says, "to be a law-abiding people; and insisted that as they looked to the law alone for their protection, so were they careful themselves to observe its provisions. Upon the conclusion of my address, I proposed to take a vote on the question, whether they would strictly observe the laws, even in opposition to their prophet and leaders. The vote was unanimous in favor of this proposition." The governor then set forth for Carthage, and such in substance is his report when viewed in the most favorable light. [*30]

    It is related that as Joseph set forth to deliver himself up to the authorities he exclaimed: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offence toward God and toward all men. I shall die innocent, and it shall yet be said of me, He was murdered in cold blood." [*31] Nevertheless, for a moment he hesitated. Should he offer himself a willing sacrifice, or should he endeavor to escape out of their hands? Thus meditating, he crossed the river thinking

[p. 177]

to depart. On reaching the opposite bank he turned and gazed upon the beautiful city, the holy city, his own hallowed creation, the city of Joseph, with its shining temple, its busy hum of industry, and its thousand happy homes. And they were his people who were there, his very own, given to him of God; and he loved them! Were he to leave them now, to abandon them in this time of danger, they would be indeed as sheep without a shepherd, stricken, and scattered, and robbed, and butchered by the destroyer. No, he could not do it. Better die than to abandon them thus! So he recrossed the river, saying to his brother Hyrum, "Come, let us go together, and let God determine what we shall do or suffer."

    Bidding their families and friends adieu, the two brothers set out for Carthage. Their hearts were very heavy. There was dire evil abroad; the air was oppressive, and the sun shot forth malignant rays. Once more they returned to their people; once more they embraced their wives and kissed their children, as if they knew, alas! that they should never see them again.

    The party reached Carthage about midnight, and on the following day the troops were formed in line, and Joseph and Hyrum passed up and down in company with the governor, who showed them every respect--either as guests or victims--introducing them as military officers under the title of general. Present were the Carthage Greys, who showed signs of mutiny, hooting at and insulting the prisoners--for such in fact they were, being committed to jail the same afternoon until discharged by due course of law.

    A few hours later Joseph asked to see the governor, and next morning Ford went to the prison. "All this is illegal," said the former. "It is a purely civil matter, not a question to be settled by force of arms." "I know it," said the governor, "but it is better so; I did not call out this force, but found it assembled; I pledge you my honor, however, and the faith and honor of

[p. 178]

the state, that no harm shall come to you while undergoing this imprisonment." The governor took his departure on the morning of the 27th of June. Scarcely was he well out of the way when measures were taken for the consummation of a most damning deed. The prison was guarded by eight men detailed from the Carthage Greys, their company being in camp on the public square a quarter of a mile distant, while another company under Williams, also the sworn enemies of the Mormons, was encamped eight miles away, there awaiting the development of events.

    It was a little after five o'clock in the evening. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were confined in an upper room. With the prisoners were John Taylor and Willard Richards, other friends having withdrawn a few moments before. At this juncture a band of a hundred and fifty armed men with painted faces appeared before the jail, and presently surrounded it. The guard shouted vociferously and fired their guns over the heads of the assailants, who paid not the slightest attention to them. [*32] I give what followed from Burton's City of the Saints, being the statement of President John Taylor, who was present and wounded on the occasion.

    "I was sitting at one of the front windows of the jail, when I saw a number of men, with painted faces, coming around the corner of the jail, and aiming toward the stairs. The other brethren had seen the same, for, as I went to the door, I found Brother Hyrum Smith and Dr Richards already leaning against it. They both pressed against the door with their shoulders to prevent its being opened, as the lock and latch were comparatively useless. While in this position, the mob, who had come up stairs, and tried to open the door, probably thought it was

[p. 179]

locked, and fired a ball through the keyhole; at this Dr Richards and Brother Hyrum leaped back from the door, with their faces toward it; almost instantly another ball passed through the panel of the door, and struck Brother Hyrum on the left side of the nose, entering his face and head. At the same instant, another ball from the outside entered his back, passing through his body and striking his watch. The ball came from the back, through the jail window, opposite the door, and must, from its range, have been fired from the Carthage Greys, who were placed there ostensibly for our protection, as the balls from the fire-arms, shot close by the jail, would have entered the ceiling, we being in the second story, and there never was a time after that when Hyrum could have received the latter wound. Immediately, when the balls struck him, he fell flat on his back, crying as he fell, 'I am a dead man!' He never moved afterward.

    "I shall never forget the deep feeling of sympathy and regard manifested in the countenance of Brother Joseph as he drew nigh to Hyrum, and, leaning over him, exclaimed, 'Oh! my poor, dear brother Hyrum!' He, however, instantly arose, and with a firm, quick step, and a determined expression of countenance, approached the door, and pulling the six-shooter left by Brother Wheelock from his pocket, opened the door slightly, and snapped the pistol six successive times; only three of the barrels, however, were discharged. I afterward understood that two or three were wounded by these discharges, two of whom, I am informed, died. [*33] I had in my hands a large, strong hickory stick, brought there by Brother Markham, and left by him, which I had seized as soon as I saw the mob approach; and while Brother Joseph was firing the pistol, I stood close behind him. As soon

[p. 180]

as he had discharged it he stepped back, and I immediately took his place next to the door, while he occupied the one I had done while he was shooting. Brother Richards, at this time, had a knotty walking-stick in his hands belonging to me, and stood next to Brother Joseph, a little farther from the door, in an oblique direction, apparently to avoid the rake of the fire from the door. The firing of Brother Joseph made our assailants pause for a moment; very soon after, however, they pushed the door some distance open, and protruded and discharged their guns into the room, when I parried them off with my stick, giving another direction to the balls.

    "It certainly was a terrible scene: streams of fire as thick as my arm passed by me as these men fired, and, unarmed as we were, it looked like certain death. I remember feeling as though my time had come, but I do not know when, in any critical position, I was more calm, unruffled, energetic, and acted with more promptness and decision. It certainly was far from pleasant to be so near the muzzles of those fire-arms as they belched forth their liquid flames and deadly balls. While I was engaged in parrying the guns, Brother Joseph said, 'That's right, Brother Taylor, parry them off as well as you can.' These were the last words I ever heard him speak on earth.

    "Every moment the crowd at the door became more dense, as they were unquestionably pressed on by those in the rear ascending the stairs, until the whole entrance at the door was literally crowded with muskets and rifles, which, with the swearing, shouting, and demoniacal expressions of those outside the door and on the stairs, and the firing of the guns, mingled with their horrid oaths and execrations, made it look like pandemonium let loose, and was, indeed, a fit representation of the horrid deed in which they were engaged.

    "After parrying the guns for some time, which now protruded thicker and farther into the room, and

[p. 181]

seeing no hope of escape or protection there, as we were now unarmed, it occurred to me that we might have some friends outside, and that there might be some chance to escape in that direction, but here there seemed to be none. As I expected them every moment to rush into the room--nothing but extreme cowardice having thus far kept them out--as the tumult and pressure increased, without any other hope, I made a spring for the window which was right in front of the jail door, where the mob was standing, and also exposed to the fire of the Carthage Greys, who were stationed some ten or twelve rods off. The weather was hot, we had our coats off, and the window was raised to admit air. As I reached the window, and was on the point of leaping out, I was struck by a ball from the door about midway of my thigh, which struck the bone and flattened out almost to the size of a quarter of a dollar, and then passed on through the fleshy part to within about half an inch of the outside. I think some prominent nerve must have been severed or injured, for, as soon as the ball struck me, I fell like a bird when shot, or an ox when struck by a butcher, and lost entirely and instantaneously all power of action or locomotion. I fell upon the window-sill, and cried out, 'I am shot!' Not possessing any power to move, I felt myself falling outside of the window, but immediately I fell inside, from some, at that time, unknown cause. When I struck the floor my animation seemed restored, as I have seen it sometimes in squirrels and birds after being shot. As soon as I felt the power of motion I crawled under the bed, which was in a corner of the room, not far from the window where I received my wound. While on my way and under the bed I was wounded in three other places; one ball entered a little below the left knee, and never was extracted; another entered the forepart of my left arm, a little above the wrist, and passing down by the joint, lodged in the fleshy part of my hand, about

[p. 182]

midway, a little above the upper joint of my little finger; another struck me on the fleshy part of my left hip, and tore away the flesh as large as my hand, dashing the mangled fragments of flesh and blood against the wall.

    "It would seem that immediately after my attempt to leap out of the window, Joseph also did the same thing, of which circumstance I have no knowledge only from information. The first thing that I noticed was a cry that he had leaped out of the window. A cessation of firing followed, the mob rushed down stairs, and Dr. Richards went to the window. Immediately afterward I saw the doctor going toward the jail door, and as there was an iron door at the head of the stairs adjoining our door which led into the cells for criminals, it struck me that the doctor was going in there, and I said to him, 'Stop, doctor, and take me along.' He proceeded to the door and opened it, and then returned and dragged me along to a small cell prepared for criminals.

    "Brother Richards was very much troubled, and exclaimed, 'Oh! Brother Taylor, is it possible that they have killed both Brothers Hyrum and Joseph? it cannot surely be, and yet I saw them shoot them;' and, elevating his hands two or three times, he exclaimed, 'Oh Lord, my God, spare thy servants!' He then said, 'Brother Taylor, this is a terrible event;' and he dragged me farther into the cell, saying, 'I am sorry I can not do better for you;' and, taking an old filthy mattress, he covered me with it, and said, 'That may hide you, and you may yet live to tell the tale, but I expect they will kill me in a few moments.' While lying in this position I suffered the most excruciating pain. Soon afterward Dr. Richards came to me, informed me that the mob had precipitately fled, and at the same time confirmed my worst fears that Joseph was assuredly dead." It appears that Joseph, thus murderously beset and in dire extremity, rushed to the window and threw himself

[p. 183]

out, receiving in the act several shots, and with the cry, "O Lord, my God!" fell dead to the ground. [*34] The fiends were not yet satiated; but setting up the lifeless body of the slain prophet against the well-curb, riddled it with bullets. [*35]

    Where now is the God of Joseph and of Hyrum, that he should permit this most iniquitous butchery? Where are Moroni and Ether and Christ? What mean these latter-day manifestations, their truth and efficacy, if the great high priest and patriarch of the new dispensation can thus be cruelly cut off by wicked men? Practical piety is the doctrine! Prayer

[p. 184]

and faith must cease not though prayer be unanswered; and they ask where was the father when the son called in Gethsemane? It was foreordained that Joseph and Hyrum should die for the people; and the more of murder and extermination on the part of their enemies, the more praying and believing on the part of saints, and the more praise and exultation in the heavenly inheritance.

    The further the credulity of a credulous people is taxed the stronger will be their faith. Many of the saints believed in Joseph; with their whole mind and soul they worshipped him. He was to them as God; he was their deity present upon earth, their savior from evil, and their guide to heaven. Whatever he did, that to his people was right; he could do no wrong, no more than king or pope, no more than Christ or Mahomet. Accordingly they obeyed him without question; and it was this belief and obedience that caused the gentiles to fear and hate. There are still open in the world easier fields than this for new religions, which might recommend themselves as a career to young men laboring under a fancied inexorable necessity.

 

    Whatever else may be said of Joseph Smith, it must be admitted that he was a remarkable man. His course in life was by no means along a flowery path; his death was like that which too often comes to the founder of a religion. What a commentary on the human mind and the human heart, the deeds of those who live for the love of God and man, who die for the love of God and man, who severally and collectively profess the highest holiness, the highest charity, justice, and humanity, higher far than any held by other sect or nation, now or since the world began--how lovely to behold, to write and meditate upon their disputings and disruptions, their cruelties and injustice, their persecutions for opinion's sake, their ravenous hate and bloody butcheries!

[p. 185]

    The founder of Mormonism displayed a singular genius for the work he gave himself to do. He made thousands. believe in him and in his doctrines, howsoever good or evil his life, howsoever true or false his teachings. The less that can be proved the more may be asserted. Any one possessing the proper abilities may found a religion and make proselytes. His success will depend not on the truth or falsity of his statements, nor on their gross absurdity or philosophic refinement, but on the power and skill with which his propositions are promulgated. If he has not the natural and inherited genius for this work, though his be otherwise the greatest mind that ever existed, he is sure to fail. If he has the mental and physical adaptation for the work, he will succeed, whatever may be his abilities in other directions.

    There was more in this instance than any consideration short of careful study makes appear: things spiritual and things temporal; the outside world and the inside workings. The prophet's days were full of trouble. His people were often petulant, his elders quarrelsome, his most able followers cautious and captious. While the world scoffed and the neighbors used violence, his high priests were continually asking him for prophecies, and if they were not fulfilled at once and to the letter, they stood ready to apostatize. Many did apostatize; many behaved disgracefully, and brought reproach and enmity upon the cause. Moreover, Joseph was constantly in fear for his life, and though by no means desirous of death, in moments of excitement he often faced danger with apparent indifference as to the results. But without occupying further space with my own remarks, I will give the views of others, who loved or hated him and knew him personally and well.

    Of his physique and character, Parley P. Pratt remarks: "President Joseph Smith was in person tall and well built, strong and active; of a light complexion, light hair, blue eyes, very little beard, and of an

[p. 186]

expression peculiar to himself, on which the eye naturally rested with interest, and was never weary of beholding. His countenance was ever mild, affable, and beaming with intelligence and benevolence, mingled with a look of interest and an unconscious smile of cheerfulness, and entirely free from all restraint, or affectation of gravity; and there was something connected with the serene and steady, penetrating glance of his eye, as if he would penetrate the deepest abyss of the human heart, gaze into eternity, penetrate the heavens, and comprehend all worlds. He possessed a noble boldness and independence of character; his manner was easy and familiar, his rebuke terrible as the lion, his benevolence unbounded as the ocean, his intelligence universal, and his language abounding in original eloquence peculiar to himself."

    And thus a female convert who arrived at Nauvoo a year or two before the prophet's death: "The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith I recognized him from a vision that once appeared to me in a dream. His countenance was like that of an angel, and such as I had never beheld before. He was then thirty-seven years of age, of ordinary appearance in dress and manner, but with a child-like innocence of expression. His hair was of a light brown, his eyes blue, and his complexion light. His natural demeanor was quiet; his character and disposition were formed by his life-work; he was kind and considerate, taking a personal interest in all his people, and considering every one his equal." [*36]

    On the other hand, the author of Mormonism Unveiled says: "The extreme ignorance and apparent stupidity of this modern prophet were by his early followers looked upon as his greatest merit, and as furnishing the most incontestable proof of his divine mission...His followers have told us that he could not at the time he was chosen of the Lord even write his own name. But it is obvious that all these deficiencies

[p. 187]

are fully supplied by a natural genius, strong inventive powers of mind, a deep study, and an unusually correct estimate of the human passions and feelings. In short, he is now endowed with all the requisite traits of character to pursue most successfully the humbug which he has introduced. His address is easy, rather fascinating and winning, of a mild and sober deportment when not irritated. But he frequently becomes boisterous by the impertinence or curiosity of the skeptical, and assumes the bravado, instead of adhering to the meekness which he professes. His followers, of course, can discover in his very countenance all the certain indications of a divine mission."

    One more quotation will serve to show the impression that Joseph Smith's doctrines and discourse made not only on his own followers but on the gentiles, and even on gentile divines. In 1843 a methodist minister, named Prior, visited Nauvoo and was present during a sermon preached by the prophet in the temple. "I took my seat," he remarks, "in a conspicuous place in the congregation, who were waiting in breathless silence for his appearance. While he tarried, I had plenty of time to revolve in my mind the character and common report of that truly singular personage. I fancied that I should behold a countenance sad and sorrowful, yet containing the fiery marks of rage and exasperation. I supposed that I should be enabled to discover in him some of those thoughtful and reserved features, those mystic and sarcastic glances, which I had fancied the ancient sages to possess. I expected to see that fearful faltering look of conscious shame which from what I had heard of him he might be expected to evince. He appeared at last; but how was I disappointed when, instead of the head and horns of the beast and false prophet, I beheld only the appearance of a common man, of tolerably large proportions.

    "I was sadly disappointed, and thought that,

[p. 188]

although his appearance could not be wrested to indicate anything against him, yet he would manifest all I had heard of him when he began to preach. I sat uneasily and watched him closely. He commenced preaching, not from the book of Mormon, however, but from the bible; the first chapter of the first of Peter was his text. He commenced calmly, and continued dispassionately to pursue his subject, while I sat in breathless silence, waiting to hear that foul aspersion of the other sects, that diabolical disposition of revenge, and to hear that rancorous denunciation of every individual but a Mormon. I waited in vain; I listened with surprise; I sat uneasy in my seat, and could hardly persuade myself but that he had been apprised of my presence, and so ordered his discourse on my account, that I might not be able to find fault with it; for instead of a jumbled jargon of half-connected sentences, and a volley of imprecations, and diabolical and malignant denunciations heaped upon the heads of all who differed from him, and the dreadful twisting and wresting of the scriptures to suit his own peculiar views, and attempt to weave a web of dark and mystic sophistry around the gospel truths, which I had anticipated, he glided along through a very interesting and elaborate discourse, with all the care and happy facility of one who was well aware of his important station and his duty to God and man." [*37]

 

    No event, probably, that had occurred thus far in the history of the saints gave to the cause of Mormonism so much of stability as the assassination of Joseph Smith. Not all the militia mobs in Illinois, in Missouri, or in the United States could destroy this cause, any more than could the roundheads in the

[p. 189]

seventeenth century destroy the cause of monarchy. The deed but reacted on those who committed it.

    When two miles on his way from Nauvoo, the governor was met by messengers who informed him of the assassination, and, as he relates, he was "struck with a kind of dumbness." At daybreak the next morning all the bells in Carthage were ringing. It was noised abroad throughout Hancock county, he says, that the Mormons had attempted the rescue of Joseph and Hyrum; that they had been killed in order to prevent their escape, and that the governor was closely besieged at Nauvoo by the Nauvoo Legion, and could hold out only for two days. Ford was convinced that "those whoever they were who assassinated the Smiths meditated in turn his assassination by the Mormons," thinking that they would thus rid themselves of the Smiths and the governor, and that the result would be the expulsion of the saints, for Ford had shown a determination to defend Nauvoo, so far as lay in his power, from the threatened violence. Arriving at Carthage at ten o'clock at night, he found the citizens in flight with their families and effects, one of his companies broken up, and the Carthage Greys also disbanding, the citizens that remained being in instant fear of attack. At length he met with John Taylor and Willard Richards, who, notwithstanding the ill-usage they had received, came to the relief of the panic-stricken magistrate, and addressed a letter to their brethren at Nauvoo, exhorting them to preserve the peace, the latter stating that he had pledged his word that no violence would be used.

    The letter of Richards and Taylor, signed also by Samuel H. Smith, a brother of the deceased, who a few weeks afterward died, as the Mormons relate, of a broken heart, prevented a threatened uprising of the saints. [*38] On the 29th of June, the day after the news was received, the legion was called out, the letter read,

[p. 190]

and the fury of the citizens allayed by addresses from Judge Phelps, Colonel Buckmaster, the governor's aid, and others. In the afternoon the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum arrived in wagons guarded by three men. They were met by the city council, the prophet's staff, the officers of the legion, and a vast procession of citizens, crying out "amid the most solemn lamentations and wailings that ever ascended into the ears of the Lord of hosts to be avenged of their enemies." Arriving at the Nauvoo House, the assemblage, numbering ten thousand persons, was again addressed, and "with one united voice resolved to trust to the law for a remedy of such a high-handed assassination, and when that failed, to call upon God to avenge them of their wrongs. Oh I widows and orphans! Oh Americans! weep, for the glory of freedom has departed!"

    Meanwhile the governor, fearing that the Mormons would rise in a body to execute vengeance, issued an address to the people of Illinois, in which he attempted to explain his conduct, [*39] and again called out the militia. Two officers were despatched to Nauvoo, with orders to ascertain the disposition of the citizens, and to proceed thence to Warsaw, where were the headquarters of the anti-Mormon militia, and forbid violent measures in the name of the state. On arriving at the former place they laid their instructions before the members of the municipality. A meeting of the council was summoned, and it was resolved that the saints rigidly sustain the laws and the governor, so long as they are themselves sustained in their constitutional rights; that they discountenance vengeance on the assassins of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; that instead of an appeal to arms, they appeal to the majesty of the law, and, should the law fail, they

[p. 191]

leave the matter with God; that the council pledges itself that no aggressions shall be made by the citizens of Nauvoo, approves the course taken by the governor, and will uphold him by all honorable means. A meeting of citizens was then held in the public square; the people were addressed, the resolutions read, and all responded with a hearty amen.

    The two officers then returned to Carthage and reported to the governor, who was so greatly pleased with the forbearance of the saints that he officially declared them "human beings and citizens of the state." He caused writs to be issued for the arrest of three of the murderers--after they had taken refuge in Missouri. [*40] The assassins escaped punishment, however; and now that order was restored, the chief magistrate disbanded the militia, after what he termed "a campaign of about thirteen days."

    On the afternoon of July 1st a letter was addressed by Richards, Taylor, and Phelps to the citizens of Nauvoo, and a fortnight later, an epistle signed by the same persons and also by Parley P. Pratt was despatched to all the saints throughout the world. "Be peaceable, quiet citizens, doing the works of righteousness; and as soon as the twelve and other authorities can assemble, or a majority of them, the onward course to the great gathering of Israel, and the final consummation of the dispensation of the fulness of times, will be pointed out, so that the murder of Abel, the assassination of hundreds, the righteous blood of all the holy prophets, from Abel to Joseph, sprinkled with the best blood of the son of God, as the crimson sign of remission, only carries conviction to the business and bosoms of all flesh, that the cause is just and will continue; and blessed are they that hold out faithful to the end, while apostates, consenting to the shedding of innocent blood, have no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come...Let no vain

[p. 192]

and foolish plans or imaginations scatter us abroad and divide us asunder as a people, to seek to save our lives at the expense of truth and principle, but rather let us live or die together and in the enjoyment of society and union." [*41]

    At this time the saints needed such words of advice and consolation. Some were already making preparations to return to the gentiles; some feared that their organization as a sect would soon corec to an end. To reassure them, one more address was issued on August 15th, in the name of the twelve apostles, [*42] and signed by Brigham Young, the president of the apostles. The saints were told that though they were now without a prophet present in the flesh, the twelve would administer and regulate the affairs of the church; and that even if they should be taken away, there were still others who would insure the triumph of their cause throughout the world.

    In 1830, as will be remembered, the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized in a chamber by a few humble men; in 1811 the prophet's followers mustered scores of thousands. Speedy dissolution was now predicted by some, while others argued that as all his faults would lie buried in the tomb, while on his virtues martyrdom would stied its lustre, the progress of the sect would be yet more remarkable. The latter prediction was verified, and after the Mormons had suffered another period of persecution, Joseph Smith the martyr became a greater power in the land than Joseph Smith the prophet.

Footnotes

^143:1 'Among the more zealous Mormons, it became the fashion at this time (1845) to disuse the word Nauvoo, and to call the place the holy city, or the city of Joseph.' Mackay's The Mormons, 191.

^143:2 The charter granted by the legislature was signed by Gov. Carlin Sept. 16, 1840, to take effect Feb. 1, 1841. 'So artfully framed that it was found that the state government was practically superseded within the Mormon corporation. Under the judicial clause its courts were supreme.' McBride in International Review, Feb. 1882. Charters were also granted to the university and the Nauvoo legion. Times and Seasons, ii. 281.

^144:3 The blocks contain 'four lots of eleven by twelve rods each, making all corner lots...For three or four miles upon the river, and about the same distance back in the country, Nauvoo presents a city of gardens, ornamented with the dwellings of those who have made a covenant by sacrifice...It will be no more than probably correct, if we allow the city to contain between 700 and 800 houses, with a population of 14,000 or 15,000.' Times and Seasons, iii. 936. A correspondent of the New York Herald is a little wild when lie writes about this time: 'The Mormons number in Europe and America about 150,000, and are constantly pouring into Nauvoo and the neighboring country. There are probably in and about this city and adjacent territories not far from 30,000.' Fifteen thousand in 1840 is the number given in Mackay's The Mormons, 115, as I mentioned in the last chapter. A correspondent's estimate in the Times and Seasons, in 1842, was for the city 7,000, and for the immediate surroundings 3,000. Phelps, in The Prophet, estimates the population during the height of the city's prosperity in 1844 at 14,000, of whom nine tenths were Mormons. Some 2000 houses were built the first year. Joseph Smith in Times and Seasons, March 1842, says: 'We number from six to eight thousand here, besides vast numbers in the county around, and in almost every county in the state.'

^144:4 The structure was 83 by 128 feet, and 60 feet high. The stone was quarried within city limits. There was an upper story and basement; and in the latter a baptismal font wrought after the manner of King Solomon's brazen sea. A huge tank, upon whose panels were painted various scenes, and ascent to which was made by stairs, was upborne by twelve oxen, beautifully carved, and overlaid with gold. 'The two great stories,' says a Mormon eye-witness, 'each have two pulpits, one at each end, to accommodate the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods, graded into four rising seats, the first for the president of the ciders and his two counsellors, the second for the president of the high priesthood and his two counsellors, and the third for the Melchizedek president and his two counsellors, and the fourth for the president of the whole church and his two counsellors. There are thirty hewn stone pilasters which cost about $3,000 apiece. The base is a crescent new moon; the capitals, near 50 feet high; the sun, with a human face in bold relief, about two and a half feet broad, ornamented with rays of light and waves, surmounted by two hands holding two trumpets.' All was crowned by a high steeple surmounted with angel and trumpet. The cost was nearly $1,000,000, and was met by tithes contributed by some in money or produce, and by others in labor. The four corner-stones of the temple were laid with much ceremony on the 6th of April, 1841, on the celebration of the anniversary of the church. Sidney Rigdon delivered the address, and upon the placing of the first stone, said: 'May the persons employed in the erection of this house be preserved from all harm while engaged in its construction, till the whole is completed--in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy [p. 145] ghost; even so, amen.' Times and Seasons, ii. 376. A revelation was published in Jan. 1841. 'Let all my saints come from afar, and send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say unto them: "Come ye with all your gold and your silver and your precious stones, and with all your antiquities, and with all who have knowledge of antiquities, that will come, may come; and bring the box-tree and the fir-tree and the pine-tree, together with all the precious trees of the earth, and with iron and with copper and with brass and with zinc and with all your precious things of the earth, and build a house to my name for the most high to dwell therein."' Smucker's Hist. Mor., 132. For reference notes on temple: minutes of conference, relating to building a church, etc., see Times and Seasons, i. 185-7. Laying the foundation stone, Id., ii. 375-7, 380-2; Mackay's The Mormons, 118-20; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 133. Laying of the capstone, Times and Seasons, vi. 926. Progress of its building, Id., iii. 775-6; iv. 10-11; The Prophet, in Mackay's The Mormons, 189-91. Description of the temple with cut, Smucker's Mormons, 129; Ferris' The Mormons, 137-9; Pratt's Autobiography, 378; without cut, Smucker's Mormons, 202-4; Bertrand Mem. Morm., 61; Cincinnati Times; Deseret News, March 22, 1876; church claims, Times and Seasons, iii. 735-8; 767-9; v. 618-20; Kimball, in Times and Seasons, vi. 972-3; misappropriation of funds, Hall's Mormonism Exposed, 7-8. 'One of the most powerful levers which he had invented for moving his disciples in temple building was the doctrine of baptism for the dead...which baptism must be performed in the temple; no other place would give it the requisite efficacy.' Ferris' The Mormons, 97-8. 'Another mode of making the dimes was that of giving the blessing, as it was said, from heaven. This was the sole province of the patriarch, which office, till his death, was exercised by Hiram Smith. No blessing could be obtained for less than one dollar; but lie frequently received for this service twenty, thirty, and even forty dollars.' Hall's Mormonism, 22.

^145:5 It was ordered by revelation given to Joseph Smith, Jan. 19, 1841, that a hotel should be built and called the Nauvoo House; that it should be erected under the supervision of George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws, one of whom should be president of a joint-stock company to be formed for the purpose, and that stock subscriptions should be for not less than Jiffy dollars nor more than fifteen thousand dollars by any one man, and that only by a believer in the book of Mormon. Vinson Knight, Hyrum Smith, Isaac Galland, William Marks, Henry G. Sherwood, and William Law were directed by name to take stock. 'And now I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding-house, which I have commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it be built unto my name, and let my name be names upon it, and let my servant Joseph and his house have place therein from generation to generation.' The Nauvoo House Associaton was incorporated Feb. 23, 1841, by George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Snider, and Peter Haws, and associates. Copy of act in Bennett's Hist. Saints, 204-5. Plan of city, with cuts of temple baptismal font, and Nauvoo Legion, with description, in Bennett's Hist. Saints, 188-91, which is quite erroneous, the building being then not completed. I have taken this account chiefly from Phelps' description in The Prophet. The Nauvoo House, says Bennett, though intended chiefly for the reception and entertainment of strangers and travellers, contains, or rather when completed is to contain, a splendid suite of apartments for the special accommodation of the prophet Joe Smith, and heirs and descendants forever.' Cut of temple, and best description of Nauvoo institutions, in Mackay's The Mormons, 115, 190-1. The Nauvoo House, in form of an L, had a frontage on two streets of 120 feet each, by a depth of 49 feet; the estimated cost was $100,000. Times and Seasons, ii. 369. Another building opened in Nov. 1843 was the Nauvoo mansion.

^146:6 Chancellor, John C. Bennett; registrar, William Law; regents, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, William Marks, Samuel H. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, N. K. Whitney, Charles C. Rich, John T. Barnett, Wilson Law, John P. Greene, Vinson Knight, Isaac Galland, Elias Higbee, Robert D. Foster, James Adams, Samuel Bennett, Ebenezer Robinson, John Snider, George Miller, Lenos M. Knight, John Taylor, Heber C. Kimball. The tuition fees were five dollars per quarter, payable twice each quarter in advance.

^146:7 Among his generals were Robert D. Foster, George W. Robinson, Charles C. Rich, W. P. Lyon, Davison Hibbard, Hirum Kimball, A. P. Rockwood; majors, Willard Richards, Hosea Stout; colonels, John F. Weld, Orson Pratt, Francis M. Higbee, Carlos Gove, C. L. Higbee, James Sloan, George Schindle, Amass Lyman, D. B. Smith, George Coulson, Alexander McRea, J. R. Backenstos, [p. 147] L. Woodworth; captains, D. B. Huntington, Samuel Hicks, Amos Davis, Marcellus Bates, Charles Allen, L. N. Scovil, W. M. Allred, Justus Morse, John F. Olney, Darwin Chase, C. M. Kreymyer, and others. 'Col. A. P. Rockwood was drill-master. Rockwood was then a captain, but was afterward promoted to colonel of the militia, or host of Israel. I was then fourth corporal of a company. The people were regularly drilled and taught military tactics, so that they would be ready to act when the time came for returning to Jackson county, the promised land of our inheritance.' Lee's Mormonism, 112. 'Reviews were held from time to time, and flags presented, and Joseph appeared on all those occasions with a splendid staff, in all the pomp and circumstance of a full-blown military commander.' Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 100-1. 'At the last dress parade of the legion, he was accompanied in the field by display of ten of his spiritual wives or concubines, dressed in a fine uniform, and mounted on elegant white horses.' Tucker's Mormonism, 170. After the force reached Utah it was 'regularly drilled by competent officers, many of whom served in Mexico with the Mormon battalion under Gen. W. Scott. They are well armed, and perfectly fearless.' Hyde's Mormonism, 183. See further Times and Seasons, ii. 321-2, 417-18, 435, 517; iii. 654, 700-1, 718, 733-4, 921; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 306; Deseret News, April 15 and July 1, 1857, July 6, 1859; Gunnison's Mormons, 183; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 149; Kidder's Mormonism, 182-9.

^147:8 Says the St Louis Atlas of September 1841: The people of Nauvoo 'have [p. 148] been grossly misunderstood and shamefully libelled...The present population is between eight and nine thousand, and of course it is the largest town in Illinois. The people are very enterprising, industrious, and thrifty. They are at least quite as honest as the rest of us in this part of the world, and probably in any other. Some peculiarities they have, no doubt. Their religion is a peculiar one; that is, neither Buddhism, nor Mahometanism, nor Judaism, nor Christianity, but it is a faith which they say encourages no vice nor immorality, nor departure from established laws and usages; neither polygamy, nor promiscuous intercourse, nor community of property...Ardent spirits as a drink are not in use among them...Tobacco, also, is a weed which they seem almost universally to despise. We don't know but that the Mormons ought to be expatriated for refusing to drink whiskey and chew tobacco; but we hope the question will not be decided hastily, nor until their judges have slept off the fumes of their own liquor and cigars.' 'They have enclosed large farms on the prairie ground, on which they have raised corn, wheat, hemp, etc., and all this they have accomplished within the short space of four years. I do not believe there is another people in existence who could have made such improvements in the same length of time under the same circumstances. And here allow me to remark, that there are some here who have lately emigrated to this place, who have built themselves large and convenient homes in the town; others on their farms on the prairie, who, if they had remained at home, might have continued to live in rented houses all their days, and never once have entertained the idea of building one for themselves at their own expense.' Smucker's Mormonism, 159.

^148:9 Gentiles were not excluded from the holy city. In Bennett's Hist. Saints, 158, is given an ordinance, dated March 1, 1841, running as follows: 'Be it ordained by the city council the city of Nauvoo, that the catholics, presbyterians, methodists, baptists, latter-day saints, quakers, episcopalians, universalists, unitarians, mohammedans, and all other religious sects and denominations whatever, shall have toleration and equal privileges in this city; [p. 149] and should any person be guilty of ridiculing, abusing, or otherwise depreciating another in consequence of his religion, etc., he shall be fined and imprisoned.' On the 17th of March, 1842, the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo was organized.

^149:10 In the Salem Advertiser was published an account of the visit to Nauvoo in 1843 of one Newhall, a lecturer, who says: 'I sought in vain for anything that bore the marks of immorality, but was both astonished and highly pleased at my ill success. I could see no loungers about the streets nor any drunkards about the taverns. I did not meet with those distorted features of ruffians, or with the ill-bred and impudent. I heard not an oath in the place, I saw not a gloomy countenance; all were cheerful, polite, and industrious.' Smucker's Mormons, 154-5. 'The mayor of Nauvoo deserves praise for the stand he has taken in favor of temperance. The retailing of ardent spirits is not permitted within the bounds of the corporation.' Kidder's Mormons, 189. For city ordinance prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors in less quantity then a quart except as a physician's prescription, see Bennett's Hist. Saints, 27. On the 12th of Nov. 1841, B. Winchester writes from Nauvoo: 'You would be astonished, if you were here, at the vast improvement made in so short space of time...You will see nothing like idleness, but will hear the hum of industry, nay, may I not say more, the voice of merriment...Now as to the morality of the people here:...you know if you should throw cold water into melted iron the scene would be terrific, because the contrast would be so great; so it is with the saints: if a small portion of wickedness happens among them, the contrast between the spirit of Christ and that of darkness is so great that it makes a great upstir and tremendous excitement; this is the case here; but in other communities the same amount of crime would hardly be noticed.'

^150:11 Representative of a class of anti-Mormon literature, not altogether creditable to either its authors or supporters, are the following:

    The History of the Saints; or, An Expose of Joe Smith and Mormonism. By John C. Bennett. (Boston, 1842.)

    The Abominations of Mormonism Exposed; containing many Facts and Doctrines concerning that singular people during seven years' membership with them, from 1840 to 1847. By William Hall. (Cincinnati, 1852.)

    Mormonism: Its Leaders and Designs. By John Hyde, Jun., formerly a Mormon elder and resident of Salt Lake City. (New York, 1857.)

    Mormonism Unveiled; or, The Life and Confessions of the late Mormon bishop, John D. Lee; Written by Himself; Embracing a history of Mormonism from its inception down to the present time, with an exposition of the secret history, signs, symbols, and crimes of the Mormon Church; also the true history of the horrible butchery known as the Mountain Meadow Massacre. (St Louis, 1877.)

    The role of traitor is not one which in any wise brings credit to the performer, either from one side or the other. However great the service he may render us, we cannot but feel that he is false-hearted and vile. Many of the apostates, though they may not have written books, declare that they joined the sect only to learn their secrets and then expose them. These are the most contemptible of all. There may be cases where a young or inexperienced person, through ignorance or susceptibility, has been carried away for a time contrary to the dictates of cooler judgment; but the statements of such persons are justly regarded with more or less suspicion. Far better is it, far more honest and praiseworthy, for him who, having unwittingly made a mistake, seeks to rectify it, to go his way and say nothing about it; for if he talks of writing a book for the good of others, as a warning, and that they may avoid his errors, few will believe him. 'If he has proved traitor once,' they say, 'he will deceive again; and if he is sincere, we cannot more than half believe him, for such an individual is never sure of himself.' John C. Bennett, general, doctor, methodist preacher, and quack, is from his own showing a bad man. He devotes some fifty pages to the vindication of his character, which would not be necessary were he honest; other fifty are given to defaming his late worshipful patron Joseph Smith, which would never have been written were he true. When a man thrusts in your face three-score certificates of his good character, each signed by from one to a dozen persons, you may know that he is a very great rascal. Nor are we disappointed here. This author is a charlatan, pure and simple; such was he when he joined the Mormons, and before and after. We may credit him fully when he says, 'I never believed in them or their doctrines;' although in a letter to Dr Dyer, dated Nauvoo, Jan. 20, 1842, he declares: 'My heart is [p. 151] filled with indignation, and my blood boils within me, when I contemplate the vast injustice and cruelty which Missouri has meted out to the great philanthropist and devout Christian, General Joseph Smith, and his honest and faithful adherents.' When, however, he affects patriotism and lofty devotion to the welfare of his fellow-men, pretending to have joined the society in order to frustrate 'a daring and colossal scheme of rebellion and usurpation throughout the north-western states,...a despotic military and religious empire, the head of which, as emperor and pope, was to be Joseph Smith,' we know that the writer is well aware that it is all nonsense. Nor do we believe that he was induced to print his book 'by a desire to expose the enormous iniquities which have been perpetrated by one of the grossest and most infamous impostors that ever appeared upon the face of the earth.' We have heard and are still hearing so much of that kind of talk from some of the worst men in the community that it is becoming somewhat stale, and if the general really does not know better than this why he wrote his book, perhaps he will excuse me for telling him that it was, first, for notoriety; second, for money; and third, in order to make people think him a better and greater man than he is. When a man's ambition is pitched so low, it is a pity that he should not have the gratification of success. Bravely, then, the general proceeded to offer himself on the altar of his country, 'to overthrow the impostor and expose his iniquity' by 'professing himself a convert to his doctrines;' for 'the fruition of his hopeful project would, of course, have been preceded by plunder, devastation, and bloodshed, and by all the countless horrors which invariably accompany civil war.' We are still more impressed when we read: 'I was quite aware of the danger I ran'--that of being kicked out of some back door--'but none of these things deterred me.' Without wasting more time and space upon the man, we are well enough prepared to place a proper estimate upon his statements, particularly when we take into account that, in May of the very year in which his book was published, he went before Alderman Wells and made affidavit that Joseph Smith was an honest, virtuous, sincere, high-minded, and patriotic man. He says himself that he solemnly swore to be true to the Mormons and not reveal their secrets, and now in breaking that oath he has the audacity to ask us to regard him as an honest and truthful man! In some measure, at least, the statements of such men as this, taken up by the press and people, and reiterated throughout the land, have given the latter-day saints a worse name than they deserve. Some of his charges are too coarse and filthy for repetition. I will cite a few specimens, however, to show how far mendacity is sometimes carried in this direction.

    Joseph Smith is a 'monster who is using the power he possesses to gratify a brutal lust;' 'a Giovanni of some dozens of mistresses;' 'must be branded as a consummate knave;' one 'of the most heaven-daring liars the world ever saw;' 'notoriously profane;' 'gets most gloriously drunk,' etc. In the most vulgar and licentious language, he goes on to describe what he calls the 'Mormon seraglio,' 'the female inquisition,' 'Joe's cloistered, chambered, and cyprian maids.' He revels in all the wickedness of this kind during past ages which he can make up, rolling it as a sweet morsel under his tongue, finally affirming that 'the holy Joe outdoes them all!' He says that any woman belonging to the society who lapses from virtue is condemned to a life of secret prostitution, the most trustworthy members of the church having knowledge of it; another class indulge in illicit intercourse by special permission of the prophet; another class are the spiritual wives. All this is said, be it remembered, within two or three months of the time he made oath that Smith was one of the best and purest of men. Next comes an expose of several secret societies, the Danites, Destroying Angel, etc., and finally a list of murders and robberies perpetrated in that section during a certain time, all of [p. 152] which are charged to these agencies. Sidney Rigdon is praised by Bennett; so much the worse for Sidney. Doubtless this book played its part in bringing about the assassination of Joseph Smith. Says John Taylor of John C. Bennett: 'At one time he was a good man, but fell into adultery, and was cut off from the church for his iniquity;...he was also expelled from the municipal court, of which he was a member.' Public Discussion, 5-6.

    William Hall was an old gentleman of simple mind and manners when he wrote his book; he appears to be earnest and truthful. As he says of the saints, so I should say of him: he meant well, but he should beware of bad leaders. Hall was not a great man in the church, like Bennett; nevertheless, like Bennett he wrote a book, but unlike Bennett's, his book reads like that of an honest man, although it is full of bitter accusations against the Mormons. All such works should be taken with some degrees of allowance; for when a person begins to rail against any people or individual, he is apt to be carried away and misrepresent, intentionally or unintentionally. The period that Hall's experiences cover is quite an important one, including as it does the Illinois expulsion and the exodus to Great Salt Lake.

    Quite different from any of his brother apostates is John Hyde, Jr. who cannot by right be placed in the category of vulgar ranter or hypocritical reformer. I regard him as an able and honest man, sober and sincere. He does not denounce the sect as hypocrites. 'I know your sincerity; I know also your delusion,' he writes. He does not even denounce all the leaders; even to Brigham Young, whom he mercilessly scourges, he gives credit for ability and sincerity. 'That you are sincere in your confidence in Joseph Smith, and in your own pretensions,' he writes to him, 'I believe and acknowledge; but at the same time, that you are leading confiding thousands to misery and ruin is evident...I admire your genius, but I deplore its exercise...I admire the industry of your people, their notable labors, and their general sincerity; but I deplore their delusion, and I denounce their deceivers.' His book is dedicated 'To the honest believers in Mormonism,' and he says to them: 'In writing the following work I was not actuated by the base design of helping to malign an unpopular people, nor by the unworthy one of administering to a mere idle curiosity.' John Hyde was born in England, in 1833, and joined the Mormons there when fifteen years of age. He was almost immediately ordained a priest and began to preach. In 1851 he was ordained one of the seventies, an office of equal power but inferior jurisdiction to that of one of the twelve, and joined John Taylor in France. With about 400 Mormon converts he sailed from Liverpool in Feb. 1853, visited Nauvoo, and thence crossed the plains in company with 2,500 brethren to Salt Lake City, where he married and began teaching school. In Feb. 1854 he was 'initiated into the mysteries of the Mormon endowment,' became shaken in the faith, and the following year, having accepted a mission to the Hawaiian Islands, he threw off Mormonism and preached and wrote against it instead of for it. In his book he gives a description of Salt Lake City in 1853-4, a chapter entitles 'Practical Polygamy,' and others on Mormon Mysteries, Education, Brigham Young, Book of Mormon, Theoretical Polygamy, and Suppression of Mormonism. Hyde's book would be quite useful were he not so more about his dates; it would appear from the way he throws statements together that in the absence of a date he guessed at it.

    Still another style of book is that of John D. Lee, purporting to have been written by him, but as a matter of fact written for the most part by W. W. Bishop while Lee was in prison condemned to death. The work, therefore, though the story of a Mormon, and of one who under the circumstances could not be expected to be very friendly, is not by a Mormon. The book is not essentially different from the matter published in the newspapers about the time of Lee's execution, under the title of 'Confessions.' Lee gives the [p. 153] story of his life, simply and honestly enough; to this is added an account of the Mountain Meadow massacre, and of the arrest, trial, and execution of Lee. He was a native of Illinois, born in 1812, worked hard and with success while a young man, became an enthusiastic Mormon in 1837, and went to Missouri. With everything there he was highly delighted; he attended devoutly all the services of the church, and was duly promoted. He was with his people at Nauvoo, migrated with them to Utah, and was adopted by Brigham Young. In 1877 he was executed for participation in the Mountain Meadow massacre, excusing himself while cursing others.

    Mormonism and the Mormons; A Historical View of the rise and progress of the sect self-styled Latter-day Saints; by Daniel P. Kidder, is the title of a 16mo vol. of 342 pages, published in New York, and bearing no date, though entered for copyright in the year 1842. Mr Kidder certainly wrote a book on short acquaintance with the subject; as he says up to Nov. 1840, he knew little about it. On the 13th of that month he found himself on board a Mormon steamboat called the Fulton City, on the Mississippi River, bound for Nauvoo. Nearly all the passengers and crew were Mormons. Desirous of knowing more of them, and holding to the maxim that by teaching most is to be learned, he procured copies of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Howe's Mormonism Unveiled, and Corrill's Brief History, and seating himself before them made his book, which consists chiefly of extracts from the above sources tied together with occasional remarks neither startling nor original. In Nauvoo, without date, but probably about 1841, were published two chapters of nonsense about women and their relations and duties to men, entitled, An Extract from a Manuscript entitled The Peace-maker, or the Doctrines of the Millennium, being a Treatise on Religion and Jurisprudence, or a New System of Religion and Politics. For God, my Country, and my Rights. By Adney Hay Jacob, an Israelite, and a Shepherd of Israel. Nauvoo, Ill. J. Smith, Printer. In a preface the reader is told: 'The author of this work is not a Mormon although it is printed by their press.'

^153:12 In a letter to the prophet dated October 24, 1843 which has become quite famous, James A. Bennett pretends to have been baptized by Brigham Young, a ceremony that he alludes to as 'a glorious frolic in the clear blue ocean' with 'your most excellent and worthy friend, President B. Young.' 'Nothing of this kind,' he goes on to say, 'would in the least attach me to your person or cause. I am capable of being a most undeviating friend, without being governed by the smallest religious influence...I say, therefore, go ahead, you have my good wishes. You know Mahomet had his right-hand man,' etc. Smith replied at length in a religio-philosophic strain. More has been made of this correspondence than it deserves. It was printed in Times and Seasons, iv. 371-3, in Cor. between Joseph Smith... Wentworth... and... Calhoun, as well as in Mackay's The Mormons, and Smucker's Hist. Mor. See also Edinburgh Review, April 1854, 334. Mackay observes: 'Joseph's reply to this singular and too candid epistle was quite as singular and infinitely more amusing. Joseph was too cunning a man to accept, in plain terms, the rude but serviceable offer; and he rebuked the vanity and presumption of Mr Bennett, while dexterously retaining him for future use.' All this would have some signigicance if Smith had been in the least deceived, or had the writer of this letter and the original rascal been one.

^154:13 'At the conference in April 1840, the prophet delivered a lengthy address upon the history and condition of the saints. He reminded the brethren that all had suffered alike for the sake of the gospel. The rich and the poor had been brought to a common level by persecution; that many of the brethren were owing debts that they hail been forced to contract in order to get out of Missouri alive. He considered it was unchristian-like for the brethren to demand the payment of such debts; that he did not wish to screen any one from the just payment of his debts, but he did think that it would be for the glory of the kingdom if the people would, of their own will, freely forgive each other for all their existing indebtedness, one to the other, then renew their covenants with almighty God and with each other; refrain from evil, and live their religion; by this means, God's holy spirit would support and bless the people. The people were then asked if they were in favor of thus bringing about the year of jubilee. All that felt so inclined were asked to make it known by raising their hands; every hand in the audience was raised.' The prophet then declared all debts of the saints, to and from each other, forgiven and cancelled. He then gave the following words of advice to the people: 'I wish you all to know that because you were justified in taking property from your enemies while engaged in war in Missouri, which was needed to support you, there is now a different condition of things existing. We are no longer at war, and you must stop stealing. When the right time comes we will go in force and take the whole state of Missouri. It belongs to us as an inheritance; but I want no more petty stealing.' Lee's Mormonism, 110-11.

^154:14 Smith was first mayor. Feb. 1, 1841, Bennett was elected mayor and so continued till May 19, 1842, when Smith again assumed the office.

^155:15 Describing Nauvoo at this period, Linforth remarks: 'Before the close of 1842 a vast improvement had taken place. The city, which then extended 3 or 4 miles on the river, and about the same distance back, had been regularly laid off into blocks, containing 4 lots of 11 by 12 rods each, between 700 and 800 houses had been erected, and the population numbered about 15,000. Two steam-mills and 2 printing-presses existed, and buildings for various manufactures were rapidly going up. In the mean time the temple and Nauvoo House were progressing.' Route from Liverpool to G. S. L. Vally, 62.

^156:16 When on his return from Quincy, to which place he had accompanied Hyrum Smith and William Law, who were on a mission to the east, Joseph was arrested the 5th of June, 1841, on a warrant from Gov. Carlin to deliver him to the Missouri state authorities. In return, Joseph Smith brought suit against J. H. Reynolds and H. G. Wilson for false imprisonment. This as well as other affairs of the kind kept up a bitter excitement.

^156:17 On the 6th of May, 1842 Gov. Boggs was fired at through a window, and narrowly escaped being killed. The crime was charged to O. P. Rockwell, 'with the connivance and under the instructions of Joseph Smith.' Hyde's Mormonism, 105, 206. Boggs swore he believed Smith a party to the attempted assassination, and instituted legal proceedings. Mackay's The Mormons, 139. Bennett, Hist. Saints, 281-2, labors hard to prove that Smith wanted Boggs killed, and said as much, which it seems to me few would deny. Bennett states that in 1841 Smith prophesied that Boggs would die by violent hands within a year. 'In the spring of the year 1842 Smith offered a reward of $500 to any man who would secretly assassinate Gov. Boggs.' Joseph O. Boggs, brother of the governor, writes Bennett, Sept. 12, 1842, 'We have now no doubt of the guilt of Smith and Rockwell.' Id., 286. Rockwell was arrested, discharged, and went to Utah. 'Brigham has had him into the pulpit,' says Hyde, 'to address the meetings.' We read: 'Orin Porter Rockwell, the Mormon confined in our county jail some time since for the attempted assassination of ex-governor Boggs, was indicted by our last grand jury for escaping from the county jail some weeks since, and sent to Clay county for trial. Owing, however, to some informality in the proceedings, he was remanded to this county again for trial. There was not sufficient proof adduced against him to justify an indictment for shooting at ex-governor Boggs; and the grand jury, therefore, did not indict him for that offence.' Independent Expositor; Niles' Register, Sept. 30, 1843.

^162:18 John Hyde mentions a previous revelation. He says that about the year 1838 'Smith pretended to obtain a revelation from God authorizing him to practise polygamy, and began to practise it accordingly.' Mormonism, 203. See also Slater's Mormonism, 84, and Deseret News, Oct. 22, 1879. There is no truth whatever in this assertion. And yet John Hyde is regarded as pretty good authority; but in this loose way thousands of false statements have been made regarding the secrets of the saints.

^162:19 This revelation was first published in the Deseret News in 1852, and next in the Millennial Star at Liverpool, England, in 1853. It is given entire elsewhere in this volume. The Edinburgh Review of April 1854, 335, says, 'Not many months have yet passed since the Mormon leaders have decided on a bolder policy and have publicly avowed this portion of the system,' which shows that the fact of publication was not generally known to the gentile European world until two years after the official notice in Salt Lake City appeared. epics of it will also be found in Doc. and Cov., 423-32; Young's Wife No. 19, 77-86; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, app.; Burton's City of the Saints, 451-7; Tucker's Mormonism, 172-82; Smith's Rise, Prog. and Travels, 42-8; Pearl of Great Price, 64-70; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 135-8; and Stenhouse's Expose of Polygamy, 207-15.

^163:20 It is denied by some that polygamy was practised by the Mormons at this date. In the Deseret News of Oct. 22, 1879, are several statements under oath to the effect that between 1840 and 1843 Joseph taught the doctrine of celestial or plural marriage, that several women were sealed to him according to this doctrine, and this with the consent of Joseph's wife, Emma Smith. On the other hand, it is stated in the Salt Lake City Tribune, Oct. 3, 1879, that Emma denied that her husband was ever married to another, or that, so far as she knew, he ever had improper relations with any woman. Elder Pratt reported at Plano, Ill., in the summer of 1878, several instances of Joseph's having had wives sealed to him, one at least as early as April 5, 1841. 'Smith introduced (at Nauvoo) the system of spiritual wifeism, and had largely increased his household by celestial ensealment. This was the preliminary step of polygamy, or its practical adoption, though it had not yet been revealed as a tenet in the Mormon creed.' Tucker's Mormonism, 170. The revelation was written after he had taken other wives. Stenhouse's Expose of Polygamy, 70. Jos. Smith adopts it and is sealed to Eliza Snow. Tullidge's Life of Young, Suppl. 22. In a letter to the Deseret News, Oct. 22, 1879, Eliza R. Snow signs her name as 'a wife of Joseph Smith the prophet.' 'Brigham Young delivered over to Jo Smith all his wives except one, and soon after Smith had a revelation that Young should be his successor as head of the church.' Slater's Mormonism, 84. John D. Lee says: 'I understood that Brig. Young's wife was sealed to Joseph. After his death Brig. Young told me that Joseph's time on earth was short, and that the Lord allowed him privileges that we could not have.' Mormonism, 147. Jos. Smith had taken some more wives, but the revelation required that he should do it without publicity (for fear of the mob). Richards' Reminiscences, MS., 18. 'Joseph Smith lost his life entirely through attempting to persuade a Mrs Dr Foster, at Nauvoo, that it was the will of God she should become his spiritual wife; not to the exclusion of her husband, Dr Foster, but only to become his in time for eternity. This nefarious offer she confessed to her husband. Some others of a similar nature were discovered, and Dr Foster, William Law, and others began to expose Smith. Their paper was burned, type and press demolished, for which Smith was arrested, and afterward shot by Missourians, at Carthage, Ill.' Hyde's Mormonism, 85.

    'Smith and Noble repaired by night to the banks of the Mississippi, where Noble's sister was sealed to Smith by Noble, said the latter to another woman by Smith. These were the first plural marriages, and a son born to Noble the first child born in polygamy.' Young's Wife No. 19, 72-3. 'That polygamy existed at Nauvoo, and is now a mater scarcely attempted to be concealed among the Mormons, is certain.' Gunnison's Mormons, 120. On the other side, in Times and Seasons, iv. 143 (March 15, 1843), we read, 'The charge of advocating a plurality of wives is as false as the many other ridiculous charges brought against us.' In Id., v. 474 (March 15, 1844), Hyrum Smith declares that no such doctrine is taught or practised; and on p. 715 it is declared that 'the law of the land and the rules of the church do not allow one man to have more than one wife alive at once.' For additional denials by Parley Pratt, John Taylor, and others, see S. L. Tribune, Nov. 11, 1879.

^167:21 Doctrine and Covenants, app. 331.

^167:22 'It is believed,' writes Governor Ford not long afterward to the Illinois legislature, 'that Joseph Smith had announced a revelation from heaven sanctioning polygamy, by some kind of spiritual-wife system, which I never could well understand; but at any rate, whereby a man was allowed one wife in pursuance of the laws of the country, and an indefinite number of others, to be enjoyed in some mystical and spiritual mode; and that he himself, and many of his followers, had practised upon the precepts of this revelation, by seducing a large number of women.' Message to Ill. Sen.; 14th Ass. 1st Sess., 6. A copy of Ford's message will be found in Utah Tracts, no. 11.

^168:23 Copies of the correspondence may be found in Times and Sections, v. 393-6, 544-8; Mackay's The Mormons, 151-62; Olshausen, Geschichte der Mormonen, 202-19.

^168:24 'Now, oh people !' he continues, 'turn unto the Lord and live; and reform this nation. Frustrate the designs of wicked men. Reduce congress at least one half. Two senators from a state and two members to a million of population will do more business than the army that now occupy the halls [p. 169] of the national legislature. Pay them two dollars and their board per diem, except Sundays; that is more than the farmer gets, and he lives honestly. Curtail the offices of government in pay, number, and power, for the philistine lords have shorn our nation of its goodly locks in the lap of Delilah. Petition your state legislature to pardon every convict in their several penitentiaries, blessing them as they go, and saying to them in the name of the Lord, Go thy way and sin no more...Petition also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave states, your legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now, and save the abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame. Pray congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands, and from the deduction of pay from the members of congress...Give every man his constitional freedom, and the president full power to send an army to suppress mobs; and the states authority to repeal and impugn that relic of folly which makes it necessary for the governor of a state to make the demand of the president for troops in cases of invasion or rebellion. The governor himself may be a mobber, and instead of being punished as he should be for murder and treason, he may destroy the very lives, rights, and property he should protect. Like the good Samaritan, send every lawyer as soon as he repents and obeys the ordinances of heaven, to preach the gospel to the destitute, without purse or scrip, pouring in the oil and the wine...Were I the president of the United States, by the voice of a virtuous people, I would honor the old paths of the venerated fathers of freedom; I would walk in the tracks of the illustrious patriots, who carried the ark of the government upon their shoulders with an eye single to the glory of the people...When a neighboring realm petitioned to join the union of the sons of liberty, my voice would be, Come; yea, come Texas; come Mexico; come Canada; and come all the world--let us be brethren; let us be one great family; and let there be universal peace.' A full copy of the address is given in Times and Seasons, 528-533; Mackay's The Mormons, 141-51; Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, 353-71.

^169:25 Two months after announcing himself a candidate for the presidency, Joseph again publicly declared that all America, from north to south, constituted the Zion of the saints, theirs by right of heavenly inheritance.

^170:26 In Remy's Jour. to G. S. Lake City, i. 388, it is stated that, among others, a renegade catholic priest, J. H. Jackson by name, 'conceived the idea of starting at Nauvoo a newspaper called the Expositor, with the avowed object of opposing the Mormons.' I find no confirmation of this statement. The first number of the Nauvoo Neighbor had been issued May 3, 1843, in place of the Wasp, suspended.

^171:27 Letter of John S. Fullmer to the New York Herald, dated Nauvoo, Oct. 30, 1844 (but not published until several years later). A copy of it will be found in Utah Tracts, ix. p. 7. Smith had been elected mayor on the resignation of John C. Bennett April 19, 1842. Mackay, The Mormons, 168, says 'A body of the prophet's adherents, to the number of two hundred and upward, sallied forth in obedience to this order and proceeding to the office of the Expositor, speedily razed it to the ground.' Remy states that 'an order to destroy the journal signed by Joseph was immediately put into execution by a police officer, who proceeded the same day to break up the presses.' Journey, i. 389. Ford declares that the marshal aided by a portion of the legion executed his warrant by destroying the press and scattering the type and other materials of the office. Message to Ill. Sen., 14th Ass. 1st Sess., 4.

^171:28 'At a meeting of the citizens of Hancock co. held at Carthage, on the [p. 172] 6th inst, it was resolved to call in the people of the surrounding counties and states, to assist them in delivering up Joe Smith, if the governor of Illinois refused to comply with the requisition of the governor of Missouri. The meeting determined to avenge with blood any assaults made upon citizens by the Mormons. It was also resolved to refuse to obey officers elected by the Mormons, who have complete control of the country, being a numerical majority.' Missouri Reporter, in Niles Register, lxv. 70, Sept. 30, 1843.

^175:29 Report, ut supra, 10-11. In Times and Seasons, v. 560, it is stated that 'on Monday, June 24th, after Ford had sent word that eighteen persons demanded on a warrant, among whom were Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith, should be protected by the militia of the state, they in company with ten or twelve others start for Carthage.'

^176:30 Message, ut supra. The above appear to be the facts of the case, so far as they can be sifted from a lengthy report, which consists mainly of apology or explanation of what the governor did or left undone.

^176:31 Smith's Doc. and Cov., app. 335. The same morning he read in the fifth chapter of Ether, 'And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the gentiles grace, that they might have charity. And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me, If they have not charity it mattereth not unto you, thou hast been faithful; wherefore thy garments are clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness, thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my father.'

^178:32 Littlefield says the Carthage Greys were marched in a body, 'within about eight rods of the jail, where they halted, in plain view of the whole transaction, until the deed was executed.' Narrative, 9.

^179:33 'He wounded three of them, two mortally, one of whom, as he rushed down out of the door, was asked if he was badly hurt. He replied, "Yes; my arm is shot all to pieces by old Joe; but I don't care, I've got revenge; and I shot Hyrum!"' Id., 11.

^183:34 Joseph dropped his pistol, and sprang into the window; but just as he was preparing to descend, he saw such an array of bayonets below, that he caught by the window casing, where he hung by his hands and feet, with his head to the north, feet to the south, and his body swinging downward. He hung in that position three or four minutes, during which time he exclaimed two or three times, 'O Lord, my God!' and fell to the ground. While he was hanging in that situation, Col. Williams halloed, 'Shoot him! God damn him! shoot the damned rascal!' However, none fired at him. He seemed to fall easy. He struck partly on his right shoulder and back, his neck and head reaching the ground a little before his feet. He rolled instantly on his face. From this position he was taken by a young man who sprung to him from the other side of the fence, who held a pewter fife in his hand, was barefooted and bareheaded, having on no coat, with his pants rolled above his knees, and shirt-sleeves above his elbows. He set President Smith against the south side of the well-curb that was situated a few feet from the jail. While doing this the savage muttered aloud, 'This is old Jo; I know him. I know you, old Jo. Damn you; you are the man that had my daddy shot'--intimating that he was a son of Boggs, and that it was the Missourians who were doing this murder. Littlefield's Narrative, 13.

^183:35 After President Taylor's account in Burton's City of the Saints, the best authorities on this catastrophe are: Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; also a Condensed History of the Expulsion of the Saints from Nauvoo, by Elder John S. Fullmer (of Utah, U.S.A.), Pastor of the Manchester, Liverpool, and Preston Conferences. Liverpool and London, 1855; Message of the Governor of the State of Illinois, in relation to the disturbances in Hancock County, December 23, 1844. Springfield, 1844; Awful assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith; the pledged faith of the State of Illinois stained with innocent blood by a mob, in Times and Seasons, v. 560-75; A Narrative of the Massacre of Joseph and Hyrum Smith by an Outsider and an Eye-witness, in Utah Tracts, i.; and The Martyrdom of Joseph Smith, by Apostle John Taylor, a copy of which is contained in Burton's City of the Saints, 625-67. Brief accounts will be found in Utah Pamphlets, 23; Lee's Mormonism, 152-5; Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, 388-96; Hall's Mormonism Exposed, 15-16; Green's Mormonism, 36-7; Tullidge's Women, 297-300; Olshausen, Gesch. der Mor., 100-3; Tucker's Mormonism, 189-92; Mackay's The Mormons, 169-72; Smucker's Hist. Mor., 177-9; Ferris' Utah and Mormons, 120-5, and in other works on Mormonism. In the Atlantic Monthly for Dec. 1869 ia an article entitled 'The Mormon Prophet's Tragedy,' which, however justly it may lay claim to Boston 'smart' writing, so far as the facts are concerned is simply a tissue of falsehoods.

^186:36 Another account says that at 36 he weighed 212 lbs, stood 6 feet in his pumps, was robust, corpulent, and jovial, but when roused to anger his expression was very severe.

^188:37 Mackay's The Mormons, 131-3. Of course views as to Joseph Smith's character are expressed in nearly all the works published on Mormonism. With the exception, perhaps, of Mahomet, no one has been so much bespattered with praise by his followers and with abuse by his adversaries as the founder of this faith.

^189:38 To the letter was appended a postscript from the governor, bidding the Mormons defend themselves until protection could be furnished, and one from [p. 190] General Deming, telling them to remain quiet, that the assassination would be condemned by three fourths of the people of Illinois, but that they were in danger of attack from Missouri, and 'prudence might obviate material destruction.' Times and Seasons, v. 561.

^190:39 Copies of it will be found in Id., v. 564-5; Mackay's The Mormons, 178-9; and Smucker's Hist. Mor., 1867.

^191:40 In Message to Ill. Legis., 20, it is stated that some of the murderers afterward surrendered on the understanding that they should be admitted to bail. There was not sufficient proof to convict them.

^192:41 The full text of both letters is given in Times and Seasons, v. 568, 586-7; Mackay's The Mormons, 180-2; Smucker's Hist. Mormons, 189-92.

^192:42 Who are thus described in a letter addressed by Phelps to the editor of the New York Prophet, a small journal established to promulgate the views of the sect: 'Brigham Young, the lion of the Lord; Heber C. Kimball, the herald of grace; Parley P. Pratt, the archer of paradise; Orson Hyde, the olive branch of Israel; Willard Richards, the keeper of the rolls; John Taylor, the champion of right; William Smith, the patriarchal staff of Jacob; Wilford Woodruff, the banner of the gospel; George A. Smith, the entablature of truth; Orson Pratt, the gauge of philosophy; John E. Page, the sun-dial; and Lyman Wight, the wild ram of the mountains. They are good men; the best the Lord can find.' See Mackay's The Mormons. 186.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

CHAPTER VII.
 BRIGHAM YOUNG SUCCEEDS JOSEPH.
 1844-1845.

THE QUESTION OF SUCCESSION--BIOGRAPHY OF BRIGHAM YOUNG--HIS EARLY LIFE--CONVERSION--MISSIONARY WORK--MADE PRESIDENT OF THE TWELVE--HIS DEVOTION TO THE PROPHET--SIDNEY RIGDON AND BRIGHAM YOUNG RIVAL ASPIRANTS FOR THE PRESIDENCY--RIGDON'S CLAIMS--PUBLIC MEETINGS--BRIGHAM ELECTED PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH--HIS CHARACTER--TEMPLE- BUILDING--FRESH DISASTERS--THE AFFAIR AT MORLEY--THE MEN OF QUINCY AND THE MEN OF CARTHAGE--THE MORMONS CONSENT TO ABANDON THEIR CITY.

    UPON the death of Joseph Smith, one of the questions claiming immediate attention was, Who shall be his successor? It was the first time the question had arisen in a manner to demand immediate solution, and the matter of succession was not so well determined then as now, it being at present well established that upon the death of the president of the church the apostle eldest in ordination and service takes his place.

    Personal qualifications would have much to do with it; rules could be established later. The first consideration now was to keep the church from falling in pieces. None realized the situation better than Brigham Young, who soon made up his mind that he himself was the man for the emergency. Then to make it appear plain to the brethren that God would have him take Joseph's place, his mind thus works: "The first thing that I thought of," he says, "was whether Joseph had taken the keys of the kingdom with him

[p. 194]

from the earth. Brother Orson Pratt sat on my left; we were both leaning back on our chairs. Bringing my hand down on my knee, I said, 'The keys of the kingdom are right here with the church.'" But who held the keys of the kingdom? This was the all-absorbing question that was being discussed at Nauvoo when Brigham and the other members of the quorum arrived at that city on the 6th of August, 1844.

    Brigham Young was born at Whitingham, Windham county, Vermont, on the 1st of June, 1801. His father, John, a Massachusetts farmer, served as a private soldier in the revolutionary war, and his grandfather as surgeon in the French and Indian war. [*1] In 1804 his family, which included nine children, [*2] of whom he was then the youngest, removed to Sherburn, Chenango county, New York, where for a time hardship and poverty were their lot. Concerning Brigham's youth there is little worthy of record. Lack of means compelled him, almost without education, to earn his own livelihood, as did his brothers, finding employment as best they could. Thus, at the age of twenty-three, when he married he had learned how to work as farmer, carpenter, joiner, painter, and glazier, in the last of which occupations he was an expert craftsman.

    In 1829 he removed to Mendon, Monroe county, where his father then resided; and here, for the first time, he saw the book of Mormon at the house of his brother Phineas, who had been a pastor in the reformed methodist church, but was now a convert to Mormonism. [*3]

[p. 195]

    About two years later he himself was converted [*4] by the preaching of Elder Samuel H. Smith, brother of the prophet; on the 14th of April, 1832, he was baptized, and on the same night ordained an elder, his father [*5] and all his brothers afterward becoming proselytes. During the same month he set forth to meet the prophet at Kirtland, where he found him and several of his brethren chopping wood. "Here," says Brigham, "my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the prophet of God...He was happy to see us and bid us welcome. In the evening a few of the brethren came in, and we conversed together upon the things of the kingdom. He called upon me to pray. In my prayer I spoke in tongues. As soon as we rose from our knees, the brethren flocked around him, and asked his opinion...He told them it was the pure Adamic language;...it is of God, and the time will come when Brother Brigham Young will preside over this church." In 1835 he was chosen, as will be remembered, one of the quorum of the twelve, and the following spring set forth on a missionary tour to the eastern states. Returning early in the winter, he saved the life of the prophet, and otherwise rendered good service during the great apostasy of 1836, when the church passed through its darkest hour. [*6]

    Brigham was ever a devoted follower of the prophet, and at the risk of his own life, shielded him against the persecutions of apostates. At the close of 1837 he was driven by their machinations from Kirtland, [*7]

[p. 196]

and took refuge at Dublin, Indiana, where he was soon afterward joined by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. Thence, in company with the former, he went to Missouri, arriving at Far West a short time before the massacre at Haun's Mill. Once more Brigham was compelled to flee for his life, and now betook himself to Quincy, where he raised means to aid the destitute brethren in leaving Missouri, [*8] and directed the first settlement of the saints in Illinois, the prophet Joseph, Parley P. Pratt, and others being then in prison.

    By revelation of July 8, 1838, [*9] it was ordered that eleven of the quorum should "depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name. Let them take leave of my saints in the city Far West, on the 26th day of April next; on the building spot of my house, saith the Lord." As the twelve had been banished from Missouri and could not return with safety, many of the church dignitaries urged that the latter part of this revelation should not be fulfilled. "But," says Brigham, "I felt differently, and so did those of the quorum who were with me." The affairs of the church were now in the hands of the twelve, and their president was not the man to shrink from danger. "The Lord had spoken, and it was their duty to obey."

    The quorum started forth, and reaching Far West toward the end of April, hid themselves in a grove. Between midnight of the 25th and dawn of the 26th

[p. 197]

they held a conference, relaid the foundation of the house of the Lord, [*10] and ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith as apostles in place of those who had fallen from grace. "Thus," says Brigham, "was this revelation fulfilled, concerning which our enemies said, if all the other revelations of Joseph Smith came to pass, that one should not be fulfilled."

    Upon the excommunication of Thomas B. Marsh, in 1839, the office of president of the twelve devolved by right on Brigham by reason of his seniority of membership. On the 14th of April, 1840, he was publicly accepted by the council as their head, and at the reorganization of the church councils at Nauvoo he was appointed by revelation on the 19th of January, 1843, president of the twelve travelling council.

    After the founding of Nauvoo, the president, together with three others of the quorum, [*11] sailed for Liverpool, where they arrived on the 6th of April, 1840, the tenth anniversary of the organization of the church. Here he was engaged for about a year in missionary work, of which more hereafter. Taking ship for New York on the 20th of April, 1841, he reached Nauvoo on the 1st of July, and was warmly welcomed by the prophet, who a few days afterward [*12] received the following revelation: "Dear and well-beloved brother Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me; I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name. I therefore command you to send my word abroad, and take special care of your family from this time henceforth and forever. Amen."

    Already the mantle of the prophet was falling upon the president of the twelve; already the former had

[p. 198]

foretold his own death; but notwithstanding the revelation, Brigham was sent as a missionary to the eastern states, and at Peterborough, New Hampshire, received news of the tragedy at Carthage jail.

    When Governor Ford and his militia were preparing to march on Nauvoo for the purpose of forestalling civil war, the only course open to the prophet and his followers was a removal from Illinois. In 1842 an expedition had been planned to explore the country toward or beyond the Rocky Mountains; but when Joseph Smith put himself forward as a candidate for the presidency of the United States, all other matters were for the time forgotten. Brigham claimed that had he been present the assassination would never have occurred; he would not have permitted the prophet's departure for Carthage: rather would he have sent him to the mountains under a guard of elders. But Brigham had no reason to complain of the dispensation of providence which was now to bring his clear, strong judgment and resolute will to the front.

 

    Prominent among the aspirants for the presidency of the church was Sidney Rigdon, one of the first and ablest to espouse the cause, and not altogether without grounds for his pretensions. He had performed much labor, had encountered many trials, and had received scanty honors, being at present nothing more than preacher, and professor of history, belles-lettres, and oratory. By revelation of January 19, 1841, he had been offered the position of counsellor to the prophet, [*13]

[p. 199]

if he would consent to humble himself. But Sidney would not humble himself. Soon after Joseph's death, at which he was not present, he had a revelation of his own, bidding him conduct the saints to pittsburgh. [*14] Visiting that city, he found the time not yet ripe for this measure; and meanwhile returning to Nauvoo, the 3d of August, he offered himself on the following day as a candidate for the presidency, aided by Elder Marks.

    Sidney now put forth all his strength to gain influence and secure retainers. He must have Joseph's mantle; he must have the succession, or henceforth he would be nothing. It was a momentous question, not to be disposed of in a day. To substantiate his claim, Sidney could now have visions with the best of them; on various occasions he told how the Lord had through him counselled the people to appoint him as their guardian. He requested that a meeting should be held on the following sabbath, the 8th of August, for the further consideration of the matter. But prior to this meeting Parley Pratt and two others of the twelve bade the candidate go with them to the house of John Taylor, who yet lay prostrate with his wounds. Taylor expostulated with him, but to no purpose. Sidney continued to press his claims, even assuming the sacred office, prophesying and ordaining. On the sabbath named, according to appointment, Sidney and his supporters met in the grove near the temple; but were confronted by the apostles, with Brigham at their head. Standing before them, Sidney addressed the

[p. 200]

brethren for nearly two hours. Yet he seemed to make no impression. "The Lord has not chosen him," said one to another. The assembly then adjourned to two o'clock, when the saints in and about Nauvoo gathered in great numbers. After singing and prayer, through the vast assemblage was heard a voice, strikingly clear, distinct, and penetrating. [*15] It was the voice of Brigham, who said: "Attention, all! For the first time in my life I am called to act as chief of the twelve; for the first time in your lives you are called to walk by faith, your prophet being no longer present in the flesh. I desire that every one present shall exercise the fullest liberty. I now ask you, and each of you, if you want to choose a guardian, a prophet, evangelist, or something else as your head to lead you. All who wish to draw away from the church, let them do it, but they will not prosper. If any want Sidney Rigdon to lead them, let them have him; but I say unto you that the keys of the kingdom are with the twelve." [*16]

    It was then put to vote, Brigham meanwhile saying, "All those who are for Joseph and Hyrum, the book of Mormon, book of Doctrine and Covenants, the temple, and Joseph's measures, they being one party, will be called upon to manifest their principles boldly, the opposite party to enjoy the same liberty." [*17] The result was ten votes for Sidney, the quorum with Brigham at their head getting all the rest. Elder Philips then motioned that all "who have voted for Sidney Rigdon be suspended until they can have a trial before the high council." [*18]

    The truth is, Sidney was no match for Brigham. It was a battle of the lion and the lamb; only Brigham

[p. 201]

did not know before that he was a lion, while Sidney received the truth with reluctance that he was indeed a lamb. Something more than oratory was necessary to win in this instance; and of that something, with great joy in his heart, Brigham found himself in possession. It was the combination of qualities which we find present primarily in all great men, in all leaders of men--intellectual force, mental superiority, united with personal magnetism, and physique enough to give weight to will and opinion; for Brigham Young was assuredly a great man, if by greatness we mean one who is superior to others in strength and skill, moral, intellectual, or physical. The secret of this man's power--a power that within a few years made itself felt throughout the world--was this: he was a sincere man, or if an impostor, he was one who first imposed upon himself. He was not a hypocrite; knave, in the ordinary sense of the term, he was not; though he has been a thousand times called both. If he was a bad man, he was still a great man, and the evil that he did was done with honest purpose. He possessed great administrative ability; he was far-seeing, with a keen insight into human nature, and a thorough knowledge of the good and evil qualities of men, of their virtues and frailties. His superiority was native to him, and he was daily and hourly growing more powerful, developing a strength which surprised himself, and gaining constantly more and more confidence in himself, gaining constantly more and more the respect, fear, and obedience of those about him, until he was able to consign Sidney to the buffetings of Satan for a thousand years, while Brigham remained president and supreme ruler of the church. [*19]

[p. 202]

    Thus Brigham Young succeeded Joseph Smith. The work of the latter was done. It was a singular work, to which he was singularly adapted; the work yet to be done is no less remarkable, and a no less remarkable agent is raised up at the right moment. Matters assume now a more material turn, and a more material nature is required to master them--if coarser-grained, more practical, rougher, more dogmatical, dealing less in revelations from heaven and more in self-protection and self-advancement here on earth, so much the better for the saints. "Strike, but hear me!" Joseph with Themistocles used to cry; "I will strike, and you shall hear me," Brigham would say.

    No wonder the American Israel received Brigham as the gift of God, the Lion of the Lord, [*20] though the explanation of the new ruler himself would have been nearer that of the modern evolutionist, who would account for Brigham's success as the survival of the fittest. It was fortunate for the saints at this juncture that their leader should be less prophet than priest and king, less idealist than business manager, political economist, and philosopher. Brigham holds communion with spiritual powers but distantly, perhaps distrustfully; at all events, he commands the spirits rather than let them command him; and the older he grows the less he has to do with them; and the less he has to do with heavenly affairs, the more his mind dwells on earthly matters. His prophecies are eminently practical; his people must have piety that will pay. And later, and all through his life, his position is a strange one. If the people about Nauvoo are troublesome, God orders him west; and then he tells

[p. 203]

him if roads are opened and canals constructed it will please him. From these practical visions come actions, and on a Sunday the great high-priest rises in the tabernacle and says: "God has spoken. He has said unto his prophet, 'Get thee up, Brigham, and build me a city in the fertile valley to the south, where there is water, where there are fish, where the sun is strong enough to ripen the cotton plants, and give raiment as well as food to my saints on earth. Brethren willing to aid God's work should come to me before the bishop's meeting.'" "As the prophet takes his seat again," says an eye-witness, "and puts on his broad-brimmed hat, a hum of applause runs around the bowery, and teams and barrows are freely promised."

    To whatsoever Brigham applied himself he directed his whole strength, provided his whole strength was necessary to the accomplishment of his purpose. There were others in the field against him, aspirants for the late prophet's place, besides Sidney; but directing his efforts only against the most powerful of them, the president of the twelve summoned the quorum and the people, as we have seen, crushed Rigdon and his adherents by one of the master-strokes which he was now learning, declared the revelations of Rigdon to be of the devil, cut him off, cursed him, and was himself elected almost without a dissenting voice, giving all ostensibly the fullest liberty to act, yet permitting none of them to do so, and even causing ten to be tried for dissenting. Henceforth none dared to gainsay his authority; he became not only the leader of the Mormons, but their dictator; holding authority for a time as president of the twelve apostles, and finally in the capacity of the first presidency, being made president of the whole church in December 1847.

    Brigham Young was now in his forty-third year, in the prime of a hale and vigorous manhood, with exuberant vitality, with marvelous energy, and with unswerving faith in his cause and in himself. In stature

[p. 204]

he was a little above medium height; in frame well-knit and compact, though in later years rotund and portly; in carriage somewhat stately; presence imposing, even at that time, and later much more so; face clean shaven now, but afterward lengthened by full beard except about the mouth; features all good, regular, well formed, sharp, and smiling, and wearing an expression of self-sufficiency, bordering on the supercilious, which later in life changed to a look of subdued sagacity which he could not conceal; deep-set, gray eyes, cold, stern, and of uncertain expression, lips thin and compressed, and a forehead broad and massive--his appearance was that of a self-reliant and strong-willed man, of one born to be master of himself and many others. In manner and address he was easy and void of affectation, deliberate in speech, conveying his original and suggestive ideas in apt though homely phrase. [*21] When in council he was cool and imperturbable, slow to decide, and in no haste to act; but when the time for action came he worked with an energy that was satisfied only with success.

    Like his predecessor, he was under all circumstances naturally a brave man, possessing great physical strength, and with nerves unshaken by much excess or sickness. That he was given to strong drink has often been asserted by his enemies, but never by his friends, and rarely by impartial observers. He was always in full possession of himself, being far too wise a man to destroy himself through any indiscretion.

    He was undoubtedly the man for the occasion, however, for no other could, at this juncture, save the Mormons from dissolution as a sect and as a people. If the saints had selected as their leader a man less resolute, less confident, less devoted to his cause and to his people, a man like Sidney Rigdon,

[p. 205]

for example, Mormonism would have split into half a dozen petty factions, the strongest of which would hardly be worthy of notice.

    Discussing the great Mormon leaders, Hyde, who though an apostate was one of the most impartial of writers, says: "Brigham Young is far superior to Smith in everything that constitutes a great leader. Smith was not a man of genius; his forte was tact. He only embraced opportunities that presented themselves. He used circumstances, but did not create them. The compiling genius of Mormonism was Sidney Rigdon. Smith had boisterous impetuosity, but no foresight. Polygamy was not the result of his policy, but of his passions. Sidney gave point, direction, and apparent consistency to the Mormon system of theology. He invented its forms and many of its arguments. He and Parley Pratt were its leading orators and polemics. Had it not been for the accession of these two men, Smith would have been lost, and his schemes frustrated and abandoned. That Brigham was superior not only to Smith but also to Rigdon is evident."

    Burton says: "His manner is at once affable and impressive, simple and courteous,...shows no sign of dogmatism,...impresses a stranger with a certain sense of power; his followers are, of course, wholly fascinated by his superior strength of brain." Temper even and placid, manner cold, but he is neither morose nor methodistic. Often reproves in violent language; powers of observation acute; has an excellent memory, and is a keen judge of character. "If he dislikes a stranger at the first interview, he never sees him again. Of his temperance and sobriety there is but one opinion. His life is ascetic; his favorite food is baked potatoes with a little buttermilk, and his drink water." [*22]

[p. 206]

    Further: though he made his people obey him, he shared their privations. Soon we shall find him rousing his followers from the lethargy of despair, when their very hearts had died within them, and when all cheeks blanched but his; speaking words of cheer to the men, and with his own sick child in his arms, sharing his scant rations with women and children who held out their hands for bread.

 

    For a brief space after the election of Brigham the saints had rest. The city of Nauvoo continued to thrive; [*23] a portion of the temple was finished and dedicated, [*24] the building of the Nauvoo house and council-house was progressing rapidly.

    Their buildings were erected with great sacrifice of time, and amidst difficulties and discouragement in consequence of poverty. Money was exceedingly scarce. [*25] The revelation requiring tithing, made in 1838, was first practically applied in Nauvoo; the tenth day was regularly given to work on the temple; the penny subscriptions of the sisters are mentioned, which was a weekly contribution, and was intended for the purchase of glass and nails. Every effort was made to encourage manufacture, and to utilize their water-power. At a meeting of the trades delegates

[p. 207]

there was intelligent discussion as to the place becoming a great manufacturing centre. [*26]

    In January 1845 it was proposed that a building for the high-priests should be erected, to cost $15,000, and the work was cheerfully undertaken. There were frequent entertainments given in the way of dances and public dinners in the Nauvoo mansion and in the bowery six miles out of the city. [*27] At their conference in April, thousands gathered. The temple was pushed forward, as the people were counselled to receive their endowments there as early as possible. On the 24th of May the walls were finished, and the event was duly celebrated. [*28] On the 5th of October their first meeting in the temple was held. [*29] From mites and tithings it was estimated that a million dollars had been raised. Brigham, Parley, and others of the quorum administered in the temples to hundreds of people, the services often continuing all day and night. [*30] At the end of December one thousand of the people had received the ordinances. And all this was done midst renewed persecutions, and while the people were making preparations to evacuate the city.

    The masons withdrew the dispensation previously granted to Nauvoo, and to this day they refuse to admit Mormons into their order.

[p. 208]

    Fresh disaster now approached Nauvoo. The whigs and the democrats of Illinois had both sought to secure the Mormon vote, until finally they began to declare that Mormonism signified a government not in accord with that of the United States. The city charter had been repealed in January 1845, and Daniel Spencer, who had been elected to fill the remainder of the term of the murdered mayor, was deposed, as were all the other city officers; a new charter was before the legislature, but never granted. These and like measures, followed as they were by the discharge of Joseph Smith's assassins, imparted to the gentiles renewed courage. The crimes of the whole country were laid at the door of the saints. Nauvoo was denounced as a den of counterfeiters, cattle-thieves, and assassins, [*31] the leaders of the gang being men who in the name of religion outraged all sense of decency. The smuts retaliated in kind; and shortly it came about that in sections settled by Mormons gentiles feared to travel, and in sections settled by gentiles Mormons feared to travel. In view of this state of affairs, which was more like old-time feudalism than latter-day republicanism, Governor Ford made an inspection of the city, and declared that fewer thefts were committed in Nauvoo in proportion to population than in any other town in the state. The cause of this, however, may have lain in the fact that the population of Nauvoo was chiefly Mormon, and whatever might be their depredations upon the gentiles, the saints were not accustomed to steal from each other.

    At a place called the Morley settlement, in Hancock county, in September 1845, the people held a meeting to devise means for the prevention of thievery. Though few definite charges were advanced, there was much said derogatory to Mormon honesty. Presently the discharge of a gun was heard, once or twice, perhaps more. It was said the shots were fired

[p. 209]

by Mormons, and that they took aim at the house in which the meeting was held. Soon the cry went abroad that the Mormons were in arms, and there were quickly volunteers at hand to help the men of Morley. A meeting was held, and it was resolved to expel the saints. At the time appointed, armed bands appeared and burned some twenty Mormon dwellings, driving the inmates into the bushes. [*32] The people of Illinois were evidently now determined to adopt the previous policy of the men of Missouri. This was not all. Word had come that forces from Nauvoo were moving to the aid of the Mormons at Morley, whereupon the gentiles throughout all that region banded, threatening to burn and drive out the saints until not one should remain. As a beginning, Buel's flouring mill and carding machine, near Lima, the property of a Mormon, was reduced to ashes. [*33]

    And now the men of Quincy, their old friends and benefactors, turned against them; and though not manifesting the deadly hate displayed in some quarters, were nevertheless resolved that the Mormons should depart from the stake. On the 22d the citizens met and agreed that further efforts to live in peace with the Mormons were useless. [*34]

    Indeed, the saints themselves had reached the

[p. 210]

same conclusion. It was no new idea to them, seeking a home elsewhere. It was a rough element, that by which they were surrounded, an element which brought upon them more of evil than of good. Comparatively few additions were made to their number from the bold border men of Missouri and Illinois, most of their proselytes coming from other parts of the United States and from Europe. The whole great west was open to them; even during the days of Joseph there had been talk of some happy Arcadian retreat far away from every adverse influence; [*35] and in the fertile brain of Brigham the idea assumed proportions yet broader and of more intensified form, significant of western empire and isolation somewhere in California or the Pacific isles, with himself as leader, and followers drawn from every quarter of the globe.

    A general council was held on the 9th of September, at which it was resolved that a company of fifteen hundred men be selected to go to Salt Lake Valley, and a committee of five was appointed to gather information relative to the subject. [*36] There were frequent meetings of the authorities and consultations in regard to emigrating to California. [*37]

    The saints would go, they said, but they must have a reasonable time in which to dispose of their property

[p. 211]

and leave the country. [*38] The meeting at Quincy, notice of which with a copy of the resolutions was sent to Nauvoo, named six months as the time within which the Mormons must depart. In answer, the council of the church replied, on the 24th of September, that they could not set forth so early in the spring, when there would be neither food for man or beast, nor even running water, but that it was their full intention to depart as soon as possible, and that they would go far enough, God helping them, forever thereafter to be free from their enemies. Meanwhile all they asked was that they should not be further molested by armed bands or suits at law, but rather assisted in selling their property and collecting their effects. [*39]

    To this the men of Quincy gave assent; at the same time pledging themselves to prompt action in case of failure oil the part of the saints to keep their promise, and taking measures to secure a military organization of the people of Adams county. [*40]

    It was not to be expected that Carthage would remain idle while other towns were acting. A convention of delegates from nine surrounding counties was held there about the end of September, and four commissioners, among whom were Hardin, commander of the state militia, and Douglas, senator, [*41] were sent to Nauvoo to demand the departure of the Mormons. The deputation was met by the council of the twelve with the president at their head, and answer was promptly made that the removal would

[p. 212]

take place as speedily as possible. "What guarantee will you give us?" asked Hardin. "You have our all as guarantee," answered Brigham. "Young is right," said Douglas. But this reply would not satisfy all the commissioners, and the twelve were requested to submit their intentions in writing, in order that they might be laid before the governor and people of the state. This was done. [*42]

    The commissioners then returned home; but not even yet were the men of Carthage content. To the resolutions passed at Quincy were added others of similar nature, and the whole adopted. A plan of organization was agreed upon, and arrangements were made for calling meetings and securing volunteers, who were to select their own officers and report to the Quincy military committee. The judge of Hancock county was requested by this convention not to hold

[p. 213]

court during that autumn, for fear of collision between saints and gentiles, and the governor was recommended to station in that vicinity a small military force to keep peace during the winter.

    During the height of the troubles at Nauvoo, Orson Pratt was in New York, where on the 8th of November, 1845, he addressed a farewell message to the brethren in the east, calling upon such of them as had means to sell their property, buy teams, and join the overland emigration, and those who had none to take passage in the ship Brooklyn, chartered for the purpose by Elder Samuel Brannan, and which was to sail round Cape Horn, via the Hawaiian Islands, for California. Shortly after, the Brooklyn sailed with 238 emigrants, the price of passage being $50 for adults, with $25 additional for subsistence. The details of this expedition, with names of the emigrants, their doings in California, and the departure for the Great Salt Lake of a large portion of them, is given in volume V. chapter XX. of my History of California. Upon his return to Nauvoo, Pratt brought $400 worth of Allen's six-shooting pistols.

Footnotes

^194:1 Waite's The Mormon Prophet and his Harem. Linforth, Route from Liverpool, 112, note, states that his grandfather was an officer in the revolutionary war; this is not confirmed by Mrs Waite, who quotes from Brigham's autobiography. Again, Nabby Howe was the maiden name of Brigham's mother, as given in his autobiography; while Linforth reads Nancy Howe; and Remy, Jour. to G. S. L. City, i. 413, Naleby Howe.

^194:2 Born as follow: Nancy, Aug. 6, 1786, Fanny, Nov. 8, 1787, Rhoda, Sept. 10, 1789, John, May 22, 1791, Nabby, Apr. 23, 1793, Susannah, June 7, 1795, Joseph, Apr. 7, 1797, Phineas, Feb. 16, 1799, and Brigham, June 1, 1801. Two others were born later: Louisa, Sept. 25, 1804, and Lorenzo Dow, Oct. 19, 1807.

^194:3 In Ibid., it is mentioned that before the organization of the latter-day [p. 195] church, Phineas had wrought a miracle, 'whereby a young girl on the point of death had been restored to life.' Remy does not give his authority.

^195:4 At a branch of the church at Columbia, Penn. Tullidge's Life of Young, 78.

^195:5 John Young was made first patriarch of the church. He died at Quincy, Ill., Oct. 12, 1839. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 2.

^195:6 Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 83. In a speech delivered after he became president, Brigham says: 'Ascertaining that a plot was laid to waylay Joseph for the purpose of taking his life, on his return from Monroe, Michigan, to Kirtland, I procured a horse and buggy, and took brother William Smith along to meet Joseph, whom we met returning in the stage-coach. Joseph requested William to take his seat in the stage, and he rode with me in the buggy. We arrived at Kirtland in safety.'

^195:7 'On the morning of Dec. 22d I left Kirtland in consequence of the fury [p. 196] of the mob, and the spirit that prevailed in the apostates, who threatened to destroy me because I would proclaim publicly and privately that I knew, by the power of the holy ghost, that Joseph Smith was a prophet of the most high God, and had not transgressed and fallen, as apostates declared.' Id., 84.

^196:8 I held a meeting with the brethren of the twelve and the members of the church in Quincy, on the 17th of March, when a letter was read to the people from the committee, on behalf of the saints at Far West, who were left destitute of the means to move. Though the brethren were poor and stripped of almost everything, yet they manifested a spirit of willingness to do their utmost, offering to sell their hate, coats, and shoes to accomplish the object. At the close of the meeting $50 was collected in money and several teams were subscribed to go and bring the brethren.' Id., 89-90.

^196:9 This is the date given in Doctrine and Covenants, 381 (ed. S. L. City, 1876). See also Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 112, note. Tullidge gives July 8, 1836. Life of Brigham Young, 90.

^197:10 'Elder Cutler, the master workman of the house, recommenced laying the foundation by rolling up a large stone near the south-east corner. Id., 92.

^197:11 Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and Parley P. Pratt. Reuben Hedlock also accompanied them.

^197:12 On July 9th. Doctrine and Covenants, 409.

^198:13 Doctrine and Covenants, 406. In this same revelation the officers of the priesthood were likewise named: Hyrum Smith, patriarch; Joseph Smith, presiding elder over the whole church, also translator, revelator, seer, and prophet, with Sidney Rigdon and William Law as councillors, the three to constitute a quorum and first presidency. Brigham Young, president over the twelve travelling council, who were Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, William Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, George A. Smith, and some one to be appointed in place of David Patten; a high council, Samuel Bent, H. G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles C. Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson, Aaron Johnson, David Fulmer, Alpheus Cutler, William [p. 199] Huntington; president over a quorum of high priests, Don Carlos Smith, with Amasa Lyman and Noah Packard for counsellors; a priesthood to preside over the quorum of elders, John A. Hicks, Samuel Williams, and Jesse Baker; to preside over the quorum of seventies, Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield, Daniel Miles, Henry Herriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James Foster--this for elders constantly travelling, while the quorum of elders was to preside over the churches from time to time; to preside over the bishopric, Vinson Knight, Samuel H. Smith, and Shadrach Roundy, and others.

^199:14 See his memorial to the Pennsylvania legislature, in Times and Seasons, v. 418-23. Remy says that he was also instructed to pay a visit; to Queen Victoria, and overthrow her if she refused to accept the gospel. Jour. to G. S. L. City, i. 411; a statement for which I find no authority.

^200:15 'He [Brigham] said, as he stood on the stand, he would rather sit in sackcloth and ashes for a month than appear before the people, but he pitied their loneliness, and was constrained to step forward, and we know he was, because he had the voice and manner of Joseph, as hundreds can testify.' Reminiscences of Mrs F. D. Richards, MS., p. 14.

^200:16 Woodruff's Journal, MS., Aug. 8, 1844.

^200:17 Hist. Brigham Young, 1844, MS., 25.

^200:18 Wifford Woodruff states that Rigdon did not receive a single vote. Reminiscences, MS., 2.

^201:19 Sidney had a trial, and was convicted and condemned. Sidney Rigdon was a native of Saint Clair, Penn., where he was born in 1793. Until his 26th year he worked on his father's farm, but in 1819 received a license to preach, from the society known as the regular baptists, being appointed in 1822 to the charge of the first baptist church in Pittsburgh, where he became very popular. In 1824 he resigned his position, from conscientious motives, and joined the Campbellites, supporting himself by working as a journeyman tanner. Two years later he accepted a call as a Campbellite preacher at Bainbridge, O., [p. 202] and afterward built up churches at Mantua and Mentor in that state. In 1830 he joined the Mormon church, being converted by the preaching of Parley. Further particulars will be found in Times and Seasons, iv. 177-8, 193-4, 209-10; Cobb's Mormon Problem, MS., 12; Tucker's Mormonism, 123-7; Pittsburgh Gaz., in S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 4, 1876. Returning to Pittsburgh after his excommunication, Sidney led a life of utter obscurity, and finally died at Friendship, Allegheny County, N. Y., July 14, 1876. Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880.

^202:20 See note , <page 192>, this vol.

^204:21 Bowles, Across the Continent, 86, says that even at 64 he spoke ungrammatically. This criticism is a fair commentary on the difference between a Bowles and a Brigham.

^205:22 City of the Saints, 292--3,; Mormonism, 170. Hyde is by no means one of Brigham's flatterers, but appears to speak from conviction. On the same page he remarks: 'Brigham may be a great man, greatly deceived, but he [p. 206] is not a hypocrite;' and on the next page: 'Brigham, however deceived, is still a bad man, and a dangerous man; and as much more dangerous, being sincere in thinking he is doing God's work, as a madman is than an impostor.' In Id., 136-40, we have a short and succinct narrative of Brigham's career up to the assassination of Joseph Smith, probably the best that has yet been written in such brief space.

^206:23 'Almost every stranger that enters our city is excited with astonishment that so much has been done in so short a time.' Likewise there was always work enough for them among the gentiles, who 'did not know how to make a short johnny-cake until our girls taught them.' Speech of Elder Kimball, April 8, 1845, in Id., vi. 973. Says John Taylor: 'When we first settled in Nauvoo,...farming lands out of the city were worth from $1.25 to $5 per acre; when we left they were worth from $5 to $50 per acre. We turned the desert into a city, and the wilderness into a fruitful field or fields and gardens.' Millennial Star, viii. 115. Bennett mentions a community farm near Nauvoo, which was cultivated in common by the poorer classes. History of the Saints, 191.

^206:24 It was dedicated May 1, 1846, by Wilford Woodruff and Orson Hyde. Two days later they held their last meeting there. Woodruff's Rem., MS., 3.

^206:25 'When corn was brought to my door at ten cents a bushel, and sadly needed, the money could not be raised.' Utah Notes, MS., p. 6.

^207:26 There was $500 or $600 already collected from the penny subscriptions, which was drawn by order of Brigham to meet a debt on land which must be immediately paid. Hist. B. Young MS., Dec. 5, 1844. John Taylor says it was intended to establish manufactures at Nauvoo on a large scale, for which the services of English emigrants were to be secured. At the head of the rapids, near Nauvoo, stood an island, to which it was proposed to build a dam, leaving spaces for water-wheels, and thus securing power for mills. Rem., MS., 19-20.

^207:27 In Hist. B. Young, MS., July 9, 1845, is a description of a public dinner for the benefit of the church, where Young, Kimball, Taylor, and others officiated at the table.

^207:28 At six o'clock in the morning the people assembled. The 'Capstone March,' composed for the occasion, was played by Pitt's band; Brigham laid on the last stone and pronounced the benediction, and the whole congregation shouted, Hosanna! hosanna to God and the lamb! amen, amen, and amen!' Hist, B. Young, MS., 83.

^207:29 The first stone was laid April 6, 1841.

^207:30 'I commenced administering the ordinances of endowment at five o'clock and continued until half-past three in the morning.' Id., MS., Dec. 10, 1845.

^208:31 For specimens of the accusations brought against them, see Hall's Mormonism Exposed, 24-34.

^209:32 Says the Quincy Whig: 'If the Mormons have been guilty of crime, why, punish them; but do not visit their sins on defenceless women and children. This is as bad as the savages.' Sheriff Backenstos thus testifies: 'It is proper to state that the Mormon community have acted with more than ordinary forbearance, remaining perfectly quiet, and offering no resistance when their dwellings, other buildings, stacks of grain, etc., were set on fire in their presence, and they have forborne until forbearance is no longer a virtue.' Fullmer's Expulsion, 19.

^209:33 'Mobs commenced driving out the Mormons in the lower part of Hancock co., and burning their houses and property...The burning was continued from settlement to settlement for ten or eleven days without any resistance whatever. The people at Nauvoo sent out wagons and teams to bring those people in whom the mob had driven out of their homes.' Wells' Narrative, MS., 35-6. 'The mob said they would drive all into Nauvoo, and all Nauvoo into the Mississippi.' Richards, Rem., MS., 16.

^209:34 'It is a settled thing that the public sentiment of the state is against the Mormons, and it will be in vain for them to contend against it; and to prevent bloodshed and the sacrifice of so many lives on both sides it is their duty to obey the public will, and leave the state as speedily as possible. That they will do this, we have a confident hope, and that, too, before the last extreme is resorted to, that of force.' Fullmer's Expulsion, 20.

^210:35 On the 20th of Feb., 1844, according to the Millennial Star, xxii. 819, Joseph counselled the twelve to send out a delegation and 'investigate the locations of California and Oregon, and hunt out a good location where we can remove to after the temple is completed, where we can build a city in a day and have a government of our own.' In Taylor's Reminiscences, MS., 19, is the following: 'A favorite song in Nauvoo, and of my own composition, was entitled "The Upper California, O that's the land for me!" what is now Utah being known by that name. Joseph Smith was the first who talked of the latter-day saints coming to this region. As early as August 1842 he prophesied that the saints would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, and there become a mighty people.'

^210:36 See Hist. B. Young, 1845, MS., 19.

^210:37 F. D. Richards read Fremont's Journal to the twelve, and later Hastings' account of California was read. Hist. B. Young, MS., 308-16. A letter was also read to the authorities from Brother Sam Brannan, stating that the secretary of war and others of the cabinet were planning to prevent their moving west--alleging that it was against the law for an armed body to go from the U.S. to any other government; that it would not do to let them go to California or Oregon, but that they must be obliterated. Hist. B. Young, MS., 305.

^211:38 One thousand families, including 5,000 or 6,000 souls, would remove in the spring. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1845, 234. Hundreds of farms and some 2,000 houses were offered for sale in Nauvoo city and county. 'There was grain enough growing within 10 miles of Nauvoo, raised by the Mormons, to feed the whole population for two years, if they were to do nothing but gather it in and feast upon it.' Id., MS., 35.

^211:39 A lengthy communication to this effect was drawn up and signed by Brigham Young, president, and Willard Richards, clerk. Printed in full in Fullmer's Expulsion, 20-1.

^211:40 Answer in full in Id., 22.

^211:41 The other two were W. B. Warren and J. A. McDougal. Tullidge's Life of Young, 8.

^212:42 In answer to the letter of the commissioners, the saints on the same day said, after referring to their communication of the 24th to the Quincy committee: 'In addition to this, we would say that we had commenced making arrangements to remove from the country previous to the recent disturbances; that we have four companies of 100 families each, and six more companies now organizing, of the same number each, preparatory to a removal. That 1,000 families, including the twelve, the high council, the trustees, and general authorities of the church, are fully determined to remove in the spring, independent of the contingencies of selling our property; and this company will comprise from 5,000 to 6,000 souls. That the church, as a body, desire to remove with us, and will if sales can be effected so as to raise the necessary means. That the organization of the church we represent is such that there never can exist but one head or presidency at any one time. And all good members wish to be with the organization; and all are determined to remove to some distant point, where we shall neither infringe nor be infringed upon, so soon as time and means will permit. That we have some hundreds of farms and some 2,000 houses for sale in this city and county, and we request all good citizens to assist in the disposal of our property. That we do not expect to find purchasers for our temple and other public buildings; but we are willing to rent them to a respectable community who may inhabit the city. That we wish it distinctly understood that although we may not find purchasers for our property, we will not sacrifice it, nor give it away, or suffer it illegally to be wrested from us. That we do not intend to sow any wheat this fall, and should we all sell, we shall not put in any more crops of any description. That as soon as practicable we will appoint committees from the city, La Harpe, Macedonia, Bear Creek, and all necessary places in the country, to give information to purchasers. That if these testimonies are not sufficient to satisfy any people that we are in earnest, we will soon give them a sign that cannot be mistaken--we will leave them.' In Hist. B. Young, MS., Nov. 1845, it is stated that there were families organized 3,285: wagons on hand 1,508; wagons commenced 1,892.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

  

CHAPTER VIII.
 EXPULSION FROM NAUVOO.
 1845-1846.

A BUSY CITY--MEETING IN THE TEMPLE--SACRIFICE OF PROPERTY--DETACHMENTS MOVE FORWARD--A SINGULAR EXODUS--THE FIRST ENCAMPMENT--COOL PROPOSAL FROM BROTHER BRANNAN--THE JOURNEY--COURAGE AND GOOD CHEER--SWELLING OF THEIR NUMBERS--THE REMNANT OF THE SAINTS IN NAUVOO--ATTITUDE OF THE GENTILES--THE MORMONS ATTACKED--CONTINUED HOSTILITIES--THE FINAL DEPARTURES--THE POOR CAMP--A DESERTED CITY.

    THE holy city now presented an exciting scene. Men were making ready their merchandise, and families preparing to vacate their homes. Hundreds were making tents and wagon covers out of cloth bought with anything they happened to have; companies were organized and numbered, each of which had its own wagon-shop, wheelwrights, carpenters, and cabinetmakers, who were all busily employed. [*1] Green timber was prepared for spokes and felloes, some kiln-dried, and some boiled in salt and water. it the Nauvoo house shops were established as well as at the mason's hall and arsenal. Iron was brought from different parts of the country, and blacksmiths were at work night and day. [*2]

    Some three years previous, the prophet Joseph had ordered that there should not be another general conference

[p. 215]

until it could be held in the temple. And now, on the 5th of October, 1845, five thousand persons assembled, and on the following day began the great conference, which lasted three days. The saints, however, were permitted but short enjoyment of their beautiful structure, a meagre reward for all the tell and money expended. Holiness to the Lord was the motto of it; and there was little else they could now carry hence; the hewn stone, the wood-work, and the brass they must leave behind. This building was to them as a temple "where the children of the last kingdom could come together to praise the Lord." As they cast one last gaze on their homes and the monuments reared to their faith, they asked, "Who is the God of the gentiles? Can he be our God?" [*3]

    In the same number of the Times and Seasons in which appeared a notice of this meeting was published a circular signed by Brigham Young, and addressed to the brethren scattered abroad throughout America, informing them of the impending change. "The exodus of the nations of the only true Israel from these United States to a far distant region of the west, where bigotry, intolerance, and insatiable oppression will have lost its power over them, forms a new epoch, not only in the history of the church, but of this nation." [*4]

[p. 216]

    The arbitrary acts of the people of Illinois in forcing the departure of the saints lays them open to the grave charge, among others, of a desire to possess their property for less than its value. Houses and lots, farms and merchandise, could not be turned into money, or even into wagons and live-stock, in a moment, except at a ruinous sacrifice. Granted that the hierarchy was opposed to American institutions, that the Mormons wished to gain possession of the United States and rule the world: no one feared the immediate consummation of their pretentious hopes. Granted that among them were adulterers, thieves, and murderers: the gentiles were the stronger, and had laws by which to punish the guilty. It was not a noble sentiment which had actuated the people of Missouri; it was not a noble sentiment which now actuated the people of Illinois, thus to continue their persecutions during the preparations for departure, and drive a whole cityful from their homes out upon the bleak prairie in the dead of winter.

    In January 1846 the council ordered that a detachment should set forth at once, and that the remainder of the saints should follow as soon as possible. "Beloved brethren," said their leader, "it now remains to be proven whether those of our family and friends who are necessarily left behind for a season, to obtain an outfit through the sale of property, shall be mobbed, burned, and driven away by force. Does any American want the honor of doing it? or will any Americans suffer such acts to be done, and the disgrace of them to remain on their character, under existing circumstances. If they will, let the world know it."

    The world was soon to know it. Driven almost at the point of the sword, a large number of the saints, soon afterward followed by the president, the twelve, the high council, and other companies, gathered on the eastern bank of the Mississippi early in February.

    There was but little money in circulation throughout

[p. 217]

the west at this time. Over vast wild sections skins were the only currency, and at the settlements traffic for the most part assumed the form of barter or exchange of labor. It was, therefore, exceedingly difficult, as I have said, for the saints to get their property into portable form, even after selling their lands at half or quarter their value. The gentiles, of course, could pay what they pleased, being the only buyers, and the saints being forced to sell. Moreover, there was more property thrown upon the market than could be taken at once, and the departure of so large and thrifty a portion of the population was of itself sufficient to depreciate property. The best they could do was to exchange their lands for wagons and horses and cattle, and this they did to as large an extent as possible, scouring the country for a hundred miles around in search of live-stock. [*5]

    And now, putting upon their animals and vehicles such of their household effects as they could carry, in small detachments the migratory saints began to leave Nauvoo. [*6] Before them was the ice-bound river, and beyond that the wilderness.

    There is no parallel in the world's history to this migration from Nauvoo. The exodus from Egypt was from a heathen land, a land of idolaters, to a fertile region designated by the Lord for his chosen people, the land of Canaan. The pilgrim fathers in flying to America came from a bigoted and despotic people--a

[p. 218]

people making few pretensions to civil or religious liberty. It was from these same people who had fled from old-world persecutions that they might enjoy liberty of conscience in the wilds of America, from their descendants and associates, that other of their descendants, who claimed the right to differ from them in opinion and practice, were now fleeing. True, the Mormons in various ways had rendered themselves abominable to their neighbors: so had the puritan fathers to their neighbors. Before this the Mormons had been driven to the outskirts of civilization, where they had built themselves a city; this they must now abandon, and throw themselves upon the mercy of savages.

    The first teams crossed about the 10th, in flat boats, which were rowed over, and which plied forth and back from early dawn until late into the night, skiffs and other river craft being also used for passengers and baggage. The cold increased. On the 16th snow fell heavily; and the river was frozen over, so that the remainder of the emigration crossed on the ice. Their first camp, the camp of the congregation, was on Sugar Creek, a few miles from Nauvoo and almost within sight of the city. [*7] All their movements were directed by Brigham, who with his family and a quorum of the twelve, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Parley P. Pratt, and Amasa Lyman, joined the brethren on Sugar Creek on the 15th. Wilford Woodruff, who had been sent to preside over the mission to England, joined the emigration later at Mount Pisgah.

    On the morning of the 17th, all the saints in camp being assembled near the bridge to receive their leader's instructions, the president stood upright in his wagon, and cried with a loud voice, "Attention! the

[p. 219]

whole camp of Israel." [*8] He then went on to say that as the Lord had been with them in times past, howsoever singular had been his method of proving his presence, so would he be with them in the future. His empire, the empire of his people, was established, and the powers of hell should not prevail against it. [*9]

    After this, with comparatively light hearts, they broke camp, and slowly wending their way westward, disappeared at length beyond the horizon, in pursuit once more of the ever-mocking phantom of home. Whither they journeyed they were as yet uncertain. They knew only that they were to search out, probably beyond the Rocky Mountains, if not indeed among them, some isolated spot, where, far away from the land of boasted freedom, the soil, the skies, and mind and manners were free. If they were offensive to the laws, if the laws of the land were offensive to them, they would go where they might have land and laws of their own.

    Considering their situation, and what they had been lately called to undergo--ignominy, insult, the loss of property, the abandonment of home--there was little complaint. It was among their opponents, and in the midst of a general recital of their wrongs, that the saints were accustomed to put on a long face and strike into a doleful strain. Among themselves there were

[p. 220]

few people more free from care, or more light-hearted and happy.

    In the present instance, though all were poor and some destitute, and though man and beast were exposed to driving rain and hail, and the chill blasts of a western winter often sweeping down upon them unchecked from the limitless prairie, they made the best of it, and instead of wasting time in useless repining, set themselves at work to make the most of their joys and the least of their sorrows. On the night of March 1st, when the first camp was pitched beyond Sugar Creek, after prayer they held a dance, and as the men of Iowa looked on they wondered how these homeless outcasts from Christian civilization could thus praise and make merry in view of their near abandoning of themselves to the mercies of savages and wild beasts. [*10] Food and raiment were provided for all; for shelter they had their tents and wagons, and after the weather had spent somewhat of its ruggedness, no extreme hardships were suffered. Without attempting long distances in a single day, they made camp rather early, and after the usual manner of emigrants, the wagons in a circle or semicircle round the camp-fire, placed so as best to shield them from the wind and wild beasts and Indians, with the animals at a convenient distance, some staked, and some running loose, but all carefully guarded. The country through which they passed was much of it well wooded; the land was fertile and afforded abundant pastures, the grass in summer being from one to ten feet high. Provisions were cheap: corn twelve cents and wheat twenty-five to thirty cents a bushel,

[p. 221]

beef two cents a pound, and all payable in labor at what was then considered good wages, say forty or fifty cents a day.

    Into the wilderness they went, journeying day after day on toward the setting sun, their hearts buoyant, their sinews strengthened by a power not of this world. Forever fades the real before the imaginary. There is nothing tougher than fanaticism. What cared they for wind and rain, for comfortless couches or aching limbs?--the kingdom of the Lord was with them. What cared they for insults and injustice when the worst this world could do was to hasten heaven to them? So on toward the west their long train of wagons rolled, leaving each day farther and farther behind the old, cold, fanatical east, with its hard, senseless dogmas, and its merciless civilization, without murmurings, without discord, the man above any other on earth they most loved and feared riding at their head, or standing with uplifted and extended hands as his people passed by, blessing and comforting them. "We were happy and contented," says John Taylor, "and the songs of Zion resounded from wagon to wagon, reverberating through the woods, while the echo was returned from the distant hills." [*11]

    There were brass or stringed instruments in every company, and night and morning all were called to prayers [*12] at the sound of the bugle. Camp-fires drew around them the saints when their day s work was finished, and singing, dancing, and story-telling enlivened the hour.

    As they went on their way their ranks were swelled by fresh bands, until there were brought together 3,000 wagons, 30,000 head of cattle, a great number of mules and horses, and immense flocks of sheep.

[p. 222]

[paragraph continues] Richardson Point [*13] they made their second stationary camp, the third at Chariton River, the fourth at Locust Creek, where a considerable time was spent. Then there were--so named by the saints--Garden Grove, [*14] a large timbered tract which had been burned over, Mount Pisgah, [*15] and finally Winter Quarters, in Nebraska, on the west side of the Missouri, a little above the modern Omaha, on the site of the present town of Florence. [*16] At Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah were established farming settlements for the benefit of those who were to follow. In July the main body reached the Missouri at the spot now known as Council Bluffs, and soon afterward many crossed the river in a ferry-boat of their own construction, and pitched their tents at Winter Quarters. Other large encampments

Click to enlarge
BETWEEN THE MISSISSIPPI AND MISSOURI.

[p. 223]

were formed on both banks of the river, or at points near by, where grass was plentiful. In early autumn about 12,000 Mormons were assembled in this neighborhood, or were on their way across the plains.

 

    Leaving here the advance portion of the emigration, let us return to Nauvoo and see how it fared with those who were still engaged in preparations for their pilgrimage. It had been stipulated, the reader will remember, that the Mormons should remove from the state in the spring, or as soon afterward as they could sell their property, and that meanwhile they should not be molested. Long before spring, thousands had crossed the Mississippi, among whom were all the more obnoxious members of the sect. Meanwhile, how had the gentiles kept their faith?

    But passing the cause, what a picture was now presented by the deserted city and its exiled inhabitants!--the former, as Colonel Kane viewed it--but which view must be regarded as ideal rather than strictly historical--with "its bright new dwellings set in cool green gardens, ranging up around a stately dome-shaped hill, which was crowned by a noble marble edifice, whose high tapering spire was radiant with white and gold. The city appeared to cover several miles; and beyond it, in the background, there rolled off a fair country, checkered by the careful lines of fruitful husbandry."

    To the Nauvoo Eagle Major Warren sent notice from Carthage, on the 16th of April, that he had been directed by the governor to disband on the 1st of May the force which had been kept there ostensibly for the protection of the saints, as the time appointed for their departure would expire on that day. [*17] The day arrived, and there were yet many Mormons remaining, many who had found it impossible to remove on

[p. 224]

account of sickness, failure to dispose of their property, or other adverse fortune; whereat the men of Illinois began to bluster and threaten annihilation. Warren, who had disbanded his troops on the 1st, received an order from the governor on the following day to muster them into service again. This he did; for he would, if possible, see the treaty between the Mormons and the governor faithfully carried out, and while urging the saints to haste, he endeavored to stand between them and the mob which now threatened their lives and the destruction of their property. [*18]

    Major Warren appears to have performed his duty firmly and well, and to have done all that lay in his power to protect the Mormons. In a letter to the Quincy Whig, dated May 20th, he writes: "The Mormons are leaving the city with all possible despatch. During the week four hundred teams have crossed at three points, or about 1,350 souls. The demonstrations made by the Mormon people are unequivocal. They are leaving the state, and preparing to leave, with every means God and nature have placed in their hands." It was but the lower class of people that clamored for the immediate expulsion of the remnant of the saints--the ignorant, the bigoted, the brutal, the vicious, the lawless, and profligate, those who hated their religion and coveted their lands.

[p. 225]

    On the 6th of June the people of Hancock county met at Carthage to arrange for celebrating the 4th of July. One of the citizens rose and said that since the Mormons were not all removed they could not rejoice as freemen. Mormon affairs then took precedence, and another meeting was appointed for the 12th, an invitation being sent to the gentiles at Nauvoo who had occupied the deserted dwellings of the saints. It happened that this was the day appointed for the assembling of the militia, with a view to raise volunteers for the Mexican war; and now, it was thought, was a good opportunity to show the Mormons the military strength of the county. The officers conferred, and without authority from the governor, marched their troops, some three or four hundred in number, to a place called Golden Point, five miles from Nauvoo, where they encamped, and opened communication with the city. It happened, however, at this juncture, that Colonel Markham and others had returned with teams from Council Bluffs for some of the church property, and arming a force of six or eight hundred, prepared to sally forth; the name of Colonel Markham was a terror to evil-doers, and the militia fled, no one pursuing them.

    There were yet remaining, as late as August, certain sturdy saints who, having committed no crime, would not consent to be driven from their homes or barred from their occupations. Among these was a party engaged in harvesting wheatat a settlement eight miles from Nauvoo, in company with one or two of the gentiles, although it was forbidden by the men of Illinois that any Mormon should show himself outside the city, except en route for the west. The harvesters were seized and beaten with clubs, whereupon the people of Nauvoo, both Mormons and gentiles, took up the matter. Some arrests were made, and the culprits taken to Nauvoo, but by writ of habeas corpus were removed to Quincy, where they met with little trouble. While in Nauvoo, a gun in the hands

[p. 226]

of a militia officer was recognized by William Pickett as belonging to one of the harvesters. Pickett took possession of the weapon, and a warrant was issued against him for theft; when an officer came to arrest him, he refused to surrender. As the Mormons stood by him in illegal attitude, the affair caused considerable excitement.

    In short, from the let of May until the final evacuation of the city, the men of Illinois never ceased from strife and outrage. Of the latter I will mention only two instances: "A man of near sixty years of age," writes Major Warren in the letter just referred to, "living about seven miles from this place, was taken from his house a few nights since, stripped of his clothing, and his back out to pieces with a whip, for no other reason than because he was a Mormon, and too old to make a successful resistance. Conduct of this kind would disgrace a horde of savages." In August a party consisting of Phineas H. Young, his son Brigham, and three others who were found outside the city, were kidnapped by a mob, hurried into the thickets, passed from one gang to another--men from Nauvoo being in hot pursuit--and for a fortnight were kept almost without food or rest, and under constant threat of death.

    Fears are now entertained that, by reason of the popular feeling throughout the country, Nauvoo city will be again attacked; the gentile citizens therefore ask Governor Ford for protection, whereupon Major Parker is sent to their relief. [*19] All through August

[p. 227]

troubles continue, the anti-Mormons almost coming to blows among themselves. Before the end of the month about six hundred men are assembled at Carthage, by order of Thomas Carlin, a special constable, ostensibly to enforce the arrest of Pickett, but in reality to enforce the expulsion of the Mormons. Major Parker orders the constable's posse to disperse, otherwise he threatens to treat them as a mob. The constable replies that if the major should attempt to molest them in discharge of their duty he will regard him and his command as a mob and so treat them. "Now, fellow-citizens," declares a committee selected from four counties, [*20] in a proclamation issued at Carthage, "an issue is fairly raised. On the one hand, a large body of men have assembled at Carthage, under the command of a legal officer, to assist him in performing legal duties. They are not excited--they are cool, but determined at all hazards to execute the law in Nauvoo, which has always heretofore defied it. They are resolved to go to work systematically and with ample precaution, but under a full knowledge that on their good and orderly behavior their character is staked. On the other hand, in Nauvoo is a blustering Mormon mob, who have defied the law, and who are now organized for the purpose of arresting the arm of civil power. Judge ye which is in the right."

    Intending, as it seems, to keep his word, Carlin places his men under command of Colonel Singleton, who at once throws off the mask, and on the 7th of September announces to Major Parker that the Mormons must go. On the same day a stipulation is made, granting to the saints sixty days' extension of time, and signed by representatives on both sides. [*21]

[p. 228]

[paragraph continues] But to the terms of this stipulation the men of Illinois would not consent. They were sore disgusted, and rebelled against their leaders, causing Singleton, Parker, and others to abandon their commands, the posse being left in charge of Constable Carlin, who summoned to his aid one Thomas Brockman, a clergyman of Brown county, and for the occasion dubbed general. On the 10th of September the posse, now more than a thousand strong, with wagons, equipments, and every preparation for a campaign, approached Nauvoo and encamped at Hunter's farm.

    At this time there were in the city not more than a hundred and fifty Mormons, and about the same number of gentiles, or, as they were termed, 'new citizens,' capable of bearing arms, the remainder of the population consisting of destitute women and children and of the sick. Many of the gentiles had departed, fearing a general massacre, and those who remained could not be relied upon as combatants, for they were of course unwilling to risk their lives in a conflict which, if successful, would bring them no credit. Nothing daunted, the little band, under command of colonels Daniel H. Wells [*22] and William Cutler, took up its position on the edge of a wood in the suburbs of Nauvoo, and less than a mile from the enemy's camp. [*23]

    Before hostilities commenced, a deputation from Quincy [*24] visited the camp of the assailants, and in vain attempted to dissuade them from their purpose. No sooner had they departed than fire was opened on the Mormons from a battery of six-pounders, but without effect. Here for the day matters rested. At sunrise the posse changed their position, intending to take the city by storm, but were held in cheek by

[p. 229]

[paragraph continues] Captain Anderson [*25] at the head of thirty-five men, termed by the saints the Spartan band. The enemy now fired some rounds of grape-shot, forcing the besieged to retire out of range; and after some further cannonading, darkness put an end to the skirmish, the Mormons throwing up breastworks during the night. [*26]

    On the morning of the 12th the demand of unconditional surrender was promptly rejected; whereupon, at a given signal, several hundred men who had been stationed in ambush, on the west bank of the river, to cut off the retreat of the Mormons, appeared with red flags in their hands, thus portending massacre. The assailants now opened fire from all their batteries, and soon afterward advanced to the assault, slowly, and with the measured tramp of veterans, at their head being Constable Carlin and the Reverend Brockman, and unfurled above them--the stars and stripes. When within rifle-range of the breastworks the posse wheeled toward the south, attempting to outflank the saints and gain possession of the temple square. But this movement had been anticipated, and posted in the woods to the north of the Mormon position lay the Spartan band. Leading on his men at double-quick, Anderson suddenly confronted the enemy and opened a brisk fire from revolving rifles. [*27] The posse advanced no farther, but for an hour and a half held their ground bravely against the Spartan band, the expense of ammunition in proportion to casualties being greater than has yet been recorded in modern warfare. Then they retreated in excellent order to the camp. The losses of the Mormons were three killed and a few slightly wounded; the losses of the gentiles are variously

[p. 230]

stated. [*28] Among those who fell were Captain Anderson and his son, a youth of sixteen, the former dying, as he had vowed that he would die, in defence of the holy sanctuary.

    The following day was the sabbath, and hostilities were not renewed; but on that morning a train of wagons, despatched by the posse for ammunition and supplies, entered the town of Quincy. It was now evident that, whether the men of Illinois intended massacre or forcible expulsion, it would cost them many lives to effect either purpose. With a view, therefore, to prevent further bloodshed, a committee of one hundred proceeded to Nauvoo and attempted mediation. At the same time the Reverend Brockman sent in his ultimatum, the terms being that the Mormons surrender their arms, and immediately cross the river or disperse, and that all should be protected from violence. [*29] There was no alternative. The armed mob in their front was daily swelling in number, while beyond the river still appeared the red flag; their own ranks, meanwhile, were being rapidly thinned by defection among the new citizens. [*30]

[p. 231]

    On the 17th of September the remnant of the Mormons crossed the Mississippi, and on the same day the gentiles took possession of Nauvoo. [*31]

 

    It was indeed a singular spectacle, as I have said, this upon the western border of the world's great republic in the autumn of 1846. A whole cityful, with other settlements, and thousands of thrifty

[p. 232]

agriculturists in the regions about, citizens of the United States, driven beyond the border by other citizens: not by reason of their religion alone, though this was made a pretence; not for breaking the laws, though this was made a pretence; not on account of their immorality, for the people of Illinois and Missouri were not immaculate in this respect; nor was it altogether on account of their solid voting and growing political power, accompanied ever by the claim of general inheritance and universal dominion, though this last had more to do with it probably than all the rest combined, notwithstanding that the spirit of liberty and the laws of the republic permitted such massing of social and political influence, and notwithstanding the obvious certainty that any of the gentile political parties now playing the role of persecutors would gladly and unscrupulously have availed themselves of such means for the accomplishment of their ends. It was all these combined, and so combined as to engender deadly hate. It gave the Mormons a power in proportion to their numbers not possessed by other sects or societies, which could not and would not endure it; a power regarded by the others as unfairly acquired, and by a way and through means not in accord with the American idea of individual equality, of equal rights and equal citizenship. In regard to all other sects within the republic, under guard of the constitution, religion was subordinated to politics and government; in regard to the Mormons, in spite of the constitution, politics and government were subordinated to religion.

    And in regard to the late occupants of the place, the last of the Mormon host that now lay huddled to the number of 640 on the western bank of the river in sight of the city: [*32] if the first departures from Nauvoo escaped extreme hardships, not so these. It was the

[p. 233]

latter part of September, and nearly all were prostrated with chills and fevers; [*33] there at the river bank, among the dock and rushes, poorly protected, without the shelter of a roof or anything to keep off the force of wind or rain, little ones came into life and were left motherless at birth. [*34] They had not food enough to satisfy the cravings of the sick, nor clothing fit to wear. For months thereafter there were periods when all the flour they used was of the coarsest, the wheat being ground in coffee and hand mills, which only cut the grain; others used a pestle; the finer meal was used for bread, the coarser made into hominy. Boiled wheat was now the chief diet for sick and well. For ten days they subsisted on parched corn. Some mixed their remnant of grain with the pounded bark of the slippery elm which they stripped from the trees along their route.

    This encampment was about two miles above Montrose on the Mississippi, and was called the Poor Camp. Aid was solicited, and within three weeks a little over one hundred dollars was collected, mostly in Quincy, with provisions and clothing, though the prejudice against them was deep and strong. [*35] Some of the people were crowded into tents, made frequently of quilts and blankets; others in bowers made of brush; others had only wagons for shelter. They suffered from heavy thunder-storms, when the rain was bailed out with basins from their beds. Mothers huddled their children in the one dress which often was all they possessed, and shaking with ague or burning with fever, took refuge from the pitiless storms under wagons and bushes. [*36]

[p. 234]

    "While the people for the most part were ill with chills and fever," says Wells, "quail fell into camp and were picked up with ease. [*37] This supply was looked upon as miraculous by the half famished people. So long had they been lashed by the fierce winds of misfortune, that now they accepted with gratitude this indication of providential care.

    Wagons were sent from Winter Quarters for the removal of the people from Poor Camp; and gradually all reached the various stations in which the Mormons had gathered. [*38]

    Of their long journey many painful incidents are recorded. Weakened by fever or crippled with rheumatism, and with sluggish circulation, many were severely frost-bitten. Women were compelled to drive the nearly worn-out teams, while tending on their knees, perhaps, their sick children. The strength of the beasts was failing, as there were intervals when they could be kept froth starving only by the browse or tender buds and branches of the cotton-wood, felled for the purpose. [*39]

    At one time no less than two thousand wagons could be counted, it was said, along the three hundred miles of road that separated Nauvoo from the Mormon encampments. Many families possessed no wagons,

[p. 235]

and in the long procession might be seen vehicles of all descriptions, from the lumbering cart, under whose awning lay stretched its fever-stricken driver, to the veriest makeshifts of poverty, the wheelbarrow or the two-wheeled trundle, in which was dragged along a bundle of clothing and a sack of meal--all of this world's goods that the owner possessed.

    On arriving at the banks of the Missouri, the wagons were drawn up in double lines and in the form of squares. Between the lines, tents were pitched at intervals, space being left between each row for a passage-way, which was shaded with awnings or a lattice-work of branches, and served as a promenade for convalescents and a playground for children.

    And what became of Nauvoo? The temple was destroyed by fire and tempest, [*40] and all the wood-work consumed, while the rock was utilized for miles around as foundations of houses, for door-steps, and other purposes. A French company coming in later bought the stone from those in possession, and built wine-vaults. Foundations of buildings were broken up, and houses once surrounded by carefully tended flower-gardens, pillaged of all that was valuable, were now abandoned by their ruthless destroyers. [*41] "At present," writes Linforth, "the Icarians form the most important part of the population of Nauvoo...They live in a long ugly row of buildings, the architect of which and of the school-house was a cobbler." In the house built for the prophet and his family dwelt in 1854 the prophet's widow, his mother, and his family. [*42]

Footnotes

^214:1 Parley Pratt's calculation for an outfit of every family of 5 persons was 1 good wagon, 3 yoke cattle, 2 cows, 2 beef cattle, 3 sheep, 1,000 lbs flour, 20 lbs sugar, 1 rifle and ammunition, a tent and tent-poles, from 10 to 20 lbs seed to a family, from 25 to 100 lbs tools for farming, and a few other items, the cost being about $250, provided they had nothing else but bedding and cooking utensils. Hist. B. Young, MS., 125.

^214:2 In December the drying-house of emigrating company no. 18 was burned to the ground, consuming $300 worth of wagon timber. Id., MS., Dec, 1845.

^215:3 Kane, with the carelessness usual in his statements, says that the temple was completed and consecrated in May, and that the day after its consecration its ornaments were carried away. 'For that one day the temple shone resplendent in all its typical glories of sun, moon, and stars, and other abounding figured and lettered signs, hieroglyphs, and symbols; but that day only. The sacred rites of consecration ended, the work of removing the sacrasancta proceeded with the rapidity of magic. It went on through the night; and when the morning of the next day dawned,' all the ornaments and furniture, everything that could provoke a sneer, had been carried off; and except some fixtures that would not bear removal, the building was dismantled to the bare walls. It was this day saw the departure of the last elders, and the largest hand that moved in one company together. The people of Iowa have told me that from morning to night they passed westward like an endless procession. They did not seem greatly out of heart, they said; but at the top of every hill, before they disappeared, were to be seen looking back, like banished Moors, on their abandoned homes and the far-seen temple and its glittering spire.' The Mormons, 21.

^215:4 Times and Seasons, vi. 1018. In this number is a notice, signed by Willard Richards, cutting off William Smith, the prophet's brother, for apostasy.

^217:5 'The Mormons went up and down with their furniture, etc., and traded for anything that could travel, such as an animal or a wagon...Another company went out in May, but they did not sell their property, leaving it in the hands of trustees to sell.' Wells' Narrative, MS., 37. Their two-story brick house, which they had occupied but three months, and which they had denied themselves in every way to build, Mrs Richards says was sold for 'two yoke of half-broken cattle and an old wagon.' Reminiscences, MS., 20.

^217:6 When we were to leave Mo., the saints entered into a covenant not to cease their exertions until every saint who wished to go was removed, which was done...We are better off now than we were then;...he [B. Y.] wants to see this influence extend from the west to the east sea.' Brigham moved: 'That we take all the saints with us, to the extent of our ability, that is, our influence and property; seconded by Elder Kimball, and carried unanimously.' This covenant was entered into Oct. 6, 1845. Times and Seasons, vi. 1011.

^218:7 'We encamped at Sugar Creek, in the snow, while two of my children were very ill. We slept in our wagons, which were placed close to our tents.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 16.

^219:8 The camp of Israel was wherever the president and apostles were.

^219:9 It has been stated that after dismissing his congregation on the 17th the president led several of the twelve aside to a valley east of the camp, and held a council. A letter was then read from Samuel Brennan, a Mormon elder then in New York, together with a copy of an agreement between him and one A. G. Benson. Brennan was at that time in charge of a company of saints bound for the Pacific coast by way of Cape Horn, and the agreement which he forwarded for Brigham's signature required the pioneers to transfer to A. G. Benson and company the odd numbers of all the town lots that they might acquire in the country where they settled. 'I shall select,' writes Brennan, 'the most suitable spot on the bay of San Francisco for the location of a commercial city.' the council refused to take any action in the matter. In case they refused to sign the agreement, Tullidge soberly relates, Life of Brigham Young, 19-23, the president, it was said, would issue a proclamation, setting forth that it was the intention of the Mormons to take sides with either Mexico or Great Britain against the United States, and order them to be disarmed or dispersed! Further mention of this matter is made in History of California, vol. v. cap. xx., this series.

^220:10 'In the latter part of March we started for Council Bluffs, 400 miles distant, and were three months on the way. Crossing a long prairie in a fearful storm, the mud became so soft that we could not travel, and we were obliged to encamp; the water was several inches deep all over our camping-ground; we had no wood for a fire, and no means of drying our soaked clothing. In the morning everything was frozen fast; and a squirrel was found frozen...Frequently boughs were laid on the ground before the teams could pass...We had to camp in mad until the roads were dry enough to travel.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 18-19.

^221:11 'It is true,' he writes, 'that in our sojourning we do not possess all the luxuries and delicacies of old-established countries and cities, but we have abundance of the staple commodities, such as flour, meal, beef, mutton, pork, milk, butter, and in some instances cheese, sugar, coffee, tea, etc.' Letter in Millennial Star, viii. 114.

^221:12 Each family had prayers separately. Taylor's Rem., MS., 9.

^222:13 In Lee County, Iowa, three weeks from their staging-point.

^222:14 About 150 miles from Nauvoo, on the east fork of the Grand River. 'Many located there, ploughing and sowing, and preparing homes for their poor brethren for a longer period.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 19. 'On the morning of the 27th of April the bugle sounded at Garden Grove, and all the men assembled to organize for labor. Immediately hundreds of men were at work, cutting trees, splitting rails, making fences, cutting logs for houses, building bridges, making ploughs, and herding cattle. Quite a number were sent into the Missouri settlements to exchange horses for oxen, valuable feather-beds and the like for provisions and articles most needed in the camp, and the remainder engaged in ploughing and planting. Messengers were also despatched to call in the bands of pioneers scattered over the country seeking work, with instructions to hasten them up to help form the new settlements before the season had passed; so that, in a scarcely conceivable space of time, at Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah, industrious settlements sprung up almost as if by magic.' Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 41.

^222:15 This site was discovered by Parley, who was sent forward to reconnoitre by Brigham. It was situated on a branch of Grand River, and for years was the resting-place for the saints on their way to Utah. Autobiog. P. Pratt, 381.

^222:16 Here 700 log cabins and 150 dugouts (cabins half under ground) were built. A large quantity of hay was cut, and a flouring mill erected. Id., 383.

^223:17 'The removal of the entire population,' the major adds, has been looked forward to as an event that could alone restore peace and quiet to this portion of our state,' Fullmer's Expulsion, 24.

^224:18 'Thus while with one hand he pushed the saints from their possessions across the river to save their lives, with the other he kept at bay the savage fiends who thirsted for blood, and who would fain have washed their hands in the blood of innocence, and feasted their eyes on the smoking ruins of their martyred victims.' Id., 24-5. From Nauvoo, May 11, 1846, Warren writes: 'To the Mormons I would say, Go on with your preparations, and leave as fast as you can. Leave the fighting to be done by my detachment. If we are overpowered, then recross the river and defend yourselves and property. The neighboring counties, under the circumstances, cannot and will not lend their aid to an unprovoked and unnecessary attack upon the Mormons at this time; and without such aid the few desperadoes in the county can do but little mischief, and can be made amenable to the law for that little. The force under my command is numerically small; but backed as I am by the moral force of the law, and possessing as I do the confidence of nine tenths of the respectable portion of the old citizens, my force is able to meet successfully any mob which can be assembled in the county, and if any such force does assemble, they or I will leave the field in double-quick time.'

^226:19 'Sir--I have received information that another effort is to be made on Monday next to drive out the inhabitants of Nauvoo, new as well as old, and destroy the city. I am informed that it is believed in the surrounding counties that the new citizens in Nauvoo are all Mormons, and that the remnant of the old Mormon population are determined to remain there, although I am assured that the contrary in both particulars is the truth. You are therefore hereby authorized and empowered to repair to Nauvoo, and there remain until you are relieved. You will immediately inquire how many of the inhabitants are new citizens, and how many of them are Mormons; how many of the old Mormon population remain, and what the prospect is of their removal in a reasonable time; and in case an attack on the city should be attempted or threatened, you are hereby authorized to take command of such [p. 227] volunteers as may offer themselves, free of cost to the state, to repel it and defend the city.' Fullmer's Expulsion, 29-30.

^227:20 Among the members was the Rev. Thomas S. Brockman, who afterward took command of the posse.

^227:21 Hostilities to cease; the city to be evacuated in 60 days, 25 men remaining to see the stipulation carried out. Id., 34-5.

^228:22 Who afterward became lieut-gen. of the Nauvoo legion in Utah.

^228:23 There were about 300 Mormons and new citizens who could then bear arms against the mob, but on the day of the fight no more than 100 could be found to go, as the Mormons were continually leaving.' Wells' Narrative, MS., 39.

^228:24 John Wood, the mayor, Major Flood, Dr Conyera, and Joel Rice. See Wells' Narrative, MS., passim.

^229:25 He was more than brave, he was presumptuous. Wells, in Utah Notes, MS., p. 7.

^229:26 'Many of our log houses were torn down by the mob, which numbered 1,000 men; we made barricades of corn-stalks stacked up.' Wells, in Utah Notes, MS., 7.

^229:27 Elder John S. Fullmer, then a colonel in the Nauvoo legion, claims that he directed this movement. Expulsion, 38.

^230:28 'But three in all were killed...Meetings were held to stop the effusion of blood,...but there was no necessity for such action, when no blood was shed.' Wells, in Utah Notes, 7.

^230:29 '1st. The city of Nauvoo will surrender. The force of Reverend Brockman to enter and take possession of the city to-morrow, the 17th of September, at three o'clock P.M. 2d. The arms to be delivered to the Quincy committee, to be returned on crossing the river. 3d. The Quincy committee pledge themselves to use their influence for the protection of persons and property, and the officers of the camp and the men likewise pledge themselves. 4th. The sick and helpless to be protected and treated with humanity. 5th. The Mormon population of the city to leave the state or disperse as soon as they can cross the river. 6th. Five men, including the trustees of the church, and five clerks with their families (William Pickett not one of the number), to be permitted to remain in the city for the disposition of property, free from all molestation and personal violence. 7th. Hostilities to cease immediately, and ten men of the Quincy committee to enter the city in the execution of their duty as soon as they think proper.' It will be observed that nothing is said about the surrender of Pickett. He was not even arrested.

^230:30 'The mob entered the temple, instituted an inquisition, and regardless of the Mormons or new citizens, went from house to house plundering cow-yards, pig-pens, hen-roosts, and bee-stands indiscriminately; thus turning some of their best friends into enemies, bursting open trunks and cheats, searching for arms, keys, etc.' p. 343. 'In the temple ringing the bells, shouting, and [p. 231] hallooing; they took several to the river and baptized them, swearing, throwing them backward, then on to their faces, saying: "The commandments must be fulfilled, and God damn you."'. Hist. B. Young, MS., 345.

^231:31 The best narrative, and indeed the only one that enters circumstantially into all the details of the expulsion from Nauvoo, is contained in the Assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church of Latter-day Saints. Also a Condensed History of the Expulsion of the Saints from Nauvoo by Elder John S. Fullmer (of Utah, U. S. A.), Pastor of the Manchester, Liverpool, and Preston Conferences. Liverpool and London, 1855. The work is written from a Mormon standpoint, but including as it does copies of the despatches of Illinois officers and officials, of the stipulations between the belligerents, and of some comments made by the Quincy Whig, appears in the main reliable. The author's comments on the gentiles are sufficiently bitter, and his description of the fight at Nauvoo and the valor of the saints militant must of course be taken with due allowance. For instance: 'Seeing our men take possession of some vacant buildings on the line of their approach, they took a position on an elevated spot of ground, and opened a heavy cannonade at a distance of something less than half a mile. This was returned with great spirit on our part from guns made of steam shafts that carried six-pound balls. Many were the balls that we picked up as they came rolling and bounding among us, and we sent them back with as much spirit and precision as they were first sent.' p. 37. Col Kane says: 'A vindictive war was waged upon them, from which the weakest tied in scattered parties, leaving the rest to make a reluctant and almost ludicrously unavailing defence.' The Mormons, 54. In the General Epistle of the Twelve, Dec. 23, 1847, in Snow's Voice of Joseph, 14-15, we read: 'In September 1846 an infuriated mob, clad in all the horrors of war, fell on the saints who had still remained in Nauvoo for want of means to remove, murdered some, and drove the remainder across the Mississippi into Iowa, where, destitute of houses, tents, food, clothing, or money, they received temporary assistance from some benevolent souls in Quincy, St Louis, and other places, whose names will ever be remembered with gratitude. Their property in Hancock co., Illinois, was little or no better than confiscated; many of their houses were burned by the mob, and they were obliged to leave most of those that remained without sale; and those who bargained sold almost for a song; for the influence of their enemies was to cause such a diminution in the value of property that for a handsome estate was seldom realized enough to remove the family comfortably away; and thousands have since been wandering to and fro, destitute, afflicted, and distressed for the common necessaries of Life, or unable to endure, have sickened and died by hundreds; while the temple of the Lord is left solitary in the midst of our enemies, an enduring monument of the diligence and integrity of the saints.' Mention of the expulsion from Nauvoo is of course made in most of the books published on Mormonism, but in none of them, except perhaps in one or two of the meet rabid anti-Mormon works, which I have not thought it worth while to notice, is the conduct of the Illinois mob defended.

^232:32 A few months before, Nauvoo with the neighboring Mormon settlements had contained some 20,000 saints, of whom in July about 15,000 were encamped on the Missouri River, or were scattered through the western states in search of employment.

^233:33 While at Montrose, Heber C. Kimball writes thus in his journal of the condition of his family, his wife having a babe a few days old, and he himself ill with ague. 'I went to the bed; my wife, who was shaking with the ague, having two children lying sick by her side;...the only child well was little Heber Parley, and it was with difficulty he could carry a two-quart pail full of water from a spring at the bottom of the hill.'

^233:34 'Such deaths occurred from exposure and fright in Nauvoo. The camp journalist recorded: Effect of persecution by the Illinois mob.'

^233:35 The trustees from Nauvoo also distributed clothing, and molasses, salt, and salt pork. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1846, 383.

^233:36 Mrs Clara Young's Experience, MS., 3.

^234:37 'On the 9th of October, while our teams were waiting on the banks of the Miss. for the poor saints...left without any of the necessaries of life,...and nothing to start their journey with, the Lord sent flocks of quail, which lit upon their wagons and on their empty tables, and upon the ground within their reach, which the saints, and even the sick, caught with their hands until they were satisfied.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 9. This phenomenon extended some 30 or 40 miles along the river, and was generally observed. The quail in immense quantities had attempted to cross the river, but it being beyond their strength, had dropped into the river boats or on the bank.' Wells, in Utah Notes, MS., 7.

^234:38 See The Mormons: A Discourse delivered before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, March 26, 1850, by Thomas L. Kane. Philadelphia, 1850. A copy of it will be found at the end of Orson Pratt's Works, and in Mackay's The Mormons, 200-45. The story of the Mormon exodus, as handed down to us by a man of Colonel Kane's powers of observation, would have been a valuable record were it not plainly apparent that truth is too often sacrificed to diction. Among Mormon writers we find no detailed narrative of this exodus, and among others little that is not borrowed from the colonel's discourse.

^234:39 Snow's Biography, 89.

^235:40 The temple was half destroyed by fire on Nov. 19, 1848. Nauvoo Patriot, in Millennial Star, xi. p. 46; and on May 27, 1850, further damaged by a tornado. Hancock Patriot, in Mackay's The Mormons, 210. For cut of remnants, see Linforth's Route from Liverpool to G. S. L. Valley, 62, and Hyde's Mormonism, 140. See also George Q. Cannon, in Juvenile Instuctor, vol. ix. no. 5, and Wells' Narrative, MS., 41; Deseret News, Aug. 24, 1850; Frontier Guardian, July 24, 1850.

^235:41 As James Linforth describes in writing of Nauvoo in 1858.

^235:42 Route from Liverpool to G. S. L. Valley, 63.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 236]

  

CHAPTER IX.
 AT THE MISSOURI.
 1846-1847.

NATIVE RACES OF THE MISSOURI--THE POTTAWATTAMIES AND THE OMAHAS--THE MORMONS WELCOMED AS BRETHREN--WAR WITH MEXICO--CALIFORNILA TERRITORY--MEXICAN BOUNDARIES--APPLICATION TO THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT FOR AID--AN OFFER TO SERVE AS SOLDIERS ACCEPTED--ORGANIZATION OF THE MORMON BATTALION--DEPARTURE OF THE BATTALION--BOUNTY MONEY--MARCH ACROSS THE CONTINENT--THE BATTALION IN CALIFORNIA--MATTERS ON THE MISSOURI.

    AMONG the savages on either side of the Missouri, the Pottawattamies on the east side and the Omahas on the west side, the outcasts from Nauvoo were warmly welcomed. "My Mormon brethren," said the chief Pied Riche, [*1] "the Pottawattamie came sad and tired into this unhealthy Missouri bottom, not many years back, when he was taken from his beautiful country beyond the Mississippi, which had abundant game and timber and clear water everywhere. Now you are driven away in the same manner from your lodges and lands there, and the graves of your people. So we have both suffered. We must help one another, and the great spirit will help us both."

    Extreme care was taken not to infringe in any way upon the rights of the Indians or the government. Brigham counselled the brethren to regard as sacred the burial customs of the natives; frequently their dead were deposited in the branches of trees, wrapped in buffalo robes and blankets, with pipes and trinkets

[p. 237]

beside them. At Cutler Park there were friendly negotiations made with Big Elk, chief of the Omahas, who said: "I am willing you should stop in my country, but I am afraid of my great father at Washington." [*2]

    As the United States pretended to hold the title to the land, it was thought that the Pottawattamies had no right to convey their timber to others; so Brigham enjoined that there should be no waste of timber within these limits, but that as much as was necessary might be used. A permit for passing through their territory, and for remaining while

Click to enlarge
ABOUT THE MISSOURI.

necessary, was obtained from Colonel Allen, who was acting for the United States. [*3]

    Although it was late in the season when the first bands of emigrants crossed the Missouri, some of them still moved westward as far as the Pawnee villages on Grand Island, intending to select a new home before winter. But the evil tidings from Nauvoo, and the destitute condition in which other parties of the

[p. 238]

saints reached the Mormon encampments, forbade further progress, and all prepared to spend the winter on the prairie. To the Mormon encampment on the site of the present town of Council Bluffs was afterward given the name of Kanesville. [*4]

 

    While the saints were undergoing their infelicities at Nauvoo, war had broken out between the United States and Mexico. At that time New Mexico and California were a part of Mexico, and Utah and Nevada were a part of California. [*5] Journeying west from Nauvoo, California or Oregon would be reached. The latter territory was already secured to the United States; people were there from the United States, composing religious sects and political parties as jealous of their holdings as any in Missouri or Illinois. Vancouver Island [*6] was practically unoccupied, but the Hudson's Bay Company would scarcely regard with favor its occupation by a large body of American citizens whose government was at that moment crowding them out of the Oregon territory and across the Columbia River.

    But had the Mormons known their destination, had they known what point among the mountains or

[p. 239]

beside the sea was to be their final resting-place, they would not have told it. When they turned their back on Nauvoo, the whole western coast was before them, with its multitudinous mountains and valleys, its rivers and lakes, and long line of seaboard. Of the several parts of this immense territory, ownership and right of occupation were not in every instance determined. The question of the boundary line between England's possessions and those of the United States had stirred up no small discussion and feeling, and out of the present war with Mexico would doubtless arise some changes. [*7] It was a foregone conclusion in the minds of many, before ever the migratory saints had reached the Missouri River, that when the present troubles with Mexico were ended the United States would have California. But however this might be, the saints had a firm reliance on an overruling providence, and once adrift upon the vast untenanted west, their God and their sagacity would point out to them their future home. Thus it was that while the Mormons in the western states took the route overland, another portion living at the east took passage round Cape Horn, the intention being that the two bodies of brethren should come together somewhere upon the Pacific slope, which indeed they did. [*8]

    The national title to what is now the Pacific United States being at this time thus unsettled, and the Mormons having been driven from what was then

[p. 240]

the United States, it was considered but natural, as indeed it seemed to be a necessity, that they would take possession of such unoccupied lands in the region toward the Pacific as best suited them. But it was not necessary that they should hold possession of such lands in opposition to the government of the United States, as they have been charged with doing.

    They now applied to the government at Washington for work, offering to open roads, transport military stores, or perform any other service which the government might require in this farthest west, even to assist in fighting its battles. Such occupation would be of the greatest advantage to them in this new country, where land was fertile and plenty and free, and possessing as they did large herds of cattle and horses and sheep, with no market and but little money. And on the other hand, being on the ground, accustomed to work, and having every facility at hand without long and expensive transportation, they could give more and better work for the pay than the government could obtain by any other means.

    They even asked for aid direct about the time the exodus began, being represented at Washington by Elder Jesse C. Little, [*9] who, aided by Colonel Kane, Amos Kendall, and others, brought the matter before President Polk. While negotiations were yet in progress, news arrived that General Taylor had already won two victories over the Mexicans; whereupon the elder addressed a petition to the president, stating that from twelve to fifteen thousand Mormons had set forth from Nauvoo for California, while some had departed by sea, and in Great Britain alone were forty thousand converts, all resolved to join the saints in their promised land. Many of them were without means; they were compelled to go; they wanted assistance

[p. 241]

either in the way of work or otherwise. The Mormons were true-hearted Americans, the memorial went on to say, and if the government would assist them in their present emergency, the petitioner stood ready to pledge himself as their representative to answer any call the government might make upon them for service on the field of battle.

    Elder Little was taken at his word. At a cabinet meeting, held a day or two after his petition was presented, the president advised that the elder be sent at once to the Mormon camps, and there raise a thousand men to take possession of California in the name of the United States, while a thousand more be sent by way of Cape Horn for the same purpose, on board a United States transport. It was finally arranged that the elder, in company with Kane, should proceed westward, the latter bearing despatches to Kearny, then at Fort Leavenworth, with a view to raising a corps of about five hundred men.

    On the 19th of June, Kearny issued an order to Captain James Allen of the 1st dragoons to proceed to the Mormon camp, and there raise four or five companies of volunteers, to be mustered into the service of the United States and receive the pay and rations of other infantry volunteers. They were then to be marched to Fort Leavenworth, where they would be armed; after which they would proceed to California by way of Santa Fe. They were to enlist for twelve months, after which time they were to be discharged, retaining as their own property the arms furnished them.

    In pursuance of his orders, Captain Allen proceeded to Mount Pisgah, where on the 26th he made known his mission. After a conference with the church council at that point, Allen went to Council Bluffs, where on the 1st of July it was determined by President Young that the battalion should be raised. In two weeks the corps was enrolled, and mustered in on the 16th of July, the president of the church

[p. 242]

promising to look after the wants of the families of those enlisting.

    Though in reality a great benefit to the brethren, there were some hardships connected with the measure. [*10] As Brigham and others were on their way from Council Bluffs to Pisgah to aid in obtaining these recruits, they passed 800 west-bound wagons. At their encampments on each side the river there was much serious illness, and as many of the teamsters had been withdrawn for this campaign, much heavy work fell upon the women and children, and the aged and infirm. [*11]

    After a ball on the afternoon of the 19th, the volunteers next day bade farewell to their families and friends, and accompanied by eighty women and children, [*12] set forth on their march, [*13] on the 1st of August arriving at Fort Leavenworth. Here the men received

[p. 243]

their arms and accoutrements, and to each was given a bounty of forty dollars, most of the money being sent back to the brethren by the hands of elders Hyde, Taylor, and others, who accompanied the battalion to that point, and there bade them God speed. [*14]

    About the middle of August the corps resumed its march toward Santa Fe, a distance of seven hundred miles, arriving at that place in two parties on the 9th and 12th of October. There eighty-eight men were invalided and sent back to Pueblo for the winter, and later a second detachment of fifty-five, being found unfit for service, was also ordered to Pueblo. [*15] Many of them found their way during the following year to the valley of Great Salt Lake.

    From Santa Fe the remainder of the troops set forth for San Diego, a journey of more than eleven hundred miles, the entire distance between that, town and the Mormon camps on the Missouri exceeding two thousand miles. Much of the route lay through a pathless desert; at few points could food be obtained in sufficient quantity for man or beast, and sometimes even water failed. Wells were sunk in the wilderness; but on one occasion, at least, the men travelled for a hundred miles without water. [*16] Before leaving Santa

[p. 244]

[paragraph continues] Fe rations were reduced, [*17] and soon afterward further reduced to one half and finally to one quarter allowance, the meat issued to the troops being the flesh of such animals as were unable to proceed further, though their hides and entrails were eagerly devoured, being gulped down with draughts of water, when water could be had. [*18] While suffering these hardships the men were compelled to carry their own knapsacks, muskets, and extra ammunition, and sometimes to push the wagons through heavy sand, or help to drag them over mountain ranges.

    Passing through a New Mexican pueblo on the 24th of October, some of the men were almost as naked as on the day of their birth, except for a breech-clout, or as their colonel termed it, a 'centre-clothing,' tied around the loins. In this plight, near the middle of December, the battalion reached the San Pedro River, some three hundred and forty strong, and here occurred the only battle which the saints militant fought during their campaign--an encounter with a

[p. 245]

herd of wild bulls. Thence, without further adventure worthy of note, they continued their march, and reaching the Pacific coast on the 29th of January, 1847, found the stars and stripes floating peacefully over the town of San Diego. [*19]

    A more detailed account of the career of the Mormon battalion will be found in my History of California. It remains only to add here that about one hundred of the men reached Salt Lake City in the winter of 1847, while some remained on the Pacific coast. [*20]

    The alacrity displayed by the Mormon president in raising this battalion has been ascribed to various causes; to the fear of further persecution should the levy be refused, and to a desire of showing that, notwithstanding their maltreatment, the saints were still

[p. 246]

unswerving in their loyalty to the United States. While all this carried weight, the bounty of twenty thousand dollars was no insignificant consideration, nor the hope that this battalion might serve as vanguard to Brigham's host, provided he carried out his partially formed purpose to settle in California.

 

    At the close of 1846, about twelve thousand souls had assembled in the Mormon camps, a portion of them being yet stationed as far eastward as Garden Grove. Of the rest a few had made their way to some Atlantic port and taken ship for California; many had dispersed throughout the country, some of whom were now gathering at the rendezvous. Though the first bands that crossed the Mississippi encountered no very severe hardships, as I have said, the sufferings of those who set forth later have few parallels, even among the pioneers, who, a year or two afterward, followed their track westward in search of gold. [*21]

    Mount Pisgah, the next encampment west of Garden Grove, was on the middle fork of Grand River. Through this winter of 1846-7, which was one of severest struggle, there was great lack of food and clothing. They could not go on because they had no teams, most of them being employed in bringing forward the emigration from the Mississippi. Many

[p. 247]

families were entirely out of provisions, and their destitute neighbors were sorely taxed. [*22] A fatal sickness swept through the camp, and soon there were not sufficient persons to nurse the sick; frequently burials were hastened with little ceremony. In the spring of 1847, Lorenzo Snow was made president of the camp. The men were put to work wherever they could get it. Seed was planted, and the result was enough not only for themselves, but they were enabled to send supplies to the camp at Council Bluffs. [*23] Snow instituted religious ceremonies and amusements to brighten and encourage them. He describes a dance in his log cabin, where clean straw was spread over the ground floor, and the walls draped with sheets. Turnips were scooped out and in them were placed lighted candles, which, suspended from the ceiling of earth and cane, or fastened on the walls, imparted a picturesque effect. Dancing, speeches, songs, and recitations varied the exercises, which opened and closed with prayer.

    On each side of the hills where now stands Council Bluffs could be seen the white canvas tents of a Mormon encampment, from which arose at sunrise the smoke of hundreds of fires. After the morning meal, the men employed themselves in tending herds, in planting grain and vegetables, or in building houses for winter. Many of them were excellent craftsmen, and could fell a tree, and split its trunk into boards, scantling, rails, posts, or whatever were needed, as

[p. 248]

readily as the most expert backwoodsmen of their day. [*24]

    During the summer and autumn months of 1846, the Papillon camp, near the Little Butterfly River, in common with the others, was stricken with fever, and with a scorbutic disease which the Mormons termed the black canker. In the autumn drought, the streams that discharge into the Missouri at this point are often little better than open sewers, pestilential as open cesspools, and the river, having lost more than half its volume, flows sluggishly through its channel of slime and sedge. Of the baked mud on either bank is formed the rich soil on which lay the encampments, the site being called, in their own phrase, Misery Bottom. In the year previous the Indians in this neighborhood had lost one ninth of their number; and now that the earth was for the first time upturned by the plough, the exhalations from this rank and steaming soil were redolent of disease and death.

    In the camp nearest to Papillon more than one third of the company lay sick at the beginning of August; elsewhere matters were even worse; and as the season advanced there were in some of the encampments not one who escaped the fever, the few who were able to stagger from tent to tent carrying food and water to their comrades. For several weeks it was impossible to dig graves quickly enough for the burial of the dead, [*25] and one might see in the open tents the wasted forms of women brushing away the flies from the putrefying corpses of their children.

    Through all these months building was continually going on at Winter Quarters. [*26] The axe and saw were

[p. 249]

incessantly at work night and day. It was a city of mud and logs; the houses had puncheon floors and roofs of straw and dirt, or of turf and willows; they were warm and nat unwholesome, but would not endure the thaw, rain, and sunshine. [*27]

    There was a camp at Cutler Park which was moved to Winter Quarters. Great difficulty was experienced in getting flour and meal; a little grain was ground at the government mill, and the rest was obtained in Missouri, a hundred and fifty miles distant. [*28] Brigham kept everybody busy, and everything was well organized and systematically executed. [*29] Schools were soon established, officers of the church appointed, and men sent on missions. The whole machinery was apparently in as active operation as it had been at Nauvoo. The gathering continued through the summer,

[p. 250]

but it was deemed inexpedient to move forward that year. Some twelve hundred cattle were herded on the rush bottoms, about a hundred miles up the river.

    The building of a water flouring mill was in process of construction, and Brigham superintended the work. As the camp journalist writes: "He sleeps with one eye open and one foot out of bed, and when anything is wanted he is on hand." The tithing collected was distributed among the destitute at Mount Pisgah. To the gentiles who visited their camps such hospitality was extended as their means permitted, which though often scant was never stinted.

    Within the camp the women attended not only to their ordinary household duties, but were busily occupied spinning, knitting, making leggings from deer and elk skins, and in weaving willow baskets for market. [*30] With cheerfulness and courage they adapted themselves to their many vicissitudes, their faith in their religion never swerving, and supported by it to a patient endurance beyond human strength. Most of them had exchanged their household treasures and personal effects, even to their table and bed furniture, for stores of maize or flour, which with milk were their only articles of diet. As evening approached, the tinkling of cattle bells announced the return of the men, when the women went forth to meet them, and welcome them back to their log hut and frugal meal. Then a little later all sounds were hushed, save that on the still night arose the strains of the evening hymn and the murmur of the evening prayer, the day closing, as it had commenced, with a supplication for the blessing of the Almighty, and with heartfelt thanksgiving that he had been pleased to deliver his people from the hands of their persecutors.

    During the latter part of the winter and toward the early spring matters assumed a brighter look.

[p. 251]

[paragraph continues] New-year's day was ushered in at Winter Quarters by the firing of cannon. [*31] There were frequent assemblies for dancing, and in February several picnics were held. In inaugurating these festivities, Brigham told the people he would show them how to go forth in the dance in an acceptable manner before the Lord, [*32] and to the sound of music led the dance. A picnic lasting for three days was also given, at which three hundred of the poor were feasted. [*33]

Footnotes

^236:1 Surnamed Le Clerc, on account of his scholarship.

^237:2 'The Omahas caused them some trouble, as they would steal with one hand while we fed them with the other.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 46, Oct. 18th.

^237:3 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1846, 98-9. Maj. Harvey brought the Mormons at Winter Quarters letters from Washington, expecting them to leave the Pottawattamie lands in the spring. See cor., Hist. B. Young, MS., 441-52.

^238:4 So called after Thomas L. Kane. Here was first issued on Feb. 7, 1849, the Frontier Guardian, and its publication was continued till March 22, 1852. Richards' Narr., MS,, 65; Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 13. The paper was edited by Orson Hyde, and makes a very creditable appearance. The subscription was $2 per year. In the second number we read: 'Flour nicely put up in sacks of from 50 to 100 lbs each will be received in exchange for the Guardian at the rate of $2 per hundred pounds, if good.' The last number of the Times and Seasons bears date Feb. 15, 1846.

^238:5 I frequently find California and Utah confounded by writers of this early period. The limits of California on the east were not then defined, and it was not uncommon, nor indeed incorrect, to apply that term to territory east of the sierra. I find this written in Snow's Voice of the Prophet, 15: 'The pioneers discovered a beautiful valley beyond the pass of the great Rocky Mts, being a portion of the great basin of Upper California.' As we shall see later, the Mormons knew even less about Utah than they did about California.

^238:6 Brigham Young at first suggested Vancouver Island. 'There are said to be many good locations for settlements on the Pacific, especially at Vancouver Island.' Circular to the brethren, in Times and Seasons, vi. 1019. In 1845 the report was current that the Mormons of Illinois had chosen V. I. as their future home, the metropolis to be situated at Nootka. Niles' Register, lxix. 134. The Quincy Whig thinks the Mormons intend to settle at Nootka Sound. Polynesian, ii. 1846.

^239:7 In a letter to Pres. Polk, dated near Council Bluffs, Aug. 9, 1846, the determination was expressed, 'that as soon as we are settled in the great basin, we design to petition the U.S. for a territorial govt, bounded on the north by the British and south by the Mexican dominions, east and west by the summits of the Rocky and Cascade Mts.' And again elsewhere: 'We told Col Kane we intended settling in the great basin on Bear River Valley; that those who went round by water would settle in S. F. That was in council with the twelve and Col Kane.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 133, 140.

^239:8 In his address to the saints in Great Britain, dated Liverpool, 1849, Elder John Taylor says: 'When we arrive in California, according to the provisions of the Mexican government, each family will be entitled to a large tract of land, amounting to several hundred acres; but as the Mexican and American nations are now at war, should Cal. fall into the hands of the American nation, there has been a bill before congress in relation to Or., which will undoubtedly pass, appropriating 640 acres of land to every male settler.' Millennial Star, viii. 115.

^240:9 In the letter appointing and giving instructions to Elder Little is the following: 'If our government should offer facilities for emigrating to the western coast, embrace these facilities if possible. As a wise and faithful man, take every advantage of the times you can.' Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 48.

^242:10 So ingrafted in their minds was the idea of persecution, and so accustomed were they now to complaining, that when the government acceded to their request, there were many who believed, and so expressed themselves, that this was but an act of tyranny on the part of the United States, whose people, after driving them from their borders, had now come upon them to make a draft on their healthiest and hardiest men, forcing them to separate from their wives and children now in the time of their extremest need, under penalty of extermination in case of refusal. And this idea, which was wholly at variance with the facts, is present in the minds of some even to this day. In order to facilitate enlisting, or for some other cause best known to himself, Brigham deemed it best to preserve this idea rather than wholly disabuse their minds of it; for in his address to the brethren on the 15th of July he said: 'If we want the privilege. of going where we can worship God according to the dictates of our consciences, we must raise the battalion.' In his address at the gathering of the pioneers on the 24th of July, 1880, Wilford Woodruff said: 'Our government called upon us to raise a battalion of 500 men to go to Mexico to fight the battles of our country. This draft was ten times greater, according to the population of the Mormon camp, than was made upon any other portion of our nation...Whether our government expected we would comply with the request or not, is not for me to say. But I think I am safe in saying that plan was laid by certain parties for our destruction if we did not comply.' Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 20.

^242:11 'Most of our people were sick; in fact, the call for 500 able-bodied men from Council Bluffs for Mexico, by the government, deprived us of about all our strength.' Richards' Rem., MS., 25.

^242:12 Compare official report in U. S. House Ex. Doc., no. 24, 31st Cong., 1st Sess., and Tyler's Hist. Mormon Battalion, and note discrepancies in regard to numbers enlisted and discharged. The names of those who reached California will be found in my pioneer register, Hist. Cal., this series.

^242:13 'The members started upon their pilgrimage cheerfully,' says Woodruff, 'understanding that they occupied the place of a ram caught in a thicket, and were making a sacrifice for the salvation of Israel.' Utah Pioneers, 20.

^243:14 'Here they received 100 tents, one for every 6 privates.' 'The paymaster remarked that every one of the Mormon battalion could write his own name, but only about one third of the volunteers he had previously paid could do so.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1846, 18. 'Five thousand eight hundred and sixty dollars was brought in by Parley Pratt from Ft Leavenworth, being a portion of the allowance for clothing paid the battalion. It was counselled that this money be expended in St Louis for the families; three prices have to be paid here;...we wish they should all act voluntarily, so that they may have no reflections to cast upon themselves or counsellors.' Id., MS., 1846, 150. 'When the goods were bought, prices had advanced and ferriage was very high, all of which brought the goods higher than was anticipated, and produced some grumbling in camp.' Id., MS., 1847, 12.

^243:15 Families accompanying the battalion were ordered to Pueblo for winter quarters. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1S46, 260. A detachment was sent to Pueblo consisting of 89 men and 18 laundresses. Later in this vol., I refer to affairs at Pueblo as furnished me in a very valuable manuscript by Judge Stone of Colorado.

^243:16 In a general order issued at San Diego on Jan. 30, 1847, by command of Lieut-col St George Cooke, then in charge of the battalion, vice Col Allen, deceased, the men are thus complimented on their safe arrival at the shores of the Pacific: 'History may be searched in vain for an equal march of infantry; nine tenths of it through a wilderness, where nothing but savages and [p. 244] wild beasts are found; or deserts where, for the want of water, there is no living creature. There, with almost hopeless labor, we have dug deep wells, which the future traveller will enjoy. Without a guide who had traversed them, we have ventured into trackless prairies, where water was not found for several marches. With crowbar and pickaxe in hand, we have worked our way over mountains which seemed to defy aught save the wild goat, and hewed a passage through a chasm of living rock, more narrow than our wagons.' Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 10.

^244:17 'Until further orders, three fourths pound of flour, also three fourths rations sugar and coffee will be issued. Beef, one and a half pounds will be issued for a day's ration.' Order No. 11, Headquarters Mormon Battalion, Santa Fe. A copy of it will be found in Tyler's Hist. Mor. Battalion, 175-6.

^244:18 During the march from Santa Fe to San Diego a song was composed by Levi W. Hancock, a musician belonging to company E. It was entitled the 'Desert Route,' and commences:

While here beneath a sultry sky,
 Our famished mules and cattle die;
 Scarce aught but skin and bones remain;
 To feed poor soldiers on the plain.

Chorus: How hard to starve and wear us out
 Upon this sandy desert route.

We sometimes now for lack of bread,
 Are less than quarter rations fed,
 And soon expect, for all of meat,
 Naught else than broke-down mules to eat.

Now half-starved oxen, over-drilled,
 Too weak to draw, for beef are killed;
 And gnawing hunger prompting men,
 To eat small entrails and the skin.

[paragraph continues] Id., 181-2.

^245:19 In A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War, 1846-1847, by Sergeant Daniel Tlyer, (Salt Lake City,) 1881, 8vo, 376 pp., we have a most valuable hook, and one that forms the leading authority on this subject. Though written, of course, from a Mormon standpoint, and marked by the credulity of his sect, the execution of the work is all that its title-page promises. In the introduction, occupying 109 pages, we have President John Taylor's account of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, Colonel Kane's discourse on the Mormons, and a poem by Eliza R. Snow, entitled The Mormon Battalion, and First Wagon Load over the Great American Desert. The remainder of the volume consists of original matter. Tyler was a member of company C in the battalion, and no doubt speaks the truth when he says in his preface that 'neither labor, pains, nor expense has been spared in the effort to make this a just and authentic history.' Among other authorities may be mentioned Horne's Migr. and Settlem't, L, D. Saints, MS., 32-3; Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 3; Woodruff's Rem., MS., 76; Henry W. Bigler's Diary of a Mormon in California, MS., in which last we have a faithful and interesting record of the Mormon battalion and Mr Bigler's account of the discovery of gold in California. The Conquest of New Mexico and California: an Historical and Personal Narrative, by P. St. George Cooke, Brigadier and Brevet Major-general U.S.A., N.Y., 1878, 12mo, gives some additional matter, as do the journal and report of that officer in U.S. Sen. Doc. No. 2, 30th Cong., Special Sess., and in House Ex. Doc., 30th Cong., 1st Sess., no. 41, pp. 549-63. Cooke, it will be remembered, was in command of the battalion. Items have also been gathered from U.S. House Ex. Doc., 31st Cent., 1st Sess., no. 24, p. 22; Apostle Wilford Woodruff's Speech, in Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 19-22; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 8-11; Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 41-76; Olshausen, Gesch. de Mor., 142-4; and Kane's The Mormons, 27-9. Biographical notices of some of the members, and the names of the women who accompanied the battalion, are given in Tullidge's Women, 427, 432, 443-4.

^245:20 In the Frontier Guardian, March 7, 1849, is a notice copied from the St Joseph Gazette, stating that the members of the battalion can at once receive their extra pay at Fort Leavenworth. The notice is signed by Paymaster Thos S. Bryant.

^246:21 Instance the experiences of Mrs Richards, Reminiscences, MS., passim. While on their journey toward the Missouri, having parted from her husband who was about starting on a mission to England, her little daughter was taken dangerously ill, and the mother was prematurely confined in a wagon with a son, who died soon after. 'Our situation was pitiable; I had no suitable food for myself or my child; the severe rain prevented our having any fire; on the third day we resumed our journey. In ten days we reached Mt Pisgah: my little girl was very ill, and I was also. We continued our journey till we reached my mother at Cutler Park, and here, after weeks of almost incredible suffering, my little daughter died. A few days previously she had asked for some potato soup, the first thing she had shown any desire for for weeks, and as we were then travelling, we came in sight of a potato-field. One of the sisters eagerly asked for a single potato. A rough woman impatiently heard her story through, and putting her hands on her shoulders, marched her out of the house, saying, "I won't give or sell a thing to one of you damned Mormons." I turned on my bed and wept, as I heard them trying to comfort my little one in her disappointment. When she was taken from me I only lived because I could not die.'

^247:22 It cannot be said that any considerable number died of starvation. 'Only those died of it outright,' says Kane in The Mormons, 'who fell in out-of-the-way places that the hand of brotherhood could not reach...If but part of a group were supplied with provisions, the whole went on half or quarter ration.' 'Articles of diet, such as tea, coffee, sugar, with every species of clothing, were eagerly stored up, as possibly the last we should ever see.' Brown's Testimonies, MS., 24. 'When starting from Nauvoo, a gentile neighbor gave me a pound of tea, which through sickness and great suffering was about all the sustenance I had for some time.' Mrs Richards' Rem., MS., 20.

^247:23 'Parties were sent to the gentile settlements to look for work, food, and clothing, and elders Dana and Campbell collected about $600 from the rich gentiles in Ohio and elsewhere.' Snow's Biography, 91.

^248:24 'There were among them many skilled mechanics, who could work at forge, loom, or turning-lathe. A Mormon gunsmith is the inventor of the excellent repeating rifle that loads by slides instead of cylinders; and one of the neatest finished fire-arms I have ever seen was of this kind, wrought from scraps of old iron, and inlaid with the silver of a couple of half-dollars.' Kane's The Mormons, 36.

^248:25 At the camp situated on the site of the town of Florence, there were over 600 burials. Kane's The Mormons, 51.

^248:26 'Here we suffered terribly from scurvy, for want of vegetables. I was a victim, and even my little children as young as three years of age. The [p. 249] first relief experienced was when a bag of potatoes was brought in from Missouri...It was observed that those who had milk escaped the trouble.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 20.

^249:27 'The buildings were generally of logs from 12 to 18 feet long, a few were split, and made from lynn and cotton-wood timber; many roofs were made by splitting oak timber into boards, called shakes, about 3 ft long and 6 in. wide, and kept in place by weights and poles; others were made of willows, straw, and earth, about a foot thick; some of puncheon. Many cabins had no floors; there were a few dugouts on the sidehills--the fireplace was cut out at the upper end. The ridge-pole roof was supported by two uprights in the centre and roofed with straw and earth, with chimneys of prairie sod. The doors were made of shakes, with wooden hinges and string latch; the inside of the log houses was daubed with clay; a few had stoves.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1846, 534. 'The roofs were made of logs laid across with flags spread over them, and earth spread over these. This was partial protection from the rain, but when once it was soaked through in a heavy storm, we were at the mercy of the rain.' Richards' Rem., MS., 27. In Dec. 1846, at Winter Quarters there were '538 log houses and 83 sod houses, inhabited by 3,483 souls, of whom 334 were sick.' Church Chronology, 65.

^249:28 '$8,000 was sent by Whitney to St Louis to purchase stones and machinery for flouring mills; and through A. H. Perkins a carding machine was ordered from Savannah.' Hist. B. Young, MS., Aug. 30, 1846. 'Sugar and coffee were 16 2/3 cts per lb.; domestics and calicoes from 18 to 25 cts; $3 a cwt. for flour,' etc.; all of which could be purchased in St Louis for a third of these rates. These prices seemed exorbitant to the Mormons, though in reality they were not unreasonable. In transporting the goods from St Louis later, ferriage became so high and prices were so advanced that the brethren burst forth: 'Woe unto you, Missourians! but we are independent of them and can live without them, for we have thousands of cattle left.'

^249:29 'At a meeting of the council July 14th, it was voted that colonies be established on the east side of the river to put in buckwheat, and winter; that a fort be built on Grand Island and a settlement made there; and that Bishop Miller and a company go over the mountains.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1846, 50.

^250:30 Several loads of willow baskets were manufactured. Hist. B. Young, MS., 534.

^251:31 The thermometer was during that week from 2 degrees to 8 degrees below zero, later falling several degrees lower.

^251:32 'I then knelt down and prayed to God in behalf of the meeting,...and dedicated the meeting and house to the Lord,...and led forth in the dance.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 27. In an address Brigham said: 'For some weeks past I could not wake up at any time of the night but I heard the axe at work,...and now my feelings are, dance all night if you desire to do so.' p. 48. 'The "Silver Greys" and spectacled dames,...some nearly a hundred years old, dancing like ancient Israel.' p. 49.

^251:33 'There were 117 poor adults,...divided into three wards...Shortly after noon I met with 66 of my family, including my adopted children.' Id., p. 53.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

  

CHAPTER X.
 MIGRATION TO UTAH.
 1847.

CAMP NEAR THE MISSOURI--PREPARATIONS AT WINTER QUARTRS--DEPARTURE OF THE PIONEER BAND--ELKHORN RENDEZVOUS--ROUTE AND ROUTINE--INCIDENTS OF JOURNEY--APPROACH TO ZION--IN THE CAnON--HOSANNA! HALLELUJAH!--ENTRY INTO THE VALLEY OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE--PLOUGHING AND PLANTING--PRAYING AND PRAISING--SITE FOR A CITY CHOSEN--TEMPLE BLOCK SELECTED--RETURN OF COMPANIES TO WINTER QUARTERS--THEIR MEETING WITH THE WESTWARD-BOUND--GENERAL EPISTLE OF THE TWELVE.

    IN the spring of 1847 we find the saints still in camp in the vicinity of the Missouri. Considering what they had been called upon to undergo, they were in good health and spirits. There is nothing like the spiritual in man to stimulate and sustain the physical; and this result is equally accomplished by the most exalted piety of the true believer, or by the most stupid fanaticism or barbaric ignorance; for all of us are true believers, in our own eyes. There is nothing like religion to sustain, bear up, and carry men along under trying circumstances. They make of it a fight; and they are determined that the world, the flesh, and the devil shall not conquer.

    In the present instance it was of course a miracle in their eyes that so many of their number were preserved; it was to this belief, and to the superhuman skill and wisdom of their leader, and partly to their own concert of action, that their preservation was due.

   Frequent meetings had been held by the council to consider plans for further explorations by a pioneer

[p. 253]

band. [*1] A call was made for volunteers of young and able-bodied men, and in April a company was organized, with Brigham Young as lieutenant-general, Stephan Markham colonel, John Pack major, and fourteen captains. The company consisted of 143 persons, including three women, wives of Brigham Young, Lorenzo Young, and Heber C. Kimball. They had 73 wagons drawn by horses and mules, and loaded chiefly with grain and farming implements, [*2] and with provisions which were expected to last them for the return journey.

    Early in April a detachment moved out of Winter Quarters for the rendezvous on the Elkhorn, and on the 14th the pioneer band, accompanied by eight members of the council, [*3] began the long journey westward in search of a site for their new Zion. If none were found, they were to plant crops and establish a settlement at some suitable spot which might serve as a base for future explorations. [*4]

    The route was along the north branch of the Platte, and for more than 500 miles the country was bare of

[p. 254]

vegetation. Roused by the call of the bugle at five o'clock in the morning, they assembled for prayers; then they breakfasted, and upon a second call of the bugle at seven o'clock they started, and travelled about twenty miles for the day. At night the note of the bugle sent each to his own wagon to prayers and at nine o'clock to bed. They rested on Sunday, giving up the day to fasting and prayer. They were careful in marching to preserve order, with loaded guns and powder-horn ready. And the better to present a compact front, the wagons were kept well together, usually two abreast where the ground would permit, and the men were required to walk by the wagons.

    They felled cotton-wood trees for their horses and

Click to enlarge
ROUTE OF THE MORMONS.

cattle to browse upon, and at last were obliged to feed them from the grain, flour, and biscuit they carried, subsisting meanwhile themselves on game and fish. In the valley of the Platte roamed such vast herds of buffaloes that it was often necessary to send parties in advance and clear the road before the teams could pass. At night the wagons would be drawn up in a semicircle on the bank, the river forming a defence upon one side. The tongues of the wagons were on the outside, and a fore wheel of each was placed against the hind wheel of the wagon before it; all the horses and cattle were brought inside of the enclosure. The corral thus formed was oblong, with an

[p. 255]

opening at either end, where was stationed a guard. The tents were pitched outside of the corral. [*5]

    In crossing the Loup River on the 24th, they used a leathern boat made for this expedition, and called The Revenue Cutter. On the 4th of May letters were sent back to Winter Quarters by a trader named Charles Beaumont. On the 22d they encamped at Ancient Bluff Ruins. Here the spirits of the people reached such high hilarity that their commanding

Click to enlarge
CORRAL OF WAGONS.

officer was obliged to rebuke them, whereupon all covenanted to humble themselves. [*6]

    Early in June they reached the Black Hills by way of Fort Laramie. [*7] Here they rested for two or three

[p. 256]

weeks to build ferry-boats and recruit their animals. Grass was now plentiful; most of the brethren depended upon their rifles for food, and after having prepared sufficient dried meat for the rest of the journey, they continued on their way.

    No sooner had they crossed the river than a horseman, who had followed their trail from Laramie, rode up and begged them to halt, as near by was a large company bound for Oregon, for which he asked conveyance over the stream. The pioneers consented, stipulating that they should receive payment in provisions. Other parties following, the larder of the saints was replenished. [*8]

    Travelling rapidly, and a little to the south of what was known as the Oregon track, [*9] the Mormons arrived at South Pass in the latter part of June, about the time when the tide of emigration usually passed the Missouri. Thence skirting the Colorado desert and reaching the Green River country, the monotony was broken. Here the brethren were met by Elder Brannan, who had sailed from New York for California in the ship Brooklyn, the previous February, with 238 saints, as before mentioned. He reported that they were all busy making farms and raising grain on the San Joaquin River. [*10] As several of the present

[p. 257]

company were ill with mountain fever, they encamped for a few days. Thirteen battalion brethren who were out searching for stolen cattle now surprised them, and Brigham led in three hearty cheers. [*11] Again en route, passing through the Green River country, they reached Fort Bridger. Soon after leaving this point the real difficulties of the journey commenced. Led, as the saints relate, only by the inspiration of the Almighty. [*12] Brigham and his band crossed the rugged spurs of the Uintah range, now following the rocky bed of a mountain torrent, and now cleaving their way through dense and gnarled timber until they arrived at Echo Canon, near the eastern slope of the Wasatch Mountains, where for a brief space the main body rested, the president and many others being attacked with mountain fever. [*13]

    Impatient of the delay, Brigham, after a formal

[p. 258]

meeting, directed Orson Pratt [*14] to take the strongest of their number and cut through the mountains into the valley, making roads and bridges as they went. After crossing what were designated as Big and Little mountains, the party, consisting of some forty-two men having twenty-three wagons, encamped in Emigration Canon. [*15]

 

    Thus the saints are reaching their resting-place. Their new Zion is near at hand; how near, they are as yet all unaware. But their prophet has spoken; their way is plain; and the spot for them prepared from the foundation of the earth will presently be pointed out to them. The great continental chain is penetrated. In the heart of America they are now upon the border of a new holy land, with its Desert

[p. 259]

and Dead Sea, its River Jordan, Mount of Olives, and Gallilee Lake, and a hundred other features of its prototype of Asia.

    Through the western base of the mountains extends the canon, the two sides of which are serrated by a narrow stream, which along the last five miles flings itself from one side to the other a score or two of times, in places tumbling over bowlders, again quietly threading its way over a pebbly bottom, but everywhere cutting up the narrow and rugged gorge so as to make it most difficult and dangerous of passage.

    The primeval silence is now broken; the primeval songs are now disturbed by sounds strange to the surrounding hills, accustomed only to the music of running water and the notes of birds and wild beasts. There is the rumbling of the caravan as it comes slowly picking its way down the dark ravine, the tramping of the horses upon the hard ground, and the grinding of the wheels among the rocks as they plunge down one bank and climb another, or thread their way along the narrow ledge overhanging an abyss, the songs of Israel meanwhile being heard, and midst the cracking of whips the shouts now and then breaking forth of a leader in Israel awe-struck by the grandeur of the scene, "Hosanna to the Lord! hosanna to the creator of all I hallelujah! hallelujah!"

    Emerging from the ravine upon a bench or terrace, they behold the lighted valley, the land of promise, the place of long seeking which shall prove a place of rest, a spot whereon to plant the new Jerusalem, a spot of rare and sacred beauty. Behind them and on either hand majestic mountains rear their proud fronts heavenward, while far before them the vista opens. Over the broad plain, through the clear thin air, bathed in purple sunlight, are seen the bright waters of the lake, dotted with islands and bordered by glistening sands, the winding river, and along the creek the broad patches of green cane which look like waving corn. Raising their hats in reverence

[p. 260]

from their heads, again hosannas burst from their lips, while praise to the most high ascends from grateful hearts.

    It was near this terrace, being in fact a mile and a half up the canon, that Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow, with their detachment of pioneers, encamped on the 20th of July, 1847. Next day, the ever-memorable 21st, to reach this bench, whence was viewed with such marvellous effect the warm, pulsating panorama before them, Pratt and Snow crept on their hands and knees, warned by the occasional rattle of a snake, through the thick underbrush which lined the south side of the mountain and filled the canon's mouth, leaving their companions on the other side of the brush. After drinking in the scene to the satisfaction of their soils, they descended to the open plain, Snow on horseback, with his coat thrown loosely upon his saddle, and Pratt on foot. They journeyed westward three miles, when Snow missing his coat turned back, and Pratt continued alone. After traversing the site of the present city, and standing where later was temple block, he rejoined his comrade at the mouth of the canon. Together they then returned to camp late in the evening and told of their discoveries.

    The following morning the advance company, composed of Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, [*16] and seven others, entered the valley and encamped on the bank of Canon Creek. They explored the valley toward the lake, and about three miles from the camp found two fine streams with stony bottoms, whose banks promised sufficient pasturage. Proceeding northward, they found hot springs at the base of the mountain spur. Upon their return they were greeted by the working camp five miles from the mouth of the canon, at what was subsequently known as Parley Canon

[p. 261]

creek. [*17] On the 23d the camp moved some two or three miles northward, the site chosen being near the two or three dwarf cotton-woods, [*18] which were the only trees within sight, and on the bank of a stream of pure water now termed City Creek, overgrown with high grass and willows. Pratt called the men together, dedicated the land to the Lord, and prayed for his blessing on the seeds about to be planted and on the labors of the saints. Before noon a committee returned a report that they had staked off land suitable for crops; that the soil was friable, and composed of loam and gravel. The first furrow was thereupon turned by William Carter, and through the afternoon three ploughs and one harrow were at work. A dam was commenced and trenches cut to convey water to the fields. Toward evening their energetic labors were interrupted by a thunder-storm. [*19] The ground was so dry that they found it necessary to irrigate it before ploughing, some ploughs having been broken; and it was not until after the arrival of Brigham that planting was begun.

    The coming of the leader had been impatiently awaited, although in their ambition to have as much as possible accomplished, the time quickly passed. Brigham was slowly following with the remainder of the company, and was still so weak as to be obliged to be carried on a bed in Wilford Wordruff's carriage. As they reached a point on Big Mountain where the view was unbroken, the carriage was turned into proper position, and Brigham arose from his bed and surveyed the country. He says: "The spirit of light rested upon me and hovered over the valley, and I felt that there the saints would find protection and

[p. 262]

safety." [*20] Woodruff in describing the scene says of Brigham: "He was enwrapped in vision for several minutes. He had seen the valley before in vision, and upon this occasion he saw the future glory of Zion...planted in the valley." [*21] Then Brigham said: "It is enough. This is the right place. Drive on." Toward noon on the 24th they reached the encampment. Potatoes were planted in a five-acre patch of ploughed ground, and a little early corn. [*22]

    Their first impressions of the valley, Lorenzo Young says, were most disheartening. [*23] But for the two or three cotton-wood trees, not a green thing was in sight. And yet Brigham speaks almost pathetically of the destruction of the willows and wild roses growing thickly on the two branches of City Creek, destroyed because the channels must be changed, and leaving nothing to vary the scenery but rugged mountains, the sage bush, and the sunflower. The ground was covered with millions of black crickets which the Indians were harvesting for their winter food. [*24] An unusual number of natives had assembled for this purpose, and after dinner gathered about the new-comers, evincing great curiosity as to their plans.

    Lumber was made in the canons, or from logs drawn thence, with whip-saws, through the entire winter;

[p. 263]

afterward, on account of alarm at the apparent scarcity of timber, restrictions were put upon the manner of cutting and quantity used. Certain fines were imposed as a penalty for disobedience; for fuel only dead timber was allowed, and while there was sufficient, the restraint excited some opposition. [*25]

The next day was the sabbath; and as had been the custom at Nauvoo, two services were held, George A. Smith, followed by Heber C. Kimball and Ezra T. Benson, preaching the first sermon, and in the afternoon the meeting was addressed by Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, and Willard Richards. One cause for thankfulness was that not a man or an animal had died on the journey. The sacrament was administered, and before dismissing the saints, the president bade them refrain from labor, hunting, or fishing. "You must keep the commandments of God," he said, "or not dwell with us; and no man shall buy or sell land, but all shall have what they can cultivate free, and no man shall possess that which is not his own."

    On the 27th, [*26] the president, the apostles, and six others crossed a river which was afterward found to be the outlet of Utah Lake, and thence walked dry-shod over ground subsequently covered by ten feet of water to Black Rock, where all bathed in the lake, Brigham being the first to enter it. [*27] The party returned to camp on the following day, when a council was held, after which the members walked to a spot midway between the north and south forks of a neighboring creek, where Brigham stopped, and striking the ground with his cane, exclaimed, "Here will

[p. 264]

be the temple of our God." [*28] This was about five o'clock in the afternoon. An hour later it was agreed that a site should be laid out for a city in blocks or squares of ten acres, and in lots of an acre and a quarter, the streets to be eight rods wide, with sidewalks of twenty feet.

    At eight o'clock on the same evening a meeting was held on the temple square, and it was decided by vote that on that spot the temple should be built, [*29] and from that spot the city laid out.

    On the 29th of July a detachment of the battalion, which had wintered at Pueblo, [*30] to the number of 150, under Captain James Brown, arrived in the valley; they were accompanied by fifty of the brethren who had started the year previous from the Mississippi. On the following evening a praise service for their safe arrival was held in the brush bowery, [*31] hastily

[p. 265]

constructed for the purpose by the battalion brethren.

    During the next three weeks all were busily at work, tilling the soil, cutting and hauling timber, making adobes, and building, ambitious to accomplish as much as possible before the main body of the pioneer band should start on its return journey to report to the brethren and to promote further emigration. The battalion brethren moved their wagons and formed a corral between the forks of City Creek. Brigham exhorted the brethren to be rebaptized, himself setting the example, and reconfirming the elders. On the 8th of August three hundred were immersed, the services commencing at six o'clock in the morning. During the month twenty-nine log houses had been built, either with roofs or ready for the usual substitute, a covering of poles and dirt. These huts were so arranged as to carry out their plan of forming a rectangular stockade, [*32] the president and Heber C. Kimball being the first to take possession of their dwellings.

    On the 17th of August twenty-four pioneers and forty-six of the battalion set out on their return to Winter Quarters. [*33]

    On the afternoon of the 22d a conference was held, at which it was resolved that the place should be called the City of the Great Salt Lake. The term 'Great' was retained for several years, until changed by legislative enactment. It was so named in contradistinction to Little Salt Lake, a term applied

[p. 266]

to a body of water some two hundred miles to the south, situated in what was later known as Iron county, near Parowan, and which has since almost disappeared. The stream connecting the two great lakes was named the Western Jordan, now called the Jordan, and the whole region whose waters flow into the lake was distinguished as the great basin. [*34] On the 26th a second company, consisting of 107 persons, [*35] started for Winter Quarters. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball set forth on horseback a little in advance of the others, but turning back, they waved their hats with a cheery "Good-by to all who tarry," and then rode on.

    "We have accomplished more this year," writes Wilford Woodruff, "than can be found on record concerning an equal number of men in the same time since the days of Adam. We have travelled with heavily laden wagons more than a thousand miles, over rough roads, mountains, and curious, searching out a land, a resting-place for the saints. We have laid out a city two miles square, and built a fort of hewn timber drawn seven miles from the mountains, and of sun-dried bricks or adobes, surrounding ten acres of ground, forty rods of which were covered with block-houses, besides planting about ten acres of corn and vegetables. All this we have done in a single month." [*36]

 

    At Winter Quarters active preparations had been making for following the pioneers at the earliest opportunity. Throughout the spring all was activity. Every one who had teams and provisions to last a year and a half was preparing to move, and assisting those who were to remain to plough and sow. Parley P. Pratt, having returned [*37] from England shortly

[p. 267]

before Brigham's departure, was left in charge of the first companies ordered westward. On the 4th of July, 1847, they set forth for the Rocky Mountains, numbering in all 1,553 persons. [*38]

    A complete organization of the people was effected, according to a revelation of the Lord made through Brigham on the 14th of January, 1847. [*39] They were divided into companies, each with one hundred wagons, and these into companies of fifty wagons, and ten wagons, every company under a captain or commander. Two fifties travelled in double columns if practicable. When a halt was called the wagons were arranged as in the march of the pioneers, forming a temporary fort, with its back opening upon the corral formed by the two semicircles. The cattle were then driven into the corral under charge of the herdsmen. When ready to march, the captain of each ten attended to his company, under the supervision of the captain of fifty. Advance parties each day selected the next camping-ground. In the absence of wood, fires were made from buffalo chips and sage brush. The wagons had projections extending over the sides, making the interior six feet wide. Hen-coops were carried at the end of each wagon, and a few young pigs were brought for use in the valley. Great care was used to prevent a stampede of the animals, as they appeared to recognize the peculiarities and dangers of the new country and

[p. 268]

were easily alarmed. The organization and order in the camp was so perfect that not unfrequently half an hour after a halt the people sat down to a comfortable meal of fresh bread and broiled meat. [*40]

    At the beginning of their journey, jealousy, bickering, and insubordination arose among them, and a halt was called for the purpose of holding a council and adjusting matters. For several hundred miles they followed the trail of the pioneers, and now were approaching the president and his men, who, encamped between Green River and the Sweetwater, had sent forward two messengers [*41] to ascertain the progress and condition of the company. Upon hearing of the difficulties that had arisen, Brigham sent for Pratt and censured him severely for defects in the management of the party at the start, and for misunderstandings on the road. Pratt humbly acknowledged his faults and was forgiven. While the president and council were at prayer, the Sioux improved the occasion by stealing a number of horses, which proved a serious loss.

    Pratt now returned to his command, and without special incident reached the Salt Lake settlement on the 19th of September; the companies arriving in detachments at intervals of several weeks.

    Brigham's band was scantily provisioned for the journey to Winter Quarters. [*42] The number that had already gathered at Salt Lake had drawn heavily on the pioneers' resources, and they set out depending for subsistence on game and fish. They travelled more rapidly in returning, [*43] although most of them were compelled to walk. A few days after the Indian depredation

[p. 269]

mentioned during the council, the Mormons were attacked by a large war party of Sioux, who again carried off many horses. The meeting of the battalion and pioneer brethren with Parley Pratt's company was an occasion of rejoicing to all. [*44] On the 7th of September the former arrived at the Sweetwater. Here, with the assembled companies, a jubilee was held and a feast of good things prepared. While the men cut down brush and constructed a bowery, the women, with great trouble, unpacked their dishes and table furniture, delighted at the opportunity of assisting at such an event. A fat heifer was killed, and whatever luxuries were in camp were now produced. A slight snow fell, but in no degree marred their merriment; the feast was followed by music and dancing, and by accounts of the pioneers' experiences in entering upon and settling their new Zion; after prayer the company dispersed. [*45] The remnants of the banquet were left with the eastern-bound train, and as they separated each bade the other God speed. A fortnight before reaching Winter Quarters a small delegation met Brigham's company with most welcome supplies. On the 31st of October, when within one mile of the settlement, Brigham called his men together, praised them for their good conduct, blessed and dismissed them. They drove into town in order an hour before sunset. The streets were crowded, and friends pressed forward, shaking hands as they passed through the lines. [*46]

 

    During this season an abundant harvest had been gathered by the brethren at their encampments near

[p. 270]

the Missouri, though sickness was an ever-present guest; and many of their number who could least be spared were scattered throughout the world as missionaries in Europe, and as far westward as the Sandwich Islands, as soldiers in California, or as laborers wherever they could find a livelihood in the western states. The winter was passed quietly and in content, most of the saints preparing for their migration in the spring. Meanwhile, on the 23d of December, 1847, a general epistle of the twelve was issued to the brethren and to the gentiles. In this it was stated that they were at peace with all the world, that their mission was to extend salvation to the ends of the earth, and an invitation was extended to "all presidents, and emperors, and kings, and princes, and nobles, and governors, and rulers, and judges, and all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people under the whole heaven, to come and help us to build a house to the name of the God of Jacob, a place of peace, a city of rest, a habitation for the oppressed of every clime." Then followed an exhortation for the saints to gather unto Zion, promising that their reward should be a hundred-fold and their rest glorious. They must bring "their gold, their silver, their copper, their zinc, their tin, and brass, and iron, and choice steel, and ivory, and precious stones; their curiosities of science,...or anything that ever was, or is, or is to be for the exaltation, glory, honor, and salvation of the living and the dead, for time and for all eternity." [*47]

    Such a gathering of saints and gentiles would of itself have constituted an earthly Zion, especially for the president and the twelve, who held virtual control over their brethren's property. Among the gentiles one would think that such rhodomontade could not fail to bring discredit on the Mormon faith and the Mormon cause, but no such result followed. As will be mentioned later, their missions were never more prosperous than during the years when at their new

[p. 271]

stake of Zion the saints were employed, not in adorning their temple with gold, silver, and precious stones, but in building rough shanties, hewing timber, hoeing corn, and planting potatoes.

    The trite maxim commencing Aequam memento was one which the saints had taken well to heart, and on few was the mens aequa in arduis more firmly stamped than on the brow of him who, on christmas eve, the day after his invitation to the princes and potentates of all the earth, was appointed president of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints. And while in adversity there were none more steadfast, it must be admitted there were few in whom success developed so little of pride and of vainglory. From this time forth Brigham Young was to the saints as a prophet--yea, and more than a prophet: one on whom the mantle had fallen not unworthily. By his foresight he had saved his people from dispersion, and perchance his faith from annihilation. Hounded by a mob, he had led his followers with consummate tact throughout their pilgrimage, and in a wilderness as vet almost untrodden by man had at length established for them an abiding-place.

 

    After the departure of Brigham from Salt Lake, John Smith, the prophet's uncle, was nominally president of the camp; [*48] but upon the arrival of John Taylor and Parley P. Pratt their precedence was acknowledged and they were placed in charge. [*49] There were no laws until the latter part of this year, though certain penalties were assigned for certain crimes and executed by the people. As there was no jail, the whipping-post was substituted, but used only two or three times. In such cases the high council tried the

[p. 272]

prisoner, and sentenced him. "President Young was decidedly opposed to whipping," [*50] says George Q. Cannon, "but matters arose that we considered required punishment at the time." [*51]

    During this period men and women voted by ballot in matters relating to government. Women had already voted in religious meetings by the uplifted hand, but this is probably the first instance in the United States where woman suffrage was permitted. Utah at that time, however, was not a part of the United States, and before its admission as a territory the privilege was withdrawn. [*52]

[p. 273]

    On the 16th of November, O. P. Rockwell, E. K. Fuller, A. A. Lathrop, and fifteen others set forth for California to buy cows, mules, mares, wheat, and seeds. They bought two hundred head of cows at six dollars each, with which they started from California, but lost forty head on the Mojave; being ninety days on the return trip. During the autumn, several parties of the battalion men arrived from California, bringing a quantity of wheat. Captain Grant came to Salt Lake City from Fort Hall in December to arrange for opening trade between the two points. After due discussion, the matter was referred to the headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company.

    In regard to affairs at Pueblo and on the Missouri, I am indebted for further and later information to my esteemed friends Wilbur F. Stone and William N. Byers of Colorado. A detachment of the Mormons that wintered at Pueblo underwent many hardships, and there have been found relics in that vicinity, in the shape of furnace and cinders, significant of their industrial occupation at the time.

    On the Missouri, the Indians, who at first had so heartily welcomed the saints during the year 1847, complained to the government that they were intruding on their domain. The government therefore ordered away the Mormons, but gave them permission to occupy lands on the east bank of the river for five years. There they built a town, named Kanesville, opposite Omaha, and occupied the best part of the country up and down the left bank of the river for a distance of twenty miles in each direction. Many of them lived in dugouts, that is, artificial caves made by digging out a space for occupancy in the bank of the river or on the side of a bluff. Most

[p. 274]

of them were farmers, and they had three or four grist-mills and two or three saw-mills.

    The first emigrants did not stop on the east side of the river, but passed over at once on arrival, making their first settlement, as before mentioned, at Winter Quarters, situated six miles from the present city of Omaha, at the north end of the plateau, nearly all of which they ploughed up in the spring of 1847, and planted seed corn brought by those who the previous winter had returned to the Mississippi to work for wages. Hereabout they built many log houses, Brigham having a little cluster of them for his wives in a cosey nook apart from the others.

    On their final departure for the west, the Mormons left a few of their number under A. J. Mitchell, who was assisted by A. J. Smith. They lived on the east side of the Missouri at first, and had a ferry across the river as early as 1851, with other ferries west, one at Loup Fork, and one on the Elkhorn. A large emigration up the river from New Orleans set in about this time. In the spring of 1852 the steamboat Saluda, having six hundred souls on board, was blown up at the mouth of the Platte.

    In 1854 the lands of the Omahas, on the west side of the river, came into market, through a treaty made during the summer of that year with the natives, who ceded that section to the United States. Mitchell and Smith then moved to the western side, and changed the name of Winter Quarters to that of Florence, at the same time selling their interests on the eastern side to the gentiles, who changed the name of Kanesville to that of Council Bluffs.

Footnotes

^253:1 The octagon house of Dr Richards in which the council met is described as a queer-looking thing, much resembling a New England potato-heap in time of frost. 'Council voted a load of wood for each day they met in his house.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 2.

^253:2 Woodruff's Journal, MS., Apr. 17, 1847.

^253:3 John Taylor, Parley Pratt, and Orson Hyde were engaged in missionary work abroad. Pratt's Autobiog., 383.

^253:4 The impression was that they would reach as soon as possible 'the foot of the mountains somewhere in the region of the Yellowstone River, perhaps at the fork of Tongue River, say 2 days' ride north of the Oregon road, and a week's travel west of Ft Laramie...I informed Bishop Miller that when we moved hence it would be to the great basin.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 79. No one knew whither they were going, not even the leaders. 'We have learned by letter to Elder G. D. Watt that a company left Council Bluffs for the mountains on the 12th of April to seek a location for a stake in Zion.' Millennial Star, ix. 235. 'The pioneers started for the mountains to seek out a resting-place for the saints.' Brown's Testimonies for the Truth, 26. In Niles' Register, lxxii. 206 (May 29, 1847), we read: 'Their intention is to proceed as far as possible up to the period of necessary planting-time, when they will stop and commence a crop. The leaders will make but a short delay at this point, and will proceed over into California and communicate with or joia the disbanded forces of the Mormon battalion, whose period of service will expire about the 1st of July next.' 'When President Young was questioned by any of the pioneers as to the definite point of our destination, all he could say to them was, that he would know it when he should see it.' Erastus Snow, in Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 44.

^255:5 Woodruff's Journal, MS., April 19, 1847. On May 4th they 'established a post-office and guide system for the benefit of the next camp following. Every ten miles...we put up a guide-board.'

^255:6 'I have told the few who did not belong to the church that they were not at liberty to introduce cards, dancing, or iniquity of any description.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 90.

^255:7 Fort John, or Laramie, was occupied by 'James Bordeaux and about eighteen French half-breeds and a few Sioux...There had been no rain for the last two years...Two or three of us visited Mr Bordeaux at the fort. [p. 256] We paid him $15 for the use of his ferry-boat. Mr Bordeaux said that this was the most civil and best-behaved company that had ever passed the fort.' Id., MS., 1847, 91.

^256:8 Snow, in Utah Pioneers, 44. 'Capt. Grover and eight others of the pioneers were left at North Platte ferry and ford to ferry the companies that should arrive, and especially to ferry the emigration from Winter Quarters.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847.

^256:9 'Making a new road for a majority of more than one thousand miles westward, they arrived at the great basin in the latter part of July.' General Epistle of the Twelve, in Millennial Star, x. 82. 'He [Brigham] and the company arrived on the 24th of July, having sought out and made a new road 650 miles, and followed a trapper's trail nearly 400 miles Smith's Rise Progress, and Travels, 16; see also Tullidge s Life of Young, 161. Remy says that an odometer was attached to a wheel of one of the wagons, and careful notes taken of the distances. Jour. to G. S. L. City, i. 433-4. 'As I remember, there was no trail after leaving Laramie, going over the Black Hills, except very rarely. For a short distance before reaching the Sweetwater, we saw a wagon truck; it was a great surprise and a great curiosity.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 7.

^256:10 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 95; Tullidge's Life of Young, 166.

^257:11 'I exclaimed, "Hosanna! hosanna! give glory to God and the lamb, amen!" in which they all joined.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 96. 'Left Phineas Young and four others, who had volunteered to return to guide the immigrants.'

^257:12 Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 16. 'For,' says the author, 'no one knew anything of the country.' Snow, in Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 44, remarks: 'The president said we were to travel "the way the spirit of the Lord should direct us."' Snow states that James Bridger, who had a trading post which still bears the name of Fort Bridger, when he met the president on the Big Sandy River about the last of June, and learned that his destination was the valley of Great Salt Lake, offered $1,000 for the first car of corn raised there. 'Wait a little,' said the president, 'and we will show you.' Again, on p. 45 he says that, being encamped on what is now known as Tar Springs, the pioneers were met by a mountaineer named Goodyear, who had wintered on the site of the present city of Ogden, after planting brain and vegetables in the valley, but with meagre results. The mountaineer's report was very discouraging, but to him also Brigham replied, 'Give us time and we will show you.' There is no evidence that as yet the president knew anything about the Salt Lake Valley except what he heard from Bridger and Goodyear, or had gleaned from the reports of Fremont's expedition. 'On the 15th of June met James H. Grieve, Wm Tucker, James Woodrie, James Bouvoir, and six other Frenchmen, from whom we learned that Mr Bridger was located about 300 miles west, that the mountaineers could ride to Salt Lake from Fort Bridger in two days, and that the Utah country was beautiful.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 92. 'Half-mile west of Fort Bridger some traded for buckskins, their clothing being worn out.' Id., 97. Note also the following: 'Met Capt. Bridger, who said he was ashamed of Fremont's map of this country. Bridger considered it imprudent to bring a large population into the great basin until it was ascertained that grain could be raised.'

^257:13 'We had to stop at Yellow Creek and again at the head of Echo Canon, stopping and travelling as the sick were able to endure the journey, until we reached the Weber at the mouth of Echo Canon, and shuck our camp a fear miles below, the present railroad station.' Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 45.

^258:14 'Voted, that Orson Pratt take charge of an expedition to go on and make a road down the Weber River.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 97. O. Pratt was appointed to take 23 wagons and 42 men, and precede the main company. Church Chron., 65. Erastus Snow says, in a discourse on the Utah pioneers, delivered in the tabernacle July 25, 1880: 'I well remember, as we called at the wagon to bid the president good-by, Brother Willard Richards...asking if he had any counsel to give to guide our movements...Resting his elbow on the pillow with his head in his hand, he spoke feebly,..."My impressions are," said he, "that when you emerge from the mountains into the open country you bear to the northward, and stop at the first convenient place for putting in your seed."'

^258:15 'The emigration route previous to 1847 was via Laramie through South Pass to Big Sandy River. Then to avoid a desert stretch, down the Big Sandy to its junction with Green River, and across, then up Black's Fork to junction with Ham's Fork, and thence up Black's Fork to Fort Bridger. The Mormons here took the road made by Hastings and the Donner company in 1846, bearing almost due west, crossing Bear River, down Echo Canon to junction with the Weber. The Mormons here chose the Donner trail, which passed up the Weber southerly from Echo about twelve miles, then westerly into Parley's Park, then across the hills northerly to the head of Emigration Canon, then into the valley. As the Donner company had passed over this route more recently than any other, it seems to have been followed as probably the best, and was usually travelled for many years. In 1847, when the Mormons entered the valley, there were three wagon routes into it. The first, down Bear River from Soda Springs, through Cache Valley--Capt. Bartlett's route in 1841, followed by Fremont in 1843: the second, Hastings' California emigration through Echo and Weber canons in 1846; and the third, the Donner route of 1846, described. The Mormons found a plain road into a fertile, unoccupied country;...its isolation alone was the cause of its non-occupation.' McBride's Route of the Mormons, MS. This manuscript, to which among other favors I am indebted to Judge McBride, throws fresh light on the question of passes and routes in early times. The author, one of the first to enter Utah, was second to none in ability and position at a later period.

^260:16 Geo. A. Smith says in his autobiography that on this journey he walked 1,700 miles and rode some 800 miles on horseback. He had 25 lbs of flour, which he used by the cupful for those who were ill; for six weeks he was without bread, and like the rest of the company, lived on buffalo meat and other game.

^261:17 Parley was always quite popular among the brethren, though his judgment was not always the best.

^261:18 'My poor mother was heart-broken because there were no trees to be seen; I don't remember a tree that could be called a tree.' Clara Young s Experiences, MS., 5.

^261:19 'July 23d, 96 degrees Fah. A company commenced mowing the grass and preparing a turnip-patch.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 99.

^262:20 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 99.

^262:21 Woodruff, in Utah Pioneers, 1880, 23. See also Wroodruff's Journal, MS.; Clara Young's Experiences, MS.; Utah Early Record, MS.; Pioneer Women, MS.; Taylor's Rem., MS.

^262:22 'I had brought a bushel of potatoes with me, and I resolved that I would neither eat nor drink until I had planted them.' Woodruff, in Utah Pioneers, 1880, 23. 'I planted the first potato...in Salt Lake Valley,' says Geo. A. Smith in his autobiography.

^262:23 Mrs Clara Decker Young speaks of the distress she suffered at leaving Winter Quarters, where there were so many people and life so social; but that when she finally reached her destination she was satisfied. 'It didn't look so dreary to me as to the other two ladies. They were terribly disappointed because there were no trees, and to them there was such a sense of desolation and loneliness.' Experience of a Pioneer Woman, MS., 5.

^262:24 'The Indians made a corral twelve or fifteen feet square, fenced about with sage brush and grease-wood, and with branches of the same drove them into the enclosure. Then they set fire to the brush fence, and going amongst them, drove them into the fire. Afterward they took them up by the thousand, rubbed off their wings and legs, and after two or three days separated the meat, which was, I should think, an ounce or half an ounce of fat to each cricket.' Early Experiences of Lorenzo Young, MS., 4.

^263:25 'Taylor and Pratt took the lead; through them this understanding about the timber occurred.' Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 4.

^263:26 On Monday, the 26th, the president and his apostles ascended Ensign Peak, so called on account of a remark made by Brigham: 'Here is a proper place to raise an ensign to the nations.' Ibid. See also Utah Early Records, MS., 4; Woodruff's Journal, MS.; Nebeker's Early Justice, MS. Woodruff was the first who stood on the top of the peak.

^263:27 On this day was commenced the first blacksmith's shop, the property of Burr Frost.

^264:28 'This was about the centre of the site of the Temple we are now building.' Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 23.

^264:29 'Some wished for forty acres to be set apart for temple purposes, but it was finally decided to have ten acres;...the base line was on the south-east corner, and government officials afterward adopted it as the base meridian line.' Taylor's Reminiscences, MS., 21. When the elders arrived from England they brought with them to Winter Quarters, just before the starting of the pioneers, 'two sextants, two barometers, two artificial horizons, one circular reflector, several thermometers, and a telescope.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 82. Thus Orson Pratt was enabled to take scientific observations. He reported the latitude of the north line of temple square, which was ten acres in size, to be 40 degrees 45' 44" N., and its longitude 111 degrees 26' 34" W. From George W. Dean's Observations in 1869, taken at the temple block, the results were lat. 40 degrees 46' 2", long. 111 degrees 53' 30". Rept Coast Survey, 1869-70. In taking lunar distances for longitude, it is usual to have four observers, but Orson Pratt had no assistant; hence probably the discrepancy. On August 16th it was determined that the streets around the temple block should be called respectively North, South, East, arid West Temple streets, the others to be named, as required, First North street, Second North street, First South street, Second South street, etc.

^264:30 Says Mrs Clara Young: 'Before reaching Laramie three of tire pioneers were sent to Pueblo to tell the families there to strike their trail and follow them to their settlement.' Ex. of a Pioneer Woman, MS., 7. 'The men of this detachment were on their way to San Francisco, but their wagons breaking down and their cattle being in very poor condition, they were compelled to turn aside and await further orders.' Utah Early Records, MS., 8.

^264:31 For many years these boweries of trees and brush had been constructed when any large number of the people needed a temporary place of shelter. This one was 40 * 28 feet. Col Markham reported at this meeting 'that 13 ploughs and 3 harrows had been stocked during the past week, 3 lots of ground broken up, one lot of 35 acres planted in corn, oats, buckwheat, potatoes, beans, and garden seed.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 103-4. 'On the 20th H. G. Sherwood, in returning from an excursion to Cache Valley, brought an [p. 265] Englishman with him, named Wells, who had been living in New Mexico for some years.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 109. On the 21st A. Carrington, J. Brown, W. W. Rust, G. Wilson, and A. Calkins made the ascent of the Twin Peaks, 15 miles south-east of the stockade, and the highest mountain in the Wasatch Range, its elevation being, as they reported, 11,219 feet. These were probably the first white men who ascended this mountain.

^265:32 They were 8 or 9 feet high, and 16 or 17 feet long, by 14 wide. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 110. 'We were the first to move into the fort; our house had a door and a wooden window, which through the day was taken out for light, and nailed in at night...There was also a port-hole at the east end of the fort, which could be opened and closed at pleasure...We had adobe chimneys and a fire-place in the corner, with a clay hearth.' Young's Pioneer Women, MS., 6.

^265:33 'With 34 wagons, 92 yoke of oxen, 18 horses, and 14 mules, in charge of Shadrach Roundy and Tunis Rappelye. Lt Wesley Willis was in charge of the battalion men.' Richards' Narr., MS., 13-14.

^266:34 'It was also called The Great North American Desert.' Taylor's Rem., MS., 22.

^266:35 With 36 wagons, 71 horses, and 49 mules.

^266:36 Woodruff's Journal, MS., 78.

^266:37 'I found my family all alive and dwelling in a log cabin; they had, howerver, suffered much from cold, hunger, and sickness...The winter had been [p. 267] very severe, the snow deep, and consequently horses and cattle had been lost. ...My wagons were overhauled and put in order, tires reset, chains repaired, yokes and bows arranged in order, wagon bows made and mended.' Pratt's Autobiog., 397-8. 'The companies were organized by Elder P. P. Pratt and myself, as near as we could in accordance with instructions left by Pres. Young.' Taylor's Rem., MS., 7.

^267:38 This company is distinguished as the first immigration. It was supplied with 580 wagons, 2,213 oxen, 124 horses, 887 cows, 358 sheep, 716 chickens, and 35 hogs. Utah Early Records, MS., 17. Smith says about 700 wagons. Rise, Progress, and Travels, 16. Kearny's and Fremont's parties met Pratt's companies at Loup River; and according to Martin's Narr., '42 in Cal., MS., 122, John Young was appointed president and John Van Cott marshal.

^267:39 This was called 'the word and will of the Lord concerning the camp of Israel.' Like all revelations, it was in scriptural phraseology, and very explicit in its directions. It was also read by Brigham to his people in Salt Lake City on the 1st of August.

^268:40 From account of their journeyings furnished me in Taylor's Rem., 7-12.

^268:41 O. P. Rockwell and E. T. Benson.

^268:42 Among them was a party of battalion men who were entirely destitute except for a very small quantity of beef, which was soon exhausted. General Epistle of the Twelve, in Millennial Star, x. 83.

^268:43 'Camped on the south side of the Platte. We were 42 days in going to the valley from this point, and only 23 days in returning.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 115.

^269:44 'Met Spencer's advance company Sept. 3d, with 76 wagons; we had a joyful meeting; on the 4th met encampment of 75 wagons; on the 5th 162; and on the 8th met the last company of saints.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847.

^269:45 'All felt greatly encouraged. We now knew for the first time our destination; we had talked of California, and knew not until now where we should settle.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 22.

^269:46 'We were truly rejoiced once more to behold our wives, children, and old friends, after an absence of six months, having travelled over 2,000 miles... and accomplished the most important mission in this last dispensation.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1847, 122.

^270:47 The full text of this epistle is given in the Millennial Star, x. 81-8.

^271:48 Affairs were controlled by the high council, consisting of twelve high-priests. Salt Lake City was a stake of Zion, with president and other officers. 'At the conference on Oct. 3d Father John Smith was elected president of the stake of Zion and patriarch of the church. Brigham Young was sustained as president of the whole church.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 117.

^271:49 Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 4.

^272:50 'I had to chastise one in that way for stealing.' Id., MS., 4.

^272:51 'For instance, one of our best men now, who was then young, was accused of riding on horseback with a girl in front of him. This was looked upon as indecorous. He and others guilty of the same thing were severely reprimanded.' G. Q. Cannon, in Taylor's Rem., MS., 12-13.

^272:52 Taylor's Rem., MS., 14. Herewith I give a list of the Utah pioneers of 1847: Adams, Barnabas L.; Angel, Truman O.; Allen, Rufus; Attwood, Millen; Badger, Rodney; Barney, Lewis; Barnham, Charles D.; Benson, Ezra T.; Billings, Geo. P.; Boggs, Francis; Brown, Geo.; Brown, John; Brown, Nathaniel Thomas; Bullock, Thos; Burke, Charles; Burnham, Jacob D.; Byard, Robert; Carrington, Albert; Carter, William; Case, James; Chamberlin, Solomon; Chessley, Alexander P.; Clayton, William; Cloward, Thos P.; Coltrin, Zebedee; Craig, James; Crosby, Oscar; Curtis, Lyman; Cushing, Hosea; Davenport, James; Dewey, Benjamin F.; Dixon, John; Driggs, Starling; Dykes, William; Earl, Sylvester H.; Eastman, Ozro; Egan, Howard; Egbert, Joseph; Eldredge, John S.; Ellsworth, Edmund; Empey, William A.; Ensign, Datus; Everett, Addison; Fairbanks, Nathaniel; Farr, Aaron; Fitzgerald, Perry; Flake, Green (colored); Fowler, John S.; Fox, Samuel; Freeman, John M.; Frink, Horace M.; Frost, Burr; Gibbons, Andrew S.; Gleason, John S.; Glines, Eric; Goddard, Stephen H.; Grant, David; Grant, Geo. R.; Greene, John Y.; Grover, Thomas; Hancock, Joseph; Hanks, Sidney A.; Hanson, Hans C.; Harmon, Appleton M.; Harper, Charles A.; Henrie, William; Hewd, Simeon; Higbee, John S.; Holman, John G.; Ivory, Matthew; Jackman, Levi; Jacobs, Norton; Johnson, Artemas; Johnson, Luke; Johnson Philo; Kelsey, Stephen; Kendall, Levi N.; Kimball, Ellen S. (wife of H. C. K.); Kimball, Heber C.; King, William A.; Klineman, Conrad; Lark, Hark (colored); Lewis, Tarlton; Little, Jessie C.; Losee, John G.; Loveland, Chancey; Lyman, Amasa; Marble, Samuel H.; Markham, Stephen; Matthews, Joseph; Mills, George; Murray, Carlos; Newman, Elijah; Norton, John W.; Owen, Seely; Pack, John; Pierce, Eli H.; Pomeroy, Francis M.; Powell, David; Pratt, Orson; Reddin, Jackson; Rappelye, Tunis; Richards, Willard; Rockwell, Orrin P.; Rockwood, Albert P.; Rolfe, Benjamin W.; Rooker, Joseph; Roundy, Shadrach; Schofield, Joseph S.; Scholes, George; Sherwood, Henry G.; Shumway, Andrew P.; Shumway, Charles; Smith, George A.; Smoot, Wm C. A.: Snow, Erastus; Stevens, Roswell; Stewart, Benjamin F.; Stewart, James W.; Stringham, Briant; Summe, Gilburd; Taft, Seth; Tanner, Thomas; Taylor, Norman; Thomas, Robert T.; Thornton, Horace M.; Thorpe, Marcus B.; Tippitts, John H.; Vance, William P.; Walker, Henson; Wardel, George; Weiler, Jacob; Wheeler, John; Whipple, Edson; Whitney, Horace K.; Whitney, Orson K.; Williams, Almon L.; Woodard, George; Woodruff, Wilford; Woolsey, Thomas; Wordsworth,[p. 273] William; Young, Brigham; Clarissa D. (wife of B. Y.); Young, Harriet P. (wife of Lorenzo D.); Young, Isaac P. D.; Young, Lorenzo D.; Young, Lorenzo Z.; Young, Phineas H.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 275]

  

CHAPTER XI.
 IN THE VALLEY OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE.
 1848.

FOOD AND RAIMENT--HOUSES--HOME MANUFACTURES--THE FORT--WILD BEASTS--CANNON FROM SUTTER'S FORT--INDIAN CHILDREN FOR SALE--MEASLES--POPULATION--MILLS AND FARMING MACHINERY--THE PLAGUE OF CRICKETS--THEY ARE DESTROYED BY GULLS--SCARCITY OF PROVISIONS--THE HARVEST FEAST--IMMIGRATION--FIVE THOUSAND SAINTS GATHERED IN THE VALLEY--FENCING AND FARMING--DISTRIBUTION OF LOTS--ORGANIZATION OF COUNTY GOVERNMENT--ASSOCIATION FOR THE EXTERMINATION OF WILD BEASTS.

    AT the opening of January 1848, the saints were housed, clad, and fed in moderate comfort, and general content prevailed. [*1] The season was exceptionally mild; there were occasional light falls of snow, but not enough to interfere with ploughing and sowing, [*2] and a large tract of land was partially enclosed and planted with wheat and vegetables.

    So many people were now in the valley that notwithstanding the abundant crops food at length became scarce. Families weighed out their flour and allowed themselves so much a day. The wheat was ground at a mill on City Creek, but as there was no bolting-cloth, the shorts and bran could not be separated. The beef was very poor, [*3] as most of the cattle

[p. 276]

had been worked hard while driven to the valley and after their arrival, while those turned out to range did not fatten quickly. Butter and tallow were needed. One wild steer, well fattened, was brought in from Goodyear's rancho. A herd of deer crossing from one range of mountains to another was startled by the unexpected obstruction of the fort, and one sprang into the enclosure and was killed. Wild sago and parsnip roots constituted the vegetable food of the settlers. A few deaths occurred from poisonous roots. The bracing air and hard work stimulated appetite as stores decreased. For coffee parched barley and wheat were used, and as their sugar gave out, they substituted some of home manufacture. [*4] In the spring thistle tops were eaten, and became an important article of diet. [*5]

    Anxiety began to be felt about clothing, and the hand-looms were now busily at work, although wool was scarce. [*6] As shoes wore out, moccasins were substituted, and goat, deer, and elk skins were manufactured into clothing for men and women, though most unsuitable for use in rain and snow.

    At the time of Parley P. Pratt's arrival, the city of Great Salt Lake consisted of a fort enclosing a block of ten acres, the walls of part of the buildings being of adobes and logs. There were also some tents. [*7] As additional companies came in, they extended

[p. 277]

the south divisions, which were connected with the old fort by gates. Wagon-boxes were also brought into line, and served for habitations until better accommodations were provided. The houses were built of logs, and were placed close together, the roofs slanting inward, and all the doors and windows being on the inside, with a loop-hole to each room on the outside. As everything indicated a dry climate, the roofs were made rather flat, and great inconvenience resulted. In March the rains were very heavy, and umbrellas were used to protect women and children while cooking, and even in bed. The clay found in the bottoms near the fort made excellent plaster, but would not stand exposure to rain, and quickly melted. All breadstuffs were carefully gathered into the centre of the rooms, and protected with buffalo skins obtained from the Indians. The rooms in the outer lines all adjoined, and many of the families had several rooms. On the interior cross-lines rooms were built on both sides, the streets being eight rods wide.

Click to enlarge
FORT, GREAT SLT LAKE CITY, 1848.

    There were serious depredations committed by wolves, foxes, and catamounts, and great annoyance occasioned by the howling of some of these animals. [*8] Further discomfort was caused by innumerable swarms of mice. Digging cavities and running about under the earthen floor, they caused the ground to tremble, and when the rain loosened the stones of the roofs,

[p. 278]

scampered off in hordes. Frequently fifty or sixty had to be caught and killed before the family could sleep. [*9]

    The furniture was home-made, and very little of it at that. The table was a chest, and the bedstead was built into the corner of the house, which formed two of its sides, rails or poles forming the opposite sides; pegs were driven into the walls and rails, and the bed-cord tightly wound around them. [*10] The chimneys were of adobe, and sometimes there was a fireplace in the corner with a clay hearth.

    In the early part of the year two brass cannon were purchased at Sutter's Fort for the church, by the battalion brethren. [*11]

    During the winter of 1847-8, some Indian children were brought to the fort to be sold. At first two were offered, but the settlers peremptorily refused to buy them. The Indian in charge said that the children were captured in war, and would be killed at sunset if the white men did not buy them. Thereupon they purchased one of them, and the one not sold was shot. Later, several Indians came in with two more children, using the same threat; they were bought and brought up at the expense of the settlers. [*12]

    Measles now appeared for the first time among the natives, who did not know where the disease came from or what to do. They assembled in large numbers at the warm springs, bathed in the waters, and died. [*13]

[p. 279]

    Public meetings were generally held near the liberty-pole in the centre of the fort; religious and secular meetings were also held in private houses. In March 1848 the population of the city was reported at 1,671, and the number of houses 423. [*14] Bridges were built over Mill Creek and Jordan River. Daniel Spencer was appointed road-master, and authorized to call on men to assist in making roads. In order that the burden might fall equally on all, a poll and property tax were instituted.

    There were several mills soon in working order. A small grist-mill on City Creek was built by Charles Crismon near the pioneer garden; then there were Chase's saw-mill and Archibald and Robert Gardiner's on Mill Creek, and Nebeker, Riter, and Wallace's in a canon ten miles north of the city. A carding machine was erected near Gardiner's saw-mill by Amasa Russell, and a flouring mill during the summer by John Neff. Leffingwell constructed a threshing machine and fanning mill on City Creek, with a capacity of two hundred bushels per day. Mill-stones cut out of the basalt in the valley were of very good quality. Millions, mill-stones, printing-presses, type, paper, and the carding machine were brought by the first bands of emigrants in 1848. [*15]

 

    The spring saw everybody busy, and soon there were many flourishing gardens, containing a good variety of vegetables. In the early part of March ploughing commenced. The spring was mild and rain plentiful, and all expected an abundant harvest. But in the latter part of May, when the fields had put on their brightest green, there appeared a visitation in the form of vast swarms of crickets, black and baleful as the locust of the Dead Sea. [*16] In their track

[p. 280]

they left behind them not a blade or leaf, the appearance of the country which they traversed in countless and desolating myriads being that of a land scorched by fire. [*17] They came in a solid phalanx, from the direction of Arsenal Hill, darkening the earth in their passage. Men, women, and children turned out en masse to combat this pest, driving them into ditches or on to piles of reeds, which they would set on fire, striving in every way, until strength was exhausted, to beat back the devouring host. But in vain they toiled, in vain they prayed; the work of destruction ceased not, and the havoc threatened to be as complete as was that which overtook the land of Egypt in the last days of Israel's bondage. "Think of their condition," says Mr Cannon--"the food they brought with them almost exhausted, their grain and other seeds all planted, they themselves 1,200 miles from a settlement or place where they could get food on the east, and 800 miles from California, and the crickets eating up every green thing, and every day destroying their sole means of subsistence for the months and winter ahead." [*18]

    I said in vain they prayed. Not so. For when everything was most disheartening and all effort spent, behold, from over the lake appeared myriads of snow-white gulls, their origin and their purpose alike unknown to the new-comers! Was this another scourge God was sending them for their sins? Wait and see. Settling upon all the fields and every part of them, they pounced upon the crickets, seizing and swallowing them. They gorged themselves. Even after their stomachs were filled they still devoured them. On Sunday the people, full of thankfulness, left the fields to the birds, and on the morrow found on the edges of the ditches great piles of dead crickets that had been swallowed and thrown up by the

[p. 281]

greedy gulls. Verily, the Lord had not forgotten to be gracious!

    To escape the birds, the crickets would rush into the lake or river, and thus millions were destroyed. Toward evening the gulls took flight and disappeared beyond the lake, but each day returned at sunrise, until the scourge was past. [*19] Later grasshoppers seem to have taken the place of crickets. They were of a kind popularly called iron-clad, and did much mischief. [*20]

    Though the crops of this year of 1848 were thus saved from total destruction, fears were entertained that there would not be food enough for those already in the valley, and the expected arrival of large additional numbers was looked upon as a calamity. [*21] The stock of provisions was therefore husbanded with care, many living principally on roots and

[p. 282]

thistles, to which fare was sometimes added a little flour or milk. The wheat crop, however, turned out better than was expected, and pumpkins, melons, and corn yielded good returns. [*22]

    On the 10th of August, however, the harvest being then gathered, a feast was held in the bowery, at which the tables were loaded with a variety of viands, vegetables, beef, and bread, butter and cheese, with cakes and pastry. Sheaves of wheat and other grain were hoisted on harvest poles; "and," says Parley, "there was prayer and thanksgiving, congratulations, songs, speeches, music, dancing, smiling faces, and merry hearts."

 

    The rendezvous for westward-bound brethren in the spring of 1848 was the Elkhorn River, and thither at the end of May came the president, who organized the people and gave them instructions to be observed on the way. Good order was to be preserved in camp; there must be no shouting; prayers were to be attended to, and lights put out at 9 o'clock. Drivers of teams must walk beside their oxen, and not leave them without permission. Brigham was general superintendent of the emigrating companies, with Daniel H. Wells as aide-de-camp, H. S. Eldredge marshal, and Hosea Stout captain of the night-guard. Moving west early in June, on the 14th the emigrants were fired on by Indians, two being wounded. At this time also there was sickness in the camp. To secure grass and water, the emigration was separated into divisions, of which there were two principal

[p. 283]

ones, under Brigham Young and H. C. Kimball, with several subdivisions. [*23]

    The first letters received at Great Salt Lake City from Brigham came twelve months after his departure from the valley, and were sent on in advance from the encampments. The excitement was great as Taylor and Green rode into the city and distributed the letters, without envelopes, tied round and round with buckskin thongs, and bearing the cheering news that a large body of brethren was on the way, and bringing plenty of food. [*24]

    In June and July two small parties left the city to meet the immigration, and another in August. In September Brigham and the first companies arrived; and under the organization of the president and his two counsellors, Willard Richards and Heber C. Kimball, during the autumn months most of the brethren from Winter Quarters and other camps reached the valley. [*25]

    Before the expiration of the year, there were nearly

[p. 284]

three thousand, [*26] and including the pioneers, the battalion men, and the companies that arrived under Parley, at least five thousand of the saints assembled in the valley.

    Thus about one fourth of the exiles from Nauvoo were for the present beyond reach of molestation. That five thousand persons, including a very large proportion of women and children, almost without money, almost without provisions, excepting the milk of their kine and the grain which they had raised near their own camps, should, almost without the loss of a life, have accomplished this journey of more than twelve hundred miles, crossing range after range of mountains, bridging rivers, and traversing deserts, while liable at any moment to be attacked by roaming bands of savages, is one of the marvels that this century has witnessed. To those who met them on the route, the strict order of their march, their coolness and rapidity in closing ranks to repel assault, their method in posting sentries around camp and corral, suggested rather the movements of a well-organized army than the migration of a people; and in truth, few armies have been better organized or more ably led than was this army of the Lord. [*27] To the skill of their leaders, and their own concert of purpose and action, was due their preservation. And now, at length, they had made good their escape from the land of their bondage to the promised land of their freedom, in which, though a wilderness, they rejoiced to dwell.

    In a private letter written in September 1848, Parley writes' "How quiet, how still, how free from excitement we live! The legislation of our high council, the decision of some judge or court of

[p. 285]

the church, a meeting, a dance, a visit, an exploring tour, the arrival of a party of trappers and traders, a Mexican caravan, a party arrived from the Pacific, [*28] from the States, from Fort Bridger, a visit of Indians, or perhaps a mail from the distant world once or twice a year, is all that breaks the monotony of our busy and peaceful life...Here, too, we all are rich--there is no real poverty; all men have access to the soil, the pasture, the timber, the water power, and all the elements of wealth, without money or price." [*29]

    On his arrival in the autumn, Brigham stirred up the people to the greatest activity. Fencing material being scarce, and the city lands all appropriated, it was proposed that a large field for farming purposes adjoining the city should be selected and fenced in common. By October there were 863 applications for lots, amounting to 11,005 acres.

    A united effort was made to fence the city, which was done by enclosing each ward in one field, and requiring the owner of every lot to build his proportion of the fence. [*30] No lots were allowed to be held for speculation, the intention, originally, being to assign them only to those who would occupy and improve them. The farming land nearest the city was surveyed in five-acre lots to accommodate the mechanics and artisans; next beyond were ten-acre lots, followed by forty and eighty acres, where farmers could build and reside. All these farms were enclosed in one Common fence, constituting what was called the 'big field,' before mentioned. [*31]

[p. 286]

    The streets were kept open, but were barely wide enough for travel, as the owners cultivated the space in front of their houses. At a meeting on the 24th of September, permission was granted to build on the lots immediately, all buildings to be at least twenty feet from the sidewalk; and a few days later it was voted "that a land record should be kept, and that $1.50 be paid for each lot; one dollar to the surveyor and fifty cents to the clerk for recording." A council-house was ordered to be built by tithing labor; and it was suggested that water from the Big Cottonwood be brought into the city; the toll for grinding grain was to be increased, [*32] and a resolution was passed against the sale or use of ardent spirits. That all might be satisfied, the lots were to be distributed "by ballot, or casting lots, as Israel did in days of old." [*33]

 

    On the 1st of October Brigham called the battalion brethren together, blessed them, and thanked them for the service they had rendered. "The plan of raising a battalion to march to California," he said, "by a call from the war department, was devised with a view to the total overthrow of this kingdom, and the destruction of every man, woman, and child." [*34]

    Winter was now at hand, and there was sore need that the saints should bestir themselves. The president

[p. 287]

and others of the church dignitaries worked indefatigably with their people, carrying mortar and making adobes, hauling timber and sawing it. There were but 450 log cabins within the stockade, and one thousand more well-filled wagons had arrived this season.

    A county government was organized, and John D. Barker elected sheriff, Isaac Clark judge of probate, and Evan M. Green recorder and treasurer. [*35] Two hunting companies in December were formed, under the leadership of John D. Lee and John Pack, for the extermination of wild beasts. There were eighty-four men in all, and their efforts were successful. [*36] From the 1st of December until the end of February there were heavy snow-storms. On the coldest day the mercury fell below zero, [*37] and on the warmest marked 21 degrees of Fahrenheit. On account of the snow in the canons it was difficult to bring in the necessary fuel. As the previous winter had been warm, the settlers were unprepared for such cold weather, and there was much suffering. [*38]

Footnotes

^275:1 Parley P. Pratt says: 'Here life was as sweet as the holidays, as merry as in the Christian palaces and mansions of those who had driven us to the mountains.'

^275:2 'It was a strange sight to see sometimes furrows on one side and snow on the other. In Feb. men worked out of doors in their shirt sleeves.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 24.

^275:3 'It was so tough that Brother Taylor suggested we must grease the saw to make it work.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 26.

^276:4 'We manufactured our own sugar and molasses from beets, corn-stalks, and watermelons, and made preserves for winter, which were excellent, by boiling the rinds of the melons in this molasses.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 30. 'I attempted to make sugar out of corn. A rude apparatus was made to squeeze the corn stalks, but the manufacture was not altogether a success. After this, beet molasses followed. The boiler I used this time I made out of some stove piping and lumber. Brother Cannon and I assisted to saw our lumber.' Taylor's Reminiscences, MS., 16.

^276:5 Geo. Q. Cannon, in Juv. Inst., xix. no. 5, 68.

^276:6 'They collected the hair of the buffalo from the sage brush as they travelled, and used also the hair of cows.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 35. From this blankets were woven and used in exchange with the Indians. Mrs Horne remarks that 'in Nauvoo there was a man dressed throughout in a suit made from the curly hair of his dog, which was sheared annually.'

^276:7 It stood on what was later known as the 6th Ward Square.

^277:8 'One night soon after our arrival I spread some strychnine about, and in the morning found fourteen white wolves dead.' Lorenzo Young's Ex., MS., 8.

^278:9 'One contrivance for catching them was a bucketful of water with a board sloping at each end, greased and balanced on the edge. The first eat and her progeny were invaluable. The green timber from the mountains was full of bed-bugs, another serious trouble.' Horne's Migrations, MS., 31.

^278:10 This describes the furniture of the first house occupied in the fort by Brigham Young's family. Mrs Clara Young's Pioneer Ex., MS., 8.

^278:11 Forty-five of the battalion brethren contributing $512 for the purpose. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 35.

^278:12 'Charles Decker bought one of the prisoners, a girl, who was afterward brought up in President Young's family. She married an Indian chief named Kanosh.' Wells' Narr., MS., 48.

^278:13 'Some they buried, but not all. We buried thirty-six in one grave. They killed their dogs when their masters died.' Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 2.

^279:14 Juv. Inst., ix. no. 1, 9.

^279:15 Hist. B. Young, MS.; Horne's Migrations, MS.; Geo. Q. Cannon, in Juv. Inst.; Taylor's Reminiscences, MS.; Woodruff's Journal, MS.; Young's Ex., MS.; Wells' Narr., MS.; Richards' Narr., MS.; Nebeker's Early Justice, MS.; Jenning's Material Progress, MS., passim.

^279:16 Utah Early Records, MS., 29-30.

^280:17 Autobiog. P. P. Pratt, 405; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 17.

^280:18 Juv. Inst., ix. no. 2, 22.

^281:19 Kane says that the gulls soon grew to be as tame as poultry, and that the children called them their pigeons. They had clear, dark eyes, small feet, and large wings that arched in flight. The Mormons, 67. 'No one is allowed to kill a gull in Utah, and they are consequently very tame.' Jenning's Material Progress, MS., 7. 'I am sure that the wheat was in head, and that it averaged two or three crickets on every head, bending them down. One couldn't step without crushing under foot as many as the foot could cover.' Mrs Clara Young's Experiences of a Pioneer, MS., 9. 'Channels were dug and filled with water to prevent their travel, but they would throw themselves across; it was impossible to fight them back.' Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 2. 'In the spring, when thousands of young trees had been started and were several inches in height, came the crickets. The wheat, too, was well in head.' Horne's Migrations, MS., p. 28.

^281:20 Says Mr Jennings: 'They would devastate hundreds of acres, and as they would rise and fly high in the air, the air would be darkened with them. They seemed to be massed together, and to take but one direction, flying eight or ten miles perhaps, then settling upon another field...The only exterminator seems to be the sea-gulls. They gorge themselves on this rich diet; they suddenly appear in the wake of the grasshoppers, and will swallow them, throw them up, and swallow them again...Sometimes the grasshoppers come like a cloud, and apparently alighting not knowing where; on one occasion a quarter of their number perhaps dropped rate the lake, and were blown on shore by the wind, in rows of sometimes two feet deep for a distance of two miles.' Material Progress, MS., 6-7.

^281:21 'Word was sent back that probably no crops could be raised that year, and advising that no further emigrations should come in that season.' Mrs Clara Young's Experiences of a Pioneer MS., 9. John Young wished to send an express to his brother, the president, advising him not to bring any more people to the valley, as there was danger of starvation. Utah Early Records, MS., 30-2. Parley P. Pratt writes; 'I had a good harvest of wheat and rye without irrigation, but those who irrigated had double the quantity. Wheat harvest commenced early in July...Oats do extremely well, yielding sixty bushels for one.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 54.

^282:22 'Wheat harvest good. Corn crop good. The worms ate some in the ear. Price of wheat, $2 a bushel. Population, 1,800; main fence, 12 miles long. Had a surplus of bread-stuff this year.' Hist. B. Young, MS., Aug. 1, 1848, 52. Parley states that he and his family, in common with many others, suffered much for want of food. He had ploughed and planted, in grain and vegetables, nearly 40 acres, nearly every women and child in his family toiling in the field so far as their age and strength would permit. Autobiog., 405. 'One family had nothing but milk to live upon;...they would let a portion thicken, and then mix it with new milk and eat it for bread. They lived upon it for six weeks, and thrived.' Eliza Snow, in Utah Notes, MS., 6.

^283:23 The first division consisted of 1,229 persons, with 397 wagons, 74 horses, 91 mules, 1,275 oxen, 699 cows, 184 loose cattle, 411 sheep, 141 pigs, 605 chickens, 37 eats, 82 dogs, 3 goats, 10 geese, 2 hives of bees, 8 doves, and 1 crow; the second of 662 persons, with 226 wagons, 57 horses, 25 mules, 737 oxen, 284 cows, 150 loose cattle, 243 sheep, 96 pigs, 299 chickens, 17 eats, 52 dogs, 3 hives of bees, 3 doves, 5 ducks, and 1 squirrel.

^283:24 As recorded in Mrs Clara Decker Young's very valuable manuscript. She shows now the first letter received, still tied with buckskin thongs.

^283:25 The first companies under Brigham arrived on Sept. 20th; Kimball's party reached the valley a few days later. At the beginning of August Lorenzo Snow, A. O. Smoot, and others, with 47 wagons and 124 yoke of oxen, were sent from Salt Lake City to assist the emigrants. On the 28th of the same month a party well supplied with wagons and cattle was sent back to Winter Quarters from the camp of the president, then on the Sweet-water. Utah Early Records, MS., 33. The companies under Richards reached their destination toward the end of October. Richards' Narr., MS., 38. In relating the incidents of his journey, Richards states that his was the last party to leave Winter Quarters during that summer. His men were ill supplied with provisions; feed was scarce, and many of the cattle died from drinking alkali water, so that he was compelled to yoke to the wagons even his yearlings and his milch-cows. Many families, including the children, were compelled to walk the entire distance; yet not a single death occurred. Id., 34-5. 'The companies behind were kept well informed of the progress of those in advance...Sometimes a copy of the camp journal was written and placed in a notch in a tree,...sometimes in a post stuck in the ground; but whenever a large buffalo skull or other suitable bone was found,...some particulars were written on them.' Cannon, in Juv. Inst., xix. no. 3, 36.

^284:26 White persons 2,393, and 24 negroes, with 792 wagons, 2,527 oxen, about 1,700 cows, 181 horses, 1,023 sheep, and other live-stock. Utah Early Records, MS., 41.

^284:27 'So well recognized were the results of this organization, that bands of hostile Indians have passed by comparatively small parties of Mormons to attack much larger but less compact bodies of other emigrants.' Kane's The Mormons, 34.

^285:28 'In July 1848, William and Nathan Hawks, Sanford Jacobs, and Richard Slater came from California with copies of Brannan's Star of April 1st, and tidings that the brethren at San Francisco were doing well, and that those who had settled on the San Joaquin River had vacated in favor of the mosquitoes.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 46.

^285:29 The letter was afterward published in part in Snow's Voice of Joseph, 16, and portions copied into Utah Early Pioneers, MS., 34-5.

^285:30 'Every man is to help build a pole, ditch, or a stone fence...in proportion to the land he draws, also a canal on each side for the purpose of irrigation.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 55.

^285:31 'The fence will be 17 miles and 53 rods long, and 8 ft high.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 68-9; Juv. Inst., ix. no. 3, 34. It had been decided by the high council in Jan. that fencing be commenced, and that the farm lands be [p. 286] located as near together as possible, and immediately south of the city. The line of the fence began at a steep point in the bluffs just south of the warm springs, thence straight to the north-west corner of the fort, then from the south-east corner of the fort, east of south, to some distance south of Mill Creek, thence east to the bluffs again, its entire length, including two sides of the fort, being 3,638 rods. Utah Early Records, MS., 20-1. The entire tract was 5,153 acres, of which 872 acres were sown with winter-wheat, the remainder being intended for spring and summer crops.

^286:32 'Chas Crismon petitions that it be increased from 1-16 to 1-10; granted.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 64.

^286:33 'The city plat is already allotted, and many families are at present without lots; therefore we have deemed it expedient to run off an addition to the city, commencing at the eastern line of the city and running east as far as the nature of the land will allow for building purposes. Not only is this addition necessary, but we are going to lay off a site for a city about ten miles north, and another site about ten miles to the south of our city.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 69.

^286:34 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1848, 65. This was not the case. See Hist. Cal., vol. v. chap. xviii., this series.

^287:35 'George Coulson, Andrew H. Perkins, and David D. Yearsley, county commissioners; James Sloan, district clerk; Jacob G. Bigler, William Snow, Levi Bracken, and Jonathan C. Wright, magistrates.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 77.

^287:36 'The two hunting companies organized last Dec. report that they have killed 2 bears, 2 wolverenes, 2 wild-cats, 783 wolves, 409 foxes, 31 minks, 9 eagles, 530 magpies, hawks, and owls, and 1,026 ravens.' Hist. B. Young, MS., March 1849.

^287:37 'To 33 degrees below freezing-point on Feb. 5th.' General Epistle of the Twelve, in Frontier Guardian, May 30, 1849.

^287:38 'At Fort Bridger the winter had been unusually severe, mad the traders, it was reported, had suffered almost starvation.' It was resolved that no corn should be made into whiskey, and that if any man was preparing to distil corn into whiskey or alcohol, the corn should be taken and given to the poor. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 4.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 288]

  

CHAPTER XII.
 IN THE VALLEY OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE.
 1849.

FOOD SUPPLY AND SHELTER--BUILDING LOTS--CURRENCY ISSUE--BANK NOTES AND COINAGE--PRIVATE AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS--WIDE AREA OF THE CITY--SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE PIONEERS--FESTIVALS AND AMUSEMENTS--LABOR A DUTY AMONG THE SAINTS--EFFECT OF THE CALIFORNIA GOLD DISCOVERY--IMMIGRATION--CARRYING COMPANY--CALIFORNIA-BOUND EMIGRANTS--THEIR TRAFFIC WITH THE MORMONS--PRODUCTS AND PRICES--GOLD-HUNTING FROWNED UPON BY THE CHURCH.

    THROUGHOUT the winter of 1848-9 food was scarce among the settlers. Many still subsisted mainly on roots, thistles, and even on rawhides. [*1] Milk, flesh, and the small quantity of breadstuffs that remained were, however, distributed among the poor in such quantities as to prevent actual starvation. On April 1, 1849, each household was required to state the smallest allowance of breadstuffs that would suffice until the forth-coming harvest. Some received half a pound a day, and others four ounces. [*2]

[p. 289]

    Until the first fruits were reaped the famine continued, but the harvest of 1849 was a bountiful one, [*3] and for six years thereafter none wanted for bread in the city of Salt Lake. [*4]

    During part of this season many women and children were without shelter or fuel. To each family as it arrived was given a city lot, until the site was exhausted, as we have seen; but for most a wagon served for dwelling during the coldest months, and later an adobe hut, roofed with unseasoned lumber, and thatched with hay or frozen mud. [*5] Before summer all were housed in log or adobe dwellings, [*6] the fort

[p. 290]

being rapidly broken up by the removal of the houses on to the city lots. The city was divided into nineteen bishops' wards; [*7] the ten-acre blocks were divided into allotments of an acre and a quarter, the five-acre lots in similar proportion, each building facing the garden of the one adjoining, the space of twenty feet left between the houses and the surrounding fence being afterward planted with trees and shrubbery. [*8]

    The need of a circulating medium had been felt ever since the valley had been settled. [*9] Their currency was blankets, grain, and seeds; and even after gold-dust was brought in by the miners great inconvenience was experienced in its use, and many refused to take it, as there was a waste in weighing it. To meet this emergency, bank bills for one dollar

[p. 291]

were issued on the 1st of January, 1849, signed by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Thomas Bullock, clerk. In September, Brigham had brought eighty-four dollars in small change into the valley, which had been distributed, but was no longer in circulation. On the 6th of January, resolutions were passed by the council to the effect that "the Kirtland bank bills be put into circulation for the accommodation of the people, thus fulfilling the prophecy of Joseph, that the Kirtland notes would one day be as good as gold." The first printing was in connection with the manufacture of paper money. [*10]

    Previous to the issue of this currency an attempt was made by John Kay to coin gold-dust, but the crucibles broke in the attempt. All the dies and everything connected with the coining were made in Salt Lake City. [*11] Subsequent attempts were more successful. The coin was made of pure gold, without alloy, which made it deficient in weight; it was therefore sold as bullion. Brigham then proposed the issue of paper currency until gold could be coined. [*12] There was also a paper currency issued some years later by a company in Salt Lake City known as the Deseret Currency Association, its capital being in cattle, but this was merely a temporary convenience. [*13] Currency,

[p. 292]

in either gold or paper, was afterward designated as valley tan, a name synonymous with home-made or of Utah manufacture, the origin of which will be explained later. [*14]

    Of the houses built early in 1849, few had more than two rooms, many had only board windows, and some were without doors. Several of the adobe houses in the fort had fallen down from the effects of the thaw. When at last they had learned how to make adobes, they were of the best kind. Alkali at first was mixed with the clay, which, when exposed to rain, would expand and burst the bricks. After this year more commodious structures were erected for public and private use, the means being supplied in part by traffic with emigrants for California. Conspicuous among them was the council-house on East Temple street, a two-story stone edifice, forty-five feet square, [*15] used originally for church purposes, and afterward occupied by the state and territorial legislatures. In front of the council-house was temple block, on the south-west corner of which stood the tabernacle, built in 1851-2, on the ground now occupied by the assembly hall, with accommodation for 2,500 persons, [*16] and consecrated on April 6th of the latter year. [*17] During

[p. 293]

its construction, the saints in every part of the world were urged to self-denial, and it was voted to dispense with the use of tea, coffee, snuff, and tobacco, the sums thus saved to be also used for the building of the temple, which was to stand on the same block. The latter was to be built of stone quarried in the mountains, and a railroad from temple block to the quarry was chartered for the conveyance of building material.

    Adjoining the tabernacle was the bowery, 100 by 60 feet, made of posts and boarding, completed three or four years later, and large enough to contain 8,000 people, a temporary structure having been erected in 1848. Among other buildings may be mentioned the tithing office, the social hall, and the seventies' hall of science. Several bridges were also built, which were paid for by the one per centum property tax. [*18]

    Thus at the western base of the Wasatch Mountains was laid out the city of Great Salt Lake, its buildings being distributed over a greater area than that on which stood, in 1850, the commercial metropolis of the United States. [*19] Its site was on a slope, barely perceptible except toward the north, where it was enclosed by the Wasatch Range and a spur trending to the westward. Resting on the eastern bank of the Jordan, it was watered by several creeks; a canal, twelve miles long, crossing three streams, being proposed to convey the waters of the Big Cottonwood to the farm-lands south of the city; and through each street flowed a rivulet of pure water, which was thence diverted into the garden plats.

 

    On the 24th of July, 1849, was held the second anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers. [*20] At day-break

[p. 294]

cannon were fired and bands of music passed through the city, arousing the citizens for the great events of the day. A flag brought from Nauvoo was prominently displayed, and a larger flag was hoisted from the liberty-pole. A procession was formed of young men and maidens, who in appropriate costumes, bearing banners and singing, escorted Brigham to the bowery. They were received with shouts of "Hosanna to God and the Lamb!" While the governor and the church dignitaries were passing down the aisle cheers and shouts of "Hail to the governor of Deseret!" greeted them on every side. The declaration of independence and the constitution were then read, followed by patriotic addresses. The procession was then reformed and marched to the feast served on tables fourteen hundred feet in length. "The tables were heavily loaded," says Brigham, "with all the luxuries of field and garden, and with nearly all the vegetables of the world; the seats were filled and refilled by a people who had been deprived of those luxuries for years, and they welcomed to their table every stranger within their border." [*21] A greater variety was provided, as the saints had exchanged for many luxuries their flour, butter, potatoes, and other produce, with passing emigrants.

    Not only on the pioneer anniversary but on the 4th of July, [*22] at christmas week, and on other occasions

[p. 295]

festivities were held. [*23] Sometimes the guests contributed toward the expense of the entertainment, the amount that each one was expected to pay being stated on the card of invitation. [*24]

 

    In winter, theatrical performances were given by the Deseret Dramatic Association at the social hall, and in summer at the bowery, the parts being well sustained and the orchestra and decorations well appointed. [*25] At the former, private parties were given when the gathering was too large for the residence of the host; in the basement were appliances for cooking, and adjoining was a dining-room with seats and tables sufficient for three hundred persons. All entertainments were opened with prayer; then came dancing, songs, and music, followed by supper, the guests being dismissed with a benediction at an early hour.

    The public festivities of the Mormons were always conducted under the auspices of the church, and none were allowed to join in them who were not in good standing. To sing, dance, and rejoice before the Lord was regarded almost as a religious duty, but only those must rejoice whose hearts were pure and whose hands were clean. Thus, toward christmas of this year, 1849, regulations were issued by the high council for the observance of the approaching holidays. They were to commence on the 20th of December and last until the council should declare them at an end, officers being appointed to preside over the dances. No person who had been disfellowshipped

[p. 296]

or excommunicated was allowed to go forth to the dance. Those who had sold liquor for gain, thereby corrupting the morals of society, were also disqualified. All friends and well-wishers to society, all who remembered the poor and needy, [*26] were invited to participate, though not members of the church. But declares the council: "Woe unto them that dance with guile and malice in their hearts toward their neighbor! Woe unto them that have secretly injured their neighbor or his or her property! Woe unto them that are ministers of disorder and of evil! If these shall go forth in the dance without confessing and forsaking their guilt, the faith of the council is that they seal their doom by it."

    After their festivities the people returned, each to his calling, with renewed zest. It was an article of faith among them that labor was honorable, and all who were not missionaries were expected to do their part. By revelation, Joseph Smith was released from this obligation, but Brigham Young worked as a carpenter in his own mills. Labor was regarded as a duty no less than prayer or temple service, each one working with his hands at whatsoever he found to do, and cheerfully contributing his tithes toward the church revenues, which were expended for public improvements, for the support of missions, and the relief of the sick and destitute. [*27]

[p. 297]

    Among the causes that led to the prosperity of the people of Utah at this period was the migration of gold-seekers to California. Hundreds of emigrants, turning aside to Salt Lake City, wearied and dispirited, their cattle worn out and their wagons broken, were glad to exchange them, together with their tools, household furniture, and spare clothing, for provisions and pack animals at very low rates. [*28] Many were glad to remain during winter, and work for their livelihood. Though reports were freely circulated to the contrary, there is sufficient evidence that as a rule they were kindly treated, and not a few abandoned their search for gold to cast in their lot with the saints. [*29]

    The arrival in November of the first pack-mule train from California, laden with many luxuries and necessities, was an important event. The people formed in line, waiting hours for their turn to buy the limited amount allowed. [*30] When a sack of potatoes was

[p. 298]

brought into the valley in the spring, they were eagerly bought at any price. From four small ones, costing fifty cents, was obtained a bushel of good-sized potatoes which were saved for seed.

    The immigration during the season numbered some 1,400 souls, who were added to the settlers in the valley, [*31] and who, with the number remaining of those originally bound for California, made a large population to clothe, feed, and shelter.

    A carrying company was also established [*32] in December for the purpose of conveying passengers and goods from the Missouri River to the gold regions of California. In their prospectus, the proprietors set forth that, residing as they did in the valley, and being acquainted with the route, they could provide fresh animals as they were needed and save the loss of hundreds and thousands of dollars that had been incurred by former parties through inexperience. For passengers to Sutter's Fort, the rate was $300, of which $200 must be paid in advance, and the remainder on reaching Salt Lake City. For freight, the terms were $250 per ton, of which two thirds must also be paid in advance.

    A small company under Captain Lamoreaux left the valley for Green River, and there established a ferry and trading post; among them were wagon-makers and blacksmiths, whose services would be invaluable.

    When the immigrants of this year arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, many of them were

[p. 299]

almost destitute of clothing, [*33] bedding, and household furniture, such articles as they possessed having been exchanged for food during their journey. In 1848 it had been prophesied by Heber C. Kimball that the commodities, known among the brethren as 'states goods,' would be as cheap in Salt Lake City as in New York; while Brigham Young, soon after setting forth froth Nauvoo, had made a similar prediction, declaring that within five years his people would be more prosperous than they had ever been. Both prophecies were fulfilled, [*34] when, during the first years of the gold fever, company after company came pouring into Utah, which might now be termed the half-way house of the nation. Several hundred California-bound emigrants arrived in the valley in 1849, too late to continue their journey on the northern route, and proposed to spend the winter in the valley. There was scarcely provision enough for those already there, and as Jefferson Hunt of the battalion offered to pilot the company over the southern route, they decided to undertake the trip, and started on the 8th of October, arriving in California on the 22d of December. [*35] On the 1st of December nineteen men came into the city on foot, nearly famished, having been two days making their way over Big Mountain. Their wagons had been left on Echo Creek, and their animals at Willow Springs, where the snow, they said, was six feet deep on a level. Though many of these adventurers were poor, some of the trains were loaded with valuable merchandise, for which their owners

[p. 300]

expected to find a ready market on reaching their destination. But while sojourning in the valley, news arrived that vessels laden with similar merchandise had arrived in San Francisco, or were far on their way, and that already the market was greatly overstocked. [*36] The emigrants were therefore glad to exchange their costly outfits and their trading goods for whatever they could get in exchange, a single horse or a mule, with a small stock of provisions, being sometimes accepted as an equivalent for property that had cost the owner thousands of dollars. The cattle thus obtained by the settlers, in barter, after being fattened on the nutritious grasses of the valley, were driven to California, where a sure and profitable market was found.

    As a result of the California-bound migration, there followed an enormous advance in the price of provisions, flour selling before the harvest of 1850 at one dollar per pound, and after harvest at twenty-five dollars per cental. [*37] Throughout the autumn of this year the grist-mills were run to their utmost capacity, grinding wheat for the passing emigrants, who at any cost must procure sufficient to carry them to the gold mines. Some other articles of food were for a time equally scarce, sugar selling at the rate of three pounds for two dollars; [*38] though beef was plentiful, and could be had for ten cents per pound. [*39] It is probable,

[p. 301]

however, that these rates represent the prices charged to passing emigrants, for at this period the wages of laborers did not exceed $2 per day, and of skilled mechanics $3. The saints prided themselves upon their honorable dealings with these strangers, and the moderate prices demanded, though frequently charged with swindling. [*40] They could afford to part with their produce, because they had learned to dispense with many articles which among other communities were considered necessaries. For men who had fed during their first winter in the valley on hides and roots, it was no great hardship to dispense for a season with a portion of their provisions, their grain, beef, and butter, their coffee and sugar, in return for which they received such value.

    It was not of course to be expected that while thousands of California-bound emigrants were passing each year through the Mormon settlements, the saints should themselves entirely escape the gold fever. In November 1848, several small parties of the battalion found their way to Salt Lake City, [*41] some of them bringing considerable quantities of gold-dust, which, as they relate, had come into their possession in this wise.

    In September 1847 about forty of the battalion men arrived at Sutter's Fort in search of employment and were hired by Sutter to dig the races for a flour mill about six miles from the fort and for a saw-mill some forty-five miles distant. [*42] The latter work being completed in January 1848, and the frame of the

[p. 302]

building erected, water was turned into the flume on the 24th, and the fall being considerable, washed out a hole near the base of the mill on reaching the tail-race, whereupon Marshall, Sutter's partner, and superintendent of the party, examined the spot, fearing that the water would undermine the foundations. While thus engaged, he observed there pieces of yellow glistening metal, and picking up a handful put them in his pocket, not knowing what they were, and supposing probably that he had found nothing more valuable than iron pyrites.

    They were no iron pyrites, however, that Marshall had found, but, as it proved, nuggets of gold, the largest of them being worth about five dollars. The discovery was revealed in confidence to three of the saints, who unearthed a few more specimens, and soon afterward removed to a sand-bar in the Sacramento river, since known as Mormon Island. Here was gold in paying quantities, the average earnings of each man being twenty to thirty dollars per day. But though dust and nuggets were freely shown to the brethren, there were few who would believe their senses, and for weeks the matter caused no excitement. At length, however, the secret was disclosed, which soon transformed the peaceful valleys of California into busy mining camps, changing as if by magic the entire face of the country. How throughout the settlements on seaboard and on river the merchant abandoned his wares, the lawyer his clients, the parson his flock, the doctor his patients, the farmer his standing grain--all making one mad rush for the gold-fields, some on horseback, some with pack-mules, some with wheelbarrows, some with costly outfits, and some with no outfit save the clothes on their backs--is fully set forth in my History of California.

    When the disbanded soldiers arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake and displayed their treasures, a cry was raised among the saints, "To California; to the land of Ophir that our brethren have discovered!"

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] But from the twelve came a stern rebuke. "The true use of gold is for paving streets, covering houses, and making culinary dishes; and when the saints shall have preached the gospel, raised grain, and built up cities enough, the Lord will open the way for a supply of gold to the perfect satisfaction of his people. Until then, let them not be over-anxious, for the treasures of the earth are in the Lord's storehouse, and he will open the doors thereof when and where he pleases." [*43]

    President John Smith wrote to the saints in California in March 1848, urging them to gather at the Great Salt Lake, "that they might share in the blessings to be conferred on the faithful; and warned them against settling down at ease in California with an eye and a half upon this world and its goods, and half an eye dimly set towards Zion on account of the high mountains and the privations to be endured by the saints."

    "If we were to go to San Francisco and dig up chunks of gold," said Brigham to the returned battalion on the 1st of October, 1848, "or find it in the valley, it would ruin us." In an address on the sabbath he said: "I hope the gold mines will be no nearer than eight hundred miles...There is more delusion and the people are more perfectly crazy on this continent than ever before...If you elders of Israel want to go to the gold mines, go and be damned. If you go, I would not give a picayune to keep you from damnation." [*44] "I advise the corrupt, and all who want, to go to California and not come back, for I will not fellowship them...Prosperity and riches blunt the feelings of man. If the people were united, I would send men to get the gold who would care no more about it than the dust under their feet, and then we would gather millions into the church...

[p. 304]

[paragraph continues] Some men don't want to go after gold, but they are the very men to go." [*45]

    Thus the threatened migration was stayed; a few companies departed, [*46] and were asked in all kindness never to return. "If they have a golden god in their hearts," said Brigham, "they had better stay were they are." But the majority of the settlers were well content to abide in the valley, building up towns, planting farms, and tending stock in their land of promise.

Footnotes

^288:1 'Many were necessitated to eat rawhides, and to dig sago and thistle roots for mouths to subsist upon.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 95.

^288:2 The committee on breadstuffs reported on the 8th of Feb. that there was 78/100 lb. per capita for the next five months. Utah Early Records, MS., 45. 'In the former part of Feb. the bishops took an inventory of the breadstuff in the valley, when was reported a little moro than  3/4 lb. per day for each soul, until the 9th of July; and considerable was known to exist which was not reported. Hence while some were nearly destitute others had abundance. The price of corn since harvest has been $2; some has sold for $3; at present there is none in the market at any price. Wheat has ranged from $4 to $5, and potatoes from $6 to $20, a bushel; and though not to be bought at present, it is expected that there will be a good supply for seed by another year.' General Epistle of the Twelve, in Frontier Guardian, May 30, 1849. 'Those persons who had imparted measurably to these who had not, so that all extremity of suffering from hunger was avoided.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 95.

^289:3 It was not injured by crickets. Kane's The Mormons, 67. 'Our prophet predicted that if we would exercise patience under our difficulties during the immediate future, our necessities would be supplied as cheaply as they could be in the city of St Louis; and this proved to be true, for in 1849 we raised fair crops.' Smoot's Mormon Wife, MS., 5-6.

^289:4 The peculiar chemical formations in earth and water proved of great practical value when once understood. 'For two years all the salerufus used was obtained from Saleratus Lake, near Independence Rock; the salt from the lake became an article of value in local use and among their exports. The alkali swept down from the mountains, and composed of a great variety of ingredients, such as magnesia, soda, salt, etc., when once subdued, makes the most durable of soils, which needs no enriching.' Richards, in Utah Notes, MS., 8.

^289:5 'Now as regards my beginning at Salt Lake. Soon after my arrival a city lot was assigned to me for a home and residence, on which I placed my wagon box or wagon bed, which contained our provisions, bedding, and all our earthly goods, placed them upon the ground, turned away our stock upon the winter range, and looked about us. I soon disposed of some of my clothing for some adobes, and put the walls up of a small room, which we covered with a tent-cloth, that answered us during the winter, until lumber could be procured next spring.' Richards' Narr., MS., 38; Early Records, MS., 36-8.

^289:6 On Feb. 18th the people began to move out of the fort to their city lots. Id., 47. A number of temporary farm buildings had been completed before this date. Pratt's Autobiography, 406; Millennial Star, x. 370. A correspondent of the New York Tribune, writing from Salt Lake City, July 8, 1849, gives an exaggerated account of the place, which has been copied by several writers on Mormonism. 'There were no hotels, because there was no travel; no barbers' shops, because every one chose to shave his neighbor; no stores, because they had no goods to sell nor time to traffic; no centre of business, because all were too busy to make a centre. There was abundance of mechanics' shops, of dressmakers, milliners, and tailors, etc.; but they needed no sign, nor had they time to paint or erect one, for they were crowded with business. I this day attended worship with them in the open air. Some thousands of well-dressed, intelligent-looking people assembled, some on foot, some in carriages, and on horseback. Many were neatly and even fashionably clad. The beauty and neatness of the ladies reminded me of some of our congregations in New York.' The letter is in Mackay's The Mormons, 282. It is unnecessary to expose the absurdity of this description, as the reader is well aware that hundreds of California-bound emigrants passed through the valley this year. Harvesting began July 9th, and until that date the Mormons were [p. 290] often without their daily bread, as we have seen. The following is probably much nearer the truth: 'The houses are small, principally of brick (adobe), built up only as temporary abodes, until the more urgent and important matters of enclosure and cultivation are attended to; but I never saw anything to surpass the ingenuity of arrangement with which they are fitted up, and the scrupulous cleanliness with which they are kept. There were tradesmen and artisans of all descriptions, but no regular stores or workshops, except forges. Still, from the shoeing of a horse to the mending of a watch there was no difficulty in getting it done, as cheap and as well put out of hand as m any other city in America.' Kelly's Excursion to California, 226.

^290:7 The bishops were David Fairbanks, John Lowry, Christopher Williams, William Hickenlooper, William J. Perkins, Addison Everett, Seth Taft, David Pettigrew, Benjamin Covey, Edward Hunter, John Murdock, Abraham O. Smoot, Isaac Higbee, Joseph L. Heywood, James Hendrix, Benjamin Brown, Orville S. Cox, and Joel H. Johnson. Utah Early Records, MS., 47-8, 69. The valley is settled for 20 miles south and 40 miles north, and divided into 19 wards. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 57.

^290:8 At a council held Feb. 17, 1849, the committee on fencing reported that the enclosure termed the big field would include 291 ten-acre lots, 460 five-acre lots, the church farm of 800 acres, and 17 acres of fractional lots, the whole requiring 5,240 rods of fencing, of which it was recommended that 3,216 should be of adobes, 663 of adobes or stone, and 1,361 of ditch, posts, and rails. 'When the Mormons first arrived they did not quarrel for best lands, but cultivated a whole district in common, dividing the harvest according to work done, seed supplied, and need of family. On dividing the town into lots, each received his plat, and so with fields, for south of the town lay a field of 6 square miles, cultivated in common; this was divided into 5-acre square lots and given to heads of families, by lot or distribution, in tracts of one to eight lots each. After the distribution some began to speculate with their lots, but to this the church objected, saying that none should sell his land for more than first cost and improvements, for it belonged to God, and was merely held in use by the holder. Still, secret speculations occurred.' Olshausen's Mormonen, 166-7.

^290:9 'Owing to the absence of small change, the tax collector was instructed give due-bills for sums less than a dollar, and redeem them when presented in sufficient amount.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 23.

^291:10 Fifty-cent and one-dollar paper currency was issued. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 3. On the 22d, type was set for 50-cent bills--the first typesetting in the city. Id., 42-3; S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 209.

^291:11 'Robert Campbell engraved the stamps for the coin.' Wells' Narr., MS., 42. Brigham says, 'I offered the gold-dust back to the people, but they did not want it.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 1. 'Thos L. Smith, a mountaineer, wrote me from Bear River Valley, offering to sell me $200 or $300 in small coin...and take our currency for the same, and he would trade his skins, furs, robes, etc., with us.' Id., 79.

^291:12 'John Kay coined $2.50, $5, and $20 pieces.' Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 3. A description is given in Juv. Inst. of coins with beehive and spread eagle on one side, with inscription 'Deseret Assay Office, Pure Gold,' and at the base '5 D.' On the reverse is a lion, surrounded by 'Holiness to the Lord,' in characters known as the Deseret alphabet. Vol. ix. no. 4, p. 39. In 1849 and 1850, coins of the value of $20, $10, $5, and $2.50 were struck off. Their fineness was 899-1000, and no alloy was used except a little silver. S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 209. 'The gold-dust was sufficient in quantity for all ordinary purposes...In the exchange the brethren deposited the gold-dust with the presidency, who issued bills or a paper currency; and the Kirtland safety fund resigned it on a par with gold.' Id., 56.

^291:13 See Taylor's Reminiscences, MS., 23.

^292:14 See chap. xix., note , this vol.

^292:15 'I was appointed superintendent of public works in the fall of 1848. The first house that was built was a little adobe place that was used for the church office...The little office that was the first place built was one story, about 18 by 12 feet, slanting roof covered with boards and dirt. This remained the church office for about two years...The foundation of the council-house was laid in the spring of 1849, and then the first story put up.' Wells' Narr., MS., 41-2. Built by tithing. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 55. At a meeting held Oct. 1, 1848, it was resolved to build a council-house, and on the 7th of November masons commenced laying the foundation. Utah Early Records, MS., 36, 38.

^292:16 Linforth gives its dimensions at 126 ft by 64, and states that the roof was arched, without being supported by pillars. Route from Liverpool, 109. In Utah Early Records, MS., 125, 127, it is stated that the dimensions were 120 by 60 ft, and that work was begun May 21st. See also Deseret News, May 17, 1851; The Mormons at Home, 112-13, 147-9; Burton's City of the Saints, 270.

^292:17 At a general conference, the proceedings of which are related in the Contributor, ii. 333. The conference lasted several days, and at its conclusion a collection was made to provide funds for a sacramental service, $149 being given in coin, together with several pounds' weight of silver watch-cases, spoons, rings, and ornaments. From the silver, cups were made, which are still in use at the tabernacle.

^293:18 Resolved that a tax of one per ct per annum be assessed on property to repair public highways. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 5.

^293:19 Kane's The Mormons, 74; New York Tribune, Oct. 7, 1849.

^293:20 The 4th and 24th of July were at first celebrated together, but on the latter date because bread and vegetables were more plentiful at the end of month than at the beginning. Utah Early Records, MS., 91.

^294:21 'The hospitalities of the occasion were not confined to the saints alone, but included several hundreds of California emigrants who had stopped to recruit, as well as threescore Indians,' says Eliza Snow. See Snow's Biography, 95-107, for description of the celebration; also Kane's The Mormons, 80-1; Hist. B. Young, MS., 108-116, 143; Mrs Horne's Migrations, MS., 30; Frontier Guardian, Sept. 19, 1849. After dinner four and twenty toasts were drunk, followed by volunteer toasts. President Young declared that he never saw such a dinner in his life. One of the elders remarked that it was almost a marvellous thing that everybody was satisfied, and...not an oath was uttered, not a man intoxicated, not a jar or disturbance occurred to mar the union, peace, and harmony of the day.' Frontier Guardian, Sept. 19, 1849. Among the guests was the Indian chief Walker, who, accompanied by Soweite, chief of the Utahs, and several hundred Indians, men, women, and children, had visited the city in Sept. 1848. Utah Early Records, MS., 33.

^294:22 For a description of 4th of July festivities, see Frontier Guardian, July 10, 1850, Oct. 3, 1851; Deseret News, July 12, 1851, July 10, 1852; S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 271.

^295:23 The christmas festival of 1851 is described in the Deseret News, Jan. 24, 1852. 'On the 24th,' writes Brigham in regard to another occasion, 'I invited the wives of the twelve apostles, and other elders who were on missions, with a number of my relatives, to dine at my house. Seventy ladies sat down at the first table. I employed five sleighs to collect the company; the day was stormy: near my house the snow drifted three feet deep.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1850, 2.

^295:24 Contributions were often made in the shape of eatables, and an in-door picnic extemporized. Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 306.

^295:25 In May 1851, the second act of 'Robert Macaire' was performed at the bowery, the performance concluding with the farce of 'The Dead Shot.' Contributor, ii. 271.

^296:26 'Bring all your tithes and offerings to the proper place for the poor, that there be none hungry among us, and let the poor rejoice; and then you may rejoice in the dance to your heart's content.' Regulations of the High Council, in Frontier Guardian, Nov. 28, 1849. Brigham, in an address at the state-house in 1852, at a party given to the legislature, said: 'I want it distinctly understood that fiddling and dancing are no part of our worship. My mind labors like a man logging. This is the reason why I am fond of these pastimes; they give me a privilege to throw everything off and shake myself, that my body may exercise and my mind rest.' And again: 'This company is controlled like the ship by the rudder in a gentle breeze, that can be turned hither and thither at the will and pleasure of him who commands.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1852, 22.

^296:27 Olshausen's Mormonen, 164-5. On July 28, 1850, the president writes to Orson Hyde, then at Kanesville. 'Our celebration was well attended. It is a general time of health with the saints, and peace and plenty of hard work, as every one has been so busy that they can hardly get time to eat or sleep. You speak about hurry and bustle at Kanesville; but if you were here, to see, feel, and realize the burdens, labors, and responsibilities, which are daily, [p. 297] hourly, momentarily, rolling, piling, tumbling, and thundering upon us, you would at least conclude that there was no danger of our getting the gout from idleness or too much jollity.' Frontier Guardian, Sept. 18, 1850. Mention of cholera on the Mississippi and Missouri rivers in the spring of 1849 is made by Brigham. 'Many Mormon brethren and sisters emigrating on those rivers died; 60 died going from St Louis to Kanesville, mostly from England and Wales, under Capt. Dan. Jones.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 85.

^297:28 Horses, harnesses, carriages, wagons, etc., were bought of eager emigrantsat one fifth of their cost in the states. Utah Early Records, MS., 113.

^297:29 In the autumn of 1849 many emigrants, while resting in Salt Lake City, wrote letters to their friends, in which they acknowledged the kindness and hospitality shown them by the saints. Extracts from these letters were published in newspapers throughout the states. Gunnison, The Mormons, 65, says: 'Their many deeds of charity to the sick and broken-down gold-seekers all speak loudly in their favor, and must eventually redound to their praise.' See also Kane's The Mormons, 76-7; Stansbury's Expedition to G. S. Lake, i. 134. In March 1851, numbers of emigrants were baptized, and most of them remained in Utah. Id., 123. D.J. Staples, who remained at S. L. City for two or three weeks with a Boston party bound for California in 1849, says: 'The Mormons showed their kindness in every possible way, supplying all wants and taking care of the sick.' Incidents and Inform., in Cal., MS., D. 1-3. See also Van Dyke's Statement, in Id., 1. Among later instances may be mentioned that of John C. Fremont, who with nine white men and twelve Indians arrived at Parowan Jan. 7, 1854, in a starving condition. He was supplied with provisions and fresh animals, setting forth eastward on the 20th.

^297:30 Brown sugar was $1 a lb.; and everything else in proportion. No one was allowed more than one pound of anything. Mrs Horne's Migrations, MS., 30.

^298:31 'Our cattle stampeded, and at the south pass of the Platte we were overtaken by a heavy storm, in which 70 animals were frozen. We made our journey to Salt Lake City, 1,034 miles, in 145 days, arriving Oct. 27th.' Geo. A. Smith's Autobiog., in Tullidge's Mag., July 1884. The cattle of the California Enterprise Company, under Judge Thos K. Owen of Ill., stampeded near the forks of the Platte and ran back 130 miles in about 26 hours; they were bronght alon g by Capt. Allen Taylor's company, which received from their owners a series of resolutions expressive of their gratitude. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 157-8.

^298:32 Termed the Great Salt Lake Valley Carrying Company. The proprietors were Shadrach Roundy, Jedediah M. Grant, John S. Fullmer, George D. Grant, and Russell Homer. Utah Early Records, MS., 101; Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 168.

^299:33 Parley relates that during 1848 he and his family were compelled to go barefooted for several months, reserving their Indian moccasins for extra occasions. Autobiog., 405.

^299:34 In the summer of 1849, almost every article except tea and coffee sold at 50 per cent below the prices ruling in eastern cities. Frontier Guardian, Sept. 5, 1849.

^299:35 'The company became dissatisfied at the continued southern direction. At Beaver Creek, one Capt. Smith came up with a company of packers, saying that he had maps and charts of a new route, called Walker's cut-off. All the packers and most of Capt. Hunter's co. joined Smith. After wandering about the mountains for a time many turned back and took the southern route, while Capt. Smith and a few others struggled through and arrived in California on foot.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 167.

^300:36 'Thousands of emigrants...have passed through Salt Lake City this season, exchanging domestic clothing, wagons, etc., for horses and mules.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 143.

^300:37 Utah Early Records, MS., 112; Contributor, ii. 240. See also Frontier Guardian, Sept. 18, 1850, where is a copy of an address delivered by Brigham Young at the bowery, S. L. City. 'I say unto you, farmers, keep your wheat, for I foresee if you are not careful starvation will be on our heels.' It was not intended, however, that food should be withheld from the destitute; in another address from Brigham, published in the same paper, we read: 'I say to you, latter-day saints let no man go hungry from your doors; divide with them and trust in God for more.' 'Emigrants, don't let your spirits be worn down; and shame be to the door where a man has to go hungry away.'

^300:38 On Nov. 21, 1849, Mr Vasquez opened a store in Salt Lake City, and met with ready sale for his sugar at this rate. Utah Early Records, MS., 100.

^300:39 Fuel and building material were costly, firewood being worth, in 1850, ten dollars per cord, adobe bricks a dollar a hundred, and lumber five dollars the hundred feet. Two years later, 'states goods' had also become scarce throughout the territory, linen selling for 20 to 30 cents per yard, flannel for [p. 301] 30 to 40 cents, prints for 25 to 50 cents, and jeans for 75 cents to $1.25; while a bottle of ink cost $2, and a ream of writing-paper $10 to $12. Deseret News, Nov. 6, 1852, where it is stated that on some classes of goods traders realized from 200 to 10,000 per cent profit.

^301:40 'I saved straw that spring and braided forty hats...I made one to order and sold to an emigrant at the usual price, $1. He was surprised at its cheapness, but in all our dealings with emigrants we took no advantage of them. I took boarders at five or six dollars a week.' Mrs Richards' Rem., MS., 36.

^301:41 Others had already arrived in June and Sept. of this year. Utah Early Records, MS., 30-1.

^301:42 Their pay was to be 12 1/2 cents per cubic yard, with rations and free pasture for their stock. Tyler's Hist. Mormon Battalion, 332.

^303:43 Second General Epistle of the Twelve, dated Salt Lake City, Oct. 12, 1849, in Frontier Guardian, Dec. 26, 1849.

^303:44 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 100-2, 123.

^304:45 On the 7th of December, 1848, Brigham writes in his journal: 'Some few have caught the gold fever; I counselled such, and all the saints, to remain in the valleys of the mountains, make improvements, build comfortable houses, and raise grain against the days of famine and pestilence with which the earth would be visited.'

^304:46 The gold fever first broke out in June 1848, news of the discovery being brought by a party of battalion men that arrived from California in that month. In March 1849, about a dozen families departed or were preparing to depart for the mines. In March 1851, about 520 of the saints were gathered at Payson, Utah county, most of them for the purpose of moving to California. Utah Early Records, MS., 31, 69, 122.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 305]

  

CHAPTER XIII.
 SETTLEMENT AND OCCUPATION OF THE COUNTRY.
 1847-1852.

FOUNDING OF CENTREVILLE--BOUNTIFUL--OGDEN--LYNNE--EASTON--MARRIOTSVILLE--SAN PETE--PROVO--INDIAN WAR--WALLED CITIES--EVANSVILLE--LEHI--BATTLE CREEK--PLEASANT GROVE--AMERICAN FORK--PAYSON--NEPHI--MANTI--CHIEF WALKER--FILLMORE--SITE CHOSEN FOR THE CAPITAL--TOOELE--GRANTSVILLE--KAYSVILLE--LITTLE SALT LAKE--PAROWAN--CEDAR CITY--PARAGOONAH--FORTS WALKER AND HARMONY--BOX ELDER CREEK--BRIGHAM CITY--WILLARD CITY--SAN BERNARDINO IN CALIFORNIA.

    IN the autumn of 1847 one Thomas Grover arrived with his family on the bank of a stream twelve miles north of Salt Lake City, and now called Centreville Creek. His intention was to pasture stock for the winter; and for this purpose a spot was chosen where the stream spreading over the surface forms plats of meadow-land, the soil being a black, gravelly loam. Here Grover, joined by others in the spring, resolved to remain, though in the neighborhood were encamped several bands of Indians, and this notwithstanding that as yet there was no white settlement north of Salt Lake City. Land was ploughed and sown in wheat and vegetables, the crops being more promising than those to the south. But in May of the following year the settlers were startled, not by the war-whoop of the Utahs, but by hordes of black monster crickets, swarming down from the bench-lands, as at Salt Lake City, and bringing destruction on field and garden. They turned out to do battle with the foe; ditches were dug around the grain-fields, and the

[p. 306]

water of the stream diverted into them, while men, women, and children, armed with clubs, checked the advance of the devouring host. Enough of the crop was saved to supply the wants of the settlers, and their energy, on this occasion, coupled with a supposed

Click to enlarge
SETTLEMENTS AT THE END OF 1852.

miraculous visitation of gulls, probably saved a foretaste of the disaster of 1848. [*1]

A site for a town was

[p. 307]

surveyed in the autumn of 1849, and the place was named Centreville.

    Near Centreville, in what was afterward Davis county, a settlement was begun in the spring of 1848 by Peregrine Sessions, the place being called Bountiful. [*2]

    As early as 1841 the country round where the city of Ogden was laid out was held as a Spanish grant by Miles M. Goodyear, who built a fort, consisting of a stockade and a few log houses, near the confluence of the Weber and Ogden rivers. [*3] On the 6th of June, 1848, James Brown, of the battalion, coming from California with $5,000, mostly in gold-dust, purchased the tract from Goodyear. [*4] As it was one of the most fertile spots in all that region, grain and vegetables being raised in abundance, not only numbers of the brethren from Salt Lake City, but after a while gentiles from the western states, settled there. In August 1850 Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and others laid out the city of Ogden, so called from the name of the river. [*5] The

[p. 308]

president urged the people to move at once to their city lots, and to build for themselves substantial dwellings, a meeting-house, and a school-house, to fence their gardens and plant fruit-trees, so that the place might become a permanent settlement, and the headquarters of the northern portion of the territory. Before the end of the year a log structure was finished, which served for school and meeting house, and soon afterward the settlers commenced to build a wall for protection against the Indians, completing it about three years later at a cost of some $40,000. [*6] So rapid was the growth of the town, that in 1851 it was made a stake of Zion, [*7] divided into wards, and incorporated by act of legislature. [*8]

    In 1848 Isaac Morley and two hundred others settled in the southern part of the valley of the San Pete [*9]--particulars to be mentioned hereafter.

    In the spring of 1849 a stockade was built and log houses erected by the pioneer settlers of Utah county, numbering about thirty families, [*10] near the Timpanogos or Provo River, and below the point where a small creek issuing from it discharges into Lake Utah. To

[p. 309]

this settlement was given the name of Fort Utah. Within the space enclosed by the stockade was a mound, the top of which was levelled, and on a platform bulk thereon were mounted several twelve-pounders for the purpose of intimidating the Indians. But the Indians were not to be thus intimidated. In the autumn they began to steal the grain and cattle of the white men, and one of their number being killed while in the act of pilfering, hostilities broke out and the fort was soon in a state of siege.

    Indeed, ill feeling on the part of the Indians had begun to show itself the previous year. Vasquez and Bridger wrote to Brigham on the 17th of April, 1849, that the Utes were badly disposed toward Americans, and that chiefs Elk and Walker were urging the Utes to attack the settlements in Utah Valley. The brethren were advised to protect themselves, but if the Indians were friendly, to teach them to raise grain, and "order them to quit stealing." Brigham was persuaded that Bridger was his enemy, and expressed the conviction that he and the other mountaineers were responsible for all the Indian trouble, and that he was watching every movement of the Mormons and reporting to Thomas H. Benton at Washington. [*11] Alexander Williams and D. B. Huntington were empowered by the council to trade exclusively with the Indians on behalf of the community.

    On the 31st of January, 1850, Isaac Higbee, of Fort Utah, reported at Salt Lake that the Indians of Utah Valley had stolen fifty or sixty head of cattle or horses, threatening further depredations, and asked permission to chastise them, which was granted. General Daniel H. Wells then called for volunteers from the militia, and on the 4th of February Captain George D. Grant started with a company for Utah Fort, followed soon after by Major Andrew Lytle.

[p. 310]

[paragraph continues] The Indians were attacked on the 8th, and took refuge in a log house, whence they were dislodged next day, and driven into the thicket along the Provo River. In this encounter Joseph Higbee was killed, and Alexander Williams, Samuel Kearns, Albert Miles, Jabez Nowland, and two men named Orr and Stevens were wounded.

    On the 11th the Indians fled from the thicket to Rock Canon, whither the volunteers pursued them; but failing to find them, the white men proceeded to the west and south sides of Utah Lake, and shot all they could find there.

    During the expedition twenty-seven warriors were killed. The women and children threw themselves upon the settlers for protection and support, and were fed and cared for in Salt Lake City until spring. Thus Utah Valley was entirely rid of hostile Indians. Until 1852 there was no further trouble with them of a serious nature; [*12] and thus ended the first Indian war of Utah, which like all the others was rather a tame affair. It was the mission of the Mormons to convert the Indians, who were their brethren, and not to kill them.

    Later in the year was founded the city of Provo, [*13] somewhat to the eastward of Fort Utah, near the western base of the Wasatch Mountains, on a site where timber and pasture were abundant, [*14] and where the gradual fall of the Timpanogos affords excellent water-power. In March 1851 it was organized as a stake of Zion. The settlement was pushed forward with the energy characteristic of the settlers. Before the close of 1850 more than twenty dwellings

[p. 311]

had been completed; [*15] and before the end of 1851 the place began to wear the appearance of a town, among the buildings in course of erection being a touring-mill and two hotels; manufactures were started; all were busy the livelong day at farm or workshop, and in the evening, writes Elder Isaac Higbee, in February 1852, "We have on Monday singing-school, on Tuesday lyceum, on Wednesday seventies' meeting, on Thursday prayer-meeting, on Friday spelling-school, and on Saturday the meeting of the lesser priesthood." [*16]

    On Dry Creek, near the head of Lake Utah and about sixteen miles northwest of Provo, a settlement was formed in 1851, named Evansville. [*17] The neighboring lands were surveyed in lots of forty acres, and to each new settler as he arrived was given a plat of this size until the tract was exhausted. The soil was rich; but here, as elsewhere in the northern part of Utah county, water was scarce. A supply was obtained by diverting a portion of the waters of American Fork creek, [*18] and thereafter the affairs of the settlement prospered so rapidly that, in February 1852, the place was incorporated under the name of Lehi, or as it is sometimes written, Lehigh.

    South-east of Lehi, on a plain about three miles east of Lake Utah, was founded, in 1850, a settlement

[p. 312]

first known as Battle Creek, and afterward called Pleasant Grove. It was here that the first engagement with the natives occurred. Captain Scott with a band of thirty or forty men started south in pursuit of Indians who had stolen fourteen horses from Orr's herd, on Wilson Creek, in Utah Valley, and several cattle from Tooele Valley. The band was found encamped on a creek in the midst of willows and dense brushwood in a deep ravine. After a desultory fight of three or four hours, four Indians were killed, but none of the settlers. As was their custom, the women and children of the slain followed the victorious party to their camp. [*19]

    In the neighborhood of Pleasant Grove were good farming land, good range for stock, and water-power, inducements which quickly attracted emigrants, and caused the place to thrive rapidly. In 1853 the present site was laid out, [*20] and to this spot were transferred, on July 24th of that year, the effects of the community, then numbering seventy-five families.

    Between Lehi and Pleasant Grove the village of American Fork was founded in 1850, on a site where were farming and grazing land of fair quality, a little timber, springs of fresh water, and a stream that could be easily diverted for purposes of irrigatiom. [*21]

    About twenty miles south of Provo the settlement of Payson was laid out on the banks of the Peteetneet Creek; [*22] a few miles to the north-east of Payson was founded a village named Palmyra, containing, at the close of 1852, fifty families; and in 1851, on Salt Creek,

[p. 313]

twenty-five miles to the south, the site of Nephi, in Juab county, was first occupied by Joseph L. Heywood. Nephi was surveyed in the autumn of 1852, the spot being selected on account of its beauty and convenience. A fort was afterward built, surrounded by a wall twelve feet in height and six feet at the base. [*23] Through this town passed the old California or southern road made by the pioneers in 1849; and here, in cabins built of mud and willows, lived, at the close of 1852, more than forty families. [*24]

 

    I have mentioned that Isaac Morley with two hundred settlers went into the San Pete country in 1848. On the 14th of June, 1849, a council was held at Salt Lake City, at which were present a Ute chief named Walker, [*25] and twelve of his tribe. After the pipe of peace had been passed around, Walker declared himself a friend of the settlers, and asked their sachem to send a party southward to the valley of San Pete, where they might teach his people how to build and farm. "Within six moons," answered Brigham, "I will send you a company." In the spring of this year the party sent to explore this valley had already selected the site of the present town of Manti, on a branch of the San Pete Creek, though there was little in the neighborhood to invite the settler, sage brush and rabbit brush, the red man and the coyote, being

[p. 314]

the principal features. In November the town was laid out. [*26] The name of Manti was suggested by Brigham, who declared that on this spot should be raised one of the cities spoken of in the book of Mormon, and here he built with his own hands an adobe house, which in 1883 was still pointed out to visitors as one of the curiosities of the place. [*27]

    On Chalk Creek, in Pahvan Valley, south-west of Manti and about a hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake City, a site was chosen by Brigham, in October 1851, for the capital of the territory, and named Fillmore, in honor of the president. [*28] During 1852 the foundations of the state-house were laid, and many private buildings erected, the settlement numbering about seventy families at the close of the year.

 

    In the autumn of 1849, John Rowberry, Cyrus Tolman, and others set forth from Salt Lake City to explore the country west of the Jordan Valley, in search of grazing lands whereon to pasture their stock. Crossing the mountain range which forms the western boundary of Cedar and Jordan valleys, [*29] they discovered a spot where grass, timber, and water were abundant, and encamped for the winter on the banks of a stream now called Emigrant Canon creek. Returning in the spring, they made their report to Brigham, who recommended them to form a settlement in that neighborhood. To this the men consented. "By what name will you call it?" asked the

[p. 315]

president. Tolman suggested Cedar Valley, a large belt of cedar having been found there; but Brigham recommended Tule, as reeds were plentiful in that neighborhood. And so it was ordered; and this word, spelled Tooele by Thomas Bullock, the president's private secretary, is still applied to the town, the site of which was discovered by Rowberry and his comrades. [*30]

 

    In the winter of 1849-50, Edward Phillips and John H. Green proceeded northward from Salt Lake City, intending to settle in the neighborhood of Ogden. When within twelve miles of that place, the snow-drifts prevented further progress, and turning aside to Sandy Creek, or as it was later termed, Kay Creek, where the land was covered with bunch-grass, they resolved to take up their abode in that neighborhood. After passing the winter in Salt Lake City, the two men set forth in the spring of 1850, accompanied by William Kay and others, and founded the settlement of Kaysville. [*31] In September it was organized as a ward, Kay being appointed bishop, with Green and Phillips as councillors. [*32]

 

    In the winter of 1849-50, it was ordered by the first presidency that Parley P. Pratt, with a company of fifty men, should explore the southern part of the territory in the neighborhood of Little Salt Lake. They found the brethren at Manti well pleased with their location, there being a good stone quarry and an abundance

[p. 316]

of cedar at hand. At the Sevier River they met Charles Shumway, James Allred, and Elijah Ward; also Walker, the Utah war chief, and his people, many of whom were sick with the measles. They proceeded to explore the country for some distance round. On the 1st of January, 1850, they were on Virgen River, whence they passed up the Santa Clara, and came to "the valley subsequently named Mountain Meadows." One division of the party explored Little Salt Lake. Beaver Creek was pronounced an excellent place for a settlement. In a half-frozen condition they reached Provo the 30th, and next day some of them were in Salt Lake.

    The report of Parley being favorable, a party of about one hundred and seventy persons, well supplied with wagons, implements, live-stock, seeds, and provisions, [*33] set forth, in charge of George A. Smith, on the 7th of December, 1850, toward the south; and on Centre Creek, in a valley of the Wasatch Range, about two hundred and fifty miles from Salt Lake City, built a fort near the site of the present town of Parowan. [*34] Pasture and timber were plentiful, the soil was of good quality, and in the season of 1851 a bountiful harvest was gathered from about one thousand acres of land. [*35] The main attraction, however, was the immense deposits of magnetic iron ore found in the neighboring mountains. In May, Brigham and others visited Parowan and addressed the people in the fort. The Indian name Parowan was then recommended and adopted. Brigham

[p. 317]

urged the people to buy up the Lamanite children as rapidly as possible, and educate them in the gospel, for though they would fade away, yet a remnant of the seed of Joseph would be saved. [*36]

    At Cedar City--or, as it was then called, Cedar Fort--seventeen miles to the south-west of Parowan, a furnace was built in 1852, but at the close of the year stood idle for lack of hands. [*37] Here, in May 1851, coal had been discovered near what was then known as the Little Muddy, now Coal Creek. In November of that year the site was occupied [*38] by a company from Parowan. The winter was passed amid some privation, mainly from lack of warm clothing; but on the 30th of January a dry-goods pedler making his appearance--probably the first who had ventured so far south into the land of the Utahs--the settlers were soon clad in comfort. [*39] In October it was resolved to move the settlement to a point farther to the west and south, and before the end of the year a number of iron-workers and farmers arrived from Salt Lake City. [*40]

    In 1851 a party under Simeon A. Carter, sent to explore the country north of Ogden, founded a small settlement at Box Elder Creek. [*41] The soil was of the

[p. 318]

poorest, but near by were a few spots of meadow and farm land, on which, with irrigation, a fair crop could be raised. A number of emigrants, principally Welsh and Scandinavian, joined the party, and two years later a new site was surveyed [*42] under the direction of Lorenzo Snow. To the town then laid out was afterward given the name of Brigham City.

    A few weeks later a small settlement was formed about five miles south of this point, and in 1853 was removed to the present site of Willard City. [*43]

    On Red Creek, about twenty miles north of Cedar City, a small settlement was formed in the autumn of 1852, named Paragoonah, the Pi-Ede name for Little Salt Lake. [*44] Six miles south of Cedar City, Fort Walker was built, containing at the close of 1851 only nine men capable of bearing arms; and on Ash Creek, nineteen miles farther south, was Fort Harmony, the southernmost point in the valley occupied by white men, [*45] and where John D. Lee located a rancho in 1852.

[p. 319]

    Thus we see that within less than two years after the founding of Salt Lake City, the population there had become larger than could be supported in comfort on the city lots and the lands in their vicinity, and it had been found necessary to form new settlements toward the north and south, the latter part of the territory being preferred, as water, pasture, and land fit for tillage were more abundant. Instead of merely adding suburb to suburb, all clustering around the parent centre, as might have been done by other communities, the church dignitaries, while yet Salt Lake City was but a village, ordered parties of the brethren, some of them still barely rested from their toilsome journey across the plains, to start afresh for remote and unprotected portions of a then unknown country. As new locations were needed, exploring parties were sent forth, and when a site was selected, a small company, usually of volunteers, was placed in charge of an elder and ordered to make ready the proposed settlement. Care was taken that the various crafts should be represented in due proportion, and that the expedition should be well supplied with provisions, implements, and live-stock.

    When, for instance, at the close of 1850, it had been resolved to form a settlement in the neighborhood of Little Salt Lake, a notice appeared in the Deseret News of November 16th, giving the names of those who had joined the party, and calling for a hundred additional volunteers. They must take with them 30,000 pounds of breadstuffs, 500 bushels of seed wheat, 34 ploughs, 50 horses, 50 beef-cattle, 50 cows, and 25 pairs of holster pistols; each man must be supplied with an axe, spade, shovel, and hoe, [*46] a gun and 200 rounds

[p. 320]

of ammunition. Among them there should be five carpenters and joiners, a millwright, a surveyor, and two blacksmiths, shoemakers, and masons. Thus equipped and selected, the settlers, with their marvellous energy and thrift, made more progress and suffered less privation in reclaiming the waste lands of their wilderness than did the Spaniards in the garden spots of Mexico and Central America, or the English in the most favored regions near the Atlantic seaboard.

    A company was organized in March 1851, at the suggestion of Brigham, to go to California and form the nucleus of a settlement in the Cajon Pass, where they should cultivate the olive, grape, sugar-cane, and cotton, gather around them the saints, and select locations on the line of a proposed mail route. [*47] The original intention was to have twenty in this company, with Amasa M. Lyman and C. C. Rich in charge. The number, however, reached over five hundred, and Brigham's heart failed him as he met them at starting. "I was sick at the sight of so many of the saints running to California, chiefly after the god of this world, and was unable to address them:" [*48]

Footnotes

^306:1 After this incident the water in the creek began to fail, thus for a time preventing the growth of the settlement. In 1880 there was a good flow of water, sufficient for the wants of forty families, with their orchards, gardens, and farm lands. N. T. Porter, in Utah Sketches, MS., 177.

^307:2 A little to the south of Centreville was a small settlement which at first went by the name of Call's settlement, afterward taking the name Bountiful. Utah Early Records, MS., 132. In Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 130-1, it is stated that there were three settlements of this name--East, West, and South Bountiful--West Bountiful being settled in 1848 by James Fackrell and his family, South Bountiful by George Meeyers and Edwin Page. All are now on the line of the Utah Central railroad. In January of this year Sessions also founded a settlement which bore his name, about 15 miles north of S. L. City. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 45.

^307:3 The tract is described as commencing at the mouth of Weber Canon, following the base of the mountains north to the hot springs, thence westward to the Great Salt Lake, along the southern shore of the lake to a point opposite Weber Canon, and thence to the point of beginning. Stanford's Ogden City, MS., l; Richards' Narr., MS., passim.

^307:4 Some say for $1,950; others place the amount at $3,000. See Richards' Narr., MS.; Stanford's Ogden City, MS.

^307:5 Utah Early Records, MS., 112. See also S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 240; and Deseret News, Sept. 7, 1850. Stanford's Ogden City, MS., 1-2. The site was selected as early as Sept. 1849, on the south side of the Ogden River, at the point of bench-land between the forks of the Ogden and Weber rivers, so that water from both streams might be used for irrigation. Utah Early Records, MS., 94. North Ogden, formerly called Ogden Hole, once the resort of a noted desperado, was laid out in 1851. Amos Maycock, in Utah Sketches, MS., 114. 'Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, J. M. Grant, Brigham Young, and several others ascended a sand hill, Sept. 3d, to discover the best location for a town, which we finally decided should be on the south side of [p. 308] Ogden...A dance was instituted in the evening.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 124.

^308:6 Raised by taxation. Stanford's Ogden City, MS., 4.

^308:7 Of which Lorin Farr was appointed president, and R. Dana and David B. Dillie councillors. Id., 3.

^308:8 The first municipal election was held on Oct. 23d, Farr being chosen mayor, Gilbert Belnap marshal, David Moore recorder, and William Critchellow justice of the peace. Four aldermen and twelve councillors were also elected. Id., 4. According to the statement of John Brown, a resident of Ogden in 1884, there were 100 families in Ogden in 1852. Brown, a native of Yorkshire, England, came to Winter Quarters in 1849, remained in the church for 21 years, and was then cut off at his own request. In 1883 he was the proprietor of the hotel which bears his name. Two miles north of Ogden a settlement named Lynne was formed in 1849. Stanford's Weber Co., MS., 1. Near Lynne a few families formed a settlement named Slaterville in 1852-3, but on account of troubles with Indians, moved into Lynne in 1854. Id., 3. Eight miles south-east of Ogden, at the month of Weber Canon, on the line of the railway, a small settlement named Easton was formed in 1852, a branch of the church organized, and A. Wadsworth appointed bishop. Three miles northwest of Ogden a settlement named Marriotsville was formed in 1850 by three families. The neighborhood was infested with wolves and bears, and near by were the lodges of 200 Indian warriors. Id., 10.

^308:9 So called from the name of an Indian chief. Richards' Narr., MS., 66.

^308:10 Under the leadership of John and Isaac Higbee and Jefferson Hunt of the battalion. Albert Jones, in Utah Sketches, MS., 54.

^309:11 'I believe that old Bridger is death on us, and if he knew that 400,000 Indians were coming against us, and any man were to let us know, he would cut his throat...His letter is all bubble and froth...Vasquez is a different sort of man.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 77.

^310:12 'I was ordered not to leave that valley until every Indian was out of it.' Wells' Narr., MS., 45-6.

^310:13 At a general conference of the church, held in October 1849, it was ordered that a city be laid out in the Utah Valley, and called Provo. Utah Early Records, MS., 97.

^310:14 A heavy growth of cotton-wood and box-elder covered the river bottom, with a large belt of cedar extending some four miles north from the river and about half a mile in width. Bunch-grass was very plentiful. Albert Jones, in Utah Sketches, MS., 55.

^311:15 Deseret News, Jan. 24, 1852. Ross R. Rogers built the first adobe house in 1851. Albert Jones, in Utah Sketches, MS., 53. A large building was erected in 1852 for George A. Smith, the prophet's cousin, then president of Utah co. stake. It was afterward used as a school-house and known as the seminary. In 1851 an adobe wall was commenced, 14 feet in height and four feet at the base. Three sides of it, with bastions, port-holes, and gates, were completed in 1855, the finished length being then two and a half miles. A portion of this wall remained in 1880. Id., 57. These walls were built about several of the settlements. 'It was usual for our people to protect themselves by building what we call a fort--a place the people could get into in the event of a raid. Our wall was a kind of concrete. In Mount Pleasant their walls were built of cobble rock, parts of which are now standing. At that place they put a grist-mill inside, so the Indians couldn't cut them off. At Nephi the Indians did cut them off from their grist-mill.' Wells' Narr., MS., 60.

^311:16 Letter in Deseret News, Feb. 21, 1852.

^311:17 A few houses were built on an adjacent site by David Savage and others in 1850. David Evans, in Utah Sketches, MS., 37.

^311:18 By a ditch seven miles in length.

^312:19 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 24-5; John Brown, in Utah Sketches, MS., 30. The first Indian trouble was a little skirmish between some sheep-herders and Indians. Wells' Narr., MS., 43.

^312:20 By George A. Smith and Ezra T. Benson.

^312:21 The site was laid out by George A. Smith, assisted by L. E. Harrington, Arza Adams, Stephen Chipman, William Greenwood, and Stephen Mott. A. J. Stewart was the surveyor. The first house was built by Adams and Chipman in 1850; the first grist-mill by Adams in 1851; and the first store was opened by Thomas McKenzie in the same year. L. E. Harrington, in Utah Sketches, MS., 121.

^312:22 The first settlers were James Pace, Andrew Jackson Stewart, and John C. Searle, Joseph S. Tanner, in Utah Sketches, MS., 3.

^313:23 Its length was 420 rods, and its cost $8,400. Portions of it remained in 1880. Geo. Teasdale, in Id., 111.

^313:24 The first settler was Timothy B. Foote, who, with his wife and six children, took up his abode in this neighborhood in the autumn of 1851. Before the end of the year he was joined by seven other families. Id., 107; and before the end of 1852, 35 additional families settled at Nephi. Deseret News, Dec. 11, 1852.

^313:25 'Walker was the chief of the Ute Indians...Uinta was the great chief of this region, and Ora was the head chief of the Ute nation...Walker's headquarters were the Sevier, generally; he would pay a visit to San Pete once a year.' Wells' Narr., MS., 48, 56. 'Walker used to go into California to steal horses; had a place of concealment among the mountains. At one time, while there, people were so incensed that they turned out to capture him and his band. In the dead of night be quietly took possession of their horses and trappings and came into Utah triumphant. He would boast of his proceedings some time later. He never brought stolen goods into the settlements, but secreted them among his people.' Utah Notes, MS., 8.

^314:26 Including 110 blocks, each 26 rods square, with eight lots to each block. Utah Early Records, MS., 111. The site was surveyed by Jesse W. Fox, under Brigham's direction. J. B. Maiben, in Utah Sketches, MS., 172.

^314:27 In June 1852 a fort was completed, the walls being eight feet high and two feet thick. Deseret News, July 10, 1852.

^314:28 In the Deseret News of Jan. 24, 1852, is a letter to Brigham from Anson Call, one of the first settlers, dated Nov. 24, 1851. 'We have had an addition of three to our camp since you left; have built a corral according to your instructions, including about two and a half acres of ground. We found, upon trial, that the ground was so dry and hard, being also rocky, that it was next to an impossibility to stockade or picket in our houses with the tools we have to work with; so we have built our houses in close order, having our doors or windows on the outside.'

^314:29 Now called the Oquirrh Mountains, Oquirrh being probably an Indian word.

^315:30 The site was surveyed by Jesse W. Fox, under Rowberry's direction. The first house was built by Tolman, who in partnership with Rowberry erected a saw-mill nine miles north of the settlement. The first grist-mill was built by Ezaias Edwards, and the first store opened by Isaac Lee. John Rowberry and F. M. Lyman, in Utah Sketches, MS., 150. A meeting-house 24 feet square had been finished in March 1852. Deseret News, April 17, 1852. Twelve miles to the west of Tooele was a small settlement named Grantsville.

^315:31 From 5 bushels of club-wheat, planted during this year, 250 bushels were raised. Edward Phillips, in Utah Sketches, 81-2.

^315:32 A mile and a half south of Sandy Creek was a herd-house, the property of S. O. Holmes. Near this spot a fort was built, surrounded with a mud wall.

^316:33 John Urie, in Utah Sketches, MS., 88, says that there were 119 men and 48 women and children, with 101 wagons, 368 oxen, 146 cows, and about 22 tons of seed; that they were well supplied with implements, and had 300 lbs of flour per capita. Richards, in Utah Early Records, MS., 117, mentions 163 souls, of whom 30 were women.

^316:34 James G. Bleak, in Utah Sketches, MS., 67-8. On the south-east corner of the fort a meeting-house in the shape of a St Andrew's cross was built of hewn logs. Utah Early Records, MS., 163. The name was first spelt Paroan. Frontier Guardian, Aug. 8, 1851. A view of the fort, with Little Salt Lake in the distance, painted by W. Majors, was presented by Brigham Young to the Deseret University in 1870. Contributor, ii. 270.

^316:35 In the Deseret News of March 6, 1852, is an account of the pioneer anniversary celebrated at Parowan on July 24, 1851.

^317:36 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 46. On the same page is mentioned the first use in the country of the stone-coal at Parowan, used in blacksmith work.

^317:37 George A. Smith, in Frontier Guardian, Aug. 8, 1851, and in Deseret News, Dec. 11, 1852.

^317:38 This valley had been explored as early as 1847. In December of that year, a party of the pioneers passed through it, as already mentioned, on their way to California to purchase live-stock and provisions.

^317:39 Building progressed rapidly, and during the following summer one Burr Frost, a blacksmith from Parowan, started the manufacture of iron, making nails enough to shoe a horse. Deseret News, Nov. 27, 1852.

^317:40 John Urie, in Utah Sketches, MS., 93-4. See also Deseret News, July 24, 1852. The scarcity of nails hindered building. Workmen were brought from England to manufacture them from native ore, but the experiment failed; as the work could not be done on a sufficiently large scale to make it profitable, and it was abandoned. Years later, when the soldiers were ordered away from Camp Floyd, the settlers bought old iron cheap, and nails were manufactured to advantage. The price in market then was 30 or 40 cts a lb.; afterward the railroad brought them in and they were sold at 3 to 5 cents a pound.

^317:41 About 60 miles north of Salt Lake City. A. Christensen, in Utah Sketches, MS., 102.

^318:42 In blocks of six acres, each lot being half an acre.

^318:43 The first settlers on the old site were Jonathan S. Wells, who built the first house, and was the first to commence farming, Elisha Mallory, who with his brother Lemuel built the first grist-mill, M. McCreary, Alfred Walton, and Lyman B. Wells. George W. Ward, in Utah Sketches, MS., 44-5. The city was named after Willard Richards. Richards' Narr., MS., 67.

^318:44 In December, 15 or 20 families had settled there. Deseret News, Dec. 11, 1852. On June 12, 1851, a company with a few wagons started for this point from Salt Lake City, Utah Early Records, MS., 128.

^318:45 This settlement was 20 miles north of the Rio Virgen. It was thought that the route to California might be shortened by way of the fort about 35 miles. Deseret News, Dec. 11, 1852. In addition to those mentioned in the text, a number of small settlements had been made in various parts of the territory. Farmington, now the county seat of Davis co., and on the line of the Utah Central railroad, was first settled in 1848 by D. A. Miller and four others. In 1849 it was organized as a ward. Mill Creek, in S. Lake co., was settled in 1848-9 by John Neff and nine others; Alpine City and Springville, in Utah co., in 1850, the former by Isaac Houston with ten others, the latter by A. Johnson and three comrades. Santaquin, in the same county, was settled in 1852; abandoned in 1853 on account of Indian raids, and reoccupied in 1856 by B. F. Johnson and 23 associates. The site of Harrisville, a few miles north of Ogden, was occupied in the spring of 1850 by Ivin Stewart, abandoned the same autumn on account of an Indian outbreak, and resettled in 1851 by P. G. Taylor and others. In 1883 Taylor was bishop of this ward. Slaterville, in Weber county, was first settled in the fall of 1850 by Alex. Kelley, who was soon afterward joined by several families; in 1853--the year of the Walker war--it was abandoned, the inhabitants taking refuge in Bingham Fort, but was again occupied in 1854. South Weber, in the same county, [p. 319] was located in 1851 by Robt Watts and nine others. Uintah, at the mouth of Weber Canon, was settled in 1850 by Dan. Smith and a few others. It was first called East Weber, and received its present name on the 4th of March, 1867, at which date the Union Pacific railroad was finished to this point. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, passim. Of the above settlements, those which became prominent will be mentioned later.

^319:46 The party must also have 17 sets of drag teeth, and of grain and grass scythes, sickles, and pitchforks, 50 each.

^320:47 In Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 85, it is stated that, at the next session of congress, it was expected that a mail route would be established to San Diego by way of Parowan. At this date there was, as we shall see later, a monthly mail between S. L. City and Independence, Mo. There was also a mail to Sacramento, leaving that and S. L. City on the 1st of each month, a bi-monthly mail to The Dalles, Or., a weekly mail to the San Pete valley, and a semi-weekly mail to Brownsville.

^320:48 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 14. The object of the establishment of this colony was that the people gathering to Utah from the Islands, and even Europe, might have an outfitting post. In 1853, Keokuk, Iowa, on the Mississippi River, was selected by the western-bound emigrants as a rendezvous and place of outfitting.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 321]

  

CHAPTER XIV.
 EDUCATION, MANUFACTURES, COMMERCE, AGRICULTURE, SOCIETY.
 1850-1852.

BOUNDARIES AND EXTENT OF UTAH--CONFIGURATION AND PHYSICAL FEATURES OF THE COUNTRY--ITS LANDS AND WATERS--FLORA AND FAUNA--STATE UNIVERSITY--CURRICULUM--EDUCATIONAL IDEAS--LIBRARY--PERIODICALS--TABERNACLE AND TEMPLE--NEW FORT--PROGRESS OF THE USEFUL ARTS--MILLS, FACTORIES, AND MANUFACTURES--FARM PRODUCTS--TRAFFIC--POPULATION--REVENUE--MORTALITY--HEALTHFUL AIRS AND MEDICINAL SPRINGS.

    IN the year 1850 Utah, bounded on the south and east by New Mexico, Kansas, and Nebraska, on the west by California, on the north by Oregon, which then included Idaho, was one of the largest territories in the United States. Its length from east to west was 650 miles, its breadth 350 miles, and its area 145,000,000 acres. The portion known as the great basin, beyond which were no settlements in 1852, has an elevation of 4,000 to 5,000 feet, and is surrounded and intersected by mountain ranges, the highest peaks of the Humboldt Range near its centre being more than 5,000 feet, and of the Wasatch on the east about 7,000 feet, above the level of the basin.

    For 300 miles along the western base of the Wasatch Range is a narrow strip of alluvial land. [*1] Elsewhere in the valley the soil is not for the most part fertile until water is conducted to it, and some of the alkali washed out. Rain seldom falls in spring

[p. 322]

or summer, and during winter the snow-fall is not enough to furnish irrigating streams in sufficient number and volume. Throughout the valley, vegetation is scant except in favored spots. With the exception of the Santa Clara River in the south-west, the Green River in the east, the Grand and other branches of the Colorado in the south and east, the streams all discharge into lakes or are lost in the alkali soil of the bottom-lands. On the hillsides bunch-grass is plentiful the year round, and in winter there is pasture in the canons. Around Salt Lake the soil is poor; in the north and east are narrow tracts of fertile land; toward the valleys of the Jordan and Tooele, separated by the Oquirrh Range, and on the banks of the Timpanogos and San Pete, is soil of good quality, that yielded in places from sixty to a hundred bushels of grain to the acre.

    The Jordan and Timpanogos furnished good waterpower, and on the banks of the latter stream was built a woollen-mill that ranked as the largest factory of the kind west of the Missouri River. In the Green River basin, immense deposits of coal were known to exist, and the Iron Mountains near Little Salt Lake were so called from the abundance of ore found in their midst. Other valuable minerals were afterward discovered, among them being gold, silver, copper, zinc, lead, sulphur, alum, and borax; the waters of Great Salt Lake were so densely impregnated that one measure of salt was obtained from five of brine. [*2]

    In the streams were fish of several varieties; [*3] in

[p. 323]

the mountains roamed the deer, elk, antelope, and bear, and on the marshy flats amid the plains were smaller game. [*4] Timber was scarce and of poor quality, except in places difficult of access; [*5] but with this exception there was no great lack of resources in the territory which the saints had made their abode.

 

    During the first years that followed their migration, while yet engaged in building houses, fencing lands, planting crops, and tending herds, the Mormons provided liberally for the cause of education. In the third general epistle of the twelve, dated the 12th of April, 1850, it is stated that an appropriation of $5,000 per annum, for a period of twenty years, had been made for a state university [*6] in Salt Lake City, branches to be established elsewhere throughout the territory as they were needed. In the curriculum the Keltic and Teutonic languages were to rank side by side with the Romanic, and all living languages spoken by men were to be included. Astronomy, geology, chemistry, agriculture, engineering, and other branches of science were to be studied; for having sought first the kingdom of heaven, the saints were now assured that knowledge and all other things should be added unto them. [*7] The world of science was to be revolutionized;

[p. 324]

the theories of gravitation, repulsion, and attraction overthrown, the motion of atoms, whether single or in mass, being ascribed to the all-pervading presence of the holy spirit. The planetary systems were to be rearranged, their number and relations modified, for in the book of Abraham it was revealed that in the centre of the universe was the great orb Kolob, the greatest of all the stars seen by that patriarch, revolving on its axis once in a thousand years, and around which all other suns and planets revolved in endless cycles. [*8]

    At first, however, education among the settlers was mainly of an elementary nature. There were many, even among the adults, who could not write or spell, and not a few who could not read. A parents' school was therefore established at Salt Lake City, for the heads of families and for the training of teachers, among the pupils being Brigham Young. [*9] Primary and other schools were opened in all the principal settlements, [*10] and for those who were sufficiently advanced, classes were organized as early as the winter of 1848-9, for the study of ancient and modern languages. [*11]

[p. 325]

    In 1850, by vote of congress, twenty thousand dollars were appropriated for the building of a state-house, and the sum of five thousand dollars was appropriated for the foundation of a library in Salt Lake City. The delegate from Utah was authorized to make a selection of books, and several thousand volumes were forwarded from the east during this and the following year. [*12] Rooms were prepared in the council-house for their reception, and many periodicals, both Mormon and gentile, were added to the stock of reading matter. Among the former was the Millennial Star, already mentioned, and the Frontier Guardian, published bi-monthly at Kanesville, Iowa, between February 1849 and March 1852, and afterward as a weekly paper under the style of the Frontier Guardian and Iowa Sentinel. [*13]

[p. 326]

    On the 15th of June, 1850, was published at Salt Lake City, under the editorship of Willard Richards, the first number of the Deseret News, a weekly paper, and the church organ of the saints. [*14] In this number, a copy of which I have before me, is a report of the conflagration which occurred in San Francisco on christmas eve of 1849, and of Zachary Taylor's message to the house of representatives relating to the admission of California as a state.

[p. 327]

    At Salt Lake City and elsewhere throughout the country manufactures began to thrive. Isolated, poor, having brought little or nothing with them, these settlers were peculiarly dependent for necessaries and comforts upon themselves, and what they could do with their hands. And it would be difficult to find anywhere in the history of colonization settlers who could do more. Among them were many of the best of Europe's artisans, workers in wood, iron, wool, and cotton, besides farmers, miners, and all kinds of laborers.

    At Tooele and several other settlements gristmills and saw-mills were established before the close of 1852. [*15] Near Salt Lake City, a small woollen-mill was in operation. [*16] At Parowan and Cedar City, iron-works were in course of construction; at Paragoonah, a tannery had been built; and at Salt Lake City, in addition to other branches of manufacture, flannels, linseys, jeans, pottery, and cutlery were produced, [*17] and sold at lower prices than were asked for eastern cods of inferior quality "Produce what you consume, writes Governor Brigham Young in his message of January 5, 1852; "draw from the native elements the necessaries of life; permit no vitiated taste to lead you into indulgence of expensive luxuries which can only be obtained by involving yourselves in debt; let home industry produce every article of home consumption." [*18] This excellent advice

[p. 328]

was not unheeded; but the supply of home-manufactured goods did not, of course, keep pace with the demand. Such commodities as were not the products of home industry were, for the most part, obtained by barter with passing emigrants, or were brought in wagon trains by way of Kanesville; [*19] though already traffic had been opened with regions far to the westward on either side of the Sierra Nevada. [*20]

    According to the United States census returns for the year 1850, the population of the valley of Great Salt Lake mustered 11,354 persons, of whom about 53 per cent were males, and 6,000 residents of Salt Lake City. [*21] There were 16,333 acres under cultivation, on which were raised 128,711 bushels of grain. The value of live-stock was estimated at $546,698, and of farming implements at $84,288. At the close of 1852, the total population was variously estimated at from 25,000 to 30,000, [*22] of whom perhaps 10,000 resided in the metropolis. The assessed value of

[p. 329]

taxable property at the latter date was $1,160,883.80, or an average of more than $400 per capita. The entire revenue amounted to $26,690.58, [*23] of which sum $9,725.87 was expended for public improvements, the encouragement of industries, or educational purposes.

 

    Little more than five years had elapsed since the pioneer band entered the valley of Great Salt Lake, and now the settlers found themselves amidst plenty and comfort in the land of promise, where until their arrival scarce a human being was to be seen, save the Indians whose clothing was the skins of rabbits and whose food was roasted crickets. [*24] There was no destitution in their midst; [*25] there was little sickness. [*26] In these and some other respects, the wildest misstatements have been made by certain gentile writers, among them Mr Ferris, who, as we shall see, was appointed secretary for Utah. [*27] In this pure

[p. 330]

mountain air, with its invigorating embrace, the aged and infirm regained the elasticity of a second youth. Here was no rank vegetation, here were no stagnant pools to generate miasma, no vapors redolent of death, like those amid which the saints encamped on the banks of the Missouri. In the valley were mineral springs, the temperature of which ranged from 36 degrees to 150 degrees of Fahrenheit, some of them being prized for their medicinal properties. From the warm spring [*28] in the vicinity of Salt Lake City, waters which varied between 98 degrees in summer and 104 degrees in winter [*29] were conducted by pipes to a large bath-house in the northern part of the city. [*30]

[p. 331]

[p. 332]

Footnotes

^321:1 Gunnison's The Mormons, 15.

^322:2 An analysis of the mineral matter forty years ago showed 97.8 per cent of chloride of sodium, 1.12 of sulphate of lime, .24 of magnesium, and .23 of sulphate of soda. Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 101. The specific gravity of the water is given by L. D. Gale, in Stansbury's Expedition to G. S. Lake, at 1.117. Out of 22.422 parts of solid matter Gale found 20.196 of common salt, 1.834 of soda, .252 of magnesium, and of chloride of calcium a trace. See also Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 177-8; Hist. Nev., 11, this series. In chap. i. of that vol. is a further description of the great basin, its topography, climate, soil, springs and rivers, fauna and flora.

^322:3 'The angler can choose his fish either in the swift torrents of the canons, where the trout delights to live, or in the calmer currents on the plains, [p. 323] where he will find abundance of the pike, the perch, the bass, and the chub. Gunnison's The Mormons, 20.

^323:4 Wild ducks and geese were abundant in 1852. Ibid. There were also quail and herons. In summer, boys filled their baskets with eggs found among the reeds on the banks of streams or on the islands in the Great Salt Lake.

^323:5 'Hidden away in the profound chasms and along the streams, whose beds are deeply worn in the mountain-sides, are the cedar, pine, dwarf-maple, and occasionally oak, where the inhabitants of the vale seek their fuel and building timber, making journeys to obtain these necessaries twenty to forty miles from their abodes.' Id., 21.

^323:6 Under the supervision and control of a chancellor, twelve regents, a secretary, and a treasurer. Frontier Guardian, June 12, 1850.

^323:7 'But what,' says Phelps in an oration delivered July 24, 1851, 'will all the precious things of time, the inventions of men, the records, from Japheth in the ark to Jonathan in congress, embracing the wit and the gist, the fashions and the folly, which so methodically, grammatically and transcendentally grace the libraries of the elite of nations, really be worth to a saint, when our father sends down his regents, the angels, from the grand library of Zion above, with a copy of the history of eternal lives, the records of worlds, the genealogy of the gods, the philosophy of truth, the names of our spirits from [p. 324] the Lamb's book of life, and the songs of the sanctified?' Deseret News, July 26, 1851.

^324:8 'I saw the stars that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones that were near it; and the Lord said unto me, These are the governing ones: and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God; I have set this one to govern all those which belong to the same order of that upon which thou standest. And the Lord said unto me, By the urim and thummim, that Kolob was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolution thereof, that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest.' Reynolds' Book of Abraham, 29. See also Orson Pratt's lecture on astronomy in Deseret News, Dec. 27, 1851.

^324:9 The parent school is in successful operation in the council-house, and schools have been built in most of the wards. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 32; Gunnison's The Mormons, 80; Utah Early Records, MS., 115. Lyons Collins was appointed teacher by the chancellor and board of regents.

^324:10 Jesse W. Fox taught the first school at Manti in 1850. Utah Sketches, MS., 172. The first school at Nephi was opened in 1851. Id., 111. The best school-house in Utah county was at Palmyra; at Provo, Evan M. Greene opened a select school in the second ward. Deseret News, Dec. 11, 1852.

^324:11 'There have been a large number of schools the past winter, in which the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, German, Tahitian, and English languages [p. 325] have been taught successfully. First General Epistle of the Twelve, in Utah Early Records, MS., 74, and Frontier Guardian, May 30, 1849. 'German books were bought in order that the elders might learn that language. 'Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 3.

^325:12 Dr Bernhisel was appointed by the president of the U.S. as special agent to expend the U.S. appropriation of $5,000. Hist. B. Young, MS., 80. Many valuable donations of maps, papers, etc., were received. Contributor, 270; Gunnison's The Mormons, 83; Utah Early Records, MS., 130; Millennial Star, xii. 330-1. William C. Staines was appointed librarian. Deseret News, Feb. 21, 1852.

^325:13 Of the Frontier Guardian, brief mention has already been made. The first number, published Feb. 7, 1849, with Orson Hyde as editor and proprietor, will bear comparison with many of the leading newspapers in eastern or European cities. In the prospectus Mr Hyde states that 'it will be devoted to the news of the day, to the signs of the times, to religion and prophecy, both ancient and modern; to literature and poetry; to the arts and sciences, together with all and singular whatever the spirit of the times may dictate.' Published, as was the Guardian, on the extreme frontier of the states, Mr Hyde was enabled to furnish the latest news from Salt Lake City, and many valuable items have been gleaned from its pages. Glancing at them for the first time, one asks, How did he contrive to bring out his newspaper in such creditable shape, at a place which one year before was only an encampment of emigrants en route for the valley? During this year, however, Kanesville--later Florence--had made very rapid progress, due, in part, to the migration to California. Glancing over the first numbers of the Guardian, we find advertised for sale dry goods, groceries, provisions, hardware, clothing, and most of the commodities needed by emigrants. There was a hotel, a fashionable tailor, a lawyer, a doctor, and of course a tabernacle, which served for social parties and religious worship. Provisions rose to very high rates, though not to the prices demanded in Salt Lake City. On Feb. 7, 1849, flour, beef, and pork were selling at Kanesville for about $2 per 100 lbs. On May 1, 1850, flour was worth $6 to $6.50, beef $3.50 to $4.50, and pork $5 to $6. Potatoes had risen meanwhile from 25 cents to $1, corn from 20 cents to $2.25, and wheat from 50 cents to $1.75, per bushel. On March 4, 1852, appeared the first number [p. 326] of the Frontier Guardian and Iowa Sentinel, the paper having then passed into the hands of Jacob Dawson & Co.

^326:14 Until Aug. 19, 1851, it was issued as an eight-page quarto, the pages being about 8 1/2 by 6 1/2 in., and without column rules. After that date it was suspended for want of paper until Nov. 19th. 'We got short of type, and I happened to have some stereotyped plates,...which we melted down and used for type. We were short, too, of paper, and all went to work to make it. We collected all the rags we could and made the pulp, sifted it through a sieve, and pressed it as well as we could.' Taylor's Rem., MS., 17. The terms were $5 per year, payable half-yearly in advance, single copies being sold for fifteen cents. There seems to have been some difficulty in collecting subscriptions, for in the issue of November 15, 1851, the editor states that payment will be due at the office on receipt of the first number, 'and no one need expect the second number until these terms are complied with, as credit will not create the paper, ink, press, or hands to labor.' In his prospectus, Richards said that the Deseret News is designed 'to record the passing events of our state, and in connection refer to the arts and sciences, embracing general education, medicine, law, divinity, domestic and political economy, and everything that may fall under our observation which may tend to promote the best interest, welfare, pleasure, and amusement of our fellow-citizens...We shall ever take pleasure in communicating foreign news as we have opportunity; in receiving communications from our friends at home and abroad; and solicit ornaments for the News from our poets and poetesses.' In the first issue is the following, perhaps by Beta, who afterward wrote a number of papers styled the Chronicles of Utah in the Salt Lake City Contributor:

To my Friends in the Valley.

Let all who would have a good paper,
   Their talents and time ne'er abuse;
 Since 'tis said by the wise and the humored,
   That the best in the world is the News.

Then ye who so long have been thinking
   What paper this year you will choose,
 Come trip gayly up to the office
   And subscribe for the Deseret News.

And now, dearest friends, I will leave you;
   This counsel, I pray you, don't lose;
 The best of advice I can give you
   Is, pay in advance for the News.

[paragraph continues] Fortunately for the prospects and reputation of the paper, such effusions were rare even in its early pages. The Deseret News was at first less ably edited, and inferior, as to type and paper, to the Frontier Guardian. It appears, indeed, to have lacked support, for in the first number are only two advertisements, one from a blacksmith and the other from a surgeon-dentist, who also professes to cure the scurvy. In Nov. 1851 it appeared in folio and in greatly improved form; for years it was the only paper, and is still the leading Mormon journal, in the territory.

^327:15 The first grist-mill built at Tooele was erected by Ezaias Edwards; in 1849 a saw-mill was built at Provo by James Porter and Alex. Williams, and in 1850 a grist-mill, by James A. Smith and Isaac Higbee. At American Fork Ezra Adams built a grist-mill in 1851; at Mantia grist-mill was built by Brigham Young and Isaac Morley, and a saw-mill by Charles Shumway; in 1848 Samuel Parish built a grist-mill at Centreville. Utah Sketches, MS., passim. In Salt Lake county there were, in the autumn of 1851, four gristmills and five saw-mills. Utah Early Records, MS., 158. Near Ogden, Lorin Farr built a grist-mill and saw-mill in 1850. Stanford's Ogden City, MS., 3.

^327:16 In March 1851 the general assembly appropriated $2,000 for this purpose. Utah Early Records, MS., 123.

^327:17 'Our pottery is nearly completed;...cutlery establishments are completed.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 26.

^327:18 In Id., Nov. 6, 1852, similar advice is given to the saints: 'Buy no article from the stores that you can possibly do without. Stretch our means, skill, and wisdom to the utmost to manufacture what we need, beginning with [p. 328] a shoestring (if we cannot begin higher).' 'When we have manufactured an article, sell it for cash or its equivalent, as low, or lower, than it can be bought for at the stores.' In the fifth general epistle is the following: 'Beach and Blair have opened a general manufacturing establishment;...are now making molasses and vinegar. Several grain and lumber mills have been erected in the various settlements,...chairs and various articles of furniture are multiplying,...two or three threshing-machines have been in successful operation.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 24. 'We are going in extensively for home manufactures. My own family alone have this season manufactured over 500 yds of cloth, and the home-made frequently makes its appearance in our streets'--a great blessing, 'if it will prove an inducement to the people to depend and rely upon their own resources for their own supplies.' Id., 1852, 16.

^328:19 On May l, 1851, the first train of merchandise for the season arrived in the city, laden partly with sugar, coffee, and calicoes. Utah Early Records, MS., 127.

^328:20 On Nov. 19, 1848, Capt. Grant of the Hudson's Bay Company arrived from Fort Hall with pack-horses laden with skins, groceries, and other goods. On April 17, 1851, a small party arrived from Fort Hall in search of provisions and Indian trading goods. On the 10th of the same month, Col Reese sent ten or twelve wagon-loads of flour to Carson Valley for trading purposes. Id., 39, 125, 127.

^328:21 The returns were made under the direction of Brigham Young, who was appointed census agent. Utah Early Records, MS., 112; Deseret News, Oct. 5, 1850.

^328:22 Early in 1853 the Deseret Almanac places the number at 30,000, while in Orson Pratt's Seer it is given at 30,000 to 35,000. Olshausen's Mormonen, 192. At this date it was estimated at 25,000 by the gentiles. Burton's City of the Saints, 357. Probably the Mormons exaggerated, as they desired to [p. 329] show as soon as possible a population of 100,000, which would entitle them to claim admission as a state.

^329:23 Not more than one tenth was collected in cash, payment being usually made in grain. Contributor, 332. 'Securing a territorial revenue of $23,000, including merchants' licenses and tax on liquors.' Hist. B. Young, MS, 1852, 2.

^329:24 'The most exposed parts of the country are annually run over by the fires set by the Indians to kill and roast the crickets, which they gather in summer for winter food.' Gunnison's The Mormons, 21.

^329:25 The country was canvassed to ascertain how many inmates there would be for a poor-house, then projected. Only two were found, and the Mormons concluded that it was not yet time for such an institution. Id., 34.

^329:26 The number of deaths in the territory during the year ending June 1, 1850, was 239. U.S. Census, 1850, 997; and in Salt Lake county, which virtually meant Salt Lake City, 121; in both, the mortality was therefore less than 20 per thousand, or about the average death-rate in San Francisco during recent years. Moreover, the population of Utah included a very large proportion of infants. Of 64 deaths reported in the Deseret News of March 8, 1851, 34 occurred between the ages of one and ten.

^329:27 Utah and the Morrmons: the History, Government, Doctrines, Customs, and Prospects of the Latter-day Saints; from personal observation during a six months' residence at Great Salt Lake City. By Benjamin G. Ferris, late secretary of Utah Territory, New York, 1854. Mr Ferris is not the first one whom in his own opinion a six months' residence in the west justifies in writing a book. It was the winter of 1852-3 which he spent there, and while professing that he writes wholly from an anti-Mormon standpoint, as a rule he is comparatively moderate in his expressions. The illustrations in this volume are many of them the same which are found in several other works. Beginning with the physical features of Utah, he goes through the whole range of Mormon history, and concludes with chapters on government, doctrines, polygamy, book of Mormon proselytizing, and society. While sometimes interesting, there is little original information; and aside from what the author saw during his residence in Utah, the book has no special value.

^330:28 The water was analyzed in 1851 by L. D. Gale. Its specific gravity was found to be 1.0112; it was strongly impregnated with sulphur, and 100 parts of water yielded 1.082 of solid matter. The specific gravity of the hot spring in the same neighborhood was 1.013, and 100 parts yielded 1.1454 of solid matter. Detailed analyses are given in Stunsbury's Expedition to G. S. Lake, i. 419-20. An analysis of the warm spring given by Joseph T. Kingsbury in Contributor, iv. 59-60, differs somewhat from that of Gale. Further information on these and other springs and mineral waters will be found in Id., iv. 86-9; Hist. Nev., 17, this series; Salt Lake Weekly Herald, July 29, 1880; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 5, 1878; Wheeler's Surveys, iii. 105-17; Hollister's Resources of Utah, 83-5; Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie, 121; Burton's City of the Saints, 222; Sac. Union, Aug. 7, 1860.

^330:29 Contributor, iv. 59. One of the brethren, writing to Orson Hyde from Salt Lake City, Sept. 10, 1850, says that the temperature stands, winter and summer, at about 92 degrees. Frontier Guardian, Jan. 8, 1851.

^330:30 On Nov. 27, 1850, the warm-spring bath-house was dedicated and opened with prayer, festival, and dance. Utah Early Records, MS., 116.

    The material for the preceding chapters has been gathered mainly from a number of manuscripts furnished at intervals between 1880 and 1885. As I have already stated, to F. D. Richards I am especially indebted for his unremitting effort in supplying data for this volume. The period between Feb. 1846 and the close of 1851--say between the commencement of the exodus from Nauvoo and the opening of the legislature of Utah territory--is one of which there are few authentic printed records. From Kane's The Mormons, from Fullmer's Expulsion, and other sources, I have gleaned a little; but as far as I am aware, no work has yet been published that gives, or pretends to give, in circumstantial detail the fall story of this epoch in the annals of Mormonism. In the Utah Early Records, MS., I have been supplied with a brief but full statement of all the noteworthy incidents from the entrance of Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow into the valley of the Great Salt Lake to the close of the year 1851. In the Narrative of Franklin D. Richards, MS.; the Reminiscences of Mrs F. D. Richards, MS.; Inner Facts of Social Life in Utah, MS., by the same writer; History of Brigham Young, MS., which is indeed a continuation of the History of Joseph Smith, or the history of the church; Martin's Narrative, MS.--I have been kindly furnished with many details that it would have been impossible to obtain elsewhere. Some of them I have already noticed, and others I shall mention in their place.

    In Reminiscences of President John Taylor, MS., we have an account of the migration from Nauvoo to Winter Quarters, the organization of the various [p. 331] companies, and much information of a miscellaneous nature, relating to house-building in Salt Lake City, the first manufactures, the location of the temple, and other matters. The manuscript also makes mention of his visit to England as a missionary in 1846, in company with Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde.

    The Narrative of General Daniel H. Wells, MS., gives an account of the disturbances in Hancock county, the troubles at Nauvoo before the exodus, the journey to Winter Quarters, the organization of the Nauvoo legion, and of the state of Deseret; but perhaps the most valuable portion is a condensed narrative of all the Indian outbreaks between 1849 and 1864, a task for which General Wells, who during this period had charge of the Nauvoo legion and aided in suppressing some of the disturbances, is specially qualified.

    Wilford Woodruff's Journal, MS., commencing with the claims of Sidney Rigdon to the guardianship of the church, in 1846, and closing with a summary of the operations of the pioneers in the following year. Mr Woodruff gives some valuable details concerning this most interesting period in the annals of Mormonism. Being himself a pioneer, he furnishes minute particulars as to their journey and their early labors in the valley.

    In A Woman's Experiences with the Pioneer Band, by Mrs Clara Decker Young, MS., we have also some information as to the work accomplished during the single month that the pioneers remained in the valley, among other matters being the building of the old fort. Items of interest are also given concerning those who were left alone in the valley after the pioneers' departure, until the arrival of Parley Pratt's companies. Clara Decker Young, a native of Freedom, N.Y., moved with her parents to Daviess co., Mo., in 1837, the family being driven, during the persecutions of that year, to Far West, whence they removed to Quincy, and later to Nauvoo. When 16 years of age she became the fifth wife of Brigham Young.

    From the Material Progress of Utah, by William Jennings, MS., I have gathered many details as to the industrial condition of the Mormons from the earliest settlement of S. L. City up to a recent date, among them being items relating to manufactures, agriculture, stock-raising, the grasshopper plague, and the influence of the railroad on the population of Utah.

    Early Justice, by John Nebeker, MS., besides describing the punishment of offenders in the days of 1847, when, as I have already stated, the whipping-post was substituted for imprisonment, furnishes other material of value relating to early times. In his capacity of public complainer, Mr Nebeker prosecuted one culprit before the high council for stealing, and himself administered the flogging. Mr Nebeker, a native of Delaware, came to Nauvoo in the winter of 1846; crossed the plains with the first companies, and left Winter Quarters with Parley Pratt's detachment.

    In The Migration and Settlements of the Latter-day Saints, by Mrs Joseph H. Horne, MS., is an account of her conversion, her experiences at Far West, Quincy, and Nauvoo, and the hardships suffered during the migration. Then follows a description of the first years in S. L. City, the food, dress, and dwellings of the saints, their make-shifts and privations, with some mention of the Mormon battalion, and the ill feeling caused by the withdrawal of 500 able-bodied men at this crisis in their affairs. Mrs Horne, a native of Rainham, England, moved with her parents to New York (now Toronto, Canada) when ten years of age. In 1836, the year of her marriage, she was converted by the preaching of Parley and Orson Pratt, her house being afterward open to the elders, who frequently held meetings there.

    From the Utah Sketches, MS., I have gathered much information as to the founding of various settlements and their progress up to the year 1880, of which mention will be made later. Most of them were written by persons who were themselves among the earliest settlers, and of whom some are still prominent members of the several communities among which their lot was cast. In this connection may be mentioned the Brief Historical Sketch of the Settlements in Weber County, by Joseph Stanford, MS., and the Historical Sketch of Ogden City, by the same author.

    In addition to the manuscripts and journals constituting the vast original [p. 332] sources upon which I have drawn, I would mention also the following printed and secondary authorities: Millen. Star, iv. 187-90, v. 174-7, vi. 41-2, vii. 71-2, 87-9, 103-4, 149-53, viii. 68-71, 97-8, 102-3, 113-21, 149-58, ix. 11-22, xi. 46-7; Times and Seasons, i. 30-1, 44, 185-7, 517, ii. 273-4, 281-6, 309, 319, 321-2, 336, 355-6, 370-1, 375-7, 380-2, 417-18, 435, 517, 567-70, iii. 630-1, 666, 638, 654, 683-6, 700, 718, 733-4, 743, 767-9, 775-6, 806-7, 831-2, 902-3, 919-21, 936-7, iv. 10-11, 33-6, 65-71, 154-7, 198-9, 241-78, v. 392-6, 418-23, 455, 471-2, 536-48, 560-75, 584-99, 618-22, vi. 762, 773-8O, 926, 972-3; Beadle, Life in Utah, 58-9, 63-121, 125-54, 161-2, 280; Bennett, Morm. Exposed, 5-10, 140-62, 188-214, 278-302, 307-40; Bertrand, Mem. Morm., 61, 65-70; Bonwick, Morm. and Silv. Mines, 3; Burton, City of Saints, 183-4, 433, 625-67; Busch, Gesch. Morm., 43-5, 97-113, 125-30, 205-17, 254-98; Death of the Prophets, with Offic. Doc., no. 23, in Utah Pamph. Relig.; Deseret News, 1851, Apr. 8, Nov. 29, Dee. 13, 27; 1867, July 24; 1868, July 1, Dec. 16, 30; 1869, Apr. 7, Sept. 1; 1876, Mar. 22; 1877, Nov. 14; Hall, Morm. Exposed, 7-8, 15-16, 24-7, 28-34, 55-70, 91-9, 106-7; Tucker, Morm., 37, 167-207; Tullidge, Life of Young, 6-191, 204; Women of Morm., 297-300, 425-32, 443-4, 488-95; Edinburg Rev., Apr. 1854, 319-83; Ford (Thos, Gov. Ill.), in Utah Tracts, no. 11; Ferris, Utah and Morm., 51, 92-107, 114-15, 137-46, 151-4, 120-30; Gunnison, Morm., 133, 115-39; Stansbury, Exped., 135-7; Green, Morm., 28-9, 36-7, 54-64; Hickman, Destroying Angel, 41-5; Hyde, Morm., 140, 144-6, 152-3, 155-7, 172-5, 183-5, 189-92; Kidder, Morm., 157-9, 182-92; Kanesville (Ia), Front. Guard., 1849, Feb. 7, 21, Mar. 7, June 27, Aug. 8, Nov. 14; Id., 1850, May 1, 29, Oct. 2, 30; Id., 1852, Mar. 18, 25; Linforth, Route from Liverpool, 61-9, 72-5; Lee, Morm., 109-12, 144-8, 152-5, 167-8, 173-4, 179-80; Mackay, The Morm., 115-206; Niles' Reg., lxix. 70, 134, lxx. 208, 211, 327, lxxii. 206, 370, lxxiii. 6; Olshausen, Gesch. Mormonen, 59-65, 88-90, 100-3, 144-51, 202-34; Hon. Polynesian, ii. 1846, 91; Pratt (P.), Autobiog., 378, 398-401,405-6; Remy, Journey to G. S. L. City, i. 336-406, 434-8, ii. 258-63; Smucker, Hist. Morm., 119-34, 148-276, passim; Snow (Eliza), in Utah Pioineers, 33d Ann., 41-50, in Times and Seasons, iv. 287; Snow (Lorenzo), with Taylor, Govt of God, no. 12, 9-11; Stenhouse, Tell It All, 306; Crimes of L. D. Saints, 11-15; Dunbar, Romance of Age, 45; Ebberts, Trapper's Life, MS., 18; Fullmer, in Utah Tracts, no. 9. 1-40; Mather, in Lippincott's Mag., Aug. 1880; McGlashen, Hist. Donner Party, 34-56; Spence, Settler's Guide, 268-9; Sala, Amer. Revisited, ii. 289; Salt Lake City, Contributor, ii. 86, 134-7, 195-8, 239, 301, 354-6, 366, iii. passim, iv. 370-6; Salt Lake City, Deseret News, 1850, July 27; 1851, July 26, Aug. 19; 1852, Feb. 7, Aug. 7, 21; 1854, July 27, Aug. 3; 1855, Sept. 26; 1857, July 29, Aug. 5; 1858, June 30; Salt Lake City, Herald, 1880, July 3, 29; Salt Lake City, Telegraph, 1868, May 30, Oct. 10, 12-14; Smith, Rise, Progress, etc., 6-18, 314-22, 334-6; Smoot (Margaret S.), Experience, etc., MS., 4-5; Cal., Its Past Hist., 218-19; Tracy (Mrs N. N.), Narr., MS., 10-19; Thornton, Or. and Cal., i. 158-9; Utah Pioneer, 33d Ann., 50-2; Narrative of the Murders of the Smiths, in Utah Tracts, no. 1, passim; The Murder of Jos Smith, in Utah Tracts, no. 1, 54-5; Tyler, Hist. Morm. Battalion, passim; U. S. Ex. Doc., 24, 31 Cong. 1st Sess.; Van Tramp, Adventures, 313-38; Woodruff (W.), in Utah Pion., 33d Ann., 19-24; Ward, Mormon Wife, 81-4, 109-40, 165; White (Mrs C. V.), The Mormon Prophet, etc., 4-8; Young (Ann Eliza), Wife No. 19, 54-7; Marshall, Through Amer., 184; Murphy, Mineral Resour., 84-5; Miller (J.), First Families, etc., 65-73; Martin (Thos S.), Narrative, etc., MS., 42; San Francisco, Alta Cal., 1851, Aug. 8; Id., Cal. Star, 1848, Feb. 26; Id., Call, 1869, Sept. 5, 1877, Aug. 31; Id., Chronicle, 1881, Jan. 9; Id., Herald, 1851, Oct. 12, 1859, Nov. 15; Sacramento, Placer Times, 1849, May 26; Id., Union, 1855, Sept. 10, 27, 1859, Aug. 24; Portland (Or.), Telegram, 1879, Mar. 15; Salem (Or.), Argus, 1858, Feb. 13, Aug. 28; Id., Statesman, 1851, Dec. 23; Or. City (Or.), Spectator, 1846, July 4; Ogden (Utah), Freeman, 1879, May 2; Gold Hill (Nev.), News, 1872, May 1, Oct. 24; Eureka (Nev.), Leader, 1880, July 24; Carson (Nev.), State Register, 1872, Nov. 24; Rae, Westward by Rail, 125-7.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 333]

  

CHAPTER XV.
 MORMONISM AND POLYGAMY.

WHAT IS MORMONISM?--TENETS OF THE CHURCH--SACRED BOOKS AND PERSONAGES--ORGANIZATION--PRIESTHOOD--FIRST PRESIDENCY--THE TWELVE APOSTLES--PATRIARCHS--ELDERS, BISHOPS, PRIESTS, TEACHERS, AND DEACONS--THE SEVENTIES--STAKES AND WARDS--MARRIAGE--TEMPLE BUILDING--TABERNACLE--POLITICAL ASPECT--POLYGAMY AS A CHURCH TENET--CELESTIAL MARRIAGE--ATTITUDE AND ARGUMENTS OF CIVILIZATION--POLYGAMY'S REPLY--ETHICS AND LAW--THE CHARGE OF DISLOYALTY--PROPOSED REMEDIES.

    WE are now prepared to ask the question with some degree of intelligence, What is Mormonism? In formulating an answer, we must consider as well the political as the religious idea. I will examine the latter first.

    Mormonism in its religious aspect is simply the acceptation of the bible, the whole of it, literally, and following it to its logical conclusions.

    As the Christian world has advanced in civilization and intelligence these two thousand years or so, it has gradually left behind a little and a little more of its religion, first of the tenets of the Hebraic record, and then somewhat even of those of the later dispensation. Long before religionists began to question as myths the stories of Moses, and Jonah, and Job, they had thrown aside as unseemly blood-sacrifice and burnt-offerings, sins of uncleanness, the stoning of sabbath-breakers, the killing in war of women, children, and prisoners, the condemnation of whole nations to perpetual bondage, and many other revolting customs of the half-savage Israelites sanctioned by holy writ.

[p. 334]

[paragraph continues] This they did of their own accord, not because they were so commanded, but in spite of commandments, and by reason of a higher and more refined culture--a culture which had outgrown the cruder dogmas of the early ages. Then came the putting away of slavery and polygamy, the former but recently permitted in these American states, and the latter being here even now. Among the discarded customs taught and encouraged by the new testament are, speaking in tongues, going forth to preach without purse or scrip, laying on of hands for the healing of the sick, raising the dead, casting out devils, and all other miracles; and there will be further repudiations as time passes, further ignoring of portions of the scriptures by orthodox sects, a further weeding out of the unnatural and irrational from things spiritual and worshipful.

    The tenets of the Mormon church are these:

    The bible is the inspired record of God's dealings with men in the eastern hemisphere; the book of Mormon is the inspired record of God's dealings with the ancient inhabitants of this continent; the book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consists of revelations from God concerning the present dispensation to Joseph Smith, who was inspired to translate the book of Mormon and organize the church of Christ anew. Joseph Smith to the present dispensation is as Moses was to Israel; there is no conflict, either in personages or books. The statements, assertions, promises, and prophecies of the books, and the precepts and practices of the personages, are accepted, all of them, and held to be the revealed will to man of one and the same God, whose will it is the duty and endeavor of his people to carry out in every particular to the best of their ability.

    There are more gods than one. There are spiritual gifts. Not only must there be faith in Christ, but faith in the holy priesthood, and faith in continual

[p. 335]

revelation. [*1] Man is a free agent. The laying on of hands for ordination, and for the healing of the sick, descends from the early to the later apostles. [*2] There will be a resurrection of the body and a second coming of Christ. Israel is a chosen people; there has been a scattering of Israel, and there will be a gathering. Joseph Smith was the fulfiller not only of bible prophecies, but of the book of Mormon prophecies, and of his own prophecies. Foreordination, election, and dispensation of the fulness of times are held. There was an apostasy of the primitive church, and now there is a return. There was the Jerusalem of the eastern hemisphere; on the continent of North America is planted the new Jerusalem. Miracles obtain; also visions and dreams, signs and tokens, and angels of light and darkness. There are free spirits and spirits imprisoned; the wicked will be destroyed, and there will be a millennial reign. The saints are largely of the house of Israel, and heirs to the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The aboriginal inhabitants of America and the Pacific isles were the

[p. 336]

seed of Joseph, divided into numerous nations and tribes. The Lamanites were of the house of Manasseh.

    We believe, say their articles of faith, in God the father, in Jesus Christ the son, and in the holy ghost. For their own sins, and not for any transgression of Adam, men will be punished; but all may be saved, through the atonement, by obedience to the ordinances of the gospel, which are: faith in Christ, repentance, baptism by immersion, [*3] and laying on of

[p. 337]

hands for the gift of the holy ghost. We believe in the same organization and powers that existed in

[p. 338]

the primitive church, namely, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists; in the gift of tongues, [*4]

[p. 339]

prophecy, revelation, and visions. In the scriptures is found the law of tithing, which law is now revived, and the keeping of it made one of the first duties of the saints. The ten commandments, and all other commandments, ordinances, promulgations, and possibilities, are in force now as at the time they were given. Marriage is a sacred and an eternal covenant. Plural marriage, sanctioned under the old dispensation and revived under the new, is open to all, and is, in some instances, commanded, when it becomes a sacred obligation.

    Seldom does a good Mormon appear in a court of law arrayed against a brother Mormon. And this is why, as the saints allege, the twenty-five or fifty lawyers in Utah who are compelled to derive their living almost entirely from the gentiles, are so bitter against the saints. When two Mormons disagree, they present themselves before the president of the stake, who with twelve councillors, six facing six, their selection having been agreed to by the litigants, is ready to try the case without delay. Plaintiff and defendant, each with his witnesses, take their places before the president, and between the rows of councillors. Prayer is then offered, almighty aid being asked in bringing the affair to a righteous and amicable conclusion. The litigants state the case, each from his own standpoint; the witnesses are heard; the councillors decide. Prayer is again offered. The adversaries shake hands; there is nothing to pay. Until the gentiles came, there were in Utah no police or police courts; no houses of drinking, or of gambling, or of prostitution. Of the administration of justice among the saints I shall speak more at length in a later chapter.

[p. 340]

    The doctrine of blood atonement was early inculcated by the church, as a sacrifice necessary for salvation, and not, as many have asserted, in order to legalize murder. There were the altars and the offerings of the old testament, and the great god-man sacrifice of the new. Christ made the atonement for the sins of the world by the shedding of his blood. By the laws of the land, he who commits murder must atone for it by his own death. [*5] There are sins of various degrees

[p. 341]

of heinousness; some requiring only public confession and promised reformation by way of atonement, whilst others are characterized by an enormity so vast that pardon on earth is impossible. Of the first class are all minor offences against church discipline, breach of which has been publicly acknowledged by nearly every leader, from Joseph himself down to the humblest official.

 

    For the proper carrying out of the instructions revealed in the sacred books, an organization has been effected in these latter days, based upon books and on former organizations. There are two principal priesthoods, the Melchisedek and the Aaronic, the latter including the Levitical. The Melchisedek is the higher, comprising apostles, patriarchs, high-priests, seventies, and elders. It holds the right of presidency, with authority to administer in all the offices, ordinances, and affairs of the church. It holds the keys of all spiritual blessings, receives the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, whose doors are ever open, and holds communion with God the father, Jesus Christ the mediator, Joseph Smith the prophet, and all departed saints. [*6]

    The Aaronic is a subordinate priesthood, being an appendage to the Melchisedek, and acting under its

[p. 342]

supervision. It comprises bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons, who hold the keys of the ministering angels, having power to administer in certain ordinances and in the temporal affairs of the church, baptizing and sitting as judges in Israel. The bishopric is the presidency of the Aaronic priesthood. The office of a bishop is to administer in temporal matters. First-born sons, lineal descendants of Aaron, and no others, have a legal right to the bishopric. But a high-priest of the order of Melchisedek may officiate in all lesser offices, including that of bishop, when no lineal descendant of Aaron can be found, and after he has been ordained to this power by the first presidency. There is also the patriarchal priesthood, [*7]

[p. 343]

the patriarch to be the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Likewise there are mothers in Israel. [*8]

    Head over all is the First Presidency of the Church, known also as the First Presidency of the High-Priesthood, and consisting of a president and two councillors. [*9] The first presidency presides over and governs

[p. 344]

all the affairs of the church, temporal and spiritual; the first president is the prophet of God, seer, revelator, and translator.

    Next in authority are twelve apostles, who are a travelling presiding high-council, and with whom, on the death of the president of the church, the supreme rulership rests until another first presidency is installed. [*10] The president of the twelve, chosen in the

[p. 345]

first instance by reason of seniority or ordination, usually becomes president of the church. The office of the twelve is to preach and teach throughout the world, regulating the affairs of the church everywhere under the direction of the first presidency, calling to their aid therein the seventies.

    An apostle may administer in the several offices of the church, particularly in spiritual matters. [*11] The office of a patriarch is to give patriarchal blessings; the office of a member of a seventy is to travel and preach the gospel; but a patriarch, a high-priest, a

[p. 346]

member of a seventy, and an elder may, in common with an apostle, adtninister in other spiritual offices.

    All superior officers are frequently called elders. Thus an apostle is an elder; and he may baptize, and ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons. It is his calling to administer bread and wine, or bread and water, emblems of the flesh and blood of Christ; to confirm the baptized by the laying on of hands for the baptism of fire and the holy ghost; to teach, expound, exhort, and to lead in meetings as lie is led by the holy ghost.

    A bishop who is a first-born and a lineal descendant of Aaron may sit as a common judge in the church without councillors, except in the trial of a president of the high-priesthood. But a bishop from the high-priesthood may not sit as a judge without his two councillors. Over all the bishops in the church there is a presiding bishop.

    The duties of a priest are to preach, baptize, administer the sacrament, and visit families and pray with them. The duties of a teacher are to watch over and strengthen the church, and see that no iniquity creeps into it, and that every member performs his obligations and conducts himself without guile. The duties of the deacon are to assist the teacher and the bishop, attending to the temporal affairs of the church, looking after the houses of worship and the necessities of the poor. Teachers and deacons may instruct and exhort, but they are not authorized to baptize, lay on hands, or administer the sacrament. No one can hold office except by authoritative call and ordination, or by special appointment of God.

    The seventies are organized into various councils of seventy, commonly called quorums. Each council of seventy has seven presidents, chosen out of the seventy, one of the seven presiding over the others and over the whole seventy. The seven presidents of the first council of seventies also preside over all the councils

[p. 347]

of seventies. [*12] According to Elder John Jaques, to whose little book on the priesthood I am indebted for this information, there were in 1882 seventy-six councils of seventies, with seventy members in each council when complete. Elders are organized in councils of ninety-six, each council having a president and two councillors. [Priests are organized in councils of forty-eight, each with a president--who must be a bishop--and two councillors. Teachers are organized in councils of twenty-four, and deacons in councils of twelve, each with a president and two councillors. [*13]

    In the society of saints, there are territorial divisions into what are called Stakes of Zion. In Utah, these divisions correspond usually, but not necessarily, with the counties, each county being a stake.

[p. 348]

[paragraph continues] Every stake has a president, with his two councillors, and a high-council, consisting of twelve high-priests. [*14] The high-priests assemble in council, having its president and two councillors, at stated times, usually once a month, for conference and instruction. The president of a stake, with his two councillors, presides over the high-council of that stake, which has original and appellate jurisdiction, and whose decisions are usually, but not invariably, final. Appeals are had to a general assembly of the several councils of the priesthood, but such appeals are seldom taken. The jurisdiction of the several councils is ecclesiastical, affecting fellowship and standing only, the extreme penalty being excommunication.

    Each stake is divided into wards, the number being according to territory and population; over each ward presides a bishop, with his two councillors. Each stake and each ward, as a rule, has its own meeting-house. There are about twenty-five stakes, divided into some three hundred wards. Salt Lake City is divided into twenty-one wards, each containing for the most part nine ten-acre blocks, though in the outskirts they are larger. Each stake holds a quarterly conference; and the church holds a general conference every April and October.

    It will be observed that the orders of priesthood and organization of the church are copied essentially from the bible. As before remarked, the Mormons believe and practise what their sacred books teach, and all that they teach, without intended misinterpretation,

[p. 349]

elimination, or repudiation. And as the book of Mormon is held to be a continuation of the historical portion of the bible, and equally with it the word of God; and as the ideas and instructions contained in the book of Doctrine and Covenants have been derived, for the most part, from a study and literal interpretation of the bible--though with something added--it is safe to say that in the main the Mormons believe what the bible teaches, and that Mormonism is the acceptation of the bible, the whole of it, literally, and following it to its logical conclusions.

 

Tithing, though enjoined by divine command, is a free-will offering. [*15] The law of tithing in its

[p. 350]

fulness requires the tenth of the surplus property of members coming to Zion to be paid into the church as a consecration, and after that one tenth of increase or earnings annually. This is to be used for the poor, for

[p. 351]

building or other church purposes, and for the support of those engaged in church business. There are no salaried preachers. Tithing is paid in kind to the bishop, who renders a strict account, the whole financial

[p. 352]

system being in the hands of the bishopric, but supervised by the trustee in trust through the aid of an auditing committee. The names of those who do not keep the law of tithing shall not be enrolled with the people of God; neither shall their genealogy be kept.

    The doctrine of divine revelation is continued. God's ways are immutable; past and present to him are as one; what he has done, that he continues to do; what was right five thousand years ago is right now. If God spoke to Abraham and Solomon, and gave them more wives than one, even giving to David his neighbor's wives, there is no reason why he should not do the same with Joseph and Brigham. There is nothing which God has ever done and sanctioned that he may not do and sanction now; otherwise he is not an omniscient, omnipotent, unchangeable, all-wise, and perfect being. Every member of the church may hold communion with God relative to his own affairs; revelations for the church are only given through its head.

    As through Christ alone man may be saved, in order that the souls of many millions who never heard of him may not be all of them lost, baptism for the dead, and thereby salvation, was revealed, as was also celestial marriage.

    Nature is dual. An unmarried man or woman is and forever must be an imperfect creature. There are marriages for time and marriages for eternity. A celestial marriage is a marriage of God, and those thus

[p. 353]

joined can never be divorced, except by the power of God. If a man's wife dies and he marries another, and she dies and he marries a third, believing in resurrection and a life of purity beyond the grave but repudiating polygamy, how will he manage with his plural wives in heaven? She who dies unmarried cannot enter into the full enjoyment of God; but as a man may be baptized for the dead and so save their souls, so he may be sealed to a husbandless woman in heaven. There is a difference between marriage and sealing; the former is secular, and the latter both secular and celestial, as it may be either for time or for eternity, in person or by proxy, and with the living or with the dead. A woman may be sealed to one man for time and to another for eternity, the former being still living. [*16]

[p. 354]

    A sacred duty is the constant effort to convert all men throughout the world to a belief in the divinity

[p. 355]

of Joseph Smith's mission. To this end are sent forth proselyting ministers, elders of the church, selected by

[p. 356]

the authorities and called by the saints assembled at the general semiannual conferences held in Salt Lake City. Neither age nor pecuniary condition governs the selection. They may be men or boys, rich or poor; but they must have faith and integrity, and go forth without purse or scrip, relying alone upon the hand of God to feed them. An elder is likewise selected by the church authorities to preside over each mission. Thus has been visited almost every quarter of the globe, the book of Mormon being meanwhile translated into many languages. And a Perpetual Emigration Fund Company has been established, which has advanced the funds to bring out thousands to Zion, the money being paid back by the immigrant after his arrival, as he has been able to earn it.

    Temple building is a characteristic work, and is prompted by the belief that Jesus Christ will some day come suddenly to his temple. Hence the devotion and self-sacrifice practised by Christ's people in order to prepare for him a fitting place of reception. Wonders in this direction have been accomplished by a poor and wandering people, at Kirtland, at Nauvoo, at Salt Lake City, St George, Manti, and Logan.

    In the north-west corner of Temple block, Salt Lake City, in which is the tabernacle, the smaller church building, and the new temple, stands a plain two-story adobe structure known as the Endowment House. Here are conducted the most secret and solemn mysteries of the church, which may be termed religio-masonic ceremonies, illustrative of the origin and destiny of man. Here also are performed the rites of baptism for the dead, anointing with oil, marriage, and other ceremonies, by which the convert is endowed with the special grace of God, receives his inheritance as a child of God, and is made a partaker of the fulness of all the blessings of religion. All these rites should properly be performed in the temple, which on its completion will supersede the endowment

[p. 357]

house, and in which special apartments are being constructed for these purposes. [*17]

[p. 358]

    The order of exercises in the tabernacle, which seats seven thousand persons, is much the same as in orthodox evangelical churches, beginning and ending with prayer and singing, and sometimes singing and administering the sacrament in the middle of a discourse. The speaker seldom knows that he is to speak until called upon by the moderator, who regulates the services, and makes the selection under inspiration, announcing the name of the person sometimes without knowing whether he is in the house, or even in the city. The singing is very fine, the organ, constructed wholly by Mormon artisans, being the largest

[p. 359]

and finest in America at the time it was built. The acoustic properties of the oval-shaped room and ceiling are wonderful; stationed at one point, a pin may be heard drop at the opposite end. The singers, thirty or forty in number, are stationed on the main stage, facing the audience in front of the organ. In front of them are the church officials, seated on a series of platforms according to their respective grades, the first presidency highest, next the twelve apostles, and finally the teachers, priests, and bishops, who have charge of administering the sacrament of the Lord's supper, which is done regularly every Sunday. In the first organization of the church, bread and wine were specified as the proper elements to be used, but it was soon after revealed that it makes no difference what the emblems are, and now bread and water are used. Tabernacle services are held Sunday afternoons; there are Sunday-schools at the ward meeting-houses Sunday mornings, and preaching at the same places in the evening by subordinate officials, who often repeat the main points of the morning tabernacle discourse. In the tabernacle, several rows of the best seats are reserved for gentile strangers, and are filled for the most part by travellers and tourists, American and European, who take no pains to hide their contempt for all about them, and return the courtesy extended by smiles and sneers, which, to say the least, is in bad taste for people pretending to a superior culture. [*18]

[p. 360]

    After all that can be said about Mormonism and polygamy in their social or moral relations, it is only when we come to consider them in their political aspect, in their relations to government and governing,

[p. 361]

that we touch the core of the matter. Those who wax the hottest against the latter-day saints and their polygamous practices are not as a rule among the purest of our people. They care no more, indeed,

[p. 362]

about the half-dozen wives of the Mormon than about the half-dozen mistresses of the congressman. As Judge Roseborough, in a very able dictation to my stenographer, remarks: "When I came here I was a

[p. 363]

democrat. They pretended to be democrats, but, I found them such democrats as hell is full of. They are neither democrats nor republicans. I did not care about matters of belief, if they were American citizens.

[p. 364]

[paragraph continues] They might worship the devil if they were citizens and discharged their duties as citizens. But I found that in a military way, in a political way, and in a judicial way they controlled matters; and nearly all of them

[p. 365]

are aliens. I found that I had got out of the United States and come to Utah. I have never got over that feeling yet, and I think I will get out of Utah and back into the United States again."

[p. 366]

    Thus, notwithstanding the iniquities of the saints, together with their impudence and arrogance, as charged upon them by their enemies, the impossibility of others living with them as members of one community, of

[p. 367]

one commonwealth, is the real difficulty--not their religion, their so-called blasphemies, their pretended revelations and miracles, their opposition bible, their latter-day dispensations, and the rest; nor yet their crimes and misdemeanors, their robberies and murders; nor even yet their secret ceremonies, their endowments, Danite bands, blood atonement, and the rest. The copy or counterpart of very many of these, in greater or smaller degree, is, or has been, practised by the gentiles; or if not, few care enough for any of them to go to war on their account. The trouble is this, and this will continue to be the trouble, in Utah or elsewhere in the United States, and that whether polygamy stands or falls--the saints are too exclusive, industrially and politically, for their neighbors.

    The theory of government of this republic is numerical equality, each man and each hundred men being equal to every other man or every other hundred men as industrial and political factors. In this case, however, it is not so, and it never can be so. Spiritual manifestations and spiritual wives have nothing to do with it. A hundred or a thousand Mormons are a unit, socially, politically, and commercially, in a community organized theoretically upon the basis of only one man to the unit. And until the principles of the United States republic are remodelled, Mormons and gentiles cannot live together in peace and amity. It is folly for gentiles to enter a Mormon

[p. 368]

community and think to rule, or to have any part in the government as at present existing, and following the line of law and order. This is why the people of Missouri and Illinois drove them out--not because of their religion or immorality, for their religion was nothing to the gentiles, and their morals were as good or better than those of their neighbors. It may as well be understood and agreed upon that, in the United States or out of the United States, the Mormons are, and ever will be, a people self-contained and apart.

    Thus the matter continues to be discussed by the world at large, as a question of theology or morality, and not of active political and judicial control, or of the domination of a politico-religions organization, with aspirations and purposes diverse from those of the American people generally.

    The theory and assumption of the Mormon church as a politico-religious organization is that the church is a government of God, and not responsible to any other government on earth conflicting with it, if not indeed bound from necessity to overturn and supplant all civil governments. This assumption lies at the very foundation of the Mormon creed; and from this point, in practical operation as well as in theory, there is a divergence between that organization and the United States government. Grant that any man believes what the Mormons believe, say their enemies, and where will his allegiance rest--with the government of the United States, or with this politico-religious organization which ought to and will, as they imagine, supplant all other governments? Many of them are alien born, and, from the treatment they receive on their arrival, learn to distrust the government of the United States, and to cling all the closer to the institutions of their sect.

    "It is not consistent that the people of God," says Orson Pratt, "should organize or be subject to man-made governments. If it were so, they could never

[p. 369]

be perfected. There can be but one perfect government,--that organized by God, a government by apostles, prophets, priests, teachers, and evangelists; the order of the original church of all churches acknowledged by God."

    Early in this narrative we saw plainly, and remarked upon it as we proceeded, that it has been chiefly the political character and aspirations of the church that have brought it into all its difficulties everywhere--in Ohio, in Missouri, in Illinois. And its thirty years of isolation and independence in Utah, during which time it came in contact with the American people or with the government only in a limited degree, intensified its desire for control. The only way the Mormons can live in peace with gentile neighbors is for them to follow the example of their brethren, the Josephites--leave politics and government out of their ethics, and not combine for the purpose of controlling counties, states, or territories. But this strikes at the very root of their religion, which has already given them for an inheritance all counties and countries and peoples throughout the world, as they modestly claim.

    There is here much more than the religious unity of ancient Israel. As a cooperative association, Mormonism has not its equal in the history of the world. In every conceivable relation, position, interest, and idea; in every sentiment of hope and fear, of joy and sorrow--there is mutual assistance and sympathy. It enters into all affairs, whether for time or eternity; there is an absolute unity in religion, government, and society, and to the fullest extent short of communism, internal assistance in agriculture, commerce, and manufactures. If a foreign convert wishes to come to America, he is helped hither; if he wants land, farming implements, seed, stock, he is helped to them; trade and manufactures are largely cooperative. And this bond of strength, whether it be called the holiness of saints or

[p. 370]

the bigotry of fanatics, causes them to be feared and hated by their neighbors.

 

    Polygamy, as a tenet of the Mormon church, is based upon scripture example, and if this is unlawful, it says, all is unlawful. Marriage is ordained of God, and essential to salvation. Christian sects hold up the patriarchs as examples in their sacred instruction, and yet condemn in these personages a practice which Christ nowhere condemns. While in polygamy, God blessed them and their polygamous seed, saying never a word about their plural wives. Polygamy was common in Asia at the time of the apostles; yet none of them preached against it, nor does John the revelator mention it, writing to the seven churches. In the days of Justin Martyr, the Jews practised polygamy. It is true that the emperor Theodosius, about A. D. 393, promulgated a law against polygamy, but it was repealed sixty years after by Valentinian. Nevertheless, as the civilized world, particularly Christian sects, regarded the practice with abhorrence, the prophet Joseph inquired of the Lord as to what he should do. And the Lord answered, commanding him to restore all things, the practice of polygamy among the rest. The revelation on this subject is given entire in note [*19] of this chapter. The inferior order of wifehood, known in the sacred scriptures as concubinage, is not recognized in the Mormon church. By the marriage covenant, all are made wives, and all children are legitimate.

    Celestial marriage and the plural-wife system, as incorporated parts of the Mormon religion, are essential to the fulness of exaltation in the eternal world. The space around us, it declares, is inhabited by spirits, thousands of years old, awaiting tabernacles in the flesh, which can be legitimately furnished them only by marriage and procreation; and bodies cannot be obtained for these spirits fast enough unless men have more wives than one. It is the will and glory of God

[p. 371]

that these spirits have bodies as speedily as possible, that they become saints on earth and in his kingdom, those who keep this commandment thus to multiply being as gods; otherwise these spirits will take refuge in the bodies of unbelievers, and so sink to perdition.

    But civilization has pronounced polygamy a curse and a crime, a retrogression, an offence against society and against morality, a beastly abomination, immoral, incestuous, degrading, a relic of barbarism, a sin, a shame, a vice, and as such has discarded it and passed laws against it. And the issue between polygamy and monogamy is one purely for civilization to determine; christianity has not a foot of ground to stand upon in the matter.

    Culture cares nothing for religion; it is what a man does, not what he believes, that affects progress. It will not do to break the law in the name of religion. Suppose a man's religion authorizes him to commit murder: does that make it right? Civilization seeks the highest morality; and the highest morality, it says, is not that of the bible, of the book of Mormon, or of any other so-called holy book. The highest morality is based on nature, and by a study of nature's laws men may find it. Long before Christ, civilization awoke to the evils of this custom, which is not in accord with its morality. The religious reformer, Buddha, who died 470 years before Christ was born, and whose followers now number about one third of the whole human race, preached against polygamy. When Greece and Rome were the foremost nations of the world, they did not practise polygamy, nor has ever the highest civilization entertained it. Polygamy is to monogamy as Greece to China, or as England to India.

    All very religious people, as well as science fanatics, are partially insane. This insanity may be passive and harmless, or aggressive and hurtful. We have innumerable instances of both kinds in the history of the Christian church. But as the world

[p. 372]

progresses, religion becomes less dogmatic, and the insanity assumes more and more the milder form. Thus it is with the Mormons as with others; they would not feel justified in doing now some things which were done by their predecessors, any more than gentile Christians would wish to burn heretics, or slaughter millions in the name of the redeemer; or any more than they would accept Joseph Smith as a prophet from God, or believe in his metal book of Mormon, or his pretended revelations.

    But admitting man's obligation to follow the precepts and example of the bible, which, if done literally, would lead him into all manner of contrarieties and absurdities, even as it does the Mormons to-day, the scriptural argument in support of polygamy does not go for much. Among the half-savage Israelites the custom obtained, but as they grew more civilized, it died out. The first apostles had none of them two wives, and St Paul maintained that it was best not to have any; the spirit of the new testament is all against plurality of wives, and, though it nowhere in so many words condemns the system, the books of Mormon and doctrine and covenants do.

    Thus we see that holy books are contradictory and unreliable, not being consistent in themselves, or producing consistent followers. Codes of morality depending on the divine will are without foundation: are, indeed, not codes of morality, which to be genuine must be based on nature as the law-giver and punisher; for otherwise all men to whom the will of God has not been revealed, or who do not believe in any god or revelation, would be without any knowledge of right and wrong, or any standard of morality.

    Innate perceptions, supernatural intuitions, or a conscience divinely given, instead of one evolved from the ever-increasing accumulation of human experiences, are not safe guides to right conduct, as the doctrines and doings of the Mormons clearly show. By the result of an act, not by supernatural revelation, we know

[p. 373]

whether it is good or bad; and here, the result being bad, the act is wrong, immoral.

    The result is bad because by reason of the act civilization takes a step backward, woman is degraded, and the progress of the race hampered. The mono-gamic is the highest type of family, and the highest type of society, yet evolved. Polygamy is better than promiscuity or polyandry, but it is not equal to monogamy. Polygamy springs from the desire to extend the sexual gratification at the expense of the better sense of the better part of the world's inhabitants. It is but a few removes from the old way among savages, where women were property, and bought by husbands to be used as slaves. To monogamy is due the fullest development of the emotions, of the higher sentiments, motherly tenderness, fatherly care, and the dutiful respect and obedience on the part of children. It is here that the passion of love assumes its most refined form; it is here that we find in family, social, and political relations, the greatest good to the greatest number.

    For if we degrade woman, we degrade her children, her husband, and the whole community. Throughout all ages the position of woman has fixed the advancement of the nation in the scale of refinement and intelligence. Polygamy makes of woman, not the equal and companion of man, but his subordinate, if not indeed his serf or slave. The charm of her influence is gone; the family circle becomes incongruous and less cohesive; and there is an absence of those firm relations, filial and paternal, which, continued through successive generations, engender the highest type of society yet known. Make of American women Circassian slaves, and you will make of American men Turks.

    The nations having the highest and best literature, laws, commerce, and religion, the nations that are enlightening the world with their books, telegraphs, steamboats, and railroads, are monogamic. Polygamy

[p. 374]

encourages, if it does not necessitate, a domestic despotism, which, united with a religious and political despotism, constitutes one of the worst possible of social evils. It adds to the Mormons numbers and strength, banding them in a peculiar brotherhood, politically and socially.

    The system is not an equitable one. There are born a tolerably even number of males and females, so that under this arrangement, where one man had a dozen wives, a dozen or so men would have none. Then, as to the relationships of the individual members, injustice is wrought, some of them being but little better than those existing among animals. There is an instinct in every woman which tells her that to be second or third is to be no wife at all. Neglect must exist. One man cannot properly care for so many women and children. Even if he is wealthy, he has not the time. Differences of origin and interests breed jealousies, foster selfishness, and are injurious to character. Then, when the reproductive age has passed, there is nothing left for the wife but a lonely and miserable old age.

    Further than this, if reproduction be the chief incentive to the plural-wife system among the Mormons, and if it be true, as is often asserted, that as a rule the sexes are born numerically equal, then the system will in the end defeat its own object, for more children will be born and cared for where there is one man for every woman than where some women have to go without a husband, or with a fraction of one. It might pertinently be asked, in this connection, what is the benefit in multiplying the population? Are there not enough people already in the world? and is it not better to improve the stock than unduly to multiply it? This prevention is practised often for improper motives and by injurious methods; but millions do it because they think they cannot afford to raise children, and have no right to bring them into existence.

[p. 375]

    True, the evils of the practice are not so great under a theocratic and patriarchal system like that of the Mormons, as it would be if allowed to run riot round the world, giving libertines the widest opportunity to deceive and then desert women; in which case there would be no need of prostitution to satisfy men's passions, as the great barriers between the virtuous and the lewd would be for the most part broken down. Among the Mormons, this is prevented by strong religious feeling, and by the patriarchal influence of the leaders. But the majority of mankind in the great outside world are not controlled by religion or reason--they simply drift.

    Whether for this reason or some other reason, Mormons are not loyal to the government, and the issue is between polygamic theocracy and American republicanism. Nor are the fears of the friends of the latter wholly groundless; for, as one writer said of it, "the Mormon church is one of the best organized systems in the world. The cunning of the devil and the sophistry of error are so mingled with truth as to make it one of the most powerful agencies to delude the ignorant." The truth is, the theocratic organization has already become absolute. Opposition stimulates propagandism, and persecution brings only defiance of federal authority and the moral sense of the nation. Legislation is defeated at every turn. The history of Utah is the history of the Mormon priesthood in its attempt to subordinate the state to the church, and make the authority of the priesthood superior to that of the United States government.

    So says civilization.

 

    In answer, polygamy reiterates scriptural example and divine command, and repudiates civilization wherever it interferes with religion. Culture and progress, which set at defiance God's law, are of the devil. There is no retrogression in keeping the commands of the most high. God blessed Abraham, and

[p. 376]

[paragraph continues] David, and Solomon; polygamy is no curse. And that cannot be a sin which God commands; that cannot be a vice which has for its accomplishment only the highest and holiest purposes of the almighty; that cannot be against morality which is practised only by the righteous, and for the pure and eternal welfare of the human race. [*19]

[p. 377]

    Whatever may be the blessings attending civilization, they are insignificant as compared with the blessings of religion, a life of faith and holiness, and the pure worship of God. Civilization with its one-wife or no-wife system breeds licentiousness, fosters prostitution,

[p. 378]

and brings much misery on the human race in this world, not to mention the world to come. The laws of God we know; civilization's laws we know not. Civilization has little to boast of in the

[p. 379]

line of its moralities. It is true that monogamy was early enforced in Greece; but outside of marriage limits, there was gross indulgence in every form, which was as freely permitted and practised as among

[p. 380]

the foremost nations of to-day. Plato even advocated plurality of wives, chiefly on patriotic grounds. In Rome, the one-wife system was more firmly established, though in the absence of marriage, chastity was little regarded. Marcus Aurelius, indeed, was eulogized by his biographer for bringing into his

[p. 381]

house a concubine, upon the death of his wife, instead of inflicting upon his children a step-mother.

    If monogamy is the only natural form of sexual relationship, how happens it that, throughout the lifetime of the race, there have been and still are so many other forms of relationship? From time immemorial polygamy has existed, and has been sanctioned by all religions. Bramin, Parsee, and Rajpoot all indulged in it. Though nothing is said of it in the new testament, we learn from the Talmud that it was lawful among the Jews about the time of Christ's coming. Among the early converts to christianity in Syria and Egypt were many polygamists who remained uncensured. The rabbies of the west prohibited it eight or nine centuries ago, but those of the east, where it is practised by nearly all nations, permit it even now. It is common to-day throughout a large part of the world. Take all the peoples of the earth, of all times and cultures, and those among whom plural wives obtained are far in excess of the others.

    Pre-nuptial unchastity was scarcely censured either in Greece or Rome. "If there be any one," said Cicero, "who thinks that young men should be altogether restrained from the love of courtesans, he is indeed very severe." Even that most austere of Stoics, Epictetus, makes a wide distinction between what he regards as comparatively innocent pre-nuptial indulgences, and those which were regarded as adulterous and unlawful. While the utmost license was allowed the husband, the wife was held under close restrictions. Courtesans were the real companions of men, and the only free women in Athens. Apelles painted them; Pindar and Simonides sang their praises. Aspasia was worshipped before Pericles, and sage philosophers did not hesitate to pay homage at her shrine, and receive words of wisdom from her lips.

    In imperial Rome, while the courtesan class never

[p. 382]

attained to such distinction as in Greece, divorce was so easy and frequent as to render the marriage ceremony almost a nullity. There were periods when the term 'adultery' had no significance as applied to men; only women were punished for this crime. Persons five, ten, twenty times married and divorced were not uncommon. Though monogamy obtained, female life was lower there than in England under the restoration, or in France under the regency. Alexander Severus, the most persistent of all the Roman emperors, in vainly legislating against vice, provided his provincial governors, if unmarried, with a concubine as well as with horses and servants.

    The privilege of royalty in having many mistresses, tolerated until all the people arose and usurped royalty, was but a modified form of polygamy, and is still secretly practised by individuals.

    The question of sensualism has nothing to do with it. The polygamist, as a rule, is no more sensual than the monogamist. Your true sensualist does not marry at all. He holds himself free to taste pleasure as he can find it. The trammels of matrimony and the responsibilities of parentage he alike avoids. He is the most selfish of beings; for his own gratification he is willing to sacrifice society, debase manhood, and doom to perdition the highest inspirations and holiest affections of the race.

    Beastliness is hardly a fit word to apply to the exercise of an animal impulse, the gratification of animal appetite. It too often maligns the brute creation. Eating and sleeping are in one sense beastly; while smoking and dram-drinking are worse than beastly. Beasts are natural in all things. In many respects they are less open to the charge of beastliness, as we commonly employ the term, than men; they indulge less in excess; they are sometimes gluttonish, but they do not intoxicate themselves; if they do not regulate intercourse by numbers, they do by seasons. Their passions are in subordination to the

[p. 383]

laws of nature. Man's passions are not. Taking this charge of beastliness as it is meant, the polygamist is less beastly than the monogamist, who in the majority of cases is more beastly in his sexual intercourse than the beast, being less obedient to the laws of nature, less considerate for the health and strength of his one only wife. Millions of gentle, uncomplaining women have been killed by beastly husbands putting upon them more children than they should bear, not to mention innumerable cruelties of other kinds. In so far as any system is not in accordance with the laws of nature, nature will in due time assert her rights and put it down. It is said that the Mormon women are martyrs: so are other women; part of them because they are married, and part because they are not.

    The readers must bear in mind that these are the assertions and arguments of polygamy, and must be prepared to take them for what they are worth, and answer them each according to the light of his own reason. I have already presented the current arguments against polygamy; these are the opinions and dogmas of the Mormons themselves, the doctrines they everywhere preach and print, teaching them to their children, inculcating them into the minds of young men and women, until they have fully imbibed them.

    And thus they continue. How many husbandless women there are who drag out a miserable existence in the effort to sustain themselves without sin! how many fall into shame under the effort! Society lays no heavier burden on any of its members than on its poverty-stricken single women, reared in luxury, and unable to support themselves by work.

    If you are so tender of woman, her position and morals, why not turn your batteries against the ten thousand of your own people of all classes, including preachers and legislators, who tamper with other men's wives, seduce and abandon innocent girls, keep mistresses, and frequent the haunts of prostitution?

[p. 384]

    That the race deteriorates under the polygamous system is not true, they say. The single wife is very often hurried to a premature grave by an inconsiderate or brutal husband, the offspring which she meanwhile bears being puny and ill-developed. And again, it is only the better class of men, the healthy and wealthy, the strongest intellectually and physically, who as a rule have a plurality of wives; and thus, by their becoming fathers to the largest number of children, the stock is improved.

    The charge of immorality, as laid upon the Mormons as a community, is likewise untenable. Morality is the doctrine of right and wrong, the rule of conduct implying honesty and sobriety. In all honesty and sobriety the Mormons live up to their standard of right and wrong, they claim, more completely than any other people. They indulge in fewer vices, such as drunkenness, prostitution, gambling, and likewise fewer crimes. There is nothing necessarily immoral in the practice of polygamy; if it is not immoral for a man to take one wife, it is not for him to take twelve wives.

    The Mormons are loyal to their consciences and convictions. They are essentially a moral people, moral in the highest sense of the term, more so, they claim, than the average American or European. They do not drink, cheat, or steal; adultery is scarcely known among them; they are not idle, profligate, or given to lying. They are true to themselves, true to their principles, and true to the world. Of what other society can you fairly say as much? They are honest in all things, and law-abiding when the law does not touch their rights or their religion; when it does, all who are not dastards will fight. Judge them by their fruits; if a sect is to be regarded from the standpoint of its imperfections and inconsistencies rather than from its results, what shall be said of christianity, which has butchered millions for the faith,

[p. 385]

and has further committed all the wickedness flesh is heir to, or of which Satan could conceive?

    It is not right to place the polygamist on a par with the bigamist. The one, without deception, and in conformity with the proclaimed tenets of his faith, takes to wife the second, or third, or twentieth--the more the better for all, it is said--promising to her the same life-long care and protection as to the first; the other breaks his contract with his first wife, and deserts her for another woman. Neither can the polygamist be justly placed on a level with the adulterer. Mormons abhor everything of the kind. The sacred ceremony of marriage signifies far more with them than with those who mark the difference between morality and immorality by a few insignificant rites.

    The Mormons lay no small stress on the fact that there is always a large number of women who have no husbands, and can get none, on account of women being always so greatly in the preponderance. They deny that there are more men than women.

    Whatever may be true with regard to the numerical equality or inequality of the sexes at birth, it is certain, dating back almost from the beginning, that there have always been more women than men in the world. Particularly in primitive times, owing to war or exposure, the death rate was much greater among the males than among the females. To obviate the evil--for it was early recognized that the sexes should be mated--in some instances the female children were killed, but more frequently the excess of women was divided among the men. Where wars were frequent and continuous, everything else being equal, the monogamous nation could not long stand before a polygamous neighbor.

    Coming down to later times, it is safe to say that there are a million more women than men in christendom to-day; there are here five millions of women who would like to marry but cannot, being denied one of the fundamental rights of humanity by statutory law.

[p. 386]

[paragraph continues] A large class of men refuse to take upon themselves the cost and cares of matrimony, preferring more free and cheaper indulgence. Of very many of these five millions thus left to themselves, unmated, unsupported, forbidden to become plural wives, Christian civilization makes prostitutes or paupers. And this is the orthodox idea of the elevation of woman! Make angels of light and happiness of one portion, while dooming the rest, under the hard heel of social despotism, to the depths of misery and despair. Nay, more: while the men are thus busied working upon the affections of women, taking advantage of their loneliness and poverty, and constantly adding to the numbers of the lost by seducing the pure from the paths of respectability, their sisters, mothers, wives, and daughters are applying the scourge with all their might to these unfortunates, hoping thereby to gain further favor with the men by showing how much better are they than their most foully wronged sisters.

    Such are the men, such the society, in which the foulest wrongs to women are so universally and constantly committed--wrongs which would put to blush savages, yea, and all the devils of darkness; such are the men who wage war on the plural-wife system, which would give to this class and all classes of women home and honorable alliance.

    Further than all this, polygamy claims that men or governments have no natural or moral right to forbid the practice, pass laws against it, and inflict punishments. Inherent human rights are above statutory law. Governments have no right to pass laws against gambling, prostitution, drunkenness, or any act of the individual resulting in injury only to himself. He who harms another may be punished, not he who harms himself; otherwise, who is to determine what is or what is not harmful? All men and women are every day doing things harmful to themselves, but which no one thinks of checking by legislation. By no line of logic can polygamy be rightly placed in the

[p. 387]

criminal category. In its worst aspect, it can only be called a vice. Drunkenness is not a crime: it is a vice. Statutory law cannot justly make criminal that which by the law of human rights is only a vice. Governments may repress crime, but they never can uproot vice; and the sooner legislators realize and act upon this truth, the fewer failures they will have to record. Public sentiment and moral force are the only agencies which can be brought against this class of evils with any hope of success.

    The right and wrong of the matter, as usually discussed, are not the right and wrong of nature and common sense, but of divine and human enactment, variously interpreted and viewed from different standpoints. The bible forbids prostitution, but permits polygamy; the supporters of the bible and its civilization forbid polygamy, but permit prostitution.

    The Mormons are held to be a most unphilosophical sect, and yet the sentiment against them is more un-philosophical than their doctrines or practices. The American congress is not a Sunday-school, neither is it within the province of government to establish and enforce a code of ethics. Congress has no more right to legislate, against their consent, for the territories than it has for the states. I do not know that all Mormons hold to this opinion, but many of them do. The idea of political nonage is only an idea; it is not a fact. Murder, theft, breach of contract, malefeasance in office, unjust monopoly, cheating, slave-holding, adulteration, bigamy, etc., are crimes to be punished by law. Drunkenness, gambling, prostitution, and the like, are vices to be uprooted by precept and example. A crime is an injury to one's neighbor; a vice is an injury to one's self. I have no right to injure my neighbor, but I have the right to do as I will with my own and myself, howsoever foolish may be the act. Congress, indeed, would have its hands full were it to undertake to pass laws to keep men from making fools of themselves. If polygamy must be

[p. 388]

placed in one category or the other, it must be denominated a vice, and not a crime. If one man and three women contract to live in a connubial relationship, neither God nor nature pronounces it a crime. In bigamy the marriage contract is broken; in polygamy it is kept. Admit that monogamy is best, that one man for one woman tends to the highest culture, it still does not prove that coercion in morals is better than precept and example. Is woman less chaste than in the days of feudalism, now that she is less watched? If the law has the right to limit a man to one wife, it may if it chooses deny him any wife, as many orders among the Greeks and Armenians, the heathens and christians, have declared. If one man is restricted by law to one woman, the least the law can do in common justice is to compel every man to marry one woman. Why does not the United States war upon the catholic priest or the unprincipled debauchee, who by refusing to take a wife repudiates the laws of nature, and sets an example which if universally followed would prove the strangulation of the race? Better punish those who denaturalize themselves rather than those who are too natural.

    This is what Utah polygamy says to civilization. [*20]

[p. 389]

    In reply to the charge of disloyalty, of maintaining an anti-American attitude toward the people of America, of endeavoring by any illegal or indirect means to undermine the institutions of the country

[p. 390]

and eventually usurp the government, the Mormons say that it is not true. It is not true that Mormons are not good citizens, law-abiding and patriotic. Even when hunted down and robbed and butchered by the

[p. 391]

enemies to their faith, they have not retaliated.--On this point they are naturally very sore.--When deprived of those sacred rights given to them in common with all American citizens, when disfranchised, their

[p. 392]

homes broken up, their families scattered, the husband and father seized, fined, and imprisoned, they have not defended themselves by violence, but have left their cause to God and their country.

[p. 393]

    Much has been said in terms of reproach against the unity and brotherhood of the Mormons, or as it is more often denominated, their exclusiveness or clannishness, as applied to their social, business, and religious relations. It is said that they hold to one another, band against all societies and interests except their own; that they hold all the agricultural lands, cooperate in commerce and manufactures, vote all one way, and so work into one another's hands in every way; that no other people can stand up in competition with them.

[p. 394]

    Grant it, they answer; is it a crime? May not people legally labor hard, practise frugality, worship God after their own fashion, and vote as they choose? Is this contrary to the free enlightenment of American institutions?

    Of what are the people of the United States afraid, with their fifty millions of free, intelligent, progressive men and women, that they should deem it their duty to be seized with such a savage hate toward this handful of poor and despised religionists? In the evolution of society as an organism, the fittest is sure to remain. If this principle be true, it is perfectly safe to let the Mormons alone. Their evil practices, as well as those of their enemies, are sure in due time to be dissipated by the ever-increasing enlightenment of

[p. 395]

civilization. The best will remain, while the rest will be destroyed.

 

    As a remedy against the Mormon evil, many plans have been put forth. "Send an army and wipe them out," say the unthinking masses. An army was sent once, but when it came to Utah there was nothing at hand to wipe out. But should an army go and find them there, it would hardly be prepared to enter upon the wholesale slaughter of 140,000 men, women, and children while in pursuit of their daily vocations. Education has been urged. This means is already employed; but while there are gentile schools, the Mormons still teach Mormonism, and the more they educate, the stronger and more widely extended becomes their faith. Senator Hoar suggested seizing the perpetual emigration fund, but this appeared too much like robbery. Make marriage a civil compact, give the wife the right of dower, and so make her less dependent on the husband, some have said. Amend the constitution, prohibiting polygamy, others have urged. But if congressional enactment fails, what can constitutional amendment do? Admit Utah as a state, and let the people split into parties, and so fight out their own issues. But they will not split into parties, is the reply. If they were like other people, this might be the result; but they are not like other people. For the people to differ from their chiefs on matters of government, or on any other matters, would throw them outside the category of Mormons. Such a thing cannot be. Their government, ecclesiastical and civil, is a government of God; their chief is God's prophet and vicegerent, and his will is God's will and cannot be questioned.

    By the Edmunds act, approved March 22, 1882, congress made polygamy punishable by disfranchisement, and a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, with imprisonment for not more than three years, the children to be deemed illegitimate. There have

[p. 396]

been numerous convictions under this law, bringing serious injury upon individuals, and greatly alarming the entire brotherhood. Many other schemes have been urged. Cut up the territory and divide it among the adjacent states; permit the wife to testify against her husband; compel marriages to be registered; throw in more gentile population, establishing milliners' shops for the women and whiskey-shops for the men, so that the full force of civilization may be brought to bear upon them. A proposed remedy is for congress to assume the political powers, and govern the country by a commission of nine or thirteen members appointed for that purpose, and which, the majority being always gentiles, would adopt the necessary laws for the government of the territory, instead of congress or a legislature. Executive and judicial affairs would go on in the usual way; and as for the municipal, the commission as a legislature could make such regulations as they pleased, providing for the appointment of mayors by the governor if necessary. In such an event there would not be held ally elections of any kind. A board of five commissioners was appointed under act of congress of March 22, 1882, but nothing extraordinary came of it.

    In conclusion, it is scarcely necessary to say that an intelligent and well-balanced mind, free from the bias of religion, and regarding the well-being and refinement of the race as most greatly to be desired, cannot look upon polygamy as conducive to the highest culture. On the other hand, it may as truthfully be said that coercion is not consistent with the highest type of morality, and that a social despotism, in the name of freedom and pure republicanism, can become the severest of tyrannies.

Footnotes

^335:1 In 1853, Benjamin Brown, high-priest, and pastor of the London, Reading, Kent, and Essex conferences, published at Liverpool a tract entitled, Testimonies for the Truth; a Record of Manifestations of the Power of God, Miraculous and Providential, witnessed by him in his travels and experiences. The author was a native of New York, and born in 1794. He was a firm believer in latter-day revelations from God, and that the ancient gifts of the gospel still remained, long before he joined the Mormons. He labored long and in various places. He held property in Nauvoo when the saints were driven out, and was obliged to take $250 for what was worth $3,000. Afterward he underwent all the sufferings and vicissitudes of the overland journey to Salt Lake. Mr Brown was an earnest and honest man; his book is the record of his life, and is simple and attractive in style and substance.

^335:2 Healing the sick. Joseph early laid it down as a rule that all diseases and sickness among them were to be cured by the elders, and by the use of herbs alone. Physicians of the world were denounced as enemies to mankind, and the use of their medicines was prohibited. Afterward, anointing with oil, prayer, and laying on hands were resorted to in addition to the first mentioned. Says Mrs Richards, 'In all sicknesses we used no medicines, with the exception of herb teas that we ourselves prepared, trusting exclusively to the efficacy of the anointing with oil and prayer.' Reminiscences, MS., 34. Joseph said, 'All wholesome herbs God hath ordained for the constitution, nature, and use of man. Every herb in the season thereof, and every fruit in the season thereof.' The use of flesh was not forbidden, but rather restricted to seasons of cold and famine. All grain was pronounced good for man, but wheat was particularly recommended with corn for the ox, oats for the horse, rye for fowls and swine, and barley for all useful animals, and for mild drinks; as also other grain. Times and Seasons, v. 736.

^336:3 Baptism, a prerequisite to church membership, as well as to final salvation, to be of avail, must be by immersion, and performed by one of the sect. The person who is called of God, and has authority from Jesus Christ to baptize, shall go down into the water with the person to be baptized, and shall say, calling him or her by name: 'Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.' Doctrine and Covenants, 115, 118. Baptisms are entered in the general church records, giving the name, place, and date of birth, quorum, date of baptism, first time or re-baptism, by whom baptized, when and by whom confirmed. Deseret News, Feb. 22, 1851. In 1844, complaints were made that members of the church, dismissed by the council, had been re-baptized by elders who were themselves excluded, and declaring such baptisms invalid. Times and Seasons, v. 458-9.

    In 1836, Joseph introduced the ceremony of anointing with consecrated oil. He first anointed his father, who, having been blessed by the first presidency, anointed them in turn, beginning with the eldest. The bishops of Kirtland and Zion, together with their counsellors, were next anointed, and afterward the presiding officers of each quorum performed the ceremony on their subordinates, assisted in some instances by the Smith brothers. Joseph describes the ceremony of consecreting the oil, as follows: 'I took the oil in my left hand, Father Smith being seated before me, and the remainder of the presidency encircled him round about. We then stretched our right hands towards heaven, and blessed the oil, and consecrated it in the name of Jesus Christ.' Mil. Star, xv. 620. Olive-oil is commonly used. Mrs Richards, Reminiscences, MS., 34. Many remarkable cures are mentioned. A seaman, belonging to H. B. M. ship Terror, was rendered deaf and dumb by a stroke of lightning, at Bermuda. Several years after, he was baptized by elders in a canal in England, and instantly recovered both speech and hearing. Frontier Guardian, Jan. 23, 1850. In 1840, a young woman then living at Batavia, N.Y., who had been deaf and dumb for four and one half years, was first restored to her hearing by the laying on of the hands of the elders of the church, and a second ministration, some time afterward, enabled her to speak. Times and Seasons, ii. 516-17. During the building of Nauvoo, nearly every one was attacked with malarial fever, caused by breaking up the new land, and even the prophet himself succumbed for a time. But hearing the voice of the Lord calling on him, he arose and went through the camp healing all to whom he drew near. Woodruff (Mrs), Autobiog., 2-3. Brigham declares he was among the number healed at this time. Mil. Star, xxv. 646. While Joseph was in the midst of his sick, an unbeliever, living a few miles distant, came to him, beseeching him to come and heal his twin children, who were near death's door. The prophet was unable to go himself, but sent Wilford Woodruff in his place. Says the latter, 'He [Joseph] took a red silk handkerchief out of his pocket and gave it to me, and told me to wipe their faces with the handkerchief [p. 337] when I administered to them, and they should be healed.' He also said unto me: "As long as you will keep that handkerchief, it shall remain a league between you and me." I went with the man, and did as the prophet commanded me, and the children were healed. I have possession of the handkerchief unto this day [1881].' Leaves from my Journal, 65. F.D. Richards, who had been sick for several months, was baptized, anointed, and confirmed; immediately after which he was restored to health. Some time afterward, being then an elder, he cured a severe toothache by touching the tooth with his finger. Narrative, MS., 15-16. Mrs Richards' brother, afterward Elder Snyder, was raised from a sick-bed after having been baptized and administered to by Elder John E. Page. Mrs Richards was taken by her brother from a sick-bed to a lake from the surface of which ice more than a foot thick had been removed, and there baptized, whereupon she immediately recovered. Similar cases might be given by the score.

    Baptism for the dead is first alluded to by the prophet, who, in a revelation dated Jan. 19, 1841, declares, 'A baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be baptized for those who are dead.' It is intimated that a reasonable time will be allowed in which to build a temple and a permanent font, and that during this time a temporary substitute for the font may be employed; but after the completion of the temple, no baptisms for the dead will be of avail unless conducted within the building. See Doctrine and Covenants, 392, 395. Brigham says he first heard of the new doctrine when he was in Europe (1840), and that he believed in it before anything was said or done about it in the church. Times and Seasons, vi. 954. Daniel Tyler says the doctrine was first taught in Nauvoo, although Joseph told some of the elders in Kirtland that it was part of the gospel, and would yet be practised as such. Juvenile Instructor, xv. 56. He also says that before other provision was made, many were baptized in the Mississippi River. The first baptismal font, a temporary structure, intended for use only until the completion of the temple, was erected in the basement of that building, and dedicated on Nov. 8, 1841, Joseph being present and Brigham delivering the address. Joseph thus describes the font: It is constructed of pine staves, tongued and grooved, and is oval-shaped, 'sixteen feet long east and west, and twelve feet wide, seven feet high from the foundation, the basin four feet deep; the mouldings of the cap and base are formed of beautiful carved work in antique style. The sides are finished with panel-work. A flight of stairs in the north and south sides lead up and down into the basin, guarded by a side railing. The font stands upon twelve oxen, four on each side and two at each end, their heads shoulders, and fore legs projecting out from under the font; they are carved out of oak plank, glued together, and copied after the most beautiful five-year-old steer that could be found in the country, and they are an excellent striking likeness of the original; the horns were geometrically formed after the most perfect horn that could be procured. The oxen and the mouldings were carved by Elder Elijah Fordham, from the city of New York, the work occupying eight months. The whole was enclosed in a temporary frame building. Mil. Star, xviii. 744. On Sept. 6, 1842, Joseph writes to the church that all baptisms must be recorded by a person appointed for the purpose, and whose duty it will be to note every detail of the ceremony in each case. One of the officials is to be appointed in each ward, and his returns properly certified to are to be forwarded to the general recorder, who will enter them on the church records, together with the names of all witnesses, etc., and finally add his own certificate as to the genuineness of the signature of the ward recorder. This detail is necessary for the proper identification hereafter of those baptized, for the authority for which the prophet quotes Revelations, xx. 12. 'And I saw the [p. 338] dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened,' etc. He also states that it was revealed to him on Sept. 1, 1842, that a general recorder must be appointed. Mil. Star, xx. 5-6; Doctrine and Covenants, 409-13. For the ceremony itself, he finds warrant in 1st Cor., xv. 29. 'Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?'

    Confirmation follows baptism, with frequently an interval of a few days. Baptism may take place on any day in the week, and the confirmation be deferred until the church assembles on the following, or even a later, Sunday. Two or more elders commonly attend, all taking part in the ceremony. Mrs Stenhouse thus describes her own confirmation: 'Four elders placed their hands solemnly upon my head, and one of them said: "Fanny, by virtue of the authority vested in me, I confirm you a member of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints; and inasmuch as you have been obedient to the command of God, through his servants, and have been baptized for the remission of your sins, I say unto you that those sins are remitted. And in the name of God I bless you, and say unto you, that inasmuch as you are faithful and obedient to the teachings of the priesthood, and seek the advancement of the kingdom, there is no good thing that your heart can desire that the Lord will not give unto you. You shall have visions and dreams, and angels shall visit you by day and by night. You shall stand in the temple in Zion, and administer to the saints of the most high God. You shall speak in tongues and prophecy; and the Lord shall bless you abundantly, both temporally and spiritually. These blessings I seal upon your head, inasmuch as you shall be faithful; and I pray heaven to bless you; and say unto you, be thou blessed, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen."' Englishwoman in Utah, 19-20.

^338:4 The gift of tongues is the power to speak in a strange language, but not to translate. It first appeared about 1830, when it was pronounced of the devil. Howe says it was revived in the early part of 1833, and that at one meeting Joseph passed around the room laying his hand upon each one, and speaking as follows: 'Ak man, oh son, oh man, ah ne commene en holle goste en haben en glai hosanne en holle goste en esac milkea jeremiah, ezekiel, Nephi, Lehi, St John,' etc. Mormonism Unveiled, 132-6. In this year, it was suggested that 'no prophecy spoken in tongues should be made public, for this reason: many who pretend to have the gift of interpretation are liable to be mistaken, and do not give the true interpretation of what is spoken;... but if any speak in tongues a word of exhortation or doctrine, or the principles of the gospel, etc., let it be interpreted for the edification of the church.' Times and Seasons, vi. 865. The gift was not confined to men; many women were noted for eloquence when thus inspired. Says Mrs Stenhouse of a Sister Ellis: 'Her hands were clenched, and her eyes had that wild and supernatural glare which is never seen save in cases of lunacy or intense feverish excitement. Every one waited breathlessly, listening to catch what she might say; you might have heard a pin drop. They [her utterances] seemed to me chiefly the repetition of the same syllables, something like a child repeating la, la, la, le, lo; ma, ma, ma, mi, ma; dele, dele, dele, hela; followed, perhaps, by a number of sounds strung together, which could not be rendered in any shape by the pen.' Englishwoman in Utah, 27-8. Says Orson Hyde: 'We believe in the gift of the holy ghost being enjoyed now as much as it was in the apostles' days, and that it is imparted by the laying on of hands of those in authority; and that the gift of tongues, and also the gift of prophecy, are gifts of the spirit, and are obtained through that medium.' Frontier Guardian, Dec. 12, 1849. Mrs Stenhouse remarks that 'in later days, the exercise of this gift has been discouraged by the elders, and especially by Brigham.' Going to the Lion House one day, she was blessed by one of Brigham's wives, [p. 339] and the blessing interpreted by another wife; the latter, however, cautioned her not to repeat what had occurred, for 'Brother Brigham does not like to hear of these things.' Englishwoman in Utah, 29. Tullidge mentions the names of many women who were distinguished as possessing this gift, and relates an instance of a party whose wagon was surrounded by Indians, escaping with their lives and property; the captors being induced to abandon their prize by Jane Grover, a girl of seventeen, who addressed them in their own language. Women of Mormondom, 474-8.

^340:5 The theory of blood atonement is that for certain sins the blood of the transgressor must be shed to save his soul. Among these sins are apostasy, the shedding of innocent blood, and unfaithfulness to marriage obligations on the part of the wife. Says Brigham, in a discourse delivered in Salt Lake City: 'There are sins which then commit for which they cannot receive forgiveness in this world, or in that which is to come, and if they had their eyes open to their true condition, they would be perfectly willing to have their blood spilled upon the ground, that the smoke thereof might ascend to heaven as an offering for their sins; and the smoking incense would atone for their sins; whereas, if such is not the case, they will stick to them and remain upon them in the spirit world. I know, when you hear my brethren telling about cutting people off from the earth, that you consider it is strong doctrine; but it is to save them, not to destroy them...I do know that there are sins committed, of such a nature that if the people did understand the doctrine of salvation they would tremble because of their situation. And furthermore, I know that there are transgressors who, if they knew themselves and the only condition upon which they can obtain forgiveness, would beg of their brethren to shed their blood, that the smoke thereof might ascend to God as an offering to appease the wrath that is kindled against them, and that the law might have its course. I will say further: I have had men come to me and offer their lives to atone for their sins...There are sins that can be atoned for by an offering upon an altar, as in ancient days; and there are sins that the blood of a lamb, of a calf, or of turtle-doves cannot remit, but they must be atoned for by the blood of the man.' And at another time: 'All mankind love themselves, and let these principles be known by an individual, and he would be glad to have his blood shed. That would be loving themselves, even unto an eternal exaltation. Will you love your brothers or sisters likewise when they have committed a sin that cannot be alerted for without the shedding of their blood? Will you love that man or woman well enough to shed their blood? That is what Jesus Christ meant...I could refer you to plenty of instances where men have been righteously slain in order to atone for their sins. I have seen scores and hundreds of people for whom there would have been a chance in the last resurrection if their lives had been taken and their blood spilled on the ground as a smoking incense to the almighty...I have known a great many men who have left this church for whom there is no chance whatever for exaltation; but if their blood had been spilled it would have been better for them. This is loving our neighbor as ourselves; if he needs help, help him; and if he wants salvation, and it is necessary to spill his blood on the earth in order that he may be saved, spill it.' Deseret News, Oct. 1, 1856, Feb. 18, 1857. Following Brigham's lead, Heber C. Kimball and Jedediah M. Grant taught the same doctrine during the religious revival, or so-called reformation, in Utah, in 1856-7, of which more later, Grant being the most vehement of the three. The reader will find these discourses reported at length in the Deseret News. the doctrine is very clearly explained in Penrose's [p. 341] Blood Atonement, passim. See also Lee's Morm., 282-3; Morm. Proph., 157-60; Young's Wife No. 19, 182-99; Paddock's La Tour, 305-8; Bertrand's Mem Morm., 139-72, 250-8, 296-316.

^341:6 In regard to the two priesthoods, the Melchisedek and the Aaronic, or Levitical, all authority in the church is subordinate to the first, which holds the right of presidency and has power over all the offices in the church. The presidency of the high-priesthood of this order has the right; to officiate in all the offices of the church. High-priests are authorized to officiate m any lower positions in the church, as well as in their own office. Elders are of this priesthood, and are authorized to officiate instead of high-priests, in the absence of the latter. The twelve apostles are charged with the duty of ordaining all the subordinate officers of the church, and also with its missionary work. Together they form a quorum whose authority equals that of the first presidency, but action by either body must be unanimous. A majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to assemble the whole body. They also constitute a travelling, presiding high-council, under the direction of the presidency of the church, and it is their duty to ordain ministers in all large branches. The seventies are also missionaries--assistants to the twelve, and united they are equal in authority with the twelve.

^342:7 About 1834, Joseph Smith had a revelation to the effect that it was the will of the Lord that every father should bless his own children, and that patriarchs should be set apart to bless those without a father in the church. This revelation was due to an expressed desire on the part of Brigham Young's father to bless his own children before dying, after the manner of the patriarchs of old. Young's Wife No. 19, 581. Several years before this, it had been directed that every member of the church having children should bring them to the elders before the church, who were to lay their hands upon them in the name of Jesus Christ, and bless them. Doctrine and Covenants, 72. During the life of the first patriarch--Jos. Smith, sen.--these blessings were nominally free to the recipients. A high-council held at Kirtland in Sept. 1835 decided that when the patriarch was occupied in blessing the church, he should be paid at the rate of ten dollars a week, and his expenses; also that Frederick G. Williams be appointed to attend blessing meetings, and record the proceedings, for which services he should receive the same compensation. The payment of twelve dollars for a book in which to record the blessings caused discussion in this council, and brother Henry Green, who had intimated that a suitable book could be procured for less money, was excluded from the church for his presumption. Mil. Star, xv. 308-9. In Jan. 1836, Smith, sen., was anointed with oil by the prophet, blessed by each of the presidency in turn, and was thenceforth known as Father Smith. Id., 620. In 1837, the pay of the patriarch was fixed at a dollar and fifty cents a day, and that of the recorder at ten cents for each 100 words. Mil. Star, xvi. 109. When Hyrum became patriarch, says the author of Young's Wife No. 19, 581, the demand for blessings had so increased that one dollar each was charged for them; and in 1875 the price had advanced to two dollars. Upon the death of his father in 1840, Hyrum Smith succeeded to the office of patriarch, pursuant to a revelation entailing it on the eldest son. The revelation is dated in Jan. 1841. Doctrine and Covenants, 305-6; Mil. Star, xviii. 363. The following notice appears in Times and Seasons, Nov. 1, 1841: 'The brethren are hereby notified that our well-beloved brother, Hyrum Smith, patriarch of the church, has erected a comfortable office opposite his dwelling-house [in Nauvoo], where himself, together with his scribe and recorder, James Sloan, will attend regularly every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, during the entire day, or upon any other day if urgent circumstances require it, to perform the duties of his high and holy calling. A copy of the blessings can be received immediately after being pronounced, so that the brethren who live [p. 343] at a distance can have it to take with them.' Hyrum's successor was his brother William, who was disfellowshipped in 1845, John Smith, brother to the prophet, being ordained patriarch over the church, and holding that office until his death in 1854. In the following year Hyrum's son John was ordained patriarch, and since that date has been sustained in his office at each successive conference. A child is first blessed when eight days old, and again so soon as the mother is able to present her child on a regular fast-day. The first Thursday in each month is set apart for fasting. Mrs Richards' Reminiscences, MS., 34-5. The second ceremony is usually attended by both parents, and in addition to a blessing, the child receives its name. Each birthday it is customary for the parents to hold a family gathering, when the child is again blessed, and prayers offered for its welfare. When eight years old, the child is baptized. See Horace's Migrations, MS., 37. The blessings are not only pronounced, but also written out. Id., 34. 'These blessings are rather wonderful affairs; they promise all sorts of things, in a vague, indefinite way, if only the recipient proves faithful. Some are assured they shall never taste death, but live until Christ comes, and be caught up to meet him in the air; others are assured that they are to have the privilege of redeeming their dead so far back that there shall not be a broken link in the chain. Absurd as this all seems, there are hundred of saints who believe that every word shall be fulfilled.' Young's Wife No. 19, 581.

^343:8 Hall says there is a class of women, mothers in Israel, whose business it is to instruct females as to their duty in matters not suitable to be taught from the stand. Mormonism Exposed, 39-44.

^343:9 Early in 1833 the first presidency was established, with Joseph Smith at the head, his associates in the management of affairs being Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams. The revelation creating this trium virate is dated March 8th, and in it Joseph's coadjutors are instructed first to finish the translation of the prophets, and afterward preside over the affairs of the church and the school. Times and Seasons, v. 736-7. William Hall, who was a member of the church for seven years, erroneously states that the presidency at first consisted of Smith, Rigdon, and William Law. Abominations, 8. At a conference held in Sept. 1837, Joseph appealed to the church to ascertain if he was still regarded as its head, when the vote was unanimous. He then introduced Rigdon and Williams as his councillors. According to the minutes of the conference, Williams was not accepted at first, but this action appears to have been rescinded afterward. Mil. Star, xvi. 56. Oliver Cowdery, Jos. Smith, sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith were accepted as assistant councillors, and these seven were henceforth to be regarded the heads of the church. At a general conference of the branch of the church at Far West in Nov. 1837, the action of the Kirtland conference was sustained so far as Smith and Rigdon were concerned, but Williams was rejected. Hyrum Smith was unanimously chosen in Williams' place. Mil. Star, xvi. 106-7. At a conference held at Far West in April 1838, the first presidency was appointed to sign the licenses of the official members of the church. In Jan. 1841, Joseph had a revelation to the effect that he was presiding elder over all the church, translator, revelator, a seer, and prophet; and that his councillors were Sidney Rigdon and William Law. These three were to constitute [p. 344] a quorum and first presidency, to receive the oracles for the whole church. Law's selection was to fill the vacancy caused by the appointment of Hyrum Smith to be patriarch. Mil. Star, xviii. 363. In this same month Joseph notified the recorder of Hancock county that he (Joseph) had been elected sole trustee of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints by the church at Nauvoo, to hold office during life. Id., 373. Smith, Rigdon, and Law were continued in office by the annual conference, convened in April 1843. After the murder of the Smiths in 1844, the first presidency lapsed, and for more than three years the church was governed by the quorum of the twelve apostles, of which Brigham was president. At a meeting of the twelve apostles, high-council, and high-priests at Nauvoo, in August 1844, Sidney Rigdon offered himself as guardian to the church, claiming that his action was in obedience to revelation. Young opposed Rigdon's claims, and the assembly decided that the twelve should govern the church, with Young at their head. Mil. Star, xxv. 215-17, 263-4. In Dec. 1847 Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards were chosen to constitute the first presidency. Juv. Inst., xiv. 128. Young died in 1877, and the presidency remained vacant until October 1880, when John Taylor was chosen, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors. Marshall, Through America, 161. This conference lasted five days. S. L. Tribune, Oct. 11, 1880. On the death of the president the quorum is dissolved, and its members, as a presidency, have no status. Richards' Narr., MS., 51.

^344:10 On Feb. 14, 1835, the church at Kirtland met for the purpose of choosing and ordaining the twelve apostles. The business occupied several days. Briefly, the ceremonies were as follows: The assemblage consented to accept the names presented by the three witnesses who had been appointed to make the selection. P.P. Pratt says, in his Autobiog., 127-28, the ceremonies were performed by Smith, Whitmer, and Cowdery, and that they acted in accordance with the revelation of June 1829; but in the history of Jos. Smith, Mil. Star, Mar. and Apr. 1853, the three witnesses only are mentioned. Martin Harris' name does not appear in the revelation referred to. See Doctrine and Covenants, 190-2. In an article by 'R. A.' in the Juv. Inst., xiv. 128, the selection is accredited to the three witnesses, who are mentioned by name. As Pratt was one of the ordained, it would seem that his account should be reliable. Each candidate came forward as summoned, and in return received a blessing, and a charge from one of the three. The order of ordination was as follows: On Feb. 14th, Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball. On the next day, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke Johnson, Wm E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith. On Feb. 21st, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, and Thos B. Marsh, who were absent on a mission, were ordained upon their return to Kirtland, which occurred later. Mil. Star, xv. 206-12. Shortly after, the names were arranged according to seniority, when they stood, Marsh, Patten, Young, Kimball, Hyde, McLellin, P. P. Pratt, Luke Johnson, Smith, O. Pratt, Boynton, and L. E. Johnson. Four of the above apostatized in 1838, viz.: McLellin, the Johnsons, and Boynton; John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards were appointed instead. Shortly after this, Marsh, the [p. 345] president of the twelve, apostatized, and in 1838 Patten was killed, which left Young at the head of the list, and he became president of the twelve. Geo. A. Smith was ordained in 1839, and Lyman Wight not long after. In 1844, according to Elder Phelps, the following names were on the roll: Young, Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Hyde, Richards, Taylor, William Smith, Woodruff, George A. Smith, Orson Pratt, Page, and Wight. During this year Wm Smith and Page apostatized, and were replaced by Amasa M. Lyman and Ezra T. Benson. Early in 1845, Young, Kimball, and Richards were chosen to the first presidency, and Wight was disfellowshipped for apostasy; the vacancies thus caused were filled by appointing Chas C. Rich, Lorenzo and Erastus Snow, and Franklin D. Richards. In 1857, Geo. Q. Cannon was appointed, vice P. P. Pratt, deceased. In 1867, Lyman was dropped and Jos. F. Smith appointed. In 1868, Geo. A. Smith became one of the first presidency, and Brigham Young, jun., succeeded him. Albert Carrington was appointed in 1869 in place of Benson, deceased, and Moses Thatcher in 1879, vice Hyde, deceased in 1878; which left the twelve in the following order: John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Pratt, Chas C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Joseph F. Smith, Albert Carrington, Moses Thatcher, Pratt being the only remaining member of the original twelve. Juv. Inst., xiv. 128-9. The vacancies caused by the elevation of John Taylor to the presidency in 1839, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors, were partially filled by the appointment of Francis M. Lyman and John H. Smith. S. L. Tribune, Oct. 11, 1880. Orson Pratt died Oct. 1881, and a year later Geo. Teasdale and Heber J. Grant were elected. Handbook of Ref., 89-90. Up to 1877, the twelve received no pay for their services; but the conference of Oct. voted $1,500 a year to each apostle. 'This is the first sum that has ever been publicly appropriated to any council of the church for the performance of their duties to the people. When I went to Europe in 1866, I borrowed the means and gave my note; on my return I had to pay back my indebtedness.' Richards' Narr., MS., 59-60.

^345:11 In 1845 was issued at New York and Liverpool, Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; to all the Kings of the World; to the President of the Uuited States of Ammerica; to the Governors of the several states, and to the rulers and people of all nations, Greeting, 'Know ye that the kingdom of God has come,' etc. The tract goes on to say that 'Jehovah has been pleased once more to speak from the heavens,' by which means the apostleship of Christ has been restored, in preparation for his coming, which is now near at hand. Then are recited the leading points of faith, with allusions to the history of the church, and calls to repentance.

^347:12 In February 1835, Joseph Smith, with the aid of the recently appointed apostles, proceeded to organize two quorums of the seventies, whose duties were to assist in the missionary work of the church. Each quorum had seven presidents, and these constituted the councils of the two organizations. Joseph Youngsen, who gives an account of the seventies, gives the names of the presidents of the first quorum only, as follows: Hazen Aldrich, Joseph Young, Levi W. Hancock, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, Lyman Sherman, and Sylvester Smith. After noting the changes in the interval, he states that in 1878 the presidents were Young, sen., Hancock, Henry Herriman, Albert P. Rockwood, Horace S. Eldredge, Jacob Gates, and John Van Cott. Hist. of Organ. of Seventies, 1-8. In an account of the dedication of their hall at Nauvoo, in 1844, it is stated there were fifteen quorums--one thousand and fifty in all, if each quorum was full. Times and Seasons, vi. 794.

^347:13 For act of incorporation of Mormon church, 1851, see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 108; S.L.C. Contributor, ii. 270; number and wealth of churches, Seventh Census Rept, 1851-2, 45; prayer in the family, Robinson's Sinners and Sailors, 243-4; church property, and law regulating it, Richards' Narr., MS., 83; church government, Ward's Husband in Utah, 16-17; Mil. Star, iii. 67; positions of church officials, Id., xv. 709. As showing the relative standing of the church dignitaries, the order of voting, as prescribed at the conference which elected Taylor to the presidency in 1880, is given. The twelve apostles and their councillor's; the patriarchs; presidents of stakes and their councillors, and the high-councils; the high-priests; the seventies; the elders; the bishops and their councillors; the lesser priesthood--priests, teachers, and deacons. The members of each order voted standing and with the right hand uplifted, and finally the congregation voted in tire same manner. S. L. City Tribune, Oct. 11, 1880. On faith and doctrine, see Jaques' Church of Jesus Christ, passim; Hand-book of Reference, passim; Jaques' Catechism, passim; Book of Doctrine and Covenants, passim; Richards' and Little's Compendium, passim; Articles of Our Faith, passim; Pearl of Great Price, passim; Times and Seasons, passim; Millenial Star, passim; Deseret News, passim; Moffat's Catechism, passim; Pratt's Persecutions, passim; Pratt's Voice of Warning, passim; Reynolds' Book of Abraham, passim; and many other books, pamphlets, and periodicals by various members and dignitaries of the church.

^348:14 The standing high-council at the stakes of Zion forms a quorum equal in authority in the affairs of the church, in all its decisions, to the quorum of the presidency, or to the travelling high-council. Each order is governed as follows: the seventy, by seven presidents, one of whom presides over the other six; and as many additional seventies may be organized as the increase of the church shall demand. The president of the high-priests is to preside over the whole church; the president of the elders presides over ninety-six elders; the president of the Aaronic priesthood over forty-eight priests; the president of the teachers over twenty-four teachers, and the president of the deacons over twelve deacons. Should the president of the church transgress, he is to be tried before the common council of the church.

^349:15 Upon the matter of tithing, Joseph Smith in 1831 had three several revelations, each containing a clause requiring money and other property to be set apart for general use in the church. The first was received in Feb., the second in May, and the last in Aug. See Times and Seasons, iv. 369; v. 416, 466. But it was not until several years later that an organized system was established, by revelation dated Far West, July 8, 1838. See Doctrine and Covenants, 382-3. During the progress of settlements at Far West, the question of taxation was brought up and referred to the prophet, who inquired of the Lord, and received answer that all surplus property must be turned over to the bishop as the first step, after which one lentil of each annual interest was also to be paid. These payments were to be devoted to the building of a place of worship, and for the debts of the presidency. In the Millennial Star, xxv. 474, it is denied that the priesthood receive any support from the tithing fund, and asserted that it is expended for general purposes solely, such as public buildings, roads, assisting immigration. The twelve apostles, in an epistle dated Nauvoo, Dec. 13, 1841, declare that the tithing required is 'one tenth of all any one possessed at the commencement of the building of the temple, and one tenth part of all his increase from that time till the completion of the same, whether it be money, or whatever he be blessed with. Many in this place are laboring every tenth day for the house, and this is the tithing of their income, for they have nothing else.' Times and Seasons, iii. 626. Says William Hall: 'When I came to Illinois, I gave, as was required, one tenth of the amount of my whole estate to be appropriated to the building of the temple. After this, annually, I gave one tenth of the products of my farm; even the chickens, cabbages, and other vegetables in kind were turned over, with a like share of the grain.' Mormonism Exposed, 6. Mrs Stenhouse, during her first winter in Salt Lake City, made bonnets for Brigham Young's wives, for which a bill of $250 was presented to Young, when the latter gave orders that the amount should be credited to the Stenhouses for tithing. Englishwoman in Utah, 187-8. There are two colonies of Mormons in Arizona that are free from territorial and county taxes. They are so isolated that the cost of collecting amounts to more than the taxes. They do not escape tithes, however. Elko (Nev.) Daily Independent, Jan. 28, 1882. During the construction of the railroad through Utah, Mormon agents collected tithings from the railroad laborers. Salt Lake Reporter, Feb. 9, 1869, in S. F. Times, Feb. 19, 1869. Should a laborer be idle thirty days, the tithing office claims three [p. 350] days from him, on the grounds that he may do as he pleases with twenty-seven days, but he has no right to idle away three days belonging to the Lord. Vedette, in San Jose Mercury, Mar. 14, 1867. Says Richards: 'If they do not pay their tithes, nothing is done to compel them to do it; they are only reminded of the case, as with neglect to attend meeting, or of any other duty.' Narr., MS., 60-1. At the conference held at Salt Lake City on April 6, 1880, it was reported that the total tithing receipts for the year ending Dec. 31, 1879, were $458,333; which amount it had cost $13,956.75--paid the bishops--to collect. S. L. C. Tribune, April 7, 1880. This report includes only the branches of the church in Utah. Coyner, in a letter to the Boston Educational Journal, dated S. L. City, Nov. 20, 1878, states that the church lies an income of about $1,000,000 from tithing. Numerous complaints are made from the church's pulpits against delinquents who have failed to pay. In a book of travels, entitled My First Holiday, Boston, 1881, Caroline H. Dall wrongly asserts that the Scandinavian Mormons refuse to pay tithes. In almost any number of the Deseret News the reader may find a notice calling upon delinquents to pay their tithing. In the issue of May 14, 1853, the bishop within whose jurisdiction a saw-mill is in operation is reminded that lumber is wanted at the public yard; and in the number of July 20, 1854, the first presidency calls on every bishop throughout the territory to furnish at once lists showing who have paid and who still owe. In a speech by Brigham, April 7, 1873, he said: 'When I reached here I could not pay one tenth, I could not pay my surplus, I could not give my all, for I had nothing.' Deseret News, April 23, 1873. Finally, at the jubilee conference, held in celebration of the semi-centennial of the church's organization, one half of the delinquent tithes throughout the whole church, the amount being about $75,900, was remitted. The deserving poor of the church were further assisted on this occasion by the gift of 6,000 head of milch-cows and sheep, and a loan of about 34,000 bushels of wheat until after harvest, without interest. Circulars from the Twelve Apostles, S. L. City, Apr. 16, 1880.

    If tithing dues are satisfied by manual labor, the workman is paid from the public stores at rates which, though fixed from time to time, are probably never so low as those paid in ready money elsewhere. Captain Burton copies a price-current list for 1860, too long for me to repeat here, but which will be referred to again elsewhere, and remarks that wheat is quoted at $1.50 per bushel, more than double its current value at the time in the valley of the Mississippi. City of the Saints, 389. Mrs Waite states that when the poor clamored, in 1862-3, because the tithing-office price of flour was $6 per hundred, they were assured that though flour would undoubtedly still advance in price, the cost to them would be no greater. But the following winter, when, owing to the demand from the mining regions of Idaho and elsewhere, flour rose rapidly in price, the tithing-office charged $12 per hundred. This caused so great an excitement that Brigham deemed it necessary to interfere, and the price was reduced to $6 again. It is complained in the Deseret News of Jan. 10, 1852, that merchants are paying 33 per cent more for butter than tithing-house rates, and that this action had drawn the saints away from the tithing-house, and thus forced the laborers on the temple to eat their bread without butter. This was in the midst of winter, when such action might not be altogether unexpected; but we find six months later another complaint, reporting that from March 29th to July 11th there had only been received 5,115 3/4 pounds of butter, 2,534 1/2 of cheese, and 1,182 1/2 dozens of eggs, and inquiring how fast the work would proceed at this rate of supply. Id., July 24, 1852. The revelation establishing tithing was followed [p. 351] ten days later by another, in which it was declared that the church fund should be disposed of by a council composed of the first presidency, the bishop and his council, and the high-council. This revelation, which is not given in the earliest editions of Doctrine and Covenants, will be found, however, on p. 383 of the edition (if 1876, and also in the Mil. Star, xvi. 183. The twelve, in an epistle dated Nauvoo, Dec. 13, 1841, direct that all money and other property designed for tithings be paid to President Joseph Smith, trustee in trust. Times and Seasons, iii. 627. Smith had been chosen to this office some time before by a general conference, at Quincy, Ill. Id., ii. 579. After Smith, each president has held the position in turn. W. Richards, editor of the Deseret News, describes the system of accounts in use at the general tithing-office, in his number of Nov. 29, 1851. A debtor and credit account was kept on a ledger, with all persons who paid tithing. When an account was settled in full, the name was transferred to the general tithing record, or the book of 'The Law of the Lord,' and a certificate of non-in-debtedness given to the person paying, which was evidence in case of a demand from the bishop of his ward. Four kinds of certificates were issued at this time: one for property tithing due previous to Sept. 10, 1851; one for property tithing due in accordance with the vole of a conference of the date mentioned; and one each for labor and produce tithing. These were all for the year 1851, after which only the labor and produce tithes would be required until a future conference should authorize a new levy. the business of appraising property belongs of right to the presiding bishop, but he may send one of his clerks to attend to the matter. It has been charged against Joseph Smith that his entire wealth was acquired by the diversion of tithes. The prophet, at his own estimate, had property worth one million dollars about the time of his death. He was then at the head of affairs in planning and laying out the city of Nauvoo. His estimates, based upon his faith in the prosperity of the city, may have been not unreasonable; but with the crash of the falling walls of his temple came ruin to his estate. As the general conduct of the church under Brigham was peaceful, and therefore progressive compared with the disastrous rule of his predecessor, so opportunities increased, not only for augmenting private fortunes, but for the circulation of scandal. A writer in the Salt Lake Tribune of June 25, 1879, asserts that during Brigham's term of office he received about $13,000,000 in tithes, of which 'about $9,000,000 was squandered on his family,' and dying, left the remainder to be quarrelled over by his heirs and assigns, including the church. In July 1859 Horace Greeley visited Brigham, who said: 'I am the only person in the church who has not a regular calling apart from the church's service, and I never received one farthing from her treasury. If I obtain anything from the tithing-house, I am charged with and pay for it, just as any one else would...I am called rich, and consider myself worth $250,000; but no dollar of it was ever paid me by the church, nor for any service as a minister of the everlasting gospel. I lost nearly all I had when we were broken up in Missouri and driven from that state. I was nearly stripped again when Joseph Smith was murdered, and we were driven from Illinois; but nothing was ever made up to me by the church, nor by any one. I believe I know how to acquire property, and how to take care of it.' Overland Journey to California, 213-14. The governor, in his message to the legislature in 1882, stated that tithing should be prohibited. The message was referred to a committee, which reported that the question being one of a purely religious character did not call for legislative action. 'The payment of tithing, like contributions for missionary, charitable, [p. 352] and other church purposes, by the members of other religious bodies, is clearly an ecclesiastical matter, with which, as law-makers, we have nothing whatever to do, so long as the free exercise thereof does not interfere with the rights and liberties of others. Tithing is not, as we understand it, a new doctrine, for, as a religious privilege and duty, Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedek about four thousand years ago. We are not aware, however, that exactions of tithings are made in this territory, even by ecclesiastical authority; but supposing they were, there is no law by which payment can be enforced, nor is it likely there ever will be, for it is a matter not within the constitutional province of legislative enactment. If any citizen in the territory feels aggrieved by reason of the payment of tithes or other church donations, he holds the remedy in his own hands by simply renouncing connection with any religious body requiring such donations.'

^353:16 Gentile marriage and divorce are not recognized as valid in the Mormon church. In its early days, the church had no marriage ordinances of its own, and the requirements, conditions, and ceremonies incident to the rite were similar to those of the various protestant sects. Nor had it officials legally qualified to marry, other, perhaps, than a few such men as Sidney Rigdon, wire, having been duly appointed to preside over churches of other denominations, were still competent to join in legal marriage. In 1836, when the church was three years old and the Kirtland temple about to be dedicated, we find Joseph petitioning the court of Medina county, Ohio, for licenses permitting his elders to perform marriage ceremonies, which authority had been refused them by the Geauga county court. Mil. Star, xv. 708.

    Later, when the church had gained power, the result of more complete organization, Joseph announced, as its belief respecting marriage, that it 'should be solemnized in a public meeting, or feast, prepared for that purpose,' and that the celebrant should be 'a presiding high-priest, bishop, elder, or priest.' But no prohibition was issued against marriage by any other authority. Neither were church-members forbidden to marry out of the church, though any so doing would be considered weak in the faith. In the edition of Doctrine and Covenants, published at S. L. City in 1876, a revelation of the prophet's purporting to explain 1st Cor., vii. 14, is construed as forbidding marriages between believers and unbelievers. Ann Eliza Webb, who was twice married according to Mormon practice, once by Brigham, and afterward to him, thus describes the ceremonies: After registration, which includes name, age, place of birth, with county, state, or country, 'we went before Brigham Young, who was waiting for us,' and who asked, 'Do you, Brother James Dee, take Sister Ann Eliza Webb by the right hand, to receive her unto yourself, to be your lawful and wedded wife, and you to be her lawful and wedded husband, for time and eternity, with a covenant and promise on your part that you will fulfil all the laws, rights, and ordinances pertaining to this holy matrimony, in the new and everlasting covenant, doing this in [p. 354] the presence of God, angels, and these witnesses, of your own free will and accord?' 'Yes.' 'Do you, Sister Ann Eliza Webb take Brother James Dee by the right hand, and give yourself to him, to be his lawful and wedded wife, for time and for all eternity, with a covenant and promise on your part that you will fulfil all the laws, rights, and ordinances pertaining to this holy matrimony, in the new and everlasting covenant, doing this in the presence of God, angels, and these witnesses, of your own free will and accord?' 'Yes.' 'In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the authority of the holy priesthood, I pronounce you legally and lawfully husband and wife, for time and for all eternity. And I seal upon you the blessings of the holy resurrection, with power to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality, and everlasting lives; and I seal upon you the blessings of thrones, and dominions, and principalities, and powers, and exaltations, together with the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And I say unto you, Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the earth, that you may have joy and rejoicing in your prosperity in the day of the Lord Jesus. All these blessings, together with all other blessings pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, I seal upon your heads, through your faithfulness unto the end, by the authority of the holy priesthood, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Amen.' 'The scribe then entered the date of the marriage, together with the names of my mother and the one or two friends who accompanied us.' When the marriage is a polygamous one, the wife stands on the left of her husband, and the bride at her left hand. The president then puts this question to the wife: 'Are you willing to give this woman to your husband, to be his lawful and wedded wife for time and for all eternity? If you are, you will manifest it by placing her right hand within the right hand of your husband.' The right hands of the husband and bride being thus joined, the wife takes her husband by the left arm, as in walking, and the ceremony then proceeds as in the manner quoted above. Young's Wife No. 19, 388. Mrs Stenhouse, who gave a polygamous wife to her husband, states that in her case the ceremony was performed at the altar, her husband kneeling on one side, and the two women opposite him; the wife being required to join the hands of the contracting parties as in the other case; but it does not appear that she afterward took her husband's arm. Indeed, the position of the three would render this impracticable. See Tell It All, 453-4. Of course, as these ceremonies took place in the endowment house, the temple robes were worn.

    But apart from ordinary marriage as known among gentiles, remarriage of converts and polygamous unions, the church in its beneficence, by an additional marriage rite, secures to her children eternal salvation accompanied with permanent positions of rank. This is effected by the ceremony known as spiritual marriage, based upon the following tenets: No unmarried man or woman can be eternally saved. One woman can save one man only; but a man can be instrumental in the salvation of an indefinite number of women. Scaling may be either for the dead, or for those yet alive. Persons sealed on earth need not necessarily live together. Brigham, in a discourse delivered in Nauvoo, Apr. 6, 1845, announces the doctrine in the following language: 'And I would say, as no man can be perfect without the woman, so no woman can be perfect without a man to lead her. I tell you the truth as it is in the bosom of eternity; and I say so to every man upon the face of the earth: if he wishes to be saved, he cannot be saved without a woman by his side. This is spiritual wifeism, that is, the doctrine of spiritual wives.' Times and Seasons, vi. 955. 'No woman can be scaled to two husbands; she must choose which it shall be whom she will marry for eternity. The man can be scaled to as many wives as he pleases. If the husband will be baptized for a former husband who perhaps died out of the church, then it leaves the wife at liberty to make that choice. If she feels that her second husband is her preference, she can be baptized for some dead female, and have her sealed to her dead husband, so as to secure his conjugal happiness forever.' Mrs Richards' Inner Facts, MS., 5. 'If a husband has lost his wife by death, before he had the opportunity of attending to this holy ordinance, and securing her as his lawful wife for eternity, then it is the duty of the second wife, first, to be [p. 355] sealed or married to the husband, for and in the name of the deceased wife, for all eternity; and, secondly, to be married for time and eternity herself, to the same man. Thus, by this holy ordinance, both the dead and the living wife will be his in the eternal worlds. But if, previous to marriage for eternity, a woman lose her husband by death, and marry a second, and if her first husband was a good man, then it is the duty of the second husband to be married to her for eternity, not for herself, but in the name of her deceased husband, while he himself can only be married to her for time; and he is obliged to enter into a covenant to deliver her up, and all her children, to her deceased husband, in the morning of the first resurrection.' Waite's Mormon Prophet, 173. 'A man can either have a woman sealed to him as his cow sort for this world only, or he can have her sealed to him both for this world as well as for the world to come--she is A.'s wife while she is on earth, but she becomes B.'s as soon as she has reached heaven. Or again, a woman--a spinster, for instance--who has taken a particular fancy to any deceased saint, and who wishes to become his consort in the world to come, can be sealed to him by proxy by becoming the wife of some living saint. She has first to be sealed on earth before she can obtain the necessary introduction into heaven. When a woman is said to be sealed to a man, it does not necessarily imply that she is married to him. It may mean marriage, or it may simply amount to an arrangement to marry, to be consummated in the next world, made either directly between the two parties, or by proxy by another party in place of one of the two interested parties who is dead,...even if she prefers being the consort of Abraham, Isaac, Moses, Job, etc., for the Mormon spiritual-wife doctrine even ventures to go the length of this!' Marshall, Through America, 186. Mrs Stenhouse says President Heber C. Kimball upon one occasion introduced her to five of his wives in succession, and upon being asked, 'Are these all you have got?' replied, 'O dear! no. I have a few more at home, and about fifty more scattered over the earth somewhere. I have never seen them since they were sealed to me in Nauvoo, and I hope I never shall again.' Expose of Polygamy in Utah, 91-2. See also, in this connection, Green's Mormonism, 180-92; Lee's Mormonism Unveiled, 166-72.

    Brigham, as head of the church, claimed authority not only to marry, but also to divorce at will. No law's delay, mo filing of bills, summoning witnesses, or learned decision granting absolute or partial severance, accompanied by partial or impartial award of property and the custody of infants, was required. Given the approbation of the chief, and the rest followed as speedily as a clerk could write the certificate and receive the fee. In a district removed from the capital, only the consent of the bishop is necessary, and the bill of divorcement is a very simple writing. 'March 18, 1871. To whomsoever it may concern. This is to certify, in the beginning of 1869 when I gave a bill of divorce to Sarah Ann Lowry I gave to her for the good of her four children the following property, viz.: a parcel of land of about nine acres enclosed all around, with a house of two rooms and one cow and heifer. William C. Ritter.' The customary fee is ten dollars, and Mrs Waite relates an instance in which a woman who had been granted a divorce was told by Brigham that the act was null until the money was paid. The Mormon Prophet, 239. The following is copied from note G, app. to Paddock's Madame La Tour: 'An Englishwoman who abandoned her husband and children for the purpose of gathering with the saints to Zion has been divorced and remarried five times since she came to Utah. The present writer has lived within half a block of a woman who, after being divorced from five husbands, is now living in polygamy with the sixth; and one of our district judges reports the case of an elderly saintess, living near the place in which he holds court, who has been divorced fourteen times.'

^357:17 The ceremony of Endowment, or as it is termed, going through the endowment house, occupies usually about eight hours. It has been described at length by several persons who have experienced it, and I give herewith a condensation of the most reliable accounts. Minor changes have been introduced since the days of Joseph Smith, but, in the main, the rites are as they were in the beginning. Certain days in each week, throughout the year, are set apart, upon which candidates present themselves at the endowment house, as early as seven o'clock A. M. Each is required to bring a bottle of the best olive-oil, and supposed to bring his robes also, although it is common to borrow the latter from friends, for the first appearance, after which every good Mormon possesses his own. These garments are described as follows: The temple robe, alike for both sexes, is a long, loose, flowing garment, made of white linen or bleached muslin, and reaching to the ankle. It is gathered to a band sufficiently long to pass around the body from the right shoulder underneath the left arm, thus leaving the latter free. A linen belt holds it in place. The women wear a head covering made of a large square of Swiss muslin, gathered in one corner so as to form a sort of cap to fit the head, the reminder falling down as a veil. For the men, a round piece of linen, drawn up with a string and a bow in front, something after the fashion of a Scotch cap, is used. The under garment, which is also alike for both sexes, is a sort of jacket and trousers together, something like the night-dresses made for children; and is worn night and day. When changed, only an arm or a leg must be removed at once, the fresh garment being thus put on as the other is taken off. This garment protects from disease, and even death, for the bullet of an enemy will not penetrate it. The prophet Joseph carelessly left off this garment on the day of his death, and had he not done so, he would have escaped unharmed. Over the inner garment the men wear an ordinary shirt, and the women a white skirt. White stockings and a pair of white linen slippers complete the costume. Entering the building, the candidate's own name and age are registered, and also the names of the parents. The candidates hand in their oil, remove their shoes, and pass with their bundles of clothing into a bath-room divided down the middle by a heavy curtain which separates the sexes. Here the ceremony of purification is performed, the women being washed by women, and the men by men. The person washed is informed that he or she is now cleansed from the blood of this generation, and if faithful, shall never be subject to the plagues and miseries which are about to come upon the earth. Next follows the anointing. The oil is poured from a large horn into the hand of the person officiating, and applied to the crown of the head, eyes, ears, mouth, and feet of the candidate. The eyes are touched, that they may be quick to see; the ears, that the hearing may be sharp; the mouth, to bestow wisdom upon speech; and the feet, that they be swift to run in the ways of the Lord. Then a new name, which is rarely to be mentioned, is whispered into the ear, and all are marched into room No. 2, where they are seated, the sexes on opposite sides of the room, and facing each other. Here they are told by a priest that any person not strong enough to proceed may retire; but if any portion of the ceremony is disclosed, the throat of the person so offending will be cut from ear to ear. Those faltering, if any, having retired, the remainder are taken into room No. 3, where a representation of the creation, the temptation, and fall is given. Each candidate then puts on over his robe an apron of white linen, upon which are sewn pieces of green silk representing fig-leaves, and also the cap or veil. All good Mormons are buried in their endowment robes, and the veil worn by the women covers their faces when they are consigned to the grave. In the morning of the resurrection, this veil is to be lifted by the husband; otherwise no woman can see the face of the almighty in the next world. This ends the first degree; and the initiated are now driven out of Eden into room No. 4, [p. 358] which represents the world, where they encounter many temptations, the chief of which is the false gospel preached by methodists, baptists, etc. Finally St James and St John appear and proclaim the true gospel of Mormonism, which all gladly embrace. After this they receive certain grips and pass-words, and all are arranged in a circle, kneel, and the women lower their veils. Then, with the right hand uplifted, an oath is taken to avenge the death of Joseph Smith, jun., upon the gentiles who had caused his murder, to teach the children of the church to do likewise, to obey implicitly and without murmur or question all commands of the priesthood, to refrain from adultery, and finally, eternal secrecy concerning all that transpired in the endowment house is promised. Then comes an address, after which another room is entered, leading from which is a door with a hole in it, covered with a piece of muslin. The men approach this door in turn and ask to enter. Then a person behind the door reaches through the opening, and with knife in hand cuts a certain mark on the left breast of the shirt, another over the abdomen, and one over the right knee, which marks are faithfully copied by the women in their own garments after returning to their homes. The man then mentions his new name, gives the grip of the third degree, and is permitted to pass in. This is called going behind the veil. When the men are all in, each woman is passed through by her husband, or having none, by one of the brethren. This concludes the ceremony, with the exception of marriage, which will be noticed elsewhere. Of these ceremonies Mrs Stenhouse, from whose account the foregoing is partly taken, says: 'About what was done in Nauvoo, I can only speak by hearsay, but have been told many strange and revolting stories about the ceremonies which were there performed. Of the endowments in Utah, everything was beautifully neat and clean, and I wish to say most distinctly that, although the initiation appears now to my mind as a piece of the most ridiculous absurdity, there was, nevertheless, nothing in it indecent or immoral. Englishwoman in Utah, 190-2. For more on endowment ceremonies, see Morm. at Home, 209; Stenhouse's Englishwoman, 155-201; Tell It All, 233-6, 514-15; Beadle's Life in Utah, 486-502; Hyde's Morm., 89-101, 108-9; Worthington's Woman in Battle, 591-2; Burton's City of Saints, 271-2; Young's Wife No. 19, 306-72; S. L. Herald, Mar. 31, 1881; Tribune, Nov. 16, 1878; Sept. 28, 1879; Utah Rev., Dec. 12, 1871; S. F. Bulletin, 1878, Nov. 16; 1879, May 5, Oct. 25; Herald, July 27, 1852; Red Bluff Sentinel, Nov. 30, 1878; Sac. Union, Sept. 25, 1858; Rec.-Union, Oct. 1, 1879; San Jose Argus, Sept. 15, 22, 1877; Sta Cruz Cour., May 10, 1878; Stockton Indep., May 6, 1879; Tehama Tocsin, Nov. 1, 1879; Yreka Union, Nov. 22, 1879; Salem (Or.) Statesman, Nov. 7, 1879; Carson City (Nev.) Tribune, Oct. 6, 1879; Elko Indep., Dec. 12, 1878; Gold Hill News, 1878, Oct. 29-31.

^359:18 One or two other matters of belief I may mention here. There was early established the order of Enoch. The prophet Joseph not only indorsed the biblical account of the translation of Enoch, but added to it. There was not only one Enoch, but a whole city full. This city of Enoch was located where are now the waters of the gulf of Mexico, and its inhabitants were absolutely perfect. Many sought to reach this place, for its fame had become noised abroad; but none were successful, owing to wanderings and bickerings by the way. Within its gates all things were held in common, and unalloyed happiness reigned. And inasmuch as the people of Enoch were unfitted by their moral excellence to mingle with other earthly inhabitants, they were removed to celestial realms. Joseph's idea at this time seems to have been to induce his followers to surrender all rights, including that of property, into the hands of the church. In May 1831 it was revealed, 'And again, let the bishop appoint a storehouse unto this church, and let all [p. 360] things, both in money and in meat, which is more than is needful for the wants of this people, be kept in the hands of the bishop.' Times and Seasons, v. 416. This revelation was for the information and guidance of the first bishop, Partridge, who is authorized therein to take what he wants for himself and family. The prophet's revelation concerning the order of Enoch is without date, and is entitled 'Revelation given to Enoch concerning the order of the church for the benefit of the poor.' In it is prescribed that there shall be two treasuries: from the first, to be called 'the sacred treasury of the Lord,' nothing can be taken but by the voice of the order, or by commandment; into the second treasury are to be cast all moneys except those reserved for sacred purposes. It is also provided that general consent is necessary for the withdrawal of funds from this, as in the case of the first repository, but common consent in this case is construed to be, if any man shall say to the treasurer, 'I have need of a certain sum,' he shall receive it, provided the asker shall be in full fellowship. The revelation in full will be found in Doctrine and Covenants, 283-9. One of the grounds of complaint brought against the saints in Caldwell county, by the Missourians, was that the former were communists, as has been narrated already. Says the Salt Lake Tribune of May 9, 1874: 'The Mormons paid the United States authorities $318,000 for public lands in Missouri, but were not allowed to enjoy one acre of their purchase.' See also Deseret News, May 13, 1874. At Nauvoo, Joseph had himself appointed trustee in trust of the whole church, and thereafter we hear no more of the order of Enoch until some years subsequent to the establishment of the Deseret colonies. Soon after Joseph's death we find Brigham sole trustee of affairs. During the scenes following the murder of the Smiths, the expulsion from Illinois, and up to the settlement of the migratory saints in Utah, there was little property to care for; but after that, attention was again turned to the matter. Robinson, in his Sinners and Saints, gives a copy of a deed: 'Be it known by these presents, that I, Jessie W. Fox, of Great Salt Lake City, in the county of Great Salt Lake, and territory of Utah, for and in consideration of the sum of one hundred ($100) dollars and the good-will which I have to the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints, give and convey unto Brigham Young, trustee in trust for the said church, his successor in office and assigns, all my claims to and ownership of the following-described property, to wit: One house and lot, $1,000; one city lot, $100; east half of lot 1, block 12, $50; lot 1, block 14, $75; two cows, $50; two calves, $15; one mare, $100; one colt, $50; one watch, $20; one clock, $12; clothing, $300; beds and bedding, $125; one stove, $20; household furniture, $210; total, $2,127; together with all the rights, privileges, and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining. I also covenant and agree that I am the lawful claimant and owner of said property, and will warrant and forever defend the same unto the said trustee in trust, his successor in office and assigns, against the claims of my heirs, assigns, or any person whomsoever.' Then follows the attestation of the witness, and the formal certificate of the judge of the probate court that the signer of the above transfer personally appeared before him on April 2, 1857, and made the customary acknowledgment. Robinson also gives a list of rules, which I have not room for in detail, but which the reader may find in pp. 223-5, in the work already quoted. William Hall, who was a member of the church from 1840 until 1847, says that at the time of the exodus from Nauvoo a mercantile firm was appointed to act as trustees, not only for the church property, but also for individuals. These trustees were to sell the property [p. 361] left behind, and account to the proper owners. Mormonism Exposed, 66-70. Says Ex-elder John Hyde, jun.: 'In 1854 Brigham Young commanded the people to consecrate by legal transfer all right and title to all personal property. Quitclaim deeds were drawn up, and from their land to their wearing apparel the maiority transferred everything to Brigham or his successor as trustee in trust for the latter-day saints; and some, in the exuberance of enthusiasm, threw in their wives and families.' Mormonism, 37-9. The legislature, by act approved Jan. 18, 1855, legalized these transfers, and provided a form in blank therefor. See Utah Laws (ed. 1855), 268-9; (ed. 1866), 92-3. At the semiannual conference held in Oct. 1873, the subject of reviving the order was again agitated. Elder David McKenzie touched upon the ultimate establishment of the order of Enoch in a very emphatic manner. Deseret News, Oct. 15, 1873. The Salt Lake Tribune of March 21, 1874, quotes the elder as follows: 'We should give thanks and praise to almighty God that there is a chance, a door opened, by which we may take a step towards establishing the order of Enoch.' Mrs Stenhouse says efforts were made to revive the order before the completion of the railways, which were not finished until 1869. Englishwoman in Utah, 371-2. Rev. Clark Smith, author of a 12mo pamphlet entitled Mystery and Crime in the Land of the Ute, states that the plan for reviving the order was matured during the winter of 1873-4 at St George, where Brigham and a few of his leaders were at that time. During the early part of 1874, scarcely a sermon was delivered without a reference to the order and an assurance that all joining would be benefited both spiritually and temporally. On May 9th an election of officers was held. Brigham was was chosen president; Geo. Smith, Danl H. Wells, and the twelve apostles, vice-presidents; David McKenzie, George Goddard, D.O. Calder, P. A. Schettler, John T. Caine, and James Jack, secretaries; Thos W. Ellerbeck, general book-keeper; Edward Hunter, treasurer; and Horace J. Eldridge, John Sharp, Ferezmore Little, James Van Cott, Moses Thatcher, Thos Dinwiddie, and Elijah Sheets, directors. S. L. C. Tribune, May 16, 1874.

    The dogma of adoption for eternity originated after Joseph's time. Hall says he first heard of it about the date of the expulsion from Nauvoo. Mormonism Exposed, 70. It was ascertained that many of the saints had inter-married with gentile stock, and were thus debarred from a full enjoyment of the rights and privileges of the house and lineage of Abraham. But these lost blessings could be restored by ingraftment upon the stock of one of the twelve tribes of Israel, represented by the twelve apostles, each of whom was deemed as in lineal descent from Abraham, tracing his consanguinity to Isaac and Jacob, and thence to himself as a chief of one of the tribes. Romans, xi. 16, is quoted as authorizing the doctrine, which requires every member of the church, except the twelve, to choose a father fresh one of the latter. The father may be either younger or older than the son, but in any case assumes the character of guardian, with full control of the labor and estate of the adopted son Many young men give themselves over to the leaders as 'eternal sons,' in the hope of sharing the honor of their adopted parents. W.C. Statues was Brigham's adopted son, and D. Candland, Heber C. Kimball's. Hyde, Mormonism, 110. Witbert Earls is also mentioned as Kimball's son. Hall, Mormonism Exposed, 70.

    About 1840, in obedience to a special revelation, Joseph Smith established a secret society known as the Order Lodge. None save persons of high standing in the church could gain admission, the avowed object of the organization being induction into the higher mysteries of the priesthood. J. C. Bennett writes as follows of this order: 'The lodge-room is carefully prepared and [p. 362] consecrated; and from 12 to 24 sprigs of cassia, olive branches, cedar boughs, or other evergreens, are tastefully arranged about it. These are intended to represent the eternal life and unmingled bliss, which, in the celestial kingdom, will be enjoyed by all who continue in full fellowship.'...The candidate is stripped naked, blindfolded, and in this condition marched around the lodge-room, the most excellent Grand Master repeating: 'I will bring the blind by a way they know not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.' The candidate having knelt before the altar, the following oath is administered: 'In the name of Jesus Christ, the son of God, I now promise and swear, truly, faithfully, and without reserve, that I will serve the Lord with a perfect heart and a willing mind, dedicating myself, wholly and unreservedly, in my person and effects, to the upbuilding of his kingdom on earth, according to his revealed will. I furthermore promise and swear that I will regard the first president of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints as the supreme head of the church on earth, and obey him the same as the supreme God, in all written revelations, given under the solemnities of a "thus saith the Lord," and that I will always uphold the presidency, right or wrong. I furthermore promise and swear that I will never touch a daughter of Adam unless she is given me of the Lord. I furthermore promise and swear that no gentile shall ever be admitted to the secrets of this holy institution, or participate in its blessings. I furthermore promise and swear that I will assist the Daughter of Zion in the utter destruction of apostates, and that I will assist in setting up the Kingdom of Daniel in these last days, by the power of the highest and the sword of his might. I furthermore promise and swear that I will never communicate the secrets of this degree to any person in the known world, except it be to a true and lawful brother, binding myself under no less a penalty than that of having melted lead poured into my ear. So help me God and keep me faithful.' Hist. of the Saints, 275-6.

    I have thousands of references to articles written and sermons preached on the doctrines of the church. The tabernacle and bowery sermons have been reported and published in the Deseret News, from its first publication up to 1860. Besides President Young, the prominent speakers were Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Lorenzo Snow, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, John Taylor, Franklin D. Richards, David Fullmer, J. W. Cummings, John Young, Wilford Woodruff, John D. McAllister, Joseph Young, Daniel H. Wells, Cyrus H. Wheelock, Robert T. Burton, Jacob Gates, Charles H. Bassett, and many others. For duties of bishops, see Deseret News, 1850, Aug. 10; patriarchal notice, Sept. 21; revelation, Dec. 28; 1851, for religious questions and answers, Jan. 11; minutes special conference of seventies, Jan. 25; appel. presidency and apostolate, Mar. 8; min. gen. con., 19; Patriarch Smith's letter to the saints throughout the world, and letter from P. P. Pratt to Brigham Young, Nov. 29; letter from Thos Bullock, president of seventies, Dec. 27; 1852, letter from O. Jones to Pres. Young, Jan. 10; offices in church, authority explained, Jan. 24; signs of the times, and advice to the saints, Feb. 7; disc. by Brigham, Feb. 9; letter, Patriarch Smith, Feb. 20; opinions about Mormonism (from Harper's Mag.), Feb. 21; min. con. new tabernacle, Apr. 17; Mormon question (N. Y. Tribune and Herald), May 1; letter of defence (in N. Y. Herald), May 15; reflections, O. Pratt, June 26; disc. by Kimball, Aug. 15; gen. funeral sermon by O. Pratt, Aug. 21; Brigham on apostles, News extra, p. 25; remarks by Taylor and Kimball, Sept. 4; speech by Kimball, Sept. 14; special con., [p. 363] Sept. 18; disc. by Brigham, Oct. 2; min. gen. con., Oct. 16 and Nov. 6; epistle by Young, Oct. 16; the Mormons the Mahometans of 19th cent. (N. Y. Herald), Nov. 2; remarks, Young, Aug. 26, Nov. 6; 1853, sermon by P. P. Pratt, Jan. 19; address by Taylor, Jan. 19; disc. by Benson, Feb. 1; sermon, Pratt, Mar. 2; Brigham and Pratt, address, Apr. 2; Brigham, disc., Apr. 13; min. gem con., Apr. 16, 30; epistle pres., rept quorum seventies, Apr. 16; ad., Hyde, May 14; ad., Brigham, May 14; disc., Brigham, July 6 and 20; speech, Hyde, July 30; disc., Brigham, Aug. 24, 31, and Oct. 1; min. gen. con., Oct. 15 and 29; ep. pres., Oct. 15; disc., Brigham, Sept. 7; ad., H. Kimball, Nov. 12; ad., tabernacle, Nov. 24; Mormon vs gentile, Nov. 24; ad., Brigham, Dec. 8; Mormonism, Dec. 8; sermon, Taylor, Dec. 22; 1854, disc., H. Kimball, Jan. 4; Smith, Jan. 18; reg. dialogue, and art. on restitution, Jan. 12; bible and Mormonism, Jan. 19; repts of quorums of seventies, Mar. 2, Apr. 13, Apr. 27; gen. epis., Apr. 13; gen. confer., Apr. 13; address, Hyde, Apr. 27; disc., Pratt, Apr. 27; address, Kimball, Apr. 27; disc., Taylor, May 11; Brigham, May 11; Smith, May 11; Grant, June 8; Brigham, July 27; Grant, July 27; Brigham, Aug. 3; Kimball, Aug. 17; epis. pres., Sept. 14; disc., Kimball, Sept. 14; a Mormon leader (from Sem. Wy. Jour., Tex.), Sept. 21; disc., Grant, Sept. 21; epis. against litigation, Sept. 21; remarks, Grant, Sept. 28; disc., Kimball, Sept. 28; Hyde, Oct. 5, Oct. 19; Kimball, Oct. 19; Benson, Oct. 19; Smith, Oct. 26; Pratt, Oct. 26; Brigham, Oct. 26; Hyde, Nov. 9; Grant. Nov. 2; Kimball, Nov. 23; Pratt, Nov. 30; Grant, Dec. 7; Kimball, Dec. 14; Pratt, Dec. 21; local recog. of Morm. (from Democracy), Dec. 21; disc., Pratt, Dec. 28; 1855, Grant, Jan. 25; testimony, Kimball, Jan. 25; disc., Brigham, Feb. 8; rept of 27 quor., Jan. 11; disc. on prophecies, Pratt, Feb. 22; Morm. worldliness, etc., Harrison; address, Brigham, Mar. 1; belief in superiority, Hyde, Mar. 14; sermon, Woodruff, Mar. 21; Hyde, Mar. 28; Smith, Apr. 4; testimony, faith, and confidence; gen. confer., Apr. 11; sermon, Grant, Apr. 11; gen. epist., Apr. 25; disc., Brigham, Apr. 25, May 9; remarks, Pratt, May 2; elders' corresp., May 16; disc., Pratt, May 16; on inspection, Brigham, May 23; elders' corresp., May 23, May 30; remarks, Brigham, June 6; disc., Brigham, June 20; the word of wisdom (in Doctrines and Covenants), June 27; sermon Smith, July 11; Morm., July 18; disc., Brigham, July 18; lecture, Grant, July 25; disc. Brigham, Aug. 1; Smith, Aug. 22; Benson, Aug. 22; Smith, Aug. 29; comments (N. Y. Papers), Sept. 12; remarks, Benson, Sept. 12; disc., Pratt, Sept. 12; remarks, Pratt, Sept. 19; disc., Brigham, Sept. 26; Smith, Oct. 10; gen. confer., Oct. 10; disc., Oct. 10; bowery meeting, Oct. 17; confer., Oct. 17, 24; tabernacle meeting, Oct. 24, 31; gen. epis., Oct. 31; sermon, Brigham, Oct. 31; to the truth-loving, Nov. 7; disc., Nov. 7; remarks, Grant, Nov. 7; tabernacle meeting, Nov. 7; remarks, Kimball, Nov. 7; sermon, Brigham, Nov. 21; disc., Kimball, Dec. 4; Pratt, Dec. 12, 19; Lyman, Dee. 19, 26; 1856, disc., Lyman, Jan. 2; Pratt, Jan. 30; Kimball, Feb. 6; Brigham, Feb. 6; Grant, Feb. 6; Lyman, Feb. 20; Brigham, Feb. 27; remarks, Kimball, Mar. 5; Brigham, Mar. 5, 12; cpis. to high priest's quorum, Mar. 12; disc., Kimball, Mar. 12; remarks, Grant, Mar. 12; fair weather disc., Mar. 12; disc., Wells, Mar. 19; Kimball, Mar. 19; Brigham, Mar. 26; Vernon, Mar. 26; remarks, Brigham, Mar. 26; disc., Grant, Apr. 2; Brigham, Apr. 2; Kimball, Apr. 2; gen. confer., Apr. 9; disc., Kimball, Apr. 9; sacrifice, Apr. 9; disc., Smith, Apr. 16; obedience, Apr. 23; disc., Pratt, Apr. 23; Brigham, Apr. 30; Pratt, May 14; the world and the saints May 28; remarks Brigham June 18 disc., Brigham, June 25; counsel, July 9; obedience, July 16; disc., Pratt, July 16; Kimball, Aug 20; sermon Brigham Aug. 27; confer. at Kayville. Sept. 24; disc., Pratt, Sept. 24; sermon, Brigham, Sept. 27; disc., Grant, Sept. 27; disc., [p. 364] Brigham, Oct. 1; meetings, Oct. 1; disc., Kimball, Oct. 1; Brigham, Oct. 1; remarks, Grant, Oct. 1; confer., Oct. 8; remarks, Kimball, Oct. 8; Brigham, Oct. 8, 15; disc., Richards, Oct. 15; confer., Oct. 15; remarks, Spencer, Oct. 15; condition of saints, Oct. 22; remarks, Kimball, Nov. 5; disc., Grant, Nov. 5; special confer., Nov. 5; quart. confer., Nov. 12; remarks, Nov. 12; disc., Brigham, Nov. 12; Grant, Nov. 12; appointments, Nov. 12; disc., Grant, :Nov. 19; Kimball, Nov. 19; remarks, Brigham, Nov. 19; Young (Jos. A.), Nov. 19; Woodruff, Nov. 28; Brigham, Nov. 26; Kimball, Nov. 26; address, Pratt, Dec. 1; remarks, Brigham, Dec. 10; gen. epist., Dec. 10; disc., Pratt. Dec. 24; high priest's meeting, Dec. 31; sermon, Kimball, Dee. 31; remarks, Woodruff, Dec. 31; 1857, disc., Kimball, Jan. 7: remarks, Grant, Jan. 7; disc., Snow, Jan. 14; Richards, Jan. 21; Kimball, Jan. 21; Snow, Jan. 28; remarks, Woodruff, Feb. 4; toleration, Feb. 4; remarks, Grant, Feb. 4; morals, Feb. 11; disc., Brigham, Feb. 11; Kimball, Feb. 11; Cummings, Feb. 18; Brigham, Feb. 18; remarks, Kimball, Feb. 25; Hyde, Mar. 4; disc., Richards, Mar. 4; Woodruff, Mar. 4; remarks, Wells, Mar. 4; disc., Brigham, Mar. 11; Kimball, Mar. 11; Snow, Mar. 11; remarks, Wells, Mar. 11; disc., Brigham, Mar. 18; Young (Jos.), Mar. 18; Brigham, Mar. 25; Kimball, Mar. 25; Grant, Mar. 25; remarks, McAllister, Mar. 25; Kimball, Apr. 1; Richards, Apr. 1; disc. Woodruff, Apr. 1; sermon, Brigham, Apr. 8; remarks, Burton, Apr. 8; gen. confer., Apr. 15; remarks, Wells, Apr. 15; Stout, Apr. 15; Wells, Apr. 15; disc., Kimball, Apr. 2-2; Brigham, Apr. 22, 29; remarks, Herriman, Apr. 29; Wheelock, Apr. 29; remarks, Snow, May 6; Brigham, May 6; Woodruff, May 13; disc., Brigham, May 13; disc., May 20; the bible, May 20; remarks, Brigham, May 20; Ferguson, May 29; Fullmer, May 20; Davis, May 20; McKnight, May 20; Bassett, May, 27; disc., Gates, May 27; remarks, Woodruff, May 27; disc., Woolley, June 3; Mills, June 3; remarks, Brigham, June 10; Smith, June 10; Kimball, June 10; disc., Kimball, June 17; remarks, Brigham, June 17, 24; Rich, June 24; Brigham, June 24; Hyde, June 24; Lyman, June 24; disc., Kimball, June 24; Chislett, July 8; remarks, Brigham, July 8; Cummings, July 8; Brigham, July 15; Kimball, July 15; Carn, July 15; Lyman, July 22; Ellsworth, July 22; Brigham, July 22; disc., Lyman, July 29; pol. move. against Utah, July 29; remarks, Brigham, Aug. 5; Smoot, Aug. 5; Smith, Aug. 5; disc., Hyde, Aug. 5; Smith, Aug. 12; Kimball, Aug. 12; Smith (E.), Aug. 12; remarks, Brigham, Aug. 12; Kimball, Aug. 12; Taylor, Aug. 19; Brigham, Aug. 19; Kimball, Aug. 26; Brigham, Aug. 26; disc., Hyde, Aug. 26; Taylor, Sept. 2; remarks, Brigham, Sept. 9; Stewart, Sept. 9; disc., Kimball, Sept. 9, 16; Taylor, Sept. 16, 23; remarks, Smith, Sept. 23; Brigham, Sept. 23; Kimball, Sept. 30; Brigham, Sept. 30; disc., Taylor, Sept. 30; remarks, Woodruff, Oct. 7; disc., Kimball, Oct. 7; sem. ann. confer., Oct. 14; remarks, Brigham, Oct. 14; Spencer, Oct. 14; Snow, Oct. 14; disc., Hyde, Oct. 14; Kimball, Oct. 14; Snow, Oct. 21; sermon, Lyman, Oct. 21; remarks, Spencer, Oct. 21; remarks, Brigham, Oct. 21; Rich, Oct. 21; Young, Oct. 21; Snow, Oct. 21; Brigham, Oct. 28; by bishops and elders, Oct. 28; Brigham, Nov. 11, 25, Dec. 2, 9, 30; 1858, confer., Apr. 14; 1859, Mar. 9, Apr. 13, Oct. 12, Dec. 28; disc., 1858, Jan. 27, Feb. 17, Apr. 14, July 14, 28; 1859, May 25, June 1, 8, 15, July 6, Aug. 10, 17, Nov. 10, 23, 30; 1860, remarks, Brigham, Mar. 14, Apr. 4, 25, May 2, 16, 30, June 6, 27, July 18, 25, Aug. 1, 8, 15, 22, 29, Sept. 5; 1864, June 15; 1865, Jan. 4; 1866, Mar. 15; 1867, Feb. 3; 1868, Jan. 15; 1869, Jan. 20, Feb. 2, Dec. 10; 1870, Mar. 30; 1871, Apr. 19; 1879, Feb. 12; confer., 1860, Feb. 8, Apr. 11, Oct. 10; 1861, Apr. 10, Oct. 23; 1862, Apr. 9, 16, 29, Oct. 15; 1863, Apr. 15, 22; 1864, Apr. 13, May 25, Oct. 12, Dec. 14; 1865, Apr. 12, Oct. 12; 1866, Mar. 8, Apr. 12, Oct. 10; 1867, Apr. 10, Oct. 9; 1868, Apr. 8, 15, Oct. 14; [p. 365] 1869, Apr. 14, July 7, Oct. 13; 1870, Apr. 13, May 11, Oct. 12, Nov. 2; 1871, Apr. 12, May 24, Oct. 11; 1872, Apr. 10, 17, 24, May 1, Aug. 28, Oct. 9, 16; 1873, Apr. 9, 16, May 7, Aug. 13, Oct. 8; 1874, Apr. 8, May 13, Oct. 14; 1875, Mar. 3, Apr. 14, 21, Oct. 13; 1876, Apr. 12, Oct. 11; 1877, May 16, June 6, 13, Oct. 10; 1878, Mar. 9, Apr. 10, Oct. 9, 16; 1879, Apr. 9, 16; Oct. 15; 1884, Apr. 7; high council, 1877, Oct. 24; meetings of priesthood, 1877, Oct. 10, Dec. 5; 1878, Feb. 6; 1879, Mar. 12; epist., 1879, Apr. 2; elders' disc., 1872, Jan. 24; 1873, Jan. 22, Apr. 16; 1874, Jan. 21, Apr. 22, May 6, 27; 1876, May 3, Oct. 11; 1877, May 16, 23; 1878, Feb. 13; hist. of Morm. (from St Louis Weekly Union), Dec. 27, 1851; miscel. (from St Louis Republican), S. F. Herald, Sept. 25, 1851.

    For sermons and discourses, see also Millennial Star, passim; address, Kimball, Young's Journal of Discourses, ii. 354-7; sermons, Ferris, Utah and the Mormons, 217-32, 302-3; sermon, Brigham, Salem (Or.) Statesman, Feb. 5, 1856; repts of confer., among others, Frontier Guardian, 1851, June 13, Oct. 31, Nov. 28; gen. epist., in Id., Nov. 14; various sermons, Young's Jour. of Disc., ii. passim; disc., Pratt, Ward's Husband in Utah, 79-103; sermons, Brigham, Sac. Union, 1855, Oct. 25, Dec. 13; 1857, June 16; sermons by Brigham and Kimball, et al., S. F. Alta, 1854, May 16; 1S55, Apr. 6, May 1; 1857, Jan. 12, June 4, Oct. 14; S. F. Bulletin, 1857, May 2; 1866, Apr. 18; lecture, Hyde, S. F. Herald, 1857, Apr. 14; rites and ceremonies, Ferris, Utah and the Mormons, 311-17; Gunnison's Mormons, 37-8; Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City, ii. 4-82; Derby, Overland Route, 30-2; Rae's Westward by Rail, 123-4; Beadle's Life in Utah, 255-9; Rusling's Across America, 166-9; Life among the Mormons, 173-9; Boller's Among the Indians, 401-3; Bowles' Our New West, 242-7; Stenhouse, Tell It All, 251, 387-9; Ward's Husband in Utah, 204-8; Schiel, Reise dutch Felsengeb, 103-24; Smith's Rise, Progress and Travels, 64-5; Utah Scraps, 5, 16; Burton's City of Saints, 365-75. On faith and doctrines, see Smith, Doc. and Cov., passim; S. F. Gol. Era, Dec. 1, 1867: Des. News, Sept. 14, 1864; Mackay's The Morm., 51-4; Ferris, Utah and Morm., 201-16; Gunnison's Morm., 39-63; Frontier Guardian, Feb. 20, 1850; Busch, Morm., 72-105; De Rupert's Cal. and Morm., 138-46; Times and Seasons, vi. 971; Tucker's Morm., 174-9; S. L C. Contributor, ii. 192-324; church gov., Tullidge, Hist. S. L. City, 57-8; Todd's Sunset Land, 185-93; S. L. Direc., 1869, 58; Head, in Overland Monthly, v. 275-7; Utah Seraps, 8-9; Mackay's Morm., 298-305; Ferris, Utah and Morm., 171-7; Stausbury's Expior. Exp., 135-9; Richards' Narr., MS., 42; Smith's Rise, Prog., etc., 17-18, 27-8; Green's Morm., 150-66, 308-19; Hyde's Worm., 18, 25, 101-2, 188-9; The Morm. Proph., 120-1, 114-19; Beadle's Life in Utah, 381-9; Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City, ii. 229-34; Young's Wife No. 19, 577; Gunnison's Morm., 23-5, 57-61, 78-9; Sac. Union, June 26, 1857; theory of creation, Stenhouse's R. M. Saints, 485-94; order of Enoch, Id., 495-503; law of adoption, Id., 503-6; book of Abraham, Id., 507-20; res. of infants, 483-4; Washington bap. by prox., Id., 475-82; Hyde expelled, Id., 640; negro Mormons, S. F. Bulletin, Nov. 14, 1884; pub. discuss., Pratt, Ser. of Pamph., no. 10, 1-46, no. 11, 1-46; Taylor's Govt of God, passim; Morm. pro and con, Chandless' Visit to S. Lake, 156; Ward's Husband in Utah, 140-283; Gunnison's Morm., 35, 164; Salem (Or.) Statesman, Dec. 5, 1854; S. F. Herald, 1854, Jan. 26, Aug. 23, Sept. 27; Alta, 1851, July 24, Aug. 6, 7; 1852, Dec. 21; 1853, Nov. 26; 1854, June 25, 26; 1856, May 10, 15, June 13, Sept. 15, Dec. 17; 1858, Jan. 22; Cal. Chris. Advoc., Apr. 6, 1865; Bulletin, 1856, Aug. 21; 1877, Sept. 8; Sac. Union, 1855, Mar. 16, July 17, Dec. 13; 1856, June 14; Morm. at Home, 65, 122-3, 142-5, 220-1; N. Y. Jour. of Com., in Pan. Star and Her., [p. 366] Feb. 18, 1869; Smucker's Hist. Morm., 323-99; Young's Wife No. 19, 333-40; Olshausen, Morm., 170-5; Jonveaux, L'Amerique, 235-6, 244-8; Mackay's The Morm., 271-326; Ferris, Utah and Morm., 171-7; Young's Resurrection, 11; Smet's Western Missions, 390-7; 32 Cong. 1st Sess., H. Ex. Dec., 19-20; Frontier Guardian, 1850, Feb. 6, 20, Mar. 6, 20, June 12, July 10, Sept. 4, Oct. 30, Dec. 25; 1851, Jan. 8, Mar. 21, Apr. 18, May 16, 30, June 13, 27, July 25, Aug. 8, Sept. 5, Oct. 31, Dec. 12, 26; 1852, Jan. 9, 23, Feb. 6, 20; Ward's Husband in Utah, 283-9; Hyde's Morm., 50, 179-81, 306-30; Burton's City of Saints, 437-97; Hickman's Dest. Angel, 10-15.

    In addition to these authorities, it is safe to assert that every gentile paper of importance in the U.S. has at some time extracted from the Salt Lake papers, and commented freely thereon. During the existence of the Kanes-ville (Iowa) Frontier Guardian, 1849-52, nearly every issue contained articles explanatory of the dogmas of the church, a few of which I have referred to. The Millennial Star, although devoted more especially to missionary effort abroad, has always copied freely from home publications. I append a few additional authorities, as follows: On religion, S. F. Alta, Jan. 19, 1860; Bulletin, June 19, 1871; S. L. Rev., Sept. 22, 1871; Gaz. Utah, 1874; S. L. Trib., Jan. 29, 1876, May 19, 1877; Juv. Inst., xv.; doc., Pratt, Key to Scien. Theol., passim; Bonwick, Morm. and Silv. Mines, 34-61; S. L. Trib., Jan. 25, 1872, Mar. 28, 1874; S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 39, 70, 135; bible and book of Morm., S. L. Trib., May 16, 1874; rev., Eureka Sent., Apr. 16, 1875; Silv. City Avalan., Mar. 31, 1876; S. L. Trib., June 2, Oct. 20, 1877; Sept. 24, Oct. 26, 1879; Silv. Reef Miner, June 11, 1879; Stenhouse, Englishwoman in Utah, 34, 74; S. F. Stock Rept, Jan. l, 1880; church, Sac. Union, Feb. 4, Sept. 1, 1860; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 22, 1868, Oct. 10, 1870; Chronicle, Oct. 7, 1883; priesthood, Sac. Union, Oct. 20, 1860; S. L. Trib., in Unionville Silv. State, Mar. 23, 1872; Eureka Sent., Apr. 15, 1873; S. F. Alta, Apr. 14, 1873; S. L. Trib., July 4, 1874, July 10, 1875; Gold Hill News, Dec. 14, 1875; Smith's Mystery and Crime, 16-23, 27-30; Circulars of First Presid., 1877; Pratt's prophecy, Austin, Reese Riv. Rev., Apr. 23, 1880; worship and preachers, Burton, City of Saints, 316; sermons, Young, 1860; Burton, City of Saints, 320; Sac. Union, May 30, Oct. 9; Morm. Expos., i. no 1; S. F. Call, May 11, 1865; Bulletin, Oct. 17, 1867; Alta, July 19, 1860; S. L. Rev., Dec. 7, 1871; Hubner's Round the World, 109; The Resurr., S. L. City, 1875; Prescott Miner, Aug. 17, 1877; by elders, S. L. Tel., June 15, 1869; Corinne Reptr., in Elko Indpt, Aug. 21, 1869; Greenwood's New Life, 144-7; Taylor's Summer Savory, 21-5; S. L. Herald, 1878, Sept. 2, 17, 24, Oct. 1, 22, 29, Nov. 5, 12, 19; Marshall's Through Amer., 198-205; Silver Reef Min., June 18, 1879; character of, Sala's Amer. Revis., 296; Richardson's Beyond Miss., 356-7; Sac. Union, Feb. 28, 1861; relig. freedom, Cannon, Rev. of Decis. of Supm. Ct; confer., S. F. Alta, 1869, Oct. 9; 1872, Apr. 29; Bulletin, 1870, Apr. 12; 1871, Oct. 6, 7; 1872, Apr. 9, 29; 1873, Apr. 7, 9; 1874, Oct. 7; 1876, Nov. 3; 1877, Apr. 11, Oct. 8; 1879, Apr. 9; 1883, Oct. 6, 15; Call, 1864, Apr. 7; 1871, Apr. 11; 1872, Apr. 9; 1873, Apr. 7; Chronicle, 1883, Oct. 6; Post, 1875, Apr. 12; 1877, Apr. 6; Times, 1868, Apr. 21; Sac. Union, 1860, Oct. 20; Carson Union, Apr. 12, 1873; Jackson (Amador) Ledger, Dec. 29, 1877; S. L. Herald, 1878, Oct. 8; 1879, Apr. 9, 12, 22, May 20, June 10, 24, Oct. 7; 1880, Jan. 6; Telegraph, 1869, Apr. 6, 7, 8, 9; 1870, May 7, 8, 9; Tribune, 1873, May 10; 1874, Apr. 4; 1875, Apr. 17, Aug. 6, Oct. 9, 10, 12; 1876, Apr. 8-15, Oct. 7; 1877, May 19, 26, Oct. 13; 1878, Apr. 13, July 13, Oct. 12; 1879, Apr. 5, 8, Oct. 7; 1880, Apr. 10, Sept. 23; Townsend's Morm. Trials, 44; Beadle's Life in Utah, 278:-89; Robinson's Sinners and Saints; bishops, Des. News, Nov. 29, 185l; book of [p. 367] Abraham, Smith's Pearl of Gt Price, 25-30; Mil. Star, xv. 549-50, passim. For additional sermons on theology, see Mil. Star, i. passim, vi. 33-8, 49-56, 65-70, 97-9, viii. 35-8; Times and Seasons, ii., iii., iv., and v. passim, vi. 808-9, 823-5, 957-8, 1001-5; anal. of, Beadle's Life in Utah, 311-31; Townsend's Morm. Trials, 40; on creed and faith, Times and Seasons, i. 68-70, iii. 863-5, 931-3; Spencer's Letters, etc., 1-252; Young's Wife No. 19, 58-60; Bennett's Hist. of Saints, 103-32, 302-7, 340-1; Eden Rev., Apr. 1854, 352; Pratt, Inter. Acct, 27-36; Id., Series of Pamph., nos 2-6; Tucker's Morm., 139-52; Vetromile, A Tour, 70-1; Ferris' Utah and Morm., 211-13, 299-300; Sten-house's Tell It All, 295-300; Reynolds' Bk of Abraham, 15; Grass Valley, Foothill Tidings, July 5, 1879; Pratt, in Des. News, Aug. 21, 1852; Smith, in Times and Seasons, iii. 709; Id., Pearl of Gt Price, 63; Smucker's Morm., 61-6; Pratt's Persecutions, iii.-v.; Id., Voice of Warn., passim; Dixon, White Conquest, 182-8, 193-7, 223-8; preachers and preaching, Greeley's Overland Jour., 218-22; Seventies, Mil. Star, xxxvi. 369-72; church charter, S. F. Bulletin, Nov. 26, 1858; sincerity of Morm., S. F. Alta, Mar. 30, 1858.

^376:19 For a time, in so far as possible, the practice of polygamy in Illinois and Utah was kept secret by the missionaries in England and in Europe. Says Parley P. Pratt in Manchester, and in the Millennial Star of 1846, 'Such a doctrine is not held, known, or practised as a principle of the latter-day saints;' and John Taylor at the Boulogne discussion, in France, in July 1850, says, 'We are accused here of polygamy and actions the most indelicate, obscene, and disgusting, such as none but a corrupt heart could have conceived. these things are too outrageous to be believed.'

    On the morning of Aug. 29, 1852, before a special conference in session at S. L. City, Orson Pratt preached on the subject of marriage, in which discourse he stated, 'It is well known, however, to the congregation before me, that the latter-day saints have embraced the doctrine of a plurality of wives as part of their religious faith.' In the evening, whilst the sacrament was being passed, Brigham addressed the audience, saying in the course of his remarks, 'Though that doctrine [polygamy] has not been preached by the elders, this people have believed in it for many years.' At the close of Brigham's address, the revelation of July 12, 1843, was read by Elder Thomas Bullock. The proceedings of this conferencc were published in full in all 8vo pamphlet of 48 pages, issued as an extra by the Deseret News, on Sept. 14, 1852, when the revelation first saw the light. It next appeared in the Millennial Star, and may now be found in the book of Doctrine and Covenants. Herewith I give the revelation entire.

    Revelation given to Joseph Smith, at Nauvoo, July 12, 1843: 'Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph, that inasmuch as you have inquired of my hand to know and understand wherein I, the Lord, justified my servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as also Moses, David, and Solomon, my servants, as touching the principle and doctrine of their having many wives and concubines: behold, and lo! I am the Lord thy God, and will answer thee as touching this matter; therefore, prepare thy heart to receive and obey the instructions which I am about to give unto you; for all those who have this law revealed unto them must obey the same; for behold! I reveal unto you a new and an everlasting covenant, and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned; for no one can reject this covenant and be permitted to enter into my glory; for all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundations of the world; and as pertaining to the new and everlasting covenant, it was instituted for the fulness of my glory; and he that receiveth a fulness thereof must and shall abide the law, or he shall be damned, saith the Lord God. And verily I say unto you, that the conditions of this law arc these: All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations that are not made and entered into and sealed by the holy spirit of promise, of him who is anointed, both as well for time and for all eternity, and that, too, most holy, by revelation and commandment, through the medium of mine anointed, whom I have appointed on the earth to hold this power (and I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred), are of no efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead: for all contracts [p. 377] that are not made unto this end have an end when men are dead. Behold mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my father ordained unto you, before the world was? I am the Lord thy God, and I give unto you this commandment that no man shall come unto the father but by me, or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord; and everything that is in the world, whether it be ordained of men, by thrones, or principalities, or powers, or things of name, whatsoever they may be that are not by me, or by my word, saith the Lord, shall be thrown down, and shall not remain after men are dead, neither in nor after the resurrection, saith the Lord your God; for whatsoever things remain are by me, and whatsoever things are not by me shall be shaken and destroyed. Therefore, if a man marry him a wife in the world, and he marry her not byrne, nor by my word, and he covenant with her so long as he is in the world, and she with him, their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead, and when they are out of the world; therefore, they are not bound by any law when they are out of the world; therefore, when they are out of the world, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are appointed angels in heaven, which angels are ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more and an exceeding and an eternal weight of glory; for these angels did not abide my law, therefore they cannot be enlarged, but remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition to all eternity, and from henceforth are not gods, but are angels of God forever and ever. And again, verily I say unto you, if a man marry a wife, and make a covenant with her for time and for all eternity, if that covenant is not by me or by my word, which is my law, and is not sealed by the holy spirit of promise, through him whom I have anointed and appointed unto this power, then it is not valid, neither of force when they are out of the world, because they are not joined by me, saith the Lord, neither by my word; when they are out of the world, it can not be received there because the angels and the gods are appointed there, by whom they cannot pass; they cannot, therefore, inherit my glory, for my house is a house of order, saith the Lord God. And again, verily I say unto you if a man marry a wife by my word, which is my law, and by the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the holy spirit of promise, by him who is anointed, unto whom I have appointed this power and the keys of this priesthood, and it shall be said unto them, Ye shall come forth in the first resurrection; and if it be after the first resurrection, in the next resurrection; and shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers, dominions, all heights and depths; then shall it be written in the Lamb's book of life, that he shall commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, and if lie abide in my covenant, and commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood, it shall be done unto them in all things whatsoever my servant hath put upon them, in time and through all eternity; and shall be of full force when they are out of the world, and they shall pass by the angels and the gods which are set there, to their exaltation and glory in all things, as hath been sealed upon their heads, which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things [p. 378] are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them.

    'Verily, verily, I say unto you, except ye abide my law ye cannot attain to this glory; for straight is the gate and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it, because ye receive me not in the world, neither do ye know me. But if ye receive me in the world, then shall ye know me, and shall receive your exaltation, that where I am ye shall be also. This is eternal lives, to know the only wise and true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent. I am he. Receive ye, therefore, my law. Broad is the gate and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths, and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to my word, and they are sealed by the holy spirit of promise, according to mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression of the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of blasphemies, and if they commit no murder wherein they shed innocent blood, yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection and enter into their exaltation; but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan, unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God. The blasphemy against the holy ghost, which shall not be forgiven in the world nor out of the world, is in that ye commit murder wherein ye shed innocent blood, and assent unto my death, after ye have received my new and everlasting covenant, saith the Lord God; and he that abideth not this law can in no wise enter into my glory, but shall be damned, saith the Lord. I am the Lord thy God, and will give unto thee the law of my holy priesthood as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was. Abraham received all things whatsoever he received by revelation and commandment by my word, saith the Lord, and hath entered into his exaltation and sitteth upon his throne. Abraham received promises concerning his seed and of the fruit of his loins--from whose loins ye are, viz., my servant Joseph--which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed out of the world, they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars, or if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore, ye could not number them. This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham, and by this law are the continuation of the works of my father, wherein he glorifieth himself. Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law, and ye shall be saved. But if ye enter not into my law, ye cannot receive the promise of my Father which he made unto Abraham. God commanded Abraham, and Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham to wife. And why did she do it? Because this was the law, and from Hagar sprang many people. This, therefore, was fulfilling, among other things, the promises. Was Abraham, therefore, under condemnation? Verily I say unto you, nay; for I, the Lord, commanded it. Abraham was commanded to offer his son Isaac; nevertheless it was written thou shalt not kill. Abraham, however, did not refuse, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness.

    'Abraham received concubines, and they bare him children, and it was accounted unto him for righteousness, because they were given unto him and he abode in my law; as Isaac also, and Jacob, did none other things than that which they were commanded; and because they did none other things than that which they were commanded, they have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises, and sit upon thrones, and are not angels, but [p. 379] are gods. David also received many wives and concubines, as also Solomon and Moses, my servants, as also many others of my servants, from the beginning of creation until this time, and in nothing did they sin, save in those things which they received not of me. David's wives and concubines were given unto him of me by the hand of Nathan, my servant, and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power; and in none of these things did he sin against me, save in the case of Uriah and his wife; and therefore he hath fallen from his exaltation and received his portion; and he shall not inherit them out of the world, for I gave them unto another, saith the Lord. I am the Lord thy God, and I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, an appointment, and restore all things; ask what ye will, and it shall be given unto you, according to my word; and as ye have asked concerning adultery, verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man receiveth a wife in the new and everlasting covenant, and if she be with another man, and I have not appointed unto her by the holy anointing, she hath committed adultery, and shall be destroyed. If she be not in the new and everlasting covenant, and she be with another man, she has committed adultery; and if her husband be with another woman, and he was under a vow, he hath broken his vow and hath committed adultery; and if she hath not committed adultery, but is innocent, and hath not broken her vow, and she knoweth it, and I reveal it unto you, my servant Joseph, then shall you have power, by the power of my holy priesthood, to take her and give her unto him that hath not committed adultery, but hath been faithful, for he shall be made ruler over many; for I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood, wherein I restore all things and make known unto you all things in due time. And verily, verily, I say unto you, that whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven, and whatsoever you bind on earth, in my name and by my word, saith the Lord, it shall be eternally bound in the heavens; and whosesoever sins you remit on earth shall be remitted eternally in the heavens, and whosesoever sins you retain on earth shall be retained in heaven. And again, verily I say, whomsoever you bless, I will bless; and whomsoever you curse, I will curse, saith the Lord; for I the Lord am thy God. And again, verily I say unto you, my servant Joseph, that whatsoever you give on earth, and to whomsoever you give any one on earth, by my word and according to my law, it shall be visited with blessings, and not cursings, and with my power, saith the Lord, and shall be without condemnation on earth and in heaven; for I am the Lord thy God, and will be with thee even unto the end of the world, and through all eternity; for verily I seal upon you your exaltation and prepare a throne for you in the kingdom of my father, with Abraham, your father. Behold! I have seen your sacrifices, and will forgive all your sins; I have seen your sacrifices, in obedience to that which I have told you; go, therefore, and I make a way for your escape, as I accepted the offering of Abraham, of his son Isaac.

    'Verily I say unto you, a commandment I give unto mine handmaid, Emma Smith, your wife, whom I have given unto you, that she stay herself and partake not of that which I commanded you to offer unto her; for I did it, saith the Lord, to prove you all, as I did Abraham, and that I might require an offering at your hand by covenant and sacrifice; and let my handmaid Emma Smith receive all those that have been given unto my servant Joseph, and who are virtuous and pure before me; and those who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God; for I am the Lord thy God, and ye shall obey my voice; and I give unto my servant Joseph that he shall be made ruler over many things, for he hath been faithful over a few things, and from henceforth I will strengthen him. And I command mine handmaid [p. 380] Emma Smith to abide and cleave unto my servant Joseph and to none else. But if she will not abide this commandment, she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord, for I am the Lord thy God, and will destroy her if she abide not in my law; but if she will not abide this commandment, then shall my servant Joseph do all things for her even as he hath said, and I will bless him and multiply him, and give unto him a hundred-fold in this world, of fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, houses and lands, wives and children, and crowns of eternal lives in the eternal worlds. And again, verily I say, let mine handmaid forgive my servant Joseph his trespasses, and then shall she be forgiven her trespasses, wherein she has trespassed against me, and I, the Lord thy God, will bless her and multiply her, and make her heart rejoice. And again, I say, let not my servant Joseph put his property out of his hands, lest an enemy come and destroy him--for Satan seeketh to destroy--for I am the Lord thy God, and he is my servant; and behold! and lo I am with him, as I am with Abraham, thy father, even unto his exaltation and glory. Now as touching the law of the priesthood, there are many things pertaining thereunto. Verily, if a man be called of my Father, as was Aaron, by mine own voice, and by the voice of him that sent me, and I have endowed him with the keys of the power of this priesthood, if he do anything in my name, and according to my law, and by my word, he will not commit sin, and I will justify him. Let no one, therefore, set on my servant Joseph, for I will justify him; for he shall do the sacrifice which I require at his hands, for his transgressions, saith the Lord your God. And again, as pertaining to the law of the priesthood; if any man esouse a virgin, and desire to espouse another, and the first give her consent, if and he espouse the second, and they are virgins, and have vowed to on other man, then is he justified; he cannot commit adultery, for they are given unto him; for he cannot commit adultery with that that belonged unto him, and to none else; and if he have ten virgins given unto him by this law, he cannot commit adultery, for they belong to him and they are given unto him; therefore is he justified. But if one or either of the ten virgins after she is espoused shall be with another man, she has committed adultery and shall be destroyed; for they are given unto him to multiply and replenish the earth, according to my commandment and to fulill the promise which was given by my father before the foundation of the world, and for their exaltation in the eternal worlds, that they may bear the souls of men; for herein is the work of my father continued, that he may be glorified. And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man have a wife who holds the keys of this power, and he teaches unto her the law of my priesthood as pertaining to these things, then shall she believe and administer unto him, or she shall be destroyed, saith the Lord your God; for I will destroy her; for I will magnify my name upon all those who receive and abide in my law. Therefore it shall be lawful in me, if she receive not this law, for him to receive all things whatsoever I, the Lord his God, will give unto him, because she did not administer unto him according to my word; and she then becomes the transgressor, and be is exempt from the law of Sarah, who administered unto Abraham according to the law, when I commanded Abraham to take Hagar to wife. And now, as pertaining to this law, verily, verily, I say unto you, I will reveal more unto you hereafter; therefore let this suffice for the present. Behold I am Alpha and Omega. Amen.'

^388:20 My references to articles, both printed and in manuscript, relating to polygamy, are no less voluminous than those touching upon other church matters. I note as follows: early polygamists, Ferris' Utah and Morm., 117; Smucker's Hist. Morm., 161-2; Young's Wife No. 19, 150-5; Stenhouse's Expose, 85-93; Atlantic Monthly, 1859, 576-7; denial of exist., Stenhouse's Tell It All, 103-4, 499-500; Pratt, in Millennial Star, vi. 22; Lee's Morm., 167; Young's Wife No. 19, 329-31; favored by women, Des. News, 1870, Jan. 12, 19; 1871, Nov. 8, Dec. 20; S. F. Gol. Era, June 13, 1868; Woodruff's Autobiog., MS., 4-6; The Morm. at Home, 145-7, 159; S. L. Herald, Feb. 1, 1879; Burton's City of Saints, 525-34; Ward's Husband in Utah, 130-4, 216-22; Tanner's Letter, MS., passim; Smoot's Experience, etc., MS., 4, 8-9; Tracy's Narr., MS., 30-2; Richards' Retain., MS., 18-19, 36-7, 48-9; Pratt (Belinda M.), in Utah Pamph. Relig., no. 3, 27-33; Marshall's Through Amer., 185-8; Millennial Star, xvii. 36-7; Brown's Letter, MS., passim; arg. in favor of, Smith's Rise, Progress, etc., 48-56; Millennial Star, xix. 636-40, xxxvii. 340-1; Beadle's Life in Utah, 252-4; Paddock's La Tour, 324-5; Ferris' Utah and Morm., 115-17; Johnson, in Utah Tracts, no. 10; Richardson, with Taylor's Govt of God, no. 19; Spencer, with Id., no. 18; Taylor vs Hollister, Sup. Ct Decis., no. 2, in Morm. Pamph.; Cannon's Rev. of Decis., no. 11, in Id.; Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 82-109; Dilke's Greater Brit., i. 130; Stenhouse's Expose, 218-21; Tell It All, 256-8; Richards' Narr., MS., 79-81; Worthington's Women, etc., 592-3; Busch, Gesch. Morm., 340-52, 407-44; Times and [p. 389] Seasons, vi. 798-9; Tullidge's Women, etc., 367-78; Boise City Statesman, Sept. 30, 1879; S. F. Alta, Nov. 13, 1857; Chronicle, 1880, Dec. 12; 1882, Feb. 15, July 29; Stock Rept, Jan. 8, 1880; Des. News, 1857, May 13, July 16; 1866, Mar. 15; 1867, Apr. 17, 24; 1871, Oct. 11; S. L. Contrib., ii. 213; Tribune, 1875, July 17; 1879, Oct. 10, 11; S. F. Herald, 1852, Sept. 17; 1853, Mar. 1; 1869, Aug. 28; 1880, Jan. 6, 18; sermons, Young, Dilke's Greater Brit., i. 129; Young, Jour. of Disc., ii. 75-90; S. iv. Bulletin, 1856, Sept. 16; 1862, Sept. 10; 1866, Oct. 26; 1869, Mar. 3; 1874, Nov. 13; Call, 1867, Sept. 11; 1868, Sept. 5; Occident, July 10, 1873; Sac. Union, Jan. 12, 1856; Elko Indpt, Sept. 6, 1873; Pan. Star and Her., Jan. 1867; Boise City Statesman, July 24, 1869; Salem (Or.)Statesman, May 5, 1857; S. L. Herald, June 6, 1877; Ward's Husband in Utah, 104-30, 245-6, 303-7; Des. News, May 25, 1870; Pratt, Smith, and Cannon, Discourses, passim; disc., Pratt, Des. News, Oct. 20, 1869; Hyde, S. F. Herald, Nov. 23, 1854; Des. News, May 9, 1860; Young (John), Id., Apr. 22, 1857; origin and prog., S. F. Bulletin, 1858, July 23; 1859, Apr. 16; 1868, July 18; 1869, Mar. 1; 1870, Nov. 12; 1871, July 6; 1872, Feb. 21, June 25; 1882, Mar. 3; Call, 1865, Aug. 2; 1868, Aug. 29; 1869, Feb. 28; 1874, July 15, Oct. 21; Gol. Era, July 3, 1869; Plac. Times, Feb. 2, 1850; N. Y. Her., in Watsonville Pajar., June 6, 1872; Cal. Chris. Advoc., Oct. 15, 1874; Cal. Farm., June 16, 1870; Des. News, 1866, Mar. 22, Apr. 19, May 17; 1879, May 7, 14; S. L. Contrib., iii. 61; Herald, May 23, 77; Review, 1871, Dee. 11, 19; Telegraph, May 26, 1868; Tribune, 1874, May 16; 1883, Oct. 20; Sac. Union, Nov. 26, Dec. 5, 1856; S. L. Herald, in Helena Gaz., Apr. 27, 1872; Cole, Cal., 18; Beadle's Letter, Jan. 1, 1869; Life in Utah, 346-7; The Morm. at Home, 94-5, 102, 111-12; Young's Wife No. 19, 124-6, 135-59; Olshausen, Gesch. Morm., 175-84; Smucker's Hist. Morm., 402-24; Bertrand's Mem. Morm., 173-217; Busch, Gesch. Morm., 105-33, 313-17; Marshall's Through Amer., 221; Stenhouse's Englishwoman in Utah, 38-9, 76-87, 153-4; Slater, Morm., 85-6; Burton's City of Saints, 217, 301-2; The Morm. Proph., 211-14; Ferris' Utah and Morm., 239, 248-64, 309-11; Mackay's The Morm., 287; Olympia, Pion. and Dem., Feb. 6, 1857; women's opposition, Stenhouse's Expose, 34-41, 72-84; Tell It All, 393-404, 420-58.

    For arguments against polygamy, see Ward's Husband in Utah, 180, 303-5; Beadle's Life in Utah, 262-4, 354-80; Nouv. Ann. Voy., cxliii. 183-4; Carvallo's Inc. of Travel, 151-4, 166-71; Hall's Morm. Exp., 52-5; Overland Monthly, vii. 551-8; De Rupert, Cal. and Morm., 153-62; Todd's Sunset Land, 161-212; Dilke's Greater Brit., i. 144-52; Remy's Journey, etc., ii. 137-72; Young's Wife No. 19, 98-109, 591-7; Pop. Scien. Month., lii. 479-90, lvi. 160-5; Codman's Round Trip, 173-277; Froiseth's Women, etc., passim; Jonveaux, L'Amer., 230-49; Waite's Morm. Proph., 216-60; Book of Morm., 83, 132; Doc. and Cov., 218, 330; Tuckcr's Morm., 184-6, 267, 283; Times and Seasons, iv. 369; Ferris' Utah and Morm., 309-10; Marshall's Through Amer., 178-9; Harper's Mag., liii. 647-51; Stansbury's Explor. Exp., 4-5; Life Among Morm., 123-59; Utah Scraps, 15-17; Townsend's Morm. Trials, 42-3; Greenwood's New Life, 131-71, 161-3; Hubner's Ramble, 90, 116; Olshausen, Morm., 175-82; McClure's Three Thous. Miles, etc., 158-9; Nordhoff's Cal., 43; Burton's City of Saints, 517-25; Crimes of L. D. Saints, 30-4; Hyde's Morm., 284-5; Dixon's White Conq., i. 200-14; Stenhouse's Expose, 47-51, 146-53; Taylder's Morm., 148-83; Barnes' Atlan. to Pac., 56-8; Greeley's Overland Jour., 238-41; Howitt's Hist. Amer., ii. 356; Richardson's Beyond Miss., 360-2; S. F. Advocate, Aug. 4, 1870; Alta, Mar. 26, 1877; Feb. 7, 1882; Bulletin, 1856, Aug. 18; 1860, Apr. 28; 1864, Jan. 18; 1865, Aug, 24; 1867, Oct. 25; 1870, Apr. 22, Sept. 2; 1871, Nov. 6; 1872, Sept. 25; 1873, Jan. 17, Dec. 17; [p. 390] 1875, Apr. 9; 1877, June 1, Aug. 3; 1878, Jan. 8, Nov. 1; 1879, Jan. 7, 10, 21; 1881, Aug. 22; Call, 1870, Mar. 27; 1871, June 30, Aug. 9, 18; 1872, Feb. 21, Sept. 6; 1873, Feb. 11; 1874, Jan. 14; 1879, Aug. 11; Cal. Farm., Apr. 17, 1863; Chronicle, 1869, June 26, July 28, Aug. 11, 17, 18, 22, Nov. 12, 28, Dec. 14; 1870, Jan. 28, Feb. 27, May 8, 17; 1871, Sept. 21, Oct. 4, 8, 14, 17, 31, Nov. 5, Dec. 2; 1872, Feb. 3, 10, Apr. 20, Oct. 10; 1873, Apr. 11, 12, July 17, 27, 31, Aug. 1, 6, 26, Mar. 4; 1880, Oct. 14, 24, Nov. 6, 14, 28; 1881, Jan. 9; Gol. Era, Sept. 26, 1869; News Letter, Mar. 16, 1867; Pacif. Observ., Nov. 10, 1871; Pioneer, Sept. 15, 1873; Post, 1879, Sept. 11, Dec. 5; Times, 1869, Jan. 5, Mar. 25; Town Talk, Nov. 26, 1856; Sac. Union, May 11, 1859; San Jose Herald, Apr. 20, 1877; Jackson (Am.) Ledger, Dec. 15, 1877; Sta Barbara Index, Mar. 8, 1877; San Rafael Jour., Oct. 16, 1879; May 20, 1880; Red Bluff Sentinel, Nov. 16, 1878; Jan. 18, 1879; Ukiah Democ., Sept. 6, 1879; Cres. City Cour., Oct. 15, 1879; Roseburg Plaindealer, Dec. 20, 1879; Marin Co. Jour., Oct. 16, 1879; Monterey Cal., Feb. 4, 1879; Antioch Ledger, Nov. 23, 1878; Healdsburg, Russ. Riv. Flag, Aug. 22, 1872; Ogden (Utah) Freeman, Max. 28, 1879; S. L. Anti-Polyg. Standard, June 1880; Contributor, iii. passim; Des. News, 1854, Aug. 24, Oct. 5; 1858, Aug. 11, 25; 1866, Mar. 29; 1867, July 3; 1869, Aug. 5, Sept. 22; 1870, Feb. 2; 1871, Nov. 1; 1878, Nov. 20; 1884, Sept. 10; Utah Rev., 1871, Aug. 18, Dec. 5; 1872, Jan. 12, 26; Tribune, 1872, May 25, June 1; 1874, Mar. 21, Apr. 4, Oct. 24; 1875, Aug. 21; 1876, Jan. 5, Nov. 19; 1877, Apr. 14, Aug. 25; 1878, Oct. 1, Nov. 22, Dec. 21; Apr. 20, May 9, June 25, 29, July 17, Aug. 23, Sept. 24, Oct. 3, 10, 29, Nov. 16; 1883, June 7; 1884, Sept. 7, 14; Austin (Nev.) Reese Riv. Reveil., Feb. 15, 1866, Mar. 5, 1872; Carson State Regis., Oct. 24, 1871; Elko Indep., Aug. 11, 1879; Eureka Sentinel, Aug. 28, 1879; Gold Hill News, Dec. 6, 1878; Tuscarora Times-Rev., Nov. 22, 1878; Virg. City Chron., Dec. 12, 1877; Winnemucca, Silv. State, Apr. 26, 1880; Prescott (Ariz.) Miner, Aug. 15, 1879; Helena (Mont.) Indep., Mar. 12, 1875; Boise (Idah.) News, Aug. 27, 1864; City Statesman, May 24, 1879; Oxford (Idah.) Enterprise, Oct. 9, 1879; Portland (Or.) Bee, Oct. 30, 1878; Oregonian, July 28, 1865; Ev. Telegram, May 1, 1879; Astoria, Astorian, Jan. 19, 1878; Eugene City Guard, Feb. 1, 1879; Salem Mercury, Oct. 29, 1870; Dy Talk, Nov. 7, 1879; socialism, Woods (J. O.), in N. Y. Church Union, Aug. 15, 1884; suggest. for suppress. polyg., Colfax, in Freiseth, Women, 360-2; Bliss in Id., 367-71; Ward's Husband in Utah, 55-62; Crimes of L .D. Saints, i.-iii.; Russling, Across Amer., 191-5; S. F. Alta, Jan. 8, 1880; Bulletin, Feb. 8, 1859; Nov. 29, 1883; Inyo Indep., July 27, 1872; sermons against, Smith (T. W.), in N. Y. Herald, Feb. 20, 1882; Higbee, A Discourse, etc., passim; Sac. Union, May 12, 1855; Nov. 15, 1856; S. L Review, Sept. 15, 1871; S. F. Alta, Nov. 8, 1878; Ogden Freeman, May 30, 1879; marriage, social and moral effects, Young's Wife No. 19, 388-9; S. F. Alta, Oct. 14, 1857; Pratt, in Des. News, Jan. 16, 1856; sealing for eternity, Chandless, Visit to S. L., 161-2; Stenhouse's Expose, 69-70; Rocky Mtn Saints, 586-8; .Englishwoman in Utah, 120-1; Tell It All, 405-19, 550, 607; S. F. Bulletin, Jan. 27, 1872; Oct. 29, 1878; Ferris' Utah and Mormons, 233-46; Young's Wife No. 19, 310-18; Ward's Husband in Utah, 12-38, 208-12; Hyde's Morm., 83-9; Tucker's Morm., 270-5; San Jose Herald-Argus, Nov. 22, 1878; Dall, My First Holiday, 91; first monog. marriage, S. F. Call, Feb. 8, 1865; divorce, Utah Laws, 1878, 1-2; Utah Scraps, 19; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 390-1, 554-8; S. F. Alta, 1873, July 31, Aug. 9, 23; Bulletin, 1877, Sept. 27, Oct. 11; Cal. Farm., May 12, 1870; Post, Feb. 13, 1873; Stock Exch., Feb. 23, 1878; Sta Rosa Times, Nov. 1, 1877; S. L. Tribune, 1874, Mar. 28; 1877, June 9, July 14, Sept. 29; Virg. City Chron., Sept. 27, 1877; dower, Paddock's La Tour, 293; [p. 391] Utah, Gov. Mess., 1882, 14; adultery, Dilke's Greater Brit., i. 127; Kanesville (Iowa) Front. Guard., June 13, 1851; Crimes of L. D. Saints, 2-6; condition of women, Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities, etc., 103-4; Leslie, California, etc., 76-102; Putnam's Mag., 144-607, passim; Utah Scraps, 18-19; Young's Wife No. 19, 224-531, passim; Cradlebaugh, Speech of, 4-7; Bowles' Our New West, 249-53; Ward's Husband in Utah, 23-303, passim; The Morm. Proph., 218-77; Life Among Morm., 183-6; Prime's Around the World, 31-2; Dilke's Greater Brit., i. 129; Hyde's Morm., 51-82, 158-67; Hall's Morm., 113; Tucker's Morm., 173-82, 275-6; Appleton's Jour., xi. 547-8; Morm. at Home, 116-85; Clark's Sights, MS., 7-11; Mackay's The Morm., 298, 303; Smith's Mys. and Crimes, 38-43; Bonwick's Morm. and Silv. Mines, 110-140; Jackson's Bits of Trav. at Home, 22-7; Greenwood's New Life, 160-1; Gunnison's Morm., 75, 159-61; Stenhouse's Englishwoman, 202-339; Expose, 96-190; Tell It All, passim; S. F. Alta, July 17, 1873; Call, Oct. 8, 1876; Bulletin, 1856, Nov. 24; 1858, Nov. 17; 1871, May 4, July 25; 1872, Sept. 30; 1872, Aug. 20; 1877, July 19; Herald, Nov. 24, 1856; Mail, Jan. 4, 1876; Pacif. Baptist, Sept. 17, 1874; Post, Nov. 18, 1872; Eureka Sentinel, Jan. 22, 1875; Placer Herald, Nov. 4, 1871; Red Bluff Indept, Apr. 3, 1867; Sac. Union, Aug. 25, 1855; Aug. 19, 1857; Bee, Nov. 9, 1878; S. L. Obispo Tribune, May 5, 1877; Stockton In-dept, Mar. 8, 1879; S. L. Des. News, Oct. 5, 1850; Jan. 15, 1868; Apr. 27, 1870; Herald, Nov. 12, 1878; June 25, 1879; Utah Rev., 1871, Aug, 21, Oct. 7, Dec. 7, 19; 1872, Jan. 17, 20, 24; Tribune, 1877, Apr. 28, May 19, 26, June 9; Kanesville (Iowa) Front. Guard., June 13, 1849; Belmont (Nev.) Cour., Jan. 12, 1878; Portland (Or.) Oregonian, Dec. 24, 1863; Ev. Telegram, May 5, 1879; Young's wives, Stenhouse's Englishwoman, 168-78; Expose, 154-97; Tell It All, 510-14; Ward's Husband in Utah, 243-4; Morm. at Home, 130-1; Young's Wife No. 19, 598-605; S. L. Tribune, 1874, Apr. 25, May 23, July 18; S. F. Call, 1874, Aug. 27, Oct. 4; 1866, Mar. 29, Aug. 2; 1867, Feb. 1; Deer Lodge (Mont.) New N. West, Jan. 31, 1874. For references to polygamy in presidential messages, see S. F. Times, June 27, 1869; U.S. H. Ex. Doc., i., 42 Cong., 2d Sess.; S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 1, 1872; Post, Feb. 15, 1873; Elko Indept, Dec. 18, 1875; S. L. Herald, Dec. 8, 1881; N. Y. The Nation, Dec. 15, 1881.

    In his message to the congress of 1883-4, the president favors a repeal of the organic act, and recommends a federal commission as a substitute. In commenting upon this, the Des. News declares that the destruction of the local government will fail to destroy polygamy, neither can 'commissions, edicts, or armies, or any other earthly powers,' for the plural marriages of the Mormons are ecclesiastical, perpetual, and eternal. Says W. S. Godbie, well-known writer on Mormonism, in a letter to the S. L. Tribune of Dec. 9, 1883, after first quoting George Q. Cannon as preaching in the tabernacle 'it is not vox populi vox Dei,' but 'vox Dei vox populi,' 'The essence of the whole Utah question lies couched in these telling words of the church organ and the leading apostle.'

    For the messages of Utah governors touching polygamy, see Utah Jour. Legis., 1862-3, app. v.-viii.; 1872, 32-4; 1876, 31-3, 34, 240; 1878, 43, 44-5, 47-9; Utah, Gov. Mess., 1882, 11; S. F. Call, Jan. 28, 1872; Jan. 17, 1878; Prescott Miner, Apr. 30, 1875; Morm. Prophet, 79-84; Hazen's report, in Hayes' Scraps, R. R. iii. 212; discussions in congress, S. F. Bulletin, Mar. 23, 1870; Call, 1870, Feb. 19, Mar. 24, Aug. 16; Chronicle, Feb. 16, 1882; Deer Lodge New N. West, Apr. 29, 1870; S. L .Dy Teletgraph, Mar. 23, 24, 1870; Des. News, May 16, 1860; Apr. 26, 1866; Apr. 3, 1867; Mar. 9, 1870; Apr. 6, 1870; Nov. 29, 1871; Mar. 6, 1872; Tribune, May 15, 1875; Millennial Star, xxxiv. 257-63, 268-71; [p. 392] Antioch Ledger, Jan. 17, 1874; Gooch's Speech, Apr. 1860; Green, Morm., 457-65; Beadle's Life in Utah, 523-6; Utah Pamph., Polit., no. 2; Id., Relig., no. 7; Colfax's Morm. Quest., passim; Prescott Miner, Apr. 30, 1875; also Cong. Globe, passim; bills introd. in congress, U. S. H. Jour., 34 Cong., 1st-2d Sess., 1117-18; U.S. Acts, 37 Cong., 2d Sess., 208-9; S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 1, 1870; S. L. Dy Telegraph, Mar. 25, 1870; Cong. Globe, 1870-1, 966; N. Y. Herald, Jan. 27, 1872; Utah, Jour. Legis., 1872, 84; 1878, 203-4; Nat. Quart. Rev., July 1879, 91-2; U. S. Dist Atty, in Froiseth's Women, etc., 334-5, 346 -51, 355; S. L. Herald, Dec. 15, 1881; Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 74-81; S. L. Contributor, iii. 204-13; S. F. Alta, 1874, Mar. 1, June 3, Dec. 6; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 14, 1881; Call, Jan. 9, 1879; Feb. 17, 1882; Chronicle, 1881, Dec. 13; 1882, Jan. 25, Feb. 17; 1884, June 18; Post, Feb. 27, 1873; June 3, 1874; S. Jose Mercury, Dec. 1878; Austin, Reese Riv. Reveil., Aug. 12, 1879; Eureka Sentinel, Jan. 28, 1879; Gold Hill News, Jan. 3, 1878; S. L. Tribune, Feb. 2, 1878; U.S. Acts and Res., passim.

    Arthur G. Sedgwick, in the Century Mag. for Jan. 1882, under the heading Leading Aspects of the Mormon Problem, refers to the various bills introduced, and mentions the most important prosecutions and their results: decis. of U.S. Supreme Ct, S. L. Herald, 1879, Jan. 8, May 23; Tribune, Aug. 2, 1879; S. F. Bulletin, 1879, Jan. 7, 8, Feb. 24; Eureka Sentinel, Jan. 16, 1879; evasion of the Edmunds law, S. F. Bulletin, 1883, Apr. 30, Sept. 29; grand juries, charges to, S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 9, 1858; Salem (Oregon) Argus, Aug. 28, 1858; Sac. Union, Apr. 20, 22, 1867; S. F. Call, Oct. 14, 1875; competency of polygamists as jurors, S. L. Utah Rev., 1871, Sept. 19, 27; report of, Deseret News, Oct. 3, 1877; rept of commission, Utah, Rept on Gov. Mess., 9-13; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 7, 1882; Chronicle, Oct. 3, 1882; cause of trouble with U.S., Richards' Narr., MS., 74; discuss. between Colfax and Morm., Bowles' Our New West, 238-41; Des. News, Feb. 9, 1870; Chaplain Newman and others, Pratt and Newman, etc., 3-67; Tullidge's Life of Young, 403-6; Newman, Sermon, passim; Des. News, Aug. 17, 1870; corresp. Newman and Young, Id., 1870, Aug. 10, 17;mass-meetings, memorials, petitions, and protests, Tullidge's Life of Young, 389-413; Women of Morm., 379-402, 528-31; Coyner's Letters, etc., vii.; Stenhouse's Englishwoman, etc., 373-4; Tell It All, 606-7; U.S. H. Ex. Doc., 58, 45 Cong., 3d Sess., 1-6; Utah Pamph., Relig., no. 18; The Cullom Bill, in Morm. Pamph., no. 6; S. F. Alta, Apr. 22, 1872; Bulletin, Jan. 18, 1870; Nov. 9, 1878; Jan. 21, 1879; Feb. 17, 23, 1882; Call, Nov. 8, 1878; Chronicle, Feb. 3, 27, 1882; Petaluma Argus, Nov. 22, 1878; Sac. Bee, Nov. 16, 1878; Stockton Indept, Jan. 21, 1878; Elko Indept, Nov. 15, 1878; Eureka Sentinel, Nov. 17, 1878; Gold Hill News, Nov. 8, 1878; Reno Gazette, Nov. 21, 1878; S. L. Contributor, iii. 155-6; Des. News, 1867, Jan. 16; 1870, Apr. 6; 1872, May 22, 29; Herald, June 14, 1879; Telegraph, Apr. 1, 1870; Tribune, 1878, Nov. 16, 23; the Reynolds case, Froiseth's Women, 401-12; Utah Pamph., Polit., no. 17, 20; Review of Opin., etc., in Morm. Pamph., no. 1; S. F. Bulletins, Aug. 21, 1874; Call, Dec. 22, 1875; Dec. 10, 1878; Elko Indept, 1878, Oct. 30, Nov. 13; 1879, Jan. 8; Eureka Sentinel, Aug. 6, 1879; Gold Hill News, Nov. 15, 1878; Tuscarora Times-Rev., Nov. 21, 1878; S. L. Coutributor, ii. 154-7, 188-90; Des. News, 1874, Oct. 28; 1875, Apr. 7; 1878, Oct. 9; 1879, Jan. 15, 29, Dec. 3; Herald, July 19, 1879; the Miles case, S. F. Bulletin, May 7, 1879; Call, Oct. 31, 1878; Sac. Rec.-Union, May 5, 7, 1879; Elko Indept, June 5, 1879; Virg. City Eve. Chron., Oct. 30, 31, Nov. 8, 1878; S. L. Des. News, 1878, Nov. 6, 13; 1879, May 7, 14, June 4; Herald, 1878, Oct. 27, 29, Nov. 5; 1879, Apr. 29, 30, May 1-4, 6, 7.

    On March 10, 1863, the president of the church was arrested, as we shall see later, the charge being polygamy, and brought under the act of July 1, 1862; the accused was placed under bonds in the sum of $2,000 to appear [p. 393] at the next sitting of the U.S. ct for the 3d judic. dist. On Oct. 2, 1871, he was again arrested on an indictment of the grand jury, found under the statutes of Utah; see Utah Laws, 58, sec. 32, which prohibits the cohabitation of persons not married to each other. On Jan. 2, 1872, Brigham was for the third time arrested, the accusation on this occasion being complicity in the murder of one Richard Yates in Echo Canon, in 1857. There being no government jail, and the prisoner old and feeble, he was allowed to remain in his own house under charge of the U.S. marshal. It does not appear that, beyond the annoyance caused by restraint of liberty, Brigham suffered in consequence of either of these charges. For details of the arrests, I refer to Millennial Star, xxv. 273-4, xxxiii. 696-700, 708-14, 728, xxxiv. 58-60, 70-1, 120-3, 209-15; S. F. Alta, 1871, Oct. 3, 4, 8, 13, 28, 29, Nov. 1, 22, 24, 1872, Apr. 26; Bulletin, 1871, Oct. 3, 9, 13, 25, 27, 30, 31, Nov. 21, 28; 1872, Jan. 3, 8, Apr. 26; Call, 1870, Jan. 3; 1871, Oct. 3, 5, 11, 17, Nov. 22, 28; 1872, Apr. 26; Examiner, 1871, Oct. 6, 9, 13, 17, 19, 25, Nov. 2, 22, 28; 1872, Jan. 3, Feb. 14; Gol. Era, Nov. 12, 1871; Sac. Unions, 1871, Oct. 6, 18; S. L. Des. News, 1871, Oct. 11, 18, Nov. 1, 8, 22; 1872, May 1; Tribune, 1872, Feb. 1, Apr. 27; Utah Review, 1871, Oct. 12, 13, 20, 21, Nov. 25, 27, Dec. 1, 4; 1872, Jan. 16, Feb. 10; Carson State Regis., Oct. 14, 1871; Elko Indept, Jan. 6, 1872; Silver City (Id.) Avalanche, Oct. 7, 1871; Portland (Or.) Deutsche Zeit., Nov. 4, 1871.

    On Oct. 28, 1871, Thomas Hawkins, of Salt Lake City, having been found guilty of adultery with two women, under a territorial statute approved by Gov. Young on Mar. 6, 1852, was sentenced to three years' imprisonment and to pay $500 fine; see S. F. Alta, Oct. 4, 1871; Bulletin, Nov. 3, 1871; Sac. Unions, 1871, Oct. 24, 30, Nov. 1. On Mar. 6, 1879, Dan. H. Wells was imprisoned for two days and fined $100 for contempt of court in refusing to testify as to the garments worn during the endowment ceremonies. Juv. Inst., xiv. 114-15; McClellan, Golden State, 587-9. In 1873, Ann Eliza Young, known as Wife No. 19, began suit against Brigham for divorce, with alimony. About two years later she was awarded $500 per month, which decision was afterward set aside, but not, Tullidge says, until Brigham had been imprisoned for contempt of court, and had paid two months' alimony and $4,000 counsel fees; see Young's Wife No. 19, 553-65; Tullidge's Life of Young, 431-3; Helena (Mont.) Indept, Nov. 25, 1875; Virginia Madisonian, June 9, 1877; S. F. Bulletin, 1873, July 29, 31; 1875, Feb. 26, May 11; 1876, Nov. 1, 8; Call, July 10, 1875; Los Angeles Star, May 5, 1877; Dayton (Lyon co.) Times, May 2, 1877; Eureka Sentinel, Jan. 10, 1879; Gold Hill News, Apr. 28, 1877; S. L. Des. News, Apr. 24, 1872; Sept. 2, 1874; Mar. 3, Nov. 3, 24, 1875; Aug. 2, Nov. 8, 1876; Tribune, Nov. 16, 1875; July 22, 1876; Apr. 28, 1877.

    Herewith I give a table, brought down to include 1882, compiled from census of 1880, police and penitentiary statistics, and report of commissioners appointed under the Edmunds bill, comparing the distribution of criminals [p. 394] between Mormon and non-Mormon. The table includes the Mormon settlements in Idaho.

           

       Mormons

       Non-Mormon

     
      Murder, manslaughter, and all assaults endangering life

       41

       317

     
      Rape

       1

       5

     
      Prostitution

       --

       95

     
      Keeping brothels

       --

       27

     
      Lewd conduct, insulting women, exposing person, nuisance, obscene and   profane language

       4

       47

     
      Forgery and counterfeiting

       --

       8

     
      Drunkenness, etc

       109

       594

     
      Violation of liquor ordinance

       --

       18

     
      Gambling

       --

       52

     
      Robbery and burglary

       4

       62

     
      Disturbing the peace

       34

       111

     
      Bigamy

       --

       1

     
      Destroying property

       15

       26

     
      Arson

       --

       2

     
      Obtaining property under false pretences

       --

       25

     
      Opium-smoking, etc

       --

       16

     
      Stealing railroad rides

       --

       19

     
      Vagrancy

       --

       147

     
      Violating prison rules

        --

            6

     
       

       208

       1,578

     
       

       Mormon

       Non-Mormon

     
      Confined in Utah penitentiary

       6

       22

     
      Confined in S. L. co. jail

       14

       97

     
      Confined in Oneida co. jail

       1

       30

     
      Confined in Idaho penitentiary

       --

       6

     
      Confined in Bear Lake co. jail

       --

       1

     
       The prostitutes enumerated are those in S. L. City only; to these it will be safe to add as many more living in the outside towns and mining camps. In 1880, the population of Utah was 143,963, that of Oneida. co., Idaho, was 6,964, and there were 3,235 souls in Bear Lake county. About 7,000 women were in 1885 living in polygamy in Utah. See Richards' Crime in Utah, MS., passim.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 397]

  

CHAPTER XVI.
 MISSIONS AND IMMIGRATION.
 1830-1883.

MORMON MISSIONARIES--PARLEY PRATT AND HIS COLLEAGUES--MISSIONARY LABOR IN CANADA--IN GREAT BRITAIN--MISSIONARIES IN EUROPE--AND IN OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD--THE PERPETUAL EMIGRATION FUND--A GENERAL EPISTLE OF THE TWELVE--FROM LIVERPOOL TO SALT LAKE CITY FOR FIFTY DOLLARS--EMIGRANT SHIPS--REPORT OF A LIVERPOOL MANAGER--THE PASSAGE TO NEW ORLEANS--OVERLAND TRAVEL--CLASSES OF EMIGRANTS--GEORGE A. SMITH'S COMPANIES AT SOUTH PASS--THE HAND-CART EMIGRATION--BIOGRAPHICAL.

    OF the twenty-five or thirty thousand latter-day saints gathered in the valley of the Great Salt Lake at the close of the year 1852, less than one third came from Nauvoo; nearly seven thousand proselytes had arrived from various parts of Europe, and the remainder consisted principally of converts made in the United States. [*1] As to the number of those who

[p. 398]

had been baptized into the faith in various paris of the world, and were waiting for means or opportunity to emigrate, there are no reliable data; but they probably amounted to not less than 150,000, and possibly to a larger number.

    Thus within little more than twenty years the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints had increased from a handful to an army. And theirs was a new religion, a new revelation, not an ancient faith; they chose for their proselytizing efforts civilized rather than savage fields. In their missionary adventures no sect was ever more devoted, more self-sacrificing, or more successful. The catholic friars in their new-world excursions were not more indifferent to life, wealth, health, and comfort, not more indifferent to scorn and insult, not more filled with high courage and lofty enthusiasm, than were the Mormon elders in their old-world enterprises. In all their movements they were circumspect, moderate, studying the idiosyncrasies of the several nations in which they labored, and careful about running unnecessarily counter to their prejudices.

    On reaching the scene of his labors, the missionary earned his daily bread by some trade or handicraft, not even refusing domestic service, in order to provide for his wants, and meanwhile studying the language of the people among whom he lived. Many were cast into dungeons, where they were forced to live on bread and water; many travelled on foot from district to district, with no other food than the roots which they dug near the wayside; many journeyed under the rays of a tropical sun, the water trickling from the rocks and the berries hanging from the bushes forming at times their only sustenance. [*2]

    The term of their labors had no certain limit, depending entirely on the will of the first presidency. For the more distant missions it was seldom less than two years or more than six. They must remain at

[p. 399]

their post until ordered home; and when recalled, they were often forced to earn by their own labor the means of crossing seas and deserts. Restored at length to their families, they were ready to set forth at a day's notice to new fields of labor; and for all this self-denial they sought no earthly reward, esteeming it as their greatest privilege thus to give proof of their unfailing devotion to the church.

    One of the first Mormon missions of which we have any record was sent forth in October 1830, in which year, as will be remembered, it was ordered that Pratt, Cowdery, Whitmer, and Peterson should go and preach the gospel to the Lamanites. During their progress they labored for a season among the Wyandots in western Ohio. Thence they journeyed to Cincinnati, but meeting there with little success, proceeded to St Louis, preaching at several points on their way to large congregations. Starting forth westward early in the spring, they travelled for 300 miles through the snow, sometimes knee-deep, their food being corn bread and raw frozen pork. After a journey of 1,500 miles, occupying about four months, they reached Independence, having preached the gospel to thousands of the gentiles, baptizing and confirming many hundreds, and establishing several churches. [*3]

[p. 400]

    For twenty-five years Parley labored at intervals as a missionary in various parts of the Union, [*4] and in 1845 was appointed president of the churches in New England and the middle states. During his

[p. 401]

career he made several thousand proselytes, and wheresoever he set foot, seldom failed of success.

    "Of all the places in which the English language is spoken," writes Parley in 1838, "I find the city of New York to be the most difficult as to access to the minds or attention of the people. From July to January we preached, advertised, printed, published, [*5] testified, visited, talked, prayed, and wept in vain." Elijah Fordham was with him, and for several weeks only six proselytes were made, of whom two or three sometimes met in a small upper room in an obscure street.

    Sorely discouraged, the two elders invited their converts to a last prayer-meeting, intending to set forth for New Orleans. Each prayed in turn, when suddenly the room was filled with the holy spirit, and all began to prophesy and speak in tongues. "They should tarry in the city and go not thence as yet; for the Lord had many people in that city, and he had now come by the power of his holy spirit to gather them into his fold."

    Among the converts was a chairmaker, named David Rogers, who now fitted up a large chamber at his own expense and invited the elders to preach. The room was crowded at the first meeting, and soon afterward the elders were ministering at fifteen different places throughout the city, all of which were crowded, sometimes preaching twice a day almost every day in the week, besides visiting from house to house. [*6]

    Mention has already been made of the labors of Brigham Young and other missionaries in various

[p. 402]

parts of the United States. To relate them in detail for each succeeding year would more than occupy the space alotted to this volume, and for further particulars I refer the reader to the note subjoined. [*7] It

[p. 403]

remains only to add that, throughout the Union, the Mormons were less successful in making proselytes than in some other parts of the world, especially in Great Britain and northern Europe.

 

    In the year 1833, Orson Pratt was sent as a missionary to southern Canada, and [*8] about the same date Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon organized a church near Hamilton. In 1836, Parley Pratt, brother to Orson, being then one of the twelve, was sent to Upper Canada [*9] to preach and establish a church; and from this ministry it was foretold that the gospel should spread into England. With him went Brother Nickerson, who parted company at Hamilton. Left alone, knowing no one, having no money, what should he do? His destination was Toronto; fare by steamer two dollars; it would be a tedious journey on foot. He entered his closet and prayed to the Lord, then stepped out upon the street and began chatting with the people. Presently he was accosted by a stranger who asked his name, and whither he was going, and if he did not want money. Parley answered, explaining his position, whereupon the stranger gave him ten dollars, and a letter of introduction to John Taylor, a merchant of Toronto, where he arrived the same day. He was kindly received by Mr and Mrs

[p. 404]

[paragraph continues] Taylor, but they could give him no direct encouragement; he took tea with them, and then sought lodgings at a public house. In the morning he visited the clergymen of the place, none of whom would open to him their dwellings or places of worship. Then he applied to the sheriff for the use of the court-house, then to the authorities for a public room in the market-place, and with no better result. The prospect was dark, considering the prophecies concerning this mission. Again and again he tried with no better success. His resources were exhausted; he could do nothing more; he must depart.

    He retired to a grove just outside the town and prayed. His heart was very heavy. He returned to the house of John Taylor, where he had left his handful of baggage, and bade his friends farewell. Mr Taylor was touched with pity, and held him for a moment in conversation, during which a Mrs Walton entered and began talking in an adjoining room with Mrs Taylor, who spoke of Parley's failure, saying: "He may be a man of God, and I am sorry to have him depart." The visitor was at once deeply interested. "Indeed," she said, "I feel that it is so, and that I was directed hither by the spirit of the Lord. I am a widow; but I have a spare room and bed, and food in plenty. My son will come and guide him to my house, which shall be his home; and there are two large rooms to preach in." Parley gladly accepted the offer. His labors were thenceforth attended with success. Mrs Walton soon received baptism; a friend of hers, a poor widow, was miraculously cured of blindness, and many in consequence believed.

    There was a Mr Patrick, a wealthy and influential man, whose custom it was every sabbath to hold in his house a meeting, wherein were discussed questions concerning salvation, without regard to doctrine or dogma. Both John Taylor and Mrs Walton were in the habit of attending these meetings, the former frequently taking a part in the discussions. On one occasion

[p. 405]

[paragraph continues] Parley attended, and was invited to speak, but declined, preferring to give a special call, which he did. At the appointed hour the rooms were filled; at the close of a powerful discourse another meeting was called for, and then another. Taylor became more and more interested; he once accompanied Parley into the country where he had promised to preach; at length, with Mrs Taylor, he was baptized. Thus was a shining light brought into the church, a branch of which was now established in Toronto, and was the forerunner of the mission work in Great Britain. [*10]

    During the year 1837, Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde, of the quorum of the twelve, accompanied by Willard Richards, were placed at the head of a mission to England, the members of which were drawn from elders of the church in Canada, and several of whom were English, or had friends in England. The elders chosen were Joseph Fielding, Isaac Russell, John Goodson, and John Snider. [*11] Taking ship for Liverpool, where they arrived on the 20th of July, [*12] apostles Kimball, Hyde, and Willard Richards landed without the means of paying for their first night's lodging; but the remainder of the party furnishing the funds, all secured apartments in the same dwelling, and two days later took coach for Preston. Here at Vauxhall Chapel, then in charge of the Rev. James Fielding, brother to Elder Fielding, the doctrines of Mormonism were first proclaimed in Great Britain, Kimball giving a brief account of the origin of the church, and of the teachings of the book of Mormon.

[p. 406]

    The work prospered, and within a few months about 1,500 converts were made, [*13] not only at Preston, but also at Manchester, Leeds, Birmingham, and as we shall see later, in Glasgow and in the south of Wales. In April 1840, when was held, at Preston, the first council of the twelve in a foreign land, Brigham Young, who arrived in England during this year, [*14] being elected their president, the church claimed in the British Islands nearly 2,000 proselytes, [*15] in April 1841 more than 6,000, [*16] and at the close of 1852 more than 32,000. According to a statistical report of the church throughout the United Kingdom for the half-year ending December 31, 1852, there were at that date 742 branches, 17 of the quorum of seventies, 10 high-priests, 1,913 priests, 2,752 elders, 1,446 teachers, and 856

[p. 407]

deacons. [*17] It is worthy of note that the number of members at this date was about the same as is stated in the report dated June 1, 1851, [*18] no interval of this length having previously occurred during which the number of proselytes was not largely increased. Meanwhile, however, the number of branches had increased by 100, and during the last half of the year 1852 more than 2,000 members had emigrated.

    Manchester conference, with its starved factory operatives, heads the list with 3,282 members, and those who have visited any of the great manufacturing towns of Lancashire, where in winter men, women, and children may be seen hastening from their ill-drained hovels through the snow and slush of the dark streets to the cotton-mill, returning exhausted with toil to their supper of bread and tea, will not wonder that these hapless human beings were glad to exchange their hard lot for the plenty of the promised land. In London the number of proselytes was 2,464, in Birmingham 1,883, in Norwich 1,061, and in Liverpool 1,041. In no other town or city does the number amount to one thousand, though most of the shires of England are represented in the list of branches.

    At this period the British Islands were justly termed the stronghold of Mormonism; and that Mormon missionaries made in that country a deep and abiding impression is shown by the fact that their 32,000 proselytes, nearly all of them being mechanics, laborers, or factory operatives, expended of their scant earnings nearly one dollar per capita a year for the purchase of Mormon books, periodicals, and insignia. [*19]

[p. 408]

[paragraph continues] In later-years a strong reaction set in, the members of the church at the close of 1878 mustering only 2,904, the number of branches having decreased to

[p. 409]

[paragraph continues] 98, of priests to 182, of elders to 521, of teachers to 105; and of deacons to 128. [*20]

    In Wales and Scotland the Mormons were at first no less successful, the number of proselytes at the close of 1852 being in the former country nearly 5,000, [*21] and in the latter more than 3,000; [*22] but in these countries also a reaction occurred, the number of Welsh members at the close of 1878 having fallen to 325 and of Scotch to 351. [*23] In Ireland, as in other catholic countries, their missionaries were regarded with little favor, the converts mustering in 1852 only 245, though between 1846 and 1852 Ireland was passing through the years of her sorest tribulation, and those of her people who accepted Mormonism

[p. 410]

had an opportunity, as we shall see later, of improving their condition. [*24]

    In British India, [*25] Ceylon, British Guiana, at the cape of Good Hope, in the West Indies, [*26] in Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, [*27] Malta, and Gibraltar, there were also branches of the church, though in none of the British colonies were the missionaries received so cordially as in the mother country.

[p. 411]

    In France and Germany few proselytes were made. In the former country there were, in June 1850, branches of the church at Paris, Boulogne, Calais, and Havre; but the total number of members was probably little more than a hundred. [*28] In Germany the Mormons were even less successful. In 1853 Elder Carn, who, two years before, had been imprisoned and afterward expelled from the confederation for preaching Mormonism, applied at Berlin for permission to hold meetings. The answer was that he must leave the city immediately under pain of transportation. [*29] In Holland, [*30] Denmark, [*31] Scandinavia, [*32]

[p. 412]

[paragraph continues] Iceland, [*33] where was published The Voice of Joseph, [*34] in Italy, Switzerland, [*35] in Mexico, [*36] in Chili, in China, in Siam, [*37] in the Sandwich and Society islands, [*38]

[p. 413]

and even in Jerusalem, was the Mormon gospel preached. [*39]

 

    It may be stated in general terms that the success of Mormon evangelism has been the most pronounced in countries where the climate is harsh, where wages are low, and the conditions of life severe, where there is freedom of conscience, and where there is a large class of illiterate men and women, prone to superstition and fanaticism. Elsewhere no lasting impression has been made. Thus for many years the stronghold of Mormonism was, as we have seen, in England, while in the British colonies, where for the most part food is cheap, labor is in demand at living rates, and the people are somewhat more enlightened than in the mother country, missionaries have met with little encouragement. In Norway, Sweden, and Denmark large numbers of proselytes have also been baptized; but in central and southern Europe, with the exception perhaps of Switzerland, the results have been meagre, and accomplished with great effort. The Scandinavian and British missions, the former including Denmark, claimed, at the close of 1878, nearly 8,000 members of the church; [*40] and it is probable that in other parts of Europe there could not be

[p. 414]

found more than 2,000 or 3,000 additional members. If to these figures be added 15,000 converts distributed throughout the United States, 4,000 in British America, 3,000 in the Sandwich and Society islands, and perhaps 2,000 elsewhere in the world, we have a total of 35,000 latter-day saints scattered among the gentiles; and estimating the population of Utah at 140,000, a total of 175,000 professing the Mormon faith. [*41]

    Of the present population of Utah, about one third are of foreign birth, and at least another third of foreign parentage, converts having been gathered to Zion as speedily as the means could be furnished, from the earliest days of Mormon evangelism.

    Between 1837 and 1851 about 17,000 proselytes set sail from England, [*42] among them a considerable percentage belonging to other nationalities. In the latter year, not more than 3,000 persons arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, including converts from the United States; although at this time it was published in American and copied in European papers that proselytes by the hundred thousand were on their way. In 1852 immigration was on a somewhat larger scale. [*43] During a single month 352 converts

[p. 415]

took ship from Liverpool, of whom 108 were laborers, the remainder being farmers, joiners, shoemakers, rope-makers, watch-makers, engine-makers, weavers, tailors, masons, butchers, bakers, painters, potters, dyers, iron-moulders, glass-cutters, nail-makers, basket-makers, sawyers, gun-makers, saddlers, miners, smiths, and shipwrights. [*44] Of the total emigration between 1850 and 1854, it was estimated that 28 per cent were laborers, 14 per cent miners, and about 27 per cent mechanics, among every two hundred being found one domestic servant, a shepherd, and a printer, and among every five hundred a schoolmaster, with here and there a university graduate, usually of no occupation, a dancing-master, a doctor, a dentist, and a retired or cashiered army officer. [*45] For each emigrant as he arrived was apportioned an allotment of ground, and thus all became landed proprietors; though few brought with them capital, save the ability to labor, and many had not the means wherewith to pay for their passage.

 

    On October 6, 1849, was organized at Salt Lake City the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, for the purpose of aiding the poor to remove from Europe and the United States. [*46] The company has continued

[p. 416]

in operation for nearly forty years, and through it fifty thousand persons have been assisted in removing to Utah. "The fund was gotten up," says Woodruff, "on the principle of perpetual succession, to continue increasing on condition of the people acting honestly, and in accordance with their covenants repaying the amounts...which had been advanced. [*47] The sum thus loaned was usually refunded as soon as possible, for this obligation was held sacred by most of the saints, some working out their indebtedness at the public ateliers of the tithing office, and receiving meanwhile half the value of their labor, besides being supplied with food. There were many, however, who neglected or were unable to pay the advance, the amount due to the funds increasing gradually, until, in 1880, it had reached, with interest, $1,604,000. At the jubilee conference, held in April of this year, one half of the debt was remitted in favor of the most worthy and needy of the assisted emigrants. [*48]

 

    On the 1st of May, 1852, Samuel W. Richards was placed in charge of the British mission, and on September 30th was appointed agent of the emigration company. During this and the following year emigration parties were organized with better system, and the benefits of the fund extended to larger numbers than during any previous period. On July 17, 1852, was published in the Millennial Star the seventh general epistle of the twelve. "Finally, brethren, fear God;

[p. 417]

work righteousness, and come home speedily. Prepare against another season to come by tens of thousands; and think not that your way is going to be opened to come in chariots, feasting on the fat of all lands. We have been willing to live on bread and water, and many times very little bread too, for years, that we might search out and plant the saints in a goodly land. This we have accomplished, through the blessing of our heavenly father; and we now invite you to a feast of fat things, to a land that will supply all your wants with reasonable labor; therefore let all who can procure a bit of bread, and one garment on their back, be assured there is water plenty and pure by the way, and doubt no longer, but come next year to the place of gathering, and even in flocks, as doves fly to their windows before a storm."

    These words were repeated by hundreds of elders throughout the United Kingdom, and no second invitation was needed. Men offered themselves by thousands, begging for passage to the land of the saints, promising to walk the entire way from St Louis to Salt Lake City, and to assist in hauling the provisions and baggage. To meet this demand, it was determined to despatch emigrants for the ensuing season at the low rate of L10 sterling per capita for the entire journey, [*49] including provisions, and nearly one thousand persons availed themselves of the opportunity. There were now four classes of emigrants: first, those assisted from the fund by order from Salt Lake City; second, assisted emigrants selected in Great Britain; third, the L10 emigrants; fourth, emigrants who paid all their own expenses and sent forward money to procure teams. [*50] The entire outlay

[p. 418]

for the season's emigration was not less than L30,000. A year or two later it was found necessary to increase the minimum charge from L10 to L13, on account of the greater cost of provisions, wagons, and cattle, caused by the California emigration.

    Of emigrant travel by sea and land we have interesting records. Excepting perhaps some parts of Soudan, there were, at this date, few places in the world more difficult to reach than the valley of the Great Salt Lake. After arriving at New Orleans, a journey of more than three thousand miles awaited the emigrants by way of St Louis and Council Bluffs, from which latter point they must proceed in wagons or on foot across the wilderness, travelling in this primitive fashion for three weary months before reaching their destination. Of all the thousands who set forth on this toilsome pilgrimage, few failed to reach the city of the saints, the loss of life, whether of man or beast, being very much below that which was suffered by parties bound for the gold-fields of California. While at sea, every provision was made for their health and comfort, and after reaching Council Bluffs none were allowed to start until their outfit was complete and their party fully organized.

    The Liverpool manager of one of the New Orleans packet lines speaks in the highest terms of his intercourse with the Mormons during the year 1850. He states that they were generally intelligent and well behaved, and many of them highly respectable. After mentioning the vocations of the emigrants, he declares that the precautions taken for the preservation of order, decency, and cleanliness on board were admirable, and well worthy of imitation; and that from his observation of the slovenly and dirty habits of other classes of emigrants, it would not only conduce to their comfort and health, but would absolutely save the lives of many if similar regulations were introduced. [*51]

[p. 419]

    The Mormons objected to take passage in ships which carried other emigrants; or, if they embarked in such vessels, it was always arranged that a partition should be built to separate them from the gentiles. The dietary was on a scale [*52] that gave to most of them better fare than that to which they had before been accustomed. Many of the vessels chartered for New Orleans were of large tonnage, some of them carrying as many as a thousand passengers. When on board, the brethren were divided into wards, each with its bishop and two councillors, who were implicitly obeyed. The centre of the ship was occupied by married couples, single men being placed in the bow and single women in the stern. Strict discipline was enforced on the voyage. [*53] Divine service was held each day, morning and evening, when the weather was favorable, and on Sundays an awning was spread over the main deck, and spare spars so arranged as to furnish seats. Among many of the companies were excellent choirs, which rendered the church music; and during the passage there were frequent entertainments, concerts, and dance-parties, in which the captain and officers of the ship participated.

    After landing, the same organization was maintained. Remaining for a few days at New Orleans, the emigrants were conveyed in companies by steamer to St Louis, and thence proceeded to Council Bluffs. [*54] Here

[p. 420]

they rested for a time to recruit themselves and their cattle, and those who were without funds worked for the means wherewith to continue their journey, or waited until supplied with money from the emigration fund.

    When the brethren were ready to set forth for Salt Lake City, they were divided into companies of ten, fifty, and a hundred, and the order of march was the same as that adopted in 1848, during the migration from Nauvoo. For every party of ten, a wagon, two oxen, two milch cows, and a tent were provided. Each wagon was examined by one of the bishops, and none were allowed to start that did not contain the requisite quantity of provisions [*55] and ammunition. All who were capable of bearing arms were required to carry a rifle or musket. Any surplus means that the members might possess was invested in breadstuffs, groceries, dry goods, clothing, cattle, seeds, or implements.

    Of the journey of the emigrant trains from Council Bluffs to the city of the saints, little remains to be said, as mention of this matter has been made in a previous chapter. To each emigrant as he travelled his wagon served for bedroom, parlor, and kitchen, and sometimes even as a boat in which to convey his effects over river or swamp. The average day's journey did not exceed thirteen miles, though the trains were in motion almost from sunrise until even-fall, a halt being made for the mid-day meal, and in order to give the cattle time to graze. Many of the caravans consisted of several hundred wagons, some of them drawn by six or eight oxen, and with every company went large bands of live-stock. [*56] The procession, as it moved

[p. 421]

slowly along with its endless train of vehicles and its hundreds of cattle, sheep, horses, and mules, formed a picturesque and motley spectacle. Among the members of the party were to be found the New England man with his stock of trading goods, the southerner with his colored attendant, the Englishman with his box of mechanic's tools, the Dane, the Swiss, and the Scandinavian with their implements of agriculture. There were few trades and few nationalities not represented, and few professions save that of the lawyer. Among the proselytes were university graduates, physicians, ministers, army and navy officers, school-masters, merchants, storekeepers, and even pawnbrokers. Yet amidst all this heterogeneous gathering, throughout all the hardships and privations of the march, there was little strife or discord; and never did it happen, as was often the case with parties bound for the gold-fields, that a Mormon company broke up into fragments through the dissension of its members. [*57]

    Those who set forth early in the season--not later than the middle of June--seldom met with any serious disaster; and it was recommended that none should leave Council Bluffs after that time of year, on account of the severe snow-storms that sometimes prevailed in the mountains during autumn. In October 1849, for instance, while crossing Rocky Ridge, near the summit of South Pass, a party in charge of George A. Smith, the prophet's cousin, encountered a storm, in which more than sixty of their cattle perished. Toward night on the 2d a strong wind set in from the north-east, accompanied with driving snow. The company encamped on a branch of the Sweetwater,

[p. 422]

driving their cattle into a willow copse near by, as to build a corral was impossible. The wind freshened into a gale, and then into a hurricane, howling incessantly for thirty-six hours, and drifting the snow in every direction. For two nights women and children lay under their frail covering, exposed to the blast, with no food but a morsel of bread or biscuit. Tents and wagon-tops were blown away, and the wagons buried almost to the tops of their wheels in the snow-drifts. No fires could be lighted; little food could be had; no aid was nigh; and now, in this wintry solitude, though within a few days' march of the valley, the saints expected no other fate than to leave their bodies a prey to the wolves and the vultures.

    At length the storm abated, and making their way toward the willow copse, the men found nearly half their cattle lying stiff amid the snow-banks, while others died from the effects of the storm. Not a human life was lost, however, though in this neighborhood many a grave was passed, some of friends near and dear, some of gold-seekers, whose bodies had been disinterred and half devoured by the wolves, and some of their persecutors in Illinois and Missouri, whose bones lay bleaching in the sun, a head-board with name, age, and date of decease being all that remained to mark their resting-place. [*58]

 

    Until the year 1856 the poorer classes of emigrants were supplied with ox-teams for the overland portion of the trip, the total cost of the journey from Liverpool, including provisions, never exceeding sixty dollars. There were thousands of converts in Europe, however,

[p. 423]

who were anxious to be gathered unto Zion, but could not command even this sum, and measures were now considered whereby the expense could be reduced. After much discussion, it was decided that parties should cross the plains with hand-carts, in which they were to carry their baggage, wagons being provided only for tents, extra provisions, and those who were unable to walk. Instructions to this effect were issued from Brigham Young, September 30, 1855, and in a general epistle of the twelve, dated October 29th, a circular being published in Liverpool about four months later by the presidency of the British Isles, in which the rate of passage was fixed at L9 sterling per capita. [*59] "The Lord, through his prophet, says of the poor, 'Let them come on foot, with hand-carts or wheelbarrows; let them gird up their loins, and walk through, and nothing shall hinder them.'"

    Iowa City was selected as the point of outfit, and there the hand-carts were built. They were of somewhat primitive fashion, the shafts being about five feet long and of hickory or oak, with cross-pieces, one of them serving for handle, forming the bed of the cart, under the centre of which was a wooden axle-tree, the wheels being also of wood, with a light iron band, and the entire weight of the vehicle about sixty pounds. [*60] Better carts were provided in subsequent years. When the hand-cart emigrants, about thirteen hundred in number, set forth from Liverpool, they were assured that everything would be provided for them on their arrival at Iowa City; but on reaching that point many of them were delayed for weeks until the carts were built. Three companies started early in the season and made the journey without mishap. [*61] The next company, under Captain James G. Willie,

[p. 424]

was not in motion until the middle of July, and the last that season, under Captain Edward Martin, not until the end of that month. They were divided, as usual, into hundreds, Willie's company being somewhat below that number; and for each hundred were furnished twenty hand-carts, five tents, three or four milch cows, and a wagon with three yoke of oxen to convey the provisions and tents, the quantity of clothing and bedding being limited to seventeen pounds per capita, and the freight of each cart, including cooking utensils, being about one hundred pounds.

    Willie's company reached Winter Quarters, or Florence, as it was now termed, near the middle of August, and here a meeting was held to decide whether they should continue their journey or encamp for the winter. They had yet more than a thousand miles to travel, and with their utmost effort could not expect to arrive in the valley until late in November. The matter was left with the elders, all of whom, except one named Levi Savage, counselled them to go forward and trust in the Lord, who would surely protect his people. Savage declared that they should trust also to such common sense as the Lord had given them. From his certain knowledge, the company, containing as it did so large a number of the aged and infirm, of women and children, could not cross the mountains thus late in the season, without much suffering, sickness, and death. He was overruled and rebuked for want of faith. "Brethren and sisters," he replied, "what I have said I know to be true; but seeing you are to go forward, I will go with you. May God in his mercy preserve us."

    The company set forth from Florence on the 18th, and on each hand-cart was now placed a ninety-eight-pound sack of flour, as the wagons could not carry the entire load. At first they travelled about fifteen miles a day, although delays were caused by the breaking of wheels and axles, the heat and aridity of the plains and mountain country speedily making many of the cart-wheels rickety, and unable to sustain their

[p. 425]

burdens without frequent repairs. Some shod the axles of their carts with old leather, others with tin from the plates and kettles of their mess outfit; and for grease they used their allowance of bacon, and even their soap, of which they had but little. On reaching Wood River, the cattle stampeded, [*62] and thirty head were lost, the remainder being only sufficient to allow one yoke to each wagon. The beef cattle, milk cows, and heifers were used as draught animals, but were of little service, and it was found necessary to place another sack of flour on each hand-cart. The issue of beef was then stopped, the cows gave no milk, and the daily ration was reduced to a pound of flour, with a little rice, sugar, coffee, and bacon, an allowance which only furnished breakfast for some of the men, who fasted for the remainder of the day.

    While encamped on the north fork of the Platte, the emigrants were overtaken by F. D. Richards, W. H. Kimball, G. D. Grant, and a party of elders, returning from foreign missions, who gave them what encouragement they could. "Though it might storm on their right and on their left, the Lord would keep open their way before them, and they would reach Zion in safety." After camping with them for one night, the elders went on their way, promising to leave provisions for them at Fort Laramie if possible, and to send aid from Salt Lake City. On reaching Laramie no provisions were found, and rations were again reduced, men able to work receiving twelve ounces of flour daily, women and old men nine ounces, and children from four to eight ounces.

    As the emigrants travelled along the banks of the Sweetwater, the nights became severe, and their bed-covering was now insufficient. Before them were the mountains, clad almost to the base with snow, where already the storms of winter were gathering. Gradually the old and infirm began to droop, and soon deaths became frequent, the companies seldom leaving

[p. 426]

their camping-ground without burying one or more of the party. Then able-bodied men began to succumb, a few of them continuing to pull their carts until the day before they died, and one or two even on the day of their death. On the morning when the first snowstorm occurred, the last ration of flour was issued, and a march of sixteen miles was before them to the nearest camping-ground on the Sweetwater. The task seemed hopeless; but at noon a wagon drove up, containing Joseph A. Young and Stephen Taylor, from Salt Lake City, who told them that a train of supplies was on the way, and would reach them in a day or two. Young and Taylor immediately went on to meet Martin's company, which it was feared was even in worse plight than that of Captain Willie. Thus encouraged, the emigrants pushed forward, and by doubling their teams, while the strongest of the party helped the weak to drag along their carts, all reached the camping-ground, though some of the cattle perished, and during the night five persons died of cold and exhaustion.

    In the morning the snow was a foot deep; and now there remained only two barrels of biscuit, a few pounds of sugar and dried apples, and a quarter of a sack of rice. Two of the disabled cattle were killed, their carcasses issued for beef, and on this and a small dole of biscuit the emigrants were told that they must subsist until supplies reached them, the small remnant of provisions being reserved for the young children and the sick. It was now decided to remain in camp, while Captain Willie with one of the elders went in search of the supply trains. The small allowance of beef and biscuit was consumed the first day, and on the second day more cattle were killed and eaten without biscuit. On the next day there was nothing to eat, for no more cattle could be spared, and still the supplies came not, being delayed by the same storm which the emigrants had encountered. During these three

[p. 427]

days many died and numbers sickened, some expiring in the arms of those who were themselves almost at the point of death, mothers clasping with their dying clutch the remnants of their tattered clothing around the wan forms of their perishing infants, and, most pitiful sight of all, strong men begging for the morsel of food that had been set apart for the sick and helpless.

    It was now the evening of the third day, and the sun was sinking behind the snow-clad ranges, which could be traced far to the west amid the clear, frosty atmosphere of the desert. There were many who, while they gazed on this scene, did not expect to see the light of another day, and there were many who cared no longer for life, having lost all that makes life precious. They retired to their tents, and commending themselves to their maker, lay down to rest, perchance to die. But presently a shout of joy was raised, as from an eminence near the western portion of the camp covered wagons were seen approaching, with Willie at their head. In charge of the train were Kimball and Grant, who distributed to the companies about half of their provisions, together with a quantity of warm clothing, blankets, and buffalo-robes, the remainder being sent forward under charge of Grant for the use of Martin's company, while Kimball now took command of Willie's detachment.

    But the troubles of the hand-cart emigrants were not yet at an end. Some were already beyond all human aid; some had lost their reason, and around others the blackness of despair had gathered, all efforts to rouse them from their stupor being unavailing. Each day the weather grew colder, and many were frost-bitten, losing fingers, toes, or ears, one sick man who held on to the wagon-bars, to avoid jolting, having all his fingers frozen. At a camping-ground on Willow Creek, a tributary of the Sweetwater, fifteen corpses were buried, thirteen of them being

[p. 428]

frozen to death. Near South Pass another company of the brethren met them, with supplies from Salt Lake City, and from the trees near their camp several quarters of fat beef were suspended--"a picture," says Chislett, who had charge of one of the companies, "that far surpassed the paintings of the ancient masters." From this point warmer weather prevailed, and fresh teams from the valley constantly met them, distributing provisions sufficient for their needs, and then travelling eastward to meet Martin's company.

    On reaching Salt Lake City on the 9th of November, it was found that sixty-seven out of a total of four hundred and twenty had died on the journey. Of the six hundred emigrants included in Martin's detachment, which arrived three weeks later, a small percentage perished, the storm which overtook Willie's party on the Sweetwater reaching them on the North Platte. There they encamped, and waited about ten days for the weather to moderate. Their rations were reduced to four ounces of flour per head per day, for a few days, until relief came. On arriving at Salt Lake, the survivors were received with the utmost kindness, arrangements being made with the bishops of wards to provide for those who had no relatives in the territory; and throughout the settlements, wherever it was known that a family had crossed the plains with the hand-cart companies, that alone was sufficient to insure for them substantial aid from the brethren. [*63]

[p. 429]

    There remains yet one more incident in the story of the hand-cart emigration. On arrival at Devil's Gate on the Sweetwater, twenty men, belonging to Martin's company, were left in charge of stock, merchandise, and baggage, with orders to follow in the spring. The snow fell deep, and many of the cattle were devoured by the wolves, while others perished from cold. The rest were slaughtered, and on their frozen carcasses the men subsisted, their small stock of flour and salt being now exhausted. Game was scarce in the neighborhood, and with their utmost care the supply of food could not hold out until spring. Two of the men, with the only horses that remained, were sent to Platte Bridge to obtain supplies; but the animals were lost, and they returned empty-handed. Presently the meat was all consumed; and then their only resource was the hides, which were cut into small pieces and soaked in hot water, after the hair had been removed. When the last hides had been eaten, nothing remained but their boot-tops and the scraps of leather around their wagons, even the neck-piece of a buffalo skin which had served as door-mat being used for food. Thus they kept themselves alive until spring, when they subsisted on thistle roots and wild garlic, until at length relief came from Salt Lake City.

    Even the worst enemies of Brigham Young admit that he was in no sense to blame for this disaster, and that he spared no effort to prevent it. When tidings of the emigrants' condition arrived in Salt Lake City, he at once suspended all other business, [*64] and declared that nothing more should be done until every available team was sent to their relief. He himself set

[p. 430]

the example by sending several of his best teams laden with provisions and clothing, other large supplies being forwarded by Heber C. Kimball and the more wealthy of the elders. Each one contributed according to his means, those who had no teams furnishing apparel, bedding, and food, and this at a time when, as will presently appear, the territory was almost in a state of famine, on account of a second plague of grasshoppers.

    The catastrophe was due mainly to the error in starting so late in the season from Iowa City, and to the fact that the companies did not contain a sufficient number of able-bodied men in proportion to the infirm, the women, and children. [*65] Moreover, the winter was one of the earliest and most severe that has ever been known in Utah. The hand-cart scheme was perfectly feasible, if carried out under proper management, as was proved by the success of the first companies, and, in the spring of 1857, by a party of seventy-four missionaries, who accomplished the trip to the Missouri in forty-eight days, or less than half the time needed when the journey was made by wagon. [*66]

    After the hand-cart disaster, and perhaps partly on account of the reports sent home by the survivors, there was a gradual diminution in the rate of emigration, though with many fluctuations. In 1876 only 1,184 proselytes were despatched from Liverpool, this being one of the smallest movements recorded. In 1877 the number increased to 1,479, and in 1878 to 1,864, but in 1879 fell off to 1,456, about 55 per cent of the emigrants for the last of these years being of

[p. 431]

British nationality, and 35 per cent Swedish, Norwegian, and Danish. [*67] In the church records, the total emigration from foreign countries, between 1840 and 1883, is stated at 78,219 souls, or an average of nearly 2,000 a year, the proselytes taking passage in companies of from 12 to 800 in 243 different vessels, all of which reached their destination in safety. [*68] Probably the main cause of the decrease in emigration during later years was the advance in the rate of fare, which in 1878 was fixed at L14-14, a sum for which passage could be secured to almost any portion of the world.

    Between 1850 and 1856 the movement appears to have reached its culmination, proselytes being gathered by the thousand to the promised land, and thousands more preparing to follow. The elders were exhorted to "thunder the word of the almighty to the saints to arise and come to Zion." [*69] The brethren were commanded to shake from their feet the dust of Babylon and hasten to the holy city. "Every saint who does not come home," says the sixth general epistle of the twelve, [*70] "will be afflicted by the devil." "Every particle of our means that we use in Babylon," remarks Elder Erastus Snow, [*71] "is a loss to ourselves; and it is so much means expended upon Babylon that shall perish." "O ye poor and oppressed saints!" writes Elder Samuel Richards, "and ye rich ones too, in these lands, do not your bosoms burn with the good spirit of God, which fills his saints always with a desire to congregate together, and become a holy and

[p. 432]

peculiar people? Do you not long to gather to your brethren and sisters in the heights of Zion, where sinners cannot dwell? Do you not fondly wish to assemble with the elders of Israel in the sacred resting-places of the excellent of the earth, and there inherit the earth and enjoy the bountiful blessings of a munificent creator?"

    Such sayings, freely circulated among the toiling myriads of Europe, where for twelve and fifteen hours a day men worked for a wage barely sufficient to supply their needs, were not without effect. Under such conditions, a new religion, which promised to exchange the penury and drudgery of its converts for plenty and moderate labor, could not fail to receive a hearing. Moreover, the story of the prophet's assassination and of the expulsion from Illinois was yet fresh in the minds of the people. The saints were still looked upon as martyrs, and as martyrs who, having boldly launched forth into an untrodden wilderness, had at length established for themselves an abiding-place, and now stretched forth the hand of christian fellowship to the weary and heavy-laden in all the earth. Never since the founding of the sect was their cause held in more esteem; never had they dwelt together in more perfect harmony, less disturbed by outside influences, or less mindful of the events that were transpiring in the great world beyond. The years that had elapsed since their departure from Nauvoo had witnessed the rise and fall of an empire, the crash of a throne, the great revolutions in the world of science and the world of commerce. But, except so far as they seemed to fulfil the predictions of their seer, all these matters concerned them less than did the building of a sawmill or a nail-factory in the land of which their prophet had foretold: "And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord,...and a highway shall be made in the midst of the great deep,...and in the barren deserts there shall

[p. 433]

come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land." [*72]

[p. 434]

[p. 435]

[p. 436]

[p. 437]

[p. 438]

Footnotes

^397:1 The pioneer band included, as we have seen, 143 members. Parley Pratt's companies, which arrived in Sept. 1847, mustered 1,540. In August 1848 the inhabitants at Salt Lake City were estimated at nearly 1,800, and there were at this date no other settlements with any considerable population. The emigrants from Winter Quarters during the autumn of this year numbered 2,393, and in 1849, 1,400. Smaller bands arrived from time to time, but with the close of the latter year the migration from Nauvoo practically came to an end. The number of Mormons from Nauvoo gathered in the valley at this date may be roughly estimated at not more than 8,000, for there were still large numbers scattered throughout the western states. According to the statistics of emigration from Great Britain and Europe, in Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 14-15, 2,877 proselytes left the United Kingdom between 1846 and 1849. This would make a total of 10,877. As the reader will remember, the entire population is stated at 11,380 in the U.S. Census Rept of 1850. Add to this number 3,714 emigrants who arrived from Great Britain and Europe between 1850 and 1852, as reported in Linforth's tables, we have a total of 15,094. The remainder were not all converts from the U.S., for there was a considerable number of persons who were not Mormons, probably 500 in all.

^398:2 Remy, Jour. to G. S. L. City, ii. 199.

^399:3 The Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt, one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, embracing his Life, Ministry, and Travels, with Extracts, in Prose and Verse, from his Miscellaneous Writings, Edited by his son Parley P. Pratt, New York, 1874, is one of the most valuable works extant on the subject of Mormon missions. The author relates in simple phrase the hardships, persecutions, and adventures which he and other missionaries encountered in various parts of the United States, and though probably he makes the most of them, there can be little doubt that so far his narrative is in the main reliable. Chosen a member of the first quorum in 1835, he was on terms of intimacy with Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others of the church dignitaries, and as the editor remarks, his history, therefore, was so interwoven with that of the church, that many of the most interesting sketches of church history will be found therein.' In the autobiography, which covers a period of twenty years, from his early boyhood to his betrayal into the hands of his enemies, of which more hereafter, is an account of his life and travels, his missionary labors, and the labors of those with whom he was associated, together with some of his miscellaneous writings in prose and verse. Other works of this author are: An Appeal to the Inhabitants of the State of New York, a pamphlet [p. 400] of six pages calling for help and deliverance from the persecutions of the people of the United States, particularly from their enemies in Missouri; Letter to Queen Victoria is a dissertation on the fundamental principles of the faith, dated Manchester, May 22, 1841. The Fountain of Knowledge is a short essay on the scriptures. Immortality and Eternal Life of the Material Body is an attempt to prove the proposition as named. Intelligence and Affection comprises a few pages on these qualities in man, more particularly in regard to their immortality. The above five pamphlets, besides being published separately, were issued as one pamphlet at Nauvoo. The third son of Jared and Charity Pratt, Parley, was born at Burlington, Otsego co., N.Y., his ancestors being among the earliest settlers at Hartford, Conn., in 1839, and probably among the party that accompanied Thomas Hooker from Newtown, now Cambridge, Mass., in 1836. Of his conversion to Mormonism I have already spoken, and of the leading incidents in his life and the manner of his death mention is made elsewhere. One of those who set forth from Nauvoo in Feb. 1846, he was sent from Winter Quarters, as will be remembered, during the same year, on a mission to England. But for this circumstance his Autobiography would probably have included a complete and reliable account of the great Mormon exodus, and one that would have been a most valuable addition to the records of the latter-day saints. Parley was a man of many miracles and visions. In fact, with him all was miraculous; the voice of nature was the voice of God, and in one current ran revelation and human happenings. He was miraculously directed in the first instance to the book of Mormon and Joseph Smith. Myriads of false spirits were rebuked by him and driven back into the darkness. During an illness he had a dream. 'I thought I saw myself dressed in a clean and beautiful linen robe, white as snow,' on which was written the words 'holy prophet' and 'new Jerusalem.' At the elder's conference in Missouri, February 1832, he was obliged to keep his bed, as he had not yet recovered from his illness. At the close of it, he says, 'I requested the elders to lay their hands on me and pray. They did so. I was instantly healed.' Again, when detained by a severe fever, he whispered to Brother Murdock to lay hands on him unobserved while giving him water. I drank of it, he says, 'bounded on my feet, dressed myself, put on my shoes and hat, and told him I was ready to start.' Still travelling with Murdock, he was again taken ill, and again miraculously cured. While engaged in fencing and ploughing six acres for wheat, he heard a voice at night saying, Parley, Parley!' I answered, 'Here am I.' Said the voice, 'Cease splitting rails, for the Lord hath prepared you for a greater work.' He dreamed one night, during the troubles in Missouri, of an attack by enemies at a distance, and learned afterward that the vision was true. About to set out from Kirtland on a mission to Canada in April 1836, being in debt and deeply depressed, his wife sick and childless, Heber C. Kimball and other elders, filled with the spirit of prophecy, entered his house late one night and said: 'Brother Parley, thy wife shall be healed from this hour, and shall bear a son, and his name snail be Parley, and he shall be a chosen instrument in the hands of the Lord to inherit the priesthood and to walk in the steps of his father.' Instances might be multiplied. Scores of sick women and children in obedience to the command, 'In the name of Jesus Christ, be thou made whole,' arose and walked.

^400:4 In 1831 among the Delawares; in 1832 in the states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri; in 1833, after the exodus from Independence, in New York; in 1835 in New England, N.Y., and Penn.; in 1837 and 1845 in N.Y. city, where in the latter year he commenced the publication of The Prophet; and in 1856 in St Louis, Phil., N.Y., and elsewhere. Autobiog., passim.

^401:5 'My first production in that city was a book of upwards of two hundred pages, entitled the Voice of Warning. The first edition of this work consisted of four thousand copies; it has since been published and republished in America and Europe till some forty or fifty thousand copies have not been sufficient to supply the demand.' Id., 184.

^401:6 Branches of the church were formed during 1838 at Sing Sing and in New Jersey, also at Brooklyn and elsewhere on Long Island. Id., 188. In the S. L. Herald, June 16, 1877, is a sketch of the Mormon mission in New York at that date.

^402:7 In Jan. 1838, B. Winchester left Ohio on a missionary tour, during which he preached in Md, Penn., and N.J. At this time Orson Pratt was in New York city, and L. Barnes and H. Sayers in the states of N.Y. and Penn. Times and Seasons, i. 9-11. About April 1, 1839, Jno. D. Lee and Levi Stewart started on foot from Vandalia, Ill., and, preaching as they went, passed through several towns in O., returning to their starting-point in October. During this journey they depended entirely on donations for subsistence. Lee's Mormonism, 97-108. During 1839, Lorenzo Barnes, H. Sayers, E. D. Woolly, Elisha H. Davis, J. Huston, Henry Dean, Benjamin Winchester, Jas Blakslee, and Saml James preached in O., Va, Del., Penn., N.J., and N.Y.; A. Petty, G. H. Brandon, J. D. Hunter, Benjamin Clapp, Jeremiah Mackley, Jno. E. Page, and Daniel and Norman B. Shearer, in Mo., Tenn., and Ill.; Almon Babbitt, Jacob K. Chapman, and Orson Hyde, in Ind.; Stephen Post, Julian Moses, and M. Sirrine, in Mich.; Nathan Holmes, in Mass.; and Lysander M. Davis, in S.C. Times and Seasons, i. 25-9, 39-40, 59-63, 71-4. Francis G. Bishop writes, under date Feb. 4, 1840, that since 1832, when he joined the church, he has preached in fourteen states, spending two years in Va and N. C. Jos. Smith, jr, made a visit of inspection through the middle states at this time and presided at several assemblies. Edward M. Webb, and others preached in Ill. and In; Duncan McArthur and others, in Me and N.H.; Orson Hyde, in Philadelphia and N.J.; and Geo. J. Adams, in Philadelphia, New York, and Brooklyn. Id., i. 77-80, 87-9, 108-10, 116-23, ii. 204-5, 220-1; Millennial Star, i. 274-6. In 1840-1, Elder Snyder and others established a church, baptizing about 100, in Laporte, Ind.; Richards' Rem., MS., 8-9; and in northern Ind., Ohio, Penn., and N.Y. some converts were made. Id., Narr., MS., 11-12, 16-18, 20-1. At a conference held at Phil. Oct. 17, 1840, reports were received from various churches in N.Y., N.J., and Penn., showing a membership of 896 (details given). In 1840-1, Benj. C. Elsworth, Chas Thompson, and Isaac C. Haight were preaching in N.Y.; Erastus Snow, in Penn. and R. I.; Jos. Ball, Phineas Richards, and Saml Bent, in Mass. and Conn.; Zadock Parker and P. Brown, in Vt; Norwell M. Head, Danl Tyler, and others, in Tenn. and Miss.; E. Luddington and others, in N. O.; A. J. Lumereaux, in Ohio; and J. M. Adams, Amasa Lyman, and W. O. Clark, in Ill. Times and Seasons, ii. 215-17, 219-21, 253-4, 339-40, 348-50, 384-6, 399-402, 415-16, 451-2, 468, 515-16. In 1841-3, Erastus Snow and others were in Mass.; Joshua Grant, in Va and N. C.; Jacob Gates, in Ind.; Jas Blakeslee, in N.Y.; and A. Young and Saml B. Frost, in Tenn. Id., iii. 602-6, 620, 696-7, 792-8, 820-1. In 1842-3, A. L. Lamareaux was preaching in Ind.; E. M. Webb, M. Serrine, and several others, in Mich.; Edwin D. Woolley and L. A. Shirtlift, in Mass.; Wesley Wandell, in Conn.; F. M. Edwards, in Tenn.: and R. H. Kinnamon and O. White, in Ky. Id., iv. 89, 166-7, 194-5, 226-7, 280-1, 300, 302, 354, v. 508. In 1843--4, G. J. Adams was preaching in Penn.; Benj. Brown and Jesse W. Crosby, in N.Yddd Alfred Hall and S. Brainan, in Ind.; Benj. L. Clapp, W. Huitt, S. Gully, and H. W. Church, in Miss.; Danl Botsford, Jos. Coon, Levi Stewart, and W. O. Clark, in Ill.; W. O. Clark, in Iowa; R. H. Kinnamon, in Va and N. C.; and P. Haws and John Brown, in Alabama. Id., v. 387-8, 444, 460-1, 468-9, 484-5, 507-8, 520-2, 702-3. In the Frontier Guardian, July 25 and Oct. 17, 1851, also in the Deseret News, Dec. 13, 1851, are further reports from missionaries in various parts of the U.S. Between the date of Joseph--Smith's assassination and the settlement of the saints in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, missionary work was partially suspended. For further missionary work in New York, see S. L. Herald, June 16, 1877; S. F. Alta, [p. 403] Nov. 6, 1869; in Boston, S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 16, 1870; in Washington, Deseret News, Apr. 30, 1853; in Pa, S. F. Bulletin, July 22, 1881; in Va, Juvenile Instructor, xv. 128-9; in N. C., Id., xv. 21-2; in Georgia, S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 12, 1881; in Tex., Millennial Star, xxxviii. 588-9; in the southern states generally, Juvenile Instructor, xv. 63; in Iowa, Millennial Star, xxxviii. 381; Deseret News, Aug. 8, 1877; in Ark., Millennial Star, xxxviii. 380-1; in Col., S. F. Bull., Nov. 11, 1864; in Ar., S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 12, 1873; S. F. Call, July 14, 1873; Prescott Miner, Aug. 9, 1873; Millennial Star, xxxviii. 170-1; in Cal., S. F. Herald, June 26, 1854, Feb. 9, June 4, 1855; in Or., S. F. Alta, Jan. 21, 1858; Sac. Union, Aug. 12, 1857. In 1882 there were about 110 Mormon missionaries in the United States. Contributor, iii. 128.

^403:8 Preaching in Potten, Canada, north of Vermont, the first sermon, so far as is known, that was ever delivered in the British dominions. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 25.

^403:9 After retiring to rest on a certain evening in April 1835 he was aroused by Heber C. Kimball, who, being filled with the spirit of prophecy, said: 'Thou shalt go to Upper Canada, even to the city of Toronto, the capital, and there thou shalt find a people prepared for the fulness of the gospel, and they shall receive thee.' Pratt's Autobiog., 141-2.

^405:10 After ministering at Toronto and its neighborhood for about two months, the apostle announced that he must return toKirtland, and, as he relates, on the eve of his departure several hundred dollars were placed in his hands, though he had asked no one for money, and none knew that the main reason for returning was to arrange for the payment of his debts. Parley again visited Toronto in April 1836, and labored there until spring of the following year. Id., 166. In 1841, elders Morrison and Bates were preaching near Kingston. Times and Seasons, ii. 415. About two years later, Ben. Brown and Jesse W. Crosby preached in Montreal and Quebec. Id., vi. 766-7.

^405:11 Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26; Pratt's Autobiog., 183; Times and Seasons, iii. 879.

^405:12 On board the Garrick.

^406:13 Smith, Rise, Progress, and Travels, 30-1. In Tullidge's Women, 246, it is stated that 2,000 were baptized within eight months. This is probably exaggerated. The first converts, nine in number, were baptized in the Ribble, July 30, 1837. Names given in Id., 241.

^406:14 On board the Patrick Hearty, together with Parley and Orson Pratt, Geo. A. Smith, Heber C. Kimball, and Reuben Hodlock. Brigham left his home in Montrose on Sept. 14, 1839. Being in feeble health, he was carried to the house of Heber C. Kimball, where he remained until the 18th, when they set forth together. Mrs Mary Ann Young was left with an infant only ten days old, and the youngest child of Mrs Kimball, who was then sick with chills and fever, was only three weeks old. Heber, who was also suffering from ague, relates that when he took leave of his family, it seemed as if his very heart would melt within him. 'This is pretty tough, is it not?' he remarked to Brigham. 'Let us rise up and give them a cheer.' They arose, and swinging their hats, cried, 'Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah for Israel!' Neither were in condition to travel, and both were almost penniless. Arriving at Kirtland, which place they visited on their way, Brigham had one New York shilling left, and Heber claims that meanwhile the necessary funds had been supplied by some heavenly messenger. The vessel sailed on the 19th of March, and reached Liverpool on the 6th of April, the tenth anniversary of the organization of the church. Brigham left the ship in company with Heber and Parley, and when he landed shouted with a loud voice, 'Hosanna!' On the next day they went to Preston by rail. Hist. B. Young, MS.; Young's Jour., in Millennial Star, xxv. 711-12; Times and Seasons, ii. 223; Whitney's Woman's Exper., MS. A parting hymn, composed by Parley a few days before the vessel sailed, will be found in Pratt's Autobiog., 332, and Times and Seasons, i. 111. On Dec. 8, 1839, elders Hiram Clark, Alex. Wright, and Sam. Mulliner had arrived at Preston, and on Jan. 13, 1840, elders Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and Theodore Turley. Id., iii. 884.

^406:15 In the Millennial Star, i. 20, is a list of most of the towns in which branches were established, with the number of members in each.

^406:16 In Id., i. 302, the number is given at 5,814, besides 800 who had emigrated to America during that season. These figures include the Welsh, Irish, Scotch, and Manx converts.

^407:17 During that term 3,400 persons had been baptized, 85 had emigrated, and 234 had died. Id., xv. 78.

^407:18 A copy of which will be found in Id., xiii. 207, and in condensed form in Mackay, The Mormons, 246-7.

^407:19 In the Millennial Star, xiii. 208, it is stated that, between May 30 and June 16, 1851, L255-8-1 was received, or at the rate of about 80 cents per capita for that period. In Ibid. we have a list of L1,965-2-1 3/4 due from the various conferences for books, badges, etc.

    The first number of the Millennial Star was published in May 1840, some few weeks after the arrival of Brigham Young and his party, Parley P. [p. 408] Pratt being the first editor. Issued originally as a monthly, and afterward as a bi-monthly and then as a weekly periodical, the circulation at one time teached 22,000 copies. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 8-9. But for this publication and the Frontier Guardian, it would be impossible to fill the gap which occurs in the records of the Mormon people between Feb. 15, 1846, the date of the last issue of the Times and Seasons, and June 15, 1850, when appeared the first number of the Deseret News. For conferences at which reports were received as to the condition of the church branches at Manchester and elsewhere in 1840-1, see Millennial Star, i. 67-71, 84-9, 165-8, 301-5; Times and Seasons, ii. 404, 463; Pratt's Autobiog., 341-2, 344, 348-50; in 1842, Millennial Star, iii. 28-32; Times and Seasons, iv. 76-80; in 1843, Millennial Star, iv. 32-6, 81-5; in 1845, Id., v. 166-7; in 1846-7, Id., vii. passim. For reports of church progress, giving minor details of no particular value between 1840 and 1846, see Times and Seasons, ii. 529, 543, 557; iii. 596-9, 618, 636-7, 682-3, 789-90, 843, 924-5; Millennial Star, iv. 129-30, 145-8, 161-2, 174-5, 203-4; v. 25-6, 195; vi. 6-7, 13-14, 23-4, 28-9, 39-40, 73-5. For condensed reports showing progress during latter half of 1840 and spring of 1841, see Kidder's Mormonism, 191-200. For missionary work in different towns in 1840-1, see Millennial Star, i. 71-2, 90-3, 184-5, 212-15, 238-40, 255-6, 283-6, 305-9. With the conference of April 6, 1841, the mission of Brigham Young and his associates ended in Eng., and soon afterward they returned home, first sending an epistle to the church in Great Britain, and leaving Parley in charge. For text of epistle, see Millenial Star, i. 309-12. Brigham, Heber, O. Pratt, Woodruff, Taylor, Smith, and Richards left for New York on the ship Rochester, on Apr. 20, 1841. Young arrived in Nauvoo July 1st. Tullidge's Life of Young, 99-100. Parley remained at the head of affairs until Oct. 29, 1842, when he sailed for the U.S. on the Emerald, arriving in New Orleans early in Jan. 1843, leaving Thomas Ward to succeed him, with Lorenzo Snow and Hiram Clark as assistants. During Parley's administration, several parties of emigrants were sent to the U.S. Pratt's Autobiog., 359, 361. The Times and Seasons of Feb. 1, 1843, announces Pratt's arrival at Nauvoo. In June 1843, Elder Reuben Hadlock was appointed president of the English mission, Id., iv. 232; and again in 1846, Millennial Star, vii. 42, where the name is spelled Hedlock. Ward was associated with Hedlock in the presidency. Id., v. 140, 142. In 1846-7 Orson Hyde was president of the European mission. Richards' Narr., MS., 27. For 1879, 32 missionaries were appointed for the United States. A list is given in Millennial Star, xli. 692. Further mention of missionary work in England will be found in the pages of the Millennial Star, Frontier Guardian, Apr. 4, July 25, Sept. 19, 1849, July 24, Dec. 11, 1850, July 13, Aug. 8, 1851; Lyon's Harp of Zion, 64-6; Deseret News, Nov. 29, Dec. 27, 1851, July 24, 1852, Feb. 5. 1853, Oct. 5, 1854, July 25, 1855, Feb. 26, 1862, Sept. 9, 1863, March 9, Dec. 7, 1864, March 22, 1865, June 7, 1865, May 8, Nov. 20, 1867, March 15, 1871, July 15, 1874, June 30, 1870, Sept. 11, 1878; Utah Scraps, 5; S. F. Bulletin, June 11, Nov. 24, 1883; Sac. Union, July 2, 1855, May 14, 1869. In the autumn of 1846 John Taylor, Parley Pratt, and Orson Hyde were ordered to proceed to England, the saints being then encamped at Council Bluffs. Procuring a flat-bottomed boat, they voyaged down the Missouri River to Fort Leavenworth, where they met with some of the battalion men, and thence took the steamer for St Louis. From that city they reached England by way of New York, Parley, however, returning to Council Bluffs and Winter Quarters with money contributed by the saints in the eastern states for the assistance of their families and brethren, joining his comrades later. The missionaries visited the various churches in England, [p. 409] Scotland, and Wales, and were well received. Taylor relates that the converts were in the habit of getting up tea-parties, at which he was often requested to sing, one of the songs composed by himself being 'The Upper California, O that's the land for me!' He also states that a marked feeling among the English was the desire to emigrate. Reminiscences, MS., 18-19.

^409:20 Millennial Star, xli. 110.

^409:21 Millennial Star, xv. 78. On July 6, 1840, Henry Royle and Frederick Cook were appointed to Flintshire, and on Oct. 3Oth a church of 32 members was established there. Jas Burnhaul reported front Wrexham on Dec. 23, 1840, that there were about 100 saints in that neighborhood. On Feb. 10, 1841, the 2 churches had an aggregate membership of 150. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. In 1844 Elder Henshaw was in South Wales and meeting with good success. Millennial Star, iv. 203. In 1845, Strutton and Henshaw were in Wales, the latter preaching in the south the language of the country. Capt. Dan. Jones was preaching in Wrexham. Times and Seasons, vi. 988-9. Jones writes from Rhyd-y-bont, Feb. 7, 1846, that he has more places to preach in than he can possibly attend to. Millennial Star, vii. 63. For several years a periodical entitled The Udgorn Scion was published at Merthyr Tydvil, and continued until emigration greatly reduced the numbers at the Welsh mission. Richard,s' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 9.

^409:22 Alexander Wright and Samuel Mulliner were sent to Scotland in Dec. 1839, shortly after their arrival in England. At the beginning of March, they had baptized a few converts at Paisley. Times and Seasons, i. 110; O. Pratt, in Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. At a general conference on Apr. 17, 1840, it was reported the Scotland branch had 3 elders and 21 members. Times and Seasons, i. 120. Elder H. Clark left Liverpool for Scotland July 27, 1840. Id., ii. 229. About May 1, 1840, Elder Orson Pratt was sent to Edinburgh. Id., ii. 91. At a conference at Glasgow April 6, 1841, the membership was 368. In 1842 Jno. McAuley was stationed there. In 1843, Elder Jno. Cairns was appointed to Scotland, and at the Glasgow conference of Nov. 5, 1843. the membership had increased to 768. Id., ii. 191, iv. 129-30; Times and Seasons, iv. 232. In 1845 Peter McCue was president of the Glasgow conference and Jno. Banks of the one at Edinburgh. Millennial Star, v. 182-3. In 1846 Franklin D. Richards was appointed to the presidency of the church in Scotland, assisted by his brother Samuel. Richards' Narr., MS., 27.

^409:23 Millennial Star, xli. 110.

^410:24 On July 27, 1840, Apostle John Taylor, Elder McGaffe, and Priest Black sailed from Liverpool for Ireland, staying about a week at Newry and Lisburn. They were followed in Sept. by Elder Theodore Curtis. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. On May 29, 1843, Elder Jas Sloan was appointed to Ireland. Times and Seasons, iv. 232. Mackay, The Mormons, 247, says that Mormonism was not preached in Dublin till 1850, but this statement is doubtful. In Sept. 1840 Taylor visited the Isle of Man, accompanied by Hiram Clark and one or two brethren from Liverpool. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. Taylor remained but a short time, being replaced by J. Blakeslee in Nov. A church was organized at Douglas. Clark returned to Liverpool on Jan. 8, 1841, and Blakeslee on Feb. 16th, leaving a membership of 70. Times and Seasons, ii. 484; Millennial Star, iv. 147.

^410:25 Wm Donaldson sailed from England for Calcutta early in August 1840. Times and Seasons, ii. 229. Wm Willes landed in Calcutta Dec. 25, 1851, and during his sojourn baptized some 300 natives and established a church of about 40 Europeans. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann. 26. Jos. Richards was also in Calcutta in 1851. Id., 28. Elders Nathaniel V. Jones, Robert Skelton, Samuel A. WoolIey, Wm Fotheringham, Richard Ballantyne, Truman Leonard, Amos Milton Musser, Robert Owen, and Wm F. Carter arrived in Calcutta and held a conference in April 1853. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 34-5. For further items, see Deseret News, May 14, 1853, Jan. 5, Oct. 19, 1854, March 8, 1855; Sac. Union, May 17, 1856.

^410:26 Elders Aaron F. Farr, Darwin Richardson, Jesse Turpin, and A. B. Lambson landed at Jamaica Jan. 10, 1853. They called on the American consul, who told them that the law extended toleration to all religious sects, and soon afterward held a meeting; but a mob gathered round the hall where service was being held and threatened to tear it down, as they had heard that the elders were polygamists. Two of the missionaries were shot at while making their escape from the island. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 36.

^410:27 Wm Barrett was sent to Australia from Burslem, England, by Geo. A. Smith in July 1840. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 34. In 1845 Andrew Anderson had organized a church of 9 members at Montipeer township. Times and Seasons, vi. 989. In March 1852 Jno. Murdock and Chas W. Wandell had organized a church with a membership of 36 at Sydney. Early in 1853 Augustus Farnham, Wm Hyde, Burr Frost, Josiah W. Fleming, and others landed at Sydney, and afterward extended their labors to Van Dieman's Land and New Zealand. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 34. In August of this year Farnham published the first number of Zion's Watchman at Sydney. It was continued until Apr. 1855. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 13. A brief account of the work in the above countries is given in Utah Pion., 26, and Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 34-6. In 1852 the Australian missions were prosperous. Deseret News, May 28, 1853. In later years they were less successful. On the 6th of April, 1876, Elder Croxall writes from Sidney that the brethren are working faithfully in Australia, but meet with little encouragement Millennial Star, xxxviii. 381. In this year there were four Mormon missionaries at Christ Church, and one at Wellington, N.Z. There were also two or more at Hobart Town, Tasmania. Id., 379, 509.

^411:28 An Elder, name not given, was in France in 1845 and baptized two. Times and Seasons, vi. 989. John Pack and Curtis E. Bolton left Salt Lake City in colnpany with Apostle Jno. Taylor, on Oct. 19, 1849, and arrived in Paris in June 1850, having been joined in England by Fred Piercy, Arthur Stayner, and Wm Howell, the last of whom had been in France before. For success, etc., see Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 32. Further information concerning the branches in France will be found in Frontier Guardian, Feb. 6, Aug. 21, 1850, June 13, Sept. 19, 1851; Deseret News, Jan. 10, Oct. 2, 1852. In 1861 a petition was presented to Napoleon III., asking for the privilege of preaching the gospel. Millennial Star, xxiii. 220-1.

^411:29 For affairs in Germany and Prussia see Deseret News, Apr. 17, 1852, May 28, 1853, Aug. 14, 1867, Oct. 11, 1870; Spencer Orson, in Taylor's Govt of God's Tracts, no. 20; Bertrand, Mem. Morm., 285-6. At the close of 1878 the German mission claimed 152 members of the church. Millennial Star, xli. 111.

^411:30 After several months' labor, a church was organized at Amsterdam, numbering 14 members. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 28. In 1866 the Dutch mission was fairly prosperous. See letter of Elder Joseph Weiler, in Deseret News, Oct. 24, 1866. In 1877 there was 72 merebers of the church at Amsterdam. Millenial Star, xl. 91.

^411:31 Apostle Erastus Snow and three elders, appointed by Salt Lake conference of Oct. 1849, arrived at Copenhagen June 1, 1850. For results of early Danish mission, see Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 32-3; Deseret News, May 1, Dec. 11, 1852; Frontier Guardian, Sept. 18, Oct. 16, 1850, March 7, May 16, July 11, 1851, Jan. 10, Nov. 6, 1852. In 1851 the book of Mormon was translated into Danish, and later The Doctrine and Covenants. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 11. There were in 1851, 261 converts in Denmark, of whom 150 were at Copenhagen. Frontier Guardian, Aug. 22, 1851. About 600 are claimed in Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27. In July 1877 the first two chapters of Joseph Smith the Prophet were published in Danish, bringing his history up to the time of the first publication of the book of Mormon.

^411:32 By order of Apostle Snow, who had charge of the Scandinavian mission, Elder John Forsgren proceeded to northern Sweden in 1850, where, at Geffie, he baptized 20 persons, but was sent out of the country by the authorities. In 1851 Elder Peterson was ordered to Norway, and organized a branch at Bergen. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27. In 1879 the work had so greatly increased that 23 missionaries were appointed for Scandinavia. A list of them is given in Millennial Star, xli. 692-3. At the close of 1878 there were in this mission 40 branches, 467 elders, and 4,158 members of the church, 1,255 persons having been baptized during the year. Id., III. For further particulars, see [p. 412] Deseret News, July 19, 1865, May 3, 1866; Juvenile Instructor, xv. 92-3; Carson State Register, June 26, 1872. Several pamphets were published in the Swedish language, and in 1853 the Scandinavien Stjerne was established at Copenhagen, which 30 years later was still the organ of the Mormon church and was well supported. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 9.

^412:33 Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27; Deseret News, July 21, 1875, Sept. 20, 1876.

^412:34 See letter of Francois Stoudeman, in Deseret News, Oct. 16, 1852. Lorenzo Snow, with three elders, arrived at La Tour Sept. 19, 1820. For results, see Id., 27; Millennial Star xii. 370-4; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 32; Frontier Guardian, Feb. 21, 1850. Further missionary items will be found in the Deseret News, Apr. 2, 1853, March 8, 1855, Aug. 14, 1867. The book of Mormon and other works were translated into Italian in 1852. The Voice of Joseph: A Brief Account of the Rise, Progress, and Persecutions of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; with their present position and prospects in Utah Territory, together with American Exiles' Memorial to Congress, by Lorenzo Snow, one of the Twelve Apostles, Liverpool and London, 1852, abbreviated from the Italian edition, was published for general circulation in various languages, and is a well-written historical sketch, admirably adapted to the purpose. Besides the expulsion from Missouri and Illinois, a general view of their 'location, settlements, and government in Upper California' is well presented. There is also an account of the missionary labors of the ciders in the United States, Canada, England, Wales, Scotland, and elsewhere.

^412:35 Branches of the church were established in Switzerland, under the direction of Lorenzo Snow, about the year 1850. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 28. Soon afterward Elder T. B. H. Stenhouse published at Geneva a volume, entitled Le Reflecteur, and organized a branch of the church in the French quarter of that city. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 11. In 1856-7 Elder Jno. L. Smith published two volumes of a monthly periodical styled Der Darsteller der heiligen der letzen tage. Other books and pamphlets innumerable were published in Switzerland and elsewhere in Europe. Richards Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 11. For further mention of the Swiss mission, see Deseret News, Sept. 21, 1854, Aug. 14, 1867, Oct. 11, 1867. At the close of 1878 there were in Switzerland 17 branches, 31 elders, and 494 members of the church, 127 baptisms being recorded during that year. Millennial Star, xli. 111.

^412:36 letter from Elder D. W. Jones, dated Concepcion, Chihuahua, Mex., Apr. 21, 1876, states that he and his fellow-missionaries were hard at work. About this time Jones preached at the theatre in the city of Chihuahua, but was ill received. Millennial Star, xxxviii. 381, 509. Portions of the book of Mormon were translated into Spanish for the use of Mexicans, and entitled Trozos Selectos del Libro de Mormon (S. L. City, 1875).

^412:37 Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 33, 35. The Chinese mission was a failure. See Deseret News, Oct. 29. Dec. 22, 1853.

^412:38 Deseret News, Nov. 29, 1851, May 1, 15, July 24, Nov. 27, 1852. In 1856 the book of Mormon was published in Hawaiian by George Q. Cannon. See Honolulu Friend. An account of Cannon's mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1853-4 is given in his work entitled My First Mission. For further missionary labors in these islands, see Deseret News, Apr. 2, July 30, Oct. 29, Dec. 15, 1853, Aug. 6, 1856, Jan. 21, Dec. 9, 1857, June l, Aug. 17, Nov. 30, 1864, June 12, 1867, Aug. 19, 1868, July 3, 1874; Millennial Star, xxxviii. 380; Contributor, v. 240; Juvenile Instructor, xv. 21. In 1844 Addison Pratt was stationed on the island of Tooboui, Society group, where he had organized a church with about a dozen members. At the same time, Noah Rogers and Benj. F. Grouard were stationed at Tahiti, but met with little success. In Oct. Rogers went to the island of Huahiae. Millennial Star, v. 178-9, vi. 5-6, [p. 413] 57-60, vii. 14; Times and Seasons, vi. 812-14, 835-8, 882, 1019. These elders started in Oct. 1843, their passage being paid by P. B. Lewis as a donation to the mission. One of their number, K. F. Hanks, died on the voyage and was buried at sea. They baptized over 1,200 natives. Other missionaries at these islands were Jas S. Brown, Alva Hanks, and one Whittaker; but all were expelled by the French in 1851. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 31. See also Utah Early Records, MS., 35, 37, 84.

^413:39 Orson Hyde was appointed by a general conference held at Nauvoo Apr. 6, 1840, to a mission to the Jews in London, Amsterdam, Constantinople, and Jerusalem. He arrived in the last-mentioned city Oct. 24, 1841, and returned to Nauvoo in 1842. Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 26. By his own efforts, he raised the money for his passage, often suffering great privation during his labors, his only food at times being snails. Of Jewish descent, he stirred up his unbelieving race in the towns to which he was sent to a livelier faith in the promises of their gathering, and consecrated their land anew to their restoration, when the glory of their latter house should be greater than the glory of their former house. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 18. See also Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 31; Millennial Star, ii. 166-9. For mission to Palestine in 1872, see Corresp. of Pal. Tourists, passim.

^413:40 A statistical report is given in Millennial Star, xli, 110-11.

^414:41 Remy, Jour. to G. S. L. City, ii. 212-13, gives a table of the approximate number of Mormons in each country in 1859. The total is 186,000, of whom 80,000 were in Utah, 40,000 in other states and territories, 32,000 in England and Scotland, 8,000 in British America, 5,000 in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, and 7,000 in the Sandwich and Society islands. His figures are at least 20 per cent too high. The entire population of Utah, for instance, was not more than 60,000 at this date. A writer in the Hist. Mag., March 1859, p. 85, places the total at 126,000, of whom 38,000 were residents of Utah. Add 20,000 more for Utah, and we have a total of 146,000 which may be accepted approximately as the correct figures. Other estimates differ widely, the Mormons themselves, in an official statement published in the Deseret News, in 1856, claiming 480,000 members of the church in all parts of the world. See American Almanac, 1858, 338.

^414:42 Linforth gives the number despatched by the British agency between 1840 and 1852 at 11,296. Route from Liverpool, 15. The first vessel sent from England was the North America, which sailed TJune 16, 1840. The ship started on another voyage Sept. 8th of the same year. In Burton's City of the Saints, 361-2, is a list of vessels that sailed between 1851 and 1861.

^414:43 Estimated by Ezra T. Benson at 10,000 souls. It was probably less than half that number. The census of 1850 places the population of the territory at a little over 11,000; the reports of the bishops of wards at the Oct. conference in 1853, as given in Richards' Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 39, at 18,206.

^415:44 Mayhew, The Mormons, 245; Edinburgh Review, Apr. 1854, 351. In Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 16-17, is a table showing the occupations of emigrants sent through the British agency between 1849 and 1854.

^415:45 Remy's Jour. to S. L. City, ii. 224-5.

^415:46 Utah Perpetual Emigrating Fund, MS. On Sunday Sept. 9, 1849, it was voted that a perpetual fund be instituted in aid of the poor among the latter-day saints, and that Willard Snow, John D. Lee, Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and John S. Fullmer be appointed a committee. At a general conference of the church, held Oct. 6th and 7th, it was ordered that the committee should raise funds for this purpose, to be placed in charge of Edward Hunter, and that the control of the funds be under the direction of the first presidency. On Sept. 15th Brigham Young was chosen president and Willard Richards was afterward appointed secretary. Utah Early Records, MS., 95, 97, 113, 114. The company was incorporated by the provisional government of the state of Deseret, Sept. 14, 1850, and the act of incorporation was made legal Oct. 4, 1851, and amended and confirmed by the same body Jan. 12, 1856. The company began rendering material aid on the 13th of March, 1850. On Sept. 3, 1852, the first company of emigrants assisted by this fund arrived at S. L. City in charge of Abraham O. Smoot. Richards' Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 18; Deseret News, Sept. 18, 1852; [p. XXX] Utah Emigrating Fund, MS. For further particulars concerning the fund, see Snow's Voice of Joseph, 16; Frontier Guardian, Apr. 3, 1856; Deseret News, Sept. 18, 1852, Dec. l, 1853; Contributor, ii. 177; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 163-4; Mackay's The Mormons, 260-2; Olshausen, Mormonen, 167; Bertrand, Mem. d'un Mormon, 73-4; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 13; Young's Jour. of Disc., ii. 49-74; Todd's Sunset Land, 182-4.

^416:47 Utah Pioneers, 1880, p. 47. In a letter to Orson Hyde, Brigham says: 'When the saints thus helped arrive here, they will give their obligations to the church to refund the amount of what they have received as soon as circumstances will admit,...the funds to be appropriated as a loan rather than a gift.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, 152-3. Immigrants nearly all came to Salt Lake and were distributed from this point.

^416:48 Utah Emigrating Fund, MS.; Circular from the Twelve Apostles, in Mormon Pamphlets, no. 3.

^417:49 Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 12. In the Millennial Star, xv. 618, is a notice that the first ship of the season would sail early in Jan. 1853. Each application must be accompanied by a statement of the name, age, occupation, and nativity of the applicant, and by a deposit of L1. Parties were to provide their own bedding and cooking utensils. Richards, Narr., MS., 32, remarks that vessels from New Orleans could be chartered at low rates, as they could seldom obtain return freight.

^417:50 At this date the price of a team, including wagon, two yoke of oxen, and two milch cows, was about L40. Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 12.

^418:51 Mackay, The Mormons, 270-3. 'The most scrupulous cleanliness was thought to be necessary; frequent fumigation and sprinkling with lime; and [p. XXX] on warm days all sick persons, whether willing or not, were brought into the air and sunshine.' Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 25. 'For each party were appointed watchmen (or committeemen) to see that no improprieties occurred among the people, or between our people and the sailors.' Richards' Narr., MS., 31. In 1855 the line of route was changed to Philadelphia and New York, and thence to Cincinnati. Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 6.

^419:52 For each adult, weekly, 2 1/2 lbs bread or biscuit, 1 lb. wheat flour, 5 lbs oatmeal, 2 lbs rice,  1/2 lb. sugar, 2 oz. tea, 2 oz. salt. Three quarts of water were allowed per diem. Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 20. Twenty pounds of breadstuffs per capita and an allowance of butter and cheese were provided by the Mormon superintendent. Mackay, The Mormons, 270. Meat was often issued in lieu of meal or bread.

^419:53 All were required to be in their berths at 8 o'clock, and before 7 the beds were made and the decks swept. Mackay, The Mormons, 272.

^419:54 In the Deseret News, May 29, June 12, 1852, and the Juvenile Instructor, xiv. 143, is an account of a boiler explosion that occurred on board a steamer from St Louis, with a list of those who were killed by the accident.

^420:55 For those assisted by the emigration fund in 1853 was supplied for each wagon 1,000 lbs of flour, 50 lbs each of sugar, rice, and bacon, 30 of beans, 20 of dried apples or peaches, 25 of salt, 5 of tea, a gallon of vinegar, and 10 bars of soap. Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 19.

^420:56 Describing one of these trains which he encountered in the valley of the Weber on Sept. 2, 1850, Capt. Stunsbury says: 'Ninety-five wagons were met to-day containing the advance of the Mormon emigration to the Valley of the Salt Lake. Two large flocks of sheep were driven before the train; and geese [p. XXX] and turkeys had been conveyed in coops the whole distance without apparent damage...The appearance of this train was good, most of the wagons having from three to five yoke of cattle, and all in fine condition. The wagons swarmed with women and children, and I estimated the train at one thousand head of cattle, 100 head of sheep, and 500 human souls.' Exped. to G. S. Lake, 223.

^421:57 For letters and news from emigrants on their way across the plains and matters concerning the organization of emigrant bands, see Frontier Guardian, Dec. 16, 1849, June 12, July 10, 24, Sept. 4, Oct. 2, 1850, Jan. 22, March 21, July 11, Aug. 8, 1851.

^422:58 In a letter dated Muddy Fork--930 miles from Winter Quarters--Oct. 18, 1849, and published in the Frontier Guardian, Dec. 26th, of that year, George A. Smith writes: 'Among others we noticed at the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains the grave of one E. Dodd, of Gallatin, Mo., died on the 19th of July last of typhus fever. The wolves had completely disinterred him. The clothes in which he had been buried lay strewed around. His under jawbone lay in the grave, with the teeth complete, the only remains discernable of him. It is believed he was the same Dodd that took an active part, and a prominent mobocrat, in the murder of the saints at Haun's Mills, Mo. If so, it is a righteous retribution.'

^423:59 The letter, epistle, and circular will be found in the Millennial Star, xvii. 812-15, xviii. 49-55, 121-3.

^423:60 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 314. The construction of the cart will be seen in a cut facing this page.

^423:61 The first arrived Sept. 26th, and were met by the first presidency and a large number of the citizens, with an escort of cavalry and the bands of the Nauvoo legion. Deseret News, Oct. 6, 1856.

^425:62 At this point the country was alive with buffaloes.

^428:63 My account of the hand-cart emigration is taken principally from Mr Chislett's narrative in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 312-338. The story as told in Stenhouse's Tell It All, 206-36, though it claims to have been written by one of the women of the party, and perhaps was so written, is merely an adaptation of the above. Another version will be found in Young's Wife No. 19, 206-21. For other mention of the hand-cart emigration, see Siskiyou Co. Affairs, MS., 18; Paddock's La Tour, 345; Deseret News, Nov. 12, 19, 30, 1856; S. L. Herald, Jan. 4, 1879; S. L. Alta, Nov. 12, 13, 1856; S. F. Bulletin, Jan. 12, 1857. In hundreds of newspapers and magazines appeared grossly exaggerated descriptions of this disaster, of which the following, taken from the Or. Statesman, June 15, 1857, may serve as a specimen: 'Of the 2,500 persons who started from the frontier, only about 200 frost-bitten, starving, and emaciated beings lived to tell the tale of their sufferings. The remaining 2,300 perished on the way of hunger, cold, and fatigue.' The emigrants [p. XXX] were happy and content, until winter overtook them in the mountains, singing as they journeyed, one of their songs commencing:

'We're going to Zion with our carts,
 And the spirit of God within our hearts;'

the chorus of another, sung to the tune of 'A little more cider:'

Hurrah for the camp of Israel!
 Hurrah for the hand-cart scheme!
 Hurrah! Hurrah! 'tis better far
 Than wagon and ox-team.'

^429:64 The October conference was then in session.

^430:65 It was from Iowa City that the late start was made. Stenhouse and others delight in making out something horrible in the hand-cart business, and the leaders no better than the vilest criminals. It was an unfortunate affair, in which the leaders suffered with the rest, but nothing further than this can be justly charged to any one. Rocky Mountain Saints, 341-2. A biographical notice of Spencer and his funeral sermon, delivered by Brigham, will be found in S. Lake Tel., Dec. 9, 10, 1868.

^430:66 Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 26. In the Deseret News, Apr. 29, 1857, it is stated that they hoped to make the trip in 40 days.

^431:67 Millennial Star, xli. 680; Deseret News, Nov. 19, 1879. There were also 90 Swiss, 34 Germans, and 8 of other nationalities.

^431:68 Though some were driven back to port, and one was dismasted on the voyage to New Orleans, Richards' Emigr. to Utah, MS., 1.

^431:69 Millennial Star, xiv. 201.

^431:70 Published July 15., 1852, in Id., xiv. 20.

^431:71 At a special council, held at 23 Ratcliffe Terrace, Islington, London, on the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th of April. An account of the proceedings will be found in Id., xiv. 209-12, 225-8, 243-7. At the close of the conference a memorial was presented to Franklin D. Richards, who was then about to return to Salt Lake City.

^433:72 Revelation of Joseph Smith, in Doctrine and Covenants, 327.

    Among the Mormon works largely circulated throughout the British Isles and Europe was one published in 1852, and entitled The Government of God, by John Taylor, one of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In a preface by James Linforth, the writer states that it had been the author's intention to superintend the publication of this work, an 8vo volume of 118 pages, in person; but the cares pretaining to his missionary labors and literary work, then more urgently needed, prevented him. He therefore, on his departure for Salt Lake City in the spring of 1852, left with Mr Linforth the manuscript, the printing of which was superintended by him. As a dissertation on a general and abstract subject, it probably has not its equal in point of ability within the whole range of Mormon literature. The style is lofty and clear, and every page betokens the great learning of the author. As a student of ancient and modern history, theologian, and moral philosopher, President Taylor is justly entitled to the front rank; while his proficiency in foreign languages and his knowledge of men and of practical affairs rendered his services no less important as manager abroad than as executive officer at home.

    I will here begin the biographical notices of the leading men of Utah, and of some of the pioneers, carrying the same along in the notes to the end of the volume as I have done in other cases in my historical works. The lives of some have already been fully given; and in regard to some of the others who have not yet finished playing their part in the history of the country, their biographies will be given here but partially, and finished as the work proceeds.

    First after Joseph Smith and Brigham Young should be mentioned John Taylor, third president of the entire church. A native of Milnthorpe, England, where he was born in November 1808, Taylor emigrated in 1829 to Toronto, Canada, to which city his father had removed two years before. Here, joining a methodist society, he searched the scriptures earnestly, and became convinced that the churches had fallen from grace and were corrupt. With prayer and fasting he besought the Lord that if there were a true church on earth he would send a messenger to him. Shortly afterward he was visited by Parley P. Pratt, to whom he gave but a cool reception, as many evil reports concerning Mormonism were then current. But after close scrutiny, he and several of his friends believed and were baptized. In 1838 it was ordered by revelation that he should be appointed an apostle, and after the schism of that year he filled the vacancy in the quorum caused by the apostasy of John Boynton. In 1840 he arrived in England as a missionary, his labors extending to Ireland and to the Isle of Man, where he was the first to preach the doctrines of Mormonism. While on a visit to Scotland, he corrected the proof-sheets of the book of Mormon, and helped to prepare a hymn-book for the use of converts in the British Islands. He also wrote several pamphlets in reply to charges against the church. Returning to America in 1841, in company with Brigham Young, he proceeded to Nauvoo, where he was selected one of a committee to petition congress for a redress of wrongs, and presented the petition. He also purchased and took charge of the Times and Seasons, at the request of the prophet, the last three volumes being published under his direction, and was chosen a member of the city council, a regent of the university, and judge-advocate of the Nauvoo legion. He was firmly attached to the prophet, and at Carthage jail, as we have seen, almost lost his life in attempting to save him. After the expulsion he went, with others of the twelve, to Winter Quarters, where he assisted in organizing the Mormon battalion. At this juncture he was again ordered to England, in company with Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde, and returning the following spring, accompanied Pratt's companies to Salt Lake City. In October 1849 he was sent as a missionary to France, where he published a monthly paper, styled [p. 434] L'Etoile du Deseret. Before leaving Europe he translated the book of Mormon into the French language, and preached the gospel of the saints at Hamburg, where under his direction the same work was translated into German, and where he also published a monthly paper named Zion's Panier. Returning to Salt Lake City in 1852, he was elected, two years afterward, a member of the legislature, but resigning this office, went as a missionary to New York, where he superintended the affairs of the church in the eastern states, and established a journal, the first number of which appeared Feb. 17, 1855, under the title of The Mormon, the paper being discontinued in 1857, when Taylor was recalled at the outbreak of the Utah war. After that date, his labors were mainly confined to the territory, where he was partly engaged in literary work for the church, serving also for a brief term as probate judge of Utah county, and for several terms as a member of the Utah legislature and speaker of the house. In Oct. 1880 he was appointed, as we shall see later, president of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints. Further details as to his early career will be found in Hist. B. Young, MS.; Woodruffs Journal, MS.; Richards' Narr., MS., and many other manuscripts and books.

    George Q. Cannon, a native of Liverpool, England, was trained in the Mormon faith, his parents having been converted in 1839, when he was twelve years of age, through the preaching of John Taylor, who some time before had married his father's sister. A short time before the assassination of Joseph Smith the family arrived at Nauvoo, where George found employment as a printer in the office of the Times and Seasons and Nauvoo Neighbor. In 1847 he set out for S. L. City with Parley Pratt's companies, and for two years was engaged in farming, house-building, and other labor incidental to new settlements. In the autumn of 1849 he went to California in company with Chas C. Rich, and there worked in the gold mines until the summer of 1850, when he was sent on a mission to the Sandwich Islands. On arriving at Honolulu he began to study the Hawaiian language, which he mastered in six weeks, and then travelled and preached among the natives, organizing several branches of the church. In 1854 he returned to Salt Lake City, and the following year went as a missionary to California, where he established and edited a newspaper called the Western Standard. When news arrived of the Utah war, he again returned to the valley, and during the exodus of 1858 took charge of the press and printing materials of the Deseret News, which were conveyed to Fillmore City. In October 1859 he was chosen an apostle to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Parley Pratt, and was afterward appointed president of the European mission. In 1862 he was ordered to Washington to support the claims of Utah to admission as a state, of which more later. After the adjournment of congress he repaired to England, where he labored until August 1864, 13,000 converts being forwarded to Zion during this period. Being then summoned home, he was elected a member of the legislative council, and was for three years private secretary to Brigham Young. In 1867 he became editor and publisher of the Deseret News, which was then a semiweekly paper, and started the Deseret Evening News, which was issued daily, his connection with the latter continuing until the autumn of 1872, when he was chosen delegate to congress. In 1880 Mr Cannon was appointed first councillor to President John Taylor. For further particulars, see authorities before quoted; also Sala's America Revisited, 302; Reno Daily Gazette, Jan. 24, 1882.

    Joseph F., the son of Hyrum Smith, who with his brother, the prophet, was assassinated at Carthage jail, was born at Far West, Mo., in 1838. After passing his early youth among the vicissitudes attending the expulsion from Nauvoo and the colonization of Utah, he was ordered, when 16 years of age, to proceed as a missionary to the Sandwich Islands, where he labored earnestly and with marked success. 'By the blessing of the almighty,' he writes, 'I acquired the language of the islanders, and commenced my labors, preaching, baptizing, etc., among the natives, in one hundred days after my arrival at Honolulu.' At the beginning of the Utah war he returned to S. L. City and served in the militia up to the time when Johnston's army entered [p. 435] the valley. In 1860 he was sent on mission work to England, where he remained till 1863, being again ordered, the following year, to the Sandwich Islands in company with A. L. Smith, L. Snow, E. T. Benson, and W. W. Cluff. Returning in 1865, he was soon after elected an apostle and a member of the legislature, in which latter capacity he served until 1872. In 1874 and 1875 he presided over the British mission, and in 1880 was chosen second councillor to President Taylor. For additional items, see above authorities.

    Wilford, the third son of Aphek and Beulah Thompson Woodruff, was born at Farmington (now Avon), Conn., in March 1807, his ancestors for at least three generations being residents of that neighborhood. In 1632 he was converted to Mormonism, together with his brother Azmon, and soon afterward cast in his lot at Kirtland, where, for a time, he was the guest of Joseph Smith. Two years later he started on a missionary tour in company with an elder named Brown, journeying on foot through southern Missouri, northern Arkansas, and western Tennessee. In 1837 he was appointed a member of the first quorum of the seventies, and in April of this year, was married to Phoebe W. Carter at the house of Joseph Smith. In 1839 he was chosen an apostle, and soon afterward was sent on a mission to England, where, in a few months, he and his fellow-missionaries baptized more than 1,800 proselytes, their success being so remarkable as to alarm the orthodox clergy, who brought the matter before the notice of parliament. In 1841 he was shipwrecked at Lake Michigan while on his way to Nauvoo, but escaped with his life and reached that city in October. A few weeks before the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, he was again ordered to England as a missionary, returning in 1846, when he crossed the plains with the pioneer band. In 1848 we find him once more a missionary, this time in the eastern states, whence he returned to Salt Lake City in 1850, being elected in December of that year a senator for the provisional state of Deseret. After that date he became one of the foremost men in Utah, the church annals being largely compiled from his records. In his public career he is regarded as one of the founders of the territory; his apostolic labors have earned for him among the saints the title of 'Wilford the faithful.' Woodruff's Leaves from Journal, 1-96; Millennial Star, xxvii. passim; Times and Seasons, v. 692; Deseret News, July 7, 14, 1858.

    Among the pioneers was Willard Richards, born at Hopkinton, Middlesex county, Mass., on the 24th of June, 1804. Under the instruction of his parents, Joseph and Rhoda Richards, he applied himself during his youth to the study of theology, but could not discern in the doctrines of any of the sects around him the fulness of truth. In 1835 he obtained a copy of the book of Mormon, and reading it through twice in ten days, became convinced of its divine authenticity. At this date he was practising medicine at Boston, but at once resolved to remove to Kirtland, where a year later he was baptized and ordained an elder by his cousin, Brigham Young. Proceeding on a mission to England, he labored successfully, and in April 1840 was chosen by revelation one of the twelve. Returning to America, he was appointed historian and general recorder to the church, which offices he held until his decease in March 1854. He was an intimate friend of the prophet's, and, as will be remembered, was present at his assassination in Carthage jail. In 1848, after the return of the pioneer band, he was appointed second councillor to the president. He was also editor of the Deseret News, the official organ of the church, and wrote most of the general epistles of the twelve to the brethren throughout the world. After the organization of the state of Deseret he was made secretary of state, and afterward presided over the council of the legislative assembly. The last occasion on which he left his house was for the purpose of addressing the council at the close of its session. 'I will go and perform this duty,' he said, 'if, like John Quincy Adams, I die in the attempt; but no one knows the aggravated extent of my bodily malady. Death stares me in the face, waiting for his prey.' Further particulars will be found in The Millennial ,Star, xxvii. 118-20, 133-6, 150-2, 165-6; [p. 436] Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 75-6; Deseret News, March 16, 1854, June 23, 30, 1858, Dec. 9, 1874; Richards' Narr., MS., 107-8.

    Franklin Dewey Richards, nephew to Willard, was born at Richmond, Berkshire co., Mass., on April 2, 1821. After receiving a common-school education, he was employed at farm labor, or at his father's trade--that of carpenter. His attention was first called to Mormonism during a visit of Brigham to the house of his grandfather, Joseph Richards. On the 3d of June, 1838, he relates that after being baptized and anointed with oil, he was cured, by the efficacy of prayer, of a severe sickness. In October following, he set forth for Far West, but finding that Gen. Clark had issued an order requiring all Mormons to leave the state, he went to St Louis, where he found employment. In the spring of 1840 he attended a conference at Nauvoo, and was soon afterward sent as a missionary to Indiana, where he established a church. After some further missionary work in the United States, he repaired to Nauvoo where he married, and by great self-denial obtained the means of building a brick house in the eastern part of the city. This he sold before the expulsion for two yoke of oxen and an old wagon. In the spring of 1844 he was ordered with several others to proceed on a mission to England, but after reaching New York he heard of the assassination of the prophet, and returned to Nauvoo. In 1845 he assisted at the completion of the temple, working as a carpenter and painter. When the first bands of the saints crossed the Mississippi in Feb. 1856, Mr Richards accompanied them as far as their camping-ground on Sugar Creek, where he bade adieu to his wife and family, and soon afterward sailed for Liverpool in company with Parley P. Pratt and others. Of further incidents in his life, I shall have occasion to speak elsewhere.

    Heber Chase Kimball was a native of Sheldon, Vt, where he was born in 1801. When ten years of age his family removed to West Bloomfield, N.Y., in which town he afterward worked as a blacksmith in his father's shop. In 1820, his father having lost his property, he was compelled to seek his own livelihood, and after suffering much hardship, found employment with his brother, who was a potter by trade, and removed with him to Mendon. He was converted to Mormonism by the preaching of Phiheas H. Young, and in 1832 was baptized, and soon afterward ordained an Elder. In Sept. of this year he went to Kirtland with Brigham and Joseph Young, and there met the prophet. In 1835 he was chosen a member of the first quorum of the twelve, and from that date until the expulsion from Nauvoo his time was mainly spent in missionary labors in the eastern states and in England. Returning from Salt Lake City to Winter Quarters with the main body of the pioneers, he was appointed first councillor to the president, which office he held until his decease, in June 1868. On the organization of the state of Deseret, he was elected lieutenant-governor and chief justice, and later became president of the council of the legislative assembly. A man of singular generosity, integrity, and purity of heart, there are few whose names are held in more esteem among the latter-day saints than that of President Kimball.

    In March 1850 occurred the decease of Oliver Cowdery, at Richmond, Ray co., Mo. His connection with the church from its earliest days, and the part which he took in the translation of the book of Mormon, have already been mentioned. He was cut off, as we have seen, in 1838, but in 1848 was rebaptized. 'His relation of events,' remarks S. W. Richards, 'was of no ordinary character, maintaining unequivocally all those written testimonies he had furnished to the church in earlier days. Moroni, Peter, James, and John, and other heavenly messengers who had ministered to him in connection with the prophet, Joseph Smith, were familiarly but sacredly spoken of.' After his second conversion he devoted the brief remainder of his life entirely to the cause of the church, declaring his willingness to go forth among the nations and bear testimony of that which had been revealed to him--a testimony which none but he could bear. Contributor, 1884, p. 446.

    In addition to the authorities already quoted on the subject of missions and immigration, I append the following: Millennial Star, i. 302, iv. 17-19, 33-6, viii. 142, ix. 244-5, x. and xi. passim, xiv. 618, xxi. 638, xxii. 18. xxiii. [p. 437] 220-1, xxiv. 510, xxv. 640, 744, 760, 807, xxix. 64, xxxvi. 666, xli. 545-680, passim; Times and Season, i. passim, ii. 273-7, iii. 593-6, 682-3, 895-6, iv. passim, v. 556, 558-9; S. L. Deseret News, 1850, Aug. 10, Oct. 5, Dec. 14; 1851, Mar. 22, June 14, Nov. 15, 29, Dec. 13, 27, 1852, passim; 1853, Feb. 5, 19, Mar. 19, May 14, July 9, Oct. 29, Dec. 1, 8; 1854, Jan. 5, Mar. 2, May 11, June 22, Aug. 10, Sept. 21, Oct. 5; 1855, Jan. 4, Feb. 22, Apr. 4, May 9, July 25, Oct. 17, Dec. 19; 1856, Feb. 27, Apr. 16, May 14, June 4, July 2, Aug. 6, Oct. 8; 1857, Jan. 21, Mar. 18, Apr. 15, May 13, Aug. 26, Dec. 9, 23; 1858, May 19, June 9, July 7, Oct. 27; 1859, Mar. 30, May 11, June 29, Aug. 3, Sept. 21; 1860, May 30, June 13, July 4, Aug. 15, Oct. 24, Nov. 21; 1861, Jan. 2, Mar. 6, Apr. 3, May 15, Sept. 11; 1862, Feb. 26, July 2, Sept. 17; 1863, Mar. 18, May 6, July 15, Sept. 16; 1864, Mar. 9, June 1, Aug. 17, Oct. 19, Nov. 30, Dec. 7; 1865, Mar. 22, June 7, July 12, Oct. 12; 1866, Mar. 8, Apr. 12, May 3, Aug. 30, Oct. 3, 24; 1867, Jan. 23, Feb. 13, May 8, June 12, Aug. 7, Dec. 25; 1868, Feb. 12, July 1, Aug. 19, Dec. 23; 1869, Feb. 10, Apr, 28, June 2, Sept. 29, Oct. 13; 1870, Jan. 26, June 8, Aug. 10; 1871, Mar. 15, June 14; 1872, Jan. 24, Mar. 6, June 12, July 31; 1873, Feb. 12, Aug. 27, Oct. 15, Nov. 19; 1874, Feb. 4, July 3, 15; 1875, Feb. 3, June 30, July 21, Oct. 20; 1876, Feb. 2, July 19, Sept. 20, Oct. 11, Nov. 29; 1877, Feb. 14, Apr. 11, July 4, Aug. 8, Sept. 26; 1868, Mar. 13, Sept. 11, Nov. 13; 1879, Mar. 12, Sept. 10, Nov. 19; Taylor's Remin., MS., 18-19; Woodruff's Pion. Incid., MS., 1; Utah Early Records, MS., passim; Richard's Bibliog. Utah, MS., 8-14; Richards' Ear. Emig. to Utah, MS., 1-2; Cooke's Theatr. and Soc. Aff. in Utah, MS., 10-11; Hyde's Autobiog., MS., 2; Never's Nev. Pion., MS., 1-2; Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 82; Kanesville (Iowa) Frontier Guardian, 1849-51, passim; 1852, Jan. 9; Linforth's Route from Lirerpool, 1-22, 81-108, 117-20; Hall's Mormonism Exposed, 103-5; Smith' s Rise, Progress, and Travels, etc., 31, 33-7; Pratt (O.), in Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., 27-8; Id., in Millennial Star, x. 244-5; Id., Series of Pamphlets, no. 7, 1-16; Pratt's (P. P.) Autobiog., 348-62, 383, 398, 414-26, 428-55, 458-65; Utah Pamphlets, Religions, no. 1, 9-14; Utah, Perpetual Emigrating Fund, MS., passim; Honolulu (H. I.) Friend, iv. 133, 151; Olshausen's Mormonen, 165-7, 192; Busch's Gesch. Mormonen, 320-36; Bertrand's Mem. Mormonen, 73-4, 284-90; Richards' Narrative, MS., 30-8; Richards' (Mrs) Reminiscences, MS., 34-5; Snow (Lorenzo), in Millennial Star, xii. 370-4; Mackay's The Mormons, 116, 246-7, 260-75; Smucker's Hist. of Mormons, 302-3; Stenhouse's (Mrs T. B. H.) Expose of Polygamy, 19-25, 27-32; Id., Tell It All, 91, 101-2, 105-6, 118-19, 171-96, 216-18; Gunnison, The Mormons, 64-7, 143-4; Burton, City of the Saints, 5-7, 169-70, 275-9, 359-66; Beadle's Life in Utah, 159-67, 233-70, 527-32; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 38-9, 163-4, 178, 318-22; Waite (Mrs C. V.), The Mormon Prophet, etc., 144-52; Kidder's Mormonism, etc., 200; Smucker's Hist. of Mormons, 131, 297-302, 438-9; Tucker, Mormonism, 168, 213-21, 277; Utah Scraps, 5, 13, 17; Lyon's Harp of Zion, 17-19, 41-2, 64-6; Snow (Eliza), Poems, i. 219, 260-70; Rae's Westward by Rail, 118--43; S. L. City Contributor, ii. 59-61, 147-8, 177, iii. 128; Ferris' (Mrs G. B.) The Mormons at Home, 69-70, 163, 172-215; Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 167, 181, 196-205; Hedlock (R.), in Millennial Star, v. 154-5; Utah Pioneers, 33d Ann., passim; Juvenile Inst., xiv. 143, xv. 21-129, passim; Young (Ann Eliza), Wife No. 19, 166-80; Remy and Rrenchley, Journey to (G. S. L. City, it. 194-226, 314-15; Sac., Placer Times, Aug. 1, 1849; Lee (Jno. .D.), Morm. Unveiled, 97-108; Vetromile, A Tour, etc., 71-2; Amer. Almanac, 1857, 338; 1858, 338; McClure, Three Thousand Miles, etc., 184-6; U.S. Bur. of Statis., no. 2, 179-80, 188; Coyher's Letters, it. passim; Todd's Sunset Land, 182-4; Spencer (O.), in Taylor's Govt of God, passim; Circular from the Twelve, etc., 1, 3; Young's Jour. of Disc., ii. 49-74; A String of Pearls, passim; Spencer's Labors in the Vineyard, 9-61; Kimball's Gems for Young Folks, 26-9; U.S. Comr Ind. Aff. Rept, 1856, 229-30; 1871, 173, 188, 191-2; Utah, Jour. Legis., 1854-5, 102-3; Acts, 1855-6, 38-41; 1866, 111-12; Marshall's Through Amer., 225-7; Hist. Mag., iii. 85; Hyde's Mormon., 191-2; Stat. Rept Stakes of Zion, MS., passim; Nor. Amer. Rev., xcv. 191-2; Dall's First Holiday, 99-104; Bowles' Our New West, 211-12; Life among the Mormons, 159-73; [p. 438] Jonveaux, L'Amerique, 242-3; Carvalho's Incid. of Travel, 144-5; Huber's Round the World, 100-5; Comettant's Civ. Inconnues, 20-5; Bonwick's Morm. and Silver Mines, 106; Codman's Round Trip, 274; Paddock's Fate of Mme. La Tour, 350-2; Ward's Husband in Utah, 36, 111-23, 278; Corres. Palestine Tourists, passim; S. L. Herald, 1877, June 16; 1878, Oct. 31; 1879, Mar. 22, Apr. 2, Aug. 10, Nov. 13; 1880, Feb. 6, June 17; Telegragh, 1868, Aug. 5, 17, 18, Sept. 15, 25; Tribune, 1876, Apr. 29; 1877, June 2, 6, Aug. 31, Oct. 25, Nov. 2; S. F. Alta, 1854, Mar. 10, Apr. 27; 1856, Nov. 17, Dec. 9; 1857, May 15, June 14, Sept. 7, Oct. 13; 1858, Jan. 6, 21, Apr. 13, May 29, June 13, 27, Aug. 3, 10; 1863, July 6; 1867, June 25; 1868, Aug. 4; 1869, May 14, Nov. 6; 1870, Oct. 9; 1873, Sept. 21; 1878, July 1; Bulletin, 1856, July 31; 1857, May 15, Oct. 21; 1861, Oct. 3; 1863, June 29, July 9, 11, Aug. 6; 1864, Aug. 22, Nov. 11; 1865, July 29; 1866, May 14; 1867, Sept. 13; 1868, May 25; 1870, Aug. 16; 1872, June 13, Nov. 20; 1873, Apr. 12; 1877, June 15, July 17; 1881, May 4, July 8, 22, Aug. 12, Nov. 3; 1883, June 11, July 2, Sept. 5, Nov. 14, 24; Call, 1863, Dec. 1; 1864, July 8, 23; 1865, Feb. 21, June 21, July 13; 1867, Feb. 15, Mar. 31; 1868, July 14, Sept. 5; 1869, Aug. 21; 1870, Oct. 6; 1871, Oct. 6; 1872, May 2; 1873, July 14; 1875; Chronicle, 1879, Aug. 6, 20; 1884, June 22; Examiner, 1878, July 22; Gold. Era, 1865, June 18, July 25; Herald, 1850, Aug. 1; 1851, July 25; 1852, June 4; 1853, Feb. 12; 1854, June 26, Aug. 6; 1855, Feb. 9, June 4; Pac. Churchman, 1868, Nov. 5; 1870, Nov. 24; Post, 1876, June 3; Times, 1867, July 16; 1868, Aug. 6, 14, Sept. 2; 1869, Apr. 8, 13, July 3, Sept. 17; Sac. Union, 1855, July 2, Sept. 20; 1856, May 17, June 24; 1857, June 26, July 1, 14, 15, Aug. 1, 12, Sept. 21, Oct. 5, Nov. 5; 1858, Mar. 15; 1859, June 21, Nov. 2; 1860, Sept. 24, Oct. 6; 1861, Aug. 22, May 17; 1867, Aug. 5; S. Jose Mercury, Aug. 31, 1871; Prescott (Ariz.) Miner, 1873, Aug. 9; 1879, Apr. 4; Roseburg (Or.) Plaindealer, Aug. 2, 1879; Astoria Astorian, Oct. 12, 1878; Or. City Argus, Sept. 1, 1855; Salem (Or.)Statesman, 1854, Sept. 26; 1856, Dec. 2; 1857, Sept. 15, 29, Nov. 3; 1858, Jan. 5; Helena (Mont.) Republican, Sept. 6, 1866; Olympia (Wash.) Standard, Oct. 25, 1862; Gold Hill (Nev.) News, 1863, Oct. 28; 1866, Mar. 3; 1878, Oct. 30; 1880, June 15; 1881, July 14; Austin Reese Riv. Reveil., Sept. 8, 1867; Carson State Regis., 1871, Mar. 30; 1872, June 26; Eureka Sentinel, 1878, Jan. 13.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 439]

  

CHAPTER XVII.
 UTAH AS A TERRITORY.
 1849-1853.

NEED OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT--THE STATE OF DESERET ORGANIZED--MEMORIALS FOR ADMISSION INTO THE UNION--PROPOSED CONSOLIDATION WITH CALIFORNIA--ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE--PROCEEDINGS OF THE LEGISLATURE--BABBIT'S RECEPTION AT WASHINGTON--THE STATE OF DESERET BEFORE CONGRESS--ACT TO ESTABLISH A TERRITORIAL GOVERNMENT APPOINTMENT OF OFFICIALS--ILL FEELING BETWEEN THEM AND THE MORMONS--THE OFFICIALS DEPART FOR WASHINGTON--MEASURES OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY--STANSBURY'S SURVEY--THE GUNNISON MASSACRE--INDIAN OUTBREAKS--THE WALKER WAR--MEXICAN SLAVE-TRADERS.

    UNTIL the year 1849 the Mormons were entirely under the control of their ecclesiastical leaders, regarding the presidency not only as their spiritual head, but as the source of law in temporal matters. Disputes were settled by the bishops, or, as they were also termed, magistrates of wards, appointed by the presidency. The brotherhood discountenanced litigation, as before mentioned, but the population did not consist entirely of members of the church. There was already in their midst a small percentage of gentile citizens, gathered, as we have seen, from nearly all the civilized nations of the earth. It was probable that, as the resources of the territory were developed, this number would increase in greater ratio, and it was not to be expected that they would always remain content without some form of civil government. Not infrequently litigation arose among the gentiles, or between Mormon and gentile; and though strict justice may have been done by the bishops, it was

[p. 440]

difficult for the latter to believe that such was the case. When the loser appealed to the presidency, [*1] their judgment always confirmed the decision of the bishops, and hence was further ground for dissatisfaction. The saints regarded their courts as divinely commissioned and inspired tribunals; but not so the gentiles, by whom reports were freely circulated of what they termed the lawless oppression of the Mormons. Thus it became advisable to establish for the benefit of all some judicial authority that could not be questioned by any, whether members of the church or not, and this authority must be one that, being recognized by the government of the United States, would have the support of its laws and the shield of its protection. Further than this, if the Mormons neglected to establish such government, the incoming gentiles would do so erelong.

    Early in 1849, therefore, a convention was summoned of "the inhabitants of that portion of Upper California lying east of the Sierra Nevada Mountains," and on the 4th of March assembled at Salt Lake City. A committee [*2] was appointed to draught a constitution, under which the people might govern themselves until congress should otherwise provide by law. A, few days later the constitution was adopted, and a provisional government organized, under the name of the State of Deseret. [*3] An immense tract of country was claimed, extending from latitude 33 degrees to the border of Oregon, and from the Rocky Mountains to the Sierra Nevada, together with a section of the territory now included in southern California, and the strip of

[p. 441]

coast lying between Lower California and 118 degrees 30' of west longitude. [*4] The seat of government was to be at Salt Lake City, and its powers were to be divided, as in other states, into three branches, the legislative, executive, and judiciary. The legislative authority was to be vested in a general assembly, consisting of a senate and house of representatives, both to be elected by the people. [*5] The executive power was placed in the hands of a governor, elected as elsewhere for four years; [*6] a lieutenant-governor, who was chosen for the

[p. 442]

same term, and became ex officio president of the senate; a secretary of state; an auditor; and a treasurer. [*7] The judiciary was to consist of a supreme court, and such inferior courts as the general assembly might establish. A chief justice and two associate judges were to be elected by a joint vote of the senate and house of representatives. [*8]

    All free white male residents of the state over the age of twenty-one were allowed a vote at the first election, [*9] and all between the ages of eighteen and forty-five, except those exempt by the laws of the United States and of the state of Deseret, were to be armed, equipped, and trained as a state militia, embodied a few weeks later in the Nauvoo legion, which was now reorganized and divided into two cohorts, each cohort containing four regiments, each regiment two battalions, and each battalion five companies, Daniel H. Wells being major-general, and Jedediah M. Grant and Horace S. Eldredge brigadier-generals. [*10]

[p. 443]

    On the 12th of March a general election was held at the bowery in Salt Lake City, this being the first occasion on which the saints had met for such a purpose. For the successful ticket 624 votes were polled, Brigham Young being chosen governor; Willard Richards, secretary; Horace S. Eldredge, marshal; Daniel H. Wells, attorney-general; Albert Carrington, assessor and collector; Newell K. Whitney, treasurer; and Joseph L. Heywood, supervisor of roads. As no session of the assembly had yet been held, the judiciary was also elected by the people, Heber C. Kimball being chosen chief justice, and John Taylor and Newell K. Whitney associate judges. [*11]

    The general assembly was first convened on the 2d of July, and on the 3d Willard Snow, being appointed speaker of the house of representatives, administered the oath or affirmation to the executive officials.

    Thus did the brethren establish, in the valley of the Great Salt Lake, the state of Deseret. It was certainly a novel and somewhat bold experiment on the part of the saints, mustering then little more than one sixth of the number required for admission as a state, thus to constitute themselves a sovereign and independent people, with a vast extent of territory, and calmly await the action of congress in the matter. It will be remembered that they themselves had lent their aid, in howsoever slight degree, in wresting a portion of this territory from Mexico, and they did not claim more than they believed that they could in time subdue and occupy. Already they felt assured that proselytes

[p. 444]

would gather by myriads under the banner of the prophet. Nor was their assurance unfounded; for, as we have seen, not less than fifteen thousand arrived in the valley before the close of 1852, and were content to remain there, believing that they had found better prospects than were to be had even in the gold-fields of California, which lay but a few weeks' journey beyond.

    The Mormons did not, however, hope to remain an independent republic, nor did they probably wish to do so. Well they knew that the tide of westward-bound migration, soon to be increased by the establishing of a stage line and possibly by the building of a railroad, which, as we shall see later, was already projected, would sorely disturb the peace of their mountain home unless their claims were recognized by the United States. On the 30th of April a memorial had already been signed by more than two thousand persons, asking for a "territorial government of the most liberal construction authorized by our excellent federal constitution, with the least possible delay." [*12] On the 5th of July Almon W. Babbitt was elected delegate to congress in a joint session of the senate and representatives, and on the 6th a memorial was adopted by the representatives, in which the senate concurred three days later, asking for admission as a state.

    The latter memorial is a somewhat remarkable document, and serves to show the slight esteem in which the Mormons held the legislature of the United States, and the unbounded confidence which they placed in themselves. Congress is reminded that it has failed

[p. 445]

to provide a civil government for any portion of the territory ceded by the republic of Mexico; that the revolver and bowie-knife have so far been the law of the land; and that, since the gold discovery, many thousands have emigrated to California, all well supplied with the implements and munitions of war. Fears are expressed that, through the failure to provide civil jurisdiction, political aspirants may subject the government to great loss of blood and treasure in extending its authority over this portion of the national domain. The memorial declares that, for their own security, and for the preservation of the rights of the United States, the people of the state of Deseret have organized a provisional government, under which the civil policy of the nation is duly maintained; [*13] also that there is now a sufficient number of individuals to support a state government, and that they have erected at their own expense a hall of legislature which will bear comparison with those in the older states. "Your memorialists therefore ask your honorable body to favorably consider their interests; and if consistent with the constitution and usages of the federal government, that the constitution accompanying this memorial be ratified, and that the state of Deseret be admitted into the Union on an equal footing with other states, or to such other form of civil government as your wisdom and magnanimity may award to the people of Deseret; and upon the adoption of any form of government here, that their delegate be received, and their interests properly and faithfully represented in the congress of the United States." [*14]

[p. 446]

    The remarks made in this memorial on the danger of failing to provide a civil government, at a time when California was occupied by thousands of armed and resolute men, seem the more pertinent when it is remembered that, between 1846 and 1849, occurred the great struggle in congress on the question of slavery or no slavery in the ceded territory. When congress adjourned on the 4th of March, 1849, all that had been done toward establishing some form of government for the immense domain acquired by the treaty with Mexico was to extend over it the revenue laws, and to make San Francisco a port of entry. Thus 'Upper California,' as the entire region was still termed, had at this time the same political status as was held by Alaska between 1867 and 1884, at which latter date the national legislature placed that territory within pale of the law.

    It is worthy of note, also, that, in September 1849, the people of California, incensed by the dilatory action of congress, followed the example of the Mormons by framing a constitution of their own. On the 6th of that month, by order of President Taylor, General John Wilson, then United States Indian agent, held a consultation with Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and others, with a view to the temporary amalgamation of the states of California and Deseret, in order to avoid possible difficulties on the slavery question. It was agreed that a memorial should be drawn up, asking for a convention of all the people of Upper California, both east and west of the Sierra Nevada, for the purpose of consolidating the two states in one that should include all the territory acquired from Mexico. At the beginning of 1851 the union was to be dissolved, each state retaining its own constitution, and the people being allowed to determine for themselves to which they would belong. John Wilson and Amasa Lyman were sent as delegates

[p. 447]

to California, and presented the memorial to the legislature; but the governor of that state, reviewing the proposals in his message, one by one, condemned them all. "The two communities were too far apart," he declared, "to be combined even temporarily, and Texas and Maine might as well have been made one state as Deseret and California." Thereupon the legislature refused to entertain the memorial, and nothing was accomplished. [*15]

 

    While Babbitt and his colleagues [*16] are fulfilling their mission to Washington, let us inquire how justice is administered and the affairs of the people managed in the self-constituted state of Deseret, through which lay the principal routes to the gold-fields of California. Some of the emigrant parties arrived at Salt Lake City with no effects save their jaded cattle, their wagons, and a scant outfit, while others brought with them valuable merchandise, for which they hoped to find a market in the mining camps. When they made a division of their property, as frequently happened on arriving in the valley, difficulties arose among them, and the discontented parties applied for redress to the courts of Deseret. In these instances there is sufficient evidence that impartial justice was rendered, [*17] and whatever the decision, appeal to a higher court was useless, for the judgment was invariably confirmed. If the losing party rebelled, or expressed in unseemly language his opinion of Mormon justice, he was severely fined, or sometimes imprisoned for a term long enough to teach him respect for the civil law.

    Trespass of emigrants' cattle on the imperfectly

[p. 448]

fenced lands of the Mormons was a frequent cause of trouble between saint and gentile. For this a fine was imposed, and the injured party must be fully recompensed. Protests were often made and the case taken before the bishops, but the only result was that the costs were added to the original demand. From the ruling of the bishop, who acted somewhat in the capacity of county court judge, an appeal was sometimes made to the bench of bishops; but seldom to any purpose. A final appeal could be made, however, to Brigham, who administered practical justice in patriarchal fashion, and whose opinion of the bishops was the reverse of flattering. "They are not fit to decide a case between two old women, let alone two men," he remarked on one occasion, while at the same time he threatened to dismiss the entire bench if they did not improve.

    The organization of a civil government was intended mainly for the better control of the gentiles, [*18] since, to its own members, the authority of the church sufficed. The judicial system of the saints was founded on the doctrines of the book of Mormon rather than on common law, and later, as we shall see, became obnoxious to federal judges and lawyers, none of whom succeeded in making much impression on the pockets of the community. For other reasons the Mormon code was distasteful, especially so far as it related to women. To marry out of the church was an offence. Those who had been sealed were advised not to cast in their lot with the gentiles; [*19] any one found guilty of seducing a Mormon's wife must surely be put to death. [*20]

[p. 449]

    As with the judiciary so with the legislature. The people were instructed by their spiritual law-givers whom to elect as law-makers in matters temporal, and these were always the dignitaries of the church. Vote by ballot obtained, indeed, in name, but there was practically no freedom of election, and there were seldom even opposing candidates, the strife between political parties, as republican and democrat, being something unknown among them. It is this that the gentiles find fault with; though the Mormons boasted, they say, and still boast of this feature in their polity, as showing the harmony which prevails in their midst, it is in fact tyranny, and tyranny of the worst kind--an oligarchy with the form but without any of the spirit of republican institutions. Here we have one of the worst phases of Mormonism. It must be remembered, however, that a great majority of the Mormons were foreigners or of foreign extraction, most of them being men who had never enjoyed political rights, and therefore did not miss them in the land of their adoption.

    In the proceedings of the general assembly of the state of Deseret there is little worthy of record, and that little relates mainly to municipal affairs, and the establishment of courts of justice, no expense being incurred for this or other branches of government. [*21] During the winter of 1849-50 a portion of the territory was divided into counties, which were named Salt Lake, Weber, Utah, San Pete, Tooele, and Juab. [*22] To these were added, in 1850, Iron county; in 1851, Millard

[p. 450]

and Box Elder counties; and in 1852, Washington county. The limits of Davis county were settled as early as 1848, and the boundaries of several other counties, together with the county seats, were defined in 1850. [*23] Acts were passed whereby it was ordered that county courts should be established, and judges, clerks, and sheriffs appointed for each, together with justices and constables for the several precincts. At Salt Lake City, the supreme court was to hold annual sessions, and a system of jurisprudence was instituted, whereby every case, whether civil or criminal, could receive a hearing before the proper officers, and be determined without delay, according to law and equity.

    In January 1851 Salt Lake City was incorporated [*24] by charter of the general assembly, powers being granted to levy and collect taxes; to establish a system of common schools; to provide a water supply; to open streets, light them, and keep them in repair; to organize a police; and to tax, regulate, restrain, or suppress gambling-houses, houses of ill-fame, and the sale of spirituous and fermented liquors. [*25] Acts of incorporation were also passed, between this date and 1865, for Payson, Tooele, Palmyra, Parowan, Nephi, Springville, Lehi, Manti, American Fork, Pleasant Grove, Spanish Fork, Fillmore, Cedar City, Ogden, and Provo, [*26] the privileges granted being similar to those conferred on the capital.

[p. 451]

    Perhaps the most remarkable feature in the proceedings of the assembly is the liberality with which valuable timber and pasture lands and water privileges were granted to favored individuals. By act of December 9, 1850, the control of City Creek and canon was granted to Brigham Young, who was required to pay therefor the sum of five hundred dollars. A month later the right to the timber in the canons of the mountain range that lay to the west of the Jordan was bestowed on George A. Smith. To Ezra T. Benson was granted the control of the timber in the canons and mountains at the entrance of Tooele Valley, of the curious between that point and Salt Lake Valley, and of the waters of Twin and Rock Springs in Tooele Valley. To Heber C. Kimball were given the waters of North Mill Creek canon--all these grants, with the exception of the first, being made without consideration. [*27]

 

    On his arrival at Washington, Babbitt met with a somewhat cool reception. That the Mormons, not deigning to pass through the years of their political minority, should now ask admission as a state, and meanwhile constitute themselves a free and independent community, an imperium in imperio, issuing full-fledged, as did Minerva from the cranium of Jove, into the society of republics, was a proceeding that of course failed to meet with the approval of congress. The memorial, accompanied by the constitution of the state of Deseret, was presented to the senate on the 27th of December, 1849, by Stephen A. Douglas, who moved that it be referred to the committee on territories, [*28] and about one month later it was so

[p. 452]

referred. [*29] On the 28th of January, 1850, it was ordered by the house of representatives that a memorial presented by the delegate praying to be admitted to a seat in that body be referred to the committee on elections. [*30] The committee unanimously recommended the adoption of the following resolution: "That it is inexpedient to admit Almon W. Babbitt, Esq., to a seat in this body, as a delegate to the alleged state of Deseret." In a committee of the whole the report of the committee on elections was read, and among the reasons alleged against the admission of Babbitt the following is most cogent: "The memorialist comes as the representative of a state; but of a state not in the Union, and therefore not entitled to a representation here; the admission of Mr Babbitt would be a quasi recognition of the legal existence of the state of Deseret; and no act should be done by this house which, even by implication, may give force and vitality to a political organization extra-constitutional and independent of the laws of the United States." After considerable debate the report was adopted by a vote of 108 to 77, and the state of Deseret thus failed to receive recognition from congress. [*31]

[p. 453]

    Some action must be taken in the matter, however, for while yet the struggle on slavery was at its fiercest, the inhabitants of the territory ceded by Mexico had formed themselves into two separate states, each with its own constitution, the people of California having declared against slavery, and the people of Deseret having taken the reins into their own hands. Finally, on the 7th of September, 1850, on which date the celebrated compromise measures became law and were supposed to have settled forever the slavery question, a bill passed the senate for the admission of California as a state, without slavery, while the self-constituted state of Deseret, shorn somewhat of its proportions, was reduced to the condition of New Mexico, under the name of the Territory of Utah, with a proviso that, "when admitted as a state, the said territory, or any portion of the same, shall be received into the Union, with or without slavery, as their constitution may prescribe at the time of their admission." Two days later, both bills passed the house of representatives, and afterward received the president's signature. It is worthy of remark that the final discussion on the bill for the admission of Utah turned entirely on the question of allowing slavery in that territory, for throughout the magnificent domain acquired from Mexico, the only chance now remaining to the south was in the desert portion of the great basin, which, as Senator Sodden of Virginia remarked, "had been abandoned to the Mormons for its worthlessness."

    The act to establish a territorial government for

[p. 454]

[paragraph continues] Utah [*32] placed the southern boundary at the thirty-seventh parallel, the section between that limit and the thirty-third parallel being included in the territory of New Mexico, with the exception of the part transferred to California, by which state Utah was to be bounded on the west. On the north, Oregon was to remain as the boundary, and on the east the Rocky Mountains. The remaining provisions of the organic act differ but little from those framed for other territories, for New Mexico, admitted at the same date as was Utah, or for Nevada, admitted in 1861.

    Thus the Mormons were shut in between the mountain walls of the great basin, the strip of coast which was claimed under the constitution of the state of Deseret, and would have included the port of San Diego, being denied to them. It is probable that, if they could have foreseen all the results of the war with Mexico, the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, and the gold discovery, which now threatened to place them almost in the centre of the United States, and not, as they had intended, in a remote and untravelled solitude, they would have selected the site of their new Zion elsewhere than in the valley of the Great Salt Lake.

    On the 5th of April, 1851, the general assembly of the state of Deseret was dissolved, [*33] though it was

[p. 455]

not until one year later that the state was officially merged into the territory of Utah. The territorial form of government was accepted only as a temporary measure, applications being made to congress for admission as a state, at intervals, as we shall see later, until 1882. Meanwhile, for many years, the shadow of a state government was preserved, the members of the ideal state assembly, after each session, reenacting and sanctioning by vote and in due form the laws which they had previously passed as a territorial legislature.

    On the 1st of July a proclamation was issued by the governor, ordering that an election for members of the assembly and for a delegate to congress be held throughout the territory on the first Monday in August. On July 21st three Indian agencies were established, [*34] an agent and two sub-agents, of whom the latter had already arrived, and were now assigned to their districts, having been appointed by the government. On the 8th of August three judicial districts were defined. Judges were assigned to each, and the times and places appointed for holding courts in the several counties appointed, [*35] these powers being temporarily conferred on the governor by the organic act.

    The appointment of governor and superintendent of

[p. 456]

[paragraph continues] Indian affairs was given to Brigham, [*36] and it is probable that no better selection could have been made. It is at least certain that if any other had been made, the rupture which occurred a few years later between the Mormons and the United States government would have been hastened. B.D. Harris of Vermont was chosen secretary; Joseph Buffington of Pennsylvania, chief justice; Perry E. Brocchus of Alabama and Zerubbabel Snow of Ohio, associate judges; Seth M. Blair of Deseret, United States attorney; and Joseph L. Heywood of Deseret, United States marshal. As Buffington declined to serve, Lemuel H. Brandebury was selected to fill his place. [*37] Snow, Heywood, and Blair being Mormons, the government patronage was thus fairly distributed between saints and gentiles. Although these appointments were made on the 20th of September, 1850, none of the gentile officials arrived in Salt Lake City until the following summer, and all were not assembled until the first week in August. With them came Almon W. Babbitt, who was intrusted with the sum of $20,000 appropriated by congress toward the building of a state-house. Harris also brought with him $24,000 for the expenses of the legislature.

    The authorities were kindly received by the saints; and had they been men of ability and discretion, content to discharge their duty without interfering with the social and religious peculiarities of the people, all would have been well; but such was not their character or policy. Judge Brocchus especially was a vain and ambitious man, full of self-importance, fond of intrigue, corrupt, revengeful, hypocritical. Between

[p. 457]

the 7th and 10th of September, a general conference of the church was held, at which the judge obtained permission to address the assembly. During his remarks he drifted into the subject of polygamy, directing this part of his discourse to the women, whom he exhorted to a life of virtue. [*38] He also took to task some of the Mormon leaders, who on a previous occasion had spoken disrespectfully of the government, one of them having gone so far as to consign the late President Zachary Taylor to the nether regions.

    The Mormons were sorely exasperated, and but that they were held in restraint by Brigham, would have done violence to the judge. "If," said the former, "I had but crooked my little finger, he would have been used up; but I did not bend it. If I had, the sisters alone felt indignant enough to have chopped him in pieces." [*39] The governor contented himself with rebuking the judge, who, he declared, must be either profoundly ignorant or perversely wicked. It had become a matter of history throughout the enlightened world, he declared, that the government of the United States regarded the persecution of the saints with indifference, and by their silence gave sanction to such proceedings. Hundreds of women and children had in consequence gone to their graves prematurely, and their blood cried to heaven against those who had caused or consented to their death. Nevertheless, he loved the government and the constitution of the United States; but he did not love corrupt ministers of the government. He was indignant that such men as Brocchus should come there to lecture the people on morality and virtue, and should make such insinuations as he had done; and he repeated the statement that Zachary Taylor was then in to-phet. At this last remark, Brocchus jumped to his feet and protested angrily, whereupon Heber C. Kimball

[p. 458]

touched him lightly on the shoulder, and told him that he need have no doubt of it, for he would see him when he went there.

    A few days later Brigham invited the judge to attend a meeting, to be held on the 19th, and explain or apologize for his conduct. The latter declared that he had neither apology nor explanation to make; that he did not intend any insult, especially to the women, but that his remarks were deliberate and premeditated, and that his purpose was to vindicate the government. Then followed a lengthy reply from the governor, in which Brocchus was severely handled, the judge and his colleagues being thereafter condemned to social ostracism.

    Soon afterward it was reported to Brigham that the secretary, together with Brocchus and the chief justice, intended to return to Washington, whereupon the governor called on them to ascertain if this was so. He was assured that such was their purpose, and that the secretary would also take with him the funds placed in his hands, and the seal, records, and documents pertaining to his office. The governor considered this course illegal, and immediately issued a proclamation declaring the result of the election, [*40] and ordering the assembly to convene on the 22d of September, only four days later. [*41] On the 24th a

[p. 459]

resolution was passed, enjoining the United States marshal to take into his custody all the government funds and other public property in possession of the secretary. [*42] This resolution was presented to Harris, together with an order for $500 to defray the incidental expenses of the assembly. The secretary ignored the resolution and refused to pay the order, under the plea that the members were not legally elected.

    Among the grounds on which the secretary declared the election illegal was, that before the votes were cast the governor had failed to take a census of the territory, as provided in the organic act; this the latter attributed to the miscarriage of instructions and blanks, which had not even yet arrived. [*43] On the other hand, it was clearly the duty of the secretary, as stated in that act, to remain in the territory during his tenure of office. Moreover, the judges organized and held a session of the supreme court before any time or place was appointed for such session by the executive or legislative authorities, and apparently for the purpose of shielding the secretary. On the 26th Brigham addressed a letter to the court, asking their opinion as to his duty with reference to the organic act, which required that the governor should take care that the laws were faithfully executed, and that the secretary should reside within the territory. No answer was returned; and after the district attorney had been

[p. 460]

ordered to file a petition, in which the request was couched in legal form and phrase, no further action was taken. Finally, on the 28th of September, the secretary, and judges Brandebury and Brocchus, set forth for Washington, taking with them the territorial seal, the records, documents, and funds, which were returned to the proper authorities. [*44] On the following

Click to enlarge
TERRITORIAL SEAL.

[p. 461]

day the legislative assembly signed a memorial praying that the vacancies be filled as soon as possible from residents of the territory. [*45] Meanwhile, to prevent further derangement, and for the safe-keeping of the territorial records, Willard Richards was temporarily appointed secretary.

    The successors to the runaway officials were Lazarus H. Reid of New York, who was appointed chief justice; Leonidas Shaver, who succeeded Brocchus; and as secretary, Benjamin G. Ferris. The new officials enjoyed but a brief tenure of office. After remaining in Utah for about a year, Reid returned to New York, where he died in 1855. [*46] Shaver retiring to rest one night, soon after his arrival, was found dead in his room next morning, thereby giving rise to an unfounded rumor that he had been poisoned on account of a supposed difficulty with the governor. [*47] Secretary Ferris, after a six months' residence, proceeded

[p. 462]

to California. The next batch of officials were, as chief justice, John F. Kinney; associate judges, George P. Stiles and W. W. Drummond; and secretary, Almon W. Babbitt, who were appointed in 1854-5. Of these, Stiles and Babbitt were Mormons, though the former was not in harmony with the priesthood, and, as we shall see, Kinney and Drummond play a prominent part in the history of the saints.

    Although there were no funds wherewith to pay the members, the sessions of the legislature were continued, with occasional adjournments, until February 1852, when a special session was ordered by the governor, [*48] and lasted until the 6th of March. The laws enacted by the assembly of the state of Deseret were declared to be in force, so far as they did not conflict with the organic act. [*49] Other laws were passed relating to the punishment of crime, the organization of courts, the administration of estates, the training of the militia, the incorporation of cities, the distribution of lands, the construction of roads, bridges, and canals, and such matters as lay within the range of territorial legislation. [*50] It was determined to remove the site of the capital from Salt Lake City [*51] to some point in the Pahvan Valley, and a committee appointed for that purpose selected the town of Fillmore.

    Memorials to congress were also adopted, one of which asked that provision be made for the construction of "a national central railroad from some eligible point on the Mississippi or Missouri River to San Diego, San Francisco, Sacramento, Astoria, or such

[p. 463]

other point on or near the Pacific coast as the wisdom of your honorable body may dictate." The memorialists stated that for want of proper means of transport about five thousand persons had perished on the different routes within the three preceding years; that there was no great obstacle to the construction of a road between Salt Lake City and San Diego; that at various points on the route iron, coal, and timber were abundant; that on the completion of the line the entire trade of China and the East Indies would pass through the United States; and that the road would consolidate the relations of the country with foreign powers in times of peace, and furnish means of defence in times of war. [*52] In 1854 a second memorial was presented, stating the opinion of the Mormons as to the best route for an overland railroad, and a demonstration was held in favor of the project, the inhabitants, male and female, attending en masse. In the preceding year congress had also been petitioned to provide for the construction of a telegraph line from some convenient point on the Mississippi or Missouri to a suitable port on the Pacific.

 

    As early as April 1849 Captain Howard Stunsbury, of the topographical engineers, had been ordered to Fort Leavenworth, for the purpose of making a survey of the Great Salt Lake and an exploration of its valley, with a view to the construction of a transcontinental railroad. Among his party was Lieutenant J. W. Gunnison, who was placed in charge of the astronomical department. Before reaching Salt Lake City the captain was informed that no survey would be permitted, and it was even hinted that his life would be in danger should he attempt it. Giving no heed to these warnings, he at once called on Brigham, aware that if the good-will of the governor were not

[p. 464]

obtained every obstacle, short of open resistance, would be thrown in his way, that neither provisions nor labor would be furnished, and that no information would be afforded. At first Brigham demurred. He was surprised, he said, that the valley should be thus invaded so soon after the Mormons had established their settlements; he had heard of the expedition since its departure from Fort Leavenworth, and the entire community was anxious to know what was the purpose of the government. Moreover, an attache of General Wilson, the newly appointed Indian agent for California, whose train had passed through the city a few days before, had boasted that the general was authorized to expel the Mormons from the territory. They supposed, therefore, that the arrival of the two parties was a concerted movement, and that Stansbury was sent for the purpose of dividing the land into townships and sections, and of establishing thereto the claims of government. Upon all these subjects Brigham was undeceived, and, the true object of the expedition being explained, he laid the matter before the council. Stansbury was then informed that the authorities were well pleased with the proposed exploration, that they had themselves contemplated such a measure, but could not yet afford the expense, and that they would cheerfully render all the assistance in their power. [*53]

    After exploring a route to Fort Hall, and making a reconnoissance of Cache Valley and the western shore of the lake, Stansbury and his men returned to Salt Lake City, and there passed the winter of 1849-50. During this winter Lieutenant Gunnison gathered most of the material for his well-known book on the Mormons, one of the most valuable and impartial works yet published by a gentile writer. [*54]

[p. 465]

    Early in the spring the captain and his staff again took the field, and on the 16th of April were engaged in surveying both sides of Bear River Bay, Gunnison with several of the men being out in a storm all

[p. 466]

night in the mud-flats on the eastern shore. On the 12th of August Stansbury had completed his survey, which included Great Salt Lake with its islands, Lake Utah, the Jordan, and several of its tributaries, his observations extending over an area of more than five

[p. 467]

thousand square miles. [*55] He then resolved to search out on his return journey some practicable route to the southward of South Pass, though a part of it lay through the territory where Sioux, Blackfoot, Snake, and Utah were used to meet in conflict. Disposing of his wagons and spare instruments to the Mormons, by whom he was furnished with a sufficient escort, he bade them a kindly farewell, and returned by way of Bridger's and Cheyenne passes to Fort Leavenworth.

    The route recommended by Stansbury for the portion of a transcontinental railroad between the Missouri, near Independence, and Salt Lake City was by way of the Republican fork and the south fork of the Platte; thence by way of Lodge Pole Creek, and skirting the southern extremity of the Black Hills to the Laramie Plains; thence crossing the north fork of the Platte to South Pass; thence by way of Bear River Valley to Fort Bridger; from that point by way of Black Fork and turning the Uintah Range to the Kamas prairie, whence the route to the capital lay through the valley of the Timpanogos. [*56]

    In 1853 Gunnison, who had now been promoted to the rank of captain, was ordered to survey a route farther to the south, by way of the Huerfano River and the pass of Coochetopa; thence through the valleys of the Grand and Green rivers; thence to the vegas de Santa Clara and the Nicollet River; thence northward on a return route to Lake Utah, from which point he was to explore the most available

[p. 468]

passes and canons of the Wasatch Range and South Pass. The party included Lieutenant E.G. Beckwith, R. H. Kern as topographer and artist, Sheppard Homans astronomer, Dr James Schiel surgeon and geologist, F. Creutzfeldt botanist, J. A. Snyder assistant topographer, a number of employes, and an escort of mounted riflemen in charge of Captain R. M. Morris. On the 24th of October the party was encamped on the Sevier River, fifteen or eighteen miles from the point where it discharges into the lake of that name, and on the following day Gunnison started out to explore the lake, accompanied by Kern, Creutzfeldt, the guide, and a corporal with six men of the escort, the remainder of the party, under Captain Morris, proceeding up the river in a north-easterly direction. The following day several men of Morris' detachment were sent to ascertain whether a route were practicable northward from that point to Great Salt Lake. While the men were yet within a hundred yards of camp, the corporal came running toward them, breathless and exhausted, and sinking to the ground, gasped out a few broken sentences, the purport of which was that Gunnison and his party had been massacred by Indians, and that, as far as he knew, he was the only survivor. Morris at once ordered his men to arm and mount, and within half an hour was on his way to the scene of the disaster; meanwhile a second member of Gunnison's escort reached camp on horseback, and two other survivors came in later.

    Gunnison had encamped, with no thought of danger, in a sheltered nook under the river bank, where wood and pasture were abundant. He was aware that a large band of Pah Utes was in the neighborhood, and their camp-fires had been seen daily since entering the valley of the Sevier. A recent quarrel with an emigrant band had resulted in the killing of one of the natives and the wounding of two others, but they had made no raids on the Mormon settlements, and peace had recently been confirmed at a parley held

[p. 469]

with some of them by an agent of Brigham. At daybreak all arose and prepared for their day's work, but while seated quietly at breakfast the men were startled by a volley of rifles, a flight of arrows, and the yells of a band of Pah Utes, who had crept, under cover of the bushes, to within twenty-five yards of the spot. The surprise was complete. In vain Gunnison, running forth from his tent, called out to them that he was their friend. He fell, pierced by fifteen arrows, and of the rest only four escaped, after being pursued for several hours by the Indians. [*57]

Click to enlarge
SITE OF THE GUNNISON MASSACRE.

    When Captain Morris reached the scene of the massacre no bodies were found. There was hope, therefore, that others were still alive, and a signal-fire was lighted to assure them of safety; but all the night long no response was heard, nor any sound save the howling of wolves. Still the men remained at their post, though not more in number than the party that had been massacred. At daylight the corpses were discovered, and though none were scalped, they were mutilated with all the atrocity common to the most savage tribes. Some of them, among whom was that of Captain Gunnison, had their arms hacked off at the

[p. 470]

elbow, their entrails cut open and torn by wolves, and were in such condition that they were buried where they lay. It is related that Gunnison's heart was cut out while he was yet alive, and that it was so full of blood that it bounded on the ground.

    By many the Gunnison massacre has been and is still ascribed to the agency of the Mormons; and it has even been asserted that Mormons, disguised as Indians, were among those who committed the deed. Here we have a fair specimen of the hundreds of defamatory stories which have been told about the Mormons from the beginning. In this instance not only is there no valid proof against them, but there are many circumstances pointing in the opposite direction, [*58] one of them being that among the slain was a Mormon guide. The Gunnison massacre was brought on by gentiles; it was the direct result of the killing of the Pah Ute by California emigrants. As no compensation had been made to his tribe, they avenged themselves, as was their custom, on the first Americans--for thus they termed all white men, other than Mormons--whom they found in their territory. [*59] The

[p. 471]

survey of which Gunnison was placed in charge was completed by Beckwith and the other survivors of the party, who reached Salt Lake City by way of Nephi, Payson, and Provo.

 

    The Mormon maxim with regard to the Indians was that it was cheaper to feed than to fight them. Hence their intercourse with the Utes and Shoshones [*60] was generally peaceable. [*61] They taught them

[p. 472]

how to till their lands; they assured them that they would suffer no wrong; but they also told them that if they inflicted wrong, punishment would follow. Nevertheless, when the tide of gentile emigration set in for California, outbreaks among the Indians were of frequent occurrence. The troubles caused to the early settlers in the Utah Valley in 1849-50 have already been mentioned. In the autumn of the latter year, a disturbance occurred in the northern part of the territory, caused by a party of emigrants, who, while encamped on the Malade River, shot two Shoshone women as they were crossing the stream on horseback, stole their horses, and then set forth on their journey. Thereupon the warriors of the tribe began to commit depredations on the northern settlements, slaying a Mormon named Campbell, who was engaged in building a saw-mill, near Ogden, and threatening to massacre the inhabitants of that village. General Eldredge of the Nauvoo legion, being sent with a detachment to the scene of action, found that the Shoshones had moved northward, carrying off a number of horses

[p. 473]

and cattle. A number of Utahs were on the ground, and a portion of them were made prisoners and retained as hostages, the tribe being advised to move south to their usual place of abode and avoid all further intercourse with the Shoshones. Thus the matter was settled without further bloodshed. [*62]

    No serious outbreaks occurred among the Indian tribes during 1851-2, though emigrant parties, both Mormon and gentile, were sometimes molested, [*63] and in October of the former year, the mail for California was captured within a few days after leaving Salt Lake City. [*64]

    During 1853 and a portion of the following year occurred what was known as the Walker war, in which the Mormons suffered serious loss of life and property throughout their territory. Walker, a favorite chief of the Utahs, was at this time a man in the prime of life, one versed in all manly exercises, an excellent shot, and a capital judge of horse-flesh. In addition to several of the native dialects, he could converse fluently in Spanish, and make himself understood in English. Long before the advent of the Mormons he made frequent raids into the Mexican states, where he laid the people under contribution, and took captive persons of rank and condition whom he held to ransom. When setting forth on one of these forays he was attired in a suit of the finest broadcloth, cut

[p. 474]

in the latest fashion, and donned a cambric shirt and a beaver hat. Over this costume he wore his gaudy Indian trappings, and as he rode at the head of his braves, with their gayly accoutred steeds and embroidered saddles glittering with metal ornaments, he might have been taken for a Soldan among the dusky Painims of the west. [*65]

    At first Walker received the exiled saints with open arms, gave them information as to the nature of the country, advised them where to establish settlements, and guarded them from depredation. But when he saw that they had occupied his choicest lands; when game disappeared from the canons and mountain sides; and when his people were shot down without provocation, and their cattle stolen by bands of emigrants, his friendship turned to hate, and he longed to rid himself of the white man. On the 17th of July, 1853, hostilities broke out, and continued with little interruption until winter. During this year twelve Mormons were killed and a number wounded; about four hundred cattle and horses were stolen, and the expense incurred in building forts and removing settlements amounted to $200,000. [*66] That the loss was not still greater was due to the vigilance of

[p. 475]

the governor, for in the spring an emeute had already been threatened, and was only prevented by the prompt measures of Brigham, who visited the Indian camps in person, and for a time averted the outbreak.

    Among the causes that led to disturbance with the Utahs was the presence of trading parties from New Mexico, who supplied the Indians with horses, firearms, and ammunition, often taking in exchange Indian women and children, who were afterward sold into slavery. [*67] To remedy this evil, an act was passed by the Utah legislature in 1852, legalizing the enforced apprenticeship of Indian children, but only for the purpose of inducing the brethren to purchase those who would otherwise have been sold to the Mexicans or abandoned by their parents. [*68] So frequent were

[p. 476]

the visits of the slave-traders, that in April 1853 a proclamation was issued by the governor, ordering the arrest of all strolling parties of Mexicans, and forbidding any Mexican to leave the territory until further advised. [*69]

    Between 1854 and 1856 troubles with the Indians were less frequent, [*70] and these were mainly with the

[p. 477]

[paragraph continues] Utahs. On the 7th of August, 1855, a treaty was negotiated by the Indian agent with the Shoshones, whereby, for a consideration of $3,000, peace and friendship were to be confirmed with the United States, and the passage of United States citizens through their territory without molestation was to be guaranteed. [*71] In January of this year the chief Walker died, [*72] at peace, as it seems, with the Mormons,

[p. 478]

and was succeeded by his brother Arapeen. [*73] Thus the leading spirit of the Utahs was taken from their midst, and starved though the Indians were, [*74] they ceased for a time from open hostility, contenting themselves with occasional raids on the Mormons' cattle and horses, and accepting with thankfulness such small presents as the Indian agents were pleased to give them. [*75]

    It is worthy of note that the United States should have deemed Utah fit to be organized as a territory, and should yet have considered the sum of $3,000 a fair compensation to the Indian tribes for its occupation. Though no territory was of course acquired by the informal treaty with the Shoshones, Utah was then the abode of more than forty thousand

[p. 479]

citizens, and on the highway of travel between the verges of the continent. Between July 1853 and August 1856 more than $11,000,000 were expended for the occupation or acquisition of Indian territory. [*76] Of this total less than the three-hundredth part of one per cent was paid to the Shoshones, and to the Utahs nothing. For the five years ending the 30th of June, 1855, the sum paid to the Mormons for losses incurred through Indian depredations, for the expense of suppressing Indian outbreaks, and of negotiating treaties, amounting probably to not less than $300,000 was $95,940.65; and, small as it was, when drafts were presented at the treasury, excuses were found for not paying them. [*77]

    The occupation of territory under such conditions was of course resented by the original owners of the soil, and it is no matter for surprise that the small detachments of United States troops lost more in number between the years 1853 and 1856 than did the Mormons. [*78] The saints seldom used their rifles

[p. 480]

except in case of need, and treated their Indian neighbors as human beings. The emigrants had no such scruples.

Footnotes

^440:1 The president desired no litigation among his people. 'Most of them,' he said, 'have learned that it is a condescension far beneath them, and that it opens a wide door, when indulged in, for the admission of every unclean spirit.' Hist. B. Young, 1852, MS., 15.

^440:2 Albert Carrington, Joseph L. Heywood, William W. Phelps, David Fullmer, John S. Fullruer, Charles C. Rich, John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, John M. Bernhisel, and Erastus Snow. Utah Early Records, MS., 51.

^440:3 The word 'Deseret' is taken from the book of Mormon, and means honey-bee. As it is written in the book of Ether of the people who came over the great water from the old world to the new: 'And they did also carry with them "deseret," which, by interpretation, is a honey-bee.'

^441:4 After the preamble, in which it is stated that since the treaty with Mexico all civil organization originating with that republic was abrogated, and that congress had failed to provide for the civil government of the territory lying in the great interior basin of Upper California, or any portion of it, the constitution declares: 'We, the people, grateful to the supreme being for the blessings hitherto enjoyed, and feeling our dependence on him for a continuation of those blessings, do ordain and establish a free and independent government by the name of the State of Deseret, including all the territory of the United States within the following boundaries, to wit: commencing at the 33d degree of north latitude, where it crosses the 108th degree of longitude west of Greenwich; thence running south and west to the northern boundary of Mexico; thence west to and down the main channel of the Gila River, on the northern line of Mexico, and on the northern boundary of Lower California to the Pacific Ocean; thence along the coast north-westerly to 118 degrees 30' of west longitude; thence north to where the said line intersects the dividing ridge of the Sierra Nevada Mountains; thence north along the summit of the Sierra Nevada Mountains to the dividing range of mountains that separates the waters flowing into the Columbia River from the waters running into the great basin; thence easterly along the dividing range of mountains that separates said waters flowing into the Columbia River on the north from the waters flowing into the great basin on the south, to the summit of the Wind River chain of mountains; thence south-east and south by the dividing range of mountains that separates the waters flowing into the gulf of Mexico from the waters flowing into the gulf of California, to the place of beginning, as set forth in a map drawn by Charles Preuss, and published by order of the senate of the United States in 1848.' Id., 52-4; Hist. B. Young, MS., passim; Burton's City of the Saints, 350-1; Mackay's The Mormons, 258-9.

^441:5 Annual sessions of the general assembly were to be held, the first one to convene on the first Monday in July 1849, and thereafter on the first Monday in December, unless summoned by the governor of the state during the interim. Members of the house of representatives were elected biennially. They must be at least twenty-five years of age, free white male citizens of the United States, residents of the state for one year preceding their election, and of the district or county 30 days preceding. Senators were elected for four years, must be at least 30 years of age, and possess, as to residence and citizenship, the same qualifications as representatives. The number of senators must not be less than one third, nor more than one half that of the representatives. Each house was to choose its own officers, and a majority in each house was to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Each member of the assembly must take an oath or affirmation to support the constitution of the United States and of the state of Deseret, the oath to be administered by the members to each other. To the governor was granted the usual power of veto. Utah Early Records, MS., 54-6.

^441:6 The qualifications, powers, and duties of the governor were similar to those of the governors of other states.

^442:7 The returns of each election for executive officials were to be sealed up and transmitted to the speaker of the house of representatives, who, during the first week of the session, must open and publish them in the presence of both houses. They were required to take the same oath or affirmation as did the members of the assembly. Id., 60.

^442:8 The judges were to hold office for four years, or until their successors were elected.

^442:9 No person in the service of the U.S. government was to be considered a resident on account of his being stationed within the territory, unless otherwise provided by law. Vote was of course by ballot. Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 53.

^442:10 Military districts were organized, one in each county. At the first there were only sufficient men in each district for a company or battalion. As the number increased, a brigade was formed, with a brigadier-general in command, and afterward a division, in charge of a major-general. Each district made returns direct to the adjutant-general's office. Wells' Narr., MS., 10. In May, Charles C. Rich and Daniel H. Wells of the committee on military affairs reported that they had organized the legion. Grant was brigadier-general of the first cohort, John S. Fullmer being colonel of the first regiment, Willard Snow major of the first battalion, and George D. Grant captain of the first company, first battalion. The first regiment consisted entirely of cavalry, and the first company, first battalion--termed life-guards--of selected men, whose duty it was to protect Salt Lake City and its vicinity from Indian depredations. Eldredge was in command of the second cohort, with John Scott as colonel of the first regiment, Andrew Little major of the first battalion, and Jesse P. Harmon captain of the first company, first battalion, called the silver grays, and composed of men over 50 years of age. The second and third companies of this battalion were artillery. The second company, second battalion, of this regiment was termed the juvenile rifle company, and consisted of youths under eighteen. Hist. B. Young, MS., 79; [p. 443] S. L. City Contributor, ii. 177. In the Deseret News of Oct. 19, 1850, is an account of a three days' muster of the legion. In Id., Sept. 14, 24, 1850, Feb. 22, 1851, July 30, 1853, are copies of general orders issued to the legion during certain Indian troubles, of which more later. Other general orders will be found in Id., Dec. 8, 1853, Jan. 26, 1854, Oct. 3, 1855, July 11, Sept. 10, 1856, Apr. 1, 15, June 17, 1857. For additional items concerning the legion, see Id., Jan. 25, March 21, Apr. 4, 1855; S. F. Herald, Feb. 22, 1854; Sen. Doc., 32d Cong. 2d Sess., no. 33; Fisher's Am. Star. Ann., 1854, 120; Burton's City of the Saints, 408.

^443:11 Utah Early Records, MS., 66; Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 5-6; S. L. City Contributor, ii. 177; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 19. At the same election 25 magistrates or bishops of wards were elected. The number of votes polled was 674. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1849, p. 38.

^444:12 In the preamble we read: 'Whereas we are so far removed from all civilized society and organized government, and also by natural barriers of trackless deserts, everlasting mountains of snow, and savages moro bloody than either, so that we can never be united with any other portion of the country, in territorial or state legislature, with advantage to ourselves or others;...and whereas we have done more by our arms and influence than any other equal number of citizens to obtain and secure this country to the government of the United States;...and whereas a large portion of this territory has recently been ceded to the United States'--then follows the body of the petition, which was signed by Brigham on the 30th, 2,270 signatures having been appended at that date. Utah Early Records, Ms., 75-7.

^445:13 Then follow two clauses in the preamble in which are mentioned the natural barriers between the state of Deseret and other portions of the Union, and the importance of meeting out the boundaries of states and territories in such a manner that the heads of departments may be able to communicate with all parts of the U.S. territory with as little delay as possible. Next comes a brief homily on the science of government and its application to the state of Deseret. A copy of the memorial will be found in Id., 87-90.

^445:14 The assembly at S. L. City resolved that 2,000 copies of the memorial, together with copies of the constitution, and an abstract of all records, journals, [p. 446] and other documents pertaining to the organization of the state, be printed and furnished to members of congress. Id., 90-1.

^447:15 Cal. Sen. Jour. 1850, 429-42, 1296; Frontier Guardian, May 29, 1850; Deseret News, July 6, 1850; Utah Early Records, MS., 94-5; Hist. B. Young, MS., 1850-1.

^447:16 R. L. Campbell, Oliver G. Workman, and Edgar Blodgett. Utah Early Records, MS., 93.

^447:17 Lieut Gunnison and Capt. Stansbury, who may be considered impartial observers, both state that this was the case. The former says: 'There was every appearance of impartiality and strict justice done to all parties.' The Mormons, 65. The latter remarks: 'Justice was equitably administered alike to saint and gentile.' Expedition to Valley of G. S. Lake. 130.

^448:18 Although we read in Doctrine and Covenants, 332, 'We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same.'

^448:19 Gunnison relates an instance where an emigrant, on his way to California, took in his train, at her own request, a woman who represented that the person to whom she was sealed had not visited or provided for her for three years, and that she wished to join a young man in California to whom she had been betrothed. When about 100 miles from Salt Lake City he was overtaken by a party of Mormons and compelled to surrender the woman. The Mormons, 72.

^448:20 At the trial of a man named Egan for killing the seducer of a Mormon [p. 449] woman, during the husband's absence, the judge declared: 'The principle, the only one that beats and throbs through the heart of the entire inhabitants of this territory, is simply this: The man who seduces his neighbor's wife must die, and her nearest relative must kill him.' Id., 72. See also Utah Early Records, MS., 159-60.

^449:21 Utah Early Records, MS., 117.

^449:22 Third General Epistle of the Twelve, in Frontier Guardian, June 12, 1850, where the two last are spelled Yoab and Tuille. In Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 20, it is stated that Juab county was not organized Until 1852. The same statement is made in Utah Sketches, 106. Juab is a Ute word, signifying flat or level. San Pete, sometimes called Sanpitch, was the name of an Indian chief. Weber is named after an explorer along the river of that name. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 1.

^450:23 Utah, Compend. Laws, 113-18. For organization of Millard co., see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 224. It was called after Millard Fillmore; Davis co. after Capt. Davis of the Morm. battalion; Iron co., of course, from the deposits of iron ore found thereabout; and Box Elder from the trees on Box Elder creek. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 7.

^450:24 Jedediah M. Grant was appointed mayor; Nathaniel H. Felt, William Snow, Jesse P. Harmon, and Nathaniel V. Jones, aldermen; Vincent Shirtleff, Benjamin L. Clapp, Zera Pulsipher, William G. Perkins, Lewis Robinson, Harrison Burgess, Jeter Clinton, John L. Dunyon, and Samuel W. Richards, councillors. Deseret News, Jan. 11, 1851. See also Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 77, where the name of Lewis Robinson does not appear in the list of councillors.

^450:25 Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 64-72; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 72-7. In 1860 this charter was repealed, and a new act of incorporation passed. In 1864 'an act amending the charter of Great Salt Lake City' passed the legislative assembly, and was approved by the governor. Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 113-20.

^450:26 Id. (ed. 1855), 74-102, 321-57; (ed. 1866), 120-72; Utah, Comp. Laws, 770, 823-42; Deseret News, Feb. 19, 1853.

^451:27 Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 63-4, 72-3.

^451:28 On Dec. 31st, Joseph R. Underwood of Kentucky presented a memorial from William Smith and Isaac Sheen--the former a brother of the prophet--representing themselves to be the legitimate presidents of the church of Jesus Christ of latter-day saints, and from twelve members of that church. It is there set forth that, prior to the migration from Nauvoo, 1,500 of the Mormons had taken the following oath: 'You do solemnly swear, in the presence of almighty God, his holy angels, and these witnesses, that you will avenge the blood of Joseph Smith upon this nation, and so teach your children; and that [p. 452] you will from this day henceforth and forever begin and carry out hostility against this nation, and keep the same a profound secret now and ever. So help yea God.' The memorial was referred to the committee on territories. Cong. Globe, 1849-50, xxi. 92. A second memorial from the same parties was presented to Mr Underwood on March 14, 1850, preferring grievous complaints against the people of Deseret, and stating that the Mormons around Council Bluffs controlled the post-office in that district and obstructed the free circulation of newspapers. It was referred to the committee on post-offices and post-roads. Id., 524.

^452:29 On Jan. 22d. On the same date a bill introduced by Henry S. Foote of Mississippi to establish suitable territorial governments for California, Deseret, and New Mexico, and for other purposes, was referred to the committee on territories. Id., 212-13.

^452:30 House Jour., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 414.

^452:31 A report of the debates in the senate and house with regard to the admission of Utah as a state or territory will be found in Cong. Globe, 1849-50, passim. In Id., xxi. 1221, is a copy of a memorial drawn up by James J. Strung, George J. Adams, and William Marks, and presented to the senate. It sets forth that ten thousand men, women, and children were illegally expelled from Missouri, plundered of their effects, exiled from their homes, driven in destitution, hunger, and want in midwinter to a distant land, passing much of the way in the midst of foes who not only refused them shelter and food [p. XXX] but kept them in continual danger. 'If you tell us, as some of your predecessors told our martyred prophets while they were yet alive, that you have no power to redress our wrongs, then there is presented to the world the melancholy spectacle of the greatest republic on earth, a christian nation, acknowledging itself powerless to judge; unable to protect the right; a nation on whose righteousness half the earth rest the hopes of man, confessing that there is a power above the law.' The memoralists beg that congress pass a law granting the saints the right to settle on and forever occupy the uninhabited lands in the islands of Lake Michigan. Although there probably were no unoccupied lands in these islands in 1850, the petition was referred to the committee on public lands.

^454:32 Copies of it will be found in U. S. Public Laws, 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 453-8; U. S. Charters and Const., ii. 1236-40; U. S. Acts and Res., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 53-8; Utah, Acts Legist. (ed. 1866), 25-8; (ed. 1855), 111-19; Deseret News, Dec. 30, 1850; Frontier Guardian, Oct. 16, 1850.

^454:33 Ten days before, the governor had formally notified the assembly, in a special message, of the passing of the organic act. 'Upon the dissolving of this legislature,' he says, 'permit me to add, the industry and unanimity which have ever characterized your efforts, and contributed so much to the pre-eminent success of this government, will, in all future time, be a source of gratification to all; and whatever may be the career and destiny of this young but growing republic, we can ever carry with us the proud satisfaction of having erected, established, and maintained a peaceful, quiet, yet energetic government, under the benign auspices of which unparalleled prosperity has showered her blessings upon every interest.' Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 107-8; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 79. On March 28th the legislature, in joint session, passed resolutions cordially accepting the legislation of congress and appropriating the union square for the public buildings. Id., 80.

^455:34 The first or Parvan agency included all that lay within the limits of the territory north of the Parvan Valley and west of the Shoshones. The second, or Uintah agency, included the Shoshones, Ewintes or Uintahs, Yampas, 'and all other tribes south within said territory, and east of the eastern rim of the great basin.' The third or Parowan agency included 'all the country lying west of the eastern rim of the great basin, and south of the south line of the Parvan Valley, to the western bounds of the territory.' Governor Young's Proclamation, in Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, 160.

^455:35 The first judicial district included the city and county of G. S. Lake, Tootle county, and the region east and west to the limits of the territory. Two terms were to be held each year at S. L. City, commencing on the second Tuesday of April and October. The second district included Davis and Weber counties, and the region east, west, and north. Semiannual terms were to be held at Ogden, commencing on the second Tuesday in May and December. Utah, San Pete, and Iron counties, with the country east, west, and south, formed the third district, and sessions were to be held twice a year at Provo, beginning on the second Tuesday of August and February. Each term in the several districts was to continue one week, if necessary, after which the court might adjourn to any other county if business should require it. Id., 160-1.

^456:36 Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, 275, says that Brigham owed his appointment to the recommendation of Kane. He took the oath of office Jan. 3, 1851. On the same day a special session of the county court was held, and a grand jury impanelled for the first time. The prisoners, who were emigrants en route for California, were convicted of stealing, and sentenced to hard labor, but were afterward pardoned by the executive, and sent out of the country. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 28.

^456:37 Brandebury was assigned to the first district, Snow to the second, and Brocchus to the third. Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, 161.

^457:38 Utah Early Records, MS., 134-5; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 276.

^457:39 Journal of Discourses, ii. 186-7. After this occurrence, Brigham frequently warned the troublesome of the danger they incurred should he but crook his finger. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 277.

^458:40 The members of the council were Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, Dan. H. Wells, Jedediah M. Grant, Ezra T. Benson, and Orson Spencer for Salt Lake co.; John S. Fullmer for Davis co.; Loren Farr and Chas R. Dana for Weber co.; Alex. Williams and Aaron Johnson for Utah co.; Isaac Morley for San Pete co.; and Geo. A. Smith for Iron co. Representatives: Wilford Woodruff, David Fullmer, Dan. Spencer, Willard Snow, W. W. Phelps, Albert P. Rockwood, Nathaniel H. Felt, Edwin D. Woolley, Phinehas Richards, Jos. Young, Henry G. Sherwood, Ben. F. Johnson, and Hosea Stout for Salt Lake co.; Andrew L. Lamoreaux, John Stoker, and Wm Kay for Davis co.; Jas Brown, David B. Dille and Jas G. Browning for Weber co.; John Rowberry for Tooele co.; David Evans, Wm Miller, and Levi W. Hancock for Utah co.; Chas Shumway for San Pete co.; and Elisha H. Groves for Iron co. Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, 162. Thus it will be seen there were 13 members of the council and 25 representatives. In the organic act it was provided that there should be 26 representatives, the number of members for either house being based on the census of 1850. George Brimhall, the remaining member for Iron co., was elected Nov. 15, 1851.

^458:41 This proceeding did not conflict with the organic act, which provides--section iv.--that the first election shall be held and the members elected shall [p. XXX] meet at such places and on such day as the governor shall appoint, but that thereafter the time, place, and manner of conducting elections, and the day for the opening of the regular sessions, shall be prescribed by law.

^459:42 Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, p. 99.

^459:43 In a letter to Willard Richards, president of the council, and W. W. Phelps, speaker of the representatives, dated Sept. 25, 1851, Harris declares the election illegal on the grounds--lst. That no census had been taken; 2d. That the governor's proclamation was faulty in form and substance; 3d. That 'aliens voted indiscriminately with American citizens, and those recognized as such by the treaty with Mexico;' 4th. That 'aliens acted as officers at the polls, and were elected to office;' 5th. That 'officers not authorized to be chosen were voted for and elected;' 6th. That legal and timely notice of the election was not given; 7th. That the time and place for the first meeting were not duly appointed. House Ex. Doc., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 25, pp. 25-6. Albert Carrington was chosen clerk of the representatives, and James Cragun sergeant-at-arms; Howard Coray secretary of the council, and Wm H. Kimball sergeant-at-arms. Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, pp. 5, 46.

^460:44 Young's Despatch to Fillmore in House Doc., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., v. no. 25, pp. 28-32. See also Utah Early Records, MS., 249-51. Stenhouse says that on their return Harris and his colleagues published an account of the matter, remarking 'that polygamy monopolized all the women, which made it very inconvenient for the federal officers to reside there.' This remark disgusted the authorities, and the officials met with a cool reception at Washington. Rocky Mountain Saints, 277-8. Their official report will be found in House Ex. Doc., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., v. no. 25, pp. 8-22. The principal charge alleged against the Mormons was that a citizen of Utica, N. Y., named James Munroe, while on his way to S. L. City, was murdered by one of the Saints, that his remains were brought into the city and buried without an inquest, and that the murderer was not arrested. There is no proof of this statement. In the Utah Early Records, MS., 161-3, we have a synopsis of their report, which was afterward circulated among the people. They alleged that they had been compelled to withdraw in consequence of the lawless acts and seditious tendencies of Brigham Young and the majority of the residents, that the Mormon church overshadowed and controlled the opinions, actions, property, and lives of its members--disposing of the public lands on its own terms, coining and issuing money at will, openly sanctioning polygamy, exacting tithes from members and onerous taxes from non-members, penetrating and supervising social and business circles, and requiring implicit obedience to the council of the church as a duty paramount to all the obligations of morality, society, allegiance, and law. On the other side, we have in Id., 148-158, a copy of the letter addressed by Brigham to the president. After reviewing his proceedings and policy since taking the oath of office the governor says: 'Mr Harris informed me, in a conversation which I had with him, that he had private instructions designed for no eye but his own, to watch every movement and not pay out any funds unless the same should be strictly legal, according to his own judgment.' He states that there are none more friendly [p. 461] toward the government than the people of Utah, that they revere the constitution, seek to honor the laws, and complain only of their non-execution, and the abuse of power at the hands of those intrusted with them. He states that Brocchus had never even been in his district, and that, so far as the public interests were concerned, it would have been quite as well if neither the judges nor the secretary had troubled themselves to cross the plains. 'What good and substantial reason can be given that the people of this territory should be deprived, for probably near a year to come, of a supreme court, of the official seal of a secretary of state, of the official publication of the laws, and other matters pertaining to the office of secretary? Is it true that officers coming here by virtue of any appointment by the president have private instructions that so far control their actions as to induce the belief that their main object is not the strict and legal performance of their respective duties, but rather to watch for iniquity, to catch at shadows, and make a man "an offender for a word," to spy out our liberties, and by manifold misrepresentations seek to prejudice the minds of the people against us? If such is the case, better, far better, would it be for us to live under the organization of our provisional government, and entirely depending upon our own resources, as we have hitherto done, until such time as we can be admitted as a state.' A copy of the report will be found in House Ex. Doc., 32d Cong. 1st Seas., v. no. 25, pp. 28-32. It is also mentioned in Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, p. 136.

^461:45 Utah Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, p. 53; Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, p. 109.

^461:46 At his home in Bath, Steuben co., Waite's The Morm. Prophet, 25; in his 40th year. Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 5.

^461:47 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 279. Brigham said of him: 'One of our judges, Judge Shaver, has been here during the winter, and, as far as he is known, he is a straightforward, judicious, upright man.' The heads of the church took great pains to investigate the matter, and came to the conclusion that 'he had died of some disease of the head.' See Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 78. Beadle, Life in Utah, 170, says that the Mormons believed him to be an opium-eater, and that he died from being suddenly deprived of that drug.

^462:48 As the 40 days allowed by the organic act were about to expire, and further time was required for the completion of the necessary business of the session. For copy of proclamation, see Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, 166.

^462:49 By joint resolution, approved Oct. 4, 1851. Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 108.

^462:50 They will be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 120-232. 'It is questionable,' says Richards in his Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 8, 'whether any of the sister territories had a code of laws framed by its own legislature that would compare favorably with those enacted during this session.'

^462:51 The foundation for a state-house was laid in S. L. City Sept. 1, 1851. Utah Early Records, MS., 133.

^463:52 A copy of the memorial will be found in Tullidge's Life of Young, 213-14; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 22. For other memorials passed during the sessions of 1851-2, see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 401-5.

^464:53 Stansbury's Exped. to Valley of G. S. Lake, 84-6.

^464:54 The Mormons or Latter-day Saints in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake: A History of their Rise and Progress, Peculiar Doctrines, Present Condition, and Prospects, Derived from Personal Observation during a Residence among Them. By Lieut J. W. Gunnison of the Topographical Engineers. Philadelphia, 1857. [p. 465] The first six chapters of this work are mainly devoted to a description of the valley of G. S. Lake, the civil and theocratic system of the Mormons, and the tenets of the Mormon church. In chapter vi.-vii., which complete the first part, we have an interesting description of the social condition of the settlers, and of the influence of the priesthood. The second part contains a sketch of the rise and early progress of Mormonism. Unlike most writers on this topic, Mr Gunnison appears to have given the subject some thought. 'This treatise on the faith and condition of the Mormons,' he says, 'results from a careful observation of that strange and interesting people during more than a year's residence among them in an official capacity. The writer has undertaken neither the task of criticism nor controversy. His aim is not "to shoot folly as it flies," but to let folly tire on its own pinions, and reason regain its sway over erratic feeling, when the mists of prejudice on one side and of fanaticism on the other are dispelled by the light of knowledge. For those who desire facts in the history of humanity on which to indulge in reflection, is this offered.' The book is dedicated to Captain Stansbury.

    An Expedition to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake of Utah, including a Description of its Geography, Natural History, and Minerals, and an Analysis of its Waters; with an Authentic Account of the Mormon Settlement. Illustrated by numerous beautiful plates from drawings taken on the spot. Also a Reconnoissance of a New Route through the Rocky Mountains, and two large and accurate maps of that region. By Howard Stansbury, Captain Corps Topographical Engineers, U. S. Army. Philadelphia, 1855. The first six chapters of this work contain an account of the captain's journey to the valley of G. S. Lake, and of the explorations mentioned above. Travelling, as he did, during the early days of the gold-fever, his narrative is full of interest. Leaving the valley of Warm Spring Branch near Fort Laramie on July 19, 1849, he writes: 'We passed to-day the nearly consumed fragments of about a dozen wagons that had been broken up and burned by their owners; and near them was piled up in one heap from six to eight hundred weight of bacon, thrown away for want of means to transport it farther. Boxes, bonnets, trunks, wagon-wheels, whole wagon-bodies, cooking utensils, and in fact almost every article of household furniture, were found from place to place along the prairie, abandoned for the same reason.' Two days later he found the road strewn with immense quantities of white beans, which seemed to have been thrown out of the wagons by the sackful, their owners being tired of carrying them farther, or afraid to eat them from danger of cholera. Crossing a spur of the Red Buttes on the 27th, he says: 'To-day we find additional and melancholy evidence of the difficulties encountered by those who are ahead of us. ...Bar iron and steel, large blacksmith's anvils and bellows, crowbars, drills, augers, gold-washers, chisels, axes, lead, trunks, spades, ploughs, large grindstones, baking-ovens, cooking-stoves without number, kegs, barrels, harness, clothing, bacon, and beans were found along the road in pretty much the order in which they have been here enumerated.' In the seventh chapter is a description of the settlements and industrial condition of the Mormons in the winter of 1849-50, together with some excellent remarks on the polity of the state of Deseret. In the remainder of the volume we have an account of various explorations and adventures in the valley and on the return journey. In the appendices are tables of distances, papers on zoology, botany, geology, and paleontology, meteorological observations, and chemical analyses of mineral waters. The work is well written, sketchy and entertaining in style, and impartial in its comments on the Mormons. A German edition of it on a smaller scale was published at Stuttgart in 1854, entitled [p. 466] Die Mormonen--Ansiedlungen, die Felsengebirge und der grosse Salzsee, nebst einer Beschreibung der Auswanderer--Stratze und der interessanter Abenteuer der Auswanderungen nach jeuen Gegenden Geschildert auf einer Untersuchungs Expedition.

    Among other works covering about the same period as Lieut Gunnison's book, may be mentioned the following: The Mormons, or Latter-day Saints; with memoirs of the Life and Death of Joseph Smith., the American Mahomet. Edited by Charles Mackay. Fourth edition, London, 1856. The first edition of this work was published in 1851. It claims to have been, as indeed it was, the first work upon the subject which could justly be entitled a historical statement of the case. It is a work full of valuable information, much of it of an original character and nowhere else existing. It is written with marked ability, and in a spirit of exceeding fairness, though taking decidedly an anti-Mormon view. Yet the author says: 'It presents the history of Joseph Smith, a great impostor or a great visionary, perhaps both, but in either case one of the most remarkable persons who has appeared on the stage of the world in modern times.' In the fourth edition, 'the whole of the doctrinal chapter, which formed the conclusion of the work in the previous editions, has been excluded in the present instance to make room for matter of a more historical character. Polygamy, which the Mormons attempted to deny, or explain by the euphemism of the spiritual-wife doctrine, has now been unblushingly avowed; and this practice, which has become the most distinctive, as it is the most odious, characteristic of the sect, has received more notice in this edition than was bestowed upon it in the original publication.'

    The Religious, Social, and Political History of the Mormons, or Latter-day Saints, from their Origin to the Present Time; containing full statements of their Doctrines, Government, and Condition, and memoirs of their founder, Joseph Smith; edited with important additions, by Samuel M. Smucker. New York, 1860. What it is that Mr Smucker edits, and to what he makes additions, does not appear, but the student with this book and that of Mackay's before him soon discovers that the former is taken almost verbatim from the latter, and without a word of credit. Smucker evidently worked at so much a day for the publishers, who desired something by that name to sell. Considering the circumstances, the work is fairly done; the saints are abused with moderation and decorum, and the publishers probably made money out of it.

    Origin, Rise, and Progress of Mormonism. Biography of its Founders and History of its Church. Personal Remembrances and historical collections hitherto unwritten. By Pomeroy Tucker. Palmyra, N. Y., 1867. This author claims a personal acquaintance with Joseph Smith and the Smith family since their arrival at Palmyra, the birthplace of the writer, in 1816. He also knew Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, and others of the first converts. He was editorially connected with the Wayne Sentinel when the book of Mormon was printed in the office of that journal. His book is published for the purpose of proving Joseph Smith an impostor and the book of Mormon a fraud. The author has ability, and is accustomed to writing; he has done his work well. He employs with no small skill and success that most powerful of weapons in the hand of a ready writer--sarcasm. Much space is devoted to sustaining the Spaulding theory. Historically, the book is of little value after the departure of the Mormons from the vicinity of the writer's home; but up to that point, and not forgetting that it is the plea of an advocate rather than the decision of a judge, it may be called a first-class authority.

^467:55 Stansbury's field-work is thus summarized: 1. The selection and measurement of a base-line 6 miles in length; 2. The erection of 24 principal triangulation stations; 3. The survey of G. S. Lake, the shore-line of which is stated at 291 miles; 4. The survey of the islands, 96 miles; 5. The survey of Lake Utah, 76 miles; 6. The survey of the Jordan and some of its tributaries, 50 miles, making in all 513 miles; 7. The observations from different triangular stations extending from the northern extremity of G. S. Lake to the southern boundary of the valley of Lake Utah. Exped. to Valley of G. S. Lake, 216.

^467:56 Id., 227, 261-3; Gunnison's The Mormons, 152. There is little difference in the line of route laid down by either. Stansbury suggests that from Kamas prairie the road might fork, one branch descending the Wasatch Range by the Golden Pass, and the other following the Timpanogos Valley.

^469:57 One of the survivors was thrown from his horse into a bush, where he lay for several hours, the Indians passing him on every side. Beckwith, in Rept. Explor. and Surveys, ii. 74.

^470:58 A full account of Gnnnison's survey, prepared mainly by himself, and of the massacre will be found in Beckwith's Reports, in Id., ii. Lieut Beckwith writes: 'The statement which has from time to time appeared or been copied in various newspapers of the country, since the occurrence of these sad events, charging the Mormons or Mormon authorities with instigating the Indians to, if not actually aiding them in, the murder of Captain Gunnison and his associates is, I believe, not only entirely false, but there is no accidental circumstance connected with it affording the slightest foundation for such a charge.' Captain Morris, in his official report to the adjutant-general, says nothing about the Mormons being implicated in the matter. See House Ex. Doc., 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 18, pp. 5-6. The names of those who were killed, besides Captain Gunnison, were R. H. Kern, F. Creutzfeldt, William Potter, a Mormon guide, privates Caulfield, Liptoote, and Mehrteens, mounted riflemen, and an employe named John Bellows. House Ex. Doc., 33d Cong. 1st. Sess., no. 18, pp. 6. For other accounts and comments on the Gunnison massacre, see Mollhausen, Tagelbuch, 429-30; Carvalho's Incidents of Travel, 196-9; S. F. Alta, June 25, 1854, Nov. 11, 1857; S. F. Herald, May 7, 1855.

^470:59 On hearing of the massacre, Brigham took measures for the recovery of the property and the disposal of the bodies. Gunnison was somewhat of a favorite among the Mormons. In the Deseret Nrews of Nov. 12, 1853, where is a copy of Beckwith's report of the massacre, is the following: 'We feel to commiserate deeply with the friends of those who have been so suddenly and unexpectedly cut off, but more especially with the wife and children of Captain Gunnison, who was endeared to us by a former and fondly cherished acquaintanceship in 1849-50, while he was engaged with Captain Howard Stunsbury in the survey of the Great Salt and Utah lakes.' The following is [p. 471] a sworn statement from the private journal of Anson Call, a Mormon residing in Fillmore City in 1853, and in 1883 one of the most prominent citizens of East Bountiful, Davis co.: 'From Fillmore to the site of the Gunnison massacre is about 35 miles. The settlements were in a state of alarm on account of the "Walker war," and just before the massacre a party of emigrants from Missouri, on their way to California, came to Fillmore. During their stay they made many threats concerning the Indians, and declared repeatedly that they would kill the first one who came into their camp. I remonstrated with them and cautioned them. After this party had left, I learned that some Indians around had gone into their camp, and that they had killed two of them and wounded three others. This so enraged the Indians that nothing short of blood would appease their wrath. At this time Capt. Gunnison and his exploring party came along. I told him what had happened, and spoke of the exasperation of the Indians. He expressed deep regret, and remarked: "The Indians are sure to take their revenge."' Then follows an account of the massacre, and of the burial of the dead. Call states that Captain Gunnison's remains were interred at Fillmore. At Lieut Beckwith's request he furnished men for an express to Brigham with news of the massacre. Utah Co. Sketches, MS., 163-8. Call's statement is confirmed by Wells in his Narr., MS., 15-19. Wells states that Capt. Gunnison's brother at first believed the report that the Mormons were implicated, and met Call by appointment at S. L. City. The latter produced his diary, from which he read extracts, and after a full investigation, declared himself satisfied that the Mormons had nothing to do with the massacre, F. D. Richards says that he and Erastus Snow rescued four of the survivors near Cedar Springs. Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 42-3.

^471:60 Although the Indian tribes of Utah were at this period very numerous, the word 'Utahs' was commonly applied to those south of G. S. Lake, and 'Shoshones' or 'Snakes' to those north and west of the lake, especially in the valley of the Humboldt River. The Snakes and Utahs were both Shoshone tribes. See my Native Races, i. passim.

^471:61 Richards' Narr., MS., 47; Wells' Narr., MS., 23; Young's Early Experiences, MS., 5-6. In the latter MS. it is related that when the pioneers entered the valley Indians were very numerous, but that the only trouble which occurred in early times was with a lame and vicious savage whom the Mormons named 'the old cripple.' One day this man entered Mrs Young's cabin during her husband's absence, and asked for some biscuits. She gave him all that she could spare, and when he demanded more replied that she had none. The Indian then strung his bow and threatened to shoot her. 'Wait a moment,' said Mrs Young, and I will bring more biscuits. Stepping into an adjoining shed, she let loose at him a huge mastiff, which seized him by the leg, causing him to howl with pain. The savage now gave up his arrows, whereupon his wound was dressed and he was sent about his business. He was never seen again in that neighborhood. This incident is also related in Tullidge's Women of Morm., 442.

    Lorenzo Dow Young, brother to Brigham, by whom this MS. was presented to me, arrived in the valley on the 24th of July, 1847, with the pioneer [p. 472] band, and encamped near the present site of Main Street, S. L. City. During my visit to Utah, in August 1884, he described to me the cabin that he built soon after his arrival near the spot where the 'Beehive' later stood. Its roof was of dirt, and its flooring of planks, sawn by his own hands. This was the first house built in the city, and as it had glass for windows, was long considered one of the most comfortable. Around this residence locust trees were planted, but only those were saved which were covered with buckets. At the time of my visit I found Mr Young living at his country home, within two or three miles of the capital, in company with the eldest of his three wives, Harriet Page Wheeler Young, a native of Hillsborough, N.H., who was baptized into the faith in Feb. 1836, and was married to Lorenzo at Nauvoo in 1844, a few weeks before the assassination of Joseph Smith. The house was long and narrow, plainly built and furnished, indicating no surplus of this world's goods. Mrs Harriet Young is the heroine of the story related above. In a double brick house near by lived the other wives of Mr Young. They were honest, good-natured, credulous people, and were thoroughly contented with their lot. Their simple needs were all supplied; their barn was filled with hay, and the yard well stocked with poultry. All the wives addressed Lorenzo as 'father,' and the entire party seemed to form one patriarchal family, living quietly, happily, and in accordance with their faith. At this date Mr Young was 77 years of age; he was a man of medium height, ruddy, and cheerful of countenance, with kindly blue eyes, thin, white, curly locks, and except for a slight deafness, showed little trace of age. He said that on his 75th birthday he counted 122 living descendants, but had since lost track of the number of his grandchildren. He expressed a wish that the doctrine of polygamy should be studied in the light of the old testament, and the facts laid bare by some honest and impartial inquirer.

^473:62 Deseret News, Sept. 21, 1850; Smith's Rise, Progress and Travels, 28. Smith states that on arriving at the spot, the detachment ascertained the cause of the outbreak from some friendly Indians, and restored peace by reimbursing the Shoshones.

^473:63 When near a branch of the Loupe fork of the Platte, Orson Hyde and his party were robbed by a band of 300 Pawnees, the plunder amounting to about $1,000. Frontier Guardian, Aug. 22, 1851. In 1852 there was also some trouble in Tooele co. between the settlers and the Indians, and a company of the legion was sent there, but the Indians got the best of it, carrying away the Mormons' cattle. Wells' Narr., MS., 13.

^473:64 The party with the mail left S. L. City on Oct. 1st, and reached Goose Creek on the 6th. Here they encamped and lighted a fire for the first time. In the morning, when ready to start, 200 or 300 Indians made their appearance, and pressed so closely on the mail-wagon that the men were forccd to abandon it and retreat, some on mules and some on foot, keeping up a fight with the Indians for several miles. At least five of the assailants were killed. S. F. Alta, Nov. 2, 1851. In Id., June 2, 5, 1852, are reports of murders committed by Indians.

^474:65 Richards and others state that even after the gold discovery Walker made raids into California, and that on one occasion, about the year 1849, the people turned out en masse to capture him and his band in their lurking place among the mountains. The chief quietly secured their horses and trappings at dead of night and returned with them to Utah. Utah Notes, MS., 8. Wells, Narr., MS., 17, says that Walker did not inherit the chieftainship, but obtained it through the success of his raids into California. When an Indian possessed cattle and horses enough to mount and feed others, he was at once regarded as a big man among the Utahs, and thus Walker obtained his prestige. Ora, now dead, was the head chief of the Ute nation, and Uintah was a great chief among the Utahs.

^474:66 Governor's message, in Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1853-4, 121-2. On July 17th the Utahs made a raid on Springville, but, the inhabitants being forewarned, no damage was done. On the 18th Alexander Keele, who was on sentry near Payson, was shot dead by Arapeen, Walker's brother. The Indians then moved up Peteetneet Canon, firing on the settlers as they passed. On the 19th Col Conover started from Provo with 150 men to assist the smaller settlements. On the same day the savages attempted to surprise the settlement at Pleasant Creek, and stoic horses and cattle at Manti and Nephi. On the 20th the guard at Nephi was fired upon. On the 24th Clark Roberts and John Berry were wounded at Pleasant Creek, while on their way to Provo, in charge of an express. On the 23d Conover sent forth a scouting party[p. 475] which encountered a band of 20 or 30 Indians near Pleasant Creek, and killed six of them. On the night of August 10th a party under Lieut Burns, encamped on Clover Creek, was attacked, and one of them wounded, several animals being lost. On the 17th four men, who were hauling lumber near Parley Park, were fired on and two of them killed. Deseret News, July 30, Aug. 25, 1853; Wells' Narr., MS., 56. Sept. 30th, four men on their way to Manti with ox teams loaded with wheat were killed and mutilated at Uintah Springs. Oct. 2d, eight Indians were killed and others captured in a skirmish at Nephi. Oct. 4th, two Mormons named John E. Warner and William Mills were killed at the grist-mill near Manti. Id., Oct. 15, 1853. Oct. 31st, news of the Gunnison massacre was received at Salt Lake City by letter from Capt. Morris. Id., Nov. 12, 1853. For other accounts of Indian disturbances, see S. F. Herald, Sept. 30, Dec. 24, 1853; S. F. Alta, Aug. 27, Sept. 30, 1853; Olshausen's Mormonen, 186-7.

^475:67 In the Deseret News of Nov. 15, 1851, it is stated that a copy of a license granted to one Pedro Leon, dated Santa Fe, Aug. 14, 1851, and signed by James S. Calhoon, superintendent of Indian affairs, was shown to Willard Richards, who states that on the 3d of that month Leon, with 20 Mexicans, was at Manti, for the purpose of trading horses for Indian children, and that two other companies were about to follow. Wells, Narr., MS., 23, and Richards, Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 25-6, state that the Utahs were in the habit of stealing children from the Piutes and selling them to Mexican traders. The latter relates that Arapeen had a stolen child who was taken sick, and as the savage could not sell it, he took it by the heels, swung it round his head, and dashed out its brains. The act was witnessed by several Mormons, who were only prevented from shooting him on the spot through fear of provoking a general uprising. By virtue of his authority as governor and superintendent of Indian affairs, Brigham Young forbade all trading of this nature, and told the Mexicans that their license was not valid. Hist. B. Young, MS., 1851, 115.

^475:68 In the preamble it is stated that the purchase of Indian women and children by Mexican traders has been carried on from time immemorial; that it is a common practice with Indians to gamble away their women and children; that the captives thus obtained, or obtained by war or theft, were often carried from place to place, packed on horses or mules, lariated out to subsist on grass or roots, bound with thongs of rawhide, until their feet and hands were [p. 476] swollen; and when they fell sick, were frequently slain by their masters. It was therefore enacted that whenever any white person within the territory should have in his possession an Indian prisoner, whether by purchase or otherwise, he should immediately take his captive before the probate judge or one of the selectmen, and if in their opinion the applicant was a fit person to retain and educate him, he was to be bound by indenture for a term not exceeding 20 years, during which he must be decently clad at the owner's expense, and attend school for three months in each year. Selectmen were authorized to obtain such prisoners and have them trained to useful vocations. A copy of the act will be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 87-8, and Burton's City of the Saints, 297-9, note. In a message to the legislature, dated Jan. 6, 1852, Brigham, reviewing at length the internal policy of the territory, said that the system of slavery was obnoxious to humanity, but that the negro should serve the seed of Abraham, and not be a ruler nor vote for men to rule over him. 'My own feelings are, that no property can or should be recognized as existing in slaves, either Indian or African.' Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, pp. 108-10. Nevertheless, a few years later, there were slaves in Utah. Horace Greeley, during an interview with Brigham, in 1859, asked him, 'What is the position of your church in regard to slavery?' 'We consider it,' he answered, 'of divine institution.' 'Are any slaves now held in this territory?' 'There are.' 'Do your territorial laws uphold slavery?' 'These laws are printed--you can read for yourself. If slaves are brought here by those who owned them in the states, we do not favor their escape from the service of those owners.' Greeley's Overland Journey, 211-12. 'The constitution of Deseret is silent upon this; we mean it should be. The seed of Canaan cannot hold any office, civil or ecclesiastical. They have not wisdom to act like white men...The day will come when the seed of Canaan will be redeemed.' Hist. B. Young, MS., 1852, p. 2.

^476:69 A copy of the proclamation will be found in the Deseret News of April 30, 1853.

^476:70 On Jan. 1, 1854, a wagon-train on its way from S. L. City to California for supplies was attacked by Indians, and three Mormons were wounded. When the party arrived at San Bernardino they had only 30 out of nearly 100 head of stock remaining. S. F. Alta, Feb. 22, 1854. In Sept. certain Indians were arrested for killing two boys, named William and Warren Weeks. On Sept. 4th Brigham returned from an official visit to the Shoshones. The Indians declared that they desired peace, and had always done so, except when maltreated by passing emigrants. Deseret News, in Id., Oct. 19, 1854. During this trip Brigham met the chief Walker at Chicken Creek, made a truce with him, and gave him presents. Walker afterward became very friendly to the Mormons. During the negotiations Walker said, through an interpreter, that Brigham was a great chief, and that he was himself as great--holding up both thumbs to indicate that both were equally great. By the terms of the truce Walker agreed to give up all the stolen horses, or all that could be found. Wells' Narr., MS., 21. On the 17th of August, while a train of Mormon emigrants was passing a Sioux encampment near Fort Laramie, one of their cattle strayed into the Indian camp and was killed. The Mormons complained to the commandant, who ordered Lieut J. L. Grattan to [p. 477] proceed to the camp with two howitzers and 29 men of the sixth infantry, and arrest the offender, if it could be done without unnecessary risk. This at the instance of a Sioux chief named The Bear, who stated that the culprit would doubtless be surrendered. Arriving at the outskirts of the camp, Grattan sent for The Bear, who said that his people had determined not to deliver up the accused; whereupon the lieutenant resolved to enter the camp and arrest him at all hazards. Thus far the statements of witnesses agree, but from this point there is a conflict of testimony. It can only be stated with certainty that a fight ensued, in which the lieutenant and his entire command were killed. The whole matter wears the appearance of a well-planned attempt on the part of the Indians to gain possession of Fort Laramie, and of the warehouses of a trading company near by, where the Sioux were awaiting the arrival of the Indian agent to distribute their annuity goods. In the latter attempt they were successful. Various reports of the massacre will be found in House Ex. Doc., 33d Cong. 2d Sess., viii. no. 63. See also Rept of Sec. of Inter., in Id., i. pt i. 224-5. Toward the end of the year a party of Crows captured the mail from S. L. City, destroyed the mail-bags, and secured plunder to the amount of $12,000. S. F. Alta, Jan. 1, 1855. In Sept. three Mormons were murdered near the Elk Mountains. For particulars, see Deseret News, Oct. 10, 17, 1855; S. F. Alta, Nov. 8, 1855; S. F. Bulletin, Nov. 9, 1855. In Feb. 1856 there was some trouble with Indians in the Utah and Cedar valleys, during which a Mormon named George Carson was mortally wounded, and two herdsmen killed. Deseret News, Feb. 27, March 5, 1856. In May of this year Carlos Murray and his family were massacred in Thousand Spring Valley. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1856, 227-30. It is probable that this massacre was caused by the misconduct of California-bound emigrants. In House Ex. Doc., 34th Cong. 1st Sess., i. pt i. 519, Garland Hurt, then Indian agent, in his report to Brigham dated Sept. 30, 1855, says: 'On our return trip we were exceedingly anxious to meet with some Indians whom we had reason to believe were haunting the road between the Humboldt and Bear River. In Thousand Spring Valley we saw but one, and had to chase him on horseback before we came up with him. I asked him why he and his people were so wild when I came so far just to see them and give them presents. He said they were afraid we were Californians and would kill them.'

^477:71 Id., 267. The treaty was not ratified, and only a copy of it was received at Washington.

^477:72 At Meadow Creek, near Fillmore. In a letter to Brigham, dated Fillmore City, Jan. 29th, David Lewis says that on the previous day he met Walker, who was so feeble that he had to he supported on his horse. He asked whether Brigham 'talked good.' Lewis replied that he talked very good, and gave him a letter and a number of presents from the governor. The chieftain then went his way, asking Lewis to visit him at Meadow Creek the next morning. Before daybreak a number of Indians came running into the fort (at Fillmore) with news of Walker's death. Walker, in his last words, asked his people not to kill the cattle of the Mormons or steal from them. Deseret News, Feb. 8, 1855. For biography and portrait of Walker, see Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 104-5; for mention of his death, Incidents in [p. 478] Utah Hist., MS., 63; MiIlennial Star, 269-70; S. F. Alta, Apr. 6, 1855; Sac. Union, Apr. 9, 1855.

^478:73 Walker had three brothers, named Arapeen, Sanpitch, and Tabby. Sanpitch succeeded Arapeen, and Tabby was afterward chief of the Utahs. Wells' Narr., MS., 22. In his summary of the Walker war, Richards mentions a brother named Ammon. Incidents in Hist. Utah, MS., 30.

^478:74 In his report to Brigham Young, in House Ex. Doc., i. 34th Cong. 1st Sess., pt i. 518, Garland Hurt states that while in the Humboldt Valley 400 Indians came to his camp within three days, and that many had travelled 100 miles without food. Again, p. 520, he mentions that a party of Utahs were put to work on a farm at Nephi, but they had nothing to eat, and most of them were compelled to betake themselves to the mountains and streams, where there were fish and game.

^478:75 In 1849 John Wilson was appointed Indian agent at Salt Lake. In House Ex. Doc., 17, 31st Cong. 1st Sess., pp. 182-4, is a copy of his instructions. The total sum allowed him for presents to Indians, rent, fuel, stationery, forage, the purchase of two horses, travelling and incidental expenses, was $1,500. What portion of this amount the Indians were likely to receive in the way of presents the reader will judge for himself. In Id., no. 17, pp. 104-111, is a copy of the agent's report, which contains much that was already known about the geography of the country, but very little about the Indian tribes. Wilson states that to gain anything like a personal knowledge of the actual situation of these tribes would require five years' travel. One would think that he might at least have learned something from the Mormons. In 1851 Jacob H. Holman was appointed Indian agent, and Henry R. Day and Stephen B. Rose sub-agents Amer. Almanac, 1852. Day was removed in 1852. In 1854 Garland Hurt succeeded Holman, and Edward A. Bedell was also appointed agent. In 1855-6 the agents were Garland Hurt and G. W. Armstrong, Brigham being still superintendent of Indian affairs. Id., 1854-7. The reports of the various agents and of the superintendent will be found in Ind. Aff. Repts, passim. In his report to the secretary of the interior, dated Nov. 22, 1856, Geo. W. Manypenny, commissioner of Indian affairs, says: 'The Indians in the territory of Utah have, with but few exceptions, continued quiet and peaceable.' Nevertheless, in Feb. of this year there were a few war parties in the field. See Brigham Young's proclamation, in Deseret News. Feb. 27, 1856.

^479:76 Ind. Aff. Repts, 1856, 264-7.

^479:77 Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 108. Gen. Wells states that the cost of the Walker war, apart from losses incurred, was $70,000; that this was cut down to $40,000, after special agents had been sent to investigate, and was not paid until ten years afterward. Narr., MS., 25. On Jan. 5, 1853, the committee on territories transferred to the committee on military affairs a memorial of the Utah legislature for an appropriation for the expense of Indian expeditions. U. S. House Jour., 32d Cong. 2d Sess., 104. On Jan. 29, 1855, the committee on military affairs reported that it had not sufficient data to advise on refunding to Utah her expenses in suppressing Indian outbreaks. U. S. House Com. Repts, 33d Cong. 2d Sess., 39. On March 2, 1857, the U.S. senate voted against a motion authorizing the secretary of war to settle the accounts of Utah territory for moneys advanced in suppressing Indian hostilities in 1853. U.S. Sen. Jour., 34th Cong. 3d Sess., 298. For copies of memorials, of which two were forwarded to congress, see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 409-10, 416-17.

^479:78 Garland Hurt, under date G. S. L. City, May 2, 1855, in Ind. Aff. Repts, 1857, 305, says he has become satisfied that the saints have accidentally or purposely created a distinction in the minds of the Indian tribes of this territory between the Mormons and the people of the U.S. that cannot act otherwise than prejudicially to the latter. He recommends that the 13th and 14th sections of the 'act to regulate trade and intercourse with the Indian tribes, and to preserve peace on the frontier,' be rigidly enforced. It is true tha t the Indians made a distinction between Mormons and gentiles, for the former fed and clothed them, while the latter shot them down. Richards, Narr., MS., 47, says that when the saints first arrived in the valley, Brigham assured the Indians that they would be well treated, and told them that they must not behave toward his people as they did toward the Americans. In Indian Aff. [p. 480] Repts, 1837, 311, the governor remarks that more liberal appropriations should be made, and that the troops must be kept away, 'for it is a prevalent fact that wherever there are the most of these, we may expect to find the greatest amount of hostile Indians, and the least security to persons and property.' Most of Brigham's reports bear the impress of common sense, but he had not in his hands the appropriation of government funds or the appointment of Indian agents. For further mention of matters relating to Indian affairs, see House Ex. Doc., i. 32d Cong. 2d Sess., pt. i., 299-300, 487-45; Id., i. 33d Cong. 1st Sess., pt i. 441-7; Utah, Jour. Legisl., Joint Sess, 1854-5, pp. 94-7, 102; Deseret News, May 1, 1852, Apr. 2, 1853, May 11, June 22, Sept. 7, Oct. 15, 26, Nov. 16, 1854, Oct. 15, 1856; Front. Guardian, Oct 3, 1849; Tullidge's Quart. Mag., July 1884, 235-41; Mackay's The Mormons, 233, 238-40; Olshausen's Gesch. de Morm., 184-7; Carvalho's Incidents of Travel, 188-94; Ward's Husband in Utah, 39-60, 64-7; Marshall's Through Amer., 192; Hunt's Merchants' Mag., xxx. 639; Pacific R. R. Rept, ii. 26-7; Sac. Union, June 16, 1855; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 11, 1855; S. F. Alta, July 4, 1854, Dec, 9, 1856; San Jose Times, Nov. 23, 1879; S. F. Herald, June 25, 1854.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 481]

  

CHAPTER XVIII.
 THE GOVERNMENT IN ARMS.
 1853-1857.

BRIGHAM AS DICTATOR--UTAH SEEKS ADMISSION AS A STATE--DISSATISFACTION AMONG THE SAINTS--CONFLICTING JUDICIARIES--THE NEW FEDERAL OFFICIALS--DISPUTES WITH JUDGE DRUMMOND--COLONEL STEPTOE--AN EXPEDITION ORDERED TO UTAH--OFFICIAL BLUNDERS--THE TROOPS ASSEMBLE AT FORT LEAVENWORTH--HOCKADAY AND MAGRAW'S MAIL CONTRACT--THE BRIGHAM YOUNG EXPRESS--CELEBRATION OF THE PIONEER ANNIVERSARY--NEWS OF THE COMING INVASION--ITS EFFECT ON THE MORMONS--ARRIVAL OF MAJOR VAN VLIET--THE NAUVOO LEGION--MORMON TACTICS.

    "I AM and will be governor, and no power can hinder it," declared Brigham in a sabbath discourse at the tabernacle in June 1853; "until," he added with characteristic shrewdness, "the Lord almighty says, 'Brigham, you need not be governor any longer.'" [*1] After the departure of the runaway officials in September 1851, there were none to dispute the authority of the governor, and for several years his will was law. At the opening of the joint sessions of the assembly, a committee was appointed to escort him to the hall of the representatives, where he took his seat in front of the speaker's chair, the members and spectators rising in a body as he entered. The message was then read by his private secretary; it was ordered that a thousand copies of it be printed for the use of both houses, and that it be published in the Deseret News for the benefit of the people. The assembly then adjourned, and at the meetings which followed

[p. 482]

adopted only such measures as were suggested in the message, or as they knew would find favor with the governor. [*2] "Laws should be simple and plain," remarked Brigham, in his message of December 1853, "easy to be comprehended by the most unlearned, void of ambiguity, and few in number." [*3] Most sensible advice.

    During the years 1852-3 little of importance occurred in the political history of Utah. By act approved January 3, 1853, it was ordered that general elections should be held annually in each precinct on the first Monday in August, [*4] and in section five of this act each elector was required to provide himself with a vote containing the names of the persons he wished to be elected, and the offices he would have them fill, and present it folded to the judge of the election, who must number and deposit it in the ballot-box; the clerk then wrote the name of the elector, and opposite to it the number of the vote. This measure,

[p. 483]

which virtually abolished vote by ballot, gave much ground of complaint to the anti-Mormons. "In a territory so governed," writes Benjamin G. Ferris, who superseded Willard Richards as secretary in the winter of 1852-3, "it will not excite surprise that cases of extortion, robbery, murder, and other crimes should occur and defy all legal redress, or that the law should be made the instrument of crime." The remark is unjust. If crime was not punished, it was from no fault of the legislature, but, as we shall see later, from want of harmony between the federal and territorial judiciaries.

    In January 1854 [*5] Utah again sought admission as a state, a memorial to congress being adopted by the legislative assembly praying that the inhabitants be authorized to call a convention for the purpose of

[p. 484]

framing a constitution and state government. [*6] As no notice was taken of this request, the convention met in March 1856, and the people again adopted a constitution of their own, under the style of the state of Deseret, resembling, though with some additions, the one framed in 1849. [*7] It was signed by every member of the convention, and together with a second memorial, was presented by John M. Bernhisel, who between 1851 and 1859 filled the position of territorial delegate. Both were again ignored, [*8] probably on the score of polygamy, for otherwise there were many arguments in favor of the Mormons. If their population was not yet large enough to entitle them to admission, it was larger than that of several of the younger states when first admitted. [*9] They were a prosperous and fairly intelligent community; their wars with the Indian tribes had been conducted successfully, and at their own expense; at their own expense also they had constructed public buildings, roads, and bridges; they had conquered the desert, and amid its wastes had founded cities; there could be no doubt of their ability to maintain a state government; and thus far, at least, there was no valid reason to question their loyalty. That under these circumstances their memorial should be treated with contempt gave sore offence to the saints. [*10]

[p. 485]

    Another cause of complaint with the Mormons was the impossibility of acquiring a secure title to land. In December 1853 the president of the United States had recommended in his message that the land system be extended over Utah, [*11] with such modifications as the peculiarities of that territory might require. About a year later, an act was passed authorizing the appointment of a surveyor-general for Utah, [*12] and soon afterward large tracts were surveyed. But the Indian title had not yet been extinguished; the sections were not open to preemption, and the saints therefore found themselves merely in the condition of squatters in their land of Zion. They were ready to purchase, but the organic act forbade the primary disposal of the soil, and, as it seems, the government, knowing their ability and their eagerness to purchase, still hesitated to make them its permanent owners. Nevertheless, a few years before, this portion of the public domain had virtually been ceded to them as worthless.

    Still another reason for dissatisfaction was the failure of congress to make such appropriations as were granted for other territories. With the exception of about $96,000 granted, it will be remembered, as part compensation for an expense of $300,000 in quelling Indian outbreaks, $20,000 for a state-house, and $5,000 for a library, no money was voted specially for the benefit of Utah between 1850 and 1857; for the sums expended on the survey and construction of roads connecting that territory with other parts of the Union cannot, of course, be so regarded. In 1855 the

[p. 486]

seat of the legislative assembly and of the supreme court was removed to Fillmore, and in 1856 again transferred to Salt Lake City. [*13] In the latter year a further appropriation was asked for the completion of the state-house, but the request was refused, and even the expenses of the assembly and other necessary items were not promptly paid. [*14]

    Meanwhile most of the gentile officials appointed by the authorities were, according to Mormon accounts, political adventurers of the lowest grade--men who, being glad to accept the crumbs of government patronage, were sent to this the cesspool of the United States. The officials, of course, answered with counter-charges, among them that the Mormons combined to obstruct the administration of justice. To attempt to carry out the laws was, they declared, a hopeless task, in a community controlled by an ecclesiastical star-chamber, working out in darkness a sectarian law, and with a grand lama presiding over their suffrages. Complications hence arise, and the conflict known as the Mormon war.

    Among the principal causes of the rupture were the frequent disputes between the conflicting judiciaries. By act of 1852 it had been ordered that the district courts should exercise original jurisdiction, both in civil and criminal cases, when not otherwise provided for by law, and should have a general supervision over all inferior courts, to prevent and correct abuses where no other remedy existed. By consent of court,

[p. 487]

any person could be selected to act as judge for the trial of a particular cause or question, and while in this capacity possessed all the powers of a district judge. The district court judges were, of course, federal magistrates. By the same act it was provided that there should be judges of probate for each county within the territory; that they should be elected for a term of four years by joint vote of the legislative assembly; should hold four regular sessions each year; and that their courts should be considered in law as always open. Besides the powers pertaining to such courts, they had the administration of estates, the guardianship of minors, idiots, and insane persons, and "power to exercise original jurisdiction, both civil and criminal, and as well in chancery as at common law, when not prohibited by legislative enactment." [*15] The probate court judges were, of course, Mormons; but appeal lay from their decisions to the district courts. Subject to the revision of the probate courts were the municipal courts, the justices of the peace, and the three 'selectmen' appointed for each county, whose duties were to oversee and provide for the maintenance of the poor, to take charge of the persons and estates of the insane, and to bind apprentice, orphan, and vagrant children. [*16]

    Thus the probate courts, whose proper jurisdiction concerned only the estates of the dead, were made judges of the living, with powers almost equal to those of the supreme and district courts. These powers were conferred on them, as the gentiles alleged, in order to nullify, so far as possible, the authority of

[p. 488]

the higher courts; and as the Mormons alleged, because justice could not be had at the hands of the federal officials, who were little with them and at such uncertain times that, save for the probate courts, they would have been practically without civil and criminal jurisdiction. To the malevolent representations of the latter the saints mainly ascribed the Mormon war, and, as will presently appear, the violation of some of their most cherished rights and privileges.

 

    After Seretary Harris and judges Brocchus and Brandebury had set out for Washington, taking with them the territorial seal and the territorial funds, Zerubbabel Snow held court, [*17] with little heed to gentile law, until succeeded in 1854 by George P. Stiles, W. W. Drummond being appointed associate judge, as will be remembered, and John F. Kinney chief justice, about the same time.

    Stiles, a renegade Mormon, who had been counsel for Joseph Smith and the municipality of Nauvoo at the time when the Nauvoo Expositor was ordered to be suppressed as a nuisance, was assigned to the Carson district, but soon afterward returned to Salt Lake City, where he held several sessions of the court. And now trouble commenced. The legislature had appointed a territorial marshal, who was to take the place of the United States marshal, impanel jurors, and enforce writs when the courts were sitting as territorial courts; while the United States marshal claimed the right to officiate in all the United States courts, whether they were sitting as territorial or federal courts. To the latter, the judge issued certain writs, which it was found impossible to serve, and when the question of jurisdiction was brought before the court, several Mormon lawyers entered and

[p. 489]

insulted the judge, threatening him with violence unless he decided in their favor. [*18] Stiles appealed to the governor, but was told that if he could not sustain and enforce the laws, the sooner he adjourned his court the better. A short time afterward the records of the United States district courts were taken from the judge's office during his absence, and a few moments before his return a bonfire was made of the books and papers in his office. He, of course, supposed that the records were also consumed, and so made affidavit on his return to Washington in the spring of 1857. Meanwhile the business of the courts was suspended. The records had, in fact, been removed, and were in safe-keeping; but this silly freak was noised abroad throughout the land with many exaggerations, and excited much adverse comment.

    The chief justice was a more popular magistrate than either of his colleagues. In Iowa, where he resided before receiving his appointment, he was better known as a tradesman than as a jurist, and on account of his traffic with the saints at Kanesville was called a jack Mormon. On his arrival at Salt Lake City he added to his judicial functions the occupations of store-keeper and boarding-house proprietor. He never lost the good-will of his patrons, and never refused to drink with them. Rotund, of vinous aspect, and of medium height, dull-witted, brusque in manner, and pompous in mien, he was a man whom Brigham knew well how to use; before taking leave of the Mormons he became an open apologist for polygamy. He remained in the territory until 1856,

[p. 490]

and four years afterward was reappointed. We shall hear of him later.

    The official who did more than any other, and perhaps more than all others, to bring about the Mormon war was Associate Judge W. W. Drummond. Leaving his wife and family in Illinois without the means of support, he brought with him a harlot whom he had picked up in the streets of Washington, and introducing her as Mrs Drummond, seated her by his side on the judicial bench. Gambler and bully, he openly avowed that he had come to Utah to make money, and in the presence of the chief justice declared: "Money is my God" [*19] When first he appeared in court he insulted the community by mocking at their laws and institutions, and especially at the institution of polygamy. He also declared that he would set aside the finding of the probate courts in all cases other than those which lay strictly within their jurisdiction. Here was a direct issue, and one that was immediately taken up, for as yet none of the federal judges had declared the powers granted to these courts by the act of 1852 to be of no effect. [*20] Nor had any such view of the matter been expressed by the authorities at Washington.

    When asking for admission as a state or territory, the Mormons did not suppose that the majesty of the

[p. 491]

law would be represented by a gamester [*21] with a strumpet by his side. Drummond soon became even more unpopular than had been Judge Brocchus, and after administering justice for a brief term at Fillmore and Carson, went home by way of California. On handing in his resignation, he addressed a letter to the attorney-general, in which are many groundless accusations and some truths. He complains "that the federal officers are daily compelled to hear the form of the American government traduced, the chief executives of the nation, both living and dead, slandered and abused from the masses, as well as from the leading members of the church, in the most vulgar, loathsome, and wicked manner that the evil passions of men can possibly conceive." He is pained to say that he has accomplished little good while there, and that the judiciary is only a puppet. He states that the records and papers of the supreme court had been destroyed by order of the church, that Brigham had pardoned Mormon criminals, and imprisoned at will innocent inch who were not Mormons. [*22] He attributes to the saints the Gunnison massacre, the death of Judge Shaver and of Secretary Almon W. Babbitt, [*23] who was in fact murdered by Indians during the year 1856, and says that officials are "insulted, harassed, and murdered for doing their duty, and not recognizing

[p. 492]

Brigham Young as the only law-giver and lawmaker on earth."

    These allegations were denied by the Mormon authorities in an official letter from the deputy clerk of the supreme court of Utah to the attorney-general, [*24] except those relating to the treatment of the federal officials, the Gunnison massacre, the death of Shaver, and the murder of Babbitt, which needed no denial. If it was true that the magistrates appointed by the United States were held in contempt, there was sufficient provocation. Two of them, as we have seen, deserted their post, a third was probably an opium-eater, a fourth a drunkard, a fifth a gambler and a lecher.

    After the departure of Drummond, the only gentile official remaining in the territory was Garland Hurt, the Indian agent, and none were found willing to accept office in a territory where it was believed they could only perform their duty at peril of their lives. The saints had now few apologists at Washington. Even Senator Douglas, who in former years was their stoutest champion, had deserted them, and in a speech delivered at Springfield, Illinois, early in 1856, had denounced Mormonism as "the loathsome ulcer of the body politic." At least two years before this date it was apparent that matters in Utah were tending toward a crisis, though no measures had yet been taken except a feeble effort to supersede Brigham as governor of the territory. On the 31st of August, 1854, Lieutenant-colonel E. J. Steptoe arrived in Salt Lake City, en route for California with a body of troops. As Brigham's term of office was now about to expire, the governorship of Utah was tendered to the colonel by President Pierce. Knowing, however, that the former

[p. 493]

was the people's choice, he refused to accept the position, and a memorial signed by himself, by the federal officials, the army officers, and all the prominent citizens, was addressed to the president, asking for the reappointment of Brigham as governor and superintendent of Indian affairs. [*25] The request was granted, and the colonel and his command remained in the valley until the following spring, being on good terms with the Mormons, except for a fracas that occurred between the soldiers and the saints on new-year's day. [*26]

    Orders had been given to Colonel Steptoe to arrest and bring to trial the perpetrators of the Gunnison massacre, and after much expense and the exercise of great tact and judgment, most of them were secured and indicted for murder. Eight of the offenders, including a chief named Kanosh, were put on trial at Nephi City; and though the judge distinctly charged the jury that they must find the prisoners guilty or not guilty of murder, a verdict of manslaughter was returned against three of the accused, the rest being acquitted. The sentence was three years imprisonment in the Utah penitentiary, this being the severest

[p. 494]

punishment prescribed by statute; but after a brief imprisonment, the culprits made their escape, or, as some declare, were allowed to escape. [*27]

    On the sabbath after the colonel's departure, Brigham repeated in the tabernacle the remark which he had made two years before, commencing, "I am and will be governor;" adding on this occasion: "I do not know what I shall say next winter if such men make their appearance here as some last winter. I know what I think I shall say: if they play the same game again, so help me God, we will slay them." [*28]

    Such phrase, deliberately uttered at the place and on the day of public worship, at a time when Utah sought admission as a state, was certainly, from an outside standpoint, injudicious, and boded ill for the saints. At this period the slavery question was the all-absorbing topic throughout the country. The sedition in Utah, grave though it was, passed for a time almost unheeded, except by a section of the republican party, which, while criticising the theories of Senator Douglas, added to the venom of its sting by coupling slavery and polygamy as the twin relics of barbarism. After the presidential election of 1856, however, matters assumed a different phase. There was now a temporary lull in the storm which a few years later swept with all the fury of a tornado over the fairest portions of the Union, and the nation had leisure to turn its attention to the Mormon question. [*29]

[p. 495]

    It was now established, as was supposed, on sufficient evidence, that the Mormons refused obedience to gentile law, that federal officials had been virtually driven from Utah, that one, at least, of the federal judges had been threatened with violence while his court was in session, and that the records of the court had been destroyed or concealed. With the advice of his cabinet, therefore, and yielding perhaps not unwillingly to the outcry of the republican party, President Buchanan determined that Brigham should be superseded as governor, and that a force should be sent to the territory, ostensibly as a posse comitatus, to sustain the authority of his successor. [*30]

[p. 496]

    In a report of the secretary of war, dated December 5, 1857, it is stated that Utah was inhabited exclusively by Mormons; that the people implicitly obeyed their prophet, from whose decrees there was no appeal; that from the day when they had settled in the territory their aim had been to secede from the Union; that for years they had not preserved even the semblance of obedience to authority, unless by doing so they could benefit themselves; that they encouraged and perhaps excited nomad bands of savages to pillage and massacre emigrants; and that they stood as a lion in the path of the gentile communities established on the Pacific seaboard. Except that the internal government of the saints was nominally theocratic and practically autocratic, these statements are grossly unjust, but not more so than might be expected from a biased and ill-informed official, who was not even aware that the population of Utah contained a considerable percentage of gentiles. When first the Mormons peopled their desert land they had raised with due respect the Union flag, and as citizens of the nation had, in the name of the nation, claimed the territory as the nation's right; but now, on the 24th of July, 1857, while celebrating the tenth anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers, they were to hear for the first time of the approach of a United States army, and, as they supposed, were to be driven out of their homes at the point of the bayonet.

    It has not been alleged, however, except by Mormons, that in ordering the Utah expedition the president had any desire to limit the freedom of the saints in its broadest constitutional sense. However baneful to gentile eyes their rights appeared, however profane their dogmas, however bigoted their rulers, it was not proposed to interfere with them until it was made to appear by the reports of Drummond

[p. 497]

and others that they came in conflict with the secular authorities, and even then every precaution was taken to avoid, if possible, the shedding of blood. "The instructions of the commanding officer," writes the secretary of war, "were deliberately considered and carefully drawn, and he was charged not to allow any conflict to take place between the troops and the people of the territory, except only he should be called upon by the governor for soldiers to act as a posse comitatus in enforcing obedience to the laws."

    Before the departure of the troops an opinion was requested of General Winfield Scott as to the prospects of an expedition during the year 1857. The general's decision was strongly against the despatch of an army until the following season, on account of the distance and the time required for the concentration of regiments. It would have been well if his advice had been taken, but other counsels prevailed, and about the end of May orders were given that a force, consisting of the 5th and 10th infantry, the 2d dragoons, and a battery of the 4th artillery, should assemble as soon as possible at Fort Leavenworth. [*31] Several reenforcements were sent forward during the year, and in June 1858 there were more than six thousand troops in Utah, or en route for that territory. [*32] The command was given to Brigadier-general Harney, a man of much rude force of character, ambitious, and a capable officer, but otherwise ill fitted for the conduct of an expedition that needed the qualities of a diplomatist more than those of a soldier.

    It is probable that no expedition was ever despatched by the United States better equipped and provisioned than was the army of Utah, [*33] of which the portion

[p. 498]

now under orders mustered about twenty-five hundred men. Two thousand head of beef cattle, together with a huge and unwieldy convoy, were sent in advance, the trains being larger than in ordinary warfare would have been required for a force of ten thousand troops. The price to be paid for the transport of stores, provisions, and munitions of war was at the rate of twenty-two cents a pound; and thus it will be seen that if the Utah war served no other purpose, it made the fortunes of those who secured the government contracts. Through a little dexterous manipulation at Washington, permission was given to the man who secured the flour contract to furnish Utah flour, and this he did at a cost of seven cents per pound, receiving, of course, meanwhile, the money allowed for freight, and netting in a single year the sum of $170,000. [*34] The troops remained in the territory for about four years, and no wonder that they often asked one of another, "Why were we sent here? Why are we kept here? What good call we do by remaining here?" No wonder also that the people asked, "Were they retained in Utah in order to fill the purses of the contractors?" [*35]

    Fortunately for the welfare of the expedition, it happened that the harvest of 1857 was a plentiful one, and though the crop of 1856 had been a partial failure, and that of 1855 almost a total failure, [*36] there

[p. 499]

was now an abundant supply of grain. Neither the famine nor the bountiful harvest which followed appear, however, to have been known to the authorities at Washington. The winter of 1856-7 had been unusually severe. For six months the territory had been shut out from the remainder of the world, no mails having reached the eastern states. To add to their distress, the Mormons were compelled to feed large multitudes of emigrants, who arrived at this period in a starving condition in the hand-cart companies. At the time when the expedition was ordered, there were thousands in the territory who, for more than a year, had not had a full meal; there were thousands of children who had endured the gnawings of hunger until hunger had become to them a second nature. Yet in the orders to Harney, issued while yet the famine was at its sorest, we read: "It is not doubted that a surplus of provisions and forage, beyond the wants of the resident population, will be found in the valley of Utah, and that the inhabitants, if assured by energy and justice, will be ready to sell them to the troops. Hence, no instructions are given you for the extreme event of the troops being in absolute need of such supplies, and their being withheld by the inhabitants. The necessities of such an occasion would furnish a law for your guidance." [*37]

    But the sequel will show that instead of the troops living on the Mormons, the Mormons lived on the troops, stampeding their cattle, plundering or destroying their provision trains, and only after all fear of active hostilities had been removed, selling them surplus grain at exorbitant rates.

[p. 500]

    Before the end of June 1857 the first division of the army of Utah was assembled at Fort Leavenworth, and before the end of July was on its march to Salt Lake City, Harney remaining meanwhile with some squadrons of the second dragoons in Kansas, where trouble was anticipated at the forthcoming elections in October. In the instructions issued to the general, it was stated that though the lateness of the season and the smallness of the force presented difficulties, if not danger, it was believed that these obstacles might be overcome by care in its outfit and prudence in its conduct. No expense was to be spared that would insure the efficiency, health, and comfort of the troops; a large discretion was allowed in the purchase of supplies, and no reasonable limit was placed as to the number of guides, interpreters, spies, and laborers to be employed. The men were to be so completely equipped as to act, for a time, as a self-sustaining machine, and to be kept well massed and in hand. Detachments were not to be lightly hazarded, but a small, though sufficient, force was to move separately in charge of the more cumbersome part of the convoy, and in advance of the rest, until overtaken by the main body, when it was to form the rear-guard. Thus no precautions were omitted that might serve to insure the success of the expedition, and it was hoped that its purpose might be attained without the loss of a single life.

    Meanwhile, events of some importance had transpired at Washington. The governorship of Utah, after being refused by several persons, was accepted in July by Alfred Cumming, who had recently been superintendent of Indian affairs on the upper Missouri, in which capacity he had displayed tact and executive ability. About the same time D. R. Eckles was appointed chief justice, and John Cradlebaugh and Charles E. Sinclair, associate judges.

    During the month of June, also, a contract granted to Hiram Kimball, for the carriage of the United

[p. 501]

States mails between Salt Lake City and Independence, Missouri, was annulled, ostensibly on account of their non-arrival within the stipulated time. [*38] Between 1851 and 1856 the service had been regularly performed, the contract being held in the autumn of 1856 by the gentile firm of Hockaday & Megraw, [*39] the latter

[p. 502]

of whom, when it was awarded to a Mormon, addressed a malignant epistle to the president. I have no doubt," he declares, "that the time is near at hand and the elements rapidly combining to bring about a state of affairs which will result in indiscriminate bloodshed, robbery, and rapine, and which, in a brief space of time, will reduce that country to the condition of a howling wilderness." The remainder of Magraw's communication, [*40] though containing no specific charges, is in a similar vein.

    This despatch was probably the actual reason that led to the withdrawal of the mail contract, and certainly among the reasons that led to the Utah war; for in answer to a resolution asking for details as to the cause of the expedition, the secretary of state reported that the only document on record or on file in his department was the letter of Mr Magraw to the president. [*41]

    The annual payment on account of Hiram Kimball's contract amounted only to $23,600 a year, a sum barely sufficient to defray expenses; but such a favor, small as it was, had never before been conferred on a Mormon citizen. Brigham resolved, therefore, that all diligence should be used in keeping faith with the government, and for his own benefit established in connection with the mail service the B. Y. Express Carrying Company. In the early spring of 1857 the snow was still deep on plain and mountain, and to build stations and provide draught animals, and forage for the entire distance of more than twelve hundred miles was no easy task. But Brigham had at his call the entire community. Summoning the more enterprising of the brethren, he laid before them his plan, convinced them that the B. Y. Express would develop

[p. 503]

into a good money-making enterprise, and would place Utah in frequent intercourse with the world long before an overland railroad could be completed. Moreover, it was proposed that Mormon settlements should be formed along the line of route, and parties were at once organized and equipped for this purpose. [*42]

    On the 2d of June, 1857, Abraham O. Smoot, then mayor of Salt Lake City, [*43] set out in charge of the eastward-bound mail and of the B. Y. Express. Between Fort Laramie and Fort Kearny he encountered the advanced guard of the army of Utah, and, as he relates, was informed by the commanding officer that the troops "were reconnoitring the country in search of hostile Indians." When about a hundred miles west of Independence freight teams were met, destined, as the drivers said, for some western post, but for what particular post they did not know. On reaching Kansas City, Smoot repaired with one Nicholas Groesbeck, who took charge of the mails at that point, to the office of William H. Russell, and there

[p. 504]

ascertained that the freight trains were intended for Salt Lake City, that Cumming had been appointed governor, and that orders had been given that no more mails should for the present be delivered to the Mormons. Harnessing his fleetest animals to a light spring wagon, Smoot immediately started homeward, and making the distance from Fort Laramie in about five days, found the brethren celebrating their pioneer anniversary at Little Cottonwood Canon. [*44]

    Thus, in part through the stubbornness of the Mormons, but in part also through the malice of a dissolute and iniquitous judge, the spite of a disappointed mail contractor, the wire-pulling of birds of prey at Washington, and possibly in accordance with the policy of the president, who, until the confederate flag had been unfurled at Fort Sumter, retained in the valley of Great Salt Lake nearly all the available forces in the Union army and a store of munitions of war sufficient to furnish an arsenal, was brought about the Utah war.

    "Give us ten years of peace, and we will ask no odds of the United States," declared Brigham when the pioneers first entered the valley. And now the ten years had passed, and on the margin of a mountain lake, seven thousand feet above sea-level, under bowers of fragrant pine and fir, twenty-five hundred of the saints were assembled on the 24th of July, 1857. It was a day of feasting and recreation. Hand in hand with little children, who had seen nothing of the great world beyond their native valley, walked silver-haired elders and apostles, who had passed through all the tribulations of Kirtland and Nauvoo. Of the rest, some were strolling among the trees, some were fishing in the lake, some were dancing, some busied with games. Laughter and the noise of merry-making mingled with the songs of Zion. It was now near even-fall, and the western sun had already crimsoned the frosted peaks, when two dust-stained messengers

[p. 505]

rode in hot haste up the canon, and announced to the brethren the approach of the army of Utah.

    All eyes turned at once to Brigham. It was at times like the present, when the hearts of the others sank within them, that his genius rose superior to all obstacles, proving him the born leader that all acknowledged him to be. Gathering the people around him, he repeated the words uttered ten years before, prophesying even now that at no distant day he would himself become president of the United States, or dictate who should be president. Then festivities were renewed, and when the day was far spent the people returned to their homes with trust in Brigham and the God of Joseph.

    Then war became the universal theme. Fire-arms were manufactured or repaired; scythes were turned into bayonets; long-unused sabres were burnished and sharpened, and from all parts of the earth the saints were summoned to the defence of Zion. Apostles Lyman and Rich, who were in charge of the saints at San Bernardino, and Orson Hyde, who, as we shall see, had founded a thriving colony in Carson Valley, were ordered to break up their settlements and gather to the defence of Zion. Messengers were sent to the Atlantic states and to Europe to summon home the elders and apostles, [*45] and, had it been possible, thousands of converts from all parts of the world would have rallied this year round the standard of the prophet.

    On the 8th of September Captain Van Vliet arrived in Salt Lake City, [*46] with orders to purchase forage and lumber, and to assure the Mormons that

[p. 506]

the troops would not molest or interfere with them. Though informed by parties whom he met en route that he would not be allowed to enter the territory, or would do so at the risk of his life, the captain met with a cordial reception. Brigham, Wells, Bernhisel, and other leading citizens called at his quarters on the evening of his arrival, and a formal interview was appointed for the following day [*47] at the social hall, when Van Vliet was introduced to a large number of prominent Mormons, presented to Brigham an official letter from Harney, and declared the purpose of his mission. The governor and the captain then retired with a few others to a private office, where a conversation took place, from which I give a few extracts that may be of interest to the reader.

    "We do not want to fight the United States," remarked Brigham, "but if they drive us to it, we shall do the best we can; and I will tell you, as the Lord lives, we shall come off conquerors. The United States are sending their armies here to simply hold us until a mob can come and butcher us, as has been done before. We are the supporters of the constitution of the United States, and we love that constitution and respect the laws of the United States; but it is by the corrupt administration of those laws that we are made to suffer. Most of the government officers who have been sent here have taken no interest in us, but on the contrary, have tried many times to destroy us."

    "This is the case with most men sent to the territories," Van Vliet replied. "They receive their offices as a political reward, or as a stepping-stone to the senatorship; but they have no interest in common with the people. The greatest hold that the government now has upon you is in the accusation that you have burned the United States records."

[p. 507]

    "I deny that any books of the United States have been burned," said Brigham. "I have broken no law; and under the present state of affairs, I will not suffer myself to be taken by any United States officer to be killed as they killed Joseph Smith."

    "I do not think it is the intention of the government to arrest you," said Van Vliet, "but to install a new governor in the territory."

    "I believe you tell the truth," returned Brigham, "that you believe this--but you do not know their intentions as well as I do. If they dare to force the issue, I shall not hold the Indians by the wrist any longer for white men to shoot at them; they shall go ahead and do as they please. If the issue comes, you may tell the government to stop all emigration across the continent, for the Indians will kill all who attempt it. And if an army succeeds in penetrating this valley, tell the government to see that it has forage and provisions in store, for they will find here only a charred and barren waste. We have plenty here of what you want, but we will sell you nothing. Further than this, your army shall not enter this valley." [*48]

    In vain Van Vliet remonstrated, stating that though the mountain passes might be defended against the small army then approaching Utah, a force would surely be sent, during the following year, that would overcome all opposition. To this warning, several times repeated, but one answer was returned: "We are aware that such will be the case; but when these troops arrive they will find Utah a desert; every house will be burned to the ground, every tree cut down, and every field laid waste. We have three years' provisions on hand, which we will cache, and then take

[p. 508]

to the mountains and bid defiance to all the powers of the government."

    During the captain's visit, Brigham, with the apostles, General Wells of the Nauvoo legion, and others, asked him to walk through their grounds, and introducing him to some of the Mormon women, showed him the garden-spots which their hands had fashioned out of the wilderness. "What, madam," he exclaimed to one of the sisters, "would you consent to see this beautiful home in ashes and this fruitful orchard destroyed?" "I would not only consent to it," was the answer, "but I would set fire to my home with my own hands, and cut down every tree, and root up every plant." On the following sabbath the captain attended divine service at the tabernacle, when John Taylor, after referring in his discourse to the approach of the troops, and repeating that they should not be allowed to enter the territory, desired all who would apply the torch to their dwellings, cut down their trees, and lay waste their farms to raise their hands. Every hand was raised in a congregation numbering more than four thousand. "When the time comes to burn and lay waste our improvements," said Brigham in a sermon delivered on the same day, "if any man undertakes to shield his he will be treated as a traitor. ...Now the faint-hearted can go in peace; but should that time come, they must not interfere. Before I will again suffer, as I have in times gone by, there shall not one building, nor one foot of lumber, nor a fence, nor a tree, nor a particle of grass or hay, that will burn, be left in reach of our enemies. I am sworn, if driven to extremity, to utterly lay waste this land in the name of Israel's God, and our enemies shall find it as barren as when we came here."

    Captain Van Vliet was astounded. He had expected to find a seditious and priest-ridden community, mouth-valiant and few in number, whom the mere approach of the troops would tame into submission. He found instead this handful of enthusiasts,

[p. 509]

rising against the might of a great nation. He declared, as the Mormons relate, that if the United States made war on them, he would withdraw from the army. Quitting Salt Lake City a few days afterward, he arrived at Washington in November, and delivered his report to the secretary of war. [*49]

    On the day after the captain's departure, Brigham issued a proclamation declaring martial law in Utah, forbidding all armed forces to enter the territory under any pretence whatever, and ordering the Mormon militia to be in readiness to march at a moment's notice. [*50] It is probable that the Nauvoo legion, which now included the entire militia force of the territory, mustered at this date from four to five thousand men. [*51] Though imperfectly armed and equipped, and of course no match for regular troops, they were not to be held in contempt. In July 1857 the legion had been reorganized, the two cohorts, now termed divisions, having each a nominal strength of two thousand. The divisions consisted of two brigades, the brigades of two regiments, the regiments of five battalions, each of a hundred men, [*52] the battalion being divided into companies of fifty, and the companies into platoons of ten. Each platoon was in charge of a lieutenant, whose duty it was carefully to inspect the

[p. 510]

arms, ammunition, and accoutrements. Those who failed to provide their equipments were fined, and those who disposed of them were tried by court-martial and doubly fined. Penalties were also imposed for non-attendance at muster and drill. [*53] The cavalry arm was for a time abolished [*54] as unsuited to mountain warfare, and a corps of topographical engineers organized, together with an ordnance corps.

    All able-bodied males in the territory, except those exempt by law, were liable, as we have seen, to military service, and it is probable that the Mormons could put in the field not less than seven thousand raw troops, half disciplined, indeed, but inured to hardship, and most of them excellent marksmen. If Brigham had now carried out his threat of letting loose the Indian tribes of Utah, the United States forces would have been hopelessly outnumbered. Arms and ammunition were supplied in part from San Bernardino, [*55] though no considerable reinforcements from southern California arrived until after the crisis was over, and those from Carson Valley did not exceed one hundred men capable of bearing arms. [*56]

    It was not, of course, the intention of the saints to encounter the army of Utah in the open field, or even behind breastworks, if it could be avoided. In order

[p. 511]

to explain their tactics, I cannot do better than quote a few lines from a despatch addressed soon afterward by the lieutenant-general of the Nauvoo legion to Major Joseph Taylor, and signed, "your brother in Christ, Daniel H. Wells." "On ascertaining the locality or route of the troops, proceed at once to annoy them in every possible way. Use every exertion to stampede their animals and set fire to their trains. Burn the whole country before them and on their flanks. Keep them from sleeping, by night surprises; blockade the road by felling trees or destroying the river fords where you can. Watch for opportunities to set fire to the grass on their windward, so as, if possible, to envelop their trains. Leave no grass before them that can be burned. Keep your men concealed as much as possible, and guard against surprise." [*57]

Footnotes

^481:1 Journal of Discourses, i. 135.

^482:2 Officials nominated by the governor were also elected by the assembly, by a unanimous vote. At a joint session held Jan. 17, 1854, Councillor Taylor presented a list of nominations, including an auditor, treasurer, territorial commissioner, surveyor-general, librarian, member of the code commission, a district attorney, a probate judge, and several notaries public. A vote was taken on each nomination, and all were carried unanimously. Utah, Jour. Legisl., 134.

^482:3 Copies of the message will be found in Id., 1853-4, 111-23; Deseret News, Dec. 15, 1853. It contains a statement of the revenue and expenses of the territory for the then current year. The assessment for 1853 was at the rate of one per cent, and should have yielded, including the delinquencies in the previous year's collections, $24,121.09. The expenses were only $14,181.23, of which $12,301.37 was for public improvements; but during the year warrants had been issued on the treasury amounting to $14,834.92, and there were previous warrants, not yet redeemed, amounting to $2,896.66, together with outstanding debts estimated at $6,000, making in all $23,733.58. Of this sum $10,003.66 had been redeemed, and there was a balance in the treasurer's hands of $1,298.41, leaving a debt of $12,431.57, for which there were no available funds. The delinquencies still remaining for 1852, when the assessment was two per cent, were $6,463, and for 1853, $10,523. If these were collected, there would be a balance of $4,554.49 in the treasury. The saints are exhorted to pay their assessments more promptly, and the officers to be more energetic in their collection. Copies of the governor's messages for 1851-2 will be found in Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1851-2, 100-13; Deseret News, Jan. 10, 1852.

^482:4 Copies of the act are in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 232-4; Utah Pamphlets, Polit., xiv. 6-7. The result of the election for 1853 is given in an extra of the Deseret News, Aug. 25, 1853, and will be found in the same paper for each succeeding year.

^483:5 The remaining acts of the legislature for 1852-3 will be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 231-52, (ed. 1866), 64-6. On March 3, 1852, an act was approved whereby it was made unlawful 'to use with disrespect the name of the deity,' or to 'become publicly intoxicated so as to endanger the peace and quiet of the community.' For the former offence the penalty was a fine of $2 to $10, or one to five days' labor on the public highway, at the discretion of the court; for the latter, a fine of $1 to $10. On Jan. 17, 1853, an act was approved incorporating the Deseret Iron Co., Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, and Geo. A. Smith being among the members of the body corporate. Acts were also passed incorporating the Provo Canal and Irrigation Co., of which Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, and Geo. W. Armstrong were the promoters, power being granted to divert a portion of the waters of Provo River. Another act bearing this date gives to Dan. H. Wells the right to erect and control ferries on Green River, the rates of toll being $3 for each vehicle not over 2,000 lbs weight, $4 for any vehicle between 2,000 and 3,000, $5 for those between 3,000 and 4,000, and $6 for those over 4,000 lbs; for each horse, mule, ox, or cow 50 cents, and for each sheep, goat, or swine 25 cents. Wells was required to pay ten per cent of the proceeds to the emigration fund. On Jan. 21, 1853, an act was passed incorporating the Provo Manufacturing Co., of which Orson Hyde, Geo. A. Smith, and others were members. By other acts of this date the Great S. L. City Water Works Association was incorporated, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Ezra T. Benson, Jedediah M. Grant, Jesse C. Little, and Phineas W. Cook being the body corporate; to Chas Hopkins and others was granted the right to build a toll-bridge across the Jordan, to Jos. Busby the privilege of establishing ferries on Ham Fork of the Green River, and to Jos. Young, David Fullmer, and two others that of establishing ferries at Bear River and building a toll-bridge across the Malad. On the same date an act was passed regulating the mode of procedure in criminal cases. By act of June 4, 1853, Abiah Wardsworth and two others were granted the right to erect a toll-bridge across the Weber. The acts, resolutions, and memorials of the legislature were published in the Deseret News. In the issues of June 18, 1853, and Jan. 11, 1855, is a description of festivities held by the members, which the federal officials were invited. They were afterward held once twice each year.

^484:6 A copy of it may be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 414-15.

^484:7 The full text is given in Sen. Misc. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., iii. no. 240, Utah Acts, 1855-6; Deseret News, Apr. 2, 1856.

^484:8 They were tabled in the senate on the 20th of April, 1858.

^484:9 In 1854 W. Richards estimated the population of Utah at 40,000 to 50,000. In Feb. 1856 Leonard W. Hardy, census agent, gave 76,335 as the number, of whom 37,277 were males and 39,058 females. The peace commissioners sent to the territory in 1858, after the Utah war, reported its population at the figures given by Richards. The census of 1860 was taken under some disadvantages. Gen. Burr was appointed to that duty by Marshal Dotson, a strong anti-Mormon, but as the saints murmured at this selection, a clerk in his store was chosen in his stead. The returns gave 40,295 souls, including 29 apprentices, or so-called slaves, and are probably much within the actual figures. At this date the Mormons claimed a population of 90,000 to 100,000, which is doubtless an exaggeration. In order to show the number that would entitle them to admission as a state, they were accused of counting cattle and unborn children as souls. Burton's City of the Saints. 356-8. It is probable that the actual population in 1860 was about 65,000.

^484:10 For comments on the admission of Utah as a state at this period, see [p. XXX] Deseret News, Apr. 2, May 21, 1856; Putnam's Mag., v. 225-36; S. F. Bulletins, Aug. 23, 1856.

^485:11 And also over New Mexico. House Ex. Doc., 33d Cong. 1st Sess., i. pt 1, p. 12.

^485:12 U. S. Public Laws, 33d Cong. 2d Sess., 611; House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. p. 971. The appointment was given to David H. Burr, who, according to a writer in the Internat. Rev., Feb. 1882, p. 192, met, with such opposition that he was compelled to flee for his life. I find no confirmation of this statement, nor does Mr Burr mention any disagreement with the Mormon authorities in his report, in House Ex. Doc., 34th Cent. 3d Sess., i. pt i. pp. 542-9.

^486:13 Taylor's Narr., MS.; Wells' Narr., MS.; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Utah Notes, MS.; Olshausen, Mormonen, 163; Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 106. In Richards' Narr., MS., 69, it is stated that the extra expense caused to most of the members was the cause of the second removal. Fillmore is about 105 miles south of S. L. City. In the Deseret News of Jan. 11, 1855, is a description of the state-house at Fillmore, so far as it was then completed.

^486:14 Demands were made on congress for the expenses of the assembly in 1856, and for making a survey of the boundaries of Oregon in the same year. Utah Acts, 1855-6, p. 47; 1858-9, p. 38. Neither was granted. In 1852 a bill passed the house of representatives in congress, giving to the legislatures of territories the control of appropriations for their expenses. To this was added an amendment 'that the provisions of this act shall not apply to Utah.' U.S. House Jour., 32d Cong. 1st Sess., 780. The bill was thrown out by the senate.

^487:15 Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 120-1, 123-4. Section 8 of this act, relating to pleadings, is worthy of note, as it shows the tendency of the Mormons to simplify their system of legal procedure. 'Any pleading which possesses the following requisites shall be deemed sufficient: First, when to the common understanding it conveys a reasonable certainty of meaning. Second, when by a fair and natural construction it shows a substantial cause of action or defence. If defective in the former, the court shall direct a more specific statement. If in the latter, it is ground for demurrer; demurrers for formal defects are abolished.'

^487:16 An act creating the office of selectmen, and defining their duties, approved Feb. 5, 1852, will be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 136-7.

^488:17 According to the provisions of 'an act concerning the judiciary and for judicial purposes,' approved Oct. 4, 1851. A copy of it will be found in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 93-4. Among other proceedings, Snow tried and convicted several Mexicans for buying Indian slaves. The slaves were forfeited and delivered into the keeping of the Mormons. Waites' Mormon Prophet, 23.

^489:18 The names of the lawyers were James Ferguson, Hosea Stout, and J. C. Little. Id., 37. In Dec. 1858 a Mormon grand jury found that 'James Ferguson of Salt Lake City did use language and threats calculated to intimidate Judge George P. Stiles.' S.E. Sinclair, who succeeded Stiles after the arrival of the troops under Johnston, did his utmost to bring to justice those who had intimidated his predecessor. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 283, note. Beadle states that Thomas Williams, also a Mormon lawyer, protested against the insult offered to the judge, that his life was threatened in consequence, and that he was murdered while attempting to escape to California. Life in Utah, 175.

^490:19 Adding, 'And you may put this down in your journal if you like.' Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City, i. 469. Remy states that he was present when the remark was made.

^490:20 Judge Shaver tacitly admitted the jurisdiction of the probate courts, but Chief Justice Kinney was the first to render decisions from the bench confirming their jurisdiction. His interpretation of the organic act is noteworthy: 'The court holds that by virtue of that clause of the organic act which provides that "the jurisdiction of the several courts provided for," including the probate courts, "shall be as limited by law," that the legislature had the right to provide by law for the exercise by the probate courts of jurisdiction in civil and criminal cases.' Burton's City of the Saints, 379. The clause in section 9 of this act to which Kinney refers provides that 'the jurisdiction of the several courts herein provided for, both appellate and original, and that of the probate courts, and of justices of the peace, shall be as limited by law.' If the phrase 'limited by law' be so interpreted as to extend the right of proving wills to jurisdiction in all other matters, one fails to see the need of federal judges. As well indict a man for murder before a justice of the peace.

^491:21 Remy states that after a gambling quarrel Drummond ordered his negro Cato to assault and ill use a Jew named Levi Abrahams, who had turned Mormon. Journey to G. S. L. City, i. 469-70. Mrs Waite's version of the matter is, that when the court was about to be opened at Fillmore, a Jew was hired to quarrel with the judge and strike him. Instead of striking him, the Jew sent an insulting message by a negro belonging to Drummond. For answer, the judge ordered the negro to take a rawhide and lay it on lustily to the back of the Jew. The negro and judge were arrested. The Mormon Prophet, 39. See also Hickman's Destroying Angel, 111-12.

^491:22 He meutions the cases of Moroni Green, convicted before Judge Kinney of assault with intent to murder, and of a man named Baker, who murdered a dumb boy. Beth were sentenced to the penitentiary, but pardoned on arriving there. Drummond states that on the sabbath after his pardon Brigham accompanied one of them to church. House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 212. He also alleges that five or six men from Missouri and Iowa, who had not violated any criminal law in America, were in the penitentiary.

^491:23 Who, he says, was murdered by Mormons by order of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and J. M. Grant. Id., p. 213.

^492:24 Id., 214-15. Curtis E. Bolton, deputy clerk (in the absenee of the chief clerk), solemnly declares that the records, papers, etc., are in safe-keeping. He states that Green, a lad 18 years of age, drew a pistol in self-defence, but did not point it, and was pardoned at the petition of the U.S. officials and influential citizens of S. L. City, and that the statement as to the incarceration of five or six men from Missouri and Iowa without due cause is utterly false.

^493:25 On Jan. 4, 1855, Bernhisel wrote from Washington to F. D. Richards: 'I regret to inform you that Prest Pierce finally declined to reappoint Gov. Young. Lieut-col Steptoe is the appointee.' Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS. The memorial states that Brigham Young possesses the confidence of the people of the territory without distinction of party or sect, that he is a firm supporter of the constitution of the U.S., and that his reappointment would serve the interests of the territory better than that of any other man, while his removal would cause the deepest feeling of regret. A copy of it will be found in Tullidge's Life of Young, 239-40, and in Skelton and Meik's Defence of Mormonism, 22. Beadle states that Col Steptoe was entrapped by two of Brigham's 'decoy women,' and to avoid exposure resigned his commission as governor. Life in Utah, 171; see also Waite' s The Mormon Prophet, 27-8. There are no gounds for such a statement. By Orson Hyde, in Deseret News, March 21, 1555, and by others of the Mormons, the colonel is spoken of in the highest terms. Memorials for Brigham's reappointment were also adopted by the legislature, for which see Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 419-21.

^493:26 A quarrel broke out between the troops and the Mormons in some of the saloons; fire-arms were used, and several men wounded, two of the soldiers severely. The entire legion turned out and threatened to annihilate Steptoe's companies, compelling them to intrench and remain under arms for three days. The matter was settled by mediation. Olshausen's Mormonen, 189. See also S. F. Herald, March 14, 1855, and Hickman's Destroying Angel, 107, where it is stated that the brawl occurred on christmas day. No mention of this matter is made in the official reports of the officers.

^494:27 Judge Drummond, in his letter to Mrs Gunnison, in Gunnison's The Mormons, ix.-x., says that those who were convicted were old, crippled, and partially blind, while the able-bodied warriors were acquitted, and that Judge Kinney, before whom the trial took place, was so much mortified at the finding of the jury that he at once adjourned the court. He also states that Col Steptoe, Gen. Holman, the government attorney, Garland Hurt, Indian agent, and others were of opinion that those who were found not guilty were acquitted by order of the church. The statement as to the escape of the three who were convicted rests mainly on the authority of Capt. Rufus Ingalls, the quartermaster of Col Steptoe's regiment. In his report to the quartermaster-general, in House Ex. Doc., 34th Cong. 1st Sess., i. pt ii. p. 167, he says that they were at large when he left the valley.

^494:28 Again, in a discourse delivered at the tabernacle June 17, 1855, he says: "Though I may not be governor, here my power will not be diminished. No man they can send here will have much influence with this community.' Journal of Discourses, ii. 322.

^494:29 In Doctrine and Covenants (ed. 1876), 278-9, is given a remarkable revelation [p. 495] to Joseph Smith, Dec. 25, 1832, and first published by F. D. Richards in the Pearl of Great Price at Liverpool in 1851. 'Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars which will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls. The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at that place; for behold! the southern states shall be divided against the northern states, and the southern states will call on other nations, even on the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and thus war shall be poured out upon all nations. And it shall come to pass after many days slaves shall rise up against their masters, who shall be marshalled and disciplined for war.' It is somewhat suspicious that this revelation should appear in the edition of 1876, but not in the one of 1845, or in any other edition published before the war, so far as I am aware. A copy of it will be found in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 420-1. According to Hist. B. Young, MS.; Carrington's Rem., MS., Joseph Smith early in his career warned the saints that 'some day they would see the United States come against them in war, and that the Lord should deliver them.'

^495:30 The above appear to be the main reasons that led to what was termed the Utah war. Among the best statements as to its causes, apart from the official documents already quoted, are those contained in Remy's Journey to G. S. L. City, i. 468-73, and Tullidye's Hist. S. L. City, 144 et seq., though the latter is somewhat far-fetched and lays too much stress on the part that Fremont bore in the matter. 'In the framing of its first platform,' he says the republican party raised her (Utah) to a kindred association with the south; and in every campaign where John C. Fremont was the standard-bearer of the party, there could be read: 'The abolishment of slavery and polygamy, the twin relics of barbarism.' Mr Tullidge borrows somewhat closely from Stenhouse, who, in his Rocky Mountain Saints, 307-8, makes the same remark. The causes of the war have, of course, been touched upon by most writers on Utah, those in favor of the saints claiming that there was no just reason for it, and others bringing numberless charges against them. During the years 1855-7 newspapers and periodicals throughout the U.S. were teeming with articles and paragraphs on the Mormon question, most of them being more or less acrid and unjust in their comments. A writer in the Atlantic Monthly, March 1859, p. 364, states that Buchanan's idea in ordering the Utah expedition was 'to gag the north, and induce her to forget that she had been robbed of her birthright, by forcing on the attention of the country other questions of absorbing interest.' For views and statements of [p. XXX] the press on the Pacific slope, see, among others, S. F. Alta, Apr. 24, May 21, July 15, Nov. 13, 16, 1857; S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 15, 1857; Sac. Daily Union, Oct. 27, 1857; S. L. C. Contributor, iii.-iv. passim.

^497:31 Circular letter of Winfield Scott, addressed to the adjutant-general and other officers, on the 28th of May, 1857. A copy of it will be found in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 121-2.

^497:32 A statement of the disposition of the troops and the reinforcements en route at this date will be found in the report of the secretary of war, in House Ex. Doc., 2, 35th Cong. 2d Sess., pp. 31-2.

^497:33 For estimates of supplies and subsistence, see House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ix. no. 33, xii. no. 99.

^498:34 Greeley's Overland Journey, 253. Greeley says that this instance had become quite notorious at Washington.

^498:35 Stenhouse relates that the man who obtained the flour contract received an order for his money payable at Camp Floyd, but had the choice of receiving in lieu army mules at a certain valuation. He chose the latter, and sending them to California realized a profit of nearly 600 per cent on his money. Rocky Mountain Saints, 416. For further specimens of sharp practice, see S. F. Bulletin, June 8, Aug. 20, 22, 30, 1859.

^498:36 Utah Notes, MS.; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 79-80; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 291. The failure was caused by crickets. In a letter to his son in England, Heber writes from S. L. City Feb. 29, 1856: 'I have been under the necessity of rationing my family sad also yours to two thirds of a pound of breadstuff per day each; as the last week is up to-day, we shall commence on half a pound each. This I am under the necessity of doing. Brother Brigham told me to-day that he had put his family on half a pound each, for there is scarcely any grain in the country, and there are thousands that have none at all, scarcely.' This second famine [p. 499] was compared to the famine of Egypt. For months some families knew not the taste of bread, and settlements in which good crops had been gathered in former years were compelled to send their teams several hundred miles for bran and shorts. After 1855 the Mormons stored their surplus wheat at each harvest, until the completion of the overland railroad removed all fear of famine.

^499:37 Letter of Aide-de-camp George W. Lay to Harney, dated from the headquarters of the army, New York, June 29, 1857. A copy of it will be found in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 122-4.

^501:38 In a distorted sketch of the Utah expedition, in the Atlantic Monthly, March 1859, p. 367, the writer gives, as the actual reason, that the postmaster believed the malls to have been tampered with, by order of Brigham Young, at S. L. City or en route. It is improbable that Brigham would take such risks, for, as we shall see, he now proposed to establish an express company in connection with the mails.

^501:39 During the winter of 1856-7 no regular mail service was performed, on account of the severity of the season. The postmaster at S. L. City contracted, however, with Messrs Little and Hanks to carry a mail to Independence for $1,500. They made the trip in 78 days, having suffered severely from cold and hunger. Little's Mail Service, MS., 35-8. Mr Little had been for several years connected with the mail service. In 1850 Sam. H. Woodson of Independence, Mo., made a contract with the U.S. P.O. department to carry a monthly mail for four years between that point and S. L. City. This was the first government mail service performed between S. L. City and any point east of the Rocky Mountains. Mr Little afterward contracted with Woodson to carry the mail between S. L. City and Fort Laramie, where the mails exchanged, commencing the service Aug. 1, 1851, and associating with himself Ephraim K. Hanks and Charles F. Decker. At that time there was no settlement between S. L. City and Fort Laramie, except the trading post at Fort Bridger. On their first trip Little and Hanks met Secretary Harris and judges Brocchus and Brandebury between Green River and South Pass. They reached Laramie in nine days without changing their animals, and there procured five unbroken Mexican mules, with which they completed their journey. In Sept. 185l C. F. Decker and Alfred Higgins set out in charge of a mail, Delegate Bernhisel being a passenger. At Box Elder Creek their party was stopped by 20 Indians, who plundered the wagon. On Oct. l, 1851, Mr Little started on a second trip eastward, among his passengers being Judge Brandebury, and among his fellow-travellers Judge Brocchus. Mr Little's third trip was made in Nov. and Dec. 1852, Howard Livingstone, of the firm of Livingstone & Kinkead, being one of his passengers. In Feb. 1852 and May 1853 Mr Decker carried the mails to Laramie, having a narrow escape from death at the hands of hostile Indians on his second trip, on which occasion he met with Kit Carson, to whose intercession he ascribes his deliverance. Another trip was made by Mr Little in April 1853. Id., 1-34; Utah Early Records, MS., passim. For further particulars on mail routes and services up to 1856, see U. S. Acts and Resol., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 111; H. Ex. Doc., 1, pt 3, 33d Cong. 1st Sess., pt iii. p. 821; Burton's City of the Saints, 5; Frontier Guardian, March 7, 1849, Apr. 17, 1850; Deseret News, Apr. 8, 1851, Dec. 25, 1852, May 14, 1853; Fisher's Amer. Star. Annual, 1854, pp. 127-8; Sac. Union, Apr. 18, 1855. In the Mail Service across the Plains, by F. Little, MS. (S. L. City, 1884), are many incidents of travel during the years of which his manuscript treats. The service was performed under great difficulties, the author suffering many hardships and having several narrow escapes from Indians. Ferez-more Little, a native of Cayuga co., N. Y., came to S. L. City in 1850, and joined the Mormon church in 1853. In 1854-5 he superintended the construction of the Big Cottonwood canon wagon road and the building of the penitentiary. In 1868-9 he was engaged in railroad work on the Union Pacific, and afterward became interested, as we shall see later, in the Utah Central and Utah Southern railroads.

^502:40 See Utah Notes, MS.; Hist. B. Young, MS.; House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, pp. 2-3.

^502:41 Id., pp. 1-2. In doc. no. 71 are the reports of the secretary of state, of war, and of the interior, and also that of the attorney-general, relating to the expedition. Reference is frequently made to them in this and the following chapter.

^503:42 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 345-6; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Little's Mail Service, MS.

^503:43 As successor to Grant, who died Dec. 1, 1856. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 27; Deseret News, Dec. 3, 1856. Jedediah Morgan Grant was native of Windsor, Broome co., N.Y., his parents, Joshua and Athalia Grant, nee Howard, removing to Naples, Ontario co., in 1817, about a year after his birth. Here the lad remained until he was 14 years of ago, and receiving little education, was trained to his father's calling, that of a farmer. The family then removed to Erie co., Penn., and two years later Jedediah heard for the first time the doctrines of Mormonism. Being convinced of their truth, he was baptized in 1832, by Elder John F. Boyington, who afterward became an apostle, and, when 18 years of age, accompanied Zion's camp in its migration to Missouri. In the winter of 1835 he was ordained, at Kirtland, a member of the first quorum of seventy, and the following spring started forth on his first mission, his labors as a missionary extending over eleven years, principally in the southern and middle states. At the expulsion from Nauvoo, he was was one of those who crossed the Mississippi in Feb. 1846, and though not a pioneer, was among the earliest settlers in the valley of Great Salt Lake, being one of the captains of hundreds appointed during the migration of 1847. After holding office under the provisional government of the state of Deseret, he was elected speaker of the house of representatives; he was also appointed brigadier-general and afterward major-general in the Nauvoo legion, and in April 1854, after the decease of Willard Richards, was made second councillor to Brigham. In the funeral sermon of this much esteemed citizen, delivered at the tabernacle Dec. 4, 1856, Brigham remarked: 'He has been in the church upwards of twenty-four years, and was a man that would live, comparatively speaking, a hundred years in that time.' Id., Dec. 10, 1856; Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 115-16; S. L. City Contributor, iv. 241-5, 281-3.

^504:44 Letter of A. O. Smoot.

^505:45 The elders returning from Europe landed as secretly as possible in New York, fearing that they would be molested by the authorities, and most of them journeyed to Utah overland by various routes. The apostles crossed the Atlantic incognito, and remaining there in disguise until the steamer sailed for Panama, travelled by way of San Francisco and southern California, accompanied by a small body-guard of elders. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 354-5.

^505:46 According to special instructions, dated army headquarters, Fort Leavenworth, July 28, 1857. See Van Vliet's rept to the acting assistant adj.-general army of Utah, in H. Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. pt 2, p. 25.

^506:47 In his Life of Brigham Young, 262, Tullidge gives Aug. 12th, and in his Hist. Salt Lake City, 161, Sept. 12th, as the date of Van Vliet's first formal interview with Brigham. The correct date is Sept. 9th. See Deseret News, Sept. 16, 1857, where is a description of the captain's visit.

^507:48 Woodruff's Journal, MS., in which were originally noted the words spoken a few hours after the interview took place. There is little doubt that, so far as I have quoted them, they are substantially true. In his report, ut supra, Van Vliet says that at this and other interviews Brigham declared that 'the Mormons had been persecuted, murdered, and robbed in Missouri and Illinois, both by the mob and state authorities, and that now the U.S. were about to pursue the same course; and that, therefore, he and the people of Utah had determined to resist all persecution at the commencement.'

^509:49 A copy of it will be found in House Ex. Doc., 351h Cong. 1st Sess., ii. pt 2, pp. 24-7, 37-8. It contains no specific statements not already made, except that Brigham's only objection to the troops entering Utah was that in doing so they would open the door for the rabble of the western frontier, which, as in former days, would persecute and annoy the saints. Copies of the correspondence between Van Vliet and Brigham as to the purchase of forage and lumber for army use will be found in Id., 35-7.

^509:50 For copies of the proclamation, dated Sept. 15, 1851, and comments thereon, see Id., 32-3; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 358-9; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 43-5; Tucker's Mormonism, 232-7; S. F. Alta, Nov. 25, 30, 1857; S. F. Herald, Nov. 25, 1857; Sac. Daily Union, Nov. 25, 1857.

^509:51 In a report of the secretary of war, in Sen. Doc., 33d Cong. 2d Sess., vt. no. 33, the strength of the Utah militia in 1854 is given at 1,744 infantry and 1,004 cavalry, or a total of 2,748 men. In this return it is stated that they had no ordnance except one howitzer, and no ordnance stores; but, as we have seen, some of their forts were mounted with cannon. Brigham, in his message of Dec. 11, 1854, in Utah, Jour. Legisl., 1854-5, anticipates a considerable increase in the new enrolments. In the Oregon Argus of Feb. 13, 1858, the Mormon forces are estimated at 5,000.

^509:52 The brigades contained 1,000 and the regiments 500 men.

^510:53 Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 190-3, where is a copy of an act, approved Jan. 15, 1857, for the organization of the militia, and of the regulations adopted six months later. The regulations were first published in the Deseret News, Apr. 1st of this year. Previous acts relating to the militia, approved in 1852, will be found in Utah, Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 207-22, 231-2. Daniel H. Wells remained lieutenant-general, James Ferguson was adjutant-general, and A. P. Rockwood commissary-general. The names of other officers will be found in Id. (ed. 1866), 193; Deseret News, Apr. 29, 1857. All the officers were elected except those in the engineers' and ordnance corps. Further items concerning the legion will be found in Id., July 6, 1859; S. F. Alta, Aug. 11, 1857; Or. Statesman, Oct. 20, 1857.

^510:54 By general order issued at the headquarters of the legion. A copy of it will be found in the Deseret News, July 1, 1857.

^510:55 In Hayes' Scraps, San Bernardino, i. 53, we read: 'Arms and ammunition continue to be forwarded from San Bernardino. The last mail-rider took along--in Nov. 1857--500 revolvers, which passed through this city.'

^510:56 With the exception of a few persons, the Carson Mormons started for S. L. City Sept. 26, 1857, and arrived Nov. ed. They mustered about 450 persons, several being from Or. and Cal., had with them 123 wagons, and were in charge of Chester Loveland. Early Hist. Carson Valley, MS., 5.

^511:57 A copy of the letter is given in Tullldge's Hist. Salt Lake City, 172. The major was captured, and the letter delivered to Assistant Adjuant-general Porter when 16 miles from Fort Bridger. In a postscript the major is ordered to 'take no life.' In Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 18-19, is a copy of a circular letter, dated S. L. City, Sept. 14, 1857, and signed by Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells, in which a similar plan of operations is marked out. 'But save life always,' is the injunction, 'when it is possible; we do not wish to shed a drop of blood if it can be avoided.'

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 512]

  

CHAPTER XIX.
 THE UTAH WAR.
 1857-1858.

OPENING OF THE CAMPAIGN--BURNING OF SUPPLY TRAINS--STRATEGIC MOVEMENT OF COLONEL ALEXANDER--HIS RETREAT--ARRIVAL OF ALBERT SIDNEY JOHNSTON--THE MARCH TO FORT BRIDGER--WINTER AT CAMP SCOTT--MISSION OF COLONEL KANE--GOVERNOR CUMMING AT SALT LAKE CITY--PARDON PROCLAIMED--THE PEACE COMMISSIONERS--THE ARMY OF UTAH ADVANCES ON ZION--THE CITY DESERTED--THE MORMONS RETURN TO THEIR HOMES--THE TROOPS CANTONED AT CAMP FLOYD--CONDUCT OF THE SOLDIERY AND CAMP FOLLOWERS--JUDGES SINCLAIR AND CRADLEBAUGH--THE REFORMATION IN UTAH.

    "I AM ordered there, and I will winter in the valley or in hell," exclaimed General Harney, who had now joined the expedition, when Van Vliet on his way to Washington reported to him the condition of affairs among the Mormons. With such prospects before them, it was probably fortunate for the army of Utah that the command changed hands early in the campaign, the general's services being again required in Kansas, Colonel Albert Sidney Johnston, then at Fort Leavenworth, being appointed his successor, and Colonel Alexander, the senior officer, meanwhile assuming command.

    About the middle of August, Colonel Robert Burton with seventy men from the first regiment of the Nauvoo legion, afterward joined by a company from Provo, had already been sent eastward as a corps of observation, with instructions to follow the main emigrant trail, protect incoming Mormon trains, ascertain the number, equipments, and materiel of the

[p. 513]

United States troops, and report to headquarters. On the 22d of September the colonel, accompanied by three others, the remainder of his command being ordered to return slowly toward Salt Lake City, selecting on their way the best points for a defensive campaign, encountered the vanguard of the army of Utah, in the vicinity of Devil's Gate, thence accompanied them to Camp Winfield, on Ham Fork, and afterward proceeded to Fort Bridger.

    A few days later General Wells, in command of 1,250 men, supplied with thirty days' rations, established his headquarters at Echo Canon, a defile some twenty-five miles in length, and whose walls are in places almost within pistol-shot of each other. Through this canon, the Mormons supposed, lay the path of the invading army, the only means of avoiding the gorge being by a circuitous route northward to Soda Springs, and thence by way of Bear River Valley, or the Wind River Mountains. On the western side of the canon dams and ditches were constructed, by means of which the road could be submerged to a depth of several feet; at the eastern side

[p. 514]

stone heaps were collected and bowlders loosened from the overhanging rocks, so that a slight leverage would hurl them on the passing troops, and parapets were built as a protection for sharp-shooters. [*1] Leaving his men in charge of staff-officers, [*2] the general set forth with a small escort for Fort Bridger, where he was informed by Burton as to the movements and strength of the invading force and the location of its supply trains. It had been ascertained that the army had pressed forward on Fort Winfield to protect the trains, which had been left insufficiently guarded, and it was now feared that the men would be ordered to pack a few days' provisions in their knapsacks and make a forced march on Salt Lake City.

    At this juncture a letter from General Wells was delivered to Colonel Alexander, together with copies of the organic act, the laws of Utah, the proclamation forbidding the entrance of armed forces into the territory, and a despatch from Brigham. The last was a remarkable document, and must have been somewhat of a surprise to the colonel, who had proved himself one of the most gallant soldiers of the Mexican war. He was informed that Brigham Young was still governor of Utah, and that he had disregarded his prohibition. He was ordered to withdraw by the same route that he had entered. Should he desire, however, to remain until spring in the neighborhood of his present encampment, he must surrender his arms and ammunition to the Mormon quartermaster-general, in which case he would be supplied with provisions, and would not be molested. [*3] The colonel replied in brief and business-like phrase. He addressed Brigham Young as governor; stated that he would

[p. 515]

submit his letter to the commanding officer immediately on his arrival; that meanwhile the troops were there by order of the president, and that their future movements and operations would depend on orders issued by competent military authority.

    On receiving the answer of Colonel Alexander, Wells determined to open the campaign, a plan of which had been before arranged at Salt Lake City. Inviting to dinner Major Lot Smith, who had conveyed the despatches to and from the enemy's camp, he asked him whether he could take some forty men, the only available force then at the Mormon camp at Cache Cave, where Wells was now encamped, and, passing in rear of the foe, turn back or burn the supply trains still on the road. "I think I can," replied Lot Smith; and the next evening he started out. Wells then addressed to Major Joseph Taylor the letter of instructions already quoted.

    Riding all night at the head of his detachment, Smith came in sight of a westward-bound government train on the morning of October 3d, and ordered the drivers to go back. This they did, but turned round when out of sight. During the day a party of troops passed them, and relieving the wagons of their freight, left them standing. Smith then started for Sandy Fork, sending a few of his men under Captain Haight in another direction. Soon he observed a cloud of dust in the direction of the old Mormon trail, and was informed by his scouts that a train of twenty-six wagons was approaching. Halting and feeding his men, he approached them at dusk, while encamped at a spot known as Simpson's Hollow, on Green River, and there lay in ambush for several hours. Meanwhile he ascertained, as he relates, that there were two trains, each of twenty-six wagons--there being, in fact, three, with seventy-five wagons in all. [*4]

[p. 516]

    It was now near midnight; but a few of the wagoners were still gathered round the camp-fires, some of them drinking and some smoking, when armed and mounted men, as it seemed in endless procession, noiselessly emerged from the darkness, their leader quietly asking for 'the captain.' Most of the teamsters were asleep, their weapons fastened to the awnings of the wagons, and resistance was almost hopeless. The captain of the wagoners, Dawson by name, stepped forward, surrendered his charge, and bade his men stack their arms and group themselves on a spot pointed out by Smith, who dealt with the other trains in like manner. Then, lighting two torches, the major handed one of them to a gentile in his party, dubbed Big James, remarking that it was proper for the gentiles to spoil the gentiles. Riding from wagon to wagon they set fire to the covers, which caught rapidly in the crisp air of this October night. "By Saint Patrick, ain't it beautiful!" exclaimed Big James; "I never saw anything go better in my life." Dawson meanwhile was sent to the rear of the trains to take out provisions for his captors. When all the wagons were fairly in a blaze, the Mormons rode away, telling their panic-stricken captives that they would return as soon as they had delivered the spoils to their comrades near by, and instantly shoot any one who should attempt to extinguish the flames. [*5]

[p. 517]

    The army of Utah was now in evil case. Harney had accepted the command reluctantly, and returned to Kansas as soon as possible. Alexander was un-fitted for it, and Johnston had not yet arrived. Winter was at hand; forage was almost exhausted; provisions would fail within a few months; and if the troops could not move into quarters within fourteen days, there would be no animals left alive to convey their supplies. The pitiful strait that had now over-taken them is explained in a letter addressed by Colonel Alexander, four days after the Green River catastrophe, to the officers in command of forces en route for Utah. "No information of the position or intentions of the commanding officer has reached me," he writes, "and I am in utter ignorance of the objects of the government in sending troops here, or the instructions given for their conduct after reaching here. I have had to decide upon the following points: First, the necessity of a speedy move to winter quarters; second, the selection of a point for wintering; third, the best method of conducting the troops and supplies to the point selected." A council of war was held, and the point selected was Fort Hall, on Beaver Head Mountain, 140 miles from Fort Bridger. So little did the colonel know even about the disposition of the command, that, at the time and place when he expected to be joined by Colonel Smith, in charge of supply trains, this officer was still at South Pass, with an escort of two hundred men.

    On the 11th of October the troops commenced their march. Snow was falling heavily, and for several days they were compelled to cut a path for their

[p. 518]

wagons through the dense brush, their trains being still of such unwieldy length that the vanguard had reached its camping-ground at nightfall before the rear-guard had moved from its camp of the preceding day. Meanwhile bands of Mormons, under their nimble and ubiquitous leaders, hung on their flanks, just out of rifle-shot, harassing them at every step, 700 oxen being captured and driven to Salt Lake City on the 13th. There was as yet no cavalry in the force. A few infantry companies were mounted on mules and sent in pursuit of the guerrillas, but the saints merely laughed at them, terming them jackass cavalry. The grass had been burned along the line of route, and the draught-animals were so weak that they could travel but three miles a day. When the point was reached where Smith's detachment was expected to join the army, the commander, disappointed and sore perplexed, called a second council, at which many of the officers were in favor of cutting their way through the canons at all hazard.

    At this juncture a despatch was received from Johnston, who was now at South Pass, ordering the troops to proceed to Fontenelle Creek, where pasture was abundant; and a few days later a second despatch directed them to march to a point three miles below the junction of Ham and Black forks, the colonel stating that he would join them at the latter point. On the 3d of November they reached the point of rendezvous, where Johnston arrived the following day, with a reenforcement of cavalry and the supply trains in charge of Smith. [*6]

    Albert Sidney Johnston was a favorite officer, and had already given earnest of the qualities that he displayed a few years later in the campaigns of the civil war. The morale of the army was at once restored, and at the touch of this great general each man put forth his utmost energy. But their troubles were

[p. 519]

not yet ended. The expedition was now ordered to Fort Bridger, and at every step difficulties increased. There were only thirty-five miles to be traversed, but, except on the margin of a few slender streams, the country through which lay their route was the barest of desert land. There was no shelter from the chill blasts of this mountain solitude, where, even in November, the thermometer sometimes sank to 16 degrees below zero. There was no fuel but the wild sage and willow; there was little pasture for the half-frozen cattle.

    The march commenced on the 6th of November, and on the previous night 500 of the strongest oxen had been stolen by the Mormons. The trains extended over six miles, and all day long snow and sleet fell on the retreating column. Some of the men were frost-bitten, and the exhausted animals were goaded by their drivers until many fell dead in their traces. At sunset the troops encamped wherever they could find a particle of shelter, some under bluffs, and some in the willow copses. At daybreak the camp was surrounded with the carcasses of frozen cattle, of which several hundreds had perished during the night. Still, as the trains arrived from the rear, each one halted for a day or more, giving time for the cattle to rest and graze on such scant herbage as they could find. To press forward more rapidly was impossible, for it would have cost the lives of most of the draught-animals; to find shelter was equally impossible, for there was none. There was no alternative but to proceed slowly and persistently, saving as many as possible of the horses, mules, and oxen. Fifteen days were required for this difficult operation. [*7] Meanwhile Colonel St George Cooke, who arrived on the 19th by way of Fort Laramie, at the head of 500 dragoons, had fared no better than the main body, having lost nearly half of his cattle. [*8]

[p. 520]

    A length the army of Utah arrived at Fort Bridger--to find that the buildings in and around it, together with those at Fort Supply, twelve miles distant, had been burned to the ground by Mormons, and the grain or other provisions removed or destroyed. All that remained were two enclosures surrounded by walls of cobblestone cemented with mortar, the larger one being a hundred feet square. This was appropriated for the storage of supplies, while on the smaller one lunettes were built and mounted with cannon. A sufficient garrison was stationed at this point; the cattle were sent for the winter to Henry Fork, in charge of Colonel Cooke and six companies of the second dragoons, and about the end of November, the remainder of the troops went into winter quarters on Black Fork of the Green River, two or three miles beyond Fort Bridger, and a hundred and fifteen from Salt Lake City. The site, to which was given the name of Camp Scott, was sheltered by bluffs,

[p. 521]

rising abruptly at a few hundred yards distance from the bed of the stream. Near by were clumps of cotton-wood which the Mormons had attempted to burn; but the wood being green and damp, the fire had merely scorched the bark. Tents of a new pattern [*9] were furnished to the men, the poles, to which was attached a strong hoop, being supported by iron tripods. From the hoops the canvas depended in the shape of a cone, somewhat in the fashion of an Indian wigwam. Even when the tents were closed fires could be lighted without discomfort beneath the tripods, a draught being created by the opening at the top. The civil officials, who arrived about this time, dwelt apart in structures resembling the Alaskan barabara--holes dug in the ground over which were built huts of mud-plastered logs. To this part of the encampment was given, in honor of the chief justice, the name of Eckelsville.

    Though most of the beef cattle had been carried off by Mormons or Indians, a sufficient number of draught-animals remained to furnish meat for seven months during six days in the week, while of bacon there was enough for one day in the week, and by reducing the rations of flour, coffee, and other articles, they might also be made to last until the 1st of June. [*10] Parties were at once sent to New Mexico and Oregon [*11] to procure cattle and remounts for the cavalry. Meantime shambles were built, to which the starved animals at Fort Henry were driven, and butchered as soon as they had gathered a little flesh, their meat being jerked and stored for future use.

    In loading the wagons at Fort Leavenworth the quartermaster had packed into each train such goods as were at hand, taking no trouble to procure for them

[p. 522]

their due proportion of other stores. The trains destroyed at Simpson Hollow, for instance, were laden entirely with provisions, while three others that followed contained the tents and all the clothing. Fortunately the latter did not fall into the hands of the Mormons, though when unpacked it was found that they contained more of utterly useless supplies than of what was really needed. For an army of about 2,400 men, wintering in a region 7,000 feet above the sea-level, where at night the thermometer always sinks below zero, there had been provided 3,150 bedsacks--articles well suited for a pleasure camp in summer--and only 723 blankets; there were more than 1,500 pairs of epaulets and metallic scales, but only 938 coats and 676 great-coats; there were 307 cap covers, and only 190 caps; there were 1,190 military stocks; but though some of the men were already barefooted, and others had no covering for their feet except moccasins, there were only 823 pairs of boots and 600 pairs of stockings. [*12] One of the wagons had been freighted entirely with camp kettles, but brine could not be had, for at this time there was not a pound of salt in the entire camp, a supply proffered as a gift from Brigham, whom Johnston now termed the great Mormon rebel, being rejected with contempt. [*13]

    Thus did the army of Utah pass the winter of 1857-8, amid privations no less severe than those endured at Valley Forge eighty-one years before; but this army was composed of seasoned veterans, under able leadership, and the men were confident and even

[p. 523]

cheerful. The festivities of christmas and new year were celebrated with song and dance and martial music, in pavilions for which the timber had been hauled by hand through miles of snow. Over each one waved the regimental colors, and over that of the fifth infantry fluttered the remnants of the flag that had been torn to shreds at Molino del Rey, and borne in triumph up the slopes of Chapultepec.

    Meanwhile the Mormon militia had returned to the valley, as soon as the snow had closed up the mountain canons. The saints of course regarded the disasters of the federal army as a righteous judgment of providence on a nation that took arms against Zion, and welcomed their returning warriors with paeans of triumph, [*14] stigmatizing the foe in sorry and insulting doggerel. [*15] At the tabernacle elders waxed bold, and all their remonstrances and overtures of peace being now rejected, [*16] they openly avowed, sometimes in braggart phrase, their contempt for the United

[p. 524]

[paragraph continues] States government and its army, [*17] and declared that Israel should now be free.

    Meanwhile Governor Cumming declared the Mormons in a state of rebellion, warned them that proceedings would be instituted against the ringleaders by Judge Eckels, and bade the militia disband; but throughout the United States and throughout Europe the question was asked, this winter, "What has become of the army of Utah?" The expedition became known as Buchanan's blunder, and there were many who believed that a harsher phrase would have been more appropriate.

    In February 1858 a messenger from Washington arrived at Salt Lake City by way of Los Angeles, [*18] and introducing himself under the name of Doctor Osborne, asked for an interview with Brigham Young. He was pale and travel-worn, but his request was immediately granted, for he was indeed a welcome visitor. It was Colonel Thomas L. Kane. The council was summoned, and as the elders recognized their old friend of the days of Nauvoo, every eye was fixed on him, for it was hoped that his mission would put a new aspect on affairs. "Governor Young, and gentlemen," he said, "I come as an ambassador from the chief executive of our nation, and am prepared and duly authorized to lay before you most fully and definitely the feelings and views of the citizens of our common country, and of the executive, towards you, relative to the present position of the territory, and relative to the army of the United States now upon your borders.

    "After giving you the most satisfactory evidence

[p. 525]

in relation to matters concerning you now pending, I shall then call your attention, and wish to enlist your sympathies in behalf of the poor soldiers who are now suffering in the cold and snow of the mountains. I shall request you to render them aid and comfort, and to assist them to come here, and to bid them a hearty welcome to your hospitable valley. Governor Young, may I be permitted to ask a private interview for a few moments with you?" The purport of this conversation has never yet been ascertained, but at its close the governor remarked: "Friend Thomas, you have done a good work, and you will do a greater work still." [*19]

    On the 12th of March the colonel arrived at Camp Scott, and was entertained as the guest of Governor Cumming. Being presented to Judge Eckels, he displayed credentials from the president and letters from Brigham authorizing him to act as a negotiator. He came as a peace-maker, but was received almost as a spy. An invitation to dinner from Colonel Johnston was construed by the sergeant who delivered it--whether in malice or mischief does not appear--as an order for his arrest. The blunder was, of course, rectified; but Kane, who was now classed as a Mormon, [*20] challenged the commander-in-chief, and a duel was only prevented by the intervention of the chief justice. Nevertheless, he received a fair hearing from the governor. His mission was to induce him to proceed to Salt Lake City under a Mormon escort, and at once

[p. 526]

assume his functions. The officers remonstrated, stating that he would surely be poisoned; but Cumming was a high-spirited man, anxious only that matters should be adjusted, if possible without loss of life. He resolved to trust himself to the colonel's guidance, and on the 5th of April set forth from Camp Scott.

    After passing through the federal lines, Cumming was met by an escort of Mormon militia, and on his way to Salt Lake City, where he arrived a week later, was everywhere acknowledged as governor and received with due honors. [*21] Several interviews were held with Brigham, during which he was assured that every facility would be afforded him. The territorial seal, the records of the supreme and district courts, and other public property, the supposed destruction of which had helped to bring about the war, were found intact. On the second sabbath after his arrival Cumming attended the tabernacle, where he addressed three or four thousand of the saints, declaring that it was not intended to station the army in close contact with any of the settlements, and that the military would not be used in making arrests until other means had failed. After touching on the leading questions at issue, remembering, meanwhile, that he was

[p. 527]

addressing a people embittered by many real and many imaginary wrongs, he stated that he had come among them to establish the sovereignty of a nation whose laws he was sworn to uphold, and to which he would require their absolute submission. Then followed harangues from certain of the elders, in which were repeated the oft-told story of the prophet's assassination, the services of the Mormon battalion, and the exodus from Nauvoo. One of the speakers declared that the government intended to occupy the territory with its troops, whether they were needed to support the civil officials or not. This remark caused the wildest uproar; and, writes the governor, "I was fully confirmed in the opinion that this people, with their extraordinary religion and customs, would gladly encounter certain death rather than be taxed with a submission to the military power, which they consider to involve a loss of honor." [*22]

    The tumult was stayed by Brigham, and no further symptoms of rebellion occurred during the governor's visit. About the middle of May he returned to Fort Scott, accompanied by Colonel Kane, and reported that the people of Utah acknowledged his authority, and that, before long, the transit of mails and passengers between the Missouri and the Pacific might be

[p. 528]

resumed without fear of interruption. the colonel then took his leave and set out for Washington, to lay before the president the result of his mission. It was admitted that by his mediation he had prevented a collision between the Mormons and the federal troops, and in Buchanan's message to congress in the following December he was thus complimented: "I cannot refrain from mentioning the valuable services of Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who, from motives of pure benevolence, and without any official character or pecuniary compensation, visited Utah during the last inclement winter for the purpose of contributing to the pacification of the territory." [*23]

    The delay caused by Kane's mission was most opportune. The army was now ready to take the field. At Fort Leavenworth three thousand additional troops [*24] had been assembled, and it was intended that the entire force should be concentrated in Utah in two divisions, one under the command of Colonel, now brevet brigadier-general, Johnston, and the other under Harney. As elsewhere mentioned, money without stint had been voted for the expedition, subsistence being provided for eight thousand persons for a period of twenty months. [*25] On the 9th and 10th of June Colonel Hoffman arrived with a detachment at Camp Scott, in charge of the supply trains that had been parked at Fort Laramie during winter, and on the 8th 1,500 horses and mules, with an escort of infantry and mounted riflemen, had reached headquarters from New Mexico. The cattle at Henry Fork had thriven

[p. 529]

well, and from that point mules could be furnished sufficient for a train of 200 wagons. By dismounting a portion of the cavalry, horses could also be spared for the field batteries. All was in readiness, and orders were given that the army of Utah should advance. There could be no longer a doubt, if ever there were any, that the troops would make short work of the Mormon militia. Behold, the days of the Utah rebellion were numbered!

 

    But meanwhile events had occurred which promised a peaceable solution of the difficulty. The spirited resistance of the saints had called forth unfavorable comments on Buchanan's policy throughout the United States and throughout Europe. He had virtually made war upon the territory before any declaration of war had been issued; he had sent forward an army before the causes of offence had been fairly investigated; and now, at this critical juncture in the nation's history, he was about to lock up in a distant and almost inaccessible region more than one third of the nation's war material and nearly all its best troops. Even the soldiers themselves, though in cheerful mood and in excellent condition, had no heart for the approaching campaign, accepting, as they did, the commonly received opinion that it was merely a move on the president's political chess-board. In a word, Buchanan and the Washington politicians and the Harney-Johnston army must all confess themselves beaten, hopelessly beaten, before a blow was struck. The army was as powerless before the people it had come to punish as was Napoleon's at Moscow. All that remained to be done was to forgive the Mormons and let them go.

    Through the pressure brought to bear, coupled with the expostulations of Kane, Van Vliet, and Bernhisel, Buchanan was induced to stop the threatened war, and on the 6th of April signed a proclamation promising amnesty to all who returned to their

[p. 530]

allegiance. After dwelling at length on the past offences of the Mormons and the malign influence of their leaders, he declares the territory to be in a state of rebellion. "This rebellion," he continues, "is not merely a violation of your legal duty; it is without just cause, without reason, without excuse. You never made a complaint that was not listened to with patience. You never exhibited a real grievance that was not redressed as promptly as it could be...But being anxious to save the effusion of blood, and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole people for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally guilty, I offer now a free and full pardon to all who will submit themselves to the authority of the government." [*26]

    The proclamation, though it served its purpose, gave offence to both parties. The Mormons did not regard themselves as rebels; but claimed that when Colonel Alexander was ordered to withdraw his forces no successor to Brigham had been legally appointed and qualified, nor had he been removed by the president, and that in obstructing the entrance of an armed force into the territory he had not exceeded his powers as commander-in-chief of the militia. [*27] Moreover, that their complaints had been ignored instead of receiving a patient hearing, and that none of their grievances had been redressed, were among the causes that led to the disturbance. On the other hand, the gentile world declared that if the Mormon question was ever to be settled, now was the time to settle it. If the president had excepted from

[p. 531]

his amnesty the Mormon leaders, this result might have been accomplished without bloodshed, and the proclamation would at least have been deemed an act of judicious clemency; but by purging their leaders of offence, he had rendered nugatory the purpose of the expedition, save to imprison the troops, during 'King' Buchanan's pleasure, in this western Siberia.

    The document was intrusted to two peace commissioners--L. W. Powell, ex-governor and senator elect for Kentucky, and Major B. McCulloch, a soldier of the Mexican war. They were ordered to set out at once for Utah, circulate the proclamation throughout the territory, and point out to the Mormons their unfortunate relations with the government, and how greatly it would be to their interest to submit promptly and peacefully to its laws. They were to assure them that the despatch of the expedition had no reference to their religious tenets, and that if they resumed their allegiance no power in the United States had either the right or the will to interfere with their religion. "To restore peace in this manner," writes the secretary of war in his instructions, "is the single purpose of your mission." [*28]

    On the 29th of May the commissioners arrived at Camp Scott, where they remained four days, gathering information as to the condition of affairs. On the 7th of June they reached Salt Lake City, where Governor Cumming arrived the next day. On the evening of the 10th they held an informal interview with Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells, who constituted the first presidency of the church. During the two following days conferences were held, some in private, and some in public at the council-house, the apostles and many leading citizens being present at the latter. The result was that the Mormon authorities admitted the burning of the army trains and the stampeding of cattle, and for those acts accepted the president's pardon. All other charges

[p. 532]

they denied. [*29] At the same time they avowed their esteem for the constitution and government of the United States, and declared that under this constitution they desired to dwell in peace.

    This concession, slight as it was, the commissioners accepted, and, at the close of the conference, Powell addressed a large number of Mormons, expressing his gratification at the result, and declaring that the army, which would arrive in the valley within a few days, had strict orders to molest no peaceable citizens in person or property. [*30] On the same evening a despatch was sent to Johnston stating the result of the negotiations, and suggesting that he issue a proclamation to the people of Utah and march to the valley at his earliest convenience. An answer was immediately returned, in which the general expressed his surprise

[p. 533]

at the uneasiness felt by the Mormons as to their treatment at the hands of the troops, and enclosed a proclamation wherein he assured the Mormons that none would be molested, but that all would be protected in person, rights, and the peaceful pursuit of their vocations. This proclamation, together with one from Governor Cumming, declaring that peace was restored, and that the laws, both federal and territorial, must be strictly obeyed by all, was immediately published. [*31]

    The army had marched from Camp Scott on the 13th of June in three columns, a sufficient garrison being left at Fort Bridger, near which a score of tents and a few stacks of turf chimneys still marked the site where the men had passed the winter. On the 14th the command was encamped on Bear River, where the express arrived from the peace commissioners, and thence moved slowly forward.

    The scene is impressive, and not without elements of the picturesque. At Fort Bridger the westward-bound traveller has passed only the portal of the Rocky Mountains. Between that point and the valley of Great Salt Lake there is scenery of surpassing loveliness. The ridges that divide the canons are richly carpeted with wild flowers, among which, in midsummer, still linger traces of snow. Thence appear glimpses of the Bear and Weber rivers, their streams, though swollen and turbulent at this season, flowing through valleys whose tranquil beauty recalls the fabled realm of Rasselas. Thence also the silver-crested lines of the Wasatch and Uintah ranges can be distinctly traced, while on every side snow-capped peaks are seen in endless perspective, so that one asks, Whither hurry the swift running rivers? Along the gorges the path winds here and there through densely interlaced thickets of alder, hawthorn, and willow,

[p. 534]

where silence reigns unbroken, save for the rush of waters and the twittering of birds, whose nests are built in the crevices of cliffs high overhead.

    Now all is astir throughout this solitude. Among the canons and ridges appears for the first time the gleam of sabres and rifle-barrels, and the stillness of the valley is broken by the measured tramp of armed men and the rumble of artillery-wagons. Up the steep mountain sides bands of horsemen are seen spurring to the summit, whence they can observe the advance of the troops; while groups of half-clad Indians stand gazing at the pageant, or gallop to and fro with the wonderment of astonished children.

    On the 26th of June, 1858, the army of Utah enters the valley of the Great Salt Lake. The day following is the sabbath, and the fourteenth anniversary of the assassination of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. "We will go far enough into the wilderness," said Brigham before the expulsion from Nauvoo, "so far that never again will we come in conflict with our persecutors." They had journeyed some two thousand miles, subsisting at times on herbs and roots, seeking but to be left alone. After years of patient toil and self-denial they had built up their new Zion, a city in which, whatever the faults of its denizens, there was less of gross dissipation, of lewdness and drunkenness, than among the gentiles. They had seen their wives and daughters coerced by a militia rabble. They had not as yet forgotten the days of Nauvoo and the posse comitatus of Governor Ford. And now the posse comitatus of Governor Cumming was debouching from the mouth of Emigration Canon, the spot whence, twelve years before, the president of their church had selected for them an abiding-place.

    The rays of the rising sun slant athwart the bayonets of the 5th infantry as, forming the van of the Union army, it approaches the outskirts of Salt Lake City. At dusk is still heard in its streets the rumble of caissons and baggage-wagons. But no other sound

[p. 535]

is heard, save the murmur of the creek; nor is there sign of life in the city of the saints. Zion is deserted! [*32]

 

    Thirty thousand of the Mormons had left their homes in Salt Lake City and the northern settlements, taking with them all their movable effects, and leaving only in the former a score of men, with instructions to apply the torch if it should be occupied by the troops. The outer doors were locked, and in the vacant dwellings were heaps of straw, shavings, and wood ready for the work of destruction. In April, when Cumming first arrived in the city, he reported that the people were already moving from the northern settlements. The roads were filled with wagons laden with provisions and household furniture. By their side women and children, many of them so thinly clad that their garments barely concealed their nakedness, some being attired only in sacking, some with no covering but a remnant of rag-carpet, and some barefooted and bleeding, [*33] tramped through the deep snow, journeying they knew not whither, no more than at the exodus from Nauvoo; but it was "the will of the Lord," or rather of their prophet. [*34] Returning with the peace commissioners, the governor repaired to the house of Elder Staines, and found the

[p. 536]

place abandoned, [*35] Brigham and those who took part in the conference with the peace commissioners being summoned from some unknown point to the southward.

    "What has become of the Mormons?" was a question asked throughout Europe and America when this second exodus became known. "We are told that they have embarked for a voyage over five hundred miles of untracked desert," said the London Times. "We think it would be unwise to treat Mormonism as a nuisance to be abated by a posse comitatus," declared the New York Times. Meanwhile the Mormons were quietly sojourning at Provo, some sixty miles to the south of Salt Lake City. That they would have followed their prophet implicitly whithersoever he might have led, does not admit of doubt; but after some further negotiation, Brigham with the members of the first presidency and certain of the elders returned to their homes on the 1st of July, [*36] followed, soon afterward, by the remainder of the community, and the Utah war was practically at an end. Two days later the commissioners started for Washington, having faithfully carried out the spirit and letter of their instructions.

    After remaining for three days on the banks of the

[p. 537]

[paragraph continues] Jordan, the troops were removed to Cedar Valley, where a site had been selected for an encampment about midway between Salt Lake City and Provo, [*37] from which the forces could operate in either direction. To this was given the name of Camp Floyd. [*38] In the valley there were but two small settlements, one of them, which was near the camp, containing only ten families. "I was desirous," writes Johnston, "to avoid proximity to any settlements, if possible; but this was not practicable, for every suitable position where there is water is occupied."

    During the march of the army not a house was disturbed, not a citizen harmed or molested, and during its sojourn of nearly two years in the territory, instances were rare indeed of gross misconduct on the part of the soldiery. [*39] The Mormons, who had before been eager to fight the troops, were now thankful for their arrival. Many of the former were still very poor; they had a few cattle, and a few implements of husbandry, but little else of this world's goods save their farms and farm-dwellings. They were ill clad and fed, their diet consisting chiefly of preparations of corn, flour, and milk, with beet molasses, and the fruits and vegetables of their gardens. Now they had an opportunity to exchange the products of their fields and dairies for clothing, for such luxuries as tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco, and for money--an article still scarce among them.

    Accompanying the troops, however, was the usual crowd of hucksters and camp-followers, and a more

[p. 538]

villanous throng was never gathered from the sweepings of the frontier states. At Camp Scott and on the march they were kept under strict surveillance, but here they found a safe field for their operations. Many of the younger Mormons were corrupted by their example, and in 1859 gambling, theft, drunkenness, and even murder were as common in Salt Lake City as they became in later years among the mining towns of Nevada and Colorado. Seldom were the offenders brought to justice, the authorities being only too glad to let these desperadoes kill each other off during their drunken carousals; but if arrests were made, resistance to an officer or any attempt to escape were considered a sufficient pretext for a free use of the revolver. Thus the community was relieved from the cost of the prisoner's trial and his support at the penitentiary, compared with which the expense of a coroner's inquest was an insignificant item. This was the anti-polygamous civilization which Buchanan and his army introduced into Utah!

 

    The Utah war was an ill-advised measure on the part of the United States government. In this, as in other crises, from the time when the latter-day saints mustered six members until now when they counted nearly sixty thousand, the Mormons, hated as they were by their fellow-men, won the respect and almost the esteem of a large portion of the gentile world. The Utah war cost several hundred lives, and at least $15,000,000, at a time in the nation's history when men and money could least be spared, and accomplished practically nothing, save that it exposed the president and his cabinet to much well-deserved ridicule. That the Mormons had displayed contempt for Judge Drummond, who had made himself altogether contemptible, that their treatment of Judge Stiles was verging on sedition, that they intermeddled with politics and strove to gain political ascendancy, that they pushed forward their settlements

[p. 539]

vigorously, [*40] cannot be disputed; but here was no cause for a military expedition to uphold the authority of the government.

 

    With the army of Utah came also the recently appointed officials, Chief Justice Eckles taking up his quarters at Camp Floyd, Judge Sinclair being assigned to the first, or as it is now termed the third, district, which included Salt Lake City, and Judge Cradlebaugh to the southern counties. [*41] Alexander Wilson of Iowa had been chosen United States attorney, and Jacob Forney of Pennsylvania superintendent of Indian affairs, which office was now separated from that of governor. John Hartnett as secretary and Peter K. Dotson as marshal completed the list of officials.

    Convening his court in November 1858, Sinclair, in his charge to the grand jury, urged the prosecution of Brigham Young, Daniel H. Wells, and other leading Mormons for treason, polygamy, and intimidation of the courts. The district attorney refused to present bills of indictment for treason, on the ground that pardon had been proclaimed by the president and accepted by the people. To ask a Mormon grand jury to indict the leading dignitaries of their church for polygamy was, of course, little better than a farce; while as to the charge of intimidation, referring to the occasion when Judge Stiles held court at Salt Lake City in 1854, all the bills were thrown out, with one

[p. 540]

exception. [*42]

Thus Sinclair's judicial career resulted in failure, and to this day he is only remembered in Utah as the judge who appointed a Sunday for the first execution of a white man that had occurred as yet in the territory. [*43]

    To Judge Cradlebaugh belonged a wider sphere of operations; but, as will presently appear, his proceedings and those of his colleague wellnigh brought about a renewal of the Utah war, hostilities being prevented only by the timely interference of the government. The matters which he proposed to investigate included several outrages, commonly ascribed to the Mormons, among them being the Mountain Meadows massacre. [*44]

    Before presenting this episode, it may be well to make some mention of a religious movement known in Utah as the reformation, though more in the nature of a revival, and attended with all the excitement and bitterness of denunciation common to such movements elsewhere in the world. On the 13th of September, 1856, Jedediah M. Grant, Joseph Young, and a few others held a conference at Kaysville, at which the saints were exhorted to repent, and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, to pay their tithing faithfully,

[p. 541]

to dedicate themselves and their substance to the Lord, to set their families in order, to purify their houses, their persons, and their lands. [*45]

    At the bowery in Salt Lake City, on the morning of the 21st, the day being a sabbath, Brigham declared that he would no longer dwell among a people filled with contention, covetousness, pride, and iniquity. Unless they put away their sins a separation must take place, and the righteous be forever parted from the ungodly. At the beginning of his discourse he requested that all who desired to obey the Lord Jesus and live to his glory, denying themselves of worldly lusts, would signify their intention by rising to their feet. As a matter of course, the entire congregation responded. He then asked if there was a man among them who knew how to handle this world's goods without setting his heart upon them, using and distributing them only to the glory of God, that that man would stand up. There was no response. "I tell you," he said, "that this people will not be suffered to walk as they have walked, to do as they have done, to live as they have lived." He was followed by Jedediah M. Grant who declared that there were some among them who, having received the priesthood, dishonored their cause by committing adultery, and every other abomination under heaven.

    For many weeks the reformation was preached at the bowery and the tabernacle, the saints being ordered to renew their covenants, and many of them were rebaptized by the elders under the direction of Grant, who, on one occasion, remained so long in the water that he contracted the disease of which he died toward the close of the year. [*46] Meetings held by the home missionaries throughout the territory were crowded, and full and frank confession was made, followed in most instances by amendment. Some benefit

[p. 542]

was wrought by the movement, especially with regard to cleanliness; but as in other religious agitations, the effect was mainly emotional, the people being worked up to a state of frenzy, and most of them believing that the coming of Christ was at hand. The revival lasted well into the following year, and coupled with the excitement of the approaching war, may serve to explain the abnormal condition of the community at this critical period. [*47]

Footnotes

^514:1 For cut of Echo Canon, see Hayden's The Great West, 313; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 363. The remains of the breastworks and darts were to be seen ten years later. Kirchoff, Reisebilder, i. 107-8.

^514:2 Colonels N. V. Jones and J. D. T. McAllister.

^514:3 For copies of both letters, see Secretary of War's Rept House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. pt 2, pp. 31-3.

^515:4 Rept of Commissary Clarke, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 63. Col. Alexander, however, in his official report to the adjutant-general, dated Camp Winfield, Oct. 9, 1857, says that only two trains were destroyed on Green River, but that one was burned on the Big Sandy, together [p. 516] with a few wagons belonging to the sutler of the tenth infantry, a few miles behind the latter. Probably the colonel was for the moment misinformed as to the train abandoned on the morning of the 4th. The destruction of the sutler's wagons was perhaps wrought by Haight's party, as Smith states that they were sent after the convoy of the tenth infantry. Otherwise I find no evidence that this was the case.

^516:5 Lot Smith's narrative, in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 173-5, when stripped of the braggadocio common to the saints militant--and thus I have given it--appears to be the best detailed account of this incident. The portions of it which conflict with the testimony of United States officials I have omitted. For instance, Smith says: 'His [Dawson's] orders to the train men were from the commander at Camp Winfield, and were to the effect that the Mormons were in the field, and that they must not go to sleep, but keep guard on their trains, and that four companies of cavalry and two pieces of artillery would come over in the morning to escort them into camp.' The truth appears to be, that Col Alexander knew nothing about the projected raid. In his report, ut supra, he mentions that Van Vliet had assured him no armed resistance would be offered if he did not proceed farther than Fort Bridger and Fort [p. XXX] Supply, and that 100 wagons had been parked for three weeks on Ham Fork without being molested. On the other hand, he states in the same report that Col Waite of the fifth infantry, though not anticipating any trouble, was preparing to send a detachment to the trains when he heard of their destruction. For other accounts and comments on the disaster on Green River, see Hickman's Destroying Angel, 117-21; Beadle's Life in Utah, 189; Burton's City of the Saints, 208-9; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 11, 1857; S. F. Alta, Dec. 17, 30, 1857; Sac. Union, Dec. 11, 1857. The list of stores destroyed is given in Commissary Clarke's Report, in H. Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 71, p. 63.

^518:6 Johnston's despatch, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 71, pp. 65-6; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 369.

^519:7 Rept of Col Johnston, dated Camp Scott, Nov. 30, 1857, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 77.

^519:8 Ibid. On the 5th the command passed Devil s Gate, and on the following [p. 520] day, while erossing what he terms a four-mile hill, Colonel Cooke writes: 'The north wind and drifting snow became severe; the air seemed turned to frozen fog; nothing could be seen; we were struggling in a freezing cloud. The lofty wall at Three Crossings was a happy relief; but the guide, who had lately passed there, was relentless in pronouncing that there was no grass... As he promised grass and other shelter two miles farther, we marched on, crossing twice more the rocky stream, half choked with snow and ice; finally he led us behind a great granite rock, but all too small for the promised shelter. Only a part of the regiment could huddle there in the deep snow; whilst the long night through the storm continued, and in fearful eddies from above, before, behind, drove the falling and drifting snow.' Meanwhile the animals were driven once more across the stream to the base of a granite ridge which faced the storm, but where there was grass. They refused to eat, the mules huddling together and moaning piteously, while some of the horses broke away from the guard and went back to the ford. The next day better camping-ground was reached ten miles farther on. On the morning of the 8th, the thermometer marked 44 degrees below freezing-point; but in this weather and through deep snow the men made eighteen miles, and the following day nineteen miles, to the next camping-grounds on Bitter Creek, and in the valley of the Sweetwater. On the 10th matters were still worse. Herders left to bring up the rear with the stray mules could not force them from the valley, and there three fourths of them were left to perish. Nine horses were also abandoned. At night the thermometer marked 25 degrees below zero; nearly all the tent-pins were broken, and nearly forty soldiers and teamsters were on the sick-list, most of them being frost-bitten. 'The earth,' writes the colonel, 'has a no more lifeless, treeless, grassless desert; it contains scarcely a wolf to glut itself on the hundreds of dead and frozen animals which for thirty miles nearly block the road.' Rept in Id., pp. 96-9. See also Rodenbough's From Everglade to Canon with the Second Dragoons, 214-18.

^521:9 The Sibley pattern. Aide-de-camp Lay's despatch to General Harney, in Rept, ut supra, 8.

^521:10 Capt. H. F. Clarke, in Id., p. 105, gives a statement of the supplies stored at Fort Bridger, Nov. 28, 1857. There were 150 days' rations of flour for 2,400 men, 144 of tea or coffee, 217 of sugar, 222 of beans, rice, or desiccated vegetables, 28 of bacon or ham, 137 of vinegar, and 83 of molasses.

^521:11 The first under Captain Marcy.

^522:12 Assistant Quartermaster Dickerson's Rept, dated Camp Scott, Nov. 29, 1857, in Id., pp. 106-7, where will be found a list of all the clothing on hand at that date.

^522:13 A copy of Brigham's letter, dated S. L. City, Nov. 26, 1857, stating that he has forwarded a load of about 800 lbs, to which Col Johnston is welcome as a gift, but for which payment will be accepted if preferred, will be found in Id., pp. 110-11 Tullidge says that the salt was secretly brought into camp, but'that the commander would not eat of it, and that the officers' mess was soon afterward supplied by Indians at the rote of $5 per lb. Hist. S. L. City, 196.

^523:14 In a song of welcome composed by W. G. Mills, and published in the Deseret News, Jan. 13, 1858, are the following lines:

Strong in the power of Brigham's God,
 Your name's a terror to our foes;
 Ye were a barrier strong and broad
 As our high mountains crowned with snows.

.       .       .       .       .

Sing! fellow-soldiers in our cause,
 For God will show his mighty hand:
 Zion shall triumph, and her laws
 The standard be to every land.

^523:15 In Id., Jan. 27, 1858, is a song composed by Matthew Rowan of South Cottonwood, commencing:

Who in all Deseret's afraid
 Of Uncle Sam, and a' that?

    A lengthy, and if possible mere silly, effusion appears in Id., Feb. 17, 1858. Stenhouse relates that after partaking of the sacrament at the tabernacle the saints concluded divine service with a chorus sung to the tune of ' Du dah day,' and commencing:

Old Sam has sent, I understand,
           Du dah,
 A Missouri ass to rule our land,
           Du dah, du dah day.

[paragraph continues] Rocky Mountain Saints, 372. I find no mention of such a song in the files of the Deseret News. In the issue of Oct. 21, 1858, is an adapted translation of the Marseillaise, also rendered by W. G. Mills, who afterward apostatized.

^523:16 For copies of further correspondence between Brigham and Col Alexander, see Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 176-84; for letter addressed by John Taylor to Capt Marcy. Id., 184-9. They are also given with some additions in the Deseret News, Jan. 13, 1858, and in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71, p. 48 et seq.

^524:17 In a sermon delivered at the tabernacle Dec. 13, 1857, Lorenzo D. Young remarked: 'If our enemies--I do not mean those few out yonder: a swarm of long-billed mosquitoes could eat them up at a supper spell; I mean the whole United States and the whole world--if they should come upon us, they can not prevail.' Deseret News, Dec. 23, 1857. The remarks of other elders, as reported in Id., Dec. 16th, were, however, for the most part rational.

^524:18 Overtaking in southern California the Mormons who had broken up their settlement at that point and were en route for Utah. Utah Notes, MS.

^525:19 Col Kane arrived Feb. 25th. Deseret News, March 3, 1858. On March 2d Major Van Vliet reached S. L. City from Washington at 4 A. M., and started four hours later, probably for Camp Scott. St Louis Republican, Dec. 14th, in Ibid.

^525:20 Hyde, Mormonism, 146; Waite, The Mormon Prophet, 52, and others claim that Col Kane had actually been baptized at Council Bluffs in 1847. The colonel himself never made any such statement; and, as Stenhouse remarks, if this had been the case he would surely have been treated by Brigham with less respect, for implicit obedience was always required from those who embraced the faith. Rocky Mountain Saints, 382. The truth appears to be that Kane's Mormon proclivities were due to the kind treatment and excellent nursing which he received from them in 1847, whereby his life was saved when he sojourned in one of their camps near Winter Quarters, as already related. There is no reliable evidence that he was a Mormon.

^526:21 It was arranged with the Mormon officer in charge of the escort that the party should pass through Echo Canon at night, the object being, as Cumming supposed, to conceal the barricades and defences; but bonfires were lighted by the Mormons, illuminating the valley and the mountain-tops. Cumming's Rept to General Johnston, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. no. 138, p. 3. According to some accounts of Cumming's journey to S. L. City, Col Kimball, who with Porter Rockwell was in command of the escort, caused a plentiful repast to be prepared for the governor at Cache Cave, the first halting-place on the route. About 150 men of the legion were then ordered out and reviewed; and as the party passed other stations, troops drawn up on both sides of the road saluted the governor. At one point a mock attempt was made to arrest him, but Col Kimball interfered. At Echo Canon hundreds of camp-fires were lighted, in order to deceive him as to the numbers of the Mormon soldiery. Cumming supposed that there were 2,000 to 3,000 of them in or near the canon, whereas, in fact, there were but the 150 men whom he had first seen, a portion of them being halted at each stage, while the rest were ordered to pass by unobserved and await him at the next station. When within a few miles of S. L. City, he was met by a strong detachment of the legion, and escorted, amid martial music and salvos of artillery, to the residence of Elder W. C. Staines. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 53-5; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 389-90. These statements are not confirmed by Tullidge in his Hist. S. L. City.

^527:22 On the same sabbath Cumming, having been informed that many persons desired to leave the territory but were unlawfully restrained from doing so, caused a notice to be read in the tabernacle asking them to forward their names and places of residence. He states that 160 persons, most of whom were of English birth, claimed his protection, asking to be forwarded to the eastern states. They were sent to Camp Scott, where they arrived in a destitute condition, some of them without apparel except for garments made from the canvas of their wagon-covers. The soldiers shared with them their rations and clothing. In his report the governor also calls attention to the depredations of Indians, and says he has been informed that Garland Hurt had roused to acts of hostility the Indians of Uintah Valley. Hurt, who, as will be remembered, was the only gentile official remaining in Utah after the departure of Judge Drummond, states that when martial law was proclaimed he was unwilling to apply to Brigham for a passport, and, with the aid of Uintah Indians, made his escape, after much privation, to Johnston's camp, then on the Sweetwater. He declares that he was surrounded by Mormons and escaped at great risk of life. Brigham, on the other hand, offered him safe and speedy transportation, and tried to dissuade him from exposing himself to needless risk and hardship. Copies of the correspondence will be found in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. no. 71. pp. 205-10, passim.

^528:23 House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pt 1, p. 10. A complimentary letter was handed to the colonel by Buchanan on the eve of his departure for Utah. Whether Kane was intrusted with any direct communication from the president to Brigham, and if so what was its purport, does not appear.

^528:24 The sixth and seventh infantry, first cavalry, and two batteries of artillery.

^528:25 At a cost of $1,220,000, the estimate being for 4,880,000 rations, at 25 cents per ration. This, of course, does not include freight. The effective force numbered 5,606, and there were 1,894 employes, 300 servants, and 200 women, for whom rations were also allowed, making 8,000 in all. Letter from the Secretary of War, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ix. no. 33. A statement of all contracts made in connection with the expedition for 1858 will be found in Id., xii. no. 99.

^530:26 For copies of the proclamation, see House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. 1, pt 1, pp. 69-72; Deseret News, June 16, 1858.

^530:27 It does not appear that Brigham had been officially notified of Cumming's appointment when he sent his despatch to Alexander by the hands of Wells. In his answer Alexander addresses him as governor, it will be remembered; and in his official report, in House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., x. pp. 24-6, Van Vliet also speaks of him as governor. Cumming did not receive his appointment until the 11th of July, 1857, and in view of the interruption of the mails, it is probable that no official intimation had reached S. L. City as early as Oct. 4th, when the baggage trains were burned at Simpson Hollow.

^531:28 Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. p. 161.

^532:29 The commissioners' rept to the secretary of war, in Id., 168-72. The Mormon version of these negotiations, as given in the Deseret News, June 23, 1858, confirms that of the commissioners. A concise statement of what was said at the conference on the 11th and 12th, addressed by the commissioners to the secretary of war after their return to Washington, in the report, pp. 175-7, is also signed by Brigham, who declares it to be substantially correct. Tullidge, Hist. S. L. City, 215-6, has a sensational account of the matter, in brief as follows: During the conference of the 11th he relates that O. P. Rockwell entered the council-chamber and whispered to the ex-governor. Brigham rose and said sharply, 'Governor Powell, are you aware, sir, that those troops are on the move towards the city?' 'It cannot be,' exclaimed Powell. 'I have received a despatch that they are on the march for this city. My messenger would not deceive me.' The commissioners were silent. 'Is brother Dunbar present?' inquired Brigham. 'Yes, sir,' was the response. 'Brother Dunbar, sing "Zion."' Zion was sung--a favorite song with the Mormons--in which occur the lines:

'Sacred home of the prophets of God;
   Thy deliverance is nigh,
   Thy oppressors shall die,
 And the gentiles shall bow 'neath thy rod.'

[paragraph continues] Cumming and McCulloch then withdrew. 'What would you do with such a people?' asked the governor, 'Damn them! I would fight them if I had my way,' answered the major. 'Fight them, would you? Did you notice the snap in those men's eyes to-day? They would never know when they were whipped!' The 'gentile yoke' recurs ad nauseam in Mormon song and hymn. In their national anthem we read:

'Hosanna, hosanna, to God! He has broke
 From off our necks the gentile yoke.'

and in their national hymn:

'All hell has combin'd with this world's bitter hatred
 Usurped men's best rights, all our freedom supprest.'

[paragraph continues] Snow's Poems, i. 261,265.

^532:30 On the 16th the commissioners addressed a large number of people at Provo, and on the 17th at Lehi. Rept, ut supra, 171. Their speeches at Provo are given in the Deseret News, July 14, 1858.

^533:31 For copies of both proclamations. see Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pp. 113, 121; Deseret News, June 23, July 7, 1858; and of Johnston's proclamation, New York Herald, July 15. 1858, in Millennial Star, xx. 532.

^535:32 Johnston's despatch, in Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. p. 122. Tullidge says that Colonel Cooke, who had commanded the Mormon battalion in 1847, rode through the city bareheaded. Hist. S. L. City, 224.

^535:33 Jennings' Mat. Progr. in Utah, MS., 2, where it is stated that, during the spring of 1858, the stock of clothing became exhausted and there were no means to replenish it. Among those who set forth from S. L. City was Mrs Jos. Horne, who started on the 1st of May for Parowan, her husband being employed in raising cotton about 100 miles to the south of that settlement. She had two teams for herself, her ten children, and her husband's second wife and baby. They were one month on the journey, sleeping in their wagons, and cooking at the roadside, were scantily clad and provisioned, and almost without money. On arriving at Parowan Mrs Horne earned the means for clothing her children comfortably by sewing, a party of Mormons having arrived there from San Bernardino, with a load of dry goods. Horne's Migr. and Settlem. L. D. Saints, MS., 36.

^535:34 Cummmg states that at the tabernacle, on Apr. 11th, Brigham mentioned Sonora as their goal. House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. p. 6, note. I find no mention of this in the files of the Deseret News. Between May 12 and Sept. 1, 1858, this paper was published at Fillmore City.

^536:35 Tullidge relates that at the elder's house a cold lunch was spread for the governor, and in the garden loads of straw were significantly heaped up. Inquiring the cause of the silence that pervaded the city, Mrs Cumming was told that the Mormons had resolved to burn it if the army should attempt its occupation. 'How terrible!' she exclaimed, 'it has the appearance of a city that has been afflicted with a plague. Every house looks like a tomb of the dead. For two miles I have seen but one man in it. Poor creatures! And so all have left their hard-earned homes.' Bursting into tears, she turned to her husband: 'Oh Alfred!' she said, 'something must be done to bring them back! Do not permit the army to stay in the city. Can't you do something for them?' 'Yes, madam,' he replied, 'I shall do all I can, rest assured.' A few days after the conference with the commissioners Cumming followed the Mormons 50 miles to the southward, pleaded with them, at first in vain, but finally induced them to return. Hist. S. L. City, 213, 225-6.

^536:36 Deseret News, July 14, 1858. The peace commissioners, whose last report from S. L. City is dated July 3d, also mention that the ex-governor and other leading Mormons had then returned with their families. Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sees., ii. 173. Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints; 399, and Tullidge, Hist. S. L. City, 226, state that Brigham did not start from Provo till the 5th.

^537:37 Salt Lake City was 36 miles north and Provo about the same distance south-east of the camp. Johnston's despatch in Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. 122. Grass was abundant in Cedar Valley, and also in Rush and Tintic valleys near by.

^537:38 So named after John B. Floyd, then secretary of war.

^537:39 The men were seldom allowed to leave camp, and only one serious affair occurred, a sergeant named Pike being accused of cracking the skull of a Mormon with his musket. During the sergeant's trial in Salt Lake City he was shot on the public street, and afterward died. His assassin escaped. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 419. Waite, The Mormon Prophet, 73, says that the culprit, whose name was Spencer, was lauded for his courage in the next issue of the Deseret News. I find no mention of it in the files of that paper.

^539:40 Tullidge, Hist. S. L. City, 138-9, says it was feared they would settle territory which 'would come within the political boundaries of half a dozen states, in which they would cast their potent united vote,' and that immigration and the rapid increase of offspring would, within the century, give them a million of people. In a leading article, the New York Herald stated that the Mormons held the whip-handle over the U.S., Fillmore and Pierce having given it into the hands of Brigham. Much similar nonsense may be found by turning over the newspaper files of this period.

^539:41 By act approved Dec. 27, 1865, the judicial districts were altered, Millard, Piute, Sevier, San Pete, Juab, Utah, and Wasatch counties forming the first district; Kane, Washington, Iron, and Beaver counties the second; and Great Salt Lake, Tooele, Summit, Green River, Davis, Morgan, Weber, Box Elder, Cache, and Richland, afterward Rich, counties the third. Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 194.

^540:42 That of James Ferguson. See chap. xvii., note , this vol.

^540:43 That of Thomas H. Ferguson for murder. The execution was, of course, postponed, and took place on Friday, Oct. 28, 1859. An account of it will be found in the Deseret News, Nov. 2, 1859, and the Sac. Union, Nov. 17, 1859.

^540:44 Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, 402-3, states that the judges were supported by the Valley Tan newspaper, the first number of which appeared Nov. 5, 1858. This was the first gentile newspaper published in Utah; it ran for only about a year and a half. The phrase 'valley tan' was first applied to leather tanned in the valley, and afterward to other articles of home production. Taylor, Reminiscences, MS., 14-15, says that the term was applied to crockcry, medicines, whiskey, furniture, and even to gold coin made in S. L. City. In fact, it became synonymous, as I have said, with home-made or Utah-manufactured. As to the manufacture of whiskey, President Taylor states that alcohol was first n made by the saints for bathing, pickling, and medicinal purposes, and was little used for drinking. Stills were afterward obtained from emigrants, and the manufacture and sale of alcohol were later controlled by the city councils. The first bar-room in S. L. City, and the only one for years, was in the Salt Lake House, owned by President Young and Feramorz Little. It was opened for the accommodation of travellers, whose requirements would be supplied by some one, and it was thought by the brethren that they had better control the trade than have outsiders do so.

^541:45 For proceedings of conference, see Deseret News, Sept. 24, 1856. 'Saints, live your religion,' was the text of a sermon delivered by Brigham at the tabernacle.

^541:46 For a description of his obsequies, see Deseret News. Dec. 10, 1856.

^542:47 In Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 292-305, and Stenhouse's Tell It All, 310-23, are sensational accounts of the reformation, the former by an eye-witness, who appears to have witnessed things which no one else observed. He states that teachers were appointed for each ward, whose duty was to pry into every secret, and learn the private history of every family, men, women, and children being asked the most indelicate questions about private actions and secret thoughts. He declares that a catechism of all obscene nature was printed by authority of Brigham and put into the hands of every elder, bishop, missionary, and teacher, those who refused to answer the questions being in danger of the ban of the church, and those who answered them being reported to the authorities and roundly abused at the public meetings. At a gathering held at the social hall, attended only by men, Brigham bid all who had been guilty of adultery to stand up. More than three fourths of the audience rose to their feet. This Mr Stenhouse explains on the supposition that the crime was admitted as having occurred at any time during the whole course of their lives as Mormons. He also states that during his twenty-five years' connection with Mormonism he knew only of two or three cases of adultery. The account of the reformation as given in the text is taken principally from the files of the Deseret News.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 543]

  

CHAPTER XX.
 THE MOUNTAIN MEADOWS MASSACRE.
 1857.

AN ARKANSAS EMIGRANT PARTY ARRIVES AT SALT LAKE CITY--ASSASSINATION OF PARLEY P. PRATT--ILL FEELING AGAINST THE EMIGRANTS--ALLEGED OUTRAGES--THEIR ARRIVAL AT MOUNTAIN MEADOWS--THEY ARE ATTACKED BY INDIANS--A FLAG OF TRUCE--PLAN OF THE MASSACRE--SURRENDER OF THE EMIGRANTS--THE BUTCHERY--BURIAL OF THE SLAIN--THE SURVIVORS--JUDGE CRADLEBAUGH'S INVESTIGATION--THE AIKEN MASSACRE--JOHN D. LEE ON TRIAL--THE JURY DISAGREE--THE SECOND TRIAL--LEE CONVICTED AND SENTENCED--HIS CONFESSION AND EXECUTION.

    THE threat uttered by Brigham during his interview with Captain Van Vliet, on the 9th of September, 1857, was speedily fulfilled--so speedily that, at first sight, its execution would appear to have been predetermined. "If, he declared, the government dare to force the issue, I shall not hold the Indians by the wrist any longer." "If the issue comes, you may tell the government to stop all emigration across the continent, for the Indians will kill all who attempt it." Two days later occurred the Mountain Meadows massacre, [*1] at a point about three hundred miles south of Salt Lake City.

[p. 544]

    The threat and the deed came so near together as to lead many to believe that one was the result of the other. But a moment's reflection will show that they were too nearly simultaneous for this to be the case; that in the absence of telegraph and railroad, it would be impossible to execute such a deed three hundred miles away in two days. Indeed, it may as well be understood at the outset that this horrible crime, so often and so persistently charged upon the Mormon church and its leaders, was the crime of an individual, the crime of a fanatic of the worst stamp, one who was a member of the Mormon church, but of whose intentions the church knew nothing, and whose bloody acts the members of the church, high and low, regard with as much abhorrence as any out of the church. Indeed, the blow fell upon the brotherhood with threefold force and damage. There was the cruelty of it, which wrung their hearts; there was the odium attending its performance in their midst; and there was the strength it lent their enemies further to malign and molest them. The Mormons denounce the Mountain Meadows massacre, and every act connected therewith, as earnestly and as honestly as any in the outside world. This is abundantly proved, and may be accepted as a historical fact.

    I will now proceed to give the incidents as they occurred. In the spring of 1857 a party of one hundred and thirty-six Arkansas emigrants, [*2] among whom were a few Missourians, [*3] set forth for southern California.

[p. 545]

[paragraph continues] It included about thirty families, most of them related by marriage or kindred, and its members were of every age, from the grandsire to the babe in arms. They belonged to the class of settlers of whom California was in need. Most of them were farmers by occupation; they were orderly, sober, thrifty, and among them was no lack of skill and capital. [*4] They travelled leisurely and in comfort, stopping at intervals to recruit their cattle, and about the end of July arrived at Salt Lake City, [*5] where they hoped to replenish their stock of provisions.

    For several years after the gold discovery the arrival of an emigrant party was usually followed, as we have seen, by friendly traffic between saint and gentile, the former thus disposing, to good advantage, of his farm and garden produce. But now all was changed. The army of Utah was advancing on Zion, and the Arkansas families reached the valley at the very time when the Mormons first heard of its approach, perhaps while the latter were celebrating their tenth anniversary at Big Cottonwood Canon. Moreover, wayfarers from Missouri and Arkansas were regarded with special disfavor; the former for reasons that have already appeared, the latter on account of the murder of a well-beloved apostle of the Mormon church.

[p. 546]

    In May of 1857 Parley P. Pratt was arraigned before the supreme court at Van Buren, Arkansas, on a charge of abducting the children of one Hector McLean, a native of New Orleans, but then living in California. He was acquitted; but it is alleged by anti-Mormon writers, and tacitly admitted by the saints, that he was sealed to Hector McLean's wife, who had been baptized into the faith years before, while living in San Francisco, and in 1855 was living in Salt Lake City. [*6] McLean swore vengeance against the apostle, who was advised to make his escape, and set forth on horseback, unarmed, through a sparsely settled country, where, under the circumstances, escape was almost impossible. His path was barred by two of McLean's friends until McLean himself with three others overtook the fugitive, when he fired six shots at him, the balls lodging in his saddle or passing through his clothes. McLean then stabbed him twice

[p. 547]

with a bowie-knife under the left arm, whereupon Parley dropped from his horse, and the assassin, after thrusting his knife deeper into the wounds, seized a derringer belonging to one of his accomplices, and shot him through the breast. The party then rode off, and McLean escaped unpunished. [*7]

    Thus, when the Arkansas families arrived at Salt Lake City, they found the Mormons in no friendly mood, and at once concluded to break camp and move on. They had been advised by Elder Charles C. Rich to take the northern route along the Bear River, but decided to travel by way of southern Utah. Passing through Provo, Springville, Payson, Fillmore, and intervening settlements, they attempted everywhere to purchase food, but without success. Toward the end of August they arrived at Corn Creek, [*8] some fifteen miles south of Fillmore, where they encamped for several days. In this neighborhood, on a farm set apart for their use by the Mormons, lived the Pah Vants, whom, as the saints allege, the emigrants attempted to poison by throwing arsenic into one of the springs and impregnating their own dead cattle with strychnine. It has been claimed that this charge was disproved; and what motive the Arkansas party could have had for thus surrounding themselves with treacherous and blood-thirsty foes has never been explained. In the valleys throughout the southern portion of the territory grows a poisonous weed, and it is possible that the cattle died from eating of this

[p. 548]

weed. [*9] It has been intimated that those who accused the emigrants of poisoning the Pah Vants were not honest in their belief, and that the story of the poisoning was invented, or at least grossly exaggerated, for the purpose of making them solely responsible for the massacre. [*10] The fact has never been so established, notwithstanding the report of the superintendent of Indian affairs, who states that none of this tribe were present at the massacre.

    Continuing their journey, the emigrants proceeded to Beaver City, and thence to Parowan. Grain was scarce this year, and the emigrants were unable to purchase all they desired for their stock, though for their own immediate necessities they obtained what they required at this place. Arriving at Cedar City, they succeeded in purchasing about fifty bushels of wheat, which was ground at a mill belonging to John D. Lee, formerly commander of the fort at Cedar, but then Indian agent, and in charge of an Indian farm near Harmony.

    It is alleged by the Mormons, and on good authority, that during their journey from Salt Lake

[p. 549]

[paragraph continues] City to Cedar the emigrants were guilty of further gross outrage. If we can believe a statement made in the confession of Lee, a few days before his death, Isaac C. Haight, president of the stake at Cedar, accused them of abusing women, of poisoning wells and streams at many points on their route, of destroying fences and growing crops, of violating the city ordinances at Cedar, and resisting the officers who attemped to arrest them. These and other charges, even more improbable, [*11] have been urged in extenuation of the massacre; but little reliance can be placed on Lee's confession, and most of them appear to be unfounded. [*12] It must be admitted, however, that rather than see their women and children starve, they perhaps took by force such necessary provisions as they were not allowed to purchase.

    Near Cedar City the Spanish trail to Santa Fe branched off from what was then known as Fremont's route. About thirty miles to the south-west of Cedar, and within fifteen of the line of the route, are the Mountain Meadows, which form the divide between the waters of the great basin and those that flow into the Colorado. At the southern end of the meadows, which are four to five miles in length and one in width, but here run to a narrow point, is a large stream, the banks of which are about ten feet in height. Close to this stream the emigrants were encamped on the 5th of September, almost midway between two

[p. 550]

ranges of hills, some fifty feet high and four hundred yards apart. On either side of their camp were ravines connected with the bed of the stream.

    It was Saturday evening when the Arkansas families encamped at Mountain Meadows. On the sabbath they rested, and at the usual hour one of them conducted divine service in a large tent, as had been their custom throughout the journey. At daybreak on the 7th, while the men were lighting their camp-fires, they were fired upon by Indians, or white men disguised as Indians, and more than twenty were killed or wounded, [*13] their cattle having been driven off meanwhile by the assailants, who had crept on them under cover of darkness. The survivors now ran for their wagons, and pushing them together so as to form a corral, dug out the earth deep enough to sink them almost to the top of the wheels; then in the centre of the inclosure they made a rifle-pit large enough to contain the entire company, strengthening their defences by night as best they could. Thereupon the attacking party, which numbered from three to four hundred, withdrew to the hills, on the crests of which they built parapets, whence they shot down all who showed themselves outside the intrenchment.

    The emigrants were now in a state of siege, and though they fought bravely, had little hope of escape. All the outlets of the valley were guarded; their ammunition

[p. 551]

was almost exhausted; of their number, which included a large proportion of women and children, many were wounded, and their sufferings from thirst had become intolerable. Down in the ravine, and within a few yards of the corral, was the stream of water; but only after sundown could a scanty supply be obtained, and then at great risk, for this point was covered by the muskets of the Indians, [*14] who lurked all night among the ravines waiting for their victims.

    Four days the siege lasted; on the morning of the fifth a wagon was seen approaching from the northern end of the meadow, and with it a company of the Nauvoo legion. When within a few hundred yards of the intrenchment, the company halted, and one of them, William Bateman by name, was sent forward with a flag of truce. In answer to this signal a little girl, dressed in white, appeared in an open space between the wagons. Half-way between the Mormons and the corral, Bateman was met by one of the emigrants named Hamilton, to whom he promised protection for his party on condition that their arms were surrendered, assuring him that they would be conducted safely to Cedar City. After a brief parley, each one returned to his comrades.

    By whose order the massacre was committed, or for what reasons other than those already mentioned, has never yet been clearly ascertained; but as to the incidents and the plan of the conspirators, we have evidence that is in the main reliable. During the week of the massacre, Lee, with several other Mormons, was encamped at a spring within half a mile of the emigrants' camp; and, as was alleged, though not distinctly proven at his trial, induced the Indians by promise of booty to make the attack; but, finding the resistance stronger than he anticipated, had sent for

[p. 552]

aid to the settlements of southern Utah. [*15] Thus far the evidence is somewhat contradictory. There is sufficient proof, however, that, in accordance with a programme previously arranged at Cedar, a company of militia, among whom were Isaac C. Haight and Major John M. Higbee, and which was afterward joined by Colonel William H. Dame, bishop of Parowan, [*16] arrived at Lee's camp on the evening before the massacre.

    It was then arranged that Lee should conclude terms with the emigrants, and, as soon as they had delivered themselves into the power of the Mormons, should start for Hamblin's rancho, on the eastern side of the meadows, with the wagons and arms, the young children, and the sick and wounded. The men and women, the latter in front, were to follow the wagons, all in single file, and on each side of them the militia were to be drawn up, two deep, and with twenty paces between their lines. Within two hundred yards of the camp the men were to be brought to a halt, until the women approached a copse of scrub-oak, about a mile distant, and near to which Indians lay in ambush. The men were now to resume their march, the militia forming in single file, each one walking by the side of an emigrant, and carrying his musket on the left arm. As soon as the women were close to the ambuscade, Higbee, [*17] who was in charge of the detachment, was to give the signal by saying to his command, "Do your duty;" whereupon the militia were to shoot down the men, the Indians were to

[p. 553]

slaughter the women and children, sparing only those of tender age, and Lee with some of the wagoners was to butcher the sick and wounded. Mounted troopers were to be in readiness to pursue and slay those who attempted to escape, so that, with the exception of infants, no living soul should be left to tell the tale of the massacre.

    Entering the corral, Lee found the emigrants engaged in burying two of their party who had died of wounds. Men, women, and children thronged around him, some displaying gratitude for their rescue, some distrust and terror. The brother played his part well. Bidding the men pile their arms in the wagons, to avoid provoking the Indians, he placed in them the women, the small children, and a little clothing. While thus engaged, one Daniel McFarland rode up, with orders from Major Higbee to hasten their departure, as the Indians threatened to renew the attack. The emigrants were then hurried away from the corral, the men, as they passed between the files of militia, cheering their supposed deliverers. Half an hour later, as the women drew near the ambuscade, the signal was given, and the butchery commenced. Most of the men were shot down at the first fire. Three only escaped from the valley; of these two were quickly run down and slaughtered, and the third was slain at Muddy Creek, some fifty miles distant. [*18]

    The women and those of the children who were on foot ran forward some two or three hundred yards, when they were overtaken by the Indians, among whom were Mormons in disguise. The women fell on their knees, and with clasped hands sued in vain

[p. 554]

for mercy; clutching the garments of their murderers, as they grasped them by the hair, children pleaded for life, meeting with the steady gaze of innocent childhood the demoniac grin of the savages, who brandished over them uplifted knives and tomahawks. Their skulls were battered in, or their throats cut from ear to ear, and, while still alive, the scalp was torn from their heads. Some of the little ones met with a more merciful death, one, an infant in arms, being shot through the head by the same bullet that pierced its father's heart. Of the women none were spared, and of the children only those who were not more than seven years of age. [*19]

    To two of Lee's wagoners, McMurdy and Knight, was assigned the duty, as it was termed, of slaughtering the sick and wounded. Carrying out their instructions, they stopped the teams as soon as firing was heard, and with loaded rifles approached the wagons where lay their victims, McMurdy being in front. "O Lord, my God," he exclaimed, "receive their spirits, it is for thy kingdom that I do this." Then, raising his rifle to his shoulder, he shot through the brain a wounded man who was lying with his head on a sick comrade's breast. The Mormons were aided in their work [*20] by Indians, who, grasping the helpless men by the hair, raised up their heads and cut their throats. The last victim was a little girl who came running up to the wagons, covered with

[p. 555]

blood, a few minutes after the disabled men had been murdered. She was shot dead within sixty yards of the spot where Lee was standing. The massacre was now completed, and after stripping the bodies of all articles of value, [*21] Brother Lee and his associates went to breakfast, [*22] returning after a hearty meal to bury the dead.

[p. 556]

    It was a ghastly sight that met them at this Wyoming of the west, amid the peaceful vales of Zion, and one that caused even the assassins to sicken and turn pale. The corpses had been entirely stripped by the Indians, who had also carried off the clothing, provisions, wagon-covers, and even the bedding of the emigrants. In one group were the naked bodies of six or seven women, in another those of ten young children, some of them horribly mangled and most of them scalped. The dead were now dragged to a ravine near by and piled in heaps; a little earth was scattered over them, but so little that it was washed away by the first rains, leaving the remains to be devoured by wolves and coyotes, the imprint of whose teeth was afterward found on their bones. It was not until nearly two years later that they were decently interred by a detachment of troops, sent for that purpose from Camp Floyd. On reaching Mountain Meadows, the men found skulls and bones scattered for the space of a mile around the ravine, whence they had been dragged by wild beasts. Nearly all the bodies had been gnawed by wolves, so that few could be recognized, and their dismembered skeletons were bleached by long exposure. Many of the skulls were crushed in with the but-ends of muskets or cleft with tomahawks; others were shattered by fire-arms, discharged close to the head. A few remnants of apparel, torn from the backs of women and children as they ran from the clutch of their pursuers, still fluttered among the bushes, and near by were masses of human hair, matted and trodden in the mould. [*23]

[p. 557]

    Over the last resting-place of the victims was built a cone-shaped cairn, some twelve feet in height, and leaning against its northern base was placed a rough slab of granite, with the following inscription: "Here 120 men, women, and children were massacred in cold blood, early in Sept. 1857. They were from Arkansas." The cairn was surmounted by a cross of cedar, on which were inscribed the words: "Vengeance is mine: I will repay, saith the Lord." [*24]

    The survivors of the slaughter were seventeen children, from two months to seven years of age, who were carried, on the evening of the massacre, by John D. Lee, Daniel Tullis, and others to the house of Jacob Hamblin, [*25] and afterward placed in charge of Mormon families at Cedar, Harmony, and elsewhere. All of them were recovered in the summer of 1858, with the exception of one who was rescued a few months later, and though thinly clad, they bore no marks of ill usage. [*26] In the following year they were

[p. 558]

conveyed to Arkansas, the sum of $10,000 having been appropriated by congress for their recovery and restoration. [*27]

    To Brigham Young, as governor and superintendent of Indian affairs, belonged the duty of ordering an investigation into the circumstances of the massacre and of bringing the guilty parties to justice. His reasons for evading this duty are best explained in his own words. In his deposition at the trial of John D. Lee, when asked why he had not instituted proceedings, he thus made answer: "Because another governor had been appointed by the president of the United States, and was then on the way here to take my place, and I did not know how soon he might arrive; and because the United States judges were not in the territory. Soon after Governor Cumming arrived I asked him to take Judge Cradlebaugh, who belonged to the southern district, with him, and I would accompany them with sufficient aid to investigate the matter and bring the offenders to justice." [*28]

[p. 559]

    The Mormons concerned in the massacre had pledged themselves by the most solemn oaths to stand by each other, and always to insist that the deed was done entirely by Indians. For several months it was believed by the federal authorities that this was the case; when it became known, however, that some of the children had been spared, suspicion at once pointed elsewhere, for among all the murders committed by the Utahs, there was no instance of their having shown any such compunction. Moreover, it was soon ascertained that an armed party of Mormons had left Cedar City, had returned with spoil, and that the Indians complained of being unfairly treated in the division of the booty. Notwithstanding their utmost efforts, some time elapsed before the United States officials procured evidence sufficient to bring home the charge of murder to any of the parties implicated, and it was not until March 1859 that Judge Cradlebaugh held a session of court at Provo. At this date only six or eight, persons had been committed for trial, and were now in the guard-house at Camp Floyd, [*29] some of them being accused of taking part in the massacre and some of other charges.

    Accompanied by a military guard, as there was no jail within his district and no other means of securing the prisoners, the judge opened court on the 8th. In his address to the grand jury he specified a number of crimes that had been committed in southern Utah, including the massacre. "To allow these things to pass over," he observed, "gives a color as if they were done by authority. The very fact of such a case as the Mountain Meadows shows that there was some person high in the estimation of the people, and it was done by that authority...You can know no law but the laws of the United States and the laws you have here. No person can commit crimes and say

[p. 560]

they are authorized by higher authorities, and if they have any such notions they will have to dispel them." [*30] The grand jury refused to find bills against any of the accused, and, after remaining in session for a fortnight, were discharged by Cradlebaugh as "a useless appendage to a court of justice," the judge remarking: "If this court cannot bring you to a proper sense of your duty, it can at least turn the savages held in custody loose upon you." [*31]

    Judge Cradlebaugh's address was ill advised. The higher authority of which he spoke could mean only the authority of the church, or in other words, of the first presidency; and to contemn and threaten to impeach that authority before a Mormon grand jury was a gross judicial blunder. Though there may have been cause for suspicion, there was no fair color of testimony, and there is none yet, that Brigham or his colleagues were implicated in the massacre. Apart from the hearsay evidence of Cradlebaugh and of an officer in the army of Utah, [*32] together with the statements of John D. Lee, [*33] there is no basis on which to frame a charge of complicity against them. That the massacre occurred the day after martial law was proclaimed, and within two days of the threat uttered by Brigham in the presence of Van Vliet; that Brigham, as superintendent of Indian affairs, failed to embody in his report any mention of the massacre;

[p. 561]

that for a long time afterward no allusion to it was made in the tabernacle or in the Deseret News--the church organ of the saints--and then only to deny that the Mormons had any share in it; [*34] and that no mention was made in the Deseret News of the arrival or departure of the emigrants;--all this was, at best, but presumptive evidence, and did not excuse the slur that was now cast on the church and the church dignitaries. "I fear, and I regret to say it," remarks the superintendent of Indians affairs, in August 1859, "that with certain parties here there is a greater anxiety to connect Brigham Young and other church dignitaries with every criminal offence than diligent endeavor to punish the actual perpetrators of crime." [*35]

    The judge's remarks served no purpose, except to draw forth from the mayor of Provo a protest against the presence of the troops, as an infringement of the rights of American citizens. The judge replied that good American citizens need have no fear of American troops, whereupon the citizens of Provo petitioned Governor Cumming to order their removal. Cumming, who was then at Provo, was officially informed by the mayor that the civil authorities were prepared and ready to keep in safe custody all prisoners arrested for trial, and others whose presence might be necessary. He therefore requested General Johnston to withdraw the force which was then encamped at the court-house, stating that its presence was unnecessary. The general refused to comply, being sustained in his

[p. 562]

action by the judges; [*36] and on the 27th of March Cumming issued a proclamation protesting against all movements of troops except such as accorded with his own instructions as chief executive magistrate. [*37] A few days later the detachment was withdrawn.

    Notwithstanding the contumacy of the grand jury, Cradlebaugh continued the sessions of his court, still resolved to bring to justice the parties concerned in the Mountain Meadows massacre, and in crimes committed elsewhere in the territory. Bench-warrants, based on sworn information, were issued against a number of persons, and the United States marshal, aided by a military escort, succeeded in making a few arrests. [*38]

    Among other atrocities laid to the charge of the Mormons was one known as the Aiken massacre, which also occurred during the year 1857. Two brothers of that name, with four others, returning from California to the eastern states, were arrested in southern Utah as spies, and, as was alleged, four of the party were escorted to Nephi, where it was arranged that Porter Rockwell and Sylvanus Collett should assassinate them. While encamped on the Sevier River they were attacked by night, two of them being killed

[p. 563]

and two wounded, the latter escaping to Nephi, whence they started for Salt Lake City, but were murdered on their way at Willow Springs. Although the guilty parties were well known, it was not until many years later that one of them, named Collett, was arrested, and in October 1878 was tried and acquitted at Provo. [*39] All the efforts of Judge Cradlebaugh availed nothing, [*40] and soon afterward he discharged the prisoners and adjourned his court sine die, entering on his docket the following minute: "The whole community presents a united and organized opposition to the proper administration of justice."

    This antagonism between the federal and territorial authorities continued until 1874, at which date an act

[p. 564]

was passed by congress "in relation to courts and judicial officers in the territory of Utah," and commonly known as the Poland bill, [*41] whereby the summoning of grand and petit juries was regulated, and provision made for the better administration of justice. The first grand jury impanelled under this law was instructed by Jacob S. Boreman, then in charge of the second judicial district, to investigate the Mountain Meadows massacre and find bills of indictment against the parties implicated. A joint indictment for conspiracy and murder was found against John D. Lee, William H. Dame, Isaac C. Haight, John M. Higbee, Philip Klingensmith, and others. [*42] Warrants were issued for their arrest, and after a vigorous search Lee and Dame were captured, the former being found concealed in a hog-pen at a small settlement named Panguitch, on the Sevier River. [*43]

    After some delay, caused by the difficulty in procuring evidence, the 12th of July, 1875, was appointed for the trial at Beaver City in southern Utah. [*44] At eleven o'clock on this day the court was opened, Judge Boreman presiding, but further delay was caused by the absence of witnesses, and the fact that Lee had promised to make a full confession, and thus turn state's evidence. In his statement the prisoner detailed minutely the plan and circumstances of the

[p. 565]

tragedy, from the day when the emigrants left Cedar City until the butchery at Mountain Meadows. He avowed that Higbee and Haight played a prominent part in the massacre, which, he declared, was committed in obedience to military orders, but said nothing as to the complicity of the higher dignitaries of the church, by whom it was believed that these orders were issued. [*45] The last was the very point that the prosecution desired to establish, its object, compared with which the conviction of the accused was but a minor consideration, being to get at the inner facts of the case. The district attorney [*46] refused, therefore, to accept the confession, on the ground that it was not made in good faith. Finally the case was brought to trial on the 23d of July, and the result was that the jury, of whom eight were Mormons, failed to agree, after remaining out of court for three days. [*47] Lee was then remanded for a second trial, which was held before the district court at Beaver City between the 13th and 20th of September, 1876, Judge Boreman again presiding. [*48]

[p. 566]

    The court-room was crowded with spectators, who cared little for the accused, but listened with rapt attention to the evidence, which, as they supposed, would certainly implicate the dignitaries of the church. They listened in vain. In opening the case to the jury, the district attorney [*49] stated that he came there to try John D. Lee, and not Brigham Young and the Mormon church. He proposed to prove that Lee had acted in direct opposition to the feelings and wishes of the officers of the Mormon church; that by means of a flag of truce Lee had induced the emigrants to give up their arms; that with his own hands the prisoner had shot two women, and brained a third with the but-end of his rifle; that he had cut the throat of a wounded man, whom he dragged forth from one of the wagons; and that he had gathered up the property of the emigrants and used it or sold it for his own benefit. [*50]

    These charges, and others relating to incidents that have already been mentioned, were in the main substantiated. The first evidence introduced was documentary, and included the depositions of Brigham Young and George A. Smith, and a letter written by Lee to the former, wherein he attempted to throw the entire responsibility of the deed upon the Indians. Brigham alleged that he heard nothing about the massacre until some time after it occurred, and then only by rumor; that two or three months later Lee called at his office and gave an account of the slaughter, which he charged to Indians; that he gave no directions as to the property of the emigrants, and knew nothing about its disposal; that about the 10th of September, 1857, he received a communication from Isaac C. Haight of Cedar City, concerning the Arkansas party, and in his answer had given orders

[p. 567]

to pacify the Indians as far as possible, and to allow this and all other companies of emigrants to pass through the territory unmolested. George A. Smith, who had been suspected of complicity, through attending a council at which Dame, Haight, and others had arranged their plans, denied that he was ever an accessary thereto. He also deposed that he had met the emigrants at Corn Creek, some eighty miles north of Cedar, on the 25th of August, while on his way to Salt Lake City, and that when he first heard of the massacre he was in the neighborhood of Fort Bridger.

    The first witness examined was Daniel H. Wells, who merely stated that Lee was a man of influence among the Indians, and understood their language sufficiently to converse with them. James Haslem testified that between five and six o'clock on Monday, September 7, 1857, he was ordered by Isaac C. Haight to start for Salt Lake City and with all speed deliver a letter or message to Brigham Young. He arrived at 11 A. M. on the following Thursday, and four hours later was on his way back with the answer. As he set forth, Brigham said to him: "Go with all speed, spare no horse-flesh. The emigrants must not be meddled with, if it takes all Iron county to prevent it. They must go free and unmolested." [*51]

    Samuel McMurdy testified that he saw Lee shoot one of the women, and two or three of the sick and wounded who were in the wagons. Jacob Hamblin alleged that soon after the massacre he met Lee within a few miles of Fillmore, when the latter stated that two young girls, [*52] who had been hiding in the underbrush at Mountain Meadows, were brought into his presence by a Utah chief. The Indian asked what should be done with them. "They must be shot," answered Lee; "they are too old to be spared."

[p. 568]

[paragraph continues] "They are too pretty to be killed," answered the chief. "Such are my orders," rejoined Lee; whereupon the Indian shot one of them, and Lee dragged the other to the ground and cut her throat. [*53]

    On the testimony which we have now before us I will make but one comment. If Haslem's statement was true, Brigham was clearly no accomplice; if it was false, and his errand to Salt Lake City was a mere trick of the first presidency, it is extremely improbable that Brigham would have betrayed his intention to Van Vliet by using the remarks that he made only two days before the event. Moreover, apart from other considerations, it is impossible to reconcile the latter theory with the shrewd and far-sighted policy of this able leader, who well knew that his militia were no match for the army of Utah, and who would have been the last one to rouse the vengeance of a great nation against his handful of followers. [*54]

    Lee was convicted of murder in the first degree, and being allowed to select the mode of his execution, was sentenced to be shot. The case was appealed to the supreme court of Utah, but the judgment was sustained, and it was ordered that the sentence should be carried into effect on the 23d of March, 1877. [*55] William H. Dame, Isaac C. Haight, and others who had also been arraigned for trial, were soon afterward discharged from custody.

    A few days before his execution, Lee made a confession, [*56]

[p. 569]

in which he attempts to palliate his guilt, to throw the burden of the crime on his accomplices, especially on Dame, Haight, and Higbee, and to show that the massacre was committed by order of Brigham and the high-council. He also makes mention of other murders, or attempts to murder, which, as he alleges, were committed by order of some higher authority. [*57] "I feel composed, and as calm as a summer morning," he writes on the 13th of March. "I hope to meet my fate with manly courage. I declare my innocence. I have done nothing designedly wrong in that unfortunate and lamentable affair with which I have been implicated. I used my utmost endeavors to save them from their sad fate. I freely would have given worlds, were they at my command, to have averted that evil. Death to me has no terror. It is but a struggle, and all is over. I know that I have a reward in heaven, and my conscience does not accuse me."

    Ten days later he was led to execution at the Mountain Meadows. Over that spot the curse of the almighty seemed to have fallen. The luxuriant herbage that had clothed it twenty years before had disappeared; the springs were dry and wasted, and now there was neither grass nor any green thing, save here and there a copse of sage-brush or of scrub-oak, that

[p. 570]

served but to make its desolation still more desolate. Around the cairn that marks their grave still flit, as some have related, the phantoms of the murdered emigrants, and nightly reenact in ghastly pantomime the scene of this hideous tragedy.

    About ten o'clock on the morning of the 23d a party of armed men alighting from their wagons approached the site of the massacre. Among them were the United States marshal, William Nelson, the district attorney, a military guard, and a score of private citizens. In their midst was John Doyle Lee. Over the wheels of one of the wagons blankets were placed to serve as a screen for the firing party. Some rough pine boards were then nailed together in the shape of a coffin, which was placed near the edge of the cairn, and upon it Lee took his seat until the preparations were completed. The marshal now read the order of the court, and, turning to the prisoner, said: "Mr Lee, if you have anything to say before the order of the court is carried into effect, you can do so now." Rising from the coffin, [*58] he looked calmly around for a moment, and then with unfaltering voice repeated in substance the statements already quoted from his confession. "I have but little to say this morning," he added. "It seems I have to be made a victim; a victim must be had, and I am the victim. I studied to make Brigham Young's will my pleasure for thirty years. See now what I have come to this day! I have been sacrificed in a cowardly, dastardly manner. I cannot help it; it is my last word; it is so. I do not fear death; I shall never go to a worse place than I am now in. I ask the Lord my God, if my labors are done, to receive my spirit." A Methodist clergyman, [*59] who acted as his spiritual adviser, then knelt by his side and offered a brief prayer, to which he listened attentively. After shaking hands

[p. 571]

with those around him, he removed a part of his clothing, handing his hat to the marshal, who bound a handkerchief over his eyes, his hands being free at his own request. Seating himself with his face to the firing party, and with hands clasped over his head, he exclaimed: "Let them shoot the balls through my heart. Don't let them mangle my body." The word of command was given; the report of rifles rang forth on the still morning air, and without a groan or quiver the body of the criminal fell back lifeless on his coffin. God was more merciful to him than he had been to his victims. [*60]

Footnotes

^543:1 In Forney's Rept, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 79, and the Hand-Book of Reference, p. 75, Sept. 9th is given as the date of the massacre. Forney, as superintendent of Indian affairs, made a close investigation into the details of this tragedy, the result of which is given in his report ut supra, pp. 87-9, and elsewhere in this document, which occupies 139 pages, and contains all the official information then to be had on the subject. His reports are dated Salt Lake City, 1859. He states that the attack began on Monday, Sept. 5th, and lasted till Friday, Sept. 9th, when the massacre occurred; but Friday of that week fell on Sept. 11th. Burton, City of the Saints, 411-12, note, also quotes an official report, in which Sept. 4th or 5th is given as the date of the first attack. See also Lee's confession in Mormonism [p. 544] Unvailed, 218, 237, 239, where Lee states that the massacre occurred on Friday, and that the attack began on Tuesday. At Lee's trial James Haslem testified, as we shall see later, that he was sent from Cedar City by Isaac C. Haight, with a letter to Brigham, on Monday, Sept. 7th, and that he reached S. L. City at 11 A. M. on Thursday. Deseret News, Sept. 20, 1876. The next day was the 11th. Other accounts differ slightly as to date.

^544:2 U.S. Attorney Wilson, in his report in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 102, states that 119 were killed, and it is certain that 17 children were rescued. Forney and Burton say that 115 to 120 were massacred; Waite, The Mormon Prophet, 66, that the party consisted of 150 men and women, besides a number of children. Stenhouse, Tell It All, 324, mentions 120 to 130. Other reports vary from 120 to 150.

^544:3 Stenhouse, Rocky Mountain Saints, 424-8, says that the Arkansas and Missouri emigrants formed two separate parties, the latter naming themselves [p. XXX] Missouri 'wild-cats,' and that the Arkansas party was advised by a friend of his to keep clear of the Missourians while passing through the Utah settlements and the portion of that territory occupied by Indians. I find no confirmation of this in other authorities, though, according to Mrs Stenhouse, Tell It All, 325, her husband's friend, whose name was Eli B. Kelsey, 'said that the train was divided into two parts, the first a rough-and-ready set of men--regular frontier pioneers; the other a picked community.' The truth appears to be, that there were a few Missourians in the Arkansas party, as stated in Hutchings' Cal. Mag., iv. 345.

^545:4 They had about 600 head of cattle, 30 wagons, and 30 horses and mules. Forney's Rept, ut supra, p. 75. Stenhouse mentions that they had also several travelling-carriages. Rocky Mountain Saints, 424. At least $30,000 worth of plunder was collected after the massacre, besides what was appropriated by the Indians. Cradlebaugh estimated the value of their property at $60,000 to $70.000.

^545:5 I find no mention of their arrival in the files of the Deseret News, although the names of passing emigrants were registered in that paper at a nominal charge; and when the party was a large one, its passage was usually noticed among the local items of news.

^546:6 The account given in the Millennial Star, xix. 417-18, is that McLean, after treating his wife in a brutal manner for several years, turned her into the streets of San Francisco, and secretly conveyed the children on board a steamer for New Orleans, where the woman followed him; but finding that her parents were in the plot, set forth for Salt Lake City. Returning to New Orleans in 1856, she rescued her children and fled to Texas; but was followed by her husband, who had previously returned to California, and now regained possession of the children. Parley, who had already befriended Mrs McLean, had written to inform her that her husband was in pursuit. Hence the prosecution. McLean and his wife finally separated in San Francisco in 1855. See also Autobiog. of Parley P. Pratt, app. Stenhouse relates that Mrs McLean was married or sealed to Pratt in Utah, that she met Pratt in Arkansas on her way to Utah, and that the apostle was acquitted on account of her assuming the responsibility for the abduction. He admits, however, that the apostle did not abduct the children. Rocky Mountain Saints, 429. Burton says that Pratt converted Mrs McLean and took her to wife, but on what authority he does not state. City of the Saints, 412. The fact, however, that Mrs McLean arrived on the scene of the apostle's assassination just before his death, as mentioned in the Millennial Star, xix. 478, wears a suspicious look. In the S. F. Bulletin of March 24, 1877, it is stated that the apostle made the acquaintance of Mrs McLean while engaged in missionary work in San Francisco; that her husband, who was a custom-house official and a respectable citizen, ordered him to discontinue his visits, and kicked him out of the house for continuing them surreptitiously; and that the woman was so infatuated with the Mormon Elder that she devoutly washed his feet whenever he visited her. On arriving at Fort Smith (near Van Buren), McLean found letters from Parley Pratt addressed to his wife, one of them signed 'Your own,----. 'The McLean residence in San Francisco, on the corner of Jones and Filbert streets, was in 1877 a dilapidated frame building, a story and a half in height. As to the apostle's assassination, the Bulletin merely states that he was overtaken by McLean and shot within eight miles of Van Buren, and that he died of his wounds an hour afterward.

^547:7 This account of Parley's murder is based on the testimony of Geo. Higginson and Geo. Crouch, whose letter, dated Flint, Arkansas, May 17, 1857, was first published in a New York paper. Copies of it will be found in the Millennial Star, xix. 478, and Burton's City of the Saints, 419,-13, note. They state that the tragedy occurred close to the residence of a farmer named Win, and was witnessed by two men who were in the house at the time, and from whose evidence at the coroner's jury the above version is taken. Pratt lived long enough to give instructions as to his burial and the disposition of his property. The account given by Stenhouse, in Rocky Mountain Saints, 429-30, does not differ materially, except that he makes no mention of any accomplices.

^547:8 In his deposition at the trial of John D. Lee and others, George A. Smith, the prophet's cousin, states that he found them at Corn Creek on Aug. 25th. Millennial Star. xxxvii. 675; Lee's Mormonisrn Unvailed 307.

^548:9 Sen. Doc., 36 Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 76. Forney mentions that an ox belonging to a Dr Ray of Fillmore died from this cause while the emigrants were in that neighborhood, that his wife was taken ill while rendering the tallow, and that a boy who was assisting her died a few days afterward. One or two Indians who ate some of the meat were also poisoned.

^548:10 John D. Lee, living 150 miles south of Fillmore, informed me that about twenty Indians and some cattle died from drinking of the poisoned water, and Indians from eating the poisoned meat.' Forney's Rept, in Id., p. 75. This report was dated S. L. City, Aug. 1859. In a letter to Brigham, dated Harmony, Nov. 20, 1857, Lee writes: 'The company there [at Corn Creek] poisoned the meat of an ox, which they gave the Pah Vant Indians to eat, causing four of them to die immediately, besides poisoning a number more. The company also poisoned the water where they encamped, killing the cattle of the settlers. This letter was used in evidence at Lee's trial in 1876.' Mormonism Unvailed, 254-5. At this trial was also placed in evidence a letter from Brigham to the commissioner of Indian affairs, dated Jan. 6, 1858, in which Lee's statement is repeated almost verbatim. Id., 313-15. In his confession, made a few months after his trial, Lee declares that President Isaac C. Haight told him of the poisoning and other atrocities committed by the emigrants, and gave him instructions as to the part he should take in the massacre. After that event Lee states (still in his confession), 'I thought over the matter, and made up my mind to write the letter to Brigham Young and lay it all to the Indians.' Id., 254.

^549:11 'They proclaimed that they had the very pistol with which the prophet Joseph Smith was murdered, and had threatened to kill Brigham and all of the apostles. That when in Cedar City they said they would have friends in Utah, who would hang Brigham by the neck until he was dead, before snow fell again in the territory. They also said that Johnston was coming with his army from the east, and they were going to return from California with soldiers, as soon as possible, and would then desolate the land, and kill every damned Mormon man, woman, and child that they could find in Utah.' Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 218-19.

^549:12 'Conflicting statements were made to me of the behavior of this company,' says the superintendent of Indian affairs. 'I have accordingly made it a matter of material importance to make a strict inquiry to ascertain reliable information on this subject...The result of my inquiries enables me to say that the company conducted themselves with propriety.' Forney's Rept, ut supra, p. 88.

^550:13 Seven were killed and sixteen wounded. Lee's Confession, in Mormonism Unvailed, 226-7; see also Forney's Rept, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 88.

^551:14 'Thursday morning I saw two men start from the corral with buckets, and run to the spring and fill their buckets with water, and go back again. The bullets flew around them thick and fast, but they got into their corral in, safety.' Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 230.

^552:15 See the district attorney's opening address to the jury, in the Deseret News, Sept. 2, 1877. Lee states that his object in sending for aid was to protect the emigrants. Confession, in Mormonism Unvailed, 229.

^552:16 A full list of the company is given in Id., 379-80, and a list of all the Mormons who took part in the massacre in the S. L. City Tribune, June 2, 1877. See also the speech delivered by Judge Cradlebaugh in the house of representatives, Feb. 7, 1863. Cong. Globe, 1862-3, app. 119. The speech was afterward published in pamphlet form, one copy of it being entitled Mormonism, and another Utah and the Mormons. The former was reprinted from the S. L. Daily Tribune, Apr. 8, 1877. The parts of it relating to the massacre will be found in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 65, and Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 447-50.

^552:17 First councillor to Haight.

^553:18 Forney's Rept, ut supra, 89; Burton's City of the Saints, 412, note. Lee also says that three escaped, but were overtaken and killed before reaching the settlements in California. Mormonism Unvailed, 244. Cradlebaugh states that two escaped and were overtaken in the desert 150 miles distant. Mormonism, 12. Beadle mentions three, one of whom starved to death in the desert, another was murdered by Indians, 90 miles south of the desert, and a third was killed on the Colorado River by persons unknown. Life in Utah, 184.

^554:19 In the official report quoted by Burton, City of the Saints, 419, it is stated that a girl 16 years of age knelt before one of the Mormons imploring mercy, but he led her away into a thicket, violated her, and then cut her throat. Beadle attributes this deed to President Haight, and says that after violating the girl he beat out her brains with a club. He also accuses Lee of selecting one of the young women for his harem, and relates that, when he made known his purpose, she attempted to stab him, whereupon he shot her through the head. Life in Utah, 183-4.

^554:20 Lee, in his confession, denied having killed any of them, but admits that he intended to do his part. He says: 'I drew my pistol and cocked it, but somehow it went off prematurely, and I shot McMurdy across the thigh, my pistol-ball cutting his buckskin pants. McMurdy turned to me and said: "Brother Lee, keep cool; you are excited."' Mormonism Unvailed, 242. As we shall see later, it was clearly proved at his trial that he killed several of the wounded.

^555:21 Lee states that only a little money and a few watches were found on them. Id., 244. This is improbable, and other accounts show that the Mormons gathered considerable booty.

^555:22 'After breakfast,' says Lee, 'we all went back in a body to the meadows, to bury the dead and take care of the property that was left there.' The above account of the Mountain Meadows massacre is taken mainly from Forney's Rept, in Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, pp. 87-9; Cradlebauqh's Mormonism, 12; the affidavit of Philip Klingon Smith (Klingensmith), bishop of Cedar City, who was present at the massacre, made in 1871 before the clerk of court of the seventh judicial district of Nevada, in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 439-42; the confession of Lee, in Mormonism Unvailed, 244, and his trial in Id., 302-78. In the S. F. Call, July 30, 1881, it is stated that Bishop Klingensmith was murdered in Mexico. There is no important discrepancy in the several versions. Forney and Cradlebaugh officially investigated the matter in 1859. The statements of both are very brief, and why the investigation was not made sooner does not appear. News of the massacre was first received in Washington in Feb. 1858. See letter of C. E. Mix, acting commissioner of Indian affairs, to Senator W. K. Sebastian, and of the secretary of war to Representative A. B. Greenwood, in Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, pp. 4, 42. On the 18th of this month Senator Gwin of California moved that the secretary of war be called upon to report what steps had been taken to bring the offenders to justice. Gwin's Memoirs, MS., 138 a, 138 e. No steps had been taken, and for reasons that will presently appear, none were taken--or none that were effectual--until nearly 20 years later. For other accounts of the massacre, see Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 435-9; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 328-37; Beadle's Life in Utah, 180-4; Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 60-9; Beadles' Western Wilds, 306-7, 496-501; Young's Wife No. 19, 228 et seq.; Bowle's Our New West, 266-8; Ruslinq, Across America, 188-90; Hayes' Scraps, Los Angeles, viii. 228-31, xvii. 3-7; Hutching's Cal. Mag., iv. 345-9; Utah Review, Feb. 1882, 243-6. The story of the massacre has, of course, been related thousands of times in the magazines and newspapers of Europe and America. Some of these accounts are substantially correct and some are absurd. One writer, for instance, attemps to throw new light on the subject by giving what is claimed to be a copy of the original order for the massacre, signed 'Daniel G. Wells,' and dated S. L. City, Apr. 9, 1858. The massacre occurred, as we have seen, on Sept. 11, 1857. For statements and comments of the press of the Pacific slope, see, among others, the Deseret News, Dec. 1, 1869; S. L. City Tribune, Jan. 3, Aug. 22, Oct. 3, Nov. 28, 1874; Aug. 14, 1875; Sept. 9, 1876; Apr. 23, 1879; S. F. Bulletin, Oct. 12, 27, Nov. 12, 1857; Apr. 13, May 14, Aug. 12, 1858; Apr. 23, Aug. 25, Oct. 28, 1859; Sept. 23, 27, Nov. 27, 1872; Nov. 17, 1874; July 26, 1875; March 24, Apr. 12, 1877; S. F. Call, July 21, 1866; May 23, Sept. 23, 1872; Oct. 14, 1874; July 18, 22, 25, 1875; Feb. 16, March 9, 24, 25, May 29, 1877; S. F. Alta, Oct. 12, 21, 1857; Aug. 13, 1858; Jan. 6, May 8, June 26, 1859; Feb. 9, 1873; July 28, Aug. 23, 1875; March 24, Apr. 7, 1877; S. F. Chronicle, March 22, 23, 31, Apr. 8, 1877; S. F. Post, March 22, 23, 1877; S. F. Herald, Oct. 12, 27, Nov. 2, 1857; Mining and Scientific Press, July 31, 1875, March 31, 1877; Pacific Rural Press, March 31, 1877; Oakland Tribune, Apr. 9, 1877; Sac. Daily Union, Oct. 13, Dec. 18, 1857; March 1, Aug. 14, 1858; Apr. 14, 25, 1859; [p. 556] Jan. 29, 1867; Nov. 28, 1872; Nov. 24, 1874; Cal. Mercantile Journal, 1860, pp. 153-4; Stockton Independent, June 11, 1879; San Jose Weekly Arqus, Dec. 5, 1874; Santa Cruz Sentinel, May 12, 1877; San Buenaventura Signal, June 23, 1877; Winnemucca Silver State, July 19, 1875; Antioch Ledger, Nov. 21, 1875; Austin Reese River Reveille, July 12, 1564; Gold Hill News, Sept. 21, 1872; Feb. 1, 1875; Sept. 12, 1876; Carson State Register, Sept. 26, 1872; Prescott Miner, Dec. 12, 1874, Apr. 11, 1879; Idaho World, Oct. 1, 1875; Portland Weekly Standard, Apr. 6, 1577; Or. Argus, Dec. 12, 1857, July 16, 1858; Or. Statesman, Nov. 3, 1857. For cuts of the massacre, see Beadle's Western Wilds, 495; Beadle's Life in Utah, facing p. 183; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, facing p. 424; Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, facing p. 240.

^556:23 Rept of Assistant Surgeon Brewer, dated Mountain Meadows, May 6, [p. XXX] 1859, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, pp. 16-17; Captain Campbell's rept, in Mess. and Doc., 1859-60, pt 2, p. 207; Hutchings' Cal. Mag., iv. 346-7. A correspondent of the New York Herald, writing from S. L. City, Nov. 8, 1574, states that William H. Rogcrs, Indian agent, was ordered to proceed from Camp Floyd with a party of cavalry and bury the remains in the summer of 1558. I find no mention of this in the official documents, though the massacre was known to Sup. Forney at least as early as June 22d of that year. See his letter to C. E. Mix, in Sen. Doc., ut supra, pp. 44-5.

^557:24 Cuts will be found in Stenhouse's Tell It All, 335; Hutchings' Cal. Mag., iv. 347. The cairn, cross, and slab are said to have been destroyed by order of Brigham. Cradlebaugh's Mormonism, 14.

^557:25 Forney's rept, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, pp. 79-80, where their names are given; see also p. 87; Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 243. Bishop Smith's statement, in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 441-2. In giving the result of his investigation, Forney states (p. 76) that Hamblin had left; his home several weeks before the massacre, and did not return until several days after it occurred. This statement was confirmed, at the trial of Lee, in the deposition of George A. Smith, who alleged that Hamblin was encamped with him at Corn Creek on Aug. 25, 1857. Millennial Star, xxxvii. 675. See also Little's Jacob Hamblin, 45. Nevertheless Hamblin was accused of complicity. Affidavit of Capt. Jas Lynch, in i., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 83.

^557:26 'I succeeded in getting sixteen children, all, it is said, that remain of this butchering affair. I have the children with me; they seem contented and happy; poorly clad, however.' Forney's letter to General Johnston, in Sen. Doc., ut supra, p. 8. 'The seventeenth child was recovered last April.' (1859.) 'It is proper to remark that when I obtained the children they were in a better condition than children generally in the settlements in which they lived.' Forney's Rept, in Id., pp. 87, 89. On the other hand, Captain James [p. 558] Lynch, who accompanied Forney's party, states under oath that when he first saw them the children were 'with little or no clothing, covered with filth and dirt.' Id., p. 81. Judge Cradlebaugh says nothing about their being ill treated. It was at first supposed that the children had been left in the hands of Indians, but this is denied by all the officers and officials whose reports are given in Id., passim. 'No one can depict the glee of these infants,' remarks Cradlebaugh, 'when they realized that they were in the custody of what they called "the Americans"--for such is the designation of those not Mormons. They say they never were in the custody of the Indians. I recollect one of them, John Calvin Sorrow, after he found he was safe, and before he was brought away from Salt Lake City, although not yet nine years of age, sitting in a contemplative mood, no doubt thinking of the extermination of his family, saying: "Oh, I wish I was a man! I know what I would do: I would shoot John D. Lee. I saw him shoot my mother." I shall never forget how he looked.' Mormonism, 13.

^558:27 For further particulars as to the treatment and disposition of the children, see Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, passim; S. F. Alta, Feb. 23, March 12, May 29, July 10, 20, 1859; S. F. Bulletin, May 30, 31, June 6, Aug. 13, 1859; Sac. Union, July 19, 1859. Cradlebaugh says that on their way back they frequently pointed out carriages and stock that had belonged to the train, and stated whose property they were. Mormonism, 14.

^558:28 The Lee Trial, 37; Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 305-6; Millennial Star, xxxvii. 675; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 243. In a conversation with Governor Cumming, George A. Smith remarked: 'If the business had not been taken out of our hands by a change of officers in the territory, the Mountain Meadows affair is one of the first things we should have attended to when a U. S. [p. XXX] court sat in southern Utah. We should see whether or not white men were concerned in the affair with the Indians.' Little's Jacob Hamblin, 57.

^559:29 Cradlebaugh's letter in Mess. and Doc., 1859-60, pt ii. 140.

^560:30 A copy of the judge's charge will be found in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 403-6.

^560:31 Cradlebaugh's Mormonism, 11; The Lee Trial, 6.

^560:32 Major Carleton, of the first dragoons. In a despatch to the assistant adjutant-general at San Francisco, dated Mountain Meadows, May 25, 1859, he says: 'A Pah Ute chief of the Santa Clara band, named Jackson, who was one of the attacking party, and had a brother slain by the emigrants from their corral by the spring, says that orders came down in a letter from Brigham Young that the emigrants were to be killed; and a chief of the Pah Utes, named Touche, new living on the Virgin River, told me that a letter from Brigham Young to the same effect was brought down to the Virgin River band by a man named Huntingdon.' A copy of the major's despatch will be found in the Hand-book of Mormonism, 67-9. Cradlebaugh says that after the attack had been made, one of the Indians declared that a white man came to their camp with written orders from Brigham to 'go and help to whip the emigrants.' Mormonism, 11.

^560:33 Lee's confession, in Mormonism Unvailed, passim.

^561:34 The massacre is thus mentioned for the first time in the Millennial Star, xxxix. 785 (Dec. 3, 1877). 'The reader cannot fail to perceive that any overt act--much less the terrible butchery at Mountain Meadows--was farthest from Brigham Young's policy at that time, to say nothing of humanitarian considerations. There can be but one just view of that melancholy event--that it was an act of retaliation by the Indians.' The emigrants are then accused of the poisoning at Corn Creek, and blamed for taking the southern route contrary to the advice of the Mormons. Forney states that the names of the guilty parties were published in the Valley Tan. Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 86.

^561:35 Letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 74. Capt. Lynch, Id., p. 84, calls Forhey 'a veritable old granny,' but, with the exception of Gov. Cumming, he appears to be the only one who kept his head at this juncture.

^562:36 Copies of all the correspondence in this matter, which is somewhat voluminous, will be found in Mess. and Doc., 1859-60, ii. 139 et seq. The action of Cumming was afterward sustained by the secretary of war, in a letter addressed to Johnston, in Id., p. 157. The judges also received a sharp rebuke at the hands of Attorney-general Black, who thus sums up the case: 'On the whole, the president is very decidedly of opinion: 1. That the governor of the territory alone has power to issue a requisition upon the commanding general for the whole or part of the army; 2. That there was no apparent occasion for the presence of the troops at Provo; 3. That if a rescue of the prisoners in custody had been attempted, it was the duty of the marshal, and not of the judge, to summon the force which might be necessary to prevent it; 4. That the troops ought not to have been sent to Provo without the concurrence of the governor, nor kept there against his remonstrance; 5. That the disregard of these principles and rules of action have been in many ways extremely unfortunate.'

^562:37 For copy of protest see Deseret News, March 30, 1859, where is also a protest from the grand jury against their dishonorable discharge.

^562:38 Cradlebaugh relates that when these arrests were made a general stampede occurred among the Mormons, especially among the church dignitaries, who fled to the mountains. Mormonism, 11.

^563:39 Deseret News, Oct. 16, 23, 1878, where is a report of Collett's trial. A sensational account of this affair is given in Hickman's Destroying Angel, 205-9. It is there stated that the party had with them money and other property to the amount of $25,000. See also Young's Wife No. 19, 270-6; S. F. Bulletin, May 30, 1859; S. F. Post, Oct. 11, 1878; S. L. City Tribune, Oct. 12, 1878. In the report of the trial I find no mention of the murdered men's property.

^563:40 Among others, an attempt was made to investigate what were known as the Potter and Parrish murders at Springville, an account of which is given in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 462-7. The proceedings in these cases will be found in the Deseret News, Apr. 6, 1859. In his address to the grand jury, Cradlebaugh states that three persons were killed on this occasion, and that young Parrish, who was among the intended victims but made his escape, could certainly identify the parties. The judge also mentions the cases of Henry Fobbs, murdered near Fort Bridger while on his way from California, and of Henry Jones, said to have been castrated at S. L. City, and afterward shot at Pond Town, near Payson. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 404-5. This writer relates that the marshal and his posse approached Springville before daylight and surrounded that settlement, but on entering the houses, it was found that the culprits had already escaped, and after searching the canon some few miles farther on, the party returned, having accomplished nothing. See also Deseret News, Apr. 6, 1859. For reports of other murders committed about this period, some of them being attributed to Mormons, see Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., xi. no. 42, passim; Burton's City of the Saints, 274; Hickman's Destroying Angel, 122 et seq.; Bowles' Our New West, 266. At this date the newspapers of the Pacific coast were teeming with accounts of atrocities said to have been committed by Mormons, for which I refer the reader to the S. F. Bulletin, May 20, Nov. 26, Dec. 21, 1858; Jan. 4, 24, Apr. 25, May 9, 30, Aug. 8, 24, 25, 30, 1859; S. F. Alta, May 15, Oct. 28, Nov. l, 1857; Jan. 25, Nov. 4, 1858; Jan. 13, May 9, Aug. 30, 31, Sept. 14, Nov. 20, 1859; Sac. Union, May 15, 1857; Jan. 6, 18, May 11, 14, Sept. 8, 1859; Jan. 16, 1860. Most of the murders committed appear to have been those of desperadoes who defied the law. On May 17, 1860, for instance, two men of this stamp were shot in the streets of Salt Lake City. Commenting on this affair, the Deseret News of May 23d remarks: 'Murder after murder has been committed with impunity within the precincts of Salt Lake City, till such occurrences do not seemingly attract much attention, particularly when the murdered [p. 564] have had the reputation of being thieves and murderers or of associating with such characters.'

^564:41 Approved June 23, 1874. See Deseret News, July 8, 1874.

^564:42 The Lee Trial, 6. Forney states that Smith, Lee, Higby, Bishop Davis, Ira Hatch, and David Tullis were the most guilty. Letter to the commissioner of Indian affairs, in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. let Sess., ii. no. 42, p. 86.

^564:43 A detailed account of the arrest of John D. Lee by Wm Stokes, deputy U.S. marshal, is given in Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 293-301. See also Beadle's Western Wilds, 490-2, where is a cut showing the scene of this incident. The two versions differ somewhat, Beadle stating that the arrest was made by Marshal Owens.

^564:44 More than 100 subpoenas had been issued, but though many obeyed the summons, several material witnesses were not forthcoming--among them being Philip Klingensmith, Joel White, and William Hawley, all of whom were present at the massacre. Klingensmith, who had promised to make a confession, arrived a day or two later, in custody of a deputy, and Joel White was induced to trust himself to the notorious Bill Hickman, then acting as special deputy marshal. The Lee Trial, 8.

^565:45 Portions of this first confession will be found in Id., 8-9; S. F. Call, July 21, 1875; S. F. Bulletin, July 21, 1875.

^565:46 William C. Carey, who was assisted by R. N. Baskin. Sutherland and Bates, Judge Hoge, Wells Spicer, John McFarlane, and W. W. Bishop appeared for the prisoner. Sutherland and Bates were the attorneys of the first presidency.

^565:47 For names of jurors, see The Lee Trial, 11. On p. 52, it is stated that the foreman, who was a gentile, sided with the Mormons, the three remaining gentiles being in favor of a conviction. In The Lee Trial, published in pamphlet form by the S. L. Daily Tribune-Reporter (S. L. City, 1875), we have a fair account of the proceedings at the first trial, except that the publishers seem unduly anxious to cast the onus of the charge on the first presidency. Other reports will be found in the files of the Deseret News, commencing July 28, 1875; Beadle's Western Wilds, 504-13; Young's Wife No. 19, 256-60; the Elko Independent, Aug. 7, 1875; the Helena Independent, July 29, 1875.

^565:48 For names of jurors, see Deseret News, Sept. 20, 1876. Lee had been cut off from the church in 1871, and among anti-Mormon writers it is stated that the church authorities now withdrew all assistance and sympathy, and determined to sacrifice him. Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 32; Beadle's Western Wilds, 515. In his introduction to the Mormonism Unvailed, W. W. Bishop says that the attorneys for the defendant were furnished with a list of jurymen, and that the list was examined by a committee of Mormons, who marked with a dash those who would convict, with an asterisk those who would probably not convict, and with two asterisks those who would certainly not convict. The names of the jurors accepted were, of course, marked with two asterisks, but they found Lee guilty, as directed by the church authorities.

^566:49 Sumner Howard, who was assisted by Presley Denny. The prisoner's counsel were Wells Spicer, J. C. Foster, and W. W. Bishop. The trial of John Lee, in Mormonism Unvailed, 302.

^566:50 A summary of Howard's opening address to the jury, which was forcible and well studied, will be found in the Deseret News, Sept. 20, 1876.

^567:51 Ibid. Haslem's testimony, together with other evidence tending to exculpate the dignitaries of the church, is omitted in the account of the trial given in Lee's Mormonism Unvailed.

^567:52 From 13 to 15 years of age.

^568:53 Deseret News, Sept. 20, 1876; confirmed in the trial of John D. Lee, in Mormonism Unvailed, 361, 365-7.

^568:54 In a sworn statement made at S. L. City, Oct. 24, 1884, Wilford Woodruff states that he was present when Lee had an interview with Brigham Young in the autumn of 1857; that the latter was deeply affected, shed tears, and said he was sorry that innocent blood had been shed. A copy of it will be found in The Mountain Meadows Massacre, 51-3, a republished lecture by Elder C. W. Penrose (S. L. City, 1884).

^568:55 Reports of the proceedings at the second trial will be found in Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 302-78; The Deseret News, Sept. 20, 27, 1876; Beadle's Western Wilds, 515-19. In passing sentence, Judge Boreman remarked: 'The men who actually participated in the deed are not the only guilty parties. Although the evidence shows plainly that you were a willing participant in the massacre, yet both trials taken together show that others, and some high in authority, inaugurated and decided upon the wholesale slaughter of the emigrants.'

^568:56 It will be found entire in Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 213-92; and in part in Beadle's Western Wilds, 519-23, Stenhouse's Tell It All, 633-48, the last of these versions being somewhat garbled. For other accounts and comments, see Deseret News, March 28, 1877; S. F. Post, March 22, 23, 24, 1877; San Buenaventura Signal, March 31, 1877; Sonoma Democrat, March 31, 1877; Napa County Reporter, Apr. 7, 1877; Los Angeles Weekly Express, March 24, 1877; Los Angeles Herald, March 24, 1877; Anaheim Gazette, March 24, 1877; Western Oregonian, Apr. 7, 1877; Portland Weekly Oregonian, Apr. 7, 1877.

^569:57 He mentions the case of an Irishman, whose throat was cut by John Weston, near Cedar City, in the winter of 1857-8; of Robert Keyes, whose assassination was attempted about the same time by Philip Klingensmith; of three California-bound emigrants, who were suspected of being spies and were slain at Cedar in 1857. An attempt was made, he says, to assassinate Lieut Tobin in the same year. A young man (name not given) was murdered near Parowan in 1854. At the same place William Laney narrowly escaped murder, his skull being fractured with a club by Barney Carter, son-in-law to William H. Dame. Rosmos Anderson, a Dane, had his throat cut at midnight by Klingensmith and others near Cedar City. Lee's Confession, in Mormonism Unvailed, 272-83. Some of these cases are imputed to the Danites, but I find no mention of them in Hickman's Destroying Angel, whose narrative covers the period 1850-65.

^570:58 He first requested one James Fennemore, who was taking photographs of the group in which Lee formed the central figure, to send a copy to each of his three wives, Rachel, Sarah, and Emma. Fennemore promised to do so.

^570:59 The Rev. George Stokes.

^571:60 The body was afterward inferred by relatives at Cedar City. Accounts of the execution will be found in Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, 383-90; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 627-31; Stenhouse's Western Wilds, 524-5; S. L. City Tribune, March 31, 1877; S. L. Herald, March 28, 1877; S. F. Bulletin, March 24, 1877; S. F. Post, March 24, 1877; Oakland Tribune, March 24, 1877; Los Angeles Weekly Express, March 31, 1877; Los Angeles Reporter, March 23, 24, 1877; Sonoma Democrat, March 31, 1877; Anaheim Gazette, March 31, 1877; Mariposa Gazette, March 31, 1877; Jacksonville (Or.) Dem. Times, March 31, 1877. Portraits of Lee will be found in the frontispiece of Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, and in Stenhouse's Tell It All, facing p. 632; cuts representing the execution in Id., facing p. 630; Beadle's Western Wilds, 525; Lee's Mormonism Unvailed, facing p. 384.

    John Doyle Lee was a native of Kaskaskia, Ill., where he was born in 1812. After engaging in the several occupations of mail-carrier, stage-driver, farmer, soldier, and clerk, he joined the Mormon church at Far West in 1837. At Nauvoo he was employed as a policeman, one of his duties being to guard the person and residence of Jos. Smith. After the migration he was one of those who laid out and built up the city of Parowan. He was later appointed probate judge of Iron co., and elected a member of the territorial legislature, holding the former position at the time of the massacre.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 572]

  

CHAPTER XXI.
 POLITICAL, SOCIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL.
 1859-1862.

BRIGHAM THREATENED WITH ARREST--THE FEDERAL JUDGES REPROVED--DEPARTURE OF GOVERNOR CUMMING--AND OF THE ARMY OF UTAH--POPULATION OF THE TERRITORY--MORTALITY--WEALTH--INDUSTRIES--PRICES--WAGES--TRADE--SALT LAKE CITY IN 1860--THE TEMPLE BLOCK--SOCIAL GATHERINGS--THEATRICALS--SCIENTIFIC AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS--CHARACTER OF THE POPULATION--CARSON VALLEY--SAN BERNARDINO--SUMMIT COUNTY AND ITS SETTLEMENTS--PURCHASE OF FORT BRIDGER--WASATCH COUNTY--MORGAN COUNTY--CACHE VALLEY--SETTLEMENTS IN SOUTHERN UTAH.

    During the disputes between Governor Cumming and General Johnston, the latter being aided, as we have seen, by the federal judges, there was constant fear that the troops would come into collision with the territorial militia. Though the Mormon authorities had no cause for complaint as to the conduct of the soldiery, they regarded their presence as a menace, and condemned the proceedings of the general and the judges as a personal insult to the governor.

After the arrival of the army, Brigham never appeared in public without a body-guard of his own intimate friends; [*1] and for many months he attended no public assemblies. At the door of his residence sentries kept watch by day, and at night a strong guard was stationed within its walls. Nor were these precautions unnecessary. About the end of March 1859 a writ was issued for his apprehension on a groundless charge of complicity in forging notes on

[p. 573]

the United States treasury. [*2] The officers deputed to make the arrest repaired to the governor's quarters and besought his cooperation, but were promptly refused, Cumming protesting against the measure as an unjustifiable outrage, [*3] whereupon they returned in discomfiture to Camp Floyd.

    But the trouble was not yet ended. In May, Judge Sinclair was to open his court at Salt Lake City, and threatened to station there a detachment of troops. On Sunday the 17th of April it was reported that two regiments were on their way to the city for the purpose of making arrests, whereat General Wells at once ordered out the militia, and within a few hours five thousand men were under arms. [*4] It was now expected

[p. 574]

and almost hoped that the Nauvoo legion would measure its strength with the army of Utah, but by a little timely forbearance on both sides the threatened encounter was averted. Soon afterward the judges were instructed as to their duty in an official letter from the attorney-general, and were ordered to confine themselves within their official sphere, which was to try causes, and not to intermeddle with the movements of the troops--the latter responsibility resting only with the governor. "In a territory like Utah," he remarked, "the person who exercises this power can make war and peace when he pleases, and holds in his hands the issues of life and death for thousands. Surely it was not intended to clothe each one of the judges, as well as the marshal and all his deputies, with this tremendous authority. Especially does this construction seem erroneous when we reflect that these different officers might make requisitions conflicting with one another, and all of them crossing the path of the governor." [*5] The judges were superseded a few months later; [*6] and thus the matter was finally set at rest, the action of the governor being sustained, although he became so unpopular with the cabinet that for a time his removal was also under consideration. [*7] Though his resignation was not demanded,

[p. 575]

he set forth from Salt Lake City in May 1861, about two months before his term of office expired. He had entered that city amid a forced display of welcome, but he left it with the sincere regrets of a people whose hearts he had won by kind treatment. [*8]

    In 1860 most of the troops were removed to Mexico and Arizona, and about a year later, war between north and south being then almost a certainty, the remainder of the army was ordered to the eastern states. The government stores at Camp Floyd, valued at $4,000,000, were sold at extremely low prices, greatly to the relief of the saints, who could now purchase provisions, clothing, wagons, live-stock, and other articles of which they were in need, at their own rates. Flour, which had cost the nation $570 per ton, sold for less than $11 per ton, and other stores in the same proportion; the entire proceeds of the sale did not exceed $100,000, or little more than two per cent of the outlay; and of this sum $40,000 was contributed by Brigham. [*9]

    At the sale at Camp Floyd some of the leading

[p. 576]

merchants of Salt Lake City laid the basis of their fortunes; to the rest of the community its main benefit was that it gave them a good supply of warm clothing at cheap rates. For years afterward the members of the Nauvoo legion were attired in military uniforms, which now took the place of the sombre gray clothing that the saints were accustomed to wear. The ammunition and spare arms were destroyed, some of the cannon being exploded and others thrown into wells, though the latter were recovered by the Mormons, and are still used on the 4th and 24th of July, and other of their festivities. [*10]

    We have now arrived at a period in the history of Utah when it may be of interest to give a brief description of the industrial and social condition of the Mormons. Between the years 1850 and 1862 they had increased in number from 11,380 to about 65,000, a gain that has seldom been equalled in any of the states or territories of the republic. [*11] They were a very healthy community, the number of deaths recorded in the census report for the year ending June 1860 being little more than nine per thousand, [*12] though this is doubtless a mistake, the actual death rate being probably at least twelve per thousand. [*13] Of the mortality,

[p. 577]

about twenty-six per cent occurred among infants, [*14] the most prominent diseases among adults being consumption and enteriris. It is worthy of note that up to this date there occurred in the territory but one case of suicide among the Mormons. [*15] There was little pauperism in their midst, and there was little crime, or such crime as was punished by imprisonment. [*16]

    The saints were now a fairly prosperous community. The value of their real and personal property was reported in 1860 at $5,596,118, of improved farm lands at $1,333,355, of farming implements $242,889, of live-stock $1,516,707, and of manufactures $900,153. To these figures about 50 per cent must be added in order to obtain the actual value. Among the list of premiums bestowed in this year by the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, [*17] we find prizes and diplomas awarded for agricultural and gardening implements of all kinds, for steam-engines and fire-engines, for leathern manufactures of every description from heavy harness to ladies' kid boots of many

[p. 578]

buttons, for woollen and cotton goods, including carpets, blankets, flannels, jeans, linseys, kerseys, and cassimeres, for many articles of furniture, and for the most needed articles of cutlery and hardware. [*18]

    The prices of most necessaries of life were moderate throughout the territory, but on account of high freights--averaging from the eastern states about $28 and from the Pacific seaboard $50 to $60 per ton--imported commodities were inordinately dear. [*19] The cost of luxuries mattered but little, however, to a community that subsisted mainly on the fruits and vegetables of their own gardens, and the bread, milk, and butter produced on their own farms.

    Wages were somewhat high at this period, common laborers receiving $2 per day and domestic servants $30 to $40 per month. Lumbermen, wood-choppers, brick-makers, masons, carpenters, plasterers, and painters were in demand at good rates; though until 1857, and perhaps for a year or two later, their hire was usually paid in kind, as there was still but little money in circulation. Thus, a mechanic might be required to receive his wages in hats, boots, or clothing, whether he needed such articles or not, and must probably submit to a heavy discount in disposing of his wares for cash or for such goods as he might require. Some commodities, however, among which were flour, sugar, coffee, and butter, could usually be sold at their par value, and some could not even be bought for cash in large quantities. Most of the stores divided their stock into two classes of wares, which they termed cash-goods and shelf-goods, and the tradesman objected to sell any considerable amount of the former unless he disposed, at the same time, of a portion of

[p. 579]

the latter. If, for instance, one should tender $50 for a bag of sugar without offering to make other purchases, the store-keeper would probably refuse; "for," he would argue, "if I sell all my cash-goods for cash, without also getting rid of my shelf-goods, I shall not be able to dispose of the latter for cash at all. I must dole out the one with care that I may be able to get rid of the other." [*20]

    In some of the shop windows on Main Street were displayed costly imported commodities--silks, velvets, and shawls of diverse pattern, jewelry, laces, and millinery; [*21] near by were less pretentious stores, where home-made and second-hand articles were retailed. In some of the latter might be seen a curious collection of dilapidated merchandise, and people almost as singular as the wares over which they chaffered. Here was a group of women holding solemn conclave over a superannuated gown that to other eyes would seem worthless; there a sister in faded garb cheapening a well-battered bonnet of Parisian make that had already served as covering and ornament for half a dozen heads.

    Approaching Zion from the direction of Fort Bridger, after days of travel through sage-brush and buffalo-grass, the traveller would observe that within a score of leagues from Salt Lake City nature's barrenness began to succumb to the marvellous energy of the saints. The canons had been converted by irrigation into fertile lands, whose emerald tint soothed the eye wearied with the leaden monotony of the desert landscape.

[p. 580]

[paragraph continues] The fields were billowing with grain, the cattle sleek and thriving, the barns well filled, the windmills buzzing merrily. Nevertheless, among these smiling settlements a painful deficiency might be noticed. Everything that industry and thrift could accomplish had been done for the farm, but nothing for the home. Between the houses of the poor and the rich there was little difference, except that one was of logs and the other of boards. Both seemed like mere enclosures in which to eat and sleep, and

Click to enlarge
SALT LAKE CITY IN 1860.

around neither was there any sign that the inmates took a pride in their home. One might pass three dwellings enclosed by a common fence, and belonging to one master, but nowhere could be seen any of those simple embellishments that cost so little and mean so much--the cultivated garden plat, the row of shade trees, the rose-bush at the doorway, or the trellised creeper at the porch.

    The city itself wore a different aspect. The streets,

[p. 581]

though unpaved and without sidewalks, were lined with cotton-wood and locust trees, acacias, and poplars. Most of the private houses were still of wood or adobe, some few only being of stone, and none pretentious as to architecture; but nearly all were surrounded with gardens in which fruit and shade trees were plentiful. Many of them were of the same pattern, barn-shaped, with wings and tiny casements, for glass was not yet manufactured by the Mormons. A few of the better class were built on a foundation of sandstone, and somewhat in the shape of a bungalow, with trellised verandas, and low flat roofs supported by pillars. Those of the poor were small hut-like buildings, most of them one-storied, and some with several entrances. At this date the entire city, except on its southern side, was enclosed by a wall some ten or twelve feet high, with semi-bastions placed at half musket-range, and pierced here and there with gateways. [*22]

    In driving through the suburbs the visitor would find the thoroughfares in bad condition, dusty in summer, and in winter filled with viscid mud. On either side were posts and rails, which, as the heart of the city was approached, gave way to neat fences of palings. On Main Street were the abodes of some of the leading Mormon dignitaries and the stores of prominent gentile merchants. On the eastern side, nearly opposite the post-office, and next door to a small structure that served for bath-house and bakery, stood the principal hostelry, the Salt Lake House, a large pent-roofed building, in front of which was a veranda supported by painted posts, and a sign-board swinging from a tall flag-staff. Here fair accommodation

[p. 582]

could be had at very moderate charges. [*23] Even in its business portion, Main Street had at this date many vacant lots, being then in the embryo condition through which all cities must pass, the log building standing side by side with the adobe hut and the stone or brick store, with here and there a few shanties, relics of the days of 1848.

    Among the principal attractions was the temple block, surrounded in 1860 with a wall of red sandstone, on which were placed layers of adobe, fashioned in imitation of some richer substance, and raising it to a height of ten feet. On each face of the wall were thirty pilasters, also of adobe, protected by sandstone copings, but without pedestals or entablatures. Up to the year 1860 the cost of the wall and the foundations of the edifice already amounted to $1,000,000, a sum equal to the entire outlay on the temple at Nauvoo. The block was consecrated on the 3d of February, 1853, and the corner-stones laid with imposing ceremonies on the 6th of the following April. [*24] In August 1860, the foundations, which were sixteen feet deep and of gray granite, had been completed, but no further progress had been made. I shall reserve until later a description of the building as it now stands. Of the tabernacle which occupied the southwest corner of the block, and the bowery immediately north of the tabernacle, mention has already been made. [*25] In the north-west corner, and separated from

[p. 583]

the tabernacle by a high fence, stood the endowment house, [*26] where, as evil-minded gentiles declared, human sacrifices were offered. The ceremonies that actually took place within its walls have been described elsewhere in this volume.

    In the blocks adjacent to the tabernacle were the residences of Brigham, Heber, Orson Hyde, George A. Smith, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and Daniel H. Wells, the first two occupying entire blocks. [*27] South of temple block was the council-house, [*28] south of Brigham's dwelling and adjoining that of Wells was the historian's office, where the church records were kept, and in the next plat to the east was the social hall, [*29] where the fashion of the city held festivities.

    Balls held at the social hall were extremely select, and sometimes a little expensive, tickets for the more pretentious fetes costing ten dollars for each couple, and the invitations, which were difficult to obtain even at that price, [*30] being issued on embossed and bordered

[p. 584]

paper. Dancing commenced about four P.M., the president of the church pronouncing a blessing with uplifted hands, and then leading off the first cotillon. All joined vigorously in the dance, and the prophet, his apostles, and bishops set the example, the saltations not being in the languid gliding pace then fashionable in other cities, but elaborately executed steps requiring severe muscular exercise. At eight came supper, a substantial repast, with four courses, [*31] after which dancing was resumed, varied at intervals with song until four or five o'clock in the morning, when the party broke up, the entertainment closing with prayer and benediction.

    Besides these fashionable gatherings held from time to time by the elite of Zion, there were ward parties, elders' cotillon parties, and picnic parties, the last being sometimes held at the social hall, where rich and poor assembled, bringing with them their children, and setting their own tables, or ordering dainties from an adjoining kitchen provided for that purpose. Here, also, until 1862, when the first theatre was built, theatrical entertainments were given in winter, [*32] and these of no mean order, for among the Mormons there was no lack of amateur talent. [*33] Among those who participated

[p. 585]

were several of the wives and daughters of Brigham. [*34] All the actors attended rehearsal each night in the week, except on Wednesdays and Saturdays, when the performances took place; most of them found their own costumes, and none received any fixed remuneration. [*35]

    While the amusements of the people were thus cared for, there was no lack of more solid entertainment. All had access to the public library under proper restrictions, and in the council-house was opened, in 1853, the first reading-room, which was supplied with newspapers and magazines from all parts of the world. Among the scientific associations may be mentioned the Universal Scientific Society, established in 1854, with Wilford Woodruff as president, and the Polysophical Society, over which Lorenzo Snow presided. [*36] The musical talent of Salt Lake City formed themselves, in 1855, into the Deseret Philharmonic Society, and in June of that year a music hall was in course of construction. [*37] In the same

[p. 586]

year the Deseret Theological Institute was organized, its purpose being to make known the principles of light and truth which its members claimed to have received from the priesthood, in the belief that "the science of theology embraces a knowledge of all intelligence, whether in heaven or on the earth, moral, scientific, literary, or religious"!

    Prominent among the charitable associations was the Relief Society, originally organized by Joseph Smith at Nauvoo in 1842, and discontinued after his assassination until 1855, when it was reestablished in Salt Lake City. After that date its operations gradually extended from ward to ward and from settlement to settlement, until it became a powerful influence for good throughout the land. Its main purpose was the relief of the poor, and by its efforts it prevented the necessity for poor-houses, which are still unknown among the latter-day saints, and otherwise it rendered good service--by educating orphans, by promoting home industries, and by giving tone and character to society through its moral and social influence. [*38]

 

    To the student of humanity there were few richer fields for study than could be found at this period in the Mormon capital, where almost every state in the union and every nation in Europe had its representatives. There were to be seen side by side the tall, sinewy Norwegian, fresh from his pine forests, the phlegmatic Dane, the stolid, practical German, the dapper, quick-minded Frenchman, the clumsy, dogmatic Englishman, and the shrewd, versatile American. So little did the emigrants know of the land in which their lot was cast that some of them, while crossing the plains, were not aware that they trod on American soil, and others cast away their blankets and warm clothing, under the impression that perpetual summer reigned in Zion. A few years' residence

[p. 587]

in the land of the saints accomplishes a wonderful change, the contrast in mien and physique between the recruits and the older settlers being very strongly marked. Especially is this the case among the women. "I could not but observe in those born hereabouts," writes an English traveller in 1860, "the noble, regular features, the lofty, thoughtful brow, the clear, transparent complexion, the long, silky hair, and, greatest charm of all, the soft smile of the American woman when she does smile." [*39]

    Much has been said about race deterioration arising

[p. 588]

from polygamous unions. It has never been shown that physical development suffers from the polygamous system, especially when regulated by religion, as in the case of the Mormons. The children of saints are much like other children. In the streets of the capital, however, during the period under review, might be seen youths of eighteen or twenty, some of them the children of church dignitaries, whose highest ambition was satisfied when they could ride through the streets, hallooing and shouting, fantastically attired in fringed and embroidered buckskin leggings, gaudily colored shirt, and slouched hat, and with the orthodox revolver and bowie-knife conspicuously displayed. [*40] They resembled somewhat the cow-boy of the present day; but their presence was barely felt amid this staid and order-loving community, [*41] the forwardness of the second generation of the saints being attributed, not without show of reason, to the corrupting influence of the gentiles.

    In order to estimate fairly the character of the population of Salt Lake City, which numbered in 1860 about 14,000, [*42] the visitor should attend the bowery or tabernacle, where according to the season of the year about 3,000 of the populace assembled on Sunday. The men appeared, in warm weather, without coats and with open vests, but always in decent and cleanly garb, most of them being clad in gray tweed, though some of the elders and dignitaries wore black broadcloth. [*43] The women wore silks, woollen stuffs,

[p. 589]

or calicoes, as they were able to afford, usually of plain pattern and dark color, though a few were dressed in gaudy attire, and with a little faded finery. [*44] The congregation was seated on long rows of benches opposite the platform, from which they were separated by the space allotted to the orchestra, then consisting of a violin and bass viol, vocal music being rendered by two female and four male singers. The oratory was somewhat of the Boanerges stamp, and contained much round abuse of the gentiles; but looking at the audience, which consisted, in the main, of a thriving, contented, and industrious class of people, light-hearted and ever ready to laugh at the somewhat broad jokes of the church dignitaries, it was impossible to believe all the hard things spoken and written of them by their enemies. Moreover, about one third of the population consisted at this date of emigrants from Great Britain, and at least two fifths were foreigners of other nationalities, most of them Danes, Swedes, or Norwegians. They were fair types of their race, and it is not very probable

[p. 590]

that they had so quickly changed their national characteristics as already to forfeit the good opinion of their fellow-men.

    Such was Zion in 1860, and such its population. Of the progress and condition of other settlements established soon after the Mormon occupation, and the founding of which has already been mentioned, I shall have occasion to speak later. During the thirteen years that had now elapsed since first they entered the valley, the saints had pushed forward their colonies in all directions almost to the verge of their territory. Especially was this the case toward the west, where, at an early date, they came into antagonism with settlers from California. In 1850 a few persons from that state had settled in Carson valley for trading purposes, the migration of gold-seekers, some of whom wintered in that region, being then very considerable. During the following year several Mormons entered the valley, John Reese, who arrived there in the spring with thirteen wagon-loads of provisions, building the first house, known for several years as the Mormon station, on the site of the present village of Genoa. [*45] Reese first came to the valley alone, his nearest neighbor, James Fennimore, living in Gold Canon, some twenty-five miles distant, in a "dug-out," or hole scooped out of the bank, the front part covered in this instance with rags and strips of canvas, the man being thriftless and a dram-drinker. He was nicknamed Virginia, and after him was named the city whence more bullion has been shipped in a single year than would now replace the floating capital of the states of California and Nevada. [*46]

[p. 591]

    By an act of the Utah legislature, approved January 17, 1854, the limits of Carson county were defined, [*47] and the governor was authorized to appoint for it a probate judge whose duty it should be to organize the county, by dividing it into precincts, holding an election, filling the various offices, and locating the county seat. The choice fell on Orson Hyde, who with Judge Styles, the United States marshal, and an escort of thirty-five men, reached the settlement of John Reese in June 1855, other parties of Mormons arriving during this and the following year. Meanwhile miners, farmers, and herdsmen from California and the Atlantic states had settled in the valley and elsewhere on the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada in such numbers as to alarm the Mormons, who now desired them to leave the territory. This they refused to do, and some pretended fears of a resort to force. The gentiles fortified themselves, and assumed an aggressive attitude, and for two weeks the opposing forces were en-camped almost within sight of each other, but without coming to blows. News of the disturbance reached the mining camps on the other side of the mountains, and numbers prepared to go in aid of their comrades. The aggressors now feared that they would be themselves expelled from the country, and proposed a truce, under which all should be allowed to remain on their lands.

    As soon as the matter became known to the authorities, the county organization was repealed, the probate judge recalled, and the records, which contained several criminal indictments of a serious

[p. 592]

nature, [*48] were removed to Salt Lake City. When news arrived of the approach of the army of Utah, the Carson Mormons were ordered, as we have seen, to return to Zion and aid in its defence, though a few remained in the valley. In 1859 the gentile inhabitants, after several fruitless appeals to congress, formally declared their independence, [*49] and demanded admission as a territory. Two years later the request was granted, and the territory of Nevada was cut off from Utah, its eastern limit being fixed at the thirty-ninth meridian, but extended by act of 1862 to the thirty-eighth, and by act of 1866 to the thirty-seventh meridian. Reluctantly the Mormons relinquished these portions of the public domain.

    In Eagle and Washoe valleys they had also established small settlements in 1854 and 1855, remaining until recalled in 1857, at which latter date, as will be remembered, the colony at San Bernardino in California was also abandoned. During the Mormon occupation the county of San Bernardino was cut off from that of Los Angeles, the former assuming its proportion of the liabilities. A city was built, with substantial dwellings, saw and grist mills, and surrounded

[p. 593]

with thriving farms; [*50] a road was constructed as far as the timber belt in the neighboring mountains, each man working incessantly until it was completed, and all this was accomplished without incurring debt, a small balance remaining in the county treasury when the settlers were ordered by Brigham to Salt Lake City. [*51]

    Of Elder Samuel Brannan's party which arrived in San Francisco, as will be remembered, in the summer of 1846, mention is made in connection with my History of California. [*52] During this year, a settlement named New Hope was founded by a portion of the company on the north bank of the Stanislaus River, near its junction with the San Joaquin, but was abandoned when news was received that the brethren had resolved to remain in the valley of Great Salt Lake. Most of the Mormons still remained, however, in California, betaking themselves to farming and lumbering until the time of the gold discovery, when they gathered at the mines on Mormon Island. Between 1848 and 1850 about a hundred and forty of them found their way to Utah; the remainder cast in their lot with the gentiles, and most of them, among whom was their leader, apostatized, though a few afterward joined the Mormon communities at San Bernardino and in Arizona. [*53]

[p. 594]

    Within the territory of Utah many new colonies were established. In 1853 the first settlement was made in Summit county by one Samuel Snider, who built a number of sawmills in Parley Park. In 1861 the county was organized, and soon became noted for

Click to enlarge
PRINCIPAL SETTLEMENTS IN 1862.

its mineral resources, among them being gold, silver, lead, copper, coal, iron, and mica. Its coal-fields first

[p. 595]

brought it into prominence, and to aid in their development a short line of railroad was built, [*54] but afterward dismantled and abandoned. Coalville, the present county seat, was first settled in 1859. [*55] In 1858 the site of the present town of Kamas was occupied as a grazing ground by Thomas Rhoads, and was then known as Rhoads Valley. Two years later a few families settled there, and in 1862 a ward was organized, with William G. Russell as presiding elder. [*56]

    About seven miles north-west of Kamas, and on the east bank of the Weber, the village of Peoa was founded in 1860 by a party of ten settlers. [*57]

    In 1853 Fort Bridger, with its Mexican grant of thirty square miles of land, on which stood a few cabins, was sold for $8,000 to the Mormons, [*58] who during the following year expended an equal sum in improvements. This was the first property owned by the saints in Green River county. At Fort Supply, in this neighborhood, a settlement was formed about the same time by John Nebeker, Isaac Bullock, and about fifty others from Salt Lake and Utah counties. In 1862 the first settlement was made in Wasatch county, south of Green River and Summit counties, on the site of the present village of Wallsburg. [*59] Situated for the most part at an elevation of about seven thousand feet, with a heavy snow-fall and prolific of streams, this section of the territory was and is yet mainly used for stock-ranges, though in the

[p. 596]

north-western portion there is farming land of good quality.

    Morgan county, west of Summit, was named after Jedediah Morgan Grant, who with Thomas J. Thurston and others first occupied it in the spring of 1855. In 1862 it was organized, the county seat, Morgan City, being incorporated six years later. The village of Milton was settled by Thurston in 1856, and Enterprise, which together with Morgan is now on the line of the Union Pacific, in 1862.

    In 1856 a party of six brethren settled in Cache Valley on the site of the present town of Wellsville, Cache county, north of Weber, being organized during the following year. Except toward the north, the valley is surrounded by mountains, on which the snow lingers late into autumn, thus affording water for irrigation throughout the year. Though the first attempt at agriculture resulted in failure on account of the severity of the climate, excellent crops were afterward raised, and soon this section became known as the granary of Utah. Amid the ranges are vast belts of timber, so dense that there are places where the sunlight never penetrates, and where the foot of man has never trod. Minerals are also abundant, though little utilized at present. During the year 1856 a fort was built at Wellsville, the site of the town being laid out in 1862, when a hundred and fifty families were gathered there. [*60] Logan City, about six miles north of Wellsville, and the capital of Cache county, was located by Peter Maughan in the spring of 1859, the spot being selected on account of its rich soil and pasture, and the ample water power afforded by the Logan River. The first settlers drew lots for their

[p. 597]

land, [*61] and in 1860 the site was surveyed, the city being divided into four wards in 1861, and incorporated five years later. About five miles to the west of Wellsville the settlement of Mendon was commenced in 1857, [*62] the settlers removing to Wellsville in the winter of 1858-59 for protection against Indians, and returning the following year in greater number. The first buildings were of logs, with roofs and floors of mud, timber being scarce in that neighborhood. [*63]

    In 1859 Seth and Robert Langton, Robert and John Thornley, travelled northward from Salt Lake City in search of an agricultural site. Arriving at Summit creek, they settled within half a mile of the present town of Smithfield, Cache county. In November the settlement was organized as a ward, with John G. Smith as bishop, and in March 1860 a survey was begun. A few weeks later troubles arose with the Indians, [*64] compelling the settlers to build and take refuge in a fort, in which they remained until late in the following year. At the close of 1861 there were in operation a lumber-mill, a molasses-mill, and a tannery, [*65] and the town had then been laid out in its present form. Other settlements in Cache county were Hyde Park, five miles north of Logan, and now on the line of the Utah and northern railroad, where, in 1860, sixteen families were gathered; [*66] Providence, two miles south of Logan,

[p. 598]

where the first settlers [*67] took up their abode in April 1859; Millville, two miles farther south, located in June 1860; [*68] Paradise, at the southern extremity of the valley, containing in 1861 about thirty inhabitants, [*69] and Hyrum, settled in 1860 by about twenty families. [*70]

    Thus far the progress of Mormon colonization in the north, east, and west. Toward the south, the first settlement in Beaver county, between Millard and Iron counties, dates from 1856, at which time Simeon F. Howd, James P. Anderson, and Wilson G. Mowers arrived in Beaver Valley, commenced to build a log cabin, and made preparations for farming and stock-raising. Soon afterward they were joined by others, making in all some thirty or forty families, and in the spring of 1858 the site of Beaver City was laid out. [*71] The appearance of the valley was not inviting. Situated at an altitude of 6,500 feet, frosty and barren, its surface covered in parts with sage-brush and its soil everywhere impregnated with alkali, it was at first considered unfit for occupation. Its main attraction was the volume of water afforded by Beaver River, which courses through the valley from east to west, its source being at an altitude

[p. 599]

of nearly twelve thousand feet. Within recent years, as we shall presently see, this district has proved itself rich in minerals. Next in importance to Beaver City, and about twenty miles to the southwest, was Minersville, first settled in 1859, with J. H. Rollins as bishop of the ward.

    The principal settlement in Kane county, which lay south of Iron and east of Washington county, and at one time included a portion of the latter, was Virgin City, founded in 1858, on the upper Virgin River. [*72] Its site is in a valley about seven miles in width, and enclosed by mountains, their foothills, seamed and broken by the rains, leaving but a narrow margin for cultivation on the banks of the stream, covered with a dense growth of cotton-woods and an undergrowth of sage and rabbit brush. Five or six miles west of Virgin City was the town of Toquerville, established in 1858 by several families front Cedar City. [*73]

    In 1854 Jacob Hamblin and two others were sent as missionaries to the Lamanites in the valley of the Virgin and Santa Clara rivers in Washington county, with orders to establish a settlement in that neighborhood. They found the Indians peaceably disposed, and in a measure civilized, many of them being engaged in planting corn, wheat, and squashes, but depending mainly for bread on the seeds of wild grasses. [*74]

[p. 600]

[paragraph continues] In 1857 other missionaries joined the party, together with a number of families from Salt Lake City, and in May of this year a settlement was formed, to which was given the name of Washington.

    In October 1861 three hundred of the saints, under the direction of Orson Pratt and Erastus Snow, were ordered to proceed to this district, and build a city, to be named St George, near the junction of the Virgin and Santa Clara rivers in Washington county. In January 1862 a site was selected and surveyed, the city incorporated, [*75] though yet unbuilt, and the people took possession of their lots. Before doing so it was decided by unanimous vote that the first building erected should be a social hall, to be used for educational and other purposes. [*76] In September Brigham visited the settlers, and advised them to build, as soon as possible, a substantial, commodious, and well-finished meeting-house, or tabernacle, large enough to seat at least two thousand persons, and one that would be an ornament to their city and a credit to their enterprise. The foundation stones were laid on the 1st of June, 1873, the prophet's birthday, and the building completed eight years later, at a cost of $110,000. Before its settlement, the valley of St George presented a barren appearance, its surface being strongly impregnated with mineral salts, even the bottom-lands of the Virgin and Santa Clara showing large strips of alkaline soil. Its climate was mild, and, with irrigation, crops of many kinds could be raised; but water was scarce, an artesian well sunk in 1862, at a cost of $5,000, being abandoned as a failure, after attaining a depth of more than two hundred feet. [*77] Notwithstanding these drawbacks, the city became

[p. 601]

the county seat of Washington, and is to-day the leading town in southern Utah. [*78]

    Of the counties organized between 1850 and 1852, and the settlements founded therein up to the latter date, mention has already been made. [*79] During the next decade many small villages and towns were located in the older counties, [*80] and I shall describe later

[p. 602]

those that afterward attained prominence. They differed but little in outward appearance from the pioneer settlements in other parts of the United States, except in one particular. Throughout the entire territory, there was rarely to be seen, except in Salt Lake City, a store or a mechanic's sign, traffic being carried on from house to house, and the few extraneous wants of the settlers being mainly supplied by peddlers. [*81]

[p. 603]

[paragraph continues] Nevertheless the traveller who might chance to visit any of the larger settlements in 1862 could purchase, at reasonable rates, all the necessaries of life, and could perhaps supply himself with luxuries, provided he were willing to pay from three to five fold their value. Though there was no indication that trade in its ordinary sense existed among these communities, and one might search in vain for a hotel, or even for a bath-house or a barber's shop, most of the ordinary crafts were represented, and all that was needful could be obtained for money.

Footnotes

^572:1 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 419-20; S. F. Alta, Sept. 29, 1858.

^573:2 Stenhouse says that a counterfeit plate was engraved at S. L. City, resembling the one used by the quartermaster at Camp Floyd for drafts drawn on the assistant U.S. treasurers at New York and St Louis. When the fraud was discovered the culprit turned state's evidence, and testified that a person in the employ of Brigham had furnished the paper. It was supposed that the latter was implicated, and thereupon the writ was issued. Rocky Mountain Saints, 410-11. Cradlebaugh says that the plate was seized by Marshal Dotson, by order of Judge Eckles, and that Brigham afterward obtained judgment against the former for $2,600 damages, the marshal's house being sold to satisfy the judgment. Mormonism, 15. See also Burton's City of the Saints, 507. I find nothing about this matter in the files of the Deseret News; but the fact that the writ was issued is mentioned by Tullidge Hist S. L. City, 228, and in the Hand-book of Reference. 77. Peter K. Dotson, a native of Virginia, came to Salt Lake City in 1851, and was first employed by Brigham as manager of a distillery, afterward becoming express and mail agent. In 1855 he was appointed U.S. marshal for Utah, and in 1857 proceeded to Washington, returning with the army during that year. Dotson's Doings, MS.

^573:3 In a conversation with Stenhouse, the governor stated that, in case of resistance, the wall surrounding Brigham's premises was to be battered down with artillery, and the president taken by force to Camp Floyd. So, at least, said the officers. 'I listened to them, sir as gravely as I could,' continued Cumming, 'and examined their papers. They rubbed their hands and were jubilant; "they had got the dead-wood on Brigham Young." I was indignant, sir, and told them, "By--, gentlemen, you can't do it! When you have to take Brigham Young, gentlemen, you shall have him without creeping through walls. You shall enter by his door with heads erect, as becomes representatives of your government. But till that time, gentlemen, you can't touch Brigham Young while I live.' Rocky Mountain Saints, 411. Wells, Narr., MS., 63-5, states that Brigham attended court, though his followers were very unwilling to allow it, as they feared a repetition of the Carthage-jail tragedy, but that no proceedings were taken against him.

^573:4 A correspondent of the New York Herald, writing from S. L. City, May 23, 1859, says that the governor notified Wells to hold the militia in readiness to resist the troops. A copy of his letter will be found in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 228-30. See also Hand-book of Reference, 77. It is very improbable that Cumming would have taken such an extreme measure, and I find no mention of it in his official despatches, in those of General Johnston, or in the files of the Deseret News. Gen. Wells himself gives the following [p. 574] account of the matter: 'I told Cumming myself that we didn't intend the Carthage scene reinacted, and he knew that we intended to resist the troops, which we did. I went to see Cumming frequently, and talked the matter over with him, and he declared himself that he could not recommend Gov. Young to trust himself to that military mob; but he did say he could not see how bloodshed could be hindered. I told him we would not let them come; that if they did come, they would never get out alive if we could help it. He said he did not know what to do.' 'They knew that if they did come, we were ready for them, and that we were ready to cut off their retreat. It gave us a good deal of trouble, and anxiety as well, to prepare against it, as it occurred at a time when we were putting in our crops.' Narr., MS., 634.

^574:5 Soon after a mass-meeting of gentiles was held at Camp Floyd, at which the judges took a prominent part. An address was drawn up, rehearsing all the crimes imputed to Mormons, stating that they were still disloyal to the government, and censuring the president for his interference.

^574:6 Their successors are mentioned in the next chapter. Cradlebaugh, refusing to recognize the right of the president to remove him, continued in office for a short time, but finding himself unsupported by the government, left Utah and settled in Nevada, whence he was twice sent as delegate to congress. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 75-6.

^574:7 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 413; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 233. [p. 575] Both these authorities claim that Cumming was aided by Col Kane, who about this time delivered a lecture before the historical society of New York on the situation of Utah, in which he spoke of Cumming as a clear-headed, resolute, but prudent executive, and the very man for the trying position. Stenhouse was present at the lecture as reporter for the New York Herald, and notices of it were widely published throughout the country.

^575:8 Before his departure the citizens desired to show their respect by some public demonstration, but this he declined, slipping away so quietly that his departure was not known until it was published in the Deseret News of May 22d. His conduct received the approval of the territorial legislature. Utah Jour. Legisl., 1860-1, p. 161.

    Gov. Cumming was a native of Georgia, his wife being the daughter of a prominent Boston physician, and an accomplished lady. In 1830 he was mayor of Augusta, Ga, and during the cholera epidemic of that year used his utmost effort to save the lives of the citizens. During a portion of the Mexican war he was attached to the staff of Gen. Scott, and was afterward appointed by government to visit several Indian tribes in the far west. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 75.

^575:9 Through his business agent, H. B. Clawson. As Horace Greeley remarks in his Overland Jour., 254, the live-stock would have brought much better prices had it been driven to California, or even to Fort Leavenworth. He states that, in 1859, 30,000 bushels of corn, which could have been bought in Utah for $2 per bushel, were sent from the eastern states at a cost of more than $11 per bushel. Greeley visited the territory in this year, but his observations, apart from his account of an interview with Brigham, already mentioned, contain little of historical value. His reception at S. L. City is described in the Deseret News, July 20, 1859.

^576:10 For descriptions of public festivities, between 1855 and 1865, see Deseret News, Jan. 4, July 18, 1855; July 9, 30, Aug. 6, 1856; July 8, 15, 22, 1857; July 11, Aug. 1, 1860; July 10, 1861; July 9, 30, 1862; July 8, 1863; July 6, 20, 27, 1864; July 5, Aug. 5, 1865; Tullidge's Life of Young; 247-9, Burton's City of the Saints, 424-5; S. F. Alta, Sept. 10, 1856; S. F. Bulletin, Dec. 2, 1858; Sac. Union, July 11, 1861. A thanksgiving proclamation issued by Gov. Harding in 1862 was ignored throughout the territory. 'The non-observance of this thanksgiving day,' remarks Tullidge, 'brought Stephen S. Harding to the full realization of the fact that, though he was governor of Utah, Brigham Young was governor of the Mormon people.'

^576:11 I have already mentioned that the census report for 1860 gives the population at only a little over 40,000, and stated my reasons for supposing this to be an error. Beadle says that a judge who travelled extensively throughout the territory about 1864-5 estimated it at 85,000, and thinks the judge's estimate too low. He himself places it, in 1867, at 100,000. Life in Utah, 483. Bowles, Our New West, about the same date, at 100,000 to 125,000. See also S. F. Herald, Jan. 30, 1861; Sac. Union, Feb. 11, 1860. In the census of 1870 the population is given at 86,786.

^576:12 U.S. Census Rept, for 1860, li. 43. The total number of deaths reported is 374.

^576:13 For the year ending June 1, 1850, it was about 22 per 1,000, the rate [p. 577] being then greater on account of the hardships and exposure incidental to new settlements. The following extracts from the sanitary report of Assistant-surgeon Robert Bartholow of Utah terr., dated Sept. 1858, and published in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., xiii. 301-2, may serve as a specimen of the prejudice of U.S. officials on matters relating to the territory, and help to account for their blunders: 'The Mormon, of all the animals now walking this globe, is the most curious in every relation.' 'Isolated in the narrow valleys of Utah, and practising the rites of a religion grossly material, of which polygamy is the main element and cohesive force, the Mormons have arrived at a physical and mental condition, in a few years of growth, such as densely populated communities in the older parts of the world, hereditary victims of all the vices of civilization, have been ages in reaching. If Mormonism received no addition from outside sources, these influences continuing, it is not difficult to see that it would eventually die out.'

^577:14 From cholera infantum 4, croup 23, infantile 57, measles 1, scarlatina 2, teething 11. Id. 43.

^577:15 After the railroad connected the territory with the Altantic and Pacific states, suicides became not infrequent.

^577:16 In Compend. Ninth Census, 533, the table of pauperism and crime shows only one person receiving support as a pauper, and eight criminals. At the time of Burton's visit, in 1860, there were only six prisoners in the penitentiary at S. L. City, of whom two were Indians. City of the Saints, 329. In the Deseret News of June 18, 1856, it is stated, however, that there were many beggars among the women and children.

^577:17 Incorporated by act approved Jan. 17, 1856, 'with a view of promoting the arts of domestic industry, and to encourage the production of articles from the native elements in this territory.' A copy of it will be found in Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 111.

^578:18 For list of premiums and diplomas, see Burton's City of the Saints, 384-7.

^578:19 From the list of prices-current at the tithing-office in 1860, we learn that cereals were rated in Salt Lake City at $1.50 per bushel, butcher's meat at 3 to 12 1/2 cents per pound, chickens and ducks at 10 to 25 cents each, eggs at 18 cents per dozen, milk at 10 cents per quart, and butter at 25 cents per pound; but sugar worth in New York about 6 cents per pound cost in Utah 35 to 60 cents, while tea ranged in price from $1.50 to $3.50, and coffee from 40 to 60 cents per pound, or at least fivefold their cost in the Atlantic states.

^579:20 William Chandless, who visited Salt Lake City in the winter of 1855-6, states that, if one wanted to sell anything, he could get nothing for it, because of the scarcity of money; while if an offer were made to buy the same article for cash, a very high price must be paid on account of the rarity of the article. Visit to S. L. City, 223. For many years afterward, this system of traffic prevailed in a measure. Thus, in the Deseret News of Feb. 22, 1860, J. C. Little advertises that he will exchange his store of furniture for wheat and flour; George B. Wallace that he will give five gallons of molasses per cord for wood; and Felt and Allen that they pay cash and store goods for wheat delivered at the Jordan mills.

^579:21 In 1860 there were three milliner's stores, thirteen dry-goods and two variety stores. Burton's City of the Saints, 277-8.

^581:22 Woodruff's Journal, MS.; Richards' Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 28-91 Wells' Narr., MS., 60; Chandless, Visit to S. L., 153; Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 25. The wall was built in 1853. Chandless remarks that for defensive purposes it would be useless, as any one could climb it with ease. Burton, City of the Saints, 245, states that it was built as a defence against Indians, though gentiles said that it was constructed only because the people wanted work. It was of mud mixed with hay and gravel; in 1860 it had already begun to crumble, and in 1883 there were few traces of it remaining.

^582:23 Burton relates that at the time of his visit, in Aug. 1860, the Salt Lake House was kept by a Mr Townsend, a Mormon convert from Maine, who had been expelled from Nauvoo, where he sold his house, land, and furniture, for $50. City of the Saints, 248. His charge for 24 days' board and lodging was $34.25. The bill, which is curiously worded, is given in full in Id., 537. Among its items are '14 Bottle Beer 600' (cents), '2 Bottles Branday 450.'

^582:24 The original plans will be found in the Millennial Star, xvi. 635, and Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 109-10. Those given by Truman O. Angell, the architect, in the Deseret News, Aug. 17, 1854, differ somewhat from the above, but both agree that the edifice was to cover a space of 21,850 sq. feet, or about half an acre. For descriptions of the consecration and laying of the corner-stones, see Woodruff's Journal, MS.; Tucker's Mormonism, 222; Ferris' Utah and the Mormons, 167-9; S. L. City Contributor, iii. 79; Deseret News, Feb. 19, Apr. 16. 1853. Seven thousand four hundred and seventy-eight tons of rock were used for the foundation. Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 81.

^582:25 Burton describes the tabernacle, in 1860, as an adobe building, capable [p. 583] of accommodating 2,000 to 3,000 persons, the interior of which was spanned by an elliptical arch. Over the entrances were carvings in wood, 'representing the sun with his usual coiffure of yellow beams, like a Somali's wig, or the symbol of the Persian empire.' City of the Saints, 270. A few years later the tabernacle was enlarged, and had a seating capacity of 7,000. Utah Notes, MS., 2.

^583:26 Cuts of the tabernacle and endowment house will be found in City of the Saints, facing p. 271.

^583:27 The residences of Young, Kimball, and Wells were on Main St, properly East Temple St, which runs past the temple block. Remy says that one of Brigham's houses was 80 x 40 ft, built of granite and other kinds of stones, with long salient ogives, that adjoining it being the dwelling which he usually occupied. Near by were the governor's offices, the tithing-office, and the court-house. Jour. to S. L. City, i. 193-4. In Id., i. 193-200; Greeley's Overland Jour., 206-7; Atlantic Monthly, iii. 573-5; Schiel, Reise durch Felsengebirge, 100-2, are descriptions of S. L. City about this date.

^583:28 This building, which was begun in 1849, and haa already been described, was afterward destroyed by fire. Nebeker's Early Justice, MS., 3. Except for a small structure used as a post-office, this was the first public building erected in S. L. City. See also Wells' Narr., MS., 42.

^583:29 The opening of the social hall is described in the Deseret News, Jan. 22, 1853. Among other buildings worthy of note were the arsenal, built on the bench north of the city, the penitentiary in the south-eastern suburb, and the hall of seventies on the 'states road.' Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 110; Burton's City of the Saints, 279-80. The court-house was yet unfinished. Atlantic Monthly, iii. 574.

^583:30 They were issued on special occasions only for 75 or 80 guests, including a few of the more prominent gentiles.

^584:31 Copies of the card of invitation and the menu at a 'territorial and civil ball' held at the social hall, Feb. 7, 1860, will be found in Burton's City of the Saints, 231-2. Among the dishes are bear, beaver-tails, slaw, mountain, pioneer, and snowballs. What the names all signify I am unable to state. Otherwise the bill of fare contains a large and choice variety of viands.

^584:32 Cooke's Theatr. and Soc. Affairs in Utah, MS., 9. In summer they were held at the bowery. The S. L. theatre, or as it was usually termed the opera-house, was dedicated March 6th of this year. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 28. A gentleman who visited the city two or three years later states that its interior resembled the opera-house at New York, having seats for 2,500 and capacity for 500 more. Externally the building was a plain but not ungraceful structure of stone, brick, and stucco. Atlantic Monthly, Apr. 1864, p. 490.

^584:33 Among others Burton mentions H. B. Clawson, B. Snow, and W. C. Dunbar. During his stay the 'Lady or Lyons' was performed. City of the Saints, 280. See also Deseret News, March 2, 1864; Busch, Gesch. Morm., 311-12, 330; The Mormons at Home, 149-51. Chandless, who visited the social hall one evening in the winter of 1855-6, when the third act of Othello and a two-act drama were performed, mentions that the parts of Othello and Iago were fairly rendered, but that the other characters were beneath criticism. Desdemona, he says, 'was a tall, masculine female, with cheeks painted beyond the possibility of a blush. Even worse was Emilia--an old dowdy, she looked, who might have been a chambermaid at a third-rate hotel for a quarter of a [p. 585] century...The afterpiece was, on the contrary, very well performed.' Visit to S. Lake, 224.

^585:34 Three of Brigham's daughters, Alice, Emily, and Zina, were on the stage. Hepworth Dixon, who was well acquainted with Alice, the youngest wife of Elder Clawson, says that she remarked to him one day at dinner, 'I am not myself very fond of playing, but my father desires that my sister and myself should act sometimes, as he does not think it right to ask any poor man's child to do anything which his own children would object to do.' New America, 144.

^585:35 Cooke's Theatr. and Soc. Affairs in Utah, MS., 9-10; Stenhouse's Tell It All, 380-1. Mrs Cooke states that the performers often remained at rehearsal until 12 or 1 o'clock, and that after a hard day's work. Occasionally a benefit was given to the lady actors, and the proceeds divided among them. Her share during the twelve years that she played amounted to $150. In Theatrical and Social Affairs in Utah, by Mrs S. A. Cooke, MS., we have, besides the information which the title-page suggests, a number of items relating to church matters and the workings of polygamy. Mrs Cooke was well acquainted with the wife of Heber C. Kimball, Eliza Snow, and other prominent women among the Mormons. Of English birth, she was for eight years a teacher of music in the city of New York, and in 1852 set forth for California, reaching S. L. City in July, where she purposed to remain only until the following spring, but was converted to Mormonism. For 16 years she was employed as a teacher, among her pupils in Zion being the children of Brigham Young.

^585:36 There was also a horticultural society, organized in connection with the American Pomological Society, and the Deseret Typographical Association formed for the advancement of their art. Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 111.

^585:37 By the members of Capt. Ballo's band. Deseret News, June 27, 1855.

^586:38 In 1880 this society had nearly 300 branches. Snow's Brief Sketch of Organizations, MS., 1-2.

^587:39 Burton's City of the Saints, 278. Burton attributes this improvement in the race to climate. In amusing contrast with Burton's remarks are those of Surgeon Bartholow, who in his sanitary report says: 'It is a curious fact that Mormonism makes its impress upon the countenance,...an expression compounded of sensuality, cunning, suspicion, and a smirking self-conceit. The yellow, sunken, cadaverous visage; the greenish colored eyes; the thick, protuberant lips; the low forehead; the light yellowish hair; and the lank, angular person--constitute an appearance so characteristic of the new race, the production of polygamy, as to distinguish them at a glance. The women of this territory, how fanatical and ignorant soever, recognize their wide departure from the normal standard in all christian countries, and from the degradation of the mother follows that of the child.' Sen. Ex. Doc., 52, 36th Cong. 1st Sess., 302.

    The City of the Saints, and across the Rocky Mountains to California, by Richard F. Burton, London, 1861, ranks among the best of gentile works on Mormonism. Less philosophical than that of Gunnison, it is equally impartial, and gives many details as to the social and industrial condition of the Mormons for which one may search in vain elsewhere. His stay in S. L. City lasted less than four weeks (from Aug. 25 to Sept. 20, 1860), excursions being made during his visit to points of interest in the neighborhood, but he saw more during that time than many others have done in four years. Travelling in company with Lieut Dana of the U.S. artillery, and procuring introductions to Gov. Cumming, Brigham Young, and several of the church dignitaries, he had every opportunity to note the different phases of Mormon life. The first and last portions of the work are taken up with his travels from St Joseph, Mo., to San Francisco, the middle chapters only relating to Utah. In style and tone the writer is sketchy and interesting, good-natured, but somewhat disposed to regard matters in their ludicrous aspect, for which he offers in his preface the excuse--sic me natura fecit.

    A Visit to Salt Lake; being a Journey across the Plains and a Residence in the Mormon Settlements at Utah, by William ChandIess, London, 1857, is the title of a less entertaining and reliable work. As Mr Chandless remarks in his preface, even at that date, 'fictions enough have been written about the Mormons;' but it does not appear that his own work is less fictitious than those of which he complains. There are chapters about religion, government, settlements, morals, institutions, and some that appear to be about nothing in particular, unless it be Mr Chandless. Nevertheless, items of interest may be gleaned from them, as the author made a tour of the principal counties in 1855, and travellers in those parts were rare at this period. After informing us where he slept, and where he dined, and what he had for dinner, he occasionally finds time to tell us something about the condition of the settlements through which he journeyed.

^588:40 Jennings' Mat. Progr. of Utah, MS., 3-4. Mr W. Jennings, ex-mayor of S. L. City, who supplied me with the above MS. in 1884, says that this condition of affairs came to an end when the railroad reached Utah.

^588:41 'There were no lamps in any but Main Street, yet the city is as safe as St James Square, London. There are perhaps not more than 25 or 35 constables or policemen in the whole place.' Burton's City of the Saints, 273. 'The few policemen that have been on duty during the summer were discharged on Monday last.' Deseret News, Sept. 12, 1860.

^588:42 In 1863 Brigham stated its population at 16,000. Atlantic Monthly, Apr. 1864, p. 492; Burton, in 1860, 9,000. City of the Saints, 284; Bowles, in 1865, 25,000 to 30,000. Our New West, 227. The last two are wide of the mark.

^588:43 Before this date Brigham attempted to lead the fashion, appearing in a yellow slouched hat, much too large for his head, green frock-coat, pants [p. XXX] large and loose, and white socks and slippers. His fashion was followed by some of the elders. Ward's Husband in Utah, 34-5. Burton says that the prophet was dressed in gray homespun, and wore a tall steeple-crowned hat, as did most of the elders. Describing one of his addresses, he writes: 'Brigham Young removed his hat, advanced to the end of the tribune, and leaning slightly forward upon both hands, propped on the green baize of the tribune, addressed his followers. The discourse began slowly, word crept titubantly after word, and the opening phrases were hardly audible; but as the orator warmed, his voice rose high and sonorous, and a fluency so remarkable succeeded falter and hesitation, that although the phenomenon is not rare in strong speakers, the latter seemed almost to have been a work of art. The manner was pleasing and animated, and the matter fluent, impromptu, and well turned, spoken rather than preached; if it had a fault, it was rather rambling and disconnected...The gestures were easy and rounded, not without a certain grace, though evidently untaught; one, however, must be excepted, namely that of raising the forefinger...The address was long. God is a mechanic. Mormonism is a great fact. Religion has made him, the speaker, the happiest of men. He was ready to dance like a shaker. At this sentence the prophet, who is a good mimic and has much of the old New English quaint humor, raised his right arm, and gave, to the amusement of the congregation, a droll imitation of Anne Lee's followers.' City of the Saints, 317.

^589:44 For many years after their arrival in the valley the women dressed in homespun linseys, as there was nothing else to wear. At one time Brigham, in order to discourage extravagance, decreed that the men must not dance with women who were dressed in other than homespun garments. Jennings, Mat. Progress, MS., 1.

^590:45 It served as hotel and store, and was a two-story log building, 50 x 30 ft. Reese's Mormon Station, MS.; Taylor's Rem., MS.

^590:46 Reese states that Virginia had a flume in the canon for gold-washing, and that Comstock, who came to Carson Valley in 1856, bought him out, the latter living but a short time afterward. Id., 5. In Jennings' Carson Valley, MS., 3, it is related that Comstock came to the valley in the autumn of 1856, in charge of a herd of sheep, but in a destitute condition. In 1852 Rese was engaged in farming on a considerable scale, selling his produce [p. 591] readily and at high prices to emigrants who, as he says, would pay almost any price for provisions, a small bunch of turnips selling for a dollar. Reese lived later at S. L. City, while S. A. Kinsey, his former partner remained at Genoa. Van Sickles' Utah Desperadoes, MS. Among the earliest settlers were three persons named Lee, and others named Condie and Gibson. Early Hist. Carson Valley, MS., 1. The place was first known as 'the Mormon station,' Genoa being laid out in 1856. Id., 3.

^591:47 It was bounded on the north by Deseret co., east by the 118th meridian, south by the boundary line of Utah, and west by California. Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 261.

^592:48 A letter of James B. Crane, dated Washington, Jan. 17, 1859, and of which copies will be found in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 31-5, and Tucker's Mormonism, 226-9, gives a detailed account of the Carson-valley troubles. The letter, which is somewhat bitter in tone, was written with a view to the admission of Nevada as a territory. Life and property were somewhat insecure in Carson valley about this date, and vigilance committees were constantly on the alert. See Sac. Union, Aug. 26, 1857, June 17, 22, July 2, Aug. 2, Dec. 21, 1858, June 1, 1859, Sept. 24, 1860. On the 14th of June, 1858, William Thorington, better known as 'Lucky Bill,' Luther Olds, William Edwards, and four others were arrested by a party of 30 men, and tried for the murder of a Frenchman named Godier, at Honey Lake. Lucky Bill was hanged, Olds was released on payment of $1,000 fine and promising to leave the valley never to return, and Edwards probably escaped by bribing his captors. The rest were released. Van Sickles' Utah Desperadoes, MS.; Placerville Tri-weekly Register, June 24, 1858; Popular Tribunals, this series.

^592:49 The declaration contains a number of charges against the Mormons, which will be found in Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, i. 493-4. On May 6, 1856, joint resolutions of the California legislature were read in the U.S. senate, setting forth that a large number of settlers in Carson valley had, for good reasons, petitioned congress that this portion of Utah be attached to California, and had asked the cooperation of the California legislature, that the latter body acquiesced, and urged the passage of a law to that effect, Cong. Globe, 1855-6, 1089.

^593:50 Elder Rich, who arrived at S. L. City from San Bernardino in April 1852, reported 1,800 acres in grain, and about 1,000 in vegetables. Deseret News, May l, 1852.

^593:51 Shepherd's Colonizing of San Bernardino, MS. See also letter of Amasa Lyman, in Millennial Star, xiv. 491-2; and extract from N. Y. Herald, in Id., xv. 61; Richards' Hist. Incidents of Utah, MS., 23; S. F. Herald, Aug. 21, 1852; Hughes, in Hastings' Or. and Cal., 96; Utah Scraps, 11.

^593:52 Vol. v., 544-54. On pp. 543-4 (note 35) is a list of the members.

^593:53 Frisbie states that after the gold discovery the Mormons, many of whom had now become wealthy, refused to pay tithes, whereupon Brannan appealed to their sense of duty, but finding them fixed in their resolve, frankly told them they were sensible, and had been damned fools for paying tithes so long. From that time he ceased to be an elder. Rem., 33-4. For further details as to Brannan's party, see Glover's Mormons in Cal., MS., passim; Larkin's Doc., MS., iv. 55; Olvera Doc., MS., 14-15; Larkin's Off: Corresp., MS., ii. 42; Millennial Star, ix. 39-40, 306-7; Times and Seasons, vi., 1126-7. Sutter spoke of them in the highest terms. 'So long as these people have been employed by me,' he says, 'they have behaved very well, and were industrious and faithful laborers.' Hutchings' Cal. Mag., ii. 196. In Jan. 1847 [p. 594] Brannan had established a newspaper styled the Yerba Buena California Star, with the press, type, and fixtures brought from the office of The Prophet, in New York. It was continued until the close of 1848. See Hist. Cal., v. 552, this series. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 12-13. In Feb. 1856 Geo. Q. Cannon commenced the issue in San Francisco of a weekly paper named the Western Standard. It was discontinued in Sept. 1857, when the brethren were recalled to Utah, Id., 14.

^595:54 The Summit County Railroad.

^595:55 By H. B. Wild, A. B. Williams, W. H. Smith, and others. It was incorporated in 1867. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 149. Summit co. was so named from the fact that it included the summit of the Wasatch range. Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 1.

^595:56 The settlers lived in a fort until 1870, when a city survey was made, and they moved out to their lots.

^595:57 The first house was built by Henry Barnum and Jacob M. Truman. Id., 150.

^595:58 The deeds are now in the possession of the church officials at S. L. City. Trans. Wyom. Acad. Sciences, 1882, pp. 81-2. Miles Goodyear, the owner, was married to a sister of the Indian chief Walker. Young's Early Exper., MS., 5.

^595:59 By Wm Wall, E. Garr, and Jas Laird. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 158. In 1866 Wallsburg was organized as a ward.

^596:60 Cache co. was so called from the fact that certain trappers or emigrants cached some goods there as they passed through; Wellsville was named for Gen. Wells. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 4. The first house was built at Wellsville by Peter Maughan, the first saw-mill by Esaias Edwards, Francis Gunnell, and Wm H. Maughan, and the first grist-mill by Dan. Hill & Co. A school-house, which served also for meeting-house, was constructed in 1857. William H. Maughan, in Utah Sketches, MS., 33.

^597:61 The first house was built by W. B. Preston and John and Aaron Thatcher, who have since been the prominent men in Cache Valley. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 332. Hezekiah, the father of the Thatchers, had made money at the mines in California, and was then esteemed the richest man in Utah, next to Brigham. In 1879 his son Moses was ordained an apostle.

^597:62 The first settlers were Wm Gardener and Alex. and Robt Hill. Walter Paul, in Utah Sketches, 41.

^597:63 The first stone dwelling was begun in 1866 by Jos. Baker; others soon followed. Id., 41-2.

^597:64 Caused by their stealing a horse. In a fight which ensued, Ira Merrill of Smithfield and an Indian chief were killed. Another of the settlers was wounded.

^597:65 In 1861 a lumber-mill was completed, and in 1864 a grist-mill. Francis Sharp, in Id., 117.

^597:66 At this date they lived in a fort. The town site was laid out in 1864. Robt Daines, in Id., 120.

^598:67 Ira Rich, John F. Maddison, and five others. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 128.

^598:68 By Ezra T. Benson, P. Maughan, and several others. George O. Pitkin, the present bishop, was appionted March 12, 1862. Ibid.

^598:69 A. M. Montierth from Box Elder co. was the first settler in Paradise. H. C. Jackson built the first saw-mill in 1860, and the first grist-mill in 1864, in which latter year the town site was laid out under the direction of Ezra T. Benson. A log meeting-house was built in 1861. In 1868 the settlement was removed three miles father to the north, for better protection against Indians. Orson Smith, in Utah Sketches, MS., 1-2.

^598:70 Those of Alva Benson, Ira Allen, and others. It is related that the settlers brought the waters of Little Bear River to their farms in 21 working-days, by means of a canal eight feet wide, which afterward furnished the water supply of Hyrum. While at this work many of them lived on bread and water, and their tools consisted only of a few old shovels and spades. Some of them dwelt for several years in holes or cellars dug in the ground.

^598:71 In the winter of 1856-7 the first log school-house was built, but gave place in 1862 to a brick building known as the Beaver Institute. In 1867, also, the first saw-mill was erected on the site now occupied by the cooperative woollen-mills. Jas H. Glines, in Utah Sketches, MS., 18. Beaver city and co. were so named from the beaver dams found there. Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 7.

^599:72 The city was laid out by Nephi Johnson and others. The first school was organized in 1860, and the first meeting-house built in 1861. John Parker, in Id., 8. Kane co. was so named after Col Thos L. Kane. Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 7.

^599:73 Among them was the family of Phillip Klingensmith, of Mountain-Meadows fame. John Steele, in Utah Sketches, MS., 9. Mr Steele went to Southern Utah in 1850, in company with Geo. A. Smith.

^599:74 On account of the warm climate, it was supposed that cotton might be raised in the valley of the Santa Clara. About one quart of cotton-seed was planted in the spring of 1855, yielding enough to produce 30 yards of cloth. The ginning and spinning were done by hand, and the weaving on a treadle-loom. James G. Bleak, in Utah Sketches, MS., 69. In 1857, 30 lbs were planted, but the crop was a failure, the seed being bad. In 1858-9 other experiments were made, the cotton raised the first year costing $3.40 per lb., and the second year $1.90. The industry was found to be unprofitable. Id., 70-1; Jennings' Mat. Progress of Utah, MS., 1. The attempt was made with a view to producing in the territory all that was needed for its population. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 25.

^600:75 By act approved Jan. 17, 1862. See Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), pp. 166-7. It was named St George after Pres. Geo. A. Smith. Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 4.

^600:76 The foundation stone was laid March 22, 1862, and when completed, at a cost of more than $6,000, it was named St George Hall. James G. Bleak, in Utah Sketches, MS., 73-4.

^600:77 The people farmed on the joint enclosure system, the first enclosed field, named the St George, being irrigated by the 'Virgin ditch,' the cost of which between Dec. 1861 and Aug. 1866 was $26,611.59. Id., 76.

^601:78 Other settlements in Washington co. were Santa Clara, on the river of that name, and about five miles north-west of St George, settled in 1853 by Jacob Hamblin and a company of missionaries; Gunlock, founded by W. Hamblin on the Santa Clara, in 1857; Price, occupied in 1858 as a cotton plantation, submerged by the flood of 1861, and reoccupied for general farming purposes in 1863; Harrisburg, twelve miles north-east of St George, settled in 1S60 by Moses Harris and 13 others; Duncan's Retreat, on the north bank of the Virgin, first settled in 1861 by Chapman Duncan, who abandoned it, and resettled by William Theobald and six others; and Shoensburg, also on the Virgin, located in Jan. 1862, by Oliver De Mill and others. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 161-2. In this and other counties, settled between 1852 and 1862, were numerous small settlements, some of which will be mentioned later.

^601:79 See chaps xiii. and xvii., this vol.

^601:80 In 1852 Call's Fort, in Box Elder co., now on the line of the Utah and Northern railway, was built by Anson Call and two others. In 1883 it contained about 35 families. Deseret, near the centre of Millard co., now having a station on the Utah Central, was founded in 1858, abandoned in 1867, and reoccupicd in 1875 by J. S. Black and others. Scipio, in the north-eastern part of the same county was settled in March 1860 by T. F. Robins and six others. Circleville, in what is now Piute co., was settled about the same time, several previous attempts having failed, on account of trouble with Indians. In the same year, also, Fort Gunnison was founded in the south-western part of San Pete co. In 1861 it was organized as a ward, with Jacob Kudger-son as bishop. About 30 miles to the north was Moroni, so called after the prophet of that name in the book of Mormon, located in March 1859 by G. W. Bradley and others, and incorporated in 1866. Fairview, farther to the north, and first known as North Bend, was founded in the winter of 1859-60 by James N. Jones and others, and was incorporated in 1872. Wales, the present terminus of the San Pete railway, was first settled in 1857 by John E. Rees and others, Rees being bishop of the ward in 1883; Fayette, on the west bank of the Sevier, but still in San Pete co., in 1861, by James Bartholomew and four others, Bartholomew being now ward bishop. In Tooele co., St John was founded in 1858 by Luke Johnson, and Lake View in 1860 by Orson Pratt, George Marshall, Moses Martin, and. four others, Martin being the present bishop. In Utah co., Spanish Fork, now on the line of the Utah Central railroad, was incorporated in 1855; Salem, a little to the north-east of Payson, and first known as Pond Town, was founded in 1856 by Robt Durfee and six others; and Goshen, in the south-western part of the county, in the same year by Phineas Cook and a few others. The present site of Goshen was located in 1869 by Brigham, a few miles south of the old settlement. In Weber county, Plain City was located in March 1859 on the Weber River, about nine miles north-west of Ogden, by J. Spiers and a few others; West Weber, a little farther south, about the same date, by Wm McFarland and 14 others; Eden, ten miles north-east of Ogden, in 1860, by John Beddle and Joseph Grover; and Huntsville, twelve miles east of Ogden, in the same year, by Jefferson Hunt and others. Taylor's Rem., MS.; Woodruff's Journal, MS.; Hist. B. Young, MS.; Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 122-65; Utah Sketches, MS., passim; Hand-Book of Reference, 71-8. In July 1855 a settlement was founded on the left bank of the Grand River, in the Elk Mountain region, by Alfred N. Billings. Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 80.

^602:81 Among other works consulted in this chapter are the Route from Liverpool to Great Salt Lake Valley: Illustrated with Steel Engravings and Wood-cuts from Sketches made by Frederick Piercy, together with a Geographical and Historical Description of Utah, and a Map of the Overland Routes to that Territory from the Missouri River. Also an Authentic History of the Latter-Day Saints' Emigration from Europe from the Commencement up to the Close of 1855, with Statistics. Edited by James Linforth. Liverpool and London, 1855. Though this book was written mainly for the purpose of giving a review of the latter-day saints' emigration from Liverpool to Salt Lake City, together with statistics to date, it contains much historical and statistical information on other subjects, drawn, as the editor says, 'from sources far and wide.' Mr Linforth acknowledges that he was assisted in his work by missionaries, whose position and acquaintance with affairs gave him access to many valuable documents. In chap. xvii., we find a description of Nauvoo, of the Carthage-jail tragedy, the persecutions in Missouri and Illinois, and many details concerning the life of the prophet. In chaps xxi.-xxii. is an account of the territory and its settlements, and the industrial condition of the saints. In the last chapters are brief biographies of some of the leading elders. All of this information is contained in notes, the text merely relating the travels of the artists by whom the sketches were made. The engravings are well executed, and among them are portraits of several church dignitaries.

    A Journey to Great Salt Lake City, by Jules Remy and Julius Brenchley, M. A.: With a Sketch of the History, Religion, and Customs of the Mormons, and an introduction on the Religious Movement in the United States, by Jules Remy. 2 vols. London, 1861. In addition to incidents of travel and descriptions of the places visited, we have in these volumes a sketch of Mormon history to 1859, together with chapters on the Mormon church and hierarchy, polygamy, education, and propagandism. At one time it was considered the standard gentile authority on Mormonism, and is freely quoted by other writers, though greatly inferior to Burton's work published two years later. 'The greater part of the matter,' remarks the author, 'was written from day to day, often in the open air, upon the slopes or the crests of mountains, in the heart of deserts, among the occupations and frequently the perils which are the necessary accompaniments of so long a journey.' Hence Mr Remy lays no claim to literary finish, a defect which he hopes may be atoned for by superior accuracy. Though there are many interesting passages and some interesting chapters, one cannot but feel that he might have said twice as much in half the space.

    The Husband in Utah; or Sights and Scenes among the Mormons: With Remarks on their Moral and Social Economy, by Austin N. Ward. Edited by Maria Ward. New York, 1857. Here and there in this work will be found some interesting sketches of Mormon life as Mrs Ward observed it in 1855. Among them are descriptions of the industrial and social condition of the Mormons, the stores, manufactures, streets, street scenes, costumes, the theatre, the tabernacle. In style the work is sketchy and entertaining, and written in more friendly mood than could be expected from one who, as Mrs Ward declares, 'escaped from Mormondom.' At the end of the work is [p. 603] 'Joseph's Smith's revelation on polygamy,' and several discourses by leading elders. Another edition was issued in 1863, under title of Male Life among the Mormons.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 604]

  

CHAPTER XXII.
 PROGRESS OF EVENTS.
 1861-1869.

GOVERNOR DAWSON'S GALLANTRY--UTAH REFUSED ADMISSION AS A STATE--PASSAGE OF A BILL AGAINST POLYGAMY--MEASURES OF THE LEGISLATURE--ARRIVAL OF GOVERNOR HARDING--DISPUTES BETWEEN BRIGHAM AND THE FEDERAL OFFICIALS--ARRIVAL OF THE CALIFORNIA VOLUNTEERS--A FALSE ALARM--THE MORRISITE TROUBLES--GOVERNORS DOTY AND DURKEE--THE LIMITS OF UTAH CURTAILED--CELEBRATION OF LINCOLN'S SECOND INAUGURATION--THE BRASSFIELD AND ROBINSON MURDERS--INDIAN OUTBREAKS--THE BATTLE OF BEAR RIVER--DISTURBANCES IN SOUTHERN UTAH--TREATIES WITH INDIAN TRIBES--THE UINTAH VALLEY RESERVATION--BIBLIOGRAPHICAL.

    THE first appointments made by President Lincoln for the territory of Utah were John W. Dawson as governor, [*1] John F. Kinney as chief justice, R. P. Flenniken and J. R. Crosby associate judges, Frank Fuller secretary, and James Duane Doty superintendent of Indian affairs. A few weeks after his arrival, the governor was accused of making improper advances to one of the Mormon women, and on new-year's eve of 1861 was glad to make his escape from Zion, being waylaid at Mountain Dell on his return journey and soundly beaten by a party of saints. [*2]

[p. 605]

[paragraph continues] A month later the associate judges also left the territory, Thomas J. Drake and Charles B. Waite, appointed in their stead, with Stephen S. Harding as governor, arriving in July. Meanwhile the secretary, by virtue of his office, became the chief magistrate. [*3]

    Now came an opportunity for Brigham to put forth once more the claim which he had several times asserted: "I am and will be governor." At this period another effort was being made to obtain admission as a state, and on the 17th of March, 1862, the legislature being then in session, a proclamation was issued, in which, styling himself governor-elect, Brigham convened the general assembly and ordered the election of senators to congress. [*4] Soon afterward he telegraphed to Washington that no assistance was needed in subduing the Indians, who, as will presently appear, were somewhat troublesome at this date; for "the militia were ready and able, as they had ever been, to take care of them, and were able and willing to protect the mail line if called upon to do so." Fuller meekly indorsed this statement, and was authorized by the war department to call out ninety men for three months' service between forts Bridger and Laramie. General Wells was ordered to take command of the party, and in three days it was ready to march.

    The choice for senators fell on William H. Hooper and George Q. Cannon. The former had been elected delegate in 1859, when he obtained a partial settlement of the outstanding claims of the territory, including a portion of the expenses for the Indian war of 1850, and for the sessions of the assembly under

[p. 606]

the provisional government. He was at once despatched to Washington, with a memorial and constitution of the inchoate state of Deseret, and Cannon, who was then in England, was instructed to join him without delay. The two elders labored diligently in their cause, but failed of success. [*5] It was claimed, however, on the part of the Mormons, that they won the respect of congress by accepting their defeat and adhering to the union at a time when it was believed throughout Europe that the war would result in favor of the south, and when the sympathies of England and France were strongly in favor of the southern states. Moreover, the attitude of the saints throughout this struggle, and especially the tone of their church organ, the Deseret News, were not adverse to the union cause. On the Sunday preceding the surrender at Appomattox their prophet foretold in the tabernacle that there would be yet four years of civil war.

    Though the saints may have had some few friends in congress at this time, it is certain that they had numerous and bitter enemies, who were constantly working against their interests. In April 1862 a bill was introduced by Justin S. Morrill of Vermont "to punish and prevent the practice of polygamy in the territories of the United States, and for other purposes, and to disapprove and annul certain acts of the territorial legislature of Utah." The objectionable acts referred to included all those which tended to establish or support polygamy, and especially an

[p. 607]

ordinance incorporating the church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, passed in 1851, and reinacted in 1855, whereby all members of the church were included in the body corporate, trustees being appointed to control the church property, and the church empowered to make laws with regard to marriage. [*6] It was further provided by the same act of congress that no corporation or association for religious purposes should hold real estate in any of the territories of a greater value than $50,000. [*7]

    In other respects the proceedings of the Utah legislature at this period and for many years afterward contained few objectionable features, most of them relating to municipal affairs, as did those of previous sessions. In 1854 and 1855 acts were passed providing for the construction of canals between Utah Lake, Big Cottonwood Creek, and Great Salt Lake. [*8]

[p. 608]

[paragraph continues] In 1862 an ordinance was approved, regulating the fisheries of the Jordan River. In 1865 laws were enacted amending the charter of Salt Lake City, [*9] and prescribing the mode of assessing and collecting territorial and county taxes, which must not exceed one per cent of the assessed value of property. [*10] In 1866 statutes were framed defining the boundaries of counties, locating the county seats, [*11] and providing for the establishment and maintenance of common schools. [*12] Between 1854 and 1866 numerous acts were also passed incorporating agricultural, manufacturing, irrigation, and road companies, [*13] and

[p. 609]

granting to individuals certain water and grazing rights, and the privilege of building toll-roads and bridges. [*14]

 

    In July 1862, Governor Harding, with judges Waite and Drake, arrived in Salt Lake City, and for the first time in his career Brigham declared himself satisfied with the United States officials. Matters worked smoothly until the meeting of the legislature in December, when the saints took offence at the governor's message, wherein he reproved them sharply for disloyalty and the practice of polygamy, and called their attention to the recent act of congress. "I am aware," he said, "that there is a prevailing opinion here that said act is unconstitutional, and therefore it is recommended by those in high authority that no regard whatever should be paid to the same...I take this occasion to warn the people of this territory against such dangerous and disloyal council." [*15]

[p. 610]

    Thus was aroused afresh the antagonism of the Mormons, and the trouble was further increased by the action of Judge Waite, who was appointed to the second, or southern district, [*16] Drake being assigned to the first, or central district, and the chief justice to the third, or northern circuit. Early in 1863 Waite drew up a bill amending the organic act, providing that juries be selected by the United States marshal, authorizing the governor to appoint militia officers, and restricting the powers of the probate courts to their proper functions, though with a limited criminal jurisdiction. The bill was approved by the governor and by Judge Drake, and, being forwarded to congress, was referred to committee. On hearing of this measure, Brigham called a meeting at the tabernacle for the 3d of March, when many inflammatory speeches were made, and resolutions passed, condemning the governor's message and the action of the judges. A committee was appointed to wait on the officials and request their resignation, and a petition drawn up requesting the president to remove them. [*17]

    To the committee, among whom was John Taylor, Drake replied: "Go back to Brigham Young, your

[p. 611]

master--that embodiment of sin and shame and disgust--and tell him that I neither fear him, nor love him, nor hate him--that I utterly despise him. Tell him, whose tools and tricksters you are, that I did not come here by his permission, and that I will not go away at his desire or by his directions. I have given no cause of offence to any one. I have not entered a Mormon's house since I came here; your wives and daughters have not been disturbed by me, and I have not even looked upon your concubines and lewd women." "We have our opinions," remarked one of the committee as they rose to depart. "Yes," replied Drake, "thieves and murderers can have opinions." The governor made answer to the committee in language hardly less injudicious, though somewhat uneasy as to his own personal safety, but Waite responded in more seemly and temperate phrase. [*18] The Mormons resented the conduct of the judges as an outrage. Men gathered in groups at the street corners and discussed the matter with angry gestures; one of the judges was threatened with personal violence, and it is probable that an emeute was only prevented by the fact that a party of California volunteers was now encamped near Salt Lake City.

    Ostensibly for protection against Indians, though in fact because the mail route and telegraph line were not considered secure in the hands of the saints, and perhaps also for the purpose of holding the territory under military surveillance, Colonel Connor was ordered to Utah in May 1862, his command consisting of the third California infantry and a part of the second California cavalry, afterward joined by a few companies from Nevada, and mustering in all about seven hundred strong. The men had volunteered in the expectation of being ordered to the seat of war, and great was their disgust when it became known that Zion was their destination. [*19] In October the troops reached Camp

[p. 612]

[paragraph continues] Floyd, or, as it was now termed, Fort Crittenden. [*20] Here it was supposed that the volunteers would encamp, and their commanding officer was informed that no nearer approach to the capital would be permitted. The colonel paid no heed to this warning. "He would cross the Jordan," he declared, "though all hell should yawn beneath it." On the next day his men, after passing through Salt Lake City with fixed bayonets, loaded rifles, and shotted cannon, encamped on the brow of a hill [*21] east of the city, their artillery being pointed at Brigham's residence. To this spot was given the name of Camp Douglas, the site being afterward declared a military reservation. [*22]

    The presence of the volunteers, though they were not sufficient in number to overawe the populace, and could have been readily annihilated by the Nauvoo legion, was a source of constant irritation. The Mormons were not backward in their denunciations, while mischief-makers were constantly spreading reports that served to increase the mutual distrust. An elder who was passing Waite's residence, while the judge was in

[p. 613]

conversation with Colonel Connor, overheard the latter remark: "These three men must be surprised." "Colonel, you know your duty," answered the judge. It was now believed that the first presidency was in danger; [*23] a flag was hoisted over Brigham's residence as a signal, and within an hour two thousand men were under arms, the prophet's dwelling being strongly guarded, scaffolding built against the surrounding walls, to enable the militia to fire down on the volunteers, and cannon planted on the avenues of approach.

    Night and day for several weeks armed men kept watch over the prophet, for it was now rumored that Connor intended to seize him at night and carry him off to Camp Douglas before the saints could rally to his aid. [*24] The citizens were instructed that, if the attempt were made, alarm guns would be fired from the hillside east of Brigham's residence. On the night of the 29th of March they were roused from sleep by the booming of cannon, and, as quickly as they could don their garments and seize their weapons, all ran forth from their homes, intent on exterminating the foe. As they rushed through the streets, the strains of martial music were heard, to which, as was supposed, the troops were marching on Zion. The alarm was unfounded, the music and salute being in honor of the colonel's promotion to the rank of brigadier-general, of which news had just arrived at Camp Douglas.

    Although it is probable that Connor never intended

[p. 614]

to risk his slender force in an encounter with the territorial militia, there was a possibility of a collision, and it is probable that hostilities were prevented by the prevailing of better counsels on both sides. Brigham was always strongly opposed to the shedding of blood, though he wished these men out of the city limits, on which the reservation slightly intrenched. [*25] The grand jury had already voted the camp a nuisance, [*26] and on the mayor devolved the duty of seeing it abated. But before taking action that official began to count the cost. To rid the city of the volunteers might be no difficult task, but if their blood was shed, others would come in tenfold numbers to take their place. [*27] By a little judicious delay the mayor gave time for the prophet's cooler judgment to assert itself, and thus averted an issue which might have resulted in the final dispersion of his people.

    The condition of affairs was now similar to that which had obtained during the presence of the army of Utah, Judge Kinney shielding the church dignitaries from molestation by his colleagues, as Governor Cumming had done from the measures of judges Sinclair and Cradlebaugh. When it was believed that the arrest of Brigham was contemplated, on the ground that he had recently married another wife, the chief justice, as a safeguard, and at his own request, ordered him into custody for violating the act for the suppression of polygamy. The writ was served by the marshal, without the aid of a posse, and the prisoner, attended by a few intimate friends, promptly appeared at the state-house, where an investigation was held,

[p. 615]

and the accused admitted to bail, awaiting the action of the grand jury. Although the prophet's recent marriage was well known throughout the city, and had long furnished food for gossip, the judges afterward refused to find a bill against him, on the ground that there was no sufficient evidence. [*28]

    During its session the grand jury indicted, for armed resistance to the laws, certain apostates known as Morrisites. In November 1860 an ignorant and simple-minded Welshman, Joseph Morris by name, made his way to the capital on foot, from an obscure settlement in Weber county. He had two letters, the contents of which were, as he claimed, inspired, their purport being to warn Brigham of his sin. [*29] His despatches were unheeded, or answered in befitting phrase, [*30] whereupon this new seer and revelator turned his face homeward. Reaching Kington Fort, on the Weber River, some thirty miles north of the city, [*31] he found favor with the bishop and certain of his neighbors, who embraced the new doctrine, believing that Morris was appointed by the Lord to deliver Israel from bondage, and that the Lord's coming was nigh at hand. Other proselytes gathered from far and near, and all held their effects in common, for Christ was about to descend and would provide for his elect. [*32]

[p. 616]

    But the Lord tarried; and meanwhile provisions ran short and the enthusiasm of the converts began to wane, some desiring to withdraw, demanding a restitution of their property, and refusing to contribute anything to the common stock, even for their own support. It was decided to let the dissenters go in peace; but some of them selected from the common herd the choicest cattle, and laying in wait for their brethren's teams, pounced on them while on their way to the mill laden with wheat. Three of the offenders were seized and imprisoned at Kington Fort, their friends in vain asking the interference of the sheriff and of Brigham. An appeal was then made to Judge Kinney, who at once issued warrants for the arrest of the Morrisite leaders, and writs of habeas corpus for the men held in custody. No heed was paid to these documents, for Morris had already appointed the day for the second advent, assuring his followers that there would no longer be seedtime or harvest, and that meanwhile they had grain and cattle sufficient for their needs. Colonel Burton, sheriff of Salt Lake county, was then ordered to enforce the writs, and on the 13th of June, 1862, appeared on the heights above their camp at the Weber settlement with a posse of three hundred or four hundred men and five pieces of artillery.

    A summons was now sent to the leaders, [*33] demanding their surrender within thirty minutes, and warning them of the consequences if they should refuse. Morris withdrew to his dwelling, to consult the Lord, and a few minutes later returned with a written revelation, promising that not one of his people should be harmed,

[p. 617]

but that their enemies should be smitten before them. The faithful were then assembled, and after prayer and reading of the revelation were told to choose which part they would take. A moment later the report of artillery was heard, and two women were struck dead by a cannon-ball, the lower jaw of a young girl being shattered by the same shot. The firing was continued almost without intermission, the assailants opening with musketry as they approached the camp.

    At first the Morrisites, both men and women, took refuge in their cellars, or wherever else they could find cover, all being unarmed and the attack unexpected; but presently, recovering from their panic, the men seized their weapons and organized for defence. The camp consisted mainly of tents and covered wagons, with a few huts built of willows, woven together and plastered. Behind this frail protection the besieged maintained for three days an unequal fight, the cannon and long-range rifles of their assailants raking the enclosure, [*34] while their own weapons consisted only of shot-guns and a few Mexican fire-locks. At intervals Morris was besought to intercede with the Lord, but his only answer was: "If it be his will, we shall be delivered, and our enemies destroyed; but let us do our duty." On the evening of the third day a white flag was raised, whereupon he exclaimed: "Your faith has gone and the Lord has forsaken us. I can now do nothing more."

    After the surrender, the Morrisites were ordered to stack their arms, the men being separated from the women, and most of the former placed under arrest. The prophet, his lieutenant, and two of the women were shot, as the survivors relate, by the sheriff, [*35] ten

[p. 618]

of their party and two of the posse having been killed during the fight. [*36] The camp was then plundered, and the dead conveyed to Salt Lake City, where the bodies of Morris and his lieutenant were exposed at the city hall, the robe, crown, and rod of the former being laid in mockery by his side, and his fate regarded by the saints as the just punishment of one who "had set himself up to teach heresy in Zion, and oppose the Lord's anointed." The prisoners were brought before Judge Kinney, placed under bonds, and at the next session of court, in March 1863, seven were convicted of murder in the second degree and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment, while sixty-six others were fined $100, being committed to jail until the titles were paid, and two were acquitted. [*37] Against

[p. 619]

the sheriff and other members of the posse no proceedings were taken at this date, though it was alleged by the Morrisites that his course was severe, and that the arrests might have been made without the loss of a single life. In 1879, however, Burton, who in consideration of his services had meanwhile been promoted to offices of trust, holding among others the post of collector of internal revenue for Utah, [*38] was indicted for the murder of one of the women. [*39] He was acquitted after a trial lasting several weeks, for he was a good and responsible man in every respect, and there was no evidence that he was guilty of the crime alleged.

    To Governor Harding and judges Waite and Drake the law appeared to have been strained against the Morrisites, even though they may have been guilty of resisting a legal process, and petitions for their pardon being signed by the federal officials, the officers

[p. 620]

at Camp Douglas, and other gentiles, [*40] the chief magistrate released the prisoners and remitted the fines. [*41] For thus turning loose on the community a number of persons whom the Mormon rulers classed as dangerous criminals, only three days after conviction, and before any investigation had been made, Harding was severely censured by the grand jury. "Therefore we present his 'Excellency' Stephen S. Harding, governor of Utah, as we would an unsafe bridge over a dangerous stream--jeopardizing the lives of all who pass over it--or as we would a pestiferous cesspool in our district breeding disease and death." Meanwhile the bonds of such offenders as had failed to appear for trial were declared forfeited by the chief justice, and execution issued against their property. The homestead of one of them named Abraham Taylor was sold for a trifling sum, [*42] and his family turned into the street. By the advice of Judge Waite, who investigated the matter, and found that no judgment had been recorded, Taylor applied to the chief justice for an injunction. The application was refused, on the ground that "if there was no judgment, he could render one, as the court had not permanently adjourned, but only to meet on his own motion."

    Of the further career of the Morrisites it remains only to be said that a few who were possessed of means at once left the territory, while most of the remainder found refuge and employment at Camp Douglas. A few weeks later Connor established a military post at Soda Springs, on Bear River, immediately

[p. 621]

beyond the northern limit of Utah, [*43] offering to furnish conveyance for all who wished to form a settlement at that point. More than two hundred of the Morrisites availed themselves of this offer, removing with their effects under the escort of a company of volunteers.

    This feud between the saints and the federal officials was brought to an end in June 1863, Harding being superseded as governor [*44] by James Duane Doty, with Amos Reed as secretary, and John Titus of Pennsylvania being appointed chief justice in place of Kinney, who at the next general election was chosen delegate to congress. [*45] Thus the president endeavored to restore peace by making concessions on both sides. In the spring of 1864 Judge Waite resigned in disgust, after holding a term of court, at which there was not a single case on the docket. [*46] His successor was a Missourian, named Solomon McCurdy. Judge Drake still remained at his post, [*47] though merely going through the form of holding court, all attempts to administer justice proving futile among a community that had never willingly submitted, and had not yet been compelled to submit, to gentile domination.

    The administration of Governor Doty lasted only for two years, and during this period little worthy of note is recorded in the annals of Utah, this being perhaps the best evidence that some degree of harmony

[p. 622]

at length prevailed between the federal and territorial authorities. The new magistrate was a conservative ruler, liberal and tolerant in his policy, an able and experienced statesman, and on terms of friendship with many of the most eminent men of his day. His youth had been passed among the frontier settlements of Wisconsin and Michigan, and in early manhood he had held prominent positions in state and national councils. [*48] During his residence in the territory he had made many friends and scarcely a single enemy, his intercourse with the citizens being always marked by the cordiality and freedom from constraint characteristic of western life and manners. At his decease, which occurred, after a painful illness, on the 13th of June, 1865, a city draped in mourning gave token of the respect in which he was held by the Mormon community. [*49]

    Governor Dory was succeeded by Charles Durkee, a native of Wisconsin, who held office until late in 1869. [*50] At the time of his appointment he was aged and infirm, and was selected perhaps for that reason, his orders being to pursue a negative and conciliatory policy. "I was sent out to do nothing," he once remarked to an intimate friend, [*51] and his instructions were faithfully executed. [*52]

    During Durkee's administration the territory of

[p. 623]

[paragraph continues] Wyoming was organized, [*53] and included the portion of Utah north of the 41st parallel and east of the 111th meridian, a surface of 8,000 square miles. Idaho, admitted in 1863, also contained, on its southern border, a narrow belt claimed by the Mormons, though merely by right of possession. [*54] In 1861, on the organization of Colorado, the eastern boundary of Utah was placed at the 109th meridian. [*55] By these partitions the area of the latter was reduced to about 85,000 square miles, its limits being identical with those which now exist. [*56]

    The antagonism between General Connor and the Mormon authorities [*57] was for the moment relieved,

[p. 624]

when, in 1865, all joined in celebrating the second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln and the success of the union arms. Though his party was strongly opposed to Mormonism, Lincoln had little to say on the so-called Mormon question, and that little was expressed in three words: Let them alone. To be left alone was all that the people asked and all that they had struggled for, since Utah was first admitted as a territory. The occasion was therefore one of rejoicing, honest and heart-felt, and the pageant more imposing than anything that had yet been witnessed in the city of the saints. [*58] In the centre of Main Street a platform was erected, and here, on the morning of the 4th of March, the federal officers, civil and military, exchanged greetings with the church dignitaries. Past them filed a procession of tradesmen and working men, a mile in length, the sidewalks, the windows, and house-tops being crowded with an eager and boisterous throng. The buildings were draped with flags, the carriages and sleighs decorated with streamers, the men and women with rosettes, while the bands of the 3d infantry and the Nauvoo legion furnished music, and Mormon banners, with their manifold devices, appeared side by side with the stars and stripes.

    Later the concourse assembled in front of the stand, the provost guard [*59] facing the platform, the militia companies forming in the rear, and the volunteers drawn up on their right, four deep and with arms at rest. Addresses were delivered, the bands playing and the multitude cheering lustily during the intervals. The troops were then escorted to their camp by the cavalry of the legion, and General Connor and his staff

[p. 625]

invited to a banquet at the city hall, the invitation being accepted, although the general, who had now received orders to take charge of the department of the Platte, was unable to attend in person. [*60] In the evening the party again met at the theatre, and the festivities concluded at a late hour, with a display of fire-works, the federal officials being well pleased, and perhaps a little surprised at the exuberant loyalty of the Mormons.

    A few weeks after this gala-day citizens and soldiers again united in fraternal gathering to mourn the loss of their president. [*61] When news of his assassination was first received, the volunteers could with difficulty be controlled from venting their fury on the inhabitants, who, as they imagined, were exulting over this deed of infamy. Soon, however, they were forced to acknowledge themselves in error, for Lincoln had ever been friendly toward the Mormons, and by none was he more respected. On the 19th of April, the day set apart for the funeral solemnities at Washington, business was suspended in Salt Lake City; the flags on the public buildings were hung at half-mast and covered with crape; many of the stores and residences were dressed in mourning, and long before the appointed hour more than three thousand persons, among them being many gentiles, were assembled at the tabernacle. The platform was occupied by the civil and military functionaries and a number of prominent

[p. 626]

citizens, the stand and organ being draped in black. The exercises commenced with an anthem by the choir, followed by a prayer from Franklin D. Richards. Then came an eloquent address from Amasa Lyman, and an impressive eulogy on the life, character, and services of Lincoln by Norman McLeod, the chaplain at Camp Douglas, the funeral rites concluding with a benediction by Wilford Woodruff.

    Soon after the departure of Connor, orders were received to disband the volunteers; but the alarm caused among gentile citizens by further Mormon troubles caused a portion of them to be retained until they could be replaced by regular troops. Of the many crimes laid to the charge of the saints at this period, and by some ascribed to the agency of the church, the murders of Newton Brassfield and King Robinson were the most notorious. [*62] In the spring of 1866 Brassfield, formerly a citizen of California and more recently of Nevada, married the wife of one of the elders, then employed on a foreign mission. Application was made and granted for a writ of habeas corpus to obtain possession of the children, the case being still pending when the assassination occurred. On the 2d of April he was shot dead by some unknown person while about to enter his hotel. [*63] A reward of $4,500 was offered by the

[p. 627]

gentile community, but without success, for the arrest of the murderer, who was probably a relative of the elder's, as the sentiment of the Mormon community required that the nearest of kin should avenge the wrongs of an absent husband. [*64]

    King Robinson, a native of Maine, and in 1864 a resident of California, was appointed in that year assistant surgeon at Camp Douglas. [*65] When the volunteers were mustered out of service he practised his profession in Salt Lake City, and in the spring of 1866 married the daughter of a physician, Dr Kay, who in his life-time had been a pillar of the church, but whose wife and children were apostates. The doctor was an intimate friend of Norman McLeod, and at the time of his assassination a superintendent of the gentile Sunday-school. [*66] While at Camp Douglas, he ascertained that certain ground in the neighborhood of Warm Springs was unoccupied, and supposing it to be a portion of the public domain, took possession of it, and erected a building thereon. The city council claimed that the land belonged to the corporation, and ordered the marshal to destroy the improvements and eject the claimant. The doctor brought the matter before the court, but the chief

[p. 628]

justice decided against him. [*67] Soon afterward other property belonging to Robinson was destroyed at midnight by a gang of twenty or thirty men, some of them in disguise, Alexander Burr, of the police force, with several others as accomplices, being accused, though not identified. By the advice of his counsel, Robinson gave notice that he intended to hold the city responsible for damages. Two days later he was aroused near midnight to attend a patient, and when a short distance from his dwelling was struck on the head with a sharp instrument, and then shot through the brain. The murder was committed at a corner of Main Street in bright moonlight, the doctor's cries were heard by his neighbors, and seven persons were seen running away from the spot, but no arrests were made, [*68] the verdict of the coroner's jury being that the deceased had died by the hands of parties unknown. [*69] By the gentiles the doctor's assassination was attributed to his contest with the city authorities, though in fact the murder may have been neither ordered nor premeditated. If it were so, it would seem improbable that seven persons should have been intrusted with the secret, and that such time and place should have been selected.

    Other murders and outrages were ascribed to the Mormons about this date, some of gentiles and some of their own apostate countrymen. [*70] So great was

[p. 629]

the alarm among gentile merchants, that, with a few exceptions, they signed an agreement to leave the territory, on condition that their property should be purchased by the authorities at a low valuation. The answer was that they had not been asked to come, and were not now asked to depart; they could stay as long as they pleased, and would not be molested if they did not molest others. No further deeds of violence occurred, the excitement gradually died away, and with the approaching completion of the overland railroad a better feeling prevailed. Contracts had been awarded without distinction to Mormon and gentile; travel had increased, and with it traffic and the circulation of money, and for a brief space all felt a common interest in the country's prosperity.

 

    Not least among the benefits caused by the building of the railroad was the gradual cessation of Indian hostilities, which had continued, with little intermission, from the date of the Mountain Meadows massacre. The natives had no alternative but to steal or starve; the white man was in possession of their pastures; game was rapidly disappearing; in the depth of winter they were starving and almost unclad, sleeping in the snow and sleet, with no covering but a cape of rabbit's fur and moccasons lined with cedar bark; even in summer they were often compelled to subsist on

[p. 630]

reptiles, insects, roots, and grass seeds. Farm reservations had been opened for their benefit, [*71] and in 1859 it was stated by the superintendent of Indian affairs that an appropriation of $150,000 would enable him to provide for all the destitute among the 18,000 natives then inhabiting the territory. No appropriation was made at this date, though, as will presently appear, liberal provision was made a few years later for certain of the Utah tribes.

    Between 1857 and the close of 1862 outbreaks were of frequent occurrence, [*72] and until the arrival of the

[p. 631]

volunteers, no effectual curb was placed on the hostile tribes. On the 29th of January, 1863, the battle of Bear River was fought, twelve miles north of Franklin, between some three hundred of the Shoshones and Banhacks, under their chiefs Bear Hunter, Pocatello, and Sanpitch, and about two hundred then of Connor's command, its result effectually putting a stop to hostilities in Northern Utah. For fifteen years the northern tribes had infested the overland mail route, slaughtering and plundering emigrants and settlers, until their outrages had become unbearable. Reaching Franklin by forced marches, during an intensely cold winter, the snow being so deep that their howitzers did not arrive in time to be of service, the troops approached the enemy's camp at daylight on the 29th, and found them posted in a ravine through which Battle Creek enters Bear River. Their position was well chosen, the ravine being six to twelve feet deep, about forty in width, with steep banks, under which willows had been densely interwoven, and whence they could deliver their fire without exposing themselves. Attacking simultaneously in flank and front, Connor routed them after an engagement lasting four hours, and, their retreat being cut off by cavalry, the band was almost annihilated. [*73] Among the slain was Bear Hunter, [*74] the other chieftains making their escape. Had the savages committed

[p. 632]

this deed, it would pass into history as a butchery or a massacre.

    Of Connor's command, which consisted of 300 volunteers, but of whom not more than two thirds were engaged, [*75] fourteen were killed and forty-nine wounded. A number of rifles and nearly 200 horses were captured, and more than seventy lodges, together with a large quantity of provisions, destroyed. This defeat completely broke the power and spirit of the Indians, and the result was immediately felt throughout Northern Utah, especially in Cache county, where flocks and herds were now comparatively safe, and where settlements could be made on new and favorable sites hitherto considered insecure. [*76]

    During the spring of this year an outbreak occurred among the Utahs in the neighborhood of the Spanish Fork reservation. A party of volunteers, under Colonel G. S. Evans, defeated them in two engagements. [*77] In April 1865 an Indian war broke out in Sanpete county, spreading to adjacent districts, and lasting without intermission until the close of 1867, under the leadership of a chieftain named Blackhawk. Although the militia of the southern counties were constantly in the field, and reenforcements were sent from Salt Lake City under General Wells, the California volunteers being then disbanded, more than fifty of the Mormon settlers were massacred, an immense quantity of live-stock captured, [*78] and so wide

[p. 633]

spread was the alarm that many of the southern settlements were for the time abandoned, [*79] the loss to the community exceeding $1,100,000. [*80] Of this sum no portion was voted by congress, the memorials of the Utah legislature asking for reimbursements being ignored, although the militia had served for more than two years without pay, and the governor had declared that their claims were just and their services necessary. [*81]

[p. 634]

    After the affair of Bear River treaties were concluded with the Shoshones and Bannacks on the 12th and 14th of October, 1863, [*82] whereby travel on the principal routes to Nevada and California was rendered secure, the stipulations being faithfully observed, and the Indians receiving in return annuity goods to the value of $21,000 for a term of twenty years. [*83] In June 1865 a treaty was made with a number of the Utah tribes, whereby they agreed to remove within one year to a reservation in the Uintah Valley, relinquishing their claim to all other lands within the territory, receiving as compensation $25,-000 annually for the first ten years, $20,000 for the next twenty years, and $15,000 for thirty years thereafter. [*84] Annuities were also to be granted to the chiefs, dwellings erected for them, and lands ploughed, enclosed, and supplied with live-stock and farming implements. A school was to be maintained for ten years, during nine months in the year; grist and lumber mills and mechanics' shops were to be built and equipped at the expense of the government, and $7,000 voted annually for ten years in aid of various industries. The Indians were to be protected on their reservation; must not make war except in self-defence; and must not steal, or if they did, the stolen

[p. 635]

property must be returned, or its value deducted from their annuities. [*85] Under these stipulations, though the treaty was not formally ratified, many of the Utahs, among whom was the chief Blackhawk, were gathered and dwelt in peace on the reservation.

    In 1864 a memorial had been presented by the Utah legislature, asking that the Indians be removed from their smaller reservations, [*86] and in the same year acts were passed by congress authorizing the appointment of a surveyor-general for Utah, providing that the Indian title to agricultural and mineral lands be extinguished, and the lands laid open to settlement, ordering the superintendent of Indian affairs to collect as many of the tribes as possible in the Uintah Valley, and appropriating for agricultural improvements the sum of $30,000. [*87] The site was well selected, being remote from routes and settlements, and enclosed by mountain ranges, which were impassable for loaded teams during nine or ten months in the year. It contained at least two millions of acres, [*88] portions of it being well adapted for agriculture and grazing, and was well supplied with timber and water-power. In the summer of 1868 about 130 acres were under cultivation, and it was estimated that the value of the produce would reach $15,000; but on the 1st of July swarms of grasshoppers settled

[p. 636]

on the land, and within a week nine tenths of the crop were destroyed. In other years the result was fairly encouraging, when it is considered that the Indian is by nature a hunter, averse to all manual labor, and subsists mainly on meat. For the year ending June 30, 1869, the amount appropriated for the Uintah agency was but $5,000. [*89] Small as this sum was, it served to prevent any serious depredations, [*90] for a bale of blankets or a few sacks of flour, distributed in proper season, accomplished more than their weight in gold expended in military operations and military surveillance.

[p. 637]

[p. 638]

[p. 639]

[p. 640]

Footnotes

^604:1 After Cumming's departure, Secretary Wooton became acting governor, but resigned as soon as the southern secession was announced. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 445, 591.

^604:2 In Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 76; Beadle's Life in Utah, 201; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 592, it is stated that Dawson was entrapped into this affair; in Tucker's Mormonism, 239; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 249; Deseret News, Jan. 1, 1862, that it was of his own seeking. In Id., Jan. 14th, is a letter from Dawson to the editor of the Deseret News, dated Bear River Station, Utah Terr., wherein the governor states that he was badly wounded in the head and kicked in the chest and loins. A copy of his first and only message to the legislature will be found in Utah Jour. Legisl., 1861-2, 12-26.

^605:3 For the seeond time, as he arrived before Gov. Dawson, and on the resignation of Wooton filled the vacancy. In Utah Jour. Legisl., 1861-2, is a joint resolution approving his first administration, which was, however, in fact a nullity. A day or two before Cumming left the territory Stenhouse asked him, 'How will Wooton get along?' 'Get along?' he replied; 'well enough, if he will do nothing.' Rocky Mountain Saints, 445, note. Some years later he was elected a representative conditional upon the admission of Utah as a state. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 29.

^605:4 A copy of it will be found in the Deseret News, March 19, 1862.

^606:5 It would appear that the Mormons hoped to succeed on this occasion. In a letter to Cannon, dated Dec. 16, 1860, Hooper writes: 'I think three-quarters of the republicans of the house would vote for our admission.' For copies of the memorial and constitution, see House Misc. Doc., 78, 37th Cong. 2d Sess.; Deseret News, Jan. 29, 1862. They were referred to the committee on territories. In the Millennial Star, xxiv. 241-5, 257-61, is a synopsis of the proceedings relating to the constitution and state government. See also Deseret News, Jan. 22, 1862; Sac. Union, Feb. 14, 17, 1802. Meetings in favor of this measure were held at Provo, Santaquin (a small settlement in Utah co.), Spanish Fork, Grantsville, and Tooele, for an account of which, see Id., Jan. 15, 1862. Prominent among those who opposed the admission of Utah was Judge Cradlebaugh, afterward representative from Nevada, whose speech in the house, on Feb. 7, 1803, has already been mentioned.

^607:6 And regulations as to solemnities, sacraments, ceremonies, consecrations, endowments, tithings, fellowship, and all matters relating to 'the religious duties of man to his maker.' Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 104.

^607:7 A copy of the act will be found in Cong. Globe, 1861-2, app. 385. In 1855 a bill was introduced for the suppression of polygamy and in the debates which ensued Morrill took an active part. It was referred to a committee of the whole. See Cong. Globe, 1855-6, pp. 895, 1491, 1501. In 1859 a bill passed the representatives. Id., 1859-60, pp. 1559. For other measures and discussions in congress between 1853 and 1862, relating to roads, surveys, mails, appropriations, boundaries, public buildings, Indian troubles and other matters, see Cong. Globe, 1853-4, pp. 286, 1437, 1440, 1472, 1621, 1701, 2236-9, passim; Id., 1854-5, pp. 5, 341, 540, passim; 1855-6, pp. 19, 39, 1451-2, 1473, 1491, 1495, 1497; 1856-7, pp. 284, 392, 408, 418, 608; 1857-8, pp. 553, 564, 572-3, passim; 1858-9, pp. 119, 335, 341, 658, 1066; 1859-60, pp. 187-98, 474, 486, 500; 1866-1, pp. 326, 336, 840, 1132, 1159, 1195, 1197, 1288, 1302; Sen. Jour., 33d Cong., 1st Sess., 1003; Id., 33d Cong., 2d Sess., 574-5; 34th Cong., 2d Sess., 943; 34th Cong., 3d Sess., 63; 35th Cong., 2d Sess., 450, 590, 660; 36th Cong., 1st Sess., 1041, 1045-6; 37th Cong., 2d Sess., 1161; H. Jour., 33d Cong., 1st Sess., 1563; Id., 33d Cong., 2d Sess., 723; 34th Cong., 1st Sess., 1837; 34th Cong., 3d Sess., 376; 35th Cong., 1st Sess., 1325, 1366; 35th Cong., 2d Sess., 323, 745, 759, 761; 36th Cong., 1st Sess., 1410, 1455-6; 36th Cong., 2d Sess., 580; 37th Cong., 2d Sess., 1271, 1318-19. In H. Misc. Doc., 100, 35th Cong., 1st Sess., is a memorial stating the grievances of the Mormons, and asking that they be allowed a voice in the selection of their rulers. In the senate, resolutions were submitted that committees should inquire into the propriety of the Mormons electing their own officials and no longer submitting their enactments to congress Sen. Misc. Doc., 12, 36th Cong., 1st Sess. The committees reported adversely.

^607:8 The first was to commence above the rapids of the Jordan, where a dam was to be built, and thence following the base of the mountains, on the east of G. S. Lake Valley, to S. L. City, with depth sufficient for boats drawing two and a half feet of water. Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 175-6. The [p. 608] Cottonwood canal was to divert half the waters of the creek and conduct them to S. L. City. Id. (ed. 1855), 277-8.

^608:9 Among other matters, the city council was empowered to build and control hospitals, and to direct the location of medical colleges, railroad tracks, depot-grounds, gas-works, canals, and telegraph-poles within the city limits; and to collect taxes on real estate for grading, paving, repairing, and lighting streets, and for drainage purposes. Id. (ed. 1866), 119.

^608:10 One half per cent for territorial tax, and for county tax a rate to be prescribed by the county court, but not exceeding a half per cent. Id., 84.

^608:11 Id., 207-9. The following is a complete list of the county seats in 1866, some of which have already been mentioned. Grafton was the county seat of Kane co., St George of Washington co., Parowan of Iron co., Salt Lake City, Beaver, and Tooele of the counties of the same name, Circleville of Piute co., Fillmore of Millard co., Richfield of Sevier co., Nephi of Juab co., Manti of Sanpete co., Provo of Utah co., Heber City of Wasatch co., Farmington of Davis co., Ogden of Weber co., Brigham City of Box Elder co., Wanship of Summit co., Littleton of Morgan co., Logan City of Cache co., St Charles of Richland co., and Fort Bridger of Green River co. A portion of Richland, later Rich, co., including the site of St Charles, Paris, Bloomington, and other settlements, was afterward included in Idaho. The county was first settled in 1863 by C. C. Rich. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 29, 141.

^608:12 Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1866), 219-23. For school purposes, a tax not exceeding one fourth per cent was to be levied by the trustees of each district; but this might be increased to as much as three per cent by vote of two thirds of the tax-payers.

^608:13 By act of 1856, the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society was incorporated, 'with a view of promoting the arts of domestic industry, and to encourage the production of articles from the native elements in this territory.' The society was required to hold an annual exhibition of the agricultural products, live-stock, and articles of domestic manufacture. By act of 1862, amended in 1865, the Jordan Irrigation Company was incorporated, with power to construct dams across the Jordan, and divert its waters at any point not more than twelve miles above Jordan bridge. By acts of 1865 and 1866, the Ogden Canon, Uintah, and Logan Canon road companies were incorporated; the first with the right of building a toll-road from the mouth of the canon to Ogden Valley, with privilege for thirty years; the second with permission to construct a similar road from Utah Lake, throurh Uintah Valley, to the eastward boundary of the territory, connecting with the road to Denver, Colorado; the third with power to build a toll-road from Logan City to the summit of the mountains [p. XXX] dividing Cache and Rich counties, their rights lasting 14 years. Ben. Holladay, Wm H. Hooper, and W. L. Halsey were the body corporate of the Uintah Road Co., with privilege for 15 years. By act of 1865 the Overland Mail Company was authorized to make a road across the Dugway Mountain, 105 miles west of S. L. City, and to erect a toll-gate at or near the eastern Base of the mountain, with privilege for ten years.

^609:14 By act of 1854, repealing acts of the previous year, Brigham Young was empowered to establish and control ferries and bridges at the Weber and Bear rivers for an indefinite term. Utah Acts Legisl. (ed. 1855), 267-8. By acts of 1855 Parley Park and an adjacent valley to the south were granted for 20 years as herd-grounds to Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant, Sam. Snyder, and their associates, and certain lands in Utah co. to Miles and Franklin Weaver for the same purpose. By acts of the same year, Kimball and his partners were authorized to make a toll-road from Big Canon, S. L. co., to Kamas prairie, Utah co., passing through Parley Park, and Orson Hyde and others to build a toll-road and bridges in Carson co., which were to become the property of the territory after five years. Id., 284-6. In 1857 John L. Butler and Aaron Johnson were granted the control of one fourth of the waters of the Spanish Fork River for irrigation purposes, during the pleasure of the legislative assembly. Id. (ed. 1866), 179. In 1866 Alvin Nichols and Wm S. Godbe were allowed to establish toll-bridges across the Bear and Malade rivers, the privilege being for eight years. Other proceedings of the legislature between 1854 and 1866 will be found in Utah Acts Legisl., and Utah Jour. Legisl., passim, and in the files of the Deseret News. The names of members are also given in Utah Jour. Legisl., for each year.

^609:15 A full copy of the message will be found in Utah Jour. Legisl., 1862-3, app.; and of parts of it in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 79-82. It was at first suppressed by the Utah legislature. Sen. Misc. Doc., 37, 37th Cong. 3d Sess.; but a senate committee ordered it printed. Sen. Com. Rept., 87, 37th Cong. 3d Sess. Other messages of the several governors will be found in the [p. 610] Utah Jour. Legisl., for each year. See also Deseret News, Dec. 14, 1854, Dec. 19, 1855, Dec. 23, 1857, Dec. 22, 1858, Dec. 14, 1859, Apr. 16, 1862, Jan. 21, Dec. 16, 1863, Jan. 25, Dee. 11, 1865; S. F. Alta, March 10, 1854; Sac. Union, Feb. 12, 1855, Feb. 12, 1856.

^610:16 In Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 85-6, it is stated that the legislature ordered court to be opened at St George on the third Monday in May, but as they did not wish the session to take place until autumn, passed a second bill, appointing the third Monday in October for the beginning of the term. Waite preferred to open court in May, and having occasion to examine the bill, found that the word 'May' had been erased and 'October' substituted. This had been done by a clerk in the house, and presumably by the order of members. The governor, who had inadvertently returned the bill, ordered the record corrected, and sent a message to the legislature, calling their attention to the forgery. Issue was taken with him on the matter, one member producing a paper which, he averred, was the original draught, and where October was the month appointed. In the Deseret News, March 25, 1863, Waite is sharply censured for holding court in the third district, where he had no jurisdiction.

^610:17 For copies of some of the speeches, the resolutions, and petition, see Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 88-95; Tullidge's Hist S. L. City, 307-11 The petition was signed by several thousand persons. A counter-petition, signed by the officers of Connor's command, will be found in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 95-7.

^611:18 The answers of the governor and judges will be found in Id., 97-9.

^611:19 A correspondent of the S. F. Bulletin writes under date Sept. 24, 1862: [p. 612] 'The third infantry California volunteers wants to go home--not for the purpose of seeing the old folks, but for the purpose of tramping upon the sacred soil of Virginia, and of swelling the ranks of the brave battlers for the brave old flag.' About $25,000 was subscribed by the men on condition that they were sent east, one private named Goldthaite, in company G., contributing $5,000. On the same date Colonel Connor wrote to General Halleck, stating that the men had enlisted for the purpose of fighting traitors, that the infantry was of no service in the territory, as cavalry alone could act effectually against Indians, and there were enough men of that arm to protect the mail route. 'Brigham Young,' writes the colonel, 'offers to protect the entire line with 100 men. Why we were sent here is a mystery. It could not be to keep Mormondon in order, for Brigham can thoroughly annihilate us with the 5,000 to 25,000 frontiersmen always at his command.'

^612:20 By order of Col Cook, his purpose being to disconnect it with the name of Floyd, who was a secessionist. Stenhouse mentions a story current among the volunteers to the effect that Brigham, on hearing of their approach, had ordered the flag-staff at Fort Crittenden to be cut down and left on the public road. This was not the case. The flag was hoisted on the brow of a hill east of Brigham's residence. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 422, 602.

^612:21 Termed the bench.

^612:22 Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 603; Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 20; Rae's Westward by Rail, 140; Gazetteer of Utah, 182. The site at first included one square mile, but was afterward enlarged to 2,560 acres. The men passed the winter of 1862-3 in dug-outs--in this instance holes dug in the earth and covered with a frame-work of logs--permanent quarters being built the following summer, without expense to the government, except for the nails and shingles.

^613:23 Letter of David O. Calder in Millennial Star, xxv. 301-2; Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 20. Colonel Connor denied that he had any designs against the first presidency. In Stenhouse's Rocky Monntain Saints, 607, it is related that one of the parties to whom Waite referred was a Mormon, who had recently married the three widows of a wealthy merchant in S. L. City. It was thought that this would furnish a good test of the law against polygamy. No arrest was made, however, as it was feared that difficulties might arise if Waite should try a case that lay within Kinney's jurisdiction.

^613:24 The Mormons feared that Brigham might be taken to Washington for trial. For several days hundreds of men kept watch in and around his residence. Elders were also instructed to visit the various wards and warn the saints of the danger to person and property, from the lawless conduct of the troops. Parties patrolled the streets at night to protect the citizens; the movements of the soldiery were carefully watched, and all trade with the camp was for a time forbidden. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS.

^614:25 Though its centre was two and a half miles from the city hall, it lapped over the municipal boundary. Id., 609, note.

^614:26 It was reported that the waters of Red Butte canon had been purposely fouled, being passed through the stables of the volunteers. The troops were stationed near the head of the stream, but it was denied that they had been guilty of any such act, though doubtless the Mormons believed it. Later in the year there may have been cause for complaint, as the supply for irrigation was curtailed during the dry season.

^614:27 When Connor heard of Brigham's order, he remarked to Stenhouse: 'I know, sir, that Brigham Young could use up this handful of men; but there are sixty thousand men in California who would avenge our blood.' Ibid.

^615:28 In his Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 18-20, Harrison states that the anti-polygamy act was considered by the Mormons as directed mainly against Brigham Young and the heads of the church. 'I will take the wind out of their sails,' the former remarked, and at once caused himseft to be arrested and taken before Judge Kinney. The witnesses were all his friends, among them being some of his own clerks, and he was simply bound over, to appear when called upon. It was not until nine years later that Brigham's name appeared again in any case of the kind, and the act of 1862 had then become void by virtue of the statute of limitations. See also Deseret News, March 11, 1863; S. F. Alta, March 11, 14, 1863; Sac. Union, March 12, 1863.

^615:29 Waite says that Morris had received many previous revelations, which he had communicated to Brigham and the apostles, that his life had been threatened, and that he now appealed to the prophet for protection. The Mormon Prophet, 122.

^615:30 Ibid.; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 594. Stenhouse also says that Brigham answered them with a brief and filthy response.

^615:31 Near the point where the Union Pacific railroad issues from Weber Canon.

^615:32 Waite says that when the Morrisites increased m number, Brigham ordered John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff to investigate the matter. Summoning [p. 616] a meeting at South Weber, they asked whether there were any present who believed in the new prophet. Seventeen persons arose and declared their faith, stating that they would adhere to it though it should cost them their lives. They were excommunicated, but nevertheless the number of converts increased rapidly, and in a few months mustered about 500 persons. The Mormon Prophet, 122-4.

^616:33 Joseph Morris, John Banks, Richard Cook, John Parsons, and Peter Klemgard. A copy of the summons is given in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 596-7.

^617:34 The cannon were loaded with musket-balls, which tore down the huts and pierced the sandy hillocks, wounding some of the women and children, who had taken refuge behind them. Beadle's Life in Utah, 417.

^617:35 In a sworn statement made before Judge Waite, Apr. 18, 1863, Alex. Dow deposed: 'In the spring of 1861 I joined the Morrisites, and was present when Joseph Morris was killed.' 'Robert T. Burton and Joseph L. Stoddard rode in among the Morrisites. Burton was much excited. He said: "Where is the man? I don't know him." Stoddard replied, "That's him," [p. 618] pointing to Morris. Burton rode his horse upon Morris, and commanded him to give himself up in the name of the Lord. Morris replied: "No never, never!" Morris said he wanted to speak to the people. Burton said: "Be damned quick about it." Morris said: "Brethren I've taught you true principles--he had scarcely got the words out of his mouth before Burton fired his revolver. The ball passed in his neck or shoulder. Burton exclaimed: "There's your prophet!" He fired again, saying: "What do you think of your prophet now?" Burton then turned suddenly and shot Banks (the prophet's lieutenant), who was standing five or six paces distant. Banks fell. Mrs Bowman, wife of James Bowman, came running up, crying: "Oh! you blood-thristy wretch." Burton said: "No one shall tell me that and live," and shot her dead. A Danish woman then came running up to Morris crying, and Burton shot her dead also.' Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 598-9; Waite's Mormon Prophet, 127; Beadle's Life in Utah, 418-19. Beadle throws doubt on portions of Dow's testimony, and says that according to the statements of members of the posse, Morris was killed because, after the surrender, he ordered his followers to take up their arms and renew the fight. Stenhouse relates that Banks was wounded at the time of Morris' death, but not fatally. In the evening he was well enough to sit up and enjoy his pipe, but died suddenly, though whether by poison, pistol, or knife is doubtful.

^618:36 Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 126. Stenhouse says, six of the Morrisites killed and three wounded. Rocky Mountain Saints, 599; Tullidge, six casualties only. Life of Brigham Young, 339; Beadle, ten killed and a very large number wounded. Life in Utah, 420.

^618:37 A nolle prosequi was entered against one of the accused. Those condemned to the penitentiary were loaded with ball and chain, and made to work on the roads. Harding, in Hickman's Destroying Angel, 215. A detailed, but condensed account of the Morrisite massacre, and perhaps one of the best, will be found in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 122-7. For other versions, see A Voice from the West, 5-12; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 593-600; Beadle's Life in Utah, 413-21; Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 336-9; Hickman's Destroying Angel, 211-14; Virginia City (Mont.) Madisonian, Nov. 24, 1877; :Deseret News, June 18, 1862, March 12, 1879; S. L. City Tribune, Aug. 11, 18, 1877. There are few material discrepancies in the above accounts, except in the one given by the Deseret News, though Beadle's work [p. 619] contains some details that do not appear elsewhere. He states, for instance, that when the prisoners were first brought before Judge Kinney, only five of them would sign bonds, and of the rest only a few could speak English, the latter protesting against the entire proceedings, and declaring that they would lie in jail till the devil's thousand years were out' before they would admit that they were legally dealt with. The account given in A Voice from the West, San Francisco, 1879, is written by one of the sect, and is purely from a Morrisite standpoint. In the Deseret News, March 12, 1879, it is stated that Morris had been excommunicated for adultery, that his followers boasted that they would soon occupy the houses and farms of the Mormons, and that Burton took command of the posse with great reluctance, after the Morrisites had frequently defied the officers of the law. 'The Morrisites,' says the church organ, 'commenced to fire upon the posse with their long-range rifles, and having torn up the floors of their log cabins and wickeups, dug np the earth and threw it against the walls. They lay in these cellars firing through port-holes at the posse. There were very close upon 200 men in these fortifications.' After the arms were stacked, Burton, Stoddard, and some fifteen others entered the camp, and Morris, being allowed at his own request to speak to the people, cried out: 'All who are for me and my God in life or in death follow me.' A rush was then made for the arms, whereupon the posse opened fire, the sheriff firing two shots at Morris, Stoddard also firing two or three shots, and two women being killed, though by whom is not stated.

^619:38 Beadle states that when he visited Utah in 1868, Burton was also assessor of S. L. co., a general in the Nauvoo legion, a prominent elder in the church, and one of the chiefs of the secret police. Life in Utah, 398.

^619:39 He was arrested in Aug. 1876, and his bail fixed at $20,000. Deseret News, March 12, 1879; in July 1877, with bail at $10,000. S. L. City Tribune, July 28, 1877. A former indictment had been found in the Sept. term of 1870, but the constitution of the grand jury was declared illegal by the U. S. sup. court.

^620:40 And by some of the Mormons. Beadle's Life in Utah, 421; Hickman's Destroying Angel, 163. Harding, in Id., 216, says that no Mormon signatures except that of Hickman appeared on the petitions, but that several of the saints called at his quarters after dark to intercede for the Morrisites.

^620:41 Beadle states that Bishop Woolley called on Harding to remonstrate against the pardon, saying, as he took his leave, that if it were granted, 'the people might proceed to violence.' Life in Utah, 421. On pp. 423-5, he relates an improbable story of a visit paid to the governor by Banks' widow, to warn him of a plot against his life.

^620:42 To Joseph A. Johnson, clerk of Kinney's court, for $200. Beadle's Life in Utah, 425. In 1868 Taylor recovered his property, with back rents for five years.

^621:43 At a point about 175 miles north of S. L. City and now in Idaho Ter. It was named Camp Connor.

^621:44 He left S. L. City on June 11th, being appointed consul at Valparaiso. Deseret News, June 17, 1863. Harding was a native of Milan, Ind., and when appointed governor of Utah was about 50 years of age. He was an able lawyer, and a man of energy and personal courage; but during his administration he labored rather to win the approval of the American people than to deal out strict justice. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 107.

^621:45 Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 325; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 609, where it is stated that Kinney's removal was caused by his subservience to the will of Brigham. In the Deseret News, Apr. 27, 1864, are reports of his first speeches in congress.

^621:46 He afterward followed his profession in Idaho City. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 105, 111.

^621:47 Before his appointment to Utah, Drake had lived for many years at Pontiac, Mich. At this date he was a man of thin, wiry frame, aged about sixty, of nervous temperament, vigorous mind, and blameless life.

^622:48 Doty, a native of Salem, N Y, was admitted to the supreme court of Michigan in 1818, in which year he began to practice law at Detroit, being then only 19 years of age. In 1819 he was appointed secretary to the Mich. legislature; in 1834-5 he was a member of the Mich. legislative council, and introduced a measure providing for a state government, which was adopted by the council; in 1837 he was elected delegate to congress, and in 1849, representative in congress from Wisconsin. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 108-9; Beadle's Life in Utah, 214-15; Deseret News, June 21, 1865.

^622:49 On the day of his funeral business was suspended in S. L. City. Deseret News, June 21, 1865.

^622:50 In the first half of 1869 Secretary E. P. Higgins acted as governor, during Durkee's absence. His message to the legislature, while in that capacity, was regarded as one of the most able ever presented to that body.

^622:51 J. H. Beadle author of Life in Utah.

^622:52 Gov. Durkee was born at Royalton, Vt, in 1802. He was one of the earliest settlers and most prominent men in Wisconsin, and a member of its first legislature. In 1855 he was elected U.S. senator, and was a stanch adherent of the anti-slavery party. He died at Omaha on the 14th of Jan., 1870. Deseret News, Jan. 26, 1870; Beadle's Life in Utah, 215.

^623:53 For organic act, see Laws of Wyoming, 1869, 18-24.

^623:54 In the organic act, the southern boundary of Idaho was fixed at the 42d parallel. Idaho Laws, 1863-4, p. 28. In 1850, when Utah was defined, it was bounded on the north by Oregon, of which the southern boundary was the same parallel.

^623:55 Colorado Laws, 1861, p. 23.

^623:56 In 1865 memorials of the Utah legislature were presented to congress for the annexation of territory in Colorado and Arizona. Utah Acts, 1865, pp. 91-2; H. Misc. Doc., 53, 38th Cong. 2d Sess. For further proceedings in congress relating to Utah, see i., 37th Cong. 3d Sess., 737; Id., 38th Cong. 2d Sess., 562; 39th Cong. 1st Sees., 1339, 1383; Sen. Jour., 37th Cong. 3d Sees., 618; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 1009, 1029, 1159; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., 503; Gong. Globe, 1862-3, 26, 60, 166, 210, 228-9, 1121; Id., 1864-5, 117, 124, 157, 596, 942, 967, 996, 1028, 1172; 1865-6, 1494, 3509, 3522, 4190.

^623:57 Hickman states that in the autumn of 1863 Brigham offered him a large bribe to assassinate Connor. Destroying Angel, 167. The ill feeling had been considerably intensified by the appearance in The Union Vedette, a newspaper first published at Camp Douglas, Nov. 20, 1863, of a number of circulars signed by Connor and relating to the mining interests of the territory. The general states his belief that Utah abounds in rich veins of gold, silver, copper, and other minerals, invites miners and prospectors to explore and develop them, and threatens the Mormon leaders with martial law in case of interference. In a letter to Col Drum, asst adjt-general at San Francisco, he writes: 'My policy in this territory has been to invite hither a large gentile and loyal population, sufficient by peaceful means and through the ballot-box to overwhelm the Mormons by mere force of numbers, and thus wrest from the church--disloyal and traitorous to the core--the absolute and tyrannical control of temporal and civil affairs.' The Daily Telegraph, the first number of which appeared July 4, 1864, with T. B. H. Stenhouse as editor and proprietor, waged fierce war with the Vedette, which was issued at Camp Douglas in Jan. 1864, as a daily paper. Early in 1865 Gen. Connor stopped its publication. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 612; Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 29. It was again published, however, in June of this year at S. L. City, and continued till Nov. 27, 1867. The Telegraph was afterward moved to Ogden, where the last number appeared in July 1869. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 15. In Aug. 1859 a newspaper named The Mountaineer was published in S. L. City by Seth M. Blair, James Ferguson, and Hosea Stout, being intended [p. 624] for secular news and for general circulation, though friendly in its tone toward the saints. It lasted only one year. Ibid.

^624:58 A meeting of officers and prominent citizens was held at Camp Douglas on the 28th of Feb., and a committee of arrangements appointed.

^624:59 Organized by Connor with a view, as Tullidge says, to establishing a military dictatorship in Utah. In a strongly anti-Mormon report to J. Bidwell, rep. from Cal., dated Feb. 1867, Gen. Hazen admits that Connor was unduly harsh toward the saints, remarking that his zeal as a catholic may account for his rigor. House Misc. Doc., 75, 39th Cong. 2d Sess., 4.

^625:60 Stenhouse mentions that before his departure a ball was given at the social hall, which Brigham and his councillors declined to attend, the officers' wives of Camp Douglas also refusing to meet the Mormon women. Rocky Mountain Saints, 612. Gen. P. Edward Connor, an Irishman by birth, came to the U.S. early in life, and enlisted in the regular army, serving for five years as a private soildier on the frontier. During the Mexican war he raised a company of volunteers in Texas, and led them as their captain at Buena Vista, where he was wounded, and received honorable mention in the official despatches. At the close of the war he settled in California, where in ten years he accumulated a fortune. At the beginning of the civil war he was offered the colonelcy of the third Cal. volunteers. Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 112-13.

^625:61 On the 18th of April a meeting of federal, civil, and military officers was held at S. L. City, when arrangements were made for the funeral exercises. It is worthy of note that Col Burton was appointed one of the committee of arrangements. See Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 335.

^626:62 Gen. Hazen remarks in his report: 'There is no doubt of their murder from Mormon church influences, although I do not believe by direct command.' He recommends that in future the commanding officer at Camp Douglas be ordered to send one of the Mormon leaders to the state prison at Jefferson, Mo., for each man that is assassinated, and that he be retained there until the culprit is surrendered. House Misc. Doc., 75, 39th Cong. 2d Sess., 4. Beadle states that, when most of the volunteers had been withdrawn, all gentiles who had taken up land west of the Jordan were whipped, tarred and feathered, or ducked in the Jordan, and their improvements destroyed, and that Weston of the Union Vedette was seized, carried to the temple block by night, and cruelly beaten. Life in Utah, 203-4. See also The Union Vedette, in Virginia and Helena (Mont.) Post, Oct 9, 1866.

^626:63 Deseret News, April 5, 12, 1866. In the former number it is stated that two other cases of shooting had occurred within less than three weeks, one of the parties, named Mayfield, being dangerously wounded by a soldier who mistook him for a gambler with whom he had had some difficultyThe account of Brassfield's murder and its cause as related in the Deseret News agrees [p. 627] essentially with the one given in Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 615, except that according to Stenhouse's version no attempt was made to arrest the murderer, while in the Deseret News it is stated that he was pursued and several shots fired at him. Beadle, Life in Utah, 204-5, says that the woman had repudiated her former marriage, that Brassfield, who had taken her trunk and clothing from her former residence, was arrested for larceny, and a day or two later, while in the street in custody of the marshal, was shot in the back by a hidden assassin, no special effort being made to arrest him.

^627:64 Stenhouse relates that General Sherman, on hearing of the assassination, telegraphed to Brigham that he hoped to hear of no more murders of gentiles in Utah, and reminded him that there were plenty of soldiers, recently mustered out of service, who would be glad to pay him a visit. Brigham replied that Brassfield had seduced a man's wife, and that life in S. L. City was as safe as elsewhere if people attended to their own business. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 616. See also The Dalles Daily Mountaineer, May 17, 1866.

^627:65 He was afterward sent to Camp Connor. The Union Vedette, Oct. 25, 1866, in Beadle's Life in Utah, 206.

^627:66 McLeod was at this time preaching at Independence Hall in opposition to Mormonism, and the doctor no doubt shared his sentiments. Both were heartily disliked by the Mormons. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 616-17.

^628:67 During the trial Robinson's counsel raised the point that the city, on account of the non-performance of certain acts, had no legal existence. Deseret News, Nov. 14, 1866.

^628:68 Parties were indicted for the murder by the grand jury, in 1871, but there was no evidence against them except that, they had been seen in the neighborhood. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 617-18.

^628:69 Deseret News, Nov. 14, 1866; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 616-20, 735-41, where are copies of the speeches of counsel. In commenting on the case, the Deseret News remarks that the investigation was conducted without the least effort to discover the assassins, unless it could be shown that they were Mormons. For other accounts, see Beadle's Life in Utah, 206-9; Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi, 363; Rusling's Across America, 183-9; Virginia and Helena Post, Oct. 30, 1866; Boise City Statesman, Nov. 3, 1866; Austin, Reese River Reveille, Oct. 29, 1866; Virginia City Post, Nov. 3, 1866. A large reward was subscribed for the arrest of the murderers, at the head of the list being the name of Brigham Young for $500.

^628:70 Among the latter, Beadle mentions the cases of three apostates named Potter, Wilson, and Walker--the first a brother of those murdered at Springville [p. 629] in 1857--who were arrested at Coalville, Weber co., for stealing a cow, and placed in charge of a party of policemen, one of them a Danite named Hinckley. Walker escaped to Camp Douglas, but Wilson and Potter were killed by the officers. The murderers were arrested, but escaped from the marshal. Soon afterward a colored man, known as Negro Tom, called on the federal officials to state that he could give important evidence concerning certain murders. A few days later he was found with his throat cut and his body horribly mangled, about two miles east of the city. Life in Utah, 211-12. See also Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 621. The latter relates that Judge Titus caused the arrests, in consequence of which one of the apostles, to mark his contempt for the judge, had a chemise made, about ten feet in length, and ordered it to be handed to the judge as a present. Titus regarded the matter as a threat, as well as an insult, considering that the night garment was intended as a shroud. In 1866 a man named Beanfield, from Austin, Nev., had some difficulty with the Mormons and was shot. Bowles, Our New West, 266. See also S. F. Call, Nov. 1, 16, 1866, April 14, 1867; S. F. Times, Aug. 15, Oct. 25, 1867; Sac. Union, Oct. 31, 1866.

^630:71 Among them the Spanish Fork reservation, including nearly 13,000 acres, was opened in 1855 in Utah Valley. Here about 2,500 bushels of wheat were raised in 1859. There were others on Sanpete Creek, in the valley of that name, on Corn Creek, in Fillmore Valley, and at Deep Creek and Ruby valleys. On each there were about 25 acres in wheat, and a small quantity of vegetables were raised. J. Forney, in Ind. Aff. Rept, 1859, pp. 367-9. In these reports for the years 1856-63, and in Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., xi. no. 42, are many statements and suggestions as to the character of the Indians, their condition, treatment, reservation work, and intercourse with the white population. As they were little heeded, it is unnecessary to mention them in detail. The names of the various superintendents of Indian affairs and Indian agents will be found in the American Almanac.

^630:72 For troubles in southern Utah in 1857-8, see Little's Jacob Hamblin, 47 et seq. In Oct. 1858, Hamblin with eleven others left the Santa Clara settlement to visit the Moquis on the eastern side of the Colorado, thus paving the way for Mormon colonization in that direction. On Feb. 25, 1858, a descent was made on one of the northern settlements by 250 Shoshones. Two settlers were killed, five wounded, and a large number of cattle and horses driven off. On the 1st and 9th of March the herds of the settlers in Rush Valley were raided and a quantity of stock stolen. On the 7th, 100 horses and mules were taken from the farm of John C. Naile at the north end of Utah Lake. House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. pt ii. pp. 74-5, 80-2. On Sept. 10th, Utah Indians violated the persons of a Danish woman and her daughter, near the Spanish Fork reservation. Id., 152; Ind. Aff. Rept, 1859, p. 362. In the summer of 1859 an emigrant party, en route for California, was surprised in the neighborhood of the Goose Creek mountains, and at least five men and two women killed, the massacre being caused by the slaughter of two Indians who entered the camp for trading purposes. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1859-60, pt ii. 210-11. On Aug. 14th, this body of Indians was attacked by Lieut Gay with a company of dragoons, and about 20 of them killed. In his message to the Utah legislature, dated Dec. 12, 1860, Gov. Cumming states that though a suitable force had been appointed for the protection of the northern emigrant route, many persons had been murdered presumably by roving bands of Shoshones and Bannacks. Utah Jour. Legisl., 1859-60, p. 8. In the summer of 1860, Mayor Ormsby, with a party of Carson Valley militia, was decoyed into a canon and perished with all his command, the cause of the outbreak being the slaying by emigrants of a chief, named Winnemucca. Burton's City of the Saints, 582. See also Moore's Pion. Exper., MS., 15-19. For further Indian depredations up to 1863, measures taken to prevent and punish them, and remarks thereon, too voluminous to be mentioned in detail, see Ind. Aff. Rept, 1859-60, pt ii., 231-44, 1861, 21, 1862, 210-14, 1863, 419-20; Sen. Doc., 36th Cong. 2d Sess., ii. no. 1, pp. 69-73; House Ex. Doc., 37 Cong. 3d Sess., iv. no. 3, pp. 78-80, 82-5, v. no. 30; [p. XXX] Hayes' Scraps, Los Angeles, iv. 96; Deseret News, March 17, Apr. 14, July 7, Nov. 3, 17, 1858, Feb. 16, Aug. 3, 24, 31, Sept. 21, Nov. 16, 1859, May 30, Aug. 1, Oct. 3, 1860, Feb. 13, 1861, Apr. 16, June 11, Aug. 13, Sept. 17, 24, Oct. 8, Nov. 26, Dec. 10, 31, 1862; S. F. Alta, May 11, Aug. 16, 17, Sept. 6, Oct. 20, 28, 29, 1858, Jan. 18, March 29, 30, July 6, Sept. 8, 12, 16, 21, 22, 28, Oct. 6, 28, 1859; S. F. Bulletin, May 8, Aug. 18, Oct. 28, 29, Nov. 26, 1858, Aug. 24, 30, Oct. 31, Nov. 19, 1859, Oct. 4, 8, 1862; Sac. Union, Aug. 10, 12, Sept. 28, Oct. 2, 5, 12, 19, 31, Nov. 2, 11, 14, Dec. 7, 1857, March 3, July 21, 29, Aug. 17, Sept. 4, Oct. 20, Nov. 16, 25, 31, 1858, Feb. 18, 23, March 16, Apr. 15, May 10, Aug. 11, 31, Sept. 17, 19, 22, 30, Oct. 5, 7, 27, Dec. 2, 19, 1859, Apr. 6, May 4, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 21, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, June 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 16, 20, 26, July 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 21, 31, Aug. 1, 21, 23, Oct. 2, 1860, Apr. 4, 24, 29, May 8, 9, 31, June 7, 11, Aug. 15, 18, Sept. 3, 18, 22, Oct. 2, Dec. 26, 1862.

^631:73 Connor states that he found 224 bodies on the field, and how many more were killed he was unable to say. A copy of his official despatch will be found in Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 283-6.

^631:74 And two inferior chiefs, named Sagwitch and Lehi, Id., 286.

^632:75 Seventy-six were disabled by frozen feet. Letter of General Halleck in Id., 287.

^632:76 In addition to the official despatches of Col Connor and Gen. Halleck, Tullidge gives in his Hist. S. L. City, 289-90, two other accounts of the battle at Bear River, one copied from a historical note in the Logan Branch records, and the other from Col Martineau's sketch of the military history of Cache co. Both differ from the official reports as to the number killed, the former placing it at 200, and a great many wounded, the latter stating that the dead, as counted by an eye-witness from Franklin, amounted to 368, besides the wounded who afterward died, and that about 90 of the slain were women and children. For other versions, see Hayes' Scraps, Indians, v. 214-17.

^632:77 The volunteers numbered 140. Among the killed was Lieut F. A. Teale. Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 29.

^632:78 Accounts of the various massacres and depredations Will be found in Wells' Narr., MS.; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 29-30; Utah Sketches, MS., 13-14, 43, 136-48, 153-7; see also Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 162-5; [p. XXX] Codman's Round Trip, 219-20, 243-5. The leading incidents are briefly as follow: On the 9th of April, 1865, Blackhawk and his band visited Manti, where they boasted of having stolen some cattle at a neighboring settlement, and wanted to hold a 'big talk.' On the next day some of the Manti citizens, who rode forth to ascertain the truth of the matter, were fired upon and one of them killed, the Indians retiring up Salt Creek Canon in Sevier co., where they killed two herdsmen. A party sent in pursuit a few days later was overpowered with the loss of two men. On May 29th the savages massacred a family of six persons at Thistle Valley in Sanpete co., slaying two others about the same time. In July three settlers were murdered, and several wounded. Many cattle had now been driven off, and the people of Sanpete, Sevier, Millard, Piute, Beaver, Iron, Washington, and Kane counties kept guard over their stock with armed and mounted men. Between Jan. and the beginning of April 1866 several raids were made in Kane co., five settlers being killed, and a man named Peter Shirts with his family sustaining a siege for several weeks until relieved by militia. Between April 22d and the end of June six persons were killed and others wounded in Sanpete and Piute counties, two of them while attempting to recover cattle driven off from the Spanish Fork reservation. Early in 1867 James J. Peterson with his wife and daughter were killed near Glenwood, Sevier co., and their bodies mutilated. The vigilance of the militia kept the Indians in check for the remainder of this year, and only three other settlers were killed, the soldiery also losing three of their number. F. H. Head, sup. of Indian affairs, in Ind. Aff. Rept, 1866, p. 124, states that the number of marauders was not more than 50 or 60.

^633:79 Sevier and Piute counties were entirely abandoned, together with the settlements of Berrysville, Winsor, upper and lower Kanab, Shunesburg, Springdale, Northup, and many ranches in Kane co., and Pangwitch and Fort Sanford in Iron co. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 30. Six flourishing settlements in Piute co., four on the borders of Sanpete, and fifteen in Iron, Kane, and Washington counties, were entirely abandoned. Joint memorial of legislature, in Laws of Utah, 1878, p. 167.

^633:80 For newspaper reports of Indian depredations, difficulties, expeditions, and battles between 1863 and 1867, see, among others, The Deseret News, Jan. 21, 28, Feb. 11, March 18, Apr. 8, 15, 22, May 13, 20, July 1, 1863, June 7, 1865, May 10, 1866, June 5, 12, 1867; Union Vedette, July 8, 13, 31, Aug. 4, 17, Nov. 5, 9, 1865; S. F. Bulletin, Jan. 26, Apr. 14, 15, May 4, June 9, July 10, 1863, Aug. 8, 1864, Apr. 20, 1866; S. F. Alta, Feb. 17, 19, May 8, June 11, 12. July 6, 7, 1863, Aug. 12, Sept. 3, 1864, July 8, 1865, May 1, 16, 22, June 10, 14, 15, July 31, Aug. 8, 1867; S. F. Call, Jan. 5, March 22, June 8, 14, 21, Aug. 10, 11, Oct. 29, 1865, May 14, June 2, 4, 5, 9, 11, July 24, Aug. 1, 3, 8, 9, 1867; Sac. Union, Jan. 31, Feb. 12, 13, 17, Apr. 14, 28, May 16, 30, June 13, 1863, Apr. 20, July 30, Aug. 20, 31, 1864, Feb. 7, June 9, Aug. 4, 26, 31, 1865, Aug. 5, 1867; Gold Hill News, March 17, July 8, 1865; Carson Appeal, June 10, Aug. 2, 1865; Boise Statesman, June 8, Dec. 12, 1865, Nov. 9 1867; Watsonville Pajaro Times, May 16, 1863.

^633:81 See the certificate of Gov. Charles Durkee, appended in 1869 to the joint [p. XXX] memorial, in Laws of Utah, 1878, p. 167. Geo. W. Emery, who was governor in Feb. 1878, stated that he knew nothing of the facts, and had no recommendation to make. Two former memorials had been forwarded, the first in 1868. House Misc. Doc., 99, 40th Cong. 2d Sess., 19; the second in 1869. Id., 41st Cong. 1st Sess.

^634:82 The first in Tooele Valley and the second at Soda Springs. They were confirmed by the senate, but with amendments which were forwarded to Gov. Doty, with instructions to obtain the consent of the Indians. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1864, p. 16. On the 30th of July, 1863, a treaty had been made with Pocatello and others whereby the roads to the Beaver Head and Boise River gold mines and the northern California and southern Oregon roads were made secure. Another treaty was concluded with the western Shoshones at Ruby Valley, Oct. 1st. Rept of James Duane Doty, in Id., 1864, p. 175.

^634:83 Id., 176. In his message to the legislature, dated Dec. 12, 1861, Gov. Doty remarks: 'These are the first treaties ever made by the U.S. with the bands of Shoshones; and it is somewhat remarkable that they have adhered to their stipulations with a fidelity equal to that of most civilized nations.' Utah Jour. Legisl., 1864-5, pp. 11-12.

^634:84 The appropriations were to be made on the supposition that the Indian tribes would muster 5,000 souls, and were to be increased or diminished in proportion to their numbers. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1865, p. 151.

^635:85 A synopsis of the provisions of this treaty, which was negotiated by O. H. Irish, superintendent of Indian affairs in 1865, will be found in Id., 150-1. See also Deseret News, June 14, 1865.

^635:86 Utah Acts, 1863-4, pp. 7-10, 13.

^635:87 U.S. Acts, 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 67-8; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., 16-17; House Ex. Doc., 46 Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. 971-3. The salary of the surveyor-general was to be $3,000 a year, and his powers and duties similar to these of the surveyor-general of Oregon. The usual school reservations were made. By act of July 16, 1868, it was ordered that the public lands of the territory should constitute a new land district, to be named the Utah district, and that the preemption, homestead, and other laws of the U.S. should be extended over it. Id., 973-4. In 1862 this district was merged with that of Colorado. U.S. Acts, 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 51, 100-1. In Ind. Aff. Rept, 1864, p. 16, Commissioner Wm P. Dale states that the Uintah Valley had been set apart for an Indian reservation as early as Oct. 1861, but that on account of the imperfect geographical knowledge of the country its exact limits could not then be defined.

^635:88 Id., 17. The tract enclosed the whole region drained by the Uintah River and its upper branches, as far as its junction with the Green River.

^636:89 Pardon Dodds, in Ind. Aff. Rept, 1868, 156. Dodds, who was then Indian agent at Uintah, states that at least $20,000 was needed.

^636:90 During the summer of 1868 a few unimportant raids were made in Sanpete co., whereupon Col Head and others repaired to Strawberry Valley, Uintah, and a treaty of peace was concluded. Deseret News, Aug. 26, 1868.

    Among the most recent works on Utah is The History of Salt Lake City and its Founders, by Edward W. Tullidge. The first volume, which is a reprint from Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, was issued in 1884, and relates the leading incidents of Mormon history between 1845 and 1865, the purpose being to continue it to a more recent date, adding thereto the records of other towns and counties, and forming when completed a history of the entire territory. The work is somewhat in the nature of a compilation, and consists largely of copies of official reports and documents, together with numerous extracts from other works, more especially from Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints. Mr Tullidge follows the text of Stenhouse very closely in portions of his work, though writing from a different standpoint, and sometimes borrows his language with very slight alterations and without acknowledgment. The chapters relating to the Utah war occupy a large portion of the first volume. They are carefully considered, and contain much that is not found elsewhere. The work is published by authority of the city council, and under supervision of its committee on revision.

    The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and Complete History of the Mormons, from the First Vision of Joseph Smith to the Last Courtship of Brigham Young, by T. B. H. Stenhouse. New York, 1873. This work, as its title indicates, carries the story of Mormonism from its earliest inception up to within a few years of the death of Brigham. Besides giving a complete outline of the political history of the latter-day saints, it contains chapters on the Mormon theocracy and priesthood, on polygamy, and on the book of Mormon, together with descriptions of the domestic and social condition of the Mormons, and of the various outrages commonly ascribed to them, more especially of the Mountain Meadows massacre. The book is profusely illustrated, entertaining in style, and though containing 761 pages of printed matter, can be read with interest throughout. The author was for 25 years a Mormon missionary and elder, during which period he was on familiar terms with the apostles, and for twelve years held daily intercourse with the president of the church. As he relates, he 'has no pet theories to advance, no revelations to announce, no personal animosity to satisfy. He has simply outgrown the past.' Though at times unduly severe, it is in the main one of the most impartial works yet published by anti-Mormon writers. Stenhouse, a Scotchman by birth, was converted to Mormonism in 1846, being then 21 years of age. He afterward labored as a missionary in England, Scotland, and various parts of Europe, [p. 637] founding the Southampton conference, and being for three years president of the Swiss and Italian missions. In 1869 he apostatized, and soon afterward removed to the city of New York, where he found employment as a journalist and wrote the above work. His decease occurred in 1882. See Stenhouse's Tell it All, preface; Burton's Rocky Mountain Saints, 272; S. F. Bulletin, March 7, 1882.

    Expose of Polygamy in Utah: A Lady's Life among the Mormons, by Mrs T. B. H. Stenhouse.New York, 1872. Tell It All: The Story of a Life's Experience in Mormonism. An Autobiography; by Mrs T. B. H. Stenhouse. Hartford, Conn., 1879. An Englishwoman in Utah: The Story of a Life's Experience in Mormonism. An Autobiography; by Mrs T. B. H. Stenhouse. London, 1880. The last two of these works are almost identical, except that one or two chapters of the former are omitted in the latter volume. Beginning with her first introduction to Mormonism about the year 1849, until the date of her own and her husband's apostasy, some 20 years later, the authoress gives what is claimed to be a plain, unvarnished record of facts which have come under her own notice. A few months after the publication of the Expose of Polygamy, Mrs Stenhouse was asked to lecture on that subject, and wherever she spoke was requested to give her narrative more circumstantially and in more detail. Finally she accepted the suggestion of a gentile newspaper, published at S. L. City, to 'tell it all.' Hence the title and subject-matter of this work. Though claiming no literary merit, it is well told, and certainly tells enough, while containing nothing that can be termed positively indelicate.

    The Mormon Prophet and his Harem: or, An Authentic History of Brigham Young, his Numerous Wives and Children, by Mrs G. V. Waite. Cambridge, 1866. Apart from the opening chapter, which contains the early life of Brigham, the first half of this work is devoted to the political history of Utah. Its main interest centres, however, in the information given in the latter portion, as to the family and social relations of the Mormon leader. There is the inevitable chapter on polygamy, written, the authoress remarks, as dispassionately as the writer's utter abhorrence of the system will permit. There is also a chapter where the mysteries of the endowment house are described in the form of a burlesque, and others where Brigham is set forth as prophet, seer, revelator, and grand archee. The volume is compact and well written; but though many of the facts may have been gathered, as is claimed, from original sources, they contain little that is not well known at the present day.

    Life in Utah: or, The Mysteries and Crimes of Mormonism, being an Expose of the Sacred Rites and Ceremonies of the Latter-Day Saints, with a Full and Authentic History of Polygamy and the Mormon Sect from its Origin to the Present Time, by J. H. Beadle. Philadelphia, etc., 1870. Though the author claims to have had access to valuable personal records and other private sources of information, his book has no special value. There are chapters on Mormon society, Mormon theology and theocracy, Mormon mysteries, theoretical and practical polygamy, but all these matters have been better treated by others, while the historical portions of the work are far inferior to those of Stenhouse. In relating the crimes of the Mormons, Mr Beadle claims that the statements for and against them have been equally presented. The reader need only turn to his account of the Mountain Meadows massacre to find that this is not the case. Here, and elsewhere, in the usual vein of looseness and exaggeration, crimes are alleged against the saints that have never been sustained, and all extenuating circumstances are omitted. Murders are laid to their charge of which there is no evidence, and which are not even mentioned by the leading authorities. The volume forms one of the many works that have been written on Mormonism with a view to pander to the vicious tastes of a certain class of readers rather than to furnish information.

    The following is a more complete list of the authorities consulted in the preceding chapters: Taylor's Rem., MS.; Wells' Narr., MS.; Utah Notes, MS.; Jennings' Mat. Progr., MS.; Early Hist. Carson Valley, MS.; Little's Mail Service, MS.; Incidents in Utah Hist., MS.; Nebeker's Early Justice, MS.; [p. 638] U. S. Acts and Res., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 53-8, 111, 307, 453-8; 33d Cong. 2d Sess., 611; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., 368, app. iii.-iv.; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 51, 100-1; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 67; Id., 2d Sess., 16-17; 46th Cong. 3d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 47, pt 3, 947, 972-3; H. Jour., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., 458, 1804; Id., 2d Sess. 602; 32d Cong. 2d Sess., 72, 104, 232, 243-4, 780; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., 1563; Id., 2d Sess., 164, 246; 34th Cong. 3d Sess., 253, 376; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., 1325, 1366; Id., 2d Sess., 323, 745, 759, 761; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., 1455; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 1271, 1318-19; Id., 3d Sess., 737; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., 562; 39th Cong. 1st Sess., 1339, 1383; H. Misc. Doc., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., no. 18; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 58; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 100; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 32; Id., 2d Sess., no. 10; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 78; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 53; 39th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 75; 40th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 99; 41st Cong. 1st Sess., no. 19; H. Ex. Doc., 31st Cong. 1st Sess., no. 5, 1002-4; 32d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 2, 272, 444-6; Id., no. 25, 1-4, 7-8, 14-33: Id., 2d Sess., no. 1, 299-300, 437-45; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 1, 12, 441-7, pt 3, 821; Id., no. 18; Id., 2d Sess., no. 1, pt 1, 224, pt 2, 63; 34th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 1,504, 515-26, 568-76, pt 2, 166-8; Id., 3d Sess., no. 1, 6-7, no. 37, 2-3, 128, 142-3; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 2, pt 1, 23-6, pt 2, 6-9, 21-38; Id., no. 33, passim; no. 71, passim; no. 93, 40-9, 77, 86-96; no. 99, passim; no. 138, passim; Id., 2d Sess., no. 2, pt 1, 8-10, 69-92, 77; pt 2, passim; pt 3, 780 2; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 1, pt 2, 14-15, 121-256, 608; Id., no. 78; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 58, no. 97; Id., no. 3, 78-85, no. 30, passim; 39th Cont. 2d Sess., no. 1, pt 2, 14-26; no. 20, 7-10; 41st Cong. 2d Sess., passim; Id., 3d Sess., no. 1, pt 2, it. 72; H. Com. Rept, 33d Cong. 2d Sess., no, 39, passim; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 201, passim; S. Jour., 31st Cong. 2d Sess., 406; 33d Cong. 1st Sess., 1003; Id., 2d Sess., 574-5; 34th Cong. 1st and 2d Sess., 943; Id., 3d Sess., 63, 298; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., 338, 1007-8; Id., 2d Sess., 450, 590, 660, 36th Cont. 2d Sess., 521-59; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., 1161; Id., 3d Sess., 618; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., 1009, 1029; Id., 2d Sess., 503; S. Ex. Doc., 32d Cong. 2d Sess., no. 33, passim; 33d Cont. 2d Sess., no. 33, 1-11; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 67; passim; Id., 2d Sess., no. 36, 68-73; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 32, passim; no. 42, passim; no. 52, 301-6; Id., 2d Sess., no. 1, 69-73, 224; 37th Cont. 1st Sess., no. 1, 58; S. Misc. Doc., 35th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 201, passim; no. 240, passim; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 12, passim; 37th Cong. 3d Sess., no. 37; S. Com. Rept, 37th Cong. 3d Sess., no. 87, passim; 45th Cont. 2d Sess., no. 142, passim; Cong. Globe, 1849-50, 1850-1, 1851-2, 1853-4, 1854-5, 1855-6, 1856-7, 1857-8, 1858-9, 1859-60, 1860-1, 1861-2, 1862-3, 1863-4, 1864-5, 1865-6, passim; Sec. Inter. Rept, 40th Cong. 2d Sess., 10-11, 173-89, 361-95; Sec. Treas. Rept, 1865, 326; 1866, 391; 1867, 442-3; Com. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1856, 227-9, 267; 1857, 306-8, 324, 380; 1859, 22, 365-73; 1861, 21; 1862, 210-14; 1863, 419-20; 1864, 16, 175-8; 1865, 143-4, 147-53; 1866, 124-5, 128-9; 1868, 5-6, 151-2; 1869, 270-1; 1870, 141-4, 191-2, 330-59; 1871, 545-51, 606-51, 683; Wilson, Ind. Agt at G. S. L., Rept, Sept. 4, 1849, passim; Chart. and Const., ii. 1236-40; Stat. 8th Census, passim; Rept Corn. Land-Office, 1864, 20; Millen. Star, xx. 107-9, 125, 186-9, 532, xxii. 348, 453-4, xxiv. 241-5, 257-61, xxvii. 118-20, 133-6, 150-2, 165-6, xxxii. 744-5, xxxvii. 673-6; S. Jour. (Cal.), 1850, 429-42, 1296; 1853, 645; S. Jour. (Nev.), 1867, 64-5; Utah Gov. Mess., 1870, 7-18; Jour. Legis., 1851-68; Acts, 1855-68; Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 5, 24-32, 56-8, 63, 336; Id., Quart. Mag., i. 190-8, 479, 526-8, 536-7; Id., Life of Young, 30-1; 196-212, 239-318, 329-55, 385-7; Id., Women, etc., 244, 353-8, 414-22, 441-8; Stenhouse's R. M. Saints, p. xxi., 262-471, passim, 591-621, 713; Id., Les Mormons, 39-41, 148-50, 172-202; Stenhouse's (Mrs) Tell It All, 248, 266-9, 324-39, 380-5, 462-3, 486-7, 496-8, 500-26, 548-9, 627-52; Id., Englishwoman, passim; Burton's City of the Saints, 2, 5, 21-5, 209-32, 265-99, 304-59, 406-32, 506-82; Lee's Morm., 16-35, 132-3, 218-50, 232, 240, 269-87, 379 -84; Remy's Journey to G. S. L., i. 189-200, 214-18, 446-52, 470-95, ii. 212-14, 240-5; Richards' Narr., MS., 22-4, 35, 123-4; Richards' (Mrs) Remin., MS., 39-46; Revue des Deux Mondes, 194-211; Rusling's Across Amer., 183-90; Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 162-5, 180; Rae's Westward by Rail, 127-8, 140, 169-82; Paddock's La Tour, 301-2, 323, 348-9; Hunt's Merch. Mag., xxx. 639; [p. 639] Hickman's Dest. Angel, 57-68, 107-12, 118-49, 158, 166-7, 205-9; Hyde's Morm., 28-49, 121-3, 147-50, 177-82; Greeley's Overland Jour., 206-57; Gun-nison's Morm., vii.-xiv., 83, 141-3, 146-7; Gwin's Mem., MS.; Green's Morm., 453-4; Glines (J. H.), in Utah Co. Sketches, MS., 21-2; Llewellyn, in Id., 43; Jones, in Id., 54-6; Morrison, in Id., 136-48; McFadyen, in Id., 153-7; Teas-dale, in Id., 100-11; Olshausen's Gesch. Morm., 153-89, 237-44; Ferris' Utah and Morm., 167-9, 185-90; Kirchoff's Reisb., etc., i. 107-8; Marshall's Through Amer., 177, 192; McClure's Three Thousand Miles, etc., 150, 435; Waite's The Morm. Prophet, 23-59, 60-113, 122-31, 214-46, 266-72, 278; Murphy's Min. Res., 87; Little's Jacob Hamblin, 45-7, 56-7, 75, 140; Linforth's Route, etc., 75-77, 104-16; Ludlow's Heart of Cont., 301-2; Mackay's The Morm., 176, 199-200, 233, 238-48, 258-9, 276; Ebey's Jour., MS., i. 146, v. 154, 219; Car-valho's Incid. of Trav., 141-3, 151-9, 188-99; Beadle's Life in Utah, 168-266, 390-485; Id., Western Wilds, 300-9, 490-530; ld., Uudevel. West, 646-53; Codman' s Round Trip, 171-2, 210-45; Cradlebaugh' s Speech, passim; Bertrand's Mem. Morm., 97-133, 246-8; Busch, Die Morm., 53-5; Id., Gesch. Morm., 46-158, 307-30; Dana's Great West, 271; Schiel's Reise, etc., 81-94, 100-2; Bowles' Our New West, 226, 266-8; Young's Wife No. 19, 228-61, 270-6, 341-8, 382-4; Townsend's Morm. Trials, 32-4; Wadsworth's Wagon Road, 12; Campbell's Idado, 11-12; Corr. Hist. Soc. Mont., 44-5; Comittant's Civili. Inconnues, 29; Clark's Statement, MS., 10; Dixon's White Conquest, i. 188-98; Siskiyou Co. Affairs, MS., 21; Revue Orient. et Amer., v. 299-306; Cradlebaugh's Nev. Biog., MS., 1; Kinney's (J. .F.) Speech, Mar. 17, 1864; Doc. Hist. Mex., 3d ser., 100-12; Moore's Pion. Explor., MS., 15-19; Marcy's Thirty Years, 267-75; De Lacy's Montana as It Is, 81; Brackett's U.S. Cavalry, 177-9; Hutchings' Cal. Mag., ii. 196, iv. 345-9; Hygiene U.S. Army, 332-3; Atlantic Monthly, iii. 573-84; De Smet's West. Missions, 396; Boadicea's The Morm. Wife; Frisbie's Retain., MS., 32-4; Chandless' Visit to Salt Lake, 154, 157 et seq.; Trans. Wyom. Acad. Sciences, 1882, 81-2; Simpson, Explor., 23; Life among the Morm., 186-93; Smith's Rise, Prog., etc., 19-30; Saxon's Five Years, 292-4; Snow's Poems, i. 225-6, 265-6; Stansbury's Explor. and Surv., 130-5, 148-50; Spence's Settler's Guide, 251, 259-60; Tucker's Morm., 222-46, 277, 280-7; Times and Seasons, v. 692; Utah Pamph., Polit., no. 14, 6-8; Stanford's Weber Co., MS., 23; Ward's Husband in Utah, 19-60, 178-290; Hughes' Voice from West, passim; Lee (J. D.), Trial, passim; Smith's Mystery and Crime, 30; Hollister's Resour. of Utah, 8; Huntington's Vocab. Utah and Shoshone Dialects, 27-9; Hand-book on Morm., 67-72; Hittell's Scrapbook, 94; Hayes' Scraps, Cal. Pol., vii. 57; Id., Indians, v. 214-17; ]d., Los Angeles, iv. 96, viii. 228-31, xvii. 3, 7; Id., S. Bernardino, i. 53, 58, 60; Id., Utah, passim; Rodenbough's Second Dragoons, 172-3; Richardson's Beyond the Mississ., 347-8, 362-3; Shelton (R.) and Meik's Def. of Morm., passim; Cram's Topog. Mem., 25-32; Crimes of L. D. Saints, 48-82; Mollhausen's Tagebuch, 429-30; Id., Reisen, etc., 25, 141, 410; Id., Das Mormon., 35-7, 102-7; Pratt's Autobiog., 483; Morse's Wash. Ter., MS., ii. 15-18; Smucker's Hist. of Morm., 216; Rinehart's Mem., MS., 3; Harper's Mag., xliv. 602; Pac. R. R. Repts, ii. 26-7; Putnam's Mag., ii. 263, v. 225-36; Utah Rev., Feb. 1882, 243-6; Trib. Alman., 1850, 51; 1854, 67; Amer. Alman., 1850, 109; 1851, 297; 1852, 116; 1853-61, passim; Fisher's Amer. Stat. Ann., 1854, 120; Sloan's Utah Gazett., 24-8; Amer. Quart. Reg., iii. 588-95; S. L. Direc., 1869, 64, 173; Des. News, 1855-77, too numerous to quote; Vidette, July 31, 1865; Review, Jan. 27, 1872; Contributor, v. 312-13, 446; S. F. Alta, 1849-76, too numerous to quote; Chronicle, June 17, 1877; Jan. 13, 1881; Examiner, Nov. 8, 1871; Jan. 10, 1872; July 21, 1875; Times, 1867, Feb. 2, June 4, 6, 13, Aug. 9, 15, Oct. 25; 1868, May 8, July 13, Sept. 29, Oct. 10, Dec. 17; 1869, Jan. 4, Mar. 23, May 20, Sept. 16; Post, 1877, Mar. 13, 22, 23, 24; 1878, Oct. 11; Herald, 1851, Nov. 2, 4; 1852, Aug. 21; 1853, June 12, Sept. 30, Dec. 3, 24; 1854, Feb. 22, May 31, June 25, Aug. 23, Oct. 1, 19; 1855, Mar. 14, Apr. 6, May 7, July 3; 1856, May 12, Nov. 11, 13; 1857, Feb. 25, May 14, June 19, Oct. 6, 12, 27, Nov. 2, 12, 25, 30, Dec. 1, 7, 17, 30; 1858, Jan. 12, 15, Mar. 11, Apr. 1, May 11, 27, June 29, July 10, Aug. 13; 1861, Jan. 30; Bulletin, too numerous to quote; [p. 640] Call, 1864, June 25, Aug. 17; 1865, Jan. 5, Mar. 3, May 6, June 1, July 29, Aug. 10, Oct. 3, Nov. 1; 1866, Nov. 1; 1867, Apr. 14, May 14, June 2, July 24, Aug. 1; 1869, Sept. 3; 1872, May 23, Sept. 23, Oct. 14, Nov. 19; 1875, July 18, 21; 1877, Feb. 16, Mar. 9, Apr. 1, May 3; 1881, July 30; Stock Rept, 1874, July 30, Nov. 27; 1875, July 24, 31; 1876, Sept. 23; 1879, May 2; Stock Exchange, Mar. 24, 1877; Californian, Jan. 26, 1848; Min. and Scien. Press, July 31, 1375; Mar. 31, ]877; Courier de S. F., Mar. 26, 1869; Spirit of the Times, July 14, 1877; Pac. Rural Press, Mar. 31, 1877; Wide West, Jan. 3, 1858; Cal. Star, Jan. 29, 1848; Golden Era, May 18, 1856; Oakland Tribune, Mar. 24, 1877; Appleton's Jour., xi. 592-3, 623; Cal., Its Past Hiptory, 211-16; Cal. Mercant. Jour., 1860, 183-4; Sac. Union, 1855-67, too numerous to quote; Bee, May 24, Nov. 2, 1869; Antioch (Cal.) Ledger, Nov. 21, 1875; June 12, 1877; Napa Co. Reporter, Apr. 7, 1877; Calaveras Chron., Mar. 31, 1877; Mariposa Gazette, Mar. 31, 1877; Wilmington Jour., Dec. 9, 1866; Havilah Courier, Apr. 27, 1867; Copperopolis Courier, Mar. 23, 1867; Watsonville, Pajaro Times, May 16, 1863; Petaluma Argus, Mar. 16; 1877; Sonoma Democrat, Mar. 31, 1877; Stockton Herald, Sept. 28, 1871; Independent, June 15, 1867; Nov. 4, 1875; June 11, 1879; San Jose Argus, Dec. 5, 1874; Herald, June 6, 1877; Times, Nov. 23, 1879; Lassen Advocate, Mar. 31, 1877; Anaheim Gazette, Mar. 24, 31, 1877; Sta Cruz Sentinel, May 12, June 30, 1877; Los Angeles Express, Mar. 24, 31, 1877; Herald, Mar. 24, 1877; Republican, Mar. 23, 24, 1877; San Buenaven-tura, Ventura Signal, Mar. 31, 1877; June 24, 1877; Free Press, Apr. 7, 1877; Winnemucca (Nev.) Silver State, July 19, 1875; Eureka Sentinel, July 17, 1875; Belmont Courier, Oct. 28, 1873; May 5, 1877; Prescott Miner, Dec. 18, 1874; Apr. 11, 1879; Austin, Reese Riv. Reveil., July 12, 1864; Aug. 18, 1865; Oct. 29, 1866; Jan. 22, 1867; Gold Hill News, 1864, Dec. 20; 1865, Mar. 17, July 8; 1872, Sept. 21; 1875, Feb. 1, Apr. 10, July 21, Aug. 4; 1876, Sept. 12; 1877, Mar. 12, May 25; Dayton, Lyon Co. Sentinel, July 16, 1864; Times, Mar. 24, 1877; Elko Independent, Aug. 7, 1875; Apr. 15, 1882; Carson Appeal, June 10, Aug. 2, 1865; Nov. 19, 1874; July 18, 1875; Oct. 27, 1876; State Register, Sept. 10, 1871; Sept. 26, 1872; Kanesville (Iowa) Front. Guard., 1849, Feb. 7, Oct. 3, 17, 31, Nov. 14; 1850, Mar. 6, May 29, June 26, Aug. 21; 1851, Mar. 21, Apr. 18, Aug. 22, Sept. 22; 1852, Feb. 6, 20, Mar. 4, 11, 18, 25; Boise (Idaho) News, Dec. 5, 1863; Feb. 20, Mar. 5, 1864; Statesman, 1865, June 8, Dec. 12; 1866, Nov. 3; 1867, June 16, Sept. 14, Nov. 2; Idaho City, Idaho World, Oct. 1, 1875; Honolulu (Hawaii) Friend, July 1, 1846; Virginia (Mont.) Madisonian, Nov. 24, 1877; Post, 1866, Oct. 8, 30, Nov. 3; Helena Independent, July 29, 1875; Apr. 5, 1877; Herald, Jan. 6, 1876; Walla Walla (Wash.) Statesman, Oct. 10, 1863; Olympia Pion. and Democ., Aug. 8, 1856; Puget Sound Courier, Sept. 22, 1876; Seattle, Puget Sound Herald, Sept. 15, 1858; Whatcom, Bellingham Bay Mail, Apr. 3, 1875; Portland (Or.) Standard, Apr. 6, 1877; Bee, Oct. 31, 1878; Oregonian, 1859, Oct. 15; 1863, June 10; 1865, Feb. 7, July 8, 13, Aug. 4, 17, Oct. 6, Nov. 9, 11; 1877, Apr. 7; Salem, Oregon Statesman, 1854, Jan. 24, May 2; 1857, July 28, Aug. 11, 18, Sept. 15, 29, Oct. 20, Nov. 3, Dec. 1, 29; 1858, Jan. 5, 12, Feb. 16, Mar. 16, 30, June 15, July 13, Oct. 12; 1862, Apr. 14, June 30; Jacksonville Democ. Times, Mar. 31, 1877; Oregon City, Oregon Argus, 1857, Feb. 27, Dec. 12, 26; 1858, Jan. 2, 23, Feb. 13, 20, 27, Mar. 6, 13, Apr. 24, June 19, July 16, 30, Aug 7, 14, 28, Sept. 11; 1866, Dec. 22; 1868, Sept. 11; Spectator, 1846 Aug. 6 20; Astoria Astorian, July 20, 1878; Roseburg Plaindealer, Apr. 28, 1877; The Dalles Mountaineer, 1866, May 17, June 8; 1867, Feb. 22.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 641]

  

CHAPTER XXIII.
 SCHISMS AND APOSTASIES.
 1844-1869.

THE STRANGITES--THE GATHERERS--BRANNAN'S FOLLOWERS--THE GLADDENITES--THE REORGANIZED CHURCH OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS--ALEXANDER AND DAVID HYRUM SMITH--THE UTAH MAGAZINE--TRIAL OF GODBE AND HARRISON--SUCCESS OF THE GODBEITE MOVEMENT--THE STRUGGLE FOR COMMERCIAL CONTROL--PERSECUTION OF GENTILE MERCHANTS--ZION'S COoPERATIVE MERCANTILE INSTITUTION--EXTENT OF ITS OPERATIONS--DISASTROROUS EFFECT ON GENTILE TRADE--REACTION IN FAVOR OF THE REFORMERS.

    During the life-time of Joseph Smith there was but one organized secession from the church, though, as we have seen, apostasies were frequent during his later years. If the words of the prophet were not the living truth, then could no faith be placed in Mormonism, for he and none other was regarded as the fountain-head of inspiration. But with his death the source of infallibility was removed, and thus the way was opened for schism and dissension, few of the diverging sects, however, having sufficient faith in their leaders to preserve them from final dissolution. The saints who followed Sidney Rigdon to Pittsburgh in 1844 became gradually scattered among the gentiles, a few of them, with William Marks at their head, afterward rejoining the church. To J. J. Strang, a prominent elder, were vouchsafed, as he claims, numerous revelations that in Wisconsin was the true Zion, and several thousands accompanied him to that state. Strang afterward settled at Beaver Island, in Lake Michigan, where he retained a small

[p. 642]

following until the time of his death. Parties also accompanied William Smith, the only surviving brother of the prophet, to northern Illinois, Elder Brewster to western Iowa, Bishop Heddrick to Missouri, and Bishop Cutler to northern Iowa. All of them were soon afterward dissolved, the remnants of Brewster's and Heddrick's disciples forming themselves into a new sect, under the name of the Gatherers, and settling in Jackson county, where they published a weekly periodical, styled the Truthteller. During the year 1846 a large Mormon settlement was made in Texas; and under the leadership of Apostle Lyman Wight the colony prospered and increased rapidly. Until 1852 they acknowledged allegiance to the first presidency, but when the doctrine of polygamy was proclaimed, they separated from the church. After the death of Wright, which occurred a few years later, his flock was scattered. A small portion of the members of most of these sects found their way to Salt Lake City, while others joined the reorganized church, as will be mentioned later, and the remainder cast in their lot with the gentiles.

    Of the party that sailed with Brother Sam. Brannan for California, in the Brooklyn, in 1846, about one fourth apostatized; their leader laying the basis of a fine fortune by investing in real estate funds, to a great extent at least, belonging to the Latter-day Saints. [*1] Of the Mormon colony, founded, as we have seen, at San Bernardino, in 1851, a considerable number fell into apostasy, though many joined the parent organization, and a few became members of the reorganized church.

    In addition to the various sects already mentioned and to be mentioned, numerous parties and individuals

[p. 643]

fell away during the migration from Nauvoo, many of the stakes becoming settlements of recusant Mormons, while numbers of the saints settled at Omaha, Nebraska City, and other towns on the Missouri and its tributaries. Some, as I have said, merely remained in the western states to obtain means for their journey to Zion, but of the twenty thousand persons who followed the apostles from Nauvoo, it is probable that nearly one third were eventually absorbed among gentile communities.

 

    In Utah, between 1852 and 1869, four distinct and organized attempts were made to throw off the yoke of Brigham, and establish what the apostates claimed to be a more perfect faith. These were the Gladdenite secession in 1852, the Josephite schism in 1860, the Morrisite movement in 1861, and the Godbe-Harrison schism in 1869.

    When the doctrine of polygamy was openly avowed in 1852, some of the saints were sorely offended, and accusing the hierarchy of having fallen from grace in other respects, formed themselves into a new sect, appointing as their leader Gladden Bishop, whence the name of Gladdenites. Together with other recusants, Gladden, who was several times disfellowshipped and readmitted on profession of repentance, had again rejoined the church, [*2] but being now disgusted with this new feature in the policy of the church dignitaries, worked with heart and soul against them. Among his followers was one Alfred Smith from St Louis, a man of great tenacity of purpose, and a bitter foe of Brigham, by whom, as he alleged, he had been stripped of his property. For a time the cause flourished, but on Sunday, the 20th of March, 1853, while Smith was holding services in front of the council-house, the gathering, though orderly and peaceable, was dispersed by the city marshal. Another meeting

[p. 644]

called for the following sabbath was dispersed, Smith being taken into custody, and detained until he promised to desist. On the same day Brigham spoke a few words concerning the apostates in the tabernacle. The whole matter was regarded of no great consequence by the church; nevertheless it was deemed best to shun the very appearance of evil, and consequently the president gave the people clearly to understand that there must be no more of it. [*3] Such warnings from the president of the church were never uttered in vain, and now the days of the Gladdenites were numbered. A few months later most of them set forth for California, the rest recanted, and after the year 1854 we hear no more of this apostasy.

 

    The most successful of the recusant sects was the one established by Joseph Smith, the prophet's son, who, with his brothers Alexander H. and David Hyrum, remained a Nauvoo after the exodus. [*4] A few years later the remnants of the Strangites and Cutlerites, being in search of a leader, organized a new church and requested Joseph to become their head. He at first refused, but in 1860, the number of members being then considerably increased by the breaking-up of other parties, he accepted the call as prophet, and began to preach the faith of his father, as he affirmed, in its original purity, repudiating the claims of Brigham and the doctrine of polygamy. The schism spread rapidly throughout Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa, the apostates being termed Josephites by the followers of Brigham, but styling themselves the Reorganized

[p. 645]

[paragraph continues] Church of Latter-day Saints. In Utah it was checked by fear of persecution, and not until the summer of 1863 did the movement become pronounced. In July of that year two Josephite missionaries, named E. C. Briggs and Alexander McCord, arrived in Salt Lake City, having crossed the plains, they said, as heralds of the gospel, and calling on Brigham, told him the object of their mission, and asked permission to preach in the tabernacle. This was, of course, refused; [*5] nor were they allowed the use of any other public building, whereupon the missionaries visited from house to house, offering up prayers for the inmates, and exhorting them to join the true faith.

    At first singly, then by dozens, and afterward by scores, converts were gathered into this fold, and in the spring of 1864 the Josephites in Zion mustered more than three hundred, the number of proselytes elsewhere being at this date between two and three thousand. [*6] Persecution followed, as they claimed; and in early summer about one half of the Josephites in Salt Lake City started eastward, so great being the excitement that General Connor ordered a strong escort to accompany them as far as Green River. To those who remained protection was also afforded by the authorities.

    The excitement caused by the evangelism of Briggs and McCord was renewed in the summer of 1869, when Alexander H. and David Hyrum Smith arrived at Salt Lake City as advocates of the reformed faith. Their meetings were held at Independence Hall, then the principal public building belonging to the gentiles, and at the first service a vast audience assembled, among the number being several of the wives of Brigham. At first the followers of Brigham trembled

[p. 646]

for the supremacy of their leader, and opposition meetings were organized under the management of Joseph F., the son of Hyrum Smith. [*7] But the mantle of the prophet had not fallen on his offspring; they were men almost without force of character, of lamb-like placidity, and of hopelessly mediocre ability; not shrewd enough to contend with their opponents, and not violent enough to arouse the populace. They accomplished little for the cause of the reorganized church.

    In 1860 the headquarters of the Josephites were established at Plano, Illinois, where, between 1860 and 1875, was published by this sect The True Latter-day Saint's Herald, and where in 1877 their leader still resided, [*8] Joseph being at that date president of the church, and Briggs the president of the twelve. A branch was also established at Malad in Idaho; a few of the sect gathered at Kirtland, [*9] and the remainder were scattered throughout the states. They rapidly increased, mustering in 1870 not less than twenty thousand in the United States, while in Europe entire churches joined the reformed faith, the name of the sect, and the more conventional morality of its doctrines, being among the causes of its success. [*10]

[p. 647]

    While the controversy between the prophet's sons and the prophet's nephew was at its height, an article appeared in the Utah Magazine, a periodical first issued in 1867, and of which elders W. S. Godbe and E. L. T. Harrison were proprietors, wherein appeared the following passage: "If we know the true feeling of our brethren, it is that they never intend Joseph Smith's nor any other man's son to preside over them simply because of their sonship. The principle of heirship has cursed the world for ages, and with our brethren we expect to fight it till, with every other relic of tyranny, it is trodden under foot." While speaking thus boldly, the magazine essayed the part of umpire between the disputants, and otherwise gave sore offence to the church dignitaries. [*11] About the same time an article was published urging the development of the mineral resources of Utah, a measure which found no favor with Brigham, for thus would the flood-gates be opened to the gentiles, while the saints might be tempted to worship at the shrine of Mammon, "I want to make a wall so thick and so high around the territory," he once exclaimed in the tabernacle, "that it would be impossible for the gentiles to get over or through it." [*12] Finally the elders were summoned before the school of prophets, by

[p. 648]

which offenders are examined before being sent for trial by the high council, and though the most serious charge against them was the publication of the article on mineral developments, both Godbe and Harrison were expelled from the church. [*13]

    That the elders should have openly advocated the development of the rich mineral resources of Utah may appear from a gentile standpoint a slight provocation for so extreme a measure; but it should be remembered that from the earliest occupation of the territory mining for the precious metals had been strongly discountenanced by the priesthood. This was in fact a most essential part of the policy in accordance with which the Mormons had sought for seclusion in the vales of Deseret, in order to preserve their liberty and individuality as a religious community. From the day when news arrived of the gold discovery, their leaders had denounced all emigration to California. Gold-seekers were indiscriminately classed as worldlings and apostates, or at least held to be weak in the faith. Nevertheless, the accounts received from members of the Mormon battalion, who had witnessed the discovery and shared in the excitement which followed it, produced a crisis that threatened their very existence as a people, and one which, perhaps, none but the Mormons could have withstood. When, in later years, mineral prospects were disclosed in Utah, and prospecting largely carried on by gentiles, all such efforts were discouraged; for they could result only in drawing into the territory a class of men dangerous to its institutions, and might even seduce from their allegiance the members of the church. Thus in the light of its full history must the policy of the Mormon hierarchy be considered in excluding from its fold this disturbing element.

    No attempt was made, however, by either of the elders to excuse this portion of the charges brought against them. Their defence was confined merely to the question of their alleged apostasy, and to the authority

[p. 649]

of the priesthood. When their case was handed to the high council, the recusants, instead of pleading their cause, merely read a series of resolutions touching measures of church reform, Godbe denying Brigham's right to enforce obedience, whether in matters secular or spiritual, and Harrison stating that if it was apostasy to differ conscientiously from the priesthood, then he must be considered an apostate. "We claim," they said, "the right of respectfully but freely discussing all measures upon which we are called to act. And if we are cut off from this church for asserting this right, while our standing is dear to us, we will suffer it to be taken from us sooner than resign the liberties of thought and speech to which the gospel entitles us; and against any such expulsion we present our solemn protest before God and angels." It remained only to pass sentence of excommunication, and in due form the elders were delivered over to the buffetings of Satan for a thousand years.

    But a few days later there appeared in the Utah Magazine an account of the trial, together with a protest and appeal to the brethren, afterward copied in the New York Herald and other leading journals. "It had been argued," remarked the recusants, "that we must passively and uninquiringly obey the priesthood, because otherwise we could not build up Zion. A nation built up on such a principle could be no Zion. The only glory or beauty there could be in a Zion must result from its being composed of people all of whom acted intelligently in all their operations." Supported as it was by a portion of the wealth and intelligence of Utah, the Walker brothers, the Tullidge brothers, Stenhouse, Lawrence, and Eli B. Kelsey, [*14] the reformation gathered weight. On Sunday, the 19th of December, 1869, services were held for the first time by the reformers, in the chapel of the assembly-rooms in the thirteenth ward, and in the

[p. 650]

evening at the Masonic hall. [*15] Before a dense audience, was sung by the choir the first hymn in the Mormon hymn-book, composed by Parley P. Pratt:

"The morning breaks, the shadows flee,
     Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled;
 The dawning of a brighter day,
     Majestic rises on the world."

[paragraph continues] Then followed speeches by Godbe, Harrison, and Lawrence, in which the gentiles, who formed one-third of the audience, were assured that the reformation would be continued with a purpose that would swerve not before Brigham and his apostles.

    The so-called Godbeite movement, however, though for a time it excited considerable interest in business circles, was a matter of small moment to the church generally, producing little effect on the masses of the members. The movement in its incipiency was the immediate occasion rather than the real cause of Godbe and his adherents leaving the church. No man can consistently be continued a member of any church if he persists in refusing to submit to the final decisions of the church authorities. His arrival at that point of insubordination is almost always the result of a growth of greater or less rapidity, and occupying more or less time in development. Godbeism at first professed to be an attempt to reform and purify the church, in part by the aid of spiritualism, but the reform pretensions were evanescent, quickly fading away, so that for many years nobody has looked upon the movement as a religious one in any respect. In fact with the fleeting religious pretensions the very name of the movement soon died out, and the prominent persons connected with it early manifested a skeptical spirit toward religion of every kind, and directed their energies more completely into channels of business and money-making. "I have been instrumental," writes Godbe in 1884, "in establishing and conducting enterprises that have required an outlay of

[p. 651]

[paragraph continues] $1,000 a day for ten years, and have given employment to many hundreds of people." [*16]

 

    The struggle for the commercial control of Utah began at an early date in its history. Among the Mormons there were few men of business training, and until the advent of the overland railroad made it certain that Salt Lake City would become a commercial centre, the policy of Brigham was to discourage commerce and commercial intercourse. Nevertheless, gentile merchants, by whom traffic was mainly conducted, as late as 1860 were subject to a running fire of ridicule and condemnation directed against them from the tabernacle. The objection to them was twofold: first, the dislike to the presence of gentiles, in whatever capacity; and second, the fact that they absorbed the small amount of floating capital that the brethren possessed. He who should hold traffic with a gentile was considered weak in the faith, but as goods could be purchased from gentile merchants

[p. 652]

to advantage, the saints were tempted sometimes to trade with them, and frequently did so, and that without the severe censure on the part of the church, which has been often alleged.

    Among those who had transactions with gentile merchants were the Walker Brothers, who in 1868 were among the prominent merchants of Salt Lake City, and had contributed in no small degree to its commercial prosperity. The firm subscribed liberally for all the purposes to which the church funds were applied, but refused to pay tithes or to recognize the right of the church to collect tithing. [*17]

    During this year, and partly with a view to placing the trade of Utah under church control, so far at least as the brethren were concerned, the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution was organized. [*18] Aside from such motives, however, there were good reasons for securing to the country the benefits of the cooperative system, for, as we shall see later, the prices of imported commodities were still extravagantly high. [*19] To protect the people from these high prices by importing from first hands and in large quantities was the professed, and perhaps the main, purpose of the promoters. After passing through some financial difficulties, the enterprise seems to have obtained a permanent foothold, and is yet a successful competitor with gentile tradesmen, supplying at wholesale many of the settlements in Utah, in addition to its local and retail trade. In 1883 the total sales exceeded $4,000,000, a half-yearly dividend of five per cent being paid in October of that year. At this date the association had a reserve fund of about $125,000, and

[p. 653]

a capital of $1,000,000, divided into $100 shares, and distributed among 700 or 800 stockholders. [*20] The head of the church continued president of the institution after it was no longer under control of the church, but managed simply on business principles, representing Mormon as against gentile trading interests. [*21] Branches were established at Ogden, Logan, [*22] and Soda Springs, and, as we shall see later, the cooperative movement spread rapidly throughout the country, though most of these ventures resulted in failure, many of the stores being compelled to close during the commercial panic of 1873.

[p. 654]

    The first effect of this movement on the trade of gentile merchants was disastrous, the sales of the Walker Brothers, for instance, decreasing in a brief space from $60,000 to $5,000 per month, [*23] while those of the Auerbach Brothers fell off in like ratio, [*24] these two firms, among others, offering to dispose of their entire property to the directors of the Zion's Cooperatire Institute for fifty cents on the dollar, and leave the territory. [*25] The offer was refused. Hence, perhaps, as will presently appear, the rapid development of the mining resources of the country after 1869, toward which purpose several prominent merchants, among them Godbe and the Walker Brothers, applied the remnants of their fortunes. Soon, however, even the Mormons began to disregard the warnings of their leaders against trading with gentiles or apostates. The spell was broken, and during the conference of 1870 the stores of the latter, and especially of the Walker Brothers, were so crowded with purchasers that it was almost impossible for them to serve their patrons. The reformers preached against and wrote against the president, and the better to support their cause, established a newspaper named the Salt Lake Tribune, at first a weekly and afterward a daily publication,

[p. 655]

in which the church dignitaries and their policy were severely criticised. Thus of all the apostasies the Godbeite movement, with its attendant incidents, was the most formidable, and wrought more harm in Zion than any which had preceded it, appealing, as it did, to the common sense and the self-interest of the community.

Footnotes

^642:1 Beadle, Life in Utah, 404--5, states that Brannon afterward repaid the money with interest, but it would be difficult to make the early Californians believe it. About 45 adults and 65 children of the Brooklyn party remained in California, a few afterward joining Mormon communities at San Bernardino or in Arizona. Nearly 100 adults and some 40 children reached Utah, most of them in 1848-50. See Hist. Cal., v. 544, this series.

^643:2 Ferris states that Gladden was cut off and rebaptized nine times. Utah and the Mormons, 326. See also Olshausen, Mormonen, 182.

^644:3 Jour. of Disc., i. 82; Deseret News, Apr. 2, 1853; Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 120-1; Beadle's Life in Utah, 408-9; Ferris, Utah and the Mormons, 328-30. Brigham was followed by Parley Pratt, who said that he had known Gladden for 20 years, and had seldom heard his name mentioned, except in connection with some imposition or falsehood in the name of the Lord.

^644:4 Beadle says that the prophet left a considerable fortune, mostly in houses and lands at Nauvoo. Life in Utah, 428. Even if this is true, we well know that the houses and lands of the Mormons in Nauvoo were worth little to them when the expulsion came.

^645:5 In Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 129, it is stated that Brigham said he would not be responsible for Briggs' safety if he remained in the city.

^645:6 Bowles, Our New West, 268, his work being published in 1869, incorrectly places the entire number at 1,500. In Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 129 (published in 1866), we read: 'In the states, those who have gone back to their first love are to be numbered by thousands.'

^646:7 Stenhouse says that debates between the two parties were held in public. Rocky Mountain Saints, 629 (note).

^646:8 S. Lake Herald, June 6, 1877.

^646:9 Ibid.; McClure's Three Thousand Miles, 435.

^646:10 The Josephite creed will be found in Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 130-1; Utah Scraps, 16. It contains the following: 'We believe that the church in Utah, under the presidency of Brigham Young, have apostatized from the true order of the gospel. We believe that the doctrines of polygamy, human sacrifice, or killing men to save them, Adam being God, Utah being Zion, or the gathering place for the saints, are doctrines of devils.' In other respects their creed was almost identical with the Mormon articles of faith. Codman, who attended their services, remarks: 'They use the same religious books in their worship, and argue from them the prohibition of polygamy with as much earnestness as Orson Pratt displays in its advocacy.' The Round Trip, 210.

    The second Joseph Smith, junior, was born at Kirtland Nov. 6, 1832. His early life was spent in Missouri and Illinois, whither he went with his parents. F. G. Mather received a letter from him in 1879, saying: 'I am now pretty widely recognized as the leader of that wing of the Mormon church declaring positive Mormonism, but denying and opposing polygamy and Utah Mormonism.' I give herewith a copy of an inscription on one of the pillars of the temple at Kirtland, as reported by Mather, Lippincott's [p. 647] Mag., Aug. 1880. 'The Salt Lake Mormons. When Joseph Smith was killed on June 27, 1844, Brigham Young assumed the leadership of the church, telling the people in the winter of 1846 that all the God they wanted was him, and all the bible they wanted was in his heart. He led or drove about two thousand people to Utah in 1847, starting for upper California and landing at Salt Lake, where in 1852 Brigham Young presented the polygamic revelation to the people. The true church remained disorganized till 1860, when Joseph Smith took the leadership or presidency of the church at Amboy, Illinois. We [thirty thousand] have no affiliation with the Mormons whatever. They are to us an apostate people, working all manner of abomination before God and man. We are no part or parcel of them in any sense whatever. Let this be distinctly understood, we are not Mormons. Truth is truth, wherever it is found.' For further particulars as to apostate sects before the year 1869, see S. F. Alta, May 21, 1857, July 3, Aug. 2, 1867; S. F. Bulletin, May 22, 1857, Aug. 10, Nov. 15, 1867; Sacramento Union, Apr. 22, May 20, June 8, Sept. 3, 18, 1857, Dec. 3, 1859, June 28, Aug. 5, 1867.

^647:11 In the Deseret News of Nov. 3, 1869, is a notice signed by the members of the first presidency and three other apostles, cautioning the saints against its teachings, and stating that it is unfit for perusal.

^647:12 Godbe's Statement, MS., 2.

^648:13 Ibid.; Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 48.

^649:14 Kelsey, who voted against their expulsion, was also excommunicated. Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 640.

^650:15 For account of secret, benefit, and benevolent societies in Utah, see Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 218-26.

^651:16 Godbe's Statement, MS., 29. For further mention of the Godbe schism and incidents connected with it, see Tullidge's Mag., i. 14-55; Stenhouse's Expose of Polygamy, 132-45; Dixon's White Conquest, i. 208-12.

    William S. Godbe, an Englishman by birth, began his career as a sailor; but after being twice shipwrecked, tired of seafaring life, and while yet a lad, betook himself to America. Having made the acquaintance of several Mormons, and being charmed with the story of their adventures, he decided to cast in his lot with them, and journeyed nearly the whole distance on foot between New York and Salt Lake City, where he arrived in 1851, and found employment with a merchant named Thomas Williams, in a few years becoming himself a leading merchant. Between 1857 and 1884 Mr Godbe crossed the Atlantic 21 times, and the plains over 50 times. After his excommunication from the church, and the consequent loss of his business, finding himself, as he says, $100,000 in debt, whereas a year before he had been worth $100,000, he followed mining as an occupation, and in 1873 organized in London the Chicago Silver Mining Co., one of the few English companies that have proved successful in Utah. Of his ventures in mining, mention will be made later. Of Mr Harrison, he remarks that he is 'a man of unusual mental qualities, of earnest nature, and has an overruling love of truth, honesty, and straightforwardness.'

    The Statement of William Godbe, MS., contains, in addition to matter relating to the Godbeite movement and personal memoirs, some valuable information on mining, together with much adverse comment on the Mormon hierarchy, terse and well put, though hurriedly written. 'They don't make many converts in the United States,' he remarks; 'they don't look for them. They make a few in the south, where the condition of things is analagous, more or less, with that which exists in Europe; but they make most of their converts in the latter country.'

^652:17 Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 2.

^652:18 On the 16th of October. Business was opened March 1, 1869, and the company was incorporated Dec. l, 1870. Zion's Coop. Merc. Inst., MS., 1. Brigham Young was the principal stockholder, and Geo. Q. Cannon, Geo. A. Smith, Wm Jennings, H. S. Eldredge, and Wm H. Hooper were among the first directors. For constitution, by-laws, form of certificates of stock, and incorporation, see Utah Religious Pamphlets, 9, 10.

^652:19 See cap. 28, notes  and , this vol.

^653:20 Deseret Ev. News, Jan. 2, 1884. The main building, on East Temple street, S. L. City, was 318 by 100 ft, the front being of iron, and the roof fireproof. It was furnished with hydraulic elevators, fire and burglar proof vaults, and all modern appliances. Zion's Coop. Merc. Inst., MS., 1-2. In connection with the institution was a tannery and shoe-factory, in which about 170 hands were employed in 1883.

^653:21 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 58-9. For further mention of the institution and its origin, see Marshall's Through Amer., 176-7; Stenhouse's Englishwoman, 371-3; Townsend's Mormon Trials, 41-2; Tullidge's Mag., 1. 363-8; for cut of buildings, Id., facing p. 385. In connection with it, it may be mentioned that Horace S. Eldredge, who has been connected with the institute from its inception, was appointed president in 1872, and in 1884 was superintendent. Mr Eldredge, a native of New York, arrived in Utah in 1848, after passing through all the tribulations of Far West, Nauvoo, and Winter Quarters. In 1868, being then in partnership with H. B. Clawson, he sold out his stock of goods to the institute.

    Hiram B. Clawson, a native of Oneida co., N.Y., was educated at the Utica academy. In 1841, his father being then deceased, and the rest of the family having joined the Mormon church, he moved with them to Nauvoo, and in 1848 to the valley of Great Salt Lake. Though only 22 years of age, he was looked upon as a man of mark, and was employed in superintending the construction of some of the first buildings erected by the church in Salt Lake City. During the Utah war he figured prominently as adjutant-general of the Nauvoo legion, and just before the departure of the troops from Camp Floyd effected a complete reconciliation between the military and the church authorities. Appointed superintendent of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institute, in 1873 he was sent east in company with H. S. Eldredge to ask for an extension of credit, in view of the panic then prevailing in commercial circles. He met everywhere with a favorable response, and within eight months the company redeemed its obligations, amounting to $1,100,000. During his management Mr Clawson states that the losses of the institution by bad debts did not exceed a quarter of one per cent. In 1875 he resigned the superintendency, having purchased from the directors the agricultural department of the Z.C.M.I., to which he added a machinery department, furnishing grist and saw mills and steam-engines complete, together with all the different kinds of machines commonly in use throughout the territory. During the earlier part of his career Mr Clawson took a leading part in theatrical affairs, and to him and John T. Caine are largely due the success and prosperity of the Salt Lake theatre. Tullidge's Mag., i. 678-84.

^653:22 For 1883 the sales of the Ogden branch were about $800,000, and of the Logan branch, of which Aaron Farr was manager, about $600,000.

^654:23 Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 3. Samuel Sharp, Joseph Robinson, David, Frederick, and Matthew Henry Walker were in 1883 the members of this firm. Englishmen by birth, being the sons of a Yorkshire squire, possessed in 1846 of a considerable landed estate, but who, like thousands of others, suffered financial shipwreck during the railroad panic of the following year, they arrived at S. L. City in 1852, at which date there were only five business houses on Main street. They laid the basis of their fortune during the presence of the army at Camp Floyd, soon making their mark among the commercial community, and being classed a few years later among the leading merchants of Utah. After 1869 their attention was chiefly given to mining, in which connection further mention will be made of the firm. Autobiog. of the Walker Bros., MS.

^654:24 The Auerbach Bros., a dry-goods firm, state that at this time ruin stared them in the face, and but for the mining developments which followed almost immediately afterward they could not have remained in the territory. Fred. H. and Sam. H. Auerbach, natives of eastern Prussia, came to S. L. City in 1864, after suffering heavy business reverses in Austin, Nev., where they afterward paid their debts in full in gold coin. Their sales for 1885 amounted to about $500,000. Auerback's Edmunds Bill, MS.; Utah Biogr. Sketches, MS., 9-10.

^654:25 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 52; Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 3.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 656]

  

CHAPTER XXIV.
 THE LAST DAYS OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.
 1869-1877.

VISIT OF SCHUYLER COLFAX--GODBE'S INTERVIEW WITH PRESIDENT GRANT--GOVERNOR SHAFFER--MILITARY RIOT AT PROVO--GOVERNOR WOODS--JUDGE MCKEAN--BURLESQUE OF JUSTICE--ARREST OF BRIGHAM YOUNG AND OTHERS--GEORGE Q. CANNON CHOSEN DELEGATE--AXTELL'S ADMINISTRATION--GOVERNOR EMERY--DEATH OF BRIGHAM--HIS OBSEQUIES--HIS CHARACTER--HIS WILL.

    "WILL Brigham Young fight?" inquired Schuyler Colfax of Elder Stenhouse, during his sojourn at Salt Lake City in 1869. [*1] "For God's sake, Mr Colfax." answered the elder, "keep the United States off. If the govermnent interferes and sends troops, you will spoil the opportunity, and drive the thousands back into the arms of Brigham Young who are ready to rebel against the one-man power. Leave the elders alone to solve their own problems. We can do it; the government cannot." But with the exception of Abraham Lincoln, none of the presidents were of the opinion that it was best to leave the Mormons alone. At this date there is little doubt that Grant was resolved on the suppression of polygamy, even if need be at the cost of war. Meanwhile the famous Cullom

[p. 657]

anti-polygamy bill [*2] was before the representatives, and the honorable Thomas Fitch was amusing congress with his speeches on the prospect of another Mormon war. [*3] Early in 1870 mass-meetings were held at the tabernacle, by men and women, to protest against the bill, and to draw up a remonstrance against its provisions. A memorial was also prepared and forwarded to congress, setting forth the revelation on polygamy and the duties of the Mormon church in that connection, wherein it was declared that the church would stand by its faith and polygamy institutions in spite of all human will and law. [*4] During this year, also, an act was passed by the territorial legislature, granting the right of suffrage to women, but the measure subsequently adopted in Wyoming and elsewhere seemed to be in advance of the times, [*5] or was in some way unpopular, and little use has ever been made of the privilege. [*6]

    Among those who realized the danger of the situation were the leaders of the Godbeite movement, who well knew that, in the event of another Mormon war, the dramatic farce of Buchanan's administration could not be reinacted, and that if the United States government again entered into the controversy, it would never withdraw from it until it had cut with its sword the Gordian knot of Mormonism.

[p. 658]

[paragraph continues] Already the apostles had declared their intention of laying the settlements of Utah in ashes and leading their people in another exodus; but an effort was made to save them, and from a source somewhat unexpected. It was resolved by the leaders of the Godbeite faction that William Godbe should proceed to Washington and state to the president the true condition of affairs. "Mr Godbe," remarked the latter, after listening to his arguments, "I am as solicitous as you can possibly be to preserve the Mormon people;" and then he declared that he would save them from their leaders by checkmating their policy. During his visit Godbe also sought an interview with Cullom, and discussed with him the provisions of the bill, section by section, pleading his cause with such warmth and earnestness that all the animus of the congressman gave way, and the bill was not brought up for action in the senate. The substance of the policy recommended by the emissary of the liberal party in Utah was to establish over Utah a firm and efficient federal rule, rather than resort to special legislation or armed interference; and in these views the president heartily concurred.

    J. Wilson Shaffer of Illinois, an old comrade of Rawlins, then secretary of war, was the man selected for the occasion, and on the resignation of Durkee, was appointed in his stead. [*7] At this time Shaffer was suffering from an incurable disease, and knew that he had but a few months to live. Nevertheless he accepted office as a trust from the president. "Never after me," he declared, "shall it be said that Brigham Young is governor of Utah." On the 15th of September, 1870, the annual muster of the Nauvoo legion being then at hand, he issued a proclamation forbidding all musters, drills, or gatherings of the militia, and all gatherings of armed persons of whatever

[p. 659]

description, except as a posse comitatus ordered forth by himself or by the United States marshal. [*8]

    After some correspondence with General Wells, the musters in the various districts were postponed until further notice, by command of the latter, though they had been regularly held for eighteen years, and returns duly made, in accordance with an act of congress approved in 1803. In 1870 the militia, which has never since been assembled, included about 13,000 men, most of them efficiently armed, drilled, and equipped, while the United States troops stationed at Camp Douglas, Camp Rawlins in Utah county, and elsewhere in the territory, numbered only a few hundred. [*9]

    The proclamation was ill-advised, and for what purpose it was issued, save as a puerile expression of the

[p. 660]

governor's authority, does not appear. The result, however, was most unfortunate; for the soldiery, among whom discipline appears to have been somewhat lax at this period, now supposed themselves masters of the situation. At midnight on the 23d of September a party of forty or fifty men from Camp Rawlins entered the town of Provo, armed with needle-guns, bayonets, and revolvers, and crazed with whiskey. Surrounding the residence of Alderman W. Miller, they fired several shots into his bedroom window, smashed in his doors, and dragged him from his chamber. Thence passing up Centre street, they tore down the sign and stove in the doors of the cooperative store, and then proceeded to the house of Councillor A. F. McDonald, which they completely demolished, scattering its contents on the sidewalk. After some further outrages, as parading defenceless citizens through the streets, beating them with rifles and pricking them with bayonets, yelling, meanwhile, as they passed along the thoroughfares, "Come out, you God damned Mormons and Mountain Meadows massacreers," they returned to camp. [*10]

    The only provocation for this disturbance appears to have been the fact that Miller refused to grant the soldiers, at their own terms, the use of a hall in which to hold a social gathering, and that the bishops had counselled the people of their wards, and especially the young women, not to hold intercourse with them. An effort was made to bring the offenders to justice, but, as during the administration of Governor Cumming, there was no harmony between the chief magistrate and the commander of the forces. After waiting several days for action to be taken by the military, Shaffer despatched to General De Trobriand, at Camp Douglas, a letter, in which he stated that if the soldiery could not be restrained, it were better for

[p. 661]

the territory to be left to itself. To this the general replied that he was perfectly agreed; that it would be the best thing for all if the territory, its governor, legislature, municipalities, and militia, were left to themselves; and that if the troops had also been left alone, instead of being poisoned physically with bad whiskey and morally with bad influences, there would have been no trouble with them. Both letters were published in the Deseret News, [*11] and of course drew forth much comment from the saints, who were probably of opinion that, if the soldiers had such proclivities, it was at least the business of their commanding officer to restrain them.

    No further incident remains to be chronicled as to the career of Governor Shaffer, whose decease occurred in October 1870, [*12] his successor being Vernon H. Vaughan, [*13] a mild and conservative ruler, concerning whose brief administration there is nothing worthy of record. [*14] To him succeeded George L. Woods, a Missourian by birth, a pronounced anti-Mormon, and one who, as a ferryman in Idaho, [*15] and judge and politician in eastern Oregon, had accumulated and lost a considerable fortune. He was a man who, though by no means of the highest and purest morality himself, was, it seems, exceedingly jealous

[p. 662]

for the morality of the nation. On the 10th of March, 1871, Woods took the oath of office, and about six weeks later arrived at Salt Lake City, James B. McKean of New York being appointed about this date chief justice, with C. M. Hawley of Illinois and O. F. Strickland of Michigan as associate judges. [*16]

    The administration of Governor Woods lasted for about four years, but during that period he sought no opportunity of making the acquaintance of Brigham Young. When invited by the first councillor to call, as had been the custom with his predecessors, [*17] he replied that the lowest subordinate in the United States ranked higher than any ecclesiastic on earth, and that he should not call until the president first called on him. The reader may judge the chief magistrate by his own words. "My first conflict with the church occurred," he says, "July 4, 1871. The organic act of the territory made the governor commander-in-chief of the militia. The Mormon legislature, prior to that time, usurped that authority, and invested it in Daniel H. Wells, the third in the church. (They had a pantomime, in which B. Young played God the Father, Daniel H. Wells God the Son, and John H. Smith the Holy Ghost.) That law was in force on my arrival. On July 1, 1871, Wells issued an order as commander-in-chief to the militia of the territory to assemble at Salt Lake City July 4th to participate in the celebration. I resented this usurpation, and forbade them to assemble, but my prohibition was disregarded. Thereupon I ordered to the rendezvous three companies of infantry, one of cavalry, and a battery of artillery, and dispersed them at the point of the bayonet. This practically ended the Nauvoo legion. Immediately thereafter,

[p. 663]

by concerted action of the federal officials, an effort was made to punish judicially the church criminals." [*18]

    The governor was ably seconded by the chief justice. In October Brigham Young, George Q. Cannon, and others were arrested for lascivious cohabitation. Motion made to quash the indictment was overruled by McKean; "for," he remarked, "while the case at bar is called the people versus Brigham Young, its other and real title is Federal Authority versus Polygamic Theocracy." In the indictment were sixteen counts, extending back to the year 1854, thus attempting to give an ex post facto interpretation to the act of 1862. The president's health was feeble at this time, and on the application of his attorney, a continuance was granted until the March term. One Thomas Hawkins, however, was convicted during this term, on the evidence of his first or legal wife, sentenced under this act to three years' imprisonment with hard labor, and fined $500. But the severest portion of the sentence was the homily. "Thomas Hawkins," commenced the chief justice, "I am sorry for you--very sorry. You may not think so now, but I shall try to make you think so by the mercy which I shall show you...The law gives me large discretion in passing sentence upon you. I might both fine and imprison you, or I might fine you only or imprison you only...It is right that you should be fined, among other reasons to help to defray the expense of enforcing the laws." [*19]

    Two or three days before sentence was passed on Hawkins, this being of course a test case, Daniel H. Wells and Hosea Stout were arrested on a charge of murder, Brigham Young, William H. Kimball, and others being indicted on a similar charge. [*20] Wells

[p. 664]

was admitted to bail, [*21] Stout and Kimball were handed over to the authorities at Camp Douglas, and Brigham, hearing that his case was set for the 8th of January, 1872, immediately set out from southern Utah, where he was sojourning, and travelling over 350 miles of mountainous country in midwinter, delivered himself into custody. He was placed in charge of the marshal, bail being refused even in the sum of $500,000, and detained a prisoner in his own house, until discharged on the 25th of April, by Justice White, on a writ of habeas corpus. [*22]

    In sore disgust, the people of Utah adopted yet another constitution, which was forwarded to congress, together with a memorial for admission as a state, but without result. [*23] A bill was passed appropriating $50,000 toward the expenses of the constitutional convention, but was vetoed by the governor, who gave, among other reasons, the open violation of the act of 1862, and the crimes committed against law and public decency in the name of religion. [*24] So far, indeed, did the governor push his privilege, that he insisted even on nominating the territorial librarian and the superintendent of common schools. [*25]

    Meanwhile the condition of affairs in the superior courts of Utah was simply lamentable. During a

[p. 665]

portion of McKean's term of office there were no funds wherewith to defray expenses, and the so-called administration of justice was openly burlesqued. In 1872 the removal of the chief justice was urged by the legislature. [*26] This was not yet to be; but after some further judicial blunders, [*27] he was finally superseded in March 1875 by David T. Lowe. [*28]

 

    For ten years William H. Hooper had been delegate to congress, and was in need of rest. He had done his duty faithfully; more acceptably, perhaps, to members of congress than any of his predecessors, and it was no easy task to fill his place. George Q. Cannon was the man selected, although an apostle and a practical polygamist. The election of Cannon was contested by George R. Maxwell, registrar of the land-offlce, [*29] who in 1870 had received a few hundred votes, as against 26,000 in favor of Hooper; but in that year and again in 1874 had no well-grounded hope of success, save his reliance on popular prejudice. At the first session of the forty-third congress he prevailed on one of the members from New York to introduce a resolution embodying a number of charges against the apostle. The reading of his certificate was then demanded, in which it appeared that he had a majority of 20,000 votes, and thereupon he was admitted. [*30]

[p. 666]

    The contest between Cannon and Maxwell was sharp but decisive, a thorough canvass being made by the latter, and its results showing how completely the saints were in unison with their church leaders. Many persons could have been found better qualified than the apostle, notwithstanding his great ability, but Brigham had so willed it. At this election, if we can believe the chief magistrate, freedom of speech was first used in Utah, and by Governor Woods. Here as on other occasions [*31] he intermeddled, playing

[p. 667]

the part rather of a sergeant of militia than of a ruler. A woman who appeared at the polls and offered her ballot was refused, and insisting on her privilege, was removed by the police, by order of Jeter Clinton, judge of election. Woods protested, whereupon Clinton threatened to arrest him, but after an unseemly altercation, the latter, according to the governor's account, narrowly escaping being lynched by the gentiles, was dragged fainting by the chief magistrate into a gentile store, while the life of Woods was also threatened by the Mormons. The matter was settled without bloodshed. [*32] What business the chief magistrate had at the polls he does not explain, though he closed the proceedings by a defiance of the Mormons and their threats, while illustrating what he considered freedom of speech in phrase which contained at least considerable freedom of language.

    At the close of 1874 Woods retired from office, [*33] his successor being S. B. Axtell of California, whose policy brought on him the censure of the gentile press, by which he was accused of complicity with the Mormon leaders in their political and other designs. [*34] He was removed in June 1875, his successor being George B. Emery of Tennessee, who held office until January 1880. Emery's policy was strictly neutral,

[p. 668]

and therefore he was roundly abused by the gentile press. [*35] It is worthy of note, however, that as the Mormons were now for the first time left undisturbed, there was little which needs record in their annals as a body politic, [*36] except that from their midst passed one whose place never could be filled. At the obsequies of the great president who had cut the cords of slavery, and being asked to banish its sister institution, said "Let them alone," believing that in time it would banish itself, none felt the nation's loss more grievously than did the Mormons. And now on the 29th of August, 1877, Brigham Young was summoned to render his account at the great tribunal before which all must appear.

    Although for several years he had been in feeble health, he was able to attend to his manifold duties until six days before his death. Retiring at eleven o'clock on the night of Thursday, the 23d of August, after delivering an address before the bishops' meeting in the council-house, he was seized with an attack of cholera-morbus, and suffered severely till the morning of the following Saturday, when he obtained a few hours' sleep, opiates being administered to relieve the pain caused by cramping of the muscles. During the afternoon, however, inflammation of the bowels set in, and throughout this and the following day he continued to moan at intervals, though when asked whether he was in pain he invariably replied, "No, I don't know that I am." On Monday morning there were strong symptoms of nervous prostration, among which was a constant moving of the hands and twitching of the

[p. 669]

muscles. During all this time his only nourishment was a tablespoonful of milk and brandy, administered at brief intervals, in the proportion of one ounce of the latter to eight of the former. At 10 o'clock on Monday night he sank into a comatose condition, from which he was aroused with difficulty by stimulating injections, and early on the following morning he sank down on his bed apparently lifeless. Artificial respiration was resorted to, and hot poultices were placed over the heart to stimulate its action. [*37] Thus his life was preserved for a few hours longer; but at five o'clock on the afternoon of the 29th of August, 1877, being then in his seventy-seventh year, he passed away quietly, surrounded by his family and intimate friends, the last rites of the church being administered by several of the apostles, to whom he responded in a clear and unfaltering voice, "Amen!" [*38]

    At eight o'clock on the morning of the 1st of September the remains of President Youug, escorted by members of his own family, by members of the twelve, and by others of the priesthood, were conveyed to the tabernacle, the coffin being enclosed in a metallic case draped in white and wreathed with flowers. The funeral rites were appointed for noon on the following day, and during each hour of the interval a constant stream of visitors, numbering in all some twenty-five thousand, passed through the great aisle of the building, all being allowed to stop and gaze for a moment

[p. 670]

on the features of him who had been to them for so many years as their God on earth, their faithful guide and counsellor. Throughout the territory flags were hung at half-mast, and civic and religious societies united in rendering tribute to one who had gained the respect and almost outlived the hatred of the civilized world. It was indeed a day of mourning in Israel, of grievous and heart-felt mourning, for to all his followers he had been a friend and benefactor, so far as they would accept his aid and receive his teachings. From Europe, also, and from various portions of the United States, came messages of condolence, and in every quarter of the globe the death of Brigham Young excited more remark than would that of a great monarch.

    Throughout the entire day clouds lowered in heavy masses over the city of the saints, and from them fell light but frequent showers, as if in sympathy with the multitudes that thronged the tabernacle; but on the morning of the 2d the sun rose over a clear, unruffled sky, ushering in one of the calmest and brightest sabbaths that had ever been seen in Zion. Long before the hour appointed for the services, more than thirty thousand persons were gathered in or around the tabernacle, the aisles, the doorways, and every inch of space being occupied. The building was tastefully decorated. From the immense arch which spans the interior depended strands and garlands of flowers grouped in rich profusion, in their midst being a massive floral centre-piece. Under the entire gallery wreaths were festooned between the pillars with baskets pendent, the front of the platform, the stands, and the organ being draped in black. The coffin, constructed according to the late president's orders, [*39]

[p. 671]

decked with chaplets, but stripped of its case and drapery, stood on a plain catafalque in view of the congregation. On the president's stand were his councillors, John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells. The apostles, of whom ten were present, occupied their accustomed seats, the north side of the platform being set apart for the bishops and councillors of stakes, and the south front for the city council, the band, and glee club; while to the family of the deceased were allotted the seats immediately facing the stands, his four brothers being in front.

    Precisely at noon the vast assemblage was called to order by George Q. Cannon, who, at the request of the president's family, presided over the ceremonies. First was sung by a choir of two hundred voices the hymn commencing:

"Hark from afar a funeral knell,"

to a tune composed for the obsequies of George A. Smith, whose decease occurred in 1875, [*40] and now

[p. 672]

used for the second time. Then followed prayer by Franklin D. Richards, after which addresses were delivered by Daniel H. Wells, Wilford Woodruff, Erastus Snow, George Q. Cannon, and John Taylor. A second funeral hymn was sung, [*41] a benediction pronounced by Orson Hyde, the congregation was dismissed, and the remains of Brigham Young were conveyed to their resting-place at his private cemetery in the suburbs of the city, where thousands gathered to witness the closing ceremonies. [*42]

 

    Some thirty years had now elapsed since the president of the church, stricken with mountain fever and seeking for the remnant of his followers an abiding-place, had stood enwrapped in vision on the Pisgah of the west, and as he gazed for the first time on the desert and dead sea that lay beneath, forecast the future glory of Zion. [*43] And who shall say that he had not lived to see his vision realized? During these years, which compassed scarce the span of a single generation, he had built cities and temples; he had converted the waste lands of Deseret into gardens and grain-fields; he had laid the basis of a system of manufactures and commerce that was already the envy of older and more favored communities; he had sent forth his missionaries to all the civilized countries of the earth, and gathered the chosen of Israel from many nations; he had rescued myriads from the sorest depths of poverty, giving to all a livelihood, and to

[p. 673]

the deserving and capable a competence. All this he had accomplished, beginning wellnigh without a dollar, [*44] and in a region forsaken by mankind for its worthlessness, struggling at times almost hopelessly against the unkindliness of nature and the unkindliness of man.

    Esteemed by his followers as an angel of light, and considered by his foes as a minister of evil, an impostor, a hypocrite, a murderer, he was in fact simply an enthusiast, a bigoted and egotistical enthusiast, as the world believes, but a practical and farsighted man, one who by his will, ability, and intuitive knowledge of human nature was fitted to combat the difficulties that beset each step in his path of life, and to give cohesion to the heterogeneous elements of which his people was composed. "As I sat near his bed," remarked George Q. Cannon, "and thought of his death, if it should occur, I recoiled from the contemplation of the view. It seemed to me that he was indispensable. What could we do without him? He has been the brain, the eye, the ear, the mouth, and hand for the entire people of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. From the greatest details connected with the organization of this church down to the smallest minutiae connected with the work, he has left upon it the impress of his great mind." [*45]

    Not least among the traits in the character of Brigham was the faculty for accumulating wealth; and this he did, not, as his enemies have asserted, by

[p. 674]

foul means, [*46] but by economy and close attention to his business interests. Of all the business men in Utah he was perhaps the most capable, but in the art of making money he had no set system; merely the ability for turning money to account and for taking care of it. He purchased saw-mills and thrashing-machines, for instance, and let them out on shares; he supplied settlers and emigrants with grain and provisions; from the lumber and firewood which he sold to the troops at Camp Floyd he is supposed to have netted some $200,000, and from other contracts a much larger sum. By many he is accused of enriching himself from the appropriations of tithes, and by plundering alike both saint and gentile, whereas none paid his church dues more punctually or subscribed to charities more liberally than did the president. That with all his opportunities for making money honestly and with safety he should put in peril his opportunities and his high position by stooping to such fraud as was commonly practised among United States officials of exalted rank, is a charge that needs no comment. [*47] He had a great advantage in being able to command men and dictate measures, but he did not rob the brethren, as many have asserted. At his decease the value of his estate was estimated at $2,500,000, [*48] though as trustee for the church he controlled a much larger amount.

[p. 675]

    Brigham was certainly a millionaire, but his fortune barely sufficed to provide for his family a moderate competence, for he had married twenty wives, [*49] and unto him were born more than fifty children, of whom 16 boys and 29 girls survived him. In the body of his will the wives were divided into classes, and to each of them was given a homestead, the sum of $25, payable one month after his decease, and such amount payable in monthly instalments as in the opinion of his executors might be needed for their comfortable support. [*50]

[p. 676]

Footnotes

^656:1 Colfax also visited Utah in 1865. For reception and purpose of visit, see Richardson's Beyond the Miss., 345-6, 348-9; Bowles' Our New West, 203-4; Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 355-8; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 613-15. For speech of Colfax, in 1869, in which, probably, the sentence most acceptable to the Mormons was the concluding line, 'I bid you all good night and good by.' see The Mormon Question (S. L. City, 1870), wherein is also a reply by John Taylor, an article on the Mormon question by the vice-president, published in the New York Independent, and a rejoinder by Taylor.

^657:2 For debate and amendments when the bill passed the representatives, see Cong. Globe, 1869-70, 2180-1.

^657:3 For career of Thomas Fitch in Utah, see Elliott & Co.'s Hist. Arizona, 289.

^657:4 For copy of memorial and resolutions, see Sen. Misc. Doc., 41st Cong. 2d Sess., no. 112, The Utah Bill, 33-40, wherein is a speech by delegate W. H. Hooper, delivered before the representatives March 23, 1870, and published in pamphlet form, as was also the speech of Aaron H. Cragin before the senate, May 18, 1870, the two forming nos. 4 and 5 in Utah Pamphlets, Political. The memorial and resolutions were referred to a committee which of course reported adversely. H. Corn. Rept, 41st Cong. 2d Sess., i. no. 21.

^657:5 Woods' Recollections, MS., 67. See, for report in favor of female suffrage, Utah Jour. Legisl., 1870, 81-2; for act granting right of suffrage, Utah Acts Legisl., 1870, p. 8; Utah Pamphlets, Polit., no. 14, 8; Deseret News, Feb. 16, 1870.

^657:6 At the municipal election held two days after the passage of the act only a few of the women voted, the first one being Seraph Young, a niece of the president. Tullidge's Women, 498.

^658:7 The interregnum between Durkee's resignation and the arrival of Shaffer was filled by secretaries Edwin Higgins and S. A. Mann, to the latter of whom the women of Utah tendered their thanks for signing the female-suffrage bill. See Deseret News, March 2, 1870. For complimentary resolutions from legislature, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1870, 183.

^659:8 For copy of proclamation, see Millennial Star, xxxii. 668; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 63.

^659:9 In 1875 the U.S. government called for bids for the rebuilding of Camp Douglas, or as it is now termed, Fort Douglas. The contract was awarded to the Watson Brothers. For description of buildings, see Surgeon-Gen. Circ. 8, 1875, 332-46. In 1872 a military post was established near Beaver City. For reasons and descriptions, see H. Ex. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., xv. 285; Sen. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., i. 12. For list of military reservations in 1882, see H. Ex. Doc., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., xviii. no. 45, p. 1181. For military organization for protection against Indians in Cache county in 1859-76, see Tullidge's Mag., ii. 122-31. For Indian raid on Kanarra, Iron co., see Utah Hand-book of References, 81; for Indian depredations in 1870, Utah Co. Sketches, MS., 78-80; S. F. Bulletin, June 30, July 6, 8, 1870; for troubles in San Juan co. on account of miners' encroachments, H. Ex. Doc., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., xii. pt 2, p. 193; Ind. Aff. Rept, 1872, p. 93; Sacramento Union, Oct. 1, 1872; S. L. C. Tribune, Sept. 14, 1872; Deseret News, Sept. 25, 1872. A brief report on the condition of Indians at this date, with statistics, will be found in U. S. H. Com. Rept, 42d Cong. 3d Sess., 365-72, 246-56, 325-6, 414-58. For remarks on the condition, management, and wants of Indians in 1872, see Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept, 1872; H. Ex. Doc., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., xii. no. 157; for condition and treatment of Indians on reservation in 1873-4, Sen. Doc. 43d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 42; Ind. Aff. Rept, 1874, 3-4, 52-3, 104-79, 270-1, 276-7; for Indian uprising at Corinne in 1875, S. F. Chronicle, Aug. 2, 3, 12, 1875, Sept. l, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 17, 1875; for cause, Id., Sept. 6, 1875; for Indian outbreak in 1875, S. F. Alta, Aug. 11, 1875; Chico (Butte) Record, Sept. 4, 1875. Reports of agents on reservation Indians in 1876-7 will be found in H. Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., viii. 550-60, 577-82. 642-62, 677-717. In 1878 congress paid to Ben Holladay $526,789 for property destroyed by Indians and losses sustained by change of mail-route. Portland Oregonian, June 21, 1878. For Indian troubles in 1879, see Or. Deutsche Zeitung, Oct. 25, 1879; in 1881, Deseret News, July 6, 1881; for information relating to Indian tribes and reservations in 1881-2, see H. Ex. Doc., 47th Cong. 1st Sess., x. 327, 344. For acts concerning Indians in 1882, see Utah Laws, 1882, pp. 32, 40. In August 1884 Gov. Murray made a requisition for troops to protect citizens against Utes. S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 14, 1884.

^660:10 A despatch from A. O. Smoot, mayor of Provo, giving an account of the outrage, together with the depositions of the injured parties, will be found in the Deseret News, Sept. 28, 1870.

^661:11 Of Oct. 5, 1870, and also in the Deseret Evening News, the publication of which will be mentioned later. De Trobriand states that, as there was no organization of military districts in the department of the Platte (which included Utah), the commanders of the several posts must communicate with the department headquarters, and that as soon as he received the requisite authority he proceeded to Provo and held an investigation. His letter is extremely insulting and indecorous.

^661:12 On the 24th of this month Wm H. McKay, with whom the governor had resided, and two others, robbed the U.S. mail about 100 miles south of S. L. City, in Juab co. They were captured the next day, and McKay was sentenced to five years' imprisonment. This was the first mail-coach robbery in Utah. Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 64. For argument between J. P. Newman and Orson Pratt at the tabernacle on the polygamy question during the autumn of this year, see Millennial Star, xxxii. 599-604, passim.

^661:13 Shaffer's secretary, and about a month after his decease appointed governor. Geo. A. Black, secretary to Woods, was also acting governor in 1871. Paul's Utah Incidents, MS.; Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS.

^661:14 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 32.

^661:15 At Lewiston, where he and his two partners made from $250 to $300 a day. Woods' Recoll., MS., 3.

^662:16 Chas C. Wilson succeeded Titus as chief justice. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS. Geo. C. Bates, who in 1870 succeeded C. H. Hempstead, appointed in 1868, was now district attorney. For his argument in the Baker habeas corpus case on the jurisdiction of probate courts, see Utah Pamphlets, Political, no. 12. A list of federal officials between 1851 and 1884 is given in Utah Gazetteer, 254-8.

^662:17 With the exception of Shaffer. Woods' Recoll., MS., 45.

^663:18 Id., 46-7.

^663:19 Deseret News, Nov. 1, 1871. For adverse comments of the press on the Hawkins case, see Austin Reese River Reveille, Carson Daily Register, Sacramento Reporter, Omaha Alta, in Millennial Star, xxxiii. 764-5. In Townsend's Mormon Trials is an impartial account of McKean's anti-Mormon crusade.

^663:20 Wells and Stout were arrested for the murder of Rich. Yates, at the mouth of Echo canon; Young, Kimball, Wm A. Hickman, O. P. Rockwell, [p. 664] G. D. Grant, and Simon Dutton, for the murder of a man named Buck, at Warm Springs. Woods' Recoll., MS., 47; Millennial Star, xxxiii. 744, 808-9.

^664:21 The prosecuting attorney asked that the bail fixed at $500;000, but the judge said he would be satisfied with two sureties each of $50,000. Deseret News, Nov. 1, 1871.

^664:22 Millennial Star, xxxvii. 788-91. In the case of Clinton et al. vs Englebrecht et al., the judgment rendered for $60,000 against the municipal officers of S. L. City it for suppressing an unlicensed liquor store was reversed by the supreme court. Millennial Star, xxxiv. 296. For grounds, see Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 68-9. This decision annulled indictments against more than 120 persons.

^664:23 A copy of the memorial and constitution is contained in Utah Pamphlets, Political, no. 8. See also Deseret News, March 6, 1872; House Misc. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., iii. no. 165. For counter-petitions, see Id., iv. no. 208; Sen. Misc. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., ii. no. 118.

^664:24 Woods' Recoll., MS., 50; Millennial Star, xxxiv. 117-80; Deseret News, Jan. 31, 1872; House Misc. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., iii. no. 155; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1872, pp. 85-7. For resolution censuring veto, and in favor of convention and election of delegates, see Id., 1872, pp. 104-5.

^664:25 Utah Jour. Legisl., 1872, p. 36.

^665:26 Utah Jour. Legisl., 1872, p. 231.

^665:27 In his charge to the grand jury, October term, 1874, MeKean, after quoting Montesquieu, 'I shall first examine the relation which laws have to the nature and principle of each government,' 'and if I can but once establish it, the laws will soon appear to flow from thence as from their source,' stigmatizes the Mormons in more vile and insulting phrase than had been used even by judges Brocchus and Drummond. See Deseret News, Oct. 14, 1874; Millennial Star, xxxiii. 550.

^665:28 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 38. See, for opinions of press on McKean's removal, Millennial Star, xxxvii. 282-5; for message of the president on judicial administration in Utah, Sen. Doc., 42d Cong. 3d Sess., no. 44; for act in relation to judiciary, House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. 997.

^665:29 Maxwell entered the union army when 17 years of age, and at 21 was a brigadier-general. During the war he had both legs broken, his right arm fractured, lost three fingers of his left hand by a sabre-cut, and had his collarbone broken by grape-shot, besides receiving several flesh wounds. Woods' Recollections, MS., 39-49.

^665:30 For further particulars as to the Cannon-Maxwcel contest, see House Misc. [p. 666] Doc., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 49; House Com. Rept, 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 484; Argument of Halbert E. Paine, in Utah Pamphlets, Political, no. 13; Millennial Star, 99-100, 104-6; Paddock's La Tour, 292; S. L. C. Tribune, Nov. 30, 1872. In 1867 Hooper's election was disputed by William McGrorty. For papers in the case, see House Misc. Doc., 40th Cong. 2d Sess., no. 35; for comments, Deseret News, May 27, 1868. At the opening of the 44th congress Cannon's seat was also disputed by a man named Baskin.

    William H. Hooper was born at the old homestead known as Warwick Manor, Eastern Shore, Md, in 1813, his father, who died during William's infancy being of English descent, and his mother of Scotch extraction. When 14 years of age he obtained a position in a store; and from this beginning rose step by step, until in 1836 we find him a member of a leading commercial firm at Galena, Ill. During the crash of 1838 the firm suspended, their debts, amounting to $200,000, being afterward paid in full. In 1850 he moved to Salt Lake City under engagement to Messrs Holliday & Warner, commencing business on his own account some four years later. In 1856 he was temporarily appointed secretary of the territory after the death of Almon W. Babbitt, and in 1859, as we have seen, was chosen delegate for Utah at the 36th congress, serving in the same capacity during the 39th, 40th, and 41st congresses. In 1808 Mr Hooper was appointed a director of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, and in 1877 became its president, retaining that position until his decease at the close of 1882. For further particulars, see Tullidge's Mag., i. 369-85, 427-30; Contributor, iv. 184-6, suppl. 25-7; Beadle's Western Wilds, 91-2; Deseret News, Feb. 8, 1860. Hooper was an able speaker, terse, to the point, and forensic. 'If,' he replied in answer to a memorial of the Salt Lake gentile lawyers, 'congress declined to enact a law that would have enabled Chief Justice Chase to pick out a jury that should convict Jefferson Davis of treason, ought it now to enable Chief Justice McKean to pick out a jury to convict Brigham Young of polygamy? It seems to me that the law would be a greater offence against the spirit of democratic republican institutions than is the existence of the evil thus sought to be reached.'

^666:31 In consequence of the military riot above mentioned, the police were instructed to arrest disorderly or drunken soldiers on slight provocation, and fine them or put them to work in chain-gangs. After protesting without avail, Woods reported the matter to the war department, and thereupon a general order was issued to the commanders of military posts, instructing them not to allow the arrest of their men except for violation of the known laws of the land. Soon afterward a soldier was arrested on a trifling charge, whereat, his release being refused, the governor proceeded to the jail with Major Gordon and a detachment of troops, knocked out the wall with a battering-ram, and 'amid hurrahs for the American flag, set the prisoner free.' Woods' Recoll., MS., 53-5.

^667:32 Id., 55-9.

^667:33 See for the memorial presented by the gentiles, setting forth the immorality and despotism of the Mormons and the insecurity of life among the gentiles, House Misc. Doc., 43d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 120; for opinion of various newspapers on the Mormon question, Deseret News, Jan. 17, 1872; for denial by gentile merchants of the disturbed condition of affairs, as alleged in various newspapers, Id., May 8, 1872. In 1867, and again during the administration of Woods, it was proposed to annex Utah to Nevada without consulting much the wishes of either. For reports of committee of the senate of Nevada on the matter, see Nev. Jour. Ass., 1867, 183-4, 195-7; Nev. Jour. Sen., 1871, 160-2; Millennial Star, xxxiii. 161-2.

    Samuel Paul, a native of Londonderry, Ireland, who served for four years as a volunteer during the war, and came to Utah in 1865, says that while the Mormons would render no assistance to the governor or his so-called ring, he was well treated in all the settlements which he visited. Paul's Utah Incidents, MS. For description of and comments on the political ring from a Mormon standpoint, see Millennial Star, xxxiv. 68-70; xxxvi. 120-2; for Vorhees' and Wheeler's bill, introduced April 1, 1872, 'to aid the enforcement of the laws of the territory of Utah,' see Deseret News, April 17, 1872.

^667:34 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 32.

^668:35 See S. L. C. Tribune, April 14, June 2, 1877.

^668:36 On the 22d of April, 1876, Dom Pedro, emperor of Brazil, visited Salt Lake City on his way eastward; and on October 3, 1875, President Grant, this being the first occasion on which a president of the United States set foot in the territory. For account of these visits, and also those of General Sheridan, Henri Rochefort, Jay Gould, and William Hepworth Dixon in 1874, James G. Blaine in 1873, generals Garfield and McClellan and the Japanese embassy in 1872, see files of the Deseret News; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1872; Ventromiles' Tour, 74-5; Tullidge's Life of Young, 441. Sheridan's visit was mainly for the purpose of establishing another military post in Utah, Provo being the point selected.

^669:37 On the evening of Tuesday a consultation was held by his physicians, S. B. Young, W. F. Anderson, J. M. Benedict, and F. D. Benedict, and it was resolved to fill up the lower portion of the bowels by injection, for the purpose of causing an action through the alimentary canal; but this treatment was discontinued on account of fainting symptoms. The coma was attributed to the pressure of the swollen bowels, which checked the circulation to the heart and lungs. Deseret Ev. News, Aug. 31, 1877.

^669:38 Francis Dorr, who crossed the plains in 1850, and rendering assistance to the Mormon trains, was told by Brigham that he would ever be welcome to Salt Lake City, paid the Mormons avisit in 1877, and was kindly received by their prominent men. He is of opinion that Brigham's last illness was partly caused by fear of being arrested and tried for complicity in the Mountain Meadows massacre. Dorr's Statement, MS., 3. I find no confirmation of this theory, which is extremely improbable, in view of the evidence and the statements of the counsel for the prosecution at the Lee trial. See pp. 566-8, this vol.

^670:39 Nearly four years before his death, Brigham gave instructions as to his funeral, and at the same time a number of elders gave orders as to their own interment. 'I, Brigham Young, wish my funeral services to be conducted after the following manner: When I breathe my last I wish my friends to put my body in as clean and wholesome state as can conveniently be done, and preserve the same for one, two, three, or four days, or as long as my body can be preserved in a good condition. I want my coffin made of plump 1 1/4-inch [p. 671] redwood boards, not scrimped in length, but two inches longer than I would measure, and from two to three inches wider than is commonly made for a person of my breadth and size, and deep enough to place me on a little comfortable cotton bed, with a good suitable pillow for size and quality; my body dressed in my temple clothing, and laid nicely into my coffin, and the coffin to have the appearance that if I wanted to turn a little to the right or left I should have plenty of room to do so.' After giving instructions as to the services and place and method of interment, he concludes: 'I wish this to be read at the funeral; providing, that if I should die anywhere in the mountains, I desire the above directions respecting my place of burial to be observed; but if I should live to go back with the church to Jackson county, I wish to be buried there.' Address of Geo. Q. Cannon, in Deseret News, Aug. 31, 1877.

^671:40 George Albert Smith, cousin to the prophet on the father's side, his mother being descended from the Lymans of revolutionary fame, was born at Potsdam, N. Y., in 1817. In the spring of 1833 the family started for Kirtland, where they were heartily welcomed, and during the summer George was employed in quarrying and hauling rock, and other duties in connection with the building of the Kirtland temple. He was also one of those who went up to redeem Zion in Jackson co., Mo., returning three months later after travelling some 2,000 miles, most of the way on foot. Of his missionary labors mention has already been made. Ordained a member of the first quorum of seventies in 1835 and an apostle in 1839, he was one of the pioneer band at the exodus from Nauvoo, and almost until the day of his death took a prominent part in settling and redeeming the vales of Deseret. Elected member for Iron co. under the provisional state government, he was afterward appointed church historian, and represented the same constituency during several sessions of the territorial legislature. After the death of Heber C. Kimball in 1868, he was appointed first councillor to Brigham, having previously been elected president of the legislative council, which latter office he held during [p. 672] six consecutive sessions. For further particulars as to his life, character, and abilities, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1876, pp. 65-8; Richards' Narr., MS., 94; Deseret News, Aug. 11, 18, 1858, June 16, Sept. 8, 1875; S. L. C. Tribune, Sept. 4, 11, 1875; Tullidge's Life of Young, suppl., 7, 13; Townsend's Mormon Trials, 47; S. L. C. Contributor, 1882, passim; Codman's Round Trip, 230-3; Beadle's Western Wilds, 92-3 (with cut). In 1860 the son of Geo. A. Smith was killed by Navajos. Deseret News, Dec. 5, 1860.

^672:41 Composed for the occasion by Charles W. Penrose.

^672:42 In accordance with his father's instructions, a stone vault had been built by John W. Young in the south-east corner of the cemetery. It was of cut stone, dowelled and bolted with steel and laid in cement. The interior was also cemented and whitened. Deseret News, Aug. 29, 1877, where is a full description of the obsequies, afterward published in pamphlet form, and entitled Death of President Brigham Young.

^672:43 See pp. <page 261>-2, this vol.

^673:44 He had about $50, then almost the only money in Utah.

^673:45 For sketches of the character, physique, and policy of Brigham Young, see, among others, Hist. Brigham Young, MS; Utah Early Records, MS., passim; Richards' Rem., MS 15; Richards Narr., MS., 83-4; Burton's City of the Saints, 290-4, 300; Hyde's Mormonism, 137-8; Tullidge's a Life of Young, 456-8; Utah Pamphlets, Religious, no. 3, p. 19; Bowles' Across the Continent, 86-7; Mackay's The Mormons, 286; Stenhouse's Englishwoman, 163-7; Young's Wife No. 19, 162-5; Beadle's Life in Utah, 265-7,362; Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi, 352-3; Rae's Westward by Rail, 106-7; Ludlow's Heart of the Continent, 366-9, 371-3; Rusling, Across America, 177-8. Mention is made of these points in more detail on pp. 200-6, this vol. A history of Brigham Young is published in the Deseret News, commencing with the issue of Jan. 27, 1858, and continued in subsequent numbers.

^674:46 Stenhouse, for instance, relates that in 1852 he balanced his account with the church, amounting to $200,000, by directing his clerk to place this sum to his credit for services rendered, and that in 1867 he discharged his liabilities, amounting to $967,000, in a similar manner. Rocky Mountain Saints, 665. Such statements are pure fiction.

^674:47 In the records of the internal revenue office at Washington his total income for 1870 is stated at $25,500, in 1871 at $111,680, and in 1872 at $39,952.

^674:48 It has been stated in several books and many newspaper paragraphs that Brigham had large deposits in the Bank of England, the amount being placed as high as $20,000,000. This is entirely untrue. Stenhouse, for instance, says that a New York journalist who visited him in 1871 inquired as to this report, the sum being then stated at $17,000,000. Brigham replied that he had not a dollar outside of Utah, but that the church had some small amount abroad for its use. The following extract from Richards' Narr., MS., may serve to explain the matter: 'The rumor that President Young ever had any money in the Bank of England is entirely false. When I was in Liverpool I [p. 675] opened an account with the branch of the Bank of England in that city, but finding their charges too high, transferred it to the Royal Bank of Liverpool, where it remained between 1850 and 1867. On the failure of the bank I was fortunate enough to get my money. There was a time in our business when there was $20,000, or $30,000 to our credit. This money came from the profits on publications, and from the deposits of people who wished to emigrate. Donations were also remitted to us from Utah, and the company's fund was sustained by the emigration business.' Franklin D. Richards, the author of this manuscript, was nephew to Willard Richards, who, as will be remembered, was appointed secretary of the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company. See <page 415>, this vol.

^675:49 In 1869, at which date the Boston board of trade visited S. L. City, Brigham said that he had 16 living and 4 deceased wives, and 49 surviving children. This was the first time that Mormon or gentile knew how many his family mustered. Utah Notes, MS., 1-2. In Waite's The Mormon Prophet, 191-214, is a burlesqued description of some of his wives, and of their treatment. Wife No. 19, or the Story of a Life in Bondage, being a Complete Expose of Mormonism, by Ann Eliza Young, is, though the writer affects to be impartial, rather a discharge of venom by a woman scorned. She was of mature age when married, and if she had not then sense enough to understand the responsibilities she was assuming, one would think that, some years later, she ought at least to have had discretion enough to abstain from inflicting her book and lectures on the public. The most valuable part of the work, if it can be said to have any value, is the chapter on the case of Young vs Young, in which Judge McKean awarded to the plaintiff $500 a month as alimony, and committed defendant to jail for refusing to pay it. His decision was reversed by Judge Lowe.

^675:50 For copy of will, see S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 19, 1883. It has been alleged that Brigham claimed to be a prophet. This he distinctly denied. In Utah Notes, MS., it is stated that the lame, halt, and blind flocked to him to be healed, and that he used great tact in dealing with them. One man who had lost a leg came to him to be made whole. Brigham said it should be as he wished; but those created with two legs would have two legs in heaven; hence, if he casused a new one to be framed, the man would have three for all eternity.

    Patriarch and President John Young, brother to Brigham, died April 27, 1870. For biographical sketch, see Deseret News, May 4, 1870. The decease of Joseph A., Brigham's eldest son, occurred Aug. 10, 1875. For biography, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1876, pp. 206-8. On July 10th of this year died Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses to the authenticity of the book of Mormon. His age was 92. Among others whose decease occurred during the period to which this chapter refers may be mentioned Ezra Taft Benson, [p. 676] a native of Mendon, Mass., who worked on his father's farm until he was 16 years of age, afterward becoming hotel-keeper, and later proprietor of a cotton-mill in the same state. In 1839 we find him at Quincy, Ill., whither he had gone in search of a home, and where, during the following year, he was converted by the preaching of Orson Hyde and John E. Page. In the autumn of 1849 he was ordained an elder, and in the summer of 1845 an apostle, most of th interval being passed in missionary work in the eastern states. In April 1847 he accompanied the pioneers, finally settling in the valley two years later. After some further missionary work, he was appointed, in 1860, brigadier-general of militia in the Cache Valley district, where he lived until the dare of his decease, Sept. 3, 1869, his death being probably caused by heart disease. When the provisional government was established be represented Salt Lake county in the legislature, and when Utah was made a territory was chosen a member, first of the representatives for Salt Lake county, and for the last ten years of his life, of the council for Tooele county. Deseret News, Sept. 8, 1869. At his death joint resolutions were passed in the assembly as a tribute of respect, for which see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1870, 185-6.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 677]

  

CHAPTER XXV.
 CHURCH AND STATE.
 1877-1885.

CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH--REORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY--JOHN TAYLOR APPOINTED PRESIDENT--HIS APPEARANCE AND MIEN--THE EDMUNDS BILL--ITS PENALTIES--AN EX POST FACTO LAW--POLYGAMISTS DISFRANCHISED--UTAH AGAIN REFUSED ADMISSION AS A STATE--OPERATIONS OF THE UTAH COMMISSION--GOVENOR MURRAY'S MESSAGE--HIS ADMINISTRATION.

    MANY years before the death of Brigham Young it was predicted that whenever that event should happen dissensions would occur among the Mormons, if not entire disintegration of the sect; for die when he would, or succeed him who might, such absolute power as he possessed would never be tolerated in another. He was elected at a time when his people were in distress, and accepting him as their deliverer, they had almost sunk their individuality, vesting him with all the powers of pope and potentate. But now, it was said, all was changed. Contact with the gentile world, the establishment of gentile schools and churches, together with other influences that had long been at work, were telling gradually upon their faith. Already they had grown weary of the yoke, and once Brigham was laid in the tomb, his followers would no longer exist as a people. Never was anticipation so ill-founded. The world was now to learn that the inherent vitality of Mormonism depended not on the existence of any one man or body of men, not even on the existence of the twelve. "If every apostle was slain but one," remarked George Q. Cannon at

[p. 678]

the October conference of 1877, "that one had the right and authority to organize the church, and ordain other apostles and a first presidency to build up the kingdom of God."

    On the decease of the president of the church, there was for the second time in its history no quorum of the first presidency, to which authority, and to no other, as the prophet Joseph had declared, the twelve were subject. Once more, therefore, until the presidency was reorganized, the apostles must step forward and take its duties upon themselves. [*1] At a meeting of the quorum, held two days after the obsequies of Brigham, ten of the number being present, [*2] it was unanimously resolved that John Taylor, the senior apostle and acting president of the apostles, should be sustained in his office, and that the quorum should be the presiding authority of the church. [*3] But this resolution, as well as the election of all the authorities of the church, from the twelve down to the deacons and teachers, must be indorsed by a vote of each quorum of the priesthood and of the people assembled in conference.

    The forty-eighth semi-annual conference of the church was held, as was now the custom, in the great tabernacle; [*4] and in addition to the general congregation, there were present more than five thousand of the priesthood. First was presented the name of John Taylor; then in their order and separately those of each member of the twelve, together with councillors John W. Young and Daniel H. Wells, [*5] the

[p. 679]

patriarch of the church, [*6] the presidents of the seventies, and other church dignitaries, concluding with the lesser priesthood. The votes were cast first by the twelve, then by the patriarchs, presidents of stakes, and high councils, after whom followed the high priests, the seventies, the elders, the bishops, with their councillors, the priests, deacons, and teachers,

[p. 680]

and finally the entire congregation. During the proceedings there was no haste. Ample time was allowed for objection to be made to any of the names proposed or to any of the propositions offered; but throughout this vast gathering there was not a dissenting vote. As the quorums rose to their feet, and with uplifted hand vowed to sustain those whom their leaders had chosen, the choice was in every instance confirmed by assembled Israel. It was evident that, as yet, the church was in no danger of dissolution. [*7]

    Addressing the congregation, President Taylor remarked that the apostles were thankful for the confidence and faith that had been manifested. For several reasons he had said little since the death of the president, who for thirty-three years had stood prominently before the church. In common with the rest of the community, he felt sad at heart. Moreover, a multiplicity of cares now devolved upon the twelve, and, so far as his position was concerned, he did not wish to say anything that might influence their choice, but desired to leave the minds of all perfectly unbiased. "If," he said, "we could carry out in our lives what we have made manifest this day by our votes, the kingdom of God would roll forth, and the favor and blessing of God would rest upon us." "No man need think this work would stop. It would go on and increase until the purposes of Jehovah were accomplished, and no power on earth or in hell could stay its progress." Three years afterward [*8] John Taylor was elected president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as councillors. The vacancies which thus occurred in the quorum of the twelve were partially filled by the election of Francis M. Lyman [*9] and

[p. 681]

[paragraph continues] John Henry Smith, [*10] George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant being chosen to the apostolate on the death of Orson Pratt, which occurred in October 1881. [*11]

[p. 682]

    Says Mr Burton in 1861: "Austin Ward describes John Taylor as 'an old man, deformed and crippled,' and Mrs. Ferris as a 'heavy, dark colored, beetle-brewed man.' Of course I could not recognize him from these descriptions--a stout, good-looking, somewhat elderly personage, with a kindly gray eye, pleasant expression, and a forehead of the superior order." [*12] When I was introduced to him in 1884, Mr Taylor being then in his seventy-seventh year, there stepped forward with a quick, decisive, nervous tread, greeting me with a smile and a cordial shake of the hand, a white-haired, benevolent-looking man of medium height and well-knit figure, long, oval face, gray, deep-set, penetrating eye, square, broad forehead, and firmly clasped lips, displaying a fixed determination, slightly tinged with melancholy, such as might be expected from one who had passed through many trying scenes, not the least among which was the escape, as by a miracle, from the tragedy of Carthage jail, and who knew that he had still many trials to undergo. [*13]

    Days of tribulation were indeed at hand. The saints, who for so many years had been buffeted, afflicted, tormented for opinion's sake, were again, after a brief respite, to be subjected to so-called christian influence. The anti-polygamy law of 1862 was, as we have seen, inoperative, although declared constitutional

[p. 683]

by the supreme court of the United States. Under the Poland bill only one conviction was made, that of George Reynolds, private secretary to Brigham, the man being sentenced to fine and imprisonment. [*14] Both these measures were sufficiently ill-advised, and rank, perhaps, among the clumsiest specimens of legislation as yet devised by man; but it remained for the Edmunds bill to cap the climax of absurdity by virtually setting aside the statute of limitations, and providing for the punishment of persons living at any time with other than their legal wives.

    By the provisions of this bill, approved March 22, 1882. and of which brief mention has already been made, [*15] polygamists were made liable to punishment by fine not exceeding $500 and imprisonment not exceeding five years, the president being authorized to grant amnesty on such conditions as he saw fit to those who might have offended before the passage of the act, provided the conditions were afterward complied with. Cohabitation with more than one woman in any territory of the United States, whether in the marriage relation or otherwise, was declared a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $300, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both, at the discretion of the court. In all prosecutions for bigamy, polygamy, or unlawful cohabitation--the three offenses being classed together, though differing widely in law--it was to be deemed sufficient cause for challenge that a juryman lived or had ever lived in these practices, or believed it right for one so to live. No polygamist was to be entitled to vote at

[p. 684]

any election, or to hold any position of public trust, honor, or emolument.

    All the registration and election offices throughout the territory were declared vacant, and all duties relating to the registration of voters, the conduct of elections, the receiving, rejection, canvassing, and return of votes, and the issuing of certificates, were to be performed by persons selected by a board of five commissioners, of whom three might belong to the same political party. [*16] After scrutiny by the board of the returns of all votes for members of the legislative assembly, certificates were to be issued to those who had been legally elected, and on or after the first meeting of an assembly, the members of which had been so elected, that body might make such laws as it saw fit concerning the offices declared vacant, provided they were not inconsistent with the organic act and with the laws of the United States. [*17]

    The Edmunds act, intended to be supplementary to the act of 1862 and to the Poland bill, is virtually a penal statute, as indicated by its title, "A bill to amend section 5352 of the revised statutes of the United States, in reference to bigamy, and for other purposes." It is also an ex post facto law, a bill of pains and penalties, wherein the judicial function, after being misinterpreted, is usurped by the legislature and the executive--one that might not have

[p. 685]

been amiss in the days of the star-chamber, but is directly at variance with the spirit and letter of the American constitution; and the more so when we consider that the Mormons, driven by persecution out of the United States, settled in what was then no portion of the territory of the United States, though aiding in the conquest and settlement of that territory, as did the colonists of Rhode Island, in 1636, when they fled from the sectional intolerance of Massachusetts.

    But not only were the Mormons to be judged as criminals by an ex post facto law--one that barred the statute of limitations, and if strictly enforced would bring within its pale no inconsiderable portion of the adult male population of the United States--they were also to be stripped of the franchise, and made ineligible for office. It was argued in the senate that this was no penalty, and it may be admitted that, as a rule, to deprive men of the suffrage, and disqualify them for office, is not a severe punishment; but in Utah, where at least five hundred lucrative positions would have been laid open to a hungry horde of gentile office-seekers, the suffrage was worth more than houses and lands, for by the ballot alone could be held in check the greed of demagogues, who sought the control of the territory as a field for plunder and oppression. The bill virtually proposed to disfranchise a people, and to govern them by a committee of five men, or at least to create a government by a minority over a large majority; for it was not to be expected that these five men, of whom a quorum belonged to the same political faction, would decide impartially on the electoral qualifications of the people. It was so expressed, and its measures were indorsed by the congress and president of the United States, the question being not whether congress had power to repeal any or all of the laws in each of the territories, and intrust the legislative, executive, and judicial functions to whomsoever it pleased--this was

[p. 686]

not disputed--but whether it was at liberty to violate for any purpose the rights guaranteed in the constitution.

    If there be anything sacred in the American constitution, or in the annals of American jurisprudence, it is that in criminal prosecutions the accused should be tried by an impartial, and not by a packed, jury--by men opposed to him through interest or prejudice, and on whom a religious test is imposed as a qualification. Under the Poland bill it was ordered that grand and petit juries should, if possible, be composed in equal proportions of Mormons and gentiles, or non-Mormons. The latter included, in 1874, about twenty-two per cent of the entire population, and as this measure gave to them the same representation in juries as was allowed to the remaining seventy-eight per cent, its injustice is sufficiently apparent. But under the Edmunds act juries might be composed entirely of gentiles, thus giving to twenty-two, or at that date perhaps twenty-five, per cent of the population the control of the entire criminal proceedings in Utah, although more than seven eighths of the arrests made in the territory were among gentile citizens. [*18]

    Before striving to regenerate the Mormons, it would seem that congress should have attempted the regeneration of the gentile portion of the population of Utah. At the time when the Edmunds bill was passed, all the keepers of brothels, and nearly all the gamesters and saloon-keepers, were gentiles. Two hundred out of the two hundred and fifty towns and villages in the territory contained not a single bagnio. [*19] Until gentiles settled in Salt Lake City there were seldom heard in its streets or dwellings oaths, imprecations, or expletives; there were no place-hunters or beggar-politicians; there was no harlotry;

[p. 687]

and there was neither political nor judicial prostitution. The Mormons were a people singularly free from vice--unless that can be called a vice which forms part of the tenets of their church--and they were one of the most industrious, sober, and thrifty communities in the world.

 

    Partly with a view to avoid the operation of the Edmunds act, the Mormons once more asked that Utah be admitted as a state. Seventy-two delegates from the different counties met at Salt Lake City, and during a nine days' session drew up a constitution, [*20] which was duly presented by Delegate John T. Caine, but with the usual result; and now the Mormons were left to the tender mercies of the commission. The members [*21] went to work vigorously; between 1882 and 1884 some twelve thousand persons were disfranchised, [*22] and at the latter date all the municipal and other officers in the territory living in polygamy or unlawful cohabitation were superseded, each elector being also required to swear that he was not so living. It would be a curious subject for speculation to estimate how many voters would be disqualified if the law against illicit cohabitation were enforced in other portions of the United States.

    The commission was seconded by Governor Eli H. Murray, who succeeded Emery, arriving in Salt Lake

[p. 688]

[paragraph continues] City on the 28th of February, 1880, and in 1884 was again appointed. His message for 1882 was in the mood of former governors of Utah. "In no sense, even in the slightest degree," he remarked, "is the sovereignty of church over state in unison with the language or spirit of the constitution, or your country's laws. That political power is wielded by church authority throughout Utah is a fact; that officers of the church exercise authority in temporal affairs is a fact; that the sovereignty of the church is supreme, and its practices followed, the laws and courts of the United States to the contrary, is a fact. These being true in whole or in part, I submit: Do you believe that the government of the United States, with all its humanity, will much longer forbear to assert its authority in support of its absolute and undoubted sovereignty? Abiding peace, so much needed, and abundant prosperity, with its attendant blessings, can never belong to the good people of Utah until the symbol of the United States is universally regarded as the symbol of absolute sovereignty." Touching the matter of tithing, he said: "The poor man who earns a dollar by the sweat of his brow is entitled to that dollar. It is the reward of honest toil, and he should be protected in the full enjoyment of it. Any exaction or undue influence to dispossess him of any part of it, in any other manner than in payment of a legal obligation, is oppression." [*23] One would think that after two years' residence in Utah the governor ought to have learned at least that, among the saints, the payment of tithes is an optional matter.

    Among the first important acts of Governor Murray was to grant to Allan G. Campbell a certificate of election as delegate to congress, although he received only 1,350 votes as against 18,568 polled for George Q. Cannon, [*24] and to declare that the latter

[p. 689]

was not a citizen of the United States, [*25] notwithstanding that he held a certificate of citizenship. Thus the chief magistrate took upon himself a function altogether

[p. 690]

outside the intent of the national legislature as expressed in the Edmunds act, which was at best but a temporary and ill-judged measure, and one that in the opinion of some of the ablest lawyers in the United States was unconstitutional.

    Not content with this puerile display of authority, the governor, at the conclusion of what he terms "the faithful labors of the commissioners appointed under the Edmunds act," recommended that the legislature be abolished, and that Utah be placed entirely under control of a commission to be selected by the president, not as was done with the territory of Louisiana and the District of Columbia, but to reduce its inhabitants to the condition of serfs; "for," he remarks, "I confidently believe that from such action by congress and a council composed of men loyal to the constitution and the laws, there would come that adjustment of wrongs and termination of contentions so earnestly prayed for by those in Utah who possess the intelligence and one third of the wealth of the territory." [*26] To the Mormons, as it would seem, he denied the attribute of intelligence; and by such rulers, with scarce an exception, has this people been misgoverned--a people which to impartial observers has been subjected to abuse, calumny, and persecution such as are almost without parallel, even in their Hebrew prototype.

Footnotes

^678:1 At the conference above mentioned, George Q. Cannon remarked that some had been much exercised about the organization of a first presidency, 'but he wished them distinctly to understand that whenever God commanded a first presidency to be appointed it would not be revealed through any one but his servant, who was now God's mouthpiece.' Deseret News, Oct. 10, 1877.

^678:2 Apostles Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith were in England at the time. Millennial Star, xxxix. 682. They arrived two or three weeks later. See Deseret News, Oct. 10, 1877.

^678:3 General Epistle of the Twelve, in Millennial Star, xxxix. 680-4. See also Deseret News, September 12, 1877; Mormon Pamphlets, Religious, no. 16.

^678:4 Completed in 1870. A description of it is given elsewhere in this vol.

^678:5 Daniel H. Wells was a native of Oneida co., N.Y., his father, who was a direct descendant of the fourth governor of Connecticut, having served in the [p. 679] war of 1812, while his mother, nee Catherine Chapin, was the daughter of a revolutionary soldier who fought under Washington. In the spring of 1834, being then in his twentieth year, he settled at Commerce (Nauvoo), and purchased a tract of 80 acres, a portion of which he afterward donated to the Mormons as a site for their temple. He was among the foremost to aid and welcome the saints after their expulsion from Nauvoo, and indignation at their maletreatment, rather than sympathy with their sect, caused him to join the church a few weeks before the commencement of the exodus. Arriving in the valley of Great Salt Lake in September 1848, he was appointed superintendent of public works, and was chosen a member of the legislative council of the provisional state of Deseret. In 1857 he was elected second councillor to Brigham Young. In 1864-5 he was in charge of the European missions, and was afterward mayor of Salt Lake City for several terms. The part that he played in the history of Utah as lieut-gen. of the Nauvoo legion is mentioned elsewhere in these pages. Wells' Narr., MS., 1-8; Tullidge's Life of Brig. Young, suppl. 13-17; The Mormons at Home, 114-15; Beadle's Western Wilds, 93.

^679:6 John Smith, son of Hyrum Smith, was a native of Kirtland, where he was born in 1832. Nearly two years after the assassination of his father in Carthage jail the boy set forth from Nauvoo in company with Heber C. Kimball's family. Reaching the encampment on the Little Papillon, he became acquainted with Col Thos L. Kane, whom he nursed through a dangerous sickness, probably saving his life. In April 1848 he started for Great Salt Lake in company with his brothers and sisters, and though only 15 years of age, performed a man's work, or rather the work of several men, driving a team composed of wild steers, cows, and oxen, with two wagons tied together, standing guard sometimes day and night, bringing in wood and water, herding cows, or assisting other teams as occasion needed. In the spring of 1850 he was enrolled in the battalion of life-guards, and for several years thereafter was frequently called on at dead of night to set forth in pursuit of marauding Indians. In 1852 occurred the decease of his step-mother, whereby he was left alone to provide for a family of eight persons, three of them being aged and infirm. In 1855 he was ordained patriarch, this being the only office in the church which is handed down from father to son in direct lineage. Ten years later he was sent on a mission to Scandinavia, and arriving in Liverpool with a single guinea in his pocket, about sufficient to procure him a meal and pay his railroad fare to London, borrowed the money for the remainder of his passage. After two years of missionary labor he returned to Salt Lake City, taking charge of a company of 300 emigrants on board the ship Monarch of the Sea. During his journey across the plains he had under his care a large party of Scandinavian emigrants, and was frequently urged by the officers at government posts which he passed en route to remain with them for a season, as the Indians were at that time extremely troublesome. His answer was: 'I am used to Indian warfare, and have only provisions enough to take us home if we keep moving; We had better run the risk of fighting Indians than starve on the plains.' After his return the patriarch was engaged in the duties of his calling and in attending to his business interests. Autobiog. of John Smith, MS.

^680:7 For account of this conference, see Deseret News, Oct. 10, 17, 1877.

^680:8 At the general conference, commencing on the 6th of October, 1880.

^680:9 Francis Marion, the eldest son of Amasa Lyman, a pioneer, who was excommunicated in 1870, was but seven years of age at the date of the exodus from Nauvoo. As an instance of the experience of Mormon evangelists, it may be mentioned that when ordered on mission to England in 1859, he was compelled to leave his newly married wife almost destitute, building for her [p. 681] with his own hands a log hut of green timber. In the spring of 1863 he settled at Fillmore, and there remained until 1877, when he was appointed president of the Tooele stake. In 1860 he was elected a member of the legislature, and on the death of Orson Pratt was appointed speaker of the house of representatives.

^681:10 The son of George A. Smith, and a native of Winter Quarters, where he was born Sept. 18, 1848. The first portion of his life was spent mainly at Provo, where he worked on a farm until 1874, when he was sent on a mission to Europe, returning the following year on account of the sickness of his father, whose decease occurred a few days after his arrival. In 1875, also, he was ordained bishop of the 17th ward at S. L. City, in which capacity he served until called to the apostolate. For six years he was a member of the city council, and in August 1881 was elected a member of the legislature, where he soon became one of the most prominent debaters.

^681:11 Orson Pratt, in 1881 the only surviving member of the first quorum of the twelve, was accounted one of the most eloquent preachers in the church; and for his championship of the cause, as a speaker and writer, was known as the Paul of Mormonism. At a general conference held in 1874 he was appointed church historian and recorder, retaining this position until his decease, and was also speaker of the legislative assembly. He was well versed in the sciences, including that of the pure mathematics, and in addition to several elementary works, published A New and Easy Method of Solution of the Cubic and Biquadratic Equations, and left in MS. a treatise on the differential calculus. S. L. C. Contributor, iii. 58-61. For resolutions of respect to his memory, see Utah Jour. Legisl.

    George Teasdale, a native of London, and an episcopalian by training, joined the church in 1852 being then in his 21st year. After several years of missionary labor, during which he was appointed in 1858 to the pastoral care of three English conferences, and in 1859 to the charge of the Scottish mission, which comprised the Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Dundee conferences, he was ordered to set forth for Zion. Borrowing the necessary funds, he took a steerage passage for New York, and journeying over the plains from Florence, accompanied by his wife, a refined and delicate woman, arrived in Salt Lake City in 1861, and looked about him for something to do. He was offered the 20th ward school, a position which he at once accepted, laboring faithfully for nearly a twelvemonth, after which he accepted a position as manager of one of Brigham Young's stores, under the direction of Hyrum B. Clawson. In 1867 he was intrusted with the charge of the general tithing office, but the following year was ordered on a mission to England, in company with Albert Carrington, and, among other duties, filled that of sub-editor to the Millennial Star. Returning to Utah in 1869, he narrowly escaped death from a railroad accident, in which several persons were killed or fatally injured. After further labors as merchant, missionary, and contractor, being chosen meanwhile a high-priest, he was elected a member of the legislative council for the sessions of 1882 and 1884. In 1885, being then in his 56th year, he was still actively engaged in forwarding the interests of his church. Autobiog. of Geo. Teasdale, MS., passim.

    Heber Jeddy Grant, the son of Jedediah M. Grant, whose decease occurred when the former was but nine days old, is a native of S. L. City, where he was born in 1856. At fifteen, the family being then in straitened circumstances, he obtained a position in an insurance office, and four years later started an agency for himself. Since that time he has been engaged in various enterprises, in all of which he has been successful, his income ranging from $3,000 to $8,000 a year, though in 1881 he met with a serious reverse [p. 682] through the destruction by fire of the Utah vinegar-works at Ogden, of which he was proprietor. In 1884 he was a member of the legislature and of the S. L. City council. After being called to the apostolate, he travelled extensively, in the interest of the church, in Arizona, Idaho, Colorado, and New Mexico. Though still but 30 years of age and in feeble health, his average weight being only 145 lbs, while in stature he was considerably over six feet, Mr Grant affords a striking example of the energy displayed by the descendants of the Mormon patriarchs. Autobiog. of Heber J. Grant, MS.

^682:12 City of the Saints, 328.

^682:13 Descriptions of President Taylor's appearance will be found in many of the books written on Mormonism, some of them fair and accurate, as is Burton's, and others varying in degrees of absurdity from that of Lady Duffus-Hardy, who speaks of him as a man 'with a rather large, loose mouth, and cunning gray eyes, which look as though they would never let you see what was going on behind them,' down to the one given by a correspondent of the New York Sun, who in 1879 stated that he was six feet high, and that his appearance, manner, and speech were those of a member of the British parliament. See Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie Lands, 117; Deseret News, Nov. 12, 1879.

^683:14 He was indicted and convicted at S. L. City in 1874. An appeal was taken to the supreme court of Utah, and the case dismissed on the ground that the grand jury had been illegally constituted. In October 1875 he was again indicted, convicted, and sentenced to two years' imprisonment and fine of $500. After a long but useless struggle, the case being argued before the supreme court by the attorney-general for the prosecution, and by Sheeks & Rawlins of S. L. City for appellant, Reynolds was finally committed to jail in Jan. 1879. For review of the decision of the supreme court by George Q. Cannon, see Utah Pamphlets, Political, no. 19.

^683:15 See <page 395>, this volume.

^684:16 The secretary of the territory was to be the secretary of the board, keep a journal of its proceedings, and attest its action.

^684:17 For copy of the Edmunds act, see United States Statutes, 47th Cong. 1st Sess., 30-2; Utah Commission, 1-5; S. F. Call, Feb. 17, 1882. As soon as its passage became known in Utah, petitions asking congress to send a deputation to investigate matters before enforcing hostile legislation were signed by 75,000 persons, some refusing to sign the petition, among them Fred. H. and Sam. H. Auerbach, who, though declining merely on the ground that they did not wish to interfere with politics, suffered in consequence. On the other hand, a mass-meeting called by the anti-polygamy society was held at the methodist church, among the speakers being Gov. Murray and Judge Boreman. For resolutions, see Hand-Book of Mormonism, 87. For principles adopted by the liberal party at their convention in October 1882, see Important Doc. Bearing on Polit Quest. in Utah, 10-13; for declaration of principles by people's party, Id., 7-9. The speeches of Vest, Morgan, Call, Brown, Pendleton, and Lamar against the bill during the final debate in the senate were afterward published in the form of a pamphlet entitled Defence of the Constitutional and Religious Rights of the People of Utah.

^686:18 For criminal statistics, taken mainly from the census of 1880, see <page 394>, this vol.

^686:19 Utah and its People, 21. Of the gamblers 98 per cent were gentiles, and of the saloon-keepers 94 per cent.

^687:20 For copy, see Constit. State of Utah. Its provisions were directed mainly against the Edmunds bill.

^687:21 Their names were Alex. Ramsey of Minnesota, Algernon S. Paddock of Nebraska, G. F. Godfrey of Iowa, Ambrose B. Carleton of Indiana, and James R. Pettigrew of Arkansas. For brief biographical sketches of these men, see Contrib., iii. 315-16.

^687:22 Special Rept Utah Commission, 1884, p. 18. In Barclay's Mormonism Exposed, 18, the number is erroneously given at 16,000. Mormonism Exposed, The Other Side, an English View of the Case, by James W. Barclay, is a pamphlet originally published in the Nineteenth Century Magazine, and containing a brief and impartial statement of affairs. Mr Barclay was a member of the British parliament. Though, as he admits, he went to Utah with strong prejudices, he comes to this conclusion: 'Mormonism, apart from polygamy, which seems to me a temporary excrescence, will, in my opinion, grow, and probably be the religion of the settlers or farming classes in the mountainous country between the great plains east of the Rocky Mountains and California on the west.'

^688:23 The governor's messages for each year will be found in Utah Jour. Legisl., and of late years have been printed in pamphlet form. See also the files of the Deseret News, and other Utah journals.

^688:24 Barclay's Mormonism Exposed, 18-19. The certificate was rejected by [p. 689] congress. For papers in the case, see House Misc. Doc., 47th Cong. 1st Sess., no. 25. The seat was declared vacant, and in 1882 John T. Caine was elected. In 1884 he was ree1ected. Mr Caine was a native of Kirk Patrick, in the Isle of Man, where he was born in 1829. Arriving in New York in 1846, not as a proselyte, but as an emigrant, he joined the church in the spring of 1847, about the time when the pioneers set forth from Council Bluffs. In September 1852 he reached Salt Lake City, and found occupation as a school-teacher at Big Cottonwood. Soon afterward he was employed in the office of the trustee in trust, and in that capacity won the confidence of Brigham Young. Sent on a mission to the Sandwich Islands in 1854, he was appointed after his return assistant secretary of the legislative council. In 1874 he was elected a member of that body, being reelected for the three ensuing terms. Tullidge's Mag., ii. 468-73.

    For laws regulating elections, see Utah Election Laws, 1878, 1882. In 1884 the Utah legislature consisted of 12 counsellors and 24 representatives, elected biennially on the first Monday in August of every odd year, the sessions commencing on the second Monday in January of every even year, and lasting for not more than 60 days. For list of members elected in 1883, see Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 268. In 1878 a criminal procedure act was passed, and in 1870 a civil practice act, the text of which is given in Utah Laws, 1878, 60-165; Utah Acts Legisl., 17-124. For further acts, proceedings, and memorials of the Utah legislature, see Utah Laws and Utah Acts Legisl., 1870, pp. 11-12, 133, 146, 148; 1872, 25-6, 41-2; 1878, 27-37, 169-70; 1880, 45, 95-6; 1882, 106, passim; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1872, pp. 234, 1876, 24-5, 31, 104-5; 1878, 36, 45-6, 225-6, 339, passim.

^689:25 S. F. Call, Jan. 9, 1881. As the reader is probably aware, the Edmunds act was declared constitutional by the supreme court of the United States. For decision, see S. F. Alta, March 24, 1885. For arguments against the act, see, among others, the speech of Gen. Jos. E. Brown of Georgia, Jan. 11, 1884, in Cong. Globe; Utah Defence Constit. and Religious Rights; Stillman's The Mormon Question; Barclay's Mormonism Exposed; Utah and its People (by an ex-U. S. official); Goodrich s Mormonism Unveiled, Black's Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories. Senator Brown's argument is very forcible, though perhaps a little strained. Quoting the clause in the constitution, which reads, 'Nor shall any person be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law,' he cites Blackstone's Comm., 36, 'Offices which are a right to exercise a public or private employment, and to take the fees and emoluments thereto belonging, are also incorporeal hereditaments,' etc. So the chief justice in 2 Ala., N. S., p. 31, remarks, 'An office is as much a species of property as anything else capable of being held or owned.' Comparing other provisions of the act with the U.S. constitution, he quotes Judge Strong in the case of Huber vs Reily, in Smith's Pennsylvania Repts, iii. 117. 'There are, it is true, many things which they [judges of election] may determine, such as age and residence of a person offering to vote, whether he has paid taxes.' 'But whether he has been guilty of a criminal offence, and as a consequence forfeited his right, is an inquiry of a different character. Neither our constitution nor our law has conferred upon the judges of elections any such judicial functions.' Thus with other features of the bill. As the senator remarks, 'There are probably twenty times as many persons practicing prostitution, or illegal sexual intercourse, in the other parts of the union as the whole number who practice it in Utah.' For arrests, prosecutions, and convictions under the Edmunds act, and cases of persons committed for contempt for refusing to answer questions under Chief Justice Zane's ruling, see S. L. C. Tribune, Nov. 4, 7, 1884; S. F. Alta, Oct. 4, 8, 1884; Jan. 25, Apr. 14, 1885; S. F. Chronicle, Jan. 31, Apr. 30, May 10, 23, 1885; S. F. Call, Nov. 8, May 23, 1884, [p. 690] May 11, 26, 1885; S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 21, 1885; Sacrarnento Rec.-Union, Apr. 25, May 23, Oct. 7, 1884; Jan. 21, 22, 30, Feb. 6, 9, 11, March 13, 16, Apr. 27, 28, 30, May 1, 12, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 29, 30, June 4, 29, 1885. For prosecutions in Arizona, see Id., Sept. 29, Nov. 28, 1884; Apr. 8, 13, 1885. At Paris, Id., polygamists resisted arrest. Id., May 12, 15, 21, 1885. In 1880 further alterations were made in the first and third judicial districts, for which, see Utah Laws, 1880, pp. 67-8.

^690:26 S. L. City Tribune, Nov. 28, 1883. The governor's policy was indorsed by President Arthur, and of course by the gentile community of Utah. See Id., Dec. 23, 1883.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 691]

  

CHAPTER XXVI.
 SETTLEMENTS, SOCIETY, AND EDUCATION.
 1862-1886.

POPULATION AND STATISTICS--SALT LAKE CITY--THE TEMPLE--THE NEW TABERNACLE--THE MUSEUM--CONDITION OF THE INHABITANTS--DISTINCTIVE FEATURES--SALT LAKE COUNTY--DAVIS COUNTY--OGDEN--CACHE COUNTY--RICH COUNTY--SUMMIT COUNTY--BRIGHAM CITY--NEPHI--PROVO--UINTAH, EMERY, SAN JUAN, GARFIELD, AND PIUTE COUNTIES--SANPETE AND SEVLER COUNTIES--IRON, KANE, AND WASHINGTON COUNTIES--SCHOOLS--THE UNIVERSITY OF DESERET--THE DESERET ALPHABET--LIBRARIES--JOURNALS AND JOURNALISM.

    IN all the stages of her existence, Utah has been constantly expanding, her growth, far from depleting her resources, only adding to her strength. Originally one of the most barren spots on the face of nature, with nothing to attract even attention, the land has become as fruitful a field, and her people as busy a commonwealth, as can be found, with few exceptions, elsewhere on the Pacific slope. With her unkindly soil, her extremes of temperature, the thermometer varying between 110 degrees above and 20 degrees below zero, [*1] her slight and uncertain rainfall, without foliage, except such as was found here and there in narrow, rock-ribbed gorges, with fuel almost inaccessible at points where habitation was possible, with no nearer sources of general supply than the small and scattered communities on the Pacific coast, and with all sources of supply often practically cut off--amid this forbidding and

[p. 692]

inhospitable region, the Mormons built up their settlements, which, nevertheless, grew with a steady and stalwart growth. As year followed year, the magic wand of progress touched into life these barren and sand-girt solitudes, and in their place sprang up a country teeming with the wealth of gardens and granaries, of mines and mills, of farms and factories. To show how this has been accomplished, and more especially to explain the industrial and social condition of the people during the first years of the present decade, will be my task in the concluding chapters of this volume.

    At the close of 1883 the population of Utah was estimated at 178,121, of whom 92,081 were males, 86,040 females, 123,506 of native and 54,615 of foreign birth. [*2] In 1880 there were 14,550 persons employed in agriculture, 4,149 in trade, and 10,212 miners, mechanics, and factory operatives; though notwithstanding the industrial activity of the settlers, the percentage of bread-winners was smaller than in any state or territory of the union with the exception of West Virginia, this fact being due mainly to the large proportion of women and young children. A noteworthy feature in the community was the small amount of debt, crime, and pauperism, the entire public debt, city, county, and territorial, being in 1879 only $116,251, and the number of criminals and paupers being, as elsewhere noticed, much below the average throughout the United States. [*3] The death-rate for a series of years averaged about sixteen per thousand, though for 1880 it was somewhat higher on account of the prevalence of diphtheria. [*4]

[p. 693]

    Of the progress of settlement up to the close of 1862 mention has already been made. [*5] At that date nearly all the available land in Utah had been taken up, and in 1883 colonies had been pushed forward into adjoining territories, until they extended from north to south in an unbroken line of about 1,000 miles, all of them under the religious and political control of the Mormon priesthood. [*6]

[p. 694]

    As Paris is said to be France, so it has been said of Salt Lake City that it is Utah, for there the commerce,

[p. 695]

arts, industries, and interests of the territory are mainly centred. In 1883 the capital contained a fixed population of about 25,000, its corporate limits including about fifty square miles, [*7] divided into five municipal and twenty-one ecclesiastical wards. The city was well supplied with all modern comforts and conveniences, including gas and electric lights, [*8] street-railroads, [*9] hotels, [*10] markets, libraries, theatres, [*11] clubs, and saloons, where men might drink, smoke, and discuss politics and religion. Through all the streets, which were about double the usual width, ran the limpid waters of City Creek, the Jordan, Red Butte,

[p. 696]

and Emigration canons, [*12] cooling the air, cleansing the thoroughfares, and giving life to verdure. The adjacent lands were cultivated, and most of the houses were surrounded with orchards, so that in early summer Zion wore the appearance of Eden in bloom. The flowers were full of beauty and fragrance, surpassing, if possible, in this respect, the ancient towns of Mexico, or the modern capital in the days of Cortes.

    Aside from the temple and the tabernacle, Salt Lake City thus far had little to boast of in the way of architecture, nor was that little interesting. The temple, when finished, was to cost several millions, [*13] and the walls of gray granite, more than six feet in thickness, with a length of 200 and a width of 100 feet, were to reach a height of 100 feet. [*14] It was determined that this building should be of elegant design, magnificent proportions, and unique pattern, a marvel of beauty, strength, and solidity. [*15] As a structure in which a vast assemblage can see and hear, the new tabernacle, west of the temple, completed in 1870, is a remarkable edifice. It is elliptical in shape, with a primitive diameter of 233 feet, a conjugate of 133 feet, and a height of 70 feet, its huge dome-shaped, or as some term it, dish-cover roof of heavy, bolted lattice-work resting on sandstone pillars.

[p. 697]

Its seating capacity is about 9,000, [*16] and in the building are twenty doors, some nine feet in width, and all of them opening outward, so that in case of fire a full congregation can make its exit in three or four minutes. As was the case in the old tabernacle, [*17] the acoustic properties are remarkably good, and it is said that one standing in the east end of the gallery and uttering a few words in his lowest tone can be distinctly heard in the amphitheatre where the church dignitaries are seated, at the opposite end of the building. [*18]

    On the site of the old tabernacle now stands the new assembly hall, [*19] which is also the stake house for the Salt Lake stake of Zion. It is built of rough-hewn granite, the rock being taken from the same quarry that supplies material for the temple, and with frescoed ceiling, representing important events in church history. Though church-like in appearance, it is considered one of the most sightly structures in the city. [*20] Of the endowment house and other buildings on temple block mention has been made elsewhere.

    On South Temple street is the museum, where are specimens of home art, in painting and sculpture, also home products and manufactures, as in cotton, wool, silk, cloth, paper; gold and silver bullion and coins, with samples of the ores and minerals of Utah;

[p. 698]

petrifactions, fossils, and obsidian; Indian weapons, scalps, ornaments, pottery, wampum, and the boat in which Kit Carson crossed the waters of great Salt Lake--the first craft launched by white man into the Dead Sea of the West. [*21]

    Other prominent buildings in Salt Lake City, and many points of interest within easy reach of the capital, as Great Salt Lake, the mineral springs, Fort Douglas, Parley's park, the Cottonwoods, Ensign and Twin peaks, Echo canon, American Fork canon--the so called Yosemite of Utah--have been described for the most part in other portions of this volume, and in many of the countless volumes that have been written concerning the Mormons.

    In order to see Salt Lake City at its best, one should stroll about three o'clock in the afternoon through Main and Temple streets, which are to this city what Market and Kearny streets are to San Francisco. At that time the spacious sidewalks are crowded with well-dressed women passing to and fro among the shops, prominent among which stands out the Zion's cooperative store, or, as it is usually termed, "Zion's Coop." In no part of the city, or elsewhere in Utah, are there signs of abject poverty, and there are few beggars, tramps, or drones, the idle and dissolute being discountenanced by the community. [*22]

[p. 699]

    While not communists, the elements of socialism enter strongly into all their relations, public and private, social, commercial, and industrial, as well as religious and political. This tends to render them exclusive, independent of the gentiles and their government, and even in some respects antagonistic to them. They have assisted each other until nine out of ten own their farms, while commerce and manufacturing are to a large extent cooperative. The rights of property are respected; but while a Mormon may sell his farm to a gentile, it would not be deemed good fellowship for him to do so.

 

    Salt Lake county contained, in 1883, nearly one fifth of the population of Utah, the eastern side of the valley, where the streams of the Wasatch Mountains are utilized for irrigation, being the principal farming section; while the western portion, in the neighborhood of the Oquirrh Range, was but sparsely settled. In this county were found, with the exception perhaps of coal, nearly all the minerals that contribute to the wealth of communities. Alta, the mining town of Little Cottonwood, contained a considerable population until the spring of 1878, when it was almost destroyed by fire. Bingham, about thirty miles south-west of the capital, was surrounded by productive mines; and Sandy, where the Bingham canon and Cottonwood ores were forwarded for sampling, was a thriving village. [*23]

[p. 700]

    Of the establishment and progress of other settlements, up to the close of 1862, mention has already been made. [*24] Davis county, north of Salt Lake, was settled by quiet pastoral and agricultural communities of the old-fashioned type. Farmington, Centreville, Kaysville, [*25] and the three towns named Bountiful, [*26] were, in 1886, reasonably prosperous, resembling somewhat small English villages, except for the fact that no ale-houses were to be seen in their midst.

    Ogden, or, as it was sometimes erroneously called, Junction City, the site of which was purchased, as the reader will remember, in 1848, for some $2,000 or $3,000, ranked in 1883 next to Salt Lake City in population. [*27] In the centre of a network of railroads and of a prosperous agricultural region, with excellent

[p. 701]

manufacturing facilities, and with many of the attractions and conveniences of modern cities, including a theatre [*28] and one of the best hotels in the country, with gentile churches and schools, both protestant and catholic, the western terminus of the Union Pacific was probably the most cosmopolitan town in Utah. [*29] Among the other settlements of Weber county the most prominent were North Ogden, [*30] Harrisville, Huntsville, [*31] Lynne, [*32] Slaterville, Uintah, Plain City, Hooperville, and West Weber. [*33]

[p. 702]

    In Cache county were added to the settlements already mentioned Richmond, a farming town [*34] on the line of the Utah and Northern railroad; Lewiston on the west bank of Bear River, opposite Richmond; Benson, eight miles south-west of Logan; and Newton, a thriving village a little to the north-west of the same town. [*35] The corner-stones of the Logan temple were laid in 1877, its site being chosen by Brigham a few weeks before his death. The structure is of stone, painted and plastered in variegated tints, and capped with an iron roof. [*36]

    Rich, or as it was first termed Richland, county, in the north-eastern corner of the territory, was organized in 1864, being carved out of Cache county, [*37] Randolph, the county seat, near its centre, and surrounded with excellent pasture-land, Garden City at its extreme north-west, and Woodruff [*38] on Bear River, being now the principal settlements. The limits of Summit county on the south were extended in 1872 by an act of the Utah legislature, and in 1886 it was bounded on the north by Wyoming and Morgan county, and on the south, east, and west by Uintah, Wasatch, Morgan, and Salt Lake counties. In 1883 Park City, the centre of supply for the Ontario and other mines, was the most considerable town. [*39]

    Brigham City, the county seat of Box Elder, west of Cache county, and on the line of the Utah and

[p. 703]

[paragraph continues] Northern railroad, together with Willard City, seven miles farther to the south, had in 1886 become places of note. The site of the former was remarkably picturesque. [*40] Tooele and Grantsville, in Tooele county, south of Box Elder, had each in 1880 a population of about 1,200, and Corinne, incorporated in 1870, about 400. [*41] Nephi, the county seat of Juab county, [*42] contained in 1880 a thriving population of about 2,500, most of them farmers, though the manufacturing interests of this town were not inconsiderable, the Tintic mines furnishing a market for surplus lumber and produce. [*43]

    Utah county, with two lines of railroad, [*44] excellent farming-lands [*45] and manufacturing facilities, and the largest fresh-water lake in the territory, [*46] ranked second in population to Salt Lake county, [*47] and first in its yield of cereals and fruits. By persistent effort, the

[p. 704]

inhabitants of Provo, the county seat, built up a settlement that ranked among the leading towns of Utah, with handsome public and private buildings, a theatre, a large tabernacle, and, as will presently be mentioned, the largest woollen-mill in the territory. Prominent among its industries was the drying of fruit, of which several hundred tons were forwarded yearly to market. [*48] In 1883 the other principal towns were fairly prosperous, several of them, as Payson, [*49] Spanish Fork, [*50] and Springville, [*51] having wealth and population sufficient to support a number of schools and churches, a theatre, [*52] and the inevitable young men's and young women's mutual improvement associations. [*53]

    Uintah county, in the eastern portion of Utah, was organized in 1880, [*54] with Ashley as the county seat.

[p. 705]

[paragraph continues] In the same year Emery and San Juan counties, and in 1882 Garfield county, were organized, with Castle Dale, Bluff City, and Panguitch as their several seats. [*55] Emery county was noted as an agricultural and mineral district, full of inherent wealth and resource. In Garfield county, below the junction of the Green and Grand rivers, is first encountered the weird scenery of the Colorado. Toward the south and in San Juan county the traveller, standing on the cliffs that overhang its banks, after making his way over leagues of sandstone, where there is no blade of grass or drop of water, sees below him the stream which Captain Cardenas discovered in 1540, [*56] still gliding peaceably, after a lapse of more than three centuries, through valleys as yet untrodden by man. Near the point below which the waters of the Green and Grand are named the Colorado, ran the eastern boundary line of Piute county, organized in 1865, [*57] and of which Junction was the county seat. [*58] Beaver City, in the county of that name west of Piute, had in 1883 a population of about 2,000, and was one of the principal manufacturing centres of southern Utah. [*59]

    In Sanpete county, [*60] south of Utah and Uintah counties, Manti was in 1883 the largest and one of the most prosperous towns. Built on a solid rock near its suburbs, and at an elevation of several hundred feet, stood the walls of an unfinished temple, facing toward the west, and destined when finished to be one

[p. 706]

of the finest in existence. [*61] Ephraim City, incorporated in 1868, [*62] contained in 1883 about 2,500 inhabitants, and rivalled the county seat in aggregate wealth, all its citizens being men of means, though none very rich. Among other towns and villages may be mentioned Spring City, nine miles north-east of Ephraim, incorporated in 1870; Mount Pleasant, second to Manti in population, incorporated in 1868; and Fairview, in the northern section of the county, incorporated in 1872, with an area of twenty square miles. [*63]

    In 1864 Albert Lewis and ten other citizens from Manti pitched their tents on a spot later forming a portion of Main street in Richfield, Sevier county, Lewis soon afterward building a hut of cottonwood logs, cedar posts, and mud. During this and the following year it is related that 600 bushels of wheat were harvested from 10 acres of land. In 1865, the settlement being then reenforced, a canal was made, eleven miles in length, tapping the waters of the Sevier. In this year, also, Sevier county was organized. [*64] After the cessation of Indian raids in 1865-6, of which mention has already been made, other portions were occupied, several villages, among them Salina, Glenwood, Vermilion, and Joseph, being built on the banks of the river.

    Parowan, the seat of Iron county, south of Sevier, had in 1883 a population of 800, the leading interests being farming and lumbering. Cedar City had about the same number, [*65] and Summit, six miles south-west of Parowan, and Kanarra, formerly in Washington

[p. 707]

county, were prosperous farming villages. In Kane county, south of Iron, the first settlement, named Kanab, was established in 1870. [*66] St George, the county seat [*67] of Washington, and a few miles north of the Arizona line, was in 1886 one of the principal cities in southern Utah, and though built on alkaline sands and artificial soil, was one of the garden spots of the country. In its suburbs was a temple built of red sandstone, and dedicated in 1875, its baptismal font being presented by Brigham. [*68]

 

    In common with all the leading towns of Utah, St George was well supplied with schools, containing in 1883 no less than five school-houses, one of which belonged to the presbyterian mission. At that date there were in the territory 411 district schools, [*69] and the total expenditure for school purposes was in 1879 about $293,500, or some $6 per capita of the school children, [*70] the term lasting on an average little more than four months in the year.

    Upon the establishment of schools belonging to other religious denominations, or as they were usually termed in Utah, mission schools, educational results were more satisfactory, and if much was professed, much was actually taught. The Saint Mark's grammar-school, founded in 1867 in connection with the

[p. 708]

episcopal church, the Salt Lake seminary, established by the methodists in 1870, and others founded later by various denominations, [*71] received so much of patronage that it became necessary for the Mormons to bestir themselves in the matter, and there was afterward more efficiency in the school system, private institutions being also founded by the saints, among them the academy at Provo, [*72] and the Brigham Young college at Logan. [*73]

    For many years a great advantage to Mormon as against gentile schools was the fact that they were allowed to use their meeting-houses for public school purposes. In 1880, when the legislature passed an act creating school districts, [*74] and authorized a tax for the erection and repair of school buildings, these meeting-houses were constituted legal district schools, though retained for religious purposes, the gentiles, none of whose children, with rare exceptions, attended them, being also axed for this purpose. Hence, legal conflicts arose, the decision of the courts being that Mormon school trustees could not collect such taxes

[p. 709]

while the buildings stood on record as church property. Many of the ward meeting-houses, therefore, were transferred to school trustees. [*75]

    The University of Deseret, founded, as we have seen, in 1850, and incorporated the same year, [*76] the curriculum of which was to include all living languages and sciences, had but a nominal existence until 1869. At the former date there were no efficient private schools in the territory, no public-school law had as yet been passed by the legislature, and there were few competent teachers. As the university

[p. 710]

could be of little service without preparatory schools, and the grant of $5,000 a year had been made from an empty treasury, it was converted into a parent school, of which mention has before been made, [*77] the attendance being invited of all who wished to qualify themselves as teachers, or for other reasons to acquire a somewhat liberal education. [*78] In 1852 the parent school was closed for lack of funds, [*79] and from that date until fifteen years later nothing further was attempted, although meanwhile valuable tracts of land had been set apart for the future state by congress for the establishment of a university. [*80] During most of this interval, however, the board of regents exercised a general supervision over the schools of the territory. [*81]

    In the autumn of 1867 an educational institute was established by the board, and conducted at the council-house, mainly as a commercial academy, [*82] until 1869, when classical, scientific, and normal departments were added, though at this date it was in fact rather a high-school than a university. [*83] Students of

[p. 711]

both sexes were admitted, the total attendance in 1870 being 546, [*84] while in 1884 the number was but 298, the decrease being due to want of sufficient appropriations, suitable buildings, [*85] and preparatory schools. In 1882 the university included an academic, a normal, and a preparatory department. In the first the courses included elementary mathematics, a little Greek and Latin, and a smattering of ancient, mediaeval, modern, and natural history, physical science, political economy, logic, and English literature. On completing any one course, and keeping only three terms, the student was entitled to a certificate of graduation. In the normal department the curriculum, apart from the theory of teaching, was about the same as in the junior classes of a San Francisco high-school, and in the preparatory department almost identical with the subjects usually taught in the lower grades of a grammar-school. [*86] Although the standard is somewhat low, it is probable that in the University of Deseret more has been accomplished, at an average cost for each pupil of $50 or $60 a year per capita, than in many similar institutions, where the pretensions were greater and the expense in proportion. [*87]

[p. 712]

    At a meeting of the board of regents, held in October 1853, Parley P. Pratt, Heber C. Kimball, and George D. Watt were appointed a committee to prepare a small school-book in characters founded on some new system of orthography, whereby the spelling and pronunciation of the English language might be made uniform and easily acquired. A further object was exclusiveness, a separate people wishing to have a separate language, and perhaps in time an independent literature. After some previous discussion, it was agreed that each regent should prepare an alphabet of his own contrivance and present it to the board. Parley Pratt was in favor of adopting one in which each letter should represent a single sound, but as some of the letters represent no sound except when in combination with other letters, and others are of uncertain sound, depending on such combination, the task would seem a difficult one. Finally, at a session held in December of this year, characters were adopted, under the style of the Deseret alphabet, the number of letters, or rather sounds, being thirty-two, of which the so-called vocal sounds were eleven, including six long, with short sounds to correspond, four double and one aspirate, and twenty-one articulate sounds. Thus the long sound of the letter e in meter was represented by a character resembling the Greek sigma reversed, the double sound of woo in wood by one resembling omega, the aspirate by phi, and the articulate sound of f by rho. While these characters are apparently borrowed from the Greek, this is also the case in the plates

[p. 713]

Click to enlarge
CHARACTERS OF THE DESERET ALPHABET.

[p. 714]

from which the book of Mormon is said to have been translated, where the letters pi, rho, tau, phi, chi, some of them as in manuscript, and others as in printed Greek, can be distinctly traced.

    Type was ordered, and with a view to durability, made so as to contain neither the top nor tail extensions of the letters. At a meeting of the board of regents, held in March 1854, some of it was presented to the members; and between that date and 1869 were published in the Deseret alphabet a primer, the book of Mormon, and the first book of Nephi. Some attempt was made to introduce into the public schools books thus printed, but without success. The tailless characters, and the monotonous evenness of the lines, made the words difficult to distinguish, and it was found impossible to insure uniform pronunciation and orthography. Within a few years the alphabet fell into disuse, and is now remembered only as a curiosity. [*88]

    In connection with the university may also be mentioned its library, containing at the close of 1875 about 10,000 volumes, later reserved for the use of students, but for many years open to the public. [*89] The territorial library, for which, as we have seen, an appropriation was made by congress in 1850, further grants being made by the Utah legislature from time to

[p. 715]

time, [*90] contained in 1883 about 4,500 volumes. At the same date the masonic library, established in 1873, contained nearly 6,000 volumes, the odd-fellows' about 1,500, and there were smaller libraries in connection with various literary, benefit, secret, and mutual improvement societies. [*91]

 

    Like citizens of the United States elsewhere, the settlers of Utah have always been patrons of newspapers--and except that their columns are cumbered with church matters, interesting only to the saints, their journals compare very favorably with others published on the Pacific slope. The news is fairly reliable, but the editorial and other comments must be taken at the reader's own valuation. In freedom from journalistic scandal-mongering, they certainly rank among the foremost, and if sometimes dull, they are never silly or obscene. As a rule, the Mormon journals are less rabid in politics and religion than the gentile newspapers. Of several of the former mention has already been made. In 1867 was first published and issued daily the Deseret Evening News, the weekly having been first issued in 1850. The Daily Telegraph first appeared on the 4th of July, 1864, under the parentage of T. B. H. Stenhouse, [*92] and in 1869 was removed to Ogden, where it expired during that year. The Juvenile Instructor, an illustrated Sunday-school periodical published semi-weekly at Salt Lake City, was established by George Q. Cannon, the first number appearing January 1, 1866. The Salt Lake Daily Herald came into existence in June 1870,

[p. 716]

Edward L. Sloan being the first editor. The Woman's Exponent, a semi-monthly woman's-rights paper, was first issued June 1, 1872, under the care of Mrs Louise L. Green Richards, and afterward transferred to Mrs Emeline B. Wells. The Salt Lake Daily Times, a theatrical and advertising sheet of which John C. Graham was editor and proprietor, commenced December 24, 1875, and in March 1881 its publication ceased. The first number of Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine appeared in October 1880. This publication is embellished with steel engravings, and has been favorably received, not only in Utah, but in the eastern states and in England. Considerable sums have been subscribed for the publication therein of city and county histories.

    The Ogden Junction was first issued as a semiweekly in charge of F. D. Richards on the 1st of January 1870. Mr Richards associated with himself C. W. Penrose, to whom he resigned the editorship, subsequent editors being John Nicholson, Joseph Hall, and Leo Haefli. Soon after its first appearance the paper became a daily and its name was changed to the Ogden Herald. [*93] The Provo Daily Times, which started into being August 1, 1873, has had a varied experience, being successively called the Provo Tri-Weekly Times, the Utah County Times, the Utah County Advertiser, and the Territorial Inquirer, the last being its present name. [*94] The Beaver Enterprise was instituted early in 1874, Joseph Field being editor; the Southern Utonian was also published at Beaver City in March 1881, with F. R. Clayton as editor, [*95] and the Beaver County Record, at first a

[p. 717]

weekly and afterward a semi-weekly, in 1883, with F. R. Clayton and R. Maeser as editors. In addition to the above, and to those already mentioned, numerous daily, weekly, monthly, semi-weekly, and semi-monthly publications were issued at the capital and elsewhere in the territory, some of them having but an ephemeral existence, and some being in existence to-day. For an account of them, I refer the reader to the note subjoined, [*96] where it will be seen that

[p. 718]

about one hundred newspapers and periodicals have been published since June 15, 1850, when the first

[p. 719]

number of the Deseret News announced to the saints the death of John C. Calhoun. [*97]

Footnotes

^691:1 On Feb. 5, 1849, the mercury stood at 33 degrees below zero at S. L. City. The mean temperature for 19 years was 51 degrees 9', and the highest 104 degrees in 1871. For meteorological tables, see Meteor Reg., passim; Surgeon-Gen. Circ. 8, 1875, pp. 339-40, 345; Wheeler's Surveys, ii. 535 et seq.

^692:2 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 300, where the population is given by counties. In the census report for 1880 the total population is given at 143,963, nearly 20,000 of the foreigners being English, and about 8,000 Scandinavians.

^692:3 In 1879 there were 33 paupers and 60 criminals. The number of prisoners at the Utah penitentiary for each year, with various statistics, will be found in the reports of the warden and directors in Utah Jour. Legisl., passim. In later years we hear little of such outrages as were alleged to have been committed about the time of the Utah war.

^692:4 In 1877-8 diphtheria was also common. See Utah Sketches, MS., 27. Description of Huntstville, MS., 6. For mortality in S. L. City between 1870 [p. 693] and 1878, see Deseret News, Jan. 8, 1879. In 1870 there were 281 deaths in S. L. City, in 1878, 497, the latter being the largest number recorded during the interval. The principal hospitals at S. L. City were the Deseret, Holy Cross, and St Mark's, the last two being mainly supported by the contributions of miners, who are entitled to its benefits. It was not until 1880 that a territorial insane asylum was established, though one was projected in 1869. See Utah Laws, 1880, 57-65; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1869, 124-5; and for grand jury report on asylum, which is built on a high bluff of the Wasatch near Provo, S. L. C. Tribune, Nov. 22, 1884.

^693:5 See caps. xiii. and xxii., this vol.

^693:6 In 1880 there were, according to the census report, 3,205 Mormons in Idaho, 1,338 in Arizona, 800 in Nevada, 234 in Washington Terr., and 241 in Colorado. There were also 1,131 in California, 451 in Wyoming, 554 in Montana, 394 in Iowa, 208 in Nebraska, and 260 in New York. These are probably below the actual figures at that date, and certainly much below the figures for 1885. The Bannack stake, in the Snake River country, Idaho, alone contained, for instance, on January 31, 1885, 1,770 souls, being divided into eight wards--Louisville, Menan, Lyman, Rexburg, Teton, Wilford, Parker, and Salem. The first Mormon who visited the Snake River country with a view to settlement was John R. Poole of Ogden, who went there in Feb. 1879, and on his return reported favorably to Franklin D. Richards. The first family to settle there was that of Jos. C. Fisher, who in March 1879 located at Cedar Buttes Island, being joined soon afterward by Poole and others. Ricks, Banaack Stake, MS., passim. For account of Mormons in Oneida co., see Silver City Avalanche, Sept. 17, 1870, March 27, 1875; in Bear Lake Valley, Boise City Statesman, Oct. 16, 1879; for agitation on the polygamy question in Idaho, Id., Sept. 3, 1870, Dec. 6, 19, 1879; Ogden Freeman, Feb. 28, 1879. The first attempt to settle the country bordering on the Little Colorado in Arizona was made in 1873, but the party returned, discouraged by the forbidding aspect of the place. Some three years later missionaries were ordered to make permanent settlements in this region, and at a meeting held at Salt Lake City in January 1876, companies were organized and captains appointed for this purpose. The first teams arrived at the Sunset crossing of the Little Colorado on the 23d of March, and after the brethren had explored the neighborhood, W. C. Allen and his company resolved to form a settlement about 20 miles to the south-east of the crossing, to be named after the captain; Geo. Lake and his band settled on the opposite side of the river, two miles to the south-west of Allen, on a spot which they called Obed, near which were springs and meadow-land; Lot Smith and his company formed a colony three miles north-east of the crossing, at a place which was called Sunset, and Jesse O. Ballinger, with his party, settled about four miles north of the crossing on the west side of the river, the settlement being named Ballinger. The brethren proceeded to plough, construct dams, and put in crops, but encountered many difficulties, the river-bottom being treacherous and full of quicksands. At Obed chills and fever prevailed, the settlers being forced to abandon the place and join the other colonies. In November 1877 a number of proselytes arrived from the southern states in a destitute condition; but [p. 694] though all the camps were scantily supplied, their wants were at once relieved. During this season sufficient grain had been raised to last with economy until the following harvest, and meanwhile other settlements had been started, one 25 miles up the river from Allen, to which was given the name of Woodruff, and one 50 miles south of Woodruff, which was called Forest Dale, the name Ballinger being now changed to Brigham City, and Allen to St Joseph. In this year, also, the colonies of eastern Arizona were divided into two presidencies, those on the Little Colorado being west of the dividing line. According to a stake report, dated Aug. 31, 1878, there were at Sunset 114 souls, at Brigham City 230, at St Joseph and Woodruff each 67, and including other small settlements, a total of 587. The harvest of 1878 was severely damaged by floods, but that of 1879 was a bountiful one. In 1880 the crops again suffered from excessive rains and freshets. Settlements on the Little Colorado. MS. The St Joseph stake at Pima, Ar., was organized in Feb. 1883, the place being first settled in 1879 by families from eastern Arizona. St David was founded in 1878, Philemon C. Merrill being the first settler; Curtis in 1881 by the Curtis family; Graham, so named from the peak a few miles to the south, in 1881; Thatcher, named after Apostle Moses Thatcher, in 1882, by John M. Moody; Central, in the same year, by Joseph Cluff and others; McDonald, named in honor of A. F. McDonald, president of the Maricopa stake, by Henry J. Horne and others; Layton, named after President C. Layton, by John and Adam Welker, Ben. Peel, and a few others. All these settlements are in Arizona. The Mesa settlement, belonging to the Maricopa stake, was founded by companies from Bear Lake co., Id., and S. L. co., Utah. Leaving S. L. City immediately after the death of Brigham Young, they reached Salt River in Jan. 1878, and soon afterward began the construction of a canal to the present site of the town. After a year's labor, only a small stream of water was obtained, barely sufficient for planting gardens, as the ditch was cut through a very difficult formation. The settlers persevered, however, their labors diminishing as their numbers increased, and in 1885 a canal had been built carrying 5,000 inches of water, at a cost of $43,000. Lehi, formerly Jonesville, also near Salt River, was founded in 1877 by a party of 71 settlers. In the autumn of this year a few members of the company became dissatisfied with the location, and set forth for San Pedro River, where they founded the settlement of St David, so named by Prest A. F. McDonald after David Patten, whom the Mormons regard as a martyr. Maricopa Stake, MS. In the Gila Valley the settlers bought squatter claims of Mexicans, and in 1885 had constructed over 60 miles of canals from 8 to 16 feet wide, besides a number of smaller ditches. The soil is a fertile, sandy loam, producing two crops or more a year, excellent for grapes and fruit, and of fair quality for all farm products. Sorghum produces three cuttings from one planting, and lucern is cut five or six times a year. Not more than five per cent of the land is arable, the remainder being grazing-land. Martineau's Settlements in Arizona, MS. For monogamic settlements in Montana, see Galveston News, Dec. 1, 1884. In the fall of 1877 Elder John Morgan led a colony of saints from the southern states to Pueblo, Colorado, where they wintered. In March of the following year, James G. Stuart, being ordered to visit the colonists, found them living as best they could, and working at whatever they could find to do. Mainly through the elder's efforts, two settlements were founded, to which were afterward given the names of Ephraim and Manassa. Stuart's Colonization in Colorado, MS. In 1884 the Mormons established a colony at Las Cruces, Sonora, Mex. At the same time their leaders issued a proclamation stating that no general migration to Mexico was intended. The Mexican Financier, Jan. 31, 1885. In La Nueva Era, Paso del Norte, Chihuahua, Apr. 8, 1885, p. 2, it is stated that 200 Mormons had established a colony at Corralitos, Galeana, in that state.

^695:7 Ten from east to west, and five from north to south, allowing for two square miles occupied by the Fort Douglas reservation. By act of Jan. 18, 1867, the western boundary was removed from the banks of the Jordan to a line running due north and south about two miles west of the river. By act of 1872 the south line was removed to Tenth South street.

^695:8 In 1877 George Erb organized the Rocky Mountain Electric Light Co. at Salt Lake City, afterward extending his operations to Ogden, Albuquerque, Cheyenne, Silver City, and Tucson, where, in 1884, all the works were in successful operation. Erb's Electric Lights, MS. Erb, a native of Penn., enlisted as a volunteer in the union army in 1861, being then 18 years of age. After serving for three years he removed to southern Utah, and in 1877 to S. L. City. For account of city gas-works, see Deseret News, Aug. 27, 1873. The city was first lighted by gas July 7, 1873.

^695:9 In 1872 the S. L. C. Street Railroad Co. was organized. It was in running order in June of the same year, its length being about seven miles. R. R. Anderson, in Utah Jottings, MS. In 1883 horse-cars ran every half-hour in eight different directions. Graham's Utah Direct., 1883-4, 184.

^695:10 Among the principal hotels in S. L. City in 1883 were the Walker House and the Continental, formerly the Townsend House. The former was built in 1872, at a cost of $140,000. Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS. For description, see Deseret News, Sept. 4, 1872; S. L. C. Tribune, Sept. 7, 1872; Sala's America Revisited, 290-4; for mention of the Garde House, sometimes nicknamed the Amelia Palace, see Dall's First Holiday, 101-3; Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie, 113.

^695:11 An account of the various libraries is given later in this chapter. The theatre at the corner of First South and First East streets was 175 by 80 ft, with a stage 62 by 32 ft. It was of rock and adobe, with granite finish, fluted pillars, and massive cornices, cost $200,000, and had a seating capacity of at least 1,500. In 1882 the Walker Bros built the opera-house, at a cost of $136,000, within a few yards of their bank. Its dimensions were 167 by 67 feet, with a height of 60 feet. The interior was tastefully decorated and upholstered, and the stage well supplied with scenery and appointments, the drop-scene being remarkably handsome. Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS.; Graham's Utah Direct., 1883-4, 193. For further mention of theatres and theatricals, see p. 584-5, this vol.; Cooke's Theatr. and Soc. Affairs in Utah, MS.; Ward's Lectures, 40; Hubner's Round the World, 80; Bowles' Our New West, 229-31; Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi, 358-9; Rusling's Across Amer., 178-81; Beadle's Life in Utah, 245-6; Ludlow's Heart of the Continent, 334-7, 365-7; Rae' s Westward by Rail, 108-10; Millennial Star, xxix. 70-3; Deseret News, March 27, 1867; Overland Monthly, v. 276-9.

^696:12 By act of Feb. 20, 1880, in Utah Laws, 1880, 55-6, amending the city charter, the city council was authorized to borrow $250,000 for the construction of a canal, tapping the Jordan at a point 25 miles south of the city, for irrigation purposes, thus releasing nearer and better sources of supply for domestic use. It was finished in 1881, at a cost of $200,000. In 1884 there were 13 miles of main pipes, which were tapped at regular intervals by hydrants, so as to insure a sufficient supply in case of fire. The city had a very efficient fire department. See Utah Direct. and Gaz., 1874, 177, 1879-80, 56.

^696:13 In 1886 it had already cost some $2,500,000.

^696:14 In 1884 they were over 60 feet above the ground.

^696:15 Under President Taylor's administration more work in the same time was done on the temple than ever before. Utah Notes, MS. For condition of the temple building in 1860, see p. 582, this vol.; at other dates, Deseret News, Nov. 20, 1867, Aug. 20, 1873, May 27, 1874, Aug. 23, 1876, July 3, Nov. 20, 1878; Millennial Star, xxxvi. 273-5; Harper's Mag., Aug. 1883. In quarrying the granite at Little Cottonwood canon, the workmen dislodged huge bowlders from the mountain side, and sent them crashing down to the railroad track, a descent of 700 feet. One of these bowlders weighed 21,000 tons.

^697:16 Richards' Utah Miscell., MS. In Utah Notes, MS., 2, it is given as low as 7,000. Other authorities say 12,000 to 13,000, but recent estimates show this to be an exaggeration, though including standing-room, the former figure is about correct.

^697:17 For mention of the old tabernacle and its organ, see <page 292>, this vol.

^697:18 For further descriptions of this tabernacle, see, among others, Sala's Amer. Revisited, 296-8; Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines, 10-17; Marshall's Through Amer., 1658; Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities and Prairie, 113-15; De Rupert's Cal. and Morm., 138-46; Deseret News, May 4, 1870, on which date were delivered the inaugural addresses.

^697:19 The corner-stones were laid Sept. 28, 1877, and it was dedicated Jan. 9, 1882, though public meetings were held in it as early as Apr. 4, 1880. Until Apr. 1879 it was called the new or little tabernacle, its name being changed at that date to the Salt Lake Assembly Hall. It is 120 by 68 feet, and can seat 3,033 people. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS.

^697:20 Utah Notes, MS., 2; Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 204. The building is 120 by 68 ft, the height of the tower which rises from the centre being 130 ft. It has excellent acoustic properties, contains a large organ, rich and sweet in tone, and was dedicated in the spring of 1880.

^698:21 Sala's America Revisited, ii. 295; Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines, 18-21; Gaz. of Utah, 1874, 178; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 1, 5, 1878; S. L. C. Herald, Sept. 13, 1878. In 1882 occurred the death of Joseph L. Barfoot, for several years curator of the museum. Born at Warwick Castle, England, and, as he claimed before his decease, legitimate heir to one of the greatest earldoms in the realm, his ancestry being traced back on the father's side to Robert Bruce of Scotland, and on the mother's to Bishop Ridley, he enlisted in the marines, probably on account of some family quarrel. His discharge being procured, he joined his father, who was superintendent of the Mormon Mission in London, and in 1856 Joseph joined the Mormon church. S. L. City Contributor, iii. 250-2; Campbell, Circular Notes, i. 62, states that his father was merely tutor at Warwick Castle.

^698:22 For descriptions of S. L. City in 1883-4, see The Mormon Metropolis; in 1881, Sala's Amer. Revisited, 290-317 (with cut); Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 73-6; in 1879, N. Y. Observer, in Portland Wkly Christ. Advoc., Feb. 6, 1879; in 1878, Marshall's Through Amer., 163-82; in 1877, Boyer's from Orient to Occident, 61-3; Musser's Fruits of Mormonism, 3, 11; Leslie's Cal., 74-5, 91-5, 103; Taylor's Summer Savory, 20-1; in 1876, Jackson's Bits of Travel at Home, 19-22; in 1875, Williams' Pac. Tourist, 132-40, 150-2; [p. 699] Curtis' Dottings, 18-28; in 1872, Bonwick's Mormons and Silver Mines, 8-10; Washington Star, in Deseret News, July 10, 1872; Oakland Monthly Rev., i. no. l, 18-19; in 1871, Hubner's Round the World, 76-80; Greenwood's New Life, 137-8, 142-4; in 1870, Nordhoff"s Cal., 40-2; Nelson's Pict. Guide-Book, 10-25; Kneeland's Wonders of Yosemite, 19-21; Overland Monthly, v. 270-3, 275; in 1869, Rae's Westward by Rail, 104-12; in 1868, Goddard's Where to Emigrate, 152-3; Bowles' Pac. Railroad, 40-51; Ludlow's Heart of the Continent, 315-28; Beadle's Life in Utah, 240-7; in 1867, Hepworth Dixon's New Amer., 133-41; McClure's 3,000 Miles Through the Rocky Mts, 165-6 (with cut); in 1866, Rusling's Across Amer., 163-6; Life among the Mormons, 88-97; in 1865, Bowles' Our New West, 202-3, 206, 219-22 (with cut); Barnes' From Atlantic to Pacific, 54-5; Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi, 347 (with cut); in 1860-2, pp. <page 577>-90, this vol. (with plan).

^699:23 Among other growing settlements in Salt Lake co. at this time were [p. 700] Mill Creek, East Mill Creek, Big Cottonwood, South Cottonwood, Union, North Jordan, South Jordan, West Jordan, Brighton, Butlerville, Granite, Draper, Herriman, Mountain Dell, and Pleasant Green.

^700:24 See caps xiii., xxi., this vol.

^700:25 So called after a bishop and early settler named William Kay, who owned a large portion of its site. About the year 1857 the bishop's interest was purchased by John S. Smith, an Englishman by birth, who, landing in Canada in 1841, afterward proceeded to Nauvoo, and was one of those who took part in the exodus. Mr Smith is now one of the principal farmers in Davis co. Among other prominent men in that county may be mentioned the following: Joseph Barton, a native of St Helens, Lancashire, England, settled at Kaysville, his present home, in 1862, being then only 14 years of age. In 1869 he was elected county surveyor, and since that date has held the appointments of city recorder of Kaysville, county clerk, and prosecuting attorney, the last two of which offices he filled in 1885. In 1884 he was a member of the territorial legislature, and almost throughout his career in Utah has occupied positions of trust, though they have come to him unsought, and somewhat against his will. N.T. Porter, a native of Vermont, was one of the first settlers in Centreville, where he took up his abode in 1849, after suffering all the hardships of the expulsion, and of a long residence at Winter Quarters. Jos. Egbert, a native of Salina co., Ind., was a pioneer, sharing the blanket of Orson Pratt during the jonrney, and driving the first team that entered the valley. John R. Baines of Kaysville, a native of Bedfordshire, England, arrived in Utah with a capital of l0 cents, and afterward accumulated a fortune of $100,000 by farming and traffic. The president of the Davis stake was W. R. Smith, who was for several years a member of the legislature, and for nine years probate judge. He was born in Ontario, Canada.

^700:26 South, East, and West Bountiful. The last was sometimes called Wood's Cross. Bountiful was a city in the book of Mormon. Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 4-5. Prominent among the citizens of West Bountiful was W. S. Muir, a Scotchman by birth, who, accepting the Mormon faith, set forth for Nauvoo, and in 1847 was a corporal in the Mormon battalion. In the following year he started, in connection with Sam. Brannan, the first store ever opened at the mines of California.

^700:27 In 1883 it contained about 8,000 inhabitants.

^701:28 Opened Jan. 4, 1870. Stanford's Ogden, MS., 10.

^701:29 For act to incorporate Ogden, see Utah Compiled Laws, 746-54; Deseret News, Jan. 30, 1861. For act amending charter of incorporation, see Utah Laws, 1880, 4-5. In 1885 the mayor of Ogden was David H. Peery, a Virginian, who during the civil war served as assistant commissary under General Marshall. In 1864, after being honorably discharged from the confederate army, he arrived in Utah with the sum of $1,400, saved from the wreck of his property. In 1885 he was the owner of several blocks of business buildings, and was worth about $150,000, being at that date a member of the territorial legislature. In 1880 the city and county built a bridge over the Weber, at a cost of $16,000, and in the same year the city constructed a reservoir on Court-house hill to collect the waters of several small springs which were conveyed in pipes to Main street. Stanford's Ogden, MS., 15-16. For sketch of the business growth of Ogden, see Tullidge's Mag., i 478-84. For description of town at various dates, see Bonwick's Silver Mines, 22-3; Millennial Star, xxxi. 518; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 1, 1878, July 6, 1879, Jan. 1, 1881; Telegraph, May 18, July 8, Dec. 19, 1869; Herald, Dec. 12, 1877. Topographical plan, in Wheeler's Surveys, ii. 471.

^701:30 With a population in 1880 of 956. Stanford's Ogden, MS., 8; about 900. Amos Maycock, in Utah Sketches, MS., 115. In 1883 it was about 1,200, and in 1886 some 1,500.

^701:31 Harrisville was an agricultural Settlement containing in 1880 about 60 families, most of them Scandinavians. Though subject to early frosts, cereals were raised, with the exception of wheat, and in the neighborhood was good pasture. A considerable income was also derived from the sale of shingles and railroad ties. Stanford's Weber Co., MS., 5, 11-12. In the Description of Huntsville, MS., 1-6, and Utah Sketches, MS., are particulars as to the resources and growth of Huntsville from 1860, when it was founded, until 1880.

^701:32 An agricultural settlement two miles north of Ogden, containing in 1880 about 500 inhabitants. Stanford's Weber Co., MS., 1.

^701:33 Slaterville was organized as a county precinct in 1864. Population in 1880 about 400. Uintah, at the western entrance of Weber canon, was first known as East Weber, the name being changed to Easton early in 1867, and in the same year to Uintah. At Plain City the raising of fruit and vegetables, especially strawberries, was the principal industry. Hooperville, settled in 1869, had in 1880 about 100 families. West Weber, organized as a ward in 1877, mustered at the same date nearly 700 inhabitants. There were also small settlements at Mound Fort, a mile north of the Weber; Eden, near Huntsville; Marriotsville, three miles north-west of Ogden; Riverdale, two miles south of Ogden; and several others. Id., passim.

    In the Brief Historical Sketch of the Settlements in Weber County, by Joseph Stanford, MS., are given in minute detail the leading incidents in the history of all the principal settlements of Weber co. from their foundation until the year 1880. The Historical Sketch of Ogden City, MS., by this author, covers [p. 702] the same period, commencing with the time when its site was purchased by Captain Brown from Miles Goodyear.

^702:34 Incorporated Feb. 6, 1868.

^702:35 At the southern end of Cache Valley is the town of Paradise, and scattered throughout the valley are several small settlements. For descriptive sketch of Cache co. settlements, see S. L. C. Herald, Nov. 3, 10, 1877. In 1880 Paradise had 490 inhabitants. Orson Smith, in Utah Sketches, MS., 1-2.

^702:36 See, for ceremony of laying the corner-stones, Deseret News, Sept. 26, 1877; for dedication, Biog. Lorenzo Snow, 452-3; for act incorporating Logan City, Utah Compiled Laws, 711-18; for description of the city, Deseret News, Oct. 15, 1873, July 23, 1879; S. L. Weekly Herald, March 31, 1881.

^702:37 For organic act, see Utah Acts Legisl., 1863-4, 18-19. The county was named after Apostle Chas C. Rich.

^702:38 Named after Apostle Wilford Woodruff. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 4.

^702:39 The other principal settlements besides those mentioned elsewhere were Echo and Wanship, both on the line of the Utah Eastern railroad. Wanship was named after an Indian who was much respected. Richards' Utah Miscell., MS., 3.

^703:40 Willard City is named after Willard Richards. Richards' Utah Miscell. MS., 7; Brigham, of course, after President Young. Both were incorporated in 1867. See Utah Compiled Laws, 737-9, 743-5. At Brigham City choice fruit was raised in abundance. In 1880 there was a large tannery and a woollen factory in operation. Near Willard City grain, fruit, and vegetables were raised, but the facilities for manufacture were meagre. A. Christensen and G. W. Ward, in Utah Sketches, MS., 45-104. For descriptions of Brigham City at various dates, see McClure's 3,000 Miles beyond the Rocky Mountains; Deseret News, July 24, 1862, Jan. 16, 1878. In 1883 Call's Fort, already mentioned, had only 35 families. Among other settlements were Honeyville on the line of the Utah and Northern railway, organized as a ward in 1877, and Snowville, a stock-raising centre, fifty miles north-west of Corinne, settled by A. Goodliffe and others in 1876.

^703:41 For acts incorporating these towns, see Utah Compiled Laws, 740, 843-52. Grantsville was named after Col. Geo. D. Grant. Richards' Utah Miscel., MS., 6. In the neighborhood of Tooele many kinds of farm and orchard products were raised. At Grantsville, also a farming settlement, there were 25 artesian wells. F. M. Lyman, John Rowberry, and Harrison Severe, in Utah Sketches, MS., 29, 151. For historical sketch of Corinne, see Tullidge's Mag., ii. 243-6.

^703:42 Juab is Indian or Spanish-Indian for flat. For acts defining and extending the limits of the county, see Utah Acts Legisl., 1868, pp. 41-2; 1870, 127.

^703:43 Mona, eight miles north of Nephi, Juab, on the Utah Central, and Levan, seven miles east of Juab, were also promising settlements. At Nephi there were in 1880 two hotels, a furniture factory, and a large cooperative store. Geo. Teasdale, in Utah Sketches, MS., 112.

^703:44 The Utah Central and Denver and Rio Grande.

^703:45 In 1880 there were over 40,000 acres in tilth.

^703:46 Utah Lake is 40 miles in length, with an average width of 10 miles.

^703:47 In 1883 Salt Lake co. had 41,890 and Utah co. 23,472 inhabitants. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 300.

^704:48 See, for act incorporating Provo, Utah Acts Legisl., 1866, 120-5; for names of municipal officers between 1861 and 1877, see Provo City Revised Ordinances, iv.-v.; in 1880, Utah Sketches, MS., where is a brief historical sketch of the town. Among the most prominent men in Provo may be mentioned Abraham O. Smoot, a native of Owen co., Ky, who joined the church in 1835, being then in his 21st year, and a few months later was ordained an elder. Of his missionary labors, and the part that he played during the exodus and the Utah war, mention has already been made. Chosen mayor of Salt Lake City in 1857, he was reappointed to that office at each election until 1866, when, declining the mayoralty, he served for twelve years in the legislature. In 1868 he removed to Provo, where he was also elected mayor, holding that office for twelve years, and receiving no pay for his services in that capacity in either city. In 1884 he was president of the Provo Manufacturing Company, the Provo Bank, the Provo branch of Zion's Cooporative Mercantile Institute, and the Utah county stake. Utah Early Scenes in Church Hist., 17-31; Tullidge's Mag., iii. 297-9.

^704:49 At Payson there was a cooperative store established, mainly by the efforts of Wm Douglas, who arrived in Utah in 1848. See for act incorporating Payson, Utah Acts Legisl., 1865, 42; for act extending limits, Utah Laws, 1882, pp. 18-19.

^704:50 Among the prominent citizens of Spanish Fork may be mentioned the bishop of ward, Geo. D. Snell, a descendant of one of the pilgrim fathers and a native of New Brunswick, whence he removed to Utah in 1854. In 1878 he was elected a member of the legislature. Wm Creer of the same city, and an Englishman by birth, was also a member of the legislature in 1883, and served on some of the most important committees. In 1882 the limits of Spanish Fork City were altered. Utah Laws, 1882, 8.

^704:51 The first mayor of Springville was G. D. Wood, who came to Utah in 1848, and in 1884 was still mayor, though 76 years of age. His son, L. S. Wood, was also one of the prominent men of Springville.

^704:52 The Payson theatre was the second largest in Utah, and had a seating capacity of 800.

^704:53 Midway between Payson and Utah Lake, on the line of the Utah Central, the settlement of Benjamin was founded in 1870. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 156.

^704:54 For organic act, see Utah Laws, 1880, 11-12.

^705:55 For organic acts, see Utah Laws, 1880, 4-5, 10-11, 1882, 98-101. Emery co. was named after Gov. Emery, and Garfield after President Garfield. Emery and San Juan were both bounded on the east by Colorado.

^705:56 See p. <page 1>-5, this vol.

^705:57 Utah Acts Legisl., 1865, 16.

^705:58 Utah Laws, 1878, 48. Circleville, settled in 1860, was the county seat until 1868, when it was removed to Bullion. Utah Acts Legisl., 1874, 6; thence to Marysville, and again to Junction.

^705:59 Beaver was incorporated in 1867. Utah Acts Legisl., 1867, 4-5. For plan, see Wheeler's Geog. Surveys, ii. 491.

^705:60 For act changing the limits of Sanpete, Utah, and Wasatch counties, see Utah Laws, 1880, 18-19. By act of 1864 the county seat of Sanpete co. was removed from Manti to Moroni, and by act of 1865 again fixed at Manti. Utah Acts Legisl., 1863-4, 21; 1865, 16.

^706:61 The site of Manti temple was chosen by Brigham, and ground was broken Apr. 30, 1877. The corner-stones were laid Apr. 14, 1879. Deseret News, May 7, 1879. For condition in 1882, see Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 163-5.

^706:62 Utah Compiled Laws, 828.

^706:63 Chester, about four miles west of Spring City, was settled in 1882 by R. N. Allred and others; Mayfield, ten miles south of Manti, by families from Ephraim and Fort Gunnison in 1873-5. In 1880 there were 16 considerable towns and villages in Sanpete co. J.B. Maiben, in Utah Sketches, MS., 173.

^706:64 Wm Morrison, Paul Poulson, and James M. Peterson, in Utah Sketches, MS., 134-6; Utah Acts Legisl., 1865, 16.

^706:65 For acts incorporating Parowan and Cedar, Bee Utah Compiled Laws, 1868, 808-11.

^707:66 Utah Sketches, MS., 100. Among other settlements were Johnson, some ten miles east of Kanab, Pahreah, near the junction of Pahreah River and Cottonwood Creek, settled in 1872, and Orderville, on the west bank of the Virgen, in 1875. In 1869 the seat of Kane co. was removed from Rockville to Toquerville. Utah Acts, 1869, 17.

^707:67 For act to incorporate St George, see Utah Compiled Laws, 814-20. It was made the county seat in 1863. Utah Acts Legisl., 1862-3, 5-6.

^707:68 For dedication and description, see Millennial Star, xxxvi. 252-5; Deserst News, Apr. 8, 1874, Jan. 17, Apr. 26, Sept. 13, 1876. For plan of St George, see Wheeler's Geog. Surveys, it. 491. Six miles from St George was the village of Washington. and three miles north of Harrisburg the town of Leeds, first settled in 1868-9 by R. H. Ashley and others. Pinto, in the northern part of the county, was settled by Jacob Hamblin and others in 1856. The mining camp of Silver Reef was about one mile from Leeds.

^707:69 Of these 111 were primary, 60 intermediate, and 240 mixed. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 293.

^707:70 Rept Dist Schools, 1880, p. 11. The value of district school property was in 1879 $393,984.57, of private school property $175,000.

^708:71 Presbyterians, congregationalists, and catholics. Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 63. Among them was the Salt Lake Collegiate Institute founded by the presbyterians, the Salt Lake Academy by the congregationalists, and St Mary's Academy by the catholics. The presbyterians a one had in 1883 33 schools and 2,200 pupils. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 280.

^708:72 Opened Jan. 1876, burned Jan. 1884, and rebuilt the same year. Id., 278-9, Albert Jones, in Utah Co. Sketches, MS., 59-60, 64, states that it was founded for the children of members of the church in good standing, though others are admitted, and that in 1880 it had 431 pupils. See also, for faculty, course of instruction, etc., Contributor, ii. 179-80, 241-2, 272-3; Deseret News, April 17, 1878, Feb. 5, 1879; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1880, 461-5, 489-93. among the professors in 1883 was Elder Karl G. Maeser, formerly of the Budig institute, Dresden. While presiding over the European mission in 1855, F. D. Richards heard that he was desirous of being informed as to the fath and doctrine of the saints, and a few months later visited that city by invitation in company with elders Win H. Kimball and Wm Budge, baptizing eight persons and organizing the first branch of the church in Saxony. Maeser was left in charge, and when the government banished the saints from fatherland, as we have seen, he and most of the other converts gathered to Utah. Richards' Miscell., MS. Mr Richards states that the B. Y. academy is one of the best and most popular educational institutes in the territory.

^708:73 Opened in Sept. 1878, the number of pupils in 1880-1 being 160. In 1877 a tract of nearly 10,000 acres south of Logan City was deeded for this purpose to a board of trustees by Brigham. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 283-4. In 1883 Mariner W. Merrill presided over the educational affairs of Logan temple.

^708:74 A copy of it will be found in Rept Dist Schools, 1880, 71-80.

^709:75 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 67-71. The first gentile elected school trustee in Utah was Benjamin Grundy Raybold, a native of Birmingham, England, who came to Utah in 1862. Finding no other occupation, he began his career among the saints as a hod-carrier; then he turned carpenter; then postmaster; then journalist; and finally, in 1866, found employment with the Walker Bros, to whom in 1885 he was confidential clerk. A brief history of the Mormon school system from 1850 to 1875 will be found in U.S. Educ. Rept, 44th Cong. 2d Sess., 458-60. See also, for further information, Id., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 21, 383-4, 600-4; 42d Cong. 3d Sess., 377-80, 416, 608-13, 942-97; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., xxii.-cxxiii. 460-3, 475, 510-12, 728; 43d Cong. 3d Sess., xiii., cxxv., 500-2, 507, 526-34, 733; 44th Cont. 1st Sess., xxvi.-ccxxiii. 510-14, 548-54; 44th Cong. 2d Sess., passim; H. Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., vol. xi., cxxvii.; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1859-60, 22-6; 1860-1, 78-9; 1861-2, 65; 1863-4, 96-9; 1864-5, 110-14; 1865-6, 17-18, 170 -3; 1869, 14-15, 108, 176-8; 1870, 191-9; 1872, 228-30; 1876, 28-9, 78-9; 1878, 33-4, 345-80; 1880, 442-60; Utah School Bepts, passim; Bien. Rept Supt Dist Schools, 1880, 1882, 1884; Utah Sketches, MS., passim; Stanford's Weber Co., MS., 1-23; Linforth's Route from Liverpool, 104, l10-11; Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, ii. 177-94; Burton's City of the Saints, 512-16; Gunnison's The Mormons, 80-1; Ward's Husb. in Utah, 264-6; Hollister's Res. of Utah, 72-3; Utah Pioneers, 33d ann., 30-4; Utah Besources, 55-8; Todd's Sunset Land, 179; Utah Gazetteer, 39-40, 175-6; 1884, 278-94; Contributor, i. 84; ii. 240, 270; iv. 182-3, 352-3; Millennial Star, xxxiii. 551; Deseret News, Oct. 19, Nov. 16, 1850, Feb. 22, 1851, March 19, 1853, Jan. 11, 1855, Apr. l, 1857, Apr. 11, Oct. 24, Dec. 5, 1860, Jan. 15, 1868, Apr. 17, 1872, Feb. 13, 1878, March 26, 1879; S. L. C. Tribune, Nov. 1, 1873, March 25, Aug. 29, 1876, March 3, 20, Apr. 21, 1877, March 20, Sept. 21, 1878, Apr. 23, May 22, Sept. 6, Nov. 20, 1879; Herald, Jan. 30, Apr. 13, 1878. For disbursement of school revenue, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1880, 469-81; for evening-schools, Deseret News, Dec. 28, 1854, Dec. 5, 12, 1860; Sunday-schools, Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 71-3; Cannon's Sunday-schools in Utah, MS., 3; Juv. Inst., xv. 89; Deseret News, Apr. 14, 1869. Mr Harrison states that until there were gentile churches in Utah the Sunday-school was almost unknown. This the Mormons deny, saying that Sunday-schools have been taught in Salt Lake City since 1857, the Sunday-school Union being established in 1866. For gentile churches and missionary work in Utah, see Hand-Book of Mormonism, 77-86; Utah Gaz., 208-11; Marshall's Through Amer., 230.

^709:76 With Orson Spencer as chancellor, Dan. Spencer, Orson Pratt, Jno. M. Bernhisel, Sam. W. Richards, W. W. Phelps, Albert Carrington, Wm I. Appleby, Dan. H. Wells, Robt L. Campbell, Hosea Stout, Elias Smith, and Zerubbabel Snow as regents, and David Fullmer as treasurer. Des. Univ., MS., 3.

^710:77 See <page 324>, this vol.

^710:78 It was opened Nov. 11, 1850, at the house of Mr Pack, in the 17th ward of S. L. City, Cyrus Collins being appointed teacher, but succeeded the same year by Orson Spencer and W. W. Phelps. The terms were $3 a quarter. Id., 6, 10; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 287.

^710:79 Des. Univ., MS., 24; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1853-4, 115.

^710:80 By act of 1855 a grant was confirmed of nearly a section of land lying east of S. L. City. By contributions of labor and produce, nearly all of it was enclosed with a stone wall. A building was also commenced in the 13th ward for the use of the parent school. Des. Univ., MS., 8-9; Utah Acts Legisl., 1866, 110. By act of congress, approved Jan. 21, 1855, two sections, including 46,080 acres, were reserved for a university, said lands to be disposed of under the direction of the territorial legislature. Utah Laws, 1878, 172. In 1859 the legislature passed an act to provide for the selection of two townships for this purpose. Utah Acts Legisl., 1866, 93-4.

^710:81 By act of 1851 the chancellor and board of regents were authorized to appoint a superintendent of primary schools, to be under their control, his salary not to exceed $1,000 a year. By act of 1866 the right of making such appointment was transferred to the legislature. Des. Univ., MS., 4-5, 24.

^710:82 Of which David O. Calder was principal.

^710:83 The course lasted four years in the classical and two in the normal department. In connection with the normal department was a 'model school,' where pupils were prepared for the college course. The charges were $20 per term for the classical, $15 for the normal and commercial, and $8 for the preparatory course, with extra charges for modern languages, music, etc. The rates for tuition were afterward reduced. For studies and faculty, see Catal. Univ. of Deseret, 1868-9, 5, 14-16; for list of text-books, Id., 1869-70, 25-6.

^711:84 There were 307 males and 239 females. Id., 1869-70, 21. Des. Univ., MS., 27.

^711:85 At the session of 1879-80 the legislature appropriated $20,000 for the university, and soon afterward the city council donated to the regents the finest public square in the city. A building was at once commenced, but the appropriation was almost expended before the basement was finished, under the expectation that the legislature of 1881-2 would vote a sum sufficient to complete it. Such a bill was passed, but failed to receive the governor's signature. At the beginning of 1884 the walls and roof had been completed, and a portion of the building was ready to be occupied, the money being raised by contribution. For the two years ending Dec. 31, 1879, the receipts were $18,151.44, of which $9,200 was from territorial appropriations, and $5,986.80 from tuition fees. The salary of the president, J.R. Park, was $2,400 a year. At this date the institution was $5,384.14 in debt. Bienn. Rept Chancellor Univ. Deseret, 1878-9, 11-13. In 1854 Orson Hyde was appointed chancellor, in 1857 and 1861 Albert Carrington, the interim being filled by Orson Pratt, elected in 1858; in 1869 Dan. H. Wells and in 1878 Geo. Q. Cannon were appointed. Des. Univ., MS., 35.

^711:86 See Circ. Acad. Dept Univ. of Deseret, 1880-2, 9-10.

^711:87 In 1870 a school in connection with the university was established at Provo, with Myron Tanner of that city, A. K. Thurber of Spanish Fork, and L. E. Harrington of American Fork as executive committee, and Warren [p. 712] Dusenberry principal. It lasted only a few years. Deseret Univ., MS., 27-8. In 1884 a deaf-mute department was opened in connection with the university. Annual of Univ. of Deseret, 1884-5, 36-7. For further items concerning the university, see the circulars and reports above quoted. Deseret Univ., MS., passim; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1870, 168-72, 1876, 121-7, 1878, 295-6, 355-7, 381-91; Ann. Univ. Deseret, 1884-5, 7-38; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 24-5; S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 13-16, 48, 82, 110, 142; Deseret News, June 9, 1869, Jan. 5, 1871: S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 13, 1876, March 9, 1878; Herald, Nov. 17, 1877, Nov. 22, 1878, Jan. 30, 1881.

    Most of the details given in the text are taken from the Deseret University, MS., 1-35, which, besides a brief historical sketch of that institution, contains some valuable items concerning the district schools and the district school system of Utah.

^714:88 Richards' Utah Misc., MS., 13-16; Des. Univ., MS., 16-18; Richards' Incidents in Utah Hist., MS., 63. The preparation and use of the alphabet were ordered, or at least suggested, by Brigham Young, who, in his address to the legislature of 1853, thus gives his reasons: 'While the world is progressing with steam-engine power and lightning speed in the accumulation of wealth, extension of science, communication, and dissemination of letters and principle, why may not the way be paved for the easier acquisition of the English language, combining, as it does, great extension and varied expression with beauty, simplicity, and power, and being unquestionably the most useful and beautiful in the world. But while we freely admit this, we also have to acknowledge that it is perhaps as much abused in its use, and as complex in its attainment, as any other.' In the Deseret News, Aug. 19, 1868, the weeding-out of objectionable literature is stated as an additional reason. In 1855 $2,500 was voted by the legislature for the new type and for printing books in the Deseret characters. Utah Acts Legisl., 110-11. In 1859-60 the Deseret alphabet was used in keeping Brigham's ledger, and to some extent in the historian's office and in journalism. In 1877 an attempt was made to have the book of Mormon printed in Pitman's phonoype, and Orson Pratt started for England for this purpose, but returned at the death of Brigham in August of that year. No further effort was made.

^714:89 Des. Univ., MS., 29; Utah Gazetteer, 228.

^715:90 The last one in 1882.

^715:91 For mention of such societies, see Contributor, ii. 27-9, 31-2, 61, 92-4, 159, 222, 287, 350; Deseret News, Aug. 7, Nov. 20, 1878; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 218-25. For further details as to libraries, see Id., 228-30; Burton's City of the Saints, 286-7; Deseret News, Aug. 20, 1862; S. L. C. Tribune, March 15, Nov. 22, 1873, Dec. 18, 1875; Reno Gazette, Dec. 6, 1880; Bonanza City (Id.), Yankee Fork Her., Sept. 25, 1879; observatories, Wheeler's Geog. Surveys, ii. 7-9, 461-7, 469-71. The office of superintendent of meteorological observations created by act of 1857 was abolished by act of 1870. Utah Jour. Legisl., 1876, 179-80.

^715:92 The author of Rocky Mountain Saints. His decease occurred in 1882.

^716:93 Among those who early took an interest in newspapers may be mentioned Sidney Stevens, who in 1885 was still one of the largest proprietors of the Herald. Mr Stevens, a native of Somersetshire, England, came to Utah in 1863, settling two years later at North Ogden, where, and at Ogden City, he has ever since been actively engaged in business. Among other ventures, he has been largely interested in the shipment of produce to the eastern states, forwarding as many as 470 car-loads in a single year. To his enterprise the terminus of the Union Pacific is in no small degree indebted for its recent growth.

^716:94 It has been edited at various dates by R. T. McEwan, R. G. Sleater, J. T. McEwan, and John C. Graham. Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS., 18.

^716:95 Later Dan. Tyler became editor. Ibid.

^717:96 Additional list of publications, showing name, where located, frequency of issue, and, where possible, date of establishment and suspension:

          Location.

       Name.

       Established.

     
      Alta City

       Cottonwood Observer, s.w.

       1870 et seq.

     
      Beaver

       Enterprise, w.

       1873.

     
      "

       Beaver County Record, s.w

       June 8, 1883, et seq.

     
      "

       The Southern Utonian, w.

       March 1881 et seq.

     
      Bear Lake

       Democrat, w. (Mor. pub., but pub. in Idaho)

       Oct. 1880 et seq.

     
      Bloomington.

       The Union and Village Echo, m.

       1882.

     
      Camp Douglas

       Union Vedette, d. (trans. to S. L. City)

       1864-7.

     
      Corinne

       Daily Reporter, d.

       1867.

     
      "

       Daily Journal, d.

       1871.

     
      "

       Mail, d.

        

     
      "

       Utah Reporter, d., s.w. (changed to)

        

     
      "

       Corinne Republican, t.w., w

        

     
      Diamond

       Rocky Mountain Husbandman, w

        

     
      Frisco

       Times, w.

        

     
      Logan

       Leader, w. (changed to)

       Sept. 1879-82.

     
      "

       Utah Journal, s.w 

       Aug. 1, 1882, et seq.

     
      "

       The Northern Light, w

       May 1879. 

     
       

       (Transferred and changed to)

        

     
      Oxford, Id.

       Idaho Banner, w.

       1879.

     
      Ogden

       Amateur

        

     
      "

       Daily Morning Rustler, d.

        

     
      "

       Evening Dispatch, d.

        

     
      "

       Ogden Herald, d., s.w.

       1881 et seq.

     
      "

       Ogden Freeman, d., s.w

        

     
      "

       Ogden Junction, d., s.w

       Jan. 1870.

     
      "

       Ogden Pilot, d.

        

     
      "

       Ogden Telegraph, s.w.

        

     
      "

       Ogden Times, s.w.

        

     
      "

       Utah Talsmand

        

     
      Park City

       Record, w. 

        

     
      Provo City

       Territorial Inquirer, s.w.

        

     
      "

       Times, d.

        

     
      "

       Utah County Times, t.w.

        

     
      "

       The Utah County Advertiser

       Jan. 13, 1876.

     
      Richfield

       Sevier Valley Echo, w

       Aug. 1884 et seq.

     
      Salt Lake City

       Anti-Polygamy Standard, m.

       Apr. '80 to Sept. '82.

     
      "

       Bikuben, w.

       Aug. 1, 1876 et seq.

     
      "

       Circular, w

       1874.

     
      "

       City Review

        

     
      "

       College Lantern, m.

       May, 1870.

     
      "

       Deseret News, d., s.w., w.

       June 1850 et seq.

     
      "

       Deseret Home, in

       Jan. '82 to Aug. '84.

     
      "

       Diogenes

       Jan. 1871.

     
      [p. 718]

        

        

     
      Location.

       Name.

       Established.

     
      Salt Lake City

       Enoch's Advocate

       1874.

     
      "

       Evening Chronicle, d

        

     
      "

       Evening Mail, d

        

     
      "

       Foot-Lights

        

     
      "

       Grocer and Trade Journal, m

       May 1,1881, et seq.

     
      "

       Juvenile Instructor, s.m.

       Jan. 1, 1866, et seq.

     
      "

       Keep-a-Pitchin-in, s.m

       1869.

     
      "

       Kirk Anderson's Valley Tan, w.

       Nov. '58 to Feb. '60.

     
      "

       Life and Home, m.

       Aug. 1884.

     
      "

       Mining Gazette, w.

       1873 et seq.

     
      "

       Monthly Record, m.

        

     
      "

       Morgenstjernen, s.m

       1882 et seq.

     
      "

       Mormon Expositor

        

     
      "

       Mormon Tribune, w.

        

     
      "

       Mountaineer, w.

       Aug. 27, 1859.

     
      "

       Mormonen Zeitung, w.

       Aug. 26, 1882.

     
      "

       New Endowment, d.

       Feb. 17, 1873.

     
      "

       Parry's Literary Journal, m.

       Oct. 1884 et seq.

     
      "

       Peep O'Day, w.

       Oct. 20, 1864.

     
      "

       Press, d.

       1874. 

     
      "

       Real Estate Circular

        

     
      "

       Real Estate and Min'g Gazette, s.m., m.

        

     
      "

       Rocky Mt Christian Advocate, m.

       1876.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Herald, d., s.w.

       June 5, 1870, et seq.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Independent, d.

        

     
      "

       Lake Journal, d.

       1872.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Leader, w.

        

     
      "

       Lake Reporter, d.

       May 11, 1868.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Review, d.

       1871.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Telegraph, d., s.w., w.

       July 4, 1864.

     
      "

       Salt Lake Times, d.

        

     
      "

       Salt Lake Tribune, d., w.

       1870 et seq.

     
      "

       Skandinav

        

     
      "

       The Contributor, m.

       Oct. 1879 et seq.

     
      "

       The Utah Farmer, m.

       Feb. '80 to Sept. '81.

     
      "

       Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, qty.

       1880 et seq.

     
      "

       Union Vedette, d., w

       1864.

     
      "

       (Trans. fr. Camp Douglas in 1867.)

        

     
      "

       Commercial, m.

        

     
      "

       Utah Educational Journal, m.

       July 1875.

     
      "

       Utah Mail, d.

        

     
      "

       Utah Magazine, w.

       1867.

     
      "

       Utah Miner

        

     
      "

       Mining Journal, d.

       June, 1872.

     
      "

       Utah Posten

       Dec. 1873.

     
      "

       Woman's Exponent, s.m.

       June 1, 1872, et seq.

     
      Silver Reef

       Silver Reef Echo, s.w

        

     
      "

       Reef Miner, s.w., chgd to w.

       1879.

     
      Spring Lake Villa.

       Farmer's Oracle, s.m.

       May 22, 1863.

     
      St George.

       Cactus, w.

       1862.

     
      "

       Enterprise, m.

       1869.

     
      "

       Our Dixie Times, w. (changed to)

       Jan. 22, 1868.

     
      "

       Rio Virgen Times, w.

        

     
      "

       Pendologist, m.

        

     
      "

       Pomologist and Gardener, m.

       1870.

     
      "

       The Union

       1878.

     
   

^719:97 For further mention of Utah journalism, see Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS.; Millennial Star, xxxvi. 731-2; xxxix. 127; Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, i. 189-90; Beadle's Life in Utah, 534-8; Richardson's Beyond the Mississippi, 351; Smith' s Rise, Progress, and Travels, 27; Bonwick' s Mormons and Silver Mines, 160-2; Tucker's Mormonism, 246-7; S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 209-10, iv. 352; Pettengell's Newsp. Direct., 1856.

    In connection with Utah literature may be mentioned Eliza R. Snow, the sister of Apostle Lorenzo Snow, and the second of the seven children of Oliver Snow, a native of Mass., and a farmer by occupation, though one much occupied by public business and holding many responsible positions. While still almost a young girl, Sister Snow commenced writing for various publications, under an assumed signature, and later in life published nine volumes, two of them being of poetry, and several reaching a second edition. Miss Snow was baptized as a Mormon in 1835, and the following year removed to Kirtland, residing in the family of Joseph Smith and teaching his children. After a brief residence at Adam-on-Diahman and Quincy, she repaired to Nauvoo, and, at the expulsion, crossed the Mississippi with the first parties, reaching the valley of Great Salt Lake with Parley P. Pratt's companies. Snow's Autobiog., MS., passim; Richards' Narr., MS., 116-7; Tullidge's Mag., 116-17.

    In connection with the press of Utah may be mentioned Chas W. Penrose, who was called to the ministry at the London conference of 1850, being then only in his 18th year. Mr Penrose commenced his literary career as a contributor to the Millennial Star, of which he was editor about 1867, having before that date passed several years in Utah, where, however, he found little encouragement as a journalist. Returning in 1870, he was appointed to the editorial charge of the Ogden Junction, which position he filled for seven years, after which he became editor of the Deseret News. In 1876 he was elected member of the legislature for Weber co., in which body he was for several sessions a tireless worker. Among the measures that he introduced was one to remove the political disabilities of women, which passed both houses, but failed to receive the governor's signature. Tullidge's Mag., ii. 27-30.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 720]

  

CHAPTER XXVII.
 AGRICULTURE, STOCK-RAISING, MANUFACTURES, AND MINING.
 1852-1886.

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS AND YIELD PER ACRE--IRRIGATION--CHARACTER OF THE SOIL--FRUIT CULTURE--VITICULTURE--SERICULTURE--TIMBER AND TIMBER-LANDS--BUNCH-GRASS--CATTLE-RAISING--DAIRY PRODUCTS--HORSES--SHEEP--WOOLLEN MANUFACTURES--LEATHER--OTHER MANUFACTURES--IRON-MINING--COAL-MINING--COPPER--SULPHUR--GYPSUM AND MICA--OTHER MINERALS--BUILDING STONE--GOLD AND SILVER--THE WEST MOUNTAIN DISTRICT--THE RUSH VALLEY DISTRICT--THE COTTONWOOD DISTRICT--THE AMERICAN FORK DISTRICT--THE TINTIC DISTRICT--THE ONTARIO MINE--OTHER MINING DISTRICTS--MINING PRODUCTS--MILLING, SMELTING, AND REDUCTION-WORKS.

    THE progress of agriculture in Utah will best be understood from the following figures: In 1849, as we have seen, nearly 130,000 bushels of cereals were raised from about 17,000 acres of land, [*1] then valued at $6.50 per acre. In 1883, which was by no means a favorable year, more than 1,600,000 bushels of wheat, and some 722,000 of oats, 305,000 of barley, 193,000 of corn, together with 215,000 tons of hay, and 800,000 bushels of potatoes, were produced from about 215,000 acres, [*2] the value of which varied according to location from $25 to $100 per acre; the yield

[p. 721]

of wheat being in 1883 about 20 bushels, of oats 33, of barley 25, and of corn 16 bushels, to the acre; though in Willard county the average of wheat was 57, [*3] of oats in Cache and Utah counties 53 and 58 bushels, and of barley in the latter nearly 41 bushels. [*4] When the pioneers entered the valley in 1847 their hearts sank within them at the hopeless prospect. The land seemed barren beyond redemption; but from less than seventeen acres of its soil were raised, in 1880, more than 1,250 bushels of grain. [*5]

    According to the census returns for 1880, there were 9,452 farms in Utah, with a total area of 655, 524 acres, of which 416,105 were in tilth, their value, including improvements, being estimated at $14,015,178; the total value of all farm products at $3,337,410, and of farming implements and machinery at $946,-753. The agricultural products of Utah in 1883 more than sufficed for her needs, [*6] and as there was no very reliable market for the surplus, there was little incentive to further exertion in this direction. It was claimed, however, that with more careful cultivation the yield could be at least doubled on the same acreage, and it is certain that there were several million acres of farming land untouched and almost unthought of, on

[p. 722]

account of an insufficient rainfall, [*7] or through lack of irrigation.

    There are few parts of the world where irrigation has been pushed forward more systematically and with better results than in Utah. In 1865, 277 canals had already been constructed, at a cost, including dams, of $1,766,939, with a total length of 1,043 miles, irrigating 153,949 acres; and there were others in progress at this date, the cost of which was estimated at $877,730. [*8] During each succeeding year thousands of acres, before considered worthless, were brought under cultivation, canals being built in all directions, the waters that had run to waste down the mountain sides and through the canons depositing

[p. 723]

on the farm-lands rich particles of fertile soil. [*9] Two or three waterings a year would, in most localities, secure good crops, and the millions devoted to purposes of irrigation throughout the territory paid better interest, directly and indirectly, than capital invested in any other description of enterprise. Nevertheless, the supply was insufficient, more water being still allowed to run to waste during the spring and winter months than was utilized. [*10]

    The winter rains swell the streams, sometimes to overflowing, when considerable damage occurs to farming-lands along the river-bottoms. Snow falls to a depth of from two to twenty-five feet, but does not usually melt before summer is well advanced. Wind-storms are often violent, and occasionally destroy growing crops. [*11] The altitude of Utah renders the high lands liable to night frosts during the summer months, and on the more elevated plateaus no attempt is made to plant, the surface being devoted entirely to grazing purposes. At times in winter a very low temperature is registered. Often the valleys are colder at night than the more elevated adjacent regions, and

[p. 724]

growing crops are occasionally nipped by frost when those on the bench-lands escape altogether. [*12]

    The havoc wrought, as we have seen, by crickets and grasshoppers among the growing crops of the first settlers, and again in 1855-6, [*13] was repeated at brief intervals in later years. Seldom was a harvest gathered in Utah that was not more or less injured by this scourge. [*14]

    Of the nature of the soil, slight mention has already been made. [*15] The early settlers discoursed in glowing terms of its fertility, though passing emigrants spoke of it as a "mean land," hard, dry, and fit only for the plodding, thrifty, sober Mormon. The main drawback was the alkaline matter, which was so abundant in spots as to form a white efflorescence on the surface, and wherever this efflorescence appeared, vegetation died. Otherwise its composition was favorable to fertility, being formed principally of the disintegrated feldspathie rocks of the mountain ranges, mingled with the debris and decomposed limestone of the valleys. [*16]

    At the annual fairs held by the Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, discontinued after 1881 on account of inability to secure permanent grounds and buildings, prizes were awarded for nearly all the varieties of grain, fruits, and vegetables that

[p. 725]

were raised in California and Oregon. [*17] With the exception of Indian corn, all the cereals raised in Utah thrive vigorously when under irrigation, fall wheat requiring only one watering a year. In the basin of Great Salt Lake the fruits of the temperate zone grow to good size, and are of excellent flavor, the crop being remarkably sure. The value of orchard products in 1883, including apples, of which there were at least ninety varieties, pears, quinces, cherries, peaches, currants, plums, and berries of many descriptions, was estimated at $157,000. The yield of apples was about 90 bushels to the acre, of pears 75, of peaches 120, of plums 165, and of cherries 75. [*18] Production was largely in excess of the demand, most of the surplus being dried for shipment, though for want of a market thousands of tons were fed to hogs, or allowed to rot on the ground. [*19]

    On the Rio Virgen and elsewhere in southern Utah below the rim of the basin were, in 1883, a few vineyards, but viticulture was not a profitable industry, as both grapes and wine were slow of sale, the latter

[p. 726]

on account of its inferior quality, and because the Mormons seldom use stimulants. In 1875 there were only 544 acres in grapes, the total yield being about 1,700 tons, and the average a little more than three tons per acre. [*20]

    In 1883 nearly 700,000 bushels of potatoes were raised from about 8,500 acres of land, the value of market-garden produce for this year being less than $65,000. The small volume of business in these and in orchard products is due to the fact that most of the settlers raised their own fruit and vegetables.

    Of experiments in the raising of cotton in southern Utah between 1855 and 1859, mention has already been made. [*21] Of flax fibre there were raised in 1879 a few thousand pounds in Washington county, and of flax straw about 1,170 tons in various counties.

    That sericulture will eventually become a leading feature in the industries of Utah seems almost beyond a peradventure, as portions of the country are well adapted to this industry, and nowhere else in the United States can the labor of women and children be obtained so cheaply and in such abundance. In 1868 a large cocoonery was built some four miles south of Salt Lake City, [*22] and about thirty acres planted in mulberry-trees, but through mismanagement, and also on account of the dampness of the building, which was of adobe, the first experiments resulted in failure. After some further efforts, a company was organized, styled the Utah Silk Association, and incorporated under the laws of the territory. [*23] Ground was leased

[p. 727]

at the mouth of City Creek, where a neat brick building was erected and fitted with machinery for the manufacturing purposes. Samples of raw silk were sent to New York, to Florence in Italy, and Florence in Massachusetts, and were found to be well reeled and of good strength and quality. Though the industry is as yet in its infancy, the Mormons are confident that it will soon develop into a source of wealth. [*24]

 

    One of the main drawbacks to the industries of Utah has been the scarcity of timber for hard and finishing woods. In the mountains and canons there was a fair supply of common timber for ordinary use, though in the valleys and plains there was no forest growth, sage-brush having been often used for fuel during the first years of settlement, willow brush for fencing, and adobes for building. In later times the black balsam and red pine, indigenous to the Oquirrh and other ranges, were largely used for posts and railroad ties, the scrub cedar and pinon pine, found in many portions of southern and western Utah, being made to serve the same purpose. Though the people were not allowed to acquire title to timber-lands, and were even nominally forbidden to use the timber except on mineral lands, and then only for domestic purposes, they obtained all that they needed without even paying stumpage, except in a few localities. In 1883 there were a hundred or more saw-mills in operation in various parts of Utah, the price of building and fencing lumber generally ruling at from $20 to $25, and of flooring and finishing lumber $40 to $45, per thousand feet. [*25]

[p. 728]

    Bunch-grass, on which the countless flocks and herds of Utah mainly subsist, first makes its appearance on the western slope of the Black Hills, and thence is found at intervals as far as the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada. Growing in clumps, as its name implies, and on the most unkindly soil, in thirsty sand or on barren hills, it gives value to millions of acres which would otherwise be absolutely worthless. Its growth commences in early spring, and though in May or June it dries up, it is still nutritious, having then the appearance of a light-yellow straw. Within its withered stalk it puts forth a green shoot after the first autumnal rains, and its pyriform seed, resembling the oat but of smaller size, is the favorite food of cattle. In winter it gathers juice and nourishment beneath the snow, and except in the late summer months, when it is still of fair quality on the mountains and high in the canon ravines, [*26] serves as pasture for stock the year round, producing large, sinewy limbs and strong, elastic muscles, and giving to the beef and mutton an excellent flavor. [*27]

    As elsewhere on the Pacific slope, before 1886 the range for cattle decreased, lands once common for grazing [*28] being taken up for agriculture, while sheep-raising was found to be a more profitable industry. Hence the introduction of alfalfa, in which many thousands of acres were seeded, the yield being three to four tons on inferior and poorly irrigated land, and ten tons under more favorable conditions.

[p. 729]

    The herds which the Utah settlers brought with them from Illinois were largely increased, as we have seen, during the California-bound migration, especially between 1849 and 1854, when thousands of steers and cows, broken-down and sore-footed, but of excellent breed, were bartered for provisions, mules, and Indian ponies. The emigrant roads from the Sweet-water to the Humboldt were lined with enterprising traders, who secured this lame stock on their own terms; and after fattening their cattle on the rich grasses of Utah, sent them to California, where they were exchanged for gold-dust or for Mexican mustangs, which were again traded off for cattle. Thus herds multiplied rapidly in the land of the saints; moreover, the natural increase was enormous, for as yet pasture was abundant and the inhabitants consumed but little meat. There was no difficulty, however, in disposing of the surplus. When California became overstocked, large numbers were driven to Nevada, [*29] afterward to Idaho and Montana, and still more recently to Wyoming and Colorado. Gradually, however, some of these markets became glutted, though there was still a considerable demand, and in later years farmers who had before paid little attention to grading, as they found that an inferior beast sold for almost as much as a well-bred animal, made some effort toward raising better and larger stock, such as would find ready sale in eastern cities. [*30] Short-horn, Devon, Hereford, Jersey, or Ayrshire cattle crossed with other breeds were then to be found on most of the principal ranges. In 1883 the total number of cattle was estimated at about 160,000, [*31] and their value, at an average of $30 per head, at $4,800,000. At that

[p. 730]

date there were fewer cattle in Utah than for several preceding years, [*32] the operations of large stock companies [*33] having forced the price to a maximum figure, and caused large droves to be sent out of the country. [*34]

    The dairy products of Utah for 1883 were about 630,000 gallons of milk, 1,300,000 pounds of butter, and 125,000 pounds of cheese. Of eggs the yield was more than 1,100,000 dozen, of honey more than 130,000 pounds, and of wax about 2,300 pounds. The home consumption of all these articles was very large, yet heavy consignments of eggs were made to San Francisco, where they sold at much higher rates than eastern eggs. Some of the butter found a market in Idaho and Montana, though imports of eastern butter were still considerable.

    The number of horses and mules in the territory at this date was estimated at not less than 75,000, [*35] the most prominent breeds of horses being the Norman, Clydesdale, and Hambleton. From the cross of the mustang with the American horse were produced animals

[p. 731]

with remarkable powers of endurance; and it was claimed that those raised in Utah had better lungs, hoofs, and muscles than could be found in most parts of the United States. The lungs gain strength from the mountain air, the hoofs from the dry climate, and the muscles from the distance to be travelled for grass and water. [*36]

    Until 1870 most of the sheep gathered in Utah, apart from the few herds which the early settlers brought with them, came from New Mexico. Since that date ewes of the Spanish-merino breed have been introduced from California, together with long-wool bucks from Canada, and fine-wool rams from Ohio, the Cotswold, Kentucky, and other breeds being also represented. [*37] Though Utah wool sold at higher rates than that produced in neighboring states, the breed still might be better. The fleece was dry and dusty, readily absorbing alkali, though after the introduction of the merino the wool improved considerably as to fineness of texture. In value it usually ranged from 15 to 20 cents a pound, and as the number of sheep in Utah was estimated, in 1883, at not less than 450,000, [*38] the clip, allowing five pounds per fleece, [*39] may be estimated at about $500,000. For many years sheep were exempt from taxation, and hence large amounts of capital were invested in this industry, some of the largest ranges being in Cache Valley, where they get little fodder in winter, and under favorable conditions this industry yielded a profit of 40 per cent a year. [*40]

[p. 732]

    About one fourth of the total clip was used for manufacturing purposes, supplying not more than one eighth of the demand for textile fabrics, most of the remaining three fourths being sent out of the territory, not only unworked but even unwashed, to be returned in the shape of clothing and blankets, with all the added charges of freight, commissions, and manufacture. In 1882 Utah possessed ten woollen-mills, which were worked only to half their capacity, one of which--the Rio Virgen Manufacturing Company--also produced cotton fabrics. They contained at that date about twenty sets of cards, with 120 looms and perhaps 5,000 spindles, the value of goods produced being estimated at $300,000. For several years the Provo Manufacturing Company had the largest woollen-mill west of the Missouri. It was built in 1872, on the cooperative plan, the people of Utah county being asked to contribute money or labor for the purpose, and the material obtained at small expense. [*41] Utah also claims to have established the pioneer woollen-mill of the Pacific slope, for in the Deseret News of April 19, 1853, we read that Mr Gaunt "has commenced weaving satinets at his factory at Western Jordan, and very soon he will full and finish some cloth." [*42]

[p. 733]

    The volume of manufactures in Utah increased from about $300,000 in 1850 to at least $5,000,000 in 1883, the value of all materials used at the latter date being estimated at about $2,400,000, of labor at $700,000, the number of hands employed at 2,500, and the amount of capital invested at $3,000,000. The chief items apart from textile fabrics were flour, lumber, furniture, leather and leathern products, machinery, lead and leaden pipes, and malt liquors. [*43] There were at least seventy-five flour and grist mills, 100 lumber-mills, eighteen furniture factories, twenty boot and shoe factories, and seven founderies and machine-shops. [*44]

    A great drawback to the leather interests is that nearly all the materials used for tanning have to be imported in the shape of extracts, at a cost that leaves

[p. 734]

little profit for the manufacturer. Pine barks are used to a small extent, but chestnut, oak, hemlock, and sumac are not found in Utah. Nevertheless there were in 1883 about 25 tanneries in operation, producing leather valued at $250,000. During this year some 200 car-loads of hides and pelts were shipped to the eastern states, sufficient to supply almost the entire demand of Utah for leathern products. The leather used for harness and saddlery, trunks and valises, of which the manufacture amounts to not less than $150,000, is almost entirely imported. The same condition of affairs exists among the furniture and carriage and wagon factories, which import nearly all of their material, paying for it the same rates of freight as on imported vehicles and furniture, while labor is considerably higher than in the eastern states. [*45]

    Under such disadvantages, it was greatly to the credit of the settlers that they undertook to compete to any considerable extent with eastern manufacturers, and that the production of goods should increase steadily from year to year, with occasional set-backs caused by dull markets and over-production. Manufacturing is seldom a profitable industry in new countries, even from materials native to them, and under the most favorable conditions. It is doubtful whether this branch of enterprise, throughout the Pacific slope, yielded, on an average, six per cent on the entire capital invested, and it is doubtful whether even this average was obtained in Utah.

    The production of iron--not only of pig-iron, but of iron and steel rails--and of mill, mining, smelting, and railroad machinery, bids fair in 1886 to be foremost

[p. 735]

among the manufactures of Utah. In 1883 the product of her founderies and machine-shops was estimated at over $360,000, being second only to that of her flouring and grist mills. With suitable and abundant fuel, there is probably no state west of the Missouri with better facilities in this direction, among them being a great variety of rich and pure ores, labor and supplies at moderate rates, a climate that seldom interferes with out-door work, a central location, a network of railroads, a fair demand, and a freight tariff [*46] that almost prohibits the shipment of crude or manufactured iron from more distant sources of supply, whether to Utah or the surrounding states.

    At a very early date it was ascertained, as will be remembered, that there were immense deposits of iron in various parts of Utah. At Smithfield, in Cache county, there were beds of hematite sixty feet in thickness. On the Provo near Kamas, on the Weber in the neighborhood of Ogden, on the Wasatch near Willard and Bountiful, at Tintic, at City Creek canon in the Cottonwoods, on many of the mountain slopes, and on much of the desert land, ores were found in almost every variety except in the form of carbonates. The largest deposits were in Iron county, and in what may be termed the southern prolongation of the Wasatch Range, about two hundred miles south of Salt Lake City. The most remarkable outcrops were in the neighborhood of Iron Springs, Iron City, and Oak City. In the Big Blowout, as it is termed, a solid mass of magnetic ore near Iron Springs, with a length of 1,000 feet and half that width, it is estimated that there are 3,000,000 tons near the surface. Other deposits have each 1,000,000 in sight, and in this district there are probably some 50,000,000 tons above or near the surface, while the ledges are practically inexhaustible and of excellent quality. [*47]

[p. 736]

    Between 1872 and 1882 about 70,000 tons of coke were brought into Utah at a cost of $1,800,000, and during the same period 500,000 tons of coal were brought from Wyoming at a cost of nearly $4,000,000. The future of the iron interests of Utah appears to depend mainly on the question whether coking coal call be produced of sufficient consistency for the smelting of pig-iron. As yet it has not been produced, or not in considerable quantity; but the coal regions are of vast extent, have been but slightly explored, and it would seem almost a certainty that deposits will somewhere be found that answer the purpose. It is well known that the best coal for coking is that which has been subjected for ages to pressure under the application of heat. The coal-beds of Utah are of recent and not of what is termed the true coal formation, but such coal sometimes makes excellent coke. At Wales, in Sanpete Valley, in Pleasant and Castle valleys to the east and south, on Cedar Mountain, and elsewhere, coking coal has been found which serves for the smelting of lead, but not for iron, [*48] though it is believed that coke will soon be produced that can bear the weight of the charges in pig-iron smelting.

    In January 1854 the Utah legislature offered a reward of $1,000 to any resident who would open a vein of coal not less than 18 inches thick within 40

[p. 737]

miles of Salt Lake City, and where it could be profitably worked. [*49] Between that date and 1880, 126,000 acres of coal-lands had been surveyed in various counties, [*50] and in 1883 the total area of such lands was estimated at 20,000 square miles. The largest deposits are found on the eastern slope of the Wasatch, extending at intervals from the Uintah reservation through Sanpete, Pleasant, and Castle valleys, as far south as Kanab, and its vicinity. In considerable areas the formation is broken or destroyed by erosion, among others, in the neighborhood of Iron City, where veins are plentiful, though too small to be profitably worked. On the Weber and its tributaries in Summit county, for 12 or 15 miles above Echo City, there is coal of fair quality for household and steam-making purposes, which has been worked since 1867, some of the mines being opened in 1883 to a depth of 1,100 or 1,200 feet. From the Coalville mines, a few miles south of Echo, were drawn until recent years most of the supplies needed for Salt Lake City and the northern settlements. At, Evanston, also in Summit county and on the line of the Union Pacific, there is a vein of bituminous coal from 17 to 19 feet in thickness. In 11 out of the 24 counties of Utah coal-lands had been surveyed in 1880, varying in extent from 120 to 35,696 acres, and in several others it was known that coal existed. Perhaps the most valuable deposits are in the Sanpete Valley, where the seams vary from 6 inches to 6 feet of bituminous coal, which, when a better plant is used in the mines, may produce a serviceable coke, while in the mountains to the

[p. 738]

south and east veins are being worked from 10 to 12 feet in width. [*51]

    In estimating the value of these deposits, it must be remembered that veins less than three or four feet wide can seldom be worked at a profit, except when near to market and under favorable circumstances, and that the Utah veins are of smaller average width. Thus the yield for 1869, though there were several mines in operation at that date, was but 4,500 tons, in 1876 and 1877 45,000 tons, and in 1878 60,000 tons, [*52] or little more than one half of the consumption, even for the last of these years. It will be observed, however, that there are large coal-beds in close proximity to the principal iron deposits; and with a ready market, cheap and reliable labor and supplies, access by railroad, and other advantages, it is probable that the coal and iron industries of the territory, far removed as it is from the manufacturing centres of Europe and America, will rank among the foremost.

    There are few of the metals or minerals known to science which are not represented in Utah. [*53] Copper is found, usually in connection with other metals, in

[p. 739]

most of her mining districts, from the Weber to the Colorado, where, in the sandstone formations, some very rich ores have been discovered. It is most abundant in southern Utah, but the only mines developed in 1883 were in the extreme north-western portion of the territory, where veins averaging seven or eight feet in width, enclosed in micacious shale and intermingled with porphyry, yielded in spots as much as fifty per cent of metal. [*54]

    Beds of sulphur were found both in northern and southern Utah, the largest, with an area of about 300 acres and a depth of not less than twenty feet, being in Millard county. In the hills of Beaver county, some fourteen miles south of Frisco, there are also large deposits of singular purity among fissures of silicious flint; but though much of it would yield fifty per cent, and some even 98 per cent, of pure brimstone, it has no commercial value, and is not even utilized for local consumption. Near Brigham City there are sulphurets of antimony, averaging at least four feet in thickness, and yielding from twenty to thirty per cent of metal. In Pluto and Garfield counties are purer and larger deposits. Gypsum and mica abound in southern Utah, the latter being found also in Salt Lake and Davis counties. East of Nephi, in Juab county, is a vein of gypsum 1,200 feet long and 100 in width. In Washington and Sanpete counties it is also encountered, both in the crystallized and oxydized state. Cinnabar, cobalt, and bismuth, the last in paying quantities, are met with in Beaver county and at Tintic. [*55] Near Salt Lake is a solid mountain of rock salt. [*56] West of the lake are large deposits of saleratus.

[p. 740]

[paragraph continues] At Emigration canon carbonate of soda is found on the surface, and was used by the first settlers for making bread. In the iron-beds red and yellow ochre are abundant. Under the shale-beds, which cover a surface of 1,000 square miles, occurs what is termed mineral wax, some of it being rich in gases and paraffine. [*57] At Promontory Range, so called because it projects into Great Salt Lake, and in Sanpete county, are vast beds of alum shale, alum in combination with other minerals being found in all parts of Utah, though as yet without value.

    Building stone is exceedingly plentiful throughout the territory, and in great variety. At Little Cottonwood there is granite; at the Red Buttes near Salt Lake City there is red sandstone; in Sanpete county is white sandstone; and at Logan, limestone, easily quarried and strongly impregnated with iron. Marbles, black, white gray, cream-colored, variegated, and some of them capable of receiving a fine polish, are found among other points on the islands of Great Salt Lake, near Provo, at Logan, Tooele, Frisco, Alpine City, and Dry canon, the Logan marbles being in most demand. On Antelope Island, also in Great Salt Lake, there is a large quarry of green and purple slate, which for some purposes is preferred to eastern slate. Clays of various descriptions, as brick clays, potter's clays, and porcelain clays, are found in Beaver, Davis, and Sevier counties, west of Utah Lake, and at several of the mines.

    Mining of most descriptions, and especially of gold and silver, was discouraged, as we have seen, by the dignitaries of the church, partly with a view to prevent the rush of gentiles which would surely follow the discovery of gold, and also because the very existence of the Mormons as a community depended on their unremitting exertions in producing the necessaries

[p. 741]

of life. The first systematic efforts at prospecting, made by permission of General Connor, when in command at Camp Douglas, were ridiculed in the tabernacle; [*58] and later, when mining projects were brought forward by gentiles, they were steadily discountenanced. In 1863 Captain A. Heitz and a party from Camp Douglas discovered argentiferous galena and copper in Bingham canon, on the east slope of the Oquirrh Range, near the Jordan, and about thirty miles south of Salt Lake City. A mine was located in September of that year by a man named Ogilbie, and in December following, a mining district was established, named the West Mountain, and including the portion of the range between Black Rock, at the southern end of Great Salt Lake, and the fortieth parallel. In 1871 this district contained thirty-five mines. [*59]

    The first shipment of ore from Utah was a car-load of copper ore from Bingham canon, hauled to Uintah on the Union Pacific, and forwarded by the Walker Brothers to Baltimore in June 1868. In 1864 free gold was discovered in this district by a party of Californians returning from Montana to pass the winter in Salt Lake City. Between 1865 and 1872 the production of gold was estimated at $1,000,000, and up to 1882 the total product was 500,000 tons of ore and 100,000 of bullion, from which was extracted $1,500,000 in gold, $8,800,000 in silver, and $5,000,000 in lead. The surface was a broken quartzite formation, the mineral belt broad and containing many fissure veins believed to be permanent, the ore being partly galena, largely silicious, and decomposed on or near the surface. [*60]

[p. 742]

    On the western side of the Oquirrh Range, on the margin of Rush Lake, in Tooele county, the Rush Valley district was organized in 1863, being segregated from the West Mountain district, and two years later about 400 claims had been taken up, 40 of them being in what was afterward known as the Ophir district, though both were more commonly termed the Stockton mines, from the town built near their location. [*61] The ores were sulphurets and carbonates of argentiferous lead, with occasionally a trace of gold, selected specimens assaying over $1,200 per ton, and the average being $50 to $60. In the Ophir district rich chloride ores, assaying in spots $500 to $5,000, were afterward discovered. [*62]

    The first discovery of silver-bearing rock in the Wasatch Range was made by General Connor in person, at the head of Little Cottonwood canon. The first ore encountered was galena, and afterward carbonate of lead, both being found in chimneys. The first shipment was made by the Walker Brothers in July 1868; but it was not until the completion of the Utah Central to Salt Lake City, early in 1870, that the mines were systematically opened. Among them were the Emma, of evil fame, and the Flagstaff, the latter producing up to the close of 1882 more than 100,000 tons of ore, averaging $30 to the ton. [*63] The former was located in 1869, the vein for the first 100 feet being only eight to twelve inches wide, but increasing with depth to thirty-five feet, and yielding from $135 to $250 per ton in silver, the output for the eighteen months ending with the close of 1872 being over $2,000,000. [*64] The unsavory transactions connected

[p. 743]

with it after its sale to a party of English capitalists, for the sum of $5,000,000, have no parallel in the history of mining swindles, except perhaps in connection with the Comstock lode. [*65] The Big Cottonwood district lay immediately to the north of its namesake, both being near Alta, in Salt Lake county, and from 8,000 to 9,000 feet above the sea-level. In 1871 none of the mines promised well, but a year later several were yielding largely, and some hundreds of claims were located. [*66]

    In the American Fork district, south of Little Cottonwood, many locations were taken up in 1870 and 1871, some of considerable value--one mine, named the Pittsburg, being afterward sold for $20,000, and one called the Miller for $190,000. The most prominent mine in 1882 was the Silver Bell, in which a strong vein of milling ore was encountered at a depth of 300 feet. In geologic features this district resembled the Cottonwoods, and was on the same mineral belt. [*67] In connection with it may be mentioned the Silver Lake district, on Deer Creek, containing several promising locations, and now merged in the American Fork district.

    On the extreme southern end of the Oquirrh Range, and on its western face, was the Tintic district, overlooking the Tintic Valley, where the first mine, named the Sunbeam, was located in 1869, the district being organized a few months later. On the Sunbeam

[p. 744]

ledge there were in 1882 nine locations, selected ores from all of them carrying 80 to 100 ounces of silver, besides gold, copper, and lead. Among the leading mines at that date were the Crismon, Mammoth, and Eureka Hill, the former with an ore-chimney 100 feet wide, averaging about $35 per ton in gold and silver, and 7 or 8 per cent of copper, the latter producing ores of several descriptions, which yielded about the same average, and paying occasional dividends. [*68]

    In the Uintah and Blue Ledge districts, both at Park City, near tributaries of the Weber and Provo rivers, is the famous Ontario mine, discovered in 1872, [*69] and in 1883 developed to a depth of 800 feet. the vein is in a quartzite formation, the pay-chute being several hundred feet in length, and about three in width. Up to the close of 1883 the total output exceeded $17,000,000, of which about $6,250,000 had been disbursed in dividends, the ore producing on an average about, $106 per ton in silver, and the yield being remarkably uniform. The cost of mining and milling, with other expenses, was $33 to $34 per ton, and was largely increased by the flow of water, which was at the rate of 2,000 gallons per minute. A huge pumping-engine of the Cornish pattern had been erected at the mine, with power to drive a double line of 20-inch pumps at a depth of 2,000 feet. [*70]

    In the San Francisco district in Beaver county, fifteen miles west of Milford and about 240 south of Salt Lake City, the leading mine was the Horn Silver, the outcrop of which resembled the top of a hay-cock,

[p. 745]

and was discovered by accident. [*71] In 1882 it had been opened to a depth of 500 feet, the ore being a decomposed argentiferous galena, some 50 feet in thickness, from which at the close of that year about $6,000,000 worth of silver and lead had been extracted, [*72] and $1,500,000 paid in dividends. The Frisco Mining and Smelting Company, in the same district, owned the Carbonate mine at the town of Frisco, the Cave, Bigelow, and other locations in Granite Range, and a large tract of auriferous ground in Osceola county, Nevada. The vein of the Carbonate was found to be composed of one part of rich argentiferous galena to three or four of trachyte, and it was of course necessary to concentrate the ores. The Cave mine, which was in the neighborhood of the Horn Silver, and consisted of a series of limestone caves, containing limonite ore near the surface and argentiferous galena at greater depth, produced a considerable amount of bullion, and in 1884 was capable of yielding 100 tons a day, but was not worked to its full capacity pending the construction of a branch railroad. [*73] The mine in Osceola county covered an area of 700 acres, and was believed to contain very rich deposits of gold, but lay idle for lack of water, the nearest supply being 17 miles distant. During the year 1885 it was expected that arrangements would be made for working the ground by the hydraulic process. [*74]

    The Harrisburg or Silver Reef district was in Washington

[p. 746]

county, south of Milford, and in the basin of the Colorado. The town of Silver Reef in this district was so named from a silver-bearing sandstone reef 100 miles in length, and yielding in places $30 to the ton. The Leeds Silver Mining Company, a San Francisco organization, was the pioneer location of this district, and from its ground about $800,000 have been extracted. From the Christy Mill and Mining Company's locations, 16 in number, about 50,000 tons were taken out during the four and a half years ending with the close of 1882, the yield of bullion being over $1,275,000. At that date the Stormont Silver Mining Company and the Barbee and Walker Mill and Mining Company, both New York organizations, had produced each a round million, the former having disbursed $145,000 in dividends. The silver-bearing part of the reef was at least 15 miles in length, and there were hundreds of locations as yet unworked, which, if consolidated and provided with mills, could probably be developed into dividend-paying properties. [*75]

[p. 747]

    For 1869 the product of all the Utah mines in gold, silver, and lead did not exceed $200,000. In 1871 it had risen to $3,000,000, and in 1875 to $7,000,000. For 1883 it was $7,017,682. Between 1870 and 1883 there were produced $2,150,000 in gold, $45,790,272 in silver, 258,000 tons of lead, worth at the Atlantic seaboard $23,220,000, and 1,000 tons of copper which sold in New York for about $300,000. The total output for this period was $71,502,772, or an average of more than $5,500,000 a year. [*76] At the close of 1883 there were at least 95 districts in Utah where mining of various descriptions was in progress, all of them contributing more or less to the total yield, though the great volume of production was confined to a few. The entire annual expense of these districts may be roughly estimated at $10,000,000, while the output is far below that figure. It does not follow, of course, that this industry has proved unprofitable, for the amount of capital invested was trifling when compared with other states on the Pacific slope, and the difference between output and outlay may be fairly considered as so much money expended on

[p. 748]

developments. That as a rule "it requires a mine to develop a mine," of whatever nature, is, however, no less true of Utah than of other mineral sections.

    Of mining at Carson Valley and other districts in Nevada which were formerly portions of Utah, mention is made in my History of Nevada. It is worthy of note that from the tailings of the Raymond and Ely mine, near Pioche, W. S. Godbe and his associates had extracted bullion to the amount of $750,000 up to the close of 1884, and it was believed that the value of that which remained in the pit exceeded $1,250,000. The tailings were worked by Russell's leaching process, the distinctive feature of which is the use of sulphate of copper as an extract solution. By this process, which has now been in use for several years, it is claimed that a very high percentage of metal can be extracted, and that ores of low grade can be profitably worked. [*77] At an earlier date Kustel's process of leaching chloridized ores with a solution of hyposulphide of soda was somewhat in favor, and it is the opinion of many practical miners that the leaching process will eventually be substituted for the usual pan amalgamation. [*78]

    At the close of 1883 there were seventeen smelting and reduction works in Utah, producing more than 2,000 tons of bullion per month, and twenty quartz-mills, with at least 350 stamps, the cost of a chloridizing-mill being $3,000 to $4,000 per stamp, and of a gold-mill perhaps $1,000 per stamp. [*79] All of the

[p. 749]

smelting and reducing works were of modern pattern, and with modern improvements, their capacity varying from 20 to 250 tons of ore per day. The largest in operation at this date were the Germania lead-works, where most of the base bullion was refined, and the Francklyn smelting-works. The former were at South Cottonwood, seven miles from Salt Lake City, and on the line of the Utah Central and Denver and Rio Grande railroads. Their refining capacity was forty tons a day, and they contained all the apparatus needed for converting galena ores into Dore bars, litharge, and marketable lead. [*80] The refining capacity of the Francklyn works, a mile distant, was 55 tons a day, or about 250 tons of crude ore. [*81]

    The average cost of mining and hauling in Utah, including dead-work, up to 1884, was probably not less than $10 per ton; and of milling silver ore at least as much, though there were districts where it did not exceed $4 per ton. [*82] When purchased at the smelting-works, the silver and lead in the base bullion were estimated at New York prices. Five per cent on silver and ten per cent on lead were deducted for loss in smelting; $10 to $12 per ton for the cost of smelting, $16 to $18 for refining, and about $25 per ton for freight to New York. When it is remembered that

[p. 750]

the average yield of galena ores, which form the bulk of the deposits, is less than $30 per ton, it will be seen that they could not be worked at a profit. With the exception of the Ontario, Horn Silver, and perhaps one or two others where the ore was exceptionally rich, none of the mines paid steady dividends of any considerable amount.

Footnotes

^720:1 See <page 328>, this vol. Three fourths of the crop was wheat, and there were 10,000 bushels each of corn and oats. Most of it was produced on the banks of Jordan River and its affluents, and in the neighborhood of Utah Lake. In Utah Sketches, MS., passim, it is stated that land was cultivated in Sanpete co. in 1848, and in Tooele and Utah cos. in 1849. Some 45,000 bushels of potatoes were also raised in 1849, besides other vegetables, together with 40 pounds of hops and 70 of tobacco.

^720:2 For tabulated statement of cereal and farm products for each county in 1883, see Utah Gazeteer, 1884, 297-8.

^721:3 Utah co. produced over 30 and Cache over 29 bushels per acre.

^721:4 Agricultural statistics for Utah will be found in the census reports for 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880. For intervening years, see the files of the Utah Directory and Gazetteer; Utah Gazetteer; Deseret News; Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 23; Fabian's Utah, 6, 8-9; Utah Resources and Attractions, 18-19; Sac. Union, Jan. 9, 1873; S. L. C. Tribune, March 30, 1879; Deseret News, Nov. 9, 1881; House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., 46, 503.

^721:5 By S. A. Woolley. Of wheat, 426 bushels were obtained from 6 2/3 acres, 517 of barley from 5 2/3 acres, and 310 of oats from 3 1/2 acres. Sloan's Utah, 4. For an essay entitled Utah: Her Attractions and Resources, as Inviting the Attention of Tourists and Those Seeking Permanent Homes, a prize was awarded in 1881 by a committee of Mormons, among whom were Joseph R. Walker and Wm Jennings, to Robt W. Sloan of the S. L. C. Herald. It was afterward published as a pamphlet, and contains much reliable information in a compact form. Mr Sloan is also the compiler of the Utah Gazetteer, and Directory of Logan, Ogden, Provo, and Salt Lake Cities for 1884, in which is a valuable compendium of the agricultural, manufacturing, mining, railroad, and commercial interests of Utah, together with a chronological table and description and brief historical sketch of the various counties and settlements.

^721:6 The consumption of wheat was estimated at 900,000 to 1,000,000 bushels a year, or about 6 1/4 bushels per capita of the population.

^722:7 The average annual precipitation at several places and periods covered by observation is as follows: S. L. City and Camp Douglas 15.72 inches for 19 years; Harrisburg 13.74 inches, 2 years; Saint George 11.39 inches, 3 years; Camp Floyd 7.33 inches, 2 1/2 years. Consult Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 189; Powell's Lands of the Arid Region, in H. Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 73, 49, 79; also Schott's Tables of Precipitation, 72, 116. In the year ending June 30, 1879, 37.71 inches of rain are reported at S. L. City. U.S. Signal Officer, in H. Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., i. pt 1, 92. The greater rain-falls at S. L. City and Camp Douglas are due to the modifying influence of G. S. Lake, which is only local. From May to October there is almost a total absence of rain. Stansbury's Expedition, 140. Burton, who visited Great Salt Lake City in 1860, says the rain that year extended to the middle of June, and attributes the change to cultivation and settlement. City of the Saints, 335. About two thirds of the districts under cultivation require irrigation. Utah Direc., 1879-80, 17.

^722:8 Smith's Rise, Progress, and Travels, 23. For act incorporating the Big Cottonwood Canal Co., see Utah Acts Legisl., 1855, 277-9; for progress of work, Deseret News, Aug. 29, 1855, March 25, 1857. In 1856 the Davis Co. Canal Co. was incorporated. Utah Acts Legisl., 1855-6, 34-5. For an account of the Weber River canal, see Deseret News, Aug. 20, 1856, Oct. 10, 1860; of the Logan canal, Tullidge's Mag., i. 534-5; and of the Jordan canon canal, Id., Sept. 21, 1864. In this year it was first proposed to bring the waters of Utah Lake into Salt Lake co., where there was not one third of the water needed for irrigation. The cost of making a canal for this purpose, 32 miles in length, 20 feet broad at the bottom, 3 feet deep, and capable of irrigating about 30,000 acres per week, was estimated at $485,580. Id., Nov. 30, 1864. The enterprise was termed the Deseret Irrigation and Navigation Co. The governor refused to grant a franchise. See Utah Jour. Legisl., 1864-5, 116-17; but it was incorporated in 1867. The act of incorporation will be found in Utah Acts Legisl., 1867, pp. 30-2. See, for statistics of irrigation for each county in 1865, Pac. Coast Direct., 1867, 151-3; for reports on extent, cost, and value of canals at this date, with other statistics, Utah Jour. Legisl., 1864-5, 130-3, 1865-6, 149-53; for various acts regulating irrigation, Utah Compiled Laws, 879; for act to provide right of way for S. L. City canals, Utah Laws, 1880, 85-8; for act regulating water rights, Id., 36-41; for other acts concerning irrigation, Id., 1882, 119; for names, length, and cost of canals in Weber co., Stanford's Brief Hist. Sketch of Weber Co., MS., 22.

^723:9 The necessity for irrigation of course reduces the size of farms, which in 1883 probably did not average more than 25 acres. See Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 16.

^723:10 See, for remarks on facilities for irrigation, Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept, 1872, 28-33; for report on water supply, character and quantity of irrigated and irrigable land, etc., in 1876, House Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 73, passim; for report on existing system of irrigation and needed improvements, Powell's Lands of the Arid Region, passim.

^723:11 The Kings of Kingston, in Piute county, one year sowed 300 acres with wheat, and the wind blew the crop away. What was not actually displaced was kept cut close to the ground by the perpetual passage of waves of sand. They planted an orchard, but some gooseberry bushes alone remained. Shade trees were set out about their houses, but the wind worked them around so that they could not take root. Robinson, Sinners and Saints, 209. In 1880 occurred the most violent storm ever known in Utah. A description of it is given in the S. L. C. Herald, July 29, 1880. For account of flood at Parowan in 1857, see Deseret News, Sept. 30, 1857. In Nov. 1860 there was a violent hurricane which caused great destruction of property. See Deseret News, Nov. 21, 28, 1860; Sac. Union, Dec. 1, 1860. In 1860 there were heavy floods in various parts of Utah. See Little's Jacob Hamblin, 75-7; Deseret News, Jan. 15, 22, Feb. 12, May 7, July 9, 1862; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1863-4. For other remarkable storms, see S. F. Bull., May 25, 1877; S. F. Chron., Apr. 25, 1883. The prevailing winds are westerly. Powell's Lands of the Arid Region, in H. Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 73, 68.

^724:12 Says Burton: 'The spring vegetation is about a fortnight later on the hanks of Jordan than above them;' and he also asserts that the presence of saleratus or alkaline salts is another cause of cold. City of the Saints, 345.

^724:13 See pp. <page 279>-81, <page 498> (note ), this vol.

^724:14 In 1859 great injury was done to the crops in Juab co. and elsewhere. Deseret News, June 29, 1859; and in Carson Valley. Sac. Union, June 23, 1859. For damage by crickets and grasshoppers in other years, see Deseret News, May 2, 1860; S. F. Call, July 22, 1864; Deseret News, Aug. 7, 14, Sept. 4, 1867, May 13, 1868; S. F. Bull., May 21, June 30, 1868; Huntsville, Descript. of MS., 6; Utah Sketches, MS., 27; S. F. Times, Aug. 10, 1869; S. F. Call, Aug. 18, 1869; Deseret News, June 29, 1870, May 17, 1871; S. F. Bull., Oct. 4, 1872. In the Second Rept Entomol. Comm., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., there is also a report on their ravages, with suggestions as to their extermination.

^724:15 See <page 322>, this vol.

^724:16 For further mention of the soil of Utah, see U.S. Agr. Rept, 1869, p. 617, 1870, 557 et seq., H. Ex. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 325; Mess. and Doc., 1868-9 (abridg.), 831; U.S. Land-Off. Rept, 1869, 170-1; King's Geol. Survey, v., p. xlviii.; Ludlow's Heart of the Continent, 202-3; Marshall's Through Amer., 237; S. L. Wkly Tribune, Feb. 14, 1880; Musser's Fruits of Mormonism, 27.

^725:17 See, for list of prizes awarded in 1879, Deseret News, Oct. 22, 1879; for report of directors in 1860, Id., Oct. 17, 1860; for exhibition in that year, Sac. Union, Oct. 20, 1860; for condition, operations, and financial exhibits, Utah Jour. Legisl., 1863-4, pp. 59-60; 1864-5, 79-81; 1865-6, 82-4, 123; 1870, 177 -8; 1876, 133-4; for rules and regulations, Deseret Agr. and Man. Soc.--List of Premiums; S. L. Dy Herald, July 19, Aug. 9, 1879; for description of last fair, S. L. Wkly Herald, Oct. 6, 1881; for agricultural fair held at Provo in 1870, Deseret News, Oct. 12, 1870; for Utah co. fair in 1860, Id., Oct. 3, 1860; for fairs at various settlements and prizes awarded, Id., Oct. 8, 1862; for complete list of agricultural societies, Id. Aug. 21, 1872. In 1865 lands and funds were appropriated for an agricultural college. See Utah Jour. Legisl., 1865-6, p. 40; Utah Acts Legisl, 1865, p. 88.

^725:18 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 46. These figures are for 1875. Of late years apples, peaches, vegetables, and grain have been infected with worms, and the trees with noxious insects, four or five large worms being sometimes found in a single ear of corn. Jennings' Mat. Progr. of Utah, MS., 7; Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah (1882), 18.

^725:19 See, for review of fruit culture in Utah, Deseret News, March 20, 1861; for tables showing area under fruit, product, yield per acre, and sketch of fruit-growing interest for 1875-9, S. L. C. Tribune, Apr. 2, 1879; for other statistics and reports on horticulture, Deseret News, Dec. 31, 1856; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1866-7, pp. 159-62; 1868, 163-8. Among the leading men engaged in the wholesale fruit business may be mentioned H. L. Griffin, who commenced operations in 1881 and met with fair success. Mr Griffin, a Pennsylvanian by birth, came to Utah in 1879, having previously resided for many years in Kansas, to which state he removed after his father was crippled in the war of the rebellion. Griffin's Fruit Cult., MS.

^726:20 Sloan, Utah, 11, says that grapes yield five tons to the acre, but this is doubtless an exaggeration. For grape culture in Utah, see Ogden Freeman, Feb. 21, 1879; for wine-making, see Sac. Union, Nov. 2, 1861; for viticulture at St George in 1882, see Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 218.

^726:21 See <page 599>, note , this vol. A little cotton was raised until 1864. See Deseret News, Oct. 9, 1861; Sac. Union, March 4, 1869; Cal. Farmer, March 11, 1864; but after that date its culture seems to have been practically discontinued.

^726:22 Experiments were made before this date. In the S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 21, 1863, a correspondent states that he saw the first silk fabric made in Utah--a small scarf from silk raised at Centreville.

^726:23 In 1880 William Jennings was president, Eliza R. Snow vice-president, A. M. Musser secretary, and Paul A. Schettler treasurer, the first three being [p. 727] directors. The other members of the board were Wm H. Hooper, Zina D. Young, Alex. C. Pyper, and M. I. Horne. S. L. C. Contributor, ii. 115. In 1878 $1,500 was appropriated by the legislature for the purchase of machinery. Snow's Autobiog., MS.; Utah Laws, 1878, 56.

^727:24 For further mention of sericulture in Utah, see Id., 115-16; S. L. Dy Tel., Dec. 5, 1868; S. F. Bulletin, July 22, 1868; Sac. Union, Nov. 25, 1868.

^727:25 Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 18; Utah Gaz., 11. See, for remarks on the scarcity of timber, Utah Early Records, MS., 20; House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., p. 504; Beadle's Life in Utah, 461-2; for extent, character, and statistics of timber-lands, Powell's Lands of the Arid [p. 728] Region, in House Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., xiii. no. 73, pp. 14-19, 27-8, 98-102; U.S. Agr. Rept, 1875, 331-2; for tenure of timber-lands, House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., pp. 497-8; for depredations committed on timber-lands, S. L. C. Tribune, June 26, 1875.

^728:26 L. B. Adams, in 1884 a resident of Ogden and the owner of one of the best winter ranges for stock about 20 miles south of Rozel, says that feed is plentiful throughout the summer.

^728:27 Burton's City of the Saints, 171-2; Beadle's Life in Utah. For further mention of pasture-lands in Utah, see House Ex. Doc., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 325, 233 et seq., no. 326, 243 et seq. In 1877 the islands of Great Salt Lake were used as herd-grounds.

^728:28 In 1856 several acts were passed granting 'herd-grounds' to various parties. See Utah Acts, 1855-6, passim. In 1860 more than 30 of these grants were revoked. Id., 1856-60, 26-30.

^729:29 As early as 1856 cattle were driven to Truckee. Huffaker's Early Cattle Trade, MS., 1-2.

^729:30 Stock-Raising in Utah, MS., 5. Burton remarks that stock-breeding was one of Brigham's hobbies, and that the difference between Utah cattle and the old Spanish herds of California was very remarkable. City of the Saints, 285.

^729:31 According to a carefully compiled table in Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 296. In the governor's message of 1882 the number was placed at 200,000, probably too high; in the census report for 1880 at 93,581, certainly too low.

^730:32 According to statistics compiled by order of the legislative assembly in 1875, there were at that date over 170,000 head. Utah Jour. Legisl., 1876, 285.

^730:33 Among them may be mentioned the Weber Co. Land and Live-Stock Co., organized in 1884 by J. M. Langsdorf, of which F. A. Hammond was president, and J. W. Guthrie vice-president, with Langsdorf as secretary and treasurer. They secured a large tract some 15 miles from Ogden, intending to raise the Hereford breed of cattle. Langsdorf's Stock-Raising in Weber Co., MS.

^730:34 For further particulars as to the cattle interests of Utah, see Stock-Raising in Utah, MS., passim; Land-Office Rept, 1869, 173; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 47-8; Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 19-20; for cattle-raising on Green River, in northern Utah, and Tooele co., see House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii. 500, 509, 514-16; in eastern Utah and Col., Id., 42d Cong. 2d Sess., xv. 248-57; for general sketch of cattle and sheep interests, S. L. C. Tribune, Apr. 2, July 18, 1879; for act equalizing taxes on passing herds, Utah Laws, 1878, 49. In 1860 there was a recorder of marks and brands, who rendered annual accounts to the legislature. Utah Jour. Legisl., 1869, 68. In 1874 the church owned large herds of stock. Tullidge's Mag., i. 560. In 1879 church sales of stock amounted to $58,557.85. S. L. C. Tribune, Apr. 7, 1880. In 1873 the epizootic appeared in Utah. S. F. Alta, Jan. 25, 1873. Among the prominent stockmen of Utah may be mentioned Ezra T. Clark of Farmington, Davis co. Mr Clark came to Utah in 1848, crossing the plains in charge of a company, and the same year settled on his farm. About 1869 he engaged in stock-raising in Idaho. He was the owner of a fiouring mill in Morgan co. He crossed the plains eleven times, and travelled 50,000 miles as a missionary, always paying his own expenses.

^730:35 In Stock-Raising in Utah, MS., 4, the number of homes alone is given at 70,000.

^731:36 In a letter of H. J. Faust to the Spirit of the Times, it is stated that one of these horses travelled 113 miles in 14 hours, over plains and mountains where there was no road; another made 65 miles in 6 1/2 hours, and a third, belonging to the pony express, 22 miles in 1 hr 20 min. Stock-Raising in Utah, MS.

^731:37 In 1869 $5,000 was appropriated for importing improved breeds. Utah Compiled Laws, 186.

^731:38 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 296. Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 1882, 20, places the number at about 400,000; the governor, in his message of 1882, at 600,000. In Stock-Raising in Utah, MS., 6,800,000 is given as the number.

^731:39 Although there are many herds that shear 10 lbs to the fleece. Id., 6, where the average is placed at 6 lbs. For wool-clip of 1884, see S. L. Dy Tribune, Aug. 16, 1884.

^731:40 In former years, especially in 1860-1, sheep were sometimes almost destroyed [p. 732] in winter. Later, people learned how to take care of them. Jennings' Mat. Progr. of Utah, MS., 3. For clip and value between 1875 and 1879, see Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 1879, 21-2; for account of the sheep industry between 1870 and 1879, S. L. Dy Tribune, Apr. 2, 1879; for sheep-raising on White River, House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., p. 495; for damage done by wolves, Deseret News, March 12, 1862. In 1871 the Utah Cashmere Goat Company was organized. For description of its operations, see Deseret News, Oct. 28, 1874.

^732:41 For further mention of the Provo Manufacturing Company, see Stanford' s Ogden,, MS., 7; Hittell's Com. and Ind. Pac. Coast, 447-8; Utah Sketches, MS., 60-1; for grant of water rights, Provo City Revised Ordinances, 129-30.

^732:42 For further mention of woolien-mills, see Deseret News, Sept. 14, 1881. In Sloan's Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 53, it is stated that Brigham brought the first carding-machine into Utah in 1849. Others were imported between 1852-4. After the latter date they were manufactured in the country. The Deseret mills, located in Parley Canon, were built by Brigham Young; the Wasatch woollen-mills by A. O. Smoot, Jolla Sharp, and R. T. Burton. In 1870 mills were built at Brigham City and Beaver. John R. Murdock took a prominent part in establishing the latter. Mr Murdock came from California in 18t7, having been honorably discharged from service in the Mexican war. In 1883 he was president of the Beaver stake. In 1871 there was [p. 733] a factory in operation at Ogden, owned by Randall, Pugsley, & Co. There were also mills in Cache co., in which John Stoddard was largely interested. Mr Stoddard, a Scotchman by birth, came to Utah in 1850, settling in Iron co., whence he moved to Cache Valley in 1860, where he also engaged in the lumber business, removing to Ogden in 1884, to follow the same business. During his career he was four years employed in fighting Indians, suffering great hardships, and was also one of those who went out to meet Johnston's army in June 1858.

^733:43 The Utah breweries by 1886 made about 20,000 barrels a year. In 1864 Henry Wagener started the first large brewery in the territory, about a mile and a half from Fort Douglas. The first year he made only 400 barrels, and in 1884 7,000 barrels. Mr Wagener, a German by birth, came to Utah in 1864, having previously resided in California and Nevada.

^733:44 According to the census returns between 1850 and 1880, which cannot, however, be accepted as the exact figures, there were in the former year 14 manufacturing establishments, with 51 hands, $44,400 of capital, and $291,223 of products; in 1860, 48 establishments, with 389 hands, $443,356 of capital, and $900,153 of products; in 1870, 533 factories employing 1,534 hands, $1,491,848 of capital, and producing $2,248,519 of goods; and in 1880, 1,066 factories, 3,221 operatives, $2,839,463 of capital, and $4,217,434 of products. See, for list of saw-mills in 1865, Pac. Coast Direct., 1867, 153-4; of gristmills in 1869, Id., 1871-3, 151-2; for further mention of saw and grist mills and lumber manufactures, Utah Sketches, MS., passim; S. L. Dy Tel., Dec. 16, 1868; Tullidge's Mag., i. 558-9, iii. 34-6. As early as 1850 there was a machine-shop in the temple building. Deseret News, Sept. 14, 1850. For account of the Deseret Iron Co. in 1852, see Bertrand's Mem. Morm., 81-2; of wagon and carriage manufactory in 1868, S. L. Dy Tel., Dec. 12, 1868; of soap factory in 1878, S. L. C. Herald, Dec. 29, 1878; of boot and shoe factories, Deseret Ev. News, Jan. 2, 1884; S. L. C. Herald, May 2, 1879; Tullidge's Mag., i. 205-8. The first nail factory in Utah worthy the name was built under the superintendence of James Finlayson in 1859, a little south of S. L. City. Before this date nails sold at 50 cents a pound. Mr Payson, a Scotchman by birth and a millwright by occupation, came to the country during this year and settled at Payson, of which town he was elected mayor in 1882.

^734:45 Nevertheless James B. Glass, who opened a carriage manufactory and repository at S. L. City in 1879, reports that between that date and 1884 his sales increased eightfold. For further general mention of Utah manufactures, see Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah (1882), 55-6; Gov. Message, 1882, pp. 7-8; S. L. Wkly Herald, Nov. 17, 1881; Dy Telegraph, Dec. 1, 1868; Tribune, May 3, 24, 1873; Sloan's Utah, 7, 13-14; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 50, 299. In March 1882, $5,000 was appropriated by the legislature as a premium to be paid to the producer of 7,000 lbs of merchantable brown sugar, made in Utah from material produced in the country. Utah Laws, 1882, 44-5.

^735:46 Varying from $20 to $40 per ton.

^735:47 Blodgett Brittan, a prominent Philadelphia iron-master, who analyzed five specimens of ore from this district, the analyses being only for iron, phosphorus, and sulphur, reports that they averaged 64 per cent of iron, 12 per cent [p. 736] of phosphorus, and of sulphur a trace. W. A. Hedges of S. L. City obtained from a specimen of magnetic ore 62.60 of iron, .12 of sulphur, and 4.8 of silica; from a specimen of hematite, 60.90 of iron, .08 of sulphur, and 5.7 of silica. Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 45. For description of Great Western iron-works at Iron City, incorporated in 1873, see Deseret News, Oct. 13, 1875; of the Ogden iron-works, at which operations were commenced systematically in 1882, Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 51; for further mention of iron deposits in Utah, see Deseret News, Aug. 26, 1874, Aug. 17, 1881; S. L. Wkly Herald, June 23, 1881; S. L. C. Tribune, Oct. 24, 1874, Apr. 10, 13, 17, Nov. 2, 1879, Dec. 3, 1880, Jan. 1, 1881; S. F. Bull., Jan. 17, 1882; S. F. Alta, Sept. 4, 1873; Austin Reese River Reveille, Nov. 21, 1866; Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, 8.

^736:48 From an analysis of Castle Valley coal, Mr Brittan reported 48.21 per cent of fixed carbon, 1.88 of ash, and 40.61 of volatile matter; from coke produced from this coal, 94.05 of fixed carbon, 3.25 of ash, and 2.70 of volatile matter. From an analysis of Sanpete Valley coal, the samples being taken 40 feet below the surface, A. P. Bouton obtained 50.7 per cent of coke, 34.2 of bitumen, 13.3 of ash, and 1.8 of moisture. Hollister's Res. of Utah, 47.

^737:49 Utah Acts Legisl., 1855, 393. The reward was claimed in 1860 by Wm H. Kimball and John Spriggs, whose petition was referred to a committee and refused, on the ground that the mine was more than 40 miles distant and the coal of inferior quality. See Utah Jour. Legisl., 1860-1, 73, 1862-3, 65-6. In 1863 a mine had been opened 40 miles from the capital, the coal selling at $40 per ton.

^737:50 For list of counties, locations, and number of acres in each, see Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 62. For coal-lands taken up in 1876-9, according to the surveyor-general's report, see S. L. C. Herald, Nov. 26, 1879.

^738:51 For act incorporating the Sanpete Coal Co., see Utah Acts, 1855-6, 33-4; for further mention of Sanpete mines, S. L. C. Tribune, May 29, 1875; for report on condition of Utah coal mines in 1859, Utah Jour. Legisl., 1859-60, 32, 64-5; for discovery of coal near Provo, Deseret News, March 14, 1860; near Ogden, Id., Aug. 13, 1862; at Farmington, Id., May 16, 1860; for extent of coal strata in Green River basin, King's Surveys, iii. 455-8; for mines opened at Coalville and their operations in 1870, Id., iii. 467-73; for Pleasant Valley mines, Reno Gazette, Nov. 12, 1881; for additional details as to coal mines, lands, discoveries, and interests, Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, 8; Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 45-51; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 61-2; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 18, 1873, Oct. 27, 1879; S. L. C. Herald, May 12, Dec. 22, 1877, March 30, 1878, Jan. 28, 1880; Herald, Nov. 17, 1881; S. L. Mail, May 17, 1876; S. F. Bull., Jan. 17, 1882; Alta, March 15, 1873, April 6, 1875; Stock Report, April 26, 1875; Sac. Union, May 30, 1860, Dec. 19, 1863; Austin Reese River Reveille, July 19, 1864.

^738:52 House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 1st Sess., 3, 157. In Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining Int. of the U.S. in 1882, 1040, the output for 1880 and 1881 is given at 275,000 tons. This statement is taken from Saward's Coal Trade, and is no doubt very much above the actual figures.

^738:53 In Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 67-8, is a complete list of the minerals and metals found in Utah. It does not include tin, which, however, is said to have been discovered near Ogden in 1871. See S. L. Rev., Oct. 27, 1871; S. F. Call, Oct. 10, 24, 1871; Scient. Press, Oct. 28, 1871. Other lists will be found in Wheeler's Surveys, iii. 652-61; S. L. Semi-Wkly Herald, Jan. 3, 1880; Silver Reef Miner, Jan. 10, 1880.

^739:54 Among other localities, copper was found in the San Francisco district, Big Cottonwood, the Snake district, Copper gulch, Red Butte and Bingham canons, Antelope Island in G. S. Lake, in many parts of Beaver co., and in the granite range between Ogden and S. L. City. For account of copper mines near Milford and at Grand gulch, see Silver Reef Miner, June 8, Oct. 15, 1881. Murphy states that in 1872 the only places where it would pay to work were in the Bingham, Tintic, and Lucin districts, the last being partly in Box Elder co. and partly in Nevada. Min. Res. of Utah, 8.

^739:55 For further mention of bismuth deposits, see S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 27, 1872.

^739:56 For description, see Niles' Register, lxxv.

^740:57 Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 52; S. L. C. Tribune, May 27, 1879; S. F. Post, March 18, 1879; Silver Reef Miner, Jan. 10, 1880.

^741:58 Harrison's Crit. Notes on Utah, MS., 48. In 1857, and perhaps at an earlier date, it was known that there were silver mines near G. S. Lake. See Surgeon-Gen. Circ. 8, 1875, 338-9; Sac. Union, Nov. 30, 1858.

^741:59 A list of them with particulars will be found in Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, facing p. 14.

^741:60 For further information as to this district, see Id., 2; Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 28-30; S. L. C. Tribune, July 13, Aug. 3, 13, 1879, Jan. 3, 1880; S. L. C. Herald, July 18, 1879; Mining and Scientific Press, July 17, 1875.

^742:61 For list and plan, with developments, etc., in 1872, see Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, facing p. 20.

^742:62 For further mention of the Rush Valley and Ophir district, see Id., 20-1, 29-31; Hollister' s Res. and Attract. of Utah, 31; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 89-91. In 1882 the town of Stockton was destroyed by fire. S. F. Call, Sept. 5, 1882.

^742:63 In 1872 the production was about 80 tons a day. Paul's Utah Incid., MS.

^742:64 The first year it paid in dividends $1,000,000. Godbe's Statement, MS., 4-5. The Walker Bros purchased a fourth-interest for $30,000, and furnished money and supplies for opening it. Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 4.

^743:65 See further, for history and description of Emma mine, Beadle's Western Wilds, 120; S. F. Call, March 11, 1876; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 11, 1872, March 25, April 8, 1876; of swindle, Id., Nov. 30, 1875; of lawsuit, Coast Rev., 1872, vol. ii., no. 5, 192, no. 6, 230-1; S. F. Bull., Jan. 7, 1875; S. F. Post, June 8, 1872.

^743:66 For further mention of the Cottonwood mines, see Godbe's Statement, MS., 4-5; Paul's Utah Incid., MS.; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 1, 1881; Tribune, Jan. 3, 1880; S. L. Herald, Jan. 3, 1880; S. F. Alta, Feb. 9, 26, 1873; Hayden's Geol. Surv. Rept, 1872, 106-8.

^743:67 For further details, see Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, 32-4. In this work are descriptions of all the mining districts of Utah up to 1872, and of the leading districts to 1882, in Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 1882, 22-41. In the former are also the names of the productive mines in each district, with no. of feet, assays, etc. In Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 73-104, there is also a description of the various districts.

^744:68 The Tintic mines are further described in the S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 5, 19, 1871, Feb. 29, 1880, Jan. 1, 1881; Wkly Tribune, March 6, 1880.

^744:69 For account of discovery, see Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining Int. of the U.S. in 1882, 788; S. L. Wkly Tribune, Dec. 4, 1880.

^744:70 In Aug 1885 this mine paid its 110th monthly dividend, the amount being $75,000, and the total to that date $6,650,000. S. F. Bulletin, Aug. 28, 1885. Additional items relating to the Ontario mine will be found in Rept Ontario Silver Mg Co., Apr. 1, 1881, to Nov. 30, 1883; Robinson's Sinners and Saints, 249-59; Utah Gaz., 6; Vallejo Chronicle, May 14, 1880. For other mines in these districts, see S. L. Tribune, Jan. 3, 1880.

^745:71 The discovery of this mine is mentioned in the Silver Reef Miner, July 30, 1879.

^745:72 J. E. Dooly, express agent at S. L. City, gives as the product for 1881, 1,259,903 oz. of silver and 16,343,995 lbs of lead, valued at $1,807,092.20. After losing his property, W. S. Godbe obtained a contract for smelting ore from this mine, rcducing in all some 20,000 tons. Godbe's Statement, MS., 7.

^745:73 The Cave mine originally belonged to Mr Godbe, who in 1885 was still largely interested in it. Id., 7, 9. In 1884 there were 300 men employed by the Frisco company. Rock was shipped to the reduction-works near Salt Lake City, and most of the bullion to Chicago. Hill's Mines and Mg in Utah, MS. In 1881 the company's mines at Frisco produced 221,846 oz. of silver and 2,023,213 lbs of lead, worth $330,329.38. For further particulars, see S. L. Wkly Tribune, Jan. 3, 1880.

^745:74 The owners of this mine were W. S. Godbe and three others, the former being confident that the deposit was worth several millions of dollars. Godbe's Statement, MS., 10-11.

^746:75 Silver Reef City was incorporated in 1878. Utah Laws, 1878, 23-6. For further mention of Silver Reef mines, see S. L. C. Tribune, March 30, 1879; Wkly Tribune, Jan. 3, 1880; Ruby Hill Mg News, Sept. 19, 1881; S. F. Chronicle, Nov. 14, 1880. In the Lucia district, on the dividing line between Utah and Nevada, there were several good locations. Among other gold and silver milling districts in Utah may be mentioned the Lincoln, where was discovered the first silver mine in Utah, named the Rollins, and containing a heavy deposit of argentiferous galena. The Star District, a few miles west of Milford, formerly produced considerable bullion, but the exhaustion of the surface deposits, distance from railroads, and the fall in the price of lead caused smelting operations to be suspended, though in 1883 development was still progressing with good results. The Rocky and Beaver Lake districts, north of the Star, abounded in ores containing gold, silver, and copper, the O.K. and Old Hickory being the prominent mines in 1882. In the Timmons or Nebo district in Juab county there were large bodies of low-grade galena ore. At the Pine Grove district, 30 or 40 miles west of Frisco, the Carrie Lucille mine had been opened at that date to a depth of 200 feet and showed strong veins of high-grade ore. In the Ohio and Mount Baldy districts, at Marysvale, in Plate county, the leading mine was the Deer Trail, at which there were 100,000 tons of ore in sight in 1882, averaging about an ounce of gold and 15 oz. of silver to the ton. There were several other good mines and prospects, but capital was needed for their development. For further mention of this district, see Silver Reef Miner, May 14, 1879; for account of Clifton mining district, S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 15, 1874; of Camp Floyd district, Utah Gazetteer. 1884, 80-1; of Walker River placer mines in 1857-9, Sac. Union, Aug. 1, 29, Sept. 7, 1857; Apr. 26, 29, May 24, 26, Dec. 11, 17, 1858; July 23, 1859; of Ruby mines, S. F. Alta, Apr. 4, 1873; for gold discoveries on Bear River, S. F. Bulletin, Apr. 30, 1864; on New River, Sac. Union, Apr. 5, 1858; on the Sweetwater, [p. 747] Deseret News, Sept. 11, 1867; for description of Willard mines, S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 8, 1880; of silver mines near Pahraganat Valley, U. S. Ind. Aff. Rept, 1865, 156-7. For historical sketches of mining in Utah, see Tullidge's Mag., i. 179-90; Stenhouse's Rocky Mountain Saints, 713-34; for lists and reports of various districts between 1870 and 1880, with operations, prospects, etc., Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept, 1872, 13-26, 51; Sec. Int. Rept, 42d Cong. 3d Sess., pt i. 166-7; Fabian's Utah, 4-5, 7-8; Raymond's Stat. of Mines, 1873, 242-64; Coast Rev. 1872-9, passim; Utah Direct. and Gaz., 1879-80, passim; Raymond's ann. repts, in House Ex. Doc., 42d Cong. 1st Sess., no. 10, 218-23; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 141, 218-23; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 141, 255-83; 43d Cong. 2d Sess., 177, 328-57; 44th Cong. 1st Sess., 159, 269-81; Professor Newberry's reports, in S. L. C. Tribune, Aug. 21, 26, 1879; Aug. 28, 1880; Delegate Cannon's statement, in House Misc. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 54, 97-100; Wheeler's Geog. Surveys Rept, 1878, 90-1; Codman's Round Trip, 185-93, 203-6, 222-3, 250-1. For Utah mines placed on the London market, see London Times, July 24, 1871; for legislation concerning mines, see Utah Laws, 1878, 8, 42.

^747:76 Professor J. E. Clayton, in Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 56. In Gov. Mess., for 1882, 8, the average output of gold, silver, and lead between 1870 and 1882 is given at $6,500,000. This is probably too high, as between 1870 and 1874 inclusive it was less than $3,000,000 and in no year did the product much exceed $7,000,000. For other estimates during portions of this period, see Balch's The Mines, Miners, and Mining Int. of the U. S. in 1882, passim; Hayden's Gt West, 317-18; New Mex. Mg World, Dec. l, 1882, 83, Nov. l, 1884, 136; S. F. Bulletin, Jan. 3, 1882; Utah Direct. and Gaz., 1879-80, 36.

^748:77 Godbe's Statement, MS., 8-9. Mr Godbe is of opinion that the leaching process will, when its merits are better known, be of vast benefit to the mining world.

^748:78 In 1871 Joshua R. Nichols, who came to S. L. City with the exclusive right for Krom's patent separating and concentrating machinery, organized a company for the introduction of this process in connection with smelting, amalgamation, and chlorination. Mr Nichols, a native of Onondaga co. , N.Y., followed at Detroit, Mich., the several occupations of farm-boy, errand-boy, clerk, and store-keeper until 1865, when he engaged in the railroad-supply business until July 1869, being then appointed assistant superintendent on the Union Pacific. Removing to Utah in 1871, he became engaged in mining and railroad enterprises. Nichols' Minting Mach., MS.

^748:79 The Pioneer quartz-mill of 15 stamps, for the reduction of silver ore, the [p. 749] first one in Utah, was built by Walker Bros, at the Ophir mining district. When that district was considered a failure the mill was removed to the Alice mine in Montana, five stamps being added, and a 60-stamp mill erected by its side. Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 5. Nevertheless, at the close of 1883 there were three mills in this district, named the Pioneer, Enterprise, and Fairview. At this date the Ontario mill, at Park City, Uintah district, had 40 stamps, and the Marsac mill at the same city, 30 stamps. Among others may be mentioned the McHenry mill at Parley Park, the Stewart mills in the West Mountain district, and one belonging to the Tintic Mining and Milling Co., the last with 10 stamps.

^749:80 Including common, refined, white, sheet, pipe, shot, and test lead. Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 43. For further mention of the Germanin works, see S. L. C. Tribune, Dec. 14, 1872, Jan. 4, 1873.

^749:81 For description of other smelting and refining works, see Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 70-1. The first smelting furnace was erected by Gen. Connor at Stockton in 1864. Murphy's Min. Res. of Utah, 2. Among the sampling-works may be mentioned these of J. C. Conklin at S. L. City, and Scott & Anderson at Sandy, the former with a capacity of 200 and the latter of 500 tons a day.

^749:82 As in the Silver Reef district.

     
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 751]

  

CHAPTER XXVIII.
 COMMERCE AND COMMUNICATION.
 1852-1885.

COMMON ROADWAYS--RAILROADS--THE UNION AND CENTRAL PACIFIC--THE UTAH CENTRAL--THE UTAH SOUTHERN--THE UTAH AND NORTHERN--THE UTAH EASTERN--THE SALT LAKE AND WESTERN--THE UTAH AND NEVADA--THE DENVER AND RIO GRANDE WESTERN--IMPORTS AND EXPORTS--COMMERCE AND TRADE--BANKING--INSURANCE--TAXATION AND REVENUE--MAILS AND MAIL SERVICES--THE FIRST TELEGRAPHIC MESSAGE--THE DESERET TELEGRAPH COMPANY.

    IN 1860 the principal route from the Missouri to Utah was still the old emigrant-road which had been mainly used during the Utah and California migrations, and which was traversed by the army of Utah in 1857. Between Utah and California there were three principal lines of travel--the northern, the central, and the southern. The first skirted the upper edge of Great Salt Lake, and thence after crossing an intervening stretch of desert followed the valleys of the Humboldt and Carson rivers, being, in fact, almost identical with the Fremont route of 1845. Notwithstanding its length, it was still preferred by travellers, as pasture and water were fairly plentiful, and only two small tracts of desert land were met with. [*1] The central, better known to the settlers of Utah by the name of Egan's and to the California-bound emigrants as the Simpson route, though the two were by no means coincident, varied but a few miles from the fortieth parallel until reaching the

[p. 752]

[paragraph continues] Hastings pass in the Humboldt Mountains, where it branched off in a south-westerly direction toward Carson lake and river, and from Carson City south to Genoa. [*2] The southern route was by way of the Sevier, Santa Clara, and Virgen rivers, striking the Fremont trail near Las Vegas, thence partly across desert tracts to the junction of Indian River and the Colorado, and from that point to San Bernardino. [*3] On neither of the last two were grass and water abundant, but the southern route had the advantage of being rarely blocked with snow, except for the portion of it that lay between Salt Lake and the Rio Virgen.

    At the close of 1883 there were more than 3,000 miles of common roadway in Utah, [*4] and 1,143 miles

[p. 753]

of railroad, [*5] of which 297 belonged to the Union Pacific, 150 to the Central Pacific, 386 to the Denver and Rio Grande, 280 to the Utah Central, and 30 to the Sanpete Valley.

    In 1854, as we have seen, a memorial was addressed to congress by the territorial legislature, urging the construction of an overland railroad. In 1860 a second memorial was presented, to the same purport, [*6] and though neither of them was regarded, none rejoiced more heartily over the advent of the railroad than did the settlers of Utah. They felt now strong enough to have let in on them the advancing tide of civilization without being swept away by it. Brigham had long foreseen that the railroad would bring with it a new and manifest destiny to his people. Being himself a man of destiny, he quickly adapted himself to the altered condition of affairs, and declared that he believed in it. As all Utah believed in Brigham, it followed that his people would do their utmost to help it to completion. They were for the most part too poor to subscribe money, but whatever of aid or material their land and labor could supply was cheerfully furnished.

    In May 1868 a contract was made between Brigham

[p. 754]

and a superintendent of construction on the Union Pacific, for grading and other work on the road between the head of Echo canon and the terminus of the line, yet to be located. At Weber canon, through which point it entered the valley, there was much tunnelling, blasting, and mason-work to be done, including the heavy stone-work of the bridge abutments. The contract amounted to about $1,000,000, gave employment to 500 or 600 men, and, according to its terms, [*7] eighty per cent of the payments were to be made monthly as the work progressed, and the remainder when it was completed and accepted. As soon as the contract was closed, the superintendent urged that the work be commenced immediately, promising that if men and teams were collected he would have the line surveyed and made ready for them within a few days. On this understanding, workmen were concentrated at various points on the line, but weeks passed, and still the line was not surveyed. Many of the sub-contractors were thus compelled to wait until the cost of their operations was largely increased by the severity of the weather, and to incur debt from bankers, merchants, and farmers, who supplied them with funds, goods, grain, and material, thinking that the money due from the promoters of the Union Pacific would be promptly paid; but the payments were not made as specified.

    Notwithstanding these drawbacks, the contracts were faithfully executed, and it was acknowledged by all railroad men that nowhere on the line could the grading compare in completeness and finish with the work done by the people of Utah. Before the last tie was laid, [*8] all the contracts with the Union and

[p. 755]

[paragraph continues] Central Pacific, including forty miles of road between Ogden and the promontory, had been completed and accepted; but on the 10th of May, 1869, it was claimed by the saints that the former company was indebted to them in the sum of $1,000,000, and the two companies about $1,250,000. Toward the close of the year John Taylor, Joseph A. Young, and John Sharp [*9] went eastward, with a view to bringing the

[p. 756]

matter to an issue, and so vigorously and adroitly did they press their claim, that, in the absence of funds, rolling stock and material to the value of $600,000 were assigned to them in payment.

    On the 17th of May, one week after the completion of the transcontinental railroad, ground was broken near the Weber River for a line between Ogden and Salt Lake City, to be named the Utah Central. [*10] The road was built and equipped mainly with the material and rolling stock transferred from the Union Pacific; for even at this date there was little money in Utah, mining and traffic being as yet undeveloped, and the entire floating currency of the community was probably less than $5,000,000. This, the pioneer line of Utah, is the only one which has preserved its original identity, and that it has done so is perhaps due to the fact that it forms the main connecting link between the route of transcontinental traffic and the principal distributing point for the country.

    In May 1871 ground was broken at Salt Lake City for the Utah Southern, [*11] the line being pushed forward at intervals both north and south through some of the richest lands in Utah, until, in June 1879, its northern terminus was at Provo, [*12] and its southern limit at Juab, 105 miles south of the capital. [*13] Later

[p. 757]

during this year the Utah Southern Extension was commenced at the latter point, completed during the following spring as far as Milford, [*14] and a few weeks later to Frisco, the location of the Horn Silver mine, its distance from Juab being 138 miles. [*15] In 1881 both these lines were incorporated with the Utah Central. [*16]

    The Utah and Northern was organized in 1871, ground being broken at Brigham City in September of that year, and the road completed to Logan at the close of January 1873, and to Franklin, Idaho, by way of Ogden, early in the following year. [*17] The means for building this line were raised by the people of northern Utah with great difficulty, and after being maintained for years, first at a loss and then with meagre returns, it was sold to the Union Pacific for an insignificant sum, in February 1877, [*18] extended through Idaho into western Montana, and in 1883 had become one of its most profitable branches.

    During Emery's administration a bill passed the legislature authorizing the counties of Salt Lake, Davis, Summit, and Tooele to issue bonds for the purpose of constructing a road from Coalville to

[p. 758]

[paragraph continues] Salt Lake City, the main object being to obtain a supply of coal at cheaper rates than was charged for fuel taken from the Wyoming mines of the Union Pacific. The bill was vetoed by the governor; but in 1880 an effort was made to build the line by private enterprise, among the subscribers being many who could ill afford such a venture. Like others of the Utah lines, it was thus commenced on a slender capital, but through the aid of wealthy stockholders in the Ontario mine, it was completed as, far as Park City, a distance of twenty-five miles from Coalville. Soon afterward a parallel branch, named the Echo and Park City, was built by the Union Pacific, and in 1883 the control of the former, which was known as the Utah Eastern, fell into the hands of the latter. [*19]

    The Salt Lake and Western, fifty-seven miles in length, and later a branch of the Union Pacific, was built in 1874-5 from Lehi junction, a mile north of Lehi City, to the Tintic mines. It was at first intended to push the line through to California, tapping some of the rich mining districts of Nevada; but this project was abandoned. In 1883 it was used mainly for hauling gold, silver, and iron ore. [*20] the Utah and Nevada, first named the Salt Lake, Sevier Valley, and Pioche Railroad, was commenced in 1872, the intention being to build the line through the mining and agricultural lands of the Sevier Valley as far as Pioche, in south-eastern Nevada. After some twenty miles had been completed, work was abandoned in 1873, but resumed later, and the road completed as far as Stockton, in Tooele county, its terminus in 1883, at which date it was also under control of the Union Pacific. On account of the failure of the Pioche mines, and for other reasons, there seems little prospect of the original project being executed. The Sanpete Valley Railroad, built in 1880, between Nephi, in Juab

[p. 759]

county, and Wales, in Sanpete county, its length being thirty miles, was constructed by an English company for the purpose of securing a market for the output of its coal mines. [*21]

    The Denver and Rio Grande Western, the Utah division of the Denver and Rio Grande system of railroads, first began work here in 1881, and in 1883 had 386 miles of road in operation, running through Emery, Utah, Salt Lake, Davis, and a portion of Weber counties, with branch lines named the Little Cottonwood and Bingham Canon, the former running east into the Wasatch Mountains and the latter west into the Oquirrh Range, both being built solely to facilitate mining operations. [*22] Ninety miles of the Denver and Rio Grande Western were built entirely by local enterprise, including fifty miles of the main line extending through Spanish Fork canon, completed by the citizens of Springville, and first known as the Utah and Pleasant Valley Railroad. [*23]

    During the years immediately preceding the completion of the overland railroad, the imports of Utah seldom exceeded 12,000 tons, while the exports were of trifling amount. Commerce with the east and west was entirely insignificant, supplies being drawn mainly from St Louis and San Francisco, and paid for in part with the money received for surplus grain, stock, and garden produce from passing emigrants, who, together with the soldiery and the stage lines, furnished almost

[p. 760]

the principal cash receipts of Utah. [*24] In 1871 the volume of domestic imports and exports had increased to 80,000 tons, and since that date has averaged about 125,000 tons, of which two thirds were imports, and nearly one half consisted of material needed for mining operations.

    The total value of imports for 1882 was estimated at $11,410,000, and of exports at $11,525,000, the chief items among the former being dry goods, groceries, clothing, lumber and other building material, agricultural implements, leather and leathern manufactures; among the latter, gold, silver, lead, copper matte, live-stock, beef, wool, hides, pelts, furs, and tallow, [*25] the exports of metals alone amounting to $9,000,000. The shipment of iron ore and charcoal to Utah, which at one time were important factors in the imports, has now practically ceased; but the territory must always import more or less of lumber, agricultural implements, wagons, and furniture; for there are no hard or finishing woods of native growth, and lumber of good quality cut from native timber is scarce and difficult to obtain. Imports of leathern and woollen goods will doubtless decrease with the growth of manufactures, though for reasons that are explained elsewhere, the leather produced in Utah is of inferior quality.

    While Utah could without difficulty produce a large surplus of many agricultural products, distance from market and an exorbitant freight tariff make it almost impossible for her to compete with the Pacific and western states. Several efforts have been made in this direction, but the results were not satisfactory, and it is doubtful whether Utah has yet sent away in all more than 1,000,000 bushels of grain. The experiment

[p. 761]

was first tried on a large scale in 1878, when a ship was laden at San Francisco with 64,000 bushels of Utah wheat, the cargo being sold before the vessel put to sea. A few months later a ship was chartered for England with 78,000 bushels, [*26] but though a small profit was realized, it was not sufficient to encourage further operations.

    If to the $11,410,000 of imports there be added 25 per cent as the profits of jobbers and retailers, we have a total of about $14,250,000, which represents approximately the general business of Utah. It is worthy of note that while this large amount of business is transacted, the average number of failures for the eight years ending 1883 did not exceed fourteen, with liabilities averaging about $11,000. [*27] The credit of Utah merchants is for the most part exceptionally good; not that they are considered more upright than other merchants, but because a very large proportion of cash is now employed in their transactions; and while many import on a small scale, the bulk of the business is done by a few large firms, which trade on a sufficient capital and do not require much credit.

    In 1883 it was estimated that the Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, with its 800 stockholders, its cash capital of $1,000,000, its surplus of $150,000, and its branches at Ogden and Logan, imported at least one third of all the merchandise consumed in Utah. Soon after this association was established, cooperative stores were opened in every large town, and in nearly every village and farming settlement, all of them purchasing from the so-called parent institution, and through its agency disposing of the produce received in barter. Every one who could purchase or earn a share of stock contributed his labor or capital, and though many of them succumbed through opposition or over-anxiety to disburse

[p. 762]

large dividends, it is probable that at least two thirds of the settlers patronize them at this day. [*28]

    The progress and development of trade in Utah froth the days of 1848, when probably the entire cash capital of the community did not amount to $3,000, present some interesting and anomalous features. At first, as we have seen, the Mormons desired to avoid all traffic with the outside world; but as emigrants passed over their roads and through their settlements, goods were exchanged with advantage to both sides. It was not until two years after the pioneers entered the valley that the first store was opened at an adobe house, in the seventeenth ward of Salt Lake City, by the firm of Livingston & Kinkead, [*29] whose stock was worth some $20,000. In 1850 the firm of Holliday & Warner established a branch of their business in the capital, through their agent, William H. Hooper, who opened a store in a building erected for school purposes, on the block occupied by Brigham Young, thence removing to the structure later occupied by the museum. [*30]

    Soon the unerring scent of commerce discovered the direction which business must take, and Main

[p. 763]

street, then dubbed Whiskey street, the denizens of which were often rebuked in the tabernacle for their iniquities, rapidly became the business quarter of the city, John and Enoch Reese, the third firm in historic date, building a store on the ground later occupied by the express office, and J M. Horner & Co., the fourth, occupying a portion of the premises of the Deseret News. [*31] Among the men who had become prominent at the time of the Utah war were Gilbert & Gerrish and William Nixon, the latter being still termed the father of Utah merchants. [*32]

    Before the Utah war and for several years afterward, internal trade was conducted mainly by barter and the due-bill system. At this period the settlers had little use for money, and preferred taking in exchange for their commodities something that they could eat, or drink, or wear, and which could not be had at home. Thus scores of well-to-do farmers, with families to clothe and educate, while living in greater comfort perhaps than those of the western or Pacific states, seldom possessed a dollar in coin. Should one of them, for instance, require clothing for wife or child, he consulted the store-keeper, who agreed, perhaps, to supply him for so many loads of wood. If he should have no spare wood, he searched out some neighbor who had a surplus and offered him its equivalent in butter or poultry. Perhaps, however, this neighbor did not need butter or poultry, but required a few loads of gravel or adobes. In that case the farmer must find some one who was willing to exchange

[p. 764]

for his poultry or butter, gravel or adobes, which he delivered in return for wood, hauled the wood to the store, and thus, at length, wife and child were clad. For the tuition of his children he would pay, perhaps, so many dozens of eggs per quarter; for admission to the theatre, a score of cabbages; for the services of a laborer or mechanic, a certain number of watermelons per day; and his tithes were usually, but not always, paid in kind.

    In this primitive fashion, until the advent of the railroad, trade was for the most part conducted in Utah; and notwithstanding the wisdom and economic system of their rulers, there were times, as will be remembered, when the settlers were really needy. The country was relieved only by a train of fortunate, or as the settlers believed providential, circumstances. These were, first, the presence of the army of Utah, which after disbursing large sums among the community sold them its substance at nominal rates; second, the arrival of a second army under Colonel Connor, with the interchange of traffic and demand for labor thereby occasioned; third, the needs of the overland mail and telegraph lines.

    In part through such adventitious aid, the merchants of Utah, putting forth their might, built up a commerce as wonderful in its growth and development as that of any of the states on the Atlantic or Pacific seaboard. As early as 1864 there were several houses in Salt Lake City that purchased in New York, St Louis, or Chicago goods to the value of $250,000 or more at a time, among them being William Jennings, [*33] Godbe & Mitchell, the Walker Brothers,

[p. 765]

and Kimball & Lawrence, than whom few firms throughout the United States, outside, perhaps, of Boston, ranked higher as to commercial integrity. After the founding of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, mentioned elsewhere, and the development of its banking system, the trade and commerce of Utah assumed a more homogeneous character. [*34]

 

    In 1883 there were twelve private and five national banks in operation in Utah, of which six were at the capital, three at Ogden, two at Logan, and one each at the several towns of Provo, Corinne, St George, Richfield, Silver Reef, and Park City. Their aggregate paid-up capital was estimated at $1,000,000, their loans at $3,000,000, their deposits at $3,500,000, and the amount of their exchange business at from $12,000,000 to $15,000,000. [*35]

[p. 766]

    At this date there were some fifty insurance agencies having business with Salt Lake City and Ogden, their risks on buildings amounting to $500,000, and on merchandise in stock to $3,500,000. [*36]

    Thus with her 1,143 miles of railroad, her agricultural and stock-raising interests, now valued at $12,000,000 a year, her manufactures at $5,000,000, her mining output at $7,000,000 or $8,000,000, her commerce at $23,000,000, and her seventeen national and commercial banks, it will be seen that Utah compares

[p. 767]

not unfavorably with the states of the Pacific slope. She is practically free from debt, and nowhere is taxation lighter or more equitably adjusted. In 1865, as we have seen, the territorial and county taxes were not allowed in any case to exceed one per cent of the assessed value of property, while for school purposes they seldom exceeded one fourth of one per cent. [*37] In 1883 the rate was but six mills on the dollar for both territorial and school purposes, [*38] counties being allowed discretion as to their rate of levy, provided that it should never exceed six mills on the dollar. [*39] Cities were limited to five mills on the dollar for municipal expenses, and five mills for the making and repair of streets. The assessed value of all property in the territory was, in 1883, $30,834,425, [*40] and this was considerably less than 50 per cent of the real value, the total revenue from territorial and school tax being $185,000, [*41] or little more than $1 per capita of the population. That this sum was expended economically for the public benefit is shown by the number of public buildings, roads, bridges, and other improvements in the cities and counties of Utah. [*42]

[p. 768]

[paragraph continues] This amount does not of course include the income from tithes, which in 1880 was estimated at $458,000, [*43] a sum not larger in proportion to population than is expended for religious and charitable purposes in other states and territories of the union.

    The receipts of the United States internal revenue from Utah were for 1883 about $48,000, and for the twenty preceding years averaged about $40,000. Neither tobacco nor spirituous liquors were manufactured in the country, though 230,000 cigars and some 18,000 barrels of malt liquors made during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1883, yielded revenue to the amount of $18,097. Apart from these items, most of the internal revenue receipts were derived from license taxes. [*44]

 

    The United States land-office at Salt Lake City was opened in the year 1869. Up to the 31st of March, 1884, the total payments made through this office were $831,209.08, this amount representing almost the entire sum paid for lands disposed of by government. During this period 6,388 homestead entries were made, covering an area of 844,159 acres, and 2,773 final proofs. The number of mineral-land entries was 1,023, and their area 8,656 acres; of coal-land entries 72, with an area of 10,423 acres. [*45]

[p. 769]

    The receipts of the post-office at Salt Lake City for the year ending March 31, 1884, amounted to $39,294, and the expenses to $12,871, leaving a surplus in this department of $26,423. The first post-office was established in March 1849, letters being usually delivered before that date at the conclusion of divine service on the sabbath at the several places of worship. Of mail contracts and services up to the close of 1856 mention has already been made. [*46] At that date, it will be remembered, there was a monthly service, when not interrupted by severity of weather or unforeseen casualties, connecting eastward with Independence and westward with Sacramento. After the reopening of postal communication, interrupted by the Utah war, there was little regard to regularity or promptness in the delivery of the mails, letters and papers being often lost, mail-bags wetted, thrown carelessly to the ground, and sometimes purposely destroyed.

[p. 770]

[paragraph continues] As for magazines and newspapers, the saints considered themselves fortunate if they received them four months after date. The establishment of the pony express in 1860, and the persistence with which the Mormons advertised their grievances, improved matters considerably; and with the building of railroads, lines of postal route were of course established throughout the territory. In 1879 there were 109 routes, the subsidies for which amounted to nearly $200,000 [*47] and about 200 postmasters, whose compensation varied from 18 cents to $2,800 a year. [*48]

    On October 18, 1861, a message from Brigham Young was received by the president of the Pacific Telegraph Company at Cleveland, Ohio, of which the following is a portion: "Utah has not seceded, but is firm for the constitution and laws of our once happy country." [*49] The message was courteously answered. the same day Secretary and Acting Governor Frank Fuller thus saluted President Lincoln: "Utah, whose citizens strenuously resist all imputations of disloyalty, congratulates the president upon the completion of an enterprise which spans a continent...May the whole system speedily thrill with the quickened pulsations

[p. 771]

of the heart, as the parricide hand is palsied, treason is punished, and the entire sisterhood of states join hands in glad reunion around the national fireside." The president answered: "The government reciprocates your congratulations." [*50] In the autumn of this year the line was completed westward to California. [*51] The charge for messages to New York was in 1861 at the rate of $7.50 for 10 words, as against $1.50 in 1880. [*52]

    At the former date Brigham had already resolved to connect the leading settlements of Utah by means of a home telegraph system. It was not, however, until the autumn of 1865 that the matter was brought prominently before the people. They responded cheerfully and promptly, as they ever did to his behests, contributing funds and labor, and about a year later the Deseret Telegraph Co. was in operation, the line opening for business in December 1866, connecting first with Ogden, and soon afterward with Brigham City and Logan, its northern terminus. In January 1867, 500 miles of wire had been laid, extending northward to Cache Valley and southward to St George, with a branch line running through Sanpete Valley. [*53] During this month the company was organized under charter from the legislature, with a capital of $500,000. [*54] The line was afterward continued

[p. 772]

through Sevier county to Monroe, and from Toquerville to the Kanab country in south-eastern Utah, to Tintic, Cottonwood, and Bingham, and to Pioche and other towns in south-eastern Nevada. In 1880 it had been further extended to Paris, Idaho, to the mining towns of Frisco, Silver City, and Alta, and toward the south-east as far as Ordenville, touching Arizona in its route. At this date there were 955 miles of pole line, 1,130 of wire, and 68 offices in operation. The capital stock was held entirely by Mormons, and though much of the route lay through a sparsely settled country, where the expenses were out of all proportion to the receipts, the enterprise was self-supporting. [*55]

    In 1882 there were 2,647 miles of telegraph and 600 of telephone wire, with 560 instruments in Utah, [*56] and communication with the adjacent states and territories was being rapidly pushed forward.

 

    The people of the United States seem now determined that polygamy shall be suppressed. During the years 1885-7, fines and imprisonments were of constant occurrence, and hundreds of heads of families went into hiding. Some voluntarily came forward, gave themselves up, and stood their trial. Whether or not the system is destined thus to be wholly rooted out, it is impossible to say. But in answer to the

[p. 773]

oft-repeated accusations of those who regard the Mormons merely as an ulcer in the body politic, there are many points which to the impartial observer would seem worthy of being noted in their favor. Laying aside the questions of religion and polygamy, we find recorded in their annals one of the greatest achievements of modern times, and one that sheds a lustre on the dark cloud which, to gentile gaze, hangs like a funeral-pall over the genius of this singular and long-suffering community. Driven from Far West, from Kirtland, from Nauvoo, they found at length, amid the farthest west, an abiding-place--one then as remote from civilization as the wilds of Senegambia. There, within forty years, has been established a thriving community; there has been built one of the most sightly capitals west of the Mississippi, an oasis amid the great American desert, and with hundreds of settlements depending upon it. There farms and orchards, flocks and herds, factories and warehouses, cover the formerly unpeopled solitude, abandoned but a few decades ago to the savage, the coyote, and the wolf. The men and women who compose this community, drawn for the most part from the lower strata of European society, have not been slow to learn the practical lessons which their church has taught them; to learn how to exercise forethought, frugality, and other qualities which lead to success in life. [*57]

[p. 774]

[p. 775]

[p. 776]

[p. 777]

[p. 778]

[p. 779]

[p. 780]

[p. 781]

[p. 782]

[p. 783]

[p. 784]

Footnotes

^751:1 For descriptions of this route, see Horn's Overl. Guide; Kelly's Excurs. to Cal., Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City, passim.

^752:2 In 1859 J. H. Simpson of the topographical engineers received instructions from Gen. Johnson to explore the great basin, with a view to find a direct wagon route from Camp Floyd to Genoa, in Carson Valley. An account of the expedition will be found in his Rept Explor. Gt Basin. For about 300 miles his route was identical with Egan's, except for a few unimportant deviations; but soon after reaching Ruby Valley it tended more toward the south. Egan's line was preferred, however, as on the one taken by Simpson grass and water were scarce. Howard Egan, a major in the Nauvoo legion, and a well-known guide and mountaineer, was for some years engaged in driving stock to Cal. in the service of Livingston & Kinkead, and afterward became a mail agent. Burton's City of the Saints, 550. See, for an account of the explorations of E. F. Beales between Fort Defiance and the Colorado, and F. W. Lander between Green and Bear rivers in 1857, Warren's mem. in Pac. R. R. Rept, xi. 91; for remarks on the advantages of different routes, Wheeler's Surveys, Progress Rept, 1872, 33-6; for J. W. Powell's exploring and surveying expeditions, Appleton's Jour., xi.; Smithsonian Rept, 1877, 67-82; for further matters relating to government roads, House Ex. Doc., 341h Cong. 1st Sess., i., pt 2, 504-7; 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii., pt 2, 12, 149-51, 202-6, pt. 3, 1300-3; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., Mess and Doc., pt 2, 13-15, 131-2, 194-5, 200-4, 221-30; House Rept, 34th Cong. let Sees., i. 185; Sen. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., nos. 39, 40. Appropriations were made at various dates for the building and repair of bridges, for which see Utah Jour. Legisl. and Utah Laws, passim. In 1882 the sum of $5,000 was appropriated toward building a bridge across the Weber at Riverdale, and $1,000 for a bridge across the Provo at Provo City. For description of Provo canon bridge in 1858, see Deseret News, Oct. 13, 1858; for condition of bridges and roads in 1859, Id., July 6, 1859.

^752:3 Portions of this route were traversed by Chandlees and Remy, by whom it is described in their respective works.

^752:4 For reports of commissioners, appropriations, work done, condition, and other matters relating to local roads, see Utah Acts, 1855-6, 44-6; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1859-60, 96-8; 1860-1, 58-9, 113-14, 149, 165, 168; 1861-2, 59, 70, 73, 104, 116-17, 121, 132, 144; 1862-3, 29-30, 45, 51, 63; 1863-4, 54-5, 85, 108, 131-2: 1864-5, 53-6, 73, 140-1; 1865-6, 20-3, 29, 53, 70-1, 102, 122, 156-7; 1866-7, 20, 23-5, 28-9, 61-3, 66; 1868, 21-2, 25, 44-6, 75-6, 92, 116-18, 129; 1869, 20-1, 23-4, 55-6, 71-2, 79-80, 82-3, 88, 93-4, 102, 112, [p. XXX] 172; 1870, 63-4, 79, 84-8, 108, 118; 1876, 29-30; Utah Laws, 1878, 57; 1882, 102-4; Deseret News, Nov. 23, 1859, Jan. 22, 1862; Rae's Westward by Rail, 99.

^753:5 In 1860 there was a weekly stage to S. L. City, conducted by Russell & Waddell, who during the same year started a pony express. In 1861 they were bought out by Ben Holliday, and in that or the following year a daily line was established to S. L. City. In 1866 Wells, Fargo, & Co. purchased Holliday's interest, believing that the railroad would not be completed for six or seven years. They lost by the transaction, among their purchases being $70,000 worth of new coaches which they never used, and afterward sold to Gilmer & Salisbury for one fourth of the cost. John T. Gilmer commenced staging in 1859 under Russell & Waddell. In 1864 he was appointed division agent at Bitter Creek by Ben Holliday. About 1876 he began mining in the Black Hills, Utah, and afterward in Nev., Id., Ariz., and Cal. He was also connected with the Stewart mine in Bingham canon, and others. In 1884 he was conducting a staging business in Utah, Id., Ariz., and Cal. Gilmer's Mails and Staging in Utah, MS. Descriptions of stage-coach travel in Utah in the years before the opening of the railroad will be found in almost every book that treats of Mormonism up to that thee. Among others, see Burton's City of the Saints; Remy's Jour. to G. S. L. City; Chandler's Visit to S. Lake; Bowles' Across the Continent; Dilke's Greater Britain; Greeley's Overl. Jour.

^753:6 See Utah Acts, 1858-9, 37-8; House Misc. Doc., 36th Cong. 2d Sess., 34.

^754:7 Particulars will be found in the Deseret News, May 27, 1868. See also S. F. Call, May 22, 1868; S. F. Times, May 22, 1868. At this date it was yet uncertain where the junction between the U. P. and C. P. R. R. would be located. For act to fix the point of junction, see House. Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., 973.

^754:8 For celebration at S. L. City on the completion of the railroad, see Deseret News, May 12, 1866. On March 8th a railroad celebration was held at Ogden, an account of which is given in Id., March 8, 1869; Tullidge's Mag., i. 476-7. [p. 755] In 1868 Gen. Connor built and launched a small steamer, named the Kate Connor, for carrying railroad ties and telegraph poles from the southern to the northern shore of the G. S. Lake. Res. and Attract. of Utah, 63. The ties were for the Union Pacific. This appears to have been the first steamer that navigated the lake, though in the S. F. Bulletin, July. 29, 1856, it is stated that there was one at that date. In 1869 an excursion steamer was built, and in 1870 a boat costing $45,000, first named the City of Corinne and then the General Garfield. In 1879 the latter was still used mainly for excursions, as there was little freight to be had. At this date there was a considerable yachting fleet on the lake, the first, and for some years the only yacht, being built by the Walker Bros. For description of excursions on G. S. Lake in 1879, see Marshall's Through Amer., 191; for navigation on the Colorado in 1865, Austin Reese River Reveille, June 27, 1865; in 1873, Prescott Miner, Jan. 18, 1873.

^755:9 Bishop Sharp, known in Utah also as the railroad bishop, was born in 1820 at the Devon iron-works, Scotland, and when eight years of age went to work in a coal-pit. In 1847, being then a coal-miner in Clackmannanshire, he was converted to Mormonism, and the following year sailed for New Orleans with his two brothers, who had also joined the faith. They reached S. L. City in 1850. Here Sharp was first employed in quarrying stone for the tabernacle and tithing-office, and was soon afterward made superintendent of the quarry. In 1854 he was ordained a bishop, and ten years later was appointed assistant superintendent of public works. When the contract was made with the Union Pacific by Brigham, as above mentioned, Sharp was one of the principal sub-contractors. In 1871 he became superintendent of the Utah Central, and in 1873 president, having previously been elected vice-president of the Utah Southern. While employed as purchasing agent for the latter company in the eastern states, he became associated with the directors of the Union Pacific, by whom he was afterward elected a member of the board. Among those who were awarded contracts by the Central Pacific was Lorin Farr, who, with Benson and West as partners, graded 200 miles of the road, Aaron F. Farr being employed as superintendent. Lorin Farr also took an active part in the building of the Utah Central and Utah Northern, of which more later, and was one of the prime movers in bringing the Denver and Rio Grande into Ogden. In 1868 he built the Ogden woollen-mills in conjunction with Randall Pugsley and Neil, and for 20 years was mayor of that city. Aaron F. Farr was for six years probate judge of Weber co., and was elected a member of the Utah legislature.

    In connection with the Central Pacific may be mentioned the name of James Forbes, their agent at Ogden between 1869 and 1884, and in connection with the Union Pacific, A. G. Fell, at the latter date superintendent of division in the same city. Forbes, a native of Conn., came to Cal. when 16 years of age, and after being engaged in mining for several years, was appointed agent for the C. P. R. R. at Elko, Nev., soon after the line was opened, removing thence to Utah a few months later. Fell, a native of Ontario, Can., and in 1867 employed in the train-despatcher's office at Montreal, also removed to Utah in 1867.

    Joshua R. Nichols, appointed assist super. U. P. R. R. in July 1869, says [p. XXX] that for three months after that date no director or manager dare travel on the line without a body-guard. Nichols' Mining Mach., MS.

^756:10 For act granting right of way, see House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., xxvi. 974; Cong. Globe, 1870-1, p. 329; Zabriskie's Land Laws, 1877, suppl. 19; Grant's Rights and Priv. Utah Cent. R. R. Co., in which last are the articles of association, by-laws, and a copy of the mortgage executed by the company to secure its first-mortgage bonds. Brigham Young was president, W. Jennings vice-president, Dan. H. Wells treasurer, and John W. Young secretary; the first three, together with Feramorz Little and Christ. Layton, forming the board of directors. The original capital was $1,500,000, divided into 15,000 shares of $100 each. It does not appear that the directors had much faith in the undertaking, for none of them, except Brigham, subscribed for more than twenty shares, while Layton took only 10, and Little 5 shares. For celebration when ground was broken, see S. F. Bulletin, May 19, 1869; Tullidge's Mag., i. 477; for ceremonies, etc., when the road was completed, Deseret News, Jan. 12, 1870; S. F. Abend Post, Jan. 12, 1876; Scientific Press, Jan. 15, 1870; Tullidge's Life of Young, 362-3.

^756:11 Deseret News, May 3, 1871.

^756:12 For bill granting right of way, see Cong. Globe, 1874-5; for special privileges, Provo City Revised Ordin., 127-9.

^756:13 For further items as to the Utah Southern, see Williams' Pac. Tourist, 131-2; [p. 757] Deseret News, Dec. 3, 1873, Jan. 27, 1875, Jan. 26, 1876; S. L. C. Herald, March 20, 1878; S. F. Alta, May 11, 1872; S. F. Post, Nov. 11, 1873; Prescott Miner, Jan. 26, 1877.

^757:14 The first train ran through to Milford in May. S. L. Wkly Tribune, May 22, 1880.

^757:15 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 108. See also S. L. Herald, Jan. 1, 1879; S. L. C. Tribune, July 8, 1879.

^757:16 In the Contributor, iv. 182, is a report of freights received and forwarded over the Utah Central for eleven and a half months in 1882.

^757:17 The road from Ogden to Franklin was built entirely by the settlers. Doddridge's U. & N. R. R., MS. For act granting right of way through public lands of Utah, Idaho, and Montana in 1873, see Zabriskie's Land Laws, suppl., 1877, p. 57; House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., 47, pt 2, 976-7. In 1772 an act was passed granting right of way through to the Utah, Idaho, and Montana road, which was to connect with the Utah and Northern. Id., 975.

^757:18 During 1879 the income had increased to about $80,000 a month. Deseret News, July 16, 1879. For further items concerning the Utah and Northern, see Id., Oct. 10, 1877; S. L. C. Herald, Nov. 21, 1877; Portland Ev. Telegram, May 3, July 24, 1879; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 108-9; Doddridge's U. & N. R. R., MS. W. B. Doddridge, a native of Circleville, O., came to Ogden in 1867, and though only 19 years of age, readily obtained employment on the U. P. R. R. In 1882 he was appointed to the charge of the Idaho division.

^758:19 S. L. C. Tribune, Dec. 28, 1879.

^758:20 Williams' Pac. Tourist, 147; S. L. C. Tribune, Dec. 19, 1874; S. F. Bulletin, July 6, 1881; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, p. 110.

^759:21 S. L. C. Herald, June 17, 1880; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 110.

^759:22 Companies were organized to build both these roads in 1872, and they were constructed by local enterprise, afterward becoming tributary to the Denver and Rio Grande.

^759:23 In addition to the above roads, there were two short lines, formerly in operation, and known as the Summit County and American Fork. Both have been abandoned. For further particulars as to the Utah railroads, see Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 58-65; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 105-11; Crofutt's Overl. Tourist, 126-42; Utah Res., 43-8; Hayden's Gt West, 319; Duffus-Hardy's Through Cities, 97; Utah Laws, 1878, 13, 1882, 12-18; Utah Jour. Legisl., 1880, 135-7; Sec. Int. Rept, 42d Cong. 3d Sess., pt i., 167; Sen. Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sees., 40. In 1883 the bonded debt of the Utah Central was $4,900,000, of the Utah Eastern $400,000, of the Utah and Northern $972,000, of the Salt Lake and Western $1,080,000, of the Sanpete Valley, $750,000. The Utah and Nevada had no bonded debt.

^760:24 Flour, meat, and vegetables were also exchanged for groceries, clothing, etc. Brown's Statement, MS., 3. In 1849 the settlers were anxious to open a highway to San Diego, whence they intended to obtain supplies. In 1867 it was proposed to use the Colorado route for traffic. See Hayes' Scraps, San Diego, ii. 171-93.

^760:25 Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 67-8; Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 113, where are tables of imports and exports for 1882.

^761:26 The names of the vessels were the Maulsden and Ivy, both being chargered by S. W. Sears.

^761:27 See reports of R. G. Dun & Co.'s agency.

^762:28 For further details as to commerce in Utah, and the development of the cooperative system, see Hollister's Res. and Attract. of Utah, 48-52, 67-9; Tullidge's Mag., Apr. 1881, passim; Contributor, iv. 182; Fabian's Utah, 11-13; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 4, 1872; S. L. Herald, in S. F. Call, Feb. 24, 1872; S. F. Alta, Apr. 10, 27, May 13, 1872; S. F. Bulletin, Feb. 22, 1872; S. F. Chronicle, Oct. 6, 1873; S. F. Post, Apr. 12, 1875; for commercial law, Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 273-7.

^762:29 Richards' Reminiscences, MS., 31. At this date the firm occupied what was considered the most convenient house in the city. Later it was pulled down. In the Deseret News of Sept. 28, 1854, it is stated that Capt. Grant of Fort Hall was the first outsider who brought goods to the Utah market for sale, offering sugar and coffee at $1 a pint, calico at 50 to 75 cents a yard, and other articles in proportion. Livingston & Kinkead, who came with the intention of trading for five years, realizing a certain net profit, and then returning to Egypt, which they did, sold coffee and sugar at 40 cents a pound (a little more than a pint), calico at 25 cents a yard, etc. At this date there were few eastern, or, as they were termed, states goods in the market; and if we can believe Beadle's Life in Utah, 197, the firm took in $10,000 in gold the first day their store was opened. As this amount then probably represented almost the entire floating capital of the Mormons, the statement must be taken for what it is worth.

^762:30 In 1851 David Smith and E. N. Cook, bound for Oregon with a large band of stock from St Joseph, stopped at Salt Lake City for three weeks, trading dry goods, etc., for additional cattle. Clark's Sights, MS., 11.

^763:31 Horner & Co. reduced the price of sugar to three pounds for $1, whereupon Livingston & Kinkead sold it at 30 ccnts a pound, calico at 18 3/4 cents a yard, and marked all their goods 25 per cent below former prices, giving a guarantee never to exceed these rates. Deseret News, Sept. 28, 1854. In 1855, however, coffee and moist sugar were still selling at 40 cents per lb., and domestics at 25 cents a yard, tea being worth $2.25 per lb., flour $6.25 per 100 lbs., bacon and cheese each 30 cents, and butter 36 to 40 cents. Chandler's Visit to S. Lake, 345. Horner & Co. continued but a short time in business, being succeeded by Hooper & Williams.

^763:32 Gilbert & Gerrish were a gentile firm, and William Nixon was a Mormon of English descent, who began his commercial career at St Louis. Among his pupils were the Walker brothers.

^764:33 Isaac, the father of William Jennings, a wealthy butcher of Yardley, Worcester, England, was better known to fame as one of the claimants in the Jennings chancery suit, in which millions of pounds were at stake; but though he proved himself a lawful claimant, his efforts won for him no substantial result. In 1847 William Jennings, then some 14 years of age, took ship for New York, where, during the ensuing winter, he was employed by a pork-packer at a wage of $6 a week. After some adventures, being at one time robbed of his all and glad to find work as a journeyman butcher, and on another occasion attacked with cholera, which left him with a shattered constitution and $200 in debt, he chanced to make the acquaintance of a catholic [p. 765] priest, from whom he borrowed $50. With this capital Jennings made his first real start in life, and turning every dollar to account, soon paid off his debt and laid the basis of his fortune. In 1851 we find him at St Joseph, where he was married to Jane Walker, a Mormon emigrant girl. In the autumn of 1852 he arrived at Salt Lake City, having first invested all his means in three wagon-loads of groceries, from which he realized a considerable profit. Joining the church, he engaged in business as a butcher, and in 1855-6 as a tanner, boot and shoe manufacturer, and saddle and harness maker. In 1856 he was sent on a mission to Carson Valley, and, returning in the summer of 1857, commenced business some three years later as a dry-goods merchant in Salt Lake City, soon becoming the leading business man in Utah. In 1864 his purchases in New York and St Louis amounted to $500,000, and in Salt Lake City to $350,000, his business thereafter averaging about $2,000,000 per annum. Mr Jennings assisted in organizing the Utah Central R. R., of which he became vice-president, and succeeded Brigham as president of the Utah Southern. He was also one of the founders and directors of the Deseret National Bank, and a member of the legislature under Governor Doty.

^765:34 Until the advent of the railroad, the prices of all commodities continued extremely high. At a convention held at the Bowery, S. L. City, Oct. 4, 1864, the price of flour was fixed at $12 her 100 lbs of wheat corn and beans at $5, $4, and $10 per bushel respectively, of pork at 30 cents, and of dried apples at 75 cents per lb., all in gold. Deseret News, Oct. 19, 1864. Bowles says that in June of the following year lumber was worth $100 per thousand feet, sugar 75 to 85 cents, coffee $1 to $1.10 and tea 3.50 to $5 per lb. Across the Continent, 101-2. These prices were in currency.

^765:35 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 115. The firm of Hooper, Eldredge, & Co.--W. H. Hooper, H. S. Eldredge, and L. S. Hills--commenced business at S. L. City May 1, 1869, with a capital of $40,000. They were succeeded by the Bank of Deseret, incorporated under territorial law Sept. 1, 1871, with a capital of $100,000, Brigham Young being president, H. S. Eldredge vice-president, and W. H. Hooper, W. Jennings, F. Little, and J. Sharp the remaining directors. L. S. Hills was cashier. this institution was again succeeded by the Deseret National Bank, organized under the act of Nov. 1, 1872, [p. 763] with a capital of $200,000, and with the same directors and officials, its deposits in 1880 being about $500,000. the Walker Bros' bank was established in 1871, the firm having at that date large deposits of cash and bullion to their credit, notwithstanding the losses caused by the cooperative movement and by the opposition of the church dignitaries. Walker's Merchants and Miners of Utah, MS., 4. The remaining banks at S. L. City in 1873 were those of Jones & Co., McCornick & Co., Wells, Fargo, & Co., and the Zion's Savings Bank, the last having a capital of $50,000, and of which John Taylor was president.

    The Ogden banks were the Commercial National Bank, the Utah National Bank of Ogden, and the First National, of which last H. S. Eldredge was president in 1885. The business of the Commercial National was purchased from J. M. Langsdorf and H. O. Harkness, the former organizing the firm of J. W. Guthrie & Co. at Corinne in 1874. J. M. Langsdorf, a native of Pittsburg, Pa, came to Utah in 1869. His first occupation was to sweep out the bank at Corinne, of which he was soon made book-keeper, and afterward manager. Langsdorf's Stock-raising in Weber Co., MS. Guthrie & Co.'s business afterward fell into the hands of R. M. Dooly, by whom the Utah National Bank of Ogden was organized in 1883. Dooly, a native of Ill., came to Cal. in 1872, removing to Utah the following year, and being employed by Wells, Fargo, & Co. until Oct. 1881. In 1878 he was married to Mary Eliza Helfrich, a native of Grass Valley, Cal. Dooly's Ogden Banks, MS. Among the bankers of Ogden may also be mentioned Watson N. Shilling, a native of Ohio, where he was born in 1840. Removing to Michigan when he was twelve years of age, he enlisted in 1861 in the 1st Michigan cavalry, serving throughout the war, and being mustered out, in 1865, at Fort Collins, Col. Two years later he proceeded to Oneida co., Id., where he engaged in farming, trading, and stock-raising, and where in 1884 he still retained his interests, his residence in Ogden being mainly with a view to the education of his family. In 1883 he was a delegate to the national republican convention, throwing in his influence to secure the nomination of Blaine. Utah Biog. Sketches, MS., 56. The Logan banks were those of Charles Frank and Thatcher Bros & Co., the latter having a capital of $75,000. The bank at Provo was named the First National, its capital being $50,000, with A. O. Smoot as president; the one at St George was conducted by Woolley, Lund, & Judd; the one at Richfield by Jas M. Peterson; and the one at Silver Reef by R. T. Gillespie. For further particulars concerning Utah banks, see Tullidge's Mag., i. 522-3; House Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., cxciii. 713; Deseret News, Nov. 6, 1872, Aug. 27, 1873; S. L. C. Tribune, Jan. 11, 1873; S. F. Post, Aug. 9, Oct. 21, 1873; S. F. Chronicle, July 17, 1877; Silver Reef Miner, Jan. 21, 1883.

^766:36 Alex. Daul of Ogden opened the first fire-insurance agency in Utah. Mr Daul, a native of Germany, came to the U.S. in 1862, and on arriving at S. L. City was for the most part employed as a missionary until 1873.

^767:37 See <page 608>, this vol.

^767:38 A property tax, not exceeding two per cent, might be levied, however, for school buildings and improvements.

^767:39 For amount of property and taxes, and financial reports of the several counties at various dates, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1859-60, 12-15; 1860-1, 19; 1861-2, 29; 1862-3, 35; 1865-6, 24; 1866-7, 22-3; 1868, 20, 66-73, 135 -6, 141-2; 1869, passim; 1876, 35-6, 45-6, 271-7; 1878, 51-2, 403-64; 1880, 151-205; Utah Fin. Repts of Cos.; Mess. of Gov., 1870, 10.

^767:40 As shown in the office of Auditor Clayton. Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 116. In S. L. C. Contributor, Feb. 1883, 183, it is given at $34,000,000.

^767:41 Mines and mining products were exempt, though machinery and improvements were liable to taxation. The county assessors were allowed to make their own standard, the result being that the tax was but 20 to 50 per cent of the cash valuation. Thus a steer was valued in one county at $15, in another at $6 or $8, whereas the cash value of cattle was in 1883 $25 to $30 per head. Roads bonded at $20,000 per mile were assessed at about $2,000, and others in the same proportion, the rate never exceeding one sixth of the indebtedness.

^767:42 For governors', auditors', and treasurers' reports and statements as to territorial revenue, expenditure, and appropriations, see Utah Jour. Legisl. 1851-2 (joint sess.), 110-13; 1853-4 (joint sess.), 118-20; 1854-5, 94, 100-1, 109-12; 1859-60, 9-16; 1860-1, 16-25; 1861-2, 27-33; 1862-3, 33-9, app xiii. -xv.; 1863-4, 21-6; 1864-5, 14-19; 1865-6, 23-33; 1866-7, 22-31; 1868, 20-7; 1869, 20-7; 1876, 35-48, 266-79; 1878, 51-64, 316, 321-2; 1880, 23-46; Utah Acts Legisl., 1866, 84-6; Utah Laws, 1878, 11-23; 1880, 41-4; [p. 768] Mess. of Gov., 1870, 9-15. For miscellaneous matters relating to taxation and revenue, see Utah Jour. Legisl., 1860-1, 76-7, 83-8; 1870, 111-13; 1876, 254-6; Utah Acts, 1859-60, 33; 1872, 2; 1878, 11-12; Deseret News, Feb. 1, 1855, Feb. 13, 1856, Dec. 21, 1865; Utah Directory, 1869, 67; S. L. C. Directory, 1869, 67.

^768:43 Utah Hand-Book of Mormonism, 6, 40, where it is stated that the total income of the priesthood exceeded $1,000,000.

^768:44 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 117. For other matters relating to internal revenue, see Rev. Rept Com., 1863, 1804, passim; Deseret News, March 8, 1871. In 1862 a memorial was presented for a remission of direct federal taxation, for which see Utah Acts Legisl., 1861-2, 59-60. In 1878 a memorial was presented to congress asking that a mint be established in S. L. City. H. Misc. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 54, 97. In 1868 the Mormons again issued a currency of their own. S. F. Call, Nov. 29, 1868; Gold Hill News, Nov. 14, 1868; S. F. Bulletin, April 12, 1872.

^768:45 Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 117. For list of Utah land-offices in 1882, see H. Ex. Doc., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., x. 42. For patents issued to gentile as against Mormon applicants, see Sen. Dec., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., v., no. 181. The total number of acres disposed of in each year will be found in H. Ex. [p. 769] Doc., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., xix., no. 72, 146. For town sites patented in 1878-80, see H. Ex. Doc., 47th Cong. 1st Sess., ix., pt 5, 187. For surveys and statistics between 1869 and 1880, see U.S. Land-Off. Rept, 1869, 168-74, 225-42, 256-62, 326-31, 400-5; Sec. Interior Repts, 42d Cong. 2d Sess., pt i., 42, 219-23; 42d Cong. 3d Sess., pt i., 12-13, 18; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., i. 149-57, 257-93; 43d Cong. 2d Sess., i. 155-68, 268-84, 300-3; 44th Cong. 1st Sess., 37-40, 248-60, 377-424; 44th Cong. 2d Sess., 32-3, 30-39, 130-52, 166-85, 277-93; H. Ex. Doc., 45th Cong. 2d Sess., viii. 69, 155-217, 299-311; 45th Cong. 3d Sess., p. x., x.-xvi., 18-19, 55, 86-7, 95-6, 161, 213, 215, 319-33; Id., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., v. 2206-8, 2213-15; Sen. Doc., 46th Cong. 3d Sess., no. 12, 50, 67. For portions of surveyor-general's reports touching Utah, see H. Ex. Doc., 46th Cong. 2d Sess., ix. 871-897; 47th Cong. 1st Sess., ix., pt 5, 141, 882-915; 47th Cong. 2d Sess., x. 75-7. For legislation of congress upon which title to land in Utah depends, see Id., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., xviii., no. 45, 971-8. For laws relating to preemption, homestead, timber-land, desert, and other lands, see U. S. Stat., 44th Cong. 2d Sess., 377; 45 Cong. 2d Sess., 88-9; Stayner, Farmers' and Miners' Manual. For further discussions, measures, proceedings, and appropriations of congress for Utah, see Cong. Globe, 1868-9, 687, 754, 781; 1869-70, passim; 1872-3, cclv., iii.-ix., ccxc., 221, 353; 1873-4, 21, 51, 84-5, 187, 204, 506, 1838; U. S. Acts, 40th Cong. 3d Sess., 224; 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 40, 223, 363, 530; House Jour., 40th Cong. 3d Sess., 617; 41st Cong. 1st Sess., 317; 41st Cong. 3d Sess., 624-5, 650-1; 42d Cong. 2d Sess., 657, 699, 701, 713, 725, 1219, 1290, 1302-5, 1345-7; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 1545, 1559, 1582-3; 43d Cong. 2d Sess., 793, 800, 810, 812; 44th Cong. 1st Sess., 1736, 1775; 45th Cong. 1st Sess., 408, 431; 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 1654-5, 1708; Sen. Jour., 41st Cong. 2d Sess., 1490, 1527-8; 41st Cong. 3d Sess., 603, 673; 42d Cong. 1st Sess., 239, 249, 266, 277, 279; 42 Cong. 2d Sess., 1234, 1380-2, 1419-20; 42d Cong. 3d Sess., 856, 870, 886; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., 1121, 1141-2; 45th Cong. 1st Sess., 168; 45th Cong. 2d Sess., 977-8, 990, 1021; H. Comm. Rept, 45th Cong. 2d Sess., iv., no. 708, v., no. 949.

^769:46 See pp. <page 500>-502, this vol.

^770:47 For list, with annual payments to each, see U. S. Off. Reg., 1876, ii.; P. O. Dept, 118-19.

^770:48 Names of post-offices, postmasters, and the compensation paid to each will be found in Id., 351-2. For further items concerning mail services, see Richards' Incidents of Utah Hist., MS., passim; for statistics, House Ex. Doc., 35th Cong. 2d Sess., ii., pt iv., pp. 757, 783, 819, 833; 37th Cong. 3d Sess., iv. 152-5, 170, 214; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., v., pt ii., 73; 38th Cong. 2d Sess., v. 802, 822, 829-30, 861; 41st Cong. 2d Sess., i. 43, 66, 88-9, 104, 114; 41st Cong. 3d Sess., i., pt iii., vol. iii., 46, 73, 147-9, 156, 169-71; 42d Cong. 3d Sess., i., pt iv., vol. iv., 54, 136, 140, 228, 237-43; 45th Cong. 2d Sess., vii., pt ii., 6-7, 20, 56, 65, 218; Sen. Ex. Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., i., vol. iii., pt i., 1432-1440; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., i., vol. iii., 585-6, 601-3, 621, 644; Mess. and Doc., 36th Cong. 1st Sess., pt iii., 1432-72; 39th Cong. 1st Sess. (abridged), 48-53; 39th Cong. 2d Sess., P. M. Genl Rept, 18-19, 24, 50, 87; 40th Cong. 2d Sess. (abridged), 772-9. For routes, expenses, subsidies, etc., see Postmaster-Gen. Rept, 1858, pp. 45, 69, 71, 12l; 1859, 46, 54, 86; 1860, 74, 76, 140; 1865, 25, 40, 58-9, 83-4; 1868, 42, 64, 261-2, 278; 1871, 17, 40, 47, 85-6, 116, 126-8; 1873, 33, 69, 184-5, 198, 208-20; 1875, 77, 83, 210, 230, 241-51; 1876, 20, 41-5, 81, 89, 182-3, 198, 204-9; H. Ex. Doc., 47th Cong. 2d Sess., xxii., no. 93, pp. 255-7; Id., 48th Cong. 1st Sess., pt 4, no. 2, pp. 252, 292, 612.

^770:49 Deseret News, Oct. 23, 1861.

^771:50 Id. See also Tullidge's Hist. S. L. City, 249-51; S. F. Bulletin, Oct. 21, 1851; Sac. Union, Oct. 25, Nov. 2, 1861.

^771:51 Deseret Tel. of. Co. Mem., in Utah Jottings, MS. In 1859 an act was passed to incorporate the Placerville, Humboldt, and S. L. C. Tel. Co. See Utah Acts, 1858-9, 26.

^771:52 For day rate. The night rate was 75 cents. Deseret Tel. Co. Mem., in Utah Jottings, MS.

^771:53 Id. On this the first circuit 320 pounds of wire were used per mile, the cost being 35 cents per lb and $150 per mile. Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, suppl. 67. In the Deseret News of Jan. 23, 1867, the line is termed the Deseret State Telegraph.

^771:54 The officers were Brigham Young president, Dan. H. Wells viee-president, Geo. Q. Cannon treasurer, and Wm Clayton secretary, the two first being ex officio members of the board; the remaining directors were Edward Hunter, Geo. A. Smith, A. O. Smoot, A. H. Raleigh, John Sharp, Jos. A. Young, Erastus Snow, Ezra T. Benson, and A. M. Musser, the last named being appointed superintendent. Deseret Tel. Co. Mem., in Utah Jottings, MS.

    Amos Milton Musser, a Pennsylvanian by birth, joined the Mormons in [p. 772] 1844, and together with his mother and sister settled at Nauvoo in 1846, remaining in that neighborhood after the expulsion until 1851, in which year be arrived in Utah and was appointed to the general tithing-office. In 1852 he was sent on mission to Hindostan, where he labored for three years, principally in Calcutta and Bombay, and was afterward employed as a missionary in England. Returning to Utah in 1857, he took an active part in promoting the home industries of the territory; he was also travelling agent of the church, assisted in emigration matters, temple building, the cooperative movement, and was, in brief, one of Brigham's most trustworthy agents.

^772:55 In 1880 John Taylor was president, Dan. H. Wells vice-president, Jas Jack treasurer, and W. B. Dougall secretary, all of them being directors. The other members of the board were John Sharp, F. Little, Ed. Hunter, H. P. Kimball, and Geo. Reynolds. Musser having resigned the superintendency in 1876, Dougall was appointed in his stead. Id. In 1878 the wires were laid to the houses of many bishops of wards throughout the territory. Conyer's letters to Boston Educ. Jour.

^772:56 Contributor, iv. 182. For list of telegraph offices, see Utah Gazetteer, 1884, 269.

^773:57 I give herewith some further biographical notices. Orson Hyde, a native of Oxford, Conn., was born in 1805, commenced life by working in an iron-foundery for six dollars a month, afterward serving for a year or two as clerk to the firm of Gilbert & Whitney of Kirtland. While at Kirtland, Hyde, who was then a stanch methodist, and a class-leader in a camp-meeting at that point, heard that a golden bible had been dug out of a rock in the state of New York. A few months later he was converted to Mormonism, and set forth as a missionary, being a member of the English mission of 1837, when he was accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, and others. In 1840 he went to Jerusalem, where he held service at the mount of Olives, and consecrated the holy land, being appointed to this duty by the prophet, who declared him to be of the house of Judah. After the prophet's assassination, he again proceeded, in company with Parley Pratt and John Taylor, to Great Britain, where he set the churches in order, having now been chosen one of the twelve. He arrived at Winter Quarters a few weeks after the departure of the pioneer band, and on their return labored to reorganize the first presidency, Brigham Young being appointed Joseph's successor, partly by his efforts. After the saints were gathered in Utah, he [p. 774] remained in that territory as presiding apostle at various settlements, maintaining robust health until about his 70th year, and continuing to labor in the ministry until his decease in November 1878. For further details, see Autobiog. of Mrs M. A. P. Hyde, MS., 4; Hyde's Travels and Ministry, passim; Tullidge's Life of Brigham Young, 69-71; Millennial Star, v. 163; Deseret News, May 5, 12, 1858, March 25, 1874, Dec. 4, 11, 1878; Smucker's Hist. Mormons, 297; S. L Herald, Nov. 30, 1878; Prescott Miner, Dec. 13, 1878.

    Edward Hunter, a native of Newtown, Pa, was descended on the father's side from John Hunter, who served as lieutenant of cavalry under William III. at the battle of the Boyne, his mother's lineage being traced back to one Robert Owen, a Welsh quaker, who, refusing to take the oath of allegiance after the restoration in 1685, was imprisoned, and afterward emigrating to America, purchased an estate near Philadelphia. On his father's death, Edward, who was then only 22 years of age, was offered his position as justice of the peace, but refused it on account of his youth. A few years afterward he purchased a farm in Chester co., Pa, where he was visited by three Mormon elders, who were invited to make his house their home, though he had not yet joined the faith. In 1839 he entertained as his guest the prophet Joseph, who was then returning from his errand to Washington. In the following year he was baptized by Orson Hyde, then on his way to Jerusalem. In the summer of 1841 he proceeded to Nauvoo and purchased a farm from the prophet, contributing the first year no less than $15,000 to the church. In 1847 he entered the valley of Great Salt Lake with the first companies that followed the pioneers, and on the death of Newel K. Whitney was appointed presiding bishop of the church.

    Of the early career of Franklin D. Richards mention has already been made in these pages. In March 1869 he was appointed probate judge of Weber co., and removed with his family to Ogden, his sons Franklin S. and Charles being in 1885 prosecuting attorney, and county clerk and recorder. With the advent of the railroad Ogden was clearly destined to become a city second in importance only to the capital, and one that must soon contain a large gentile element, whereby the commercial and political control of northern Utah would be imperilled. At this juncture, also, it became advisable that the Weber stake should be raised to the dignity of an apostolic see, and for the purpose no better selection could have been made than that of Franklin D. Richards. Brought into contact with the business world during the many years when he directed the immense European migration to Utah, a man without political ambition, kindly, placable, and tolerant, his administration was no less acceptable to the gentile than to the Mormon community. At the close of 1855, though at that date in his 65th year, he still discharged his manifold duties with all the vigor of a man yet in the prime of life, and throughout his long career he has made not a single enemy. As I have already stated, I am under deep obligations to Mr Richards for his kindness in furnishing much valuable material for this volume that would else have been inaccessible.

    Lorenzo Snow, a native of Mantua, Ohio, but of New England parentage, first made the acquaintance of the Latter-day Saints while visiting his sisters at Kirtland, Lorenzo having just completed his course at Oberlin college. Convinced of the truth of their doctrines, he was baptized, ordained an elder, and scut forth to preach. As a missionary, none remained longer in the field, or travelled more, his journeys between 1836 and 1872 extending over 150,000 miles. In Feb. 1846 he crossed the Mississippi in company with the twelve, being himself ordained an apostle some three years later. When Box Elder co. was organized, he was made president of the stake at Brigham City, and afterward member of the council for Box Elder and Weber, both of which positions he held for many years. He was an active promoter of the cooperative movement, establishing in 1863-4 a cooperative store, and afterward a tannery, a woollen factory, and several cooperative farms, the employes having the privilege of counting the value of their labor as so much capital [p. 775] invested in the concern. In the Biography and Family Records of Lorenzo Snow, Written and Compiled by his Sister, Eliza R. Snow Smith (S. L. City, 1884), we have an account of his travels and missionary labors, together with a description of various incidents in the early career of the saints. The book was written, however, as the authoress states, for the purpose of being handed down in lineal descent from generation to generation, to be preserved as a family memorial.

    Erastus Snow, who, with Orson Pratt, was, as the reader will remember, the first of the pioneer band that entered the valley of Great Salt Lake, joined the Mormon church in 1833, and two years afterward was ordained an elder, though at this time only 17 years of age. Bidding adieu to his parents at St Johnsbury, Vt--his birthplace--he journeyed to Kirtland, and thenceforward became prominently identified with the church, sharing in all its tribulations. In the winter of 1848-9 he was chosen an apostle, filling, with Lorenzo Snow, F. D. Richards, and C. C. Rich, the vacancies caused by the reorganization of the first presidency, and the apostasy of Lyman Wight. Soon afterward he was sent on a mission to Scandinavia, and through the branches of the church which he established in that country it has been claimed that nearly 20,000 converts were gathered into the fold. After the close of his missionary career his labors were directed to the founding and development of various settlements in southern Utah, over which he presided as their spiritual head, being also a member of council in the territorial legislature.

    Like Heber C. Kimball, Charles Coulson Rich came of puritan stock, though a native of Kentucky, where he was born in 1809 He was baptized into the church in 1832, receiving his endowments at Kirtland, where he was ordained a high-priest by Hyrum Smith. Moving to Far West in 1836, he rendered good service during the persecutions in Missouri, being afterward forced, to rice for his life through the wilderness, and making his way to Nauvoo, where he was appointed a member of the high council. In the winter of 1816-7 he was president of the stake at Mount Pisgah, and set forth from Winter Quarters in June of the latter year in charge of a company of saints. In 1849 he was chosen an apostle, and set out on a mission to California, returning in Nov. 1850, and the following year taking charge of the San Bernardino colony. His first mission to Europe was in 1860, when he labored for two years in England, again reaching Zion in 1863, when he settled in Bear Lake Valley, where he resided for the most part until his decease in 1883, serving for several terms as a member of the legislature. Contributor. Dec. 1883, 114-15.

    Albert Carrington, a native of Royalton, Vt, and a graduate of Dartmouth college, joined the Mormon church in Wiota, Wis., in 1841, and removed to Nauvoo in 1844, a few weeks before the prophet's assassination. A member of the pioneer band, he returned with Brigham Young to gather up the main body of the saints, and journeyed with them to the valley in 1848. After the admission of Utah as a territory, he was several times elected a member of the council until 1868, when he was sent to England to preside over the European missions. For twenty years, when not on some mission, he acted as private secretary to Brigham, and his ability gained for him among anti-Mormons the sobriquet of 'The Mormon Wolsey.' In 1870 he was ordained an apostle, and for several years afterward presided over the British mission.

    Elias Smith, nephew to Joseph Smith, the prophet's father, was born at Royalton, Vt, near the birthplace of the former. Joining the Mormon faith in 1834, being then 30 years of age, he removed in 1836 to Kirtland, and thence to Nauvoo, where he was business manager of the Times and Seasons and Nauvoo Neighbor, filling the same position on the staff of the Deseret News after his arrival in Salt Lake City. In 185l he was appointed probate judge of Salt Lake county, which office he retained for many years; and throughout his public career it may be said that he was almost without an enemy; in such respect were his decisions held, both in law and in equity, while his private life was also beyond reproach.

    In connection with the judiciary of Utah may be mentioned Alexander [p. 776] Pyper, a native of Ayrshire, Scotland, who in 1874 was appointed police court judge of Salt Lake City. His administration of justice was somewhat in contrast with that which prevailed in the third judicial district, James B. McKean being in office during the same year. At that date the questions asked by the prosecuting attorney of jurors and applicants for citizenship were of such a nature that they frequently excluded persons who were not polygamists but simply believed in the Mormon faith, among them being, 'Are you a Mormon?' 'Have you been through the Mormon Endowment House?' 'Do you believe that polygamy is a divine revelation?' 'My education and religion,' remarked Judge Pyper, 'have taught me to deal fairly and justly toward all men, under the law, irrespective of their conditions or opinions.'

    David O. Calder, a native of Thurso, Caithness, Scotland, joined the Mormon church in 1840, and in 1851 started for Utah, accompanied by his mother and her family. A man of excellent business ability, his talents were quickly recognized. In 1857 he was appointed chief clerk to the trustee in trust of the church, and in that position organized a system of accounts and records in all the departments of the church. Between 1859 and 1870 he held office as territorial treasurer, and after a visit to his native country, where he also labored as a missionary, was chosen business manager and managing editor of the Deseret News, and a director of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institute, which latter position he held until his decease in July 1884.

    Among the presidents of the Utah stake of Zion may be mentioned Harvey Harris Cluff, a native of Kirtland, whose ancestors settled at Durham, N. H., a few years after the arrival of the Mayflower, and whose father, David Cluff, served in the American army during the war of 1812. Removing from Durham to Ohio in 1830, David and his family joined the Mormon faith, and proceeding thence to Nauvoo, shared in all the hardships of the exodus, arriving in the autumn of 1850 in the valley of Great Salt Lake, where they cast in their lot at Provo. On the 6th of October, 1856, when Brigham Young announced before a general conference of the church the threatened disaster to the hand-cart emigrants, Harvey Cluff, then only in his twentieth year, was one of the first who volunteered to go to their aid. On this occasion he states that the provisions and clothing furnished before nightfall were more than sufficent to lead 22 teams. In 1859 Mr Cluff was elected city councillor, and in 1875, after his missionary labors, principally in Europe and the Sandwich Islands, was ordained bishop, and assigned two years later to the charge of the fourth ward of Provo City. Biog. Sketch of H. H. Cluff, MS.

    Biographies of other prominent men are given in Richards' Bibliog. of Utah, MS.; Utah Biog. Sketches, MS.; Contributor; Tullidge's Mag.; Deseret News; S. L. C. Tribune; S. L C. Herald, passim.

    For further references to authorities consulted in the last chapters of this volume, see 34th Cong. 1st Sess., H. Ex. Doc., l, pt 2, 504-7; pt 3, 375, 431; Doc., 10, 235; H. Rept, 185; S. Doc., 96, vol. xviii., 559; Id., 3d Sess., S. Doc., 5, 837, 877; 35th Cong. 1st Sess., H Ex. Doc., 2, pt 2, 1053, 1096; Id., 2d Sess., 1, pt 2, 12, 149-51, 202-6; pt 3, 1300-3; pt 4, 757, 783, 819, 833; S. Ex. Doc., 39, 1-73; 40, passim; 36th Cong. 1st Sess., Mess. and Doc., pt 2, 13-15, 121, 131-2, 194-5, 200-4, 207-20, 221-44, 589; pt 3, 1432, 72; Id., S. Ex. Doc., 1, vol. iii., pt 1, 490-2, 556; 52, 417-98; Id., 2d Sess., H. Misc. Doc., 34; H. Ex. Doc., 63, vol. ix.; 37th Cong. 2d Sess., S. Doc., 1, vol. iii., 585-6, 601-3, 621, 644; Acts and Res., 209; Id., 3d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 1, vol. iv., 152-5, 170, 214; 38th Cong. 1st Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 1, vol. v., pt 2, 73; Id., 45, vol. ix.; Id., 2d Sess., 802, 822, 829-30, 861; 39th Cong. 1st Sess., Mess. and Doc., 48-53; H. Com. Rept, 96; ld., 2d Sess., Mess. and Doc., 18-19, 24, 50, 87; H. Jour., 523, 733-5, 765; S. Jour., 624; Acts and Res., 303; 40th Cong. 1st Sess., S. Jour., 307; H. Jour., 365; H. Misc. Doc., 26; Id., 2d Sess., Mess. and Doc. Abridg., 772-6; H. Misc. Doc., 35; Doc., 153, 25-8; H. Com. Rept, 8, 79; H. Jour., 1407; S. Jour., 1240-1; Cong. Direc., 41; Id., 3d Sess., H. Jour., 671; Mess. and Doc. Abridg., [p. 777] 829-34, 1109, 1114, 1130, 1134, 1220-1; H. Ex. Doc., 54, 168; S. Jour., 617, 621; Acts and Res., 224; 41st Cong. 1st Sess., H. Jour., 317; H. Misc. Doc., 20; 22; 23; Id., 2d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 1, pt 1, 43, 66, 88-9, 104, 114; Doc. 68; Doc. 207, 319-21; Doc. 230; H. Com. Rept, 21, pts 1 and 2; S. Jour., 1490, 1527-8; S. Misc. Doc., 112; S. Com. Rept, 72; H. Jour., 1539, 1542-3, 1600-1; Id., 3d Sess., H. Jour., 624-5, 650-1; H. Ex. Doc., 1, pt 3, 46, 73, 147-9, 156, 169-71; pt 4, iv.; pt 1, 139-45, 443-6; Doc. 52; Doc. 71; Rept Com. Educ., 328-83, 351, 558; S. Jour., 603, 673; S. Com. Rept, 302; 42d Cong. 1st Sess., H. Jour., 279; H. Ex. Doc., 10, 218-23; S. Jour., 239, 249, 266, 277, 279; Id., 2d Sess., H. Jour., 1219, 1270, 1302-5, 1345-7; H. Ex. Doc., 211, 300-30; Doc. 256; Doc. 258; Doc. 325, 179-86; Doc. 326; Rept Sec. Int., pt 1, 51-2; H. Misc. Doc., 155; Doc. 165; Doc. 208; Rept Com. Educ., 21, 383-4, 600-4; S. Jour., 1234, 1380-2, 1419-20; S. Ex. Doc., 12; S. Misc. Doc., 118; Doc. 126; Acts and Res., 40, 223, 363, 530; Id., 3d Sess., H. Jour., 657, 699-701, 713, 725; H. Ex. Doc., 1, pt 4, 54, 136, 140, 228, 237-45, 21; H. Misc. Doc., 95; H. Com. Rept, 98, 246-56, 325-6, 365-7, 377, 414-58; S. Jour., 856, 870, 886; S. Ex. Doc., 44; S. Misc. Doc., 73; Rept Com. Educ., 24-41, 55; 379-89, 416, 608-13, 942-97; 43d Cong. 1st Sess., H. Jour., 1545, 1559, 1582-3, H. Ex. Doc., 96; Doc. 141, 255-83; Doc. 157; Doc. 193; Doc. 197; Doc. 193; Rept Com. Educ., xxii.-cxxiii., 460-3, 475, 510-12, 728; Id., 2d Sess., H. Jour., 793, 800, 810, 812; H. Misc. Doc., 49; Doc. 120; Doc. 139; H. Com. Rept, 484; S. Jour., 593, 1121, 1141-2; S. Ex. Doc., 42; Id., 2d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 177, 328-57; Rept Com. Educ., xiii.-cxxv., 500-2, 507, 526-34, 733; P. M. Genl Rept, 69, 264-5, 278, 287-300; 44th Cong. 1st Sess., H. Jour., 1775, 1736; H. Ex. Doc., 159, 267-81; Rept Com. Educ., xxvi.-cxxiii., 510-14, 548-54; H. Misc. Doc., 42; Sec. Intr Rept, 591-2, 606-44, 675-80, 859-62; Sec. War Rept, 44, 119-20, 148; Id., 2d Sess., H. Jour., 871; S. Jour., 552-3; Rept Com. Educ., xx.-xxix., lix.-clv., 458-61, 500-7, 760; S. Com. Rept, 608; Sec. Intr Rept, 532-5, 604, 610-58, 675-85; Sec. War Rept, 48, 67; 45th Cong. 1st Sess., S. Jour., 168; Id., 2d Sess., H. Jour., 431, 408, 1654-5, 1708; H. Ex. Doc., 45, 971-8; Doc. 72, 146; Doc. 73, 1-163; H. Misc. Doc., 54, 97-100; H. Com. Rept, 708, 949; S. Jour., 977-8, 990, 1021; S.. Ex. Doc., 40; Entom. Com. Second Rept, 322, 380; Id., 3d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 88, passim; 46th Cong. 2d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 46, 475-522, 632-7; H. Com. Rept, 1710; S. Ex. Doc., 181; Id., 3d Sess., S. Ex. Doc., 12, 50, 67; 47th Cong. 1st Sess., 79, 94; H. Misc. Doc., 38, 98-9, 126, 197-9; Id., 2d Sess., H. Ex. Doc., 45, 1181; Doc. 72, 153-5, 158; Doc. 77, 64; Doc. 93, 255-7, 1157-74; H. Misc. Doc., 44, 4-7; H. Com. Rept, 1865; S. Ex. Doc., 45; S. Misc. Doc., 8, pt 2, 86; Doc. 46, 70; 48th Cong. 1st Sess., H. Misc. Doc., 1, pt 4, no. 2, 252, 292, 612; Poore's Cong. Direc., 97, 102; Census Rept, 1870; Indus., passim; Id., 1880, i. 3-45, 351-3, 378-456; Id., iii. 3-10, 25-9, 94, 136, 173, 208, 244, 318; See. Intr Rept, 1871, pt 1, 166-7, 219-20; Id., 1873, pt 1, 150-1; Id., 1874, pt 1, 44-50, 156-60; Id., 1875, pt 1, 89-100, 251-3; Cong. Globe, 1868-9, 687, 754, 781, 1364, 1620; Id., 1869, 83, 86, 195; App., 47; Id., 1869-70, 41; Id., 1870-1, 329; Id., 1871-2, 127, 300; Id., 1872-3, clviii.-ix., clx-i., clxxvi.-lxxxii., cclxvi.-lxxii., ccxc., 221, 353; App., xxxii.; Id., 1874, 21, 43, 51, 85, 187, 204, 2183, 2835; Id., 1874-5, 144; Id., 1875-6, 44; Id., 241877-8, 176, 529; Id., 1878-9, 45-53, 565, 1873; Ind. Affrs Rept, 1869, 20-1, 226-34, 270-6, 460-532; Id., 1871, 683; Id., 1872, 78, 91, 93; Id., 1873, 336-46; Id., 1874, 52-4, 104-79, 270-1, 276-7; Com. Genl Land-Office Rept, 1869, 168-74, 225-42, 256-62, 326-31, 400-5; Direc. Mint Rept, 1881, 19; Id., 1882, 14; Surg.-Gen. Circ., no. 8, 1875, 328-32, 338-40, 345; Hayden, Geolog. Surv., 1872, 106-8, 659-792; Hague in King's Surv. iii., 455-73; King's Surv., v., passim; Gilbert's Rept, in Powell's Geolog. Surv. Rocky Mtns, 1876, passim, Wheeler's Surv., 1872; Progress Rept, passim; Id., 1878, ii., iii., passim; Smithsonian Inst. Rept, 1877, 67-82; Meteorol. Regis., 1813-54; U. S. Offic. Register, 1817; Id., 1879; Comptr of Currency Rept, 1878, 52, 759; Id., 1881, 94-107, 112-19, 212; Id., 1884, 128-41, 250; Com. of Educ. Rept, 1871, 8, 21, 383, 404; Id., 1875, 510-14; Id., 1875, 510-14; Id., 1877, 291-2; Id., 289-91; Id., 1879, 285-6; Id., 1880, 382-5; Id., 1881, 301-2; Id., 1882-3, 302-3. Utah Pub. Doc., as [p. 778] follows: Jour. Legis., 1869, 13, 28-9, 101-2, 131-4; Id., 1869, 158-9; Id., 1870, 81-2, 183, 185-71 Id., 1872, 36, 85-7, 104-5, 122, 149, 182, 231, 237-9; Id., 1876, 24-5, 31, 65-8, 104-5, 112-15, 197, 199-201, 206-8, 213, 239, 292; Id., 1877, 31, 35-6, 39-40, 161-4, 323, 392-402; Id., 1878, 339; Id., 1880, 1-8, 21-2, 241-31 Acta and Res., 1869, 2, 7, 17, 20-2; Id., 1870, 2, 4, 8, 12, 127-81 Id., 1872, 2, 28-33, 40-2; Id., 1874, 6; Id., 1878, 8, 11-26, 38, 41, 43, 481 Utah Laws, 1878, i., 28-37, 46, 60-165, 167-81 Id., 1880, iv., 2-5, 10-19, 26-44, 55-65, 67-81, 84-8, 95-6; Id., 1882, 2-3, 23-4, 30-6, 40, 102, 106-7; Compiled Laws, 184-896, passim; Gov. Message, 1869, passim; Id., 1870, 6-7, 9-15; Id., 1876, 5-8, 10, 12-13, 20-2, 23-4, 26-71 Utah Election Laws, 1878, 1882, passim; Com. Rept on Gov. Mess., 1882, passim; Constitution State of Utah, passim; Memors of Legislature, 1882, 1-81 Memor. to Congress, 1882, passim; Supt Schools, Rept, 1867-9, passim; Id., 1874-5, 1-42, 61-70; Id., 1876, 1878, passim; Finance Rept of Counties, 1869, passim; Supm. Court Decis., 1879, in Reynolds' Case, passim; Black, Argument for Utah, 1883, passim; Hopt vs People of Utah, 1884, passim; Cannon, in House of Rep., 1-15; Defence Constit. and Relig. Rights, passim; Bigamy and Polygamy, passim; Relief Soc. L. D. Saints, 1884, passim; Burchard's Rept, 1880, 127-32; Id., 1881, 237-48; Id., 1882, 253-69; Id., 1883, 617-41. Other authorities as mentioned below: Taylor and Woodruff, Reminiscences, MS., passim; Richards' Crime in Utah, MS., 1-15; Id., Europ. Emigration, MS., passim; Id., Narrative, MS., 59-60, 64-6, 74, 78, 82-6, 94, 96-105, 110-18; ld., Utah Miscellany, MS., passim; Id., Bib. of Utah, MS., 15-23; Incidents in Utah History, MS., 5, 81; Richards, Mrs, Remilliscences, MS., 9, 11, 15, 17, 30, 44, 50-1; Godbe, Statement, MS., 12, 15, et seq., 19, 20; Id., Mining Mem., MS., 7-11; Smoot, Margaret S., Experience of a Mormon Wife, MS., 8-9; Cluff's Overland in Winter, MS., 1-14; Tracy, Mrs N. N., Narrative, MS., 8; Glidden's Statement, MS., 1, 6-7, 11-12; Utah Bios. Sketches, MS., 1-55, 60-1; Harrison's Critical Notes, MS., 30-42, 51-91 Woods' Recollections, MS., 39, 52-5, 59-60, 66-70; Utah Notes, MS., passim; Hoyt's Arizona, MS., 29-311 Stanford's Brief Historical Sketch, etc., MS., passim; Woodruff, Phebe, Autobiog. Sketch, MS., passim; King, Hannah T., Brief Memoir, etc., MS., passim; Cobb's Mormon Problem, MS., passim; Bleak, in Utah Co. Sketches, MS., 78-80; Madsen, in Id., 12-13; Powers, in Id., 19; Huntsville Described, MS., 6; Utah Miscellany, MS., 12; Brown, Statement, MS., 3-4; Hill, Mines and Mining, MS., 1; Stanford, Ogden City, MS., 1-16; Id., Brief Hist. Sketch of Weber Co., MS., 1-23; Id., Hist. Deseret University, MS., passim; Dotson's Doings, MS., 1-21 Dalton's Autobiog., MS., 4; Ebey's Journal, MS., i. 1771 Clark's Sights, MS., pt 4, 7-9, 11-12; Cradlebaugh's Nev. Biog., MS., 4; Chambers' Hist. Ft Bridger, MS., 2; Bar-foot, Brief Hist. of Des. Museum, MS., passim; Utah Sketches, MS., 27, 47-100; Utah Early Records, MS., 5, 12, 17, 20, 24-9; Description of Huntsville, MS., 6; Jones, Albert, in Utah Co.. Sketches, MS., 1-170; Anderson, R. R., Letter on Salt Lake City Street-Railroad, MS., passim; Statistical Report of the Stakes of Zion, MS., passim; Huffaker, Early Cattle-Trade, MS., 1-4; Rept of Stakes, etc., 1880, MS., passim; Utah Merchants and Mines, MS., passim; Cannon, Geo. Q., Sunday-schools in Utah, MS., passim; Id., Life of Nephi, passim; Snow, Eliza R., Incidents in My Life, MS., passim; Deseret Telegraph Co., MS., passim; Dorr's Statement, MS., 3; Millennial Star, ii. 1-5, v. 195; ld., viii. 176; Id., xii. 159-60; Id., xvi. 109; Id., xviii. 315, 3191 Id., xix. 8-9; Id., xxv. 743, 760, 792, 8191 Id., xxix. 70-3; Id., xxxi. 518-19; Id., xxxii. 120, 400, 467, 624, 668; Id., xxxiii. 529-35, 550-1, 643-4; Id., xxxiv. 6-7, 68, 70, 177-80, 296-8, 334-5; Id., xxxv. 68-70, 72-4, 99-100, 104-6, 122, 135-8, 148-9, 191, 527, 580-3, 587-8, 671; Id., xxxvi. 11-12, 88-90, 93-5, 252-5, 263, 273-5, 424-6, 741-2; Id., xxxvii. 204-5, 282-5, 510-11, 532-3, 545-54, 576, 788-91; Id., xxxviii. 366; Id., xxxix. 127; Id., xli. 196-8, 666, 698, 811; Times and Seasons, i. 32, 96, 120-3, 139-40, 168, 179, 469; Id., ii. 467; Id. iii. 585, 710: Id., iv. 162-3, 288, 369-61; Id., v. 398-9; Id., vi. 850, 914-15, 989; Id., vii. 63; Pratt, P. P., Antobiog., 334-5, 374, 376, 387-93, 498-502; Id., Voice of Warning, passim; Id., in [p. 779] Times and Seasons, i. 64, 111; iv. 162-3; Id., Key to the Science of Theology, passim; Provo City, Rev. Ordinances, iii.-v. 1-145; Powell's Lands of the Arid Reticle, passim; Pacific R. R. Report, ii. 77-88; Murphy's Mineral Re-sour., 1-7; Niles' Register, lxxv. 383; Zabriskie's Land Laws, sup. 19, 43, 57, 86; Warren's Mem., in Pac. R. R. Rept, xi. 911 Burton's City of the Saints, 5, 15-17, 171-2, 187-8, 200-87, passim; 300-54, 426, 433, 509-50, 600-24; Browne's Min. Resources, 130-1, 240, 256, 482-6; Greeley, Horace, Overland Journey, 191-257; Gunnison, The Mormons, 26, 80-1, 84-160; Simpson, Explorations, 44-55; Id., Shortest Route to Cal., 30-3; Schott, Distribution and Variation, etc., 82-31 Id., Precipitation, etc., 62-73, 116; Smith, Rise, Progress, etc., 23-6, 27, 33-4, 36-7, 59-62, 65; Stenhouse, Mrs, Expose of Polyg., 132-45, 181, 198-205; Id., Englishwoman in Utah, 107-8, 122, 209-23, 368-73; Id., Tell It All, 59, 186-8, 231-2, 260-70, 272, 291-4, 338-9, 337-9, 552-3, 554-5, 577, 608-9; Stenhouse, T. B. H., Rocky Mtn Saints, 567-80, 613-15, 622-68, 671-88, 691-6, 698, 701-6, 741-01 Green, Mormonism, 465, 468, 470; Todd, Sunset Land, 178, 184-2, 184-51 Townsend's Mormon Trials, 16-27, 29-30, 46-9; Tucker, Mormonism, 156-8, 246-7, 250-9, 299-302; Tullidge, Women of Mormonism, 265, 278-82, 498-9, 501-15; Id., Hist. S. L. City, 247, 249-59; Id., Life of Brig. Young, 99, 203-4, 207-8, 359-82, 406-34, 436-40, 442-4, 448-9, 456-8; Supplement, 37, 66-8; Id., Quart. Magazine, i. 1-6, 14-86, 96-110, 111-17, 177-90, 201-28, 244-50, 353-432, 475-84, 496-501, 522-3, 529-75, 534-5, 537, 539-43, 548-52, 558-91, 654, 664-72, 678-84; Id., 1882, 1-8, 21-32, 34-8, 42-52, 62-7, 79-85, 91-2, 122-34, 157-232, 243-6, 260-2, 265-84, 390-413, 426-54; Id., 1883, 3-25, 34-7, 49-60, 450-80, 493-6, 506-8, 577-600, 662-4, 675-6; Id., 1884, 113, 137-70, 176-7, 225-86, 294-7; Utah, Resources and Attractions, 9-38, 43-69; McCabe, Our Country, 1106-16; Prime, Around the World, 30-1; Joureaux, L'Ame-rique, 228-30, 234-42; Ward, Husband in Utah, 163-8, 261-8; Id., Male Life among the Mormons, passim; Rae, Westward by Rail, 108-92; Dall, My First Holiday, 84, 88-91, 97-103, 105-9; Scribner's Magazine, 1880, 613-16; Chandess, Visit to Salt Lake, 345; Paddock, Fate of Madam La Tour, 286-92, 294-300, 308-30, 336-411 Quigley' s Irish Race, 545-6; Waite, Mrs, The Mormon Prophet, 31-5, 132-52, 177, 276-7, 279-80; Nordoff, Northern Cal., 38-43; Nelson, Pictorial Guide-Book, 14-25; National Almanac, 1863, 531; Nat. Quart. Rev., ix., 2d Ser., July 1879, 80-94; Nicholson, The Preceptor, passim; The Mining Industry, ii. 22; The Mines, Miners, etc., 365, 489, 507, 512-13, 569, 571, 574-5, 591, 597-682, 788-9, 959, 962-6, 984-95; New Mexico, Pointers on S. W., 54-5; New Mexican Mining World, Dec. 1882, 83; Id., Nov. 1884, 136; Mackay, The Mormons, 48-51, 189, 237, 286, 292-8, 307; McClure, Three Thousand Miles, etc., 144, 146, 155, 165-6, 186, 446; Marshall, Through America, 150, 160, 163-82, 191, 195-7, 206-12, 219, 227-8, 231-4, 237, 394-6, 409-24; Utah, Mercantile and Manuf. Estab. of Z. C. M. I., 3-13; Miller, First Families, etc., 63; Wentworth, Great West, 269-76; Mormon, Politics and Policy, passim; Mormons at Home, 215-161 Lyon, Harp of Zion, 23-7, 29-30, 31-3, 39-40, 44-9, 67-8, 70-81, 84-7, 93-4, 116-17, 135-42, 156; Ludlow, Heart of the Continent, 302-3, 307-8, 315-22, 322-5, 328-32, 333-7, 341-3, 365-73; Linforth, Route from Liverpool, 69-75, 78, 97, 90-101, 103-4, 110-15; Life among the Mormons, 88-103, 179-80; Leslie, Overland Trip to Cal., 74-5, 78, 91-5, 103; Little, Jacob Hamblin, 36; Young, Ann Eliza, Wife No. 19, 266-7, 349-51, 371-2, 378-82, 446-52, 522-4, 532-6, 603; Kelly, Excursion to Cal., ii. 231; Kneeland, Wonders of Yosemite, 19-21; Lydia Knight's History, passim; Kirchhoff, Reisebilder, i., passim; Jaques, John, Catechism for Children, passim; Goddard, George, in Juvenile Instructor, xv. 89; Olshausen, Mormonen, 149-51, 154-8, 163, 166-70; Worthington, Women in Battle, 587-8, 594-5; Wolfe, Mercantile Guide, 185-200, 202-57, 327-411 Williams, Pac. Tourist, 116-72, 295; Wells, Fargo, and Co., Statement, 1883, passim; Western Monthly, i. 290-3; Ward, Artemus, Chas F. Brown, Lectures, 20-40; Utah Miscel. Pamphlets, no. v., vi., vii., viii., ix., passim. Mormon Pamphlets, as follows: Circular from the Twelve Apostles, no. 3, passim; Epistle of the Twelve Apostles and Counsellors, [p. 780] no. 4, passim; Hughes, Elizabeth, Voice from the West, etc., no. 7, passim; Musser, Fruits of Mormonism, no. 8, 3-11, 32-5; Young, History of the Seventies, no. 10, passim; Circular of the First Presideuey, no. 12, 5-9; Utah, Pamphlets, Political, no. 3; Fitch, Thos, Speech, passim; Id., no. 5, Speech of A. H. Cragin, in U. S. Senate, 1870; Id., no. 6, Correspondence Relating to Expenses of U. S. Dis. Courts, passim; Id., no. 7, Fitch, Course of Judge McKean, 3-15; Id., no. 8, Constitution of State of Deseret, passim; Id., no. 9, Hooper, W. H., Vindication of the People of Utah, passim; Id., no. 10, Clagett, W. H., Speech against Admission of Utah as a State, passim; Id., no. 12, Bates, Geo. C., Argument on Jurisdiction of Probate Courts, passim; Id., no. 13, Opinion of U. S. Justice Bradley, etc., passim; Id., Paine, H. E., Argument in Case of Contested Election, passim; Id., no. 14, Woman Suffrage, Act Relating to, 8; Id., U. S. Marshals and Deputies, Duties of, 11-14; Id., no. 16, Int. Rev. Tax and Z. C. M. I.; Id., Religious, no. 3, Read, L. H., Character of Brig. Young, 19; Id., 9, Z. C. M. I., Constitution and By-laws, passim; Id., no. 10, Articles of Incorporation, passim; Id., no. 11, Legislation Concerning Railroads, 1-40; Vetromile, A Tour, etc., 72-5; Busch, Mormonen, 64-71; Id., Gesch. Mormon., 299, 314, 327-32, 334-9; Appleton, Guide, 357; Id., Illus. Hand-Book, 1861, 1867, passim; Id., Journal, 1874, passim; Atlantic Mouthly, iii. 571, 583-4; Annals of University of Deseret, 1884-5, passim; Bowles, Across the Continent, 100-102; Id., Our New West, 202-3, 206-70; Id. Pac. Railroad, 49-5; Bonwick, Mormons and Silver Mines, 1-219, 283-97, 339-41, 357-62; Boadicea, The Mormon Wife, passim; Bertrand, Mem. Mormon., 70-1, 76-7, 81-2, 84-90, 219-20, 261-2; Beadle, Life in Utah, 59, 196-200, 222-50, 281-8, 435-70, 508-16, 532-8; Id., Undeveloped West, 108-690, passim; Id., Western Wilds, 53-5; Utah Pioneers, 33d Anniv., 1-40; Utah Review, Feb. 1882, 243; Crocheron, Augusta J., Women of Deseret, 1-9; Brown, J. .E., Speech in U. S. Senate, 1884, passim; Annuals University of Deseret, 1882-3, 1883-4, 1884-5, passim; Bennett's Hist. of the Saints, passim; Clemens, S. C. (Mark Twain), Roughing It, 120-6; Culmer, in S. L. Grocer, ii., no. 2, 1, 3; Daly's Address, in Amer. Geog. Soc. Repts, 1873, 15; Dixon's White Conquest, i. 198-200, 206-14; Del Mar's Hist. Prec. Metals, 168; Elliott & Co., Hist. Arizona, 1, 87, 151-2, 206, 282-4, 289; Faithful's Three Visits to Amer., 159 et seq.; Goodrich's Mormon Kingdom, 6-12; Green's Mormonism, etc., passim; Stillman, J. W., Speech at Boston, 1882, passim; Harris, L., Faith of the Zunis, in Spencer's Labors in the Vineyard, 614; Internat. Review, Feb. 1882, 181; Kimball, A. A., Finding a Father, in Do's Gems for Young Folks, 1-18; Lee, John D., Mormonism, etc., 276, 294, 318; McClellan's Golden State, 586-7, 592; Merewether's By Sea and by Land, 264-71; Musser, A. M., Defence of Our People, passim; Nelson's Pict. Guide-Book, passim; Head, Frank H., in Overland Monthly, v. 277; Oakland Mouthly Review, i. 16-22; Pratt, Orson, and Newman, J. P., Public Discussion, 1877, passim; Player-Frowd, Six Months in California, 36-7; Proceedings First Natl Conv. Cattlemen, 12-13; Preble's Hist. Steam Navigation, 244; Pilling's Bib. of N. Amer. Languages, nos. 84, 217, 266, 267, 508, 509, 527, 528, 840, 1391, 1924, 1955, 2212, 2216, 2645, 2859, 3079, 3084, 3085, 3088, 3575, 3608, 3609, 3610, 4272; Pop. Science Monthly, lii. 486-90; Id., lvi. 156-62, 171; Porter's Ceusus of the West, 1880, 437-46; Ross' From Wis. to Cal., 29-32, 37-44, 48; Gary, The Roaming Badger, in Id., 91-5, 117-23; Sturgis' The Ute War of 1879, 7-8; Smyth, John H., Law of Homestead and Exemptions, 467; Spencer, Orson, Letters, etc., passim; Stay-ner's Farmers' and Miners' Manual, 1-20; Colfax's Mormon Question, passim; Young, Brig., Death, etc., 2-9, 12-35; Woodruff's Leaves from My Journal, passim; Wells' Woman's Exponent, Sept. 1, 1884, 53; Id., 15th, 63-4, 90-102, 117-28, 164-81, 333, 470-606; Barclay, Mormonism Exposed, 13, 15-16, 20, 25-6; Id., New View of Morm., 25-6; Hyde, Mormonism, 115-35, 137-8, 185-6; Hubner, Round the World, 72-125; Hollister, Resources of Utah, passim; Hickman's Destroying Angel, 48, 112-17; Hittell, Wash. Scrap-Book, 75-6; Head, in Overland Monthly, v. 270-9; Hayes, Scraps, Emigrant Notes, 653; Id., Los Angeles, ii. 186-7, viii. 416, xvii. 45, xviii. 13-16; Id., Mining, [p. 781] i. 19, 61-3, xi., passim; Id., Railroads, ii. 7, 17-19, 25, iv. 16-17, 53; Id., San Bernardino, i. 47-9; Id., San Diego, i. 202, 213, 215, ii. 171-93; Riggs, in Bienn. Rept Terrtl Supt Educ., 1874-5, 43-60; Bienn. Repts Terrtl Supt Schools, 1874-5, 1878-9, 1880-1, 1882-3, passim; Brigham Young Academy, Circular, 1880, passim; Hayden, Great West, 86, 316-19, 325-8; Duffus-Hardy, Lady, Through Cities and Prairie, 97-100, 108-9, 113-15, 117-19; Harper's Magazine, Oct. 1876, 642-4, 650-1; Id., Oct. 1883, 705; Id., Aug. 1884, 388; Jackson, Helen, Bits of Travel, etc., 17-22; Boyer, From Orient to Occident, 58-63; Barnes, From Atlantic to Pacific, 54-60; Prieto, Viage, etc., i. 551-3; Hall, Great West, 19-93; Greenwood, Grace, New Life, etc., 137-8, 140-4; Sala, America Revisited, 274-317; Simonin, in Revue des Deux Mondes, Nov. 1875, 305; Seward, Wm II., Travels, etc., 16-25; Smith, Joseph, Doctrine and Covenants, passim; Smith, Mystery and Crime, etc., passim; Snow, Eliza R., Hymns and Songs, passim; Id., Recitations, etc., i., passim; Id., Biog. of Lorenzo Snow, 167-8, 449-53; Id., Poems, i., ii., passim; Utah, Scraps, 1-5, 11-14, 24; Rept Ontario Silv. Ming Co., passim; Univ. Deseret, Annual, 1884-5, passim; Id., Circulars, 1868-71, 1874-5, 1878-9, 1880-2, passim; Smucker, Hist. of Mormons, 1, 83-4, 131, 174-5, 263-6, 273, 321-3, 349, 355, 433-5; Sacred Hymns, etc., passim; Sandette, My Queen, passim; Taylor, Summer Savory, 17-30; Culmer, Tourist's Guide-Book, passim; Garden of the World, 274; Goddard, Where to Emigrate, 148, 152-5; Codman, Round Trip, 173-4, 176, 182-255 et seq.; Cole, California, 16-9; Curtis, Dottings, 18-28; Coyner's Letters, etc., i.-v., passim; Id., Hand-Book of Mormonism, passim; Campbell, Circular Notes, i. 61-3; Cornaby, Autobiog. and Poems, passim; Camp, Year-Book, 1869, 502-4; Cradlebaugh, Mormonism, passim; Crofutt, Overland Tourist, 55, 65, 114-51; Froiseth, Women of Mormondom, 315-16, 327, 372-9, 382, 384-9, 392-3, 390, 398, 412-16; Ferris, Utah and the Mormons, 34-7, 39-40, 45-6, 75, 117, 204, 264-84, 289-302; Tanner, Mary J., Fugitive Poems, passim; Fabian, Utah, 4-15; Emerald Hill Ming Co., By-laws, passim; Dilke, Greater Britain, i. 122-7, 131-2, 142; Deseret Sunday-school Music-Book, passim; Deseret Agric. and Manufac. Soc., List of Premiums, 1878, passim; Dickeson, Amer. Numismatic Manual, 225; De Rupert, California and Morm., 123-46; Hand-Book to Salt Lake Museum, passim; Mormon Metropolis, 7-16; Horn Silver Ming Co. Rept, 1884, passim; University of Deseret, Catalogue, 1850, passim; Cummings, B. F., in Utah Pion 33d Anniversary, 30-4; Robinson, Sinners and Saints, 71-3, 110-30, 137, 139-43, 177, 183-4, 186-7, 189-90, 193-5, 234, 239, 243-5, 249-59; Richardson, Beyond the Mississippi, 347, 351, 358-9, 364; Rusling, Across America, 163-6; Richards, Willard, with Taylor's Govt of God, no. 26, passim; U. P. R. R. R., Rept of Sam. B. Reed, passim; Remy, Journey to G. S. Lake City, i. 53-4, 176, 189-90, 268-75, 450, 453-70; Id., ii. 177-94, 239, 264-8, 283-4, 323-4, 336, 343-4, 360-4; Raymond, Min. Resources, passim; Id., Statistics of Mines, 1873, 242-64; Sloan, Gazetteer of Utah, 1874, 1884, passim; Salt Lake Contributor, i., passim; Id., ii. 13-16, 27-32, 48-86, 92, 94, 110, 115-16, 142, 159, 179-80, 209-10, 222, 239-46, 270-3, 287, 302, 333, 350, 367-9; Id., iii. 61-3; Id., iv. 181-3, 276-8, 320, 352-3, 383-8; Juvenile Instructor, 1869, et seq.; California Ann. Mng Review, 154; Cal. and Nev. R. R. Prospectus, 9; Cal. State Register, 1857, 116; Coast Review, 1872-9, passim; Mining Review, 1876, 25; Fisher, Advertiser's Guide, 100-1; Id., Amer. Statis. Annual, 1854, 101, 103, 114; Directory Salt Lake City, 1869, passim; Id., Utah, 1879-80, passim; Graham, Utah Directory, passim; Directory Pac. Coast, 1871-3, 38-42, 149-53, 413-29; Histor. Magazine, iii. 85; Price, Two Americas, 259-63; Patterson, Who Wrote the Book of Mormon? Pettengill, Newspaper Directory, 185-6. From hundreds of newspapers, I select the following: S. L. City, Deseret News, 1869-81; Tribune, 1871-84; both too voluminous to be quoted in detail; Herald, 1877, Mar. 24, May 12, June 13, 16, Sept. 12, 29, Oct. 31, Nov. 3, 7, 17, 21, Dec. 12, 22; 1878, Jan. 9, 16, 30, Mar. 20, 23, 30, Apr. 13, 17, Sept. 10, 13, 14, 26, Oct. 3, Nov. 22, Dec. 8, 15, 22, 29; 1879, Jan. 1, Apr. 1, 3, 6, May 2, 24, 29, June 21, July 18, 19, Aug. 9, Sept. 2, 6, 7, 21, 24, 25, 26, Oct. 14, 17, 18, 22, Nov. 9, 12, 26, Dec. 6, 16, [p. 782] 19, 28; 1880, Jan. 1, 3, 10, 17, 28, Feb. 4, 12, June 17, July 19, Aug. 12, 19, 22, 26, Sept. 16; 188l, Mar. 17, 24, 31, June 2, 23, 30, July 23, Oct. 6, Nov. 17; 1882, Jam 12; Daily Independent, 1878, Feb. 22; Daily Telegraph, 1869, Jan. 21, Mar. 22, May 16, 18, 29, July 8, 20, 25, Nov. 30, Dec. 19; 1870, Mar. 23, Apr. 14; 1878, Jan. 1; Western Mining Gazette, 1889, Aug. 23, Sept. 1, 8, 15 20, Oct. 6, 20, 27, Nov. 10, 20, Dec. 23; Daily Mail, 1876, Jan. 6, 15, 23; Anti-Polygamy Standard, June 1, 1880; Grocer, 1882, June 1, 3; Utah Review, 1871, May 9, 10, Aug. 1, Sept. 2, 4, 5, 13, 16, 18, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, Oct. 27; 1872, Jan. 4, 11, 30, Feb. 10, 13; Corinne, Utah, Reporter, July 17, 1869; Ogden Freeman, 1879, Feb. 21, 28; Junction, 1879, Aug. 27, Sept. 30; Silver Reef Miner, 1879, May 14, June 1, 4, 14, 25, July 9, 19, 30, Aug. 13, Dec. 27; 1880, Jan. 10, 17, Feb. 14, 28; 1881, June 8, Oct. 15, 23, Dec. 31; 1882, Jan. 21, Mar. 15; San Francisco, Alta, 1869-85; Bulletin, 1869-85; Call, 1869-85; all too volumiuous to quote in detail; Chronicle, 1869, Jan. 23, 30; 1872, Aug. 25, Sept. 29; 1873, Oct. 6; 1878, July 17; 1880, July 24, Oct. 14, Nov. 6, 14, 28; 1881, Sept. 4; 1882, Jan. 1, 17, Feb. 25, Aug. 22; 1883, Apr. 25, Aug. 28; 1884, Jan. 16, 27, Feb. 21, June 2, Nov. 23; 1835, Jan. 13, 20, 31, Feb. 3, 15, Mar. 5, 24, Apr. 21, 30, May 3, 10, 23; Examiner, 1869, Jan. 30, June 11, Oct. 24, 30, Nov. 1, 4, 18; 1871, Feb. 1, 17, 21, Mar. 2; 1872, Jan. 27, Mar. 4, 7; 1874, Nov. 13, Dec. 19; 1877, Nov. 30; 1879, Mar. 6, May 7; Daily Herald, 1869, Jan. 23, Feb. 5, 11, 21, May 5, 9, 13, 19, June 20, Aug. 17; Golden Era, 1869, July 17, 24; 1871, Oct. 8; 1872, Mar. 31, Sept. 22; 1874, Sept. 27; 1878, Jan. 12; 1879, Dec. 27; 1880, May 15; Monitor, 1869, Mar. 27; News Letter, 1869, May 15; 1870, Dec. 17; 1874, June 27; Abend Post, 1869, Feb. 19, June 10; 1870, Jan. 12; 1872, May 25, June 8, Dec. 24; 1873, Jan. 15, Apr. 23, Aug. 9, Sept. 8, 16, 26, Oct. 2, 7, 17, 21, Nov. 11, Dec. 29; 1874, Jan. 29, Apr. 4, June 3, Sept. 22; 1873, Jan. 22, Mar. 18. Apr. 12, May 28, June 10; 1876, Mar. 9, Apr. 6, Dec. 13; 1877, Feb. 21, 1878, Feb. 18, Nov. 13, 30; 1879, Mar. 18, Dec. 22; Occident, 1876, Apr. 29; Stock Report, 1874, Aug. 4; 1875, Apr. 26; 1876, Sept. 17; 1879, Jan. 17, Aug. 9, Nov. 13, 27; 1880, Jan. 1, Feb. 5, June 8, July 21; 1881, Feb. 10; Times, 1869, Jan. 1, 8, 12, 15, 26, Feb. 11, 19, Mar. 2, 6, 10, 11, 17, 23, 30, Apr. 21, May 8, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 29, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, June 9, July 6, 9, 28, 30, Aug. 19, 17, 19, 24, Sept. 6, 17, 23, Oct. 9, 15; Courier de San Francisco, 1869, Dec. 15; 1870, June 11; 1871, Mar. 4; Journal of Commerce, 1876, Nov. 8; Pacific, 1873, Mar. 13, Apr. 3; Pacific Rural Press, 1879, May 3; Directory, 1873, 36-7; Scientific and Mining Press, 1870, Jan. 15, Sept. 3, Nov. 26; 1871, Oct. 8, 28; 1872, Feb. 3, Mar. 9, 30, Apr. 13, Oct. 19; 1873, Jan. 18, Feb. 15, 22, Mar. 1, 8, Apr. 5, May 31, July 17, Aug. 9, Oct. 4, 11; Commercial Herald and Market Review, 1871, Mar. 24, Aug. 11;1874, June 18; 1877, Sept 6; Pacific Baptist, 1875, May 6, 13, 20, Nov. 11; Pacific Churchman, 1870, Aug. 25; Christian Union, Jan. 14, 1875; Pac. Advertiser, Dec. 21, 1872; Pioneer, 1872, Aug. 15, Nov. 21, Dec. 5; Post, 1872, Apr. 11, 12, May 8, July 3; 1873, Apr. 9, Aug. 7, 16, Sept. 25, Oct. 9; 1875, Jan. 22, Mar. 11, Apr. 13, 24; 1876, Jan. 11, Apr. 1, May 3, July 13, 177; Apr. 4, May 3, 4, Aug. 30, Sept. 1, 17, 29; 1878, Apr. 4; 1879, May 17, Nov. 24, Dec. 30; 1884, Mar. 27; Stock Exchange, Apr. 10, Sept. 6, 1877; Vanity Fair, Nov. 12, 1881; Visitor, May 21, 1873; Cal. Christ. Advocate, 1869, Nov. 11; 1870, Apr. 28, Aug. 4; 1871, Jan. 19; 1872, Aug. 15; 1874, Aug. 27, Sept. 3; Sacramento Union, 1869-85, too voluminous to be quoted in detail; Sacramento Bee, 1869, May 24, 25; 1878, Nov. 2; 1879, Dec. 6; 1880, Feb. 28; San Rafael Wy Herald, 1877, Jan. 11; Sonora Union Democrat, Nov. 15, 1879; San Mercury, Nov. 23, 1871; Id., Pioneer, Mar. 3, 1877; Dec. 11, 1879, Jan. 1, 1880; Id., Herald, 1877, Apr. 12, 13, 16, May 8, Aug. 29, 30; Castroville Argus, Mar. 27, 1869; Independence Inyo Independent, Nov. 2, 1878; Mariposa Gazette, Apr. 3, 1875, Sept. 8, 1877, Oct. 12, 1878, Jan. 23, 1879; Vallejo Daily Chronicle, May 14, 29, 1880; Truckee Republican, May 11, 1872; Bakersfield Californian, Nov. 25, 1880; Chico Butte Record, Sept. 4, 1875; Crescent City Courier, 1879, Feb. 19, Dec. 17; Dutch Flat Forum, Sept. 6, 1877; Gilroy Advocate, May 12, 1877, Nov. 2, 1878; Healdsburg Enterprise, [p. 783] Feb. 9, Sept. 6, 1867; Id., Russian River Flag, Sept. 13, 1877; Lakeport Lake Democrat, 1877, Sept. 6, 22; Los Angeles Wy Star, Sept. 8, 1877; Id., Wy Express, 1877, May 26, Sept. 1; Id., Evening Express, 1879 Sept. 18; 1884, Jan. 2, Mar. 31, Apr. 5; Marin Co Journal Aug. 21, 1879; Marysville Dy Appeal, Sept. 6, 1879; Monterey Democrat, Sept. 1, 1877; Napa Register, 1877, Sept. 1, 8, 29; 1878, Feb. 9; Oakland Tribune, Jan. 9, 1877; Petaluma Argus, July 27, 1877; Id., Courier, Sept. 6, 1877; Red Bluff Sentinel, Sept. 8, 1877, Jan. 26, 1878; San Buenaventura Free Press, Sept. 8, 1877, Jan. 19, 1878, June 28, 1879; San Diego News, 1877, Apr. 17, May 7, Aug. 20, 30, Sept. 6, 11; Id., Union, Dec. 25, 1873, May 31, 1877; Santa Cruz Courier, Sept. 7, 1877; ld., Sentinel, Sept. 8, 1877; Santa Rosa Wy Times, Sept. 6, 1877; Sonoma Democrat, June 29, 1878, July 19, 1879; Stockton Independent, 1877, May 12, June 16, July 14, Aug. 4, Sept. 1, Nov. 24, 1878, June 29; 1879, Apr. 2, Aug. 8, Nov. 18, Dec. 6; 1881, Sept. 30, Oct. 3, Nov. 1; 1883, Jan. 1; Suisun Republican, Sept. 6, 1877, Sept. 4, 1879; Ukiah Democrat, 1877, Sept. 8, 29; Yuba Wy Banner, Nov. 2, 1878; Anaheim Gazette, 1877, May 12, June 2, Sept. 8, 15; Antioch Ledger, 1874, Nov. 14; 1877, May 12, 26, Sept. 1; Jackson Amador Ledger, 1877, Sept. 8, 22; Roseburg Plaindealer, 1877, May 26, Oct. 6; 1879, Aug. 16; Yuma Sentinel, Sept. 8, 22, 1877, July 26, 1879; Quincy Plumes National, July 16, 1870; Austin, Nev., Reese Riv. Reveille, Sept. 13, 1872, Aug. 9, 1879; Lyon Co. Times, Sept. 4, 1877; Carson Valley News, May 30, 1879; Carson Appeal, 1873, Feb. 9, Mar. 21, Apr. 20; 1874, June 3; 1875, Mar. 18, July 27; 1880, Apr. 1; Belmont Courier, Nov. 11, 1876; Carson State Register, 1871, Mar. 4, 11, Oct. 27, Nov. 12, 23; 1872, Feb. 6, Apr. 16, Oct. 11, Nov. 8; Id., City Tribune, Sept. 26, 1879; Cherry Creek White Pine News, Mar. 19, 1881; Como Sentinel, July 9, 1864; Dayton Lyon County Sentinel, July 16, 1864; Elko Independent, 1869, Aug. 18, Sept. 22, Oct. 6, 13, Nov. 10; 1870, Jan. 26, May 4, June 4, 25; 1871, July 15, Sept. 9, 30, Nov. 11, Dec. 23; 1872, Mar. 2, Aug. 10, Dec. 28; 1873, Jan. 18, June 22; 1879, Jan. 31, Aug. 17; Eureka Daily Leader, 1880, June 28; Id., Sentinel, 1871, June 13, 27, Oct. 31; 1872, Mar. 17; 1875, Jan. 23; 1878, Nov. 9; 1879, Jan. 30; 1882, Feb. 11, Mar. 7, July 14; Gold Hill News, 1869, June 5; 1871, May 8; 1874, Jan. 30; 1875, Feb. 24, Mar. 14; 1876, Apr. 10; 1877, Apr. 7, 16, May 17, June 1, 8, July 17, Aug. 29, 30, Sept. 1, 19, 27; 1878, Mar. 15, Apr. 22, July 31; 1881, June 24, July 19, Oct. 23; Pioche Journal, July 29, 1875; Id., Daily Record, 1873, Feb. 18, 25; Reno Gazette, 1877, May 5, Sept. 15, 22; 1878, Jan. 4, Nov. 14; 1880, Dec. 6; 1881, Nov. 12; 1882, Jan. 24, Mar. 30, Apr. 13, Aug. 5, 26; 1883, Jan. 24, 31, Apr. 17; ld., State Journal, 1876, Dec. 23; 1877, Sept. 22; 1879, June 18; 1880, Aug. 3, 20; Ruby Hill Mining News, Sept. 19, 1881; Tuscarora Times-Review, 1879, Feb. 1, 2, 3, 4, 23, May 10, June 17, Aug. 29; Unionville Silver State, Dec. 23, 1871; Virginia City Event Chronicle, 1877, May 4, 15, Aug. 30, Sept. 3, 8, 10; Territorial Enterprise, Nov. 25, 1869; Winnemucca Silver State, Apr. 3, 1876, Mar. 1879, Aug. 1882; 1878, Nov. 16; 1879, July 11, Aug. 29; Boise, Id., Republican, Sept. 20, 1884; Id., Statesman, 1870, June 25, Sept. 24; 1872, Jan. 6, June 1; 1873, Jan. 4, Feb. 1, 15, July 12; 1874, July 11; 1876, Mar. 18; 1879, Mar. 4, Aug. 16, Nov. 29; Bonanza City Yankee Fork Herald, Sept. 25, 1879; Oxford Idaho Enterprise, 1879, Sept. 11, 18, Oct. 16, 30; Silver City Avalanche, 1870, Sept. 17; 1872, May 4; 1873, Dec. 6; 1875, Mar. 2; 1876, Feb. 22, 26; 1877, Sept. 8, 15; Omaha, Neb., New West, Dec. 1879; Prescott, Ariz., Miner, 1872, May 4; 1873, Jan. 18, 25, Mar. 8, May 17; 1875, June 4, Aug. 27; 1876, Dec. 22; 1877, Jan. 26, May 18, June 15, Aug. 31, Sept. 14, Oct. 26; 1878, Dec. 13; 1879, May 9; Tucson Fronterizo, Jan. 27, 1882; Calveston, Tex., Daily News, Dec. 1, 1884; Id., Herald, in Watsonville Pajaronian, Apr. 4, 1878; Walla Walla Statesman, May 24, 1879; Port Townsend Democ. Press, Sept. 4, Oct. 3, 1879; Seattle Intelligencer, Nov. 15, 1869; Puget Sound Wy Courrier, Sept. 7, 1877; Olympia, Wash., Standard, Sept. 8, 1877, Aug. 15, 1879: Id., Transcript, Aug. 15, 1874; Vancouver Register, June 11, 1875; Portland, Or., Deutsche Zeitung, 1871, Sept. 23, Oct. 28; 1872, Aug. 31; 1876, Oct. 21; [p. 784] 1877, Apr. 28, June 2, 23, July 14, Oct. 6; 1879, Mar. 8, Oct. 25, Dec. 13, 20; Id., Wy Standard, 1877, Apr. 27, Sept. 7; Id., Herald, July 10, 1870, Mar. 21, 1872, Oct. 27, 1874, June 29, 1878; Id., Eveng Telegram, 1879, Sept. 8, Dec. 8; Id., Pac. Christ. Advocate, July 24, 1879; Ashland Tidings, Sept. 7, 1877, Nov. 15, 1878; Astoria Astorian, 1880, Apr. 23, Oct. 20; Eugene City, Or., State Journal, Aug. 23, 1879; Jacksonville Democ. Times, 1877, Sept. 7, 28, Oct. 5; Albany States Rights Democ., Sept. 5, 1879; Salem, Or., Statesman, Mar. 13, 1875, May 18, 1877, May 12, 1879; Virginia City, Monta, Madisonian, June 23, 1877; Deer Lodge New Northwest, 1870, Sept. 23; 1873, Feb. 22; Helena Dy Gazette, 1872, Feb. 17, Apr. 30, May 1; 1873, Nov. 25; Id., Herald, 1873, Dec. 11; 1876, Mar. 23, Sept. 14; N. Y. Tribune, in Cala-veras Chronicle, Oct. 6, 1877; N. Y. Herald, 1882, Jan. 30, Feb. 13; Id., in Independence Independent, Aug. 16, 1879; Panama Star and Herald, Nov. 18, 1869, June 7, 1873, Apr. 1, 1875, Nov. 14, 1877; Mexico Diario Oficial, 2d fol., 1880, passim.

    
History of Utah, 1540-1886, by Hubert Howe Bancroft, [1889], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 785]

  

INDEX.

A

Aaronic, priesthood of, <page 341>-2.

Abiquiu, natives with expedt. 1776, <page 9>.

Abrahams, Levi, assault on, <page 691>.

Adams, Barnabas L., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Adams, Ezra, laid out town site, <page 312>; grist-mill of, <page 327>.

Adams, Geo. J., missionary, <page 402>.

Adams, James, regent of university, <page 146>.

Adams, J. M., missionary, <page 402>.

Adoption for eternity, dogma of, <page 361>.

Agricultural and Manufacturing co. incorporated, <page 608>.

Agriculture, community farm, <page 147>; irrigation, <page 579>-80, <page 722>-4; products and yield, <page 720>-2; character of soil, <page 724>; annual fairs, <page 724>-5.

Aguas Calientes. See Currant Creek.

Aitken, murder of, 1857, <page 562>-3.

Alexander, Col, strategic movement of, <page 515>; his retreat, <page 515>-16.

Allen, Elder, tarred and feathered 1833, <page 100>.

Allen, Capt., raises Mormon battl., <page 241>.

Allen, Charles, capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Allen, Ira, settler at Hyrum, <page 598>.

Allen, Rufus, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Allen, W. C., settles in Arizona, <page 693>.

Allred, James, at Sevier River, <page 316>.

Allred, W. M., capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Alpine City founded, <page 318>.

Alta, mining town, <page 699>.

American Fork founded, <page 312>; mill at, <page 337>; incorporated, <page 450>.

American Fork dist, mines of, value, <page 743>.

Amherst, conference at, 1832, <page 90>.

Ancient Bluff Ruins, Mormons at, <page 255>.

Anderson, Capt., acts in fight at Nauvoo, <page 229>; death of, <page 230>.

Anderson, Andrew, miss. to Australia, <page 410>.

Anderson, James P., settler in Beaver co., <page 598>.

Anderson, Kosmos, murder of, <page 569>.

Angel, Truman O., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Anthon, Prof., characters submitted to, 1828, <page 49>; letter from, 1834, <page 49>-50.

Anza, Capt., expeds of, 1774-5, <page 8>.

Apostles, first quorum chosen, 1835, <page 111>; duties, <page 344>-6.

Appleby, Wm J., univ. regent, <page 709>.

Arizona, Mormon settlements, <page 693>-4.

Arkansas, emigrant party at S. L., <page 545>; ill feeling towards, <page 547>; massacre of, 1857, <page 550>-9.

Armstrong, G. W., Ind. agent, <page 478>; promotes canal co., <page 483>.

Arvard, De S., excom., <page 126>-7.

Ashley, Col, acts in Haun's mill tragedy, <page 128>.

Ashley, Wm H., trapping expedt. 1825, <page 21>-2.

Atchison, Maj.-gen., acts against Mormons, <page 122>-3; resigns, <page 130>.

Attwood, Millen, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Auerbach Bros, merchants, persecution of, <page 654>.

Australia, miss. work in, <page 410>.

Authorities quoted, <page 332>, <page 336>, <page 388>-93, <page 436>-8, <page 637>-40, <page 776>-84.

Axtell, S. B., apptd govr, <page 667>.

B

Babbitt, Almon, missionary, <page 402>.

Babbitt, A. W., del. to congress, <page 444>; seat refused, <page 452>; sec. of ter., <page 462>.

Backenstos, J. R., col of legion, <page 147>.

Badger, Rodney, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Baines, John R., biog., <page 700>.

Baker Jesse, presdt of elders, <page 199>.

Baker, Jos., settler at Mendon, <page 597>.

Baldwin, Caleb, trial of, and sentence, <page 131>.

Baldwin, Wheeler, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>.

[p. 786]

Ball, Jos., missionary, <page 402>.

Ballantine Rich., miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Ballinger, Jesse O., settles in Arizona, <page 693>.

Banking, <page 765>-6.

Banks, Jno., presdt of Edinburgh conference, <page 409>.

Bannacks, the, defeat of, 1863, <page 631>; treaty with, <page 634>.

Baptism, ceremony, <page 337>-8.

Barker, John D., sheriff 1848, <page 287>.

Barnes, L., missionary, <page 402>.

Barnett John T., regent of university, <page 146>.

Barney, Lewis, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Barnham, C. D., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Barnum, Henry, house at Peva, <page 595>.

Baron la Houtan, fables of, 1689, <page 18>, <page 19>.

Barrett, Wm, miss. to Australia, <page 410>.

Bartholomew, James, founds Fayette, <page 601>.

Bartleson, J., expedt. of, 1841, <page 29>.

Barton Joseph, biog., <page 700>.

Baskin, R. N., atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Bateman, Wm, at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 551>.

Bates, atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Bates, Marcellus, capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Battle Creek. See Pleasant Grove.

Beadle, J. H., Life in Utah, <page 637>.

Beanfield, shooting of, <page 629>.

Bear Hunter, Chief, killed, <page 631>.

Bear River, course, <page 20>; saltness, <page 30> battle at, 1863, <page 631>-2.

Bear River Bay, surveyed, <page 465>.

Beaumont, Charles, trader, <page 255>.

Beaver City, emigrants at, <page 548>; Lee trial, <page 565>; founding, <page 598>; coty seat, <page 609>; population, 1880, <page 705>.

Beaver coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; settlements, <page 598>-9; sulphur-beds, <page 739>.

Beaver Coty Record, newspaper, <page 716>.

Beaver Enterprise, newspaper, <page 716>.

Beaver River, attraction of, <page 598>.

Beckwith, Lt E. G., in Gunnison party, <page 468>.

Beddle, John, founds Eden, <page 601>.

Beebe, Calvin, of council of twelve, <page 108>.

Belden, Josiah, in Bartleson party 1841, <page 29>; Hist. Statement, <page 29>, <page 30>.

Bellows, John, of Gunnison party, <page 470>.

Belnap, Gilbert, marshal at Ogden 1851, <page 308>.

Bennett, J. C., chancellor of university, <page 146>; Hist. of the Saints, crit. on, <page 149>-53.

Bennett, Samuel, regent of university, <page 146>.

Benson, Alva, settles at Hyrum, <page 598>.

Benson, Ezra Taft, holds service, 1847, <page 263>; messenger to Pratt, <page 268>; pioneer of '47, <page 282>; lays out town site, <page 312>; apostle 1844-69, <page 345>; grant to, <page 451>; of council 1851, <page 458>; promotes water co., <page 483>; settles at Millville, <page 598>; biog., <page 675>-6.

Bent, Samuel, of high council, <page 198>; missionary, <page 402>.

Bernhisel, D., special agent 1850, <page 325>.

Bernhisel, J. M., to draught constitution, <page 440>; del. to congress, <page 484>; university regent, <page 709>.

Berry, John, attacked by Inds, <page 474>.

Berubisel, Dr J. M., committee to govr, <page 174>. [p. 787]

Bidwell, J., in Bartleson party 1841, <page 29>; California, 1841-8, <page 29>-30.

Big Blowout Mine, iron deposits, <page 735>.

Big Canon Creek, woollen-mills on, <page 732>.

Big Elk, Chief, negotiations with, <page 237>.

Bigler, Jacob G., magistrate 1848, <page 287>.

Billings, Alfred N., founds settlement, <page 601>.

Billings, G. P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Billings, Titus, to dispose of church property 1831, <page 88>.

Bingham, mining town, <page 699>.

Birmingham, work at, <page 406>-7.

Bishop, Francis G., missionary, <page 402>.

Bishop, W. W., atty in Lee trial, <page 465>.

Black, Adam, acts towards Mormons, <page 122>.

Black, Geo. A., sec. of ter., <page 661>.

Black Hill, Mormons arrive at, <page 255>.

Black, J. S., settles at Deseret, <page 601>.

Black, priest, miss. to Ireland, <page 410>.

Blair, Seth M., U. S. atty of ter., <page 456>.

Blakslee, Jas, missionary, <page 402>.

Blodgett, Edgar, del. to Wash., <page 447>.

Blood atonement, theory of, <page 340>.

Booth, Ezra, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>; apostatizes, <page 89>. [p. 786]

Boggs, Francis, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Boggs, L. W., hostility to Mormons, <page 100>; treachery of, <page 102>-3; govr of Mo., <page 116>; refuses help to Mormons, <page 123>-4; tactics of, <page 128>-9; attempt to assassinate, <page 156>.

Bolton, Curtis E., miss. to France, <page 411>.

Bordeaux, James, occupying Fort Laramie 1847, <page 255>.

Boreman, Judge, presdt at trials of J. Lee, <page 564>-5.

Botsford, Dan., missionary, <page 402>.

Bountiful, town, <page 700>.

Box Elder coty, organized, <page 450>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 609>.

Box Elder Creek, settlement at, <page 317>.

Boyer, Peter, testimony of, <page 61>.

Boynton, John F., apostle 1835-8, <page 344>-5.

Bracken, Levi, magistrate 1848, <page 287>.

Bradley, G. W., founds Moroni, <page 601>.

Braman, S., missionary, <page 402>.

Brandebury, L. H., chief justice of ter., <page 456>; disputes with, <page 458>-60.

Brandon, G. H., missionary, <page 402>.

Brannan, Sam., letter of, <page 210>; colony of, <page 213>, <page 593>, <page 642>; meets party to Utah, <page 256>.

Brassfield, Newton, murder of, <page 626>-7.

Brewster, Elder, goes to Iowa, <page 642>.

Bridger, James, discovers Great Salt Lake, <page 19>-20; trading post of, <page 258>.

Briggs, E. C., Josephite missionary, <page 645>.

Brigham City, founded, <page 318>; coty seat, <page 618>, <page 702>.

Brigham Young Express Co., <page 501>-2.

Brimhall, Geo., representative 1851, <page 458>.

[p. 787]

British India, miss. work in, <page 410>.

Brocchus, Perry E., associate judge of ter., <page 456>; disputes with, <page 456>-60.

Brockman, Rev., acts in a fight at Nauvoo, <page 228>-31.

"Brooklyn," chartered for Cal., <page 213>.

Brown, Capt., with detachment in valley, 1847, <page 264>.

Brown, Benj., missionary, <page 402>.

Brown, Geo., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Brown, Hiram, excommunicated, <page 167>.

Brown, J., ascent of Twin Peaks 1847, <page 265>.

Brown, James, bishop, <page 290>; purchases Goodyear tract, <page 307>; legislator, <page 458>.

Brown, John, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; cut off from church, <page 300>.

Brown, N. T., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Brown, P., missionary, <page 402>.

Brown, Samuel, acts at election, <page 120>.

Browning, James G., representative 1851, <page 438>.

Buchanan, Presdt, policy of, <page 529>.

Buckmaster, Col, allays fury of citizens, <page 190>.

Buffington, Jos., chief justice of ter., <page 456>.

Bullion production, <page 741>.

Bullock, Isaac, settles at Fort Supply, <page 595>.

Bunch-grass, value of, <page 728>.

Burgess, Harrison, councillor S. L. City 1851, <page 450>.

Burk, John M., signs memorial, <page 134>.

Burnham Jas, missionary to Wales 1840, <page 409>.

Burns, Lt, attacked by Inds, <page 475>.

Burr, David H., surveyor-general, <page 485>.

Burton, Louis, in Wolfskill expedt. 1830, <page 24>.

Burton, Col. R., corps of observation, <page 512>; actions in Morrisite defeat, <page 616>-18; collector internal revenue, <page 619>.

Burton, R. F., works of, <page 587>.

Burton, R. T., built woollen-mills, <page 732>.

Busby, Jos., grant to, <page 483>.

Butler, John L., grant to, <page 609>.

Butterfield, Josiah, presdt of seventies, <page 199>.

Byard, R., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

C

Cache coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; origin of name, <page 596>; coty seat, <page 608>; settlements in, <page 702>.

Cache Valley surveyed, <page 464>.

Cahoon. Reynolds, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>.

Caine, John T., sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>; presents constitution to congress, <page 687>.

Cairns, Jno., miss. to Scotland 1843, <page 409>.

Calder, D. O., sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>; biog., <page 776>.

Caldwell coty, Mormons remove to, <page 117>.

California, emigrations to, <page 210>, <page 213>, <page 297>-304, <page 320>; Mormon settlements in, <page 592>-3, <page 693>; Gladdenites leave for, <page 644>.

California volunteers, arrival of, 1862, <page 611>-12.

Call, Anson, settles at Fillmore, <page 314>; builds fort, <page 601>.

Campbell, murder of, <page 472>.

Campbell, A. G., del. to congress, <page 447>; certificate granted to, <page 688>.

Campbell, Robt L., university regent, <page 709>.

Camp Douglas, U. S. troops at, <page 659>.

Camp Floyd, troops at, <page 537>; sale of supplies, <page 575>-6; Cal. vols at, <page 612>.

Camp Rawlins, U. S. troops at, <page 659>; bad conduct of, <page 660>.

Camp Scott, winter at, <page 520>-1.

Canada, missionary work in, <page 403>-5.

Canals, acts to construct, <page 607>.

[p. 788]

Cannon, Geo. Q., apostle, <page 345>; biog., <page 434>; chosen senator, <page 605>; director Z. C. M. I., <page 652>; arrested, <page 663>; del. to congress, <page 665>; presided at B. Young's funeral, <page 671>-2; on Young's character, <page 673>; elected councillor, <page 680>; certificate of election refused, <page 688>; publishes Juvenile Instructor, <page 715>.

Carbonate mine, <page 745>.

Cardenas, Garcia Lopez de, expedt. of, 1540, <page 1>-5; map of route, <page 5>.

Carey, Wm C., atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Carlin, Gov. T., friendly to Mormons, <page 155>.

Carlin, Thomas, causes trouble at Nauvoo, <page 227>-9.

Carn, Elder, ord. to leave Berlin, <page 411>.

Carrington, Albert, ascends Twin Peaks, <page 265>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; apostle, <page 345>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; assessor, <page 443>; university regent, <page 709>; biog., <page 775>.

Carrying co. established 1849, <page 298>.

Carson, Geo., attacked by Inds, <page 477>.

Carson, Kit, in Fremont's expedt. 1843, <page 33>.

Carson coty defined, <page 591>.

Carson Valley, colony at, <page 505>; settlements in, <page 590>-2; mines of, <page 748>.

Carthage, actions of authorities, <page 170>-1; death of J. Smith at, <page 175>-83; meeting at, <page 211>; trouble at, <page 225>.

Carthage Greys act at death of Smith, <page 178>-81.

Carter, John S., sent on mission 1834, <page 104>.

Carter, Simeon, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>; of council of twelve, <page 108>.

Carter, Wm, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>; turns first furrow at Salt Lake, <page 261>; pioneer '47, <page 272>.

Carter, Wm F., miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Case, James, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Castle Valley, coal deposits in, <page 737>.

Caulfield, of Gunnison party, <page 470>.

Cave mine, <page 745>.

Cedar City, furnace at, <page 317>; ironworks, <page 327>; incorporated, <page 450>; emigrants at, <page 548>; population, <page 706>.

Central Pacific R. R., building of, <page 753>-5.

Centreville, founded, <page 305>-7; mills at, <page 327>.

Chama River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 9>.

Chamberlain, S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Chapman, Jacob K., missionary, <page 402>.

Chariton River, Mormons at, 1846, <page 222>.

Charter for Nauvoo granted 1840, <page 141>.

Chase, Darwin, capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Chessley, A. P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Chipman, Stephen, laid out town site, <page 312>.

Church, H. W., missionary, <page 402>.

Cibola. See Zuni.

Cincinnati, missionaries at, <page 78>, <page 399>.

Circleville, founded, <page 601>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Cisneros, I. P., in expedt 1776-7, <page 9>.

Civil govmt, need of, <page 439>.

Clapp Benj., missionary, <page 402>; councillor, <page 450>.

Clark, Gen., persecution of Mormons, <page 130>-3.

Clark, Isaac, judge of probate 1848, <page 287>.

Clark, W. O., missionary, <page 402>.

Clawson, H. B., biog., <page 653>.

Clay coty, refuge taken in, 1833, <page 102>; treatment, <page 115>.

Clayton, F. R., editor, <page 716>.

Clayton, Wm, clerk to Smith, <page 83>; pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Climate, <page 691>.

Clinton, Jeter, councillor S. L. City 1851, <page 450>.

Cloward, T. P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Cluff, Harvey H., biog., <page 776>.

Coal discovered 1851, <page 317>; Green River basin, <page 322>; Summit coty, <page 594>.

Coal mines of ter., value, <page 736>-8.

Coalville, settlement of, 1859, <page 595>.

Coalville Mines, coal deposits, <page 737>.

Colesville, Joe Smith and others at, 1830, <page 68>.

Colfax, Schuyler, visits Utah, <page 656>.

Colonization, system of, <page 319>-20.

Collett, Sylvanus, murder, Atkins party, <page 562>-3.

Collins, Lyons, teacher at Salt Lake, <page 324>.

Colorado, Mormons in, 1880, <page 693>.

Colorado River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 11>.

Coltrin, Zebedee, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>; on mission, <page 104>; pioneer '47, <page 272>.

Colville, James, accepts the faith and recants 1831, <page 80>.

Commerce, pioneer, <page 602>-3; struggle for control, <page 651>-5; of ter., <page 762>-5.

Commandments, Book of, printed 1832, <page 91>.

Common roadways, <page 751>-2.

Compstock, Capt. N., acts in Haun's mill tragedy, <page 128>.

Conferences, the first, 1830, <page 69>; at Fayette, <page 80>; at Amherst, <page 90>; at Nauvoo, <page 215>.

[p. 789]

Confirmation, ceremony of, <page 338>.

Connor, Col, comd. of Cal. vols, <page 611>; actions toward Mormons, <page 612>-13; defeats Inds, <page 631>-2; discovers silver mine, <page 742>.

Conover, Col, expedt. against Inds, <page 474>.

Consecrated oil, ceremony of anointing, <page 336>-7.

Constitution, commt. appointed to draught, 1849, <page 440>.

Convention at Salt Lake City, <page 440>.

Conyers, Dr, in Quincy deputation, <page 228>.

Cook, Fred, missionary to Wales 1840, <page 409>.

Cook, P. W., promotes water co., <page 483>; founds Goshen, <page 601>.

Cook, Lt-col St George, general order of, <page 243>-4; arrival, <page 519>.

Coon, Jos., missionary, <page 402>,

Cooper, Samuel, testimony of, <page 61>.

Copley, Lemon, conversion of, 1831, <page 83>-4.

Copper, discoveries of, <page 738>-9.

Coray, Howard, sec. of the council, 1851, <page 459>.

Corinne, bank at, <page 765>.

Corn Creek, emigrants at, <page 547>.

Corrill, John, historian, <page 83>; sent to Missouri, <page 84>; in jail, <page 102>.

Cotton, attempt to raise, 1855-9, <page 599>.

Coulson, Geo., col of legion, <page 146>; coty commisr, <page 287>.

Council Bluffs, Mormons at, 1846, <page 222>; Mormon battle raised, <page 241>; named, <page 274>.

Council of twelve, organized 1834, <page 108>.

Counties, boundaries defined, <page 608>.

Court conflicts, <page 486>-8.

Covey, Benj., bishop, <page 290>.

Cowdery, Oliver, conversion 1829, <page 52>; aids in translating plates, <page 57>-9; ordained elder 1830, <page 64>-5; ordered West, <page 69>-70; Work of, <page 77>-9, <page 85>-9; secedes, <page 118>.

Cox, Orville S., bishop 1849, <page 290>.

Cradlebaugh, John, assoc. judge, <page 500>; actions of, <page 539>-40; opposes admission, <page 606>.

Cragun, James, sergt-at-arms, <page 459>.

Craig, James, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Creutzfeldt, F., in Gunnison party, killed, <page 468>-70.

Crickets as Ind. food, <page 262>; plague of, <page 279>-82.

Crismon, Charles, builds grist-mill, <page 279>.

Crismon mine, <page 744>.

Critchellow, Wm, justice of peace at Ogden, <page 308>.

Crosby, J. R., apptd associate judge, <page 604>.

Crosby, Jesse W., missionary, <page 402>.

Crosby, Oscar, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Cullom, anti-polygamy bill, <page 656>-7.

Cumming, Alfred, apptd gov. 1857, <page 500>; at Salt Lake City, <page 526>-7; departure, <page 575>.

Cunningham, Artemas, testimony of, <page 60>.

Currant Creek, expedt. at, 1776, <page 14>.

Currency, issue 1849, <page 290>-2.

Curtis Lyman, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Curtis: Theodore, miss. to Ireland, <page 410>.

Cushing, Hosea, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Cutler, Alpheus, of high council, <page 198>.

D

Daily Telegraph, hist. of, <page 715>.

Dairy products, value of, <page 730>.

Dame, Wm H., at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 552>; indicted for murder, <page 564>.

Dana, Chas R., legislator, <page 458>.

Dana, R., councillor, <page 308>.

Danites, rise of, 1837-8, <page 124>-7; murders imputed to, <page 569>.

Davenport, James, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Davidson, Mrs, testimony of, <page 62>.

Davis, Amos, capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Daviess coty, Mo., Mormon persecutions, <page 122>-4.

Davis coty, boundaries defined, <page 450>; judicial dist, <page 539>, coty seat, <page 608>; settlement in, <page 700>.

Davis, Elisha H., missionary, <page 402>.

Davis, Lysander M., missionary, <page 402>.

Dawson, John W., apptd govr, gallantry of, <page 604>.

Day, Henry R., Ind. sub-agent 1851, <page 478>,

Dean, Henry, missionary, <page 402>.

Decker, C. F., mail service, <page 501>.

Delawares, the Mormons among, 1831, <page 79>, <page 400>.

De Mill, Oliver, founds Shoensburg, <page 601>.

Denmark, miss. work in, <page 411>.

Denny, Presley, atty in Lee trial, <page 566>.

Denver and Rio Grande R. R. in Utah, <page 759>.

Deseret, meaning of, <page 440>.

Deseret alphabet, hist. of, <page 712>-14; characters, <page 713>.

Deseret Evening News, first newspaper, <page 715>.

[p. 790]

Deseret Iron Co. incorporated, <page 483>.

'Deseret News,' published 1850, <page 326>.

Deseret, state organized 1849, <page 440>; fails to receive recognition, <page 452>.

Deseret Telegraph Co., <page 771>.

De Trobriand, Gen., commun. on conduct of troops, <page 660>.

Devil's Gate, army of Utah at, <page 513>.

Dewey, Benj. F., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Diahman, town laid out, <page 117>.

Dillie, David B., councillor, <page 308>; legislator, <page 458>.

Dinwiddie, Thos, director of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Dixon, John, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Dodd, Rev. Cephas, testimony of, <page 62>.

Dodd, E., grave of, <page 422>.

Dolores River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 9>.

Dominguez, Franc A., expedt. of, 1776-7, <page 8>-18.

Donaldson, Wm, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Doniphan, Gen., acts towards Mormons, <page 122>-4, <page 131>.

Dooly, R. M., biog., <page 766>.

Dort, David, of high council, <page 198>.

Dotson, Peter K., U. S. marshal 1857, <page 539>.

Doty, Gov., rule of, 1863-4, <page 621>-2; biog., <page 622>.

Doty, James D., superdt of Ind. affairs, <page 604>.

Douglas, Senator, commis. to Nauvoo, <page 211>-12; speech, <page 492>.

Drake, Thomas I., assoc. judge, <page 605>; indignation of, <page 610>-11.

Driggs, Starling, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Drummond, W. W., assoc. judge, <page 462>; character and actions, <page 490>-2.

Dubois, Robt, testimony of, <page 61>.

Duchesne River, expedt. at, 1777, <page 11>.

Duncan Chapman, founds Duncan's Retreat, <page 601>.

Duncan's Retreat, founded 1861, <page 601>.

Dunklin, Gov. D., Mormons appeal to, 1833, <page 101>; actions of, <page 103>.

Dunyon, John L.. councillor S. L. City, <page 450>.

Durfee, James, sent on mission, <page 104>.

Durfee, Robt, founds Salem, <page 601>.

Durkee, Charles, govr 1865-9, biog., <page 622>; resigns, <page 658>.

Dutton, Simon, arrested, <page 664>.

Dykes, Wm, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

E

Eagle Val., settlements in, <page 592>.

Earl, S. H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Eastman, Ozro, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Easton, settlement at, <page 308>.

Echo Canon, Gen. Wells at, <page 513>.

Eckles, D. R., chief justice, <page 500>, <page 539>.

Eden, founded, <page 601>.

Edmunds law, <page 395>-6, <page 683>.

Edwards, Esaias, grist-mills, <page 315>, <page 327>; saw-mill, <page 596>.

Edwards, F. M., missionary, <page 402>.

Edwards, Wm, arrest of, <page 592>.

Egbert, Joseph, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; biog., <page 700>.

Egan, Howard, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Egan's route, <page 751>.

Eichbaum, Mrs, testimony of, <page 62>.

Elders, duties of, <page 65>.

Elder's Journal, issue of, 1837, <page 115>.

Eldredge, H. S., marshal of immigrant co., <page 282>; brig.-gen. of militia, <page 442>; elected marshal, <page 443>; Ind. expedt., <page 472>-3; director Z. C. M. I., <page 652>.

Eldredge, J. S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Eldridge, H. J., director of Enoch order, <page 361>.

Elkhorn River, rendezvous at, <page 253>, <page 282>; ferry on, <page 274>.

Ellerbeck, Thos W., sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Ellsworth, E., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Emery coty, organized, <page 705>.

Emery, Geo. B., apptd gov., policy of, <page 667>.

Emigration Canon, Mormons encamp at, <page 258>; carbonate of soda found, <page 740>.

Emma mine, production of, <page 742>; swindles connected with, <page 742>-3.

Empey, Wm A., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Endowment, ceremony of, <page 357>-8.

England, miss. to, <page 405>-410; number of proselytes, <page 406>.

Enoch, order of, description and members, <page 359>-61.

Ensign, Datus, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Ensign Peak, named, <page 263>.

Enterprise, founded 1862, <page 596>.

Ephraim City, acct of, <page 706>.

Episcopal church, school of, <page 707>-8.

Escalante, S. V. de, expedt. of, 1776-7, <page 8>-17.

Eureka Hill mine, <page 744>.

Evans, David, legislator, <page 458>.

Evans, Col G. S., defeats Indians, <page 632>.

Evanstown, bituminous coal found, <page 737>.

Evansville. See Lehi.

Evening and Morning Star, started 1831, <page 89>-92.

[p. 791]

Everett, Addison, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; bishop, <page 290>.

Expenses of terr. 1853, <page 482>.

Exports, <page 759>-761.

F

Fackrell, James, settler, <page 307>.

Fairbanks, David, bishop, <page 290>.

Fairbanks, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Fairview, founded, <page 601>; incorporated, <page 706>.

Farmington, founded, <page 318>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Farnham, A., miss. to New Zealand, <page 410>.

Farr, Aaron, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; miss. to Jamaica, <page 410>; biog., <page 755>.

Farr, Lorin, mayor of Ogden, <page 308>; grist-mill, <page 327>; legislator, <page 458>; biog., <page 755>.

Far West, town laid out, <page 117>; celebration at, <page 119>-20; persecutions, <page 132>, <page 138>; Mormons arrested, <page 138>; conference at, <page 196>.

Fauna of ter., <page 323>.

Fayette, conference at, 1831, <page 80>; city founded, <page 601>.

Fell, A. G., biog., <page 755>.

Felt, N. H., alderman, <page 450>; legislator, <page 458>.

Fennemore, James, photographer at Lee's execution, <page 570>.

Fennimore, James, settled in Carson Val., <page 590>.

Ferguson, James, lawyer, <page 489>.

Ferguson, T. H., execution of, <page 540>.

Ferries on Missouri, <page 274>; acts relating to, <page 483>.

Ferris, Benj. G., Utah and the Mormons, <page 329>; sec. of ter., <page 461>.

Festivities at Salt Lake 1849, <page 295>.

Field, Joseph, editor, <page 716>.

Fielding, Joseph, miss. to England 1837, <page 405>.

Fillmore founded, <page 314>; incorporated, <page 450>; capital, <page 462>; immigrants at, <page 547>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Finance, revenue and expenses 1853, <page 482>.

Fish and fisheries of ter., <page 322>; acts regulating, <page 608>.

Fisher, Jos. C., settled at Snake River, <page 693>.

Fitzgerald, Perry, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Flagstaff mine, productions of, <page 742>.

Flake, Green, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Fleming, Josiah W., miss. to New Zealand, <page 410>.

Flenniken, R. P., assoc. judge, <page 604>.

Flood, Maj., in Quincy deputation, <page 228>.

Florence, Mormons at, <page 222>; named, <page 274>.

Fobbs, Henry, murder of, <page 563>.

Food, poverty of, <page 275>-6; supply, <page 288>-9.

Foote, T. B., settler at Nephi, <page 313>.

Forbes, James, biog., <page 755>.

Ford, Gov., character, <page 155>, <page 172>; acts in arrest and death of Smith, <page 172>-90.

Fordham, Elijah, missionary, <page 401>.

Forney, Jacob, superdt of Ind. affairs, <page 539>.

Fort Ashley, established 1825, <page 21>.

Fort Bridger, Mormons at, <page 257>; severe winter, <page 287>; march to, <page 519>-20; purchased, <page 595>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Fort Calls, founded, <page 601>.

Fort Gunnison, founded, <page 601>.

Fort Hall, route to, explored, <page 464>.

Fort Supply, settlement at, <page 595>.

Fort Utah, settlement of, <page 309>.

Fort Walker, building of, <page 318>.

Foster, Dr, enmity to Smith, <page 170>.

Foster, J. C., attorney in Lee trial, <page 566>.

Foster, James, president of seventies, <page 199>.

Foster, Robt D., regent of university, <page 146>.

Fotheringham, Wm, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Fowler, John S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Fox, Jesse W., surveys town site, <page 314>; teacher, <page 324>.

Fox, Samuel, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

France, miss. work in, <page 411>.

Francklyn smelting-works, capacity, <page 749>.

Freeman, John M., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Fremont, J. C., expedts 1843-5, <page 32>-4; at Salt Lake, <page 297>.

Frink, H. M., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Frontier Guardian, newspaper, <page 325>.

Frost, Burr, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; starts manufacture of iron, <page 317>; miss. to New Zealand, <page 410>.

Frost, Sam. B., missionary, <page 402>.

Fruit culture, value of, <page 725>-6.

Fuller, E. K., left for Cal., <page 273>.

Fuller, Edson, sent to Missouri, <page 84>.

Fuller, Frank, apptd sec. of ter., <page 604>.

Fullmer, David, high council, <page 198>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; legislator, <page 458>; university treasurer, <page 709>.

Fullmer, John S., of carrying co., <page 298>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; col of militia, <page 442>; legislator, <page 458>.

[p. 792]

G

Galeras, Capt. M. J., in expedt. 1540, <page 3>.

Galland, Isaac, stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>.

Gallatin, Mormons attacked at, <page 120>-2.

Garces, Father, expedt. of 1775, <page 8>.

Garden Grove, Mormons at, 1846, <page 222>.

Gardiner, Arch., saw-mill of, <page 279>.

Gardiner, Robt, saw-mill of, <page 279>.

Gardner, Wm, settler at Mendon, <page 597>.

Garfield coty, organized, <page 705>; sulphur-beds, <page 739>.

Garr, E., settler at Wallsburg, <page 595>.

Gates, Jacob, missionary, <page 402>.

Gatherers, the, sect of, <page 642>.

Gay, Lt, attack on Inds, <page 630>.

General election, the first, 1849, <page 443>.

General Epistle of the Twelve, 1852, <page 416>-17.

Gentiles, persecution of, <page 651>-4.

Germania lead-works, capacity, <page 749>.

Germany, miss. work in, <page 411>.

Gibbons, Andrew S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Gift of tongues, exercise of, <page 339>-40.

Gilbert & Gerrish, merchants, <page 763>.

Gilbert, Sidney, apptd church agent 1831, <page 86>; in jail 1833, <page 102>.

Gilliam, C., attack on Mormons, <page 123>-4, <page 130>-3.

Gilmer, John T., stage business of, <page 753>.

Gladden, Bishop, forms new sect, <page 643>.

Gladdenites, the, sect of, <page 643>-4; denounced by Young, <page 644>.

Glasgow, work at, <page 406>.

Gleason, John S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Glenwood, settlement, <page 706>.

Glines, Eric., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Godbe, W. S., grant to, <page 609>; trial <page 647>-9; biog., <page 651>; interview with Prest Grant, <page 638>.

Godbeite movement, success of, <page 647>-51.

Goddard, Geo., sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Goddard, S. H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Godier, murder of, <page 592>.

Gold discovered in Cal., <page 301>-2.

Goodson, John, miss. to England 1837, <page 405>.

Goodyear, M. M., Spanish grant of, <page 307>.

Goshen, founded 1856, <page 601>.

Gove, Carlos, col of legion, <page 146>.

Grafton, coty seat, <page 608>.

Grandin, Egbert B., prints Mormon book 1830, <page 63>.

Granger, Oliver, sent on mission 1834, <page 104>.

Grant, Presdt, Godbe's interview with, <page 658>.

Grant, Capt., attempt to open trade, <page 273>; H. B. Co. trader, <page 328>.

Grant, David, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Grant, Geo. D., of carrying co., <page 298>; Ind. expedt., <page 309>-10; overtakes immigrants, <page 425>; capt. of militia, <page 442>; arrested, <page 664>.

Grant, Geo. R., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Grant, Heber J., apostle, <page 343>, <page 681>; biog., <page 681>.

Grant, J. M., of carrying co., <page 298>; brig.-gen. of militia, <page 442>; mayor of S. L. City, <page 450>; legislator, <page 458>; promotes water co., <page 483>; biog., <page 503>; occupies Morgan coty, <page 596>; grant to, <page 609>.

Grant, Joshua, missionary, <page 402>.

Grantsville, population 1880, <page 703>.

Grasshoppers, damages by, <page 635>, <page 636>, <page 724>.

Grattan, Lt I. L., killed with party, <page 476>-7.

Great Salt Lake, first acct of, <page 16>; discovery 1824-5, <page 19>-20; immigrants at, 1841, <page 29>-31; Fremont at, <page 32>-4; Mormons in valley, <page 275>-304; map of fort, <page 277>; survey of, <page 466>.

Green, Mr, gives name to river 1825, <page 21>; trapping expedt. 1825-8, <page 21>.

Green, John H., founds Kaysville, <page 315>.

Green, Evan M., recorder, <page 287>; school at Provo, <page 324>.

Greene, John P., regent of university, <page 146>.

Greene, John Y., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Green River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 11>; Fremont at, <page 33>; ferries on, <page 483>; burning of supply trains, <page 515>-16.

Green River coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Greenwood, Wm, laid out town site, <page 312>.

Griffin, S. J., sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>.

Grouard, Benj. F., miss. to Sandwich Isl., <page 412>.

Grover, Joseph, founds Eden, <page 601>.

Grover, Thomas, of high council, <page 198>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; founds Centreville, <page 305>.

Groves, Elisha, H., legislator, <page 458>.

Gualpi, Spaniards at, 1776, <page 17>.

Gulls destroy crickets 1848, <page 280>-1.

Gully, S., missionary, <page 402>.

Gunnell, Francis, saw-mill of, <page 596>.

[p. 793]

Gunnison, Lt J. W., in Stansbury's survey 1849-50, <page 463>-467; survey expedt. and massacre 1853, <page 467>-71; The Mormons, <page 464>.

Gunlock, founded 1857, <page 601>.

H

Hadlock, Reuben, presdt of English mis., <page 408>.

Haefle, Leo, editor, <page 716>.

Haight, Isaac C., missionary, <page 402>; at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 552>; accuses immigrants, <page 549>; indicted, <page 564>.

Hale, Emma, marries Joe Smith 1826, <page 45>.

Hale, Isaac, daughter marries Joe Smith 1826, <page 45>.

Hall, Alfred, missionary, <page 402>.

Hall, Joseph, editor, <page 716>.

Hall, Wm, Abominations of Mormonism, crit., <page 150>, <page 152>.

Halsey, W. L., of Uintah Road Co., <page 609>.

Hamblin, Jacob, witness in Lee trial, <page 567>; miss. of, <page 599>; founded Sta Clara, <page 601>.

Hamblin, W., founded Gunlock, <page 601>.

Hamilton, church organized 1836, <page 403>.

Hamilton, of Mtn Meadow party, <page 551>.

Hancock, Joseph, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Hancock, Levi, sent to Missouri, <page 84>; pres. of seventies, <page 199>; song by, <page 244>; legislator, <page 458>.

Hancock, Oliver, sent to Missouri, <page 84>.

Hancock, Solomon, of council of twelve, <page 108>.

Hand-cart emigration, acct of, sufferings and mishaps, <page 422>-430.

Hanks, E. K., mail service, <page 501>.

Hanks, Sidney A., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Hanson, Hans C., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Hardin, commis. to Nauvoo, <page 211>-12.

Harding, S. S., apptd gov., <page 605>; rule, <page 609>; superseded, <page 621>.

Harmon, A. M., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Harmon, Jesse P., capt. of militia, <page 442>; alderman, <page 450>.

Harney, Brig.-gen., comd of expedt., <page 497>; remarks, <page 512>.

Harper, C. A., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Harriman, H., sent on miss. 1834, <page 104>.

Harrington, L. E., laid out town site, <page 312>.

Harris, B. D., sec. of ter., <page 456>; disputes with, <page 458>-60.

Harris, G. W., signs memorial, <page 134>; of high council, <page 198>.

Harris, Martin, aids J. Smith, <page 47>-50; plates shown to, <page 59>; character, <page 63>; pays for printing Mormon book, <page 63>-4; sent on miss., <page 104>; secedes, <page 118>; death, <page 675>.

Harris, Moses, founded Harrisburg, <page 601>.

Harrisburg, founded 1860, <page 601>.

Harrison, E. L. T., trial of, <page 647>-9.

Harrisville, founded, <page 318>.

Hartnett, John, sec. of ter., <page 539>.

Harvest feast in 1848, <page 282>.

Haslem, James, testimony of, <page 544>; witness at Lee trial, <page 567>.

Haun's mill, tragedy at, 1838, <page 128>.

Hawkins, Thos, convicted of polygamy, <page 393>, <page 663>.

Hawks, Nathan, at Salt Lake from Cal., <page 285>.

Hawks, Wm, at Salt Lake from Cal., <page 285>.

Hawley, C. M., assoc. judge, <page 662>.

Haws, Peter, supervised buildings at Nauvoo, <page 145>; missionary, <page 402>.

Head, Norwell M., missionary, <page 402>.

Heber City, coty seat, <page 608>.

Heddrick, Bishop, goes to Missouri, <page 612>.

Hedlock, Reuben, miss. to England, <page 197>.

Heitz, Capt. A., discovers copper mine, <page 741>.

Hendrix, James, bishop 1849, <page 290>.

Henrie, Wm, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Herriman, H., presdt of seventies, <page 199>.

Hewd, Simeon, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Heywood, J. L., bishop, <page 290>; settles at Nephi, <page 313>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; supervisor of roads, <page 443>; U. S. marshal, <page 456>.

Hibbard, Davison, general of legion, <page 146>.

Hickenlooper, Wm, bishop, <page 290>.

Hickman, Wm A., arrested, <page 663>.

Hicks, John A., presdt of elders, <page 199>.

Hicks, Samuel, capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Higbee, C. L., col. of legion, <page 146>.

Higbee, Elias, apptd histn 1838, <page 83>; coty judge, <page 124>; university regent, <page 146>.

Higbee, F. M., col of legion, <page 146>; enmity to Smith, <page 170>.

Higbee, Isaac, bishop, <page 290>; rept on Inds, <page 309>; grist-mill, <page 327>.

Higbee, John M., at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 552>-3; indicted, <page 564>.

Higbee John S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Higbee, Joseph, killed in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

[p. 794]

Higgins, Alfred, in charge of mail, <page 501>.

Higgins, Edwin, sec. of ter., <page 658>.

Hill, Alex., settler at Mendon, <page 597>.

Hill, Robt, settler at Mendon, <page 597>.

Hills, G., publisher of Times and Seasons, <page 109>.

Hinckle, G. M., acts of, accusations against, <page 131>.

Hiram, Smith removes to, 1831, <page 88>.

Hockaday & Magraw, mail contract, <page 501>-2.

Hoffman, Col, at Camp Scott, <page 628>.

Hoge, Judge. atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Holladay, Ben, of Uintah Road Co., <page 609>.

Holland, miss. work in, <page 411>.

Holman, Jacob H., Ind. agent 1851-4, <page 478>.

Holman, John G., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Holmes, Milton, sent on mission 1834, <page 104>.

Holmes, Nathan, missionary, <page 402>.

Homans, Sheppard, in Gunnison party, <page 468>.

Homer, Russell, of carrying co., <page 298>.

Hooper, Wm H., chosen senator, <page 605>; Uintah Road Co., <page 609>; director Z. C. M. I., <page 652>; del. to Congress, <page 665>; biog., <page 666>; director silk assoc., <page 727>.

Hooperville, settlement, <page 701>.

Hopkins, Chas, grant to, <page 483>.

Horne, M. J., director Silk Assoc., <page 727>.

Horner, J. M. & Co., merchants, <page 763>.

Horn Silver mine, outcrop, <page 744>.

Houses at Salt Lake 1847, <page 276>-7; description of, <page 292>.

Houston, Isaac, founds Alpine City, <page 318>.

Howard, Nahum, testimony of, <page 60>.

Howard, Sumner, dist atty in Lee trial, <page 566>.

Howd, Simeon F., settler in Beaver coty, <page 598>.

Howell, Wm, miss. to France, <page 411>.

Hudson's Bay Co., traders 1848-51, <page 327>.

Huitt, W., missionary, <page 402>.

Humphrey, S., sent to Missouri, <page 84>.

Hunt, Jefferson, pilots co. to Cal., <page 299>; founds Huntsville, <page 601>,

Hunter, Edw., bishop, <page 290>; order of Enoch treasurer, <page 361>; biog., <page 774>.

Hunter, J. D., missionary, <page 402>.

Huntington, D. B., capt. in legion, <page 147>; trader with Inds, <page 310>.

Huntington, Wilford, of high council, <page 199>.

Huntsville founded, <page 601>; settlement, <page 701>.

Hurlbut, Dr, trial of, <page 95>.

Hurt, Garland, report on Inds, <page 477>; Ind. agent, <page 478>.

Huston, J., missionary, <page 402>.

Hyde, John, Mormonism, crit., <page 125>, <page 150>-2.

Hyde, Orson, baptized, <page 89>; apostle, <page 111>, <page 344>; secedes, <page 118>; address, <page 192>; of travelling council, <page 198>; dedicates temple, <page 206>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; missionary work, <page 253>; lays out Ogden, <page 307>; editor Frontier Guardian, <page 325>; missionary, <page 402>; promotes canal co., <page 483>; probate judge, <page 591>; biog., <page 773>.

Hyde Park founded, <page 597>.

Hyde, Wm, miss. to New Zealand, <page 410>.

Hyrum founded, <page 598>.

I

Idaho, Josephites in, <page 646>; Mormon settlements, <page 693>.

Illinois, settlements in, <page 136>; arbitrary acts, <page 216>; schism spreads to, <page 644>.

Immigration, Perpetual Fund Co., <page 415>; ships, <page 419>; overland travel, <page 420>-2; classes of emigrants, <page 421>; hand-cart emigration, <page 423>-33.

Imports, <page 759>-61.

Independence, Mormons at, 1831-2, <page 78>, <page 85>, <page 86>; presecutions at, 1833, <page 101>-2; Mormons in prison, <page 139>.

Indian agencies established, <page 455>.

Indians, complaints of, <page 273>; sell children, <page 278>; measles among, <page 278>; ill feeling, <page 309>; attack on, <page 309>-10; fight with, <page 312>; council at S. L. City, <page 313>; outbreaks, <page 472>-80, <page 630>-2; treaties with, <page 477>, <page 634>; in Mtn Meadow massacre, <page 550>-5; reservation, <page 634>-6.

Industries of ter., <page 279>, <page 327>-8.

Ingersoll, Peter, testimony against Smiths, <page 41>.

Insurance, <page 766>.

Iowa, Mormons in, <page 140>, <page 693>; schism spreads to, <page 644>.

Iowa City, point of outfit, <page 423>.

Ireland, miss. work in, <page 409>.

Iron, deposits in ter., <page 322>, <page 735>.

Iron coty, organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; iron deposits, <page 735>.

Iron-works, <page 734>-5.

Irrigation, co. for, incorporated, <page 608>; results of, <page 722>-4.

Ivory, Matt., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

[p. 795]

J

Jack, James, sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Jackman, Levi, of council of twelve, <page 108>; pioneer '47, <page 272>.

Jackson coty, persecutions in, 1833, <page 98>-104.

Jackson, H. C., saw-mill of, <page 598>.

Jacobs, Norton, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Jacobs, Sanford, at Salt Lake from Cal., <page 285>.

James, Saml, missionary, <page 402>.

Jennings, Wm, Material Progress of Utah, <page 331>; director Z. C. M. I., <page 625>; prest silk assoc., <page 726>; vice-prest U. Cent. R. R., <page 756>; biog., <page 764>-5.

Jerusalem, Mormonism preached at, <page 413>.

Johnson, Aaron, of high council, <page 198>; legislator, <page 458>; grant to, <page 609>.

Johnson, Artemas, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Johnson, Ben. F., legislator, <page 458>.

Johnson, Edward, apostatized, <page 90>.

Johnson, Eli, apostatized, <page 90>.

Johnson, Joel H., bishop, <page 290>.

Johnson, John, apostatized, <page 90>.

Johnson, Luke, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; apostle, <page 344>; founds St John, <page 601>.

Johnson, L. E., apostle, <page 344>.

Johnson, Lyman, sent oil mission, <page 104>.

Johnson, Nephi, laid out Virgin City, <page 599>.

Johnson, Philo, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Johnson, Col Sidney, in comd of expedt. 1837, <page 512>; arrival of, <page 518>.

Jones, Capt. Dan., emigrant party of, <page 297>.

Jones, D. W., mission to Mexico, <page 412>.

Jones, Henry, murder of, <page 563>.

Jones, James N., founds Fairview, <page 601>.

Jones, Nathaniel V., miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>; alderman, <page 450>.

Jordan River, naming of, <page 266>; bridge over, <page 279>; surveyed, <page 466>.

Joseph, settlement, <page 706>.

Juab Coty, organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Jubilee at Sweetwater, 1847, <page 269>.

Justice, administration of, <page 447>-8.

Juvenile Instructor, newspaper, <page 715>.

K

Kamas, settlement of, <page 595>.

Kanab, settlement, <page 707>.

Kane, Col, aids Mormons, <page 241>; The Mormons, <page 330>; mission of, <page 524>-9.

Kane coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; settlements in, <page 599>, <page 707>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Kanesville, founding of, <page 273>.

Kanosh, Chief, trial of, <page 493>.

Kay, John, attempt to coin, <page 291>.

Kay, Wm, founds Kaysville, <page 315>; legislator, <page 458>.

Kaysville, founded, <page 315>; conference at, <page 540>; origin of name, <page 700>.

Kearns, Saml, wounded in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

Kearny, Gen., orders raising of battle, <page 241>.

Keele, Alex., murder of, <page 474>.

Keller, Alex., settles at Slaterville, <page 318>.

Kelly, James, presdt of univer., <page 146>.

Kelsey, Eli B., supports Godbeite movement, <page 649>.

Kelsey, Stephen, pioneer of '47, <page 282>.

Kendall, Levi N., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Keokuk, Mormons settle at, <page 140>.

Kern, R. H., in Gunnison party, killed, <page 468>, <page 470>.

Keyes, Robt, attempt. murder of, <page 569>.

Kimball, Ellen S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Kimball, H. C., apostle, <page 111>, <page 344>-5; signs memorial, <page 134>; at New York, <page 142>; university regent, <page 146>; address, <page 192>; miss. to England, <page 197>, <page 405>; of travelling council, <page 198>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; holds service in valley, <page 263>; at Salt Lake, <page 283>; lays out Ogden, <page 307>; biog., <page 436>; chief justice, <page 443>; grant to, <page 451>, <page 609>; legislator, <page 458>; promotes water co., <page 483>; mail contract, <page 500>-3.

Kimball, W. H., overtakes emigrants, <page 425>; arrested, <page 663>.

King, Judge A. A., holds court of inquiry, <page 122>, <page 132>.

King, Isaac, testimony of, <page 61>.

King, Wm A., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Kinnamon, R. H., missionary, <page 402>.

Kinney, John F., chief justice, <page 462>, <page 604>.

Kirtland, missionaries at, <page 75>-8; conference, <page 84>; persecutions, <page 91>; temple, <page 94>, <page 112>; mil. co. organized, <page 105>; Safety Soc. Bk established, <page 113>; Josephites at, <page 646>.

Klineman, Conrad, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Klingensmith, P., indicted for murder, <page 564>; settles at Toquerville, <page 599>.

Knight, at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 554>.

Knight, Joseph, aids Joe Smith 1829, <page 58>.

Knight, Lenos M., regent of university, <page 146>

[p. 796]

Knight, Newel, of council of twelve, <page 108>, <page 198>.

Knight, Vinson, stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>; presdt of bishopric, <page 199>.

Kreymyer, C. M., captain in legion, <page 147>.

Kudgerson, Jacob, bishop at Fort Gunnison, <page 601>.

L

Lafayette coty, refuge taken in, 1833, <page 102>.

Lain, Joaquin, in expedt. 1776-7, <page 9>.

Laird, Jas, settler at Wallsburg, <page 595>.

Lajeunesse, F., in Fremont's expedt. 1843, <page 32>.

Lake, Geo., settles in Arizona, <page 693>.

Lake, Henry, testimony of, <page 60>.

Lake View founded, <page 601>.

Lamanites, hist. of, <page 51>-4, <page 69>; miss. to, <page 75>, <page 79>, <page 599>.

Lamareaux, A. L., missionary, <page 402>.

Lambdin, Mrs, testimony of, <page 61>.

Lambson, A. B., missionary to Jamaica, <page 410>.

Lamoreaux, Capt., trading post of, <page 298>.

Lamoreaux, A. L., legislator, <page 458>.

Laney, Wm, attempted murder of, <page 569>.

Langton, Robt, settles in Cache coty, <page 547>.

Langton, Seth, settles in Cache coty, <page 597>.

Laramie, hand-cart emigrants at, <page 425>.

Lark, Hark, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Lathrop, A. A., left for Cal., <page 273>.

Latter-day Saints, church organized, <page 65>; name adopted, <page 107>.

Latter-day Saints Messenger and Advocate, established 1833, <page 104>.

Law, Wm, stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; enmity to Smith, <page 170>; councillor, <page 198>.

Law, Wilson, regent of university <page 146>.

Lawrence supports Godbeite movement, <page 649>.

Layton, Christ., director Utah Cent. R. R., <page 756>.

Lee, John D., Mormonism Unveiled, crit., <page 150>-3; comd of hunting co., <page 287>; store at Tooele, <page 315>, locates ranch, <page 318>; missionary, <page 402>; Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 548>-55; trial, <page 564>-8; confession, <page 569>; execution, <page 570>-1; biog., <page 571>.

Legislature, actions of, <page 483>, <page 607>-9.

Lehi, founded 1851, <page 311>; incorporated, <page 450>.

Leonard, Truman, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Lewis, Albert, founded Richfield, <page 706>.

Lewis, Tarlton, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Lewiston, settlement, <page 702>.

Library in Salt Lake City, <page 325>.

Lincoln, Presdt, first appointments, <page 604>; funeral exercises at S. L. City, <page 625>-6.

Lindforth, James, works of, <page 602>.

Liptoote, of Gunnison party, <page 470>.

Little, Andrew, major of militia, <page 442>.

Little, Ferezmore, direc. of order of Enoch, <page 361>; mail contract, <page 501>, direc. U. Cent. R. R., <page 756>.

Little, Jesse C., seeks U. S. aid, <page 240>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; promotes water co., <page 483>; atty, <page 489>.

Little Salt Lake, explored 1849-50, <page 315>.

Littleton, coty seat, <page 608>.

Liverpool, work at, <page 197>, <page 407>;

Locust Creek, Mormons at 1846, <page 222>.

Logan City, founded, <page 596>; coty seat, <page 608>; Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, branch at, <page 653>; college, <page 708>; banks, <page 765>.

London, work at, <page 407>.

Losee, John G., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Loup River, Mormons cross, <page 255>; Pratt's co. at, <page 267>; ferry, <page 274>.

Lovejoy, A. L., in Utah 1842, <page 32>.

Loveland, Chancey, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Lowe, David T., apptd chief justice, <page 665>.

Lowry, John, bishop, <page 290>.

Lucas, Gen., persecution of Mormons, <page 130>-3.

Lucas, Gov. Robt, friendly to Mormons, <page 155>.

Lucero, Juan de A. y S., in expedt 1776-7, <page 9>.

Luddington, E., missionary, <page 402>.

Lumber, scarcity of, <page 262>-3.

Lyman, Amasa, in jail, <page 139>; col of legion, <page 146>; councillor, <page 199>; with immigrants, <page 218>; pioneer of '47, <page 272>; apostle, <page 345>; missionary, <page 402>; at Lincoln's funeral exercises, <page 626>.

Lyman, Francis M., apostle, <page 345>, <page 680>.

Lynne, settlement at, 1849, <page 308>.

Lyon, W. P., general of legion, <page 146>.

Lytle, Andrew, expedt against Inds 1850, <page 309>, <page 310>.

[p. 797]

M

Mackley, Jeremiah, missionary, <page 402>.

Maddison, John F., settler at Providence, <page 598>.

Maeser, R., editor, <page 717>.

Mail service, <page 320>, <page 500>-4, <page 769>-70.

Mallory, Elisha, grist-mill at Willard, <page 318>.

Mallory, Lemuel, grist-mill at Willard, <page 318>.

Mammoth mine, <page 744>.

Manchester, work at, 1839, <page 406>-7.

Mann, S. A., sec. of ter., <page 658>.

Manti, founded, <page 313>; grist-mills, <page 327>; incorporated, <page 450>; coty seat, <page 608>; hist. of, <page 705>-6.

Manufactures, acct and value of, <page 733>-4.

Maps, mythical, 1605, 1611, <page 6>, <page 7>; Escalante's route 1776-7, <page 10>; Timpanogos Val., <page 13>; Utah 1826, <page 19>; Green River country, <page 24>; Bonneville's, <page 26>; Utah and Nev. 1795, <page 27>; Rector's, 1818, <page 27>; Finley's, 1826, <page 28>; war in Missouri, <page 121>; settlements in Illinois, <page 136>: Mormon route 1846, <page 222>; about the Missouri, <page 237>; Mormon route 1847, <page 254>; corral of wagons, <page 255>; fort at Salt Lake 1848, <page 277>; settlements 1852, <page 306>; seal of ter., <page 406>; Gunnison massacre, site, <page 469>; Utah campaign, <page 513>; Mtn Meadows, <page 550>; Salt Lake City 1860, <page 580>; settlements 1862, <page 594>; Deseret alphabet, characters, <page 713>.

Marble, Saml H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Markham, Stephen, actions at Nauvoo, <page 225>; col of pioneer band, <page 253>; pioneer '47, <page 272>.

Marks, Wm, stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>; rejoins church, <page 641>.

Marriage, ceremony of, <page 353>, <page 354>.

Marrion, Francis, biog., <page 680>.

Marriotsville, settlement at, <page 308>.

Marsh, T. B., allowed to preach, <page 75>; sent to Missouri, <page 84>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; secedes, <page 118>; excommunicated, <page 197>; apostle, <page 344>.

Marshall, gold discovery in Cal., <page 302>.

Marshall, Geo., founds Lake View, <page 602>.

Martial law, declared 1857, <page 509>.

Martin, Moses, founds Lake View, <page 601>.

Marvin, Edward, sent on mission 1834, <page 104>.

Matthews, Joseph, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Maugham, Peter, locates Wellsville, <page 596>.

Maugham, Wm H., saw-mill of, <page 596>. Maxwell, Geo. R., contests election to congress, <page 665>.

McArthur, Duncan, missionary, <page 402>.

McAuley, Jno., miss. to Scotland, <page 409>.

McCord, Alex., Josephite missionary, <page 645>.

McCreary, M., settler at Willard, <page 318>.

McCue, Peter, presdt of Glasgow conference, <page 409>.

McCulloch, Maj. B., apptd peace commis., <page 531>.

McCurdy, Solomon, asso. judge, <page 621>.

McDonald, A. F., treatment by Military, <page 660>.

McDougal, J. A., commis. to Nauvoo, <page 211>.

McFarland, Dan., at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 553>.

McFarland, Wm, founds West Weber, <page 601>.

McFarlane, John, atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

McGaffee, Elder, miss. to Ireland, <page 410>.

McKay, Wm H., stage robbery by, <page 661>.

McKean, James B., apptd chief justice, <page 662>; actions and blunders of, <page 663>-5.

McKee, Redick, testimony of, <page 62>.

McKenzie, David, sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

McKenzie, T., store of, <page 312>.

McLean, Hector, murders P. P. Pratt, <page 546>.

McClellan, W. E., rebuked, <page 88>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; apostle, <page 344>.

McLeod, Rev. Norman, at Lincoln's funeral exercises, <page 626>.

McMurdy, Sam., at Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 554>; witness at Lee's trial, <page 567>.

McRae, Alex., trial of, and sentence, <page 131>; col of legion, <page 146>.

Meeyers, Geo., settler, <page 307>.

Mehrteens, of Gunnison party, <page 470>.

Melchisedec priesthood, conferred 1830, <page 64>, <page 84>; acct of, <page 341>.

Mendon, settlement at, <page 597>.

Merrill, Ira, killed by Inds, <page 597>.

Merrill, Philemon C., settled in Arizona, <page 694>.

Methodists, school, <page 708>.

Mexico, miss. work in, <page 412>; settlement, <page 694>.

Miera y Pacheco, B., in expedt. 1776-7, <page 9>.

Miles, Albert, wounded in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

[p. 798]

Miles, Daniel, presdt of seventies, <page 199>.

Mill Creek, bridge built 1848, <page 279>.

Millard coty, organized, <page 449>-50; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; settlements, <page 702>.

Miller, D. A., founds Farmington, <page 318>.

Miller, George, supervised buildings at Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>.

Miller, John N., testimony of, <page 60>.

Miller, Joseph, testimony of, <page 62>.

Miller, W., legislator, <page 458>; treatment by military, <page 660>.

Mills, Geo., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Mills, Wm, killed, <page 475>.

Mills, W. G., song by, <page 523>.

Millville, founded 1860, <page 598>.

Milton founded 1856, <page 596>.

Minerals, list of, <page 322>.

Mineral springs, analyses, <page 330>.

Minersville founded, <page 599>.

Mining, resources of Summit coty, <page 594>; Cache coty, <page 596>; hist. of, <page 734>-50; discouraged by church, <page 740>.

Miracles, the first, <page 68>; limited, <page 75>.

Mirage, description of, <page 30>.

Missionaries sent to Europe, <page 197>, <page 270>; duties of, <page 354>-6.

Missions, labor of missionaries and work done, <page 397>-415.

Missouri, missionaries in, <page 78>-9, <page 236>-251; property in, <page 96>; persecutions, <page 98>-105, <page 126>-136; march to, 1834, <page 105>-8; map of war, <page 121>; expulsion from, <page 136>; affairs in, 1847, <page 273>-4; schism spreads to, <page 644>.

Mitchell, Dr, characters submitted to, <page 49>.

Mitchell, A. J., left on Missouri, <page 274>.

Mojaves, the, treatment of explorers 1826, <page 23>.

Montana, Mormons in, 1880, <page 693>.

Montierth, A. M., settler at Paradise, <page 598>.

Montrose, Mormons at, 1846, <page 233>.

Moore, David, recorder at Ogden, <page 308>.

Moquis, the, expedt. recd by, 1776, <page 17>.

Morgan coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; origin of name, <page 596>; coty seat, <page 608>.

Morley, riot at, 1845, <page 208>-9.

Morely, Isaac, sent to Missouri, <page 84>; farm sold, <page 88>; in jail, <page 102>; signs memorial, <page 134>; settles in S. Pete Val., <page 308>; grist-mill, <page 327>; legislator, <page 458>.

Mormon battalion, organization of, 1846, <page 241>; in Cal. 1846-7, <page 242>-5.

Mormon book, plates discovered 1823, <page 43>; translated, <page 47>-51; contents, <page 60>-2; printing of, 1830, <page 63>; translation continued, <page 88>.

Mormon Island, gold discovered, <page 302>.

Mormons, church organized, <page 64>-6; first conference, <page 67>; period of prosperity, <page 80>-2; persecutions, <page 98>-104; expulsion from Missouri, <page 135>; at Nauvoo, <page 143>-93; expulsion from Nauvoo, <page 209>-35; at the Missouri, <page 236>-51; received by natives, <page 236>; apply for U. S. aid, <page 240>; organize battl., <page 241>-2; sufferings, <page 246>-9; migration to Utah, <page 252>-74; map of route, <page 254>; jubilee 1847, <page 269>; affairs at Pueblo, <page 273>-4; emigration to Cal., <page 301>; prosperity 1850-52, <page 321>-30; first mission, <page 399>; work in foreign countries, <page 405>-15; accused of Gunnison massacre, <page 470>; treatment of Inds, <page 471>-80; tactics 1857, <page 511>; industrial and social condition, <page 576>-90; conference 1877, <page 677>-80; disfranchised, <page 685>; population 1880, <page 693>.

Mormonism, story of, 1820-44, <page 36>-192; what is it, <page 333>-4; tenets of church, <page 334>-41; sacred books, <page 341>; priesthood, <page 341>-9; tithing, <page 349>-52; polygamy, <page 352>-96.

Moroni, appearances of, 1820-7, <page 42>-6.

Moroni City, founded 1859, <page 601>.

Morrill, Justin S., bill against polygamy, <page 606>.

Morris, Capt. R. M., in Gunnison party, <page 468>-9.

Morrisite troubles 1862-3, <page 615>-21.

Morris, Joseph, doctrine of, <page 615>; warrant against, <page 616>; defeat and death of, <page 617>-18.

Morse, Justus, captain in legion, <page 147>.

Moses, Julian, missionary, <page 402>.

Mott, Stephen, laid out town site, <page 312>.

Mountain Meadows massacre, acct of, 1857, <page 543>-71.

Mount Pisgah, Mormons at, 1846, <page 222>; camp at, <page 246>-8.

Mount Pleasant incorporated, <page 706>.

Mowers, Wilson G., settler in Beaver coty, <page 598>.

Muir, W. S., biog., <page 700>.

Mulholland, James, clerk to Smith, <page 83>.

Mulliner, Sam., missionary to Scotland, <page 409>.

Muniz, Andres, in expedt. 1776-7, <page 9>.

Muniz, Lucrecio, in expedt. 1776-7, <page 9>.

Munroe, James, murder of, <page 460>.

[p. 799]

Murdock, John, sent to Missouri, <page 85>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; signs memorial, <page 134>; bishop, <page 290>; miss. to Australia., <page 410>.

Murry, Carlos, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; massacred with family, <page 477>.

Murray, Gov. E. H., arrival of, <page 687>; official actions of, <page 688>-90.

Musser, Amos Al., miss. to Calcutta, <page 310>; sec. of silk assoc. <page 726>; biog., <page 771>-2.

N

Naile, John C., farm attacked by Inds, <page 630>.

Nails, manufacture of, <page 317>.

National aid, appropriations granted, <page 485>-6.

Nauvoo founded, <page 141>; meaning, <page 141>; described <page 143>-8; population, <page 144>; Smith's death, acts of citizens, <page 190>-2; prosperity, <page 206>; disasters, <page 207>; charter repealed, <page 208>; preparations to leave, <page 209>-13; expulsion from, <page 214>-35; fight at, <page 228>-30; condition 1848-50, <page 235>.

Nauvoo House, building of, <page 145>-6.

Nauvoo Legion organized, <page 146>-7, <page 509>; called out, <page 171>; end of, <page 658>.

Nebeker, John, Early Justice, <page 331>; settles at Ft Supply, <page 595>.

Nebraska, Mormons in, <page 693>.

Neff, John, built flouring mill, <page 279>; founds Mill Creek, <page 318>.

Nephi, first settlement at, <page 312>-13; school, <page 324>; incorporated, <page 450>; coty seat, <page 608>; population 1880, <page 703>.

Nephites, history of, <page 51>-5.

Nevada, Mormons in, 1880, <page 693>.

Newman, Elijah, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

New Mexico, trading parties from, trouble with, <page 475>-6.

New Orleans, emigration from, 1851-2, <page 274>.

Newspapers, <page 89>, <page 92>, <page 104>, <page 115>, <page 325>-6, <page 715>-19; list of, <page 717>-18.

Newton, settlement, <page 702>.

New York, Mormons in, <page 401>, <page 693>.

Nichols, Alvin, grant to, <page 609>.

Nichols, Joshua R., biog., <page 748>.

Nicholson, John, editor, <page 716>.

Nidever, George, in Walker expedt. 1832-3, <page 25>.

Nixon, Wm, merchant, <page 763>.

North Ogden, town, <page 701>.

Norton, J. W., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Norwich, work at, <page 407>.

Newland, Jabez, wounded in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

O

Ogden founded, <page 307>-8; incorporated, <page 450>; coty seat, <page 608>; Z. M. C. I. branch at, <page 653>; account of, <page 700>; banks, <page 765>.

Ogden Junction, newspaper, <page 716>.

Ogden, Peter Skeen, with party on Humboldt River 1825, <page 21>.

Ogilbie locates mine, <page 741>.

Ohio, church established in, 1833, <page 94>-5.

Olivares, Lorenzo, in expedt. 1776-7, <page 9>.

Olney, John F., capt in legion, <page 147>.

Olds, Luther, arrest of, <page 592>.

Omahas, the treatment of Mormons, <page 236>; land of, <page 274>.

Ontario mine, value of, <page 744>.

Ophir dist, value of ores, <page 742>.

Order, Loge, establishment of, <page 361>-2.

Ormsby, Mayor, attacked by Inds, <page 630>.

Orr, wounded in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

Owen, Robt, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Owen, Seely, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

P

Pace, James, settler at Payson, <page 312>.

Pack, John, major of pioneer band, <page 253>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; hunting co., <page 287>; miss. to France, <page 411>.

Packard, Noah, councillor, <page 199>.

Padilla, Father Juan de, exped. of, 1540, <page 1>.

Page, Edwin, settler, <page 307>.

Page, John E., address, <page 192>; of travelling council, <page 198>; apostle, <page 345>; missionary, <page 402>.

Page, Hiram, plates shown to, 1829, <page 59>; controversy with Smith, <page 69>.

Pah Utes, massacre by, 1853, <page 468>-70. Palmyra founded, <page 312>; school, <page 324>; incorporated, <page 450>.

Papillon Camp, fever at, <page 248>.

Paradise founded, <page 598>.

Paragoonah founded, <page 318>.

Parish, Saml, grist-mill, <page 327>.

Park City, settlement, <page 702>.

Parker, Zadock, missionary, <page 402>.

Parks, Gen., acts towards Mormons, <page 122>-3.

Parowan founded, <page 216>; iron-works, <page 327>; incorporated, <page 450>; immigrants at <page 548>; coty seat, <page 609>; leading industries, <page 706>.

Parowan agency, <page 455>.

Partridge, Edw., conversion and hist., <page 81>; miss. work, <page 84>-5; tarred and feathered, <page 100>; signs memorial, <page 134>.

[p. 800]

Parvan, agency, <page 455>.

Patrick, Mr, meetings at house of, <page 404>.

Patten, D. W., organizer of the Danites, <page 124>-5; apostle, <page 344>.

Patterson, Robert, testimony of, <page 60>; Who Wrote the Book of Mormon? <page 61>.

Payson, migration to Cal. from, <page 304>; founded, <page 312>; incorporated, <page 450>; immigrants at, <page 547>.

Peace commissioners, <page 531>.

Peery, David H., biog., <page 701>.

Peniston, Wm, attacks Mormons, <page 120>.

Penrose, C. W. biog., <page 719>.

Peoa founded 1860, <page 595>.

Perkins, Andrew H., coty commisr 1848, <page 287>.

Perkins, Wm G., councillor S. L. City 1851, <page 450>.

Perkins, Wm J., bishop 1849, <page 290>.

Perpetual Emigration Fund Co. organized, work of, <page 415>-16.

Peterson, James J., killed by Inds, <page 633>.

Peterson, Ziba, miss. work, <page 75>-8; punishment, <page 86>.

Pettigrew, David, bishop 1849, <page 290>.

Petty, A., missionary, <page 402>.

Phelps, Judge, allays fury of citizens, <page 190>.

Phelps, W. W., joins church, <page 85>; church printer, <page 89>; starts newspaper, <page 89>, <page 92>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; secedes, <page 118>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; legislator, <page 458>; university regent, <page 709>.

Philharmonic Society, <page 585>.

Phillips, Edw., founds Kaysville, <page 315>.

Pickett, Wm, conduct at Nauvoo, <page 226>-7.

Pied Riche, Chief, reception of Mor. mons, <page 236>.

Pierce, Eli H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Piercy, Fred., miss. to France, <page 411>.

Pioneer anniversary, celebrations of, <page 293>-4, <page 504>.

Pitkin, Geo. O., bishop, <page 598>.

Pittsburg, Rigdon at, <page 641>.

Pittsburg mine, sale of, <page 743>.

Piute coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; organized, <page 705>; sulphur-beds, <page 739>.

Plain City founded, <page 601>.

Plano, headquarters of Josephites, <page 646>.

Plates, the, finding and description of, <page 42>-4; witnesses to, <page 59>.

Pleasant Grove founded, <page 312>; incorporated, <page 450>.

Pleasant Valley, coal deposits in, <page 737>.

Police statistics 1882, <page 393>-4.

Polk, Presdt, Mormons seek aid from, <page 240>.

Polygamy, revelation on, reception and practice 1843, <page 158>-68; revelation to J. Smith, <page 160>; as a, church tenet, <page 370>; celestial marriage, <page 370>-1; argument of civilization, <page 371>-5; reply, <page 375>-95; proposed remedies, <page 395>-6; bills against, <page 606>-7, <page 682>-7; attempts to suppress, <page 772>-3.

Polysophical Society, <page 585>.

Pomeroy, Francis M., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Poole, John R., visit to Snake River, <page 693>.

Population, census returns 1850, <page 328>-9; 1854-60, <page 484>.

Porter, James, saw-mill, <page 327>.

Porter, W. T., biog., <page 700>.

Post, Stephen, missionary, <page 402>.

Pottawattamies, the, treatment of Mormons, <page 236>.

Potter, arrest and killing of, <page 628>-9.

Potter, Wm, of Gunnison party, <page 470>.

Powell, David, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Powell, L. W., apptd peace commisr, <page 531>.

Pratt, Addison, miss. to Sandwich Isl., <page 412>.

Pratt, Orson, recorder, <page 83>; sent to Missouri, <page 84>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; at New York, <page 142>, <page 213>; prof. at university, <page 146>; address, <page 192>; of travelling council, <page 198>; with immigrants 1846-7, <page 218>, <page 258>; enters Salt Lake Val., <page 260>; holds service, <page 263>; takes observations, <page 264>; apostle, <page 344>-5; miss. work, <page 402>-5; founded St George, <page 600>; death, <page 681>; university regent, <page 709>.

Pratt, Parley, conversion and hist., <page 71>-4; miss. work, <page 75>, <page 84>, <page 92>, <page 197>, <page 253>, <page 400>-5, <page 408>; arrested, <page 78>; of council of twelve, <page 100>; apostle, <page 111>, <page 344>-5; trial and sentence, <page 131>; in jail, <page 139>; at New York, <page 142>; address, <page 192>; joins immigrants 1846, <page 218>; companies of, <page 266>-7; in charge of camp, <page 271>; letter of, 1848, <page 284>; explores Little Salt Lake, <page 315>; murdered, <page 546>-7; denounces Gladdenites, <page 644>.

Presidency organized 1833, <page 94>.

Preston, W. B., settler at Logan City, <page 597>.

Price founded, <page 601>.

Priesthood, officers of, 1841, <page 198>-9; order, <page 341>-9.

Prior, opinion of Smith, <page 187>-8.

[p. 801]

Provo founded, <page 310>, school, <page 324>, <page 708>; incorporated, <page 450>; immigrants at, <page 547>; troops, conduct at, <page 660>.

Provo Canal Co. incorporated, <page 483>.

Provo Manufacturing Co. incorporation of, <page 483>.

Provo river, expedt. at, 1776, <page 14>.

Public buildings at Salt Lake 1849, <page 292>-3.

Pueblo, Mormon detachment at, <page 243>; affairs at, 1847, <page 273>.

Pulsipher, Zera, presdt of seventies, <page 199>; councillor, <page 450>.

Purisima River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 11>.

Pyper, Alex. C., director silk assoc., <page 727>; biog., <page 775>-6.

Q

Quincy, Mormons at, 1839, <page 136>; actions of citizens 1845, <page 209>-11.

R

Railroad overland, mem. for, <page 462>-3.

Randall, Pugsley, & Co., facty of, <page 733>.

Randolph, settlement, <page 702>.

Rappelye, Tunis, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Rayboult, Benj. G., biog., <page 709>.

Real and personal property, value 1860, <page 577>.

Reddin, Jackson, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Reed, Amos, sec. of ter., <page 621>.

Reese, John, settles in Carson Val., <page 590>.

Reese, John and Enoch, business of, <page 763>.

Reid, Lazarus H., ch. jus. of ter., <page 461>.

Remy, Jules, works of, <page 602>.

Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints, creation of, <page 644>-6; headquarters, <page 646>; creed of, <page 646>.

Revenue of ter. 1853, <page 482>.

Reynolds, Geo., conviction of, <page 683>.

Rice, Joel, in Quincy deputation, <page 228>.

Rich, C. C., gen. of legion, <page 146>; of high council, <page 198>; apostle, <page 345>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; advice to emigrants, <page 547>; biog., <page 775>.

Rich coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; settlements, <page 702>.

Richards, F. D., asst recorder, <page 83>; Narrative, <page 330>; apostle, <page 345>; pres. of church in Scotland, <page 409>; overtakes immigrants, <page 425>; biog., <page 436>, <page 774>; director of Iron co., <page 483>; at Lincoln's funeral exercises, <page 626>; newspaper, <page 716>.

Richards, Mrs F. D., Reminiscences of, <page 246>, <page 330>.

Richards, Jos., miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Richards, Phineas, missionary, <page 402>; legislator, <page 458>.

Richards, Sam., miss. in Scotland, <page 409>, <page 416>; councillor, <page 450>; university regent, <page 709>.

Richards, Willard, recorder, <page 83>; maj. of legion, <page 146>; confined with Smith, <page 178>-82; address, <page 189>, <page 191>-2; of travelling council, <page 198>; joins immigrants 1846, <page 218>; holds service in valley, <page 263>; city named after, <page 318>; editor Deseret News, <page 326>, <page 715>; apostle, <page 344>-5; biog., <page 435>; elected sec. of state, <page 443>; legislator, <page 458>.

Richardson, Darwin, miss. to Jamaica, <page 410>.

Richardson Point, Mormons at, 1846, <page 222>.

Richfield, founding of, <page 706>.

Richland coty, coty seat of, <page 608>.

Richmond, Mormons in prison at, <page 139>.

Rider, Simonds, apostatized 1832, <page 90>.

Rigdon, Sidney, conversion 1830, <page 75>; miss. work, <page 76>-87; vision, <page 90>; persecution, <page 90>; apptd councillor, <page 94>-5; lectures by, <page 111>; oration, <page 120>; trial and sentence, <page 131>; in prison, <page 139>; prof. at university, <page 146>; aspirations, trial, excommunicated, biog., death, <page 198>-202.

Rivers of ter., <page 322>.

Road companies incorporated, <page 608>-9.

Roberts, Clark, attacked by Inds, <page 474>.

Robins, T. F., founds Scipio, <page 601>.

Robinson, E., publisher of Times and Seasons, <page 109>; university regent, <page 146>.

Robinson, G. W., church recorder, <page 83>; in prison, <page 139>; gen. of legion, <page 146>.

Robinson, King, murder of, <page 627>-8.

Robinson, Lewis, councillor S. L. City, <page 450>.

Rock Salt, mountain of, <page 739>.

Rockwell, O. P., attempts assassination Gov. Boggs, <page 156>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; left for Cal., <page 273>; murders by, <page 562>-3; arrested, <page 663>.

Rockwood, A. P., gen. of legion, <page 146>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; legislator, <page 458>.

Rogers, David, conversion of, <page 401>.

Rogers, Noah, miss. to Sandwich Isl., <page 412>.

Rogers, Ross R., house at Provo, <page 311>.

Rolfe, Benj. W., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Rollins, J. H., bishop at Minersville, <page 599>.

Rooker, Joseph, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Rose, Stephen B., Ind. sub-agent, <page 478>.

[p. 802]

Roseborough, Judge, disgust of, <page 362>-5.

Roundy, Shadrach, presdt of bishopric, <page 199>; in charge of cattle, <page 265>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; of carrying co., <page 298>.

Rowberry, John, explores Jordan Val., <page 314>; legislator, <page 458>.

Royle, Henry, miss. to Wales, <page 409>.

Ruddock, S. A., claim of, <page 20>.

Rush Valley dist, mines of, <page 742>.

Russell, Amasa, erects carding-machine, <page 279>.

Russell, Isaac, miss. to England, <page 405>.

Russell, Wm G., settles at Kamas, <page 595>.

Rust, W. W., ascent of Twin Peaks, <page 265>.

S

Safety Society Bank, hist. of, 1836-8, <page 113>-14.

St Charles, coty seat, <page 608>.

St George founded, <page 600>; coty seat, <page 608>; described, <page 707>; banks, <page 765>.

St John founded, <page 601>.

St Louis, Mormons at, <page 79>, <page 399>.

San Antonio de Padua River. See Provo River.

San Bernardino, Mormon colony at, <page 505>, <page 592>-3, <page 642>.

San Buenaventura River. See Green River,

San Clemente River. See White River.

San Cosme River named 1776, <page 11>.

San Diego, Mormon battal. at, <page 245>.

Sandusky, missionaries at, <page 78>.

Sandwich Islands, missionary work in, <page 412>.

San Francisco, Mormons at, <page 285>.

San Francisco dist, mines of, <page 744>-5.

San Juan coty organized, <page 705>.

San Juan River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 9>.

San Pete coty organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; settlements, <page 705>-6.

San Pete Valley, settlements in, <page 313>-14; coal deposits, <page 737>.

Santa Clara founded, <page 601>.

Santa Fe, expedt. from, 1775, <page 9>; return to, 1776, <page 17>; Mormon battal. at, <page 243>.

Santa Isabel River named 1776, <page 16>.

Santaquin founded <page 318>.

Salem founded, <page 601>.

Salina settlement, <page 706>.

Salt Lake City, site chosen, <page 264>; named, <page 265>; immigrants at, <page 297>-301, <page 547>; population 1850, <page 328>; warm spring baths, <page 330>; hand-cart immigrants, <page 428>; convention, <page 440>; election, 1849, <page 443>; incorporated, <page 450>; peace commis. at, <page 531>; advance of army, <page 533>; city deserted, <page 535>; description of, <page 580>-5, <page 694>-9; charter amended, <page 608>; Lincoln's funeral exercises, <page 626>; Josephite movement, <page 645>-6; Godbeite meeting, <page 648>-9; constitutional convention, <page 687>; hospitals, <page 693>; banks, <page 765>.

Salt Lake coty organized, <page 449>; acct of, <page 699>.

Salt Lake Daily Herald, <page 715>.

Salt Lake Daily Times, <page 716>.

Salt Lake Tribune established, <page 654>.

Salt Lake Valley, co. selected to go to, 1845, <page 215>.

Salt Lake water-works, co. incorporated, <page 483>.

Salt Lake and Western R. R., building of, <page 758>.

'Saluda' steamer blown up 1852, <page 274>.

Savage, Levi, opposition of, <page 424>.

Saw-mills at Salt Lake 1848, <page 279>.

Sayers, H., missionary, <page 402>.

Schettler, P. A., sec. of order of Enoch, <page 361>; treasurer silk assoc., <page 726>.

Schiel, Dr James, in Gunnison party, <page 468>.

Schindle, George, col of legion, <page 146>.

Schisms and apostasies 1844-69, <page 641>-55.

Schofield, Joseph S., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Schoes, Geo., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Schools, hist. of, <page 707>-13.

Scientific society, <page 585>.

Scipio founded, <page 601>.

Scotland, miss. work in, <page 409>.

Scott, Capt., fight with Inds, <page 312>.

Scott, Jacob, sent to Missouri 1831, <page 84>.

Scott, John, col of militia, <page 442>.

Scott, Gen. Winfield, opinion of expedt., <page 497>.

Scovil, L. N., capt. in legion, <page 147>.

Searle, John C., settler at Payon, <page 312>.

Sericulture, value of, <page 726>.

Serra, Junipero, memorial of 1773, <page 8>.

Sessions, Peregrine, founds Bountiful, <page 307>.

Seventies, duties of, <page 346>, <page 347>.

Sevier coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; organized, <page 706>.

Sevier Lake, expedt. at, 1776, <page 16>.

Sevier River, Gunnison party at, <page 468>; Aitken murder, <page 562>.

Shaffer, J. Wilson, apptd gov., <page 658>; career, <page 658>-661; death, <page 661>.

[p. 803]

Sharp, John, director order of Enoch, <page 361>; woollen-mills, <page 732>; biog., <page 755>.

Shaver, Leonidas, asso. judge, <page 461>.

Shearer, Dan., missionary, <page 402>.

Shearer, Norman B., missionary, <page 402>.

Sheets, Elijah, direc. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Sherwood, Henry G., stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; of high council, <page 198>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; legislator, <page 458>.

Shilling, W. N., biog., <page 766>.

Shirtleff, Vincent, councillor S. L. City, <page 450>.

Shirtliff, L. A., missionary, <page 402>.

Shirts, Peter, besieged by Inds, <page 633>.

Shoensburg, founded, <page 601>.

Shoshones, hostility, <page 472>; treaties, <page 477>, <page 634>; attack settlements, <page 630>; defeated, <page 631>.

Shumway, A. P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Shumway, C., pioneer '47, <page 272>; at Sevier River, <page 316>; saw-mill, <page 327>; legislator, <page 458>.

Silver Bell mine, richness of, <page 743>.

Silver Reef City, incorporated, <page 746>.

Simpson, G., leads mob against Mormons, 1833, <page 100>.

Simpson, J. H., explor. expedt., <page 752>.

Simpson's route, <page 751>.

Sinclair, C. E., assoc. judge, <page 500>; actions, <page 539>-40.

Singleton, Col, actions against Mormons, <page 227>-8.

Sioux, the, robberies by, <page 268>-9.

Sirrine, M., missionary, <page 402>.

Skelton, Robt, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Slater, Rich., at S. L. from Cal., <page 285>.

Slaterville, settlement, <page 308>, <page 318>, <page 701>.

Sloan, Edw. L., editor, <page 716>.

Sloan, James, col of legion, <page 146>; dist clerk, <page 287>; miss. to Ireland, <page 410>.

Smelting-works, production of, <page 748>-9.

Smith, Capt., pilots co. to Cal. 1849, <page 299>.

Smith, A. J., left on Missouri, <page 274>.

Smith, Alexander, at Nauvoo after exodus, <page 644>; Josephite missionary, <page 645>-6.

Smith, Alfred, joins Gladdenites, <page 643>; arrested, <page 644>.

Smith, Alvin, death of, 1825, <page 44>.

Smith, D. B., col of legion, <page 146>.

Smith, D. C., publisher of Times and Seasons, <page 109>.

Smith, Dan., settles at Uintah, <page 319>.

Smith, David Hyrum, at Nauvoo after exodus, <page 644>; Josephite missionary, <page 645>-6.

Smith, Don Carlos, presdt of highpriests, <page 199>.

Smith, Elias, university regent, <page 709>; biog., <page 775>.

Smith, Emma, hymn-book of, <page 74>.

Smith, Geo. A., recorder, <page 83>; address, <page 192>; ordained elder, <page 197>; of travelling council, <page 198>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; holds service in valley, <page 263>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; building at Provo, <page 311>; lays out town site, <page 312>; builds fort, <page 316>; apostle, <page 345>; promotes canal co., <page 483>; grant to, <page 451>; legislator, <page 450>; director Z. C. M. I., <page 652>; biog., <page 671>-2.

Smith, Hyrum, baptized, <page 58>; plates shown to, <page 59>; receives P. Pratt, <page 71>-4; sent to Missouri, <page 84>; trial and sentence, <page 131>; in prison, <page 139>; stockholder in Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>; arrested, <page 175>; death, <page 179>; patriarch, <page 198>.

Smith, James A., grist-mill, <page 327>.

Smith, Jedediah S., trapping expedt. 1826, <page 22>-3.

Smith, Jesse, sent on mission, <page 104>.

Smith, John, biog., <page 679>.

Smith, John G., bishop, <page 597>.

Smith, John H., apostle, biog., <page 345>, <page 681>.

Smith, John S., biog., <page 700>.

Smith, Joseph, parentage and birth, <page 40>; spiritual manifestations, marriage, persecutions, translates plates, organizes church, 1820-30, <page 40>-70; missionary work 1830-34, <page 74>-110; tarred and feathered, <page 92>; banking operations, <page 113>; starts newspaper, <page 115>; persecuted, <page 122>-31; in prison, <page 139>; founds Nauvoo, <page 141>; actions at, 1840-4, <page 143>-88; revelation on polygamy, <page 160>; candidate for presidency, <page 168>; arrest and murder, <page 175>-83; character, <page 184>-88.

Smith, Joseph, Sr, character and family, <page 40>, <page 41>; revelation to, <page 50>; conversion, <page 58>; plates shown to, <page 59>.

Smith, Jos., Jr, missionary, <page 402>; establishes reorganized church, <page 644>; pres. Josephites, <page 646>.

Smith, Joseph F., apostle, <page 345>; biog., <page 434>; actions against Josephites, <page 646>; councillor, <page 680>.

Smith, Maj. Lot, operations of, <page 515>-16.

Smith, Oliver, testimony of, <page 60>.

Smith (Peg-leg), in J. S. Smith's expedt., <page 23>.

Smith, S. H., sent to Missouri, <page 84>; university regent, <page 146>; death, <page 189>; converts B. Young, <page 195>; pres. of bishopric, <page 199>.

[p. 804]

Smith, Samuel, baptized 1829, <page 58>; plates shown to, <page 59>.

Smith, T. L., mountaineer, offer of, <page 291>.

Smith, Wm, legislator, <page 142>; address, <page 192>; of travelling council, <page 198>; apostle, <page 344>-5; goes to Illinois, <page 642>.

Smith, W. H., settler at Coalville, <page 595>.

Smithfield, founded, <page 597>; hematite beds, <page 735>.

Smoot, A. O., assists immigrants, <page 283>; bishop, <page 290>; meets army, <page 503>; woollen-mill, <page 732>.

Smoot, Wm C., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Snake River, first Mormon visit to, <page 693>.

Snell, Geo. D., biog., <page 704>.

Snider, J., supervised buildings at Nauvoo, <page 145>; university regent, <page 146>; miss. to England, <page 405>.

Snider, Sam., settles in Summit coty, <page 594>.

Snow, B., amateur actor, <page 584>.

Snow, Eliza R., biog. and bibliog., <page 719>; vice-presdt silk assoc., <page 726>.

Snow, Erastus, enters Salt Lake Val., <page 260>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; apostle, <page 345>; missionary, <page 402>-11; draughts constitution, <page 440>; director iron co., <page 483>; founds St George, <page 600>; biog., <page 775>.

Snow, Lorenzo, presdt of camp, <page 247>; aids immigrants, <page 283>; founds Brigham City, <page 318>; apostle, <page 345>; miss. to Switzerland, <page 412>; presdt Polysophical Sec., <page 585>; biog., <page 774>.

Snow, Willard, maj. of militia, <page 442>; legislator, <page 443>, <page 458>.

Snow, Wm, magistrate, <page 287>; alderman, <page 450>.

Snow, Zerubbabel, assoc. judge, <page 456>; university regent, <page 709>.

Snyder, J. A., in Gunnison party, <page 468>.

Snyder, Sam., grant to, <page 609>.

Soda Springs, military post-at, <page 620>; Z. C. M. I. branch, <page 653>.

Soil, character of, <page 322>, <page 724>.

Sorrow, John C., survivor of Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 558>.

Sotomayor, Pedro de, in Cardena's expedt., <page 1>, <page 4>.

Southern Utonian, newspaper, <page 716>.

South Pass, Mormons arrive at, <page 256>.

South Weber, first located, <page 318>.

Spaniards, discoveries of, 1540-<page 177><page 7>, <page 1>-17.

Spanish Fork incorporated, <page 450>: founded, <page 601>; settlers at, <page 704>.

Spanish Fork reservation, <page 630>.

Spanish River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 14>.

Spaulding, John, testimony of, <page 60>.

Spaulding, Rev. S., fictitious hist. by, <page 60>-2; The Manuscript Found, <page 60>.

Spencer, Daniel, deposed as mayor, <page 206>; legislator, <page 458>; university regent, <page 709>.

Spencer, Orson, professor at university, <page 146>, <page 709>; legislator, <page 458>.

Spicer, Wells, atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Spiers, J., founds Plain City, <page 601>.

Spring City, incorporated, <page 706>.

Springville, founded, <page 318>; incorporated, <page 450>; immigrants at, <page 547>.

Staines, A. W. C., adopted by Brigham Young, <page 361>.

Staines, Wm C., librarian 1852, <page 325>.

Stakes of Zion, division, <page 347>-8.

Stansbury, Capt. H., survey expedt. 1849-50, <page 463>-7; An Expedt. to the Valley of the Gt. S. L., <page 465>.

Stayner, Arthur, miss. to France, <page 411>.

Stenhouse, T. B. H., works of, <page 636>-7; supports Godbeites, <page 649>; editor D. Telegraph, <page 715>.

Steptoe, Lt-col, investigations by, <page 492>-4.

Stevens, wounded in Ind. fight, <page 310>.

Stevens, Roswell, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Stevens, Sidney, biog., <page 716>.

Stewart, And. J., settler at Payon, <page 312>.

Stewart, Benj. F., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Stewart, Ivin, occupies Harrisville, <page 318>,

Stewart, Levi, missionary, <page 402>.

Stewart, James W., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Stiles, Geo. P., assoc. judge, <page 462>; chief justice, <page 488>; character, <page 489>.

Stoal, Josiah, Joe Smith works for, 1825, <page 44>.

Stock-raising, description and value of, <page 729>-32.

Stoddard, John, biog., <page 733>.

Stokes, Rev. G., at Lee's execution, <page 570>.

Stoker, John, representative 1851, <page 458>.

Stout, Hosea, maj. of legion, <page 146>; capt. night guard, <page 282>; legislator, <page 458>; atty, <page 489>; arrested, <page 663>-4; university regent, <page 709>.

Strang, J. J., revelations of, <page 641>.

Strangites, the, sect of, <page 641>.

Strickland, O. F., assoc. judge, <page 662>.

Stringham, Briant, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Sugar Creek, first Mormon camp 1846, <page 218>.

[p. 805]

Sulphur, discoveries of, <page 739>.

Summe, Gilburd, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Summit coty, judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; limits, <page 702>; coal deposits, <page 737>.

Supply trains, burning of, <page 515>-16.

Sutherland, atty in Lee trial, <page 565>.

Sutter's Mill, gold discovery 1848, <page 301>-2.

Sutter's Fort, cannon from, <page 278>.

Sweden, miss. work in, <page 411>.

Sweetwater, emigrants encamp at, <page 426>.

Switzerland, miss. work in, <page 412>.

T

Tabernacle, services in, <page 358>, <page 588>-9.

Taft, Seth, pioneer of '47, <page 272>; bishop, <page 290>.

Tanner, Thomas, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Taxation, <page 767>-8.

Taylor, John, signs memorial, <page 134>; university regent, <page 146>; confined with J. Smith, wounded, 1844, <page 178>-83; address, <page 189>-92; of travelling council, <page 198>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; missionary work, <page 253>, <page 408>, <page 410>-11; in charge of camp, <page 271>; Reminiscences, <page 330>; apostle, <page 345>; conversion, <page 403>-5; biog., <page 433>; draughts constitution, <page 440>; assoc. judge, <page 443>; elected pres. of church, <page 678>-80; appearance and mien, <page 682>.

Taylor, Norman, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Taylor, P. G., reoccupies Harrisville, <page 318>.

Teasdale, Geo., apostle, <page 345>, <page 681>; biog., <page 681>.

Telegraphs, first message, <page 770>; lines in operation, <page 771>-2.

Temple at Kirtland, <page 94>, <page 112>-13; Zion, <page 95>-6; Nauvoo, <page 144>, <page 206>-7; Salt Lake City, <page 264>, <page 582>.

Territorial Inquirer, newspaper, <page 716>.

Territory, admission as, <page 453>-4; seal of, <page 460>.

Texas, Mormon settlement in, <page 642>.

Thatcher, Aaron, settler at Logan City, <page 597>.

Thatcher, Hezekiah, wealth of, <page 597>.

Thatcher, John, settler at Logan City, <page 597>.

Thatcher, Moses, apostle, <page 345>; director order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Theatricals at Salt Lake, 1849, <page 295>.

Theobald, Wm, relocates Duncan's retreat, <page 601>.

'The Revenue Cutter,' leathern boat, <page 255>.

The True Latter-day Saint's Herald, Josephite newspaper, <page 646>.

Thompson, Chas, missionary, <page 402>.

Thompson, Elder R. B., death of, 1841, <page 83>.

Thomas, Robt T., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Thorington, Wm, execution of, <page 592>.

Thornley, John, settles in Cache coty, <page 597>.

Thornton, H. M., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Thorpe, M. B., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Thurston, T. J., occupies Morgan coty, <page 596>.

Timber, scarcity of, <page 323>, <page 727>.

Times and Seasons, hist. of, <page 109>.

Timpanogos Lake. See Utah Lake.

Tintic dist, mines in, value, <page 743>-4.

Tippitts, I. H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Tithing, law of, <page 349>-52.

Titus, John, chief justice, <page 621>.

Tizon River discovery of, 1540, <page 3>, <page 4>.

Tobar, Pedro de, expedt. of, 1540, <page 1>-4.

Tobin, Lt, attempted murder of, <page 569>.

Tolman, Cyrus, explores Jordan Val., <page 314>.

Tooele City founded, <page 315>; mills, <page 327>; incorporated, <page 450>; population 1880, <page 703>.

Tooele coty organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>.

Toquerville founded, <page 599>.

Townsend, hotel-keeper, <page 582>.

Trade, <page 578>-9.

Trappers, expedts of, 1778-<page 184><page 6>, <page 18>-35.

Truman, Jacob house at Peoa, <page 595>.

Truthteller, periodical, <page 642>.

Tullidge Bros support Godbeite movement, <page 649>.

Tullidge, E. W., works of, <page 636>.

Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, first appearance, <page 716>.

Turley, Theodore, signs memorial, <page 134>.

Turpin, Jesse, miss. to Jamaica, <page 410>.

Tusayan, Spaniards at, 1540, <page 1>, <page 2>.

Twin Peaks, ascent of, 1847, <page 265>.

Tyler, Daniel, Hist. of Mormon Battl., <page 245>; missionary, <page 402>.

U

Uintah, settlement, <page 319>, <page 701>.

Uintah agency, <page 455>.

Uintah coty organized, <page 704>.

Uintah dist, mines of, <page 744>.

Uintah reservation, Indians at, <page 635>-6.

Uintah River, expedition at, 1776, <page 11>.

[p. 806]

University at Nauvoo, officers, <page 146>; Deseret, <page 323>-4, <page 709>-15.

Utah, origin of name, <page 34>-5; migration to, 1847, <page 252>-74; settlement and occupation, 1847-52, <page 305>-20; boundaries, <page 321>; physical features, <page 322>; land and waters, <page 322>; flora and fauna, <page 323>; as a ter. 1849-53, <page 439>-80; seeks state admission, <page 483>-4; <page 687>; expedt. to, 1857, <page 496>-8; martial law, <page 509>; war 1857-8, <page 512>-40; reformation, <page 540>-2; map of settlements, <page 594>; refused state admission; <page 606>; limits curtailed, <page 623>; disturbances, <page 626>-9; commercial control, <page 651>-5; climate, <page 691>; population, 1880-3, <page 692>-4; towns and settlements, <page 694>-707; schools, <page 707>-15; journalism, <page 715>-19; agriculture, <page 720>-8; stockraising, <page 729>-32; manufactures, <page 733>-4; mining, <page 734>-50.

Utah Central R. R., building of, <page 756>.

Utah coty organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; description of, <page 703>-4.

Utah Eastern R. R., building of, <page 758>.

Utah Lake, expedt. at, 1776, <page 11>-13; fort built, 1825, <page 21>; Fremont at, <page 33>; outlet, <page 263>; surveyed, <page 465>.

Utah Magazine, offence to church dignitaries, <page 647>; acct of Godbe trial, <page 649>.

Utah and Northern R. R., building of, <page 757>.

Utahs attack settlers, <page 305>-6; disturbances with, <page 474>-6; outbreak of, <page 632>-3; treaty with, <page 634>.

Utah Silk Association incorporated, <page 726>.

Utah Southern R. R., building of, <page 756>-7.

V

Vance, Wm P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Van Cott, John, marshal of Pratt's comps, <page 267>.

Van Cott, James, direc. of order of Enoch, <page 361>.

Van Vliet, Capt., at S. L., actions of, <page 505>-9.

Vaughn, Vernon H., appointed gov., <page 661>.

Vazquez de Coronado, Francisco, journey of, 1540, <page 1>.

Vermilion, settlement, <page 706>.

Virgin City founded, <page 599>.

Virginia City, origin of name, <page 590>.

Voice of Warning, issue of 1837, <page 115>.

W

Wadsworth, A., bishop at Easton, <page 308>.

Wages, <page 578>.

Waite, Chas B., associate judge, <page 605>; resigns, <page 621>.

Waite, Mrs C. V., The Mormon Prophet, <page 637>.

Wakefield, Joseph, sent to Missouri, <page 84>.

Wales, miss. work in, <page 409>.

Walker, arrest and escape of, <page 628>, <page 629>.

Walker, chief of Utes, <page 313>; character, <page 473>-4; treatment of Mormons, <page 474>; war with, <page 474>-5; death, <page 477>.

Walker Bros support Godbeite movement, <page 649>; persecution of, <page 652>, <page 654>; first shippers of ore, <page 741>.

Walker, Henson, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Walker, Joseph, expedt. of 1832-3, <page 25>.

Walker war, 1853, <page 473>-5; cost of, <page 479>.

Wall, Wm, settler at WalIsburg, <page 595>.

Wallsburg, settlement at, <page 595>.

Walton, Alfred, settler at Willard, <page 318>.

Walton, Mrs, conversion of, <page 404>.

Wandell, C. W., miss. to Australia, <page 410>.

Wandell, Wesley, missionary, <page 402>.

Wanship, coty seat, <page 608>.

Ward, Austin N., The Husband in Utah, <page 602>.

Ward, Elijah, at Sevier River, <page 316>.

Wardel, Geo., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Wadsworth, Abiah. grant to, <page 483>.

Warner, John E., killed, <page 475>,

Warren, Major, protects Mormons, <page 223>-4.

Warren, W. B., com. to Nauvoo, <page 211>.

Wasatch coty, judicial dist, <page 539>.

Washington coty organized 1852, <page 450>; judicial dist, <page 539>; settlements in, <page 600>-1; coty seat, <page 608>.

Washington ter., Mormons in 1880, <page 693>.

Washoe Val., settlement in, <page 592>.

Watts, Robt, settles at South Weber, <page 319>.

Weaver, Franklin, grant to, <page 609>.

Webb, Edw. M., missionary, <page 402>.

Weber, C. M., in Bartleson party, <page 29>.

Weber coty organized, <page 449>; judicial dist, <page 539>; coty seat, <page 608>; settlements in, <page 700>-1.

Weber River, Fremont's expedt. at, <page 32>.

[p. 807]

Weiler, Jacob, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Weld, John F., col of legion, <page 146>.

Wells, Daniel H., university regent, <page 146>, <page 709>; comd of Mormons at Nauvoo, <page 228>; call for vols, <page 309>; Narrative, <page 331>; vice-pres. order of Enoch, <page 361>; in jail, <page 393>; maj.-gen. of militia, <page 442>; atty-gen. <page 443>; legislator, <page 458>; ferry right, <page 483>; actions at Echo Canon, <page 513>-15; witness in Lee trial, <page 567>; postpones militia mustering, <page 659>; arrested, <page 663>-4; at B. Young's funeral, <page 671>-2; biog., <page 678>-9.

Wells, J. S., settles at Willard, <page 318>.

Wells, Lyman B., settler at Willard, <page 318>.

Wellsville, founded, <page 596>.

West Indies. miss. work in, <page 410>.

Western Monitor, incendiary articles of, 1833, <page 101>.

Weston, John, murder by, <page 569>.

West Weber founded, <page 601>.

Wheeler, John, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

White, O., missionary, <page 402>.

White River, expedt. at, 1776, <page 11>.

Whitlock, Harvey, sent to Missouri, <page 84>.

Whitman, Marcus, in Utah 1842, <page 32>.

Whitmer, Christian, plates shown to, <page 50>; of council of twelve, <page 108>.

Whitmer, David, baptized 1829, <page 58>; plates shown to, <page 59>; sent to Missouri, <page 84>; pres. council of twelve, <page 108>; secedes, <page 118>.

Whitmer, Jacob, plates shown to, <page 59>.

Whitmer, John, plates shown to, <page 59>; church historian, <page 82>; excommunicated, <page 83>; asst pres. council of twelve, <page 108>.

Whitmer, Peter, baptized, <page 58>.

Whitmer, Peter, Jr, plates shown to, <page 59>; miss. work, <page 75>, <page 78>.

Whitney, Horace K., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Whitney, N. K., at Kirtland, <page 89>; bishop, <page 89>-90; university regent, <page 146>; treasurer of ter., <page 443>.

Whitney, Orson K., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Whipple, Edson, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Wight, Lyman, sent to Missouri, <page 84>; of council of twelve, <page 108>; arrested and released, <page 122>; disperses mob, <page 123>-4; trial and sentence, <page 131>; supervises Nauvoo buildings , <page 145>; address, <page 192>; apostle, <page 345>; leader of Texas colony, <page 642>.

Wild, H. B., settler at Coalville, <page 595>.

Wild beasts, depredations by, <page 277>-8.

Willard City founded, <page 318>.

Willes, Wm, miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Williams, acts at assassination of Smith, <page 178>-83.

Williams, A. B., settler at Coalville, <page 595>.

Williams, Alex., trading with Inds, <page 309>; in Ind. fight, <page 310>; saw-mill, <page 327>; legislator, <page 458>.

Williams, Almon K., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Williams, Christopher, bishop, <page 290>.

Williams, F. G., conversion, <page 78>; remains at Kirtland, <page 88>; councillor, <page 94>; paymaster Kirtland co., <page 106>.

Williams S., presdt of elders, <page 199>.

Williams, Thomas, murder of, <page 489>.

Willie, James G., capt. of hand-cart co., <page 423>-7.

Willow Creek, emigrants buried at, <page 427>.

Wilson, arrest and killing of, <page 628>-9.

Wilson, Alex., U. S. atty, <page 539>.

Wilson, Dunbar, of high council, <page 198>.

Wilson, G., ascent Twin Peaks, <page 265>.

Wilson, Gen. J., consultation with Young, <page 446>; Ind. agent, <page 478>.

Winchester, Benjamin, missionary, <page 402>.

Wolfskill, Wm, trapping expedt. 1830, <page 23>-4.

Mormon's Exponent, woman's right paper, <page 716>.

Woman suffrage, first instance, <page 282>; granted, <page 657>.

Wood, G. D., mayor of Springville, <page 704>.

Wood, John, in Quincy deputation, <page 228>.

Woodward Geo., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Woodruff, Wilford, asst recorder, <page 83>; address, <page 192>; ordained elder, <page 197>; of travelling council, <page 198>; dedicates temple, <page 206>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; holds service in valley, <page 263>; pioneer '47, <page 272>; Journal, <page 331>; apostle, <page 345>; biog. <page 435>; legislator, <page 458>; pres. scientific soc., <page 585>.

Woods, Geo. L., apptd gov., <page 661>; character, <page 661>-2; career, <page 662>-4; retired from office, <page 667>.

Woodson, Sam. H., mail contract, <page 501>.

Woodworth, L., col of legion, <page 147>.

Wool business, value of, <page 731>-2.

Woollen-mills, hist. of, <page 732>-3.

Woolley, Sam. A., miss. to Calcutta, <page 410>.

Woolley, Edwin D., missionary, <page 402>; legislator, <page 458>.

[p. 808]

Woolsey, Thomas, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Wordsworth, Wm, pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Workman, Oliver G., delegate to Wash., <page 447>.

Wright, Aaron, testimony of, <page 60>.

Wright, Alex., miss. to Scotland, <page 409>.

Wright, Jonathan C., magistrate, <page 287>.

Wyandos, the, miss. labors among, <page 399>.

Wyoming ter. organized, <page 623>; Mormons in, <page 693>.

X

Xongopabi, Spaniards at, 1776, <page 17>.

Y

Yates, Rich., Murder of, <page 393>.

Yearsley, David D., coty com., <page 287>.

Young, A., missionary, <page 402>.

Young, Ann Eliza, suit for divorce, <page 393>.

Young, Brigham, sent to Missouri, <page 104>; apostle, <page 111>, <page 344>-5; signs memorial, <page 134>; at New York, <page 142>; issues address, <page 192>; pres. of church, biog., actions of, 1844-5, <page 193>-213; circular, <page 215>; joins immigrants, <page 218>; activity, <page 249>-51; at Salt Lake, 1847, <page 261>, <page 283>; rebaptized, <page 265>; revelation, <page 267>; supt of camps, <page 282>; thanks battl., <page 286>; issues currency, <page 291>; denounces Cal. emigration, <page 303>-4; founds Ogden, <page 307>; message, 1852, <page 327>; grist-mill, <page 327>; in England, <page 406>; gov. of ter., <page 443>, <page 455>-6; grants to, <page 451>, <page 609>; opposes U. S. survey, <page 464>; as a dictator, <page 481>-2; promotes co., <page 483>; reappointed gov., <page 493>; actions for defence, <page 503>; reception of Van Vliet, <page 505>-9; proclamation, <page 509>; investigates Mtn Meadows massacre, <page 558>; threatened arrest, <page 572>-3; dispute, with U. S. officials, <page 610>; denounces Gladdenites and Godbeite movement, <page 644>-8; last days of, <page 656>-76; arrested, <page 663>; death, <page 669>; character, <page 672>-4; will, <page 675>-6; woollen-mill, <page 732>; pres. U. Cent. R. R., <page 756>.

Young, Brigham, Jr, apostle, <page 345>.

Young, Mrs C. D., pioneer '47, <page 272>; A Woman's Experience, <page 331>; biog., <page 331>.

Young, Harriet P., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Young, Isaac P. D., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Young, John, first patriarch, <page 195>; pres. of Pratt's companies, <page 267>; death, <page 675>.

Young, John W., at Brigham Young's funeral, <page 671>; sec. U. Cent. R. R., <page 756>.

Young, Joseph, presdt of seventies, <page 199>; legislator, <page 458>.

Young, Lorenzo D., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Young, Lorenzo Z.. pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Young, Phineas H., pioneer of '47, <page 272>.

Young, Seraph, first woman voter, <page 657>.

Young, Zina D., director silk assoc., <page 727>.

Yount, Geo. C., in Wolfskill expedt. 1830, <page 24>.

Yutas, the, reception of Spaniards 1776, <page 10>-13.

Z

Zion City founded, <page 87>.

Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution, extent of operations, <page 652>-3.

Zuni, Spaniards at, 1540, <page 1>-5; expedt. at, 1776, <page 17>.

    


===== BOOK: htss.txt =====



Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints

  

by F. Kingsbury and G. P. Phillips

  

Calcutta: Association Press; London, NY: Oxford University Press

  

[1921]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, January 2010, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
SIVA NATARAJA

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

          CHAP.

        

       PAGE

     
       

       INTRODUCTION

       <page 1>

     
      I.

       SAMBANDAR AND HIS HYMNS--STANZAS 1-24

       <page 10>

     
      II.

       APPARSWaMI AND HIS HYMNS--STANZAS 25-64

       <page 35>

     
      III.

       SUNDARAMuRTI AND HIS HYMNS--STANZAS 65-79

       <page 70>

     
      IV.

       ManIKKA VaSAHAR AND HIS HYMNS--STANZAS 80-136

       <page 84>

     
       

       APPENDIX I: SHRINES MENTIONED IN THE POEMS

       <page 128>

     
       

       APPENDIX II: SYSTEM OF TRANSLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION

       <page 129>

     
       

       INDEX

       <page 131>

     
     

ILLUSTRATIONS

          1. SIVA NAtARaJa

       Frontispiece

     
      2. SAMBANDAR

       Following   Page 8

     
      3. APPARSWaMI

       "      34

     
      4. SUNDARAR

       "      68

     
      5. ManIKKA VaSAHAR

       "      84

     
   NOTE.--The bronze statuettes of the poets reproduced in this volume are not historical portraits but imaginative figures, created in accordance with popular traditions and used in the worship of the temple and the home.

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INTRODUCTION

  

(A)--The Hymns and their Significance

THE voice of chanting and song, to the accompaniment of unfamiliar instruments, floats out over the high wall of the temple in the coolness of the evening or the dawn, making the Western passer-by wonder what it is that is being chanted and sung. If only he had a Hindu hymn-book he thinks he could learn from it the spirit of Hinduism as well as a non-Christian could learn Christianity from Christian hymns. For the Tamil country at any rate there is such a hymnbook, and our present aim is to give enough specimens from it for readers to know what the hymns are like. Englishmen are wanting to understand India more than they ever wanted before, for their debt to India is heavy. Indians are wanting more than ever before to know the wonderful past of their own country, and the wonder of it is all bound up with its religion. At such a time these hymns are worth looking into, for they are being sung in temples and homes throughout the Tamil country, and Tamil is the mother-tongue of more than eighteen millions of people. For pious Saivites they equal in authority the Sanskrit Vedas; the mere learning of them by rote is held to be a virtue, and devout. Tamil parents compel their children to memorize them in much the same way as Christian parents make their children learn the Psalms.

[p. 2]

The hymns here given are specimens from the Devaram and the Tiruvachakam. The Devaram is the first of the collections of works held as canonical by Tamil Saivites. Its hymns were composed between six and eight hundred A.D. by the three authors of whom this book gives some account, and the whole was put together in one collection of 797 stanzas by Nambi Andar Nambi about 1000 A.D. The Tiruvachakam, or Sacred Utterance, was written by one author, Manikya Vachaka (Tamilized as Manikka Vasahar) at a date so far unsettled that scholars are still divided on the question whether it preceded or followed the Devaram, though most scholars place it in the ninth, or early in the tenth, century. Whenever it was written, it stands even higher than the Devaram in the affections of Tamil people.

Out of an immense number of hymns we have tried to select those which are most representative, those which are favourites, and those which contain the most striking thoughts. But it is amazingly difficult to give a fair or adequate idea of them in an English rendering. They are essentially songs, intended to be sung to Indian tunes, in metres which no English metre can represent. Much of their charm depends upon assonance, upon plays upon words, upon close knitting of word with word, upon intricacy of metre and rhyme, almost as much as upon the substance. We can only claim a fair degree of accuracy in our renderings, apologizing to the lovers of Tamil poetry for the plainness and poverty of our representation of so rich and varied an original. All our translations are new, and nearly all of those from the Devaram represent verses which have never before been done

[p. 3]

into English. One of the translators of this book learned as Saivite child to love these hymns, and therefore is the authority in matters of interpretation, the Englishman being responsible for the form. We shall be quite satisfied if our translations serve to call attention to the poems, and are some day replaced by worthier renderings.

We have tried to reduce introductory matter to a minimum, only giving such information as is necessary to enable readers to understand the hymns and the allusions in them. But it is entirely necessary to say something about the worship of Siva, and to give a few words of biography of each of the four authors from whose work this book contains extracts.

  

(B)--The Worship of Siva

1. Its history previous to these poems.

The word Siva occurs even in the Rig Veda, but there it is only in conjunction with Rudra. The joining together of these names provokes conjectures as to whether we have here an amalgamation of two earlier deities, an Aryan and a Dravidian, but these need not detain us here, since clearly even at this early date Siva was an Aryan deity, identical with Rudra the storm-god, and father of the Maruts, storm-gods themselves. Rudra is a handsome god; he uses his thunderbolts chiefly for punishing evil-doers, and is on the whole a kindly being. The name Siva means auspicious,' and must not be confused with the Tamil word for 'red,' although as it happens Rudra-Siva was a red being,

[p. 4]

In the period of the Puranas, we find that Siva, instead of being one of a multitude of nature-deities, has risen to be one of the great triad, Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, who are far above all gods. How the change has come about we have not yet the means of discovering. The function has changed as much as the person, Siva being now the destroyer as Brahma is the creator and Vishnu the preserver. The process of reduction in the number of the superior deities goes further, and Brahma falls practically into the background, leaving only Vishnu and Siva as supreme beings for the worship of the people of India. By the time Hinduism penetrated southwards into the Tamil country, probably somewhere about 500 B.C., it had two main forms, the worship of Vishnu and the worship of Siva, the two being not too sharply disconnected. The Tamil Hindu believed in the existence of both, but held his own god, whether Siva or Vishnu, to be supreme. Hinduism seemed to be Firmly established, but was dangerously shaken when the Jains and Buddhists spread over South India. Then came for the Vaishnavites the teachers known as the Alvars, while Saivism was defended by the poets of whose work this book gives specimens. Hinduism was saved, but it existed henceforth in two distinct forms, Vaishnavism and Saivism, separated by a wider gulf than in earlier days.

2. The portrait of Siva and its interpretation.

Siva as imagined by his worshippers has a human form, usually with one but occasionally with five or six heads. He has three eyes, the right one being really the sun, the left eye the moon, and the one in the middle of his forehead fire, His reddish hair is

[p. 5]

matted in the ascetic way, and on it is the crescent moon, the Ganges, and one or more cobras, while wreathed about it is a garland of kondai (Cassia) flowers. He has four arms, though occasional representations show eight, but one body and two legs. Commonly he is seated on a grey-coloured bull. In colour he is reddish, but his body is smeared over with white sacred ash. He holds in his hands various things such as a battle-axe, a deer, fire, a trident, a bow. Round his neck, which is dark, hangs a long necklace, the beads of which are skulls. At his waist he wears sometimes an elephant's hide, sometimes a tiger-skin, sometimes only a very scanty loin-cloth. Generally his consort, Uma, is at his left side, but sometimes he is pictured as half man and half woman, the right half (Siva) being pink-coloured, and the left half (Uma) green or black. Siva's abode is said to be on Mount Kailasa in the Himalayas, but among his special haunts is the burning-ground, where bodies are cremated. One of the favourite manifestations of Siva is that as Nataraja, the dancer in the great hall at Chidambaram, of which we give a picture (see frontispiece). Here Siva has one face, four arms, and two legs, performing a spirited dance. His right foot rests on a demon named Muyalahan. He is sometimes represented as dancing along with Kali, not the Kali who in North India is identified with Uma, but a she-devil feared in the South.

Doubtless each of these features in the manifestation of Siva has its history, but that is unknown at present. The legends give fanciful explanations of most of them. The tiger's skin and the elephant's hide, for instance, are those which Siva stripped from the wild animals sent against him by the magic of his

[p. 6]

enemies the rishis of Darukavana. But it is of more interest to find the religious ideas which these things suggest to a thoughtful Saivite devotee to-day. The hides remind him that Siva has all power, and all opposition to him is vain. That right foot of Nataraja set on Muyalahan means that God crushes down all evil. Those skulls in his necklace are the skulls of successive Brahmas, each of whom died after a life lasting many ages. This is a way of saying that while other gods at last come to their end, Siva is eternal and unchanging. Siva's dance suggests how easily, and how rhythmically, he performs his five functions of making, preserving, destroying, judging and purifying. And his dance in the burning-ground may sometimes carry the message that God becomes most real to men in the solemn hour when they part from their dead.

3. Four common legends and their meaning.

Of the many legends concerning Siva four are so frequently alluded to in our poems that they should be told here, to avoid repeated explanatory notes.

1. Brahma and Vishnu once saw a pillar of fire that seemed to grow from the depths of the earth and to pierce beyond the highest heavens. They longed to learn its depth and height, and agreed that Brahma should become a swan to fly to the pillar's top, and Vishnu a boar to dig to its root. The swan flew up to the sky, but never reached the pillar's summit. The boar dug through the earth with his tusk, but never found where the pillar began. Brahma and Vishnu perforce acknowledged their limitations and prayed to the pillar, whereupon Siva revealed himself, for the pillar was a form he had assumed. Not even the greatest and

[p. 7]

wisest of creatures can by their searching find out God. But to the humble-hearted He reveals Himself.

2. Ravana, the ten-headed giant king of Ceylon, while on his conquering progress through many realms, came to the North of India and saw Kailasa the silver mountain. Coveting its beauty he determined to uproot and transplant it to his own island. With his ten heads and twenty arms he tried to lift it from the earth, and Kailasa shook. All the hosts of heaven, and even Irma., were terrified by what seemed to them an awful earthquake. But Siva simply set his big toe upon the mountain, and lo, Ravana found himself being crushed to death. Repenting of his folly, Ravana prayed for mercy, and Siva not only forgave him but even gave him fresh boons. For God pardons sinners who repent, and gives them blessings which before they did not know.

3. Three Asuras, or supernatural beings, once by doing penance obtained from Siva three castles, one of gold, one of silver, and one of iron. These castles could fly at the owners' desire, and settle down on towns and villages, destroying many lives. In course of time the Asuras became very proud and ignored Siva. Determining to punish them, Siva mounted a chariot whose wheels were the sun and moon and whose scat was the earth. Brahma was his charioteer, the four Vedas the horses, Mount Meru his bow, the ancient serpent Adisesha his bow-string, and Vishnu his arrow. At sight of these preparations the gods became conceited, thinking that Siva could not destroy his enemies without them. Siva knowing their thoughts simply laughed, and at that laugh the three castles were on the instant reduced to ashes.

[p. 8]

Those who forget God in their pride must be punished. When those whom God uses as his instruments begin to think themselves indispensable to him, he shews that his purposes can be fulfilled without them.

4. The gods once began to churn the ocean in the hope of obtaining divine nectar. The mountain Mandara was their churning-stick, the primeval tortoise the pivot on which the stick rested and turned, and the serpent Vasuki was the churning-rope. As they churned, at first, great and splendid things came up. But suddenly something black rose up and darkened the whole universe. It was a mass of poison, deadly alike to gods and men. In terror of destruction, the gods and demons called on Siva. He came, drank the poison, and saved them all. That which was enough to destroy the universe could only stain his throat with a bluish colour. That is why Siva is often called the "poison-necked" or "blue-throated" god. There is a link here, small but real, with the Christian teaching of God as ready to suffer for the sake of humbler beings.

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

SAMBANDAR AND HIS HYMNS

Click to enlarge
SAMBANDAR

[p. 10]

  

I

  

SAMBANDAR

(Tamil: TIRU JNANA SAMBANDAMURTI SWAMI)

IN the first half of the seventh century A.D. the worship of Siva Was at its lowest ebb, overpowered by the Jainism and Buddhism which prevailed throughout the Tamil country. But a few pious Saivites remained faithful. One of them, whose name means that his heart was laid at Siva's foot, and who lived in the town in the Tanjore District now known as Shiyali, prayed to the Siva worshipped in the Shiyali temple that he might be given a son who would dispel the godless dark and win men to Lord Siva again. Sambandar's birth was the answer to that prayer. At the tender age of three, so orthodox Saivites believe, this child was fed by Sivas spouse with milk from her divine breast, mingled with divine wisdom, whence he is called in his full name, "The man connected with wisdom divine," Tiru Jnana Sambandar.

He grew up to be a pilgrim poet, who visited most of the Saivite shrines with which South India abounds, in each place singing the praise of the Siva whom there he worshipped. The cause he loved suffered a severe blow when the great king of Madura, with many of his subjects, went over to the Jain religion. The queen-consort and her prime minister (see stanzas 20 and 21) remained faithful to Saivism, and sent for Sambandar.

[p. 11]

[paragraph continues] The lonely saint faced a vast multitude of Jains in the royal presence, conquered them in argument, and reconverted the king. Eight thousand of the stubborn Jains, with Sambandar's consent, were impaled alive. Later on, after a similar adventure in another of the three great kingdoms of the Tamil country of his time, Sambandar converted to Saivism a crowd of Buddhist opponents.

This is about all that is known of a man who helped to sing Buddhism right out of Southern India, and who composed the collection of hymns which stands first among the canonical works of Saivites. Legends make him a wonder-worker, but we must draw our knowledge of the man from his poems themselves. He certainly was skilful in the handling of the many metres in which Tamil poetry is written, and it is not impossible that his productions were as effortless as the stories of him tell. That is their weakness, for there is not very much of heart religion in them. But they seem to have powerfully helped in that process of eliminating Jainism and Buddhism from India of which we know so little, though it was complete enough to be one of the marvels of history. Their author holds the foremost place among the four great 'Saivite Preceptors' (Sivacharyar), and some call him the incarnation of one of the sons of Siva.

His date seems to be one of the few clearly established dates in the history of the religion of the country. Stanza 19 shews that he was a contemporary of another great early Saivite, whose name means "Little Servant of God," and who is known to have fought in a battle which took place in 642 A.D.

[p. 12] [p. 13]

We begin with the first verse which the author composed. According to the legends he uttered it at the age of three, on the banks of the temple tank at Shiyali (once Bramapuram), after Siva's consort had fed him with milk from her own breast. The stanza itself of course contains no allusion to the story, but it is one of the best known verses in the Saivite hymnbook.

1. His ears are beringed, He rideth the bull;
   His head is adorned with the crescent moon's ray; White is He with ash from the burning-ground swept;
 And He is the thief who my heal t steals away. Great Brahma enthroned on the lotus' full bloom
   Erstwhile bowed him down and His glory extolled, And singing received he the grace of our lore
 Who dwelleth in famed Bramapuram old.

No pilgrimage in South India is more popular than that to Tiruvannamalai in North Arcot, the temple by a hill celebrated in many poems. Saivism has tried to express the existence of the 'eternal feminine' in deity by giving Siva a lady who not only is His consort, but is actually a part of Him, and is so represented in many images, which show Siva as masculine on one side and feminine on the other.

2. He is our only Lord, conjoined still
   To her whose breast no sucking lips have known.
 They who in Annamalai's holy hill,
   Where falling waters noisy chatter down,
 And the hill glistens gem-like, bow before
   Our great one who is lord and lady too,
 Unfailingly for them shall be no more
   Dread fruit of good and bad deeds they may do.

[p. 14] [p. 15]

One of the first puzzles to a student of Saivism is the way in which each of the numerous shrines seems to be spoken of as if it were Siva's exclusive abode. The broad river marked on English maps as the Cauvery, but in Tamil called the Kaviri, which brings so much blessing to a large part of South India that the respect in which it is held is not difficult to understand, is fringed throughout its length with shrines which are believed to confer the blessings of Siva on all who visit them. One of these is 'Neyttanam,' 'Place of Ghee.'

3. So ye but say Neyttanam is the home
   Of our great Lord who wears in his long hair
 The crescent moon, the river, and the snake,
   Neyttanam where chaste maidens gather fair,
 On the north bank of Kaviri's loud stream,
   Your vileness, guiltiness, the sin you dread,
   Your sorrows many, shall be banished.

This specimen of a hymn connected with Palny in the Madura District alludes (in stanza 5) to the well-known legend which says in the Saivite way that those who love God need not fear death. Markandeya was a boy devoted to Siva, but over his life hung a terrible cloud, for the fates had decreed that he would not live beyond his sixteenth year. As the appointed time drew near his father lived in an agony of dread, but Markandeya, free from fear, spent all his time in the worship of Siva. The god of Death came at last. Regardless of the fact that the boy was at worship he threw over him that noose which pulls out human life from the body. The boy clung to Siva's lingam with both his hands. From within the lingam Siva burst forth, kicked the terrible death-god and pierced him with his trident. So Markandeya was saved. The scene is sculptured on many temples.

[p. 16] [p. 17]

4. Holy Vedas chanting,
 Sacred thread He wears;
 All His hosts surround Him
 Whom the white bull bears.
 Cometh He in splendour,
 Tiger-skin attired.
 'Lord, our naked beggar
 Above all desired,'
 Cry ye in your worship,
 At His feet appeal.
 He who dwells in Palny
 All your sin will heal.

5. Three eyes hath His forehead,
 Fair moon crowns His hair;
 When Death sought a victim,
 Siva's foot crashed there;
 Gory streams of blood flowed,
 Death it was that died,
 Such is He, our Father,
 Um a, at His side;
 Dwells He aye in Palny,
 Where bees hum around
 Drunk with honeyed sweetness,
 Till its groves resound.

A multitude of hymns chant the glory of Chidambaram, ancient Tillai, holiest of all the Saivite shrines. Pious Saivites have for it a feeling not unlike the Jews' feeling for Jerusalem. The tending of the sacrificial fire comes down from pre-historic times, being firmly established when the earliest hymns of the Rig Veda were composed.

6. Tending as taught of old the sacrificial fire,
 At Tillai Brahmans pure drive out misfortune dire.
 There dwells the First of all, moon-crowned, and
 those who cleave
 For ever to His foot, no cleaving sin will grieve.

[p. 18] [p. 19]

Conjeeveram, the ancient Tamil name of which is given in this stanza, though more famous as a Vaishnavite than as a Saivite shrine, offers in its temples a remarkable compendium of the religious history of South India. See the article 'Kanchipuram' in Dr. Hastings' 'Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.'

7. He is the pith of holy writ;
   And in the tangle of His hair
 The spotless crescent's ray is lit;
   He is both Lord and Lady fair.
 He our great sovereign doth abide
   In Kachchi Ehambam's fair town.
 My mind can think of naught beside,
   Naught beside Him, and Him alone.

The next two stanzas, taken from two separate hymns associated with the great cities of Trichinopoly and Madura, both sacred places of Saivism, are set side by side in order to bring out a point which even the most sympathetic student may not ignore. Siva is commonly spoken of as all good, as in stanza 8, and yet not infrequently He includes, as in stanza 9, both good and its opposite. The pantheistic tendency even in these hymns causes God to be sometimes depicted as so all-embracing as to include evil as well as good.

8. All goodness hath He and no shadow of ill.
   Grey-white is His bull, fair Uma shares His form.
 His wealth is past searching. Chirapalli's hill
   Is His, whom to praise keeps my heart ever warm.

9. Thou art right and Thou art wrong,
   Lord of holy Alavay;
 Kinsman, I to Thee belong;
   Never fades Thy light away.
 Thou the sense of books divine,
   Thou my wealth, my bliss art Thou,
 Thou my all, and in Thy shrine
   With what praises can I bow?

[p. 20] [p. 21]

No one can know Siva unless He chooses to reveal Himself. This thought constantly recurs with great emphasis. Its favourite expression is in the first legend of the four told in our introduction. Hymn singers are fond of contrasting with the vain search of Brahma and Vishnu the revelation of Himself which Siva has graciously granted to them. Compare stanzas 25 and 48.

10. Thou Light whom Brahma, being's fount, and Vishnu could not see,
 No righteousness have I, I only speak in praise of Thee.
 Come, Valivalam's Lord, let no dark fruit of deeds, I pray,
 Torment Thy slave who with his song extols Thee day by day.

Astrology plays a large part in popular Hinduism, and the influence of baleful or auspicious stars must be reckoned with in daily life. Most baleful of all is the influence of the eclipse, which is caused by two dragons Rahu and Ketu which swallow the moon or the sun. This stanza enumerates the nine planets, Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury; Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu, and says that to the singer, who has Siva in his heart, all of them, even the dragons of eclipse, are auspicious. It is a powerful and characteristically Hindu way of saying that all things work together for good to those who love God.

The reference to the bamboo constantly recurs in descriptions of ladies' beauty. Everyone who has seen a feathery clump of bamboo trees waving in the breeze will understand it as a symbol of delicate grace.

The vina is the most delicate and beautiful instrument played in South India.

[p. 22] [p. 23]

11. She shares His form whose shoulders' curve vies with the bamboo's grace.
   His throat the poison drank, He touched the vina into tune.
 The lustrous moon and Ganges crown His hair, and He a place
   Hath made Himself within my heart. Wherefore let shine the moon
 Or sun or any star of good or ill, or serpents twain.
 For Siva's slave all are benign, all work for him great gain.

White ash from burnt cow-dung must be worn by all true Saivites. Every day the worshipper, facing north-east and crying 'Siva, Siva,' must dip in the ash the fingers of his right hand and draw the three middle fingers from left to right along his forehead, so leaving three horizontal white lines. The ceremonial side of Saivism is so prominent that this one stanza must be given, a specimen of many extolling the virtues and potencies of the ash.

The Tantras are works inculcating ceremonies, also magic performances and mystic rites. Some of these are of an immoral nature.

12. The sacred ash has mystic power,
 'Tis worn by dwellers in the sky.
 The ash bestows true loveliness.
 Praise of the ash ascends on high.
 The ash shows what tile Tantras mean,
 And true religion's essence tells,
 The ash of Him of Alavay,
 In whom red-lipped Uma dwells.

[p. 24] [p. 25]

Equally important with the wearing of the sacred ash is the constant repetition of the five syllables, or panchakshara, 'Namasivaya.' This, which means literally 'a bow to Siva,' is the chief mantra or mystic utterance of Saivism. In Saivite catechisms a whole chapter is devoted to its uses.

13. Those who repeat it while love's tears outpour,
   It gives them life, and guides them in the way.
 'Tis the true substance of the Vedas four,
   The Lord's great name, wherefore 'Hail Siva,' say.

The next three stanzas are from a hymn written in a very attractive short-lined metre, and promise light, freedom from rebirth, and bliss, through devotion to Siva at Arur (now Tiruvallur in the Tanjore District).

14. For the Father in Arur
   Sprinkle ye the blooms of love;
 In your heart will dawn true light,
   Every bondage will remove.

15. Him the holy in Arur
   Ne'er forget to laud and praise;
 Bonds of birth will severed be,
   Left behind all worldly ways.

16. In Arur, our loved one's gem,
   Scatter golden blossoms fair.
 Sorrow ye shall wipe away,
   Yours be bliss beyond compare.

[p. 26] [p. 27]

Associated with the hymn from which our next verse is taken is a story of the author, Sambandar, helping a sorrowing woman by raising to life the man she loved, who had been killed by snake-bite. The hymn makes no allusion to such a miracle, but it does give an example of intercession on behalf of another, an element which is somewhat rare in these devotional books.

17. Prostrate with fear at Thy feet she cries 'Lord with matted hair, my Refuge, Rider of the bull! Lord of Maruhal where fresh water-lilies bloom, is it right to leave her in this anguish of heart?

Our present writer's poems contain such frequent denunciations of Buddhism or Jainism that it is clear that they were written at a time when the struggle between Hinduism and these other religions was at its height. Buddhism and Jainism are scarcely known in South India to-day, though at one time they were supreme. It is probable that these songs helped not a little to drive them out of the country.

18. Those Buddhists and mad Jains may slander speak.
     Such speech befits the wand'rers from the way.
 But He who came to earth and begged for alms,
     He is the thief who stole my heart away.
 The raging elephant charged down at Him;
     O marvel! He but took and wore its hide;
 Madman men think Him, but He is the Lord
     Who in great Bramapuram doth abide.

[p. 28] [p. 29]

The "Little Servant of God" mentioned in the next verse is one of the 63 canonized saints of Saivism. According to the collection of legends known as the Periya Puranam, which is a Tamil Saivite classic, he fought at the battle of Vadapi, the modern Badami, which took place in 642 A.D. There are other indications which strengthen the view that these hymns date from the seventh century A.D.

In the first three lines of the verse Siva is conceived as a lover, and the devotee as the woman whom He loves. In India the pain of absence from a lover is supposed to cause spots to appear on the skin of the woman who loves.

19. Birds in the flowering green-branched punnai tree,
 Love writeth clear its marks on me, for He
 Who cured my grief, yet left unending pain.
 Senkattankudi is His holy fane,
 And there His "Little Servant" dwells, who now
 And ever doth before Lord Siva bow.
 There in the burning-ground, with fire in hand,
 Sporteth unceasingly our Master grand.

Another possible indication of date occurs in the next two verses, given in English prose because the Tamil names will not fit into English metres. The Mangaiyarkkarasi here mentioned was the wife of a king of Madura, Kun Pandiyan, known to history. According to the above-mentioned collection of stories, this king became a Jain. Then the queen and the prime minister named in our poem sent for Sambandar, our author, through whose efforts the king was reconverted, and all Jain teachers were executed by impaling. Unfortunately the date of Kun Pandiyan cannot at present be accurately determined. An able discussion of it can be seen in "The Tamilian Antiquary, No. 3."

[p. 30] [p. 31]

The explanation of the term 'Fish-eyed maid,' which sounds curiously in English ears, is that in Madura Siva's consort is called Minakshi, i.e. fish-eyed. The suggestion of the epithet, frequently applied to beautiful women, is that the motion of their eyes resembles the beautiful motion of a fish in water.

20. This is Alavay, where dwells the flame-formed lord of hosts, giver of the four Vedas and their meaning, with the fair fish-eyed maid. Here, reigning like the goddess of good fortune, Mangaiyarkkarasi the Chola king's daughter, braceletted chaste Pandiyan queen, daily serves and praises God.

The poem from which 20 and 21 are taken consists of stanzas like these alternately praising the queen and the king's minister, the last verse praising them both together.

21. This is Alavay, Siva's abode. To those who forsake the world He reveals Himself as world-forsaking too. Head of the heavenly ones, He rides the one white bull. Praised is He by Kulachchirai, minister of that monarch who wears white ash, and loves to lay himself bare at the feet of Siva's slaves.

Once, says a story, when Sambandar was about to contend with the Jains, the queen feared the consequences which might befal him, but he assured her in this verse that he could dare all when his God of Madura was on his side.

[p. 32] [p. 33]

22. O fair one with the deer's glance meek,
   Pandya's great queen, think not of me
 As of some sucking infant weak,
   Because such wicked foes there be.
     If only Hara by me stand,
     Stronger am I than all their band.

The story here is that the Janis had set fire to Sambandar's house. He prayed in this stanza that the fire, transformed into a fever, might go to the Pandyan king, then a Jain. It did so, and the king was converted.

23. O Thou whose form is fiery red,
   In holy Alavay, our Sire,
 In grace deliver me from dread.
   False Jains have lit for me a fire:
     O, let it to the Pandiyan ruler go,
     That he the torture of slow flame may know.

Our specimens of Sambandar's poetry may end with a verse which is a kind of benediction, often set as an auspicious word on the front page of a book.

24. Blest be the Brahmans pure, the heavenly ones, and kine.
 Cool rain fall on the earth! May the king's glory shine!
 Perish all forms of ill! Let Hara's name resound!
 May sorrow pass away, from earth's remotest bound.

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

Click to enlarge
Apparswami

[p. 35]

  

APPARSWAMI AND HIS HYMNS

[p. 36]

  

II.

  

TIRUNAVUKKARASU SWAMI

(More commonly referred to as APPARSWAMI)

SAMBANDAR, whose works we have been studying, had a friend older than himself, named Appar, or Tirunavukkarasu, belonging to that Vellala caste which to this day makes a very solid element in the population of the Tamil country. Left an orphan at an early age, Appar was brought up by a loving elder sister as a pious devotee of Siva. Great was the sister's grief when Appar forsook the faith of his fathers and became a religious teacher among the Janis. But her earnest prayers at last prevailed, and Appar not only came back to Saivism himself, but was the means of reconverting to Saivism the king of his country. His full name was Tirunavukkarasu, or 'King of the Tongue', but his young friend Sambandar called him Appar, or Father, and the name stuck to him. He too wandered throughout the Tamil country, sometimes alone, sometimes in company with Sambandar, singing his way from shrine to shrine. Pictures show him holding in his hand a little tool for scraping grass, with which he used to scrape the stones of the temple courts. The Jains persecuted him, and many stories tell of his miraculous escapes from their hands.

[p. 37]

His hymns show a truly religious nature, with a deep-rooted sense of sin and need, and an exalted joy in God. There is real critical acumen in the old epigram which represents Siva as appraising the three great writers of the Devaram, or Saivite hymn-book: "Sambandar praised himself; Sundarar praised Me for pelf; My Appar praised Me Myself."

[p. 38] [p. 39]

God, the essentially unsearchable, in His grace will reveal Himself to men. (See the first of the legends told in the Introduction.) Athihai Virattanam, in the South Arcot District, is the shrine here commemorated.

25. Vishnu, spouse of Lakshmi, and four-ways-facing Brahm,
    Searched the heights and depths, but Thy feet could never sec.
 Yet, O only Lord, who in Athihai dost dwell,
    Formless, in Thy grace, grant the sight of them to me.

The notable thing about our next verse is not so much the legend of the crushing of Ravana, who tried to storm the mountain Kailasa, where Siva had His heaven, but rather the thought of the devotee being stamped as the property of his god, a thought which recurs in other hymns. According to tradition Apparswami did receive the Hindu equivalent of St. Francis' stigmata, the mark of Siva's bull as if branded on his body. We cannot help recalling St. Paul's expression in Galatians vi. 17.

26. All other worlds his sceptre swayed,
   But when Kailasa he would rule
 Thy crushing foot presumption paid.
   O stamp me with. Thy sacred bull,
 White as Himal'ya's snowy hill.
   Accent me, O our truth divine,
 There where the moon outsoareth still
   Groves of Tunganaimadam's shrine.

[p. 40] [p. 41]

Here is the divine vision as the enraptured Saivite sees it.

27. See, there His bright trident appears to me;
   See, there is the moon in His tangled hair;
 His garland of flowers from the kondai tree,
   And the ear-ring white in His either ear,
 The cloak that He tore from the elephant wild,
   His glittering crown and His body's sheen.
 Ash-smeared, He is ever the undefiled,
   In Puvanam circled by groves all green.

The singer, standing at the shrine of Tiruvalur (Arur) in the Tanjore district, muses over the ancient connection of his lord with the holy place, suggesting that it began before the creation, before Siva wrought his greatest marvels, perhaps even before the one Supreme, Isvara, expanded into the triad Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra.

28. When was that ancient day our Lord
   Chose Arur should His temple be?
 Was't when He stood 'mid praising worlds
   Alone, or when the One grew three?
 Was't when in wrath He burned up Death,
   Or turned on Lust His flaming eye?
 Or when creative, immanent,
   He called to being earth and sky?
 Was't when, his young deer in his hand,
   He came, with Uma as His part?
 Or ere He joined that lady fair
   Took He our Arur to His heart?

[p. 42] [p. 43]

It is often said, not without truth, that Hinduism fails to create a strong sense of sin. But there are great exceptions: witness the following verses, samples of many, taken from a hymn which trembles with feeling. The author is sunk in sin. Or he has been like a swing, flying first toward evil and then towards God; but now, joy! the cord has snapped, and he lies fixed at his Lord's feet. Yet the old mood returns; his soul is bound and drugged with sleep, and life has no joys to offer unless God will save.

  

THE SOUL'S BITTER CRY

29. In right I have no power to live,
   Day after day I'm stained with sin;
 I read, but do not understand;
   I hold Thee not my heart within.
 O light, O flame, O first of all,
   I wandered far that I might see,
 Athihai Virattanam's Lord,
   Thy flower-like feet of purity.

30. Daily I'm sunk in worldly sin;
   Naught know I as I ought to know;
 Absorbed in vice as 'twere my kin,
   I see no path in which to go.
 O Thou with throat one darkling gem,
   Gracious, such grace to me accord,
 That I may see Thy beauteous feet,
   Athihai Virattanam's Lord.

31. My fickle heart one love forsakes,
   And forthwith to some other clings;
 Swiftly to some one thing it sways,
   And e'en as swiftly backward swings.
 O Thou with crescent in Thy hair,
   Athihai Virattanam's Lord,
 Fixed at Thy feet henceforth I lie,
   For Thou hast broken my soul's cord.

[p. 44] [p. 45]

32. The bond of lust I cannot break;
   Desire's fierce torture will not die;
 My soul I cannot stab awake
   To scan my flesh with seeing eye.
 I bear upon me load of deeds,
   Load such as I can ne'er lay down.
 Athihai Virattanam's Lord,
   Weary of joyless life I've grown.

Fresh pictures in another hymn set forth his sad condition. God's vessels are full of the sweetness of grace, but his spoon has no handle. He feels himself in the deadly grasp of fate, like the frog in the cruel mouth of the snake which is slowly swallowing it down. Or he is on a raft on the sea of life, wrecked on the rock of lust.

33. While violence is in my heart,
   Care of my body cage is vain.
 My spoon no handle hath when I
   Thy honey's grace to drink am fain.
 As in the serpent's mouth the frog,
   Caught in life's terrors, wild I rave.
 Thou, King of holy Ottiyur,
   Wilt Thou not care for me and save?

34. When on life's angry waves I launch,
   My heart's the raft I take to me,
 My mind's the pole I lean upon,
   Vexation's freight I bear to sea.
 I strike upon the rock of lust!
   O then, though witless quite I he,
 Grant, King of holy Ottiyur,
   Such wisdom that I think of Thee.

[p. 46] [p. 47]

It would be hard to find a more comprehensive confession of sin than our next stanza from another hymn.

35. Evil, all evil, my race, evil my qualities all,
 Great am I only in sin, evil is even my good.
 Evil my innermost self, foolish, avoiding the pure,
 Beast am I not, yet the ways of the beast I can never forsake.
 I can exhort with strong words, telling men what they should hate,
 Yet can I never give gifts, only to beg them I know.
 Ah! wretched man that I am, whereunto came I to birth?

We give next a series of stanzas in various metres from different hymns, in which the saint utters in song some of the joy which his religion has brought him. God has revealed mysteries to him which tongue cannot tell, and dwells in his life's innermost places. God is to him the fabled katpaha tree, supplying his every need. God is his all in all, and His presence is sweeter than melody or evening moonlight.

36. The moving water He made stand unmoving in His hair;
   And He my thoughtless heart hath fixed it thought of Him alone:
 He taught me that which none can learn, what none can see laid bare;
   What tongue tells not He told; me He pursuer and made His own.
     The spotless pure, the holy One, my fell disease He healed,
     And in Punturutti to me e'en me, Himself revealed.

[p. 48] [p. 49]

37. O wealth, my treasure, sweetness, lustre fair of heavenly hosts,
   Of lustre glory that excels, embodied One, my kin,
 My flesh, yea heart within my flesh, image within my heart,
   My all-bestowing tree, my eye, pupil my eye within,
 Picture seen in that pupil, lord of Aduturai cool,
   Immortals' king, keep far from me strong pain of fruits of sin.

38. Thou to me art parents, Lord,
   Thou all kinsmen that I need,
 Thou to me art loved ones fair,
   Thou art treasure rich indeed.
 Family, friends, home art Thou,
   Life and joy I draw from Thee,
 False world's good by Thee I leave,
   Gold, pearl, wealth art Thou to me.

39. As the vina's pure sound, as the moonlight at even,
   As the south wind's soft breath, as the spring's growing heat,
 As the pool hovered over by whispering bees,
   So sweet is the shade at our Father-Lord's feet.

[p. 50] [p. 51]

40. No man holds sway o'er us,
   Nor death nor hell fear we;
 No tremblings, griefs of mind,
   No pains nor cringings see.
 Joy, day by day, unchanged
   Is ours, for we are His,
 His ever, who doth reign,
   Our Sankara, in bliss.
 Here to His feet we've come,
   Feet as plucked flow're'ts fair;
 See how His ears divine
   Ring and white couch-shell wear.

41. Though they give me the jewels from Indra's abode,
   Though they grant me dominion o'er earth, yea o'er heaven,
 If they be not the friends of our lord Mahadev,
   What care I for wealth by such ruined hands giv'n?
 But if they love Siva, who hides in His hair
   The river of Ganga, then whoe'er they be,
 Foul lepers, or outcastes, yea slayers of kine,
   To them is my homage, gods are they to me.

Often the Hindu devotee asks and re-asks the fundamental question 'Who am I?', coming to the saddest of conclusions, but setting against the background of his delusive life of self the great reality of God, to worship whom is to find release from the prison-house of personality.

[p. 52] [p. 53]

42. Thy father, mother, brethren, wife,
   Ask thyself who are they?
 Thy children; yea, thy very self,
   Who art thou, canst thou say?
 How cam'st thou here, how wilt depart?
   Love not this world unreal.
 Ye anxious souls, this lesson learn,
   To one pure name appeal.
 Our father He, crowned with the moon
   And snake. Who Him adore,
 Prone lying, with ''Hail Siva, hail,''
   In heav'n live evermore.

Our next hymn with the short-lined verses (nos. 43 to 48) is a kind of Saivite consecration hymn, mentioning successively various parts of the body--head, eyes, cars--to be given to the worship of Siva. Verse 46 must sound sadly to a Saivite, for it is frequently sung in the ears of the dying, as a plaintive appeal to think of God. Verse 47 rises far above the usual ideas of future absorption to the thought of a blissful state of communion with and praise of God.

43. Head of mine, bow to Him,
   True Head, skull garlanded,
 A skull was His strange begging-bowl,
   Bow low to Him, my head.

44. Eyes of mine, gaze on Him
   Who drank the dark sea's bane.
 Eight arms He brandishes in dance,
   At Him agaze remain.

[p. 54] [p. 55]

45. Ears of mine, hear His praise,
   Siva, our flaming king.
 Flaming as coral red His form:
   Ears, hear men praises sing.

46. What kinsmen in that hour
   When life departs, have we?
 Who but Kuttalam's dancing lord
   Can then our kinsman be?

47. How proud shall I be there,
   One of His heavenly host,
 At His fair feet who holds the deer,
   How proud will he my boast!

48. I sought Him and I found.
   Brahm sought in vain on high.
 Vishnu delved vainly underground.
   Him in my soul found I.

The mystic can never be a satisfied ceremonialist. These Saivite devotees commonly praise the god of a particular shrine in language which might suggest that Siva is only to be found there. And everyone who knows India remembers the ceaseless streams of pilgrims journeying to the Ganges or the Cauvery (Tamil Kaviri), to Rameswaram or Cape Comorin or a hundred other holy places. But with a fine inconsistency these ancient singers sometimes point men away from externalities to a worship inward and spiritual; witness the following hymn. As to the terms used, in v. 50, Vedas are the religious works of the highest authority, Sastras are philosophical and practical works based on them, while Vedangas are sciences subordinate to the Vedas, and there are six of them.

[p. 56] [p. 57]

49. Why bathe in Ganga's stream, or Kaviri?
     Why go to Comorin in Kongu's land?
 Why seek the waters of the sounding sea?
   Release is theirs, and theirs alone, who call
   In every place upon the Lord of all.

50. Why chant the Vedas, hear the Sastras' lore?
     Why daily teach the books of righteousness?
 Why the Vedangas six say o'er and o'er?
   Release is theirs, and theirs alone, whose heart
   From thinking of its Lord shall ne'er depart.

51. Why roam the jungle, wander cities through?
     Why plague life with unstinting; penance hard?
 Why eat no flesh, and gaze into the blue?
   Release is theirs, and theirs alone,
   Who cry Unceasing to the Lord of wisdom high.

52. Why fast and starve, why suffer pains austere?
     Why climb the mountains, doing penance harsh?
 Why go to bathe in waters far and near?
   Release is theirs, and theirs alone, who call
   At every time upon the Lord of all.

It looks like a sudden drop when the same writer in our next hymn seems to say that everything depends upon the pronunciation of the five sacred syllables which can be translated 'Hail, Siva!' In the later development of Saivism the pronunciation of these syllables was exalted into a primary religious duty. But in the creative period in which these hymns were written the name probably stood for the person, so that we have here a religious 'calling upon the name of

[p. 58] [p. 59]

the Lord' in the devotion of worship. In the first stanza there is a remarkable use of the term 'Word.' Modern Saivites identify this 'Word' with Uma, Siva's consort. We can compare the Sanskrit Vak (Word) in the Rig Veda.

The last lines of verse 53 are connected in the minds of Saivites with a story that Apparswami was actually sunk in the sea by Jain persecutors, with two great stones tied to him, but on crying 'Hail, Siva! he floated to the surface.

The five products of the cow referred to in verse 54 are all used together in ceremonial purification--milk, curds, ghee, urine, and dung.

53. O Lord of Scripture, whom the Word doth help,
 Celestial light of heaven, so I but praise,
 With hands meetly upraised, Thy golden feet,
 Then though men tie on me two weighty stones,
 And sink me in the ocean's depth, e'en then
 The cry 'Hail, Siva,' would salvation be.

54. The lotus is the glory of all flowers;
 The glory of all kine is Hara's use
 Of that which they put forth. Glory of kings
 Is the unswerving straightness of their deeds.
 But if we ask the glory of the tongue,
 'Tis to cry out aloud, 'Hail, Siva, hail.'

55. For men who all renounce, 'tis glory true
 To wear the sacred ash. For Brahmans pure
 The Vedas and Vedangas are their pride.
 The white moon's glory is to shine serene
 On the long locks of Siva, while for us
 True glory is to cry 'Hail, Siva, hail.'

[p. 60] [p. 61]

Tradition connects our next stanza with a story of Apparswami being smitten with an inward disease when he forsook Saivism and became a Jain. The pain proved, says the legend, a convincing argument which reconverted him, whereupon he was promptly cured. But internal evidence proves this hymn to have been composed long after his return to Saivism. Nandi is the name of Siva's bull.

56. Thou takest not my deadly pain away,
   My torments, Nandi-rider, never cease;
 At Thy feet would I worship night and day,
   But since my bowels writhe, and ne'er find peace,
     I can no more! O Sire, to Thee I cry,
     Who dwell'st by Kedila, in Athihai.

Nature sometimes spoke to our author of God. The union of sexes even in animals one day spoke to him as a revelation of divine things.

57. I'll follow those who going to the shrine their praises sound,
   With blooms and water for the god who wears the moon so mild
 All lovely in His locks, a garland wreathed His neck around,
   And with Him sing they Parvati, the mountain god's fair child.
     Once as I went to Aiyaru, with light and reverent tread,
     I saw come two young elephants, male by loved female led,
     And in that sight I saw God's foot, saw secret things unsaid.

[p. 62] [p. 63]

God is the great yogi, the wielder of mystic powers.

58. "O greatly loved, our King, our Lord, from all eternity,
   Our portion, our true mystic," thus from day to day I sing.
 O golden one, O hill of coral, I in love of Thee
   Have wandered far and wide, Athihai Virattanam's king,
 Have wandered far the shining blossom of Thy foot to see.

One whole hymn, from which our next verse is taken, is a prayer for the opening of a door. Tradition has it that the great locked temple door at Vedaranyam swung open in answer to this song.

59. Uma is Thy portion, whose words are like song.
   In fair Maraikkadu men circle round Thee
 In worship. O graciously open this door
   That we Thy true servants Thy glory may see.

Here is a very popular stanza. There used to be a beggar in Madras who recited it, and it alone, all day long.

[p. 64] [p. 65]

60. He is ever hard to find, but He lives in the thought of the good;
 He is the innermost secret of Scripture, inscrutable, unknowable;
 He is honey and milk and the shining light. He is the king of the Devas,
 Immanent in Vishnu, in Brahma, in flame and in wind,
 Yea in the mighty sounding sea and in the mountains.
 He is the great One who chooses Perumpattapuliyur for His own.
 If there be days when my tongue. is dumb and speaks not of Him,
 Let no such days be counted in the record of my life.

Whatever karma may teach of the inevitable consequence of evil, devotees hold that they may count on receiving divine forgiveness, for which the gracious nature of God is a sufficient pledge and guarantee.

61. Thy throat the black sea's poison drank, as 'twere ambrosia sweet,
   O deer-skin wearer, Uma's lord, king of the gods on high;
   Kailasa's hill is Thine abode, and when Thy lovers cry
 "Forgive our sin," great One, forgiveness is Thy duty meet;
     For with Thee is great grace, lord of celestial beings all,
     Who dwell'st in Avaduturai, where peacocks dance and call.

[p. 66] [p. 67]

The dreadful fate in store for irreligious men that is of being slowly killed by sore sickness, then being born again to a joyless life that circles round once more to death in unending cycles of dreariness.

The 'letters five' in no. 63 refer to the five-syllabled phrase na-mah-Si-va-ya, whose praise is chanted in vv. 53-55.

62. The ill-starred town without a house of God,
   Wherein white ash on no man's brow doth glow,
 The town where pious praises are unsung,
   Where are no wayside shrines men's faith to show,
 Where none blow joyfully the conch-shell white,
   Where spread no canopies, no flags appear,
 Where none make flowery offerings ere they eat,
   Call it no town, 'tis but a jungle drear.

63. If men speak not His name in letters five,
   Nor e'er the fire-formed Siva's praise repeat,
 And never walk in reverence round His shrine,
   And pluck no flowers for offering ere they eat,
 If they for healing wear no sacred ash,
   I'll tell you whereunto such men were born,
 'Twas that foul plagues might torture them to death,
   Then death bring rebirths endlessly forlorn.

Our last fragment from Apparswami is in the minor key, in which so many of his refrains are pitched. It seems to prove, contrary to tradition, that Appar was once a married man.

64. Immersed in painful cherishing
   Of child and wedded wife,
 No room is there in me to feel
   Thy power, Lord of my life.
 O whereunto came I to birth?
   To cherish this false world?
 Or watch it, bubble-like, appear,
   Then be to nothing hurled?

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68] 

Click to enlarge
SUNDARAMURTI

[p. 69]

  

SUNDARAMURTI SWAMI AND HIS HYMNS

[p. 70] [p. 71]

  

III.

  

SUNDARAMURTI SWAMI

(Abbreviated as SUNDARAR)

THE third of these hymn-writers, named in full Sundaramurti Swami, was, like Sambandar, a Brahman. He was born in the South Arcot District, and is generally believed to have flourished in the first quarter of the ninth century A.D. He evidently sat loose to caste scruples, for neither of his two wives was a Brahman. One was a dancing-girl in the Saivite temple at Tiruvarur, the modern Tiruvalur in the Tanjore District, while the other was a Velala woman of Tiruvottiyur, now a suburb of Madras. His life seems to have been no happier than life in polygamy usually is, and to add to his difficulties he sometimes found himself without food for his ladies to eat. He frankly praised God for what he could get, and on the whole his hymns are on a lower spiritual plane than those of the first two writers, though there are some which bear the marks of real spiritual experience. Of the sixty-three saints whom Saivites hold in special honour, Sundarar seems to have been the last, for he sang the praises of the other sixty-two.

[p. 72] [p. 73]

Sundarar, as our first sample of him shews, was not only later than the two authors whom we have been studying; he was the last of the sixty-three canonized saints of Saivism. A serious weakness of the religion here shews its head. Siva has his favourites, who can do no wrong. The stanza is given in prose, for these names cannot fit into any English metrical line. The first two will be recognised as names of the poets whose work we have been considering. Nalaippovan is Nandan, the pariah saint. Silandi (= spider) is Kochchengat Chola, who figures largely in early Tamil history.

65. Nanasambandar and Tirunavukkarasar, skilled in the Tamil tongue, Nalaippovan, learned Sudan, Sakkiyan, Silandi, Kannappan, Kanampullan, these may do wrong, but yet Thou count'st it right. Hence have I come to the sounding anklets of Thy feet, O lord of Tiruppungur with its pools where blossoms many a golden lotus gem.

To English ears the metre of the next two verses, which are common favourites, has a curious sound. It is a close reproduction of the Tamil, so close that the tune of the Tamil hymn could be sung to the English words.

66. Golden art Thou in Thy form, girt around with the fierce tiger's skin,
 Fair shines Thy tangle of hair, crowned with blooms from the kondai's bright tree,
 Sov'reign, great jewel art Thou, the red ruby of Malapadi,
 Mother, on Thee, none but Thee, can my heart evermore fixed be.

[p. 74] [p. 75]

67. Clad in the little loin-cloth, my body with holy ash white,
 Lo I have come to Thy foot; O my head, I beseech Thee, take me.
 Portion of sword-eyed Uma, Thou red ruby of Malapadi,
 Friend, 'tis on Thee, none but Thee, can my heart evermore fixed be.

Is the Siva manifested at one shrine so distinct from the Siva manifested at another as to endanger the unity of God? If tradition is right, the danger is very real, for Sundarar was already worshipping at one shrine, Tiruvottiyur, when he remembered the lord of Arur, and deciding to go to him like a returning prodigal, sang this stanza.

68. Ah sinful, I have left the path of love and service pure!
   Now know I well the meaning of my sickness and my pain.
   I will go worship. Fool! how long can I so far remain
 From Him, my pearl, my diamond rare, the king of great Arur.

The joy in God which shines in our next hymn evidently rests on some experience of divine grace which we should have liked to hear more definitely described.

69. O madman with the moon-crowned hair,
   Thou lord of men, thou fount of grace,
 How to forget Thee could I bear?
   My soul hath aye for Thee a place.
 Venney-nallur, in "Grace's shrine"
   South of the stream of Pennai, there
 My father, I became all thine;
   How could I now myself forswear?

[p. 76] [p. 77]

70. I roamed, a cur, for many days
   Without a single thought of Thee,
 Roamed and grew weary, then such grace
   As none could win Thou gayest me.
 Venney-nallur, in "Grace's shrine"
   Where bamboos fringe the Pennai, there
 My Shepherd, I became all thine;
   How could I now myself forswear?

71. Henceforth for me no birth, no death,
   No creeping age, bull-rider mine.
 Sinful and full of lying breath
   Am I, hut do Thou mark me Thine.
 Venney-nallur, in "Graces shrine"
   South of the wooded Pennai, there
 My Master, I became all thine;
   How could I now myself forswear?

The varying mood of the saint, now joyous and triumphant, now plaintively looking for death, is reflected in the next two verses from one hymn.

72. Linked to naught else in life, my mind thinks only of Thy holy feet.
   I'm born anew, from this time forth I pass the way of birth no more.
 In Kodumudi, lord austere, where wise men Thee with praises greet,
   Should I forget Thee, my own tongue 'Hail, Siva'! crying, would adore.

[p. 78] [p. 79]

73. When will the end draw nigh, sense fade, life close, and I the bier ascend?
   This, naught but this, is all my thought. But, lord of speech, Thou light on high,
 Where the bright streams of Kaviri to Kodumudi coolness lend,
   Should I forget Thee, my own tongue to Thee would loud 'Hail, Siva' cry.

God should deliver His own from death. The appeal here is to the familiar story of Markandeya (see No. 3). Yama is the god of death who gathers in the souls of men.

74. The young saint refuge sought from Death;
   To save him, Thou grim Death did'st slay,
 Such deeds Thy might accomplisheth,
   And I who have beheld them pray
 "O Father, should dread Yama press
   On me, forbid him. 'Tis my slave";
 Do Thou in green Pungur confess.
   I've reached Thy foot, and Thou can'st save."

Sundarar is sure that Siva will understand his perplexities in supplying the needs of his fair ladies. For does not Siva Himself bear the burden of two ladies, Parvati his consort, and Ganga (lady Ganges) in his hair? Sundarar, in the legend with which these verses are connected, when one of his wives was suffering hunger, miraculously received some uncooked rice from Siva. This was not enough; to complete the miracle Siva must remove the rice for him to Arur the abode of his fair one. This too was done in answer to the hymn of which the next two stanzas are a sample.

[p. 80] [p. 81]

75. Ever I think but of Thee;
   Daily in worship I bow;
 She of the sword-piercing eyes,
   Leave her not suffering now.
 Kolili's lord, Thou didst give
   Rice in Kundaiyur this day.
 No man to bring it have I,
   Bid it be sent me, I pray.

76. Thou art half woman Thyself; 
   Ganga is in Thy long hair.
 Full well canst Thou comprehend
   Burden of women so fair.
 Kundaiyur circled with gems,
   There didst Thou give rice to-day.
 Source of all, wonderful one,
   Bid it be sent me, I pray.

The saint advises his fellow-poets to sing the praises of Siva rather than the praises of men because they seldom reward the poets. Siva rewards them here and hereafter. The Pari mentioned in 78 was a chieftain in the Tamil country in the early centuries of our era, famed for his liberality.

77. Though ye fawn on men of lies,
   They to saints will nothing give;
 Sing not them, O poets wise,
   But if ye would wealth receive
 Sing the Sire of Puhalur;
   Here your wants will be supplied,
 Pain will flee; there evermore
   Ye will kings in heav'n abide.

[p. 82] [p. 83]

78. Call the weak by Bhima's name,
   Style him Arjun with his bow,
 Give the mean man Pari's fame,
   Not a gift will he bestow.
 Sing, O bards, our holy God,
   White with ash, in Puhalur.
 In the deathless one's abode
   Ye shall reign for evermore.

Life and experience have no value, no reality. God alone is real, the refuge from the unreal.

79. Our life is all unreal,
   Its end is only dust,
 Out of the sea of birth
   Come ruin, pain and lust.
 Delay not to do good
   But praise Ketaram's king,
 Whom Vishnu and great Brahm
   Vainly sought sorrowing.

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

Click to enlarge
MANIKKA VASAHAR

[p. 85]

  

MANIKKA VASAHAR AND HIS HYMNS

[p. 86]

  

IV.

  

MANIKKA VASAHAR

(Sanskrit form MANIKYA VACHAKA)

IN the days when the powerful Pandyan Kings flourished in Madura, there was once a prime minister who early became convinced of the transitoriness of this world's life and its riches. When on a visit to Perundurai, now Avudaiyarkoil in the Tanjore District, he suddenly and completely came under the influence of a Brahman religious teacher, who for him was the manifestation of the very God Himself. Then and there he began to sing the "Sacred Utterance" (Tiruvasaham), and was named by his preceptor "Utterer of Jewels" (Manikka Vasahar). Returning to Madura, he forsook his high office with all its rewards, to become a religious poet wandering without earthly attachments from shrine to shrine. The stories clustering around his religious experience can be read by English readers in Dr. Pope's great edition of his work. We find him practising austerities at Chidambaram, or miraculously giving the gift of speech to the dumb daughter of the Chola king, or defeating in disputation a band of Buddhists from Ceylon, but of certain historical information about him we have practically none. Even the question of the century in which he lived is a battleground of the antiquarians. Tradition places him in the fifth century, earlier than the writers of the Devaram;

[p. 87]

but the opinion of scholars seems to be converging on the view that he lived in the latter half of the ninth, or the first half of the tenth century of our era. Another of his works is the Tirukkovaiyar, an erotic poem of four hundred stanzas. Among Tamil Saivite writers none makes a stronger devotional appeal than Manikka Vasahar. There is a common Tamil saying that nothing can melt the heart of the man who is not melted by the Tiruvasaham.

[p. 88] [p. 89]

Stanzas 80-92 are samples from an opening poem of one hundred stanzas, each ten of which has its own metre and is fairly complete in itself. They fairly reflect the saint's varying moods. Notice the importance he attaches to emotion; his worst self-reproach is for feeling no frenzy. As to his conception of God, see how the word 'grace' recurs in nearly every stanza. And yet that God of grace is called (in No. 84) both being and non-existence.

  

THE HUNDRED VERSES

80. Thrills and trembles my frame;
 Hands are lifted on high;
 Here at Thy fragrant feet,
 Sobbing and weeping I cry;
 Falsehood forsaking, I shout,
 "Victory, victory, praise!
 Lord of my life, these clasped hands
 Worship shall bring Thee always.

81. Indra or Vishnu or Brahm,
 Their divine bliss crave not I;
 I seek the love of Thy saints,
 Though my house perish thereby.
 To the worst hell I will go,
 So but Thy grace be with me.
 Best of all, how could my heart
 Think of a god beside Thee?

82. Though like Thy saints I seem, 'tis but the acting of a part.
 Yet wondrous swift I run to reach the heaven where Thou art.
 O hill of gold and precious gems, grant in Thy grace to me
 A heart to melt, lord of my life, in ceaseless love to Thee.

[p. 90] [p. 91]

83. I have no fear of births, but quake at thought that I must die.
 E'en heav'n to me were naught; for earth's whole empire what care I?
 O Siva wreathed with honeyed blossoms, "When shall come the morn
 When Thou wilt grant Thy grace to me?" I cry with anguish torn.

84. The sky, earth, wind, the light, our very flesh and life art Thou,
 Being art Thou, non-being too, Thou king, who see'st how
 Men dance like puppets with their foolish thoughts of 'I' and 'Mine,'
 While Thou the cords dost pull. What words can tell Thy praise divine?

85. At sound of cries like this, "O Bull-rider whose spreading hair
 The falling stream receives! "Heaven's Lord," true devotees there were,
 Whose love-thrilled heart broke forth, like stopped-up rivers rushing down.
 Yet Thou didst choose no one of them, but me to be Thine own.
 And yet my body will not turn from heel to head one heart
 To melt in love for Thee, one eye to shed the tears that smart
 In swelling floods. Ah! wretched that I am, who only moan!
 My two eyes are unfeeling wood, my heart a great dead stone!

[p. 92] [p. 93]

86. Amid the fruits of deeds I lay. Thou didst thyself reveal
 With words of comfort saying "Come, I will destruction deal
 To evil fruit of deeds," and thus thou mad'st me all Thy slave.
 And yet I stand as if a statue made of steel, nor rave,
 Nor sing, nor cry, nor wail--woe's me--nor in my spirit faint
 With deep desire, so dull am I. O being ancient,
 Thou art beginning, Thou art end: tell me, how can I be
 So dead at heart? The end if this I do not dare to see.

87. Him though men seek, none fully know; in Him no evil is.
 None are His kindred; knowledge perfect, effortless is His.
 A cur am I, yet He hath giv'n to me in sight of men
 A place on earth, and shewed me things far beyond mortal ken.
 He told me what no ears can hear; from future births He sav'd.
 Such magic wrought my Lord who me hath lovingly enslaved.

88. Our God of gods, whom e'en the devas' king knows but in part,
 Ruleth the three who in the fair world-gardens life impart,
 And life maintain, and life destroy; our First, Reality,
 Father of old, whose consort Uma is, our sovereign, He [p. 94] [p. 95]
 Came down in grace and made e'en me to be His very own.
 Henceforth before no man I bow; I fear but Him alone.
 Now of His servants' servants I have joined the sacred throng,
 And ever more and more I'll bathe in bliss. with dance and song.

89. The meanest cur am I; I know not how to do the right;
 'Twere but what I deserve, should'st Thou my wickedness requite
 With the dread fate of those who never saw Thy flowery feet;
 For though mine eyes have seen, my ears have heard saints guileless, meet,
 Who reached Thy fragrant presence, yet I stay, for false am I,
 Fit for naught save to eat and dress, Lion of victory.

90. None but myself has sunk myself. Thy name be ever praised!
 No blame lay I on Thee, lauds to my Master be upraised!
 Yet to forgive is aye a mark of greatness. Praise to Thee!
 Lord of the land celestial, Praise! O end this life for me.

[p. 96] [p. 97]

91. The fawn-eyed maid is part of Thee! From holy writ Thou'rt hid!
 Thou'rt honey, yea ambrosia, by man's mind not compassed.
 O king who bearest with my faults, some harsh words did I say.
 Thy saints have entered heaven. Without, falsehood and I still stay.

92. Since I am false, and false my heart, and false my very love,
 Howe'er I weep, still held by deed can I reach Thee above?
 O honey, nectar, O essential sweetness, great as sweet,
 Grant grace to me to find the path that leads unto Thy feet.

93. Heav'n, earth, and all that therein is, thou makest without seed.
 Thou dost preserve and Thou destroy. 'Tis Thou who hast decreed
 That I though treacherous, mean, should be a man who frenzied faints
 Before Thy temple gates, one with the band of Thy true saints.
 What men themselves have planted, e'en a poisonous mango tree,
 They root not up. O Lord of mine, as such a tree keep me.

Our next five stanzas, taken from a hymn of fifty, are full of the pathos expressed in the title, which is a refrain recurring in every verse. Only flashes of the light of the presence of God pierce the prevailing gloom. The saint cannot free himself from sensuality,

[p. 98] [p. 99]

even while he hates it. He wonders whether even the God who drank poison for others' sake will leave him alone.

  

WILT THOU LEAVE ME?

94. Mingling in grace with me, O rider of the bull, Thou mad'st me Thine.
   But wilt Thou leave me? Thou whose form in the fierce tiger's skin is clad,
 Uttarakosamangai old has Thee for king. O lord of mine
   With matted hair, hold Thou me up; for I am weary grown and sad.

95. Set in the marge of flowing stream that eats its banks away, the tree
   Shakes to its fall; and thus am I, my sense bewitch'd by maids' dark eyes.
 Uttarakosamangai's king, spouse of gem-vested Parvati,
   Who dwell'st in Arur holy, O protector, for my help arise.

96. In ignorance I spurned thy grace. Dost Thou, my gem, now me despise,
   And wilt thou leave me? O destroy my sum of deeds and make me thine.
 Uttarakosamangai's king, 'tis surely true, the great and wise,
   When only little curs play false, to mercy ever will incline.

[p. 100] [p. 101]

97. With none to cheer me from my fear, far have I wandered wearily,
   O Lightning-like, and wilt Thou leave me? If I truly thee compare,
 Uttarakosamangai's king, I find naught else resembling Thee;
   But a true father, mother dear art Thou to me, my treasure rare.

98. Whether I praise or curse Thee, still I'm stained with sin and sorrowing.
   Yet, wilt Thou leave me? Splendour shining like the red-hued coral mount,
 Master, thou drankest poison black, the humbler beings pitying,
   That I, Thy meanest one, might find no poison, but a nectar fount.

Our poet made songs which maidens might sing in their rhythmical games, or as they sat at the grinding-stone. In India the boatman sings as he rows, the ryot sings as he draws from the well, the sepoy sings on his march. A feature of such songs is the refrain, which is usually a mere collection of euphonic syllables, though it may have a meaning. Here are specimens of a few songs intended for women. The refrain of the first, "Elorembavay" probably means "Receive and ponder what I say, O lady." The Grinding song, strangely enough, is used at funerals, as also is the 'Antiphony.' The song of 'The Three Castles' Destruction' is supposed to accompany play with a ball or a kind of shuttle called 'undi.' For the legend of the Three Castles, see page <page 7>. 'The Shoulder-Play' is for some ancient game in which women grasped each other's shoulders.

[p. 102] [p. 103]

  

SONG OF THE MAIDENS

99. Older are Thou than the oldest of all,
 Newest of all that is new.
 At Thy saints' feet we in service will fall,
 We are Thy handmaidens true.
 None but Thy bondsmen shall call us their own;
 Lord, we would none others wed;
 We would be slaves at their bidding alone:
 So be our bliss perfected.
 Elorembavay.

100. "Sure for Thy child there is refuge with Thee,"
 Trembling we take up the cry.
 Hear, O our Lord, while we bring Thee one plea,
 Grant but one boon for our joy.
 May only Thy lovers rest on our breast,
 Let our hands' labour be theirs.
 Only on such our eyes night and day rest,
 Then sun rise west, east, who cares?
 Elorembavay.

  

THE GRINDING SONG

101. Grind we the powder gold, that He may bathe;
 For He is Scripture, He is sacrifice;
 He's being's truth, and being's falsehood too;
 Light is He, yea, and He is darkness deep;
 He is deep sorrow, and true bliss is He;
 He is the half, and He again the whole;
 Bondage is He, but He is true release;
 He is the alpha, He the omega.

[p. 104] [p. 105]

  

SIVA'S MYSTERIES (An Antiphony)

102. "His form is smeared with ashes white; the snake His strange adornment is;
 The secret scriptures utters He: what kind of god, my friend, is this?
 "Why talk of ash-smear, holy speech, adornment strange? This only know,
 This god, of every living thing is the true nature. Chalalo."

103. "My father and my master, He of all men Lord supreme, is clad
 With but a hanging loin-cloth stitched; pray tell me, friend, is He not mad?
 "The Vedas four with meaning fraught, the everlasting Sastras, know
 That these are but the threads whereof is wove His loin-cloth. Chalalo."

104. The burning-ground's His temple fine; the tiger's skin His raiment is;
 Father or mother hath He none; He's all alone; my friend, see this.''
 "Though He no parents hath, no kin, yet should His anger kindle, lo,
 The whole wide world would straightway turn to dust and ashes. Chalalo."

105. "Though I am but a cur, yet when I turned to Him who hath no end,
 Into a sea of bliss He made me sink o'erwhelmed; see this, my friend."
 "Those holy feet that sank thee in the sea of bliss o'erwhelmed, know,
 E'en to the very gods in heav'n they're richest treasure. Chalalo."

[p. 106] [p. 107]

  

THE THREE CASTLES' DESTRUCTION

106. Bent was the bow, begun the fight,
 The castles three were 'whelmed quite, (Fly, undi)
 Three castles blazing with one light. (Fly, undi)

107. One bolt in Siva's hand saw we,
 One single bolt for castles three, (Fly, undi)
 And e'en that one scarce needed He. (Fly, undi)

108. Cleft lay the car at His foot's tread,
 The axle was all shattered, (Fly, undi)
 Three castles ruined lay and dead. (Fly, undi)

  

THE SHOULDER-PLAY

109. Poor slave was I, how long I poured out all my days for naught,
   To Him the all-supreme no homage rendering! Yet see,
 How He, the jewel from eternal ages incorrupt,
   Has come and drawn the prison-bolt of births, and set me free.
                          Play we Tonokkam

In the poetry of all lands lovers have appealed to birds to be their messengers to the distant loved one. This is so common in Indian poetry as to have become a recognised convention. Here the saint sends his message of love and devotion, in one case by a humming bee, in the other by the Indian cuckoo, to Siva who dwells in Tillai, i.e. Chidambaram.

[p. 108] [p. 109]

  

THE BEE'S MESSAGE

110. Hard-hearted thief, stiff-necked was I, but no such name He called me;
 My stony heart He melted, and by mercy He enthralled me.
 The swans abound in Tillai's lovely hall of gold, His dwelling.
 Fly, king of bees, at His gold anklets hum, my message telling.

111. Cur though I am, my lord has set me His great glory singing;
 To me, the mad, His patient grace is aye forgiveness bringing;
 Scorning me not, He deigns to take the service I can do Him.
 Mother and God. Go, king of bees, hum thou my message to Him.

112. Far would my heart and mind have gone from Him, but He compelled me,
 The lord with tangled locks, and His fair spouse, they saved and held me.
 He is the sky, the mighty sea, east, west, north, south, indwelling.
 His feet with honey drop. There, king of bees, my praise be telling.

113. In this world's treasure false immersed lay I, and self-deceived,
 Held it for treasure true, but for His own He me received.
 My precious life itself is He, in Tillai's hall abiding.
 Go, king of bees, at His red lotus feet my words confiding.

[p. 110] [p. 111]

  

THE CUCKOO'S ERRAND

114. Hear, little cuckoo in the honey'd orchard groves.
 Heav'n did He spurn; to save us men, to earth He calve,
 Boundless in giving, reeking naught of flesh of mine,
 Entered my mind, and there my very thought became.
 He, the alone, the spouse of her whose pure eye's ray
 Shames the gazelle in softness, call Him hither, pray.

One of the little childishnesses involved in idolatry is that every morning with solemn ceremony the idol must be wakened from his sleep, bathed, and dressed. Here is a song with which he is roused from slumber. But notice how successfully our author has filled his poem with the fresh morning feeling, and the sights and sounds of the sudden break of the Indian dawn.

  

THE IDOL'S AWAKENING

115. Hail to Thee, treasure rare,
   Source of all prosperity,
 Dawn has come, at Thy feet,
   Flowers themselves, fair flowers lay we.
 Praising Thee, we await
   Smiles that blossom fair and sweet
 In Thy face, as we fall
   Prone adoring at Thy feet.

Siva, Lord, dweller in
   Perundurai, where expand
 Lotus flowers, petalled white,
   In the cool moist pasture land,
 Thou whose flag is the bull,
   Thou the Lord of all my ways,
 Now O Lord of us all,
   From Thy couch rise in Thy grace.

[p. 112] [p. 113]

116. Now anigh Indra's East
   Draws the sun; dark flies apace
 At the dawn; and the sun
   Of the kindness in Thy face 
 Riseth high'r, ever high'r,
   As like fair flowers opening,
 Eyes unclose from their sleep,
   Eyes of Thee our beauteous king.

Hear how now clouds of bees
   Humming bright fill all the air.
 Siva, Lord, dweller in
   Holy Perundurai fair,
 Thou wilt come to bestow
   Favours rich, Oh shew Thy face!
 Mountain-joy, ocean-bliss,
   From Thy couch rise in Thy grace.

117. Cocks now crow to the morn,
   While the cuckoos loudly call;
 Little birds sweetly sing,
   And the conch-shell sounds o'er all;
 Light of stars fades away
   Into common light of day;
 Dawn and sun come as one,
   Now to us, O God, display

In Thy love Thy twin feet,
   Gracious, decked with anklets rare.
 Siva, Lord, dweller in Holy Perundurai fair,
   Hard for all men to find,
 Yet to me Thou shewedst Thy face.
   Now O Lord of us all,
 From Thy couch rise in Thy grace.

[p. 114] [p. 115]

118. On this side some men play
   Lutes and vinas sweet of sound;
 On that side some men chant
   Ancient Rik, their songs resound;
 In their hands some have brought
   Wreaths of many blossoms wove;
 Some bow down, some men weep,
   Some men sway, o'ercome by love;

Clasping hands o'er their heads,
   Others stand with reverent air;
 Siva, Lord, dweller in
   Holy Perundurai fair,
 Even me didst thou save;
   Sweet to me have been Thy ways.
 Now, O Lord of us all,
   From Thy couch rise in Thy grace.

The rest of our specimens of the 'Holy Utterances' may be left to explain themselves without comment, save for a single line of title. Where two or more stanzas are given from a poem, the title here given is a translation from the Tamil.

  

ONLY WITH THEE AND THY SAINTS!

119. Our lady aye is in Thy heart,
   As Thou in hers; and if ye both
 In mine do dwell, grant me a part
   Among your slaves, O ever First.
     Unending lord, in Tillai's hall who dost abide,
     Let this deep yearning of my soul be satisfied.

[p. 116] [p. 117]

  

WHAT CAN I GIVE THEE?

120. Thou gav'st Thyself, Thou gained'st me;
   Which did the better bargain drive?
 Bliss found I in infinity;
   But what didst Thou from me derive?
 O Siva,. Perundurai's God,
   My mind Thou tookest for Thy shrine:
 My very body's Thine abode:
   What can I give Thee, Lord, of mine?

  

PASSION'S PAIN

121. Caught am I in passion's snare from women's liquid eyes;
   Stabbed at heart, a cur. O wisdom's light, no aid I see.
 Only lord, whose lady's feet are softer than the down,
   How I long to hear Thy coral lips speak cheer to me.

  

LONGINGS FOR DEATH

122. Our lord supreme, both earth and heav'n indwelling,
   See how I have no other help but Thee.
 Thou king of Siva's world, bright beyond telling,
   Dweller in Perundurai, look on me.
 Who'll hear my cry, who list to my complaining,
   If Thou Thy grace deny, who saved'st me?
 I find in sea-girt earth no joy remaining.
   Now let Thy grace speak, bid me come to Thee.

[p. 118] [p. 119]

123. In Thee she dwells whose feet than down are softer;
   See how I have no other help but Thee.
 Thou king of Siva's world, my gracious master,
   Dweller in Perundurai, look on me.
 Fear holds me; for, in dark confusion godless,
   I did forget the grace that saved me.
 Dog and deceitful am I. Life is joyless.
   Now let Thy grace speak, bid me come to Thee.

124. In Thee she dwells whose ancient praise is faultless;
   See how I have no other help but Thee.
 Thou king of S`iva's world, the bright moon wearing,
   Dweller in Perundurai, look on me.
 Whom save Thee could I worship with my praises?
   Can any other refuge give for me?
 O Rider of the bull, my life is joyless.
   Now let Thy grace speak, bid me come to Thee.

  

THE BALANCING OF DEEDS

125. O lord of Perundurai, place of peace,
   To them who call Thy name, beyond compare
 True joy art Thou. Thou mad'st my woe to cease
   When good and ill deeds done were balanced fair.
     Then lest unwith'ring seeds of birth should grow,
     In Kalukundu Thy fair self didst shew.

[p. 120] [p. 121]

  

LIFE'S CONSUMING

126. Myself I cannot understand, nor what is day nor night;
 He who both word and thought transcends has reft my senses quite,
 He who for bull has Vishnu, and in Perundurai dwells,
 O Light supreme, in Brahman guise has cast on me strange spells.

127. I ask not fame, wealth, earth or heav'n. No birth, no death for me.
 None will I touch who love not Siva. Now 'tis mine to see
 Abiding Perundurai, wear the King's foot as my crown;
 Never will I leave this His shrine, nor let Him leave His own.

128. Art Thou like honey on the branch too high for me to climb?
 Or art Thou nectar ocean-churned? O Hara, King sublime,
 In Perundurai, circled with moist fields, I can set Thee
 With form ash-smeared, the spotless. Can I bear my ecstasy?

129. Many in this great earth who live do penance; I alone
 Bearing this frame of flesh, a barren jungle-tree have grown.
 Dweller in Perundurai old where blooms the kondai tree,
 May I the sinner cry "Wilt Thou not grant Thyself to me"?

[p. 122] [p. 123]

  

PIOUS FEAR

130. I fear not serpents lurking smooth;
 I fear no liars' feigned truth;
 But when I see fools venturing
 E'en to the foot of Him our king,
 Our three-eyed Lord with matted hair,
 Of His great godhead unaware,
 Fools thinking other gods can be,
 Terror such sight inspires in me.

131. I fear no javelin's gory blade;
 Nor sidelong glance of bangled maid;
 But when I see men void of grace
 Drinking no sweetness from the praise
 Of my unchiselled Gem, whose dance
 In Tillai's hail is seen, whose glance
 Melts men's whole frame in ecstasy
 Terror such sight inspires in me.

  

I CLING TO THEE

132. King of the heavenly ones! All-filling Excellence!
 E'en to vile me Thou Thy wonders hast shown;
 Balm of true bliss, ending false earthly bliss of sense,
 Thou my whole household did'st take for Thine own.
 Meaning of holy writ! Wondrous Thy glory!
 True wealth, our Siva, to Thee, Lord, I cling.
 Never to loose my hold, firmly I cling to Thee;
 Where canst Thou go, leaving me sorrowing?

[p. 124] [p. 125]

133. King of celestial ones, ever with bull for steed,
 Evil am I, yet my riches art Thou;
 Lest I should rot in my foul flesh, and die indeed,
 Thou hast preserved me, and Thine am I now.
 Thou art our God; Thou of grace art a boundless sea,
 Saved from my flesh, now to Thee, Lord, I cling.
 Never to let Thee loose, firmly I cling to Thee;
 Where can'st Thou go, leaving me sorrowing?

134. Thou dids't come into my vile fleshly body,
 E'en as 'twere into some great golden shrine;
 Soft'ning and melting it all, Thou hast saved me,
 Lord condescending, Thou gem all divine!
 Sorrow and birth, death, all ties that deceived me,
 Thou did'st remove, all my bonds severing;
 True bliss, our kindly Light, firmly I cling to Thee;
 Where canst Thou go leaving me sorrowing?

  

NAUGHT BUT THY LOVE

135. I ask not kin, nor name, nor place,
   Nor learned men's society.
 Men's lore for me no value has;
   Kuttalam's lord, I come to Thee.
 Wilt thou one boon on me bestow,
   A heart to melt in longing sweet,
 As yearns o'er new-horn calf the cow,
   In yearning for Thy sacred feet?

[p. 126] [p. 127]

  

LONGING FOR UNION

136. I had no virtue, penance, knowledge, self-control. A doll to turn
   At others' will I danced, whirled, fell. But me He filled in every limb
 With love's mad longing, and that I might climb there whence is no return,
   He shewed His beauty, made me His. Ah me, when shall I go to Him?

  

THE WONDER OF GRACE

137. Fool's friend was I, none such may know
   The way of freedom; yet to me
 He shew'd the path of love, that so
   Fruit of past deeds might ended be.
     Cleansing my mind so foul, He made me like a god.
     Ah who could win that which the Father hath bestowed?

138. Thinking it right, sin's path I trod;
   But, so that I such paths might leave,
 And find His grace, the dancing God,
   Who far beyond our thought doth live,
     O wonder passing great!--to me His dancing shewed.
     Ah who could win that which the Father hath bestowed?

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

  

APPENDIX I

  

SHRINES MENTIONED IN THESE POEMS

Aduturai, or Avaduturai, in Tanjore District, now a station on the South Indian Railway.

Aiyaru, twelve miles from Tanjore.

Alavay, or Uttarakosaimangai, Madura.

Annamalai, or Tiruvannamalai, in South Arcot District.

Arur, Tiruvallur, Tanjore District.

Athihai Virattanam, South Arcot District.

Bramapuram, Shiyali, Tanjore District.

Chenkattankudi

Chidambaram, or Tillai, or Perumpattapuliyur, in S. Arcot District, the most venerated place of Saivism.

Chola, one of the three great kingdoms into which the ancient Tamil country was divided.

Comorin, extreme southern point of India, still a great place of pilgrimage.

Dharmapuram, near Tranquebar, Tanjore District.

Kaviri, or Cauvery, the most sacred river in South India.

Kachchi Ehambam, or Kanchipuram, the modern Conjeeveram, in North Arcot District.

Kedila

Ketaram

Kodumudi, near Erode, Coimbatore District.

Kolili, near the modern Tiruvallur, Tanjore District.

Kongu

Kundaiyur, near Tiruvallur, Tanjore District.

Kuttalam, Tanjore District.

Malapadi, South Arcot District, near Trichinopoly.

Maraikkidu, the modern Vetharaniam, Tanjore District. Curiously enough, the modern name is the Sanskrit translation of the Tamil, meaning 'Forest of the Vedas,' i.e., lonely place where Vedas are studied.

Maruhal, on the Cauvery River, Tanjore District.

Neyttanam, on the Cauvery River, Tanjore District.

Ottiyur, better known as Tiruvottiyur, a few miles north of Madras, now practically a suburb.

Palanam, Tanjore District.

Perumpattapuliyur, see Chidambaram.

Perundurai, Avudaiyarkoil, Tanjore District.

Puhalur

Pungur, seven miles from Shiyali, Tanjore District.

Punturutti

Puvanam, twelve miles from Madura.

Tillai, see Chidambaram.

Tiruputtur, Ramnad District, near Pudukottah.

Tiruvannamalai, see Annamalai.

Tiru Neyttanam, see Neyttanam.

Tunganaimadam

Uttarakosamangai, Ramnad District.

Valivalam on the Cauvery, Tanjore District.

Venneynallur, South Arcot District.

NB.--"Tiru" is an epithet meaning "Holy," but where it has become practically part of the place-name, that name is given in this list as if it began with T.

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 129]

  

APPENDIX II

  

SYSTEM OF TRANSLITERATION AND PRONUNCIATION OF TAMIL LETTERS

  

CONSONANTS

NB.--The Tamil alphabet is not fully phonetic as are the Sanskrit and the other Dravidian alphabets. Several letters indicate different sounds in different connections.

[p. 130]

Sanskrit words, unless they have become modified by long Tamil usage, as, for example, in the author's name Manikka Vasahar, are transliterated according to Sanskrit pronunciation, on the system used in other books in this series, the Sanskrit alphabet being represented as follows:--

          k

       kh

       g

       gh

       n

     
      ch

       chh

       j

       jh

       n

     
      t

       th

       d

       dh

       n

     
      t

       th

       d

       dh

       n

     
      p

       ph

       b

       bh

       m

     
      y

       r

       1

       y

        

     
      s

       sh

       s

       h

        

     
      ri

       m

       h

        

        

     
   

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints, by F. Kingsbury and G.P. Phillips, [1921], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 131]

  

INDEX

(THE NUMBERS ARE THOSE OF PAGES, NOT OF STANZAS.)

ADISESHA, <page 7>.

Aiyaru, <page 61>.

Alvar, <page 4>.

Aryan, <page 3>.

Ash, sacred, <page 23>.

Astrology, <page 21>.

Asuras, <page 7>.

Athikai Virattanam, <page 39>, <page 43>.

Avaduturai, <page 49>, <page 65>.

Avudaiyarkoil (Perundurai), <page 86>, <page 111>, <page 117> f., <page 121>.

BRAHMA, <page 4>, <page 6>, <page 13>, <page 21>, <page 39>, <page 41>, <page 55>, <page 89>.

Brahmans, <page 17>. <page 33>, <page 59>, <page 71>, <page 88>.

Buddhism, <page 11>, <page 27>, <page 86>.

CAUVERY, <page 15>, <page 55>.,

Chidambaram (Tillai, Perumpattapuliyur), <page 5>, <page 17>, <page 65>, <page 86>, <page 107>, <page 109>, <page 115>, <page 131>.

Comorin, <page 57>.

Conjeeveram, <page 19>.

Consecration, <page 53>.

Cuckoo as messenger, <page 107>.

Cycles of existence, <page 67>.

DANCE of Siva, <page 5>, <page 6>.

Devaram, <page 2>.

EMOTION, emphasis upon, <page 89>, <page 91>, <page 125>.

FAVOURITISM in God, <page 73>.

GAMES, songs sung in, <page 101> f.

Ganges, <page 5>, <page 23>, <page 51>, <page 79>.

Grace, divine, <page 65>, <page 89>, <page 127>.

HARA (Siva), <page 33>.

IDOL, worship of, <page 111>.

Indra, <page 51>, <page 89>, <page 113>.

JAINS, <page 11>, <page 27>, <page 33>, <page 59>, <page 61>.

Joy in God, <page 47>-<page 51>, <page 75>, <page 77>.

KAILASA, <page 5>, <page 39>. Kali, <page 5>,

Kalukkundu, <page 119>.

Katpaha tree, <page 47>.

Kedila, <page 61>.

Ketaram, <page 83>.

Kodumudi, <page 77>.

Kolili, <page 81>.

Kondai (cassia flower), <page 5>, <page 73>, <page 121>.

Kulachchirai, <page 31>.

Kun Pandiyan, <page 29>.

Kundaiyur, <page 81>.

Kuttalam, <page 125>.

MADURA (Alavay, Uttarakosamangai), <page 10>, <page 19>, <page 31>, <page 33>, <page 99>.

Mahadev (Siva), <page 51>.

Malapadi, <page 73>.

Mangaiyarkkarasi, <page 29>.

Markandeya, <page 15>, <page 79>.

Maruhal, <page 27>.

Meru, <page 7>.

Minakshi, <page 31>.

Muyalahan, <page 5>.

NAMASIVAYA, <page 25>, <page 67>.

Nandan, <page 73>.

Nandi (Siva's bull), <page 5>, <page 61>.

[p. 132]

Natarajan (Siva), Frontispiece, <page 5>.

Neyttanam, <page 15>.

PALNY, <page 15>.

Pari, <page 81>.

Parvati (Uma), <page 5>, <page 13>, <page 59>, <page 61>, <page 63>, <page 65>, <page 75>, <page 79>, <page 93>.

Periya Puranam, <page 29>.

Pessimism, <page 51>, <page 67>, <page 83>.

Pilgrimage, no need for, <page 57>.

Planets, <page 21>,

Puhalur, <page 81>.

Pungur, <page 79>.

Punturutti, <page 47>.

Puranas, <page 4>.

Puvanam, <page 41>.

RAMESWARAM, <page 55>.

Ravana, <page 7>, <page 39>.

Rig Veda, <page 3>, <page 17>, <page 59>,-<page 115>.

Rudra, <page 3>, <page 41>.

SANKARA (Siva), <page 51>.

Shiyali, <page 10>, <page 11>.

Sin, sense of, <page 43>-<page 47>, <page 97>, <page 99>, <page 101>.

Siva:

   Meaning of name, <page 3>.

   Conception of, <page 4> f.

   Blue-throated; <page 8>.

   Delivering from death, <page 15>, <page 79>.

   Including good and evil, <page 19>, <page 103>.

   Unsearchable, <page 21>.

   Immanent in all, <page 91>.

   His saving grace, <page 127>.

Sivacharyar, <page 11>.

TAMILIAN Antiquary, <page 29>.

Tantras, <page 23>.

Tirukkovaiyar, <page 87>.

Tiruvachakam, <page 2>.

Tiruvallur (Arur), <page 25>, <page 71>, <page 75>, <page 79>.

Tiruvannamalai, <page 13>.

Tiruvottiyur, <page 45>, <page 71>, <page 75>.

Trichinopoly (Chirapalli), <page 19>.

Tunganaimadam, <page 39>.

UMA (Parvati), <page 5>, <page 13>, <page 59>, <page 61>, <page 63>, <page 65>, <page 75>, <page 79>, <page 93>.

Unreality of life, <page 51>, <page 83>.

VADAPI, <page 29>.

Vak, <page 59>.

Valivalam, <page 21>.

Vasuki, <page 8>.

Vedaraniyam, <page 63>.

Vedas, <page 55>.

Vedangas, <page 55>.

Venneynallur, <page 75>.

Vina, <page 49>, <page 115>.

Vishnu, <page 4>, <page 41>, <page 83>.

YAMA, <page 79>.

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: hvj.txt =====


    
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

  

A HUNDRED VERSES FROM OLD JAPAN

  

being a translation of the Hyaku-nin-isshiu

  

by William N. Porter

  

The Clarendon Press, London

  

[1909]

  

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, September, 2004, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

INTRODUCTION

THE Hyaku-nin-isshiu, or 'Single Verses by a Hundred People', were collected together in A.D. 1235 by Sadaiye Fujiwara, who included as his own contribution verse No. 97. They are placed in approximately chronological order, and range from about the year 670 to the year of compilation. The Japanese devote themselves to poetry very much more than we do; and there is hardly a home in Japan, however humble, where these verses, or at least some of them, are not known. They are, and have been for many years, used also in connexion with a game of cards, in which the skill consists in fitting parts of the different verses together.

Japanese poetry differs very largely from anything we are used to; it has no rhyme or alliteration, and little, if any, rhythm, as we understand it. The verses in this Collection are all what are called Tanka, which was for many years the only form of verse known to the Japanese. A tanka verse has five lines

[p. viii]

and thirty-one syllables, arranged thus: 5-7-5-7-7 as this is an unusual metre in our ears, I have adopted for the translation a five-lined verse of 8-6-8-6-6 metre, with the second, fourth, and fifth lines rhyming, in the hope of retaining at least some resemblance to the original form, while making the sound more familiar to English readers.

I may perhaps insert here, as an example, the following well-known tanka verse, which does not appear in the Hyaku-nin-isshiu collection:--

  Idete inaba
 Nushinaki yado to
   Narinu tomo
   Nokiba no ume yo
 Haru wo wasuruna.

Though masterless my home appear,
   When I have gone away,
 Oh plum tree growing by the caves,
   Forget not to display
   Thy buds in spring, I pray.

This was written by Sanetomo Minamoto on the morning of the day he was murdered at Kamakura, as related in the note to verse No. 93.

It is necessarily impossible in a translation of this kind to adhere at all literally to the text; more especially as Japanese poetry abounds in all sorts of

[p. ix]

puns, plays upon words, and alternative meanings, which cannot be rendered into English. For example, a favourite device with Japanese verse-writers is to introduce what Professor Chamberlain calls a 'pivot-word', which they consider adds an elegant touch to the composition. An instance of this will be found in verse No. 16, where the word matsu, though only appearing once, must be understood twice with its two different meanings. It is almost as if we should say, 'Sympathy is what I needless to say I never get it.' Other peculiarities of Japanese verse, as Professor Chamberlain points out, are the 'pillow-word', or recognized conventional epithet (see verse No. 17), and the 'preface', where the first two or three lines appear to have only the slightest connexion with the main idea, and simply serve as an introduction (see verse No. 27).

The Hyaku-nin-isshiu, like all Japanese classical poetry, contains no Chinese words, such as are so extensively introduced into the modern spoken language; it consists of poetical ideas clothed in poetical language, compressed within the regulation metre, embellished with various elegant word-plays, and is absolutely free from any trace of vulgarity. In the old days it was only the nobles, court officials, and church

[p. x]

dignitaries, who wrote verses; or at all events only their verses have been handed down to our time, and the lower classes were not supposed to know anything at all about the art.

Thus, it is related that long ago Prince Ota Dokwan was hunting with his retinue on the mountains; and, a storm of rain coming on, he stopped at a mountain inn, to request the loan of a rain-coat; a girl came at his call, and retired into the hut, coming back again in a few minutes looking rather confused, and without saying a word she humbly presented the Prince with a yamabuki blossom (a kind of yellow rose) on an outstretched fan. The Prince, much incensed at being trifled with like this, turned on his heel, and went off in high dudgeon; until one of his attendants reminded him of a well-known verse, which runs:--

  Nanae yae
 Hana wa sake domo
   Yamabuki no
 Mi no hitotsu dani
 Naka zo kanashiki.

The yamabuki blossom has
   A wealth of petals gay ;
 But yet in spite of this, alas
   I much regret to say,
   No seed can it display.

[p. xi]

The words as printed in the last couplet mean, 'I am very sorry that it has not a single seed; but, if mino is taken as one word, it would mean, 'I am very sorry that (the yamabuki, i.e. herself, the mountain flower) has not any rain-coat'. And this was the maiden's delicate apology. The Prince, we are told, was astonished to find such culture and learning in a peasant girl!

Perhaps what strikes one most in connexion with the Hyaku-nin-isshiu is the date when the verses were written; most of them were produced before the time of the Norman Conquest, and one cannot but be struck with the advanced state of art and culture in Japan at a time when England was still in a very elementary stage of civilization.

The Collection, as will be seen, consists almost entirely of love-poems and what I may call picture-poems, intended to bring before the mind's eye some well-known scene in nature; and it is marvellous what effect little thumbnail sketches are compressed within thirty-one syllables, however crude and faulty the translation may be; for instance, verses Nos. 79, 87, and 98. But the predominating feature, the undercurrent that runs through them all, is a touch of pathos, which is characteristic of the Japanese. It shows out

[p. xii]

in the cherry blossoms which are doomed to fall, the dewdrops scattered by the wind, the mournful cry of the wild deer on the mountains, the dying crimson of the fallen maple leaves, the weird sadness of the cuckoo singing in the moonlight, and the loneliness of the recluse in the mountain wilds; while those verses which appear to be of a more cheerful type are rather of the nature of the 'Japanese smile', described by Lafcadio Hearn as a mask to hide the real feelings.

Some explanation is necessary as to the names of the writers of the different verses. The Japanese custom is to place the family or clan name first, followed by the preposition no (of), and then the rest of the name; but, as this would be appreciated only by those who are familiar with the language, the names have been transposed, and the titles and ranks translated, as far as possible, into English. At the same time the full name and title have also been given on the left band page in their Japanese form; for many of these names, such as Yamabe no Akahito, Abe no Nakamaro, Ono no Komachi, are so well known to Japanese students that they would hardly be recognized in their transposed form.

A word may be added as to pronunciation, for the benefit of those who are not familiar with Japanese;

[p. xiii]

every vowel in poetry must be sounded, there are no diphthongs, a long vowel is lengthened out, as if it were two syllables, a final n, which was originally mu, must be sounded as a full syllable, and a final vowel is generally elided, if the following word begins with a vowel. The continental sound is to be given to a, e, and i, and the aspirate is sounded.

The illustrations have been reproduced from a native edition of the Hyaku-nin-isshiu, which probably dates from the end of the eighteenth century, and which has been kindly lent to me by Mr. F. V. Dickins, C.B., to whom I am much indebted; as will be seen, they generally illustrate the subject of the verse, but occasionally they appear to represent the conditions under which the verse was written.

For most of the information contained in the notes the present Translator is indebted to the researches of Professor B. H. Chamberlain, F.R.G.S., Professor Clay MacCauley, and Mr. F. V. Dickins, C.B.; his thanks are also due to Mr. S. Uchigasaki, for his kind assistance towards the meaning of some of the more obscure passages. He makes no claim that his verses have any merit as English poetry; nor, where there is so much uncertainty among the Japanese themselves as to the real meaning of some of these old verses, does he claim

[p. xiv]

that his translation is in all cases the correct one. In two or three instances the original has been purposely toned down somewhat, to suit English ideas. He has, however, tried to reproduce these Verses from Old Japan in such a way, that a few of the many, who now are unfamiliar with the subject, may feel sufficient interest in them to study a more scholarly translation, such as that by Mr. F. V. Dickins, recently published in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, or Professor MacCauley's literal translation, both of which are evidently the result of hard labour and great care; and may thus learn to appreciate a branch of Japanese art which has been far too much neglected up to the present.

W. N. P.

 

[p. xv]

'Whatever Defects, as, I doubt not, there will be many, fall under the Reader's Observation, I hope his Candour will incline him to make the following Reflections: That the Works of Orientals contain many Peculiarities, and that thro' Defect of Language few European Translators can do them justice.'

WILLIAM COLLINS.

 

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

1

  

THE EMPEROR TENCHI

  

TENCHI TENNO

  Aki no ta no
 Kari ho no iho no
   Toma wo arami
 Waga koromode wa
 Tsuyu ni nure-tsutsu.

OUT in the fields this autumn day
   They're busy reaping grain ;
 I sought for shelter 'neath this roof,
   But fear I sought in vain,--
   My sleeve is wet with rain.

The Emperor Tenchi reigned from A.D. 668 to 671, his capital was Otsu, not far from Kyoto, and he is chiefly remembered for his kindness and benevolence. It is related, that one day he was scaring birds away, while the harvesters were gathering in the crop, and, when a shower of rain came on, he took shelter in a neighbouring hut; it was, however, thatched only with coarse rushes, which did not afford him much protection, and this is the incident on which the verse is founded.

The picture shows the harvesters hard at work in the field, and the hut where the Emperor took shelter.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 2]

  

2

  

THE EMPRESS JITO

  

JITO TENNO

  Haru sugite
 Natsu ki ni kerashi
   Shirotae no
 Koromo hosu teu
 Ama-no-kagu yama

THE spring has gone, the summer's come,
   And I can just descry
 The peak of Ama-no-kagu,
   Where angels of the sky
   Spread their white robes to dry.

The Empress Jito reigned A.D. 690-696, during which time sake was first made and drunk in Japan; she was the daughter of the Emperor Tenchi, the writer of the previous verse, and she married the Emperor Temmu, ascending the throne herself on his death. The poem refers to a snow-capped mountain just visible on the horizon. One of the No dramas relates, that an angel once came to a pine forest on the coast near Okitsu, and, hanging her feather mantle on a pine tree, climbed a neighbouring mountain to view Mount Fuji; a fisherman, however, found the robe and was about to carry it off with him, when the angel reappeared and begged him to give it her, as without it she could not return to the moon where she lived. He only consented to do so, however, on condition that she would dance for him; and this she accordingly did, draped in her feathery robe on the sandy beach under the shade of the pine trees; after which she floated heavenward, and was lost to view.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

3

  

THE NOBLEMAN KAKI-NO-MOTO

  

KAKI-NO-MOTO NO HITOMARO

  Ashibiki no
 Yamadori no o no
   Shidario no
 Naga-nagashi yo wo
 Hitori ka mo nemu.

LONG is the mountain pheasant's tail
   That curves down in its flight;
 But longer still, it seems to me,
   Left in my lonely plight,
   Is this unending night.

The writer was a foundling, picked up and adopted by Abaye at the foot of a persimmon tree, which is in Japanese kaki, from which he got his name. He was an attendant on the Emperor Mommu, who reigned A.D. 697-707, and was one of the great poets of the early days of Japan; he is known as the rival of Akahito Yamabe (see next verse), and after death was deified as a God of Poetry. There is a temple erected in his honour at Ichi-no-Moto, and another at Akashi, not far from Kobe; he died in the year 737.

In the fourth line nagashi may be taken as the adjective 'long', or the verb 'to drift along'; and yo may mean either 'night' or 'life'; so that this line, which I have taken as 'long, long is the night', may also mean 'my life is drifting, drifting along'. Yamadori (pheasant) is literally 'mountain bird', and ashibiki is a pillow-word for mountain, which is itself the first half of the word for pheasant.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

4

  

AKAHITO YAMABE

  

YAMABE NO AKAHITO

  Tago no ura ni
 Uchi-idete mireba
   Shirotae no
 Fuji no takane ni
 Yuki wa furi-tsutsu.

I STARTED off along the shore,
   The sea shore at Tago,
 And saw the white and glist'ning peak
   Of Fuji all aglow
   Through falling flakes of snow.

Akahito Yamabe lived about A.D. 700, and was one of the greatest of the early poets; he was contemporary with Kaki-no-Moto, the writer of the previous verse, and like him was deified as a God of Poetry. Tago is a seaside place in the Province of Izu, famous for its beautiful view of Mount Fuji.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

5

  

SARU MARU, A SHINTO OFFICIAL

  

SARU MARU TAIU

  Oku yama ni
 Momiji fumi wake
   Naku shika no
 Koe kiku toki zo
 Aki wa kanashiki.

HEAR the stag's pathetic call
   Far up the mountain side,
 While tramping o'er the maple leaves
   Wind-scattered far and wide
   This sad, sad autumn tide.

Very little is known of this writer, but he probably lived not later than A.D. 800. Stags and the crimson leaves of the maple are frequently used symbolically of autumn.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

6

  

THE IMPERIAL ADVISER YAKAMOCHI

  

CHU-NAGON YAKAMOCHI

  Kasasagi no
 Wataseru hashi ni
   Oku shimo no
 Shiroki wo mireba
 Yo zo fuke ni keru.

WHEN on the Magpies' Bridge I see
   The Hoar-frost King has cast
 His sparkling mantle, well I know
   The night is nearly past,
   Daylight approaches fast.

The author of this verse was Governor of the Province of Koshu, and Viceroy of the more or less uncivilized northern and eastern parts of Japan; he died A.D. 785. There was a bridge or passageway in the Imperial Palace at Kyoto called the Magpies' Bridge, but there is also an allusion here to the old legend about the Weaver and Herdsman. It is said, that the Weaver (the star Vega) was a maiden, who dwelt on one side of the River of the Milky Way, and who was employed in making clothes for the Gods. But one day the Sun took pity upon her, and gave her in marriage to the Herdboy (the star Aquila), who lived on the other side of the river. But as the result of this was that the supply of clothes fell short, she was only permitted to visit her husband once a year, viz. on the seventh night of the seventh month; and on this night, it is said, the magpies in a dense flock form a bridge for her across the river. The hoar frost forms just before day breaks. The illustration shows the Herdboy crossing on the Bridge of Magpies to his bride.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

7

  

NAKAMARO ABE

  

ABE NO NAKAMARO

  Ama no hara
 Furisake-mireba
   Kasuga naru
 Mikasa no yama ni
 Ideshi tsuki kamo.

WHILE gazing up into the sky,
   My thoughts have wandered far;
 Methinks I see the rising moon
   Above Mount Mikasa
   At far-off Kasuga.

The poet, when sixteen years of age, was sent with two others to China, to discover the secret of the Chinese calendar, and on the night before sailing for home his friends gave him a farewell banquet. It was a beautiful moonlight night, and after dinner he composed this verse. Another account, however, says that the Emperor of China, becoming suspicious, caused him to be invited to a dinner at the top of a high pagoda, and then had the stairs removed, in order that he might be left to die of hunger. Nakamaro is said to have bitten his hand and written this verse with his blood, after which he appears to have escaped and fled to Annam. Kasuga, pronounced Kasunga, is a famous temple at the foot of Mount Mikasa, near Nara, the poet's home; the verse was written in the year 726, and the author died in 780.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

8

  

THE PRIEST KIZEN

  

KIZEN HOSHI

  Waga iho wa
 Miyako no tatsumi
   Shika zo sumu
 Yo wo Uji yama to
 Hito wa iu nari.

MY home is near the Capital,
   My humble cottage bare
 Lies south-east on Mount Uji; so
   The people all declare
   My life's a 'Hill of Care'.

The priest Kizen lived on Mount Uji, which lies south-east of Kyoto, at this time the Capital. The word uji or ushi means 'sorrow'; so he says that, as he lives on Mount Sorrow, his friends say his life is 'a mountain of sorrows '. Notice also the two words yama to in the fourth line, which, if read as one word, form the ancient name of Japan. In the picture we see the priest sitting alone in his little hut, his poverty being shown by the patches on the roof.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

9

  

KOMACHI ONO

  

ONO NO KOMACHI

  Hana no iro wa
 Utsuri ni keri na
   Itazura ni
 Waga mi yo ni furu
 Nagame seshi ma ni.

THE blossom's tint is washed away
   By heavy showers of rain;
 My charms, which once I prized so much,
   Are also on the wane,
   Both bloomed, alas! in vain.

The writer was a famous poetess, who lived A.D. 834-880. She is remembered for her talent, her beauty, her pride, her love of luxury, her frailty, and her miserable old age. The magic of her art is said to have overcome a severe drought, from which the country suffered in the year 866, when prayers to the Gods had proved useless.

The first and last couplets may mean either 'the blossom's tint fades away under the continued downpour of rain in the world', or 'the beauty of this flower (i.e. herself) is fading away as I grow older and older in this life'; while the third line dividing the two couplets means, that the flower's tint and her own beauty are alike only vanity. This verse, with its double meaning running throughout, is an excellent example of the characteristic Japanese play upon words.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10]

  

10

  

SEMI MARU

  Kore ya kono
 Yuku mo kaeru mo
   Wakarete wa
 Shiru mo shiranu mo
 Ausaka no seki.

THE stranger who has travelled far,
   The friend with welcome smile,
 All sorts of men who come and go
   Meet at this mountain stile,--
   They meet and rest awhile.

Semi Marti is said to have been the son of the Emperor Uda, who reigned A.D. 888-897. He became blind, and so, being unable to ascend the throne, he retired to a hut on the hills, near to a barrier gate, and amused himself with his guitar. The translation does not fully reproduce the antithesis of the original--'this or that man, people coming and going, long lost friends and strangers'. The last line is literally 'the barrier on the mountain road of meeting'; and Osaka no Seki, as the name is now spelled, a small hill on the edge of Lake Biwa, not far from Kyoto, is the site commemorated in this verse.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

11

  

THE PRIVY COUNCILLOR TAKAMURA

  

SANGI TAKAMURA

  Wada no hara
 Yasoshima kakete
   Kogi idenu to
 Hito ni wa tsugeyo
 Ama no tsuribune.

OH! Fishers in your little boats,
   Quick! tell my men, I pray,
 They'll find me at Yasoshima,
   I'm being rowed away
   Far off across the bay.

Takamura, a well-known scholar, rose from poverty to riches on being appointed a Custom-house officer for the ships trading to and from China. His enemies reported him to the Emperor as an extortioner and a thief, and he was deported to Yasoshima, a group of small islands off the coast; he is said to have composed this song and sung it to the fishing-boats, as he was being carried off. He was afterwards pardoned and reinstated, dying in the year 852.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

  

12

  

BISHOP HENJO

  

SOJO HENJO

  Amatsu kaze
 Kumo no kayoiji
   Fuki tojiyo
 Otome no sugata
 Shibashi todomemu.

OH stormy winds, bring up the clouds,
   And paint the heavens grey;
 Lest these fair maids of form divine
   Should angel wings display,
   And fly far far away.

The poet's real name was Munesada Yoshimune, and he was the great-grandson of the Emperor Kwammu. On the death of the Emperor Nimmyo, to whom he was much devoted (A.D. 850), he took holy orders, and in the year 866 was made a bishop. He died in the year 890, at the age of seventy, from being buried, by his own wish, in a small stone tomb covered with soil, with only a small pipe leading from his mouth to the open air; he remained thus, until hunger and exhaustion put an end to his life. He is said to have composed the above verse, before he entered the priesthood, on seeing a dance of some maidens at a Court entertainment; he pretends that the ladies are so beautiful that they can be nothing less than angels, and he is afraid they will fly away, unless the wind will bring up the clouds to bar their passage. In the picture he is shown with two acolytes, apparently addressing the wind.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

13

  

THE RETIRED EMPEROR YOZEI

  

YOZEI IN

  Tsukuba ne no
 Mine yori otsuru
   Mina no kawa
 Koi zo tsumorite
 Fuchi to nari nuru.

THE Mina stream comes tumbling down
   From Mount Tsukuba's height;
 Strong as my love, it leaps into
   A pool as black as night
   With overwhelming might.

It was a frequent custom in the old days for the Emperors of Japan to retire into the church or private life, when circumstances demanded it. The Emperor Yozei, who was only nine years of age when he came to the throne, went out of his mind, and was forced by Mototsune Fujiwara to retire; he reigned A.D. 877-884, and did not die till the year 949. The verse was addressed to the Princess Tsuridono-no-Miko. Mount Tsukuba (2,925 feet high) and the River Mina are in the Province of Hitachi.

Koi here means the dark colour of the water from its depth, but it also means his love, and is to be understood both ways. Note also mine, a mountain peak, and Mina, the name of the river.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

14

  

THE MINISTER-OF-THE-LEFT OF THE KAWARA (DISTRICT OF KYOTO)

  

KAWARA NO SADAIJIN

  Michinoku no
 Shinobu moji-zuri
   Tare yue ni
 Midare-some nishi
 Ware naranaku ni.

AH! why does love distract my thoughts,
   Disordering my will!
 I'm like the pattern on the cloth
   Of Michinoku hill,--
   All in confusion still.

The old capital of Kyoto was divided into right and left districts, and the above is only an official title; the poet's name was Toru Minamoto, and he died in the year 949. At Michinoku, in the Province of Iwashiro, in old times a kind of figured silk fabric was made, called moji-zuri, embroidered with an intricate pattern, which was formed by placing vine leaves on the material, and rubbing or beating them with a stone until the impression was left on the silk. There is a hill close by, called Mount Shinobu, and a small temple, called Shinobu Moji-zuri Kwannon. Shinobu can also mean 'a vine', 'to love', or to 'conceal (my love)'. The meaning of this very involved verse appears to be, that his thoughts are as confused with love as the vine pattern on the embroidered fabric made at Mount Michinoku. The picture seems to show the lady with whom the poet was in love.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 15]

  

15

  

THE EMPEROR KWOKO

  

KWOKO TENNO

  Kimi ga tame
 Haru no no ni idete
   Wakana tsumu
 Waga koromode ni
 Yuki wa furi-tsutsu.

MOTHER, for thy sake I have been
   Where the wakana grow,
 To bring thee back some fresh green leaves
   And see--my koromo
   Is sprinkled with the snow!

Kwoko was raised to the throne by the Fujiwara family, when the mad Emperor Yozei was deposed; he reigned A.D. 885-887, and is said to have composed this verse in honour of his grandmother.

Wakana, literally 'young leaves', is a vegetable in season at the New Year; a koromo is really a priest's garment, but is used here for the Emperor's robe.

In the picture we see the Emperor gathering the fresh green leaves, and the snow falling from the sky.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 16]

  

16

  

THE IMPERIAL ADVISER YUKI-HIRA ARIWARA

  

CHU-NAGON ARIWARA NO YUKI-HIRA

  Tachi wakare
 Inaba no yama no
   Mine ni oru
 Matsu to shi kikaba
 Ima kaeri-komu.

IF breezes on Inaba's peak
   Sigh through the old pine tree,
 To whisper in my lonely ears
   That thou dost pine for me,--
   Swiftly I'll fly to thee.

Yuki-hira was the Governor of the Province of Inaba, and half-brother of the writer of the next verse (<page 17>); he died in the year 893, aged 75.

The word matsu in the original may mean 'a pine tree', but it may also mean 'waiting and longing for'. This is an instance of a 'pivot-word', imitated to a certain extent in the translation, although in English we have to employ the word twice over, while it only appears once in the Japanese.

The illustration shows the pine tree on the mountain, and the poet standing under it with two attendants.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

17

  

THE MINISTER NARI-HIRA ARIWARA

  

ARIWARA NO NARI-HIRA ASON

  Chi haya furu
 Kami yo mo kikazu
   Tatsuta gawa
 Kara kurenai ni
 Mizu kuguru to wa.

ALL red with leaves Tatsuta's stream
   So softly purls along,
 The everlasting Gods themselves,
   Who judge 'twixt right and wrong,
   Ne'er heard so sweet a song.

The writer, who lived A.D. 825-880, was the grandson of the Emperor Saga, and was the Don Juan of Old Japan; he was banished because of an intrigue he had with the Empress, and his adventures are fully related in the Ise-Monogatari. The Tatsuta stream is not far from Nara, and is famous for its maples in autumn. Chi haya furu, literally 'thousand quick brandishing (swords)', is a 'pillow-word', or recognized epithet, for the Gods, and almost corresponds to Virgil's Pious Aeneas, and Homer's 'Odysseus, the son of Zeus, Odysseus of many devices'. It may be noted that these 'pillow-words' only occur in the five-syllable lines, never in the longer lines.

In the picture we see the poet looking at a screen, on which is depicted the river with the red maple leaves floating on it.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

18

  

THE MINISTER TOSHI-YUKI FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO TOSHI-YUKI ASON

  Sumi-no-ye no
 Kishi ni yoru nami
   Yoru sae ya
 Yume no kayoi-ji
 Hito-me yokuramu.

TO-NIGHT on Sumi-no-ye beach
   The waves alone draw near;
 And, as we wander by the cliffs,
   No prying eyes shall peer,
   No one shall dream we're here.

Toshi-yuki, who lived A.D. 880-907, was an officer of the Imperial Guard, and a member of the great and influential Fujiwara family. This family rose into power in the reign of the Emperor Tenchi, and became almost hereditary ministers-of-state. For a long period the Emperors chose their wives from this family only, and to this day a large number of the Japanese nobility are sprung from the same stock. Sumi-no-ye, or Sumi-yoshi, is in the Province of Settsu, near Kobe.

Note the word yoru used twice in the first instance as a verb, meaning 'to approach' and in the next line meaning 'night'. The illustration shows Toshi-yuki walking on the beach, and evidently waiting for the lady to join him.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

19

  

THE PRINCESS ISE

  

ISE

  Naniwa gata
 Mijikaki ashi no
 Fushi no ma mo
   Awade kono yo wo,
   Sugushite yo to ya.

SHORT as the joints of bamboo reeds
   That grow beside the sea
 On pebble beach at Naniwa,
   I hope the time may be,
   When thou 'rt away from me.

The Princess Ise was the daughter of Tsugukage Fujiwara, the Governor of the Province of Ise; hence her name. She lived at the Imperial Court, and was the favourite maid of honour of the Emperor Uda, who reigned A.D. 888-897. She was noted for her talents and gentle disposition, and was the mother of Prince Katsura. Naniwa is the old name of Osaka. The picture shows the Princess on the pebble beach at Naniwa, and to the left are the bamboo reeds.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

20

  

THE HEIR-APPARENT MOTO-YOSHI

  

MOTO-YOSHI SHINNO

  Wabi nureba
 Ima hata onaji
   Naniwa naru
 Mi wo tsukushite mo
 Awamu to zo omou.

WE met but for a moment, and
   I'm wretched as before;
 The tide shall measure out my life,
   Unless I see once more
   The maid, whom I adore.

The composer of this verse was the son of the Emperor Yozei, who reigned A.D. 877-884; he was noted for his love-affairs, and he died in the year 943.

Mi wo tsukushite mo means 'even though I die in the attempt', but miotsukushi is a graduated stick, set up to measure the rise and fall of the tide; and Naniwa, the modern seaport of Osaka, seems to have been inserted chiefly as the place where this tide-gauge was set up. The poet may have meant, that the river of his tears was so deep as to require a gauge to measure it; or, as Professor MacCauley reads it, he was hinting, that if he could not attain his ends his body would be found at the tide-gauge in Naniwa Bay. The picture seems to show the poet on the verandah and his lady-love looking through the screen.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21]

  

21

  

THE PRIEST SOSEI

  

SOSEI HOSHI

  Ima kon to
 Iishi bakari ni
   Naga-tsuki no
 Ariake no tsuki
 Wo machi izuru kana.

THE moon that shone the whole night through
   This autumn morn I see,
 As here I wait thy well-known step,
   For thou didst promise me--
   'I'll surely come to thee.'

Sosei is supposed to have been the son of Bishop Henjo, the writer of verse No. <page 12>, born before the latter entered the church, about the year 850. His name as a layman was Hiro-nobu Yoshi-mine, and he became abbot of the Monastery of Riyau-inwin at Isono-kami, in the Province of Yamato.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

22

  

YASUHIDE BUNYA

  

BUNYA NO YASUHIDE

  Fuku kara ni
 Aki no kusa ki no
   Shiborureba
 Mube yama kaze wo
 Arashi to iuramu.

THE mountain wind in autumn time
   Is well called 'hurricane';
 It hurries canes and twigs along,
   And whirls them o'er the plain
   To scatter them again.

This well-known writer lived in the ninth century, and was the father of Asayasu, who composed verse No. <page 37>; he was also Vice-Director of the Imperial Bureau of Fabrics.

The point of this verse lies in the ideographic characters of the original; yama kaze (mountain wind) being written with two characters, which, when combined, form arashi (hurricane), and this, of course, it is quite impossible to reproduce correctly in the translation. The picture shows the wind blowing down from the mountain behind the poet and waving his sleeves about.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

23

  

CHISATO OYE

  

OYE NO CHISATO

  Tsuki mireba
 Chiji ni mono koso
   Kanashi kere
 Waga mi hitotsu no
 Aki ni wa aranedo.

THIS night the cheerless autumn moon
   Doth all my mind enthrall;
 But others also have their griefs,
   For autumn on us all
   Hath cast her gloomy pall.

Chisato Oye is said to have lived about the end of the ninth century; he was the son of a Councillor, and a very fertile poet. He was also famous as a philosopher, and acted as tutor to the Emperor Sei-wa, who reigned A.D. 859-876.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 24]

  

24

  

KWAN-KE

  Kono tabi wa
 Nusa mo tori-aezu
   Tamuke-yama
 Momiji no nishiki
 Kami no mani-mani.

I BRING no prayers on coloured silk
   To deck thy shrine to-day,
 But take instead these maple leaves,
   That grow at Tamuke;
   Finer than silk are they.

The name given above means 'A house of rushes' but the poet's real name was Michizane Sugawara; he was a great minister in the Emperor Uda's reign and a learned scholar; his works comprise twelve books of poetry and two hundred volumes of history; he was degraded in A.D. 901, and died two years later, an exile in Kinshu, aged fifty-nine. He is worshipped as Tenjin Sama, the God of Calligraphy, and is a favourite deity with schoolboys.

Nusa are strips of coloured silk or cloth inscribed with prayers, which were presented at temples in the old days. Tamuke-yama no Hachiman, a temple at Nara, is the scene of this verse; it is famous for its maple leaves, and the poet intended to say, that the crimson colour of its own maples was finer than any brocade that he could offer. Another allusion is, that Tamuke-yama, near Nara, means 'The Hill of Offerings'.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

25

  

THE MINISTER-OF-THE-RIGHT OF THE SANJO (DISTRICT OF KYOTO)

  

SANJO UDAIJIN

  Na ni shi owaba
 Ausaka yama no
   Sanekazura
 Hito ni shirarede
 Kuru yoshi mo gana.

HEAR thou art as modest as
   The little creeping spray
 Upon Mount Osaka, which hides
   Beneath the grass; then, pray,
   Wander with me to-day.

The writer's real name was Sadakata Fujiwara, and he died A.D. 932. For an account of the Fujiwara family see verse No. <page 18>. Mount Osaka mentioned here is the same place as that referred to in verse No. <page 10>, and when spelled Ausaka it means 'a hill of meeting '. The suggestion is, that if she is really like the creeping vine which grows on Meeting Hill, she will come and meet him.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

26

  

PRINCE TEI-SHIN

  

TEI-SHIN KO

  Ogura yama
 Mine no momiji-ba
   Kokoro araba
 Ima hito tabi no
 Miyuki matanamu.

THE maples of Mount Ogura,
   If they could understand,
 Would keep their brilliant leaves, until
   The Ruler of this land
   Pass with his royal band.

The above is the posthumous name given to Tadahira Fujiwara, Imperial Chief Minister of State; he died about the year 936. It is related that the Emperor Uda, after his abdication, visited Mount Ogura in Yamashiro province, and was so greatly struck with the autumn tints of the maples, that he ordered Tada-hira to invite his son, the Emperor Daigo, to visit the scene; and this verse was the invitation. The picture shows the Emperor with his attendants, and the maples all around him.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 27]

  

27

  

THE IMPERIAL ADVISER KANESUKE

  

CHU-NAGON KANESUKE

  Mika no hara
 Wakite nagaruru
   Izumi gawa
 Itsu miki tote ka
 Koishi-karuramu.

OH! rippling River Izumi,
   That flows through Mika plain,
 Why should the maid I saw but now
   And soon shall see again
   Torment my love-sick brain?

Kanesuke was a member of the Fujiwara family; he died in the year 933. The River Izumi is in the Province of Yamashiro.

The word-plays in this verse are--Izumi, in the third line, which is imitated in the next line, and Mika, which is also repeated in the third line. The first three lines of this verse, about the river flowing through the plain, form a 'preface', and appear to be inserted merely because itsu miki (when I have seen her) sounds like Izumi.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

28

  

THE MINISTER MUNE-YUKI MINAMOTO

  

MINAMOTO NO MUNE-YUKI ASON

  Yama zato wa
 Fuyu zo sabishisa
   Masari keru
 Hito-me mo kusa mo
 Karenu to omoeba.

THE mountain village solitude
   In winter time I dread;
 It seems as if, when friends are gone,
   And trees their leaves have shed,
   All men and plants are dead.

The poet was a grandson of the Emperor Kwoko, and died A.D. 940. The Minamoto family, who sprang from the Emperor Seiwa, who reigned 856-877, was at one time very powerful, and produced many famous men, including Yoritomo, the great founder of the Shogunate. The Taira family and the Minamotos were the Yorks and Lancasters of mediaeval Japan; but, after thirty years of warfare, Yoritomo finally defeated his rivals in a great battle fought at Dan-no-ura, in the Straits of Shimonoseki, in 1185; the entire Taira family was exterminated, including women and children, and the infant Emperor Antoku. The Minamoto clan themselves became extinct in 1219, when Sanetomo was murdered at Kamakura, as related in the note to verse No. <page 93>.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

29

  

MITSUNE OSHI-KOCHI

  

OSHI-KOCHI NO MITSUNE

  Kokoro-ate ni
 Orabaya oramu
   Hatsu shimo no
 Oki madowaseru
 Shira giku no hana.

IT was a white chrysanthemum
   I came to take away;
 But, which are coloured, which are white,
   I'm half afraid to say,
   So thick the frost to-day!

Mitsune lived some time in the beginning of the tenth century, and was one of the compilers of Odes Ancient and Modern (the Kokinshiu). The illustration shows him with a boy in attendance, trying to make up his mind which flower he will pick.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 30]

  

30

  

TADAMINE NIBU

  

NIBU NO TADAMINE

  Ariake no
 Tsurenaku mieshi
   Wakare yori
 Akatsuki bakari
 Uki-mono wa nashi.

I HATE the cold unfriendly moon,
   That shines at early morn;
 And nothing seems so sad and grey,
   When I am left forlorn,
   As day's returning dawn.

The writer lived to the age of ninety-nine, and died in the year 965. He was, like the composer of the previous verse, one of the compilers of the Kokinshiu, and was also the father of the author of verse No. <page 41>.

The picture seems to show the poet all alone looking out at the early dawn, but the moon is not visible.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

31

  

KORENORI SAKA-NO-UYE

  

SAKA-NO-UYE NO KORENORI

  Asaborake
 Ariake no tsuki to
   Miru made ni
 Yoshino no sato ni
 Fureru shira yuki.

SURELY the morning moon, I thought,
   Has bathed the hill in light
 But, no; I see it is the snow
   That, falling in the night,
   Has made Yoshino white.

Little is known about this poet, but he is said to have lived some time in the tenth century. Yoshino is a mountain village in the Province of Yamato, famous for its cherry blossoms; at one time it contained the Imperial Summer Palace. In the illustration we see the poet looking across at the village on the hills all covered with snow.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 32]

  

32

  

TSURAKI HARUMICHI

  

HARUMICHI NO TSURAKI

  Yama gawa ni
 Kaze no kaketaru
   Shigarami wa
 Nagare mo aenu
 Momiji nari keri.

THE stormy winds of yesterday
   The maple branches shook;
 And see! a mass of crimson leaves
   Has lodged within that nook,
   And choked the mountain brook.

The writer of this verse died in the year 864.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 33]

  

33

  

TOMONORI KINO

  

KINO TOMONORI

  Hisakata no
 Hikari nodokeki
   Haru no hi ni
 Shizu kokoro, naku
 Hana no chiruramu.

THE spring has come, and once again
   The sun shines in the sky;
 So gently smile the heavens, that
   It almost makes me cry,
   When blossoms droop and die.

Tomonori Kino was the grandson of Uchisukune Take, a famous warrior, and nephew of Tsura-yuki, who composed verse No. <page 35>; he was one of the compilers of the Kokinshiu, and died at the beginning of the tenth century. He refers in this verse to the fall of the cherry blossoms.

Hisakata is a 'pillow-word' for heaven, without any definite meaning in the present day; it is generally used in poetry in conjunction with such words as sun, moon, sky, or, as in this case, 'the light' (of heaven).

The picture shows the poet with his attendant, watching the petals falling from the cherry tree.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 34]

  

34

  

OKI-KAZE FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO OKI-KAZE

  Tare wo ka mo
 Shiru hito nisemu
   Takasago no
 Matsu mo mukashi no
 Tomo nara-naku ni.

GONE are my old familiar friends,
   The men I used to know;
 Yet still on Takasago beach
   The same old pine trees-grow,
   That I knew long ago.

Oki-kaze, the son of Michinari, was an official in the Province of Sagami in the year 911; the date of his death is unknown, but he is mentioned as being alive as late as the year 914. Takasago, which is mentioned again in verse No. <page 73>, is a seaside place in the Province of Harima, famous for its pine trees; the pine tree is one of the recognized emblems of long life in Japan, because it is believed that after a thousand years its sap turns to amber.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 35]

  

35

  

TSURA-YUKI KINO

  

KINO TSURA-YUKI

  Hito wa iza
 Kokoro mo shirazu
   Furu sato wa
 Hana zo mukashi no
 Ka ni nioi keru.

THE village of my youth is gone,
   New faces meet my gaze;
 But still the blossoms at thy gate,
   Whose perfume scents the ways,
   Recall my childhood's days.

The writer of this verse, who lived A.D. 884-946, was a nobleman at Court, one of the greatest of the classical poets, and the first writer of Japanese prose. He was the chief compiler of the Kokinshiu, in which work he was assisted by the authors of verses Nos. <page 29>, <page 30> and <page 33>. This work consists of twenty volumes, containing some eleven hundred verses, and was completed in the year 922. It is related that Tsura-yuki once visited a friend after a long absence; and on being asked jestingly by the latter, how he could remember the way after such a long interval of time, the poet broke off a spray of blossoms from a plum tree growing at the entrance, and presented it to his friend with this impromptu verse.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

  

36

  

FUKA-YABU KIYOWARA

  

KIYOWARA NO FUKA-YABU

  Natsu no yo wa
 Mada yoi nagara
   Akenuru wo
 Kumo no izuko ni
 Tsuki yadoruramu.

Too short the lovely summer night,
   Too soon 'tis passed away;
 I watched to see behind which cloud
   The moon would chance to stay,
   And here's the dawn of day!

Nothing is known of this writer, except that he was the father of the author of verse No. <page 42>.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

37

  

ASAYASU BUNYA

  

BUNYA NO ASAYASU

  Shira tsuyu ni
 Kaze no fukishiku
   Aki no no wa
 Tsuranuki-tomenu
 Tama zo chiri keru.

THIS lovely morn the dewdrops flash
   Like diamonds on the grass--
 A blaze of sparkling jewels! But
   The autumn wind, alas!
   Scatters them as I pass.

Asayasu, the son of the author of verse No. 22, lived about the end of the ninth century. He is said to have composed this verse at the request of the Emperor Daigo in the year 900. To liken the dewdrops to jewels or beads (tama) is typical of Japanese verse. The picture shows the grass, and the dewdrops scattered on the ground in front of the poet.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 38]

  

38

  

UKON

  Wasuraruru
 Mi woba omowazu
   Chikahite-shi
 Hito no inochi no
 Oshiku mo aru kana.

MY broken heart I don't lament,
   To destiny I bow;
 But thou hast broken solemn oaths,--
   I pray the Gods may now
   Absolve thee from thy vow.

The Lady Ukon is supposed to have been deserted by her husband, and in this poem she regrets, not so much her own sorrow, as the fact that he has broken his sworn oath, and is therefore in danger of divine vengeance. The illustration shows her all alone at the gate, with the house in the background, evidently waiting for the husband who has forsaken her.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 39]

  

39

  

THE PRIVY COUNCILLOR HITOSHI

  

SANGI HITOSHI

  Asaju no
 Ono no shinowara
   Shinoburedo
 Amarite nado ka
 Hito no koishiki.

'TIS easier to hide the reeds
   Upon the moor that grow,
 Than try to hide the ardent love
   That sets my cheeks aglow
   For somebody I know.

Little is known of this poet, except that he lived some time in the tenth century.

Note the word shinowara, meaning 'a bamboo moor', contrasted with shinohuredo in the next line, which means 'though I might manage to conceal'.

The picture shows Hitoshi on the wild moor, with the reeds growing all around him.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40]

  

40

  

KANEMORI TAIRA

  

TAIRA NO KANEMORI

  Shinoburedo
 Iro ni ide ni keri
   Waga koi wa
 Mono ya omou to
 Hito no tou made.

ALAS! the blush upon my cheek,
   Conceal it as I may,
 Proclaims to all that I'm in love,
   Till people smile and say--
   'Where are thy thoughts to-day?'

This verse is said to have been composed in the year 949, at the request of the Emperor Daigo. The Taira family sprang from the Emperor Kwammu, attained great influence three hundred years later, but finally fell before the power of the Minamoto clan in the year 1185 (see note to verse No. <page 28>).

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

41

  

TADAMI NIBU

  

NIBU NO TADAMI

  Koi su tefu
 Waga na wa madaki
   Tachi ni keri
 Hito shirezu koso
 Omoi-someshi ga.

OUR courtship, that we tried to hide,
   Misleading is to none;
 And yet how could the neighbours guess,
   That I had yet begun
   To fancy any one?

This poet was the son of the writer of verse No. <page 30>, and he is said to have composed the poem on the same occasion as is mentioned for No. <page 40>.

The word omoi in the last line is a 'pivot-word' used firstly in connexion with the fourth line, meaning 'I thought' (nobody knew), and also in conjunction with someshi, where it means 'I began to be in love'.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

42

  

MOTO-SUKE KIYOWARA

  

KIYOWARA NO MOTO-SUKE

  Chigiriki na
 Katami-ni sode wo
   Shibori-tsutsu
 Sue no Matsu-Yama
 Nami kosaji to wa.

OUR sleeves, all wet with tears, attest
   That you and I agree
 That to each other we'll be true,
   Till Pine-tree Hill shall be
   Sunk far beneath the sea.

Moto-suke lived towards the close of the tenth century, and was the son of the writer of verse No. <page 36>. The idea of one's sleeves being wet with tears is a common one in Japanese poetry. Matsu-yama, or Pine-tree Hill, is in Northern Japan, on the boundaries between the Provinces of Rikuchu and Nambu. In the illustration the hill with the pine tree on the top appears to be just sinking beneath the waves.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

43

  

THE IMPERIAL ADVISER YATSU-TADA

  

CHU-NAGON YATSU-TADA

  Ai-mite no
 Nochi no kokoro ni
   Kurabureba
 Mukashi wa mono wo
 Omowazari keri.

HOW desolate my former life,
   Those dismal years, ere yet
 I chanced to see thee face to face
   'Twere better to forget
   Those days before we met.

Yatsu-tada was a member of the great Fujiwara family, and is said to have died in the year 943,

It is interesting to note in these illustrations, as in nearly all old Japanese pictures, that the artist either takes off the roof of the house or removes part of the wall when he wishes you to see what is going on indoors.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

44

  

THE IMPERIAL ADVISER ASA-TADA

  

CHU-NAGON ASA-TADA

  Au koto no
 Taete shi nakuba
   Naka naka ni
 Hito wo mo mi wo mo
 Uramizaramashi.

TO fall in love with womankind
   Is my unlucky fate;
 If only it were otherwise,
   I might appreciate
   Some men, whom now I hate.

The writer of this verse was the son of Sadakata, a Minister-of-the-Right, and is said to have died in the year 961. The verse was composed at the instance of the Emperor Daigo, and is apparently written in praise of a life of single blessedness. The translation does not give the full force of the last two lines, which mean literally, 'I should not dislike both other people and myself too.' The illustration shows Asa-tada walking on the verandah outside his house, perhaps composing this verse.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 45]

  

45

  

PRINCE KEN-TOKU

  

KEN-TOKU KO

  Aware to mo
 Iu beki hito wa
   Omohoede
 Mi no itazura ni
 Narinu beki kana.

I DARE not hope my lady-love
   Will smile on me again;
 She knows no Pity, and my life
   I care not to retain,
   Since all my prayers are vain.

The real name of the writer of this verse was Koretada Fujiwara; he died in the year 972, and Prince Ken-toku is his posthumous name.

Aware to mo means, in conjunction with the next line, 'that she would give me words of pity'; but aware tomo can also mean 'to meet as a friend.'

In spite of the Prince's fears, the illustration seems to suggest that his lady-love changed her mind, and came to visit him once more.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 46]

  

46

  

THE PRIEST NE-YOSHI-TADA

  

SO NE-YOSHI-TADA

  Yura no to wo
 Wataru funabito
   Kaji wo tae
 Yukue mo shiranu
 Koi no michi kana.

THE fishing-boats are tossed about,
   When stormy winds blow strong;
 With rudder lost, how can they reach
   The port for which they long?
   So runs the old love-song.

Nothing is known of the writer of this verse, but he is said to have lived in. the tenth century. The meaning, not very clearly expressed in the translation, is that the course of true love is as uncertain as the course of the rudderless fishing-boats. In the illustration we see the fishing-boat tossing about on a rough sea and the rudder duly floating away astern.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 47]

  

47

  

THE PRIEST YE-KEI

  

YE-KEI HOSHI

  Yaemugura
 Shigereru yado no
   Sabishiki ni
 Hito koso miene
 Aki wa ki ni keri.

MY little temple stands alone,
   No other hut is near;
 No one will pass to stop and praise
   Its vine-grown roof, I fear,
   Now that the autumn's here.

The Priest Ye-kei lived about the end of the tenth century, but nothing is known about him. In the picture he is shown outside his humble little temple with its patched roof and the vine growing up the wall.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

48

  

SHIGE-YUKI MINAMOTO

  

MINAMOTO NO SHIGE-YUKI

  Kaze wo itami
 Iwa utsu nami no
   Onore nomi
 Kudakete mono wo
 Omou koro kana.

THE waves that dash against the rocks
   Are broken by the wind
 And turned to spray; my loving heart
   Is broken too, I find,
   Since thou art so unkind.

The writer of this verse is said to have died in the year 963; for a note about the great Minamoto family, see verse No. <page 28>. In the picture we see Shige-yuki, with an attendant carrying his sword, walking on the shore, while the waves break into spray at his feet.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

49

  

THE MINISTER YOSHI-NOBU, OF PRIESTLY RANK

  

ONAKATOMI NO YOSHI-NOBU ASON

  Mikaki mori
 Eji no taku hi no
   Yo wa moete
 Hiru wa kie-tsutsu
 Mono wo koso omoe.

MY constancy to her I love
   I never will forsake;
 As surely as the Palace Guards
   Each night their watch-fire make
   And guard it till daybreak.

The author was the son of the Minister Yorimoto, and he lived during the latter part of the tenth century. The illustration shows the watchman outside the Palace tending his fire.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 50]

  

50

  

YOSHITAKA FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO YOSHITAKA

  Kimi ga tame
 Oshikarazarishi
   Inochi sae
 Nagaku mogana to
 Omoi keru kana.

DEATH had no terrors, Life no joys,
   Before I met with thee;
 But now I fear, however long
   My life may chance to be,
   'Twill be too short for me!

Yoshitaka died in the year 974. See verse No. <page 18> for a note of the Fujiwara family.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

51

  

THE MINISTER SANEKATA FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO SANEKATA ASON

  Kaku to dani
 Eyawa Ibuki no
   Sashi-mogusa
 Sashimo shiraji na
 Moyuru omoi wo.

THOUGH love, like blisters made from leaves
   Grown on Mount Ibuki,
 Torments me more than I can say,
   My lady shall not see,
   How she is paining me.

The writer lived some time at the close of the tenth century. The artemisia plant (or mugwort) is used in Japan for cauterizing; a conical wad of the leaves or blossoms is placed on the spot, lit at the top, and allowed to burn down to the skin; this produces a blister, and is extremely painful. Ibuki is a hill, between the Provinces of Omi and Mino, famous for its artemisia, but ibuki can also stand for iu beki, which, in conjunction with e ya wa, would mean, 'Ah! how could I tell her!' But eyawa as one word means 'indescribable!' Notice also sashimo in the third and fourth lines sashi-mogusa means 'the artemisia plant', but sashi mo means 'even though it is smarting'; sashimo, in one word, can also mean 'in such a way'. This verse is a very good example of the way the Japanese love to play upon words. The picture seems to show Mount Ibuki with the mugwort growing on it.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

52

  

THE MINISTER MICHI-NOBU FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO MICHI-NOBU ASON

  Akenureba
 Kururu mono to wa
   Shiri nagara
 Nao urameshiki
 Asaborake kana.

ALTHOUGH I know the gentle night
   Will surely follow morn,
 Yet, when I'm wakened by the sun,
   Turn over, stretch and yawn--
   How I detest the dawn!

Michi-nobu lived in the tenth century. He is shown in the illustration with his wife on the verandah, watching the day break.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 53]

  

53

  

THE MOTHER OF MICHI-TSUNA, COMMANDER OF THE RIGHT IMPERIAL GUARD

  

UDAISHO MICHI-TSUNA NO HAHA

  Nageki-tsutsu
 Hitori nuru yo no
   Akuru ma wa
 Ikani hisashiki
 Mono to kawa shiru.

ALL through the long and dreary night
   I lie awake and moan;
 How desolate my chamber feels,
   How weary I have grown
   Of being left alone!

This lady was the daughter of Motoyasu Fujiwara, and the wife of the Regent Kaneie; she was famous for her beauty, and lived in the reign of the Emperor Mura-kami (947-967). It is related, that her husband returned home late one night, and, having to wait a moment or two before she let him in, he angrily reproached her, and she replied with this verse (see illustration).

Yo no akuru ma means 'until the dawn', but akuru ma also suggests that the room is empty when he is away.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

54

  

THE MOTHER OF THE MINISTER OF STATE

  

GIDO-SANSHI NO HAHA

  Wasureji no
 Yukusue made wa
   Katakereba
 Kyo wo kagiri no
 Inochi tomo gana.

HOW difficult it is for men
   Not to forget the past!
 I fear my husband's love for me
   Is disappearing fast;
   This day must be my last.

The real name of this lady was Taka, and her son's name was Korechika Fujiwara. She lived about A.D. 1004, and it is supposed that this verse was written in a fit of jealousy against her husband; she is shown in the picture all alone at home bewailing her lot.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

55

  

THE FIRST ADVISER OF STATE KINTO

  

DAI-NAGON KINTO

  Taki no oto wa
 Taete hisashiku
   Narinuredo
 Na koso nagarete
 Nao kikoe kere.

THIS waterfall's melodious voice
   Was famed both far and near;
 Although it long has ceased to flow,
   Yet still with memory's ear
   Its gentle splash I hear.

This poet was the father of the writer of verse No. <page 64>, and was a member of the Fujiwara family at the zenith of their power; he was a great statesman and scholar, and died in the year 1041. The verse was written in praise of a waterfall that had been made by the orders of the Emperor Saga early in the ninth century, but which had by this time ceased to exist; and the illustration well shows the watercourse now run dry.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 56]

  

56

  

IZUMI SHIKIBU

  Arazaramu
 Kono yo no hoka no
   Omoide ni
 Ima hito tabi no
 Au koto mo gana.

MY life is drawing to a close,
   I cannot longer stay,
 A pleasant memory of thee
   I fain would take away;
   So visit me, I pray.

This lady was the daughter of Masamine Oye, and the wife of Michisada Tachibana, Governor of the Province of Izumi, hence her name; and also was the mother of the author of verse No. <page 60>. She lived about the latter end of the tenth century, and was one of the lady poets who gave distinction to that period. The verse was addressed to her husband or lover just before her death, and in the illustration we see her on her deathbed, with two servants in the foreground.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 57]

  

57

  

MURASAKI SHIKIBU

  Meguri-aite
 Mishi ya sore tomo
   Wakanu ma ni
 Kumo gakure nishi
 Yowa no tsuki kana.

I WANDERED forth this moonlight night,
   And some one hurried by;
 But who it was I could not see,--
   Clouds driving o'er the sky
   Obscured the moon on high..

This lady lost her mother when very young, and her father, the minister Toyonari Fujiwara, married again. Her skill at composing verses caused her stepmother to become jealous, and the latter treated her with great cruelty. She married Nobutaka, a nobleman, and the following verse was written by her daughter. She is famous in Japanese literature as the authoress of Genii Monogatari, a historical work in fifty-four sections, which she wrote in the monastery of Ishiyama, near Kyoto. She was one night taking a moonlight stroll on her verandah and caught sight of her lover; but, though she barely recognized him, the Kokinshiu, from which the verse is taken, adds that you are to understand that her reputation was overshadowed from that moment, like the moon behind the clouds. She died in the year 992.

Sore tomo can mean either 'though I glanced at him', or else (wakanu, I did not recognize) 'that friend'.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 58]

  

58

  

DAINI NO SAMMI

  Arima yama
 Ina no sasawara
   Kaze fukeba
 Ide soyo hito wo
 Wasure yawa suru.

As fickle as the mountain gusts
   That on the moor I've met,
 'Twere best to think no more of thee,
   And let thee go. But yet
   I never can forget.

The name given above is only a title, and the real name of this lady is unknown; she was the daughter of the writer of the previous verse, and the wife of Daini Nariakira. The picture shows her on the moor composing the verse. Note the echoing sound in the last line, 'Wasure yawa suru.'

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59]

  

59

  

AKAZOME EMON

  Yasurawade
 Nenamaji mono wo
   Sayofukete
 Katabuku made no
 Tsuki wo mishi kana.

WAITING and hoping for thy step,
   Sleepless in bed I lie,
 All through the night, until the moon,
   Leaving her post on high,
   Slips sideways down the sky.

This writer is again a lady; she is said to have addressed the verse to Michinaga Fujiwara, who held the office of Regent under the Emperor Ichijo (A.D. 987-1011) and his two successors. Regent here must be understood not exactly as a temporary or vice Emperor, but rather as the Emperor's confidential adviser, and the official through whom all communications were made. Notice the moon in the illustration just disappearing behind the hill.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

60

  

LADY-IN-WAITING KO-SHIKIBU

  

KO-SHIKIBU NO NAISHI

  Ohoye yama
 Ikuno no michi no
   Tohokereba
 Mada fumi mo mizu
 Ama-no-Hashidate.

SO long and dreary is the road,
   That I have never been
 To Ama-no-Hashidate;
   Pray, how could I have seen
   The verses that you mean?

Koshikibu was the daughter of the writer of verse No. <page 56>, and early became known as a poetess. The story goes, that she was suspected of getting help from her mother in composing poetry; and on one occasion, during the absence of the latter at Ama-no-Hashidate, she was selected to take part in a poetical contest at Court. A day or two before the event a nobleman laughingly asked her, if she was not expecting a letter from her mother, hinting that she would otherwise be unable to produce a poem good enough for the contest, and she, touching his sleeve, improvised the above verse. The original brings in not only Ama-no-Hashidate, a picturesque bay in the Province of Tango, but also two other proper names, Mount Ohoye and Ikuno, which are on the road there from Kyoto; but this the translation fails to do.

The last couplet can mean 'I have not walked to or seen Ama-no-Hashidate ', and also, 'I have not seen any letter from Ama-no-Hashidate.'

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 61]

  

61

  

THE LADY ISE

  

ISE NO TAIU

  Inishie no
 Nara no Miyako no
   Yaezakura
 Kyo kokonoe ni
 Nioi nuru kana.

THE double cherry trees, which grew
   At Nara in past days,
 Now beautify this Palace, and
   Their blossoms all ablaze
   Perfume the royal ways.

The Lady Ise was another of the famous literary women, that distinguished the Imperial Court at the end of the tenth century; she was associated with the Province of Ise, from which she gets her name. Nara was the capital city from A.D. 709 to 784, after which the Court moved to Kyoto. It is related, that during the reign of the Emperor Ichijo (A.D. 987-1011) a nobleman presented him with a spray of the eight-petalled cherry trees that grew at Nara; the Emperor was so delighted, that he had the trees, or perhaps cuttings from them, brought to Kyoto, and this verse commemorates the event.

Kokonoe (Palace) really means 'ninefold', and refers to the nine enclosures of the Imperial Residence; it is here contrasted with yaezakura, the eightfold or double cherry blossom.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

62

  

THE LADY SEI

  

SEI SHO-NAGON

  Yo wo komete
 Tori no sorane wa
   Hakaru tomo
 Yo ni Ausaka no
 Seki wa yurusaji.

Too long to-night you've lingered here,
   And, though you imitate
 The crowing of a cock, 'twill not
   Unlock the tollbar gate;
   Till daylight must you wait.

The Lady Sei, Sho-nagon being merely a title, was the daughter of the writer of verse No. <page 42>, and the authoress of Makura-no-Soshi, or 'A story book to keep under one's pillow'; she was, with the writer of verse No. <page 57>, one of the greatest of Japanese authors. She was a lady-in-waiting at Court, and retired to a convent in the year 1000. This verse has reference to the Chinese story of Prince Tan Chu, who was shut up with his retainers in the town of Kankokkan; the city gates were closed from sunset to cockcrow, but during the night one of the Prince's followers so successfully imitated the crowing of a cock, that the guards, thinking it was daybreak, opened the gates, and the fugitives escaped under cover of the darkness. It is related, that the Emperor once noticed Lady Sei admiring the freshly fallen snow, and asked 'How is the snow of Koroho?' She at once raised the window curtain, showing that she recognized the allusion to the verse 'The snow of Koroho is seen by raising the curtain'.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

  

63

  

THE SHINTO OFFICIAL MICHIMASA, OF THE LEFT SIDE OF THE CAPITAL

  

SAKYO TAIU MICHIMASA

  Ima wa tada
 Omoi-taenamu
   Tobakari wo
 Hitozute narade
 Iu yoshi mo gana.

IF we could meet in privacy,
   Where no one else could see,
 Softly I'd whisper in thy ear
   This little word from me--
   'I'm dying, Love, for thee.'

Michimasa was a member of the Fujiwara family, who lived about the year 1030. He fell in love with the Princess Masako, a priestess of Ise; but when the Emperor heard of this, he put the Princess into confinement, where she was strictly guarded by female warders, and this verse was Michimasa's request to her to try to arrange a private meeting with him. The words omoi-taenamu, which is the message he sends to her, mean, 'I shall die of love'; but they can also mean 'I shall think no more about you'; so perhaps he intended the verse to be read in different ways, according to whether it reached the Princess, or fell into the hands of her guards. In the picture Michimasa is shown outside the fortress, where the Princess is confined.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 64]

  

64

  

THE ASSISTANT IMPERIAL ADVISER SADA-YORI

  

GON CHU-NAGON SADA-YORI

  Asaborake
 Uji no kawagiri
   Tae-dae ni
 Araware wataru
 Seze no ajiro-gi.

SO thickly lies the morning mist,
   That I can scarcely see
 The fish-nets on the river bank,
   The River of Uji,
   Past daybreak though it be.

The writer was the son of the author of verse No. <page 55>; he died in the year 1004. The River Uji is in the Province of Omi, and drains into Lake Biwa. Seze is a village on the lake-side, and a suburb of the larger town of Otsu. The poet, looking across the river, can hardly make out the fish-nets on the shore at Seze, because of the rising morning mist.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

65

  

SAGAMI

  Urami wabi
 Hosanu sode dani
   Aru mono wo
 Koi ni kuchinamu
 Na koso oshikere.

BE not displeased, but pardon me,
   If still my tears o'erflow;
 My lover's gone, and my good name,
   Which once I valued so,
   I fear must also go.

This lady was the wife of Kinsuke Oye, the Governor of the Province of Sagami, from which she got her name. The verse is said to have been composed at an Imperial poetical contest in the year 1051. The incidents mentioned in these verses are not all supposed to have really taken place; many of the poems, including this one, were simply written on a given subject for one of the poetical contests, which were so common at the period.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

66

  

THE ARCHBISHOP GYOSON

  

DAISOJO GYOSON

  Morotomo ni
 Aware to omoe
   Yama zakura
 Hana yori hoka ni
 Shiru hito mo nashi.

IN lonely solitude I dwell,
   No human face I see;
 And so we two must sympathize,
   Oh mountain cherry tree;
   I have no friend but thee.

The Archbishop is said to have ended his life in the year 1135, by the method described in the note to verse No. <page 12>. The scene of this poem was the sacred mountain Omine, in the Province of Yamato, famous for its cherry blossoms, and the illustration shows the Priest with his two attendants addressing the cherry tree.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 67]

  

67

  

THE LADY-IN-WAITING SUWO

  

SUWO NO NAISHI

  Haru no yo no
 Yume bakari naru
   Te-makura ni
 Kainaku tatan
 Na koso oshi kere.

IF I had made thy proffered arm
   A pillow for my head
 For but the moment's time, in which
   A summer's dream had fled,
   What would the world have said?

The authoress was the daughter of Tsugunaka Taira, the Governor of the Province of Suwo, and a lady-in-waiting at the Court of the Emperor Goreizei, who reigned A.D. 1046-1068. She was present one day at a long and tedious court function, and, feeling very tired and sleepy, she called to a servant for a pillow; a nobleman on the other side of the screen, the First Adviser of State Tadaie, gallantly offered her his arm, with a request that she would rest her head there, and she replied with this verse. She intended him to understand that, though she was willing to accept him as her husband for life, she feared that his attachment would last no longer than a fleeting summer-night's dream.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68]

  

68

  

THE RETIRED EMPEROR SANJO

  

SANJO IN

  Kokoro ni mo
 Arade uki yo ni
   Nagaraeba
 Koishikarubeki
 Yowa no tsuki kana.

IF in this troubled world of ours
   I still must linger on,
 My only friend shall be the moon,
   Which on my sadness shone,
   When other friends were gone.

The Emperor Sanjo, who reigned A.D. 1012-1015) was the son of the Emperor Reisei; he fell into ill health, his palace was burnt down twice, and he was forced to abdicate by Michinaga Fujiwara (see verse No. <page 59>)

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

69

  

THE PRIEST NO-IN

  

NO-IN HOSHI

  Arashi fuku
 Mimuro no yama no
   Momiji-ba wa
 Tatsuta no kawa no
 Nishiki nari keri.

THE storms, which round Mount Mimuro
   Are wont to howl and scream,
 Have thickly scattered maple leaves
   Upon Tatsuta's stream;
   Like red brocade they seem.

The poet's lay name was Nagayasu Tachibana; he was the son of Motoyasu Tachibana, the Governor of the Province of Hizen. Mount Mimuro and the Tatsuta River are both in the Province of Yamato, not far from Nara. The picture is not very clear, but the river is plainly depicted, and maple leaves are scattered all around.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

70

  

THE PRIEST RIYO-ZEN

  

RIYO-ZEN HOSHI

  Sabishisa ni
 Yado wo, tachi-idete
   Nagamureba
 Izuko mo onaji
 Aki no yugure.

THE prospect from my cottage shows
   No other hut in sight;
 The solitude depresses me,
   Like deepening twilight
   On a chill autumn night.

Nothing is known of this author, but he appears to have lived during the eleventh century. The Priest appears in the illustration, looking out over the bare landscape, with his tiny hut in the background.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

71

  

THE FIRST ADVISER OF STATE TSUNE-NOBU

  

DAI-NAGON TSUNE-NOBU

  Yusareba
 Kado-da no inaba
   Otozurete
 Ashi no maroya ni
 Aki kaze zo fuku.

THIS autumn night the wind blows shrill,
   And would that I could catch
 Its message, as it whistles through
   The rushes in the thatch
   And leaves of my rice-patch.

Tsune-nobu, a member of the Minamoto family, was famous as a man of letters in the eleventh century, and died in the year 1096.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 72]

  

72

  

THE LADY KII, OF THE HOUSE OF PRINCESS YUSHI

  

YUSHI NAISHINNO KE KII

  Oto ni kiku
 Takashi no hama no
   Adanami wa
 Kakeji ya sode no
 Nure mo koso sure.

THE sound of ripples on the shore
 Ne'er fails at Takashi;
 My sleeves all worn and wet with tears
 Should surely prove to thee,
 I, too, will constant be.

The Lady Kii lived at the Court of the Emperor Horikawa, who reigned A.D. 1087-1107. Takashi is a seaside place in the Province of Izumi, not far from Osaka, and on the shore we see the Lady Kii, perhaps composing this verse to her lover.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

  

73

  

THE ASSISTANT IMPERIAL ADVISER MASAFUSA

  

GON CHU-NAGON MASAFUSA

  Takasago no
 Once no zakura
   Saki ni keri
 Toyama no kasumi
 Tatazu mo aranan.

THE cherry trees are blossoming
   On Takasago's height;
 Oh may no mountain mist arise,
   No clouds so soft and white,
   To hide them from our sight.

This poet was the son of Chika-nari Ooi, and died in the year 1112. Takasago is on the sea-coast in the Province of Harima, and is also mentioned in verse No. <page 34>.

Masafusa with his attendant appears in the illustration admiring the cherry trees on the mountains, over which, however, the clouds are already beginning to gather.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 74]

  

74

  

THE MINISTER TOSHI-YORI MINAMOTO

  

MINAMOTO NO TOSHI-YORI ASON

  Ukari keru
 Hito wo Hatsuse no
   Yama-oroshi
 Hageshikare to wa
 Inoranu mono wo.

OH! Kwannon, Patron of this hill,
   The maid, for whom I pine,
 Is obstinate and wayward, like
   The gusts around thy shrine.
   What of those prayers of mine?

Toshi-yori is supposed to have been the son of the writer of verse No. <page 71>; he probably lived early in the twelfth century. Hatsuse is a mountain village near Nara, in the Province of Yamato; the temple there is dedicated to Kwannon, Goddess of Mercy, 'who looketh for ever down above the sound of prayer.'

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 75]

  

75

  

MOTOTOSHI FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO MOTOTOSHI

  Chigiri okishi
 Sasemo ga tsuyu wo
   Inochi nite
 Aware kotoshi no
 Aki mo inumeri.

IT is a promise unfulfilled,
   For which I humbly sue
 The dainty little mugwort plant
   Relies upon the dew,
   And I rely--on you.

The writer lived early in the twelfth century, when the Court was given over to intrigue. Tadamichi Fujiwara, the Regent, had promised him a post of honour for his son, but had, year after year, failed to fulfil it. The verse is a gentle reminder, and the last couplet, which does not appear in the translation, delicately hints that the autumn of the present year also is slipping away. In the illustration we see Mototoshi addressing his petition to the Regent.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 76]

  

76

  

THE LATE REGENT AND PRIME MINISTER, THE LAY PRIEST OF THE HOSHO TEMPLE

  

HOSHO-JI NYUDO SAKI NO KWAMBAKU DAIJODAIJIN

  Wada no hara
 Kogi idete mireba
   Hisakata no
 Kumoi ni magau
 Okitsu shira nami.

WHEN rowing on the open sea,
   The waves, all capped with white,
 Roll onward, like the fleecy clouds
   With their resistless might;
   Truly a wondrous sight!

The real name of this poet was Tadamichi Fujiwara, mentioned in connexion with the previous verse, who retired from the world and entered the church. He was the father of the author of verse No. <page 95>, and is supposed to have died in the year 1164, at the age of sixty-eight.

The 'pillow-word' hisakata, here used in connexion with the clouds, is referred to in the note to verse No. <page 33>.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

77

  

THE RETIRED EMPEROR SUTOKU

  

SUTOKU IN

  Se wo hayami
 Iwa ni sekaruru
   Taki-gawa no
 Warete mo sue ni
 Awan to zo omou.

THE rock divides the stream in two,
   And both with might and main
 Go tumbling down the waterfall;
   But well I know the twain
   Will soon unite again.

The town of Kamakura, where is the great bronze image of Buddha Amida, was built by this Emperor, who reigned A.D. 1124-1141; he was then forced by his father, the ex-Emperor Toba, to abdicate in favour of his brother, the Emperor Konoye; afterwards he entered the church, and died in the year 1164, an exile in the Province of Sanuki. This verse is intended to suggest the parting of two lovers, who will eventually meet again.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 78]

  

78

  

KANEMASA MINAMOTO

  

MINAMOTO NO KANEMASA

  Awaji shima
 Kayou chidori no
   Naku koe ni
 Iku yo nezamenu
 Suma no seki-mori.

BETWEEN Awaji and the shore
   The birds scream in their flight
 Full oft they've made the Suma Guard
   Toss through a sleepless night,
   Until the morning light.

The writer was the son of Kanesuke, and died about the year 1112. Chidori are snipe or plovers, but here are apparently meant for seagulls. Awaji is a large island in the Inland Sea, near Kobe, and Suma is a point on the mainland in the Province of Settsu, immediately opposite.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

79

  

THE SHINTO OFFICIAL AKI-SUKE, OF THE LEFT SIDE OF THE CAPITAL

  

SAKYO NO TAIU AKI-SUKE

  Aki kaze ni
 Tanabiku kumo no
   Taema yori
 More-izaru tsuki no
 Kage no sayakesa.

SEE how the wind of autumn drives
   The clouds to left and right,
 While in between the moon peeps out,
   Dispersing with her light
   The darkness of the night.

Aki-suke died about the year 1155. More-izuru literally means, that the light of the moon 'leaks out'; the verse is a charming example of a Japanese picture-poem. Probably the first word of the verse was purposely made to coincide with the poet's first name in sound, although the two words are written with different characters in the original.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 80]

  

80

  

LADY HORIKAWA, IN ATTENDANCE ON THE DOWAGER EMPRESS TAIKEN

  

TAIKEN MON-IN HORIKAWA

  Nagakaran
 Kokoro mo shirazu
   Kuro kami no
 Midarete kesa wa
 Mono wo koso omoe.

MY doubt about his constancy
   Is difficult to bear;
 Tangled this morning are my thoughts,
   As is my long black hair.
   I wonder--Does he care?

Lady Horikawa was the daughter of the First Adviser of State, Sane-kyo, who lived about the year 1142. In this verse she is anxiously pondering, how long her lover will continue to be true to her; and she discovers, that her ideas on the subject are as tangled and disordered as her hair is.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

81

  

THE MINISTER-OF-THE-LEFT OF THE TOKUDAI TEMPLE:

  

GO TOKUDAI-JI SADAIJIN

  Hototogisu
 Nakitsuru kata wo
   Nagamureba
 Tada ariake no
 Tsuki zo nokoreru.

THE cuckoo's echo dies away,
   And lo! the branch is bare
 I only see the morning moon,
   Whose light is fading there
   Before the daylight's glare.

The writer's name was Sanesada Fujiwara, and he entered the priesthood in the year 1198. The cuckoo, according to Japanese tradition, cries through the night until its eyes become bloodshot. It is supposed to come from the Spirit-land across the mountains of Hades, about the end of the fifth month, to warn the farmer that it is time to sow his rice. In the illustration we see the morning moon setting behind the hills, and the cuckoo flying away.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

82

  

THE PRIEST DO-IN

  

DO-IN HOSHI

  Omoi-wabi
 Satemo inochi wa
   Aru mono wo
 Uki ni taenu wa
 Namida nari keri.

How sad and gloomy is the world,
   This world of sin and woe!
 Ah! while I drift along Life's stream,
   Tossed helpless to and fro,
   My tears will ever flow.

The Priest Do-in was a member of the Fujiwara family. The date of this verse is not known, but it was probably written in the twelfth century. The illustration shows the priest alone in his hut, lamenting over the sorrows of humanity.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 83]

  

83

  

TOSHI-NARI, A SHINTO OFFICIAL IN ATTENDANCE ON THE EMPRESS DOWAGER

  

KWO-TAI-KOGU NO TAIU TOSHI-NARI

  Yo no naka yo
 Michi koso nakere
   Omoi iru
 Yama no oku ni mo
 Shika zo naku naru.

FROM pain and sorrow all around
   There 's no escape, I fear;
 To mountain wilds should I retreat,
   There also I should hear
   The cry of hunted deer.

Toshi-nari was a celebrated poet and nobleman in the reign of the Emperor Gotoba. He, however, gave up his position at Court and entered the church in the year 1176. He was the father of the writers of verses Nos. <page 94> and <page 97>, and died in the year 1204, at the age of ninety-one.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

  

84

  

THE MINISTER KIYO-SUKE FUJIWARA

  

FUJIWARA NO KIYO-SUKE ASON

  Nagaraeba
 Mata konogoro ya
   Shinobaremu
 Ushi to mishi yo zo
 Ima wa koishiki.

TIME was when I despised my youth,
   As boyhood only can;
 What would I give for boyhood now,
   When finishing life's span
   An old decrepid man!

Kiyo-suke was the son of the writer of verse No. <page 79>, and lived in the latter part of the twelfth century.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 85]

  

85

  

THE PRIEST SHUN-YE

  

SHUN-YE HOSHI

  Yomosugara
 Mono omou koro wa
   Ake yarade
 Neya no hima sae
 Tsurena kari keri.

ALL through the never-ending night
   I lie awake and think;
 In vain I look to try and see
   The daybreak's feeble blink
   Peep through the shutter's chink.

This priest was the son of the author of verse No. <page 74>. He describes in this poem a sleepless night, when he looks in vain to catch the first glimpse of daybreak through the joints of the sliding screens, that form the walls of a Japanese house. But in the picture, as will be noticed, one of the sliding screens is removed, in order to show the priest within.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

86

  

THE PRIEST SAIGYO

  

SAIGYO HOSHI

  Nageke tote
 Tsuki ya wa mono wo
   Omowasuru
 Kakochi-gao naru
 Waga namida kana.

O'ERCOME with pity for this world,
   My tears obscure my sight;
 I wonder, can it be the moon
   Whose melancholy light
   Has saddened me to-night?

Saigyo was a member of the Fujiwara family, an eccentric monk, and a famous poet, who lived A.D. 1115-1188. He was once in attendance on the Emperor, when a bird by fluttering its wings began scattering the blossoms of a plum tree. The Emperor directed him to drive off the bird, but the priest, with an excess of zeal, killed it by a stroke of his fan. On reaching home his wife told him that she had dreamt that she was changed into a bird and that he had struck her; and this incident made such an impression upon him, that he retired from Court, and spent the rest of his life in the church.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

87

  

THE PRIEST JAKU-REN

  

JAKU-REN HOSHI

 

  Murasame no
 Tsuyu mo mada hinu
   Maki no ha ni
 Kiri tachi-noboru
 Aki no yugure.

THE rain, which fell from passing showers,
   Like drops of dew, still lies
 Upon the fir-tree needles, and
   The mists of evening rise
   Up to the autumn skies.

This verse is a good example of a picture verse, intended to call up the scene to one's imagination. Jaku-ren was another of the great Fujiwara clan, and lived about the end of the twelfth century.

Murasame means 'rain falling in showers, here and there', and the illustration plainly shows it raining on one side of the house only.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 88]

  

88

  

AN OFFICIAL OF THE DOWAGER EMPRESS KWOKA

  

KWOKA MON-IN NO BETTO

  Naniwa e no
 Ashi no karine no
   Hito yo yue
 Mi wo tsukushite ya
 Koi wataru beki.

I'VE seen thee but a few short hours;
   As short, they seemed to me,
 As bamboo reeds at Naniwa;
   But tide-stakes in the sea
   Can't gauge my love for thee.

This verse was written some time in the twelfth century; and Naniwa is the ancient name of Osaka.

There are several double meanings in this verse lines 2 and 3 can mean either 'one section of a reed cut off between the joints', or 'one night's sleep as short as a reed'. In the fourth line also, miotsukushi means a tide-gauge, as explained in the note to verse No. <page 20>, but the whole line, taken as printed, reads, 'How can I be already tired of thee!' The contrast here is between the length of only one section of a short reed and the long stake set up to measure the rise and fall of the tide.

The illustration seems to show the lady to whom the verse was addressed.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 89]

  

89

  

PRINCESS SHIKISHI

  

SHIKISHI NAISHINNO

  Tama no o yo
 Taenaba taene
   Nagaraeba
 Shinoburu koto no
 Yowari mo zo suru.

THE ailments of advancing years
   Though I should try to hide,
 Some day the thread will break, the pearls
   Be scattered far and wide;
   Age cannot be defied.

The Princess was the daughter of the Emperor Goshirakawa, who reigned A.D. 1156-1158. In this short reign, however, the country suffered from a very severe earthquake and a devastating civil war.

The second line is a play upon the two verbs tae, which are both pronounced the same, but which are written with different ideographic characters. The first couplet, taken literally, reads, 'If the string of pearls (i.e. my life) break, I must bear it.'

The illustration seems to show the Princess sitting down with a nobleman in attendance.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 90]

  

90

  

THE CHIEF VICE-OFFICIAL IN ATTENDANCE ON THE DOWAGER EMPRESS IMPU

  

IMPU MON-IN NO OSUKE

  Misebayana
 Ojima no ama no
   Sode dani no
 Nure ni zo nureshi
 Iro wa kawaraji.

THE fisher's clothes, though cheap, withstand
   The drenching they receive;
 But see I my floods of tears have blurred
   The colours of my sleeve,
   As for thy love I grieve.

The writer is said to have been one of the Fujiwara family, and to have died in the year 1210. Ojima is an island in the Inland Sea.

In the last line the word iro can mean both 'colour' and 'love'; so that the meaning is, the writer's love will remain as constant as the colour of the fisher's clothes, even though drenched with salt water. In connexion with this word iro, it may be mentioned that a crimson maple leaf, When sent by a lady to her lover, is a gentle hint that she wishes to see him no more; the meaning being, that as the colour (iro) of the leaf has changed, so her love (iro) has changed also.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 91]

  

91

  

THE REGENT AND FORMER PRIME MINISTER GO-KYO-GOKU

  

GO-KYO-GOKU SESSHO SAKI NO DAIJODAIJIN

  Kirigirisu
 Naku ya shimo yo no
   Samushiro ni
 Koromo katashiki
 Hitori kamo nen.

I'M sleeping all alone, and hear
   The crickets round my head;
 So cold and frosty is the night,
   That I across the bed
   My koromo have spread.

This writer was another of the great Fujiwara family, and died in the year 1206.

The word kirigirisu, a cricket, is supposed to represent its song; the Japanese say that the chirping of crickets means cold weather.

In the picture the poet is sitting up in bed with his arm on his pillow, listening to the crickets; and in the original illustrated edition underneath the verse is drawn a cricket hiding in the grass.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

92

  

SANUKI, IN ATTENDANCE ON THE RETIRED EMPEROR NIJO

  

NIJO IN SANUKI

  Waga sode wa
 Shiohi ni mienu
   Oki no ishi no
 Hito koso shirane
 Kawaku ma mo nashi.

MY sleeve is wet with floods of tears
   As here I sit and cry;
 'Tis wetter than a low-tide rock,--
   No one, howe'er he try,
   Can find a spot that 's dry!

The Lady Sanuki was one of the Minamoto family, and lived at the Court of the Emperor Nijo, who reigned A.D. 1159-1165. She was the daughter of the retired Emperor Goshirakawa, and died A.D. 1165.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

  

93

  

THE MINISTER OF THE RIGHT DISTRICT OF KAMAKURA

  

KAMAKURA UDAIJIN

  Yo no naka wa
 Tsune ni moga mo na
   Nagisa kogu
 Ama no obune no
 Tsunade kanashi mo.

I LOVE to watch the fishing-boats
   Returning to the bay,
 The crew, all straining at the oars,
   And coiling ropes away;
   For busy folk are they.

The name of the writer of this verse was Sanetomo Minamato, the second son of the great General Yoritomo. He was a famous man of letters, and was murdered in the year 1219 by his nephew, the Priest Kugyo, at the Temple of Hachiman at Kamakura, whither he had gone to return thanks for his promotion to a high office of state. He seems to have had a premonition of his coming fate; for that morning, while being dressed, he composed the farewell poem to his plum tree given in the Introduction, and pulling out a hair he gave it to his servant, bidding him keep it in memory of him. The assassin sprang out from behind a tree, which is still pointed out to-day, growing at the side of the temple steps, cut him down, and ran off with the head. Kugyo was caught and executed, but the head was never found, and so the single hair was buried in its stead.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

94

  

THE PRIVY COUNCILLOR MASATSUNE

  

SANGI MASATSUNE

  Miyoshino no
 Yama no aki kaze
   Sayo fukete
 Furu sato samuku
 Koromo utsu nari.

AROUND Mount Miyoshino's crest
   The autumn winds blow drear;
 The villagers are beating cloth,
   Their merry din I hear,
   This night so cold and clear.

Masatsune was a son of the writer of verse No. <page 83>; he died in the year 1221. He appears in the illustration sitting alone in his house, listening to the sound of the villagers beating the cloth to make it supple.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 95]

  

95

  

THE FORMER ARCHBISHOP JIYEN

  

SAKI NO DAISOJO JIYEN

  Okenaku
 Uki yo no tami ni
   Ou kana
 Waga tatsu soma ni
 Sumizome no sode.

UNFIT to rule this wicked world
   With all its pomp and pride,
 I'd rather in my plain black robe
   A humble priest abide,
   Far up the mountain side.

The Archbishop was a son of the author of verse No. <page 76>. He had just been promoted to his exalted rank, which entailed living at the Temple of Mount Hiei, near Kyoto, and this is his modest deprecatory verse on his new appointment. He is said to have put an end to his life by the method described in the note to verse No. <page 12>.

In the picture we see the Archbishop in his robes, and the great Temple of Mount Hiei, while in the distance are: the wild hills where he longs to be.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 96]

  

96

  

THE LAY-PRIEST, A FORMER PRIME MINISTER OF STATE

  

NYUDO SAKI DAIJODAIJIN

  Hana sasou
 Arashi no niwa no
   Yuki narade
 Furi yuku mono wa
 Waga mi nari keri.

THIS snow is not from blossoms white
   Wind-scattered, here and there,
 That whiten all my garden paths
   And leave the branches bare;
   'Tis age that snows my hair!

The writer's name was Kintsune; he retired from office to enter the church, and died in the year 1244, aged seventy-six.

Note the play upon yuki, 'snow,' and yuku, the verb 'to go'; furi yuku means 'going to fall' (as snow), but furi also suggests the idea of 'growing old'. He says it is really he himself that is fading and falling, rather than the petals of his garden flowers blown by the storm.

The picture does not seem to illustrate the verse very well; it is probably meant to show Kintsune on his verandah, lamenting over his increasing years; but in the original edition, from which the pictures were taken, fallen cherry blossoms are shown underneath the verse at the bottom of the page.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

  

97

  

THE ASSISTANT IMPERIAL ADVISER SADA-IYE

  

GON CHU-NAGON SADA-IYE

  Konu hito wo
 Matsu-ho no ura no
   Yunagi ni
 Yaku ya moshio no
 Mi mo kogare-tsutsu.

UPON the shore of Matsu-ho
   For thee I pine and sigh;
 Though calm and cool the evening air,
   These salt-pans caked and dry
   Are not more parched than I!

Sada-iye, of the Fujiwara family, was the Compiler of this Collection of verses; he was the son of Toshi-nari, the writer of verse No. <page 83>, and he entered the priesthood, dying in the year 1242, at the age of eighty.

Matsu-ho is on the north coast of the Island of Awaji, in the Inland Sea; but the word also means 'a place of waiting and longing for somebody'. Kogare means 'scorching or evaporating' (sea-water in the saltpans), but it also has the meaning 'to long for, or to love ardently.'

The illustration shows two men carrying pails of sea-water to the salt-pans.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

98

  

THE OFFICIAL IYE-TAKA

  

JUNII IYE-TAKA

  Kaze soyogu
 Nara no ogawa no
   Yugure wa
 Misogi zo natsu no
 Shirushi nari keri.

THE twilight dim, the gentle breeze
   By Nara's little stream,
 The splash of worshippers who wash
   Before the shrine, all seem
   A perfect summer's dream.

Iye-taka was another of the great Fujiwara family; he died in the year 1237.

The word misogi means the Shinto ceremony of purifying the body before worship by washing or sprinkling with water. This verse is said to have been inscribed on a screen in the apartments of the Empress at Nara.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

  

99

  

THE RETIRED EMPEROR GOTOBA

  

GOTOBA NO IN

  Hito mo oshi
 Hito mo urameshi
   Ajiki-naku
 Yo wo omou yue ni.
 Mono omou mi wa.

How I regret my fallen friends
   How I despise my foes!
 And, tired of life, I only seek
   To reach my long day's close,
   And gain at last repose.

The Emperor Gotoba, or Toba II, reigned A.D. 1186-1198. He was the son of the retired Emperor Takakura, and was banished to Amagori, in the Oki Islands, where he took the name of Sen-Tei, busied himself in making swords, and died in the year 1239. He was very sensitive to noises, and it is said that the frogs of the pool of Shike-kuro have been dumb ever since the year 1200; for their croaking at night disturbed his rest, and he commanded them to be silent. It was in the eleventh year of his reign that the title of Shogun was created and conferred upon the great General Yoritomo; which title, down to the year 1868, was borne by the real rulers of the country, the Emperor himself being not much more than a figure-head.

Notice the resemblance in sound between the first and second lines, and between the fourth and fifth lines, not fully brought out in the translation.

     
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

100

  

THE RETIRED EMPEROR JUN-TOKU

  

JUN-TOKU IN

  Momoshiki ya
 Furuki nokiba no
   Shinobu ni mo
 Nao amari aru
 Mukashi nari keri.

MY ancient Palace I regret,
   Though rot attacks the eaves,
 And o'er the roof the creeping vine
   Spreads out and interweaves
   Unpruned its straggling leaves.

This writer was the third son of the Emperor Gotoba, author of the previous verse (<page 99>); he reigned A.D. 1211-1221, and was deposed like his father, and banished to the Island of Sado. It was during his reign that the first Japanese warships were built by Sanetomo, the writer of verse No. <page 93>, who headed a rebellion against the Emperor.

Shinobu means 'a creeping vine ', but it is also the verb 'to long for '; and the verse suggests that the Emperor, while mourning over the decay of the Imperial power, still longs for the o d Palace, neglected and grown over with creepers as it is.

And so the Collection ends, as it began, with two verses by Imperial poets.

    
A Hundred Verses from Old Japan (The Hyakunin-isshu), tr. by William N. Porter, [1909], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i1]

  

INDEX

Ah! why does love distract my thoughts, <page 14>.

Ai-mile no, <page 43>.

Akenureba, <page 52>.

Aki kaze ni, <page 79>.

Aki no ta no, <page 1>.

Alas I the blush upon my cheek, <page 40>.

All red with leaves Tatsuta's stream, <page 17>.

All through the long and dreary night, <page 53>.

All through the never-ending night, <page 85>.

Although I know the gentle night, <page 52>.

Ama no bara, <page 7>.

Amatsu kaze, <page 12>.

Arashi fuku, <page 69>.

Arazaramu, <page 56>.

Ariake no, <page 30>.

Arima yama, <page 58>.

Around Mount Miyoshino's crest, <page 94>.

Asaborake, <page 31>, <page 64>.

Asaju no, <page 39>.

As fickle as the mountain gusts, <page 58>.

Ashibiki no, <page 3>.

Au koto no, <page 44>.

Awaji shima, <page 78>.

Aware to mo, <page 45>.

[p. i2]

Be not displeased, but pardon me, <page 65>.

Between Awaji and the shore, <page 78>.

 

Chigiriki na, <page 42>.

Chigiri okishi, <page 75>

Chi haya furu, <page 17>.

 

Death had no terrors, Life no joys, <page 50>.

 

From pain and sorrow all around, <page 83>.

Fuku kara ni, <page 22>.

Gone are my old familiar friends, <page 34>.

 

Hana no iro wa, <page 9>.

Hana sasou, <page 96>.

Haru no yo no, <page 67>

Haru sugite, <page 2>.

Hisakata no, <page 33>

Hito mo oshi, <page 99>.

Hito wa iza, <page 35>.

Hototogisu, <page 81>.

How desolate my former life, <page 43>.

How difficult it is for men, <page 54>.

How I regret my fallen friends, <page 99>.

How sad and gloomy is the world, <page 82>.

I bring no prayers on coloured silk, <page 24>.

I dare not hope my lady-love, <page 45>,

If breezes on Inaba's peak, <page 16>.

[p. i3]

If I had made thy proffered arm, <page 67>.

If in this troubled world of ours, <page 68>.

If we could meet in privacy, <page 63>

I hate the cold unfriendly moon, <page 30>.

I hear the stag's pathetic call, <page 5>.

I hear thou art as modest as, <page 25>.

I love to watch the fishing-boats, <page 93>

Ima kon to, <page 21>.

Ima wa tada, <page 63>.

I'm sleeping all alone, and hear, <page 91>.

Inishie no, <page 61>.

In lonely solitude I dwell, <page 66>.

I started off along the shore, <page 4>

It is a promise unfulfilled, <page 75>

It was a white chrysanthemum, <page 29>.

I've seen thee but a few short hours, <page 88>.

I wandered forth this moonlight night, <page 57>.

 

Kaku to dani, <page 51>.

Kasasagi no, <page 6>.

Kaze soyogu, <page 98>.

Kaze wo itami, <page 48>.

Kimi ga tame, <page 15>, <page 50>.

Kirigirisu, <page 91>.

Koi su tefu, <page 41>.

Kokoro-ate ni, <page 29>.

Kokoro ni mo, <page 68>.

Kono tabi wa, <page 24>.

Konu hito wo, <page 97>.

Kore ya kono, <page 10>.

[p. i4]

Long is the mountain pheasant's tail; <page 3>.

 

Meguri-aite, <page 57>.

Michinoku no, <page 14>.

Mikaki mori, <page 49>

Mika no hara, <page 27>.

Misebayana, <page 90>.

Miyoshino no, <page 94>.

Momoshiki ya, <page 100>.

Morotomo ni, <page 66>.

Mother, for thy sake I have been, <page 15>.

Murasame no, <page 87>.

My ancient Palace I regret, <page 100>.

My broken heart I don't lament, <page 38>.

My constancy to her I love, <page 49>

My doubt about his constancy, <page 80>.

My home is near the Capital, <page 8>.

My life is drawing to a close, <page 56>.

My little temple stands alone, <page 47>,

My sleeve is wet with floods of tears, <page 92>.

 

Nagakaran, <page 80>.

Nagaraeba, <page 84>.

Nageke tote, <page 86>.

Nageki-tsutsu, <page 53>

Na ni shi owaba, <page 25>.

Naniwa e no, <page 88>.

Naniwa gata, <page 19>.

Natsu no yo wa, <page 36>.

[p. i5]

O'ercome with pity for this world, <page 86>.

Ogura yama, <page 26>.

Oh! Fishers in your little boats, <page 11>.

Oh! Kwannon, Patron of this hill, <page 74>.

Oh! rippling River Izumi, <page 27>.

Ohoye yama, <page 60>.

Oh stormy winds, bring up the cloud*, <page 12>.

Okenaku, <page 95>.

Oku yama ni, <page 5>.

Omoi-wabi, <page 82>.

Oto ni kiku, <page 72>.

Our courtship, that we tried to hide, <page 41>.

Our sleeves, all wet with tears, attest, <page 42>.

Out in the fields this autumn day, <page 1>.

Sabishisa ni, <page 70>.

See, how the wind of autumn drives, <page 79>.

Se wo hayami, <page 77>.

Shinoburedo, <page 40>.

Shira tsuyu ni, <page 37>.

Short as the joints of bamboo reeds, <page 19>.

So long and dreary is the road, <page 60>.

So thickly lies the morning mist, <page 64>.

Surely the morning moon, I thought, <page 31>.

Sumi-no-ye no, <page 18>.

 

Tachi wakare, <page 16>

Tago no ura ni, <page 4>.

Takasago no, <page 73>.

Taki no oto wa, <page 55>.

[p. i6]

Tama no o yo, <page 89>.

Tare wo ka mo, <page 34>

The ailments of advancing years, <page 89>.

The blossom's tint is washed away, <page 9>.

The cherry trees are blossoming, <page 73>

The cuckoo's echo dies away, <page 81>.

The double cherry trees, which grew, <page 61>.

The fisher's clothes, though cheap, withstand, go.

The fishing-boats are tossed about, <page 46>.

The maples of Mount Ogura, <page 26>.

The Mina stream comes tumbling down, <page 13>

The moon that shone the whole night through, <page 21>.

The mountain village solitude, <page 28>.

The mountain wind in autumn time, <page 22>.

The prospect from my cottage shows, <page 70>

The rain, which fell from passing showers, <page 87>.

The rock divides the stream in two, <page 77>.

The sound of ripples on the shore, <page 72>.

The spring has come, and once again, <page 33>

The spring has gone, the summer's come, <page 2>.

The storms, which round Mount Mimuro, <page 69>.

The stormy winds of yesterday, <page 32>

The stranger who has travelled far, <page 10>.

The twilight dim, the gentle breeze, <page 98>.

The village of my youth is gone, <page 35>

The waves that dash against the rocks, <page 48>.

This autumn night the wind blows shrill, <page 71>.

This lovely morn the dewdrops flash, <page 37>,

This night the cheerless autumn moon, <page 73>.

This snow is not from blossoms white, <page 96>.

[p. i7]

This waterfall's melodious voice, <page 55>.

Though love, like blisters made from leaves, <page 51>.

Time was when I despised my youth, <page 84>.

'Tis easier to hide the reeds, <page 39>.

To fall in love with womankind, <page 44>.

To-night on Sumi-no-ye beach, <page 18>

Too long to-night you've lingered here, <page 62>z.

Too short the lovely summer night, <page 36>.

Tsuki mireba, <page 23>.

Tsukuba ne no, <page 13>.

 

Ukari keru, <page 74>.

Unfit to rule this wicked world, <page 95>.

Upon the shore of Matsu-ho, <page 97>.

Urami wabi, <page 65>.

 

Wabi nureba, <page 20>.

Wada no bara, <page 11>, <page 76>.

Waga iho wa, <page 8>.

Waga sode wa, <page 92>.

Waiting and hoping for thy step, <page 59>.

Wasuraruru, <page 38>.

Wasureji no, <page 54>.

We met but for a moment, and, <page 20>.

When on the Magpies' Bridge I see, <page 6>.

When rowing on the open sea, <page 76>.

While gazing up into the sky, <page 7>.

 

Yaemugura, <page 47>.

Yama gawa ni, <page 32>.

[p. i8]

Yama zato wa, <page 28>.

Yasurawade, <page 59>.

Yomosugara, <page 85>.

Yo no naka wa, <page 93>.

Yo no naka yo, <page 83>

Yo wo komete, <page 62>.

Yura no to wo, <page 46>.

Yusareba, <page 71>.

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ida.txt =====


    
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

  

ATLANTIDA

  

(L'Atlantide)

  

BY

  

PIERRE BENOIT

  

TRANSLATED BY

  

MARY C. TONGUE AND MARY ROSS

  

NEW YORK

  

DUFFIELD AND COMPANY

  

[1920]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, November 2007. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923. These files may be used for any purpose.

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso

Click to enlarge
Sketch Map of locations in Atlantida, (c) 2007 J.B. hare

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

          CHAPTER

         

        

         

       PAGE

     
       

        

       Preface

        

       <page 3>

     
      I

        

       A Southern Assignment

        

       <page 9>

     
      II

        

       Captain de Saint-Avit

        

       <page 26>

     
      III

        

       The Morhange-Saint-Avit Mission

        

       <page 43>

     
      IV

        

       Towards Latitude 25

        

       <page 54>

     
      V

        

       The Inscription

        

       <page 70>

     
      VI

        

       The Disaster of the Lettuce

        

       <page 84>

     
      VII

        

       The Country of Fear

        

       <page 98>

     
      VIII

        

       Awakening At Ahaggar

        

       <page 113>

     
      IX

        

       Atlantis

        

       <page 130>

     
      X

        

       The Red Marble Hall

        

       <page 146>

     
      XI

        

       Antinea

        

       <page 161>

     
      XII

        

       Morhange Disappears

        

       <page 176>

     
      XIII

        

       The Hetman of Jitomir's Story

        

       <page 192>

     
      XIV

        

       Hours Of Waiting

        

       <page 212>

     
      XV

        

       The Lament Of Tanit-Zerga

        

       <page 225>

     
      XVI

        

       The Silver Hammer

        

       <page 239>

     
      XVII

        

       The Maidens of the Rocks

        

       <page 253>

     
      XVIII

        

       The Fire-Flies

        

       <page 266>

     
      XIX

        

       The Tanezruft

        

       <page 281>

     
      XX

        

       The Circle Is Complete

        

       <page 296>

     
   
     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

ATLANTIDA

HASSI-INIFEL, NOVEMBER 8, 1903.

If the following pages are ever to see the light of day it will be because they have been stolen from me. The delay that I exact before they shall be disclosed assures me of that. [*1]

As to this disclosure, let no one distrust my aim when I prepare for it, when I insist upon it. You may believe me when I maintain that no pride of authorship binds me to these pages. Already I am too far removed from all such things. Only it is useless that others should enter upon the path from which I shall not return.

Four o'clock in the morning. Soon the sun will kindle the hamada with its pink fire. All about me the bordj is asleep. Through the half-open door of

[p. 4]

his room I hear Andre de Saint-Avit breathing quietly, very quietly.

In two days we shall start, he and I. We shall leave the bordj. We shall penetrate far down there to the South. The official orders came this morning.

Now, even if I wished to withdraw, it is too late. Andre and I asked for this mission. The authorization that I sought, together with him, has at this moment become an order. The hierarchic channels cleared, the pressure brought to bear at the Ministry;--and then to be afraid, to recoil before this adventure! . . .

To be afraid, I said. I know that I am not afraid! One night in the Gurara, when I found two of my sentinels slaughtered, with the shameful cross cut of the Berbers slashed across their stomachs,--then I was afraid. I know what fear is. Just so now, when I gazed into the black depths, whence suddenly all at once the great red sun will rise, I know that it is not with fear that I tremble. I feel surging within me the sacred horror of this mystery, and its irresistible attraction.

Delirious dreams, perhaps. The mad imaginings of a brain surcharged, and an eye distraught by mirages. The day will come, doubtless, when I shall reread these pages with an indulgent smile, as a man of fifty is accustomed to smile when he rereads old letters.

Delirious dreams. Mad imaginings. But these

[p. 5]

dreams, these imaginings, are dear to me. "Captain de Saint-Avit and Lieutenant Ferrieres," reads the official dispatch, "will proceed to Tassili to determine the  relation of Albien sandstone and carboniferous limestone. They will, in addition, profit by any opportunities of determining the possible change of attitude of the Axdjers towards our penetration, etc." If the journey should indeed have to do only with such poor things I think that I should never undertake it.

So I am longing for what I dread. I shall be dejected if I do not find myself in the presence of what makes me strangely fearful.

In the depths of the valley of Wadi Mia a jackal is barking. Now and again, when a beam of moonlight breaks in a silver patch through the hollows of the heat-swollen clouds, making him think he sees the young sun, a turtle dove moans among the palm trees.

I hear a step outside. I lean out of the window. A shade clad in luminous black stuff glides over the hard-packed earth of the terrace of the fortification. A light shines in the electric blackness. A man has just lighted a cigarette. He crouches, facing southwards. He is smoking.

It is Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, our Targa guide, the man who in three days is to lead us across the unknown plateaus of the mysterious Imoschaoch, across the hamadas of black stones, the great dried oases,

[p. 6]

the stretches of silver salt, the tawny hillocks, the flat gold dunes that are crested over, when the "alize" blows, with a shimmering haze of pale sand.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh! He is the man. There recurs to my mind Duveyrier's tragic phrase, "At the very moment the Colonel was putting his foot in the stirrup he was felled by a sabre blow." [*1] Cegheir-ben-Cheikh! There he is, peacefully smoking his cigarette, a cigarette from the package that I gave him. . . . May the Lord forgive me for it.

The lamp casts a yellow light on the paper. Strange fate, which, I never knew exactly why, decided one day when I was a lad of sixteen that I should prepare myself for Saint Cyr, and gave me there Andre de Saint-Avit as classmate. I might have studied law or medicine. Then I should be today a respectable inhabitant of a town with a church and running water, instead of this cotton-clad phantom, brooding with an unspeakable anxiety over this desert which is about to swallow me.

A great insect has flown in through the window. It buzzes, strikes against the rough cast, rebounds against the globe of the lamp, and then, helpless, its wings singed by the still burning candle, drops on the white paper.

[p. 7]

It is an African May bug, big, black, with spots of livid gray.

I think of the others, its brothers in France, the golden-brown May bugs, which I have seen on stormy summer evenings projecting themselves like little particles of the soil of my native countryside. It was there that as a child I spent my vacations, and later on, my leaves. On my last leave, through those same meadows, there wandered beside me a slight form, wearing a thin scarf, because of the evening air, so cool back there. But now this memory stirs me so slightly that I scarcely raise my eyes to that dark corner of my room where the light is dimly reflected by the glass of an indistinct portrait. I realize of how little consequence has become what had seemed at one time capable of filling all my life. This plaintive mystery is of no more interest to me. If the strolling singers of Rolla came to murmur their famous nostalgic airs under the window of this bordj I know that I should not listen to them, and if they became insistent I should send them on their way.

What has been capable of causing this metamorphosis in me? A story, a legend, perhaps, told, at any rate by one on whom rests the direst of suspicions.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has finished his cigarette. I hear him returning with slow steps to his mat, in barrack B, to the left of the guard post

[p. 8]

Our departure being scheduled for the tenth of November, the manuscript attached to this letter was begun on Sunday, the first, and finished on Thursday, the fifth of November, 1903.

OLIVIER FERRIeRES,
 Lt. 3rd Spahis.    

Footnotes

^3:1 This letter, together with the manuscript which accompanies it, the latter in a separate sealed envelope, was entrusted by Lieutenant Ferrieres, of the 3rd Spahis, the day of the departure of that officer for the Tassili of the Tuareg (Central Sahara), to Sergeant Chatelain. The sergeant was instructed to deliver it, on his next leave, to M. Leroux, Honorary Counsel at the Court of. Appeals at Riom, and Lieutenant Ferrieres' nearest relative. As this magistrate died suddenly before the expiration of the term of ten years set for the publication of the manuscript here presented, difficulties arose which have delayed its publication up to the present date.

^6:1 H. Duveyrier, "The Disaster of the Flatters Mission." Bull. Geol. Soc., 1881.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

CHAPTER I

  

A SOUTHERN ASSIGNMENT

SUNDAY, the sixth of June, 1903, broke the monotony of the life that we were leading at the Post of Hassi-Inifel by two events of unequal importance, the arrival of a letter from Mlle. de C----, and the latest numbers of the Official Journal of the French Republic.

"I have the Lieutenant's permission?" said Sergeant Chatelain, beginning to glance through the magazines he had just removed from their wrappings.

I acquiesced with a nod, already completely absorbed in reading Mlle. de C----'s letter.

"When this reaches you," was the gist of this charming being's letter, "mama and I will doubtless have left Paris for the country. If, in your distant parts, it might be a consolation to imagine me as bored here as you possibly can be, make the most of it. The Grand Prix is over. I played the horse you pointed out to me, and naturally, I lost. Last night we dined with the Martials de la Touche.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] Elias Chatrian was there,--always amazingly young. I am sending you his last book, which has made quite a sensation. It seems that the Martials de la Touche are depicted there without disguise. I will add to it Bourget's last, and Loti's, and France's, and two or three of the latest music hall hits. In the political word, they say the law about congregations will meet with strenuous opposition. Nothing much in the theatres. I have taken out a summer subscription for l'Illustration. Would you care for it? In the country no one knows what to do. Always the same lot of idiots ready for tennis. I shall deserve no credit for writing to you often. Spare me your reflections concerning young Combemale. I am less than nothing of a feminist, having too much faith in those who tell me that I am pretty, in yourself in particular. But indeed, I grow wild at the idea that if I permitted myself half the familiarities with one of our lads that you have surely with your Ouled-Nails . . Enough of that, it is too unpleasant an idea."

I had reached this point in the prose of this advanced young woman when a scandalized exclamation of the Sergeant made me look up.

"Lieutenant!"

"Yes?"

"They are up to something at the Ministry. See for yourself."

He handed me the Official. I read:

[p. 11]

"By a decision of the first of May, 1903, Captain de Saint-Avit (Andre), unattached, is assigned to the Third Spahis, and appointed Commandant of the Post of Hassi-Inifel."

Chatelain's displeasure became fairly exuberant.

"Captain de Saint-Avit, Commandant of the Post. A post which has never had a slur upon it. They must take us for a dumping ground."

My surprise was as great as the Sergeant's. But just then I saw the evil, weasel-like face of Gourrut, the convict we used as clerk. He had stopped his scrawling and was listening with a sly interest.

"Sergeant, Captain de Saint-Avit is my ranking classmate," I answered dryly.

Chatelain saluted, and left the room. I followed.

"There, there," I said, clapping him on the back, "no hard feelings. Remember that in an hour we are starting for the oasis. Have the cartridges ready. It is of the utmost importance to restock the larder."

I went back to the office and motioned Gourrut to go. Left alone, I finished Mlle. de C----'s letter very quickly, and then reread the decision of the Ministry giving the post a new chief.

It was now five months that I had enjoyed that distinction, and on my word, I had accepted the responsibility well enough, and been very well pleased with the independence. I can even affirm, without taking too much credit for myself, that under my

[p. 12]

command discipline had been better maintained than under Captain Dieulivol, Saint-Avit's predecessor. A brave man, this Captain Dieulivol, a non-commissioned officer under Dodds and Duchesne, but subject to a terrible propensity for strong liquors, and too much inclined, when he had drunk, to confuse his dialects, and to talk to a Houassa in Sakalave. No one was ever more sparing of the post water supply. One morning when he was preparing his absinthe in the presence of the Sergeant, Chatelain, noticing the Captain's glass, saw with amazement that the green liquor was blanched by a far stronger admixture of water than usual. He looked up, aware that something abnormal had just occurred. Rigid, the carafe inverted in his hand, Captain Dieulivol was spilling the water which was running over on the sugar. He was dead.

For six months, since the disappearance of this sympathetic old tippler, the Powers had not seemed to interest themselves in finding his successor. I had even hoped at times that a decision might be reached investing me with the rights that I was in fact exercising. . . . And today this surprising appointment.

Captain de Saint-Avit. He was of my class at St. Cyr. I had lost track of him. Then my attention had been attracted to him by his rapid advancement, his decoration, the well-deserved recognition of three particularly daring expeditions of exploration

[p. 13]

to Tebesti and the Air; and suddenly, the mysterious drama of his fourth expedition, that famous mission undertaken with Captain Morhange, from which only one of the explorers came back. Everything is forgotten quickly in France. That was at least six years ago. I had not heard Saint-Avit mentioned since. I had even supposed that he had left the army. And now, I was to have him as my chief.

"After all, what's the difference," I mused, "he or another! At school he was charming, and we have had only the most pleasant relationships. Besides, I haven't enough yearly income to afford the rank of Captain."

And I left the office, whistling as I went.

 

We were now, Chatelain and I, our guns resting on the already cooling earth, beside the pool that forms the center of the meager oasis, hidden behind a kind of hedge of alfa. The setting sun was reddening the stagnant ditches which irrigate the poor garden plots of the sedentary blacks.

Not a word during the approach. Not a word during the shoot. Chatelain was obviously sulking.

In silence we knocked down, one after the other, several of the miserable doves which came on dragging wings, heavy with the heat of the day, to quench their thirst at the thick green water. When

[p. 14]

a half-dozen slaughtered little bodies were lined up at our feet I put my hand on the Sergeant's shoulder.

"Chatelain!"

He trembled.

"Chatelain, I was rude to you a little while ago. Don't be angry. It was the bad time before the siesta. The bad time of midday."

"The Lieutenant is master here," he answered in a tone that was meant to be gruff, but which was only strained.

"Chatelain, don't be angry. You have something to say to me. You know what I mean."

"I don't know really. No, I don't know."

"Chatelain, Chatelain, why not be sensible? Tell me something about Captain de Saint-Avit."

"I know nothing." He spoke sharply.

"Nothing? Then what were you saying a little while ago?"

"Captain de Saint-Avit is a brave man." He muttered the words with his head still obstinately bent. "He went alone to Bilma, to the Air, quite alone to those places where no one had ever been. He is a brave man."

"He is a brave man, undoubtedly," I answered with great restraint. "But he murdered his companion, Captain Morhange, did he not?"

The old Sergeant trembled.

"He is a brave man," he persisted.

"Chatelain, you are a child. Are you afraid that

[p. 15]

[paragraph continues] I am going to repeat what you say to your new Captain?"

I had touched him to the quick. He drew himself up.

"Sergeant Chatelain is afraid of no one, Lieutenant. He has been at Abomey, against the Amazons, in a country where a black arm started out from every bush to seize your leg, while another cut it off for you with one blow of a cutlass."

"Then what they say, what you yourself--"

"That is talk."

"Talk which is repeated in France, Chatelain, everywhere."

He bent his head still lower without replying.

"Ass," I burst out, "will you speak?"

"Lieutenant, Lieutenant," he fairly pled, "I swear that what I know, or nothing--"

"What you know you are going to tell me, and right away. If not, I give you my word of honor that, for a month, I shall not speak to you except on official business."

Hassi-Inifel: thirty native Arabs and four Europeans--myself, the Sergeant, a Corporal, and Gourrut. The threat was terrible. It had its effect.

"All right, then, Lieutenant," he said with a great sigh. "But afterwards you must not blame me for having told you things about a superior which should not be told and come only from the talk I overheard at mess."

[p. 16]

"Tell away."

"It was in 1899. I was then Mess Sergeant at Sfax, with the 4th Spahis. I had a good record, and besides, as I did not drink, the Adjutant had assigned me to the officers' mess. It was a soft berth. The marketing, the accounts, recording the library books which were borrowed (there weren't many), and the key of the wine cupboard,--for with that you can't trust orderlies. The Colonel was young and dined at mess. One evening he came in late, looking perturbed, and, as soon as he was seated, called for silence:

"'Gentlemen,' he said, 'I have a communication to make to you, and I shall ask for your advice. Here is the question. Tomorrow morning the City of Naples lands at Sfax. Aboard her is Captain de Saint-Avit, recently assigned to Feriana, en route to his post.'

"The Colonel paused. 'Good,' thought I, 'tomorrow's menu is about to be considered.' For you know the custom, Lieutenant, which has existed ever since there have been any officers' clubs in Africa. When an officer is passing by, his comrades go to meet him at the boat and invite him to remain with them for the length of his stay in port. He pays his score in news from home. On such occasions everything is of the best, even for a simple lieutenant. At Sfax an officer on a visit meant--one extra course, vintage wine and old liqueurs.

[p. 17]

"But this time I imagined from the looks the officers exchanged that perhaps the old stock would stay undisturbed in its cupboard.

"You have all, I think, heard of Captain de Saint-Avit, gentlemen, and the rumors about him. It is not for us to inquire into them, and the promotion he has had, his decoration if you will, permits us to hope that they are without foundation. But between not suspecting an officer of being a criminal, and receiving him at our table as a comrade, there is a gulf that we are not obliged to bridge. That is the matter on which I ask your advice.'

"There was silence. The officers looked at each other, all of them suddenly quite grave, even to the merriest of the second lieutenants. In the corner, where I realized that they had forgotten me, I tried not to make the least sound that might recall my presence.

"'We thank you, Colonel,' one of the majors finally replied, 'for your courtesy in consulting us. All my comrades, I imagine, know to what terrible rumors you refer. If I may venture to say so, in Paris at the Army Geographical Service, where I was before coming here, most of the officers of the highest standing had an opinion on this unfortunate matter which they avoided stating, but which cast no glory upon Captain de Saint-Avit.'

"'I was at Bammako, at the time of the Morhange-Saint-Avit

[p. 18]

mission,' said a Captain. 'The opinion of the officers there, I am sorry to say, differed very little from what the Major describes. But I must add that they all admitted that they had nothing but suspicions to go on. And suspicions are certainly not enough considering the atrocity of the affair.'

"'They are quite enough, gentlemen,' replied the Colonel, 'to account for our hesitation. It is not a question of passing judgment; but no man can sit at our table as a matter of right. It is a privilege based on fraternal esteem. The only question is whether it is your decision to accord it to Saint-Avit.'

"So saying, he looked at the officers, as if he were taking a roll call. One after another they shook their heads.

"'I see that we agree,' he said. 'But our task is unfortunately not yet over. The City of Naples will be in port tomorrow morning. The launch which meets the passengers leaves at eight o'clock. It will be necessary, gentlemen, for one of you to go aboard. Captain de Saint-Avit might be expecting to come to us. We certainly have no intention of inflicting upon him the humiliation of refusing him, if he presented himself in expectation of the customary reception. He must be prevented from coming. It will be wisest to make him understand that it is best for him to stay aboard.'

[p. 19]

"The Colonel looked at the officers again. They could not but agree. But how uncomfortable each one looked!

"'I cannot hope to find a volunteer among you for this kind of mission, so I am compelled to appoint some one. Captain Grandjean, Captain de Saint-Avit is also a Captain. It is fitting that it be an officer of his own rank who carries him our message. Besides, you are the latest corner here. Therefore it is to you that I entrust this painful interview. I do not need to suggest that you conduct it as diplomatically as possible.'

"Captain Grandjean bowed, while a sigh of relief escaped from all the others. As long as the Colonel stayed in the room Grandjean remained apart, without speaking. It was only after the chief had departed that he let fall the words:

"'There are some things that ought to count a good deal for promotion.'

"The next day at luncheon everyone was impatient for his return.

"'Well?' demanded the Colonel, briefly.

"Captain Grandjean did not reply immediately. He sat down at the table where his comrades were mixing their drinks, and he, a man notorious for his sobriety, drank almost at a gulp, without waiting for the sugar to melt, a full glass of absinthe.

"'Well, Captain?' repeated the Colonel.

[p. 20]

"'Well, Colonel, it's done. You can be at ease. He will not set foot on shore. But, ye gods, what an ordeal!'

"The officers did not dare speak. Only their looks expressed their anxious curiosity.

"Captain Grandjean poured himself a swallow of water.

"'You see, I had gotten my speech all ready, in the launch. But as I went up the ladder I knew that I had forgotten it. Saint-Avit was in the smoking-room, with the Captain of the boat. It seemed to me that I could never find the strength to tell him, when I saw him all ready to go ashore. He was in full dress uniform, his sabre lay on the bench and he was wearing spurs. No one wears spurs on shipboard. I presented myself and we exchanged several remarks, but I must have seemed somewhat strained for from the first moment I knew that he sensed something. Under some pretext he left the Captain, and led me aft near the great rudder wheel. There, I dared speak. Colonel, what did I say? How I must have stammered! He did not look at me. Leaning his elbows on the railing he let his eyes wander far off, smiling slightly. Then, of a sudden, when I was well tangled up in explanations, he looked at me coolly and said:

"'"I must thank you, my dear fellow, for having given yourself so much trouble. But it is quite unnecessary. I am out of sorts and have no intention

[p. 21]

of going ashore. At least, I have the pleasure of having made your acquaintance. Since I cannot profit by your hospitality, you must do me the favor of accepting mine as long as the launch stays by the vessel."

"'Then we went back to the smoking-room. He himself mixed the cocktails. He talked to me. We discovered that we had mutual acquaintances. Never shall I forget that face, that ironic and distant look, that sad and melodious voice. Ah! Colonel, gentlemen, I don't know what they may say at the Geographic Office, or in the posts of the Soudan. . . . There can be nothing in it but a horrible suspicion. Such a man, capable of such a crime,--believe me, it is not possible.'

"That is all, Lieutenant," finished Chatelain, after a silence. "I have never seen a sadder meal than that one. The officers hurried through lunch without a word being spoken, in an atmosphere of depression against which no one tried to struggle. And in this complete silence, you could see them always furtively watching the City of Naples, where she was dancing merrily in the breeze, a league from shore.

"She was still there in the evening when they assembled for dinner, and it was not until a blast of the whistle, followed by curls of smoke escaping from the red and black smokestack had announced the departure of the vessel for Gabes, that conversation

[p. 22]

was resumed; and even then, less gaily than usual.

"After that, Lieutenant, at the Officers' Club at Sfax, they avoided like the plague any subject which risked leading the conversation back to Captain de Saint-Avit."

 

Chatelain had spoken almost in a whisper, and the little people of the desert had not heard this singular history. It was an hour since we had fired our last cartridge. Around the pool the turtle doves, once more reassured, were bathing their feathers. Mysterious great birds were flying under the darkening palm trees. A less warm wind rocked the trembling black palm branches. We had laid aside our helmets so that our temples could welcome the touch of the feeble breeze.

"Chatelain," I said, "it is time to go back to the bordj."

Slowly we picked up the dead doves. I felt the Sergeant looking at me reproachfully, as if regretting that he had spoken. Yet during all the time that our return trip lasted, I could not find the strength to break our desolate silence with a single word.

The night had almost fallen when we arrived.

The flag which surmounted the post was still visible, drooping on its standard, but already its colors were indistinguishable. To the west the sun had disappeared

[p. 23]

behind the dunes gashed against the black violet of the sky.

When we had crossed the gate of the fortifications, Chatelain left me.

"I am going to the stables," he said.

I returned alone to that part of the fort where the billets for the Europeans and the stores of ammunition were located. An inexpressible sadness weighed upon me.

I thought of my comrades in French garrisons.

At this hour they must be returning home to find awaiting them, spread out upon the bed, their dress uniform, their braided tunic, their sparkling epaulettes.

"Tomorrow," I said to myself, "I shall request a change of station."

The stairway of hard-packed earth was already black. But a few gleams of light still seemed palely prowling in the office when I entered.

A man was sitting at my desk, bending over the files of orders. His back was toward me. He did not hear me enter.

"Really, Gourrut, my lad, I beg you not to disturb yourself. Make yourself completely at home."

The man had risen, and I saw him to be quite tall, slender and very pale.

"Lieutenant Ferrieres, is it not?" He advanced, holding out his hand.

[p. 24]

"Captain de Saint-Avit. Delighted, my dear fellow."

At the same time Chatelain appeared on the threshold.

"Sergeant," said the newcomer, "I cannot congratulate you on the little I have seen. There is not a camel saddle which is not in want of buckles, and they are rusty enough to suggest that it rains at Hassi-Inifel three hundred days in the year. Furthermore, where were you this afternoon? Among the four Frenchmen who compose the post, I found only on my arrival one convict, opposite a quart of eau-de-vie. We will change all that, I hope. At ease."

"Captain," I said, and my voice was colorless, while Chatelain remained frozen at attention, "I must tell you that the Sergeant was with me, that it is I who am responsible for his absence from the post, that he is an irreproachable non-commissioned officer from every point of view, and that if we had been warned of your arrival--"

"Evidently," he said, with a coldly ironical smile. "Also, Lieutenant, I have no intention of holding him responsible for the negligences which attach to your office. He is not obliged to know that the officer who abandons a post like Hassi-Inifel, if it is only for two hours, risks not finding much left on his return. The Chaamba brigands, my dear sir, love firearms, and for the sake of the sixty muskets

[p. 25]

in your racks, I am sure they would not scruple to make an officer, whose otherwise excellent record is well known to me, account for his absence to a court-martial. Come with me, if you please. We will finish the little inspection I began too rapidly a little while ago."

He was already on the stairs. I followed in his footsteps. Chatelain closed the order of march. I heard him murmuring, in a tone which you can imagine:

"Well, we are in for it now!"

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

  

CHAPTER II

  

CAPTAIN DE SAINT-AVIT

A FEW days sufficed to convince us that Chatelain's fears as to our official relations with the new chief were vain. Often I have thought that by the severity he showed at our first encounter Saint-Avit wished to create a formal barrier, to show us that he knew how to keep his head high in spite of the weight of his heavy past. Certain it is that the day after his arrival, he showed himself in a very different light, even complimenting the Sergeant on the upkeep of the post and the instruction of the men. To me he was charming.

"We are of the same class, aren't we?" he said to me. "I don't have to ask you to dispense with formalities, it is your right."

Vain marks of confidence, alas! False witnesses to a freedom of spirit, one in face of the other. What more accessible in appearance than the immense Sahara, open to all those who are willing to be engulfed by it? Yet what is more secret? After six months of companionship, of communion

[p. 27]

of life such as only a Post in the South offers, I ask myself if the most extraordinary of my adventures is not to be leaving to-morrow, toward unsounded solitudes, with a man whose real thoughts are as unknown to me as these same solitudes, for which he has succeeded in making me long.

The first surprise which was given me by this singular companion was occasioned by the baggage that followed him.

On his inopportune arrival, alone, from Wargla, he had trusted to the Mehari he rode only what can be carried without harm by such a delicate beast,--his arms, sabre and revolver, a heavy carbine, and a very reduced pack. The rest did not arrive till fifteen days later, with the convoy which supplied the post.

Three cases of respectable dimensions were carried one after another to the Captain's room, and the grimaces of the porters said enough as to their weight.

I discreetly left Saint-Avit to his unpacking and began opening the mail which the convoy had sent me.

He returned to the office a little later and glanced at the several reviews which I had just received. "So," he said. "You take these."

He skimmed through, as he spoke, the last number of the Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde in Berlin.

[p. 28]

"Yes," I answered. "These gentlemen are kind enough to interest themselves in my works on the geology of the Wadi Mia and the high Igharghar."

"That may be useful to me," he murmured, continuing to turn over the leaves.

"It's at your service."

"Thanks. I am afraid I have nothing to offer you in exchange, except Pliny, perhaps. And still--you know what he said of Igharghar, according to King Juba. However, come help me put my traps in place and you will see if anything appeals to you."

I accepted without further urging.

We commenced by unearthing various meteorological and astronomical instruments--the thermometers of Baudin, Salleron, Fastre, an aneroid, a Fortin barometer, chronometers, a sextant, an astronomical spyglass, a compass glass. . . . In short, what Duveyrier calls the material that is simplest and easiest to transport on a camel.

As Saint-Avit handed them to me I arranged them on the only table in the room.

"Now," he announced to me, "there is nothing more but books. I will pass them to you. Pile them up in a corner until I can have a book-shelf made."

For two hours altogether I helped him to heap up a real library. And what a library! Such as never before a post in the South had seen. All the texts consecrated, under whatever titles, by antiquity to the regions of the Sahara were reunited between

[p. 29]

the four rough-cast walls of that little room of the bordj. Herodotus and Pliny, naturally, and likewise Strabo and Ptolemy, Pomponius Mela, and Ammien Marcellin. But besides these names which reassured my ignorance a little, I perceived those of Corippus, of Paul Orose, of Eratosthenes, of Photius, of Diodorus of Sicily, of Solon, of Dion Cassius, of Isidor of Seville, of Martin de Tyre, of Ethicus, of Athenee, the Scriptores Historiae Augustae, the Itinerarium Antonini Augusti, the Geographi Latini Minores of Riese, the Geographi Graeci Minores of Karl Muller. . . . Since I have had the occasion to familiarize myself with Agatarchides of Cos and Artemidorus of Ephesus, but I admit that in this instance the presence of their dissertations in the saddle bags of a captain of cavalry caused me some amazement.

I mention further the Descrittione dell' Africa by Leon l'African, the Arabian Histories of Ibn-Khaldoun, of Al-Iagoub, of El-Bekri, of Ibn-Batoutah, of Mahommed El-Tounsi. . . . In the midst of this Babel, I remember the names of only two volumes of contemporary French scholars. There were also the laborious theses of Berlioux [*1] and of Schirmer. [*2]

[p. 30]

While I proceeded to make piles of as similar dimensions as possible I kept saying to myself:

"To think that I have been believing all this time that in his mission with Morhange, Saint-Avit was particularly concerned in scientific observations. Either my memory deceives me strangely or he is riding a horse of another color. What is sure is that there is nothing for me in the midst of all this chaos."

He must have read on my face the signs of too apparently expressed surprise, for he said in a tone in which I divined a tinge of defiance:

"The choice of these books surprises you a bit?"

"I can't say it surprises me," I replied, "since I don't know the nature of the work for which you have collected them. In any case I dare say, without fear of being contradicted, that never before has officer of the Arabian Office possessed a library in which the humanities were so well represented."

subjHe smiled evasively, and that day we pursued the ect no further. Among Saint-Avit's books I had noticed a volu-

minous notebook secured by a strong lock. Several times I surprised him in the act of making notations in it. When for any reason he was called out of the room he placed this album carefully in a small cabinet of white wood, provided by the munificence of the Administration. When he was not writing

[p. 31]

and the office did not require his presence, he had the mehari which he had brought with him saddled, and a few minutes later, from the terrace of the fortifications, I could see the double silhouette disappearing with great strides behind a hummock of red earth on the horizon.

Each time these trips lasted longer. From each he returned in a kind of exaltation which made me watch him with daily increasing disquietude during meal hours, the only time we passed quite alone together.

"Well," I said to myself one day when his remarks had been more lacking in sequence than usual, "it's no fun being aboard a submarine when the captain takes opium. What drug can this fellow be taking, anyway?"

Next day I looked hurriedly through my comrade's drawers. This inspection, which I believed to be my duty, reassured me momentarily. "All very good," I thought, "provided he does not carry with him his capsules and his Pravaz syringe."

pig I was still in that stage where I could suppose that Andre's imagination needed artificial stimulants. Meticulous observation undeceived me. There was nothing suspicious in this respect. Moreover, he rarely drank and almost never smoked.

And nevertheless, there was no means of denying the increase of his disquieting feverishness. He returned from his expeditions each time with his eyes

[p. 32]

more brilliant. He was paler, more animated, more irritable.

One evening he left the post about six o'clock, at the end of the greatest heat of the day. We waited for him all night. My anxiety was all the stronger because quite recently caravans had brought tidings of bands of robbers in the neighborhood of the post.

At dawn he had not returned. He did not come before midday. His camel collapsed under him, rather than knelt.

He realized that he must excuse himself, but he waited till we were alone at lunch.

"I am so sorry to have caused you any anxiety. But the dunes were so beautiful under the moon! I let myself be carried farther and farther. . . ."

"I have no reproaches to make, dear fellow, you are free, and the chief here. Only allow me to recall to you certain warnings concerning the Chaamba brigands, and the misfortunes that might arise from a Commandant of a post absenting himself too long."

He smiled.

"I don't dislike such evidence of a good memory," he said simply.

He was in excellent, too excellent spirits.

"Don't blame me. I set out for a short ride as usual. Then, the moon rose. And then, I recognized the country. It is just where, twenty years ago next November, Flatters followed the way to

[p. 33]

his destiny in an exaltation which the certainty of not returning made keener and more intense."

"Strange state of mind for a chief of an expedition," I murmured.

"Say nothing against Flatters. No man ever loved the desert as he did . . . even to dying of it."

"Palat and Douls, among many others, have loved it as much," I answered. "But they were alone when they exposed themselves to it. Responsible only for their own lives, they were free. Flatters, on the other hand, was responsible for sixty lives. And you cannot deny that he allowed his whole party to be massacred."

The words were hardly out of my lips before I regretted them. I thought of Chatelain's story, of the officers' club at Sfax, where they avoided like the plague any kind of conversation which might lead their thoughts toward a certain Morhange-Saint-Avit mission.

Happily I observed that my companion was not listening. His brilliant eyes were far away.

"What was your first garrison?" he asked suddenly.

"Auxonne."

He gave an unnatural laugh.

"Auxonne. Province of the Cote d'Or. District of Dijon. Six thousand inhabitants. P. L. M. Railway. Drill school and review. The Colonel's wife receives Thursdays, and the Major's on Saturdays.

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] Leaves every Sunday,--the first of the month to Paris, the three others to Dijon. That explains your judgment of Flatters.

"For my part, my dear fellow, my first garrison was at Boghar. I arrived there one morning in October, a second lieutenant, aged twenty, of the First African , the white chevron on my black sleeve. . . . Sun stripe, as the bagnards say in speaking of their grades. Boghar! Two days before, from the bridge of the steamer, I had begun to see the shores of Africa. I pity all those who, when they see those pale cliffs for the first time, do not feel a great leap at their hearts, at the thought that this land prolongs itself thousands and thousands of leagues. . . . I was little more than a child, I had plenty of money. I was ahead of schedule. I could have stopped three or four days at Algiers to amuse myself. Instead I took the train that same evening for Berroughia.

"There, scarcely a hundred kilometers from Algiers, the railway stopped. Going in a straight line you wont find another until you get to the Cape. The diligence travels at night on account of the heat. When we came to the hills I got out and walked beside the carriage, straining for the sensation, in this new atmosphere, of the kiss of the outlying desert.

"About midnight, at the Camp of the Zouaves, a humble post on the road embankment, overlooking

[p. 35]

a dry valley whence rose the feverish perfume of oleander, we changed horses. They had there a troop of convicts and impressed laborers, under escort of riflemen and convoys to the quarries in the South. In part, rogues in uniform, from the jails of Algiers and Douara,--without arms, of course; the others civilians,--such civilians! this year's recruits, the young bullies of the Chapelle and the Goutte-d'Or.

"They left before we did. Then the diligence caught up with them. From a distance I saw in a pool of moonlight on the yellow road the black irregular mass of the convoy. Then I heard a weary dirge; the wretches were singing. One, in a sad and  voice, gave the couplet, which trailed dismally through the depths of the blue ravines:

"'Maintenant qu'elle est grande,
   Elle fait le trottoir,
   Avec ceux de la bande
          A Richard-Lenoir.'

"And the others took up in chorus the horrible refrain:

"'A la Bastille, a la Bastille,
   On aime bien, on aime bien
          Nini Peau d'Chien;
   Elle est si belle et si gentille
            A la Bastille'

[p. 36]

"I saw them all in contrast to myself when the diligence passed them. They were terrible. Under the hideous searchlight their eyes shone with a sombre fire in their pale and shaven faces. The burning dust strangled their raucous voices in their throats. A frightful sadness took possession of me.

"When the diligence had left this fearful nightmare behind, I regained my self-control.

"'Further, much further South,' I exclaimed to myself, 'to the places untouched by this miserable bilgewater of civilization.'

"When I am weary, when I have a moment of anguish and longing to turn back on the road that I have chosen, I think of the prisoners of Berroughia, and then I am glad to continue on my way.

"But what a reward, when I am in one of those places where the poor animals never think of fleeing because they have never seen man, where the desert stretches out around me so widely that the old world could crumble, and never a single ripple on the dune, a single cloud in the white sky come to warn me.

"'It is true,' I murmured. 'I, too, once, in the middle of the desert, at Tidi-Kelt, I felt that way.' "

Up to that time I had let him enjoy his exaltations without interruption. I understood too late the error that I had made in pronouncing that unfortunate sentence.

His mocking nervous laughter began anew.

"Ah! indeed, at Tidi-Kelt? I beg you, old man,

[p. 37]

in your own interest, if you don't want to make an ass of yourself, avoid that species of reminiscence. Honestly, you make me think of Fromentin, or that poor Maupassant, who talked of the desert because he had been to Djelfa, two days' journey from the street of Bab-Azound and the Government buildings, four days from the Avenue de l'Opera;--and who, because he saw a poor devil of a camel dying near Bou-Saada, believed himself in the heart of the desert, on the old route of the caravans. . . . Tidi-Kelt, the desert!"

"It seems to me, however, that In-Saleh--" I said, a little vexed.

"In-Saleh? Tidi-Kelt! But, my poor friend, the last time that I passed that way there were as many old newspapers and empty sardine boxes as if it had been Sunday in the Wood of Vincennes."

Such a determined, such an evident desire to annoy me made me forget my reserve.

"Evidently," I replied resentfully, "I have never been to--"

I stopped myself, but it was already too late. He looked at me, squarely in the face.

"To where?" he said with good humor. I did not answer.

"To where?" he repeated.

And, as I remained strangled in my muteness: "To Wadi Tarhit, do you mean?"

It was on the east bank of Wadi Tarhit, a hundred

[p. 38]

and twenty kilometers from Timissao, at 25.5 degrees north latitude, according to the official report, that Captain Morhange was buried.

"Andre," I cried stupidly, "I swear to you--"

"What do you swear to me?"

"That I never meant--"

"To speak of Wadi Tarhit? Why? Why should you not speak to me of Wadi Tarhit?"

In answer to my supplicating silence, he merely shrugged his shoulders.

"Idiot," was all he said.

And he left me before I could think of even one word to say.

So much humility on my part had, however, not disarmed him. I had the proof of it the next day, and the way he showed his humor was even marked by an exhibition of wretchedly poor taste.

I was just out of bed when he came into my room.

"Can you tell me what is the meaning of this?" he demanded.

He had in his hand one of the official registers. In his nervous crises he always began sorting them over, in the hope of finding some pretext for making himself militarily insupportable.

This time chance had favored him.

He opened the register. I blushed violently at seeing the poor proof of a photograph that I knew well.

"What is that?" he repeated disdainfully.

[p. 39]

Too often I had surprised him in the act of regarding, none too kindly, the portrait of Mlle. de C. which hung in my room not to be convinced at that moment that he was trying to pick a quarrel with me.

I controlled myself, however, and placed the poor little print in the drawer.

But my calmness did not pacify him. "Henceforth," he said, "take care, I beg you, not to mix mementoes of your gallantry with the official papers."

He added, with a smile that spoke insult:

"It isn't necessary to furnish objects of excitation to Gourrut."

"Andre," I said, and I was white, "I demand--"

He stood up to the full height of his stature.

"Well what is it? A gallantry, nothing more. I have authorized you to speak of Wadi Halfa, to haven't I?? Then I have the right, I should think--"

"Andre!"

Now he was looking maliciously at the wall, at the little portrait the replica of which I had just subjected to this painful scene.

"There, there, I say, you aren't angry, are you? But between ourselves you will admit, will you not, that she is a little thin?"

And before I could find time to answer him, he

[p. 40]

had removed himself, humming the shameful refrain of the previous night:

"A la Bastille, a la Bastille,
  On aime bien, on aime bien,
      Nini, Peau de Chien."

For three days neither of us spoke to the other. My exasperation was too deep for words. Was I, then, to be held responsible for his avatars! Was it my fault if, between two phrases, one seemed always some allusion--

"The situation is intolerable," I said to myself. "It cannot last longer."

It was to cease very soon.

One week after the scene of the photograph the courier arrived. I had scarcely glanced at the index of the Zeitschrift, the German review of which I have already spoken, when I started with uncontrollable amazement. I had just read: "Reise and Entdeckungen zwei franzosischer offiziere, Rittmeisters Morhange and Oberleutnants de Saint-Avit, in westlichen Sahara."

At the same time I heard my comrade's voice. "Anything interesting in this number?"

"No," I answered carelessly.

"Let's see."

I obeyed; what else was there to do?

It seemed to me that he grew paler as he ran

[p. 41]

over the index. However, his tone was altogether natural when he said:

"You will let me borrow it, of course?"

And he went out, casting me one defiant glance.

 

The day passed slowly. I did not see him again until evening. He was gay, very gay, and his gaiety hurt me.

When we had finished dinner, we went out and leaned on the balustrade of the terrace. From there out swept the desert, which the darkness was already encroaching upon from the east.

Andre broke the silence.

"By the way, I have returned your review to you. You were right, it is not interesting."

His expression was one of supreme amusement. "What is it, what is the matter with you, anyway?"

"Nothing," I answered, my throat aching. "Nothing? Shall I tell you what is the matter with you?"

II looked at him with an expression of supplication.

"Idiot," he found it necessary to repeat once more.

Night fell quickly. Only the southern slope of Wadi Mia was still yellow. Among the boulders a little jackal was running about, yapping sharply.

"The dib is making a fuss about nothing, bad business," said Saint-Avit.

[p. 42]

He continued pitilessly:

"Then you aren't willing to say anything?"

I made a great effort, to produce the following pitiful phrase:

"What an exhausting day. What a night, heavy, heavy--You don't feel like yourself, you don't know any more--"

"Yes," said the voice of Saint-Avit, as from a distance, "A heavy, heavy night: as heavy, do you know, as when I killed Captain Morhange."

Footnotes

^29:1 Doctrina Ptolemaei ab injuria recentiorum vindicata, sive Nilus Superior et Niger verus, hodiernus Eghiren, ab antiquis explorati. Paris, 8vo, 1874, with two maps. (Note by M. Leroux.)

^29:2 De nomine et genere popularum qui berberi vulgo dicuntur. Paris, 8vo, 1892. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 43]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE MORHANGE-SAINT-AVIT MISSION

"SO I killed Captain Morhange," Andre de Saint-Avit said to me the next day, at the same time, in the same place, with a calm that took no account of the night, the frightful night I had just been through. "Why do I tell you this? I don't know in the least. Because of the desert, perhaps. Are you a man capable of enduring the weight of that confidence, and further, if necessary, of assuming the consequences it may bring? I don't know that, either. The future will decide. For the present there is only one thing certain, the fact, I tell you again, that I killed Captain Morhange.

I killed him. And, since you want me to specify the reason, you understand that I am not going to torture my brain to turn it into a romance for you, or commence by recounting in the naturalistic manner of what stuff my first trousers were made, or, as the neo-Catholics would have it, how often I went as a child to confession, and how much I liked doing it. I have no taste for useless exhibitions.

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] You will find that this recital begins strictly at the time when I met Morhange.

And first of all, I tell you, however much it has cost my peace of mind and my reputation, I do not regret having known him. In a word, apart from all question of false friendship, I am convicted of a black ingratitude in having killed him. It is to him, it is to his knowledge of rock inscriptions, that I owe the only thing that has raised my life in interest above the miserable little lives dragged out by my companions at Auxonne, and elsewhere.

This being understood, here are the facts:

It was in the Arabian Office at Wargla, when I was a lieutenant, that I first heard the name, Morhange. And I must add that it was for me the occasion of an attack of bad humor. We were having difficult times. The hostility of the Sultan of Morocco was latent. At Touat, where the assassination of Flatters and of Frescaly had already been concocted, connivance was being given to the plots of our enemies. Touat was the center of conspiracies, of razzias, of defections, and at the same time, the depot of supply for the insatiable nomads. The Governors of Algeria, Tirman, Cambon, Laferriere, demanded its occupation. The Ministers of War tacitly agreed. . . . But there was Parliament, which did nothing at all, because of England, because of Germany, and above all because of a certain Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the 

[p. 45]

[paragraph continues] Citizen, which prescribed that insurrection is the most sacred of duties, even when the insurgents are savages who cut your head off. In short, the military authority could only, at its own discretion, increase the southern garrisons, and establish new posts; this one, Berresof, Hassi-el-Mia, Fort MacMahon, Fort Lallemand, Fort Miribel. . . . But as Castries puts it, you don't hold the nomads with bordjs, you hold them by the belt. The middle was the oasis of Touat. Their honors, the lawyers of Paris, had to be convinced of the necessity of taking possession of the oasis of Touat. The best way would be to present them with a faithful picture of the plots that were being woven there against us.

The principal authors were, and still are, the Senoussis, whose able chief has been forced by our arms to transfer the seat of his confederation several thousand leagues from there, to Schimmedrou, in the Tibesti. They had, I say they through modesty, the idea of ascertaining the traces left by these agitators on their favorite places of concourse; Rhat, Temassinin, the plain of Adejamor, and In-Salah. It was, you see, at least after leaving Temassinin, practically the same itinerary as that followed in 1864 by General Rohlfs.

I had already attracted some attention by two excursions, one to Agades, and the other to Bilma, and was considered by the staff officers to be one of the

[p. 46]

best informed on the Senoussis question. I was therefore selected to assume this new task.

I then suggested that it would be of interest to kill two birds with one stone, and to get, in passing, an idea of the northern Ahoggar, so as to make sure whether the Tuaregs of Ahitarhen had continued to have as cordial relations with the Senoussis as they had had when they combined to massacre the Flatters' mission. I was immediately accorded the permission. The change in my first plan was as follows: After reaching Ighelaschem, six hundred kilometers south of Temassinin, instead of taking the direct road to Touat via Rhat, I would, penetrating between the high land of Mouydir and Ahaggar, strike off to the southwest as far as Shikh-Salah. There I would turn again northwards, towards In-Salah, by the road to the Soudan and Agades. In all hardly eight kilometers additional in a trip of about seven hundred leagues, with the certainty of making as complete an examination as possible of the roads which our enemies, the Senoussis of Tibesti and the Tuareg of the Ahoggar, must follow to arrive at Touat. On the way, for every explorer has his pet fancy, I was not at all displeased to think that I would have a chance to examine the geological formation of the plateau of Egere, about which Duveyrier and the others are so disappointingly indefinite.

Everything was ready for my departure from

[p. 47]

[paragraph continues] Wargla. Everything, which is to say, very little. Three mehara: mine, my companion Bou-Djema's (a faithful Chaamba, whom I had had with me in my wanderings through the Air, less of a guide in the country I was familiar with than a machine for saddling and unsaddling camels), then a third to carry provisions and skins of drinking water, very little, since I had taken pains to locate the stops with reference to the wells.

Some people go equipped for this kind of expedition with a hundred regulars, and even cannon. I am for the tradition of Douls and Rene Callie, I go alone.

I was at that perfect moment when only one thin thread still held me to the civilized world when an official cable arrived at Wargla.

"Lieutenant de Saint-Avit," it said briefly, "will delay his departure until the arrival of Captain Morhange, who will accompany him on his expedition of exploration."

I was more than disappointed. I alone had had the idea of this expedition. I had had all the difficulty that you can imagine to make the authorities agree to it. And now when I was rejoicing at the idea of the long hours I would spend alone with myself in the heart of the desert, they sent me a stranger, and, to make matters worse, a superior.

The condolences of my comrades aggravated my bad humor.

[p. 48]

The Yearly Report, consulted on the spot, had given them the following information:

"Morhange (Jean-Marie-Francois), class of 1881. Breveted. Captain, unassigned. (Topographical Service of the Army.)"

"There is the explanation for you," said one. "They are sending one of their creatures to pull the chestnuts out of the fire, after you have had all the trouble of making it. Breveted! That's a great way. The theories of Ardant du Picq or else nothing about here."

"I don't altogether agree with you," said the Major. "They knew in Parliament, for some one is always indiscreet, the real aim of Saint-Avit's mission: to force their hand for the occupation of Touat. And this Morhange must be a man serving the interests of the Army Commission. All these people, secretaries, members of Parliament, governors, keep a close watch on each other. Some one will write an amusing paradoxical history some day, of the French Colonial Expansion, which is made without the knowledge of the powers in office, when it is not actually in spite of them."

"Whatever the reason, the result will be the same," I said bitterly; "we will be two Frenchmen to spy on each other night and day, along the roads to the south. An amiable prospect when one has none too much time to foil all the tricks of the natives. When does he arrive?"

[p. 49]

"Day after tomorrow, probably. I have news of a convoy coming from Ghardaia. It is likely that he will avail himself of it. The indications are that he doesn't know very much about traveling alone."

Captain Morhange did arrive in fact two days later by means of the convoy from Ghardaia. I was the first person for whom he asked.

When he came to my room, whither I had withdrawn in dignity as soon as the convoy was sighted, I was disagreeably surprised to foresee that I would have great difficulty in preserving my prejudice against him.

He was tall, his face full and ruddy, with laughing blue eyes, a small black moustache, and hair that was already white.

"I have a thousand apologies to make to you, my dear fellow," he said immediately, with a frankness that I have never seen in any other man. "You must be furious with my importunity in upsetting your plans and delaying your departure."

"By no means, Captain," I replied coolly.

"You really have only yourself to blame. It is on account of your knowledge of the southern routes, so highly esteemed at Paris, that I wished to have you to initiate me when the Ministries of Instruction and of Commerce, and the Geographical Society combined to charge me with the mission which brings me here. These three honorable institutions have

[p. 50]

in fact entrusted me with the attempt to re-establish the ancient track of the caravans, which, from the ninth century, trafficked between Tunis and the Soudan, by Toweur, Wargla, Es-Souk and the bend of the Bourroum; and to study the possibility of restoring this route to its ancient splendor. At the same time, at the Geographic Bureau, I heard of the journey that you are undertaking. From Wargla to Shikh-Salah our two itineraries are the same. Only I must admit to you that it is the first voyage of this kind that I have ever undertaken. I would not be afraid to hold forth for an hour on Arabian literature in the amphitheatre of the School of Oriental Languages, but I know well enough that in the desert I should have to ask for directions whether to turn right or left. This is the only chance which could give me such an opportunity, and at the same time put me under obligation for this introduction to so charming a companion. You must not blame me if I seized it, if I used all my influence to retard your departure from Wargla until the instant when I could join you. I have only one more word to add to what I have said. I am entrusted with a mission which by its origin is rendered essentially civilian. You are sent out by the Ministry of War. Up to the moment when, arrived at Shikh-Salah we turn our backs on each other to attain, you Touat, and I the Niger, all your recommendations, all your orders, will be followed

[p. 51]

by a subaltern, and, I hope, by a friend as well."

All the time he was talking so openly I felt delightedly my worst recent fears melting away. Nevertheless, I still experienced a mean desire to show him some marks of reserve, for having thus disposed of my company at a distance, without consulting me.

"I am very grateful to you, Captain, for your extremely flattering words. When do you wish to leave Wargla?"

He made a gesture of complete detachment.

"Whenever you like. Tomorrow, this evening. I have already delayed you. Your preparations must have already been made for some time."

My little maneuver had turned against myself. I had not been counting on leaving before the next week.

"Tomorrow, Captain, but your luggage?" He smiled delightfully.

"I thought it best to bring as little as possible. A light pack, some papers. My brave camel had no difficulty in bringing it along. For the rest I depend on your advice, and the resources of Owargla."

I was well caught. I had nothing further to say. And moreover, such freedom of spirit and manner had already captivated me.

"It seems," said my comrades, when the time for aperitives had brought us all together again, "that

[p. 52]

this Captain of yours is a remarkably charming fellow."

"Remarkably."

"You surely can't have any trouble with him. It is only up to you to see that later on he doesn't get all the glory."

"We aren't working with the same end in view," I answered evasively.

I was thoughtful, only thoughtful I give you my word. From that moment I harbored no further grudge against Morhange. Yet my silence persuaded him that I was unforgiving. And everyone,

do you hear me, everyone said later on, when suspicions became rife:

"He is surely guilty. We saw them go off together. We can affirm it."

I am guilty. . . . But for a low motive of jealousy. . . . How sickening. . . .

After that, there was nothing to do but to flee, flee, as far as the places where there are no more men who think and reason.

Morhange appeared, his arm resting on the Major's, who was beaming over this new acquaintanceship.

He presented him enthusiastically:

"Captain Morhange, gentlemen. An officer of the old school, and a man after our own hearts, I give you my word. He wants to leave tomorrow, but we must give him such a reception that he will

[p. 53]

forget that idea before two days are up. Come, Captain, you have at least eight days to give us."

"I am at the disposition of Lieutenant de Saint-Avit," replied Morhange, with a quiet smile.

The conversation became general. The sound of glasses and laughter rang out. I heard my comrades in ecstasies over the stories that the newcomer poured out with never-failing humor. And I, never, never have I felt so sad.

The time came to pass into the dining-room.

"At my right, Captain," cried the Major, more and more beaming. "And I hope you will keep on giving us these new lines on Paris. We are not up with the times here, you know."

"Yours to command, Major," said Morhange. "Be seated, gentlemen."

The officers obeyed, with a joyous clatter of moving chairs. I had not taken my eyes off Morhange, who was still standing.

"Major, gentlemen, you will allow me," he said.

And before sitting down at that table, where every moment he was the life of the party, in a low voice, with his eyes closed, Captain Morhange recited the Benedicite.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

TOWARDS LATITUDE 25

"YOU see," said Captain Morhange to me fifteen days later, "you are much better informed about the ancient routes through the Sahara than you have been willing to let me suppose, since you know of the existence of the two Tadekkas. But the one of which you have just spoken is the Tadekka of Ibn-Batoutah, located by this historian seventy days from Touat, and placed by Schirmer, very plausibly, in the unexplored territory of the Aouelimmiden. This is the Tadekka by which the Sonrahi caravans passed every year, travelling by Egypt.

"My Tadekka is different, the capital of the veiled people, placed by Ibn-Khaldoun twenty days south of Wargla, which he calls Tadmekka. It is towards this Tadmekka that I am headed. I must establish Tadmekka in the ruins of Es-Souk. The commercial trade route, which in the ninth century bound the Tunisian Djerid to the bend the Niger makes at Bourroum, passed by Es-Souk. It is to study the possibility of reestablishing this ancient

[p. 55]

thoroughfare that the Ministries gave me this mission, which has given me the pleasure of your companionship."

"You are probably in for a disappointment," I said. "Everything indicates that the commerce there is very slight."

"Well, I shall see," he answered composedly. This was while we were following the unicolored banks of a salt lake. The great saline stretch shone pale-blue, under the rising sun. The legs of our five mehara cast on it their moving shadows of a darker blue. For a moment the only inhabitant of these solitudes, a bird, a kind of indeterminate heron, rose and hung in the air, as if suspended from a thread, only to sink back to rest as soon as we had passed.

I led the way, selecting the route, Morhange followed. Enveloped in a bernous, his head covered with the straight chechia of the Spahis, a great chaplet of alternate red and white beads, ending in a cross, around his neck, he realized perfectly the ideal of Father Lavigerie's White Fathers.

After a two-days' halt at Temassinin we had just left the road followed by Flatters, and taken an oblique course to the south. I have the honor of having antedated Fourcau in demonstrating the importance of Temassinin as a geometrical point for the passage of caravans, and of selecting the place where Captain Pein has just now constructed a fort.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] The junction for the roads that lead to Touat from Fezzan and Tibesti, Temassinin is the future seat of a marvellous Intelligence Department. What I had collected there in two days about the disposition of our Senoussis enemies was of importance. I noticed that Morhange let me proceed with my inquiries with complete indifference.

These two days he had passed in conversation with the old negro guardian of the turbet, which preserves, under its plaster dome, the remains of the venerated Sidi-Moussa. The confidences they exchanged, I am sorry to say that I have forgotten. But from the negro's amazed admiration, I realized the ignorance in which I stood to the mysteries of the desert, and how familiar they were to my companion.

And if you want to get any idea of the extraordinary originality which Morhange introduced into such surroundings, you who, after all, have a certain familiarity with the tropics, listen to this. It was exactly two hundred kilometers from here, in the vicinity of the Great Dune, in that horrible stretch of six days without water. We had just enough for two days before reaching the next well, and you know these wells; as Flatters wrote to his wife, "you have to work for hours before you can clean them out and succeed in watering beasts and men." By chance we met a caravan there, which was going east towards Rhadames, and had come too far north.

[p. 57]

[paragraph continues] The camels' humps, shrunken and shaking, bespoke the sufferings of the troop. Behind came a little gray ass, a pitiful burrow, interferring at every step, and lightened of its pack because the merchants knew that it was going to die. Instinctively, with its last strength, it followed, knowing that when it could stagger no longer, the end would come and the flutter of the bald vultures' wings. I love animals, which I have solid reasons for preferring to men. But never should I have thought of doing what Morhange did then. I tell you that our water skins were almost dry, and that our own camels, without which one is lost in the empty desert, had not been watered for many hours. Morhange made his kneel, uncocked a skin, and made the little ass drink. I certainly felt gratification at seeing the poor bare flanks of the miserable beast pant with satisfaction. But the responsibility was mine. Also I had seen Bou-Djema's aghast expression, and the disapproval of the thirsty members of the caravan. I remarked on it. How it was received! "What have I given," replied Morhange, "was my own. We will reach El-Biodh to-morrow evening, about six o'clock. Between here and there I know that I shall not be thirsty." And that in a tone, in which for the first time he allowed the authority of a Captain to speak. "That is easy to say," I thought, ill-humoredly. "He knows that when he wants them, my water-skin, and Bou-Djema's, are at his service." But I did not yet know

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] Morhange very well, and it is true that until the evening of the next day when we reached El-Biodh, refusing our offers with smiling determination, he drank nothing.

Shades of St. Francis of Assisi! Umbrian hills, so pure under the rising sun! It was in the light of a like sunrise, by the border of a pale stream leaping in full cascades from a crescent-shaped niche of the gray rocks of Egere, that Morhange stopped. The unlooked for waters rolled upon the sand, and we saw, in the light which mirrored them, little black fish. Fish in the middle of the Sahara! All three of us were mute before this paradox of Nature. One of them had strayed into a little channel of sand. He had to stay there, struggling in vain, his little white belly exposed to the air. . . . Morhange picked him up, looked at him for a moment, and put him back into the little stream. Shades of St. Francis. Umbrian hills.. . . But I have sworn not to break the thread of the story by these untimely digressions.

"You see," Captain Morhange said to me a week later, "that I was right in advising you to go farther south before making for Shikh-Salah. Something told me that this highland of Egere was not interesting from your point of view. While here you have only to stoop to pick up pebbles which will allow you to establish the volcanic origin of this region

[p. 59]

much more certainly than Bou-Derba, des Cloizeaux, and Doctor Marres have done."

This was while we were following the western pass of the Tidifest Mountains, about the 25th degree of northern latitude.

"I should indeed be ungrateful not to thank you," I said.

I shall always remember that instant. We had left our camels and were collecting fragments of the most characteristic rocks. Morhange employed himself with a discernment which spoke worlds for his knowledge of geology, a science he had often professed complete ignorance of.

Then I asked him the following question:

"May I prove my gratitude by making you a confession?"

He raised his head and looked at me.

"Well then, I don't see the practical value of this trip you have undertaken."

He smiled.

"Why not? To explore the old caravan route, to demonstrate that a connection has existed from the most ancient times between the Mediterranean world, and the country of the Blacks, that seems nothing in your eyes? The hope of settling once for all the secular disputes which have divided so many keen minds; d'Anville, Heeren, Berlioux, Quatremere on the one hand,--on the other Gosselin, Walckenaer, Tissit, Vivien, de saint-Martin; you

[p. 60]

think that that is devoid of interest? A plague upon you for being hard to please."

"I spoke of practical value," I said. "You won't deny that this controversy is only the affair of cabinet geographers and office explorers."

Morhange kept on smiling.

"Dear friend, don't wither me. Deign to recall that your mission was confided to you by the Ministry of War, while I hold mine on behalf of the Ministry of Public Instruction. A different origin justifies our different aims. It certainly explains, I readily concede that to you, why what I am in search of has no practical value."

"You are also authorized by the Ministry of Commerce," I replied, playing my next card. "By this chief you are instructed to study the possibility of restoring the old trade route of the ninth century. But on this point don't attempt to mislead me; with your knowledge of the history and geography of the Sahara, your mind must have been made up before you left Paris. The road from Djerid to the Niger is dead, stone dead. You knew that no important traffic would pass by this route before you undertook to study the possibility of restoring it."

Morhange looked me full in the face.

"And if that should be so," he said with the most charming attitude, "if I had before leaving the conviction you say, what do you conclude from that?"

"I should prefer to have you tell me."

[p. 61]

"Simply, my dear boy, that I had less skill than you in finding the pretext for my voyage, that I furnished less good reasons for the true motives that brought me here."

"A pretext? I don't see . . ."

"Be sincere in your turn, if you please. I am sure that you have the greatest desire to inform the Arabian Office about the practices of the Senouissis. But admit that the information that you will obtain is not the sole and innermost aim of your excursion. You are a geologist, my friend. You have found a chance to gratify your taste in this trip. No one would think of blaming you because you have known how to reconcile what is useful to your country and agreeable to yourself. But, for the love of God, don't deny it; I need no other proof than your presence here on this side of the Tidifest, a very curious place from a mineralogical point of view, but some hundred and fifty kilometers south of your official route."

It was not possible to have countered me with a better grace. I parried by attacking.

"Am I to conclude from all this that I do not know the real aims of your trip, and that they have nothing to do with the official motives?"

I had gone a bit too far. I felt it from the seriousness with which Morhange's reply was delivered.

"No, my dear friend, you must not conclude just that. I should have no taste for a lie which was

[p. 62]

based on fraud towards the estimable constitutional bodies which have judged me worthy of their confidence and their support. The ends that they have assigned to me I shall do my best to attain. But I have no reason for hiding from you that there is another, quite personal, which is far nearer to my heart. Let us say, if you will, to use a terminology that is otherwise deplorable, that this is the end while the others are the means."

"Would there be any indiscretion? . . ."

"None," replied my companion. "Shikh-Salah is only a few days distant. He whose first steps you have guided with such solicitude in the desert should have nothing hidden from you."

We had halted in the valley of a little dry well where a few sickly plants were growing. A spring near by was circled by a crown of gray verdure. The camels had been unsaddled for the night, and were seeking vainly, at every stride, to nibble the spiny tufts of had. The black and polished sides of the Tidifest Mountains rose, almost vertically, above our heads. Already the blue smoke of the fire on which Bou-Djema was cooking dinner rose through the motionless air.

Not a sound, not a breath. The smoke mounted straight, straight and slowly up the pale steps of the firmament.

"Have you ever heard of the Atlas of Christianity?" asked Morhange.

[p. 63]

"I think so. Isn't it a geographical work published by the Benedictines under the direction of a certain Dom Granger?"

"Your memory is correct," said Morhange. "Even so let me explain a little more fully some of the things you have not had as much reason as I to interest yourself in. The Atlas of Christianity proposes to establish the boundaries of that great tide of Christianity through all the ages, and for all parts of the globe. An undertaking worthy of the Benedictine learning, worthy of such a prodigy of erudition as Dom Granger himself."

"And it is these boundaries that you have come to determine here, no doubt," I murmured.

"Just so," replied my companion.

He was silent, and I respected his silence, prepared by now to be astonished at nothing.

"It is not possible to give confidences by halves, without being ridiculous," he continued after several minutes of meditation, speaking gravely, in a voice which held no suggestion of that flashing humor which had a month before enchanted the young officers at Wargla. "I have begun on mine. I will tell you everything. Trust my discretion, however, and do not insist upon certain events of my private life. If, four years ago, at the close of these events, I resolved to enter a monastery, it does not concern you to know my reasons. I can marvel at it myself, that the passage in my life of a being absolutely devoid

[p. 64]

of interest should have sufficed to change the current of that life. I can marvel that a creature whose sole merit was her beauty should have been permitted by the Creator to swing my destiny to such an unforeseen direction. The monastery at whose doors I knocked had the most valid reasons for doubting the stability of my vocation. What the world loses in such fashion it often calls back as readily. In short, I cannot blame the Father Abbot for having forbidden me to apply for my army discharge. By his instructions, I asked for, and obtained, permission to be placed on the inactive list for three years. At the end of those three years of consecration it would be seen whether the world was definitely dead to your servant.

"The first day of my arrival at the cloister I was assigned to Dom Granger, and placed by him at work on the Atlas of Christianity. A brief examination decided him as to what kind of service I was best fitted to render. This is how I came to enter the studio devoted to the cartography of Northern Africa. I did not know one word of Arabic, but it happened that in garrison at Lyon I had taken at the Faculte des Lettres, a course with Berlioux,--a very erudite geographer no doubt, but obsessed by one idea, the influence the Greek and Roman civilizations had exercised on Africa. This detail of my life was enough for Dom Granger. He provided me straightway with Berber vocabularies by Venture,

[p. 65]

by Delaporte, by Brosselard; with the Grammatical Sketch of the Temahaq by Stanley Fleeman, and the Essai de Grammaire de la langue Temachek by Major Hanoteau. At the end of three months I was able to decipher any inscriptions in Tifinar. You know that Tifinar is the national writing of the Tuareg, the expression of this Terachek language which seems to us the most curious protest of the Targui race against its Mohammedan enemies.

"Dom Granger, in fact, believed that the Tuareg are Christians, dating from a period which it was necessary to ascertain, but which coincided no doubt with the splendor of the church of Hippon. Even better than I, you know that the cross is with them the symbol of fate in decoration. Duveyrier has claimed that it figures in their alphabet, on their arms, among the designs of their clothes. The only tattooing that they wear on the forehead, on the back of the hand, is a cross with four equal branches; the pummels of their saddles, the handles of their sabres, of their poignards, are cross-shaped. And is it necessary to remind you that, although Islam forbids bells as a sign of Christianity, the harness of Tuareg camels are trimmed with bells?

"Neither Dom Granger nor I attach an exaggerated importance to such proofs, which resemble too much those which make such a display in the Genius of Christianity. But it is indeed impossible to refuse

[p. 66]

all credence to certain theological arguments. Amanai, the God of the Tuareg, unquestionably the Adonai of the Bible, is unique. They have a hell, 'Timsi-tan-elekhaft,' the last fire, where reigns Iblis, our Lucifer. Their Paradise, where they are rewarded for good deeds, is inhabited by 'andjelousen,' our angels. And do not urge the resemblance of this theology to the Koran, for I will meet you with historic arguments and remind you that the Tuareg have struggled all through the ages at the cost of partial extermination, to maintain their faith against the encroachments of Mohammedan fanaticism.

"Many times I have studied with Dom Granger that formidable epoch when the aborigines opposed the conquering Arabs. With him I have seen how the army of Sidi-Okba, one of the companions of the Prophet, invaded this desert to reduce the Tuareg tribes and impose on them Musselman rules. These tribes were then rich and prosperous. They were the Ihbggaren, the Imededren, the Ouadelen, the Kel-Gueress, the Kel-Air. But internal quarrels sapped their strength. Still, it was not until after a long and cruel war that the Arabians succeeded in getting possession of the capital of the Berbers, which had proved such a redoubtable stronghold. They destroyed it after they had massacred the inhabitants. On the ruins Okba constructed a new city. This city is Es-Souk. The one that Sidi-Okba

[p. 67]

destroyed was the Berber Tadmekka. What Dom Granger asked of me was precisely that I should try to exhume from the ruins of the Musselman Es-Souk the ruins of Tadmekka, which was Berber, and perhaps Christian.

"I understand," I murmured.

"So far, so good," said Morhange. "But what you must grasp now is the practical sense of these religious men, my masters. You remember that, even after three years of monastic life, they preserved their doubts as to the stability of my vocation. They found at the same time means of testing it once for all, and of adapting official facilities to their particular purposes. One morning I was called before the Father Abbot, and this is what he said to me, in the presence of Dom Granger, who expressed silent approval.

"'Your term of inactive service expires in fifteen days. You will return to Paris, and apply at the Ministry to be reinstated. With what you have learned here, and the relationships we have been able to maintain at Headquarters, you will have no difficulty in being attached to the Geographical Staff of the army. When you reach the rue de Grenelle you will receive our instructions.'

"I was astonished at their confidence in my knowledge. When I was reestablished as Captain again in the Geographical Service I understood. At the monastery, the daily association with Dom Granger

[p. 68]

and his pupils had kept me constantly convinced of the inferiority of my knowledge. When I came in contact with my military brethren I realized the superiority of the instruction I had received. I did not have to concern myself with the details of my mission. The Ministries invited me to undertake it. My initiative asserted itself on only one occasion. When I learned that you were going to leave Wargla on the present expedition, having reason to distrust my practical qualifications as an explorer, I did my best to retard your departure, so that I might join you. I hope that you have forgiven me by now."

 

The light in the west was fading, where the sun had already sunk into a matchless luxury of violet draperies. We were alone in this immensity, at the feet of the rigid black rocks. Nothing but ourselves. Nothing, nothing but ourselves.

I held out my hand to Morhange, and he pressed it. Then he said:

"If they still seem infinitely long to me, the several thousand kilometers which separate me from the instant when, my task accomplished, I shall at last find oblivion in the cloister for the things for which I was not made, let me tell you this;--the several hundred kilometers which still separate us from Shikh-Salah seem to me infinitely short to traverse in your company."

[p. 69]

On the pale water of the little pool, motionless and fixed like a silver nail, a star had just been born.

"Shikh-Salah," I murmured, my heart full of an indefinable sadness. "Patience, we are not there yet."

 

In truth, we never were to be there.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 70]

  

CHAPTER V

  

THE INSCRIPTION

WITH a blow of the tip of his cane Morhange knocked a fragment of rock from the black flank of the mountain.

"What is it?" he asked, holding it out to me.

"A basaltic peridot," I said.

"It can't be very interesting, you barely glanced at it."

"It is very interesting, on the contrary. But, for the moment, I admit that I am otherwise preoccupied."

"How?"

"Look this way a bit," I said, showing towards the west, on the horizon, a black spot across the white plain.

It was six o'clock in the morning. The sun had risen. But it could not be found in the surprisingly polished air. And not a breath of air, not a breath. Suddenly one of the camels called. An enormous antelope had just come in sight, and had stopped in its flight, terrified, facing the wall of rock. It stayed there at a little distance from us, dazed, trembling on its slender legs.

[p. 71]

Bou-Djema had rejoined us.

"When the legs of the mohor tremble it is because the firmament is shaken," he muttered.

"A storm?"

"Yes, a storm."

"And you find that alarming?"

I did not answer immediately. I was exchanging several brief words with Bou-Djema, who was occupied in soothing the camels which were giving signs of being restive.

Morhange repeated his question. I shrugged my shoulders.

"Alarming? I don't know. I have never seen a storm on the Hoggar. But I distrust it. And the signs are that this is going to be a big one. See there already."

A slight dust had risen before the cliff. In the still air a few grains of sand had begun to whirl round and round, with a speed which increased to dizziness, giving us in advance the spectacle in miniature of what would soon be breaking upon us.

With harsh cries a flock of wild geese appeared, flying low. They came out of the west.

"They are fleeing towards the Sebkha d'Amanghor," said Bou-Djema.

There could be no greater mistake, I thought. Morhange looked at me curiously.

"What must we do?" he asked.

"Mount our camels immediately, before they are

[p. 72]

completely demoralized, and hurry to find shelter in some high places. Take account of our situation. It is easy to follow the bed of a stream. But within a quarter of an hour perhaps the storm will have burst. Within a half hour a perfect torrent will be rushing here. On this soil, which is almost impermeable, rain will roll like a pail of water thrown on a bituminous pavement. No depth, all height. Look at this."

And I showed him, a dozen meters high, long hollow gouges, marks of former  on the rocky wall.

"In an hour the waters will reach that height. Those are the marks of the last inundation. Let us get started. There is not an instant to lose."

"All right," Morhange replied tranquilly.

We had the greatest difficulty to make the camels kneel. When we had thrown ourselves into the saddle they started off at a pace which their terror rendered more and more disorderly.

Of a sudden the wind began, a formidable wind, and almost at the same time the light was eclipsed in the ravine. Above our heads the sky had become, in the flash of an eye, darker than the walls of the canyon which we were descending at a breathless pace.

"A path, a stairway in the wall," I screamed against the wind to my companions. "If we don't find one in a minute we are lost."

[p. 73]

They did not hear me, but, turning in my saddle, I saw that they had lost no distance, Morhange following me, and Bou-Djema in the rear driving the two baggage camels masterfully before him.

A blinding streak of lightning rent the obscurity. A peal of thunder, re-echoed to infinity by the rocky wall, rang out, and immediately great tepid drops began to fall. In an instant, our burnouses, which had been blown out behind by the speed with which we were traveling, were stuck tight to our streaming bodies.

"Saved!" I exclaimed suddenly.

Abruptly on our right a crevice opened in the midst of the wall. It was the almost perpendicular bed of a stream, an affluent of the one we had had the unfortunate idea of following that morning. Already a veritable torrent was gushing over it with a fine uproar.

I have never better appreciated the incomparable surefootedness of camels in the most precipitate places. Bracing themselves, stretching out their great legs, balancing themselves among the rocks that were beginning to be swept loose, our camels accomplished at that moment what the mules of the  might have failed in.

After several moments of superhuman effort we found ourselves at last out of danger, on a kind of basaltic terrace, elevated some fifty meters above the channel of the stream we had just left. Luck was

[p. 74]

with us; a little grotto opened out behind. Bou-Djema succeeded in sheltering the camels there. From its threshold we had leisure to contemplate in silence the prodigious spectacle spread out before us.

You have, I believe, been at the Camp of Chalons for artillery drills. You have seen when the shell bursts how the chalky soil of the Marne effervesces like the inkwells at school, when we used to throw a piece of calcium carbonate into them. Well, it was almost like that, but in the midst of the desert, in the midst of obscurity. The white waters rushed into the depths of the black hole, and rose and rose towards the pedestal on which we stood. And there was the uninterrupted noise of thunder, and still louder, the sound of whole walls of rock, undermined by the flood, collapsing in a heap and dissolving in a few seconds of time in the midst of the rising water.

All the time that this deluge lasted, one hour, perhaps two, Morhange and I stayed bending over this fantastic foaming vat; anxious to see, to see everything, to see in spite of everything; rejoicing with a kind of ineffable horror when we felt the shelf of basalt on which we had taken refuge swaying beneath us from the battering impact of the water. I believe that never for an instant did we think, so beautiful it was, of wishing for the end of that gigantic nightmare.

[p. 75]

Finally a ray of the sun shone through. Only then did we look at each other.

Morhange held out his hand.

"Thank you," he said simply.

And he added with a smile:

"To be drowned in the very middle of the Sahara would have been pretentious and ridiculous. You have saved us, thanks to your power of decision, from this very paradoxical end."

Ah, that he had been thrown by a misstep of his camel and rolled to his death in the midst of the flood! Then what followed would never have happened. That is the thought that comes to me in hours of weakness. But I have told you that I pull myself out of it quickly. No, no, I do not regret it, I cannot regret it, that what happened did happen.

 

Morhange left me to go into the little grotto, where Bou-Djema's camels were now resting comfortably. I stayed alone, watching the torrent which was continuously rising with the impetuous inrush of its unbridled tributaries. It had stopped raining. The sun shone from a sky that had renewed its blueness. I could feel the clothes that had a moment before been drenching, drying upon me incredibly fast.

A hand was placed on my shoulder. Morhange was again beside me.

[p. 76]

"Come here," he said.

Somewhat surprised, I followed him. We went into the grotto.

The opening, which was big enough to admit the camels, made it fairly light. Morhange led me up to the smooth face of rock opposite. "Look," he said, with unconcealed joy.

"What of it?"

"Don't you see?"

"I see that there are several Tuareg inscriptions," I answered, with some disappointment. "But I thought I had told you that I read Tifinar writing very badly. Are these writings more interesting than the others we have come upon before?"

"Look at this one," said Morhange. There was such an accent of triumph in his tone that this time I concentrated my attention.

I looked again.

The characters of the inscription were arranged in the form of a cross. It plays such an important part in this adventure that I cannot forego retracing it for you.

[p. 77]

It was designed with great regularity, and the characters were cut deep into the rock. Although I knew so little of rock inscriptions at that time I had no difficulty in recognizing the antiquity of this one.

Morhange became more and more radiant as he regarded it.

I looked at him questioningly.

"Well, what have you to say now?" he asked. "What do you want me to say? I tell you that I can barely read Tifinar."

"Shall I help you?" he suggested.

This course in Berber writing, after the emotions through which we had just passed, seemed to me a little inopportune. But Morhange was so visibly delighted that I could not dash his joy.

"Very well then," began my companion, as much at his ease as if he had been before a blackboard, "what will strike you first about this inscription is its repetition in the form of a cross. That is to say that it contains the same word twice, top to bottom, and right to left. The word which it composes has seven letters so the fourth letter , comes naturally in the middle. This arrangement which is unique in Tifinar writing, is already remarkable enough. But there is better still. Now we will read it."

Getting it wrong three times out of seven I finally succeeded, with Morhange's help, in spelling the word.

[p. 78]

"Have you got it?" asked Morhange when I had finished my task.

"Less than ever," I answered, a little put out; "a, n, t, i, n, h, a,--Antinha, I don't know that word, or anything like it, in all the Saharan dialects I am familiar with."

Morhange rubbed his hands together. His satisfaction was without bounds.

"You have said it. That is why the discovery is unique."

"Why?"

"There is really nothing, either in Berber or in Arabian, analogous to this word."

"Then?"

"Then, my dear friend, we are in the presence of a foreign word, translated into Tifinar."

"And this word belongs, according to your theory, to what language?

"You must realize that the letter e does not exist in the Tifinar alphabet. It has here been replaced by the phonetic sign which is nearest to it,--h. Restore e to the place which belongs to it in the word, and you have--"

"Antinea."

"'Antinea,' precisely. We find ourselves before a Greek vocable reproduced in Tifinar. And I think that now you will agree with me that my find has a certain interest."

That day we had no more conferences upon

[p. 79]

texts. A loud cry, anguished, terrifying, rang out. We rushed out to find a strange spectacle awaiting us.

Although the sky had cleared again, the torrent of yellow water was still foaming and no one could predict when it would fall. In mid-stream, struggling desperately in the current, was an extraordinary mass, gray and soft and swaying.

But what at the first glance overwhelmed us with astonishment was to see Bou-Djema, usually so calm, at this moment apparently beside himself with frenzy, bounding through the gullies and over the rocks of the ledge, in full pursuit of the shipwreck.

Of a sudden I seized Morhange by the arm. The grayish thing was alive. A pitiful long neck emerged from it with the heartrending cry of a beast in despair.

"The fool," I cried, "he has let one of our beasts get loose, and the stream is carrying it away!"

"You are mistaken," said Morhange. "Our camels are all in the cave. The one Bou-Djema is running after is not ours. And the cry of anguish we just heard, that was not Bou-Djema either. Bou-Djema is a brave Chaamba who has at this moment only one idea, to appropriate the intestate capital represented by this camel in the stream."

"Who gave that cry, then?"

[p. 80]

"Let us try, if you like, to explore up this stream that our guide is descending at such a rate."

And without waiting for my answer he had already set out through the recently washed gullies of the rocky bank.

At that moment it can be truly said that Morhange went to meet his destiny.

I followed him. We had the greatest difficulty in proceeding two or three hundred meters. Finally we saw at our feet a little rushing brook where the water was falling a trifle.

"See there?" said Morhange.

A blackish bundle was balancing on the waves of the creek.

When we had come up even with it we saw that it was a man in the long dark blue robes of the Tuareg.

"Give me your hand," said Morhange, "and brace yourself against a rock, hard."

He was very, very strong. In an instant, as if it were child's play, he had brought the body ashore.

"He is still alive," he pronounced with satisfaction. "Now it is a question of getting him to the grotto. This is no place to resuscitate a drowned man."

He raised the body in his powerful arms.

"It is astonishing how little he weighs for a man of his height."

By the time we had retraced the way to the grotto

[p. 81]

the man's cotton clothes were almost dry. But the dye had run plentifully, and it was an indigo man that Morhange was trying to recall to life.

When I had made him swallow a quart of rum he opened his eyes, looked at the two of us with surprise, then, closing them again, murmured almost unintelligibly a phrase, the sense of which we did not get until some days later:

"Can it be that I have reached the end of my mission?"

"What mission is he talking about?" I said.

"Let him recover himself completely," responded Morhange. "You had better open some preserved food. With fellows of this build you don't have to observe the precautions prescribed for drowned Europeans."

It was indeed a species of giant, whose life we had just saved. His face, although very thin, was regular, almost beautiful. He had a clear skin and little beard. His hair, already white, showed him to be a man of sixty years.

When I placed a tin of corned-beef before him a light of voracious joy came into his eyes. The tin contained an allowance for four persons. It was empty in a flash.

"Behold," said Morhange, "a robust appetite. Now we can put our questions without scruple."

Already the Targa had placed over his forehead and face the blue veil prescribed by the ritual. He

[p. 82]

must have been completely famished not to have performed this indispensable formality sooner. There was nothing visible now but the eyes, watching us with a light that grew steadily more sombre.

"French officers," he murmured at last.

And he took Morhange's hand, and having placed it against his breast, carried it to his lips.

Suddenly an expression of anxiety passed over his face.

"And my mehari?" he asked.

I explained that our guide was then employed in trying to save his beast. He in turn told us how it had stumbled, and fallen into the current, and he himself, in trying to save it, had been knocked over. His forehead had struck a rock. He had cried out. After that he remembered nothing more.

"What is your name?" I asked.

"Eg-Anteouen."

"What tribe do you belong to?"

"The tribe of Kel-Tahat."

"The Kel-Tahats are the serfs of the tribe of Kel-Rhela, the great nobles of Hoggar?"

"Yes," he answered, casting a side glance in my direction. It seemed that such precise questions on the affairs of Ahygar were not to his liking.

"The Kel-Tahats, if I am not mistaken, are established on the southwest flank of Atakor.' [*1] What

[p. 83]

were you doing, so far from your home territory when we saved your life?"

"I was going, by way of Tit, to In-Saleh," he said.

"What were you going to do at In-Saleh?"

He was about to reply. But suddenly we saw him tremble. His eyes were fixed on a point of the cavern. We looked to see what it was. He had just seen the rock inscription which had so delighted Morhange an hour before.

"Do you know that?" Morhange asked him with keen curiosity.

The Targa did not speak a word but his eyes had a strange light.

"Do you know that?" insisted Morhange. And he added:

"Antinea?"

"Antinea," repeated the man.

And he was silent.

"Why don't you answer the Captain?" I called out, with a strange feeling of rage sweeping over me.

The Targui looked at me. I thought that he was going to speak. But his eyes became suddenly hard. Under the lustrous veil I saw his features stiffening.

Morhange and I turned around.

On the threshold of the cavern, breathless, discomfited, harassed by an hour of vain pursuit, Bou-Djema had returned to us.

Footnotes

^82:1 Another name, in the Temahaq language, for Ahaggar. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE DISASTER OF THE LETTUCE

AS Eg-Anteouen and Bou-Djema came face to face, I fancied that both the Targa and the  gave a sudden start which each immediately repressed. It was nothing more than a fleeting impression. Nevertheless, it was enough to make me resolve that as soon as I was alone with our guide,

I would question him closely concerning our new companion.

The beginning of the day had been wearisome enough. 'We decided, therefore, to spend the rest of it there, and even to pass the night in the cave, waiting till the flood had completely subsided.

In the morning, when I was marking our day's march upon the map, Morhange came toward me. I noticed that his manner was somewhat restrained.

"In three days, we shall be at Shikh-Salah," I said to him. "Perhaps by the evening of the second day, badly as the camels go."

"Perhaps we shall separate before then," he muttered.

[p. 85]

"How so?"

"You see, I have changed my itinerary a little. I have given up the idea of going straight to Timissao. First I should like to make a little excursion into the interior of the Ahaggar range."

I frowned:

"What is this new idea?"

As I spoke I looked about for Eg-Anteouen, whom I had seen in conversation with Morhange the previous evening and several minutes before. He was quietly mending one of his sandals with a waxed thread supplied by Bou-Djema. He did not raise his head.

"It is simply," explained Morhange, less and less at his ease, "that this man tells me there are similar inscriptions in several caverns in western Ahaggar. These caves are near the road that he has to take returning home. He must pass by Tit. Now, from Tit, by way of Silet, is hardly two hundred kilometers. It is a quasi-classic route [*1] as short again as the one that I shall have to take alone, after I leave you, from Shikh-Salah to Timissao. That is in part, you see, the reason which has made me decide to . . ."

"In part? In very small part," I replied. "But is your mind absolutely made up?"

[p. 86]

"It is," he answered me.

"When do you expect to leave me?"

"To-day. The road which Eg-Anteouen proposes to take into Ahaggar crosses this one about four leagues from here. I have a favor to ask of you in this connection."

"Please tell me."

"It is to let me take one of the two baggage camels, since my Targa has lost his."

"The camel which carries your baggage belongs to you as much as does your own mehari," I answered coldly.

We stood there several minutes without speaking. Morhange maintained an uneasy silence; I was examining my map. All over it in greater or less degree, but particularly towards the south, the unexplored portions of Ahaggar stood out as far too numerous white patches in the tan area of supposed mountains.

I finally said:

"You give me your word that when you have seen these famous grottos, you will make straight for Timissao by Tit and Silet?"

He looked at me uncomprehendingly.

"Why do you ask that?"

"Because, if you promise me that,--provided, of course, that my company is not unwelcome to you--I will go with you. Either way, I shall have two hundred kilometers to go. I shall strike for Shikh-Salah

[p. 87]

from the south, instead of from the west--that is the only difference."

Morhange looked at me with emotion.

"Why do you do this?" he murmured.

"My dear fellow," I said (it was the first time that I had addressed Morhange in this familiar way), "my dear fellow, I have a sense which becomes marvellously acute in the desert, the sense of danger. I gave you a slight proof of it yesterday morning, at the coming of the storm. With all your knowledge of rock inscriptions, you seem to me to have no very exact idea of what kind of place Ahaggar is, nor what may be in store for you there. On that account, I should be just as well pleased not to let you run sure risks alone."

"I have a guide," he said with his adorable naivete.

Eg-Anteouen, in the same squatting position, kept on patching his old slipper.

I took a step toward him.

"You heard what I said to the Captain?"

"Yes," the Targa answered calmly.

"I am going with him. We leave you at Tit, to which place you must bring us. Where is the place you proposed to show the Captain?"

"I did not propose to show it to him; it was his own idea," said the Targa coldly. "The grottos with the inscriptions are three-days' march southward in the mountains. At first, the road is rather rough.

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] But farther on, it turns, and you gain Timissao very easily. There are good wells where the Tuareg Taitoqs, who are friendly to the French, come to water their camels."

"And you know the road well?"

He shrugged his shoulders. His eyes had a scornful smile.

"I have taken it twenty times," he said.

"In that case, let's get started."

We rode for two hours. I did not exchange a word with Morhange. I had a clear intuition of the folly we were committing in risking ourselves so unconcernedly in that least known and most dangerous part of the Sahara. Every blow which had been struck in the last twenty years to undermine the French advance had come from this redoubtable Ahaggar. But what of it? It was of my own will that I had joined in this mad scheme. No need of going over it again. What was the use of spoiling my action by a continual exhibition of disapproval? And, furthermore, I may as well admit that I rather liked the turn that our trip was beginning to take. I had, at that instant, the sensation of journeying toward something incredible, toward some tremendous adventure. You do not live with impunity for months and years as the guest of the desert. Sooner or later, it has its way with you, annihilates the good officer, the timid executive, overthrows his solicitude for his responsibilities. What is there behind those

[p. 89]

mysterious rocks, those dim solitudes, which have held at bay the most illustrious pursuers of mystery? You follow, I tell you, you follow.

 

"Are you sure at least that this inscription is interesting enough to justify us in our undertaking?" I asked Morhange.

My companion started with pleasure. Ever since we began our journey I had realized his fear that I was coming along half-heartedly. As soon as I offered him a chance to convince me, his scruples vanished, and his triumph seemed assured to him.

"Never," he answered, in a voice that he tried to control, but through which the enthusiasm rang out, "never has a Greek inscription been found so far south. The farthest points where they have been reported are in the south of Algeria and Cyrene. But in Ahaggar! Think of it! It is true that this one is translated into Tifinar. But this peculiarity does not diminish the interest of the coincidence: it increases it."

"What do you take to be the meaning of this word?"

"Antinea can only be a proper name," said Morhange. "To whom does it refer? I admit I don't know, and if at this very moment I am marching toward the south, dragging you along with me, it is because I count on learning more about it. Its etymology? It hasn't one definitely, but there are thirty

[p. 90]

possibilities. Bear in mind that the Tifinar alphabet is far from tallying with the Greek alphabet, which increases the number of hypotheses. Shall I suggest several?"

"I was just about to ask you to."

"To begin with, there is anti and naus the woman who is placed opposite a vessel, an explanation which would have been pleasing to Gaffarel and to my venerated master Berlioux. That would apply well enough to the figure-heads of ships. There is a technical term that I cannot recall at this moment, not if you beat me a hundred times over. [*1]

"Then there is antinea, that you must relate to anti and naos, she who holds herself before the naos, the naos of the temple, she who is opposite the sanctuary, therefore priestess. An interpretation which would enchant Girard and Renan.

"Next we have antine from anti and neos, new, which can mean two things: either she who is the contrary of young, which is to say old; or she who is the enemy of novelty or the enemy of youth.

There is still another sense of 'nati, in exchange for, which is capable of complicating all the others I have mentioned; likewise there are four meanings for the verb neu, which means in turn

[p. 91]

to go, to flow, to thread or weave, to heap. There is more still. . . . And notice, please, that I have not at my disposition on the otherwise commodious hump of this mehari, either the great dictionary of Estienne or the lexicons of Passow, of Pape, or of Liddel-Scott. This is only to show you, my dear friend, that epigraphy is but a relative science, always dependent on the discovery of a new text which contradicts the previous findings, when it is not merely at the mercy of the humors of the epigraphists and their pet conceptions of the universe. [*1]

"That was rather my view of it," I said. "But I must admit my astonishment to find that, with such a sceptical opinion of the goal, you still do not hesitate to take risks which may be quite considerable."

Morhange smiled wanly.

"I do not interpret, my friend; I collect. From what I will take back to him, Dom Granger has the ability to draw conclusions which are beyond my slight knowledge. I was amusing myself a little. Pardon me."

Just then the girth of one of the baggage camels, evidently not well fastened, came loose. Part of the load slipped and fell to the ground.

[p. 92]

Eg-Anteouen descended instantly from his beast and helped Bou-Djema repair the damage.

When they had finished, I made my mehari walk beside Bou-Djema's.

"It will be better to resaddle the camels at the next stop. They will have to climb the mountain."

The guide looked at me with amazement. Up to that time I had thought it unnecessary to acquaint him with our new projects. But I supposed Eg-Anteouen would have told him.

"Lieutenant, the road across the white plain to Shikh-Salah is not mountainous," said the Chaamba.

"We are not keeping to the road across the white plain. We are going south, by Ahaggar."

"By Ahaggar," he murmured. "But . . ."

"But what?"

"I do not know the road."

"Eg-Anteouen is going to guide us."

"Eg-Anteouen!"

I watched Bou-Djema as he made this suppressed ejaculation. His eyes were fixed on the Targa with a mixture of stupor and fright.

Eg-Anteouen's camel was a dozen yards ahead of us, side by side with Morhange's. The two men were talking. I realized that Morhange must be conversing with Eg-Anteouen about the famous inscriptions. But we were not so far behind that they could not have overheard our words.

[p. 93]

Again I looked at my guide. I saw that he was pale.

"What is it, Bou-Djema?" I asked in a low voice.

"Not here, Lieutenant, not here," he muttered.

His teeth chattered. He added in a whisper:

"Not here. This evening, when we stop, when he turns to the East to pray, when the sun goes down. Then, call me to you. I will tell you. . . . But not here. He is talking, but he is listening. Go ahead. Join the Captain."

"What next?" I murmured, pressing my camel's neck with my foot so as to make him overtake Morhange.

 

It was about five o'clock when Eg-Anteouen who was leading the way, came to a stop.

"Here it is," he said, getting down from his camel.

It was a beautiful and sinister place. To our left a fantastic wall of granite outlined its gray ribs against the sky. This wall was pierced, from top to bottom, by a winding corridor about a thousand feet high and scarcely wide enough in places to allow three camels to walk abreast.

"Here it is," repeated the Targa.

To the west, straight behind us, the track that we were leaving unrolled like a pale ribbon. The white plain, the road to Shikh-Salah, the established halts, the well-known wells. . . . And, on the other side,

[p. 94]

this black wall against the mauve sky, this dark passage.

I looked at Morhange.

"We had better stop here," he said simply. "Eg-Anteouen advises us to take as much water here as we can carry."

With one accord we decided to spend the night there, before undertaking the mountain.

There was a spring, in a dark basin, from which fell a little cascade; there were a few shrubs, a few plants.

Already the camels were browsing at the length of their tethers.

Bou-Djema arranged our camp dinner service of tin cups and plates on a great flat stone. An opened tin of meat lay beside a plate of lettuce which he had just gathered from the moist earth around the spring. I could tell from the distracted manner in which he placed these objects upon the rock how deep was his anxiety.

As he was bending toward me to hand me a plate, he pointed to the gloomy black corridor which we were about to enter.

"Blad-el-Khouf!" he murmured.

"What did he say?" asked Morhange, who had seen the gesture.

"Blad-el-Khouf. This is the country of fear. That is what the Arabs call Ahaggar."

Bou-Djema went a little distance off and sat down,

[p. 95]

leaving us to our dinner. Squatting on his heels, he began to eat a few lettuce leaves that he had kept for his own meal.

Eg-Anteouen was still motionless.

Suddenly the Targa rose. The sun in the west was no larger than a red brand. We saw Eg-Anteouen approach the fountain, spread his blue burnous on the ground and kneel upon it.

"I did not suppose that the Tuareg were so observant of Mussulman tradition," said Morhange. "Nor I," I replied thoughtfully.

But I had something to do at that moment besides making such speculations.

"Bou-Djema," I called.

At the same time, I looked at Eg-Anteouen. Absorbed in his prayer, bowed toward the west, apparently he was paying no attention to me. As he prostrated himself, I called again.

"Bou-Djema, come with me to my mehari; I want to get something out of the saddle bags."

Still kneeling, Eg-Anteouen was mumbling his prayer slowly, composedly.

But Bou-Djema had not budged.

His only response was a deep moan.

Morhange and I leaped to our feet and ran to the guide. Eg-Anteouen reached him as soon as we did.

With his eyes closed and his limbs already cold, the Chaamba breathed a death rattle in Morhange's arms. I had seized one of his hands. Eg-Anteouen

[p. 96]

took the other. Each, in his own way, was trying to divine, to understand. . . .

Suddenly Eg-Anteouen leapt to his feet. He had just seen the poor embossed bowl which the Arab had held an instant before between his knees, and which now lay overturned upon the ground.

He picked it up, looked quickly at one after another of the leaves of lettuce remaining in it, and then gave a hoarse exclamation.

"So," said Morhange, "it's his turn now; he is going to go mad."

Watching Eg-Anteouen closely, I saw him hasten without a word to the rock where our dinner was set, a second later, he was again beside us, holding out the bowl of lettuce which he had not yet touched.

Then he took a thick, long, pale green leaf from Bou-Djema's bowl and held it beside another leaf he had just taken from our bowl.

"Afahlehle," was all he said.

I shuddered, and so did Morhange. It was the afahlehla, the falestez, of the Arabs of the Sahara, the terrible plant which had killed a part of the Flatters mission more quickly and surely than Tuareg arms.

Eg-Anteouen stood up. His tall silhouette was outlined blackly against the sky which suddenly had turned pale lilac. He was watching us.

We bent again over the unfortunate guide.

[p. 97]

"Afahlehle," the Targa repeated, and shook his head.

 

Bou-Djema died in the middle of the night without having regained consciousness.

Footnotes

^85:1 The route and the stages from Tit to Timissao were actually plotted out, as early as 1888, by Captain Bissuel. Les Tuareg de l'Ouest, itineraries 1 and 10. (Note by M. Leroux.)

^90:1 It is perhaps worth noting here that Figures de Proues is the exact title of a very remarkable collection of poems by Mme. Delarus-Mardrus. (Note by M. Leroux.)

^91:1 Captain Morhange seems to have forgotten in this enumeration, in places fanciful, the etymology of anthinea, a Doric dialect form of anthine, from anthos, a flower, and which would mean which is in flower. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 98]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

THE COUNTRY OF FEAR

"IT is curious," said Morhange, "to see how our expedition, uneventful since we left Ouargla, is now becoming exciting."

He said this after kneeling for a moment in prayer before the painfully dug grave in which we had lain the guide.

I do not believe in God. But if anything can influence whatever powers there may be, whether of good or of evil, of light or of darkness, it is the prayer of such a man.

For two days we picked our way through a gigantic chaos of black rock in what might have been the country of the moon, so barren was it. No sound but that of stones rolling under the feet of the camels and striking like gunshots at the foot of the precipices.

A strange march indeed. For the first few hours, I tried to pick out, by compass, the route we were following. But my calculations were soon upset; doubtless a mistake due to the swaying motion of

[p. 99]

the camel. I put the compass back in one of my addle-bags. From that time on, Eg-Anteouen was our master. We could only trust ourselves to him.

He went first; Morhange followed him, and I brought up the rear. We passed at every step most curious specimens of volcanic rock. But I did not examine them. I was no longer interested in such things. Another kind of curiosity had taken possession of me. I had come to share Morhange's madness. If my companion had said to me: "We are doing a very rash thing. Let us go back to the known trails," I should have replied, "You are free to do as you please. But I am going on."

Toward evening of the second day, we found ourselves at the foot of a black mountain whose jagged ramparts towered in profile seven thousand feet above our heads. It was an enormous shadowy fortress, like the outline of a feudal stronghold silhouetted with incredible sharpness against the orange sky.

There was a well, with several trees, the first we had seen since cutting into Ahaggar.

A group of men were standing about it. Their camels, tethered close by, were cropping a mouthful here and there.

At seeing us, the men drew together, alert, on the defensive.

Eg-Anteouen turned to us and said:

"Eggali Tuareg."

[p. 100]

We went toward them.

They were handsome men, those Eggali, the largest Tuareg whom I ever have seen. With unexpected swiftness they drew aside from the well, leaving it to us. Eg-Anteouen spoke a few words to them. They looked at Morhange and me with a curiosity bordering on fear, but at any rate, with respect.

I drew several little presents from my saddlebags and was astonished at the reserve of the chief, who refused them. He seemed afraid even of my glance.

When they had gone, I expressed my astonishment at this shyness for which my previous experiences with the tribes of the Sahara had not prepared me.

"They spoke with respect, even with fear," I said to Eg-Anteouen. "And yet the tribe of the Eggali is noble. And that of the Kel-Tahats, to which you tell me you belong, is a slave tribe."

A smile lighted the dark eyes of Eg-Anteouen. "It is true," he said.

"Well then?"

"I told them that we three, the Captain, you and I, were bound for the Mountain of the Evil Spirits."

With a gesture, he indicated the black mountain.

"They are afraid. All the Tuareg of Ahaggar are afraid of the Mountain of the Evil Spirits. You

[p. 101]

saw how they were up and off at the very mention of its name."

"It is to the Mountain of the Evil Spirits that you are taking us?" queried Morhange.

"Yes," replied the Targa, "that is where the inscriptions are that I told you about."

"You did not mention that detail to us."

"Why should I? The Tuareg are afraid of the ilhinen, spirits with horns and tails, covered with hair, who make the cattle sicken and die and cast spells over men. But I know well that the Christians are not afraid and even laugh at the fears of the Tuareg."

"And you?" I asked. "You are a Targa and you are not afraid of the ilhinen?"

Eg-Anteouen showed a little red leather bag hung about his neck on a chain of white seeds.

"I have my amulet," he replied gravely, "blessed by the venerable Sidi-Moussa himself. And then I am with you. You saved my life. You have desired to see the inscriptions. The will of Allah be done!"

As he finished speaking, he squatted on his heels, drew out his long reed pipe and began to smoke gravely.

"All this is beginning to seem very strange," said Morhange, coming over to me.

"You can say that without exaggeration," I replied. "You remember as well as I the passage in

[p. 102]

which Barth tells of his expedition to the Idinen, the Mountain of the Evil Spirits of the Azdjer Tuareg. The region had so evil a reputation that no Targa would go with him. But he got back."

"Yes, he got back," replied my comrade, "but only after he had been lost. Without water or food, he came so near dying of hunger and thirst that he had to open a vein and drink his own blood. The prospect is not particularly attractive."

I shrugged my shoulders. After all, it was not my fault that we were there.

Morhange understood my gesture and thought it necessary to make excuses.

"I should be curious," he went on with rather forced gaiety, "to meet these spirits and substantiate the facts of Pomponius Mela who knew them and locates them, in fact, in the mountain of the Tuareg. He calls them Egipans, Blemyens, Gamphasantes, Satyrs. . . . 'The Gamphasantes,' he says, 'are naked. The Blemyens have no head: their faces are placed on their chests; the Satyrs have nothing like men except faces. The Egipans are made as is commonly described.' . . . Satyrs, Egipans . . . isn't it very strange to find Greek names given to the barbarian spirits of this region? Believe me, we are on a curious trail; I am sure that Antinea will be our key to remarkable discoveries."

"Listen," I said, laying a finger on my lips. Strange sounds rose from about us as the evening

[p. 103]

advanced with great strides. A kind of crackling, followed by long rending shrieks, echoed and reechoed to infinity in the neighboring ravines. It seemed to me that the whole black mountain suddenly had begun to moan.

We looked at Eg-Anteouen. He was smoking on, without twitching a muscle.

"The ilhinen are waking up," he said simply.

Morhange listened without saying a word. Doubtless he understood as I did: the overheated rocks, the crackling of the stone, a whole series of physical phenomena, the example of the singing statue of Memnon. . . . But, for all that, this unexpected concert reacted no less painfully on our overstrained nerves.

The last words of poor Bou-Djema came to my mind.

"The country of fear," I murmured in a low voice.

And Morhange repeated:

"The country of fear."

The strange concert ceased as the first stars appeared in the sky. With deep emotion we watched the tiny bluish flames appear, one after another. At that portentous moment they seemed to span the distance between us, isolated, condemned, lost, and our brothers of higher latitudes, who at that hour were rushing about their poor pleasures with delirious

[p. 104]

frenzy in cities where the whiteness of electric lamps came on in a burst.

Chet-Ahadh essa hetisenet
 Materedjre d'Erredjaot,
 Matesekek d-Essekaot,
 Matelahrlahr d'Ellerhaot,
 Ettas djenen, barad tit-ennit abatet.

Eg-Anteouen's voice raised itself in slow guttural tones. It resounded with sad, grave majesty in the silence now complete.

I touched the Targa's arm. With a movement of his head, he pointed to a constellation glittering in the firmament.

"The Pleiades," I murmured to Morhange, showing him the seven pale stars, while Eg-Anteouen took up his mournful song in the same monotone:

"The Daughters of the Night are seven:
  Materedjre and Erredjeaot,
  Matesekek and Essekaot,
  Matelahrlahr and Ellerhaot,
  The seventh is a boy, one of whose eyes has flown away."

A sudden sickness came over me. I seized the Targa's arm as he was starting to intone his refrain for the third time.

[p. 105]

"When will we reach this cave with the inscriptions?" I asked brusquely.

He looked at me and replied with his usual calm: "We are there."

"We are there? Then why don't you show it to us?"

"You did not ask me," he replied, not without a touch of insolence.

Morhange had jumped to his feet.

"The cave is here?"

"It is here," Eg-Anteouen replied slowly, rising to his feet.

"Take us to it."

"Morhange," I said, suddenly anxious, "night is falling. We will see nothing. And perhaps it is still some way off."

"It is hardly five hundred paces," Eg-Anteouen replied. "The cave is full of dead underbrush. We will set it on fire and the Captain will see as in full daylight."

"Come," my comrade repeated.

"And the camels?" I hazarded.

"They are tethered," said Eg-Anteouen, "and we shall not be gone long."

He had started toward the black mountain. Morhange, trembling with excitement, followed. I followed, too, the victim of profound uneasiness. My pulses throbbed. "I am not afraid," I kept repeating to myself. "I swear that this is not fear."

[p. 106]

And really it was not fear. Yet, what a strange dizziness! There was a mist over my eyes. My ears buzzed. Again I heard Eg-Anteouen's voice, but multiplied, immense, and at the same time, very low.

"The Daughters of the Night are seven . . ."

It seemed to me that the voice of the mountain, re-echoing, repeated that sinister last line to infinity:

"And the seventh is a boy, one of whose eyes has flown away."

"Here it is," said the Targa.

A black hole in the wall opened up. Bending over, Eg-Anteouen entered. We followed him. The darkness closed around us.

A yellow flame. Eg-Anteouen had struck his flint. He set fire to a pile of brush near the surface. At first we could see nothing. The smoke blinded us.

Eg-Anteouen stayed at one side of the opening of the cave. He was seated and, more  than ever, had begun again to blow great puffs of gray smoke from his pipe.

The burning brush cast a flickering light. I caught a glimpse of Morhange. He seemed very pale. With both hands braced against the wall, he was working to decipher a mass of signs which I could scarcely distinguish.

[p. 107]

Nevertheless, I thought I could see his hands trembling.

"The devil," I thought, finding it more and more difficult to co-ordinate my thoughts, "he seems to be as unstrung as I."

I heard him call out to Eg-Anteouen in what seemed to me a loud voice:

"Stand to one side. Let the air in. What a smoke!"

He kept on working at the signs.

Suddenly I heard him again, but with difficulty. It seemed as if even sounds were confused in the smoke.

"Antinea. . . . At last. . . . Antinea. But not cut in the rock . . . the marks traced in ochre . . . not ten years old, perhaps not five. . . . Oh! . . ."

He pressed his hands to his head. Again he cried out:

"It is a mystery. A tragic mystery."

I laughed teasingly.

"Come on, come on. Don't get excited over it." He took me by the arm and shook me. I saw his eyes big with terror and astonishment.

"Are you mad?" he yelled in my face.

"Not so loud," I replied with the same little laugh.

He looked at me again, and sank down, overcome, on a rock opposite me. Eg-Anteouen was still smoking placidly at the mouth of the cave. We

[p. 108]

could see the red circle of his pipe glowing in the darkness.

"Madman! Madman!" repeated Morhange. His voice seemed to stick in his throat.

Suddenly he bent over the brush which was giving its last darts of flame, high and clear. He picked out a branch which had not yet caught. I saw him examine it carefully, then throw it hack in the fire with a loud laugh.

"Ha! Ha! That's good, all right!"

He staggered toward Eg-Anteouen, pointing to the fire.

"It's hemp. Hasheesh, hasheesh. Oh, that's a good one, all right."

"Yes, it's a good one," I repeated, bursting into laughter.

Eg-Anteouen quietly smiled approval. The dying fire lit his inscrutable face and flickered in his terrible dark eyes.

A moment passed. Suddenly Morhange seized the Targa's arm.

"I want to smoke, too," he said. "Give me a pipe." The specter gave him one.

"What! A European pipe?"

"A European pipe," I repeated, feeling gayer and gayer.

"With an initial, 'M.' As if made on purpose. M. . . . Captain Morhange."

"Masson," corrected Eg-Anteouen quietly.

[p. 109]

"Captain Masson," I repeated in concert with Morhange.

We laughed again.

"Ha! Ha! Ha! Captain Masson. . . . Colonel Flatters. . . . The well of Garama. They killed him to take his pipe . . . that pipe. It was Cegheir-ben-Cheikh who killed Captain Masson."

"It was Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," repeated the Targa with imperturbable calm.

"Captain Masson and Colonel Flatters had left the convoy to look for the well," said Morhange, laughing.

"It was then that the Tuareg attacked them," I finished, laughing as hard as I could.

"A Targa of Ahaggar seized the bridle of Captain Masson's horse," said Morhange.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had hold of Colonel Flatters' bridle," put in Eg-Anteouen.

"The Colonel puts his foot in the stirrup and receives a cut from Cegheir-ben-Cheikh's saber," I said.

"Captain Masson draws his revolver and fires on Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, shooting off three fingers of his left hand," said Morhange.

"But," finished Eg-Anteouen imperturbably, "but Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, with one blow of his saber, splits Captain Masson's skull."

He gave a silent, satisfied laugh as he spoke. The dying flame lit up his face. We saw the gleaming

[p. 110]

black stem of his pipe. He held it in his left hand. One finger, no, two fingers only on that hand. Hello! I had not noticed that before.

Morhange also noticed it, for he finished with a loud laugh.

"Then, after splitting his skull, you robbed him. You took his pipe from him. Bravo, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh!"

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh does not reply, but I can see how satisfied with himself he is. He keeps on smoking. I can hardly see his features now. The firelight pales, dies. I have never laughed so much as this evening. I am sure Morhange never has, either. Perhaps he will forget the cloister. And all because Cegheir-ben-Cheikh stole Captain Masson's pipe.. . .

Again that accursed song. "The seventh is a boy, one of whose eyes has flown away." One cannot imagine more senseless words. It is very strange, really: there seem to be four of us in this cave now. Four, I say, five, six, seven, eight. . . . Make yourselves at home, my friends. What! there are no more of you? . . . I am going to find out at last how the spirits of this region are made, the Gamphasantes, the Blemyens. . . . Morhange says that the Blemyens have their faces on the middle of their chests. Surely this one who is seizing me in his arms is not a Blemyen! Now he is carrying me outside. And Morhange . . . I do not want them to forget Morhange. . . .

[p. 111]

They did not forget him; I see him perched on a camel in front of that one to which I am fastened. They did well to fasten me, for otherwise I surely would tumble off. These spirits certainly are not bad fellows. But what a long way it is! I want to stretch out. To sleep. A while ago we surely were following a long passage, then we were in the open air. Now we are again in an endless stifling corridor. Here are the stars again. . . . Is this ridiculous course going to keep on? . . .

Hello, lights! Stars, perhaps. No, lights, I say. A stairway, on my word; of rocks, to be sure, but still, a stairway. How can the camels . . .? But it is no longer a camel; this is a man carrying me. A man dressed in white, not a Gamphasante nor a Blemyen. Morhange must be giving himself airs with his historical reasoning, all false, I repeat, all false. Good Morhange. Provided that his Gamphasante does not let him fall on this unending stairway. Something glitters on the ceiling. Yes, it is a lamp, a copper lamp, as at Tunis, at Barbouchy's. Good, here again you cannot see anything. But I am making a fool of myself; I am lying down; now I can go to sleep. What a silly day! . . . Gentlemen, I assure you that it is unnecessary to bind me: I do not want to go down on the boulevards.

Darkness again. Steps of someone going away. Silence.

But only for a moment. Someone is talking beside

[p. 112]

me. What are they saying? . . . No, it is impossible. That metallic ring, that voice. Do you know what it is calling, that voice, do you know what it is calling in the tones of someone used to the phrase? Well, it is calling:

"Play your cards, gentlemen, play your cards. There are ten thousand louis in the bank. Play your cards, gentlemen."

In the name of God, am I or am I not at Ahaggar?

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

AWAKENING AT AHAGGAR

IT was broad daylight when I opened my eyes. I thought at once of Morhange. I could not see him, but I heard him, close by, giving little grunts of surprise.

I called to him. He ran to me.

"Then they didn't tie you up?" I asked.

"I beg your pardon. They did. But they did it badly; I managed to get free."

"You might have untied me, too," I remarked crossly.

"What good would it have done? I should only have waked you up. And I thought that your first word would be to call me. There, that's done."

I reeled as I tried to stand on my feet.

Morhange smiled.

"We might have spent the whole night smoking and drinking and not been in a worse state," he said. "Anyhow, that Eg-Anteouen with his hasheesh is a fine rascal."

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I corrected.

[p. 114]

I rubbed my hand over my forehead.

"Where are we?"

"My dear boy," Morhange replied, "since I awakened from the extraordinary nightmare which is mixed up with the smoky cave and the lamp-lit stairway of the Arabian Nights, I have been going from surprise to surprise, from confusion to confusion. Just look around you."

I rubbed my eyes and stared. Then I seized my friend's hand.

"Morhange," I begged, "tell me if we are still dreaming."

We were in a round room, perhaps fifty feet in diameter, and of about the same height, lighted by a great window opening on a sky of intense blue.

Swallows flew back and forth, outside, giving quick, joyous cries.

The floor, the incurving walls and the ceiling were of a kind of veined marble like porphyry, panelled with a strange metal, paler than gold, darker than silver, clouded just then by the early morning mist that came in through the window in great puffs.

I staggered toward this window, drawn by the freshness of the breeze and the sunlight which was chasing away my dreams, and I leaned my elbows on the balustrade.

I could not restrain a cry of delight.

I was standing on a kind of balcony, cut into the

[p. 115]

flank of a mountain, overhanging an abyss. Above me, blue sky; below appeared a veritable earthly paradise hemmed in on all sides by mountains that formed a continuous and impassable wall about it. A garden lay spread out down there. The palm trees gently swayed their great fronds. At their feet was a tangle of the smaller trees which grow in an oasis under their protection: almonds, lemons, oranges, and many others which I could not distinguish from that height. A broad blue stream, fed by a waterfall, emptied into a charming lake, the waters of which had the marvellous transparency which comes in high altitudes. Great birds flew in circles over this green hollow; I could see in the lake the red flash of a flamingo.

The peaks of the mountains which towered on all sides were completely covered with snow.

The blue stream, the green palms, the golden fruit, and above it all, the miraculous snow, all this bathed in that limpid air, gave such an impression of beauty, of purity, that my poor human strength could no longer stand the sight of it. I laid my forehead on the balustrade, which, too, was covered with that heavenly snow, and began to cry like a baby.

Morhange was behaving like another child. But he had awakened before I had, and doubtless had had time to grasp, one by one, all these details whose fantastic ensemble staggered me.

[p. 116]

He laid his hand on my shoulder and gently pulled me back into the room.

"You haven't seen anything yet," he said. "Look! Look!"

"Morhange!"

"Well, old man, what do you want me to do about it? Look!"

I had just realized that the strange room was furnished--God forgive me--in the European fashion. There were indeed, here and there, round leather Tuareg cushions, brightly colored blankets from Gafsa, rugs from Kairouan, and Caramani hangings which, at that moment, I should have dreaded to draw aside. But a half-open panel in the wall showed a bookcase crowded with books. A whole row of photographs of masterpieces of ancient art were hung on the walls. Finally there was a table almost hidden under its heap of papers, pamphlets, books. I thought I should collapse at seeing a recent number of the Archaeological Review.

I looked at Morhange. He was looking at me, and suddenly a mad laugh seized us and doubled us up for a good minute.

"I do not know," Morhange finally managed to say, "whether or not we shall regret some day our little excursion into Ahaggar. But admit, in the meantime, that it promises to be rich in unexpected adventures. That unforgettable guide who puts us to sleep just to distract us from the unpleasantness of

[p. 117]

caravan life and who lets me experience, in the best of good faith, the far-famed delights of hasheesh: that fantastic night ride, and, to cap the climax, this cave of a Nureddin who must have received the education of the Athenian Bersot at the French Ecole Normale--all this is enough, on my word, to upset the wits of the best balanced."

"What do I think, my poor friend? Why, just what you yourself think. I don't understand it at all, not at all. What you politely call my learning is not worth a cent. And why shouldn't I be all mixed up? This living in caves amazes me. Pliny speaks of the natives living in caves, seven days' march southwest of the country of the Amantes, and twelve days to the westward of the great Syrte. Herodotus says also that the Garamentes used to go out in their chariots to hunt the cave-dwelling Ethiopians. But here we are in Ahaggar, in the midst of the Targa country, and the best authorities tell us that the Tuareg never have been willing to live in caves. Duveyrier is precise on that point. And what is this, I ask you, but a cave turned into a workroom, with pictures of the Venus de Medici and the Apollo Sauroctone on the walls? I tell you that it is enough to drive you mad."

And Morhange threw himself on a couch and began to roar with laughter again.

"See," I said, "this is Latin."

I had picked up several scattered papers from the

[p. 118]

work-table in the middle of the room. Morhange took them from my hands and devoured them greedily. His face expressed unbounded stupefaction.

"Stranger and stranger, my boy. Someone here is composing, with much citation of texts, a dissertation on the Gorgon Islands: de Gorgonum insulis. Medusa, according to him, was a Libyan savage who lived near Lake Triton, our present Chott Melhrir, and it is there that Perseus . . . Ah!"

Morhange's words choked in his throat. A sharp, shrill voice pierced the immense room.

"Gentlemen, I beg you, let my papers alone." I turned toward the newcomer.

One of the Caramani curtains was drawn aside, and the most unexpected of persons came in. Resigned as we were to unexpected events, the improbability of this sight exceeded anything our imaginations could have devised.

On the threshold stood a little bald-headed man with a pointed sallow face half hidden by an enormous pair of green spectacles and a pepper and salt beard. No shirt was visible, but an impressive broad red cravat. He wore white trousers. Red leather slippers furnished the only Oriental suggestion of his costume.

He wore, not without pride, the rosette of an officer of the Department of Education.

He collected the papers which Morhange had dropped in his amazement, counted them, arranged

[p. 119]

them; then, casting a peevish glance at us, he struck a copper gong.

The portiere was raised again. A huge white Targa entered. I seemed to recognize him as one of the genii of the cave. [*1]

"Ferradji," angrily demanded the little officer of the Department of Education, "why were these gentlemen brought into the library?"

The Targa bowed respectfully.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh came back sooner than we expected," he replied, "and last night the embalmers had not yet finished. They brought them here in the meantime," and he pointed to us.

"Very well, you may go," snapped the little man. Ferradji backed toward the door. On the threshold, he stopped and spoke again:

"I was to remind you, sir, that dinner is served." "All right. Go along."

And the little man seated himself at the desk and began to finger the papers feverishly.

I do not know why, but a mad feeling of exasperation seized me. I walked toward him.

"Sir," I said, "my friend and I do not know where we are nor who you are. We can see only that you

[p. 120]

are French, since you are wearing one of the highest honorary decorations of our country. You may have made the same observation on your part," I added, indicating the slender red ribbon which I wore on my vest.

He looked at me in contemptuous surprise. "Well, sir?"

"Well, sir, the negro who just went out pronounced the name of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, the name of a brigand, a bandit, one of the assassins of Colonel Flatters. Are you acquainted with that detail, sir?"

The little man surveyed me coldly and shrugged his shoulders.

"Certainly. But what difference do you suppose that makes to me?"

"What!" I cried, beside myself with rage. "Who are you, anyway?"

"Sir," said the little old man with comical dignity, turning to Morhange, "I call you to witness the strange manners of your companion. I am here in my own house and I do not allow . . ."

"You must excuse my comrade, sir," said Morhange, stepping forward. "He is not a man of letters, as you are. These young lieutenants are hot-headed, you know. And besides, you can understand why both of us are not as calm as might be desired."

I was furious and on the point of disavowing these strangely humble words of Morhange. But a glance

[p. 121]

showed me that there was as much irony as surprise in his expression.

"I know indeed that most officers are brutes," grumbled the little old man. "But that is no reason. . ."

"I am only an officer myself," Morhange went on, in an even humbler tone, "and if ever I have been sensible to the intellectual inferiority of that class, I assure you that it was just now in glancing--I beg your pardon for having taken the liberty to do so in glancing over the learned pages which you devote to the passionate story of Medusa, according to Procles of Carthage, cited by Pausanias."

A laughable surprise spread over the features of the little old man. He hastily wiped his spectacles. "What!" he finally cried.

"It is indeed unfortunate, in this matter," Morhange continued imperturbably, "that we are not in possession of the curious dissertation devoted to this burning question by Statius Sebosus, a work which we know only through Pliny and which . . ."

"You know Statius Sebosus?"

"And which my master, the geographer Berlioux . . ."

"You knew Berlioux--you were his pupil?" stammered the little man with the decoration.

"I have had that honor," replied Morhange, very coldly.

"But, but, sir, then you have heard mentioned, you

[p. 122]

are familiar with the question, the problem of Atlantis?"

"Indeed I am not unacquainted with the works of Lagneau, Ploix, Arbois de Jubainville," said Morhange frigidly.

"My God!" The little man was going through extraordinary contortions. "Sir--Captain, how happy I am, how many excuses. . . ."

Just then, the portiere was raised. Ferradji appeared again.

"Sir, they want me to tell you that unless you come, they will begin without you."

"I am coming, I am coming. Say, Ferradji, that we will be there in a moment. Why, sir, if I had foreseen . . . It is extraordinary . . . to find an officer who knows Procles of Carthage and Arbois de Jubainville. Again . . . But I must introduce myself. I am Etienne Le Mesge, Fellow of the University."

"Captain Morhange," said my companion. I stepped forward in my turn.

"Lieutenant de Saint-Avit. It is a fact, sir, that I am very likely to confuse Arbois of Carthage with Procles de Jubainville. Later, I shall have to see about filling up those gaps. But just now, I should like to know where we are, if we are free, and if not, what occult power holds us. You have the appearance, sir, of being sufficiently at home in this house to be able to enlighten us upon this point,

[p. 123]

which I must confess, I weakly consider of the first importance."

M. Le Mesge looked at me. A rather malevolent smile twitched the corners of his mouth. He opened his lips. . . .

A gong sounded impatiently.

"In good time, gentlemen, I will tell you. I will explain everything. . . . But now you see that we must hurry. It is time for lunch and our fellow diners will get tired of waiting."

"Our fellow diners?"

"There are two of them," M. Le Mesge explained. "We three constitute the European personnel of the house, that is, the fixed personnel," he seemed to feel obliged to add, with his disquieting smile. "Two strange fellows, gentlemen, with whom, doubtless, you will care to have as little to do as possible. One is a churchman, narrow-minded, though a Protestant. The other is a man of the world gone astray, an old fool."

"Pardon," I said, "but it must have been he whom I heard last night. He was gambling: with you and the minister, doubtless?"

M. Le Mesge made a gesture of offended dignity.

"The idea! With me, sir? It is with the Tuareg that he plays. He teaches them every game imaginable. There, that is he who is striking the gong to hurry us up. It is half past nine, and the Salle de Trente et Quarante opens at ten o'clock. Let us

[p. 124]

hurry. I suppose that anyway you will not be averse to a little refreshment."

"Indeed we shall not refuse," Morhange replied.

We followed M. Le Mesge along a long winding corridor with frequent steps. The passage was dark. But at intervals rose-colored night lights and incense burners were placed in niches cut into the solid rock. The passionate Oriental scents perfumed the darkness and contrasted strangely with the cold air of the snowy peaks.

From time to time, a white Targa, mute and expressionless as a phantom, would pass us and we would hear the clatter of his slippers die away behind us.

M. Le Mesge stopped before a heavy door covered with the same pale metal which I had noticed on the walls of the library. He opened it and stood aside to let us pass.

Although the dining room which we entered had little in common with European dining rooms, I have known many which might have envied its comfort. Like the library, it was lighted by a great window. But I noticed that it had an outside exposure, while that of the library overlooked the garden in the center of the crown of mountains.

No center table and none of those barbaric pieces of furniture that we call chairs. But a great number of buffet tables of gilded wood, like those of Venice, heavy hangings of dull and subdued colors, and cushions,

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Tuareg or Tunisian. In the center was a huge mat on which a feast was placed in finely woven baskets among silver pitchers and copper basins filled with perfumed water. The sight of it filled me with childish satisfaction.

M. Le Mesge stepped forward and introduced us to the two persons who already had taken their places on the mat.

"Mr. Spardek," he said; and by that simple phrase I understood how far our host placed himself above vain human titles.

The Reverend Mr. Spardek, of Manchester, bowed reservedly and asked our permission to keep on his tall, wide-brimmed hat. He was a dry, cold man, tall and thin. He ate in pious sadness, enormously.

"Monsieur Bielowsky," said M. Le Mesge, introducing us to the second guest.

"Count Casimir Bielowsky, Hetman of Jitomir," the latter corrected with perfect good humor as he stood up to shake hands.

I felt at once a certain liking for the Hetman of Jitomir who was a perfect example of an old beau. His chocolate-coloured hair was parted in the center (later I found out that the Hetman dyed it with a concoction of khol) . He had magnificent whiskers, also chocolate-coloured, in the style of the Emperor Francis Joseph. His nose was undeniably a little red, but so fine, so aristocratic. His hands were

[p. 126]

marvelous. It took some thought to place the date of the style of the count's costume, bottle green with yellow facings, ornamented with a huge seal of silver and enamel. The recollection of a portrait of the Duke de Morny made me decide on 1860 or 1862; and the further chapters of this story will show that I was not far wrong.

The count made me sit down beside him. One of his first questions was to demand if I ever cut fives. [*1]

"That depends on how I feel," I replied.

"Well said. I have not done so since 1866. I swore off. A row. The devil of a party. One day at Walewski's. I cut fives. Naturally I wasn't worrying any. The other had a four. 'Idiot!' cried the little Baron de Chaux Gisseux who was laying staggering sums on my table. I hurled a bottle of champagne at his head. He ducked. It was Marshal Baillant who got the bottle. A scene! The matter was fixed up because we were both Free Masons. The Emperor made me promise not to cut fives again. I have kept my promise. But there are moments when it is hard. . . ."

He added in a voice steeped in melancholy:

"Try a little of this Ahaggar, 1880. Excellent vintage. It is I, Lieutenant, who instructed these people in the uses of the juice of the vine. The vine of the palm trees is very good when it is properly fermented, but it gets insipid in the long run."

[p. 127]

It was powerful, that Ahaggar 1880. We sipped it from large silver goblets. It was fresh as Rhine wine, dry as the wine of the Hermitage. And then, suddenly, it brought back recollections of the burning wines of Portugal; it seemed sweet, fruity, an admirable wine, I tell you.

That wine crowned the most perfect of luncheons. There were few meats, to be sure; but those few were remarkably seasoned. Profusion of cakes, pancakes served with honey, fragrant fritters, cheese-cakes of sour milk and dates. And everywhere, in great enamel platters or wicker jars, fruit, masses of fruit, figs, dates, pistachios, jujubes, pomegranates, apricots, huge bunches of grapes, larger than those which bent the shoulders of the Hebrews in the land of Canaan, heavy watermelons cut in two, showing their moist, red pulp and their rows of black seeds.

I had scarcely finished one of these beautiful iced fruits, when M. Le Mesge rose.

"Gentlemen, if you are ready," he said to Morhange and me.

"Get away from that old dotard as soon as you can," whispered the Hetman of Jitomir to me. "The party of Trente et Quarante will begin soon. You shall see. You shall see. We go it even harder than at Cora Pearl's."

"Gentlemen," repeated M. Le Mesge in his dry tone.

[p. 128]

We followed him. When the three of us were back again in the library, he said, addressing me:

"You, sir, asked a little while ago what occult power holds you here. Your manner was threatening, and I should have refused to comply had it not been for your friend, whose knowledge enables him to appreciate better than you the value of the revelations I am about to make to you."

He touched a spring in the side of the wall. A cupboard appeared, stuffed with books. He took one.

"You are both of you," continued M. Le Mesge, "in the power of a woman. This woman, the sultaness, the queen, the absolute sovereign of Ahaggar, is called Antinea. Don't start, M. Morhange, you will soon understand."

He opened the book and read this sentence:

"'I must warn you before I take up the subject matter: do not be surprised to hear me call the barbarians by Greek names.'

'What is that book?" stammered Morhange, whose pallor terrified me.

"This book," M. Le Mesge replied very slowly, weighing his words, with an extraordinary expression of triumph, "is the greatest, the most beautiful, the most secret, of the dialogues of Plato; it is the Critias of Atlantis."

"The Critias? But it is unfinished," murmured Morhange.

[p. 129]

"It is unfinished in France, in Europe, everywhere else," said M. Le Mesge, "but it is finished here. Look for yourself at this copy."

"But what connection," repeated Morhange, while his eyes traveled avidly over the pages, "what connection can there be between this dialogue, complete,--yes, it seems to me complete--what connection with this woman, Antinea? Why should it be in her possession?"

"Because," replied the little man imperturbably, "this book is her patent of nobility, her Almanach de Gotha, in a sense, do you understand? Because it established her prodigious genealogy: because she is. . ."

"Because she is?" repeated Morhange.

"Because she is the grand daughter of Neptune, the last descendant of the Atlantides."

Footnotes

^119:1 The negro serfs among the Tuareg are generally called "white Tuareg." While the nobles are clad in blue cotton robes, the serfs wear white robes, hence their name of "white Tuareg." See, in this connection, Duveyrier: les Tuareg du Nord, page 292. (Note by M. Leroux.)

^126:1 Tirer a cinq, a card game played only for very high stakes.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 130]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

ATLANTIS

M. LE MESGE looked at Morhange triumphantly. It was evident that he addressed himself exclusively to Morhange, considering him alone worthy of his confidences.

"There have been many, sir," he said, "both French and foreign officers who have been brought here at the caprice of our sovereign, Antinea. You are the first to be honored by my disclosures. But you were the pupil of Berlioux, and I owe so much to the memory of that great man that it seems to me I may do him homage by imparting to one of his disciples the unique results of my private research."

He struck the bell. Ferradji appeared.

"Coffee for these gentlemen," ordered M. Le Mesge.

He handed us a box, gorgeously decorated in the most flaming colors, full of Egyptian cigarettes.

"I never smoke," he explained. "But Antinea sometimes comes here. These are her cigarettes. Help yourselves, gentlemen."

[p. 131]

I have always had a horror of that pale tobacco which gives a barber of the Rue de la Michodiere the illusion of oriental voluptuousness. But, in their way, these musk-scented cigarettes were not bad, and it was a long time since I had used up my stock of Caporal.

"Here are the back numbers of Le Vie Parisienne," said M. Le Mesge to me. "Amuse yourself with them, if you like, while I talk to your friend."

"Sir," I replied brusquely, "it is true that I never studied with Berlioux. Nevertheless, you must allow me to listen to your conversation: I shall hope to find something in it to amuse me."

"As you wish," said the little old man.

We settled ourselves comfortably. M. Le Mesge sat down before the desk, shot his cuffs, and commenced as follows:

"However much, gentlemen, I prize complete objectivity in matters of erudition, I cannot utterly detach my own history from that of the last descendant of Clito and Neptune.

"I am the creation of my own efforts. From my childhood, the prodigious impulse given to the science of history by the nineteenth century has affected me. I saw where my way led. I have followed it, in spite of everything.

"In spite of everything, everything--I mean it literally. With no other resources than my own work and merit, I was received as Fellow of History

[p. 132]

and Geography at the examination of 1880. A great examination! Among the thirteen who were accepted there were names which have since become illustrious: Julian, Bourgeois, Auerbach. . . . I do not envy my colleagues on the summits of their official honors; I read their works with commiseration; and the pitiful errors to which they are condemned by the insufficiency of their documents would amply counterbalance my chagrin and fill me with ironic joy, had I not been raised long since above the satisfaction of self-love.

"When I was Professor at the Lycee du Parc at Lyons. I knew Berlioux and followed eagerly his works on African History. I had, at that time, a very original idea for my doctor's thesis. I was going to establish a parallel between the Berber heroine of the seventh century, who struggled against the Arab invader, Kahena, and the French heroine, Joan of Arc, who struggled against the English invader. I proposed to the Faculte des Lettres at Paris this title for my thesis: Joan of Arc and the Tuareg. This simple announcement gave rise to a perfect outcry in learned circles, a furor of ridicule. My friends warned me discreetly. I refused to believe them. Finally I was forced to believe when my rector summoned me before him and, after manifesting an astonishing interest in my health, asked whether I should object to taking two years' leave on half pay. I refused indignantly. The rector did not insist;

[p. 133]

but fifteen days later, a ministerial decree, with no other legal procedure, assigned me to one of the most insignificant and remote Lycees of France, at Mont-de-Marsan.

"Realize my exasperation and you will excuse the excesses to which I delivered myself in that strange country. What is there to do in Landes, if you neither eat nor drink? I did both violently. My pay melted away in fois gras, in woodcocks, in fine wines. The result came quickly enough: in less than a year my joints began to crack like the over-oiled axle of a bicycle that has gone a long way upon a dusty track. A sharp attack of gout nailed me to my bed. Fortunately, in that blessed country, the cure is in reach of the suffering. So I departed to Dax, at vacation time, to try the waters.

"I rented a room on the bank of the Adour, overlooking the Promenade des Baignots. A charwoman took care of it for me. She worked also for an old gentleman, a retired Examining Magistrate, President of the Roger-Ducos Society, which was a vague scientific backwater, in which the scholars of the neighborhood applied themselves with prodigious incompetence to the most whimsical subjects. One afternoon I stayed in my room on account of a very heavy rain. The good woman was energetically polishing the copper latch of my door. She used a paste called Tripoli, which she spread upon a paper and rubbed and rubbed. . . . The peculiar

[p. 134]

appearance of the paper made me curious. I glanced at it. 'Great heavens! Where did you get this paper?' She was perturbed. 'At my master's; he has lots of it. I tore this out of a notebook.' 'Here are ten francs. Go and get me the notebook.'

"A quarter of an hour later, she was back with it. By good luck it lacked only one page, the one with which she had been polishing my door. This manuscript, this notebook, have you any idea what it was? Merely the Voyage to Atlantis of the mythologist Denis de Milet, which is mentioned by Diodorus and the loss of which I had so often heard Berlioux deplore. [*1]

"This inestimable document contained numerous quotations from the Critias. It gave an abstract of the illustrious dialogue, the sole existing copy of which you held in your hands a little while ago. It established past controversy the location of the stronghold of the Atlantides, and demonstrated that this site, which is denied by science, was not submerged by the waves, as is supposed by the rare and timorous defenders of the Atlantide hypothesis. He called it the 'central Mazycian range.' You know there is no longer any doubt as to the identification

[p. 135]

of the Mazyces of Herodotus with the people of Imoschaoch, the Tuareg. But the manuscript of Denys unquestionably identifies the historical Mazyces with the Atlantides of the supposed legend.

"I learned, therefore, from Denys, not only that the central part of Atlantis, the cradle and home of the dynasty of Neptune, had not sunk in the disaster described by Plato as engulfing the rest of the Atlantide isle, but also that it corresponded to the Tuareg Ahaggar, and that, in this Ahaggar, at least in his time, the noble dynasty of Neptune was supposed to be still existent.

"The historians of Atlantis put the date of the cataclysm which destroyed all or part of that famous country at nine thousand years before Christ. If Denis de Milet, who wrote scarcely three thousand years ago, believed that in his time, the dynastic issue of Neptune was still ruling its dominion, you will understand that I thought immediately--what has lasted nine thousand years may last eleven thousand. From that instant I had only one aim: to find the possible descendants of the Atlantides, and, since I had many reasons for supposing them to be debased and ignorant of their original splendor, to inform them of their illustrious descent.

"You will easily understand that I imparted none of my intentions to my superiors at the University. To solicit their approval or even their permission, considering the attitude they had taken toward me,

[p. 136]

would have been almost certainly to invite confinement in a cell. So I raised what I could on my own account, and departed without trumpet or drum for Oran. On the first of October I reached In-Salah. Stretched at my ease beneath a palm tree, at the oasis, I took infinite pleasure in considering how, that very day, the principal of Mont-de-Marsan, beside himself, struggling to control twenty horrible urchins howling before the door of an empty class room, would be telegraphing wildly in all directions in search of his lost history professor."

M. Le Mesge stopped and looked at us to mark his satisfaction.

I admit that I forgot my dignity and I forgot the affectation he had steadily assumed of talking only to Morhange.

"You will pardon me, sir, if your discourse interests me more than I had anticipated. But you know very well that I lack the fundamental instruction necessary to understand you. You speak of the dynasty of Neptune. What is this dynasty, from which, I believe, you trace the descent of Antinea? What is her role in the story of Atlantis?"

M. Le Mesge smiled with condescension, meantime winking at Morhange with the eye nearest to him. Morhange was listening without expression, without a word, chin in hand, elbow on knee.

"Plato will answer for me, sir," said the Professor.

[p. 137]

And he added, with an accent of inexpressible pity:

"Is it really possible that you have never made the acquaintance of the introduction to the Critias?"

He placed on the table the book by which Morhange had been so strangely moved. He adjusted his spectacles and began to read. It seemed as if the magic of Plato vibrated through and transfigured this ridiculous little old man.

"'Having drawn by lot the different parts of the earth, the gods obtained, some a larger, and some, a smaller share. It was thus that Neptune, having received in the division the isle of Atlantis, came to place the children he had had by a mortal in one part of that isle. It was not far from the sea, a plain situated in the midst of the isle, the most beautiful, and, they say, the most fertile of plains. About fifty stades from that plain, in the middle of the isle, was a mountain. There dwelt one of those men who, in the very beginning, was born of the Earth, Evenor, with his wife, Leucippo. They had only one daughter, Clito. She was marriageable when her mother and father died, and Neptune, being enamored of her, married her. Neptune fortified the mountain where she dwelt by isolating it. He made alternate girdles of sea and land, the one smaller, the others greater, two of earth and three of water, and centered them round the isle in such a manner that they were at all parts equally distant! . . ."

M. le Mesge broke off his reading.

[p. 138]

"Does this arrangement recall nothing to you?" he queried.

"Morhange, Morhange!" I stammered. "You remember--our route yesterday, our abduction, the two corridors that we had to cross before arriving at this mountain? . . . The girdles of earth and of water? . . . Two tunnels, two enclosures of earth?"

"Ha! Ha!" chuckled M. Le Mesge.

He smiled as he looked at me. I understood that this smile meant: "Can he be less obtuse than I had supposed?"

As if with a mighty effort, Morhange broke the silence.

"I understand well enough, I understand. . . . The three girdles of water. . . . But then, you are supposing, sir,--an explanation the ingeniousness of which I do not contest--you are supposing the exact hypothesis of the Saharan sea!"

"I suppose it, and I can prove it," replied the irascible little old chap, banging his fist on the table. "I know well enough what Schirmer and the rest have advanced against it. I know it better than you do. I know all about it, sir. I can present all the proofs for your consideration. And in the meantime, this evening at dinner, you will no doubt enjoy some excellent fish. And you will tell me if these fish, caught in the lake that you can see from this window, seem to you fresh water fish.

"You must realize," he continued more calmly,

[p. 139]

the mistake of those who, believing in Atlantis, have sought to explain the cataclysm in which they suppose the whole island to have sunk. Without exception, they have thought that it was swallowed up. Actually, there has not been an immersion. There has been an emersion. New lands have emerged from the Atlantic wave. The desert has replaced the sea, the sebkhas, the salt lakes, the Triton lakes, the sandy Syrtes are the desolate vestiges of the free sea water over which, in former days, the fleets swept with a fair wind towards the conquest of Attica. Sand swallows up civilization better than water. To-day there remains nothing of the beautiful isle that the sea and winds kept gay and verdant but this chalky mass. Nothing has endured in this rocky basin, cut off forever from the living world, but the marvelous oasis that you have at your feet, these red fruits, this cascade, this blue lake, sacred witnesses to the golden age that is gone. Last evening, in coming here, you had to cross the five enclosures: the three belts of water, dry forever; the two girdles of earth through which are hollowed the passages you traversed on camel back, where, formerly, the triremes floated. The only thing that, in this immense catastrophe, has preserved its likeness to its former state, is this mountain, the mountain where Neptune shut up his well-beloved Clito, the daughter of Evenor and Leucippe, the mother of Atlas, and the ancestress of Antinea, the sovereign

[p. 140]

under whose dominion you are about to enter forever."

"Sir," said Morhange with the most exquisite courtesy, "it would be only a natural anxiety which would urge us to inquire the reasons and the end of this dominion. But behold to what extent your revelation interests me; I defer this question of private interest. Of late, in two caverns, it has been my fortune to discover Tifinar inscriptions of this name, Antinea. My comrade is witness that I took it for a Greek name. I understand now, thanks to you and the divine Plato, that I need no longer feel surprised to hear a barbarian called by a Greek name. But I am no less perplexed as to the etymology of the word. Can you enlighten me?"

"I shall certainly not fail you there, sir," said M. Le Mesge. "I may tell you, too, that you are not the first to put to me that question. Most of the explorers that I have seen enter here in the past ten years have been attracted in the same way, intrigued by this Greek work reproduced in Tifinar. I have even arranged a fairly exact catalogue of these inscriptions and the caverns where they are to be met with. All, or almost all, are accompanied by this legend: Antinea. Here commences her domain. I myself have had repainted with ochre such as were beginning to be effaced. But, to return to what I was telling you before, none of the Europeans who have followed this epigraphic mystery here, have kept

[p. 141]

their anxiety to solve this etymology once they found themselves in Antinea's palace. They all become otherwise preoccupied. I might make many disclosures as to the little real importance which purely scientific interests possess even for scholars, and the quickness with which they sacrifice them to the most mundane considerations,--their own lives, for instance."

"Let us take that up another time, sir, if it is satisfactory to you," said Morhange, always admirably polite.

"This digression had only one point, sir: to show you that I do not count you among these unworthy scholars. You are really eager to know the origin of this name, Antinea, and that before knowing what kind of woman it belongs to and her motives for holding you and this gentleman as her prisoners."

I stared hard at the little old man. But he spoke with profound seriousness.

"So much the better for you, my boy," I thought. "Otherwise it wouldn't have taken me long to send you through the window to air your ironies at your ease. The law of gravity ought not to be topsy-turvy here at Ahaggar."

"You, no doubt, formulated several hypotheses when you first encountered the name, Antinea," continued M. Le Mesge, imperturbable under my fixed gaze, addressing himself to Morhange. "Would you object to repeating them to me?"

[p. 142]

"Not at all, sir," said Morhange.

And, very composedly, he enumerated the etymological suggestions I have given previously.

The little man with the cherry-colored shirt front rubbed his hands.

"Very good," he admitted with an accent of intense jubilation. "Amazingly good, at least for one with only the modicum of Greek that you possess. But it is all none the less false, super-false."

"It is because I suspected as much that I put my question to you," said Morhange blandly.

"I will not keep you longer in suspense," said M. Le Mesge. "The word, Antinea, is composed as follows: ti is nothing but a Tifinar addition to an essentially Greek name. Ti is the Berber feminine article. We have several examples of this combination. Take Tipasa, the North African town. The name means the whole, from ti and from nap. So, tinea signifies the new, from ti and from ea."

"And the prefix an?" queried Morhange.

"Is it possible, sir, that I have put myself to the trouble of talking to you for a solid hour about the Critias with such trifling effect? It is certain that the prefix an, alone, has no meaning. You will understand that it has one, when I tell you that we have here a very curious case of apocope. You must not read an; you must read atlan. Atl has been lost, by apocope; an has survived. To sum up, Antinea is composed in the following manner: ti-nea--

[p. 143]

[paragraph continues] atl An. And its meaning, the new Atlantis, is dazzlingly apparent from this demonstration."

I looked at Morhange. His astonishment was without . The Berber prefix ti had literally stunned him.

"Have you had occasion, sir, to verify this very ingenious etymology?" he was finally able to gasp out.

"You have only to glance over these few books," said M. Le Mesge disdainfully.

He opened successively five, ten, twenty cupboards. An enormous library was spread out to our view.

"Everything, everything--it is all here," murmured Morhange, with an astonishing inflection of terror and admiration.

"Everything that is worth consulting, at any rate," said M. Le Mesge. "All the great books, whose loss the so-called learned world deplores to-day."

"And how has it happened?"

"Sir, you distress me. I thought you familiar with certain events. You are forgetting, then, the passage where Pliny the Elder speaks of the library of Carthage and the treasures which were accumulated there? In 146, when that city fell under the blows of the knave, Scipio, the incredible collection of illiterates who bore the name of the Roman Senate had only the profoundest contempt for these riches. They presented them to the native kings. This is how

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] Mantabal received this priceless heritage; it was transmitted to his son and grandson, Hiempsal, Juba I, Juba II, the husband of the admirable Cleopatra Selene, the daughter of the great Cleopatra and Mark Antony. Cleopatra Selene had a daughter who married an Atlantide king. This is how Antinea, the daughter of Neptune, counts among her ancestors the immortal queen of Egypt. That is how, by following the laws of inheritance, the remains of the library of Carthage, enriched by the remnants of the library of Alexandria, are actually before your eyes.

"Science fled from man. While he was building those monstrous Babels of pseudo-science in Berlin, London, Paris, Science was taking refuge in this desert corner of Ahaggar. They may well forge their hypotheses back there, based on the loss of the mysterious works of antiquity: these works are not lost. They are here. They are here: the Hebrew, the Chaldean, the Assyrian books. Here, the great Egyptian traditions which inspired Solon, Herodotus and Plato. Here, the Greek mythologists, the magicians of Roman Africa, the Indian mystics, all the treasures, in a word, for the lack of which contemporary dissertations are poor laughable things. Believe me, he is well avenged, the little universitarian whom they took for a madman, whom they defied. I have lived, I live, I shall live in a perpetual burst of laughter at their false and garbled erudition.

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] And when I shall be dead, Error,--thanks to the jealous precaution of Neptune taken to isolate his well-beloved Clito from the rest of the world,--Error, I say, will continue to reign as sovereign mistress over their pitiful compositions."

"Sir," said Morhange in a grave voice, "you have just affirmed the influence of Egypt on the civilizations of the people here. For reasons which some day, perhaps, I shall have occasion to explain to you, I would like to have proof of that relationship."

"We need not wait for that, sir," said M. Le Mesge. Then, in my turn, I advanced.

"Two words, if you please, sir," I said brutally. "I will not hide from you that these historical discussions seem to me absolutely out of place. It is not my fault if you have had trouble with the University, and if you are not to-day at the College of France or elsewhere. For the moment, just one thing concerns me: to know just what this lady, Antinea, wants with us. My comrade would like to know her relation with ancient Egypt: very well. For my part, I desire above everything to know her relations with the government of Algeria and the Arabian Bureau."

M. Le Mesge gave a strident laugh.

"I am going to give you an answer that will satisfy you both," he replied.

And he added:

"Follow me. It is time that you should learn."

Footnotes

^134:1 How did the Voyage to Atlantis arrive at Dax? I have found, so far, only one credible hypothesis: it might have been discovered in Africa by the traveller, de Behagle, a member of the Roger-Ducos Society, who studied at the college of Dax, and later, on several occasions, visited the town. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 146]

  

CHAPTER X

  

THE RED MARBLE HALL

WE passed through an interminable series of stairs and corridors following M. Le Mesge.

"You lose all sense of direction in this labyrinth," I muttered to Morhange.

"Worse still, you will lose your head," answered my companion sotto voce. "This old fool is certainly very learned; but God knows what he is driving at. However, he has promised that we are soon to know."

M. Le Mesge had stopped before a heavy dark door, all incrusted with strange symbols. Turning the lock with difficulty, he opened it.

"Enter, gentlemen, I beg you," he said.

A gust of cold air struck us full in the face. The room we were entering was chill as a vault.

At first, the darkness allowed me to form no idea of its proportions. The lighting, purposely subdued, consisted of twelve enormous copper lamps, placed column-like upon the ground and burning with brilliant red flames. As we entered, the wind from the

[p. 147]

corridor made the flames flicker, momentarily casting about us our own enlarged and misshapen shadows. Then the gust died down, and the flames, no longer flurried, again licked up the darkness with their motionless red tongues.

These twelve giant lamps (each one about ten feet high) were arranged in a kind of crown, the diameter of which must have been about fifty feet. In the center of this circle was a dark mass, all streaked with trembling red reflections. When I drew nearer, I saw it was a bubbling fountain. It was the freshness of this water which had maintained the temperature of which I have spoken.

Huge seats were cut in the central rock from which gushed the murmuring, shadowy fountain. They were heaped with silky cushions. Twelve incense burners, within the circle of red lamps, formed a second crown, half as large in diameter. Their smoke mounted toward the vault, invisible in the darkness, but their perfume, combined with the coolness and sound of the water, banished from the soul all other desire than to remain there forever.

M. Le Mesge made us sit down in the center of the hall, on the Cyclopean seats. He seated himself between us.

"In a few minutes," he said, "your eyes will grow accustomed to the obscurity."

I noticed that he spoke in a hushed voice, as if he were in church.

[p. 148]

Little by little, our eyes did indeed grow used to the red light. Only the lower part of the great hall was illuminated. The whole vault was drowned in shadow and its height was impossible to estimate. Vaguely, I could perceive overhead a great smooth gold chandelier, flecked, like everything else, with sombre red reflections. But there was no means of judging the length of the chain by which it hung from the dark ceiling.

The marble of the pavement was of so high a polish, that the great torches were reflected even there.

This room, I repeat, was round a perfect circle of which the fountain at our backs was the center.

We sat facing the curving walls. Before long, we began to be able to see them. They were of peculiar construction, divided into a series of niches, broken, ahead of us, by the door which had just opened to give us passage, behind us, by a second door, a still darker hole which I divined in the darkness when I turned around. From one door to the other, I counted sixty niches, making, in all, one hundred and twenty. Each was about ten feet high. Each contained a kind of case, larger above than below, closed only at the lower end. In all these cases, except two just opposite me, I thought I could discern a brilliant shape, a human shape certainly, something like a statue of very pale bronze. In the arc

[p. 149]

of the circle before me, I counted clearly thirty of these strange statues.

What were these statues? I wanted to see. I rose.

M. Le Mesge put his hand on my arm.

"In good time," he murmured in the same low voice, "all in good time."

The Professor was watching the door by which we had entered the hall, and from behind which we could hear the sound of footsteps becoming more and more distinct.

It opened quietly to admit three Tuareg slaves. Two of them were carrying a long package on their shoulders; the third seemed to be their chief.

At a sign from him, they placed the package on the ground and drew out from one of the niches the case which it contained.

"You may approach, gentlemen," said M. Le Mesge.

He motioned the three Tuareg to withdraw several paces.

"You asked me, not long since, for some proof of the Egyptian influence on this country," said M. Le Mesge. "What do you say to that case, to begin with?"

As he spoke, he pointed to the case that the servants had deposited upon the ground after they took it from its niche.

Morhange uttered a thick cry.

[p. 150]

We had before us one of those cases designed for the preservation of mummies. The same shiny wood, the same bright decorations, the only difference being that here Tifinar writing replaced the hieroglyphics. The form, narrow at the base, broader above, ought to have been enough to enlighten us.

I have already said that the lower half of this large case was closed, giving the whole structure the appearance of a rectangular wooden shoe.

M. Le Mesge knelt and fastened on the lower part of the case, a square of white cardboard, a large label, that he had picked up from his desk, a few minutes before, on leaving the library.

"You may read," he said simply, but still in the same low tone.

I knelt also, for the light of the great candelabra was scarcely sufficient to read the label where, none the less, I recognized the Professor's handwriting.

It bore these few words, in a large round hand:

"Number 53. Major Sir Archibald Russell. Born at Richmond, July 5, 1860. Died at Ahaggar, December 3, 1896."

I leapt to my feet.

"Major Russell!" I exclaimed.

"Not so loud, not so loud," said M. Le Mesge. "No one speaks out loud here."

"The Major Russell," I repeated, obeying his injunction

[p. 151]

as if in spite of myself, "who left Khartoum last year, to explore Sokoto?"

"The same," replied the Professor.

"And . . . where is Major Russell?"

"He is there," replied M. Le Mesge.

The Professor made a gesture. The Tuareg approached.

A poignant silence reigned in the mysterious hall, broken only by the fresh splashing of the fountain.

The three negroes were occupied in undoing the package that they had put down near the painted case. Weighed down with wordless horror, Morhange and I stood watching.

Soon, a rigid form, a human form, appeared. A red gleam played over it. We had before us, stretched out upon the ground, a statue of pale bronze, wrapped in a kind of white veil, a statue like those all around us, upright in their niches. It seemed to fix us with an impenetrable gaze.

"Sir Archibald Russell," murmured M. Le Mesge slowly.

Morhange approached, speechless, but strong enough to lift up the white veil. For a long, long time he gazed at the sad bronze statue.

"A mummy, a mummy?" he said finally. "You deceive yourself, sir, this is no mummy."

"Accurately speaking, no," replied M. Le Mesge. "This is not a mummy. None the less, you have before you the mortal remains of Sir Archibald Russell.

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] I must point out to you, here, my dear sir, that the processes of embalming used by Antinea differ from the processes employed in ancient Egypt. Here, there is no natron, nor bands, nor spices. The industry of Ahaggar, in a single effort, has achieved a result obtained by European science only after long experiments. Imagine my surprise, when I arrived here and found that they were employing a method I supposed known only to the civilized world."

M. Le Mesge struck a light tap with his finger on the forehead of Sir Archibald Russell. It rang like metal.

"It is bronze," I said. "That is not a human forehead: it is bronze."

M. Le Mesge shrugged his shoulders.

"It is a human forehead," he affirmed curtly, "and not bronze. Bronze is darker, sir. This is the great unknown metal of which Plato speaks in the Critias, and which is something between gold and silver: it is the special metal of the mountains of the Atlan-tides. It is orichalch."

Bending again, I satisfied myself that this metal was the same as that with which the walls of the library were overcast.

"It is orichalch," continued M. Le Mesge. "You look as if you had no idea how a human body can look like a statue of orichalch. Come, Captain Morhange, you whom I gave credit for a certain amount of knowledge, have you never heard of the method

[p. 153]

of Dr. Variot, by which a human body can be preserved without embalming? Have you never read the book of that practitioner? [*1] He explains a method called electro-plating. The skin is coated with a very thin layer of silver salts, to make it a conductor. The body then is placed in a solution of copper sulphate, and the polar currents do their work. The body of this estimable English major has been metalized in the same manner, except that a solution of orichalch sulphate, a very rare substance, has been substituted for that of copper sulphate. Thus, instead of the statue of a poor slave, a copper statue, you have before you a statue of metal more precious than silver or gold, in a word, a statue worthy of the granddaughter of Neptune."

M. Le Mesge waved his arm. The black slaves seized the body. In a few seconds, they slid the orichalch ghost into its painted wooden sheath. That was set on end and slid into its niche, beside the niche where an exactly similar sheath was labelled "Number 52."

Upon finishing their task, they retired without a word. A draught of cold air from the door again made the flames of the copper torches flicker and threw great shadows about us.

Morhange and I remained as motionless as the pale metal specters which surrounded us. Suddenly

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] I pulled myself together and staggered forward to the niche beside that in which they just had laid the remains of the English major. I looked for the label.

Supporting myself against the red marble wall, I read:

"Number 52. Captain Laurent Deligne. Born at Paris, July 22, 1861. Died at Ahaggar, October 30, 1896."

"Captain Deligne!" murmured Morhange. "He left Colomb-Bechar in 1895 for Timmimoun and no more has been heard of him since then."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge, with a little nod of approval.

"Number 51," read Morhange with chattering teeth. "Colonel von Wittman, born at Jena in 1855. Died at Ahaggar, May 1, 1896. . . . Colonel Wittman, the explorer of Kanem, who disappeared off Agades."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge again.

"Number 50," I read in my turn, steadying myself against the wall, so as not to fall. "Marquis Alonzo d'Oliveira, born at Cadiz, February 21, 1868. Died at Ahaggar, February 1, 1896. Oliveira, who was going to Araouan."

"Exactly," said M. Le Mesge again. "That Spaniard was one of the best educated. I used to have interesting discussions with him on the exact geographical position of the kingdom of Antee."

[p. 155]

"Number 49," said Morhange in a tone scarcely more than a whisper. "Lieutenant Woodhouse, born at Liverpool, September 16, 1870. Died at Ahaggar, October 4, 1895."

"Hardly more than a child," said M. Le Mesge. "Number 48," I said. "Lieutenant Louis de Maillefeu, born at Provins, the . . ."

I did not finish. My voice choked.

Louis de Maillefeu, my best friend, the friend of my childhood and of Saint-Cyr. . . . I looked at him and recognized him under the metallic coating. Louis de Maillefeu!

I laid my forehead against the cold wall and, with shaking shoulders, began to sob.

I heard the muffled voice of Morhange speaking to the Professor:

"Sir, this has lasted long enough. Let us make an end to it."

"He wanted to know," said M. Le Mesge. "What am I to do?"

I went up to him and seized his shoulders.

"What happened to him? What did he die of?"

"Just like the others," the Professor replied, "just like Lieutenant Woodhouse, like Captain Deligne, like Major Russell, like Colonel van Wittman, like the forty-seven of yesterday and all those of to-morrow."

"Of what did they die?" Morhange demanded imperatively in his turn.

[p. 156]

The Professor looked at Morhange. I saw my comrade grow pale.

"Of what did they die, sir? They died of love."

And he added in a very low, very grave voice:

"Now you know."

Gently and with a tact which we should hardly have suspected in him, M. Le Mesge drew us away from the statues. A moment later, Morhange and I found ourselves again seated, or rather sunk among the cushions in the center of the room. The invisible fountain murmured its plaint at our feet.

Le Mesge sat between us.

"Now you know," he repeated. "You know, but you do not yet understand."

Then, very slowly, he said:

"You are, as they have been, the prisoners of Antinea. And vengeance is due Antinea."

"Vengeance?" said Morhange, who had regained his self-possession. "For what, I beg to ask? What have the lieutenant and I done to Atlantis? How have we incurred her hatred?"

"It is an old quarrel, a very old quarrel," the Professor replied gravely. "A quarrel which long antedates you, M. Morhange."

"Explain yourself, I beg of you, Professor."

"You are Man. She is a Woman," said the dreamy voice of M. Le Mesge. "The whole matter lies there."

"Really, sir, I do not see . . . we do not see."

[p. 157]

"You are going to understand. Have you really forgotten to what an extent the beautiful queens of antiquity had just cause to complain of the strangers whom fortune brought to their borders? The poet, Victor Hugo, pictured their detestable acts well enough in his colonial poem called la Fille d'O-Taiti. Wherever we look, we see similar examples of fraud and ingratitude. These gentlemen made free use of the beauty and the riches of the lady. Then, one fine morning, they disappeared. She was indeed lucky if her lover, having observed the position carefully, did not return with ships and troops of occupation.

"Your learning charms me," said Morhange. "Continue."

"Do you need examples? Alas 1 they abound. Think of the cavalier fashion in which Ulysses treated Calypso, Diomedes Callirhoe. What should I say of Theseus and Ariadne? Jason treated Medea with inconceivable lightness. The Romans continued the tradition with still greater brutality. Aenaeus, who has many characteristics in common with the Reverend Spardek, treated Dido in a most undeserved fashion. Caesar was a laurel-crowned blackguard in his relations with the divine Cleopatra. Titus, that hypocrite Titus, after having lived a whole year in Idummea at the expense of the plaintive Berenice, took her back to Rome only to make game of her. It is time that the sons of Japhet

[p. 158]

paid this formidable reckoning of injuries to the daughters of Shem.

"A woman has taken it upon herself to re-establish the great Hegelian law of equilibrium for the benefit of her sex. Separated from the Aryan world by the formidable precautions of Neptune, she draws the youngest and bravest to her. Her body is condescending, while her spirit is inexorable. She takes what these bold young men can give her. She lends them her body, while her soul dominates them. She is the first sovereign who has never been made the slave of passion, even for a moment. She has never been obliged to regain her self-mastery, for she never has lost it. She is the only woman who has been able to disassociate those two inextricable things, love and voluptuousness."

M. Le Mesge paused a moment and then went on. "Once every day, she comes to this vault. She stops before the niches; she meditates before the rigid statues; she touches the cold bosoms, so burning when she knew them. Then, after dreaming before the empty niche where the next victim soon will sleep his eternal sleep in a cold case of orichalch, she returns nonchalantly where he is waiting for her."

The Professor stopped speaking. The fountain again made itself heard in the midst of the shadow. My pulses beat, my head seemed on fire. A fever was consuming me.

[p. 159]

"And all of them," I cried, regardless of the place, "all of them complied! They submitted! Well, she has only to come and she will see what will happen."

Morhange was silent.

"My dear sir," said M. Le Mesge in a very gentle voice, "you are speaking like a child. You do not know. You have not seen Antinea. Let me tell you one thing: that among those"--and with a sweeping gesture he indicated the silent circle of statues--"there were men as courageous as you and perhaps less excitable. I remember one of them especially well, a phlegmatic Englishman who now is resting under Number 32. When he first appeared before Antinea, he was smoking a cigar. And, like all the rest, he bent before the gaze of his sovereign.

"Do not speak until you have seen her. A university training hardly fits one to discourse upon matters of passion, and I feel scarcely qualified, myself, to tell you what Antinea is. I only affirm this, that when you have seen her, you will remember nothing else. Family, country, honor, you will renounce everything for her."

"Everything?" asked Morhange in a calm voice.

"Everything," Le Mesge insisted emphatically. "You will forget all, you will renounce all."

From outside, a faint sound came to us.

Le Mesge consulted his watch.

[p. 160]

"In any case, you will see."

The door opened. A tall white Targa, the tallest we had yet seen in this remarkable abode, entered and came toward us.

He bowed and touched me lightly on the shoulder. "Follow him," said M. Le Mesge.

Without a word, I obeyed.

Footnotes

^153:1 Variot: L'anthropologie galvanique. Paris, 1890. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

ANTINEA

MY guide and I passed along another long corridor. My excitement increased. I was impatient for one thing only, to come face to face with that woman, to tell her . . . So far as anything else was concerned, I already was done for.

I was mistaken in hoping that the adventure would take an heroic turn at once. In real life, these contrasts never are definitely marked out. I should have remembered from many past incidents that the burlesque was regularly mixed with the tragic in my life.

We reached a little transparent door. My guide stood aside to let me pass.

I found myself in the most luxurious of dressing-rooms. A ground glass ceiling diffused a gay rosy light over the marble floor. The first thing I noticed was a clock, fastened to the wall. In place of the figures for the hours, were the signs of the Zodiac. The small hand had not yet reached the sign of Capricorn.

[p. 162]

Only three o'clock!

The day seemed to have lasted a century already. . And only a little more than half of it was gone.

Another idea came to me, and a convulsive laugh bent me double.

"Antinea wants me to be at my best when I meet her."

A mirror of orichalch formed one whole side of the room. Glancing into it, I realized that in all decency there was nothing exaggerated in the demand.

My untrimmed beard, the frightful layer of dirt which lay about my eyes and furrowed my cheeks, my clothing, spotted by all the clay of the Sahara and torn by all the thorns of Ahaggar--all this made me appear a pitiable enough suitor.

I lost no time in undressing and plunging into the porphry bath in the center of the room. A delicious drowsiness came over me in that perfumed water. A thousand little jars, spread on a costly carved wood dressing-table, danced before my eyes. They were of all sizes and colors, carved in a very transparent kind of jade. The warm humidity of the atmosphere hastened my relaxation.

I still had strength to think, "The devil take Atlantis and the vault and Le Mesge."

Then I fell asleep in the bath.

When I opened my eyes again, the little hand of

[p. 163]

the clock had almost reached the sign of Taurus. Before me, his black hands braced on the edge of the bath, stood a huge negro, bare-faced and bare-armed, his forehead bound with an immense orange turban.

He looked at me and showed his white teeth in a silent laugh.

"Who is this fellow?"

The negro laughed harder. Without saying a word, he lifted me like a feather out of the perfumed water, now of a color on which I shall not dwell.

In no time at all, I was stretched out on an inclined marble table.

The negro began to massage me vigorously.

"More gently there, fellow!"

My masseur did not reply, but laughed and rubbed still harder.

"Where do you come from? Kanem? Torkou? You laugh too much for a Targa."

Unbroken silence. The negro was as speechless as he was hilarious.

"After all, I am making a fool of myself," I said, giving up the case. "Such as he is, he is more agreeable than Le Mesge with his nightmarish erudition. But, on my word, what a recruit he would be for Hamman on the rue des Mathurins!"

"Cigarette, sidi?"

Without awaiting my reply, he placed a cigarette

[p. 164]

between my lips and lighted it, and resumed his task of polishing every inch of me.

"He doesn't talk much, but he is obliging," I thought.

And I sent a puff of smoke into his face.

This pleasantry seemed to delight him immensely. He showed his pleasure by giving me great slaps.

When he had dressed me down sufficiently, he took a little jar from the dressing-table and began to rub me with a rose-colored ointment. Weariness seemed to fly away from my rejuvenated muscles.

A stroke on a copper gong. My masseur disappeared. A stunted old negress entered, dressed in the most tawdry tinsel. She was talkative as a magpie, but at first I did not understand a word in the interminable string she unwound, while she took first my hands, then my feet, and polished the nails with determined grimaces.

Another stroke on the gong. The old woman gave place to another negro, grave, this time, and dressed all in white with a knitted skull cap on his oblong head. It was the barber, and a remarkably dexterous one. He quickly trimmed my hair, and, on my word, it was well done. Then, without asking me what style I preferred, he shaved me clean.

I looked with pleasure at my face, once more visible.

"Antinea must like the American type," I thought.

[p. 165]

[paragraph continues] "What an affront to the memory of her worthy grandfather, Neptune!"

The gay negro entered and placed a package on the divan. The barber disappeared. I was somewhat astonished to observe that the package, which my new valet opened carefully, contained a suit of white flannels exactly like those French officers wear in Algeria in summer.

The wide trousers seemed made to my measure. The tunic fitted without a wrinkle, and my astonishment was unbounded at observing that it even had two gilt galons, the insignia of my rank, braided on the cuffs. For shoes, there were slippers of red Morocco leather, with gold ornaments. The underwear, all of silk, seemed to have come straight from the rue de la Paix.

"Dinner was excellent," I murmured, looking at myself in the mirror with satisfaction. "The apartment is perfectly arranged. Yes, but . . ."

I could not repress a shudder when I suddenly recalled that room of red marble.

The clock struck half past four.

Someone rapped gently on the door. The tall white Targa, who had brought me, appeared in the doorway.

He stepped forward, touched me on the arm and signed for me to follow.

Again I followed him.

We passed through interminable corridors. I was

[p. 166]

disturbed, but the warm water had given me a certain feeling of detachment. And above all, more than I wished to admit, I had a growing sense of lively curiosity. If, at that moment, someone had offered to lead me back to the route across the white plain near Shikh-Salah, would I have accepted? Hardly.

I tried to feel ashamed of my curiosity. I thought of Maillefeu.

"He, too, followed this corridor. And now he is down there, in the red marble hall."

I had no time to linger over this reminiscence. I was suddenly bowled over, thrown to the ground, as if by a sort of meteor. The corridor was dark; I could see nothing. I heard only a mocking growl.

The white Targa had flattened himself back against the wall.

"Good," I mumbled, picking myself up, "the deviltries are beginning."

We continued on our way. A glow different from that of the rose night lights soon began to light up the corridor.

We reached a high bronze door, in which a strange lacy design had been cut in filigree. A clear gong sounded, and the double doors opened part way. The Targa remained in the corridor, closing the doors after me.

I took a few steps forward mechanically, then paused, rooted to the spot, and rubbed my eyes.

[p. 167]

I was dazzled by the sight of the sky.

Several hours of shaded light had unaccustomed me to daylight. It poured in through one whole side of the huge room.

The room was in the lower part of this mountain, which was more honeycombed with corridors and passages than an Egyptian pyramid. It was on a level with the garden which I had seen in the morning from the balcony, and seemed to be a continuation of it; the carpet extended out under the great palm trees and the birds flew about the forest of pillars in the room.

By contrast, the half of the room untouched by direct light from the oasis seemed dark. The sun, setting behind the mountain, painted the garden paths with rose and flamed with red upon the traditional flamingo which stood with one foot raised at the edge of the sapphire lake.

Suddenly I was bowled over a second time.

I felt a warm, silky touch, a burning breath on my neck. Again the mocking growl which had so disturbed me in the corridor.

With a wrench, I pulled myself free and sent a chance blow at my assailant. The cry, this time of pain and rage, broke out again.

It was echoed by a long peal of laughter. Furious, I turned to look for the insolent onlooker, thinking to speak my mind. And then my glance stood still.

[p. 168]

Antinea was before me.

 

In the dimmest part of the room, under a kind of arch lit by the mauve rays from a dozen incense-lamps, four women lay on a heap of many-colored cushions and rare white Persian rugs.

I recognized the first three as Tuareg women, of a splendid regular beauty, dressed in magnificent robes of white silk embroidered in gold. The fourth, very dark skinned, almost negroid, seemed younger. A tunic of red silk enhanced the dusk of her face, her arms and her bare feet. The four were grouped about a sort of throne of white rugs, covered with a gigantic lion's skin, on which, half raised on one elbow, lay Antinea.

Antinea! Whenever I saw her after that, I wondered if I had really looked at her before, so much more beautiful did I find her. More beautiful? Inadequate word. Inadequate language! But is it really the fault of the language or of those who abuse the word?

One could not stand before her without recalling the woman for whom Ephractoeus overcame Atlas, of her for whom Sapor usurped the scepter of Ozymandias, for whom Mamylos subjugated Susa and Tentyris, for whom Antony fled. . . .

O tremblant coeur humain, si jamais tu vibras
 C'est dans l'etreinte altiere et chaude de ses bras.

[p. 169]

An Egyptian klaft fell over her abundant blue-black curls. Its two points of heavy, gold-embroidered cloth extended to her slim hips. The golden serpent, emerald-eyed, was clasped about her little round, determined forehead, darting its double tongue of rubies over her head.

She wore a tunic of black chiffon shot with gold, very light, very full, slightly gathered in by a white muslin scarf embroidered with iris in black pearls.

That was Antinea's costume. But what was she beneath all this? A slim young girl, with long green eyes and the slender profile of a hawk. A more intense Adonis. A child queen of Sheba, but with a look, a smile, such as no Oriental ever had. A miracle of irony and freedom.

I did not see her body. Indeed I should not have thought of looking at it, had I had the strength. And that, perhaps, was the most extraordinary thing about that first impression. In that unforgettable moment nothing would have seemed to me more horribly sacrilegious than to think of the fifty victims in the red marble hall, of the fifty young men who had held that slender body in their arms.

She was still laughing at me.

"King Hiram," she called.

I turned and saw my enemy.

On the capital of one of the columns, twenty feet above the floor, a splendid leopard was crouched.

[p. 170]

[paragraph continues] He still looked surly from the blow I had dealt him.

"King Hiram," Antinea repeated. "Come here."

The beast relaxed like a spring released. He fawned at his mistress's feet. I saw his red tongue licking her bare little ankles.

"Ask the gentleman's pardon," she said.

The leopard looked at me spitefully. The yellow

skin of his muzzle puckered about his black moustache.

"Fftt," he grumbled like a great cat.

"Go," Antinea ordered imperiously.

The beast crawled reluctantly toward me. He laid his head humbly between his paws and waited. I stroked his beautiful spotted forehead.

"You must not be vexed," said Antinea. "He is always that way with strangers."

"Then he must often be in bad humor," I said simply.

Those were my first words. They brought a smile to Antinea's lips.

She gave me a long, quiet look.

"Aguida," she said to one of the Targa women, "you will give twenty-five pounds in gold to Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"You are a lieutenant?" she asked, after a pause.

"Yes."

"Where do you come from?"

"From France."

[p. 171]

"I might have guessed that," she said ironically,

"but from what part of France?"

"From what we call the Lot-et-Garonne."

"From what town?"

"From Duras."

She reflected a moment.

"Duras! There is a little river there, the Dropt, and a fine old chateau."

"You know Duras?" I murmured, amazed. "You go there from Bordeaux by a little branch railway," she went on. "It is a shut-in road, with vine-covered hills crowned by the feudal ruins. The villages have beautiful names: Monsegur, Sauve-terre-de-Guyenne, la Tresne, Creon, . . . Creon, as in Antigone."

"You have been there?"

She looked at me.

"Don't speak so coldly," she said. "Sooner or later we will be intimate, and you may as well lay aside formality now."

This threatening promise suddenly filled me with great happiness. I thought of Le Mesge's words: "Don't talk until you have seen her. When you have seen her, you will renounce everything for her."

"Have I been in Duras?" she went on with a burst of laughter. "You are joking. Imagine Neptune's granddaughter in the first-class compartment of a local train!"

[p. 172]

She pointed to an enormous white rock which towered above the palm trees of the garden.

"That is my horizon," she said gravely.

She picked up one of several books which lay scattered about her on the lion's skin.

"The time table of the Chemin de Fer de l'Ouest," she said. "Admirable reading for one who never budges! Here it is half-past five in the afternoon. A train, a local, arrived three minutes ago at Surgeres in the Charente-Inferieure. It will start on in six minutes. In two hours it will reach La Rochelle. How strange it seems to think of such things here. So far away! So much commotion there! Here, nothing changes."

"You speak French well," I said.

She gave a little nervous laugh.

"I have to. And German, too, and Italian, and English and Spanish. My way of living has made me a great polyglot. But I prefer French, even to Tuareg and Arabian. It seems as if I had always known it. And I am not saying that to please you."

There was a pause. I thought of her grandmother, of whom Plutarch said: "There were few races with which she needed an interpreter. Cleopatra spoke their own language to the Ethiopians, to the Troglodytes, the Hebrews, the Arabs, the Medes and the Persians."

"Do not stand rooted in the middle of the room.

[p. 173]

[paragraph continues] You worry me. Come sit here, beside me. Move over, King Hiram."

The leopard obeyed with good temper.

Beside her was an onyx bowl. She took from it a perfectly plain ring of orichalch and slipped it on my left ring-finger. I saw that she wore one like it.

"Tanit-Zerga, give Monsieur de Saint-Avit a rose sherbet."

The dark girl in red silk obeyed.

"My private secretary," said Antinea, introducing her. "Mademoiselle Tanit-Zerga, of Gao, on the Niger. Her family is almost as ancient as mine."

As she spoke, she looked at me. Her green eyes seemed to be appraising me.

"And your comrade, the Captain?" she asked in a dreamy tone. "I have not yet seen him. What is he like? Does he resemble you?"

For the first time since I had entered, I thought of Morhange. I did not answer.

Antinea smiled.

She stretched herself out full length on the lion skin. Her bare right knee slipped out from under her tunic.

"It is time to go find him," she said languidly. "You will soon receive my orders. Tanit-Zerga, show him the way. First take him to his room. He cannot have seen it."

I rose and lifted her hand to my lips. She struck

[p. 174]

me with it so sharply as to make my lips bleed, as if to brand me as her possession.

 

I was in the dark corridor again. The young girl in the red silk tunic walked ahead of me.

"Here is your room," she said. "If you wish, I will take you to the dining-room. The others are about to meet there for dinner."

She spoke an adorable lisping French.

"No, Tanit-Zerga, I would rather stay here this evening. I am not hungry. I am tired."

"You remember my name?" she said.

She seemed proud of it. I felt that in her I had an ally in case of need.

"I remember your name, Tanit-Zerga, because it is beautiful." [*1]

Then I added:

"Now, leave me, little one. I want to be alone."

It seemed as if she would never go. I was touched, but at the same time vexed. I felt a great need of withdrawing into myself.

"My room is above yours," she said. "There is a copper gong on the table here. You have only to strike if you want anything. A white Targa will answer."

For a second, these instructions amused me. I was in a hotel in the midst of the Sahara. I had only to ring for service.

[p. 175]

I looked about my room. My room! For how long?

It was fairly large. Cushions, a couch, an alcove cut into the rock, all lighted by a great window covered by a matting shade.

I went to the window and raised the shade. The light of the setting sun entered.

I leaned my elbows on the rocky sill. Inexpressible emotion filled my heart. The window faced south. It was about two hundred feet above the ground. The black, polished volcanic wall yawned dizzily below me.

In front of me, perhaps a mile and a half away, was another wall, the first enclosure mentioned in the Critias. And beyond it in the distance, I saw the limitless red desert.

Footnotes

^174:1 In Berber, Tanit means a spring; zerga is the feminine of the adjective azreg, blue. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

MORHANGE DISAPPEARS

MY FATIGUE was so great that I lay as if unconscious until the next day. I awoke about three o'clock in the afternoon.

I thought at once of the events of the previous day; they seemed amazing.

"Let me see," I said to myself. "Let us work this out. I must begin by consulting Morhange."

I was ravenously hungry.

The gong which Tanit-Zerga had pointed out lay within arm's reach. I struck it. A white Targa appeared.

"Show me the way to the library," I ordered.

He obeyed. As we wound our way through the labyrinth of stairs and corridors I realized that I could never have found my way without his help.

Morhange was in the library, intently reading a manuscript.

"A lost treatise of Saint Optat," he said. "Oh, if only Dom Granger were here. See, it is written in semi-uncial characters."

[p. 177]

I did not reply. My eyes were fixed on an object which lay on the table beside the manuscript. It was an orichalch ring, exactly like that which Antinea had given me the previous day and the one which she herself wore.

Morhange smiled.

"Well?" I said.

"Well?"

"You have seen her?"

"I have indeed," Morhange replied.

"She is beautiful, is she not?"

"It would be difficult to dispute that," my comrade answered. "I even believe that I can say that she is as intelligent as she is beautiful."

There was a pause. Morhange was calmly fingering the orichalch ring.

"You know what our fate is to be?"

"I know. Le Mesge explained it to us yesterday in polite mythological terms. This evidently is an extraordinary adventure."

He was silent, then said, looking at me:

"I am very sorry to have dragged you here. The only mitigating feature is that since last evening you seem to have been bearing your lot very easily."

Where had Morhange learned this insight into the human heart? I did not reply, thus giving him the best of proofs that he had judged correctly.

"What do you think of doing?" I finally murmured.

[p. 178]

He rolled up the manuscript, leaned back comfortably in his armchair and lit a cigar.

"I have thought it over carefully. With the aid of my conscience I have marked out a line of conduct. The matter is clear and admits no discussion.

"The question is not quite the same for me as for you, because of my semi-religious character, which, I admit, has set out on a rather doubtful adventure. To be sure, I have not taken holy orders, but, even aside from the fact that the ninth commandment itself forbids my having relations with a woman not my wife, I admit that I have no taste for the kind of forced servitude for which the excellent Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has so kindly recruited us.

"That granted, the fact remains that my life is not my own with the right to dispose of it as might a private explorer travelling at his own expenses and for his own ends. I have a mission to accomplish, results to obtain. If I could regain my liberty by paying the singular ransom which this country exacts, I should consent to give satisfaction to Antinea according to my ability. I know the tolerance of the Church, and especially that of the order to which I aspire: such a procedure would be ratified immediately and, who knows, perhaps even approved? Saint Mary the Egyptian, gave her body to boatmen under similar circumstances. She received only glorification for it. In so doing she had the certainty

[p. 179]

of attaining her goal, which was holy. The end justified the means.

"But my case is quite different. If I give in to the absurd caprices of this woman, that will not keep me from being catalogued down in the red marble hall, as Number 54, or as Number 55, if she prefers to take you first. Under those conditions . . ."

"Under those conditions?"

"Under those conditions, it would be unpardonable for me to acquiesce."

"Then what do you intend to do?"

"What do I intend to do?" Morhange leaned back in the armchair and smilingly launched a puff of smoke toward the ceiling.

"Nothing," he said. "And that is all that is necessary. Man has this superiority over woman. He is so constructed that he can refuse advances."

Then he added with an ironical smile:

"A man cannot be forced to accept unless he wishes to."

I nodded.

"I tried the most subtle reasoning on Antinea," he continued. "It was breath- wasted. 'But,' I said at the end of my arguments, 'why not Le Mesge?' She began to laugh. 'Why not the Reverend Spardek?' she replied. 'Le Mesge and Spardek are savants whom I respect. But

[p. 180]

Maudit soit a jamais le reveur inutile,
 Qui voulut, le premier, dans sa stupidite,
 S'eprenant d'un probleme insoluble et sterile,
 Aux choses de l'amour meler l'honnetete.

"'Besides,' she added with that really very charming smile of hers, 'probably you have not looked carefully at either of them.' There followed several compliments on my figure, to which I found nothing to reply, so completely had she disarmed me by those four lines from Baudelaire.

"She condescended to explain further: 'Le Mesge is a learned gentleman whom I find useful. He knows Spanish and Italian, keeps my papers in order, and is busy working out my genealogy.. The Reverend Spardek knows English and German. Count Bielowsky is thoroughly conversant with the Slavic languages. Besides, I love him like a father. He knew me as a child when I had not dreamed such stupid things as you know of me. They are indispensable to me in my relations with visitors of different races, although I am beginning to get along well enough in the languages which I need. . .. But I am talking a great deal, and this is the first time that I have ever explained my conduct. Your friend is not so curious.' With that, she dismissed me. A strange woman indeed. I think there is a bit of Renan in her, but she is cleverer than that master of sensualism."

[p. 181]

"Gentlemen," said Le Mesge, suddenly entering the room, "why are you so late? They are waiting dinner for you."

The little Professor was in a particularly good humor that evening. He wore a new violet rosette.

"Well?" he said, in a mocking tone, "you have seen her?"

Neither Morhange nor I replied.

The Reverend Spardek and the Hetman of Jitomir already had begun eating when we arrived. The setting sun threw raspberry lights on the cream-colored mat.

"Be seated, gentlemen," said Le Mesge noisily.

"Lieutenant de Saint-Avit, you were not with us last evening. You are about to taste the cooking of Koukou, our Bambara chef, for the first time. You must give me your opinion of it."

A negro waiter set before me a superb fish covered with a pimento sauce as red as tomatoes.

I have explained that I was ravenously hungry. The dish was exquisite. The sauce immediately made me thirsty.

"White Ahaggar, 1879," the Hetman of Jitomir breathed in my ear as he filled my goblet with a clear topaz liquid. "I developed it myself: rien pour la tete, tout pour les jambes."

I emptied the goblet at a gulp. The company began to seem charming.

"Well, Captain Morhange," Le Mesge called out

[p. 182]

to my comrade who had taken a mouthful of fish, "what do you say to this acanthopterygian? It was caught to-day in the lake in the oasis. Do you begin to admit the hypothesis of the Saharan sea?"

"The fish is an argument," my companion replied.

Suddenly he became silent. The door had opened.

A white Targa entered. The diners stopped talking.

The veiled man walked slowly toward Morhange and touched his right arm.

"Very well," said Morhange.

He got up and followed the messenger.

The pitcher of Ahaggar, 1879, stood between me and Count Bielowsky. I filled my goblet--a goblet which held a pint, and gulped it down.

The Hetman looked at me sympathetically.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Le Mesge, nudging me with his elbow. "Antinea has respect for the hierarchic order."

The Reverend Spardek smiled modestly.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Le Mesge again.

My glass was empty. For a moment I was tempted to hurl it at the head of the Fellow in History. But what of it? I filled it and emptied it again.

"Morhange will miss this delicious roast of mutton," said the Professor, more and more hilarious, as he awarded himself a thick slice of meat.

"He won't regret it," said the Hetman crossly.

[p. 183]

[paragraph continues] "This is not roast; it is ram's horn. Really Koukou is beginning to make fun of us."

"Blame it on the Reverend," the shrill voice of Le Mesge cut in. "I have told him often enough to hunt other proselytes and leave our cook alone."

"Professor," Spardek began with dignity.

"I maintain my contention," cried Le Mesge, who seemed to me to be getting a bit overloaded. "I call the gentleman to witness," he went on, turning to me. "He has just come. He is unbiased. Therefore I ask him: has one the right to spoil a Bambara cook by addling his head with theological discussions for which he has no predisposition?"

"Alas!" the pastor replied sadly. "You are mistaken. He has only too strong a propensity to controversy."

"Koukou is a good-for-nothing who uses Colas' cow as an excuse for doing nothing and letting our scallops burn," declared the Hetman. "Long live the Pope!" he cried, filling the glasses all around.

"I assure you that this Bambara worries me," Spardek went on with great dignity. "Do you know what he has come to? He denies transubstantiation. He is within an inch of the heresy of Zwingli and Oecolampades. Koukou denies transubstantiation."

"Sir," said Le Mesge, very much excited, "cooks should be left in peace. Jesus, whom I consider as

[p. 184]

good a theologian as you, understood that, and it never occurred to him to call Martha away from her oven to talk nonsense to her."

"Exactly so," said the Hetman approvingly.

He was holding a jar between his knees and trying to draw its cork.

"Oh, Cotes Roties, wine from the Cote-Rotie!" he murmured to me as he finally succeeded. "Touch glasses."

"Koukou denies transubstantiation," the pastor continued, sadly emptying his glass.

"Eh!" said the Hetman of Jitomir in my ear, "let them talk on. Don't you see that they are quite drunk?"

His own voice was thick. He had the greatest difficulty in the world in filling my goblet to the brim.

I wanted to push the pitcher away. Then an idea came to me:

"At this very moment, Morhange . . . Whatever he may say . . . She is so beautiful."

I reached out for the glass and emptied it once more.

Le Mesge and the pastor were now engaged in the most extraordinary religious controversy, throwing at each other's heads the Book of Common Prayer, The Declaration of the Rights of Man, and the Unigenitus. Little by little, the Hetman began to show that ascendancy over them, which is the characteristic

[p. 185]

of a man of the world even when he is thoroughly drunk; the superiority of education over instruction.

Count Bielowsky had drunk five times as much as the Professor or the pastor. But he carried his wine ten times better.

"Let us leave these drunken fellows," he said with disgust. "Come on, old man. Our partners are waiting in the gaming room."

 

"Ladies and gentlemen," said the Hetman as we entered. "Permit me to present a new player to you, my friend, Lieutenant de Saint-Avit."

"Let it go at that," he murmured in my ear. "They are the servants. But I like to fool myself, you see."

I saw that he was very drunk indeed.

The gaming room was very long and narrow. A huge table, almost level with the floor and surrounded with cushions on which a dozen natives were lying, was the chief article of furniture. Two engravings on the wall gave evidence of the happiest broadmindedness in taste; one of da Vinci's St. John the Baptist, and the Maison des Dernieres Cartouches of Alphonse de Neuville.

On the table were earthenware goblets. A heavy jar held palm liqueur.

I recognized acquaintances among those present; my masseur, the manicure, the barber, and two or

[p. 186]

three Tuareg who had lowered their veils and were gravely smoking long pipes. While waiting for

something better, all were plunged in the delights of a card game that looked like "rams." Two of Antinea's beautiful ladies in waiting, Aguida and Sydia, were among the number. Their smooth bistre skins gleamed beneath veils shot with silver. I was sorry not to see the red silk tunic of Tanit-Zerga. Again, I thought of Morhange, but only for an instant.

"The chips, Koukou," demanded the Hetman. "We are not here to amuse ourselves."

The Zwinglian cook placed a box of many-colored chips in front of him. Count Bielowsky set about counting them and arranging them in little piles with infinite care.

"The white are worth a louis," he explained to me. "The red, a hundred francs. The yellow, five hundred. The green, a thousand. Oh, it's the devil of a game that we play here. You will see."

"I open with ten thousand," said the Zwinglian cook.

"Twelve thousand," said the Hetman. "Thirteen," said Sydya with a slow smile, as she seated herself on the count's knee and began to arrange her chips lovingly in little piles.

"Fourteen," I said.

"Fifteen," said the sharp voice of Rosita, the old manicure.

"Seventeen," proclaimed the Hetman.

[p. 187]

"Twenty thousand," the cook broke in.

He hammered on the table and, casting a defiant

look at us, repeated:

"I take it at twenty thousand."

The Hetman made an impatient gesture.

"That devil, Koukou! You can't do anything against the beast. You will have to play carefully, Lieutenant."

Koukou had taken his place at the end of the table.

He threw down the cards with an air which abashed me.

"I told you so; the way it was at Anna Deslions'," the Hetman murmured proudly.

"Make your bets, gentlemen," yelped the negro. "Make your bets."

"Wait, you beast," called Bielowsky. "Don't you see that the glasses are empty? Here, Cacambo."

The goblets were filled immediately by the jolly masseur.

"Cut," said Koukou, addressing Sydya, the beautiful Targa who sat at his right.

The girl cut, like one who knows superstitions, with her left hand. But it must be said that her right was busy lifting a cup to her lips. I watched the curve of her beautiful throat.

"My deal," said Koukou.

We were thus arranged: at the left, the Hetman,

Aguida, whose waist he had encircled with the most aristocratic freedom, Cacambo, a Tuareg woman,

[p. 188]

then two veiled negroes who were watching the game intently. At the right, Sydya, myself, the old manicure, Rosita, Barouf, the barber, another woman and two white Tuareg, grave and attentive, exactly opposite those on the left.

"Give me one," said the Hetman.

Sydya made a negative gesture.

Koukou drew, passed a four-spot to the Hetman, gave himself a five.

"Eight," announced Bielowsky.

"Six," said pretty Sydya.

"Seven," broke in Koukou. "One card makes up for another," he added coldly.

"I double," said the Hetman.

Cacambo and Aguida followed his example. On our side, we were more careful. The manicure especially would not risk more than twenty francs at a time.

"I demand that the cards be evened up," said Koukou imperturbably.

"This fellow is unbearable," grumbled the count. "There, are you satisfied?"

Koukou dealt and laid down a nine.

"My country and my honor!" raged Bielowsky. "I had an eight."

I had two kings, and so showed no ill temper. Rosita took the cards out of my hands.

I watched Sydya at my right. Her heavy black hair covered her shoulders. She was really very

[p. 189]

beautiful, though a bit tipsy, as were all that fantastic company. She looked at me, too, but with lowered eyelids, like a timid little wild animal.

"Oh," I thought. "She may well be afraid. I am labelled 'No trespassing.' "

I touched her foot. She drew it back in fright.

"Who wants cards?" Koukou demanded.

"Not I," said the Hetman.

"Served," said Sydya.

The cook drew a four.

"Nine," he said.

"That card was meant for me," cursed the count.

"And five, I had a five. If only I had never promised his Majesty the Emperor Napoleon III never to cut fives! There are times when it is hard, very hard. And look at that beast of a negro who plays Charlemagne."

It was true. Koukou swept in three-quarters of the chips, rose with dignity, and bowed to the company.

"Till to-morrow, gentlemen."

"Get along, the whole pack of you," howled the Hetman of Jitomir. "Stay with me, Lieutenant de Saint-Avit."

When we were alone, he poured out another huge cupfull of liqueur. The ceiling of the room was lost in the gray smoke.

[p. 190]

"What time is it?" I asked.

"After midnight. But you are not going to leave me like this, my dear boy? I am heavy-hearted."

He wept bitterly. The tail of his coat spread out on the divan behind him like the apple-green wings of a beetle.

"Isn't Aguida a beauty?" he went on, still weeping. "She makes me think of the Countess de Teruel, though she is a little darker. You know the Countess de , Mercedes, who went in bathing nude at Biarritz, in front of the rock of the Virgin, one day when Prince Bismarck was standing on the foot-bridge. You do not remember her? Mercedes de Teruel."

I shrugged my shoulders.

"I forget; you must have been too young. Two, perhaps three years old. A child. Yes, a child. Oh, my child, to have been of that generation and to be reduced to playing cards with savages. . . . I must tell you . . ."

I stood up and pushed him off.

"Stay, stay," he implored. "I will tell you everything you want to know, how I came here, things I have never told anyone. Stay, I must unbosom myself to a true friend. I will tell you everything, I repeat. I trust you. You are a Frenchman, a gentleman. I know that you will repeat nothing to her."

"That I will repeat nothing to her? . . . To whom?"

[p. 191]

His voice stuck in his throat. I thought I saw a shudder of fear pass over him.

"To her . . . to Antinea," he murmured.

I sat down again.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THE HETMAN OF JITOMIR'S STORY

COUNT CASIMIR had reached that stage where drunkenness takes on a kind of gravity, of regretfulness.

He thought a little, then began his story. I regret that I cannot reproduce more perfectly its archaic flavor.

"When the grapes begin to color in Antinea's garden, I shall be sixty-eight. It is very sad, my dear boy, to have sowed all your wild oats. It isn't true that life is always beginning over again. How bitter, to have known the Tuileries in 1860, and to have reached the point where I am now!

"One evening, just before the war (I remember that Victor Black was still living), some charming women whose names I need not disclose (I read the names of their sons from time to time in the society news of the Gaulois) expressed to me their desire to rub elbows with some real demi-mondaines of the artist quarter. I took them to a ball at the Grande 

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Chaumiere. There was a crowd of young painters, models, students. In the midst of the uproar, several couples danced the cancan till the chandeliers shook with it. We noticed especially a little, dark man, dressed in a miserable top-coat and checked trousers which assuredly knew the support of no suspenders. He was cross-eyed, with a wretched beard and hair as greasy as could be. He bounded and kicked extravagantly. The ladies called him Leon Gambetta.

"What an annoyance, when I realize that I need only have felled this wretched lawyer with one pistol shot to have guaranteed perfect happiness to myself and to my adopted country, for, my dear fellow, I am French at heart, if not by birth.

"I was born in 1829, at Warsaw, of a Polish father and a Russian mother. It is from her that I hold my title of Hetman of Jitomir. It was restored to me by Czar Alexander II on a request made to him on his visit to Paris, by my august master, the Emperor Napoleon III.

"For political reasons, which I cannot describe without retelling the history of unfortunate Poland, my father, Count Bielowsky, left Warsaw in 1830, and went to live in London. After the death of my mother, he began to squander his immense fortune--from sorrow, he said. When, in his time, he died at the period of the Prichard affair, he left me barely a thousand pounds sterling of income, plus two or

[p. 194]

three systems of gaming, the impracticability of which I learned later.

"I will never be able to think of my nineteenth and twentieth years without emotion, for I then completely liquidated this small inheritance. London was indeed an adorable spot in those days. I had a jolly bachelor's apartment in Piccadilly.

"'Piccadilly! Shops, palaces, bustle and breeze,
   The whirling of wheels and the murmur of trees.'

"Fox hunting in a briska, driving a buggy in Hyde Park, the rout, not to mention the delightful little parties with the light Venuses of Drury Lane, this took all my time. All? I am unjust. There was also gaming, and a sentiment of filial piety forced me to verify the systems of the late Count, my father. It was gaming which was the cause of the event I must describe to you, by which my life was to be so strangely changed.

"My friend, Lord Malmesbury, had said to me a hundred times, 'I must take you to see an exquisite creature who lives in Oxford Street, number 277, Miss Howard.' One evening I went with him. It was the twenty-second of February, 1848. The mistress of the house was really marvelously beautiful, and the guests were charming. Besides Malmesbury, I observed several acquaintances: Lord Clebden, Lord Chesterfield, Sir Francis Mountjoye,

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] Major in the Second Life Guards, and Count d'Orsay. They played cards and then began to talk politics. Events in France played the main part in the conversation and they discussed endlessly the consequences of the revolt that had broken out in Paris that same morning, in consequence of the interdiction of the banquet in the 12th arrondissement, of which word had just been received by telegram. Up to that time, I had never bothered myself with public affairs. So I don't know what moved me to affirm with the impetuosity of my nineteen years that the news from France meant the Republic next day and the Empire the day after. . . .

"The company received my sally with a discreet laugh, and their looks were centered on a guest who made the fifth at a bouillotte table where they had just stopped playing.

"The guest smiled, too. He rose and came towards me. I observed that he was of middle height, perhaps even shorter, buttoned tightly into a blue frock coat, and that his eye had a far-off, dreamy look.

"All the players watched this scene with delighted amusement.

"'Whom have I the honor of addressing?' he asked in a very gentle voice.

"'Count Bielowsky,' I answered coolly to show him that the difference in our ages was not sufficient to justify the interrogation.

[p. 196]

"'Well, my dear Count, may your prediction indeed be realized; and I hope that you will not neglect the Tuileries,' said the guest in the blue coat, with a smile.

"And he added, finally consenting to present himself:

"'Prince Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte.'

 

"I played no active role in the coup d'etat, and I do not regret it. It is a principle with me that a stranger should not meddle with the internal affairs of a country. The prince understood this discretion, and did not forget the young man who had been of such good omen to him.

"I was one of the first whom he called to the Elysee. My fortune was definitely established by a defamatory note on 'Napoleon the little.' The next year, when Mgr. Sibour was out of the way, I was made Gentleman of the Chamber, and the Emperor was even so kind as to have me marry the daughter of the Marshal Repeto, Duke of Mondovi.

"I have no scruple in announcing that this union was not what it should have been. The Countess, who was ten years older than I, was crabbed and not particularly pretty. Moreover, her family had insisted resolutely on a marriage portion. Now I had nothing at this time except the twenty-five thousand pounds for my appointment as Gentleman of the Chamber. A sad lot for anyone on intimate terms

[p. 197]

with the Count d'Orsay and the Duke of Gramont-Caderousse! Without the kindness of the Emperor, where would I have been?

 

"One morning in the spring of 1852, I was in my study opening my mail. There was a letter from His Majesty, calling me to the Tuileries at four o'clock; a letter from Clementine, informing me that she expected me at five o'clock at her house. Clementine was the beautiful one for whom, just then, I was ready to commit any folly. I was so proud of her that, one evening at the Maison Doree, I flaunted her before Prince Metternich, who was tremendously taken with her. All the court envied me that conquest; and I was morally obliged to continue to assume its expenses. And then Clementine was so pretty! The Emperor himself . . . The other letters, good lord, the other letters were the bills of the dressmakers of that young person, who, in spite of my discreet remonstrances, insisted on having them sent to my conjugal dwelling.

"There were bills for something over forty thousand francs: gowns and ball dresses from Gagelin-Opigez, 23 Rue de Richelieu; hats and bonnets from Madame Alexandrine, 14 Rue d'Antin; lingerie and many petticoats from Madame Pauline, 100 Rue de Clery; dress trimmings and gloves from the Ville de Lyon, 6 Rue de la Chaussee d'Antin; foulards from the Malle des Indes; handkerchiefs from the

[p. 198]

[paragraph continues] Compagnie Irlandaise; laces from Ferguson; cosmetics from Candes. . . . This whitening cream of Candes, in particular, overwhelmed me with stupefaction. The bill showed fifty-one flasks. Six hundred and twenty-seven francs and fifty centimes' worth of whitening cream from Candes. . . . Enough to soften the skin of a squadron of a hundred guards!

"'This can't keep on,' I said, putting the bills in my pocket.

"At ten minutes to four, I crossed the wicket by the Carrousel.

"In the Salon of the aides de camp I happened on Bacciochi.

"'The Emperor has the grippe,' he said to me. 'He is keeping to his room. He has given orders to have you admitted as soon as you arrive. Come.'

"His Majesty, dressed in a braided vest and Cossack trousers, was meditating before a window. The pale green of the Tuileries showed luminously under a gentle warm shower.

"'Ah! Here he is,' said Napoleon. 'Here, have a cigarette. It seems that you had great doings, you and Gramont-Caderousse, last evening, at the Chateau des Fleurs.'

"I smiled with satisfaction.

"'So Your Majesty knows already . . .'

"'I know, I know vaguely.'

[p. 199]

"'Do you know Gramont-Caderousse's last "mot"?'

"'No, but you are going to tell it to me.'

"'Here goes, then. We were five or six: myself, Viel-Castel, Gramont, Persigny . . .'

"'Persigny!' said the Emperor. 'He has no right to associate with Gramont, after all that Paris says about his wife.'

"'Just so, Sire. Well, Persigny was excited, no doubt about it. He began telling us how troubled he was because of the Duchess's conduct.'

"'This Fialin isn't over tactful,' murmured the Emperor.

"'Just so, Sire. Then, does Your Majesty know what Gramont hurled at him?'

"'What?'

"'He said to him, "Monsieur le Duc, I forbid you to speak ill of my mistress before me."

"'Gramont goes too far,' said Napoleon with a dreamy smile.

"'That is what we all thought, including Viel-Castel, who was nevertheless delighted.'

"'Apropos of this,' said Napoleon after a silence, 'I have forgotten to ask you for news of the Countess Bielowsky.'

"She is very well, Sire, I thank Your Majesty.'

"'And Clementine? Still the same dear child?'

"'Always, Sire. But . . .'

[p. 200]

"'It seems that M. Baroche is madly in love with her.'

"'I am very much honored, Sire. But this honor becomes too burdensome.'

"I had drawn from my pocket that morning's bills and I spread them out under the eyes of the Emperor.

"He looked at them with his distant smile.

"'Come, come. If that is all, I can fix that, since I have a favor to ask of you.'

"'I am entirely at Your Majesty's service.'

"He struck a gong.

"'Send for M. Mocquard.'

"'I have the grippe,' he said. 'Mocquard will explain the affair to you.'

"The Emperor's private secretary entered.

"'Here is Bielowsky, Mocquard,' said Napoleon.

'You know what I want him to do. Explain it to him.'

"And he began to tap on the window-panes against which the rain was beating furiously.

"'My dear Count,' said Mocquard, taking a chair, 'it is very simple. You have doubtless heard of a young explorer of promise, M. Henry Duveyrier.'

"I shook my head as a sign of negation, very much surprised at this beginning.

"'M. Duveyrier,' continued Mocquard, 'has returned to Paris after a particularly daring trip to South Africa and the Sahara. M. Vivien de Saint

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] Martin, whom I have seen recently has assured me that the Geographical Society intends to confer its great gold medal upon him, in recognition of these exploits. In the course of his trip, M. Duvreyrier has entered into negotiations with the chiefs of the people who always have been so rebellious to His Majesty's armies, the Tuareg.'

"I looked at the Emperor. My bewilderment was such that he began to laugh.

"'Listen,' he said.

"'M. Duveyrier,' continued Mocquard, 'was able to arrange to have a delegation of these chiefs come to Paris to present their respects to His Majesty. Very important results may arise from this visit, and His Excellency the Colonial Minister, does not despair of obtaining the signature of a treaty of commerce, reserving special advantages to our fellow countrymen. These chiefs, five of them, among them Sheik Otham, Amenokol or Sultan of the Confederation of Adzger, arrive to-morrow morning at the Gare de Lyon. M. Duveyrier will meet them. But the Emperor has thought that besides . . .'

"'I thought,' said Napoleon III, delighted by my bewilderment, 'I thought that it was correct to have some one of the Gentlemen of my Chamber wait upon the arrival of these Mussulman dignitaries. That is why you are here, my poor Bielowsky. Don't be frightened,' he added, laughing harder. 'You will have M. Duveyrier with you. You are

[p. 202]

charged only with the special part of the reception: to accompany these princes to the lunch that I am giving them to-morrow at the Tuileries; then, in the evening, discreetly on account of their religious scruples, to succeed in giving them a very high idea of Parisian civilization, with nothing exaggerated: do not forget that in the Sahara they are very high religious dignitaries. In that respect, I have confidence in your tact and give you carte blanche. . . . Mocquard!'

"'Sire?'

"'You will apportion on the budget, half to Foreign Affairs, half to the Colonies, the funds Count Bielowsky will need for the reception of the Tuareg delegation. It seems to me that a hundred thousand francs, to begin . . . The Count has only to tell you if he is forced to exceed that figure.'

 

"Clementine lived on the Rue Boccador, in a little Moorish pavillion that I had bought for her from M. de Lesseps. I found her in bed. When she saw me, she burst into tears.

"'Great fools that we are!' she murmured amidst her sobs, 'what have we done!'

"'Clementine, tell me!'

"'What have we done, what have we done!' she repeated, and I felt against me, her floods of black hair, her warm cheek which was fragrant with eau de Nanon.

[p. 203]

"'What is it? What can it be?'

"'It is . . .' and she murmured something in my ear.

"'No!' I said, stupefied. 'Are you quite sure?'

"'Am I quite sure!'

"I was thunderstruck.

"'You don't seem much pleased,' she said sharply.

"'I did not say that. . . . Though, really, I am very much pleased, I assure you.'

"Prove it to me: let us spend the day together to-morrow.'

"'To-morrow!' I stammered. 'Impossible!'

"'Why?' she demanded suspiciously.

"'Because to-morrow, I have to pilot the Tuareg mission about Paris. The Emperor's orders.'

"'What bluff is this?' asked Clementine.

"'I admit that nothing so much resembles a lie as the truth.'

"I retold Mocquard's story to Clementine, as well as I could. She listened to me with an expression that said: 'you can't fool me that way.'

"Finally, furious, I burst out:

"'You can see for yourself. I am dining with them, to-morrow; and I invite you.'

"'I shall be very pleased to come,' said Clementine with great dignity.

"I admit that I lacked self-control at that minute. But think what a day it had been! Forty thousand francs of bills as soon as I woke up. The ordeal of

[p. 204]

escorting the savages around Paris all the next day. And, quite unexpectedly, the announcement of an approaching irregular paternity. . . .

"'After all,' I thought, as I returned to my house, 'these are the Emperor's orders. He has commanded me to give the Tuareg an idea of Parisian civilization. Clementine comports herself very well in society and just now it would not do to aggravate her. I will engage a room for to-morrow at the Cafe de Paris, and tell Gramont-Caderousse and Viel-Castel to bring their silly mistresses. It will be very French to enjoy the attitude of these children of the desert in the midst of this little party.'

"The train from Marseilles arrived at 10:20. On the platform I found M. Duveyrier, a young man of twenty-three with blue eyes and a little blond beard. The Tuareg fell into his arms as they descended from the train. He had lived with them for two years, in their tents, the devil knows where. He presented me to their chief, Sheik Otham, and to four others, splendid fellows in their blue cotton draperies and their amulets of red leather. Fortunately, they all spoke a kind of sabir [*1] which helped things along.

"I only mention in passing the lunch at the Tuileries, the visits in the evening to the Museum, to the Hotel de Ville, to the Imperial Printing Press. Each

[p. 205]

time, the Tuareg inscribed their names in the registry of the place they were visiting. It was interminable. To give you an idea, here is the complete name of Sheik Otham alone: Otham-ben-el-Hadj-el-Bekri-ben-el-Hadj-el-Faqqi-ben-Mohammad-Bouyaben-si-Ahmed-es-Souki-ben-Mahmoud. [*1]

"And there were five of them like that!

"I maintained my good humor, however, because on the boulevards, everywhere, our success was colossal. At the Cafe de Paris, at six-thirty, it amounted to frenzy. The delegation, a little drunk, embraced me: 'Bono, Napoleon; bono, Eugenie; bono, Casimir; bono, Christians.' Gramont-Caderousse and Viel Castel were already in booth number eight, with Anna Grimaldi, of the Folies Dramatiques, and Hortense Schneider, both beautiful enough to strike terror to the heart. But the palm was for my dear Clementine, when she entered. I must tell you how she was dressed: a gown of white tulle, over China blue tarletan, with pleatings, and ruffles of tulle over the pleatings. The tulle skirt was caught up on each side by garlands of green leaves mingled with rose clusters. Thus it formed a valence which allowed the tarletan skirt to show in front and on the sides. The garlands were caught

[p. 206]

up to the belt and, in the space between their branches, were knots of rose satin with long ends. The pointed bodice was draped with tulle, the billowy bertha of tulle was edged with lace. By way of head-dress, she had placed upon her black locks a diadem crown of the same flowers. Two long leafy tendrils were twined in her hair and fell on her neck. As cloak, she had a kind of scarf of blue cashmere embroidered in gold and lined with blue satin.

"So much beauty and splendor immediately moved the Tuareg and, especially, Clementine's right-hand neighbor, El-Hadj-ben-Guemama, brother of Sheik Otham and Sultan of Ahaggar. By the time the soup arrived, a bouillon of wild game, seasoned with Tokay, he was already much smitten. When they served the compote of fruits Martinique a la liqueur de Mme. Amphoux, he showed every indication of illimitable passion. The Cyprian wine de la Commanderie made him quite sure of his sentiments. Hortense kicked my foot under the table. Gramont, intending to do the same to Anna, made a mistake and aroused the indignant protests of one of the Tuareg. I can safely say that when the time came to go to Mabille, we were enlightened as to the manner in which our visitors respected the prohibition decreed by the Prophet in respect to wine.

"At Mabille, while Clementine, Hortense, Anna, Ludovic and the three Tuareg gave themselves over

[p. 207]

to the wildest gallops, Sheik Otham took me aside and confided to me, with visible emotion, a certain commission with which he had just been charged by his brother, Sheik Ahmed.

 

"The next day, very early, I reached Clementine's house.

"'My dear,' I began, after having waked her, not without difficulty, 'listen to me. I want to talk to you seriously.'

"She rubbed her eyes a bit crossly.

"'How did you like that young Arabian gentleman who was so taken with you last night?'

"'Why, well enough,' she said, blushing.

"'Do you know that in his country, he is the sovereign prince and reigns over territories five or six times greater than those of our august master, the Emperor Napoleon III?'

"'He murmured something of that kind to me,' she said, becoming interested.

"'Well, would it please you to mount on a throne, like our august sovereign, the Empress Eugenie?'

"Clementine looked startled.

"'His own brother, Sheik Otham, has charged me in his name to make this offer.'

"Clementine, dumb with amazement, did not reply.

"'I, Empress!' she finally stammered.

"'The decision rests with you. They must have

[p. 208]

your answer before midday. If it is 'yes,' we lunch together at Voisin's, and the bargain is made.'

"I saw that she had already made up her mind, but she thought it well to display a little sentiment.

"'And you, you!' she groaned. "To leave you thus. . . . Never!'

"'No foolishness, dear child,' I said gently. 'You don't know perhaps that I am ruined. Yes, completely: I don't even know how I am going to pay for your complexion cream!'

"'Ah!' she sighed

"She added, however, 'And . . . the child?'

"'What child?'

"'Our child . . . our child.'

"'Ah! That is so. Why, you will nave to put it down to profit and loss. I am even convinced that Sheik Ahmed will find that it resembles him.'

"'You can turn everything into a joke,' she said between laughing and crying.

 

"The next morning, at the same hour, the Marseilles express carried away the five Tuareg and Clementine. The young woman, radiant, was leaning on the arm of Sheik Ahmed, who was beside himself with joy.

"'Have you many shops in your capital?' she asked him languidly.

"And he, smiling broadly under his veil, replied:

"'Besef, besef, bono, roumis, bono.'

[p. 209]

"At the last moment, Clementine had a pang of emotion.

"'Listen, Casimir, you have always been kind to me. I am going to be a queen. If you weary of it here, promise me, swear to me . . .'

"The Sheik had understood. He took a ring from his finger and slipped it onto mine.

"'Sidi Casimir, comrade,' he affirmed. 'You come--find us. Take Sidi Ahmed's ring and show it. Everybody at Ahaggar comrades. Bono Ahaggar, bono.'

"When I came out of the Gare de Lyon, I had the feeling of having perpetrated an excellent joke."

 

The Hetman of Jitomir was completely drunk. I had had the utmost difficulty in understanding the end of his story, because he interjected, every other moment, couplets from Jacques Offenbach's best score.

Dans un bois passait un jeune homme,
 Un jeune homme frais et beau,
 Sa main tenait une pomme,
 Vous voyez d'ici le tableau.

"Who was disagreeably surprised by the fall of Sedan? It was Casimir, poor old Casimir! Five thousand louis to pay by the fifth of September, and not the first sou, no, not the first sou. I take my hat

[p. 210]

and my courage and go to the Tuileries. No more Emperor there, no! But the Empress was so kind. I found her alone--ah, people scatter quickly under such circumstances I--alone with a senator, M. Merimee, the only literary man I have ever known who was at the same time a man of the world. 'Madame,' he was saying to her, 'you must give up all hope. M. Thiers, whom I just met on the Pont Royal, would listen to nothing.'

"'Madame,' I said in my turn, 'Your Majesty always will know where her true friends are.'

"And I kissed her hand.

     "Evohe, que les deesses
      Ont de droles de facons
 Pour enjoler, pour enjoler, pour enjoler les gaaarcons!

"I returned to my home in the Rue de Lille. On the way I encountered the rabble going from the Corps Legislatif to the Hotel de Ville. My mind was made up.

"'Madame,' I said to my wife, 'my pistols.'

"'What is the matter?' she asked, frightened.

"'All is lost. But there is still a chance to preserve my honor. I am going to be killed on the barricades.'

"'Ah! Casimir,' she sobbed, falling into my

[p. 211]

arms. 'I have misjudged you. Will you forgive me?'

"'I forgive you, Aurelie,' I said with dignified emotion. 'I have not always been right myself.'

"I tore myself away from this mad scene. It was six o'clock. On the Rue de Bac, I hailed a cab on its mad career.

"'Twenty francs tip,' I said to the coachman, 'if you get to the Gare de Lyon in time for the Marseilles train, six thirty-seven.' "

The Hetman of Jitomir could say no more. He had rolled over on the cushions and slept with clenched fists.

I walked unsteadily to the great window.

The sun was rising, pale yellow, behind the sharp blue mountains.

Footnotes

^204:1 Dialect spoken in Algeria and the Levant--a mixture of Arabian, French, Italian and Spanish.

^205:1 I have succeeded in finding on the registry of the Imperial Printing Press the names of the Tuareg chiefs and those who accompanied them on their visit, M. Henry Duveyrier and the Count Bielowsky. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

HOURS OF WAITING

IT WAS at night that Saint-Avit liked to tell me a little of his enthralling history. He gave it to me in short instalments, exact and chronological, never anticipating the episodes of a drama whose tragic outcome I knew already. Not that he wished to obtain more effect that way--I felt that he was far removed from any calculation of that sort! Simply from the extraordinary nervousness into which he was thrown by recalling such memories.

One evening, the mail from France had just arrived. The letters that Chatelain had handed us lay upon the little table, not yet opened. By the light of the lamp, a pale halo in the midst of the great black desert, we were able to recognize the writing of the addresses. Oh! the victorious smile of Saint-Avit when, pushing aside all those letters, I said to him in a trembling voice:

"Go on."

He acquiesced without further words.

 

"Nothing can give you any idea of the fever I

[p. 213]

was in from the day when the Hetman of Jitomir told me of his adventures to the day when I found myself in the presence of Antinea. The strangest part was that the thought that I was, in a way, condemned to death, did not enter into this fever. On the contrary, it was stimulated by my desire for the event which would be the signal of my downfall, the summons from Antinea. But this summons was not speedy in coming. And from this delay, arose my unhealthy exasperation.

Did I have any lucid moments in the course of these hours? I do not think so. I do not recall having even said to myself, "What, aren't you ashamed? Captive in an unheard of situation, you not only are not trying to escape, but you even bless your servitude and look forward to your ruin." I did not even color my desire to remain there, to enjoy the next step in the adventure, by the pretext I might have given--unwillingness to escape without Morhange. If I felt a vague uneasiness at not seeing him again, it was not because of a desire to know that he was well and safe.

Well and safe, I knew him to be, moreover. The Tuareg slaves of Antinea's household were certainly not very communicative. The women were hardly more loquacious. I heard, it is true, from Sydya and Aguida, that my companion liked pomegranates or that he could not endure kouskous of bananas. But if I asked for a different kind of information,

[p. 214]

they fled, in fright, down the long corridors. With Tanit-Zerga, it was different. This child seemed to have a distaste for mentioning before me anything bearing in any way upon Antinea. Nevertheless, I knew that she was devoted to her mistress with a doglike fidelity. But she maintained an obstinate silence if I pronounced her name or, persisting, the name of Morhange.

As for the Europeans, I did not care to question these sinister puppets. Besides, all three were difficult of approach. The Hetman of Jitomir was sinking deeper and deeper into alcohol. What intelligence remained to him, he seemed to have dissolved the evening when he had invoked his youth for me. I met him from time to time in the corridors that had become all at once too narrow for him, humming in a thick voice a couplet from the music of La Reine Hortense.

De ma fille Isabelle
 Sois l'epoux a l'instant,
 Car elle est la plus belle
 Et toi, le plus vaillant.

As for Pastor Spardek, I would cheerfully have killed the old skinflint. And the hideous little man with the decorations, the placid printer of labels for the red marble hall,--how could I meet him without wanting to cry out in his face: "Eh! eh! Sir Professor, a very curious case of apocope: Atlantinea

[p. 215]

[paragraph continues] Suppression of alpha, of tau and of lambda! I would like to direct your attention to another case as curious: klemeintinea, Clementine. Apocope of kappa, of , of epsilon and of mu. If Morhange were with us, he would tell you many charming erudite things about it. But, alas! Morhange does not deign to come among us any more. We never see Morhange."

My fever for information found a little more favorable reception from Rosita, the old negress manicure. Never have I had my nails polished so often as during those days of waiting! Now--after six years--she must be dead. I shall not wrong her memory by recording that she was very partial to the bottle. The poor old soul was defenseless against those that I brought her and that I emptied with her, through politeness.

Unlike the other slaves, who are brought from the South toward Turkey by the merchants of Rhat, she was born in Constantinople and had been brought into Africa by her master when he became kaimakam of Rhadames. . . . But don't let me complicate this already wandering history by the incantations of this manicure.

"Antinea," she said to me, "is the daughter of El-Hadj-Ahmed-ben-Guemama, Sultan of Ahaggar, and Sheik of the great and noble tribe of Kel-Rhela. She was born in the year twelve hundred and eighty-one of the Hegira. She has never wished to marry

[p. 216]

any one. Her wish has been respected for the will of women is sovereign in this Ahaggar where she rules to-day. She is a cousin of Sidi-el-Senoussi, and, if she speaks the word, Christian blood will flow from Djerid to Touat, and from Tchad to Senegal. If she had wished it, she might have lived beautiful and respected in the land of the Christians. But she prefers to have them come to her."

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I said, "do you know him? He is entirely devoted to her?"

"Nobody here knows Cegheir-ben-Cheikh very well, because he is continually traveling. It is true that he is entirely devoted to Antinea. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh is a Senoussi, and Antinea is the cousin of the chief of the Senoussi. Besides, he owes his life to her. He is one of the men who assassinated the great Kebir Flatters. On account of that, Ikenoukhen, amenokol of the Adzjer Tuareg, fearing French reprisals, wanted to deliver Cegheir-ben-Cheikh to them. When the whole Sahara turned against him, he found asylum with Antinea. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh will never forget it, for he is brave and observes the law of the Prophet. To thank her, he led to Antinea, who was then twenty years old, three French officers of the first troops of occupation in Tunis. They are the ones who are numbered, in the red marble hall, 1, 2, and 3."

"And Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has always fulfilled his duties successfully?"

[p. 217]

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh is well trained, and he knows the vast Sahara as I know my little room at the top of the mountain. At first, he made mistakes. That is how, on his first trips, he brought back old Le Mesge and marabout Spardek."

"What did Antinea say when she saw them?"

"Antinea? She laughed so hard that she spared them. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh was vexed to see her laugh so. Since then, he has never made a mistake."

"He has never made a mistake?"

"No. I have cared for the hands and feet of all that he has brought here. All were young and handsome. But I think that your comrade, whom they brought to me the other day, after you were here, is the handsomest of all."

"Why," I asked, turning the conversation, "why, since she spared them their lives, did she not free the pastor and M. Le Mesge?"

"She has found them useful, it seems," said the old woman. "And then, whoever once enters here, can never leave. Otherwise, the French would soon be here and, when they saw the hall of red marble, they would massacre everybody. Besides, of all those whom Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has brought here, no one, save one, has wished to escape after seeing Antinea."

"She keeps them a long time?"

"That depends upon them and the pleasure that

[p. 218]

she takes in them. Two months, three months, on the average. It depends. A big Belgian officer, formed like a colossus, didn't last a week. On the other hand, everyone here remembers little Douglas Kaine, an English officer: she kept him almost a year."

"And then?"

"And then, he died," said the old woman as if astonished at my question.

"Of what did he die?"

She used the same phrase as M. Le Mesge:

"Like all the others: of love.

"Of love," she continued. "They all die of love when they see that their time is ended, and that Cegheir-ben-Cheikh has gone to find others. Several have died quietly with tears in their great eyes. They neither ate nor slept any more. A French naval officer went mad. All night, he sang a sad song of his native country, a song which echoed through the whole mountain. Another, a Spaniard, was as if maddened: he tried to bite. It was necessary to kill him. Many have died of kif, a kif that is more violent than opium. When they no longer have Antinea, they smoke, smoke. Most have died that way . . . the happiest. Little Kaine died differently."

"How did little Kaine die?"

"In a way that pained us all very much. I told you that he stayed longer among us than anyone

[p. 219]

else. We had become used to him. In Antinea's room, on a little Kairoun table, painted in blue and gold, there is a gong with a long silver hammer with an ebony handle, very heavy. Aguida told me about it. When Antinea gave little Kaine his dismissal, smiling as she always does, he stopped in front of her, mute, very pale. She struck the gong for someone to take him away. A Targa slave came. But little Kaine had leapt for the hammer, and the Targa lay on the ground with his skull smashed. Antinea smiled all the time. They led little Kaine to his room. The same night, eluding guards, he jumped out of his window at a height of two hundred feet. The workmen in the embalming room told me that they had the greatest difficulty with his body. But they succeeded very well. You have only to go see for yourself. He occupies niche number 26 in the red marble hall."

The old woman drowned her emotion in her glass.

"Two days before," she continued, "I had done his nails, here, for this was his room. On the wall, near the window, he had written something in the stone with his knife. See, it is still here."

"Was it not Fate, that on this July midnight . . ."

At any other moment, that verse, traced in the stone of the window through which the English officer had hurled himself, would have killed me with overpowering emotion. But just then, another thought was in my heart.

[p. 220]

"Tell me," I said, controlling my voice as well as I could, "when Antinea holds one of us in her power, she shuts him up near her, does she not? Nobody sees him any more?"

The old woman shook her head.

"She is not afraid that he will escape. The mountain is well guarded. Antinea has only to strike her silver gong; he will be brought back to her immediately."

"But my companion. I have not seen him since she sent for him. . . ."

The negress smiled comprehendingly.

"If you have not seen him, it is because he prefers to remain near her. Antinea does not force him to. Neither does she prevent him."

I struck my fist violently upon the table.

"Get along with you, old fool. And be quick about it!"

Rosita fled frightened, hardly taking time to collect her little instruments.

"Was it not Fate, that on this July midnight . . ."

I obeyed the negress's suggestion. Following the corridors, losing my way, set on the right road again by the Reverend Spardek, I pushed open the door of the red marble hall. I entered.

The freshness of the perfumed crypt did me good. No place can be so sinister that it is not, as it were, purified by the murmur of running water. The cascade, gurgling in the middle hall, comforted me.

[p. 221]

[paragraph continues] One day before an attack I was lying with my section in deep grass, waiting for the moment, the blast of the bugle, which would demand that we leap forward into the hail of bullets. A stream was at my feet. I listened to its fresh rippling. I admired the play of light and shade in the transparent water, the little beasts, the little black fish, the green grass, the yellow wrinkled sand . . . The mystery of water always has carried me out of myself.

Here, in this magic hall, my thoughts were held by the dark cascade. It felt friendly. It kept me from faltering in the midst of these rigid evidences of so many monstrous sacrifices. . . . Number 26. It was he all right. Lieutenant Douglas Kaine, born at Edinburgh, September 21, 1862. Died at Ahaggar, July 16, 189o. Twenty-eight. He wasn't even twenty-eight! His face was thin under the coat of orichalch. His mouth sad and passionate. It was certainly he. Poor youngster.--Edinburgh,--I knew Edinburgh, without ever having been there. From the wall of the castle you can see the Pentland hills. "Look a little lower down," said Stevenson's sweet Miss Flora to Anne of Saint-Yves, "look a little lower down and you will see, in the fold of the hill, a clump of trees and a curl of smoke that rises from among them. That is Swanston Cottage, where my brother and I live with my aunt. If it really pleases you to see it, I shall be glad." When he left for Darfour, Douglas Kaine

[p. 222]

must surely have left in Edinburgh a Miss Flora, as blonde as Saint-Yves' Flora. But what are these slips of girls beside Antinea! Kaine, however sensible a mortal, however made for this kind of love, had loved otherwise. He was dead. And here was number 27, on account of whom Kaine dashed himself on the rocks of the Sahara, and who, in his turn, is dead also.

To die, to love. How naturally the word resounded in the red marble hall. How Antinea seemed to tower above that circle of pale statues! Does love, then, need so much death in order that it may be multiplied? Other women, in other parts of the world, are doubtless as beautiful as Antinea, more beautiful perhaps. I hold you to witness that I have not said much about her beauty. Why then, this obsession, this fever, this consumption of all my being? Why am I ready, for the sake of pressing this quivering form within my arms for one instant, to face things that I dare not think of for fear I should tremble before them?

Here is number 53, the last. Morhange will be 54. I shall be 55. In six months, eight, perhaps,--what difference anyway?--I shall be hoisted into this niche, an image without eyes, a dead soul, a finished body.

I touched the heights of bliss, of exaltation that can be felt. What a child I was, just now! I lost my temper with a negro manicure. I was

[p. 223]

jealous of Morhange, on my word! Why not, since I was at it, be jealous of those here present; then of the others, the absent, who will come, one by one, to fill the black circle of the still empty niches. . . . Morhange, I know, is at this moment with Antinea, and it is to me a bitter and splendid joy to think of his joy. But some evening, in three months, four perhaps, the embalmers will come here. Niche 54 will receive its prey. Then a Targa slave will advance toward me. I shall shiver with superb ecstacy. He will touch my arm. And it will be my turn to penetrate into eternity by the bleeding door of love.

*      *      *      *      *      *

When I emerged from my meditation, I found myself back in the library, where the falling night obscured the shadows of the people who were assembled there.

I recognized M. Le Mesge, the Pastor, the Hetman, Aguida, two Tuareg slaves, still more, all joining in the most animated conference.

I drew nearer, astonished, even alarmed to see together so many people who ordinarily felt no kind of sympathy for each other.

An unheard of occurrence had thrown all the people of the mountain into uproar.

Two Spanish explorers, come from Rio de Oro, had been seen to the West, in Adhar Ahnet.

As soon as Cegheir-ben-Cheikh was informed,

[p. 224]

he had prepared to go to meet them. At that instant he had received the order to do nothing.

Henceforth it was impossible to doubt.

For the first time, Antinea was in love.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

THE LAMENT OF TANIT-ZERGA

"Arraou, arraou."

I roused myself vaguely from the half sleep to which I had finally succumbed. I half opened my eyes. Immediately I flattened back.

"Arraou."

Two feet from my face was the muzzle of King Hiram, yellow with a tracery of black. The leopard was helping me to wake up; otherwise he took little interest, for he yawned; his dark red jaws, beautiful gleaming white fangs, opened and closed lazily.

At the same moment I heard a burst of laughter. It was little Tanit-Zerga. She was crouching on a cushion near the divan where I was stretched out, curiously watching my close interview with the leopard.

"King Hiram was bored," she felt obliged to explain to me. "I brought him."

"How nice," I growled. "Only tell me, could he not have gone somewhere else to be amused?"

"He is all alone now," said the girl. "They have

[p. 226]

sent him away. He made too much noise when he played."

These words recalled me to the events of the previous evening.

"If you like, I will make him go away," said Tanit-Zerga.

"No, let him alone."

I looked at the leopard with sympathy. Our common misfortune brought us together.

I even caressed his rounded forehead. King Hiram showed his contentment by stretching out at full length and uncurling his great amber claws. The mat on the floor had much to suffer.

"Gale is here, too," said the little girl.

"Gale! Who may he be?"

At the same time, I saw on Tanit-Zerga's knees a strange animal, about the size of a big cat, with flat ears, and a long muzzle. Its pale gray fur was rough.

It was watching me with queer little pink eyes.

"It is my mongoose," explained Tanit-Zerga.

"Come now," I said sharply, "is that all?"

I must have looked so crabbed and ridiculous that Tanit-Zerga began to laugh. I laughed, too.

"Gale is my friend," she said when she was serious again. "I saved her life. It was when she was quite little. I will tell you about it some day. See how good-natured she is."

[p. 227]

So saying, she dropped the mongoose on my knees.

"It is very nice of you, Tanit-Zerga," I said, "to come and pay me a visit." I passed my hand slowly over the animal's back.

"What time is it now?"

"A little after nine. See, the sun is already high. Let me draw the shade."

The room was in darkness. Gale's eyes grew redder. King Hiram's became green.

"It is very nice of you," I repeated, pursuing my idea. "I see that you are free to-day. You never came so early before."

A shade passed over the girl's forehead.

"Yes, I am free," she said, almost bitterly.

I looked at Tanit-Zerga more closely. For the first time I realized that she was beautiful. Her hair, which she wore falling over her shoulders, was not so much curly as it was gently waving. Her features were of remarkable fineness: the nose very straight, a small mouth with delicate lips, a strong chin. She was not black, but copper colored. Her slender graceful body had nothing in common with the disgusting thick sausages which the carefully cared for bodies of the blacks become.

A large circle of copper made a heavy decoration around her forehead and hair. She had four bracelets, still heavier, on her wrists and anklets, and, for clothing, a green silk tunic, slashed in points, braided with gold. Green, bronze, gold.

[p. 228]

"You are a Sonrhai, Tanit-Zerga?" I asked gently.

She replied with almost ferocious pride:

"I am a Sonrhai."

"Strange little thing," I thought.

Evidently this was a subject on which Tanit-Zerga did not intend the conversation to turn. I recalled how, almost painfully, she had pronounced that "they," when she had told me how they had driven away King Hiram.

"I am a Sonrhai," she repeated. "I was born at Gao, on the Niger, the ancient Sonrhai capital. My fathers reigned over the great Mandigue Empire. You need not scorn me because I am here as a slave."

In a ray of sunlight, Gale, seated on his little haunches, washed his shining mustaches with his forepaws; and King Hiram, stretched out on the mat, groaned plaintively in his sleep.

"He is dreaming," said Tanit-Zerga, a finger on her lips.

There was a moment of silence. Then she said: "You must be hungry. And I do not think that you will want to eat with the others."

I did not answer.

"You must eat," she continued. "If you like, I will go get something to eat for you and me. I will bring King Hiram's and Gale's dinner here, too. When you are sad, you should not stay alone."

[p. 229]

And the little green and gold fairy vanished, without waiting for my answer.

That was how my friendship with Tanit-Zerga began. Each morning she came to my room with the two beasts. She rarely spoke to me of Antinea, and when she did, it was always indirectly. The question that she saw ceaselessly hovering on my lips seemed to be unbearable to her, and I felt her avoiding all the subjects towards which I, myself, dared not direct the conversation.

To make sure of avoiding them, she prattled, prattled, prattled, like a nervous little parokeet.

I was sick and this Sister of Charity in green and bronze silk tended me with such care as never was before. The two wild beasts, the big and the little, were there, each side of my couch, and, during my delirium, I saw their mysterious, sad eyes fixed on me.

In her melodious voice, Tanit-Zerga told me wonderful stories, and among them, the one she thought most wonderful, the story of her life.

It was not till much later, very suddenly, that I realized how far this little barbarian had penetrated into my own life. Wherever thou art at this hour, dear little girl, from whatever peaceful shores thou watchest my tragedy, cast a look at thy friend, pardon him for not having accorded thee, from the very first, the gratitude that thou deservedest so richly.

"I remember from my childhood," she said, "the

[p. 230]

vision of a yellow and rose-colored sun rising through the morning mists over the smooth waves of a great river, 'the river where there is water,' the Niger, it was. . . But you are not listening to me."

"I am listening to you, I swear it, little Tanit-Zerga."

"You are sure I am not wearying you? You want me to go on?"

"Go on, little Tanit-Zerga, go on."

"Well, with my little companions, of whom I was very fond, I played at the edge of the river where there is water, under the jujube trees, brothers of the zeg-zeg, the spines of which pierced the head of your prophet and which we call 'the tree of Paradise' because our prophet told us that under it would live those chosen of Paradise; [*1] and which is sometimes so big, so big, that a horseman cannot traverse its shade in a century.

"There we wove beautiful garlands with mimosa, the pink flowers of the caper bush and white cockles. Then we threw them in the green water to ward off evil spirits; and we laughed like mad things when a great snorting hippopotamus raised his swollen head and we bombarded him in glee until he had to plunge back again with a tremendous splash.

"That was in the mornings. Then there fell on Gao the deathlike lull of the red siesta. When that

[p. 231]

was finished, we came back to the edge of the river to see the enormous crocodiles with bronze goggle-eyes creep along little by little, among the clouds of mosquitoes and day-flies on the banks, and work their way traitorously into the yellow ooze of the mud flats.

"Then we bombarded them, as we had done the hippopotamus in the morning; and to fete the sun setting behind the black branches of the douldouls, we made a circle, stamping our feet, then clapping our hands, as we sang the Sonrhai hymn.

"Such were the ordinary occupations of free little girls. But you must not think that we were only frivolous; and I will tell you, if you like, how I, who am talking to you, I saved a French chieftain who must be vastly greater than yourself, to judge by the number of gold ribbons he had on his white sleeves.

"Tell me, little Tanit-Zerga," I said, my eyes elsewhere.

"You have no right to smile," she said a little aggrieved, "and to pay no attention to me. But never mind! It is for myself that I tell these things, for the sake of recollection. Above Gao, the Niger makes a bend. There is a little promontory in the river, thickly covered with large gum trees. It was an evening in August and the sun was sinking. Not a bird in the forest but had gone to rest, motionless until the morning. Suddenly we heard an unfamiliar

[p. 232]

noise in the west, boum-boum, boum-boum, boum-baraboum, boum-boum, growing louder--boum-boum, boum-baraboum--and, suddenly, there was a great flight of water birds, aigrettes, pelicans, wild ducks and teal, which scattered over the gum trees, followed by a column of black smoke, which was scarcely flurried by the breeze that was springing up.

"It was a gunboat, turning the point, sending out a wake that shook the overhanging bushes on each side of the river. One could see that the red, white and blue flag on the stern had drooped till it was dragging in the water, so heavy was the evening.

"She stopped at the little point of land. A small boat was let down, manned by two native soldiers who rowed, and three chiefs who soon leapt ashore.

"The oldest, a French marabout, with a great white burnous, who knew our language marvelously, asked to speak to Sheik Sonni-Azkia. When my father advanced and told him that it was he, the marabout told him that the commandant of the Club at Timbuctoo was very angry, that a mile from there the gunboat had run on an invisible pile of logs, that she had sprung a leak and that she could not so continue her voyage towards Ansango.

"My father replied that the French who protected the poor natives against the Tuareg were welcome: that it was not from evil design, but for fish that they had built the barrage, and that he put all

[p. 233]

the resources of Gao, including the forge, at the disposition of the French chief, for repairing the gunboat.

"While they were talking, the French chief looked at me and I looked at him. He was already middle-aged, tall, with shoulders a little bent, and blue eyes as clear as the stream whose name I bear.

"'Come here, little one,' he said in his gentle voice.

"'I am the daughter of Sheik Sonni-Azkia, and I do only what I wish,' I replied, vexed at his informality.

"'You are right,' he answered smiling, 'for you are pretty. Will you give me the flowers that you have around your neck?'

"It was a great necklace of purple hibiscus. I held it out to him. He kissed me. The peace was made.

"Meantime, under the direction of my father, the native soldiers and strong men of the tribe had hauled the gunboat into a pocket of the river.

"'There is work there for all day to-morrow, Colonel,' said the chief mechanic, after inspecting the leaks. 'We won't be able to get away before the day after to-morrow. And, if we're to do that, these lazy soldiers mustn't loaf on the job.'

"'What an awful bore,' groaned my new friend.

"But his ill-humor did not last long, so ardently did my little companions and I seek to distract him.

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] He listened to our most beautiful songs; and, to thank us, made us taste the good things that had been brought from the boat for his dinner. He slept in our great cabin, which my father gave up to him; and for a long time, before I went to sleep, I looked through the cracks of the cabin where I lay with my mother, at the lights of the gunboat trembling in red ripples on the surface of the dark waves.

 

"That night, I had a frightful dream. I saw my friend, the French officer, sleeping in peace, while a great crow hung croaking above his head: 'Caw--caw--the shade of the gum trees of Gao--caw, caw--will avail nothing to-morrow night--caw, caw--to the white chief nor to his escort.'

"Dawn had scarcely begun, when I went to find the native soldiers. They were stretched out on the bridge of the gunboat, taking advantage of the fact that the whites were still sleeping, to do nothing.

"I approached the oldest one and spoke to him with authority:

"'Listen, I saw the black crow in a dream last night. He told me that the shade of the gum trees of Gao would be fatal to your chief in the coming night! . . .'

"'And, as they all remained motionless, stretched out, gazing at the sky, without even seeming to have heard, I added:

[p. 235]

"'And to his escort!'

 

It was the hour when the sun was highest, and the Colonel was eating in the cabin with the other Frenchmen, when the chief mechanic entered.

"'I don't know what has come over the natives. They are working like angels. If they keep on this way, Colonel, we shall be able to leave this evening.'

"'Very good,' said the Colonel, 'but don't let them spoil the job by too much haste. We don't have to be at Ansango before the end of the week. It will be better to start in the morning.'

"I trembled. Suppliantly I approached and told him the story of my dream. He listened with a smile of astonishment; then, at the last, he said gravely:

"'It is agreed, little Tanit-Zerga. We will leave this evening if you wish it.'

"And he kissed me.

"The darkness had already fallen when the gunboat, now repaired, left the harbor. My friend stood in the midst of the group of Frenchmen who waved their caps as long as we could see them. Standing alone on the rickety jetty, I waited, watching the water flow by, until the last sound of the steam-driven vessel, boum-baraboum, had died away into the night [*1].

[p. 236]

Tanit-Zerga paused.

"That was the last night of Gao. While I was sleeping and the moon was still high above the forest, a dog yelped, but only for an instant. Then came the cry of men, then of women, the kind of cry that you can never forget if you have once heard it. When the sun rose, it found me, quite naked, running and stumbling towards the north with my little companions, beside the swiftly moving camels of the Tuareg who escorted us. Behind, followed the women of the tribe, my mother among them, two by two, the yoke upon their necks. There were not many men. Almost all lay with their throats cut under the ruins of the thatch of Gao beside my father, brave Sonni-Azkia. Once again Gao had been razed by a band of Awellimiden, who had come to massacre the French on their gunboat.

"The Tuareg hurried us, hurried us, for they were afraid of being pursued. We traveled thus for ten days; and, as the millet and hemp disappeared, the march became more frightful. Finally, near Isakeryen, in the country of Kidal, the Tuareg sold us to a caravan of Trarzan Moors who were going from Bamrouk to Rhat. At first, because they went more slowly, it seemed good fortune. But, before long, the desert was an expanse of rough pebbles, and the women began to fall. As for the men, the last of them had died far back under the blows of the stick for having refused to go farther.

[p. 237]

"I still had the strength to keep going, and even as far in the lead as possible, so as not to hear the cries of my little playmates. Each time one of them fell by the way, unable to rise again, they saw one of the drivers descend from his camel and drag her into the bushes a little way to cut her throat. But one day, I heard a cry that made me turn around. It was my mother. She was kneeling, holding out her poor arms to me. In an instant I was beside her. But a great Moor, dressed in white, separated us. A red moroccan case hung around his neck from a black chaplet. He drew a cutlass from it. I can still see the blue steel on the brown skin. Another horrible cry. An instant later, driven by a club, I was trotting ahead, swallowing my little tears, trying to regain my place in the caravan.

"Near the wells of Asiou, the Moors were attacked by a party of Tuareg of Kel-Tazeholet, serfs of the great tribe of Kel-Rhela, which rules over Ahaggar. They, in their turn, were massacred to the last man. That is how. I was brought here, and offered as homage to Antinea, who was pleased with me and ever since has been kind to me. That is why it is no slave who soothes your fever to-day with stories that you do not even listen to, but the last descendant of the great Sonrhai Emperors, of Sonni-Ali, the destroyer of men and of countries, of Mohammed Azkia, who made the pilgrimage to Mecca, taking with him fifteen hundred cavaliers and three

[p. 238]

hundred thousand mithkal of gold in the days when our power stretched without rival from Chad to Touat and to the western sea, and when Gao raised her cupola, sister of the sky, above the other cities, higher above her rival cupolas than is the tamarisk above the humble plants of sorghum."

Footnotes

^230:1 The Koran, Chapter 66, verse 17. (Note by M. Leroux.)

^235:1 Cf. the records and the Bulletin de la Societe de Geographie de Paris (1897) for the cruises on the Niger, made by the Commandant of the Timbuctoo region, Colonel Joffre, Lieutenants Baudry and Bluset, and by Father Hacquart of the White Fathers. (Note by M. Leroux.)

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 239]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THE SILVER HAMMER

          Je ne m'en defends plus et je ne   veux qu' aller
   Reconnaitre la place ou je dois l'immoler.
                                      (Andromaque.)

     
   IT WAS this sort of a night when what I am going to tell you now happened. Toward five o'clock the sky clouded over and a sense of the coming storm trembled in the stifling air.

I shall always remember it. It was the fifth of January, 1897.

King Hiram and Gale lay heavily on the matting of my room. Leaning on my elbows beside Tanit-Zerga in the rock-hewn window, I spied the advance tremors of lightning.

One by one they rose, streaking the now total darkness with their bluish stripes. But no burst of thunder followed. The storm did not attain the peaks of Ahaggar. It passed without breaking, leaving us in our gloomy bath of sweat.

"I am going to bed," said Tanit-Zerga.

I have said that her room was above mine. Its

[p. 240]

bay window was some thirty feet above that before which I lay.

She took Gale in her arms. But King Hiram would have none of it. Digging his four paws into the matting, he whined in anger and uneasiness.

"Leave him," I finally said to Tanit-Zerga. "For once he may sleep here."

So it was that this little beast incurred his large share of responsibility in the events which followed.

Left alone, I became lost in my reflections. The night was black. The whole mountain was shrouded in silence.

It took the louder and louder growls of the leopard to rouse me from my meditation.

King Hiram was braced against the door, digging at it with his drawn claws. He, who had refused to follow Tanit-Zerga a while ago, now wanted to go out. He was determined to go out.

"Be still," I said to him. "Enough of that. Lie down!"

I tried to pull him away from the door.

I succeeded only in getting a staggering blow from his paw.

Then I sat down on the divan.

My quiet was short. "Be honest with yourself," I said. "Since Morhange abandoned you, since the day when you saw Antinea, you have had only one idea. What good is it to beguile yourself with the stories of Tanit-Zerga, charming as they are? This

[p. 241]

leopard is a pretext, perhaps a guide. Oh, you know that mysterious things are going to happen to-night. How have you been able to keep from doing anything as long as this?"

Immediately I made a resolve.

"If I open the door," I thought, "King Hiram will leap down the corridor and I shall have great difficulty in following him. I must find some other way."

The shade of the window was worked by means of a small cord. I pulled it down. Then I tied it into a firm leash which I fastened to the metal collar of the leopard.

I half opened the door.

"There, now you can go. But quietly, quietly."

I had all the trouble in the world to curb the ardor of King Hiram who dragged me along the shadowy labyrinth of corridors. It was shortly before nine o'clock, and the rose-colored night lights were almost burned out in the niches. Now and then, we passed one which was casting its last flickers. What a labyrinth! I realized that from here on I would not recognize the way to her room. I could only follow the leopard.

At first furious, he gradually became used to towing me. He strained ahead, belly to the ground, with snuffs of joy.

Nothing is more like one black corridor than another black corridor. Doubt seized me. Suppose

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] I should suddenly find myself in the baccarat room! But that was unjust to King Hiram. Barred too long from the dear presence, the good beast was taking me exactly where I wanted him to take me.

Suddenly, at a turn, the darkness ahead lifted. A rose window, faintly glimmering red and green, appeared before us.

The leopard stopped with a low growl before the door in which the rose window was cut.

I recognized it as the door through which the white Targa had led me the day after my arrival, when I had been set upon by King Hiram, when I had found myself in the presence of Antinea.

"We are much better friends to-day," I said, flattering him so that he would not give a dangerously loud growl.

I tried to open the door. The light, coming through the window, fell upon the floor, green and red.

A simple latch, which I turned. I shortened the leash to have better control of King Hiram who was getting nervous.

The great room where I had seen Antinea for the first time was completely dark. But the garden on which it gave shone under a clouded moon, in a sky weighted down with the storm which did not break. Not a breath of air. The lake gleamed like a sheet of pewter.

I seated myself on a cushion, holding the leopard

[p. 243]

firmly between my knees. He was purring with impatience. I was thinking. Not about my goal. For a long time that had been fixed. But about the means.

Then, I seemed to hear a distant murmur, a faint sound of voices.

King Hiram growled louder, struggled. I gave him a little more leash. He began to rub along the dark walls on the sides whence the voices seemed to come. I followed him, stumbling as quietly as I could among the scattered cushions.

My eyes, become accustomed to the darkness, could see the pyramid of cushions on which Antinea had first appeared to me.

Suddenly I stumbled. The leopard had stopped. I realized that I had stepped on his tail. Brave beast, he did not make a sound.

Groping along the wall, I felt a second door. Quietly, very quietly, I opened it as I had opened the preceding one. The leopard whimpered feebly.

"King Hiram," I murmured, "be quiet."

And I put my arms about his powerful neck.

I felt his warm wet tongue on my hands. His flanks quivered. He shook with happiness.

In front of us, lighted in the center, another room opened up. In the middle six men were squatting on the matting, playing dice and drinking coffee from tiny copper coffee cups with long stems.

They were the white Tuareg.

[p. 244]

A lamp, hung from the ceiling, threw a circle of light over them. Everything outside that circle was in deep shadow.

The black faces, the copper cups, the white robes, the moving light and shadow, made a strange etching.

They played with a reserved dignity, announcing the throws in raucous voices.

Then, slowly, very slowly, I slipped the leash from the collar of the impatient little beast.

"Go, boy."

He leapt with a sharp yelp.

And what I had foreseen happened.

The first bound of King Hiram carried him into the midst of the white Tuareg, sowing confusion in the bodyguard. Another leap carried him into the shadow again. I made out vaguely the shaded opening of another corridor on the side of the room opposite where I was standing.

"There!" I thought.

The confusion in the room was indescribable, but noiseless. One realized the restraint which nearness to a great presence imposed upon the exasperated guards. The stakes and the dice-boxes had rolled in one direction, the copper cups, in the other.

Two of the Tuareg, doubled up with pain, were rubbing their ribs with low oaths.

I need not say that I profited by this silent confusion to glide into the room. I was now flattened

[p. 245]

against the wall of the second corridor, down which King Hiram had just disappeared.

At that moment a clear gong echoed in the silence. The trembling which seized the Tuareg assured me that I had chosen the right way.

One of the six men got up. He passed me and I fell in behind him. I was perfectly calm. My least movement was perfectly calculated.

"All that I risk here now," I said to myself, "is being led back politely to my room."

The Targa lifted a curtain. I followed on his heels into the chamber of Antinea.

The room was huge and at once well lighted and very dark. While the right half, where Antinea was, gleamed under shaded lamps, the left was dim.

Those who have penetrated into a Mussulman home know what a guignol is, a kind of square niche in the wall, four feet from the floor, its opening covered by a curtain. One mounts to it by wooden steps. I noticed such a guignol at my left. I crept into it. My pulses beat in the shadow. But I was calm, quite calm.

There I could see and hear everything.

I was in Antinea's chamber. There was nothing singular about the room, except the great luxury of the hangings. The ceiling was in shadow, but multicolored lanterns cast a vague and gentle light over gleaming stuffs and furs.

Antinea was stretched out on a lion's skin, smoking.

[p. 246]

[paragraph continues] A little silver tray and pitcher lay beside her. King Hiram was flattened out at her feet, licking them madly.

The Targa slave stood rigid before her, one hand on his heart, the other on his forehead, saluting.

Antinea spoke in a hard voice, without looking at the man.

"Why did you let the leopard pass? I told you that I wanted to be alone."

"He knocked us over, mistress," said the Targa humbly.

"The doors were not closed, then?"

The slave did not answer.

"Shall I take him away?" he asked.

And his eyes, fastened upon King Hiram who

stared at him maliciously, expressed well enough his desire for a negative reply.

"Let him stay since he is here," said Antinea. She tapped nervously on the little silver tray.

"What is the captain doing?" she asked.

"He dined a while ago and seemed to enjoy his food," the Targa answered.

"Has he said nothing?"

"Yes, he asked to see his companion, the other officer."

Antinea tapped the little tray still more rapidly. "Did he say nothing else?"

"No, mistress," said the man.

[p. 247]

A pallor overspread the Atlantide's little forehead.

"Go get him," she said brusquely.

Bowing, the Targa left the room.

I listened to this dialogue with great anxiety. Was this Morhange? Had he been faithful to me, after all? Had I suspected him unjustly? He had wanted to see me and been unable to!

My eyes never left Antinea's.

She was no longer the haughty, mocking princess of our first interview. She no longer wore the golden circlet on her forehead. Not a bracelet, not a ring. She was dressed only in a full flowing tunic. Her black hair, unbound, lay in masses of ebony over her slight shoulders and her bare arms.

Her beautiful eyes were deep circled. Her divine mouth drooped. I did not know whether I was glad or sorry to see this new quivering Cleopatra.

Flattened at her feet, King Hiram gazed submissively at her.

An immense orichalch mirror with golden reflections was set into the wall at the right. Suddenly she raised herself erect before it. I saw her nude.

A splendid and bitter sight!--A woman who thinks herself alone, standing before her mirror in expectation of the man she wishes to subdue!

The six incense-burners scattered about the room sent up invisible columns of perfume. The balsam spices of Arabia wore floating webs in which my

[p. 248]

shameless senses were entangled. . . . And, back toward me, standing straight as a lily, Antinea smiled into her mirror.

Low steps sounded in the corridor. Antinea immediately fell back into the nonchalant pose in which I had first seen her. One had to see such a transformation to believe it possible.

Morhange entered the room, preceded by a white Targa.

He, too, seemed rather pale. But I was most struck by the expression of serene peace on that face which I thought I knew so well. I felt that I never had understood what manner of man Morhange was, never.

He stood erect before Antinea without seeming to notice her gesture inviting him to be seated. She smiled at him.

"You are surprised, perhaps," she said finally, "that I should send for you at so late an hour." Morhange did not move an eyelash.

"Have you considered it well?" she demanded.

Morhange smiled gravely, but did not reply.

I could read in Antinea's face the effort it cost her to continue smiling; I admired the self-control of these two beings.

"I sent for you," she continued. "You do not guess why? . . . Well, it is to tell you something that you do not expect. It will be no surprise to you if I say that I never met a man like you. During

[p. 249]

your captivity, you have expressed only one wish. Do you recall it?"

"I asked your permission to see my friend before I died," said Morhange simply.

I do not know what stirred me more on hearing these words: delight at Morhange's formal tone in speaking to Antinea, or emotion at hearing the one wish he had expressed.

But Antinea continued calmly:

"That is why I sent for you--to tell you that you are going to see him again. And I am going to do something else. You will perhaps scorn me even more when you realize that you had only to oppose me to bend me to your will--I, who have bent all other wills to mine. But, however that may be, it is decided: I give you both your liberty. Tomorrow Cegheir-ben-Cheikh will lead you past the fifth enclosure. Are you satisfied?"

"I am," said Morhange with a mocking smile.

"That will give me a chance," he continued, "to make better plans for the next trip I intend to make this way. For you need not doubt that I shall feel bound to return to express my gratitude. Only, next time, to render so great a queen the honors due her, I shall ask my government to furnish me with two or three hundred European soldiers and several cannon."

Antinea was standing up, very pale.

"What are you saying?"

[p. 250]

"I am saying," said Morhange coldly, "that I foresaw this. First threats, then promises."

Antinea stepped toward him. He had folded his arms. He looked at her with a sort of grave pity.

"I will make you die in the most atrocious agonies," she said finally.

"I am your prisoner," Morhange replied.

"You shall suffer things that you cannot even imagine."

"I am your prisoner," repeated Morhange in the same sad calm.

Antinea paced the room like a beast in a cage. She advanced toward my companion and, no longer mistress of herself, struck him in the face.

He smiled and caught hold of her, drawing her little wrists together with a strange mixture of force and gentleness.

King Hiram growled. I thought he was about to leap. But the cold eyes of Morhange held him fascinated.

"I will have your comrade killed before your eyes," gasped Antinea.

It seemed to me that Morhange paled, but only for a second. I was overcome by the nobility and insight of his reply.

"My companion is brave. He does not fear death. And, in any case, he would prefer death to life purchased at the price you name."

So saying, he let go Antinea's wrists. Her pallor

[p. 251]

was terrible. From the expression of her mouth I felt that this would be her last word to him.

"Listen," she said.

How beautiful she was, in her scorned majesty, her beauty powerless for the first time!

"Listen," she continued. "Listen. For the last time. Remember that I hold the gates of this palace, that I have supreme power over your life. Remember that you breathe only at my pleasure. Remember . . ."

"I have remembered all that," said Morhange.

"A last time," she repeated.

The serenity of Morhange's face was so powerful that I scarcely noticed his opponent. In that transfigured countenance, no trace of worldliness remained.

"A last time," came Antinea's voice, almost breaking.

Morhange was not even looking at her.

"As you will," she said.

Her gong resounded. She had struck the silver disc. The white Targa appeared.

"Leave the room!"

Morhange, his head held high, went out.

 

Now Antinea is in my arms. This is no haughty, voluptuous woman whom I am pressing to my heart. It is only an unhappy, scorned little girl.

So great was her trouble that she showed no surprise

[p. 252]

when I stepped out beside her. Her head is on my shoulder. Like the crescent moon in the black clouds, I see her clear little bird-like profile amid her mass of hair. Her warm arms hold me convulsively. . . . O tremblant coeur humain. . . .

Who could resist such an embrace, amid the soft perfumes, in the langorous night? I feel myself a being without will. Is this my voice, the voice which is murmuring:

"Ask me what you will, and I will do it, I will do it."

My senses are sharpened, tenfold keen. My head rests against a soft, nervous little knee. Clouds of odors whirl about me. Suddenly it seems as if the golden lanterns are waving from the ceiling like giant censers. Is this my voice, the voice repeating in a dream:

"Ask me what you will, and I will do it. I will do it."

Antinea's face is almost touching mine. A strange light flickers in her great eyes.

Beyond, I see the gleaming eyes of King Hiram. Beside him, there is a little table of Kairouan, blue and gold. On that table I see the gong with which Antinea summons the slaves. I see the hammer with which she struck it just now, a hammer with a long ebony handle, a heavy silver head . . . the hammer with which little Lieutenant Kaine dealt death. . . .

I see nothing more. . . .

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 253]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

THE MAIDENS OF THE ROCKS

I AWAKENED in my room. The sun, already at its zenith, filled the place with unbearable light and heat.

The first thing I saw, on opening my eyes, was the shade, ripped down, lying in the middle of the floor. Then, confusedly, the night's events began to come back to me.

My head felt stupid and heavy. My mind wandered. My memory seemed blocked. "I went out with the leopard, that is certain. That red mark on my forefinger shows how he strained at the leash. My knees are still dusty. I remember creeping along the wall in the room where the white Tuareg were playing at dice. That was the minute after King Hiram had leapt past them. After that . . . oh, Morhange and Antinea. . . . And then?"

I recalled nothing more. I recalled nothing more. But something must have happened, something which I could not remember.

I was uneasy. I wanted to go back, yet it seemed

[p. 254]

as if I were afraid to go. I have never felt anything more painful than those conflicting emotions.

"It is a long way from here to Antinea's apartments. I must have been very sound asleep not to have noticed when they brought me back--for they have brought me back."

I stopped trying to think it out. My head ached too much.

"I must have air," I murmured. "I am roasting here; it will drive me mad."

I had to see someone, no matter whom. Mechanically, I walked toward the library.

I found M. Le Mesge in a transport of delirious joy. The Professor was engaged in opening an enormous bale, carefully sewed in a brown blanket.

"You come at a good time, sir," he cried, on seeing me enter. "The magazines have just arrived."

He dashed about in feverish haste. Presently a stream of pamphlets and magazines, blue, green, yellow and salmon, was bursting from an opening in the bale.

"Splendid, splendid!" he cried, dancing with joy. "Not too late, either; here are the numbers for October fifteenth. We must give a vote of thanks to good Ameur."

His good spirits were contagious.

"There is a good Turkish merchant who subscribes to all the interesting magazines of the two continents. He sends them on by Rhadames to a

[p. 255]

destination which he little suspects. Ah, here are the French ones."

M. Le Mesge ran feverishly over the tables of contents.

"Internal politics: articles by Francis Charmes, Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, d'Haussonville on the Czar's trip to Paris. Look, a study by Avenel of wages in the Middle Ages. And verse, verses of the young poets, Fernand Gregh, Edmond Haraucourt. Ah, the resume of a book by Henry de Castries on Islam. That may be interesting. . . . Take what you please."

Joy makes people amiable and M. Le Mesge was really delirious with it.

A puff of breeze came from the window. I went to the balustrade and, resting my elbows on it, began to run through a number of the Revue des Deux Mondes.

I did not read, but flipped over the pages, my eyes now on the lines of swarming little black characters, now on the rocky basin which lay shivering, pale pink, under the declining sun.

Suddenly my attention became fixed. There was a strange coincidence between the text and the landscape.

"In the sky overhead were only light shreds of cloud, like bits of white ash floating up from burnt-out logs. The sun fell over a circle of rocky peaks, silhouetting their severe lines against the azure sky.

[p. 256]

[paragraph continues] From on high, a great sadness and gentleness poured down into the lonely enclosure, like a magic drink into a deep cup. . . ." [*1]

I turned the pages feverishly. My mind seemed to be clearing.

Behind me, M. Le Mesge, deep in an article, voiced his opinions in indignant growls.

I continued reading:

"On all sides a magnificent view spread out before us in the raw light. The chain of rocks, clearly visible in their barren desolation which stretched to the very summit, lay stretched out like some great heap of gigantic, unformed things left by some primordial race of Titans to stupefy human beings. Overturned towers . . ."

"It is shameful, downright shameful," the Professor was repeating.

"Overturned towers, crumbling citadels, cupolas fallen in, broken pillars, mutilated colossi, prows of vessels, thighs of monsters, bones of titans,--this mass, impassable with its ridges and gullies, seemed the embodiment of everything huge and tragic. So clear were the distances . . ."

"Downright shameful," M. Le Mesge kept on saying in exasperation, thumping his fist on the table.

"So clear were the distances that I could see, as if I had it under my eyes, infinitely enlarged, every

[p. 257]

contour of the rock which Violante had shown me through the window with the gesture of a creator.

Trembling, I closed the magazine. At my feet, now red, I saw the rock which Antinea had pointed out to me the day of our first interview, huge, steep, overhanging the reddish brown garden.

"That is my horizon," she had said.

M. Le Mesge's excitement had passed all bounds. "It is worse than shameful; it is infamous."

I almost wanted to strangle him into silence. He seized my arm.

"Read that, sir; and, although you don't know a great deal about the subject, you will see that this article on Roman Africa is a miracle of misinformation, a monument of ignorance. And it is signed . . . do you know by whom it is signed?"

"Leave me alone," I said brutally.

"Well, it is signed Gaston Boissier. Yes, sir! Gaston Boissier, grand officer of the Legion of Honor, lecturer at the Ecole Normale Superieure, permanent secretary of the French Academy, member of the Academy of Inscriptions and Literature, one of those who once ruled out the subject of my thesis . . . one of those . . . ah, poor university, ah, poor France!"

I was no longer listening. I had begun to read again. My forehead was covered with sweat. But it seemed as if my head had been cleared like a room

[p. 258]

when a window is opened; memories were beginning to come back like doves winging their way home to the dovecote.

"At that moment, an irrepressible tremor shook her whole body; her eyes dilated as if some terrible sight had filled them with horror.

"'Antonello,' she murmured.

"And for seconds, she was unable to say another word.

"I looked at her in mute anguish and the suffering which drew her dear lips together seemed also to clutch at my heart. The vision which was in her eyes passed into mine, and I saw again the thin white face of Antonello, and the quick quivering of his eyelids, the waves of agony which seized his long worn body and shook it like a reed."

I threw the magazine upon the table.

"That is it," I said.

To cut the pages, I had used the knife with which M. Le Mesge had cut the cords of the bale, a short ebony-handled dagger, one of those daggers that the Tuareg wear in a bracelet sheath against the upper left arm.

I slipped it into the big pocket of my flannel dolman and walked toward the door.

I was about to cross the threshold when I heard M. Le Mesge call me.

"Monsieur de Saint Avit! Monsieur de Saint Avit!"

[p. 259]

"I want to ask you something, please."

"What is it?"

"Nothing important. You know that I have to mark the labels for the red marble hall. . . ." I walked toward the table.

"Well, I forgot to ask M. Morhange, at the beginning, the date and place of his birth. After that, I had no chance. I did not see him again. So I am forced to turn to you. Perhaps you can tell me?"

"I can," I said very calmly.

He took a large white card from a box which contained several and dipped his pen.

"Number 54 . . . Captain?"

"Captain Jean-Marie-Francois Morhange." While I dictated, one hand resting on the table, I noticed on my cuff a stain, a little stain, reddish brown.

"Morhange," repeated M. Le Mesge, finishing the lettering of my friend's name. "Born at . . .?" "Villefranche."

"Villefranche, Rhone. What date?"

"The fourteenth of October, 1859."

"The fourteenth of October, 1859. Good. Died at Ahaggar, the fifth of January, 1897. . . . There, that is done. A thousand thanks, sir, for your kindness."

"You are welcome."

I left M. Le Mesge.

[p. 260]

My mind, thenceforth, was well made up; and, as I said, I was perfectly calm. Nevertheless, when I had taken leave of M. Le Mesge, I felt the need of waiting a few minutes before executing my decision.

First I wandered through the corridors; then, finding myself near my room, I went to it. It was still intolerably hot. I sat down on my divan and began to think.

The dagger in my pocket bothered me. I took it out and laid it on the floor.

It was a good dagger, with a diamond-shaped blade, and with a collar of orange leather between the blade and the handle.

The sight of it recalled the silver hammer. I remembered how easily it fitted into my hand when I struck . . .

Every detail of the scene came back to me with incomparable vividness. But I did not even shiver. It seemed as if my determination to kill the instigator of the murder permitted me peacefully to evoke its brutal details.

If I reflected over my deed, it was to be surprised at it, not to condemn myself.

"Well," I said to myself, "I have killed this Morhange, who was once a baby, who, like all the others, cost his mother so much trouble with his baby sicknesses. I have put an end to his life, I have reduced to nothingness the monument of love, of

[p. 261]

tears, of trials overcome and pitfalls escaped, which constitutes a human existence. What an extraordinary adventure!"

That was all. No fear, no remorse, none of that Shakespearean horror after the murder, which, today, sceptic though I am and blase and utterly, utterly disillusioned, sets me shuddering whenever I am alone in a dark room.

"Come," I thought. "It's time. Time to finish it up."

I picked up the dagger. Before putting it in my pocket, I went through the motion of striking. All was well. The dagger fitted into my hand.

I had been through Antinea's apartment only when guided, the first time by the white Targa, the second time, by the leopard. Yet I found the way again without trouble. Just before coming to the door with the rose window, I met a Targa.

"Let me pass," I ordered. "Your mistress has sent for me."

The man obeyed, stepping back.

Soon a dim melody came to my ears. I recognized the sound of a rebaza, the violin with a single string, played by the Tuareg women. It was Aguida playing, squatting as usual at the feet of her mistress. The three other women were also squatted about her. Tanit-Zerga was not there.

Oh! Since that was the last time I saw her, let,

[p. 262]

oh, let me tell you of Antinea, how she looked in that supreme moment.

Did she feel the danger hovering over her and did she wish to brave it by her surest artifices? I had in mind the slender, unadorned body, without rings, without jewels, which I had pressed to my heart the night before. And now I started in surprise at seeing before me, adorned like an idol, not a woman, but a queen!

The heavy splendor of the Pharaohs weighted down her slender body. On her head was the great gold pschent of Egyptian gods and kings; emeralds, the national stone of the Tuareg, were set in it, tracing and retracing her name in Tifinar characters. A red satin schenti, embroidered in golden lotus, enveloped her like the casket of a jewel. At her feet, lay an ebony scepter, headed with a trident. Her bare arms were encircled by two serpents whose fangs touched her armpits as if to bury themselves there. From the ear pieces of the pschent streamed a necklace of emeralds; its first strand passed under her determined chin; the others lay in circles against her bare throat.

She smiled as I entered.

"I was expecting you," she said simply.

I advanced till I was four steps from the throne, then stopped before her.

She looked at me ironically.

"What is that?" she asked with perfect calm.

[p. 263]

I followed her gesture. The handle of the dagger protruded from my pocket.

I drew it out and held it firmly in my hand, ready to strike.

"The first of you who moves will be sent naked six leagues into the red desert and left there to die," said Antinea coldly to her women, whom my gesture had thrown into a frightened murmuring.

She turned to me.

"That dagger is very ugly and you hold it badly. Shall I send Sydya to my room to get the silver hammer? You are more adroit with it than with the dagger."

"Antinea," I said in a low voice, "I am going to kill you."

"Do not speak so formally. You were more affectionate last night. Are you embarrassed by them?" she said, pointing to the women, whose eyes were wide with terror.

"Kill me?" she went on. "You are hardly reasonable. Kill me at the moment when you can reap the fruits of the murder of . . ."

"Did--did he suffer?" I asked suddenly, trembling.

"Very little. I told you that you used the hammer as if you had done nothing else all your life." "Like little Kaine," I murmured.

She smiled in surprise.

"Oh, you know that story. . . . Yes, like little

[p. 264]

[paragraph continues] Kaine. But at least Kaine was sensible. You . . . I do not understand."

"I do not understand myself, very well."

She looked at me with amused curiosity.

"Antinea," I said.

"What is it?"

"I did what you told me to. May I in turn ask one favor, ask you one question?"

"What is it?"

"It was dark, was it not, in the room where he was?"

"Very dark. I had to lead you to the bed where he lay asleep."

"He was asleep, you are sure?"

"I said so."

"He--did not die instantly, did he?"

"No. I know exactly when he died; two minutes after you struck him and fled with a shriek."

"Then surely he could not have known?"

"Known what?"

"That it was I who--who held the hammer."

"He might not have known it, indeed," said Antinea. "But he did know."

"How?"

"He did know . . . because I told him," she said, staring at me with magnificent audacity.

"And," I murmured, "he--he believed it?"

"With the help of my explanation, he recognized your shriek. If he had not realized that you were

[p. 265]

his murderer, the affair would not have interested me," she finished with a scornful little smile.

Four steps, I said, separated me from Antinea. I sprang forward. But, before I reached her, I was struck to the floor.

King Hiram had leapt at my throat.

At the same moment I heard the calm, haughty voice of Antinea:

"Call the men," she commanded.

A second later I was released from the leopard's clutch. The six white Tuareg had surrounded me and were trying to bind me.

I am fairly strong and quick. I was on my feet in a second. One of my enemies lay on the floor, ten feet away, felled by a well-placed blow on the jaw. Another was gasping under my knee. That was the last time I saw Antinea. She stood erect, both hands resting on her ebony scepter, watching the struggle with a smile of contemptuous interest.

Suddenly I gave a loud cry and loosed the hold I had on my victim. A cracking in my left arm: one of the Tuareg had seized it and twisted until my shoulder was dislocated.

 

When I completely lost consciousness, I was being carried down the corridor by two white phantoms, so bound that I could not move a muscle.

Footnotes

^256:1 Gabrielle d'Annunzio: Les Vierges aux Rochers. Cf. The Revue des Deux Mondes of October 15, 1896; page 867.

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

THE FIRE-FLIES

THROUGH the great open window, waves of pale moonlight surged into my room.

A slender white figure was standing beside the bed where I lay.

"You, Tanit-Zerga!" I murmured. She laid a finger on her lips.

"Sh! Yes, it is I."

I tried to raise myself up on the bed. A terrible pain seized my shoulder. The events of the afternoon came back to my poor harassed mind.

"Oh, little one, if you knew!"

"I know," she said.

I was weaker than a baby. After the overstrain of the day had come a fit of utter nervous depression. A lump rose in my throat, choking me.

"If you knew, if you only knew! . . . Take me away, little one. Get me away from here."

"Not so loud," she whispered. "There is a white Targa on guard at the door."

"Take me away; save me," I repeated.

[p. 267]

"That is what I came for," she said simply.

I looked at her. She no longer was wearing her beautiful red silk tunic. A plain white haik was wrapped about her; and she had drawn one corner of it over her head.

"I want to go away, too," she said in a smothered voice. "For a long time, I have wanted to go away. I want to see Gao, the village on the bank of the river, and the blue gum trees, and the green water.

"Ever since I came here, I have wanted to get away," she repeated, "but I am too little to go alone into the great Sahara. I never dared speak to the others who came here before you. They all thought only of her. . . . But you, you wanted to kill her."

I gave a low moan.

"You are suffering," she said. "They broke your arm."

"Dislocated it anyhow."

"Let me see."

With infinite gentleness, she passed her smooth little hands over my shoulder.

"You tell me that there is a white Targa on guard before my door, Tanit-Zerga," I said. "Then how did you get in?"

"That way," she said, pointing to the window. A dark perpendicular line halved its blue opening.

Tanit-Zerga went to the window. I saw her standing erect on the sill. A knife shone in her

[p. 268]

hands. She cut the rope at the top of the opening. It slipped down to the stone with a dry sound. She came back to me.

"How can we escape?" I asked.

"That way," she repeated, and she pointed again at the window.

I leaned out. My feverish gaze fell upon the shadowy depths, searching for those invisible rocks, the rocks upon which little Kaine had dashed himself.

"That way!" I exclaimed, shuddering. "Why, it is two hundred feet from here to the ground."

"The rope is two hundred and fifty," she replied. "It is a good strong rope which I stole in the oasis; they used it in felling trees. It is quite new."

"Climb down that way, Tanit-Zerga! With my shoulder!"

"I will let you down," she said firmly. "Feel how strong my arms are. Not that I shall rest your weight on them. But see, on each side of the window is a marble column. By twisting the rope around one of them, I can let you slip down and scarcely feel your weight.

"And look," she continued, "I have made a big knot every ten feet. I can stop the rope with them, every now and then, if I want to rest."

"And you?" I asked.

"When you are down, I shall tie the rope to one of the columns and follow. There are the knots on

[p. 269]

which to rest if the rope cuts my hands too much. But don't be afraid: I am very agile. At Gao, when I was just a child, I used to climb almost as high as this in the gum trees to take the little toucans out of their nests. It is even easier to climb down."

"And when we are down, how will we get out? Do you know the way through the barriers?"

"No one knows the way through the barriers," she said, "except Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, and perhaps Antinea."

"Then?"

"There are the camels of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, those which he uses on his forays. I untethered the strongest one and led him out, just below us, and gave him lots of hay so that he will not make a sound and will be well fed when we start."

"But . . ." I still protested.

She stamped her foot.

"But what? Stay if you wish, if you are afraid. I am going. I want to see Gao once again, Gao with its blue gum-trees and its green water."

I felt myself blushing.

"I will go, Tanit-Zerga. I would rather die of thirst in the midst of the desert than stay here. Let us start."

"Tut!" she said. "Not yet."

She showed me that the dizzy descent was in brilliant moonlight.

"Not yet. We must wait. They would see us.

[p. 270]

[paragraph continues] In an hour, the moon will have circled behind the mountain. That will be the time."

She sat silent, her haik wrapped completely about her dark little figure. Was she praying? Perhaps.

Suddenly I no longer saw her. Darkness had crept in the window. The moon had turned.

Tanit-Zerga's hand was on my arm. She drew me toward the abyss. I tried not to tremble.

Everything below us was in shadow. In a low, firm voice, Tanit-Zerga began to speak:

"Everything is ready. I have twisted the rope about the pillar. Here is the slip-knot. Put it under your arms. Take this cushion. Keep it pressed against your hurt shoulder. . . . A leather cushion. . . . It is tightly stuffed. Keep face to the wall. It will protect you against the bumping and scraping."

I was now master of myself, very calm. I sat down on the sill of the window, my feet in the void. A breath of cool air from the peaks refreshed me.

I felt little Tanit-Zerga's hand in my vest pocket.

"Here is a box. I must know when you are down, so I can follow. You will open the box. There are fire-flies in it; I shall see them and follow you."

She held my hand a moment.

"Now go," she murmured.

I went.

I remember only one thing about that descent: I

[p. 271]

was overcome with vexation when the rope stopped and I found myself, feet dangling, against the perfectly smooth wall.

"What is the little fool waiting for?" I said to myself. "I have been hung here for a quarter of an hour. Ah . . . at last! Oh, here I am stopped again." Once or twice I thought I was reaching the ground, but it was only a projection from the rock. I had to give a quick shove with my foot. . . . Then, suddenly, I found myself seated on the ground. I stretched out my hands. Bushes. . . . A thorn pricked my finger. I was down.

Immediately I began to get nervous again.

I pulled out the cushion and slipped off the noose. With my good hand, I pulled the rope, holding it out five or six feet from the face of the mountain, and put my foot on it.

Then I took the little cardboard box from my pocket and opened it.

One after the other, three little luminous circles rose in the inky night. I saw them rise higher and higher against the rocky wall. Their pale rose aureols gleamed faintly. Then, one by one, they turned, disappeared.

 

"You are tired, Sidi Lieutenant. Let me hold the rope."

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh rose up at my side.

I looked at his tall black silhouette. I shuddered,

[p. 272]

but I did not let go of the rope on which I began to feel distant jerks.

"Give it to me," he repeated with authority. And he took it from my hands.

I don't know what possessed me then. I was standing beside that great dark phantom. And I ask you, what could I, with a dislocated shoulder, do against that man whose agile strength I already knew? What was there to do? I saw him buttressed against the wall, holding the rope with both hands, with both feet, with all his body, much better than I had been able to do.

A rustling above our heads. A little shadowy form.

"There," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, seizing the little shadow in his powerful arms and placing her on the ground, while the rope, let slack, slapped back against the rock.

Tanit-Zerga recognized the Targa and groaned.

He put his hand roughly over her mouth.

"Shut up, camel thief, wretched little fly."

He seized her arm. Then he turned to me.

"Come," he said in an imperious tone.

I obeyed. During our short walk, I heard Tanit-Zerga's teeth chattering with terror.

We reached a little cave.

"Go in," said the Targa.

He lighted a torch. The red light showed a superb mehari peacefully chewing his cud.

[p. 273]

"The little one is not stupid," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, pointing to the animal. "She knows enough to pick out the best and the strongest. But she is rattle-brained."

He held the torch nearer the camel.

"She is rattle-brained," he continued. "She only saddled him. No water, no food. At this hour, three days from now, all three of you would have been dead on the road, and on what a road!"

Tanit-Zerga's teeth no longer chattered. She was looking at the Targa with a mixture of terror and hope.

"Come here, Sidi Lieutenant," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, "so that I can explain to you."

When I was beside him, he said:

"On each side there is a skin of water. Make that water last as long as possible, for you are going to cross a terrible country. It may be that you will not find a well for three hundred miles.

"There," he went on, "in the saddle bags, are cans of preserved meat. Not many, for water is much more precious. Here also is a carbine, your carbine, sidi. Try not to use it except to shoot antelopes. And there is this."

He spread out a roll of paper. I saw his inscrutible face bent over it; his eyes were smiling; he looked at me.

"Once out of the enclosures, what way did you plan to go?" he asked.

[p. 274]

"Toward Ideles, to retake the route where you met the Captain and me," I said.

 shook his head.

"I thought as much," he murmured.

Then he added coldly:

"Before sunset to-morrow, you and the little one would have been caught and massacred."

"Toward the north is Ahaggar," he continued, "and all Ahaggar is under the control of Antinea. You must go south."

"Then we shall go south."

"By what route?"

"Why, by Silet and Timassao."

The Targa again shook his head.

"They will look for you on that road also," he said. "It is a good road, the road with the wells. They know that you are familiar with it. The Tuareg would not fail to wait at the wells."

"Well, then?"

"Well," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, "you must not rejoin the road from Timassao to Timbuctoo until you are four hundred miles from here toward Iferouane, or better still, at the spring of Telemsi. That is the boundary between the Tuareg of Ahaggar and the Awellimiden Tuareg."

The little voice of Tanit-Zerga broke in:

"It was the Awellimiden Tuareg who massacred my people and carried me into slavery. I do not

[p. 275]

want to pass through the country of the Awellimiden."

"Be still, miserable little fly," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh.

Then, addressing me, he continued:

"I have said what I have said. The little one is not wrong. The Awellimiden are a savage people. But they are afraid of the French. Many of them trade with the stations north of the Niger. On the other hand, they are at war with the people of Ahaggar, who will not follow you into their country. What I have said, is said. You must rejoin the Timbuctoo road near where it enters the borders of the Awellimiden. Their country is wooded and rich in springs. If you reach the springs at Telemsi, you will finish your journey beneath a canopy of blossoming mimosa. On the other hand, the road from here to Telemsi is shorter than by way of Timissao. It is quite straight."

"Yes, it is direct," I said, "but, in following it, you have to cross the Tanezruft."

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh waved his hand impatiently.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh knows that," he said. "He knows what the Tanezruft is. He who has traveled over all the Sahara knows that he would shudder at crossing the Tanezruft and the Tasili from the south. He knows that the camels that wander into that country either die or become wild, for no one will risk his life to go look for them. It is the terror

[p. 276]

that hangs over that region that may save you. For you have to choose: you must run the risk of dying of thirst on the tracks of the Tanezruft or have your throat cut along some other route."

"You can stay here," he added.

"My choice is made, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I announced.

"Good!" he replied, again opening out the roll of paper. "This trail begins at the second barrier of earth, to which I will lead you. It ends at Iferouane. I have marked the wells, but do not trust to them too much, for many of them are dry. Be careful not to stray from the route. If you lose it, it is death. . . . Now mount the camel with the little one. Two make less noise than four."

We went a long way in silence. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh walked ahead and his camel followed meekly. We crossed, first, a dark passage, then, a deep gorge, then another passage. . . . The entrance to each was hidden by a thick tangle of rocks and briars.

Suddenly a burning breath touched our faces. A dull reddish light filtered in through the end of the passage. The desert lay before us.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had stopped.

"Get down," he said.

A spring gurgled out of the rock. The Targa went to it and filled a copper cup with the water.

"Drink," he said, holding it out to each of us in turn.

[p. 277]

We obeyed.

"Drink again," he ordered. "You will save just so much of the contents of your water skins. Now try not to be thirsty before sunset."

He looked over the saddle girths.

"That's all right," he murmured. "Now go. In two hours the dawn will be here. You must be out of sight."

I was filled with emotion at this last moment; I went to the Targa and took his hand.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I asked in a low voice, "why are you doing this?"

He stepped back and I saw his dark eyes gleam.

"Why?" he said.

"Yes, why?"

He replied with dignity:

"The Prophet permits every just man, once in his lifetime, to let pity take the place of duty. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh is turning this permission to the advantage of one who saved his life."

"And you are not afraid," I asked, "that I will disclose the secret of Antinea if I return among Frenchmen?"

He shook his head.

"I am not afraid of that," he said, and his voice was full of irony. "It is not to your interest that Frenchmen should know how the Captain met his death."

I was horrified at this logical reply.

[p. 278]

"Perhaps I am doing wrong," the Targa went on, "in not killing the little one. . . . But she loves you. She will not talk. Now go. Day is coming."

I tried to press the hand of this strange rescuer, but he again drew back.

"Do not thank me. What I am doing, I do to acquire merit in the eyes of God. You may be sure that I shall never do it again neither for you nor for anyone else."

And, as I made a gesture to reassure him on that point, "Do not protest," he said in a tone the mockery of which still sounds in my ears. "Do not protest. What I am doing is of value to me, but not to you."

I looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"Not to you, Sidi Lieutenant, not to you," his grave voice continued. "For you will come back; and when that day comes, do not count on the help of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"I will come back?" I asked, shuddering. "You will come back," the Targa replied.

He was standing erect, a black statue against the wall of gray rock.

"You will come back," he repeated with emphasis. "You are fleeing now, but you are mistaken if you think that you will look at the world with the same eyes as before. Henceforth, one idea will follow you everywhere you go; and in one year, five, perhaps

[p. 279]

ten years, you will pass again through the corridor through which you have just come."

"Be still, ," said the trembling voice of Tanit-Zerga.

"Be still yourself, miserable little fly," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh.

He sneered.

"The little one is afraid because she knows that I tell the truth. She knows the story of Lieutenant Ghiberti."

"Lieutenant Ghiberti?" I said, the sweat standing out on my forehead.

"He was an Italian officer whom I met between Rhat and Rhadames eight years ago. He did not believe that love of Antinea could make him forget all else that life contained. He tried to escape, and he succeeded. I do not know how, for I did not help him. He went back to his country. But hear what happened: two years later, to the very day, when I was leaving the look-out, I discovered a miserable tattered creature, half dead from hunger and fatigue, searching in vain for the entrance to the northern barrier. It was Lieutenant Ghiberti, come back. He fills niche Number 39 in the red marble hall."

The Targa smiled slightly.

"That is the story of Lieutenant Ghiberti which you wished to hear. But enough of this. Mount your camel."

[p. 280]

I obeyed without saying a word. Tanit-Zerga, seated behind me, put her little arms around me. Cegheir-ben-Cheikh was still holding the bridle.

"One word more," he said, pointing to a black spot against the violet sky of the southern horizon. "You see the gour there; that is your way. It is eighteen miles from here. You should reach it by sunrise. Then consult your map. The next point is marked. If you do not stray from the line, you should be at the springs of Telemsi in eight days."

The camel's neck was stretched toward the dark wind coming from the south.

The Targa released the bridle with a sweep of his hand.

"Now, go."

"Thank you," I called to him, turning back in the saddle. "Thank you, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, and farewell."

I heard his voice replying in the distance:

"Au revoir, Lieutenant de Saint Avit."

     
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 281]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

THE TANEZRUFT

DURING the first hour of our flight, the great mehari of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh carried us at a mad pace. We covered at least five leagues. With fixed eyes, I guided the beast toward the gour which the Targa had pointed out, its ridge becoming higher and higher against the paling sky.

The speed caused a little breeze to whistle in our ears. Great tufts of retem, like fleshless skeletons, were tossed to right and left.

I heard the voice of Tanit-Zerga whispering:

"Stop the camel."

At first I did not understand.

"Stop him," she repeated.

Her hand pulled sharply at my right arm.

I obeyed. The camel slackened his pace with very bad grace.

"Listen," she said.

At first I heard nothing. Then a very slight noise, a dry rustling behind us.

[p. 282]

"Stop the camel," Tanit-Zerga commanded. "It is not worth while to make him kneel."

A little gray creature bounded on the camel. The mehari set out again at his best speed.

"Let him go," said Tanit-Zerga. "Gale has jumped on."

I felt a tuft of bristly hair under my arm. The mongoose had followed our footsteps and rejoined us. I heard the quick panting of the brave little creature becoming gradually slower and slower.

"I am happy," murmured Tanit-Zerga.

 

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had not been mistaken. We reached the gour as the sun rose. I looked back. The Atakor was nothing more than a monstrous chaos amid the night mists which trailed the dawn. It was no longer possible to pick out from among the nameless peaks, the one on which Antinea was still weaving her passionate plots.

You know what the Tanezruft is, the "plain of plains," abandoned, uninhabitable, the country of hunger and thirst. We were then starting on the part of the desert which Duveyrier calls the Tasili of the south, and which figures on the maps of the Minister of Public Works under this attractive title: "Rocky plateau, without water, without vegetation, inhospitable for man and beast."

Nothing, unless parts of the Kalahari, is more frightful than this rocky desert. Oh, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh

[p. 283]

did not exaggerate in saying that no one would dream of following us into that country.

Great patches of oblivion still refused to clear away. Memories chased each other incoherently about my head. A sentence came back to me textually: "It seemed to Dick that he had never, since the beginning of original darkness, done anything at all save jolt through the air." I gave a little laugh. "In the last few hours," I thought, "I have been heaping up literary situations. A while ago, a hundred feet above the ground, I was Fabrice of La Chartreuse de Parme beside his Italian dungeon. Now, here on my camel, I am Dick of The Light That Failed, crossing the desert to meet his companions in arms." I chuckled again; then shuddered. I thought of the preceding night, of the Orestes of Andromaque who agreed to sacrifice Pyrrhus. A literary situation indeed. . . .

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had reckoned eight days to get to the wooded country of the Awellimiden, forerunners of the grassy steppes of the Soudan. He knew well the worth of his beast. Tanit-Zerga had suddenly given him a name, El Mellen, the white one, for the magnificent mehari had an almost spotless coat. Once he went two days without eating, merely picking up here and there a branch of an acacia tree whose hideous white spines, four inches long, filled me with fear for our friend's oesophagus. The wells marked out by Cegheir-ben-Cheikh were

[p. 284]

indeed at the indicated spots, but we found nothing in them but a burning yellow mud. It was enough for the camel, enough so that at the end of the fifth day, thanks to prodigious self-control, we had used up only one of our two water skins. Then we believed ourselves safe.

Near one of these muddy puddles, I succeeded that day in shooting down a little straight-horned desert gazelle. Tanit-Zerga skinned the beast and we regaled ourselves with a delicious haunch. Meantime, little Gale, who never ceased prying about the cracks in the rocks during our mid-day halts in the heat, discovered an ourane, a sand crocodile, five feet long, and made short work of breaking his neck. She ate so much she could not budge. It cost us a pint of water to help her digestion. We gave it with good grace, for we were happy. Tanit-Zerga did not say so, but her joy at knowing that I was thinking no more of the woman in the gold diadem and the emeralds was apparent. And really, during those days, I hardly thought of her. I thought only of the torrid heat to be avoided, of the water skins which, if you wished to drink fresh water, had to be left for an hour in a cleft in the rocks; of the intense joy which seized you when you raised to your lips a leather goblet brimming with that life-saving water. . . . I can say this with authority, with good authority, indeed; passion, spiritual or physical, is a thing for those who have eaten and drunk and rested.

[p. 285]

It was five o'clock in the afternoon. The frightful heat was slackening. We had left a kind of rocky crevice where we had had a little nap. Seated on a huge rock, we were watching the reddening west.

I spread out the roll of paper on which Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had marked the stages of our journey as far as the road from the Soudan. I realized again with joy that his itinerary was exact and that I had followed it scrupulously.

"The evening of the day after to-morrow," I said, "we shall be setting out on the stage which will take us, by the next dawn, to the waters at Telemsi. Once there, we shall not have to worry any more about water."

Tanit-Zerga's eyes danced in her thin face.

"And Gao?" she asked.

"We will be only a week from the Niger. And Cegheir-ben-Cheikh said that at Telemsi, one reached a road overhung with mimosa."

"I know the mimosa," she said. "They are the little yellow balls that melt in your hand. But I like the caper flowers better. You will come with me to Gao. My father, Sonni-Askia, was killed, as I told you, by the Awellimiden. But my people must have rebuilt the villages. They are used to that. You will see how you will be received."

"I will go, Tanit-Zerga, I promise you. But you also, you must promise me . . ."

[p. 286]

"What? Oh, I guess. You must take me for a little fool if you believe me capable of speaking of things which might make trouble for my friend."

She looked at me as she spoke. Privation and great fatigue had chiselled the brown face where her great eyes shone. . . . Since then, I have had time to assemble the maps and compasses, and to fix forever the spot where, for the first time, I understood the beauty of Tanit-Zerga's eyes.

There was a deep silence between us. It was she who broke it.

"Night is coming. We must eat so as to leave as soon as possible."

She stood up and went toward the rocks.

Almost immediately, I heard her calling in an anguished voice that sent a chill through me.

"Come! Oh, come see!"

With a bound, I was at her side.

"The camel," she murmured. "The camel!"

I looked, and a deadly shudder seized me.

Stretched out at full length, on the other side of the rocks, his pale flanks knotted up by convulsive spasms, El Mellen lay in anguish.

I need not say that we rushed to him in feverish haste. Of what El Mellen was dying, I did not know, I never have known. All the mehara are that way. They are at once the most enduring and the most delicate of beasts. They will travel for six months across the most frightful deserts, with

[p. 287]

little food, without water, and seem only the better for it. Then, one day when nothing is the matter, they stretch out and give you the slip with disconcerting ease.

When Tanit-Zerga and I saw that there was nothing more to do, we stood there without a word, watching his slackening spasms. When he breathed his last, we felt that our life, as well as his, had gone.

It was Tanit-Zerga who spoke first.

"How far are we from the Soudan road?" she asked.

"We are a hundred and twenty miles from the springs of Telemsi," I replied. "We could make thirty miles by going toward Ifrouane, but the wells are not marked on that route."

"Then we must walk toward the springs of Telemsi," she said. "A hundred and twenty miles, that makes seven days?"

"Seven days at the least, Tanit-Zerga."

"How far is it to the first well?"

"Thirty-five miles."

The little girl's face contracted somewhat. But she braced up quickly.

"We must set out at once."

"Set out on foot, Tanit-Zerga!"

She stamped her foot. I marveled to see her so strong.

"We must go," she repeated. "We are going to

[p. 288]

eat and drink and make Gale eat and drink, for we cannot carry all the tins, and the water skin is so heavy that we should not get three miles if we tried to carry it. We will put a little water in one of the tins after emptying it through a little hole. That will be enough for to-night's stage, which will be eighteen miles without water. To-morrow we will set out for another eighteen miles and we will reach the wells marked on the paper by Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"Oh," I murmured sadly, "if my shoulder were only not this way, I could carry the water skin." "It is as it is," said Tanit-Zerga.

"You will take your carbine and two tins of meat. I shall take two more and the one filled with water. Come. We must leave in an hour if we wish to cover the eighteen miles. You know that when the sun is up, the rocks are so hot we cannot walk."

I leave you to imagine in what sad silence we passed that hour which we had begun so happily and confidently. Without the little girl, I believe I should have seated myself upon a rock and waited. Gale only was happy.

"We must not let her eat too much," said Tanit-Zerga. "She would not be able to follow us. And to-morrow she must work. If she catches another ourane, it will be for us."

 

You have walked in the desert. You know how

[p. 289]

terrible the first hours of the night are. When the moon comes up, huge and yellow, a sharp dust seems to rise in suffocating clouds. You move your jaws mechanically as if to crush the dust that finds its way into your throat like fire. Then usually a kind of lassitude, of drowsiness, follows. You walk without thinking. You forget where you are walking. You remember only when you stumble. Of course you stumble often. But anyway it is bearable. "The night is ending," you say, "and with it the march. All in all, I am less tired than at the beginning." The night ends, but then comes the most terrible hour of all. You are perishing of thirst and shaking with cold. All the fatigue comes back at once. The horrible breeze which precedes the dawn is no comfort. Quite the contrary. Every time you stumble, you say, "The next misstep will be the last."

That is what people feel and say even when they know that in a few hours they will have a good rest with food and water.

I was suffering terribly. Every step jolted my poor shoulder. At one time, I wanted to stop, to sit down. Then I looked at Tanit-Zerga. She was walking ahead with her eyes almost closed. Her expression was an indefinable one of mingled suffering and determination. I closed my own eyes and went on.

Such was the first stage. At dawn we stopped in

[p. 290]

a hollow in the rocks. Soon the heat forced us to rise to seek a deeper one. Tanit-Zerga did not eat. Instead, she swallowed a little of her half can of water. She lay drowsy all day. Gale ran about our rock giving plaintive little cries.

I am not going to tell you about the second march. It was more horrible than anything you can imagine. I suffered all that it is humanly possible to suffer in the desert. But already I began to observe with infinite pity that my man's strength was outlasting the nervous force of my little companion. The poor child walked on without saying a word, chewing feebly one corner of her haik which she had drawn over her face. Gale followed.

The well toward which we were dragging ourselves was indicated on Cegheir-ben-Cheikh's paper by the one word Tissaririn. Tissaririn is the plural of Tissarirt and means "two isolated trees."

Day was dawning when finally I saw the two trees, two gum trees. Hardly a league separated us from them. I gave a cry of joy.

"Courage, Tanit-Zerga, there is the well."

She drew her veil aside and I saw the poor anguished little face.

"So much the better," she murmured, "because otherwise . . ."

She could not even finish the sentence.

We finished the last half mile almost at a run.

[p. 291]

We already saw the hole, the opening of the well.

Finally we reached it.

It was empty.

 

It is a strange sensation to be dying of thirst. At first the suffering is terrible. Then, gradually, it becomes less. You become partly unconscious. Ridiculous little things about your life occur to you, fly about you like mosquitoes. I began to remember my history composition for the entrance examination of Saint-Cyr, "The Campaign of Marengo." Obstinately I repeated to myself, "I have already said that the battery unmasked by Marmont at the moment of Kellerman's charge included eighteen pieces. . . . No, I remember now, it was only twelve pieces. I am sure it was twelve pieces."

I kept on repeating:

"Twelve pieces."

Then I fell into a sort of coma.

I was recalled from it by feeling a red-hot iron on my forehead. I opened my eyes. Tanit-Zerga was bending over me. It was her hand which burnt so.

"Get up," she said. "We must go on."

"Go on, Tanit-Zerga i The desert is on fire. The sun is at the zenith. It is noon."

"We must go on," she repeated.

Then I saw that she was delirious.

She was standing erect. Her haik had fallen to

[p. 292]

the ground and little Gale, rolled up in a ball, was asleep on it.

Bareheaded, indifferent to the frightful sunlight, she kept repeating:

"We must go on."

A little sense came back to me.

"Cover your head, Tanit-Zerga, cover your head."

"Come," she repeated. "Let's go. Gao is over there, not far away. I can feel it. I want to see Gao again."

I made her sit down beside me in the shadow of a rock. I realized that all strength had left her. The wave of pity that swept over me, brought back my senses.

"Gao is just over there, isn't it?" she asked. Her gleaming eyes became imploring.

"Yes, dear little girl. Gao is there. But for God's sake lie down. The sun is fearful."

"Oh, Gao, Gao!" she repeated. "I know very well that I shall see Gao again."

She sat up. Her fiery little hands gripped mine. "Listen. I must tell you so you can understand how I know I shall see Gao again."

"Tanit-Zerga, be quiet, my little girl, be quiet."

"No, I must tell you. A long time ago, on the bank of the river where there is water, at Gao, where my father was a prince, there was . . . Well, one day, one feast day, there came from the interior

[p. 293]

of the country an old magician, dressed in skins and feathers, with a mask and a pointed head-dress, with castanets, and two serpents in a bag. On the village square, where all our people formed in a circle, he danced the boussadilla. I was in the first row, and because I had a necklace of pink tourmaline, he quickly saw that I was the daughter of a chief. So he spoke to me of the past, of the great Mandingue Empire over which my grandfathers had ruled, of our enemies, the fierce Kountas, of everything, and finally he said:

"'Have no fear, little girl.'

"Then he said again, 'Do not be afraid. Evil days may be in store for you, but what does that matter? For one day you will see Gao gleaming on the horizon, no longer a servile Gao reduced to the rank of a little negro town, but the splendid Gao of other days, the great capital of the country of the blacks, Gao reborn, with its mosque of seven towers and fourteen cupolas of turquoise, with its houses with cool courts, its fountains, its watered gardens, all blooming with great red and white flowers. . . . That will be for you the hour of deliverance and of royalty.'"

Tanit-Zerga was standing up. All about us, on our heads, the sun blazed on the hamada, burning it white.

Suddenly the child stretched out her arms. She gave a terrible cry.

[p. 294]

"Gao! There is Gao!"

I looked at her.

"Gao," she repeated.. "Oh, I know it well! There are the trees and the fountains, the cupolas and the towers, the palm trees, the great red and white flowers. Gao . . ."

Indeed, along the shimmering horizon rose a fantastic city with mighty buildings that towered, tier on tier, until they formed a rainbow. Wide-eyed, we stood and watched the terrible mirage quiver feverishly before us.

"Gao!" I cried. "Gao!"

And almost immediately I uttered another cry, of sorrow and of horror. Tanit-Zerga's little hand relaxed in mine. I had just time to catch the child in my arms and hear her murmur as in a whisper:

"And then that will be the day of deliverance. The day of deliverance and of royalty."

 

Several hours later I took the knife with which we had skinned the desert gazelle and, in the sand at the foot of the rock where Tanit-Zerga had given up her spirit, I made a little hollow where she was to rest.

When everything was ready, I wanted to look once more at that dear little face. Courage failed me for a moment. . . . Then I quickly drew the haik over the brown face and laid the body of the child in the hollow.

[p. 295]

I had reckoned without Gale.

The eyes of the mongoose had not left me during the whole time that I was about my sad duty. When she heard the first handfuls of sand fall on the haik, she gave a sharp cry. I looked at her and saw her ready to spring, her eyes darting fire.

"Gale!" I implored; and I tried to stroke her.

She bit my hand and then leapt into the grave and began to dig, throwing the sand furiously aside.

I tried three times to chase her away. I felt that I should never finish my task and that, even if I did, Gale would stay there and disinter the body.

My carbine lay at my feet. A shot drew echoes from the immense empty desert. A moment later, Gale also slept her last sleep, curled up, as I so often had seen her, against the neck of her mistress.

When the surface showed nothing more than a little mound of trampled sand, I rose staggering and started off aimlessly into the desert, toward the south.

    
Atlantida (L'Atlantide), by Pierre Benoit, [1920], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 296]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

THE CIRCLE IS COMPLETE

AT THE foot of the valley of the Mia, at the place where the jackal had cried the night Saint-Avit told me he had killed Morhange, another jackal, or perhaps the same one, howled again.

Immediately I had a feeling that this night would see the irremediable fulfilled.

We were seated that evening, as before, on the poor veranda improvised outside our dining-room. The floor was of plaster, the balustrade of twisted branches; four posts supported a thatched roof.

I have already said that from the veranda one could look far out over the desert. As he finished speaking, Saint-Avit rose and stood leaning his elbows on the railing. I followed him.

"And then . . ." I said.

He looked at me.

"And then what? Surely you know what all the newspapers told--how, in the country of the Awellimiden, I was found dying of hunger and thirst by an expedition under the command of Captain Aymard,

[p. 297]

and taken to Timbuctoo. I was delirious for a month afterward. I have never known what I may have said during those spells of burning fever. You may be sure the officers of the Timbuctoo Club did not feel it incumbent upon them to tell me. When I told them of my adventures, as they are related in the report of the Morhange--Saint-Avit Expedition, I could see well enough from the cold politeness with which they received my explanations, that the official version which I gave them differed at certain points from the fragments which had escaped me in my delirium.

"They did not press the matter. It remains understood that Captain Morhange died from a sunstroke and that I buried him on the border of the Tarhit watercourse, three marches from Timissao. Everybody can detect that there are things missing in my story. Doubtless they guess at some mysterious drama. But proofs are another matter. Because of the impossibility of collecting them, they prefer to smother what could only become a silly scandal. But now you know all the details as well as I."

"And--she?" I asked timidly.

He smiled triumphantly. It was triumph at having led me to think no longer of Morhange, or of his crime, the triumph of feeling that he had succeeded in imbuing me with his own madness.

"Yes," he said. "She! For six years I have

[p. 298]

learned nothing more about her. But I see her, I talk with her. I am thinking now how I shall reenter her presence. I shall throw myself at her feet and say simply, 'Forgive me. I rebelled against your law. I did not know. But now I know; and you see that, like Lieutenant Ghiberti, I have come back.'

"'Family, honor, country,' said old Le Mesge, 'you will forget all for her.' Old Le Mesge is a stupid man, but he speaks from experience. He knows, he who has seen broken before Antinea the wills of the fifty ghosts in the red marble hall.

"And now, will you, in your turn, ask me 'What is this woman?' Do I know myself? And besides, what difference does it make? What does her past and the mystery of her origin matter to me; what does it matter whether she is the true descendant of the god of the sea and the sublime Lagides or the bastard of a Polish drunkard and a harlot of the Marbeuf quarter?

"At the time when I was foolish enough to be jealous of Morhange, these questions might have made some difference to the ridiculous self-esteem that civilized people mix up with passion. But I have held Antinea's body in my arms. I no longer wish to know any other, nor if the fields are in blossom, nor what will become of the human spirit. . . .

[p. 299]

"I do not wish to know. Or, rather, it is because I have too exact a vision of that future, that I pretend to destroy myself in the only destiny that is worth while: a nature unfathomed and virgin, a mysterious love.

"A nature unfathomed and virgin. I must explain myself. One winter day, in a large city all streaked with the soot that falls from the black chimneys of factories and of those horrible houses in the suburbs, I attended a funeral.

"We followed the hearse in the mud. The church was new, damp and poor. Aside from two or three people, relatives struck down by a dull sorrow, everyone had just one idea: to find some pretext to get away. Those who went as far as the cemetery were those who did not find an excuse. I see the gray walls and the cypresses, those trees of sun and shade, so beautiful in the country of southern France against the low, purple hills. I see the horrible undertaker's men in greasy jackets and shiny top hats. I see . . . No, I'll stop; it's too horrible.

"Near the wall, in a remote plot, a grave had been dug in frightful yellow pebbly clay. It was there that they left the dead man whose name I no longer remember.

"While they were lowering the casket, I looked at my hands, those hands which in that strangely lighted country had pressed the hands of Antinea. A great pity for my body seized me, a great fear of

[p. 300]

what threatened it in these cities of mud. 'So,' I said to myself, 'it may be that this body, this dear body, will come to such an end! No, no, my body, precious above all other treasures, I swear to you that I will spare you that ignominy; you shall not rot under a registered number in the filth of a suburban cemetery. Your brothers in love, the fifty knights of orichalch, await you, mute and grave, in the red marble hall. I shall take you back to them.'

"A mysterious love. Shame to him who retails the secrets of his loves. The Sahara lays its impassable barrier about Antinea; that is why the most unreasonable requirements of this woman are, in reality, more modest and chaste than your marriage will be, with its vulgar public show, the bans, the invitations, the announcements telling an evil-minded and joking people that after such and such an hour, on such and such a day, you will have the right to violate your little tupenny virgin.

"I think that is all I have to tell you. No, there is still one thing more. I told you a while ago about the red marble hall. South of Cherchell, to the west of the Mazafran river, on a hill which in the early morning, emerges from the mists of the Mitidja, there is a mysterious stone pyramid. The natives call it, The Tomb of the Christian.' That is where the body of Antinea's ancestress, that Cleopatra Selene, daughter of Mark Antony and Cleopatra,

[p. 301]

was laid to rest. Though it is placed in the path of invasions, this tomb has kept its treasure. No one has ever been able to discover the painted room where the beautiful body reposes in a glass casket. All that the ancestress has been able to do, the descendant will be able to surpass in grim magnificence. In the center of the red marble hall, on the rock whence comes the plaint of the gloomy fountain, a platform is reserved. It is there, on an orichalch throne, with the Egyptian head-dress and the golden serpent on her brow and the trident of Neptune in her hand, that the marvelous woman I have told you about will be ensconced on that day when the hundred and twenty niches, hollowed out in a circle around her throne, shall each have received its willing prey.

"When I left Ahaggar, you remember that it was niche number 55 that was to be mine. Since then, I have never stopped calculating and I conclude that it is in number 80 or 85 that I shall repose. But any calculations based upon so fragile a foundation as a woman's whim may be erroneous. That is why I am getting more and more nervous. 'I must hurry,' I tell myself. 'I must hurry.'

"I must hurry," I repeated, as if I were in a dream.

He raised his head with an indefinable expression of joy. His hand trembled with happiness when he shook mine.

[p. 302]

"You will see," he repeated excitedly, "you will see."

Ecstatically, he took me in his arms and held me there a long moment.

An extraordinary happiness swept over both of us, while, alternately laughing and crying like children, we kept repeating:

"We must hurry. We must hurry."

Suddenly there sprang up a slight breeze that made the tufts of thatch in the roof rustle. The sky, pale lilac, grew paler still, and, suddenly, a great yellow rent tore it in the east. Dawn broke over the empty desert. From within the stockade came dull noises, a bugle call, the rattle of chains. The post was waking up.

For several seconds we stood there silent, our eyes fixed on the southern route by which one reaches Temassinin, Eguere and Ahaggar.

A rap on the dining-room door behind us made us start.

"Come in," said Andre de Saint-Avit in a voice which had become suddenly hard.

The Quartermaster, Chatelain, stood before us.

"What do you want of me at this hour?" Saint-Avit asked brusquely.

The non-com stood at attention.

"Excuse me, Captain. But a native was discovered near the post, last night, by the patrol. He was not trying to hide. As soon as he had been

[p. 303]

brought here, he asked to be led before the commanding officer. It was midnight and I didn't want to disturb you."

"Who is this native?"

"A Targa, Captain."

"A Targa? Go get him."

Chatelain stepped aside. Escorted by one of our native soldiers, the man stood behind him.

They came out on the terrace.

The new arrival, six feet tall, was indeed a Targa. The light of dawn fell upon his blue-black cotton robes. One could see his great dark eyes flashing.

When he was opposite my companion, I saw a tremor, immediately suppressed, run through both men.

They looked at each other for an instant in silence.

Then, bowing, and in a very calm voice, the Targa spoke:

"Peace be with you, Lieutenant de Saint-Avit."

In the same calm voice, Andre answered him:

"Peace be with you, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

 

 

THE END

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ihas.txt =====


    
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Initiation, Human and Solar

  

By

  

ALICE A. BAILEY

  

New York: Lucifer Publishing Company

  

[1922]

  

Dedicated with

  

reverence and gratitude

  

to

  

the Master K. H.

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, September 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vi]

  

THE LORD BUDDHA HAS SAID

that we must not believe in a thing said merely because it is said; nor traditions because they have been handed down from antiquity; nor rumors, as such; nor writings by sages, because sages wrote them: nor fancies that we may suspect to have been inspired in us by a Deva (that is, in presumed spiritual inspiration); nor from inferences drawn from some haphazard assumption we may have made; nor because of what seems an analogical necessity; nor on the mere authority of our teachers or masters. But we are to believe when the writing, doctrine, or saying is corroborated by our own reason and consciousness. "For this," says he in concluding, "I taught you not to believe merely because you have heard, but when you believed of your consciousness, then to act accordingly and abundantly."

(Secret Doctrine, Vol. III, page 401.)

[p. vii]

  

FOREWORD

The subject of Initiation is one that has a great fascination for thinkers of all schools of thought, and even those who remain sceptical and critical would like to believe that this ultimate attainment is possible. To those who do not believe that such a goal is possible this book is offered for what it may be worth as a formulation of an interesting hypothesis. To those who anticipate such a consummation of all their endeavours, this book is tendered in the hope that it may prove an inspiration and a help.

Among occidental thinkers at this time there is a wide diversity of view upon this momentous subject. There are those who think that it is not of sufficient immediate importance to engross their attention, and that if the average man adheres to the path of duty and high-minded attention to the business in hand, he will duly arrive at his destination. This is undoubtedly true, yet as capacity for increased service, and the development of powers to be used in the helping of the race are the reward of the man who is willing to make the increased effort and to pay the price which initiation demands, perhaps this book may spur some on to attainment who might otherwise have drifted slowly towards their goal. They will then become givers, and not the recipients of help.

There are those again who consider that the teaching hitherto given out in various books concerning initiation, vii

[p. viii]

is erroneous. Initiation has been made out to be fairly easy of attainment, and to call for no such rectitude of character as might have been anticipated. The following chapters may serve to show that the criticism is not unmerited. Initiation is profoundly difficult of attainment, and calls for a strenuous discipline of the entire lower nature, and a life of self-effacing and self-abnegating devotion. At the same time, it must be remembered that the earlier teaching is right in essence, though belittled in interpretation.

Again, there are some who are interested, yet who feel the possibilities involved are too far advanced for them. and that they need not occupy themselves with them at this stage of their evolution. This book seeks to make it apparent that here and now the average man may begin to build that character and to lay those foundations of knowledge which are necessary before even the Path of Discipleship can be trodden. Due preparation may now be made, and men and women everywhere may--if they choose--fit themselves for the condition of discipleship and tread the Probationary Path.

Hundreds in the East and in the West are pressing onwards towards this goal. and in the unity of the one ideal, in their common aspiration and endeavour, they will meet before the one Portal. They will then recognise themselves as brothers, severed by tongue and apparent diversity of belief, hut fundamentally holding to the same one truth and serving the same God.

Alice A. Bailey.

New York 1922.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

  

TABLE OF CONTENTS

         	 

      	Page

     
     	Chart.

      	<page xiv>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter I.

      	 

     
     	  Introductory Remarks

      	<page 1>

     
     	    Dogmatism and the Intuition

      	<page 1>

     
     	    Three basic facts to be recognised

      	<page 2>

     
     	    Five points to remember

      	<page 4>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter II.

      	 

     
     	  Initiation defined

      	<page 9>

     
     	    Four words defined

      	<page 9>

     
     	    Aspects of Initiation

      	<page 12>

     
     	    Place and effect of Initiation

      	<page 15>

     
     	    At-one-ment, the result of Initiation

      	<page 18>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter III.

      	 

     
     	  The work of the   Hierarchy

      	<page 20>

     
     	    To develop self-consciousness in all beings

      	<page 20>

     
     	    To develop consciousness in the three lower   kingdoms

      	<page 21>

     
     	    To transmit the will of the Planetary Logos

      	<page 23>

     
     	    To set an example to humanity

      	<page 24>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter IV.

      	 

     
     	  The founding of the   Hierarchy

      	<page 28>

     
     	    Its appearance on the planet

      	<page 28>

     
     	    The immediate effect

      	<page 30>

     
     	    The opening. of the Door of Initiation

      	<page 33>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter V.

      	 

     
     	  The three departments of   the Hierarchy

      	<page 37>

     
     	    The work of the Manu

      	<page 41>

     
     	    The work of the World Teacher, the Christ

      	<page 43>

     
     	    The work of the Lord of Civilisation, the   Mahachohan

      	<page 45>

     
     	[p. xii]

      	 

     
     	    Chart. Solar and Planetary Hierarchies

      	<page 48>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter VI.

      	 

     
     	  The Lodge of Masters

      	<page 50>

     
     	    Their divisions

      	<page 50>

     
     	    Certain Masters and Their work

      	<page 53>

     
     	    The present work

      	<page 60>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter VII.

      	 

     
     	  The Probationary Path

      	<page 63>

     
     	    Preparation for Initiation

      	<page 63>

     
     	    Methods of teaching

      	<page 65>

     
     	    Masters and disciples

      	<page 66>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter VIII.

      	 

     
     	  Discipleship

      	<page 71>

     
     	    A disciple described

      	<page 71>

     
     	    The work to be done

      	<page 73>

     
     	    Group relationships

      	<page 75>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter IX.

      	 

     
     	  The Path of Initiation

      	<page 82>

     
     	    The first two Initiations

      	<page 82>

     
     	    The succeeding two Initiations

      	<page 86>

     
     	    The final Initiations

      	<page 90>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter X.

      	 

     
     	  The Universality of   Initiation

      	<page 94>

     
     	    Initiation on the various planets

      	<page 94>

     
     	    Initiation and the devas

      	<page 97>

     
     	    Cosmic influences and solar Initiations

      	<page 98>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XI.

      	 

     
     	  The Participants in the   Mysteries

      	<page 100>

     
     	    Corroboration of Initiation

      	<page 100>

     
     	    Planetary Existences

      	<page 104>

     
     	    The departmental heads

      	<page 109>

     
     	    Important factors

      	<page 111>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XII.

      	 

     
     	  The Two Revelations

      	<page 112>

     
     	    The revelation of the "Presence"

      	<page 112>

     
     	    The revelation of the Vision

      	<page 119>

     
     	[p. xiii]

      	 

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XIII.

      	 

     
     	  The Rods of Initiation

      	<page 126>

     
     	    The purpose of the Rods of Power

      	<page 129>

     
     	    The effect of their application to:--

      	 

     
     	      A. The initiate's bodies

      	<page 134>

     
     	      B. The egoic body

      	<page 135>

     
     	      C. The centres

      	<page 138>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XIV.

      	 

     
     	  The Administration of   the Oath

      	<page 142>

     
     	The work of the Lodge during Initiation

      	<page 142>

     
     	Two types of oaths

      	<page 146>

     
     	The Oath of Initiation

      	<page 146>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XV.

      	 

     
     	  The Giving of the Word

      	<page 150>

     
     	    The solar Words

      	<page 150>

     
     	    The use of the Words

      	<page 155>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XVI.

      	 

     
     	  The imparting of the   "Secrets"

      	<page 163>

     
     	    The sevenfold Secret

      	<page 163>

     
     	    The three solar Mysteries

      	<page 168>

     
     	    Their sequential revelation

      	<page 168>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XVII.

      	 

     
     	  The Diversities of   Initiation

      	<page 176>

     
     	    Major and minor Initiations

      	<page 176>

     
     	    The day of opportunity

      	<page 182>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XVIII.

      	 

     
     	  The Seven Paths

      	<page 185>

     
     	 

      	 

     
     	Chapter XIX.

      	 

     
     	  Rules for Applicants

      	<page 192>

     
     	    An esoteric catechism

      	<page 209>

     
     	    Glossary

      	<page 215>

     
   
     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiv]

Click to enlarge
Chart

  

THE CONSTITUTION OF MAN

The constitution of man, as considered in the following pages, is basically threefold, as follows:--

I. The Monad, or pure Spirit, the Father in Heaven.

This aspect reflects the three aspects of the Godhead:

         	1. Will or Power

      	The Father.

     
     	2. Love-wisdom

      	The Son.

     
     	3. Active Intelligence

      	The Holy Spirit.

     
   and is only contacted at the final initiations, when man is nearing the end of his journey and is perfected. The Monad reflects itself again in

II. The Ego, Higher Self, or Individuality.

This aspect is potentially

         	1. Spiritual Will

      	Atma.

     
     	2. Intuition

      	Buddhi, Love-wisdom, the Christ principle.

     
     	3. Higher or abstract Mind

      	Higher Manas.

     
   The Ego begins to make its power felt in advanced men, and increasingly on the Probationary Path until by the third initiation the control of the lower self by the higher is perfected, and the highest aspect begins to make its energy felt.

The Ego reflects itself in

III. The Personality, or lower self, physical plane man.

This aspect is also threefold:

         	1. A mental body

      	lower manas.

     
     	2. An emotional body

      	astral body.

     
     	3. A physical body

      	the dense physical and the etheric body.

     
   The aim of evolution is therefore to bring man to the realisation of the Egoic aspect and to bring the lower nature under its control.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

INITIATION, HUMAN AND SOLAR

  

CHAPTER I

  

INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

Before entering upon the subject matter of the following articles on Initiation, on the Paths that open before the perfected man, and on the Occult Hierarchy, certain statements may be made which seem essential for the judicious study and comprehension of the ideas submitted.

It is to be recognised that throughout this volume facts are alleged and definite statements made which are not susceptible of immediate proof by the reader. Lest it be inferred that the writer arrogates to herself any credit or personal authority for the knowledge implied she emphatically disavows all such claims or representations. She cannot do otherwise than present these statements as matters of fact. Nevertheless, she would urge those who find somewhat of merit in these pages that they he not estranged by any appearance of dogmatism in the presentation. Nor should the inadequacy of the personality of the writer act as a deterrent to the open-minded consideration of the message to which her name happens to be appended. In spiritual issues, names, personalities, and the voice of external

[p. 2]

authority, hold small place. That alone is a safe guide which holds its warranty from inner recognition and inner direction. It is not, therefore, material whether the reader receive the message of these pages as a spiritual appeal in an idealistic setting, a presentation of alleged facts, or a theory evolved by one student and presented for the consideration of fellow students. To each it is offered for whatever of inner response it may evoke, for whatever of inspiration and of light it may bring.

In these days of the shattering of the old form and the building of the new, adaptability is needed. We must avert the danger of crystallisation through pliability and expansion. The "old order changeth," but primarily it is a change of dimension and of aspect, and not of material or of foundation. The fundamentals have always been true. To each generation is given the part of conserving the essential features of the old and beloved form, but also of wisely expanding and enriching it. Each cycle must add the gain of further research and scientific endeavour, and subtract that which is worn out and of no value. Each age must build in the product and triumphs of its period, and abstract the accretions of the past that would dim and blur the outline. Above all, to each generation is given the joy of demonstrating the strength of the old foundations, and the opportunity to build upon these foundations a structure that will meet the needs of the inner evolving life.

The ideas that are elaborated here find their corroboration in certain facts that are stated in the occult literature now extant. These facts are three in number, and are as follows:--

(a) In the creation of the sun and the seven sacred planets composing our solar system, our Logos employed matter that was already impregnated with particular qualities. Mrs. Besant in her book, "Avataras," (which some of

[p. 3]

us think the most valuable of all her writings, because one of the most suggestive), makes the statement that "our solar system is builded out of matter already existing, out of matter already gifted with certain properties ..." (page 48) . This matter, therefore, we deduce, held latent certain faculties that were forced to demonstrate in a peculiar way, under the law of Cause and Effect, as does all else in the universe.

(b) All manifestation is of a septenary nature, and the Central Light which we call Deity, the one Ray of Divinity, manifests first as a Triplicity, and then as a Septenary. The One God shines forth as God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, and these three are again reflected through the Seven Spirits before the Throne, or the seven Planetary Logoi. The students of occultism of non-Christian origin may call these Beings the One Ray, demonstrating through the three major Rays and the four minor, making a divine Septenary. The Synthetic Ray which blends them all is the great Love-Wisdom Ray, for verily and indeed "God is Love." This Ray is the indigo Ray, and is the blending Ray. It is the one which will, at the end of the greater cycle, absorb the others in the achievement of synthetic perfection. It is the manifestation of the second aspect of Logoic life. It is this aspect, that of the Form-Builder, that makes this solar system of ours the most concrete of the three major systems. The Love or Wisdom aspect demonstrates through the building of the form, for "God is Love," and in that God of Love we "live and move and have our being," and will to the end of aeonian manifestation.

(c) The seven planes of Divine Manifestation, or the seven major planes of our system, are but the seven subplanes of the lowest cosmic plane. The seven Rays of which

[p. 4]

we hear so much, and which hold so much of interest and of mystery, are likewise but the seven sub-rays of one cosmic Ray. The twelve creative Hierarchies are themselves but subsidiary branches of one cosmic Hierarchy. They form but one chord in the cosmic symphony. When that sevenfold cosmic chord, of which we form so humble a part, reverberates in synthetic perfection, then, and only then, will come comprehension of the words in the Book of Job: "The morning stars sang together." Dissonance yet sounds forth, and discord arises from many systems, but in the progression of the aeons an ordered harmony will eventuate, and the day will dawn when (if we dare speak of eternities in the terms of time) the sound of the perfected universe will resound to the uttermost bounds of the furthest constellation. Then will be known the mystery of "the marriage song of the heavens."

The reader is also asked to remember and weigh certain ideas prior to taking up the study of Initiation. Due to the extreme complexity of the matter it is an utter impossibility for us to do more than get a general idea of the scheme; hence the futility of dogmatism. We can do no more than sense a fraction of some wonderful whole, utterly beyond the reach of our consciousness,--a whole that the highest Angel or Perfected Being is but beginning to realise. When we recognise the fact that the average man is as yet fully conscious only on the physical plane, nearly conscious on the emotional plane, and only developing the consciousness of the mental plane, it is obvious that his comprehension of cosmic data can be but rudimentary. When we recognise the further fact, that to he conscious on a plane and to have control on that plane are two very different conditions, it becomes apparent how remote is the possibility of our approximating more than the general trend of the cosmic scheme.

[p. 5]

We must recognise also that danger lies in dogma and in the hide-bound facts of textbooks, and that safety lies in flexibility, and in a shifting angle of vision. A tact, for instance, looked at from the standpoint of humanity (using the word "fact" in the scientific sense as that which has been demonstrated past all doubt and question) may not be a fact from the standpoint of a Master. To Him it may be but part of a greater fact, only a fraction of the whole. Since His vision is fourth and fifth dimensional, His realisation of the place of time in eternity must be more accurate than ours. He sees things from above downwards, and as one to whom time is not.

An inexplicable principle of mutation exists in the Mind of the Logos, or the Deity of our solar system, and governs all His actions. We see but the ever changing forms, and catch glimpses of the steadily evolving life within those forms, but as yet have no clue to the principle which works through the shifting kaleidoscope of solar systems, rays, hierarchies, planets, planes, schemes, rounds, races, and sub-races. They interweave, interlock, and interpenetrate each other, and utter bewilderment is ours as the wonderful pattern they form unfolds before us. We know that somewhere in that scheme we, the human hierarchy, have our place. All, therefore, that we can do is to seize upon any data that seems to affect our own welfare, and concerns our own evolution, and from the study of the human being in the three worlds seek to understand somewhat the macrocosm. We know not how the one can become the three, the three become the seven, and so proceed to inconceivable differentiation. To human vision this interweaving of the system forms an unimaginable complexity, the key to which seems not to be forthcoming. Seen from the angle of a Master we know that all proceeds in ordered sequence. Seen from the angle of divine vision the whole will move

[p. 6]

in harmonious unison, producing a form geometrically accurate. Browning had hold of a part of this truth when he wrote:

"All's change, but permanence as well"... and continued:

"Truth inside, and outside, truth also; and between each, falsehood that is change, as truth is permanence."

"Truth successively takes shape, one grade above its last presentment..."

We must remember also that beyond a certain point it is not safe nor wise to carry the communication of the facts of the solar system. Much must remain esoteric and veiled. The risks of too much knowledge are far greater than the menace of too little. With knowledge comes responsibility and power,--two things for which the race is not yet ready. Therefore, all we can do is to study and correlate with what wisdom and discretion may be ours, using the knowledge that may come for the good of those we seek to help, and recognising that in the wise use of knowledge comes increased capacity to receive the hidden wisdom. Coupled also with the wise adaptation of knowledge to the surrounding need must grow the capacity for discreet reservation, and the use of the discriminating faculty. When we can wisely use, discreetly withhold, and soundly discriminate, we give the surest guarantee to the watching Teachers of the race that we are ready for a fresh revelation.

We must resign ourselves to the fact that the only way in which we can find the clue to the mystery of the rays, systems, and hierarchies, lies in the study of the law of correspondences or analogy. It is the one thread by which we can find our way through the labyrinth, and the one

[p. 7]

ray of light that shines through the darkness of the surrounding ignorance. H. P. Blavatsky, in "The Secret Doctrine," has told us so, but as yet very little has been done by students to avail themselves of that clue. In the study of this Law we need to remember that the correspondence lies in its essence, and not in the exoteric working out of detail as we think we see it from our present standpoint. The factor of time leads us astray for one thing; we err when we attempt to fix stated times or limits; all in evolution progresses through merging, with a constant process of overlapping and mingling. Only broad generalities and a recognition of fundamental points of analogy are possible to the average student. The moment he attempts to reduce to chart form and to tabulate in detail, he enters realms where he is bound to err, and staggers through a fog that will ultimately overwhelm him.

Nevertheless, in the scientific study of this law of analogy will come a gradual growth of knowledge, and in the slow accumulation of facts will gradually be built up an ever-expanding form, that will embody much of the truth. The student will then awake to the realization that after all the study and toil he has at least a wide general conception of the Logoic thoughtform into which he can fit the details as he acquires them through many incarnations. This brings us to the last point to be considered before entering upon the subject proper, which is:

That the development of the human being is but the passing from one state of consciousness to another. It is a succession of expansions, a growth of that faculty of awareness that constitutes the predominant characteristic of the indwelling Thinker. It is the progressing from consciousness polarised in the personality, lower self, or body, to that polarised in the higher self, ego, or soul, thence to a polarisation in the Monad, or Spirit, till the consciousness eventually

[p. 8]

is Divine. As the human being develops, the faculty of awareness extends first of all beyond the circumscribing walls that confine it within the lower kingdoms of nature (the mineral, vegetable and animal) to the three worlds of the evolving personality, to the planet whereon he plays his part, to the system wherein that planet revolves, until it finally escapes from the solar system itself and becomes universal.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

CHAPTER II

  

INITIATION DEFINED

The question anent initiation is one that is coming more and more before the public. Before many centuries pass the old mysteries will be restored, and an inner body will exist in the Church--the Church of the period, of which the nucleus is already forming--wherein the first initiation will become exoteric, in this sense only, that the taking of the first initiation will, before so very long, be the most sacred ceremony of the Church, performed exoterically as one of the mysteries given at stated periods, attended by those concerned. It will also hold a similar place in the ritual of the Masons. At this ceremony those ready for the first initiation will be publicly admitted to the Lodge by one of its members, authorised to do so by the great Hierophant Himself.

Four words defined.

When we speak of Initiation, of wisdom, of knowledge, or of the probationary Path, what do we mean? We use the words so glibly, without due consideration of the meaning involved. Take, for instance, the word first mentioned. Many are the definitions, and many are the explanations to be found as to its scope, the preparatory steps, the work to be done between initiations, and its result and effects. One thing before all else is apparent to the most superficial student, and that is, that the magnitude of the subject is such that in order to deal with it adequately one

[p. 10]

should be able to write from the viewpoint of an initiate; when this is not the case, anything that is said may be reasonable, logical, interesting, or suggestive, but not conclusive.

The word Initiation comes from two Latin words, in, into; and ire, to go; therefore, the making of a beginning, or the entrance into something. It posits, in its widest sense, in the case we are studying, an entrance into the spiritual life, or into a fresh stage in that life. It is the first step, and the succeeding steps, upon the Path of Holiness. Literally, therefore, a man who has taken the first initiation is one who has taken the first step into the spiritual kingdom, having passed out of the definitely human kingdom into the superhuman. Just as he passed out of the animal kingdom into the human at individualisation, so he has entered upon the life of the spirit, and for the first time has the right to be called a "spiritual man" in the technical significance of the word. He is entering upon the fifth or final stage in our present fivefold evolution. Having groped his way through the Hall of Ignorance during many ages, and having gone to school in the Hall of Learning, he is now entering into the university, or the Hall of Wisdom. When he has passed through that school he will graduate with his degree as a Master of Compassion.

It might be of benefit to us also if we studied first the difference or the connection between Knowledge, Understanding, and Wisdom. Though in ordinary parlance they are frequently interchanged, as used technically they are dissimilar.

Knowledge is the product of the Hall of Learning. It might be termed the sumtotal of human discovery and experience, that which can be recognised by the five senses, and be correlated, diagnosed, and defined by the use of the

[p. 11]

human intellect. It is that about which we feel mental certitude, or that which we can ascertain by the use of experiment. It is the compendium of the arts and sciences. It concerns all that deals with the building and developing of the form side of things. Therefore it concerns the material side of evolution, matter in the solar systems, in the planet, in the three worlds of human evolution, and in the bodies of men.

Wisdom is the product of the Hall of Wisdom. It has to do with the development of the life within the form, with the progress of the spirit through those ever-changing vehicles, and with the expansions of consciousness that succeed each other from life to life. It deals with the life side of evolution. Since it deals with the essence of things and not with the things themselves, it is the intuitive apprehension of truth apart from the reasoning faculty, and the innate perception that can distinguish between the false and the true, between the real and the unreal. It is more than that, for it is also the growing capacity of the Thinker to enter increasingly into the mind of the Logos, to realise the true inwardness of the great pageant of the universe, to vision the objective, and to harmonise more and more with the higher measure. For our present purpose (which is to study somewhat the Path of Holiness and its various stages) it may be described as the realisation of the "Kingdom of God within," and the apprehension of the "Kingdom of God without" in the solar system. Perhaps it might be expressed as the gradual blending of the paths of the mystic and the occultist,--the rearing of the temple of wisdom upon the foundation of knowledge.

Wisdom is the science of the spirit, just as knowledge is the science of matter. Knowledge is separative and objective, whilst wisdom is synthetic and subjective. Knowledge divides; wisdom unites. Knowledge differentiates

[p. 12]

whilst wisdom blends. What, then, is meant by the understanding?

The understanding may be defined as the faculty of the Thinker in Time to appropriate knowledge as the foundation for wisdom, that which enables him to adapt the things of form to the life of the spirit, and to take the flashes of inspiration that come to him from the Hall of Wisdom and link them to the facts of the Hall of Learning. Perhaps the whole idea might be expressed in this way:

Wisdom concerns the one Self, knowledge deals with the not-self, whilst the understanding is the point of view of the Ego, or Thinker, or his relation between them.

In the Hall of Ignorance the form controls, and the material side of things has the predominance. Man is there polarised in the personality or lower self. In the Hall of Learning the higher self, or Ego, strives to dominate that form until gradually a point of equilibrium is reached where the man is controlled entirely by neither. Later the Ego controls more and more, until in the Hall of Wisdom it dominates in the three lower worlds, and in increasing degree the inherent divinity assumes the mastery.

Aspects of initiation.

Initiation, or the process of undergoing an expansion of consciousness, is part of the normal process of evolutionary development, viewed on a large scale, and not from the standpoint of the individual. When viewed from the individual standpoint it has come to be narrowed down to the moment wherein the evolving unit definitely apprehends that (by dint of his own effort, aided by the advice and suggestions of the watching Teachers of the race) he has reached a point wherein a certain range of knowledge of

[p. 13]

a subjective nature, from the physical plane point of view, is his. It is in the nature of that experience wherein a pupil in a school realises suddenly that he has mastered a lesson, and that the rationale of a subject, and the method of procedure, are his to use intelligently. These moments of intelligent apprehension follow the evolving Monad throughout his long pilgrimage. What has been misinterpreted somewhat at this stage of comprehension is the fact that at various periods the emphasis is laid on different grades of expansion, and always the Hierarchy endeavours to bring the race to the point where its units will have some idea of the next step to be taken.

Each initiation marks the passing of the pupil in the Hall of Wisdom into a higher class, marks the clearer shining forth of the inner fire and the transition from one point of polarisation to another, entails the realisation of an increasing unity with all that lives and the essential oneness of the self with all selves. It results in a horizon that continuously enlarges until it includes the sphere of creation; it is a growing capacity to see and hear on all the planes. It is an increased consciousness of God's plans for the world, and an increased ability to enter into those plans and to further them. It is the effort in the abstract mind to pass an examination. It is the honour class in the Master's school, and is within the attainment of those souls whose karma permits and whose efforts suffice to fulfil the aim.

Initiation leads to the mount whence vision can be had, a vision of the eternal Now, wherein past, present, and future exist as one; a vision of the pageant of the races with the golden thread of pedigree carried through the many types; a vision of the golden sphere that holds in unison all the many evolutions of our system, deva, human, animal, vegetable, mineral, and elemental, and through which the 1 pulsating life can be clearly seen beating in regular rhythm;

[p. 14]

a vision of the Logoic thoughtform on the archetypal plane, a vision that grows from initiation to initiation until it embraces all the solar system.

Initiation leads to the stream that, once entered, sweeps a man onward until it carries him to the feet of the Lord of the World, to the feet of his Father in Heaven, to the feet of the three-fold Logos.

Initiation leads to the cave within whose circumscribing walls the pairs of opposites are known, and the secret of good and evil is revealed. It leads to the Cross and to that utter sacrifice which must transpire before perfect liberation is attained, and the initiate stands free of all earth's fetters, held by naught in the three worlds. It leads through the Hall of Wisdom, and puts into a man's hands the key to all information, systemic and cosmic, in graduated sequence. It reveals the hidden mystery that lies at the heart of the solar system. It leads from one state of consciousness to another. As each state is entered the horizon enlarges, the vista extends, and the comprehension includes more and more, until the expansion reaches a point where the self embraces all selves, including all that is "moving and unmoving," as phrased by an ancient Scripture.

Initiation involves ceremony. It is this aspect that has been emphasised in the minds of men, perhaps a little to the exclusion of the true significance. Primarily it involves the capacity to see, hear, and comprehend, and to synthesise and correlate knowledge. It does not necessarily involve the development of the psychic faculties, but it does entail the inner comprehension that sees the value underlying the form, and recognises the purpose of pervading circumstances. It is the capacity that senses the lesson to he learnt from any given occurrence and event, and that by means of these comprehensions and recognitions effects an hourly, weekly,

[p. 15]

yearly growth and expansion. This process of gradual expansion--the result of the definite effort and strenuous right thinking and living of the aspirant himself and not of some occult teacher performing an occult rite--leads to what one might term a crisis.

At this crisis, which necessitates the aid of a Master, a definite act of initiation is performed, which (acting on a particular centre) produces a result on some one body. It keys the atoms to a certain pitch, and enables a new rate of rhythm to be attained.

This ceremony of initiation marks a point of attainment. It does not bring about attainment, as is so often the misconception. It simply marks the recognition by the watching Teachers of the race of a definite point in evolution reached by the pupil, and gives two things:--

1. An expansion of consciousness that admits the personality into the wisdom attained by the Ego, and in the higher initiations into the consciousness of the Monad.

2. A brief period of enlightenment wherein the initiate sees that portion of the Path that lies ahead to be trodden, and wherein he shares consciously in the great plan of evolution.

After initiation, the work to be done consists largely in making that expansion of consciousness part of the equipment for the practical use of the personality, and in mastering that portion of the path that has yet to be traversed.

The place and effect of initiation.

The ceremony of initiation takes place on the three higher sub-planes of the mental plane, and on the three higher planes, according to the initiation. The five-pointed star, at the initiations on the mental plane, flashes out above

[p. 16]

the head of the initiate. This concerns the first initiations which are undergone in the causal vehicle. It has been said that the first two initiations take place upon the astral plane. but this is incorrect, and the statement has given rise to a misunderstanding. They are felt profoundly in connection with the astral and physical bodies and the lower mental, and affect their control. The chief effect being felt in those bodies the initiate may interpret them as having taken place on the planes concerned, as the vividness of the effect and the stimulation of the first two initiations work out largely in the astral body. But it must ever be remembered that the major initiations are taken in the causal body or--dissociated from that body--on the buddhic plane or atmic plane. At the final two initiations which set a man free from the three worlds, and enable him to function in the body of vitality of the Logos and wield that force, the initiate becomes the five-pointed star and it descends upon him, merges in him, and he is seen at its very centre. This descent is brought about by the action of the Initiator, wielding the Rod of Power, and puts a man in touch with the centre in the Body of the Planetary Logos of which he is a part, and this consciously. The two initiations called the sixth and seventh take place on the buddhic and atmic planes; the five-pointed star "blazes forth from within Itself," as the esoteric phrase has it, and becomes the seven-pointed star; it descends upon the man and he enters within the flame.

Again, the four initiations, prior to that of the adept, mark respectively the attainment of certain proportions of atomic matter in the bodies--for instance, at the first initiation one-fourth atomic matter, at the second one-half atomic matter, at the third three-quarters atomic matter, and so on to the completion. Since buddhi is the unifying principle (or the welder of all), at the fifth initiation the

[p. 17]

adept lets the lower vehicles go, and stands in his buddhic sheath. He creates thence his body of manifestation.

Each initiation gives more control on the rays, if one may so express it, although this does not adequately convey the idea. Words so often mislead. At the fifth initiation, when the adept stands Master in the three worlds, He controls more or less (according to His line of development) the five rays that are specially manifesting at the time He takes the initiation. At the sixth initiation, if He takes the higher degree, He gains power on another ray, and at the seventh initiation He wields power on all the rays. The sixth initiation marks the point of attainment of the Christ, and brings the synthetic ray of the system under His control. We need to remember that initiation gives the initiate power on the rays, and not power over the rays, for this marks a very definite difference. Every initiate has, of course, for his primary or spiritual ray one of the three major rays, and the ray of his Monad is the one on which he at length gains power. The love ray, or the synthetic ray of the system, is the final one achieved.

Those who pass away from the earth after the fifth initiation, or those who do not become Masters in physical incarnation, take their subsequent initiations elsewhere in the system. All are in the Logoic Consciousness. One great fact to be borne in mind is, that the initiations of the planet or of the solar system are but the preparatory initiations of admission into the greater Lodge on Sirius. We have the symbolism held for us fairly well in Masonry, and in combining the Masonic method with what we are told of the steps on the Path of Holiness we get an approximate picture. Let us enlarge somewhat:--

The first four initiations of the solar system correspond to the four "initiations of the Threshold," prior to

[p. 18]

the first cosmic initiation. The fifth initiation corresponds to the first cosmic initiation, that of "entered apprentice" in Masonry; and makes a Master an "entered apprentice" of the Lodge on Sirius. The sixth initiation is analogous to the second degree in Masonry, whilst the seventh initiation makes the Adept a Master Mason of the Brotherhood on Sirius.

A Master, therefore, is one who has taken the seventh planetary initiation, the fifth solar initiation, and the first Sirian or cosmic initiation.

At-one-ment, the result of initiation.

A point that we need to grasp is that each successive initiation brings about a more complete unification of the personality and the Ego, and on higher levels still, with the Monad. The whole evolution of the human spirit is a progressive at-one-ment. In the at-one-ment between the Ego and the personality lies hid the mystery of the Christian doctrine of the Atonement. One unification takes place at the moment of individualisation, when man becomes a conscious rational entity, in contradistinction to the animals. As evolution proceeds successive at-one-ments occur.

At-one-ment on all levels--emotional, intuitional, spiritual and Divine--consists in conscious, continuous functioning. In all cases it is preceded by a burning, through the medium of the inner fire, and by the destruction, through sacrifice, of all that separates. The approach to unity is through destruction of the lower, and of all that forms a barrier. Take, in illustration, the web that separates the etheric body and the emotional. When that web has been burned away by the inner fire the communication between the bodies of the personality becomes continuous and complete, and the three lower vehicles function as one. You

[p. 19]

have a somewhat analogous situation on the higher levels, though the parallel cannot be pushed to detail. The intuition corresponds to the emotional, and the four higher levels of the mental plane to the etheric. In the destruction of the causal body at the time of the fourth initiation (called symbolically "the Crucifixion") you have a process analogous to the burning of the web that leads to the unification of the bodies of the personality. The disintegration that is a part of the arhat initiation leads to unity between the Ego and the Monad, expressing itself in the Triad. It is the perfect at-one-ment.

The whole process is therefore for the purpose of making man consciously one:--

First: With himself, and those in incarnation with him.

Second: With his higher Self, and thus with all selves.

Third: With his Spirit, or "Father in Heaven," and thus with all Monads.

Fourth: With the Logos, the Three in One and the One in Three.

Man becomes a conscious human being through the instrumentality of the Lords of the Flame, through Their enduring sacrifice.

Man becomes a conscious Ego, with the consciousness of the higher Self, at the third initiation, through the instrumentality of the Masters and of the Christ, and through Their sacrifice in taking physical incarnation for the helping of the world.

Man unites with the Monad at the fifth initiation, through the instrumentality of the Lord of the World, the Solitary Watcher, the Great Sacrifice.

Man becomes one with the Logos through the instrumentality of One about Whom naught may be said.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 20]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE WORK OF THE HIERARCHY

Though the subject of the occult Hierarchy of the planet is of such a profoundly momentous interest to the average man, yet its real significance will never be understood until men realise three things in connection with it. First, that the entire Hierarchy of spiritual beings represents a synthesis of forces or of energies, which forces or energies are consciously manipulated for the furtherance of planetary evolution. This will become more apparent as we proceed. Secondly, that these forces, demonstrating in our planetary scheme through those great Personalities Who compose the Hierarchy, link it and all that it contains with the greater Hierarchy which we call Solar. Our Hierarchy is a miniature replica of the greater synthesis of those selfconscious Entities who manipulate, control, and demonstrate through the sun and the seven sacred planets, as well as the other planets, greater and smaller, of which our solar system is composed. Thirdly, that this Hierarchy of forces has four pre-eminent lines of work:

To develop selfconsciousness in all beings.

The Hierarchy seeks to provide fit conditions for the development of selfconsciousness in all beings. This it produces primarily in man through its initial work of blending the higher three aspects of spirit with the lower four; through the example it sets of service, sacrifice, and renunciation, and through the constant streams of light

[p. 21]

[paragraph continues] (occultly understood) which emanate from it. The Hierarchy might be considered as the aggregate on our planet of the forces of the fifth kingdom in nature. This kingdom is entered through the full development and control of the fifth principle of mind, and its transmutation into wisdom, which is literally the intelligence applied to all states through the full conscious utilisation of the faculty of discriminative love.

To develop consciousness in the three lower kingdoms.

As is well known, the five kingdoms of nature on the evolutionary arc might be defined as follows:--the mineral kingdom, the vegetable kingdom, the animal kingdom, the human kingdom, and the spiritual kingdom. All these kingdoms embody some type of consciousness, and it is the work of the Hierarchy to develop these types to perfection through the adjustment of karma, through the agency of force, and through the providing of right conditions. Some idea of the work may be gained if we briefly summarize the different aspects of consciousness to be developed in the various kingdoms.

In the mineral kingdom the work of the Hierarchy is directed toward the development of the discriminative and selective activity. One characteristic of all matter is activity of some kind, and the moment that activity is directed towards the building of forms, even of the most elemental kind, the faculty of discrimination will demonstrate. This is recognised by scientists everywhere, and in this recognition they are approximating the findings of the Divine Wisdom.

In the vegetable kingdom, to this faculty of discrimination is added that of response to sensation, and the rudimentary condition of the second aspect of divinity is to be seen, just as in the mineral kingdom a similar rudimentary

[p. 22]

reflection of the third aspect of activity is making itself felt.

In the animal kingdom this rudimentary activity and feeling are increased, and symptoms (if it might be so inadequately expressed) are to be found of the first aspect, or embryonic will and purpose; we may call it hereditary instinct, but it works out in fact as purpose in nature.

It has been wisely stated by H. P. Blavatsky that man is the macrocosm for the three lower kingdoms, for in him these three lines of development are synthesised and come to their full fruition. He is verily and indeed intelligence, actively and wonderfully manifested; He is incipient love and wisdom, even though as yet they may be but the goal of his endeavour; and he has that embryonic, dynamic, initiating will which will come to a fuller development after he has entered into the fifth kingdom.

In the fifth kingdom, the consciousness to be developed is that of the group, and this shows itself in the full flowering of the love-wisdom faculty. Man but repeats on a higher turn of the spiral, the work of the three lower kingdoms, for in the human kingdom he shows forth the third aspect of active intelligence. In the fifth kingdom, which is entered at the first initiation, and which covers all the period of time wherein a man takes the first five initiations, and that wherein he works as a Master, as part of the Hierarchy, the love-wisdom, or second aspect, comes to its consummation. At the sixth and seventh initiations the first, or will, aspect shines forth, and from being a Master of Compassion and a Lord of Love the adept becomes something more. He enters into a still higher consciousness than that of the group, and becomes God-conscious. The great will or purpose of the Logos becomes his.

The fostering of the various attributes of divinity, the tending of the seed of selfconsciousness in all beings, is the

[p. 23]

work of those Entities who have achieved, Who have entered into the fifth kingdom and Who have there made Their great decision, and that inconceivable renunciation which leads Them to stay within the planetary scheme, and thus co-operate with the plans of the Planetary Logos on the physical plane.

To transmit the will of the Planetary Logos.

They act as the transmitter to men and devas or angels, of the will of the Planetary Logos, and through Him of the Solar Logos. Each planetary scheme, ours amongst the others, is a centre in the body Logoic, and is expressing some form of energy or force. Each centre expresses its particular type of force, demonstrated in a triple manner, producing thus universally the three aspects in manifestation. One of the great realisations which come to those who enter into the fifth kingdom is that of the particular type of force which our own Planetary Logos embodies. The wise student will ponder on this statement, for it holds the clue to much that may be seen in the world today. The secret of synthesis has been lost, and only when men again get back the knowledge which was theirs in earlier cycles (having been mercifully withdrawn in Atlantean days) of the type of energy which our scheme should be demonstrating, will the world problems adjust themselves, and the world rhythm be stabilised. This cannot be as yet, for this knowledge is of a dangerous kind, and at present the race as a whole is not group conscious, and therefore cannot be trusted to work, think, plan, and act for the group. Man is as yet too selfish, but there is no cause for discouragement in this fact; group consciousness is already somewhat more than a vision, whilst brotherhood, and the recognition of its obligations, is beginning to permeate

[p. 24]

the consciousness of men everywhere. This is the work of the Hierarchy of Light,--to demonstrate to men the true meaning of brotherhood, and to foster in them response to that ideal which is latent in one and all.

To set an example to humanity.

The fourth thing that men need to know and to realise as a basic fact is that this Hierarchy is composed of those Who have triumphed over matter, and Who have achieved the goal by the very self-same steps that individuals tread today. These spiritual personalities, these adepts and Masters, have wrestled and fought for victory and mastery upon the physical plane, and struggled with the miasmas, the fogs, the dangers, the troubles, the sorrows and pains of everyday living. They have trodden every step of the path of suffering, have undergone every experience, have surmounted every difficulty, and have won out. These Elder Brothers of the race have one and all undergone the crucifixion of the personal self, and know that utter renunciation of all which is the lot of every aspirant at this time. There is no phase of agony, no rending sacrifice, no Via Dolorosa that They have not in Their time trodden, and herein lies Their right to serve, and the strength of the method of Their appeal. Knowing the quintessence of pain, knowing the depth of sin and of suffering, Their methods can be exquisitely measured to the individual need; yet at the same time Their realisation of the liberation to be achieved through pain, penalty, and suffering, and Their apprehension of the freedom that comes through the sacrifice of the form by the medium of the purificatory fires, suffices to give Them a firm hand, an ability to persist even when the form may seem to have undergone a sufficiency of suffering, and a love that triumphs over all

[p. 25]

setbacks, for it is founded on patience and experience. These Elder Brothers of humanity are characterised by a love which endures, and which acts ever for the good of the group; by a knowledge which has been gained through a millennia of lives, in which They have worked Their way from the bottom of life and of evolution well nigh to the top; by an experience which is based on time itself and a multiplicity of personality reactions and interactions; by a courage which is the result of that experience, and which, having itself been produced by ages of endeavour, failure, and renewed endeavour, and having in the long run led to triumph, can now be placed at the service of the race; by a purpose which is enlightened and intelligent, and which is co-operative, adjusting itself to the group and hierarchical plan and thus fitting in with the purpose of the Planetary Logos; and finally They are distinguished by a knowledge of the power of sound. This final fact is the basis of that aphorism which states that all true occultists are distinguished by the characteristics of knowledge, dynamic will, courage, and silence. "To know, to will, to dare, and to be silent." Knowing the plan so well, and having clear, illuminated vision, They can bend Their will unflinchingly and unswervingly to the great work of creation by the power of sound. This leads to Their silence where the average man would speak, and Their speaking where the average man is silent.

When men have grasped the four facts here enumerated, and they are established as acknowledged truths in the consciousness of the race, then may we look for a return of that cycle of peace and rest and righteousness which is foretold in all the Scriptures of the world. The Sun of Righteousness will then arise with healing in His wings, and the peace which passeth understanding will reign in the hearts of men.

[p. 26]

In dealing with this matter of the work of the occult Hierarchy, in a book for the general public, much must be left unsaid. The average man is interested and his curiosity is aroused by reference to these Personalities, but men are not yet ready for more than the most general information. For those who, from curiosity, pass on to desire and seek to know the truth as it is, more will be forthcoming, when they themselves have done the necessary work and study. Investigation is desired, and the attitude of mind which it is hoped this book will arouse might be summed up in the following words:--These statements sound interesting and perchance they are true. The religions of all nations, the Christian included, give indications that seem to substantiate these ideas. Let us therefore accept these ideas as a working hypothesis as to the consummation of the evolutionary process in man and his work upon the attainment of perfection. Let us therefore seek for the truth as a fact in our own consciousness. Every religious faith holds out the promise that those who seek with earnestness shall find that which they are seeking; let us, therefore, seek. If by our search we find that all these statements are but visionary dreams, and profit not at all, leading us only into darkness, time will nevertheless not have been lost, for we shall have ascertained where not to look. If by our search, on the other hand, corroboration comes little by little, and the light shines ever more clearly, let us persist until that day dawns when the light which shineth in darkness will have illuminated the heart and brain, and the seeker will awaken to the realisation that the whole trend of evolution has been to bring him this expansion of consciousness and this illumination, and that the attainment of the initiatory process, and the entrance into the fifth kingdom is no wild chimera or phantasm, but an established fact in the consciousness. This each man must ascertain for himself. Those

[p. 27]

who know may state a fact to be thus and so, but the dictum of another person and the enunciation of a theory do not aid beyond giving to the seeker confirmatory indication. Each soul has to ascertain for himself, and must find out within himself, remembering ever that the kingdom of God is within, and that only those facts which are realised within the individual consciousness as truths are of any real value. In the meantime, that which many know, and have ascertained within themselves to be truths of an incontrovertible nature for them, may here be stated; to the intelligent reader will then arise the opportunity and the responsibility of ascertaining for himself their falsity or truth.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 28]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE FOUNDING OF THE HIERARCHY

Its appearance on the planet.

It is not sought, in this book, to deal with the steps which led to the founding of the Hierarchy on the planet, nor to consider the conditions preceding the advent of those great Beings. This can be studied in other occult books in the occident, and in the sacred Scriptures of the East. Suffice it for our purpose to say that in the middle of the Lemurian epoch, approximately eighteen million years ago, occurred a great event which signified, among other things, the following developments:--The Planetary Logos of our earth scheme, one of the Seven Spirits before the throne, took physical incarnation, and, under the form of Sanat Kumara, the Ancient of Days, and the Lord of the World, came down to this dense physical planet and has remained with us ever since. Owing to the extreme purity of His nature, and the fact that He is (from the human standpoint) relatively sinless, and hence incapable of response to aught on the dense physical plane, He was unable to take a dense physical body such as ours, and has to function in His etheric body. He is the greatest of all the Avatars, or Coming Ones, for He is a direct reflection of that great Entity who lives, and breathes, and functions through all the evolutions on this planet, holding all within His aura or magnetic sphere of influence. In Him we live and move and have our being, and none of us can pass beyond the radius of His aura. He is the Great Sacrifice, Who left the glory of the high places and for the sake of

[p. 29]

the evolving sons of men took upon Himself a physical form and was made in the likeness of man. He is the Silent Watcher, as far as our immediate humanity is concerned, although literally the Planetary Logos Himself, on the higher plane of consciousness whereon He functions, is the true Silent Watcher where the planetary scheme is concerned. Perhaps it might be stated thus:--That the Lord of the World, the One Initiator, holds the same place in connection with the Planetary Logos as the physical manifestation of a Master holds to that Master's Monad on the monadic plane. In both cases the intermediate state of consciousness has been superseded, that of the Ego or higher self, and that which we see and know is the direct self-created manifestation of pure spirit itself. Hence the sacrifice. It must here be borne in mind that in the case of Sanat Kumara there is a tremendous difference in degree, for His point in evolution is as far in advance of that of an adept as that adept's is in advance of animal man. This will be somewhat elaborated in the next section of our subject.

With the Ancient of Days came a group of other highly evolved Entities, who represent His own individual karmic group and those Beings who are the outcome of the triple nature of the Planetary Logos. If one might so express it They embody the forces emanating from the head, heart, and throat centres, and They came in with Sanat Kumara to form focal points of planetary force for the helping of the great plan for the self-conscious unfoldment of all life. Their places have gradually been filled by the sons of men as they qualify, though this includes very few, until lately, from our immediate earth humanity. Those who are now the inner group around the Lord of the World have been primarily recruited from the ranks of those who were initiates on the moon chain (the cycle of evolution

[p. 30]

preceding ours) or who have come in on certain streams of solar energy, astrologically determined, from other planetary schemes, yet those who have triumphed in our own humanity are rapidly increasing in number, and hold all the minor offices beneath the central esoteric group of Six, who, with the Lord of the World, form the heart of hierarchial effort.

The immediate effect.

The result of Their advent, millions of years ago, was stupendous, and its effects are still being felt. Those effects might be enumerated as follows:--The Planetary Logos on His own plane was enabled to take a more direct method in producing the results He desired for working out His plan. As is well known, the planetary scheme, with its dense globe and inner subtler globes, is to the Planetary Logos what the physical body and its subtler bodies are to man. Hence in illustration it might he said that the coming into incarnation of Sanat Kumara was analogous to the firm grip of self-conscious control that the Ego of a human being takes upon his vehicles when the necessary stage in evolution has been achieved. It has been said that in the head of every man are seven centres of force, which are linked to the other centres in the body, and through which the force of the Ego is spread and circulated, this working out the plan. Sanat Kumara, with the six other Kumaras, holds a similar position. These central seven are as the seven head centres to the body corporate. They are the directing agents and the transmitters of the energy, force, purpose, and will of the Planetary Logos on His own plane. This planetary head centre works directly through the heart and throat centres, and thereby controls all the remaining centres. This is by way of illustration, and an attempt to show the relation

[p. 31]

of the Hierarchy to its planetary source, and also the close analogy between the method of functioning of a Planetary Logos and of man, the microcosm.

The third kingdom of nature, the animal kingdom, had reached a relatively high state of evolution, and animal man was in possession of the earth; he was a being with a powerful physical body, a co-ordinated astral body, or body of sensation and feeling, and a rudimentary germ of mind which might some day form a nucleus of a mental body. Left to himself for long aeons animal man would have eventually progressed out of the animal kingdom into the human, and would have become a self-conscious, functioning, rational entity, but how slow the process would have been may he evidenced by the study of the bushmen of South Africa, the Veddhas of Ceylon, and the hairy Ainus.

The decision of the Planetary Logos to take a physical vehicle produced an extraordinary stimulation in the evolutionary process, and by His incarnation, and the methods of force distribution He employed, He brought about in a brief cycle of time what would otherwise have been inconceivably slow. The germ of mind in animal man was stimulated. The fourfold lower man,

a. The physical body in its dual capacity, etheric and dense,

b. Vitality, life force, or prana,

c. The astral or emotional body,

d. The incipient germ of mind.

was co-ordinated and stimulated, and became a fit receptacle for the coming in of the self-conscious entities, those spiritual triads (the reflection of spiritual will, intuition, or wisdom, and higher mind) who had for long ages been waiting for just such a fitting. The fourth, or human kingdom, came

[p. 32]

thus into being, and the self-conscious, or rational unit, man, began his career.

Another result of the advent of the Hierarchy was a similar, though less recognised development in all the kingdoms of nature. In the mineral kingdom, for instance, certain of the minerals or elements received an added stimulation, and became radioactive, and a mysterious chemical change took place in the vegetable kingdom. This facilitated the bridging process between the vegetable and animal kingdoms, just as the radio-activity of minerals is the method of bridging the gulf between the mineral and vegetable kingdoms. In due course of time scientists will recognise that every kingdom in nature is linked and entered when the units of that kingdom become radioactive. But it is not necessary for us to digress along these lines. A hint suffices for those who have eyes to see, and the intuition to comprehend the meaning conveyed by terms which are handicapped by having a purely material connotation.

In Lemurian days, after the great descent of the spiritual Existences to the earth, the work They planned to do was systematised. Offices were apportioned, and the processes of evolution in all the departments of nature were brought under the conscious wise guidance of this initial Brotherhood. This Hierarchy of Brothers of Light still exists, and the work goes steadily on. They are all in physical existence, either in dense physical bodies, such as many of the Masters employ, or in etheric bodies, such as the more exalted helpers and the Lord of the World occupy. It is of value for men to remember that They are in physical existence, and to bear in mind that They exist upon this planet with us, controlling its destinies, guiding its affairs, and leading all its evolutions on to an ultimate perfection.

[p. 33]

The central home of this Hierarchy is at Shamballa, a centre in the Gobi desert, called in the ancient books the "White Island." It exists in etheric matter, and when the race of men on earth have developed etheric vision its location will be recognised and its reality admitted. The development of this vision is rapidly coming to pass, as may be seen from the newspapers and the current literature of the day, but the location of Shamballa will be one of the latest etheric sacred spots to be revealed as it exists in the matter of the second ether. Several of the Masters in physical bodies dwell in the Himalaya mountains, in a secluded spot called Shigatse, far from the ways of men, but the greater number are scattered all over the world, dwelling in different places in the various nations, unrecognised and unknown, yet forming each in His own place a focal point for the energy of the Lord of the World, and proving to His environment a distributor of the love and wisdom of the Deity.

The opening of the Door of Initiation.

It is not possible to touch upon the history of the Hierarchy during the long ages of its work, beyond mentioning certain outstanding events of the past, and pointing out certain eventualities. For ages after its immediate founding, the work was slow and discouraging. Thousands of years came and went, and races of men appeared and disappeared from the earth before it was possible to delegate even the work done by initiates of the first degree to the evolving sons of men. But in the middle of the fourth root-race, the Atlantean, an event occurred which necessitated a change, or innovation in the Hierarchical method. Certain of its members were called away to higher work elsewhere in the solar system, and this brought in, through

[p. 34]

necessity, a number of highly evolved units of the human family. In order to enable others to take Their place, the lesser members of the Hierarchy were all moved up a step, leaving vacancies among the minor posts. Therefore three things were decided upon in the Council Chamber of the Lord of the World.

1. To close the door through which animal men passed into the human kingdom, permitting for a time no more Monads on the higher plane to appropriate bodies. This restricted the number of the fourth, or human kingdom, to its then limitation.

2. To open another door, and permit members of the human family who were willing to undergo the necessary discipline and to make the required stupendous effort, to enter the fifth or spiritual kingdom. In this way the ranks of the Hierarchy could be filled by the members of earth's humanity who qualified. This door is called the Portal of Initiation, and still remains open upon the same terms as laid down by the Lord of the World in Atlantean days. These terms will be stated in the last chapter of this book. The door between the human and animal kingdoms will again be opened during the next great cycle, or "round" as it is called in some books, but as this is several million years away from us at this time, we are not concerned with it.

3. It was also decided to make the line of demarcation between the two forces of matter and spirit clearly defined; the inherent duality of all manifestation was emphasised, with the aim in view of teaching men how to liberate themselves from the limitations of the fourth, or human kingdom, and thus pass on into the fifth, or spiritual. The problem of good or evil, light or darkness, right or wrong, was enunciated solely for the benefit of humanity, and to enable men to cast off the fetters which imprisoned

[p. 35]

spirit, and thus achieve spiritual freedom. This problem exists not in the kingdoms below man, nor for those who transcend the human. Man has to learn through experience and pain the fact of the duality of all existence. Having thus learnt, he chooses that which concerns the fully conscious spirit aspect of divinity, and learns to centre himself in that aspect. Having thus achieved liberation he finds indeed that all is one, that spirit and matter are a unity, naught existing save that which is to be found within the consciousness of the Planetary Logos, and--in wider circles--within the consciousness of the Solar Logos.

The Hierarchy thus took advantage of the discriminative faculty of mind, which is the distinctive quality of humanity, to enable him, through the balancing of the pairs of opposites, to reach his goal, and to find his way back to the source from whence he came.

This decision led to that great struggle which distinguished the Atlantean civilisation, and which culminated in the destruction called the flood, referred to in all the Scriptures of the world. The forces of light, and the forces of darkness, were arrayed against each other, and this for the helping of humanity. The struggle still persists, and the World War through which we have just passed was a recrudescence of it. On every side in that World War two groups were to be found, those who fought for an ideal as they saw it, for the highest that they knew, and those who fought for material and selfish advantage. In the struggle of these influential idealists or materialists many were swept in who fought blindly and ignorantly, being thus overwhelmed with racial karma and disaster.

These three decisions of the Hierarchy are having, and will have a profound effect upon humanity, but the result desired is being achieved, and a rapid hastening of the

[p. 36]

evolutionary process, and a profoundly important effect upon the mind aspect in man, can already be seen.

It might here be well to point out that, working as members of that Hierarchy are a great number of beings called angels by the Christian, and devas by the oriental. Many of them have passed through the human stage long ages ago, and work now in the ranks of the great evolution parallel to the human, and which is called the deva evolution. This evolution comprises among other factors, the builders of the objective planet and the forces which produce, through those builders, every form familiar and unfamiliar. The devas who co-operate with the Hierarchical effort, concern themselves, therefore, with the form aspect, whilst the other members of the Hierarchy are occupied with the development of consciousness within the form.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

CHAPTER V

  

THE THREE DEPARTMENTS OF THE HIERARCHY

We have already dealt with the subject of the founding of the Hierarchy upon earth, and we saw how it came to be, touching likewise upon certain crises which have occurred, and which still affect events in the present time. In dealing with the work and aims of the personnel of the Hierarchy, it will not be possible to state what those aims have been, nor to consider in detail who the active personalities have been during the past millennia of years since the Hierarchy came into existence.

Many great Beings from planetary and solar sources, and once or twice from cosmic sources, have at times lent Their aid and dwelt briefly upon our planet. By the energy which flowed through Them, and by Their profound wisdom and experience, They stimulated earth's evolutions and brought the purposes of the Planetary Logos so much the nearer to completion. Then They passed on, and Their places were taken by those among the members of the Hierarchy Who were willing to undergo a specific training and expansion of consciousness. In turn these adepts and Masters had Their places filled by initiates, and thus constantly has there been opportunity for disciples and highly evolved men and women to pass into the ranks of the Hierarchy, and thus constantly has there been a circulation of new life and blood, and the coming in of those who belong to a particular period or age.

Some of the great names during the later periods are known to history, such as Shri Sankaracharya, Vyasa,

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] Mahommet, Jesus of Nazareth, and Krishna, down to those lesser initiates, Paul of Tarsus, Luther, and certain of the outstanding lights in European history. Always have these men and women been agents for the carrying out of race purpose, for the bringing about of group conditions, and for the furthering of the evolution of humanity. Sometimes they have appeared as beneficent forces, bringing peace and contentment with them. More often have they come as agents of destruction, breaking up the old forms of religion and of government in order that the life within the rapidly crystallising form might be set free and build for itself a newer and a better vehicle.

Much that is stated here is already well known, and has already been given out in the different occult books. Yet in the wise and careful enunciation of collected facts, and their correlation with that which may be new to some students, comes an eventual synthetic grasp of the great plan, and a wise uniform realisation as to the work of that great group of liberated souls who, in utter self-abnegation, stand silently behind the world panorama. Through the power of their will, the strength of their meditations, the wisdom of their plans, and the scientific knowledge of energy which is theirs, they direct those force currents, and control those form-building agencies which produce all that is seen and unseen, movable and immovable in the sphere of creation within the three worlds. This, coupled to their vast experience, is what fits them to be the agents for the distribution of the energy of the Planetary Logos.

As has already been stated, at the head of affairs, controlling each unit and directing all evolution, stands the KING, the Lord of the World, Sanat Kumara, the Youth of Endless Summers, and the Fountainhead of the Will, (showing forth as Love) of the Planetary Logos. Co-operating with Him as His advisers are three Personalities

[p. 39]

called the Pratyeka Buddhas, or the Buddhas of Activity. These four are the embodiment of active intelligent loving will. They are the full flowering of the intelligence, having achieved in an earlier solar system that which man is now striving to perfect. In earlier cycles in this system They began to demonstrate intelligent love, and from the standpoint of the average human being They are perfect love and perfect intelligence, though from the standpoint of that Existence Who embraces even our planetary scheme in His body of manifestation, that love aspect is as yet but in process of developing, and the will is only embryonic. Another solar system will see the will aspect come to fruition, as love will mature in this.

Standing around the Lord of the World, but withdrawn and esoteric, are three more Kumaras, Who make the seven of planetary manifestation. Their work is to us necessarily obscure. The three exoteric Buddhas, or Kumaras, are the sumtotal of activity or planetary energy, and the three esoteric Kumaras embody types of energy which as yet are not in full demonstration upon our planet. Each of these six Kumaras is a reflection of, and the distributing agent for, the energy and force of one of the six other Planetary Logoi, the remaining six spirits before the Throne. Sanat Kumara alone, in this scheme, is self-sustaining and self-sufficient, being the physical incarnation of one of the Planetary Logoi, which one it is not permissible to state, as this fact is one of the secrets of initiation. Through each of Them passes the life force of one of the six rays, and in considering Them one might sum up Their work and position as follows:--

1. They each embody one of the six types of energy, with the Lord of the World as the synthesiser and the embodier of the perfect seventh type, our planetary type.

[p. 40]

2. They are each distinguished by one of the six colours, with the Lord of the World showing forth the full planetary colour, these six being subsidiary.

3. Their work is therefore concerned, not only with force distribution, but with the passing into our scheme from other planetary schemes, of Egos seeking earth experience.

4. Each of Them is in direct communication with one or another of the sacred planets.

5. According to astrological conditions, and according to the turning of the planetary wheel of life, so one or another of these Kumaras will be active. The three Buddhas of Activity change from time to time, and become in turn exoteric or esoteric as the case may be. Only the King persists steadily and watchfully in active physical incarnation.

Besides these main presiding Personalities in the Council Chamber at Shamballa, there is a group of four Beings Who are the representatives upon the planet of the four Maharajas, or the four Lords of Karma in the solar system, who are specifically concerned with the evolution at the present time of the human kingdom. These four are connected with:--

1. The distribution of karma, or human destiny, as it affects individuals, and through the individuals, the groups.

2. The care and tabulation of the akashic records. They are concerned with the Halls of Records, or with the "keeping of the book," as it is called in the Christian Bible; They are known in the Christian world as the recording angels.

[p. 41]

3. The participation in solar councils. They alone have the right during the world cycle to pass beyond the periphery of the planetary scheme, and participate in the councils of the Solar Logos. Thus They are literally planetary mediators, representing our Planetary Logos and all that concerns Him in the greater scheme of which He is but a part.

Co-operating with these karmic Lords are the large groups of initiates and devas who occupy themselves with the right adjustment of:--

a. World karma,

b. Racial karma,

c. National karma,

d. Group karma,

e. Individual karma,

and who are responsible to the Planetary Logos for the correct manipulation of those forces and building agencies which bring in the right Egos on the different rays at the correct times and seasons.

With all these groups we have little concern, for they are contacted only by initiates of the third initiation, and by those of even more exalted rank.

The remaining personnel of the Hierarchy is divided into three main and four subsidiary groups, each of these groups, as will be seen by reference to the appended chart, being presided over by one of Those Whom we call the three Great Lords.

The work of the Manu.

The Manu presides over group one. He is called Vaivasvata Manu, and is the Manu of the fifth root-race. He

[p. 42]

is the ideal man or thinker, and sets the type for our Aryan race, having presided over its destinies since its inception nearly one hundred thousand years ago. Other Manus have come and gone and His place will be, in the relatively near future, taken by someone else. He will then pass on to other work of a more exalted kind. The Manu, or the prototype of the fourth root-race, works in close co-operation with Him, and has His centre of influence in China. He is the second Manu that the fourth root-race has had, having taken the place of the earlier Manu at the time of the final stages of Atlantean destruction. He has remained to foster the development of the race type, and to bring about its final disappearance. The periods of office of all the Manus overlap, but there remains no representative of the third root-race upon the globe at this time. Vaivasvata Manu has His dwelling place in the Himalaya mountains. and has gathered around Him at Shigatse some of those immediately connected with Aryan affairs in India, Europe and America, and those who will later be concerned with the coming sixth root-race. The plans are prepared for ages ahead, centres of energy are formed thousands of years before they will be required, and in the wise fore-knowledge of these Divine Men nothing is left to sudden eventuation, but all moves in ordered cycles and under rule and law, though within karmic limitations.

The work of the Manu is largely concerned with government, with planetary politics, and with the founding, direction, and dissolution of racial types and forms. To Him is committed the will and purpose of the Planetary Logos. He knows what is the immediate objective for this cycle of evolution over which He has to preside, and His work concerns itself with making that will an accomplished fact. He works in closer co-operation with the building devas than does His Brother, the Christ, for to Him is

[p. 43]

given the work of setting the race type, of segregating the groups out of which races will develop, of manipulating the forces which move the earth's crust, of raising and lowering continents, of directing the minds of statesmen everywhere so that racial government will proceed as desired, and conditions be brought about which will produce those needed for the fostering of any particular type. Such a work can now be seen demonstrating in North America and Australia.

The energy which flows through Him emanates from the head centre of the Planetary Logos, passing to Him through the brain of Sanat Kumara, Who focalises all the planetary energy within Himself. He works by the means of a dynamic meditation, conducted within the head centre, and produces His results through His perfect realisation of that which has to be accomplished, through a power to visualise that which must be done to bring about accomplishment, and through a capacity to transmit creative and destructive energy to those who are His assistants. And all this is brought about through the power of the enunciated sound.

The work of the World Teacher, the Christ.

Group two has the World Teacher for its presiding Head. He is that Great Being Whom the Christian calls the Christ; He is known also in the Orient as the Bodhisattva, and as the Lord Maitreya, and is the One looked for by the devout Mohammedan, under the name of the Iman Madhi. He it is Who has presided over the destinies of life since about 600 B.C. and He it is Who has come out among men before, and Who is again looked for. He is the great Lord of Love and of Compassion, just as his predecessor, the Buddha, was the Lord of Wisdom.

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Through Him flows the energy of the second aspect, reaching Him direct from the heart centre of the Planetary Logos via the heart of Sanat Kumara. He works by means of a meditation centred within the heart. He is the World Teacher, the Master of the Masters, and the Instructor of the Angels, and to Him is committed the guidance of the spiritual destinies of men, and the development of the realisation within each human being that he is a child of God and a son of the Most High.

Just as the Manu is occupied with the providing of the type and forms through which consciousness can evolve and gather experience, thus making existence in its deepest sense possible, so the World Teacher directs that indwelling consciousness in its life or spirit aspect, seeking to energise it within the form so that, in due course of time, that form can be discarded and the liberated spirit return whence it came. Ever since He left the earth, as related with approximate accuracy in the Bible story (though with much error in detail) has He stayed with the sons of men; never has He really gone, but only in appearance, and in a physical body He can be found by those who know the way, dwelling in the Himalayas, and working in close co-operation with His two great Brothers, the Manu and the Mahachohan. Daily He pours out His blessing on the world, and daily He stands under the great pine in His garden at the sunset hour with hands uplifted in blessing over all those who truly and earnestly seek to aspire. To Him all seekers are known, and, though they may remain unaware of Him, the light which He pours forth stimulates their desire, fosters the spark of struggling life and spurs on the aspirant until the momentous day dawns when they stand face to face with the One Who by being "lifted up" (occultly understood) is drawing all men unto Himself as the Initiator of the sacred mysteries.

[p. 45]

The work of the Lord of Civilisation, the Mahachohan.

Group three has as its Head the Mahachohan. His rule over the group persists for a longer period than that of His two Brothers, and He may hold office for the term of several root-races. He is the sumtotal of the intelligence aspect. The present Mahachohan is not the original one Who held the office at the founding of the Hierarchy in Lemurian days--it was then held by one of the Kumaras, or Lords of the Flame, Who came into incarnation with Sanat Kumara--but He took hold of His position during the second sub-race of the Atlantean root-race. He had achieved adeptship on the moon-chain, and it was through His instrumentality that a large number of the present more advanced human beings came into incarnation in the middle of the Atlantean root-race. Karmic affiliation with Him was one of the predisposing causes, thus making this eventuality possible.

His work concerns itself with the fostering and strengthening of that relation between spirit and matter, life and form, the self and the not-self, which results in what we call civilisation. He manipulates the forces of nature, and is largely the emanating source of electrical energy as we know it. Being the reflection of the third, or creative aspect, energy from the Planetary Logos flows to Him from the throat centre, and He it is Who in many ways makes the work of His Brothers possible. Their plans and desires are submitted to Him, and through Him pass the instructions to a large number of the deva agents.

Thus you have Will, Love, and Intelligence represented in these three great Lords; you have the self, the not-self, and the relation between synthesised in the unity of manifestation; you have racial government, religion and civilisation forming a coherent whole, and you have physical manifestation, the love or desire aspect, and the mind

[p. 46]

of the Planetary Logos working out into objectivity. The closest co-operation and unity exists between these three Personalities, and every move and plan and event exists in Their united foreknowledge. They are in daily touch with the Lord of the World at Shamballa, and the entire guidance of affairs rests in Their hands, and in those of the Manu of the fourth root-race. The World Teacher holds office in connection with both the fourth and fifth root-races.

Each of these departmental heads directs a number of subsidiary offices, and the department of the Mahachohan is divided into five divisions, so as to take in the four lesser aspects of Hierarchical rule.

Under the Manu work the regents of the different world divisions, such as, for instance, the Master Jupiter, the oldest of the Masters now working in physical bodies for humanity, Who is the regent for India, and the Master Rakoczi, Who is the regent for Europe and America. It must be remembered here that though the Master R., for instance, belongs to the seventh ray, and thus comes under the department of energy of the Mahachohan, yet in Hierarchical work He may and does hold office temporarily under the Manu. These regents hold in Their hands the reins of government for continents and nations, thus guiding, even if unknown, their destinies; They impress and inspire statesmen and rulers; They pour forth mental energy on governing groups, thus bringing about the desired results wherever co-operation and receptive intuition can be found amongst the thinkers.

The World Teacher presides over the destiny of the great religions through the medium of a group of Masters and initiates Who direct the activities of these different schools of thought. In illustration:--The Master Jesus, the inspirer and director of the Christian Churches every

[p. 47]

where, though an adept on the sixth ray under the department of the Mahachohan, works at present under the Christ for the welfare of Christianity; other Masters hold similar posts in relation to the great oriental faiths, and the various occidental schools of thought.

In the department of the Mahachohan a large number of Masters, in fivefold division, work in connection with the deva evolution, and with the intelligence aspect in man. Their divisions follow those of the four minor rays of attribute:--

1. The ray of harmony or beauty.

2. The ray of concrete science or knowledge.

3. The ray of devotion or abstract idealism.

4. The ray of ceremonial law or magic,

just as the three departmental heads represent the three major rays of:

  I. Will or power.

 II. Love or wisdom.

III. Active intelligence, or adaptability.

[paragraph continues] The four rays or attributes of mind, with the third ray of intelligence, as synthesised by the Mahachohan, make up the sumtotal of the fifth principle of mind or manas.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

Click to enlarge
Solar and Planetary Hierarchies

[p. 49]

Click to enlarge
Key to Diagram of Solar and Planetary Hierarchies

[p. 50]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE LODGE OF MASTERS

The divisions.

We have considered somewhat the highest offices in the ranks of the Hierarchy of our planet. Now we will deal with what we might call the two divisions into which the remaining members are divided. They form literally two Lodges within the greater body:--

a. The ---- Lodge, comprised of initiates above the fifth initiation, and a group of devas or angels.

b. The Blue Lodge, comprised of all initiates of the third, fourth, and fifth initiations.

[paragraph continues] Below these come a large group of initiates of the first and second initiations, and then the disciples of every grade. The disciples are considered as affiliated with the Lodge, but not as literally members of it. Finally come those who are on probation, and who hope through strenuous effort to achieve affiliation.

From another point of view we can consider the Lodge members as existing in seven groups, each group representing one type of the sevenfold planetary energy emanating from the Planetary Logos. The triple division has first been given, as ever in evolution you have the major three (manifesting through the three departments) and then the seven, these seven showing again as a triple differentiation and a septenary. Students must bear in mind that all that is herein imparted concerns the work of the Hierarchy in connection with the fourth or human kingdom,

[p. 51]

and refers especially to those Masters Who work in connection with humanity. Were the deva evolution being dealt with, the entire tabulation and division would have to differ from this.

Again, there are certain aspects of hierarchical work affecting, for instance, the animal kingdom; this work calls into activity beings and workers and adepts totally distinct from the servers of the fourth or human kingdom. Therefore students should carefully remember that all these details are relative, and that the work and personnel of the Hierarchy are infinitely greater and more important than may appear upon a superficial reading of these pages. Certainly we are dealing with what might be considered Its primary work, for in the service of the human kingdom we are concerned with the manifestation of the three aspects of divinity, but the other departments are interdependent and the work progresses as a synthetic whole.

The workers, or adepts, concerned with the evolution of the human family, comprise sixty-three, if the three great Lords are counted in making the nine times seven necessary for the work. Of these forty-nine work exoterically, if it might be so expressed, and fourteen esoterically, being more concerned with the subjective manifestation. Not many of Their names are known to the public, nor would it be wise in many cases to reveal Who They are, where They dwell, and what is Their particular sphere of activity. A very small minority, through group karma and a willingness thus to sacrifice Themselves, have come before the public eye during the past one hundred years, and therefore concerning these, certain information may be given out. Quite a number of people in the world today are aware of Their existence independently of any particular school of thought, and the realisation that Those Whom they thus know personally are workers in a great and

[p. 52]

unified scheme of endeavour may encourage these real knowers to testify to their knowledge, and thus establish past all controversy the reality of Their work. Certain schools of occultism and of theosophical endeavour have claimed to be the sole repository of Their teaching, and the sole outlet for Their efforts, thereby limiting that which They do, and formulating premises which time and circumstance will fail to substantiate. They work most assuredly through such groups of thinkers, and throw much of Their force into the work of such organisations, yet, nevertheless, They have Their disciples and Their followers everywhere, and work through many bodies and many aspects of teaching. Throughout the world, disciples of these Masters have come into incarnation at this time with the sole intent of participating in the activities and occupations and truth dissemination of the various churches, sciences, and philosophies, and thus producing within the organisation itself an expansion, a widening, and a disintegration where necessary, which might otherwise be impossible. It might be wise for occult students everywhere to recognise these facts, and to cultivate the ability to recognise the hierarchical vibration as it demonstrates through the medium of disciples in the most unlikely places and groups.

One point should here be stated in connection with the work of the Masters through Their disciples, and it is this. All the various schools of thought which are fostered by the energy of the Lodge are, in every case, founded by a disciple, or several disciples, and upon these disciples, and not upon the Master, lies responsibility for results and the consequent karma. The method of procedure is somewhat as follows:--The Master reveals to a disciple the objective in view for an immediate little cycle, and suggests to him that such and such a development would be desirable. It is the work of the disciple to ascertain the best

[p. 53]

method for bringing about the desired results, and to formulate the plans whereby a certain percentage of success will be possible. Then he launches his scheme, founds his society or organisation, and disseminates the necessary teaching. Upon him rests the responsibility for choosing the right co-workers, for handing on the work to those best fitted, and for clothing the teaching in a presentable garb. All that the Master does is to look on with interest and sympathy at the endeavour, as long as it holds its initial high ideal and proceeds with pure altruism upon its way. The Master is not to blame should the disciple show lack of discrimination in the choice of co-workers, or evidence an inability to represent the truth. If he does well, and the work proceeds as desired, the Master will continue to pour His blessing upon the attempt. If he fails, or his successors turn from the original impulse, thus disseminating error of any kind, in His love and in His sympathy the Master will withdraw that blessing, withhold His energy, and thus cease from stimulating that which had better die. Forms may come and go, and the interest of the Master and His blessing pour through this or that channel; the work may proceed through one medium or another, but always the life force persists, shattering the form where it is inadequate, or utilising it when it suffices for the immediate need.

Certain Masters and Their Work.

Under the first great group of which the Manu is the Head, can be found two Masters, the Master Jupiter, and the Master Morya. Both of them have taken more than the fifth initiation, and the Master Jupiter, Who is also the Regent of India, is looked up to by all the Lodge of Masters as the oldest among Them. He dwells in the Nilgherry Hills in Southern India, and is not one of the Masters Who

[p. 54]

usually takes pupils, for He numbers amongst His disciples initiates of high degree and quite a number of Masters. In His hands are the reins of government for India, including a large part of the Northern frontier, and to Him is committed the arduous task of eventually guiding India out of her present chaos and unrest, and of welding her diverse peoples into an ultimate synthesis. The Master Morya, Who is one of the best known of the Eastern adepts, and Who numbers amongst His pupils a large number of Europeans and Americans, is a Rajput Prince, and for many decades held an authoritative position in Indian affairs.

He works in close co-operation with the Manu, and will Himself eventually hold office as the Manu of the sixth root-race. He dwells, as does His Brother, the Master K. H., at Shigatse in the Himalayas, and is a well-known figure to the inhabitants of that far-away village. He is a man of tall and commanding presence, dark hair and beard and dark eyes, and might be considered stern were it not for the expression that lies in His eyes. He and His Brother, the Master K. H., work almost as a unit, and have done so for many centuries and will, on into the future, for the Master K. H. is in line for the office of World Teacher when the present holder of that office vacates it for higher work, and the sixth root-race comes into being. The houses in which They both dwell are close together, and much of Their time is spent in the closest association. As the Master M. is upon the first Ray, that of Will or Power, His work largely concerns itself with the carrying out of the plans of the present Manu. He acts as the Inspirer of the statesmen of the world, He manipulates forces, through the Mahachohan, that will bring about the conditions desired for the furthering of racial evolution. On the physical plane those great national executives

[p. 55]

who have far vision and the international ideal are influenced by Him, and with Him co-operate certain of the great devas of the mental plane, and three great groups of angels work with Him on mental levels, in connection with the lesser devas who vitalise thoughtforms, and thus keep alive the thoughtforms of the Guides of the race for the benefit of the whole of humanity.

The Master M. has a large body of pupils under His instruction, and works in connection with many organisations of an esoteric and occult kind, as well as through the politicians and statesmen of the world.

The Master Koot Humi, Who is also very well known in the occident, and has many pupils everywhere, is of Kashmiri origin, though the family originally came from India. He is also an initiate of high degree, and is upon the second, or the Love-Wisdom Ray. He is a man of noble presence, and tall, though of rather slighter build than the Master M. He is of fair complexion, with golden-brown hair and beard, and eyes of a wonderful deep blue, through which seem to pour the love and the wisdom of the ages. He has had a wide experience and education, having been originally educated at one of the British universities, and speaks English fluently. His reading is wide and extensive, and all the current books and literature in various languages find their way to His study in the Himalayas. He concerns Himself largely with the vitalising of certain of the great philosophies, and interests Himself in a number of philanthropic agencies. To Him is given the work very largely of stimulating the love manifestation which is latent in the hearts of all men, and of awakening in the consciousness of the race the perception of the great fundamental fact of brotherhood.

At this particular time the Master M., the Master K. H. and the Master Jesus are interesting Themselves

[p. 56]

closely with the work of unifying, as far as may be, eastern and western thought, so that the great religions of the East, with the later development of the Christian faith in all its many branches, may mutually benefit each other. Thus eventually it is hoped one great universal Church may come into being.

The Master Jesus, Who is the focal point of the energy that flows through the various Christian churches, is at present living in a Syrian body, and dwells in a certain part of the Holy Land. He travels much and passes considerable time in various parts of Europe. He works specially with masses more than with individuals, though He has gathered around Him quite a numerous body of pupils. He is upon the sixth Ray of Devotion, or Abstract Idealism, and His pupils are frequently distinguished by that fanaticism and devotion which manifested in earlier Christian times amongst the martyrs. He Himself is rather a martial figure, a disciplinarian, and a man of iron rule and will. He is tall and spare with rather a long thin face, black hair, pale complexion and piercing blue eyes. His work at this time is exceedingly responsible, for to Him is given the problem of steering the thought of the occident out of its present state of unrest into the peaceful waters of certitude and knowledge, and of preparing the way in Europe and America for the eventual coming of the World Teacher. He is well known in the Bible history, coming before us first as Joshua the Son of Nun, appearing again in the time of Ezra as Jeshua, taking the third initiation, as related in the book of Zechariah, as Joshua, and in the Gospel story He is known for two great sacrifices, that in which He handed over His body for the use of the Christ, and for the great renunciation which is the characteristic of the fourth initiation. As Appollonius of Tyana, He took the

[p. 57]

fifth initiation and became a Master of the Wisdom. From that time on He has stayed and worked with the Christian Church, fostering the germ of true spiritual life which is to be found amongst members of all sects and divisions, and neutralising as far as possible the mistakes and errors of the churchmen and the theologians. He is distinctively the Great Leader, the General, and the wise Executive, and in Church matters He co-operates closely with the Christ, thus saving Him much and acting as His intermediary wherever possible. No one so wisely knows as He the problems of the West, no one is so closely in touch with the people who stand for all that is best in Christian teachings, and no one is so well aware of the need of the present moment. Certain great prelates of the Anglican and Catholic Churches are wise agents of His.

The Master Djwhal Khul, or the Master D. K. as He is frequently called, is another adept on the second Ray of Love-Wisdom. He is the latest of the adepts taking initiation, having taken the fifth initiation in 1875, and is therefore occupying the same body in which He took the initiation, most of the other Masters having taken the fifth initiation whilst occupying earlier vehicles. His body is not a young one, and He is a Tibetan. He is very devoted to the Master K. H. and occupies a little house not far distant from the larger one of the Master, and from His willingness to serve and to do anything that has to be done, He has been called "the Messenger of the Masters." He is profoundly learned, and knows more about the rays and planetary Hierarchies of the solar system than anyone else in the ranks of the Masters. He works with those who heal, and co-operates unknown and unseen with the seekers after truth in the world's great laboratories, with all who definitely aim at the healing and solacing of the world, and with the great philanthropic world movements

[p. 58]

such as the Red Cross. He occupies Himself with various pupils of different Masters who can profit by His instruction, and within the last ten years has relieved both the Master M. and the Master K. H. of a good deal of Their teaching work, taking over from Them for certain stated times some of Their pupils and disciples. He works largely, too, with certain groups of the devas of the ethers, who are the healing devas, and who thus collaborate with Him in the work of healing some of the physical ills of humanity. He it was Who dictated a large part of that momentous book The Secret Doctrine, and Who showed to H. P. Blavatsky many of the pictures, and gave her much of the data that is to be found in that book.

The Master Who concerns Himself especially with the future development of racial affairs in Europe, and with the mental outgrowth in America and Australia, is the Master Rakoczi. He is a Hungarian, and has a home in the Carpathian mountains, and was at one time a well-known figure at the Hungarian Court. Reference to Him can be found in old historical books, and He was particularly before the public eye when he was the Comte de St. Germain, and earlier still when he was both Roger Bacon and later, Francis Bacon. It is interesting to note that as the Master R. takes hold, on the inner planes, of affairs in Europe, His name as Francis Bacon is coming before the public eye in the Bacon-Shakespeare controversy. He is rather a small, spare man, with pointed black beard, and smooth black hair, and does not take as many pupils as do the Masters previously mentioned. He is at present handling the majority of the third ray pupils in the occident in conjunction with the Master Hilarion. The Master R. is upon the seventh Ray, that of Ceremonial Magic or Order, and He works largely through esoteric ritual and ceremonial, being vitally

[p. 59]

interested in the effects, hitherto unrecognised, of the ceremonial of the Freemasons, of the various fraternities and of the Churches everywhere. He is called in the Lodge, usually, "the Count," and in America and Europe acts practically as the general manager for the carrying out of the plans of the executive council of the Lodge. Certain of the Masters form around the three great Lords an inner group, and meet in council with great frequency.

On the fifth Ray of Concrete Knowledge or Science, we find the Master Hilarion, who, in an earlier incarnation was Paul of Tarsus. He is occupying a Cretan body, but spends a large part of His time in Egypt. He it was Who gave out to the world that occult treatise "Light on the Path," and His work is particularly interesting to the general public at this crisis, for He works with those who are developing the intuition, and controls and transmutes the great movements that tend to strip the veil from the unseen. His is the energy which, through His disciples, is stimulating the Psychical Research groups everywhere, and He it was Who initiated, through various pupils of His, the Spiritualistic movement. He has under observation all those who are psychics of the higher order, and assists in developing their powers for the good of the group, and in connection with certain of the devas of the astral plane He works to open up to the seekers after truth that subjective world which lies behind the grossly material.

Little can be given out anent the two English Masters. Neither of them takes pupils in the same sense that the Master K. H. or the Master M. take pupils. One of Them, who resides in Great Britain, has in hand the definite guidance of the Anglo-Saxon race, and He works upon the plans for its future development and evolution. He is behind the Labour movement throughout the world,

[p. 60]

transmuting and directing, and the present rising tide of democracy has His directing hand upon it. Out of the democratic unrest, out of the present turmoil and chaos, will arise the future world condition which will have for its keynote co-operation and not competition, distribution, and not centralisation.

One other Master may here be briefly mentioned, the Master Serapis, frequently called the Egyptian. He is the Master upon the fourth ray, and the great art movements of the world, the evolution of music, and that of painting and drama, receive from Him an energising impulse. At present He is giving most of His time and attention to the work of the deva, or angel evolution, until their agency helps to make possible the great revelation in the world of music and painting which lies immediately ahead. More about Him cannot be given out, nor can His dwelling place be revealed.

The Master P. works under the Master R. in North America. He it is Who has had much to do esoterically with the various mental sciences, such as Christian Science, and New Thought, both of which are efforts put forth by the Lodge in an endeavour to teach men the reality of that which is not seen, and the power of the mind to create. This Master occupies an Irish body, is on the fourth ray, and the place of His residence may not be revealed. Much of the work of the Master Serapis was taken over by Him when the latter turned His attention to the deva evolution.

The present work.

Certain facts concerning these Masters, and Their work in the present and in the future, may be in place here. First, the work of training Their pupils and disciples to fit them to be of use in two great events, one, the

[p. 61]

coming of the World Teacher towards the middle or close of this present century, and the other, the training of them to be of use in the founding of the new sixth sub-race and in the reconstruction of the present world conditions. This being the fifth sub-race of the fifth root-race, the pressure of the work on the five rays of mind which are controlled by the Mahachohan, is very great. The Masters are carrying an over heavy burden, and much of Their work of teaching disciples has been delegated to initiates and advanced disciples, and certain of the Masters on the first and second rays have temporarily taken over pupils in the Mahachohan's department.

Secondly, the preparation of the world on a large scale for the coming of the World Teacher, and the taking of the necessary steps before They Themselves come out among men, as many of Them surely will towards the close of this century. A special group is forming amongst Them now Who are definitely preparing Themselves for this work. The Master M., the Master K. H. and the Master Jesus will be specially concerned with the movement towards the last quarter of this century. Other Masters will participate also, but these three are the ones with Whose names and offices people should familiarise themselves, wherever possible. Two other Masters, specially concerned with the seventh or ceremonial ray, Whose particular work it is to supervise the development of certain activities within the next fifteen years, work under the Master R. Very definitely may the assurance be given here, that prior to the coming of the Christ, adjustments will be made so that at the head of all great organisations will be found either a Master, or an initiate who has taken the third initiation. At the head of certain of the great occult groups, of the Freemasons of the world, and of the various great divisions of the Church, and resident in many of the great nations

[p. 62]

will be found initiates or Masters. This work of the Masters is proceeding now, and all Their efforts are being bent towards bringing it to a successful consummation. Everywhere They are gathering in those who in any way show a tendency to respond to high vibration, seeking to force their vibration and to fit them so that they may be of use at the time of the coming of the Christ. Great is the day of opportunity, for when that time comes, through the stupendous strength of the vibration then brought to bear upon the sons of men, it will be possible for those who now do the necessary work to take a great step forward, and to pass through the portal of initiation.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 63]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

THE PROBATIONARY PATH

Preparation for Initiation.

The Probationary Path precedes the Path of Initiation or Holiness, and marks that period in the life of a man when he definitely sets himself on the side of the forces of evolution, and works at the building of his own character. He takes himself in hand, cultivates the qualities that are lacking in his disposition, and seeks with diligence to bring his personality under control. He is building the causal body with deliberate intent, filling any gaps that may exist, and seeking to make it a fit receptacle for the Christ principle. The analogy between the prenatal period in the history of the human being and that of the development of the indwelling spirit is curiously interesting. We might look at it in this way:--

1. The moment of conception, corresponding to that of individualisation.

2. Nine months' gestation, corresponding to the wheel of life.

3. The first initiation, corresponding to the birth hour.

[paragraph continues] The Probationary Path corresponds to the latter period of gestation, to the building in the heart of the babe in Christ. At the first initiation this babe starts on the pilgrimage of the Path. The first initiation stands simply for commencement. A certain structure of right living, thinking, and conduct has been built up. That form we call character. It has now to he vivified and indwelt. Thackeray has well described this process of building, in the words so often quoted:--

[p. 64]

[paragraph continues] "Sow a thought and reap an action; sow an action and reap a habit; sow a habit and reap character; sow character and reap destiny."

[paragraph continues] The immortal destiny of each and all of us is to attain the consciousness of the higher self, and subsequently that of the Divine Spirit. When the form is ready, when Solomon's temple has been built in the quarry of the personal life, then the Christ-life enters, and the glory of the Lord overshadows His temple. The form becomes vibrant. Therein lies the difference between theory and making that theory part of oneself. One can have a perfect image or picture, but it lacks life. The life can be modelled on the divine as far as may be; it may be an excellent copy but lacks the indwelling Christ principle. The germ has been there, but it has lain dormant. Now it is fostered and brought to the birth and the first initiation is attained.

Whilst the man is on the Probationary Path he is taught principally to know himself, to ascertain his weaknesses and to correct them. He is taught to work as an invisible helper at first and for several lives is generally kept at this kind of work. Later, as he makes progress, he may be moved to more selected work. He is taught the rudiments of the Divine Wisdom and is entered into the final grades in the Hall of Learning. He is known to a Master, and is in the care (for definite teaching) of one of the disciples of that Master, or, if of rare promise, of an initiate.

Classes are held by initiates of the first and second degrees, for accepted disciples and those on probation, between the hours of ten and five every night in all parts of the world, so that the continuity of the teaching is complete. They gather in the Hall of Learning and the method is much the same as in the big Universities,--classes at certain hours, experimental work, examinations, and a

[p. 65]

gradual moving up and onward as the tests are passed. A number of the Egos on the Probationary Path are in the department that is analogous to the High School; others have matriculated and are in the University itself. Graduation results when initiation is taken and the initiate passes into the Hall of Wisdom.

Advanced Egos and the spiritually inclined, who are not yet on the Probationary Path, attend instructions from disciples, and on occasions large classes are conducted for their benefit by initiates. Their work is more rudimentary, though occult from a worldly standpoint, and they learn under supervision to be invisible helpers. The invisible helpers are usually recruited from amongst the advanced Egos. The very advanced, and those on the Probationary Path and nearing initiation, work more frequently in what might be termed departmental work, forming a group of assistants to the Members of the Hierarchy.

Methods of teaching.

Three departments of instruction watch over three parts of man's development.

First: Instruction is given tending to the disciplining of the life, the growth of character, the development of the microcosm along cosmic lines. The man is taught the meaning of himself; he comes to know himself as a complex, complete unit, a replica in miniature of the outer world. In learning the laws of his own being, comes comprehension of the Self, and a realisation of the basic laws of the system.

Secondly: Instruction is given as to the macrocosm, the amplification of his intellectual grip of the working of the cosmos. Information as to the kingdoms of nature, teaching as to the laws of those kingdoms, and instruction as to the working of those laws in all kingdoms and

[p. 66]

on all planes is given him. He acquires a deep fund of general knowledge, and when he reaches his own periphery he is met by those who lead him on to encyclopaedic knowledge. When he has attained the goal, he may not know every single thing that there is to be known in all the three worlds, but the way to know, the sources of knowledge and the reservoirs of information are in his hand. A Master can at any time find out anything on any possible subject without the slightest difficulty.

Thirdly: Instruction is given in what might be termed synthesis. This information is only possible as the intuitional vehicle co-ordinates. It is really the occult apprehension of the law of gravitation or attraction, (the basic law of this, the second solar system) with all its corollaries. The disciple learns the meaning of occult cohesion, and of that internal unity which holds the system as a homogeneous unit. The major part of this instruction is usually given after the third initiation, but a beginning is made early in the training.

Masters and disciples.

Disciples and advanced Egos on the Probationary Path receive instruction at this particular time for two special purposes:--

(a) To test out their fitness for special work lying in the future, the type of that work being known only to the Guides of the race. They are tested for aptitude in community living with a view to drafting the suitable ones into the colony of the sixth sub-race. They are tested for various lines of work, many incomprehensible to us now, but which will become ordinary methods of development as time progresses. The Masters also test for those in whom the intuition has reached a point of development that indicates a beginning of the co-ordination of the buddhic

[p. 67]

vehicle, or--to be exact--has reached a point where molecules of the seventh sub-plane of the buddhic plane can be discerned in the aura of the Ego. When this is so They can go ahead with confidence in the work of instruction, knowing that certain imparted facts will be understood.

(b) Instruction is being given at this time to a special group of people who have come into incarnation at this critical period of the world's history. They have come in, all at the same time, throughout the world, to do the work of linking up the two planes, the physical and astral, via the etheric.

This sentence is for serious consideration, for it covers the work that a number of the newer generation have come to do. In this linking up of the two planes people are required who are polarised in their mental bodies (or, if not polarised there, are nevertheless well rounded out and balanced) and can therefore work safely and with intelligence in this type of work. It necessitates primarily people in whose vehicles can be found a certain proportion of atomic sub-plane matter, so that direct communication can be effected between the higher and the lower via the atomic cross-section of the causal body. This is not easy to explain clearly, but a consideration of the diagram in "A Study in Consciousness," by Mrs. Besant, page 27, may be helpful in explaining some matters that are apt to puzzle.

We must recognise two things in pondering the subject of the Masters and Their disciples. First, that in the Hierarchy nothing is lost through failure to recognise the law of economy. Every expenditure of force on the part of a Master or Teacher is subjected to wise foresight and discrimination. just as we do not put university professors to teach the beginners, so the Masters Themselves work not individually with men until they have attained a certain stage of evolution and are ready to profit by Their instruction.

[p. 68]

Secondly, we must remember that each of us is recognised by the brilliance of his light. This is an occult fact. The finer the grade of matter built into our bodies, the more brilliantly will shine forth the indwelling light. Light is vibration, and through the measurement of vibration is fixed the grading of the scholars. Hence nothing can prevent a man's progress forward if he but attends to the purification of his vehicles. The light within will shine forth with ever greater clarity, as the refining process goes on, until--when atomic matter predominates--great will be the glory of that inner man. We are all graded, therefore, if it may be so expressed, according to the magnitude of the light, according to the rate of vibration, according to the purity of the tone and the clarity of the colour. Who our Teacher is depends therefore upon our grading. Similarity of vibration holds the secret. We are frequently told that when the demand is forceful enough the Teacher will appear. When we build in the right vibrations and attune ourselves to the right key, nothing can prevent our finding the Master.

Groups of Egos are formed:--

1. According to their ray.

2. According to their sub-ray.

3. According to their rate of vibration.

They are also grouped for purposes of classification:

1. As Egos, according to the egoic ray.

2. As personalities, according to the sub-ray which is governing the personality.

All are graded and charted. The Masters have Their Halls of Records, with a system of tabulation incomprehensible to us owing to its magnitude and its necessary intricacies, wherein these charts are kept. They are under

[p. 69]

the care of a Chohan of a Ray, each ray having its own collection of charts. These charts, being in many sections (dealing with incarnate, discarnate, and perfected Egos), are again all under the care of subordinate guardians. The Lipika Lords, with Their vast band of helpers are the most frequent users of these charts. Many discarnate egos awaiting incarnation or having just left the earth, sacrifice their time in heaven to assist in this work. These Halls of Records are mostly on the lowest levels of the mental plane and the highest of the astral, as they can be there most fully utilised and are most easily accessible.

Initiates receive instruction directly from the Masters or from some of the great devas or angels. These teachings are usually imparted at night in small classes, or individually (should the occasion warrant it) in the Master's private study. The above applies to initiates in incarnation or on the inner planes. If on causal levels, they receive instruction at any time deemed advisable direct from the Master to the Ego on causal levels.

Disciples are taught in groups in the Master's ashram, or classroom, at night, if in incarnation. Apart from these regular gatherings, in order to receive direct teaching from the Master, a disciple (for some specific reason) may be called to the Master's study for a private interview. This occurs when a Master wishes to see a disciple for commendation, warning, or to decide if initiation is desirable. The major part of a disciple's tuition is left in the hands of some initiate or more advanced disciple, who watches over his younger brother, and is responsible to the Master for his progress, handing in regular reports. Karma is largely the arbiter of this relation.

Just at present, owing to the great need in the world, a slightly different policy is being pursued. An intensified training is being given to some disciples by some Masters

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] Who have not hitherto taken pupils. The press of work on the Masters Who do take disciples being so great, They have delegated some of Their most promising pupils to some other Masters, drafting them into small groups for a brief period. The experiment is being tried of intensifying the teaching, and of subjecting disciples, not initiates, to the frequent strong vibration of a Master. It involves risk, but, if the experiment proves successful, will tend to the greater assisting of the race.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

DISCIPLESHIP

A disciple described.

A disciple is one who above all else, is pledged to do three things:--

a. To serve humanity.

b. To co-operate with the plan of the Great Ones as he sees it and as best he may.

c. To develop the powers of the Ego, to expand his consciousness until he can function on the three planes in the three worlds, and in the causal body, and to follow the guidance of the higher self and not the dictates of his three-fold lower manifestation.

A disciple is one who is beginning to comprehend group work, and to change his centre of activity from himself (as the pivot around which everything revolves) to the group centre.

A disciple is one who realises simultaneously the relative insignificance of each unit of consciousness, and also its vast importance. His sense of proportion is adjusted, and he sees things as they are; he sees people as they are; he sees himself as he inherently is and seeks then to become that which he is.

A disciple realises the life or force side of nature, and to him the form makes no appeal. He works with force and through force; he recognises himself as a force centre within a greater force centre, and his is the responsibility

[p. 72]

of directing the energy which may pour through him into channels through which the group can be benefited.

The disciple knows himself to be--to a greater or less degree--an outpost of the Master's consciousness, viewing the Master in a two-fold sense:--

a. As his own egoic consciousness.

b. As the centre of his group; the force animating the units of the group and binding them into a homogeneous whole.

A disciple is one who is transferring his consciousness out of the personal into the impersonal, and during the transition stage much of difficulty and of suffering is necessarily endured. These difficulties arise from various causes:--

a. The disciple's lower self, which rebels at being transmuted.

b. A man's immediate group, friends, or family, who rebel at his growing impersonality. They do not like to be acknowledged as one with him on the life side, and yet separate from him where desires and interests lie. Yet the law holds good, and only in the essential life of the soul can true unity be cognised. In the discovery as to what is form lies much of sorrow for the disciple, but the road leads to perfect union eventually.

The disciple is one who realises his responsibility to all units who come under his influence,--a responsibility of co-operating with the plan of evolution as it exists for them, and thus to expand their consciousness and teach them the difference between the real and the unreal, between life and form. This he does most easily by a demonstration in his own life as to his goal, his object, and his centre of consciousness.

[p. 73]

The work to be done.

The disciple, therefore, has several things at which to aim:--

A sensitive response to the Master's vibration.

A practical purity of life; a purity not merely theoretical.

A freedom from care. Here bear in mind that care is based on the personal, and is the result of lack of dispassion and a too ready response to the vibrations of the lower worlds.

Accomplishment of duty. This point involves the dispassionate discharge of all obligations and due attention to karmic debts. Special emphasis should be laid, for all disciples, on the value of dispassion. Lack of discrimination is not so often a hindrance to disciples these days, owing to the development of the mind, but lack of dispassion frequently is. This means the attainment of that state of consciousness where balance is seen, and neither pleasure nor pain dominates, for they are superseded by joy and bliss. We may well ponder on this, for much striving after dispassion is necessary.

He has also to study the Kama-manasic body (desire-mind body) . This is of very real interest, for it is, in many ways, the most important body in the solar system, where the human being in the three worlds is concerned. In the next system the mental vehicle of the self-conscious units will hold an analogous place, as the physical did in the previous solar system.

He has also to work scientifically, if it may be so expressed, at the building of the physical body. He must so strive that he will produce in each incarnation a body which will serve better as a vehicle for force. Hence there is nothing impractical in giving information anent initiation, as some may think. There is no moment of the

[p. 74]

day that that goal may not be visioned, and the work of preparation carried on. One of the greatest instruments for practical development lying in the hands of small and great, is the instrument of SPEECH. He who guards his words, and who only speaks with altruistic purpose, in order to carry the energy of Love through the medium of the tongue, is one who is mastering rapidly the initial steps to be taken in preparation for initiation. Speech is the most occult manifestation in existence; it is the means of creation and the vehicle for force. In the reservation of words, esoterically understood, lies the conservation of force; in the utilisation of words, justly chosen and spoken, lies the distribution of the love force of the solar system,--that force which preserves, strengthens, and stimulates. Only he who knows somewhat of these two aspects of speech can be trusted to stand before the Initiator and to carry out from that Presence certain sounds and secrets imparted to him under the pledge of silence.

The disciple must learn to be silent in the face of that which is evil. He must learn to be silent before the sufferings of the world, wasting no time in idle plaints and sorrowful demonstration, but lifting up the burden of the world; working, and wasting no energy in talk. Yet withal he should speak where encouragement is needed, using the tongue for constructive ends; expressing the love force of the world, as it may flow through him, where it will serve best to ease a load or lift a burden, remembering that as the race progresses, the love element between the sexes and its expression will be translated to a higher plane. Then, through the spoken word, and not through the physical plane expression as now, will come the realisation of that true love which unites those who are one in service and in aspiration. Then love between the units of the human family will take the form of the utilisation of

[p. 75]

speech for the purpose of creating on all planes, and the energy which now, in the majority, finds expression through the lower or generating centres will be translated to the throat centre. This is as yet but a distant ideal, but even now some can vision that ideal, and seek--through united service, loving co-operation, and oneness in aspiration, thought, and endeavour,--to give shape and form to it, even though inadequately.

Group relationships.

The path of the disciple is a thorny one; briars beset his every step, and difficulties meet him at every turn. Yet in the treading of the path, in the overcoming of the difficulties, and in a single-hearted adherence to the good of the group, with a proportionate attention to the individuals and their evolutionary development, comes at length fruition, and the attainment of the goal. A SERVER of the race stands forth. He is a server because he has no ends of his own to serve, and from his lower sheaths goes out no vibration which can beguile him from his chosen path. He serves, because he knows what is in man, and because for many lives he has worked with individuals and with groups, gradually expanding the range of his endeavour until he has gathered around him those units of consciousness whom he can energise, and use, and through whom he can work out the plans of his superiors. Such is the goal, but the intermediate stages are fraught with difficulty for all who stand on the verge of self-discovery, and of becoming the Path itself.

Some practical advice might be of value here:--

Study with care the first three books of the Bhagavad Gita. The problem of Arjuna is the problem of all disciples, and the solution is eternally the same.

[p. 76]

Stand ready and watch the heart. In the transferring of the fire from the solar plexus to the heart centre comes much pain. It is not easy to love as do the Great Ones, with a pure love which requires nothing back; with an impersonal love that rejoices where there is response, but looks not for it, and loves steadily, quietly, and deeply through all apparent divergences, knowing that when each has found his own way home, he will find that home to be the place of at-one-ment.

Be prepared for loneliness. It is the law. As a man dissociates himself from all that concerns his physical, astral and mental bodies, and centres himself in the Ego, it produces a temporary separation. This must be endured and passed, leading to a closer link at a later period with all associated with the disciple through the karma of past lives, through group work, and through the activity of the disciple (carried on almost unconsciously at first) in gathering together those through whom later he will work.

Cultivate happiness, knowing that depression, an over-morbid investigation of motive, and undue sensitiveness to the criticism of others leads to a condition wherein a disciple is almost useless. Happiness is based on confidence in the God within, a just appreciation of time, and a forgetfulness of self. Take all the glad things which may come as trusts to be used to spread joy, and rebel not at happiness and pleasure in service, thinking it an indication that all is not well. Suffering comes as the lower self rebels. Control that lower self, eliminate desire, and all is joy.

Have patience. Endurance is one of the characteristics of the Ego. The Ego persists, knowing itself immortal. The personality becomes discouraged, knowing that time is short.

[p. 77]

To the disciple naught occurs but what is in the plan, and where the motive and sole aspiration of the heart are towards the carrying out of the Master's will and the serving of the race, that which eventuates has in it the seeds of the next enterprise, and embodies the environment of the next step forward. Herein lies much of clarification, and herein may be found that on which the disciple may rest when the vision is clouded, the vibration lower than perhaps it should be, and the judgment fogged by the miasmas arising from circumstances on the physical plane. With many, much arises in the astral body that is based on old vibration and has no foundation in fact, and the battleground is so to control the astral situation that out of present anxieties and worries may grow confidence and peace, and out of violent action and interaction there may be elaborated tranquility.

It is possible to reach a point where naught that occurs can ruffle the inner calm; where the peace that passeth understanding is known and experienced, because the consciousness is centred in the Ego, who is peace itself, being the circle of the buddhic life; where poise itself is known and felt, and equilibrium reigns because the centre of the life is in the Ego, who is--in essence--balance; where calm rules unruffled and unshaken, because the divine Knower holds the reins of government, and permits no disturbance from the lower self; where bliss itself is reached that is based, not on circumstances in the three worlds, but on that inner realisation of existence apart from the not-self, an existence that persists when time and space and all that is contained therein, are not; that is known when all the illusions of the lower planes are experienced, passed through, transmuted and transcended; that endures when the little world of human endeavour has dissipated and gone, being

[p. 78]

seen as naught; and that is based on the knowledge that I AM THAT.

Such an attitude and experience is for all those who persist in their high endeavour, who count all things but naught if they may but achieve the goal, and who steer a steady course through circumstances, keeping the eyes fixed upon the vision ahead, the ears attentive to the Voice of the God within, that sounds in the silence of the heart; the feet firmly placed on the path that leads to the Portal of Initiation; the hands held out in assistance to the world, and the whole life subordinated to the call of service. Then all that comes is for the best--sickness, opportunity, success, and disappointment, the gibes and machinations of enemies, the lack of comprehension on the part of those we love--all is but to be used, and all exists but to be transmuted. Continuity of vision, of aspiration, and of the inner touch, is seen to be of more importance than them all. That continuity is the thing to be aimed at, in spite of, and not because of circumstances.

As the aspirant progresses he not only balances the pairs of opposites, but is having the secret of his brother's heart revealed to him. He becomes an acknowledged force in the world and is recognised as one who can be depended upon to serve. Men turn to him for assistance and help along his recognised line, and he begins to sound forth his note so as to be heard in deva and human ranks. This he does--at this stage--through the pen in literature, through the spoken word in lecturing and teaching, through music, painting and art. He reaches the hearts of men in some way or another, and becomes a helper and server of his race. Two more characteristics of this stage might here be mentioned:--

The aspirant has an appreciation of the occult value of money in service. He seeks nothing for himself, save

[p. 79]

that which may equip him for the work to be done, and he looks upon money and that which money can purchase as something which is to be used for others and as a means to bring about the fruition of the Master's plans as he senses those plans. The occult significance of money is little appreciated, yet one of the greatest tests as to the position of a man upon the Probationary Path is that which concerns his attitude to and his handling of that which all men seek in order to gratify desire. Only he who desires naught for himself can be a recipient of financial bounty, and a dispenser of the riches of the universe. In other cases where riches increase they bring with them naught but sorrow and distress, discontent, and misuse.

At this stage also the aspirant's life becomes an instrument of destruction in the occult sense of the term. Wherever he goes the force which flows through him from the higher planes and his own inner God produces at times peculiar results upon his environment. It acts as a stimulator of both the good and the evil. The lunar Pitris, or little lives which form the bodies of his brother and his own body, are likewise stimulated, their activity is increased and their power greatly aggravated. This fact is used by Those Who work on the inner side to bring about certain desired ends. This it is also which often causes the temporary downfall of advanced souls. They cannot stand the force pouring into them, or upon them, and through the temporary over-stimulation of their centres and vehicles they go to pieces. This can be seen working out in groups as well as in individuals. But, inversely, if the lunar Lords, or lives of the lower self, have been earlier subjugated and brought under control, then the effect of the force and energy contacted is to stimulate the response of the physical brain consciousness and the head centres to egoic contact.

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] Then the otherwise destructive force becomes a factor for good and a helpful stimulation, and can be used by Those Who know how, to lead men on to further illumination.

All these steps have to work out on all the three lower planes, and in the three bodies, and this they do according to the particular ray and sub-ray. In this fashion is the work of the disciple carried forward, and his testing and training carried out. Thus is he brought--through right direction of energy and wise manipulation of force currents--to the Portal of Initiation, and he graduates from the Hall of Learning into the Hall of Wisdom, that Hall wherein he gradually becomes "aware" of forces and powers latent in his own Ego and egoic group, wherein the force of the egoic group is his for the using, for he can now be trusted to wield it only for the helping of humanity, and wherein--after the fourth initiation--he becomes a sharer in, and can be trusted with, some part of the energy of the Planetary Logos, and thus be enabled to carry forward the plans of that Logos for evolution.

It would be well to remember that disciples on the first ray understand discipleship largely in terms of energy, or force, or activity, whilst disciples on the second ray understand it more in terms of consciousness or initiation. Hence the divergence of expressions in ordinary use, and the lack of comprehension among thinkers. It might prove useful to express the idea of discipleship in terms of the different rays--meaning by this, discipleship as it manifests on the physical plane in service:

       	1st Ray

      	Force

      	Energy

      	Action

      	The Occultist.

     
     	2nd Ray

      	Consciousness

      	Expansion

      	Initiation

      	The true Psychic

     
     	3rd Ray

      	Adaptation

      	Development

      	Evolution

      	The Magician.

     
     	4th Ray

      	Vibration

      	Response

      	Expression

      	The Artist.

     
     	5th Ray

      	Mentation

      	Knowledge

      	Science

      	The Scientist.

     
     	6th Ray

      	Devotion

      	Abstraction

      	Idealism

      	The Devotee.

     
     	7th Ray

      	Incantation

      	Magic

      	Ritual

      	The Ritualist.

     
 [p. 81]

Remember carefully that we are here dealing with disciples. Later on as they progress, the various lines approximate and merge. All have been at one time magicians, for all have passed upon the third ray. The problem now is concerned with the mystic and the occultist, and their eventual synthesis. A careful study of the foregoing will lead to the realisation that the difficulties between thinkers, and between disciples of all groups, consist in their identifying themselves with some form, and in their inability to understand the different points of view of others. As time elapses, and they are brought into closer relationship with the two Masters with whom they are concerned (their own inner God and their personal Master), the inability to cooperate and to merge their interests in the good of the group will pass away, and community of endeavour, similarity of object, and mutual co-operation will take the place of what is now so much seen, divergence. We might well ponder on this, for it holds the key to much that is puzzling and, to many, distressing.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

THE PATH OF INITIATION

After a longer or shorter period of time the disciple stands at the Portal of Initiation. We must remember that as one approaches this portal and draws nearer to the Master it is, as says "Light on the Path," with the feet bathed in the blood of the heart. Each step up is ever through the sacrifice of all that the heart holds dear on one plane or another, and always must this sacrifice be voluntary. He who treads the Probationary Path and the Path of Holiness is he who has counted the cost, whose sense of values has been readjusted, and who therefore judges not as judges the man of the world. He is the man who is attempting to take the "kingdom by violence," and in the attempt is prepared for the consequent suffering. He is the man who counts all things but loss if he may but win the goal, and who, in the struggle for the mastery of the lower self by the higher, is willing to sacrifice even unto death.

The first two initiations.

At the first initiation, the control of the Ego over the physical body must have reached a high degree of attainment. "The sins of the flesh," as the Christian phraseology has it, must be dominated; gluttony, drink, and licentiousness must no longer hold sway. The physical elemental will no longer find its demand obeyed; the control must be complete and the lure departed. A general attitude of obedience to the Ego must have been achieved, and the

[p. 83]

willingness to obey must be very strong. The channel between the higher and the lower is widened, and the obedience of the flesh practically automatic.

That all initiates measure not up to this standard may be ascribed to several things, but the note they sound should be on the side of righteousness; the recognition of their own shortcomings which they will evidence will be sincere and public, and their struggle to conform to the highest standard will be known, even though perfection may not be achieved. Initiates may, and do, fall, and thereby incur the working of the law in punishment. They may, and do, by this fall injure the group, and thereby incur the karma of readjustment, having to expiate the injury through later prolonged service, wherein the group members themselves, even though unconsciously, apply the law; their progress will be seriously hindered, much time being lost in which they must work out the karma with the injured units. The very fact that a man is an initiate, and therefore the medium for force of a greatly increased kind, makes his lapses from the straight path to have more powerful effects than is the case with a less advanced man; his retribution and punishment will be equally greater. Inevitably he must pay the price before he is allowed to proceed further upon the Way. As for the group he injures, what should their attitude be? A recognition of the gravity of the error, a wise acceptance of the facts in the case, a refraining from unbrotherly criticism, and a pouring out of love upon the sinning brother:--all this, coupled with such action as will make clear to the onlooking general public that such sins and infringements of the law are not condoned. To this must be added an attitude of mind within the group concerned which will lead them (whilst taking firm action) to help the mistaken brother to see his error, to work out the retributive karma, and then to reinstate him

[p. 84]

in their regard and respect when due amends have been made.

All people do not develop exactly along the same or parallel lines, and therefore no hard or fast rules can be laid down as to the exact procedure at each initiation, or as to just what centres are to be vivified, or what vision is to be accorded. So much depends upon the ray of the disciple, or his development in any particular direction (people do not usually develop evenly), upon his individual karma, and also upon the exigencies of any special period. This much can be suggested, however: At the first initiation, that of the birth of the Christ, the heart centre is the one usually vivified, with the aim in view of the more effective controlling of the astral vehicle, and the rendering of greater service to humanity. After this initiation the initiate is taught principally the facts of the astral plane; he has to stabilise his emotional vehicle and learn to work on the astral plane with the same facility and ease as he does on the physical plane; he is brought in contact with the astral devas; he learns to control the astral elementals; he must function with facility on the lower sub-planes, and the value and quality of his work on the physical plane becomes of increased worth. He passes, at this initiation, out of the Hall of Learning into the Hall of Wisdom. At this time, emphasis is consistently laid on his astral development, although his mental equipment grows steadily.

Many lives may intervene between the first initiation and the second. A long period of many incarnations may elapse before the control of the astral body is perfected, and the initiate is ready for the next step. The analogy is kept in an interesting way in the New Testament in the life of the initiate Jesus. Many years elapsed between the Birth and the Baptism, but the remaining three steps were taken in three years. Once the second initiation is taken

[p. 85]

the progress will be rapid, the third and fourth following probably in the same life, or the succeeding.

The second initiation forms the crisis in the control of the astral body. Just as, at the first initiation, the control of the dense physical has been demonstrated, so here the control of the astral is similarly demonstrated. The sacrifice and death of desire has been the goal of endeavour. Desire itself has been dominated by the Ego, and only that is longed for which is for the good of the whole, and in the line of the will of the Ego, and of the Master. The astral elemental is controlled, the emotional body becomes pure and limpid, and the lower nature is rapidly dying. At this time the Ego grips afresh the two lower vehicles and bends them to his will. The aspiration and longing to serve, love, and progress become so strong that rapid development is usually to be seen. This accounts for the fact that this initiation and the third, frequently (though not invariably) follow each other in one single life. At this period of the world's history such stimulus has been given to evolution that aspiring souls--sensing the dire and crying need of humanity--are sacrificing all in order to meet that need.

Again, we must not make the mistake of thinking that all this follows in the same invariable consecutive steps and stages. Much is done in simultaneous unison, for the labour to control is slow and hard, but in the interim between the first three initiations some definite point in the evolution of each of the three lower vehicles has to be attained and held, before the further expansion of the channel can be safely permitted. Many of us are working on all the three bodies now, as we tread the Probationary Path.

At this initiation, should the ordinary course be followed, (which again is not at all certain) the throat centre is vivified. This causes a capacity to turn to account in the Master's service, and for the helping of man, the attainments

[p. 86]

of the lower mind. It imparts the ability to give forth and utter that which is helpful, possibly in the spoken word, but surely in service of some kind. A vision is accorded of the world's need, and a further portion of the plan shown. The work, then, to be done prior to the taking of the third initiation, is the complete submerging of the personal point of view in the need of the whole. It entails the complete domination of the concrete mind by the Ego.

The succeeding two initiations.

After the second initiation the teaching shifts up a plane. The initiate learns to control his mental vehicle; he develops the capacity to manipulate thought matter, and learns the laws of creative thought building. He functions freely on the four lower sub-planes of the mental plane, and before the third initiation he must,--consciously or unconsciously,--be complete master of the four lower sub-planes in the three. planes of the three worlds. His knowledge of the microcosm becomes profound, and he has mastered theoretically and practically, in great measure, the laws of his own nature, hence his ability experimentally to be master on the four lower sub-planes of the physical, astral, and mental planes. The last fact is of interest. The control of the three higher sub-planes is not yet complete, and here is one of the explanations as to the failures and mistakes of initiates. Their mastery of matter in the three higher sub-planes is not yet perfect; these yet remain to be dominated.

At the third initiation, termed sometimes the Transfiguration, the entire personality is flooded with light from above. It is only after this initiation that the Monad is definitely guiding the Ego, pouring His divine life ever more into the prepared and cleansed channel, just as in the third, or Moon Chain, the Ego individualised the personality

[p. 87]

through direct contact, a method different to the individualisation as shown in this fourth chain. The law of correspondences, if applied here, might prove very revealing, and might demonstrate an interesting analogy between the methods of individualising in the various chains, and the expansions of consciousness that occur at the different initiations.

Again, a vision is accorded of what lies ahead; the initiate is in a position at all times to recognise the other members of the Great White Lodge, and his psychic faculties are stimulated by the vivification of the head centres. It is not necessary nor advisable to develop the synthetic faculties, or clairaudience and clairvoyance, until after this initiation. The aim of all development is the awakening of the spiritual intuition; when this has been done, when the physical body is pure, the astral stable and steady, and the mental body controlled, then the initiate can safely wield and wisely use the psychic faculties for the helping of the race. Not only can he use these faculties, but he is able now to create and vivify thoughtforms that are clear and well-defined, pulsating with the spirit of service and not controlled by lower mind or desire. These thoughtforms will not he (as is the case with those created by the mass of men) disjointed, unconnected, and uncorrelated, but will attain a fair measure of synthesis. Hard and ceaseless must the work be before this can be done, but when the desire nature has been stabilised and purified, then the control of the mind-body comes more easily. Hence the path of the devotee is easier in some ways than that of the intellectual man, for he has learnt the measures of purified desire, and progresses by the requisite stages.

The personality has now reached a point where its vibrations are of a very high order, the matter in all three bodies relatively pure, and its apprehension of the work to be done in the microcosm, and the share to be taken in the

[p. 88]

work of the macrocosm is very advanced. It is apparent, therefore, why it is only at the third initiation that the great Hierophant, the Lord of the World, Himself officiates. It is the first at which He contacts the initiate. Earlier it would not be possible. For the first two initiations the Hierophant is the Christ, the World-Teacher, the Firstborn among many brethren, one of the earliest of our humanity to take . Browning brings out this thought most beautifully in the words found in his poem "Saul":--

              .........It shall be
 A face like my face that receives thee; a Man like to me,
 Thou shalt love and be loved by, forever;
 A Hand like this hand
 Shall throw open the gates of new life to thee!
                See the Christ stand!

[paragraph continues] But when the initiate has made still further progress, and has taken two initiations, a change comes. The Lord of the World, the Ancient of Days, the ineffable Ruler Himself administers the third initiation. Why has this become possible? Because now the fully consecrated physical body can safely bear the vibrations of the two other bodies when they return to its shelter from the Presence of the KING; because now the purified astral and controlled mental can safely stand before that KING. When purified and controlled they stand and for the first time consciously vibrate to the Ray of the Monad, then with prepared bodies can the ability to see and hear on all the planes be granted and achieved, and the faculty of reading and comprehending the records be safely employed, for with fuller knowledge comes added power. The heart is now sufficiently pure and loving, and the intellect sufficiently stable to stand the strain of knowing.

Before the fourth initiation can be taken, the work of

[p. 89]

training is intensified, and the hastening and accumulation of knowledge has to be unbelievably rapid. The initiate has frequent access to the library of occult books, and after this initiation he can contact not only the Master with Whom he is linked and with Whom he has worked consciously for a long time, but he can contact and assist (in measure) the Chohans, the Bodhisattva, and the Manu.

He has also to grasp the laws of the three lower planes intellectually, and likewise wield them for the aiding of the scheme of evolution. He studies the cosmic plans and has to master the charts; he becomes versed in occult technicalities and develops fourth dimensional vision, if he has not already done so. He learns to direct the activities of the building devas, and at the same time, he works continually at the development of his spiritual nature. He begins rapidly to co-ordinate the buddhic vehicle, and in its co-ordination he develops the power of synthesis, at first in small measure, and gradually in fuller detail.

By the time the fourth initiation is taken the initiate has mastered perfectly the fifth sub-plane, and is therefore adept,--to use a technical phrase,--on the five lower subplanes of the physical, astral, and mental planes, and is well on the way to master the sixth. His buddhic vehicle can function on the two lower sub-planes of the buddhic plane.

The life of the man who takes the fourth initiation, or the Crucifixion, is usually one of great sacrifice and suffering. It is the life of the man who makes the Great Renunciation, and even exoterically it is seen to be strenuous, hard, and painful. He has laid all, even his perfected personality, upon the altar of sacrifice, and stands bereft of all. All is renounced, friends, money, reputation, character, standing in the world, family, and even life itself.

[p. 90]

The final initiations.

After the fourth initiation not much remains to be done. The domination of the sixth sub-plane goes forward with rapidity, and the matter of the higher sub-planes of the buddhic is co-ordinated. The initiate is admitted into closer fellowship in the Lodge, and his contact with the devas is more complete. He is rapidly exhausting the resources of the Hall of Wisdom, and is mastering the most intricate plans and charts. He becomes adept in the significance of colour and sound, can wield the law in the three worlds, and can contact his Monad with more freedom than the majority of the human race can contact their Egos. He is in charge, also, of large work, teaching many pupils, aiding in many schemes, and is gathering under him those who are to assist him in future times. This refers only to those who stay to help humanity on this globe; we will deal later with some of the lines of work that stretch before the Adept if He passes away from earth service.

After the fifth initiation the man is perfected as far as this scheme goes, though he may, if he will, take two further initiations.

To achieve the sixth initiation the Adept has to take a very intensive course in planetary occultism. A Master wields the law in the three worlds, whilst a Chohan of the sixth initiation wields the law in the chain on all levels; a Chohan of the seventh initiation wields the law in the solar system.

It will be apparent that, should he search these subjects with application, the student will find much that concerns him personally, even though the ceremony itself may be far ahead. By the study of the process and the purpose he may become aware of the great fundamental fact that the method of initiation is the method of:--

[p. 91]

a. Force realisation.

b. Force application.

c. Force utilisation.

The initiate of every degree, from the humble initiate of the first degree, making for the first time his contact with a certain type of specialised force, up to the emancipated buddha of the seventh degree, is dealing with energy of some kind or other. The stages of development of the aspirant might be expressed as follows:--

1. He has to become aware, through discrimination, of the energy or force of his own lower self.

2. He has to impose upon that energetic rhythm one that is higher, until that lower rhythm is superseded by the higher, and the old method of expressing energy dies out entirely.

3. He then is permitted, by gradually expanding realisations, to contact and--under guidance--to employ certain forms of group energy, until the time comes when he is in a position scientifically to wield planetary force. The length of time taken over his final stage is entirely dependent upon the progress he makes in the service of his race and in the development of those powers of the soul which are the natural sequence of spiritual unfoldment.

The application of the Rod of Initiation at the first two initiations by the Bodhisattva enables the initiate to control and utilise the force of the lower self, the true sanctified energy of the personality in service; at the third initiation the application of the Rod by the One Initiator makes available in a vastly more extensive manner the force of the higher self or Ego, and brings into play on the physical plane the entire energy stored up during numerous incarnations

[p. 92]

in the causal vehicle. At the fourth initiation the energy of his egoic group becomes his to use for the good of planetary evolution, and at the fifth initiation the force or energy of the planet (esoterically understood, and not merely the force or energy of the material globe) is at his disposal. During these five initiations those two great beings, the Bodhisattva first, and then the One Initiator, the Lord of the World, Sanat Kumara, are the administrators or hierophants. After these ceremonies, should the initiate choose to take the two final initiations which it is possible to take in this solar system, a still higher type of energy in expression of the One Self comes into play, and can only be hinted at. At the seventh initiation that One of Whom Sanat Kumara is the manifestation, the Logos of our scheme on His own plane, becomes the Hierophant. At the sixth initiation the expression of this Existence on an intermediate plane, a Being Who must at present remain nameless, wields the Rod and administers the oath and secret. In these three expressions of hierarchical government--Sanat Kumara on the periphery of the three worlds, the Nameless One on the confines of the high planes of human evolution, and the planetary Spirit himself at the final stage--we have the three great manifestations of the Planetary Logos Himself. Through the Planetary Logos at the final great initiation flows the power of the Solar Logos, and He it is Who reveals to the initiate that the Absolute is consciousness in its fullest expression, though at the stage of human existence the Absolute must be regarded as unconsciousness.

Each of the great initiations is but the synthesis of the smaller ones, and only as man seeks ever to expand his consciousness in the affairs of daily life can he expect to achieve those later stages which are but culminations of the many earlier. Students must get rid of the idea that if they are "very good and altruistic" suddenly some day

[p. 93]

they will stand before the Great Lord. They are putting effect before cause. Goodness and altruism grow out of realisation and service, and holiness of character is the outcome of those expansions of consciousness which a man brings about within himself through strenuous effort and endeavour. Therefore it is here and now that man can prepare himself for initiation, and this he does, not by dwelling upon the ceremonial aspect, as so many do in excited anticipation, but by working systematically and enduringly at the steady development of the mental body, by the strenuous and arduous process of controlling the astral body so that it becomes responsive to three vibrations:--

a. That from the Ego.

b. That from the Master.

c. Those from his brothers everywhere around him. He becomes sensitive to the voice of his higher self, thus working off karma under the intelligent guidance of his own Ego. He becomes conscious, via the Ego, of the vibration emanating from his Master; he learns to feel it ever more and more, and to respond to it ever more fully; finally, he becomes increasingly sensitive to the joys and pains and sorrows of those he daily contacts; he feels them to be his joys and pains and sorrows, and yet he is not incapacitated thereby.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94]

  

CHAPTER X

  

THE UNIVERSALITY OF INITIATION

It has been emphasised many times in the occult teachings that the process of initiation, as it is usually understood, is an abnormal and not a normal one. All progression in the realm of consciousness is naturally by a graded series of awakenings, but this would proceed much more gradually and cover a longer period of time than is the case under our present planetary conditions. This particular mode of developing the consciousness of the human family was initiated by the Hierarchy during the Atlantean root-race at the latter end of the fourth sub-race, and will persist until the middle of the next round. At that time the needed stimulus will have been imparted, and as three-fifths of the human family will then have esoterically "set their feet upon the path," and a large percentage of them will then be in process of becoming the Path itself, the more normal routine will again be resumed.

Initiation on the various planets.

The process of stimulation of the human Egos by means of graded instructions, and the application of the dynamic electrical force of the Rod is employed on three of the planets of our system at this time. It is instituted during every fourth round, and its peculiar interest lies in the fact that the emphasis for the fourth Creative Hierarchy in every fourth chain and globe during the fourth round is laid upon the fourth initiation, that of the Crucifixion. The fourth Creative Hierarchy is the great expression of the conscious

[p. 95]

will and sacrifice of the Solar Logos, and the great symbol of the intelligent union of spirit and matter. Hence the fourth initiation, with its presentation of these cosmic truths, and its epitomising of the purpose of this fundamental sacrifice, has a pre-eminent place.

The student needs to remind himself that the other planetary schemes, though fundamentally the same as our fourth scheme, yet have their profound differences in manifestation, due to the varying characteristics and the individual karma of the incarnating Planetary Logos or Ray. These differences affect:--

a. The initiatory process, both in its ceremonial and altruistic aspects.

b. The application of the Rod, for the type of force which it embodies, when brought into conjunction with the differentiated force of the planetary type, produces results of varying nature and degree.

c. The seasons of initiation. The Egos in incarnation on any planet will--according to ray type--be easily stimulated or not as the case may be, according to astrological conditions, and this will produce shorter or more protracted periods of development prior to or between each initiation.

d. The electrical phenomena produced on the higher planes, as more and more the human units esoterically "blaze forth." It must be remembered that the entire solar system, with all that is included therein, is expressing itself in terms of light, and that the process of initiation might therefore be regarded as one in which the different points of light (or human sparks) are stimulated, their radiance and temperature increased, and the sphere of influence of each light extended in radius.

[p. 96]

The three planetary schemes wherein the great experiment of initiation is being tried are the Earth, Venus, and one other. Venus was the first sphere of experiment, and the success of the endeavour and the force generated was the cause of a similar effort being made on our planet. No planet increases its store of force, and consequently its sphere of influence, without incurring obligations and affecting other schemes; the interchange of force and energy between these two planets, Earth and Venus, is continuous. A similar process has but lately been instituted on another planetary scheme, and when, in the next round, our Earth attains a point in evolution analogous to that of the Venusian scheme at the time its influence was felt by us, then we shall aid in the stimulation of still another group of planetary Egos; we shall assist in the institution of a similar procedure among the sons of men in another scheme.

In the three great planetary schemes, Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn, the method of initiation will not be employed. They will be the recipients of those who are esoterically "saved" from among the other schemes. That is to say that all those who, in any scheme, achieve the needed expansions of consciousness (such as will be achieved by the majority of the human family prior to the middle of the next great cycle, or round), will be considered "saved," whilst the remainder will be held to be failures, and will be held over for further development during later periods, or will be transferred to those planetary schemes which from the point of view of time are not so far advanced as our Earth scheme. These three major schemes are the absorbers and synthesisers of the energy of the others.

Initiation and the Devas.

The question may be asked whether the devas undergo initiation, and we might deal briefly with the point here.

[p. 97]

Initiation has to do with the conscious development of the self, and concerns the wisdom aspect of the One Self. It presupposes the development of the intelligence principle, and involves the apprehension by the human unit of purpose and of will, and his intelligent participation therein through love and service. The devas, with the exception of those greater devas who have in earlier cycles passed through the human kingdom and are now co-operating in the evolution of man, are not as yet self-conscious. They grow and develop through feeling and not through the power of conscious thought. Man, however, grows through expansions of self-conscious realisation, self-initiated and self-imposed. It is the line of aspiration and of conscious endeavour, and is the most difficult line of development in the solar system, for it follows not along the line of least resistance, but seeks to initiate and impose a higher rhythm. The devas follow the line of least resistance, and seek to appropriate and experience in fullest tide of feeling and sentiency the vibration of things as they are. Therefore the method for them is an ever-increasing intensity of appreciation for the feeling of the moment, and not, as in man, an ever-increasing depreciation of things as they are, or of the material aspect, which leads to an endeavour to reach out and enfold within his consciousness the subjective reality, or the things of the spirit--this in contradistinction to the objective unreality, or the things of matter. The devas seek to feel, whilst man seeks to know. For the former, then, those expansions of consciousness which we call , exist not, except in the cases of those advanced beings who, having passed through the human stage, both feel and know, and who, under the evolutionary law, expand their knowledge in ever-increasing degree.

[p. 98]

Cosmic influences and solar initiations.

All that can be done here in dealing with this profound subject is to enumerate briefly some of the cosmic influences which definitely affect our earth, and produce results in the consciousness of men everywhere, and which, during the process of initiation, bring about certain specific phenomena.

First and foremost is the energy or force emanating from the sun Sirius. If it might be so expressed, the energy of thought, or mind force, in its totality, reaches the solar system from a distant cosmic centre via Sirius. Sirius acts as the transmitter, or the focalising centre, whence emanate those influences which produce self-consciousness in man. During initiation, by means of the Rod of Initiation (acting as a subsidiary transmitter and as a powerful magnet) this energy is momentarily intensified, and applied to the centres of the initiate with terrific force; were it not that the Hierophant and the two sponsors of the initiate pass it primarily through their bodies, it would be more than he could stand. This increase of mind energy results in an expansion and an apprehension of the truth as it is, and is lasting in its effects. It is felt primarily in the throat centre, the great organ of creation through sound.

Another type of energy reaches man from the Pleiades, passing through the Venusian scheme to us, just as the Sirian energy passes through the Saturnian. It has a definite effect upon the causal body, and serves to stimulate the heart centre.

A third type of energy is applied to the initiate, and affects his head centre. It emanates from that one of the seven stars of the Great Bear whose ensouling life holds the same relationship to our Planetary Logos as the Ego does to a human being. This energy, therefore, is seven-fold, and differs according to a man's ray or type.

[p. 99]

It is not possible here to state the order of the application of these varying types of energy, nor to give the initiation during which the man contacts the different types. These facts involve the secrets of the mysteries, and no purpose is served by revealing them. Other types of force from certain of the planetary schemes, as well as from cosmic centres, are brought into play by the Initiator and transmitted through the medium of the Rod to the various centres in the initiate's three vehicles, the mental, the astral, and the etheric centres. At the fourth initiation a specialised type of force from a centre which must remain nameless is applied to a man's causal body, and is one of the causes of its final disintegration.

In thinking of this matter of the attainment of the sons of men, we must recognise that as mankind completes one unification after another, the "Heavenly Men" on intuitional levels and on spiritual levels are completed, and in their turn go to the formation of the centres in the great "Heavenly Men" of the solar system. These seven Heavenly Men, in Whose bodies each human Monad and each deva finds his place, form the seven centres in the body of the Logos. He, in His turn, forms the Heart centre (for God is Love) of a still greater Entity. The consummation of all for this solar system will be when the Logos takes His fifth initiation. When all the sons of men attain the fifth initiation, He achieves. This is a great mystery and incomprehensible to us.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE MYSTERIES

The participants in the mysteries are generally known, and no secret has been made of the general personnel and procedure. It is only sought here to impart a greater sense of reality to the data already given by a fuller exposition and a more pointed reference to the parts played by such during the ceremony. At this stage the student would be wise to bear in mind certain things as he ponders upon the mysteries touched upon here:--

That care must be taken to interpret all here given in terms of spirit and not of matter or form. We are dealing entirely with the subjective or consciousness aspect of manifestation, and with that which lies back of the objective form. This realisation will save the student from much later confusion.

That we are considering facts which are substantial and real on the mental plane--the plane on which all the major initiations take place--but which are not materialised on the physical plane, and are not physical plane phenomena. The link between the two planes exists in the continuity of consciousness which the initiate will have developed, and which will enable him to bring through to the physical brain, occurrences and happenings upon the subjective planes of life.

Corroboration of these occurrences, and proof of the accuracy of the transmitted knowledge will demonstrate as follows:--

[p. 101]

In and through the etheric centres. These centres will be greatly stimulated, and will, through their increased inherent energy, enable the initiate to accomplish more in the path of service than he ever before dreamed possible. His dreams and ideals become, not possibilities, but demonstrating facts in manifestation.

The physical centres, such as the pineal gland and the pituitary body, will begin to develop rapidly, and he will become conscious of the awakening of the "siddhis," or powers of the soul, in the higher connotation of the words. He will be aware of the process of conscious control, and of the self-initiated manipulations of the above powers. He will realise the methods of egoic contact and the right direction of force.

The nervous system, through which the emotional body or astral nature works, will become highly sensitised, yet strong withal. The brain will become ever more rapidly an acute transmitter of the inner impulses. This fact is of real importance, and will bring about--as its significance becomes more apparent--a revolution in the attitude of educators, of physicians and others, to the development of the nervous system and the healing of nervous disorders.

Occult memory. The initiate finally becomes aware increasingly of the growth of that inner recollection, or "occult memory," which concerns the work of the Hierarchy and primarily his share in the general plan. When the initiate, who occultly recalls, in his waking consciousness, a ceremonial fact, finds all these manifestations of increased growth and conscious realisation in himself, then the truth of his inner assurance is proven and substantiated to him.

It must be remembered that this inner substantiation is of no value to anyone but the initiate. He has to prove himself to the outer world through his life of service and the work accomplished, and thereby call forth from all his

[p. 102]

environing associates a recognition that will show itself in a sanctified emulation and a strenuous effort to tread the same path, actuated ever by the same motive,--that of service and brotherhood, not self-aggrandisement and selfish acquirement. It should also be remembered that if the above is true in connection with the work, it is still more true in connection with the initiate himself. Initiation is a strictly personal matter with a universal application. It rests upon his inner attainment. The initiate will know for himself when the event occurs and needs no one to tell him of it. The expansion of consciousness called initiation must include the physical brain or it is of no value. As those lesser expansions of consciousness which we undergo normally every day, and call "learning" something or other, have reference to the apprehension by the physical brain of an imparted fact or apprehended circumstance, so with the greater expansions which are the outcome of the many lesser.

At the same time, it is quite possible for men to be functioning on the physical plane and to be actively employed in world service who have no recollection of having undergone the initiatory process, yet who, nevertheless, may have taken the first or second initiation in a previous or earlier life. This is the result, simply, of a lack of "bridging" from one life to another, or it may be the outcome of a definite decision by the Ego. A man may be able better to work off certain karma and to carry out certain work for the Lodge if he is free from occult occupation and mystic introspection during the period of any one earth life. There are many such amongst the sons of men at this time who have previously taken the first initiation, and a few who have taken the second, but who are nevertheless quite unaware of it, yet their centres and nervous organisation carry proof to those who have the inner vision. If initiation is taken for

[p. 103]

the first time in any life, the recollection of it extends to the physical brain.

Curiosity, or even ordinary good living, never brought a man to the Portal of Initiation. Curiosity, by arousing a strong vibration in a man's lower nature, only serves to swing him away from, instead of towards the goal he is interested in; whilst ordinary good living, when not furthered by a life of utter sacrifice for others, and by a reticence, humility, and disinterestedness of a very unusual kind, may serve to build good vehicles which will be of use in another incarnation, but will not serve to break down those barriers, outer and inner, and overcome those opposing forces and energies which stand between a "good" man and the ceremony of initiation.

The Path of Discipleship is a difficult one to tread, and the Path of Initiation harder still; an initiate is but a battle-scarred warrior, the victor in many a hard-won fight; he speaks not of his achievements, for he is too busy with the great work in hand; he makes no reference to himself or to all that he has accomplished, save to deprecate the littleness of what has been done. Nevertheless, to the world he is ever a man of large influence, the wielder of spiritual power, the embodier of ideals, the worker for humanity, who unfailingly brings results which succeeding generations will recognise. He is one who, in spite of all this great achievement, is seldom understood by his own generation. He is frequently the butt of men's tongues, and frequently all that he does is misinterpreted; he lays his all--time, money, influence, reputation, and all that the world considers worth while--upon the altar of altruistic service, and frequently offers his life as a final gift, only to find that those whom he has served throw his gift back to him, scorn his renunciation, and label him with unsavory names. But the initiate cares not, for his is the privilege to see somewhat

[p. 104]

into the future, and therefore he realises that the force he has generated will in due course of time bring to fulfilment the plan; he knows also that his name and effort are noted in the archives of the Lodge, and that the "Silent Watcher" over the affairs of men has taken notice.

Planetary Existences.

In considering now the personalities taking part in the initiation ceremonies, the first to be dealt with are Those Who are termed Planetary Existences. This refers to those great Beings who, for a period of planetary manifestation, overshadow or stay with our humanity. They are not very many in number, for the majority of the Great Ones pass on steadily and increasingly to other and higher work, as Their places can be taken and Their functions carried on by members of our earth evolution, both deva and human.

Among Those directly connected with our Lodge of Masters in its various divisions upon the planet, the following might be enumerated:--

The "Silent Watcher," that great Entity Who is the informing life of the planet, and Who holds the same position to the Lord of the World, Sanat Kumara, as the Ego does to the lower self of man. Some idea of the high stage of evolution of this Great Being may be gathered from the analogous degree of evolutionary difference existing between a human being and a perfected adept. From the standpoint of our planetary scheme, this great Life has no greater, and He is, as far as we are concerned, a correspondence to the personal God of the Christian. He works through His representative on the physical plane, Sanat Kumara, Who is the focal point for His life and energy. He holds the world within His aura. This great Existence is only contacted directly by the adept who has taken the

[p. 105]

fifth initiation, and is proceeding to take the other two, the sixth and seventh. Once a year, at the Wesak Festival, the Lord Buddha, sanctioned by the Lord of the World, carries to the assembled humanity a dual stream of force, that emanating from the Silent Watcher, supplemented by the more focalised energy of the Lord of the World. This dual energy He pours out in blessing over the people gathered at the ceremony in the Himalayas, and from them in turn it flows out to all peoples and tongues and races. It may not perhaps be generally known that at a certain crisis during the Great War the Hierarchy of our planet deemed it well nigh necessary to invoke the aid of the Silent Watcher, and--employing the great mantram whereby the Buddha can be reached--called the attention of the latter, and sought his agency with the Planetary Logos. In consultation between the Planetary Logos, the Lord of the World, one of the Buddhas of Activity, the Buddha, the Mahachohan, and the Manu (these names are given in order of their relative evolutionary stage) it was decided to watch proceedings a little longer before interfering with the trend of affairs, as the karma of the planet would have been delayed should the strife have been ended toc soon. Their confidence in the ability of men duly to adjust conditions was justified, and interference proved needless. This conference took place at Shamballa. This is mentioned to show the close scrutiny given to everything concerning the affairs of men by the various Planetary Existences. It is literally true, in an occult sense, that "not a sparrow falleth" without its fall being noticed.

It may be asked why the Bodhisattva was not included in the conference. The reason was that the war was in the department of the Manu, and members of the Hierarchy concern Themselves with that which is strictly Their own business; the Mahachohan, being the embodiment of the

[p. 106]

intelligent or manasic principle, participates in all conferences. In the next great strife the department of religions will be involved, and the Bodhisattva intimately concerned. His Brother, the Manu, will then be relatively exempt, and will proceed with His own affairs. And yet withal there is the closest co-operation in all departments, with no loss of energy. Owing to the unity of consciousness of those who are free from the three lower planes, what transpires in one department is known in the others.

As the Planetary Logos is only concerned in the two final initiations, which are not compulsory as are the earlier five, it serves no purpose to enlarge upon His work. These initiations are taken upon the buddhic and atmic planes, whereas the first five are taken upon the mental.

The Lord of the World, the One Initiator, He Who is called in the Bible "The Ancient of Days," and in the Hindu Scriptures the First Kumara, He, Sanat Kumara it is, Who from His throne at Shamballa in the Gobi desert, presides over the Lodge of Masters, and holds in His hands the reins of government in all the three departments. Called in some Scriptures "the Great Sacrifice," He has chosen to watch over the evolution of men and devas until all have been occultly "saved." He it is Who decides upon the "advancements" in the different departments, and Who settles who shall fill the vacant posts; He it is Who, four times a year, meets in conference with all the Chohans and Masters, and authorises what shall be done to further the ends of evolution.

Occasionally, too, He meets with initiates of lesser degree, but only at times of great crises, when some individual is given the opportunity to bring peace out of strife, and to kindle a blaze whereby rapidly crystallising forms are destroyed and the imprisoned life consequently set free.

At stated periods in the year the Lodge meets, and at

[p. 107]

the Wesak Festival gathers under His jurisdiction for three purposes:

1. To contact planetary force through the medium of the Buddha.

2. To hold the principal of the quarterly conferences.

3. To admit to the ceremony of initiation those who are ready in all grades.

Three other initiation ceremonies take place during the year:--

1. For the minor initiations administered by the Bodhisattva, all of which are in the department of the Mahachohan, and on one or other of the four lesser rays, the rays of attribute.

2. For the major initiations on one or other of the three major rays, the rays of aspect, which are administered by the Bodhisattva, and are therefore the first two initiations.

3. For the higher three initiations at which Sanat Kumara wields the Rod.

At all initiations the Lord of the World is present, but at the first two He holds a position similar to that held by the Silent Watcher, when Sanat Kumara administers the oath at the third, fourth and fifth initiations. His power streams forth and the flashing forth of the star before the initiate is the signal of His approval, but the initiate does not see Him face to face until the third initiation.

The function of the three Kumaras, or the three Buddhas of Activity at initiation is interesting. They are three aspects of the one aspect, and the pupils of Sanat Kumara. Though Their functions are many and varied, and concern primarily the forces and energies of nature, and the direction

[p. 108]

of the building agencies, They have a vital connection with the applicant for initiation, inasmuch as They each embody the force or energy of one or other of the three higher subplanes of the mental plane. Therefore at the third initiation one of these Kumaras transmits to the causal body of the initiate that energy which destroys third subplane matter, and thus brings about part of the destruction of the vehicle; at the fourth initiation another Buddha transmits second plane force, and at the fifth, first subplane force is similarly passed into the remaining atoms of the causal vehicle, producing the final liberation. The work done by the second Kumara, with second subplane force, is in this solar system the most important in connection with the egoic body, and produces its complete dissipation, whereas the final application causes the atoms themselves (which formed that body) to disperse.

During the initiation ceremony, when the initiate stands before the Lord of the World, these three great Beings form a triangle, within whose lines of force the initiate finds himself. At the first two initiations, wherein the Bodhisattva functions as the Hierophant, the Mahachohan, the Manu, and a Chohan who temporarily represents the second department perform a similar office. At the highest two initiations, those three Kumaras who are called "the esoteric Kumaras" form a triangle wherein the initiate stands, when he faces the Planetary Logos.

These facts are imparted to teach two things, first, the unity of the method, second, that the truism "as above so below" is an occult fact in nature.

At the final two initiations many members of the Hierarchy who are, if one might so express it, extra-planetary, and who function outside the dense physical and the etheric globe of our planet, take part, but a stricter enumeration is needless. Sanat Kumara is still the Hierophant, yet in a

[p. 109]

very esoteric manner it is the Planetary Logos Himself who officiates. They are merged at that time into one Identity, manifesting different aspects.

Suffice it to say, in concluding this brief statement, that the making of an initiate is an affair with a dual effect, for it involves ever a passing on of some adept or initiate to a higher grade or to other work, and the coming in under the Law of some human being who is in process of attainment. Therefore it is a thing of great moment, involving group activity, group loyalty, and united endeavour, and much may depend upon the wisdom of admitting a man to high office and to a place in the council chambers of the Hierarchy.

The Departmental Heads.

The Manu.

The Bodhisattva.

The Mahachohan.

As has been said, these three great Beings, represent the triplicity of all manifestation, and might be expressed under the following form, remembering that all this deals with subjectivity, and therefore with the evolution of consciousness and primarily with self-consciousness in man.

         	 

      	Consciousness

      	 

     
     	The   Manu

      	The   Bodhisattva

      	The   Mahachohan

     
     	Matter aspect

      	Spirit aspect

      	Intelligence aspect.

     
     	Form

      	Life

      	Mind.

     
     	The Not-Self

      	The Self

      	The relation between.

     
     	Body

      	Spirit

      	Soul.

     
   [p. 110]

Or, in words strictly dealing with self-conscious realisation.

         	Politics

      	Religion

      	Science.

     
     	Government

      	Beliefs

      	Civilisation.

     
     	Races

      	Faiths

      	Education.

     
   All human beings belong to one or other of these three departments, and all are of equal importance, for Spirit and matter are one. All are so interdependent, being but expressions of one life, that the endeavour to express the functions of the three departments in tabular form is liable to lead to error.

The three Great Lords closely co-operate in the work, for that work is one, just as man, though a triplicity, is yet an individual unit. The human being is a form through which a spiritual life or entity is manifesting, and employing the intelligence under evolutionary law.

Therefore the Great Lords are closely connected with the initiations of a human unit. They are too occupied with greater affairs and with group activities to have any relationship with a man until he stands upon the probationary path. When he has, through his own effort, brought himself on to the Path of Discipleship, the particular Master Who has him under supervision reports to the Head of one of the three departments (this being dependent upon a man's ray) that he is nearing the Portal of Initiation and should be ready for the great step during such and such a life. Each life, and later each year, report is made, until the final year upon the Path of Probation, when closer and more frequent reports are handed in. During this final year also, the applicant's name is submitted to the Lodge, and after his own Master has reported upon him, and his record has been briefly summarised, his name is balloted, and sponsors are arranged.

[p. 111]

During the initiation ceremony the important factors are:

1. The Initiator.

2. The triangle of force formed by three adepts or three Kumaras.

3. The sponsors.

In the case of the first two initiations, two Masters stand, one on each side of the applicant, within the triangle; at the third, fourth and fifth initiations, the Mahachohan and the Bodhisattva perform the function of sponsor; at the sixth and seventh initiations two great Beings, Who must remain nameless, stand within the esoteric triangle. The work of the sponsors is to pass through Their bodies the force or electrical energy emanating from the Rod of Initiation. This force, through radiation, circles around the triangle and is supplemented by the force of the three guardians; it next passes through the centres of the sponsors, being transmitted by an act of will to the initiate.

Enough has been said elsewhere in this book anent the Lodge of Masters and Their relation to the applicant for initiation, whilst the work of the initiate himself has been likewise touched upon. That work is not unknown to the children of men everywhere, but remains as yet an ideal and a far-off possibility. Yet when a man strives to reach that ideal, to make it a demonstrating fact within himself, he will find that it becomes not only a possibility, but something attainable, provided he strives sufficiently. The first initiation is within the reach of many, but the necessary one-pointedness and the firm belief in the reality ahead, coupled to a willingness to sacrifice all rather than turn back, are deterrents to the many. If this book serves no other purpose than to spur some one to renewed believing effort, it will not have been written in vain.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 112]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

THE TWO REVELATIONS

We can now consider the stages of the initiation ceremony, which are five in number, as follows:--

1. The "Presence" revealed.

2. The "Vision" seen.

3. The application of the Rod, affecting:--

a. The bodies.

b. The centres.

c. The causal vehicle.

4. The administration of the oath.

5. The giving of the "Secret" and the Word.

These points are given in due order, and it must be remembered that this order is not idly arranged, but carries the initiate on from revelation to revelation until the culminating stage wherein is committed to him one of the secrets and one of the five words of power which open to him the various planes, with all their evolutions. All that is aimed at here is to indicate the five main divisions into which the initiation ceremony naturally divides itself, and the student must bear in mind that each of these five stages is in itself a complete ceremony, and capable of detailed division.

Let us now take up the various points, dwelling briefly upon each, and remembering that words but limit and confine the true meaning.

[p. 113]

The revelation of the "Presence."

Right through the later periods of the cycle of incarnation wherein the man is juggling with the pairs of opposites, and through discrimination is becoming aware of reality and unreality, there is growing up in his mind a realisation that he himself is an immortal Existence, an eternal God, and a portion of Infinity. Ever the link between the man on the physical plane and this inner Ruler becomes clearer until the great revelation is made. Then comes a moment in his existence when the man stands consciously face to face with his real Self and knows himself to be that Self in reality and not just theoretically; he becomes aware of the God within, not through the sense of hearing, or through attention to the inner voice directing and controlling, and called the "voice of conscience." This time the recognition is through sight and direct vision. He now responds not only to that which is heard, but also to that which he sees.

It is known that the first senses developed in a child are hearing, touch, and sight; the infant becomes aware of sound and turns his head; he feels and touches; finally, he consciously sees, and in these three senses the personality is co-ordinated. These are the three vital senses. Taste and smell follow later, but life can be lived without them, and should they be absent, the man remains practically unhandicapped in his contacts on the physical plane. On the path of inner, or subjective development, the sequence is the same.

Hearing--response to the voice of conscience, as it guides, directs, and controls. This covers the period of strictly normal evolution.

Touch--response to control or vibration, and the recognition of that which lies outside of the separated human

[p. 114]

unit on the physical plane. This covers the period of gradual spiritual unfoldment, the Paths of Probation and of Discipleship right up to the door of initiation. The man touches at intervals that which is higher than himself; he becomes aware of the "touch" of the Master, of the egoic vibration and of group vibration, and through this occult sense of touch he accustoms himself to that which is inner and subtle. He reaches out after that which concerns the higher self, and through touching unseen things, habituates himself to them.

Finally, Sight--that inner vision which is produced through the initiation process, yet which is withal but the recognition of faculty, always present yet unknown. Just as an infant has eyes which are perfectly good and clear from birth, yet there comes a day wherein the conscious recognition of that which is seen is first to be noted, so with the human unit undergoing spiritual unfoldment. The medium of the inner sight has ever existed, and that which can be seen is always present, but the recognition of the majority as yet exists not.

This "recognition" by the initiate is the first great step in the initiation ceremony, and until it has transpired all the other stages must wait. That which is recognised differs at the different initiations, and might be roughly summarised as follows:--

The Ego, the reflection of the Monad, is in itself a triplicity, as is all else in nature, and reflects the three aspects of divinity, just as the Monad reflects on a higher plane the three aspects--will, love-wisdom, and active intelligence--of the Deity. Therefore:

At the first initiation the initiate becomes aware of the third, or lowest, aspect of the Ego, that of active intelligence. He is brought face to face with that manifestation of the great solar angel (Pitri) who is himself, the real self. He

[p. 115]

knows now past all disturbance that that manifestation of intelligence is that eternal Entity who has for ages past been demonstrating its powers on the physical plane through his successive incarnations.

At the second initiation this great Presence is seen as a duality, and another aspect shines forth before him. He becomes aware that this radiant Life, Who is identified with himself, is not only intelligence in action but also is love-wisdom in origin. He merges his consciousness with this Life, and becomes one with it so that on the physical plane, through the medium of that personal self, that Life is seen as intelligent love expressing itself.

At the third initiation the Ego stands before the initiate as a perfected triplicity. Not only is the Self known to be intelligent, active love, but it is revealed also as a fundamental will or purpose, with which the man immediately identifies himself, and knows that the three worlds hold for him in the future naught, but only serve as a sphere for active service, wrought out in love towards the accomplishment of a purpose which has been hid during the ages in the heart of the Self. That purpose, being now revealed, can be intelligently co-operated with, and thus matured.

These profound revelations shine forth before the initiate in a triple manner:--

As a radiant angelic existence. This is seen by the inner eye with the same accuracy of vision and judgment as when a man stands face to face with another member of the human family. The great solar Angel, Who embodies the real man and is his expression on the plane of higher mind, is literally his divine ancestor, the "Watcher" Who, through long cycles of incarnation, has poured Himself out in sacrifice in order that man might BE.

[p. 116]

As a sphere of radiant fire, linked with the initiate standing before it by that magnetic thread of fire which passes through all his bodies and terminates within the centre of the physical brain. This "silver thread" (as it is rather inaccurately called in the Bible, where the description of its loosing of the physical body and subsequent withdrawal is found) emanates from the heart centre of the solar Angel, linking thus heart and brain,--that great duality manifesting in this solar system, love and intelligence. This fiery sphere is linked likewise with many others belonging to the same group and ray, and thus it is a literal fact in demonstration that on the higher planes we are all one. One life pulsates and circulates through all, via the fiery strands. This is part of the revelation which comes to a man who stands in the "Presence" with his eyes occultly opened.

As a many tinted Lotus of nine petals. These petals are arranged in three circles around a central set of three closely folded petals, which shield what is called in the eastern books "The Jewel in the Lotus." This Lotus is a thing of rare beauty, pulsating with life and radiant with all the colours of the rainbow, and at the first three initiations the three circles are revealed in order, until at the fourth initiation the initiate stands before a still greater revelation, and learns the secret of that which lies within the central bud. In this connection the third initiation differs somewhat from the other two, inasmuch as through the power of a still more exalted Hierophant than the Bodhisattva, the electrical fire of pure Spirit, latent in the heart of the Lotus, is first contacted.

In all these words, "solar angel," "sphere of fire," and "lotus," lies hid some aspect of the central mystery of human life, but it will only he apparent to those who have eves to see. The mystic significance of these pictorial phrases will prove only a snare or a basis for incredulity to the man who

[p. 117]

seeks to materialise them unduly. The thought of an immortal existence, of a divine Entity, of a great centre of fiery energy, and of the full flower of evolution, lies hidden in these terms, and they must be thus considered.

At the fourth. initiation, the initiate is brought into the Presence of that aspect of Himself which is called "His Father in Heaven." He is brought face to face with his own Monad, that pure spiritual essence on the highest plane but one, which is to his Ego or higher self, what that Ego is to the personality or lower self.

This Monad has expressed itself on the mental plane through the Ego in a triple fashion, but now all aspects of the mind, as we understand it, are lacking. The solar angel hitherto contacted has withdrawn himself, and the form through which he functioned (the egoic or causal body) has gone, and naught is left but love-wisdom and that dynamic will which is the prime characteristic of Spirit. The lower self has served the purposes of the Ego, and has been discarded; the Ego likewise has served the purposes of the Monad, and is no longer required, and the initiate stands free of both, fully liberated and able to contact the Monad, as earlier he learned to contact the Ego. For the remainder of his appearances in the three worlds he is governed only by will and purpose, self-initiated, and creates his body of manifestation, and thus controls (within karmic limits) his own times and seasons. The karma here referred to is planetary karma, and not personal.

At this fourth initiation he contacts the love aspect of the Monad, and at the fifth the will aspect, and thus completes his contacts, responds to all necessary vibrations, and is master on the five planes of human evolution.

Further, it is at the third, the fourth, and the fifth initiations that he becomes aware also of that "Presence" which enfolds even that spiritual Entity, his own Monad.

[p. 118]

[paragraph continues] He sees his Monad as one with the Planetary Logos. Through the channel of his own Monad he sees the selfsame aspects (which that Monad embodies) on a wider scale, and the Planetary Logos, Who ensouls all the Monads on His ray, is thus revealed. This truth is well-nigh impossible to express in words, and concerns the relation of the electrical point of fire, which is the Monad, to the five-pointed star, which reveals the Presence of the Planetary Logos to the initiate. This is practically incomprehensible to the average man for whom this book is written.

At the sixth initiation, the initiate, functioning consciously as the love-aspect of the Monad, is brought (via his "Father") into a still vaster recognition, and becomes aware of that Star which encloses his planetary star, just as that star has earlier been seen as enclosing his own tiny "Spark." He thus makes his conscious contact with the solar Logos, and realises within himself the Oneness of all life and manifestation.

This recognition is extended at the seventh initiation, so that two aspects of the One life become realities to the emancipated Buddha.

Thus by a graded series of steps is the initiate brought face to face with Truth and Existence. It will be apparent to thoughtful students why this revealing of the Presence has to precede all other revelations. It produces within the mind of the initiate the following basic realisations:

His faith for ages is justified, and hope and belief merge themselves in self-ascertained fact. Faith is lost in sight, and things unseen are seen and known. No more can he doubt, but he has become instead, through his own effort, a knower.

His oneness with his brothers is proven, and he realises the indissoluble link which binds him to his fellow-men everywhere. Brotherhood is no longer a theory but a proven

[p. 119]

scientific fact, no more to be disputed than the separateness of men on the physical plane is to be disputed.

The immortality of the soul and the reality of the unseen worlds is for him proven and ascertained. Whereas, before initiation, this belief was based on brief and fleeting vision and strong inner convictions (the result of logical reasoning and of a gradually developing intuition) now it is based on sight and on a recognition past all disproving, of his own immortal nature.

He realises the meaning and source of energy, and can begin to wield power with scientific accuracy and direction. He knows now whence he draws it, and has had a glimpse of the resources of energy which are available. Before, he knew that that energy existed, and used it blindly and sometimes unwisely; now he sees it under the direction of the "open mind," and can co-operate intelligently with the forces of nature.

Thus, in many ways, does the revelation of the Presence produce definite results in the initiate, and thus it is judged by the Hierarchy to be the necessary preamble to all later revelations.

The Revelation of the Vision.

Having brought the initiate face to face with the One with whom for countless ages he has had to do, and having awakened in him an unshakable realisation of the oneness of the fundamental life as it manifests through all lesser lives, the next momentous revelation is that of the Vision. The first revelation has concerned that which is undefinable, illimitable, and (to the finite mind), infinite in its abstractness and absoluteness. The second revelation concerns time and space, and involves the recognition by the initiate--through the newly aroused sense of occult sight--of

[p. 120]

the part he has played and has to play in the plan, and later of the plan itself in so far as it concerns:--

a. His Ego.

b. His egoic group.

c. His ray group.

d. His Planetary Logos.

In this fourfold apprehension you have portrayed the gradual realisation that is his during the process of the four initiations preceding final liberation.

At the first initiation he becomes aware definitely of the part, relatively inconspicuous, that he has to play in his personal life during the period ensuing between the moment of revelation and the taking of the second initiation. This may involve one more life or several. He knows the trend they should take, he realises somewhat his share in the service of the race; he sees the plan as a whole where he himself is concerned, a tiny mosaic within the general pattern; he becomes conscious of how he--with his particular type of mind, aggregate of gifts, mental and otherwise, and his varying capacities--can serve, and what must be accomplished by him before he can again stand in the Presence, and receive an extended revelation.

At the second initiation the part his egoic group plays in the general scheme is shown to him. He becomes more aware of the different group units with whom he is intrinsically associated; he realises who they are in their personalities, if in incarnation, and he sees somewhat what are the karmic relations between groups, units and himself; he is given an insight into the specific group purpose, and its relation to other groups. He can now work with added assurance, and his intercourse with people on the physical plane becomes more certain; he can both aid them and himself in the adjusting of karma, and therefore bring about a more

[p. 121]

rapid approach to the final liberation. Group relations are consolidated, and the plans and purposes can be furthered more intelligently. As this consolidation of group relations proceeds, it produces on the physical plane that concerted action and that wise unity in purpose which results in the materialisation of the higher ideals, and the adaptation of force in the wise furthering of the ends of evolution. When this has reached a certain stage, the units forming the groups have learned to work together, and have thus stimulated each other; they can now proceed to a further expansion of knowledge, resulting in a further capacity to help.

At the third initiation there is revealed to the initiate the purpose of the subray of the ray to which he belongs, that upon which his Ego finds itself. All egoic units are upon some subray of the monadic ray. This knowledge is conferred upon the initiate so as to enable him eventually to find for himself (along the line of least resistance) the ray of his Monad. This subray bears upon its stream of energy many groups of Egos, and the initiate is therefore made aware not only of his egoic group and its intelligent purpose, but of many other groups, similarly composed. Their united energy is working towards a clearly defined goal.

Having learned somewhat group relations, and having developed the ability to work with units in group formation, the initiate now learns the secret of group subordination to the good of the aggregate of groups. This will demonstrate on the physical plane as an ability to work wisely, intelligently and harmoniously with many diverse types, and to co-operate in large plans and wield wide influence.

A part of the plans of the Planetary Logos becomes revealed to him, and the vision includes the revelation of the plan and purpose as it concerns the planet, though as yet the

[p. 122]

vision is obscured in connection with those plans in their planetary relationship. This brings the initiate through a series of graded realisations to the portals of the fourth initiation. Through the entire loosing of the initiate from all trammels in the three worlds and the breaking of all bonds of limiting karma, the vision this time is greatly extended, and it might be said that for the first time he becomes aware of the extent of planetary purpose and karma within the scheme. His own personal unimportant karma being now adjusted, he can give his attention to the working off of planetary karma, and the far reaching plans of that great Life Who includes all the lesser lives. He not only is brought to a full recognition of the purposes and plans for all the evolutions upon his own planetary scheme, the earth, but also there swings into the radius of his apprehension that planetary scheme which is our earth's complement or polar opposite. He realises the inter-relation existing between the two schemes and the vast dual purpose is revealed to him. It is shown to him how this dual purpose must become one united plan, and henceforth he bends all his energies towards planetary co-operation as it is furthered by work with and through the two great evolutions, human and deva, upon our planet. This concerns the making of adjustments, and the gradual application of energy in stimulation of the various kingdoms in nature, so that through the blending of all of nature's forces the interplay of energy between the two schemes may be quickened. In this way the plans of the solar Logos, as they are being worked out through two Planetary Logoi, may be consummated. The handling, therefore, of solar energy on a tiny scale, is now his privilege, and he is admitted not only into the council chambers of his own Hierarchy, but is permitted entrance also when agents from other planetary schemes are in conference

[p. 123]

with the Lord of the World and the two great departmental heads.

At the fifth Initiation the vision brings to him a still more extended outlook and a third planetary scheme is seen, forming with the other two schemes one of those triangles of force which are necessitated in the working out of solar evolution. Just as all manifestation proceeds through duality and triplicity back to eventual synthesis so these schemes, which are but centres of force in the body of a solar Logos, work first as separated units living their own integral life, then as dualities, through the interplay of force through any two schemes, thus aiding, stimulating and complementing each other, and finally as a solar triangle, circulating force from point to point and centre to centre until the energy is merged and synthesised and the three work together in unity.

When the adept of the fifth initiation can work in line with the plans of the three Logoi involved, co-operating with Them with ever greater ability, as time elapses, he becomes ready for the sixth Initiation, which admits him to still higher conclaves. He becomes a participant in solar and not merely planetary purposes.

At this sixth Initiation the most marvelous vision of the entire series is his. He sees the solar system as a unit, and gets a brief revealing which opens to his amazed understanding the fundamental purpose of the solar Logos; for the first time he sees the plans as a whole in all their ramifications.

At the seventh Initiation his vision penetrates beyond the solar ring-pass-not, and he sees that which he has long realised as a basic theoretical fact, that our solar Logos is involved in the plans and purposes of a still greater Existence, and that the solar system is but one of many centres of force through which a cosmic Entity vastly greater than

[p. 124]

our own solar Logos is expressing Himself. In these visions one great purpose underlies them all,--the revelation of essential unity and the unveiling of those inner relationships, which, when known, will tend ever more fully to swing the initiate into the line of self-abnegating service, and which will make of him one who works towards synthesis, towards harmony, and towards a basic unity.

During the Initiation ceremony, the opening of the eyes of the Initiate to see and realise, divides itself into three parts, which are nevertheless parts of one process:--

1. The past sweeps before him, and he sees himself playing many parts, all of which are realised to be but the gradual bringing of his forces and capacities to the point where he can be of service to and with his group. He sees and identifies himself--according to the particular initiation--with

a. Himself in many earlier lives.

b. His group in earlier groups of lives.

c. His egoic ray as it pours down through many cycles of time.

d. His Planetary Logos as He functions in the past through many evolutions and kingdoms in the entire scheme,

and so on until he has identified himself with the past of the one life flowing through all planetary schemes and evolutions in the solar system. This produces in him the resolve to work off karma, and the knowledge (from the seeing of past causes) of how it must be accomplished.

2. The present. It is revealed to him what is the specific work to be done during the lesser cycle in which he is immediately involved. This means that he sees not only that which concerns him in any one life, but he knows what is to

[p. 125]

be the immediate bit of the plan--involving maybe several of his tiny cycles called lives--which the Planetary Logos seeks to see consummated. He then may be said to know his work past all gainsaying, and can apply himself to his task with a clear knowledge as to the why, the how, and the when.

3. The future. Then, for his encouragement, there is granted to him a picture of a final consummation of a glory past all description, with a few outstanding points indicative of the major steps thereto. He sees for one brief second the glory as it shall be, and that path of radiant beauty which shineth ever more and more unto the perfect day. In the earlier stages he sees the glory of his perfected egoic group; later the radiance which pours forth from the ray which carries on its bosom the perfected sons of men of one particular colour and type; later again he gets a glimpse of the perfection of that great Being who is his own Planetary Logos, until finally the perfection of all beauty and the radiance which includes all other rays of light is revealed,--the sun shining in his strength, the solar Logos at the moment of consummated purpose.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THE RODS OF INITIATION

The Rods of Initiation are of four kinds:--

1. Cosmic, used by a cosmic Logos in the initiations of a solar Logos and of the three major Planetary Logoi.

2. Systemic, used by a solar Logos in the initiations of a Planetary Logos. With cosmic initiation we have naught to do; it concerns expansions of realisation beyond even the ken of the highest initiate in our solar system. With systemic initiations we are concerned only in trifling measure, for they are on so vast a scale that the average human mind cannot as yet envisage them. Man appreciates these initiations only in so far as they produce effects in the planetary scheme with which he may be concerned. Particularly is this so should the scheme in which he plays his microscopic part be the centre in the Logoic body receiving stimulation. When that is the case, the initiation of his own Planetary Logos takes place, and consequently he (as a cellular body) receives an added stimulation along with the other sons of men.

3. Planetary, used by a Planetary Logos for initiatory purposes, and for the third, fourth, and fifth major initiations, with the two higher. At the planetary initiation the Rod of Power, wielded by the solar Logos, is charged with pure electrical force from Sirius, and was received by our Logos during the secondary period of creation, from the hands of that great Entity Who is the presiding Lord of the Lords of Karma. He is the repository of the law during manifestation, and He it is Who is the representative in

[p. 127]

the solar system of that greater Brotherhood on Sirius Whose Lodges are found functioning as the occult Hierarchies in the different planets. Again, He it is Who, with the solar Logos to assist Him, invests the various Initiators with power, gives to Them that word in secret which enables Them to draw down the pure electric force with which Their rods of office must be charged, and commits to Their keeping the peculiar secret of Their particular planetary scheme.

4. Hierarchical, used by an occult Hierarchy for minor initiations, and for the first two initiations of manas by the Bodhisattva.

When man individualised in Lemurian days, it was through the application of the Rod of Initiation to the Logos of our earth chain, which touched into activity certain centres in His body, with their corresponding groups. This application produced literally the awakening of the life to intelligent work on the mental plane. Animal man was conscious on the physical and on the astral planes. By the stimulation effected by the electric rod this animal man awoke to consciousness on the mental. Thus the three bodies were co-ordinated, and the Thinker enabled to function in them.

All Rods of Initiation cause certain effects:

a. Stimulation of the latent fires till they blaze.

b. Synthesis of the fires through an occult activity that brings them within the radius of each other.

c. Increase of the vibratory activity of some centre, whether in man, a Heavenly Man, or a solar Logos.

d. Expansion of all the bodies, but primarily of the causal body.

e. The arousing of the kundalinic fire (or the fire at the base of the spine), and the direction of its upward progression. This fire and the fire of manas, are directed [p. 128] along certain routes--or triangles--by the following of the Rod as it moves in a specified manner. There is a definite occult reason, under the laws of electricity, behind the known fact that every initiate presented to the Initiator is accompanied by two of the Masters, Who stand one on either side of the initiate. The three of Them together form a triangle which makes the work possible.

The force of the Rod is twofold, and its power terrific. Apart and alone the initiate could not receive the voltage from the Rod without serious hurt, but in triangular transmission comes safety. We need to remember here that two Masters sponsor all applicants for initiation, and represent two polarities of the electric All. Part of Their function is to stand with applicants for initiation when they come before the Great Lord.

When the rods are held in the hands of the Initiator in His position of power, and at the stated seasons, they act as transmitters of electric force from very high levels, so high indeed that the "Flaming Diamond," at certain of the final initiations, the sixth and seventh, transmits force via the Logos from outside the system altogether. This major Rod is the one used on this planet, but within the system there are several such Rods of Power, and they are to be found in three grades--if it may be so expressed.

One Rod of Initiation is used for the first two initiations, and is wielded by the Great Lord. It is magnetised by the application of the "Flaming Diamond," the magnetisation being repeated for each new World Teacher. There is a wonderful ceremony performed at the time that a new World Teacher takes office, in which He receives His Rod of Power--the same Rod as used since the foundation of our Planetary Hierarchy--and holds it forth to the Lord of the

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] World, Who touches it with His own mighty Rod, causing a fresh recharging of its electric capacity. This ceremony takes place at Shamballa.

The Rod of Initiation known as the "Flaming Diamond," is used by Sanat Kumara, the One Initiator. This Rod lies hidden "in the East," and holds the fire hidden that irradiates the Wisdom Religion. This Rod was brought by the Lord of the World from Venus, and once in every world period it is subjected to a similar process to that of the lesser Rod, only this time it is recharged by the direct action of the Logos Himself, the Logos of the solar system. The exact location of this Rod is known only to the Lord of the World and to the Chohans of the rays, and being the talisman of this evolution the Chohan of the second ray is--under the Lord of the World--its prime guardian, aided by the deva Lord of the second plane. The Buddhas of Activity are responsible for its custody, and under Them the Chohan of the ray. It is produced only at stated times, when specific work has to be done. It is used not only at the initiating of men, but at certain planetary functions of which nothing is at present known. It has its place and function in certain ceremonies connected with the inner round, and the triangle formed by the Earth, Mars, and Mercury.

The Purpose of the Rods of Power.

In the sceptre of a ruling monarch at this day is hidden the symbolism of these various Rods. They are duly recognised as symbols of office and of power, but it is not generally appreciated that they are of electrical origin, and that their true significance is concerned with the dynamic stimulation of all the subordinates in office who come under their touch, thus inspiring them to increased activity and service for the race.

[p. 130]

The great Rod of Power of the Logos Himself is hidden in the sun.

To recapitulate, the esoteric location of the various rods is as follows:--

1. The Rod of the Bodhisattva lies hidden in the "heart of the wisdom," that is, at Shamballa.

2. The Rod of the One Initiator is hidden in "the East," a definite planetary location.

3. The Rod of the solar Logos is hidden in "the heart of the sun," that mysterious subjective sphere which lies back of our physical sun, and of which our physical sun is but the environing shield and envelope.

4. The Rod of the cosmic Logos associated with our solar Logos is secreted in that central spot in the heavens around which our solar system revolves, and which is termed "the central spiritual sun."

One Rod is charged anew at Shamballa for each new World Teacher; the Rod of Sanat Kumara is charged afresh at each recurring world period, and therefore seven times in the history of a planetary scheme. The Logoic Rod of Power is electrified at the recurrence of each new period of creation, or for each solar system through which the Logos manifests, as a man manifests through his physical body life. The first two ceremonies take place at Shamballa, the sacred point of planetary manifestation, that central location in our physical planet which corresponds to the heart of a human being. Many of the places on the earth's surface, for instance, which are famed for their healing properties, are thus noted because they are magnetised spots, and their magnetic properties demonstrate as healing influences. The recognition of these properties by man is but the preamble of a later and more definite recognition, which will eventuate when his etheric sight is normally developed.

[p. 131]

These magnetic spots are magnetised in three ways:--

1. By Sanat Kumara working through the Manu. This occurs when it is desirable to form a central magnetic point which, by its attractive power, will draw into a coherent whole some race, nation, or large organisation. Every nation has its "magnetic point," formed in etheric matter by the application of the "Flaming Diamond" to the ethers; it is the national heart and the basis of the national character. Usually the chief city of a nation is built up around it, but this is not invariably so.

2. By Sanat Kumara working through the Bodhisattva. In this case, the electric force in the Rod is wielded in order to draw closer together those influences which demonstrate in the great religions of the world. The lesser Rod of Power is used here in conjunction with the greater. By their means the attractive quality or keynote of any religion is struck, and of any organisation with a religious basis.

3. By Sanat Kumara working through the Mahachohan. By the wielding of the Rod of Power the magnetic focal points of those great organisations which affect the civilisation and the culture of a people are brought into coherent activity.

All physical plane organisation--governmental, religious, or cultural--is the working out of inner forces and causes, and, before they definitely appear in physical manifestation, a focalisation--if it might be so expressed--of these influences and energies, takes place on etheric levels. The organisation of the Freemasons is a case in point. It has two magnetic centres, one of which is in Central Europe. In all the cases cited, the Lord of the World was the officiating agent, as is ever the case in the founding of great and important

[p. 132]

movements. In all lesser movements for the helping of the race, initiated by the Masters working through Their disciples, the aid of the Bodhisattva is invoked, and the lesser Rod of Power employed.

When disciples initiate a movement on a relatively tiny scale, the Master with Whom they work can similarly assist them, and though He wields no Rod of Power, He has methods whereby He can stimulate and cause to cohere the little endeavour of the faithful followers. Thus in all departments of human life the Rods of Initiation and the Words of Power are used. The entire world government functions under law and order, and the whole scheme is interdependent.

To return to the subject of human initiation, and these Rods of Power. At the time of the Initiation ceremony, after the two great revelations there comes a moment of utter silence, and in the interim the initiate realises within himself the meaning of "Peace." He stands, as it were, in a void, or in a vacuum, wherein naught seemingly can reach him; he stands betwixt earth and heaven for a brief second, conscious of naught but the meaning of things as they are, realising his own essential divinity, and the part which he must play when he again returns to earth service from the Council Chamber of Heaven. He is conscious of no anxiety, fear, or doubt. He has contacted the divine "Presence," and has seen the vision. He knows what he has to do and how he must do it, and peace and joy unutterable fill his heart. This is an interlude of stillness before a period of renewed activity, which begins at the moment that the Rod is applied. Whilst he has been thus withdrawn within himself, with all his forces centred in his heart, the attendant Lodge of Masters have been performing certain ceremonies and chanting certain words, preparatory to the appearance of the Initiator upon the throne, and the wielding

[p. 133]

of the Rod. The Hierophant has hitherto been present, but the work has been handled by the Lodge and the Sponsors. He now ascends to the place of power, and the Rod is brought to Him by its legitimate custodians.

It is not possible here to publish the details of the next stage, beyond using the description as embodied in the words "fire descends from heaven." Through the utterance of certain words and phrases, which are one of the secrets of initiation, and which vary with each initiation, the electrical force to be employed descends upon the Rod, passing through the heart and the hand of the Initiator to the Three Who stand in triangular relation to the throne of office. They receive it in turn, and circulate it by act of will through Their hearts, thus passing it to the Sponsors. They again, by an act of will, prepare to transmit it to that centre in the body of the Initiate which is (according to the initiation) to receive stimulation. Then succeeds an interesting interlude, wherein the united wills of the Hierarchy are blended in order to transmit that force which the Rod has put into circulation. The Hierophant utters the word, and the force is literally thrown into the initiate's bodies and centres, passing down through the centres on the mental plane, via the astral centres, to the centres on etheric levels, which finally absorb it. This is the stupendous moment for the initiate, and brings to him a realisation of the literal absolute truth of the phrase that "God is a consuming fire." He knows past all gainsaying that fiery energy and electric force constitute the sumtotal of all that is. He is literally bathed in the fires of purification; he sees fire on all sides, pouring out through the Rod, circulating around the Triangle, and passing through the bodies of the two sponsoring adepts. For a brief second, the entire Lodge of Masters and initiates, standing in Their ceremonial places without the Triangle, are hidden from view by a wall of

[p. 134]

pure fire. The initiate sees no one, save the Hierophant, and is aware of nothing but a fiery blaze of pure, blue-white flame, which burns, but destroys not, which intensifies the activity of every atom in his body without disintegrating, and which purifies his entire nature. The fire tries his work, of what sort it is, and he passes through the Flame.

The Effect of the Application of the Rod.

A. Upon the Initiate's bodies: The effect is four-fold and lasting, but varies according to the initiation taken. The action of the Rod is most carefully and scientifically regulated, and at each succeeding initiation the voltage is increased, and the activity of the resulting fire and its heat intensified. By the application of the Rod the initiate finds:--

1. That the activity of each individual atom in the various bodies is increased, resulting in a greater degree of nervous energy and an elasticity and resistance which will serve him in good stead in the strenuous life of service ahead.

2. That matter of an undesirable type in his bodies is shaken loose, and the atomic wall somewhat destroyed, making the atoms radioactive--if it might be so expressed--and therefore more easily eliminated.

3. The fires of the body are stimulated, and the total energy of the threefold lower man is co-ordinated, so that there is less waste of energy and a greater coherence and uniformity in action.

4. The aligning of the various bodies in connection with the causal, or egoic body is aided, and thus continuity of consciousness, and receptivity to the behests of the Ego, become possible.

[p. 135]

The initiate will find, when he returns from the ceremony, and takes up his work in the world, that the stimulation received will bring about in his bodies a period of great activity, and also of strife. This strife, persisted in to the point of victory, will result in his taking out of his body undesirable matter, and building in new and better material; he will find that his powers for service are enormously increased, and his nervous energy intensified, so that he can draw upon reserves of force in service hitherto unsuspected. He will find, also, that the response of the physical brain to the voice of the higher Self, and its receptivity to the higher and subtler impressions, is greatly furthered. Eventually, through the work accomplished, he will succeed in eliminating all matter of a subatomic character, and will then build bodies of substance of the highest subplane on each plane; he will become aware that all his energies can be consciously and constructively controlled, that he knows the real meaning of continuity of consciousness, and can function simultaneously on the three planes with full inner realisation.

B. Upon the causal or egoic body.

It is only possible to touch very briefly upon the effect of the application of the Rod to the causal body of the initiate. The subject is immense, and will be more fully dealt with in A Treatise on Cosmic Fire. There are just two ways in which some idea of the fundamental truth will be conveyed to the mind of the student, which we might now consider.

First, the student should bear in mind the interesting significance of the fact that he, on the physical plane, is a functioning personality, with known and realised characteristics, and yet withal, that he is a subjective Life, who

[p. 136]

uses that personality as a medium of expression, and who--through the agency of the physical, emotional, and mental bodies which comprise the threefold lower man--makes his contacts with the physical plane and thus develops. The same general idea of development must be now extended to the higher Self, the Ego on its own plane. This Ego is a great solar angel, who is the medium of expression for the Monad or pure spirit, just as is the personality for the Ego on the lower level. From the point of view of man in the three worlds, this Ego, or Solar Lord, is eternal; he persists throughout the entire cycle of incarnations, just as the personality persists during the tiny physical life cycle. Nevertheless, this period of existence is only relatively permanent, and the day dawns when the life which expresses itself through the medium of the Ego, the Thinker, the Solar Lord or Manasadeva, seeks to loose itself from even this limitation, and to return to the source from which it originally emanated.

The life then, which manifested as a solar angel, and which, through inherent energy, held together through long ages the form egoic, withdraws itself gradually, and the form slowly dissipates; the lesser lives of which it has been constituted, return to the general fount of deva substance, plus the increased consciousness and activity which is theirs through the experience of being built into a form, and utilised by a still higher aspect of existence. Similarly, in the case of the personality, when the life egoic withdraws, the threefold lower self dissipates; the little lives which form the body of what has been called the lunar self (in contradistinction to the solar self, being but its reflection) are absorbed into the general reservoir of deva substance of a lower vibration to that which composed the body egoic. Similarly, also, their evolution has been furthered through

[p. 137]

having been built into a form for the use of the higher Self.

Through the application of the Rod of Initiation, the work of separating the spiritual self from the higher self is furthered, and the imprisoned life gradually escapes, whilst the causal body is slowly absorbed or dissipated.

This has led to the expression, sometimes used in occult books, of "the cracking of the causal body" at each initiation, and to the idea of the inner central fire gradually breaking through and destroying the confining walls, and also of the destruction of the Temple of Solomon through the withdrawal of the Shekinah. All these phrases are symbolic wordings, and are attempts to convey to the mind of man fundamental truth from different angles.

By the time the fourth initiation has been reached, the work of destruction is accomplished, the solar angel returns to his own place, having performed his function, and the solar lives seek their point of emanation. The life within the form mounts up then in triumph to the bosom of its "Father in Heaven," just as the life within the physical body at the moment of death seeks its source, the Ego, and this likewise in four stages:--

1. By the withdrawal from the dense physical body.

2. By the withdrawal from the etheric body.

3. By a later vacating of the astral body.

4. A final leaving of the mental body.

Another way of emphasising the same truth is to regard he egoic body as a centre of force, a wheel of energy, or a lotus, and to picture it as a lotus with nine petals, hiding within these petals a central unit of three petals; these in turn secrete the central life, or the "jewel in the lotus." As evolution proceeds, these three circles of three petals gradually unfold, having a simultaneous effect on one or

[p. 138]

other of the central three. These three circles are called respectively the petals of Sacrifice, Love, and Knowledge. At initiation the Rod is applied to the petals in a scientific manner, and regulated according to ray and tendency. This brings about the opening of the central bud, the revelation of the jewel, the withdrawal of that jewel from the casket which has so long shielded it, and its transference to "the crown," as it is occultly called, meaning its return to the Monad whence it came.

We must clearly recognise that all the above is but an attempt, through the limiting agency of words, to describe the method and the rites whereby spiritual liberation is finally achieved in this cycle; first, through the method of evolutionary unfoldment, or gradual development, and then in the final stages through the Rod of Initiation.

C. Upon the centres.

At the time that initiation is taken, the centres are all active, and the lower four (which correspond to the Personality) are beginning the process of translating the fire into the three higher. The dual revolution in the lower centres is clearly to be seen, and the three higher are commencing to be similarly active. By the application of the Rod of Initiation at the time of the initiation ceremony, definite results are achieved in connection with the centres, which might be enumerated as follows:--

The fire at the base of the spine is definitely directed to whichever centre is the object of special attention. This varies according to ray, or the specialised work of the initiate.

The centre has its activity intensified, its rate of revolution increased, and certain of the central spokes of the wheel brought into more active radiance. These spokes

[p. 139]

of the wheel, or these petals of the lotus, have a close connection with the different spirillae in the permanent atoms, for instance, and in their stimulation comes into play one or more of the corresponding spirillae in the permanent atoms on the three lower planes. After the third initiation a corresponding stimulation takes place in the permanent atoms of the Triad, leading to a co-ordination of the buddhic vehicle, and the transference of the lower polarisation into the higher.

By the application of the Rod of Initiation, the down-flow of force from the Ego to the personality is tripled, the direction of that force being dependent upon whether the centres receiving attention are the etheric or the astral at the first and second initiations, or whether the initiate is standing before the Lord of the World. In the latter case, his mental centres, or their corresponding force vortices on higher levels, will receive stimulation. When the World Teacher initiates at the first and second initiations, the direction of the triadal force is turned to the vivification of the heart and throat centres in their position of synthesising the lower. When the One Initiator applies the Rod of His power, the downflow is from the Monad, and though the throat and heart intensify vibration as a response, the main direction of the force is to the seven head centres, and finally (at liberation) to the radiant head centre above, synthesising the lesser seven head centres.

The centres, at initiation, receive a fresh access of vibratory capacity and of power, and this results in the exoteric life as:--

1. A sensitiveness and refinement of the vehicles which may result at first in much suffering to the initiate, but which produce a capacity to respond, that far outweighs the incidental pain.

[p. 140]

2. A development of psychic faculty that again may lead to temporary distress, but which eventually causes a recognition of the one self in all selves, which is the goal of endeavour.

S. A burning away of the etheric web, through the gradual arousing of kundalini and its correct geometrical progression, and a resultant continuity of consciousness that enables the initiate consciously to utilise time as a factor on the planes of evolution.

4. A gradual grasp of the law of vibration as an aspect of the basic law of building, the law of attraction, is brought about, and the initiate learns consciously to build, to manipulate thought matter for the perfecting of the plans of the Logos, to work in mental essence, and to apply the law on mental levels, and thereby affect the physical plane. Motion originates cosmically on cosmic levels, and in the microcosm the same will be seen. There is an occult hint here that, pondered on, will reveal much. At initiation, at the moment of the application of the Rod, the initiate consciously realises the meaning of the Law of Attraction in form building, and in the synthesis of the three fires. Upon his ability to retain that realisation, and himself to apply the law, will depend his power to progress.

5. The Hierophant transmits higher manasic energy to the initiate, so that he is enabled consciously to know and recognise the plan for his group centre, through the immensely increased stimulation. This force descends from the manasic permanent atom via the antahkarana, and is directed to whichever centre the Hierophant--under the law--sees should be stimulated.

6. The Initiator stabilises the force and regulates its flow, as it circulates through the egoic body, so that when the work of unfoldment is accomplished, the seventh principle

[p. 141]

at the Heart of the Lotus can stand revealed. After each initiation the lotus is more unfolded, and light from the centre begins to blaze forth--a light or fire which ultimately burns through the three enshrining petals, and permits the full inner glory to be seen, and the electric fire of spirit to be manifested. As this is brought about on the second subplane of the mental plane (whereon the egoic lotus is now situated) a corresponding stimulation takes place in the dense substance which forms the petals or wheels of the centres on the astral and etheric levels.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 142]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH

The Work of the Lodge during Initiation.

We now come to the most solemn part of the initiation ceremony. This ceremony, from one point of view, divides itself into three parts:--

First. That in which the initiate is concerned and in which he realises his own august Self, the Presence, and sees the vision and the plan.

Second. That in which the Initiator is concerned, in which He wields the Rod of Fire, and effects certain specific results in the body of the applicant.

Third. That in which certain words and formulas are committed to the initiate by the Hierophant, and which he carries away within his consciousness in order the better to carry out that portion of the plan which concerns himself.

During the whole procedure the Lodge of Masters, congregated without the Triangle of force, has been occupied with a three-fold work, Their aim being to produce certain results in the consciousness of the initiate and thus to aid the Hierophant in His strenuous endeavour. It must be remembered that under the law of economy wherever there is an application or a transmission of force from one force centre to another there is a consequent diminution in the centre of withdrawal. This is the basis of the set times and seasons in connection with the initiation ceremony. The sun

[p. 143]

is the source of all energy and power, and the work of the Initiator is facilitated when advantage is taken of favourable solar conditions. The times and seasons are ascertained through esoteric solar and cosmic astrology; this being based, of course, on the correct figures, the true mathematical conception, and a real knowledge of the basic facts concerning the planets and the solar system. The horoscope of the initiate is also invariably cast so as to check the time for an individual initiation, and only when the individual signs blend and coincide with the ceremonial chart by which the Initiator is guided, is it possible to perform the ceremony. This is the reason why sometimes initiation has to be postponed to a later life, even when the initiate has done the necessary work.

The threefold work of the Lodge during the ceremony may be described as follows:--

First: The chanting of certain mantrams sets loose energy from a particular planetary centre. It must be remembered here that every planetary scheme is a centre in the body of a Solar Logos, and embodies a peculiar type of energy or force. According to the energy desired at a particular initiation, so it is transferred, via the sun, from that planetary centre to the initiate. The procedure is as follows:--

a. The energy is set in motion from the planetary centre through the power of the Planetary Logos, aided by the scientific knowledge of the Lodge, and the utilisation of certain words of power.

b. It passes thence to the sun where it mingles with pure solar energy.

c. It is transmitted from the sun to that particular chain in our Earth scheme which corresponds numerically to the particular originating planetary scheme.

[p. 144]

d. From there it is transferred to the corresponding globe, and thence to the dense physical planet. By the use of a particular mantram the Initiator then focuses the energy in His own body, using it both as a receiving and a transmitting station. Eventually it reaches the initiate, via the Triangle and the Sponsors. It will be apparent, therefore, to the student that when the Initiator is the Lord of the World, or the physical reflection of the Planetary Logos of our scheme, the force comes more directly to the initiate than at the first two initiations, wherein the Bodhisattva is the Hierophant. Only at the third initiation will the initiate be in a condition to receive direct planetary force.

Second: The concentration undertaken by the Lodge assists the initiate to realise within himself the various processes undergone. This is accomplished by working definitely on. his mental body, and thus stimulating all the atoms, through the united thought power of the Masters. The work of apprehension is thus directly aided. This concentration in no way resembles hypnotic suggestion, or the powerful impress of stronger minds upon the weaker. It takes the form of a strenuous meditation by the assembled Masters and initiates upon the realities concerned and upon the Self; through the force thus liberated the initiate is enabled to transfer his consciousness more easily away from the not-self to the divine essentials wherewith he is immediately concerned. The thought power of the Masters succeeds in shutting out the vibration of the three worlds and enables the applicant literally to "leave behind him" all the past and to have that far-seeing vision which sees the end from the beginning and the things of time as though they were not.

Third: Through certain ceremonial rhythmic action the

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] Lodge greatly assists in the work of initiation. Just as in the Wesak Festival, results in force demonstration arc brought about by the use of chanted mantrams and the sacred ceremonial pacing and interweaving of the assembled crowd in the formation of geometrical figures, so in the initiation ceremony a similar procedure is followed. The geometrical figures appropriate for the various initiations differ, and herein lies one of the safeguards of the ceremony. The initiate knows the set figure for his own initiation, but no more.

All these three aspects of the work of the Masters and initiates in Lodge assembled, occupy them until the moment when the Rod has been applied. Through its application the initiate has become a member of the Lodge, and the entire ceremonial then changes, prior to the taking of the oath and the revelation of the Word and Secret.

The Sponsors drop back from either side of the initiate and take Their places in the ranks, whilst the three Buddhas of Activity (or Their representatives at the first two initiations) take Their stand behind the seat of office of the Hierophant. The Lodge members are grouped differently, and initiates of the same degree as the newly admitted applicant place themselves around him, and assist in the final part of the ceremony; the remainder of the initiates and adepts stand in their various grades.

The earlier three stages of the initiation ceremony are the same for all initiations. In the final two stages those who are not of equal rank with the newly made initiate (such as first degree initiates at the initiation of a third degree member) drop back to the rear of the Hall of Initiation at Shamballa, and a "wall of silence" is built up through mantric energy between the two groups; a vacuum, so to speak, is formed, and nothing can then be transmitted from the

[p. 146]

inner group to the outer. The latter confine themselves to deep meditation and the chanting of certain formulas, and in the inner group around the Hierophant a dual performance is taking place:

a. The newly made initiate is taking the oath.

b. Certain Words and Secrets are being handed over to him.

Two Types of Oaths.

All oaths connected with the occult Hierarchy may be divided into two groups:--

1. The Oath of Initiation, in which the initiate binds himself by the most solemn pledges never to reveal, on pain of summary punishment, any occult secret, or to express in words outside the Initiation Hall that which has been committed to his keeping.

2. The Oath of Office, administered when any member of the Lodge takes a specific post in Hierarchical work. This oath deals with his functions and with his relations to

a. The Lord of the World,

b. His immediate superior,

c. His fellow workers in the Lodge,

d. The world of men whom he is to serve.

It is needless to say more here regarding this latter type of oath, as it concerns only officials of the Hierarchy.

The Oath of Initiation.

The Oath of Initiation, with which we are dealing now, is divided into three sections, and is administered by the Hierophant to the initiate, being repeated after the Initiator

[p. 147]

phrase by phrase; it is punctuated at various points by the chanting, by initiates of the same degree, of words in Sensa equivalent to "So let it be."

The three divisions of the oath may be roughly described as:--

1. A solemn phrase embodying the purpose actuating the initiate, a protestation as to his unchangeable will-attitude, and a solemn declaration as to his realisation, coupled with a promise to reveal no part of the realised purpose except in so far as his daily life in the world of men and his service for the race will proclaim it. This involves an oath as to secrecy concerning the revealed part of the Logoic plan seen in the "revelation of the vision."

2. An undertaking of a profoundly solemn nature concerning his relation to his other selves, the Lodge of which he is a member, and the selves of men everywhere. This involves his attitude to his brothers of all degrees, and includes also a serious undertaking never to reveal the true nature of the Self aspect as it has been shown to him in initiation. This includes an oath of secrecy as to the realised relationship of the Solar Logos to the Planetary Logos, and of the Planetary Logos of our scheme to the scheme itself.

3. The enunciation of a solemn undertaking never to reveal to anyone the knowledge that has come to him as to the sources of energy and of force with which he has been brought into contact. This is a triple oath to retain complete silence as to the true nature of energy, as to its laws of manipulation, and a pledge only to use the force placed at his disposal through initiation for the service of the race and the furthering of the plans of the Planetary Logos.

[p. 148]

This great oath is couched in different terms, according to the initiation undergone, and, as earlier said, is taken in three sections with an interlude between each part occupied by certain ceremonial work of the initiated group around the newly admitted brother.

It might here be noted that each section of the oath really concerns one of the three aspects of divine manifestation, and as the initiate takes his pledge, one of the three Heads of Departments collaborates with the Initiator in the work of administration. In this way energy of a triple nature becomes available according to the different sections of the oath taken. This energy flows down from the three major rays, through the Hierophant and the corresponding departmental head at the first two initiations, to the initiate, via the group of initials of the same degree, so that each initiation is a means of stimulation and expansion to all. At the final five initiations the force flows via the three Buddhas of Activity instead of the departmental heads.

It might be of interest to point out here that during this part of the ceremony the group is bathed in colour, corresponding to the type of energy and its originating planetary scheme, and it is the work of the Initiator to put the initiate in touch with this energy. This pours down upon the group from the moment that segregation has been effected, and is brought about by the Initiator using certain words and elevating His Rod of Power. The three Buddhas of Activity, Who are the great energy centres upon our planet, then touch the tip of the Rod with Their staffs of office, a certain mystic Word is jointly uttered by Them, and the downpour begins, continuing to the end of the ceremony.

The question may be asked whether any initiates break their oath. Very rarely, for we must remember that no

[p. 149]

initiation is taken until a certain stage has been reached. A few cases have occurred, but as the Lord of the World is cognisant of all that transpires, the future, as well as the present and the past, no opportunity is ever given to an initiate to reveal that which is hidden. Intent may exist. but opportunity will lack. The initiate who thus sins in intention will be struck dumb, and sometimes dead, prior to thus failing.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

THE GIVING OF THE WORD

The Solar Words.

The basis of all manifested phenomena is the enunciated sound, or the Word spoken with power, that is, with the full purpose of the will behind it. Herein, as is known, lies the value of meditation, for meditation produces eventually that inner dynamic purpose and recollection, or that internal ideation which must invariably precede the uttering of any creative sound. When it is said that the Logos produced the worlds through meditation it means that within His own centre of consciousness there was a period wherein He brooded over and meditated upon the purposes and plans He had in view; wherein He visualised to Himself the entire world process as a perfected whole, seeing the end from the beginning and being aware of the detail of the consummated sphere. Then, when His meditation was concluded, and the whole completed as a picture before His inner vision, He brought into use a certain Word of Power which had been committed to Him by the One about Whom naught may be said, the Logos of the cosmic scheme of which our system is but a part. With cosmic and Logoic initiations we are not concerned, except in so far as the human initiations reflect their stupendous prototypes, but it is of interest to the student to realise that just as at each initiation some Word of Power is committed to the initiate, so similarly to the Logos was committed the great Word of Power which produced our solar system, that Word which is called the

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] "Sacred Word," or AUM. It must be here remembered that this sound AUM is man's endeavour to reproduce on an infinitesimally small scale the cosmic triple sound whereby creation was made possible. The Words of Power of all degrees have a triple sequence.

First. They are sounded by some fully selfconscious entity, and this invariably takes place after a period of deliberation or meditation wherein the purpose in toto is visualised.

Second. They affect the deva kingdom and produce the creation of forms. This effect is dual in character--

a. The devas on the evolutionary path, the great builders of the solar system, and those under them who have passed the human stage respond to the sound of the Word, and with conscious realisation collaborate with the one who has breathed it forth, and thus the work is carried out.

b. The devas on the involutionary arc, the lesser builders, who have not passed through the human stage, also respond to the sound, but unconsciously, or perforce, and through the power of the initiated vibrations build the required forms out of their own substance.

Third. They act as a stabilising factor, and as long as the force of the sound persists, the forms cohere. When the Logos, for instance, finishes the sounding of the sacred AUM, and the vibration ceases, then disintegration of the forms will ensue. So with the Planetary Logos, and thus on down the scale.

The Words of Power, or the permutations of the AUM, exist in every possible tone, sub-tone, and quarter-tone, and upon these shades of sound the work of creation and its sustentation is built up. A multiplicity of sounds exists within each greater sound and affects different groups. It

[p. 152]

must be remembered also that, generally and broadly speaking, the sounds within the solar system fall into two groups:--

1. The initiatory sounds, or those which produce manifestation or phenomena of any kind on all planes.

2. Eventuating sounds, or those which are produced from within the forms themselves during the evolutionary process, and which are the aggregate of the tones of every form in any particular kingdom of nature. Every form likewise has a tone which is produced by the minute sounds produced by the atoms composing that form. These sounds grow out of the other group and affect inferior groups or kingdoms, if the word "inferior" may be used in connection with any department of divine manifestation. For instance, the human kingdom (the fourth creative Hierarchy) was produced by a triple AUM sounded in a particular key by the three persons of the Trinity in unison,--God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, or Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma. This sound is still going forth; the interplay and interblending of the many tiny notes of each human being produces a great united sound which call be heard in the high places and which, in its turn, is having a definite effect upon the animal kingdom. It is one of the factors which produces animal forms, both for human and animal occupation, for it must ever be remembered that man links the animal and the divine.

It is neither possible nor desirable to enumerate the Words of Power, but certain general indications may be given which will help the student to realise somewhat the magnitude of the subject and its intricacy.

[p. 153]

1. The Great Word, as sounded by the Logos of the solar system, and communicated to Him by His superior.

2. Three Words committed by the Solar Logos to each of the three Logoi as follows:--

a. The sacred sound A to Shiva, He Who embodies the spirit or will aspect. It is the Word through which God the Father works.

b. The sound U to Vishnu, God the Son. He is the form-builder and provides the body which the spirit must occupy, thereby making divine incarnation possible. A is the life sound, U is the form sound.

c. The sound M to Brahma, Who, in His work of Energy-provider, links in active intelligence, spirit and form, or the self and not-self.

It might here be pointed out that much information anent the three departments of the Hierarchy of our planet will come to the student who wisely ponders these functions.

3. Seven Great Words, again based on the sacred three sounds A U M. These produced creation, or the manifestation of the seven planes of our solar system. They are committed not to human entities, but to the seven great Devas or Raja-Lords who are the ensouling lives of a plane; hence in the various initiations their collaboration is necessary, before these key words can be committed to the initiate.

4. Forty-nine Words related to the forty-nine subplanes or Fires. These again are committed to the forty-nine Builders of the Sacred Fires.

The above two groups of words are in the jurisdiction of the third aspect, and are given out by Brahma.

5. There are again five Great Words with signs which come under the department of Vishnu, or God the Son,

[p. 154]

and are breathed out by Him. By their means the five kingdoms of nature on the evolutionary arc came into being:

a. The mineral kingdom.

b. The vegetable kingdom.

c. The animal kingdom.

d. The human kingdom.

e. The spiritual kingdom.

These five are permutations of, or are built up upon the sound U, as the ones earlier enumerated are built up upon the sound M.

In connection with the first three kingdoms it may be of interest to note that they are based upon two sounds, the U sounded on the basic key tone of the M. In the fourth kingdom the M tone is dying down and the two notes sounded forth are the U and the A. In the fifth kingdom the M has subsided into a distant undertone, the U is blended with it so as to be indistinguishable, and the A, or Shiva note, is pealing forth in power, and is practically the only note heard. By the sounding of this note,--that of Shiva the Destroyer,--the not-self is negated, and all that is not of spirit passes into dissolution. It is the coming in of the A sound which affects the severance or liberation of the initiate from the three worlds.

6. There are certain Words also committed to each of the Planetary Logoi, and they are the basis of planetary manifestation. As is well known, the sound of the Brahma aspect, or the third aspect of our particular Planetary Logos, is FA, and herein lies much of illumination as to His point in evolution, for it is immediately apparent that the A sound is reaching even the dense physical.

7. Within our own Hierarchy there are numbers of Words built up upon the Great Word of our Planetary Logos, and these are committed to the Departmental Heads,

[p. 155]

who in turn pass them on in permutated order to the graded initiates. It will be wise here for the student to differentiate carefully in his mind between words and sounds, for the word veils the thought or intended idea or purpose, and the sound makes it possible to manifest in matter of some kind, on one or other of the seven planes.

We cannot here trace the expansion of the basic words, from their enunciation by cosmic entities down to the infinitesimal differentiations produced in the speech of man, the vocal expression of the animals, and the song of birds. Each is a manifestation of consciousness in some degree, and each produces an effect. What the initiate is learning to do is to make sounds consciously, and thus produce a studied and desired result; to utter words, and be fully aware of the consequence on all planes; and to create forms and direct energy through sacred sounds, and thus further the ends of evolution.

It has been necessary to digress thus before taking up the committal of words to the initiate, in order to emphasise the radical importance of the matter, and thus account for the carefully guarding of this aspect of divine work.

The Use of the Words.

We have already dealt with the significance of the Words of Power in a brief manner. We might now sum up certain of the inferred postulates, and then touch somewhat upon the initiation ceremony, and the Words as committed to the initiate. The postulates here made are nine in number, and if duly pondered upon by the aspirant, will reveal to him much anent the creative process and the power of speech.

1. All the Words of Power are rooted in the Great Word committed to the Solar Logos at the dawn of manifestation.

[p. 156]

2. All the Words of Power are permutations or expansions of the three basic sounds, and increase in length as the planes are involved, until the sentences and speech of the finite unit, man, in their myriad differentiations are arrived at.

3. Therefore, on the path of return, speech becomes ever more brief, words are more sparingly used, and the time eventually comes when the adept employs formulas of words only as required to carry out specific purposes along two lines:--

a. Definite creative processes.

b. Specific direction of energy.

This, of course, on the planes in the three worlds.

4. The aspirant, therefore, has mainly three things to do when preparing for initiation:--

a. To control every activity of his threefold lower nature. This involves the application of intelligent energy to every atom of his three sheaths--physical, astral, and mental. It is literally the shining forth of the Brahma, or third aspect, of the inner God.

b. To control his speech every minute of every day. This is a statement easily made, but most difficult to make practical. He who achieves it is rapidly nearing emancipation. This applies not to the reticence, the moroseness, the silence, and the voicelessness which often distinguishes natures but little evolved, and which are in reality an inarticulate condition. It refers to the controlled use of words to effect certain ends, and the retention of speech energy when not needed,--a very different matter. It involves a realisation of cycles; of times and of seasons; it supposes a knowledge of the power of sound, and of the effects produced [p. 157] through the spoken word; it involves an apprehension of the building forces of nature and their due manipulation, and is based on an ability to wield mental matter, and to set it in motion, in order to produce results in physical matter, consonant with the clearly defined purpose of the inner God. It is the shining forth of the second aspect of the Self, the Vishnu, or form-building aspect, which is the prime characteristic of the Ego on its own plane. It would be well to ponder on this.

c. To meditate, and thus arrive at the purpose of the Ego. By thus meditating the first aspect comes steadily into greater prominence, and the conscious will of the inner God can make itself felt on the physical plane.

The three activities of the aspirant must parallel each other, and it will be noted that the second is the outcome of the first and will manifest as energy on the physical plane. Only when the aspirant has made real progress in these three lines of endeavour will the first of the Great Words be committed to him.

5. Every Great Word includes within itself its differentiations, its expansions and permutations, and by its utterance the initiate sets in motion the lesser, through the vibration of the greater. Hence the terrific responsibility and the magnitude of the results achieved. Each Word is committed to the initiate orally and visually. It is spoken to him first in the form of seven syllables, each of which he has to memorise as a separate Word. Then he is shown how to blend these seven so as to make a threefold sound and thus produce more united and far reaching results. Finally the three die blended into one Word which is committed to him. The seven words which form the Great Word at any initiation are communicated to the initiate by the initiates of equal rank with his own. This group divides itself into

[p. 158]

seven groups, according to subray or ray formation, and each group then chants one word in rapid rotation. Simultaneously, the colours and symbols of the various sounds pass in front of him, so that he hears and sees that which is committed to him. The more advanced group around the throne of office (the three Departmental Heads at the first two initiations, and the Pratyeka Buddhas at the final ones) chant then for him the triple Word which blends the seven, and again he sees it before his inner eye. Finally the Initiator sounds it forth, and the initiate becomes aware within himself, in practical experience, of the one great sound, and knows in one particular centre what its vibration is. As is well known, every centre is connected with some plane, scheme, ray, and other septenary divisions, and thus the significance of its inner reaction will be apparent.

6. The Masters and initiates, in Their work of aiding the evolution of the three worlds, concern Themselves principally with the seven syllables of the Word of Their degree or initiated grade. The three Words which blend the seven are seldom used except under the direct sanction of one of the departmental heads (according to the syllable involved each Word is directly connected with the triple AUM, and therefore with the Brahma, Vishnu, or Siva aspect, of which the three Heads are the planetary representatives) .

When any initiate desires to use, for evolutionary purposes, the entire Word as a unit, the sanction of the assembled Lodge has to be gained, for such a Word affects the matter of an entire plane within a planetary scheme, and consequently the matter of those planes which are subsidiary to the one involved. For instance, an initiate of the third degree, in sounding the Word of his degree, affects the matter of the lower mental subplanes, and subsequently the matter of the astral and physical planes. An initiate of the second degree similarly affects the astral plane, and subsequently

[p. 159]

the physical. Far reaching results are thus achieved, and the work of many is thus affected.

7. Every Word, differentiated or synthesised, affects the deva kingdoms, and hence the form-building aspects of manifestation. No sound is ever made without producing a corresponding response in deva substance, and driving multitudes of tiny lives to take specific forms. These forms persist and carry out their functions just as long as the sound which caused them is prolonged, and the specific will-energy of the one who initiated the sound is directed towards the living form. This is equally true of a Solar Logos enunciating the AUM, and thus producing the solar system; of a Planetary Logos sounding his planetary Word, and producing a planetary scheme; of an adept producing results for the helping of humanity on the physical plane; and of an ordinary human being, who--in much differentiated diversified speech--expresses an inner purpose or state of mind, and thus builds a form or vehicle in deva substance. The majority of human beings as yet build unconsciously, and the form constructed is either of a beneficent or maleficent agency, according to the underlying motive or purpose of the man, and will carry out his will as long as its term of being persists.

8. Every Word sounded is distinguished by:--

a. A specific colour.

b. A particular tone.

c. A special form.

d. A degree of energy or activity.

e. The nature of the ensouling life, self-conscious, self-conscious, or unconscious, God, man, or deva.

[paragraph continues] The student, again, will find this equally true of a solar system, of a planetary scheme, of a human being, of a thought form ensouled by an elemental life, and of the atom of the physicist or chemist. In the knowledge of these facts,

[p. 160]

and in their conscious realisation, may be known the true occultist. The Solar Logos sounded forth a Word, the form of our solar system came into being, its color being blue and its note a particular cosmic musical tone. Its degree of activity is of a specific mathematical notation beyond the grasp of the human mind at this stage of development; and the nature of its great ensouling Life, that of the triple Logos, is active, intelligent Love.

9. The Great Word of our solar system keys in, if it might be so expressed, with other Words, and is but one Word of the sevenfold Word, known to that great Existence Who stands in the same relation to the Solar Logos as the latter does to the Planetary Logos. The sacred Words of seven solar systems (of which ours is but one) make up this septenary sound, which vibrates at this time in the cosmic spheres.

In these nine statements are very cursorily summed up the major truths anent the creative processes in the solar system. In them lies hidden the secret of the true magic, and in their comprehension will come to the man who has spiritual intuition, purity of life and motive, altruistic intention, and a stern self-control and courage, the power to further the purposes of the Ego, who is a conscious collaborator in the work of evolution, and a sharer in part of the plans of the Planetary Logos of our scheme. They are given in this brief form both to protect the concealed truths and yet to reveal them to those who are ready.

These seven Words of the solar system, which form the logoic Word which we only know in its triple form as AUM, are revealed at the seven initiations.

At the first initiation is given the Word for the physical plane. [p. 161]

At the second initiation is given the Word for the astral plane.

At the third initiation is given the Word for the lower mental plane.

At this initiation, in which, as earlier said, the Hierophant is the Lord of the World, not only is the Word given for the lower mental plane, but a word which synthesises the three Words for the three worlds is also committed. It is given to the initiate as a topic for meditation, until he takes the fourth initiation, but he is forbidden to use it until the final liberation, as it gives entire control on the three lower planes.

At the fourth initiation the Word for the higher mental plane is imparted.

At the fifth initiation the Word for the buddhic plane is given.

At the sixth initiation the Word for the atmic plane.

At the seventh initiation the Word for the monadic plane is given.

[paragraph continues] At the sixth initiation the Word which synthesises the fourth, fifth and sixth Words is given by the Hierophant, and thus the initiate wields complete control, through the power of sound, over the substance of the five planes of human evolution. At the seventh initiation the triple AUM, in its true character, is revealed to the illuminated Buddha, and he can then manipulate energy in the six worlds or planes.

Two more initiations can be taken, but little is ever said about them on our earth scheme, for the reason that our scheme is not a "sacred" scheme, and few, if any, of our humanity achieve the eighth and ninth initiations. To do so, they must first pass to another scheme for a lengthy period of service and instruction. All that can be hinted at is,

[p. 162]

that at the eighth initiation the duality of the triple AUM is brought out, and at the ninth the one sound of the Absolute stands revealed, and its significance is heard and seen. This brings into the consciousness of the initiate somewhat of the energy and power of the "One about Whom Naught may be Said," or the Logos of our Solar Logos. The unit of consciousness is then perfect, as the Logos is perfect, and passes on to work paralleling that of the Solar Logos. Such is the great program and the opportunity reaching out before the sons of man, aye, and before every atom everywhere.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THE IMPARTING OF THE SECRETS

We now come to the consideration of the secrets committed at the initiation ceremony to the initiate. It is apparent, of course, that only the fact of the secret, and an indication as to the matter with which it concerns itself can be touched upon, and even this would be left unmentioned were it not that a knowledge of the general outline of the subject may inspire the applicant for initiation to a more careful study of such a subject and to a more diligent equipping of his mental body with information. Thereby (when in due course of time he stands before the Initiator) he will lose no time in utilising the acquired secret.

The Sevenfold Secret.

After the administration of the oath which pledges the initiate to inviolable secrecy, the newly made initiate advances alone closer to the Hierophant; he then places his hand upon the lower end of the Rod of Initiation which is held in the centre by the Hierophant. The Three Who stand around the throne of office then place Their hands upon the glowing diamond which surmounts the Rod, and when these five personalities are thus linked by the circulating energy emanating from the Rod, the Initiator confides to the initiate the secret. The reason for this is as follows: Each of the five initiations with which we are immediately concerned (for the higher two, not being compulsory, are outside our present consideration) affects one of the five centres in man,

[p. 164]

1. The head,

2. The heart,

3. The throat,

4. The solar plexus,

5. The base of the spine,

and reveals to him knowledge concerning the various types of force or energy by which the solar system is animated, and which reach him via a particular etheric centre. At the application of the Rod his centres were affected in a particular fashion. By the impartation of the Secret, the reason is committed to his care, and that reason is demonstrated to him to be identical with that which necessarily produces some particular planetary manifestation, and which causes a certain specific greater cycle.

It might be pointed out that:--

1. Each secret concerns one or other of the seven great planes of the solar system.

2. Each secret deals with, and is the enunciation of, one of the seven laws of nature. They therefore concern one or other of the basic evolutions of each planetary scheme. Each scheme embodies one of the laws as its primary law, and all its evolutions tend to demonstrate the perfection of that law with its six subsidiary mutations, these six differing in one particular in each case according to the primary law manifested.

3. Each secret conveys a key to the nature of some particular Planetary Logos, and consequently gives the clue to the characteristics of those Monads who are on that particular planetary ray. It is obvious how necessary such knowledge is to the adept who seeks to work with the sons of men, and to manipulate the force currents affecting them and which they emanate.

[p. 165]

4. Each secret concerns some one ray or colour and gives the number, note, and the vibration which corresponds.

These seven secrets are simply short formulas, not of mantric value, such as in the case of the Sacred Word, but of a mathematical nature, precisely worded so as to convey the exact intent of the speaker. To the uninitiated they would look and sound like algebraical formulas, except that each is composed (when seen clairvoyantly) of an oval of a specific hue, according to the secret imparted, containing five peculiar hieroglyphics or symbols. One symbol contains the formula of the law concerned, another gives the planetary key and tone, a third deals with vibration, whilst the fourth shows the number and department under which the ray concerned falls. The last hieroglyph gives one of the seven hierarchical keys by means of which the members of our planetary hierarchy can link up with the solar. This is evidently very vague and ambiguous information, but it will serve to show that, as in the case of the Words, apprehension had to involve two senses, so in the cognition of the secrets the two senses again come into play, and the secret is both heard and appears symbolically to the inner eye.

It will now be apparent why so much stress is laid upon the study of symbols, and why students are urged to ponder and meditate upon the cosmic and systemic signs. It prepares them for the grasp and inner retention of the symbols and formulas which embody the knowledge whereby they can eventually work. These formulas are based upon nine symbols which are now recognised:--

1. The cross in its varying forms.

2. The lotus.

3. The triangle.

4. The cube.

[p. 166]

5. The sphere and the point.

6. Eight animal forms, the goat, the bull, the elephant, the man, the dragon, the bear, the lion, and the dog.

7. The line.

8. Certain signs of the Zodiac, hence the need for the study of astrology.

9. The cup, or the holy grail.

All these symbols allied, interwoven, or taken in part, are combined to express one or other of the seven Secrets. The initiate has to recognise them by sight as well as to hear them, and by an effort of the will to imprint them irrevocably upon his memory. This he is aided to do in three ways:--First, by a long prior training in observation; this can be begun here and now by all aspirants, and as they learn to imprint details accurately upon their memory they are laying the foundation for that acute instantaneous apprehension of that which is shown them by the Hierophant; secondly, by having cultivated within themselves the power to visualise again that which has once been seen. It will be apparent here why the emphasis has been laid by all wise teachers of meditation upon the faculty of the careful building of mental pictures. The aim has been two-fold:--

a. To teach the student to visualise his thought-forms accurately, so that when he begins to create consciously he may lose no time in inaccurate transformation.

b. To enable him to picture again accurately the imparted secret, so that it may instantly be of use to him whenever needed.

[paragraph continues] Finally, by the strongly applied will of the other four Personalities who are holding the Rod at the same time as the

[p. 167]

initiate. Their trained intense mental concentration greatly facilitates his apprehension.

In the case of human evolution certain types of force are generated, dealt with, assimilated, and used, at first unconsciously, and finally with full intelligence.

a. In the Hall of Ignorance the force or energy of Brahma (the activity and intelligence of substance) is that mostly dealt with, and the man has to learn the meaning of activity based on:--

a. Inherent energy.

b. Absorbed energy.

c. Group energy.

d. Material energy, or that which is hidden in physical plane matter.

b. In the Hall of Learning he becomes aware of, and uses the energy of the second aspect in form building, in social relations, and in family affiliations. He comes to the recognition of sex and its relations, but as yet views this force as something to be controlled, but not consciously and constructively utilised.

c. In the Hall of Wisdom he comes to the knowledge of the first aspect of energy, the dynamic use of will in sacrifice, and to him is then committed the key to the threefold mystery of energy. This energy in its threefold aspect he became aware of, in the other two Halls. At the third initiation, and at the fourth and fifth, the three keys to the three mysteries are given to him.

The key to the mystery sensed in the first Hall, the mystery of Brahma, is handed to him, and he can then unlock the hidden energies of atomic substance. [p. 168] [paragraph continues] The key to the mystery of sex, or of the pairs of opposites, is thrust into his hand, and he can then unlock the hidden forces of the will aspect. The dynamo of the solar system is shown to him,--if it might be so expressed--and the intricacies of the mechanism revealed.

The Three Solar Mysteries.

The three mysteries of the solar system are:--

1. The mystery of Electricity. The mystery of Brahma, The secret of the third aspect. It is latent in the physical sun.

2. The mystery of Polarity, or of the universal sex impulse. The secret of the second aspect. It is latent in the Heart of the Sun, or the subjective Sun.

3. The mystery of Fire itself, or the dynamic central systemic force. The secret of the first aspect. It is latent in the Central Spiritual Sun.

Their Sequential Revelation.

The secrets, as imparted sequentially to the initiate, are roughly three in number, though within them may be found lesser mysteries which are earlier revealed. At the third initiation the first of the three fundamental secrets of the solar system is imparted to the initiate, immediately after he has taken the oath. This we might, for lack of a better term, call "the secret of electricity." It concerns the phenomena of the dense objective manifestation of the Logos. It would be wise here for the student to remember that the three planes of the three worlds, physical, astral, and mental, form the dense physical body of the solar Logos. whilst the

[p. 169]

four higher form His etheric body. Students are apt to for- get that our seven planes are the seven sub-planes of the cosmic physical. This has a very definite bearing on the secret of electricity. This is why the secret is not revealed till the third initiation, and is prepared for by the impartation of two lesser secrets which concern the physical and astral planes, and which are imparted at the first two initiations by the Bodhisattva.

Electrical phenomena are scientifically recognised as dual in nature, but the inherent triplicity of electricity is as yet but a matter for speculation for modern science. The fact that it is triple is demonstrated to the initiate at the first initiation, and the secret of how to balance forces on the physical plane, and thereby produce equilibrium, is revealed to him at the first initiation. This secret likewise puts him in touch with certain of the Builders on the physical plane--that is, on the etheric levels--and he can then produce physical plane phenomena should he deem it wise. This he seldom does, as the results gained thereby are practically unimportant and he wastes not energy in this manner. The workers with the involutionary forces, the brothers of darkness, employ this method for the startling and the enthralling of the unwary. Not thus work the brothers of humanity.

The secret of the coherence of the atom is revealed to the initiate, and he then is in a position to study the microcosm under the law of correspondences in a new and illuminating manner. Similarly, through this revelation concerning the densest part of the logoic body, he can ascertain much concerning the previous solar system, and the facts anent the first round of our scheme. This secret is also called "the mystery of matter."

At the second initiation "the secret of the sea" is unfolded to him, and through this revelation two subjects of profound

[p. 170]

interest become clarified to his inner vision. They are:--

a. The mystery of the astral light.

b. The law of karma.

He is, after this, in a position to do two things, without which he cannot work off that which hinders, and thus achieve liberation; he can read the akashic records and ascertain the past, thereby enabling himself to work intelligently in the present, and he can begin to balance his karma, to work off his obligations, and to understand how karma in the three worlds can be negated. The relation of that hierarchy of spiritual beings who are connected with the law of karma as it affects man is demonstrated to him, and he knows with first-hand knowledge that the lords of karma are no myth, or symbolical units, but are highly intelligent entities who wield the law for the benefit of humanity, and thus enable men to become fully self-conscious and self-reliant in the occult sense, and to become creators through perfected knowledge.

At the third initiation "the secret of fohat" is given to him, and then the mystery of the threefold body of the triple Logos is his, and the why of the phenomena of the dense liquid and gaseous bodies of the Supreme Being is unfolded before his amazed vision. The two secrets previously imparted, and the knowledge which they gave having been utilised, the initiate is now in a position to profit by this greater revelation, and to understand somewhat the following facts:--

1. The creative process of thought form building.

2. The transmission of energy from the Ego to the physical body via the force centres on the various planes.

[p. 171]

3. The uprising of kundalini, its geometrical progression, and its vivification of all the centres.

By the knowledge thus imparted, and the progress which the initiate has made in the study of the law of analogy, he can comprehend the manipulation of the same forces on a vastly larger scale in the planetary scheme and in the solar system. The method of development in the three earlier rounds is revealed to him, and he understands, practically as well as theoretically, the evolutionary process in its earlier stages. The key to the three lower kingdoms of nature is in his hands, and certain ideas anent the subject of polarity, of at-one-ment, and essential union, are beginning to come within his range of consciousness, only waiting for the fourth initiation to complete the revelation.

This secret of electricity, which is essentially triple in its nature, deals with the Brahma or third aspect, and is called sometimes by the following names:--

1. The Secret of Brahma.

2. The Revelation of the Mother.

3. The Secret of Fohatic Force.

4. The Mystery of the Creator.

5. The Secret of the Three Who issued from the First (solar system),

and also by four mystic phrases conveying much light to the intuition:

6. The Boat of Mystery which Ploughs the Ocean.

7. The Key to the Divine Storehouse.

8. The Light that Guides through the triple caves of Darkness.

9. The Clue to the Energy uniting Fire and Water.

[p. 172]

[paragraph continues] In all these names much information will come to the student who carefully ponders them, remembering that they deal with the Brahma aspect in its lowest manifestation and with the three worlds of human endeavour, and thus meditating, the student must relate this present solar system to the preceding one, in which the Brahma aspect dominated, as the Vishnu, or consciousness aspect dominates in this.

The initiate, through the knowledge imparted, is now in a position to understand his own triple lower nature, and therefore to balance it in relation to the higher, to read the records and understand his place within the group, to manipulate the forces in the three worlds and thereby effect liberation for himself, thus helping the ends of evolution, and to co-operate intelligently with the plans of the Planetary Logos as they may be revealed to him stage by stage. He can now wield power, and becomes a centre of energy in a greatly increased degree, being able to dispense or retract force currents. The moment a man becomes consciously powerful on the mental plane, his power for good is a hundredfold increased.

At the fourth initiation another of the great secrets is revealed to him. It is called "the mystery of polarity," and the clue to the significance of sex in every department of nature on all the planes is given to him. It is not possible to say much along these lines. All that can be done is to enumerate some of the subjects to which it gives the clue, adding to this the information that in our planetary scheme; owing to the point in evolution of our own Planetary Logos, this secret is the most vital. Our Planetary Logos is at the stage wherein He is consciously seeking the at-one-ment with his polar opposite, another Planetary Logos.

[p. 173]

The subjects on which this secret throws a flood of light are:--

a. Sex on the physical plane. It gives us a key to the mystery of the separation of the sexes in Lemurian days.

b. The balancing of forces in all departments of nature.

c. The clue as to which Scheme forms with ours a duality.

d. The true name of our Planetary Logos and His relation to the Solar Logos.

e. "The Marriage of the Lamb" and the problem of the heavenly bride. A clue to this lies in the solar system of S... which must be read astrologically.

f. The mystery of the Gemini, and the connection of our particular Planetary Logos with that constellation.

[paragraph continues] On a lesser scale, and in relation to the microcosm, the following subjects are illuminated when the initiate receives the second great secret, or the fourth which includes the earlier lesser ones:--

g. The processes of at-one-ment in the different kingdoms of nature. The bridging between the kingdoms is shown him, and he sees the unity of the scheme.

h. The method of egoic at-one-ment is seen clearly revealed, and the antahkarana is shown in its real nature, and having been thus revealed, is dispensed with.

i. The essential unity existing between the Ego and the personality is seen.

j. The relation of the two evolutions, human and deva, is no longer a mystery, but their position in the body of the Heavenly Man is seen to be a fact.

[p. 174]

One could go on emphasising the multiplicity of matters which the mystery of polarity, when revealed, makes clear to the initiate, but the above suffices. This secret concerns primarily the Vishnu, or second aspect. It sums up in one short phrase the totality of knowledge gained in the Hall of Wisdom, as the earlier secrets summed up the totality achieved in the Hall of Learning. It deals with consciousness and its development by and through the matter aspect. It concerns literally the unification of the self and the not-self till they are verily and indeed one.

At the fifth initiation the great secret which concerns the fire or spirit aspect is revealed to the wondering and amazed Master, and He realises in a sense incomprehensible to man the fact that all is fire and fire is all. This secret may be said to reveal to the Initiate that which makes clear to Him:

a. The secret name of the Planetary Logos, thus revealing one syllable of the name of the Solar Logos.

b. The work and method of the destroyer aspect of divinity.

c. The processes whereby obscuration and pralaya are induced.

d. The mathematical formula which sums up all the cycles of manifestation.

e. The triple nature of fire, and the effect of the great fire upon the lesser.

As this Shiva, or first, aspect is the one which will arrive at perfection, or, rather, come within the reach of comprehension within the next solar system, it profits not to continue considering this secret. The following tabulation may make the whole matter clearer to the mind of the student:--

[p. 175]

         	Secret   of

      	Initiation

      	Logos
   Concerned

      	Source   of
   Energy

      	Planes

     
     	Fohat

      	Third

      	Brahma
   Creator

      	Physical
   Sun

      	Seven
   Six
   Five

     
     	Polarity

      	Fourth

      	Vishnu
   Preserver

      	Subjective
   Sun

      	Four
   Three

     
     	Fire

      	Fifth

      	Shiva
   Destroyer

      	Central
   Spiritual
   Sun

      	Two

     
   As the student will observe, the source of the particular energy concerned is one aspect of the sun.

At the sixth and seventh initiations two more secrets are revealed, one--a lesser secret--preparing the way for the revelation of the fourth. Only four secrets of a major order are revealed to initiates on this planet, and herein lies the clue to our position in the scheme of solar evolution. There are only five secrets altogether, of a major kind, revealed in this solar system, owing to the fact that this is a system wherein pre-eminently the fifth principle of mind forms the basis of unfoldment. This fifth revelation is only imparted to those who pass to the Schemes of synthesis.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

DIVERSITIES OF INITIATIONS

Major and Minor Initiations.

In dealing with this question of the diversities of initiations it may be of value to the student to remember that the great moment in which a man passed out of the animal kingdom into the human, which is called in many occult textbooks the "moment of individualisation," was in itself one of the greatest of all initiations. Individualisation is the conscious apprehension by the self of its relation to all that constitutes the not-self, and in this great initiatory process, as in all the later ones, the awakening of consciousness is preceded by a period of gradual development; the awakening is instantaneous at the moment of self-realisation for the first time, and is always succeeded by another period of gradual evolution. This period of gradual evolution, in its turn, leads up to a later crisis which is called Initiation. In the one case, we have initiation into self-conscious existence, in the other, initiation into spiritual existence.

These realisations, or apprehended expansions of consciousness, are under natural law, and come in due course of time to every soul without exception. In a lesser degree they are undergone daily by every human being, as his mental grip of life and experience gradually grows, but they only become initiations into the wisdom (as differentiated from expansions of knowledge) when the knowledge gained is:--

[p. 177]

a. Consciously sought for.

b. Self-sacrificingly applied to life.

c. Willingly used in service for others.

d. Intelligently utilised on the side of evolution.

Only souls of a certain amount of experience and development do all these four things consistently and steadily, and thus transmute knowledge into wisdom, and experience into quality. The ordinary average man transmutes ignorance into knowledge, and experience into faculty. It would be helpful if all of us pondered upon the difference between inherent quality and innate faculty; one is the very nature of buddhi, or wisdom, and the other of manas, or mind. The union of these two, through a man's conscious effort, results in a major initiation.

These results are brought about in two ways:--First, by a man's own unaided effort, which leads him in due course of time to find his own centre of consciousness, to be guided and led by the inner ruler or Ego entirely, and to unravel, through strenuous effort and painful endeavour, the mystery of the universe, which is concealed in material substance energised by Fohat. Secondly, by a man's efforts, supplemented by the intelligent loving co-operation of the Knowers of the race, the Masters of the Wisdom. In this case the process is quicker, for a man comes under instruction--should he so desire--and subsequently, when he has on his part provided the right conditions, there is placed at his disposal the knowledge and the help of Those Who have achieved. In order to avail himself of this help he has to work with the material of his own body, building right material into an ordered form, and has therefore to learn discrimination in the choice of matter, and to understand the laws of vibration and of construction. This entails the mastering, in some measure, of the laws that govern the

[p. 178]

[paragraph continues] Brahma and Vishnu aspects: it means a faculty of vibrating with atomic accuracy, and the development of the quality of attractiveness, which is the basis of the building, or Vishnu aspect.

He has to equip, also, his mental body so that it may be an explainer and transmitter, and not a hindering factor as now. He must likewise develop group activity, and learn to work in a co-ordinated manner with other units. These are the main things that a man must accomplish along the path of initiation, but when he has worked at them, he will find the Way, it will be made clear to him, and he will then join the ranks of the Knowers.

Another point to be remembered is that this effort to make people co-operate intelligently with the Hierarchy, and to train them to join the ranks of the Lodge, is, as earlier pointed out, a special effort (inaugurated in Atlantean days and continued to this time) made by the Hierarchy of the planet, and is very largely in the nature of an experiment. The method whereby a man assumes conscious place in the body of a Heavenly Man differs in different planetary Schemes; the Heavenly Man, Who uses our planetary Scheme as His body of manifestation, chooses to work in this particular way during this particular period for His own specific purposes; it is part of the process of vitalising one of His centres, and of linking up His heart centre with its connection in the head. As other of His centres are vitalised, and come into full activity, other methods of stimulating the cells in His body (the deva and human monads) may be followed, but for the present the cosmic Rod of Initiation, which is applied to a Heavenly Man, in much the same manner as the lesser rods are applied to man, is being utilised in such a way that it produces that specific stimulation which demonstrates in the activity of man on the Path of Probation and the Path of Initiation.

[p. 179]

Therefore man must recognise the cyclic nature of initiation, and the place of the process in time and space. This is a special period of activity in the cycle of a Heavenly Man, and it works out on our planet as a vast period of trial or initiatory testing; it is, nevertheless, equally a period of vitalisation and of opportunity.

We must also endeavour to realise the fact that initiation may be seen taking place on the three planes in the three worlds, and the thought must ever be borne in mind of the relative value and place of the unit, or cell, in the body of a Heavenly Man. The point must here be emphasised that the major initiations, or the initiations of manas, are those taken on the mental plane and in the causal body. They mark the point in evolution where the unit recognises in fact, and not only in theory, his identity with the divine Manasaputra in Whose body he has place. Initiations can be taken on the physical plane, on the astral, and on the lower mental, but they are not considered major initiations, and are not a conscious, co-ordinated, unified stimulation that involves the whole man.

A man, therefore, may take initiation on each plane, but only those initiations which mark his transference from a lower four into a higher three are considered so in the real sense of the word, and only those in which a man transfers his consciousness from the lower quarternary into the triad are major initiations. We have, therefore, three grades of initiations:--

First, initiations in which a man transfers his consciousness from the lower four subplanes of the physical, astral, and mental planes respectively, into the higher three subplanes. When this is done upon the mental plane a man is then known technically as a disciple, an initiate, an adept. He uses then each of the three higher subplanes of the mental plane as a point from

[p. 180]

which to work his way completely out of the three worlds of human manifestation into the triad. Therefore it is apparent that what one might consider as lesser initiations can be taken on the physical and astral planes, in the conscious control of their three higher subplanes. These are true initiations, but do not make a man what is technically understood as a Master of the Wisdom. He is simply an adept of a lesser degree.

Secondly, initiations in which a man transfers his consciousness from plane to plane, instead of from subplane to subplane. Herein comes a point to be carefully recognised. A true Master of the Wisdom has not only taken the lesser initiations referred to above, but has also taken the five steps involved in the conscious control of the five planes of human evolution. It remains for him then to take the two final initiations which make him a Chohan of the sixth degree, and a Buddha, before that control is extended to the remaining two planes of the solar system. It is obvious, therefore, that it is correct to speak of the seven initiations, yet it would be nevertheless equally correct to enumerate five, ten, or twelve initiations. The matter is complicated for occult students, owing to certain mysterious factors about which they can naturally know nothing, and which must remain to them, as yet, utterly incomprehensible. These factors are founded in the individuality of the Heavenly Man Himself, and involve such mysteries as His particular karma, the aim He may have in view for any particular cycle, and the turning of the attention of the cosmic ego of a Heavenly Man to His reflection, the evolving Heavenly Man of a solar system.

A further factor may also be found in certain periods of stimulation, and of increased vitalisation, such as a cosmic initiation produces. These outside effects naturally

[p. 181]

produce results in the units or cells in the body of the Heavenly Man, and lead often to events unforeseen and apparently inexplicable.

Thirdly, initiations in which a Heavenly Man may take either a minor or a major initiation, thereby involving His entire nature. For instance, when individualisation took place during the Lemurian, or the third root race, and the human family in this cycle definitely came into manifestation, it signified a major initiation for our Heavenly Man. The present stimulation in hierarchical effort is leading up to a lesser initiation. Each great cycle sees a major initiation of a Heavenly Man taken on one or other of the globes, and herein again complication lies, and much food for thought.

To the three above points we might also briefly add that of the coming in, or passing out, of any particular ray. The little that can be said upon this point, which is one of the greatest difficulty, might be summed up in the following three statements: First, that initiations taken on the four minor rays rank not in equality with initiations taken upon the major three. This is complicated somewhat by the fact that within the planetary Scheme, during cyclic evolution, a minor ray may be temporarily regarded as a major ray. For instance, at this particular time in our planetary Scheme, the seventh Ray of Ceremonial Law or Order is regarded as a major ray, being a ray of synthesis, and one on which the Mahachohan is blending His work. Secondly, that the first three initiations are taken upon the ray of the Ego, and link a man up with the great White Lodge; the last two are taken upon the ray of the monad, and have a definite effect upon the path for service that will be chosen later by the adept. This statement must be linked up with that earlier made, which stated that the fifth initiation made a man

[p. 182]

a member of the Greater Lodge, or Brotherhood, on Sirius, being literally the first of the Sirian initiations. The fourth initiation is the synthesis of the Initiations of the Threshold in the Sirian Lodge. Finally, according to the ray on which initiation is taken, so very largely depends the subsequent path of service.

The Day of Opportunity.

The question might here be asked wherein this information is of value to the student. In illustration of this it would be wise if students would ponder the significance of the coming in of the present Ray of Ceremonial Law or Magic. It is the ray that deals with the building forces of nature, that concerns itself with the utilisation of the form intelligently by the life aspect. It is largely the ray of executive work, with the object of building, co-ordinating and producing cohesion in the four lower kingdoms of nature. It is distinguished largely by the energy which manifests itself in ritual, but this word ritual must not be narrowed down to its present use in connection with Masonic, or religious ritual. Its application is far wider than this, and includes the methods of organisation which are demonstrated in all civilised communities, such as in the world of commerce and of finance, and the great business organisations everywhere to be seen. Above all, its interest lies for us in the fact that it is the ray which brings opportunity to the occidental races, and through the medium of this life force of executive organisation, of government by rule and order, by rhythm and by ritual, will come the time wherein the occidental races (with their active, concrete mind, and their vast business capacity) can take initiation,--an initiation, we must remember, upon a ray which is temporarily recognised as a major ray. A large number of the initiates and

[p. 183]

those who have obtained adeptship in the last cycle, have been orientals and those in Hindu bodies. This cycle has been dominated by the sixth ray, which is just passing out, and the two preceding. In the preservation of equilibrium the time now comes when a period of attainment by occidentals will be seen, and this upon a ray suited to their type of mind. It is interesting to note that the oriental type attains its objective through meditation, with a modicum of executive organisation and ritual, and that the occidental will achieve largely through the organisation which lower mind produces, and a type of meditation of which intense business concentration might be considered an illustration. The one-pointed application of the mind by a European or American business man might be regarded as a type of meditation. In the purification of motive lying back of this application will come, for the occidental, his day of opportunity.

By availing themselves of the present day of opportunity, and by conformity to the rules for treading the Path, will come to many in the West the chance to take these further steps. That opportunity will be found by the man who is ready in the place where he is, and among the familiar circumstances of his daily life. It will be found in attention to duty, in the surmounting of tests and trials, and in that inner adherence to the voice of the God within, which is the mark of every applicant for initiation. Initiation involves the very thing that is done from day to day by any who are consciously endeavouring to train themselves:--the next point to be reached, and the next bit of work to be accomplished is pointed out by the Master (either the God within or a man's Master if he is consciously aware of Him) and the reason is given. Then the Teacher stands aside and watches the aspirant achieve. As He watches, He recognises points of crisis, where the application of a test will do one of two

[p. 184]

things, focalise and disperse any remaining unconquered evil--if that term might here be used--and demonstrate to the disciple both his weakness and his strength. In the great initiations, the same procedure can be seen, and the ability of the disciple to pass these greater tests and stages is dependent upon his ability to meet and surmount the daily lesser ones. "He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much," is an occult statement of fact, and should characterise the whole daily activity of the true aspirant; the "much" is surmounted and passed, because it is regarded simply as an intensification of the normal, and no initiate has ever passed the great test of initiation who has not accustomed himself to pass lesser tests every day of his life; tests then come to be regarded as normal, and are considered, when encountered, as part of the usual fabric of his life. When this attitude of mind is attained and held, there exists no surprise or possible defeat.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 185]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

THE SEVEN PATHS

As might be expected, very little has appeared in our literature as to the seven Paths which stretch before the man who has reached the fifth initiation. It is obviously impossible, and also unnecessary, to convey to our mind any impression as to the significance of these paths, or as to the attributes needed for their treading. As time progresses and the race reaches a higher point of development, we shall be able to comprehend more, but under the law of economy it would be fruitless effort for the teachers of the race to instruct us on the characteristics needed for the treading of the seven Paths, before we have as yet apprehended or developed those required for traversing the Probationary Path, not to mention the Path of Initiation.

One general fact we do know, and that is, that before these Paths can be trodden, a man must be a Master of the Wisdom, he must be a Brother of Compassion, and he must be able, through intelligence and love, to wield the law. Our part at this time is to fit ourselves for the treading of the Path of Initiation, by the discipline of the Probationary Path, by the careful direction of the life, by obedience to the law as understood, and by service to the race. When we have attained liberation, then these Paths will stretch before us, and the one that we should tread will become apparent to us. All in this system works under the great law of attraction, and therefore, according to our vibration,

[p. 186]

according to our colour and tone, will depend, in all probability, our choice. The greater free will of the cosmic system is under limitation, just as is the free will of the system of which we are a part, and the free will of man himself. Upon innate quality will depend the direction of our further progress.

These seven Paths might be enumerated as follows, and certain deductions, based on the law of correspondence, might be given out, provided always that we remember that words serve more to blind than to elucidate, and that the briefest details only are possible.

1. The Path of Earth Service.

This is the Path that keeps a man linked to the Hierarchy that is pledged to the service of our planet, and to the help of its evolutions. It comprises those who work under the Lord of the World in the seven groups into which our Masters of the Wisdom are divided. Not so many Masters follow this Path as some of the others, and only enough are permitted to do so to carry on planetary evolution satisfactorily. More is known about this path than about the others, and more will be found out as members of our humanity fit themselves to contact the Brotherhood. Their field of employ, Their methods of work, will eventually become exoteric knowledge, and as the seven groups are recognised and known, schools of development for the filling of posts in these groups will be the logical sequence.

2. The Path of Magnetic Work.

Those who do the work of wielding forces, or electrical magnetism for the use of the Great Ones on all the planes, pass to this Path. They wield the elemental formative energy, manipulating matter of every density and vibration.

[p. 187]

[paragraph continues] Great waves of ideas and surging currents of public opinion on astral levels, as well as on the higher levels where the Great Ones work, are manipulated by them. A large number of fifth ray people, those who have the Ray of Concrete Knowledge for their monadic ray, pass to this line of endeavour. The inherent quality in the type of the monad settles usually the line of activity. The karma of the fifth ray is one of the factors which produces this. These monads work with Fohat, and must, to the end of the greater manvantara. They have their eventual position on the cosmic mental plane, but as yet the capacity for abstract thought is so little developed that it is impossible for us to comprehend the significance of this expression.

3. The Path of Training for Planetary Logoi.

This Path is trodden by those who will take up the work of the seven Planetary Logoi of the next system, and of the forty-nine sub-planetary Logoi, Their assistants, and of certain other Entities working in that particular department. There will be seven systems, though we are only concerned with the three major systems, of which our present system is the second major system. Each Chohan of a ray takes a certain number of initiates of the sixth initiation and trains them specially for this work; special aptitude in colour and sound predisposes the choice, and the ability to work with "psyche," or the spirits in evolution marks a man out for this high post. We might say that the Planetary Logoi are the divine psychologists, and therefore in the training for this post psychology is the basic subject, though it is a psychology inconceivable as yet to us. Every Planetary Logos has, in His own special planet, schools for the development of subordinate Logoi, and there trains Them for this high office, giving Them opportunity for wide experience. Even

[p. 188]

the Logoi Themselves progress onward, and Their places must be taken.

4. The Path to Sirius.

Very little may be communicated about this Path, and the curiously close relation between it and the Pleiades can only be mentioned, further speculation being impossible. The bulk of liberated humanity goes this way, and the prospect holds out glorious possibilities. The seven stars of the Pleiades are the goal for the seven types, and this is hinted at in the Book of Job, in the words, "Canst thou bind the sweet influence of the Pleiades?" In the mystery of this influence, and in the secret of the sun Sirius, are hidden the facts of our cosmic evolution, and incidentally, therefore, of our solar system.

5. The Ray Path.

It is difficult to know by what other name to call this Path, as so little is known about it. In treading it, a man stays on his own ray, and works thereon in the various kingdoms on all the planes, carrying out the behests of the Lord of the World, and working under His direction. It carries a man to every part of the solar system, yet links him definitely with the synthetic ray. It is a very complex path, for it necessitates a capacity for the most intricate mathematics, and an ability to geometrise in a manner incomprehensible to our three-dimensional brains. This path is taken by the man to whom the law of vibration is of profound importance. He works first in the council chamber of the Lord of the World at Shamballa, manipulating the law of vibration on his own ray. Later he will have his habitat on the planet corresponding to his own ray, and

[p. 189]

not on the earth unless he is on the ray of the Planetary Logos holding sway upon the earth. Later again as his evolution progresses, he will pass to the sun; then having mastered all connected with vibration in this system he will pass to the cosmic system, going off his own ray (which is but a subsidiary ray of one cosmic ray), on to the corresponding cosmic ray.

Just as the evolution of man in this system is fivefold, so in the above we have enumerated the principal five Paths from which a Master has to choose. The remaining two can only be touched upon still more briefly, for they hold but a very few of the evolving sons of men, owing to the high point of attainment necessitated for their entrance, and the fact that those who enter upon them pass out of the system altogether. They do not lead to Sirius, as do some of the other Paths. It will be noted that four groups remain in the system, passing eventually, in dim and distant aeons, to the cosmic planes. One group passes directly to Sirius, and the remaining two groups pass directly after initiation to the cosmic planes, with no period of intermediate work on earth, in the system, or on Sirius. These two Paths are:--

6. The Path the Logos Himself Is On.

It will have become apparent to all occult students who have studied with care the world processes in the light of the law of correspondences, that the Logos on the cosmic planes is evolving inner cosmic vision, just as man in his lesser degree is aiming at the same vision in the system. This might be called the development of the cosmic third eye. In the physical plane structure of the eye lies hid the secret and in its study may come some revelation of the mystery.

[p. 190]

A certain part of the eye is the nucleus of sight, and the apparatus of vision itself; the remainder of the eye acts as a protecting shell, and both parts are required, and neither can exist without the other. So in this greater case, only the analogy exists on such high levels that words only blur and dim the truth. Certain of the sons of men, a nucleus who reached a very high initiation in the previous solar system, formed an esoteric group around the Logos when He decided upon further progress. In consequence He formed this system, cosmic desire for incarnation driving Him on. This esoteric group remains with the Logos on the atomic, or first plane of the system, on the subjective inner side, and it corresponds, in an occult sense, to the pupil of the eye. The real home of these great Entities is upon the cosmic buddhic plane.

Gradually, by dint of hard effort, certain Masters have qualified Themselves, or are qualifying Themselves, to take the place of the original members of the group, permitting of Their return to a cosmic centre around which our system, and the greater system of Sirius revolve. Only one adept here and there has the necessary qualifications, for it involves the development of a certain type of response to cosmic vibration. It means a specialising in the inner sight, and the development of a certain measure of cosmic vision. More of the deva evolution pass to this path than do the human. Human beings pass to it via the deva evolution, which can be entered by transference to the fifth Path, the ray Path. On this latter Path, the two evolutions can merge, and from the fifth Path the sixth can be entered.

7. The Path of Absolute Sonship.

This Sonship is a correspondence on the highest plane to that grade of discipleship which we call "Son of the Master."

[p. 191]

[paragraph continues] It is the Sonship to a Being higher than our Logos, of whom we may not speak. It is the great controlling Path of Karma. The Lipika Lords are on this Path, and all who are fitted for that line of work, and who are close to the Logos in a personal intimate sense, pass to the Path of absolute Sonship. It is the Path of the special intimates of the Logos, and into Their hands He has put the working out of karma in the solar system. They know His wishes, His will and His aim, and to Them He entrusts the carrying out of His behests. This group, associated with the Logos, forms a special group linked to a still higher Logos.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 192]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

RULES FOR APPLICANTS

There are certain aphorisms and injunctions which the applicant for initiation needs to study and obey. There is a great distinction between the terms "aspirant to the Path" and "applicant for initiation." He who aspires and strives towards discipleship is in no way pledged to the same specific attitude and discipline as is the applicant for initiation, and he can, if he so choose, take as long as he desires in the treading of the Probationary Path. The man who seeks initiation is in a different position, and having once made application has to bring his life under a definite rule, and a strict regime which is only optional to the disciple.

The rules given here are fourteen in number, and are gathered from a series of instructions compiled for those who seek to take the first initiation.

RULES FOR APPLICANTS

Rule 1.

Let the disciple search within the heart's deep cave. If there the fire burns bright, warming his brother yet heating not himself, the hour has come for making application to stand before the door.

When love for all beings, irrespective of who they may be, is beginning to be a realised fact in the heart of a disciple, and yet nevertheless love for himself exists not, then comes

[p. 193]

the indication that he is nearing the Portal of Initiation, rand may make the necessary preliminary pledges. These are necessitated before his Master hands in his name as a candidate for initiation. If he cares not for the suffering and pain of the lower self, if it is immaterial to him whether happiness comes his way or not, if the sole purpose of his life is to serve and save the world, and if his brother's need is for him of greater moment than his own, then is the fire of love irradiating his being, and the world can warm itself at his feet. This love has to be a practical, tested manifestation, and not just a theory, nor simply an impractical ideal and a pleasing sentiment. It is something that has grown in the trials and tests of life, so that the primary impulse of the life is towards self-sacrifice and the immolation of the lower nature.

Rule 2.

When application has been made in triple form, then let the disciple withdraw that application, and forget it has been made.

Herein lies one of the initial tests. The disciple's attitude of mind must be that he cares not whether he takes initiation or not. Selfish motive must not enter in. Only those applications which reach the Master through the energy engendered through pure altruistic motive are transmitted by Him to the recording angel of the Hierarchy; only those disciples who seek initiation because of the added power to help and bless that it confers, will find a response to their plea. Those careless of initiation receive not the occult accolade, and those anxious, through selfishness or curiosity, to participate in the mysteries, enter not the door but remain knocking outside. Those who are keen to serve, those who are weighed down with a sense of world need, and the personal

[p. 194]

responsibility thereby awakened, and who have fulfilled the law, knock and meet with response, and make application which meets with recognition. They are the ones who send forth a cry for added power to aid, which penetrates to the ear of Those Who silently wait.

Rule 3.

Triple the call must be, and long it takes to sound it forth. Let the disciple sound the cry across the desert, over the sea, and through the fires which separate him from the veiled and hidden door.

Under this symbology comes to the disciple the injunction to make the desert of the physical plane life to blossom like the rose, so that from the garden of the lower life may arise those sounds and scents, and a vibration strong enough to cross the intervening space between it and the portal; to still the restless waters of the emotional life, so that in their limpid, still expanse, that portal may be reflected, and the lower life mirror forth the spiritual life of the indwelling divinity; to pass through the fiery furnace those motives, words, and thoughts which are the mainspring of activity, and have their origin upon the mental plane. When these three aspects of the manifesting Ego, the God within, are brought under control, co-ordinated, and utilised, then, even unconsciously to himself, will the voice of the disciple be heard, demanding the opening of the door. When the lower life upon the physical plane is fertilised, the emotional stabilised, and the mental transmuted, then naught can prevent the latch upon that door being lifted, and the disciple passing through. Only synchronous vibration to that which lies the other side of the door produces its opening, and when the key of the disciple's life is attuning itself to that

[p. 195]

of the hierarchical life, then, one by one, the doors will open, and nothing can keep them closed.

Rule 4.

Let the disciple tend the evolution of the fire; nourish the lesser lives, and thus keep the wheel revolving.

Here comes an injunction to the disciple to remember his responsibility to those many lesser lives which, in their sum-total, compose his triple body of manifestation. Thus is evolution possible, and thus each life, in the different kingdoms of nature, consciously or unconsciously, fulfils its function of rightly energising that which is to it as is the planet to the sun. Thus will the unfolding of the plan logoic proceed with greater accuracy. The kingdom of God is within, and the duty of that inner hidden Ruler is twofold, first, to the lives which form the bodies, physical, astral, and mental, and then to the macrocosm, the world of which the microcosm is but an infinitesimal part.

Rule 5.

Let the applicant see to it that the solar angel dims the light of the lunar angels, remaining the sole luminary in the microcosmic sky.

To fulfil this injunction all applicants need to do two things, first, to study their origin, to realise their own true psychology occultly understood, and to become scientifically aware of the real nature of the Ego, or the Higher Self, functioning in the causal body. Then they have to assert upon the physical plane, through the medium of the three lower bodies, their innate divinity, and to demonstrate in ever increasing degree their essential value. Secondly, to study the constitution of man, to understand the method

[p. 196]

of functioning in the lower nature, to realise the interdependence and interrelation of all living things, and thus bring the lesser lives, which compose those three bodies of manifestation, under control. Thus the solar Lord, the inner Reality, the Son of the Father, and the Thinker on his own plane becomes the intermediary between that which is of the earth, earthy, and that which finds its home within the sun. Two verses in the Christian Bible hide something of this idea within themselves, and students in the occident may find it helpful to meditate upon them:--"The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ." "O Lord, our God, other lords beside Thee have had dominion over us, but by Thee only will we make mention of Thy name." The last verse is particularly interesting, as it demonstrates the suppression of the lower sound and creative force by that which is of higher origin.

Rule 6.

The purificatory fires burn dim and low when the third is sacrificed to the fourth. Therefore let the disciple refrain from taking life, and let him nourish that which is lowest with the produce of the second.

This rule might be summed up in the trite instruction to each disciple that he be strictly vegetarian. The lower nature becomes clogged and heavy, and the inner blaze cannot shine forth when meat is included in the diet. This is a drastic rule for applicants, and may not be violated. Aspirants can choose to eat meat or not as they prefer, but at a certain stage upon the path it is essential that all meat eating of every kind be stopped, and the strictest attention must be paid to diet. A disciple must confine himself to vegetables, grains, fruits and nuts. Only thus can he build the

[p. 197]

type of physical body which can stand the entry of the real man who has stood in his subtler bodies before the Initiator. Should he not do this, and should it be possible for him to take initiation without having thus prepared himself, the physical body would be shattered by the energy pouring through the newly stimulated centres, and dire danger to the brain, the spine, or the heart would eventuate.

It must, of course, here be recognised that no hard or fast rules can ever be laid down, except the initial one that for all applicants for initiation meat, fish, and fermented liquors of all kinds, as well as the use of tobacco, are absolutely forbidden. For those who can stand it, eggs and cheese are sometimes better eliminated from the diet, but this is not in any way compulsory. It is advisable always that those who are in process of developing psychic faculties of any kind should not permit themselves to eat eggs and very little cheese. Milk and butter come under a different category, and most initiates and applicants find it necessary to retain them in the diet. A few exceptional people can subsist and retain their full physical energies on the diet mentioned in the preceding paragraph. but there the ideal is embodied, and, as we all know, the ideal is seldom attainable in the present transitional period.

In this connection two things should be emphasised:--First, the need that all applicants have for common sense; this factor is very often lacking, and students do well to remember that unbalanced fanatics are not desirable members of the Hierarchy. Equilibrium, a just sense of proportion, a due regard for environing conditions, and a sane common sense are the marks of the true occultist. When a real sense of humour exists likewise, many dangers will be avoided. Secondly, a recognition of time, and an ability to move slowly when effecting changes in the diet and in the habits of a lifetime. Everything in nature progresses

[p. 198]

slowly, and applicants must learn the occult truth of the words:--"Make haste slowly." A process of gradual elimination is usually the path of wisdom, and this eliminating period should--under ideal conditions which so seldom exist --cover the stage which we call that of the aspirant, so that when a man becomes an applicant for initiation he will have done the necessary preparatory purification of the diet.

Rule 7.

Let the disciple turn his attention to the enunciating of those sounds which echo in the halls where walks the Master. Let him not sound the lesser notes which awaken vibration within the halls of Maya.

The disciple who seeks to enter within the Portals of Initiation cannot do so until he has learnt the power of speech and the power of silence. This has a deeper and a wider significance than perhaps is apparent, for it holds, if rightly interpreted, the key to manifestation, the clue to the great cycles, and the revelation of the purpose underlying pralaya. Until a man comprehends the significance of the spoken word, and until he utilises the silence of the high places for the bringing about of desired effects on one plane or another, he cannot be admitted into those realms wherein every sound and every word spoken produces powerful results in matter of some kind, being energised by two predominant factors, (a) a powerful will, scientifically applied, (b) right motive, purified in the fires.

An adept is a creator in mental matter, an originator of impulses on the mental plane, thereby producing results in astral or physical manifestation. These results are powerful and effective, and hence the necessity for their originator to be pure in thought, accurate in word, and skilful in

[p. 199]

action. When these ideas are realised by applicants, the immediate consequence will be important changes in the life of every day. These changes might, for the sake of their practical use, be enumerated as follows:

a. Motives will be closely searched, and a strict check will be kept upon originating impulses. Hence during the first year in which the applicant devotes himself to the work of preparation for initiation he will, three times a day, keep a written account of the investigations he pursues, which concern his motives, or the mainspring of action.

b. Speech will be watched, and an endeavour will be made to eliminate all unkind, unnecessary and wasteful words. The effects of the spoken word will be studied, and be traced back to those originating impulses which, in every case, initiate action upon the physical plane.

c. Silence will be cultivated, and applicants will be careful to preserve strict silence concerning themselves, their occult work or. knowledge, the affairs of those associated with them, and the work of their occult group. Only in group circles or in connection with their superiors will a wise latitude in speech he permitted. There is a time to speak. That time comes when the group can be served by wise words, a careful intimation of conditions, good or bad, and a rare, but necessary word to some brother concerning the inner life, or to some superior or group of officials, in cases where a brother may he hindering a group through error of some kind, or might help the group if put to different work.

d. The effect of the Sacred Word will be studied, and conditions for its use wisely arranged. The sounding [p. 200] of the Word, and its effect upon a particular esoteric centre (not in any case whatsoever a physical centre) will be watched, and the life thereby influenced and regulated.

The whole question of the study of sound and of words, sacred or otherwise, has to be taken up by applicants for initiation. This is something which must be faced more strenuously by all eventuating occult groups.

Rule 8.

When the disciple nears the portal, the Greater Seven must awaken and bring forth response from the lesser seven upon the double circle.

This rule is a very difficult one, and one which holds in it the elements of danger for the man who undertakes too early to tread the final path. Literally it can be interpreted thus: The would-be initiate must develop somewhat the vibration of the seven head centres, and thus sweep into increased vibratory activity the seven centres in the body upon the etheric plane; affecting also, through reciprocal vibration, the seven physical centres which are inevitably stimulated when the etheric centres approach their maximum vibration. It is not necessary to enlarge upon this point beyond pointing out that as the seven centres within the head become responsive to the Ego the following seven centres,

1. The head, considered as a unit,

2. The heart,

3. The throat,

4. The solar plexus,

5. The base of the spine, [p. 201]

6. The spleen,

7. The organs of generation,

are also affected, but affected along the line of purification and control. This will produce results in the definitely physical organs through which man functions on the physical plane. In illustration:--Man can then transfer consciously the creative fire and energy from the organs of generation a to the throat, or, through the conscious control of the heart, produce suspended animation of the physical body. This is not achieved through what is called Hatha Yoga practices, or concentrating the attention upon the physical organs, but through the development of the control by the inner God, Who works through the head centre and thus dominates all else.

The applicant, therefore, will bend all his energies towards the development of the spiritual life, which development will be the outcome of right thinking, meditation, and service. Through deep study of all there is to be known concerning energy and its focal points, he will co-ordinate his life so that the life of the spirit may flow through it. This study can only be safely undertaken at present in group work and under guidance from a teacher; the pupils will pledge themselves to permit no experimentation in their lives, and no careless trifling with the fires of the body. They will simply apply themselves to a theoretical comprehension and a life of service.

The centres will then develop normally, whilst the applicant bends his attention to loving his brother perfectly in truth and in deed, to serving wholeheartedly, to thinking intelligently, and to keeping a close watch upon himself. He will also record all that seems to him in his inner life to be concerned with the evolution of the centres. This record can be surveyed by the teacher, comment made, deduction

[p. 202]

sought, and the quota of information thus gained filed for group reference. In this way much knowledge can be stored up for use.

The applicant who misuses knowledge, who indulges in such practices as "breathing for development," or concentrating upon the centres, will inevitably fail in his endeavour to reach the portal, and will pay the price in his body by the appearance of insanity, of neurasthenic conditions, and various physical ills.

Rule 9.

Let the disciple merge himself within the circle of his other selves. Let but one colour blend them and their unity appear. Only when the group is known and sensed can energy be wisely emanated.

One thing all disciples and applicants for initiation have to do is to find that particular group of servers to which they belong on the inner plane, to recognise them upon the physical plane, and to unite with them in service for the race. This recognition will be based upon:

a. Unity of aim.

b. Oneness of vibration.

c. Identity in group affiliation.

d. Karmic links of long standing.

e. Ability to work in harmonious relation.

Superficially, this may appear one of the easiest of the rules, but in practice it is not so. Mistakes are easily made, and the problem of working harmoniously in group alignment is not so simple as it may appear. Egoic vibration and relationship may exist, yet the outer personalities may not harmonise. It is the work, then, of the applicant to strengthen the grip of his Ego upon his personality, so that

[p. 203]

the esoteric group relation may become possible upon the physical plane. He will do this by the disciplining of his own personality, and not by the correction of his brothers.

Rule 10.

The Army of the Voice, the devas in their serried ranks, work ceaselessly. Let the disciple apply himself to the consideration of their methods; let him learn the rules whereby that Army works within the veils of Maya.

This rule refers to the work of occult investigation, which must be pursued at some time or another by all who seek initiation. Though it is not safe for the uninitiated to tamper with the parallel evolution of the devas, yet it is necessary and safe to investigate the procedure pursued by the builders, the methods followed by them, in reproducing from the archetype, via the etheric that which we call physical manifestation; their groups must be somewhat theoretically cognised, and the sounds whereby they are swept into activity considered. This involves, therefore, the organised study, by all applicants, of:--

1. The purpose of sound.

2. The esoteric meaning of words, of grammar, and of syntax.

3. The laws of vibration and of electricity, and many other subsidiary studies which concern themselves with the manifestation of divinity and consciousness through the medium of deva substance and the activity of the controlling devas. The laws of the macrocosm will be investigated, and the correspondence between the activities of the microcosm, and the active manifestation of the macrocosm will be recognised.

[p. 204]

Rule 11.

Let the disciple transfer the fire from the lower triangle to the higher, and preserve that which is created through the fire of the midway point.

This means, literally, the control by the initiate of the sex impulse, as usually understood, and the transference of the fire which now normally vitalises the generative organs to the throat centre, thus leading to creation upon the mental plane through the agency of mind. That which is to be created must then be nourished and sustained by the love energy of nature issuing from the heart centre.

The lower triangle referred to is:--

1. The solar plexus.

2. The base of the spine.

3. The generative organs.

Whilst the higher one is, as pointed out:--

1. The head.

2. The throat.

3. The heart.

This might be interpreted by the superficial reader as an injunction to the celibate life, and the pledging of the applicant to abstain from all physical manifestation of the sex impulse. This is not so. Many initiates have attained their objective when duly and wisely participating in the marriage relation. An initiate cultivates a peculiar attitude of mind, wherein there is a recognition that all forms of manifestation are divine, and that the physical plane is as much a form of divine expression as any of the higher planes. He realises that the lowest manifestation of divinity must be under the conscious control of that indwelling divinity, and

[p. 205]

it that all acts of every kind should be regulated by the endeavour to fulfil every duty and obligation, to control every action and deed, and to utilise the physical vehicle so that the group may be thereby benefited and aided in its spiritual progress, and the law perfectly fulfilled.

That it may be advisable, at certain stages, for a man to perfect control along any particular line through a temporary abstention is not to be denied, but that is a means to an end, and will be succeeded by stages when--the control having been gained--the man demonstrates perfectly through the medium of the physical body, the attributes of divinity, and every centre will be normally and wisely used, and thus race purposes furthered.

Initiates and Masters, in many cases marry, and normally perform their duties as husbands, wives, and householders, but all is controlled and regulated by purpose and intention, and none is carried away by passion or desire. In the perfect man upon the physical plane, all the centres are under complete control, and their energy is legitimately used; the spiritual will of the divine inner God is the main factor, and there will be a unity of effort shown on all the planes through all the centres for the greatest good oL the greatest number.

This point has been touched upon because so many students go astray upon these matters, and cultivate either an attitude of mind which results in the complete atrophying of the entire normal physical nature, or indulge in an orgy of license under the specious plea of "stimulating the centres," and thus furthering astral development. The true initiate should be known by his wise and sanctified normality, by his steady conformity to that which is best for the group as emphasised by the group laws of the land, by his control and his refraining Non, excess of any kind, and by

[p. 206]

the example he sets to his environing associates of spiritual living and moral rectitude, coupled with the discipline of his life.

Rule 12.

Let the disciple learn the use of the hand in service; let him seek the mark of the messenger in his feet, and let him learn to see with the eye that looks out from between the two.

This rule looks easy of interpretation upon the first reading, and seems to enjoin upon the applicant the use of the hands in service, of the feet upon hierarchical errands, and the development of clairvoyance. But the real meaning is much more esoteric. Occultly understood, the "use of the hands" is the utilisation of the chakras (or centres) in the palms of the hands in:--

a. Healing bodily ills.

b. Blessing, and thus curing emotional ills.

c. Raised in prayer, or the use of the centres of the hands during meditation in the manipulation of mental matter and currents.

These three points will bear careful consideration, and much may be learnt by occidental students from the study of the life of Christ, and a consideration of His methods in using His hands. More cannot be said here, as the subject is too vast to be enlarged upon in this brief commentary.

The "mark of the messenger" in the feet, is a reference to that well-known symbol of the wings on the heels of Mercury. Much upon this subject will he revealed to students in occult schools who will gather together all that can be found concerning the Messenger of the Gods, and who also will study with care information which astrological

[p. 207]

students have gleaned anent the planet Mercury, and which occult students have gathered concerning the inner round.

On the surface, the expression "the eye which looks out from between the two" seems to signify the third eye, which clairvoyants utilise, but the meaning is very much deeper than that, and lies hidden in the following facts:

a. That the inner vision is that which all self-conscious beings, from a Logos to a man, are in process of developing.

b. That the Ego, or Higher Self, is literally to the Monad what the third eye is to man, and therefore is described as looking out from between the Monad or spiritual self on the one hand, and the personal self on the other.

In the fullest sense, therefore, this rule incites the applicant to develop self-consciousness, and thus learn to function in the causal body on the higher levels of the mental plane, controlling from thence all the lower vehicles and seeing clearly all that can be seen in the three worlds, in the past and in the future.

Rule 13.

Four things the disciple must learn and comprehend before he can be shewn that inmost mystery: first, the laws of that which radiates; the five meanings of magnetisation make the second; the third is transmutation, or the secret lost of alchemy; and lastly the first letter of the Word which has been imparted, or the hidden name egoic.

This rule cannot be enlarged upon. It concerns mysteries and subjects too immense to be fully handled here. It is

[p. 208]

included in these rules so that it may form a subject for meditation, for study, and for group discussion.

The final rule is very brief and consists of five words.

Rule 14.

Listen, touch, see, apply, know.

These words concern what the Christian might aptly call the consecration of the three major senses, and their utilisation in the evolution of the inner spiritual life, application then made of that which is learnt and ascertained, followed by the fruition of realised knowledge.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 209]

  

AN ESOTERIC CATECHISM

The following are some words from Archive XIII of the Masters' Records, that carry with them a message for the struggler on the Way. They are somewhat on the line of an old catechism, and used to be recited by the participants in the lesser mysteries before they passed on into the greater.

What seest thou, O Pilgrim? Lift up thine eyes and tell what thou beholdest.

[paragraph continues] I see a ladder, mounting within the vault of blue, its feet lost sight of in the mists and fogs that circle round our planet.

Where standest thou, O Pilgrim? On what are placed thy feet?

[paragraph continues] I stand upon a portion of the ladder, the fourth division well nigh mounted; its latter part stretches before me into the darkness of a stormy night. Beyond that sphere of utter gloom I see the ladder rise again, radiant and glowing in its fifth division.

What marks those portions which you thus describe as separated from another part? Do not all form but one completed ladder of clearly marked proportions?

[paragraph continues] Always a gap appeareth to the eye, which (when approached more closely) resolveth then itself into a Cross, by which one mounteth to the next division.

[p. 210]

What causeth then the Cross? How mount you by its aid?

[paragraph continues] The Cross is formed by aspirations, instilled by Godlike urge, which cut athwart the lower world desires, implanted by the life developed from below.

Explain more clearly what you mean, and how that Cross becomes the Way.

[paragraph continues] The arms that form the Cross become the great dividing line, placed twixt the lower and the higher. Upon those arms the hands are nailed,--the hands that grasp and hold, ministering to the lower needs, trained thus through many aeons. Lo, when the hands are helpless held, and cannot grasp and hold, the inner life slips from its sheath, mounting the limb upright. It passeth from the lower fourth, and the Cross doth bridge the gap.

Pass they with ease that mount that limb, and leave the fourth behind?

[paragraph continues] They pass through tears, through clouds and mists; they suffer and they die. They bid adieu to all earth's friends; they mount the Way alone; they bridge the gap with loving deeds done in the pain of living; they lift one hand aloft to Him Who standeth just above; they lean one downward to the man who standeth next below. The hands, freed from the transverse arms, are freed but to be held. Only the empty nail-marked hands can keep the chain complete.

Where ends the ladder's length? What point of gloom is pierced by it and where projects its end?

[paragraph continues] It cuts the crystallising sphere with all its myriad forms; it

[p. 211]

pierces through the watery plane, washed by the swirling tides; it passes through the nethermost hell, down into densest maya, and ends within the latent fire, the molten lake of fiercest burning, touching the denizens of fire, the Agnichaitans of the scarlet heat.

Where mounts the ladder's length? Where is its consummation?

[paragraph continues] It mounteth through the radiant spheres, through all their six divisions. It riseth to the mighty Seat within the final fifth, and passeth from that mighty Seat to yet another greater.

Who sits upon that mighty Seat within the final fifth?

[paragraph continues] He with the Name we mention not, save in utter adoration; the Youth of Endless Summers, the Light of Life itself, the Wondrous One, the Ancient One, Lord of Venusian Love, the great Kumara with the Flaming Sword, the Peace of all the Earth.

Sits He alone, this Wondrous One, upon His sapphire throne?

[paragraph continues] He sits alone, yet close upon the rainbow steps there stand three other Lords, garnering the product of Their work and sacrificing all Their gain to aid the Lord of Love.

Are They assisted in Their work? Do other Ones of greater powers than ours stand too upon the ladder?

[paragraph continues] These mighty Four, Action and Love, in wise co-operation work with Their Brothers of a lesser grade, the three Great Lords we know.

[p. 212]

Who aid these mighty Lords? Who carry on Their work, linking the lower with the higher?

[paragraph continues] The Brothers of Logoic Love in all Their many grades. They stay within the final fifth till it absorbeth all the fourth.

Where mounts the ladder then?

[paragraph continues] To the greatest Lord of all, before Whom e'en that Ancient One bends in obeisance low; before Whose throne of effulgent light Angels of highest rank, Masters and Lords of uttermost compassion, prostrate Themselves and humbly bend, waiting the Word to rise.

When sounds that Word and what transpires when it echoes through the spheres?

[paragraph continues] That Word sounds not till all is done, until the Lord of endless love deemeth the work correct. He uttereth then a lesser Word that vibrateth through the scheme. The greater Lord of cosmic Love, hearing the circling sound, addeth completion to the chord, and breatheth forth the whole.

What will be seen, O Pilgrim on the Way, when sounds that final chord?

[paragraph continues] The music of the endless spheres, the merging of the seven; the end of tears, of sin, of strife, the shattering of forms; the finish of the ladder, the blending in the All, completion of the circling spheres and their entry into peace.

What part, O Pilgrim on the Way, play you within this scheme? How will you enter into peace? How stand before your Lord?

[paragraph continues] I play my part with stern resolve, with earnest aspiration;

[p. 213]

[paragraph continues] I look above, I help below; I dream not, nor I rest; I toil; I serve; I reap; I pray; I am the Cross; I am the Way; I tread upon the work I do; I mount upon my slain self; I kill desire, and I strive, forgetting all reward. I forego peace; I forfeit rest, and in the stress of pain I lose myself and find Myself and enter into peace.

     
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

  

THE GREAT INVOCATION

  From the point of Light within the Mind of God
     Let light stream forth into the minds of men.
       Let Light descend on Earth.

  From the point of Love within the Heart of God
     Let love stream forth into the hearts of men.
       May Christ return to Earth.

  From the centre where the Will of God is known
     Let purpose guide the little wills of men--
       The purpose which the Masters know and serve.

  From the centre which we call the race of men
     Let the Plan of Love and Light work out
       And may it seal the door where evil dwells.

Let Light and Love and Power restore the Plan on Earth.

"The above Invocation or Prayer does not belong to any person or group but to all Humanity. The beauty and the strength of this Invocation lies in its simplicity, and in its expression of certain central truths which all men, innately and normally, accept--the truth of the existence of a basic Intelligence to Whom we vaguely give the name of God; the truth that behind all outer seeming, the motivating power of the universe is Love; the truth that a great Individuality came to earth, called by Christians, the Christ, and embodied that love so that we could understand; the truth that both love and intelligence are effects of what is called the Will of God; and finally the self-evident truth that only through humanity itself can the Divine Plan work out."--ALICE A. BAILEY.

    
Initiation, Human and Solar, by Alice A. Bailey, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

  

GLOSSARY

Adept. A Master, or human being who, having traversed the path of evolution and entered upon the final stage of the path, the Path of Initiation, has taken five of the Initiations, and has therefore passed into the Fifth, or Spiritual kingdom, having but two more Initiations to take.

Adi. The First; the primeval; the atomic plane of the solar system; the highest of the seven planes.

Agni. The Lord of Fire in the Vedas. The oldest and most revered of the Gods in India. One of the three great deities Agni, Vayu and Surya, and also all the three, as he is the triple aspect of fire; fire is the essence of the solar system. The Bible says: "Our God is a consuming fire." It is also the symbol of the mental plane of which Agni is paramountly lord.

Agnichaitans. A group of fire devas.

Atlantis. The continent that was submerged in the Atlantic ocean, according to the occult teaching and Plato. Atlantis was the home of the Fourth Root Race, whom we now call the Atlanteans.

Antahkarana. The path, or bridge, between higher and lower mind, serving as a medium of communication between the two. It is built by the aspirant himself in mental matter.

Ashram. The centre to which the Master gathers the disciples and aspirants for personal instruction.

[p. 216]

Atma. The Universal Spirit; the divine Monad; the seventh Principle; so called in the septenary constitution of man. (See diagram in Introduction.)

Atomic subplane. The matter of the solar system is divided by the  into seven planes or states, the highest of which is the atomic plane. Similarly, each of the seven planes is divided into seven subplanes, of which the highest is called the atomic subplane. There are therefore forty-nine subplanes, and seven of these are atomic.

Aura. A subtle invisible essence or fluid which emanates from human and animal bodies, and even from things. It is a psychic effluvium, partaking of both mind and body. It is electro-vital, and also electro-mental.

Auric egg. An appellation that has been given to the causal body owing to its form.

Bodhisattva. Literally, he whose consciousness has become intelligence, or buddhi. Those who need but one more incarnation to become perfect buddhas. As used in these letters the Bodhisattva is the name of the office which is at present occupied by the Lord Maitreya, Who is known in the occident as the Christ. This office might be translated as that of World Teacher. The Bodhisattva is the Head of all the religions of the world, and the Master of the Masters and of the angels.

Buddha (The) . The name given to Gautama. Born in India about B.C. 621 he became a full buddha in B.C. 592. The Buddha is one who is the "Enlightened," and has attained the highest degree of knowledge possible for man in this solar system.

[p. 217]

Buddhi. The Universal Soul or Mind. It is the spiritual soul in man (the Sixth Principle) and therefore the vehicle of Atma, the Spirit, which is the Seventh Principle.

Causal Body. This body is, from the standpoint of the physical plane, no body, either subjective or objective. It is, nevertheless, the centre of the egoic consciousness, and is formed of the conjunction of buddhi and manas. It is relatively permanent and lasts throughout the long cycle of incarnations, and is only dissipated after the fourth initiation, when the need for further rebirth on the part of a human being no longer exists.

Chohan. Lord, Master, a Chief. In this book it refers to those Adepts who have gone on and taken the sixth initiation.

Deva (or Angel) . A god. In Sanskrit a resplendent deity. A Deva is a celestial being, whether good, bad, or indifferent. Devas are divided into many groups, and are called not only angels and archangels, but lesser and greater builders.

Egoic Groups. On the third subplane of the fifth plane, the mental, are found the causal bodies of the individual men and women. These bodies, which are the expression of the Ego, or of the individualised self-consciousness, are gathered together into groups according to the ray or quality of the particular Ego involved.

Elementals. The Spirits of the Elements; the creatures involved in the four kingdoms, or elements, Earth. Air, Fire, and Water. Except a few of the higher kinds and their rulers they are forces of nature more than ethereal men and women.

[p. 218]

Etheric body. (Etheric double.) The physical body of a human being is, according to occult teaching, formed of two parts, the dense physical body, and the etheric body. The dense physical body is formed of matter of the lowest three subplanes of the physical plane. The etheric body is formed of the four highest or etheric subplanes of the physical plane.

Fifth Principle. The principle of mind; that faculty in man which is the intelligent thinking principle, and which differentiates man from the animals.

Fohat. Cosmic electricity; primordial light; the ever-present electrical energy; the universal propelling vital force; the ceaseless destructive and formative power; the synthesis of the many forms of electrical phenomena.

Guru. Spiritual Teacher. A Master in metaphysical and ethical doctrines.

Hierarchy. That group of spiritual beings on the inner planes of the solar system who are the intelligent forces of nature, and who control the evolutionary processes. They are themselves divided into twelve Hierarchies. Within our planetary scheme, the earth scheme, there is a reflection of this Hierarchy which is called by the occultist the Occult Hierarchy. This Hierarchy is formed of chohans, adepts, and initiates working through their disciples, and, by this means, in the world. (See diagram page <page 48>.)

Initiations. From the Latin root meaning the first principles of any science. Process of penetrating into the mysteries of the science of the Self and of the one self in all selves. The Path of Initiation is the final stage of

[p. 219]

the path of evolution trodden by man, and is divided into five stages, called the Five Initiations.

Jiva. A separated unit of consciousness.

Kali yuga. "Yuga" is an age or cycle. According to the Indian philosophy our evolution is divided into four yugas or cycles. The Kali-yuga is the present age. It means the "Black Age," a period of 432,000 years.

Karma. Physical action. Metaphysically, the law of retribution; the law of cause and effect, or ethical causation. There is the karma of merit and the karma of demerit. It is the power that controls all things, the resultant of moral action, or the moral effect of an act committed for the attainment of something which gratifies a personal desire.

Kumaras. The highest seven self-conscious beings in the solar system. These seven Kumaras manifest through the medium of a planetary scheme in the same way as a human being manifests through the medium of a physical body. They are called by the Hindu "the mind-born sons of Brahma" amongst other names. They are the sumtotal of intelligence and of wisdom. Within the planetary scheme the reflection of the systemic order is also seen. At the head of our world evolution stands the first Kumara, aided by six other Kumaras, three exoteric and three esoteric, Who are the focal points for the distribution of the force of the systemic Kumaras.

Kundalini. The power of Life: one of the forces of nature. It is a power known only to those who practise concentration in yoga, and is centred within the spine.

Lemuria. A modern term first used by some naturalists and now adopted by Theosophists to indicate a continent

[p. 220]

that, according to the Secret Doctrine of the East, preceded Atlantis. It was the home of the third root race.

Logos. The deity manifested through every nation and people. The outward expression, or the effect of the cause which is ever concealed. Thus, speech is the Logos of thought, hence it is aptly translated by the "verbum" and the "word" in its metaphysical sense. (See John 1: 1-3.)

Lord of Civilisation. (See Mahachohan.)

Lords of the Flame. One of the great Hierarchies of spiritual beings who guide the solar system. They took control of the evolution of humanity upon this planet about 18 million years ago, during the middle of the Lemurian, or third root race.

Macrocosm. The great universe, literally; or God manifesting through His body, the solar system.

Mahachohan. The Head of the third great department of the Hierarchy. This great being is the Lord of Civilisation, and the flowering forth of the principle of intelligence. He is the embodiment on the planet of the third, or intelligence aspect of deity in its five activities.

Mahamanvantara. The great interludes of time between two solar systems. This term is frequently applied to the greater solar cycles. It implies a period of universal activity.

Manas, or Manasic Principle. Literally, the Mind, the mental faculty; that which distinguishes man from the mere animal. It is the individualising principle; that which enables man to know that he exists, feels, and knows. It is divided in some schools into two parts, higher or abstract mind, and lower or concrete mind.

[p. 221]

Mantrams. Verses from the Vedas. In the exoteric sense a mantram (or that psychic faculty or power that conveys perception or thought) is the older portion of the Vedas, the second part of which is composed of the Brahmanas. In esoteric phraseology mantram is the word made flesh, or rendered objective through divine magic. A form of words or syllables rhythmically arranged, so that when sounded certain vibrations are generated.

Manu. The representative name of the great Being Who is the Ruler, primal progenitor and chief of the human race. It comes from the Sanskrit root "man"--to think.

Manvantara. A period of activity as opposed to a period of rest, without reference to any specific length of cycle. Frequently used to express a period of planetary activity and its seven races.

Maya. Sanskrit, "Illusion." Of the principle of form or limitation. The result of manifestation. Generally used in a relative sense for phenomena or objective appearances that are created by the mind.

Mayavi Rupa. Sanskrit, "Illusive Form." It is the body of manifestation created by the adept by an act of will for use in the three worlds. It has no material connection with the physical body. It is spiritual and ethereal and passes everywhere without let or hindrance. It is built by the power of the lower mind, of the highest type of astral matter.

Microcosm. The little universe, or man manifesting through his body, the physical body.

Monad. The One. The threefold spirit on its own plane. In occultism it often means the unified triad--Atma, Buddhi, Manas; Spiritual Will, Intuition and Higher

[p. 222]

mind,--or the immortal part of man which reincarnates in the lower kingdoms and gradually progresses through them to man and thence to the final goal.

Nirmanakaya. Those perfected beings who renounce Nirvana (the highest state of spiritual bliss) and choose a life of self-sacrifice, becoming members of that invisible host which ever protects humanity within karmic limits.

Permanent atom. Those five atoms, with the mental unit, one on each of the five planes of human evolution (the mental unit being also on the mental plane) which the monad appropriates for purposes of manifestation. They form a stable centre and are relatively permanent. Around them the various sheaths or bodies are built. They are literally small force centres.

Planetary Logos. This term is generally applied to the seven highest spirits corresponding to the seven archangels of the Christian. They have all passed through the human stage and are now manifesting through a planet and its evolutions, in the same way that man manifests through his physical body. The highest planetary spirit working through any particular globe is, in reality, the personal God of the planet.

Prakriti. Derives its name from its function as the material cause of the first evolution of the universe. It may be said to be composed of two roots, "pra" to manifest, and "krita" to make; meaning, that which caused the universe to manifest itself.

Prana. The Life Principle, the breath of Life. The occultist believes the following statement: "Life we look upon as the one form of existence, manifesting in what is called matter, or what, incorrectly separating then.

[p. 223]

we name Spirit, Soul, and Matter in man. Matter is the vehicle for the manifestation of soul on this plane of existence; soul is the vehicle for the manifestation of spirit, and these three as a trinity are synthesised by Life, which pervades them all."

Purusha. The spiritual self. The embodied self. The word literally means "The dweller in the city"--that is, in the body. It is derived from the Sanskrit "pura" which means city or body, and "usha" a derivative of the verb "vas," to dwell.

Quaternary. The fourfold lower self, or man, in the three worlds. There are various divisions of this, but perhaps for our purpose the best is to enumerate the four as follows:

1. Lower mind.

2. Emotional or  body.

3. Prana, or the Life Principle.

4. The etheric body, or the highest division of the twofold physical body.

Raja Lord. The word "Raja" simply means King or Prince; the word has been applied to those great angels or entities who ensoul the seven planes. These are great devas who are the sumtotal and the controlling intelligence of a plane.

Raja Yoga. The true system of developing psychic and spiritual powers and union with one's higher self or the Ego. It involves the exercise, regulation, and concentration of thought.

Ray. One of the seven streams of force of the Logos; the seven great lights. Each of them is the embodiment of a great cosmic entity. The seven Rays can be divided

[p. 224]

into the three Rays of Aspect and the four Rays of Attribute, as follows:

Rays of Aspect

1. The Ray of Will, or Power.

2. The Ray of Love-Wisdom.

3. The Ray of Activity or Adaptability.

Rays of Attribute

4. The Ray of Harmony, Beauty, Art, or Unity.

5. The Ray of Concrete Knowledge or Science.

6. The Ray of Abstract Idealism or Devotion.

7. The Ray of Ceremonial Magic, or Law.

The above names are simply some chosen from among many, and embody the different aspects of force by means of which the Logos manifests.

Ring-pass-not. This is at the circumference of the manifested solar system, and is the periphery of the influence of the sun, both esoterically and exoterically understood. The limit of the field of activity of the central life force.

Root Race. One of the seven races of man which evolve upon a planet during the great cycle of planetary existence. This cycle is called a world period. The Aryan root race, to which the Hindu, European, and modern American races belong, is the fifth, the Chinese and Japanese belonging to the fourth race.

Sensa, or Senzar. The name for the secret sacerdotal language, or the "mystery speech" of the initiated adepts all over the world. It is a universal language, and largely a hieroglyphic cypher.

[p. 225]

Shamballa. The City of the Gods, which is in the West to some nations, in the East to others, in the North or South to yet others. It is the sacred island in the Gobi Desert. It is the home of mysticism and the Secret Doctrine.

Triad. The Spiritual Man; the expression of the monad. It is the germinal spirit containing the potentialities of divinity. These potentialities will be unfolded during the course of evolution. This Triad forms the individualised or separated self, or Ego.

Viveka. The Sanskrit "discrimination." The very first step in the path of occultism is the discrimination between the real and the unreal, between substance and phenomenon, between the Self and the Not-self, between spirit and matter.

Wesak. A festival which takes place in the  at the full moon of May. It is said that at this festival, at which all the members of the Hierarchy are present, the Buddha, for a brief period, renews his touch and association with the work of our planet.

Yoga. 1. One of the six schools of India, said to be founded by Patanjali, but really of much earlier origin. 2. The practice of Meditation as a means of leading to spiritual liberation.

Note: This glossary does not undertake fully to explain all the above terms. It is simply an attempt to render into English certain words used in this book, so that the reader may understand their connotation. The majority of the definitions have been culled from the Theosophical Glossary, The Secret Doctrine, and the Voice of the Silence.

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ili.txt =====



The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad of Homer

  

Translated by Samuel Butler

  

[1898]

  

Formatted at sacred-texts.com, April 2002, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK I

Sing, O goddess, the anger of Achilles son of Peleus, that brought countless ills upon the Achaeans. Many a brave soul did it send hurrying down to Hades, and many a hero did it yield a prey to dogs and vultures, for so were the counsels of Jove fulfilled from the day on which the son of Atreus, king of men, and great Achilles, first fell out with one another. 

And which of the gods was it that set them on to quarrel? It was the son of Jove and Leto; for he was angry with the king and sent a pestilence upon the host to plague the people, because the son of Atreus had dishonoured Chryses his priest. Now Chryses had come to the ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and had brought with him a great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of Apollo wreathed with a suppliant's wreath and he besought the Achaeans, but most of all the two sons of Atreus, who were their chiefs. 

"Sons of Atreus," he cried, "and all other Achaeans, may the gods who dwell in Olympus grant you to sack the city of Priam, and to reach your homes in safety; but free my daughter, and accept a ransom for her, in reverence to Apollo, son of Jove." 

On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon, who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. "Old man," said he, "let me not find you tarrying about our ships, nor yet coming hereafter. Your sceptre of the god and your wreath shall profit you nothing. I will not free her. She shall grow old in my house at Argos far from her own home, busying herself with her loom and visiting my couch; so go, and do not provoke me or it shall be the worse for you." 

The old man feared him and obeyed. Not a word he spoke, but went by the shore of the sounding sea and prayed apart to King Apollo whom lovely Leto had borne. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow, that protectest Chryse and holy Cilla and rulest Tenedos with thy might, hear me oh thou of Sminthe. If I have ever decked your temple with garlands, or burned your thigh-bones in fat of bulls or goats, grant my prayer, and let your arrows avenge these my tears upon the Danaans." 

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He came down furious from the summits of Olympus, with his bow and his quiver upon his shoulder, and the arrows rattled on his back with the rage that trembled within him. He sat himself down away from the ships with a face as dark as night, and his silver bow rang death as he shot his arrow in the midst of them. First he smote their mules and their hounds, but presently he aimed his shafts at the people themselves, and all day long the pyres of the dead were burning. 

For nine whole days he shot his arrows among the people, but upon the tenth day Achilles called them in assembly- moved thereto by Juno, who saw the Achaeans in their death-throes and had compassion upon them. Then, when they were got together, he rose and spoke among them. 

"Son of Atreus," said he, "I deem that we should now turn roving home if we would escape destruction, for we are being cut down by war and pestilence at once. Let us ask some priest or prophet, or some reader of dreams (for dreams, too, are of Jove) who can tell us why Phoebus Apollo is so angry, and say whether it is for some vow that we have broken, or hecatomb that we have not offered, and whether he will accept the savour of lambs and goats without blemish, so as to take away the plague from us." 

With these words he sat down, and Calchas son of Thestor, wisest of augurs, who knew things past present and to come, rose to speak. He it was who had guided the Achaeans with their fleet to Ilius, through the prophesyings with which Phoebus Apollo had inspired him. With all sincerity and goodwill he addressed them thus:- 

"Achilles, loved of heaven, you bid me tell you about the anger of King Apollo, I will therefore do so; but consider first and swear that you will stand by me heartily in word and deed, for I know that I shall offend one who rules the Argives with might, to whom all the Achaeans are in subjection. A plain man cannot stand against the anger of a king, who if he swallow his displeasure now, will yet nurse revenge till he has wreaked it. Consider, therefore, whether or no you will protect me." 

And Achilles answered, "Fear not, but speak as it is borne in upon you from heaven, for by Apollo, Calchas, to whom you pray, and whose oracles you reveal to us, not a Danaan at our ships shall lay his hand upon you, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth- no, not though you name Agamemnon himself, who is by far the foremost of the Achaeans." 

Thereon the seer spoke boldly. "The god," he said, "is angry neither about vow nor hecatomb, but for his priest's sake, whom Agamemnon has dishonoured, in that he would not free his daughter nor take a ransom for her; therefore has he sent these evils upon us, and will yet send others. He will not deliver the Danaans from this pestilence till Agamemnon has restored the girl without fee or ransom to her father, and has sent a holy hecatomb to Chryse. Thus we may perhaps appease him." 

With these words he sat down, and Agamemnon rose in anger. His heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he scowled on Calchas and said, "Seer of evil, you never yet prophesied smooth things concerning me, but have ever loved to foretell that which was evil. You have brought me neither comfort nor performance; and now you come seeing among Danaans, and saying that Apollo has plagued us because I would not take a ransom for this girl, the daughter of Chryses. I have set my heart on keeping her in my own house, for I love her better even than my own wife Clytemnestra, whose peer she is alike in form and feature, in understanding and accomplishments. Still I will give her up if I must, for I would have the people live, not die; but you must find me a prize instead, or I alone among the Argives shall be without one. This is not well; for you behold, all of you, that my prize is to go elsewhither." 

And Achilles answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, covetous beyond all mankind, how shall the Achaeans find you another prize? We have no common store from which to take one. Those we took from the cities have been awarded; we cannot disallow the awards that have been made already. Give this girl, therefore, to the god, and if ever Jove grants us to sack the city of Troy we will requite you three and fourfold." 

Then Agamemnon said, "Achilles, valiant though you be, you shall not thus outwit me. You shall not overreach and you shall not persuade me. Are you to keep your own prize, while I sit tamely under my loss and give up the girl at your bidding? Let the Achaeans find me a prize in fair exchange to my liking, or I will come and take your own, or that of Ajax or of Ulysses; and he to whomsoever I may come shall rue my coming. But of this we will take thought hereafter; for the present, let us draw a ship into the sea, and find a crew for her expressly; let us put a hecatomb on board, and let us send Chryseis also; further, let some chief man among us be in command, either Ajax, or Idomeneus, or yourself, son of Peleus, mighty warrior that you are, that we may offer sacrifice and appease the the anger of the god." 

Achilles scowled at him and answered, "You are steeped in insolence and lust of gain. With what heart can any of the Achaeans do your bidding, either on foray or in open fighting? I came not warring here for any ill the Trojans had done me. I have no quarrel with them. They have not raided my cattle nor my horses, nor cut down my harvests on the rich plains of Phthia; for between me and them there is a great space, both mountain and sounding sea. We have followed you, Sir Insolence! for your pleasure, not ours- to gain satisfaction from the Trojans for your shameless self and for Menelaus. You forget this, and threaten to rob me of the prize for which I have toiled, and which the sons of the Achaeans have given me. Never when the Achaeans sack any rich city of the Trojans do I receive so good a prize as you do, though it is my hands that do the better part of the fighting. When the sharing comes, your share is far the largest, and I, forsooth, must go back to my ships, take what I can get and be thankful, when my labour of fighting is done. Now, therefore, I shall go back to Phthia; it will be much better for me to return home with my ships, for I will not stay here dishonoured to gather gold and substance for you." 

And Agamemnon answered, "Fly if you will, I shall make you no prayers to stay you. I have others here who will do me honour, and above all Jove, the lord of counsel. There is no king here so hateful to me as you are, for you are ever quarrelsome and ill affected. What though you be brave? Was it not heaven that made you so? Go home, then, with your ships and comrades to lord it over the Myrmidons. I care neither for you nor for your anger; and thus will I do: since Phoebus Apollo is taking Chryseis from me, I shall send her with my ship and my followers, but I shall come to your tent and take your own prize Briseis, that you may learn how much stronger I am than you are, and that another may fear to set himself up as equal or comparable with me." 

The son of Peleus was furious, and his heart within his shaggy breast was divided whether to draw his sword, push the others aside, and kill the son of Atreus, or to restrain himself and check his anger. While he was thus in two minds, and was drawing his mighty sword from its scabbard, Minerva came down from heaven (for Juno had sent her in the love she bore to them both), and seized the son of Peleus by his yellow hair, visible to him alone, for of the others no man could see her. Achilles turned in amaze, and by the fire that flashed from her eyes at once knew that she was Minerva. "Why are you here," said he, "daughter of aegis-bearing Jove? To see the pride of Agamemnon, son of Atreus? Let me tell you- and it shall surely be- he shall pay for this insolence with his life." 

And Minerva said, "I come from heaven, if you will hear me, to bid you stay your anger. Juno has sent me, who cares for both of you alike. Cease, then, this brawling, and do not draw your sword; rail at him if you will, and your railing will not be vain, for I tell you- and it shall surely be- that you shall hereafter receive gifts three times as splendid by reason of this present insult. Hold, therefore, and obey." 

"Goddess," answered Achilles, "however angry a man may be, he must do as you two command him. This will be best, for the gods ever hear the prayers of him who has obeyed them." 

He stayed his hand on the silver hilt of his sword, and thrust it back into the scabbard as Minerva bade him. Then she went back to Olympus among the other gods, and to the house of aegis-bearing Jove. 

But the son of Peleus again began railing at the son of Atreus, for he was still in a rage. "Wine-bibber," he cried, "with the face of a dog and the heart of a hind, you never dare to go out with the host in fight, nor yet with our chosen men in ambuscade. You shun this as you do death itself. You had rather go round and rob his prizes from any man who contradicts you. You devour your people, for you are king over a feeble folk; otherwise, son of Atreus, henceforward you would insult no man. Therefore I say, and swear it with a great oath- nay, by this my sceptre which shalt sprout neither leaf nor shoot, nor bud anew from the day on which it left its parent stem upon the mountains- for the axe stripped it of leaf and bark, and now the sons of the Achaeans bear it as judges and guardians of the decrees of heaven- so surely and solemnly do I swear that hereafter they shall look fondly for Achilles and shall not find him. In the day of your distress, when your men fall dying by the murderous hand of Hector, you shall not know how to help them, and shall rend your heart with rage for the hour when you offered insult to the bravest of the Achaeans." 

With this the son of Peleus dashed his gold-bestudded sceptre on the ground and took his seat, while the son of Atreus was beginning fiercely from his place upon the other side. Then uprose smooth-tongued Nestor, the facile speaker of the Pylians, and the words fell from his lips sweeter than honey. Two generations of men born and bred in Pylos had passed away under his rule, and he was now reigning over the third. With all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:- 

"Of a truth," he said, "a great sorrow has befallen the Achaean land. Surely Priam with his sons would rejoice, and the Trojans be glad at heart if they could hear this quarrel between you two, who are so excellent in fight and counsel. I am older than either of you; therefore be guided by me. Moreover I have been the familiar friend of men even greater than you are, and they did not disregard my counsels. Never again can I behold such men as Pirithous and Dryas shepherd of his people, or as Caeneus, Exadius, godlike Polyphemus, and Theseus son of Aegeus, peer of the immortals. These were the mightiest men ever born upon this earth: mightiest were they, and when they fought the fiercest tribes of mountain savages they utterly overthrew them. I came from distant Pylos, and went about among them, for they would have me come, and I fought as it was in me to do. Not a man now living could withstand them, but they heard my words, and were persuaded by them. So be it also with yourselves, for this is the more excellent way. Therefore, Agamemnon, though you be strong, take not this girl away, for the sons of the Achaeans have already given her to Achilles; and you, Achilles, strive not further with the king, for no man who by the grace of Jove wields a sceptre has like honour with Agamemnon. You are strong, and have a goddess for your mother; but Agamemnon is stronger than you, for he has more people under him. Son of Atreus, check your anger, I implore you; end this quarrel with Achilles, who in the day of battle is a tower of strength to the Achaeans." 

And Agamemnon answered, "Sir, all that you have said is true, but this fellow must needs become our lord and master: he must be lord of all, king of all, and captain of all, and this shall hardly be. Granted that the gods have made him a great warrior, have they also given him the right to speak with railing?" 

Achilles interrupted him. "I should be a mean coward," he cried, "were I to give in to you in all things. Order other people about, not me, for I shall obey no longer. Furthermore I say- and lay my saying to your heart- I shall fight neither you nor any man about this girl, for those that take were those also that gave. But of all else that is at my ship you shall carry away nothing by force. Try, that others may see; if you do, my spear shall be reddened with your blood." 

When they had quarrelled thus angrily, they rose, and broke up the assembly at the ships of the Achaeans. The son of Peleus went back to his tents and ships with the son of Menoetius and his company, while Agamemnon drew a vessel into the water and chose a crew of twenty oarsmen. He escorted Chryseis on board and sent moreover a hecatomb for the god. And Ulysses went as captain. 

These, then, went on board and sailed their ways over the sea. But the son of Atreus bade the people purify themselves; so they purified themselves and cast their filth into the sea. Then they offered hecatombs of bulls and goats without blemish on the sea-shore, and the smoke with the savour of their sacrifice rose curling up towards heaven. 

Thus did they busy themselves throughout the host. But Agamemnon did not forget the threat that he had made Achilles, and called his trusty messengers and squires Talthybius and Eurybates. "Go," said he, "to the tent of Achilles, son of Peleus; take Briseis by the hand and bring her hither; if he will not give her I shall come with others and take her- which will press him harder." 

He charged them straightly further and dismissed them, whereon they went their way sorrowfully by the seaside, till they came to the tents and ships of the Myrmidons. They found Achilles sitting by his tent and his ships, and ill-pleased he was when he beheld them. They stood fearfully and reverently before him, and never a word did they speak, but he knew them and said, "Welcome, heralds, messengers of gods and men; draw near; my quarrel is not with you but with Agamemnon who has sent you for the girl Briseis. Therefore, Patroclus, bring her and give her to them, but let them be witnesses by the blessed gods, by mortal men, and by the fierceness of Agamemnon's anger, that if ever again there be need of me to save the people from ruin, they shall seek and they shall not find. Agamemnon is mad with rage and knows not how to look before and after that the Achaeans may fight by their ships in safety." 

Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him. He brought Briseis from the tent and gave her over to the heralds, who took her with them to the ships of the Achaeans- and the woman was loth to go. Then Achilles went all alone by the side of the hoar sea, weeping and looking out upon the boundless waste of waters. He raised his hands in prayer to his immortal mother, "Mother," he cried, "you bore me doomed to live but for a little season; surely Jove, who thunders from Olympus, might have made that little glorious. It is not so. Agamemnon, son of Atreus, has done me dishonour, and has robbed me of my prize by force." 

As he spoke he wept aloud, and his mother heard him where she was sitting in the depths of the sea hard by the old man her father. Forthwith she rose as it were a grey mist out of the waves, sat down before him as he stood weeping, caressed him with her hand, and said, "My son, why are you weeping? What is it that grieves you? Keep it not from me, but tell me, that we may know it together." 

Achilles drew a deep sigh and said, "You know it; why tell you what you know well already? We went to Thebe the strong city of Eetion, sacked it, and brought hither the spoil. The sons of the Achaeans shared it duly among themselves, and chose lovely Chryseis as the meed of Agamemnon; but Chryses, priest of Apollo, came to the ships of the Achaeans to free his daughter, and brought with him a great ransom: moreover he bore in his hand the sceptre of Apollo, wreathed with a suppliant's wreath, and he besought the Achaeans, but most of all the two sons of Atreus who were their chiefs. 

"On this the rest of the Achaeans with one voice were for respecting the priest and taking the ransom that he offered; but not so Agamemnon, who spoke fiercely to him and sent him roughly away. So he went back in anger, and Apollo, who loved him dearly, heard his prayer. Then the god sent a deadly dart upon the Argives, and the people died thick on one another, for the arrows went everywhither among the wide host of the Achaeans. At last a seer in the fulness of his knowledge declared to us the oracles of Apollo, and I was myself first to say that we should appease him. Whereon the son of Atreus rose in anger, and threatened that which he has since done. The Achaeans are now taking the girl in a ship to Chryse, and sending gifts of sacrifice to the god; but the heralds have just taken from my tent the daughter of Briseus, whom the Achaeans had awarded to myself. 

"Help your brave son, therefore, if you are able. Go to Olympus, and if you have ever done him service in word or deed, implore the aid of Jove. Ofttimes in my father's house have I heard you glory in that you alone of the immortals saved the son of Saturn from ruin, when the others, with Juno, Neptune, and Pallas Minerva would have put him in bonds. It was you, goddess, who delivered him by calling to Olympus the hundred-handed monster whom gods call Briareus, but men Aegaeon, for he is stronger even than his father; when therefore he took his seat all-glorious beside the son of Saturn, the other gods were afraid, and did not bind him. Go, then, to him, remind him of all this, clasp his knees, and bid him give succour to the Trojans. Let the Achaeans be hemmed in at the sterns of their ships, and perish on the sea-shore, that they may reap what joy they may of their king, and that Agamemnon may rue his blindness in offering insult to the foremost of the Achaeans." 

Thetis wept and answered, "My son, woe is me that I should have borne or suckled you. Would indeed that you had lived your span free from all sorrow at your ships, for it is all too brief; alas, that you should be at once short of life and long of sorrow above your peers: woe, therefore, was the hour in which I bore you; nevertheless I will go to the snowy heights of Olympus, and tell this tale to Jove, if he will hear our prayer: meanwhile stay where you are with your ships, nurse your anger against the Achaeans, and hold aloof from fight. For Jove went yesterday to Oceanus, to a feast among the Ethiopians, and the other gods went with him. He will return to Olympus twelve days hence; I will then go to his mansion paved with bronze and will beseech him; nor do I doubt that I shall be able to persuade him." 

On this she left him, still furious at the loss of her that had been taken from him. Meanwhile Ulysses reached Chryse with the hecatomb. When they had come inside the harbour they furled the sails and laid them in the ship's hold; they slackened the forestays, lowered the mast into its place, and rowed the ship to the place where they would have her lie; there they cast out their mooring-stones and made fast the hawsers. They then got out upon the sea-shore and landed the hecatomb for Apollo; Chryseis also left the ship, and Ulysses led her to the altar to deliver her into the hands of her father. "Chryses," said he, "King Agamemnon has sent me to bring you back your child, and to offer sacrifice to Apollo on behalf of the Danaans, that we may propitiate the god, who has now brought sorrow upon the Argives." 

So saying he gave the girl over to her father, who received her gladly, and they ranged the holy hecatomb all orderly round the altar of the god. They washed their hands and took up the barley-meal to sprinkle over the victims, while Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud on their behalf. "Hear me," he cried, "O god of the silver bow, that protectest Chryse and holy Cilla, and rulest Tenedos with thy might. Even as thou didst hear me aforetime when I prayed, and didst press hardly upon the Achaeans, so hear me yet again, and stay this fearful pestilence from the Danaans." 

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal, they drew back the heads of the victims and killed and flayed them. They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them, and then Chryses laid them on the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands. When the thigh-bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon the spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off: then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, pages filled the mixing-bowl with wine and water and handed it round, after giving every man his drink-offering. 

Thus all day long the young men worshipped the god with song, hymning him and chaunting the joyous paean, and the god took pleasure in their voices; but when the sun went down, and it came on dark, they laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship, and when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they again set sail for the host of the Achaeans. Apollo sent them a fair wind, so they raised their mast and hoisted their white sails aloft. As the sail bellied with the wind the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward. When they reached the wide-stretching host of the Achaeans, they drew the vessel ashore, high and dry upon the sands, set her strong props beneath her, and went their ways to their own tents and ships. 

But Achilles abode at his ships and nursed his anger. He went not to the honourable assembly, and sallied not forth to fight, but gnawed at his own heart, pining for battle and the war-cry. 

Now after twelve days the immortal gods came back in a body to Olympus, and Jove led the way. Thetis was not unmindful of the charge her son had laid upon her, so she rose from under the sea and went through great heaven with early morning to Olympus, where she found the mighty son of Saturn sitting all alone upon its topmost ridges. She sat herself down before him, and with her left hand seized his knees, while with her right she caught him under the chin, and besought him, saying- 

"Father Jove, if I ever did you service in word or deed among the immortals, hear my prayer, and do honour to my son, whose life is to be cut short so early. King Agamemnon has dishonoured him by taking his prize and keeping her. Honour him then yourself, Olympian lord of counsel, and grant victory to the Trojans, till the Achaeans give my son his due and load him with riches in requital." 

Jove sat for a while silent, and without a word, but Thetis still kept firm hold of his knees, and besought him a second time. "Incline your head," said she, "and promise me surely, or else deny me- for you have nothing to fear- that I may learn how greatly you disdain me." 

At this Jove was much troubled and answered, "I shall have trouble if you set me quarrelling with Juno, for she will provoke me with her taunting speeches; even now she is always railing at me before the other gods and accusing me of giving aid to the Trojans. Go back now, lest she should find out. I will consider the matter, and will bring it about as wish. See, I incline my head that you believe me. This is the most solemn that I can give to any god. I never recall my word, or deceive, or fail to do what I say, when I have nodded my head." 

As he spoke the son of Saturn bowed his dark brows, and the ambrosial locks swayed on his immortal head, till vast Olympus reeled. 

When the pair had thus laid their plans, they parted- Jove to his house, while the goddess quitted the splendour of Olympus, and plunged into the depths of the sea. The gods rose from their seats, before the coming of their sire. Not one of them dared to remain sitting, but all stood up as he came among them. There, then, he took his seat. But Juno, when she saw him, knew that he and the old merman's daughter, silver-footed Thetis, had been hatching mischief, so she at once began to upbraid him. "Trickster," she cried, "which of the gods have you been taking into your counsels now? You are always settling matters in secret behind my back, and have never yet told me, if you could help it, one word of your intentions." 

"Juno," replied the sire of gods and men, "you must not expect to be informed of all my counsels. You are my wife, but you would find it hard to understand them. When it is proper for you to hear, there is no one, god or man, who will be told sooner, but when I mean to keep a matter to myself, you must not pry nor ask questions." 

"Dread son of Saturn," answered Juno, "what are you talking about? I? Pry and ask questions? Never. I let you have your own way in everything. Still, I have a strong misgiving that the old merman's daughter Thetis has been talking you over, for she was with you and had hold of your knees this self-same morning. I believe, therefore, that you have been promising her to give glory to Achilles, and to kill much people at the ships of the Achaeans." 

"Wife," said Jove, "I can do nothing but you suspect me and find it out. You will take nothing by it, for I shall only dislike you the more, and it will go harder with you. Granted that it is as you say; I mean to have it so; sit down and hold your tongue as I bid you for if I once begin to lay my hands about you, though all heaven were on your side it would profit you nothing." 

On this Juno was frightened, so she curbed her stubborn will and sat down in silence. But the heavenly beings were disquieted throughout the house of Jove, till the cunning workman Vulcan began to try and pacify his mother Juno. "It will be intolerable," said he, "if you two fall to wrangling and setting heaven in an uproar about a pack of mortals. If such ill counsels are to prevail, we shall have no pleasure at our banquet. Let me then advise my mother- and she must herself know that it will be better- to make friends with my dear father Jove, lest he again scold her and disturb our feast. If the Olympian Thunderer wants to hurl us all from our seats, he can do so, for he is far the strongest, so give him fair words, and he will then soon be in a good humour with us." 

As he spoke, he took a double cup of nectar, and placed it in his mother's hand. "Cheer up, my dear mother," said he, "and make the best of it. I love you dearly, and should be very sorry to see you get a thrashing; however grieved I might be, I could not help for there is no standing against Jove. Once before when I was trying to help you, he caught me by the foot and flung me from the heavenly threshold. All day long from morn till eve, was I falling, till at sunset I came to ground in the island of Lemnos, and there I lay, with very little life left in me, till the Sintians came and tended me." 

Juno smiled at this, and as she smiled she took the cup from her son's hands. Then Vulcan drew sweet nectar from the mixing-bowl, and served it round among the gods, going from left to right; and the blessed gods laughed out a loud applause as they saw him ing bustling about the heavenly mansion. 

Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every one had his full share, so that all were satisfied. Apollo struck his lyre, and the Muses lifted up their sweet voices, calling and answering one another. But when the sun's glorious light had faded, they went home to bed, each in his own abode, which lame Vulcan with his consummate skill had fashioned for them. So Jove, the Olympian Lord of Thunder, hied him to the bed in which he always slept; and when he had got on to it he went to sleep, with Juno of the golden throne by his side. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK II

Now the other gods and the armed warriors on the plain slept soundly, but Jove was wakeful, for he was thinking how to do honour to Achilles, and destroyed much people at the ships of the Achaeans. In the end he deemed it would be best to send a lying dream to King Agamemnon; so he called one to him and said to it, "Lying Dream, go to the ships of the Achaeans, into the tent of Agamemnon, and say to him word to word as I now bid you. Tell him to get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for he shall take Troy. There are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans." 

The dream went when it had heard its message, and soon reached the ships of the Achaeans. It sought Agamemnon son of Atreus and found him in his tent, wrapped in a profound slumber. It hovered over his head in the likeness of Nestor, son of Neleus, whom Agamemnon honoured above all his councillors, and said:- 

"You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has the welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. Hear me at once, for I come as a messenger from Jove, who, though he be not near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. He bids you get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take Troy. There are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them over to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans at the hands of Jove. Remember this, and when you wake see that it does not escape you." 

The dream then left him, and he thought of things that were, surely not to be accomplished. He thought that on that same day he was to take the city of Priam, but he little knew what was in the mind of Jove, who had many another hard-fought fight in store alike for Danaans and Trojans. Then presently he woke, with the divine message still ringing in his ears; so he sat upright, and put on his soft shirt so fair and new, and over this his heavy cloak. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and slung his silver-studded sword about his shoulders; then he took the imperishable staff of his father, and sallied forth to the ships of the Achaeans. 

The goddess Dawn now wended her way to vast Olympus that she might herald day to Jove and to the other immortals, and Agamemnon sent the criers round to call the people in assembly; so they called them and the people gathered thereon. But first he summoned a meeting of the elders at the ship of Nestor king of Pylos, and when they were assembled he laid a cunning counsel before them. 

"My friends," said he, "I have had a dream from heaven in the dead of night, and its face and figure resembled none but Nestor's. It hovered over my head and said, 'You are sleeping, son of Atreus; one who has the welfare of his host and so much other care upon his shoulders should dock his sleep. Hear me at once, for I am a messenger from Jove, who, though he be not near, yet takes thought for you and pities you. He bids you get the Achaeans instantly under arms, for you shall take Troy. There are no longer divided counsels among the gods; Juno has brought them over to her own mind, and woe betides the Trojans at the hands of Jove. Remember this.' The dream then vanished and I awoke. Let us now, therefore, arm the sons of the Achaeans. But it will be well that I should first sound them, and to this end I will tell them to fly with their ships; but do you others go about among the host and prevent their doing so." 

He then sat down, and Nestor the prince of Pylos with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "My friends," said he, "princes and councillors of the Argives, if any other man of the Achaeans had told us of this dream we should have declared it false, and would have had nothing to do with it. But he who has seen it is the foremost man among us; we must therefore set about getting the people under arms." 

With this he led the way from the assembly, and the other sceptred kings rose with him in obedience to the word of Agamemnon; but the people pressed forward to hear. They swarmed like bees that sally from some hollow cave and flit in countless throng among the spring flowers, bunched in knots and clusters; even so did the mighty multitude pour from ships and tents to the assembly, and range themselves upon the wide-watered shore, while among them ran Wildfire Rumour, messenger of Jove, urging them ever to the fore. Thus they gathered in a pell-mell of mad confusion, and the earth groaned under the tramp of men as the people sought their places. Nine heralds went crying about among them to stay their tumult and bid them listen to the kings, till at last they were got into their several places and ceased their clamour. Then King Agamemnon rose, holding his sceptre. This was the work of Vulcan, who gave it to Jove the son of Saturn. Jove gave it to Mercury, slayer of Argus, guide and guardian. King Mercury gave it to Pelops, the mighty charioteer, and Pelops to Atreus, shepherd of his people. Atreus, when he died, left it to Thyestes, rich in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left it to be borne by Agamemnon, that he might be lord of all Argos and of the isles. Leaning, then, on his sceptre, he addressed the Argives. 

"My friends," he said, "heroes, servants of Mars, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn promise that I should sack the city of Priam before returning, but he has played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to Argos with the loss of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who has laid many a proud city in the dust, as he will yet lay others, for his power is above all. It will be a sorry tale hereafter that an Achaean host, at once so great and valiant, battled in vain against men fewer in number than themselves; but as yet the end is not in sight. Think that the Achaeans and Trojans have sworn to a solemn covenant, and that they have each been numbered- the Trojans by the roll of their householders, and we by companies of ten; think further that each of our companies desired to have a Trojan householder to pour out their wine; we are so greatly more in number that full many a company would have to go without its cup-bearer. But they have in the town allies from other places, and it is these that hinder me from being able to sack the rich city of Ilius. Nine of Jove years are gone; the timbers of our ships have rotted; their tackling is sound no longer. Our wives and little ones at home look anxiously for our coming, but the work that we came hither to do has not been done. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say: let us sail back to our own land, for we shall not take Troy." 

With these words he moved the hearts of the multitude, so many of them as knew not the cunning counsel of Agamemnon. They surged to and fro like the waves of the Icarian Sea, when the east and south winds break from heaven's clouds to lash them; or as when the west wind sweeps over a field of corn and the ears bow beneath the blast, even so were they swayed as they flew with loud cries towards the ships, and the dust from under their feet rose heavenward. They cheered each other on to draw the ships into the sea; they cleared the channels in front of them; they began taking away the stays from underneath them, and the welkin rang with their glad cries, so eager were they to return. 

Then surely the Argives would have returned after a fashion that was not fated. But Juno said to Minerva, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, shall the Argives fly home to their own land over the broad sea, and leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at Troy, far from their homes? Go about at once among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the sea." 

Minerva was not slack to do her bidding. Down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, and in a moment she was at the ships of the Achaeans. There she found Ulysses, peer of Jove in counsel, standing alone. He had not as yet laid a hand upon his ship, for he was grieved and sorry; so she went close up to him and said, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are you going to fling yourselves into your ships and be off home to your own land in this way? Will you leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, for whose sake so many of the Achaeans have died at Troy, far from their homes? Go about at once among the host, and speak fairly to them, man by man, that they draw not their ships into the sea." 

Ulysses knew the voice as that of the goddess: he flung his cloak from him and set off to run. His servant Eurybates, a man of Ithaca, who waited on him, took charge of the cloak, whereon Ulysses went straight up to Agamemnon and received from him his ancestral, imperishable staff. With this he went about among the ships of the Achaeans. 

Whenever he met a king or chieftain, he stood by him and spoke him fairly. "Sir," said he, "this flight is cowardly and unworthy. Stand to your post, and bid your people also keep their places. You do not yet know the full mind of Agamemnon; he was sounding us, and ere long will visit the Achaeans with his displeasure. We were not all of us at the council to hear what he then said; see to it lest he be angry and do us a mischief; for the pride of kings is great, and the hand of Jove is with them." 

But when he came across any common man who was making a noise, he struck him with his staff and rebuked him, saying, "Sirrah, hold your peace, and listen to better men than yourself. You are a coward and no soldier; you are nobody either in fight or council; we cannot all be kings; it is not well that there should be many masters; one man must be supreme- one king to whom the son of scheming Saturn has given the sceptre of sovereignty over you all." 

Thus masterfully did he go about among the host, and the people hurried back to the council from their tents and ships with a sound as the thunder of surf when it comes crashing down upon the shore, and all the sea is in an uproar. 

The rest now took their seats and kept to their own several places, but Thersites still went on wagging his unbridled tongue- a man of many words, and those unseemly; a monger of sedition, a railer against all who were in authority, who cared not what he said, so that he might set the Achaeans in a laugh. He was the ugliest man of all those that came before Troy- bandy-legged, lame of one foot, with his two shoulders rounded and hunched over his chest. His head ran up to a point, but there was little hair on the top of it. Achilles and Ulysses hated him worst of all, for it was with them that he was most wont to wrangle; now, however, with a shrill squeaky voice he began heaping his abuse on Agamemnon. The Achaeans were angry and disgusted, yet none the less he kept on brawling and bawling at the son of Atreus. 

"Agamemnon," he cried, "what ails you now, and what more do you want? Your tents are filled with bronze and with fair women, for whenever we take a town we give you the pick of them. Would you have yet more gold, which some Trojan is to give you as a ransom for his son, when I or another Achaean has taken him prisoner? or is it some young girl to hide and lie with? It is not well that you, the ruler of the Achaeans, should bring them into such misery. Weakling cowards, women rather than men, let us sail home, and leave this fellow here at Troy to stew in his own meeds of honour, and discover whether we were of any service to him or no. Achilles is a much better man than he is, and see how he has treated him- robbing him of his prize and keeping it himself. Achilles takes it meekly and shows no fight; if he did, son of Atreus, you would never again insult him." 

Thus railed Thersites, but Ulysses at once went up to him and rebuked him sternly. "Check your glib tongue, Thersites," said be, "and babble not a word further. Chide not with princes when you have none to back you. There is no viler creature come before Troy with the sons of Atreus. Drop this chatter about kings, and neither revile them nor keep harping about going home. We do not yet know how things are going to be, nor whether the Achaeans are to return with good success or evil. How dare you gibe at Agamemnon because the Danaans have awarded him so many prizes? I tell you, therefore- and it shall surely be- that if I again catch you talking such nonsense, I will either forfeit my own head and be no more called father of Telemachus, or I will take you, strip you stark naked, and whip you out of the assembly till you go blubbering back to the ships." 

On this he beat him with his staff about the back and shoulders till he dropped and fell a-weeping. The golden sceptre raised a bloody weal on his back, so he sat down frightened and in pain, looking foolish as he wiped the tears from his eyes. The people were sorry for him, yet they laughed heartily, and one would turn to his neighbour saying, "Ulysses has done many a good thing ere now in fight and council, but he never did the Argives a better turn than when he stopped this fellow's mouth from prating further. He will give the kings no more of his insolence." 

Thus said the people. Then Ulysses rose, sceptre in hand, and Minerva in the likeness of a herald bade the people be still, that those who were far off might hear him and consider his council. He therefore with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus:- 

"King Agamemnon, the Achaeans are for making you a by-word among all mankind. They forget the promise they made you when they set out from Argos, that you should not return till you had sacked the town of Troy, and, like children or widowed women, they murmur and would set off homeward. True it is that they have had toil enough to be disheartened. A man chafes at having to stay away from his wife even for a single month, when he is on shipboard, at the mercy of wind and sea, but it is now nine long years that we have been kept here; I cannot, therefore, blame the Achaeans if they turn restive; still we shall be shamed if we go home empty after so long a stay- therefore, my friends, be patient yet a little longer that we may learn whether the prophesyings of Calchas were false or true. 

"All who have not since perished must remember as though it were yesterday or the day before, how the ships of the Achaeans were detained in Aulis when we were on our way hither to make war on Priam and the Trojans. We were ranged round about a fountain offering hecatombs to the gods upon their holy altars, and there was a fine plane-tree from beneath which there welled a stream of pure water. Then we saw a prodigy; for Jove sent a fearful serpent out of the ground, with blood-red stains upon its back, and it darted from under the altar on to the plane-tree. Now there was a brood of young sparrows, quite small, upon the topmost bough, peeping out from under the leaves, eight in all, and their mother that hatched them made nine. The serpent ate the poor cheeping things, while the old bird flew about lamenting her little ones; but the serpent threw his coils about her and caught her by the wing as she was screaming. Then, when he had eaten both the sparrow and her young, the god who had sent him made him become a sign; for the son of scheming Saturn turned him into stone, and we stood there wondering at that which had come to pass. Seeing, then, that such a fearful portent had broken in upon our hecatombs, Calchas forthwith declared to us the oracles of heaven. 'Why, Achaeans,' said he, 'are you thus speechless? Jove has sent us this sign, long in coming, and long ere it be fulfilled, though its fame shall last for ever. As the serpent ate the eight fledglings and the sparrow that hatched them, which makes nine, so shall we fight nine years at Troy, but in the tenth shall take the town.' This was what he said, and now it is all coming true. Stay here, therefore, all of you, till we take the city of Priam." 

On this the Argives raised a shout, till the ships rang again with the uproar. Nestor, knight of Gerene, then addressed them. "Shame on you," he cried, "to stay talking here like children, when you should fight like men. Where are our covenants now, and where the oaths that we have taken? Shall our counsels be flung into the fire, with our drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we have put our trust? We waste our time in words, and for all our talking here shall be no further forward. Stand, therefore, son of Atreus, by your own steadfast purpose; lead the Argives on to battle, and leave this handful of men to rot, who scheme, and scheme in vain, to get back to Argos ere they have learned whether Jove be true or a liar. For the mighty son of Saturn surely promised that we should succeed, when we Argives set sail to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans. He showed us favourable signs by flashing his lightning on our right hands; therefore let none make haste to go till he has first lain with the wife of some Trojan, and avenged the toil and sorrow that he has suffered for the sake of Helen. Nevertheless, if any man is in such haste to be at home again, let him lay his hand to his ship that he may meet his doom in the sight of all. But, O king, consider and give ear to my counsel, for the word that I say may not be neglected lightly. Divide your men, Agamemnon, into their several tribes and clans, that clans and tribes may stand by and help one another. If you do this, and if the Achaeans obey you, you will find out who, both chiefs and peoples, are brave, and who are cowards; for they will vie against the other. Thus you shall also learn whether it is through the counsel of heaven or the cowardice of man that you shall fail to take the town." 

And Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, you have again outdone the sons of the Achaeans in counsel. Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I had among them ten more such councillors, for the city of King Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it. But the son of Saturn afflicts me with bootless wranglings and strife. Achilles and I are quarrelling about this girl, in which matter I was the first to offend; if we can be of one mind again, the Trojans will not stave off destruction for a day. Now, therefore, get your morning meal, that our hosts join in fight. Whet well your spears; see well to the ordering of your shields; give good feeds to your horses, and look your chariots carefully over, that we may do battle the livelong day; for we shall have no rest, not for a moment, till night falls to part us. The bands that bear your shields shall be wet with the sweat upon your shoulders, your hands shall weary upon your spears, your horses shall steam in front of your chariots, and if I see any man shirking the fight, or trying to keep out of it at the ships, there shall be no help for him, but he shall be a prey to dogs and vultures." 

Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans roared applause. As when the waves run high before the blast of the south wind and break on some lofty headland, dashing against it and buffeting it without ceasing, as the storms from every quarter drive them, even so did the Achaeans rise and hurry in all directions to their ships. There they lighted their fires at their tents and got dinner, offering sacrifice every man to one or other of the gods, and praying each one of them that he might live to come out of the fight. Agamemnon, king of men, sacrificed a fat five-year-old bull to the mighty son of Saturn, and invited the princes and elders of his host. First he asked Nestor and King Idomeneus, then the two Ajaxes and the son of Tydeus, and sixthly Ulysses, peer of gods in counsel; but Menelaus came of his own accord, for he knew how busy his brother then was. They stood round the bull with the barley-meal in their hands, and Agamemnon prayed, saying, "Jove, most glorious, supreme, that dwellest in heaven, and ridest upon the storm-cloud, grant that the sun may not go down, nor the night fall, till the palace of Priam is laid low, and its gates are consumed with fire. Grant that my sword may pierce the shirt of Hector about his heart, and that full many of his comrades may bite the dust as they fall dying round him." 

Thus he prayed, but the son of Saturn would not fulfil his prayer. He accepted the sacrifice, yet none the less increased their toil continually. When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley-meal upon the victim, they drew back its head, killed it, and then flayed it. They cut out the thigh-bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set pieces of raw meat on the top of them. These they burned upon the split logs of firewood, but they spitted the inward meats, and held them in the flames to cook. When the thigh-bones were burned, and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small, put the pieces upon spits, roasted them till they were done, and drew them off; then, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share, so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak. "King Agamemnon," said he, "let us not stay talking here, nor be slack in the work that heaven has put into our hands. Let the heralds summon the people to gather at their several ships; we will then go about among the host, that we may begin fighting at once." 

Thus did he speak, and Agamemnon heeded his words. He at once sent the criers round to call the people in assembly. So they called them, and the people gathered thereon. The chiefs about the son of Atreus chose their men and marshalled them, while Minerva went among them holding her priceless aegis that knows neither age nor death. From it there waved a hundred tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven, and each one of them worth a hundred oxen. With this she darted furiously everywhere among the hosts of the Achaeans, urging them forward, and putting courage into the heart of each, so that he might fight and do battle without ceasing. Thus war became sweeter in their eyes even than returning home in their ships. As when some great forest fire is raging upon a mountain top and its light is seen afar, even so as they marched the gleam of their armour flashed up into the firmament of heaven. 

They were like great flocks of geese, or cranes, or swans on the plain about the waters of Cayster, that wing their way hither and thither, glorying in the pride of flight, and crying as they settle till the fen is alive with their screaming. Even thus did their tribes pour from ships and tents on to the plain of the Scamander, and the ground rang as brass under the feet of men and horses. They stood as thick upon the flower-bespangled field as leaves that bloom in summer. 

As countless swarms of flies buzz around a herdsman's homestead in the time of spring when the pails are drenched with milk, even so did the Achaeans swarm on to the plain to charge the Trojans and destroy them. 

The chiefs disposed their men this way and that before the fight began, drafting them out as easily as goatherds draft their flocks when they have got mixed while feeding; and among them went King Agamemnon, with a head and face like Jove the lord of thunder, a waist like Mars, and a chest like that of Neptune. As some great bull that lords it over the herds upon the plain, even so did Jove make the son of Atreus stand peerless among the multitude of heroes. 

And now, O Muses, dwellers in the mansions of Olympus, tell me- for you are goddesses and are in all places so that you see all things, while we know nothing but by report- who were the chiefs and princes of the Danaans? As for the common soldiers, they were so that I could not name every single one of them though I had ten tongues, and though my voice failed not and my heart were of bronze within me, unless you, O Olympian Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, were to recount them to me. Nevertheless, I will tell the captains of the ships and all the fleet together. 

Peneleos, Leitus, Arcesilaus, Prothoenor, and Clonius were captains of the Boeotians. These were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky Aulis, and who held Schoenus, Scolus, and the highlands of Eteonus, with Thespeia, Graia, and the fair city of Mycalessus. They also held Harma, Eilesium, and Erythrae; and they had Eleon, Hyle, and Peteon; Ocalea and the strong fortress of Medeon; Copae, Eutresis, and Thisbe the haunt of doves; Coronea, and the pastures of Haliartus; Plataea and Glisas; the fortress of Thebes the less; holy Onchestus with its famous grove of Neptune; Arne rich in vineyards; Midea, sacred Nisa, and Anthedon upon the sea. From these there came fifty ships, and in each there were a hundred and twenty young men of the Boeotians. 

Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sons of Mars, led the people that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenus the realm of Minyas. Astyoche a noble maiden bore them in the house of Actor son of Azeus; for she had gone with Mars secretly into an upper chamber, and he had lain with her. With these there came thirty ships. 

The Phoceans were led by Schedius and Epistrophus, sons of mighty Iphitus the son of Naubolus. These were they that held Cyparissus, rocky Pytho, holy Crisa, Daulis, and Panopeus; they also that dwelt in Anemorea and Hyampolis, and about the waters of the river Cephissus, and Lilaea by the springs of the Cephissus; with their chieftains came forty ships, and they marshalled the forces of the Phoceans, which were stationed next to the Boeotians, on their left. 

Ajax, the fleet son of Oileus, commanded the Locrians. He was not so great, nor nearly so great, as Ajax the son of Telamon. He was a little man, and his breastplate was made of linen, but in use of the spear he excelled all the Hellenes and the Achaeans. These dwelt in Cynus, Opous, Calliarus, Bessa, Scarphe, fair Augeae, Tarphe, and Thronium about the river Boagrius. With him there came forty ships of the Locrians who dwell beyond Euboea. 

The fierce Abantes held Euboea with its cities, Chalcis, Eretria, Histiaea rich in vines, Cerinthus upon the sea, and the rock-perched town of Dium; with them were also the men of Carystus and Styra; Elephenor of the race of Mars was in command of these; he was son of Chalcodon, and chief over all the Abantes. With him they came, fleet of foot and wearing their hair long behind, brave warriors, who would ever strive to tear open the corslets of their foes with their long ashen spears. Of these there came fifty ships. 

And they that held the strong city of Athens, the people of great Erechtheus, who was born of the soil itself, but Jove's daughter, Minerva, fostered him, and established him at Athens in her own rich sanctuary. There, year by year, the Athenian youths worship him with sacrifices of bulls and rams. These were commanded by Menestheus, son of Peteos. No man living could equal him in the marshalling of chariots and foot soldiers. Nestor could alone rival him, for he was older. With him there came fifty ships. 

Ajax brought twelve ships from Salamis, and stationed them alongside those of the Athenians. 

The men of Argos, again, and those who held the walls of Tiryns, with Hermione, and Asine upon the gulf; Troezene, Eionae, and the vineyard lands of Epidaurus; the Achaean youths, moreover, who came from Aegina and Mases; these were led by Diomed of the loud battle-cry, and Sthenelus son of famed Capaneus. With them in command was Euryalus, son of king Mecisteus, son of Talaus; but Diomed was chief over them all. With these there came eighty ships. 

Those who held the strong city of Mycenae, rich Corinth and Cleonae; Orneae, Araethyrea, and Licyon, where Adrastus reigned of old; Hyperesia, high Gonoessa, and Pellene; Aegium and all the coast-land round about Helice; these sent a hundred ships under the command of King Agamemnon, son of Atreus. His force was far both finest and most numerous, and in their midst was the king himself, all glorious in his armour of gleaming bronze- foremost among the heroes, for he was the greatest king, and had most men under him. 

And those that dwelt in Lacedaemon, lying low among the hills, Pharis, Sparta, with Messe the haunt of doves; Bryseae, Augeae, Amyclae, and Helos upon the sea; Laas, moreover, and Oetylus; these were led by Menelaus of the loud battle-cry, brother to Agamemnon, and of them there were sixty ships, drawn up apart from the others. Among them went Menelaus himself, strong in zeal, urging his men to fight; for he longed to avenge the toil and sorrow that he had suffered for the sake of Helen. 

The men of Pylos and Arene, and Thryum where is the ford of the river Alpheus; strong Aipy, Cyparisseis, and Amphigenea; Pteleum, Helos, and Dorium, where the Muses met Thamyris, and stilled his minstrelsy for ever. He was returning from Oechalia, where Eurytus lived and reigned, and boasted that he would surpass even the Muses, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, if they should sing against him; whereon they were angry, and maimed him. They robbed him of his divine power of song, and thenceforth he could strike the lyre no more. These were commanded by Nestor, knight of Gerene, and with him there came ninety ships. 

And those that held Arcadia, under the high mountain of Cyllene, near the tomb of Aepytus, where the people fight hand to hand; the men of Pheneus also, and Orchomenus rich in flocks; of Rhipae, Stratie, and bleak Enispe; of Tegea and fair Mantinea; of Stymphelus and Parrhasia; of these King Agapenor son of Ancaeus was commander, and they had sixty ships. Many Arcadians, good soldiers, came in each one of them, but Agamemnon found them the ships in which to cross the sea, for they were not a people that occupied their business upon the waters. 

The men, moreover, of Buprasium and of Elis, so much of it as is enclosed between Hyrmine, Myrsinus upon the sea-shore, the rock Olene and Alesium. These had four leaders, and each of them had ten ships, with many Epeans on board. Their captains were Amphimachus and Thalpius- the one, son of Cteatus, and the other, of Eurytus- both of the race of Actor. The two others were Diores, son of Amarynces, and Polyxenus, son of King Agasthenes, son of Augeas. 

And those of Dulichium with the sacred Echinean islands, who dwelt beyond the sea off Elis; these were led by Meges, peer of Mars, and the son of valiant Phyleus, dear to Jove, who quarrelled with his father, and went to settle in Dulichium. With him there came forty ships. 

Ulysses led the brave Cephallenians, who held Ithaca, Neritum with its forests, Crocylea, rugged Aegilips, Samos and Zacynthus, with the mainland also that was over against the islands. These were led by Ulysses, peer of Jove in counsel, and with him there came twelve ships. 

Thoas, son of Andraemon, commanded the Aetolians, who dwelt in Pleuron, Olenus, Pylene, Chalcis by the sea, and rocky Calydon, for the great king Oeneus had now no sons living, and was himself dead, as was also golden-haired Meleager, who had been set over the Aetolians to be their king. And with Thoas there came forty ships. 

The famous spearsman Idomeneus led the Cretans, who held Cnossus, and the well-walled city of Gortys; Lyctus also, Miletus and Lycastus that lies upon the chalk; the populous towns of Phaestus and Rhytium, with the other peoples that dwelt in the hundred cities of Crete. All these were led by Idomeneus, and by Meriones, peer of murderous Mars. And with these there came eighty ships. 

Tlepolemus, son of Hercules, a man both brave and large of stature, brought nine ships of lordly warriors from Rhodes. These dwelt in Rhodes which is divided among the three cities of Lindus, Ielysus, and Cameirus, that lies upon the chalk. These were commanded by Tlepolemus, son of Hercules by Astyochea, whom he had carried off from Ephyra, on the river Selleis, after sacking many cities of valiant warriors. When Tlepolemus grew up, he killed his father's uncle Licymnius, who had been a famous warrior in his time, but was then grown old. On this he built himself a fleet, gathered a great following, and fled beyond the sea, for he was menaced by the other sons and grandsons of Hercules. After a voyage. during which he suffered great hardship, he came to Rhodes, where the people divided into three communities, according to their tribes, and were dearly loved by Jove, the lord, of gods and men; wherefore the son of Saturn showered down great riches upon them. 

And Nireus brought three ships from Syme- Nireus, who was the handsomest man that came up under Ilius of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus- but he was a man of no substance, and had but a small following. 

And those that held Nisyrus, Crapathus, and Casus, with Cos, the city of Eurypylus, and the Calydnian islands, these were commanded by Pheidippus and Antiphus, two sons of King Thessalus the son of Hercules. And with them there came thirty ships. 

Those again who held Pelasgic Argos, Alos, Alope, and Trachis; and those of Phthia and Hellas the land of fair women, who were called Myrmidons, Hellenes, and Achaeans; these had fifty ships, over which Achilles was in command. But they now took no part in the war, inasmuch as there was no one to marshal them; for Achilles stayed by his ships, furious about the loss of the girl Briseis, whom he had taken from Lyrnessus at his own great peril, when he had sacked Lyrnessus and Thebe, and had overthrown Mynes and Epistrophus, sons of king Evenor, son of Selepus. For her sake Achilles was still grieving, but ere long he was again to join them. 

And those that held Phylace and the flowery meadows of Pyrasus, sanctuary of Ceres; Iton, the mother of sheep; Antrum upon the sea, and Pteleum that lies upon the grass lands. Of these brave Protesilaus had been captain while he was yet alive, but he was now lying under the earth. He had left a wife behind him in Phylace to tear her cheeks in sorrow, and his house was only half finished, for he was slain by a Dardanian warrior while leaping foremost of the Achaeans upon the soil of Troy. Still, though his people mourned their chieftain, they were not without a leader, for Podarces, of the race of Mars, marshalled them; he was son of Iphiclus, rich in sheep, who was the son of Phylacus, and he was own brother to Protesilaus, only younger, Protesilaus being at once the elder and the more valiant. So the people were not without a leader, though they mourned him whom they had lost. With him there came forty ships. 

And those that held Pherae by the Boebean lake, with Boebe, Glaphyrae, and the populous city of Iolcus, these with their eleven ships were led by Eumelus, son of Admetus, whom Alcestis bore to him, loveliest of the daughters of Pelias. 

And those that held Methone and Thaumacia, with Meliboea and rugged Olizon, these were led by the skilful archer Philoctetes, and they had seven ships, each with fifty oarsmen all of them good archers; but Philoctetes was lying in great pain in the Island of Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaeans left him, for he had been bitten by a poisonous water snake. There he lay sick and sorry, and full soon did the Argives come to miss him. But his people, though they felt his loss were not leaderless, for Medon, the bastard son of Oileus by Rhene, set them in array. 

Those, again, of Tricca and the stony region of Ithome, and they that held Oechalia, the city of Oechalian Eurytus, these were commanded by the two sons of Aesculapius, skilled in the art of healing, Podalirius and Machaon. And with them there came thirty ships. 

The men, moreover, of Ormenius, and by the fountain of Hypereia, with those that held Asterius, and the white crests of Titanus, these were led by Eurypylus, the son of Euaemon, and with them there came forty ships. 

Those that held Argissa and Gyrtone, Orthe, Elone, and the white city of Oloosson, of these brave Polypoetes was leader. He was son of Pirithous, who was son of Jove himself, for Hippodameia bore him to Pirithous on the day when he took his revenge on the shaggy mountain savages and drove them from Mt. Pelion to the Aithices. But Polypoetes was not sole in command, for with him was Leonteus, of the race of Mars, who was son of Coronus, the son of Caeneus. And with these there came forty ships. 

Guneus brought two and twenty ships from Cyphus, and he was followed by the Enienes and the valiant Peraebi, who dwelt about wintry Dodona, and held the lands round the lovely river Titaresius, which sends its waters into the Peneus. They do not mingle with the silver eddies of the Peneus, but flow on the top of them like oil; for the Titaresius is a branch of dread Orcus and of the river Styx. 

Of the Magnetes, Prothous son of Tenthredon was commander. They were they that dwelt about the river Peneus and Mt. Pelion. Prothous, fleet of foot, was their leader, and with him there came forty ships. 

Such were the chiefs and princes of the Danaans. Who, then, O Muse, was the foremost, whether man or horse, among those that followed after the sons of Atreus? 

Of the horses, those of the son of Pheres were by far the finest. They were driven by Eumelus, and were as fleet as birds. They were of the same age and colour, and perfectly matched in height. Apollo, of the silver bow, had bred them in Perea- both of them mares, and terrible as Mars in battle. Of the men, Ajax, son of Telamon, was much the foremost so long as Achilles' anger lasted, for Achilles excelled him greatly and he had also better horses; but Achilles was now holding aloof at his ships by reason of his quarrel with Agamemnon, and his people passed their time upon the sea shore, throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark, and in archery. Their horses stood each by his own chariot, champing lotus and wild celery. The chariots were housed under cover, but their owners, for lack of leadership, wandered hither and thither about the host and went not forth to fight. 

Thus marched the host like a consuming fire, and the earth groaned beneath them when the lord of thunder is angry and lashes the land about Typhoeus among the Arimi, where they say Typhoeus lies. Even so did the earth groan beneath them as they sped over the plain. 

And now Iris, fleet as the wind, was sent by Jove to tell the bad news among the Trojans. They were gathered in assembly, old and young, at Priam's gates, and Iris came close up to Priam, speaking with the voice of Priam's son Polites, who, being fleet of foot, was stationed as watchman for the Trojans on the tomb of old Aesyetes, to look out for any sally of the Achaeans. In his likeness Iris spoke, saying, "Old man, you talk idly, as in time of peace, while war is at hand. I have been in many a battle, but never yet saw such a host as is now advancing. They are crossing the plain to attack the city as thick as leaves or as the sands of the sea. Hector, I charge you above all others, do as I say. There are many allies dispersed about the city of Priam from distant places and speaking divers tongues. Therefore, let each chief give orders to his own people, setting them severally in array and leading them forth to battle." 

Thus she spoke, but Hector knew that it was the goddess, and at once broke up the assembly. The men flew to arms; all the gates were opened, and the people thronged through them, horse and foot, with the tramp as of a great multitude. 

Now there is a high mound before the city, rising by itself upon the plain. Men call it Batieia, but the gods know that it is the tomb of lithe Myrine. Here the Trojans and their allies divided their forces. 

Priam's son, great Hector of the gleaming helmet, commanded the Trojans, and with him were arrayed by far the greater number and most valiant of those who were longing for the fray. 

The Dardanians were led by brave Aeneas, whom Venus bore to Anchises, when she, goddess though she was, had lain with him upon the mountain slopes of Ida. He was not alone, for with him were the two sons of Antenor, Archilochus and Acamas, both skilled in all the arts of war. 

They that dwelt in Telea under the lowest spurs of Mt. Ida, men of substance, who drink the limpid waters of the Aesepus, and are of Trojan blood- these were led by Pandarus son of Lycaon, whom Apollo had taught to use the bow. 

They that held Adresteia and the land of Apaesus, with Pityeia, and the high mountain of Tereia- these were led by Adrestus and Amphius, whose breastplate was of linen. These were the sons of Merops of Percote, who excelled in all kinds of divination. He told them not to take part in the war, but they gave him no heed, for fate lured them to destruction. 

They that dwelt about Percote and Practius, with Sestos, Abydos, and Arisbe- these were led by Asius, son of Hyrtacus, a brave commander- Asius, the son of Hyrtacus, whom his powerful dark bay steeds, of the breed that comes from the river Selleis, had brought from Arisbe. 

Hippothous led the tribes of Pelasgian spearsmen, who dwelt in fertile Larissa- Hippothous, and Pylaeus of the race of Mars, two sons of the Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus. 

Acamas and the warrior Peirous commanded the Thracians and those that came from beyond the mighty stream of the Hellespont. 

Euphemus, son of Troezenus, the son of Ceos, was captain of the Ciconian spearsmen. 

Pyraechmes led the Paeonian archers from distant Amydon, by the broad waters of the river Axius, the fairest that flow upon the earth. 

The Paphlagonians were commanded by stout-hearted Pylaemanes from Enetae, where the mules run wild in herds. These were they that held Cytorus and the country round Sesamus, with the cities by the river Parthenius, Cromna, Aegialus, and lofty Erithini. 

Odius and Epistrophus were captains over the Halizoni from distant Alybe, where there are mines of silver. 

Chromis, and Ennomus the augur, led the Mysians, but his skill in augury availed not to save him from destruction, for he fell by the hand of the fleet descendant of Aeacus in the river, where he slew others also of the Trojans. 

Phorcys, again, and noble Ascanius led the Phrygians from the far country of Ascania, and both were eager for the fray. 

Mesthles and Antiphus commanded the Meonians, sons of Talaemenes, born to him of the Gygaean lake. These led the Meonians, who dwelt under Mt. Tmolus. 

Nastes led the Carians, men of a strange speech. These held Miletus and the wooded mountain of Phthires, with the water of the river Maeander and the lofty crests of Mt. Mycale. These were commanded by Nastes and Amphimachus, the brave sons of Nomion. He came into the fight with gold about him, like a girl; fool that he was, his gold was of no avail to save him, for he fell in the river by the hand of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, and Achilles bore away his gold. 

Sarpedon and Glaucus led the Lycians from their distant land, by the eddying waters of the Xanthus. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK III

When the companies were thus arrayed, each under its own captain, the Trojans advanced as a flight of wild fowl or cranes that scream overhead when rain and winter drive them over the flowing waters of Oceanus to bring death and destruction on the Pygmies, and they wrangle in the air as they fly; but the Achaeans marched silently, in high heart, and minded to stand by one another. 

As when the south wind spreads a curtain of mist upon the mountain tops, bad for shepherds but better than night for thieves, and a man can see no further than he can throw a stone, even so rose the dust from under their feet as they made all speed over the plain. 

When they were close up with one another, Alexandrus came forward as champion on the Trojan side. On his shoulders he bore the skin of a panther, his bow, and his sword, and he brandished two spears shod with bronze as a challenge to the bravest of the Achaeans to meet him in single fight. Menelaus saw him thus stride out before the ranks, and was glad as a hungry lion that lights on the carcase of some goat or horned stag, and devours it there and then, though dogs and youths set upon him. Even thus was Menelaus glad when his eyes caught sight of Alexandrus, for he deemed that now he should be revenged. He sprang, therefore, from his chariot, clad in his suit of armour. 

Alexandrus quailed as he saw Menelaus come forward, and shrank in fear of his life under cover of his men. As one who starts back affrighted, trembling and pale, when he comes suddenly upon a serpent in some mountain glade, even so did Alexandrus plunge into the throng of Trojan warriors, terror-stricken at the sight of the son Atreus. 

Then Hector upbraided him. "Paris," said he, "evil-hearted Paris, fair to see, but woman-mad, and false of tongue, would that you had never been born, or that you had died unwed. Better so, than live to be disgraced and looked askance at. Will not the Achaeans mock at us and say that we have sent one to champion us who is fair to see but who has neither wit nor courage? Did you not, such as you are, get your following together and sail beyond the seas? Did you not from your a far country carry off a lovely woman wedded among a people of warriors- to bring sorrow upon your father, your city, and your whole country, but joy to your enemies, and hang-dog shamefacedness to yourself? And now can you not dare face Menelaus and learn what manner of man he is whose wife you have stolen? Where indeed would be your lyre and your love-tricks, your comely locks and your fair favour, when you were lying in the dust before him? The Trojans are a weak-kneed people, or ere this you would have had a shirt of stones for the wrongs you have done them." 

And Alexandrus answered, "Hector, your rebuke is just. You are hard as the axe which a shipwright wields at his work, and cleaves the timber to his liking. As the axe in his hand, so keen is the edge of your scorn. Still, taunt me not with the gifts that golden Venus has given me; they are precious; let not a man disdain them, for the gods give them where they are minded, and none can have them for the asking. If you would have me do battle with Menelaus, bid the Trojans and Achaeans take their seats, while he and I fight in their midst for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who shall be victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his home, but let the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby you Trojans shall stay here in Troy, while the others go home to Argos and the land of the Achaeans." 

When Hector heard this he was glad, and went about among the Trojan ranks holding his spear by the middle to keep them back, and they all sat down at his bidding: but the Achaeans still aimed at him with stones and arrows, till Agamemnon shouted to them saying, "Hold, Argives, shoot not, sons of the Achaeans; Hector desires to speak." 

They ceased taking aim and were still, whereon Hector spoke. "Hear from my mouth," said he, "Trojans and Achaeans, the saying of Alexandrus, through whom this quarrel has come about. He bids the Trojans and Achaeans lay their armour upon the ground, while he and Menelaus fight in the midst of you for Helen and all her wealth. Let him who shall be victorious and prove to be the better man take the woman and all she has, to bear them to his own home, but let the rest swear to a solemn covenant of peace." 

Thus he spoke, and they all held their peace, till Menelaus of the loud battle-cry addressed them. "And now," he said, "hear me too, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I deem that the parting of Achaeans and Trojans is at hand, as well it may be, seeing how much have suffered for my quarrel with Alexandrus and the wrong he did me. Let him who shall die, die, and let the others fight no more. Bring, then, two lambs, a white ram and a black ewe, for Earth and Sun, and we will bring a third for Jove. Moreover, you shall bid Priam come, that he may swear to the covenant himself; for his sons are high-handed and ill to trust, and the oaths of Jove must not be transgressed or taken in vain. Young men's minds are light as air, but when an old man comes he looks before and after, deeming that which shall be fairest upon both sides." 

The Trojans and Achaeans were glad when they heard this, for they thought that they should now have rest. They backed their chariots toward the ranks, got out of them, and put off their armour, laying it down upon the ground; and the hosts were near to one another with a little space between them. Hector sent two messengers to the city to bring the lambs and to bid Priam come, while Agamemnon told Talthybius to fetch the other lamb from the ships, and he did as Agamemnon had said. 

Meanwhile Iris went to Helen in the form of her sister-in-law, wife of the son of Antenor, for Helicaon, son of Antenor, had married Laodice, the fairest of Priam's daughters. She found her in her own room, working at a great web of purple linen, on which she was embroidering the battles between Trojans and Achaeans, that Mars had made them fight for her sake. Iris then came close up to her and said, "Come hither, child, and see the strange doings of the Trojans and Achaeans till now they have been warring upon the plain, mad with lust of battle, but now they have left off fighting, and are leaning upon their shields, sitting still with their spears planted beside them. Alexandrus and Menelaus are going to fight about yourself, and you are to the the wife of him who is the victor." 

Thus spoke the goddess, and Helen's heart yearned after her former husband, her city, and her parents. She threw a white mantle over her head, and hurried from her room, weeping as she went, not alone, but attended by two of her handmaids, Aethrae, daughter of Pittheus, and Clymene. And straightway they were at the Scaean gates. 

The two sages, Ucalegon and Antenor, elders of the people, were seated by the Scaean gates, with Priam, Panthous, Thymoetes, Lampus, Clytius, and Hiketaon of the race of Mars. These were too old to fight, but they were fluent orators, and sat on the tower like cicales that chirrup delicately from the boughs of some high tree in a wood. When they saw Helen coming towards the tower, they said softly to one another, "Small wonder that Trojans and Achaeans should endure so much and so long, for the sake of a woman so marvellously and divinely lovely. Still, fair though she be, let them take her and go, or she will breed sorrow for us and for our children after us." 

But Priam bade her draw nigh. "My child," said he, "take your seat in front of me that you may see your former husband, your kinsmen and your friends. I lay no blame upon you, it is the gods, not you who are to blame. It is they that have brought about this terrible war with the Achaeans. Tell me, then, who is yonder huge hero so great and goodly? I have seen men taller by a head, but none so comely and so royal. Surely he must be a king." 

"Sir," answered Helen, "father of my husband, dear and reverend in my eyes, would that I had chosen death rather than to have come here with your son, far from my bridal chamber, my friends, my darling daughter, and all the companions of my girlhood. But it was not to be, and my lot is one of tears and sorrow. As for your question, the hero of whom you ask is Agamemnon, son of Atreus, a good king and a brave soldier, brother-in-law as surely as that he lives, to my abhorred and miserable self." 

The old man marvelled at him and said, "Happy son of Atreus, child of good fortune. I see that the Achaeans are subject to you in great multitudes. When I was in Phrygia I saw much horsemen, the people of Otreus and of Mygdon, who were camping upon the banks of the river Sangarius; I was their ally, and with them when the Amazons, peers of men, came up against them, but even they were not so many as the Achaeans." 

The old man next looked upon Ulysses; "Tell me," he said, "who is that other, shorter by a head than Agamemnon, but broader across the chest and shoulders? His armour is laid upon the ground, and he stalks in front of the ranks as it were some great woolly ram ordering his ewes." 

And Helen answered, "He is Ulysses, a man of great craft, son of Laertes. He was born in rugged Ithaca, and excels in all manner of stratagems and subtle cunning." 

On this Antenor said, "Madam, you have spoken truly. Ulysses once came here as envoy about yourself, and Menelaus with him. I received them in my own house, and therefore know both of them by sight and conversation. When they stood up in presence of the assembled Trojans, Menelaus was the broader shouldered, but when both were seated Ulysses had the more royal presence. After a time they delivered their message, and the speech of Menelaus ran trippingly on the tongue; he did not say much, for he was a man of few words, but he spoke very clearly and to the point, though he was the younger man of the two; Ulysses, on the other hand, when he rose to speak, was at first silent and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground. There was no play nor graceful movement of his sceptre; he kept it straight and stiff like a man unpractised in oratory- one might have taken him for a mere churl or simpleton; but when he raised his voice, and the words came driving from his deep chest like winter snow before the wind, then there was none to touch him, and no man thought further of what he looked like." 

Priam then caught sight of Ajax and asked, "Who is that great and goodly warrior whose head and broad shoulders tower above the rest of the Argives?" 

"That," answered Helen, "is huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, and on the other side of him, among the Cretans, stands Idomeneus looking like a god, and with the captains of the Cretans round him. Often did Menelaus receive him as a guest in our house when he came visiting us from Crete. I see, moreover, many other Achaeans whose names I could tell you, but there are two whom I can nowhere find, Castor, breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer; they are children of my mother, and own brothers to myself. Either they have not left Lacedaemon, or else, though they have brought their ships, they will not show themselves in battle for the shame and disgrace that I have brought upon them." 

She knew not that both these heroes were already lying under the earth in their own land of Lacedaemon. 

Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy oath-offerings through the city- two lambs and a goatskin of wine, the gift of earth; and Idaeus brought the mixing bowl and the cups of gold. He went up to Priam and said, "Son of Laomedon, the princes of the Trojans and Achaeans bid you come down on to the plain and swear to a solemn covenant. Alexandrus and Menelaus are to fight for Helen in single combat, that she and all her wealth may go with him who is the victor. We are to swear to a solemn covenant of peace whereby we others shall dwell here in Troy, while the Achaeans return to Argos and the land of the Achaeans." 

The old man trembled as he heard, but bade his followers yoke the horses, and they made all haste to do so. He mounted the chariot, gathered the reins in his hand, and Antenor took his seat beside him; they then drove through the Scaean gates on to the plain. When they reached the ranks of the Trojans and Achaeans they left the chariot, and with measured pace advanced into the space between the hosts. 

Agamemnon and Ulysses both rose to meet them. The attendants brought on the oath-offerings and mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls; they poured water over the hands of the chieftains, and the son of Atreus drew the dagger that hung by his sword, and cut wool from the lambs' heads; this the men-servants gave about among the Trojan and Achaean princes, and the son of Atreus lifted up his hands in prayer. "Father Jove," he cried, "that rulest in Ida, most glorious in power, and thou oh Sun, that seest and givest ear to all things, Earth and Rivers, and ye who in the realms below chastise the soul of him that has broken his oath, witness these rites and guard them, that they be not vain. If Alexandrus kills Menelaus, let him keep Helen and all her wealth, while we sail home with our ships; but if Menelaus kills Alexandrus, let the Trojans give back Helen and all that she has; let them moreover pay such fine to the Achaeans as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among those that shall be born hereafter. Aid if Priam and his sons refuse such fine when Alexandrus has fallen, then will I stay here and fight on till I have got satisfaction." 

As he spoke he drew his knife across the throats of the victims, and laid them down gasping and dying upon the ground, for the knife had reft them of their strength. Then they poured wine from the mixing-bowl into the cups, and prayed to the everlasting gods, saying, Trojans and Achaeans among one another, "Jove, most great and glorious, and ye other everlasting gods, grant that the brains of them who shall first sin against their oaths- of them and their children- may be shed upon the ground even as this wine, and let their wives become the slaves of strangers." 

Thus they prayed, but not as yet would Jove grant them their prayer. Then Priam, descendant of Dardanus, spoke, saying, "Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, I will now go back to the wind-beaten city of Ilius: I dare not with my own eyes witness this fight between my son and Menelaus, for Jove and the other immortals alone know which shall fall." 

On this he laid the two lambs on his chariot and took his seat. He gathered the reins in his hand, and Antenor sat beside him; the two then went back to Ilius. Hector and Ulysses measured the ground, and cast lots from a helmet of bronze to see which should take aim first. Meanwhile the two hosts lifted up their hands and prayed saying, "Father Jove, that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, grant that he who first brought about this war between us may die, and enter the house of Hades, while we others remain at peace and abide by our oaths." 

Great Hector now turned his head aside while he shook the helmet, and the lot of Paris flew out first. The others took their several stations, each by his horses and the place where his arms were lying, while Alexandrus, husband of lovely Helen, put on his goodly armour. First he greaved his legs with greaves of good make and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of his brother Lycaon, and fitted it to his own body; he hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his helmet, well-wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it, and he grasped a redoubtable spear that suited his hands. In like fashion Menelaus also put on his armour. 

When they had thus armed, each amid his own people, they strode fierce of aspect into the open space, and both Trojans and Achaeans were struck with awe as they beheld them. They stood near one another on the measured ground, brandishing their spears, and each furious against the other. Alexandrus aimed first, and struck the round shield of the son of Atreus, but the spear did not pierce it, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus next took aim, praying to Father Jove as he did so. "King Jove," he said, "grant me revenge on Alexandrus who has wronged me; subdue him under my hand that in ages yet to come a man may shrink from doing ill deeds in the house of his host." 

He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it at the shield of Alexandrus. Through shield and cuirass it went, and tore the shirt by his flank, but Alexandrus swerved aside, and thus saved his life. Then the son of Atreus drew his sword, and drove at the projecting part of his helmet, but the sword fell shivered in three or four pieces from his hand, and he cried, looking towards Heaven, "Father Jove, of all gods thou art the most despiteful; I made sure of my revenge, but the sword has broken in my hand, my spear has been hurled in vain, and I have not killed him." 

With this he flew at Alexandrus, caught him by the horsehair plume of his helmet, and began dragging him towards the Achaeans. The strap of the helmet that went under his chin was choking him, and Menelaus would have dragged him off to his own great glory had not Jove's daughter Venus been quick to mark and to break the strap of oxhide, so that the empty helmet came away in his hand. This he flung to his comrades among the Achaeans, and was again springing upon Alexandrus to run him through with a spear, but Venus snatched him up in a moment (as a god can do), hid him under a cloud of darkness, and conveyed him to his own bedchamber. 

Then she went to call Helen, and found her on a high tower with the Trojan women crowding round her. She took the form of an old woman who used to dress wool for her when she was still in Lacedaemon, and of whom she was very fond. Thus disguised she plucked her by perfumed robe and said, "Come hither; Alexandrus says you are to go to the house; he is on his bed in his own room, radiant with beauty and dressed in gorgeous apparel. No one would think he had just come from fighting, but rather that he was going to a dance, or had done dancing and was sitting down." 

With these words she moved the heart of Helen to anger. When she marked the beautiful neck of the goddess, her lovely bosom, and sparkling eyes, she marvelled at her and said, "Goddess, why do you thus beguile me? Are you going to send me afield still further to some man whom you have taken up in Phrygia or fair Meonia? Menelaus has just vanquished Alexandrus, and is to take my hateful self back with him. You are come here to betray me. Go sit with Alexandrus yourself; henceforth be goddess no longer; never let your feet carry you back to Olympus; worry about him and look after him till he make you his wife, or, for the matter of that, his slave- but me? I shall not go; I can garnish his bed no longer; I should be a by-word among all the women of Troy. Besides, I have trouble on my mind." 

Venus was very angry, and said, "Bold hussy, do not provoke me; if you do, I shall leave you to your fate and hate you as much as I have loved you. I will stir up fierce hatred between Trojans and Achaeans, and you shall come to a bad end." 

At this Helen was frightened. She wrapped her mantle about her and went in silence, following the goddess and unnoticed by the Trojan women. 

When they came to the house of Alexandrus the maid-servants set about their work, but Helen went into her own room, and the laughter-loving goddess took a seat and set it for her facing Alexandrus. On this Helen, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, sat down, and with eyes askance began to upbraid her husband. 

"So you are come from the fight," said she; "would that you had fallen rather by the hand of that brave man who was my husband. You used to brag that you were a better man with hands and spear than Menelaus. go, but I then, an challenge him again- but I should advise you not to do so, for if you are foolish enough to meet him in single combat, you will soon all by his spear." 

And Paris answered, "Wife, do not vex me with your reproaches. This time, with the help of Minerva, Menelaus has vanquished me; another time I may myself be victor, for I too have gods that will stand by me. Come, let us lie down together and make friends. Never yet was I so passionately enamoured of you as at this moment- not even when I first carried you off from Lacedaemon and sailed away with you- not even when I had converse with you upon the couch of love in the island of Cranae was I so enthralled by desire of you as now." On this he led her towards the bed, and his wife went with him. 

Thus they laid themselves on the bed together; but the son of Atreus strode among the throng, looking everywhere for Alexandrus, and no man, neither of the Trojans nor of the allies, could find him. If they had seen him they were in no mind to hide him, for they all of them hated him as they did death itself. Then Agamemnon, king of men, spoke, saying, "Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and allies. The victory has been with Menelaus; therefore give back Helen with all her wealth, and pay such fine as shall be agreed upon, in testimony among them that shall be born hereafter." 

Thus spoke the son of Atreus, and the Achaeans shouted in applause. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK IV

Now the gods were sitting with Jove in council upon the golden floor while Hebe went round pouring out nectar for them to drink, and as they pledged one another in their cups of gold they looked down upon the town of Troy. The son of Saturn then began to tease Juno, talking at her so as to provoke her. "Menelaus," said he, "has two good friends among the goddesses, Juno of Argos, and Minerva of Alalcomene, but they only sit still and look on, while Venus keeps ever by Alexandrus' side to defend him in any danger; indeed she has just rescued him when he made sure that it was all over with him- for the victory really did lie with Menelaus. We must consider what we shall do about all this; shall we set them fighting anew or make peace between them? If you will agree to this last Menelaus can take back Helen and the city of Priam may remain still inhabited." 

Minerva and Juno muttered their discontent as they sat side by side hatching mischief for the Trojans. Minerva scowled at her father, for she was in a furious passion with him, and said nothing, but Juno could not contain herself. "Dread son of Saturn," said she, "what, pray, is the meaning of all this? Is my trouble, then, to go for nothing, and the sweat that I have sweated, to say nothing of my horses, while getting the people together against Priam and his children? Do as you will, but we other gods shall not all of us approve your counsel." 

Jove was angry and answered, "My dear, what harm have Priam and his sons done you that you are so hotly bent on sacking the city of Ilius? Will nothing do for you but you must within their walls and eat Priam raw, with his sons and all the other Trojans to boot? Have it your own way then; for I would not have this matter become a bone of contention between us. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, if ever I want to sack a city belonging to friends of yours, you must not try to stop me; you will have to let me do it, for I am giving in to you sorely against my will. Of all inhabited cities under the sun and stars of heaven, there was none that I so much respected as Ilius with Priam and his whole people. Equitable feasts were never wanting about my altar, nor the savour of burning fat, which is honour due to ourselves." 

"My own three favourite cities," answered Juno, "are Argos, Sparta, and Mycenae. Sack them whenever you may be displeased with them. I shall not defend them and I shall not care. Even if I did, and tried to stay you, I should take nothing by it, for you are much stronger than I am, but I will not have my own work wasted. I too am a god and of the same race with yourself. I am Saturn's eldest daughter, and am honourable not on this ground only, but also because I am your wife, and you are king over the gods. Let it be a case, then, of give-and-take between us, and the rest of the gods will follow our lead. Tell Minerva to go and take part in the fight at once, and let her contrive that the Trojans shall be the first to break their oaths and set upon the Achaeans." 

The sire of gods and men heeded her words, and said to Minerva, "Go at once into the Trojan and Achaean hosts, and contrive that the Trojans shall be the first to break their oaths and set upon the Achaeans." 

This was what Minerva was already eager to do, so down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. She shot through the sky as some brilliant meteor which the son of scheming Saturn has sent as a sign to mariners or to some great army, and a fiery train of light follows in its wake. The Trojans and Achaeans were struck with awe as they beheld, and one would turn to his neighbour, saying, "Either we shall again have war and din of combat, or Jove the lord of battle will now make peace between us." 

Thus did they converse. Then Minerva took the form of Laodocus, son of Antenor, and went through the ranks of the Trojans to find Pandarus, the redoubtable son of Lycaon. She found him standing among the stalwart heroes who had followed him from the banks of the Aesopus, so she went close up to him and said, "Brave son of Lycaon, will you do as I tell you? If you dare send an arrow at Menelaus you will win honour and thanks from all the Trojans, and especially from prince Alexandrus- he would be the first to requite you very handsomely if he could see Menelaus mount his funeral pyre, slain by an arrow from your hand. Take your home aim then, and pray to Lycian Apollo, the famous archer; vow that when you get home to your strong city of Zelea you will offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour." 

His fool's heart was persuaded, and he took his bow from its case. This bow was made from the horns of a wild ibex which he had killed as it was bounding from a rock; he had stalked it, and it had fallen as the arrow struck it to the heart. Its horns were sixteen palms long, and a worker in horn had made them into a bow, smoothing them well down, and giving them tips of gold. When Pandarus had strung his bow he laid it carefully on the ground, and his brave followers held their shields before him lest the Achaeans should set upon him before he had shot Menelaus. Then he opened the lid of his quiver and took out a winged arrow that had yet been shot, fraught with the pangs of death. He laid the arrow on the string and prayed to Lycian Apollo, the famous archer, vowing that when he got home to his strong city of Zelea he would offer a hecatomb of firstling lambs in his honour. He laid the notch of the arrow on the oxhide bowstring, and drew both notch and string to his breast till the arrow-head was near the bow; then when the bow was arched into a half-circle he let fly, and the bow twanged, and the string sang as the arrow flew gladly on over the heads of the throng. 

But the blessed gods did not forget thee, O Menelaus, and Jove's daughter, driver of the spoil, was the first to stand before thee and ward off the piercing arrow. She turned it from his skin as a mother whisks a fly from off her child when it is sleeping sweetly; she guided it to the part where the golden buckles of the belt that passed over his double cuirass were fastened, so the arrow struck the belt that went tightly round him. It went right through this and through the cuirass of cunning workmanship; it also pierced the belt beneath it, which he wore next his skin to keep out darts or arrows; it was this that served him in the best stead, nevertheless the arrow went through it and grazed the top of the skin, so that blood began flowing from the wound. 

As when some woman of Meonia or Caria strains purple dye on to a piece of ivory that is to be the cheek-piece of a horse, and is to be laid up in a treasure house- many a knight is fain to bear it, but the king keeps it as an ornament of which both horse and driver may be proud- even so, O Menelaus, were your shapely thighs and your legs down to your fair ancles stained with blood. 

When King Agamemnon saw the blood flowing from the wound he was afraid, and so was brave Menelaus himself till he saw that the barbs of the arrow and the thread that bound the arrow-head to the shaft were still outside the wound. Then he took heart, but Agamemnon heaved a deep sigh as he held Menelaus's hand in his own, and his comrades made moan in concert. "Dear brother, "he cried, "I have been the death of you in pledging this covenant and letting you come forward as our champion. The Trojans have trampled on their oaths and have wounded you; nevertheless the oath, the blood of lambs, the drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship in which have put our trust shall not be vain. If he that rules Olympus fulfil it not here and now, he. will yet fulfil it hereafter, and they shall pay dearly with their lives and with their wives and children. The day will surely come when mighty Ilius shall be laid low, with Priam and Priam's people, when the son of Saturn from his high throne shall overshadow them with his awful aegis in punishment of their present treachery. This shall surely be; but how, Menelaus, shall I mourn you, if it be your lot now to die? I should return to Argos as a by-word, for the Achaeans will at once go home. We shall leave Priam and the Trojans the glory of still keeping Helen, and the earth will rot your bones as you lie here at Troy with your purpose not fulfilled. Then shall some braggart Trojan leap upon your tomb and say, 'Ever thus may Agamemnon wreak his vengeance; he brought his army in vain; he is gone home to his own land with empty ships, and has left Menelaus behind him.' Thus will one of them say, and may the earth then swallow me." 

But Menelaus reassured him and said, "Take heart, and do not alarm the people; the arrow has not struck me in a mortal part, for my outer belt of burnished metal first stayed it, and under this my cuirass and the belt of mail which the bronze-smiths made me." 

And Agamemnon answered, "I trust, dear Menelaus, that it may be even so, but the surgeon shall examine your wound and lay herbs upon it to relieve your pain." 

He then said to Talthybius, "Talthybius, tell Machaon, son to the great physician, Aesculapius, to come and see Menelaus immediately. Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay, and to his own great glory." 

Talthybius did as he was told, and went about the host trying to find Machaon. Presently he found standing amid the brave warriors who had followed him from Tricca; thereon he went up to him and said, "Son of Aesculapius, King Agamemnon says you are to come and see Menelaus immediately. Some Trojan or Lycian archer has wounded him with an arrow to our dismay and to his own great glory." 

Thus did he speak, and Machaon was moved to go. They passed through the spreading host of the Achaeans and went on till they came to the place where Menelaus had been wounded and was lying with the chieftains gathered in a circle round him. Machaon passed into the middle of the ring and at once drew the arrow from the belt, bending its barbs back through the force with which he pulled it out. He undid the burnished belt, and beneath this the cuirass and the belt of mail which the bronze-smiths had made; then, when he had seen the wound, he wiped away the blood and applied some soothing drugs which Chiron had given to Aesculapius out of the good will he bore him. 

While they were thus busy about Menelaus, the Trojans came forward against them, for they had put on their armour, and now renewed the fight. 

You would not have then found Agamemnon asleep nor cowardly and unwilling to fight, but eager rather for the fray. He left his chariot rich with bronze and his panting steeds in charge of Eurymedon, son of Ptolemaeus the son of Peiraeus, and bade him hold them in readiness against the time his limbs should weary of going about and giving orders to so many, for he went among the ranks on foot. When he saw men hasting to the front he stood by them and cheered them on. "Argives," said he, "slacken not one whit in your onset; father Jove will be no helper of liars; the Trojans have been the first to break their oaths and to attack us; therefore they shall be devoured of vultures; we shall take their city and carry off their wives and children in our ships." 

But he angrily rebuked those whom he saw shirking and disinclined to fight. "Argives," he cried, "cowardly miserable creatures, have you no shame to stand here like frightened fawns who, when they can no longer scud over the plain, huddle together, but show no fight? You are as dazed and spiritless as deer. Would you wait till the Trojans reach the sterns of our ships as they lie on the shore, to see, whether the son of Saturn will hold his hand over you to protect you?" 

Thus did he go about giving his orders among the ranks. Passing through the crowd, he came presently on the Cretans, arming round Idomeneus, who was at their head, fierce as a wild boar, while Meriones was bringing up the battalions that were in the rear. Agamemnon was glad when he saw him, and spoke him fairly. "Idomeneus," said he, "I treat you with greater distinction than I do any others of the Achaeans, whether in war or in other things, or at table. When the princes are mixing my choicest wines in the mixing-bowls, they have each of them a fixed allowance, but your cup is kept always full like my own, that you may drink whenever you are minded. Go, therefore, into battle, and show yourself the man you have been always proud to be." 

Idomeneus answered, "I will be a trusty comrade, as I promised you from the first I would be. Urge on the other Achaeans, that we may join battle at once, for the Trojans have trampled upon their covenants. Death and destruction shall be theirs, seeing they have been the first to break their oaths and to attack us." 

The son of Atreus went on, glad at heart, till he came upon the two Ajaxes arming themselves amid a host of foot-soldiers. As when a goat-herd from some high post watches a storm drive over the deep before the west wind- black as pitch is the offing and a mighty whirlwind draws towards him, so that he is afraid and drives his flock into a cave- even thus did the ranks of stalwart youths move in a dark mass to battle under the Ajaxes, horrid with shield and spear. Glad was King Agamemnon when he saw them. "No need," he cried, "to give orders to such leaders of the Argives as you are, for of your own selves you spur your men on to fight with might and main. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo that all were so minded as you are, for the city of Priam would then soon fall beneath our hands, and we should sack it." 

With this he left them and went onward to Nestor, the facile speaker of the Pylians, who was marshalling his men and urging them on, in company with Pelagon, Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, and Bias shepherd of his people. He placed his knights with their chariots and horses in the front rank, while the foot-soldiers, brave men and many, whom he could trust, were in the rear. The cowards he drove into the middle, that they might fight whether they would or no. He gave his orders to the knights first, bidding them hold their horses well in hand, so as to avoid confusion. "Let no man," he said, "relying on his strength or horsemanship, get before the others and engage singly with the Trojans, nor yet let him lag behind or you will weaken your attack; but let each when he meets an enemy's chariot throw his spear from his own; this be much the best; this is how the men of old took towns and strongholds; in this wise were they minded." 

Thus did the old man charge them, for he had been in many a fight, and King Agamemnon was glad. "I wish," he said to him, that your limbs were as supple and your strength as sure as your judgment is; but age, the common enemy of mankind, has laid his hand upon you; would that it had fallen upon some other, and that you were still young." 

And Nestor, knight of Gerene, answered, "Son of Atreus, I too would gladly be the man I was when I slew mighty Ereuthalion; but the gods will not give us everything at one and the same time. I was then young, and now I am old; still I can go with my knights and give them that counsel which old men have a right to give. The wielding of the spear I leave to those who are younger and stronger than myself." 

Agamemnon went his way rejoicing, and presently found Menestheus, son of Peteos, tarrying in his place, and with him were the Athenians loud of tongue in battle. Near him also tarried cunning Ulysses, with his sturdy Cephallenians round him; they had not yet heard the battle-cry, for the ranks of Trojans and Achaeans had only just begun to move, so they were standing still, waiting for some other columns of the Achaeans to attack the Trojans and begin the fighting. When he saw this Agamemnon rebuked them and said, "Son of Peteos, and you other, steeped in cunning, heart of guile, why stand you here cowering and waiting on others? You two should be of all men foremost when there is hard fighting to be done, for you are ever foremost to accept my invitation when we councillors of the Achaeans are holding feast. You are glad enough then to take your fill of roast meats and to drink wine as long as you please, whereas now you would not care though you saw ten columns of Achaeans engage the enemy in front of you." 

Ulysses glared at him and answered, "Son of Atreus, what are you talking about? How can you say that we are slack? When the Achaeans are in full fight with the Trojans, you shall see, if you care to do so, that the father of Telemachus will join battle with the foremost of them. You are talking idly." 

When Agamemnon saw that Ulysses was angry, he smiled pleasantly at him and withdrew his words. "Ulysses," said he, "noble son of Laertes, excellent in all good counsel, I have neither fault to find nor orders to give you, for I know your heart is right, and that you and I are of a mind. Enough; I will make you amends for what I have said, and if any ill has now been spoken may the gods bring it to nothing." 

He then left them and went on to others. Presently he saw the son of Tydeus, noble Diomed, standing by his chariot and horses, with Sthenelus the son of Capaneus beside him; whereon he began to upbraid him. "Son of Tydeus," he said, "why stand you cowering here upon the brink of battle? Tydeus did not shrink thus, but was ever ahead of his men when leading them on against the foe- so, at least, say they that saw him in battle, for I never set eyes upon him myself. They say that there was no man like him. He came once to Mycenae, not as an enemy but as a guest, in company with Polynices to recruit his forces, for they were levying war against the strong city of Thebes, and prayed our people for a body of picked men to help them. The men of Mycenae were willing to let them have one, but Jove dissuaded them by showing them unfavourable omens. Tydeus, therefore, and Polynices went their way. When they had got as far the deep-meadowed and rush-grown banks of the Aesopus, the Achaeans sent Tydeus as their envoy, and he found the Cadmeans gathered in great numbers to a banquet in the house of Eteocles. Stranger though he was, he knew no fear on finding himself single-handed among so many, but challenged them to contests of all kinds, and in each one of them was at once victorious, so mightily did Minerva help him. The Cadmeans were incensed at his success, and set a force of fifty youths with two captains- the godlike hero Maeon, son of Haemon, and Polyphontes, son of Autophonus- at their head, to lie in wait for him on his return journey; but Tydeus slew every man of them, save only Maeon, whom he let go in obedience to heaven's omens. Such was Tydeus of Aetolia. His son can talk more glibly, but he cannot fight as his father did." 

Diomed made no answer, for he was shamed by the rebuke of Agamemnon; but the son of Capaneus took up his words and said, "Son of Atreus, tell no lies, for you can speak truth if you will. We boast ourselves as even better men than our fathers; we took seven-gated Thebes, though the wall was stronger and our men were fewer in number, for we trusted in the omens of the gods and in the help of Jove, whereas they perished through their own sheer folly; hold not, then, our fathers in like honour with us." 

Diomed looked sternly at him and said, "Hold your peace, my friend, as I bid you. It is not amiss that Agamemnon should urge the Achaeans forward, for the glory will be his if we take the city, and his the shame if we are vanquished. Therefore let us acquit ourselves with valour." 

As he spoke he sprang from his chariot, and his armour rang so fiercely about his body that even a brave man might well have been scared to hear it. 

As when some mighty wave that thunders on the beach when the west wind has lashed it into fury- it has reared its head afar and now comes crashing down on the shore; it bows its arching crest high over the jagged rocks and spews its salt foam in all directions- even so did the serried phalanxes of the Danaans march steadfastly to battle. The chiefs gave orders each to his own people, but the men said never a word; no man would think it, for huge as the host was, it seemed as though there was not a tongue among them, so silent were they in their obedience; and as they marched the armour about their bodies glistened in the sun. But the clamour of the Trojan ranks was as that of many thousand ewes that stand waiting to be milked in the yards of some rich flockmaster, and bleat incessantly in answer to the bleating of their lambs; for they had not one speech nor language, but their tongues were diverse, and they came from many different places. These were inspired of Mars, but the others by Minerva- and with them came Panic, Rout, and Strife whose fury never tires, sister and friend of murderous Mars, who, from being at first but low in stature, grows till she uprears her head to heaven, though her feet are still on earth. She it was that went about among them and flung down discord to the waxing of sorrow with even hand between them. 

When they were got together in one place shield clashed with shield and spear with spear in the rage of battle. The bossed shields beat one upon another, and there was a tramp as of a great multitude- death-cry and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with blood. As torrents swollen with rain course madly down their deep channels till the angry floods meet in some gorge, and the shepherd the hillside hears their roaring from afar- even such was the toil and uproar of the hosts as they joined in battle. 

First Antilochus slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Echepolus, son of Thalysius, fighting in the foremost ranks. He struck at the projecting part of his helmet and drove the spear into his brow; the point of bronze pierced the bone, and darkness veiled his eyes; headlong as a tower he fell amid the press of the fight, and as he dropped King Elephenor, son of Chalcodon and captain of the proud Abantes began dragging him out of reach of the darts that were falling around him, in haste to strip him of his armour. But his purpose was not for long; Agenor saw him haling the body away, and smote him in the side with his bronze-shod spear- for as he stooped his side was left unprotected by his shield- and thus he perished. Then the fight between Trojans and Achaeans grew furious over his body, and they flew upon each other like wolves, man and man crushing one upon the other. 

Forthwith Ajax, son of Telamon, slew the fair youth Simoeisius, son of Anthemion, whom his mother bore by the banks of the Simois, as she was coming down from Mt. Ida, where she had been with her parents to see their flocks. Therefore he was named Simoeisius, but he did not live to pay his parents for his rearing, for he was cut off untimely by the spear of mighty Ajax, who struck him in the breast by the right nipple as he was coming on among the foremost fighters; the spear went right through his shoulder, and he fell as a poplar that has grown straight and tall in a meadow by some mere, and its top is thick with branches. Then the wheelwright lays his axe to its roots that he may fashion a felloe for the wheel of some goodly chariot, and it lies seasoning by the waterside. In such wise did Ajax fell to earth Simoeisius, son of Anthemion. Thereon Antiphus of the gleaming corslet, son of Priam, hurled a spear at Ajax from amid the crowd and missed him, but he hit Leucus, the brave comrade of Ulysses, in the groin, as he was dragging the body of Simoeisius over to the other side; so he fell upon the body and loosed his hold upon it. Ulysses was furious when he saw Leucus slain, and strode in full armour through the front ranks till he was quite close; then he glared round about him and took aim, and the Trojans fell back as he did so. His dart was not sped in vain, for it struck Democoon, the bastard son of Priam, who had come to him from Abydos, where he had charge of his father's mares. Ulysses, infuriated by the death of his comrade, hit him with his spear on one temple, and the bronze point came through on the other side of his forehead. Thereon darkness veiled his eyes, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Hector, and they that were in front, then gave round while the Argives raised a shout and drew off the dead, pressing further forward as they did so. But Apollo looked down from Pergamus and called aloud to the Trojans, for he was displeased. "Trojans," he cried, "rush on the foe, and do not let yourselves be thus beaten by the Argives. Their skins are not stone nor iron that when hit them you do them no harm. Moreover, Achilles, the son of lovely Thetis, is not fighting, but is nursing his anger at the ships." 

Thus spoke the mighty god, crying to them from the city, while Jove's redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, went about among the host of the Achaeans, and urged them forward whenever she beheld them slackening. 

Then fate fell upon Diores, son of Amarynceus, for he was struck by a jagged stone near the ancle of his right leg. He that hurled it was Peirous, son of Imbrasus, captain of the Thracians, who had come from Aenus; the bones and both the tendons were crushed by the pitiless stone. He fell to the ground on his back, and in his death throes stretched out his hands towards his comrades. But Peirous, who had wounded him, sprang on him and thrust a spear into his belly, so that his bowels came gushing out upon the ground, and darkness veiled his eyes. As he was leaving the body, Thoas of Aetolia struck him in the chest near the nipple, and the point fixed itself in his lungs. Thoas came close up to him, pulled the spear out of his chest, and then drawing his sword, smote him in the middle of the belly so that he died; but he did not strip him of his armour, for his Thracian comrades, men who wear their hair in a tuft at the top of their heads, stood round the body and kept him off with their long spears for all his great stature and valour; so he was driven back. Thus the two corpses lay stretched on earth near to one another, the one captain of the Thracians and the other of the Epeans; and many another fell round them. 

And now no man would have made light of the fighting if he could have gone about among it scatheless and unwounded, with Minerva leading him by the hand, and protecting him from the storm of spears and arrows. For many Trojans and Achaeans on that day lay stretched side by side face downwards upon the earth. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK V

Then Pallas Minerva put valour into the heart of Diomed, son of Tydeus, that he might excel all the other Argives, and cover himself with glory. She made a stream of fire flare from his shield and helmet like the star that shines most brilliantly in summer after its bath in the waters of Oceanus- even such a fire did she kindle upon his head and shoulders as she bade him speed into the thickest hurly-burly of the fight. 

Now there was a certain rich and honourable man among the Trojans, priest of Vulcan, and his name was Dares. He had two sons, Phegeus and Idaeus, both of them skilled in all the arts of war. These two came forward from the main body of Trojans, and set upon Diomed, he being on foot, while they fought from their chariot. When they were close up to one another, Phegeus took aim first, but his spear went over Diomed's left shoulder without hitting him. Diomed then threw, and his spear sped not in vain, for it hit Phegeus on the breast near the nipple, and he fell from his chariot. Idaeus did not dare to bestride his brother's body, but sprang from the chariot and took to flight, or he would have shared his brother's fate; whereon Vulcan saved him by wrapping him in a cloud of darkness, that his old father might not be utterly overwhelmed with grief; but the son of Tydeus drove off with the horses, and bade his followers take them to the ships. The Trojans were scared when they saw the two sons of Dares, one of them in fright and the other lying dead by his chariot. Minerva, therefore, took Mars by the hand and said, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, bloodstained stormer of cities, may we not now leave the Trojans and Achaeans to fight it out, and see to which of the two Jove will vouchsafe the victory? Let us go away, and thus avoid his anger." 

So saying, she drew Mars out of the battle, and set him down upon the steep banks of the Scamander. Upon this the Danaans drove the Trojans back, and each one of their chieftains killed his man. First King Agamemnon flung mighty Odius, captain of the Halizoni, from his chariot. The spear of Agamemnon caught him on the broad of his back, just as he was turning in flight; it struck him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. 

Then Idomeneus killed Phaesus, son of Borus the Meonian, who had come from Varne. Mighty Idomeneus speared him on the right shoulder as he was mounting his chariot, and the darkness of death enshrouded him as he fell heavily from the car. 

The squires of Idomeneus spoiled him of his armour, while Menelaus, son of Atreus, killed Scamandrius the son of Strophius, a mighty huntsman and keen lover of the chase. Diana herself had taught him how to kill every kind of wild creature that is bred in mountain forests, but neither she nor his famed skill in archery could now save him, for the spear of Menelaus struck him in the back as he was flying; it struck him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he fell headlong and his armour rang rattling round him. 

Meriones then killed Phereclus the son of Tecton, who was the son of Hermon, a man whose hand was skilled in all manner of cunning workmanship, for Pallas Minerva had dearly loved him. He it was that made the ships for Alexandrus, which were the beginning of all mischief, and brought evil alike both on the Trojans and on Alexandrus himself; for he heeded not the decrees of heaven. Meriones overtook him as he was flying, and struck him on the right buttock. The point of the spear went through the bone into the bladder, and death came upon him as he cried aloud and fell forward on his knees. 

Meges, moreover, slew Pedaeus, son of Antenor, who, though he was a bastard, had been brought up by Theano as one of her own children, for the love she bore her husband. The son of Phyleus got close up to him and drove a spear into the nape of his neck: it went under his tongue all among his teeth, so he bit the cold bronze, and fell dead in the dust. 

And Eurypylus, son of Euaemon, killed Hypsenor, the son of noble Dolopion, who had been made priest of the river Scamander, and was honoured among the people as though he were a god. Eurypylus gave him chase as he was flying before him, smote him with his sword upon the arm, and lopped his strong hand from off it. The bloody hand fell to the ground, and the shades of death, with fate that no man can withstand, came over his eyes. 

Thus furiously did the battle rage between them. As for the son of Tydeus, you could not say whether he was more among the Achaeans or the Trojans. He rushed across the plain like a winter torrent that has burst its barrier in full flood; no dykes, no walls of fruitful vineyards can embank it when it is swollen with rain from heaven, but in a moment it comes tearing onward, and lays many a field waste that many a strong man hand has reclaimed- even so were the dense phalanxes of the Trojans driven in rout by the son of Tydeus, and many though they were, they dared not abide his onslaught. 

Now when the son of Lycaon saw him scouring the plain and driving the Trojans pell-mell before him, he aimed an arrow and hit the front part of his cuirass near the shoulder: the arrow went right through the metal and pierced the flesh, so that the cuirass was covered with blood. On this the son of Lycaon shouted in triumph, "Knights Trojans, come on; the bravest of the Achaeans is wounded, and he will not hold out much longer if King Apollo was indeed with me when I sped from Lycia hither." 

Thus did he vaunt; but his arrow had not killed Diomed, who withdrew and made for the chariot and horses of Sthenelus, the son of Capaneus. "Dear son of Capaneus," said he, "come down from your chariot, and draw the arrow out of my shoulder." 

Sthenelus sprang from his chariot, and drew the arrow from the wound, whereon the blood came spouting out through the hole that had been made in his shirt. Then Diomed prayed, saying, "Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, if ever you loved my father well and stood by him in the thick of a fight, do the like now by me; grant me to come within a spear's throw of that man and kill him. He has been too quick for me and has wounded me; and now he is boasting that I shall not see the light of the sun much longer." 

Thus he prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard him; she made his limbs supple and quickened his hands and his feet. Then she went up close to him and said, "Fear not, Diomed, to do battle with the Trojans, for I have set in your heart the spirit of your knightly father Tydeus. Moreover, I have withdrawn the veil from your eyes, that you know gods and men apart. If, then, any other god comes here and offers you battle, do not fight him; but should Jove's daughter Venus come, strike her with your spear and wound her." 

When she had said this Minerva went away, and the son of Tydeus again took his place among the foremost fighters, three times more fierce even than he had been before. He was like a lion that some mountain shepherd has wounded, but not killed, as he is springing over the wall of a sheep-yard to attack the sheep. The shepherd has roused the brute to fury but cannot defend his flock, so he takes shelter under cover of the buildings, while the sheep, panic-stricken on being deserted, are smothered in heaps one on top of the other, and the angry lion leaps out over the sheep-yard wall. Even thus did Diomed go furiously about among the Trojans. 

He killed Astynous, and shepherd of his people, the one with a thrust of his spear, which struck him above the nipple, the other with a sword- cut on the collar-bone, that severed his shoulder from his neck and back. He let both of them lie, and went in pursuit of Abas and Polyidus, sons of the old reader of dreams Eurydamas: they never came back for him to read them any more dreams, for mighty Diomed made an end of them. He then gave chase to Xanthus and Thoon, the two sons of Phaenops, both of them very dear to him, for he was now worn out with age, and begat no more sons to inherit his possessions. But Diomed took both their lives and left their father sorrowing bitterly, for he nevermore saw them come home from battle alive, and his kinsmen divided his wealth among themselves. 

Then he came upon two sons of Priam, Echemmon and Chromius, as they were both in one chariot. He sprang upon them as a lion fastens on the neck of some cow or heifer when the herd is feeding in a coppice. For all their vain struggles he flung them both from their chariot and stripped the armour from their bodies. Then he gave their horses to his comrades to take them back to the ships. 

When Aeneas saw him thus making havoc among the ranks, he went through the fight amid the rain of spears to see if he could find Pandarus. When he had found the brave son of Lycaon he said, "Pandarus, where is now your bow, your winged arrows, and your renown as an archer, in respect of which no man here can rival you nor is there any in Lycia that can beat you? Lift then your hands to Jove and send an arrow at this fellow who is going so masterfully about, and has done such deadly work among the Trojans. He has killed many a brave man- unless indeed he is some god who is angry with the Trojans about their sacrifices, and and has set his hand against them in his displeasure." 

And the son of Lycaon answered, "Aeneas, I take him for none other than the son of Tydeus. I know him by his shield, the visor of his helmet, and by his horses. It is possible that he may be a god, but if he is the man I say he is, he is not making all this havoc without heaven's help, but has some god by his side who is shrouded in a cloud of darkness, and who turned my arrow aside when it had hit him. I have taken aim at him already and hit him on the right shoulder; my arrow went through the breastpiece of his cuirass; and I made sure I should send him hurrying to the world below, but it seems that I have not killed him. There must be a god who is angry with me. Moreover I have neither horse nor chariot. In my father's stables there are eleven excellent chariots, fresh from the builder, quite new, with cloths spread over them; and by each of them there stand a pair of horses, champing barley and rye; my old father Lycaon urged me again and again when I was at home and on the point of starting, to take chariots and horses with me that I might lead the Trojans in battle, but I would not listen to him; it would have been much better if I had done so, but I was thinking about the horses, which had been used to eat their fill, and I was afraid that in such a great gathering of men they might be ill-fed, so I left them at home and came on foot to Ilius armed only with my bow and arrows. These it seems, are of no use, for I have already hit two chieftains, the sons of Atreus and of Tydeus, and though I drew blood surely enough, I have only made them still more furious. I did ill to take my bow down from its peg on the day I led my band of Trojans to Ilius in Hector's service, and if ever I get home again to set eyes on my native place, my wife, and the greatness of my house, may some one cut my head off then and there if I do not break the bow and set it on a hot fire- such pranks as it plays me." 

Aeneas answered, "Say no more. Things will not mend till we two go against this man with chariot and horses and bring him to a trial of arms. Mount my chariot, and note how cleverly the horses of Tros can speed hither and thither over the plain in pursuit or flight. If Jove again vouchsafes glory to the son of Tydeus they will carry us safely back to the city. Take hold, then, of the whip and reins while I stand upon the car to fight, or else do you wait this man's onset while I look after the horses." 

"Aeneas." replied the son of Lycaon, "take the reins and drive; if we have to fly before the son of Tydeus the horses will go better for their own driver. If they miss the sound of your voice when they expect it they may be frightened, and refuse to take us out of the fight. The son of Tydeus will then kill both of us and take the horses. Therefore drive them yourself and I will be ready for him with my spear." 

They then mounted the chariot and drove full-speed towards the son of Tydeus. Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, saw them coming and said to Diomed, "Diomed, son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, I see two heroes speeding towards you, both of them men of might the one a skilful archer, Pandarus son of Lycaon, the other, Aeneas, whose sire is Anchises, while his mother is Venus. Mount the chariot and let us retreat. Do not, I pray you, press so furiously forward, or you may get killed." 

Diomed looked angrily at him and answered: "Talk not of flight, for I shall not listen to you: I am of a race that knows neither flight nor fear, and my limbs are as yet unwearied. I am in no mind to mount, but will go against them even as I am; Pallas Minerva bids me be afraid of no man, and even though one of them escape, their steeds shall not take both back again. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart- if Minerva sees fit to vouchsafe me the glory of killing both, stay your horses here and make the reins fast to the rim of the chariot; then be sure you spring Aeneas' horses and drive them from the Trojan to the Achaean ranks. They are of the stock that great Jove gave to Tros in payment for his son Ganymede, and are the finest that live and move under the sun. King Anchises stole the blood by putting his mares to them without Laomedon's knowledge, and they bore him six foals. Four are still in his stables, but he gave the other two to Aeneas. We shall win great glory if we can take them." 

Thus did they converse, but the other two had now driven close up to them, and the son of Lycaon spoke first. "Great and mighty son," said he, "of noble Tydeus, my arrow failed to lay you low, so I will now try with my spear." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it from him. It struck the shield of the son of Tydeus; the bronze point pierced it and passed on till it reached the breastplate. Thereon the son of Lycaon shouted out and said, "You are hit clean through the belly; you will not stand out for long, and the glory of the fight is mine." 

But Diomed all undismayed made answer, "You have missed, not hit, and before you two see the end of this matter one or other of you shall glut tough-shielded Mars with his blood." 

With this he hurled his spear, and Minerva guided it on to Pandarus's nose near the eye. It went crashing in among his white teeth; the bronze point cut through the root of his to tongue, coming out under his chin, and his glistening armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. The horses started aside for fear, and he was reft of life and strength. 

Aeneas sprang from his chariot armed with shield and spear, fearing lest the Achaeans should carry off the body. He bestrode it as a lion in the pride of strength, with shield and on spear before him and a cry of battle on his lips resolute to kill the first that should dare face him. But the son of Tydeus caught up a mighty stone, so huge and great that as men now are it would take two to lift it; nevertheless he bore it aloft with ease unaided, and with this he struck Aeneas on the groin where the hip turns in the joint that is called the "cup-bone." The stone crushed this joint, and broke both the sinews, while its jagged edges tore away all the flesh. The hero fell on his knees, and propped himself with his hand resting on the ground till the darkness of night fell upon his eyes. And now Aeneas, king of men, would have perished then and there, had not his mother, Jove's daughter Venus, who had conceived him by Anchises when he was herding cattle, been quick to mark, and thrown her two white arms about the body of her dear son. She protected him by covering him with a fold of her own fair garment, lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him. 

Thus, then, did she bear her dear son out of the fight. But the son of Capaneus was not unmindful of the orders that Diomed had given him. He made his own horses fast, away from the hurly-burly, by binding the reins to the rim of the chariot. Then he sprang upon Aeneas's horses and drove them from the Trojan to the Achaean ranks. When he had so done he gave them over to his chosen comrade Deipylus, whom he valued above all others as the one who was most like-minded with himself, to take them on to the ships. He then remounted his own chariot, seized the reins, and drove with all speed in search of the son of Tydeus. 

Now the son of Tydeus was in pursuit of the Cyprian goddess, spear in hand, for he knew her to be feeble and not one of those goddesses that can lord it among men in battle like Minerva or Enyo the waster of cities, and when at last after a long chase he caught her up, he flew at her and thrust his spear into the flesh of her delicate hand. The point tore through the ambrosial robe which the Graces had woven for her, and pierced the skin between her wrist and the palm of her hand, so that the immortal blood, or ichor, that flows in the veins of the blessed gods, came pouring from the wound; for the gods do not eat bread nor drink wine, hence they have no blood such as ours, and are immortal. Venus screamed aloud, and let her son fall, but Phoebus Apollo caught him in his arms, and hid him in a cloud of darkness, lest some Danaan should drive a spear into his breast and kill him; and Diomed shouted out as he left her, "Daughter of Jove, leave war and battle alone, can you not be contented with beguiling silly women? If you meddle with fighting you will get what will make you shudder at the very name of war." 

The goddess went dazed and discomfited away, and Iris, fleet as the wind, drew her from the throng, in pain and with her fair skin all besmirched. She found fierce Mars waiting on the left of the battle, with his spear and his two fleet steeds resting on a cloud; whereon she fell on her knees before her brother and implored him to let her have his horses. "Dear brother," she cried, "save me, and give me your horses to take me to Olympus where the gods dwell. I am badly wounded by a mortal, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight even with father Jove." 

Thus she spoke, and Mars gave her his gold-bedizened steeds. She mounted the chariot sick and sorry at heart, while Iris sat beside her and took the reins in her hand. She lashed her horses on and they flew forward nothing loth, till in a trice they were at high Olympus, where the gods have their dwelling. There she stayed them, unloosed them from the chariot, and gave them their ambrosial forage; but Venus flung herself on to the lap of her mother Dione, who threw her arms about her and caressed her, saying, "Which of the heavenly beings has been treating you in this way, as though you had been doing something wrong in the face of day?" 

And laughter-loving Venus answered, "Proud Diomed, the son of Tydeus, wounded me because I was bearing my dear son Aeneas, whom I love best of all mankind, out of the fight. The war is no longer one between Trojans and Achaeans, for the Danaans have now taken to fighting with the immortals." 

"Bear it, my child," replied Dione, "and make the best of it. We dwellers in Olympus have to put up with much at the hands of men, and we lay much suffering on one another. Mars had to suffer when Otus and Ephialtes, children of Aloeus, bound him in cruel bonds, so that he lay thirteen months imprisoned in a vessel of bronze. Mars would have then perished had not fair Eeriboea, stepmother to the sons of Aloeus, told Mercury, who stole him away when he was already well-nigh worn out by the severity of his bondage. Juno, again, suffered when the mighty son of Amphitryon wounded her on the right breast with a three-barbed arrow, and nothing could assuage her pain. So, also, did huge Hades, when this same man, the son of aegis-bearing Jove, hit him with an arrow even at the gates of hell, and hurt him badly. Thereon Hades went to the house of Jove on great Olympus, angry and full of pain; and the arrow in his brawny shoulder caused him great anguish till Paeeon healed him by spreading soothing herbs on the wound, for Hades was not of mortal mould. Daring, head-strong, evildoer who recked not of his sin in shooting the gods that dwell in Olympus. And now Minerva has egged this son of Tydeus on against yourself, fool that he is for not reflecting that no man who fights with gods will live long or hear his children prattling about his knees when he returns from battle. Let, then, the son of Tydeus see that he does not have to fight with one who is stronger than you are. Then shall his brave wife Aegialeia, daughter of Adrestus, rouse her whole house from sleep, wailing for the loss of her wedded lord, Diomed the bravest of the Achaeans." 

So saying, she wiped the ichor from the wrist of her daughter with both hands, whereon the pain left her, and her hand was healed. But Minerva and Juno, who were looking on, began to taunt Jove with their mocking talk, and Minerva was first to speak. "Father Jove," said she, "do not be angry with me, but I think the Cyprian must have been persuading some one of the Achaean women to go with the Trojans of whom she is so very fond, and while caressing one or other of them she must have torn her delicate hand with the gold pin of the woman's brooch." 

The sire of gods and men smiled, and called golden Venus to his side. "My child," said he, "it has not been given you to be a warrior. Attend, henceforth, to your own delightful matrimonial duties, and leave all this fighting to Mars and to Minerva." 

Thus did they converse. But Diomed sprang upon Aeneas, though he knew him to be in the very arms of Apollo. Not one whit did he fear the mighty god, so set was he on killing Aeneas and stripping him of his armour. Thrice did he spring forward with might and main to slay him, and thrice did Apollo beat back his gleaming shield. When he was coming on for the fourth time, as though he were a god, Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "Take heed, son of Tydeus, and draw off; think not to match yourself against gods, for men that walk the earth cannot hold their own with the immortals." 

The son of Tydeus then gave way for a little space, to avoid the anger of the god, while Apollo took Aeneas out of the crowd and set him in sacred Pergamus, where his temple stood. There, within the mighty sanctuary, Latona and Diana healed him and made him glorious to behold, while Apollo of the silver bow fashioned a wraith in the likeness of Aeneas, and armed as he was. Round this the Trojans and Achaeans hacked at the bucklers about one another's breasts, hewing each other's round shields and light hide-covered targets. Then Phoebus Apollo said to Mars, "Mars, Mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of cities, can you not go to this man, the son of Tydeus, who would now fight even with father Jove, and draw him out of the battle? He first went up to the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and afterwards sprang upon me too, as though he were a god." 

He then took his seat on the top of Pergamus, while murderous Mars went about among the ranks of the Trojans, cheering them on, in the likeness of fleet Acamas chief of the Thracians. "Sons of Priam," said he, "how long will you let your people be thus slaughtered by the Achaeans? Would you wait till they are at the walls of Troy? Aeneas the son of Anchises has fallen, he whom we held in as high honour as Hector himself. Help me, then, to rescue our brave comrade from the stress of the fight." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Then Sarpedon rebuked Hector very sternly. "Hector," said he, "where is your prowess now? You used to say that though you had neither people nor allies you could hold the town alone with your brothers and brothers-in-law. I see not one of them here; they cower as hounds before a lion; it is we, your allies, who bear the brunt of the battle. I have come from afar, even from Lycia and the banks of the river Xanthus, where I have left my wife, my infant son, and much wealth to tempt whoever is needy; nevertheless, I head my Lycian soldiers and stand my ground against any who would fight me though I have nothing here for the Achaeans to plunder, while you look on, without even bidding your men stand firm in defence of their wives. See that you fall not into the hands of your foes as men caught in the meshes of a net, and they sack your fair city forthwith. Keep this before your mind night and day, and beseech the captains of your allies to hold on without flinching, and thus put away their reproaches from you." 

So spoke Sarpedon, and Hector smarted under his words. He sprang from his chariot clad in his suit of armour, and went about among the host brandishing his two spears, exhorting the men to fight and raising the terrible cry of battle. Then they rallied and again faced the Achaeans, but the Argives stood compact and firm, and were not driven back. As the breezes sport with the chaff upon some goodly threshing-floor, when men are winnowing- while yellow Ceres blows with the wind to sift the chaff from the grain, and the chaff- heaps grow whiter and whiter- even so did the Achaeans whiten in the dust which the horses' hoofs raised to the firmament of heaven, as their drivers turned them back to battle, and they bore down with might upon the foe. Fierce Mars, to help the Trojans, covered them in a veil of darkness, and went about everywhere among them, inasmuch as Phoebus Apollo had told him that when he saw Pallas, Minerva leave the fray he was to put courage into the hearts of the Trojans- for it was she who was helping the Danaans. Then Apollo sent Aeneas forth from his rich sanctuary, and filled his heart with valour, whereon he took his place among his comrades, who were overjoyed at seeing him alive, sound, and of a good courage; but they could not ask him how it had all happened, for they were too busy with the turmoil raised by Mars and by Strife, who raged insatiably in their midst. 

The two Ajaxes, Ulysses and Diomed, cheered the Danaans on, fearless of the fury and onset of the Trojans. They stood as still as clouds which the son of Saturn has spread upon the mountain tops when there is no air and fierce Boreas sleeps with the other boisterous winds whose shrill blasts scatter the clouds in all directions- even so did the Danaans stand firm and unflinching against the Trojans. The son of Atreus went about among them and exhorted them. "My friends," said he, "quit yourselves like brave men, and shun dishonour in one another's eyes amid the stress of battle. They that shun dishonour more often live than get killed, but they that fly save neither life nor name." 

As he spoke he hurled his spear and hit one of those who were in the front rank, the comrade of Aeneas, Deicoon son of Pergasus, whom the Trojans held in no less honour than the sons of Priam, for he was ever quick to place himself among the foremost. The spear of King Agamemnon struck his shield and went right through it, for the shield stayed it not. It drove through his belt into the lower part of his belly, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. 

Then Aeneas killed two champions of the Danaans, Crethon and Orsilochus. Their father was a rich man who lived in the strong city of Phere and was descended from the river Alpheus, whose broad stream flows through the land of the Pylians. The river begat Orsilochus, who ruled over much people and was father to Diocles, who in his turn begat twin sons, Crethon and Orsilochus, well skilled in all the arts of war. These, when they grew up, went to Ilius with the Argive fleet in the cause of Menelaus and Agamemnon sons of Atreus, and there they both of them fell. As two lions whom their dam has reared in the depths of some mountain forest to plunder homesteads and carry off sheep and cattle till they get killed by the hand of man, so were these two vanquished by Aeneas, and fell like high pine-trees to the ground. 

Brave Menelaus pitied them in their fall, and made his way to the front, clad in gleaming bronze and brandishing his spear, for Mars egged him on to do so with intent that he should be killed by Aeneas; but Antilochus the son of Nestor saw him and sprang forward, fearing that the king might come to harm and thus bring all their labour to nothing; when, therefore Aeneas and Menelaus were setting their hands and spears against one another eager to do battle, Antilochus placed himself by the side of Menelaus. Aeneas, bold though he was, drew back on seeing the two heroes side by side in front of him, so they drew the bodies of Crethon and Orsilochus to the ranks of the Achaeans and committed the two poor fellows into the hands of their comrades. They then turned back and fought in the front ranks. 

They killed Pylaemenes peer of Mars, leader of the Paphlagonian warriors. Menelaus struck him on the collar-bone as he was standing on his chariot, while Antilochus hit his charioteer and squire Mydon, the son of Atymnius, who was turning his horses in flight. He hit him with a stone upon the elbow, and the reins, enriched with white ivory, fell from his hands into the dust. Antilochus rushed towards him and struck him on the temples with his sword, whereon he fell head first from the chariot to the ground. There he stood for a while with his head and shoulders buried deep in the dust- for he had fallen on sandy soil till his horses kicked him and laid him flat on the ground, as Antilochus lashed them and drove them off to the host of the Achaeans. 

But Hector marked them from across the ranks, and with a loud cry rushed towards them, followed by the strong battalions of the Trojans. Mars and dread Enyo led them on, she fraught with ruthless turmoil of battle, while Mars wielded a monstrous spear, and went about, now in front of Hector and now behind him. 

Diomed shook with passion as he saw them. As a man crossing a wide plain is dismayed to find himself on the brink of some great river rolling swiftly to the sea- he sees its boiling waters and starts back in fear- even so did the son of Tydeus give ground. Then he said to his men, "My friends, how can we wonder that Hector wields the spear so well? Some god is ever by his side to protect him, and now Mars is with him in the likeness of mortal man. Keep your faces therefore towards the Trojans, but give ground backwards, for we dare not fight with gods." 

As he spoke the Trojans drew close up, and Hector killed two men, both in one chariot, Menesthes and Anchialus, heroes well versed in war. Ajax son of Telamon pitied them in their fall; he came close up and hurled his spear, hitting Amphius the son of Selagus, a man of great wealth who lived in Paesus and owned much corn-growing land, but his lot had led him to come to the aid of Priam and his sons. Ajax struck him in the belt; the spear pierced the lower part of his belly, and he fell heavily to the ground. Then Ajax ran towards him to strip him of his armour, but the Trojans rained spears upon him, many of which fell upon his shield. He planted his heel upon the body and drew out his spear, but the darts pressed so heavily upon him that he could not strip the goodly armour from his shoulders. The Trojan chieftains, moreover, many and valiant, came about him with their spears, so that he dared not stay; great, brave and valiant though he was, they drove him from them and he was beaten back. 

Thus, then, did the battle rage between them. Presently the strong hand of fate impelled Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules, a man both brave and of great stature, to fight Sarpedon; so the two, son and grandson of great Jove, drew near to one another, and Tlepolemus spoke first. "Sarpedon," said he, "councillor of the Lycians, why should you come skulking here you who are a man of peace? They lie who call you son of aegis-bearing Jove, for you are little like those who were of old his children. Far other was Hercules, my own brave and lion-hearted father, who came here for the horses of Laomedon, and though he had six ships only, and few men to follow him, sacked the city of Ilius and made a wilderness of her highways. You are a coward, and your people are falling from you. For all your strength, and all your coming from Lycia, you will be no help to the Trojans but will pass the gates of Hades vanquished by my hand." 

And Sarpedon, captain of the Lycians, answered, "Tlepolemus, your father overthrew Ilius by reason of Laomedon's folly in refusing payment to one who had served him well. He would not give your father the horses which he had come so far to fetch. As for yourself, you shall meet death by my spear. You shall yield glory to myself, and your soul to Hades of the noble steeds." 

Thus spoke Sarpedon, and Tlepolemus upraised his spear. They threw at the same moment, and Sarpedon struck his foe in the middle of his throat; the spear went right through, and the darkness of death fell upon his eyes. Tlepolemus's spear struck Sarpedon on the left thigh with such force that it tore through the flesh and grazed the bone, but his father as yet warded off destruction from him. 

His comrades bore Sarpedon out of the fight, in great pain by the weight of the spear that was dragging from his wound. They were in such haste and stress as they bore him that no one thought of drawing the spear from his thigh so as to let him walk uprightly. Meanwhile the Achaeans carried off the body of Tlepolemus, whereon Ulysses was moved to pity, and panted for the fray as he beheld them. He doubted whether to pursue the son of Jove, or to make slaughter of the Lycian rank and file; it was not decreed, however, that he should slay the son of Jove; Minerva, therefore, turned him against the main body of the Lycians. He killed Coeranus, Alastor, Chromius, Alcandrus, Halius, Noemon, and Prytanis, and would have slain yet more, had not great Hector marked him, and sped to the front of the fight clad in his suit of mail, filling the Danaans with terror. Sarpedon was glad when he saw him coming, and besought him, saying, "Son of Priam, let me not he here to fall into the hands of the Danaans. Help me, and since I may not return home to gladden the hearts of my wife and of my infant son, let me die within the walls of your city." 

Hector made him no answer, but rushed onward to fall at once upon the Achaeans and. kill many among them. His comrades then bore Sarpedon away and laid him beneath Jove's spreading oak tree. Pelagon, his friend and comrade drew the spear out of his thigh, but Sarpedon fainted and a mist came over his eyes. Presently he came to himself again, for the breath of the north wind as it played upon him gave him new life, and brought him out of the deep swoon into which he had fallen. 

Meanwhile the Argives were neither driven towards their ships by Mars and Hector, nor yet did they attack them; when they knew that Mars was with the Trojans they retreated, but kept their faces still turned towards the foe. Who, then, was first and who last to be slain by Mars and Hector? They were valiant Teuthras, and Orestes the renowned charioteer, Trechus the Aetolian warrior, Oenomaus, Helenus the son of Oenops, and Oresbius of the gleaming girdle, who was possessed of great wealth, and dwelt by the Cephisian lake with the other Boeotians who lived near him, owners of a fertile country. 

Now when the goddess Juno saw the Argives thus falling, she said to Minerva, "Alas, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, the promise we made Menelaus that he should not return till he had sacked the city of Ilius will be of none effect if we let Mars rage thus furiously. Let us go into the fray at once." 

Minerva did not gainsay her. Thereon the august goddess, daughter of great Saturn, began to harness her gold-bedizened steeds. Hebe with all speed fitted on the eight-spoked wheels of bronze that were on either side of the iron axle-tree. The felloes of the wheels were of gold, imperishable, and over these there was a tire of bronze, wondrous to behold. The naves of the wheels were silver, turning round the axle upon either side. The car itself was made with plaited bands of gold and silver, and it had a double top-rail running all round it. From the body of the car there went a pole of silver, on to the end of which she bound the golden yoke, with the bands of gold that were to go under the necks of the horses Then Juno put her steeds under the yoke, eager for battle and the war-cry. 

Meanwhile Minerva flung her richly embroidered vesture, made with her own hands, on to her father's threshold, and donned the shirt of Jove, arming herself for battle. She threw her tasselled aegis about. her shoulders, wreathed round with Rout as with a fringe, and on it were Strife, and Strength, and Panic whose blood runs cold; moreover there was the head of the dread monster Gorgon,, grim and awful to behold, portent of aegis-bearing Jove. On her head she set her helmet of gold, with four plumes, and coming to a peak both in front and behind- decked with the emblems of a hundred cities; then she stepped into her flaming chariot and grasped the spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, with which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno lashed the horses on, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open of their own accord -gates over which the flours preside, in whose hands are Heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides them, or to close it. Through these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds, and found the son of Saturn sitting all alone on the topmost ridges of Olympus. There Juno stayed her horses, and spoke to Jove the son of Saturn, lord of all. "Father Jove," said she, "are you not angry with Mars for these high doings? how great and goodly a host of the Achaeans he has destroyed to my great grief, and without either right or reason, while the Cyprian and Apollo are enjoying it all at their ease and setting this unrighteous madman on to do further mischief. I hope, Father Jove, that you will not be angry if I hit Mars hard, and chase him out of the battle." 

And Jove answered, "Set Minerva on to him, for she punishes him more often than any one else does." 

Juno did as he had said. She lashed her horses, and they flew forward nothing loth midway betwixt earth and sky. As far as a man can see when he looks out upon the sea from some high beacon, so far can the loud-neighing horses of the gods spring at a single bound. When they reached Troy and the place where its two flowing streams Simois and Scamander meet, there Juno stayed them and took them from the chariot. She hid them in a thick cloud, and Simois made ambrosia spring up for them to eat; the two goddesses then went on, flying like turtledoves in their eagerness to help the Argives. When they came to the part where the bravest and most in number were gathered about mighty Diomed, fighting like lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance, there Juno stood still and raised a shout like that of brazen-voiced Stentor, whose cry was as loud as that of fifty men together. "Argives," she cried; "shame on cowardly creatures, brave in semblance only; as long as Achilles was fighting, fi his spear was so deadly that the Trojans dared not show themselves outside the Dardanian gates, but now they sally far from the city and fight even at your ships." 

With these words she put heart and soul into them all, while Minerva sprang to the side of the son of Tydeus, whom she found near his chariot and horses, cooling the wound that Pandarus had given him. For the sweat caused by the hand that bore the weight of his shield irritated the hurt: his arm was weary with pain, and he was lifting up the strap to wipe away the blood. The goddess laid her hand on the yoke of his horses and said, "The son of Tydeus is not such another as his father. Tydeus was a little man, but he could fight, and rushed madly into the fray even when I told him not to do so. When he went all unattended as envoy to the city of Thebes among the Cadmeans, I bade him feast in their houses and be at peace; but with that high spirit which was ever present with him, he challenged the youth of the Cadmeans, and at once beat them in all that he attempted, so mightily did I help him. I stand by you too to protect you, and I bid you be instant in fighting the Trojans; but either you are tired out, or you are afraid and out of heart, and in that case I say that you are no true son of Tydeus the son of Oeneus." 

Diomed answered, "I know you, goddess, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, and will hide nothing from you. I am not afraid nor out of heart, nor is there any slackness in me. I am only following your own instructions; you told me not to fight any of the blessed gods; but if Jove's daughter Venus came into battle I was to wound her with my spear. Therefore I am retreating, and bidding the other Argives gather in this place, for I know that Mars is now lording it in the field." 

"Diomed, son of Tydeus," replied Minerva, "man after my own heart, fear neither Mars nor any other of the immortals, for I will befriend you. Nay, drive straight at Mars, and smite him in close combat; fear not this raging madman, villain incarnate, first on one side and then on the other. But now he was holding talk with Juno and myself, saying he would help the Argives and attack the Trojans; nevertheless he is with the Trojans, and has forgotten the Argives." 

With this she caught hold of Sthenelus and lifted him off the chariot on to the ground. In a second he was on the ground, whereupon the goddess mounted the car and placed herself by the side of Diomed. The oaken axle groaned aloud under the burden of the awful goddess and the hero; Pallas Minerva took the whip and reins, and drove straight at Mars. He was in the act of stripping huge Periphas, son of Ochesius and bravest of the Aetolians. Bloody Mars was stripping him of his armour, and Minerva donned the helmet of Hades, that he might not see her; when, therefore, he saw Diomed, he made straight for him and let Periphas lie where he had fallen. As soon as they were at close quarters he let fly with his bronze spear over the reins and yoke, thinking to take Diomed's life, but Minerva caught the spear in her hand and made it fly harmlessly over the chariot. Diomed then threw, and Pallas Minerva drove the spear into the pit of Mars's stomach where his under-girdle went round him. There Diomed wounded him, tearing his fair flesh and then drawing his spear out again. Mars roared as loudly as nine or ten thousand men in the thick of a fight, and the Achaeans and Trojans were struck with panic, so terrible was the cry he raised. 

As a dark cloud in the sky when it comes on to blow after heat, even so did Diomed son of Tydeus see Mars ascend into the broad heavens. With all speed he reached high Olympus, home of the gods, and in great pain sat down beside Jove the son of Saturn. He showed Jove the immortal blood that was flowing from his wound, and spoke piteously, saying, "Father Jove, are you not angered by such doings? We gods are continually suffering in the most cruel manner at one another's hands while helping mortals; and we all owe you a grudge for having begotten that mad termagant of a daughter, who is always committing outrage of some kind. We other gods must all do as you bid us, but her you neither scold nor punish; you encourage her because the pestilent creature is your daughter. See how she has been inciting proud Diomed to vent his rage on the immortal gods. First he went up to the Cyprian and wounded her in the hand near her wrist, and then he sprang upon me too as though he were a god. Had I not run for it I must either have lain there for long enough in torments among the ghastly corpes, or have been eaten alive with spears till I had no more strength left in me." 

Jove looked angrily at him and said, "Do not come whining here, Sir Facing-bothways. I hate you worst of all the gods in Olympus, for you are ever fighting and making mischief. You have the intolerable and stubborn spirit of your mother Juno: it is all I can do to manage her, and it is her doing that you are now in this plight: still, I cannot let you remain longer in such great pain; you are my own off-spring, and it was by me that your mother conceived you; if, however, you had been the son of any other god, you are so destructive that by this time you should have been lying lower than the Titans." 

He then bade Paeeon heal him, whereon Paeeon spread pain-killing herbs upon his wound and cured him, for he was not of mortal mould. As the juice of the fig-tree curdles milk, and thickens it in a moment though it is liquid, even so instantly did Paeeon cure fierce Mars. Then Hebe washed him, and clothed him in goodly raiment, and he took his seat by his father Jove all glorious to behold. 

But Juno of Argos and Minerva of Alalcomene, now that they had put a stop to the murderous doings of Mars, went back again to the house of Jove. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK VI

THE fight between Trojans and Achaeans was now left to rage as it would, and the tide of war surged hither and thither over the plain as they aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another between the streams of Simois and Xanthus. 

First, Ajax son of Telamon, tower of strength to the Achaeans, broke a phalanx of the Trojans, and came to the assistance of his comrades by killing Acamas son of Eussorus, the best man among the Thracians, being both brave and of great stature. The spear struck the projecting peak of his helmet: its bronze point then went through his forehead into the brain, and darkness veiled his eyes. 

Then Diomed killed Axylus son of Teuthranus, a rich man who lived in the strong city of Arisbe, and was beloved by all men; for he had a house by the roadside, and entertained every one who passed; howbeit not one of his guests stood before him to save his life, and Diomed killed both him and his squire Calesius, who was then his charioteer- so the pair passed beneath the earth. 

Euryalus killed Dresus and Opheltius, and then went in pursuit of Aesepus and Pedasus, whom the naiad nymph Abarbarea had borne to noble Bucolion. Bucolion was eldest son to Laomedon, but he was a bastard. While tending his sheep he had converse with the nymph, and she conceived twin sons; these the son of Mecisteus now slew, and he stripped the armour from their shoulders. Polypoetes then killed Astyalus, Ulysses Pidytes of Percote, and Teucer Aretaon. Ablerus fell by the spear of Nestor's son Antilochus, and Agamemnon, king of men, killed Elatus who dwelt in Pedasus by the banks of the river Satnioeis. Leitus killed Phylacus as he was flying, and Eurypylus slew Melanthus. 

Then Menelaus of the loud war-cry took Adrestus alive, for his horses ran into a tamarisk bush, as they were flying wildly over the plain, and broke the pole from the car; they went on towards the city along with the others in full flight, but Adrestus rolled out, and fell in the dust flat on his face by the wheel of his chariot; Menelaus came up to him spear in hand, but Adrestus caught him by the knees begging for his life. "Take me alive," he cried, "son of Atreus, and you shall have a full ransom for me: my father is rich and has much treasure of gold, bronze, and wrought iron laid by in his house. From this store he will give you a large ransom should he hear of my being alive and at the ships of the Achaeans." 

Thus did he plead, and Menelaus was for yielding and giving him to a squire to take to the ships of the Achaeans, but Agamemnon came running up to him and rebuked him. "My good Menelaus," said he, "this is no time for giving quarter. Has, then, your house fared so well at the hands of the Trojans? Let us not spare a single one of them- not even the child unborn and in its mother's womb; let not a man of them be left alive, but let all in Ilius perish, unheeded and forgotten." 

Thus did he speak, and his brother was persuaded by him, for his words were just. Menelaus, therefore, thrust Adrestus from him, whereon King Agamemnon struck him in the flank, and he fell: then the son of Atreus planted his foot upon his breast to draw his spear from the body. 

Meanwhile Nestor shouted to the Argives, saying, "My friends, Danaan warriors, servants of Mars, let no man lag that he may spoil the dead, and bring back much booty to the ships. Let us kill as many as we can; the bodies will lie upon the plain, and you can despoil them later at your leisure." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. And now the Trojans would have been routed and driven back into Ilius, had not Priam's son Helenus, wisest of augurs, said to Hector and Aeneas, "Hector and Aeneas, you two are the mainstays of the Trojans and Lycians, for you are foremost at all times, alike in fight and counsel; hold your ground here, and go about among the host to rally them in front of the gates, or they will fling themselves into the arms of their wives, to the great joy of our foes. Then, when you have put heart into all our companies, we will stand firm here and fight the Danaans however hard they press us, for there is nothing else to be done. Meanwhile do you, Hector, go to the city and tell our mother what is happening. Tell her to bid the matrons gather at the temple of Minerva in the acropolis; let her then take her key and open the doors of the sacred building; there, upon the knees of Minerva, let her lay the largest, fairest robe she has in her house- the one she sets most store by; let her, moreover, promise to sacrifice twelve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the goddess, if she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little ones of the Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from falling on the goodly city of Ilius; for he fights with fury and fills men's souls with panic. I hold him mightiest of them all; we did not fear even their great champion Achilles, son of a goddess though he be, as we do this man: his rage is beyond all bounds, and there is none can vie with him in prowess" 

Hector did as his brother bade him. He sprang from his chariot, and went about everywhere among the host, brandishing his spears, urging the men on to fight, and raising the dread cry of battle. Thereon they rallied and again faced the Achaeans, who gave ground and ceased their murderous onset, for they deemed that some one of the immortals had come down from starry heaven to help the Trojans, so strangely had they rallied. And Hector shouted to the Trojans, "Trojans and allies, be men, my friends, and fight with might and main, while I go to Ilius and tell the old men of our council and our wives to pray to the gods and vow hecatombs in their honour." 

With this he went his way, and the black rim of hide that went round his shield beat against his neck and his ancles. 

Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus, and the son of Tydeus went into the open space between the hosts to fight in single combat. When they were close up to one another Diomed of the loud war-cry was the first to speak. "Who, my good sir," said he, "who are you among men? I have never seen you in battle until now, but you are daring beyond all others if you abide my onset. Woe to those fathers whose sons face my might. If, however, you are one of the immortals and have come down from heaven, I will not fight you; for even valiant Lycurgus, son of Dryas, did not live long when he took to fighting with the gods. He it was that drove the nursing women who were in charge of frenzied Bacchus through the land of Nysa, and they flung their thyrsi on the ground as murderous Lycurgus beat them with his oxgoad. Bacchus himself plunged terror-stricken into the sea, and Thetis took him to her bosom to comfort him, for he was scared by the fury with which the man reviled him. Thereon the gods who live at ease were angry with Lycurgus and the son of Saturn struck him blind, nor did he live much longer after he had become hateful to the immortals. Therefore I will not fight with the blessed gods; but if you are of them that eat the fruit of the ground, draw near and meet your doom." 

And the son of Hippolochus answered, son of Tydeus, why ask me of my lineage? Men come and go as leaves year by year upon the trees. Those of autumn the wind sheds upon the ground, but when spring returns the forest buds forth with fresh vines. Even so is it with the generations of mankind, the new spring up as the old are passing away. If, then, you would learn my descent, it is one that is well known to many. There is a city in the heart of Argos, pasture land of horses, called Ephyra, where Sisyphus lived, who was the craftiest of all mankind. He was the son of Aeolus, and had a son named Glaucus, who was father to Bellerophon, whom heaven endowed with the most surpassing comeliness and beauty. But Proetus devised his ruin, and being stronger than he, drove him from the land of the Argives, over which Jove had made him ruler. For Antea, wife of Proetus, lusted after him, and would have had him lie with her in secret; but Bellerophon was an honourable man and would not, so she told lies about him to Proteus. 'Proetus,' said she, 'kill Bellerophon or die, for he would have had converse with me against my will.' The king was angered, but shrank from killing Bellerophon, so he sent him to Lycia with lying letters of introduction, written on a folded tablet, and containing much ill against the bearer. He bade Bellerophon show these letters to his father-in-law, to the end that he might thus perish; Bellerophon therefore went to Lycia, and the gods convoyed him safely. 

"When he reached the river Xanthus, which is in Lycia, the king received him with all goodwill, feasted him nine days, and killed nine heifers in his honour, but when rosy-fingered morning appeared upon the tenth day, he questioned him and desired to see the letter from his son-in-law Proetus. When he had received the wicked letter he first commanded Bellerophon to kill that savage monster, the Chimaera, who was not a human being, but a goddess, for she had the head of a lion and the tail of a serpent, while her body was that of a goat, and she breathed forth flames of fire; but Bellerophon slew her, for he was guided by signs from heaven. He next fought the far-famed Solymi, and this, he said, was the hardest of all his battles. Thirdly, he killed the Amazons, women who were the peers of men, and as he was returning thence the king devised yet another plan for his destruction; he picked the bravest warriors in all Lycia, and placed them in ambuscade, but not a man ever came back, for Bellerophon killed every one of them. Then the king knew that he must be the valiant offspring of a god, so he kept him in Lycia, gave him his daughter in marriage, and made him of equal honour in the kingdom with himself; and the Lycians gave him a piece of land, the best in all the country, fair with vineyards and tilled fields, to have and to hold. 

"The king's daughter bore Bellerophon three children, Isander, Hippolochus, and Laodameia. Jove, the lord of counsel, lay with Laodameia, and she bore him noble Sarpedon; but when Bellerophon came to be hated by all the gods, he wandered all desolate and dismayed upon the Alean plain, gnawing at his own heart, and shunning the path of man. Mars, insatiate of battle, killed his son Isander while he was fighting the Solymi; his daughter was killed by Diana of the golden reins, for she was angered with her; but Hippolochus was father to myself, and when he sent me to Troy he urged me again and again to fight ever among the foremost and outvie my peers, so as not to shame the blood of my fathers who were the noblest in Ephyra and in all Lycia. This, then, is the descent I claim." 

Thus did he speak, and the heart of Diomed was glad. He planted his spear in the ground, and spoke to him with friendly words. "Then," he said, you are an old friend of my father's house. Great Oeneus once entertained Bellerophon for twenty days, and the two exchanged presents. Oeneus gave a belt rich with purple, and Bellerophon a double cup, which I left at home when I set out for Troy. I do not remember Tydeus, for he was taken from us while I was yet a child, when the army of the Achaeans was cut to pieces before Thebes. Henceforth, however, I must be your host in middle Argos, and you mine in Lycia, if I should ever go there; let us avoid one another's spears even during a general engagement; there are many noble Trojans and allies whom I can kill, if I overtake them and heaven delivers them into my hand; so again with yourself, there are many Achaeans whose lives you may take if you can; we two, then, will exchange armour, that all present may know of the old ties that subsist between us." 

With these words they sprang from their chariots, grasped one another's hands, and plighted friendship. But the son of Saturn made Glaucus take leave of his wits, for he exchanged golden armour for bronze, the worth of a hundred head of cattle for the worth of nine. 

Now when Hector reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, the wives and daughters of the Trojans came running towards him to ask after their sons, brothers, kinsmen, and husbands: he told them to set about praying to the gods, and many were made sorrowful as they heard him. 

Presently he reached the splendid palace of King Priam, adorned with colonnades of hewn stone. In it there were fifty bedchambers- all of hewn stone- built near one another, where the sons of Priam slept, each with his wedded wife. Opposite these, on the other side the courtyard, there were twelve upper rooms also of hewn stone for Priam's daughters, built near one another, where his sons-in-law slept with their wives. When Hector got there, his fond mother came up to him with Laodice the fairest of her daughters. She took his hand within her own and said, "My son, why have you left the battle to come hither? Are the Achaeans, woe betide them, pressing you hard about the city that you have thought fit to come and uplift your hands to Jove from the citadel? Wait till I can bring you wine that you may make offering to Jove and to the other immortals, and may then drink and be refreshed. Wine gives a man fresh strength when he is wearied, as you now are with fighting on behalf of your kinsmen." 

And Hector answered, "Honoured mother, bring no wine, lest you unman me and I forget my strength. I dare not make a drink-offering to Jove with unwashed hands; one who is bespattered with blood and filth may not pray to the son of Saturn. Get the matrons together, and go with offerings to the temple of Minerva driver of the spoil; there, upon the knees of Minerva, lay the largest and fairest robe you have in your house- the one you set most store by; promise, moreover, to sacrifice twelve yearling heifers that have never yet felt the goad, in the temple of the goddess if she will take pity on the town, with the wives and little ones of the Trojans, and keep the son of Tydeus from off the goodly city of Ilius, for he fights with fury, and fills men's souls with panic. Go, then, to the temple of Minerva, while I seek Paris and exhort him, if he will hear my words. Would that the earth might open her jaws and swallow him, for Jove bred him to be the bane of the Trojans, and of Priam and Priam's sons. Could I but see him go down into the house of Hades, my heart would forget its heaviness." 

His mother went into the house and called her waiting-women who gathered the matrons throughout the city. She then went down into her fragrant store-room, where her embroidered robes were kept, the work of Sidonian women, whom Alexandrus had brought over from Sidon when he sailed the seas upon that voyage during which he carried off Helen. Hecuba took out the largest robe, and the one that was most beautifully enriched with embroidery, as an offering to Minerva: it glittered like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. With this she went on her way and many matrons with her. 

When they reached the temple of Minerva, lovely Theano, daughter of Cisseus and wife of Antenor, opened the doors, for the Trojans had made her priestess of Minerva. The women lifted up their hands to the goddess with a loud cry, and Theano took the robe to lay it upon the knees of Minerva, praying the while to the daughter of great Jove. "Holy Minerva," she cried, "protectress of our city, mighty goddess, break the spear of Diomed and lay him low before the Scaean gates. Do this, and we will sacrifice twelve heifers that have never yet known the goad, in your temple, if you will have pity upon the town, with the wives and little ones If the Trojans." Thus she prayed, but Pallas Minerva granted not her prayer. 

While they were thus praying to the daughter of great Jove, Hector went to the fair house of Alexandrus, which he had built for him by the foremost builders in the land. They had built him his house, storehouse, and courtyard near those of Priam and Hector on the acropolis. Here Hector entered, with a spear eleven cubits long in his hand; the bronze point gleamed in front of him, and was fastened to the shaft of the spear by a ring of gold. He found Alexandrus within the house, busied about his armour, his shield and cuirass, and handling his curved bow; there, too, sat Argive Helen with her women, setting them their several tasks; and as Hector saw him he rebuked him with words of scorn. "Sir," said he, "you do ill to nurse this rancour; the people perish fighting round this our town; you would yourself chide one whom you saw shirking his part in the combat. Up then, or ere long the city will be in a blaze." 

And Alexandrus answered, "Hector, your rebuke is just; listen therefore, and believe me when I tell you that I am not here so much through rancour or ill-will towards the Trojans, as from a desire to indulge my grief. My wife was even now gently urging me to battle, and I hold it better that I should go, for victory is ever fickle. Wait, then, while I put on my armour, or go first and I will follow. I shall be sure to overtake you." 

Hector made no answer, but Helen tried to soothe him. "Brother," said she, "to my abhorred and sinful self, would that a whirlwind had caught me up on the day my mother brought me forth, and had borne me to some mountain or to the waves of the roaring sea that should have swept me away ere this mischief had come about. But, since the gods have devised these evils, would, at any rate, that I had been wife to a better man- to one who could smart under dishonour and men's evil speeches. This fellow was never yet to be depended upon, nor never will be, and he will surely reap what he has sown. Still, brother, come in and rest upon this seat, for it is you who bear the brunt of that toil that has been caused by my hateful self and by the sin of Alexandrus- both of whom Jove has doomed to be a theme of song among those that shall be born hereafter." 

And Hector answered, "Bid me not be seated, Helen, for all the goodwill you bear me. I cannot stay. I am in haste to help the Trojans, who miss me greatly when I am not among them; but urge your husband, and of his own self also let him make haste to overtake me before I am out of the city. I must go home to see my household, my wife and my little son, for I know not whether I shall ever again return to them, or whether the gods will cause me to fill by the hands of the Achaeans." 

Then Hector left her, and forthwith was at his own house. He did not find Andromache, for she was on the wall with her child and one of her maids, weeping bitterly. Seeing, then, that she was not within, he stood on the threshold of the women's rooms and said, "Women, tell me, and tell me true, where did Andromache go when she left the house? Was it to my sisters, or to my brothers' wives? or is she at the temple of Minerva where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess?" 

His good housekeeper answered, "Hector, since you bid me tell you truly, she did not go to your sisters nor to your brothers' wives, nor yet to the temple of Minerva, where the other women are propitiating the awful goddess, but she is on the high wall of Ilius, for she had heard the Trojans were being hard pressed, and that the Achaeans were in great force: she went to the wall in frenzied haste, and the nurse went with her carrying the child." 

Hector hurried from the house when she had done speaking, and went down the streets by the same way that he had come. When he had gone through the city and had reached the Scaean gates through which he would go out on to the plain, his wife came running towards him, Andromache, daughter of great Eetion who ruled in Thebe under the wooded slopes of Mt. Placus, and was king of the Cilicians. His daughter had married Hector, and now came to meet him with a nurse who carried his little child in her bosom- a mere babe. Hector's darling son, and lovely as a star. Hector had named him Scamandrius, but the people called him Astyanax, for his father stood alone as chief guardian of Ilius. Hector smiled as he looked upon the boy, but he did not speak, and Andromache stood by him weeping and taking his hand in her own. "Dear husband," said she, "your valour will bring you to destruction; think on your infant son, and on my hapless self who ere long shall be your widow- for the Achaeans will set upon you in a body and kill you. It would be better for me, should I lose you, to lie dead and buried, for I shall have nothing left to comfort me when you are gone, save only sorrow. I have neither father nor mother now. Achilles slew my father when he sacked Thebe the goodly city of the Cilicians. He slew him, but did not for very shame despoil him; when he had burned him in his wondrous armour, he raised a barrow over his ashes and the mountain nymphs, daughters of aegis-bearing Jove, planted a grove of elms about his tomb. I had seven brothers in my father's house, but on the same day they all went within the house of Hades. Achilles killed them as they were with their sheep and cattle. My mother- her who had been queen of all the land under Mt. Placus- he brought hither with the spoil, and freed her for a great sum, but the archer- queen Diana took her in the house of your father. Nay- Hector- you who to me are father, mother, brother, and dear husband- have mercy upon me; stay here upon this wall; make not your child fatherless, and your wife a widow; as for the host, place them near the fig-tree, where the city can be best scaled, and the wall is weakest. Thrice have the bravest of them come thither and assailed it, under the two Ajaxes, Idomeneus, the sons of Atreus, and the brave son of Tydeus, either of their own bidding, or because some soothsayer had told them." 

And Hector answered, "Wife, I too have thought upon all this, but with what face should I look upon the Trojans, men or women, if I shirked battle like a coward? I cannot do so: I know nothing save to fight bravely in the forefront of the Trojan host and win renown alike for my father and myself. Well do I know that the day will surely come when mighty Ilius shall be destroyed with Priam and Priam's people, but I grieve for none of these- not even for Hecuba, nor King Priam, nor for my brothers many and brave who may fall in the dust before their foes- for none of these do I grieve as for yourself when the day shall come on which some one of the Achaeans shall rob you for ever of your freedom, and bear you weeping away. It may be that you will have to ply the loom in Argos at the bidding of a mistress, or to fetch water from the springs Messeis or Hypereia, treated brutally by some cruel task-master; then will one say who sees you weeping, 'She was wife to Hector, the bravest warrior among the Trojans during the war before Ilius.' On this your tears will break forth anew for him who would have put away the day of captivity from you. May I lie dead under the barrow that is heaped over my body ere I hear your cry as they carry you into bondage." 

He stretched his arms towards his child, but the boy cried and nestled in his nurse's bosom, scared at the sight of his father's armour, and at the horse-hair plume that nodded fiercely from his helmet. His father and mother laughed to see him, but Hector took the helmet from his head and laid it all gleaming upon the ground. Then he took his darling child, kissed him, and dandled him in his arms, praying over him the while to Jove and to all the gods. "Jove," he cried, "grant that this my child may be even as myself, chief among the Trojans; let him be not less excellent in strength, and let him rule Ilius with his might. Then may one say of him as he comes from battle, 'The son is far better than the father.' May he bring back the blood-stained spoils of him whom he has laid low, and let his mother's heart be glad.'" 

With this he laid the child again in the arms of his wife, who took him to her own soft bosom, smiling through her tears. As her husband watched her his heart yearned towards her and he caressed her fondly, saying, "My own wife, do not take these things too bitterly to heart. No one can hurry me down to Hades before my time, but if a man's hour is come, be he brave or be he coward, there is no escape for him when he has once been born. Go, then, within the house, and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for war is man's matter, and mine above all others of them that have been born in Ilius." 

He took his plumed helmet from the ground, and his wife went back again to her house, weeping bitterly and often looking back towards him. When she reached her home she found her maidens within, and bade them all join in her lament; so they mourned Hector in his own house though he was yet alive, for they deemed that they should never see him return safe from battle, and from the furious hands of the Achaeans. 

Paris did not remain long in his house. He donned his goodly armour overlaid with bronze, and hasted through the city as fast as his feet could take him. As a horse, stabled and fed, breaks loose and gallops gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to bathe in the fair-flowing river- he holds his head high, and his mane streams upon his shoulders as he exults in his strength and flies like the wind to the haunts and feeding ground of the mares- even so went forth Paris from high Pergamus, gleaming like sunlight in his armour, and he laughed aloud as he sped swiftly on his way. Forthwith he came upon his brother Hector, who was then turning away from the place where he had held converse with his wife, and he was himself the first to speak. "Sir," said he, "I fear that I have kept you waiting when you are in haste, and have not come as quickly as you bade me." 

"My good brother," answered Hector, you fight bravely, and no man with any justice can make light of your doings in battle. But you are careless and wilfully remiss. It grieves me to the heart to hear the ill that the Trojans speak about you, for they have suffered much on your account. Let us be going, and we will make things right hereafter, should Jove vouchsafe us to set the cup of our deliverance before ever-living gods of heaven in our own homes, when we have chased the Achaeans from Troy." 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK VII

WITH these words Hector passed through the gates, and his brother Alexandrus with him, both eager for the fray. As when heaven sends a breeze to sailors who have long looked for one in vain, and have laboured at their oars till they are faint with toil, even so welcome was the sight of these two heroes to the Trojans. 

Thereon Alexandrus killed Menesthius the son of Areithous; he lived in Ame, and was son of Areithous the Mace-man, and of Phylomedusa. Hector threw a spear at Eioneus and struck him dead with a wound in the neck under the bronze rim of his helmet. Glaucus, moreover, son of Hippolochus, captain of the Lycians, in hard hand-to-hand fight smote Iphinous son of Dexius on the shoulder, as he was springing on to his chariot behind his fleet mares; so he fell to earth from the car, and there was no life left in him. 

When, therefore, Minerva saw these men making havoc of the Argives, she darted down to Ilius from the summits of Olympus, and Apollo, who was looking on from Pergamus, went out to meet her; for he wanted the Trojans to be victorious. The pair met by the oak tree, and King Apollo son of Jove was first to speak. "What would you have said he, "daughter of great Jove, that your proud spirit has sent you hither from Olympus? Have you no pity upon the Trojans, and would you incline the scales of victory in favour of the Danaans? Let me persuade you- for it will be better thus- stay the combat for to-day, but let them renew the fight hereafter till they compass the doom of Ilius, since you goddesses have made up your minds to destroy the city." 

And Minerva answered, "So be it, Far-Darter; it was in this mind that I came down from Olympus to the Trojans and Achaeans. Tell me, then, how do you propose to end this present fighting?" 

Apollo, son of Jove, replied, "Let us incite great Hector to challenge some one of the Danaans in single combat; on this the Achaeans will be shamed into finding a man who will fight him." 

Minerva assented, and Helenus son of Priam divined the counsel of the gods; he therefore went up to Hector and said, "Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in counsel, I am your brother, let me then persuade you. Bid the other Trojans and Achaeans all of them take their seats, and challenge the best man among the Achaeans to meet you in single combat. I have heard the voice of the ever-living gods, and the hour of your doom is not yet come." 

Hector was glad when he heard this saying, and went in among the Trojans, grasping his spear by the middle to hold them back, and they all sat down. Agamemnon also bade the Achaeans be seated. But Minerva and Apollo, in the likeness of vultures, perched on father Jove's high oak tree, proud of their men; and the ranks sat close ranged together, bristling with shield and helmet and spear. As when the rising west wind furs the face of the sea and the waters grow dark beneath it, so sat the companies of Trojans and Achaeans upon the plain. And Hector spoke thus:- 

"Hear me, Trojans and Achaeans, that I may speak even as I am minded; Jove on his high throne has brought our oaths and covenants to nothing, and foreshadows ill for both of us, till you either take the towers of Troy, or are yourselves vanquished at your ships. The princes of the Achaeans are here present in the midst of you; let him, then, that will fight me stand forward as your champion against Hector. Thus I say, and may Jove be witness between us. If your champion slay me, let him strip me of my armour and take it to your ships, but let him send my body home that the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when I am dead. In like manner, if Apollo vouchsafe me glory and I slay your champion, I will strip him of his armour and take it to the city of Ilius, where I will hang it in the temple of Apollo, but I will give up his body, that the Achaeans may bury him at their ships, and the build him a mound by the wide waters of the Hellespont. Then will one say hereafter as he sails his ship over the sea, 'This is the monument of one who died long since a champion who was slain by mighty Hector.' Thus will one say, and my fame shall not be lost." 

Thus did he speak, but they all held their peace, ashamed to decline the challenge, yet fearing to accept it, till at last Menelaus rose and rebuked them, for he was angry. "Alas," he cried, "vain braggarts, women forsooth not men, double-dyed indeed will be the stain upon us if no man of the Danaans will now face Hector. May you be turned every man of you into earth and water as you sit spiritless and inglorious in your places. I will myself go out against this man, but the upshot of the fight will be from on high in the hands of the immortal gods." 

With these words he put on his armour; and then, O Menelaus, your life would have come to an end at the hands of hands of Hector, for he was far better the man, had not the princes of the Achaeans sprung upon you and checked you. King Agamemnon caught him by the right hand and said, "Menelaus, you are mad; a truce to this folly. Be patient in spite of passion, do not think of fighting a man so much stronger than yourself as Hector son of Priam, who is feared by many another as well as you. Even Achilles, who is far more doughty than you are, shrank from meeting him in battle. Sit down your own people, and the Achaeans will send some other champion to fight Hector; fearless and fond of battle though he be, I ween his knees will bend gladly under him if he comes out alive from the hurly-burly of this fight." 

With these words of reasonable counsel he persuaded his brother, whereon his squires gladly stripped the armour from off his shoulders. Then Nestor rose and spoke, "Of a truth," said he, "the Achaean land is fallen upon evil times. The old knight Peleus, counsellor and orator among the Myrmidons, loved when I was in his house to question me concerning the race and lineage of all the Argives. How would it not grieve him could he hear of them as now quailing before Hector? Many a time would he lift his hands in prayer that his soul might leave his body and go down within the house of Hades. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were still young and strong as when the Pylians and Arcadians were gathered in fight by the rapid river Celadon under the walls of Pheia, and round about the waters of the river Iardanus. The godlike hero Ereuthalion stood forward as their champion, with the armour of King Areithous upon his shoulders- Areithous whom men and women had surnamed 'the Mace-man,' because he fought neither with bow nor spear, but broke the battalions of the foe with his iron mace. Lycurgus killed him, not in fair fight, but by entrapping him in a narrow way where his mace served him in no stead; for Lycurgus was too quick for him and speared him through the middle, so he fell to earth on his back. Lycurgus then spoiled him of the armour which Mars had given him, and bore it in battle thenceforward; but when he grew old and stayed at home, he gave it to his faithful squire Ereuthalion, who in this same armour challenged the foremost men among us. The others quaked and quailed, but my high spirit bade me fight him though none other would venture; I was the youngest man of them all; but when I fought him Minerva vouchsafed me victory. He was the biggest and strongest man that ever I killed, and covered much ground as he lay sprawling upon the earth. Would that I were still young and strong as I then was, for the son of Priam would then soon find one who would face him. But you, foremost among the whole host though you be, have none of you any stomach for fighting Hector." 

Thus did the old man rebuke them, and forthwith nine men started to their feet. Foremost of all uprose King Agamemnon, and after him brave Diomed the son of Tydeus. Next were the two Ajaxes, men clothed in valour as with a garment, and then Idomeneus, and Meriones his brother in arms. After these Eurypylus son of Euaemon, Thoas the son of Andraemon, and Ulysses also rose. Then Nestor knight of Gerene again spoke, saying: "Cast lots among you to see who shall be chosen. If he come alive out of this fight he will have done good service alike to his own soul and to the Achaeans." 

Thus he spoke, and when each of them had marked his lot, and had thrown it into the helmet of Agamemnon son of Atreus, the people lifted their hands in prayer, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, "Father Jove, grant that the lot fall on Ajax, or on the son of Tydeus, or upon the king of rich Mycene himself." 

As they were speaking, Nestor knight of Gerene shook the helmet, and from it there fell the very lot which they wanted- the lot of Ajax. The herald bore it about and showed it to all the chieftains of the Achaeans, going from left to right; but they none of of them owned it. When, however, in due course he reached the man who had written upon it and had put it into the helmet, brave Ajax held out his hand, and the herald gave him the lot. When Ajax saw him mark he knew it and was glad; he threw it to the ground and said, "My friends, the lot is mine, and I rejoice, for I shall vanquish Hector. I will put on my armour; meanwhile, pray to King Jove in silence among yourselves that the Trojans may not hear you- or aloud if you will, for we fear no man. None shall overcome me, neither by force nor cunning, for I was born and bred in Salamis, and can hold my own in all things." 

With this they fell praying to King Jove the son of Saturn, and thus would one of them say as he looked into the vault of heaven, "Father Jove that rulest from Ida, most glorious in power, vouchsafe victory to Ajax, and let him win great glory: but if you wish well to Hector also and would protect him, grant to each of them equal fame and prowess. 

Thus they prayed, and Ajax armed himself in his suit of gleaming bronze. When he was in full array he sprang forward as monstrous Mars when he takes part among men whom Jove has set fighting with one another- even so did huge Ajax, bulwark of the Achaeans, spring forward with a grim smile on his face as he brandished his long spear and strode onward. The Argives were elated as they beheld him, but the Trojans trembled in every limb, and the heart even of Hector beat quickly, but he could not now retreat and withdraw into the ranks behind him, for he had been the challenger. Ajax came up bearing his shield in front of him like a wall- a shield of bronze with seven folds of oxhide- the work of Tychius, who lived in Hyle and was by far the best worker in leather. He had made it with the hides of seven full-fed bulls, and over these he had set an eighth layer of bronze. Holding this shield before him, Ajax son of Telamon came close up to Hector, and menaced him saying, "Hector, you shall now learn, man to man, what kind of champions the Danaans have among them even besides lion-hearted Achilles cleaver of the ranks of men. He now abides at the ships in anger with Agamemnon shepherd of his people, but there are many of us who are well able to face you; therefore begin the fight." 

And Hector answered, "Noble Ajax, son of Telamon, captain of the host, treat me not as though I were some puny boy or woman that cannot fight. I have been long used to the blood and butcheries of battle. I am quick to turn my leathern shield either to right or left, for this I deem the main thing in battle. I can charge among the chariots and horsemen, and in hand to hand fighting can delight the heart of Mars; howbeit I would not take such a man as you are off his guard- but I will smite you openly if I can." 

He poised his spear as he spoke, and hurled it from him. It struck the sevenfold shield in its outermost layer- the eighth, which was of bronze- and went through six of the layers but in the seventh hide it stayed. Then Ajax threw in his turn, and struck the round shield of the son of Priam. The terrible spear went through his gleaming shield, and pressed onward through his cuirass of cunning workmanship; it pierced the shirt against his side, but he swerved and thus saved his life. They then each of them drew out the spear from his shield, and fell on one another like savage lions or wild boars of great strength and endurance: the son of Priam struck the middle of Ajax's shield, but the bronze did not break, and the point of his dart was turned. Ajax then sprang forward and pierced the shield of Hector; the spear went through it and staggered him as he was springing forward to attack; it gashed his neck and the blood came pouring from the wound, but even so Hector did not cease fighting; he gave ground, and with his brawny hand seized a stone, rugged and huge, that was lying upon the plain; with this he struck the shield of Ajax on the boss that was in its middle, so that the bronze rang again. But Ajax in turn caught up a far larger stone, swung it aloft, and hurled it with prodigious force. This millstone of a rock broke Hector's shield inwards and threw him down on his back with the shield crushing him under it, but Apollo raised him at once. Thereon they would have hacked at one another in close combat with their swords, had not heralds, messengers of gods and men, come forward, one from the Trojans and the other from the Achaeans- Talthybius and Idaeus both of them honourable men; these parted them with their staves, and the good herald Idaeus said, "My sons, fight no longer, you are both of you valiant, and both are dear to Jove; we know this; but night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be well gainsaid." 

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "Idaeus, bid Hector say so, for it was he that challenged our princes. Let him speak first and I will accept his saying." 

Then Hector said, "Ajax, heaven has vouchsafed you stature and strength, and judgement; and in wielding the spear you excel all others of the Achaeans. Let us for this day cease fighting; hereafter we will fight anew till heaven decide between us, and give victory to one or to the other; night is now falling, and the behests of night may not be well gainsaid. Gladden, then, the hearts of the Achaeans at your ships, and more especially those of your own followers and clansmen, while I, in the great city of King Priam, bring comfort to the Trojans and their women, who vie with one another in their prayers on my behalf. Let us, moreover, exchange presents that it may be said among the Achaeans and Trojans, 'They fought with might and main, but were reconciled and parted in friendship.' 

On this he gave Ajax a silver-studded sword with its sheath and leathern baldric, and in return Ajax gave him a girdle dyed with purple. Thus they parted, the one going to the host of the Achaeans, and the other to that of the Trojans, who rejoiced when they saw their hero come to them safe and unharmed from the strong hands of mighty Ajax. They led him, therefore, to the city as one that had been saved beyond their hopes. On the other side the Achaeans brought Ajax elated with victory to Agamemnon. 

When they reached the quarters of the son of Atreus, Agamemnon sacrificed for them a five-year-old bull in honour of Jove the son of Saturn. They flayed the carcass, made it ready, and divided it into joints; these they cut carefully up into smaller pieces, putting them on the spits, roasting them sufficiently, and then drawing them off. When they had done all this and had prepared the feast, they ate it, and every man had his full and equal share, so that all were satisfied, and King Agamemnon gave Ajax some slices cut lengthways down the loin, as a mark of special honour. As soon as they had had enough to cat and drink, old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest began to speak; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:- 

"Son of Atreus, and other chieftains, inasmuch as many of the Achaeans are now dead, whose blood Mars has shed by the banks of the Scamander, and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades, it will be well when morning comes that we should cease fighting; we will then wheel our dead together with oxen and mules and burn them not far from the ships, that when we sail hence we may take the bones of our comrades home to their children. Hard by the funeral pyre we will build a barrow that shall be raised from the plain for all in common; near this let us set about building a high wall, to shelter ourselves and our ships, and let it have well-made gates that there may be a way through them for our chariots. Close outside we will dig a deep trench all round it to keep off both horse and foot, that the Trojan chieftains may not bear hard upon us." 

Thus he spoke, and the princess shouted in applause. Meanwhile the Trojans held a council, angry and full of discord, on the acropolis by the gates of King Priam's palace; and wise Antenor spoke. "Hear me he said, "Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even as I am minded. Let us give up Argive Helen and her wealth to the sons of Atreus, for we are now fighting in violation of our solemn covenants, and shall not prosper till we have done as I say." 

He then sat down and Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen rose to speak. "Antenor," said he, "your words are not to my liking; you can find a better saying than this if you will; if, however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. I will speak plainly, and hereby notify to the Trojans that I will not give up the woman; but the wealth that I brought home with her from Argos I will restore, and will add yet further of my own." 

On this, when Paris had spoken and taken his seat, Priam of the race of Dardanus, peer of gods in council, rose and with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "Hear me, Trojans, Dardanians, and allies, that I may speak even as I am minded. Get your suppers now as hitherto throughout the city, but keep your watches and be wakeful. At daybreak let Idaeus go to the ships, and tell Agamemnon and Menelaus sons of Atreus the saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has come about; and let him also be instant with them that they now cease fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They took supper in their companies and at daybreak Idaeus went his wa to the ships. He found the Danaans, servants of Mars, in council at the stern of Agamemnon's ship, and took his place in the midst of them. "Son of Atreus," he said, "and princes of the Achaean host, Priam and the other noble Trojans have sent me to tell you the saying of Alexandrus through whom this quarrel has come about, if so be that you may find it acceptable. All the treasure he took with him in his ships to Troy- would that he had sooner perished- he will restore, and will add yet further of his own, but he will not give up the wedded wife of Menelaus, though the Trojans would have him do so. Priam bade me inquire further if you will cease fighting till we burn our dead; hereafter we will fight anew, till heaven decide between us and give victory to one or to the other." 

They all held their peace, but presently Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke, saying, "Let there be no taking, neither treasure, nor yet Helen, for even a child may see that the doom of the Trojans is at hand." 

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words that Diomed had spoken, and thereon King Agamemnon said to Idaeus, "Idaeus, you have heard the answer the Achaeans make you-and I with them. But as concerning the dead, I give you leave to burn them, for when men are once dead there should be no grudging them the rites of fire. Let Jove the mighty husband of Juno be witness to this covenant." 

As he spoke he upheld his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and Idaeus went back to the strong city of Ilius. The Trojans and Dardanians were gathered in council waiting his return; when he came, he stood in their midst and delivered his message. As soon as they heard it they set about their twofold labour, some to gather the corpses, and others to bring in wood. The Argives on their part also hastened from their ships, some to gather the corpses, and others to bring in wood. 

The sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh risen into the vault of heaven from the slow still currents of deep Oceanus, when the two armies met. They could hardly recognise their dead, but they washed the clotted gore from off them, shed tears over them, and lifted them upon their waggons. Priam had forbidden the Trojans to wail aloud, so they heaped their dead sadly and silently upon the pyre, and having burned them went back to the city of Ilius. The Achaeans in like manner heaped their dead sadly and silently on the pyre, and having burned them went back to their ships. 

Now in the twilight when it was not yet dawn, chosen bands of the Achaeans were gathered round the pyre and built one barrow that was raised in common for all, and hard by this they built a high wall to shelter themselves and their ships; they gave it strong gates that there might be a way through them for their chariots, and close outside it they dug a trench deep and wide, and they planted it within with stakes. 

Thus did the Achaeans toil, and the gods, seated by the side of Jove the lord of lightning, marvelled at their great work; but Neptune, lord of the earthquake, spoke, saying, "Father Jove, what mortal in the whole world will again take the gods into his counsel? See you not how the Achaeans have built a wall about their ships and driven a trench all round it, without offering hecatombs to the gods? The The fame of this wall will reach as far as dawn itself, and men will no longer think anything of the one which Phoebus Apollo and myself built with so much labour for Laomedon." 

Jove was displeased and answered, "What, O shaker of the earth, are you talking about? A god less powerful than yourself might be alarmed at what they are doing, but your fame reaches as far as dawn itself. Surely when the Achaeans have gone home with their ships, you can shatter their wall and Ring it into the sea; you can cover the beach with sand again, and the great wall of the Achaeans will then be utterly effaced." 

Thus did they converse, and by sunset the work of the Achaeans was completed; they then slaughtered oxen at their tents and got their supper. Many ships had come with wine from Lemnos, sent by Euneus the son of Jason, born to him by Hypsipyle. The son of Jason freighted them with ten thousand measures of wine, which he sent specially to the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon and Menelaus. From this supply the Achaeans bought their wine, some with bronze, some with iron, some with hides, some with whole heifers, and some again with captives. They spread a goodly banquet and feasted the whole night through, as also did the Trojans and their allies in the city. But all the time Jove boded them ill and roared with his portentous thunder. Pale fear got hold upon them, and they spilled the wine from their cups on to the ground, nor did any dare drink till he had made offerings to the most mighty son of Saturn. Then they laid themselves down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK VIII

   NOW when Morning, clad in her robe of saffron, had begun to suffuse light over the earth, Jove called the gods in council on the topmost crest of serrated Olympus. Then he spoke and all the other gods gave ear. "Hear me," said he, "gods and goddesses, that I may speak even as I am minded. Let none of you neither goddess nor god try to cross me, but obey me every one of you that I may bring this matter to an end. If I see anyone acting apart and helping either Trojans or Danaans, he shall be beaten inordinately ere he come back again to Olympus; or I will hurl him down into dark Tartarus far into the deepest pit under the earth, where the gates are iron and the floor bronze, as far beneath Hades as heaven is high above the earth, that you may learn how much the mightiest I am among you. Try me and find out for yourselves. Hangs me a golden chain from heaven, and lay hold of it all of you, gods and goddesses together- tug as you will, you will not drag Jove the supreme counsellor from heaven to earth; but were I to pull at it myself I should draw you up with earth and sea into the bargain, then would I bind the chain about some pinnacle of Olympus and leave you all dangling in the mid firmament. So far am I above all others either of gods or men." 

They were frightened and all of them of held their peace, for he had spoken masterfully; but at last Minerva answered, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, we all know that your might is not to be gainsaid, but we are also sorry for the Danaan warriors, who are perishing and coming to a bad end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the Argives that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure." 

Jove smiled at her and answered, "Take heart, my child, Trito-born; I am not really in earnest, and I wish to be kind to you." 

With this he yoked his fleet horses, with hoofs of bronze and manes of glittering gold. He girded himself also with gold about the body, seized his gold whip and took his seat in his chariot. Thereon he lashed his horses and they flew forward nothing loth midway twixt earth and starry heaven. After a while he reached many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Gargarus, where are his grove and fragrant altar. There the father of gods and men stayed his horses, took them from the chariot, and hid them in a thick cloud; then he took his seat all glorious upon the topmost crests, looking down upon the city of Troy and the ships of the Achaeans. 

The Achaeans took their morning meal hastily at the ships, and afterwards put on their armour. The Trojans on the other hand likewise armed themselves throughout the city, fewer in numbers but nevertheless eager perforce to do battle for their wives and children. All the gates were flung wide open, and horse and foot sallied forth with the tramp as of a great multitude. 

When they were got together in one place, shield clashed with shield, and spear with spear, in the conflict of mail-clad men. Mighty was the din as the bossed shields pressed hard on one another- death- cry and shout of triumph of slain and slayers, and the earth ran red with blood. 

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning their weapons beat against one another, and the people fell, but when the sun had reached mid-heaven, the sire of all balanced his golden scales, and put two fates of death within them, one for the Trojans and the other for the Achaeans. He took the balance by the middle, and when he lifted it up the day of the Achaeans sank; the death-fraught scale of the Achaeans settled down upon the ground, while that of the Trojans rose heavenwards. Then he thundered aloud from Ida, and sent the glare of his lightning upon the Achaeans; when they saw this, pale fear fell upon them and they were sore afraid. 

Idomeneus dared not stay nor yet Agamemnon, nor did the two Ajaxes, servants of Mars, hold their ground. Nestor knight of Gerene alone stood firm, bulwark of the Achaeans, not of his own will, but one of his horses was disabled. Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen had hit it with an arrow just on the top of its head where the mane begins to grow away from the skull, a very deadly place. The horse bounded in his anguish as the arrow pierced his brain, and his struggles threw others into confusion. The old man instantly began cutting the traces with his sword, but Hector's fleet horses bore down upon him through the rout with their bold charioteer, even Hector himself, and the old man would have perished there and then had not Diomed been quick to mark, and with a loud cry called Ulysses to help him. 

"Ulysses," he cried, "noble son of Laertes where are you flying to, with your back turned like a coward? See that you are not struck with a spear between the shoulders. Stay here and help me to defend Nestor from this man's furious onset." 

Ulysses would not give ear, but sped onward to the ships of the Achaeans, and the son of Tydeus flinging himself alone into the thick of the fight took his stand before the horses of the son of Neleus. "Sir," said he, "these young warriors are pressing you hard, your force is spent, and age is heavy upon you, your squire is naught, and your horses are slow to move. Mount my chariot and see what the horses of Tros can do- how cleverly they can scud hither and thither over the plain either in flight or in pursuit. I took them from the hero Aeneas. Let our squires attend to your own steeds, but let us drive mine straight at the Trojans, that Hector may learn how furiously I too can wield my spear." 

Nestor knight of Gerene hearkened to his words. Thereon the doughty squires, Sthenelus and kind-hearted Eurymedon, saw to Nestor's horses, while the two both mounted Diomed's chariot. Nestor took the reins in his hands and lashed the horses on; they were soon close up with Hector, and the son of Tydeus aimed a spear at him as he was charging full speed towards them. He missed him, but struck his charioteer and squire Eniopeus son of noble Thebaeus in the breast by the nipple while the reins were in his hands, so that he died there and then, and the horses swerved as he fell headlong from the chariot. Hector was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but let him lie for all his sorrow, while he went in quest of another driver; nor did his steeds have to go long without one, for he presently found brave Archeptolemus the son of Iphitus, and made him get up behind the horses, giving the reins into his hand. 

All had then been lost and no help for it, for they would have been penned up in Ilius like sheep, had not the sire of gods and men been quick to mark, and hurled a fiery flaming thunderbolt which fell just in front of Diomed's horses with a flare of burning brimstone. The horses were frightened and tried to back beneath the car, while the reins dropped from Nestor's hands. Then he was afraid and said to Diomed, "Son of Tydeus, turn your horses in flight; see you not that the hand of Jove is against you? To-day he vouchsafes victory to Hector; to-morrow, if it so please him, he will again grant it to ourselves; no man, however brave, may thwart the purpose of Jove, for he is far stronger than any." 

Diomed answered, "All that you have said is true; there is a grief however which pierces me to the very heart, for Hector will talk among the Trojans and say, 'The son of Tydeus fled before me to the ships.' This is the vaunt he will make, and may earth then swallow me." 

"Son of Tydeus," replied Nestor, "what mean you? Though Hector say that you are a coward the Trojans and Dardanians will not believe him, nor yet the wives of the mighty warriors whom you have laid low." 

So saying he turned the horses back through the thick of the battle, and with a cry that rent the air the Trojans and Hector rained their darts after them. Hector shouted to him and said, "Son of Tydeus, the Danaans have done you honour hitherto as regards your place at table, the meals they give you, and the filling of your cup with wine. Henceforth they will despise you, for you are become no better than a woman. Be off, girl and coward that you are, you shall not scale our walls through any Hinching upon my part; neither shall you carry off our wives in your ships, for I shall kill you with my own hand." 

The son of Tydeus was in two minds whether or no to turn his horses round again and fight him. Thrice did he doubt, and thrice did Jove thunder from the heights of. Ida in token to the Trojans that he would turn the battle in their favour. Hector then shouted to them and said, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, lovers of close fighting, be men, my friends, and fight with might and with main; I see that Jove is minded to vouchsafe victory and great glory to myself, while he will deal destruction upon the Danaans. Fools, for having thought of building this weak and worthless wall. It shall not stay my fury; my horses will spring lightly over their trench, and when I am at their ships forget not to bring me fire that I may burn them, while I slaughter the Argives who will be all dazed and bewildered by the smoke." 

Then he cried to his horses, "Xanthus and Podargus, and you Aethon and goodly Lampus, pay me for your keep now and for all the honey-sweet corn with which Andromache daughter of great Eetion has fed you, and for she has mixed wine and water for you to drink whenever you would, before doing so even for me who am her own husband. Haste in pursuit, that we may take the shield of Nestor, the fame of which ascends to heaven, for it is of solid gold, arm-rods and all, and that we may strip from the shoulders of Diomed. the cuirass which Vulcan made him. Could we take these two things, the Achaeans would set sail in their ships this self-same night." 

Thus did he vaunt, but Queen Juno made high Olympus quake as she shook with rage upon her throne. Then said she to the mighty god of Neptune, "What now, wide ruling lord of the earthquake? Can you find no compassion in your heart for the dying Danaans, who bring you many a welcome offering to Helice and to Aegae? Wish them well then. If all of us who are with the Danaans were to drive the Trojans back and keep Jove from helping them, he would have to sit there sulking alone on Ida." 

King Neptune was greatly troubled and answered, "Juno, rash of tongue, what are you talking about? We other gods must not set ourselves against Jove, for he is far stronger than we are." 

Thus did they converse; but the whole space enclosed by the ditch, from the ships even to the wall, was filled with horses and warriors, who were pent up there by Hector son of Priam, now that the hand of Jove was with him. He would even have set fire to the ships and burned them, had not Queen Juno put it into the mind of Agamemnon, to bestir himself and to encourage the Achaeans. To this end he went round the ships and tents carrying a great purple cloak, and took his stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship, which was middlemost of all; it was from this place that his voice would carry farthest, on the one hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards those of Achilles- for these two heroes, well assured of their own strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the line. From this spot then, with a voice that could be heard afar, he shouted to the Danaans, saying, "Argives, shame on you cowardly creatures, brave in semblance only; where are now our vaunts that we should prove victorious- the vaunts we made so vaingloriously in Lemnos, when we ate the flesh of horned cattle and filled our mixing-bowls to the brim? You vowed that you would each of you stand against a hundred or two hundred men, and now you prove no match even for one- for Hector, who will be ere long setting our ships in a blaze. Father Jove, did you ever so ruin a great king and rob him so utterly of his greatness? yet, when to my sorrow I was coming hither, I never let my ship pass your altars without offering the fat and thigh-bones of heifers upon every one of them, so eager was I to sack the city of Troy. Vouchsafe me then this prayer- suffer us to escape at any rate with our lives, and let not the Achaeans be so utterly vanquished by the Trojans." 

Thus did he pray, and father Jove pitying his tears vouchsafed him that his people should live, not die; forthwith he sent them an eagle, most unfailingly portentous of all birds, with a young fawn in its talons; the eagle dropped the fawn by the altar on which the Achaeans sacrificed to Jove the lord of omens; When, therefore, the people saw that the bird had come from Jove, they sprang more fiercely upon the Trojans and fought more boldly. 

There was no man of all the many Danaans who could then boast that he had driven his horses over the trench and gone forth to fight sooner than the son of Tydeus; long before any one else could do so he slew an armed warrior of the Trojans, Agelaus the son of Phradmon. He had turned his horses in flight, but the spear struck him in the back midway between his shoulders and went right through his chest, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell forward from his chariot. 

After him came Agamemnon and Menelaus, sons of Atreus, the two Ajaxes clothed in valour as with a garment, Idomeneus and his companion in arms Meriones, peer of murderous Mars, and Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon. Ninth came Teucer with his bow, and took his place under cover of the shield of Ajax son of Telamon. When Ajax lifted his shield Teucer would peer round, and when he had hit any one in the throng, the man would fall dead; then Teucer would hie back to Ajax as a child to its mother, and again duck down under his shield. 

Which of the Trojans did brave Teucer first kill? Orsilochus, and then Ormenus and Ophelestes, Daetor, Chromius, and godlike Lycophontes, Amopaon son of Polyaemon, and Melanippus. these in turn did he lay low upon the earth, and King Agamemnon was glad when he saw him making havoc of the Trojans with his mighty bow. He went up to him and said, "Teucer, man after my own heart, son of Telamon, captain among the host, shoot on, and be at once the saving of the Danaans and the glory of your father Telamon, who brought you up and took care of you in his own house when you were a child, bastard though you were. Cover him with glory though he is far off; I will promise and I will assuredly perform; if aegis-bearing Jove and Minerva grant me to sack the city of Ilius, you shall have the next best meed of honour after my own- a tripod, or two horses with their chariot, or a woman who shall go up into your bed." 

And Teucer answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, you need not urge me; from the moment we began to drive them back to Ilius, I have never ceased so far as in me lies to look out for men whom I can shoot and kill; I have shot eight barbed shafts, and all of them have been buried in the flesh of warlike youths, but this mad dog I cannot hit." 

As he spoke he aimed another arrow straight at Hector, for he was bent on hitting him; nevertheless he missed him, and the arrow hit Priam's brave son Gorgythion in the breast. His mother, fair Castianeira, lovely as a goddess, had been married from Aesyme, and now he bowed his head as a garden poppy in full bloom when it is weighed down by showers in spring- even thus heavy bowed his head beneath the weight of his helmet. 

Again he aimed at Hector, for he was longing to hit him, and again his arrow missed, for Apollo turned it aside; but he hit Hector's brave charioteer Archeptolemus in the breast, by the nipple, as he was driving furiously into the fight. The horses swerved aside as he fell headlong from the chariot, and there was no life left in him. Hector was greatly grieved at the loss of his charioteer, but for all his sorrow he let him lie where he fell, and bade his brother Cebriones, who was hard by, take the reins. Cebriones did as he had said. Hector thereon with a loud cry sprang from his chariot to the ground, and seizing a great stone made straight for Teucer with intent kill him. Teucer had just taken an arrow from his quiver and had laid it upon the bow-string, but Hector struck him with the jagged stone as he was taking aim and drawing the string to his shoulder; he hit him just where the collar-bone divides the neck from the chest, a very deadly place, and broke the sinew of his arm so that his wrist was less, and the bow dropped from his hand as he fell forward on his knees. Ajax saw that his brother had fallen, and running towards him bestrode him and sheltered him with his shield. Meanwhile his two trusty squires, Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor, came up and bore him to the ships groaning in his great pain. glad when he saw 

Jove now again put heart into the Trojans, and they drove the Achaeans to their deep trench with Hector in all his glory at their head. As a hound grips a wild boar or lion in flank or buttock when he gives him chase, and watches warily for his wheeling, even so did Hector follow close upon the Achaeans, ever killing the hindmost as they rushed panic-stricken onwards. When they had fled through the set stakes and trench and many Achaeans had been laid low at the hands of the Trojans, they halted at their ships, calling upon one another and praying every man instantly as they lifted up their hands to the gods; but Hector wheeled his horses this way and that, his eyes glaring like those of Gorgo or murderous Mars. 

Juno when she saw them had pity upon them, and at once said to Minerva, "Alas, child of aegis-bearing Jove, shall you and I take no more thought for the dying Danaans, though it be the last time we ever do so? See how they perish and come to a bad end before the onset of but a single man. Hector the son of Priam rages with intolerable fury, and has already done great mischief." 

Minerva answered, "Would, indeed, this fellow might die in his own land, and fall by the hands of the Achaeans; but my father Jove is mad with spleen, ever foiling me, ever headstrong and unjust. He forgets how often I saved his son when he was worn out by the labours Eurystheus had laid on him. He would weep till his cry came up to heaven, and then Jove would send me down to help him; if I had had the sense to foresee all this, when Eurystheus sent him to the house of Hades, to fetch the hell-hound from Erebus, he would never have come back alive out of the deep waters of the river Styx. And now Jove hates me, while he lets Thetis have her way because she kissed his knees and took hold of his beard, when she was begging him to do honour to Achilles. I shall know what to do next time he begins calling me his grey-eyed darling. Get our horses ready, while I go within the house of aegis-bearing Jove and put on my armour; we shall then find out whether Priam's son Hector will be glad to meet us in the highways of battle, or whether the Trojans will glut hounds and vultures with the fat of their flesh as they he dead by the ships of the Achaeans." 

Thus did she speak and white-armed Juno, daughter of great Saturn, obeyed her words; she set about harnessing her gold-bedizened steeds, while Minerva daughter of aegis-bearing Jove flung her richly vesture, made with her own hands, on to the threshold of her father, and donned the shirt of Jove, arming herself for battle. Then she stepped into her flaming chariot, and grasped the spear so stout and sturdy and strong with which she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her. Juno lashed her horses, and the gates of heaven bellowed as they flew open of their own accord- gates over which the Hours preside, in whose hands are heaven and Olympus, either to open the dense cloud that hides them or to close it. Through these the goddesses drove their obedient steeds. 

But father Jove when he saw them from Ida was very angry, and sent winged Iris with a message to them. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, turn them back, and see that they do not come near me, for if we come to fighting there will be mischief. This is what I say, and this is what I mean to do. I will lame their horses for them; I will hurl them from their chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take them all ten years to heal the wounds my lightning shall inflict upon them; my grey-eyed daughter will then learn what quarrelling with her father means. I am less surprised and angry with Juno, for whatever I say she always contradicts me." 

With this Iris went her way, fleet as the wind, from the heights of Ida to the lofty summits of Olympus. She met the goddesses at the outer gates of its many valleys and gave them her message. "What," said she, "are you about? Are you mad? The son of Saturn forbids going. This is what he says, and this is he means to do, he will lame your horses for you, he will hurl you from your chariot, and will break it in pieces. It will take you all ten years to heal the wounds his lightning will inflict upon you, that you may learn, grey-eyed goddess, what quarrelling with your father means. He is less hurt and angry with Juno, for whatever he says she always contradicts him but you, bold bold hussy, will you really dare to raise your huge spear in defiance of Jove?" 

With this she left them, and Juno said to Minerva, "Of a truth, child of aegis-bearing Jove, I am not for fighting men's battles further in defiance of Jove. Let them live or die as luck will have it, and let Jove mete out his judgements upon the Trojans and Danaans according to his own pleasure." 

She turned her steeds; the Hours presently unyoked them, made them fast to their ambrosial mangers, and leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard. The two goddesses then sat down upon their golden thrones, amid the company of the other gods; but they were very angry. 

Presently father Jove drove his chariot to Olympus, and entered the assembly of gods. The mighty lord of the earthquake unyoked his horses for him, set the car upon its stand, and threw a cloth over it. Jove then sat down upon his golden throne and Olympus reeled beneath him. Minerva and Juno sat alone, apart from Jove, and neither spoke nor asked him questions, but Jove knew what they meant, and said, "Minerva and Juno, why are you so angry? Are you fatigued with killing so many of your dear friends the Trojans? Be this as it may, such is the might of my hands that all the gods in Olympus cannot turn me; you were both of you trembling all over ere ever you saw the fight and its terrible doings. I tell you therefore-and it would have surely been- I should have struck you with lighting, and your chariots would never have brought you back again to Olympus." 

Minerva and Juno groaned in spirit as they sat side by side and brooded mischief for the Trojans. Minerva sat silent without a word, for she was in a furious passion and bitterly incensed against her father; but Juno could not contain herself and said, "What, dread son of Saturn, are you talking about? We know how great your power is, nevertheless we have compassion upon the Danaan warriors who are perishing and coming to a bad end. We will, however, since you so bid us, refrain from actual fighting, but we will make serviceable suggestions to the Argives, that they may not all of them perish in your displeasure." 

And Jove answered, "To-morrow morning, Juno, if you choose to do so, you will see the son of Saturn destroying large numbers of the Argives, for fierce Hector shall not cease fighting till he has roused the son of Peleus when they are fighting in dire straits at their ships' sterns about the body of Patroclus. Like it or no, this is how it is decreed; for aught I care, you may go to the lowest depths beneath earth and sea, where Iapetus and Saturn dwell in lone Tartarus with neither ray of light nor breath of wind to cheer them. You may go on and on till you get there, and I shall not care one whit for your displeasure; you are the greatest vixen living." 

Juno made him no answer. The sun's glorious orb now sank into Oceanus and drew down night over the land. Sorry indeed were the Trojans when light failed them, but welcome and thrice prayed for did darkness fall upon the Achaeans. 

Then Hector led the Trojans back from the ships, and held a council on the open space near the river, where there was a spot ear corpses. They left their chariots and sat down on the ground to hear the speech he made them. He grasped a spear eleven cubits long, the bronze point of which gleamed in front of it, while the ring round the spear-head was of gold Spear in hand he spoke. "Hear me," said he, "Trojans, Dardanians, and allies. I deemed but now that I should destroy the ships and all the Achaeans with them ere I went back to Ilius, but darkness came on too soon. It was this alone that saved them and their ships upon the seashore. Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of night, and prepare our suppers. Take your horses out of their chariots and give them their feeds of corn; then make speed to bring sheep and cattle from the city; bring wine also and corn for your horses and gather much wood, that from dark till dawn we may burn watchfires whose flare may reach to heaven. For the Achaeans may try to fly beyond the sea by night, and they must not embark scatheless and unmolested; many a man among them must take a dart with him to nurse at home, hit with spear or arrow as he is leaping on board his ship, that others may fear to bring war and weeping upon the Trojans. Moreover let the heralds tell it about the city that the growing youths and grey-bearded men are to camp upon its heaven-built walls. Let the women each of them light a great fire in her house, and let watch be safely kept lest the town be entered by surprise while the host is outside. See to it, brave Trojans, as I have said, and let this suffice for the moment; at daybreak I will instruct you further. I pray in hope to Jove and to the gods that we may then drive those fate-sped hounds from our land, for 'tis the fates that have borne them and their ships hither. This night, therefore, let us keep watch, but with early morning let us put on our armour and rouse fierce war at the ships of the Achaeans; I shall then know whether brave Diomed the son of Tydeus will drive me back from the ships to the wall, or whether I shall myself slay him and carry off his bloodstained spoils. To-morrow let him show his mettle, abide my spear if he dare. I ween that at break of day, he shall be among the first to fall and many another of his comrades round him. Would that I were as sure of being immortal and never growing old, and of being worshipped like Minerva and Apollo, as I am that this day will bring evil to the Argives." 

Thus spoke Hector and the Trojans shouted applause. They took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, and made them fast each by his own chariot. They made haste to bring sheep and cattle from the city, they brought wine also and corn from their houses and gathered much wood. They then offered unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, and the wind carried the sweet savour of sacrifice to heaven- but the blessed gods partook not thereof, for they bitterly hated Ilius with Priam and Priam's people. Thus high in hope they sat through the livelong night by the highways of war, and many a watchfire did they kindle. As when the stars shine clear, and the moon is bright- there is not a breath of air, not a peak nor glade nor jutting headland but it stands out in the ineffable radiance that breaks from the serene of heaven; the stars can all of them be told and the heart of the shepherd is glad- even thus shone the watchfires of the Trojans before Ilius midway between the ships and the river Xanthus. A thousand camp-fires gleamed upon the plain, and in the glow of each there sat fifty men, while the horses, champing oats and corn beside their chariots, waited till dawn should come. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK IX

THUS did the Trojans watch. But Panic, comrade of blood-stained Rout, had taken fast hold of the Achaeans and their princes were all of them in despair. As when the two winds that blow from Thrace- the north and the northwest- spring up of a sudden and rouse the fury of the main- in a moment the dark waves uprear their heads and scatter their sea-wrack in all directions- even thus troubled were the hearts of the Achaeans. 

The son of Atreus in dismay bade the heralds call the people to a council man by man, but not to cry the matter aloud; he made haste also himself to call them, and they sat sorry at heart in their assembly. Agamemnon shed tears as it were a running stream or cataract on the side of some sheer cliff; and thus, with many a heavy sigh he spoke to the Achaeans. "My friends," said he, "princes and councillors Of the Argives, the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me. Cruel Jove gave me his solemn promise that I should sack the city of Troy before returning, but he has played me false, and is now bidding me go ingloriously back to Argos with the loss of much people. Such is the will of Jove, who has laid many a proud city in the dust as he will yet lay others, for his power is above all. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say and sail back to our own country, for we shall not take Troy." 

Thus he spoke, and the sons of the Achaeans for a long while sat sorrowful there, but they all held their peace, till at last Diomed of the loud battle-cry made answer saying, "Son of Atreus, I will chide your folly, as is my right in council. Be not then aggrieved that I should do so. In the first place you attacked me before all the Danaans and said that I was a coward and no soldier. The Argives young and old know that you did so. But the son of scheming Saturn endowed you by halves only. He gave you honour as the chief ruler over us, but valour, which is the highest both right and might he did not give you. Sir, think you that the sons of the Achaeans are indeed as unwarlike and cowardly as you say they are? If your own mind is set upon going home- go- the way is open to you; the many ships that followed you from Mycene stand ranged upon the seashore; but the rest of us stay here till we have sacked Troy. Nay though these too should turn homeward with their ships, Sthenelus and myself will still fight on till we reach the goal of Ilius, for for heaven was with us when we came." 

The sons of the Achaeans shouted applause at the words of Diomed, and presently Nestor rose to speak. "Son of Tydeus," said he, "in war your prowess is beyond question, and in council you excel all who are of your own years; no one of the Achaeans can make light of what you say nor gainsay it, but you have not yet come to the end of the whole matter. You are still young- you might be the youngest of my own children- still you have spoken wisely and have counselled the chief of the Achaeans not without discretion; nevertheless I am older than you and I will tell you every" thing; therefore let no man, not even King Agamemnon, disregard my saying, for he that foments civil discord is a clanless, hearthless outlaw. 

"Now, however, let us obey the behests of night and get our suppers, but let the sentinels every man of them camp by the trench that is without the wall. I am giving these instructions to the young men; when they have been attended to, do you, son of Atreus, give your orders, for you are the most royal among us all. Prepare a feast for your councillors; it is right and reasonable that you should do so; there is abundance of wine in your tents, which the ships of the Achaeans bring from Thrace daily. You have everything at your disposal wherewith to entertain guests, and you have many subjects. When many are got together, you can be guided by him whose counsel is wisest- and sorely do we need shrewd and prudent counsel, for the foe has lit his watchfires hard by our ships. Who can be other than dismayed? This night will either be the ruin of our host, or save it." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The sentinels went out in their armour under command of Nestor's son Thrasymedes, a captain of the host, and of the bold warriors Ascalaphus and Ialmenus: there were also Meriones, Aphareus and Deipyrus, and the son of Creion, noble Lycomedes. There were seven captains of the sentinels, and with each there went a hundred youths armed with long spears: they took their places midway between the trench and the wall, and when they had done so they lit their fires and got every man his supper. 

The son of Atreus then bade many councillors of the Achaeans to his quarters prepared a great feast in their honour. They laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had enough to eat and drink, old Nestor, whose counsel was ever truest, was the first to lay his mind before them. He, therefore, with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus. 

"With yourself, most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, will I both begin my speech and end it, for you are king over much people. Jove, moreover, has vouchsafed you to wield the sceptre and to uphold righteousness, that you may take thought for your people under you; therefore it behooves you above all others both to speak and to give ear, and to out the counsel of another who shall have been minded to speak wisely. All turns on you and on your commands, therefore I will say what I think will be best. No man will be of a truer mind than that which has been mine from the hour when you, sir, angered Achilles by taking the girl Briseis from his tent against my judgment. I urged you not to do so, but you yielded to your own pride, and dishonoured a hero whom heaven itself had honoured- for you still hold the prize that had been awarded to him. Now, however, let us think how we may appease him, both with presents and fair speeches that may conciliate him." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you have reproved my folly justly. I was wrong. I own it. One whom heaven befriends is in himself a host, and Jove has shown that he befriends this man by destroying much people of the Achaeans. I was blinded with passion and yielded to my worser mind; therefore I will make amends, and will give him great gifts by way of atonement. I will tell them in the presence of you all. I will give him seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold. I will give him twenty iron cauldrons and twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich, indeed, both in land and gold is he that has as many prizes as my horses have won me. I will give him seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom I chose for myself when he took Lesbos- all of surpassing beauty. I will give him these, and with them her whom I erewhile took from him, the daughter of Briseus; and I swear a great oath that I never went up into her couch, nor have been with her after the manner of men and women. 

"All these things will I give him now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe me to sack the city of Priam, let him come when we Achaeans are dividing the spoil, and load his ship with gold and bronze to his liking; furthermore let him take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, he shall be my son-in-law and I will show him like honour with my own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. I have three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and lphianassa, let him take the one of his choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of Peleus; I will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his daughter, and will give him seven well established cities, Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire, where there is grass; holy Pherae and the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour him with gifts as though he were a god, and be obedient to his comfortable ordinances. All this will I do if he will now forgo his anger. Let him then yieldit is only Hades who is utterly ruthless and unyielding- and hence he is of all gods the one most hateful to mankind. Moreover I am older and more royal than himself. Therefore, let him now obey me." 

Then Nestor answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon. The gifts you offer are no small ones, let us then send chosen messengers, who may go to the tent of Achilles son of Peleus without delay. Let those go whom I shall name. Let Phoenix, dear to Jove, lead the way; let Ajax and Ulysses follow, and let the heralds Odius and Eurybates go with them. Now bring water for our hands, and bid all keep silence while we pray to Jove the son of Saturn, if so be that he may have mercy upon us." 

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well. Men-servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering; then, when they had made their offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the envoys set out from the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus; and Nestor, looking first to one and then to another, but most especially at Ulysses, was instant with them that they should prevail with the noble son of Peleus. 

They went their way by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed earnestly to earth-encircling Neptune that the high spirit of the son of Aeacus might incline favourably towards them. When they reached the ships and tents of the Myrmidons, they found Achilles playing on a lyre, fair, of cunning workmanship, and its cross-bar was of silver. It was part of the spoils which he had taken when he sacked the city of Eetion, and he was now diverting himself with it and singing the feats of heroes. He was alone with Patroclus, who sat opposite to him and said nothing, waiting till he should cease singing. Ulysses and Ajax now came in- Ulysses leading the way -and stood before him. Achilles sprang from his seat with the lyre still in his hand, and Patroclus, when he saw the strangers, rose also. Achilles then greeted them saying, "All hail and welcome- you must come upon some great matter, you, who for all my anger are still dearest to me of the Achaeans." 

With this he led them forward, and bade them sit on seats covered with purple rugs; then he said to Patroclus who was close by him, "Son of Menoetius, set a larger bowl upon the table, mix less water with the wine, and give every man his cup, for these are very dear friends, who are now under my roof." 

Patroclus did as his comrade bade him; he set the chopping-block in front of the fire, and on it he laid the loin of a sheep, the loin also of a goat, and the chine of a fat hog. Automedon held the meat while Achilles chopped it; he then sliced the pieces and put them on spits while the son of Menoetius made the fire burn high. When the flame had died down, he spread the embers, laid the spits on top of them, lifting them up and setting them upon the spit-racks; and he sprinkled them with salt. When the meat was roasted, he set it on platters, and handed bread round the table in fair baskets, while Achilles dealt them their portions. Then Achilles took his seat facing Ulysses against the opposite wall, and bade his comrade Patroclus offer sacrifice to the gods; so he cast the offerings into the fire, and they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Ajax made a sign to Phoenix, and when he saw this, Ulysses filled his cup with wine and pledged Achilles. 

"Hail," said he, "Achilles, we have had no scant of good cheer, neither in the tent of Agamemnon, nor yet here; there has been plenty to eat and drink, but our thought turns upon no such matter. Sir, we are in the face of great disaster, and without your help know not whether we shall save our fleet or lose it. The Trojans and their allies have camped hard by our ships and by the wall; they have lit watchfires throughout their host and deem that nothing can now prevent them from falling on our fleet. Jove, moreover, has sent his lightnings on their right; Hector, in all his glory, rages like a maniac; confident that Jove is with him he fears neither god nor man, but is gone raving mad, and prays for the approach of day. He vows that he will hew the high sterns of our ships in pieces, set fire to their hulls, and make havoc of the Achaeans while they are dazed and smothered in smoke; I much fear that heaven will make good his boasting, and it will prove our lot to perish at Troy far from our home in Argos. Up, then, and late though it be, save the sons of the Achaeans who faint before the fury of the Trojans. You will repent bitterly hereafter if you do not, for when the harm is done there will be no curing it; consider ere it be too late, and save the Danaans from destruction. 

"My good friend, when your father Peleus sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon, did he not charge you saying, 'Son, Minerva and Juno will make you strong if they choose, but check your high temper, for the better part is in goodwill. Eschew vain quarrelling, and the Achaeans old and young will respect you more for doing so.' These were his words, but you have forgotten them. Even now, however, be appeased, and put away your anger from you. Agamemnon will make you great amends if you will forgive him; listen, and I will tell you what he has said in his tent that he will give you. He will give you seven tripods that have never yet been on the fire, and ten talents of gold; twenty iron cauldrons, and twelve strong horses that have won races and carried off prizes. Rich indeed both in land and gold is he who has as many prizes as these horses have won for Agamemnon. Moreover he will give you seven excellent workwomen, Lesbians, whom he chose for himself, when you took Lesbos- all of surpassing beauty. He will give you these, and with them her whom he erewhile took from you, the daughter of Briseus, and he will swear a great oath, he has never gone up into her couch nor been with her after the manner of men and women. All these things will he give you now down, and if hereafter the gods vouchsafe him to sack the city of Priam, you can come when we Achaeans are dividing the spoil, and load your ship with gold and bronze to your liking. You can take twenty Trojan women, the loveliest after Helen herself. Then, when we reach Achaean Argos, wealthiest of all lands, you shall be his son-in-law, and he will show you like honour with his own dear son Orestes, who is being nurtured in all abundance. Agamemnon has three daughters, Chrysothemis, Laodice, and Iphianassa; you may take the one of your choice, freely and without gifts of wooing, to the house of Peleus; he will add such dower to boot as no man ever yet gave his daughter, and will give you seven well-established cities, Cardamyle, Enope, and Hire where there is grass; holy Pheras and the rich meadows of Anthea; Aepea also, and the vine-clad slopes of Pedasus, all near the sea, and on the borders of sandy Pylos. The men that dwell there are rich in cattle and sheep; they will honour you with gifts as though were a god, and be obedient to your comfortable ordinances. All this will he do if you will now forgo your anger. Moreover, though you hate both him and his gifts with all your heart, yet pity the rest of the Achaeans who are being harassed in all their host; they will honour you as a god, and you will earn great glory at their hands. You might even kill Hector; he will come within your reach, for he is infatuated, and declares that not a Danaan whom the ships have brought can hold his own against him." 

Achilles answered, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, I should give you formal notice plainly and in all fixity of purpose that there be no more of this cajoling, from whatsoever quarter it may come. Him do I hate even as the gates of hell who says one thing while he hides another in his heart; therefore I will say what I mean. I will be appeased neither by Agamemnon son of Atreus nor by any other of the Danaans, for I see that I have no thanks for all my fighting. He that fights fares no better than he that does not; coward and hero are held in equal honour, and death deals like measure to him who works and him who is idle. I have taken nothing by all my hardships- with my life ever in my hand; as a bird when she has found a morsel takes it to her nestlings, and herself fares hardly, even so man a long night have I been wakeful, and many a bloody battle have I waged by day against those who were fighting for their women. With my ships I have taken twelve cities, and eleven round about Troy have I stormed with my men by land; I took great store of wealth from every one of them, but I gave all up to Agamemnon son of Atreus. He stayed where he was by his ships, yet of what came to him he gave little, and kept much himself. 

"Nevertheless he did distribute some meeds of honour among the chieftains and kings, and these have them still; from me alone of the Achaeans did he take the woman in whom I delighted- let him keep her and sleep with her. Why, pray, must the Argives needs fight the Trojans? What made the son of Atreus gather the host and bring them? Was it not for the sake of Helen? Are the sons of Atreus the only men in the world who love their wives? Any man of common right feeling will love and cherish her who is his own, as I this woman, with my whole heart, though she was but a fruitling of my spear. Agamemnon has taken her from me; he has played me false; I know him; let him tempt me no further, for he shall not move me. Let him look to you, Ulysses, and to the other princes to save his ships from burning. He has done much without me already. He has built a wall; he has dug a trench deep and wide all round it, and he has planted it within with stakes; but even so he stays not the murderous might of Hector. So long as I fought the Achaeans Hector suffered not the battle range far from the city walls; he would come to the Scaean gates and to the oak tree, but no further. Once he stayed to meet me and hardly did he escape my onset: now, however, since I am in no mood to fight him, I will to-morrow offer sacrifice to Jove and to all the gods; I will draw my ships into the water and then victual them duly; to-morrow morning, if you care to look, you will see my ships on the Hellespont, and my men rowing out to sea with might and main. If great Neptune vouchsafes me a fair passage, in three days I shall be in Phthia. I have much there that I left behind me when I came here to my sorrow, and I shall bring back still further store of gold, of red copper, of fair women, and of iron, my share of the spoils that we have taken; but one prize, he who gave has insolently taken away. Tell him all as I now bid you, and tell him in public that the Achaeans may hate him and beware of him should he think that he can yet dupe others for his effrontery never fails him. 

"As for me, hound that he is, he dares not look me in the face. I will take no counsel with him, and will undertake nothing in common with him. He has wronged me and deceived me enough, he shall not cozen me further; let him go his own way, for Jove has robbed him of his reason. I loathe his presents, and for himself care not one straw. He may offer me ten or even twenty times what he has now done, nay- not though it be all that he has in the world, both now or ever shall have; he may promise me the wealth of Orchomenus or of Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world, for it has a hundred gates through each of which two hundred men may drive at once with their chariots and horses; he may offer me gifts as the sands of the sea or the dust of the plain in multitude, but even so he shall not move me till I have been revenged in full for the bitter wrong he has done me. I will not marry his daughter; she may be fair as Venus, and skilful as Minerva, but I will have none of her: let another take her, who may be a good match for her and who rules a larger kingdom. If the gods spare me to return home, Peleus will find me a wife; there are Achaean women in Hellas and Phthia, daughters of kings that have cities under them; of these I can take whom I will and marry her. Many a time was I minded when at home in Phthia to woo and wed a woman who would make me a suitable wife, and to enjoy the riches of my old father Peleus. My life is more to me than all the wealth of Ilius while it was yet at peace before the Achaeans went there, or than all the treasure that lies on the stone floor of Apollo's temple beneath the cliffs of Pytho. Cattle and sheep are to be had for harrying, and a man buy both tripods and horses if he wants them, but when his life has once left him it can neither be bought nor harried back again. 

"My mother Thetis tells me that there are two ways in which I may meet my end. If I stay here and fight, I shall not return alive but my name will live for ever: whereas if I go home my name will die, but it will be long ere death shall take me. To the rest of you, then, I say, 'Go home, for you will not take Ilius.' Jove has held his hand over her to protect her, and her people have taken heart. Go, therefore, as in duty bound, and tell the princes of the Achaeans the message that I have sent them; tell them to find some other plan for the saving of their ships and people, for so long as my displeasure lasts the one that they have now hit upon may not be. As for Phoenix, let him sleep here that he may sail with me in the morning if he so will. But I will not take him by force." 

They all held their peace, dismayed at the sternness with which he had denied them, till presently the old knight Phoenix in his great fear for the ships of the Achaeans, burst into tears and said, "Noble Achilles, if you are now minded to return, and in the fierceness of your anger will do nothing to save the ships from burning, how, my son, can I remain here without you? Your father Peleus bade me go with you when he sent you as a mere lad from Phthia to Agamemnon. You knew nothing neither of war nor of the arts whereby men make their mark in council, and he sent me with you to train you in all excellence of speech and action. Therefore, my son, I will not stay here without you- no, not though heaven itself vouchsafe to strip my years from off me, and make me young as I was when I first left Hellas the land of fair women. I was then flying the anger of father Amyntor, son of Ormenus, who was furious with me in the matter of his concubine, of whom he was enamoured to the wronging of his wife my mother. My mother, therefore, prayed me without ceasing to lie with the woman myself, that so she hate my father, and in the course of time I yielded. But my father soon came to know, and cursed me bitterly, calling the dread Erinyes to witness. He prayed that no son of mine might ever sit upon knees- and the gods, Jove of the world below and awful Proserpine, fulfilled his curse. I took counsel to kill him, but some god stayed my rashness and bade me think on men's evil tongues and how I should be branded as the murderer of my father: nevertheless I could not bear to stay in my father's house with him so bitter a against me. My cousins and clansmen came about me, and pressed me sorely to remain; many a sheep and many an ox did they slaughter, and many a fat hog did they set down to roast before the fire; many a jar, too, did they broach of my father's wine. Nine whole nights did they set a guard over me taking it in turns to watch, and they kept a fire always burning, both in the cloister of the outer court and in the inner court at the doors of the room wherein I lay; but when the darkness of the tenth night came, I broke through the closed doors of my room, and climbed the wall of the outer court after passing quickly and unperceived through the men on guard and the women servants. I then fled through Hellas till I came to fertile Phthia, mother of sheep, and to King Peleus, who made me welcome and treated me as a father treats an only son who will be heir to all his wealth. He made me rich and set me over much people, establishing me on the borders of Phthia where I was chief ruler over the Dolopians. 

"It was I, Achilles, who had the making of you; I loved you with all my heart: for you would eat neither at home nor when you had gone out elsewhere, till I had first set you upon my knees, cut up the dainty morsel that you were to eat, and held the wine-cup to your lips. Many a time have you slobbered your wine in baby helplessness over my shirt; I had infinite trouble with you, but I knew that heaven had vouchsafed me no offspring of my own, and I made a son of you, Achilles, that in my hour of need you might protect me. Now, therefore, I say battle with your pride and beat it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might and majesty of heaven are more than ours, but even heaven may be appeased; and if a man has sinned he prays the gods, and reconciles them to himself by his piteous cries and by frankincense, with drink-offerings and the savour of burnt sacrifice. For prayers are as daughters to great Jove; halt, wrinkled, with eyes askance, they follow in the footsteps of sin, who, being fierce and fleet of foot, leaves them far behind him, and ever baneful to mankind outstrips them even to the ends of the world; but nevertheless the prayers come hobbling and healing after. If a man has pity upon these daughters of Jove when they draw near him, they will bless him and hear him too when he is praying; but if he deny them and will not listen to them, they go to Jove the son of Saturn and pray that he may presently fall into sin- to his ruing bitterly hereafter. Therefore, Achilles, give these daughters of Jove due reverence, and bow before them as all good men will bow. Were not the son of Atreus offering you gifts and promising others later- if he were still furious and implacable- I am not he that would bid you throw off your anger and help the Achaeans, no matter how great their need; but he is giving much now, and more hereafter; he has sent his captains to urge his suit, and has chosen those who of all the Argives are most acceptable to you; make not then their words and their coming to be of none effect. Your anger has been righteous so far. We have heard in song how heroes of old time quarrelled when they were roused to fury, but still they could be won by gifts, and fair words could soothe them. 

"I have an old story in my mind- a very old one- but you are all friends and I will tell it. The Curetes and the Aetolians were fighting and killing one another round Calydon- the Aetolians defending the city and the Curetes trying to destroy it. For Diana of the golden throne was angry and did them hurt because Oeneus had not offered her his harvest first-fruits. The other gods had all been feasted with hecatombs, but to the daughter of great Jove alone he had made no sacrifice. He had forgotten her, or somehow or other it had escaped him, and this was a grievous sin. Thereon the archer goddess in her displeasure sent a prodigious creature against him- a savage wild boar with great white tusks that did much harm to his orchard lands, uprooting apple-trees in full bloom and throwing them to the ground. But Meleager son of Oeneus got huntsmen and hounds from many cities and killed it- for it was so monstrous that not a few were needed, and many a man did it stretch upon his funeral pyre. On this the goddess set the Curetes and the Aetolians fighting furiously about the head and skin of the boar. 

"So long as Meleager was in the field things went badly with the Curetes, and for all their numbers they could not hold their ground under the city walls; but in the course of time Meleager was angered as even a wise man will sometimes be. He was incensed with his mother Althaea, and therefore stayed at home with his wedded wife fair Cleopatra, who was daughter of Marpessa daughter of Euenus, and of Ides the man then living. He it was who took his bow and faced King Apollo himself for fair Marpessa's sake; her father and mother then named her Alcyone, because her mother had mourned with the plaintive strains of the halcyon-bird when Phoebus Apollo had carried her off. Meleager, then, stayed at home with Cleopatra, nursing the anger which he felt by reason of his mother's curses. His mother, grieving for the death of her brother, prayed the gods, and beat the earth with her hands, calling upon Hades and on awful Proserpine; she went down upon her knees and her bosom was wet with tears as she prayed that they would kill her son- and Erinys that walks in darkness and knows no ruth heard her from Erebus. 

"Then was heard the din of battle about the gates of Calydon, and the dull thump of the battering against their walls. Thereon the elders of the Aetolians besought Meleager; they sent the chiefest of their priests, and begged him to come out and help them, promising him a great reward. They bade him choose fifty plough-gates, the most fertile in the plain of Calydon, the one-half vineyard and the other open plough-land. The old warrior Oeneus implored him, standing at the threshold of his room and beating the doors in supplication. His sisters and his mother herself besought him sore, but he the more refused them; those of his comrades who were nearest and dearest to him also prayed him, but they could not move him till the foe was battering at the very doors of his chamber, and the Curetes had scaled the walls and were setting fire to the city. Then at last his sorrowing wife detailed the horrors that befall those whose city is taken; she reminded him how the men are slain, and the city is given over to the flames, while the women and children are carried into captivity; when he heard all this, his heart was touched, and he donned his armour to go forth. Thus of his own inward motion he saved the city of the Aetolians; but they now gave him nothing of those rich rewards that they had offered earlier, and though he saved the city he took nothing by it. Be not then, my son, thus minded; let not heaven lure you into any such course. When the ships are burning it will be a harder matter to save them. Take the gifts, and go, for the Achaeans will then honour you as a god; whereas if you fight without taking them, you may beat the battle back, but you will not be held in like honour." 

And Achilles answered, "Phoenix, old friend and father, I have no need of such honour. I have honour from Jove himself, which will abide with me at my ships while I have breath in my body, and my limbs are strong. I say further- and lay my saying to your heart- vex me no more with this weeping and lamentation, all in the cause of the son of Atreus. Love him so well, and you may lose the love I bear you. You ought to help me rather in troubling those that trouble me; be king as much as I am, and share like honour with myself; the others shall take my answer; stay here yourself and sleep comfortably in your bed; at daybreak we will consider whether to remain or go." 

On this she nodded quietly to Patroclus as a sign that he was to prepare a bed for Phoenix, and that the others should take their leave. Ajax son of Telamon then said, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, let us be gone, for I see that our journey is vain. We must now take our answer, unwelcome though it be, to the Danaans who are waiting to receive it. Achilles is savage and remorseless; he is cruel, and cares nothing for the love his comrades lavished upon him more than on all the others. He is implacable- and yet if a man's brother or son has been slain he will accept a fine by way of amends from him that killed him, and the wrong-doer having paid in full remains in peace among his own people; but as for you, Achilles, the gods have put a wicked unforgiving spirit in your heart, and this, all about one single girl, whereas we now offer you the seven best we have, and much else into the bargain. Be then of a more gracious mind, respect the hospitality of your own roof. We are with you as messengers from the host of the Danaans, and would fain he held nearest and dearest to yourself of all the Achaeans." 

"Ajax," replied Achilles, "noble son of Telamon, you have spoken much to my liking, but my blood boils when I think it all over, and remember how the son of Atreus treated me with contumely as though I were some vile tramp, and that too in the presence of the Argives. Go, then, and deliver your message; say that I will have no concern with fighting till Hector, son of noble Priam, reaches the tents of the Myrmidons in his murderous course, and flings fire upon their ships. For all his lust of battle, I take it he will be held in check when he is at my own tent and ship." 

On this they took every man his double cup, made their drink-offerings, and went back to the ships, Ulysses leading the way. But Patroclus told his men and the maid-servants to make ready a comfortable bed for Phoenix; they therefore did so with sheepskins, a rug, and a sheet of fine linen. The old man then laid himself down and waited till morning came. But Achilles slept in an inner room, and beside him the daughter of Phorbas lovely Diomede, whom he had carried off from Lesbos. Patroclus lay on the other side of the room, and with him fair Iphis whom Achilles had given him when he took Scyros the city of Enyeus. 

When the envoys reached the tents of the son of Atreus, the Achaeans rose, pledged them in cups of gold, and began to question them. King Agamemnon was the first to do so. Tell me, Ulysses," said he, "will he save the ships from burning, or did be refuse, and is he still furious?" 

Ulysses answered, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, Achilles will not be calmed, but is more fiercely angry than ever, and spurns both you and your gifts. He bids you take counsel with the Achaeans to save the ships and host as you best may; as for himself, he said that at daybreak he should draw his ships into the water. He said further that he should advise every one to sail home likewise, for that you will not reach the goal of Ilius. 'Jove,' he said, 'has laid his hand over the city to protect it, and the people have taken heart.' This is what he said, and the others who were with me can tell you the same story- Ajax and the two heralds, men, both of them, who may be trusted. The old man Phoenix stayed where he was to sleep, for so Achilles would have it, that he might go home with him in the morning if he so would; but he will not take him by force." 

They all held their peace, sitting for a long time silent and dejected, by reason of the sternness with which Achilles had refused them, till presently Diomed said, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, you ought not to have sued the son of Peleus nor offered him gifts. He is proud enough as it is, and you have encouraged him in his pride am further. Let him stay or go as he will. He will fight later when he is in the humour, and heaven puts it in his mind to do so. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say; we have eaten and drunk our fill, let us then take our rest, for in rest there is both strength and stay. But when fair rosy-fingered morn appears, forthwith bring out your host and your horsemen in front of the ships, urging them on, and yourself fighting among the foremost." 

Thus he spoke, and the other chieftains approved his words. They then made their drink-offerings and went every man to his own tent, where they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK X

NOW the other princes of the Achaeans slept soundly the whole night through, but Agamemnon son of Atreus was troubled, so that he could get no rest. As when fair Juno's lord flashes his lightning in token of great rain or hail or snow when the snow-flakes whiten the ground, or again as a sign that he will open the wide jaws of hungry war, even so did Agamemnon heave many a heavy sigh, for his soul trembled within him. When he looked upon the plain of Troy he marvelled at the many watchfires burning in front of Ilius, and at the sound of pipes and flutes and of the hum of men, but when presently he turned towards the ships and hosts of the Achaeans, he tore his hair by handfuls before Jove on high, and groaned aloud for the very disquietness of his soul. In the end he deemed it best to go at once to Nestor son of Neleus, and see if between them they could find any way of the Achaeans from destruction. He therefore rose, put on his shirt, bound his sandals about his comely feet, flung the skin of a huge tawny lion over his shoulders- a skin that reached his feet- and took his spear in his hand. 

Neither could Menelaus sleep, for he, too, boded ill for the Argives who for his sake had sailed from far over the seas to fight the Trojans. He covered his broad back with the skin of a spotted panther, put a casque of bronze upon his head, and took his spear in his brawny hand. Then he went to rouse his brother, who was by far the most powerful of the Achaeans, and was honoured by the people as though he were a god. He found him by the stern of his ship already putting his goodly array about his shoulders, and right glad was he that his brother had come. 

Menelaus spoke first. "Why," said he, "my dear brother, are you thus arming? Are you going to send any of our comrades to exploit the Trojans? I greatly fear that no one will do you this service, and spy upon the enemy alone in the dead of night. It will be a deed of great daring." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Menelaus, we both of us need shrewd counsel to save the Argives and our ships, for Jove has changed his mind, and inclines towards Hector's sacrifices rather than ours. I never saw nor heard tell of any man as having wrought such ruin in one day as Hector has now wrought against the sons of the Achaeans- and that too of his own unaided self, for he is son neither to god nor goddess. The Argives will rue it long and deeply. Run, therefore, with all speed by the line of the ships, and call Ajax and Idomeneus. Meanwhile I will go to Nestor, and bid him rise and go about among the companies of our sentinels to give them their instructions; they will listen to him sooner than to any man, for his own son, and Meriones brother in arms to Idomeneus, are captains over them. It was to them more particularly that we gave this charge." 

Menelaus replied, "How do I take your meaning? Am I to stay with them and wait your coming, or shall I return here as soon as I have given your orders?" "Wait," answered King Agamemnon, "for there are so many paths about the camp that we might miss one another. Call every man on your way, and bid him be stirring; name him by his lineage and by his father's name, give each all titular observance, and stand not too much upon your own dignity; we must take our full share of toil, for at our birth Jove laid this heavy burden upon us." 

With these instructions he sent his brother on his way, and went on to Nestor shepherd of his people. He found him sleeping in his tent hard by his own ship; his goodly armour lay beside him- his shield, his two spears and his helmet; beside him also lay the gleaming girdle with which the old man girded himself when he armed to lead his people into battle- for his age stayed him not. He raised himself on his elbow and looked up at Agamemnon. "Who is it," said he, "that goes thus about the host and the ships alone and in the dead of night, when men are sleeping? Are you looking for one of your mules or for some comrade? Do not stand there and say nothing, but speak. What is your business?" 

And Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, it is I, Agamemnon son of Atreus, on whom Jove has laid labour and sorrow so long as there is breath in my body and my limbs carry me. I am thus abroad because sleep sits not upon my eyelids, but my heart is big with war and with the jeopardy of the Achaeans. I am in great fear for the Danaans. I am at sea, and without sure counsel; my heart beats as though it would leap out of my body, and my limbs fail me. If then you can do anything- for you too cannot sleep- let us go the round of the watch, and see whether they are drowsy with toil and sleeping to the neglect of their duty. The enemy is encamped hard and we know not but he may attack us by night." 

Nestor replied, "Most noble son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, Jove will not do all for Hector that Hector thinks he will; he will have troubles yet in plenty if Achilles will lay aside his anger. I will go with you, and we will rouse others, either the son of Tydeus, or Ulysses, or fleet Ajax and the valiant son of Phyleus. Some one had also better go and call Ajax and King Idomeneus, for their ships are not near at hand but the farthest of all. I cannot however refrain from blaming Menelaus, much as I love him and respect him- and I will say so plainly, even at the risk of offending you- for sleeping and leaving all this trouble to yourself. He ought to be going about imploring aid from all the princes of the Achaeans, for we are in extreme danger." 

And Agamemnon answered, "Sir, you may sometimes blame him justly, for he is often remiss and unwilling to exert himself- not indeed from sloth, nor yet heedlessness, but because he looks to me and expects me to take the lead. On this occasion, however, he was awake before I was, and came to me of his own accord. I have already sent him to call the very men whom you have named. And now let us be going. We shall find them with the watch outside the gates, for it was there I said that we would meet them." 

"In that case," answered Nestor, "the Argives will not blame him nor disobey his orders when he urges them to fight or gives them instructions." 

With this he put on his shirt, and bound his sandals about his comely feet. He buckled on his purple coat, of two thicknesses, large, and of a rough shaggy texture, grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and wended his way along the line of the Achaean ships. First he called loudly to Ulysses peer of gods in counsel and woke him, for he was soon roused by the sound of the battle-cry. He came outside his tent and said, "Why do you go thus alone about the host, and along the line of the ships in the stillness of the night? What is it that you find so urgent?" And Nestor knight of Gerene answered, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, take it not amiss, for the Achaeans are in great straits. Come with me and let us wake some other, who may advise well with us whether we shall fight or fly." 

On this Ulysses went at once into his tent, put his shield about his shoulders and came out with them. First they went to Diomed son of Tydeus, and found him outside his tent clad in his armour with his comrades sleeping round him and using their shields as pillows; as for their spears, they stood upright on the spikes of their butts that were driven into the ground, and the burnished bronze flashed afar like the lightning of father Jove. The hero was sleeping upon the skin of an ox, with a piece of fine carpet under his head; Nestor went up to him and stirred him with his heel to rouse him, upbraiding him and urging him to bestir himself. "Wake up," he exclaimed, "son of Tydeus. How can you sleep on in this way? Can you not see that the Trojans are encamped on the brow of the plain hard by our ships, with but a little space between us and them?" 

On these words Diomed leaped up instantly and said, "Old man, your heart is of iron; you rest not one moment from your labours. Are there no younger men among the Achaeans who could go about to rouse the princes? There is no tiring you." 

And Nestor knight of Gerene made answer, "My son, all that you have said is true. I have good sons, and also much people who might call the chieftains, but the Achaeans are in the gravest danger; life and death are balanced as it were on the edge of a razor. Go then, for you are younger than I, and of your courtesy rouse Ajax and the fleet son of Phyleus." 

Diomed threw the skin of a great tawny lion about his shoulders- a skin that reached his feet- and grasped his spear. When he had roused the heroes, he brought them back with him; they then went the round of those who were on guard, and found the captains not sleeping at their posts but wakeful and sitting with their arms about them. As sheep dogs that watch their flocks when they are yarded, and hear a wild beast coming through the mountain forest towards them- forthwith there is a hue and cry of dogs and men, and slumber is broken- even so was sleep chased from the eyes of the Achaeans as they kept the watches of the wicked night, for they turned constantly towards the plain whenever they heard any stir among the Trojans. The old man was glad bade them be of good cheer. "Watch on, my children," said he, "and let not sleep get hold upon you, lest our enemies triumph over us." 

With this he passed the trench, and with him the other chiefs of the Achaeans who had been called to the council. Meriones and the brave son of Nestor went also, for the princes bade them. When they were beyond the trench that was dug round the wall they held their meeting on the open ground where there was a space clear of corpses, for it was here that when night fell Hector had turned back from his onslaught on the Argives. They sat down, therefore, and held debate with one another. 

Nestor spoke first. "My friends," said he, "is there any man bold enough to venture the Trojans, and cut off some straggler, or us news of what the enemy mean to do whether they will stay here by the ships away from the city, or whether, now that they have worsted the Achaeans, they will retire within their walls. If he could learn all this and come back safely here, his fame would be high as heaven in the mouths of all men, and he would be rewarded richly; for the chiefs from all our ships would each of them give him a black ewe with her lamb- which is a present of surpassing value- and he would be asked as a guest to all feasts and clan-gatherings." 

They all held their peace, but Diomed of the loud war-cry spoke saying, "Nestor, gladly will I visit the host of the Trojans over against us, but if another will go with me I shall do so in greater confidence and comfort. When two men are together, one of them may see some opportunity which the other has not caught sight of; if a man is alone he is less full of resource, and his wit is weaker." 

On this several offered to go with Diomed. The two Ajaxes, servants of Mars, Meriones, and the son of Nestor all wanted to go, so did Menelaus son of Atreus; Ulysses also wished to go among the host of the Trojans, for he was ever full of daring, and thereon Agamemnon king of men spoke thus: "Diomed," said he, "son of Tydeus, man after my own heart, choose your comrade for yourself- take the best man of those that have offered, for many would now go with you. Do not through delicacy reject the better man, and take the worst out of respect for his lineage, because he is of more royal blood." 

He said this because he feared for Menelaus. Diomed answered, "If you bid me take the man of my own choice, how in that case can I fail to think of Ulysses, than whom there is no man more eager to face all kinds of danger- and Pallas Minerva loves him well? If he were to go with me we should pass safely through fire itself, for he is quick to see and understand." 

"Son of Tydeus," replied Ulysses, "say neither good nor ill about me, for you are among Argives who know me well. Let us be going, for the night wanes and dawn is at hand. The stars have gone forward, two-thirds of the night are already spent, and the third is alone left us." 

They then put on their armour. Brave Thrasymedes provided the son of Tydeus with a sword and a shield (for he had left his own at his ship) and on his head he set a helmet of bull's hide without either peak or crest; it is called a skull-cap and is a common headgear. Meriones found a bow and quiver for Ulysses, and on his head he set a leathern helmet that was lined with a strong plaiting of leathern thongs, while on the outside it was thickly studded with boar's teeth, well and skilfully set into it; next the head there was an inner lining of felt. This helmet had been stolen by Autolycus out of Eleon when he broke into the house of Amyntor son of Ormenus. He gave it to Amphidamas of Cythera to take to Scandea, and Amphidamas gave it as a guest-gift to Molus, who gave it to his son Meriones; and now it was set upon the head of Ulysses. 

When the pair had armed, they set out, and left the other chieftains behind them. Pallas Minerva sent them a heron by the wayside upon their right hands; they could not see it for the darkness, but they heard its cry. Ulysses was glad when he heard it and prayed to Minerva: "Hear me," he cried, "daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, you who spy out all my ways and who are with me in all my hardships; befriend me in this mine hour, and grant that we may return to the ships covered with glory after having achieved some mighty exploit that shall bring sorrow to the Trojans." 

Then Diomed of the loud war-cry also prayed: "Hear me too," said he, "daughter of Jove, unweariable; be with me even as you were with my noble father Tydeus when he went to Thebes as envoy sent by the Achaeans. He left the Achaeans by the banks of the river Aesopus, and went to the city bearing a message of peace to the Cadmeians; on his return thence, with your help, goddess, he did great deeds of daring, for you were his ready helper. Even so guide me and guard me now, and in return I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will gild her horns and will offer her up to you in sacrifice." 

Thus they prayed, and Pallas Minerva heard their prayer. When they had done praying to the daughter of great Jove, they went their way like two lions prowling by night amid the armour and blood-stained bodies of them that had fallen. 

Neither again did Hector let the Trojans sleep; for he too called the princes and councillors of the Trojans that he might set his counsel before them. "Is there one," said he, "who for a great reward will do me the service of which I will tell you? He shall be well paid if he will. I will give him a chariot and a couple of horses, the fleetest that can be found at the ships of the Achaeans, if he will dare this thing; and he will win infinite honour to boot; he must go to the ships and find out whether they are still guarded as heretofore, or whether now that we have beaten them the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches." 

They all held their peace; but there was among the Trojans a certain man named Dolon, son of Eumedes, the famous herald- a man rich in gold and bronze. He was ill-favoured, but a good runner, and was an only son among five sisters. He it was that now addressed the Trojans. "I, Hector," said he, "Will to the ships and will exploit them. But first hold up your sceptre and swear that you will give me the chariot, bedight with bronze, and the horses that now carry the noble son of Peleus. I will make you a good scout, and will not fail you. I will go through the host from one end to the other till I come to the ship of Agamemnon, where I take it the princes of the Achaeans are now consulting whether they shall fight or fly." 

When he had done speaking Hector held up his sceptre, and swore him his oath saying, "May Jove the thundering husband of Juno bear witness that no other Trojan but yourself shall mount those steeds, and that you shall have your will with them for ever." 

The oath he swore was bootless, but it made Dolon more keen on going. He hung his bow over his shoulder, and as an overall he wore the skin of a grey wolf, while on his head he set a cap of ferret skin. Then he took a pointed javelin, and left the camp for the ships, but he was not to return with any news for Hector. When he had left the horses and the troops behind him, he made all speed on his way, but Ulysses perceived his coming and said to Diomed, "Diomed, here is some one from the camp; I am not sure whether he is a spy, or whether it is some thief who would plunder the bodies of the dead; let him get a little past us, we can then spring upon him and take him. If, however, he is too quick for us, go after him with your spear and hem him in towards the ships away from the Trojan camp, to prevent his getting back to the town." 

With this they turned out of their way and lay down among the corpses. Dolon suspected nothing and soon passed them, but when he had got about as far as the distance by which a mule-plowed furrow exceeds one that has been ploughed by oxen (for mules can plow fallow land quicker than oxen) they ran after him, and when he heard their footsteps he stood still, for he made sure they were friends from the Trojan camp come by Hector's orders to bid him return; when, however, they were only a spear's cast, or less away form him, he saw that they were enemies as fast as his legs could take him. The others gave chase at once, and as a couple of well-trained hounds press forward after a doe or hare that runs screaming in front of them, even so did the son of Tydeus and Ulysses pursue Dolon and cut him off from his own people. But when he had fled so far towards the ships that he would soon have fallen in with the outposts, Minerva infused fresh strength into the son of Tydeus for fear some other of the Achaeans might have the glory of being first to hit him, and he might himself be only second; he therefore sprang forward with his spear and said, "Stand, or I shall throw my spear, and in that case I shall soon make an end of you." 

He threw as he spoke, but missed his aim on purpose. The dart flew over the man's right shoulder, and then stuck in the ground. He stood stock still, trembling and in great fear; his teeth chattered, and he turned pale with fear. The two came breathless up to him and seized his hands, whereon he began to weep and said, "Take me alive; I will ransom myself; we have great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this my father will satisfy you with a very large ransom, should he hear of my being alive at the ships of the Achaeans." 

"Fear not," replied Ulysses, "let no thought of death be in your mind; but tell me, and tell me true, why are you thus going about alone in the dead of night away from your camp and towards the ships, while other men are sleeping? Is it to plunder the bodies of the slain, or did Hector send you to spy out what was going on at the ships? Or did you come here of your own mere notion?" 

Dolon answered, his limbs trembling beneath him: "Hector, with his vain flattering promises, lured me from my better judgement. He said he would give me the horses of the noble son of Peleus and his bronze-bedizened chariot; he bade me go through the darkness of the flying night, get close to the enemy, and find out whether the ships are still guarded as heretofore, or whether, now that we have beaten them, the Achaeans design to fly, and through sheer exhaustion are neglecting to keep their watches." 

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "You had indeed set your heart upon a great reward, but the horses of the descendant of Aeacus are hardly to be kept in hand or driven by any other mortal man than Achilles himself, whose mother was an immortal. But tell me, and tell me true, where did you leave Hector when you started? Where lies his armour and his horses? How, too, are the watches and sleeping-ground of the Trojans ordered? What are their plans? Will they stay here by the ships and away from the city, or now that they have worsted the Achaeans, will they retire within their walls?" 

And Dolon answered, "I will tell you truly all. Hector and the other councillors are now holding conference by the monument of great Ilus, away from the general tumult; as for the guards about which you ask me, there is no chosen watch to keep guard over the host. The Trojans have their watchfires, for they are bound to have them; they, therefore, are awake and keep each other to their duty as sentinels; but the allies who have come from other places are asleep and leave it to the Trojans to keep guard, for their wives and children are not here." 

Ulysses then said, "Now tell me; are they sleeping among the Trojan troops, or do they lie apart? Explain this that I may understand it." 

"I will tell you truly all," replied Dolon. "To the seaward lie the Carians, the Paeonian bowmen, the Leleges, the Cauconians, and the noble Pelasgi. The Lysians and proud Mysians, with the Phrygians and Meonians, have their place on the side towards Thymbra; but why ask about an this? If you want to find your way into the host of the Trojans, there are the Thracians, who have lately come here and lie apart from the others at the far end of the camp; and they have Rhesus son of Eioneus for their king. His horses are the finest and strongest that I have ever seen, they are whiter than snow and fleeter than any wind that blows. His chariot is bedight with silver and gold, and he has brought his marvellous golden armour, of the rarest workmanship- too splendid for any mortal man to carry, and meet only for the gods. Now, therefore, take me to the ships or bind me securely here, until you come back and have proved my words whether they be false or true." 

Diomed looked sternly at him and answered, "Think not, Dolon, for all the good information you have given us, that you shall escape now you are in our hands, for if we ransom you or let you go, you will come some second time to the ships of the Achaeans either as a spy or as an open enemy, but if I kill you and an end of you, you will give no more trouble." 

On this Dolon would have caught him by the beard to beseech him further, but Diomed struck him in the middle of his neck with his sword and cut through both sinews so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he was yet speaking. They took the ferret-skin cap from his head, and also the wolf-skin, the bow, and his long spear. Ulysses hung them up aloft in honour of Minerva the goddess of plunder, and prayed saying, "Accept these, goddess, for we give them to you in preference to all the gods in Olympus: therefore speed us still further towards the horses and sleeping-ground of the Thracians." 

With these words he took the spoils and set them upon a tamarisk tree, and they marked the place by pulling up reeds and gathering boughs of tamarisk that they might not miss it as they came back through the' flying hours of darkness. The two then went onwards amid the fallen armour and the blood, and came presently to the company of Thracian soldiers, who were sleeping, tired out with their day's toil; their goodly armour was lying on the ground beside them all orderly in three rows, and each man had his yoke of horses beside him. Rhesus was sleeping in the middle, and hard by him his horses were made fast to the topmost rim of his chariot. Ulysses from some way off saw him and said, "This, Diomed, is the man, and these are the horses about which Dolon whom we killed told us. Do your very utmost; dally not about your armour, but loose the horses at once- or else kill the men yourself, while I see to the horses." 

Thereon Minerva put courage into the heart of Diomed, and he smote them right and left. They made a hideous groaning as they were being hacked about, and the earth was red with their blood. As a lion springs furiously upon a flock of sheep or goats when he finds without their shepherd, so did the son of Tydeus set upon the Thracian soldiers till he had killed twelve. As he killed them Ulysses came and drew them aside by their feet one by one, that the horses might go forward freely without being frightened as they passed over the dead bodies, for they were not yet used to them. When the son of Tydeus came to the king, he killed him too (which made thirteen), as he was breathing hard, for by the counsel of Minerva an evil dream, the seed of Oeneus, hovered that night over his head. Meanwhile Ulysses untied the horses, made them fast one to another and drove them off, striking them with his bow, for he had forgotten to take the whip from the chariot. Then he whistled as a sign to Diomed. 

But Diomed stayed where he was, thinking what other daring deed he might accomplish. He was doubting whether to take the chariot in which the king's armour was lying, and draw it out by the pole, or to lift the armour out and carry it off; or whether again, he should not kill some more Thracians. While he was thus hesitating Minerva came up to him and said, "Get back, Diomed, to the ships or you may be driven thither, should some other god rouse the Trojans." 

Diomed knew that it was the goddess, and at once sprang upon the horses. Ulysses beat them with his bow and they flew onward to the ships of the Achaeans. 

But Apollo kept no blind look-out when he saw Minerva with the son of Tydeus. He was angry with her, and coming to the host of the Trojans he roused Hippocoon, a counsellor of the Thracians and a noble kinsman of Rhesus. He started up out of his sleep and saw that the horses were no longer in their place, and that the men were gasping in their death-agony; on this he groaned aloud, and called upon his friend by name. Then the whole Trojan camp was in an uproar as the people kept hurrying together, and they marvelled at the deeds of the heroes who had now got away towards the ships. 

When they reached the place where they had killed Hector's scout, Ulysses stayed his horses, and the son of Tydeus, leaping to the ground, placed the blood-stained spoils in the hands of Ulysses and remounted: then he lashed the horses onwards, and they flew forward nothing loth towards the ships as though of their own free will. Nestor was first to hear the tramp of their feet. "My friends," said he, "princes and counsellors of the Argives, shall I guess right or wrong?- but I must say what I think: there is a sound in my ears as of the tramp of horses. I hope it may Diomed and Ulysses driving in horses from the Trojans, but I much fear that the bravest of the Argives may have come to some harm at their hands." 

He had hardly done speaking when the two men came in and dismounted, whereon the others shook hands right gladly with them and congratulated them. Nestor knight of Gerene was first to question them. "Tell me," said he, "renowned Ulysses, how did you two come by these horses? Did you steal in among the Trojan forces, or did some god meet you and give them to you? They are like sunbeams. I am well conversant with the Trojans, for old warrior though I am I never hold back by the ships, but I never yet saw or heard of such horses as these are. Surely some god must have met you and given them to you, for you are both of dear to Jove, and to Jove's daughter Minerva." 

And Ulysses answered, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, heaven, if it so will, can give us even better horses than these, for the gods are far mightier than we are. These horses, however, about which you ask me, are freshly come from Thrace. Diomed killed their king with the twelve bravest of his companions. Hard by the ships we took a thirteenth man- a scout whom Hector and the other Trojans had sent as a spy upon our ships." 

He laughed as he spoke and drove the horses over the ditch, while the other Achaeans followed him gladly. When they reached the strongly built quarters of the son of Tydeus, they tied the horses with thongs of leather to the manger, where the steeds of Diomed stood eating their sweet corn, but Ulysses hung the blood-stained spoils of Dolon at the stern of his ship, that they might prepare a sacred offering to Minerva. As for themselves, they went into the sea and washed the sweat from their bodies, and from their necks and thighs. When the sea-water had taken all the sweat from off them, and had refreshed them, they went into the baths and washed themselves. After they had so done and had anointed themselves with oil, they sat down to table, and drawing from a full mixing-bowl, made a drink-offering of wine to Minerva. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XI

AND now as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus, harbinger of light alike to mortals and immortals, Jove sent fierce Discord with the ensign of war in her hands to the ships of the Achaeans. She took her stand by the huge black hull of Ulysses' ship which was middlemost of all, so that her voice might carry farthest on either side, on the one hand towards the tents of Ajax son of Telamon, and on the other towards those of Achilles- for these two heroes, well-assured of their own strength, had valorously drawn up their ships at the two ends of the line. There she took her stand, and raised a cry both loud and shrill that filled the Achaeans with courage, giving them heart to fight resolutely and with all their might, so that they had rather stay there and do battle than go home in their ships. 

The son of Atreus shouted aloud and bade the Argives gird themselves for battle while he put on his armour. First he girded his goodly greaves about his legs, making them fast with ankle clasps of silver; and about his chest he set the breastplate which Cinyras had once given him as a guest-gift. It had been noised abroad as far as Cyprus that the Achaeans were about to sail for Troy, and therefore he gave it to the king. It had ten courses of dark cyanus, twelve of gold, and ten of tin. There were serpents of cyanus that reared themselves up towards the neck, three upon either side, like the rainbows which the son of Saturn has set in heaven as a sign to mortal men. About his shoulders he threw his sword, studded with bosses of gold; and the scabbard was of silver with a chain of gold wherewith to hang it. He took moreover the richly-dight shield that covered his body when he was in battle- fair to see, with ten circles of bronze running all round see, wit it. On the body of the shield there were twenty bosses of white tin, with another of dark cyanus in the middle: this last was made to show a Gorgon's head, fierce and grim, with Rout and Panic on either side. The band for the arm to go through was of silver, on which there was a writhing snake of cyanus with three heads that sprang from a single neck, and went in and out among one another. On his head Agamemnon set a helmet, with a peak before and behind, and four plumes of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it; then he grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears, and the gleam of his armour shot from him as a flame into the firmament, while Juno and Minerva thundered in honour of the king of rich Mycene. 

Every man now left his horses in charge of his charioteer to hold them in readiness by the trench, while he went into battle on foot clad in full armour, and a mighty uproar rose on high into the dawning. The chiefs were armed and at the trench before the horses got there, but these came up presently. The son of Saturn sent a portent of evil sound about their host, and the dew fell red with blood, for he was about to send many a brave man hurrying down to Hades. 

The Trojans, on the other side upon the rising slope of the plain, were gathered round great Hector, noble Polydamas, Aeneas who was honoured by the Trojans like an immortal, and the three sons of Antenor, Polybus, Agenor, and young Acamas beauteous as a god. Hector's round shield showed in the front rank, and as some baneful star that shines for a moment through a rent in the clouds and is again hidden beneath them; even so was Hector now seen in the front ranks and now again in the hindermost, and his bronze armour gleamed like the lightning of aegis-bearing Jove. 

And now as a band of reapers mow swathes of wheat or barley upon a rich man's land, and the sheaves fall thick before them, even so did the Trojans and Achaeans fall upon one another; they were in no mood for yielding but fought like wolves, and neither side got the better of the other. Discord was glad as she beheld them, for she was the only god that went among them; the others were not there, but stayed quietly each in his own home among the dells and valleys of Olympus. All of them blamed the son of Saturn for wanting to Live victory to the Trojans, but father Jove heeded them not: he held aloof from all, and sat apart in his all-glorious majesty, looking down upon the city of the Trojans, the ships of the Achaeans, the gleam of bronze, and alike upon the slayers and on the slain. 

Now so long as the day waxed and it was still morning, their darts rained thick on one another and the people perished, but as the hour drew nigh when a woodman working in some mountain forest will get his midday meal- for he has felled till his hands are weary; he is tired out, and must now have food- then the Danaans with a cry that rang through all their ranks, broke the battalions of the enemy. Agamemnon led them on, and slew first Bienor, a leader of his people, and afterwards his comrade and charioteer Oileus, who sprang from his chariot and was coming full towards him; but Agamemnon struck him on the forehead with his spear; his bronze visor was of no avail against the weapon, which pierced both bronze and bone, so that his brains were battered in and he was killed in full fight. 

Agamemnon stripped their shirts from off them and left them with their breasts all bare to lie where they had fallen. He then went on to kill Isus and Antiphus two sons of Priam, the one a bastard, the other born in wedlock; they were in the same chariot- the bastard driving, while noble Antiphus fought beside him. Achilles had once taken both of them prisoners in the glades of Ida, and had bound them with fresh withes as they were shepherding, but he had taken a ransom for them; now, however, Agamemnon son of Atreus smote Isus in the chest above the nipple with his spear, while he struck Antiphus hard by the ear and threw him from his chariot. Forthwith he stripped their goodly armour from off them and recognized them, for he had already seen them at ships when Achilles brought them in from Ida. As a lion fastens on the fawns of a hind and crushes them in his great jaws, robbing them of their tender life while he on his way back to his lair- the hind can do nothing for them even though she be close by, for she is in an agony of fear, and flies through the thick forest, sweating, and at her utmost speed before the mighty monster- so, no man of the Trojans could help Isus and Antiphus, for they were themselves flying panic before the Argives. 

Then King Agamemnon took the two sons of Antimachus, Pisander and brave Hippolochus. It was Antimachus who had been foremost in preventing Helen's being restored to Menelaus, for he was largely bribed by Alexandrus; and now Agamemnon took his two sons, both in the same chariot, trying to bring their horses to a stand- for they had lost hold of the reins and the horses were mad with fear. The son of Atreus sprang upon them like a lion, and the pair besought him from their chariot. "Take us alive," they cried, "son of Atreus, and you shall receive a great ransom for us. Our father Antimachus has great store of gold, bronze, and wrought iron, and from this he will satisfy you with a very large ransom should he hear of our being alive at the ships of the Achaeans." 

With such piteous words and tears did they beseech the king, but they heard no pitiful answer in return. "If," said Agamemnon, "you are sons of Antimachus, who once at a council of Trojans proposed that Menelaus and Ulysses, who had come to you as envoys, should be killed and not suffered to return, you shall now pay for the foul iniquity of your father." 

As he spoke he felled Pisander from his chariot to the earth, smiting him on the chest with his spear, so that he lay face uppermost upon the ground. Hippolochus fled, but him too did Agamemnon smite; he cut off his hands and his head- which he sent rolling in among the crowd as though it were a ball. There he let them both lie, and wherever the ranks were thickest thither he flew, while the other Achaeans followed. Foot soldiers drove the foot soldiers of the foe in rout before them, and slew them; horsemen did the like by horsemen, and the thundering tramp of the horses raised a cloud of dust frim off the plain. King Agamemnon followed after, ever slaying them and cheering on the Achaeans. As when some mighty forest is all ablaze- the eddying gusts whirl fire in all directions till the thickets shrivel and are consumed before the blast of the flame- even so fell the heads of the flying Trojans before Agamemnon son of Atreus, and many a noble pair of steeds drew an empty chariot along the highways of war, for lack of drivers who were lying on the plain, more useful now to vultures than to their wives. 

Jove drew Hector away from the darts and dust, with the carnage and din of battle; but the son of Atreus sped onwards, calling out lustily to the Danaans. They flew on by the tomb of old Ilus, son of Dardanus, in the middle of the plain, and past the place of the wild fig-tree making always for the city- the son of Atreus still shouting, and with hands all bedrabbled in gore; but when they had reached the Scaean gates and the oak tree, there they halted and waited for the others to come up. Meanwhile the Trojans kept on flying over the middle of the plain like a herd cows maddened with fright when a lion has attacked them in the dead of night- he springs on one of them, seizes her neck in the grip of his strong teeth and then laps up her blood and gorges himself upon her entrails- even so did King Agamemnon son of Atreus pursue the foe, ever slaughtering the hindmost as they fled pell-mell before him. Many a man was flung headlong from his chariot by the hand of the son of Atreus, for he wielded his spear with fury. 

But when he was just about to reach the high wall and the city, the father of gods and men came down from heaven and took his seat, thunderbolt in hand, upon the crest of many-fountained Ida. He then told Iris of the golden wings to carry a message for him. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, and speak thus to Hector- say that so long as he sees Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, he is to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then will I vouchsafe him strength to slay till he reach the ships and night falls at the going down of the sun." 

Iris hearkened and obeyed. Down she went to strong Ilius from the crests of Ida, and found Hector son of Priam standing by his chariot and horses. Then she said, "Hector son of Priam, peer of gods in counsel, father Jove has sent me to bear you this message- so long as you see Agamemnon heading his men and making havoc of the Trojan ranks, you are to keep aloof and bid the others bear the brunt of the battle, but when Agamemnon is wounded either by spear or arrow, and takes to his chariot, then will Jove vouchsafe you strength to slay till you reach the ships, and till night falls at the going down of the sun." 

When she had thus spoken Iris left him, and Hector sprang full armed from his chariot to the ground, brandishing his spear as he went about everywhere among the host, cheering his men on to fight, and stirring the dread strife of battle. The Trojans then wheeled round, and again met the Achaeans, while the Argives on their part strengthened their battalions. The battle was now in array and they stood face to face with one another, Agamemnon ever pressing forward in his eagerness to be ahead of all others. 

Tell me now ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus, who, whether of the Trojans or of their allies, was first to face Agamemnon? It was Iphidamas son of Antenor, a man both brave and of great stature, who was brought up in fertile Thrace the mother of sheep. Cisses, his mother's father, brought him up in his own house when he was a child- Cisses, father to fair Theano. When he reached manhood, Cisses would have kept him there, and was for giving him his daughter in marriage, but as soon as he had married he set out to fight the Achaeans with twelve ships that followed him: these he had left at Percote and had come on by land to Ilius. He it was that naw met Agamemnon son of Atreus. When they were close up with one another, the son of Atreus missed his aim, and Iphidamas hit him on the girdle below the cuirass and then flung himself upon him, trusting to his strength of arm; the girdle, however, was not pierced, nor nearly so, for the point of the spear struck against the silver and was turned aside as though it had been lead: King Agamemnon caught it from his hand, and drew it towards him with the fury of a lion; he then drew his sword, and killed Iphidamas by striking him on the neck. So there the poor fellow lay, sleeping a sleep as it were of bronze, killed in the defence of his fellow-citizens, far from his wedded wife, of whom he had had no joy though he had given much for her: he had given a hundred-head of cattle down, and had promised later on to give a thousand sheep and goats mixed, from the countless flocks of which he was possessed. Agamemnon son of Atreus then despoiled him, and carried off his armour into the host of the Achaeans. 

When noble Coon, Antenor's eldest son, saw this, sore indeed were his eyes at the sight of his fallen brother. Unseen by Agamemnon he got beside him, spear in hand, and wounded him in the middle of his arm below the elbow, the point of the spear going right through the arm. Agamemnon was convulsed with pain, but still not even for this did he leave off struggling and fighting, but grasped his spear that flew as fleet as the wind, and sprang upon Coon who was trying to drag off the body of his brother- his father's son- by the foot, and was crying for help to all the bravest of his comrades; but Agamemnon struck him with a bronze-shod spear and killed him as he was dragging the dead body through the press of men under cover of his shield: he then cut off his head, standing over the body of Iphidamas. Thus did the sons of Antenor meet their fate at the hands of the son of Atreus, and go down into the house of Hades. 

As long as the blood still welled warm from his wound Agamemnon went about attacking the ranks of the enemy with spear and sword and with great handfuls of stone, but when the blood had ceased to flow and the wound grew dry, the pain became great. As the sharp pangs which the Eilithuiae, goddesses of childbirth, daughters of Juno and dispensers of cruel pain, send upon a woman when she is in labour- even so sharp were the pangs of the son of Atreus. He sprang on to his chariot, and bade his charioteer drive to the ships, for he was in great agony. With a loud clear voice he shouted to the Danaans, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, defend the ships yourselves, for Jove has not suffered me to fight the whole day through against the Trojans." 

With this the charioteer turned his horses towards the ships, and they flew forward nothing loth. Their chests were white with foam and their bellies with dust, as they drew the wounded king out of the battle. 

When Hector saw Agamemnon quit the field, he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanian warriors, be men, my friends, and acquit yourselves in battle bravely; their best man has left them, and Jove has vouchsafed me a great triumph; charge the foe with your chariots that. you may win still greater glory." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and as a huntsman hounds his dogs on against a lion or wild boar, even so did Hector, peer of Mars, hound the proud Trojans on against the Achaeans. Full of hope he plunged in among the foremost, and fell on the fight like some fierce tempest that swoops down upon the sea, and lashes its deep blue waters into fury. 

What, then is the full tale of those whom Hector son of Priam killed in the hour of triumph which Jove then vouchsafed him? First Asaeus, Autonous, and Opites; Dolops son of Clytius, Opheltius and Agelaus; Aesymnus, Orus and Hipponous steadfast in battle; these chieftains of the Achaeans did Hector slay, and then he fell upon the rank and file. As when the west wind hustles the clouds of the white south and beats them down with the fierceness of its fury- the waves of the sea roll high, and the spray is flung aloft in the rage of the wandering wind- even so thick were the heads of them that fell by the hand of Hector. 

All had then been lost and no help for it, and the Achaeans would have fled pell-mell to their ships, had not Ulysses cried out to Diomed, "Son of Tydeus, what has happened to us that we thus forget our prowess? Come, my good fellow, stand by my side and help me, we shall be shamed for ever if Hector takes the ships." 

And Diomed answered, "Come what may, I will stand firm; but we shall have scant joy of it, for Jove is minded to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us." 

With these words he struck Thymbraeus from his chariot to the ground, smiting him in the left breast with his spear, while Ulysses killed Molion who was his squire. These they let lie, now that they had stopped their fighting; the two heroes then went on playing havoc with the foe, like two wild boars that turn in fury and rend the hounds that hunt them. Thus did they turn upon the Trojans and slay them, and the Achaeans were thankful to have breathing time in their flight from Hector. 

They then took two princes with their chariot, the two sons of Merops of Percote, who excelled all others in the arts of divination. He had forbidden his sons to go to the war, but they would not obey him, for fate lured them to their fall. Diomed son of Tydeus slew them both and stripped them of their armour, while Ulysses killed Hippodamus and Hypeirochus. 

And now the son of Saturn as he looked down from Ida ordained that neither side should have the advantage, and they kept on killing one another. The son of Tydeus speared Agastrophus son of Paeon in the hip-joint with his spear. His chariot was not at hand for him to fly with, so blindly confident had he been. His squire was in charge of it at some distance and he was fighting on foot among the foremost until he lost his life. Hector soon marked the havoc Diomed and Ulysses were making, and bore down upon them with a loud cry, followed by the Trojan ranks; brave Diomed was dismayed when he saw them, and said to Ulysses who was beside him, "Great Hector is bearing down upon us and we shall be undone; let us stand firm and wait his onset." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it, nor did he miss his mark. He had aimed at Hector's head near the top of his helmet, but bronze was turned by bronze, and Hector was untouched, for the spear was stayed by the visored helm made with three plates of metal, which Phoebus Apollo had given him. Hector sprang back with a great bound under cover of the ranks; he fell on his knees and propped himself with his brawny hand leaning on the ground, for darkness had fallen on his eyes. The son of Tydeus having thrown his spear dashed in among the foremost fighters, to the place where he had seen it strike the ground; meanwhile Hector recovered himself and springing back into his chariot mingled with the crowd, by which means he saved his life. But Diomed made at him with his spear and said, "Dog, you have again got away though death was close on your heels. Phoebus Apollo, to whom I ween you pray ere you go into battle, has again saved you, nevertheless I will meet you and make and end of you hereafter, if there is any god who will stand by me too and be my helper. For the present I must pursue those I can lay hands on." 

As he spoke he began stripping the spoils from the son of Paeon, but Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen aimed an arrow at him, leaning against a pillar of the monument which men had raised to Ilus son of Dardanus, a ruler in days of old. Diomed had taken the cuirass from off the breast of Agastrophus, his heavy helmet also, and the shield from off his shoulders, when Paris drew his bow and let fly an arrow that sped not from his hand in vain, but pierced the flat of Diomed's right foot, going right through it and fixing itself in the ground. Thereon Paris with a hearty laugh sprang forward from his hiding-place, and taunted him saying, "You are wounded- my arrow has not been shot in vain; would that it had hit you in the belly and killed you, for thus the Trojans, who fear you as goats fear a lion, would have had a truce from evil." 

Diomed all undaunted answered, "Archer, you who without your bow are nothing, slanderer and seducer, if you were to be tried in single combat fighting in full armour, your bow and your arrows would serve you in little stead. Vain is your boast in that you have scratched the sole of my foot. I care no more than if a girl or some silly boy had hit me. A worthless coward can inflict but a light wound; when I wound a man though I but graze his skin it is another matter, for my weapon will lay him low. His wife will tear her cheeks for grief and his children will be fatherless: there will he rot, reddening the earth with his blood, and vultures, not women, will gather round him." 

Thus he spoke, but Ulysses came up and stood over him. Under this cover he sat down to draw the arrow from his foot, and sharp was the pain he suffered as he did so. Then he sprang on to his chariot and bade the charioteer drive him to the ships, for he was sick at heart. 

Ulysses was now alone; not one of the Argives stood by him, for they were all panic-stricken. "Alas," said he to himself in his dismay, "what will become of me? It is ill if I turn and fly before these odds, but it will be worse if I am left alone and taken prisoner, for the son of Saturn has struck the rest of the Danaans with panic. But why talk to myself in this way? Well do I know that though cowards quit the field, a hero, whether he wound or be wounded, must stand firm and hold his own." 

While he was thus in two minds, the ranks of the Trojans advanced and hemmed him in, and bitterly did they come to me it. As hounds and lusty youths set upon a wild boar that sallies from his lair whetting his white tusks- they attack him from every side and can hear the gnashing of his jaws, but for all his fierceness they still hold their ground- even so furiously did the Trojans attack Ulysses. First he sprang spear in hand upon Deiopites and wounded him on the shoulder with a downward blow; then he killed Thoon and Ennomus. After these he struck Chersidamas in the loins under his shield as he had just sprung down from his chariot; so he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in the hollow of his hand. These he let lie, and went on to wound Charops son of Hippasus own brother to noble Socus. Socus, hero that he was, made all speed to help him, and when he was close to Ulysses he said, "Far-famed Ulysses, insatiable of craft and toil, this day you shall either boast of having killed both the sons of Hippasus and stripped them of their armour, or you shall fall before my spear." 

With these words he struck the shield of Ulysses. The spear went through the shield and passed on through his richly wrought cuirass, tearing the flesh from his side, but Pallas Minerva did not suffer it to pierce the entrails of the hero. Ulysses knew that his hour was not yet come, but he gave ground and said to Socus, "Wretch, you shall now surely die. You have stayed me from fighting further with the Trojans, but you shall now fall by my spear, yielding glory to myself, and your soul to Hades of the noble steeds." 

Socus had turned in flight, but as he did so, the spear struck him in the back midway between the shoulders, and went right through his chest. He fell heavily to the ground and Ulysses vaunted over him saying, "O Socus, son of Hippasus tamer of horses, death has been too quick for you and you have not escaped him: poor wretch, not even in death shall your father and mother close your eyes, but the ravening vultures shall enshroud you with the flapping of their dark wings and devour you. Whereas even though I fall the Achaeans will give me my due rites of burial." 

So saying he drew Socus's heavy spear out of his flesh and from his shield, and the blood welled forth when the spear was withdrawn so that he was much dismayed. When the Trojans saw that Ulysses was bleeding they raised a great shout and came on in a body towards him; he therefore gave ground, and called his comrades to come and help him. Thrice did he cry as loudly as man can cry, and thrice did brave Menelaus hear him; he turned, therefore, to Ajax who was close beside him and said, "Ajax, noble son of Telamon, captain of your people, the cry of Ulysses rings in my ears, as though the Trojans had cut him off and were worsting him while he is single-handed. Let us make our way through the throng; it will be well that we defend him; I fear he may come to harm for all his valour if he be left without support, and the Danaans would miss him sorely." 

He led the way and mighty Ajax went with him. The Trojans had gathered round Ulysses like ravenous mountain jackals round the carcase of some homed stag that has been hit with an arrow- the stag has fled at full speed so long as his blood was warm and his strength has lasted, but when the arrow has overcome him, the savage jackals devour him in the shady glades of the forest. Then heaven sends a fierce lion thither, whereon the jackals fly in terror and the lion robs them of their prey- even so did Trojans many and brave gather round crafty Ulysses, but the hero stood at bay and kept them off with his spear. Ajax then came up with his shield before him like a wall, and stood hard by, whereon the Trojans fled in all directions. Menelaus took Ulysses by the hand, and led him out of the press while his squire brought up his chariot, but Ajax rushed furiously on the Trojans and killed Doryclus, a bastard son of Priam; then he wounded Pandocus, Lysandrus, Pyrasus, and Pylartes; as some swollen torrent comes rushing in full flood from the mountains on to the plain, big with the rain of heaven- many a dry oak and many a pine does it engulf, and much mud does it bring down and cast into the sea- even so did brave Ajax chase the foe furiously over the plain, slaying both men and horses. 

Hector did not yet know what Ajax was doing, for he was fighting on the extreme left of the battle by the banks of the river Scamander, where the carnage was thickest and the war-cry loudest round Nestor and brave Idomeneus. Among these Hector was making great slaughter with his spear and furious driving, and was destroying the ranks that were opposed to him; still the Achaeans would have given no ground, had not Alexandrus husband of lovely Helen stayed the prowess of Machaon shepherd of his people, by wounding him in the right shoulder with a triple-barbed arrow. The Achaeans were in great fear that as the fight had turned against them the Trojans might take him prisoner, and Idomeneus said to Nestor, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, mount your chariot at once; take Machaon with you and drive your horses to the ships as fast as you can. A physician is worth more than several other men put together, for he can cut out arrows and spread healing herbs." 

Nestor knight of Gerene did as Idomeneus had counselled; he at once mounted his chariot, and Machaon son of the famed physician Aesculapius went with him. He lashed his horses and they flew onward nothing loth towards the ships, as though of their own free will. 

Then Cebriones seeing the Trojans in confusion said to Hector from his place beside him, "Hector, here are we two fighting on the extreme wing of the battle, while the other Trojans are in pell-mell rout, they and their horses. Ajax son of Telamon is driving them before him; I know him by the breadth of his shield: let us turn our chariot and horses thither, where horse and foot are fighting most desperately, and where the cry of battle is loudest." 

With this he lashed his goodly steeds, and when they felt the whip they drew the chariot full speed among the Achaeans and Trojans, over the bodies and shields of those that had fallen: the axle was bespattered with blood, and the rail round the car was covered with splashes both from the horses' hoofs and from the tyres of the wheels. Hector tore his way through and flung himself into the thick of the fight, and his presence threw the Danaans into confusion, for his spear was not long idle; nevertheless though he went among the ranks with sword and spear, and throwing great stones, he avoided Ajax son of Telamon, for Jove would have been angry with him if he had fought a better man than himself. 

Then father Jove from his high throne struck fear into the heart of Ajax, so that he stood there dazed and threw his shield behind him- looking fearfully at the throng of his foes as though he were some wild beast, and turning hither and thither but crouching slowly backwards. As peasants with their hounds chase a lion from their stockyard, and watch by night to prevent his carrying off the pick of their herd- he makes his greedy spring, but in vain, for the darts from many a strong hand fall thick around him, with burning brands that scare him for all his fury, and when morning comes he slinks foiled and angry away- even so did Ajax, sorely against his will, retreat angrily before the Trojans, fearing for the ships of the Achaeans. Or as some lazy ass that has had many a cudgel broken about his back, when he into a field begins eating the corn- boys beat him but he is too many for them, and though they lay about with their sticks they cannot hurt him; still when he has had his fill they at last drive him from the field- even so did the Trojans and their allies pursue great Ajax, ever smiting the middle of his shield with their darts. Now and again he would turn and show fight, keeping back the battalions of the Trojans, and then he would again retreat; but he prevented any of them from making his way to the ships. Single-handed he stood midway between the Trojans and Achaeans: the spears that sped from their hands stuck some of them in his mighty shield, while many, though thirsting for his blood, fell to the ground ere they could reach him to the wounding of his fair flesh. 

Now when Eurypylus the brave son of Euaemon saw that Ajax was being overpowered by the rain of arrows, he went up to him and hurled his spear. He struck Apisaon son of Phausius in the liver below the midriff, and laid him low. Eurypylus sprang upon him, and stripped the armour from his shoulders; but when Alexandrus saw him, he aimed an arrow at him which struck him in the right thigh; the arrow broke, but the point that was left in the wound dragged on the thigh; he drew back, therefore, under cover of his comrades to save his life, shouting as he did so to the Danaans, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, rally to the defence of Ajax who is being overpowered, and I doubt whether he will come out of the fight alive. Hither, then, to the rescue of great Ajax son of Telamon." 

Even so did he cry when he was wounded; thereon the others came near, and gathered round him, holding their shields upwards from their shoulders so as to give him cover. Ajax then made towards them, and turned round to stand at bay as soon as he had reached his men. 

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the mares of Neleus, all in a lather with sweat, were bearing Nestor out of the fight, and with him Machaon shepherd of his people. Achilles saw and took note, for he was standing on the stern of his ship watching the hard stress and struggle of the fight. He called from the ship to his comrade Patroclus, who heard him in the tent and came out looking like Mars himself- here indeed was the beginning of the ill that presently befell him. "Why," said he, "Achilles do you call me? what do you what do you want with me?" And Achilles answered, "Noble son of Menoetius, man after my own heart, I take it that I shall now have the Achaeans praying at my knees, for they are in great straits; go, Patroclus, and ask Nestor who is that he is bearing away wounded from the field; from his back I should say it was Machaon son of Aesculapius, but I could not see his face for the horses went by me at full speed." 

Patroclus did as his dear comrade had bidden him, and set off running by the ships and tents of the Achaeans. 

When Nestor and Machaon had reached the tents of the son of Neleus, they dismounted, and an esquire, Eurymedon, took the horses from the chariot. The pair then stood in the breeze by the seaside to dry the sweat from their shirts, and when they had so done they came inside and took their seats. Fair Hecamede, whom Nestor had had awarded to him from Tenedos when Achilles took it, mixed them a mess; she was daughter of wise Arsinous, and the Achaeans had given her to Nestor because he excelled all of them in counsel. First she set for them a fair and well-made table that had feet of cyanus; on it there was a vessel of bronze and an onion to give relish to the drink, with honey and cakes of barley-meal. There was also a cup of rare workmanship which the old man had brought with him from home, studded with bosses of gold; it had four handles, on each of which there were two golden doves feeding, and it had two feet to stand on. Any one else would hardly have been able to lift it from the table when it was full, but Nestor could do so quite easily. In this the woman, as fair as a goddess, mixed them a mess with Pramnian wine; she grated goat's milk cheese into it with a bronze grater, threw in a handful of white barley-meal, and having thus prepared the mess she bade them drink it. When they had done so and had thus quenched their thirst, they fell talking with one another, and at this moment Patroclus appeared at the door. 

When the old man saw him he sprang from his seat, seized his hand, led him into the tent, and bade him take his place among them; but Patroclus stood where he was and said, "Noble sir, I may not stay, you cannot persuade me to come in; he that sent me is not one to be trifled with, and he bade me ask who the wounded man was whom you were bearing away from the field. I can now see for myself that he is Machaon shepherd of his people. I must go back and tell Achilles. You, sir, know what a terrible man he is, and how ready to blame even where no blame should lie." 

And Nestor answered, "Why should Achilles care to know how many of the Achaeans may be wounded? He recks not of the dismay that reigns in our host; our most valiant chieftains lie disabled, brave Diomed son of Tydeus is wounded; so are Ulysses and Agamemnon; Eurypylus has been hit with an arrow in the thigh, and I have just been bringing this man from the field- he too wounded- with an arrow; nevertheless Achilles, so valiant though he be, cares not and knows no ruth. Will he wait till the ships, do what we may, are in a blaze, and we perish one upon the other? As for me, I have no strength nor stay in me any longer; would that I Were still young and strong as in the days when there was a fight between us and the men of Elis about some cattle-raiding. I then killed Itymoneus the valiant son of Hypeirochus a dweller in Elis, as I was driving in the spoil; he was hit by a dart thrown my hand while fighting in the front rank in defence of his cows, so he fell and the country people around him were in great fear. We drove off a vast quantity of booty from the plain, fifty herds of cattle and as many flocks of sheep; fifty droves also of pigs, and as many wide-spreading flocks of goats. Of horses moreover we seized a hundred and fifty, all of them mares, and many had foals running with them. All these did we drive by night to Pylus the city of Neleus, taking them within the city; and the heart of Neleus was glad in that I had taken so much, though it was the first time I had ever been in the field. At daybreak the heralds went round crying that all in Elis to whom there was a debt owing should come; and the leading Pylians assembled to divide the spoils. There were many to whom the Epeans owed chattels, for we men of Pylus were few and had been oppressed with wrong; in former years Hercules had come, and had laid his hand heavy upon us, so that all our best men had perished. Neleus had had twelve sons, but I alone was left; the others had all been killed. The Epeans presuming upon all this had looked down upon us and had done us much evil. My father chose a herd of cattle and a great flock of sheep- three hundred in all- and he took their shepherds with him, for there was a great debt due to him in Elis, to wit four horses, winners of prizes. They and their chariots with them had gone to the games and were to run for a tripod, but King Augeas took them, and sent back their driver grieving for the loss of his horses. Neleus was angered by what he had both said and done, and took great value in return, but he divided the rest, that no man might have less than his full share. 

"Thus did we order all things, and offer sacrifices to the gods throughout the city; but three days afterwards the Epeans came in a body, many in number, they and their chariots, in full array, and with them the two Moliones in their armour, though they were still lads and unused to fighting. Now there is a certain town, Thryoessa, perched upon a rock on the river Alpheus, the border city Pylus; this they would destroy, and pitched their camp about it, but when they had crossed their whole plain, Minerva darted down by night from Olympus and bade us set ourselves in array; and she found willing soldiers in Pylos, for the men meant fighting. Neleus would not let me arm, and hid my horses, for he said that as yet I could know nothing about war; nevertheless Minerva so ordered the fight that, all on foot as I was, I fought among our mounted forces and vied with the foremost of them. There is a river Minyeius that falls into the sea near Arene, and there they that were mounted (and I with them) waited till morning, when the companies of foot soldiers came up with us in force. Thence in full panoply and equipment we came towards noon to the sacred waters of the Alpheus, and there we offered victims to almighty Jove, with a bull to Alpheus, another to Neptune, and a herd-heifer to Minerva. After this we took supper in our companies, and laid us down to rest each in his armour by the river. 

"The Epeans were beleaguering the city and were determined to take it, but ere this might be there was a desperate fight in store for them. When the sun's rays began to fall upon the earth we joined battle, praying to Jove and to Minerva, and when the fight had begun, I was the first to kill my man and take his horses- to wit the warrior Mulius. He was son-in-law to Augeas, having married his eldest daughter, golden-haired Agamede, who knew the virtues of every herb which grows upon the face of the earth. I speared him as he was coming towards me, and when he fell headlong in the dust, I sprang upon his chariot and took my place in the front ranks. The Epeans fled in all directions when they saw the captain of their horsemen (the best man they had) laid low, and I swept down on them like a whirlwind, taking fifty chariots- and in each of them two men bit the dust, slain by my spear. I should have even killed the two Moliones sons of Actor, unless their real father, Neptune lord of the earthquake, had hidden them in a thick mist and borne them out of the fight. Thereon Jove vouchsafed the Pylians a great victory, for we chased them far over the plain, killing the men and bringing in their armour, till we had brought our horses to Buprasium rich in wheat and to the Olenian rock, with the hill that is called Alision, at which point Minerva turned the people back. There I slew the last man and left him; then the Achaeans drove their horses back from Buprasium to Pylos and gave thanks to Jove among the gods, and among mortal men to Nestor. 

"Such was I among my peers, as surely as ever was, but Achilles is for keeping all his valour for himself; bitterly will he rue it hereafter when the host is being cut to pieces. My good friend, did not Menoetius charge you thus, on the day when he sent you from Phthia to Agamemnon? Ulysses and I were in the house, inside, and heard all that he said to you; for we came to the fair house of Peleus while beating up recruits throughout all Achaea, and when we got there we found Menoetius and yourself, and Achilles with you. The old knight Peleus was in the outer court, roasting the fat thigh-bones of a heifer to Jove the lord of thunder; and he held a gold chalice in his hand from which he poured drink-offerings of wine over the burning sacrifice. You two were busy cutting up the heifer, and at that moment we stood at the gates, whereon Achilles sprang to his feet, led us by the hand into the house, placed us at table, and set before us such hospitable entertainment as guests expect. When we had satisfied ourselves with meat and drink, I said my say and urged both of you to join us. You were ready enough to do so, and the two old men charged you much and straitly. Old Peleus bade his son Achilles fight ever among the foremost and outvie his peers, while Menoetius the son of Actor spoke thus to you: 'My son,' said he, 'Achilles is of nobler birth than you are, but you are older than he, though he is far the better man of the two. Counsel him wisely, guide him in the right way, and he will follow you to his own profit.' Thus did your father charge you, but you have forgotten; nevertheless, even now, say all this to Achilles if he will listen to you. Who knows but with heaven's help you may talk him over, for it is good to take a friend's advice. If, however, he is fearful about some oracle, or if his mother has told him something from Jove, then let him send you, and let the rest of the Myrmidons follow with you, if perchance you may bring light and saving to the Danaans. And let him send you into battle clad in his own armour, that the Trojans may mistake you for him and leave off fighting; the sons of the Achaeans may thus have time to get their breath, for they are hard pressed and there is little breathing time in battle. You, who are fresh, might easily drive a tired enemy back to his walls and away from the tents and ships." 

With these words he moved the heart of Patroclus, who set off running by the line of the ships to Achilles, descendant of Aeacus. When he had got as far as the ships of Ulysses, where was their place of assembly and court of justice, with their altars dedicated to the gods, Eurypylus son of Euaemon met him, wounded in the thigh with an arrow, and limping out of the fight. Sweat rained from his head and shoulders, and black blood welled from his cruel wound, but his mind did not wander. The son of Menoetius when he saw him had compassion upon him and spoke piteously saying, "O unhappy princes and counsellors of the Danaans, are you then doomed to feed the hounds of Troy with your fat, far from your friends and your native land? say, noble Eurypylus, will the Achaeans be able to hold great Hector in check, or will they fall now before his spear?" 

Wounded Eurypylus made answer, "Noble Patroclus, there is no hope left for the Achaeans but they will perish at their ships. All they that were princes among us are lying struck down and wounded at the hands of the Trojans, who are waxing stronger and stronger. But save me and take me to your ship; cut out the arrow from my thigh; wash the black blood from off it with warm water, and lay upon it those gracious herbs which, so they say, have been shown you by Achilles, who was himself shown them by Chiron, most righteous of all the centaurs. For of the physicians Podalirius and Machaon, I hear that the one is lying wounded in his tent and is himself in need of healing, while the other is fighting the Trojans upon the plain." 

"Hero Eurypylus," replied the brave son of Menoetius, "how may these things be? What can I do? I am on my way to bear a message to noble Achilles from Nestor of Gerene, bulwark of the Achaeans, but even so I will not be unmindful your distress." 

With this he clasped him round the middle and led him into the tent, and a servant, when he saw him, spread bullock-skins on the ground for him to lie on. He laid him at full length and cut out the sharp arrow from his thigh; he washed the black blood from the wound with warm water; he then crushed a bitter herb, rubbing it between his hands, and spread it upon the wound; this was a virtuous herb which killed all pain; so the wound presently dried and the blood left off flowing. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XII

SO THE son of Menoetius was attending to the hurt of Eurypylus within the tent, but the Argives and Trojans still fought desperately, nor were the trench and the high wall above it, to keep the Trojans in check longer. They had built it to protect their ships, and had dug the trench all round it that it might safeguard both the ships and the rich spoils which they had taken, but they had not offered hecatombs to the gods. It had been built without the consent of the immortals, and therefore it did not last. So long as Hector lived and Achilles nursed his anger, and so long as the city of Priam remained untaken, the great wall of the Achaeans stood firm; but when the bravest of the Trojans were no more, and many also of the Argives, though some were yet left alive when, moreover, the city was sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back with their ships to their own country- then Neptune and Apollo took counsel to destroy the wall, and they turned on to it the streams of all the rivers from Mount Ida into the sea, Rhesus, Heptaporus, Caresus, Rhodius, Grenicus, Aesopus, and goodly Scamander, with Simois, where many a shield and helm had fallen, and many a hero of the race of demigods had bitten the dust. Phoebus Apollo turned the mouths of all these rivers together and made them flow for nine days against the wall, while Jove rained the whole time that he might wash it sooner into the sea. Neptune himself, trident in hand, surveyed the work and threw into the sea all the foundations of beams and stones which the Achaeans had laid with so much toil; he made all level by the mighty stream of the Hellespont, and then when he had swept the wall away he spread a great beach of sand over the place where it had been. This done he turned the rivers back into their old courses. 

This was what Neptune and Apollo were to do in after time; but as yet battle and turmoil were still raging round the wall till its timbers rang under the blows that rained upon them. The Argives, cowed by the scourge of Jove, were hemmed in at their ships in fear of Hector the mighty minister of Rout, who as heretofore fought with the force and fury of a whirlwind. As a lion or wild boar turns fiercely on the dogs and men that attack him, while these form solid wall and shower their javelins as they face him- his courage is all undaunted, but his high spirit will be the death of him; many a time does he charge at his pursuers to scatter them, and they fall back as often as he does so- even so did Hector go about among the host exhorting his men, and cheering them on to cross the trench. 

But the horses dared not do so, and stood neighing upon its brink, for the width frightened them. They could neither jump it nor cross it, for it had overhanging banks all round upon either side, above which there were the sharp stakes that the sons of the Achaeans had planted so close and strong as a defence against all who would assail it; a horse, therefore, could not get into it and draw his chariot after him, but those who were on foot kept trying their very utmost. Then Polydamas went up to Hector and said, "Hector, and you other captains of the Trojans and allies, it is madness for us to try and drive our horses across the trench; it will be very hard to cross, for it is full of sharp stakes, and beyond these there is the wall. Our horses therefore cannot get down into it, and would be of no use if they did; moreover it is a narrow place and we should come to harm. If, indeed, great Jove is minded to help the Trojans, and in his anger will utterly destroy the Achaeans, I would myself gladly see them perish now and here far from Argos; but if they should rally and we are driven back from the ships pell-mell into the trench there will be not so much as a man get back to the city to tell the tale. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say; let our squires hold our horses by the trench, but let us follow Hector in a body on foot, clad in full armour, and if the day of their doom is at hand the Achaeans will not be able to withstand us." 

Thus spoke Polydamas and his saying pleased Hector, who sprang in full armour to the ground, and all the other Trojans, when they saw him do so, also left their chariots. Each man then gave his horses over to his charioteer in charge to hold them ready for him at the trench. Then they formed themselves into companies, made themselves ready, and in five bodies followed their leaders. Those that went with Hector and Polydamas were the bravest and most in number, and the most determined to break through the wall and fight at the ships. Cebriones was also joined with them as third in command, for Hector had left his chariot in charge of a less valiant soldier. The next company was led by Paris, Alcathous, and Agenor; the third by Helenus and Deiphobus, two sons of Priam, and with them was the hero Asius- Asius the son of Hyrtacus, whose great black horses of the breed that comes from the river Selleis had brought him from Arisbe. Aeneas the valiant son of Anchises led the fourth; he and the two sons of Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, men well versed in all the arts of war. Sarpedon was captain over the allies, and took with him Glaucus and Asteropaeus whom he deemed most valiant after himself- for he was far the best man of them all. These helped to array one another in their ox-hide shields, and then charged straight at the Danaans, for they felt sure that they would not hold out longer and that they should themselves now fall upon the ships. 

The rest of the Trojans and their allies now followed the counsel of Polydamas but Asius son of Hyrtacus would not leave his horses and his esquire behind him; in his foolhardiness he took them on with him towards the ships, nor did he fail to come by his end in consequence. Nevermore was he to return to wind-beaten Ilius, exulting in his chariot and his horses; ere he could do so, death of ill-omened name had overshadowed him and he had fallen by the spear of Idomeneus the noble son of Deucalion. He had driven towards the left wing of the ships, by which way the Achaeans used to return with their chariots and horses from the plain. Hither he drove and found the gates with their doors opened wide, and the great bar down- for the gatemen kept them open so as to let those of their comrades enter who might be flying towards the ships. Hither of set purpose did he direct his horses, and his men followed him with a loud cry, for they felt sure that the Achaeans would not hold out longer, and that they should now fall upon the ships. Little did they know that at the gates they should find two of the bravest chieftains, proud sons of the fighting Lapithae- the one, Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, and the other Leonteus, peer of murderous Mars. These stood before the gates like two high oak trees upon the mountains, that tower from their wide-spreading roots, and year after year battle with wind and rain- even so did these two men await the onset of great Asius confidently and without flinching. The Trojans led by him and by Iamenus, Orestes, Adamas the son of Asius, Thoon and Oenomaus, raised a loud cry of battle and made straight for the wall, holding their shields of dry ox-hide above their heads; for a while the two defenders remained inside and cheered the Achaeans on to stand firm in the defence of their ships; when, however, they saw that the Trojans were attacking the wall, while the Danaans were crying out for help and being routed, they rushed outside and fought in front of the gates like two wild boars upon the mountains that abide the attack of men and dogs, and charging on either side break down the wood all round them tearing it up by the roots, and one can hear the clattering of their tusks, till some one hits them and makes an end of them- even so did the gleaming bronze rattle about their breasts, as the weapons fell upon them; for they fought with great fury, trusting to their own prowess and to those who were on the wall above them. These threw great stones at their assailants in defence of themselves their tents and their ships. The stones fell thick as the flakes of snow which some fierce blast drives from the dark clouds and showers down in sheets upon the earth- even so fell the weapons from the hands alike of Trojans and Achaeans. Helmet and shield rang out as the great stones rained upon them, and Asius the son of Hyrtacus in his dismay cried aloud and smote his two thighs. "Father Jove," he cried, "of a truth you too are altogether given to lying. I made sure the Argive heroes could not withstand us, whereas like slim-waisted wasps, or bees that have their nests in the rocks by the wayside- they leave not the holes wherein they have built undefended, but fight for their little ones against all who would take them- even so these men, though they be but two, will not be driven from the gates, but stand firm either to slay or be slain." 

He spoke, but moved not the mind of Jove, whose counsel it then was to give glory to Hector. Meanwhile the rest of the Trojans were fighting about the other gates; I, however, am no god to be able to tell about all these things, for the battle raged everywhere about the stone wall as it were a fiery furnace. The Argives, discomfited though they were, were forced to defend their ships, and all the gods who were defending the Achaeans were vexed in spirit; but the Lapithae kept on fighting with might and main. 

Thereon Polypoetes, mighty son of Pirithous, hit Damasus with a spear upon his cheek-pierced helmet. The helmet did not protect him, for the point of the spear went through it, and broke the bone, so that the brain inside was scattered about, and he died fighting. He then slew Pylon and Ormenus. Leonteus, of the race of Mars, killed Hippomachus the son of Antimachus by striking him with his spear upon the girdle. He then drew his sword and sprang first upon Antiphates whom he killed in combat, and who fell face upwards on the earth. After him he killed Menon, Iamenus, and Orestes, and laid them low one after the other. 

While they were busy stripping the armour from these heroes, the youths who were led on by Polydamas and Hector (and these were the greater part and the most valiant of those that were trying to break through the wall and fire the ships) were still standing by the trench, uncertain what they should do; for they had seen a sign from heaven when they had essayed to cross it- a soaring eagle that flew skirting the left wing of their host, with a monstrous blood-red snake in its talons still alive and struggling to escape. The snake was still bent on revenge, wriggling and twisting itself backwards till it struck the bird that held it, on the neck and breast; whereon the bird being in pain, let it fall, dropping it into the middle of the host, and then flew down the wind with a sharp cry. The Trojans were struck with terror when they saw the snake, portent of aegis-bearing Jove, writhing in the midst of them, and Polydamas went up to Hector and said, "Hector, at our councils of war you are ever given to rebuke me, even when I speak wisely, as though it were not well, forsooth, that one of the people should cross your will either in the field or at the council board; you would have them support you always: nevertheless I will say what I think will be best; let us not now go on to fight the Danaans at their ships, for I know what will happen if this soaring eagle which skirted the left wing of our with a monstrous blood-red snake in its talons (the snake being still alive) was really sent as an omen to the Trojans on their essaying to cross the trench. The eagle let go her hold; she did not succeed in taking it home to her little ones, and so will it be- with ourselves; even though by a mighty effort we break through the gates and wall of the Achaeans, and they give way before us, still we shall not return in good order by the way we came, but shall leave many a man behind us whom the Achaeans will do to death in defence of their ships. Thus would any seer who was expert in these matters, and was trusted by the people, read the portent." 

Hector looked fiercely at him and said, "Polydamas, I like not of your reading. You can find a better saying than this if you will. If, however, you have spoken in good earnest, then indeed has heaven robbed you of your reason. You would have me pay no heed to the counsels of Jove, nor to the promises he made me- and he bowed his head in confirmation; you bid me be ruled rather by the flight of wild-fowl. What care I whether they fly towards dawn or dark, and whether they be on my right hand or on my left? Let us put our trust rather in the counsel of great Jove, king of mortals and immortals. There is one omen, and one only- that a man should fight for his country. Why are you so fearful? Though we be all of us slain at the ships of the Argives you are not likely to be killed yourself, for you are not steadfast nor courageous. If you will. not fight, or would talk others over from doing so, you shall fall forthwith before my spear." 

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after with a cry that rent the air. Then Jove the lord of thunder sent the blast of a mighty wind from the mountains of Ida, that bore the dust down towards the ships; he thus lulled the Achaeans into security, and gave victory to Hector and to the Trojans, who, trusting to their own might and to the signs he had shown them, essayed to break through the great wall of the Achaeans. They tore down the breastworks from the walls, and overthrew the battlements; they upheaved the buttresses, which the Achaeans had set in front of the wall in order to support it; when they had pulled these down they made sure of breaking through the wall, but the Danaans still showed no sign of giving ground; they still fenced the battlements with their shields of ox-hide, and hurled their missiles down upon the foe as soon as any came below the wall. 

The two Ajaxes went about everywhere on the walls cheering on the Achaeans, giving fair words to some while they spoke sharply to any one whom they saw to be remiss. "My friends," they cried, "Argives one and all- good bad and indifferent, for there was never fight yet, in which all were of equal prowess- there is now work enough, as you very well know, for all of you. See that you none of you turn in flight towards the ships, daunted by the shouting of the foe, but press forward and keep one another in heart, if it may so be that Olympian Jove the lord of lightning will vouchsafe us to repel our foes, and drive them back towards the city." 

Thus did the two go about shouting and cheering the Achaeans on. As the flakes that fall thick upon a winter's day, when Jove is minded to snow and to display these his arrows to mankind- he lulls the wind to rest, and snows hour after hour till he has buried the tops of the high mountains, the headlands that jut into the sea, the grassy plains, and the tilled fields of men; the snow lies deep upon the forelands, and havens of the grey sea, but the waves as they come rolling in stay it that it can come no further, though all else is wrapped as with a mantle so heavy are the heavens with snow- even thus thickly did the stones fall on one side and on the other, some thrown at the Trojans, and some by the Trojans at the Achaeans; and the whole wall was in an uproar. 

Still the Trojans and brave Hector would not yet have broken down the gates and the great bar, had not Jove turned his son Sarpedon against the Argives as a lion against a herd of horned cattle. Before him he held his shield of hammered bronze, that the smith had beaten so fair and round, and had lined with ox hides which he had made fast with rivets of gold all round the shield; this he held in front of him, and brandishing his two spears came on like some lion of the wilderness, who has been long famished for want of meat and will dare break even into a well-fenced homestead to try and get at the sheep. He may find the shepherds keeping watch over their flocks with dogs and spears, but he is in no mind to be driven from the fold till he has had a try for it; he will either spring on a sheep and carry it off, or be hit by a spear from strong hand- even so was Sarpedon fain to attack the wall and break down its battlements. Then he said to Glaucus son of Hippolochus, "Glaucus, why in Lycia do we receive especial honour as regards our place at table? Why are the choicest portions served us and our cups kept brimming, and why do men look up to us as though we were gods? Moreover we hold a large estate by the banks of the river Xanthus, fair with orchard lawns and wheat-growing land; it becomes us, therefore, to take our stand at the head of all the Lycians and bear the brunt of the fight, that one may say to another, Our princes in Lycia eat the fat of the land and drink best of wine, but they are fine fellows; they fight well and are ever at the front in battle.' My good friend, if, when we were once out of this fight, we could escape old age and death thenceforward and for ever, I should neither press forward myself nor bid you do so, but death in ten thousand shapes hangs ever over our heads, and no man can elude him; therefore let us go forward and either win glory for ourselves, or yield it to another." 

Glaucus heeded his saying, and the pair forthwith led on the host of Lycians. Menestheus son of Peteos was dismayed when he saw them, for it was against his part of the wall that they came- bringing destruction with them; he looked along the wall for some chieftain to support his comrades and saw the two Ajaxes, men ever eager for the fray, and Teucer, who had just come from his tent, standing near them; but he could not make his voice heard by shouting to them, so great an uproar was there from crashing shields and helmets and the battering of gates with a din which reached the skies. For all the gates had been closed, and the Trojans were hammering at them to try and break their way through them. Menestheus, therefore, sent Thootes with a message to Ajax. "Run, good Thootes," said and call Ajax, or better still bid both come, for it will be all over with us here directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon us, men who have ever fought desperately heretofore. But if the have too much on their hands to let them come, at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon do so, and let Teucer the famous bowman come with him." 

The messenger did as he was told, and set off running along the wall of the Achaeans. When he reached the Ajaxes he said to them, "Sirs, princes of the Argives, the son of noble Peteos bids you come to him for a while and help him. You had better both come if you can, or it will be all over with him directly; the leaders of the Lycians are upon him, men who have ever fought desperately heretofore; if you have too much on your hands to let both come, at any rate let Ajax son of Telamon do so, and let Teucer the famous bowman come with him." 

Great Ajax, son of Telamon, heeded the message, and at once spoke to the son of Oileus. "Ajax," said he, "do you two, yourself and brave Lycomedes, stay here and keep the Danaans in heart to fight their hardest. I will go over yonder, and bear my part in the fray, but I will come back here at once as soon as I have given them the help they need." 

With this, Ajax son of Telamon set off, and Teucer his brother by the same father went also, with Pandion to carry Teucer's bow. They went along inside the wall, and when they came to the tower where Menestheus was (and hard pressed indeed did they find him) the brave captains and leaders of the Lycians were storming the battlements as it were a thick dark cloud, fighting in close quarters, and raising the battle-cry aloud. 

First, Ajax son of Telamon killed brave Epicles, a comrade of Sarpedon, hitting him with a jagged stone that lay by the battlements at the very top of the wall. As men now are, even one who is in the bloom of youth could hardly lift it with his two hands, but Ajax raised it high aloft and flung it down, smashing Epicles' four-crested helmet so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell from the high wall as though he were diving, with no more life left in him. Then Teucer wounded Glaucus the brave son of Hippolochus as he was coming on to attack the wall. He saw his shoulder bare and aimed an arrow at it, which made Glaucus leave off fighting. Thereon he sprang covertly down for fear some of the Achaeans might see that he was wounded and taunt him. Sarpedon was stung with grief when he saw Glaucus leave him, still he did not leave off fighting, but aimed his spear at Alcmaon the son of Thestor and hit him. He drew his spear back again Alcmaon came down headlong after it with his bronzed armour rattling round him. Then Sarpedon seized the battlement in his strong hands, and tugged at it till it an gave way together, and a breach was made through which many might pass. 

Ajax and Teucer then both of them attacked him. Teucer hit him with an arrow on the band that bore the shield which covered his body, but Jove saved his son from destruction that he might not fall by the ships' sterns. Meanwhile Ajax sprang on him and pierced his shield, but the spear did not go clean through, though it hustled him back that he could come on no further. He therefore retired a little space from the battlement, yet without losing all his ground, for he still thought to cover himself with glory. Then he turned round and shouted to the brave Lycians saying, "Lycians, why do you thus fail me? For all my prowess I cannot break through the wall and open a way to the ships single-handed. Come close on behind me, for the more there are of us the better." 

The Lycians, shamed by his rebuke, pressed closer round him who was their counsellor their king. The Argives on their part got their men in fighting order within the wall, and there was a deadly struggle between them. The Lycians could not break through the wall and force their way to the ships, nor could the Danaans drive the Lycians from the wall now that they had once reached it. As two men, measuring-rods in hand, quarrel about their boundaries in a field that they own in common, and stickle for their rights though they be but in a mere strip, even so did the battlements now serve as a bone of contention, and they beat one another's round shields for their possession. Many a man's body was wounded with the pitiless bronze, as he turned round and bared his back to the foe, and many were struck clean through their shields; the wall and battlements were everywhere deluged with the blood alike of Trojans and of Achaeans. But even so the Trojans could not rout the Achaeans, who still held on; and as some honest hard-working woman weighs wool in her balance and sees that the scales be true, for she would gain some pitiful earnings for her little ones, even so was the fight balanced evenly between them till the time came when Jove gave the greater glory to Hector son of Priam, who was first to spring towards the wall of the Achaeans. As he did so, he cried aloud to the Trojans, "Up, Trojans, break the wall of the Argives, and fling fire upon their ships." 

Thus did he hound them on, and in one body they rushed straight at the wall as he had bidden them, and scaled the battlements with sharp spears in their hands. Hector laid hold of a stone that lay just outside the gates and was thick at one end but pointed at the other; two of the best men in a town, as men now are, could hardly raise it from the ground and put it on to a waggon, but Hector lifted it quite easily by himself, for the son of scheming Saturn made it light for him. As a shepherd picks up a ram's fleece with one hand and finds it no burden, so easily did Hector lift the great stone and drive it right at the doors that closed the gates so strong and so firmly set. These doors were double and high, and were kept closed by two cross-bars to which there was but one key. When he had got close up to them, Hector strode towards them that his blow might gain in force and struck them in the middle, leaning his whole weight against them. He broke both hinges, and the stone fell inside by reason of its great weight. The portals re-echoed with the sound, the bars held no longer, and the doors flew open, one one way, and the other the other, through the force of the blow. Then brave Hector leaped inside with a face as dark as that of flying night. The gleaming bronze flashed fiercely about his body and he had tow spears in his hand. None but a god could have withstood him as he flung himself into the gateway, and his eyes glared like fire. Then he turned round towards the Trojans and called on them to scale the wall, and they did as he bade them- some of them at once climbing over the wall, while others passed through the gates. The Danaans then fled panic-stricken towards their ships, and all was uproar and confusion. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XIII

NOW when Jove had thus brought Hector and the Trojans to the ships, he left them to their never-ending toil, and turned his keen eyes away, looking elsewhither towards the horse-breeders of Thrace, the Mysians, fighters at close quarters, the noble Hippemolgi, who live on milk, and the Abians, justest of mankind. He no longer turned so much as a glance towards Troy, for he did not think that any of the immortals would go and help either Trojans or Danaans. 

But King Neptune had kept no blind look-out; he had been looking admiringly on the battle from his seat on the topmost crests of wooded Samothrace, whence he could see all Ida, with the city of Priam and the ships of the Achaeans. He had come from under the sea and taken his place here, for he pitied the Achaeans who were being overcome by the Trojans; and he was furiously angry with Jove. 

Presently he came down from his post on the mountain top, and as he strode swiftly onwards the high hills and the forest quaked beneath the tread of his immortal feet. Three strides he took, and with the fourth he reached his goal- Aegae, where is his glittering golden palace, imperishable, in the depths of the sea. When he got there, he yoked his fleet brazen-footed steeds with their manes of gold all flying in the wind; he clothed himself in raiment of gold, grasped his gold whip, and took his stand upon his chariot. As he went his way over the waves the sea-monsters left their lairs, for they knew their lord, and came gambolling round him from every quarter of the deep, while the sea in her gladness opened a path before his chariot. So lightly did the horses fly that the bronze axle of the car was not even wet beneath it; and thus his bounding steeds took him to the ships of the Achaeans. 

Now there is a certain huge cavern in the depths of the sea midway between Tenedos and rocky Imbrus; here Neptune lord of the earthquake stayed his horses, unyoked them, and set before them their ambrosial forage. He hobbled their feet with hobbles of gold which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place until their lord should return. This done he went his way to the host of the Achaeans. 

Now the Trojans followed Hector son of Priam in close array like a storm-cloud or flame of fire, fighting with might and main and raising the cry battle; for they deemed that they should take the ships of the Achaeans and kill all their chiefest heroes then and there. Meanwhile earth-encircling Neptune lord of the earthquake cheered on the Argives, for he had come up out of the sea and had assumed the form and voice of Calchas. 

First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, who were doing their best already, and said, "Ajaxes, you two can be the saving of the Achaeans if you will put out all your strength and not let yourselves be daunted. I am not afraid that the Trojans, who have got over the wall in force, will be victorious in any other part, for the Achaeans can hold all of them in check, but I much fear that some evil will befall us here where furious Hector, who boasts himself the son of great Jove himself, is leading them on like a pillar of flame. May some god, then, put it into your hearts to make a firm stand here, and to incite others to do the like. In this case you will drive him from the ships even though he be inspired by Jove himself." 

As he spoke the earth-encircling lord of the earthquake struck both of them with his sceptre and filled their hearts with daring. He made their legs light and active, as also their hands and their feet. Then, as the soaring falcon poises on the wing high above some sheer rock, and presently swoops down to chase some bird over the plain, even so did Neptune lord of the earthquake wing his flight into the air and leave them. Of the two, swift Ajax son of Oileus was the first to know who it was that had been speaking with them, and said to Ajax son of Telamon, "Ajax, this is one of the gods that dwell on Olympus, who in the likeness of the prophet is bidding us fight hard by our ships. It was not Calchas the seer and diviner of omens; I knew him at once by his feet and knees as he turned away, for the gods are soon recognised. Moreover I feel the lust of battle burn more fiercely within me, while my hands and my feet under me are more eager for the fray." 

And Ajax son of Telamon answered, "I too feel my hands grasp my spear more firmly; my strength is greater, and my feet more nimble; I long, moreover, to meet furious Hector son of Priam, even in single combat." 

Thus did they converse, exulting in the hunger after battle with which the god had filled them. Meanwhile the earth-encircler roused the Achaeans, who were resting in the rear by the ships overcome at once by hard fighting and by grief at seeing that the Trojans had got over the wall in force. Tears began falling from their eyes as they beheld them, for they made sure that they should not escape destruction; but the lord of the earthquake passed lightly about among them and urged their battalions to the front. 

First he went up to Teucer and Leitus, the hero Peneleos, and Thoas and Deipyrus; Meriones also and Antilochus, valiant warriors; all did he exhort. "Shame on you young Argives," he cried, "it was on your prowess I relied for the saving of our ships; if you fight not with might and main, this very day will see us overcome by the Trojans. Of a truth my eyes behold a great and terrible portent which I had never thought to see- the Trojans at our ships- they, who were heretofore like panic-stricken hinds, the prey of jackals and wolves in a forest, with no strength but in flight for they cannot defend themselves. Hitherto the Trojans dared not for one moment face the attack of the Achaeans, but now they have sallied far from their city and are fighting at our very ships through the cowardice of our leader and the disaffection of the people themselves, who in their discontent care not to fight in defence of the ships but are being slaughtered near them. True, King Agamemnon son of Atreus is the cause of our disaster by having insulted the son of Peleus, still this is no reason why we should leave off fighting. Let us be quick to heal, for the hearts of the brave heal quickly. You do ill to be thus remiss, you, who are the finest soldiers in our whole army. I blame no man for keeping out of battle if he is a weakling, but I am indignant with such men as you are. My good friends, matters will soon become even worse through this slackness; think, each one of you, of his own honour and credit, for the hazard of the fight is extreme. Great Hector is now fighting at our ships; he has broken through the gates and the strong bolt that held them." 

Thus did the earth-encircler address the Achaeans and urge them on. Thereon round the two Ajaxes there gathered strong bands of men, of whom not even Mars nor Minerva, marshaller of hosts could make light if they went among them, for they were the picked men of all those who were now awaiting the onset of Hector and the Trojans. They made a living fence, spear to spear, shield to shield, buckler to buckler, helmet to helmet, and man to man. The horse-hair crests on their gleaming helmets touched one another as they nodded forward, so closely seffied were they; the spears they brandished in their strong hands were interlaced, and their hearts were set on battle. 

The Trojans advanced in a dense body, with Hector at their head pressing right on as a rock that comes thundering down the side of some mountain from whose brow the winter torrents have torn it; the foundations of the dull thing have been loosened by floods of rain, and as it bounds headlong on its way it sets the whole forest in an uproar; it swerves neither to right nor left till it reaches level ground, but then for all its fury it can go no further- even so easily did Hector for a while seem as though he would career through the tents and ships of the Achaeans till he had reached the sea in his murderous course; but the closely serried battalions stayed him when he reached them, for the sons of the Achaeans thrust at him with swords and spears pointed at both ends, and drove him from them so that he staggered and gave ground; thereon he shouted to the Trojans, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, stand firm: the Achaeans have set themselves as a wall against me, but they will not check me for long; they will give ground before me if the mightiest of the gods, the thundering spouse of Juno, has indeed inspired my onset." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Deiphobus son of Priam went about among them intent on deeds of daring with his round shield before him, under cover of which he strode quickly forward. Meriones took aim at him with a spear, nor did he fail to hit the broad orb of ox-hide; but he was far from piercing it for the spear broke in two pieces long ere he could do so; moreover Deiphobus had seen it coming and had held his shield well away from him. Meriones drew back under cover of his comrades, angry alike at having failed to vanquish Deiphobus, and having broken his spear. He turned therefore towards the ships and tents to fetch a spear which he had left behind in his tent. 

The others continued fighting, and the cry of battle rose up into the heavens. Teucer son of Telamon was the first to kill his man, to wit, the warrior Imbrius son of Mentor rich in horses. Until the Achaeans came he had lived in Pedaeum, and had married Medesicaste a bastard daughter of Priam; but on the arrival of the Danaan fleet he had gone back to Ilius, and was a great man among the Trojans, dwelling near Priam himself, who gave him like honour with his own sons. The son of Telamon now struck him under the ear with a spear which he then drew back again, and Imbrius fell headlong as an ash-tree when it is felled on the crest of some high mountain beacon, and its delicate green foliage comes toppling down to the ground. Thus did he fall with his bronze-dight armour ringing harshly round him, and Teucer sprang forward with intent to strip him of his armour; but as he was doing so, Hector took aim at him with a spear. Teucer saw the spear coming and swerved aside, whereon it hit Amphimachus, son of Cteatus son of Actor, in the chest as he was coming into battle, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Hector sprang forward to take Amphimachus's helmet from off his temples, and in a moment Ajax threw a spear at him, but did not wound him, for he was encased all over in his terrible armour; nevertheless the spear struck the boss of his shield with such force as to drive him back from the two corpses, which the Achaeans then drew off. Stichius and Menestheus, captains of the Athenians, bore away Amphimachus to the host of the Achaeans, while the two brave and impetuous Ajaxes did the like by Imbrius. As two lions snatch a goat from the hounds that have it in their fangs, and bear it through thick brushwood high above the ground in their jaws, thus did the Ajaxes bear aloft the body of Imbrius, and strip it of its armour. Then the son of Oileus severed the head from the neck in revenge for the death of Amphimachus, and sent it whirling over the crowd as though it had been a ball, till fell in the dust at Hector's feet. 

Neptune was exceedingly angry that his grandson Amphimachus should have fallen; he therefore went to the tents and ships of the Achaeans to urge the Danaans still further, and to devise evil for the Trojans. Idomeneus met him, as he was taking leave of a comrade, who had just come to him from the fight, wounded in the knee. His fellow-soldiers bore him off the field, and Idomeneus having given orders to the physicians went on to his tent, for he was still thirsting for battle. Neptune spoke in the likeness and with the voice of Thoas son of Andraemon who ruled the Aetolians of all Pleuron and high Calydon, and was honoured among his people as though he were a god. "Idomeneus," said he, "lawgiver to the Cretans, what has now become of the threats with which the sons of the Achaeans used to threaten the Trojans?" 

And Idomeneus chief among the Cretans answered, "Thoas, no one, so far as I know, is in fault, for we can all fight. None are held back neither by fear nor slackness, but it seems to be the of almighty Jove that the Achaeans should perish ingloriously here far from Argos: you, Thoas, have been always staunch, and you keep others in heart if you see any fail in duty; be not then remiss now, but exhort all to do their utmost." 

To this Neptune lord of the earthquake made answer, "Idomeneus, may he never return from Troy, but remain here for dogs to batten upon, who is this day wilfully slack in fighting. Get your armour and go, we must make all haste together if we may be of any use, though we are only two. Even cowards gain courage from companionship, and we two can hold our own with the bravest." 

Therewith the god went back into the thick of the fight, and Idomeneus when he had reached his tent donned his armour, grasped his two spears, and sallied forth. As the lightning which the son of Saturn brandishes from bright Olympus when he would show a sign to mortals, and its gleam flashes far and wide- even so did his armour gleam about him as he ran. Meriones his sturdy squire met him while he was still near his tent (for he was going to fetch his spear) and Idomeneus said 

"Meriones, fleet son of Molus, best of comrades, why have you left the field? Are you wounded, and is the point of the weapon hurting you? or have you been sent to fetch me? I want no fetching; I had far rather fight than stay in my tent." 

"Idomeneus," answered Meriones, "I come for a spear, if I can find one in my tent; I have broken the one I had, in throwing it at the shield of Deiphobus." 

And Idomeneus captain of the Cretans answered, "You will find one spear, or twenty if you so please, standing up against the end wall of my tent. I have taken them from Trojans whom I have killed, for I am not one to keep my enemy at arm's length; therefore I have spears, bossed shields, helmets, and burnished corslets." 

Then Meriones said, "I too in my tent and at my ship have spoils taken from the Trojans, but they are not at hand. I have been at all times valorous, and wherever there has been hard fighting have held my own among the foremost. There may be those among the Achaeans who do not know how I fight, but you know it well enough yourself." 

Idomeneus answered, "I know you for a brave man: you need not tell me. If the best men at the ships were being chosen to go on an ambush- and there is nothing like this for showing what a man is made of; it comes out then who is cowardly and who brave; the coward will change colour at every touch and turn; he is full of fears, and keeps shifting his weight first on one knee and then on the other; his heart beats fast as he thinks of death, and one can hear the chattering of his teeth; whereas the brave man will not change colour nor be on finding himself in ambush, but is all the time longing to go into action- if the best men were being chosen for such a service, no one could make light of your courage nor feats of arms. If you were struck by a dart or smitten in close combat, it would not be from behind, in your neck nor back, but the weapon would hit you in the chest or belly as you were pressing forward to a place in the front ranks. But let us no longer stay here talking like children, lest we be ill spoken of; go, fetch your spear from the tent at once." 

On this Meriones, peer of Mars, went to the tent and got himself a spear of bronze. He then followed after Idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour. As when baneful Mars sallies forth to battle, and his son Panic so strong and dauntless goes with him, to strike terror even into the heart of a hero- the pair have gone from Thrace to arm themselves among the Ephyri or the brave Phlegyans, but they will not listen to both the contending hosts, and will give victory to one side or to the other- even so did Meriones and Idomeneus, captains of men, go out to battle clad in their bronze armour. Meriones was first to speak. "Son of Deucalion," said he, "where would you have us begin fighting? On the right wing of the host, in the centre, or on the left wing, where I take it the Achaeans will be weakest?" 

Idomeneus answered, "There are others to defend the centre- the two Ajaxes and Teucer, who is the finest archer of all the Achaeans, and is good also in a hand-to-hand fight. These will give Hector son of Priam enough to do; fight as he may, he will find it hard to vanquish their indomitable fury, and fire the ships, unless the son of Saturn fling a firebrand upon them with his own hand. Great Ajax son of Telamon will yield to no man who is in mortal mould and eats the grain of Ceres, if bronze and great stones can overthrow him. He would not yield even to Achilles in hand-to-hand fight, and in fleetness of foot there is none to beat him; let us turn therefore towards the left wing, that we may know forthwith whether we are to give glory to some other, or he to us." 

Meriones, peer of fleet Mars, then led the way till they came to the part of the host which Idomeneus had named. 

Now when the Trojans saw Idomeneus coming on like a flame of fire, him and his squire clad in their richly wrought armour, they shouted and made towards him all in a body, and a furious hand-to-hand fight raged under the ships' sterns. Fierce as the shrill winds that whistle upon a day when dust lies deep on the roads, and the gusts raise it into a thick cloud- even such was the fury of the combat, and might and main did they hack at each other with spear and sword throughout the host. The field bristled with the long and deadly spears which they bore. Dazzling was the sheen of their gleaming helmets, their fresh-burnished breastplates, and glittering shields as they joined battle with one another. Iron indeed must be his courage who could take pleasure in the sight of such a turmoil, and look on it without being dismayed. 

Thus did the two mighty sons of Saturn devise evil for mortal heroes. Jove was minded to give victory to the Trojans and to Hector, so as to do honour to fleet Achilles, nevertheless he did not mean to utterly overthrow the Achaean host before Ilius, and only wanted to glorify Thetis and her valiant son. Neptune on the other hand went about among the Argives to incite them, having come up from the grey sea in secret, for he was grieved at seeing them vanquished by the Trojans, and was furiously angry with Jove. Both were of the same race and country, but Jove was elder born and knew more, therefore Neptune feared to defend the Argives openly, but in the likeness of man, he kept on encouraging them throughout their host. Thus, then, did these two devise a knot of war and battle, that none could unloose or break, and set both sides tugging at it, to the failing of men's knees beneath them. 

And now Idomeneus, though his hair was already flecked with grey, called loud on the Danaans and spread panic among the Trojans as he leaped in among them. He slew Othryoneus from Cabesus, a sojourner, who had but lately come to take part in the war. He sought Cassandra the fairest of Priam's daughters in marriage, but offered no gifts of wooing, for he promised a great thing, to wit, that he would drive the sons of the Achaeans willy nilly from Troy; old King Priam had given his consent and promised her to him, whereon he fought on the strength of the promises thus made to him. Idomeneus aimed a spear, and hit him as he came striding on. His cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly, so that he fell heavily to the ground. Then Idomeneus vaunted over him saying, "Othryoneus, there is no one in the world whom I shall admire more than I do you, if you indeed perform what you have promised Priam son of Dardanus in return for his daughter. We too will make you an offer; we will give you the loveliest daughter of the son of Atreus, and will bring her from Argos for you to marry, if you will sack the goodly city of Ilius in company with ourselves; so come along with me, that we may make a covenant at the ships about the marriage, and we will not be hard upon you about gifts of wooing." 

With this Idomeneus began dragging him by the foot through the thick of the fight, but Asius came up to protect the body, on foot, in front of his horses which his esquire drove so close behind him that he could feel their 'breath upon his shoulder. He was longing to strike down Idomeneus, but ere he could do so Idomeneus smote him with his spear in the throat under the chin, and the bronze point went clean through it. He fell as an oak, or poplar, or pine which shipwrights have felled for ship's timber upon the mountains with whetted axes- even thus did he lie full length in front of his chariot and horses, grinding his teeth and clutching at the bloodstained just. His charioteer was struck with panic and did not dare turn his horses round and escape: thereupon Antilochus hit him in the middle of his body with a spear; his cuirass of bronze did not protect him, and the spear stuck in his belly. He fell gasping from his chariot and Antilochus great Nestor's son, drove his horses from the Trojans to the Achaeans. 

Deiphobus then came close up to Idomeneus to avenge Asius, and took aim at him with a spear, but Idomeneus was on the look-out and avoided it, for he was covered by the round shield he always bore- a shield of oxhide and bronze with two arm-rods on the inside. He crouched under cover of this, and the spear flew over him, but the shield rang out as the spear grazed it, and the weapon sped not in vain from the strong hand of Deiphobus, for it struck Hypsenor son of Hippasus, shepherd of his people, in the liver under the midriff, and his limbs failed beneath him. Deiphobus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying, "Of a truth Asius has not fallen unavenied; he will be glad even while passing into the house of Hades, strong warden of the gate, that I have sent some one to escort him." 

Thus did he vaunt, and the Argives were stung by his saying. Noble Antilochus was more angry than any one, but grief did not make him forget his friend and comrade. He ran up to him, bestrode him, and covered him with his shield; then two of his staunch comrades, Mecisteus son of Echius, and Alastor stooped down, and bore him away groaning heavily to the ships. But Idomeneus ceased not his fury. He kept on striving continually either to enshroud some Trojan in the darkness of death, or himself to fall while warding off the evil day from the Achaeans. Then fell Alcathous son of noble Aesyetes: he was son-in-law to Anchises, having married his eldest daughter Hippodameia who was the darling of her father and mother, and excelled all her generation in beauty, accomplishments, and understanding, wherefore the bravest man in all Troy had taken her to wife- him did Neptune lay low by the hand of Idomeneus, blinding his bright eyes and binding his strong limbs in fetters so that he could neither go back nor to one side, but stood stock still like pillar or lofty tree when Idomeneus struck him with a spear in the middle of his chest. The coat of mail that had hitherto protected his body was now broken, and rang harshly as the spear tore through it. He fell heavily to the ground, and the spear stuck in his heart, which still beat, and made the butt-end of the spear quiver till dread Mars put an end to his life. Idomeneus vaunted over him and cried with a loud voice saying, "Deiphobus, since you are in a mood to vaunt, shall we cry quits now that we have killed three men to your one? Nay, sir, stand in fight with me yourself, that you may learn what manner of Jove-begotten man am I that have come hither. Jove first begot Minos chief ruler in Crete, and Minos in his turn begot a son, noble Deucalion; Deucalion begot me to be a ruler over many men in Crete, and my ships have now brought me hither, to be the bane of yourself, your father, and the Trojans." 

Thus did he speak, and Deiphobus was in two minds, whether to go back and fetch some other Trojan to help him, or to take up the challenge single-handed. In the end, he deemed it best to go and fetch Aeneas, whom he found standing in the rear, for he had long been aggrieved with Priam because in spite his brave deeds he did not give him his due share of honour. Deiphobus went up to him and said, "Aeneas, prince among the Trojans, if you know any ties of kinship, help me now to defend the body of your sister's husband; come with me to the rescue of Alcathous, who being husband to your sister brought you up when you were a child in his house, and now Idomeneus has slain him." 

With these words he moved the heart of Aeneas, and he went in pursuit of Idomeneus, big with great deeds of valour; but Idomeneus was not to be thus daunted as though he were a mere child; he held his ground as a wild boar at bay upon the mountains, who abides the coming of a great crowd of men in some lonely place- the bristles stand upright on his back, his eyes flash fire, and he whets his tusks in his eagerness to defend himself against hounds and men- even so did famed Idomeneus hold his ground and budge not at the coming of Aeneas. He cried aloud to his comrades looking towards Ascalaphus, Aphareus, Deipyrus, Meriones, and Antilochus, all of them brave soldiers- "Hither my friends," he cried, "and leave me not single-handed- I go in great fear by fleet Aeneas, who is coming against me, and is a redoubtable dispenser of death battle. Moreover he is in the flower of youth when a man's strength is greatest; if I was of the same age as he is and in my present mind, either he or I should soon bear away the prize of victory 

On this, all of them as one man stood near him, shield on shoulder. Aeneas on the other side called to his comrades, looking towards Deiphobus, Paris, and Agenor, who were leaders of the Trojans along with himself, and the people followed them as sheep follow the ram when they go down to drink after they have been feeding, and the heart of the shepherd is glad- even so was the heart of Aeneas gladdened when he saw his people follow him. 

Then they fought furiously in close combat about the body of Alcathous, wielding their long spears; and the bronze armour about their bodies rang fearfully as they took aim at one another in the press of the fight, while the two heroes Aeneas and Idomeneus, peers of Mars, outxied every one in their desire to hack at each other with sword and spear. Aeneas took aim first, but Idomeneus was on the lookout and avoided the spear, so that it sped from Aeneas' strong hand in vain, and fell quivering in the ground. Idomeneus meanwhile smote Oenomaus in the middle of his belly, and broke the plate of his corslet, whereon his bowels came gushing out and he clutched the earth in the palms of his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. Idomeneus drew his spear out of the body, but could not strip him of the rest of his armour for the rain of darts that were showered upon him: moreover his strength was now beginning to fail him so that he could no longer charge, and could neither spring forward to recover his own weapon nor swerve aside to avoid one that was aimed at him; therefore, though he still defended himself in hand-to-hand fight, his heavy feet could not bear him swiftly out of the battle. Deiphobus aimed a spear at him as he was retreating slowly from the field, for his bitterness against him was as fierce as ever, but again he missed him, and hit Ascalaphus, the son of Mars; the spear went through his shoulder, and he clutched the earth in the palms of his hands as he fell sprawling in the dust. 

Grim Mars of awful voice did not yet know that his son had fallen, for he was sitting on the summits of Olympus under the golden clouds, by command of Jove, where the other gods were also sitting, forbidden to take part in the battle. Meanwhile men fought furiously about the body. Deiphobus tore the helmet from off his head, but Meriones sprang upon him, and struck him on the arm with a spear so that the visored helmet fell from his hand and came ringing down upon the ground. Thereon Meriones sprang upon him like a vulture, drew the spear from his shoulder, and fell back under cover of his men. Then Polites, own brother of Deiphobus passed his arms around his waist, and bore him away from the battle till he got to his horses that were standing in the rear of the fight with the chariot and their driver. These took him towards the city groaning and in great pain, with the blood flowing from his arm. 

The others still fought on, and the battle-cry rose to heaven without ceasing. Aeneas sprang on Aphareus son of Caletor, and struck him with a spear in his throat which was turned towards him; his head fell on one side, his helmet and shield came down along with him, and death, life's foe, was shed around him. Antilochus spied his chance, flew forward towards Thoon, and wounded him as he was turning round. He laid open the vein that runs all the way up the back to the neck; he cut this vein clean away throughout its whole course, and Thoon fell in the dust face upwards, stretching out his hands imploringly towards his comrades. Antilochus sprang upon him and stripped the armour from his shoulders, glaring round him fearfully as he did so. The Trojans came about him on every side and struck his broad and gleaming shield, but could not wound his body, for Neptune stood guard over the son of Nestor, though the darts fell thickly round him. He was never clear of the foe, but was always in the thick of the fight; his spear was never idle; he poised and aimed it in every direction, so eager was he to hit some one from a distance or to fight him hand to hand. 

As he was thus aiming among the crowd, he was seen by Adamas son of Asius, who rushed towards him and struck him with a spear in the middle of his shield, but Neptune made its point without effect, for he grudged him the life of Antilochus. One half, therefore, of the spear stuck fast like a charred stake in Antilochus's shield, while the other lay on the ground. Adamas then sought shelter under cover of his men, but Meriones followed after and hit him with a spear midway between the private parts and the navel, where a wound is particualrly painful to wretched mortals. There did Meriones transfix him, and he writhed convulsively about the spear as some bull whom mountain herdsmen have bound with ropes of withes and are taking away perforce. Even so did he move convulsively for a while, but not for very long, till Meriones came up and drew the spear out of his body, and his eyes were veiled in darkness. 

Helenus then struck Deipyrus with a great Thracian sword, hitting him on the temple in close combat and tearing the helmet from his head; the helmet fell to the ground, and one of those who were fighting on the Achaean side took charge of it as it rolled at his feet, but the eyes of Deipyrus were closed in the darkness of death. 

On this Menelaus was grieved, and made menacingly towards Helenus, brandishing his spear; but Helenus drew his bow, and the two attacked one another at one and the same moment, the one with his spear, and the other with his bow and arrow. The son of Priam hit the breastplate of Menelaus's corslet, but the arrow glanced from off it. As black beans or pulse come pattering down on to a threshing-floor from the broad winnowing-shovel, blown by shrill winds and shaken by the shovel- even so did the arrow glance off and recoil from the shield of Menelaus, who in his turn wounded the hand with which Helenus carried his bow; the spear went right through his hand and stuck in the bow itself, so that to his life he retreated under cover of his men, with his hand dragging by his side- for the spear weighed it down till Agenor drew it out and bound the hand carefully up in a woollen sling which his esquire had with him. 

Pisander then made straight at Menelaus- his evil destiny luring him on to his doom, for he was to fall in fight with you, O Menelaus. When the two were hard by one another the spear of the son of Atreus turned aside and he missed his aim; Pisander then struck the shield of brave Menelaus but could not pierce it, for the shield stayed the spear and broke the shaft; nevertheless he was glad and made sure of victory; forthwith, however, the son of Atreus drew his sword and sprang upon him. Pisander then seized the bronze battle-axe, with its long and polished handle of olive wood that hung by his side under his shield, and the two made at one another. Pisander struck the peak of Menelaus's crested helmet just under the crest itself, and Menelaus hit Pisander as he was coming towards him, on the forehead, just at the rise of his nose; the bones cracked and his two gore-bedrabbled eyes fell by his feet in the dust. He fell backwards to the ground, and Menelaus set his heel upon him, stripped him of his armour, and vaunted over him saying, "Even thus shall you Trojans leave the ships of the Achaeans, proud and insatiate of battle though you be: nor shall you lack any of the disgrace and shame which you have heaped upon myself. Cowardly she-wolves that you are, you feared not the anger of dread Jove, avenger of violated hospitality, who will one day destroy your city; you stole my wedded wife and wickedly carried off much treasure when you were her guest, and now you would fling fire upon our ships, and kill our heroes. A day will come when, rage as you may, you shall be stayed. O father Jove, you, who they say art above all both gods and men in wisdom, and from whom all things that befall us do proceed, how can you thus favour the Trojans- men so proud and overweening, that they are never tired of fighting? All things pall after a while- sleep, love, sweet song, and stately dance- still these are things of which a man would surely have his fill rather than of battle, whereas it is of battle that the Trojans are insatiate." 

So saying Menelaus stripped the blood-stained armour from the body of Pisander, and handed it over to his men; then he again ranged himself among those who were in the front of the fight. 

Harpalion son of King Pylaemenes then sprang upon him; he had come to fight at Troy along with his father, but he did not go home again. He struck the middle of Menelaus's shield with his spear but could not pierce it, and to save his life drew back under cover of his men, looking round him on every side lest he should be wounded. But Meriones aimed a bronze-tipped arrow at him as he was leaving the field, and hit him on the right buttock; the arrow pierced the bone through and through, and penetrated the bladder, so he sat down where he was and breathed his last in the arms of his comrades, stretched like a worm upon the ground and watering the earth with the blood that flowed from his wound. The brave Paphlagonians tended him with all due care; they raised him into his chariot, and bore him sadly off to the city of Troy; his father went also with him weeping bitterly, but there was no ransom that could bring his dead son to life again. 

Paris was deeply grieved by the death of Harpalion, who was his host when he went among the Paphlagonians; he aimed an arrow, therefore, in order to avenge him. Now there was a certain man named Euchenor, son of Polyidus the prophet, a brave man and wealthy, whose home was in Corinth. This Euchenor had set sail for Troy well knowing that it would be the death of him, for his good old father Polyidus had often told him that he must either stay at home and die of a terrible disease, or go with the Achaeans and perish at the hands of the Trojans; he chose, therefore, to avoid incurring the heavy fine the Achaeans would have laid upon him, and at the same time to escape the pain and suffering of disease. Paris now smote him on the jaw under his ear, whereon the life went out of him and he was enshrouded in the darkness of death. 

Thus then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. But Hector had not yet heard, and did not know that the Argives were making havoc of his men on the left wing of the battle, where the Achaeans ere long would have triumphed over them, so vigorously did Neptune cheer them on and help them. He therefore held on at the point where he had first forced his way through the gates and the wall, after breaking through the serried ranks of Danaan warriors. It was here that the ships of Ajax and Protesilaus were drawn up by the sea-shore; here the wall was at its lowest, and the fight both of man and horse raged most fiercely. The Boeotians and the Ionians with their long tunics, the Locrians, the men of Phthia, and the famous force of the Epeans could hardly stay Hector as he rushed on towards the ships, nor could they drive him from them, for he was as a wall of fire. The chosen men of the Athenians were in the van, led by Menestheus son of Peteos, with whom were also Pheidas, Stichius, and stalwart Bias: Meges son of Phyleus, Amphion, and Dracius commanded the Epeans, while Medon and staunch Podarces led the men of Phthia. Of these, Medon was bastard son to Oileus and brother of Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own country, for he had killed the brother of his stepmother Eriopis, the wife of Oileus; the other, Podarces, was the son of Iphiclus son of Phylacus. These two stood in the van of the Phthians, and defended the ships along with the Boeotians. 

Ajax son of Oileus never for a moment left the side of Ajax son of Telamon, but as two swart oxen both strain their utmost at the plough which they are drawing in a fallow field, and the sweat steams upwards from about the roots of their horns- nothing but the yoke divides them as they break up the ground till they reach the end of the field- even so did the two Ajaxes stand shoulder to shoulder by one another. Many and brave comrades followed the son of Telamon, to relieve him of his shield when he was overcome with sweat and toil, but the Locrians did not follow so close after the son of Oileus, for they could not hold their own in a hand-to-hand fight. They had no bronze helmets with plumes of horse-hair, neither had they shields nor ashen spears, but they had come to Troy armed with bows, and with slings of twisted wool from which they showered their missiles to break the ranks of the Trojans. The others, therefore, with their heavy armour bore the brunt of the fight with the Trojans and with Hector, while the Locrians shot from behind, under their cover; and thus the Trojans began to lose heart, for the arrows threw them into confusion. 

The Trojans would now have been driven in sorry plight from the ships and tents back to windy Ilius, had not Polydamas presently said to Hector, "Hector, there is no persuading you to take advice. Because heaven has so richly endowed you with the arts of war, you think that you must therefore excel others in counsel; but you cannot thus claim preeminence in all things. Heaven has made one man an excellent soldier; of another it has made a dancer or a singer and player on the lyre; while yet in another Jove has implanted a wise understanding of which men reap fruit to the saving of many, and he himself knows more about it than any one; therefore I will say what I think will be best. The fight has hemmed you in as with a circle of fire, and even now that the Trojans are within the wall some of them stand aloof in full armour, while others are fighting scattered and outnumbered near the ships. Draw back, therefore, and call your chieftains round you, that we may advise together whether to fall now upon the ships in the hope that heaven may vouchsafe us victory, or to beat a retreat while we can yet safely do so. I greatly fear that the Achaeans will pay us their debt of yesterday in full, for there is one abiding at their ships who is never weary of battle, and who will not hold aloof much longer." 

Thus spoke Polydamas, and his words pleased Hector well. He sprang in full armour from his chariot and said, "Polydamas, gather the chieftains here; I will go yonder into the fight, but will return at once when I have given them their orders." 

He then sped onward, towering like a snowy mountain, and with a loud cry flew through the ranks of the Trojans and their allies. When they heard his voice they all hastened to gather round Polydamas the excellent son of Panthous, but Hector kept on among the foremost, looking everywhere to find Deiphobus and prince Helenus, Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of Hyrtacus; living, indeed, and scatheless he could no longer find them, for the two last were lying by the sterns of the Achaean ships, slain by the Argives, while the others had been also stricken and wounded by them; but upon the left wing of the dread battle he found Alexandrus, husband of lovely Helen, cheering his men and urging them on to fight. He went up to him and upbraided him. "Paris," said he, "evil-hearted Paris, fair to see but woman-mad and false of tongue, where are Deiphobus and King Helenus? Where are Adamas son of Asius, and Asius son of Hyrtacus? Where too is Othryoneus? Ilius is undone and will now surely fall!" 

Alexandrus answered, "Hector, why find fault when there is no one to find fault with? I should hold aloof from battle on any day rather than this, for my mother bore me with nothing of the coward about me. From the moment when you set our men fighting about the ships we have been staying here and doing battle with the Danaans. Our comrades about whom you ask me are dead; Deiphobus and King Helenus alone have left the field, wounded both of them in the hand, but the son of Saturn saved them alive. Now, therefore, lead on where you would have us go, and we will follow with right goodwill; you shall not find us fail you in so far as our strength holds out, but no man can do more than in him lies, no matter how willing he may be." 

With these words he satisfied his brother, and the two went towards the part of the battle where the fight was thickest, about Cebriones, brave Polydamas, Phalces, Orthaeus, godlike Polyphetes, Palmys, Ascanius, and Morys son of Hippotion, who had come from fertile Ascania on the preceding day to relieve other troops. Then Jove urged them on to fight. They flew forth like the blasts of some fierce wind that strike earth in the van of a thunderstorm- they buffet the salt sea into an uproar; many and mighty are the great waves that come crashing in one after the other upon the shore with their arching heads all crested with foam- even so did rank behind rank of Trojans arrayed in gleaming armour follow their leaders onward. The way was led by Hector son of Priam, peer of murderous Mars, with his round shield before him- his shield of ox-hides covered with plates of bronze- and his gleaming helmet upon his temples. He kept stepping forward under cover of his shield in every direction, making trial of the ranks to see if they would give way be him, but he could not daunt the courage of the Achaeans. Ajax was the first to stride out and challenge him. "Sir," he cried, "draw near; why do you think thus vainly to dismay the Argives? We Achaeans are excellent soldiers, but the scourge of Jove has fallen heavily upon us. Your heart, forsooth, is set on destroying our ships, but we too have bands that can keep you at bay, and your own fair town shall be sooner taken and sacked by ourselves. The time is near when you shall pray Jove and all the gods in your flight, that your steeds may be swifter than hawks as they raise the dust on the plain and bear you back to your city." 

As he was thus speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand, and the host of the Achaeans shouted, for they took heart at the omen. But Hector answered, "Ajax, braggart and false of tongue, would that I were as sure of being son for evermore to aegis-bearing Jove, with Queen Juno for my mother, and of being held in like honour with Minerva and Apollo, as I am that this day is big with the destruction of the Achaeans; and you shall fall among them if you dare abide my spear; it shall rend your fair body and bid you glut our hounds and birds of prey with your fat and your flesh, as you fall by the ships of the Achaeans." 

With these words he led the way and the others followed after with a cry that rent the air, while the host shouted behind them. The Argives on their part raised a shout likewise, nor did they forget their prowess, but stood firm against the onslaught of the Trojan chieftains, and the cry from both the hosts rose up to heaven and to the brightness of Jove's presence. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XIV

NESTOR was sitting over his wine, but the cry of battle did not escape him, and he said to the son of Aesculapius, "What, noble Machaon, is the meaning of all this? The shouts of men fighting by our ships grow stronger and stronger; stay here, therefore, and sit over your wine, while fair Hecamede heats you a bath and washes the clotted blood from off you. I will go at once to the look-out station and see what it is all about." 

As he spoke he took up the shield of his son Thrasymedes that was lying in his tent, all gleaming with bronze, for Thrasymedes had taken his father's shield; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and as soon as he was outside saw the disastrous rout of the Achaeans who, now that their wall was overthrown, were flying pell-mell before the Trojans. As when there is a heavy swell upon the sea, but the waves are dumb- they keep their eyes on the watch for the quarter whence the fierce winds may spring upon them, but they stay where they are and set neither this way nor that, till some particular wind sweeps down from heaven to determine them- even so did the old man ponder whether to make for the crowd of Danaans, or go in search of Agamemnon. In the end he deemed it best to go to the son of Atreus; but meanwhile the hosts were fighting and killing one another, and the hard bronze rattled on their bodies, as they thrust at one another with their swords and spears. 

The wounded kings, the son of Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon son of Atreus, fell in Nestor as they were coming up from their ships- for theirs were drawn up some way from where the fighting was going on, being on the shore itself inasmuch as they had been beached first, while the wall had been built behind the hindermost. The stretch of the shore, wide though it was, did not afford room for all the ships, and the host was cramped for space, therefore they had placed the ships in rows one behind the other, and had filled the whole opening of the bay between the two points that formed it. The kings, leaning on their spears, were coming out to survey the fight, being in great anxiety, and when old Nestor met them they were filled with dismay. Then King Agamemnon said to him, "Nestor son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, why have you left the battle to come hither? I fear that what dread Hector said will come true, when he vaunted among the Trojans saying that he would not return to Ilius till he had fired our ships and killed us; this is what he said, and now it is all coming true. Alas! others of the Achaeans, like Achilles, are in anger with me that they refuse to fight by the sterns of our ships." 

Then Nestor knight of Gerene answered, "It is indeed as you say; it is all coming true at this moment, and even Jove who thunders from on high cannot prevent it. Fallen is the wall on which we relied as an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet. The Trojans are fighting stubbornly and without ceasing at the ships; look where you may you cannot see from what quarter the rout of the Achaeans is coming; they are being killed in a confused mass and the battle-cry ascends to heaven; let us think, if counsel can be of any use, what we had better do; but I do not advise our going into battle ourselves, for a man cannot fight when he is wounded." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Nestor, if the Trojans are indeed fighting at the rear of our ships, and neither the wall nor the trench has served us- over which the Danaans toiled so hard, and which they deemed would be an impregnable bulwark both for us and our fleet- I see it must be the will of Jove that the Achaeans should perish ingloriously here, far from Argos. I knew when Jove was willing to defend us, and I know now that he is raising the Trojans to like honour with the gods, while us, on the other hand, he bas bound hand and foot. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say; let us bring down the ships that are on the beach and draw them into the water; let us make them fast to their mooring-stones a little way out, against the fall of night- if even by night the Trojans will desist from fighting; we may then draw down the rest of the fleet. There is nothing wrong in flying ruin even by night. It is better for a man that he should fly and be saved than be caught and killed." 

Ulysses looked fiercely at him and said, "Son of Atreus, what are you talking about? Wretch, you should have commanded some other and baser army, and not been ruler over us to whom Jove has allotted a life of hard fighting from youth to old age, till we every one of us perish. Is it thus that you would quit the city of Troy, to win which we have suffered so much hardship? Hold your peace, lest some other of the Achaeans hear you say what no man who knows how to give good counsel, no king over so great a host as that of the Argives should ever have let fall from his lips. I despise your judgement utterly for what you have been saying. Would you, then, have us draw down our ships into the water while the battle is raging, and thus play further into the hands of the conquering Trojans? It would be ruin; the Achaeans will not go on fighting when they see the ships being drawn into the water, but will cease attacking and keep turning their eyes towards them; your counsel, therefore, Sir captain, would be our destruction." 

Agamemnon answered, "Ulysses, your rebuke has stung me to the heart. I am not, however, ordering the Achaeans to draw their ships into the sea whether they will or no. Some one, it may be, old or young, can offer us better counsel which I shall rejoice to hear." 

Then said Diomed, "Such an one is at hand; he is not far to seek, if you will listen to me and not resent my speaking though I am younger than any of you. I am by lineage son to a noble sire, Tydeus, who lies buried at Thebes. For Portheus had three noble sons, two of whom, Agrius and Melas, abode in Pleuron and rocky Calydon. The third was the knight Oeneus, my father's father, and he was the most valiant of them all. Oeeneus remained in his own country, but my father (as Jove and the other gods ordained it) migrated to Argos. He married into the family of Adrastus, and his house was one of great abundance, for he had large estates of rich corn-growing land, with much orchard ground as well, and he had many sheep; moreover he excelled all the Argives in the use of the spear. You must yourselves have heard whether these things are true or no; therefore when I say well despise not my words as though I were a coward or of ignoble birth. I say, then, let us go to the fight as we needs must, wounded though we be. When there, we may keep out of the battle and beyond the range of the spears lest we get fresh wounds in addition to what we have already, but we can spur on others, who have been indulging their spleen and holding aloof from battle hitherto." 

Thus did he speak; whereon they did even as he had said and set out, King Agamemnon leading the way. 

Meanwhile Neptune had kept no blind look-out, and came up to them in the semblance of an old man. He took Agamemnon's right hand in his own and said, "Son of Atreus, I take it Achilles is glad now that he sees the Achaeans routed and slain, for he is utterly without remorse- may he come to a bad end and heaven confound him. As for yourself, the blessed gods are not yet so bitterly angry with you but that the princes and counsellors of the Trojans shall again raise the dust upon the plain, and you shall see them flying from the ships and tents towards their city." 

With this he raised a mighty cry of battle, and sped forward to the plain. The voice that came from his deep chest was as that of nine or ten thousand men when they are shouting in the thick of a fight, and it put fresh courage into the hearts of the Achaeans to wage war and do battle without ceasing. 

Juno of the golden throne looked down as she stood upon a peak of Olympus and her heart was gladdened at the sight of him who was at once her brother and her brother-in-law, hurrying hither and thither amid the fighting. Then she turned her eyes to Jove as he sat on the topmost crests of many-fountained Ida, and loathed him. She set herself to think how she might hoodwink him, and in the end she deemed that it would be best for her to go to Ida and array herself in rich attire, in the hope that Jove might become enamoured of her, and wish to embrace her. While he was thus engaged a sweet and careless sleep might be made to steal over his eyes and senses. 

She went, therefore, to the room which her son Vulcan had made her, and the doors of which he had cunningly fastened by means of a secret key so that no other god could open them. Here she entered and closed the doors behind her. She cleansed all the dirt from her fair body with ambrosia, then she anointed herself with olive oil, ambrosial, very soft, and scented specially for herself- if it were so much as shaken in the bronze-floored house of Jove, the scent pervaded the universe of heaven and earth. With this she anointed her delicate skin, and then she plaited the fair ambrosial locks that flowed in a stream of golden tresses from her immortal head. She put on the wondrous robe which Minerva had worked for her with consummate art, and had embroidered with manifold devices; she fastened it about her bosom with golden clasps, and she girded herself with a girdle that had a hundred tassels: then she fastened her earrings, three brilliant pendants that glistened most beautifully, through the pierced lobes of her ears, and threw a lovely new veil over her head. She bound her sandals on to her feet, and when she had arrayed herself perfectly to her satisfaction, she left her room and called Venus to come aside and speak to her. "My dear child," said she, "will you do what I am going to ask of you, or will refuse me because you are angry at my being on the Danaan side, while you are on the Trojan?" 

Jove's daughter Venus answered, "Juno, august queen of goddesses, daughter of mighty Saturn, say what you want, and I will do it for at once, if I can, and if it can be done at all." 

Then Juno told her a lying tale and said, "I want you to endow me with some of those fascinating charms, the spells of which bring all things mortal and immortal to your feet. I am going to the world's end to visit Oceanus (from whom all we gods proceed) and mother Tethys: they received me in their house, took care of me, and brought me up, having taken me over from Rhaea when Jove imprisoned great Saturn in the depths that are under earth and sea. I must go and see them that I may make peace between them; they have been quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not slept with one another this long while; if I can bring them round and restore them to one another's embraces, they will be grateful to me and love me for ever afterwards." 

Thereon laughter-loving Venus said, "I cannot and must not refuse you, for you sleep in the arms of Jove who is our king." 

As she spoke she loosed from her bosom the curiously embroidered girdle into which all her charms had been wrought- love, desire, and that sweet flattery which steals the judgement even of the most prudent. She gave the girdle to Juno and said, "Take this girdle wherein all my charms reside and lay it in your bosom. If you will wear it I promise you that your errand, be it what it may, will not be bootless." 

When she heard this Juno smiled, and still smiling she laid the girdle in her bosom. 

Venus now went back into the house of Jove, while Juno darted down from the summits of Olympus. She passed over Pieria and fair Emathia, and went on and on till she came to the snowy ranges of the Thracian horsemen, over whose topmost crests she sped without ever setting foot to ground. When she came to Athos she went on over the, waves of the sea till she reached Lemnos, the city of noble Thoas. There she met Sleep, own brother to Death, and caught him by the hand, saying, "Sleep, you who lord it alike over mortals and immortals, if you ever did me a service in times past, do one for me now, and I shall be grateful to you ever after. Close Jove's keen eyes for me in slumber while I hold him clasped in my embrace, and I will give you a beautiful golden seat, that can never fall to pieces; my clubfooted son Vulcan shall make it for you, and he shall give it a footstool for you to rest your fair feet upon when you are at table." 

Then Sleep answered, "Juno, great queen of goddesses, daughter of mighty Saturn, I would lull any other of the gods to sleep without compunction, not even excepting the waters of Oceanus from whom all of them proceed, but I dare not go near Jove, nor send him to sleep unless he bids me. I have had one lesson already through doing what you asked me, on the day when Jove's mighty son Hercules set sail from Ilius after having sacked the city of the Trojans. At your bidding I suffused my sweet self over the mind of aegis-bearing Jove, and laid him to rest; meanwhile you hatched a plot against Hercules, and set the blasts of the angry winds beating upon the sea, till you took him to the goodly city of Cos away from all his friends. Jove was furious when he awoke, and began hurling the gods about all over the house; he was looking more particularly for myself, and would have flung me down through space into the sea where I should never have been heard of any more, had not Night who cows both men and gods protected me. I fled to her and Jove left off looking for me in spite of his being so angry, for he did not dare do anything to displease Night. And now you are again asking me to do something on which I cannot venture." 

And Juno said, "Sleep, why do you take such notions as those into your head? Do you think Jove will be as anxious to help the Trojans, as he was about his own son? Come, I will marry you to one of the youngest of the Graces, and she shall be your own- Pasithea, whom you have always wanted to marry." 

Sleep was pleased when he heard this, and answered, "Then swear it to me by the dread waters of the river Styx; lay one hand on the bounteous earth, and the other on the sheen of the sea, so that all the gods who dwell down below with Saturn may be our witnesses, and see that you really do give me one of the youngest of the Graces- Pasithea, whom I have always wanted to marry." 

Juno did as he had said. She swore, and invoked all the gods of the nether world, who are called Titans, to witness. When she had completed her oath, the two enshrouded themselves in a thick mist and sped lightly forward, leaving Lemnos and Imbrus behind them. Presently they reached many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, and Lectum where they left the sea to go on by land, and the tops of the trees of the forest soughed under the going of their feet. Here Sleep halted, and ere Jove caught sight of him he climbed a lofty pine-tree- the tallest that reared its head towards heaven on all Ida. He hid himself behind the branches and sat there in the semblance of the sweet-singing bird that haunts the mountains and is called Chalcis by the gods, but men call it Cymindis. Juno then went to Gargarus, the topmost peak of Ida, and Jove, driver of the clouds, set eyes upon her. As soon as he did so he became inflamed with the same passionate desire for her that he had felt when they had first enjoyed each other's embraces, and slept with one another without their dear parents knowing anything about it. He went up to her and said, "What do you want that you have come hither from Olympus- and that too with neither chariot nor horses to convey you?" 

Then Juno told him a lying tale and said, "I am going to the world's end, to visit Oceanus, from whom all we gods proceed, and mother Tethys; they received me into their house, took care of me, and brought me up. I must go and see them that I may make peace between them: they have been quarrelling, and are so angry that they have not slept with one another this long time. The horses that will take me over land and sea are stationed on the lowermost spurs of many-fountained Ida, and I have come here from Olympus on purpose to consult you. I was afraid you might be angry with me later on, if I went to the house of Oceanus without letting you know." 

And Jove said, "Juno, you can choose some other time for paying your visit to Oceanus- for the present let us devote ourselves to love and to the enjoyment of one another. Never yet have I been so overpowered by passion neither for goddess nor mortal woman as I am at this moment for yourself- not even when I was in love with the wife of Ixion who bore me Pirithous, peer of gods in counsel, nor yet with Danae the daintily-ancled daughter of Acrisius, who bore me the famed hero Perseus. Then there was the daughter of Phoenix, who bore me Minos and Rhadamanthus: there was Semele, and Alcmena in Thebes by whom I begot my lion-hearted son Hercules, while Semele became mother to Bacchus the comforter of mankind. There was queen Ceres again, and lovely Leto, and yourself- but with none of these was I ever so much enamoured as I now am with you." 

Juno again answered him with a lying tale. "Most dread son of Saturn," she exclaimed, "what are you talking about? Would you have us enjoy one another here on the top of Mount Ida, where everything can be seen? What if one of the ever-living gods should see us sleeping together, and tell the others? It would be such a scandal that when I had risen from your embraces I could never show myself inside your house again; but if you are so minded, there is a room which your son Vulcan has made me, and he has given it good strong doors; if you would so have it, let us go thither and lie down." 

And Jove answered, "Juno, you need not be afraid that either god or man will see you, for I will enshroud both of us in such a dense golden cloud, that the very sun for all his bright piercing beams shall not see through it." 

With this the son of Saturn caught his wife in his embrace; whereon the earth sprouted them a cushion of young grass, with dew-bespangled lotus, crocus, and hyacinth, so soft and thick that it raised them well above the ground. Here they laid themselves down and overhead they were covered by a fair cloud of gold, from which there fell glittering dew-drops. 

Thus, then, did the sire of all things repose peacefully on the crest of Ida, overcome at once by sleep and love, and he held his spouse in his arms. Meanwhile Sleep made off to the ships of the Achaeans, to tell earth-encircling Neptune, lord of the earthquake. When he had found him he said, "Now, Neptune, you can help the Danaans with a will, and give them victory though it be only for a short time while Jove is still sleeping. I have sent him into a sweet slumber, and Juno has beguiled him into going to bed with her." 

Sleep now departed and went his ways to and fro among mankind, leaving Neptune more eager than ever to help the Danaans. He darted forward among the first ranks and shouted saying, "Argives, shall we let Hector son of Priam have the triumph of taking our ships and covering himself with glory? This is what he says that he shall now do, seeing that Achilles is still in dudgeon at his ship; We shall get on very well without him if we keep each other in heart and stand by one another. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say. Let us each take the best and largest shield we can lay hold of, put on our helmets, and sally forth with our longest spears in our hands; will lead you on, and Hector son of Priam, rage as he may, will not dare to hold out against us. If any good staunch soldier has only a small shield, let him hand it over to a worse man, and take a larger one for himself." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. The son of Tydeus, Ulysses, and Agamemnon, wounded though they were, set the others in array, and went about everywhere effecting the exchanges of armour; the most valiant took the best armour, and gave the worse to the worse man. When they had donned their bronze armour they marched on with Neptune at their head. In his strong hand he grasped his terrible sword, keen of edge and flashing like lightning; woe to him who comes across it in the day of battle; all men quake for fear and keep away from it. 

Hector on the other side set the Trojans in array. Thereon Neptune and Hector waged fierce war on one another- Hector on the Trojan and Neptune on the Argive side. Mighty was the uproar as the two forces met; the sea came rolling in towards the ships and tents of the Achaeans, but waves do not thunder on the shore more loudly when driven before the blast of Boreas, nor do the flames of a forest fire roar more fiercely when it is well alight upon the mountains, nor does the wind bellow with ruder music as it tears on through the tops of when it is blowing its hardest, than the terrible shout which the Trojans and Achaeans raised as they sprang upon one another. 

Hector first aimed his spear at Ajax, who was turned full towards him, nor did he miss his aim. The spear struck him where two bands passed over his chest- the band of his shield and that of his silver-studded sword- and these protected his body. Hector was angry that his spear should have been hurled in vain, and withdrew under cover of his men. As he was thus retreating, Ajax son of Telamon struck him with a stone, of which there were many lying about under the men's feet as they fought- brought there to give support to the ships' sides as they lay on the shore. Ajax caught up one of them and struck Hector above the rim of his shield close to his neck; the blow made him spin round like a top and reel in all directions. As an oak falls headlong when uprooted by the lightning flash of father Jove, and there is a terrible smell of brimstone- no man can help being dismayed if he is standing near it, for a thunderbolt is a very awful thing- even so did Hector fall to earth and bite the dust. His spear fell from his hand, but his shield and helmet were made fast about his body, and his bronze armour rang about him. 

The sons of the Achaeans came running with a loud cry towards him, hoping to drag him away, and they showered their darts on the Trojans, but none of them could wound him before he was surrounded and covered by the princes Polydamas, Aeneas, Agenor, Sarpedon captain of the Lycians, and noble Glaucus: of the others, too, there was not one who was unmindful of him, and they held their round shields over him to cover him. His comrades then lifted him off the ground and bore him away from the battle to the place where his horses stood waiting for him at the rear of the fight with their driver and the chariot; these then took him towards the city groaning and in great pain. When they reached the ford of the air stream of Xanthus, begotten of Immortal Jove, they took him from off his chariot and laid him down on the ground; they poured water over him, and as they did so he breathed again and opened his eyes. Then kneeling on his knees he vomited blood, but soon fell back on to the ground, and his eyes were again closed in darkness for he was still sturined by the blow. 

When the Argives saw Hector leaving the field, they took heart and set upon the Trojans yet more furiously. Ajax fleet son of Oileus began by springing on Satnius son of Enops and wounding him with his spear: a fair naiad nymph had borne him to Enops as he was herding cattle by the banks of the river Satnioeis. The son of Oileus came up to him and struck him in the flank so that he fell, and a fierce fight between Trojans and Danaans raged round his body. Polydamas son of Panthous drew near to avenge him, and wounded Prothoenor son of Areilycus on the right shoulder; the terrible spear went right through his shoulder, and he clutched the earth as he fell in the dust. Polydamas vaunted loudly over him saying, "Again I take it that the spear has not sped in vain from the strong hand of the son of Panthous; an Argive has caught it in his body, and it will serve him for a staff as he goes down into the house of Hades." 

The Argives were maddened by this boasting. Ajax son of Telamon was more angry than any, for the man had fallen close be, him; so he aimed at Polydamas as he was retreating, but Polydamas saved himself by swerving aside and the spear struck Archelochus son of Antenor, for heaven counselled his destruction; it struck him where the head springs from the neck at the top joint of the spine, and severed both the tendons at the back of the head. His head, mouth, and nostrils reached the ground long before his legs and knees could do so, and Ajax shouted to Polydamas saying, "Think, Polydamas, and tell me truly whether this man is not as well worth killing as Prothoenor was: he seems rich, and of rich family, a brother, it may be, or son of the knight Antenor, for he is very like him." 

But he knew well who it was, and the Trojans were greatly angered. Acamas then bestrode his brother's body and wounded Promachus the Boeotian with his spear, for he was trying to drag his brother's body away. Acamas vaunted loudly over him saying, "Argive archers, braggarts that you are, toil and suffering shall not be for us only, but some of you too shall fall here as well as ourselves. See how Promachus now sleeps, vanquished by my spear; payment for my brother's blood has not long delayed; a man, therefore, may well be thankful if he leaves a kinsman in his house behind him to avenge his fall." 

His taunts infuriated the Argives, and Peneleos was more enraged than any of them. He sprang towards Acamas, but Acamas did not stand his ground, and he killed Ilioneus son of the rich flock-master Phorbas, whom Mercury had favoured and endowed with greater wealth than any other of the Trojans. Ilioneus was his only son, and Peneleos now wounded him in the eye under his eyebrows, tearing the eye-ball from its socket: the spear went right through the eye into the nape of the neck, and he fell, stretching out both hands before him. Peneleos then drew his sword and smote him on the neck, so that both head and helmet came tumbling down to the ground with the spear still sticking in the eye; he then held up the head, as though it had been a poppy-head, and showed it to the Trojans, vaunting over them as he did so. "Trojans," he cried, "bid the father and mother of noble Ilioneus make moan for him in their house, for the wife also of Promachus son of Alegenor will never be gladdened by the coming of her dear husband- when we Argives return with our ships from Troy." 

As he spoke fear fell upon them, and every man looked round about to see whither he might fly for safety. 

Tell me now, O Muses that dwell on Olympus, who was the first of the Argives to bear away blood-stained spoils after Neptune lord of the earthquake had turned the fortune of war. Ajax son of Telamon was first to wound Hyrtius son of Gyrtius, captain of the staunch Mysians. Antilochus killed Phalces and Mermerus, while Meriones slew Morys and Hippotion, Teucer also killed Prothoon and Periphetes. The son of Atreus then wounded Hyperenor shepherd of his people, in the flank, and the bronze point made his entrails gush out as it tore in among them; on this his life came hurrying out of him at the place where he had been wounded, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Ajax son of Oileus killed more than any other, for there was no man so fleet as he to pursue flying foes when Jove had spread panic among them. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XV

BUT when their flight had taken them past the trench and the set stakes, and many had fallen by the hands of the Danaans, the Trojans made a halt on reaching their chariots, routed and pale with fear. Jove now woke on the crests of Ida, where he was lying with golden-throned Juno by his side, and starting to his feet he saw the Trojans and Achaeans, the one thrown into confusion, and the others driving them pell-mell before them with King Neptune in their midst. He saw Hector lying on the ground with his comrades gathered round him, gasping for breath, wandering in mind and vomiting blood, for it was not the feeblest of the Achaeans who struck him. 

The sire of gods and men had pity on him, and looked fiercely on Juno. "I see, Juno," said he, "you mischief- making trickster, that your cunning has stayed Hector from fighting and has caused the rout of his host. I am in half a mind to thrash you, in which case you will be the first to reap the fruits of your scurvy knavery. Do you not remember how once upon a time I had you hanged? I fastened two anvils on to your feet, and bound your hands in a chain of gold which none might break, and you hung in mid-air among the clouds. All the gods in Olympus were in a fury, but they could not reach you to set you free; when I caught any one of them I gripped him and hurled him from the heavenly threshold till he came fainting down to earth; yet even this did not relieve my mind from the incessant anxiety which I felt about noble Hercules whom you and Boreas had spitefully conveyed beyond the seas to Cos, after suborning the tempests; but I rescued him, and notwithstanding all his mighty labours I brought him back again to Argos. I would remind you of this that you may learn to leave off being so deceitful, and discover how much you are likely to gain by the embraces out of which you have come here to trick me." 

Juno trembled as he spoke, and said, "May heaven above and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx- and this is the most solemn oath that a blessed god can take- nay, I swear also by your own almighty head and by our bridal bed- things over which I could never possibly perjure myself- that Neptune is not punishing Hector and the Trojans and helping the Achaeans through any doing of mine; it is all of his own mere motion because he was sorry to see the Achaeans hard pressed at their ships: if I were advising him, I should tell him to do as you bid him." 

The sire of gods and men smiled and answered, "If you, Juno, were always to support me when we sit in council of the gods, Neptune, like it or no, would soon come round to your and my way of thinking. If, then, you are speaking the truth and mean what you say, go among the rank and file of the gods, and tell Iris and Apollo lord of the bow, that I want them- Iris, that she may go to the Achaean host and tell Neptune to leave off fighting and go home, and Apollo, that he may send Hector again into battle and give him fresh strength; he will thus forget his present sufferings, and drive the Achaeans back in confusion till they fall among the ships of Achilles son of Peleus. Achilles will then send his comrade Patroclus into battle, and Hector will kill him in front of Ilius after he has slain many warriors, and among them my own noble son Sarpedon. Achilles will kill Hector to avenge Patroclus, and from that time I will bring it about that the Achaeans shall persistently drive the Trojans back till they fulfil the counsels of Minerva and take Ilius. But I will not stay my anger, nor permit any god to help the Danaans till I have accomplished the desire of the son of Peleus, according to the promise I made by bowing my head on the day when Thetis touched my knees and besought me to give him honour." 

Juno heeded his words and went from the heights of Ida to great Olympus. Swift as the thought of one whose fancy carries him over vast continents, and he says to himself, "Now I will be here, or there," and he would have all manner of things- even so swiftly did Juno wing her way till she came to high Olympus and went in among the gods who were gathered in the house of Jove. When they saw her they all of them came up to her, and held out their cups to her by way of greeting. She let the others be, but took the cup offered her by lovely Themis, who was first to come running up to her. "Juno," said she, "why are you here? And you seem troubled- has your husband the son of Saturn been frightening you?" 

And Juno answered, "Themis, do not ask me about it. You know what a proud and cruel disposition my husband has. Lead the gods to table, where you and all the immortals can hear the wicked designs which he has avowed. Many a one, mortal and immortal, will be angered by them, however peaceably he may be feasting now." 

On this Juno sat down, and the gods were troubled throughout the house of Jove. Laughter sat on her lips but her brow was furrowed with care, and she spoke up in a rage. "Fools that we are," she cried, "to be thus madly angry with Jove; we keep on wanting to go up to him and stay him by force or by persuasion, but he sits aloof and cares for nobody, for he knows that he is much stronger than any other of the immortals. Make the best, therefore, of whatever ills he may choose to send each one of you; Mars, I take it, has had a taste of them already, for his son Ascalaphus has fallen in battle- the man whom of all others he loved most dearly and whose father he owns himself to be." 

When he heard this Mars smote his two sturdy thighs with the flat of his hands, and said in anger, "Do not blame me, you gods that dwell in heaven, if I go to the ships of the Achaeans and avenge the death of my son, even though it end in my being struck by Jove's lightning and lying in blood and dust among the corpses." 

As he spoke he gave orders to yoke his horses Panic and Rout, while he put on his armour. On this, Jove would have been roused to still more fierce and implacable enmity against the other immortals, had not Minerva, ararmed for the safety of the gods, sprung from her seat and hurried outside. She tore the helmet from his head and the shield from his shoulders, and she took the bronze spear from his strong hand and set it on one side; then she said to Mars, "Madman, you are undone; you have ears that hear not, or you have lost all judgement and understanding; have you not heard what Juno has said on coming straight from the presence of Olympian Jove? Do you wish to go through all kinds of suffering before you are brought back sick and sorry to Olympus, after having caused infinite mischief to all us others? Jove would instantly leave the Trojans and Achaeans to themselves; he would come to Olympus to punish us, and would grip us up one after another, guilty or not guilty. Therefore lay aside your anger for the death of your son; better men than he have either been killed already or will fall hereafter, and one cannot protect every one's whole family." 

With these words she took Mars back to his seat. Meanwhile Juno called Apollo outside, with Iris the messenger of the gods. "Jove," she said to them, "desires you to go to him at once on Mt. Ida; when you have seen him you are to do as he may then bid you." 

Thereon Juno left them and resumed her seat inside, while Iris and Apollo made all haste on their way. When they reached many-fountained Ida, mother of wild beasts, they found Jove seated on topmost Gargarus with a fragrant cloud encircling his head as with a diadem. They stood before his presence, and he was pleased with them for having been so quick in obeying the orders his wife had given them. 

He spoke to Iris first. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, tell King Neptune what I now bid you- and tell him true. Bid him leave off fighting, and either join the company of the gods, or go down into the sea. If he takes no heed and disobeys me, let him consider well whether he is strong enough to hold his own against me if I attack him. I am older and much stronger than he is; yet he is not afraid to set himself up as on a level with myself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe." 

Iris, fleet as the wind, obeyed him, and as the cold hail or snowflakes that fly from out the clouds before the blast of Boreas, even so did she wing her way till she came close up to the great shaker of the earth. Then she said, "I have come, O dark-haired king that holds the world in his embrace, to bring you a message from Jove. He bids you leave off fighting, and either join the company of the gods or go down into the sea; if, however, you take no heed and disobey him, he says he will come down here and fight you. He would have you keep out of his reach, for he is older and much stronger than you are, and yet you are not afraid to set yourself up as on a level with himself, of whom all the other gods stand in awe." 

Neptune was very angry and said, "Great heavens! strong as Jove may be, he has said more than he can do if he has threatened violence against me, who am of like honour with himself. We were three brothers whom Rhea bore to Saturn- Jove, myself, and Hades who rules the world below. Heaven and earth were divided into three parts, and each of us was to have an equal share. When we cast lots, it fell to me to have my dwelling in the sea for evermore; Hades took the darkness of the realms under the earth, while air and sky and clouds were the portion that fell to Jove; but earth and great Olympus are the common property of all. Therefore I will not walk as Jove would have me. For all his strength, let him keep to his own third share and be contented without threatening to lay hands upon me as though I were nobody. Let him keep his bragging talk for his own sons and daughters, who must perforce obey him. 

Iris fleet as the wind then answered, "Am I really, Neptune, to take this daring and unyielding message to Jove, or will you reconsider your answer? Sensible people are open to argument, and you know that the Erinyes always range themselves on the side of the older person." 

Neptune answered, "Goddess Iris, your words have been spoken in season. It is well when a messenger shows so much discretion. Nevertheless it cuts me to the very heart that any one should rebuke so angrily another who is his own peer, and of like empire with himself. Now, however, I will give way in spite of my displeasure; furthermore let me tell you, and I mean what I say- if contrary to the desire of myself, Minerva driver of the spoil, Juno, Mercury, and King Vulcan, Jove spares steep Ilius, and will not let the Achaeans have the great triumph of sacking it, let him understand that he will incur our implacable resentment." 

Neptune now left the field to go down under the sea, and sorely did the Achaeans miss him. Then Jove said to Apollo, "Go, dear Phoebus, to Hector, for Neptune who holds the earth in his embrace has now gone down under the sea to avoid the severity of my displeasure. Had he not done so those gods who are below with Saturn would have come to hear of the fight between us. It is better for both of us that he should have curbed his anger and kept out of my reach, for I should have had much trouble with him. Take, then, your tasselled aegis, and shake it furiously, so as to set the Achaean heroes in a panic; take, moreover, brave Hector, O Far-Darter, into your own care, and rouse him to deeds of daring, till the Achaeans are sent flying back to their ships and to the Hellespont. From that point I will think it well over, how the Achaeans may have a respite from their troubles." 

Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and left the crests of Ida, flying like a falcon, bane of doves and swiftest of all birds. He found Hector no longer lying upon the ground, but sitting up, for he had just come to himself again. He knew those who were about him, and the sweat and hard breathing had left him from the moment when the will of aegis-bearing Jove had revived him. Apollo stood beside him and said, "Hector, son of Priam, why are you so faint, and why are you here away from the others? Has any mishap befallen you?" 

Hector in a weak voice answered, "And which, kind sir, of the gods are you, who now ask me thus? Do you not know that Ajax struck me on the chest with a stone as I was killing his comrades at the ships of the Achaeans, and compelled me to leave off fighting? I made sure that this very day I should breathe my last and go down into the house of Hades." 

Then King Apollo said to him, "Take heart; the son of Saturn has sent you a mighty helper from Ida to stand by you and defend you, even me, Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, who have been guardian hitherto not only of yourself but of your city. Now, therefore, order your horsemen to drive their chariots to the ships in great multitudes. I will go before your horses to smooth the way for them, and will turn the Achaeans in flight." 

As he spoke he infused great strength into the shepherd of his people. And as a horse, stabled and full-fed, breaks loose and gallops gloriously over the plain to the place where he is wont to take his bath in the river- he tosses his head, and his mane streams over his shoulders as in all the pride of his strength he flies full speed to the pastures where the mares are feeding- even so Hector, when he heard what the god said, urged his horsemen on, and sped forward as fast as his limbs could take him. As country peasants set their hounds on to a homed stag or wild goat- he has taken shelter under rock or thicket, and they cannot find him, but, lo, a bearded lion whom their shouts have roused stands in their path, and they are in no further humour for the chase- even so the Achaeans were still charging on in a body, using their swords and spears pointed at both ends, but when they saw Hector going about among his men they were afraid, and their hearts fell down into their feet. 

Then spoke Thoas son of Andraemon, leader of the Aetolians, a man who could throw a good throw, and who was staunch also in close fight, while few could surpass him in debate when opinions were divided. He then with all sincerity and goodwill addressed them thus: "What, in heaven's name, do I now see? Is it not Hector come to life again? Every one made sure he had been killed by Ajax son of Telamon, but it seems that one of the gods has again rescued him. He has killed many of us Danaans already, and I take it will yet do so, for the hand of Jove must be with him or he would never dare show himself so masterful in the forefront of the battle. Now, therefore, let us all do as I say; let us order the main body of our forces to fall back upon the ships, but let those of us who profess to be the flower of the army stand firm, and see whether we cannot hold Hector back at the point of our spears as soon as he comes near us; I conceive that he will then think better of it before he tries to charge into the press of the Danaans." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. Those who were about Ajax and King Idomeneus, the followers moreover of Teucer, Meriones, and Meges peer of Mars called all their best men about them and sustained the fight against Hector and the Trojans, but the main body fell back upon the ships of the Achaeans. 

The Trojans pressed forward in a dense body, with Hector striding on at their head. Before him went Phoebus Apollo shrouded in cloud about his shoulders. He bore aloft the terrible aegis with its shaggy fringe, which Vulcan the smith had given Jove to strike terror into the hearts of men. With this in his hand he led on the Trojans. 

The Argives held together and stood their ground. The cry of battle rose high from either side, and the arrows flew from the bowstrings. Many a spear sped from strong hands and fastened in the bodies of many a valiant warrior, while others fell to earth midway, before they could taste of man's fair flesh and glut themselves with blood. So long as Phoebus Apollo held his aegis quietly and without shaking it, the weapons on either side took effect and the people fell, but when he shook it straight in the face of the Danaans and raised his mighty battle-cry their hearts fainted within them and they forgot their former prowess. As when two wild beasts spring in the dead of night on a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep when the herdsman is not there- even so were the Danaans struck helpless, for Apollo filled them with panic and gave victory to Hector and the Trojans. 

The fight then became more scattered and they killed one another where they best could. Hector killed Stichius and Arcesilaus, the one, leader of the Boeotians, and the other, friend and comrade of Menestheus. Aeneas killed Medon and Iasus. The first was bastard son to Oileus, and brother to Ajax, but he lived in Phylace away from his own country, for he had killed a man, a kinsman of his stepmother Eriopis whom Oileus had married. Iasus had become a leader of the Athenians, and was son of Sphelus the son of Boucolos. Polydamas killed Mecisteus, and Polites Echius, in the front of the battle, while Agenor slew Clonius. Paris struck Deiochus from behind in the lower part of the shoulder, as he was flying among the foremost, and the point of the spear went clean through him. 

While they were spoiling these heroes of their armour, the Achaeans were flying pellmell to the trench and the set stakes, and were forced back within their wall. Hector then cried out to the Trojans, "Forward to the ships, and let the spoils be. If I see any man keeping back on the other side the wall away from the ships I will have him killed: his kinsmen and kinswomen shall not give him his dues of fire, but dogs shall tear him in pieces in front of our city." 

As he spoke he laid his whip about his horses' shoulders and called to the Trojans throughout their ranks; the Trojans shouted with a cry that rent the air, and kept their horses neck and neck with his own. Phoebus Apollo went before, and kicked down the banks of the deep trench into its middle so as to make a great broad bridge, as broad as the throw of a spear when a man is trying his strength. The Trojan battalions poured over the bridge, and Apollo with his redoubtable aegis led the way. He kicked down the wall of the Achaeans as easily as a child who playing on the sea-shore has built a house of sand and then kicks it down again and destroys it- even so did you, O Apollo, shed toil and trouble upon the Argives, filling them with panic and confusion. 

Thus then were the Achaeans hemmed in at their ships, calling out to one another and raising their hands with loud cries every man to heaven. Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, lifted up his hands to the starry firmament of heaven, and prayed more fervently than any of them. "Father Jove," said he, "if ever any one in wheat-growing Argos burned you fat thigh-bones of sheep or heifer and prayed that he might return safely home, whereon you bowed your head to him in assent, bear it in mind now, and suffer not the Trojans to triumph thus over the Achaeans." 

All counselling Jove thundered loudly in answer to die prayer of the aged son of Neleus. When the heard Jove thunder they flung themselves yet more fiercely on the Achaeans. As a wave breaking over the bulwarks of a ship when the sea runs high before a gale- for it is the force of the wind that makes the waves so great- even so did the Trojans spring over the wall with a shout, and drive their chariots onwards. The two sides fought with their double-pointed spears in hand-to-hand encounter-the Trojans from their chariots, and the Achaeans climbing up into their ships and wielding the long pikes that were lying on the decks ready for use in a sea-fight, jointed and shod with bronze. 

Now Patroclus, so long as the Achaeans and Trojans were fighting about the wall, but were not yet within it and at the ships, remained sitting in the tent of good Eurypylus, entertaining him with his conversation and spreading herbs over his wound to ease his pain. When, however, he saw the Trojans swarming through the breach in the wall, while the Achaeans were clamouring and struck with panic, he cried aloud, and smote his two thighs with the flat of his hands. "Eurypylus," said he in his dismay, "I know you want me badly, but I cannot stay with you any longer, for there is hard fighting going on; a servant shall take care of you now, for I must make all speed to Achilles, and induce him to fight if I can; who knows but with heaven's help I may persuade him. A man does well to listen to the advice of a friend." 

When he had thus spoken he went his way. The Achaeans stood firm and resisted the attack of the Trojans, yet though these were fewer in number, they could not drive them back from the ships, neither could the Trojans break the Achaean ranks and make their way in among the tents and ships. As a carpenter's line gives a true edge to a piece of ship's timber, in the hand of some skilled workman whom Minerva has instructed in all kinds of useful arts- even so level was the issue of the fight between the two sides, as they fought some round one and some round another. 

Hector made straight for Ajax, and the two fought fiercely about the same ship. Hector could not force Ajax back and fire the ship, nor yet could Ajax drive Hector from the spot to which heaven had brought him. 

Then Ajax struck Caletor son of Clytius in the chest with a spear as he was bringing fire towards the ship. He fell heavily to the ground and the torch dropped from his hand. When Hector saw his cousin fallen in front of the ship he shouted to the Trojans and Lycians saying, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close fight, bate not a jot, but rescue the son of Clytius lest the Achaeans strip him of his armour now that he has fallen." 

He then aimed a spear at Ajax, and missed him, but he hit Lycophron a follower of Ajax, who came from Cythera, but was living with Ajax inasmuch as he had killed a man among the Cythereans. Hector's spear struck him on the head below the ear, and he fell headlong from the ship's prow on to the ground with no life left in him. Ajax shook with rage and said to his brother, "Teucer, my good fellow, our trusty comrade the son of Mastor has fallen, he came to live with us from Cythera and whom we honoured as much as our own parents. Hector has just killed him; fetch your deadly arrows at once and the bow which Phoebus Apollo gave you." 

Teucer heard him and hastened towards him with his bow and quiver in his hands. Forthwith he showered his arrows on the Trojans, and hit Cleitus the son of Pisenor, comrade of Polydamas the noble son of Panthous, with the reins in his hands as he was attending to his horses; he was in the middle of the very thickest part of the fight, doing good service to Hector and the Trojans, but evil had now come upon him, and not one of those who were fain to do so could avert it, for the arrow struck him on the back of the neck. He fell from his chariot and his horses shook the empty car as they swerved aside. King Polydamas saw what had happened, and was the first to come up to the horses; he gave them in charge to Astynous son of Protiaon, and ordered him to look on, and to keep the horses near at hand. He then went back and took his place in the front ranks. 

Teucer then aimed another arrow at Hector, and there would have been no more fighting at the ships if he had hit him and killed him then and there: Jove, however, who kept watch over Hector, had his eyes on Teucer, and deprived him of his triumph, by breaking his bowstring for him just as he was drawing it and about to take his aim; on this the arrow went astray and the bow fell from his hands. Teucer shook with anger and said to his brother, "Alas, see how heaven thwarts us in all we do; it has broken my bowstring and snatched the bow from my hand, though I strung it this selfsame morning that it might serve me for many an arrow." 

Ajax son of Telamon answered, "My good fellow, let your bow and your arrows be, for Jove has made them useless in order to spite the Danaans. Take your spear, lay your shield upon your shoulder, and both fight the Trojans yourself and urge others to do so. They may be successful for the moment but if we fight as we ought they will find it a hard matter to take the ships." 

Teucer then took his bow and put it by in his tent. He hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders, and on his comely head he set his helmet well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it; he grasped his redoubtable bronze-shod spear, and forthwith he was by the side of Ajax. 

When Hector saw that Teucer's bow was of no more use to him, he shouted out to the Trojans and Lycians, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians good in close fight, be men, my friends, and show your mettle here at the ships, for I see the weapon of one of their chieftains made useless by the hand of Jove. It is easy to see when Jove is helping people and means to help them still further, or again when he is bringing them down and will do nothing for them; he is now on our side, and is going against the Argives. Therefore swarm round the ships and fight. If any of you is struck by spear or sword and loses his life, let him die; he dies with honour who dies fighting for his country; and he will leave his wife and children safe behind him, with his house and allotment unplundered if only the Achaeans can be driven back to their own land, they and their ships." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Ajax on the other side exhorted his comrades saying, "Shame on you Argives, we are now utterly undone, unless we can save ourselves by driving the enemy from our ships. Do you think, if Hector takes them, that you will be able to get home by land? Can you not hear him cheering on his whole host to fire our fleet, and bidding them remember that they are not at a dance but in battle? Our only course is to fight them with might and main; we had better chance it, life or death, once for all, than fight long and without issue hemmed in at our ships by worse men than ourselves." 

With these words he put life and soul into them all. Hector then killed Schedius son of Perimedes, leader of the Phoceans, and Ajax killed Laodamas captain of foot soldiers and son to Antenor. Polydamas killed Otus of Cyllene a comrade of the son of Phyleus and chief of the proud Epeans. When Meges saw this he sprang upon him, but Polydamas crouched down, and he missed him, for Apollo would not suffer the son of Panthous to fall in battle; but the spear hit Croesmus in the middle of his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and Meges stripped him of his armour. At that moment the valiant soldier Dolops son of Lampus sprang upon Lampus was son of Laomedon and for his valour, while his son Dolops was versed in all the ways of war. He then struck the middle of the son of Phyleus' shield with his spear, setting on him at close quarters, but his good corslet made with plates of metal saved him; Phyleus had brought it from Ephyra and the river Selleis, where his host, King Euphetes, had given it him to wear in battle and protect him. It now served to save the life of his son. Then Meges struck the topmost crest of Dolops's bronze helmet with his spear and tore away its plume of horse-hair, so that all newly dyed with scarlet as it was it tumbled down into the dust. While he was still fighting and confident of victory, Menelaus came up to help Meges, and got by the side of Dolops unperceived; he then speared him in the shoulder, from behind, and the point, driven so furiously, went through into his chest, whereon he fell headlong. The two then made towards him to strip him of his armour, but Hector called on all his brothers for help, and he especially upbraided brave Melanippus son of Hiketaon, who erewhile used to pasture his herds of cattle in Percote before the war broke out; but when the ships of the Danaans came, he went back to Ilius, where he was eminent among the Trojans, and lived near Priam who treated him as one of his own sons. Hector now rebuked him and said, "Why, Melanippus, are we thus remiss? do you take no note of the death of your kinsman, and do you not see how they are trying to take Dolops's armour? Follow me; there must be no fighting the Argives from a distance now, but we must do so in close combat till either we kill them or they take the high wall of Ilius and slay her people." 

He led on as he spoke, and the hero Melanippus followed after. Meanwhile Ajax son of Telamon was cheering on the Argives. "My friends," he cried, "be men, and fear dishonour; quit yourselves in battle so as to win respect from one another. Men who respect each other's good opinion are less likely to be killed than those who do not, but in flight there is neither gain nor glory." 

Thus did he exhort men who were already bent upon driving back the Trojans. They laid his words to heart and hedged the ships as with a wall of bronze, while Jove urged on the Trojans. Menelaus of the loud battle-cry urged Antilochus on. "Antilochus," said he, "you are young and there is none of the Achaeans more fleet of foot or more valiant than you are. See if you cannot spring upon some Trojan and kill him." 

He hurried away when he had thus spurred Antilochus, who at once darted out from the front ranks and aimed a spear, after looking carefully round him. The Trojans fell back as he threw, and the dart did not speed from his hand without effect, for it struck Melanippus the proud son of Hiketaon in the breast by the nipple as he was coming forward, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Antilochus sprang upon him as a dog springs on a fawn which a hunter has hit as it was breaking away from its covert, and killed it. Even so, O Melanippus, did stalwart Antilochus spring upon you to strip you of your armour; but noble Hector marked him, and came running up to him through the thick of the battle. Antilochus, brave soldier though he was, would not stay to face him, but fled like some savage creature which knows it has done wrong, and flies, when it has killed a dog or a man who is herding his cattle, before a body of men can be gathered to attack it. Even so did the son of Nestor fly, and the Trojans and Hector with a cry that rent the air showered their weapons after him; nor did he turn round and stay his flight till he had reached his comrades. 

The Trojans, fierce as lions, were still rushing on towards the ships in fulfilment of the behests of Jove who kept spurring them on to new deeds of daring, while he deadened the courage of the Argives and defeated them by encouraging the Trojans. For he meant giving glory to Hector son of Priam, and letting him throw fire upon the ships, till he had fulfilled the unrighteous prayer that Thetis had made him; Jove, therefore, bided his time till he should see the glare of a blazing ship. From that hour he was about so to order that the Trojans should be driven back from the ships and to vouchsafe glory to the Achaeans. With this purpose he inspired Hector son of Priam, who was cager enough already, to assail the ships. His fury was as that of Mars, or as when a fire is raging in the glades of some dense forest upon the mountains; he foamed at the mouth, his eyes glared under his terrible eye-brows, and his helmet quivered on his temples by reason of the fury with which he fought. Jove from heaven was with him, and though he was but one against many, vouchsafed him victory and glory; for he was doomed to an early death, and already Pallas Minerva was hurrying on the hour of his destruction at the hands of the son of Peleus. Now, however, he kept trying to break the ranks of the enemy wherever he could see them thickest, and in the goodliest armour; but do what he might he could not break through them, for they stood as a tower foursquare, or as some high cliff rising from the grey sea that braves the anger of the gale, and of the waves that thunder up against it. He fell upon them like flames of fire from every quarter. As when a wave, raised mountain high by wind and storm, breaks over a ship and covers it deep in foam, the fierce winds roar against the mast, the hearts of the sailors fail them for fear, and they are saved but by a very little from destruction- even so were the hearts of the Achaeans fainting within them. Or as a savage lion attacking a herd of cows while they are feeding by thousands in the low-lying meadows by some wide-watered shore- the herdsman is at his wit's end how to protect his herd and keeps going about now in the van and now in the rear of his cattle, while the lion springs into the thick of them and fastens on a cow so that they all tremble for fear- even so were the Achaeans utterly panic-stricken by Hector and father Jove. Nevertheless Hector only killed Periphetes of Mycenae; he was son of Copreus who was wont to take the orders of King Eurystheus to mighty Hercules, but the son was a far better man than the father in every way; he was fleet of foot, a valiant warrior, and in understanding ranked among the foremost men of Mycenae. He it was who then afforded Hector a triumph, for as he was turning back he stumbled against the rim of his shield which reached his feet, and served to keep the javelins off him. He tripped against this and fell face upward, his helmet ringing loudly about his head as he did so. Hector saw him fall and ran up to him; he then thrust a spear into his chest, and killed him close to his own comrades. These, for all their sorrow, could not help him for they were themselves terribly afraid of Hector. 

They had now reached the ships and the prows of those that had been drawn up first were on every side of them, but the Trojans came pouring after them. The Argives were driven back from the first row of ships, but they made a stand by their tents without being broken up and scattered; shame and fear restrained them. They kept shouting incessantly to one another, and Nestor of Gerene, tower of strength to the Achaeans, was loudest in imploring every man by his parents, and beseeching him to stand firm. 

"Be men, my friends," he cried, "and respect one another's good opinion. Think, all of you, on your children, your wives, your property, and your parents whether these be alive or dead. On their behalf though they are not here, I implore you to stand firm, and not to turn in flight." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all. Minerva lifted the thick veil of darkness from their eyes, and much light fell upon them, alike on the side of the ships and on that where the fight was raging. They could see Hector and all his men, both those in the rear who were taking no part in the battle, and those who were fighting by the ships. 

Ajax could not bring himself to retreat along with the rest, but strode from deck to deck with a great sea-pike in his hands twelve cubits long and jointed with rings. As a man skilled in feats of horsemanship couples four horses together and comes tearing full speed along the public way from the country into some large town- many both men and women marvel as they see him for he keeps all the time changing his horse, springing from one to another without ever missing his feet while the horses are at a gallop- even so did Ajax go striding from one ship's deck to another, and his voice went up into the heavens. He kept on shouting his orders to the Danaans and exhorting them to defend their ships and tents; neither did Hector remain within the main body of the Trojan warriors, but as a dun eagle swoops down upon a flock of wild-fowl feeding near a river-geese, it may be, or cranes, or long-necked swans- even so did Hector make straight for a dark-prowed ship, rushing right towards it; for Jove with his mighty hand impelled him forward, and roused his people to follow him. 

And now the battle again raged furiously at the ships. You would have thought the men were coming on fresh and unwearied, so fiercely did they fight; and this was the mind in which they were- the Achaeans did not believe they should escape destruction but thought themselves doomed, while there was not a Trojan but his heart beat high with the hope of firing the ships and putting the Achaean heroes to the sword. 

Thus were the two sides minded. Then Hector seized the stern of the good ship that had brought Protesilaus to Troy, but never bore him back to his native land. Round this ship there raged a close hand-to-hand fight between Danaans and Trojans. They did not fight at a distance with bows and javelins, but with one mind hacked at one another in close combat with their mighty swords and spears pointed at both ends; they fought moreover with keen battle-axes and with hatchets. Many a good stout blade hilted and scabbarded with iron, fell from hand or shoulder as they fought, and the earth ran red with blood. Hector, when he had seized the ship, would not loose his hold but held on to its curved stern and shouted to the Trojans, "Bring fire, and raise the battle-cry all of you with a single voice. Now has Jove vouchsafed us a day that will pay us for all the rest; this day we shall take the ships which came hither against heaven's will, and which have caused us such infinite suffering through the cowardice of our councillors, who when I would have done battle at the ships held me back and forbade the host to follow me; if Jove did then indeed warp our judgements, himself now commands me and cheers me on." 

As he spoke thus the Trojans sprang yet more fiercely on the Achaeans, and Ajax no longer held his ground, for he was overcome by the darts that were flung at him, and made sure that he was doomed. Therefore he left the raised deck at the stern, and stepped back on to the seven-foot bench of the oarsmen. Here he stood on the look-out, and with his spear held back Trojan whom he saw bringing fire to the ships. All the time he kept on shouting at the top of his voice and exhorting the Danaans. "My friends," he cried, "Danaan heroes, servants of Mars, be men my friends, and fight with might and with main. Can we hope to find helpers hereafter, or a wall to shield us more surely than the one we have? There is no strong city within reach, whence we may draw fresh forces to turn the scales in our favour. We are on the plain of the armed Trojans with the sea behind us, and far from our own country. Our salvation, therefore, is in the might of our hands and in hard fighting." 

As he spoke he wielded his spear with still greater fury, and when any Trojan made towards the ships with fire at Hector's bidding, he would be on the look-out for him, and drive at him with his long spear. Twelve men did he thus kill in hand-to-hand fight before the ships. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XVI

THUS did they fight about the ship of Protesilaus. Then Patroclus drew near to Achilles with tears welling from his eyes, as from some spring whose crystal stream falls over the ledges of a high precipice. When Achilles saw him thus weeping he was sorry for him and said, "Why, Patroclus, do you stand there weeping like some silly child that comes running to her mother, and begs to be taken up and carried- she catches hold of her mother's dress to stay her though she is in a hurry, and looks tearfully up until her mother carries her- even such tears, Patroclus, are you now shedding. Have you anything to say to the Myrmidons or to myself? or have you had news from Phthia which you alone know? They tell me Menoetius son of Actor is still alive, as also Peleus son of Aeacus, among the Myrmidons- men whose loss we two should bitterly deplore; or are you grieving about the Argives and the way in which they are being killed at the ships, throu their own high-handed doings? Do not hide anything from me but tell me that both of us may know about it." 

Then, O knight Patroclus, with a deep sigh you answered, "Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, do not be angry, but I weep for the disaster that has now befallen the Argives. All those who have been their champions so far are lying at the ships, wounded by sword or spear. Brave Diomed son of Tydeus has been hit with a spear, while famed Ulysses and Agamemnon have received sword-wounds; Eurypylus again has been struck with an arrow in the thigh; skilled apothecaries are attending to these heroes, and healing them of their wounds; are you still, O Achilles, so inexorable? May it never be my lot to nurse such a passion as you have done, to the baning of your own good name. Who in future story will speak well of you unless you now save the Argives from ruin? You know no pity; knight Peleus was not your father nor Thetis your mother, but the grey sea bore you and the sheer cliffs begot you, so cruel and remorseless are you. If however you are kept back through knowledge of some oracle, or if your mother Thetis has told you something from the mouth of Jove, at least send me and the Myrmidons with me, if I may bring deliverance to the Danaans. Let me moreover wear your armour; the Trojans may thus mistake me for you and quit the field, so that the hard-pressed sons of the Achaeans may have breathing time- which while they are fighting may hardly be. We who are fresh might soon drive tired men back from our ships and tents to their own city." 

He knew not what he was asking, nor that he was suing for his own destruction. Achilles was deeply moved and answered, "What, noble Patroclus, are you saying? I know no prophesyings which I am heeding, nor has my mother told me anything from the mouth of Jove, but I am cut to the very heart that one of my own rank should dare to rob me because he is more powerful than I am. This, after all that I have gone through, is more than I can endure. The girl whom the sons of the Achaeans chose for me, whom I won as the fruit of my spear on having sacked a city- her has King Agamemnon taken from me as though I were some common vagrant. Still, let bygones be bygones: no man may keep his anger for ever; I said I would not relent till battle and the cry of war had reached my own ships; nevertheless, now gird my armour about your shoulders, and lead the Myrmidons to battle, for the dark cloud of Trojans has burst furiously over our fleet; the Argives are driven back on to the beach, cooped within a narrow space, and the whole people of Troy has taken heart to sally out against them, because they see not the visor of my helmet gleaming near them. Had they seen this, there would not have been a creek nor grip that had not been filled with their dead as they fled back again. And so it would have been, if only King Agamemnon had dealt fairly by me. As it is the Trojans have beset our host. Diomed son of Tydeus no longer wields his spear to defend the Danaans, neither have I heard the voice of the son of Atreus coming from his hated head, whereas that of murderous Hector rings in my cars as he gives orders to the Trojans, who triumph over the Achaeans and fill the whole plain with their cry of battle. But even so, Patroclus, fall upon them and save the fleet, lest the Trojans fire it and prevent us from being able to return. Do, however, as I now bid you, that you may win me great honour from all the Danaans, and that they may restore the girl to me again and give me rich gifts into the bargain. When you have driven the Trojans from the ships, come back again. Though Juno's thundering husband should put triumph within your reach, do not fight the Trojans further in my absence, or you will rob me of glory that should be mine. And do not for lust of battle go on killing the Trojans nor lead the Achaeans on to Ilius, lest one of the ever-living gods from Olympus attack you- for Phoebus Apollo loves them well: return when you have freed the ships from peril, and let others wage war upon the plain. Would, by father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that not a single man of all the Trojans might be left alive, nor yet of the Argives, but that we two might be alone left to tear aside the mantle that veils the brow of Troy." 

Thus did they converse. But Ajax could no longer hold his ground for the shower of darts that rained upon him; the will of Jove and the javelins of the Trojans were too much for him; the helmet that gleamed about his temples rang with the continuous clatter of the missiles that kept pouring on to it and on to the cheek-pieces that protected his face. Moreover his left shoulder was tired with having held his shield so long, yet for all this, let fly at him as they would, they could not make him give ground. He could hardly draw his breath, the sweat rained from every pore of his body, he had not a moment's respite, and on all sides he was beset by danger upon danger. 

And now, tell me, O Muses that hold your mansions on Olympus, how fire was thrown upon the ships of the Achaeans. Hector came close up and let drive with his great sword at the ashen spear of Ajax. He cut it clean in two just behind where the point was fastened on to the shaft of the spear. Ajax, therefore, had now nothing but a headless spear, while the bronze point flew some way off and came ringing down on to the ground. Ajax knew the hand of heaven in this, and was dismayed at seeing that Jove had now left him utterly defenceless and was willing victory for the Trojans. Therefore he drew back, and the Trojans flung fire upon the ship which was at once wrapped in flame. 

The fire was now flaring about the ship's stern, whereon Achilles smote his two thighs and said to Patroclus, "Up, noble knight, for I see the glare of hostile fire at our fleet; up, lest they destroy our ships, and there be no way by which we may retreat. Gird on your armour at once while I call our people together." 

As he spoke Patroclus put on his armour. First he greaved his legs with greaves of good make, and fitted with ancle-clasps of silver; after this he donned the cuirass of the son of Aeacus, richly inlaid and studded. He hung his silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then his mighty shield. On his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought, with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it. He grasped two redoubtable spears that suited his hands, but he did not take the spear of noble Achilles, so stout and strong, for none other of the Achaeans could wield it, though Achilles could do so easily. This was the ashen spear from Mount Pelion, which Chiron had cut upon a mountain top and had given to Peleus, wherewith to deal out death among heroes. He bade Automedon yoke his horses with all speed, for he was the man whom he held in honour next after Achilles, and on whose support in battle he could rely most firmly. Automedon therefore yoked the fleet horses Xanthus and Balius, steeds that could fly like the wind: these were they whom the harpy Podarge bore to the west wind, as she was grazing in a meadow by the waters of the river Oceanus. In the side traces he set the noble horse Pedasus, whom Achilles had brought away with him when he sacked the city of Eetion, and who, mortal steed though he was, could take his place along with those that were immortal. 

Meanwhile Achilles went about everywhere among the tents, and bade his Myrmidons put on their armour. Even as fierce ravening wolves that are feasting upon a homed stag which they have killed upon the mountains, and their jaws are red with blood- they go in a pack to lap water from the clear spring with their long thin tongues; and they reek of blood and slaughter; they know not what fear is, for it is hunger drives them- even so did the leaders and counsellors of the Myrmidons gather round the good squire of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, and among them stood Achilles himself cheering on both men and horses. 

Fifty ships had noble Achilles brought to Troy, and in each there was a crew of fifty oarsmen. Over these he set five captains whom he could trust, while he was himself commander over them all. Menesthius of the gleaming corslet, son to the river Spercheius that streams from heaven, was captain of the first company. Fair Polydora daughter of Peleus bore him to ever-flowing Spercheius- a woman mated with a god- but he was called son of Borus son of Perieres, with whom his mother was living as his wedded wife, and who gave great wealth to gain her. The second company was led by noble Eudorus, son to an unwedded woman. Polymele, daughter of Phylas the graceful dancer, bore him; the mighty slayer of Argos was enamoured of her as he saw her among the singing women at a dance held in honour of Diana the rushing huntress of the golden arrows; he therefore- Mercury, giver of all good- went with her into an upper chamber, and lay with her in secret, whereon she bore him a noble son Eudorus, singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. When Ilithuia goddess of the pains of child-birth brought him to the light of day, and he saw the face of the sun, mighty Echecles son of Actor took the mother to wife, and gave great wealth to gain her, but her father Phylas brought the child up, and took care of him, doting as fondly upon him as though he were his own son. The third company was led by Pisander son of Maemalus, the finest spearman among all the Myrmidons next to Achilles' own comrade Patroclus. The old knight Phoenix was captain of the fourth company, and Alcimedon, noble son of Laerceus of the fifth. 

When Achilles had chosen his men and had stationed them all with their captains, he charged them straitly saying, "Myrmidons, remember your threats against the Trojans while you were at the ships in the time of my anger, and you were all complaining of me. 'Cruel son of Peleus,' you would say, 'your mother must have suckled you on gall, so ruthless are you. You keep us here at the ships against our will; if you are so relentless it were better we went home over the sea.' Often have you gathered and thus chided with me. The hour is now come for those high feats of arms that you have so long been pining for, therefore keep high hearts each one of you to do battle with the Trojans." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they serried their companies yet more closely when they heard the of their king. As the stones which a builder sets in the wall of some high house which is to give shelter from the winds- even so closely were the helmets and bossed shields set against one another. Shield pressed on shield, helm on helm, and man on man; so close were they that the horse-hair plumes on the gleaming ridges of their helmets touched each other as they bent their heads. 

In front of them all two men put on their armour- Patroclus and Automedon- two men, with but one mind to lead the Myrmidons. Then Achilles went inside his tent and opened the lid of the strong chest which silver-footed Thetis had given him to take on board ship, and which she had filled with shirts, cloaks to keep out the cold, and good thick rugs. In this chest he had a cup of rare workmanship, from which no man but himself might drink, nor would he make offering from it to any other god save only to father Jove. He took the cup from the chest and cleansed it with sulphur; this done he rinsed it clean water, and after he had washed his hands he drew wine. Then he stood in the middle of the court and prayed, looking towards heaven, and making his drink-offering of wine; nor was he unseen of Jove whose joy is in thunder. "King Jove," he cried, "lord of Dodona, god of the Pelasgi, who dwellest afar, you who hold wintry Dodona in your sway, where your prophets the Selli dwell around you with their feet unwashed and their couches made upon the ground- if you heard me when I prayed to you aforetime, and did me honour while you sent disaster on the Achaeans, vouchsafe me now the fulfilment of yet this further prayer. I shall stay here where my ships are lying, but I shall send my comrade into battle at the head of many Myrmidons. Grant, O all-seeing Jove, that victory may go with him; put your courage into his heart that Hector may learn whether my squire is man enough to fight alone, or whether his might is only then so indomitable when I myself enter the turmoil of war. Afterwards when he has chased the fight and the cry of battle from the ships, grant that he may return unharmed, with his armour and his comrades, fighters in close combat." 

Thus did he pray, and all-counselling Jove heard his prayer. Part of it he did indeed vouchsafe him- but not the whole. He granted that Patroclus should thrust back war and battle from the ships, but refused to let him come safely out of the fight. 

When he had made his drink-offering and had thus prayed, Achilles went inside his tent and put back the cup into his chest. 

Then he again came out, for he still loved to look upon the fierce fight that raged between the Trojans and Achaeans. 

Meanwhile the armed band that was about Patroclus marched on till they sprang high in hope upon the Trojans. They came swarming out like wasps whose nests are by the roadside, and whom silly children love to tease, whereon any one who happens to be passing may get stung- or again, if a wayfarer going along the road vexes them by accident, every wasp will come flying out in a fury to defend his little ones- even with such rage and courage did the Myrmidons swarm from their ships, and their cry of battle rose heavenwards. Patroclus called out to his men at the top of his voice, "Myrmidons, followers of Achilles son of Peleus, be men my friends, fight with might and with main, that we may win glory for the son of Peleus, who is far the foremost man at the ships of the Argives- he, and his close fighting followers. The son of Atreus King Agamemnon will thus learn his folly in showing no respect to the bravest of the Achaeans." 

With these words he put heart and soul into them all, and they fell in a body upon the Trojans. The ships rang again with the cry which the Achaeans raised, and when the Trojans saw the brave son of Menoetius and his squire all gleaming in their armour, they were daunted and their battalions were thrown into confusion, for they thought the fleet son of Peleus must now have put aside his anger, and have been reconciled to Agamemnon; every one, therefore, looked round about to see whither he might fly for safety. 

Patroclus first aimed a spear into the middle of the press where men were packed most closely, by the stern of the ship of Protesilaus. He hit Pyraechmes who had led his Paeonian horsemen from the Amydon and the broad waters of the river Axius; the spear struck him on the right shoulder, and with a groan he fell backwards in the dust; on this his men were thrown into confusion, for by killing their leader, who was the finest soldier among them, Patroclus struck panic into them all. He thus drove them from the ship and quenched the fire that was then blazing- leaving the half-burnt ship to lie where it was. The Trojans were now driven back with a shout that rent the skies, while the Danaans poured after them from their ships, shouting also without ceasing. As when Jove, gatherer of the thunder-cloud, spreads a dense canopy on the top of some lofty mountain, and all the peaks, the jutting headlands, and forest glades show out in the great light that flashes from the bursting heavens, even so when the Danaans had now driven back the fire from their ships, they took breath for a little while; but the fury of the fight was not yet over, for the Trojans were not driven back in utter rout, but still gave battle, and were ousted from their ground only by sheer fighting. 

The fight then became more scattered, and the chieftains killed one another when and how they could. The valiant son of Menoetius first drove his spear into the thigh of Areilycus just as he was turning round; the point went clean through, and broke the bone so that he fell forward. Meanwhile Menelaus struck Thoas in the chest, where it was exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell dead. The son of Phyleus saw Amphiclus about to attack him, and ere he could do so took aim at the upper part of his thigh, where the muscles are thicker than in any other part; the spear tore through all the sinews of the leg, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Of the sons of Nestor one, Antilochus, speared Atymnius, driving the point of the spear through his throat, and down he fell. Maris then sprang on Antilochus in hand-to-hand fight to avenge his brother, and bestrode the body spear in hand; but valiant Thrasymedes was too quick for him, and in a moment had struck him in the shoulder ere he could deal his blow; his aim was true, and the spear severed all the muscles at the root of his arm, and tore them right down to the bone, so he fell heavily to the ground and his eyes were closed in darkness. Thus did these two noble comrades of Sarpedon go down to Erebus slain by the two sons of Nestor; they were the warrior sons of Amisodorus, who had reared the invincible Chimaera, to the bane of many. Ajax son of Oileus sprang on Cleobulus and took him alive as he was entangled in the crush; but he killed him then and there by a sword-blow on the neck. The sword reeked with his blood, while dark death and the strong hand of fate gripped him and closed his eyes. 

Peneleos and Lycon now met in close fight, for they had missed each other with their spears. They had both thrown without effect, so now they drew their swords. Lycon struck the plumed crest of Peneleos' helmet but his sword broke at the hilt, while Peneleos smote Lycon on the neck under the ear. The blade sank so deep that the head was held on by nothing but the skin, and there was no more life left in him. Meriones gave chase to Acamas on foot and caught him up just as he was about to mount his chariot; he drove a spear through his right shoulder so that he fell headlong from the car, and his eyes were closed in darkness. Idomeneus speared Erymas in the mouth; the bronze point of the spear went clean through it beneath the brain, crashing in among the white bones and smashing them up. His teeth were all of them knocked out and the blood came gushing in a stream from both his eyes; it also came gurgling up from his mouth and nostrils, and the darkness of death enfolded him round about. 

Thus did these chieftains of the Danaans each of them kill his man. As ravening wolves seize on kids or lambs, fastening on them when they are alone on the hillsides and have strayed from the main flock through the carelessness of the shepherd- and when the wolves see this they pounce upon them at once because they cannot defend themselves- even so did the Danaans now fall on the Trojans, who fled with ill-omened cries in their panic and had no more fight left in them. 

Meanwhile great Ajax kept on trying to drive a spear into Hector, but Hector was so skilful that he held his broad shoulders well under cover of his ox-hide shield, ever on the look-out for the whizzing of the arrows and the heavy thud of the spears. He well knew that the fortunes of the day had changed, but still stood his ground and tried to protect his comrades. 

As when a cloud goes up into heaven from Olympus, rising out of a clear sky when Jove is brewing a gale- even with such panic stricken rout did the Trojans now fly, and there was no order in their going. Hector's fleet horses bore him and his armour out of the fight, and he left the Trojan host penned in by the deep trench against their will. Many a yoke of horses snapped the pole of their chariots in the trench and left their master's car behind them. Patroclus gave chase, calling impetuously on the Danaans and full of fury against the Trojans, who, being now no longer in a body, filled all the ways with their cries of panic and rout; the air was darkened with the clouds of dust they raised, and the horses strained every nerve in their flight from the tents and ships towards the city. 

Patroclus kept on heading his horses wherever he saw most men flying in confusion, cheering on his men the while. Chariots were being smashed in all directions, and many a man came tumbling down from his own car to fall beneath the wheels of that of Patroclus, whose immortal steeds, given by the gods to Peleus, sprang over the trench at a bound as they sped onward. He was intent on trying to get near Hector, for he had set his heart on spearing him, but Hector's horses were now hurrying him away. As the whole dark earth bows before some tempest on an autumn day when Jove rains his hardest to punish men for giving crooked judgement in their courts, and arriving justice therefrom without heed to the decrees of heaven- all the rivers run full and the torrents tear many a new channel as they roar headlong from the mountains to the dark sea, and it fares ill with the works of men- even such was the stress and strain of the Trojan horses in their flight. 

Patroclus now cut off the battalions that were nearest to him and drove them back to the ships. They were doing their best to reach the city, but he would not Yet them, and bore down on them between the river and the ships and wall. Many a fallen comrade did he then avenge. First he hit Pronous with a spear on the chest where it was exposed near the rim of his shield, and he fell heavily to the ground. Next he sprang on Thestor son of Enops, who was sitting all huddled up in his chariot, for he had lost his head and the reins had been torn out of his hands. Patroclus went up to him and drove a spear into his right jaw; he thus hooked him by the teeth and the spear pulled him over the rim of his car, as one who sits at the end of some jutting rock and draws a strong fish out of the sea with a hook and a line- even so with his spear did he pull Thestor all gaping from his chariot; he then threw him down on his face and he died while falling. On this, as Erylaus was on to attack him, he struck him full on the head with a stone, and his brains were all battered inside his helmet, whereon he fell headlong to the ground and the pangs of death took hold upon him. Then he laid low, one after the other, Erymas, Amphoterus, Epaltes, Tlepolemus, Echius son of Damastor, Pyris, lpheus, Euippus and Polymelus son of Argeas. 

Now when Sarpedon saw his comrades, men who wore ungirdled tunics, being overcome by Patroclus son of Menoetius, he rebuked the Lycians saying. "Shame on you, where are you flying to? Show your mettle; I will myself meet this man in fight and learn who it is that is so masterful; he has done us much hurt, and has stretched many a brave man upon the ground." 

He sprang from his chariot as he spoke, and Patroclus, when he saw this, leaped on to the ground also. The two then rushed at one another with loud cries like eagle-beaked crook-taloned vultures that scream and tear at one another in some high mountain fastness. 

The son of scheming Saturn looked down upon them in pity and said to Juno who was his wife and sister, "Alas, that it should be the lot of Sarpedon whom I love so dearly to perish by the hand of Patroclus. I am in two minds whether to catch him up out of the fight and set him down safe and sound in the fertile land of Lycia, or to let him now fall by the hand of the son of Menoetius." 

And Juno answered, "Most dread son of Saturn, what is this that you are saying? Would you snatch a mortal man, whose doom has long been fated, out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we shall not all of us be of your mind. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, that if you send Sarpedon safely to his own home, some other of the gods will be also wanting to escort his son out of battle, for there are many sons of gods fighting round the city of Troy, and you will make every one jealous. If, however, you are fond of him and pity him, let him indeed fall by the hand of Patroclus, but as soon as the life is gone out of him, send Death and sweet Sleep to bear him off the field and take him to the broad lands of Lycia, where his brothers and his kinsmen will bury him with mound and pillar, in due honour to the dead." 

The sire of gods and men assented, but he shed a rain of blood upon the earth in honour of his son whom Patroclus was about to kill on the rich plain of Troy far from his home. 

When they were now come close to one another Patroclus struck Thrasydemus, the brave squire of Sarpedon, in the lower part of the belly, and killed him. Sarpedon then aimed a spear at Patroclus and missed him, but he struck the horse Pedasus in the right shoulder, and it screamed aloud as it lay, groaning in the dust until the life went out of it. The other two horses began to plunge; the pole of the chariot cracked and they got entangled in the reins through the fall of the horse that was yoked along with them; but Automedon knew what to do; without the loss of a moment he drew the keen blade that hung by his sturdy thigh and cut the third horse adrift; whereon the other two righted themselves, and pulling hard at the reins again went together into battle. 

Sarpedon now took a second aim at Patroclus, and again missed him, the point of the spear passed over his left shoulder without hitting him. Patroclus then aimed in his turn, and the spear sped not from his hand in vain, for he hit Sarpedon just where the midriff surrounds the ever-beating heart. He fell like some oak or silver poplar or tall pine to which woodmen have laid their axes upon the mountains to make timber for ship-building- even so did he lie stretched at full length in front of his chariot and horses, moaning and clutching at the blood-stained dust. As when a lion springs with a bound upon a herd of cattle and fastens on a great black bull which dies bellowing in its clutches- even so did the leader of the Lycian warriors struggle in death as he fell by the hand of Patroclus. He called on his trusty comrade and said, "Glaucus, my brother, hero among heroes, put forth all your strength, fight with might and main, now if ever quit yourself like a valiant soldier. First go about among the Lycian captains and bid them fight for Sarpedon; then yourself also do battle to save my armour from being taken. My name will haunt you henceforth and for ever if the Achaeans rob me of my armour now that I have fallen at their ships. Do your very utmost and call all my people together." 

Death closed his eyes as he spoke. Patroclus planted his heel on his breast and drew the spear from his body, whereon his senses came out along with it, and he drew out both spear-point and Sarpedon's soul at the same time. Hard by the Myrmidons held his snorting steeds, who were wild with panic at finding themselves deserted by their lords. 

Glaucus was overcome with grief when he heard what Sarpedon said, for he could not help him. He had to support his arm with his other hand, being in great pain through the wound which Teucer's arrow had given him when Teucer was defending the wall as he, Glaucus, was assailing it. Therefore he prayed to far-darting Apollo saying, "Hear me O king from your seat, may be in the rich land of Lycia, or may be in Troy, for in all places you can hear the prayer of one who is in distress, as I now am. I have a grievous wound; my hand is aching with pain, there is no staunching the blood, and my whole arm drags by reason of my hurt, so that I cannot grasp my sword nor go among my foes and fight them, thou our prince, Jove's son Sarpedon, is slain. Jove defended not his son, do you, therefore, O king, heal me of my wound, ease my pain and grant me strength both to cheer on the Lycians and to fight along with them round the body of him who has fallen." 

Thus did he pray, and Apollo heard his prayer. He eased his pain, staunched the black blood from the wound, and gave him new strength. Glaucus perceived this, and was thankful that the mighty god had answered his prayer; forthwith, therefore, he went among the Lycian captains, and bade them come to fight about the body of Sarpedon. From these he strode on among the Trojans to Polydamas son of Panthous and Agenor; he then went in search of Aeneas and Hector, and when he had found them he said, "Hector, you have utterly forgotten your allies, who languish here for your sake far from friends and home while you do nothing to support them. Sarpedon leader of the Lycian warriors has fallen- he who was at once the right and might of Lycia; Mars has laid him low by the spear of Patroclus. Stand by him, my friends, and suffer not the Myrmidons to strip him of his armour, nor to treat his body with contumely in revenge for all the Danaans whom we have speared at the ships." 

As he spoke the Trojans were plunged in extreme and ungovernable grief; for Sarpedon, alien though he was, had been one of the main stays of their city, both as having much people with him, and himself the foremost among them all. Led by Hector, who was infuriated by the fall of Sarpedon, they made instantly for the Danaans with all their might, while the undaunted spirit of Patroclus son of Menoetius cheered on the Achaeans. First he spoke to the two Ajaxes, men who needed no bidding. "Ajaxes," said he, "may it now please you to show youselves the men you have always been, or even better- Sarpedon is fallen- he who was first to overleap the wall of the Achaeans; let us take the body and outrage it; let us strip the armour from his shoulders, and kill his comrades if they try to rescue his body." 

He spoke to men who of themselves were full eager; both sides, therefore, the Trojans and Lycians on the one hand, and the Myrmidons and Achaeans on the other, strengthened their battalions, and fought desperately about the body of Sarpedon, shouting fiercely the while. Mighty was the din of their armour as they came together, and Jove shed a thick darkness over the fight, to increase the of the battle over the body of his son. 

At first the Trojans made some headway against the Achaeans, for one of the best men among the Myrmidons was killed, Epeigeus, son of noble Agacles who had erewhile been king in the good city of Budeum; but presently, having killed a valiant kinsman of his own, he took refuge with Peleus and Thetis, who sent him to Ilius the land of noble steeds to fight the Trojans under Achilles. Hector now struck him on the head with a stone just as he had caught hold of the body, and his brains inside his helmet were all battered in, so that he fell face foremost upon the body of Sarpedon, and there died. Patroclus was enraged by the death of his comrade, and sped through the front ranks as swiftly as a hawk that swoops down on a flock of daws or starlings. Even so swiftly, O noble knight Patroclus, did you make straight for the Lycians and Trojans to avenge your comrade. Forthwith he struck Sthenelaus the son of Ithaemenes on the neck with a stone, and broke the tendons that join it to the head and spine. On this Hector and the front rank of his men gave ground. As far as a man can throw a javelin when competing for some prize, or even in battle- so far did the Trojans now retreat before the Achaeans. Glaucus, captain of the Lycians, was the first to rally them, by killing Bathycles son of Chalcon who lived in Hellas and was the richest man among the Myrmidons. Glaucus turned round suddenly, just as Bathycles who was pursuing him was about to lay hold of him, and drove his spear right into the middle of his chest, whereon he fell heavily to the ground, and the fall of so good a man filled the Achaeans with dismay, while the Trojans were exultant, and came up in a body round the corpse. Nevertheless the Achaeans, mindful of their prowess, bore straight down upon them. 

Meriones then killed a helmed warrior of the Trojans, Laogonus son of Onetor, who was priest of Jove of Mt. Ida, and was honoured by the people as though he were a god. Meriones struck him under the jaw and ear, so that life went out of him and the darkness of death laid hold upon him. Aeneas then aimed a spear at Meriones, hoping to hit him under the shield as he was advancing, but Meriones saw it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, whereon the spear flew past him and the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Mars robbed it of its force. The spear, therefore, sped from Aeneas's hand in vain and fell quivering to the ground. Aeneas was angry and said, "Meriones, you are a good dancer, but if I had hit you my spear would soon have made an end of you." 

And Meriones answered, "Aeneas, for all your bravery, you will not be able to make an end of every one who comes against you. You are only a mortal like myself, and if I were to hit you in the middle of your shield with my spear, however strong and self-confident you may be, I should soon vanquish you, and you would yield your life to Hades of the noble steeds." 

On this the son of Menoetius rebuked him and said, "Meriones, hero though you be, you should not speak thus; taunting speeches, my good friend, will not make the Trojans draw away from the dead body; some of them must go under ground first; blows for battle, and words for council; fight, therefore, and say nothing." 

He led the way as he spoke and the hero went forward with him. As the sound of woodcutters in some forest glade upon the mountains- and the thud of their axes is heard afar- even such a din now rose from earth-clash of bronze armour and of good ox-hide shields, as men smote each other with their swords and spears pointed at both ends. A man had need of good eyesight now to know Sarpedon, so covered was he from head to foot with spears and blood and dust. Men swarmed about the body, as flies that buzz round the full milk-pails in spring when they are brimming with milk- even so did they gather round Sarpedon; nor did Jove turn his keen eyes away for one moment from the fight, but kept looking at it all the time, for he was settling how best to kill Patroclus, and considering whether Hector should be allowed to end him now in the fight round the body of Sarpedon, and strip him of his armour, or whether he should let him give yet further trouble to the Trojans. In the end, he deemed it best that the brave squire of Achilles son of Peleus should drive Hector and the Trojans back towards the city and take the lives of many. First, therefore, he made Hector turn fainthearted, whereon he mounted his chariot and fled, bidding the other Trojans fly also, for he saw that the scales of Jove had turned against him. Neither would the brave Lycians stand firm; they were dismayed when they saw their king lying struck to the heart amid a heap of corpses- for when the son of Saturn made the fight wax hot many had fallen above him. The Achaeans, therefore stripped the gleaming armour from his shoulders and the brave son of Menoetius gave it to his men to take to the ships. Then Jove lord of the storm-cloud said to Apollo, "Dear Phoebus, go, I pray you, and take Sarpedon out of range of the weapons; cleanse the black blood from off him, and then bear him a long way off where you may wash him in the river, anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him in immortal raiment; this done, commit him to the arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who will carry him straightway to the rich land of Lycia, where his brothers and kinsmen will inter him, and will raise both mound and pillar to his memory, in due honour to the dead." 

Thus he spoke. Apollo obeyed his father's saying, and came down from the heights of Ida into the thick of the fight; forthwith he took Sarpedon out of range of the weapons, and then bore him a long way off, where he washed him in the river, anointed him with ambrosia and clothed him in immortal raiment; this done, he committed him to the arms of the two fleet messengers, Death, and Sleep, who presently set him down in the rich land of Lycia. 

Meanwhile Patroclus, with many a shout to his horses and to Automedon, pursued the Trojans and Lycians in the pride and foolishness of his heart. Had he but obeyed the bidding of the son of Peleus, he would have, escaped death and have been scatheless; but the counsels of Jove pass man's understanding; he will put even a brave man to flight and snatch victory from his grasp, or again he will set him on to fight, as he now did when he put a high spirit into the heart of Patroclus. 

Who then first, and who last, was slain by you, O Patroclus, when the gods had now called you to meet your doom? First Adrestus, Autonous, Echeclus, Perimus the son of Megas, Epistor and Melanippus; after these he killed Elasus, Mulius, and Pylartes. These he slew, but the rest saved themselves by flight. 

The sons of the Achaeans would now have taken Troy by the hands of Patroclus, for his spear flew in all directions, had not Phoebus Apollo taken his stand upon the wall to defeat his purpose and to aid the Trojans. Thrice did Patroclus charge at an angle of the high wall, and thrice did Apollo beat him back, striking his shield with his own immortal hands. When Patroclus was coming on like a god for yet a fourth time, Apollo shouted to him with an awful voice and said, "Draw back, noble Patroclus, it is not your lot to sack the city of the Trojan chieftains, nor yet will it be that of Achilles who is a far better man than you are." On hearing this, Patroclus withdrew to some distance and avoided the anger of Apollo. 

Meanwhile Hector was waiting with his horses inside the Scaean gates, in doubt whether to drive out again and go on fighting, or to call the army inside the gates. As he was thus doubting Phoebus Apollo drew near him in the likeness of a young and lusty warrior Asius, who was Hector's uncle, being own brother to Hecuba, and son of Dymas who lived in Phrygia by the waters of the river Sangarius; in his likeness Jove's son Apollo now spoke to Hector saying, "Hector, why have you left off fighting? It is ill done of you. If I were as much better a man than you, as I am worse, you should soon rue your slackness. Drive straight towards Patroclus, if so be that Apollo may grant you a triumph over him, and you may rull him." 

With this the god went back into the hurly-burly, and Hector bade Cebriones drive again into the fight. Apollo passed in among them, and struck panic into the Argives, while he gave triumph to Hector and the Trojans. Hector let the other Danaans alone and killed no man, but drove straight at Patroclus. Patroclus then sprang from his chariot to the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in his right a jagged stone as large as his hand could hold. He stood still and threw it, nor did it go far without hitting some one; the cast was not in vain, for the stone struck Cebriones, Hector's charioteer, a bastard son of Priam, as he held the reins in his hands. The stone hit him on the forehead and drove his brows into his head for the bone was smashed, and his eyes fell to the ground at his feet. He dropped dead from his chariot as though he were diving, and there was no more life left in him. Over him did you then vaunt, O knight Patroclus, saying, "Bless my heart, how active he is, and how well he dives. If we had been at sea this fellow would have dived from the ship's side and brought up as many oysters as the whole crew could stomach, even in rough water, for he has dived beautifully off his chariot on to the ground. It seems, then, that there are divers also among the Trojans." 

As he spoke he flung himself on Cebriones with the spring, as it were, of a lion that while attacking a stockyard is himself struck in the chest, and his courage is his own bane- even so furiously, O Patroclus, did you then spring upon Cebriones. Hector sprang also from his chariot to the ground. The pair then fought over the body of Cebriones. As two lions fight fiercely on some high mountain over the body of a stag that they have killed, even so did these two mighty warriors, Patroclus son of Menoetius and brave Hector, hack and hew at one another over the corpse of Cebriones. Hector would not let him go when he had once got him by the head, while Patroclus kept fast hold of his feet, and a fierce fight raged between the other Danaans and Trojans. As the east and south wind buffet one another when they beat upon some dense forest on the mountains- there is beech and ash and spreading cornel; the to of the trees roar as they beat on one another, and one can hear the boughs cracking and breaking- even so did the Trojans and Achaeans spring upon one another and lay about each other, and neither side would give way. Many a pointed spear fell to ground and many a winged arrow sped from its bow-string about the body of Cebriones; many a great stone, moreover, beat on many a shield as they fought around his body, but there he lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless of his driving now. 

So long as the sun was still high in mid-heaven the weapons of either side were alike deadly, and the people fell; but when he went down towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Achaeans proved to be beyond all forecast stronger, so that they drew Cebriones out of range of the darts and tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the armour from his shoulders. Then Patroclus sprang like Mars with fierce intent and a terrific shout upon the Trojans, and thrice did he kill nine men; but as he was coming on like a god for a time, then, O Patroclus, was the hour of your end approaching, for Phoebus fought you in fell earnest. Patroclus did not see him as he moved about in the crush, for he was enshrouded in thick darkness, and the god struck him from behind on his back and his broad shoulders with the flat of his hand, so that his eyes turned dizzy. Phoebus Apollo beat the helmet from off his head, and it rolled rattling off under the horses' feet, where its horse-hair plumes were all begrimed with dust and blood. Never indeed had that helmet fared so before, for it had served to protect the head and comely forehead of the godlike hero Achilles. Now, however, Zeus delivered it over to be worn by Hector. Nevertheless the end of Hector also was near. The bronze-shod spear, so great and so strong, was broken in the hand of Patroclus, while his shield that covered him from head to foot fell to the ground as did also the band that held it, and Apollo undid the fastenings of his corslet. 

On this his mind became clouded; his limbs failed him, and he stood as one dazed; whereon Euphorbus son of Panthous a Dardanian, the best spearman of his time, as also the finest horseman and fleetest runner, came behind him and struck him in the back with a spear, midway between the shoulders. This man as soon as ever he had come up with his chariot had dismounted twenty men, so proficient was he in all the arts of war- he it was, O knight Patroclus, that first drove a weapon into you, but he did not quite overpower you. Euphorbus then ran back into the crowd, after drawing his ashen spear out of the wound; he would not stand firm and wait for Patroclus, unarmed though he now was, to attack him; but Patroclus unnerved, alike by the blow the god had given him and by the spear-wound, drew back under cover of his men in fear for his life. Hector on this, seeing him to be wounded and giving ground, forced his way through the ranks, and when close up with him struck him in the lower part of the belly with a spear, driving the bronze point right through it, so that he fell heavily to the ground to the great of the Achaeans. As when a lion has fought some fierce wild-boar and worsted him- the two fight furiously upon the mountains over some little fountain at which they would both drink, and the lion has beaten the boar till he can hardly breathe- even so did Hector son of Priam take the life of the brave son of Menoetius who had killed so many, striking him from close at hand, and vaunting over him the while. "Patroclus," said he, "you deemed that you should sack our city, rob our Trojan women of their freedom, and carry them off in your ships to your own country. Fool; Hector and his fleet horses were ever straining their utmost to defend them. I am foremost of all the Trojan warriors to stave the day of bondage from off them; as for you, vultures shall devour you here. Poor wretch, Achilles with all his bravery availed you nothing; and yet I ween when you left him he charged you straitly saying, 'Come not back to the ships, knight Patroclus, till you have rent the bloodstained shirt of murderous Hector about his body. Thus I ween did he charge you, and your fool's heart answered him 'yea' within you." 

Then, as the life ebbed out of you, you answered, O knight Patroclus: "Hector, vaunt as you will, for Jove the son of Saturn and Apollo have vouchsafed you victory; it is they who have vanquished me so easily, and they who have stripped the armour from my shoulders; had twenty such men as you attacked me, all of them would have fallen before my spear. Fate and the son of Leto have overpowered me, and among mortal men Euphorbus; you are yourself third only in the killing of me. I say further, and lay my saying to your heart, you too shall live but for a little season; death and the day of your doom are close upon you, and they will lay you low by the hand of Achilles son of Aeacus." 

When he had thus spoken his eyes were closed in death, his soul left his body and flitted down to the house of Hades, mourning its sad fate and bidding farewell to the youth and vigor of its manhood. Dead though he was, Hector still spoke to him saying, "Patroclus, why should you thus foretell my doom? Who knows but Achilles, son of lovely Thetis, may be smitten by my spear and die before me?" 

As he spoke he drew the bronze spear from the wound, planting his foot upon the body, which he thrust off and let lie on its back. He then went spear in hand after Automedon, squire of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, for he longed to lay him low, but the immortal steeds which the gods had given as a rich gift to Peleus bore him swiftly from the field. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XVII

BRAVE Menelaus son of Atreus now came to know that Patroclus had fallen, and made his way through the front ranks clad in full armour to bestride him. As a cow stands lowing over her first calf, even so did yellow-haired Menelaus bestride Patroclus. He held his round shield and his spear in front of him, resolute to kill any who should dare face him. But the son of Panthous had also noted the body, and came up to Menelaus saying, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, draw back, leave the body, and let the bloodstained spoils be. I was first of the Trojans and their brave allies to drive my spear into Patroclus, let me, therefore, have my full glory among the Trojans, or I will take aim and kill you." 

To this Menelaus answered in great anger "By father Jove, boasting is an ill thing. The pard is not more bold, nor the lion nor savage wild-boar, which is fiercest and most dauntless of all creatures, than are the proud sons of Panthous. Yet Hyperenor did not see out the days of his youth when he made light of me and withstood me, deeming me the meanest soldier among the Danaans. His own feet never bore him back to gladden his wife and parents. Even so shall I make an end of you too, if you withstand me; get you back into the crowd and do not face me, or it shall be worse for you. Even a fool may be wise after the event." 

Euphorbus would not listen, and said, "Now indeed, Menelaus, shall you pay for the death of my brother over whom you vaunted, and whose wife you widowed in her bridal chamber, while you brought grief unspeakable on his parents. I shall comfort these poor people if I bring your head and armour and place them in the hands of Panthous and noble Phrontis. The time is come when this matter shall be fought out and settled, for me or against me." 

As he spoke he struck Menelaus full on the shield, but the spear did not go through, for the shield turned its point. Menelaus then took aim, praying to father Jove as he did so; Euphorbus was drawing back, and Menelaus struck him about the roots of his throat, leaning his whole weight on the spear, so as to drive it home. The point went clean through his neck, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. His hair which was like that of the Graces, and his locks so deftly bound in bands of silver and gold, were all bedrabbled with blood. As one who has grown a fine young olive tree in a clear space where there is abundance of water- the plant is full of promise, and though the winds beat upon it from every quarter it puts forth its white blossoms till the blasts of some fierce hurricane sweep down upon it and level it with the ground- even so did Menelaus strip the fair youth Euphorbus of his armour after he had slain him. Or as some fierce lion upon the mountains in the pride of his strength fastens on the finest heifer in a herd as it is feeding- first he breaks her neck with his strong jaws, and then gorges on her blood and entrails; dogs and shepherds raise a hue and cry against him, but they stand aloof and will not come close to him, for they are pale with fear- even so no one had the courage to face valiant Menelaus. The son of Atreus would have then carried off the armour of the son of Panthous with ease, had not Phoebus Apollo been angry, and in the guise of Mentes chief of the Cicons incited Hector to attack him. "Hector," said he, "you are now going after the horses of the noble son of Aeacus, but you will not take them; they cannot be kept in hand and driven by mortal man, save only by Achilles, who is son to an immortal mother. Meanwhile Menelaus son of Atreus has bestridden the body of Patroclus and killed the noblest of the Trojans, Euphorbus son of Panthous, so that he can fight no more." 

The god then went back into the toil and turmoil, but the soul of Hector was darkened with a cloud of grief; he looked along the ranks and saw Euphorbus lying on the ground with the blood still flowing from his wound, and Menelaus stripping him of his armour. On this he made his way to the front like a flame of fire, clad in his gleaming armour, and crying with a loud voice. When the son of Atreus heard him, he said to himself in his dismay, "Alas! what shall I do? I may not let the Trojans take the armour of Patroclus who has fallen fighting on my behalf, lest some Danaan who sees me should cry shame upon me. Still if for my honour's sake I fight Hector and the Trojans single-handed, they will prove too many for me, for Hector is bringing them up in force. Why, however, should I thus hesitate? When a man fights in despite of heaven with one whom a god befriends, he will soon rue it. Let no Danaan think ill of me if I give place to Hector, for the hand of heaven is with him. Yet, if I could find Ajax, the two of us would fight Hector and heaven too, if we might only save the body of Patroclus for Achilles son of Peleus. This, of many evils would be the least." 

While he was thus in two minds, the Trojans came up to him with Hector at their head; he therefore drew back and left the body, turning about like some bearded lion who is being chased by dogs and men from a stockyard with spears and hue and cry, whereon he is daunted and slinks sulkily off- even so did Menelaus son of Atreus turn and leave the body of Patroclus. When among the body of his men, he looked around for mighty Ajax son of Telamon, and presently saw him on the extreme left of the fight, cheering on his men and exhorting them to keep on fighting, for Phoebus Apollo had spread a great panic among them. He ran up to him and said, "Ajax, my good friend, come with me at once to dead Patroclus, if so be that we may take the body to Achilles- as for his armour, Hector already has it." 

These words stirred the heart of Ajax, and he made his way among the front ranks, Menelaus going with him. Hector had stripped Patroclus of his armour, and was dragging him away to cut off his head and take the body to fling before the dogs of Troy. But Ajax came up with his shield like wall before him, on which Hector withdrew under shelter of his men, and sprang on to his chariot, giving the armour over to the Trojans to take to the city, as a great trophy for himself; Ajax, therefore, covered the body of Patroclus with his broad shield and bestrode him; as a lion stands over his whelps if hunters have come upon him in a forest when he is with his little ones- in the pride and fierceness of his strength he draws his knit brows down till they cover his eyes- even so did Ajax bestride the body of Patroclus, and by his side stood Menelaus son of Atreus, nursing great sorrow in his heart. 

Then Glaucus son of Hippolochus looked fiercely at Hector and rebuked him sternly. "Hector," said he, "you make a brave show, but in fight you are sadly wanting. A runaway like yourself has no claim to so great a reputation. Think how you may now save your town and citadel by the hands of your own people born in Ilius; for you will get no Lycians to fight for you, seeing what thanks they have had for their incessant hardships. Are you likely, sir, to do anything to help a man of less note, after leaving Sarpedon, who was at once your guest and comrade in arms, to be the spoil and prey of the Danaans? So long as he lived he did good service both to your city and yourself; yet you had no stomach to save his body from the dogs. If the Lycians will listen to me, they will go home and leave Troy to its fate. If the Trojans had any of that daring fearless spirit which lays hold of men who are fighting for their country and harassing those who would attack it, we should soon bear off Patroclus into Ilius. Could we get this dead man away and bring him into the city of Priam, the Argives would readily give up the armour of Sarpedon, and we should get his body to boot. For he whose squire has been now killed is the foremost man at the ships of the Achaeans- he and his close-fighting followers. Nevertheless you dared not make a stand against Ajax, nor face him, eye to eye, with battle all round you, for he is a braver man than you are." 

Hector scowled at him and answered, "Glaucus, you should know better. I have held you so far as a man of more understanding than any in all Lycia, but now I despise you for saying that I am afraid of Ajax. I fear neither battle nor the din of chariots, but Jove's will is stronger than ours; Jove at one time makes even a strong man draw back and snatches victory from his grasp, while at another he will set him on to fight. Come hither then, my friend, stand by me and see indeed whether I shall play the coward the whole day through as you say, or whether I shall not stay some even of the boldest Danaans from fighting round the body of Patroclus." 

As he spoke he called loudly on the Trojans saying, "Trojans, Lycians, and Dardanians, fighters in close combat, be men, my friends, and fight might and main, while I put on the goodly armour of Achilles, which I took when I killed Patroclus." 

With this Hector left the fight, and ran full speed after his men who were taking the armour of Achilles to Troy, but had not yet got far. Standing for a while apart from the woeful fight, he changed his armour. His own he sent to the strong city of Ilius and to the Trojans, while he put on the immortal armour of the son of Peleus, which the gods had given to Peleus, who in his age gave it to his son; but the son did not grow old in his father's armour. 

When Jove, lord of the storm-cloud, saw Hector standing aloof and arming himself in the armour of the son of Peleus, he wagged his head and muttered to himself saying, "A! poor wretch, you arm in the armour of a hero, before whom many another trembles, and you reck nothing of the doom that is already close upon you. You have killed his comrade so brave and strong, but it was not well that you should strip the armour from his head and shoulders. I do indeed endow you with great might now, but as against this you shall not return from battle to lay the armour of the son of Peleus before Andromache." 

The son of Saturn bowed his portentous brows, and Hector fitted the armour to his body, while terrible Mars entered into him, and filled his whole body with might and valour. With a shout he strode in among the allies, and his armour flashed about him so that he seemed to all of them like the great son of Peleus himself. He went about among them and cheered them on- Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, Thersilochus, Asteropaeus, Deisenor and Hippothous, Phorcys, Chromius and Ennomus the augur. All these did he exhort saying, "Hear me, allies from other cities who are here in your thousands, it was not in order to have a crowd about me that I called you hither each from his several city, but that with heart and soul you might defend the wives and little ones of the Trojans from the fierce Achaeans. For this do I oppress my people with your food and the presents that make you rich. Therefore turn, and charge at the foe, to stand or fall as is the game of war; whoever shall bring Patroclus, dead though he be, into the hands of the Trojans, and shall make Ajax give way before him, I will give him one half of the spoils while I keep the other. He will thus share like honour with myself." 

When he had thus spoken they charged full weight upon the Danaans with their spears held out before them, and the hopes of each ran high that he should force Ajax son of Telamon to yield up the body- fools that they were, for he was about to take the lives of many. Then Ajax said to Menelaus, "My good friend Menelaus, you and I shall hardly come out of this fight alive. I am less concerned for the body of Patroclus, who will shortly become meat for the dogs and vultures of Troy, than for the safety of my own head and yours. Hector has wrapped us round in a storm of battle from every quarter, and our destruction seems now certain. Call then upon the princes of the Danaans if there is any who can hear us." 

Menelaus did as he said, and shouted to the Danaans for help at the top of his voice. "My friends," he cried, "princes and counsellors of the Argives, all you who with Agamemnon and Menelaus drink at the public cost, and give orders each to his own people as Jove vouchsafes him power and glory, the fight is so thick about me that I cannot distinguish you severally; come on, therefore, every man unbidden, and think it shame that Patroclus should become meat and morsel for Trojan hounds." 

Fleet Ajax son of Oileus heard him and was first to force his way through the fight and run to help him. Next came Idomeneus and Meriones his esquire, peer of murderous Mars. As for the others that came into the fight after these, who of his own self could name them? 

The Trojans with Hector at their head charged in a body. As a great wave that comes thundering in at the mouth of some heaven-born river, and the rocks that jut into the sea ring with the roar of the breakers that beat and buffet them- even with such a roar did the Trojans come on; but the Achaeans in singleness of heart stood firm about the son of Menoetius, and fenced him with their bronze shields. Jove, moreover, hid the brightness of their helmets in a thick cloud, for he had borne no grudge against the son of Menoetius while he was still alive and squire to the descendant of Aeacus; therefore he was loth to let him fall a prey to the dogs of his foes the Trojans, and urged his comrades on to defend him. 

At first the Trojans drove the Achaeans back, and they withdrew from the dead man daunted. The Trojans did not succeed in killing any one, nevertheless they drew the body away. But the Achaeans did not lose it long, for Ajax, foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus alike in stature and prowess, quickly rallied them and made towards the front like a wild boar upon the mountains when he stands at bay in the forest glades and routs the hounds and lusty youths that have attacked him- even so did Ajax son of Telamon passing easily in among the phalanxes of the Trojans, disperse those who had bestridden Patroclus and were most bent on winning glory by dragging him off to their city. At this moment Hippothous brave son of the Pelasgian Lethus, in his zeal for Hector and the Trojans, was dragging the body off by the foot through the press of the fight, having bound a strap round the sinews near the ancle; but a mischief soon befell him from which none of those could save him who would have gladly done so, for the son of Telamon sprang forward and smote him on his bronze-cheeked helmet. The plumed headpiece broke about the point of the weapon, struck at once by the spear and by the strong hand of Ajax, so that the bloody brain came oozing out through the crest-socket. His strength then failed him and he let Patroclus' foot drop from his hand, as he fell full length dead upon the body; thus he died far from the fertile land of Larissa, and never repaid his parents the cost of bringing him up, for his life was cut short early by the spear of mighty Ajax. Hector then took aim at Ajax with a spear, but he saw it coming and just managed to avoid it; the spear passed on and struck Schedius son of noble Iphitus, captain of the Phoceans, who dwelt in famed Panopeus and reigned over much people; it struck him under the middle of the collar-bone the bronze point went right through him, coming out at the bottom of his shoulder-blade, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Ajax in his turn struck noble Phorcys son of Phaenops in the middle of the belly as he was bestriding Hippothous, and broke the plate of his cuirass; whereon the spear tore out his entrails and he clutched the ground in his palm as he fell to earth. Hector and those who were in the front rank then gave ground, while the Argives raised a loud cry of triumph, and drew off the bodies of Phorcys and Hippothous which they stripped presently of their armour. 

The Trojans would now have been worsted by the brave Achaeans and driven back to Ilius through their own cowardice, while the Argives, so great was their courage and endurance, would have achieved a triumph even against the will of Jove, if Apollo had not roused Aeneas, in the likeness of Periphas son of Epytus, an attendant who had grown old in the service of Aeneas' aged father, and was at all times devoted to him. In his likeness, then, Apollo said, "Aeneas, can you not manage, even though heaven be against us, to save high Ilius? I have known men, whose numbers, courage, and self-reliance have saved their people in spite of Jove, whereas in this case he would much rather give victory to us than to the Danaans, if you would only fight instead of being so terribly afraid." 

Aeneas knew Apollo when he looked straight at him, and shouted to Hector saying, "Hector and all other Trojans and allies, shame on us if we are beaten by the Achaeans and driven back to Ilius through our own cowardice. A god has just come up to me and told me that Jove the supreme disposer will be with us. Therefore let us make for the Danaans, that it may go hard with them ere they bear away dead Patroclus to the ships." 

As he spoke he sprang out far in front of the others, who then rallied and again faced the Achaeans. Aeneas speared Leiocritus son of Arisbas, a valiant follower of Lycomedes, and Lycomedes was moved with pity as he saw him fall; he therefore went close up, and speared Apisaon son of Hippasus shepherd of his people in the liver under the midriff, so that he died; he had come from fertile Paeonia and was the best man of them all after Asteropaeus. Asteropaeus flew forward to avenge him and attack the Danaans, but this might no longer be, inasmuch as those about Patroclus were well covered by their shields, and held their spears in front of them, for Ajax had given them strict orders that no man was either to give ground, or to stand out before the others, but all were to hold well together about the body and fight hand to hand. Thus did huge Ajax bid them, and the earth ran red with blood as the corpses fell thick on one another alike on the side of the Trojans and allies, and on that of the Danaans; for these last, too, fought no bloodless fight though many fewer of them perished, through the care they took to defend and stand by one another. 

Thus did they fight as it were a flaming fire; it seemed as though it had gone hard even with the sun and moon, for they were hidden over all that part where the bravest heroes were fighting about the dead son of Menoetius, whereas the other Danaans and Achaeans fought at their ease in full daylight with brilliant sunshine all round them, and there was not a cloud to be seen neither on plain nor mountain. These last moreover would rest for a while and leave off fighting, for they were some distance apart and beyond the range of one another's weapons, whereas those who were in the thick of the fray suffered both from battle and darkness. All the best of them were being worn out by the great weight of their armour, but the two valiant heroes, Thrasymedes and Antilochus, had not yet heard of the death of Patroclus, and believed him to be still alive and leading the van against the Trojans; they were keeping themselves in reserve against the death or rout of their own comrades, for so Nestor had ordered when he sent them from the ships into battle. 

Thus through the livelong day did they wage fierce war, and the sweat of their toil rained ever on their legs under them, and on their hands and eyes, as they fought over the squire of the fleet son of Peleus. It was as when a man gives a great ox-hide all drenched in fat to his men, and bids them stretch it; whereon they stand round it in a ring and tug till the moisture leaves it, and the fat soaks in for the many that pull at it, and it is well stretched- even so did the two sides tug the dead body hither and thither within the compass of but a little space- the Trojans steadfastly set on drag ing it into Ilius, while the Achaeans were no less so on taking it to their ships; and fierce was the fight between them. Not Mars himself the lord of hosts, nor yet Minerva, even in their fullest fury could make light of such a battle. 

Such fearful turmoil of men and horses did Jove on that day ordain round the body of Patroclus. Meanwhile Achilles did not know that he had fallen, for the fight was under the wall of Troy a long way off the ships. He had no idea, therefore, that Patroclus was dead, and deemed that he would return alive as soon as he had gone close up to the gates. He knew that he was not to sack the city neither with nor without himself, for his mother had often told him this when he had sat alone with her, and she had informed him of the counsels of great Jove. Now, however, she had not told him how great a disaster had befallen him in the death of the one who was far dearest to him of all his comrades. 

The others still kept on charging one another round the body with their pointed spears and killing each other. Then would one say, "My friends, we can never again show our faces at the ships- better, and greatly better, that earth should open and swallow us here in this place, than that we should let the Trojans have the triumph of bearing off Patroclus to their city." 

The Trojans also on their part spoke to one another saying, "Friends, though we fall to a man beside this body, let none shrink from fighting." With such words did they exhort each other. They fought and fought, and an iron clank rose through the void air to the brazen vault of heaven. The horses of the descendant of Aeacus stood out of the fight and wept when they heard that their driver had been laid low by the hand of murderous Hector. Automedon, valiant son of Diores, lashed them again and again; many a time did he speak kindly to them, and many a time did he upbraid them, but they would neither go back to the ships by the waters of the broad Hellespont, nor yet into battle among the Achaeans; they stood with their chariot stock still, as a pillar set over the tomb of some dead man or woman, and bowed their heads to the ground. Hot tears fell from their eyes as they mourned the loss of their charioteer, and their noble manes drooped all wet from under the yokestraps on either side the yoke. 

The son of Saturn saw them and took pity upon their sorrow. He wagged his head, and muttered to himself, saying, "Poor things, why did we give you to King Peleus who is a mortal, while you are yourselves ageless and immortal? Was it that you might share the sorrows that befall mankind? for of all creatures that live and move upon the earth there is none so pitiable as he is- still, Hector son of Priam shall drive neither you nor your chariot. I will not have it. It is enough that he should have the armour over which he vaunts so vainly. Furthermore I will give you strength of heart and limb to bear Automedon safely to the ships from battle, for I shall let the Trojans triumph still further, and go on killing till they reach the ships; whereon night shall fall and darkness overshadow the land." 

As he spoke he breathed heart and strength into the horses so that they shook the dust from out of their manes, and bore their chariot swiftly into the fight that raged between Trojans and Achaeans. Behind them fought Automedon full of sorrow for his comrade, as a vulture amid a flock of geese. In and out, and here and there, full speed he dashed amid the throng of the Trojans, but for all the fury of his pursuit he killed no man, for he could not wield his spear and keep his horses in hand when alone in the chariot; at last, however, a comrade, Alcimedon, son of Laerces son of Haemon caught sight of him and came up behind his chariot. "Automedon," said he, "what god has put this folly into your heart and robbed you of your right mind, that you fight the Trojans in the front rank single-handed? He who was your comrade is slain, and Hector plumes himself on being armed in the armour of the descendant of Aeacus." 

Automedon son of Diores answered, "Alcimedon, there is no one else who can control and guide the immortal steeds so well as you can, save only Patroclus- while he was alive- peer of gods in counsel. Take then the whip and reins, while I go down from the car and fight. 

Alcimedon sprang on to the chariot, and caught up the whip and reins, while Automedon leaped from off the car. When Hector saw him he said to Aeneas who was near him, "Aeneas, counsellor of the mail-clad Trojans, I see the steeds of the fleet son of Aeacus come into battle with weak hands to drive them. I am sure, if you think well, that we might take them; they will not dare face us if we both attack them." 

The valiant son of Anchises was of the same mind, and the pair went right on, with their shoulders covered under shields of tough dry ox-hide, overlaid with much bronze. Chromius and Aretus went also with them, and their hearts beat high with hope that they might kill the men and capture the horses- fools that they were, for they were not to return scatheless from their meeting with Automedon, who prayed to father Jove and was forthwith filled with courage and strength abounding. He turned to his trusty comrade Alcimedon and said, "Alcimedon, keep your horses so close up that I may feel their breath upon my back; I doubt that we shall not stay Hector son of Priam till he has killed us and mounted behind the horses; he will then either spread panic among the ranks of the Achaeans, or himself be killed among the foremost." 

On this he cried out to the two Ajaxes and Menelaus, "Ajaxes captains of the Argives, and Menelaus, give the dead body over to them that are best able to defend it, and come to the rescue of us living; for Hector and Aeneas who are the two best men among the Trojans, are pressing us hard in the full tide of war. Nevertheless the issue lies on the lap of heaven, I will therefore hurl my spear and leave the rest to Jove." 

He poised and hurled as he spoke, whereon the spear struck the round shield of Aretus, and went right through it for the shield stayed it not, so that it was driven through his belt into the lower part of his belly. As when some sturdy youth, axe in hand, deals his blow behind the horns of an ox and severs the tendons at the back of its neck so that it springs forward and then drops, even so did Aretus give one bound and then fall on his back the spear quivering in his body till it made an end of him. Hector then aimed a spear at Automedon but he saw it coming and stooped forward to avoid it, so that it flew past him and the point stuck in the ground, while the butt-end went on quivering till Mars robbed it of its force. They would then have fought hand to hand with swords had not the two Ajaxes forced their way through the crowd when they heard their comrade calling, and parted them for all their fury- for Hector, Aeneas, and Chromius were afraid and drew back, leaving Aretus to lie there struck to the heart. Automedon, peer of fleet Mars, then stripped him of his armour and vaunted over him saying, "I have done little to assuage my sorrow for the son of Menoetius, for the man I have killed is not so good as he was." 

As he spoke he took the blood-stained spoils and laid them upon his chariot; then he mounted the car with his hands and feet all steeped in gore as a lion that has been gorging upon a bull. 

And now the fierce groanful fight again raged about Patroclus, for Minerva came down from heaven and roused its fury by the command of far-seeing Jove, who had changed his mind and sent her to encourage the Danaans. As when Jove bends his bright bow in heaven in token to mankind either of war or of the chill storms that stay men from their labour and plague the flocks- even so, wrapped in such radiant raiment, did Minerva go in among the host and speak man by man to each. First she took the form and voice of Phoenix and spoke to Menelaus son of Atreus, who was standing near her. "Menelaus," said she, "it will be shame and dishonour to you, if dogs tear the noble comrade of Achilles under the walls of Troy. Therefore be staunch, and urge your men to be so also." 

Menelaus answered, "Phoenix, my good old friend, may Minerva vouchsafe me strength and keep the darts from off me, for so shall I stand by Patroclus and defend him; his death has gone to my heart, but Hector is as a raging fire and deals his blows without ceasing, for Jove is now granting him a time of triumph." 

Minerva was pleased at his having named herself before any of the other gods. Therefore she put strength into his knees and shoulders, and made him as bold as a fly, which, though driven off will yet come again and bite if it can, so dearly does it love man's blood- even so bold as this did she make him as he stood over Patroclus and threw his spear. Now there was among the Trojans a man named Podes, son of Eetion, who was both rich and valiant. Hector held him in the highest honour for he was his comrade and boon companion; the spear of Menelaus struck this man in the girdle just as he had turned in flight, and went right through him. Whereon he fell heavily forward, and Menelaus son of Atreus drew off his body from the Trojans into the ranks of his own people. 

Apollo then went up to Hector and spurred him on to fight, in the likeness of Phaenops son of Asius who lived in Abydos and was the most favoured of all Hector's guests. In his likeness Apollo said, "Hector, who of the Achaeans will fear you henceforward now that you have quailed before Menelaus who has ever been rated poorly as a soldier? Yet he has now got a corpse away from the Trojans single-handed, and has slain your own true comrade, a man brave among the foremost, Podes son of Eetion. 

A dark cloud of grief fell upon Hector as he heard, and he made his way to the front clad in full armour. Thereon the son of Saturn seized his bright tasselled aegis, and veiled Ida in cloud: he sent forth his lightnings and his thunders, and as he shook his aegis he gave victory to the Trojans and routed the Achaeans. 

The panic was begun by Peneleos the Boeotian, for while keeping his face turned ever towards the foe he had been hit with a spear on the upper part of the shoulder; a spear thrown by Polydamas had grazed the top of the bone, for Polydamas had come up to him and struck him from close at hand. Then Hector in close combat struck Leitus son of noble Alectryon in the hand by the wrist, and disabled him from fighting further. He looked about him in dismay, knowing that never again should he wield spear in battle with the Trojans. While Hector was in pursuit of Leitus, Idomeneus struck him on the breastplate over his chest near the nipple; but the spear broke in the shaft, and the Trojans cheered aloud. Hector then aimed at Idomeneus son of Deucalion as he was standing on his chariot, and very narrowly missed him, but the spear hit Coiranus, a follower and charioteer of Meriones who had come with him from Lyctus. Idomeneus had left the ships on foot and would have afforded a great triumph to the Trojans if Coiranus had not driven quickly up to him, he therefore brought life and rescue to Idomeneus, but himself fell by the hand of murderous Hector. For Hector hit him on the jaw under the ear; the end of the spear drove out his teeth and cut his tongue in two pieces, so that he fell from his chariot and let the reins fall to the ground. Meriones gathered them up from the ground and took them into his own hands, then he said to Idomeneus, "Lay on, till you get back to the ships, for you must see that the day is no longer ours." 

On this Idomeneus lashed the horses to the ships, for fear had taken hold upon him. 

Ajax and Menelaus noted how Jove had turned the scale in favour of the Trojans, and Ajax was first to speak. "Alas," said he, "even a fool may see that father Jove is helping the Trojans. All their weapons strike home; no matter whether it be a brave man or a coward that hurls them, Jove speeds all alike, whereas ours fall each one of them without effect. What, then, will be best both as regards rescuing the body, and our return to the joy of our friends who will be grieving as they look hitherwards; for they will make sure that nothing can now check the terrible hands of Hector, and that he will fling himself upon our ships. I wish that some one would go and tell the son of Peleus at once, for I do not think he can have yet heard the sad news that the dearest of his friends has fallen. But I can see not a man among the Achaeans to send, for they and their chariots are alike hidden in darkness. O father Jove, lift this cloud from over the sons of the Achaeans; make heaven serene, and let us see; if you will that we perish, let us fall at any rate by daylight." 

Father Jove heard him and had compassion upon his tears. Forthwith he chased away the cloud of darkness, so that the sun shone out and all the fighting was revealed. Ajax then said to Menelaus, "Look, Menelaus, and if Antilochus son of Nestor be still living, send him at once to tell Achilles that by far the dearest to him of all his comrades has fallen." 

Menelaus heeded his words and went his way as a lion from a stockyard- the lion is tired of attacking the men and hounds, who keep watch the whole night through and will not let him feast on the fat of their herd. In his lust of meat he makes straight at them but in vain, for darts from strong hands assail him, and burning brands which daunt him for all his hunger, so in the morning he slinks sulkily away- even so did Menelaus sorely against his will leave Patroclus, in great fear lest the Achaeans should be driven back in rout and let him fall into the hands of the foe. He charged Meriones and the two Ajaxes straitly saying, "Ajaxes and Meriones, leaders of the Argives, now indeed remember how good Patroclus was; he was ever courteous while alive, bear it in mind now that he is dead." 

With this Menelaus left them, looking round him as keenly as an eagle, whose sight they say is keener than that of any other bird- however high he may be in the heavens, not a hare that runs can escape him by crouching under bush or thicket, for he will swoop down upon it and make an end of it- even so, O Menelaus, did your keen eyes range round the mighty host of your followers to see if you could find the son of Nestor still alive. Presently Menelaus saw him on the extreme left of the battle cheering on his men and exhorting them to fight boldly. Menelaus went up to him and said, "Antilochus, come here and listen to sad news, which I would indeed were untrue. You must see with your own eyes that heaven is heaping calamity upon the Danaans, and giving victory to the Trojans. Patroclus has fallen, who was the bravest of the Achaeans, and sorely will the Danaans miss him. Run instantly to the ships and tell Achilles, that he may come to rescue the body and bear it to the ships. As for the armour, Hector already has it." 

Antilochus was struck with horror. For a long time he was speechless; his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance, but he did as Menelaus had said, and set off running as soon as he had given his armour to a comrade, Laodocus, who was wheeling his horses round, close beside him. 

Thus, then, did he run weeping from the field, to carry the bad news to Achilles son of Peleus. Nor were you, O Menelaus, minded to succour his harassed comrades, when Antilochus had left the Pylians- and greatly did they miss him- but he sent them noble Thrasymedes, and himself went back to Patroclus. He came running up to the two Ajaxes and said, "I have sent Antilochus to the ships to tell Achilles, but rage against Hector as he may, he cannot come, for he cannot fight without armour. What then will be our best plan both as regards rescuing the dead, and our own escape from death amid the battle-cries of the Trojans?" 

Ajax answered, "Menelaus, you have said well: do you, then, and Meriones stoop down, raise the body, and bear it out of the fray, while we two behind you keep off Hector and the Trojans, one in heart as in name, and long used to fighting side by side with one another." 

On this Menelaus and Meriones took the dead man in their arms and lifted him high aloft with a great effort. The Trojan host raised a hue and cry behind them when they saw the Achaeans bearing the body away, and flew after them like hounds attacking a wounded boar at the loo of a band of young huntsmen. For a while the hounds fly at him as though they would tear him in pieces, but now and again he turns on them in a fury, scaring and scattering them in all directions- even so did the Trojans for a while charge in a body, striking with sword and with spears pointed ai both the ends, but when the two Ajaxes faced them and stood at bay, they would turn pale and no man dared press on to fight further about the dead. 

In this wise did the two heroes strain every nerve to bear the body to the ships out of the fight. The battle raged round them like fierce flames that when once kindled spread like wildfire over a city, and the houses fall in the glare of its burning- even such was the roar and tramp of men and horses that pursued them as they bore Patroclus from the field. Or as mules that put forth all their strength to draw some beam or great piece of ship's timber down a rough mountain-track, and they pant and sweat as they, go even so did Menelaus and pant and sweat as they bore the body of Patroclus. Behind them the two Ajaxes held stoutly out. As some wooded mountain-spur that stretches across a plain will turn water and check the flow even of a great river, nor is there any stream strong enough to break through it- even so did the two Ajaxes face the Trojans and stern the tide of their fighting though they kept pouring on towards them and foremost among them all was Aeneas son of Anchises with valiant Hector. As a flock of daws or starlings fall to screaming and chattering when they see a falcon, foe to i'll small birds, come soaring near them, even so did the Achaean youth raise a babel of cries as they fled before Aeneas and Hector, unmindful of their former prowess. In the rout of the Danaans much goodly armour fell round about the trench, and of fighting there was no end. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XVIII

THUS then did they fight as it were a flaming fire. Meanwhile the fleet runner Antilochus, who had been sent as messenger, reached Achilles, and found him sitting by his tall ships and boding that which was indeed too surely true. "Alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "why are the Achaeans again scouring the plain and flocking towards the ships? Heaven grant the gods be not now bringing that sorrow upon me of which my mother Thetis spoke, saying that while I was yet alive the bravest of the Myrmidons should fall before the Trojans, and see the light of the sun no longer. I fear the brave son of Menoetius has fallen through his own daring and yet I bade him return to the ships as soon as he had driven back those that were bringing fire against them, and not join battle with Hector." 

As he was thus pondering, the son of Nestor came up to him and told his sad tale, weeping bitterly the while. "Alas," he cried, "son of noble Peleus, I bring you bad tidings, would indeed that they were untrue. Patroclus has fallen, and a fight is raging about his naked body- for Hector holds his armour." 

A dark cloud of grief fell upon Achilles as he listened. He filled both hands with dust from off the ground, and poured it over his head, disfiguring his comely face, and letting the refuse settle over his shirt so fair and new. He flung himself down all huge and hugely at full length, and tore his hair with his hands. The bondswomen whom Achilles and Patroclus had taken captive screamed aloud for grief, beating their breasts, and with their limbs failing them for sorrow. Antilochus bent over him the while, weeping and holding both his hands as he lay groaning for he feared that he might plunge a knife into his own throat. Then Achilles gave a loud cry and his mother heard him as she was sitting in the depths of the sea by the old man her father, whereon she screamed, and all the goddesses daughters of Nereus that dwelt at the bottom of the sea, came gathering round her. There were Glauce, Thalia and Cymodoce, Nesaia, Speo, thoe and dark-eyed Halie, Cymothoe, Actaea and Limnorea, Melite, Iaera, Amphithoe and Agave, Doto and Proto, Pherusa and Dynamene, Dexamene, Amphinome and Callianeira, Doris, Panope, and the famous sea-nymph Galatea, Nemertes, Apseudes and Callianassa. There were also Clymene, Ianeira and Ianassa, Maera, Oreithuia and Amatheia of the lovely locks, with other Nereids who dwell in the depths of the sea. The crystal cave was filled with their multitude and they all beat their breasts while Thetis led them in their lament. 

"Listen," she cried, "sisters, daughters of Nereus, that you may hear the burden of my sorrows. Alas, woe is me, woe in that I have borne the most glorious of offspring. I bore him fair and strong, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling; I tended him as a plant in a goodly garden, and sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the Trojans, but never shall I welcome him back to the house of Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun he is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot help him. Nevertheless I will go, that I may see my dear son and learn what sorrow has befallen him though he is still holding aloof from battle." 

She left the cave as she spoke, while the others followed weeping after, and the waves opened a path before them. When they reached the rich plain of Troy, they came up out of the sea in a long line on to the sands, at the place where the ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up in close order round the tents of Achilles. His mother went up to him as he lay groaning; she laid her hand upon his head and spoke piteously, saying, "My son, why are you thus weeping? What sorrow has now befallen you? Tell me; hide it not from me. Surely Jove has granted you the prayer you made him, when you lifted up your hands and besought him that the Achaeans might all of them be pent up at their ships, and rue it bitterly in that you were no longer with them." 

Achilles groaned and answered, "Mother, Olympian Jove has indeed vouchsafed me the fulfilment of my prayer, but what boots it to me, seeing that my dear comrade Patroclus has fallen- he whom I valued more than all others, and loved as dearly as my own life? I have lost him; aye, and Hector when he had killed him stripped the wondrous armour, so glorious to behold, which the gods gave to Peleus when they laid you in the couch of a mortal man. Would that you were still dwelling among the immortal sea-nymphs, and that Peleus had taken to himself some mortal bride. For now you shall have grief infinite by reason of the death of that son whom you can never welcome home- nay, I will not live nor go about among mankind unless Hector fall by my spear, and thus pay me for having slain Patroclus son of Menoetius." 

Thetis wept and answered, "Then, my son, is your end near at hand- for your own death awaits you full soon after that of Hector." 

Then said Achilles in his great grief, "I would die here and now, in that I could not save my comrade. He has fallen far from home, and in his hour of need my hand was not there to help him. What is there for me? Return to my own land I shall not, and I have brought no saving neither to Patroclus nor to my other comrades of whom so many have been slain by mighty Hector; I stay here by my ships a bootless burden upon the earth, I, who in fight have no peer among the Achaeans, though in council there are better than I. Therefore, perish strife both from among gods and men, and anger, wherein even a righteous man will harden his heart- which rises up in the soul of a man like smoke, and the taste thereof is sweeter than drops of honey. Even so has Agamemnon angered me. And yet- so be it, for it is over; I will force my soul into subjection as I needs must; I will go; I will pursue Hector who has slain him whom I loved so dearly, and will then abide my doom when it may please Jove and the other gods to send it. Even Hercules, the best beloved of Jove- even he could not escape the hand of death, but fate and Juno's fierce anger laid him low, as I too shall lie when I am dead if a like doom awaits me. Till then I will win fame, and will bid Trojan and Dardanian women wring tears from their tender cheeks with both their hands in the grievousness of their great sorrow; thus shall they know that he who has held aloof so long will hold aloof no longer. Hold me not back, therefore, in the love you bear me, for you shall not move me." 

Then silver-footed Thetis answered, "My son, what you have said is true. It is well to save your comrades from destruction, but your armour is in the hands of the Trojans; Hector bears it in triumph upon his own shoulders. Full well I know that his vaunt shall not be lasting, for his end is close at hand; go not, however, into the press of battle till you see me return hither; to-morrow at break of day I shall be here, and will bring you goodly armour from King Vulcan." 

On this she left her brave son, and as she turned away she said to the sea-nymphs her sisters, "Dive into the bosom of the sea and go to the house of the old sea-god my father. Tell him everything; as for me, I will go to the cunning workman Vulcan on high Olympus, and ask him to provide my son with a suit of splendid armour." 

When she had so said, they dived forthwith beneath the waves, while silver-footed Thetis went her way that she might bring the armour for her son. 

Thus, then, did her feet bear the goddess to Olympus, and meanwhile the Achaeans were flying with loud cries before murderous Hector till they reached the ships and the Hellespont, and they could not draw the body of Mars's servant Patroclus out of reach of the weapons that were showered upon him, for Hector son of Priam with his host and horsemen had again caught up to him like the flame of a fiery furnace; thrice did brave Hector seize him by the feet, striving with might and main to draw him away and calling loudly on the Trojans, and thrice did the two Ajaxes, clothed in valour as with a garment, beat him from off the body; but all undaunted he would now charge into the thick of the fight, and now again he would stand still and cry aloud, but he would give no ground. As upland shepherds that cannot chase some famished lion from a carcase, even so could not the two Ajaxes scare Hector son of Priam from the body of Patroclus. 

And now he would even have dragged it off and have won imperishable glory, had not Iris fleet as the wind, winged her way as messenger from Olympus to the son of Peleus and bidden him arm. She came secretly without the knowledge of Jove and of the other gods, for Juno sent her, and when she had got close to him she said, "Up, son of Peleus, mightiest of all mankind; rescue Patroclus about whom this fearful fight is now raging by the ships. Men are killing one another, the Danaans in defence of the dead body, while the Trojans are trying to hale it away, and take it to wind Ilius: Hector is the most furious of them all; he is for cutting the head from the body and fixing it on the stakes of the wall. Up, then, and bide here no longer; shrink from the thought that Patroclus may become meat for the dogs of Troy. Shame on you, should his body suffer any kind of outrage." 

And Achilles said, "Iris, which of the gods was it that sent you to me?" 

Iris answered, "It was Juno the royal spouse of Jove, but the son of Saturn does not know of my coming, nor yet does any other of the immortals who dwell on the snowy summits of Olympus." 

Then fleet Achilles answered her saying, "How can I go up into the battle? They have my armour. My mother forbade me to arm till I should see her come, for she promised to bring me goodly armour from Vulcan; I know no man whose arms I can put on, save only the shield of Ajax son of Telamon, and he surely must be fighting in the front rank and wielding his spear about the body of dead Patroclus." 

Iris said, 'We know that your armour has been taken, but go as you are; go to the deep trench and show yourelf before the Trojans, that they may fear you and cease fighting. Thus will the fainting sons of the Achaeans gain some brief breathing-time, which in battle may hardly be." 

Iris left him when she had so spoken. But Achilles dear to Jove arose, and Minerva flung her tasselled aegis round his strong shoulders; she crowned his head with a halo of golden cloud from which she kindled a glow of gleaming fire. As the smoke that goes up into heaven from some city that is being beleaguered on an island far out at sea- all day long do men sally from the city and fight their hardest, and at the going down of the sun the line of beacon-fires blazes forth, flaring high for those that dwell near them to behold, if so be that they may come with their ships and succour them- even so did the light flare from the head of Achilles, as he stood by the trench, going beyond the wall- but he aid not join the Achaeans for he heeded the charge which his mother laid upon him. 

There did he stand and shout aloud. Minerva also raised her voice from afar, and spread terror unspeakable among the Trojans. Ringing as the note of a trumpet that sounds alarm then the foe is at the gates of a city, even so brazen was the voice of the son of Aeacus, and when the Trojans heard its clarion tones they were dismayed; the horses turned back with their chariots for they boded mischief, and their drivers were awe-struck by the steady flame which the grey-eyed goddess had kindled above the head of the great son of Peleus. 

Thrice did Achilles raise his loud cry as he stood by the trench, and thrice were the Trojans and their brave allies thrown into confusion; whereon twelve of their noblest champions fell beneath the wheels of their chariots and perished by their own spears. The Achaeans to their great joy then drew Patroclus out of reach of the weapons, and laid him on a litter: his comrades stood mourning round him, and among them fleet Achilles who wept bitterly as he saw his true comrade lying dead upon his bier. He had sent him out with horses and chariots into battle, but his return he was not to welcome. 

Then Juno sent the busy sun, loth though he was, into the waters of Oceanus; so he set, and the Achaeans had rest from the tug and turmoil of war. 

Now the Trojans when they had come out of the fight, unyoked their horses and gathered in assembly before preparing their supper. They kept their feet, nor would any dare to sit down, for fear had fallen upon them all because Achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so long from battle. Polydamas son of Panthous was first to speak, a man of judgement, who alone among them could look both before and after. He was comrade to Hector, and they had been born upon the same night; with all sincerity and goodwill, therefore, he addressed them thus:- 

"Look to it well, my friends; I would urge you to go back now to your city and not wait here by the ships till morning, for we are far from our walls. So long as this man was at enmity with Agamemnon the Achaeans were easier to deal with, and I would have gladly camped by the ships in the hope of taking them; but now I go in great fear of the fleet son of Peleus; he is so daring that he will never bide here on the plain whereon the Trojans and Achaeans fight with equal valour, but he will try to storm our city and carry off our women. Do then as I say, and let us retreat. For this is what will happen. The darkness of night will for a time stay the son of Peleus, but if he find us here in the morning when he sallies forth in full armour, we shall have knowledge of him in good earnest. Glad indeed will he be who can escape and get back to Ilius, and many a Trojan will become meat for dogs and vultures may I never live to hear it. If we do as I say, little though we may like it, we shall have strength in counsel during the night, and the great gates with the doors that close them will protect the city. At dawn we can arm and take our stand on the walls; he will then rue it if he sallies from the ships to fight us. He will go back when he has given his horses their fill of being driven all whithers under our walls, and will be in no mind to try and force his way into the city. Neither will he ever sack it, dogs shall devour him ere he do so." 

Hector looked fiercely at him and answered, "Polydamas, your words are not to my liking in that you bid us go back and be pent within the city. Have you not had enough of being cooped up behind walls? In the old-days the city of Priam was famous the whole world over for its wealth of gold and bronze, but our treasures are wasted out of our houses, and much goods have been sold away to Phrygia and fair Meonia, for the hand of Jove has been laid heavily upon us. Now, therefore, that the son of scheming Saturn has vouchsafed me to win glory here and to hem the Achaeans in at their ships, prate no more in this fool's wise among the people. You will have no man with you; it shall not be; do all of you as I now say;- take your suppers in your companies throughout the host, and keep your watches and be wakeful every man of you. If any Trojan is uneasy about his possessions, let him gather them and give them out among the people. Better let these, rather than the Achaeans, have them. At daybreak we will arm and fight about the ships; granted that Achilles has again come forward to defend them, let it be as he will, but it shall go hard with him. I shall not shun him, but will fight him, to fall or conquer. The god of war deals out like measure to all, and the slayer may yet be slain." 

Thus spoke Hector; and the Trojans, fools that they were, shouted in applause, for Pallas Minerva had robbed them of their understanding. They gave ear to Hector with his evil counsel, but the wise words of Polydamas no man would heed. They took their supper throughout the host, and meanwhile through the whole night the Achaeans mourned Patroclus, and the son of Peleus led them in their lament. He laid his murderous hands upon the breast of his comrade, groaning again and again as a bearded lion when a man who was chasing deer has robbed him of his young in some dense forest; when the lion comes back he is furious, and searches dingle and dell to track the hunter if he can find him, for he is mad with rage- even so with many a sigh did Achilles speak among the Myrmidons saying, "Alas! vain were the words with which I cheered the hero Menoetius in his own house; I said that I would bring his brave son back again to Opoeis after he had sacked Ilius and taken his share of the spoils- but Jove does not give all men their heart's desire. The same soil shall be reddened here at Troy by the blood of us both, for I too shall never be welcomed home by the old knight Peleus, nor by my mother Thetis, but even in this place shall the earth cover me. Nevertheless, O Patroclus, now that I am left behind you, I will not bury you, till I have brought hither the head and armour of mighty Hector who has slain you. Twelve noble sons of Trojans will I behead before your bier to avenge you; till I have done so you shall lie as you are by the ships, and fair women of Troy and Dardanus, whom we have taken with spear and strength of arm when we sacked men's goodly cities, shall weep over you both night and day." 

Then Achilles told his men to set a large tripod upon the fire that they might wash the clotted gore from off Patroclus. Thereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire: they threw sticks on to it to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. When the water in the cauldron was boiling they washed the body, anointed it with oil, and closed its wounds with ointment that had been kept nine years. Then they laid it on a bier and covered it with a linen cloth from head to foot, and over this they laid a fair white robe. Thus all night long did the Myrmidons gather round Achilles to mourn Patroclus. 

Then Jove said to Juno his sister-wife, "So, Queen Juno, you have gained your end, and have roused fleet Achilles. One would think that the Achaeans were of your own flesh and blood." 

And Juno answered, "Dread son of Saturn, why should you say this thing? May not a man though he be only mortal and knows less than we do, do what he can for another person? And shall not I- foremost of all goddesses both by descent and as wife to you who reign in heaven- devise evil for the Trojans if I am angry with them?" 

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Thetis came to the house of Vulcan, imperishable, star-bespangled, fairest of the abodes in heaven, a house of bronze wrought by the lame god's own hands. She found him busy with his bellows, sweating and hard at work, for he was making twenty tripods that were to stand by the wall of his house, and he set wheels of gold under them all that they might go of their own selves to the assemblies of the gods, and come back again- marvels indeed to see. They were finished all but the ears of cunning workmanship which yet remained to be fixed to them: these he was now fixing, and he was hammering at the rivets. While he was thus at work silver-footed Thetis came to the house. Charis, of graceful head-dress, wife to the far-famed lame god, came towards her as soon as she saw her, and took her hand in her own, saying, "Why have you come to our house, Thetis, honoured and ever welcome- for you do not visit us often? Come inside and let me set refreshment before you." 

The goddess led the way as she spoke, and bade Thetis sit on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under her feet. Then she called Vulcan and said, "Vulcan, come here, Thetis wants you"; and the far-famed lame god answered, "Then it is indeed an august and honoured goddess who has come here; she it was that took care of me when I was suffering from the heavy fall which I had through my cruel mother's anger- for she would have got rid of me because I was lame. It would have gone hardly with me had not Eurynome, daughter of the ever-encircling waters of Oceanus, and Thetis, taken me to their bosom. Nine years did I stay with them, and many beautiful works in bronze, brooches, spiral armlets, cups, and chains, did I make for them in their cave, with the roaring waters of Oceanus foaming as they rushed ever past it; and no one knew, neither of gods nor men, save only Thetis and Eurynome who took care of me. If, then, Thetis has come to my house I must make her due requital for having saved me; entertain her, therefore, with all hospitality, while I put by my bellows and all my tools." 

On this the mighty monster hobbled off from his anvil, his thin legs plying lustily under him. He set the bellows away from the fire, and gathered his tools into a silver chest. Then he took a sponge and washed his face and hands, his shaggy chest and brawny neck; he donned his shirt, grasped his strong staff, and limped towards the door. There were golden handmaids also who worked for him, and were like real young women, with sense and reason, voice also and strength, and all the learning of the immortals; these busied themselves as the king bade them, while he drew near to Thetis, seated her upon a goodly seat, and took her hand in his own, saying, "Why have you come to our house, Thetis honoured and ever welcome- for you do not visit us often? Say what you want, and I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be done at all." 

Thetis wept and answered, "Vulcan, is there another goddess in Olympus whom the son of Saturn has been pleased to try with so much affliction as he has me? Me alone of the marine goddesses did he make subject to a mortal husband, Peleus son of Aeacus, and sorely against my will did I submit to the embraces of one who was but mortal, and who now stays at home worn out with age. Neither is this all. Heaven vouchsafed me a son, hero among heroes, and he shot up as a sapling. I tended him as a plant in a goodly garden and sent him with his ships to Ilius to fight the Trojans, but never shall I welcome him back to the house of Peleus. So long as he lives to look upon the light of the sun, he is in heaviness, and though I go to him I cannot help him; King Agamemnon has made him give up the maiden whom the sons of the Achaeans had awarded him, and he wastes with sorrow for her sake. Then the Trojans hemmed the Achaeans in at their ships' sterns and would not let them come forth; the elders, therefore, of the Argives besought Achilles and offered him great treasure, whereon he refused to bring deliverance to them himself, but put his own armour on Patroclus and sent him into the fight with much people after him. All day long they fought by the Scaean gates and would have taken the city there and then, had not Apollo vouchsafed glory to Hector and slain the valiant son of Menoetius after he had done the Trojans much evil. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees if haply you may be pleased to provide my son, whose end is near at hand, with helmet and shield, with goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and with a breastplate, for he lost his own when his true comrade fell at the hands of the Trojans, and he now lies stretched on earth in the bitterness of his soul." 

And Vulcan answered, "Take heart, and be no more disquieted about this matter; would that I could hide him from death's sight when his hour is come, so surely as I can find him armour that shall amaze the eyes of all who behold it." 

When he had so said he left her and went to his bellows, turning them towards the fire and bidding them do their office. Twenty bellows blew upon the melting-pots, and they blew blasts of every kind, some fierce to help him when he had need of them, and others less strong as Vulcan willed it in the course of his work. He threw tough copper into the fire, and tin, with silver and gold; he set his great anvil on its block, and with one hand grasped his mighty hammer while he took the tongs in the other. 

First he shaped the shield so great and strong, adorning it all over and binding it round with a gleaming circuit in three layers; and the baldric was made of silver. He made the shield in five thicknesses, and with many a wonder did his cunning hand enrich it. 

He wrought the earth, the heavens, and the sea; the moon also at her full and the untiring sun, with all the signs that glorify the face of heaven- the Pleiads, the Hyads, huge Orion, and the Bear, which men also call the Wain and which turns round ever in one place, facing. Orion, and alone never dips into the stream of Oceanus. 

He wrought also two cities, fair to see and busy with the hum of men. In the one were weddings and wedding-feasts, and they were going about the city with brides whom they were escorting by torchlight from their chambers. Loud rose the cry of Hymen, and the youths danced to the music of flute and lyre, while the women stood each at her house door to see them. 

Meanwhile the people were gathered in assembly, for there was a quarrel, and two men were wrangling about the blood-money for a man who had been killed, the one saying before the people that he had paid damages in full, and the other that he had not been paid. Each was trying to make his own case good, and the people took sides, each man backing the side that he had taken; but the heralds kept them back, and the elders sate on their seats of stone in a solemn circle, holding the staves which the heralds had put into their hands. Then they rose and each in his turn gave judgement, and there were two talents laid down, to be given to him whose judgement should be deemed the fairest. 

About the other city there lay encamped two hosts in gleaming armour, and they were divided whether to sack it, or to spare it and accept the half of what it contained. But the men of the city would not yet consent, and armed themselves for a surprise; their wives and little children kept guard upon the walls, and with them were the men who were past fighting through age; but the others sallied forth with Mars and Pallas Minerva at their head- both of them wrought in gold and clad in golden raiment, great and fair with their armour as befitting gods, while they that followed were smaller. When they reached the place where they would lay their ambush, it was on a riverbed to which live stock of all kinds would come from far and near to water; here, then, they lay concealed, clad in full armour. Some way off them there were two scouts who were on the look-out for the coming of sheep or cattle, which presently came, followed by two shepherds who were playing on their pipes, and had not so much as a thought of danger. When those who were in ambush saw this, they cut off the flocks and herds and killed the shepherds. Meanwhile the besiegers, when they heard much noise among the cattle as they sat in council, sprang to their horses, and made with all speed towards them; when they reached them they set battle in array by the banks of the river, and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another. With them were Strife and Riot, and fell Fate who was dragging three men after her, one with a fresh wound, and the other unwounded, while the third was dead, and she was dragging him along by his heel: and her robe was bedrabbled in men's blood. They went in and out with one another and fought as though they were living people haling away one another's dead. 

He wrought also a fair fallow field, large and thrice ploughed already. Many men were working at the plough within it, turning their oxen to and fro, furrow after furrow. Each time that they turned on reaching the headland a man would come up to them and give them a cup of wine, and they would go back to their furrows looking forward to the time when they should again reach the headland. The part that they had ploughed was dark behind them, so that the field, though it was of gold, still looked as if it were being ploughed- very curious to behold. 

He wrought also a field of harvest corn, and the reapers were reaping with sharp sickles in their hands. Swathe after swathe fell to the ground in a straight line behind them, and the binders bound them in bands of twisted straw. There were three binders, and behind them there were boys who gathered the cut corn in armfuls and kept on bringing them to be bound: among them all the owner of the land stood by in silence and was glad. The servants were getting a meal ready under an oak, for they had sacrificed a great ox, and were busy cutting him up, while the women were making a porridge of much white barley for the labourers' dinner. 

He wrought also a vineyard, golden and fair to see, and the vines were loaded with grapes. The bunches overhead were black, but the vines were trained on poles of silver. He ran a ditch of dark metal all round it, and fenced it with a fence of tin; there was only one path to it, and by this the vintagers went when they would gather the vintage. Youths and maidens all blithe and full of glee, carried the luscious fruit in plaited baskets; and with them there went a boy who made sweet music with his lyre, and sang the Linus-song with his clear boyish voice. 

He wrought also a herd of homed cattle. He made the cows of gold and tin, and they lowed as they came full speed out of the yards to go and feed among the waving reeds that grow by the banks of the river. Along with the cattle there went four shepherds, all of them in gold, and their nine fleet dogs went with them. Two terrible lions had fastened on a bellowing bull that was with the foremost cows, and bellow as he might they haled him, while the dogs and men gave chase: the lions tore through the bull's thick hide and were gorging on his blood and bowels, but the herdsmen were afraid to do anything, and only hounded on their dogs; the dogs dared not fasten on the lions but stood by barking and keeping out of harm's way. 

The god wrought also a pasture in a fair mountain dell, and large flock of sheep, with a homestead and huts, and sheltered sheepfolds. 

Furthermore he wrought a green, like that which Daedalus once made in Cnossus for lovely Ariadne. Hereon there danced youths and maidens whom all would woo, with their hands on one another's wrists. The maidens wore robes of light linen, and the youths well woven shirts that were slightly oiled. The girls were crowned with garlands, while the young men had daggers of gold that hung by silver baldrics; sometimes they would dance deftly in a ring with merry twinkling feet, as it were a potter sitting at his work and making trial of his wheel to see whether it will run, and sometimes they would go all in line with one another, and much people was gathered joyously about the green. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up with his tune. 

All round the outermost rim of the shield he set the mighty stream of the river Oceanus. 

Then when he had fashioned the shield so great and strong, he made a breastplate also that shone brighter than fire. He made helmet, close fitting to the brow, and richly worked, with a golden plume overhanging it; and he made greaves also of beaten tin. 

Lastly, when the famed lame god had made all the armour, he took it and set it before the mother of Achilles; whereon she darted like a falcon from the snowy summits of Olympus and bore away the gleaming armour from the house of Vulcan. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XIX

NOW when Dawn in robe of saffron was hasting from the streams of Oceanus, to bring light to mortals and immortals, Thetis reached the ships with the armour that the god had given her. She found her son fallen about the body of Patroclus and weeping bitterly. Many also of his followers were weeping round him, but when the goddess came among them she clasped his hand in her own, saying, "My son, grieve as we may we must let this man lie, for it is by heaven's will that he has fallen; now, therefore, accept from Vulcan this rich and goodly armour, which no man has ever yet borne upon his shoulders." 

As she spoke she set the armour before Achilles, and it rang out bravely as she did so. The Myrmidons were struck with awe, and none dared look full at it, for they were afraid; but Achilles was roused to still greater fury, and his eyes gleamed with a fierce light, for he was glad when he handled the splendid present which the god had made him. Then, as soon as he had satisfied himself with looking at it, he said to his mother, "Mother, the god has given me armour, meet handiwork for an immortal and such as no living could have fashioned; I will now arm, but I much fear that flies will settle upon the son of Menoetius and breed worms about his wounds, so that his body, now he is dead, will be disfigured and the flesh will rot." 

Silver-footed Thetis answered, "My son, be not disquieted about this matter. I will find means to protect him from the swarms of noisome flies that prey on the bodies of men who have been killed in battle. He may lie for a whole year, and his flesh shall still be as sound as ever, or even sounder. Call, therefore, the Achaean heroes in assembly; unsay your anger against Agamemnon; arm at once, and fight with might and main." 

As she spoke she put strength and courage into his heart, and she then dropped ambrosia and red nectar into the wounds of Patroclus, that his body might suffer no change. 

Then Achilles went out upon the seashore, and with a loud cry called on the Achaean heroes. On this even those who as yet had stayed always at the ships, the pilots and helmsmen, and even the stewards who were about the ships and served out rations, all came to the place of assembly because Achilles had shown himself after having held aloof so long from fighting. Two sons of Mars, Ulysses and the son of Tydeus, came limping, for their wounds still pained them; nevertheless they came, and took their seats in the front row of the assembly. Last of all came Agamemnon, king of men, he too wounded, for Coon son of Antenor had struck him with a spear in battle. 

When the Achaeans were got together Achilles rose and said, "Son of Atreus, surely it would have been better alike for both you and me, when we two were in such high anger about Briseis, surely it would have been better, had Diana's arrow slain her at the ships on the day when I took her after having sacked Lyrnessus. For so, many an Achaean the less would have bitten dust before the foe in the days of my anger. It has been well for Hector and the Trojans, but the Achaeans will long indeed remember our quarrel. Now, however, let it be, for it is over. If we have been angry, necessity has schooled our anger. I put it from me: I dare not nurse it for ever; therefore, bid the Achaeans arm forthwith that I may go out against the Trojans, and learn whether they will be in a mind to sleep by the ships or no. Glad, I ween, will he be to rest his knees who may fly my spear when I wield it." 

Thus did he speak, and the Achaeans rejoiced in that he had put away his anger. 

Then Agamemnon spoke, rising in his place, and not going into the middle of the assembly. "Danaan heroes," said he, "servants of Mars, it is well to listen when a man stands up to speak, and it is not seemly to interrupt him, or it will go hard even with a practised speaker. Who can either hear or speak in an uproar? Even the finest orator will be disconcerted by it. I will expound to the son of Peleus, and do you other Achaeans heed me and mark me well. Often have the Achaeans spoken to me of this matter and upbraided me, but it was not I that did it: Jove, and Fate, and Erinys that walks in darkness struck me mad when we were assembled on the day that I took from Achilles the meed that had been awarded to him. What could I do? All things are in the hand of heaven, and Folly, eldest of Jove's daughters, shuts men's eyes to their destruction. She walks delicately, not on the solid earth, but hovers over the heads of men to make them stumble or to ensnare them. 

"Time was when she fooled Jove himself, who they say is greatest whether of gods or men; for Juno, woman though she was, beguiled him on the day when Alcmena was to bring forth mighty Hercules in the fair city of Thebes. He told it out among the gods saying, 'Hear me all gods and goddesses, that I may speak even as I am minded; this day shall an Ilithuia, helper of women who are in labour, bring a man child into the world who shall be lord over all that dwell about him who are of my blood and lineage.' Then said Juno all crafty and full of guile, 'You will play false, and will not hold to your word. Swear me, O Olympian, swear me a great oath, that he who shall this day fall between the feet of a woman, shall be lord over all that dwell about him who are of your blood and lineage.' 

"Thus she spoke, and Jove suspected her not, but swore the great oath, to his much ruing thereafter. For Juno darted down from the high summit of Olympus, and went in haste to Achaean Argos where she knew that the noble wife of Sthenelus son of Perseus then was. She being with child and in her seventh month, Juno brought the child to birth though there was a month still wanting, but she stayed the offspring of Alcmena, and kept back the Ilithuiae. Then she went to tell Jove the son of Saturn, and said, 'Father Jove, lord of the lightning- I have a word for your ear. There is a fine child born this day, Eurystheus, son to Sthenelus the son of Perseus; he is of your lineage; it is well, therefore, that he should reign over the Argives.' 

"On this Jove was stung to the very quick, and in his rage he caught Folly by the hair, and swore a great oath that never should she again invade starry heaven and Olympus, for she was the bane of all. Then he whirled her round with a twist of his hand, and flung her down from heaven so that she fell on to the fields of mortal men; and he was ever angry with her when he saw his son groaning under the cruel labours that Eurystheus laid upon him. Even so did I grieve when mighty Hector was killing the Argives at their ships, and all the time I kept thinking of Folly who had so baned me. I was blind, and Jove robbed me of my reason; I will now make atonement, and will add much treasure by way of amends. Go, therefore, into battle, you and your people with you. I will give you all that Ulysses offered you yesterday in your tents: or if it so please you, wait, though you would fain fight at once, and my squires shall bring the gifts from my ship, that you may see whether what I give you is enough." 

And Achilles answered, "Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, you can give such gifts as you think proper, or you can withhold them: it is in your own hands. Let us now set battle in array; it is not well to tarry talking about trifles, for there is a deed which is as yet to do. Achilles shall again be seen fighting among the foremost, and laying low the ranks of the Trojans: bear this in mind each one of you when he is fighting." 

Then Ulysses said, "Achilles, godlike and brave, send not the Achaeans thus against Ilius to fight the Trojans fasting, for the battle will be no brief one, when it is once begun, and heaven has filled both sides with fury; bid them first take food both bread and wine by the ships, for in this there is strength and stay. No man can do battle the livelong day to the going down of the sun if he is without food; however much he may want to fight his strength will fail him before he knows it; hunger and thirst will find him out, and his limbs will grow weary under him. But a man can fight all day if he is full fed with meat and wine; his heart beats high, and his strength will stay till he has routed all his foes; therefore, send the people away and bid them prepare their meal; King Agamemnon will bring out the gifts in presence of the assembly, that all may see them and you may be satisfied. Moreover let him swear an oath before the Argives that he has never gone up into the couch of Briseis, nor been with her after the manner of men and women; and do you, too, show yourself of a gracious mind; let Agamemnon entertain you in his tents with a feast of reconciliation, that so you may have had your dues in full. As for you, son of Atreus, treat people more righteously in future; it is no disgrace even to a king that he should make amends if he was wrong in the first instance." 

And King Agamemnon answered, "Son of Laertes, your words please me well, for throughout you have spoken wisely. I will swear as you would have me do; I do so of my own free will, neither shall I take the name of heaven in vain. Let, then, Achilles wait, though he would fain fight at once, and do you others wait also, till the gifts come from my tent and we ratify the oath with sacrifice. Thus, then, do I charge you: take some noble young Achaeans with you, and bring from my tents the gifts that I promised yesterday to Achilles, and bring the women also; furthermore let Talthybius find me a boar from those that are with the host, and make it ready for sacrifice to Jove and to the sun." 

Then said Achilles, "Son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, see to these matters at some other season, when there is breathing time and when I am calmer. Would you have men eat while the bodies of those whom Hector son of Priam slew are still lying mangled upon the plain? Let the sons of the Achaeans, say I, fight fasting and without food, till we have avenged them; afterwards at the going down of the sun let them eat their fill. As for me, Patroclus is lying dead in my tent, all hacked and hewn, with his feet to the door, and his comrades are mourning round him. Therefore I can take thought of nothing save only slaughter and blood and the rattle in the throat of the dying." 

Ulysses answered, "Achilles, son of Peleus, mightiest of all the Achaeans, in battle you are better than I, and that more than a little, but in counsel I am much before you, for I am older and of greater knowledge. Therefore be patient under my words. Fighting is a thing of which men soon surfeit, and when Jove, who is wars steward, weighs the upshot, it may well prove that the straw which our sickles have reaped is far heavier than the grain. It may not be that the Achaeans should mourn the dead with their bellies; day by day men fall thick and threefold continually; when should we have respite from our sorrow? Let us mourn our dead for a day and bury them out of sight and mind, but let those of us who are left eat and drink that we may arm and fight our foes more fiercely. In that hour let no man hold back, waiting for a second summons; such summons shall bode ill for him who is found lagging behind at our ships; let us rather sally as one man and loose the fury of war upon the Trojans." 

When he had thus spoken he took with him the sons of Nestor, with Meges son of Phyleus, Thoas, Meriones, Lycomedes son of Creontes, and Melanippus, and went to the tent of Agamemnon son of Atreus. The word was not sooner said than the deed was done: they brought out the seven tripods which Agamemnon had promised, with the twenty metal cauldrons and the twelve horses; they also brought the women skilled in useful arts, seven in number, with Briseis, which made eight. Ulysses weighed out the ten talents of gold and then led the way back, while the young Achaeans brought the rest of the gifts, and laid them in the middle of the assembly. 

Agamemnon then rose, and Talthybius whose voice was like that of a god came to him with the boar. The son of Atreus drew the knife which he wore by the scabbard of his mighty sword, and began by cutting off some bristles from the boar, lifting up his hands in prayer as he did so. The other Achaeans sat where they were all silent and orderly to hear the king, and Agamemnon looked into the vault of heaven and prayed saying, "I call Jove the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, I call also Earth and Sun and the Erinyes who dwell below and take vengeance on him who shall swear falsely, that I have laid no hand upon the girl Briseis, neither to take her to my bed nor otherwise, but that she has remained in my tents inviolate. If I swear falsely may heaven visit me with all the penalties which it metes out to those who perjure themselves." 

He cut the boar's throat as he spoke, whereon Talthybius whirled it round his head, and flung it into the wide sea to feed the fishes. Then Achilles also rose and said to the Argives, "Father Jove, of a truth you blind men's eyes and bane them. The son of Atreus had not else stirred me to so fierce an anger, nor so stubbornly taken Briseis from me against my will. Surely Jove must have counselled the destruction of many an Argive. Go, now, and take your food that we may begin fighting." 

On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own ship. The Myrmidons attended to the presents and took them away to the ship of Achilles. They placed them in his tents, while the stable-men drove the horses in among the others. 

Briseis, fair as Venus, when she saw the mangled body of Patroclus, flung herself upon it and cried aloud, tearing her breast, her neck, and her lovely face with both her hands. Beautiful as a goddess she wept and said, "Patroclus, dearest friend, when I went hence I left you living; I return, O prince, to find you dead; thus do fresh sorrows multiply upon me one after the other. I saw him to whom my father and mother married me, cut down before our city, and my three own dear brothers perished with him on the self-same day; but you, Patroclus, even when Achilles slew my husband and sacked the city of noble Mynes, told me that I was not to weep, for you said you would make Achilles marry me, and take me back with him to Phthia, we should have a wedding feast among the Myrmidons. You were always kind to me and I shall never cease to grieve for you." 

She wept as she spoke, and the women joined in her lament-making as though their tears were for Patroclus, but in truth each was weeping for her own sorrows. The elders of the Achaeans gathered round Achilles and prayed him to take food, but he groaned and would not do so. "I pray you," said he, "if any comrade will hear me, bid me neither eat nor drink, for I am in great heaviness, and will stay fasting even to the going down of the sun." 

On this he sent the other princes away, save only the two sons of Atreus and Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the knight Phoenix, who stayed behind and tried to comfort him in the bitterness of his sorrow: but he would not be comforted till he should have flung himself into the jaws of battle, and he fetched sigh on sigh, thinking ever of Patroclus. Then he said- 

"Hapless and dearest comrade, you it was who would get a good dinner ready for me at once and without delay when the Achaeans were hasting to fight the Trojans; now, therefore, though I have meat and drink in my tents, yet will I fast for sorrow. Grief greater than this I could not know, not even though I were to hear of the death of my father, who is now in Phthia weeping for the loss of me his son, who am here fighting the Trojans in a strange land for the accursed sake of Helen, nor yet though I should hear that my son is no more- he who is being brought up in Scyros- if indeed Neoptolemus is still living. Till now I made sure that I alone was to fall here at Troy away from Argos, while you were to return to Phthia, bring back my son with you in your own ship, and show him all my property, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house- for Peleus must surely be either dead, or what little life remains to him is oppressed alike with the infirmities of age and ever present fear lest he should hear the sad tidings of my death." 

He wept as he spoke, and the elders sighed in concert as each thought on what he had left at home behind him. The son of Saturn looked down with pity upon them, and said presently to Minerva, "My child, you have quite deserted your hero; is he then gone so clean out of your recollection? There he sits by the ships all desolate for the loss of his dear comrade, and though the others are gone to their dinner he will neither eat nor drink. Go then and drop nectar and ambrosia into his breast, that he may know no hunger." 

With these words he urged Minerva, who was already of the same mind. She darted down from heaven into the air like some falcon sailing on his broad wings and screaming. Meanwhile the Achaeans were arming throughout the host, and when Minerva had dropped nectar and ambrosia into Achilles so that no cruel hunger should cause his limbs to fail him, she went back to the house of her mighty father. Thick as the chill snow-flakes shed from the hand of Jove and borne on the keen blasts of the north wind, even so thick did the gleaming helmets, the bossed shields, the strongly plated breastplates, and the ashen spears stream from the ships. The sheen pierced the sky, the whole land was radiant with their flashing armour, and the sound of the tramp of their treading rose from under their feet. In the midst of them all Achilles put on his armour; he gnashed his teeth, his eyes gleamed like fire, for his grief was greater than he could bear. Thus, then, full of fury against the Trojans, did he don the gift of the god, the armour that Vulcan had made him. 

First he put on the goodly greaves fitted with ancle-clasps, and next he did on the breastplate about his chest. He slung the silver-studded sword of bronze about his shoulders, and then took up the shield so great and strong that shone afar with a splendour as of the moon. As the light seen by sailors from out at sea, when men have lit a fire in their homestead high up among the mountains, but the sailors are carried out to sea by wind and storm far from the haven where they would be- even so did the gleam of Achilles' wondrous shield strike up into the heavens. He lifted the redoubtable helmet, and set it upon his head, from whence it shone like a star, and the golden plumes which Vulcan had set thick about the ridge of the helmet, waved all around it. Then Achilles made trial of himself in his armour to see whether it fitted him, so that his limbs could play freely under it, and it seemed to buoy him up as though it had been wings. 

He also drew his father's spear out of the spear-stand, a spear so great and heavy and strong that none of the Achaeans save only Achilles had strength to wield it; this was the spear of Pelian ash from the topmost ridges of Mt. Pelion, which Chiron had once given to Peleus, fraught with the death of heroes. Automedon and Alcimus busied themselves with the harnessing of his horses; they made the bands fast about them, and put the bit in their mouths, drawing the reins back towards the chariot. Automedon, whip in hand, sprang up behind the horses, and after him Achilles mounted in full armour, resplendent as the sun-god Hyperion. Then with a loud voice he chided with his father's horses saying, "Xanthus and Balius, famed offspring of Podarge- this time when we have done fighting be sure and bring your driver safely back to the host of the Achaeans, and do not leave him dead on the plain as you did Patroclus." 

Then fleet Xanthus answered under the yoke- for white-armed Juno had endowed him with human speech- and he bowed his head till his mane touched the ground as it hung down from under the yoke-band. "Dread Achilles," said he, "we will indeed save you now, but the day of your death is near, and the blame will not be ours, for it will be heaven and stern fate that will destroy you. Neither was it through any sloth or slackness on our part that the Trojans stripped Patroclus of his armour; it was the mighty god whom lovely Leto bore that slew him as he fought among the foremost, and vouchsafed a triumph to Hector. We two can fly as swiftly as Zephyrus who they say is fleetest of all winds; nevertheless it is your doom to fall by the hand of a man and of a god." 

When he had thus said the Erinyes stayed his speech, and Achilles answered him in great sadness, saying, "Why, O Xanthus, do you thus foretell my death? You need not do so, for I well know that I am to fall here, far from my dear father and mother; none the more, however, shall I stay my hand till I have given the Trojans their fill of fighting." 

So saying, with a loud cry he drove his horses to the front. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XX

THUS, then, did the Achaeans arm by their ships round you, O son of Peleus, who were hungering for battle; while the Trojans over against them armed upon the rise of the plain. 

Meanwhile Jove from the top of many-delled Olympus, bade Themis gather the gods in council, whereon she went about and called them to the house of Jove. There was not a river absent except Oceanus, nor a single one of the nymphs that haunt fair groves, or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass. When they reached the house of cloud-compelling Jove, they took their seats in the arcades of polished marble which Vulcan with his consummate skill had made for father Jove. 

In such wise, therefore, did they gather in the house of Jove. Neptune also, lord of the earthquake, obeyed the call of the goddess, and came up out of the sea to join them. There, sitting in the midst of them, he asked what Jove's purpose might be. "Why," said he, "wielder of the lightning, have you called the gods in council? Are you considering some matter that concerns the Trojans and Achaeans- for the blaze of battle is on the point of being kindled between them?" 

And Jove answered, "You know my purpose, shaker of earth, and wherefore I have called you hither. I take thought for them even in their destruction. For my own part I shall stay here seated on Mt. Olympus and look on in peace, but do you others go about among Trojans and Achaeans, and help either side as you may be severally disposed. If Achilles fights the Trojans without hindrance they will make no stand against him; they have ever trembled at the sight of him, and now that he is roused to such fury about his comrade, he will override fate itself and storm their city." 

Thus spoke Jove and gave the word for war, whereon the gods took their several sides and went into battle. Juno, Pallas Minerva, earth-encircling Neptune, Mercury bringer of good luck and excellent in all cunning- all these joined the host that came from the ships; with them also came Vulcan in all his glory, limping, but yet with his thin legs plying lustily under him. Mars of gleaming helmet joined the Trojans, and with him Apollo of locks unshorn, and the archer goddess Diana, Leto, Xanthus, and laughter-loving Venus. 

So long as the gods held themselves aloof from mortal warriors the Achaeans were triumphant, for Achilles who had long refused to fight was now with them. There was not a Trojan but his limbs failed him for fear as he beheld the fleet son of Peleus all glorious in his armour, and looking like Mars himself. When, however, the Olympians came to take their part among men, forthwith uprose strong Strife, rouser of hosts, and Minerva raised her loud voice, now standing by the deep trench that ran outside the wall, and now shouting with all her might upon the shore of the sounding sea. Mars also bellowed out upon the other side, dark as some black thunder-cloud, and called on the Trojans at the top of his voice, now from the acropolis, and now speeding up the side of the river Simois till he came to the hill Callicolone. 

Thus did the gods spur on both hosts to fight, and rouse fierce contention also among themselves. The sire of gods and men thundered from heaven above, while from beneath Neptune shook the vast earth, and bade the high hills tremble. The spurs and crests of many-fountained Ida quaked, as also the city of the Trojans and the ships of the Achaeans. Hades, king of the realms below, was struck with fear; he sprang panic-stricken from his throne and cried aloud in terror lest Neptune, lord of the earthquake, should crack the ground over his head, and lay bare his mouldy mansions to the sight of mortals and immortals- mansions so ghastly grim that even the gods shudder to think of them. Such was the uproar as the gods came together in battle. Apollo with his arrows took his stand to face King Neptune, while Minerva took hers against the god of war; the archer-goddess Diana with her golden arrows, sister of far-darting Apollo, stood to face Juno; Mercury the lusty bringer of good luck faced Leto, while the mighty eddying river whom men can Scamander, but gods Xanthus, matched himself against Vulcan. 

The gods, then, were thus ranged against one another. But the heart of Achilles was set on meeting Hector son of Priam, for it was with his blood that he longed above all things else to glut the stubborn lord of battle. Meanwhile Apollo set Aeneas on to attack the son of Peleus, and put courage into his heart, speaking with the voice of Lycaon son of Priam. In his likeness therefore, he said to Aeneas, "Aeneas, counsellor of the Trojans, where are now the brave words with which you vaunted over your wine before the Trojan princes, saying that you would fight Achilles son of Peleus in single combat?" 

And Aeneas answered, "Why do you thus bid me fight the proud son of Peleus, when I am in no mind to do so? Were I to face him now, it would not be for the first time. His spear has already put me to Right from Ida, when he attacked our cattle and sacked Lyrnessus and Pedasus; Jove indeed saved me in that he vouchsafed me strength to fly, else had the fallen by the hands of Achilles and Minerva, who went before him to protect him and urged him to fall upon the Lelegae and Trojans. No man may fight Achilles, for one of the gods is always with him as his guardian angel, and even were it not so, his weapon flies ever straight, and fails not to pierce the flesh of him who is against him; if heaven would let me fight him on even terms he should not soon overcome me, though he boasts that he is made of bronze." 

Then said King Apollo, son to Jove, "Nay, hero, pray to the ever-living gods, for men say that you were born of Jove's daughter Venus, whereas Achilles is son to a goddess of inferior rank. Venus is child to Jove, while Thetis is but daughter to the old man of the sea. Bring, therefore, your spear to bear upon him, and let him not scare you with his taunts and menaces." 

As he spoke he put courage into the heart of the shepherd of his people, and he strode in full armour among the ranks of the foremost fighters. Nor did the son of Anchises escape the notice of white-armed Juno, as he went forth into the throng to meet Achilles. She called the gods about her, and said, "Look to it, you two, Neptune and Minerva, and consider how this shall be; Phoebus Apollo has been sending Aeneas clad in full armour to fight Achilles. Shall we turn him back at once, or shall one of us stand by Achilles and endow him with strength so that his heart fail not, and he may learn that the chiefs of the immortals are on his side, while the others who have all along been defending the Trojans are but vain helpers? Let us all come down from Olympus and join in the fight, that this day he may take no hurt at the hands of the Trojans. Hereafter let him suffer whatever fate may have spun out for him when he was begotten and his mother bore him. If Achilles be not thus assured by the voice of a god, he may come to fear presently when one of us meets him in battle, for the gods are terrible if they are seen face to face." 

Neptune lord of the earthquake answered her saying, "Juno, restrain your fury; it is not well; I am not in favour of forcing the other gods to fight us, for the advantage is too greatly on our own side; let us take our places on some hill out of the beaten track, and let mortals fight it out among themselves. If Mars or Phoebus Apollo begin fighting, or keep Achilles in check so that he cannot fight, we too, will at once raise the cry of battle, and in that case they will soon leave the field and go back vanquished to Olympus among the other gods." 

With these words the dark-haired god led the way to the high earth-barrow of Hercules, built round solid masonry, and made by the Trojans and Pallas Minerva for him fly to when the sea-monster was chasing him from the shore on to the plain. Here Neptune and those that were with him took their seats, wrapped in a thick cloud of darkness; but the other gods seated themselves on the brow of Callicolone round you, O Phoebus, and Mars the waster of cities. 

Thus did the gods sit apart and form their plans, but neither side was willing to begin battle with the other, and Jove from his seat on high was in command over them all. Meanwhile the whole plain was alive with men and horses, and blazing with the gleam of armour. The earth rang again under the tramp of their feet as they rushed towards each other, and two champions, by far the foremost of them all, met between the hosts to fight- to wit, Aeneas son of Anchises, and noble Achilles. 

Aeneas was first to stride forward in attack, his doughty helmet tossing defiance as he came on. He held his strong shield before his breast, and brandished his bronze spear. The son of Peleus from the other side sprang forth to meet him, fike some fierce lion that the whole country-side has met to hunt and kill- at first he bodes no ill, but when some daring youth has struck him with a spear, he crouches openmouthed, his jaws foam, he roars with fury, he lashes his tail from side to side about his ribs and loins, and glares as he springs straight before him, to find out whether he is to slay, or be slain among the foremost of his foes- even with such fury did Achilles burn to spring upon Aeneas. 

When they were now close up with one another Achilles was first to speak. "Aeneas," said he, "why do you stand thus out before the host to fight me? Is it that you hope to reign over the Trojans in the seat of Priam? Nay, though you kill me Priam will not hand his kingdom over to you. He is a man of sound judgement, and he has sons of his own. Or have the Trojans been allotting you a demesne of passing richness, fair with orchard lawns and corn lands, if you should slay me? This you shall hardly do. I have discomfited you once already. Have you forgotten how when you were alone I chased you from your herds helter-skelter down the slopes of Ida? You did not turn round to look behind you; you took refuge in Lyrnessus, but I attacked the city, and with the help of Minerva and father Jove I sacked it and carried its women into captivity, though Jove and the other gods rescued you. You think they will protect you now, but they will not do so; therefore I say go back into the host, and do not face me, or you will rue it. Even a fool may be wise after the event." 

Then Aeneas answered, "Son of Peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though I were a child. I too, if I will, can brag and talk unseemly. We know one another's race and parentage as matters of common fame, though neither have you ever seen my parents nor I yours. Men say that you are son to noble Peleus, and that your mother is Thetis, fair-haired daughter of the sea. I have noble Anchises for my father, and Venus for my mother; the parents of one or other of us shall this day mourn a son, for it will be more than silly talk that shall part us when the fight is over. Learn, then, my lineage if you will- and it is known to many. 

"In the beginning Dardanus was the son of Jove, and founded Dardania, for Ilius was not yet stablished on the plain for men to dwell in, and her people still abode on the spurs of many-fountained Ida. Dardanus had a son, king Erichthonius, who was wealthiest of all men living; he had three thousand mares that fed by the water-meadows, they and their foals with them. Boreas was enamoured of them as they were feeding, and covered them in the semblance of a dark-maned stallion. Twelve filly foals did they conceive and bear him, and these, as they sped over the rich plain, would go bounding on over the ripe ears of corn and not break them; or again when they would disport themselves on the broad back of Ocean they could gallop on the crest of a breaker. Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the Trojans, and Tros had three noble sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymede who was comeliest of mortal men; wherefore the gods carried him off to be Jove's cupbearer, for his beauty's sake, that he might dwell among the immortals. Ilus begat Laomedon, and Laomedon begat Tithonus, Priam, Lampus, Clytius, and Hiketaon of the stock of Mars. But Assaracus was father to Capys, and Capys to Anchises, who was my father, while Hector is son to Priam. 

"Such do I declare my blood and lineage, but as for valour, Jove gives it or takes it as he will, for he is lord of all. And now let there be no more of this prating in mid-battle as though we were children. We could fling taunts without end at one another; a hundred-oared galley would not hold them. The tongue can run all whithers and talk all wise; it can go here and there, and as a man says, so shall he be gainsaid. What is the use of our bandying hard like women who when they fall foul of one another go out and wrangle in the streets, one half true and the other lies, as rage inspires them? No words of yours shall turn me now that I am fain to fight- therefore let us make trial of one another with our spears." 

As he spoke he drove his spear at the great and terrible shield of Achilles, which rang out as the point struck it. The son of Peleus held the shield before him with his strong hand, and he was afraid, for he deemed that Aeneas's spear would go through it quite easily, not reflecting that the god's glorious gifts were little likely to yield before the blows of mortal men; and indeed Aeneas's spear did not pierce the shield, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point. It went through two layers, but the god had made the shield in five, two of bronze, the two innermost ones of tin, and one of gold; it was in this that the spear was stayed. 

Achilles in his turn threw, and struck the round shield of Aeneas at the very edge, where the bronze was thinnest; the spear of Pelian ash went clean through, and the shield rang under the blow; Aeneas was afraid, and crouched backwards, holding the shield away from him; the spear, however, flew over his back, and stuck quivering in the ground, after having gone through both circles of the sheltering shield. Aeneas though he had avoided the spear, stood still, blinded with fear and grief because the weapon had gone so near him; then Achilles sprang furiously upon him, with a cry as of death and with his keen blade drawn, and Aeneas seized a great stone, so huge that two men, as men now are, would be unable to lift it, but Aeneas wielded it quite easily. 

Aeneas would then have struck Achilles as he was springing towards him, either on the helmet, or on the shield that covered him, and Achilles would have closed with him and despatched him with his sword, had not Neptune lord of the earthquake been quick to mark, and said forthwith to the immortals, "Alas, I am sorry for great Aeneas, who will now go down to the house of Hades, vanquished by the son of Peleus. Fool that he was to give ear to the counsel of Apollo. Apollo will never save him from destruction. Why should this man suffer when he is guiltless, to no purpose, and in another's quarrel? Has he not at all times offered acceptable sacrifice to the gods that dwell in heaven? Let us then snatch him from death's jaws, lest the son of Saturn be angry should Achilles slay him. It is fated, moreover, that he should escape, and that the race of Dardanus, whom Jove loved above all the sons born to him of mortal women, shall not perish utterly without seed or sign. For now indeed has Jove hated the blood of Priam, while Aeneas shall reign over the Trojans, he and his children's children that shall be born hereafter." 

Then answered Juno, "Earth-shaker, look to this matter yourself, and consider concerning Aeneas, whether you will save him, or suffer him, brave though he be, to fall by the hand of Achilles son of Peleus. For of a truth we two, I and Pallas Minerva, have sworn full many a time before all the immortals, that never would we shield Trojans from destruction, not even when all Troy is burning in the flames that the Achaeans shall kindle." 

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went into the battle amid the clash of spears, and came to the place where Achilles and Aeneas were. Forthwith he shed a darkness before the eyes of the son of Peleus, drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of Aeneas, and laid it at the feet of Achilles. Then he lifted Aeneas on high from off the earth and hurried him away. Over the heads of many a band of warriors both horse and foot did he soar as the god's hand sped him, till he came to the very fringe of the battle where the Cauconians were arming themselves for fight. Neptune, shaker of the earth, then came near to him and said, Aeneas, what god has egged you on to this folly in fighting the son of Peleus, who is both a mightier man of valour and more beloved of heaven than you are? Give way before him whensoever you meet him, lest you go down to the house of Hades even though fate would have it otherwise. When Achilles is dead you may then fight among the foremost undaunted, for none other of the Achaeans shall slay you." 

The god left him when he had given him these instructions, and at once removed the darkness from before the eyes of Achilles, who opened them wide indeed and said in great anger, "Alas! what marvel am I now beholding? Here is my spear upon the ground, but I see not him whom I meant to kill when I hurled it. Of a truth Aeneas also must be under heaven's protection, although I had thought his boasting was idle. Let him go hang; he will be in no mood to fight me further, seeing how narrowly he has missed being killed. I will now give my orders to the Danaans and attack some other of the Trojans." 

He sprang forward along the line and cheered his men on as he did so. "Let not the Trojans," he cried, "keep you at arm's length, Achaeans, but go for them and fight them man for man. However valiant I may be, I cannot give chase to so many and fight all of them. Even Mars, who is an immortal, or Minerva, would shrink from flinging himself into the jaws of such a fight and laying about him; nevertheless, so far as in me lies I will show no slackness of hand or foot nor want of endurance, not even for a moment; I will utterly break their ranks, and woe to the Trojan who shall venture within reach of my spear." 

Thus did he exhort them. Meanwhile Hector called upon the Trojans and declared that he would fight Achilles. "Be not afraid, proud Trojans," said he, "to face the son of Peleus; I could fight gods myself if the battle were one of words only, but they would be more than a match for me, if we had to use our spears. Even so the deed of Achilles will fall somewhat short of his word; he will do in part, and the other part he will clip short. I will go up against him though his hands be as fire- though his hands be fire and his strength iron." 

Thus urged the Trojans lifted up their spears against the Achaeans, and raised the cry of battle as they flung themselves into the midst of their ranks. But Phoebus Apollo came up to Hector and said, "Hector, on no account must you challenge Achilles to single combat; keep a lookout for him while you are under cover of the others and away from the thick of the fight, otherwise he will either hit you with a spear or cut you down at close quarters." 

Thus he spoke, and Hector drew back within the crowd, for he was afraid when he heard what the god had said to him. Achilles then sprang upon the Trojans with a terrible cry, clothed in valour as with a garment. First he killed Iphition son of Otrynteus, a leader of much people whom a naiad nymph had borne to Otrynteus waster of cities, in the land of Hyde under the snowy heights of Mt. Tmolus. Achilles struck him full on the head as he was coming on towards him, and split it clean in two; whereon he fell heavily to the ground and Achilles vaunted over him saying, "You he low, son of Otrynteus, mighty hero; your death is here, but your lineage is on the Gygaean lake where your father's estate lies, by Hyllus, rich in fish, and the eddying waters of Hermus." 

Thus did he vaunt, but darkness closed the eyes of the other. The chariots of the Achaeans cut him up as their wheels passed over him in the front of the battle, and after him Achilles killed Demoleon, a valiant man of war and son to Antenor. He struck him on the temple through his bronze-cheeked helmet. The helmet did not stay the spear, but it went right on, crushing the bone so that the brain inside was shed in all directions, and his lust of fighting was ended. Then he struck Hippodamas in the midriff as he was springing down from his chariot in front of him, and trying to escape. He breathed his last, bellowing like a bull bellows when young men are dragging him to offer him in sacrifice to the King of Helice, and the heart of the earth-shaker is glad; even so did he bellow as he lay dying. Achilles then went in pursuit of Polydorus son of Priam, whom his father had always forbidden to fight because he was the youngest of his sons, the one he loved best, and the fastest runner. He, in his folly and showing off the fleetness of his feet, was rushing about among front ranks until he lost his life, for Achilles struck him in the middle of the back as he was darting past him: he struck him just at the golden fastenings of his belt and where the two pieces of the double breastplate overlapped. The point of the spear pierced him through and came out by the navel, whereon he fell groaning on to his knees and a cloud of darkness overshadowed him as he sank holding his entrails in his hands. 

When Hector saw his brother Polydorus with his entrails in his hands and sinking down upon the ground, a mist came over his eyes, and he could not bear to keep longer at a distance; he therefore poised his spear and darted towards Achilles like a flame of fire. When Achilles saw him he bounded forward and vaunted saying, "This is he that has wounded my heart most deeply and has slain my beloved comrade. Not for long shall we two quail before one another on the highways of war." 

He looked fiercely on Hector and said, "Draw near, that you may meet your doom the sooner." Hector feared him not and answered, "Son of Peleus, think not that your words can scare me as though I were a child; I too if I will can brag and talk unseemly; I know that you are a mighty warrior, mightier by far than I, nevertheless the issue lies in the the lap of heaven whether I, worse man though I be, may not slay you with my spear, for this too has been found keen ere now." 

He hurled his spear as he spoke, but Minerva breathed upon it, and though she breathed but very lightly she turned it back from going towards Achilles, so that it returned to Hector and lay at his feet in front of him. Achilles then sprang furiously on him with a loud cry, bent on killing him, but Apollo caught him up easily as a god can, and hid him in a thick darkness. Thrice did Achilles spring towards him spear in hand, and thrice did he waste his blow upon the air. When he rushed forward for the fourth time as though he were a god, he shouted aloud saying, "Hound, this time too you have escaped death- but of a truth it came exceedingly near you. Phoebus Apollo, to whom it seems you pray before you go into battle, has again saved you; but if I too have any friend among the gods I will surely make an end of you when I come across you at some other time. Now, however, I will pursue and overtake other Trojans." 

On this he struck Dryops with his spear, about the middle of his neck, and he fell headlong at his feet. There he let him lie and stayed Demouchus son of Philetor, a man both brave and of great stature, by hitting him on the knee with a spear; then he smote him with his sword and killed him. After this he sprang on Laogonus and Dardanus, sons of Bias, and threw them from their chariot, the one with a blow from a thrown spear, while the other he cut down in hand-to-hand fight. There was also Tros the son of Alastor- he came up to Achilles and clasped his knees in the hope that he would spare him and not kill him but let him go, because they were both of the same age. Fool, he might have known that he should not prevail with him, for the man was in no mood for pity or forbearance but was in grim earnest. Therefore when Tros laid hold of his knees and sought a hearing for his prayers, Achilles drove his sword into his liver, and the liver came rolling out, while his bosom was all covered with the black blood that welled from the wound. Thus did death close his eyes as he lay lifeless. 

Achilles then went up to Mulius and struck him on the ear with a spear, and the bronze spear-head came right out at the other ear. He also struck Echeclus son of Agenor on the head with his sword, which became warm with the blood, while death and stern fate closed the eyes of Echeclus. Next in order the bronze point of his spear wounded Deucalion in the fore-arm where the sinews of the elbow are united, whereon he waited Achilles' onset with his arm hanging down and death staring him in the face. Achilles cut his head off with a blow from his sword and flung it helmet and all away from him, and the marrow came oozing out of his backbone as he lay. He then went in pursuit of Rhigmus, noble son of Peires, who had come from fertile Thrace, and struck him through the middle with a spear which fixed itself in his belly, so that he fell headlong from his chariot. He also speared Areithous squire to Rhigmus in the back as he was turning his horses in flight, and thrust him from his chariot, while the horses were struck with panic. 

As a fire raging in some mountain glen after long drought- and the dense forest is in a blaze, while the wind carries great tongues of fire in every direction- even so furiously did Achilles rage, wielding his spear as though he were a god, and giving chase to those whom he would slay, till the dark earth ran with blood. Or as one who yokes broad-browed oxen that they may tread barley in a threshing-floor- and it is soon bruised small under the feet of the lowing cattle- even so did the horses of Achilles trample on the shields and bodies of the slain. The axle underneath and the railing that ran round the car were bespattered with clots of blood thrown up by the horses' hoofs, and from the tyres of the wheels; but the son of Peleus pressed on to win still further glory, and his hands were bedrabbled with gore. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XXI

NOW when they came to the ford of the full-flowing river Xanthus, begotten of immortal Jove, Achilles cut their forces in two: one half he chased over the plain towards the city by the same way that the Achaeans had taken when flying panic-stricken on the preceding day with Hector in full triumph; this way did they fly pell-mell, and Juno sent down a thick mist in front of them to stay them. The other half were hemmed in by the deep silver-eddying stream, and fell into it with a great uproar. The waters resounded, and the banks rang again, as they swam hither and thither with loud cries amid the whirling eddies. As locusts flying to a river before the blast of a grass fire- the flame comes on and on till at last it overtakes them and they huddle into the water- even so was the eddying stream of Xanthus filled with the uproar of men and horses, all struggling in confusion before Achilles. 

Forthwith the hero left his spear upon the bank, leaning it against a tamarisk bush, and plunged into the river like a god, armed with his sword only. Fell was his purpose as he hewed the Trojans down on every side. Their dying groans rose hideous as the sword smote them, and the river ran red with blood. As when fish fly scared before a huge dolphin, and fill every nook and corner of some fair haven- for he is sure to eat all he can catch- even so did the Trojans cower under the banks of the mighty river, and when Achilles' arms grew weary with killing them, he drew twelve youths alive out of the water, to sacrifice in revenge for Patroclus son of Menoetius. He drew them out like dazed fawns, bound their hands behind them with the girdles of their own shirts, and gave them over to his men to take back to the ships. Then he sprang into the river, thirsting for still further blood. 

There he found Lycaon, son of Priam seed of Dardanus, as he was escaping out of the water; he it was whom he had once taken prisoner when he was in his father's vineyard, having set upon him by night, as he was cutting young shoots from a wild fig-tree to make the wicker sides of a chariot. Achilles then caught him to his sorrow unawares, and sent him by sea to Lemnos, where the son of Jason bought him. But a guest-friend, Eetion of Imbros, freed him with a great sum, and sent him to Arisbe, whence he had escaped and returned to his father's house. He had spent eleven days happily with his friends after he had come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth heaven again delivered him into the hands of Achilles, who was to send him to the house of Hades sorely against his will. He was unarmed when Achilles caught sight of him, and had neither helmet nor shield; nor yet had he any spear, for he had thrown all his armour from him on to the bank, and was sweating with his struggles to get out of the river, so that his strength was now failing him. 

Then Achilles said to himself in his surprise, "What marvel do I see here? If this man can come back alive after having been sold over into Lemnos, I shall have the Trojans also whom I have slain rising from the world below. Could not even the waters of the grey sea imprison him, as they do many another whether he will or no? This time let him taste my spear, that I may know for certain whether mother earth who can keep even a strong man down, will be able to hold him, or whether thence too he will return." 

Thus did he pause and ponder. But Lycaon came up to him dazed and trying hard to embrace his knees, for he would fain live, not die. Achilles thrust at him with his spear, meaning to kill him, but Lycaon ran crouching up to him and caught his knees, whereby the spear passed over his back, and stuck in the ground, hungering though it was for blood. With one hand he caught Achilles' knees as he besought him, and with the other he clutched the spear and would not let it go. Then he said, "Achilles, have mercy upon me and spare me, for I am your suppliant. It was in your tents that I first broke bread on the day when you took me prisoner in the vineyard; after which you sold away to Lemnos far from my father and my friends, and I brought you the price of a hundred oxen. I have paid three times as much to gain my freedom; it is but twelve days that I have come to Ilius after much suffering, and now cruel fate has again thrown me into your hands. Surely father Jove must hate me, that he has given me over to you a second time. Short of life indeed did my mother Laothoe bear me, daughter of aged Altes- of Altes who reigns over the warlike Lelegae and holds steep Pedasus on the river Satnioeis. Priam married his daughter along with many other women and two sons were born of her, both of whom you will have slain. Your spear slew noble Polydorus as he was fighting in the front ranks, and now evil will here befall me, for I fear that I shall not escape you since heaven has delivered me over to you. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, spare me, for I am not of the same womb as Hector who slew your brave and noble comrade." 

With such words did the princely son of Priam beseech Achilles; but Achilles answered him sternly. "Idiot," said he, "talk not to me of ransom. Until Patroclus fell I preferred to give the Trojans quarter, and sold beyond the sea many of those whom I had taken alive; but now not a man shall live of those whom heaven delivers into my hands before the city of Ilius- and of all Trojans it shall fare hardest with the sons of Priam. Therefore, my friend, you too shall die. Why should you whine in this way? Patroclus fell, and he was a better man than you are. I too- see you not how I am great and goodly? I am son to a noble father, and have a goddess for my mother, but the hands of doom and death overshadow me all as surely. The day will come, either at dawn or dark, or at the noontide, when one shall take my life also in battle, either with his spear, or with an arrow sped from his bow." 

Thus did he speak, and Lycaon's heart sank within him. He loosed his hold of the spear, and held out both hands before him; but Achilles drew his keen blade, and struck him by the collar-bone on his neck; he plunged his two-edged sword into him to the very hilt, whereon he lay at full length on the ground, with the dark blood welling from him till the earth was soaked. Then Achilles caught him by the foot and flung him into the river to go down stream, vaunting over him the while, and saying, "Lie there among the fishes, who will lick the blood from your wound and gloat over it; your mother shall not lay you on any bier to mourn you, but the eddies of Scamander shall bear you into the broad bosom of the sea. There shall the fishes feed on the fat of Lycaon as they dart under the dark ripple of the waters- so perish all of you till we reach the citadel of strong Ilius- you in flight, and I following after to destroy you. The river with its broad silver stream shall serve you in no stead, for all the bulls you offered him and all the horses that you flung living into his waters. None the less miserably shall you perish till there is not a man of you but has paid in full for the death of Patroclus and the havoc you wrought among the Achaeans whom you have slain while I held aloof from battle." 

So spoke Achilles, but the river grew more and more angry, and pondered within himself how he should stay the hand of Achilles and save the Trojans from disaster. Meanwhile the son of Peleus, spear in hand, sprang upon Asteropaeus son of Pelegon to kill him. He was son to the broad river Axius and Periboea eldest daughter of Acessamenus; for the river had lain with her. Asteropaeus stood up out of the water to face him with a spear in either hand, and Xanthus filled him with courage, being angry for the death of the youths whom Achilles was slaying ruthlessly within his waters. When they were close up with one another Achilles was first to speak. "Who and whence are you," said he, "who dare to face me? Woe to the parents whose son stands up against me." And the son of Pelegon answered, "Great son of Peleus, why should you ask my lineage. I am from the fertile land of far Paeonia, captain of the Paeonians, and it is now eleven days that I am at Ilius. I am of the blood of the river Axius- of Axius that is the fairest of all rivers that run. He begot the famed warrior Pelegon, whose son men call me. Let us now fight, Achilles." 

Thus did he defy him, and Achilles raised his spear of Pelian ash. Asteropaeus failed with both his spears, for he could use both hands alike; with the one spear he struck Achilles' shield, but did not pierce it, for the layer of gold, gift of the god, stayed the point; with the other spear he grazed the elbow of Achilles! right arm drawing dark blood, but the spear itself went by him and fixed itself in the ground, foiled of its bloody banquet. Then Achilles, fain to kill him, hurled his spear at Asteropaeus, but failed to hit him and struck the steep bank of the river, driving the spear half its length into the earth. The son of Peleus then drew his sword and sprang furiously upon him. Asteropaeus vainly tried to draw Achilles' spear out of the bank by main force; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might to draw it out, and thrice he had to leave off trying; the fourth time he tried to bend and break it, but ere he could do so Achilles smote him with his sword and killed him. He struck him in the belly near the navel, so that all his bowels came gushing out on to the ground, and the darkness of death came over him as he lay gasping. Then Achilles set his foot on his chest and spoiled him of his armour, vaunting over him and saying, "Lie there- begotten of a river though you be, it is hard for you to strive with the offspring of Saturn's son. You declare yourself sprung from the blood of a broad river, but I am of the seed of mighty Jove. My father is Peleus, son of Aeacus ruler over the many Myrmidons, and Aeacus was the son of Jove. Therefore as Jove is mightier than any river that flows into the sea, so are his children stronger than those of any river whatsoever. Moreover you have a great river hard by if he can be of any use to you, but there is no fighting against Jove the son of Saturn, with whom not even King Achelous can compare, nor the mighty stream of deep-flowing Oceanus, from whom all rivers and seas with all springs and deep wells proceed; even Oceanus fears the lightnings of great Jove, and his thunder that comes crashing out of heaven." 

With this he drew his bronze spear out of the bank, and now that he had killed Asteropaeus, he let him lie where he was on the sand, with the dark water flowing over him and the eels and fishes busy nibbling and gnawing the fat that was about his kidneys. Then he went in chase of the Paeonians, who were flying along the bank of the river in panic when they saw their leader slain by the hands of the son of Peleus. Therein he slew Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus, Thrasius, Oeneus, and Ophelestes, and he would have slain yet others, had not the river in anger taken human form, and spoken to him from out the deep waters saying, "Achilles, if you excel all in strength, so do you also in wickedness, for the gods are ever with you to protect you: if, then, the son of Saturn has vouchsafed it to you to destroy all the Trojans, at any rate drive them out of my stream, and do your grim work on land. My fair waters are now filled with corpses, nor can I find any channel by which I may pour myself into the sea for I am choked with dead, and yet you go on mercilessly slaying. I am in despair, therefore, O captain of your host, trouble me no further." 

Achilles answered, "So be it, Scamander, Jove-descended; but I will never cease dealing out death among the Trojans, till I have pent them up in their city, and made trial of Hector face to face, that I may learn whether he is to vanquish me, or I him." 

As he spoke he set upon the Trojans with a fury like that of the gods. But the river said to Apollo, "Surely, son of Jove, lord of the silver bow, you are not obeying the commands of Jove who charged you straitly that you should stand by the Trojans and defend them, till twilight fades, and darkness is over an the earth." 

Meanwhile Achilles sprang from the bank into mid-stream, whereon the river raised a high wave and attacked him. He swelled his stream into a torrent, and swept away the many dead whom Achilles had slain and left within his waters. These he cast out on to the land, bellowing like a bull the while, but the living he saved alive, hiding them in his mighty eddies. The great and terrible wave gathered about Achilles, falling upon him and beating on his shield, so that he could not keep his feet; he caught hold of a great elm-tree, but it came up by the roots, and tore away the bank, damming the stream with its thick branches and bridging it all across; whereby Achilles struggled out of the stream, and fled full speed over the plain, for he was afraid. 

But the mighty god ceased not in his pursuit, and sprang upon him with a dark-crested wave, to stay his hands and save the Trojans from destruction. The son of Peleus darted away a spear's throw from him; swift as the swoop of a black hunter-eagle which is the strongest and fleetest of all birds, even so did he spring forward, and the armour rang loudly about his breast. He fled on in front, but the river with a loud roar came tearing after. As one who would water his garden leads a stream from some fountain over his plants, and all his ground-spade in hand he clears away the dams to free the channels, and the little stones run rolling round and round with the water as it goes merrily down the bank faster than the man can follow- even so did the river keep catching up with Achilles albeit he was a fleet runner, for the gods are stronger than men. As often as he would strive to stand his ground, and see whether or no all the gods in heaven were in league against him, so often would the mighty wave come beating down upon his shoulders, and be would have to keep flying on and on in great dismay; for the angry flood was tiring him out as it flowed past him and ate the ground from under his feet. 

Then the son of Peleus lifted up his voice to heaven saying, "Father Jove, is there none of the gods who will take pity upon me, and save me from the river? I do not care what may happen to me afterwards. I blame none of the other dwellers on Olympus so severely as I do my dear mother, who has beguiled and tricked me. She told me I was to fall under the walls of Troy by the flying arrows of Apollo; would that Hector, the best man among the Trojans, might there slay me; then should I fall a hero by the hand of a hero; whereas now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end, trapped in this river as though I were some swineherd's boy, who gets carried down a torrent while trying to cross it during a storm." 

As soon as he had spoken thus, Neptune and Minerva came up to him in the likeness of two men, and took him by the hand to reassure him. Neptune spoke first. "Son of Peleus," said he, "be not so exceeding fearful; we are two gods, come with Jove's sanction to assist you, I, and Pallas Minerva. It is not your fate to perish in this river; he will abate presently as you will see; moreover we strongly advise you, if you will be guided by us, not to stay your hand from fighting till you have pent the Trojan host within the famed walls of Ilius- as many of them as may escape. Then kill Hector and go back to the ships, for we will vouchsafe you a triumph over him." 

When they had so said they went back to the other immortals, but Achilles strove onward over the plain, encouraged by the charge the gods had laid upon him. All was now covered with the flood of waters, and much goodly armour of the youths that had been slain was rifting about, as also many corpses, but he forced his way against the stream, speeding right onwards, nor could the broad waters stay him, for Minerva had endowed him with great strength. Nevertheless Scamander did not slacken in his pursuit, but was still more furious with the son of Peleus. He lifted his waters into a high crest and cried aloud to Simois saying, "Dear brother, let the two of us unite to save this man, or he will sack the mighty city of King Priam, and the Trojans will not hold out against him. Help me at once; fill your streams with water from their sources, rouse all your torrents to a fury; raise your wave on high, and let snags and stones come thundering down you that we may make an end of this savage creature who is now lording it as though he were a god. Nothing shall serve him longer, not strength nor comeliness, nor his fine armour, which forsooth shall soon be lying low in the deep waters covered over with mud. I will wrap him in sand, and pour tons of shingle round him, so that the Achaeans shall not know how to gather his bones for the silt in which I shall have hidden him, and when they celebrate his funeral they need build no barrow." 

On this he upraised his tumultuous flood high against Achilles, seething as it was with foam and blood and the bo&ies of the dead. The dark waters of the river stood upright and would have overwhelmed the son of Peleus, but Juno, trembling lest Achilles should be swept away in the mighty torrent, lifted her voice on high and called out to Vulcan her son. "Crook-foot," she cried, "my child, be up and doing, for I deem it is with you that Xanthus is fain to fight; help us at once, kindle a fierce fire; I will then bring up the west and the white south wind in a mighty hurricane from the sea, that shall bear the flames against the heads and armour of the Trojans and consume them, while you go along the banks of Xanthus burning his trees and wrapping him round with fire. Let him not turn you back neither by fair words nor foul, and slacken not till I shout and tell you. Then you may stay your flames." 

On this Vulcan kindled a fierce fire, which broke out first upon the plain and burned the many dead whom Achilles had killed and whose bodies were lying about in great numbers; by this means the plain was dried and the flood stayed. As the north wind, blowing on an orchard that has been sodden with autumn rain, soon dries it, and the heart of the owner is glad- even so the whole plan was dried and the dead bodies were consumed. Then he turned tongues of fire on to the river. He burned the elms the willows and the tamarisks, the lotus also, with the rushes and marshy herbage that grew abundantly by the banks of the river. The eels and fishes that go darting about everywhere in the water, these, too, were sorely harassed by the flames that cunning Vulcan had kindled, and the river himself was scalded, so that he spoke saying, "Vulcan, there is no god can hold his own against you. I cannot fight you when you flare out your flames in this way; strive with me no longer. Let Achilles drive the Trojans out of city immediately. What have I to do with quarrelling and helping people?" 

He was boiling as he spoke, and all his waters were seething. As a cauldron upon 'a large fire boils when it is melting the lard of some fatted hog, and the lard keeps bubbling up all over when the dry faggots blaze under it- even so were the goodly waters of Xanthus heated with the fire till they were boiling. He could flow no longer but stayed his stream, so afflicted was he by the blasts of fire which cunning Vulcan had raised. Then he prayed to Juno and besought her saying, "Juno, why should your son vex my stream with such especial fury? I am not so much to blame as all the others are who have been helping the Trojans. I will leave off, since you so desire it, and let son leave off also. Furthermore I swear never again will I do anything to save the Trojans from destruction, not even when all Troy is burning in the flames which the Achaeans will kindle." 

As soon as Juno heard this she said to her son Vulcan, "Son Vulcan, hold now your flames; we ought not to use such violence against a god for the sake of mortals." 

When she had thus spoken Vulcan quenched his flames, and the river went back once more into his own fair bed. 

Xanthus was now beaten, so these two left off fighting, for Juno stayed them though she was still angry; but a furious quarrel broke out among the other gods, for they were of divided counsels. They fell on one another with a mighty uproar- earth groaned, and the spacious firmament rang out as with a blare of trumpets. Jove heard as he was sitting on Olympus, and laughed for joy when he saw the gods coming to blows among themselves. They were not long about beginning, and Mars piercer of shields opened the battle. Sword in hand he sprang at once upon Minerva and reviled her. "Why, vixen," said he, "have you again set the gods by the ears in the pride and haughtiness of your heart? Have you forgotten how you set Diomed son of Tydeus on to wound me, and yourself took visible spear and drove it into me to the hurt of my fair body? You shall now suffer for what you then did to me." 

As he spoke he struck her on the terrible tasselled aegis- so terrible that not even can Jove's lightning pierce it. Here did murderous Mars strike her with his great spear. She drew back and with her strong hand seized a stone that was lying on the plain- great and rugged and black- which men of old had set for the boundary of a field. With this she struck Mars on the neck, and brought him down. Nine roods did he cover in his fall, and his hair was all soiled in the dust, while his armour rang rattling round him. But Minerva laughed and vaunted over him saying, "Idiot, have you not learned how far stronger I am than you, but you must still match yourself against me? Thus do your mother's curses now roost upon you, for she is angry and would do you mischief because you have deserted the Achaeans and are helping the Trojans." 

She then turned her two piercing eyes elsewhere, whereon Jove's daughter Venus took Mars by the hand and led him away groaning all the time, for it was only with great difficulty that he had come to himself again. When Queen Juno saw her, she said to Minerva, "Look, daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, that vixen Venus is again taking Mars through the crowd out of the battle; go after her at once." 

Thus she spoke. Minerva sped after Venus with a will, and made at her, striking her on the bosom with her strong hand so that she fell fainting to the ground, and there they both lay stretched at full length. Then Minerva vaunted over her saying, "May all who help the Trojans against the Argives prove just as redoubtable and stalwart as Venus did when she came across me while she was helping Mars. Had this been so, we should long since have ended the war by sacking the strong city of Ilius." 

Juno smiled as she listened. Meanwhile King Neptune turned to Apollo saying, "Phoebus, why should we keep each other at arm's length? it is not well, now that the others have begun fighting; it will be disgraceful to us if we return to Jove's bronze-floored mansion on Olympus without having fought each other; therefore come on, you are the younger of the two, and I ought not to attack you, for I am older and have had more experience. Idiot, you have no sense, and forget how we two alone of all the gods fared hardly round about Ilius when we came from Jove's house and worked for Laomedon a whole year at a stated wage and he gave us his orders. I built the Trojans the wall about their city, so wide and fair that it might be impregnable, while you, Phoebus, herded cattle for him in the dales of many valleyed Ida. When, however, the glad hours brought round the time of payment, mighty Laomedon robbed us of all our hire and sent us off with nothing but abuse. He threatened to bind us hand and foot and sell us over into some distant island. He tried, moreover, to cut off the ears of both of us, so we went away in a rage, furious about the payment he had promised us, and yet withheld; in spite of all this, you are now showing favour to his people, and will not join us in compassing the utter ruin of the proud Trojans with their wives and children." 

And King Apollo answered, "Lord of the earthquake, you would have no respect for me if I were to fight you about a pack of miserable mortals, who come out like leaves in summer and eat the fruit of the field, and presently fall lifeless to the ground. Let us stay this fighting at once and let them settle it among themselves." 

He turned away as he spoke, for he would lay no hand on the brother of his own father. But his sister the huntress Diana, patroness of wild beasts, was very angry with him and said, "So you would fly, Far-Darter, and hand victory over to Neptune with a cheap vaunt to boot. Baby, why keep your bow thus idle? Never let me again hear you bragging in my father's house, as you have often done in the presence of the immortals, that you would stand up and fight with Neptune." 

Apollo made her no answer, but Jove's august queen was angry and upbraided her bitterly. "Bold vixen," she cried, "how dare you cross me thus? For all your bow you will find it hard to hold your own against me. Jove made you as a lion among women, and lets you kill them whenever you choose. You will And it better to chase wild beasts and deer upon the mountains than to fight those who are stronger than you are. If you would try war, do so, and find out by pitting yourself against me, how far stronger I am than you are." 

She caught both Diana's wrists with her left hand as she spoke, and with her right she took the bow from her shoulders, and laughed as she beat her with it about the ears while Diana wriggled and writhed under her blows. Her swift arrows were shed upon the ground, and she fled weeping from under Juno's hand as a dove that flies before a falcon to the cleft of some hollow rock, when it is her good fortune to escape. Even so did she fly weeping away, leaving her bow and arrows behind her. 

Then the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, said to Leto, "Leto, I shall not fight you; it is ill to come to blows with any of Jove's wives. Therefore boast as you will among the immortals that you worsted me in fair fight." 

Leto then gathered up Diana's bow and arrows that had fallen about amid the whirling dust, and when she had got them she made all haste after her daughter. Diana had now reached Jove's bronze-floored mansion on Olympus, and sat herself down with many tears on the knees of her father, while her ambrosial raiment was quivering all about her. The son of Saturn drew her towards him, and laughing pleasantly the while began to question her saying, "Which of the heavenly beings, my dear child, has been treating you in this cruel manner, as though you had been misconducting yourself in the face of everybody?" and the fair-crowned goddess of the chase answered, "It was your wife Juno, father, who has been beating me; it is always her doing when there is any quarrelling among the immortals." 

Thus did they converse, and meanwhile Phoebus Apollo entered the strong city of Ilius, for he was uneasy lest the wall should not hold out and the Danaans should take the city then and there, before its hour had come; but the rest of the ever-living gods went back, some angry and some triumphant to Olympus, where they took their seats beside Jove lord of the storm cloud, while Achilles still kept on dealing out death alike on the Trojans and on their As when the smoke from some burning city ascends to heaven when the anger of the gods has kindled it- there is then toil for all, and sorrow for not a few- even so did Achilles bring toil and sorrow on the Trojans. 

Old King Priam stood on a high tower of the wall looking down on huge Achilles as the Trojans fled panic-stricken before him, and there was none to help them. Presently he came down from off the tower and with many a groan went along the wall to give orders to the brave warders of the gate. "Keep the gates," said he, "wide open till the people come flying into the city, for Achilles is hard by and is driving them in rout before him. I see we are in great peril. As soon as our people are inside and in safety, close the strong gates for I fear lest that terrible man should come bounding inside along with the others." 

As he spoke they drew back the bolts and opened the gates, and when these were opened there was a haven of refuge for the Trojans. Apollo then came full speed out of the city to meet them and protect them. Right for the city and the high wall, parched with thirst and grimy with dust, still they fied on, with Achilles wielding his spear furiously behind them. For he was as one possessed, and was thirsting after glory. 

Then had the sons of the Achaeans taken the lofty gates of Troy if Apollo had not spurred on Agenor, valiant and noble son to Antenor. He put courage into his heart, and stood by his side to guard him, leaning against a beech tree and shrouded in thick darkness. When Agenor saw Achilles he stood still and his heart was clouded with care. "Alas," said he to himself in his dismay, "if I fly before mighty Achilles, and go where all the others are being driven in rout, he will none the less catch me and kill me for a coward. How would it be were I to let Achilles drive the others before him, and then fly from the wall to the plain that is behind Ilius till I reach the spurs of Ida and can hide in the underwood that is thereon? I could then wash the sweat from off me in the river and in the evening return to Ilius. But why commune with myself in this way? Like enough he would see me as I am hurrying from the city over the plain, and would speed after me till he had caught me- I should stand no chance against him, for he is mightiest of all mankind. What, then, if I go out and meet him in front of the city? His flesh too, I take it, can be pierced by pointed bronze. Life is the same in one and all, and men say that he is but mortal despite the triumph that Jove son of Saturn vouchsafes him." 

So saying he stood on his guard and awaited Achilles, for he was now fain to fight him. As a leopardess that bounds from out a thick covert to attack a hunter- she knows no fear and is not dismayed by the baying of the hounds; even though the man be too quick for her and wound her either with thrust or spear, still, though the spear has pierced her she will not give in till she has either caught him in her grip or been killed outright- even so did noble Agenor son of Antenor refuse to fly till he had made trial of Achilles, and took aim at him with his spear, holding his round shield before him and crying with a loud voice. "Of a truth," said he, "noble Achilles, you deem that you shall this day sack the city of the proud Trojans. Fool, there will be trouble enough yet before it, for there is many a brave man of us still inside who will stand in front of our dear parents with our wives and children, to defend Ilius. Here therefore, huge and mighty warrior though you be, here shall you cue. 

As he spoke his strong hand hurled his javelin from him, and the spear struck Achilles on the leg beneath the knee; the greave of newly wrought tin rang loudly, but the spear recoiled from the body of him whom it had struck, and did not pierce it, for the gods gift stayed it. Achilles in his turn attacked noble Agenor, but Apollo would not vouchsafe him glory, for he snatched Agenor away and hid him in a thick mist, sending him out of the battle unmolested Then he craftily drew the son of Peleus away from going after the host, for he put on the semblance of Agenor and stood in front of Achilles, who ran towards him to give him chase and pursued him over the corn lands of the plain, turning him towards the deep waters of the river Scamander. Apollo ran but a little way before him and beguiled Achilles by making him think all the time that he was on the point of overtaking him. Meanwhile the rabble of routed Trojans was thankful to crowd within the city till their numbers thronged it; no longer did they dare wait for one another outside the city walls, to learn who had escaped and who were fallen in fight, but all whose feet and knees could still carry them poured pell-mell into the town. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XXII

THUS the Trojans in the city, scared like fawns, wiped the sweat from off them and drank to quench their thirst, leaning against the goodly battlements, while the Achaeans with their shields laid upon their shoulders drew close up to the walls. But stern fate bade Hector stay where he was before Ilius and the Scaean gates. Then Phoebus Apollo spoke to the son of Peleus saying, "Why, son of Peleus, do you, who are but man, give chase to me who am immortal? Have you not yet found out that it is a god whom you pursue so furiously? You did not harass the Trojans whom you had routed, and now they are within their walls, while you have been decoyed hither away from them. Me you cannot kill, for death can take no hold upon me." 

Achilles was greatly angered and said, "You have baulked me, Far-Darter, most malicious of all gods, and have drawn me away from the wall, where many another man would have bitten the dust ere he got within Ilius; you have robbed me of great glory and have saved the Trojans at no risk to yourself, for you have nothing to fear, but I would indeed have my revenge if it were in my power to do so." 

On this, with fell intent he made towards the city, and as the winning horse in a chariot race strains every nerve when he is flying over the plain, even so fast and furiously did the limbs of Achilles bear him onwards. King Priam was first to note him as he scoured the plain, all radiant as the star which men call Orion's Hound, and whose beams blaze forth in time of harvest more brilliantly than those of any other that shines by night; brightest of them all though he be, he yet bodes ill for mortals, for he brings fire and fever in his train- even so did Achilles' armour gleam on his breast as he sped onwards. Priam raised a cry and beat his head with his hands as he lifted them up and shouted out to his dear son, imploring him to return; but Hector still stayed before the gates, for his heart was set upon doing battle with Achilles. The old man reached out his arms towards him and bade him for pity's sake come within the walls. "Hector," he cried, "my son, stay not to face this man alone and unsupported, or you will meet death at the hands of the son of Peleus, for he is mightier than you. Monster that he is; would indeed that the gods loved him no better than I do, for so, dogs and vultures would soon devour him as he lay stretched on earth, and a load of grief would be lifted from my heart, for many a brave son has he reft from me, either by killing them or selling them away in the islands that are beyond the sea: even now I miss two sons from among the Trojans who have thronged within the city, Lycaon and Polydorus, whom Laothoe peeress among women bore me. Should they be still alive and in the hands of the Achaeans, we will ransom them with gold and bronze, of which we have store, for the old man Altes endowed his daughter richly; but if they are already dead and in the house of Hades, sorrow will it be to us two who were their parents; albeit the grief of others will be more short-lived unless you too perish at the hands of Achilles. Come, then, my son, within the city, to be the guardian of Trojan men and Trojan women, or you will both lose your own life and afford a mighty triumph to the son of Peleus. Have pity also on your unhappy father while life yet remains to him- on me, whom the son of Saturn will destroy by a terrible doom on the threshold of old age, after I have seen my sons slain and my daughters haled away as captives, my bridal chambers pillaged, little children dashed to earth amid the rage of battle, and my sons' wives dragged away by the cruel hands of the Achaeans; in the end fierce hounds will tear me in pieces at my own gates after some one has beaten the life out of my body with sword or spear-hounds that I myself reared and fed at my own table to guard my gates, but who will yet lap my blood and then lie all distraught at my doors. When a young man falls by the sword in battle, he may lie where he is and there is nothing unseemly; let what will be seen, all is honourable in death, but when an old man is slain there is nothing in this world more pitiable than that dogs should defile his grey hair and beard and all that men hide for shame." 

The old man tore his grey hair as he spoke, but he moved not the heart of Hector. His mother hard by wept and moaned aloud as she bared her bosom and pointed to the breast which had suckled him. "Hector," she cried, weeping bitterly the while, "Hector, my son, spurn not this breast, but have pity upon me too: if I have ever given you comfort from my own bosom, think on it now, dear son, and come within the wall to protect us from this man; stand not without to meet him. Should the wretch kill you, neither I nor your richly dowered wife shall ever weep, dear offshoot of myself, over the bed on which you lie, for dogs will devour you at the ships of the Achaeans." 

Thus did the two with many tears implore their son, but they moved not the heart of Hector, and he stood his ground awaiting huge Achilles as he drew nearer towards him. As serpent in its den upon the mountains, full fed with deadly poisons, waits for the approach of man- he is filled with fury and his eyes glare terribly as he goes writhing round his den- even so Hector leaned his shield against a tower that jutted out from the wall and stood where he was, undaunted. 

"Alas," said he to himself in the heaviness of his heart, "if I go within the gates, Polydamas will be the first to heap reproach upon me, for it was he that urged me to lead the Trojans back to the city on that awful night when Achilles again came forth against us. I would not listen, but it would have been indeed better if I had done so. Now that my folly has destroyed the host, I dare not look Trojan men and Trojan women in the face, lest a worse man should say, 'Hector has ruined us by his self-confidence.' Surely it would be better for me to return after having fought Achilles and slain him, or to die gloriously here before the city. What, again, if were to lay down my shield and helmet, lean my spear against the wall and go straight up to noble Achilles? What if I were to promise to give up Helen, who was the fountainhead of all this war, and all the treasure that Alexandrus brought with him in his ships to Troy, aye, and to let the Achaeans divide the half of everything that the city contains among themselves? I might make the Trojans, by the mouths of their princes, take a solemn oath that they would hide nothing, but would divide into two shares all that is within the city- but why argue with myself in this way? Were I to go up to him he would show me no kind of mercy; he would kill me then and there as easily as though I were a woman, when I had off my armour. There is no parleying with him from some rock or oak tree as young men and maidens prattle with one another. Better fight him at once, and learn to which of us Jove will vouchsafe victory." 

Thus did he stand and ponder, but Achilles came up to him as it were Mars himself, plumed lord of battle. From his right shoulder he brandished his terrible spear of Pelian ash, and the bronze gleamed around him like flashing fire or the rays of the rising sun. Fear fell upon Hector as he beheld him, and he dared not stay longer where he was but fled in dismay from before the gates, while Achilles darted after him at his utmost speed. As a mountain falcon, swiftest of all birds, swoops down upon some cowering dove- the dove flies before him but the falcon with a shrill scream follows close after, resolved to have her- even so did Achilles make straight for Hector with all his might, while Hector fled under the Trojan wall as fast as his limbs could take him. 

On they flew along the waggon-road that ran hard by under the wall, past the lookout station, and past the weather-beaten wild fig-tree, till they came to two fair springs which feed the river Scamander. One of these two springs is warm, and steam rises from it as smoke from a burning fire, but the other even in summer is as cold as hail or snow, or the ice that forms on water. Here, hard by the springs, are the goodly washing-troughs of stone, where in the time of peace before the coming of the Achaeans the wives and fair daughters of the Trojans used to wash their clothes. Past these did they fly, the one in front and the other giving ha. behind him: good was the man that fled, but better far was he that followed after, and swiftly indeed did they run, for the prize was no mere beast for sacrifice or bullock's hide, as it might be for a common foot-race, but they ran for the life of Hector. As horses in a chariot race speed round the turning-posts when they are running for some great prize- a tripod or woman- at the games in honour of some dead hero, so did these two run full speed three times round the city of Priam. All the gods watched them, and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak. 

"Alas," said he, "my eyes behold a man who is dear to me being pursued round the walls of Troy; my heart is full of pity for Hector, who has burned the thigh-bones of many a heifer in my honour, at one while on the of many-valleyed Ida, and again on the citadel of Troy; and now I see noble Achilles in full pursuit of him round the city of Priam. What say you? Consider among yourselves and decide whether we shall now save him or let him fall, valiant though he be, before Achilles, son of Peleus." 

Then Minerva said, "Father, wielder of the lightning, lord of cloud and storm, what mean you? Would you pluck this mortal whose doom has long been decreed out of the jaws of death? Do as you will, but we others shall not be of a mind with you." 

And Jove answered, "My child, Trito-born, take heart. I did not speak in full earnest, and I will let you have your way. Do without let or hindrance as you are minded." 

Thus did he urge Minerva who was already eager, and down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. 

Achilles was still in full pursuit of Hector, as a hound chasing a fawn which he has started from its covert on the mountains, and hunts through glade and thicket. The fawn may try to elude him by crouching under cover of a bush, but he will scent her out and follow her up until he gets her- even so there was no escape for Hector from the fleet son of Peleus. Whenever he made a set to get near the Dardanian gates and under the walls, that his people might help him by showering down weapons from above, Achilles would gain on him and head him back towards the plain, keeping himself always on the city side. As a man in a dream who fails to lay hands upon another whom he is pursuing- the one cannot escape nor the other overtake- even so neither could Achilles come up with Hector, nor Hector break away from Achilles; nevertheless he might even yet have escaped death had not the time come when Apollo, who thus far had sustained his strength and nerved his running, was now no longer to stay by him. Achilles made signs to the Achaean host, and shook his head to show that no man was to aim a dart at Hector, lest another might win the glory of having hit him and he might himself come in second. Then, at last, as they were nearing the fountains for the fourth time, the father of all balanced his golden scales and placed a doom in each of them, one for Achilles and the other for Hector. As he held the scales by the middle, the doom of Hector fell down deep into the house of Hades- and then Phoebus Apollo left him. Thereon Minerva went close up to the son of Peleus and said, "Noble Achilles, favoured of heaven, we two shall surely take back to the ships a triumph for the Achaeans by slaying Hector, for all his lust of battle. Do what Apollo may as he lies grovelling before his father, aegis-bearing Jove, Hector cannot escape us longer. Stay here and take breath, while I go up to him and persuade him to make a stand and fight you." 

Thus spoke Minerva. Achilles obeyed her gladly, and stood still, leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen spear, while Minerva left him and went after Hector in the form and with the voice of Deiphobus. She came close up to him and said, "Dear brother, I see you are hard pressed by Achilles who is chasing you at full speed round the city of Priam, let us await his onset and stand on our defence." 

And Hector answered, "Deiphobus, you have always been dearest to me of all my brothers, children of Hecuba and Priam, but henceforth I shall rate you yet more highly, inasmuch as you have ventured outside the wall for my sake when all the others remain inside." 

Then Minerva said, "Dear brother, my father and mother went down on their knees and implored me, as did all my comrades, to remain inside, so great a fear has fallen upon them all; but I was in an agony of grief when I beheld you; now, therefore, let us two make a stand and fight, and let there be no keeping our spears in reserve, that we may learn whether Achilles shall kill us and bear off our spoils to the ships, or whether he shall fall before you." 

Thus did Minerva inveigle him by her cunning, and when the two were now close to one another great Hector was first to speak. "I will-no longer fly you, son of Peleus," said he, "as I have been doing hitherto. Three times have I fled round the mighty city of Priam, without daring to withstand you, but now, let me either slay or be slain, for I am in the mind to face you. Let us, then, give pledges to one another by our gods, who are the fittest witnesses and guardians of all covenants; let it be agreed between us that if Jove vouchsafes me the longer stay and I take your life, I am not to treat your dead body in any unseemly fashion, but when I have stripped you of your armour, I am to give up your body to the Achaeans. And do you likewise." 

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Fool, prate not to me about covenants. There can be no covenants between men and lions, wolves and lambs can never be of one mind, but hate each other out and out an through. Therefore there can be no understanding between you and me, nor may there be any covenants between us, till one or other shall fall and glut grim Mars with his life's blood. Put forth all your strength; you have need now to prove yourself indeed a bold soldier and man of war. You have no more chance, and Pallas Minerva will forthwith vanquish you by my spear: you shall now pay me in full for the grief you have caused me on account of my comrades whom you have killed in battle." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. Hector saw it coming and avoided it; he watched it and crouched down so that it flew over his head and stuck in the ground beyond; Minerva then snatched it up and gave it back to Achilles without Hector's seeing her; Hector thereon said to the son of Peleus, "You have missed your aim, Achilles, peer of the gods, and Jove has not yet revealed to you the hour of my doom, though you made sure that he had done so. You were a false-tongued liar when you deemed that I should forget my valour and quail before you. You shall not drive spear into the back of a runaway- drive it, should heaven so grant you power, drive it into me as I make straight towards you; and now for your own part avoid my spear if you can- would that you might receive the whole of it into your body; if you were once dead the Trojans would find the war an easier matter, for it is you who have harmed them most." 

He poised his spear as he spoke and hurled it. His aim was true for he hit the middle of Achilles' shield, but the spear rebounded from it, and did not pierce it. Hector was angry when he saw that the weapon had sped from his hand in vain, and stood there in dismay for he had no second spear. With a loud cry he called Diphobus and asked him for one, but there was no man; then he saw the truth and said to himself, "Alas! the gods have lured me on to my destruction. I deemed that the hero Deiphobus was by my side, but he is within the wall, and Minerva has inveigled me; death is now indeed exceedingly near at hand and there is no way out of it- for so Jove and his son Apollo the far-darter have willed it, though heretofore they have been ever ready to protect me. My doom has come upon me; let me not then die ingloriously and without a struggle, but let me first do some great thing that shall be told among men hereafter." 

As he spoke he drew the keen blade that hung so great and strong by his side, and gathering himself together be sprang on Achilles like a soaring eagle which swoops down from the clouds on to some lamb or timid hare- even so did Hector brandish his sword and spring upon Achilles. Achilles mad with rage darted towards him, with his wondrous shield before his breast, and his gleaming helmet, made with four layers of metal, nodding fiercely forward. The thick tresses of gold wi which Vulcan had crested the helmet floated round it, and as the evening star that shines brighter than all others through the stillness of night, even such was the gleam of the spear which Achilles poised in his right hand, fraught with the death of noble Hector. He eyed his fair flesh over and over to see where he could best wound it, but all was protected by the goodly armour of which Hector had spoiled Patroclus after he had slain him, save only the throat where the collar-bones divide the neck from the shoulders, and this is a most deadly place: here then did Achilles strike him as he was coming on towards him, and the point of his spear went right through the fleshy part of the neck, but it did not sever his windpipe so that he could still speak. Hector fell headlong, and Achilles vaunted over him saying, "Hector, you deemed that you should come off scatheless when you were spoiling Patroclus, and recked not of myself who was not with him. Fool that you were: for I, his comrade, mightier far than he, was still left behind him at the ships, and now I have laid you low. The Achaeans shall give him all due funeral rites, while dogs and vultures shall work their will upon yourself." 

Then Hector said, as the life ebbed out of him, "I pray you by your life and knees, and by your parents, let not dogs devour me at the ships of the Achaeans, but accept the rich treasure of gold and bronze which my father and mother will offer you, and send my body home, that the Trojans and their wives may give me my dues of fire when I am dead." 

Achilles glared at him and answered, "Dog, talk not to me neither of knees nor parents; would that I could be as sure of being able to cut your flesh into pieces and eat it raw, for the ill have done me, as I am that nothing shall save you from the dogs- it shall not be, though they bring ten or twenty-fold ransom and weigh it out for me on the spot, with promise of yet more hereafter. Though Priam son of Dardanus should bid them offer me your weight in gold, even so your mother shall never lay you out and make lament over the son she bore, but dogs and vultures shall eat you utterly up." 

Hector with his dying breath then said, "I know you what you are, and was sure that I should not move you, for your heart is hard as iron; look to it that I bring not heaven's anger upon you on the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo, valiant though you be, shall slay you at the Scaean gates." 

When he had thus said the shrouds of death enfolded him, whereon his soul went out of him and flew down to the house of Hades, lamenting its sad fate that it should en' youth and strength no longer. But Achilles said, speaking to the dead body, "Die; for my part I will accept my fate whensoever Jove and the other gods see fit to send it." 

As he spoke he drew his spear from the body and set it on one side; then he stripped the blood-stained armour from Hector's shoulders while the other Achaeans came running up to view his wondrous strength and beauty; and no one came near him without giving him a fresh wound. Then would one turn to his neighbour and say, "It is easier to handle Hector now than when he was flinging fire on to our ships" and as he spoke he would thrust his spear into him anew. 

When Achilles had done spoiling Hector of his armour, he stood among the Argives and said, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, now that heaven has vouchsafed us to overcome this man, who has done us more hurt than all the others together, consider whether we should not attack the city in force, and discover in what mind the Trojans may be. We should thus learn whether they will desert their city now that Hector has fallen, or will still hold out even though he is no longer living. But why argue with myself in this way, while Patroclus is still lying at the ships unburied, and unmourned- he Whom I can never forget so long as I am alive and my strength fails not? Though men forget their dead when once they are within the house of Hades, yet not even there will I forget the comrade whom I have lost. Now, therefore, Achaean youths, let us raise the song of victory and go back to the ships taking this man along with us; for we have achieved a mighty triumph and have slain noble Hector to whom the Trojans prayed throughout their city as though he were a god." 

On this he treated the body of Hector with contumely: he pierced the sinews at the back of both his feet from heel to ancle and passed thongs of ox-hide through the slits he had made: thus he made the body fast to his chariot, letting the head trail upon the ground. Then when he had put the goodly armour on the chariot and had himself mounted, he lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loth. The dust rose from Hector as he was being dragged along, his dark hair flew all abroad, and his head once so comely was laid low on earth, for Jove had now delivered him into the hands of his foes to do him outrage in his own land. 

Thus was the head of Hector being dishonoured in the dust. His mother tore her hair, and flung her veil from her with a loud cry as she looked upon her son. His father made piteous moan, and throughout the city the people fell to weeping and wailing. It was as though the whole of frowning Ilius was being smirched with fire. Hardly could the people hold Priam back in his hot haste to rush without the gates of the city. He grovelled in the mire and besought them, calling each one of them by his name. "Let be, my friends," he cried, "and for all your sorrow, suffer me to go single-handed to the ships of the Achaeans. Let me beseech this cruel and terrible man, if maybe he will respect the feeling of his fellow-men, and have compassion on my old age. His own father is even such another as myself- Peleus, who bred him and reared him to- be the bane of us Trojans, and of myself more than of all others. Many a son of mine has he slain in the flower of his youth, and yet, grieve for these as I may, I do so for one- Hector- more than for them all, and the bitterness of my sorrow will bring me down to the house of Hades. Would that he had died in my arms, for so both his ill-starred mother who bore him, and myself, should have had the comfort of weeping and mourning over him." 

Thus did he speak with many tears, and all the people of the city joined in his lament. Hecuba then raised the cry of wailing among the Trojans. "Alas, my son," she cried, "what have I left to live for now that you are no more? Night and day did I glory in. you throughout the city, for you were a tower of strength to all in Troy, and both men and women alike hailed you as a god. So long as you lived you were their pride, but now death and destruction have fallen upon you." 

Hector's wife had as yet heard nothing, for no one had come to tell her that her husband had remained without the gates. She was at her loom in an inner part of the house, weaving a double purple web, and embroidering it with many flowers. She told her maids to set a large tripod on the fire, so as to have a warm bath ready for Hector when he came out of battle; poor woman, she knew not that he was now beyond the reach of baths, and that Minerva had laid him low by the hands of Achilles. She heard the cry coming as from the wall, and trembled in every limb; the shuttle fell from her hands, and again she spoke to her waiting-women. "Two of you," she said, "come with me that I may learn what it is that has befallen; I heard the voice of my husband's honoured mother; my own heart beats as though it would come into my mouth and my limbs refuse to carry me; some great misfortune for Priam's children must be at hand. May I never live to hear it, but I greatly fear that Achilles has cut off the retreat of brave Hector and has chased him on to the plain where he was singlehanded; I fear he may have put an end to the reckless daring which possessed my husband, who would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour." 

Her heart beat fast, and as she spoke she flew from the house like a maniac, with her waiting-women following after. When she reached the battlements and the crowd of people, she stood looking out upon the wall, and saw Hector being borne away in front of the city- the horses dragging him without heed or care over the ground towards the ships of the Achaeans. Her eyes were then shrouded as with the darkness of night and she fell fainting backwards. She tore the tiring from her head and flung it from her, the frontlet and net with its plaited band, and the veil which golden Venus had given her on the day when Hector took her with him from the house of Eetion, after having given countless gifts of wooing for her sake. Her husband's sisters and the wives of his brothers crowded round her and supported her, for she was fain to die in her distraction; when she again presently breathed and came to herself, she sobbed and made lament among the Trojans saying, 'Woe is me, O Hector; woe, indeed, that to share a common lot we were born, you at Troy in the house of Priam, and I at Thebes under the wooded mountain of Placus in the house of Eetion who brought me up when I was a child- ill-starred sire of an ill-starred daughter- would that he had never begotten me. You are now going into the house of Hades under the secret places of the earth, and you leave me a sorrowing widow in your house. The child, of whom you and I are the unhappy parents, is as yet a mere infant. Now that you are gone, O Hector, you can do nothing for him nor he for you. Even though he escape the horrors of this woful war with the Achaeans, yet shall his life henceforth be one of labour and sorrow, for others will seize his lands. The day that robs a child of his parents severs him from his own kind; his head is bowed, his cheeks are wet with tears, and he will go about destitute among the friends of his father, plucking one by the cloak and another by the shirt. Some one or other of these may so far pity him as to hold the cup for a moment towards him and let him moisten his lips, but he must not drink enough to wet the roof of his mouth; then one whose parents are alive will drive him from the table with blows and angry words. 'Out with you,' he will say, 'you have no father here,' and the child will go crying back to his widowed mother- he, Astyanax, who erewhile would sit upon his father's knees, and have none but the daintiest and choicest morsels set before him. When he had played till he was tired and went to sleep, he would lie in a bed, in the arms of his nurse, on a soft couch, knowing neither want nor care, whereas now that he has lost his father his lot will be full of hardship- he, whom the Trojans name Astyanax, because you, O Hector, were the only defence of their gates and battlements. The wriggling writhing worms will now eat you at the ships, far from your parents, when the dogs have glutted themselves upon you. You will lie naked, although in your house you have fine and goodly raiment made by hands of women. This will I now burn; it is of no use to you, for you can never again wear it, and thus you will have respect shown you by the Trojans both men and women." 

In such wise did she cry aloud amid her tears, and the women joined in her lament. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XXIII

THUS did they make their moan throughout the city, while the Achaeans when they reached the Hellespont went back every man to his own ship. But Achilles would not let the Myrmidons go, and spoke to his brave comrades saying, "Myrmidons, famed horsemen and my own trusted friends, not yet, forsooth, let us unyoke, but with horse and chariot draw near to the body and mourn Patroclus, in due honour to the dead. When we have had full comfort of lamentation we will unyoke our horses and take supper all of us here." 

On this they all joined in a cry of wailing and Achilles led them in their lament. Thrice did they drive their chariots all sorrowing round the body, and Thetis stirred within them a still deeper yearning. The sands of the seashore and the men's armour were wet with their weeping, so great a minister of fear was he whom they had lost. Chief in all their mourning was the son of Peleus: he laid his bloodstained hand on the breast of his friend. "Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus, even in the house of Hades. I will now do all that I erewhile promised you; I will drag Hector hither and let dogs devour him raw; twelve noble sons of Trojans will I also slay before your pyre to avenge you." 

As he spoke he treated the body of noble Hector with contumely, laying it at full length in the dust beside the bier of Patroclus. The others then put off every man his armour, took the horses from their chariots, and seated themselves in great multitude by the ship of the fleet descendant of Aeacus, who thereon feasted them with an abundant funeral banquet. Many a goodly ox, with many a sheep and bleating goat did they butcher and cut up; many a tusked boar moreover, fat and well-fed, did they singe and set to roast in the flames of Vulcan; and rivulets of blood flowed all round the place where the body was lying. 

Then the princes of the Achaeans took the son of Peleus to Agamemnon, but hardly could they persuade him to come with them, so wroth was he for the death of his comrade. As soon as they reached Agamemnon's tent they told the serving-men to set a large tripod over the fire in case they might persuade the son of Peleus 'to wash the clotted gore from this body, but he denied them sternly, and swore it with a solemn oath, saying, "Nay, by King Jove, first and mightiest of all gods, it is not meet that water should touch my body, till I have laid Patroclus on the flames, have built him a barrow, and shaved my head- for so long as I live no such second sorrow shall ever draw nigh me. Now, therefore, let us do all that this sad festival demands, but at break of day, King Agamemnon, bid your men bring wood, and provide all else that the dead may duly take into the realm of darkness; the fire shall thus burn him out of our sight the sooner, and the people shall turn again to their own labours." 

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. They made haste to prepare the meal, they ate, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As soon as they had had had enough to eat and drink, the others went to their rest each in his own tent, but the son of Peleus lay grieving among his Myrmidons by the shore of the sounding sea, in an open place where the waves came surging in one after another. Here a very deep slumber took hold upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows, for his limbs were weary with chasing Hector round windy Ilius. Presently the sad spirit of Patroclus drew near him, like what he had been in stature, voice, and the light of his beaming eyes, clad, too, as he had been clad in life. The spirit hovered over his head and said- 

"You sleep, Achilles, and have forgotten me; you loved me living, but now that I am dead you think for me no further. Bury me with all speed that I may pass the gates of Hades; the ghosts, vain shadows of men that can labour no more, drive me away from them; they will not yet suffer me to join those that are beyond the river, and I wander all desolate by the wide gates of the house of Hades. Give me now your hand I pray you, for when you have once given me my dues of fire, never shall I again come forth out of the house of Hades. Nevermore shall we sit apart and take sweet counsel among the living; the cruel fate which was my birth-right has yawned its wide jaws around me- nay, you too Achilles, peer of gods, are doomed to die beneath the wall of the noble Trojans. 

"One prayer more will I make you, if you will grant it; let not my bones be laid apart from yours, Achilles, but with them; even as we were brought up together in your own home, what time Menoetius brought me to you as a child from Opoeis because by a sad spite I had killed the son of Amphidamas- not of set purpose, but in childish quarrel over the dice. The knight Peleus took me into his house, entreated me kindly, and named me to be your squire; therefore let our bones lie in but a single urn, the two-handled golden vase given to you by your mother." 

And Achilles answered, "Why, true heart, are you come hither to lay these charges upon me? will of my own self do all as you have bidden me. Draw closer to me, let us once more throw our arms around one another, and find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows." 

He opened his arms towards him as he spoke and would have clasped him in them, but there was nothing, and the spirit vanished as a vapour, gibbering and whining into the earth. Achilles sprang to his feet, smote his two hands, and made lamentation saying, "Of a truth even in the house of Hades there are ghosts and phantoms that have no life in them; all night long the sad spirit of Patroclus has hovered over head making piteous moan, telling me what I am to do for him, and looking wondrously like himself." 

Thus did he speak and his words set them all weeping and mourning about the poor dumb dead, till rosy-fingered morn appeared. Then King Agamemnon sent men and mules from all parts of the camp, to bring wood, and Meriones, squire to Idomeneus, was in charge over them. They went out with woodmen's axes and strong ropes in their hands, and before them went the mules. Up hill and down dale did they go, by straight ways and crooked, and when they reached the heights of many-fountained Ida, they laid their axes to the roots of many a tall branching oak that came thundering down as they felled it. They split the trees and bound them behind the mules, which then wended their way as they best could through the thick brushwood on to the plain. All who had been cutting wood bore logs, for so Meriones squire to Idomeneus had bidden them, and they threw them down in a line upon the seashore at the place where Achilles would make a mighty monument for Patroclus and for himself. 

When they had thrown down their great logs of wood over the whole ground, they stayed all of them where they were, but Achilles ordered his brave Myrmidons to gird on their armour, and to yoke each man his horses; they therefore rose, girded on their armour and mounted each his chariot- they and their charioteers with them. The chariots went before, and they that were on foot followed as a cloud in their tens of thousands after. In the midst of them his comrades bore Patroclus and covered him with the locks of their hair which they cut off and threw upon his body. Last came Achilles with his head bowed for sorrow, so noble a comrade was he taking to the house of Hades. 

When they came to the place of which Achilles had told them they laid the body down and built up the wood. Achilles then bethought him of another matter. He went a space away from the pyre, and cut off the yellow lock which he had let grow for the river Spercheius. He looked all sorrowfully out upon the dark sea, and said, "Spercheius, in vain did my father Peleus vow to you that when I returned home to my loved native land I should cut off this lock and offer you a holy hecatomb; fifty she-goats was I to sacrifice to you there at your springs, where is your grove and your altar fragrant with burnt-offerings. Thus did my father vow, but you have not fulfilled his prayer; now, therefore, that I shall see my home no more, I give this lock as a keepsake to the hero Patroclus." 

As he spoke he placed the lock in the hands of his dear comrade, and all who stood by were filled with yearning and lamentation. The sun would have gone down upon their mourning had not Achilles presently said to Agamemnon, "Son of Atreus, for it is to you that the people will give ear, there is a time to mourn and a time to cease from mourning; bid the people now leave the pyre and set about getting their dinners: we, to whom the dead is dearest, will see to what is wanted here, and let the other princes also stay by me." 

When King Agamemnon heard this he dismissed the people to their ships, but those who were about the dead heaped up wood and built a pyre a hundred feet this way and that; then they laid the dead all sorrowfully upon the top of it. They flayed and dressed many fat sheep and oxen before the pyre, and Achilles took fat from all of them and wrapped the body therein from head to foot, heaping the flayed carcases all round it. Against the bier he leaned two-handled jars of honey and unguents; four proud horses did he then cast upon the pyre, groaning the while he did so. The dead hero had had house-dogs; two of them did Achilles slay and threw upon the pyre; he also put twelve brave sons of noble Trojans to the sword and laid them with the rest, for he was full of bitterness and fury. Then he committed all to the resistless and devouring might of the fire; he groaned aloud and callid on his dead comrade by name. "Fare well," he cried, "Patroclus, even in the house of Hades; I am now doing all that I have promised you. Twelve brave sons of noble Trojans shall the flames consume along with yourself, but dogs, not fire, shall devour the flesh of Hector son of Priam." 

Thus did he vaunt, but the dogs came not about the body of Hector, for Jove's daughter Venus kept them off him night and day, and anointed him with ambrosial oil of roses that his flesh might not be torn when Achilles was dragging him about. Phoebus Apollo moreover sent a dark cloud from heaven to earth, which gave shade to the whole place where Hector lay, that the heat of the sun might not parch his body. 

Now the pyre about dead Patroclus would not kindle. Achilles therefore bethought him of another matter; he went apart and prayed to the two winds Boreas and Zephyrus vowing them goodly offerings. He made them many drink-offerings from the golden cup and besought them to come and help him that the wood might make haste to kindle and the dead bodies be consumed. Fleet Iris heard him praying and started off to fetch the winds. They were holding high feast in the house of boisterous Zephyrus when Iris came running up to the stone threshold of the house and stood there, but as soon as they set eyes on her they all came towards her and each of them called her to him, but Iris would not sit down. "I cannot stay," she said, "I must go back to the streams of Oceanus and the land of the Ethiopians who are offering hecatombs to the immortals, and I would have my share; but Achilles prays that Boreas and shrill Zephyrus will come to him, and he vows them goodly offerings; he would have you blow upon the pyre of Patroclus for whom all the Achaeans are lamenting." 

With this she left them, and the two winds rose with a cry that rent the air and swept the clouds before them. They blew on and on until they came to the sea, and the waves rose high beneath them, but when they reached Troy they fell upon the pyre till the mighty flames roared under the blast that they blew. All night long did they blow hard and beat upon the fire, and all night long did Achilles grasp his double cup, drawing wine from a mixing-bowl of gold, and calling upon the spirit of dead Patroclus as he poured it upon the ground until the earth was drenched. As a father mourns when he is burning the bones of his bridegroom son whose death has wrung the hearts of his parents, even so did Achilles mourn while burning the body of his comrade, pacing round the bier with piteous groaning and lamentation. 

At length as the Morning Star was beginning to herald the light which saffron-mantled Dawn was soon to suffuse over the sea, the flames fell and the fire began to die. The winds then went home beyond the Thracian sea, which roared and boiled as they swept over it. The son of Peleus now turned away from the pyre and lay down, overcome with toil, till he fell into a sweet slumber. Presently they who were about the son of Atreus drew near in a body, and roused him with the noise and tramp of their coming. He sat upright and said, "Son of Atreus, and all other princes of the Achaeans, first pour red wine everywhere upon the fire and quench it; let us then gather the bones of Patroclus son of Menoetius, singling them out with care; they are easily found, for they lie in the middle of the pyre, while all else, both men and horses, has been thrown in a heap and burned at the outer edge. We will lay the bones in a golden urn, in two layers of fat, against the time when I shall myself go down into the house of Hades. As for the barrow, labour not to raise a great one now, but such as is reasonable. Afterwards, let those Achaeans who may be left at the ships when I am gone, build it both broad and high." 

Thus he spoke and they obeyed the word of the son of Peleus. First they poured red wine upon the thick layer of ashes and quenched the fire. With many tears they singled out the whitened bones of their loved comrade and laid them within a golden urn in two layers of fat: they then covered the urn with a linen cloth and took it inside the tent. They marked off the circle where the barrow should be, made a foundation for it about the pyre, and forthwith heaped up the earth. When they had thus raised a mound they were going away, but Achilles stayed the people and made them sit in assembly. He brought prizes from the ships-cauldrons, tripods, horses and mules, noble oxen, women with fair girdles, and swart iron. 

The first prize he offered was for the chariot races- a woman skilled in all useful arts, and a three-legged cauldron that had ears for handles, and would hold twenty-two measures. This was for the man who came in first. For the second there was a six-year old mare, unbroken, and in foal to a he-ass; the third was to have a goodly cauldron that had never yet been on the fire; it was still bright as when it left the maker, and would hold four measures. The fourth prize was two talents of gold, and the fifth a two-handled urn as yet unsoiled by smoke. Then he stood up and spoke among the Argives saying- 

"Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, these are the prizes that lie waiting the winners of the chariot races. At any other time I should carry off the first prize and take it to my own tent; you know how far my steeds excel all others- for they are immortal; Neptune gave them to my father Peleus, who in his turn gave them to myself; but I shall hold aloof, I and my steeds that have lost their brave and kind driver, who many a time has washed them in clear water and anointed their manes with oil. See how they stand weeping here, with their manes trailing on the ground in the extremity of their sorrow. But do you others set yourselves in order throughout the host, whosoever has confidence in his horses and in the strength of his chariot." 

Thus spoke the son of Peleus and the drivers of chariots bestirred themselves. First among them all uprose Eumelus, king of men, son of Admetus, a man excellent in horsemanship. Next to him rose mighty Diomed son of Tydeus; he yoked the Trojan horses which he had taken from Aeneas, when Apollo bore him out of the fight. Next to him, yellow-haired Menelaus son of Atreus rose and yoked his fleet horses, Agamemnon's mare Aethe, and his own horse Podargus. The mare had been given to Agamemnon by echepolus son of Anchises, that he might not have to follow him to Ilius, but might stay at home and take his ease; for Jove had endowed him with great wealth and he lived in spacious Sicyon. This mare, all eager for the race, did Menelaus put under the yoke. 

Fourth in order Antilochus, son to noble Nestor son of Neleus, made ready his horses. These were bred in Pylos, and his father came up to him to give him good advice of which, however, he stood in but little need. "Antilochus," said Nestor, "you are young, but Jove and Neptune have loved you well, and have made you an excellent horseman. I need not therefore say much by way of instruction. You are skilful at wheeling your horses round the post, but the horses themselves are very slow, and it is this that will, I fear, mar your chances. The other drivers know less than you do, but their horses are fleeter; therefore, my dear son, see if you cannot hit upon some artifice whereby you may insure that the prize shall not slip through your fingers. The woodman does more by skill than by brute force; by skill the pilot guides his storm-tossed barque over the sea, and so by skill one driver can beat another. If a man go wide in rounding this way and that, whereas a man who knows what he is doing may have worse horses, but he will keep them well in hand when he sees the doubling-post; he knows the precise moment at which to pull the rein, and keeps his eye well on the man in front of him. I will give you this certain token which cannot escape your notice. There is a stump of a dead tree-oak or pine as it may be- some six feet above the ground, and not yet rotted away by rain; it stands at the fork of the road; it has two white stones set one on each side, and there is a clear course all round it. It may have been a monument to some one long since dead, or it may have been used as a doubling-post in days gone by; now, however, it has been fixed on by Achilles as the mark round which the chariots shall turn; hug it as close as you can, but as you stand in your chariot lean over a little to the left; urge on your right-hand horse with voice and lash, and give him a loose rein, but let the left-hand horse keep so close in, that the nave of your wheel shall almost graze the post; but mind the stone, or you will wound your horses and break your chariot in pieces, which would be sport for others but confusion for yourself. Therefore, my dear son, mind well what you are about, for if you can be first to round the post there is no chance of any one giving you the goby later, not even though you had Adrestus's horse Arion behind you horse which is of divine race- or those of Laomedon, which are the noblest in this country." 

When Nestor had made an end of counselling his son he sat down in his place, and fifth in order Meriones got ready his horses. They then all mounted their chariots and cast lots.- Achilles shook the helmet, and the lot of Antilochus son of Nestor fell out first; next came that of King Eumelus, and after his, those of Menelaus son of Atreus and of Meriones. The last place fell to the lot of Diomed son of Tydeus, who was the best man of them all. They took their places in line; Achilles showed them the doubling-post round which they were to turn, some way off upon the plain; here he stationed his father's follower Phoenix as umpire, to note the running, and report truly. 

At the same instant they all of them lashed their horses, struck them with the reins, and shouted at them with all their might. They flew full speed over the plain away from the ships, the dust rose from under them as it were a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes were all flying in the wind. At one moment the chariots seemed to touch the ground, and then again they bounded into the air; the drivers stood erect, and their hearts beat fast and furious in their lust of victory. Each kept calling on his horses, and the horses scoured the plain amid the clouds of dust that they raised. 

It was when they were doing the last part of the course on their way back towards the sea that their pace was strained to the utmost and it was seen what each could do. The horses of the descendant of Pheres now took the lead, and close behind them came the Trojan stallions of Diomed. They seemed as if about to mount Eumelus's chariot, and he could feel their warm breath on his back and on his broad shoulders, for their heads were close to him as they flew over the course. Diomed would have now passed him, or there would have been a dead heat, but Phoebus Apollo to spite him made him drop his whip. Tears of anger fell from his eyes as he saw the mares going on faster than ever, while his own horses lost ground through his having no whip. Minerva saw the trick which Apollo had played the son of Tydeus, so she brought him his whip and put spirit into his horses; moreover she went after the son of Admetus in a rage and broke his yoke for him; the mares went one to one side the course, and the other to the other, and the pole was broken against the ground. Eumelus was thrown from his chariot close to the wheel; his elbows, mouth, and nostrils were all torn, and his forehead was bruised above his eyebrows; his eyes filled with tears and he could find no utterance. But the son of Tydeus turned his horses aside and shot far ahead, for Minerva put fresh strength into them and covered Diomed himself with glory. 

Menelaus son of Atreus came next behind him, but Antilochus called to his father's horses. "On with you both," he cried, "and do your very utmost. I do not bid you try to beat the steeds of the son of Tydeus, for Minerva has put running into them, and has covered Diomed with glory; but you must overtake the horses of the son of Atreus and not be left behind, or Aethe who is so fleet will taunt you. Why, my good fellows, are you lagging? I tell you, and it shall surely be- Nestor will keep neither of you, but will put both of you to the sword, if we win any the worse a prize through your carelessness, fly after them at your utmost speed; I will hit on a plan for passing them in a narrow part of the way, and it shall not fail me." 

They feared the rebuke of their master, and for a short space went quicker. Presently Antilochus saw a narrow place where the road had sunk. The ground was broken, for the winter's rain had gathered and had worn the road so that the whole place was deepened. Menelaus was making towards it so as to get there first, for fear of a foul, but Antilochus turned his horses out of the way, and followed him a little on one side. The son of Atreus was afraid and shouted out, "Antilochus, you are driving recklessly; rein in your horses; the road is too narrow here, it will be wider soon, and you can pass me then; if you foul my chariot you may bring both of us to a mischief." 

But Antilochus plied his whip, and drove faster, as though he had not heard him. They went side by side for about as far as a young man can hurl a disc from his shoulder when he is trying his strength, and then Menelaus's mares drew behind, for he left off driving for fear the horses should foul one another and upset the chariots; thus, while pressing on in quest of victory, they might both come headlong to the ground. Menelaus then upbraided Antilochus and said, "There is no greater trickster living than you are; go, and bad luck go with you; the Achaeans say not well that you have understanding, and come what may you shall not bear away the prize without sworn protest on my part." 

Then he called on his horses and said to them, "Keep your pace, and slacken not; the limbs of the other horses will weary sooner than yours, for they are neither of them young." 

The horses feared the rebuke of their master, and went faster, so that they were soon nearly up with the others. 

Meanwhile the Achaeans from their seats were watching how the horses went, as they scoured the plain amid clouds of their own dust. Idomeneus captain of the Cretans was first to make out the running, for he was not in the thick of the crowd, but stood on the most commanding part of the ground. The driver was a long way off, but Idomeneus could hear him shouting, and could see the foremost horse quite plainly- a chestnut with a round white star, like the moon, on its forehead. He stood up and said among the Argives, "My friends, princes and counsellors of the Argives, can you see the running as well as I can? There seems to be another pair in front now, and another driver; those that led off at the start must have been disabled out on the plain. I saw them at first making their way round the doubling-post, but now, though I search the plain of Troy, I cannot find them. Perhaps the reins fell from the driver's hand so that he lost command of his horses at the doubling-post, and could not turn it. I suppose he must have been thrown out there, and broken his chariot, while his mares have left the course and gone off wildly in a panic. Come up and see for yourselves, I cannot make out for certain, but the driver seems an Aetolian by descent, ruler over the Argives, brave Diomed the son of Tydeus." 

Ajax the son of Oileus took him up rudely and said, "Idomeneus, why should you be in such a hurry to tell us all about it, when the mares are still so far out upon the plain? You are none of the youngest, nor your eyes none of the sharpest, but you are always laying down the law. You have no right to do so, for there are better men here than you are. Eumelus's horses are in front now, as they always have been, and he is on the chariot holding the reins." 

The captain of the Cretans was angry, and answered, "Ajax you are an excellent railer, but you have no judgement, and are wanting in much else as well, for you have a vile temper. I will wager you a tripod or cauldron, and Agamemnon son of Atreus shall decide whose horses are first. You will then know to your cost." 

Ajax son of Oileus was for making him an angry answer, and there would have been yet further brawling between them, had not Achilles risen in his place and said, "Cease your railing Ajax and Idomeneus; it is not you would be scandalised if you saw any one else do the like: sit down and keep your eyes on the horses; they are speeding towards the winning-post and will be bere directly. You will then both of you know whose horses are first, and whose come after." 

As he was speaking, the son of Tydeus came driving in, plying his whip lustily from his shoulder, and his horses stepping high as they flew over the course. The sand and grit rained thick on the driver, and the chariot inlaid with gold and tin ran close behind his fleet horses. There was little trace of wheel-marks in the fine dust, and the horses came flying in at their utmost speed. Diomed stayed them in the middle of the crowd, and the sweat from their manes and chests fell in streams on to the ground. Forthwith he sprang from his goodly chariot, and leaned his whip against his horses' yoke; brave Sthenelus now lost no time, but at once brought on the prize, and gave the woman and the ear-handled cauldron to his comrades to take away. Then he unyoked the horses. 

Next after him came in Antilochus of the race of Neleus, who had passed Menelaus by a trick and not by the fleetness of his horses; but even so Menelaus came in as close behind him as the wheel is to the horse that draws both the chariot and its master. The end hairs of a horse's tail touch the tyre of the wheel, and there is never much space between wheel and horse when the chariot is going; Menelaus was no further than this behind Antilochus, though at first he had been a full disc's throw behind him. He had soon caught him up again, for Agamemnon's mare Aethe kept pulling stronger and stronger, so that if the course had been longer he would have passed him, and there would not even have been a dead heat. Idomeneus's brave squire Meriones was about a spear's cast behind Menelaus. His horses were slowest of all, and he was the worst driver. Last of them all came the son of Admetus, dragging his chariot and driving his horses on in front. When Achilles saw him he was sorry, and stood up among the Argives saying, "The best man is coming in last. Let us give him a prize for it is reasonable. He shall have the second, but the first must go to the son of Tydeus." 

Thus did he speak and the others all of them applauded his saying, and were for doing as he had said, but Nestor's son Antilochus stood up and claimed his rights from the son of Peleus. "Achilles," said he, "I shall take it much amiss if you do this thing; you would rob me of my prize, because you think Eumelus's chariot and horses were thrown out, and himself too, good man that he is. He should have prayed duly to the immortals; he would not have come in fast if he had done so. If you are sorry for him and so choose, you have much gold in your tents, with bronze, sheep, cattle and horses. Take something from this store if you would have the Achaeans speak well of you, and give him a better prize even than that which you have now offered; but I will not give up the mare, and he that will fight me for her, let him come on." 

Achilles smiled as he heard this, and was pleased with Antilochus, who was one of his dearest comrades. So he said- 

"Antilochus, if you would have me find Eumelus another prize, I will give him the bronze breastplate with a rim of tin running all round it which I took from Asteropaeus. It will be worth much money to him." 

He bade his comrade Automedon bring the breastplate from his tent, and he did so. Achilles then gave it over to Eumelus, who received it gladly. 

But Menelaus got up in a rage, furiously angry with Antilochus. An attendant placed his staff in his hands and bade the Argives keep silence: the hero then addressed them. "Antilochus," said he, "what is this from you who have been so far blameless? You have made me cut a poor figure and baulked my horses by flinging your own in front of them, though yours are much worse than mine are; therefore, O princes and counsellors of the Argives, judge between us and show no favour, lest one of the Achaeans say, 'Menelaus has got the mare through lying and corruption; his horses were far inferior to Antilochus's, but he has greater weight and influence.' Nay, I will determine the matter myself, and no man will blame me, for I shall do what is just. Come here, Antilochus, and stand, as our custom is, whip in hand before your chariot and horses; lay your hand on your steeds, and swear by earth-encircling Neptune that you did not purposely and guilefully get in the way of my horses." 

And Antilochus answered, "Forgive me; I am much younger, King Menelaus, than you are; you stand higher than I do and are the better man of the two; you know how easily young men are betrayed into indiscretion; their tempers are more hasty and they have less judgement; make due allowances therefore, and bear with me; I will of my own accord give up the mare that I have won, and if you claim any further chattel from my own possessions, I would rather yield it to you, at once, than fall from your good graces henceforth, and do wrong in the sight of heaven." 

The son of Nestor then took the mare and gave her over to Menelaus, whose anger was thus appeased; as when dew falls upon a field of ripening corn, and the lands are bristling with the harvest- even so, O Menelaus, was your heart made glad within you. He turned to Antilochus and said, "Now, Antilochus, angry though I have been, I can give way to you of my own free will; you have never been headstrong nor ill-disposed hitherto, but this time your youth has got the better of your judgement; be careful how you outwit your betters in future; no one else could have brought me round so easily, but your good father, your brother, and yourself have all of you had infinite trouble on my behalf; I therefore yield to your entreaty, and will give up the mare to you, mine though it indeed be; the people will thus see that I am neither harsh nor vindictive." 

With this he gave the mare over to Antilochus's comrade Noemon, and then took the cauldron. Meriones, who had come in fourth, carried off the two talents of gold, and the fifth prize, the two-handled urn, being unawarded, Achilles gave it to Nestor, going up to him among the assembled Argives and saying, "Take this, my good old friend, as an heirloom and memorial of the funeral of Patroclus- for you shall see him no more among the Argives. I give you this prize though you cannot win one; you can now neither wrestle nor fight, and cannot enter for the javelin-match nor foot-races, for the hand of age has been laid heavily upon you." 

So saying he gave the urn over to Nestor, who received it gladly and answered, "My son, all that you have said is true; there is no strength now in my legs and feet, nor can I hit out with my hands from either shoulder. Would that I were still young and strong as when the Epeans were burying King Amarynceus in Buprasium, and his sons offered prizes in his honour. There was then none that could vie with me neither of the Epeans nor the Pylians themselves nor the Aetolians. In boxing I overcame Clytomedes son of Enops, and in wrestling, Ancaeus of Pleuron who had come forward against me. Iphiclus was a good runner, but I beat him, and threw farther with my spear than either Phyleus or Polydorus. In chariot-racing alone did the two sons of Actor surpass me by crowding their horses in front of me, for they were angry at the way victory had gone, and at the greater part of the prizes remaining in the place in which they had been offered. They were twins, and the one kept on holding the reins, and holding the reins, while the other plied the whip. Such was I then, but now I must leave these matters to younger men; I must bow before the weight of years, but in those days I was eminent among heroes. And now, sir, go on with the funeral contests in honour of your comrade: gladly do I accept this urn, and my heart rejoices that you do not forget me but are ever mindful of my goodwill towards you, and of the respect due to me from the Achaeans. For all which may the grace of heaven be vouchsafed you in great abundance." 

Thereon the son of Peleus, when he had listened to all the thanks of Nestor, went about among the concourse of the Achaeans, and presently offered prizes for skill in the painful art of boxing. He brought out a strong mule, and made it fast in the middle of the crowd- a she-mule never yet broken, but six years old- when it is hardest of all to break them: this was for the victor, and for the vanquished he offered a double cup. Then he stood up and said among the Argives, "Son of Atreus, and all other Achaeans, I invite our two champion boxers to lay about them lustily and compete for these prizes. He to whom Apollo vouchsafes the greater endurance, and whom the Achaeans acknowledge as victor, shall take the mule back with him to his own tent, while he that is vanquished shall have the double cup." 

As he spoke there stood up a champion both brave and great stature, a skilful boxer, Epeus, son of Panopeus. He laid his hand on the mule and said, "Let the man who is to have the cup come hither, for none but myself will take the mule. I am the best boxer of all here present, and none can beat me. Is it not enough that I should fall short of you in actual fighting? Still, no man can be good at everything. I tell you plainly, and it shall come true; if any man will box with me I will bruise his body and break his bones; therefore let his friends stay here in a body and be at hand to take him away when I have done with him." 

They all held their peace, and no man rose save Euryalus son of Mecisteus, who was son of Talaus. Mecisteus went once to Thebes after the fall of Oedipus, to attend his funeral, and he beat all the people of Cadmus. The son of Tydeus was Euryalus's second, cheering him on and hoping heartily that he would win. First he put a waistband round him and then he gave him some well-cut thongs of ox-hide; the two men being now girt went into the middle of the ring, and immediately fell to; heavily indeed did they punish one another and lay about them with their brawny fists. One could hear the horrid crashing of their jaws, and they sweated from every pore of their skin. Presently Epeus came on and gave Euryalus a blow on the jaw as he was looking round; Euryalus could not keep his legs; they gave way under him in a moment and he sprang up with a bound, as a fish leaps into the air near some shore that is all bestrewn with sea-wrack, when Boreas furs the top of the waves, and then falls back into deep water. But noble Epeus caught hold of him and raised him up; his comrades also came round him and led him from the ring, unsteady in his gait, his head hanging on one side, and spitting great clots of gore. They set him down in a swoon and then went to fetch the double cup. 

The son of Peleus now brought out the prizes for the third contest and showed them to the Argives. These were for the painful art of wrestling. For the winner there was a great tripod ready for setting upon the fire, and the Achaeans valued it among themselves at twelve oxen. For the loser he brought out a woman skilled in all manner of arts, and they valued her at four oxen. He rose and said among the Argives, "Stand forward, you who will essay this contest." 

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, and crafty Ulysses, full of wiles rose also. The two girded themselves and went into the middle of the ring. They gripped each other in their strong hands like the rafters which some master-builder frames for the roof of a high house to keep the wind out. Their backbones cracked as they tugged at one another with their mighty arms- and sweat rained from them in torrents. Many a bloody weal sprang up on their sides and shoulders, but they kept on striving with might and main for victory and to win the tripod. Ulysses could not throw Ajax, nor Ajax him; Ulysses was too strong for him; but when the Achaeans began to tire of watching them, Ajax said to ulysses, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall either lift me, or I you, and let Jove settle it between us." 

He lifted him from the ground as he spoke, but Ulysses did not forget his cunning. He hit Ajax in the hollow at back of his knee, so that he could not keep his feet, but fell on his back with Ulysses lying upon his chest, and all who saw it marvelled. Then Ulysses in turn lifted Ajax and stirred him a little from the ground but could not lift him right off it, his knee sank under him, and the two fell side by side on the ground and were all begrimed with dust. They now sprang towards one another and were for wrestling yet a third time, but Achilles rose and stayed them. "Put not each other further," said he, "to such cruel suffering; the victory is with both alike, take each of you an equal prize, and let the other Achaeans now compete." 

Thus did he speak and they did even as he had said, and put on their shirts again after wiping the dust from off their bodies. 

The son of Peleus then offered prizes for speed in running- a mixing-bowl beautifully wrought, of pure silver. It would hold six measures, and far exceeded all others in the whole world for beauty; it was the work of cunning artificers in Sidon, and had been brought into port by Phoenicians from beyond the sea, who had made a present of it to Thoas. Eueneus son of jason had given it to Patroclus in ransom of Priam's son Lycaon, and Achilles now offered it as a prize in honour of his comrade to him who should be the swiftest runner. For the second prize he offered a large ox, well fattened, while for the last there was to be half a talent of gold. He then rose and said among the Argives, "Stand forward, you who will essay this contest." 

Forthwith uprose fleet Ajax son of Oileus, with cunning Ulysses, and Nestor's son Antilochus, the fastest runner among all the youth of his time. They stood side by side and Achilles showed them the goal. The course was set out for them from the starting-post, and the son of Oileus took the lead at once, with Ulysses as close behind him as the shuttle is to a woman's bosom when she throws the woof across the warp and holds it close up to her; even so close behind him was Ulysses- treading in his footprints before the dust could settle there, and Ajax could feel his breath on the back of his head as he ran swiftly on. The Achaeans all shouted applause as they saw him straining his utmost, and cheered him as he shot past them; but when they were now nearing the end of the course Ulysses prayed inwardly to Minerva. "Hear me," he cried, "and help my feet, O goddess." Thus did he pray, and Pallas Minerva heard his prayer; she made his hands and his feet feel light, and when the runners were at the point of pouncing upon the prize, Ajax, through Minerva's spite slipped upon some offal that was lying there from the cattle which Achilles had slaughtered in honour of Patroclus, and his mouth and nostrils were all filled with cow dung. Ulysses therefore carried off the mixing-bowl, for he got before Ajax and came in first. But Ajax took the ox and stood with his hand on one of its horns, spitting the dung out of his mouth. Then he said to the Argives, "Alas, the goddess has spoiled my running; she watches over Ulysses and stands by him as though she were his own mother." Thus did he speak and they all of them laughed heartily. 

Antilochus carried off the last prize and smiled as he said to the bystanders, "You all see, my friends, that now too the gods have shown their respect for seniority. Ajax is somewhat older than I am, and as for Ulysses, he belongs to an earlier generation, but he is hale in spite of his years, and no man of the Achaeans can run against him save only Achilles." 

He said this to pay a compliment to the son of Peleus, and Achilles answered, "Antilochus, you shall not have praised me to no purpose; I shall give you an additional half talent of gold." He then gave the half talent to Antilochus, who received it gladly. 

Then the son of Peleus brought out the spear, helmet and shield that had been borne by Sarpedon, and were taken from him by Patroclus. He stood up and said among the Argives, "We bid two champions put on their armour, take their keen blades, and make trial of one another in the presence of the multitude; whichever of them can first wound the flesh of the other, cut through his armour, and draw blood, to him will I give this goodly Thracian sword inlaid with silver, which I took from Asteropaeus, but the armour let both hold in partnership, and I will give each of them a hearty meal in my own tent." 

Forthwith uprose great Ajax the son of Telamon, as also mighty Diomed son of Tydeus. When they had put on their armour each on his own side of the ring, they both went into the middle eager to engage, and with fire flashing from their eyes. The Achaeans marvelled as they beheld them, and when the two were now close up with one another, thrice did they spring forward and thrice try to strike each other in close combat. Ajax pierced Diomed's round shield, but did not draw blood, for the cuirass beneath the shield protected him; thereon the son of Tydeus from over his huge shield kept aiming continually at Ajax's neck with the point of his spear, and the Achaeans alarmed for his safety bade them leave off fighting and divide the prize between them. Achilles then gave the great sword to the son of Tydeus, with its scabbard, and the leathern belt with which to hang it. 

Achilles next offered the massive iron quoit which mighty Eetion had erewhile been used to hurl, until Achilles had slain him and carried it off in his ships along with other spoils. He stood up and said among the Argives, "Stand forward, you who would essay this contest. He who wins it will have a store of iron that will last him five years as they go rolling round, and if his fair fields lie far from a town his shepherd or ploughman will not have to make a journey to buy iron, for he will have a stock of it on his own premises." 

Then uprose the two mighty men Polypoetes and Leonteus, with Ajax son of Telamon and noble Epeus. They stood up one after the other and Epeus took the quoit, whirled it, and flung it from him, which set all the Achaeans laughing. After him threw Leonteus of the race of Mars. Ajax son of Telamon threw third, and sent the quoit beyond any mark that had been made yet, but when mighty Polypoetes took the quoit he hurled it as though it had been a stockman's stick which he sends flying about among his cattle when he is driving them, so far did his throw out-distance those of the others. All who saw it roared applause, and his comrades carried the prize for him and set it on board his ship. 

Achilles next offered a prize of iron for archery- ten double-edged axes and ten with single eddies: he set up a ship's mast, some way off upon the sands, and with a fine string tied a pigeon to it by the foot; this was what they were to aim at. "Whoever," he said, "can hit the pigeon shall have all the axes and take them away with him; he who hits the string without hitting the bird will have taken a worse aim and shall have the single-edged axes." 

Then uprose King Teucer, and Meriones the stalwart squire of Idomeneus rose also, They cast lots in a bronze helmet and the lot of Teucer fell first. He let fly with his arrow forthwith, but he did not promise hecatombs of firstling lambs to King Apollo, and missed his bird, for Apollo foiled his aim; but he hit the string with which the bird was tied, near its foot; the arrow cut the string clean through so that it hung down towards the ground, while the bird flew up into the sky, and the Achaeans shouted applause. Meriones, who had his arrow ready while Teucer was aiming, snatched the bow out of his hand, and at once promised that he would sacrifice a hecatomb of firstling lambs to Apollo lord of the bow; then espying the pigeon high up under the clouds, he hit her in the middle of the wing as she was circling upwards; the arrow went clean through the wing and fixed itself in the ground at Meriones' feet, but the bird perched on the ship's mast hanging her head and with all her feathers drooping; the life went out of her, and she fell heavily from the mast. Meriones, therefore, took all ten double-edged axes, while Teucer bore off the single-edged ones to his ships. 

Then the son of Peleus brought in a spear and a cauldron that had never been on the fire; it was worth an ox, and was chased with a pattern of flowers; and those that throw the javelin stood up- to wit the son of Atreus, king of men Agamemnon, and Meriones, stalwart squire of Idomeneus. But Achilles spoke saying, "Son of Atreus, we know how far you excel all others both in power and in throwing the javelin; take the cauldron back with you to your ships, but if it so please you, let us give the spear to Meriones; this at least is what I should myself wish." 

King Agamemnon assented. So he gave the bronze spear to Meriones, and handed the goodly cauldron to Talthybius his esquire. 

The Iliad of Homer, tr. by Samuel Butler, [1898], at sacred-texts.com

  

The Iliad: BOOK XXIV

THE assembly now broke up and the people went their ways each to his own ship. There they made ready their supper, and then bethought them of the blessed boon of sleep; but Achilles still wept for thinking of his dear comrade, and sleep, before whom all things bow, could take no hold upon him. This way and that did he turn as he yearned after the might and manfulness of Patroclus; he thought of all they had done together, and all they had gone through both on the field of battle and on the waves of the weary sea. As he dwelt on these things he wept bitterly and lay now on his side, now on his back, and now face downwards, till at last he rose and went out as one distraught to wander upon the seashore. Then, when he saw dawn breaking over beach and sea, he yoked his horses to his chariot, and bound the body of Hector behind it that he might drag it about. Thrice did he drag it round the tomb of the son of Menoetius, and then went back into his tent, leaving the body on the ground full length and with its face downwards. But Apollo would not suffer it to be disfigured, for he pitied the man, dead though he now was; therefore he shielded him with his golden aegis continually, that he might take no hurt while Achilles was dragging him. 

Thus shamefully did Achilles in his fury dishonour Hector; but the blessed gods looked down in pity from heaven, and urged Mercury, slayer of Argus, to steal the body. All were of this mind save only Juno, Neptune, and Jove's grey-eyed daughter, who persisted in the hate which they had ever borne towards Ilius with Priam and his people; for they forgave not the wrong done them by Alexandrus in disdaining the goddesses who came to him when he was in his sheepyards, and preferring her who had offered him a wanton to his ruin. 

When, therefore, the morning of the twelfth day had now come, Phoebus Apollo spoke among the immortals saying, "You gods ought to be ashamed of yourselves; you are cruel and hard-hearted. Did not Hector burn you thigh-bones of heifers and of unblemished goats? And now dare you not rescue even his dead body, for his wife to look upon, with his mother and child, his father Priam, and his people, who would forthwith commit him to the flames, and give him his due funeral rites? So, then, you would all be on the side of mad Achilles, who knows neither right nor ruth? He is like some savage lion that in the pride of his great strength and daring springs upon men's flocks and gorges on them. Even so has Achilles flung aside all pity, and all that conscience which at once so greatly banes yet greatly boons him that will heed it. man may lose one far dearer than Achilles has lost- a son, it may be, or a brother born from his own mother's womb; yet when he has mourned him and wept over him he will let him bide, for it takes much sorrow to kill a man; whereas Achilles, now that he has slain noble Hector, drags him behind his chariot round the tomb of his comrade. It were better of him, and for him, that he should not do so, for brave though he be we gods may take it ill that he should vent his fury upon dead clay." 

Juno spoke up in a rage. "This were well," she cried, "O lord of the silver bow, if you would give like honour to Hector and to Achilles; but Hector was mortal and suckled at a woman's breast, whereas Achilles is the offspring of a goddess whom I myself reared and brought up. I married her to Peleus, who is above measure dear to the immortals; you gods came all of you to her wedding; you feasted along with them yourself and brought your lyre- false, and fond of low company, that you have ever been." 

Then said Jove, "Juno, be not so bitter. Their honour shall not be equal, but of all that dwell in Ilius, Hector was dearest to the gods, as also to myself, for his offerings never failed me. Never was my altar stinted of its dues, nor of the drink-offerings and savour of sacrifice which we claim of right. I shall therefore permit the body of mighty Hector to be stolen; and yet this may hardly be without Achilles coming to know it, for his mother keeps night and day beside him. Let some one of you, therefore, send Thetis to me, and I will impart my counsel to her, namely that Achilles is to accept a ransom from Priam, and give up the body." 

On this Iris fleet as the wind went forth to carry his message. Down she plunged into the dark sea midway between Samos and rocky Imbrus; the waters hissed as they closed over her, and she sank into the bottom as the lead at the end of an ox-horn, that is sped to carry death to fishes. She found Thetis sitting in a great cave with the other sea-goddesses gathered round her; there she sat in the midst of them weeping for her noble son who was to fall far from his own land, on the rich plains of Troy. Iris went up to her and said, "Rise Thetis; Jove, whose counsels fail not, bids you come to him." And Thetis answered, "Why does the mighty god so bid me? I am in great grief, and shrink from going in and out among the immortals. Still, I will go, and the word that he may speak shall not be spoken in vain." 

The goddess took her dark veil, than which there can be no robe more sombre, and went forth with fleet Iris leading the way before her. The waves of the sea opened them a path, and when they reached the shore they flew up into the heavens, where they found the all-seeing son of Saturn with the blessed gods that live for ever assembled near him. Minerva gave up her seat to her, and she sat down by the side of father Jove. Juno then placed a fair golden cup in her hand, and spoke to her in words of comfort, whereon Thetis drank and gave her back the cup; and the sire of gods and men was the first to speak. 

"So, goddess," said he, "for all your sorrow, and the grief that I well know reigns ever in your heart, you have come hither to Olympus, and I will tell you why I have sent for you. This nine days past the immortals have been quarrelling about Achilles waster of cities and the body of Hector. The gods would have Mercury slayer of Argus steal the body, but in furtherance of our peace and amity henceforward, I will concede such honour to your son as I will now tell you. Go, then, to the host and lay these commands upon him; say that the gods are angry with him, and that I am myself more angry than them all, in that he keeps Hector at the ships and will not give him up. He may thus fear me and let the body go. At the same time I will send Iris to great Priam to bid him go to the ships of the Achaeans, and ransom his son, taking with him such gifts for Achilles as may give him satisfaction. 

Silver-footed Thetis did as the god had told her, and forthwith down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus. She went to her son's tents where she found him grieving bitterly, while his trusty comrades round him were busy preparing their morning meal, for which they had killed a great woolly sheep. His mother sat down beside him and caressed him with her hand saying, "My son, how long will you keep on thus grieving and making moan? You are gnawing at your own heart, and think neither of food nor of woman's embraces; and yet these too were well, for you have no long time to live, and death with the strong hand of fate are already close beside you. Now, therefore, heed what I say, for I come as a messenger from Jove; he says that the gods are angry with you, and himself more angry than them all, in that you keep Hector at the ships and will not give him up. Therefore let him go, and accept a ransom for his body." 

And Achilles answered, "So be it. If Olympian Jove of his own motion thus commands me, let him that brings the ransom bear the body away." 

Thus did mother and son talk together at the ships in long discourse with one another. Meanwhile the son of Saturn sent Iris to the strong city of Ilius. "Go," said he, "fleet Iris, from the mansions of Olympus, and tell King Priam in Ilius, that he is to go to the ships of the Achaeans and free the body of his dear son. He is to take such gifts with him as shall give satisfaction to Achilles, and he is to go alone, with no other Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive his mules and waggon, and bring back the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. Let him have no thought nor fear of death in his heart, for we will send the slayer of Argus to escort him, and bring him within the tent of Achilles. Achilles will not kill him nor let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy." 

On this Iris, fleet as the wind, sped forth to deliver her message. She went to Priam's house, and found weeping and lamentation therein. His sons were seated round their father in the outer courtyard, and their raiment was wet with tears: the old man sat in the midst of them with his mantle wrapped close about his body, and his head and neck all covered with the filth which he had clutched as he lay grovelling in the mire. His daughters and his sons' wives went wailing about the house, as they thought of the many and brave men who lay dead, slain by the Argives. The messenger of Jove stood by Priam and spoke softly to him, but fear fell upon him as she did so. "Take heart," she said, "Priam offspring of Dardanus, take heart and fear not. I bring no evil tidings, but am minded well towards you. I come as a messenger from Jove, who though he be not near, takes thought for you and pities you. The lord of Olympus bids you go and ransom noble Hector, and take with you such gifts as shall give satisfaction to Achilles. You are to go alone, with no Trojan, save only some honoured servant who may drive your mules and waggon, and bring back to the city the body of him whom noble Achilles has slain. You are to have no thought, nor fear of death, for Jove will send the slayer of Argus to escort you. When he has brought you within Achilles' tent, Achilles will not kill you nor let another do so, for he will take heed to his ways and sin not, and he will entreat a suppliant with all honourable courtesy." 

Iris went her way when she had thus spoken, and Priam told his sons to get a mule-waggon ready, and to make the body of the waggon fast upon the top of its bed. Then he went down into his fragrant store-room, high-vaulted, and made of cedar-wood, where his many treasures were kept, and he called Hecuba his wife. "Wife," said he, "a messenger has come to me from Olympus, and has told me to go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom my dear son, taking with me such gifts as shall give satisfaction to Achilles. What think you of this matter? for my own part I am greatly moved to pass through the of the Achaeans and go to their ships." 

His wife cried aloud as she heard him, and said, "Alas, what has become of that judgement for which you have been ever famous both among strangers and your own people? How can you venture alone to the ships of the Achaeans, and look into the face of him who has slain so many of your brave sons? You must have iron courage, for if the cruel savage sees you and lays hold on you, he will know neither respect nor pity. Let us then weep Hector from afar here in our own house, for when I gave him birth the threads of overruling fate were spun for him that dogs should eat his flesh far from his parents, in the house of that terrible man on whose liver I would fain fasten and devour it. Thus would I avenge my son, who showed no cowardice when Achilles slew him, and thought neither of Right nor of avoiding battle as he stood in defence of Trojan men and Trojan women." 

Then Priam said, "I would go, do not therefore stay me nor be as a bird of ill omen in my house, for you will not move me. Had it been some mortal man who had sent me some prophet or priest who divines from sacrifice- I should have deemed him false and have given him no heed; but now I have heard the goddess and seen her face to face, therefore I will go and her saying shall not be in vain. If it be my fate to die at the ships of the Achaeans even so would I have it; let Achilles slay me, if I may but first have taken my son in my arms and mourned him to my heart's comforting." 

So saying he lifted the lids of his chests, and took out twelve goodly vestments. He took also twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts. He weighed out ten talents of gold, and brought moreover two burnished tripods, four cauldrons, and a very beautiful cup which the Thracians had given him when he had gone to them on an embassy; it was very precious, but he grudged not even this, so eager was he to ransom the body of his son. Then he chased all the Trojans from the court and rebuked them with words of anger. "Out," he cried, "shame and disgrace to me that you are. Have you no grief in your own homes that you are come to plague me here? Is it a small thing, think you, that the son of Saturn has sent this sorrow upon me, to lose the bravest of my sons? Nay, you shall prove it in person, for now he is gone the Achaeans will have easier work in killing you. As for me, let me go down within the house of Hades, ere mine eyes behold the sacking and wasting of the city." 

He drove the men away with his staff, and they went forth as the old man sped them. Then he called to his sons, upbraiding Helenus, Paris, noble Agathon, Pammon, Antiphonus, Polites of the loud battle-cry, Deiphobus, Hippothous, and Dius. These nine did the old man call near him. "Come to me at once," he cried, "worthless sons who do me shame; would that you had all been killed at the ships rather than Hector. Miserable man that I am, I have had the bravest sons in all Troy- noble Nestor, Troilus the dauntless charioteer, and Hector who was a god among men, so that one would have thought he was son to an immortal- yet there is not one of them left. Mars has slain them and those of whom I am ashamed are alone left me. Liars, and light of foot, heroes of the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own people, why do you not get a waggon ready for me at once, and put all these things upon it that I may set out on my way?" 

Thus did he speak, and they feared the rebuke of their father. They brought out a strong mule-waggon, newly made, and set the body of the waggon fast on its bed. They took the mule-yoke from the peg on which it hung, a yoke of boxwood with a knob on the top of it and rings for the reins to go through. Then they brought a yoke-band eleven cubits long, to bind the yoke to the pole; they bound it on at the far end of the pole, and put the ring over the upright pin making it fast with three turns of the band on either side the knob, and bending the thong of the yoke beneath it. This done, they brought from the store-chamber the rich ransom that was to purchase the body of Hector, and they set it all orderly on the waggon; then they yoked the strong harness-mules which the Mysians had on a time given as a goodly present to Priam; but for Priam himself they yoked horses which the old king had bred, and kept for own use. 

Thus heedfully did Priam and his servant see to the yolking of their cars at the palace. Then Hecuba came to them all sorrowful, with a golden goblet of wine in her right hand, that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. She stood in front of the horses and said, "Take this, make a drink-offering to father Jove, and since you are minded to go to the ships in spite of me, pray that you may come safely back from the hands of your enemies. Pray to the son of Saturn lord of the whirlwind, who sits on Ida and looks down over all Troy, pray him to send his swift messenger on your right hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most dear to him of all birds, that you may see it with your own eyes and trust it as you go forth to the ships of the Danaans. If all-seeing Jove will not send you this messenger, however set upon it you may be, I would not have you go to the ships of the Argives." 

And Priam answered, "Wife, I will do as you desire me; it is well to lift hands in prayer to Jove, if so be he may have mercy upon me." 

With this the old man bade the serving-woman pour pure water over his hands, and the woman came, bearing the water in a bowl. He washed his hands and took the cup from his wife; then he made the drink-offering and prayed, standing in the middle of the courtyard and turning his eyes to heaven. "Father Jove," he said, "that rulest from Ida, most glorious and most great, grant that I may be received kindly and compassionately in the tents of Achilles; and send your swift messenger upon my right hand, the bird of omen which is strongest and most dear to you of all birds, that I may see it with my own eyes and trust it as I go forth to the ships of the Danaans." 

So did he pray, and Jove the lord of counsel heard his prayer. Forthwith he sent an eagle, the most unerring portent of all birds that fly, the dusky hunter that men also call the Black Eagle. His wings were spread abroad on either side as wide as the well-made and well-bolted door of a rich man's chamber. He came to them flying over the city upon their right hands, and when they saw him they were glad and their hearts took comfort within them. The old man made haste to mount his chariot, and drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Before him went the mules drawing the four-wheeled waggon, and driven by wise Idaeus; behind these were the horses, which the old man lashed with his whip and drove swiftly through the city, while his friends followed after, wailing and lamenting for him as though he were on his road to death. As soon as they had come down from the city and had reached the plain, his sons and sons-in-law who had followed him went back to Ilius. 

But Priam and Idaeus as they showed out upon the plain did not escape the ken of all-seeing Jove, who looked down upon the old man and pitied him; then he spoke to his son Mercury and said, "Mercury, for it is you who are the most disposed to escort men on their way, and to hear those whom you will hear, go, and so conduct Priam to the ships of the Achaeans that no other of the Danaans shall see him nor take note of him until he reach the son of Peleus." 

Thus he spoke and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea; he took the wand with which he seals men's eyes in sleep, or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand till he came to Troy and to the Hellespont. To look at, he was like a young man of noble birth in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his face. 

Now when Priam and Idaeus had driven past the great tomb of Ilius, they stayed their mules and horses that they might drink in the river, for the shades of night were falling, when, therefore, Idaeus saw Mercury standing near them he said to Priam, "Take heed, descendant of Dardanus; here is matter which demands consideration. I see a man who I think will presently fall upon us; let us fly with our horses, or at least embrace his knees and implore him to take compassion upon us? 

When he heard this the old man's heart failed him, and he was in great fear; he stayed where he was as one dazed, and the hair stood on end over his whole body; but the bringer of good luck came up to him and took him by the hand, saying, "Whither, father, are you thus driving your mules and horses in the dead of night when other men are asleep? Are you not afraid of the fierce Achaeans who are hard by you, so cruel and relentless? Should some one of them see you bearing so much treasure through the darkness of the flying night, what would not your state then be? You are no longer young, and he who is with you is too old to protect you from those who would attack you. For myself, I will do you no harm, and I will defend you from any one else, for you remind me of my own father." 

And Priam answered, "It is indeed as you say, my dear son; nevertheless some god has held his hand over me, in that he has sent such a wayfarer as yourself to meet me so Opportunely; you are so comely in mien and figure, and your judgement is so excellent that you must come of blessed parents." 

Then said the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, all that you have said is right; but tell me and tell me true, are you taking this rich treasure to send it to a foreign people where it may be safe, or are you all leaving strong Ilius in dismay now that your son has fallen who was the bravest man among you and was never lacking in battle with the Achaeans?" 

And Priam said, "Wo are you, my friend, and who are your parents, that you speak so truly about the fate of my unhappy son?" 

The slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, answered him, "Sir, you would prove me, that you question me about noble Hector. Many a time have I set eyes upon him in battle when he was driving the Argives to their ships and putting them to the sword. We stood still and marvelled, for Achilles in his anger with the son of Atreus suffered us not to fight. I am his squire, and came with him in the same ship. I am a Myrmidon, and my father's name is Polyctor: he is a rich man and about as old as you are; he has six sons besides myself, and I am the seventh. We cast lots, and it fell upon me to sail hither with Achilles. I am now come from the ships on to the plain, for with daybreak the Achaeans will set battle in array about the city. They chafe at doing nothing, and are so eager that their princes cannot hold them back." 

Then answered Priam, "If you are indeed the squire of Achilles son of Peleus, tell me now the Whole truth. Is my son still at the ships, or has Achilles hewn him limb from limb, and given him to his hounds?" 

"Sir," replied the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "neither hounds nor vultures have yet devoured him; he is still just lying at the tents by the ship of Achilles, and though it is now twelve days that he has lain there, his flesh is not wasted nor have the worms eaten him although they feed on warriors. At daybreak Achilles drags him cruelly round the sepulchre of his dear comrade, but it does him no hurt. You should come yourself and see how he lies fresh as dew, with the blood all washed away, and his wounds every one of them closed though many pierced him with their spears. Such care have the blessed gods taken of your brave son, for he was dear to them beyond all measure." 

The old man was comforted as he heard him and said, "My son, see what a good thing it is to have made due offerings to the immortals; for as sure as that he was born my son never forgot the gods that hold Olympus, and now they requite it to him even in death. Accept therefore at my hands this goodly chalice; guard me and with heaven's help guide me till I come to the tent of the son of Peleus." 

Then answered the slayer of Argus, guide and guardian, "Sir, you are tempting me and playing upon my youth, but you shall not move me, for you are offering me presents without the knowledge of Achilles whom I fear and hold it great guiltless to defraud, lest some evil presently befall me; but as your guide I would go with you even to Argos itself, and would guard you so carefully whether by sea or land, that no one should attack you through making light of him who was with you." 

The bringer of good luck then sprang on to the chariot, and seizing the whip and reins he breathed fresh spirit into the mules and horses. When they reached the trench and the wall that was before the ships, those who were on guard had just been getting their suppers, and the slayer of Argus threw them all into a deep sleep. Then he drew back the bolts to open the gates, and took Priam inside with the treasure he had upon his waggon. Ere long they came to the lofty dwelling of the son of Peleus for which the Myrmidons had cut pine and which they had built for their king; when they had built it they thatched it with coarse tussock-grass which they had mown out on the plain, and all round it they made a large courtyard, which was fenced with stakes set close together. The gate was barred with a single bolt of pine which it took three men to force into its place, and three to draw back so as to open the gate, but Achilles could draw it by himself. Mercury opened the gate for the old man, and brought in the treasure that he was taking with him for the son of Peleus. Then he sprang from the chariot on to the ground and said, "Sir, it is I, immortal Mercury, that am come with you, for my father sent me to escort you. I will now leave you, and will not enter into the presence of Achilles, for it might anger him that a god should befriend mortal men thus openly. Go you within, and embrace the knees of the son of Peleus: beseech him by his father, his lovely mother, and his son; thus you may move him." 

With these words Mercury went back to high Olympus. Priam sprang from his chariot to the ground, leaving Idaeus where he was, in charge of the mules and horses. The old man went straight into the house where Achilles, loved of the gods, was sitting. There he found him with his men seated at a distance from him: only two, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus of the race of Mars, were busy in attendance about his person, for he had but just done eating and drinking, and the table was still there. King Priam entered without their seeing him, and going right up to Achilles he clasped his knees and kissed the dread murderous hands that had slain so many of his sons. 

As when some cruel spite has befallen a man that he should have killed some one in his own country, and must fly to a great man's protection in a land of strangers, and all marvel who see him, even so did Achilles marvel as he beheld Priam. The others looked one to another and marvelled also, but Priam besought Achilles saying, "Think of your father, O Achilles like unto the gods, who is such even as I am, on the sad threshold of old age. It may be that those who dwell near him harass him, and there is none to keep war and ruin from him. Yet when he hears of you being still alive, he is glad, and his days are full of hope that he shall see his dear son come home to him from Troy; but I, wretched man that I am, had the bravest in all Troy for my sons, and there is not one of them left. I had fifty sons when the Achaeans came here; nineteen of them were from a single womb, and the others were borne to me by the women of my household. The greater part of them has fierce Mars laid low, and Hector, him who was alone left, him who was the guardian of the city and ourselves, him have you lately slain; therefore I am now come to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his body from you with a great ransom. Fear, O Achilles, the wrath of heaven; think on your own father and have compassion upon me, who am the more pitiable, for I have steeled myself as no man yet has ever steeled himself before me, and have raised to my lips the hand of him who slew my son." 

Thus spoke Priam, and the heart of Achilles yearned as he bethought him of his father. He took the old man's hand and moved him gently away. The two wept bitterly- Priam, as he lay at Achilles' feet, weeping for Hector, and Achilles now for his father and now for Patroclous, till the house was filled with their lamentation. But when Achilles was now sated with grief and had unburthened the bitterness of his sorrow, he left his seat and raised the old man by the hand, in pity for his white hair and beard; then he said, "Unhappy man, you have indeed been greatly daring; how could you venture to come alone to the ships of the Achaeans, and enter the presence of him who has slain so many of your brave sons? You must have iron courage: sit now upon this seat, and for all our grief we will hide our sorrows in our hearts, for weeping will not avail us. The immortals know no care, yet the lot they spin for man is full of sorrow; on the floor of Jove's palace there stand two urns, the one filled with evil gifts, and the other with good ones. He for whom Jove the lord of thunder mixes the gifts he sends, will meet now with good and now with evil fortune; but he to whom Jove sends none but evil gifts will be pointed at by the finger of scorn, the hand of famine will pursue him to the ends of the world, and he will go up and down the face of the earth, respected neither by gods nor men. Even so did it befall Peleus; the gods endowed him with all good things from his birth upwards, for he reigned over the Myrmidons excelling all men in prosperity and wealth, and mortal though he was they gave him a goddess for his bride. But even on him too did heaven send misfortune, for there is no race of royal children born to him in his house, save one son who is doomed to die all untimely; nor may I take care of him now that he is growing old, for I must stay here at Troy to be the bane of you and your children. And you too, O Priam, I have heard that you were aforetime happy. They say that in wealth and plenitude of offspring you surpassed all that is in Lesbos, the realm of Makar to the northward, Phrygia that is more inland, and those that dwell upon the great Hellespont; but from the day when the dwellers in heaven sent this evil upon you, war and slaughter have been about your city continually. Bear up against it, and let there be some intervals in your sorrow. Mourn as you may for your brave son, you will take nothing by it. You cannot raise him from the dead, ere you do so yet another sorrow shall befall you." 

And Priam answered, "O king, bid me not be seated, while Hector is still lying uncared for in your tents, but accept the great ransom which I have brought you, and give him to me at once that I may look upon him. May you prosper with the ransom and reach your own land in safety, seeing that you have suffered me to live and to look upon the light of the sun." 

Achilles looked at him sternly and said, "Vex me, sir, no longer; I am of myself minded to give up the body of Hector. My mother, daughter of the old man of the sea, came to me from Jove to bid me deliver it to you. Moreover I know well, O Priam, and you cannot hide it, that some god has brought you to the ships of the Achaeans, for else, no man however strong and in his prime would dare to come to our host; he could neither pass our guard unseen, nor draw the bolt of my gates thus easily; therefore, provoke me no further, lest I sin against the word of Jove, and suffer you not, suppliant though you are, within my tents." 

The old man feared him and obeyed. Then the son of Peleus sprang like a lion through the door of his house, not alone, but with him went his two squires Automedon and Alcimus who were closer to him than any others of his comrades now that Patroclus was no more. These unyoked the horses and mules, and bade Priam's herald and attendant be seated within the house. They lifted the ransom for Hector's body from the waggon. but they left two mantles and a goodly shirt, that Achilles might wrap the body in them when he gave it to be taken home. Then he called to his servants and ordered them to wash the body and anoint it, but he first took it to a place where Priam should not see it, lest if he did so, he should break out in the bitterness of his grief, and enrage Achilles, who might then kill him and sin against the word of Jove. When the servants had washed the body and anointed it, and had wrapped it in a fair shirt and mantle, Achilles himself lifted it on to a bier, and he and his men then laid it on the waggon. He cried aloud as he did so and called on the name of his dear comrade, "Be not angry with me, Patroclus," he said, "if you hear even in the house of Hades that I have given Hector to his father for a ransom. It has been no unworthy one, and I will share it equitably with you." 

Achilles then went back into the tent and took his place on the richly inlaid seat from which he had risen, by the wall that was at right angles to the one against which Priam was sitting. "Sir," he said, "your son is now laid upon his bier and is ransomed according to desire; you shall look upon him when you him away at daybreak; for the present let us prepare our supper. Even lovely Niobe had to think about eating, though her twelve children- six daughters and six lusty sons- had been all slain in her house. Apollo killed the sons with arrows from his silver bow, to punish Niobe, and Diana slew the daughters, because Niobe had vaunted herself against Leto; she said Leto had borne two children only, whereas she had herself borne many- whereon the two killed the many. Nine days did they lie weltering, and there was none to bury them, for the son of Saturn turned the people into stone; but on the tenth day the gods in heaven themselves buried them, and Niobe then took food, being worn out with weeping. They say that somewhere among the rocks on the mountain pastures of Sipylus, where the nymphs live that haunt the river Achelous, there, they say, she lives in stone and still nurses the sorrows sent upon her by the hand of heaven. Therefore, noble sir, let us two now take food; you can weep for your dear son hereafter as you are bearing him back to Ilius- and many a tear will he cost you." 

With this Achilles sprang from his seat and killed a sheep of silvery whiteness, which his followers skinned and made ready all in due order. They cut the meat carefully up into smaller pieces, spitted them, and drew them off again when they were well roasted. Automedon brought bread in fair baskets and served it round the table, while Achilles dealt out the meat, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Priam, descendant of Dardanus, marvelled at the strength and beauty of Achilles for he was as a god to see, and Achilles marvelled at Priam as he listened to him and looked upon his noble presence. When they had gazed their fill Priam spoke first. "And now, O king," he said, "take me to my couch that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep. Never once have my eyes been closed from the day your hands took the life of my son; I have grovelled without ceasing in the mire of my stable-yard, making moan and brooding over my countless sorrows. Now, moreover, I have eaten bread and drunk wine; hitherto I have tasted nothing." 

As he spoke Achilles told his men and the women-servants to set beds in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Priam and Idaeus to wear. So the maids went out carrying a torch and got the two beds ready in all haste. Then Achilles said laughingly to Priam, "Dear sir, you shall lie outside, lest some counsellor of those who in due course keep coming to advise with me should see you here in the darkness of the flying night, and tell it to Agamemnon. This might cause delay in the delivery of the body. And now tell me and tell me true, for how many days would you celebrate the funeral rites of noble Hector? Tell me, that I may hold aloof from war and restrain the host." 

And Priam answered, "Since, then, you suffer me to bury my noble son with all due rites, do thus, Achilles, and I shall be grateful. You know how we are pent up within our city; it is far for us to fetch wood from the mountain, and the people live in fear. Nine days, therefore, will we mourn Hector in my house; on the tenth day we will bury him and there shall be a public feast in his honour; on the eleventh we will build a mound over his ashes, and on the twelfth, if there be need, we will fight." 

And Achilles answered, "All, King Priam, shall be as you have said. I will stay our fighting for as long a time as you have named." 

As he spoke he laid his hand on the old man's right wrist, in token that he should have no fear; thus then did Priam and his attendant sleep there in the forecourt, full of thought, while Achilles lay in an inner room of the house, with fair Briseis by his side. 

And now both gods and mortals were fast asleep through the livelong night, but upon Mercury alone, the bringer of good luck, sleep could take no hold for he was thinking all the time how to get King Priam away from the ships without his being seen by the strong force of sentinels. He hovered therefore over Priam's head and said, "Sir, now that Achilles has spared your life, you seem to have no fear about sleeping in the thick of your foes. You have paid a great ransom, and have received the body of your son; were you still alive and a prisoner the sons whom you have left at home would have to give three times as much to free you; and so it would be if Agamemnon and the other Achaeans were to know of your being here." 

When he heard this the old man was afraid and roused his servant. Mercury then yoked their horses and mules, and drove them quickly through the host so that no man perceived them. When they came to the ford of eddying Xanthus, begotten of immortal Jove, Mercury went back to high Olympus, and dawn in robe of saffron began to break over all the land. Priam and Idaeus then drove on toward the city lamenting and making moan, and the mules drew the body of Hector. No one neither man nor woman saw them, till Cassandra, fair as golden Venus standing on Pergamus, caught sight of her dear father in his chariot, and his servant that was the city's herald with him. Then she saw him that was lying upon the bier, drawn by the mules, and with a loud cry she went about the city saying, "Come hither Trojans, men and women, and look on Hector; if ever you rejoiced to see him coming from battle when he was alive, look now on him that was the glory of our city and all our people." 

At this there was not man nor woman left in the city, so great a sorrow had possessed them. Hard by the gates they met Priam as he was bringing in the body. Hector's wife and his mother were the first to mourn him: they flew towards the waggon and laid their hands upon his head, while the crowd stood weeping round them. They would have stayed before the gates, weeping and lamenting the livelong day to the going down of the sun, had not Priam spoken to them from the chariot and said, "Make way for the mules to pass you. Afterwards when I have taken the body home you shall have your fill of weeping." 

On this the people stood asunder, and made a way for the waggon. When they had borne the body within the house they laid it upon a bed and seated minstrels round it to lead the dirge, whereon the women joined in the sad music of their lament. Foremost among them all Andromache led their wailing as she clasped the head of mighty Hector in her embrace. "Husband," she cried, "you have died young, and leave me in your house a widow; he of whom we are the ill-starred parents is still a mere child, and I fear he may not reach manhood. Ere he can do so our city will be razed and overthrown, for you who watched over it are no more- you who were its saviour, the guardian of our wives and children. Our women will be carried away captives to the ships, and I among them; while you, my child, who will be with me will be put to some unseemly tasks, working for a cruel master. Or, may be, some Achaean will hurl you (O miserable death) from our walls, to avenge some brother, son, or father whom Hector slew; many of them have indeed bitten the dust at his hands, for your father's hand in battle was no light one. Therefore do the people mourn him. You have left, O Hector, sorrow unutterable to your parents, and my own grief is greatest of all, for you did not stretch forth your arms and embrace me as you lay dying, nor say to me any words that might have lived with me in my tears night and day for evermore." 

Bitterly did she weep the while, and the women joined in her lament. Hecuba in her turn took up the strains of woe. "Hector," she cried, "dearest to me of all my children. So long as you were alive the gods loved you well, and even in death they have not been utterly unmindful of you; for when Achilles took any other of my sons, he would sell him beyond the seas, to Samos Imbrus or rugged Lemnos; and when he had slain you too with his sword, many a time did he drag you round the sepulchre of his comrade- though this could not give him life- yet here you lie all fresh as dew, and comely as one whom Apollo has slain with his painless shafts." 

Thus did she too speak through her tears with bitter moan, and then Helen for a third time took up the strain of lamentation. "Hector," said she, "dearest of all my brothers-in-law-for I am wife to Alexandrus who brought me hither to Troy- would that I had died ere he did so- twenty years are come and gone since I left my home and came from over the sea, but I have never heard one word of insult or unkindness from you. When another would chide with me, as it might be one of your brothers or sisters or of your brothers' wives, or my mother-in-law- for Priam was as kind to me as though he were my own father- you would rebuke and check them with words of gentleness and goodwill. Therefore my tears flow both for you and for my unhappy self, for there is no one else in Troy who is kind to me, but all shrink and shudder as they go by me." 

She wept as she spoke and the vast crowd that was gathered round her joined in her lament. Then King Priam spoke to them saying, "Bring wood, O Trojans, to the city, and fear no cunning ambush of the Argives, for Achilles when he dismissed me from the ships gave me his word that they should not attack us until the morning of the twelfth day." 

Forthwith they yoked their oxen and mules and gathered together before the city. Nine days long did they bring in great heaps wood, and on the morning of the tenth day with many tears they took trave Hector forth, laid his dead body upon the summit of the pile, and set the fire thereto. Then when the child of morning rosy-fingered dawn appeared on the eleventh day, the people again assembled, round the pyre of mighty Hector. When they were got together, they first quenched the fire with wine wherever it was burning, and then his brothers and comrades with many a bitter tear gathered his white bones, wrapped them in soft robes of purple, and laid them in a golden urn, which they placed in a grave and covered over with large stones set close together. Then they built a barrow hurriedly over it keeping guard on every side lest the Achaeans should attack them before they had finished. When they had heaped up the barrow they went back again into the city, and being well assembled they held high feast in the house of Priam their king. 

Thus, then, did they celebrate the funeral of Hector tamer of horses. 

THE END

 

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ioc.txt =====


    The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST

  

by Thomas a Kempis

  

Translated by Rev. William Benham

  

London: J. C. Nimmo

  

[1886]

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The treatise "Of the Imitation of Christ" appears to have been originally written in Latin early in the fifteenth century. Its exact date and its authorship are still a matter of debate. Manuscripts of the Latin version survive in considerable numbers all over Western Europe, and they, with the vast list of translations and of printed editions, testify to its almost unparalleled popularity. One scribe attributes it to St. Bernard of Clairvaux; but the fact that it contains a quotation from St. Francis of Assisi, who was born thirty years after the death of St. Bernard, disposes of this theory. In England there exist many manuscripts of the first three books, called "Musica Ecclesiastica," frequently ascribed to the English mystic Walter Hilton. But Hilton seems to have died in 1395, and there is no evidence of the existence of the work before 1400. Many manuscripts scattered throughout Europe ascribe the book to Jean le Charlier de Gerson, the great Chancellor of the University of Paris, who was a leading figure in the Church in the earlier part of the fifteenth century. The most probable author, however, especially when the internal evidence is considered, is Thomas Haemmerlein, known also as Thomas a Kempis, from his native town of Kempen, near the Rhine, about forty miles north of Cologne. Haemmerlein, who was born in 1379 or 1380, was a member of the order of the Brothers of Common Life, and spent the last seventy years of his life at Mount St. Agnes, a monastery of Augustinian canons in the diocese of Utrecht. Here he died on July 26, 1471, after an uneventful life spent in copying manuscripts, reading, and composing, and in the peaceful routine of monastic piety.

With the exception of the Bible, no Christian writing has had so wide a vogue or so sustained a popularity as this. And yet, in one sense, it is hardly an original work at all. Its structure it owes largely to the writings of the medieval mystics, and its ideas and phrases are a mosaic from the Bible and the Fathers of the early Church. But these elements are interwoven with such delicate skill and a religious feeling at once so ardent and so sound, that it promises to remain, what it has been for five hundred years, the supreme call and guide to spiritual aspiration.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST

  

THE FIRST BOOK

  

ADMONITIONS PROFITABLE FOR THE SPIRITUAL LIFE

  

CHAPTER I

  

OF THE IMITATION OF CHRIST, AND OF CONTEMPT OF THE WORLD AND ALL ITS VANITIES

He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness,(1) saith the Lord. These are the words of Christ; and they teach us how far we must imitate His life and character, if we seek true illumination, and deliverance from all blindness of heart. Let it be our most earnest study, therefore, to dwell upon the life of Jesus Christ.

2. His teaching surpasseth all teaching of holy men, and such as have His Spirit find therein the hidden manna.(2) But there are many who, though they frequently hear the Gospel, yet feel but little longing after it, because they have not the mind of Christ. He, therefore, that will fully and with true wisdom understand the words of Christ, let him strive to conform his whole life to that mind of Christ.

3. What doth it profit thee to enter into deep discussion concerning the Holy Trinity, if thou lack humility, and be thus displeasing to the Trinity? For verily it is not deep words that make a man holy and upright; it is a good life which maketh a man dear to God. I had rather feel contrition than be skilful in the definition thereof. If thou knewest the whole Bible, and the sayings of all the philosophers, what should all this profit thee without the love and grace of God? Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, save to love God, and Him only to serve. That is the highest wisdom, to cast the world behind us, and to reach forward to the heavenly kingdom.

4. It is vanity then to seek after, and to trust in, the riches that shall perish. It is vanity, too, to covet honours, and to lift up ourselves on high. It is vanity to follow the desires of the flesh and be led by them, for this shall bring misery at the last. It is vanity to desire a long life, and to have little care for a good life. It is vanity to take thought only for the life which now is, and not to look forward to the things which shall be hereafter. It is vanity to love that which quickly passeth away, and not to hasten where eternal joy abideth.

5. Be ofttimes mindful of the saying,(3) The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. Strive, therefore, to turn away thy heart from the love of the things that are seen, and to set it upon the things that are not seen. For they who follow after their own fleshly lusts, defile the conscience, and destroy the grace of God.

(1) John viii. 12. (2) Revelations ii. 17. (3) Ecclesiastes i. 8.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

  

OF THINKING HUMBLY OF ONESELF

There is naturally in every man a desire to know, but what profiteth knowledge without the fear of God? Better of a surety is a lowly peasant who serveth God, than a proud philosopher who watcheth the stars and neglecteth the knowledge of himself. He who knoweth himself well is vile in his own sight; neither regardeth he the praises of men. If I knew all the things that are in the world, and were not in charity, what should it help me before God, who is to judge me according to my deeds?

2. Rest from inordinate desire of knowledge, for therein is found much distraction and deceit. Those who have knowledge desire to appear learned, and to be called wise. Many things there are to know which profiteth little or nothing to the soul. And foolish out of measure is he who attendeth upon other things rather than those which serve to his soul's health. Many words satisfy not the soul, but a good life refresheth the mind, and a pure conscience giveth great confidence towards God.

3. The greater and more complete thy knowledge, the more severely shalt thou be judged, unless thou hast lived holily. Therefore be not lifted up by any skill or knowledge that thou hast; but rather fear concerning the knowledge which is given to thee. If it seemeth to thee that thou knowest many things, and understandest them well, know also that there are many more things which thou knowest not. Be not high-minded, but rather confess thine ignorance. Why desirest thou to lift thyself above another, when there are found many more learned and more skilled in the Scripture than thou? If thou wilt know and learn anything with profit, love to be thyself unknown and to be counted for nothing.

4. That is the highest and most profitable lesson, when a man truly knoweth and judgeth lowly of himself. To account nothing of one's self, and to think always kindly and highly of others, this is great and perfect wisdom. Even shouldest thou see thy neighbor sin openly or grievously, yet thou oughtest not to reckon thyself better than he, for thou knowest not how long thou shalt keep thine integrity. All of us are weak and frail; hold thou no man more frail than thyself.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

  

OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF TRUTH

Happy is the man whom Truth by itself doth teach, not by figures and transient words, but as it is in itself.(1) Our own judgment and feelings often deceive us, and we discern but little of the truth. What doth it profit to argue about hidden and dark things, concerning which we shall not be even reproved in the judgment, because we knew them not? Oh, grievous folly, to neglect the things which are profitable and necessary, and to give our minds to things which are curious and hurtful! Having eyes, we see not.

2. And what have we to do with talk about genus and species! He to whom the Eternal Word speaketh is free from multiplied questionings. From this One Word are all things, and all things speak of Him; and this is the Beginning which also speaketh unto us.(2) No man without Him understandeth or rightly judgeth. The man to whom all things are one, who bringeth all things to one, who seeth all things in one, he is able to remain steadfast of spirit, and at rest in God. O God, who art the Truth, make me one with Thee in everlasting love. It wearieth me oftentimes to read and listen to many things; in Thee is all that I wish for and desire. Let all the doctors hold their peace; let all creation keep silence before Thee: speak Thou alone to me.

3. The more a man hath unity and simplicity in himself, the more things and the deeper things he understandeth; and that without labour, because he receiveth the light of understanding from above. The spirit which is pure, sincere, and steadfast, is not distracted though it hath many works to do, because it doth all things to the honour of God, and striveth to be free from all thoughts of self-seeking. Who is so full of hindrance and annoyance to thee as thine own undisciplined heart? A man who is good and devout arrangeth beforehand within his own heart the works which he hath to do abroad; and so is not drawn away by the desires of his evil will, but subjecteth everything to the judgment of right reason. Who hath a harder battle to fight than he who striveth for self-mastery? And this should be our endeavour, even to master self, and thus daily to grow stronger than self, and go on unto perfection.

4. All perfection hath some imperfection joined to it in this life, and all our power of sight is not without some darkness. A lowly knowledge of thyself is a surer way to God than the deep searching of man's learning. Not that learning is to be blamed, nor the taking account of anything that is good; but a good conscience and a holy life is better than all. And because many seek knowledge rather than good living, therefore they go astray, and bear little or no fruit.

5. O if they would give that diligence to the rooting out of vice and the planting of virtue which they give unto vain questionings: there had not been so many evil doings and stumbling-blocks among the laity, nor such ill living among houses of religion. Of a surety, at the Day of Judgment it will be demanded of us, not what we have read, but what we have done; not how well we have spoken, but how holily we have lived. Tell me, where now are all those masters and teachers, whom thou knewest well, whilst they were yet with you, and flourished in learning? Their stalls are now filled by others, who perhaps never have one thought concerning them. Whilst they lived they seemed to be somewhat, but now no one speaks of them.

6. Oh how quickly passeth the glory of the world away! Would that their life and knowledge had agreed together! For then would they have read and inquired unto good purpose. How many perish through empty learning in this world, who care little for serving God. And because they love to be great more than to be humble, therefore they "have become vain in their imaginations." He only is truly great, who hath great charity. He is truly great who deemeth himself small, and counteth all height of honour as nothing. He is the truly wise man, who counteth all earthly things as dung that he may win Christ. And he is the truly learned man, who doeth the will of God, and forsaketh his own will.

(1) Psalm xciv. 12; Numbers xii. 8. (2) John viii. 25 (Vulg.).

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

  

OF PRUDENCE IN ACTION

We must not trust every word of others or feeling within ourselves, but cautiously and patiently try the matter, whether it be of God. Unhappily we are so weak that we find it easier to believe and speak evil of others, rather than good. But they that are perfect, do not give ready heed to every news-bearer, for they know man's weakness that it is prone to evil and unstable in words.

2. This is great wisdom, not to be hasty in action, or stubborn in our own opinions. A part of this wisdom also is not to believe every word we hear, nor to tell others all that we hear, even though we believe it. Take counsel with a man who is wise and of a good conscience; and seek to be instructed by one better than thyself, rather than to follow thine own inventions. A good life maketh a man wise toward God, and giveth him experience in many things. The more humble a man is in himself, and the more obedient towards God, the wiser will he be in all things, and the more shall his soul be at peace.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

  

OF THE READING OF HOLY SCRIPTURES

It is Truth which we must look for in Holy Writ, not cunning of words. All Scripture ought to be read in the spirit in which it was written. We must rather seek for what is profitable in Scripture, than for what ministereth to subtlety in discourse. Therefore we ought to read books which are devotional and simple, as well as those which are deep and difficult. And let not the weight of the writer be a stumbling-block to thee, whether he be of little or much learning, but let the love of the pure Truth draw thee to read. Ask not, who hath said this or that, but look to what he says.

2. Men pass away, but the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Without respect of persons God speaketh to us in divers manners. Our own curiosity often hindereth us in the reading of holy writings, when we seek to understand and discuss, where we should pass simply on. If thou wouldst profit by thy reading, read humbly, simply, honestly, and not desiring to win a character for learning. Ask freely, and hear in silence the words of holy men; nor be displeased at the hard sayings of older men than thou, for they are not uttered without cause.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

  

OF INORDINATE AFFECTIONS

Whensoever a man desireth aught above measure, immediately he becometh restless. The proud and the avaricious man are never at rest; while the poor and lowly of heart abide in the multitude of peace. The man who is not yet wholly dead to self, is soon tempted, and is overcome in small and trifling matters. It is hard for him who is weak in spirit, and still in part carnal and inclined to the pleasures of sense, to withdraw himself altogether from earthly desires. And therefore, when he withdraweth himself from these, he is often sad, and easily angered too if any oppose his will.

2. But if, on the other hand, he yield to his inclination, immediately he is weighed down by the condemnation of his conscience; for that he hath followed his own desire, and yet in no way attained the peace which he hoped for. For true peace of heart is to be found in resisting passion, not in yielding to it. And therefore there is no peace in the heart of a man who is carnal, nor in him who is given up to the things that are without him, but only in him who is fervent towards God and living the life of the Spirit.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

  

OF FLEEING FROM VAIN HOPE AND PRIDE

Vain is the life of that man who putteth his trust in men or in any created Thing. Be not ashamed to be the servant of others for the love of Jesus Christ, and to be reckoned poor in this life. Rest not upon thyself, but build thy hope in God. Do what lieth in thy power, and God will help thy good intent. Trust not in thy learning, nor in the cleverness of any that lives, but rather trust in the favour of God, who resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble.

2. Boast not thyself in thy riches if thou hast them, nor in thy friends if they be powerful, but in God, who giveth all things, and in addition to all things desireth to give even Himself. Be not lifted up because of thy strength or beauty of body, for with only a slight sickness it will fail and wither away. Be not vain of thy skilfulness or ability, lest thou displease God, from whom cometh every good gift which we have.

3. Count not thyself better than others, lest perchance thou appear worse in the sight of God, who knoweth what is in man. Be not proud of thy good works, for God's judgments are of another sort than the judgments of man, and what pleaseth man is ofttimes displeasing to Him. If thou hast any good, believe that others have more, and so thou mayest preserve thy humility. It is no harm to thee if thou place thyself below all others; but it is great harm if thou place thyself above even one. Peace is ever with the humble man, but in the heart of the proud there is envy and continual wrath.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

OF THE DANGER OF TOO MUCH FAMILIARITY

Open not thine heart to every man, but deal with one who is wise and feareth God. Be seldom with the young and with strangers. Be not a flatterer of the rich; nor willingly seek the society of the great. Let thy company be the humble and the simple, the devout and the gentle, and let thy discourse be concerning things which edify. Be not familiar with any woman, but commend all good women alike unto God. Choose for thy companions God and His Angels only, and flee from the notice of men.

2. We must love all men, but not make close companions of all. It sometimes falleth out that one who is unknown to us is highly regarded through good report of him, whose actual person is nevertheless unpleasing to those who behold it. We sometimes think to please others by our intimacy, and forthwith displease them the more by the faultiness of character which they perceive in us.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

  

OF OBEDIENCE AND SUBJECTION

It is verily a great thing to live in obedience, to be under authority, and not to be at our own disposal. Far safer is it to live in subjection than in a place of authority. Many are in obedience from necessity rather than from love; these take it amiss, and repine for small cause. Nor will they gain freedom of spirit, unless with all their heart they submit themselves for the love of God. Though thou run hither and thither, thou wilt not find peace, save in humble subjection to the authority of him who is set over thee. Fancies about places and change of them have deceived many.

2. True it is that every man willingly followeth his own bent, and is the more inclined to those who agree with him. But if Christ is amongst us, then it is necessary that we sometimes yield up our own opinion for the sake of peace. Who is so wise as to have perfect knowledge of all things? Therefore trust not too much to thine own opinion, but be ready also to hear the opinions of others. Though thine own opinion be good, yet if for the love of God thou foregoest it, and followest that of another, thou shalt the more profit thereby.

3. Ofttimes I have heard that it is safer to hearken and to receive counsel than to give it. It may also come to pass that each opinion may be good; but to refuse to hearken to others when reason or occasion requireth it, is a mark of pride or wilfulness.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

  

OF THE DANGER OF SUPERFLUITY OF WORDS

Avoid as far as thou canst the tumult of men; for talk concerning worldly things, though it be innocently undertaken, is a hindrance, so quickly are we led captive and defiled by vanity. Many a time I wish that I had held my peace, and had not gone amongst men. But why do we talk and gossip so continually, seeing that we so rarely resume our silence without some hurt done to our conscience? We like talking so much because we hope by our conversations to gain some mutual comfort, and because we seek to refresh our wearied spirits by variety of thoughts. And we very willingly talk and think of those things which we love or desire, or else of those which we most dislike.

2. But alas! it is often to no purpose and in vain. For this outward consolation is no small hindrance to the inner comfort which cometh from God. Therefore must we watch and pray that time pass not idly away. If it be right and desirable for thee to speak, speak things which are to edification. Evil custom and neglect of our real profit tend much to make us heedless of watching over our lips. Nevertheless, devout conversation on spiritual things helpeth not a little to spiritual progress, most of all where those of kindred mind and spirit find their ground of fellowship in God.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

  

OF SEEKING PEACE OF MIND AND OF SPIRITUAL PROGRESS

We may enjoy abundance of peace if we refrain from busying ourselves with the sayings and doings of others, and things which concern not ourselves. How can he abide long time in peace who occupieth himself with other men's matters, and with things without himself, and meanwhile payeth little or rare heed to the self within? Blessed are the single-hearted, for they shall have abundance of peace.

2. How came it to pass that many of the Saints were so perfect, so contemplative of Divine things? Because they steadfastly sought to mortify themselves from all worldly desires, and so were enabled to cling with their whole heart to God, and be free and at leisure for the thought of Him. We are too much occupied with our own affections, and too anxious about transitory things. Seldom, too, do we entirely conquer even a single fault, nor are we zealous for daily growth in grace. And so we remain lukewarm and unspiritual.

3. Were we fully watchful of ourselves, and not bound in spirit to outward things, then might we be wise unto salvation, and make progress in Divine contemplation. Our great and grievous stumbling-block is that, not being freed from our affections and desires, we strive not to enter into the perfect way of the Saints. And when even a little trouble befalleth us, too quickly are we cast down, and fly to the world to give us comfort.

4. If we would quit ourselves like men, and strive to stand firm in the battle, then should we see the Lord helping us from Heaven. For He Himself is alway ready to help those who strive and who trust in Him; yea, He provideth for us occasions of striving, to the end that we may win the victory. If we look upon our progress in religion as a progress only in outward observances and forms, our devoutness will soon come to an end. But let us lay the axe to the very root of our life, that, being cleansed from affections, we may possess our souls in peace.

5. If each year should see one fault rooted out from us, we should go quickly on to perfection. But on the contrary, we often feel that we were better and holier in the beginning of our conversion than after many years of profession. Zeal and progress ought to increase day by day; yet now it seemeth a great thing if one is able to retain some portion of his first ardour. If we would put some slight stress on ourselves at the beginning, then afterwards we should be able to do all things with ease and joy.

6. It is a hard thing to break through a habit, and a yet harder thing to go contrary to our own will. Yet if thou overcome not slight and easy obstacles, how shalt thou overcome greater ones? Withstand thy will at the beginning, and unlearn an evil habit, lest it lead thee little by little into worse difficulties. Oh, if thou knewest what peace to thyself thy holy life should bring to thyself, and what joy to others, methinketh thou wouldst be more zealous for spiritual profit.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

  

OF THE USES OF ADVERSITY

It is good for us that we sometimes have sorrows and adversities, for they often make a man lay to heart that he is only a stranger and sojourner, and may not put his trust in any worldly thing. It is good that we sometimes endure contradictions, and are hardly and unfairly judged, when we do and mean what is good. For these things help us to be humble, and shield us from vain-glory. For then we seek the more earnestly the witness of God, when men speak evil of us falsely, and give us no credit for good.

2. Therefore ought a man to rest wholly upon God, so that he needeth not seek much comfort at the hand of men. When a man who feareth God is afflicted or tried or oppressed with evil thoughts, then he seeth that God is the more necessary unto him, since without God he can do no good thing. Then he is heavy of heart, he groaneth, he crieth out for the very disquietness of his heart. Then he groweth weary of life, and would fain depart and be with Christ. By all this he is taught that in the world there can be no perfect security or fulness of peace.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

OF RESISTING TEMPTATION

So long as we live in the world, we cannot be without trouble and trial. Wherefore it is written in Job, The life of man upon the earth is a trial.(1) And therefore ought each of us to give heed concerning trials and temptations, and watch unto prayer, lest the devil find occasion to deceive; for he never sleepeth, but goeth about seeking whom he may devour. No man is so perfect in holiness that he hath never temptations, nor can we ever be wholly free from them.

2. Yet, notwithstanding, temptations turn greatly unto our profit, even though they be great and hard to bear; for through them we are humbled, purified, instructed. All Saints have passed through much tribulation and temptation, and have profited thereby. And they who endured not temptation became reprobate and fell away. There is no position so sacred, no place so secret, that it is without temptations and adversities.

3. There is no man wholly free from temptations so long as he liveth, because we have the root of temptation within ourselves, in that we are born in concupiscence. One temptation or sorrow passeth, and another cometh; and always we shall have somewhat to suffer, for we have fallen from perfect happiness. Many who seek to fly from temptations fall yet more deeply into them. By flight alone we cannot overcome, but by endurance and true humility we are made stronger than all our enemies.

4. He who only resisteth outwardly and pulleth not up by the root, shall profit little; nay, rather temptations will return to him the more quickly, and will be the more terrible. Little by little, through patience and longsuffering, thou shalt conquer by the help of God, rather than by violence and thine own strength of will. In the midst of temptation often seek counsel; and deal not hardly with one who is tempted, but comfort and strengthen him as thou wouldest have done unto thyself.

5. The beginning of all temptations to evil is instability of temper and want of trust in God; for even as a ship without a helm is tossed about by the waves, so is a man who is careless and infirm of purpose tempted, now on this side, now on that. As fire testeth iron, so doth temptation the upright man. Oftentimes we know not what strength we have; but temptation revealeth to us what we are. Nevertheless, we must watch, especially in the beginnings of temptation; for then is the foe the more easily mastered, when he is not suffered to enter within the mind, but is met outside the door as soon as he hath knocked. Wherefore one saith,

   Check the beginnings; once thou might'st have cured,
    But now 'tis past thy skill, too long hath it endured.

For first cometh to the mind the simple suggestion, then the strong imagination, afterwards pleasure, evil affection, assent. And so little by little the enemy entereth in altogether, because he was not resisted at the beginning. And the longer a man delayeth his resistance, the weaker he groweth, and the stronger groweth the enemy against him.

6. Some men suffer their most grievous temptations in the beginning of their conversion, some at the end. Some are sorely tried their whole life long. Some there are who are tempted but lightly, according to the wisdom and justice of the ordering of God, who knoweth the character and circumstances of men, and ordereth all things for the welfare of His elect.

7. Therefore we ought not to despair when we are tempted, but the more fervently should cry unto God, that He will vouchsafe to help us in all our tribulation; and that He will, as St. Paul saith, with the temptation make a way to escape that we may be able to bear it.(2) Let us therefore humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God in all temptation and trouble, for He will save and exalt such as are of an humble spirit.

8. In temptations and troubles a man is proved, what progress he hath made, and therein is his reward the greater, and his virtue doth the more appear. Nor is it a great thing if a man be devout and zealous so long as he suffereth no affliction; but if he behave himself patiently in the time of adversity, then is there hope of great progress. Some are kept safe from great temptations, but are overtaken in those which are little and common, that the humiliation may teach them not to trust to themselves in great things, being weak in small things.

(1) Job vii. 1 (Vulg.). (2) 1 Corinthians x. 13.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

ON AVOIDING RASH JUDGMENT

Look well unto thyself, and beware that thou judge not the doings of others. In judging others a man laboureth in vain; he often erreth, and easily falleth into sin; but in judging and examining himself he always laboureth to good purpose. According as a matter toucheth our fancy, so oftentimes do we judge of it; for easily do we fail of true judgment because of our own personal feeling. If God were always the sole object of our desire, we should the less easily be troubled by the erring judgment of our fancy.

2. But often some secret thought lurking within us, or even some outward circumstance, turneth us aside. Many are secretly seeking their own ends in what they do, yet know it not. They seem to live in good peace of mind so long as things go well with them, and according to their desires, but if their desires be frustrated and broken, immediately they are shaken and displeased. Diversity of feelings and opinions very often brings about dissensions between friends, between countrymen, between religious and godly men.

3. Established custom is not easily relinquished, and no man is very easily led to see with the eyes of another. If thou rest more upon thy own reason or experience than upon the power of Jesus Christ, thy light shall come slowly and hardly; for God willeth us to be perfectly subject unto Himself, and all our reason to be exalted by abundant love towards Him.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

  

OF WORKS OF CHARITY

For no worldly good whatsoever, and for the love of no man, must anything be done which is evil, but for the help of the suffering a good work must sometimes be postponed, or be changed for a better; for herein a good work is not destroyed, but improved. Without charity no work profiteth, but whatsoever is done in charity, however small and of no reputation it be, bringeth forth good fruit; for God verily considereth what a man is able to do, more than the greatness of what he doth.

2. He doth much who loveth much. He doth much who doth well. He doth well who ministereth to the public good rather than to his own. Oftentimes that seemeth to be charity which is rather carnality, because it springeth from natural inclination, self-will, hope of repayment, desire of gain.

3. He who hath true and perfect charity, in no wise seeketh his own good, but desireth that God alone be altogether glorified. He envieth none, because he longeth for no selfish joy; nor doth he desire to rejoice in himself, but longeth to be blessed in God as the highest good. He ascribeth good to none save to God only, the Fountain whence all good proceedeth, and the End, the Peace, the joy of all Saints. Oh, he who hath but a spark of true charity, hath verily learned that all worldly things are full of vanity.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

OF BEARING WITH THE FAULTS OF OTHERS

Those things which a man cannot amend in himself or in others, he ought patiently to bear, until God shall otherwise ordain. Bethink thee that perhaps it is better for thy trial and patience, without which our merits are but little worth. Nevertheless thou oughtest, when thou findeth such impediments, to beseech God that He would vouchsafe to sustain thee, that thou be able to bear them with a good will.

2. If one who is once or twice admonished refuse to hearken, strive not with him, but commit all to God, that His will may be done and His honour be shown in His servants, for He knoweth well how to convert the evil unto good. Endeavour to be patient in bearing with other men's faults and infirmities whatsoever they be, for thou thyself also hast many things which have need to be borne with by others. If thou canst not make thine own self what thou desireth, how shalt thou be able to fashion another to thine own liking. We are ready to see others made perfect, and yet we do not amend our own shortcomings.

3. We will that others be straitly corrected, but we will not be corrected ourselves. The freedom of others displeaseth us, but we are dissatisfied that our own wishes shall be denied us. We desire rules to be made restraining others, but by no means will we suffer ourselves to be restrained. Thus therefore doth it plainly appear how seldom we weigh our neighbour in the same balance with ourselves. If all men were perfect, what then should we have to suffer from others for God?

4. But now hath God thus ordained, that we may learn to bear one another's burdens, because none is without defect, none without a burden, none sufficient of himself, none wise enough of himself; but it behoveth us to bear with one another, to comfort one another, to help, instruct, admonish one another. How much strength each man hath is best proved by occasions of adversity: for such occasions do not make a man frail, but show of what temper he is.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

OF A RELIGIOUS LIFE

It behoveth thee to learn to mortify thyself in many things, if thou wilt live in amity and concord with other men. It is no small thing to dwell in a religious community or congregation, and to live there without complaint, and therein to remain faithful even unto death. Blessed is he who hath lived a good life in such a body, and brought it to a happy end. If thou wilt stand fast and wilt profit as thou oughtest, hold thyself as an exile and a pilgrim upon the earth. Thou wilt have to be counted as a fool for Christ, if thou wilt lead a religious life.

2. The clothing and outward appearance are of small account; it is change of character and entire mortification of the affections which make a truly religious man. He who seeketh aught save God and the health of his soul, shall find only tribulation and sorrow. Nor can he stand long in peace, who striveth not to be least of all and servant of all.

3. Thou art called to endure and to labour, not to a life of ease and trifling talk. Here therefore are men tried as gold in the furnace. No man can stand, unless with all his heart he will humble himself for God's sake.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

OF THE EXAMPLE OF THE HOLY FATHERS

Consider now the lively examples of the holy fathers, in whom shone forth real perfectness and religion, and thou shalt see how little, even as nothing, is all that we do. Ah! What is our life when compared to theirs? They, saints and friends of Christ as they were, served the Lord in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness, in labour and weariness, in watchings and fastings, in prayer and holy meditations, in persecutions and much rebuke.

2. O how many and grievous tribulations did the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, endure; and all others who would walk in the footsteps of Christ. For they hated their souls in this world that they might keep them unto life eternal. O how strict and retired a life was that of the holy fathers who dwelt in the desert! what long and grievous temptations they did suffer! how often were they assaulted by the enemy! what frequent and fervid prayers did they offer unto God! what strict fasts did they endure! what fervent zeal and desire after spiritual profit did they manifest! how bravely did they fight that their vices might not gain the mastery! how entirely and steadfastly did they reach after God! By day they laboured, and at night they gave themselves ofttimes unto prayer; yea, even when they were labouring they ceased not from mental prayer.

3. They spent their whole time profitably; every hour seemed short for retirement with God; and through the great sweetness of contemplation, even the need of bodily refreshment was forgotten. They renounced all riches, dignities, honours, friends, kinsmen; they desired nothing from the world; they ate the bare necessaries of life; they were unwilling to minister to the body even in necessity. Thus were they poor in earthly things, but rich above measure in grace and virtue. Though poor to the outer eye, within they were filled with grace and heavenly benedictions.

4. They were strangers to the world, but unto God they were as kinsmen and friends. They seemed unto themselves as of no reputation, and in the world's eyes contemptible; but in the sight of God they were precious and beloved. They stood fast in true humility, they lived in simple obedience, they walked in love and patience; and thus they waxed strong in spirit, and obtained great favour before God. To all religious men they were given as an example, and they ought more to provoke us unto good livings than the number of the lukewarm tempteth to carelessness of life.

5. O how great was the love of all religious persons at the beginning of this sacred institution! O what devoutness of prayer! what rivalry in holiness! what strict discipline was observed! what reverence and obedience under the rule of the master showed they in all things! The traces of them that remain until now testify that they were truly holy and perfect men, who fighting so bravely trod the world underfoot. Now a man is counted great if only he be not a transgressor, and if he can only endure with patience what he hath undertaken.

6. O the coldness and negligence of our times, that we so quickly decline from the former love, and it is become a weariness to live, because of sloth and lukewarmness. May progress in holiness not wholly fall asleep in thee, who many times hast seen so many examples of devout men!

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

OF THE EXERCISES OF A RELIGIOUS MAN

The life of a Christian ought to be adorned with all virtues, that he may be inwardly what he outwardly appeareth unto men. And verily it should be yet better within than without, for God is a discerner of our heart, Whom we must reverence with all our hearts wheresoever we are, and walk pure in His presence as do the angels. We ought daily to renew our vows, and to kindle our hearts to zeal, as if each day were the first day of our conversion, and to say, "Help me, O God, in my good resolutions, and in Thy holy service, and grant that this day I may make a good beginning, for hitherto I have done nothing!"

2. According to our resolution so is the rate of our progress, and much diligence is needful for him who would make good progress. For if he who resolveth bravely oftentimes falleth short, how shall it be with him who resolveth rarely or feebly? But manifold causes bring about abandonment of our resolution, yet a trivial omission of holy exercises can hardly be made without some loss to us. The resolution of the righteous dependeth more upon the grace of God than upon their own wisdom; for in Him they always put their trust, whatsoever they take in hand. For man proposeth, but God disposeth; and the way of a man is not in himself.(1)

3. If a holy exercise be sometimes omitted for the sake of some act of piety, or of some brotherly kindness, it can easily be taken up afterwards; but if it be neglected through distaste or slothfulness, then is it sinful, and the mischief will be felt. Strive as earnestly as we may, we shall still fall short in many things. Always should some distinct resolution be made by us; and, most of all, we must strive against those sins which most easily beset us. Both our outer and inner life should be straitly examined and ruled by us, because both have to do with our progress.

4. If thou canst not be always examining thyself, thou canst at certain seasons, and at least twice in the day, at evening and at morning. In the morning make thy resolves, and in the evening inquire into thy life, how thou hast sped to-day in word, deed, and thought; for in these ways thou hast often perchance offended God and thy neighbour. Gird up thy lions like a man against the assaults of the devil; bridle thine appetite, and thou wilt soon be able to bridle every inclination of the flesh. Be thou never without something to do; be reading, or writing, or praying, or meditating, or doing something that is useful to the community. Bodily exercises, however, must be undertaken with discretion, nor are they to be used by all alike.

5. The duties which are not common to all must not be done openly, but are safest carried on in secret. But take heed that thou be not careless in the common duties, and more devout in the secret; but faithfully and honestly discharge the duties and commands which lie upon thee, then afterwards, if thou hast still leisure, give thyself to thyself as thy devotion leadeth thee. All cannot have one exercise, but one suiteth better to this man and another to that. Even for the diversity of season different exercises are needed, some suit better for feasts, some for fasts. We need one kind in time of temptations and others in time of peace and quietness. Some are suitable to our times of sadness, and others when we are joyful in the Lord.

6. When we draw near the time of the great feasts, good exercises should be renewed, and the prayers of holy men more fervently besought. We ought to make our resolutions from one Feast to another, as if each were the period of our departure from this world, and of entering into the eternal feast. So ought we to prepare ourselves earnestly at solemn seasons, and the more solemnly to live, and to keep straightest watch upon each holy observance, as though we were soon to receive the reward of our labours at the hand of God.

7. And if this be deferred, let us believe ourselves to be as yet ill-prepared, and unworthy as yet of the glory which shall be revealed in us at the appointed season; and let us study to prepare ourselves the better for our end. Blessed is that servant, as the Evangelist Luke hath it, whom, when the Lord cometh He shall find watching. Verily I say unto you He will make him ruler over all that He hath.(2)

(1) Jeremiah x. 23. (2) Luke xii. 43, 44.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XX

  

OF THE LOVE OF SOLITUDE AND SILENCE

Seek a suitable time for thy meditation, and think frequently of the mercies of God to thee. Leave curious questions. Study such matters as bring thee sorrow for sin rather than amusement. If thou withdraw thyself from trifling conversation and idle goings about, as well as from novelties and gossip, thou shalt find thy time sufficient and apt for good meditation. The greatest saints used to avoid as far as they could the company of men, and chose to live in secret with God.

2. One hath said, "As oft as I have gone among men, so oft have I returned less a man." This is what we often experience when we have been long time in conversation. For it is easier to be altogether silent than it is not to exceed in word. It is easier to remain hidden at home than to keep sufficient guard upon thyself out of doors. He, therefore, that seeketh to reach that which is hidden and spiritual, must go with Jesus "apart from the multitude." No man safely goeth abroad who loveth not to rest at home. No man safely talketh but he who loveth to hold his peace. No man safely ruleth but he who loveth to be subject. No man safely commandeth but he who loveth to obey.

3. No man safely rejoiceth but he who hath the testimony of a good conscience within himself. The boldness of the Saints was always full of the fear of God. Nor were they the less earnest and humble in themselves, because they shone forth with great virtues and grace. But the boldness of wicked men springeth from pride and presumption, and at the last turneth to their own confusion. Never promise thyself security in this life, howsoever good a monk or devout a solitary thou seemest.

4. Often those who stand highest in the esteem of men, fall the more grievously because of their over great confidence. Wherefore it is very profitable unto many that they should not be without inward temptation, but should be frequently assaulted, lest they be over confident, lest they be indeed lifted up into pride, or else lean too freely upon the consolations of the world. O how good a conscience should that man keep, who never sought a joy that passeth away, who never became entangled with the world! O how great peace and quiet should he possess, who would cast off all vain care, and think only of healthful and divine things, and build his whole hope upon God!

5. No man is worthy of heavenly consolation but he who hath diligently exercised himself in holy compunction. If thou wilt feel compunction within thy heart, enter into thy chamber and shut out the tumults of the world, as it is written, Commune with your own heart in your own chamber and be still.(1) In retirement thou shalt find what often thou wilt lose abroad. Retirement, if thou continue therein, groweth sweet, but if thou keep not in it, begetteth weariness. If in the beginning of thy conversation thou dwell in it and keep it well, it shall afterwards be to thee a dear friend, and a most pleasant solace.

6. In silence and quiet the devout soul goeth forward and learneth the hidden things of the Scriptures. Therein findeth she a fountain of tears, wherein to wash and cleanse herself each night, that she may grow the more dear to her Maker as she dwelleth the further from all worldly distraction. To him who withdraweth himself from his acquaintance and friends God with his holy angels will draw nigh. It is better to be unknown and take heed to oneself than to neglect oneself and work wonders. It is praiseworthy for a religious man to go seldom abroad, to fly from being seen, to have no desire to see men.

7. Why wouldest thou see what thou mayest not have? The world passeth away and the lust thereof. The desires of sensuality draw thee abroad, but when an hour is past, what dost thou bring home, but a weight upon thy conscience and distraction of heart? A merry going forth bringeth often a sorrowful return, and a merry evening maketh a sad morning? So doth all carnal joy begin pleasantly, but in the end it gnaweth away and destroyeth. What canst thou see abroad which thou seest not at home? Behold the heaven and the earth and the elements, for out of these are all things made.

8. What canst thou see anywhere which can continue long under the sun? Thou believest perchance that thou shalt be satisfied, but thou wilt never be able to attain unto this. If thou shouldest see all things before thee at once, what would it be but a vain vision? Lift up thine eyes to God on high, and pray that thy sins and negligences may be forgiven. Leave vain things to vain men, and mind thou the things which God hath commanded thee. Shut thy door upon thee, and call unto thyself Jesus thy beloved. Remain with Him in thy chamber, for thou shalt not elsewhere find so great peace. If thou hadst not gone forth nor listened to vain talk, thou hadst better kept thyself in good peace. But because it sometimes delighteth thee to hear new things, thou must therefore suffer trouble of heart.

(1) Psalm iv. 4.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXI

  

OF COMPUNCTION OF HEART

If thou wilt make any progress keep thyself in the fear of God, and long not to be too free, but restrain all thy senses under discipline and give not thyself up to senseless mirth. Give thyself to compunction of heart and thou shalt find devotion. Compunction openeth the way for many good things, which dissoluteness is wont quickly to lose. It is wonderful that any man can ever rejoice heartily in this life who considereth and weigheth his banishment, and the manifold dangers which beset his soul.

2. Through lightness of heart and neglect of our shortcomings we feel not the sorrows of our soul, but often vainly laugh when we have good cause to weep. There is no true liberty nor real joy, save in the fear of God with a good conscience. Happy is he who can cast away every cause of distraction and bring himself to the one purpose of holy compunction. Happy is he who putteth away from him whatsoever may stain or burden his conscience. Strive manfully; custom is overcome by custom. If thou knowest how to let men alone, they will gladly let thee alone to do thine own works.

3. Busy not thyself with the affairs of others, nor entangle thyself with the business of great men. Keep always thine eye upon thyself first of all, and give advice to thyself specially before all thy dearest friends. If thou hast not the favour of men, be not thereby cast down, but let thy concern be that thou holdest not thyself so well and circumspectly, as becometh a servant of God and a devout monk. It is often better and safer for a man not to have many comforts in this life, especially those which concern the flesh. But that we lack divine comforts or feel them rarely is to our own blame, because we seek not compunction of heart, nor utterly cast away those comforts which are vain and worldly.

4. Know thyself to be unworthy of divine consolation, and worthy rather of much tribulation. When a man hath perfect compunction, then all the world is burdensome and bitter to him. A good man will find sufficient cause for mourning and weeping; for whether he considereth himself, or pondereth concerning his neighbour, he knoweth that no man liveth here without tribulation, and the more thoroughly he considereth himself, the more thoroughly he grieveth. Grounds for just grief and inward compunction there are in our sins and vices, wherein we lie so entangled that we are but seldom able to contemplate heavenly things.

5. If thou thoughtest upon thy death more often than how long thy life should be, thou wouldest doubtless strive more earnestly to improve. And if thou didst seriously consider the future pains of hell, I believe thou wouldest willingly endure toil or pain and fear not discipline. But because these things reach not the heart, and we still love pleasant things, therefore we remain cold and miserably indifferent.

6. Oftentimes it is from poverty of spirit that the wretched body is so easily led to complain. Pray therefore humbly unto the Lord that He will give thee the spirit of compunction and say in the language of the prophet, Feed me, O Lord, with bread of tears, and give me plenteousness of tears to drink.(1)

(1) Psalm lxxv. 5.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXII

  

ON THE CONTEMPLATION OF HUMAN MISERY

Thou art miserable wheresoever thou art, and whithersoever thou turnest, unless thou turn thee to God. Why art thou disquieted because it happeneth not to thee according to thy wishes and desires? Who is he that hath everything according to his will? Neither I, nor thou, nor any man upon the earth. There is no man in the world free from trouble or anguish, though he were King or Pope. Who is he who hath the happiest lot? Even he who is strong to suffer somewhat for God.

2. There are many foolish and unstable men who say, "See what a prosperous life that man hath, how rich and how great he is, how powerful, how exalted." But lift up thine eyes to the good things of heaven, and thou shalt see that all these worldly things are nothing, they are utterly uncertain, yea, they are wearisome, because they are never possessed without care and fear. The happiness of man lieth not in the abundance of temporal things but a moderate portion sufficeth him. Our life upon the earth is verily wretchedness. The more a man desireth to be spiritual, the more bitter doth the present life become to him; because he the better understandeth and seeth the defects of human corruption. For to eat, to drink, to watch, to sleep, to rest, to labour, and to be subject to the other necessities of nature, is truly a great wretchedness and affliction to a devout man, who would fain be released and free from all sin.

3. For the inner man is heavily burdened with the necessities of the body in this world. Wherefore the prophet devoutly prayeth to be freed from them, saying, Deliver me from my necessities, O Lord.(1) But woe to those who know not their own misery, and yet greater woe to those who love this miserable and corruptible life. For to such a degree do some cling to it (even though by labouring or begging they scarce procure what is necessary for subsistence) that if they might live here always, they would care nothing for the Kingdom of God.

4. Oh foolish and faithless of heart, who lie buried so deep in worldly things, that they relish nothing save the things of the flesh! Miserable ones! they will too sadly find out at the last, how vile and worthless was that which they loved. The saints of God and all loyal friends of Christ held as nothing the things which pleased the flesh, or those which flourished in this life, but their whole hope and affection aspired to the things which are above. Their whole desire was borne upwards to everlasting and invisible things, lest they should be drawn downwards by the love of things visible.

5. Lose not, brother, thy loyal desire of progress to things spiritual. There is yet time, the hour is not past. Why wilt thou put off thy resolution? Arise, begin this very moment, and say, "Now is the time to do: now is the time to fight, now is the proper time for amendment." When thou art ill at ease and troubled, then is the time when thou art nearest unto blessing. Thou must go through fire and water that God may bring thee into a wealthy place. Unless thou put force upon thyself, thou wilt not conquer thy faults. So long as we carry about with us this frail body, we cannot be without sin, we cannot live without weariness and trouble. Gladly would we have rest from all misery; but because through sin we have lost innocence, we have lost also the true happiness. Therefore must we be patient, and wait for the mercy of God, until this tyranny be overpast, and this mortality be swallowed up of life.

6. O how great is the frailty of man, which is ever prone to evil! To-day thou confessest thy sins, and to-morrow thou committest again the sins thou didst confess. Now dost thou resolve to avoid a fault, and within an hour thou behavest thyself as if thou hadst never resolved at all. Good cause have we therefore to humble ourselves, and never to think highly of ourselves, seeing that we are so frail and unstable. And quickly may that be lost by our negligence, which by much labour was hardly attained through grace.

7. What shall become of us at the end, if at the beginning we are lukewarm and idle? Woe unto us, if we choose to rest, as though it were a time of peace and security, while as yet no sign appeareth in our life of true holiness. Rather had we need that we might begin yet afresh, like good novices, to be instructed unto good living, if haply there might be hope of some future amendment and greater spiritual increase.

(1) Psalm xxv. 17.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIII

  

OF MEDITATION UPON DEATH

Very quickly will there be an end of thee here; take heed therefore how it will be with thee in another world. To-day man is, and to-morrow he will be seen no more. And being removed out of sight, quickly also he is out of mind. O the dulness and hardness of man's heart, which thinketh only of the present, and looketh not forward to the future. Thou oughtest in every deed and thought so to order thyself, as if thou wert to die this day. If thou hadst a good conscience thou wouldst not greatly fear death. It were better for thee to watch against sin, than to fly from death. If to-day thou art not ready, how shalt thou be ready to-morrow? To-morrow is an uncertain day; and how knowest thou that thou shalt have a to-morrow?

2. What doth it profit to live long, when we amend so little? Ah! long life doth not always amend, but often the more increaseth guilt. Oh that we might spend a single day in this world as it ought to be spent! Many there are who reckon the years since they were converted, and yet oftentimes how little is the fruit thereof. If it is a fearful thing to die, it may be perchance a yet more fearful thing to live long. Happy is the man who hath the hour of his death always before his eyes, and daily prepareth himself to die. If thou hast ever seen one die, consider that thou also shalt pass away by the same road.

3. When it is morning reflect that it may be thou shalt not see the evening, and at eventide dare not to boast thyself of the morrow. Always be thou prepared, and so live that death may never find thee unprepared. Many die suddenly and unexpectedly. For at such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.(1) When that last hour shall come, thou wilt begin to think very differently of thy whole life past, and wilt mourn bitterly that thou hast been so negligent and slothful.

4. Happy and wise is he who now striveth to be such in life as he would fain be found in death! For a perfect contempt of the world, a fervent desire to excel in virtue, the love of discipline, the painfulness of repentance, readiness to obey, denial of self, submission to any adversity for love of Christ; these are the things which shall give great confidence of a happy death. Whilst thou art in health thou hast many opportunities of good works; but when thou art in sickness I know not how much thou wilt be able to do. Few are made better by infirmity: even as they who wander much abroad seldom become holy.

5. Trust not thy friends and kinsfolk, nor put off the work of thy salvation to the future, for men will forget thee sooner than thou thinkest. It is better for thee now to provide in time, and to send some good before thee, than to trust to the help of others. If thou art not anxious for thyself now, who, thinkest thou, will be anxious for thee afterwards? Now the time is most precious. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. But alas! that thou spendest not well this time, wherein thou mightest lay up treasure which should profit thee everlastingly. The hour will come when thou shalt desire one day, yea, one hour, for amendment of life, and I know not whether thou shalt obtain.

6. Oh, dearly beloved, from what danger thou mightest free thyself, from what great fear, if only thou wouldst always live in fear, and in expectation of death! Strive now to live in such wise that in the hour of death thou mayest rather rejoice than fear. Learn now to die to the world, so shalt thou begin to live with Christ. Learn now to contemn all earthly things, and then mayest thou freely go unto Christ. Keep under thy body by penitence, and then shalt thou be able to have a sure confidence.

7. Ah, foolish one! why thinkest thou that thou shalt live long, when thou art not sure of a single day? How many have been deceived, and suddenly have been snatched away from the body! How many times hast thou heard how one was slain by the sword, another was drowned, another falling from on high broke his neck, another died at the table, another whilst at play! One died by fire, another by the sword, another by the pestilence, another by the robber. Thus cometh death to all, and the life of men swiftly passeth away like a shadow.

8. Who will remember thee after thy death? And who will entreat for thee? Work, work now, oh dearly beloved, work all that thou canst. For thou knowest not when thou shalt die, nor what shall happen unto thee after death. While thou hast time, lay up for thyself undying riches. Think of nought but of thy salvation; care only for the things of God. Make to thyself friends, by venerating the saints of God and walking in their steps, that when thou failest, thou mayest be received into everlasting habitations.(2)

9. Keep thyself as a stranger and a pilgrim upon the earth, to whom the things of the world appertain not. Keep thine heart free, and lifted up towards God, for here have we no continuing city.(3) To Him direct thy daily prayers with crying and tears, that thy spirit may be found worthy to pass happily after death unto its Lord. Amen.

(1) Matthew xxiv. 44. (2) Luke xvi. 9. (3) Hebrews xiii. 14.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIV

  

OF THE JUDGMENT AND PUNISHMENT OF THE WICKED

In all that thou doest, remember the end, and how thou wilt stand before a strict judge, from whom nothing is hid, who is not bribed with gifts, nor accepteth excuses, but will judge righteous judgment. O most miserable and foolish sinner, who art sometimes in fear of the countenance of an angry man, what wilt thou answer to God, who knoweth all thy misdeeds? Why dost thou not provide for thyself against the day of judgment, when no man shall be able to be excused or defended by means of another, but each one shall bear his burden himself alone? Now doth thy labour bring forth fruit, now is thy weeping acceptable, thy groaning heard, thy sorrow well pleasing to God, and cleansing to thy soul.

2. Even here on earth the patient man findeth great occasion of purifying his soul. When suffering injuries he grieveth more for the other's malice than for his own wrong; when he prayeth heartily for those that despitefully use him, and forgiveth them from his heart; when he is not slow to ask pardon from others; when he is swifter to pity than to anger; when he frequently denieth himself and striveth altogether to subdue the flesh to the spirit. Better is it now to purify the soul from sin, than to cling to sins from which we must be purged hereafter. Truly we deceive ourselves by the inordinate love which we bear towards the flesh.

3. What is it which that fire shall devour, save thy sins? The more thou sparest thyself and followest the flesh, the more heavy shall thy punishment be, and the more fuel art thou heaping up for the burning. For wherein a man hath sinned, therein shall he be the more heavily punished. There shall the slothful be pricked forward with burning goads, and the gluttons be tormented with intolerable hunger and thirst. There shall the luxurious and the lovers of pleasure be plunged into burning pitch and stinking brimstone, and the envious shall howl like mad dogs for very grief.

4. No sin will there be which shall not be visited with its own proper punishment. The proud shall be filled with utter confusion, and the covetous shall be pinched with miserable poverty. An hour's pain there shall be more grievous than a hundred years here of the bitterest penitence. No quiet shall be there, no comfort for the lost, though here sometimes there is respite from pain, and enjoyment of the solace of friends. Be thou anxious now and sorrowful for thy sins, that in the day of judgment thou mayest have boldness with the blessed. For then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him and made no account of his labours.(1) Then shall he stand up to judge, he who now submitteth himself in humility to the judgments of men. Then shall the poor and humble man have great confidence, while the proud is taken with fear on every side.

5. Then shall it be seen that he was the wise man in this world who learned to be a fool and despised for Christ. Then shall all tribulation patiently borne delight us, while the mouth of the ungodly shall be stopped. Then shall every godly man rejoice, and every profane man shall mourn. Then the afflicted flesh shall more rejoice than if it had been alway nourished in delights. Then the humble garment shall put on beauty, and the precious robe shall hide itself as vile. Then the little poor cottage shall be more commended than the gilded palace. Then enduring patience shall have more might than all the power of the world. Then simple obedience shall be more highly exalted than all worldly wisdom.

6. Then a pure and good conscience shall more rejoice than learned philosophy. Then contempt of riches shall have more weight than all the treasure of the children of this world. Then shalt thou find more comfort in having prayed devoutly than in having fared sumptuously. Then thou wilt rather rejoice in having kept silence than in having made long speech. Then holy deeds shall be far stronger than many fine words. Then a strict life and sincere penitence shall bring deeper pleasure than all earthly delight. Learn now to suffer a little, that then thou mayest be enabled to escape heavier sufferings. Prove first here, what thou art able to endure hereafter. If now thou art able to bear so little, how wilt thou be able to endure eternal torments? If now a little suffering maketh thee so impatient, what shall hell-fire do then? Behold of a surety thou art not able to have two Paradises, to take thy fill or delight here in this world, and to reign with Christ hereafter.

7. If even unto this day thou hadst ever lived in honours and pleasures, what would the whole profit thee if now death came to thee in an instant? All therefore is vanity, save to love God and to serve Him only. For he who loveth God with all his heart feareth not death, nor punishment, nor judgment, nor hell, because perfect love giveth sure access to God. But he who still delighteth in sin, no marvel if he is afraid of death and judgment. Nevertheless it is a good thing, if love as yet cannot restrain thee from evil, that at least the fear of hell should hold thee back. But he who putteth aside the fear of God cannot long continue in good, but shall quickly fall into the snares of the devil.

(1) Wisd. v. 1.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXV

  

OF THE ZEALOUS AMENDMENT OF OUR WHOLE LIFE

Be thou watchful and diligent in God's service, and bethink thee often why thou hast renounced the world. Was it not that thou mightest live to God and become a spiritual man? Be zealous, therefore, for thy spiritual profit, for thou shalt receive shortly the reward of thy labours, and neither fear nor sorrow shall come any more into thy borders. Now shalt thou labour a little, and thou shalt find great rest, yea everlasting joy. If thou shalt remain faithful and zealous in labour, doubt not that God shall be faithful and bountiful in rewarding thee. It is thy duty to have a good hope that thou wilt attain the victory, but thou must not fall into security lest thou become slothful or lifted up.

2. A certain man being in anxiety of mind, continually tossed about between hope and fear, and being on a certain day overwhelmed with grief, cast himself down in prayer before the altar in a church, and meditated within himself, saying, "Oh! if I but knew that I should still persevere," and presently heard within him a voice from God, "And if thou didst know it, what wouldst thou do? Do now what thou wouldst do then, and thou shalt be very secure." And straightway being comforted and strengthened, he committed himself to the will of God and the perturbation of spirit ceased, neither had he a mind any more to search curiously to know what should befall him hereafter, but studied rather to inquire what was the good and acceptable will of God, for the beginning and perfecting of every good work.

3. Hope in the Lord and be doing good, saith the Prophet; dwell in the land and thou shalt be fed(1) with its riches. One thing there is which holdeth back many from progress and fervent amendment, even the dread of difficulty, or the labour of the conflict. Nevertheless they advance above all others in virtue who strive manfully to conquer those things which are most grievous and contrary to them, for there a man profiteth most and meriteth greater grace where he most overcometh himself and mortifieth himself in spirit.

4. But all men have not the same passions to conquer and to mortify, yet he who is diligent shall attain more profit, although he have stronger passions, than another who is more temperate of disposition, but is withal less fervent in the pursuit of virtue. Two things specially avail unto improvement in holiness, namely firmness to withdraw ourselves from the sin to which by nature we are most inclined, and earnest zeal for that good in which we are most lacking. And strive also very earnestly to guard against and subdue those faults which displease thee most frequently in others.

5. Gather some profit to thy soul wherever thou art, and wherever thou seest or hearest good examples, stir thyself to follow them, but where thou seest anything which is blameworthy, take heed that thou do not the same; or if at any time thou hast done it, strive quickly to amend thyself. As thine eye observeth others, so again are the eyes of others upon thee. How sweet and pleasant is it to see zealous and godly brethren temperate and of good discipline; and how sad is it and grievous to see them walking disorderly, not practising the duties to which they are called. How hurtful a thing it is to neglect the purpose of their calling, and turn their inclinations to things which are none of their business.

6. Be mindful of the duties which thou hast undertaken, and set always before thee the remembrance of the Crucified. Truly oughtest thou to be ashamed as thou lookest upon the life of Jesus Christ, because thou hast not yet endeavoured to conform thyself more unto Him, though thou hast been a long time in the way of God. A religious man who exercises himself seriously and devoutly in the most holy life and passion of our Lord shall find there abundantly all things that are profitable and necessary for him, neither is there need that he shall seek anything better beyond Jesus. Oh! if Jesus crucified would come into our hearts, how quickly, and completely should we have learned all that we need to know!

7. He who is earnest receiveth and beareth well all things that are laid upon him. He who is careless and lukewarm hath trouble upon trouble, and suffereth anguish upon every side, because he is without inward consolation, and is forbidden to seek that which is outward. He who is living without discipline is exposed to grievous ruin. He who seeketh easier and lighter discipline shall always be in distress, because one thing or another will give him displeasure.

8. O! if no other duty lay upon us but to praise the Lord our God with our whole heart and voice! Oh! if thou never hadst need to eat or drink, or sleep, but wert always able to praise God, and to give thyself to spiritual exercises alone; then shouldst thou be far happier than now, when for so many necessities thou must serve the flesh. O! that these necessities were not, but only the spiritual refreshments of the soul, which alas we taste too seldom.

9. When a man hath come to this, that he seeketh comfort from no created thing, then doth he perfectly begin to enjoy God, then also will he be well contented with whatsoever shall happen unto him. Then will he neither rejoice for much nor be sorrowful for little, but he committeth himself altogether and with full trust unto God, who is all in all to him, to whom nothing perisheth nor dieth, but all things live to Him and obey His every word without delay.

10. Remember always thine end, and how the time which is lost returneth not. Without care and diligence thou shalt never get virtue. If thou beginnest to grow cold, it shall begin to go ill with thee, but if thou givest thyself unto zeal thou shalt find much peace, and shalt find thy labour the lighter because of the grace of God and the love of virtue. A zealous and diligent man is ready for all things. It is greater labour to resist sins and passions than to toil in bodily labours. He who shunneth not small faults falleth little by little into greater. At eventide thou shalt always be glad if thou spend the day profitably. Watch over thyself, stir thyself up, admonish thyself, and howsoever it be with others, neglect not thyself. The more violence thou dost unto thyself, the more thou shall profit. Amen.

(1) Psalm xxxvii. 3.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE SECOND BOOK

  

ADMONITIONS CONCERNING THE INNER LIFE

  

CHAPTER I

  

OF THE INWARD LIFE

The kingdom of God is within you,(1) saith the Lord. Turn thee with all thine heart to the Lord and forsake this miserable world, and thou shalt find rest unto thy soul. Learn to despise outward things and to give thyself to things inward, and thou shalt see the kingdom of God come within thee. For the kingdom of God is peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and it is not given to the wicked. Christ will come to thee, and show thee His consolation, if thou prepare a worthy mansion for Him within thee. All His glory and beauty is from within, and there it pleaseth Him to dwell. He often visiteth the inward man and holdeth with him sweet discourse, giving him soothing consolation, much peace, friendship exceeding wonderful.

2. Go to, faithful soul, prepare thy heart for this bridegroom that he may vouchsafe to come to thee and dwell within thee, for so He saith, if any man loveth me he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him.(2) Give, therefore, place to Christ and refuse entrance to all others. When thou hast Christ, thou art rich, and hast sufficient. He shall be thy provider and faithful watchman in all things, so that thou hast no need to trust in men, for men soon change and swiftly pass away, but Christ remaineth for ever and standeth by us firmly even to the end.

3. There is no great trust to be placed in a frail and mortal man, even though he be useful and dear to us, neither should much sorrow arise within us if sometimes he oppose and contradict us. They who are on thy side to-day, may to-morrow be against thee, and often are they turned round like the wind. Put thy whole trust in God and let Him be thy fear and thy love, He will answer for thee Himself, and will do for thee what is best. Here hast thou no continuing city,(3) and wheresoever thou art, thou art a stranger and a pilgrim, and thou shalt never have rest unless thou art closely united to Christ within thee.

4. Why dost thou cast thine eyes hither and thither, since this is not the place of thy rest? In heaven ought thy habitation to be, and all earthly things should be looked upon as it were in the passing by. All things pass away and thou equally with them. Look that thou cleave not to them lest thou be taken with them and perish. Let thy contemplation be on the Most High, and let thy supplication be directed unto Christ without ceasing. If thou canst not behold high and heavenly things, rest thou in the passion of Christ and dwell willingly in His sacred wounds. For if thou devoutly fly to the wounds of Jesus, and the precious marks of the nails and the spear, thou shalt find great comfort in tribulation, nor will the slights of men trouble thee much, and thou wilt easily bear their unkind words.

5. Christ also, when He was in the world, was despised and rejected of men, and in His greatest necessity was left by His acquaintance and friends to bear these reproaches. Christ was willing to suffer and be despised, and darest thou complain of any? Christ had adversaries and gainsayers, and dost thou wish to have all men thy friends and benefactors? Whence shall thy patience attain her crown if no adversity befall thee? If thou art unwilling to suffer any adversity, how shalt thou be the friend of Christ? Sustain thyself with Christ and for Christ if thou wilt reign with Christ.

6. If thou hadst once entered into the mind of Jesus, and hadst tasted yea even a little of his tender love, then wouldst thou care nought for thine own convenience or inconvenience, but wouldst rather rejoice at trouble brought upon thee, because the love of Jesus maketh a man to despise himself. He who loveth Jesus, and is inwardly true and free from inordinate affections, is able to turn himself readily unto God, and to rise above himself in spirit, and to enjoy fruitful peace.

7. He who knoweth things as they are and not as they are said or seem to be, he truly is wise, and is taught of God more than of men. He who knoweth how to walk from within, and to set little value upon outward things, requireth not places nor waiteth for seasons, for holding his intercourse with God. The inward man quickly recollecteth himself, because he is never entirely given up to outward things. No outward labour and no necessary occupations stand in his way, but as events fall out, so doth he fit himself to them. He who is rightly disposed and ordered within careth not for the strange and perverse conduct of men. A man is hindered and distracted in so far as he is moved by outward things.

8. If it were well with thee, and thou wert purified from evil, all things would work together for thy good and profiting. For this cause do many things displease thee and often trouble thee, that thou art not yet perfectly dead to thyself nor separated from all earthly things. Nothing so defileth and entangleth the heart of man as impure love towards created things. If thou rejectest outward comfort thou wilt be able to contemplate heavenly things and frequently to be joyful inwardly.

(1) Luke xvii. 21. (2) John xiv. 23. (3) Hebrews xiii. 14.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

  

OF LOWLY SUBMISSION

Make no great account who is for thee or against thee, but mind only the present duty and take care that God be with thee in whatsoever thou doest. Have a good conscience and God will defend thee, for he whom God will help no man's perverseness shall be able to hurt. If thou knowest how to hold thy peace and to suffer, without doubt thou shalt see the help of the Lord. He knoweth the time and the way to deliver thee, therefore must thou resign thyself to Him. To God it belongeth to help and to deliver from all confusion. Oftentimes it is very profitable for keeping us in greater humility, that others know and rebuke our faults.

2. When a man humbleth himself for his defects, he then easily pacifieth others and quickly satisfieth those that are angered against him. God protecteth and delivereth the humble man, He loveth and comforteth the humble man, to the humble man He inclineth Himself, on the humble He bestoweth great grace, and when he is cast down He raiseth him to glory: to the humble He revealeth His secrets, and sweetly draweth and inviteth him to Himself. The humble man having received reproach, is yet in sufficient peace, because he resteth on God and not on the world. Reckon not thyself to have profited in anywise unless thou feel thyself to be inferior to all.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

  

OF THE GOOD, PEACEABLE MAN

First keep thyself in peace, and then shalt thou be able to be a peacemaker towards others. A peaceable man doth more good than a well-learned. A passionate man turneth even good into evil and easily believeth evil; a good, peaceable man converteth all things into good. He who dwelleth in peace is suspicious of none, but he who is discontented and restless is tossed with many suspicions, and is neither quiet himself nor suffereth others to be quiet. He often saith what he ought not to say, and omitteth what it were more expedient for him to do. He considereth to what duties others are bound, and neglecteth those to which he is bound himself. Therefore be zealous first over thyself, and then mayest thou righteously be zealous concerning thy neighbour.

2. Thou knowest well how to excuse and to colour thine own deeds, but thou wilt not accept the excuses of others. It would be more just to accuse thyself and excuse thy brother. If thou wilt that others bear with thee, bear thou with others. Behold how far thou art as yet from the true charity and humility which knows not how to be angry or indignant against any save self alone. It is no great thing to mingle with the good and the meek, for this is naturally pleasing to all, and every one of us willingly enjoyeth peace and liketh best those who think with us: but to be able to live peaceably with the hard and perverse, or with the disorderly, or those who oppose us, this is a great grace and a thing much to be commended and most worthy of a man.

3. There are who keep themselves in peace and keep peace also with others, and there are who neither have peace nor suffer others to have peace; they are troublesome to others, but always more troublesome to themselves. And there are who hold themselves in peace, and study to bring others unto peace; nevertheless, all our peace in this sad life lieth in humble suffering rather than in not feeling adversities. He who best knoweth how to suffer shall possess the most peace; that man is conqueror of himself and lord of the world, the friend of Christ, and the inheritor of heaven.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

  

OF A PURE MIND AND SIMPLE INTENTION

By two wings is man lifted above earthly things, even by simplicity and purity. Simplicity ought to be in the intention, purity in the affection. Simplicity reacheth towards God, purity apprehendeth Him and tasteth Him. No good action will be distasteful to thee if thou be free within from inordinate affection. If thou reachest after and seekest, nothing but the will of God and the benefit of thy neighbour, thou wilt entirely enjoy inward liberty. If thine heart were right, then should every creature be a mirror of life and a book of holy doctrine. There is no creature so small and vile but that it showeth us the goodness of God.

2. If thou wert good and pure within, then wouldst thou look upon all things without hurt and understand them aright. A pure heart seeth the very depths of heaven and hell. Such as each one is inwardly, so judgeth he outwardly. If there is any joy in the world surely the man of pure heart possesseth it, and if there is anywhere tribulation and anguish, the evil conscience knoweth it best. As iron cast into the fire loseth rust and is made altogether glowing, so the man who turneth himself altogether unto God is freed from slothfulness and changed into a new man.

3. When a man beginneth to grow lukewarm, then he feareth a little labour, and willingly accepteth outward consolation; but when he beginneth perfectly to conquer himself and to walk manfully in the way of God, then he counteth as nothing those things which aforetime seemed to be so grievous unto him.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

  

OF SELF-ESTEEM

We cannot place too little confidence in ourselves, because grace and understanding are often lacking to us. Little light is there within us, and what we have we quickly lose by negligence. Oftentimes we perceive not how great is our inward blindness. We often do ill and excuse it worse. Sometimes we are moved by passion and count it zeal; we blame little faults in others and pass over great faults in ourselves. Quickly enough we feel and reckon up what we bear at the hands of others, but we reflect not how much others are bearing from us. He who would weigh well and rightly his own doings would not be the man to judge severely of another.

2. The spiritually-minded man putteth care of himself before all cares; and he who diligently attendeth to himself easily keepeth silence concerning others. Thou wilt never be spiritually minded and godly unless thou art silent concerning other men's matters and take full heed to thyself. If thou think wholly upon thyself and upon God, what thou seest out of doors shall move thee little. Where art thou when thou art not present to thyself? and when thou hast overrun all things, what hath it profited thee, thyself being neglected? If thou wouldst have peace and true unity, thou must put aside all other things, and gaze only upon thyself.

3. Then thou shalt make great progress if thou keep thyself free from all temporal care. Thou shalt lamentably fall away if thou set a value upon any worldly thing. Let nothing be great, nothing high, nothing pleasing, nothing acceptable unto thee, save God Himself or the things of God. Reckon as altogether vain whatsoever consolation comes to thee from a creature. The soul that loveth God looketh not to anything that is beneath God. God alone is eternal and incomprehensible, filling all things, the solace of the soul, and the true joy of the heart.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

  

OF THE JOY OF A GOOD CONSCIENCE

The testimony of a good conscience is the glory of a good man. Have a good conscience and thou shalt ever have joy. A good conscience is able to bear exceeding much, and is exceeding joyful in the midst of adversities; an evil conscience is ever fearful and unquiet. Thou shalt rest sweetly if thy heart condemn thee not. Never rejoice unless when thou hast done well. The wicked have never true joy, nor feel internal peace, for there is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.(1) And if they say "we are in peace, there shall no harm happen unto us, and who shall dare to do us hurt?" believe them not, for suddenly shall the wrath of God rise up against them, and their deeds shall be brought to nought, and their thoughts shall perish.

2. To glory in tribulation is not grievous to him who loveth; for such glorying is glorying in the Cross of Christ. Brief is the glory which is given and received of men. Sadness always goeth hand in hand with the glory of the world. The glory of the good is in their conscience, and not in the report of men. The joy of the upright is from God and in God, and their joy is in the truth. He who desireth true and eternal glory careth not for that which is temporal; and he who seeketh temporal glory, or who despiseth it from his heart, is proved to bear little love for that which is heavenly. He who careth for neither praises nor reproaches hath great tranquillity of heart.

3. He will easily be contented and filled with peace, whose conscience is pure. Thou art none the holier if thou art praised, nor the viler if thou art reproached. Thou art what thou art; and thou canst not be better than God pronounceth thee to be. If thou considerest well what thou art inwardly, thou wilt not care what men will say to thee. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart:(2) man looketh on the deed, but God considereth the intent. It is the token of a humble spirit always to do well, and to set little by oneself. Not to look for consolation from any created thing is a sign of great purity and inward faithfulness.

4. He that seeketh no outward witness on his own behalf, showeth plainly that he hath committed himself wholly to God. For not he that commendeth himself is approved, as St. Paul saith, but whom the Lord commendeth.(3) To walk inwardly with God, and not to be held by any outer affections, is the state of a spiritual man.

(1) Isaiah lvii. 21. (2) 1 Samuel xvi. 7. (3) 2 Corinthians x. 18.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

  

OF LOVING JESUS ABOVE ALL THINGS

Blessed is he who understandeth what it is to love Jesus, and to despise himself for Jesus' sake. He must give up all that he loveth for his Beloved, for Jesus will be loved alone above all things. The love of created things is deceiving and unstable, but the love of Jesus is faithful and lasting. He who cleaveth to created things will fall with their slipperiness; but he who embraceth Jesus will stand upright for ever. Love Him and hold Him for thy friend, for He will not forsake thee when all depart from thee, nor will he suffer thee to perish at the last. Thou must one day be separated from all, whether thou wilt or wilt not.

2. Cleave thou to Jesus in life and death, and commit thyself unto His faithfulness, who, when all men fail thee, is alone able to help thee. Thy Beloved is such, by nature, that He will suffer no rival, but alone will possess thy heart, and as a king will sit upon His own throne. If thou wouldst learn to put away from thee every created thing, Jesus would freely take up His abode with thee. Thou wilt find all trust little better than lost which thou hast placed in men, and not in Jesus. Trust not nor lean upon a reed shaken with the wind, because all flesh is grass, and the goodliness thereof falleth as the flower of the field.(1)

3. Thou wilt be quickly deceived if thou lookest only upon the outward appearance of men, for if thou seekest thy comfort and profit in others, thou shalt too often experience loss. If thou seekest Jesus in all things thou shalt verily find Jesus, but if thou seekest thyself thou shalt also find thyself, but to thine own hurt. For if a man seeketh not Jesus he is more hurtful to himself than all the world and all his adversaries.

(1) Isaiah xl. 6.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

OF THE INTIMATE LOVE OF JESUS

When Jesus is present all is well and nothing seemeth hard, but when Jesus is not present everything is hard. When Jesus speaketh not within, our comfort is nothing worth, but if Jesus speaketh but a single word great is the comfort we experience. Did not Mary Magdalene rise up quickly from the place where she wept when Martha said to her, The Master is come and calleth for thee?(1) Happy hour when Jesus calleth thee from tears to the joy of the spirit! How dry and hard art thou without Jesus! How senseless and vain if thou desirest aught beyond Jesus! Is not this greater loss than if thou shouldst lose the whole world?

2. What can the world profit thee without Jesus? To be without Jesus is the nethermost hell, and to be with Jesus is sweet paradise. If Jesus were with thee no enemy could hurt thee. He who findeth Jesus findeth a good treasure, yea, good above all good; and he who loseth Jesus loseth exceeding much, yea, more than the whole world. Most poor is he who liveth without Jesus, and most rich is he who is much with Jesus.

3. It is great skill to know how to live with Jesus, and to know how to hold Jesus is great wisdom. Be thou humble and peaceable and Jesus shall be with thee. Be godly and quiet, and Jesus will remain with thee. Thou canst quickly drive away Jesus and lose His favour if thou wilt turn away to the outer things. And if thou hast put Him to flight and lost Him, to whom wilt thou flee, and whom then wilt thou seek for a friend? Without a friend thou canst not live long, and if Jesus be not thy friend above all thou shalt be very sad and desolate. Madly therefore doest thou if thou trusteth or findest joy in any other. It is preferable to have the whole world against thee, than Jesus offended with thee. Therefore of all that are dear to thee, let Jesus be specially loved.

4. Let all be loved for Jesus' sake, but Jesus for His own. Jesus Christ alone is to be specially loved, for He alone is found good and faithful above all friends. For His sake and in Him let both enemies and friends be dear to thee, and pray for them all that they may all know and love Him. Never desire to be specially praised or loved, because this belongeth to God alone, who hath none like unto Himself. Nor wish thou that any one set his heart on thee, nor do thou give thyself up to the love of any, but let Jesus be in thee and in every good man.

5. Be pure and free within thyself, and be not entangled by any created thing. Thou oughtest to bring a bare and clean heart to God, if thou desirest to be ready to see how gracious the Lord is. And in truth, unless thou be prevented and drawn on by His grace, thou wilt not attain to this, that having cast out and dismissed all else, thou alone art united to God. For when the grace of God cometh to a man, then he becometh able to do all things, and when it departeth then he will be poor and weak and given up unto troubles. In these thou art not to be cast down nor to despair, but to rest with calm mind on the will of God, and to bear all things which come upon thee unto the praise of Jesus Christ; for after winter cometh summer, after night returneth day, after the tempest a great calm.

(1) John xi. 28.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

  

OF THE LACK OF ALL COMFORT

It is no hard thing to despise human comfort when divine is present. It is a great thing, yea very great, to be able to bear the loss both of human and divine comfort; and for the love of God willingly to bear exile of heart, and in nought to seek oneself, nor to look to one's own merit. What great matter is it, if thou be cheerful of heart and devout when favour cometh to thee? That is an hour wherein all rejoice. Pleasantly enough doth he ride whom the grace of God carrieth. And what marvel, if he feeleth no burden who is carried by the Almighty, and is led onwards by the Guide from on high?

2. We are willing to accept anything for comfort, and it is difficult for a man to be freed from himself. The holy martyr Laurence overcame the love of the world and even of his priestly master, because he despised everything in the world which seemed to be pleasant; and for the love of Christ he calmly suffered even God's chief priest, Sixtus, whom he dearly loved, to be taken from him. Thus by the love of the Creator he overcame the love of man, and instead of human comfort he chose rather God's good pleasure. So also learn thou to resign any near and beloved friend for the love of God. Nor take it amiss when thou hast been deserted by a friend, knowing that we must all be parted from one another at last.

3. Mightily and long must a man strive within himself before he learn altogether to overcome himself, and to draw his whole affection towards God. When a man resteth upon himself, he easily slippeth away unto human comforts. But a true lover of Christ, and a diligent seeker after virtue, falleth not back upon those comforts, nor seeketh such sweetness as may be tasted and handled, but desireth rather hard exercises, and to undertake severe labours for Christ.

4. When, therefore, spiritual comfort is given by God, receive it with giving of thanks, and know that it is the gift of God, not thy desert. Be not lifted up, rejoice not overmuch nor foolishly presume, but rather be more humble for the gift, more wary and more careful in all thy doings; for that hour will pass away, and temptation will follow. When comfort is taken from thee, do not straightway despair, but wait for the heavenly visitation with humility and patience, for God is able to give thee back greater favour and consolation. This is not new nor strange to those who have made trial of the way of God, for with the great saints and the ancient prophets there was often this manner of change.

5. Wherefore one said when the favour of God was present with him, I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved,(1) but he goeth on to say what he felt within himself when the favour departed: Thou didst turn Thy face from me, and I was troubled. In spite whereof he in no wise despaireth, but the more instantly entreateth God, and saith, Unto Thee, O Lord, will I cry, and will pray unto my God; and then he receiveth the fruit of his prayer, and testifieth how he hath been heard, saying, The Lord heard me and had mercy upon me, the Lord was my helper. But wherein? Thou hast turned my heaviness into joy, Thou hast put off my sackcloth and girded me with gladness. If it was thus with the great saints, we who are poor and needy ought not to despair if we are sometimes in the warmth and sometimes in the cold, for the Spirit cometh and goeth according to the good pleasure of His will. Wherefore holy Job saith, Thou dost visit him in the morning, and suddenly Thou dost prove him.(2)

6. Whereupon then can I hope, or wherein may I trust, save only in the great mercy of God, and the hope of heavenly grace? For whether good men are with me, godly brethren or faithful friends, whether holy books or beautiful discourses, whether sweet hymns and songs, all these help but little, and have but little savour when I am deserted by God's favour and left to mine own poverty. There is no better remedy, then, than patience and denial of self, and an abiding in the will of God.

7. I have never found any man so religious and godly, but that he felt sometimes a withdrawal of the divine favour, and lack of fervour. No saint was ever so filled with rapture, so enlightened, but that sooner or later he was tempted. For he is not worthy of the great vision of God, who, for God's sake, hath not been exercised by some temptation. For temptation is wont to go before as a sign of the comfort which shall follow, and heavenly comfort is promised to those who are proved by temptation. As it is written, To him that overcometh I will give to eat of the tree of life.(3)

8. Divine comfort is given that a man may be stronger to bear adversities. And temptation followeth, lest he be lifted up because of the benefit. The devil sleepeth not; thy flesh is not yet dead; therefore, cease thou not to make thyself ready unto the battle, for enemies stand on thy right hand and on thy left, and they are never at rest.

(1) Psalm xxx. 6. (2) Job vii. 18. (3) Revelation ii. 7.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

  

OF GRATITUDE FOR THE GRACE OF GOD

Why seekest thou rest when thou art born to labour? Prepare thyself for patience more than for comforts, and for bearing the cross more than for joy. For who among the men of this world would not gladly receive consolation and spiritual joy if he might always have it? For spiritual comforts exceed all the delights of the world, and all the pleasures of the flesh. For all worldly delights are either empty or unclean, whilst spiritual delights alone are pleasant and honourable, the offspring of virtue, and poured forth by God into pure minds. But no man can always enjoy these divine comforts at his own will, because the season of temptation ceaseth not for long.

2. Great is the difference between a visitation from above and false liberty of spirit and great confidence in self. God doeth well in giving us the grace of comfort, but man doeth ill in not immediately giving God thanks thereof. And thus the gifts of grace are not able to flow unto us, because we are ungrateful to the Author of them, and return them not wholly to the Fountain whence they flow. For grace ever becometh the portion of him who is grateful and that is taken away from the proud, which is wont to be given to the humble.

3. I desire no consolation which taketh away from me compunction, I love no contemplation which leadeth to pride. For all that is high is not holy, nor is everything that is sweet good; every desire is not pure; nor is everything that is dear to us pleasing unto God. Willingly do I accept that grace whereby I am made humbler and more wary and more ready to renounce myself. He who is made learned by the gift of grace and taught wisdom by the stroke of the withdrawal thereof, will not dare to claim any good thing for himself, but will rather confess that he is poor and needy. Give unto God the thing which is God's,(1) and ascribe to thyself that which is thine; that is, give thanks unto God for His grace, but for thyself alone confess thy fault, and that thy punishment is deserved for thy fault.

4. Sit thou down always in the lowest room and thou shalt be given the highest place.(2) For the highest cannot be without the lowest. For the highest saints of God are least in their own sight, and the more glorious they are, so much the lowlier are they in themselves; full of grace and heavenly glory, they are not desirous of vain-glory; resting on God and strong in His might, they cannot be lifted up in any wise. And they who ascribe unto God all the good which they have received, "seek not glory one of another, but the glory which cometh from God only," and they desire that God shall be praised in Himself and in all His Saints above all things, and they are always striving for this very thing.

5. Be thankful, therefore, for the least benefit and thou shalt be worthy to receive greater. Let the least be unto thee even as the greatest, and let that which is of little account be unto thee as a special gift. If the majesty of the Giver be considered, nothing that is given shall seem small and of no worth, for that is not a small thing which is given by the Most High God. Yea, though He gave punishment and stripes, we ought to be thankful, because He ever doth for our profit whatever He suffereth to come upon us. He who seeketh to retain the favour of God, let him be thankful for the favour which is given, and patient in respect of that which is taken away. Let him pray that it may return; let him be wary and humble that he lose it not.

(1) Matthew xxii. 21. (2) Luke xiv. 10.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

  

OF THE FEWNESS OF THOSE WHO LOVE THE CROSS OF JESUS

Jesus hath many lovers of His heavenly kingdom, but few bearers of His Cross. He hath many seekers of comfort, but few of tribulation. He findeth many companions of His table, but few of His fasting. All desire to rejoice with Him, few are willing to undergo anything for His sake. Many follow Jesus that they may eat of His loaves, but few that they may drink of the cup of His passion. Many are astonished at His Miracles, few follow after the shame of His Cross. Many love Jesus so long as no adversities happen to them. Many praise Him and bless Him, so long as they receive any comforts from Him. But if Jesus hide Himself and withdraw from them a little while, they fall either into complaining or into too great dejection of mind.

2. But they who love Jesus for Jesus' sake, and not for any consolation of their own, bless Him in all tribulation and anguish of heart as in the highest consolation. And if He should never give them consolation, nevertheless they would always praise Him and always give Him thanks.

3. Oh what power hath the pure love of Jesus, unmixed with any gain or love of self! Should not all they be called mercenary who are always seeking consolations? Do they not prove themselves lovers of self more than of Christ who are always seeking their own gain and advantage? Where shall be found one who is willing to serve God altogether for nought?

4. Rarely is any one found so spiritual as to be stripped of all selfish thoughts, for who shall find a man truly poor in spirit and free of all created things? "His value is from afar, yea from the ends of the earth." A man may give away all his goods, yet that is nothing; and if he do many deeds of penitence, yet that is a small thing; and though he understand all knowledge, yet that is afar off; and if he have great virtue and zealous devotion, yet much is lacking unto him, yea, one thing which is the most necessary to him of all. What is it then? That having given up all things besides, he give up himself and go forth from himself utterly, and retain nothing of self-love; and having done all things which he knoweth to be his duty to do, that he feel that he hath done nothing. Let him not reckon that much which might be much esteemed, but let him pronounce himself to be in truth an unprofitable servant, as the Truth Himself saith, When ye have done all things that are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants.(1) Then may he be truly poor and naked in spirit, and be able to say with the Prophet, As for me, I am poor and needy.(2) Nevertheless, no man is richer than he, no man stronger, no man freer. For he knoweth both how to give up himself and all things, and how to be lowly in his own eyes.

(1) Luke xvii. 10. (2) Psalm xxv. 16.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

  

OF THE ROYAL WAY OF THE HOLY CROSS

That seemeth a hard saying to many, If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow Me.(1) But it will be much harder to hear that last sentence, Depart from me, ye wicked, into eternal fire.(2) For they who now willingly hear the word of the Cross and follow it, shall not then fear the hearing of eternal damnation. This sign of the Cross shall be in heaven when the Lord cometh to Judgment. Then all servants of the Cross, who in life have conformed themselves to the Crucified, shall draw nigh unto Christ the Judge with great boldness.

2. Why fearest thou then to take up the cross which leadeth to a kingdom? In the Cross is health, in the Cross is life, in the Cross is protection from enemies, in the Cross is heavenly sweetness, in the Cross strength of mind, in the Cross joy of the spirit, in the Cross the height of virtue, in the Cross perfection of holiness. There is no health of the soul, no hope of eternal life, save in the Cross. Take up therefore, thy cross and follow Jesus and thou shalt go into eternal life. He went before thee bearing His Cross and died for thee upon the Cross, that thou also mayest bear thy cross and mayest love to be crucified upon it. For if thou be dead with Him, thou shalt also live with Him, and if thou be a partaker of His sufferings thou shalt be also of His glory.

3. Behold everything dependeth upon the Cross, and everything lieth in dying; and there is none other way unto life and to true inward peace, except the way of the Holy Cross and of daily mortification. Go where thou wilt, seek whatsoever thou wilt, and thou shalt find no higher way above nor safer way below, than the way of the Holy Cross. Dispose and order all things according to thine own will and judgment, and thou shalt ever find something to suffer either willingly or unwillingly, and thus thou shalt ever find thy cross. For thou shalt either feel pain of body, or tribulation of spirit within thy soul.

4. Sometimes thou wilt be forsaken of God, sometimes thou wilt be tried by thy neighbour, and which is more, thou wilt often be wearisome to thyself. And still thou canst not be delivered nor eased by any remedy or consolation, but must bear so long as God will. For God will have thee learn to suffer tribulation without consolation, and to submit thyself fully to it, and by tribulation be made more humble. No man understandeth the Passion of Christ in his heart so well as he who hath had somewhat of the like suffering himself. The Cross therefore is always ready, and every where waiteth for thee. Thou canst not flee from it whithersoever thou hurriest, for whithersoever thou comest, thou bearest thyself with thee, and shalt ever find thyself. Turn thee above, turn thee below, turn thee without, turn thee within, and in them all thou shalt find the Cross; and needful is it that thou everywhere possess patience if thou wilt have internal peace and gain the everlasting crown.

5. If thou willingly bear the Cross, it will bear thee, and will bring thee to the end which thou seekest, even where there shall be the end of suffering; though it shall not be here. If thou bear it unwillingly, thou makest a burden for thyself and greatly increaseth thy load, and yet thou must bear it. If thou cast away one cross, without doubt thou shalt find another and perchance a heavier.

6. Thinketh thou to escape what no mortal hath been able to avoid? Which of the saints in the world hath been without the cross and tribulation? For not even Jesus Christ our Lord was one hour without the anguish of His Passion, so long as He lived. It behooved, He said, Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and so enter into his glory.(3) And how dost thou seek another way than this royal way, which is the way of the Holy Cross?

7. The whole life of Christ was a cross and martyrdom, and dost thou seek for thyself rest and joy? Thou art wrong, thou art wrong, if thou seekest aught but to suffer tribulations, for this whole mortal life is full of miseries, and set round with crosses. And the higher a man hath advanced in the spirit, the heavier crosses he will often find, because the sorrow of his banishment increaseth with the strength of his love.

8. But yet the man who is thus in so many wise afflicted, is not without refreshment of consolation, because he feeleth abundant fruit to be growing within him out of the bearing of his cross. For whilst he willingly submitteth himself to it, every burden of tribulation is turned into an assurance of divine comfort, and the more the flesh is wasted by affliction, the more is the spirit strengthened mightily by inward grace. And ofttimes so greatly is he comforted by the desire for tribulation and adversity, through love of conformity to the Cross of Christ, that he would not be without sorrow and tribulation; for he believeth that he shall be the more acceptable to God, the more and the heavier burdens he is able to bear for His sake. This is not the virtue of man, but the grace of Christ which hath such power and energy in the weak flesh, that what it naturally hateth and fleeth from, this it draweth to and loveth through fervour of spirit.

9. It is not in the nature of man to bear the cross, to love the cross, to keep under the body and to bring it into subjection, to fly from honours, to bear reproaches meekly, to despise self and desire to be despised, to bear all adversities and losses, and to desire no prosperity in this world. If thou lookest to thyself, thou wilt of thyself be able to do none of this; but if thou trustest in the Lord, endurance shall be given thee from heaven, and the world and the flesh shall be made subject to thy command. Yea, thou shalt not even fear thine adversary the devil, if thou be armed with faith and signed with the Cross of Christ.

10. Set thyself, therefore, like a good and faithful servant of Christ, to the manful bearing of the Cross of thy Lord, who out of love was crucified for thee. Prepare thyself for the bearing many adversities and manifold troubles in this wretched life; because so it shall be with thee wheresoever thou art, and so in very deed thou shalt find it, wherever thou hide thyself. This it must be; and there is no means of escaping from tribulation and sorrow, except to bear them patiently. Drink thou lovingly thy Lord's cup if thou desirest to be His friend and to have thy lot with Him. Leave consolations to God, let Him do as seemeth best to Him concerning them. But do thou set thyself to endure tribulations, and reckon them the best consolations; for the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us,(4) nor would they be even if thou wert to endure them all.

11. When thou hast come to this, that tribulation is sweet and pleasant to thee for Christ's sake, then reckon that it is well with thee, because thou hast found paradise on earth. So long as it is hard to thee to suffer and thou desirest to escape, so long it will not be well with thee, and tribulations will follow thee everywhere.

12. If thou settest thyself to that thou oughtest, namely, to suffer and to die, it shall soon go better with thee, and thou shalt find peace. Though thou shouldest be caught up with Paul unto the third heaven,(5) thou art not on that account secure from suffering evil. I will show him, saith Jesus, what great things he must suffer for My Name's sake.(6) It remaineth, therefore, to thee to suffer, if thou wilt love Jesus and serve Him continually.

13. Oh that thou wert worthy to suffer something for the name of Jesus, how great glory should await thee, what rejoicing among all the saints of God, what bright example also to thy neighbour! For all men commend patience, although few be willing to practise it. Thou oughtest surely to suffer a little for Christ when many suffer heavier things for the world.

14. Know thou of a surety that thou oughtest to lead the life of a dying man. And the more a man dieth to himself, the more he beginneth to live towards God. None is fit for the understanding of heavenly things, unless he hath submitted himself to bearing adversities for Christ. Nothing more acceptable to God, nothing more healthful for thyself in this world, than to suffer willingly for Christ. And if it were thine to choose, thou oughtest rather to wish to suffer adversities for Christ, than to be refreshed with manifold consolations, for thou wouldest be more like Christ and more conformed to all saints. For our worthiness and growth in grace lieth not in many delights and consolations, but rather in bearing many troubles and adversities.

15. If indeed there had been anything better and more profitable to the health of men than to suffer, Christ would surely have shown it by word and example. For both the disciples who followed Him, and all who desire to follow Him, He plainly exhorteth to bear their cross, and saith, If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his cross, and follow Me.(7) So now that we have thoroughly read and studied all things, let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.(8)

(1) Matthew xvi. 24. (2) Matthew xxv. 41. (3) Luke xxiv. 46. (4) Romans viii. 18. (5) 2 Corinthians xii. 2. (6) Acts ix. 16. (7) Luke ix. 23. (8) Acts xiv. 21.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE THIRD BOOK

  

ON INWARD CONSOLATION

  

CHAPTER I

  

OF THE INWARD VOICE OF CHRIST TO THE FAITHFUL SOUL

I will hearken what the Lord God shall say within me.(1) Blessed is the soul which heareth the Lord speaking within it, and receiveth the word of consolation from His mouth. Blessed are the ears which receive the echoes of the soft whisper of God, and turn not aside to the whisperings of this world. Blessed truly are the ears which listen not to the voice that soundeth without, but to that which teacheth truth inwardly. Blessed are the eyes which are closed to things without, but are fixed upon things within. Blessed are they who search inward things and study to prepare themselves more and more by daily exercises for the receiving of heavenly mysteries. Blessed are they who long to have leisure for God, and free themselves from every hindrance of the world. Think on these things, O my soul, and shut the doors of thy carnal desires, so mayest thou hear what the Lord God will say within thee.

2. These things saith thy Beloved, "I am thy salvation, I am thy peace and thy life. Keep thee unto Me, and thou shalt find peace." Put away thee all transitory things, seek those things that are eternal. For what are all temporal things but deceits, and what shall all created things help thee if thou be forsaken by the Creator? Therefore put all things else away, and give thyself to the Creator, to be well pleasing and faithful to Him, that thou mayest be able to attain true blessedness.

(1) Psalm lxxxv. 8.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

  

WHAT THE TRUTH SAITH INWARDLY WITHOUT NOISE OF WORDS

Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth.(1) I am Thy servant; O give me understanding that I may know Thy testimonies. Incline my heart unto the words of Thy mouth.(2) Let thy speech distil as the dew. The children of Israel spake in old time to Moses, Speak thou unto us and we will hear, but let not the Lord speak unto us lest we die.(3) Not thus, O Lord, not thus do I pray, but rather with Samuel the prophet, I beseech Thee humbly and earnestly, Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth. Let not Moses speak to me, nor any prophet, but rather speak Thou, O Lord, who didst inspire and illuminate all the prophets; for Thou alone without them canst perfectly fill me with knowledge, whilst they without Thee shall profit nothing.

2. They can indeed utter words, but they give not the spirit. They speak with exceeding beauty, but when Thou art silent they kindle not the heart. They give us scriptures, but Thou makest known the sense thereof. They bring us mysteries, but Thou revealest the things which are signified. They utter commandments, but Thou helpest to the fulfilling of them. They show the way, but Thou givest strength for the journey. They act only outwardly, but Thou dost instruct and enlighten the heart. They water, but Thou givest the increase. They cry with words, but Thou givest understanding to the hearer.

3. Therefore let not Moses speak to me, but Thou, O Lord my God, Eternal Truth; lest I die and bring forth no fruit, being outwardly admonished, but not enkindled within; lest the word heard but not followed, known but not loved, believed but not obeyed, rise up against me in the judgment. Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth; Thou hast the words of eternal life.(4) Speak unto me for some consolation unto my soul, for the amendment of my whole life, and for the praise and glory and eternal honour of Thy Name.

(1) 1 Samuel iii. 9. (2) Psalm cxix. 125. (3) Exodus xx. 19. (4) John vi. 68.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

  

HOW ALL THE WORDS OF GOD ARE TO BE HEARD WITH HUMILITY, AND HOW MANY CONSIDER THEM NOT

"My Son, hear My words, for My words are most sweet, surpassing all the knowledge of the philosophers and wise men of this world. My words are spirit, and they are life,(1) and are not to be weighed by man's understanding. They are not to be drawn forth for vain approbation, but to be heard in silence, and to be received with all humility and with deep love."

2. And I said, "Blessed is the man whom Thou teachest, O Lord, and instructest him in Thy law, that Thou mayest give him rest in time of adversity,(2) and that he be not desolate in the earth."

3. "I," saith the Lord, "taught the prophets from the beginning, and even now cease I not to speak unto all; but many are deaf and hardened against My voice; many love to listen to the world rather than to God, they follow after the desires of the flesh more readily than after the good pleasure of God. The world promiseth things that are temporal and small, and it is served with great eagerness. I promise things that are great and eternal, and the hearts of mortals are slow to stir. Who serveth and obeyeth Me in all things, with such carefulness as he serveth the world and its rulers?

Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, saith the sea;(3) And if thou reason seekest, hear thou me.

For a little reward men make a long journey; for eternal life many will scarce lift a foot once from the ground. Mean reward is sought after; for a single piece of money sometimes there is shameful striving; for a thing which is vain and for a trifling promise, men shrink not from toiling day and night."

4. "But, O shame! for an unchangeable good, for an inestimable reward, for the highest honour and for a glory that fadeth not away, it is irksome to them to toil even a little. Be thou ashamed therefore, slothful and discontented servant, for they are found readier unto perdition than thou unto life. They rejoice more heartily in vanity than thou in the truth. Sometimes, indeed, they are disappointed of their hope, but my promise faileth no man, nor sendeth away empty him who trusteth in Me. What I have promised I will give; what I have said I will fulfil; if only a man remain faithful in My love unto the end. Therefore am I the rewarder of all good men, and a strong approver of all who are godly.

5. "Write My words in thy heart and consider them diligently, for they shall be very needful to thee in time of temptation. What thou understandest not when thou readest, thou shalt know in the time of thy visitation. I am wont to visit Mine elect in twofold manner, even by temptation and by comfort, and I teach them two lessons day by day, the one in chiding their faults, the other in exhorting them to grow in grace. He who hath My words and rejecteth them, hath one who shall judge him at the last day."

A PRAYER FOR THE SPIRIT OF DEVOTION

6. O Lord my God, Thou art all my good, and who am I that I should dare to speak unto Thee? I am the very poorest of Thy servants, an abject worm, much poorer and more despicable than I know or dare to say. Nevertheless remember, O Lord, that I am nothing, I have nothing, and can do nothing. Thou only art good, just and holy; Thou canst do all things, art over all things, fillest all things, leaving empty only the sinner. Call to mind Thy tender mercies, and fill my heart with Thy grace, Thou who wilt not that Thy work should return to Thee void.

7. How can I bear this miserable life unless Thy mercy and grace strengthen me? Turn not away Thy face from me, delay not Thy visitation. Withdraw not Thou Thy comfort from me, lest my soul "gasp after thee as a thirsty land." Lord, teach me to do Thy will, teach me to walk humbly and uprightly before Thee, for Thou art my wisdom, who knowest me in truth, and knewest me before the world was made and before I was born into the world.

(1) John vi. 63. (2) Psalm xciv. 13. (3) Isaiah xxiii. 4.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

  

HOW WE MUST WALK IN TRUTH AND HUMILITY BEFORE GOD

"My Son! walk before Me in truth, and in the simplicity of thy heart seek Me continually. He who walketh before Me in the truth shall be safe from evil assaults, and the truth shall deliver him from the wiles and slanders of the wicked. If the truth shall make thee free, thou shalt be free indeed, and shalt not care for the vain words of men."

2. Lord, it is true as Thou sayest; let it, I pray Thee, be so with me; let Thy truth teach me, let it keep me and preserve me safe unto the end. Let it free me from all evil and inordinate affection, and I will walk before Thee in great freedom of heart.

3. "I will teach thee," saith the Truth, "the things which are right and pleasing before Me. Think upon thy sins with great displeasure and sorrow, and never think thyself anything because of thy good works. Verily thou art a sinner, liable to many passions, yea, tied and bound with them. Of thyself thou always tendest unto nothing, thou wilt quickly fall, quickly be conquered, quickly disturbed, quickly undone. Thou hast nought whereof to glory, but many reasons why thou shouldest reckon thyself vile, for thou art far weaker than thou art able to comprehend.

4. "Let, therefore, nothing which thou doest seem to thee great; let nothing be grand, nothing of value or beauty, nothing worthy of honour, nothing lofty, nothing praiseworthy or desirable, save what is eternal. Let the eternal truth please thee above all things, let thine own great vileness displease thee continually. Fear, denounce, flee nothing so much as thine own faults and sins, which ought to be more displeasing to thee than any loss whatsoever of goods. There are some who walk not sincerely before me, but being led by curiosity and pride, they desire to know my secret things and to understand the deep things of God, whilst they neglect themselves and their salvation. These often fall into great temptations and sins because of their pride and curiosity, for I am against them.

5. "Fear thou the judgments of God, fear greatly the wrath of the Almighty. Shrink from debating upon the works of the Most High, but search narrowly thine own iniquities into what great sins thou hast fallen, and how many good things thou hast neglected. There are some who carry their devotion only in books, some in pictures, some in outward signs and figures; some have Me in their mouths, but little in their hearts. Others there are who, being enlightened in their understanding and purged in their affections, continually long after eternal things, hear of earthly things with unwillingness, obey the necessities of nature with sorrow. And these understand what the Spirit of truth speaketh in them; for He teacheth them to despise earthly things and to love heavenly; to neglect the world and to desire heaven all the day and night."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

  

OF THE WONDERFUL POWER OF THE DIVINE LOVE

I bless Thee, O Heavenly Father, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, for that Thou hast vouchsafed to think of me, poor that I am. O, Father of Mercies and God of all comfort,(1) I give thanks unto Thee, who refreshest me sometimes with thine own comfort, when I am unworthy of any comfort. I bless and glorify Thee continually, with thine only begotten Son and the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete, for ever and ever. O Lord God, Holy lover of my soul, when Thou shalt come into my heart, all my inward parts shall rejoice. Thou art my glory and the joy of my heart. Thou art my hope and my refuge in the day of my trouble.

2. But because I am still weak in love and imperfect in virtue, I need to be strengthened and comforted by Thee; therefore visit Thou me often and instruct me with Thy holy ways of discipline. Deliver me from evil passions, and cleanse my heart from all inordinate affections, that, being healed and altogether cleansed within, I may be made ready to love, strong to suffer, steadfast to endure.

3. Love is a great thing, a good above all others, which alone maketh every heavy burden light, and equaliseth every inequality. For it beareth the burden and maketh it no burden, it maketh every bitter thing to be sweet and of good taste. The surpassing love of Jesus impelleth to great works, and exciteth to the continual desiring of greater perfection. Love willeth to be raised up, and not to be held down by any mean thing. Love willeth to be free and aloof from all worldly affection, lest its inward power of vision be hindered, lest it be entangled by any worldly prosperity or overcome by adversity. Nothing is sweeter than love, nothing stronger, nothing loftier, nothing broader, nothing pleasanter, nothing fuller or better in heaven nor on earth, for love was born of God and cannot rest save in God above all created things.

4. He who loveth flyeth, runneth, and is glad; he is free and not hindered. He giveth all things for all things, and hath all things in all things, because he resteth in One who is high above all, from whom every good floweth and proceedeth. He looketh not for gifts, but turneth himself to the Giver above all good things. Love oftentimes knoweth no measure, but breaketh out above all measure; love feeleth no burden, reckoneth not labours, striveth after more than it is able to do, pleadeth not impossibility, because it judgeth all things which are lawful for it to be possible. It is strong therefore for all things, and it fulfilleth many things, and is successful where he who loveth not faileth and lieth down.

5. Love is watchful, and whilst sleeping still keepeth watch; though fatigued it is not weary, though pressed it is not forced, though alarmed it is not terrified, but like the living flame and the burning torch, it breaketh forth on high and securely triumpheth. If a man loveth, he knoweth what this voice crieth. For the ardent affection of the soul is a great clamour in the ears of God, and it saith: My God, my Beloved! Thou art all mine, and I am all Thine.

6. Enlarge Thou me in love, that I may learn to taste with the innermost mouth of my heart how sweet it is to love, to be dissolved, and to swim in love. Let me be holden by love, mounting above myself through exceeding fervour and admiration. Let me sing the song of love, let me follow Thee my Beloved on high, let my soul exhaust itself in Thy praise, exulting with love. Let me love Thee more than myself, not loving myself except for Thy sake, and all men in Thee who truly love Thee, as the law of love commandeth which shineth forth from Thee.

7. Love is swift, sincere, pious, pleasant, gentle, strong, patient, faithful, prudent, long-suffering, manly, and never seeking her own; for wheresoever a man seeketh his own, there he falleth from love. Love is circumspect, humble, and upright; not weak, not fickle, nor intent on vain things; sober, chaste, steadfast, quiet, and guarded in all the senses. Love is subject and obedient to all that are in authority, vile and lowly in its own sight, devout and grateful towards God, faithful and always trusting in Him even when God hideth His face, for without sorrow we cannot live in love.

8. He who is not ready to suffer all things, and to conform to the will of the Beloved, is not worthy to be called a lover of God. It behoveth him who loveth to embrace willingly all hard and bitter things for the Beloved's sake, and not to be drawn away from Him because of any contrary accidents.

(1) 2 Corinthians i. 3.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

  

OF THE PROVING OF THE TRUE LOVER

"My Son, thou art not yet strong and prudent in thy love."

2. Wherefore, O my Lord?

3. "Because for a little opposition thou fallest away from thy undertakings, and too eagerly seekest after consolation. The strong lover standeth fast in temptations, and believeth not the evil persuasions of the enemy. As in prosperity I please him, so in adversity I do not displease.

4. "The prudent lover considereth not the gift of the lover so much as the love of the giver. He looketh for the affection more than the value, and setteth all gifts lower than the Beloved. The noble lover resteth not in the gift, but in Me above every gift.

5. "All is not lost, though thou sometimes think of Me or of My saints, less than thou shouldest desire. That good and sweet affection which thou sometimes perceivest is the effect of present grace and some foretaste of the heavenly country; but hereon thou must not too much depend, for it goeth and cometh. But to strive against the evil motions of the mind which come to us, and to resist the suggestions of the devil, is a token of virtue and great merit.

6. "Therefore let not strange fancies disturb thee, whencesoever they arise. Bravely observe thy purpose and thy upright intentions towards God. It is not an illusion when thou art sometimes suddenly carried away into rapture, and then suddenly art brought back to the wonted vanities of thy heart. For thou dost rather unwillingly undergo them than cause them; and so long as they displease thee and thou strivest against them, it is a merit and no loss.

7. "Know thou that thine old enemy altogether striveth to hinder thy pursuit after good, and to deter thee from every godly exercise, to wit, the contemplation of the Saints, the pious remembrance of My passion, the profitable recollection of sin, the keeping of thy own heart, and the steadfast purpose to grow in virtue. He suggesteth to thee many evil thoughts, that he may work in thee weariness and terror, and so draw thee away from prayer and holy reading. Humble confession displeaseth him, and if he were able he would make thee to cease from Communion. Believe him not, nor heed him, though many a time he hath laid for thee the snares of deceit. Account it to be from him, when he suggesteth evil and unclean thoughts. Say unto him, 'Depart unclean spirit; put on shame, miserable one; horribly unclean art thou, who bringest such things to mine ears. Depart from me, detestable deceiver; thou shalt have no part in me; but Jesus shall be with me, as a strong warrior, and thou shalt stand confounded. Rather would I die and bear all suffering, than consent unto thee. Hold thy peace and be dumb; I will not hear thee more, though thou plottest more snares against me. The Lord is my light and my salvation: whom then shall I fear? Though a host of men should rise up against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid. The Lord is my strength and my Redeemer.'(1)

8. "Strive thou like a good soldier; and if sometimes thou fail through weakness, put on thy strength more bravely than before, trusting in My more abundant grace, and take thou much heed of vain confidence and pride. Because of it many are led into error, and sometimes fall into blindness well-nigh irremediable. Let this ruin of the proud, who foolishly lift themselves up, be to thee for a warning and a continual exhortation to humility."

(1) Psalms xxvii. 1-3; xix. 14.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

  

OF HIDING OUR GRACE UNDER THE GUARD OF HUMILITY

"My Son, it is better and safer for thee to hide the grace of devotion, and not to lift thyself up on high, nor to speak much thereof, nor to value it greatly; but rather to despise thyself, and to fear as though this grace were given to one unworthy thereof. Nor must thou depend too much upon this feeling, for it can very quickly be turned into its opposite. Think when thou art in a state of grace how miserable and poor thou art wont to be without grace. Nor is there advance in spiritual life in this alone, that thou hast the grace of consolation, but that thou humbly and unselfishly and patiently takest the withdrawal thereof; so that thou cease not from the exercise of prayer, nor suffer thy other common duties to be in anywise neglected; rather do thy task more readily, as though thou hadst gained more strength and knowledge; and do not altogether neglect thyself because of the dearth and anxiety of spirit which thou feelest.

2. "For there are many who, when things have not gone prosperous with them, become forthwith impatient or slothful. For the way of a man is not in himself,(1) but it is God's to give and to console, when He will, and as much as He will, and whom He will, as it shall please Him, and no further. Some who were presumptuous because of the grace of devotion within them, have destroyed themselves, because they would do more than they were able, not considering the measure of their own littleness, but rather following the impulse of the heart than the judgment of the reason. And because they presumed beyond what was well-pleasing unto God, therefore they quickly lost grace. They became poor and were left vile, who had built for themselves their nest in heaven; so that being humbled and stricken with poverty, they might learn not to fly with their own wings, but to put their trust under My feathers. They who are as yet new and unskilled in the way of the Lord, unless they rule themselves after the counsel of the wise, may easily be deceived and led away.

3. "But if they wish to follow their own fancies rather than trust the experience of others, the result will be very dangerous to them if they still refuse to be drawn away from their own notion. Those who are wise in their own conceits, seldom patiently endure to be ruled by others. It is better to have a small portion of wisdom with humility, and a slender understanding, than great treasures of sciences with vain self-esteem. It is better for thee to have less than much of what may make thee proud. He doeth not very discreetly who giveth up himself entirely to joy, forgetting his former helplessness and the chaste fear of the Lord, which feareth to lose the grace offered. Nor is he very wise, after a manly sort, who in time of adversity, or any trouble whatsoever, beareth himself too despairingly, and feeleth concerning Me less trustfully than he ought.

4. "He who in time of peace willeth to be oversecure shall be often found in time of war overdispirited and full of fears. If thou knewest always how to continue humble and moderate in thyself, and to guide and rule thine own spirit well, thou wouldest not so quickly fall into danger and mischief. It is good counsel that when fervour of spirit is kindled, thou shouldest meditate how it will be with thee when the light is taken away. Which when it doth happen, remember that still the light may return again, which I have taken away for a time for a warning to thee, and also for mine own glory. Such a trial is often more useful than if thou hadst always things prosperous according to thine own will.

5. "For merits are not to be reckoned by this, that a man hath many visions or consolations, or that he is skilled in the Scriptures, or that he is placed in a high situation; but that he is grounded upon true humility and filled with divine charity, that he always purely and uprightly seeketh the honour of God, that he setteth not by himself, but unfeignedly despiseth himself, and even rejoiceth to be despised and humbled by others more than to be honoured."

(1) Jeremiah x. 23.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

OF A LOW ESTIMATION OF SELF IN THE SIGHT OF GOD

I will speak unto my Lord who am but dust and ashes. If I count myself more, behold Thou standest against me, and my iniquities bear true testimony, and I cannot gainsay it. But if I abase myself, and bring myself to nought, and shrink from all self-esteem, and grind myself to dust, which I am, Thy grace will be favourable unto me, and Thy light will be near unto my heart; and all self-esteem, how little soever it be, shall be swallowed up in the depths of my nothingness, and shall perish for ever. There Thou showest to me myself, what I am, what I was, and whither I have come: so foolish was I and ignorant.(1) If I am left to myself, behold I am nothing, I am all weakness; but if suddenly Thou look upon me, immediately I am made strong, and filled with new joy. And it is great marvel that I am so suddenly lifted up, and so graciously embraced by Thee, since I am always being carried to the deep by my own weight.

2. This is the doing of Thy love which freely goeth before me and succoureth me in so many necessities, which guardeth me also in great dangers and snatcheth me, as I may truly say, from innumerable evils. For verily, by loving myself amiss, I lost myself, and by seeking and sincerely loving Thee alone, I found both myself and Thee, and through love I have brought myself to yet deeper nothingness: because Thou, O most sweet Lord, dealest with me beyond all merit, and above all which I dare ask or think.

3. Blessed be Thou, O my God, because though I be unworthy of all Thy benefits, Thy bountiful and infinite goodness never ceaseth to do good even to ingrates and to those who are turned far from Thee. Turn Thou us unto Thyself, that we may be grateful, humble, and godly, for Thou art our salvation, our courage, and our strength.

(1) Psalm lxxiii. 22.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

  

THAT ALL THINGS ARE TO BE REFERRED TO GOD, AS THE FINAL END

"My Son, I must be thy Supreme and final end, if thou desirest to be truly happy. Out of such purpose thy affection shall be purified, which too often is sinfully bent upon itself and upon created things. For if thou seekest thyself in any matter, straightway thou wilt fail within thyself and grow barren. Therefore refer everything to Me first of all, for it is I who gave thee all. So look upon each blessing as flowing from the Supreme Good, and thus all things are to be attributed to Me as their source.

2. "From Me the humble and great, the poor and the rich, draw water as from a living fountain, and those who serve Me with a free and faithful spirit shall receive grace for grace. But he who will glory apart from Me, or will be delighted with any good which lieth in himself, shall not be established in true joy, nor shall be enlarged in heart, but shall be greatly hindered and thrown into tribulation. Therefore thou must not ascribe any good to thyself, nor look upon virtue as belonging to any man, but ascribe it all unto God, without whom man hath nothing. I gave all, I will receive all again, and with great strictness require I the giving of thanks.

3. "This is the Truth, and by it the vanity of boasting is put to flight. And if heavenly grace and true charity shall enter into thee, there shall be no envy, nor straitening of the heart, nor shall any self-love take possession of thee. For divine charity conquereth all things, and enlargeth all the powers of the soul. If thou art truly wise, thou wilt rejoice in Me alone, thou wilt hope in Me alone; for there is none good but one, that is God,(1) Who is to be praised above all things, and in all things to receive blessing."

(1) Luke xviii. 19.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

  

THAT IT IS SWEET TO DESPISE THE WORLD AND TO SERVE GOD

Now will I speak again, O my Lord, and hold not my peace; I will say in the ears of my God, my Lord, and my King, who is exalted above all, Oh how plentiful is Thy goodness which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee!(1) But what art Thou to those who love Thee? What to those who serve Thee with their whole heart? Truly unspeakable is the sweetness of the contemplation of Thee, which Thou bestowest upon those who love Thee. In this most of all Thou hast showed me the sweetness of Thy charity, that when I was not, Thou madest me, and when I wandered far from Thee, Thou broughtest me back that I might serve Thee, and commandedst me to love Thee.

2. O Fountain of perpetual love, what shall I say concerning Thee? How shall I be unmindful of Thee, who didst vouchsafe to remember me, even after I pined away and perished? Thou hast had mercy beyond all hope upon Thy servant, and hast showed Thy grace and friendship beyond all deserving. What reward shall I render Thee for this Thy grace? For it is not given unto all to renounce this world and its affairs, and to take up a religious life. For is it a great thing that I should serve Thee, whom every creature ought to serve? It ought not to seem a great thing to me to serve Thee; but rather this appeareth to me a great and wonderful thing, that Thou vouchsafest to receive as Thy servant one so poor and unworthy, and to join him unto Thy chosen servants.

3. Behold all things which I have are Thine, and with them I serve Thee. And yet verily it is Thou who servest me, rather than I Thee. Behold the heaven and the earth which Thou hast created for the service of men; they are at Thy bidding, and perform daily whatsoever Thou dost command. Yea, and this is little; for Thou hast even ordained the Angels for the service of man. But it surpasseth even all these things, that Thou Thyself didst vouchsafe to minister unto man, and didst promise that Thou wouldest give Thyself unto him.

4. What shall I render unto Thee for all these Thy manifold mercies? Oh that I were able to serve Thee all the days of my life! Oh that even for one day I were enabled to do Thee service worthy of Thyself! For verily Thou art worthy of all service, all honour, and praise without end. Verily Thou art my God, and I am Thy poor servant, who am bound to serve Thee with all my strength, nor ought I ever to grow weary of Thy praise. This is my wish, this is my exceeding great desire, and whatsoever is lacking to me, vouchsafe Thou to supply.

5. It is great honour, great glory to serve Thee, and to despise all for Thy sake. For they shall have great grace who of their own will shall submit themselves to Thy most holy service. They who for Thy love have cast away every carnal delight shall find the sweetest consolation of the Holy Ghost. They who enter the narrow way of life for Thy Name's sake, and have put away all worldly cares, shall attain great liberty of spirit.

6. Oh grateful and delightsome service of God, whereby man is made truly free and holy! Oh sacred condition of the religious servant, which maketh man equal to the Angels, well-pleasing unto God, terrible to evil spirits, and acceptable to all faithful ones! Oh service to be embraced and ever desired, in which the highest good is promised, and joy is gained which shall remain for evermore!

(1) Psalm xxxi. 21.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

  

THAT THE DESIRES OF THE HEART ARE TO BE EXAMINED AND GOVERNED

"My Son, thou hast still many things to learn, which thou hast not well learned yet."

2. What are they, Lord?

3. "To place thy desire altogether in subjection to My good pleasure, and not to be a lover of thyself, but an earnest seeker of My will. Thy desires often excite and urge thee forward; but consider with thyself whether thou art not more moved for thine own objects than for My honour. If it is Myself that thou seekest, thou shalt be well content with whatsoever I shall ordain; but if any pursuit of thine own lieth hidden within thee, behold it is this which hindereth and weigheth thee down.

4. "Beware, therefore, lest thou strive too earnestly after some desire which thou hast conceived, without taking counsel of Me; lest haply it repent thee afterwards, and that displease thee which before pleased, and for which thou didst long as for a great good. For not every affection which seemeth good is to be forthwith followed; neither is every opposite affection to be immediately avoided. Sometimes it is expedient to use restraint even in good desires and wishes, lest through importunity thou fall into distraction of mind, lest through want of discipline thou become a stumbling-block to others, or lest by the resistance of others thou be suddenly disturbed and brought to confusion.

5. "Sometimes, indeed, it is needful to use violence, and manfully to strive against the sensual appetite, and not to consider what the flesh may or not will; but rather to strive after this, that it may become subject, however unwillingly, to the spirit. And for so long it ought to be chastised and compelled to undergo slavery, even until it be ready for all things, and learn to be contented with little, to be delighted with things simple, and never to murmur at any inconvenience."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

  

OF THE INWARD GROWTH OF PATIENCE, AND OF THE STRUGGLE AGAINST EVIL DESIRES

O Lord God, I see that patience is very necessary unto me; for many things in this life fall out contrary. For howsoever I may have contrived for my peace, my life cannot go on without strife and trouble.

2. "Thou speakest truly, My Son. For I will not that thou seek such a peace as is without trials, and knoweth no adversities; but rather that thou shouldest judge thyself to have found peace, when thou art tried with manifold tribulations, and proved by many adversities. If thou shalt say that thou art not able to bear much, how then wilt thou sustain the fire hereafter? Of two evils we should always choose the less. Therefore, that thou mayest escape eternal torments hereafter, strive on God's behalf to endure present evils bravely. Thinkest thou that the children of this world suffer nought, or but little? Thou wilt not find it so, even though thou find out the most prosperous.

3. "'But,' thou wilt say, 'they have many delights, and they follow their own wills, and thus they bear lightly their tribulations.'

4. "Be it so, grant that they have what they list; but how long, thinkest thou, will it last? Behold, like the smoke those who are rich in this world will pass away, and no record shall remain of their past joys. Yea, even while they yet live, they rest not without bitterness and weariness and fear. For from the very same thing wherein they find delight, thence they oftentimes have the punishment of sorrow. Justly it befalleth them, that because out of measure they seek out and pursue pleasures, they enjoy them not without confusion and bitterness. Oh how short, how false, how inordinate and wicked are all these pleasures! Yet because of their sottishness and blindness men do not understand; but like brute beasts, for the sake of a little pleasure of this corruptible life, they incur death of the soul. Thou therefore, my son, go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine appetites.(1) Delight thou in the Lord, and He shall give thee thy heart's desire.(2)

5. "For if thou wilt truly find delight, and be abundantly comforted of Me, behold in the contempt of all worldly things and in the avoidance of all worthless pleasures shall be thy blessing, and fulness of consolation shall be given thee. And the more thou withdrawest thyself from all solace of creatures, the more sweet and powerful consolations shalt thou find. But at the first thou shalt not attain to them, without some sorrow and hard striving. Long-accustomed habit will oppose, but it shall be overcome by better habit. The flesh will murmur again and again, but will be restrained by fervour of spirit. The old serpent will urge and embitter thee, but will be put to flight by prayer; moreover, by useful labour his entrance will be greatly obstructed."

(1) Ecclesiastes xviii. 30. (2) Psalm xxxvii. 4.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

OF THE OBEDIENCE OF ONE IN LOWLY SUBJECTION AFTER THE EXAMPLE OF JESUS CHRIST

"My Son, he who striveth to withdraw himself from obedience, withdraweth himself also from grace, and he who seeketh private advantages, loseth those which are common unto all. If a man submit not freely and willingly to one set over him, it is a sign that his flesh is not yet perfectly subject to himself, but often resisteth and murmureth. Learn therefore quickly to submit thyself to him who is over thee, if thou seekest to bring thine own flesh into subjection. For the outward enemy is very quickly overcome if the inner man have not been laid low. There is no more grievous and deadly enemy to the soul than thou art to thyself, if thou art not led by the Spirit. Thou must not altogether conceive contempt for thyself, if thou wilt prevail against flesh and blood. Because as yet thou inordinately lovest thyself, therefore thou shrinkest from yielding thyself to the will of others.

2. "But what great thing is it that thou, who art dust and nothingness, yieldest thyself to man for God's sake, when I, the Almighty and the Most High, who created all things out of nothing, subjected Myself to man for thy sake? I became the most humble and despised of men, that by My humility thou mightest overcome thy pride. Learn to obey, O dust! Learn to humble thyself, O earth and clay, and to bow thyself beneath the feet of all. Learn to crush thy passions, and to yield thyself in all subjection.

3. "Be zealous against thyself, nor suffer pride to live within thee, but so show thyself subject and of no reputation, that all may be able to walk over thee, and tread thee down as the clay in the streets. What hast thou, O foolish man, of which to complain? What, O vile sinner, canst thou answer those who speak against thee, seeing thou hast so often offended God, and many a time hast deserved hell? But Mine eye hath spared thee, because thy soul was precious in My sight; that thou mightest know My love, and mightest be thankful for My benefits; and that thou mightest give thyself altogether to true subjection and humility, and patiently bear the contempt which thou meritest."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

OF MEDITATION UPON THE HIDDEN JUDGMENTS OF GOD, THAT WE MAY NOT BE LIFTED UP BECAUSE OF OUR WELL-DOING

Thou sendest forth Thy judgments against me, O Lord, and shakest all my bones with fear and trembling, and my soul trembleth exceedingly. I stand astonished, and remember that the heavens are not clean in thy sight.(1) If Thou chargest Thine angels with folly, and didst spare them not, how shall it be unto me? Stars have fallen from heaven, and what shall I dare who am but dust? They whose works seemed to be praiseworthy, fell into the lowest depths, and they who did eat Angels' food, them have I seen delighted with the husks that the swine do eat.

2. There is therefore no holiness, if Thou O Lord, withdraw Thine hand. No wisdom profiteth, if Thou leave off to guide the helm. No strength availeth, if Thou cease to preserve. No purity is secure, if Thou protect it not. No self-keeping availeth, if Thy holy watching be not there. For when we are left alone we are swallowed up and perish, but when we are visited, we are raised up, and we live. For indeed we are unstable, but are made strong through Thee; we grow cold, but are rekindled by Thee.

3. Oh, how humbly and abjectly must I reckon of myself, how must I weigh it as nothing, if I seem to have nothing good! Oh, how profoundly ought I to submit myself to Thy unfathomable judgments, O Lord, when I find myself nothing else save nothing, and again nothing! Oh weight unmeasurable, oh ocean which cannot be crossed over, where I find nothing of myself save nothing altogether! Where, then, is the hiding-place of glory, where the confidence begotten of virtue? All vain-glory is swallowed up in the depths of Thy judgments against me.

4. What is all flesh in Thy sight? For how shall the clay boast against Him that fashioned it?(2) How can he be lifted up in vain speech whose heart is subjected in truth to God? The whole world shall not lift him up whom Truth hath subdued; nor shall he be moved by the mouth of all who praise him, who hath placed all his hope in God. For they themselves who speak, behold, they are all nothing; for they shall cease with the sound of their words, but the truth of the Lord endureth for ever.(3)

(1) Job xv. 15. (2) Psalm xxix. 16. (3) Psalm cxvii. 2.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

  

HOW WE MUST STAND AND SPEAK, IN EVERYTHING THAT WE DESIRE

"My Son, speak thou thus in every matter, 'Lord, if it please Thee, let this come to pass. Lord, if this shall be for Thine honour, let it be done in Thy Name. Lord, if thou see it good for me, and approve it as useful, then grant me to use it for Thy honour. But if thou knowest that it shall be hurtful unto me, and not profitable for the health of my soul, take the desire away from me'! For not every desire is from the Holy Ghost, although it appear to a man right and good. It is difficult to judge with certainty whether a good or an evil spirit move thee to desire this or that, or whether thou art moved by thine own spirit. Many have been deceived at the last, who seemed at the beginning to be moved by a good spirit.

2. "Therefore, whatsoever seemeth to thee desirable, thou must always desire and seek after it with the fear of God and humility of heart, and most of all, must altogether resign thyself, and commit all unto Me and say, 'Lord, thou knowest what is best; let this or that be, according as Thou wilt. Give what Thou wilt, so much as Thou wilt, when Thou wilt. Do with me as Thou knowest best, and as best shall please Thee, and as shall be most to Thine honour. Place me where Thou wilt, and freely work Thy will with me in all things. I am in Thine hand, and turn me in my course. Behold, I am Thy servant, ready for all things; for I desire to live not to myself but to Thee. Oh, that I might live worthily and perfectly.'"

A PRAYER TO BE ENABLED TO DO GOD'S WILL PERFECTLY

3. Grant me Thy grace, most merciful Jesus, that it may be with me, and work in me, and persevere with me, even unto the end. Grant that I may ever desire and wish whatsoever is most pleasing and dear unto Thee. Let Thy will be mine, and let my will alway follow Thine, and entirely accord with it. May I choose and reject whatsoever Thou dost; yea, let it be impossible for me to choose or reject except according to Thy will.

4. Grant that I may die to all worldly things, and for Thy sake love to be despised and unknown in this world. Grant unto me, above all things that I can desire, to rest in Thee, and that in Thee my heart may be at peace. Thou art the true peace of the heart, Thou alone its rest; apart from Thee all things are hard and unquiet. In Thee alone, the supreme and eternal God, I will lay me down in peace and take my rest.(1) Amen.

(1) Psalm iv. 9.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THAT TRUE SOLACE IS TO BE SOUGHT IN GOD ALONE

Whatsoever I am able to desire or to think of for my solace, I look for it not here, but hereafter. For if I alone had all the solaces of this world, and were able to enjoy all its delights, it is certain that they could not endure long. Wherefore, O my soul, thou canst be fully comforted and perfectly refreshed, only in God, the Comforter of the poor, and the lifter up of the humble. Wait but a little while, my soul, wait for the Divine promise, and thou shalt have abundance of all good things in heaven. If thou longest too inordinately for the things which are now, thou shalt lose those which are eternal and heavenly. Let temporal things be in the use, eternal things in the desire. Thou canst not be satisfied with any temporal good, for thou wast not created for the enjoyment of these.

2. Although thou hadst all the good things which ever were created, yet couldst not thou be happy and blessed; all thy blessedness and thy felicity lieth in God who created all things; not such felicity as seemeth good to the foolish lover of the world, but such as Christ's good and faithful servants wait for, and as the spiritual and pure in heart sometimes taste, whose conversation is in heaven.(1) All human solace is empty and short-lived; blessed and true is that solace which is felt inwardly, springing from the truth. The godly man everywhere beareth about with him his own Comforter, Jesus, and saith unto Him: "Be with me, Lord Jesus, always and everywhere. Let it be my comfort to be able to give up cheerfully all human comfort. And if Thy consolation fail me, let Thy will and righteous approval be alway with me for the highest comfort. For Thou wilt not always be chiding, neither keepest Thou Thine anger for ever."(2)

(1) Philippians iii. 20. (2) Psalm cii. 9.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

THAT ALL CARE IS TO BE CAST UPON GOD

"My Son, suffer me to do with thee what I will; I know what is expedient for thee. Thou thinkest as a man, in many things thou judgest as human affection persuadeth thee."

2. Lord, what Thou sayest is true. Greater is Thy care for me than all the care which I am able to take for myself. For too insecurely doth he stand who casteth not all his care upon Thee. Lord, so long as my will standeth right and firm in Thee, do with me what Thou wilt, for whatsoever Thou shalt do with me cannot be aught but good. Blessed be Thou if Thou wilt leave me in darkness: blessed also be Thou if Thou wilt leave me in light. Blessed be Thou if Thou vouchsafe to comfort me, and always blessed be Thou if Thou cause me to be troubled.

3. "My Son! even thus thou must stand if thou desirest to walk with Me. Thou must be ready alike for suffering or rejoicing. Thou must be poor and needy as willingly as full and rich."

4. Lord, I will willingly bear for Thee whatsoever Thou wilt have to come upon me. Without choice I will receive from Thy hand good and evil, sweet and bitter, joy and sadness, and will give Thee thanks for all things which shall happen unto me. Keep me from all sin, and I will not fear death nor hell. Only cast me not away for ever, nor blot me out of the book of life. Then no tribulation which shall come upon me shall do me hurt.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

THAT TEMPORAL MISERIES ARE TO BE BORNE PATIENTLY AFTER THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST

"My Son! I came down from heaven for thy salvation; I took upon Me thy miseries not of necessity, but drawn by love that thou mightest learn patience and mightest bear temporal miseries without murmuring. For from the hour of My birth, until My death upon the Cross, I ceased not from bearing of sorrow; I had much lack of temporal things; I oftentimes heard many reproaches against Myself; I gently bore contradictions and hard words; I received ingratitude for benefits, blasphemies for My miracles, rebukes for My doctrine."

2. Lord, because Thou wast patient in Thy life, herein most of all fulfilling the commandment of Thy Father, it is well that I, miserable sinner, should patiently bear myself according to Thy will, and as long as Thou wilt have it so, should bear about with me for my salvation, the burden of this corruptible life. For although the present life seemeth burdensome, it is nevertheless already made very full of merit through Thy grace, and to those who are weak it becometh easier and brighter through Thy example and the footsteps of Thy saints; but it is also much more full of consolation than it was of old, under the old Testament, when the gate of heaven remained shut; and even the way to heaven seemed more obscure when so few cared to seek after the heavenly kingdom. But not even those who were then just and in the way of salvation were able, before Thy Passion and the ransom of Thy holy Death, to enter the kingdom of heaven.

3. Oh what great thanks am I bound to give Thee, who hast vouchsafed to show me and all faithful people the good and right way to Thine eternal kingdom, for Thy way is our way, and by holy patience we walk to Thee who art our Crown. If Thou hadst not gone before and taught us, who would care to follow? Oh, how far would they have gone backward if they had not beheld Thy glorious example! Behold we are still lukewarm, though we have heard of Thy many signs and discourses; what would become of us if we had not such a light to help us follow Thee?

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

OF BEARING INJURIES, AND WHO SHALL BE APPROVED AS TRULY PATIENT

"What sayest thou, My Son? Cease to complain; consider My suffering and that of My saints. Thou hast not yet resisted unto blood.(1) It is little which thou sufferest in comparison with those who have suffered so many things, have been so strongly tempted, so grievously troubled, so manywise proved and tried. Thou oughtest therefore to call to mind the more grievous sufferings of others that thou mightest bear thy lesser ones more easily, and if they seem not to thee little, see that it is not thy impatience which is the cause of this. But whether they be little or whether they be great, study to bear them all with patience.

2. "So far as thou settest thyself to bear patiently, so far thou dost wisely and art deserving of the more merit; thou shalt also bear the more easily if thy mind and habit are carefully trained hereunto. And say not 'I cannot bear these things from such a man, nor are things of this kind to be borne by me, for he hath done me grievous harm and imputeth to me what I had never thought: but from another I will suffer patiently, such things as I see I ought to suffer.' Foolish is such a thought as this, for it considereth not the virtue of patience, nor by whom that virtue is to be crowned, but it rather weigheth persons and offences against self.

3. "He is not truly patient who will only suffer as far as seemeth right to himself and from whom he pleaseth. But the truly patient man considereth not by what man he is tried, whether by one above him, or by an equal or inferior, whether by a good and holy man, or a perverse and unworthy; but indifferently from every creature, whatsoever or how often soever adversity happeneth to him, he gratefully accepteth all from the hand of God and counteth it great gain: for with God nothing which is borne for His sake, however small, shall lose its reward.

4. "Be thou therefore ready for the fight if thou wilt have the victory. Without striving thou canst not win the crown of patience; if thou wilt not suffer thou refusest to be crowned. But if thou desirest to be crowned, strive manfully, endure patiently. Without labour thou drawest not near to rest, nor without fighting comest thou to victory."

5. Make possible to me, O Lord, by grace what seemeth impossible to me by nature. Thou knowest how little I am able to bear, and how quickly I am cast down when a like adversity riseth up against me. Whatsoever trial of tribulation may come to me, may it become unto me pleasing and acceptable, for to suffer and be vexed for Thy sake is exceeding healthful to the soul.

(1) Hebrews xii. 4.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XX

  

OF CONFESSION OF OUR INFIRMITY AND OF THE MISERIES OF THIS LIFE

I will acknowledge my sin unto Thee;(1) I will confess to Thee, Lord, my infirmity. It is often a small thing which casteth me down and maketh me sad. I resolve that I will act bravely, but when a little temptation cometh, immediately I am in a great strait. Wonderfully small sometimes is the matter whence a grievous temptation cometh, and whilst I imagine myself safe for a little space; when I am not considering, I find myself often almost overcome by a little puff of wind.

2. Behold, therefore, O Lord, my humility and my frailty, which is altogether known to Thee. Be merciful unto me, and draw me out of the mire that I sink not,(2) lest I ever remain cast down. This is what frequently throweth me backward and confoundeth me before Thee, that I am so liable to fall, so weak to resist my passions. And though their assault is not altogether according to my will, it is violent and grievous, and it altogether wearieth me to live thus daily in conflict. Herein is my infirmity made known to me, that hateful fancies always rush in far more easily than they depart.

3. Oh that Thou, most mighty God of Israel, Lover of all faithful souls, wouldst look upon the labour and sorrow of Thy servant, and give him help in all things whereunto he striveth. Strengthen me with heavenly fortitude, lest the old man, this miserable flesh, not being yet fully subdued to the spirit, prevail to rule over me; against which I ought to strive so long as I remain in this most miserable life. Oh what a life is this, where tribulations and miseries cease not, where all things are full of snares and of enemies, for when one tribulation or temptation goeth, another cometh, yea, while the former conflict is yet raging others come more in number and unexpected.

4. And how can the life of man be loved, seeing that it hath so many bitter things, that it is subjected to so many calamities and miseries. How can it be even called life, when it produces so many deaths and plagues? The world is often reproached because it is deceitful and vain, yet notwithstanding it is not easily given up, because the lusts of the flesh have too much rule over it. Some draw us to love, some to hate. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, these draw to love of the world; but the punishments and miseries which righteously follow these things, bring forth hatred of the world and weariness.

5. But, alas! an evil desire conquereth a mind given to the world, and thinketh it happiness to be under the nettles(3) because it savoureth not nor perceiveth the sweetness of God nor the inward gracefulness of virtue. But they who perfectly despise the world and strive to live unto God in holy discipline, these are not ignorant of the divine sweetness promised to all who truly deny themselves and see clearly how grievously the world erreth, and in how many ways it is deceived.

(1) Psalm xxxii. 5. (2) Psalm lix. 16. (3) Job xxx. 7.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXI

  

THAT WE MUST REST IN GOD ABOVE ALL GOODS AND GIFTS

Above all things and in all things thou shalt rest alway in the Lord, O my soul, for he himself is the eternal rest of the saints. Grant me, most sweet and loving Jesus, to rest in Thee above every creature, above all health and beauty, above all glory and honour, above all power and dignity, above all knowledge and skilfulness, above all riches and arts, above all joy and exultation, above all fame and praise, above all sweetness and consolation, above all hope and promise, above all merit and desire, above all gifts and rewards which Thou canst give and pour forth, above all joy and jubilation which the mind is able to receive and feel; in a word, above Angels and Archangels and all the army of heaven, above all things visible and invisible, and above everything which Thou, O my God, art not.

2. For Thou, O Lord, my God, art best above all things; Thou only art the Most High, Thou only the Almighty, Thou only the All-sufficient, and the Fulness of all things; Thou only the All-delightsome and the All-comforting; Thou alone the altogether lovely and altogether loving; Thou alone the Most Exalted and Most Glorious above all things; in Whom all things are, and were, and ever shall be, altogether and all-perfect. And thus it falleth short and is insufficient whatsoever Thou givest to me without Thyself or whatsoever Thou revealest or dost promise concerning Thyself, whilst Thou art not seen or fully possessed: since verily my heart cannot truly rest nor be entirely content, except it rest in Thee, and go beyond all gifts and every creature.

3. O my most beloved Spouse, Jesus Christ, most holy lover of my soul, Ruler of this whole Creation, who shall give me the wings of true liberty, that I may flee to Thee and find rest? Oh when shall it be given me to be open to receive Thee to the full, and to see how sweet Thou art, O Lord my God? When shall I collect myself altogether in Thee, that because of Thy love I may not feel myself at all, but may know Thee only above every sense and measure, in measure not known to others. But now I ofttimes groan, and bear my sad estate with sorrow; because many evils befall me in this vale of miseries which continually disturb and fill me with sorrow, and encloud me, continually hinder and fill me with care, allure and entangle me, that I cannot have free access to Thee, nor enjoy that sweet intercourse which is always near at hand to the blessed spirits. Let my deep sighing come before Thee, and my manifold desolation on the earth.

4. O Jesus, Light of Eternal Glory, solace of the wandering soul, before Thee my mouth is without speech, and my silence speaketh to Thee. How long will my Lord delay to come unto me? Let Him come unto me, His poor and humble one, and make me glad. Let Him put forth His hand, and deliver His holy one from every snare. Come, Oh come; for without Thee shall be no joyful day or hour, for Thou art my joy, and without Thee is my table empty. I am miserable, and in a manner imprisoned and loaded with fetters, until Thou refresh me by the light of Thy presence, and give me liberty, and show Thy loving countenance.

5. Let others seek some other thing instead of Thee, whatsoever it shall please them; but for my part nothing else pleaseth or shall please, save Thou, my God, my hope, my eternal salvation. I will not hold my peace, nor cease to implore, until Thy grace return, and until Thou speak to me within.

6. "Behold, here I am! Behold, I come to thee, for thou didst call Me. Thy tears and the longing of thy soul, thy humbleness and contrition of heart have inclined Me, and brought Me to thee."

7. And I said Lord, I have called upon Thee, and I have longed to enjoy Thee, being ready to reject everything for Thy sake. For Thou didst first move me to seek Thee. Therefore, blessed be Thou, O Lord, who has wrought this good work upon Thy servant, according to the multitude of Thy mercy. What then hath Thy servant to say in Thy presence, save to humble himself greatly before Thee, being alway mindful of his own iniquity and vileness. For there is none like unto Thee in all marvels of heaven and earth. Excellent are Thy works, true are Thy judgments, and by Thy Providence are all things governed. Therefore praise and glory be unto Thee, O Wisdom of the Father, let my mouth and my soul and all created things praise and bless Thee together.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXII

  

OF THE RECOLLECTION OF GOD'S MANIFOLD BENEFITS

Open, O Lord, my heart in Thy law, and teach me to walk in the way of Thy commandments. Grant me to understand Thy will and to be mindful of Thy benefits, both general and special, with great reverence and diligent meditation, that thus I may be able worthily to give Thee thanks. Yet I know and confess that I cannot render Thee due praises for the least of Thy mercies. I am less than the least of all the good things which Thou gavest me; and when I consider Thy majesty, my spirit faileth because of the greatness thereof.

2. All things which we have in the soul and in the body, and whatsoever things we possess, whether outwardly or inwardly, naturally or supernaturally, are Thy good gifts, and prove Thee, from whom we have received them all, to be good, gentle, and kind. Although one receiveth many things, and another fewer, yet all are Thine, and without Thee not even the least thing can be possessed. He who hath received greater cannot boast that it is of his own merit, nor lift himself up above others, nor contemn those beneath him; for he is the greater and the better who ascribeth least to himself, and in giving thanks is the humbler and more devout; and he who holdeth himself to be viler than all, and judgeth himself to be the more unworthy, is the apter for receiving greater things.

3. But he who hath received fewer gifts, ought not to be cast down, nor to take it amiss, nor to envy him who is richer; but rather ought he to look unto Thee, and to greatly extol Thy goodness, for Thou pourest forth Thy gifts so richly, so freely and largely, without respect of persons. All things come of Thee; therefore in all things shalt thou be praised. Thou knowest what is best to be given to each; and why this man hath less, and that more, is not for us but for Thee to understand, for unto Thee each man's deservings are fully known.

4. Wherefore, O Lord God, I reckon it even a great benefit, not to have many things, whence praise and glory may appear outwardly, and after the thought of men. For so it is that he who considereth his own poverty and vileness, ought not only to draw therefrom no grief or sorrow, or sadness of spirit, but rather comfort and cheerfulness; because Thou, Lord, hast chosen the poor and humble, and those who are poor in this world, to be Thy friends and acquaintance. So give all Thine apostles witness whom Thou hast made princes in all lands. Yet they had their conversation in this world blameless, so humble and meek, without any malice or deceit, that they even rejoiced to suffer rebukes for Thy Name's sake,(1) and what things the world hateth, they embraced with great joy.

5. Therefore ought nothing so much to rejoice him who loveth Thee and knoweth Thy benefits, as Thy will in him, and the good pleasure of Thine eternal Providence, wherewith he ought to be so contented and comforted, that he would as willingly be the least as any other would be the greatest, as peaceable and contented in the lowest as in the highest place, and as willingly held of small and low account and of no name or reputation as to be more honourable and greater in the world than others. For Thy will and the love of Thine honour ought to go before all things, and to please and comfort him more, than all benefits that are given or may be given to himself.

(1) Acts v. 41.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIII

  

OF FOUR THINGS WHICH BRING GREAT PEACE

"My Son, now will I teach thee the way of peace and of true liberty."

2. Do, O my Lord, as Thou sayest, for this is pleasing unto me to hear.

3. "Strive, My Son, to do another's will rather than thine own. Choose always to have less rather than more. Seek always after the lowest place, and to be subject to all. Wish always and pray that the will of God be fulfilled in thee. Behold, such a man as this entereth into the inheritance of peace and quietness."

4. O my Lord, this Thy short discourse hath in itself much of perfectness. It is short in words but full of meaning, and abundant in fruit. For if it were possible that I should fully keep it, disturbance would not so easily arise within me. For as often as I feel myself disquieted and weighed down, I find myself to have gone back from this teaching. But Thou, Who art Almighty, and always lovest progress in the soul, vouchsafe more grace, that I may be enabled to fulfil Thy exhortation, and work out my salvation.

A PRAYER AGAINST EVIL THOUGHTS

5. O Lord my God, be not Thou far from me, my God, haste Thee to help me,(1) for many thoughts and great fears have risen up against me, afflicting my soul. How shall I pass through them unhurt? how shall I break through them?

6. "I," saith He, "will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight."(2) I will open the prison doors, and reveal to thee the secret places.

7. Do, Lord, as Thou sayest; and let all evil thoughts fly away before Thy face. This is my hope and my only comfort, to fly unto Thee in all tribulation, to hope in Thee, to call upon Thee from my heart and patiently wait for Thy loving kindness.

A PRAYER FOR ENLIGHTENMENT OF THE MIND

8. Enlighten me, Blessed Jesus, with the brightness of Thy inner light, and cast forth all darkness from the habitation of my heart. Restrain my many wandering thoughts, and carry away the temptations which strive to do me hurt. Fight Thou mightily for me, and drive forth the evil beasts, so call I alluring lusts, that peace may be within Thy walls and plenteousness of praise within Thy palaces,(3) even in my pure conscience. Command Thou the winds and the storms, say unto the sea, "Be still," say unto the stormy wind, "Hold thy peace," so shall there be a great calm.

9. Oh send forth Thy light and Thy truth,(4) that they may shine upon the earth; for I am but earth without form and void until Thou give me light. Pour forth Thy grace from above; water my heart with the dew of heaven; give the waters of devotion to water the face of the earth, and cause it to bring forth good and perfect fruit. Lift up my mind which is oppressed with the weight of sins, and raise my whole desire to heavenly things; that having tasted the sweetness of the happiness which is from above, it may take no pleasure in thinking of things of earth.

10. Draw me and deliver me from every unstable comfort of creatures, for no created thing is able to satisfy my desire and to give me comfort. Join me to Thyself by the inseparable bond of love, for Thou alone art sufficient to him that loveth Thee, and without Thee all things are vain toys.

(1) Psalm lxxi. 12. (2) Isaiah xlv. 2. (3) Psalm cxxii. 7. (4) Psalm xliii. 3.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIV

  

OF AVOIDING OF CURIOUS INQUIRY INTO THE LIFE OF ANOTHER

"My Son, be not curious, nor trouble thyself with vain cares. What is that to thee? Follow thou Me.(1) For what is it to thee whether a man be this or that, or say or do thus or thus? Thou hast no need to answer for others, but thou must give an answer for thyself. Why therefore dost thou entangle thyself? Behold, I know all men, and I behold all things which are done under the sun; and I know how it standeth with each one, what he thinketh, what he willeth, and to what end his thoughts reach. All things therefore are to be committed to Me; watch thou thyself in godly peace, and leave him who is unquiet to be unquiet as he will. Whatsoever he shall do or say, shall come unto him, for he cannot deceive Me.

2. "Trouble not thyself about the shadow of a great name, nor about the friendship of many, nor about the love of men towards thee. For these things beget distraction and great sorrows of heart. My word should speak freely unto thee, and I would reveal secrets, if only thou didst diligently look for My appearing, and didst open unto Me the gates of thy heart. Be sober and watch unto prayer,(2) and humble thyself in all things."

(1) John xxi. 12. (2) 1 Peter iv. 7.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXV

  

WHEREIN FIRM PEACE OF HEART AND TRUE PROFIT CONSIST

"My Son, I have said, Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you, not as the world giveth give I unto you.(1) All men desire peace, but all do not care for the things which belong unto true peace. My peace is with the humble and lowly in heart. Thy peace shall be in much patience. If thou heardest Me, and didst follow My voice, thou shouldest enjoy much peace."

2. What then shall I do, Lord?

3. "In everything take heed to thyself what thou doest, and what thou sayest; and direct all thy purpose to this, that thou please Me alone, and desire or seek nothing apart from Me. But, moreover, judge nothing rashly concerning the words or deeds of others, nor meddle with matters which are not committed to thee; and it may be that thou shalt be disturbed little or rarely. Yet never to feel any disquiet, nor to suffer any pain of heart or body, this belongeth not to the present life, but is the state of eternal rest. Therefore count not thyself to have found true peace, if thou hast felt no grief; nor that then all is well if thou hast no adversary; nor that this is perfect if all things fall out according to thy desire. Nor then reckon thyself to be anything great, or think that thou art specially beloved, if thou art in a state of great fervour and sweetness of spirit; for not by these things is the true lover of virtue known, nor in them doth the profit and perfection of man consist."

4. In what then, Lord?

5. "In offering thyself with all thy heart to the Divine Will, in not seeking the things which are thine own, whether great or small, whether temporal or eternal; so that thou remain with the same steady countenance in giving of thanks between prosperity and adversity, weighing all things in an equal balance. If thou be so brave and long-suffering in hope that when inward comfort is taken from thee, thou even prepare thy heart for the more endurance, and justify not thyself, as though thou oughtest not to suffer these heavy things, but dost justify Me in all things that I appoint, and dost bless My Holy Name, then dost thou walk in the true and right way of peace, and shalt have a sure hope that thou shalt again behold My face with joy. For if thou come to an utter contempt of thyself, know that then thou shalt enjoy abundance of peace, as much as is possible where thou art but a wayfaring man."

(1) John xiv. 27.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVI

  

OF THE EXALTATION OF A FREE SPIRIT, WHICH HUMBLE PRAYER MORE DESERVETH THAN DOTH FREQUENT READING

Lord, this is the work of a perfect man, never to slacken his mind from attention to heavenly things, and among many cares to pass along as it were without care, not after the manner of one indifferent, but rather with the privilege of a free mind, cleaving to no creature with inordinate affection.

2. I beseech Thee, my most merciful Lord God, preserve me from the cares of this life, lest I become too much entangled; from many necessities of the body, lest I be taken captive by pleasure; from all obstacles of the spirit, lest I be broken and cast down with cares. I say not from those things which the vanity of the world goeth about after with all eagerness, but from those miseries, which by the universal curse of mortality weigh down and hold back the soul of thy servant in punishment, that it cannot enter into liberty of spirit, so often as it would.

3. O my God, sweetness unspeakable, turn into bitterness all my fleshly consolation, which draweth me away from the love of eternal things, and wickedly allureth toward itself by setting before me some present delight. Let not, O my God, let not flesh and blood prevail over me, let not the world and its short glory deceive me, let not the devil and his craftiness supplant me. Give me courage to resist, patience to endure, constancy to persevere. Grant, in place of all consolations of the world, the most sweet unction of Thy Spirit, and in place of carnal love, pour into me the love of Thy Name.

4. Behold, food and drink and clothing, and all the other needs appertaining to the support of the body, are burdensome to the devout spirit. Grant that I may use such things with moderation, and that I be not entangled with inordinate affection for them. To cast away all these things is not lawful, because nature must be sustained, but to require superfluities and things which merely minister delight, the holy law forbiddeth; for otherwise the flesh would wax insolent against the spirit. In all these things, I beseech Thee, let Thy hand guide and teach me, that I in no way exceed.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVII

  

THAT PERSONAL LOVE GREATLY HINDERETH FROM THE HIGHEST GOOD

"My Son, thou must give all for all, and be nothing of thine own. Know thou that the love of thyself is more hurtful to thee than anything in the world. According to the love and inclination which thou hast, everything more or less cleaveth to thee. If thy love be pure, sincere, well-regulated, thou shalt not be in captivity to anything. Do not covet what thou mayest not have; do not have what is able to hinder thee, and to rob thee of inward liberty. It is wonderful that thou committest not thyself to Me from the very bottom of thy heart, with all things which thou canst desire or have.

2. "Why art thou consumed with vain sorrow? Why art thou wearied with superfluous cares? Stand thou by My good pleasure, and thou shalt suffer no loss. If thou seekest after this or that, and wilt be here or there, according to thine own advantage or the fulfilling of thine own pleasure, thou shalt never be in quiet, nor free from care, because in everything somewhat will be found lacking, and everywhere there will be somebody who opposeth thee.

3. "Therefore it is not gaining or multiplying of this thing or that which advantageth thee, but rather the despising it and cutting it by the root out of thy heart; which thou must not only understand of money and riches, but of the desire after honour and vain praise, things which all pass away with the world. The place availeth little if the spirit of devotion is wanting; nor shall that peace stand long which is sought from abroad, if the state of thy heart is without the true foundation, that is, if it abide not in Me. Thou mayest change, but thou canst not better thyself; for when occasion ariseth and is accepted thou shalt find what thou didst fly from, yea more."

A PRAYER FOR CLEANSING OF THE HEART AND FOR HEAVENLY WISDOM

4. Strengthen me, O God, by the grace of Thy Holy Spirit. Give me virtue to be strengthened with might in the inner man, and to free my heart from all fruitless care and trouble, and that I be not drawn away by various desires after any things whatsoever, whether of little value or great, but that I may look upon all as passing away, and myself as passing away with them; because there is no profit under the sun, and all is vanity and vexation of spirit.(1) Oh how wise is he that considereth thus!

5. Give me, O Lord, heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek Thee above all things and to find Thee; to relish Thee above all things and to love Thee; and to understand all other things, even as they are, according to the order of Thy wisdom. Grant me prudently to avoid the flatterer, and patiently to bear with him that opposeth me; for this is great wisdom, not to be carried by every wind of words, nor to give ear to the wicked flattering Siren; for thus do we go safely on in the way we have begun.

(1) Ecclesiastes ii. 11.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXVIII

  

AGAINST THE TONGUES OF DETRACTORS

"My Son, take it not sadly to heart, if any think ill of thee, and say of thee what thou art unwilling to hear. Thou oughtest to think worse of thyself, and to believe no man weaker than thyself. If thou walkest inwardly, thou wilt not weigh flying words above their value. It is no small prudence to keep silence in an evil time and to turn inwardly unto Me, and not to be troubled by human judgment.

2. "Let not thy peace depend upon the word of men; for whether they judge well or ill of thee, thou art not therefore any other man than thyself. Where is true peace or true glory? Is it not in Me? And he who seeketh not to please men, nor feareth to displease, shall enjoy abundant peace. From inordinate love and vain fear ariseth all disquietude of heart, and all distraction of the senses."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIX

  

HOW WHEN TRIBULATION COMETH WE MUST CALL UPON AND BLESS GOD

Blessed be thy name, O Lord, for evermore, who hast willed this temptation and trouble to come upon me. I cannot escape it, but have need to flee unto Thee, that Thou mayest succour me and turn it unto me for good. Lord, now am I in tribulation, and it is not well within my heart, but I am sore vexed by the suffering which lieth upon me. And now, O dear Father, what shall I say? I am taken among the snares. Save me from this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour,(1) that Thou mightest be glorified when I am deeply humbled and am delivered through Thee. Let it be Thy pleasure to deliver me;(2) for what can I do who am poor, and without Thee whither shall I go? Give patience this time also. Help me, O Lord my God, and I will not fear how much soever I be weighed down.

2. And now amid these things what shall I say? Lord, Thy will be done. I have well deserved to be troubled and weighed down. Therefore I ought to bear, would that it be with patience, until the tempest be overpast and comfort return. Yet is Thine omnipotent arm able also to take this temptation away from me, and to lessen its power that I fall not utterly under it, even as many a time past thou has helped me, O God, my merciful God. And as much as this deliverance is difficult to me, so much is it easy to Thee, O right hand of the most Highest.

(1) John xii. 27. (2) Psalm xl. 16.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXX

  

OF SEEKING DIVINE HELP, AND THE CONFIDENCE OF OBTAINING GRACE

"My Son, I the Lord am a stronghold in the day of trouble.(1) Come unto Me, when it is not well with thee.

"This it is which chiefly hindereth heavenly consolation, that thou too slowly betakest thyself unto prayer. For before thou earnestly seekest unto Me, thou dost first seek after many means of comfort, and refresheth thyself in outward things: so it cometh to pass that all things profit thee but little until thou learn that it is I who deliver those who trust in Me; neither beside Me is there any strong help, nor profitable counsel, nor enduring remedy. But now, recovering courage after the tempest, grow thou strong in the light of My mercies, for I am nigh, saith the Lord, that I may restore all things not only as they were at the first, but also abundantly and one upon another.

2. "For is anything too hard for Me, or shall I be like unto one who saith and doeth not? Where is thy faith? Stand fast and with perseverance. Be long-suffering and strong. Consolation will come unto thee in its due season. Wait for Me; yea, wait; I will come and heal thee. It is temptation which vexeth thee, and a vain fear which terrifieth thee. What doth care about future events bring thee, save sorrow upon sorrow? Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.(2) It is vain and useless to be disturbed or lifted up about future things which perhaps will never come.

3. "But it is the nature of man to be deceived by fancies of this sort, and it is a sign of a mind which is still weak to be so easily drawn away at the suggestion of the enemy. For he careth not whether he deceive and beguile by true means or false; whether he throw thee down by the love of the present or fear of the future. Therefore let not thy heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Believe in Me, and put thy trust in My mercy.(3) When thou thinkest thyself far removed from Me, I am often the nearer. When thou reckonest that almost all is lost, then often is greater opportunity of gain at hand. All is not lost when something goeth contrary to thy wishes. Thou oughtest not to judge according to present feeling, nor so to take or give way to any grief which befalleth thee, as if all hope of escape were taken away.

4. "Think not thyself totally abandoned, although for the time I have sent to thee some tribulation, or have even withdrawn some cherished consolation; for this is the way to the Kingdom of Heaven. And without doubt it is better for thee and for all My other servants, that ye should be proved by adversities, than that ye should have all things as ye would. I know thy hidden thoughts: and that it is very needful for thy soul's health that sometimes thou be left without relish, lest perchance thou be lifted up by prosperity, and desirous to please thyself in that which thou art not. What I have given I am able to take away, and to restore again at My good pleasure.

5. "When I shall have given, it is Mine; when I shall have taken away, I have not taken what is thine; for every good gift and every perfect gift(4) is from me. If I shall have sent upon thee grief or any vexation, be not angry, nor let thy heart be sad; I am able quickly to lift thee up and to change every burden into joy. But I am just and greatly to be praised, when I do thus unto thee.

6. "If thou rightly consider, and look upon it with truth, thou oughtest never to be so sadly cast down because of adversity, but rather shouldst rejoice and give thanks; yea, verily to count it the highest joy that I afflict thee with sorrows and spare thee not. As My Father hath loved Me, so love I you;(5) thus have I spoken unto My beloved disciples: whom I sent forth not unto worldly joys, but to great strivings; not unto honours, but unto contempt; not unto ease, but to labours; not unto rest, but to bring forth much fruit with patience. My son, remember these words."

(1) Nahum i. 7. (2) Matthew vi. 34. (3) John xiv. 27; Psalm xiii. 5. (4) James i. 17. (5) John xv. 9.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXI

  

OF THE NEGLECT OF EVERY CREATURE, THAT THE CREATOR MAY BE FOUND

O Lord, I still need more grace, if I would arrive where neither man nor any other creature may hinder me. For so long as anything keepeth me back, I cannot freely fly unto Thee. He desired eagerly thus to fly, who cried, saying, Oh that I had wings like a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest. What is more peaceful than the single eye? And what more free than he that desireth nothing upon earth? Therefore must a man rise above every creature, and perfectly forsake himself, and with abstracted mind to stand and behold that Thou, the Creator of all things, hast among Thy creatures nothing like unto Thyself. And except a man be freed from all creatures, he will not be able to reach freely after Divine things. Therefore few are found who give themselves to contemplation, because few know how to separate themselves entirely from perishing and created things.

2. For this much grace is necessary, which may lift up the soul and raise it above itself. And except a man be lifted up in the spirit, and freed from all creatures, and altogether united to God, whatsoever he knoweth, whatsoever even he hath, it mattereth but little. He who esteemeth anything great save the one only incomprehensible, eternal, good, shall long time be little and lie low. For whatsoever is not God is nothing, and ought to be counted for nothing. Great is the difference between a godly man, illuminated with wisdom, and a scholar learned in knowledge and given to books. Far nobler is that doctrine which floweth down from the divine fulness above, than that which is acquired laboriously by human study.

3. Many are found who desire contemplation, but they do not strive to practice those things which are required thereunto. It is also a great impediment, that much is made of symbols and external signs, and too little of thorough mortification. I know not how it is, and by what spirit we are led, and what we who would be deemed spiritual are aiming at, that we give so great labour and so eager solicitude for transitory and worthless things, and scarcely ever gather our senses together to think at all of our inward condition.

4. Ah, me! Forthwith after a little recollection we rush out of doors, and do not subject our actions to a strict examination. Where our affections are set we take no heed, and we weep not that all things belonging to us are so defiled. For because all flesh had corrupted itself upon the earth, the great deluge came. Since therefore our inmost affections are very corrupt, it followeth of necessity that our actions also are corrupt, being the index of a deficient inward strength. Out of a pure heart proceedeth the fruit of good living.

5. We demand, how much a man hath done; but from how much virtue he acted, is not so narrowly considered. We ask if he be strong, rich, handsome, clever, whether he is a good writer, good singer, good workman; but how poor he may be in spirit, how patient and gentle, how devout and meditative, on these things many are silent. Nature looketh upon the outward appearance of a man, grace turneth its thought to the heart. The former frequently judgeth amiss; the latter trusteth in God, that it may not be deceived.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXII

  

OF SELF-DENIAL AND THE CASTING AWAY ALL SELFISHNESS

"My Son, thou canst not possess perfect liberty unless thou altogether deny thyself. All they are enslaved who are possessors of riches, they who love themselves, the selfish, the curious, the restless; those who ever seek after soft things, and not after the things of Jesus Christ; those who continually plan and devise that which will not stand. For whatsoever cometh not of God shall perish. Hold fast the short and complete saying, 'Renounce all things, and thou shalt find all things; give up thy lust, and thou shalt find rest.' Dwell upon this in thy mind, and when thou art full of it, thou shalt understand all things."

2. O Lord, this is not the work of a day, nor children's play; verily in this short saying is enclosed all the perfection of the religious.

3. "My son, thou oughtest not to be turned aside, nor immediately cast down, because thou hast heard the way of the perfect. Rather oughtest thou to be provoked to higher aims, and at the least to long after the desire thereof. Oh that it were so with thee, and that thou hadst come to this, that thou wert not a lover of thine own self, but wert ready always to My nod, and to his whom I have placed over thee as thy father. Then shouldest thou please Me exceedingly, and all thy life should go on in joy and peace. Thou hast still many things to renounce, which if thou resign not utterly to Me, thou shalt not gain what thou seekest. I counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich,(1) that is heavenly wisdom, which despiseth all base things. Put away from thee earthly wisdom, and all pleasure, whether common to men, or thine own.

4. "I tell thee that thou must buy vile things with those which are costly and great in the esteem of men. For wonderfully vile and small, and almost given up to forgetfulness, doth true heavenly wisdom appear, which thinketh not high things of itself, nor seeketh to be magnified upon the earth; many honour it with their lips, but in heart are far from it; it is indeed the precious pearl, which is hidden from many."

(1) Revelation iii. 18.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIII

  

OF INSTABILITY OF THE HEART, AND OF DIRECTING THE AIM TOWARDS GOD

"My Son, trust not thy feeling, for that which is now will be quickly changed into somewhat else. As long as thou livest thou art subject to change, howsoever unwilling; so that thou art found now joyful, now sad; now at peace, now disquieted; now devout, now indevout; now studious, now careless; now sad, now cheerful. But the wise man, and he who is truly learned in spirit, standeth above these changeable things, attentive not to what he may feel in himself, or from what quarter the wind may blow, but that the whole intent of his mind may carry him on to the due and much-desired end. For thus will he be able to remain one and the same and unshaken, the single eye of his desire being steadfastly fixed, through the manifold changes of the world, upon Me.

2. "But according as the eye of intention be the more pure, even so will a man make his way steadfastly through the manifold storms. But in many the eye of pure intention waxeth dim; for it quickly resteth itself upon anything pleasant which occurreth, and rarely is any man found altogether free from the blemish of self-seeking. So the Jews of old came to Bethany, to the house of Martha and Mary, that they might see not Jesus, but Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.(1) Therefore must the eye of the intention be cleansed, that it may be single and right, and above all things which come in its way, may be directed unto Me."

(1) John xii. 9.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIV

  

THAT TO HIM WHO LOVETH GOD IS SWEET ABOVE ALL THINGS AND IN ALL THINGS

Behold, God is mine, and all things are mine! What will I more, and what more happy thing can I desire? O delightsome and sweet world! that is, to him that loveth the Word, not the world, neither the things that are in the world.(1) My God, my all! To him that understandeth, that word sufficeth, and to repeat it often is pleasing to him that loveth it. When Thou art present all things are pleasant; when Thou art absent, all things are wearisome. Thou makest the heart to be at rest, givest it deep peace and festal joy. Thou makest it to think rightly in every matter, and in every matter to give Thee praise; neither can anything please long without Thee but if it would be pleasant and of sweet savour, Thy grace must be there, and it is Thy wisdom which must give unto it a sweet savour.

2. To him who tasteth Thee, what can be distasteful? And to him who tasteth Thee not, what is there which can make him joyous? But the worldly wise, and they who enjoy the flesh, these fail in Thy wisdom; for in the wisdom of the world is found utter vanity, and to be carnally minded is death. But they who follow after Thee through contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the flesh, are found to be truly wise because they are carried from vanity to verity, from the flesh to the spirit. They taste that the Lord is good, and whatsoever good they find in creatures, they count it all unto the praise of the Creator. Unlike, yea, very unlike is the enjoyment of the Creator to enjoyment of the Creature, the enjoyment of eternity and of time, of light uncreated and of light reflected.

3. O Light everlasting, surpassing all created lights, dart down Thy ray from on high which shall pierce the inmost depths of my heart. Give purity, joy, clearness, life to my spirit that with all its powers it may cleave unto Thee with rapture passing man's understanding. Oh when shall that blessed and longed-for time come when Thou shalt satisfy me with Thy presence, and be unto me All in all? So long as this is delayed, my joy shall not be full. Still, ah me! the old man liveth in me: he is not yet all crucified, not yet quite dead; still he lusteth fiercely against the spirit, wageth inward wars, nor suffereth the soul's kingdom to be in peace.

4. But Thou who rulest the raging of the sea, and stillest the waves thereof when they arise, rise up and help me. Scatter the people that delight in war.(2) Destroy them by Thy power. Show forth, I beseech Thee, Thy might, and let Thy right hand be glorified, for I have no hope, no refuge, save in Thee, O Lord my God.

(1) 1 John ii. 15. (2) Psalm lxviii. 30.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXV

  

THAT THERE IS NO SECURITY AGAINST TEMPTATION IN THIS LIFE

"My Son, thou art never secure in this life, but thy spiritual armour will always be needful for thee as long as thou livest. Thou dwellest among foes, and art attacked on the right hand and on the left. If therefore thou use not on all sides the shield of patience, thou wilt not remain long unwounded. Above all, if thou keep not thy heart fixed upon Me with steadfast purpose to bear all things for My sake, thou shalt not be able to bear the fierceness of the attack, nor to attain to the victory of the blessed. Therefore must thou struggle bravely all thy life through, and put forth a strong hand against those things which oppose thee. For to him that overcometh is the hidden manna given,(1) but great misery is reserved for the slothful.

2. "If thou seek rest in this life, how then wilt thou attain unto the rest which is eternal? Set not thyself to attain much rest, but much patience. Seek the true peace, not in earth but in heaven, not in man nor in any created thing, but in God alone. For the love of God thou must willingly undergo all things, whether labours or sorrows, temptations, vexations, anxieties, necessities, infirmities, injuries, gainsayings, rebukes, humiliations, confusions, corrections, despisings; these things help unto virtue, these things prove the scholar of Christ; these things fashion the heavenly crown. I will give thee an eternal reward for short labour, and infinite glory for transient shame.

3. "Thinkest thou that thou shalt always have spiritual consolations at thy will? My Saints had never such, but instead thereof manifold griefs, and divers temptations, and heavy desolations. But patiently they bore themselves in all, and trusted in God more than in themselves, knowing that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.(2) Wouldst thou have that immediately which many have hardly attained unto after many tears and hard labours? Wait for the Lord, quit thyself like a man and be strong; be not faint-hearted, nor go aside from Me, but constantly devote thy body and soul to the glory of God. I will reward thee plenteously, I will be with thee in trouble."(3)

(1) Revelation ii. 17. (2) Romans viii. 17. (3) Psalm xci. 15.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVI

  

AGAINST VAIN JUDGMENTS OF MEN

"My Son, anchor thy soul firmly upon God, and fear not man's judgment, when conscience pronounceth thee pious and innocent. It is good and blessed thus to suffer; nor will it be grievous to the heart which is humble, and which trusteth in God more than in itself. Many men have many opinions, and therefore little trust is to be placed in them. But moreover it is impossible to please all. Although Paul studied to please all men in the Lord, and to become all things to all men,(1) yet nevertheless with him it was a very small thing that he should be judged by man's judgment."(2)

2. He laboured abundantly, as much as in him lay, for the building up and the salvation of others; but he could not avoid being sometimes judged and despised by others. Therefore he committed all to God, who knew all, and by patience and humility defended himself against evil speakers, or foolish and false thinkers, and those who accused him according to their pleasure. Nevertheless, from time to time he replied, lest his silence should become a stumbling-block to those who were weak.

3. "Who art thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a man that shall die? To-day he is, and to-morrow his place is not found. Fear God and thou shalt not quail before the terrors of men. What can any man do against thee by words or deeds? He hurteth himself more than thee, nor shall he escape the judgment of God, whosoever he may be. Have thou God before thine eyes, and do not contend with fretful words. And if for the present thou seem to give way, and to suffer confusion which thou hast not deserved, be not angry at this, nor by impatience diminish thy reward; but rather look up to Me in heaven, for I am able to deliver thee from all confusion and hurt, and to render to every man according to his works."

(1) 1 Corinthians ix. 22. (2) 1 Corinthians iv. 3.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVII

  

OF PURE AND ENTIRE RESIGNATION OF SELF, FOR THE OBTAINING LIBERTY OF HEART

"My Son, lose thyself and thou shalt find Me. Stand still without all choosing and all thought of self, and thou shalt ever be a gainer. For more grace shall be added to thee, as soon as thou resignest thyself, and so long as thou dost not turn back to take thyself again."

2. O Lord, how often shall I resign myself, and in what things shall I lose myself?

3. "Always; every hour: in that which is little, and in that which is great. I make no exception, but will that thou be found naked in all things. Otherwise how canst thou be Mine and I thine, unless thou be inwardly and outwardly free from every will of thine own? The sooner thou dost this, the better shall it be with thee; and the more fully and sincerely, the more thou shalt please Me, and the more abundantly shalt thou be rewarded.

4. "Some resign themselves, but with certain reservations, for they do not fully trust in God, therefore they think that they have some provision to make for themselves. Some again at first offer everything; but afterwards being pressed by temptation they return to their own devices, and thus make no progress in virtue. They will not attain to the true liberty of a pure heart, nor to the grace of My sweet companionship, unless they first entirely resign themselves and daily offer themselves up as a sacrifice; without this the union which bringeth forth fruit standeth not nor will stand.

5. "Many a time I have said unto thee, and now say again, Give thyself up, resign thyself, and thou shalt have great inward peace. Give all for all; demand nothing, ask nothing in return; stand simply and with no hesitation in Me, and thou shalt possess Me. Thou shalt have liberty of heart, and the darkness shall not overwhelm thee. For this strive thou, pray for it, long after it, that thou mayest be delivered from all possession of thyself, and nakedly follow Jesus who was made naked for thee; mayest die unto thyself and live eternally to Me. Then shall all vain fancies disappear, all evil disturbings, and superfluous cares. Then also shall immoderate fear depart from thee, and inordinate love shall die."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXVIII

  

OF A GOOD GOVERNMENT IN EXTERNAL THINGS, AND OF HAVING RECOURSE TO GOD IN DANGERS

"My Son, for this thou must diligently make thy endeavour, that in every place and outward action or occupation thou mayest be free within, and have power over thyself; and that all things be under thee, not thou under them; that thou be master and ruler of thy actions, not a slave or hireling, but rather a free and true Hebrew, entering into the lot and the liberty of the children of God, who stand above the present and look upon the eternal, who with the left eye behold things transitory, and with the right things heavenly; whom temporal things draw not to cleave unto, but who rather draw temporal things to do them good service, even as they were ordained of God to do, and appointed by the Master Workman, who hath left nought in His creation without aim and end.

2. "And if in any chance of life thou stand not in outward appearances, nor judgest things which are seen and heard by the fleshly sense, but straightway in every cause enterest with Moses into the tabernacle to ask counsel of God; thou shalt hear a divine response and come forth instructed concerning many things that are and shall be. For always Moses had recourse to the tabernacle for the solving of all doubts and questionings; and fled to the help of prayer to be delivered from the dangers and evil deeds of men. Thus also oughtest thou to fly to the secret chamber of thy heart, and earnestly implore the divine succour. For this cause we read that Joshua and the children of Israel were deceived by the Gibeonites, that they asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord,(1) but being too ready to listen to fair speeches, were deceived by pretended piety."

(1) Joshua ix. 14.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXXIX

  

THAT MAN MUST NOT BE IMMERSED IN BUSINESS

"My Son, always commit thy cause to Me; I will dispose it aright in due time. Wait for My arrangement of it, and then thou shalt find it for thy profit."

2. O Lord, right freely I commit all things to Thee; for my planning can profit but little. Oh that I did not dwell so much on future events, but could offer myself altogether to Thy pleasures without delay.

3. "My Son, a man often striveth vehemently after somewhat which he desireth; but when he hath obtained it he beginneth to be of another mind, because his affections towards it are not lasting, but rather rush on from one thing to another. Therefore it is not really a small thing, when in small things we resist self."

4. The true progress of man lieth in self-denial, and a man who denieth himself is free and safe. But the old enemy, opposer of all good things, ceaseth not from temptation; but day and night setteth his wicked snares, if haply he may be able to entrap the unwary. Watch and pray, saith the Lord, lest ye enter into temptation.(1)

(1) Matthew xxvi. 41.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XL

  

THAT MAN HATH NO GOOD IN HIMSELF, AND NOTHING WHEREOF TO GLORY

Lord, what is man that Thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that Thou visitest him?(1) What hath man deserved, that Thou shouldest bestow thy favour upon him? Lord, what cause can I have of complaint, if Thou forsake me? Or what can I justly allege, if Thou refuse to hear my petition? Of a truth, this I may truly think and say, Lord, I am nothing, I have nothing that is good of myself, but I fall short in all things, and ever tend unto nothing. And unless I am helped by Thee and inwardly supported, I become altogether lukewarm and reckless.

2. But Thou, O Lord, art always the same, and endurest for ever, always good, righteous, and holy; doing all things well, righteously, and holily, and disposing all in Thy wisdom. But I who am more ready to go forward than backward, never continue in one stay, because changes sevenfold pass over me. Yet it quickly becometh better when it so pleaseth Thee, and Thou puttest forth Thy hand to help me; because Thou alone canst aid without help of man, and canst so strengthen me that my countenance shall be no more changed, but my heart shall be turned to Thee, and rest in Thee alone.

3. Wherefore, if I but knew well how to reject all human consolations, whether for the sake of gaining devotion, or because of the necessity by which I was compelled to seek Thee, seeing there is no man who can comfort me; then could I worthily trust in Thy grace, and rejoice in the gift of new consolation.

4. Thanks be to Thee, from whom all cometh, whensoever it goeth well with me! But I am vanity and nothing in Thy sight, a man inconstant and weak. What then have I whereof to glory, or why do I long to be held in honour? Is it not for nought? This also is utterly vain. Verily vain glory is an evil plague, the greatest of vanities, because it draweth us away from the true glory, and robbeth us of heavenly grace. For whilst a man pleaseth himself he displeaseth Thee; whilst he gapeth after the praises of man, he is deprived of true virtues.

5. But true glory and holy rejoicing lieth in glorying in Thee and not in self; in rejoicing in Thy Name, not in our own virtue; in not taking delight in any creature, save only for Thy sake. Let thy Name, not mine be praised; let Thy work, not mine be magnified; let Thy holy Name be blessed, but to me let nought be given of the praises of men. Thou art my glory, Thou art the joy of my heart. In Thee will I make my boast and be glad all the day long, but for myself let me not glory save only in my infirmities.(2)

6. Let the Jews seek the honour which cometh from one another; but I will ask for that which cometh from God only.(3) Truly all human glory, all temporal honour, all worldly exultation, compared to Thy eternal glory, is but vanity and folly. O God my Truth and my Mercy, Blessed Trinity, to Thee alone be all praise, honour, power, and glory for ever and for ever. Amen.

(1) Psalm viii. 4. (2) 2 Corinthians xii. 5. (3) John v. 44.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLI

  

OF CONTEMPT OF ALL TEMPORAL HONOUR

"My Son, make it no matter of thine, if thou see others honoured and exalted, and thyself despised and humbled. Lift up thine heart to Me in heaven, and then the contempt of men upon earth will not make thee sad."

2. O Lord, we are in blindness, and are quickly seduced by vanity. If I look rightly within myself, never was injury done unto me by any creature, and therefore I have nought whereof to complain before Thee. But because I have many times and grievously sinned against Thee, all creatures do justly take arms against me. Therefore to me confusion and contempt are justly due, but to Thee praise and honour and glory. And except I dispose myself for this, namely, to be willing that every creature should despise and desert me, and that I should be esteemed altogether as nothing, I cannot be inwardly filled with peace and strength, nor spiritually enlightened, nor fully united to Thee.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLII

  

THAT OUR PEACE IS NOT TO BE PLACED IN MEN

"My Son, if thou set thy peace on any person because thou hast high opinion of him, and art familiar with him, thou shalt be unstable and entangled. But if thou betake thyself to the ever-living and abiding Truth, the desertion or death of a friend shall not make thee sad. In Me ought the love of thy friend to subsist, and for My sake is every one to be loved, whosoever he be, who appeareth to thee good, and is very dear to thee in this life. Without Me friendship hath no strength or endurance, neither is that love true and pure, which I unite not. Thou oughtest to be so dead to such affections of beloved friends, that as far as in thee lieth, thou wouldst rather choose to be without any companionship of men. The nearer a man approacheth to God, the further he recedeth from all earthly solace. The deeper also he descendeth into himself, and the viler he appeareth in his own eyes, the higher he ascendeth towards God.

2. "But he who attributeth anything good to himself, hindereth the grace of God from coming to him, because the grace of the Holy Ghost ever seeketh the humble heart. If thou couldst make thyself utterly nothing, and empty thyself of the love of every creature, then should it be My part to overflow unto thee with great grace. When thou settest thine eyes upon creatures, the face of the Creator is withdrawn from thee. Learn in all things to conquer thyself for thy Creator's sake, then shalt thou be able to attain unto divine knowledge. How small soever anything be, if it be loved and regarded inordinately, it holdeth us back from the highest good, and corrupteth."

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIII

  

AGAINST VAIN AND WORLDLY KNOWLEDGE

"My Son, let not the fair and subtle sayings of men move thee. For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.(1) Give ear to My words, for they kindle the heart and enlighten the mind, they bring contrition, and they supply manifold consolations. Never read thou the word that thou mayest appear more learned or wise; but study for the mortification of thy sins, for this will be far more profitable for thee than the knowledge of many difficult questions.

2. "When thou hast read and learned many things, thou must always return to one first principle. I am He that teacheth man knowledge,(2) and I give unto babes clearer knowledge than can be taught by man. He to whom I speak will be quickly wise and shall grow much in the spirit. Woe unto them who inquire into many curious questions from men, and take little heed concerning the way of My service. The time will come when Christ will appear, the Master of masters, the Lord of the Angels, to hear the lessons of all, that is to examine the consciences of each one. And then will He search Jerusalem with candles,(3) and the hidden things of darkness(4) shall be made manifest, and the arguings of tongues shall be silent.

3. "I am He who in an instant lift up the humble spirit, to learn more reasonings of the Eternal Truth, than if a man had studied ten years in the schools. I teach without noise of words, without confusion of opinions, without striving after honour, without clash of arguments. I am He who teach men to despise earthly things, to loathe things present, to seek things heavenly, to enjoy things eternal, to flee honours, to endure offences, to place all hope in Me, to desire nothing apart from Me, and above all things to love Me ardently.

4. "For there was one, who by loving Me from the bottom of his heart, learned divine things, and spake things that were wonderful; he profited more by forsaking all things than by studying subtleties. But to some I speak common things, to others special; to some I appear gently in signs and figures, and again to some I reveal mysteries in much light. The voice of books is one, but it informeth not all alike; because I inwardly am the Teacher of truth, the Searcher of the heart, the Discerner of the thoughts, the Mover of actions, distributing to each man, as I judge meet."

(1) 1 Corinthians iv. 20. (2) Psalm xciv. 10. (3) Zephaniah i. 12. (4) 1 Corinthians iv. 5.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIV

  

OF NOT TROUBLING OURSELVES ABOUT OUTWARD THINGS

"My Son, in many things it behoveth thee to be ignorant, and to esteem thyself as one dead upon the earth, and as one to whom the whole world is crucified. Many things also thou must pass by with deaf ear, and must rather think upon those things which belong unto thy peace. It is more profitable to turn away thine eyes from those things that displease, and to leave each man to his own opinion, than to give thyself to discourses of strife. If thou stand well with God and hast His judgment in thy mind, thou wilt verily easily bear to be as one conquered."

2. O Lord, to what have we come? Behold a temporal loss is mourned over; for a trifling gain we labour and hurry; and spiritual loss passeth away into forgetfulness, and we rarely recover it. That which profiteth little or nothing is looked after, and that which is altogether necessary is negligently passed by; because the whole man slideth away to outward things, and unless he quickly recovereth himself in outward things he willingly lieth down.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLV

  

THAT WE MUST NOT BELIEVE EVERYONE, AND THAT WE ARE PRONE TO FALL IN OUR WORDS

Lord, be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man.(1) How often have I failed to find faithfulness, where I thought I possessed it. How many times I have found it where I least expected. Vain therefore is hope in men, but the salvation of the just, O God, is in Thee. Blessed be thou, O Lord my God, in all things which happen unto us. We are weak and unstable, we are quickly deceived and quite changed.

2. Who is the man who is able to keep himself so warily and circumspectly as not sometimes to come into some snare of perplexity? But he who trusteth in Thee, O Lord, and seeketh Thee with an unfeigned heart, doth not so easily slip. And if he fall into any tribulation, howsoever he may be entangled, yet very quickly he shall be delivered through Thee, or by Thee shall be comforted, because Thou wilt not forsake him that trusteth in Thee unto the end. A friend who continueth faithful in all the distresses of his friend is rare to be found. Thou, O Lord, Thou alone art most faithful in all things, and there is none other like unto Thee.

3. Oh, how truly wise was that holy soul which said, "My mind is steadfastly fixed, and it is grounded in Christ."(2) If thus it were with me, the fear of man should not so easily tempt me, nor the arrows of words move me. Who is sufficient to foresee all things, who to guard beforehand against future ills? If even things which are foreseen sometimes hurt us, what can things which are not foreseen do, but grievously injure? But wherefore have I not better provided for myself, miserable that I am? Why, too, have I given such heed to others? But we are men, nor are we other than frail men, even though by many we are reckoned and called angels. Whom shall I trust, O Lord, whom shall I trust but Thee? Thou art the Truth, and deceivest not, nor canst be deceived. And on the other hand, Every man is a liar,(3) weak, unstable and frail, especially in his words, so that one ought scarcely ever to believe what seemeth to sound right on the face of it.

4. With what wisdom hast thou warned us beforehand to beware of men, and that a man's foes are they of his own household,(4) and that we must not believe if one say unto us Lo here, or Lo there.(5) I have been taught by my loss, and O that I may prove more careful and not foolish hereby. "Be cautious," saith some one: "be cautious, keep unto thyself what I tell thee." And whilst I am silent and believe that it is hid with me, he himself cannot keep silence concerning it, but straightway betrayeth me and himself, and goeth his way. Protect me, O Lord, from such mischief-making and reckless men; let me not fall into their hands, nor ever do such things myself. Put a true and steadfast word into my mouth, and remove a deceitful tongue far from me. What I would not suffer, I ought by all means to beware of doing.

5. Oh, how good and peacemaking a thing it is to be silent concerning others, and not carelessly to believe all reports, nor to hand them on further; how good also to lay one's self open to few, to seek ever to have Thee as the beholder of the heart; not to be carried about with every wind of words, but to desire that all things inward and outward be done according to the good pleasure of Thy will! How safe for the preserving of heavenly grace to fly from human approval, and not to long after the things which seem to win admiration abroad, but to follow with all earnestness those things which bring amendment of life and heavenly fervour! How many have been injured by their virtue being made known and too hastily praised. How truly profitable hath been grace preserved in silence in this frail life, which, as we are told, is all temptation and warfare.

(1) Psalm lx. 11. (2) St. Agatha. (3) Psalm cxvi. 11; Romans iii. 4. (4) Matthew x. 17, 36. (5) Matthew xxiv. 23.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVI

  

OF HAVING CONFIDENCE IN GOD WHEN EVIL WORDS ARE CAST AT US

"My Son, stand fast and believe in Me. For what are words but words? They fly through the air, but they bruise no stone. If thou are guilty, think how thou wouldst gladly amend thyself; if thou knowest nothing against thyself, consider that thou wilt gladly bear this for God's sake. It is little enough that thou sometimes hast to bear hard words, for thou art not yet able to bear hard blows. And wherefore do such trivial matters go to thine heart, except that thou art yet carnal, and regardest men more than thou oughtest? For because thou fearest to be despised, thou art unwilling to be reproved for thy faults, and seekest paltry shelters of excuses.

2. "But look better into thyself, and thou shalt know that the world is still alive in thee, and the vain love of pleasing men. For when thou fleest away from being abased and confounded for thy faults, it is plain that thou art neither truly humble nor truly dead to the world, and that the world is not crucified to thee. But hearken to My word, and thou shalt not care for ten thousand words of men. Behold, if all things could be said against thee which the utmost malice could invent, what should it hurt thee if thou wert altogether to let it go, and make no more account of it than of a mote? Could it pluck out a single hair of thy head?

3. "But he that hath no heart within him, and hath not God before his eyes, is easily moved by a word of reproach; but he who trusteth in Me, and seeketh not to abide by his own judgment, shall be free from the fear of men. For I am the Judge and the Discerner of all secrets; I know how the thing hath been done; I know both the injurer and the bearer. From Me went forth that word, by My permission this hath happened, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.(1) I shall judge the guilty and the innocent; but beforehand I have willed to try them both by a secret judgment.

4. "The testimony of men often deceiveth. My judgment is true; it will stand, and it shall not be overturned. It commonly lieth hid, and only to few in certain cases is it made known; yet it never erreth, nor can err, although it seem not right to the eyes of foolish men. To Me, therefore, must men have recourse in all judgment, and must not lean to their opinion. For there shall no evil happen to the just,(2) whatsoever may be sent to him by God. Even though some unjust charge be brought against him, he will care little; nor, again, will he exult above measure, if through others he be clearly vindicated. For he considereth that I am He who try the hearts and reins,(3) who judge not outwardly and according to human appearance; for often in Mine eyes that is found blameworthy which in the judgment of men is held worthy of praise."

5. O Lord God, O Judge, just, strong, and patient, who knowest the frailty and sinfulness of men, be Thou my strength and my whole confidence; for my own conscience sufficeth me not. Thou knowest what I know not; and therefore ought I under all rebuke to humble myself, and to bear it meekly. Therefore mercifully forgive me as often as I have not done this, and grant me the next time the grace of greater endurance. For better unto me is Thine abundant pity for the attainment of Thy pardon, than the righteousness which I believe myself to have for defence against my conscience, which lieth wait against me. Although I know nothing against myself, yet I am not hereby justified,(4) because if Thy mercy were removed away, in Thy sight should no man living be justified.(5)

(1) Luke ii. 35. (2) Proverbs xii. 21. (3) Psalm vii. 9. (4) 1 Corinthians iv. 4. (5) Psalm cxliii. 2.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVII

  

THAT ALL TROUBLES ARE TO BE ENDURED FOR THE SAKE OF ETERNAL LIFE

"My Son, let not the labours which thou hast undertaken for Me break thee down, nor let tribulations cast thee down in any wise, but let my promise strengthen and comfort thee in every event. I am sufficient to reward thee above all measure and extent. Not long shalt thou labour here, nor always be weighed down with sorrows. Wait yet a little while, and thou shalt see a speedy end of thine evils. An hour shall come when all labour and confusion shall cease. Little and short is all that passeth away with time.

2. "Do earnestly what thou dost; labour faithfully in My vineyard; I will be thy reward. Write, read, sing, weep, be silent, pray, endure adversities manfully; eternal life is worthy of all these conflicts, yea, and of greater. Peace shall come in one day which is known to the Lord; which shall be neither day nor night,(1) but light eternal, infinite clearness, steadfast peace, and undisturbed rest. Thou shalt not say then, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?(2) nor cry out, Woe is me, for my sojourning is prolonged,(3) because death will be utterly destroyed, and there shall be salvation which can never fail, no more anxiety, happy delight, sweet and noble society.

3. "Oh, if thou sawest the unfading crowns of the Saints in heaven, and with what great glory they now rejoice, who aforetime were reckoned by this world contemptibly and as it were unworthy of life, truly thou wouldst immediately humble thyself even to the earth, and wouldst desire rather to be in subjection to all, than to have authority over one; nor wouldst thou long for pleasant days of this life, but wouldst more rejoice to be afflicted for God's sake, and wouldst esteem it gain to be counted for nought amongst men.

4. "Oh, if these things were sweet to thy taste, and moved thee to the bottom of thine heart, how shouldst thou dare even once to complain? Are not all laborious things to be endured for the sake of eternal life? It is no small thing, the losing or gaining the Kingdom of God. Lift up therefore thy face to heaven. Behold, I and all My Saints with Me, who in this world had a hard conflict, now rejoice, are now comforted, are now secure, are now at peace, and shall remain with Me evermore in the Kingdom of My Father."

(1) Zechariah xiv. 7. (2) Romans vii. 24. (3) Psalm cxx.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLVIII

  

OF THE DAY OF ETERNITY AND OF THE STRAITNESSES OF THIS LIFE

Oh most blessed mansion of the City which is above! Oh most clear day of eternity which the night obscureth not, but the Supreme Truth ever enlighteneth! Day always joyful, always secure and never changing its state into those which are contrary. Oh would that this day might shine forth, and that all these temporal things would come to an end. It shineth indeed upon the Saints, glowing with unending brightness, but only from afar and through a glass, upon those who are pilgrims on the earth.

2. The citizens of heaven know how glorious that day is; the exiled sons of Eve groan, because this is bitter and wearisome. The days of this life are few and evil, full of sorrows and straits, where man is defiled with many sins, ensnared with many passions, bound fast with many fears, wearied with many cares, distracted with many questionings, entangled with many vanities, compassed about with many errors, worn away with many labours, weighed down with temptations, enervated by pleasures, tormented by poverty.

3. Oh when shall there be an end of these evils? When shall I be delivered from the wretched slavery of my sins? When shall I be mindful, O Lord, of Thee alone? When shall I rejoice in Thee to the full? When shall I be in true liberty without any impediment, without any burden on mind or body? When shall there be solid peace, peace immovable and secure, peace within and without, peace firm on every side? Blessed Jesus, when shall I stand to behold Thee? When shall I gaze upon the glory of Thy kingdom? When shalt Thou be to me all in all? Oh when shall I be with Thee in Thy Kingdom which Thou hast prepared from the foundation of the world for them that love Thee? I am left destitute, an exile in a hostile land, where are daily wars and grievous misfortunes.

4. Console my exile, mitigate my sorrow, for towards Thee all my desire longeth. For all is to me a burden, whatsoever this world offereth for consolation. I yearn to enjoy Thee intimately, but I cannot attain unto it. I long to cleave to heavenly things, but temporal things and unmortified passions press me down. In my mind I would be above all things, but in my flesh I am unwillingly compelled to be beneath them. So, wretched man that I am, I fight with myself, and am made grievous even unto myself, while the spirit seeketh to be above and the flesh to be beneath.

5. Oh how I suffer inwardly, while with the mind I discourse on heavenly things, and presently a crowd of carnal things rusheth upon me whilst I pray. My God, be not Thou far from me, nor depart in wrath from Thy servant. Cast forth Thy lightning and scatter them; send out Thine arrows,(1) and let all delusions of my enemy be confounded. Recall my senses unto Thyself, cause me to forget all worldly things; grant me quickly to cast away and despise the imaginations of sin. Succour me, O Eternal Truth, that no vanity may move me. Come unto me, O Heavenly Sweetness, and let all impurity flee from before Thy face. Pardon me also, and of Thy mercy deal gently with me, whensoever in prayer I think on anything besides Thee; for truly I confess that I am wont to be continually distracted. For often and often, where in the body I stand or sit, there I myself am not; but rather am I there, whither I am borne by my thoughts. Where my thought is, there am I; and there commonly is my thought where that which I love is. That readily occurreth to me, which naturally delighteth, or pleaseth through custom.

6. Wherefore Thou, who art the Truth, hast plainly said, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.(2) If I love heaven, I gladly meditate on heavenly things. If I love the world, I rejoice in the delights of the world, and am made sorry by its adversities. If I love the flesh, I am continually imagining the things which belong to the flesh; if I love the spirit, I am delighted by meditating on spiritual things. For whatsoever things I love, on these I readily converse and listen, and carry home with me the images of them. But blessed is that man who for Thy sake, O Lord, is willing to part from all creatures; who doth violence to his fleshly nature and crucifieth the lusts of the flesh by the fervour of his spirit, so that with serene conscience he may offer unto Thee a pure prayer, and be made worthy to enter into the angelic choirs, having shut out from himself, both outwardly and inwardly, all worldly things.

(1) Psalm lxxi. 12. (2) Matthew vi. 21.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XLIX

  

OF THE DESIRE AFTER ETERNAL LIFE, AND HOW GREAT BLESSINGS ARE PROMISED TO THOSE WHO STRIVE

"My Son, when thou feelest the desire of eternal happiness to be poured into thee from above, and longest to depart from the tabernacle of this body, that thou mayest contemplate My glory without shadow of turning, enlarge thine heart, and take in this holy inspiration with all thy desire. Give most hearty thanks to the Supreme Goodness, who dealeth with thee so graciously, visiteth thee so lovingly, stirreth thee up so fervently, raiseth thee so powerfully, lest thou sink down through thine own weight, to earthly things. For not by thine own meditating or striving dost thou receive this gift, but by the sole gracious condescension of Supreme Grace and Divine regard; to the end that thou mayest make progress in virtue and in more humility, and prepare thyself for future conflicts, and cleave unto Me with all the affection of thy heart, and strive to serve Me with fervent will.

2. "My Son, often the fire burneth, but the flame ascendeth not without smoke. So also the desires of some men burn towards heavenly things, and yet they are not free from the temptation of carnal affection. Thus therefore they are not acting with an altogether simple desire for God's glory when they pray to Him so earnestly. Such, too, is oftentimes thy desire, when thou hast imagined it to be so earnest. For that is not pure and perfect which is tainted with thine own self-seeking.

3. "Seek thou not what is pleasant and advantageous to thyself, but what is acceptable and honourable unto Me; for if thou judgest rightly, thou must choose and follow after My appointment rather than thine own desire; yea, rather than anything that can be desired. I know thy desire, and I have heard thy many groanings. Already thou longest to be in the glorious liberty of the children of God; already the eternal home delighteth thee, and the heavenly country full of joy; but the hour is not yet come; there remaineth still another season, even a season of warfare, a season of labour and probation. Thou desirest to be filled with the Chief Good, but thou canst not attain it immediately. I AM that Good; wait for Me, until the Kingdom of God shall come.

4. "Thou must still be tried upon earth, and be exercised in many things. Consolation shall from time to time be given thee, but abundant satisfying shall not be granted. Be strong therefore, and be thou brave both in working and in suffering things which are against thy nature. Thou must put on the new man, and be changed into another man. Thou must often do what thou wouldst not; and thou must leave undone what thou wouldst do. What pleaseth others shall have good success, what pleaseth thee shall have no prosperity. What others say shall be listened to; what thou sayest shall receive no heed. Others shall ask and receive; thou shalt ask and not obtain. Others shall be great in the report of men, but about thee shall nothing be spoken. To others this or that shall be entrusted; thou shalt be judged useful for nought.

5. "For this cause nature shall sometimes be filled with sadness; and it is a great thing if thou bear it silently. In this and many like things the faithful servant of the Lord is wont to be tried, how far he is able to deny himself and bring himself into subjection in all things. Scarcely is there anything in which thou hast need to mortify thyself so much as in seeing things which are adverse to thy will; especially when things are commanded thee to be done which seem to thee inexpedient or of little use to thee. And because thou darest not resist a higher power, being under authority, therefore it seemeth hard for thee to shape thy course according to the nod of another, and to forego thine own opinion.

6. "But consider, My Son, the fruit of these labours, the swift end, and the reward exceeding great; and thou shalt find it no pain to bear them then, but rather the strongest solace of thy patience. For even in exchange for this trifling desire which thou hast readily forsaken, thou shalt always have thy will in Heaven. There verily thou shalt find all that thou wouldst, all that thou canst long for. There thou shalt have all good within thy power without the fear of losing it. There thy will, ever at one with Mine, shall desire nothing outward, nothing for itself. There no man shall withstand thee, none shall complain of thee, none shall hinder, nothing shall stand in thy path; but all things desired by thee shall be present together, and shall refresh thy whole affection, and fill it up even to the brim. There I will glory for the scorn suffered here, the garment of praise for sorrow, and for the lowest place a throne in the Kingdom, for ever. There shall appear the fruit of obedience, the labour of repentance shall rejoice, and humble subjection shall be crowned gloriously.

7. "Now therefore bow thyself humbly under the hands of all men; nor let it trouble thee who said this or who ordered that; but take special heed that whether thy superior, thy inferior, or thy equal, require anything from thee, or even show a desire for it; take it all in good part, and study with a good will to fulfil the desire. Let one seek this, another that; let this man glory in this, and that man in that, and be praised a thousand thousand times, but rejoice thou only in the contempt of thyself, and in Mine own good pleasure and glory. This is what thou art to long for, even that whether by life or by death God may be ever magnified in thee."(1)

(1) Philippians i. 20.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER L

  

HOW A DESOLATE MAN OUGHT TO COMMIT HIMSELF INTO THE HANDS OF GOD

O Lord, Holy Father, be Thou blessed now and evermore; because as Thou wilt so it is done, and what Thou doest is good. Let Thy servant rejoice in Thee, not in himself, nor in any other; because Thou alone art the true joy, Thou art my hope and my crown, Thou art my joy and my honour, O Lord. What hath Thy servant, which he received not from Thee, even without merit of his own? Thine are all things which Thou hast given, and which Thou hast made. I am poor and in misery even from my youth up,(1) and my soul is sorrowful unto tears, sometimes also it is disquieted within itself, because of the sufferings which are coming upon it.

2. I long after the joy of peace; for the peace of Thy children do I beseech, for in the light of Thy comfort they are fed by Thee. If Thou give peace, if Thou pour into me holy joy, the soul of Thy servant shall be full of melody, and devout in Thy praise. But if Thou withdraw Thyself as too often Thou art wont, he will not be able to run in the way of Thy commandments, but rather he will smite his breast and will bow his knees; because it is not with him as yesterday and the day before, when Thy candle shined upon his head,(2) and he walked under the shadow of Thy wings,(3) from the temptations which beset him.

3. O Father, righteous and ever to be praised, the hour cometh when Thy servant is to be proved. O beloved Father, it is well that in this hour Thy servant suffer somewhat for Thy sake. O Father, evermore to be adored, as the hour cometh which Thou foreknewest from everlasting, when for a little while Thy servant should outwardly bow down, but always live inwardly with Thee; when for a little while he should be little regarded, humbled, and fail in the eyes of men; should be wasted with sufferings and weaknesses, to rise again with Thee in the dawn of the new light, and be glorified in the heavenly places. O Holy Father, thou hast ordained it so, and so hast willed it; and that is done which Thou Thyself hast commanded.

4. For this is Thy favour to Thy friend, that he should suffer and be troubled in the world for Thy love's sake, how often soever, and by whomsoever and whosoever Thou hast suffered it to be done. Without Thy counsel and providence, and without cause, nothing cometh to pass on the earth. It is good for me, Lord, that I had been in trouble, that I may learn Thy statutes,(4) and may cast away all pride of heart and presumption. It is profitable for me that confusion hath covered my face, that I may seek to Thee for consolation rather than unto men. By this also I have learned to dread Thine unsearchable judgment, who afflictest the just with the wicked, but not without equity and justice.

5. Thanks be unto Thee, because Thou hast not spared my sins, but hast beaten me with stripes of love, inflicting pains, and sending troubles upon me without and within. There is none who can console me, of all things which are under heaven, but Thou only, O Lord my God, Thou heavenly Physician of souls, who dost scourge and hast mercy, who leadest down to hell and bringest up again.(5) Thy discipline over me, and Thy rod itself shall teach me.

6. Behold, O beloved Father, I am in Thy hands, I bow myself under the rod of Thy correction. Smite my back and my neck that I may bend my crookedness to Thy will. Make me a pious and lowly disciple, as Thou wert wont to be kind, that I may walk according to every nod of Thine. To Thee I commend myself and all that I have for correction; better is it to be punished here than hereafter. Thou knowest all things and each of them; and nothing remaineth hid from Thee in man's conscience. Before they are, thou knowest that they will be, and Thou needest not that any man teach Thee or admonish Thee concerning the things which are done upon the earth. Thou knowest what is expedient for my profit, and how greatly trouble serveth unto the scrubbing off the rust of sin. Do with me according to Thy desired good pleasure, and despise not my life which is full of sin, known to none so entirely and fully as to Thee alone.

7. Grant me, O Lord, to know that which ought to be known; to love that which ought to be loved; to praise that which pleaseth Thee most, to esteem that which is precious in Thy sight, to blame that which is vile in Thine eyes. Suffer me not to judge according to the sight of bodily eyes, nor to give sentence according to the hearing of the ears of ignorant men; but to discern in true judgment between visible and spiritual things, and above all things to be ever seeking after the will of Thy good pleasure.

8. Oftentimes the senses of men are deceived in judging; the lovers of the world also are deceived in that they love only visible things. What is a man better because by man he is reckoned very great? The deceiver deceiveth the deceiver, the vain man the vain, the blind man the blind, the weak man the weak, when they exalt one another; and in truth they rather put to shame, while they foolishly praise. For as humble St. Francis saith, "What each one is in Thine eyes, so much he is, and no more."

(1) Psalm lxxxviii. 15. (2) Job xxix. 3. (3) Psalm xvii. 8. (4) Psalm cxix. 71. (5) Job xiii. 2.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LI

  

THAT WE MUST GIVE OURSELVES TO HUMBLE WORKS WHEN WE ARE UNEQUAL TO THOSE THAT ARE LOFTY

"My Son, thou art not always able to continue in very fervent desire after virtues, nor to stand fast in the loftier region of contemplation; but thou must of necessity sometimes descend to lower things because of thine original corruption, and bear about the burden of corruptible life, though unwillingly and with weariness. So long as thou wearest a mortal body, thou shalt feel weariness and heaviness of heart. Therefore thou oughtest to groan often in the flesh because of the burden of the flesh, inasmuch as thou canst not give thyself to spiritual studies and divine contemplation unceasingly.

2. "At such a time it is expedient for thee to flee to humble and external works, and to renew thyself with good actions; to wait for My coming and heavenly visitation with sure confidence; to bear thy exile and drought of mind with patience, until thou be visited by Me again, and be freed from all anxieties. For I will cause thee to forget thy labours, and altogether to enjoy eternal peace. I will spread open before thee the pleasant pastures of the Scriptures, that with enlarged heart thou mayest begin to run in the way of My commandments. And thou shalt say, 'The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.'"(1)

(1) Romans viii. 18.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LII

  

THAT A MAN OUGHT NOT TO RECKON HIMSELF WORTHY OF CONSOLATION, BUT MORE WORTHY OF CHASTISEMENT

O Lord, I am not worthy of Thy consolation, nor of any spiritual visitation; and therefore Thou dealest justly with me, when Thou leavest me poor and desolate. For if I were able to pour forth tears like the sea, still should I not be worthy of Thy consolation. Therefore am I nothing worthy save to be scourged and punished, because I have grievously and many a time offended Thee, and in many things have greatly sinned. Therefore, true account being taken, I am not worthy even of the least of Thy consolations. But Thou, gracious and merciful God, who willest not that Thy works should perish, to show forth the riches of Thy mercy upon the vessels of mercy,(1) vouchsafest even beyond all his own deserving, to comfort Thy servant above the measure of mankind. For Thy consolations are not like unto the discoursings of men.

2. What have I done, O Lord, that Thou shouldst bestow any heavenly comfort upon me? I remember not that I have done any good, but have been ever prone to sin and slow to amendment. It is true and I cannot deny it. If I should say otherwise, Thou wouldst rise up against me, and there would be none to defend me. What have I deserved for my sins but hell and everlasting fire? In very truth I confess that I am worthy of all scorn and contempt, nor is it fit that I should be remembered among Thy faithful servants. And although I be unwilling to hear this, nevertheless I will for the Truth's sake, accuse myself of my sins, that the more readily I may prevail to be accounted worthy of Thy mercy.

3. What shall I say, guilty that I am and filled with confusion? I have no mouth to utter, unless it be this word alone, "I have sinned, Lord, I have sinned; have mercy upon me, forgive me." Let me alone, that I may take comfort a little before I go whence I shall not return even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death.(2) What dost Thou so much require of a guilty and miserable sinner, as that he be contrite, and humble himself for his sins? In true contrition and humiliation of heart is begotten the hope of pardon, the troubled conscience is reconciled, lost grace is recovered, a man is preserved from the wrath to come, and God and the penitent soul hasten to meet each other with a holy kiss.(3)

4. The humble contrition of sinners is an acceptable sacrifice unto Thee, O Lord, sending forth a smell sweeter far in Thy sight than the incense. This also is that pleasant ointment which Thou wouldst have poured upon Thy sacred feet, for a broken and contrite heart Thou hast never despised.(4) There is the place of refuge from the wrathful countenance of the enemy. There is amended and washed away whatsoever evil hath elsewhere been contracted.

(1) Romans ix. 23. (2) Job x. 20, 21. (3) Luke xv. 20. (4) Psalm li. 17.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LIII

  

THAT THE GRACE OF GOD DOTH NOT JOIN ITSELF TO THOSE WHO MIND EARTHLY THINGS

"My Son, precious is My grace, it suffereth not itself to be joined with outward things, nor with earthly consolations. Therefore thou oughtest to cast away all things which hinder grace, if thou longest to receive the inpouring thereof. Seek a secret place for thyself, love to dwell alone with thyself, desire the conversation of no one; but rather pour out thy devout prayer to God, that thou mayest possess a contrite mind and a pure conscience. Count the whole world as nought; seek to be alone with God before all outward things. For thou canst not be alone with Me, and at the same time be delighted with transitory things. Thou oughtest to be separated from thy acquaintances and dear friends, and keep thy mind free from all worldly comfort. So the blessed Apostle Peter beseecheth, that Christ's faithful ones bear themselves in this world as strangers and pilgrims.(1)

2. "Oh how great a confidence shall there be to the dying man whom no affection to anything detaineth in the world? But to have a heart so separated from all things, a sickly soul doth not yet comprehend, nor doth the carnal man know the liberty of the spiritual man. But if indeed he desire to be spiritually minded, he must renounce both those who are far off, and those who are near, and to beware of no man more than himself. If thou perfectly conquer thyself, very easily shalt thou subdue all things besides. Perfect victory is the triumph over oneself. For whoso keepeth himself in subjection, in such manner that the sensual affections obey the reason, and the reason in all things obeyeth Me, he truly is conqueror of himself, and lord of the world.

3. "If thou desire to climb to this height, thou oughtest to start bravely, and to lay the axe to the root, to the end that thou mayest pull up and destroy the hidden inordinate inclination towards thyself, and towards all selfish and earthly good. From this sin, that a man loveth himself too inordinately, almost everything hangeth which needeth to be utterly overcome: when that evil is conquered and put under foot, there shall be great peace and tranquillity continually. But because few strive earnestly to die perfectly to themselves, and do not heartily go forth from themselves, therefore do they remain entangled in themselves, and cannot be raised in spirit above themselves. But he who desireth to walk at liberty with Me, must of necessity mortify all his evil and inordinate affections, and must cling to no creature with selfish love."

(1) 1 Peter ii. 11.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LIV

  

OF THE DIVERSE MOTIONS OF NATURE AND OF GRACE

"My Son, pay diligent heed to the motions of Nature and of Grace, because they move in a very contrary and subtle manner, and are hardly distinguished save by a spiritual and inwardly enlightened man. All men indeed seek good, and make pretence of something good in all that they say or do; and thus under the appearance of good many are deceived.

2. "Nature is deceitful and draweth away, ensnareth, and deceiveth many, and always hath self for her end; but Grace walketh in simplicity and turneth away from every appearance of evil, maketh no false pretences, and doeth all entirely for the sake of God, in whom also she finally resteth.

3. "Nature is very unwilling to die, and to be pressed down, and to be overcome, and to be in subjection, and to bear the yoke readily; but Grace studieth self-mortification, resisteth sensuality, seeketh to be subdued, longeth to be conquered, and willeth not to use her own liberty. She loveth to be held by discipline, and not to have authority over any, but always to live, to remain, to have her being under God, and for God's sake is ready to be humbly subject to every ordinance of man.

4. "Nature laboureth for her own advantage, and considereth what profit she may gain from another; but Grace considereth more, not what may be useful and convenient to self, but what may be profitable to the many.

5. "Nature willingly receiveth honour and reverence; but Grace faithfully ascribeth all honour and glory to God.

6. "Nature feareth confusion and contempt, but Grace rejoiceth to suffer shame for the name of Jesus.

7. "Nature loveth ease and bodily quiet; Grace cannot be unemployed, but gladly embraceth labour.

8. "Nature seeketh to possess things curious and attractive, and abhorreth those which are rough and cheap; Grace is delighted with things simple and humble, despiseth not those which are rough, nor refuseth to be clothed with old garments.

9. "Nature hath regard to things temporal, rejoiceth in earthly lucre, is made sad by loss, vexed by any little injurious word; but Grace reacheth after things eternal, cleaveth not to those which are temporal, is not perturbed by losses, nor embittered by any hard words, because she hath placed her treasure and joy in heaven where nought perisheth.

10. "Nature is covetous, and receiveth more willingly than she giveth, loveth things that are personal and private to herself; while Grace is kind and generous, avoideth selfishness, is contented with a little, believeth that it is more blessed to give than to receive.

11. "Nature inclineth thee to created things, to thine own flesh, to vanities and dissipation; but Grace draweth to God and to virtues, renounceth creatures, fleeth from the world, hateth the desires of the flesh, restraineth vagaries, blusheth to be seen in public.

12. "Nature is glad to receive some outward solace in which the senses may have delight; but Grace seeketh to be comforted in God alone, and to have delight in the chief good above all visible things.

13. "Nature doeth everything for her own gain and profit, can do nothing as a free favour, but hopeth to attain something as good or better, or some praise or favour for her benefits; and she loveth that her own deeds and gifts should be highly valued; but Grace seeketh nothing temporal, nor requireth any other gift of reward than God alone; neither longeth she for more of temporal necessities than such as may suffice for the attaining of eternal life.

14. "Nature rejoiceth in many friends and kinsfolk, she boasteth of noble place and noble birth, she smileth on the powerful, flattereth the rich, applaudeth those who are like herself; but Grace loveth even her enemies, and is not lifted up by the multitude of friends, setteth no store upon high place or high birth, unless there be greater virtue therewith; favoureth the poor man more than the rich, hath more sympathy with the innocent than with the powerful; rejoiceth with the truthful, not with the liar; always exhorteth the good to strive after better gifts of grace, and to become by holiness like unto the Son of God.

15. "Nature quickly complaineth of poverty and of trouble; Grace beareth want with constancy.

16. "Nature looketh upon all things in reference to herself; striveth and argueth for self; but Grace bringeth back all things to God from whom they came at the beginning; ascribeth no good to herself nor arrogantly presumeth; is not contentious, nor preferreth her own opinion to others, but in every sense and understanding submitteth herself to the Eternal wisdom and the Divine judgment.

17. "Nature is eager to know secrets and to hear new things; she loveth to appear abroad, and to make experience of many things through the senses; she desireth to be acknowledged and to do those things which win praise and admiration; but Grace careth not to gather up new or curious things, because all this springeth from the old corruption, whereas there is nothing new or lasting upon earth. So she teacheth to restrain the senses, to shun vain complacency and ostentation, to hide humbly those things which merit praise and real admiration, and from everything and in all knowledge to seek after useful fruit, and the praise and honour of God. She desireth not to receive praise for herself or her own, but longeth that God be blessed in all His gifts, who out of unmingled love bestoweth all things."

18. This Grace is a supernatural light, and a certain special gift of God, and the proper mark of the elect, and the pledge of eternal salvation; it exalteth a man from earthly things to love those that are heavenly; and it maketh the carnal man spiritual. So far therefore as Nature is utterly pressed down and overcome, so far is greater Grace bestowed and the inner man is daily created anew by fresh visitations, after the image of God.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LV

  

OF THE CORRUPTION OF NATURE AND THE EFFICACY OF DIVINE GRACE

O Lord my God, who hast created me after thine own image and similitude, grant me this grace, which Thou hast shown to be so great and so necessary for salvation, that I may conquer my wicked nature, which draweth me to sin and to perdition. For I feel in my flesh the law of sin, contradicting the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the obedience of sensuality in many things; nor can I resist its passions, unless Thy most holy grace assist me, fervently poured into my heart.

2. There is need of Thy grace, yea, and of a great measure thereof, that my nature may be conquered, which hath alway been prone to evil from my youth. For being fallen through the first man Adam, and corrupted through sin, the punishment of this stain descended upon all men; so that Nature itself, which was framed good and right by Thee, is now used to express the vice and infirmity of corrupted Nature; because its motion left unto itself draweth men away to evil and to lower things. For the little power which remaineth is as it were one spark lying hid in the ashes. This is Natural reason itself, encompassed with thick clouds, having yet a discernment of good and evil, a distinction of the true and the false, though it be powerless to fulfil all that it approveth, and possess not yet the full light of truth, nor healthfulness of its affections.

3. Hence it is, O my God, that I delight in Thy law after the inward man,(1) knowing that Thy commandment is holy and just and good; reproving also all evil, and the sin that is to be avoided: yet with the flesh I serve the law of sin, whilst I obey sensuality rather than reason. Hence it is that to will to do good is present with me, but how to perform it I find not.(2) Hence I ofttimes purpose many good things; but because grace is lacking to help mine infirmities, I fall back before a little resistance and fail. Hence it cometh to pass that I recognize the way of perfectness, and see very clearly what things I ought to do; but pressed down by the weight of my own corruption, I rise not to the things which are more perfect.

4. Oh how entirely necessary is Thy grace to me, O Lord, for a good beginning, for progress, and for bringing to perfection. For without it I can do nothing, but I can do all things through Thy grace which strengtheneth me.(3) O truly heavenly grace, without which our own merits are nought, and no gifts of Nature at all are to be esteemed. Arts, riches, beauty, strength, wit, eloquence, they all avail nothing before Thee, O Lord, without Thy grace. For the gifts of Nature belong to good and evil alike; but the proper gift of the elect is grace--that is, love-- and they who bear the mark thereof are held worthy of everlasting life. So mighty is this grace, that without it neither the gift of prophecy nor the working of miracles, nor any speculation, howsoever lofty, is of any value at all. But neither faith, nor hope, nor any other virtue is accepted with Thee without love and grace.

5. O most blessed grace that makest the poor in spirit rich in virtues, and renderest him who is rich in many things humble in spirit, come Thou, descend upon me, fill me early with Thy consolation, lest my soul fail through weariness and drought of mind. I beseech thee, O Lord, that I may find grace in Thy sight, for Thy grace is sufficient for me,(4) when I obtain not those things which Nature longeth for. If I be tempted and vexed with many tribulations, I will fear no evil, while Thy grace remaineth with me. This alone is my strength, this bringeth me counsel and help. It is more powerful than all enemies, and wiser than all the wise men in the world.

6. It is the mistress of truth, the teacher of discipline, the light of the heart, the solace of anxiety, the banisher of sorrow, the deliverer from fear, the nurse of devotion, the drawer forth of tears. What am I without it, save a dry tree, a useless branch, worthy to be cast away! "Let Thy grace, therefore, O Lord, always prevent and follow me, and make me continually given to all good works, through Jesus Christ, Thy Son. Amen."

(1) Romans vii. 12, 22. 25. (2) Romans vii. 18. (3) Philippians iv. 13. (4) 2 Corinthians xii. 9.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVI

  

THAT WE OUGHT TO DENY OURSELVES, AND TO IMITATE CHRIST BY MEANS OF THE CROSS

My Son, so far as thou art able to go out of thyself so far shalt thou be able to enter into Me. As to desire no outward thing worketh internal peace, so the forsaking of self inwardly joineth unto God. I will that thou learn perfect self-denial, living in My will without contradiction or complaint. Follow Me: I am the way, the truth, and the life.(1) Without the way thou canst not go, without the truth thou canst not know, without the life thou canst not live. I am the Way which thou oughtest to follow; the Truth which thou oughtest to believe; the Life which thou oughtest to hope for. I am the Way unchangeable; the Truth infallible; the Life everlasting. I am the Way altogether straight, the Truth supreme, the true Life, the blessed Life, the uncreated Life. If thou remain in My way thou shalt know the Truth, and the truth shall make thee free,(2) and thou shalt lay hold on eternal life.

2. "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.(3) If thou wilt know the truth, believe in Me. If thou wilt be perfect, sell all that thou hast. If thou wilt be My disciple, deny thyself. If thou wouldst possess the blessed life, despise the life which now is. If thou wilt be exalted in heaven, humble thyself in the world. If thou wilt reign with Me, bear the cross with Me; for only the servants of the cross find the way of blessedness and of true light."

3. O Lord Jesu, forasmuch as Thy life was straitened and despised by the world, grant unto me to imitate Thee in despising the world, for the servant is not greater than his lord, nor the disciple above his master.(4) Let Thy servant be exercised in Thy life, because there is my salvation and true holiness. Whatsoever I read or hear besides it, it refresheth me not, nor giveth me delight.

4. "My son, because thou knowest these things and hast read them all, blessed shalt thou be if thou doest them. He who hath My commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me, and I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him,(5) and I will make him to sit down with Me in My Father's Kingdom."

5. O Lord Jesu, as Thou hast said and promised, even so let it be unto me, and grant me to prove worthy. I have received the cross at Thy hand; I have carried it, and will carry it even unto death, as Thou hast laid it upon me. Truly the life of a truly devoted servant is a cross, but it leadeth to paradise. I have begun; I may not return back nor leave it.

6. Come, my brothers, let us together go forward. Jesus shall be with us. For Jesus' sake have we taken up this cross, for Jesus' sake let us persevere in the cross. He will be our helper, who was our Captain and Forerunner. Behold our King entereth in before us, and He will fight for us. Let us follow bravely, let no man fear terrors; let us be prepared to die bravely in battle, and let us not so stain our honour,(6) as to fly from the cross.

(1) John xiv. 6. (2) John viii. 32. (3) Matthew xix. 17, 21. (4) Matthew x. 24. (5) John xiv. 21. (6) 1 Mac. ix. 10.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVII

  

THAT A MAN MUST NOT BE TOO MUCH CAST DOWN WHEN HE FALLETH INTO SOME FAULTS

"My Son, patience and humility in adversities are more pleasing to Me than much comfort and devotion in prosperity. Why doth a little thing spoken against thee make thee sad? If it had been more, thou still oughtest not to be moved. But now suffer it to go by; it is not the first, it is not new, and it will not be the last, if thou live long. Thou art brave enough, so long as no adversity meeteth thee. Thou givest good counsel also, and knowest how to strengthen others with thy words; but when tribulation suddenly knocketh at thine own door, thy counsel and strength fail. Consider thy great frailty, which thou dost so often experience in trifling matters nevertheless, for thy soul's health these things are done when they and such like happen unto thee.

2. "Put them away from thy heart as well as thou canst, and if tribulation hath touched thee, yet let it not cast thee down nor entangle thee long. At the least, bear patiently, if thou canst not joyfully. And although thou be very unwilling to hear it, and feel indignation, yet check thyself, and suffer no unadvised word to come forth from thy lips, whereby the little ones may be offended. Soon the storm which hath been raised shall be stilled, and inward grief shall be sweetened by returning grace. I yet live, saith the Lord, ready to help thee, and to give thee more than wonted consolation if thou put thy trust in Me, and call devoutly upon Me.

3. "Be thou more calm of spirit, and gird thyself for greater endurance. All is not frustrated, though thou find thyself very often afflicted or grievously tempted. Thou art man, not God; thou art flesh, not an angel. How shouldst thou be able to remain alway in the same state of virtue, when an angel in heaven fell, and the first man in paradise? I am He who lifteth up the mourners to deliverance, and those who know their own infirmity I raise up to my own nature."

4. O Lord, blessed be Thy word, sweeter to my mouth than honey and the honeycomb. What should I do in my so great tribulations and anxieties, unless Thou didst comfort me with Thy holy words? If only I may attain unto the haven of salvation, what matter is it what things or how many I suffer? Give me a good end, give me a happy passage out of this world. Remember me, O my God, and lead me by the right way unto Thy Kingdom. Amen.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LVIII

  

OF DEEPER MATTERS, AND GOD'S HIDDEN JUDGMENTS WHICH ARE NOT TO BE INQUIRED INTO

"My Son, beware thou dispute not of high matters and of the hidden judgments of God; why this man is thus left, and that man is taken into so great favour; why also this man is so greatly afflicted, and that so highly exalted. These things pass all man's power of judging, neither may any reasoning or disputation have power to search out the divine judgments. When therefore the enemy suggesteth these things to thee, or when any curious people ask such questions, answer with that word of the Prophet, Just art Thou, O Lord, and true is Thy judgment,(1) and with this, The judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.(2) My judgments are to be feared, not to be disputed on, because they are incomprehensible to human understanding.

2. "And be not given to inquire or dispute about the merits of the Saints, which is holier than another, or which is the greater in the Kingdom of Heaven. Such questions often beget useless strifes and contentions: they also nourish pride and vain glory, whence envyings and dissensions arise, while one man arrogantly endeavoureth to exalt one Saint and another another. But to wish to know and search out such things bringeth no fruit, but it rather displeaseth the Saints; for I am not the God of confusion but of peace;(3) which peace consisteth more in true humility than in self-exaltation.

3. "Some are drawn by zeal of love to greater affection to these Saints or those; but this is human affection rather than divine. I am He Who made all the Saints: I gave them grace, I brought them glory; I know the merits of every one; I prevented them with the blessings of My goodness.(4) I foreknew my beloved ones from everlasting, I chose them out of the world;(5) they did not choose Me. I called them by My grace, drew them by My mercy, led them on through sundry temptations. I poured mighty consolations upon them, I gave them perseverance, I crowned their patience.

4. "I acknowledge the first and the last; I embrace all with inestimable love. I am to be praised in all My Saints; I am to be blessed above all things, and to be honoured in every one whom I have so gloriously exalted and predestined, without any preceding merits of their own. He therefore that shall despise one of the least of these My people, honoureth not the great; because I made both small and great.(6) And he who speaketh against any of My Saints speaketh against Me, and against all others in the Kingdom of Heaven."

   They are all one through the bond of charity; they think the
 same thing, will the same thing, and all are united in love one to another.

5. "But yet (which is far better) they love Me above themselves and their own merits. For being caught up above themselves, and drawn beyond self-love, they go all straightforward to the love of Me, and they rest in Me in perfect enjoyment. There is nothing which can turn them away or press them down; for being full of Eternal Truth, they burn with the fire of inextinguishable charity. Therefore let all carnal and natural men hold their peace concerning the state of the Saints, for they know nothing save to love their own personal enjoyment. They take away and add according to their own inclination, not as it pleaseth the Eternal Truth.

6. "In many men this is ignorance, chiefly is it so in those who, being little enlightened, rarely learn to love any one with perfect spiritual love. They are still much drawn by natural affection and human friendship to these or to those: and as they reckon of themselves in lower matters, so also do they frame imaginations of things heavenly. But there is an immeasurable difference between those things which they imperfectly imagine, and these things which enlightened men behold through supernatural revelation.

7. "Take heed, therefore, My son, that thou treat not curiously those things which surpass thy knowledge, but rather make this thy business and give attention to it, namely, that thou seek to be found, even though it be the least, in the Kingdom of God. And even if any one should know who were holier than others, or who were held greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven; what should that knowledge profit him, unless through this knowledge he should humble himself before Me, and should rise up to give greater praise unto My name? He who considereth how great are his own sins, how small his virtues, and how far he is removed from the perfection of the Saints, doeth far more acceptably in the sight of God, than he who disputeth about their greatness or littleness.

8. "They are altogether well content, if men would learn to be content, and to refrain from vain babbling. They glory not of their own merits, seeing they ascribe no good unto themselves, but all unto Me, seeing that I of my infinite charity have given them all things. They are filled with so great love of the Divinity, and with such overflowing joy, that no glory is lacking to them, neither can any felicity be lacking. All the Saints, the higher they are exalted in glory, the humbler are they in themselves, and the nearer and dearer are they unto Me. And so thou hast it written that they cast their crowns before God and fell on their faces before the Lamb, and worshipped Him that liveth for ever and ever.(7)

9. "Many ask who is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, who know not whether they shall be worthy to be counted among the least. It is a great thing to be even the least in Heaven, where all are great, because all shall be called, and shall be, the sons of God. A little one shall become a thousand, but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed. For when the disciples asked who should be the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, they received no other answer than this, Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same shall be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven."(8)

10. Woe unto them who disdain to humble themselves willingly with the little children; for the low gate of the kingdom of Heaven will not suffer them to enter in. Woe also to them who are rich, who have their consolation here;(9) because whilst the poor enter into the kingdom of God, they shall stand lamenting without. Rejoice ye humble, and exult ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God if only ye walk in the truth.

(1) Psalm cxix. 137. (2) Psalm xix. 9. (3) Corinthians xiv. 33. (4) Psalm xxi. 3. (5) John xv. 19. (6) Wisd. vi. 8. (7) Revelation iv. 10; v. 14. (8) Matthew xviii. 3. (9) Philippians ii. 21.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER LIX

  

THAT ALL HOPE AND TRUST IS TO BE FIXED IN GOD ALONE

O Lord, what is my trust which I have in this life, or what is my greatest comfort of all the things which are seen under Heaven? Is it not Thou, O Lord my God, whose mercies are without number? Where hath it been well with me without Thee? Or when could it be evil whilst Thou wert near? I had rather be poor for Thy sake, than rich without Thee. I choose rather to be a pilgrim upon the earth with Thee than without Thee to possess heaven. Where Thou art, there is heaven; and where Thou are not, behold there death and hell. Thou art all my desire, and therefore must I groan and cry and earnestly pray after Thee. In short I can confide fully in none to give me ready help in necessities, save in Thee alone, O my God. Thou art my hope, Thou art my trust, Thou art my Comforter, and most faithful in all things.

2. All men seek their own;(1) Thou settest forward only my salvation and my profit, and turnest all things unto my good. Even though Thou dost expose me to divers temptations and adversities, Thou ordainest all this unto my advantage, for Thou are wont to prove Thy beloved ones in a thousand ways. In which proving Thou oughtest no less to be loved and praised, than if Thou wert filling me full of heavenly consolations.

3. In Thee, therefore, O Lord God, I put all my hope and my refuge, on Thee I lay all my tribulation and anguish; because I find all to be weak and unstable whatsoever I behold out of Thee. For many friends shall not profit, nor strong helpers be able to succour, nor prudent counsellors to give a useful answer, nor the books of the learned to console, nor any precious substance to deliver, nor any secret and beautiful place to give shelter, if Thou Thyself do not assist, help, strengthen, comfort, instruct, keep in safety.

4. For all things which seem to belong to the attainment of peace and felicity are nothing when Thou art absent, and bring no felicity at all in reality. Therefore art Thou the end of all good, and the fulness of Life, and the soul of eloquence; and to hope in Thee above all things is the strongest solace of Thy servants. Mine eyes look unto Thee,(2) in Thee is my trust, O my God, Father of mercies.

5. Bless and sanctify my soul with heavenly blessing that it may become Thy holy habitation, and the seat of Thy eternal glory; and let nothing be found in the Temple of Thy divinity which may offend the eyes of Thy majesty. According to the greatness of Thy goodness and the multitude of Thy mercies look upon me, and hear the prayer of Thy poor servant, far exiled from Thee in the land of the shadow of death. Protect and preserve the soul of Thy least servant amid so many dangers of corruptible life, and by Thy grace accompanying me, direct it by the way of peace unto its home of perpetual light. Amen.

(1) Luke vi. (2) Psalm cxli. 8.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE FOURTH BOOK

  

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR

  

The Voice of Christ

Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,(1) saith the Lord. The bread that I will give is My flesh which I give for the life of the world.(2) Take, eat: this is My Body, which is given for you; this do in remembrance of Me.(3) He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood dwelleth in Me and I in him. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.(4)

(1) Matthew xi. 28 (2) John vi. 51. (3) Matthew xxi. 26; Luke xxii. 19. (4) John vi. 51, 63.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER I

  

WITH HOW GREAT REVERENCE CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED

  

The Voice of the Disciple

These are Thy words, O Christ, Eternal Truth; though not uttered at one time nor written together in one place of Scripture. Because therefore they are Thy words and true, I must gratefully and faithfully receive them all. They are Thine, and Thou hast uttered them; and they are mine also, because Thou didst speak them for my salvation. Gladly I receive them from Thy mouth, that they may be more deeply implanted in my heart. Words of such great grace arouse me, for they are full of sweetness and love; but my own sins terrify me, and my impure conscience driveth me away from receiving so great mysteries. The sweetness of Thy words encourageth me, but the multitude of my faults presseth me down.

2. Thou commandest that I draw near to Thee with firm confidence, if I would have part with Thee, and that I receive the food of immortality, if I desire to obtain eternal life and glory. Come unto Me, sayest Thou, all that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Oh, sweet and lovely word in the ear of the sinner, that Thou, O Lord my God, dost invite the poor and needy to the Communion of Thy most holy body and blood. But who am I, O Lord, that I should presume to approach unto Thee? Behold the heaven of heavens cannot contain Thee, and yet Thou sayest, Come ye all unto Me.

3. What meaneth this most gracious condescension, this most lovely invitation? How shall I dare to come, who know no good thing of myself, whence I might be able to presume? How shall I bring Thee within my house, seeing that I so often have sinned in Thy most loving sight? Angels and Archangels stand in awe of Thee, the Saints and just men fear Thee, and Thou sayest, Come unto Me! Except Thou, Lord, hadst said it, who should believe it true? And except Thou hadst commanded, who should attempt to draw near?

4. Behold, Noah, that just man, laboured for a hundred years in building the ark, that he might be saved with the few; and I, how shall I be able in one hour to prepare myself to receive the Builder of the world with reverence? Moses, Thy servant, Thy great and especial friend, made an ark of incorruptible wood, which also he covered with purest gold, that he might lay up in it the tables of the law, and I, a corruptible creature, shall I dare thus easily to receive Thee, the Maker of the Law and the Giver of life? Solomon, the wisest of the kings of Israel, was seven years building his magnificent temple to the praise of Thy Name, and for eight days celebrated the feast of its dedication, offered a thousand peace offerings, and solemnly brought up the Ark of the Covenant to the place prepared for it, with the sound of trumpets and great joy, and I, unhappy and poorest of mankind, how shall I bring Thee into my house, who scarce know how to spend half an hour in devotion? And oh that it were even one half hour worthily spent!

5. O my God, how earnestly these holy men strove to please Thee! And alas! how little and trifling is that which I do! how short a time do I spend, when I am disposing myself to Communion. Rarely altogether collected, most rarely cleansed from all distraction. And surely in the saving presence of Thy Godhead no unmeet thought ought to intrude, nor should any creature take possession of me, because it is not an Angel but the Lord of the Angels, that I am about to receive as my Guest.

6. Yet there is a vast difference between the Ark of the Covenant with its relics, and Thy most pure Body with its ineffable virtues, between those sacrifices of the law, which were figures of things to come, and the true sacrifice of Thy Body, the completion of all the ancient sacrifices.

7. Wherefore then do I not yearn more ardently after Thy adorable presence? Why do I not prepare myself with greater solicitude to receive Thy holy things, when those holy Patriarchs and Prophets of old, kings also and princes, with the whole people, manifested so great affection of devotion towards Thy Divine Service?

8. The most devout king David danced with all his might before the Ark of God, calling to mind the benefits granted to his forefathers in days past; he fashioned musical instruments of various sorts, put forth Psalms, and appointed them to be sung with joy, played also himself ofttimes on the harp, being inspired with the grace of the Holy Ghost; he taught the people of Israel to praise God with the whole heart, and with unity of voice to bless and praise Him every day. If so great devotion was then exercised, and celebration of divine praise was carried on before the Ark of the Testimony, how great reverence and devotion ought now to be shown by me and all Christian people at the ministering of the Sacrament, at receiving the most precious Body and Blood of Christ.

9. Many run to diverse places to visit the memorials of departed Saints, and rejoice to hear of their deeds and to look upon the beautiful buildings of their shrines. And behold, Thou art present here with me, O my God, Saint of Saints, Creator of men and Lord of the Angels. Often in looking at those memorials men are moved by curiosity and novelty, and very little fruit of amendment is borne away, especially when there is so much careless trifling and so little true contrition. But here in the Sacrament of the Altar, Thou art present altogether, My God, the Man Christ Jesus; where also abundant fruit of eternal life is given to every one soever that receiveth Thee worthily and devoutly. But to this no levity draweth, no curiosity, nor sensuality, only steadfast faith, devout hope, and sincere charity.

10. O God, invisible Creator of the world, how wondrously dost Thou work with us, how sweetly and graciously Thou dealest with Thine elect, to whom Thou offerest Thyself to be received in this Sacrament! For this surpasseth all understanding, this specially draweth the hearts of the devout and enkindleth their affections. For even thy true faithful ones themselves, who order their whole life to amendment, oftentimes gain from this most excellent Sacrament great grace of devotion and love of virtue.

11. Oh admirable and hidden grace of the Sacrament, which only Christ's faithful ones know, but the faithless and those who serve sin cannot experience! In this Sacrament is conferred spiritual grace, and lost virtue is regained in the soul, and the beauty which was disfigured by sin returneth again. So great sometimes is this grace that out of the fulness of devotion given, not only the mind but also the weak body feeleth that more strength is supplied unto it.

12. But greatly must we mourn and lament over our lukewarmness and negligence, that we are not drawn by greater affection to become partakers of Christ, in whom all the hope and the merit of those that are to be saved consist. For He Himself is our sanctification and redemption.(1) He is the consolation of pilgrims and the eternal fruition of the Saints. Therefore it is grievously to be lamented that many so little consider this health-giving mystery, which maketh heaven glad and preserveth the whole world. Alas for the blindness and hardness of man's heart, that he considereth not more this unspeakable gift, and even slippeth down through the daily use, into carelessness.

13. For if this most holy Sacrament were celebrated in one place only, and were consecrated only by one priest in the whole world, with what great desire thinkest thou, would men be affected towards that place and towards such a priest of God, that they might behold the divine mysteries celebrated? But now are many men made priests and in many places the Sacrament is celebrated, that the grace and love of God towards men might the more appear, the more widely the Holy Communion is spread abroad over all the world. Thanks be unto Thee, O good Jesus, Eternal Shepherd, who hast vouchsafed to refresh us, poor and exiled ones, with Thy precious Body and Blood, and to invite us to partake these holy mysteries by the invitation from Thine own mouth, saying, Come unto Me, ye who labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

(1) 1 Corinthians i. 30.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

  

THAT THE GREATNESS AND CHARITY OF GOD IS SHOWN TO MEN IN THE SACRAMENT

  

The Voice of the Disciple

Trusting in Thy goodness and great mercy, O Lord, I draw near, the sick to the Healer, the hungering and thirsting to the Fountain of life, the poverty-stricken to the King of heaven, the servant to the Lord, the creature to the Creator, the desolate to my own gentle Comforter. But whence is this unto me, that Thou comest unto me? Who am I that Thou shouldest offer me Thyself? How doth a sinner dare to appear before Thee? And how dost thou vouchsafe to come to the sinner? Thou knowest Thy servant, and Thou knowest that he hath in him no good thing for which Thou shouldest grant him this grace. I confess therefore mine own vileness, I acknowledge Thy goodness, I praise Thy tenderness, and I give Thee thanks for Thine exceeding great love. For Thou doest this for Thine own sake, not for my merits, that Thy goodness may be more manifest unto me, Thy charity more abundantly poured out upon me, and Thy humility more perfectly commended unto me. Therefore because this pleaseth Thee and Thou hast commanded that thus it shall be, Thy condescension pleaseth me also; and oh that mine iniquity hinder it not.

2. O most sweet and tender Jesus, what reverence, what giving of thanks is due to Thee with perpetual praise for the receiving of Thy sacred Body and Blood, the dignity whereof no man is found able to express. But what shall I think upon in this Communion in approaching my Lord, whom I am not able worthily to honour, and nevertheless whom I long devoutly to receive? What shall be better and more healthful meditation for me, than utter humiliation of myself before Thee, and exaltation of Thine infinite goodness towards me? I praise Thee, O my God, and exalt Thee for evermore. I despise myself, and cast myself down before Thee into the deep of my vileness.

3. Behold, Thou art the Saint of saints and I the refuse of sinners; behold, Thou stoopest unto me who am not worthy to look upon Thee; behold, Thou comest unto me, Thou willest to be with me, Thou invitest me to Thy feast. Thou willest to give me the heavenly food and bread of angels to eat; none other, in truth, than Thyself, The living bread, which didst descend from heaven; and givest life to the world.(1)

4. Behold, whence this love proceedeth! what manner of condescension shineth forth herein. What great giving of thanks and praise is due unto Thee for these benefits! Oh how salutary and profitable Thy purpose when Thou didst ordain this! How sweet and pleasant the feast when Thou didst give Thyself for food! Oh how admirable is thy working, O Lord, how mighty Thy power, how unspeakable Thy truth! For Thou didst speak the word, and all things were made; and this is done which Thou hast commanded.

5. A thing wonderful, and worthy of faith, and surpassing all the understanding of man, that Thou, O Lord my God, very God and very man, givest Thyself altogether to us in a little bread and wine, and art so our inexhaustible food. Thou, O Lord of all, who hast need of nothing, hast willed to dwell in us through Thy Sacrament. Preserve my heart and my body undefiled, that with a joyful and pure conscience I may be able very often to [celebrate, and](2) receive to my perpetual health. Thy mysteries, which Thou hast consecrated and instituted both for Thine own honour, and for a perpetual memorial.

6. Rejoice, O my soul, and give thanks unto God for so great a gift and precious consolation, left unto thee in this vale of tears. For so oft as thou callest this mystery to mind and receivest the body of Christ, so often dost thou celebrate the work of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of Christ. For the charity of Christ never groweth less, and the greatness of His propitiation is never exhausted. Therefore, by continual renewal of thy spirit, thou oughtest to dispose thyself hereunto and to weigh the great mystery of salvation with attentive consideration. So great, new, and joyful ought it to appear to thee when thou comest to communion, as if on this self-same day Christ for the first time were descending into the Virgin's womb and becoming man, or hanging on the cross, suffering and dying for the salvation of mankind.

(1) John vi. 51. (2) The words in brackets are only suitable for a priest.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

  

THAT IT IS PROFITABLE TO COMMUNICATE OFTEN

  

The Voice of the Disciple

Behold I come unto Thee, O Lord, that I may be blessed through Thy gift, and be made joyful in Thy holy feast which Thou, O God, of Thy goodness hast prepared for the poor.(1) Behold in Thee is all that I can and ought to desire, Thou art my salvation and redemption, my hope and strength, my honour and glory. Therefore rejoice the soul of Thy servant this day, for unto Thee, O Lord Jesus, do I lift up my soul.(2) I long now to receive Thee devoutly and reverently, I desire to bring Thee into my house, so that with Zacchaeus I may be counted worthy to be blessed by Thee and numbered among the children of Abraham. My soul hath an earnest desire for Thy Body, my heart longeth to be united with Thee.

2. Give me Thyself and it sufficeth, for besides Thee no consolation availeth. Without Thee I cannot be, and without Thy visitation I have no power to live. And therefore I must needs draw nigh unto Thee often, and receive Thee for the healing of my soul, lest haply I faint by the way if I be deprived of heavenly food. For so Thou, most merciful Jesus, preaching to the people and healing many sick, didst once say, I will not send them away fasting to their own homes, lest they faint by the way.(3) Deal therefore now to me in like manner, for Thou left Thyself for the consolation of the faithful in the Sacrament. For Thou art the sweet refreshment of the soul, and he who shall eat Thee worthily shall be partaker and inheritor of the eternal glory. Necessary indeed it is for me, who so often slide backwards and sin, so quickly wax cold and faint, to renew, cleanse, enkindle myself by frequent prayers and penitences and receiving of Thy sacred Body and Blood lest haply by too long abstinence, I fall short of my holy resolutions.

3. For the imaginations of man's heart are evil from his youth,(4) and except divine medicine succour him, man slideth away continually unto the worse. The Holy Communion therefore draweth us back from evil, and strengtheneth us for good. For if I now be so negligent and lukewarm when I communicate [or celebrate], how should it be with me, if I receive not this medicine, and sought not so great a help? [And though I am not every day fit nor well prepared to celebrate, I will nevertheless give diligent heed at due season, to receive the divine mysteries, and to become partaker of so great grace]. For this is the one principal consolation of a faithful soul, so long as it is absent from Thee in mortal body, that being continually mindful of its God, it receiveth its Beloved with devout spirit.

4. Oh wonderful condescension of Thy pity surrounding us, that Thou, O Lord God, Creator and Quickener of all spirits, deignest to come unto a soul so poor and weak, and to appease its hunger with Thy whole Deity and Humanity. Oh happy mind and blessed soul, to which is granted devoutly to receive Thee its Lord God, and in so receiving Thee to be filled with all spiritual joy! Oh how great a Lord doth it entertain, how beloved a Guest doth it bring in, how delightful a Companion doth it receive, how faithful a Friend doth it welcome, how beautiful and exalted a Spouse, above every other Beloved, doth it embrace, One to be loved above all things that can be desired! Oh my most sweet Beloved, let heaven and earth and all the glory of them, be silent in Thy presence; seeing whatsoever praise and beauty they have it is of Thy gracious bounty; and they shall never reach unto the loveliness of Thy Name, Whose Wisdom is infinite.(5)

(1) Psalm lxviii. 10. (2) Psalm lxxxvi. 4. (3) Matthew xv. 32. (4) Genesis viii. 21. (5) Psalm cxlvii. 5.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THAT MANY GOOD GIFTS ARE BESTOWED UPON THOSE WHO COMMUNICATE DEVOUTLY

  

The Voice of the Disciple

O Lord my God, prevent Thou Thy servant with the blessings of Thy sweetness, that I may be enabled to draw near worthily and devoutly to Thy glorious Sacrament. Awaken my heart towards Thee, and deliver me from heavy slumber. Visit me with Thy salvation that I may in spirit taste Thy sweetness, which plentifully lieth hid in this Sacrament as in a fountain. Lighten also mine eyes to behold this so great mystery, and strengthen me that I may believe it with undoubting faith. For it is Thy word, not human power; it is Thy holy institution, not the invention of man. For no man is found fit in himself to receive and to understand these things, which transcend even the wisdom of the Angels. What portion then shall I, unworthy sinner, who am but dust and ashes, be able to search into and comprehend of so deep a Sacrament?

2. O Lord, in the simplicity of my heart, in good and firm faith, and according to Thy will, I draw nigh unto Thee with hope and reverence, and truly believe that Thou art here present in the Sacrament, God and man. Thou willest therefore that I receive Thee and unite myself to Thee in charity. Wherefore I beseech Thy mercy, and implore Thee to give me Thy special grace, to this end, that I may be wholly dissolved and overflow with love towards Thee, and no more suffer any other consolation to enter into me. For this most high and most glorious Sacrament is the health of the soul and the body, the medicine of all spiritual sickness, whereby I am healed of my sins, my passions are bridled, temptations are conquered or weakened, more grace is poured into me, virtue begun is increased, faith is made firm, hope is strengthened, and charity is enkindled and enlarged.

3. For in this Sacrament Thou hast bestowed many good things and still bestowest them continually on Thine elect who communicate devoutly, O my God, Lifter up of my soul, Repairer of human infirmity, and Giver of all inward consolation. For Thou pourest into them much consolation against all sorts of tribulation, and out of the deep of their own misery Thou liftest them up to the hope of Thy protection, and with ever new grace, dost inwardly refresh and enlighten them; so that they who felt themselves to be anxious and without affection before Communion, afterwards being refreshed with heavenly food and drink, find themselves changed for the better. And even in such wise Thou dealest severally with Thine elect, that they may truly acknowledge and clearly make proof that they have nothing whatsoever of their own, and what goodness and grace come to them from Thee; because being in themselves cold, hard of heart, indevout, through Thee they become fervent, zealous, and devout. For who is there coming humbly to the fountain of sweetness, carrieth not away thence at the least some little of that sweetness? Or who standing by a large fire, feeleth not from thence a little of its heat? And Thou art ever a full and overflowing fountain, a fire continually burning, and never going out.

4. Wherefore if it is not suffered to me to draw from the fulness of the fountain, nor to drink unto satisfying, yet will I set my lips to the mouth of the heavenly conduit, that at least I may receive a small drop to quench my thirst, that I dry not up within my heart. And if I am not yet able to be altogether heavenly and so enkindled as the Cherubim and Seraphim, yet will I endeavour to give myself unto devotion, and to prepare my heart, that I may gain if it be but a little flame of the divine fire, through the humble receiving of the life-giving Sacrament. But whatsoever is wanting unto me, O merciful Jesus, Most Holy Saviour, do Thou of Thy kindness and grace supply, who hast vouchsafed to call all unto Thee, saying, Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.

5. I indeed labour in the sweat of my face, I am tormented with sorrow of heart, I am burdened with sins, I am disquieted with temptations, I am entangled and oppressed with many passions, and there is none to help me, there is none to deliver and ease me, but Thou, O Lord God, my Saviour, to whom I commit myself and all things that are mine, that Thou mayest preserve me and lead me unto life eternal.

   Receive me unto the praise and glory of Thy name, who hast
 prepared Thy Body and Blood to be my meat and drink. Grant, O Lord God my Saviour, that with coming often to Thy mysteries the zeal of my devotion may increase.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

  

OF THE DIGNITY OF THIS SACRAMENT, AND OF THE OFFICE OF THE PRIEST

  

The Voice of the Beloved

If thou hadst angelic purity and the holiness of holy John the Baptist, thou wouldest not be worthy to receive or to minister this Sacrament. For this is not deserved by merit of man that a man should consecrate and minister the Sacrament of Christ, and take for food the bread of Angels. Vast is the mystery, and great is the dignity of the priests, to whom is given what is not granted to Angels. For priests only, rightly ordained in the church, have the power of consecrating and celebrating the Body of Christ. The priest indeed is the minister of God, using the Word of God by God's command and institution; nevertheless God is there the principal Author and invisible Worker, that to whom all that He willeth is subject, and all He commandeth is obedient.

2. Therefore thou must believe God Almighty in this most excellent Sacrament, more than thine own sense or any visible sign at all. And therefore with fear and reverence is this work to be approached. Take heed therefore and see what it is of which the ministry is committed to thee by the laying on of the Bishop's hand. Behold thou art made a priest and art consecrated to celebrate. See now that thou do it before God faithfully and devoutly at due time, and shew thyself without blame. Thou hast not lightened thy burden, but art now bound with a straiter bond of discipline, and art pledged to a higher degree of holiness. A priest ought to be adorned with all virtues and to afford to others an example of good life. His conversation must not be with the popular and common ways of men, but with Angels in Heaven or with perfect men on earth.

3. A priest clad in holy garments taketh Christ's place that he may pray unto God with all supplication and humility for himself and for the whole people. He must always remember the Passion of Christ. He must diligently look upon Christ's footsteps and fervently endeavour himself to follow them. He must bear meekly for God whatsoever ills are brought upon him by others. He must mourn for his own sins, and for the sins committed by others, and may not grow careless of prayer and holy oblation, until he prevail to obtain grace and mercy. When the priest celebrateth, he honoureth God, giveth joy to the Angels, buildeth up the Church, helpeth the living, hath communion with the departed, and maketh himself a partaker of all good things.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

  

AN INQUIRY CONCERNING PREPARATION FOR COMMUNION

  

The Voice of the Disciple

When I consider Thy dignity, O Lord, and mine own vileness, I tremble very exceedingly, and am confounded within myself. For if I approach not, I fly from life; and if I intrude myself unworthily, I run into Thy displeasure. What then shall I do, O my God, Thou helper and Counsellor in necessities.

2. Teach Thou me the right way; propound unto me some short exercise befitting Holy Communion. For it is profitable to know how I ought to prepare my heart devoutly and reverently for Thee, to the intent that I may receive Thy Sacrament to my soul's health [or it may be also for the celebrating this so great and divine mystery].

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

  

OF THE EXAMINATION OF CONSCIENCE, AND PURPOSE OF AMENDMENT

  

The Voice of the Beloved

Above all things the priest of God must draw nigh, with all humility of heart and supplicating reverence, with full faith and pious desire for the honour of God, to celebrate, minister, and receive this Sacrament. Diligently examine thy conscience and with all thy might with true contrition and humble confession cleanse and purify it, so that thou mayest feel no burden, nor know anything which bringeth thee remorse and impedeth thy free approach. Have displeasure against all thy sins in general, and specially sorrow and mourn because of thy daily transgressions. And if thou have time, confess unto God in the secret of thine heart, all miseries of thine own passion.

2. Lament grievously and be sorry, because thou art still so carnal and worldly, so unmortified from thy passions, so full of the motion of concupiscence, so unguarded in thine outward senses, so often entangled in many vain fancies, so much inclined to outward things, so negligent of internal; so ready to laughter and dissoluteness, so unready to weeping and contrition; so prone to ease and indulgence of the flesh, so dull to zeal and fervour; so curious to hear novelties and behold beauties, so loth to embrace things humble and despised; so desirous to have many things, so grudging in giving, so close in keeping; so inconsiderate in speaking, so reluctant to keep silence; so disorderly in manners, so inconsiderate in actions; so eager after food, so deaf towards the Word of God; so eager after rest, so slow to labour; so watchful after tales, so sleepy towards holy watchings; so eager for the end of them, so wandering in attention to them; so negligent in observing the hours of prayer, so lukewarm in celebrating, so unfruitful in communicating; so quickly distracted, so seldom quite collected with thyself; so quickly moved to anger, so ready for displeasure at others; so prone to judging, so severe at reproving; so joyful in prosperity, so weak in adversity; so often making many good resolutions and bringing them to so little effect.

3. When thou hast confessed and bewailed these and thy other shortcomings, with sorrow and sore displeasure at thine own infirmity, make then a firm resolution of continual amendment of life and of progress in all that is good. Then moreover with full resignation and entire will offer thyself to the honour of My name on the altar of thine heart as a perpetual whole burnt-offering, even by faithfully presenting thy body and soul unto Me, to the end that thou mayest so be accounted worthy to draw near to offer this sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to God, and to receive the Sacrament of My Body and Blood to thy soul's health. For there is no oblation worthier, no satisfaction greater for the destroying of sin, than that a man offer himself to God purely and entirely with the oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy Communion. If a man shall have done what in him lieth, and shall repent him truly, then how often soever he shall draw nigh unto Me for pardon and grace, As I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted, and live. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him.(1)

(1) Ezekiel xviii. 22, 23.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

OF THE OBLATION OF CHRIST UPON THE CROSS, AND OF RESIGNATION OF SELF

  

The Voice of the Beloved

As I of my own will offered myself unto God the Father on the Cross for thy sins with outstretched hands and naked body, so that nothing remained in Me that did not become altogether a sacrifice for the Divine propitiation; so also oughtest thou every day to offer thyself willingly unto Me for a pure and holy oblation with all thy strength and affections, even to the utmost powers of thine heart. What more do I require of thee than thou study to resign thyself altogether unto Me? Whatsoever thou givest besides thyself, I nothing care for, for I ask not thy gift, but thee.

2. As it would not be sufficient for thee if thou hadst all things except Me, even so whatsoever thou shalt give Me, if thou give Me not thyself, it cannot please Me. Offer thyself to Me, and give thyself altogether for God, so shall thy offering be accepted. Behold I offered Myself altogether to the Father for thee, I give also My whole body and blood for food, that thou mightest remain altogether Mine and I thine. But if thou stand in thyself, and offer not thyself freely to My will, thy offering is not perfect, neither shall the union betwixt us be complete. Therefore ought the freewill offering of thyself into the hands of God to go before all thy works, if thou wilt attain liberty and grace. For this is the cause that so few are inwardly enlightened and made free, that they know not how to deny themselves entirely. My word standeth sure, Except a man forsake all, he cannot be My disciple.(1) Thou therefore, if thou wilt be My disciple, offer thyself to Me with all thy affections.

(1) Luke xiv. 33.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

  

THAT WE OUGHT TO OFFER OURSELVES AND ALL THAT IS OURS TO GOD, AND TO PRAY FOR ALL

  

The Voice of the Disciple

Lord, all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Thine.(1) I desire to offer myself up unto thee as a freewill offering, and to continue Thine for ever. Lord, in the uprightness of mine heart I willingly offer(2) myself to Thee to-day to be Thy servant for ever, in humble submission and for a sacrifice of perpetual praise. Receive me with this holy Communion of Thy precious Body, which I celebrate before Thee this day in the presence of the Angels invisibly surrounding, that it may be for the salvation of me and of all Thy people.

2. Lord, I lay before Thee at this celebration all my sins and offences which I have committed before Thee and Thy holy Angels, from the day whereon I was first able to sin even unto this hour; that Thou mayest consume and burn them every one with the fire of Thy charity, and mayest do away all the stains of my sins, and cleanse my conscience from all offence, and restore me to Thy favour which by sinning I have lost, fully forgiving me all, and mercifully admitting me to the kiss of peace.

3. What can I do concerning my sins, save humbly to confess and lament them and unceasingly to beseech Thy propitiation? I beseech Thee, be propitious unto me and hear me, when I stand before Thee, O my God. All my sins displease me grievously: I will never more commit them; but I grieve for them and will grieve so long as I live, steadfastly purposing to repent me truly, and to make restitution as far as I can. Forgive, O God, forgive me my sins for Thy holy Name's sake; save my soul, which Thou hast redeemed with Thy precious blood. Behold I commit myself to Thy mercy, I resign myself to Thy hands. Deal with me according to Thy loving-kindness, not according to my wickedness and iniquity.

4. I offer also unto Thee all my goodness, though it is exceedingly little and imperfect, that Thou mayest mend and sanctify it, that Thou mayest make it well pleasing and acceptable in Thy sight, and ever draw it on towards perfection; and furthermore bring me safely, slothful and useless poor creature that I am, to a happy and blessed end.

5. Moreover I offer unto Thee all pious desires of the devout, necessities of parents, friends, brothers, sisters, and all who are dear to me, and of those who have done good to me, or to others for Thy love; and those who have desired and besought my prayers for themselves and all belonging to them; that all may feel themselves assisted by Thy grace, enriched by consolation, protected from dangers, freed from pains; and that being delivered from all evils they may joyfully give Thee exceeding thanks.

6. I offer also to Thee prayers and Sacramental intercessions for those specially who have injured me in aught, made me sad, or spoken evil concerning me, or have caused me any loss or displeasure; for all those also whom I have at any time made sad, disturbed, burdened, and scandalized, by words or deeds, knowingly or ignorantly; that to all of us alike, Thou mayest equally pardon our sins and mutual offences. Take away, O Lord, from our hearts all suspicion, indignation, anger, and contention, and whatsoever is able to injure charity and diminish brotherly love. Have mercy, have mercy, Lord, on those who entreat Thy mercy; give grace to the needy; and make us such that we may be worthy to enjoy Thy grace, and go forward to the life eternal. Amen.

(1) 1 Chronicles xxix. 11. (2) 1 Chronicles xxix. 17.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

  

THAT HOLY COMMUNION IS NOT LIGHTLY TO BE OMITTED

  

The Voice of the Beloved

Thou must frequently betake thee to the Fountain of grace and divine mercy, to the Fountain of goodness and all purity; to the end that thou mayest obtain the healing of thy passions and vices, and mayest be made stronger and more watchful against all temptations and wiles of the devil. The enemy, knowing what profit and exceeding strong remedy lieth in the Holy Communion, striveth by all means and occasions to draw back and hinder the faithful and devout, so far as he can.

2. For when some set about to prepare themselves for Holy Communion, they suffer from the more evil suggestions of Satan. The very evil spirit himself (as is written in Job), cometh among the sons of God that he may trouble them by his accustomed evil dealing, or make them over timid and perplexed; to the intent that he may diminish their affections, or take away their faith by his attacks, if haply he may prevail upon them to give up Holy Communion altogether, or to come thereto with lukewarm hearts. But his wiles and delusions must not be heeded, howsoever wicked and terrible they be; but all his delusion must be cast back upon his own head. The wretch must be despised and laughed to scorn: neither must Holy Communion be omitted because of his insults and the inward troubles which he stirreth up.

3. Often also too much carefulness or some anxiety or other touching confession hindereth from obtaining devotion. Do thou according to the counsel of wise men, and lay aside anxiety and scruple, because it hindereth the grace of God and destroyeth devotion of mind. Because of some little vexation or trouble do not thou neglect Holy Communion, but rather hasten to confess it, and forgive freely all offences committed against thee. And if thou hast offended any man, humbly beg for pardon, and God shall freely forgive thee.

4. What profiteth it to put off for long time the confession of thy sins, or to defer Holy Communion? Cleanse thyself forthwith, spit out the poison with all speed, hasten to take the remedy, and thou shalt feel thyself better than if thou didst long defer it. If to-day thou defer it on one account, to-morrow perchance some greater obstacle will come, and so thou mayest be long time hindered from Communion and become more unfit. As soon as thou canst, shake thyself from thy present heaviness and sloth, for it profiteth nothing to be long anxious, to go long on thy way with heaviness of heart, and because of daily little obstacles to sever thyself from divine things: nay it is exceeding hurtful to defer thy Communion long, for this commonly bringeth on great torpor. Alas! there are some, lukewarm and undisciplined, who willingly find excuses for delaying repentance, and desire to defer Holy Communion, lest they should be bound to keep stricter watch upon themselves.

5. Alas! how little charity, what flagging devotion, have they who so lightly put off Holy Communion. How happy is he, how acceptable to God, who so liveth, and in such purity of conscience keepeth himself, that any day he could be ready and well inclined to communicate, if it were in his power, and might be done without the notice of others. If a man sometimes abstaineth for the sake of humility or some sound cause, he is to be commended for his reverence. But if drowsiness have taken hold of him, he ought to rouse himself and to do what in him lieth; and the Lord will help his desire for the good will which he hath, which God specially approveth.

6. But when he is hindered by sufficient cause, yet will he ever have a good will and pious intention to communicate; and so he shall not be lacking in the fruit of the Sacrament. For any devout man is able every day and every hour to draw near to spiritual communion with Christ to his soul's health and without hindrance. Nevertheless on certain days and at the appointed time he ought to receive the Body and Blood of his Redeemer with affectionate reverence, and rather to seek after the praise and honour of God, than his own comfort. For so often doth he communicate mystically, and is invisibly refreshed, as he devoutly calleth to mind the mystery of Christ's incarnation and His Passion, and is inflamed with the love of Him.

7. He who only prepareth himself when a festival is at hand or custom compelleth, will too often be unprepared. Blessed is he who offereth himself to God for a whole burnt-offering, so often as he celebrateth or communicateth! Be not too slow nor too hurried in thy celebrating, but preserve the good received custom of those with whom thou livest. Thou oughtest not to produce weariness and annoyance in others, but to observe the received custom, according to the institution of the elders; and to minister to the profit of others rather than to thine own devotion or feeling.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

  

THAT THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST AND THE HOLY SCRIPTURES ARE MOST NECESSARY TO A FAITHFUL SOUL

  

The Voice of the Disciple

O most sweet Lord Jesus, how great is the blessedness of the devout soul that feedeth with Thee in Thy banquet, where there is set before it no other food than Thyself its only Beloved, more to be desired than all the desires of the heart? And to me it would verily be sweet to pour forth my tears in Thy presence from the very bottom of my heart, and with the pious Magdalene to water Thy feet with my tears. But where is this devotion? Where the abundant flowing of holy tears? Surely in Thy presence and in the presence of the holy Angels my whole heart ought to burn and to weep for joy; for I have Thee in the Sacrament verily present, although hidden under other form.

2. For in Thine own Divine brightness, mine eyes could not endure to behold Thee, neither could the whole world stand before the splendour of the glory of Thy Majesty. In this therefore Thou hast consideration unto my weakness, that Thou hidest Thyself under the Sacrament. I verily possess and adore Him whom the Angels adore in heaven; I yet for a while by faith, but they by sight and without a veil. It is good for me to be content with the light of true faith, and to walk therein until the day of eternal brightness dawn, and the shadows of figures flee away.(1) But when that which is perfect is come, the using of Sacraments shall cease, because the Blessed in heavenly glory have no need of Sacramental remedy. For they rejoice unceasingly in the presence of God, beholding His glory face to face, and being changed from glory to glory(2) of the infinite God, they taste the Word of God made flesh, as He was in the beginning and remaineth for everlasting.

3. When I think on these wondrous things, even spiritual comfort whatsoever it be becometh sore weariness to me; for so long as I see not openly my Lord in His own Glory, I count for nothing all which I behold and hear in the world. Thou, O God, art my witness that nothing is able to comfort me, no creature is able to give me rest, save Thou, O my God, whom I desire to contemplate everlastingly. But this is not possible, so long as I remain in this mortal state. Therefore ought I to set myself unto great patience, and submit myself unto Thee in every desire. For even Thy Saints, O Lord, who now rejoice with Thee in the kingdom of heaven, waited for the coming of Thy glory whilst they lived here, in faith and great glory. What they believed, that believe I; what they hoped, I hope; whither they have attained to, thither through Thy grace hope I to come. I will walk meanwhile in faith, strengthened by the examples of the Saints. I will have also holy books for comfort and for a mirror of life, and above them all Thy most holy Body and Blood shall be for me a special remedy and refuge.

4. For two things do I feel to be exceedingly necessary to me in this life, without which this miserable life would be intolerable to me; being detained in the prison of this body, I confess that I need two things, even food and light. Thou hast therefore given to me who am so weak, Thy sacred Body and Blood, for the refreshing of my soul and body, and hast set Thy Word for a lantern to my feet.(3) Without these two I could not properly live; for the Word of God is the light of my soul, and Thy Sacrament the bread of life. These may also be called the two tables, placed on this side and on that, in the treasury of Thy holy Church. One table is that of the Sacred Altar, bearing the holy bread, that is the precious Body and Blood of Christ; the other is the table of the Divine Law, containing holy doctrine, teaching the true faith, and leading steadfastly onwards even to that which is within the veil, where the Holy of Holies is.

5. Thanks be unto Thee, O Lord Jesus, Light of Light everlasting, for that table of holy doctrine which Thou has furnished unto us by Thy servants the Prophets and Apostles and other teachers. Thanks be to Thee, O Creator and Redeemer of men, who to make known Thy love to the whole world has prepared a great supper, in which Thou hast set forth for good not the typical lamb, but Thine own most Holy Body and Blood; making all Thy faithful ones joyful with this holy banquet and giving them to drink the cup of salvation, wherein are all the delights of Paradise, and the holy Angels do feed with us, and with yet happier sweetness.

6. Oh how great and honourable is the office of the priests, to whom it is given to consecrate the Sacrament of the Lord of majesty with holy words, to bless it with the lips, to hold it in their hands, to receive it with their own mouth, and to administer it to others! Oh how clean ought those hands to be, how pure the mouth, how holy the body, how unspotted the heart of the priest, to whom so often the Author of purity entereth in! From the mouth of the priest ought naught to proceed but what is holy, what is honest and profitable, because he so often receiveth the Sacrament of Christ.

7. His eyes ought to be single and pure, seeing they are wont to look upon the Body of Christ; the hands should be pure and lifted towards heaven, which are wont to hold within them the Creator of heaven and earth. To priests is it specially said in the Law, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.(4)

8. Assist us with Thy grace, O Almighty God, that we who have taken upon us the priestly office, may be able to converse worthily and devoutly with Thee in all purity and good conscience. And if we are not able to have our conversation in such innocency of life as we ought, yet grant unto us worthily to lament the sins which we have committed, and in the spirit of humility and full purpose of a good will, to serve Thee more earnestly for the future.

(1) Cant. ii. 17. (2) 2 Corinthians iii. 18. (3) Psalm cxix. 105. (4) Leviticus xix. 2.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

  

THAT HE WHO IS ABOUT TO COMMUNICATE WITH CHRIST OUGHT TO PREPARE HIMSELF WITH GREAT DILIGENCE

  

The Voice of the Beloved

I am the Lover of purity, and Giver of sanctity. I seek a pure heart, and there is the place of My rest. Prepare for Me the larger upper room furnished, and I will keep the Passover at thy house with my disciples.(1) If thou wilt that I come unto thee and abide with thee, purge out the old leaven,(2) and cleanse the habitation of thy heart. Shut out the whole world, and all the throng of sins; sit as a sparrow alone upon the house-top,(3) and think upon thy transgressions with bitterness of thy soul. For everyone that loveth prepareth the best and fairest place for his beloved, because hereby the affection of him that entertaineth his beloved is known.

2. Yet know thou that thou canst not make sufficient preparation out of the merit of any action of thine, even though thou shouldest prepare thyself for a whole year, and hadst nothing else in thy mind. But out of My tenderness and grace alone art thou permitted to draw nigh unto My table; as though a beggar were called to a rich man's dinner, and had no other recompense to offer him for the benefits done unto him, but to humble himself and to give him thanks. Do therefore as much as lieth in thee, and do it diligently, not of custom, nor of necessity, but with fear, reverence, and affection, receive the Body of thy beloved Lord God, who vouchsafeth to come unto thee. I am He who hath called thee; I commanded it to be done; I will supply what is lacking to thee; come and receive Me.

3. When I give the grace of devotion, give thanks unto thy God; it is not because thou art worthy, but because I had mercy on thee. If thou hast not devotion, but rather feelest thyself dry, be instant in prayer, cease not to groan and knock; cease not until thou prevail to obtain some crumb or drop of saving grace. Thou hast need of Me, I have no need of thee. Nor dost thou come to sanctify Me, but I come to sanctify thee and make thee better. Thou comest that thou mayest be sanctified by Me, and be united to Me; that thou mayest receive fresh grace, and be kindled anew to amendment of life. See that thou neglect not this grace, but prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receive thy Beloved unto thee.

4. But thou oughtest not only to prepare thyself for devotion before Communion, thou must also keep thyself with all diligence therein after receiving the Sacrament; nor is less watchfulness needed afterwards, than devout preparation beforehand: for good watchfulness afterwards becometh in turn the best preparation for the gaining more grace. For hereby is a man made entirely indisposed to good, if he immediately return from Communion to give himself up to outward consolations. Beware of much speaking; remain in a secret place, and hold communion with thy God; for thou hast Him whom the whole world cannot take away from thee. I am He to whom thou oughtest wholly to give thyself; so that now thou mayest live not wholly in thyself, but in Me, free from all anxiety.

(1) Mark xiv. 14, 15. (2) 1 Corinthians v. 7. (3) Psalm cii. 7.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THAT THE DEVOUT SOUL OUGHT WITH THE WHOLE HEART TO YEARN AFTER UNION WITH CHRIST IN THE SACRAMENT

  

The Voice of the Disciple

Who shall grant unto me, O Lord, that I may find Thee alone, and open all my heart unto Thee, and enjoy Thee as much as my soul desireth; and that no man may henceforth look upon me, nor any creature move me or have respect unto me, but Thou alone speak unto me and I unto Thee, even as beloved is wont to speak unto beloved, and friend to feast with friend? For this do I pray, this do I long for, that I may be wholly united unto Thee, and may withdraw my heart from all created things, and by means of Holy Communion and frequent celebration may learn more and more to relish heavenly and eternal things. Ah, Lord God, when shall I be entirely united and lost in Thee, and altogether forgetful of myself? Thou in me, and I in Thee;(1) even so grant that we may in like manner continue together in one.

2. Verily Thou art my Beloved, the choicest among ten thousand,(2) in whom my soul delighteth to dwell all the days of her life. Verily Thou art my Peacemaker, in Whom is perfect peace and true rest, apart from Whom is labour and sorrow and infinite misery. Verily Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, and Thy counsel is not with the wicked, but Thy Word is with the humble and the simple. O how sweet, O Lord, is Thy spirit, who that Thou mightest manifest Thy sweetness towards Thy children, dost vouchsafe to refresh them with the bread which is full of sweetness, which cometh down from heaven. Verily there is no other nation so great, which hath its gods drawing nigh to them, as Thou, our God, art present unto all Thy faithful ones,(3) unto whom for their daily solace, and for lifting up their heart unto heaven, Thou givest Thyself for their food and delight.

3. For what other nation is there so renowned as the Christian people? Or what creature is so beloved under heaven as the devout soul to which God entereth in, that he may feed it with His glorious flesh? O unspeakable grace! O wonderful condescension! O immeasurable love specially bestowed upon men! But what reward shall I give unto the Lord for this grace, for charity so mighty? There is nothing which I am able to present more acceptable than to give my heart altogether unto God, and to join it inwardly to Him. Then all my inward parts shall rejoice, when my soul shall be perfectly united unto God. Then shall He say unto me, "If thou wilt be with Me, I will be with thee." And I will answer Him, "Vouchsafe, O Lord, to abide with me, I will gladly be with Thee; this is my whole desire, even that my heart be united unto Thee."

(1) John xv. 4. (2) Cant. v. 10. (3) Deuteronomy iv. 7.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

OF THE FERVENT DESIRE OF CERTAIN DEVOUT PERSONS TO RECEIVE THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST

  

The Voice of the Disciple

O how great is the abundance of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee. When I call to mind some devout persons who draw nigh to Thy Sacrament, O Lord, with the deepest devotion and affection, then very often I am confounded in myself and blush for shame, that I approach Thine altar and table of Holy Communion so carelessly and coldly, that I remain so dry and without affection, that I am not wholly kindled with love before Thee, my God, nor so vehemently drawn and affected as many devout persons have been, who out of the very earnest desire of the Communion, and tender affection of heart, could not refrain from weeping, but as it were with mouth of heart and body alike panted inwardly after Thee, O God, O Fountain of Life, having no power to appease or satiate their hunger, save by receiving Thy Body with all joyfulness and spiritual eagerness.

2. O truly ardent faith of those, becoming a very proof of Thy Sacred Presence! For they verily know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whose heart so ardently burneth within them(1) when Jesus walketh with them by the way. Ah me! far from me for the most part is such love and devotion as this, such vehement love and ardour. Be merciful unto me, O Jesus, good, sweet, and kind, and grant unto Thy poor suppliant to feel sometimes, in Holy Communion, though it be but a little, the cordial affection of Thy love, that my faith may grow stronger, my hope in Thy goodness increase, and my charity, once kindled within me by the tasting of the heavenly manna, may never fail.

3. But Thy mercy is able even to grant me the grace which I long for, and to visit me most tenderly with the spirit of fervour when the day of Thy good pleasure shall come. For, although I burn not with desire so vehement as theirs who are specially devout towards Thee, yet, through Thy grace, I have a desire after that greatly inflamed desire, praying and desiring to be made partaker with all those who so fervently love Thee, and to be numbered among their holy company.

(1) Luke xxiv. 32.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

  

THAT THE GRACE OF DEVOTION IS ACQUIRED BY HUMILITY AND SELF-DENIAL

  

The Voice of the Beloved

Thou oughtest to seek earnestly the grace of devotion, to ask it fervently, to wait for it patiently and faithfully, to receive it gratefully, to preserve it humbly, to work with it diligently, and to leave to God the time and manner of heavenly visitation until it come. Chiefly oughtest thou to humble thyself when thou feelest inwardly little or no devotion, yet not to be too much cast down, nor to grieve out of measure. God ofttimes giveth in one short moment what He hath long time denied; He sometimes giveth at the end what at the beginning of prayer He hath deferred to give.

2. If grace were always given immediately, and were at hand at the wish, it would be hardly bearable to weak man. Wherefore the grace of devotion is to be waited for with a good hope and with humble patience. Yet impute it to thyself and to thy sins when it is not given, or when it is mysteriously taken away. It is sometimes a small thing which hindereth and hideth grace; (if indeed that ought to be called small and not rather great, which hindereth so great a good); but if thou remove this, be it small or great, and perfectly overcome it, thou wilt have what thou hast asked.

3. For immediately that thou hast given thyself unto God with all thine heart, and hast sought neither this nor that according to thine own will and pleasure, but hast altogether settled thyself in Him, thou shalt find thyself united and at peace; because nothing shall give thee so sweet relish and delight, as the good pleasure of the Divine will. Whosoever therefore shall have lifted up his will unto God with singleness of heart, and shall have delivered himself from every inordinate love or dislike of any created thing, he will be the most fit for receiving grace, and worthy of the gift of devotion. For where the Lord findeth empty vessels,(1) there giveth He His blessing. And the more perfectly a man forsaketh things which cannot profit, and the more he dieth to himself, the more quickly doth grace come, the more plentifully doth it enter in, and the higher doth it lift up the free heart.

4. Then shall he see, and flow together, and wonder, and his heart shall be enlarged within him,(2) because the hand of the Lord is with him, and he hath put himself wholly in His hand, even for ever. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed, that seeketh God with all his heart, and receiveth not his soul in vain. This man in receiving the Holy Eucharist obtaineth the great grace of Divine Union; because he hath not regard to his own devotion and comfort, but, above all devotion and comfort, to the glory and honour of God.

(1) 2 Kings iv. (2) Isaiah lx. 5.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THAT WE OUGHT TO LAY OPEN OUR NECESSITIES TO CHRIST AND TO REQUIRE HIS GRACE

  

The Voice of the Disciple

O most sweet and loving Lord, whom now I devoutly desire to receive, Thou knowest my infirmity and the necessity which I suffer, in what evils and vices I lie; how often I am weighed down, tempted, disturbed, and defiled. I come unto Thee for remedy, I beseech of Thee consolation and support. I speak unto Thee who knowest all things, to whom all my secrets are open, and who alone art able perfectly to comfort and help me. Thou knowest what good thing I most stand in need of, and how poor I am in virtues.

2. Behold, I stand poor and naked before Thee, requiring grace, and imploring mercy. Refresh the hungry suppliant, kindle my coldness with the fire of Thy love, illuminate my blindness with the brightness of Thy presence. Turn thou all earthly things into bitterness for me, all grievous and contrary things into patience, all things worthless and created into contempt and oblivion. Lift up my heart unto Thee in Heaven, and suffer me not to wander over the earth. Be Thou alone sweet unto me from this day forward for ever, because Thou alone art my meat and drink, my love and joy, my sweetness and my whole good.

3. Oh that Thou wouldest altogether by Thy presence, kindle, consume, and transform me into Thyself; that I may be made one spirit with Thee, by the grace of inward union, and the melting of earnest love! Suffer me not to go away from Thee hungry and dry; but deal mercifully with me, as oftentimes Thou hast dealt wondrously with Thy saints. What marvel if I should be wholly kindled from Thee, and in myself should utterly fail, since Thou art fire always burning and never failing, love purifying the heart and enlightening the understanding.

     The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

OF FERVENT LOVE AND VEHEMENT DESIRE OF RECEIVING CHRIST

  

The Voice of the Disciple

With the deepest devotion and fervent love, with all affection and fervour of heart, I long to receive Thee, O Lord, even as many Saints and devout persons have desired Thee in communicating, who were altogether well pleasing to Thee by their sanctity of life, and dwelt in all ardent devotion. O my God, Eternal Love, my whole Good, Happiness without measure, I long to receive Thee with the most vehement desire and becoming reverence which any Saint ever had or could have.

2. And although I be unworthy to have all those feelings of devotion, yet do I offer Thee the whole affection of my heart, even as though I alone had all those most grateful inflamed desires. Yea, also, whatsoever things a pious mind is able to conceive and long for, all these with the deepest veneration and inward fervour do I offer and present unto Thee. I desire to reserve nothing unto myself, but freely and entirely to offer myself and all that I have unto Thee for a sacrifice. O Lord my God, my Creator and Redeemer! with such affection, reverence, praise, and honour, with such gratitude, worthiness, and love, with such faith, hope, and purity do I desire to receive Thee this day, as Thy most blessed Mother, the glorious Virgin Mary, received and desired Thee, when she humbly and devoutly answered the Angel who brought unto her the glad tidings of the mystery of the Incarnation. Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word.(1)

3. And as Thy blessed forerunner, the most excellent of Saints, John Baptist, being full of joy in Thy presence, leapt while yet in the womb of his mother, for joy in the Holy Ghost; and afterwards discerning Jesus walking amongst men, humbled himself exceedingly, and said, with devout affection, The friend of the bridegroom, who standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice;(2) even so I wish to be inflamed with great and holy desires, and to present myself unto Thee with my whole heart. Whence also, on behalf of myself and of all commended to me in prayer, I offer and present unto Thee the jubilation of all devout hearts, their ardent affections, their mental ecstasies, and supernatural illuminations and heavenly visions, with all the virtues and praises celebrated and to be celebrated by every creature in heaven and earth; to the end that by all Thou mayest worthily be praised and glorified for ever.

4. Receive my prayers, O Lord my God, and my desires of giving Thee infinite praise and unbounded benediction, which, according to the multitude of Thine unspeakable greatness, are most justly due unto Thee. These do I give Thee, and desire to give every day and every moment; and with beseechings and affectionate desires I call upon all celestial spirits and all Thy faithful people to join with me in rendering Thee thanks and praises.

5. Let all peoples, nations, and tongues praise Thee, and magnify Thy holy and sweet-sounding Name, with highest jubilations and ardent devotion. And let all who reverently and devoutly celebrate Thy most high Sacrament, and receive it with full assurance of faith, be accounted worthy to find grace and mercy with Thee, and intercede with all supplication for me a sinner; and when they shall have attained unto their wished-for devotion and joyous union with Thee, and shall depart full of comfort and wondrously refreshed from Thy holy, heavenly table, let them vouchsafe to be mindful of me, for I am poor and needy.

(1) Luke i. 38. (2) John iii. 29.

    The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas a Kempis, tr. by William Benham [1886], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

THAT A MAN SHOULD NOT BE A CURIOUS SEARCHER OF THE SACRAMENT, BUT A HUMBLE IMITATOR OF CHRIST, SUBMITTING HIS SENSE TO HOLY FAITH

  

The Voice of the Beloved

Thou must take heed of curious and useless searching into this most profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not be plunged into the abyss of doubt. He that is a searcher of Majesty shall be oppressed by the glory thereof.(1) God is able to do more than man can understand. A pious and humble search after truth is to be allowed, when it is always ready to be taught, and striving to walk after the wholesome opinions of the fathers.

2. Blessed is the simplicity which leaveth alone the difficult paths of questionings, and followeth the plain and firm steps of God's commandments. Many have lost devotion whilst they sought to search into deeper things. Faith is required of thee, and a sincere life, not loftiness of intellect, nor deepness in the mysteries of God. If thou understandest not nor comprehendest the things which are beneath thee, how shalt thou comprehend those which are above thee? Submit thyself unto God, and humble thy sense to faith, and the light of knowledge shall be given thee, as shall be profitable and necessary unto thee.

3. There are some who are grievously tempted concerning faith and the Sacrament; but this is not to be imputed to themselves but rather to the enemy. Care not then for this, dispute not with thine own thoughts, nor make answer to the doubts which are cast into thee by the devil; but believe the words of God, believe His Saints and Prophets, and the wicked enemy shall flee from thee. Often it profiteth much, that the servant of God endureth such things. For the enemy tempteth not unbelievers and sinners, because he already hath secure possession of them; but he tempteth and harasseth the faithful and devout by various means.

4. Go forward therefore with simple and undoubting faith, and draw nigh unto the Sacrament with supplicating reverence. And whatsoever thou art not enabled to understand, that commit without anxiety to Almighty God. God deceiveth thee not; he is deceived who believeth too much in himself. God walketh with the simple, revealeth Himself to the humble, giveth understanding to babes, openeth the sense to pure minds, and hideth grace from the curious and proud. Human reason is weak and may be deceived; but true faith cannot be deceived.

5. All reason and natural investigation ought to follow faith, not to precede, nor to break it. For faith and love do here especially take the highest place, and work in hidden ways in this most holy and exceeding excellent Sacrament. God who is eternal and incomprehensible, and of infinite power, doth great and inscrutable things in heaven and in earth, and His wonderful works are past finding out. If the works of God were of such sort that they might easily be comprehended by human reason, they should no longer be called wonderful or unspeakable.

(1) Proverbs xxv. 27 (Vulg.)

 

    


===== BOOK: itp.txt =====


    Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk

 

a Study in Social Evolution

 

BY

 

EDWARD CARPENTER

 

LONDON GEORGE ALLEN & Co. LTD., RATHBONE PLACE, W. MANCHESTER: S. CLARKE LTD., 41, GRANBY Row.

 

[1914]

 

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, May 2004, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

Note

THE four chapters forming Part I of this book were originally published in Professor Stanley Hall's American Journal of Religious Psychology for July, 1911; and in the Revue d' Ethnographie et de Sociologie of the same date, issued by the International Ethnographic Institute of Paris.

With regard to the Dorian institutions in Part II, I owe much to Professor E. Bethe's learned and authoritative treatise on that subject in the Rheinisches Museum fur Philologie, Frankfurt-a-M., 1907.

E. C.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

 

Contents

        Page 
     INTRODUCTION  <page 9> 
  

   Part I:
 The Intermediate in the Service of Religion  

 
  Chapter       
  I.  AS PROPHET OR PRIEST  <page 15> 
  II.  AS WIZARD OR WITCH  <page 36> 
  III.  AS INVENTORS OF THE ARTS AND CRAFTS  <page 55> 
  IV.  HERMAPHRODISM AMONG GODS AND MORTALS  <page 66> 
      Part II:
 The Intermediate as Warrior    
  V.  THE DORIAN MILITARY COMRADESHIP  <page 87> 
  VI.  ITS RELATION TO THE STATUS OF WOMAN  <page 102> 
  VII.  ITS RELATION TO CIVIC LIFE AND RELIGION  <page 117> 
  VIII.  THE SAMURAI OF JAPAN: AND THEIR IDEAL  <page 137> 
     CONCLUSION  <page 161> 
     INDEX  175 
  

 

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

 

Introduction

THAT between the normal man and the normal woman there exist a great number of intermediate types--types, for instance, in which the body may be perfectly feminine, while the mind and feelings are decidedly masculine, or vice versa--is a thing which only a few years ago was very little understood. But to-day--thanks to the labours of a number of scientific men--the existence of the-se types is generally recognised and admitted; it is known that the variations in question, whether affecting the body or the mind, are practically always congenital; and that similar variations have existed in considerable abundance in all ages and among all races of the world. Since the Christian era these intermediate types have been much persecuted in some periods and places, while in others they have been mildly tolerated; but that they might possibly fulfil a positive and useful function of any kind in society is an idea which seems hardly if ever to have been seriously considered.

[p. 10]

Such an idea, however, must have been familiar in pre-Christian times and among the early civilisations, and if not consciously analysed or generalised in philosophical form, it none the less underran the working customs and life of many, if not most primitive tribes--in such a way that the intermediate people and their corresponding sex-relationships played a distinct part in the life of the tribe or nation, and were openly acknowledged and recognised as part of the general polity.

It is probably too early at present to formulate any elaborate theory as to the various workings of this element in the growth of society. It might be easy to enter into a tirade against sex-inversion in general and to point out and insist on all the evils which may actually or possibly flow from it. But this would not be the method either of commonsense or of science; and if one is to understand any widespread human tendency it is obvious that the procedure has to be different from this. One has to enquire first what advantages (if any) may have flowed, or been reported to flow, from the tendency, what place it may possibly have occupied in social life, and what (if any) were its healthy, rather than its unhealthy, manifestations. Investigating thus in this case, we are surprised to find how often-according to the views of these early peoples themselves-inversion in some form was

[p. 11]

regarded as a necessary part of social life, and the Uranian man accorded a certain meed of honour.

it would seem-as a first generalisation on this unexplored subject--that there have been two main directions in which the intermediate types have penetrated into the framework of normal society, and made themselves useful if not indispensable. And the two directions have been in some sense opposite, the one being towards service in Warfare and the other towards the service of Religion. It would seem that where the homosexual tendency was of the robuster and more manly sort, leading men to form comrade alliances with each other in the direction of active and practical life, this tendency was soon reinforced and taken advantage of by the military spirit. Military comradeship grew into an institution, and the peoples who adopted it became extraordinarily successful in warfare, and overcoming other tribes spread their customs among them. Such was the case with the Dorian Greeks, whose comradeship institutions form the subjects of chapters v., vi., and vii. of this book; and such also appears to have been the case in a somewhat different way with the Samurai of Japan (chapter viii.) in the twelfth and succeeding centuries; and in lesser degree with many Mohammedan. peoples in Arabia, Persia, Afghanistan, and elsewhere.

[p. 12]

On the other hand, it would seem that where the homosexual tendency was of a more effeminate and passive sort, it led to a distaste, on the part of those individuals or groups who were affected by it, for the ordinary masculine occupations and business of the world, and to an inclination to retire into the precincts of the Temples and the services (often sexual) of Religion--which, of course in primitive days, meant not only the religious life in our sense, but the dedication to such things as Magic, learning, poetry, music, prophecy, and other occupations not generally favoured by the normal man, the hunter and the warrior. There are also some considerations which go to show that this class of Intermediate did actually tend to develop faculties like divination, clairvoyance, ecstasy, and so forth, which are generally and quite naturally associated with religion.

This connection of homosexuality with divination and religion I have made the special subject of the first portion of this book; and it certainly is remarkable to find--even from this slight study--how widespread the connection has been among the primitive peoples and civilisations.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

 

PART I.

 

The Intermediate in the Service of Religion

[p. 14] [p. 15]

 

CHAPTER I.

 

As Prophet or Priest

A CURIOUS and interesting subject is the connection of the Uranian temperament with prophetic gifts and divination. It is a subject which, as far as I know, has not been very seriously considered--though it has been touched upon by Elie Reclus, Westermarck, Bastian, Iwan Bloch, and others. The fact is well known, of course, that in the temples and cults of antiquity and of primitive races it has been a widespread practice to educate and cultivate certain youths in an effeminate manner, and that these youths in general become the priests or medicine-men of the tribe; but this fact has hardly been taken seriously, as indicating any necessary connection between the two functions, or any relation in general between homosexuality and psychic powers. Some such relation or connection, however, I think we must admit as being obviously indicated by the following facts; and the admission

[p. 16]

leads us on to the further enquiry of what the relation may exactly be, and what its rationale and explanation.

Among the tribes, for instance, in the neighbourhood of Behring's Straits--the Kamchadales, the Chukchi, the Aleuts, Inoits, Kadiak islanders, and so forth, homosexuality is common, and its relation to shamanship or priesthood most marked and curious. Westermarck, in his well-known book, The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas, [*1] quoting from Dr. Bogoraz, says:--"It frequently happens that, under the supernatural influence of one of their shamans, or priests, a Chukchi lad at sixteen years of age will suddenly relinquish his sex and imagine himself to be a woman. He adopts a woman's attire, lets his hair grow, and devotes himself altogether to female occupation. Furthermore, this disclaimer of his sex takes a husband into the yurt (hut) and does all the work which is usually incumbent on the wife, in most unnatural and voluntary subjection. . . . These abnormal changes of sex imply the most abject immorality in the community, and appear to be strongly encouraged by the shamans, who interpret such cases as an injunction of their individual deity." Further, Westermarck says "the change

[p. 17]

of sex was usually accompanied by future shamanship; indeed nearly all the shamans were former delinquents of their sex." Again he says, "In describing the Koriaks, Krasheninnikoff makes mention of the Ke'yev, that is men occupying the position of concubines, and he compares them with the Kamchadale Koe'kcuc, as he calls them, that is men transformed into women. Every Koe'kcuc, he says, 'is regarded as a magician and interpreter of dreams. . . . The Koe'kcuc wore women's clothes, did women's work, and were in the position of wives or concubines.'" And (on p. 472) "There is no indication that the North American aborigines attached any opprobrium to men who had intercourse with those members of their own sex who had assumed the. dress and habits of women. In Kadiak such a companion was on the contrary regarded as a great acquisition; and the effeminate men, far from being despised, were held in repute by the people, most of them being wizards."

This connection with wizardry and religious divination is particularly insisted upon by Elie Reclus, in his Primitive Folk (Contemporary Science Series). Speaking of the Inoits (p. 68) he says:--"Has a boy with a pretty face also a graceful demeanour? The mother no longer permits him to associate with companions of his own age, but clothes him and brings him up as a girl. Any stranger would

[p. 18]

be deceived as to his sex, and when he is about fifteen he is sold for a good round sum to a wealthy personage. [*1] 'Choupans,' or youths of this kind are highly prized by the Konyagas. On the other hand, there are to be met with here and there among the Esquimaux or kindred populations, especially in Youkon, girls who decline marriage and maternity. Changing their sex, so to speak, they live as boys, adopting masculine manners and customs, they hunt the stag, and in the chase shrink from no danger; in fishing from no fatigue."

Reclus then says that the Choupans commonly dedicate themselves to the priesthood; but all are not qualified for this. "To become an angahok it is needful to have a very marked vocation, and furthermore a character and temperament which every one has not. The priests in office do not leave the recruiting of their pupils to chance; they make choice at an early age of boys or girls, not limiting themselves to one sex--a mark of greater intelligence than is exhibited by most other priesthoods" (p. 71). The pupil has to go through considerable ordeals:--"Disciplined by abstinence and prolonged vigils, by hardship and constraint, be must learn to endure pain stoically and to subdue his bodily desires, to make the body obey

[p. 19]

unmurmuringly the commands of the spirit. Others may be chatterers; he will be silent, as becomes the prophet and the soothsayer. At an early age the novice courts solitude. He wanders throughout the long nights across silent plains filled with the chilly whiteness of the moon; he listens to the wind moaning over the desolate floes;--and then the aurora borealis, that ardently sought occasion for 'drinking in the light,' the angahok must absorb all its brilliancies and splendours. . . . And now the future sorcerer is no longer a child. Many a time he has felt himself in the presence of Sidne, the Esquimaux Demeter, he has divined it by the shiver which ran through his veins, by the tingling of his flesh and the bristling of his hair. . . . He sees stars unknown to the profane; he asks the secrets of destiny from Sirius, Algol, and Altair; he passes through a series of initiations, knowing well that his spirit will not be loosed from the burden of dense matter and crass ignorance, until the moon has looked him in the face, and darted a certain ray into his eyes. At last his own Genius, evoked from the bottomless depths of existence, appears to him, having scaled the immensity of the heavens, and climbed across the abysses of the ocean. White, wan, and solemn, the phantom will say to him: 'Behold me, what dost thou desire?' Uniting himself with the Double from beyond the grave,

[p. 20]

the soul of the angakok flies upon the wings of the wind, and quitting the body at will, sails swift and light through the universe. It is permitted to probe all hidden things, to seek the knowledge of all mysteries, in order that they may be revealed to those who have remained mortal with spirit unrefined" (p. 73).

Allowing something for poetic and imaginative expression, the above statement of the ordeals and initiations of the angakok, and their connection with the previous career of the Choupan are well based on the observations of many authorities, as well as on their general agreement with similar facts all over the world. There is also another passage of Reclus (p. 70) on the duties of the angahok, which seems to throw considerable light on certain passages in the Bible referring to the kedeshim and kedeshoth of the Syrian cults, also on the kosio of the Slave Coast and the early functions of the priesthood in general:--"As soon as the Choupan has moulted into the angakok, the tribe confide to him the girls most suitable in bodily grace and disposition; he has to complete their education--he will perfect them in dancing and other accomplishments, and finally will initiate them into the pleasures of love. If they display intelligence, they will become seers and medicine-women, priestesses and prophetesses. The summer kachims (assemblies),

[p. 21]

which are closed to the women of the community, will open wide before these. It is believed that these girls would be unwholesome company if they had not been purified by commerce with a man of God."

Catlin, in his North American Indians (vol. i., pp. 112-114), describes how on one occasion he was in a large tent occupied in painting portraits of some of the chiefs of the tribe (the Mandans) among whom he was staying, when he noticed at the door of the tent, but not venturing to come in, three or four young men of handsome presence and rather elegantly dressed, but not wearing the eagle's feathers of warriors. He mentally decided to paint the portrait of one of these also; and on a later day when he had nearly done with the chiefs, he invited one of these others to come in and stand for him. The youth was overjoyed at the compliment, and smiled all over his face. He was clad from head to foot in the skin of the mountain goat, which for softness and whiteness is almost like Chinese crape, embroidered with ermine and porcupine quills; and with his pipe and his whip in his hand, and his long hair falling over neck and shoulders, made a striking and handsome figure, which showed, too, a certain grace and gentleness as of good breeding. "There was nought about him of the terrible," says Catlin,

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] "and nought to shock the finest, chastest intellect." But to Catlin's surprise, no sooner had he begun to sketch his new subject, than the chiefs rose up, flung their buffalo robes around them, and stalked out of the tent.

Catlin's interpreter afterwards explained to him the position of these men and the part they played in the tribal life; and how the chiefs were offended at the idea of their being placed on an equality with themselves. But the offence, it seemed, was not on any ground of immorality; but--and this is corroborated by the customs of scores of other tribes--arose simply from the fact that the young men were associated with the women, and shared their modes of life, and were not worthy therefore to rank among the warriors. In their own special way they held a position of some honour.

"Among the Illinois Indians," says Westermarck (vol. ii., p. 473), "the effeminate men assist in [i.e., are present at] all the juggleries and the solemn dance in honour of the calumet, or sacred tobacco-pipe, for which the Indians have such a deference. . . . but they are not permitted either to dance or to sing. They are called into the councils of the Indians, and nothing can be decided without their advice; for because of their extraordinary manner of living they are looked upon as manitous, or supernatural beings, and persons of consequence."

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] "The Sioux, Sacs, and Fox Indians," he continues, "give once a year, or oftener, a feast to the Berdashe, or I-coo-coo-a, who is a man dressed in women's clothes, as he has been all his life." And Catlin (N.A. Indians, vol. ii., p. 214) says of this Berdashe:--"For extraordinary privileges which he is known to possess, he is driven to the most servile and degrading duties, which he is not allowed to escape; and he being the only one of the tribe submitting to this disgraceful degradation is looked upon as medicine and sacred, and a feast is given to him annually; and initiatory to it a dance by those few young men of the tribe who can--as in the illustration--dance forward and publicly make their boast (without the denial of the Berdashe) that" [then follow three or four unintelligible lines of some native dialect; and then] "such and such only are allowed to enter the dance and partake of the feast."

In this connection it may not be out of place to quote Joaquin Miller (who spent his early life as a member of an Indian tribe) on the prophetic powers of these people. He says ("Life among the Modocs," p. 360) "If there is a race of men that has the gift of prophecy or prescience I think it is the Indian. It may be a keen instinct sharpened by meditation that makes them foretell. many things with such precision, but I have seen some things

[p. 24]

that looked much like the fulfilment of prophecies. They believe in the gift of prophecy thoroughly, and are never without their seers."

In this connection we may quote the curious remark of Herodotus, who, after mentioning (i. 105) that some of the Scythians suffered from a disease of effeminacy (Theleia nosos), and were called Enarees, says (iv. 67) that "these Enarees, or Androgyni, were endowed by Venus with the power of divination," and were consulted by the King of the Scythians when the latter was ill.

The Jesuit father Lafitau, who published in 1724, at Paris, an extremely interesting book on the manners and customs of the North American tribes among whom he had been a missionary, [*1] after speaking of warlike women and Amazons, says (vol. I, p. 53):--"If some women are found possessing virile courage, and glorying in the profession of war, which seems only suitable to men; there exist also men so cowardly as to live like women. Among the Illinois, among the Sioux, in Louisiana, in Florida, and in Yucatan, there are found youths who adopt the garb of women and preserve it all their lives, and who think themselves honoured in stooping to all their occupations; they never marry; they take part in all ceremonies in

[p. 25]

which religion seems to be concerned; and this profession of an extraordinary life causes them to pass for beings of a superior order, and above the common run of mankind. Would not these be the same kind of folk as the Asiatic worshippers of Cybele, or those Easterns of whom Julius Firmicus speaks (Lib. de Errore prof. Relig.), who consecrated to the Goddess of Phrygia, or to Venus Urania, certain priests, who dressed as women, who affected an effeminate countenance, who painted their faces, and disguised their true sex under garments borrowed from the sex which they wished to counterfeit."

The instance, just quoted, of the Enarees among the Scythians, who by excessive riding were often rendered impotent and effeminate, is very curiously paralleled in quite another part of the world by the so-called mujerados (or feminised men) among the Pueblo-Indians of Mexico. Dr. W. A. Hammond, who was stationed, in 1850, as military doctor, in New Mexico, reported [*1] that in each village one of the strongest men, being chosen, was compelled by unintermitted riding to pass through this kind of metamorphosis." He then became indispensable for the religious orgies which were celebrated among the Pueblo-Indians in the

[p. 26]

same way as they once were among the old Greeks, Egyptians, and other people. . . . These Saturnalia take place among the Pueblos in the Spring of every year, and are kept with the greatest secrecy from the observation of non-Indians." [*1] And again, "To be a mujerado is no disgrace to a Pueblo-Indian. On the contrary, he enjoys the protection of his tribes-people, and is accorded a certain amount of honour."

Similar customs to those of the American Indians were found among the Pacific islanders. Captain James Wilson, [*2] in visiting the South Sea Islands in 1796-8, found there men who were dressed like women and enjoyed a certain honour; and expresses his surprise at finding that "even their women do not despise these fellows, but form friendships with them." While William Ellis, also a Missionary, in his Polynesian Researches, [*3] (vol. i., p. 340), says that they not only enjoyed the sanction of the priests, but even the direct example of one of their divinities. He goes on to say that when he asked the natives why they made away with so many more female than male children, "they generally answered that the fisheries, the service of the 

[p. 27]

 temple and especially war were the only purposes for which they thought it desirable to rear children!"

But one of the most interesting examples of the connection we are studying is that of Apollo with the temple at Delphi. Delphi, of course, was one of the chief seats of prophecy and divination in the old world, and Apollo, who presided at this shrine, was a strange blend of masculine and feminine attributes. It will be remembered that he was frequently represented as being very feminine in form--especially in the more archaic statues. He was the patron of song and music. He was also, in some ways, the representative divinity of the Uranian love, for he was the special god of the Dorian Greeks, among whom comradeship became an institution. [*1] It was said of him that to expiate his pollution by the blood of the Python (whom he slew), he became the slave and devoted favorite of Admetus; and Muller [*2] describes a Dorian religious festival, in which a boy, taking the part of Apollo, "probably imitated the manner in which the god, as herdsman and slave of Alcestis, submitted to the most degrading service." Alcestis, in fact, the wife of Admetus, said of Apollo (in a

[p. 28]

verse of Sophocles cited by Plutarch): oymos d`alektur ayton Ege pros "mulen". When we consider that Apollo, as Sun god, corresponds in some points to the Syrian Baal (masculine), and that in his epithet Karneios, used among the Dorians, [*1] he corresponds to the Syrian Ashtaroth Karnaim (feminine), we seem to see a possible clue connecting certain passages in the Bible--which refer to the rites of the Syrian tribes and their occasional adoption in the Jewish Temple--with some phases of the Dorian religious ritual.

"The Hebrews entering Syria," says Richard Burton, [*2] "found it religionised by Assyria and Babylonia, when the Accadian Ishtar had passed West, and had become Ashtoreth, Ashtaroth, or Ashirah, the Anaitis of Armenia, the Phoenician Astarte, and the Greek Aphrodite, the great Moon-goddess who is queen of Heaven and Love. . . . She was worshipped by men habited as women, and vice versa; for which reason, in the Torah (Deut. xxii. 5), the sexes are forbidden to change dress."

In the account of the reforming zeal of King Josiah (2 Kings xxiii.) we are told (v. 4) that "the King commanded Hilkiah, the high priest, and the

[p. 29]

priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all the host of heaven; and he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron. . . . And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove."

The word here translated "sodomites" is the Hebrew word Kedeshim, meaning the "consecrated ones" (males), and it occurs again in 1 Kings xiv. 24; xv. 12; and xxii. 46. And the word translated "grove" is Asherah. There is some doubt, I believe, as to the exact function of these Kedeshim in the temple ritual, and some doubt as to whether the translation of the word given in our Authorised Version is justified. [*1] It is clear, however, that these men corresponded in some way to the Kedeshoth or sacred women, who were--like the Devadasis of the Hindu temples--a kind of courtesan or prostitute dedicated to the god, and strange as it may seem to the modern mind, it is probable that they united some kind of sexual service with prophetic functions. Dr. Frazer, speaking [*2] of the sacred slaves or Kedeshim in various parts of Syria, concludes

[p. 30]

that "originally no sharp line of distinction existed between the prophets and the Kedeshim; both were 'men of God,' as the prophets were constantly called; in other words they were inspired mediums, men in whom the god manifested himself from time to time by word and deed, in short, temporary incarnations of the deity. But while the prophets roved freely about the country, the Kedeshim appears to have been regularly attached to a sanctuary, and among the duties which they performed at the shrines there were clearly some which revolted the conscience of men imbued with a purer morality."

As to the Asherah, or sometimes plural Asherim, translated "grove,"--for which the women wove hangings--the most generally accepted opinion is that it was a wooden post or tree stripped of its branches and planted in the ground beside an altar, whether of Jehovah or other gods. [*1] Several biblical passages, like Jeremiah ii. 27, suggest that it was an emblem of Baal or of the male organ, and others (e.g., Judges ii. 13, and iii. 7) connect it with Ashtoreth, the female partner of Baal; while the weaving of hangings or garments for the "grove" suggests the combination of female with male in one effigy. [*2] At any rate we may conclude

[p. 31]

pretty safely that the thing or things had a strongly sexual signification.

Thus it would seem that in the religious worship of the Canaanites there were male courtesans attached to the temples and inhabiting their precincts, as well as consecrated females, and that the ceremonies connected with these cults were of a markedly sexual character. These ceremonies had probably originated in an ancient worship of sexual acts as being symbolical of, and therefore favorable to, the fertility of Nature and the crops. But though they had penetrated into the Jewish temple they were detested by the more zealous adherents of Jehovah, because--for one reason at any rate--they belonged to the rival cult of the Syrian Baal and Ashtoreth, the Kedeshim in fact being "consecrated to the Mother of the Gods, the famous Dea Syria." [*1] And they were detestable, too, because they went hand in hand with the cultivation of 'familiar spirits' and 'wizards'--who of course knew nothing of Jehovah! Thus we see (2 Kings xxi.) that Manasseh followed the abominations of the heathen, building up the high places and the 'groves' and the altars for Baal. "And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, [*2] and dealt with

[p. 32]

familiar spirits and wizards, and wrought much wickedness. . . . and he set a graven image of the 'grove' in the house of the Lord." But Josiah, his grandson, reversed all this, and drove the familiar spirits and the wizards out of the land, together with the Kedeshim.

So far with regard to Syria and the Bible. But Dr. Fraser points out the curious likeness here to customs existing to-day among the Negroes of the Slave Coast of West Africa. In that region, women, called Kosio, are attached to the temples as wives, priestesses and temple prostitutes of the python-god. But besides these "there are male Kosio as well as female Kosio, that is there are dedicated men as well as dedicated women, priests as well as priestesses, and the ideas and customs in regard to them seem to be similar. [*1] "Indeed," he says, "the points of resemblance between the prophets of Israel and of West Africa are close and curious." [*2] It must be said, however, that Dr. Frazer does not in either case insist on the inference of homosexuality. On the contrary, he rather endeavours to avoid it, and of course it would be unreasonable to suppose any invariable connection of these "sacred men" with this peculiarity. At the same time the general inference in that direction is strong and difficult to evade.

[p. 33]

Throughout China and Japan and much of Malaysia, the so-called Bonzes, or Buddhist priests, have youths or boys attached to the service of the temples. Each priest educates a novice to follow him in the ritual, and it is said that the relations between the two are often physically intimate. Francis Xavier, in his letters from Japan (in 1549), mentions this. He says that the Bonzes themselves allowed that this was so, but maintained that it was no sin. They said that intercourse with woman was for them a deadly sin, or even punishable with death; but that the other relation was, in their eyes, by no means execrable, but harmless and even commendable. [*1] And, as it was then, so on the whole it appears to be now, or to have been till very lately. In all the Buddhist sects in Japan (except Shinto) celibacy is imposed on the priests, but homosexual relations are not forbidden.

And to return to the New World, we find Cieza de Leon-who is generally considered a trustworthy authority--describing practices and ceremonials in the temples of New Granada in his time (1550) strangely similar to those referred to in the Hebrew

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] Bible:--"Every temple or chief house of worship keeps one or two men, or more, according to the idol--who go about attired like women, even from their childhood, and talk like women, and imitate them in their manner, carriage, and all else." [*1] These served in the temples, and were made use of "almost as if by way of sanctity and religion" (casi come por via de santidad y religion); and he concludes that "the Devil had gained such mastery in that land that, not content with causing the people to fall into mortal sin, he had actually persuaded them that the same was a species of holiness and religion, in order that by so doing he might render them all the more subject to him. And this (he says) Fray Domingo told me in his own writing--a man of whom everyone knows what a lover of truth he is."

Thus, as Richard Burton remarks, [*2] these same usages in connection with religion have spread nearly all over the world and "been adopted by the priestly castes from Mesopotamia to Peru."

It is all very strange and difficult to understand. Indeed, if the facts were not so well-established and so overwhelmingly numerous, it would appear incredible to most of us nowadays that the conception

[p. 35]

of "sacredness" or "consecration" could be honestly connected, in the mind of any people, with the above things and persons. And yet it is obvious, when one sums up the whole matter, that though in cases Cieza de Leon may have been right in suggesting that religion was only brought in as a cloak and excuse for licentiousness, yet in the main this explanation does not suffice. There must have been considerably more at the back of it all than that: a strange conviction apparently, or superstition, if one likes to call it so, that unusual powers of divination and prophecy were to be found in homosexual folk, and those who adopted the said hybrid kind of life--a conviction moreover (or superstition) so rooted and persistent that it spread over the greater part of the world.

Is any explanation, we may ask, of this strange and anomalous belief possible? Probably a complete explanation, in the present state of our knowledge, is not possible. Yet some suggestions in that direction we may perhaps venture to give. Before doing so, however, it may be as well to dwell for a moment on the further and widely prevalent belief in the connection between homosexuality and sorcery.

Footnotes

^16:1 2 vols. (Macmillan, 1908), vol. ii., p. 458.

^18:1 See also Bancroft's Native Races of the Pacific States, vol. i., p. 82.

^24:1 Moeurs des Sauvages Ameriquains, comparees aux moeurs des premiers temps, par le p. Lafitau (Paris, 1724).

^25:1 Wm. A. Hammond in American Journal of Neurology and Psychiatry (August, 1882), p. 339.

^26:1 See Dr. Karsch, Jahrbuch Sex. Zwisch, vol. iii., p. 142.

^26:2 First Missionary Voyage to the South Sea Islands (London, 1799), p. 200.

^26:3 2 vols. (London, 1829).

^27:1 See chapters v., vi., and vii. in this vol.

^27:2 History and Antiquities of the Doric Race, vol. i., p. 338.

^28:1 See infra, ch. viii., <page 12>.

^28:2 The Thousand Nights and a Night (1886), vol. x., p. 229.

^29:1 See Frazer's Adonis, Attis and Osiris (2nd edition, 1907), pp. 14, 64 note, etc.

^29:2 Ibid., p. 67.

^30:1 See Frazer's Adonis, p. 14, note, etc.

^30:2 See a full consideration of this subject in Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism, by Thomas Inman (2nd edition, 1874), p. 120 et seq. Also a long article by A. E. Whatham in The American Journal of Religious Psychology and Education, for July, 1911, on "The Sign of the Mother-goddess."

^31:1 See Westermarck's Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas, vol. ii., p. 488.

^31:2 All this suggests the practice of some early and primitive science, and much resembles the accusations made in the thirteenth century against our Roger Bacon, pioneer of modern science.

^32:1 Adonis, etc. p. 60.

^32:2 Ibid., p. 66.

^33:1 See T. Karsch-Haack, Forschungen uber gleichgeschlechtliche Liebe (Munich), Die Japaner, p. 77. Also The Letters of Fr. Xavier, translated into German by Joseph Burg (3 vols., 1836-40).

^34:1 See la Chronica del Peru, by Cieza de Leon (Antwerp, 1554), ch. 64.

^34:2 Op. cit., p. 243. 34

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 36]

 

CHAPTER II.

 

As Wizard or Witch

PERHAPS--as it is now generally considered that the belief in Magic preceded what we call religion, and that the wizard came in order of development before the priest--I ought to have placed the present chapter first; but for some reasons the order adopted seems the better. Anyhow it is certain that among primitive folk the prophet, the priest, the wizard, and the witch-doctor largely unite their functions, and are not easily distinguishable from one another; and therefore, from what has already been said, we may naturally expect to find an association between homosexuality and sorcery.

Westermarck (vol. i., p. 477) mentions the ancient Scandinavians as regarding passive homosexuals in the light of sorcerers; and refers (p. 484 note) to Thomas Falkner, who, in his Description of Patagonia (1775), p. 117, says that among the Patagonians "the wizards are of both sexes. The

[p. 37]

male wizards are obliged (as it were) to leave their sex, and to dress themselves in female apparel, and are not permitted to marry, though the female ones or witches may. They are generally chosen for this office when they are children, and a preference is always shown to those who at that early time of life discover an effeminate disposition. They are clothed very early in female attire, and presented with the drum and rattles belonging to the profession they are to follow."

The following is an account given by Dawydow, the Russian traveller, [*1] of the quite similar custom prevalent in his time (about 1800) among the Konyagas in the Alaska region:--"There are here (in the island of Kadiak) men with tatooed chins, who work only as women, who always live with the women-kind, and like the latter, have husbands;--not infrequently even two. Such men are called Achnutschik. They are not by any means despised, but, on the contrary, are respected in the settlements, and are for the most part wizards. The Konyaga, who possesses an Achnutschik instead of a wife, is even thought fortunate. When father or mother regard their son as feminine in his bearing they will often dedicate him in earliest childhood to the vocation of Achnutschik. Sometimes

[p. 38]

it will happen that the parents have in mind beforehand to have a daughter, and when they find themselves disappointed they make their new-born son an Achnutschik."

Here we have the association between homosexuality and sorcery clearly indicated for the very extremes, South and North, of the American continent; and, as a matter of fact, and as appears from various other passages in the present work, the same association may be traced among countless tribes of the middle regions of the same continent, and all over the world. There was a legend current among the North American Indians at one time [*1] about a Bardache, or man of this kind, who was shot at by an enraged warrior of his own tribe; but when the onlookers ran to the place where the transfixed man fell they found only an arrow sticking in a heap of stones. The man had disappeared!

With regard to the attribution of homosexuality also to female wizards, or witches, I believe that, rightly or wrongly, this was very common in Europe a few centuries ago. Leo Africanus (1492) in his description of Morocco [*2] says, "The third kind of diviners are women-witches, which are affirmed to

[p. 39]

have familiarity with divels. Changing their voices they fain the divell to speak within them: then they which come to enquire ought with greate feare and trembling (to) aske these vile and abominable witches such questions as they mean to propound, and lastly, offering some fee unto the divell, they depart. But the wiser and honester sort of people call these women Sahacat, which in Latin signifieth Fricatrices, because they have a damnable custom to commit unlawful venerie among themselves, which I cannot express in any modester terms." He then goes on to say that these witches, carnally desiring some of the young women who come to "enquire," entrap them and corrupt them so far as actually to cause them in some cases to "desire the companie of those witches" (and to that end, he explains, deceive their husbands). Whether this is all true or not--and probably it is quite vulgarly exaggerated--it shows the kind of thing that was believed at that time about witches.

In some cases the adoption of the life of priest or sorcerer is accompanied by a change of dress (as we have seen), but this is by no means always so. Speaking of the Pelew Islanders, Dr. Frazer [*1] attributes the adoption by the priests of female attire to the fact that "it often happens that a goddess chooses a man, not a woman, for her

[p. 40]

minister and inspired mouthpiece. When that is so, the favoured man is thenceforth regarded and treated as a woman." And he continues--"This pretended change of sex under the inspiration of a female spirit perhaps explains a custom widely spread among savages, in accordance with which some men dress as women and act as women through life."

This explanation is certainly not very convincing--though it is just possible that in certain cases of men of this kind in early times, the feminine part of their natures may have personified itself, and presented itself to them as a vision of a female spirit or goddess; and thus the explanation might be justified. But anyhow it should not be overlooked that the same impulse (for men to dress as women, and women to dress as men) perseveres to-day in quite a large percentage of our modern civilised populations; and whatever its explanations, the impulse is often enormously powerful, and its satisfaction a source of great delight. It must also not be overlooked, in dealing with this complex and difficult subject, that the mere fact of a person delighting to adopt the garb of the opposite sex does not in. itself prove that his or her love-tendency is abnormal--i.e., cross-dressing does not prove homosexuality. There are not a few cases of men in the present day (and presumably

[p. 41]

the same in past times) who love to dress as women and yet are perfectly normal in their sex-relations; and therefore too sweeping generalisations on this subject must be avoided. [*1]

On the whole, however, cross-dressing must be taken as a general indication of, and a cognate phenomenon to, homosexuality; and its wide prevalence in early times, especially in connection with the priesthood, must give us much matter for thought. Dr. Frazer, in his Adonis, Attis, and Osiris, continuing the passage I have just quoted, says:--"These unsexed creatures often, perhaps generally, profess the arts of sorcery and healing, they communicate with spirits and are regarded sometimes with awe and sometimes with contempt, as beings of a higher or lower order than common folk. Often they are dedicated or trained to their vocation from childhood. Effeminate sorcerers or priests of this sort are found among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo, the Bugis of South Celebes, the Patagonians of South America. . . . In Madagascar we hear of effeminate men who wore female attire and acted as women, thinking thereby to do God service. In the kingdom of Congo there was a sacrificial priest who commonly dressed as a woman and gloried in the title of the grandmother."

[p. 42]

And Dr. Karsch, in his Uranismus bei den Natur: volkern, after enumerating the above and many other instances, says that among many or most of these tribes the main object of the cross-dressing seems to be something of a religious or mystical character, since the persons concerned are accounted as beings of a higher order, priests or sorcerers; but that fact does not stand in the way of the homosexual relationship, which certainly prevails in many cases.

An important point in all this matter, and one which on the one hand gives an air of sincerity to the phenomenon, and on the other may easily have connected it with magic and sorcery in the primitive mind, is the rapidity and decisiveness with which the sexual transformation sometimes seems to take place. This is indicated in Dr. Frazer's just-quoted passage on the Pelew Islanders; and in such cases we seem to be witnessing a veritable metamorphosis, and cannot help wondering whether a real psychological or physiological transmutation may not be in progress. For though sometimes, as we have seen, children are brought up from an early age to play this exchanged or inverted part in life, yet often they take it up themselves, and cannot be persuaded to abandon it; and often they quite suddenly adopt it as young men (or women) or in mature age--as the result of some supposed

[p. 43]

dream or inspiration. Wied, lately quoted, says concerning the Bardaches:--"These generally assert that a dream or some high impulse has commanded them to adopt this state as their 'medicine' or salvation, and nothing then can turn them away from their purpose. Many a father has sought even by force to divert his child from this object, has reasoned with him at first, offered him fine weapons and masculine articles of dress in order to inspire him with a taste for manly occupations; and when this proved useless, has handled him sternly, punished and beaten him, yet all in vain." [*1]

John T. Irving, in his Indian Sketches (1835)--a description of the Pawnee and other American Indians-has a whole chapter (ch. xxii.) entitled "The Metamorphosis" and dealing with this subject. He there describes how among a group of female Indians occupied in drying shelled corn in the sun, he one day noticed what seemed a particularly tall and powerful woman--who, on enquiry, turned out to be a man. This man's story was as follows. Once an Otoe brave of the highest renown, he on one occasion, after a desperate fight with the Osages, returned home, and refusing to speak to anyone, threw himself on his bed for the night. In the morning he rose up an

[p. 44]

altered man. "He collected his family round him, and informed them that the Great Spirit had visited him in a dream, and had told him he had now reached the zenith of his reputation; that no voice had more weight in the Council; no arm was heavier in battle. But that he must thenceforth relinquish all claim to the rank of a warrior and assume the dress and avocations of a female." His friends heard him in sorrow, but did not attempt to dissuade him, "for they listened to the communications of the deity with a veneration equal to his own." So he snapped his bow in twain, buried his tomahawk and rifle, washed off his war paint, discarded the eagle plume from his scalp-lock, and ceased to be numbered among the warriors, relinquishing all "for the lowly and servile duties of a female."

Years had elapsed, says the author, since that act of renunciation, but the man had kept to his resolve.

These strange changes, induced in childhood, or spontaneously adopted in youth, maturity, and even old age, have been observed amongst almost all the North American Indian tribes. Wied mentions the Sauks, Foxes, Mandans, Crows, Blackfeet, Dakotas, Assimboins, and others. And their connection with the Moon seems to be frequently believed in. W. H. Keating, in his Expedition to 

[p. 45]

 Lake Winnipeck (2 vols., 1824), says that the Sun among the Winnebagos is held to be propitious to man; but "the Moon, on the contrary, they held to be inhabited by an adverse female deity, whose delight is to cross man in all his pursuits. If, during their sleep, this deity should present herself to them in their dreams, the Indians consider it enjoined on them by duty to become cinaedi; and they ever after assume the female garb. It is not impossible (continues Keating) that this may have been the source of the numerous stories of hermaphrodites related by all the old writers on America."

Whatever may be the truth about the connection between these strange changes of sexual habit and visionary appearances of the deities (a subject on which I shall touch again later on), we cannot help seeing, as I say, that the fervent belief in such connection is a testimony to the sincerity and actuality of the transformations, as well as a partial explanation of why sorcerous and miraculous powers were credited to the transformed persons. At any rate, the total mass of facts connecting homosexualism in general with religion and divination, or with unusual psychic powers, and on the same lines as those already presented in this and the preceding chapter, is enormously large; and we need delay no longer on their further accumulation.

[p. 46]

[paragraph continues] We may, however, venture to say a few words in possible explanation of the connection.

Dr. Iwan Bloch, in his monumental work, Die Prostitution, [*1] leans to the general explanation that homosexuality, just on account of its strange and inexplicable character, was by primitive people accounted as something divine and miraculous, and the homosexual man or woman therefore credited with supernatural powers. He says (vol. i., p. 101), "This riddle, which despite all our efforts, present-day science has not yet satisfactorily solved, must to the primitive intelligence have appeared even more inexplicable than to us; and a man born with the inclination towards his own sex must have been regarded as something extraordinary, as one of those strange freaks of Nature which among Primitives are so easily accounted divine marvels and honored as such. The by no means scanty supply of ethnological facts on this subject which we possess confirms the above view, and shows in what odour of sanctity homosexual individuals have often stood among Nature-folk-for which reason they frequently played an important part in religious rituals and festivals."

Bloch also quotes a theory of Adolf Bastian, who, in his great work, Der Mensch in der Geschichte, supposes that the priests among early

[p. 47]

peoples, as representatives of the bisexual principle in Nature, encouraged homosexual rites in the temples on the same footing as heterosexual rites. "The men," says Bastian, "prayed to the active powers of Nature, and the women, in privacy and retirement, to the feminine powers; while the priests, who had to satisfy the demands of both parties, learned the idea of sex-changes from the Moon, and served the masculine gods in masculine attire, and the goddesses in feminine garments, or set up images of a bearded Venus and of a Herkules spinning at the wheel."

Neither of these explanations seems to me to be quite adequate. That of Bloch is hardly sufficient; for though it is true that freaks of Nature are often regarded with superstitious awe by savages, that fact does not quite suffice to explain the world-wide attribution of magic powers to homosexuals, nor the systematic adoption of the services of such folk in the temples. The theory of Bastian, on the other band, is quite opposed to that of Bloch, for it pre-supposes a very wide original prevalence of homosexuality in the human race, which was only preserved (and not instituted) by the priests in the tradition of the religious rituals; and therefore it cuts away the speculation that the homosexual man was divinised on account of his rarity. Moreover, the theory of Bastian suffers from the fact

[p. 48]

that the supposed wide prevalence of bisexuality in aboriginal times is by no means proved, or indeed easily provable--although, of course, it may have existed. However, on the subject of bisexuality I shall touch in a later chapter.

For myself, I think that there are two quite possible and not unreasonable theories on the whole matter. The first and most important is that there really is a connection between the homosexual temperament and divinatory or unusual psychic powers; the second is (that there is no such particular connection, but) that the idea of sorcery or witchcraft naturally and commonly springs up round the ceremonials of an old religion or morality when that religion is being superseded by a new one. This is, of course, a well-recognised fact. The gods of one religion become the devils of its successor; the poetic rites of one age become the black magic of the next. But in the case of the primitive religions of the earth their ceremonials were, without doubt, very largely sexual, and even homosexual. Consequently, when new religious developments set in, the homosexual rites, which were most foreign to the later religionists and most disturbing to their ideas, associated themselves most strongly with the notion of sorcery and occult powers.

For myself I am inclined to accept both explanations,

[p. 49]

and--leaving out, of course, the clause in brackets in the second--to combine them. I think there is an organic connection between the homosexual temperament and unusual psychic or divinatory powers; but I think also that the causes mentioned in the second explanation have in many cases led to an exaggerated belief in such connection, and have given it a sorcerous or demonic aspect.

To take the second point first. just as, according to Darwin, the sharpest rivalry occurs between a species and the closely allied species from which it has sprung, so in any religion there is the fiercest theological hatred against the form which has immediately preceded it. Early Christianity could never say enough against the Pagan cults of the old world (partly for the very reason that it embodied so much of their ceremonial and was in many respects their lineal descendant). They were the work and inspiration of the devil. Their Eucharists and baptismal rites and initiations--so strangely and diabolically similar to the Christian rites--were sheer black magic; their belief in the sacredness of sex mere filthiness. Similarly the early Protestants could never say malignant things enough against the Roman Catholics; or the Secularists in their turn against the Protestants. In all these cases there is an element of fear--fear because

[p. 50]

the thing supposed to have been left behind lies after all so close, and is always waiting to reassert itself--and this fear invests the hated symbol or person with a halo of devilish potency. Think, for instance, what sinister and magical powers and influence have been commonly ascribed to the Roman Catholic priests in the ordinary Protestant parlours and circles!

It is easy, therefore, to understand that when the Jews established their worship of Jehovah as a great reaction against the primitive nature-cults of Syria--and in that way to become in time the germ of Christianity--the first thing they did was to denounce the priests and satellites of Baal-Peor and Ashtoreth as wizards and sorcerers, and wielders of devilish faculties. These cults were frankly sexual--probably the most intimate meaning of them, as religions, being the glory and sacredness of sex; but the Jews (like the later Christians) blinding themselves to this aspect, were constrained to see in sex only filthiness, and in its religious devotees persons in league with Beelzebub and the powers of darkness. And, of course, the homosexual elements in these cults, being the most foreign to the new religion, stood out as the most sorcerous and the most magical part of them. Westermarck points out ("Moral Ideas," ii. 489) that the Mediaeval Christianity constantly associated

[p. 51]

homosexuality with heresy--to such a degree in fact that the French word herite or heretique was sometimes used in both connections; and that bougre or Bulgarian was commonly used in both, though to begin with it only denoted a sect of religious heretics who came from Bulgaria. And he thinks that the violent reprobation and punishment of homosexuality arose more from its connection in the general mind with heresy than from direct aversion in the matter--more in fact from religious motives than from secular ones.

But connecting with all this, we must not neglect the theory so ably worked out by Prof. Karl Pearson among others--namely that the primitive religions were not only sexual in character but that they were largely founded on an early matriarchal order of society, in which women had the predominant sway--descent being traced through them, and tribal affairs largely managed by them, and in which the chief deities were goddesses, and the priests and prophets mainly females. Exactly how far such an order of society really extended in the past is apparently a doubtful question; but that there are distinct traces of such matriarchal institutions in certain localities and among some peoples seems to be quite established. Karl Pearson, assuming the real prevalence of these institutions in early times points out, reasonably enough,

[p. 52]

that when Christianity became fairly established matriarchal rites and festivals, lingering on in out-of-the-way places and among the peasantry, would at once be interpreted as being devilish and sorcerous in character, and the women (formerly priestesses) who conducted them and perhaps recited snatches of ancient half-forgotten rituals, would be accounted witches. "We have, therefore," he says, [*1] "to look upon the witch as essentially the degraded form of the old priestess, cunning in the knowledge of herbs and medicine, jealous of the rites of the goddess she serves, and preserving in spells and incantations such wisdom as early civilisation possessed." This civilisation, he explains, included the "observing of times and seasons," the knowledge of weather-lore, the invention of the broom, the distaff, the cauldron, the pitchfork, the domestication of the goat, the pig, the cock and the hen, and so forth-all which things became symbols of the witch in later times, simply because originally they were the inventions of woman and the insignia of her office, and so the religious symbols of the Mother-goddess and her cult.

The connection of all this with homosexual customs is not at once clear; but it has been suggested

[p. 53]

[paragraph continues] --though I am not sure that Karl Pearson himself supports this--that the primitive religions of the Matriarchate may have ultimately led to men-priests dressing in female attire. For when the matriarchal days were passing away, and men were beginning to assert their predominance, it still may have happened that the old religious customs lingering on may have induced men to simulate the part of women and to dress as priestesses, or at least have afforded them an excuse for so doing. [*1] In this way it seems just possible that the pendulum-swing of society from the matriarchate to the patriarchate may have been accompanied by some degree of crasis and confusion between the functions of the sexes, homosexual customs and tendencies may have come to the fore, and the connection of homosexuality with the priesthood may seem to be accounted for.

This explanation, however, though it certainly has a claim to be mentioned, seems to me too risky and insecure for very much stress to be laid upon it. In the first place the extent and prevalence of the matriarchal order of society is a matter still very much disputed, and to assume that at any early period of human history the same was practically universal would be unjustified. In the second place, granting the existence of the matriarchal

[p. 54]

order and its transmutation into the patriarchal, the connection of this change with the development of homosexual customs is still only a speculation and a theory, supported by little direct evidence. On the other hand, the facts to be explained--namely, the connection of homosexuality with priesthood and divination--seem to be world-wide and universal. Therefore, though we admit that the causes mentioned--namely the attribution of magical qualities to old religious rites, and the introduction of feminine inversions and disguises through the old matriarchal custom--may account in part for the facts, and in particular may in certain localities have given them a devilish or sorcerous complexion, yet I think we must look deeper for the root-explanations of the whole matter, and consider whether there may not be some fundamental causes in human nature itself.

Footnotes

^37:1 See Uranismus bei den Naturvolkern, Dr. F. Karsch., in "Jahrbuch fur Sexuellen Zwischenstufen," vol. iii., pp. 161, 162.

^38:1 See Maxn. Prinz zu Wied, Reise in das innere N. America (2 vols., 1819 and 1841), vol. ii., p. 133.

^38:2 Hakluyt Society (3 vols.), vol. ii., p. 458.

^39:1 Adonis, etc., p. 428.

^41:1 See, in these connections, Dr. Hirschfeld's remarkable book Die Transvestiten (Berlin, 1910); also Die Kontrare Sexual-empfindung, by Dr. A. Moll (edition 1893), pp. 82-90.

^43:1 See Prinz zu Wied, op. cit., vol. ii., p. 133.

^46:1 Berlin, 1912.

^52:1 The Chances of Death and other studies, by Karl Pearson (2 Vols., 1897), vol. ii., p. 13.

^53:1 See above, pp. <page 25> and <page 32>, etc.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

 

CHAPTER III.

 

As Inventors of the Arts and Crafts

I HAVE already said that I think there is an original connection of some kind between homosexuality and divination; but in saying this, of course, I do not mean that everywhere and always the one is associated with the other, or that the relationship between the two is extremely well marked; but I contend that a connection can be traced and that on a priori grounds its existence is quite probable.

And first, with regard to actual observation of such a connection, the fact of the widespread belief in it, which I have already noted as existing among the primitive tribes of the earth, and their founding of all sorts of customs on that belief, must count for something. Certainly the mere existence of a widespread belief among early and superstitious peoples--as for instance that an eclipse is caused by a dragon swallowing the sun--does not prove its truth; but in the case we are considering the matter is well within the range of ordinary

[p. 56]

observation, and the constant connection between the choupan and the angakok, the ke'yev and the shaman, the berdashe and the witch-doctor, the ganymede and the temple-priest, and their correspondences all over the world, the basir among the Dyaks, the boy-priests in the temples of Peru, the same in the Buddhist temples of Ceylon, Burma and China--all these cases seem to point to some underlying fact, of the fitness or adaptation of the invert for priestly or divinatory functions. And though the tendency already alluded to, of a later religion to ascribe devilish potency to earlier cults, must certainly in many instances shed a sinister or sorcerous glamour over the invert, yet this exaggeration need not blind us to the existence of a residual fact behind it; and anyhow to a great many of the cases just mentioned it does not apply at all, since in them the question of one religion superseding another does not enter.

To come to more recent times, the frequency with which accusations of homosexuality have been launched against the religious orders and monks of the Catholic Church. the Knights Templars, and even the ordinary priests and clerics, must give us pause. Nor need we overlook the fact that in Protestant Britain the curate and the parson quite often appear to belong to some "third sex" which is neither wholly masculine nor wholly feminine!

[p. 57]

Granting, then, that the connection in question is to a certain degree indicated by the anthropological facts which we already possess--is there, we may ask, any rational ground for expecting this connection a priori and from psychological considerations? I think there is.

In the first place all science now compels us to admit the existence of the homosexual temperament as a fact of human nature, and an important fact; and not only so, but to perceive that it is widely spread among the various races of the earth, and extends back to the earliest times of which we have anything like historical knowledge. We can no longer treat it as a mere local and negligible freak, or put it in the category of a sinful and criminal disposition to be stamped out at all costs. We feel that it must have some real significance. The question is what that may be. The following is a suggestion that may cover part of the ground, though not, I think, the whole.

In the primitive societies the men (the quite normal men) are the warriors and hunters. These are their exclusive occupations. The women (the normal women) attend to domestic work and agriculture, and their days are consumed in those labors. But in the evolution of society there are many more functions to be represented than those simple ones just mentioned. And we may almost

[p. 58]

think that if it had not been for the emergence of intermediate types--the more or less feminine, man and similarly the more or less masculine woman--social life might never have advanced beyond these primitive phases. But when the man came along who did not want to fight--who perhaps was more inclined to run away--and who did not particularly care about hunting, he necessarily discovered some other interest and occupation--composing songs or observing the qualities of herbs or the processions of the stars. Similarly with the woman who did not care about house-work and child-rearing. The non-warlike men and the non-domestic women, in short, sought new outlets for their energies. They sought different occupations from those of the quite ordinary man and woman--as in fact they do to-day; and so they became the initiators of new activities. They became students of life and nature, inventors and teachers of arts and crafts, or wizards (as they would be considered) and sorcerers; they became diviners and seers, or revealers of the gods and religion; they became medicine-men and healers, prophets and prophetesses; and so ultimately laid the foundation of the priesthood, and of science, literature and art. Thus--on this view, and as might not unreasonably be expected--it was primarily a variation in the intimate sex-nature

[p. 59]

of the human being which led to these important differentiations in his social life and external activities.

In various ways we can see the likelihood of this thesis, and the probability of the intermediate man or woman becoming a forward force in human evolution. In the first place, as just mentioned, not wholly belonging to either of the two great progenitive branches of the human race, his nature would not find complete satisfaction in the activities of either branch, and he would necessarily create a new sphere of some kind for himself. Secondly, finding himself different from the great majority, sought after by some and despised by others, now an object of contumely and now an object of love and admiration, he would be forced to think. His mind turned inwards on himself would be forced to tackle the problem of his own nature, and afterwards the problem of the world and of outer nature. He would become one of the first thinkers, dreamers, discoverers. Thirdly, some of the Intermediates (though certainly not all) combining the emotionality of the feminine with the practicality of the masculine, and many other qualities and powers of both sexes, as well as much of their experience, would undoubtedly be greatly superior in ability to the rest of their, tribe, and making forward progress in the world of thought and imagination

[p. 60]

would become inventors, teachers, musicians, medicine-men and priests; while their early science and art (for such it would be)--prediction of rain, determination of seasons, observation of stars, study of herbs, creation of chants and songs, rude drawings, and so forth-would be accounted quite magical and divinatory.

With regard to the early beginnings of poetry and music, we know that dancing had an important place; and there is an interesting passage in Leguevel de Lacombe's Voyage d Madagascar, [*1] (vol. L, pp. 97, 98), which indicates the connection of these arts, among the Tsecats of Madagascar, with sexual variation. "Dancers form a distinct class in Madagascar, though they are not very numerous. They have their own manners and customs, and live apart; they do not marry, and even affect dislike for women--although they wear the dress of the latter and imitate their voice, gestures, and general habits. They wear large earrings of gold or silver, necklaces of coral or coloured beads, and bracelets of silver; they carefully extract the hair of their beards, and in short play the part of women so well that one is often deceived. For the rest these dancers have simple manners, and are very sober in their habits; they are continually on the move, and are well accepted

[p. 61]

wherever they go; sometimes, indeed, they receive considerable presents. I have seen chiefs who have been amused by them for some days make them a present, on their departure, of two or three slaves. They are the poets or the bards of the island, and they improvise rhapsodies in praise of those who are generous to them."

Very similar customs connecting the wandering life of dancers, actors, and singers with a certain amount of inversion of temperament, are known to have existed among that strange and remarkable people, the Areoi of Polynesia: of whom Win. Ellis, the missionary already quoted, says that they were honoured as gods, and were supposed to be inspired by the gods to become members of the Areoi society; also that their initiations began by submission to service and to various ordeals, and ended by a ceremonial in which the candidate snatched and appropriated the cloth worn by the chief woman present!

In all this--whether relating to primitive science or primitive art--there would, of course, really be nothing miraculous. It is easy to see that certain individuals, whose interests or abilities were turned in special or unusual directions, would seem to the general herd as having supernatural intuitions or powers. The "rain-maker's" predictions in South Africa to-day may date from no more weather

[p. 62]

lore than those of a British farmer; but to his tribe he appears a magician. Magic and early science have almost everywhere been interchangeable terms. The intermediate or Uranian man, from this point of view, would be simply an ordinary member of the tribe who from his double temperament would be rather more observant and acute and originative than the rest. There is, however, another point of view from which he might be credited with something distinctly additional in the way of faculty.

For, in the fourth place, I believe that at this stage an element of what might really be called divination would come in. I believe that the blending of the masculine and feminine temperaments would in some of these cases produce persons whose perceptions would be so subtle and complex and rapid as to come under the head of genius, persons of intuitive mind who would perceive things without knowing how, and follow far concatenations of causes and events without concerning themselves about the why--diviners and prophets in a very real sense. And these persons-whether they prophesied downfall or disaster, or whether they urged their people onward to conquest and victory, or whether by acute combinations of observation and experience they caught at the healing properties of herbs or determined the starry influences on

[p. 63]

the seasons and the crops--in almost all cases would acquire and did acquire a strange reputation for sanctity and divinity--arising partly perhaps out of the homosexual taboo, but also out of their real possession and command of a double-engine psychic power.

The double life and nature certainly, in many cases of inverts observed to-day, seems to give to them an extraordinary humanity and sympathy, together with a remarkable power of dealing with human beings. It may possibly also point to a further degree of evolution than usually attained, and a higher order of consciousness, very imperfectly realised, of course, but indicated. This interaction in fact, between the masculine and the feminine, this mutual illumination of logic and intuition, this combination of action and meditation, may not only raise and increase the power of each of these faculties, but it may give the mind a new quality, and a new power of perception corresponding to the blending of subject and object in consciousness. It may possibly lead to the development of that third order of perception which has been called the cosmic consciousness, and which may also be termed divination. "He who knows the masculine," says Lao-tsze, "and at the same time keeps to the feminine, will be the whole world's channel. Eternal virtue will not depart from him,

[p. 64]

and he will return again to the state of an infant." To the state of an infant!--that is, he will become undifferentiated from Nature, who is his mother, and who will lend him all her faculties.

It is not, of course, to be supposed that the witchdoctors and diviners of barbarian tribes have in general reached to the high order of development just described, yet it is noticeable, in the slow evolution of society, how often the late and high developments have been indicated in the germ in primitive stages; and it may be so in this case. Very interesting in this connection is the passage already quoted (page <page 19>) from Elie Reclus about the initiations of the Esquimaux angakok and the appearance to him of his own Genius or Double from the world beyond, for almost exactly the same thing is supposed to take place in the initiation of the religious yogi in India--except that the god in this latter case appears to the pupil in the form of his teacher or guru. And how often in the history of the Christian saints has the divinity in the form of Jesus or Mary appeared to the strenuous devotee, apparently as the culminating result of his intense effort and aspiration, and of the opening out of a new plane of perception in his mind! It may be that with every great onward push of the growing soul, and every great crisis in which as it were a sheath or a husk falls away from the

[p. 65]

expanding bud, something in the nature of a metamorphosis does really take place; and the new order, the new revelation, the new form of life, is seen for a moment as a Vision in glorious state of a divine being within. [*1]

Footnotes

^60:1 2 vols. (Paris, 1840).

^65:1 It is probable also that the considerable degree of continence, to which many homosexuals are by nature or external necessity compelled, contributes to this visionary faculty.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

 

CHAPTER IV.

 

Hermaphrodism among Gods and Mortals

IN chapter ii. above, reference is made by one of the writers quoted to "the numerous stories of hermaphrodites related by all the old writers on America." That there are such numerous stories is quite correct. Jacobus Le Moyne, who travelled as artist with a French Expedition to Florida in 1564, left some very interesting drawings [*1] representing the Indians of that region and their customs; and among them one representing the "Hermaphrodites"--tall and powerful men, beardless, but with long and abundant hair, and naked except for a loin-cloth, engaged in carrying wounded or dying fellow-Indians on their backs or on litters to a place of safety. He says of them that in Florida such folk of double nature are frequent, and that

[p. 67]

being robust and powerful, they are made use of in the place of animals for the carrying of burdens. For when their chiefs go to war the hermaphrodites carry the food; and when any of the tribe die of wounds or disease they construct litters . . . of wood and rushes . . . and so carry the dead to the place of burial. And indeed those who are stricken with any infectious disease are borne by the hermaphrodites to certain appointed places, and nursed and cared for by them, until they may be restored to full health."

Similar stories are told by Charlevoix, [*1] de Pauw, [*2] and others; and one seems to get a glimpse in them of an intermediate class of human beings who made themselves useful to the community not only by their muscular strength, but by their ability and willingness to act as nurses and attendants on the sick and dying.

It is needless, of course, to say that these were not hermaphrodites in the strict sense of the term--i.e., human beings uniting in one person the functions both of male and female--since such beings do practically not exist. But it is evident that they were intermediate types--in the sense of being men with much of the psychologic character of women,

[p. 68]

or in some cases women with the mentality of men; and the early travellers, who had less concrete and reliable information on such subjects than we have, and who were already prepossessed by the belief in the prevalence of hermaphroditism, leapt easily to the conclusion that these strange beings were indeed of that nature. De Pauw, indeed, just mentioned, positively refuses to believe in the explanation that they were men dressed as women, and insists that they were hermaphrodites!

In 1889, a certain Dr. A. B. Holder, anxious to settle positively the existence or non-existence of hermaphrodites, made some investigations among the Crow-Indians of Montana--among whom the Bardaches were called "Bote." [*1] And Dr. Karsch, summarising his report, says [*2]:--"This word, bo-te, means literally 'not man, not woman.' A corresponding Tulalip-word which the Indians of the Washington region make use of is, according to Holder, 'burdash,' which means 'half man, half woman'--and that without necessarily implying any anomalous structure of the sex-organs. . . The Crow-tribe, in 1889, included five such Bote, and possessed about the same number before. They form a class in every tribe, are well-known to each

[p. 69]

other, and knit friendly relations with their likes in other tribes, so that they become well acquainted with the Uranian relationships also in the neighbour tribes. They wear female attire, part their hair in the middle, and plait it in womanly style; they possess or cultivate feminine voices and gestures, and live continually in association with the women, just as if they belonged to that sex. All the same their voices, features, and figure never lose their masculine quality so completely as to make it hard for a careful observer to distinguish. a Bote from a woman. Such a Bote among the: Crows carried on women's work, like sweeping, scrubbing, dish-washing, with such neatness and willingness that he would often obtain employment among the white folk. Usually the feminine attire is adopted in childhood, and the corresponding ways of life at an early age, but his special calling is not exercised by the Bote till the age of puberty. A young scholar of an educational establishment--a boys' school in an Indian Agency--was often caught dressing himself in secret in women's clothes; and although punished on each occasion, he nevertheless, after leaving school, transformed himself into a Bote--to which calling he has ever since remained true. A certain Bote, well accredited among the Crow-tribe, who belonged to the scouting-party of Dr. Holder, was

[p. 70]

a Dakota Indian; he is described as a splendidly built young man of pleasing features, perfect health, brisk alertness, and the happiest disposition. Holder attached him to his own service, and finally persuaded him--though only after much unwillingness on his part--to allow himself to be personally examined." The result of the examination was to prove him to be physically a complete man--and, moreover, an exceedingly modest one!

The Pere Lafitau, whom I have quoted before and who was a keen observer and a broad-minded man, says, in one passage of his Sauvages Americains: "The spectacle of the men disguised as women surprised the Europeans who first landed in America. And, as they did not at all understand the motives of this sort of metamorphosis, they concluded that these were folk in whom the two sexes were conjoined: as a matter of fact our old records always term them hermaphrodites." He goes on to say that though the spirit of religion which made these men embrace this mode of life caused them to be regarded as extraordinary beings, yet the suspicions which the Europeans entertained concerning them took such hold upon the latter "that they invented every possible charge against them, and these imaginations inflamed the zeal of Vasco Nugnes de Vabra, the Spanish captain who first discovered the Southern Sea (la mer 

[p. 71]

 du Sud), to such an extent that he destroyed numbers of them by letting loose upon them those savage dogs, of whom his compatriots indeed made use for the purpose of exterminating a large proportion of the Indians."

On the cruelties of the Spanish conquerors among the Indian tribes--only paralleled apparently by those of modern Commercialism among the same--we need not dwell. What interests us here is the evidence of the wide-spread belief in hermaphroditism current among the early European travellers. That a similar belief has ruled also among most primitive peoples is evident from a consideration of their gods. Why it should so have ruled is a question which I shall touch on towards the conclusion of this chapter. The whole matter, anyhow, belongs to the subjects we are discussing in this book. For clearly bisexuality links on to homosexuality, and the fact that this characteristic was ascribed to the gods suggests that in the popular mind it must have played a profound and important part in human life. I will, therefore, in concluding this portion of the book, give some instances of this divine bisexuality.

Brahm, in the Hindu mythology, is often represented as two-sexed. Originally he was the sole Being. But, "delighting not to be alone he wished for the existence of another, and at once he became

[p. 72]

such, as male and female embraced (united). He caused this his one self to fall in twain." [*1] Siva, also, the most popular of the Hindu divinities, is originally bi-sexual. In the interior of the great rockhewn Temple at Elephanta the career of Siva is carved in successive panels. And on the first he appears as a complete full-length human being conjoining the two sexes in one--the left side of the figure (which represents the female portion) projecting into a huge breast and hip, while the right side is man-like in outline, and in the centre (though now much defaced) the organs of both sexes. In the second panel, however, his evolution or differentiation is complete, and he is portrayed as complete male with his consort Sakti or Parvati standing as perfect female beside him. [*2] There are many such illustrations in Hindu literature and art, representing the gods in their double or bi-sexual role--e.g., as Brahma Ardhanarisa, Siva Ardhanarisa (half male and half female). [*3] And these again are interesting in connection with the account of Elohim in the 1st chapter of Genesis, and the supposition that he was such an androgynous

[p. 73]

deity. For we find (v. 27) that "Elohim created man in his own image, in the image of Elohim created he him, male and female created he them." And many commentators have maintained that this not only meant that the first man was hermaphrodite, but that the Creator also was of that nature. In the Midrasch we find that Rabbi Samuel-bar-Nachman said that "Adam, when God had created him, was a man-woman (androgyne);" and the great and learned Maimonides supported this, saying that "Adam and Eve were created together, conjoined by their backs, but God divided this double being, and taking one half (Eve), gave her to the other half (Adam) for a mate." And the Rabbi Manasseh-ben-Israel, following this up, explained that when "God took one of Adam's ribs to make Eve with," it should rather be rendered "one of his sides"--that is, that he divided the double Adam, and one half was Eve. [*1]

In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (I Adhyaya, 4th Brahmana) the evolution of Brahm is thus described [*2]t--"In the beginning of this [world] was Self alone, in the shape of a person. . . . But he

[p. 74]

felt no delight. . . . He wished for a second. He was so large as man and wife together [i.e., he included male and female]. He then made this his Self to fall in two; and thence arose husband and wife. Therefore, Yagnavalkya said: We two are thus (each of us) like half a shell [or as some translate, like a split pea]." The singular resemblance of this account to what has been said above about the creation of Adam certainly suggests the idea that Jehovah, like Brahm (and like Baal and other Syrian gods), was conceived of as double-sexed, and that primitive man was also conceived as of like nature. The author (Ralston Skinner) of The Source of Measures says (p. 159) "The two words of which Jehovah is composed make up the original idea of male-female of the birth-originator. For the Hebrew letter Jod (or J) was the membrum virile, and Hovah was Eve, the mother of all living, or the procreatrix Earth and Nature." [*1]

The tradition that mankind was anciently hermaphrodite is world-old. It is referred to in Plato's Banquet, where Aristophanes says:--"Anciently the nature of mankind was not the same as now, but different. For at first there were three sexes of human beings, not two only, namely male and female, as at present, but a third besides, common

[p. 75]

to both the others--of which the name remains, though the sex itself has vanished. For the androgynous sex then existed, both male and female; but now it only exists as a name of reproach." He then describes how all these three sorts of human beings were originally double, and conjoined (as above) back to back; until Jupiter, jealous of his supremacy, divided them vertically "as people cut apples before they preserve them, or as they cut eggs with hairs"--after which, of course, these divided and imperfect folk ran about over the earth, ever seeking their lost halves, to be joined to them again.

I have mentioned the Syrian Baal as being sometimes represented as double-sexed (apparently in combination with Astarte). In the Septuagint (Hos. ii. 8, and Zeph. i. 4) he is called e Baal (feminine) and Arnobius tells us that his worshippers invoked him thus [*1] "Hear us, Baal! whether thou be a god or goddess." Similarly Bel and other Babylonian gods were often represented as androgyne. [*2] Mithras among the Persians is spoken of by the Christian controversialist Firmicus as two-sexed, and by Herodotus (Bk. i., c. 131) as identified with a goddess, while there are innumerable Mithraic

[p. 76]

monuments on which appear the symbols of two deities, male and female combined. [*1] Even Venus or Aphrodite was sometimes worshipped in the double form. "In Cyprus," says Dr. Frazer in his Adonis, etc. (p. 432, note), "there was a bearded and masculine image of Venus (probably Astarte) in female attire: according to Philochorus the deity thus represented was the moon, and sacrifices were offered to him or her by men clad as women, and by women clad as men (see Macrobius Saturn iii. 7, 2)." This bearded female deity is sometimes also spoken of as Aphroditus, or as Venus Mylitta. Richard Burton says [*2]:--"The Phoenicians spread their androgynic worship over Greece. We find the consecrated servants and votaries of Corinthian Aphrodite called Hierodouloi (Strabo, viii. 6), who aided the 10,000 courtesans in gracing the Venus-temple. . . . One of the headquarters of the cult was Cyprus, where, as Servius relates (Ad. Aen. ii. 632), stood the simulacre of a bearded Aphrodite with feminine body and costume, sceptred and mitred like a man. The sexes when worshiping it exchanged habits, and here the virginity was offered in sacrifice."

The worship of this bearded goddess was mainly in Syria and Cyprus. But in Egypt also a representation of a bearded Isis has been found,--with

[p. 77]

infant Horus in her lap; [*1] while again there are a number of representations (from papyri) of the goddess Neith in androgyne form, with a male member (erected). And again, curiously enough, the Norse Freya, or Friga, corresponding to Venus, was similarly figured. Dr. von Romer says: [*2]--"just as the Greeks had their Aphroditos as well as Aphrodite so the Scandinavians had their Friggo as well as their Friga. This divinity, too, was androgyne. Friga, to whom the sixth day of the week was dedicated, was sometimes thought of as hermaphrodite. She was represented as having the members of both sexes, standing by a column with a sword in her right hand, and in her left a bow."

In the Orphic hymns we have:--

"Zeus was the first of all, Zeus last, the lord of the lightning;
 Zeus was the head, the middle, from him all things were created;
 Zeus was Man, and again Zeus was the Virgin Eternal."

And in another passage, speaking of Adonis:--

"Hear me, who pray to thee, hear me O many-named and best of deities,
 Thou, with thy gracious hair . . . both maiden and youth, Adonis."

Again, with regard to the latter, Ptolemaeus Hephaestius (according to Photius) writes:--"They

[p. 78]

say that the androgyne Adonis fulfilled the part of a man for Aphrodite, but for Apollo the part of a wife." [*1]

Dionysus, one of the most remarkable figures in the Greek Mythology, is frequently represented as androgyne. Euripides in his Bacchae calls him "feminine-formed" (Thelumorfos) or thelumorphos, and the Orphic hymns "double-sexed" (difues) or diphues; and Aristides in his discourse on Dionysus says:--"Thus the God is both male and female. His form corresponds to his nature, since everywhere in himself he is like a double being; for among young men he is a maiden, and among maidens a young man, and among men a beardless youth overflowing with vitality." In the museum at Naples there is a very fine sculptured head of Dionysus, which though bearded has a very feminine expression, and is remindful of the traditional head of Christ. "In legend and art," says Dr. Frazer, [*2] "there are clear traces of an effeminate Dionysus, and in some of his rites and processions men wore female attire. Similar things are reported of Bacchus, who was, of course, another form of Dionysus. Even Hercules, that most masculine figure, was said to have dressed as a woman for three years, during which he was the

[p. 79]

slave of Omphale, queen of Lydia. "If we suppose," says Dr. Frazer, [*1]" that queen Omphale, like queen Semiramis, was nothing but the great Asiatic goddess, or one of her Avatars, it becomes probable that the story of the womanish Hercules of Lydia preserves a reminiscence of a line or college of effeminate priests who, like the eunuch priests of the Syrian goddess, dressed as women in imitation of their goddess, and were supposed to be inspired by her. The probability is increased by the practice of the priests of Heracles at Antimachia in Cos, who, as we have just seen, actually wore female attire when they were engaged in their sacred duties. Similarly at the vernal mysteries of Hercules in Rome the men were draped in the garments of women."

Such instances could be rather indefinitely multiplied. Apollo is generally represented with a feminine--sometimes with an extremely feminine--bust and figure. The great hero Achilles passed his youth among women, and in female disguise. Every one knows the recumbent marble Hermaphrodite in the Louvre. There are also in the same collection two or three elegant bronzes of Aphrodite-like female figures in the standing position--but of masculine sex. What is the explanation of all this?

[p. 80]

It is evident that the conception of a double sex, or of a sex combining the characters of male and female, haunted the minds of early peoples. Yet we have no reason for supposing that such a combination, in any complete and literal sense, ever existed. Modern physiological investigation has never produced a single case of a human being furnished with the complete organs of both sexes, and capable of fulfilling the functions of both. And the unfortunate malformations which do exist in this direction are too obviously abortive and exceptional to admit of their being generalised or exalted into any kind of norm or ideal. All we can say is that--though in the literal sense no double forms exist--certainly a. vast number of intermediate forms of male and female are actually found, which are double in the sense that the complete organs of one sex are conjoined with some or nearly all of the (secondary) characters of the other sex; and that we have every reason to believe that these intermediate types have existed in considerable numbers from the remotest antiquity. That being so, it is possible that the observation or influence of these intermediate types led to a tentative and confused idealisation of a double type.

Anyhow the fact remains--that these idealisations of the double type are so numerous. And it

[p. 81]

is interesting to notice that while they begin in early times with being merely grotesque and symbolical, they end in the later periods by becoming artistic and gracious and approximated to the real and actual. The Indian Siva, with his right side masculine and his left side feminine, is in no way beautiful or attractive; any more than Brahma with twenty arms and twenty legs. And the same may be said of the bearded Egyptian Isis or the bearded Syrian Aphrodite. These were only rude and inartistic methods of conveying an idea. The later spirit, however, found a better way of expression. It took its cue from the variations of type to be seen every day in the actual world; and instead of representing the Persian Mithra as a two-sexed monster, it made him a young man, but of very feminine outline. The same with the Greek Apollo; while on the other hand, the female who is verging toward the male type is represented by Artemis or even by the Amazons.

It may be said:--we can understand this representation of intermediate forms from actual life, but we do not see why such mingling of the sexes should be ascribed to the gods, unless it might be from a merely fanciful tendency to personify the two great powers of nature in one being--in which case it is strange that the tendency should have been so universal. To this we may reply that

[p. 82]

probably the reason or reasons for this tendency must be accounted quite deep-rooted and anything but fanciful. One reason, it seems to me, is the psychological fact that in the deeps of human nature (as represented by Brahm and Siva in the Hindu philosophy, by Zeus in the Orphic Hymns, by Mithra in the Zend-avesta, etc.) the sex-temperament is undifferentiated; [*1] and it is only in its later and more external and partial manifestations that it branches decidedly into male and female; and that, therefore, in endeavoring through religion to represent the root facts of life, there was always a tendency to cultivate and honor hermaphroditism, and to ascribe some degree of this quality to heroes and divinities. The other possible reason is that as a matter of fact the great leaders and heroes did often exhibit this blending of masculine and feminine qualities and habits in their actual lives, and that therefore at some later period, when exalted to divinities, this blending of qualities was strongly ascribed to them and was celebrated in the rites and ceremonies of their religion and their temples. The feminine traits in genius (as in a Shelley or a Byron) are well marked in the present day. We have only to go back to the Persian Bab

[p. 83]

of the last century [*1] or to a St. Francis or even to a Jesus of Nazareth, to find the same traits present in founders and leaders of religious movements in historical times. And it becomes easy to suppose the same again of those early figures--who once probably were men--those Apollos, Buddhas, Dionysus, Osiris, and so forth--to suppose that they too were somewhat bi-sexual in temperament, and that it was really largely owing to that fact that they were endowed with far-reaching powers and became leaders of mankind. In either case--whichever reason is adopted--it corroborates the general thesis and argument of this paper.

Footnotes

^66:1 Indorum Floridam provinciam inhabitantium eicones, etc. (Frankfurt, 1591). Also translation of the same with heliotypes of the engravings (Boston, J. R. Osgood & Co., 1875.)

^67:1 P. F. X. de Charlevoix, La Nouvelle France, 2 vols. (Paris, 1744).

^67:2 De Pauw, Recherches sur les Americains, 2 vols. (Berlin, 1768).

^68:1 See for his Report, The New York Medical Journal, Vol. L., No. 23 (7th Dec., 1889).

^68:2 Jahrbuch fur s.Z., Vol. iii., p, 138.

^72:1 Quoted from the Yajur-Veda. See Bible Folk-lore: a study in Comp. Mythology (London, 1884), p. 104.

^72:2 See Adam's Peak to Elephanta, by E. Carpenter (1903), p. 308.

^72:3 See drawings in Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism, by Thomas Inman (London, 1874).

^73:1 These and some other references are taken from the learned and careful study "Ueber die androgynische Idee des Lebens," by Dr. von Romer, of Amsterdam, which is to be found in vol. v. of the Jahrbuch fur Sexuelle Zwischenstufen (Leipzig, 1903).

^73:2 Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv., p. 85.

^74:1 See H. p. Blavatsky, Secret Doctrine, vol. ii., p. 132, quoted in vol. v., Jahrbuch fur S. Z., p. 76.

^75:1 Inman's Ancient Pagan and Modern Christian Symbolism (Trubner, 1874), p. 119.

^75:2 Pagan Christs, by John M. Robertson (1908), p. 308.

^76:1 Ibid., p. 307.

^76:2 The Thousand Nights and a Night (1886), vol. x., p. 231.

^77:1 See illustration, Jahrbuch fur S.Z., vol. v., p. 732.

^77:2 See his study already quoted, Jahrbuch, pp. 735-744.

^78:1 See Jahrbuch, as above, pp. 806, 807 and 809.

^78:2 Adonis, etc., p. 432

^79:1 Ibid., p. 431.

^82:1 Compare the undifferentiated sex-tendencies of boys and girls at puberty and shortly after.

^83:1 Ali Muhammed, who called himself the Bab (or Gate), was born at Shiraz in 1820. In 1844 he commenced preaching his gospel, which was very like that of Jesus, and which now has an immense following. In 1850 he was shot, at Tabriz, as a malefactor, and his beloved disciple Mirza Muhammed Ali, refusing to leave him, was shot with him.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 84] [p. 85]

 

Part II.

 

The Intermediate as Warrior

[p. 86] [p. 87]

 

CHAPTER V.

 

Military Comradeship among the Dorian Greeks

IN the preceding chapters, especially the earlier ones, we have seen how, among a vast number of primitive peoples, the Uranian temperament and tendency has contributed to the cultivation of divination and prophecy, religious ceremonial, song, dance, literature, medicine, and so forth. We inferred a priori that the man of those days who experienced a distaste for warfare and the chase would not unnaturally discover other fields of activity, and develop these milder arts and crafts of life, and we found that as a matter of fact this commonly happened. Such a man was no doubt in some cases "effeminate," as we should say: but where not exactly that, he was, at any rate, a trifle more feminine than his quite normal brother--and hence the differentiation in his pursuits.

We have now, however, to see that among some early peoples the Uranian temperament favored a

[p. 88]

quite different development; it took on a much more masculine character, and led to the formation of military comradeships of a passionate kind which, instead of discounting, immensely strengthened the warlike ardour of the people concerned, and confirmed their success in campaigns and conquests. The homosexual tendency, in fact, among such peoples, instead of urging towards effeminacy, worked greatly in the opposite direction. It bred ideals of heroism, courage, resource, and endurance among the men, and exalted these virtues into the highest place of public honor. Such was the case among the Dorian Greeks of the 7th century or so, B.C.--of whom I am treating in the present section; and such also seems to have been the case among the Japanese Samurai of the 12th, 13th, and later centuries, A.D., whom I shall deal with presently. In a lesser degree, too, there is evidence of a similar tendency among some other tribes and peoples.

The chief modern accounts of the Dorian Military love are to be found in the History and Antiquities of the Doric Race, by C. O. Muller, [*1] and in Professor E. Bethe's long treatise, Die Dorische Knabenliebe, printed in Frankfurt in 1907. [*2] John

[p. 89]

[paragraph continues] Addington Symonds also, in his A Problem in Greek Ethics, pp. 23, 24 et seq. of the original edition (1883), gives a sketch of the subject and his views about it.

It seems that the rough and warlike tribes of the Dorians, descending into Greece from Doris and the mountains of the north and west at an early period, probably before 800 B.C., subdued and enslaved the former inhabitants as they came, and largely introduced their own institutions into the countries which they occupied. They spread thus over Sparta and a large part of the Peloponnesus, through the southern archipelago of the Aegean to the coast of Asia Minor, and finally to the island of Crete, in which latter place their customs were preserved for a long period in primitive integrity.

Chief among such customs was this one of military comradeship or paiderastia. The Greek word paiderastia (literally "boy-love") had apparently a wide range of meaning. For a full understanding of it, J. A. Symonds' Problem in Greek Ethics may with advantage be consulted. The term seems to have applied generally to the love of an elder comrade for a younger; but as far as it referred to or originated from the military relationship it is evident that our word "boy" is hardly appropriate. Clearly the younger had to be of sufficient

[p. 90]

age or physical stature to bear arms effectively; and his commonly used name parastatheys or parastates--the "stand-by" or "stander-by"--is a good indication of his function and utility. He corresponded in fact, in many respects, to, the squire who attended on the mediaeval knight; and while such a squire might often be quite youthful, we do not exactly think of him as a "boy." The difference of age therefore in this military comradeship might be slight or negligible, or in cases it might be considerable.

Again, this kind of love was apparently always conceived of as having an element of physical passion in it--though this element might, of course, be quite slight, or it might be dominant and engrossing. Historically speaking, too, and in different periods and connections, the meaning of the term varied; if it indicated originally the rather heroic devotion of comrades to each other in campaign and warfare, it branched out later into other fields of life, and was adapted to the more spiritual relationship commended by Plato--the philosophia combined with paiderastia of the ideal man--or again to the frankly sensual attachment described in passages of the Greek Anthology. The word consequently has a rather extensive connotation.

In the present paper I incline to use both words, "comrade-love" and "paiderastia," to denote the

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Dorian relation, bearing in mind, of course, that a difference of age is generally understood, and using the latter term rather more for the physical and ceremonial side of the attachment, and the former rather more for the emotional and social bond--but without pressing this distinction too closely or persistently. And it might be helpful here to remind the reader, who is troubled as to "where to draw the line" in estimating this kind of love--and in order to help him towards an understanding of the whole subject--that the painful rending-asunder and divorce of the "spiritual" from the "physical," which so vexes the modern mind, had probably but small place in the minds of many earlier peoples, like the Dorians, whom we are now considering.

I cannot perhaps do better by way of description of this institution than to quote the careful account of it both in Sparta and in Crete given by C. O. Muller in his great work. [*1] He says:--"At Sparta the party loving was called eispnelas and his affection was termed a breathing-in or inspiring (eispnein); which expresses the pure and mental connection between the two persons, and corresponds with the name of the other, viz., aitas i.e., listener or hearer. Now it appears to have been the practice

[p. 92]

for every youth of good character to have his lover; and on the other hand, every well educated man was bound by custom to be the lover of some youth. Instances of this connection are furnished by several of the royal family of Sparta; thus Agesilaus, while he still belonged to the herd (agele) of youths, was the hearer (aitas) of Lysander, and himself had in his time also a hearer; his son Archidamus was the lover of the son of Sphodrias, the noble Cleonymus; Cleomenes III. was, when a young man, the hearer of Xenares, and later in life the lover of the brave Panteus. The connection usually originated from the proposal of the lover; yet it was necessary that the listener should regard him with real affection, as a regard to the riches of the proposer was considered very disgraceful; sometimes, however, it happened that the proposal originated from the other party. The connection appears to have been very intimate and faithful; and was recognised by the State. If his relations were absent, the youth might be represented in the public assembly by his lover; in battle, too, they stood near one another, where their fidelity and affection were often shown till death, while at home the youth was constantly under the eyes of his lover, who was to him as it were a model and pattern of life; which explains why, for many faults, particularly for want of

[p. 93]

ambition, the lover could be punished instead of the listener . . . ."

"This ancient national custom prevailed with still greater force in Crete, which island was hence by many persons considered as the original seat of the connection in question. Here, too, it was disgraceful for a well-educated youth to be without a lover; and hence the party loved was termed kleinos, the praised; the lover being simply called filetur."

Of the institution in Crete--of which the tradition still existed in his time--Strabo, in his Geographica, gives a detailed account. [*1] And his account is particularly interesting on account of the similarity of the uses which he describes to the custom of ordinary marriage-by-capture, with which all students of primitive society are familiar. Quoting from Ephorus, who wrote about 340 B.C., Strabo says:--"They have a peculiar custom with respect to their attachments. They do not influence the objects of their love by persuasion, but have recourse to violent abduction. The lover apprises the friends of the youth, three or more days beforehand, of his intention to carry off the object of his affection. It is reckoned a most base act to conceal the youth, or not to permit him to walk

[p. 94]

about as usual, since it would be an acknowledgment that the youth was unworthy of such lover. But if they are informed that the ravisher is equal or superior in rank or other circumstances to the youth, they pursue and oppose the former slightly, merely in conformity with the custom. They then willingly allow him to carry off the youth. If, however, he is an unworthy person, they take the youth from him. This show of resistance does not end till the youth is received into the Andreium (men's quarters), to which the ravisher belongs. They do not regard as an object of affection a youth exceedingly handsome, but him who is distinguished for courage and modesty (decorum). The lover makes the youth presents, and takes him away to whatever place he likes. The persons present at the abduction accompany them, and, having passed two months in feasting and the chase (for it is not permitted to detain the youth longer), they return to the city. The youth is dismissed with presents, which consist of a military dress, an ox, and a drinking-cup; the last are prescribed by law; and besides there are many other very costly gifts, so that the friends contribute each their share in order to diminish the expense.

"The youth sacrifices the ox to Jupiter, and entertains at a feast those who came down with him from the mountains. He then declares concerning

[p. 95]

the intercourse with the lover whether it took place with his consent or not, since the law allows him, if any violence is used in the abduction, to insist upon redress, and sets him free from his engagement to the lover But for the beautiful and high-born not to have lovers is disgraceful, since the neglect would be attributed to a bad disposition.

"The Parastathentes, for this is the name which they give to those youths who have been carried away, enjoy certain honors. At races and at festivals they have the principal places. They are permitted to wear the stole, which distinguishes them from other persons, and which has been presented to them by their lovers; and not only at that time, but in mature age, they appear in distinctive dress, by which each individual is recognised as Kleinos, for this name is given to the object of their attachment, and that of Philetor to the lover. These, then are the usages concerning attachments."

And C. O. Muller, continuing the passage I cited before, says:--"Institutions so systematic and regular as these did not exist in any Doric State except Crete and Sparta; but the feelings on which they were founded seem to have been common to all the Dorians. The loves of Philolaus, a Corinthian of the family of the Bacchiadae, and the

[p. 96]

law-giver of Thebes, and of Diocles, the Olympic conqueror, lasted until death; and even their graves were turned toward each other in token of their affection; and another person of the same name was honored in Megara as a noble instance of self-devotion for the object of his love."

With regard to the genesis of the institution, J. Addington Symonds, in his Problem in Greek Ethics (original edition, 1883, p. 23), says:--"It has frequently occurred to my mind that the mixed type of paiderastia which I have named Greek Love, took its origin in Doris. Homer, who knew nothing about the passion as it afterwards existed, drew a striking picture of masculine affection in Achilles. Friendship occupies the first place in the hero's heart, while only the second is reserved for sexual emotion. Now Achilles came from Phthia, itself a portion of that mountain region to which Doris belonged. Is it unnatural to conjecture that the Dorians in their migration to Lacedaemon and Crete, the recognised headquarters of the custom, carried a tradition of heroic paiderastia along with them? If so, the circumstances of their invasion would have fostered the transformation into a tribal institution. They went forth, a band of warriors and pirates, to cross the sea in boats, and to fight their way along the hills and plains of Southern Greece. The dominions they had conquered with

[p. 97]

their swords they occupied like soldiers. The camp became their country, and for a long time they literally lived upon the bivouac. . . . Fighting and foraging in company, sharing the same wayside board and heath-strewn bed, rallying to the comrade's voice in onset, relying on the comrade's shield when fallen, these men learned the meanings of the words Filetur and parastates. To be loved was honorable, for it implied being worthy to be died for. To love was glorious, since it pledged the lover to self-sacrifice in case of need."

Professor Bethe, in his article on Die Dorische Knabenliebe, to which I have already alluded, says (p. 447):--"Among the Dorians, although the practice was no doubt sensual, [*1] paiderastia was not by any means a crime; on the contrary, it was, or could be, or aspired to be, the most complete imaginable union and mutual devotion of two tribesmen, out of which sprung abundant noble impulses towards the perfection of each individual in rivalry with the other, and the most absolute

[p. 98]

surrender for the sake of the loved one in every danger, and even to death in the very bloom of life. So that the true ideal of military comradeship and high endeavor was realised in these lover-pairs, Who cherished these ideas and sealed them with their blood. And the number of such has certainly been anything but small. Is it not the most wonderful phenomenon in the history of human culture?"

The closeness of the alliance, moreover, is indicated in the foregoing quotation from Strabo, which shows, as we have seen, that certain formalities attending it precisely resembled the primitive rites of ordinary marriage, in the well-known form of "Marriage by capture." And this fact--as Bethe and others have observed--suggests the great antiquity of the institution and also its wide ramification. Professor Bethe indeed says:--"Consequently the custom must date from a high antiquity, and since certain traces of it in Corinth and Boeotia coincide with the practice in Crete, I think the conclusion is not too rash that not only there but among all the Dorians these same forms once prevailed, and that therefore they date back even to the time before the Dorian immigration, or at any rate before their dispersal."

The remarks of Strabo above refer especially to Crete, but we have just seen that some indications

[p. 99]

of a marriage-ceremonial were to be found in Corinth and Boeotia; and it is interesting to note that in Albania--which is the very land from which the Dorians probably came--a marriage-ceremonial still lingers on to-day and is perfectly recognised as customary between a man and a youth who are attached to each other. [*1] Anyhow, whether the formalities of marriage were observed or not, the general institution of military comradeship, as we have described it, spread far and wide among the Greek peoples, and immense importance was attached to it. It became a sort of foundational element in their life, a publicly recognised source of political and social activity, an incentive to soldierly valour, and a bulwark of security to the state, an inspiration to art and literature, and a custom consecrated by religion and divine approval. Innumerable stories and legends--whether of "Harmodius and Aristogeiton who slew the despot Hipparchus at Athens; of Diocles and Philolaus, who gave laws to Thebes; of Chariton and Melanippus, who resisted the sway of Phalaris in Sicily; or of Cratinus and Aristodemus, who devoted their lives to propitiate offended deities when a plague had fallen on

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] Athens," [*1] testify to the profound interest felt in the subject. And similar stories [*2] from Sparta, from Chalkis, from Elis, Euboea, and other places, show how wide and universal was the impression. As far back as the time of Solon at Athens, the inspiration of paiderastia had taken such hold, and was felt to be so thoroughly honorable, that even he, Athens' great and wise law-giver, wrote poems in praise of it, and in his laws placed the pursuit of it and of athletics on a par, as worthy of, and to be encouraged in free men, but as forbidden to slaves. [*3] Aeschylus and Sophocles did not disdain to make comrade-love the theme of two of their tragedies--the Myrmidones and Niobe respectively--nor is evidence wanting that they personally favored it themselves; and Plato, of course, makes it the corner-stone of much of his philosophy and of more than one of his dialogues. Plato's Strong and weighty verdict on the value of this bond--a verdict which was apparently a reflection of a good deal of current opinion--is given in the speech of Pausanias in the Symposium, in the form of a rebuke against those peoples who did not honor the love:--"In Ionia and other places, and generally

[p. 101]

in countries which are subject to the Barbarians, the custom is held to be dishonorable; loves of youths share the evil repute of philosophy and gymnastics, because they are inimical to tyranny; for the interests of rulers require that their subjects should be poor in spirit, and that there should be no strong bond of friendship or society among them,--which Love above all other motives is likely to inspire, as our Athenian tyrants learned by experience."

Finally, the splendid heroism of the Theban band, composed solely of lovers--which perished to a man at Chaeronaea, B.C. 338, in the last battle of Greek Independence, against the huge army of Philip of Macedon--set a kind of seal to the great tradition of Greek military comradeship, and marked it with an ineffaceable impression of grandeur.

Footnotes

^88:1 2 vols., translated from the German by G. Cornewall Lewis (John Murray, 1830).

^88:2 In the Rheinisches Museum, vol. lxii., pp. 438-475.

^91:1 History and Antiquities of the Doric Race, Book iv., ch. 4, p. 6; see also E. Carpenter's Iolaus, pp. 16-19.

^93:1 Strabo, Book x., ch. 4, p. 21 (Bohn's edition of the classics).

^97:1 Muller maintains the general chastity of the institution, quoting Xenophon and others; but Bethe contests this, referring to Plato (The Laws) and Aristotle (vol. ii. 10), where it is suggested that one of its objects was the prevention of overpopulation. Probably in this, as in other such cases, it is impossible to make any very definite statement. Whatever general theories there might be, practice would vary widely from place to place and from people to people, and public opinion would do the same.

^99:1 See Hahn's Albanesische Studien, vol. i., p. 166, where considerable light altogether is thrown on the Dorian comradeship.

^100:1 See Studies of the Greek Poets, by J. A. Symonds, vol. i., p. 97.

^100:2 See Plutarch's Eroticus, his Lives, etc.

^100:3 See Plutarch's Solon, ch. i.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 102]

 

CHAPTER VI.

 

The Dorian Comradeship in Relation to the Status of Woman

ALTHOUGH, as has been already indicated, there are instances of manly and military institutions of somewhat similar quality among other early peoples, it is doubtful whether in the history of the world there has ever been another case of such complete acceptance of comrade-love as a valued and recognised cult; and certainly this cult has never been associated with such priceless contributions to art, literature and civilisation generally, as in the case of the Greeks. It is consequently all the more strange to find with what neglect the whole subject--both of the love itself and of its relation to political and social life--has been treated in modern times. It is difficult to understand the attitude of mind which--as in some professorial and literary circles--is never tired of pointing out the excellencies of the Greek civilisation, the public

[p. 103]

spirit and bravery of its peoples, their instinct for beauty, their supremacy (especially at Athens) in literature and art; and yet absolutely ignores a matter which was obviously a foundation element of that civilisation.

The only feasible explanation, to my mind, of this strange phenomenon is that people--taking (it must be said) a very easy-going and superficial view of the whole subject--have assumed that the love-customs and institutions which have been described above were merely adopted as a blind or a cloak for sensuality, and were of no particular importance in themselves. Everyone knows, of course, that homosexual habits of a more or less frivolous and ephemeral kind are to be found fairly widely spread among most peoples; and as it has been generally assumed among Western moralists that nothing good can proceed from the homosexual instinct, it has been possible for a certain class of minds either to pass over the said institutions as being frivolous and unimportant too, or else, if forced to acknowledge their value and importance, to separate this aspect of them entirely from the homosexual aspect, and to say that while the former was glorious the latter was negligible. But as I say, this kind of view is of the most superficial sort. It is impossible, with any seriousness, or deliberate consideration,

[p. 104]

to maintain on the one hand that the institution of military comradeship among the Dorians--branching out as it did later in the various Greek states into an inspiration of political freedom, or of art, or of philosophy--was frivolous or unimportant; and it is equally impossible on the other hand, to weigh the evidence and not see that a most intimate and, to some degree, physical relation lay at the root of the institution and could not possibly be separated from it--not to see, in fact, that what we call homosexuality was of the essence of the thing. All the historical evidence, and all the literature of this period--whether serious or fanciful, whether in prose or in verse--point to this intimate unity; and what the people themselves, who knew all the circumstances, associated so closely together, it is hard for us to separate and disunite.

We must conclude, then, that the Dorian Greeks and those who were influenced by them regarded a very close and personal love between men as part and parcel of their civic life. Though homosexual, as we should say, in its quality, this love did not interfere with the institution of normal or ordinary marriage, which existing alongside of it had its own sphere of civic value and service--while the comrade-love occupied another sphere, equally necessary.

[p. 105]

This being so, it would obviously be as absurd to try to explain away the Greek comradeship, and all the life that flowed from it, by its connection with sensual pleasure of a certain kind, as it would be to explain away the joys and activities of marriage, and the life of the family, by the phenomena of concubinage and hetairism.

There is, however, another explanation which has from time to time been put forward--namely, that the predominance of the Uranian affection in the Greek States was due to the contempt or neglect of women which prevailed there; and this may demand a brief consideration.

Supposing such contempt and neglect to have been proved, the argument even then is not very satisfactory, for it would still remain uncertain which might be the horse and which the cart in the sequence--which the cause and which the effect. But as a matter of fact, to prove anything like general disregard or neglect of women by the Greek peoples would be difficult. Lowes Dickinson, in his Greek View of Life, insists on the prevalent conception among them of the inferiority of the female sex, but he finds himself obliged (p. 164) to qualify this by large exceptions, and he points out (what most authorities agree in) that great fluctuations occurred, and that while in Homer there ruled "a conception of woman and of her relation

[p. 106]

to man finer and nobler in some respects than that of modern times," in the 5th and 4th centuries, B.C., a comparatively low estimate had become dominant. Benecke, in his Women in Greek Poetry, (Sonnenschein, 1896,) goes with much care into this subject, and makes some remarks which are very helpful for our purpose. He says (p. 7):--"It is generally agreed that in prehistoric times the position of women among the Greeks was a much higher one than was the case subsequently. There seems every reason to believe that the social conditions of the Lesbians and the Dorians, and the other nations which did not come under the influence of the history-writing Ionians, were but the survivals of what was originally a more or less general state." This is especially interesting to us because it points to the fact that the institution of military comradeship which came into Greece with the Dorians from prehistoric sources must have been in its inception associated with just such a high standard in the position of women, and not by any means with their neglect or contempt. This association is also very noticeable in Homer. For the main motive of the Iliad is, as Benecke observes, undoubtedly the dramatic and passionate comradeship between Achilles and Patroclus; yet no one could say that Andromache or Penelope or Nausicaa are negligible or servile characters.

[p. 107]

There is ample evidence indeed to show that the status of women among the early Dorians was one of freedom and honour--a survival, perhaps, of a matriarchal period. Addington Symonds, in his Key of Blue  [*1] (p. 64), says:--"This masculine love did not exclude marriage, nor had it the effect of lowering the position of women in society, since it is notorious that in those Dorian States where the love of comrades became an institution, women received more public honour and enjoyed fuller liberty and power over property than elsewhere." C. O. Muller, in his already quoted book (vol. ii., p. 395), says:--"The Dorians, as well at Sparta as in the South of Italy, were almost the only nation who esteemed the higher attributes of the female mind as capable of cultivation." In Sparta the women had great sway and influence. The wife was called despoina (mistress) by the husband. As girls they were "trained by physical exercise for the healthy performance of the duties of motherhood; they were taught to run and wrestle naked, like the youths, to dance and sing in public, and to associate freely with men. Marriage was permitted only in the prime of life; and a free intercourse, outside the limits of marriage, between healthy men and women was encouraged and approved by public opinion." [*2]

[p. 108]

It may be worth while to quote entire the passage in which Plutarch (Lycurgus, c. 14) describes this state of affairs. He first of all cites Aristotle as saying (Polit, Book ii.) that "in the absence of their husbands, the wives made themselves absolute mistresses at home, and would be treated with as much respect as if they had been so many queens;" and then he goes on to say that Lycurgus "took for that sex all the care that was possible. As an instance of it, he ordered the maidens to exercise themselves with wrestling, running, throwing the bar, and casting the dart, to the end that the fruit they conceived might take deeper root, and grow strong, and spread itself in strong and healthy bodies; and withal that they themselves, by such robust exercises, might be the more able to undergo the pains of child-bearing with ease and safety. And to the end he might take away their overgreat tenderness and that acquired womanishness which vain custom hath added to the natural, he ordered that they should go naked as well as the young men, and dance, too, in that condition at their solemn feasts and sacrifices, singing certain songs, whilst the young men stood in a ring about them, seeing and hearing them. In these songs they now and then gave a satirical glance, to very good purpose, on those who had misbehaved themselves (in the wars), and some

[p. 109]

times sang enconiums upon such as had done any gallant action; and by these means enflamed the younger sort with an emulation of their glory. Those that were thus praised for their bravery, and in high credit among the virgins, went away hugely satisfied with such commendation; and those who were rallied were as sensibly touched with it as if they had been formally and severely reprimanded; and so much the more because the Kings and the whole Senate, as well as the rest of the rest of the city, went to see and hear all that passed." [*1]

This passage is particularly interesting here for two reasons:--(1) because it shows the respect of the men for the opinion of the women--their praise or their blame; and (2) because of the extraordinarily public and open life of the latter, here represented, and the equality of their physical training with that of the men. With regard to this last, we have in the Epithalamium of Theocritus (Idyll xviii.) a charming picture of a chorus of Spartan maidens singing before the bridal chamber of Helen, and reminding her of how they used to exercise by the banks of the Eurotas:--

	 
		"Thrice eighty virgins we pursued the race,
		 Like men, anointed with the glistering oil." [*2]
		
		 [paragraph continues] No wonder it has been said of the Spartans that

[p. 110]

they were "the most healthy of the Greeks, and that the most beautiful men as well as women were found amongst them." [*1] Nor can we be surprised to read further in Plutarch the anecdote of Gorgo, wife of King Leonidas,--"who being told, in discourse with some foreign ladies, 'You women of Lacedaemon are they only of the world who have an empire over the men,' she briskly reparteed: 'A good reason, for we are the only women who bring forth Men.'" [*2] All this goes to show clearly enough that--however it may have been in other Greek States, or at other times--contempt and neglect of women did not prevail in Sparta in the period which we are considering; and it proves conclusively that the institution of military love among the Dorians did not rest upon inferiority in the character of the women, or on any insufficiency of access to them. [*3] The love was an independent and authentic phenomenon, self-produced out of the heart and temperament of the people, and not to be explained away by adventitious and subsidiary circumstances.

And it suggests a further speculation, namely, whether the Uranian temperament in the Dorian

[p. 111]

men--or such amount of it as existed among them--did not naturally favour rather than discourage this freedom and self-dependence and political activity of the women. In present-day life it pretty clearly is so. It is the Uranian classes of men, or those at least who are touched with the Uranian temperament, who chiefly support the modern woman's movement. They, among the men, are those who sympathise with the aspirations of women towards liberty. The downright normal man with whom the passion for the other sex is the dominant note of life may love and care for his womenkind; but it is generally with a proprietary sort of love. He does not exactly want to see them independent and self-determining of their fates. It is the man in whom sex-polarity is not too pronounced and dominant who looks for comradeship in woman, and is glad to give her an equal footing with himself in social life. And so also was it, perhaps, among some of these early and prehistoric peoples of whom the Dorian traditions and the Homeric poems give us a glimpse.

Certainly it is curious that the gradual fall of the status of women in Greece from those early days down to the 5th, 4th, and 3rd centuries, B.C., when the position of the wife became that of a domestic drudge, and her ideal was "to stay at home and mind the house" [*1]--that this fall was

[p. 112]

simultaneous with the gradual decline of the honour in which manly love was held, and its gradual deterioration from a great civic institution into a mere personal pastime and indulgence. The growth of civilisation (as has elsewhere been remarked) [*1] had from the first the effect of accentuating the sex-passion. The luxurious selfishness of men was stimulated in a way that led to the ultimate enslavement of women; and it is possible that the simultaneous decay of the Uranian love removed the one force which might have acted in the opposite direction-namely, towards heroism, endurance, military and civic efficiency, and a generous sense of comradeship towards the other sex. Curious, I say, that these two changes should have gone on simultaneously, and suggestive of the question whether there may not be a necessary connection between them. Curious, too, to find that in our present-day civilisations where (till quite recently) the position of women had reached its lowest ebb, the Uranian attachment has similarly been disowned and its healing influences utterly ignored.

With regard to the general suggestion just made that in very early times--bordering on the prehistoric and matriarchal--love of a homosexual or Uranian kind had a far wider scope and acknowledged

[p. 113]

place in social life than in later days, I may, of course, refer to the earlier chapters in this volume--which must anyhow convince us of the immense ramifications and importance of the impulse in primitive societies. And, with regard to the special peoples we are dealing with in this paper, it may be desirable here to point out that this impulse among the early Greek peoples was by no means confined to the men, but was active and salient among the women also. Plutarch, in his Lycurgus (c. 18), speaking of paiderastia among the Spartans, says:--"This sort of love was so much in fashion among them that the most staid and virtuous matrons would own publicly their passion to a modest and beautiful virgin." [*1] The loves of the Lesbian women and of Sappho (B.C. 600) have been celebrated in all literature, and have in modern times been treated with more respect, perhaps, and understanding, than their counterpart among Greek men. Bethe, in his treatise cited above, says, speaking first of the attachment among the Greek men:--"It is clear that the Aeolian warriors in Lesbos about 600, B.C., favored the same in their general admiration for the Spartan ways, although in their poetry this does not show itself very strongly. But the very close alliances of women there--well-known in connection

[p. 114]

with Sappho--presuppose equally close bonds among the men; just as these latter in Sparta had their counterpart in feminine associations." [*1] And in another passage, rebutting the contention that these homosexual relations sprang from the seclusion of the sexes from each other, he says:--"The attempt breaks down utterly in face of the fact that just in Sparta and Lesbos, where we know most about this boy-love and girl-love, the sexes to the best of our knowledge, mixed with each other more freely than in the other Greek States." [*2]

There appears to have been a curious custom in Sparta, connected with the ordinary marriage by capture, which may be mentioned here as suggesting some wavering, so to speak, at that time, of the line between male and female. "The bridegroom," says Muller, [*3] "brought the young virgin, having carried her off from the chorus of maidens or elsewhere, to the bride's maid--who cut short her hair, and left her lying in a man's dress and shoes, without a light, on a bed of rushes; until the bridegroom returning from the public supper, carried the bride to the nuptial couch, and unloosed her girdle." Whatever may have been the exact meaning of this custom, it almost suggests that

[p. 115]

marriage by capture of women was preceded by marriage by capture of youths.

At any rate, it becomes quite clear, I think, from all this that no extraneous explanation--about the relative position of women, or the fortuitous confusion of abstract friendship with mere sensual passion--is needed in order to account for the genesis of boy-love or comrade-love among the Dorians, and the growth of this love into a positive institution. It sprang quite naturally from the temperament of the people--just as any one nowadays may see it springing spontaneously, though obscurely, in all classes of modern society, and as it has sprung also at various times in the past in Persia or Arabia or Japan, or among the other peoples mentioned in the first essay in this volume. In each of these cases it may have had a different complexion and expression according to the genius of the people concerned, in some it may have been established as a civic or a military institution, in others it may have fallen short of this kind of recognition; but in all, I think, we may say it has been a natural and not an artificial racial outgrowth. In no case may it have been a perfectly ideal thing, but almost always it has been a positive, serious and deep-rooted impulse; and the problem before each people has been not to extinguish the impulse, but to turn it into

[p. 116]

a great, publicly-recognised and honorable force making for the welfare of the community. We have seen in what way the Dorians solved this problem.

Footnotes

^107:1 Published by John Lane (London, 1893).

^107:2 Lowes Dickinson, The Greek View of Life, p. 97.

^109:1 Dacier's translation, vol. i.

^109:2 Translation by M. J. Chapman (London, 1836).

^110:1 Muller, op. cit., vol. ii., p. 327.

^110:2 Dacier's Plutarch, vol. I., p. 215.

^110:3 Though as regards the latter, Symonds suggests (A Problem in Greek Ethics, p. 2) that in camp-life this may have been one contributing cause.

^111:1 See The Greek View of Life, p. 161.

^112:1 Civilisation: its Cause and Cure, by E. Carpenter, p. 26.

^113:1 Dacier's translation of Plutarch.

^114:1 Bethe, op. cit., p. 442.

^114:2 Bethe, op. cit., p. 440.

^114:3 Op. cit., ii., 229. See also Plutarch's Lycurgus, ch. xv.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 117]

 

CHAPTER VII.

 

Relation to Civic Life and Religion

BUT more has to be said before the full scope and character of the Dorian solution can be recognised. It is quite in keeping with what we know of the hardihood, public spirit, military prowess, and so forth, of the Doric race, to find that in this matter of love between an elder warrior and a younger it was not the epithet kalos which was the coveted one, but agathos--not to be "beautiful" or "handsome," but to be "worthy," "brave," "efficient." This last was the decisive thing. [*1] The Athenian and other peoples, with greater refinement and artistic sense, might worship beauty and indulge in a kind of luxurious contemplation of it; kalos o pais, "fair, fair is the youth," is their constant refrain in epigram and inscription; but to the Dorian it was valor, efficiency,

[p. 118]

which drew his admiration. It is like the difference between the Doric architecture and that of the Ionians or Corinthians. There is a certain severity about the first-mentioned--an absolute adaptation to use, and freedom from superfluous ornament. The sense of public life, in fact, and of dedication to the common weal, was so strong among the Dorians--as we see in many other ways--that it deeply coloured their love-relations, and gave the latter a scope and a purpose considerably beyond that of personal gratification. The normal marriage, as we have already seen, was regulated in the interests of the State; and so too, the love between men and youths, instead of sinking as it did among some peoples into a dilettante affair and matter of private indulgence, was lifted into an important institution in the interests of general education and militarism. The love was not by any means--as a score of passages show--a purely ideal or abstract sentiment; but what is interesting to us is the splendour of the result which was evolved out of its comparatively coarse and sensual roots.

"The Dorians," says Bethe, "regulated the love-relation of the man to the youth in fixed forms, and dealt with it quite openly and with honorable seriousness, as deeming it an important institution under the aegis of the Family, the Public,

[p. 119]

the State, and Religion. Everywhere among them--in Sparta, Crete, Thebes, or wherever anything more than the mere fact has come down to us--we clearly discover that paiderastia was among the ruling class the foundation of all training towards arete (courage, virtue), in other words, towards manly efficiency such as shows itself principally in war, and the cultivation and preservation of the same. For to a point beyond this somewhat narrow and mediaeval conception of virtue, the Dorian States never attained, and could not well attain, as long as their outlook on life remained. The highest ethic and wisdom that Theognis had to offer, he was fain to put into words of counsel to a beloved youth who should be the inheritor of his arete."

"In Sparta," he continues, "the lovers were so far responsible for their loved ones that for any dishonorable conduct of the latter they--not the latter--were punished. And it was the lover, as well as the youth's relatives, who represented the beloved in all affairs in the Agora--to which indeed the latter was not admitted till his 30th year. So that in fact the Erastes is put legally on an equal footing with the father and elder brothers of the Eromenos--indeed, even above them, since he bears a responsibility for him which the latter's family does not undertake."

[p. 120]

[paragraph continues] Speaking further of the custom of placing lover-pairs together in the battle-ranks, Professor Bethe says that the reason for this is obvious:--"Any conduct that was not in accordance with the chivalric sense of honour was barred on the one hand by the anxiety of the man to be a model to his beloved of true arete, and no less by the latter's consciousness of his duty to show himself worthy of his lover." And then he quotes the well-known words of Phaedrus in Plato's Banquet:--"I say, then, that if a man who loves should be discovered doing anything dishonourable or through fear suffering the same without resistance, he would not be so shamed or pained before his own father or companions, or any one else, as before his beloved youth. And we see the same with regard to the youth, that he throws disgrace especially on his lovers when he is discovered in any dishonour."

J. Addington Symonds has a very interesting essay, [*1] in which he compares the love-ideal of mediaeval and feudal Europe with that of ancient Greece. Both loves became recognised and accepted institutions, and both had the same social purpose, namely the formation of the perfect knight-the embodiment of honour and bravery. But in the first case it was the devotion to one

[p. 121]

fair lady-and through her to all the suffering and oppressed women-kind; and in the second case it was devotion to some youth, and through him to the whole commonwealth--which led to this result. In both cases the love was apart from and outside of ordinary matrimony. The mediaeval knight might be duly married, but what inspired his romance and heroism was worship of some lady--who was probably the wife of another; and the Dorian knight no doubt had a wife and children at home, but the love which spurred him to his deeds of bravery was for the younger comrade who stood beside him in the ranks. The direct incitements were, in both cases, the same. "Just as in the 12th and 13th centuries," says Bethe, "the lady sends her warrior suitor from one love-ordeal to another, so does Konon tell of a Cretan youth (Leucocomas, he calls him) who tests his lover (Promachos) with great and dangerous encounters. Such stories are not by any means later growths; they were the commonly accepted view of the matter in the 5th century, B.C., certainly in the 6th. For the contemporaries of Aeschylus and Pindar were hardly able to think of warrior-pairs like Achilles and Patroclus, Theseus and Peirithous, Herakles and Iolaus, otherwise than as pairs of lovers."

Thus it was largely for the purpose of spreading

[p. 122]

a high standard of public honour, bravery, and efficiency, that military comradeship was encouraged among the Dorians. It worked powerfully among the boys and youths, who aspired to become men, and especially to be loved by some heroic warrior; [*1] and it had a deep influence on the men, who (referring again to the extract from Strabo) would be well received by the boy's relations if of good name and fame, but rejected if "unworthy." Remembering that the Dorian polity was an aristocracy, in which families of good name and tradition had a great sway, we see how it was that to become the parastates or squire of a well-known warrior, was to become at once kleinos or distinguished, to wear a distinctive dress, and to pass into a good social position; while on the other hand, for a man to have his advances towards a youth refused by the relations was to suffer the deepest of insults.

We have thus seen that the education of the youths, the honour and fair name of the men, efficiency in battle, and the safety of the State were all involved in the Dorian Custom of military comradeship. It is needless, therefore, to remark that religion was also involved; for in the old pagan world every great social custom was identified with or sanctioned by religion.

[p. 123]

With regard to this point the remarkable investigations of Hiller von Gaertringen, a few years ago in the island of Thera, in the Aegean Sea, yield important evidence. As we have already said, the Dorians on their immigration settled not only in various parts of Greece, but in the islands of the Aegean and in Crete. One of these islands was Thera (or Santorin), and it became an important centre--a holy place and resort of the Dorian tribes, with temples and dancing and running grounds. [*1] At some early period it had been occupied by the Phoenicians; but Strabo calls it "a colony of the Lacedaemonians, and the mother-city of the Cyrenians;" and there seems little doubt that it was colonised from Sparta, and that afterwards it sent out a colony to Cyrene in Africa. As this latter event took place about 630 B.C., it seems probable that the former was not later than 700 B.C. Here, then, on one hill on this island are the remains of temples and holy places--sacred to Apollo (Karneios and Delphinios), to Zeus, Athena, Artemis, and others; and close at hand an old circular structure and a natural cavern, "both of which were later united by the Gymnasium-building, and were clearly at that early period dedicated to the Dorian athletic exercises

[p. 124]

and dances of youths." [*1] Less than a stone's throw from these, on the side of the sacred mountain itself, are (as Hiller found and copied) a quantity of very archaic inscriptions, at least as old as the 7th century, B.C., deeply chiselled in the rock (as it were for all time) in letters four to six inches long, and celebrating the names and the betrothals of comrades. [*2] We are accustomed, in the modern world, to see love-inscriptions on trees and even rocks, of feminine names; but here we have the names of youths and men. Let us give Hiller's own words: [*3]--"At first we find the simple names, like Aglon, Maisiadas, Kikinnios, Arasimandros, Biaios, Euryteles, Tharres, and many another. But soon we find the same with additions: 'Moniadas is the first'--'Ainesis was brought up by the Graces'--'So and so is good, so and so is good (agathos).'"

Leaving Hiller for a moment, it is interesting to see here, what we noticed before, the admiration of this people for "goodness," valour, efficiency, rather than for beauty. The epithet kalos in this collection hardly appears more than once, but the epithet agathos over and over again, sometimes alone, as Laqudidas agathos or Telekrates agathos,

[p. 125]

sometimes in praise of their dancing, as Barbax orkheitai te agathos, or Eymelos aristos orkhestas.

Continuing, then, Hiller says:--"But presently the inscriptions speak more plainly. We find not only praise of the best dancer, but also direct evidence of the love of youth in quite sensual form--over which later ages sought to draw a veil. For evidence of this, I refer to the classic examples, I.G. xii., 3, 536-540. They prove to us the rude habits of the Dorian settlers, and they show also their total absence of prudery, and an entirely different sentiment on these subjects from what afterwards prevailed."

Among the examples referred to are for instance 536, saying that Pheidippidas was united to Timagoras, or 537 (also quoted by Bethe), saying: "Here in these sacred precincts, with invocation of the Delphinian, Krimon was united to the son of Bathycles." [*1] In the latter, the solemn appeal to the Delphinian Apollo (nai ton Delphinion) assures us of the religious character of the betrothal; and others of the inscriptions contain similar dedications. Hiller himself says:--"Of the various lovers

[p. 126]

one invokes Apollo, [*1] another Delphinios--that is Apollo again--as witness that he has fulfilled his proper duty."

Ordinary marriage between man and woman has, of course, in all ages and among most peoples, been made a religious institution, and has been ceremonially sealed in the presence of the deity and with the invocation of his name--as in our Christian churches; but it is strange to find here a similar ritual between men. Yet, as a matter of fact, even to-day, in Albania, and under the protection of the Greek Church, something of the kind--as already mentioned--continues. Hahn, in his Albanesische Studien, says that the Dorian customs of comradeship still flourish in Albania "just as described by the ancients," and are closely entwined with the whole life of the people. (The elder lover instructs and, when necessary, reproves the younger, follows him jealously about, fights duels on his behalf, protects him, makes him presents of various kinds, and so forth.) And he describes, in some detail, the church ceremonial

[p. 127]

attending the brotherhood-union of two men. And Dr. p. Naecke, reporting [*1] information received from Albania, says:--"The Skipetars (North Albanians) entertain for handsome youths a quite enthusiastic love. Their passion and jealousy is so strong that even to-day sometimes a case of suicide on that account will occur. . . . Further, it is quite true that the brotherhood-unions when taking place are blessed by the priests--the two partners sharing the Eucharist immediately after. With the Turks the ceremony is different. My landlord (a Christian) in Ochrida sealed blood-brotherhood with an Albanian Moslem (Gega). The two made incision in each other's fingers, and sucked drops of each other's blood. Henceforth one must stand by the other in life and death; and for the Christian landlord that is a valuable guarantee."

The latter part of this passage is interesting as showing how in Albania, though the blood-brotherhoods may be sanctified by some kind of religious ceremonial, they still in some cases overpass the ordinary religious barriers--as between Christian and Turk. And Hahn, again, in his book, says that religious differences do not form a bar. The Turk loves the Christian, and the Christian the Turk, and many a Christian has gone

[p. 128]

over to Islam because his beloved had promised, on this condition, to be subject to him.

Here then, it would seem, at Thera there was a celebrated holy place and rendezvous of the Doric race, [*1] and hither, at festival periods, crowds would come;--comrade-pairs would ratify their alliances in the temple-precincts, and lovers would inscribe the names of their beloved on the rocks.

If this was the case at Thera, would there not be other places, we may ask, where similar ceremonies took place? And Professor Bethe, with great plausibility, suggests that there were. "I do not doubt," he says, [*2] "that starting from the above solid evidence we can also interpret that

[p. 129]

custom of the Thebans which lingered still in Aristotle's time, and attracted his attention. 'On the grave of the hero Iolaus,' he wrote, 'lovers and their beloved youths still pledge their troth with one another;' [*1] and Plutarch adds: 'because Iolaus was the favorite of Heracles, and for that reason took part in his battles as his squire.' In Thebes no doubt at that time folk would be satisfied with a festal symbolical ceremony, corresponding to betrothal before divine witnesses. But originally in Thebes, even as in Thera, the act must have been carried out right on the holy place in the presence of the heroic prototype and patron of comrade-love. To understand the meaning of the name, The Sacred Band, from the sacredness of these comrade-alliances is now easy." Further he suggests that the competition which yearly took place among the youths at the tomb of the great hero and lover, Diocles, in Megara--and which is known to us through Theocritus (Idyll xii.)--had a similar origin; and represented the survival of actual betrothals which once were celebrated there, as at a holy place.

There is certainly something very grand about this whole conception and manifestation of the Uranian love among the Dorians. The wonderful stories--treasured in the hearts of the Greek peoples

[p. 130]

for centuries--of heroic bravery and mutual devotion inspired by it; the high seriousness with which it was cultivated both as a political safeguard and as a means of the education of youth, the religious sanction and dedication to the gods, and withal the absolute recognition of its human and passional origin, cannot fail to make us feel that here was a great people with a unique message for the world. Certainly we shall never in modern times understand this love until we realise this quality of it and its immense capabilities.

The modern peoples, it must be said, seem to have a strangely low estimate of love in general. Even the quite normal love between man and wife--though recognised as the foundation of the family, and contributing somewhat to the education of children--does not often figure as an inspiration to political life or to public service; and certainly, in the public mind, has no great association with religion. Indeed the physical circumstances of marriage are generally looked upon as repugnant to religion, and the sexual relation between man and woman as in itself unclean, and by no means to be thought of in connection with a church or other consecrated place or the divinity that may dwell there. Yet we know that this low estimate has not by any means been universal. It seems to mark a certain period, and to characterise

[p. 131]

certain races in the evolution of humanity. The Jewish peoples--perhaps by way of protest and reaction against the excesses of the surrounding Syrian tribes--insisted on a complete divorce between sex and religion; and that alienation of the two has lasted on down the Christian centuries. But in much of the old pagan world it was just the contrary. Sexual rituals were an intimate part of religion; and the wonder and glory of sex were a recognised manifestation of divinity. In India, even to-day, I believe, ordinary marriages are sometimes consummated within the temple-precincts; women who wish for children pay their respects in a very practical way to the lingams or phallic emblems in the sacred cloisters, just as they did in earlier times to the priests themselves, representing the gods; and the devadasis, or girls who dance before the divinities, are still treated with honour and a certain reverence, though their sexual functions in connection with the temple services, dating from thousands of years back (but now largely discontinued), are well-known. In the temples of Syria, and in other cases--some of which have just been touched upon in the first paper in this volume--a similar rapprochement between sex and religion existed.

In all these cases it has been the usual criticism of the votaries of Christianity to say that this connection

[p. 132]

or rapprochement only proves how unworthy and debased and merely sensual the religions of the old world were. But does this conclusion follow? Doubtless in cases these worships were unworthy and debased. But would not the argument be equally valid if it were said that our conclusion that religion was soiled by its contact with sex only proves how unclean our conception of sex is? In the Upanishads of India--a series of writings, which perhaps show the high-watermark of the religious sense in any age of the world--the perfectly naive, direct and open way in which the physical facts of human love are brought into direct touch with the supreme inspiration of the religious consciousness affords to us a profound lesson, which we should do well to bear in mind. In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad--one of the finest of the Upanishads--there is a passage in which instruction is given to the man who desires a noble son as to the prayers which he shall offer to the gods on the occasion of congress with his wife. In simple and serene language it directs him how--"when he has placed his virile member in the body of his wife, and joined his mouth to her mouth," he should pray to the various forms of deity who preside over the operations of nature: to Vishnu to prepare the womb of the future mother, to Prajapati to watch over the influx of

[p. 133]

the semen, and to the other gods to nourish the foetus, etc. [*1] How far all this seems from the modern mind, how alien, how profane!

Yet the gross details of physical union were obviously not unclean to the writers of this and similar passages in the Upanishads. There is indeed, for instance, not a little reason for thinking that many of the early peoples regarded the semen as the vehicle and special condensation of the soul. [*2] The soul was transferred to the woman, perhaps for re-embodiment in the child, perhaps for union with and reinforcement of her soul.

And it must be confessed that in view of all the conclusions of modern thought and science, such a theory, if not by any means to be considered valid or even adequate, does at any rate appear a natural and not impossible one. To such people, then, the so-called physical union was in very truth and reality a sacred affair taking place in the presence of the gods, and vouched for by the amazing inspiration and revelation of the passion of love itself.

And leaving aside this special theory with regard to the semen; we to-day can see that in the more subtle and refined intimacies of lovers in caresses and embraces, and in the silent influences of mere

[p. 134]

presence and nearness, there do pass over from one to the other elements of character, shades of feeling and disposition, and something indeed of the nature of the soul. That well-known and fine epigram of Plato conveys this very idea:--

	 
		"Thee as I kist, behold I on my lips my own soul was trembling;
		 For, bold one, she had come, meaning to find her way through."
		
		 And yet, strangely enough, while this is recognised, there is little sense in modern times of the sacredness of love, even in its most gracious forms, nor any inclination to connect it with religion. The marvellous and mysterious process by which the soul, the very inner being, of one person passes over and transfuses that of another, seems to be passed by or treated as something unworthy. How vulgar--if one may use the word--is our current conception of these subjects!

However, with the modern world--except for the purpose of illustrating certain points--we are not here concerned. The point which I wish especially to illuminate is that love in its more serious aspects was recognised in the old world as having influences on character so deep and solemn that they brought it into close touch with religion. We have seen in the Dorian institution that the love between a man and a youth was largely encouraged

[p. 135]

on this very ground--of the communication of character, virtue, arete. For a valiant warrior not to have a youth attached to him as squire or favorite was disgraceful, or even punishable, because so the contagion and inheritance of his valour would be lost. [*1] We have seen above, in the account of Ephorus in Strabo, that the relatives would enquire most closely about the honour and bravery of such a lover before surrendering their boy to him. On the other hand, Plutarch, in his Lycurgus (c. 18), says:--"It is a thing remarkable that their lovers had a share in the young lad's honour or disgrace: and there goes a story that one of them was fined by the magistrates, because the lad whom he loved cried out effeminately as he was fighting. . . . And though several men's fancies met in one person, yet did not this cause any strangeness or jealousy among them, but was rather the beginning of a very intimate friendship, whilst they all jointly conspired to render the belov'd boy the most accomplished in the world."

Such a contagion and identification of the sense of honour between two persons could obviously only come about through a deep and heroic love between them; and when such love ramified widely, as indicated in the last quotation, from one to

[p. 136]

another through the land, and when the standard of honour concerned was the welfare of the country--then clearly the "soul" transmitted by means of the love-relation was not merely the soul of any one individual concerned, but was the Soul of the People--that is, in other words, the inspiration of their religion.

How far the primitive Dorians, beneath their strange customs and quasi-religious rites, may have had an inkling of this truth, it might be difficult to say. Probably no very reasoned perception of it, but rather a kind of sub-conscious intuition. Anyhow, the love-customs of a people whose career was so splendid, and who exercised such a profound influence upon the other Greek peoples, and so on the rest of the world, cannot but be deeply interesting to us moderns--despite such elements of crudeness and barbarism as are certainly to be found among them.

Footnotes

^117:1 See the quotation above (ch. v., p. 94) from Strabo: "They do not regard as an object of affection a youth exceedingly handsome, but him who is distinguished for courage and decorum (andreiai kai kosmioteti)."

^120:1 The Dantesque and Platonic Ideals of Love, in the Key of Blue (John Lane, 1893).

^122:1 See Aelian 7, iii., 12--who says that the Spartan boys would beg a man eispnein aytois.

^123:1 See Thera, by Hiller von Gaertringen (3 vols., Berlin, 1899).

^124:1 Bethe, p. 450.

^124:2 See for these, H. von Gaertringen, I. G., xii., 3, 536-601, etc.

^124:3 Thera, vol. iii., p. 67 et seq.

^125:1 Pheidippidas uiphe Timagoras, and Nai ton Delphinion ho Krimun teide uiphe paida Bathykleos. These inscriptions are in an archaic script which cannot exactly be reproduced here, but the readings given are as near as available in the later alphabet--a modern "h" being used for the old Greek aspirate.

^126:1 With regard to this invocation of Apollo, see above, ch. i., page 27. Apollo was the special god of comradeship; as Delphinios he was the source of divination; as Karneios he links on to the Syrian Ashteroth Karnaim, the feminine principle. Nor must it be forgotten that Thera had already been at an earlier date a Phoenician or Syrian colony, and that here was a point of contact between the Dorian and the Syrian festivals.

^127:1 In the Jahrbuch fur Sexuelle Zwischenstufen, vol. ix., p. 328.

^128:1 Thera, in fact, occupied for the Dorian Greeks much the same position as Delos did for the Ionians: of which Mr. H. B. Cotterill (Ancient Greece, p. 152) says, "This island, lying in the midst of the Cyclades, which offer easy transit between Greece and Ionia, was in early times an important entrepot. It was also the religious centre of the Ionian world, famed as the birthplace of Artemis and Apollo and for the most ancient oracle of the god. Every fifth year the birth of the twin deities was celebrated with magnificence amid a great concourse, vividly described in the ancient Hymn to Apollo: 'Hither gather the long-robed Ionians with their children and chaste wives. They wrestle, they dance, they sing, in memory of the god. He who saw them would say they were immortal and ageless, so much grace and charm would he find in viewing the men, the fair-girdled women, the swift ships, and riches of every kind.' These festivals seem to have been accompanied by contests in music and poetry."

^128:2 Bethe, op. cit. p. 450.

^129:1 See Plutarch's Pelopidas, ch. xviii.

^133:1 See Love's Coming of Age, by E. Carpenter, p. 17.

^133:2 See Bethe, op. cit., p. 464 et seq.

^135:1 See Aelian 8, iii. 10.

     Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

 

CHAPTER VIII.

 

The Samurai of Japan: and their Ideal

THE Samurai of Japan afford another instance of the part played by the Uranian love in a nation's life, and of its importance; and what we know of their institutions resembles in many respects those of the Dorian Greeks which we have just described. This Order of Knighthood, as it may be called, was the ruling element of Japanese life during six or seven centuries, from 1200 A.D. onwards; and it was only in 1870 or so, with the introduction of the new Constitution, that it was dissolved--though its code of personal honour and of social service, under the name Bushido, still has a large, almost a national, following.

Of late years much has been written about the Samurai; and their high tradition of chivalry, their spartan simplicity of life, their bravery, their loyalty, and dedication to the service of their country and its Mikado, are matters of common knowledge.

[p. 138]

Lafcadio Hearn, in his Japan: an Interpretation (p. 264, et seq.), tells us that, in the period we are speaking of, Japan, emerging from an earlier and looser tribal state, "was still but a great aggregate of clans and sub-clans kept together by military coercion. At the head of this vast aggregate was the Heavenly Sovereign, the Living God of the race--Priest-Emperor and Pontiff Supreme--representing the oldest dynasty in the world. Next to him stood the Kuge, or ancient nobility, descendants of emperors and of gods. . . Next to the Kuge ranked the Buke, or military class. But the difference in most cases between the lords and the warriors of the Buke was a difference of rank based upon income and title: all alike were Samurai." He further explains that--"In early times the head of the military class was appointed by the Emperor, only as a temporary Commander-in-chief; afterwards these commanders-in-chief, by usurpation of power, made their office hereditary, and became veritable Imperatores in the Roman sense. Their title of Shogun is well-known to Western readers. The Shogun ruled over between two and three hundred lords (Daimyo: plural) of provinces or districts, whose powers and privileges varied according to income and grade. . . . Before that time each lord exercised supreme rule over his own domain; and it is not surprising

[p. 139]

that the Jesuit missionaries, as well as the early Dutch and English traders, should have called the Daimyo 'Kings.' . . The great Daimyo had their greater and lesser vassals; and each of these again had his force of trained Samurai or fighting gentry." There was also a particular class of soldier-farmers called Goshi--something like our yeomen.

Thus with the various grades and ranks of Samurai their total number was about two millions, and they were exempted from taxation and privileged each to wear two swords. "Such in brief outline was the general ordination of those noble and military classes by whom the nation was ruled with great severity. The bulk of the common people were divided into three classes: farmers, artisans, and merchants."

In the book, Bushido, the Soul of Japan, [*1] by Inazo Nitobe, which during the last ten years has had a large circulation, an interesting account is given of the moral and social ideal of these Samurai. The author explains that Bu-shi or Bu-ke means Fighting Knight; and so Bushido means literally Military-Knight ways--the ways that fighting nobles should observe in their daily life as well as in their vocation; in a word, the "Precepts of Knighthood," the noblesse oblige of the warrior

[p. 140]

class. . . . . "Bushido, then," he continues, "is the code of moral principles which the knights were required or instructed to observe. It is not a written code; at best, it consists of a few maxims handed down from mouth to mouth, or coming from the pen of some well-known warrior or savant. . . . It was founded not on the creation of one brain, however able, or on the life of a single personage, however renowned. It was an organic growth of decades and centuries of military career. . . . As in England the political institutions of feudalism may be said to date from the Norman Conquest, so we may say that in Japan its rise was simultaneous with the ascendancy of Yoritomo, late in the 12th century. As, however, in England we find the social elements of feudalism far back in the period previous to William the Conqueror, so, too, the germs of feudalism in Japan had been long existent before the period I have mentioned. . . . Coming to possess great honour and great privileges, and correspondingly great responsibilities, they, the Fighting Knights, soon felt the need of a common standard of behaviour, especially as they were always on a belligerent footing and belonged to different clans."

Mr. Inazo Nitobe then goes on to report, in some detail, this common standard of conduct which inspired the Samurai; and it need hardly be said

[p. 141]

that he describes it as of fine and heroic quality. Rectitude, justice, courage, endurance, and absolute readiness to die for duty--these were virtues inculcated from childhood onwards with a kind of Spartan insistence. "To rush into the thick of battle and be slain in it, is easy enough, and a common churl is equal to that task; but to live when it is right to live, and to die only when it is right to die--that is true courage. What Samurai youth has not heard of 'Great Valor' and of the 'Valor of a Villein!'"

Simplicity of life again, and contempt of money; the high sense of honour which prompted "Happy Dispatch," or Harakiri, rather than suffer the least disgrace; these were all characteristics which relate them to the early Spartans. For the Samurai commerce and the vulgar seeking of gain was forbidden. Only in the form of farming was anything of the kind allowed. Yet with all this sternness of life the finer arts were not neglected. As the older people, the Dorians, had their music and dancing and poetry, and their contests of wit, which were specially encouraged among the young folk, so it was with the Samurai. "In the principality of Satsuma, noted for its martial spirit and education, the custom prevailed for young men to practise music; not the blast of trumpets, or the beat of drums, but sad and tender

[p. 142]

melodies on the biwa, soothing our fiery spirits and drawing our thoughts away from scent of blood and scenes of carnage. Polybius tells us of the Constitution of Arcadia, which required all youths under thirty to practise music, in order that this gentle art might alleviate the rigors of the inclement region. It is to its influence that he attributes the absence of cruelty in that part of the Arcadian mountains." [*1]

In this connection it may be mentioned that Mr. Lowes Dickinson, in a letter from Japan (Manchester Guardian, 12th Sept., 1913), insists upon the remarkable combination of the masculine and the feminine in the Japanese character--of the sensitiveness to beauty with heroic endurance and courage. He says:--"Northerners, and Anglo-Saxons in particular, have always at the back of their minds a notion that there is something effeminate about the sense for beauty . . . but history gives the lie to this complacent theory. No nations were ever more virile than the Greeks or Italians: they have left a mark on the world which will endure when Anglo-Saxon civilisation is forgotten. And none have been, or are, more virile than the Japanese. That they have also the delicacy of women does not alter the fact."

The author of Bushido also points out that among

[p. 143]

the Japanese Fighting Knights the study of letters and poetry was common. "Everybody of any education was either a poet or a poetaster. Not infrequently a marching soldier might be seen to halt, take his writing utensils from his belt, and compose an ode--and such papers were found afterwards in the helmets or the breastplates when these were removed from their lifeless wearers."

How all these details--and among them the inculcation of good manners, and of mercy to the weak or distressed, must not be forgotten--remind us of our own period of chivalry in the West! Truly Mr. Inazo Nitobe has given us an interesting picture; and if, as one seems to find, the picture is all lights and no shadows, doubtless this is because he is painting the ideal of the case rather than the actuality. For the latter, or for phases of the latter, Mitford's Tales of Old Japan should, of course, be consulted. What the author of Bushido impresses on us with great force is that this ideal became the root of Japanese life. As the figure of the gentle-man, the perfect knight sans peur et sans reproche emerged from our Feudal era, so the ideal of Bushido emerged from the feudal era of Japan. "What Japan was she owed to the Samurai; they were not only the flower of the nation, but the root as well . . . the innumerable avenues of popular amusement and instruction--

[p. 144]

the theatres, the story-tellers' booths, the preachers' dais, the musical recitations, the novels--have taken for their chief theme the stories of the Samurai. The peasants round the open fire in their huts never tire of repeating the achievements of Yoshitsune [*1] and his faithful retainer Benkei, or of the two brave Soga brothers; the dusky urchins listen with gaping mouths until the last stick burns out and the fire dies in its embers, still leaving their hearts aglow with the tale that is told. . . Samurai grew to be the beau-ideal of the whole race. 'As among flowers the cherry is queen, so among men the Samurai is lord.' Debarred from commercial pursuits the military class itself did not aid commerce; but there was no channel of human activity, no avenue of thought, which did not receive in some measure an impetus from Bushido. Intellectual and moral Japan was directly or indirectly the work of knighthood." [*2]

There is only one fault to be found with this

[p. 145]

charmingly written book of Inazo Nitobe's--but it is a serious one. He tells us that Bushido was the root of Japanese social life, but he does not tell us what was the root of Bushido. The Samurai ideal is a noble one, but, in his account of it, it is something up in the air--it does not touch the ground anywhere. In no passage does he tell us from what great human emotion it sprang, or what it was that through all those centuries held the elements of Bushido together. He indicates (see pp. 7 and 123) that its source was not in religion, for though Shintoism played a large part in Bushido, Mr. Nitobe regards religion as only one of its elements; and so we are left in doubt as to where the ideal really rooted.

And yet there ought not to be any doubt. We have seen in the Dorian Chivalry that whatever elements of religion, of morality, of patriotism there were about it, they were brought to a focus by the personal relation--in that case the love of a man for the youth that fought at his side; or rather their mutual love for each other. It was love that gave life and actuality to the ideal--for the youth to see the glory of Knighthood in the man, for the man to train the youth into an embodiment of his vision. And in the Chivalry of Mediaeval Europe it was much the same: only there the love was that of a Knight for his Lady--or

[p. 146]

their mutual love of each other; the lady to hold out an image and a symbol of perfection, and the knight to make himself worthy at every point of the light in his lady's eyes--for her sake to care more for his honour than his life. Probably wherever there has been a great and inspiring ideal of this kind actually moving among a people, there has lain at or very near the root of it that wonderful thing, human love; so individual, so human, and yet so close and vital to the very soul of the race.

Certainly it was so among the Samurai of Japan. The love and devotion of the retainer towards his lord runs like a golden thread through the history of that land; and how intensely personal that devotion might be is illustrated by scores of stories, like the story of the Forty-seven Ronins, or that above mentioned of Yoshitsune and Benkei. But beyond that, and perhaps even deeper and more personal, runs the love between comrades of the same grade, generally but not necessarily an elder and a younger. And here certainly is a point of close resemblance between the chivalry of the Samurai and the chivalry of the Dorians. It was not so much the fair lady of his dreams, or even the wife and family at home, that formed the rallying point of the Samurai's heroism and loyalty, but the younger comrade whom he loved

[p. 147]

and who was his companion-at-arms. In Mitford's Tales of Old Japan this motive shows but slightly. But in the case of that book--excellent as it is in its way--it is easy to see from the mode of its production, the tales being selected for British consumption and more or less re-cast, of course, in the telling, that the theme which interests us here is comparatively neglected. One must go to the Japanese authors and storytellers themselves--as I shall do presently--to show the matter in its true light.

Mr. Suyewo-Iwaya, of Tokio, in an article on Comrade-Love in Japan, says [*1]:--"From 1200 A.D. onwards the Samurai became prominent in Japan. To them it seemed more manly and heroic that men should love men and consort with them, than to give themselves over to women. For several centuries this view had sway far and wide. Almost every knight sought out a youth who should be worthy of him, and consolidated with such youth a close blood-brotherhood. It often happened that on account of the beloved one the knight would become involved in an affair of jealousy or a duel. If one reads Nanshok-Okagami (a series of tales on this subject by Saikak, a celebrated novelist of the 17th century) one will find plenty of stories of

[p. 148]

this sort. Thus the relation remained at first only between knights and knightlings (so they called the favorites), but afterwards it became more general." Further, the same author says:--"It is also remarkable that this kind of love is not known to the same degree in all the provinces of Japan. It seems that it has spread more widely in the Southern part than in the Northern provinces. There are regions where the general public knows nothing of it. On the other hand, in Kyushu, and especially in Satsuma, it is from of old very wide spread. That arises possibly from the fact that people there in Satsuma prize courage and manliness so very highly, while in other provinces where comrade-love is little or not at all known, women command much more attention and love. For one hears it said by well-informed folk that the population in those provinces where the love of youths prevail is more manly and robust, while in regions which are void of it the people are softer, more lax, and often more dissolute." Satsuma is celebrated, of course, even down to to-day for the great athletes and warriors it produces and has produced; and it has been pointed out what a remarkable list may be made of well-known heroes of the Russo-Japanese war coming from this general region--among them for instance, Field-Marshals Saigo, Kawamura, and Oyama,

[p. 149]

and Admirals Togo and Yamamoto. Mr. Suweyo Iwaya says (Ibid., pp. 467, 468) that the knightlings (corresponding to the Dorian eromenoi) were called Kosho, and Dr. Karsch-Haack, [*1] drawing his information partly from Iwaya and partly from other sources, says that "the Samurai, including the military and nobility, in the feudal period from the 12th century onwards, were reckoned the first and most honorable class in Japan, and the custom rooted itself among them more and more, especially among the Daimyo chiefs, of having attached to them, besides their wives, fine young men or youths--their Kosho. And this passionate love-relation of a knight to the youth whom he had sought and won--a relation which now and again under special circumstances would end in the simultaneous death of both partners--found its Japanese Homer in the unknown poet-author of the romance Shidzu-no Odamaki."

A Japanese friend of mine assures me that of all the historical characters of the "Age of Wars" (400 years ago) Nobunaga Oda, a great overlord and warrior-chief, was one of the most famous. He is said to have had many Kosho; but of them all Rammaru Mori was the most intelligent and beautiful, and his special favourite. Tradition

[p. 150]

affirms that the love-relation between Nobunaga and Rammaru was most intimate. When Nobunaga's vassals revolted against him, Rammaru fought very bravely for his lord, and seriously damaged the enemy; but in a surprise attack Nobunaga's party was defeated, and he and Rammaru perished fighting side by side.

Dr. Karsch-Haack goes on to say that the region of Satsuma has been from of old, and is yet to-day the centre of this comrade-love; and as an explanation of this fact he mentions the opinion just quoted, which prevails there, concerning the greater tendency of the affection to produce manliness and efficiency in the population; but he says that "beyond this there used to be in Satsuma under the old feudal regime-and until it was abolished in 1868--a law which considerably limited normal intercourse between man and woman, imposing the death penalty on any young man under thirty who had dealings of sexual nature with a woman. [*1] This law arose out of the circumstance that the population of Satsuma was of a very warlike breed, and as generally ten to twenty thousand men would be absent from home on military campaigns, they would naturally be in continual anxiety about the fidelity of

[p. 151]

their wives, left exposed to the importunities of the younger generation, unless the latter were kept in check by severest penalties."

We have already mentioned the romance Shidzu-no Odamaki, and as an illustration of Samurai comradeship a brief digest of it may be given (from the same author). The scene is laid towards the end of the 16th century, and describes the devotion existing between the young man Yoshida Daizo, of the Daimyo's Court, and the youth Hirata Sangoro, son of the chief attendant of the court. Yoshida's love for Hirata begins with his rescue of the latter from the hands of two scoundrels, and on the outbreak of Japan's second war with Korea (1597), Yoshida takes Hirata as his companion-at-arms with him. Their ages are now twenty-five and fifteen respectively. Yoshida falls in battle, and when Hirata learns of this, he throws himself on the enemy and dies a hero's death. The story ends with the remark: "Hirata's death was the simple result of his heartfelt devotion to Yoshida, and his self-forgetting friendship compelled him to this tragic end. But such blossoms of knightly courage in the feudal times are  to all, and we know how much this sort of love-intimacy was prized, and what tears this manner of dying elicited."

Of the same period apparently is the romance 

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] Mokukudzu-Monogatari. A young Samurai, Uneme, of eighteen years of age, and in the service or retinue of the lord Funakawa, falls desperately in love with Ukyo, a youth of sixteen, also a Samurai, and in the retinue of another lord, Sakuragawa. Ukyo is wonderfully beautiful, well-formed, and well-mannered, but Uneme finds no  to approach him or to confess his passion. A chance meeting only makes matters worse. "Tortured by unsatisfied longing he falls into a sheer love-sickness. To impart his secret to anyone he does not dare. Even his doctor fails to fathom the cause of his suffering. But when one day the patient receives a visit from some acquaintances, who by chance bring Ukyo with them, he at once is himself again, and his face fairly shines with joy. Though his beloved does not understand, Uneme directs towards him all the fulness of his heart. Only one of his friends, the Shiga Samonosuke, notices the change which Ukyo's presence brings, and he guesses the secret. Uneme, at first, when Samonosuke challenges him, denies the truth out of shame. But presently Samonosuke finds verses in which Uneme has given expression to his agony of love for Ukyo; and this discovery brings about an open conversation. Uneme confesses to Samonosuke his love, and at the same time his dread of exposure and punishment, and

[p. 153]

his fear that under this unhappy dispensation he will die. Samonosuke tries to soothe these anxieties, and offers himself as mediator between lover and beloved. And so it comes about that Ukyo receives a letter from Uneme with a love-poem therein. In his answer Ukyo expresses his hope of seeing Uneme again right soon in full health and activity; and Ukyo's friendliness works like a charm on Uneme, who at once feels that he has recovered. In their respective occupations opportunities of meeting do not so often present themselves to the youthful pair. Only at a festival, on the occasion of a visit of the Shogun, do they come to definite speech and mutual understanding. The youths swear to each other--whatever else may happen--to hold together in life and in death.

"And from thenceforward they are one heart and one soul. Till evil fate in the shape of Hosono Chuzen, a contemporary and old comrade of Uneme, steps between. This fellow, a young man of bad and insolent nature and of repellent aspect, had already for some time been scheming for the possession of Ukyo, but the latter had taken no notice of him. Now, however, he thinks the time has come for him to represent his desire through the mediation and introduction of a third person, but is curtly and indignantly repulsed by

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] Ukyo. Hosono, out of revenge, determines on Ukyo's death. When Ukyo hears a report of this, he decides at first to turn to Uneme for help, but rejecting this plan as too womanish, resolves to forestall his mortal enemy, and does so by stabbing him to death. Ukyo's superior officer hears of the murder, and brings him to justice; but when Ukyo makes known the circumstances which led to his deed, he is only punished by a lenient confinement. Hosono's father, however, with the help of the Shujin Nato, in whose service he is, brings a charge before Sakuragawa against the murderer of his son; and Sakuragawa is obliged to repeal the former sentence, and condemn the guilty man to harakiri.

"Uneme, meanwhile, knowing nothing of all this, is on a visit to his mother in Kanagawa. Being informed by a letter from Samonosuke of what has happened, he takes most affectionate leave of his mother, and forever, in order to return with all speed to Yedo. On his earliest arrival he repairs immediately to the Keiyo-ji Temple, the place where such executions were always accomplished, and on that very spot comes upon Ukyo in the midst of the tragic preparations for his own suicide. He throws himself on the ground beside Ukyo; and the friends once again exchange a few words of tenderest import, embrace each

[p. 155]

other with tears, and then with dignity and heroism complete the work of harakiri. 'They died like dewdrops on the flowers of spring.' When Ukyo's unhappy mother received the sign of the self-destruction of her son--a tuft of his hair--she lost her reason and drowned herself."

Dr. Haack, who gives the above two summaries, says that according to J. Schedel, these two romances "were till a few years ago classic reading-lessons in the Japanese schools!"

But Nanshok Okagami (the Great Mirror of Man's Love) seems to be the most classical collection of such tales. It appeared first in 1687; and its author, Saikaku, has for two centuries had great renown in Japan, as a creative artist and poetic realist; and though in his later period the re-issue of his works has been prohibited, it may be said of him that--"Pornography was by no means the purpose of his literary activity, but rather an untampered reproduction of real life, to which, of course, a poetical side may always be found. His works are wanting neither in charming freshness, nor in deep feeling, nor in poetic beauty." [*1] Saikaku describes, in one place, the loves of the young Okura and the eighteen-year-old Geki--both sons of Shinto priests. "For two years this comrade-alliance lasted, and during this

[p. 156]

time they were together night and day. One of them was never seen alone. It was only with the death of Okura that the tie was broken. Geki, however, was then adopted by Okura's father, and the latter's daughter was given to him for wife." As models of such lovers, Saikaku draws the picture of Mondo and Hanimon, the one aged sixty-three, and the other sixty-six. They learned to know and love each other when the first counted only sixteen years, while the second was nineteen years old and had already gone through his course of military instruction. For almost fifty years they lived thus, as bachelors, in an ever renewed freshness of intimacy."

Dr. Von Meyer, in a book by his friend Elisar von Kupffer, gives a translation of a few pages from the story of Tamura by Saikak--which may be reproduced here as an example of a rather more sentimental and less heroic tale of Samurai love. Kanimon Maruo, whose dress betrays that he is a Samurai, falls in love, while on an angling excursion, with a good-looking youth named Sannojo Tamura, connected with the family of the Daimyo of Koriyama. One evening, late, the latter has to return, and by a somewhat dangerous route, from a theatrical performance which he has attended. "As Tamura reached the vicinity of Daianji (a well-known temple) there came from a side-path

[p. 157]

a man in the style of a servant, with a cowl over his head and a lantern in his hand, who walked on in front of him. And by the help of this guide, whom he gladly followed, Tamura soon reached Koriyama. The man indeed went as far as Tamura's house in Takata-Machi, and then turned back again when he saw Tamura enter his home. So far Tamura had not paid much attention, but now the affair seemed really strange. He looked, however, to his parents first, and let them know of his return from the theatre. Having done this, he went out again and hastened after the lantern, and at length over-took it. By the glimmer of the lantern he caught sight of a robe of chrysanthemum pattern. And now guessing that this must be the Samurai whom he had met once before, by day, he followed the light closer; but in the vicinity of Nara it slowly dwindled and went out, and in the pitch darkness the keenest eyesight could perceive nothing. Presently a voice became audible:--'Art thou not perhaps an attendant of the young nobleman, sent to make enquiries, seeing he was accompanied by a person in disguise?' But Tamura knew the voice and said:--'I have followed thee back again so far, because I have learned to know thy heart,' and he grasped Maruo's hand. To Maruo it seemed all like a dream, and for a time he stood quite still and unable to speak.

[p. 158]

'Is it all true?' he said.

'I am grateful to thee for thy friendliness,' replied Tamura.

'Do not let thy feeling change!'

'My feeling shall not change.'

'Forget me not!'

'I will never forget thee.'

And so as they exchanged many such words, the clock of Kiyo in the West struck two; and as it was deep night they remained there and entertained each other in the darkness; and before dawn they made ready to return--though in truth their parting came too soon. Each wished for a favorable opportunity of meeting again. Maruo accompanied Tamura back again, and on the way they spoke of how uncertain life is. 'No one can count on the cherry-tree blooming a second time, that is why the ripe cherry is so beautiful!' And so they made an appointment for the second day of March."

And now Maruo catches a chill and dies. Tamura, unsuspecting, arrives on the appointed day, only to hear of the disaster. He goes to Maruo's house, and finds the corpse already on its bier, and praying beside it a young man whose name proves to be Sanai. Amid tears and lamentations the two young men make acquaintance. Tamura insists that he will put an end to his life,

[p. 159]

in order not to be separated from Maruo. Sanai, not without much difficulty, dissuades him; and finally out of their common love for Maruo the two become close friends. They unite their lives, and one night the spirit of Maruo appears to the two sleepers and blesses their union.

Dr. Haack rightly says, [*1] with regard to this and the other works of Saikaku:--"How is it possible to justify the complete neglect of this literature? Saikaku's work does not only belong to the history of literature generally, but is also a mine of information for the history of Japanese culture, such as can only be left out of consideration by wilful suppression of the truth."

It is hardly possible to study the above and other accounts of the Samurai Institution in Japan without being struck by its resemblance (already noticed) to the Dorian military comradeship. Though the comrade-alliances of knight and knightling were quite commonly recognised in Japan, they never became exactly an institution of the State as they were in Sparta and Crete; but they obviously had their profound influence and result in sealing and confirming the lofty standard of honour represented by Bushido.

Dr. Friedrich Kraus, in his book on Japan, [*2]

[p. 160]

describes the comrade-relation there between knight and youth as of the same noble type as among the early Greeks; and he goes on to say that similar relations continue to-day in the army, as between officers and soldiers, and that many a time on the battlefields of Manchuria during the last war they inspired contempt of death or willing devotion of life for the sake of a loved friend.

I may say that a friend of my own who took part in the same war confirms this view, and Karsch-Haack says [*1]:--"If it is true, as eye-witnesses of the campaign have declared, that comrade-love is still--as a legacy from the Samurai--much favored in both the Japanese army and navy, and that it has contributed not a little to the marvelous results of their late war with Russia--why then one can hardly reject as unjustifiable the opinion that this love is more likely to encourage manly bearing than to stand in the way of the same."

Footnotes

^139:1 Simpkin and Marshall, 2/6.

^142:1 Bushido, p. 26.

^144:1 Yoshitsune was brother to Yoritomo (above mentioned), who was one of the first and most renowned of the Samurai. Yoshitsune and his retainer Benkei were inseparable, and together they performed such feats of heroism that Yoritomo became jealous of their fame, and tried to chase them from the land. Adopting many disguises and in constant peril of their lives they wandered far and passed through many adventures, till at last they died together in a wild country in the North of Japan.

^144:2 Bushido, pp. 107, 108.

^147:1 In the Jahrbuch fur homosexuelle Zwischenstufen, Vol. iv. (1902), p. 265 et seq.

^149:1 Forschungen ueber gleichgeschlechtliche Liebe (Munich, 1906), p. 79.

^150:1 The explanation is reported by Dr. Karsch-Haack as having been verbally given to him by a commercial man residing in Japan.

^155:1 Karsch-Haack, op. cit., p. 115.

^159:1 Op. cit., p. 117.

^159:2 Das Geschlechtsleben der Japaner (Leipzig, 1911).

^160:1 Op. cit., p. 121.

    Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk, by Edward Carpenter, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 161]

 

Conclusion.

IT may seem rather too late--at the close of a book--to criticise its title! But in the present case perhaps this is the best place for the purpose. It may have occurred to readers of the foregoing pages that the word "Intermediate" hardly covers all the human types dealt with or spoken of. Between the quite normal man and the quite normal woman there are certainly a number of intermediate grades. There are men who approach women more or less in their sex-temperament and other respects--who are feminine or even effeminate in their various degrees; and there are women who approach men--who are somewhat masculine or even virile; and specimens of all these degrees have passed before us. But there are other types which can hardly be called "intermediate." If there are men who vary from the normal man-type in the feminine direction-and who may perhaps be termed "subvirile"--there are also men who vary in the opposite direction, and may be called

[p. 162]

[paragraph continues] "supervirile." If there are women who are less feminine than the normal woman, there are also other women who are "ultra-feminine." These types--these superviriles and ultra-feminines--are not between but beyond the normal boundaries. And not only should we theoretically conclude on the existence of such types, but practically we discover them, both around us to-day, and among the various peoples of the past.

There are certainly some men of amazing virility--great fighters, organisers, thinkers--powerful both in muscle and brain--who seem in their love-relations to stand to the ordinary man much as the latter does to the woman. Prof. Gustav Jaeger [*1] said, in 1884:--"What struck me most at first, but now appears to be perfectly explicable and natural, is that among the homosexuals are to be found the most remarkable specimens of men, namely those that I call supervirile. Such men stand by virtue of a special variation of their soul-stuff as much above the man as the normally sexual man does above the woman. Such a man is able by virtue of his soul-aroma to bewitch men, just as they, in the passive way, bewitch him. And as he lives almost always in the society of men, and men cast themselves at his feet, it often

[p. 163]

happens that such a supervirile mounts to the highest grades of mental and spiritual development, of social position, and of masculine ability." Dr. Jaeger then gives a strong list of generals, sovereigns, philosophers, artists, etc. as examples.

Allowing something for a kind of enthusiastic exaggeration in this passage, and something also for the use of the invidious word "above" when "beyond" perhaps would have been more to the point, we may say that Dr. Jaeger's remarks of thirty years ago have, on the whole, been corroborated and accepted by modern thought; and refering to the present volume we may fairly suppose that the Dorian Greeks or the Japanese Samurai must have counted among them men of such a "supervirile" quality as he describes.

Similarly among the women alluded to here and there in the first chapter above, there would doubtless be some ultra-feminine--who would stand in their love-relation to the ordinary woman much as the latter does to the normal man. In both these cases the term "intermediate" is not quite the fitting one; and I can only ask the reader to excuse its use in consideration of the difficulty of finding a term which really covers all the ground. I must also acknowledge a similar deficiency in the use of the expression "Primitive Folk" in the title. The expression is somewhat too narrow,

[p. 164]

and requires a good deal of stretching in order to include the early Greek and Japanese civilisations; but I failed to find a better one to hand.

There is another point which may be mentioned here. As we have seen that the varieties of human type, intermediate and other, are very numerous, almost endless, so we shall do well to keep in mind that the varieties of love and sex-relation between individuals of these types are almost endless, and cannot be dispatched in sweeping generalisations--whether such relations be normal or homosexual.

The British mind, curiously enough, if the latter are mentioned as occurring among men, immediately flies to one only conclusion--the same in fact as that indicated by the translators of the Bible in dealing with the word "Kedeshim" (supra, <page 29>) and the common repugnance to the idea of masculine love in this country is no doubt largely due to this view--since no great repugnance seems to be felt to the idea of feminine amours. Now it would be absurd and insincere to say that this mode of familiarity does not occur; but it is certain that in love-relations between men in the Western world, it is comparatively rare and only to be found in a small percentage of cases; and there is plenty of evidence to show that even in the primitive world of which we have been speaking it was by no means always implied. If one reads Xenophon,

[p. 165]

for instance, speaking as a contemporary of the Dorian customs in Sparta, one finds that he expressly denies the implication. Nor in foreign countries to-day does the British view hold.

In Germany and Italy a quite devoted or passionate love between men is recognised without people necessarily assuming this particular expression of it. And the common view here affords a strange glimpse into the working of the British mind, and has even led some foreigners to form a quite unfavorable, and probably false, conclusion as to our actual habits.

However this may be, I think the facts put forward in the preceding papers about the early social life of the world will never be understood in their right light, and their real import recognised, until it is perceived that love in a very true and deep human sense lay at the root of most of the institutions described, and became through them the source of vital developments to humanity. Sex, of course, has its perfect rights to expression and consideration--and no sensible person would wish to deny these; but we feel that love is the real thing on which human nobility rests. When we once clearly see: and understand that--as for example through the Dorian or the Samurai institutions--it will doubtless become easier to understand some of the more remote and primitive institutions dealt with in the first chapter, on divination, etc.

[p. 166]

One common cause of misunderstanding in these matters is that in most cases where the modern mind has to deal with ancient customs, of peoples far back and alien from ourselves, we may indeed know the outer forms, but we are profoundly ignorant of the real feelings and emotions which underlay and inspired them; and we easily fall into a way, on the one hand, of falsely interpreting the forms, and on the other hand, of ignoring their inner meaning altogether.

There has been a tendency for instance--and that no doubt derived largely from the Jewish Bible--to dismiss the more or less sexual worships of Syria and Babylonia as mere unadulterated wickedness and licentiousness; but is this not largely because we have so little means of seeing from within what they really meant to those who took part in them? The rite of Venus Mylitta, as described by Herodotus (Book i. 199), by which every woman was "obliged, once in her life, to sit in the temple of Venus and have intercourse with some stranger," sounds at a first reading like a mere glorification of prostitution, and has led to much horrified holding up of hands; but when one turns to the further account by the same author (Book i. 131, 132), one sees that the worship must have had great and admirable elements in it. It was associated with sacrifice to the sun and moon and

[p. 167]

the great powers of Nature, and "he that sacrifices is not permitted to pray for blessings for himself alone; but is obliged to offer prayers for the prosperity of all." Richard Burton, referring to this custom in The Thousand Nights and a Night (1886, Vol. x., p. 231), says "It was a mere consecration of a tribal rite. Everywhere girls before marriage belong either to the father or the clan, and thus the maiden paid the debt due to the public before becoming private property as a wife. The same usage prevailed in ancient Armenia, and in parts of Ethiopia. . . . It is noticed by Justin (xviii., c. 5), and it probably explains the Succoth Benoth, or damsels' booths, which the Babylonians transplanted to the cities of Samaria."

Or one may refer in the same connection to the well-known passage in Captain Cook's First Voyage (Hawkesworth ii. 128), where he describes the rites of Venus performed as a religious ceremony in Otaheite between a young man and a girl, in public "before several of our people and a great number of the natives; but, as appeared, in perfect conformity to the custom of the place. Among the spectators were several women of superior rank, who may properly be said to have assisted at the ceremony, for they gave instruction to the girl how to perform her part." Here evidently a ceremony indecent in the eyes of white folk excited respect and reverence in the natives themselves.

[p. 168]

Or again, we have quoted the Father Lafitau (ch. i., supra) on the extraordinary customs of the American Indians and their connection with religion, which he compares with similar features in the old worships of Cybele or Venus Urania; and anyone might superficially suppose that he dismisses all these customs as examples of mere license. Yet in another passage of his book (vol. 1, p. 607) he compares the friendships of the Indians to the heroic friendships of Greece, and after mentioning some of these latter, he continues:--"The Brazilians call friends of this kind Atour-assap, i.e., the perfect ally ("le parfait allie"). The Sieur de Leri (Leri, Hist. du Bresil, ch. xx.) assures us that the alliance which is formed between them by this sort of union is so strong that all their possessions become absolutely in common,  if they really were but one person; and that the one cannot after that marry into the family of the other, within the prohibited degrees, any more than if they were blood relations of the first degree."

"Among the Indians of North America," Lafitau further says: "these friendship-relations do not exhibit any appearance of vice, although there is--or may be--a good deal of this in fact. They are very ancient in their origin, very marked and constant in their form, sacred almost, if I may say

[p. 169]

so, in respect of the union which they compose, and of which the bonds are as closely knit as those of blood and of nature. Nor can they be dissolved unless indeed one of the two, rendering himself unworthy by such cowardices as would dishonour his friend, should force the latter to renounce the alliance--a thing which some missionaries have assured me they have witnessed examples of. The relatives of the friends are the first to encourage these alliances, and to respect their rights and duties; and the selections are honorable in character, being founded on mutual merit according to their idea, on conformity of customs, and on a kind of rivalry which makes each one wish to be the friend of those who are well thought of and justly honoured."

"These friendships are gained by presents made by the one to such other as he desires to have as friend; they are maintained by mutual tokens of good will; and the friends remain companions of the chase, of war, and of fortune; and have the right to food and hospitality each in the cabin of the other. The warmest compliments indeed that one can make to the other is to give him this name of friend; and these friendships mature with advancing age, and are so closely connected that one often finds among them a heroism similar to that of Orestes and Pylades." (Lafitau concludes

[p. 170]

this passage by quoting stories, told him by the missionaries, of such Indian friends refusing to be separated and insisting on dying together.)

Such evidence as this does not point to a state of unadulterated wickedness! And in fact may we not say that it is extremely improbable that any great people that has left an abiding mark upon the world has had its institutions and religion built upon mere sexual licence? Would it not argue indeed a great want of perception in anyone to suppose such a thing? We may, however, say this, that probably for these earlier folk who lived so much more out in the great open of Nature than we do, and who also lived, mentally speaking, in the great open of the tribal life of their fellows, their outlook on the world was in many respects far saner than ours. There was probably less disease both of body and mind, and many things were clean to them which for us have become soiled and unclean. There was a religion of the body, and a belief in the essential sacredness of all its processes, which we somehow have lost--and which we shall not probably socially regain until we once more adopt the free life of the open air and restore the healing and gracious sense of human community and solidarity.

Bearing this in mind it becomes possible to see that a great many of the customs we have mentioned,

[p. 171]

whether in Syria or Babylonia, or in Greece or in Africa, or in North and South America, had a value quite other than that which appears at first sight--a profound and human value--and that they represented necessary contributions towards the evolution of mankind and the expression of its latent powers. And as regards the present volume, I think we may say that the general result of the enquiries contained in it is to show that among primitive folk variations of sex-temperament from the normal have not been negligible freaks, but have played an important part in the evolution and expansion of human society--that in a certain sense variations of social activity have run parallel with and been provoked by variations in sex-temperament.

We have seen that among early peoples the quite normal man is warrior and hunter, and the quite normal woman house-wife and worker-round-the-house; and it is quite conceivable that if no intermediate types had arisen, human society might have remained stationary in these simple occupations. But when types of men began to appear who had no taste for war and slaughter--men, perhaps, of a more gentle or feminine disposition; or when types of women arose who chafed at the slavery of the house, and longed for the open field of adventure and activity--women, in fact, of

[p. 172]

a more masculine tendency-then necessarily and quite naturally these new-comers had to find, and found, for themselves new occupations and new activities. The intermediate types of human beings created intermediate spheres of social life and work. And we have seen that there is abundant evidence to show (what, of course, all physiology and modern thought would lead us to expect) that these variations of the general human type commonly sprang from, or at least were most intimately associated with, variations of the sex-temperament itself; or perhaps we should say of the germ-plasm which lies at the back of the sex-temperament. We have seen over and over again in the preceding pages that peculiar classes of men and women, diverging from the normal in their sex-customs and habits, became the repositories and foci of new kinds of learning and skill, of new activities and accomplishments. Thus the foundational occupations of human life--such as fighting, hunting, child-rearing, and agriculture--having been laid down by the normal sex types, it was largely the intermediate types who developed the superstructure. The priest or medicine-man or shaman was at first the sole representative of this new class, and we have seen that he was almost invariably, in some degree or other, of Uranian temperament.

[p. 173]

His work, to begin with, was prophetic or divinatory; but this soon branched out on the one hand into rude poetry, drama, dance and song--what we should call Art--and on the other into elementary observation of the stars and the seasons, medicine and the herbs--what we should call Science. The temples became centres of learning and of the development of the arts and crafts. And a god who combined in some degree the attributes of both male and female was commonly worshipped in their courts.

So far with regard to the sex-types that may be called truly intermediate. But we have touched on the existence also of types quite beyond the normal at either end of the scale--namely the supervirile man and the ultra-feminine woman. We have seen that the facts now accessible suggest that the supervirile type of man has done great service to the world in furnishing it not only with superb individuals--generals, organisers, and leaders of men; but also with powerful and noble races and classes like the Dorians or the Samurai. There is a certain a priori probability in this theory, but it waits for further study and development. Finally we have the ultra-feminine woman whose special mission to society may perhaps turn out to reside in works of charity and mercy; but this type has at present been but little studied or

[p. 174]

Footnotes

^162:1 In the third part of his Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Zoologie.

considered, and before pronouncing any opinion it would be wise to wait and see what the actual facts may indicate.

 
